This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.

We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/


npiiiii

6000548508


IH^^  JL. 3


^s  ^  ^^1


PHYSICO-PHYSIOLOGICAL  RESEARCHES

ON

THE  DYNAMICS

OF

MAGNETISxM,  ELECTRICITY,  HEAT,  LIGHT,
CRYSTALLIZATION,  AND  CHEMISM,

IX  THET&  RELATIONS  TO


Kttal  /0rce.


BY

BARON  CHARLES  VON  REICHENBACH.

THE  COMPLETE  WORK,

FROM THE GERMAN SECOND EDITION.


WITH  THE  ADDITION  OF  A  PREFACE  AND  CRITICAL  N(tt!fiS. . .,/  .

JOHN  ASHBURNER,  M.D.


LONDON:
HIPPOLYTE  BAILLIERE,  219,  REGENT  STREET.

PAKIS:  J.-B.  BAILLIERE,  BUE  HAUTEFEUILLE.

NEW  YORK:  H.  BAILLlfiRE.

MADRID:  BAILLY-BAILLIBBE,  CALLE  DEL  PRINCIPE.

1850.


"  Einer  nenen  Wahrheit  ist  nichts  schadiicber,  als  ein  alter  Irrtbum."
"  A  new  tratb  is  not  more  miscbieyons  tban  an  old  error."

Ootfu;.


Wikon  and  OgUTy,  17,  Skhum  Stmt,  SMwhUl.LocKloii.


TO

JOHN  ELLIOTSON,  Esq.  M.D.

ETC.  ETC.

€^m  Cranalato

OF  THE  COMPLETE  WOEE  OF  BEICHENBAGH  IS  DEDICATED,

19  TBariMOKY  OF  THE  DEEP  BESFBOT  BNTEBTAINED  FOB  A

HIGH  AND  HONOURABLE  CHABACTER.

SPLENDID  TALENTS  AND  ACTIVE  BENEVOLENCE,

RARE  LIBERALITY  AND  EXTENSIVE  CHABITT,

HAVE CHARACTERISED  THE PROFESSIONAL  CAREER  OF  THE  MAN, WHO, MORE
THAN  ANT  OTHER  OF  HIS  TIME,  HAS  PROVED  HIMSELF

A  PROFOUND  PHYSIOLOGIST — A  THOROUGH  MEDICAL  INVESTIGATOB, —
AND  A  PBACTICAL  PHYSICIAN.

DISDAINING  THE  SEBVILE  DEVICES,

WHICH A  DEBASING SPIBIT  OF  COMPETITION  AND  AN ENVIOUS  DBEAD  OF
SUPERIORITY  HAVE  SUGGESTED  TO  SOME  OF  HIS  CONTEMPORARIES,

HE  STANDS  FORTH  AS  THE INTREPID CHAMPION OF  THE HOLY  PHILOSOPHY  OF


Mtsmmm,


THE  KEY  TO  THE  FUTURE  PB00BES8  OF  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MEDICINE.

HAIL!

DEVOTED  AND  UNFLINCHING  MABTYB  IN  THE  SEBVICE  OF

TRUTH,

WHICH IS  FOB  EVEB  THE  TYPE  AND  THE ESSENCE OF  THE


§xu\  $wfxmt


CONTENTS


OF THE FIRST PART.


Pace
Dedication v

Commentary  Preface  vii

Introduction  1

1*/  Treatise. — The  Magnetic  light. The  Aurora  borealis .... 5

2,nd  Treatise, — Crystals:  the  relation  of  these  and  of  the
magnet  to  human  organs.  The  poles  of
crystals. Light  and  force  of  these 37

Srrf  Treatise, — Certain  physical  and  physiological  laws  of  the
organic  force^  hitherto  called  Magnetism.
Relations  to  the  magnet^  to  terrestrial
magnetism,  and  to  crystals 105

4M  Treatise. — The  rays  of  the  sun  and  of  the  moon,  heat,
friction,  light, — as  sources  of  the  new
force  139

bth  Treatise. — Chemism;  the  Magnetic  tub;  Digestion;
Chemical  action.  The  light  over  graves.
Voltaic  and  frictional  Electricity ;  electrical
atmosphere 162


Tl  00H1S5T8  OF  PABT  L

6/A  TVeaiise. — Matter  in  general :  the  heavenly  bodies;  regions
of  the  earth.  The  new  force,  embracing
Uie  whole  oniTerBe.  Nomendature.  The
word  Od 190

7/A  TVeaiise, — Dualiam  in  the  Odic  phenomena.  Warmth
and  cold.  Magnets,  Crystals,  Plants,
the  Human  body;  their  two  halves;  all
polar.  -f-Od  and  —  Od.  Variability  of
the  odic  intensity  in  time,  in  the  haman
body 227

Condoflon 277


^•'


PREFACE.


The  preseut  edition  of  a  translation  of  these  Researches  owes
its  existence  perhaps  to  one,  perhaps  to  a  series  of  luisap-
prehensions^  with  which  the  public  may  have  little  concern.
Certain  it  is,  that  at  no  time,  have  I  had  the  sliglitest  in-
tention to  be  guilty  of  a  want  of  courtesy  towards  the
gentleman  who  had,  by  ttie  pnblication  of  a  very  skilful  ab-
stract of  his  labours  m  the  year  1846,  the  merit  of  introduc-
ing the  Baron  von  Reichenbach  to  the  British  pnbhc,  as  an
investigator  of  the  Philosopliy  of  Mesmerism.  Various
efforts  liave  been  made  to  convince  me  that  I  did  not  act  as
I  ought  to  have  done,  in  omitting  to  place  myself  in  com-
munication with  Professor  Gregory,  when  I  was  appUed  to
by  the  Publisher,  through  a  well-known  Uteraiy  physician,
to  fmmish  some  notes  to  a  complete  edition  of  these  Re-
searches ;  but  I  confess  my  obtuseness  shuts  out  from  my
miod  the  light  of  all  the  reasoning  that  has  been  brought  to
bear  on  this  matter.  All  that  I  can  allow  is,  that,  although
I  have  no  personal  acquaintance  with  the  Professor,  I  am
very  sorry  in  any  way  to  have  injured  his  feelings,  and  I  am
grieved  to  find  myself  in  such  a  relative  jiosition  wth  a
man  for  whom  I  am  bound  to  entertain  a  deep  respect ;
for,  besides  his  high  scientific  reputation,  he  is  known  to
have  the  courage  to  avow  his  belief  in  Phrenology  and  in
Mesmerism^  **  even  in  the  spirit  of  truth,  whom  the  world


PKEFACB,


cannot  receive,  because  it  seetb  Mm  not,  neither  knoweth
liim ;  but,"  to  all  like  the  Professor,  it  may  be  said,  '*  ye  know
him,  for  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you  !"  To
me,  I'eehng  quite  innocent  of  all  wrong  intention,  in  the  per-
fect freedom  of  action  which,  under  the  circumstances,  I
claim  for  myself,  it  is  sad  to  be  at  opi>osite  poles  with  one
who  is  of  the  salt  of  this  earth*  To  those  who  cannot  know
of  the  dii*e  consequences  resulting  from  the  aggregation  of
the  petty  and  repulsive  mental  forces  concentrating  and
directing  in  society  the  baneful  powers  of  theur  various  hi-
fluences  upon  characters  who  dare  to  think  for  themselves, —
who  are  hai^dly  aware  that  new  tniths  are  met  so  frequently
by  sneers,  taunts,  ridicule,  or  that  unworthy  social  persecu-
tion, at  once  the  proof  of  a  want  of  capacity  to  be  noble  and
just,  and  the  disgrace  of  an  advanced  civilization, — the  ex-
alted courage  of  such  persons  must  be  lost*  To  those  who
know  how  to  respect  scientilic  ai^dour,  and  a  pm^e  love  of
ti'uth,  the  fortitude  of  a  faithful  and  sincei-o  man  is  for  high
admiration,  and  for  deep  respect.

Such  observations  are  perhaps  equally  applicable  to  the
Professor,  and  to  his  friend  the  Bui^on,  and  I  may  be  re-
garded as  bold  in  remarking,  as  freely  as  I  have  done,  on
some  of  the  philosophy  in  the  following  pages.  No  one  can
entertain  a  deeper  veneration  for  large  cerebral  organiza-
tions than  I  do.  I  am  clear,  from  the  work  before  us,  that
so  much  patience,  so  much  ingenuity,  so  much  caution,  so
much  concentration,  so  much  ideal  resource,  so  much
just  and  honest  desire  to  be  true,  coidd  not  characterize
any  individual,  who  had  not  a  rare  combination  of  organs
hi  bis  magniticent  head.  Regarding  any  person  in  this
point  of  view,  one  is  immediately  at  liberty  to  look  out
tor  all  those  inconsistencies  that  belong  to  humanity ;  deeply
respecting  the  excellencies,  and  always,  with  due  hmnility,
doubting  one's  own  power  of  detecting  the  weakness  that
may  belong  to  any  logical  editiee  he  may  cMjnstruct.


PHEFACE.


There  arc  not  wanting  persons  who  doubt  entirely  of  the
Baron's  power  of  accurate  and  severe  observation.  They
doubt  some  of  his  most  striking  fact.s.  They  deny  the  ac-
curacy of  liis  results  with  the  magnet  and  photographic  plate.
Some,  and  among  them  are  persons  of  no  mean  note  as
flOiBtlfie  characters,  affect  to  hold  him  in  very  secondary
estimation — pitying  him  for  wild  ideas,  and  denying  that  his
reeearches  deserve  any  rank  as  philosophy.

But  the  Baron  is  not  the  builder  up  of  a  tail  house  of  loose
cards  to  be  toppled  down  by  a  brcath,  I  have  not  tried  all
his  experiments,  I  have  tried,  comparatively,  only  a  few.
Where  1  have  found^the  suitable  cases,  the  results  have  been,
with  few  exceptions,  identical.

Then,  because  I  have  been  disappointed  in  the  i*esults  of
many  otlier  experiments,  I  have  no  right  to  conclude  that
the  Baron  is  at  fault,  but  rather  that  I  have  not  yet  been
fortunate  enough  to  meet  with  exactly  the  same  description
of  C4ise  he  terms  the  ''sick  semitiwr — a  vague  expression
of  an  idea,  with  which,  surely,  it  is  not  criminal  to  disagree.
Long  before  1  had  read  Professor  Gregory's  abstract,  I  had
arrived  at  conclusions  on  differences,  as  well  as  analogies,
between  electric,  magnetic,  and  mesmeric  agencies,  and,  ope-
latiug  differently,  have  witnessed  many  confirmations  of  the
Gicto  established  by  the  Baron,  Dr,  Elhotson  has  noted
many  remarkable  analogies  in  many  pages  of  the  Zoisi.
But  then,  the  greater  number  of  oiur  cases  have  been  in
mesmerized  persons.  How  the  Bai'on  would  have  fared,  as
to  bis  conclusions,  if  he  had  not  taken  up  the  study  of  his
subject,  in  its  most  elemental  form,  is  another  question.
Seeing,  as  I  do,  the  conditions  of  his  patients,  in  a  different
point  of  view,  from  that  in  which  he  regards  them,  I  cannot
ocRieede  to  him  that,  professing  to  contemn  the  mesmeric
state,  as  one  unfit  for  liis  purpose,  he  has  not  been  operating
with  persons,  who,  though  not  at  all  asleep,  have  actually
been  in  a  state  coustitutiug  the  very  condition  which dis-


FRIFACE.


tinguishes  some  of  the  phenomena  of  somnambulism. One
mistake  has  been,  to  suppose  that  the  tmthfulness  of  an  in-
dividual de|)ends  upon  a  certain  normal  state  of  the  general
fibres  of  the  brain,  instead  of  the  tendencies  derived  firom  a
particular  relative  size,  and  combination  of  certain  organs  of
that  viscus, A  patient,  who  is  a  sleep-waker,  may,  from  a
certain  configuration  of  organs,  be  a  most  just  and  honour-
able character,  and  have  that  fine  disposition  considerably
exalted  by  the  state  of  somnambulism  ;  while  a  wide-awake
person  may  be  a  most  cunning  and  habitual  deceiver.  Ano-
ther  mistake  is,  to  suppose  that  the  "  sensitive,''  and  "  sick
sensitive,"  form  a  category,  independent  of  aU  phrenological,
and  all  mesmeric  considerations. They  are,  in  fact,  those
most  easily  affected  by  mesmeric  and  crystalUc  agencies —
those  most  obedient  to  the  influence  of  the  silent  will — and
those  most  easily  stimulated  to  clairvoyance,  in  the  state  of
wide  vigilance. Certain  I  am,  that  with  the  advantages
offered  by  the  power  of  his  head,  the  Baron  woidd  have  ad-
vanced both  further  and  faster,  if,  to  all  his  other  knowledge,
he  had  combined  a  more  extensive  view  of  physiological  pa-
tliotogy,  with  a  study  of  plirenologj^  and  mesmerism. They
may  opjMisc  the  tnith  in  Germany,  as  they  do  here. The
Author  exhibits  some  of  their  doings,  but  the  Baron  has
the  courage  flowing  from  a  sense  of  justice. He  worships
the spirit of  truth, which must  eventually prevaU. I
marvel  at  many  of  the  objectors  to  his  philosophy,  for  in
regarding  these  researches  with  the  eye  of  criticism,  ready
to  seize  a  weak  point,  I  feel  that  one  is  at  a  loss  which  most
to  admire, — the  plain,  straightfonvard,  philosophical  acumen
which  guides  each  consecutive  inquiry,  or  the  combination
of  ingenuity  and  common  sense  with  whicli  questions  of
great  delicacy  are  made  subservient  to  the  progress  of  severe
inquiry. Time  and  opportunity  only  are  required  to  cor-
roborate rather  than  to  con^e^t  the  facets  he  ha.s  advanced.
Those  who  venture  to  risk  their  own  reputations  in  throwing


4


PRBFACB,


n


doubts  on  the  Baroii*s  results,  should  remember  that  the
candiiions  under  which  the  ea^periments  were  originally
made,tnust,injtis1ice,  he  strictly  repeated.  The  discoverer
of  creosote,  paraffine,  eupion,  and  many  other  new  com-
{K>unds,  for  the  knowledge  of  which  the  world  is  iudebted
to  his  lalx>rious  researches,  is  not  a  common-place  authority;
he  has  now  taken  up  a  subject,  the  troth  of  which  will
Sdl  With  tremendous  force  over  all  obstacles.

Those  who  regard  the  science  of  Physics,  in  the  isolated
form  in  which  it  is  generally  presented  in  most  of  the  Ele-
ments of  National  Philosophy,  must  necessarily  have  a  very
limited  view  of  the  importance  of  tlie  researches  now  pre-
sented to  the  public.  Indeed^  it  woidd  be,  at  present,
almost  impossible  to  indicate  all  the  points  in  cosmogony,  to
which  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach's  commencement,  in  strict
logical  deduction,  on  imponderable  agencies,  may  not,  at  a
future  period,  have  a  positive  reference.  It  may  be  re-
marked, that  the  evolution  of  each  new  fact  is  a  step  in  that
progress,  which  may  be  ultimately  connected  with  the  forces,
agencies,  fluids,  or  powei's  that  pervade  space  in  universal
nature.

Undoubtedly,  the  attempt  to  place  Mesmerism  within  the
domoui  of  physics  was  a  liold  conception.  It  is  an  attempt
to  bring  the  whole  of  physiology  into  the  strict  limits  of
diemical  philosophy.  The  establishment  of  the  existence  of
the  odic  force  is  that  which  was  wanting  to  reply  to  most  of
the  questions  respecting  life.  No  doubt  much  is  yet  to  be
desired  in  order  to  clear  the  obscurities  enveloping  the
innumerable  modifications  of  this  force  ;  but  enlightenment
reai^hes  us  from  the  enlightened,  and  the  Baron  piu^ues  his
continued  researches  with  a  zeal  which  promises  to  unfold
to  us  many  a  new  principle,  as  well  as  many  a  new  fact  con-
nected with  this  subject ;  and,  considering  the  very  curious
investigations  which  will  be  published  in  the  second  part  of
thia  work,  it  is  harldy  too  much  to  anticipate  that  we  may.


em  long,  be  favoured  with  ^me  insight  into  the  philosophy
of  a  subject  evidently  connected  mth  the  matter  of  U^t,
or  in  some  way  aUied  with  that  of  the  development  of  either
latent  Ught,  or  of  some  combination  of  a  share  of  this  prin-
ciple with  certain  organic  reagents* The  researches  into
odic  light  by  the  Baron  do  not  appear  yet  to  belong  imme^
djstely  to  clairvoyance,  and  yet  the  links  which  connect  the
inquiries  are  not  far  off.  Numerous  questions  suggest  th^n-
selves  in  an  examination  of  the  philosophy  of  this  subject : —
Why  the  condition  of  brain  favourable  to  the  development
of  clairvoyance  should  belong  to  certain  individuals,  and  not
to  others  ? Why  it  should  belong  to  some  nervous  suscep-
tible temperaments,  and  not  to  others  ? Wliy  some  insane
persons  should  be  in  the  category,  and  not  others  ? Why
in  some  brains  these  peculiar  developments  of  mental  lucidity
should  take  place,  quickly  and  easily,  by  peculiar  stimulants,
while  others  should  require  a  long  period  for  the  attainment
of  the  object  ? ^\Tiy,  in  some,  the  phenomena  are  not  pro-
duced without  a  long  course  of  mesmeric  sleep,  while  in
others,  the  presence  of  certain  individuals,  or  of  cert^  crys-
tals, or  of  clear  bottles  of  clean mesmerised  water,  in  the
same  room,  suffice  to  excite  the  brain  to  the  requisite  condi-
tion ? In  one  and  the  same  {person,  one  mesmeriser  shall
never  be  able  to  produce  clairvoyance  ;  another  mesmeriser
will  establish  it,  at  the  first  stance. I  have  no  doubt  of
these  facts : I  have  often  witnesssed  them. I  have  pro-
duced the  condition  of  clainoyance ;  but  the  kind  and  the
degree  of  the  phenomena  differed,  very  remarkably,  from
those  produced  by  Major  Buckley,  in  the  same  patients.
Repeatedly  I  have  tried,  in  vain,  to  make  clairvoyant  som-
nambulesread  printed  words  which  were  enclosed  in  apill-box.
Major  Buckley,  ignorant  of  the  same  words,  has  had  them
quicklyread  in  the  innermost  of  a  nest  of  five,  foiu*  of  them
tightly-fitting  silver  boxes. The  stimulus  afforded  by  the  odic
lights  issuing  from  my  brain,  must  then  be  very  different


FRETAOE.


SUl


from  that  of  those  emitted  by  his,  I  have  elsewhere  said,
(Zoist,  vch  iv.,  p.  125)  befon?  the  abstract  of  the  work  of
Reichenbach  appeared  here,  tliat  **  striking  facts  may  be
adduced  wliich  may  tend  to  the  conclusion  that  the  eTercisc
of  the  facidties  of  the  human  mind,  and  particularly  that  of
the  will,  is  attended  by  the  emanation  of  a  fluid  from  the
brainj  from  the  fingers,  seats  of  the  functional  extremities
of  the  nerves,  or  from  some  part  of  the  person  who  may  be
exercising  the  mental  faculties,  I  propose  to  show  that  the
smne  series  of  events  may  be  produced  in  individuals  of  a
certain  nervous  diathesis,  by  the  impingement  of  a  fluid
evolved  by  the  \^all  of  another ;  or  by  manipulations  attended
by  the  emanation  of  the  same  fluid,  or  by  certain  emana-
tions fipom  magnets,  or  from  some  metallic  wires,  thiough
which  cmrents  of  electricity  are  passed ;  or  from  the  direct
application  of  certain  metals,  I  do  not  attempt  to  establish
the  ideniiiy  of  these  fluids,  for  the  facts  daUy  developing
themselves  tend  to  show  that  the  distinctive  pro|>erties  of
these  fluids  are  as  various  as  the  siibsiances  from  which  Ihey
emanate ;  and  it  may  be  that  the  great  power,  antecedent  to
all  consequents,  may  ordain  the  simplicity  and  unity  of  one
electric,  and  gravitating  with  centrifugal  force,  evolving  an
infinite  complication  and  variety  of  magnetic  cohesive  and
repulsive  agencies ;  the  entire  system  emerging  from  the
volonte  directing  '  La  Grande  Formule/  "* All  these  con-


^  A  Berie«  of  essays,  under  the  signature  of  IgBotus,  appeared  in  the
LfomdoD  Journal  and  Repertory  of  Arts,  ScienceSi  and  Man ti fact u res,  in
the  jfear  1 848,  which  contained  many  very  ingenious  speculations  on
impoDderahle  bodies,  and  which,  though  not  founded  on  original  experi-
mental inquiry,  are  deaerving  of  attention  from  the  point  of  view  in
which  these  agencies  are  regarded.

Ifnotua  maintains  that  three  distinct  kinds  of  inipondemble  matter
«mt  in  nature,  namely — mugnetine,  or  the  principle  of  magnetism  ;
lufiiine^  or  the  principle  of  b'ght ,-  and  calorine,  or  the  principle  of
heat ;  and  that  the  whole  of  these  are  capable  of  existing  in  either  a
free  or  latent  state,  and  of  manifesting  cheitneaf  agencies,  by  virtue  of


PREFACE.


«itlcmtion8  are  for  inquiry.  They  must  meet  witb  scrutiny,
and  new  tnithn  will  be  elicited,  uuiltijilyiiig  the  facts,  pro-
loagiag  the  interest  and  the  fame  attached  to  the  genius  of
the  discoverer  of  the  odic  force.  AVe  are  but  at  the  com-
BMSOoraient  of  the  wonders  of  clairvoyance,  and  can  certainly
be  in  no  position  to  estimate  the  great  fund  of  new  trutlis,
that,  by  means  of  its  cultivated  agency,  are  in  store  for  us.
We  arc  so  often  met  witli  olyections  as  to  the  possibility  of
the  phenomena  of  clairvoyance,  that  after  the  Baron  von
Ketchenbach'^  arguments  on  the  varjing  powers  of  various  fl
individuals  to  perceive  the  odic  flames,  one  is  tempted  to
adduc^e  the  fact  discovered  by  Sir  Isaac  New  ton,  that  the
den»4.^t  and  heavicHt  metal,  gold,  has  more  pores*  in  it  than
iolid  metallic  partieks,  and  consequently  that  light  may  be
trauKmitttrd  through  it ;  and  if  so,  it  is  quite  possible  to  con-
ceive  of  its  being  dtapliunous  to  certain  iodividuals  possessed
of  a  higldy  seimitive  nervous  system. But  what  are  the  mar-


which  thry  are  tnmnly  Influential  in  inducing  the  various  phenomena
which  nature  exhibits, ^ — as,  for  iafltanco,  the  tendencies  of  the  chemical
rlcmenlB  (of  which  they  arc  confttituents),  to  enter  into  chemical  action
and  prmlucc  new  componnda.  Upon  their  agencies  depend  the  prin-
ciple of  gravitation,  of  the  aggregation  and  segregation  of  the  molecules
of  ponderable  matter ;  of  ordinary  electricity ;  of  voltaism  and  cata-
lysis ;  and  it  ia  upon  their  operation,  hut  more  particularly  on  the
influence  of  magnetine,  that  the  vital  functions,  in  all  their  modifica-
tions, are  dependent.

With  respect  to  ekctricity,  Ignotua  regards  this  principle  as  distinct
from  magnetism  and  voltaism,  and  attributes  its  phenomena  to  the  dis-
engagement of  a  hitlierto  undeacribed  ponderable  chemical  element,
which  he  terms  eiectrine^  and  which  he  Rssiiinea  to  be  an  essential
constituent  of  oxygen.

I  have  reason  to  beheve  that,  since  his  curiginal  publication,  Iguotas
has  occupied  himself  with  important  alterations  and  additions^  his  views
now  extending  to  the  creation  of  the  universe,  and  constituting  in  fact
A  new  chemical  theory  of  nature.

♦  See  "  A  Dissertation  on  the  i^ther  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,**  by  Bryan
Robinson,  M*D.,p.  H.


I
I

I


PREFACE.


XV


vellotis  things  of  clairvoyance,  compared  to  those  contained
in  a  supplementary  note  to  the  relation  between  Holy
Scripture  and  sonic  parts  of  geological  science,  by  Dr.  Pye
Smith,  to  which  1  refer  below  in  order  to  cause  reflection  on
such  matters  ^* Here  our  object  is  not  to  display  wonders,

*  In  the  'Philosophical  TranBactioDa '  for  1800,  is  a  paper  hy  the
Ule  Sir  WLlUain  ller^hel  upoo  the  Power  of  Tefescopes  to  Penetrate
into  Space,  a  property  tlistinct  from  the  magniffjhuf  power.  By  obaer-
viitioQB  and  calculations,  which  appear  to  have  been  corroborated  by
facta  independently  and  previonsly  ascertained,  the  apace-penetrating
power  of  his  forty  feet  reflector  is  brought  out  to  be  a  httle  more  than
lyi  times  that  of  ordinary  natural  vision,  or  extending  to  more  than
300,000  times  the  distance  of  Sjriu?,  which,  on  satisfactory  grounds,  is
regarded  «a  one  of  the  nearest  of  the  fixed  stars.  The  light  by  which
SiriuB  is  seen  by  ua,  moving  at  its  known  velocity  of  19'i,000  miles  in  a
second,  is  at  least  six  years  and  four  months  on  its  passage  from  our
(system.  By  applying  the  cqtiatiou  which  Sir  William  had  established,
he  brought  out  that  the  brilliant  nebulee,  which  only  that  telescope  can
reach,  are  distant  from  our  earth  such  an  immense  number  of  miles,
that  to  cipress  them  our  arithmetie?il  numeration  requires  twenty
fignrest  of  which  tlie  first  eight  are  11,765,475,  the  eleven  deootiug
trillion  a,  and  the  other  number  billions ;  the  remaining  part  of  the  sum
being  much  more  thnn  948,000  millions.  This  almo&t  numanageable
ttumber  is  expressed  by  Sir  William  Ilerschel  thua^ — *  above  1 1|  millions
of  millions  of  miUiona  of  miles !'  It  follows  that  the  light  by  w  hich
thoec  bright  objects  become  visible  to  us  cannot  have  been  leas  than
one  million  and  nine  hundred  thousand  years  in  its  proj^ress.

Yet  when  we  have  strained  our  minds  to  contemplate,  in  the  ex-
tremely feeble  manner  to  which  our  faculties  are  competent,  this  over-
whelming distance,  we  have  no  reasou  to  think  that  we  have  touched
the  circumference  of  the  astral  sphere ;  or  that  we  have  advanced  be-
yond the  threshold  of  God's  creation-

If  it  be  objected  that,  in  accordance  with  these  deductions,  we  might
expect  new  portions  of  *Iehovah*s  dominion  to  be  frequently  disclosing
themsdvea,  stars  and  clusters  of  stars  '  blushing  out '  on  our  view,  new
to  us,  because  their  light  had  now  first  arrived  at  our  earthly  abode ;
1  conceive  the  following  cousiderations  suHHcient  to  meet  the  ob-
jection : —

I .  The  ab<K>lute  distances  of  fixed  stars  and  groups  from  each  other
may  be  such  aa  to  reqmre  respective  intervals  of  years  and  even  cea*


XVI  PREFACE.

but  while  in  passing  we  reply  to  objectors,  we  must  continue
to  illustrate  the  leading  purpose  of  these  researches,  really

turiea  for  the  light  of  the  more  remote  ohjects  to  reach  us ;  that  light
arriving  Buccessively  from  each  according  to  the  distance.

2.  Our  case  refers  to  ohjects  which,  though  self-luminous,  are  not
visible  to  the  naked  eye.  They  may  *  blush  out,'  even  frequently  ;  but
men  are  not  capable  of  being  their  observers.  Only  a  few  of  mankind
can  enjoy,  and  be  qualified  to  use,  such  telescopes  as  those  of  Sir
William  Herschel,  and  his  still  more  accomplished  son.

3.  Granting  the  possession  of  these  advantages,  the  opportunities  for
observation  are  too  scanty  for  the  construction  of  a  negative  argument.
Sir  William  Herschel,  in  the  same  paper,  says  that  the  number  of
night-hours,  suited  to  this  kind  of  celestial  observation,  is  averaged
favourably  in  our  climate  at  one  hundred  in  a  year;  and  that  to
*  sweep ' — ^to  examine  as  rapidly  as  is  consistent  with  astronomical
attention — every  zone  of  the  heavens,  for  the  two  hemispheres,  would
require  eight  hundred  and  eleven  of  such  favourable  years.  The  num-
ber of  the  objects  to  be  observed  is  great  almost  beyond  conception.
Sir  William  Herschel,  by  counting  the  stars  in  a  definite  portion  of  the
field  of  view  which  he  observed  in  one  hour,  and  estimating  the  rest,
concluded  that  fifty  thousand  passed  under  his  review  in  that  hour.
It  is  therefore  within  the  scope  of  probability  that  new  masses  of  light
are  achieving  their  first  arrival  in  parts  of  our  telescopic  sphere,  fre-
quently, without  its  being  possible  for  men  to  be  aware  of  it ;  and,
when  any  of  them  comes  to  be  discovered,  the  date  of  their  arrival  is
unknown.

I  draw  no  argument  from  the  fact  that,  within  the  short  period  of
the  last  two  or  three  centuries,  stars  have  been  discovered  which  earlier
catalogues  or  descriptions  had  not  noticed.  The  attention,  requisite  to
give  certainty  in  this  matter,  we  cannot  assume  to  have  been  exercised  i
and  to  look  for  evidence  from  this  quarter  would  be  forgetting  that  it
can  exist  in  the  domain  of  only  the  greatest  telescopic  powers.

These  views  of  the  antiquity  of  that  vast  portion  of  the  Creator's
works  which  astronomy  discloses,  may  well  abate  our  reluctance  to  ad-
mit the  deductions  of  geology,  concerning  the  past  ages  of  our  planets'
existence. — [Supplementary  note  to  the  relation  between  the  Holy
Scriptures  and  some  parts  of  Geological  Science. By  Dr.  Pye  Smith.]

Nor  ought  it  to  be  forgotten  that  these  very  principles  and  deduc-
tions of  geology,  that  have  excited  so  much  of  alarm  and  opposition
among  some  friends  of  religion,  and  so  much  of  premature  and  ground-


FRKFACK.


^


and  truly  the  i)hilosnpliy  of  mesmerism.  Strange  would  it
be  if  the  wonders  of  clairvoyance  ;  those  of  the  phenomena
detected  by  the  telescope;  the  events  accming  from  the
nature  of  living  organisms,  in  all  their  infinite  viurieties,
should  finally  be  dependent  on  the  same  force,  which  Newton
contemplated,  in  his  acute  conjectui^e  that  water  was  a  com-
pound body,  and  which  gave  rise  to  the  wild  but  important
speculations  of  Mesmer,  on  the  existence  of  an  universal
fluid,  when  he  led  the  way  to  the  facts  of  a  new  science,
which,  after  a  struggle  of  eighty  years,  has  emerged  in  the
hands  of  Von  Reicheubach  into  principles  applicable  to  all
nature.

A  remai'kable  fact  connected  with  the  emergence  of  mes-
merism into  its  present  importance  is  the  serious  neglect  of
its  merits  which  has  marked  tlie  conduct  of  those  who  were
lx)und  to  encourage  them,  by  study  and  infpmy.  Really,
practically,  mesmerism  has  deserved  very  different  treatment/
It  has  merited  high  civic  honours.  It  ha.^,  under  the  patient
philosophic  guidance  of  Dr.  EUiotson,  conquered  malignant
cancer.  It  has  removed  enormous  gmwths  known  as
polypus,  as  I  can  testify. I  know  that  it  has  chased  away


\em  exultntion  among  tU  cnemiea,  ha?e  ueverthelesB,  when  taken  in
connection  with  astronomy,  dcFcloped  and  csUiblishcd  a  law  of  God'a
Datum]  government  of  tlie  universt*,  ffrand  betfond  all  others  knoum  to
man,  and  undi«covcred  or  only  dimly  seen  by  the  great  minds  of  other
gteneration9.  I  refer  to  the  fact,  that  perpetual  change  w  made  the
fframl  cmiervatwe  and  controUht^  principle  of  the  universe.  Men
ha?c  always  seen  and  felt  this  infitability  in  respect  to  everything  on
earth  ;  and  they  have  regarded  it  ae  a  defect,  rather  than  a^  a  wise  law
of  the  natnral  world.  But  they  now  find  it  to  be  equally  true  of  snns
and  planets  as  of  plants  and  animals.  Perpetual  change,  perpetual
progreiaion,  increase,  and  diminution^  appear  to  be  the  rules  of  the
tniterial  world,  and  to  prevail  without  exception. — [Professor  Wlie well,
^^  qooted  by  Dr,  Fyc  Smith.]  Burke  might  he  quoted  on  the  same  sub-
^H  ject,  for  with  the  acumen  and  terseness  of  Genius,  he  says,  in  a  tilter
^H  to  Sir  Henry  Langrishe.  Change  is  (he  great  ham  of  Nature,


XVlll


PREFACE.


lai^c  ovarian  tiiEioi's,  and  dropsies  tlmt  have  defied  all
iiiedieal  skilL  It  has  cured  niahgnant  fevers  in  their
advanecd  stages.  It  1ms  removed  tnberelcs,  and  healed
abscesses.  To  enmiiemtc  all  the  good  that  has  been  done
by  tliis  agent,  combined  with  the  essence  of  hnnian  kind-
ness— for  without  that  the  practice  of  mesmerism  is  useless—
would  take  many  volumes.  Tlionsands  of  cases  are  now
extant  of  the  benefits  derived  from  this  lioly  power.  The
Zvisiis  the  grand  Knghsh  work  of  testimony  on  this  subject,
and  it  is  full  of  useful  information,  as  well  as  of  noble  essays  to
advance  the  cause  of  luummity.  The  defenders  of  mesmerism
have,  in  that  w^ork,  Ial)oured  hard  for  the  truth,  wliich  they
have  advocated  with  the  l)oldness  belonging  to  sincerity.
How  much  soever  they  liave  been  op|}osed  by  the  sordid  and
the  mean,  by  those  systematically  ojiposed  to  the  progress
of  expansion — with  wliatcvcr  success  falsehood  has  rt*tardcd
the  march  of  useful  knowledge — it  is  consoling  to  the  wri-
ters in  the  Zoisi  to  know  that  the  great  cause  is  advancing.
Small-minded  men,  not  capable,  from  imfortnnate  organiza-
tion of  brain,  of  believing  in  truths  at  variance  with  the
iilols  they  have  been  accustomed  to  woMiip,  sL't  tliemselves
up  as  oracles  of  wisdoui.  Too  many  imphcitly  give  up  their
convictions  to  such  incompetent  leaders !  Fight,  however,
as  they  wUl  against  the  trutli,  it  is  always  too  strong  for  its
opponents.  Time,  which  settles  all  dittcrences»  liy  changing
old  things  and  by  I>ringing  forwiuxl  new,  sweeps  away  the
fidlaeies  of  the  obsLinately  proud  and  ignorant.  Would  it
were  |X)ssible  for  small  minds  to  reflect,  that  all  their  eflbrts
to  establish  falsehood  will  nut  alter  the  laws  of  nature,  and
no  folly  of  striving  to  prove  that  falsehood  is  truth  can
change  these  established  laws  !  For  nearly  eiglity  years  has
the  professional  world  of  science  opposed  itself  to  the  dis-
covei'y  of  Mesmer,  yet  still  the  facts  exist.  Turn  to  the
truths  placed  before  mankind  by  the  stupendous  powci-s  of
observation  and  catenation  of  that  rare  genius,  Gall ! It  is


PREFACE.


XIX


gickening  to  note  the  causes  which  have  hitherto  deprived
9cx;iety  of  the  advantages,  destined  to  accme  to  our  race,  at
a  later  period,  by  tlie  cidtivatioii  of  phrenology.  How
curiously  and  strikingly  has  mesmeric  science  veritied  all
the  diBcinerics  of  Gall !  Still  the  flood  of  opposition  pours
on,  and  the  pretenders  to  religion,  real  enemies  of  the  spirit
of  truth ^  with  awful  pride  and  cunning,  endeavour  by  sly
arU  to  crusli  its  rising  light.

It  is  remarkable  that  three  great  philosophers,  each  in
succsession,  in  some  measure  contemning  the  labours  of  his
jiredecessor,  should  have  arisen  in  the  same  spot ;  that  each
should  have  put  forth  a  discovery  of  signal  importance  to
the  philosophy  of  mind  ;  that  Vienna  should  be  the  well-

^ftpring,  whence  these  lights  should  radiate ;  that  the  spark-
ling, crystalline,  luminous  knowledge  emanating  from  that
fountiiin,  placed  in  the  central  capital  of  Eiu-opean  civiliza-
tion, should  have  reHected  a  glory  round  the  names  of  three
philosophei's,  which  wdl  emblazon  their  researches  as
amongst  the  most  important  that  can  occupy  the  attention
M  mankind  ;  that  Mesmcr,  Gall,  ami  Reichenbach,  fii*st
fciuomiced  their  grand  ideas  trom  the  capital  of  the  Austrian
cnipii*e.
The  Baron  von  Reichenbach  may  not  believe  himself
complimented  by  this  allocation.  He  may  have  some  scien-
tific pride,  notwithstandojg  the  size  and  ipiality  of  the
majority  of  the  organs  of  his  brain  ;  nevertiieless,  the  reflec-
tion  must  l>e  made,  that  all  knowledge  is  relative,  as  every
atom  of  matter  is  relative.  Nothing  is  fixed  and  absolute ;
but  iu  tlie  vast  range  of  human  acquirement,  it  would  be
dtiKcult  to  exliibit  three  sets  of  facts,  announced  at  separate
intervals  of  tune,  liaving  so  intimate  a  relation  to  each  otiier,
and  which  are  so  interwoven  in  their  dependencies,  as  those
Vieuucse  discoveries ;  having,  moreover,  such  numerous
aUiances  to  all  the  circumstances  to  which  man  can,  by
tunt8,  trau&fer  his  attentions.


XX  PREFACE.

Where  will  all  this  philosophy  lead  us  ?  Can  any  sincere
person  entertain  a  doubt  ?  It  is  the  spirit  of  truth  which
is  about  to  be  victorious.  It  is  not  a  question  as  to  the
appreciation,  at  the  present  moment,  of  the  best  knowledge,
of  the  soundest  philosophy.  Educated  in  selfishness,  we
live  in  a  world  of  hallucinations.  It  has  been  well  said  that
we  form  one  large  lunatic  estabUshment.  We  are  surrounded
by  influences  that  are  always  tending  to  impress  upon  us
a  desire  to  succumb  to  the  tyranny  of  falsehood.  The  con-
ventional habits  of  our  Uves  make  us,  more  or  less,  hypo-
crites ;  and  according  to  the  energy,  originality,  or  some
other  individual  pecuUarity  of  oiur  character,  we  swerve  from
the  leaning  of  our  fellowmen.  If  the  proposition  be  offered
to  his  innate  desire  for  justice,  it  is  not  that  man  does  not
essentially  love  truth,  but  that  the  progress  of  his  organiza-
tion, through  ages,  has  not  yet  ripened  sufficiently  to  allow
that  expanded  development  which,  as  science  advances,
must  have  place  in  a  more  perfect  arrangement  of  society.
Man  cannot  yet  worship  ttnith  as  the  best  knowledge.  He
has  not  yet  passed  the  age  of  idols.  The  knavery  of  the
selfish  and  interested  is  always  ready  to  excite  his  lower
feelings  against  that  which  is  really  holy  and  reverential,
the  sacred  will  of  the  Most  Just.  But  the  good  time
approaches — ^for  science  advances  vrith  immensely  rapid
strides.  Those  who  are  now  young  have  to  witness  many
improvements,  all  tending,  like  the  researches  of  the  Baron
von  ReichcnbEch,  to  expand  the  intellects  and  morals  of
man,  and  to  lead  him  finally  to  the  realms  of  light.


JOHN  ASHBURNER.


65,  Grosvenor  Street,
April  25,  1850.


1)  Y  N  A  M  1  C  S


MxIlGnetism,  electricity,


8sc.


TNTROBTJCTION,

Ir  a  strong  magnet,  capable  of  supporting  about  ten  pounds,
be  drawn  downward  over  the  bodies  of  fifteen  or  twenty
persons,  without  actually  touching  them,  some  among  them
will  always  be  found  to  be  excited  by  it  in  a  peculiar  man-
ner 'fhe  number  of  people  who  are  sensitive  in  this  way
is  greater  than  is  generally  imagined :  sometimes  three  or
four  are  met  \vith  in  such  a  number  as  above  mentioned  :
indeed,  1  know  an  establishment  where  the  experiment  was
tried,  and  of  twenty-two  young  ladies  who  were  collected
there,  no  less  than  eighteen  felt  more  or  less  distinctly  tlie
passage  of  the  magnet.  The  kind  of  iuipression  pioduced
on  these  excitable  people,  who  otherwise  may  be  regarded
as  in  perfect  health,*  is  scarcely  describable ; it  is  rather

*  Wlimt  15  meant  by  this  expression  ?  Ordinary  health  would  be
more  eooaonjiot  to  the  Baron 'a  meaning.  Great  or  even  modified  ira-
premoimbility  is  not  a  condition  of  perfect  healtli.  A  ner?ous  system
wbicll  gireti  s  procliTity  to  disorder  from  keen  susceptibility  to  external
loipitMt008»  lA  not  one  which  belongs  to  an  ort^anism  in  every  part  of
which  the  configuration  is  the  most  convenient  for  the  perfect  perforra-
ftnec  of  the  functions  to  which  that  organism  or  any  of  its  parts  is
dftttoed.  Perfect  health  belongs  only  to  a  body  in  which  no  part  ia
ht  ' F'ioped* A  law  exists  which  establishes  the  fact  that  every

ttti  iopment  of  a  part  is  at  the  expense  of  some  other  part ;  and

it  will  be  foundi  in  endeavouring  to  establish  most  incontrovertible  facts,
that  alt  jodiridttala  who  have  an  impressionable  nervous  fabric  are  the

B


diMi|rrtie;b.bk  iLw  pieasact^  and  ocimbuiad  with  a  sl^t  seo-

Mii  K>ii  eiUier  (4  oold  or  wanuih.  redemblmg  a  caul  or  g^tljr

iHd9eieU  uf  BKire  «r  k»  impfrfecf  de^fc^opmest. At  pft^  3^  the  Buon

wv^  '^  ^ijpjTMik  mea  snd  b<«hliv  voafeeo  nMallj  £mj  ziotLiag  of  these
MnHHCliOM.'*  Sedmlarr  ocrapttioDs  iu>d  m  vmriefr  of  the  Gimmslaiices
iiunvBuudiix^  mas  in  Li*  pmrat  imperfect  ftate  of  chihntiaB,  render
kkt  SKirer  liiijufMiuualile,  becaoae  thej  inrnlste  aod  wabalaiiee  the
hii  wiiij  of  his  STitem.  It  b  moR  difirah  to  indiioe  sMCitheM,  or
mj  of  the  Derrom  stain  uudogoia  to  it,  ia  a  pexiectlT  heahhy  and
Y3j^cirgu»  povon  than  in  one  vht.*  is  snsceptibie  of  the  inflnenoe  of
tibone  pWMjUB  vbicfa  unhalance  the  aecoants  between  the  tvo  srstems
</  Uoad;'^«*M*k.  A  man  in  the  hot  ita^  of  trphns,  or  the  ferer  of
mahtMhhj  Tenotts  congestion,  maj  be  aared  bj  messKrism,  aa  has  hap-
fnmd  m  wt%€nl  eases ;  vhile  in  a  person  onder  the  oondiiaon  of  perfect
b««Ith  the  mesmeric  passes  produce  fittle  or  no  effect  for  a  great  length
of  time.  It  is  the  same  with  the  impressionabQity  to  magnets.  Those
vbo  feel  the  infloenoe  of  the  magnet  are  in  a  greater  or  in  a  !e$$  decree
in  the  Mme  category  of  the  impetfectly  derdoped  and  trndalj  balanced.
^  The  aenaaticms  of  drawing,  pricking,  or  creeping,*'  from  the  applica-
tMPO  of  the  hands  to  a  strong  magnet^  which  I  caused  to  be  rtpe&ted
daily  in  two  impressionable  cases,  terminated  in  one  in  ligidity  and
deep  mesmeric  sleep  in  foor  days  ;  in  the  other,  in  nine  days.

Binee  ibe  above  was  written  (24th  of  March,  1850),  I  hare  a  strong
eorroboration  of  the  riew  given  in  this  note.  A  young  woman  had
applied  to  me  six  weeks  ago  for  a  set  of  sympCoaw  which  indicated
great  debility.  She  bad  passive  hemorrhage,  under  which,  complicated
with  hysteria,  leucorrhoea,  &c.,  she  had  laboured  for  some  months  pre-
viously. It  was  a  case  which  mesmerism  would  have  cured  rapidly.  I
tried  some  passes  ;  the  pupils  dilated,  and  other  symptoms  of  mesmerie
sleep  were  present.  She  felt  a  warm  air  from  the  large  magnet.  I
tried  the  pointed  end  of  a  large  crystal,  which  made  hex  very  sleepy.
At  Ust  I  put  her  to  sleep  by  the  gaze.  She  awoke  in  an  hour,  refreshed
and  strengthened.  Finding  that  she  could  not  be  mesmerised  at  home,
I  prescribed  a  solution  of  persulphate  of  iron  in  diluted  sulphuric  add,
to  be  taken  three  times  a  day.  I  find  she  has  strictly  attended  to  my
directions,  and  she  is  quite  well,  with  a  healthy  florid  complexion.  I
try  her  with  the  same  large  magnet,  and  she  experiences  no  sensation.
I  try  for  half  an  hour  to  make  her  sleep  mesmerically  :  in  vain.  The
pupils  of  the  eyes  refuse  to  dilate.  She  says  if  I  proceeded  with  my
experiments  she  is  sure  I  should  make  her  head  ache.  Here  has  been
a  clonic  state  of  system,  in  which  the  nerves  and  blood-vessels  have  in-
duced "  a  temporary  derangement  of  organization,"  in  which  some  parts


ll^TIlDDtJCTTON.

warm  breath  of  air,  which  the  patients  imagine  to  blow
softly  upon  them.  Sometimes  they  feel  sensations  of
drawing,  pricking,  or  creeping  ;  some  complain  of  sutklen
attacks  of  headache.  Not  only  women,  but  men  in  the  very
prime  of  life,  are  found  distinctly  susceptible  of  this  in-
fiuence ;  in  chiklren  it  is  sometimes  very  active.

To  produce  this  effect,  it  is  essentially  indifferent  whether
we  use  a  horse-shoe  magnet  or  a  straight  iron  bar,  with
either  pole,  if  it  be  but  strong  enough  and  possess  some-
thing hkc  the  sustaining  power  above  mentioned.  The  passes
must  be  nmde  from  head  to  foot,  and  not  with  too  great  rapi-
dity. The  magnet  must  be  carried  as  near  the  body  as  pos-
mble  without  actually  touching  the  clothes ;  and  to  ensure  the
absence  of  deception  on  either  side,  the  pass  may  be  made
downward  from  the  back  of  the  head  over  the  neck  and  back.
ITic  person  magnetized  is  then  unaware  of  the  passage  of
tlie  magnet,  and  his  movement  must  be  unconstrained.

Vigorous  men  and  healthy  strong  women  usually  feel
nothing  of  these  sensations.  Nevertheless,  I  have  met  with
individuals  who  have  been  distinctly  affected  by  the  |>assagc
of  the  magnet  when  in  the  full  cnjojinent  of  health,
and  these,  active  light-heaited  men  and  women.  But
the  excitability  presents  itself  more  frequently  in  people
of  sedentary  habits,  w^ho  may  otherwise  be  considered  m
healthy,  especially  in  men  who  are  occupied  continuously
in  writings  or  gii*ls  who  pass  the  greater  pait  of  their  time
at  needle-work ;  moreover,  in  those  w  ho  are  depressed  by
secret  troubles,  anxiety  respecting  their  means  of  suppoit,
neglect,  or  the  loss  of  relatives.  Next  to  these  imperfectly
healthy,  the  sHghtly  diseased  are  very  frequently  the  most
aenflittve  to  the  magnet,  especially  those  persons  of  whom  it
is  c5omraonly  said  they  suffer  from  weak  nerves,  who  are  readily


b»TC  iaffered  a  while  at  the  expense  of  others,  in  which  a  "  mk  aerm-
UiHy**  has  supervened,  in  which  the  individual  has  become  undiUy  im-
preiuiioDable,  and  in  which  restored  health  has  removed  the  liability  to
Ije  influenced  by  magnetism  and  by  mesnieri»m.


INTRODUCTION.


frightened,  or  have  received  a  shock  from  some  fright  they
have  experienced  ;  besides  these,  the  truly  sick  in  innumer-
able cases,  especially  in  those  whose  complaints  are  accompa-
nied by  local  or  general  cramps ;  during  abnormal  develop-
ments of  puberty ;  many  hypochondriacs,  valetudinarians
as  they  are  called ;  persons  who  are  very  disagreeably  affected
by  odours ;  but  above  all,  those  suffering  from  catalepsy,
St.  Vitus's  dance,  palsy,  many  of  the  hysterical,  and  lastly,
those  who  walk  in  their  sleep,  and  the  true  somnambidists
without  exception.  Thus  from  the  healthy  person  to  the
sleep-walker  a  chain  is  formed,  at  one  end  of  which  stands
a  powerful  man,  and  at  the  other  a  weak  somnambulist.
Any  one  may  readily  convince  himself  of  those  facts  in  every
large  hospital.

The  magnet  thus  declares  itself  as  a  general  agent  upon  ilie
vital  principle  ;  a  property  of  it  which  individual  physicians
have  indeed  endeavoured,  though  as  yet  without  solid
results,  to  bring  into  raoi'e  extensive  application,  in  re-
ference to  the  possibility  of  deriving  from  it  a  curative
treatment  in  cases  of  disease, — which,  however,  has  not  yet
been  received  by  natural  philosophers  into  the  realm  of
physics;  and  from  the  uncertainty  of  the  obsei*vations,
hitherto,  has  been  altogether  passed  over  by  natural  science
generally.  Nevertheless,  magnetism,  when  more  closely
examined,  presents  an  infinitely  varied  and  exalted  interest
on  this  side.  If  a  portion  of  the  phenomena  here  assert  an
influence  upon  life,  this  occurs  exactly  and  especially  at  the
point  where  the  boundaries  of  the  organic  and  inorganic  are
intermingled.  Since  a  doubt  exists  whether  it  shall  be
attributed  to  the  domain  of  physiology  or  of  physics,  it  is
neglected  on  both  sides.  Thus  it  is  left  over  to  medicine,  and
has  not  always  fallen  into  the  best  hands  there.  I  hope,
in  the  following  pages,  to  disentangle  some  of  the  threads
of  this  knot,  and  to  combine  a  number  of  phenomena  under
a  common  point  of  view,  at  the  same  time  arranging  them
under  fixed  physical  laws.


FIRST  TREATISE.


liXOUS  PHENOMENA  AT  THE  POLES  AND  SIDKS  OF  STRONG
MAGNETS.


1.  Srksitivb  persons,  wlio  arc  actually  or  apparently  liealtliy,
perceive  notliiiig  particultir  in  the  magnet  beyond  the  ex-
mtement  above  mentioned,  and  bear  the  circuit  of  it  mth-
oiit  injurious  influence.  But  this  is  not  the  case  with  the
sick  sensitive,* The  effect  upon  these  is  either  pleasant,

•  Tbere  are  many  persons  in  the  category  of  the  sick  semkwe  upon
wbonif  in  England^  these  experimeols  have  been  repeated,  and  they
have  not  always  exhibited  the  pheiiomeua  detailed.  In  aiTortling  a
most  wining  and  respectful  testimony  corroborative  of  the  greatest  part
of  the  fact*  reported  ahove,  whenever  I  have  had  it  in  my  power  to
repeat  the  experiments  with  strong  magnets,  I  nevertheless  helieve  it  to

}  of  importance  that  the  class  of  the  sick  sensitive  to  whom  these  facta
applicahle  should  be  more  strictly  defined,  I  have  no  tlouht  that
Qianj  of  the  individtmls  ahove  described  coidd  be  most  easily  mea-
merised  into  sleep ;  and  of  those  who  would  not  readily  sleep,  some
vonld  probably,  by  repetitions  of  mesmeric  paeaes,  be  rendered  more
brourable  for  the  development  of  the  phenomena  which  the  Baron  has
noted.  The  very  impressionable  conditions  sometimes  present  without
atekneaa  or  disease  is  not  one  of  perfect  health — certaiidy  not  usually
of  vigorous  health ;  but  there  are  many  states  of  disease  in  which  that
tuipressiouabiiity  not  only  does  not  exist,  hat  in  which  a  sensitiveness
of  wm^  &rffajM  is  present  without  any  of  others.  If  it  be  absolutely
oeceasary  to  yield  to  party  considerations  for  the  sake  of  advancing
truth  by  a  aide  route ;  if  it  be  requisite  to  assume ,  in  order  to  meet  the
mlly  prejudices  of  the  ignorant,  that  experiments  of  the  nature  desctibed
in  the  text  are  valueless  unless  they  be  performed  upon  persons  awake,
who  happen  to  have *' an  extraotditiunj  exaltation  of  the  senaitoua


6


THE  MAGNETIC  LIT.HT  —


uiipleanaiit,  or  fearfully  adverse,  according  to  tbe  nature
of  their  disease^  and  the  last  sometimes  to  such  a  degree


perceptions^**  then  many  of  the  very  numerous  corroborationa  here,  of
the  facts  establiBhed  by  the  Baron  son  Keichenbach  in  Vienna,  mast  be
thrown  asitlc*  But  I  am  inclined  to  contend  fur  their  value  j  and  no
one  can  read  the  review  in  the  4lh  volume  of  the  ZoUt,  hy  Dr.  EUiot-
»on,  of  the  Abstract  of  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach's  Papers,  by  Pro-
fessor Gregory,  without  being  struck  by  the  strong  analogies  adduced
from  mesmeric  experience  of  the  Baron's  facts,  Wlicn  it  becomes  more
known  that  the  mei^meric  condition  is  simply  a  state  of  nervous  system,
sometimes  artltieiaily  produced,  sometimes  spontaneously  present,  of  ao
'*  exalted  se^mwus"  state^  or  the  vety  reverse,  and  that  at  pleasure,  in
many  individuals,  can  he  produced  those  conditions  which  the  Baron  en-
deavours to  indicate  at  pages  6^  7,  8,  there  will  be  no  more  hesitation  in
preparing  a  mesmeric  test  than  the  chemist  now  experiences  in  producing
a  htrouB  test.  The  truth  is,  that  we  are  at  all  times,  while  hfe  remainfl
in  us,  in  a  mesmeric  condition,  each  varying  lu  degree;  and  without
the  agency  of  the  mesmeric  forces  we  neither  think,  nor  move,  iior  have
our  being.

It  is  a  irant  of  sufficient  reflection  on  the  use  of  terms  that  leads  us
astray  from  dear  ideas  on  the  various  conditions  of  the  nervous  system.
Because  the  matter  has  not  been  studied  as  it  ought  to  be,  the  Baron
von  Reichenbaeh  deprecates  experiments  on  subjects  who  have  been
mesmerised.  Suppose,  which  is  actually  the  case,  that  the  same  phe-
nomena are  offered  to  our  observation  in  the  persons  who  have  been
made,  by  artificial  expedients,  highly  sensitive — very  impressionable,
the  facts  are  reaBy  just  as  valuable  as  if  they  had  been  displayed  in
those  naturally  impression  able «  Tbe  only  question  is  as  to  the  nuro-
bera  of  mankind  readily  influenced  to  exhibit  phenomena  which  prove
the  existence  of  the  Baron's  new  force.  If  all  men  could  conduct  in-
vestigations as  logically,  as  clearly,  a»  philosophically  as  the  Baron,  we
should  now  have  it  in  our  power  to  arrange  the  characters  of  each  con-
dition of  the  nervous  system  in  an  tinmi stakes ble  category.  They
would  easily  be  tabulated.  Tliey  would  present  a  very  interesttag
scries.  I  have  attempted  to  sketch  my  meaning  in  Essays  on  lilesmeric
Phenomena,  and  on  the  Theory  of  Sleep  (Zoist,  Vol.  iv.)  Whaiever
may  hereafter  prove  to  be  the  varieties  of  the  states  in  which  individuab
may  be,  when  aberrant  from  the  condition  of  **  perfect  health'* — a
condition  upon  the  definition  of  which  physiologists  as  yet  might  not
agree — it  is  clear,  to  those  who  have  studied  tliis  matter,  that  the  grada*
tiou;i  in  the  series  of  the  phenomena  have  some  connection  with  attrac-


4


THE  AURORA BOHEALIS.


I


that  fainting,  cataleptic  attiicks,  and  craiiij>s,  arise  of  sucb
violence  that  they  may  at  last  become  dangemus, In  the

tion  and  repaUion*  If  I  ob»enre  in  a  hospitftl  a  putient  who,  in  result
of  AD  accident,  has  been  deprived  of  a  portion  of  the  frontal  or  parietal
bone  of  tiis  akuU^  ao  that  the  brait^  is  exposed^  I  shall  find,  what  Boer-
baftTcloDg  ago  found,  that  this  viscuB,  during  sleep,  occupies  less  spaee
tlian  in  the  yig^llant  condition.  The  particles  of  brain-mar ter  are
approximated,  and  an  attraction  is  active  among  them.  If  this  patient
be  awake,  and  I  apply  very  gentle  pressure  on  the  Burface  of  the  brain^
I  induce  a  tendency  to  sleep.  If  I  increase  the  pressure,  I  occasion
coma ;  I  continue  to  increase,  and  the  stertor  accompanying  coma  may
ccaae,  but  the  nervous  condition  is  one  of  tonic  spasm.  The  simple
paralysis  goes  on  to  a  rigid  condition  of  the  muscles.  Convulsions
supervene  when  the  surface  of  brain  pressed  upon  is  not  extensive
enough,  because  partial  irritation  is  produceci  upon  certain  nerves.  I
have  made  these  experiments  on  several  human  beings  ;  but  the  fairest
mode  of  obtaining  accurate  results  is  to  expose  the  brain  in  a  rabbit,
cat,  or  dog.  Tickle  the  brain  with  a  soft  brush,  and  clojiic  spasms
ensue.  The  brain  appears  to  swell  ont»  it  occupies  more  spac^  under
irritaiioQ,  and  ia  sobjected  to  a  repulsive  agency  among  its  particles.
So  that  the  state  of  sleep  and  of  coma,  quietude,  paralysis,  rigid  tonic
ip«am,  are  degrees  of  a  condition  influenced  to  exist  under  attraction;
the  state  of  vigilance,  restlessness,  activity,  agitation,  clonic  spssm,
are  varieties  of  a  condition  influenced  by  repulsion.  In  "perfect
bcmlih,'*  there  is  no  extreme  state  of  attraction  or  of  repulsion.  But  if
health  be  disturbed  by  some  poison,  the  inconvenience  produces  an
improper  state  of  the  balance  between  the  attractive  and  repulsive
force* ;  the  brain  and  nerves  influence  a  want  of  due  balance  in  the
arterial  and  venous  syst<fms.  With  arterial  fulness  there  is  inflam-
mation ;  with  venous  fulness  there  is  congestion.  The  degrees  of
variety  in  nervous  phenomena  dependent  on  these  opposite  states  are
very  n«iiii«ro«is  ;  but  still  a  law  exists  which  we  have  yet  to  trace  out.
Th*  tarieliea  of  those  nervous  plienoraena  called  psychological,  closely
allied  to  the  varieties  of  the  conditions  of  the  arterial  and  venous  sys-
tem*, fail  particQlarly  aa  subjects  of  inquiry  into  the  province  of  the
•todmt  in  mesmerism  and  phrenology  ;  and  the  satisfactory  solution  of
nwny  problems  suggested  by  facts  in  the  text  of  the  Baron  von  Reichen-
bftch  can  never  be  arrived  at  without  arranging  all  the  gradations  of
facta  Manging  to  the  nervous  system,  under  a  scale  of  which  the
extneniM  are  the  deep  tonic,  and  the  deep  clonic  spasms.  Complicated
it  iIm  liam«ii  nervous  system  becomes  by  the  many  varieties  in  cerebral


^


r>  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT

latter  cuses,  among  which  somnambulists  also  are  found,
an  (wtraordhiary  exaltation  of  the  stemsHoms  percepiions

k  usuully  met  witli ;  the  sick  smell  and  taste  with  oncom-
mt)ii  thIinirvaiKl  acuteness, — many  kinds  of  food  become  as
iiisuticraMe  to  them  as  the  at  other  tiroes  most  pleasant
odours  of  flowers  l^'conie  disagreeable ;  they  hear  and  un-
derstand what  is  s]K)ken  three  or  four  rooms  oflF,  and  arc
often  so  sensitive  to  light  that,  on  the  one  hand,  they  cannot
Ix^ar  the  lighl  o!"  the  smi  or  of  a  fire,  while,  on  the  other,
they  are  able,  in  ffrvat  darkmss,  not  only  to  perceive  the
outlines  of  ohjecls,  but  to  distinguish  colours  clearly,  when
the  heahhy  can  no  longer  perceive  anything.  These
things  are  to  a  great  extent  well  kno^^Ti,  and  reqiure  no
further  proof  here.  Tlie  intelhgibility  and  possibility  of
them  are  by  no  means  so  far  off  as  they  appear,  at  first
sight,  to  many  who  inistnist  all  such  things  as  supernatural
or  inere(iil)le.  Not  only  do  most  animals  surpass  civilised
man  in  t|je  delicacy  of  particular  senses,  but  savages — there-


to! jui-tijic  lyfti-ri  «l  \ty  varieties  in  development  of  size,  delicacy,  or  <
iii:M-,  ttn*i  </<iit'f  iUnrHcirn  and  relations  of  phrenological  organs,  there
Jit  viiitiiltr.r  <iut  ft'rUim  Halient  pathognomonic  signs  by  which  to
ibiMifii  till  iJieiifirtionH  on  which  logicians  may  reason  with  accuracy;
uiiij  jji  tiific  it  will  U;  found  that  the  condition  of  sleep  mixed  up  with
tiic  M'4-oijfJ  roiihcifMiHijcKH  UHually  accompanying  the  modified  waking
tttuti.'  (thr  hU'fj^  wHkitig  of  ElUotsou)  is  no  obstacle  to  the  attainment  of
trutli  ill  toU4ii « A|>«fiiii«'iit«  as  those  instituted  by  the  Baron  von  Reichen-
bai'li.  Jiidi'cd,  out  it.  ib<iin<'time6  convinced,  in  reading  his  details  of
expei'iint'uttt,  tUmt,  iio^^ivi-r  MnMiuous  he  is  to  avoid  the  imputation  of
mesmcritiiii,  \iv  lo  all  iln'  wliile  describing  facts  occurring  in  what  is
commonly  and  vulgarly  mikd  the  mesmeric  state.  Here  is  the  mischief
of  the  want  of  deiiiiitc  Utiiih.  Certain  events  occur  in  a  condition  of
the  nervous  system  accompanied  by  full  vigilance,  identical  with  those
which  take  place  in  the  condition  of  sleep-waking.  The  Baron  is  quite
content  with  the  fact  in  vigilance,  but  thinks  that  in  sleep-waking
unsatisfactory.  Deeper  reflection  and  further  experience  would  con-
vince him  that  in  a  vast  majority  of  cases,  as  a  testing  meter,  the  stato
of  sleep- waking  is  the  more  complete — the  more  delicate.


THE  AUROAA  BOREALI

fcin*  man  himself — not  unfrcquently  equal  dogs  and  other
animals  in  smell  antl  hearing  :  as  to  sight,  horses,  cats,  and
owls  arc  ready  examples  of  capacity  to  see  tolerably  well
with  the  optical  apparatus  in  dark  night.

2,  Through the kindness  of  a  surgeon practising  in
Viennap  1  was  introduced,  in  March  1 S44,  to  one  of  his

-:  ■  *  *}[(*  daughter  of  the  tax-collector  Nowotny,  No.  471 ,
..  -e,  a  young  woman  of  25  years  of  age,  who  had
suffered  for  eight  yem*s  from  increasing  pains  in  the  head,
and  from  these  had  fallen  into  cataleptic  attacks,  with
alternate  tonic  and  clonic  spasms.  In  her  all  the  exalted
intensity  of  the  senses  had  appeared,  so  that  she  could  uot
Ijcer  sun  or  candle-light,  saw  her  chamber  as  in  a  twilight
in  the  darkness  of  night,  and  clearly  distinguished  the  colours
of  all  the  furniture  and  clothes  in  it.  On  this  patient  the
maguet  acted  with  extraordinary  \4olence  in  several  ways,
and  she  manifested  the  sensitive  pecuUarity,  in  every  respect,
in  such  a  high  degree,  that  she  equalled  the  true  somnam-
bulists (which  she  herself,  however,  was  not)  in  eveiy  par-
ticular relating  to  the  acuteness  of  sensuous  irritability.

At  the  sight  of  all  this,  and  in  recalluig  to  mind  that  the
northern  light  appeared  to  be  nothing  else  but  an  electrical
phenomenon  produced  through  the  terrestrial  magnetism,
the  intimate  nature  of  which  is  still  inexplicable,  in  so  far
that  no  direct  emanation  of  light  from  the  magnet  is  known
in  physics,  I  came  to  the  idea  of  making  a  trial  whether  a
power  of  vipion  so  exalted  as  that  of  Miss  Nowotny  might
not  perhaps  j^rceive  some  phenomena  of  light  on  the
maguet  in  perfect  darkness.  The  possiliility  did  not  appear
to  mc  so  ver)^  distant,  and  if  it  did  actually  present  itself,
the  ki?y  to  the  ejqilanation  of  the  aurora  boreal  is  seemed  in
I  my  hands,

3.  I  allowed  the  father  of  the  girl  to  make  the  first  pre-
ljiair,n.r.  i  xperiuicnt  in  my  absence. In  order  to  profit  by

thi  t  d^irkness,  and  the  maximian  dilalalion  of  the


LJ


lu


TOE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT


piipU»  from  the  eye  haviug  been  loiig  accustomed  to  the
toUil  absence  of  light,  I  directed  him  to  hold  before  the
patient,  m  the  middle  of  the  night,  the  largest  existing
magnet,  a  nine-fold  hoi'se-shoe  capable  of  supporting  about
ninety  pounds  of  iron,  with  the  armature  removed.  This
was  done,  and  on  the  following  morning  I  was  informed
that  the  girl  had  really  perceived  a  distinct  coniinunnn
luminosity  as  long  as  the  magnet  was  kept  open,  but  that  it
disappeared  every  time  the  armature  was  placed  on  it.
^To  convince  myself  more  completely,  and  study  the
tter  more  closely,  I  made  preparations  to  undertake  the
eiperiment  with  modifications  myseUl  I  devoted  the  follow-
ing night  to  this,  and  selected  for  it  the  period  when  the
{mtient  had  just  awakened  from  a  cataleptic  fit,  and,  conse-
c|uently,  was  most  excitable.  The  windows  were  covered  with
a  iupembundance  of  curtains,  and  the  lighted  candles  removed
from  the  room  long  before  the  termuiation  of  the  spasms.

The  magnet  was  placed  upon  a  table  about  ten  yards
from  the  patient,  with  both  poles  dirt^eted  toward  the
ceiling,  and  tlien  freed  from  its  mTiuiture.  No  one  present
could  see  in  the  least ;  but  the  girl  beheld  two  luminous
appearances,  one  at  the  extremity  of  each  pole  of  the  mag-
net. When  this  was  closed  by  the  application  of  the
annature,  they  disappeared,  and  she  saw  nothing  more ;
when  it  was  ojiened  again,  the  Ughts  itj-appeared.  They
seemed  to  be  somewhat  stronger  at  the  moment  of  lifting
up  the  armature,  then  to  acxpiire  a  permanent  condition,
which  w  as  weaker.  The  fiery  appearance  was  about  equal
in  size  at  each  pole,  and  without  perceptible  tendency  to
mutual  connexion.  Close  upon  the  steel  from  which  it
streamed,  it  appeared  to  form  a  fiery  vaix)ur,  and  this  was
surrounded  by  a  kind  of  glory  of  rays.  But  the  rays  were
not  at  rest ;  they  became  shorter  and  longer  without  inter-
mission, and  exhibited  a  kind  of  daiting  rays  and  active
scintillation,  which  the  obsers  er  assured  us  was  micommunly


>RA  BOREALIS*


11


lUfuL The  whole  appearance  was  more  delicate  and

iutiful  than  that  of  common  fire ;  the  Hght  was  far  purer,

lahuost  white,  sometimes  intermingled  with  iridescent  colours,

Ithc  whole  resembling  the  light  of  the  sun  more  than  that

y{  a  fire. The  distribution  of  the  hght  in  rays  was  not

inifonn  ;  in  the  middle  of  the  edges  of  the  horse-shoe  they

rere  more  crowded  and  brilliant  than  toward  the  comers,

3ut  at  the  corners  they  were  collected  in  tufts,  which  pro-

ed  ftirther  than  the  rest  of  the  rays. 1  showed  her  a

little  electric  spark,  which  she  had  never  seen  before,  and

iad  no  conception  of ; she  found  it  much  more  blue  than

lie  magnetic  light. It  left  a  pecuhar  lasting  impression  on

lie  eye,  which  disappeared  very  slowly.

The  interest  with  which  the  subject  necessarily  inspired
ie,  made  me  wish  to  multiply  my  observations,  and  to  test
Ihera  by  repetition  and  by  carrying  them  further  out.  The
>»tieut  had  alreiuly  began  to  recover;  her  irritability  dimi-
nished daUy,  and  there  was  therefore  no  time  to  be  lost.
Two  days  after,  I  joined  her  relations  in  a  resumption  of
I  he  ex[)eriment.  It  proceeded  exactly  m  the  same  way  and
Iwith  the  same  results.  Allowing  a  day  to  elapse,  we  re-
the  experiment  in  the  first  instance  with  a  weaker
let,  without  informing  her  of  the  alteration  ;  the  obser'
rer  did  not  see  the  phenomenon  m  the  same  manner  now
at  first,  but  only  perceived  what  she  called  two  fiery
lu-eads** ^fhese  were  evidently  the  edges  of  the  two  poles


^  la  repcatiDg  these  experimeats  with  persons  of  great  iropresaiona*
bUity,  1  huve  not  been  so  fortuuate  at  aoy  time  aa  to  witness  in  a  wide-
iw&ke  penoa  aoy  other  phenomenon  than  the  appearance  of  one  or  aotne-
two  fiery  threads,  said  to  liave  been  seen,  in  a  room  perfectly
kened,  emaiiating  frotn  the  poles  of  a  powerful  hofBe-shoe  magnet.
SoiBc  ladies  have  clearly  diatinguished  these  beautiful  bluish  threads
>(  light  proceeding  upwards  to  the  height  of  a  foot  or  more.  Some
Rfe  seen  a  liaxy  cloud  at  a  little  distanee  on  each  side,  "like  that  of
wet  moon,'*  One  gentleman  saw  a  hazy  light  very  distinctly  ;  another
ethifig  like  a  piece  of  red-hot  iron  wire,  rarying  from  six  inches  to


12  THK  MAGNETIC  LIGHT —

of  the  magnet,  which  were  all  that  her  eyes  coiild  i)erceivc
of  the  weaker  lumiuosity .  When  we  then  opened  before  her
the  stronger  901bs.  magnet,  she  at  once  reoc^ised  the

a  foot  in  length.  These  persons  were  brought  into  my  dining-room,
which  had  been  preTionsly  darkened  and  prepared,  without  being  in-
formed of  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  introduced.

Into  the  same  room,  and  under  the  same  conditions,  I  have  intro-
duced persons  who  instantly  fell  asleep,  became  donically  convuUed,
and  passed  rapidly  into  the  deeply  rigid  or  tonic  spasm,  so  that  I  have
withdrawn  them  into  another  room  while  they  have  been  as  stiflf  as  if
they  were  frozen  ;  and  there  I  have  gradually  produced  a  relaxation  of
the  muscular  system,  and  complete  wakefulness,  by  the  application  of
nnmagnetised  iron  to  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  to  the  soles  of  the  feet.
Some  individuals  under  these  experiments  wake  up  by  the  ordinary
mesmeric  manipulations,  remaining  fixed  with  tonic  spasm  until  I  ap-
plied the  nnmagnetised  iron.  In  the  same  individuals,  twelve  in
number,  I  have  produced  the  same  phenomena  without  the  previous
clonic  spasm,  by  touching  the  nape  of  the  neck  with  pure  gold,  or  with
platinum,  or  with  rhodium,  or  with  nickel,  or  with  cobalt,  or  vrith  an-
timony, or  with  bismuth.  In  every  case,  except  in  one  (M.  A.  D.),  I
was  always  able  to  dissipate  the  spasm  and  awaken  the  patient  by  means
of  iron  applied  to  the  nape  of  the  neck.  In  that  one — the  case  will  be  well
remembered  by  Mrs.  Charles  Lushington  and  by  Dr.  Thomas  Mayo,
who  were  present — I  held  a  newly-cast  disk  of  cobalt  about  two  yards
off,  without  the  patient's  knowledge,  directed  towards  her  back.  She
fell  forward  insensible  upon  Mrs.  C.  Lushington,  who  was  talking  to
her.  She  was  rigid  and  insensible.  The  pulse  was  for  a  time  imper-
ceptible. A  current  from  a  pingle-coU  electro-dynamic  apparatus,  which
happened  to  be  in  action,  was  passed  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  to  the
nape  of  the  neck.  Colour  gradually  returned  to  her  cheek,  and  her
pulse  and  breathing  removed  our  alarm.  She  slept  on  that  occasion
fifty-six  hours.  A  fortnight  afterwards  I  was  induced  to  repeat  the  ex-
periment, and  she  slept  forty-seven  hours.  If  I  endeavoured  to  awake  her
by  mesmerism,  I  found  her  idiotic,  and  I  restored  her  to  the  influence  of
deep  sleep,  out  of  which  she  always  awoke  spontaneously,  much  refreshed
and  improved  in  vigour.  This  experiment,  repeated  in  this  case  very
often,  has  been  attended  with  beneficial  results  to  the  patient's  health  ;
but  she  now  never  sleeps  under  the  cobalt  influence  more  than  three
hours.  I  have  performed  many  of  the  Baron's  experiments  with  mag-
nets of  different  numbers  of  layers  and  with  various  powers.  When
the  subjects  of  the  experiments  remain  in  the  sleep-waking  state,  tkey


THB  AtFRQRA  BORBALIB.


13


fonuer  luminosity,  af  the  form  and  colour  already  known.
After  another  interval  of  several  days,  during  vk^hicli  her
con\'(ile-8cencc  liad  preatly  advanced,  wc  renewed  the  expe-
riment ;  hut  the  hght  no  longer  made  its  appcuranec,  even
wth  the  large  magnet.  The  patient  saw  it  less  distinctly
than  before,  smaller  and  rather  unsteady :  often  it  seemed


d««cnbe  almost  exactly  what  the  Baron  has  stated  as  fact  regardiag
Mhm  Nowotiiy*  and  hh  other  cases.

For  «ome  remarkHble  experiments  with  a  large  apparatua  thirty*three
mehea  high,  made  of  iron  wire  a  quarter  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  coiled
<lfly-«ix  limes  in  a  circumference  of  eight  feet,  I  refer  to  page  137  of
4th  volame  of  the  ZoUf, This  coil  was  of  an  oval  form,  so  con-

ncted  in  order  to  enable  nie  to  place  it  with  eajse  over  any  individnal
imti-d  io  an  arm-chair.  By  means  of  one,  two,  three,  or  four  of  Smee's
clement^,  each  ten  inches  hy  five,  a  more  or  less  powerful  current  was
Mlablisfied,  enabling  me  to  use  a  magnetic  force  adapted  to  ditlerent
iii«ceptibiUties<  For  nearly  six  months  daily,  for  two  hours,  a  nervous,
hightv  ficnsitive,  and  strumous  young  man,  aged  1 7]  who  had  been  twelve
or  thirteen  years  lame  from  an  ununited  fracture  of  his  right  leg,  used

lit  within  this  coil  urged  by  four  pairs  of  Smee's  plates.  He  never
I  sensible  of  any  light  or  of  any  cloud.  He  was  very  somnolent,  but
became  wide  awake  again  on  being  removed  from  the  magnetic  iniuence.
Under  this  treatment  he  became  stronger,  and  the  bones  of  his  leg
were  united*  Acupuncture  was  occasionally  practised  where  the
local  appearance  indicated  the  measure.  If,  when  he  came  out  of
his  mge,  he  went  into  the  next  apartment,  where  six  or  seven  young
iromcrt  were  waiting,  he  touched  any  of  them,  instantly  sleep  and
rigidity  supervened*  Sometimes  in  sport  he  would  touch  every  one  of
tlteni,  and  leave  them  all  in  deep  sleep.  I  have  myself  often  obtained
this  same  result  in  various  persons,  male  and  female,  who,  being  of  im-
-htutionst  have  gone  into  a  deep  sleep  upon  my  touch-

-^  I Living  in  another  room,  without  their  knowledge,  rubbed

tny  band*  upon  the  poles  of  a  powerful  magnet.  I  have  notes  of  thl!^ee
lads,  of  difl'erent  ages,  cured  of  epilepsy  by  mesmerism,  who  could  be
instAntly  put  to  sleep  and  rendered  rigid  in  this  manner.  Dr.  Elliot*
son's  celebrated  ease  of  cancer  cured  by  mesmerism,  became  rigid  on
tonching  a  magtict.  1  know  three  diilerent  females  so  susceptible  of
magnetic  influence  that  they  are  made  ill,  being  seized  with  painful
«pB«ms,  if  f  bring  a  middle-sized  magnet  conceded  in  my  coat  pocket
into  tbt?  room. These  pei-sons  do  not  know  eath  other.  ,,„,p.  «,,


14  THK  MAGNETIC  LIGHT

to  sink,  then  to  brighten  up  again ;  sometimes  almost  to
disappear,  and  then  after  a  short  time  to  return  agaan.  On
the  following  evening  she  perceived  in  the  hrf^  magnet
only  the  two  luminous  threads ;  and  the  night  after^  the
phenomenon  was  so  imperceptible  to  her  vision  that  she
beheld  only  two  flashes,  vanishing  rapidly  like  lightning,
which  appeared  and  disappeared  every  time  the  armature
was  pulled  off.

4.  So  far  Miss  Maria  Nowotny.  Her  rapidly  increasing
health  had  now  so  far  lessened  her  sensitiveness  that  no
further  experiments  were  practicable,  or  productive  of  new
results.  I  had  every  reason  to  consider  her  statement  as
true  and  exact,  since  she  was  an  intelligent  girl,  and,  for  her
station,  well  educated  and  sensible ;  at  the  same  time,  to
give  it  certainty  and  scientific  reality,  it  was  indispensable
to  seek  about  for  corroboration  from  other  quarters.  Through
the  present  investigations  I  had  become  acquainted  with  an
accomplished  physician.  Dr.  Lippich,  House  Physician  to
the  Hospital,  Clinical  Professor  in  Ordinary  in  the  Vienna
University,  and  by  his  kindness  I  was  introduced  lo  a
patient  lying  under  his  treatment  in  the  hospital.  This  was
Miss  Angelica  Sturmann,  nineteen  years  of  age,  daughter
of  an  inspector  of  farms  in  Prague,  suffering  from  tubercu-
lar afiection  of  the  lungs,  and  long  subject  to  somnam-
bulism  in  its  slighter  stages,  with  attacks  of  tetanus  and
cataleptic  fits.  The  influence  of  the  magnet  displayed  itself
so  powerfully  in  her,  after  a  few  experiments,  that  she  fieur  sur-
passed Miss  Nowotny  in  sensitiveness.  When  I  stood  in
the  darkened  ward,  holding  the  901b.  magnet  open  at  a
distance  of  six  paces  from  the  feet  of  the  patient,  while  Pro-
fessor Lippich  stood  beside  her,  and  she  was  previously  per-
fectly conscious  of  what  was  going  on  around  her,  the  patient
ceased  to  answer.  She  fell  into  tetanic  spasms  and  complete
unconsciousness,  from  the  action  of  the  magnet,  immediately
I  had  pulled  off  the  armatiure. This  did  not  hold  out  a


IB  AURORA  BQRRAfilS.


II


very  hopeful  prospect  of  the  resuUs  of  my  experiments;
they  were  not  in  vain. After  a  while  the  gii*l  came  to

self  again,  and  said  tliat  at  the  moment  I  removed  the
armature  from  the  large  magnet  she  had  seen  a  flame  flash
Qcer  fl,  about  the  length  of  a  small  hand,  and  of  a  white

)ur  mingled  with  red  and  blue.  She  had  wished  to  look
'  at  it  more  closely,  when  suddenly  tlie  action  of  the  opened
magnet  took  away  her  consciousness.  I  had  an  intense
desire  to  repeat  the  experiment,  to  obtain  more  exact  infor-
mation of  the  circmnstances.  The  patient,  also,  was  per-
fectly willing;  but  the  physician  considered  it  injurious  tx>
complaint  of  his  patient,  and  I  was  therefore  forced  to

indon  any  further  investigation  of  the  matter.  At  the
same  time,  I  had  attained  my  principal  aim  :  a  confirmation
of  Mm  Nowotny's  statements  res^iccting  the  luminosity
over  the  magnet  was  obtained  :  it  had  now  been  seen  by  a
second  person  suffering  from  quite  a  different  disease,  with-
ottt  aoy  communication  with  the  first.

5.  In  another  ward  of  the  hospital,  Dr.  Lippich  took  me
to  a  young  lad  of  some  eighteen  years,  a  journeyman  glover,
suffering  from  intermittent  spasms,  produced  by  fright  and
ill  usage.  Wlien  I  approached  him  with  the  magnet  lie  at
omse  spoke  of  Jire  and  flames  appearing  be/ore  him,  and
which  rctiunied  every  time  I  removed  the  armature.  But
the  lad  was  so  uneducated  that  it  w^ould  have  been  impos-
sible to  make  any  accmate  experiments  with  him ;  and  in
the  meantime  I  found  more  interesting  opportunities  of

ring  out  my  subject  in  detail.

6,  Miss  Maria  Maix,  25  years  old,  daughter  of  a  groom
of  the  chambers  in  the  Imperial  Palaces,  residing  at  No.  260
in  the  Kohhuarket>  was  the  next  person  who  was  brought
to  mei  through  the  kindness  of  her  physician.  He  was
treating  her  for  a  |>aralytic  affection  of  the  lower  extremities,
with  occasional  attacks  of  spasms.  She  was  neither  a  som-
uambulist^  nor  did  she  talk  in  her  sleep ;  she  had  never


\t\  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT

,.,^^  fMtiit'A  H\\\  atfacks  of  insanity,  and  was  in  all  respects
.,  f'^ui^*/  wotuHu  of  clear  good  sense.  UTicn  a  large  magnet
•'^  ff\Kt'4i*'A  U.'fore  her  in  the  night-time,  whidi  was  often
/t/y^»i:,  $fui  alicayt  immediately  beheld  a  Iwmimorihi  aver  ii,
^^$h0U/  im  the  poles ^  about  a  hand's  breadth  in  hdght.
\'^$y  t^heri  Hhc  was  labouring  under  spasms,  the  phenomena
u>i:fi'.HM'A\  nioHt  extraordinarily  to  her  eyes.  She  then  saw
>>!/'  fuagnetic  light,  which  now  appeared  greatly  increased
iw  «i/>;,  not  merely  on  the  poles,  but  also  perceived  rays  of
lifflU  JUpnnny  from  all  over  the  outer  sides  of  the  steel,
wrjik'-r  index^l  than  at  the  poles,  but  spread  universally
fntr  ilw;  whole  horse-shoe,  which  appeared  as  a  bright
If^lit,  $iiu\,  iiH  in  the  case  of  Miss  Nowotny,  left  a  dazzling
hnffUluirtm  tM;fore  h(;r  eyes,  which  would  not  disappear  for
>i  l/^fi«  Utw,.  We  shall  see  the  meaning  and  connection
//f  »\\  lUiH  Meantime  I  had  now  obtained  the  fourth  con-
hiMiiftion  of  the.  ohH(5r>'ation  of  the  magnetic  light  But  by
t»9  lU  iiitmi  remarkable  and  clearest  of  the  observers  was  yet

y  'tUm  WHH  MIhh  Barbara  lleichel,  29  years  old,  stoutly
iitutU',  dHMf/liNT  of  a  servant  in  the  Imperial  Palace  at  Lax-
Mfibiiri/  When  a  child  of  seven  years,  she  had  fallen
tiniii  Mm^  wmmImw  of  the  second  floor  of  her  dwelling,  and
Unm  Mini,  liinii  forwiircl  had  Huffcrcd  from  nervous  attacks,
whirh  iHiamd  ni  ntuwr.  degree  into  true  somnambulism,  and
nihi  hillMtiK  Ml  her  nhrp,  and  wandering  in  her  dreams.
'Mil'  nim\i\hu\i  wiiN  iniermittent,  coming  and  going  at  long
ni^t  I  viilh  Thi^  p;nl  lind  just  recovered  from  a  violent  spas-
ih«;Jm  Mlhirk,  bill  nIIII  retained  all  the  irritability  of  her
*^Uni  |M  iM'd  |iower  of  vJHion.  She  was  at  the  same  time  quite
t^<ioi)|/,  rlriiiiy  ronm'idtiN.  looking  well,  and,  moreover,  walked
^Un^'  thioii^h  nil  the  buNtle  of  the  town,  to  visit  her  rela-
lioJiN  I  mvileil  her  to  my  house,  and  received  visits  from
in  I  iin  oileii  iiM  I  wIhIumI.  in  order  to  make  use  of  her  extra-
i»i«iniiiry  KtMiNJtivt^neNN  to  the  magnet,  in  investigations  with


THE  AURORA  BORE  A  LIS.


n


physical  appaiatus  which  could  not  well  be  taken  to  other
houses,

1'Im-  •"'I'^'mi  united  in  herself  tlie  rare  gifts,  that  she  saw
the  in  light  as  strongly  as  any  exhausted,  helpless,

sick  patient,  while  she  was  outwardly  healthy,  active,  and

:i3iUlei  and  that,  with  the  greatest  sensitiveness  to  the
aous  appearances,  she  could  l)ear  the  circuit  of  the
HMgjDet  almost  as  welJ  as  a  healthy  pei'son  ;  wliich,  with
most  of  the  sensitive,  as  we  have  an  example  of  in  Miss
Sturmaun,  and  as  also  occurred  in  a  slight  degree  in  Miss
Nowotny,  is  so  far  from  being  the  case,  that  an  open
pagnct  is  liable  to  throw  tliem  into  convulsions,  and  even

ider  them  senseless.  Little  can  be  dune  with  such  j
hist  with  Miss  Reichel  I  could  follow  every  investigation
quietly  to  the  end.  IncUviduals  like  her  are  invaluable
far  scientific  inquiries :  ami  thus  I  have  tlu^ugli  her  I)ecn
able  to  obtain  most  valuable  elucidations  of  the  electro-
magnetic theory.  In  this  place  I  shall  in  the  first  instance
only  indicate  those  observations  which  relate  to  the  emis-

m  of  light  from  magnets.

She  saw^  the  magnetic  light  not  only  ia  darkness,  but  in
the  dim  light  which  I  required  to  perceive  all  objects,  and
thus  manipulate,  to  modify,  and  repeat  the  experiments.
If  the  obscurity  w as  moderate,  the  magnetic  light  appeared
shorter  and  smaller,  she  saw  less  of  it ;  that  is,  those  parts
in  which  the  light  was  weakest  were  first  overpowered  by
daj-ligbt ;  but  she  saw  the  flaming  effluences  most  brilliantly,
their  size  giH^atest,  their  definition  sharjicst,  and  the  play  of

Jour  most  distinct,  when  tlie  darkness  was  perfect,

b.  When  a  magnet  wiia  laid  before  her  in  darkness,  she
saw  U  emit  lighi,  not  merely  when  open,  hut  when  it  wu$
ekmed^  like  a  horne'shoe,  hy  the  armature.  This  nuiy  at
fiist  sight  appear  surprising ;  but  the  sciiiicl  will  show  that
this  statement  of  the  observer  correi^pontU  perfectly  witli
Uie  jaitimate  natiue  of  the  matter* The  two  luminous  pic-

c


i


IS


THE  MAG!nrnC  UGVT


Fig.  1.


tares  were  natanJhr  different  ib  ewtrj  respect.  On  the
dosed  horse-fihoe  she  cooid  wA  detect  anj  phce  al  wUch
the  fl^mmg  appeannces  were  espedidhr  concentnled,  as
ther  were  at  both  poles  when  it  was  open ;  bat  the  magnet
emitted  from  all  its  edges,  points  of  jonctim  of  the  pktes^
and  an^es,  a  short  flame-Kke  hmiinositr,  with  a  constant
undoktiDg  motion.  With  a  h<Mse-sboe  composed  of  nine
hjers,  capable  of  supporting  ninetv  poonds,  this  was  not
longer  than  aboat  a  finger's  breadth.

9.  Wlien  the  horse-shoe  was  opened,
it  exhibited  the  beautifdl  appeanmce
represented  in  fig.  1.  The  drawing
was  prepared  by  Miss  Rdchel  hersrif,
as  well  as  she  conld  execute  it;  but
she  lamented  that  she  was  not  able  to
attain  an  exact  imitation  of  nature.
While  an  arm  of  the  horse-shoe  mea-
sured ten  inches,  the  flaming  light
reached  up  almost  to  an  equal  length,
and  arose  of  greater  breadth  than  the
steel.  At  every  break  formed  by  the
layers  of  the  magnet,  smaller  flames
stoo<l  around  the  edges  and  angles,
terminating  in  sparkling  brushes.  She
described  these  little  flames  as  blue,  the
main  light  as  white  below,  becoming  yellow  above,  passing
then  into  red,  and  terminating  at  the  top  with  green  and
bine.  This  light  did  not  remain  still,  but  flickered,  waved
and  darted  continually,  so  as  to  produce,  as  it  were,  shooting
rays.  But  here  also,  as  had  occurred  in  the  observation  of
Miss  Nowotny,  there  was  no  attraction,  no  intermingling
of  the  flames,  not  even  an  indication  of  a  tendency  to  this,
from  pole  to  pole ;  and  as  there,  too,  no  observable  dis-
tinction between  the  condition  of  the  two  poles  of  the
horse-shoe. Fig.  2  gives  a  side  view,  in  which  a  separate


THE  AURORA  BOREALTS.


19


tuft,  of a  lighter, flame-like appe^irance, F>g.
I  spreads  out  from  the  edge  of  each  eonii>o-

nent  hiyer  of  the  magnet. This  was  iicces-

sjirily  omitted  in  fig.  1,  for  the  sake  of  dis-

tiii0tne!}s. Along  the  back  end  inner  sides
►  of  the  steel,  weaker  liglits  streamed  out  uni-
versally, like  those  which  had  been  partially

dcjscribed  by  Miss  Maix  :  on  the  inside  tliey
I  were  all  curved  opw  ard,  but  on  the  outside

they  were  only  turned  upward  for  a  short
!  space,  then  were  straight  for  a  moment,  and
I  next took the directly  opposite direction

downwards.  They  were  shortest  at  the  lowest
I  part,  on  the  eiu^ature  of  the  steel ;  therefore

on  the  magnetically  indifferent  space. These

shorter  weaker  rays  are  very  delicate,  and  also  more  fixed.

They  arc  tlrawTi,  from  a  single  layer  of  steel,  in  fig,  1 0. The

condition  of  the  luminosity  along  the  four

longitudinal  edges  of  each  of  the  nine


Fig.  10.


layers of  steel fitted  ujjon  one  another,  ; ; J

is  worthy  of  remark. At  places  where

the  edges  of  tw^o  lamellai  arc  accurately ;

and  closely  fitted  alongside  one  another,

and  alnjost  form  a  continuous  line,  they

were  still  clearly  distinguished  by  the  emis-

I  siou,  on  each  side,  of  lin^  of  flame,  wliich

I  one  must  supjjose  were  necessarily  eou-
flticnt  at  the  bottom.  Directly  above  their  point  of  origin
they  diverged,  C4>nse(|nently  converged  tow^ard  the  other  late-
ral radiation  of  the  same  lamella ;  whence  it  follows,  that
a  transvexse  section  would  exhibit  such  a  figin-e  as  is
represented  in  fig.  3. — Weaker  magnets?,  from
wliich  Miss  Reichel  made  drawings,  gave
the  same  picture,  but  the  emitted  rays  were  T Tl]
shorter.  -^  ^  ^


Fig.  3.


if}


TSEI.  MAdTTDC  UCXV


Fic.4.


]  0 I  iuid  bdore  ihcf  a  icnaes  Tiaciirtir  w^ It
£L'xiu:  J  f  if  1  i'.inE.  <nuinT»ngrn"ag'  joic  iAihiii  3iBoke&  broad,

xh/^sKtjrt  a:  iLe  nesHDrf-  aid  cf  ihe

(kijcsng,  szid  iMr.^thi^  am  rsr^L  &^  id  tiie  lKCSl^-

h^MJt:  n^  be-lvir.  ^re«D  in  tbe  iniddic:.  j

aJxntr. Froixi  eadi  of  tbe  foor  edges  cf  <

{Xykr  ^nctKUiJtj  iseo&d  a  srrong  Iig)ii,eacii

p^cdemlv  fr>»-iiig  out  at  an  angle  ci  45'  to  tiie

[Aauf:  U  tLe  ^j&se,  and  baring  a  sosDemiiax  iMa-

um  WfAifjSi.  Iff  A  eiLilnted  br  the  dueC  omtnL

flkrLering  flaioe ;  tfaiu  there  vm^  a  twofold  db-

iriirnXMrn  at  each  pr^. A  shmlantT  exists  in

t\^  t^tatearueuts  of  Miss  Xowotny,  who  ako  per-

odi\^  a  istfoiiger  and  more  doogated  flame  at

enfAi  iiAid  angle  of  the  horse-shoe. Hie  four

eilga^  ^/  the  rod  were  clothed  with  a  weaker

ligtit^  jwiX  like  the  indi\idoal  layers  of  the  horse-

hboe ;  tbii»  exhibiting  the  red,  green,  and  blue

aAfAim,  but  otberwise  issuing  steadily  and  with-

(mi  motion. It  did  not  present  any  decrease

along  it8  whole  extent,  and  neither  edges  nor  indifferent

IMutM  could  be  recognised,  as  was  the  case  in  the  horse-

1 1 .  Placing  the  magnetic  bar  in  the  meridian  or  in  the
uiagrifftic  parallel,  with  the  poles  directed  forward  or  back-
ward or  in  the  direction  of  the  dip,  did  not  appear  to  «ert
any  imfKirtant  influence  in  the  shape  or  direction  of  the
flflinr^i  the*  terrestrial  magnetism  not  being  strong  raongh  to
eiiect  any  considerable  opposing  action.

1 2.  I  now  tcx)k  an  electro-dynamic  apparatus,  on  the
one  hand  U)  make  an  electro-magnet  before  her  eyes,  on  the


till!  AtJROBA  BOREAITS.


other  to  bring  to  observation  the  action  which  this  and  a

romnion  steel  magnet  would  prodnce  npon  one  another  in

lieiereiice  to  the  Ituninous  phenomena. It  consisted  of  a

'home-dioe  magnet  with  the  poles  widely  separated,  between

which  a  horizontal  coiled  electro-magnet  coidd  be  made  to

I  rotate. The  magnet  itself,  the  poles  of  which  were  directed

^  upwards,  had  leg*  of  square  section  measiu'ing  abont  three-

fourths  of  an  inch  on  a  side.  In  a  dim  light  it  exhibited  a  con-

i  dition  essentially  similm'  in  all  respects  to  that  which  the  large

[hoiBC-shoe  magnet  had  presented  ;  at  the  foiu*  solid  angles

of  the  polar  extremities  obliquely  ascending  fianies,  but  in

the  middle  of  them,  issuing  ft*oni  the  centre  of  the  plane  of

the  base,  a  longer,  erect,  ascending  flame. But  this  latter

was  not  a  dense  fiery  mass  here,  for  it  had  assumed  the

shape  of  a  thin,  straight,  and  vertically  erected  needle ;  a

modification  of  the  condition  which  might  depend  on  the

tive  strength  of  the  magnet,  on  its  size,  or  on  other  ac-

jty  circumstances  of  its  fonu. It  is  jx)ssible  that  a  very

[filight  excavation,  which  had  been  drilled  in  the  two  ends

of  the  steel,  for  the  rotation  of  fine  points  fittijig  on  to  them,

may  have  contributed  to  this. The  luminous  appearance

S¥t»  stationary  in  this  fonn,  and,  with  a  shght  ditlerence  in

[fiize,  almost  exactly  the  same  at  both  poles. When  1  caused

[a  current  from  a  single  pair  of  Grove's  elements  to  pass

the  stout  silk-covered  wnre  coiled  round  the  iron

nerved  for  the  electro-magnet,  this  emitti*d  fiaining

I  lights  from  both  ends,  and  exhibited  in  an  instant  all  the

luminout;  phenomena  of  a  magnetic  rod. Nay  more  ;  when

H  was  removed  out  of  the  voltaic  current,  and  had  thus

[ceaaed  to  be  a  magnet,  it  continued  to  emit  magnetic  liglit

the  poles,  and,  as  regai'ds  luminosity,  like  the  Hitter's

Ifiile^  went  on  acting  after  the  removal  of  the  cause. (I  shall

[return  to  the  reason  and  explanation  of  this  phenomenon  in

[cHie  of  the  succeeding  treatises). Comcqimtihj,  in  ike  eyas

\af  u Bamiive  person^  an  ekclro-maynei  ea:hibiis  exactly  the


THE  lif  AGNKTIC  LTUHT—


same  behaviour  in  its  emission  ojjlamimf  light,  as  the
common  steel  tnat/net*

13*  But  the  reciprocal  action  exerted  by  the  two  tiames
U|TOii  each  other  was  renmrkable.  The  flame  of  the  steel
mm/ net  was  complete h/  turned  aside  hij  that  of  the  electro-
maynet,  imd  that  as  distinctly  as  the  current  of  a  bIo\v^>ipe
directs  the  flame  of  a  caudle.  To  shorten  as  nnich  as  pos-
sible the  descriptions,  which  are  tedious  to  read  and  at  the
same  time  dillicult  to  comprehend,  1  briefly  direct  attention
to  figures  5,  6,  7,  and  9.  Fig.  5  represents  the  steel
magnet  with  its  lumhiosity  alone,  ftg.  6,  a  and  i,  the  electro,
magnet  imdenieath  the  poles  of  the  latter,  with  the  outline,

*  1  bad  ilve  years  ago  a  beautiful  case  of  suniQaiiibulism,  in  a  femate«  who
could  ill  her  sleep  see  the  light  from  the  poles  of  magneta,  exactly  as  in
IbiB  case ;  cveti  wliere  the  armature  was  appUeJ,  slie  saw  lambent
blue  flames  issuing  from  between  the  magnet  and  the  armature,  and
between  the  platea  of  which  the  magnet  was  composed.  Awake,  she
saw  nothiug ;  but  on  looking  at  the  magnet  a  while»  she  fell  asleep,
and  then  saw  the  light  again.  If  abe  touched  the  magnet,  instantly
a  deep  sleep  and  rigidity  seized  her*  Wlien  I  operated  with  an  eleetro-
magnetic  single  coil  apparatus^  the  same  phenomena  occurred  as  in  the
magnet.  While  the  keeper  or  contact-breaker  continued  its  action,  she
saw  volumes  of  blue  light  and  cloud  emanating  from  the  coil  arouutl  the
hohhin  ;  if  the  circle  were  closed,  the  curreut  still  paaiing,  she  still  saw
a  subdued  lights  but  the  grey  cloud  as  before ;  and  if  in  this  state  she
touched  the  coil,  instantly  she  became  unconscions  and  rigid.  From
this  it  is  manifest,  that  besides  that  force  which  can  in  Hue  nee  the  gal-
vanometer, some  other  agent  powerfully  inflnences  the  human  system  ;
and  that  certain  individuals  in  the  mesmerie  sleep- waking  are  as  good
testa  of  the  presence  of  this  agent  ns  any  sensitive  individuals  in  an  ana-
logous condition  of  nerves,  who  may  happen  to  be  awake.  Since  the
time  above  mentioned,  several  of  my  somiiamhule."*,  separated  from  one
another,  each  ignorant  of  the  purpose  of  the  experiment,  have  been,  at
dltferent  times,  introduced  to  a  room  where  an  electro-dynamic  appa-
ratus  haa  been  in  action,  and  they  have  seen  an  emanation  from  the
coil  fxactif/  as  in  the  above  case.  Moreover,  in  corroboration  of  the
fact  noticed  by  the  Baron,  each  of  these  persons  has  rejieatedly  been
put  to  sleep  by  tonebing  the  helix^  at  various  iuten^als,  from  one  hour
to  two  hours  after  the  J:?mee*s  battery  has  been  removed.


<


THS  AURORA  BORBALI8.  23

Fig.  6.


Fig.  5.


w w


T&


\


/


'^b


Fig.  7.


Hdy^-^^^d*


Fig.  8.


\V


^^^B^mMm^


fig.  7,  beside  it,  fig.  8  close  above  it,  fig.  9  high  over  it,  and
showing  the  remarkable  divei^-  Yiq.  9.

ence  of  the  flame  of  the  steel  mag-
net. The  question  whether  this
is  to  be  attributed  to  a  difference
of  strength  or  to  some  other  cause,
is  reserved  for  fature  investigation.
Hius  in  Miss  Reichel  we  have
the  fifth  and  at  the  same  time  the
clearest  testimony  for  the  luminous
phenomena  at  the  poles  of  the
magnet.


24  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT —

Lastly,  I  must  mention  a  Miss  Maria  Atzmannsdorfer,  a
girl  26  years  old  (Golden  Lamb,  in  the  suburb  Alte  Wieden).
She  is  the  daughter  of  a  pensioned  military  surgeon.  She
has  an  affection  of  the  head,  with  spasms  and  sleep-walking,
but  walks  about  the  streets  looking  like  a  healthy  person.
I  brought  her  to  my  house  late  in  the  evening,  when  it  was
getting  very  dark,  and  into  a  room  which  I  could  darken
perfectly  by  closing  inside  shutters.  She  was  sensitive  in  a
high  degree,  and  saw  the  Magnetic  poles  flame  here  in  a
most  lively  manner.  She  described  the  luminous  appear-
ance as  still  larger  than  Miss  Reichel,  from  the  nine-layered
horse-shoe  more  than  twice  the  height,  and  gave  an  exactly
similar  account  of  the  light,  the  colours,  and  the  mobility
of  the  flame ;  like  her  she  saw  the  whole  magnet  luminous,
and  its  entire  surface  clothed  with  a  delicate  light.  She
makes  the  sixth  witness.

14.  Let  us  now  briefly  compare  the  different  statements :
the  same  nine-layered  horse-shoe  magnet  displayed  at  its
poles,  to  the  eyes  of  the  greatly  convalescent —

a.  Miss  Nowotny,  a  kind  of  luminous  vapour,  sur-
rounded and  intermingled  with  rays  of  shining,  moving,
darting,  white  and  sometimes  iridescent  light,  about  one
half  to  three  quarters  of  an  inch  long.

h.  Miss  Maix,  when  free  from  spasms,  saw  a  white  flame
about  a  hand's  breadth  high.

c.  Miss  Sturmann,  a  white  flame  as  high  as  the  length
of  a  small  hand,  with  an  intermixture  of  colours.

d.  The  journeyman  glover,  aflame  a  hand's  length  in  height.

e.  Miss  Maix,  in  a  spasmodic  state,  a  general  light,  dis-
tributed all  over  the  magnet,  dazzling  her  eyes,  and  issuing
largest  and  strongest  from  the  poles.

/.  Miss  Reichel,  a  variously-coloured,  flickering,  radiating
flame,  as  large  as  the  whole  horse-shoe  magnet,  therefore
10  inches  long;  lateral  flames  out  from  each  layer  of  the
magnet ;  a  general  weaker  efflux  of  light  along  all  the  edges
of  the  layers  inward  over  the  whole  horse-shoe.


TtfS  AURORA  BORBALI9.


25


g. Miss Atemaiisdorfer,  the same appearances more
;ly  markedi  aud  the  entire  magnet  m  a  dehcate  glow.

15.  From  ail  tliis  it  follows^  that  Ihose  sensHlve  ptrsotts,
who  are  so  in  a  high  dtyree,  perceive  in  the  dark,  at  ihe
poles  iff  powerful  magnels,  a luminous  ajqyearance  of  a

tvinii^flame4ike  nature^  less  or  more  according  to  the  de-
gree of' their  diseased  sensihiliiy^  or  the  more  or  less  perfect
degree  of  darkness  ;  that  they  do  indeed  difter  in  their  ob-
8er\ation8  as  to  its  size,  in  consequence  of  then*  varying
jiowers  of  perception^  but  agree  unconditionally  in  all  their
gmeral  statements;  such  a  luminous  nppcaruDcc  of  con-
mderable  magnitude,  of  which  healthy  persons  see  nothing,
docs  therefore  actually  exist  ou  nuiguets.  Since,  witli  the
exceptiou  of  an  acqiuiintance  between  Miss  Maix  aud  Miss
Reiehcl,  none  of  the  witnesses  had  any  communication  Avith
each  other,  or  did  even  know  one  another,  but  lived  leagues
u{iart,  aud  in  my  innmnerable  experiments  never  contra-
dicted one  another,  much  less  themselves ;  and  since  they
never  stated  anything  opposed  to  the  fixed  laws  of  elec-
tricity and  magnetism ;  lastly,  conscious  of  the  precaution
and  accuracy  of  my  own  method  of  investigation, — I  feel  no
lic^sitation  in  expressing  the  conviction  1  ha\e  anived  at,~
that  I  regard  the  reality  of  the  perception,  by  |>ersons  of
exalted  sensibility,  of  luminous  phenomena  at  the  magnetic
polea^  as  incontestible,  and  as  an  ascertained  and  settled
b^  of  science ;  so  far,  that  is,  as  an  imUvidual  observer  is
in  a  jKjsition  to  complete  it.  I  am  certain  that  we  shall  not
have  to  wait  long  for  its  confirmation  from  other  quarters.
Thti  sensitive  are  not  indeed  so  numerous  in  small  towns,
that  they  may  be  found  almost  everywhere,  if  sought ;  but
in  lai^e  cities  they  are  far  from  nue,  and  I  do  not  consider
it  a  clilticult  task  to  find  hundreds  at  once,  if  requisite,  in  a
place  like  Vienna,  My  statements  may  therefore  be  readily
ii^qstod  in  Berlin,  IIaml)urgh,  or  Paris.

Hi, \Vt^  uill  uiiw  turn  to  some  of  the  prqjcrties  of  tbe


26  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT

mafrnetic  light  That  it  is  invisible  to  healthy  eyes,  is  not
in  itself  very  wonderfnl.  WTien  we  consider  the  difference
between  sun-light  and  candle-light,  the  former  of  which
Wollaston  found  5560,  Leslie  even  12,000  times  stronger
than  the  latter ;  when  we  see  how  very  weak  is  the  lumi-
nosity of  alcohol,  wood-spirit,  carbonic-oxide  gas,  pure  hy-
drogen, and  other  combustibles,  the  flames  of  which  are  not
only  wholly  invisible  in  strong  sun-light,  but  become  to  a
certain  extent  imperceptible  in  strong  reflected  dayUght,  we
are  aware  already  of  such  extreme  differences  between  the
luminosities  of  different  flames,  that  the  step  to  the  com-
plete invisibility  to  oiu*  eyes  is  no  longer  a  great  one,  and
hence  the  possibiUty  as  well  as  the  comprehensibiUty  lies
tolerably  near.  It  therefore  cannot  be  regarded  as  strange,
that  other  lights  exist,  which  fall  beneath  our  powers  of
vision,  and  that  a  luminosity  pervades  magnets,  which,  from
its  weakness,  we  are  usually  unable  to  see.

17.  To  convince  myself,  where  possible,  whether  it
was  actually  Ught  then,  and  not  some  different  kind  of  ap-
pearance, that  was  perceived  by  the  sensitive  persons,  I
wished  to  make  an  experiment  with  the  daguerreotype,  and
to  see  if  an  impression  could  be  produced  upon  the  iodised
silver  plate.  To  carry  out  this  experiment,  I  invited  my
obliging  friend,  M.  Karl  Schuh,  a  private  teacher  of  physics
in  Vienna,  known  by  his  improvements  in  the  gas-micro-
scope and  his  skill  in  daguerr6otyping.  He  shut  up  an
iodized  plate,  in  front  of  which  an  open  magnet  was  placed,
in  a  dark  box,  and  at  the  same  time  deposited  another  plate
in  another  dark  case,  without  a  magnet.  After  some  hours
he  found  the  former,  when  it  had  been  treated  with  mer-
curial vapour,  affected  by  light,  the  other  not ;  but  the  dis-
tinction was  not  very  strong.  In  order  to  make  it  perfectly
clear,  he  took  the  magnet,  turned  towards  an  iodized  plate,
with  extreme  precautions  for  keeping  out  every  trace  of
light  during  the  manipulation,  of  which  I  was  witness,  and


*rfiS  AURORA  BOREALIS.


US


plAoed  it  ill  a  C3a»e  in  a  tliick  bed,  and  left  it  tliere  sixty-four
boars.  Taken  out  in  darkness  and  ex|>08ed  to  mercurial
vnpcMir,  tl>e  plate  now  exhibited  tlie  full  ettect  of  the  light
wbidi  it  had  received,  ovtrr  the  entire  surface.  It  was  clear
from  this,  that  imless  other  causes  are  ca|jal>le  of  affecting
the  photographic  plate  after  considerable  time,  it,  in  fact,
musi  be  lifjhi^  real,  ihout^h  weak  and  acliny  but  slowly,
which  issues  from  the  magnet,

18.  1  made  aiiotlier  experiment^  with  a  similar  vietv^  with
a  large  burning  glass.  The  lens  was  about  eight  inches
across,  ami  had  a  focal  distance  of  about  twelve  iuclies  for
a  candle  standing  about  five  feet  belimd  it.  In  a  com-
pletely  darkened  room,  I  brought  the  magnet,  of  wliich  the
flame  was  ten  inches  long,  about  twenty-five  inches  behind
tills  lens,  and  directed  it  against  the  wall,  calling  Miss
Reicliers  attention  to  it.  The  clever  mechauist  of  this  city,
Mr,  Ekling,  was  present.  We  removed  the  lens  gi-adually
four  feet  sL\  inches  fitim  the  wall,  during  which  the  observer
aaw  this  picture  of  the  light  continually  diminish  in  size,
and  first  at  that  distance  contract  to  about  one-eightli  of  an
inch.  But  in  spite  of  this,  no  one  present  was  able  to  per-
ceive a  trace  of  the  light,  even  under  this  considerable  con*
cctitratiou.  Yet  it  furnished  us  with  a  sure  means  of  testing
the  accuracy  of  the  observer  in  a  variety  of  ways.  Among
others,  she  laid  her  finger  on  the  s|X)t  where  she  saw  the
fijcal  jioiut ;  I  followed  her,  and,  by  feeling  in  the  dark,
placed  mine  upon  it*  Mr,  Ekling,  who  held  the  lens,  now
altered  its  dii't^tion  a  httle,  without  saying  in  what  way.
The  position  of  the  focus  on  the  wall  was  thus  of  coiu^se
altered  in  the  same  diitjction.  The  obsener  immediatelv
gave  another,  which  I  traced  out  with  my  finger,  and  then
made  Mr.  Ekling  state  in  what  direction  he  had  diverted  the
axis.  WTicther  he  said  to  the  right,  downward  or  upward,
my  finger  was  in  c^very  aise  already  on  the  right,  below  or
above. The  exactitude  and  genuineness  of  the  observation


28  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT

was  consequently  beyond  all  doubt.  She  described  the
colour  of  the  focal  point  as  red ;  and  she  also  said  that  the
whole  of  the  large  glass  lens  was  illumined  red  by  the
magnet.

19.  The  magnetic  light  emitted  no  heat ;  at  least  none
appreciable  by  our  most  delicate  instruments.  Directed  on
to  a  NobiU's  thermoscope,  I  could  not  detect  any  movement
of  the  astatic  needle  of  the  differential  galvanometer,  even
after  a  lengthened  trial.

20.  It  was  very  desirable  to  obtain  some  more  intimate
knowledge  as  to  the  substantiality  of  the  flame,  light,  gr
whatever  we  may  please  to  call  it,  waving  over  the
magnetic  poles.  Since  it  did  not  issue  in  a  radiant  form
from  its  source,  but  in  a  flickering  shape,  forming  all  sorts
of  curved  and  changing  hues,  it  could  not  well  consist  of  a
simple  and  pure  emission  of  light.  In  fact,  when  I  turned
the  poles  of  the  magnet  downward,  it  flowed  dovmward  in
the  identical  shape  in  which  it  flowed  upward  when  I  re-
versed them,  and  in  each  direction  sideways  as  I  held  them
to  either  side.  This  testifies  strongly  to  its  more  than
probable  imponderability,  but  proves  nothing  positive  as  to
its  nature.  But  the  answer  I  obtained  to  the  question,  how
the  magnetic  flame  behaved  when  blown  upon,  seemed  to
me  more  important  in  this  respect.  The  observer  said  that
it  flared  divergently  to  the  side  like  any  other  flame.  Wlien
a  solid  is  brought  too  near,  the  points  curl  round  it :  when
in  the  last  experiments,  also,  the  large  glass  lens  had  been
brought  too  near  the  open  magnet,  the  flames  had  applied
themselves  upon  the  glass  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as
happens  when  another  glass  is  placed  in  the  flame  of  a
candle  to  blacken  it ;  when  the  hand  was  placed  on  the
magnet,  the  flames  passed  between  the  fingers  and  out
behind  the  hand,  &c.  It  follows  from  this,  that  the  mag-
netic  flame  is  evidently  either  itself  something  wholly  mate-
rial,  or  has  such  for  a  substratum ;  further,  that  the  magnetic


TBS  AtJRORA  BOHEALTS.


lijfhi  is  sautethififf  different  from  it,  and  the  magnetic  flame
k  a  cfHupound,  in  which  some  kind  of  raateriality  is  united

Tlie  sensitive


with  the  immaterial  essence  of  tlie  Hght.*


*  In  a  logical  work,  the  meaning  of  such  words  as  raateriul
and  immaterial  slioiild  be  strictly  defined.  Tlie  question  relates  not
here  to  Theology,  hut  to  Natural  Science.  Great  confusion  of  ideas
oiu«t  inevitably  result  from  misapprehension  of  the  accurate  im-
port of  terma.  If  1  understand  the  adjective  material,  it  relates  to
matter — ^lomethinff.  On  the  other  hand,  immaterial  relates  to  immaiter
"^noth^nff.  Divisibility  is  infinite*  The  attenuation  of  any  substance  in
■giice  it  bounded  only  by  the  opposition  oifered  to  its  expansion  by  the
pmaure  of  other  matrcr  \  otherwise  its  expansibihtj  would  be  infinite.
It  t5  impoasible  to  conceive  of  its  annihilation — of  its  being  reduced
lo  nothing.  Without  clear  ideas,  logic  is  nothing — philosophy  is
nothing — reason  is  nothing — truth  is  nothing.  Their  provinces  are
in  entity.  It  is  absurd  to  speak  of  reasoning  upon  nothing.  We  can-
not conceive  of  nothing.  Our  faculties  have  no  relations  to  Hothing,
Being  in  tbemaelves  somethings  we  can  have  nu  faith  in  nothing.  Move
for  an  instant  from  physics  to  theology.  It  is  the  atheist  who  believes
in  nothing.  The  believer  in  a  God,  dearer  in  his  logic,  confessing,  in
great  humility,  his  perfect  and  complete  inability  to  graj?p  the  idea  of
nothing,  can  never  measure  more  than  the  attributes  of  an  all-wise,  all  -
just,  all-holy,  and  all-powerful  Being ;  stdl,  cannot  believe  that  being
nou^emteut.  He  faik^  perhaps  of  that  Being  being  immaterial.  He
doeft  not  for  one  moment  mean  constituted  of  nothing  !  He  would  be
winer  to  avoid  the  use  of  terms  which  have  no  meaniug,  .  .  .  Real
humility^  which  characterizes  real  philosophy,  leads  him  to  say — "  I  do
not  know,  but  in  future  I  will  not  talk  nonsense  about  immaterial  ism.
I  will  not  get  angry,  I  will  not  dispute  about  what  no  imagination  can
conceive.  A  being  must  be  something,  although  I  may  be  quite  igno-
rant of  the  nature  of  that  thing.''  It  is  highly  important  that,  in  all
considerations  on  those  agencies  which  are  sometimes  designated  as  im-
p&ndernttte  forms  of  matter,  we  should  not  use  such  terms  as  immaterial.
Hie  lena  can  be  used  only  when  there  is  an  absence  of  a  clear  idea^  or
t  nilUiignesa  to  envelop  the  mind  in  hazy  cloudy  clothing.

It  10  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  accurate  definition  is  necessary  only  in
metAphysica.  All  the  phenomena  rtdiitiug  to  the  subject  of  light  may
one  day  be  proved  to  belong  to  the  science  of  psychology ;  and  the  re-
•etrchea  now  presented  to  public  notice  may  indeed  be  regarded  as  the
emmmoe&mmt  of  rcry  numerous  investigations  hereat^r  by  men  of


30


THE  MAQNETTC  UfillT


person  actually  sees  the  miigiietic  flame  curve  round  the
glixss  lens,  while  the  light  itself  passes  through,  and  its  rays

science,  which  must  establish  the  relatiooa  of  light  to  the  phenomena
of  the  human  roiml.  It  is  silly  aufl  idle  to  oppose  to  the  progress  of
clear  ideas  the  confnsed  noDBensewliich  pervades  the  brains  of  men  who
cannot  help  hating  all  newtrtitbs.  Those  who  ore  really  Acwim^  luidsmcere
in  their  religious  faiths  need  never  fear  the  advance  of  science,  A  wise
and  just  God,  permitting  the  developments  of  truth,  decrees  that  man
cannot  alter  the  laws  which  regulate  Nature  in  her  operations.  The
repulsive  agencies  of  his  brain  raay  malignantly  oppose  the  revelations
of  science,  which  are  the  revelaliows  of  God's  will  to  man  given  out  at
progressively  advancing  periods  of  that  time  which  i»  a  fragment  of
Eternity  ;  but  ihey  cannot  overwhelm  the  truth,  And  are  able  to  stay  its
progress  only  as  the  midge  intercepts  the  progress  of  the  sun's  ligbt
for  a  moment.  To  our  limited  ken,  all  Nature's  truths  are  materiaL
Mathematics  have  enabled  wondrous  plnlosopbers  to  calculate  tbe  speed
at  which  light  traveK  and  tbe  admirable  observations  in  paragraph  16
of  the  text  are  sufficient  lo  prove  that  tbe  nmtenality  of  all  light,  when
man's  ken  shall  be  enlarged  by  science,  may  come  to  be  easily  estabH6be<l.
I  have  known  At  least  fifty  persons  who  have  seen  a  grey  silvery,  or  a
bine  light  emanating  from  my  hand  and  fingers,  when  they  bave  been
wide  awake.  I  have  known  a  great  many  persotis  wlio  having  been
put  into  mesmeric  sleep  have  declared  that  they  have  seen  blue  ligbt
issuing  in  copious  streams  from  my  eyes,  when  I  have  concentrated  my
thoughts  in  the  acts  of  volition  or  study.  Tbis  is  so  commoiu  that  as
the  investigation 8  into  mesmerism  proceed,  1  know  there  must  be
thousands  of  corroborations  of  the  faci,  instead  of  hundreds,  as  at  pre^
sent.  Will  any  one  venture  to  say  that  a  force  having  relation  to  sudi
a  ligbi  is  not  a  material  power  ?  The  ligbt  proceeds  from  the  brain  of
a  person  willing,  and  impinges  on  a  sleeper — sent  to  sleep  by  a  magnet
^-or  by  a  crystal.  The  light  is  sent  forth  by  the  will  of  that  person,
and  becomes  a  motive  power,  for  tbe  recipient  sleeper  moves  and  obeys
tbe  mandate  received  through  the  lumimuj*  agency.  I  have  repeatedly
performed  an  experiment  under  these  circumstance^*,  and  the  resttUs
have  been  as  above  stated »  But  though  I  bave  often  willed  persons
awake  as  well  as  sleep-wakei-s,  and  even  magnetic  and  crystallic-sicepcrs,
to  do  my  silent  bidding,  [i roving  that  the  light  from  my  brain  is  a
motive  power,  I  regard  some  other  experiments  on  rare  subjecis  to  be
itill  more  conclusive  as  to  the  material  agency  of  the  liftbt  whidi
emanates  from  the  human  brain.  I  have  cnuNcd  it  to  travel  72  miles,
producing  immediate  effects. I have  witnesses  who  can  testify  that  I


TITB  AtmOBA  BOKEAlilS.


I  may  be  collected  in  a  focus. Miss  Nowotny  and  Miss
I  Stumiann  both  assured  nie  that  the  Uglit  spread  a  bright-


hare  repeatedly  willed  an  individual  to  come  to  me  when  at  the  distance

of  nearly  two  tnilea. I  have  witne^es  who  can  testify  that  a  patient  for

i  Kome  months  required  the  force  of  the  light  emanating  from  my  hrain  by

I  the  exertion  of  the  will,  to  enable  her  to  sleep  at  all,  when  she  was  at  the

distance  of  nearly  two  miles  from  me. Hundreds  of  persons  have  seen

I  an  individQal  made  inisensihle  and  rigid  by  my  imagining  a  circle  round

her. In  Ler  delirium,  wiiich  made  her  muscles  enormously  powerful,  she

would  oceaaionally  master  several  persons. My  will,  impinginj^;  its  light

upon  her,  rendered  her  not  otdy  tractable  for  a  time,  but  set her  fast,

I  for  hours,  in  a  deep  sleep  and  rigid  spasm* If  I  imagined  a  bar  on  the

carpet,  she  could  indicate  with  acctiracy  the  position  and  limits  of  that

[bar. She  described  it  as  a  bar  of  blue  light  on  the  carpet ;  and  if  sbe

I  were  deaired  to  get  up  and  paas  over  it,  she  became  iu»eusible,  and  fell

Ion  the  iioor  tike  any  Lnnuimate  object. Sometimes  I  have  placed  this

IImf  of  light  across  the  threshold  of  a  door,  and  it  has  beeu  impossible

[for  her  to  paas  over  it. The  Bight  of  the  blue  bar  of  liglit,  placed  by  au

leflbrt  of  my  will,  even  after  many  repetitions  of  the  e^rperiment,  made  her

I  fall  down  in*en«ible ;  and  she  has  remained  insensible  to  all  external  im-

Iprewions,  like  a  person  dend  asleep  on  the  floor,  until  I  have  wilted  the

llwir  10  disappear. Hundreds  of  persona  have  seen  me  perform  this  ex-

{penment. On  one  occasion  I  left  the  bar  for  one  hour  and  a  half,  and

be  femiiined  qaite  nnconsciouB,  getting  up  instautly  when  I  willed

Ita  diMifipearance. Though  not  a  common,  this  has  not  been  a  solt-

Itary  caae  ill uat rati ve  of  auch  a  striking  fact. Charpignon  (Etndes  Phya,

■  •tif  le  Magn.  Anim.  Paris,  1843)  has  proposed  physical  tests  to  eata-

Ibliah  the  existence  of  the  mesmeric  fluid. One  of  them  consisted  in

[ro1)«cUiig  the  fluid  from  the  ends  of  the  finger  into  a  glass  tumbler,  and

grtting  patients  to  inhale  the  air  collected  in  that  glass  vessel.

pat  the  indiriduals  to  sleep* Several  persons  have  aeen  while

iwnke  the  blue  light proceeding  from  my  fingera,  and  collecting  in

Ihe  glaa9. I  have  directed  their  attention  to  other  objects,  so  that  ihey

Niold  not  be  aware  of  my  resuming  hold  of  the  glass  I  had  left,  and

Ihafi?  liecn  unawares  put  to  sleep  by  my  pouring  the  fluid  on  the  back

lof  their  necks. On  several  occHsions lately,  I  have  sat  in  one  room

Iwdling  the  mesmeric  light  into  a  wide-mouthed  phial  of  a  pint  capacity,

land  hate  taken  it  into  another  room,  where,  pouring  the  fiub:<tance  on

Is  patient's  head,  she  ha^  instantly fallen  asleep, The,-^e  experimenta,

IpeTfonned  with  every  precaution  to  avoid  sources  of  fallacy,  can  succeed

"only  la  tnm  of  moat  extreme  anaceptibility. Repeated  occurrences  of


32  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT

ness  around  it,  and  illuminated  neighbouring  objects ;  and
Miss  Reicliel  marked  the  exact  distance  to  which  the  visible
light  of  the  magnetic  flame  spread  over  the  table  on  which
it  lay ;  I  measured  this,  and  found  it  to  extend  to  about
nineteen  inches  in  diameter.  Whether  that  which  issues
from  the  magnet  in  the  form  of  flame  is  really  a  substantial
emission,  or  only  indicates  an  alteration  of  condition  which
the  magnet  produces  in  the  surrounding  air,  or  according
to  the  newer  theories,  in  the  ether,  which  then  in  further
progress  becomes  associated  with  an  evolution  of  light,  are
questions  to  solve  which  many  more  things,  among  others
the  slow  spontaneous  loss  of  power  of  the  steel  magnet,
must  be  placed  in  the  balance,  and  they  must  remain  as
subjects  for  further  research.  For  the  present,  only  this
much  is  established ; — that  the  magnetic  flame,  timiing  aside
before  mechanical  obstacles,  is  not  identical  with  the  inde-
pendent, simultaneously  issuing  magnetic  Ught,  which  pos-
sesses a  higher  radiant  nature.

21.  And  now  I  return  to  the  introductory  consideration
of  ^  2.  The  first  practical  use  to  be  made  of  these  obser-
vations would  be  an  endeavour  to  apply  them  to  the  eluci-
dation of  the  aurora  borealis.  We  are  in  possession  of  the
valuable  explanations  given  by  Sir  Humphry  Davy,  who
applied  the  influence  of  the  magnet  on  the  electrical  current
in  rarified  air,  to  the  aurora,  and  endeavoured  to  make  out
the  probability  that  this  phenomenon  was  produced  by  a
current  of  this  kind  on  the  outermost  limits  of  the  atmos-
phere. But  since,  through  the  recent  polar  expeditions,  it
has  been  found  how  deeply  this  frequently  descends  in  the
atmosphere,  Davy's  ingenious  comparison  has  lost  much  of

these  facUy  and,  as  they  are  easily  reproduced,  we  shall  have  have  ac-
counts of  many  of  them,  will  establish  the  conclusion  that  a  force  which
is  a  material  agent ^  attended  by  or  constituting  a  coloured  light,
emanates  from  the  brain  of  man,  when  he  thinks — that  his  will  can
direct  its  impingement — and  that  it  is  a  motive  power.


THl  AUEOEA  BOEEALIS.


m


its  certainty ;  the  raritied  ^mcA^^  tlie  ground  on  wliich  he
htted  it,  has  disnppearedj  and  with  it  the  diftu^ioii  of  the
fifee  cluctricity,  which,  derived  from  our  thimder-storms,  he
claifned  fur  the  aurora.  Tlie  certaiiity  which  we  possess
thai  tlie  aurora  is  only  formed  uuder  the  influence  of  the
magnetic  jjoles  of  the  earth,  the  Wtol  absence  of  any  diiect
phenomeDa  of  hght  on  magnets,  which  we  have  hitherto
assumed  ;  the  fiu-^U  now  gained,  that  although  invisible  to
common  eyes,  coluiu'ed,  esijeciaUy  white,  yellow,  and  red
€niia8bn8  of  hgbt  do  issue  from  magnets,  certainly  must  lead
to  surmise  that  the  aurora  may  be  either  actually  the
aetism  itself  issuing  from  the  polar  regions,  or  else  a
direct  cifect  of  it.  It  is  known  that  the  aurora,  when  it
appears,  affects  and  distm*hs  the  magnetic  needles  of  whole
coiuitries,  as  does  the  magnetic  flume,  or  the  magnet  pro-
ducing it,  at  a  certain  distance :  lastly,  it  is,  in  fact,  only
the  emanation  from  the  magnet,  and  not  the  magnet  itself,
which  produces  the  movements  at  a  distance ;  and  thus,
tberefore,  the  deflectmg  action  of  the  aurora  upon  the
n^dle  completely  agrees  with  those  of  the  magnet.  Finally,
if  we  compare  the  special  phenomena  in  tlie  appearance  of
the  magnetic  hght  and  the  magnetic  flame,  with  those  of  the
atirora,  the  probabiUty  of  such  an  assumption  evidently  in-
Gnoses,  The  aurora  is  known  as  a  white  arc,  according  to
others  as  a  white  vapoury  or  cloud-like  mass  on  the  polar
horizon,  from  which  shoot  out  towards  the  equator  flicker-
ing, brush-like,  wandering  rays,  the  lines  of  which  have
indeed  a  principal  direction,  but  arc  not  parallel  to  each
other,  nor  straight,  but  appear  curved  slightly  in  various
ways,  and  sometimes  scintillate.  Their  coloiu'  changes  from
Ihe  white  of  the  arc  to  bluish,  emerald  green,  yellow,  and
above  all,  red,  which  light  they  then  spread  over  whole  zones.
The  same  mobility  of  emitted  rays,  the  same  flickering
flame  running  in  cuiTcd  lines,  the  same  brilliant  play  of
colour,  tlie  same  reddening  of  illiuuinated  objects,  w^e  find

D


\0^  Tlii  ILj^i-TITi


i^>^ V^/^rr:r  »rx  *arx onis dgi:  ^*«^  xbook  m  dl


€^l3jg^^^^ l t^^Uti'^llrJi V^ tilt TT=«.^i^»ry ipc d

i<>  /'/^a' /L  'u*.  air/r?  ij-j:  vl}t^  iiad  "an*  mnc^

0^^  *//.*:«*X  rr.: ^i^u*:^  vf  ii^. li  iLt  SBXHe ITET  wc  find

*kiu  j^iAw  -.vr'r.i-;,  twc  tiut  upperen:  size  rf  liit  micnrt'C
*^"\  *< i^^  ^r^n^  '^^n,  §jr/i  paot  viii  ber  caan«leaeDOC|
au/^-  *i«i'  »M.  y^.^t, '/  r.  a^^^airwi  lo  baxsDe  smiDer,  frora
J/*;///*-  v^  j/*5^^/:  jx  ^J>;  fesoK  profKiniaii  is  her  disetae  di-
iUii^uM/:,  »jUL  «>  isuf.  i»,  ^0^x3sk  Trbc»IiT  impestcpdbk  to  her
^^i««a A*  '^^,  Yot.^'A.j^f  pOTod  sbe  reccciiised  a  kind  of
Imujii^'^^.  kii}/.^u/ 3u;jij»/Jiir/r}T  cnrer  tbe  steeL  vhidi  the  &r
i<y/fi:  M;f^jtf^5w:  MiM  )i,A:u:i^\  hfrrer  saw ;  from  this  dood  of
v»j//«^  kiij^;  M^w  tljfc  tJ/fu  '/  light  isme  in  the  same  way  as
♦>**;  l4«l.t*5r  j^;r^>?iv^/J  ili^  Uift*  of  light  from  the  comas  of
wi'jkh^r  ui^ft^^, 'HiiJi  va|x/rxi«»  cloud,  immediatehr  upon
Um:  iKt^;<;l,  r^:i¥nuh\*A  in  a  higti  degree  the  polar  lominoosaic
'/f  iti^;  HJ^n^ffhf Htui\  if  Miiw  Jteicbel,  as  she  stated,  saw
lifAhihf^  //f  it,  tJvj  r<:iui^/f  J  cj^iUiuly  i»,  that  in  her  sight,  which
jMrn'i?iv«ul IJmj  far  iii//n;  f\k\imng  light  and  the flames
ttii^'^?udiii«  from th*^  %\ufrU:f  layers  of  the  magnet,  the
VHiK/foiiii  <;ii/iiil  wttM  vAm'.fiA  or  eclipsed  by  these  so  that
mIm5  /J*;iild  n'/t  [KiMnibly  wje  them. It  might  be  expected
that,  with  Uk?  progr<jH»  of  her  recovery,  a  period  would
vwnrn  in  whi^rh  thij  flames  of  the  sides  of  the  layers  would
ciiNapiNtiir,  and  ih^^n  the  va{K)rous  cloud  would  be  free  to


THE  AiniORA  BOREALIS.


3S


eyes,  and  would  be  seen  as  well  by  her  as  by  Miss
Nowotny.

It  is  thii  calm,  bright,  cloud^Uke  appearance,  however,
which  brings  the  resemblance  to  northern  light  to  such  a
high  degree  of  agreement,  that  one  is  iuvolimtarUy  led  to
the  acknowledgment  of  the  complete  identity  of  the  aurora
and  the  magnetic  light.  But  I  must  not  be  misappre-
hended ;  I  do  not  wish  to  say  that  I  regard  the  identity  of
the  two  phenomena  as  proved ;  for  between  hgbts  visible
and  invisible  to  healthy  eyes  hes  a  chasm  wliicli  is  not  yet
filled  up,  and  cannot  even  be  filled  up  by  the  byi>othcsis  of
a  different  intensity  of  the  two  phenomena :  but  I  believe
this  much  to  be  certain,  and  that  I  may  venture  to  express
it,  that  an  astonishing  analogy  exists  between  the  two ;  so
greats  that  the  uienlity  of  the  magnetic  Jlame  and  the  aurora
rises  unmistakeably  to  a  liigh  degree  of  probability.


22.  EETROSPECT.

a.  A  strong  magnet  exercises  a  pecuhar  action  upon  the
of  many  healthy  and  sick  persons ;  it  is  an  agent

'upon  the  vital  force,

b.  Those  who  manifest  this  sensibility  in  a  high  degree
firequently  exhibit  a  great  exaltation  of  the  acutencss  of  the
senses,  and  are  then  in  a  condition  to  perceive  light  and
flame-like  appearances  upon  the  magnet.  The  sti*ength
and  distinctness  of  this  perception  increases  with  the  sensi-
bility of  the  observer  and  the  obscurity  of  the  place.

c.  The  pole  —  m  gives  the  larger,  the  +m  the  smaller
flame,  in  the  northern  latitude  of  Vienna.  Its  form  and
colour  change  according  as  the  magnet  is  open  or  closed, —
a  magnet  made  by  touch,  or  an  electro-magnet,— free,  or
imder  the  influence  of  other  magnets.

d.  Positive  and  negative  flames  display  no  tendency  to
unite.


3C  TEX  llAGl^FnC  LIGHT.

e.  The  flame  xuaj  be  medhamcaDj  divert^  in  TBiioos
directionfi,  just  like  the  flame  of  a  fire.

/.  It  emits  a  light  which  is  red,  that  ads  i^kid  the
daguerreot}^,  and  mar  be  canoentrated  by  a  glass  lens,
but  is  without  peroepUl»le  heaL

y.  Magnetic  flames  and  their  Ugfat  exhibit  sudi  complete
resemblauoe  to  the  aurora,  that  I  behe\^e  mrself  compelled
to  consider  tibe  two  as  identical


SECOND TREATISE.


CRYSTALS.


23.  Previously  to  my  visits,  Miss  Nowotuy*s  physician
had  repeated  some  of  the  observations  of  the  older  phy-
sicians iu  cataleptic  cases,  in  particular  those  which  Dr.
Petetin,  at  Lyons,  in  17S8,  as  well  as  other  persons,  had
investigated  and  made  known;— that  w^hen  a  powerful  mag-
net was  placed  upon  the  hand,  it  adhered  to  it  in  the  same
way  as  a  piece  of  h'on  to  the  magnet ;  moreover,  that  water
through  which  the  magnet  had  been  passed  a  few^  times,
was  accurately  distinguished  by  the  patients  from  common
water.  The  latter  was  first  observed  and  made  knovi^  by
Mesmcr,  often  enough  ridiculed,  and  as  often  re-asserted.
We  shall  see  in  the  com-se  of  the  present  investigation  how
much  of  it  is  found  true,  and  how^  much  false,  by  the  test
of  physics. The  adliesion*  of  a  Uving  member  to  a  magnet

♦  I  have  Men  two  persons  whose  hands,  when  the  mdividaals  have
been  awake,  could  not  be  kept  away  from  the  poles  of  a  powerful
hor«e-&hae  magnet  presented  to  them  at  a  distance  of  six  feet.  The
attractiTe  power  of  the  magnet  always  induced  these  ladies  to  move  the
bead  End  to  inclioe  the  body  forward.  But  1  have  witnessed  the  phe-
nomenon of  the  attraction  of  the  hands  to  a  magnet  in  more  than
twenty  cases  of  individuals  in  a  condition  of  sleep- waking.  A  boy,
aged  14>  who  occasionally  came  to  my  bouse  in  Wimpole  Street,  used  to
rush  forward  from  a  distance  of  six  feet  to  a  magnet  with  a  ten  pounds
sustaining  power;  if  I  took  off  the  armature  while  1  sat  opposite  to
him,  the  poles  beiog  directed  towards  him«  he  would  full  asleep  on  his
way  to  the  magnet,  and  remain  unconscious  while  his  hand  adhered  to
it.  I  muat  continue  to  regard  the  sleep-waking  state  as  no  obstacle  to
ihe  eoadiuioos  arrived  at  by  the  Baron j  and  I  look  upou  the  facts  in
1  as  corroborative  of  the  establiahment  of  truths  erroneously


38  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

is  a  fact  totally  unknown  both  in  physics  and  physiology,
and  few  persons  have  satisfied  themselves  on  the  point  by
inspection  ;  it  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  examine  and
elucidate  it  in  some  measure  in  this  place.  When  the  sick
Miss  Nowotny  lay  unconscious  and  motionless  in  a  cata-
leptic condition,  but  free  from  spasms,  and  a  horse-shoe
magnet,  capable  of  sustaining  some  22  lbs.,  was  brought
near  her  hand,  this  adhered  to  it  in  such  a  manner  that
when  the  magnet  was  raised,  or  moved  sideways,  backward,
or  in  any  desired  position,  the  hand  remained  constantly
attached  to  it,  as  if  it  had  been  a  piece  of  iron  cleaving  to
it.  The  patient  remained  perfectly  unconscious  all  the
while;  but  the  attraction  was  so  strong,  that  when  the
magnet  was  drawn  down  in  the  direction  of  the  feet,  be-
yond the  reach  of  the  patient's  arm,  she  not  only  did  not
leave  it,  but,  in  an  unconscious  state,  rose  up  in  the  bed
and  followed  the  magnet  with  her  hand  as  long  as  it  was
at  all  within  her  reach :  thus  it  looked  as  if  the  patient  had
been  grasped  by  the  hand,  and  her  body  thus  been  drawn
toward  her  feet.  Finally,  when  the  magnet  was  removed
beyond  its  distance  of  attraction,  she  was  indeed  compelled
to  leave  it,  but  then  remained  unalterable  and  immoveable
in  the  position  in  which  she  had  been  placed,  according  to
the  well-knovm  manner  of  cataleptic  patients.  This  1  saw
daily,  between  six  and  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when
the  patient  had  her  fits ;  and  eight  or  ten  persons,  physicians,
physicists,  chemists,  and  friends  of  science,  were  usually

imagined  to  be  arriTed  at  in  a  condition  of  system  non-mesmeric.
The  simple  act  of  falling  asleep  may  establish  the  existence  of  a  tonic
state  of  nerves,  but  that  tonic  state  of  nerves  is  not  incompatible  with
acuteness  of  perception  in  perceptive  organs — with  acoteness  of  appre-
hension in  inteUectual  organs — ^with  extreme  delicacy  of  conviction,
refinement,  and  grace  in  the  moral  organs ;  and  of  great  increase  of
sensibility  and  force  in  the  organs  of  passion  and  desire.  It  is  phre-
nology that  must  be  studied  to  enlighten  us  on  the  relations  of  physics
.  to  the  phenomena  of  vitality.


RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  OKOANS.

witnesBes  of  it,  to  name  whom  cau  be  of  no  essential  use
to  tue.

When  I  visited  the  girl  at  otlier  times  of  tlie  day,  in  the
morning  for  instance,  I  faviiid  that  the  phenomena  were  still
the  same  at  the  time  of  her  best  and  clearest  consciousness.
Her  hand  followed  the  magnet  which  I  placed  on  it,  exactly
iu  the  same  way  as  when  she  w^as  in  the  unconscious
cataleptic  condition.  The  account  of  the  matter  wliich  I
obtained  from  her  added  little  to  the  explication  of  this
physical  singularity;  she  described  her  sensation  as  an
irresistible  attraction,  which  slie  felt  compelled  to  follow
imconditionally  and  involuntarily,  and  which  she  was  obliged
to  obey  even  against  her  will  It  was  an  agreeable  sensa-
tion, as  if  connected  with  a  cool  gentle  wnd,  issuing  firom
tlie  magnet  ou  to  the  hand,  which  seemed  to  be  attached  to
it  as  by  a  thousand  fine  thi^eads,  and  to  be  ch*awii  along  by
it.  In  other  respects  slie  knew^  of  nothing  at  all  hke  in
life,  and  the  whole  was  a  peculiar,  indescril)able  sensation,
in  which  lay  a  refreshing,  infiuite  pleasure,  when  tlie  magnet
w^as  of  the  right  size  and  not  too  strong,*


*  Since  the  thing  appeared  far  too  »trange,  and  stood  too  completely
in  contradiction  to  the  known  laws  and  powers  of  the  magnet,  for  me
to  see  my  way  clearly,  I  confess  that,  at  first,  doubts  arose  in  my
tnind  whether  all  was  quite  right  here,  and  whether  some  iDtentional
deception  was  not  going  on,  however  much  this  might  stand  in  oppo-
sition to  the  visible  manifest  honesty  of  all  around,  and  the  respecta-
bihly  of  the  patient.  I  therefore  took  various  measures  of  precaution,-*
bound  up  the  eyes  of  the  patient  m  the  cataleptic  state,  operated  in
TarioQuly  moditied  ways  with  the  magnet,  &c.  ;  but  the  reactions  were
always  the  same.  It  will  be  necessary  to  mention  here  some  of  the
teats  to  which  1  subjected  the  patient.  Among  others,  I  concerted  with
m  friend,  that  while  I  stood  beside  the  bed  and  observed  the  patient,
be  should  stand  at  the  other  side  of  the  stone  wall  agouiet  which  the
bed  was  placed,  and  at  an  appointed  sign  should  alternately  open  and
close  with  the  armature  a  strong  magnet  capable  of  sustaining  90  lbs.,
keeping  it  directed  toward  the  patient  when  open.  It  was  easy  to  find
the  place  of  her  hcjid  on  the  other  side  of  the  waU  in  the  next  room.


40


CRYSTALS  AN©  THl  MAGNET  TN


1  subsequently  liad  opportunity  to  observe  exactly  tlie
same  phenoTiienon  in  Miss  Reit^heL  The  complaint  was
different  here,  but  also  connected  with  periodical  cataleptic
fits,  and  botli  in  these  and  in  the  awake  condition  her  hand

Scarcely  was  the  an»atnre  removed  wheo  the  patient  became  restless,
and  complained  tlml  a  niagiiet  must  be  open  somewliere,  desiring  that
some  one  would  look,  and  relieve  her  from  the  pain  ;  for  large  magnet*
always  caused  her  great  nneasiness  from  over-excitement,  wbile  smaller
ones  were  pleasantly  cooling.  The  armature  was  replaced  without  ber
knowledc^e,  and  she  became  quiet  again.  When  this  was  secretly
repeated  she  hecame  perplexed,  and  could  not  conceive  the  cause  of
this  ckaogeable  uneasiness  wbich  seized  her  and  left  ber  again,  just  as
if  a  magnet  had  be^n  turned  towards  her.  The  magnet  had,  therefore,
acted  through  a  stone  wall  without  the  patient  being  aware  of  its
vicinity,  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  it  did  when  lying  open  before  her,
in  correspondence  with  the  known  laws  of  magnetism,  which  penetrate?
irresistibly  through  all  bodies.  Lastly,  the  riddle  was  explained  to
her,  and  the  experiment  repeated  with  her  conscious  participation ;
every  time  the  large  magnet  was  opened  it  produced  the  same  varying
unnatural  redness  in  her  countenance  as  1  bad  seen  appear  and  dis-
appear during  the  secret  treatment.  Another  exceedingly  weil-selected
test  was  undertaken  by  M,  Baumgartner,  well  known  in  lus  former
capacity  of  Professor  of  Physics,  at  a  visit  for  his  own  satisfaction*
\Vljen  the  phenomena  with  the  magnets  had  been  exhibited  to  him^
and  their  strange  effect?  upon  the  patient  repeated  one  after  anotlier
before  his  eyes,  be  took  from  his  pocket  a  horse-shoe  magnet  of  hia
own,  which  he  told  the  bystandersi  in  the  presence  of  the  patient,  was
the  most  remarkable  of  all  the  magnets  in  bis  collection  of  apparatus,
and  that  which  hail  always  proved  itself  the  strongest ;  be  was  de-
sirous, therefore,  of  knowing  the  strength  of  the  action  it  would
exercise  upon  the  patient.  To  our  astonishment,  however,  Miss
Nowotny  declared  that  she  could  not  confirm  this  ;  on  the  contrmry,
she  not  only  found  it  much  weaker  than  any»  even  than  the  weakest
of  the  magnets  present,  hut  it  seemed  to  her  almost  without  influence  i
she  did  not  smell  it»  she  did  not  taste  it,  it  did  not  make  her  hot,  and
it  did  not  attract  her  hand  at  all,  M.  Baumgartner  laughed  at  our
aatonifihrnent,  and  now  told  us  that  the  borae-shoe,  which  was  indeed
his  best  magnet,  had  been  deprived  of  its  magnetism  before  he  left
home  by  friction  in  the  reverse  direction,  and,  therefore,  its  power  bad
been  reduced  almost  to  nothing ;  that  it,  therefore,  was  little  else  than
A  mere  plain  piece  of  iron  ;  in  fact,  it  no  longer  evinced  any  attraction


RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAT?  ORGANS.


41


followed  a  strong  ms^net,  exactly  in  tliu  way  I  have  de-
scribed it  in  Miss  Nowotny.  Professor  Lippich  reported
the  same  to  me  of  a  stage  of  the  disease  of  Miss  Stunnann,
which  I  was  prevented  from  examinhig  myself;  and  I  have
every  reason  to  place  unconditional  trust  in  the  accuracy  of
the  statement.  These  difFcreiit  cases,  compared  with  those  of
a  similar  kind  which  Petetin,  Rick,  and  others  fiuiiish  from
past  times,  leave  no  doubt  of  the  correctness  of  the  fact,
that  in  certain  diseases,  espemdly  those  in  which  eataff*psi/
eriits,  a  distinct  attraction  occurs  between  the  human  hand
and  strong  may  nets, "^

for  iU  armature'.  M.  Baumgartner  had  desired  to  fissure  himself  of
tbe  trutU  of  all  thnt  took  plnce  here,  and  thus  funiished  \m  all  with  a
ti€w  warranty  of  it.  Alter  such  teats,  of  which  1  could  mention
olbefs  atmilar  ia  tlieir  nature,  1  hope  I  shall  uot  be  required  to  give
new  mfcurities  for  the  truth  of  these  things,  the  accuracy  of  which  will,
moreover,  be  sufficiently  tested  by  itself  in  the  course  of  that  which  I
am  here  endeavouring  to  explain* — Authors  Note.

*  The  Baron  is  most  correct  in  this  conclusion,— that  in  constitutions
of  a  tendency  to  catalepsy  **«  distinct  of  tract  ion  occurs  between  the
kaman  hand  and  a  magnet  ;*'  and  he  enlarges  the  proposition  by  the
words,  "in  certain  diseases,**  Now%  what  are  these  diseases?  All
affections  of  the  nervous  system  which  fall  under  a  great  class  of  Iboae
exhibiting  proclivity  to  clonic  spasms,  may  be  considered  m  opposed
to  another  of  those  evincing  a  tendency  to  tonic  spasms,  In  tbe  one
set  there  is  an  attraction  between  the  particles  of  nerve  matter,  and  in
the  other  there  is  a  repulstou  between  those  pnrticles.  In  the  opposite
conditions  of  hniin  and  nerves  which  obtain  in  sleep  and  in  vigilance,
we  hare  illustrfilions  of  this  idea.  Constitutions  vary  according  to
degrees  of  tone  and  done,  and  there  are  thousands  of  grades  of  these


^  Among  aeveral  other  remarkable  instances  in  my  own  experience
CORXiborating  this  fact,  I  may  notice  a  striking  case  of  a  lady  who  felt
<nery  unpleasant  eflVcts  when  a  powerful  magnet,  in  my  po^tscssion,
bappened  to  he  in  the  room  where  she  was  present. It  was  accidentally

yn  my  table  one  day  that  she  came  iu,  and  seeing  it  she  remarked
It  her  constitution  must  have  undergone  a  change,  since  she  perceived
tluil  without  inconvenience  she  could  renmin  in  the  room  with  tliat
magnet;  in  fact  it  had  been  deprived  of  its  magnetism.


I  ii:*fi  z:shiit  iz,  azjGrmaBisi  ol  "ilit  lfie(  of  Hiss  Xovotny ;
Uer^  ti^'v  I  yjnti  l  !l£±  c^rbmaiiii^  bn:  iir  v«Ajer ;  but  no
''.CU7  puhce,  iec^sn^Ti  ir  laa^  wv^  oisBai  m  «bt  put  of

^(  T^  ±Esii  izd  rshogc  T^-"^f^«^->  qaesckn  tint  arose
ar.nr  vift,  injffiMx  ^sut  £xrK?kQ  v^k^  ib^  nugnet  eier-
<f»v^  '.^jc  :^  pikikxii  WK  ncprociL  or  wkther  ii  was
nfiTjA  'fj  ':z  TipjEi  b^dks  cipab&e  d  pirriripariiig  in  the
^^tf^surxi  of  Hfk^iKtsan.  aixL  like  iron.  temponnlT  con-
7'^rv>^  7r.v>  TiotzDir^  hj  ibe  appiv^xizucxn  of  a  magnetic
^/>tT  h  ->1£kt  wonfc,  wbc^bcT,  iLroozh  lier  diseased  oondi-
V^^,,  r.'^zr^ejitkiL,  ai»d,  with  this,  magD«ic  atmction,  resided
JTi^  ;>«T^  r  To  decide  this  I  took  some  iron  filings  and
J^v,;r:*t  x}jh  paakfDt's  finger  over  than ;  thejr  did  not  adhere


^f^/nvU:  wUt/ts^  U,  in  Tigikiiee,  tooe  gms  a  diinctcr  to  €btt  fiame,
Mi^  M  La>/itBa.lT  earned  to  iu  extRme  point  iboft  of  ilecp,  with  ligid
yj^jflfr^tbfeiirtfcTJdoal  11  in  perfect  faeahh,  and

/>A  tl;<at  vLkli  is  cfaanctcriscd  bj  a  want  of  senabaitT  to  magnetic
myrtmtfHtM.  Remark  the  oppocite  extreme :  bvsteiia, — fras^e  frame,
nkU  MAHtj  and  Terr  delicate  soBeepCflnHtr  to  impw anions  Inflict
t}t*t  f^/u^rti  oi  bjdropbobia  on  the  tonic  individnal,  and  the  extreme
fif/t/k  (rpa/nnt  are  not  long  before  they  become  erident.  A  levefsal  of
y^AMnikt  erauev,  which  nuJcet  the  person  mon  extremdy  sosceptible
tloiii  the  uvM  fragile  hysterical  female.  The  brain  and  nerres  in  tone
ar^  e^/mpaiii  and  tense ;  in  clone,  loose  and  wanting  in  firmness.  In
tb';  cz/unie  of  a  long  mesmeric  treatment,  patients  exhibit  in  some  caaes
tarious  pliiukes  in  degrees  of  sensibility  to  impressions.  Hie  organs  of
l\t*t  fi^tt  mtiiMion  nuLj  become  more  acate,  and  their  powers  exalted.  The
UtU:]\ts4:iutd,  the  moral,  or  the  lower  animal  nerroos  fonctions,  accord-
iitu;  U}  the  individual  peculiarity  of  fabric,  may  be  more  strikingly
matiifested.  A  time  arrives  when  tone  assumes  the  mastery.  Deep
sU'ifp,  tlie  l/est  test  of  the  progress  towards  tonic  health,  balances  the
relations  lietween  nerve  and  blood,  and  the  patient  is  restored  to  a  state
of  rnind  and  body  in  which  neither  mesmeric  manipulations  nor  power-
ful magnets  have  much  more  than  the  slightest  influence  in  producing
flUrsrtion  or  repulsion.  The  diseases,  then,  in  which  the  magnet
influi'nccfi  the  hand  by  attraction  towards  it,  are  those  in  which  a  pro-
rliviiy  Ut  clone  preponderates,  and  in  which  a  due  course  of  mesmerism
or  nmgncfts  have  not  perfectly  conquered  this  disposition.


RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.


48


in  the  slightest  degree,  even  when  she  was  in  contact  with
the  magnet,  and  might  thus  have  been  more  strongly  in-
fluenced than  she  might  have  been  naturally.  A  suspended
magnetic  needle  which  I  brought  to  her,  and  which  I  bade
her^hold  her  finger  close  to  at  both  poles,  and  in  variously
modified  alteniating  ways,*  was  not  caused  to  diverge  or
oscillate  in  the  least.  Another  experiment  in  reference  to
this  point  was  made  at  tlie  desire  and  in  the  presence  of
M.  Baumgartner,  When  the  hand,  and  with  it  the  whole
arm,  were  lifted  up  by  the  magnet,  it  seemed  to  many  that
the  horse*shoe  bceume  as  much  heavier  as  the  weight  of  the
attached  burden,  the  arm,  amounted  to.  I  could  not  find
this  myself,  but  many  persons  believed  that  they  felt  it
distinctly.  The  horse-shoe  was  therefore  attached  to  the
beam  of  a  pair  of  scales,  and  its  weight  lialanced  by  a
counterpoise.  After  the  patient's  hand  had  been  spread
out  flat,  with  the  back  on  a  firm  support,  I  held  it  fast
_down  upon  this  by  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  and  the  freely

spended  magnet  was  brought  near  to  it :  the  hand  strove
to  move  toward  this,  and  I  was  obliged  to  exert  some  force
to  keep  it  back ;  but  the  index  of  the  balance  did  not  stir
in  the  least,  even  when  the  magnet  ahuost  touched  the
fingers,  and  then  strove  so  convulsively  to  contract,  that  I
had  much  trouble  to  retain  them  in  their  flat  position.

WhUe  I  was  busied  with  these  investigations,  the  known
statement  of  Thilorier,  that  he  had  magnetised  steel  by
induction  from  nervous  patients,  appeared  in  the  journals  :
whether  the  induction  here  depended  solely  or  only  in  part
upon  the  disease,  I  must  leave  unsettled:  the  result  in  Vienna
was,  that  I  soon  received  news  from  their  physician  that
both  Miss  Reichel  and  Miss  Maix  converted  eveiy  steel
needle  into  a  magnet,  by  holding  it  in  the  hand  for  some
time.  I  went  to  see  the  patients,  who  assiured  me  of  the
ocxnectness  of  the  matter,  and  showed  me  knitting  needles
which  8upix)rted  common sewing  needles. I  made  the


44


CRtSTAI.S  AKD  THE  MAOXET  IX


experiment  with  them  myself ;  procured  knitting  needles
which  were  not  at  all  magnetic,  removed  all  magnets  from
the  vicinity  of  the  patients,  and  gave  them  the  needles.
At  my  desire  they  held  them  in  the  hand,  first  the  same
length  of  time,  then  twice  as  long  as  in  the  pluvious
experiments,  in  which  their  medical  attendant  stated  he
had  produced  magnets  with  them,  but  the  needles  were
not  magnetic  now,  and  all  endeavour  to  make  them  so  was
in  vain.  Doubtless  it  had  been  neglected  before  to  examine
the  condition  of  the  needles  previously  to  the  experiment,
for  among  a  dozen  knitting  needles  always  half  are  moi^e
or  less  magnetic*  Lastly,  I  was  assured  that  Miss  Stur-
mann  was  so  magnetic  that  she  caused  the  magnetic  needle
to  diverge  from  20  to  30  degrees.  1  was  invited  to  a  trial
by  Professor  Lippich,  and  really  saw  a  freely  suspended
needle  considerably  deflected.  As  the  needle  was  not
sufficiently  secured  from  currents  of  air,  I  imdertook  the
experiment  next  day,  with  the  precaution  of  placing  the
needle  in  a  vessel  which  was  covered  by  a  glass  plate  at
the  top,  so  that  we  could  see  all  that  took  place.  At  the
side  I  had  made  a  round  hole  just  large  enough  to  admit
a  finger.  By  this  means  the  patient  could  bring  her  finger
quite  close  to  the  needle  without  setting  the  air  in  motion,
while  the  breath  of  those  standing  round  could  no  longer
exert  any  influence  on  the  experiment.  When  the  finger
was  introduced,  it  appeared  this  time  that  some  attraction
occurred.  I  examined  the  tij)  of  tlie  finger,  and  as  it  seemed
rather  moist,  I  rubbed  it  over  with  flour  for  another  trial:
then  all  attraction  for  the  magnet  was  at  once  at  an  end ;
the  needle  remained  motionless.  It  was  evident  that  in
the  former  case  the  very  mobile  needle  had  adhered  to  the
Inger  from  the  presence  of  shght  perspiration,  and  when
llie  slight  stickiness  of  this  was  removed  by  the  flour,  all
attraction  ceased  directly.  It  was  not  of  magnetic  nature,
t  an  eflfect  of  adhesion. Quite  superfluously  I  afterwards


4

4


^&


A


RELATION  TO  TH1B  HUMAN  ORGANS.


^

P
^


introduced  Miss  Stiirmaun^s  finger  into  tbe  heUx  of  a  dif-
ferential  galvanometer :  neither  when  uiserted  or  taken  out
was  any  induced  current  perceptible,  and  the  astatic  needle
remained  immoveable.

25.  From  the  preceding  it  follows,  that  the  attraction
exercised  by  the  magnet  upon  the  Iiands  and  feet  of  cata-
leptic patients  is  nothing  ponderable  ;  it  Lis  no  supporting
pan)er^  cannot  even  raise  iron  fihugs,  and  is  equally  inca-
pable of  affecting  the  magnetic  needle  and  inducing  a  mag-
netic current.  The  arm  lifted  up  in  catalepsy  therefore
supported  itself,  and  its  passive  attraction  was  quite  diffe-
rent in  its  import  fr&m  thai  of  iron  ton*ard  the  mat/net,
or,  more  accurately,  toward  magnetically  oppositely  pola-
riased  matter  in  the  sense  hitherto  received.

It  is  known  well  enough  that  we  are  not  acquainted  in
physics  vi4th  any  attraction  whicli  is  not  reciprocal  On  the
other  hand,  it  is  equally  well  known  that  a  person  in  a  state
of  cataleptic  unconscionsness,  which  cannot  be  feigned,  not
only  has  no  free  will,  but  in  fact  no  will  at  all  :*  since.


♦  This  is  tbe  subject  wbicb  is  the  keystone  of  all  tbe  objections  to  ibe
application  of  raagnetism  or  of  mesmerism  to  the  biiinan  system.  To
fthew  that  roan  is  not  a  free  agent  is  bad  enough,  but  to  prove  it  by  phy-
sical facts  should  be  atrocious.  The  insliiict  of  thosc^  who  have  large
organs  of  cunning,  acquisitiveness,  and  self-esteem,  is  inatmiily  on  the
alert;  and  forgetting  thai  they  do  not  wholly  belont^  to  tbe  baser  animals^
ibey  give  way  to  the  lower  feelings  of  their  nature.

InsUnclive  feelings  operate  powerfully  upon  mankind  as  well  as  upon
tbe  animals  not  gifted  with  the  organs  of  the  reasoning  faculties^  and  the
condition  of  tbe  brain  of  the  man  who  anticipates  disagreeable  change,  or
Bometbing  adverse  to  bis  foregone  conclusions,  is  just  that  which  is
analogous  to  the  magnetised  brain  which  has  no  free  will  The  being  of
pciejtidice  with  his  very  limited  power  of  understand  mg  h,  of  necessity,
no  fi^e  agent ;  be  is  not  more  so  than  the  tiger,  who,  fotiowing  tbe  law
of  bis  organisation,  flares  bis  eyes  with  ecstatic  delight  while  he  mangles
his  prey.  It  is  tbe  decree  of  such  that  Man  is  not  to  know  of  his  brain
being  influenced  by  external  agencies.  With  a  penalty  before  him,  the
risk  of  disease,  or  of  death,  he  may  be  pennitted  to  indulge  in  tbe  dead-


46  CET8TAL8  AND  THE  MAG5BT  IK

therefore,  the  magnetic  mechanical  attraction  by  the  magnet
is  a  fact,  which  is  not  only  established  here  by  sufficient  ex-

dnmkeimess  of  cblorofonn,  of  opium,  or  of  brandy,  in  its  manj  shapes,
for  then  be  is  not  placed  in  tbose  gradations  which  excite  in  bis  fellow
man  the  reasoning  (acuities.  Sinners  have  free  wiU,  and  are  accoon table
beings,  eren  when  drunk ;  but  a  man  rendered  &tuous,  ecstatic,  or  un-
conscious by  a  magnet,  is  too  evidently  a  being  without  a  will.  There
toe  nurious  degrees  of  the  influence  exerted  by  magDets  on  the  brain.
It  is  not  a  necessary  consequence  that  imconsciousness  should  accompany
the  catalepsy  which  results  from  this  agency.  A  man  may  be  qoite  con-
scious, and  yet  be  unable  to  exercise  will :  or  the  organs  of  his  brain,
influenced  by  a  force  analogous  to  the  magnetic  power,  may  be  pkced  in
a  condition  such  that  the  individual  is  unable  to  act,  except  at  the
bidding  of  another.  Apparently  there  are  other  influences,  but  a  stricter
study  of  the  philosophy  of  this  subject  will  show  us  that  they  are  really
what  were  formerly  called  magnetic,  but  which  Reichenbach  s  discoveries
will  establish  as  crystallic  or  mesmeric,  operating  upon  the  brain  of  mau,
and  obliging  him  to  form  convictions,  to  do  deeds,  that  prove  him  as
much  a  machine  without  free  will  as  if  he  had  actually  been  the  victim
of  the  Baron's  largest  magnets.  All  influences,  all  impelling  forces,
acting  upon  the  phrenological  organs  of  man,  are  motive  powers.  Do
we  not  in  common  parlance  speak  of  the  influence  of  motives  P  No  one
acts  without  a  motive :  so  that  the  immediate  antecedent  motive  or  force
is  the  necessary  impellent  to  the  production  of  the  consequent  action.
The  will  of  the  Jesuit^  like  that  of  the  snake  persuading  Eve,  is  as  much
an  overpowering  magnetism  as  the  flames  from  the  light-spreading  mag-
net :  they  lx)th  act  by  an  influence  of  attraction.  The  serpentine  luring
is  attractive,  like  the  rattlesnake's,  to  destruction,  to  arrieration,  and  per-
dition. The  magnetic  light,  a  symbol  of  Baron  von  Reichenbach's  illu-
mination against  superstition,  attracts  to  the  establishment  of  health — the
parent  of  many  blessings.  But  in  each  case  the  %ictim  is  the  creature  of
a  necessity.  To  speak  of  his  free  will  is  an  absurdity.  He  is  trained  to
his  actions  as  much  as  a  vine  is  trained  against  a  wall  to  grow  in  a  direc-
tion about  which  it  has  no  choice.  The  Negro  victim  to  the  superstition
of  Obi  is  in  a  magnetic  groove,  in  which  he  runs  his  course  and  dies.
Then,  is  man  in  all  his  actions  to  be  considered  as  a  machine  obeying  the
impulses  received  upon  his  brain  from  the  thousands  of  crystallic  forces
that  are  playing  upon  him  incessantly  P  Look  at  him  proceeding  along
a  crowded  thorough fiEU-e ; — is  he  not  receiving  from  a  plane  below  the
axis  of  the  sphere  in  which  his  brain  may  be  supposed  to  be  placed,  a
constant  series  of  varied  impressions,  acting  in  the  sense  of  the  centrifugal


KELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS,


47


imeuts,  but  may  i*eatlily  be  tested  and  confirmed  in  everj^
Targe  town,  where  such  patients  are  never  wanting,  it
acquires,  in  spite  of  all  its  apparent  strangeness,  a  solid,
scientific  certitude,  and  imperiously  claims  fmlher  investi-
gation. Not  in  order  to  explain  it,  but  to  render  it  provi-
sionally in  some  degree  comprehensible,  I  ventm-e  to  refer
to  aU  the  attractions  and  repulsions  which  the  vegetative
Uie  of  animals  and  plants  unceasingly  brings  to  pass,  in
thoQfland-fold  variety,  without  our  being  able  at  present
cither  to  perceive  or  even  to  infer  a  counter  attraction.  A
root  penetrates  strongly  into  the  hard  soil,  breaks  and  bursts
powerful  mechanical  obstacles :  we  perceive  no  cause  for
the  coimter-attraction  or  counter-expulsion  which  so  power-
fally  impels  it  thereto,  and  yet  it  happens.  Similar  condi-
tions lead  the  hand  of  the  patient  toward  the  magnet,
whether  we  now  comprehend  it  or  not.

20.  When,  instead  of  a  middle-si^ed  magnet  of  some
201b.  capacity,  we  took  a  strong  one  capable  of  bearing
901b.  and  placed  this  on  the  flat  hand  of  Miss  Nowotny,  she

fofces,  which  are  repellent  and  hare  ihe  tendency  to  keep  him  awake  and
ihmkiog  ?  and  bis  ihoughla  inider  such  circumstances,  are  they  uol
wiUii»al  his  control  forced  upon  his  atlemion  ?  A  carriage  goes  orer
m  child ;— -can  he  help  the  start  of  sympathy  P  He  could  have  helped
ttt  if  •  ,  •  if  he  had  had  other  motives  offered  lo  him,  more  powerful
iJiia  lho«e  which  obliged  hitn  to  act  as  he  did ;  but  tlte  impurhe  he  re-
ceired  had  its  legitimate  consequences.  Regard  him  under  tlie  influence
of  eetitfipeia]  forces*  They  are,  like  the  large  magnet,  attractive.  He
is  so  Iktigued  he  cannot  keep  his  eyes  open.  Does  his  fme  wiU  pre-
T«ot  htm  fmm  sleeping  ?  The  attractive  forces  are  too  much  for  him.
AJl  josutance  is  in  tida* He  yields,  and  he  sleeps.

Will  man  never  Icam  the  principle  upon  which  all  real  charity  depends !
Wffl  man  aJways  acknowledge  thai  he  is  truly  ihe  riotim  of  the  power  of
funounding  circumstances,  and  yet  constantly  act  towards  his  broiher
man  as  if  he  were  free  to  command  the  events  that  control  him  !  Glorions
Voii  RcieheDbach  I  the  lights  that  emanate  from  your  magnets,  from
your  ciystals,  and  from  your  crystalline  brain,  are  destined  lo  aid  in
libeniting  your  fellow-beings  from  their  irreligious  thraldom  of  super-
mition.


48


CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN


grasped,  both  iw  the  conscious  and  unconscious  state,  the
presented  ends  of  the  horse-shoe,  and  Uiid  hold  of  it  so
firndy  that  it  could  not  be  taken  away  from  her  without
great  effort*  She  herself  was  unable  to  loosen  her  hold.
The  whole  hand  was  clenched  spasmodically,  and  the  cramp
knitted  Ihe  fingers  round  the  magnet,  and  contracted  the
whole  hand  so  violently  that  all  voluntary  power  of  motion
ceased.*

27.  I  have  ah-eady  (^  2)  mentioned  the  magnetized  water
which  the  patient  immediately  distinguished  from  common
water,  when  ignorant  of  what  had  been  done  to  it.  Nothing
could  be  more  cUsagreeable  than  the  reappearance  of  an
apparently  so  absm'd  thing,  which  all  physicists  and  chemists
are  horrified  even  to  hear  of  But  in  spite  of  this,  1  could
not  refuse  to  admit  what  I  saw  before  my  eyes  as  often  as
I  tried  it ;  namely,  that  the  girl  always  determined,  and  un-
failingly distinguished,  a  magnetized  glass  of  water  from  an
immagnetized.  The  force  of  facts  cannot  be  combatted  by
any  reasoning ;  I  was  compelled  to  recognise  what  I  was
by  no  means  able  to  comprehend.  But  when  I  again  met
with  the  same  subsequently  in  Misses  Stiu'niann,  Maix,
Reichel,  Atzmannsdorfer,  and  others,  and  saw  it  in  a  still


^  This  bas  been  witnessed  here  very  frequently,  aod  we  consider  the
patieut  to  he  in  a  deep  meBmeric  sleep,  with  the  addition  of  strong
spasm.  In  my  paper  on  the  Theory  of  Sleep  (see  the  Zoist,  Vol,  4,
pag^  260  to  267,  poMtm)  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  that  however
the  cerebral  ttssuea  may  be  arranged  to  produce  resuJU  analogoua
to  those  caused  by  our  artificial  electric  and  magnetic  agenciesi  attractive
forces  tend  to  soothe  the  individual,  aud^  %  degrees^  induce  qmetudiSt
simmalcitee,  ileep^  and  ihe  tonic  spasm  i  while  inquietude,  pain  «imI
restleaime^s,  wakeful ness,  full  mgilancet  delirium  treaient,  climic  apatrntt
result  from  repuktve  forces.  To  illustrate  the  facta  here  stated,  cases
analogous  to  those  selected  by  the  Baron  should  be  choaen ;  but  tlie
confusion  ought  not  to  arise  in  the  mind  that  the  individoaXs  do  not
exhibit  mesmeric  phenomena.  Brown  etudy>  reverie,  absence  of  mind»
are  slighter  degrees  of  the  state  exhibited  in  Miss  Nowotny's  case,  and
are  to  be  produced  by  a  magnet  in  Bai^iF^dAT^duals.


RET.ATrOK  TO  THE  lltTMAN  ORGAXS.

ittroBger  degree,  I  gave  up  all  doubt  and  opposition  to  a
phenomenon,  the  actuality  of  which  no  longer  admitted  of
oantradiction  in  any  reasonable  manner.*

2S.  But  the  singularity  seemed  to  reach  the  height  of
incomprehensibility  when  it  proved  that  not  merely  the
magnet,  but  even  a  simple  glass  of  magnetised  water,  pos<
aeteed  the  power  of  drawing  along  tlie  hand  of  Miss
Ndwotny.  It  is  true  that  this  occurred  in  a  much  weaker
degree,  but  her  hand  was  unmistakcably  attracted,  both  in
the  catalepsy  and  at  every  other  time,  by  a  magnetized  glass
of  water,  in  such  a  manner  that  a  tendency  to  follow  this
in  every  direction  made  itself  evident.

29.  Contemplatmg  this,  and  convinced  that  so  strange  a
plieiiomenon  could  not  exist  isolated  in  nature,  I  was
desirous  of  trying  whether  the  same  effect  as  that  of  the
wftter  might  not  be  brought  about  by  means  of  some  other
liody ;  if  this  proved  to  be  so,  1  hoped  to  see  cases
occur  with  various  modifications,  from  which  some  laws
might  be  deduced. With  this  view,  all  sorts  of  minerals,

•  These  admiisioos  are  the  proofs  of  tlie  greatneis  of  Von  Reichen-
iMch'A  taiBd*  Thia  man  must  have  a  large  brain^  with  well-developed
orgmns  of  camalitj,  companson,  aod  cooBcientiouaneas.  The  facta
sbUed  in  this  and  the  next  paragraph  have  been  exhibited  in  my  house
littiidreda  of  times.  Water  has  been  magnetized  with  magnets,  mesme-
riscid  by  the  fingers,  by  breathiog,  by  the  exertion  of  the  will :  over  and
oiver  again  I  the  tomblers  in  which  these  specifically  treated  quauittiea
of  valer  have  been  contained  have  been  instantly  detected  by  somnam-
botiila  in  the  lucid  stat*?  of  sleep-waking,  who  have  been  in  another
room  when  the  fluid  was  charged ;  and  yet  most  absurd  nonsense  baa
bf«i  talked  by  even  Fellows  of  the  Royal  Society,  let  alone  those  of
odMr  acteutiiic  or  learned  bodies,  as  to  the  iinpoBsibility  of  the  pheno-
mmmtik^  *'  I  won*t  believe  it,"  and  "  I  would  not  beheve  it  if  I  saw  it/*
baa  been  a  very  common  mode  of  expression  with  tbeae  wise  leaders  of
public  opinion «  It  would  be  a  glorious  im mortality  for  them  to  band
tbeir  names  to  posterity,  with  s  proper  measure  of  the  circumference  of
Ibehead  of  each  individual.  But  Mesmer,  Gall,  and  Reicbenbach  will
bt  nMMPberrd  when  they  are  forgotten.

£


50


0KY8


LB  AND  THl  MAGNET  IN


preparations,  drugs*  and  other  things,  were  rubbed  with  the
magnet,  and  the  patient  was  tried  with  them  in  the  same
way  as  with  the  magnetized  water ;  and  it  actually  happened
that  aJI  reacted  at  once  upon  her,  more  or  less,  in  the  same
way  as  the  magnetised  water :  they  attracted  the  patient's
hand  more  strongly  or  weakly,  but  in  variously  modified
ways.  Some  produced  spasms  throughout  the  whole  body,
others  only  in  the  arms,  others  only  in  the  hand,  others
scarcely  caused  any  eifect,  although  all  had  been  equaUy
strongly  magnetized.  It  was  evident,  therefore,  that  some
difference  lay  in  the  matter  itself,  and  required  to  be  taken
into  account  here.

30.  To  investigate  this,  I  now  tried  to  bring  the  same
substances  into  contact  with  the  patient,  mthout  having
been  previously  magnetized^  in  their  natural  condition.  To
my  great  surprise,  they  also  acted  now  upon  the  patient,
with  a  force  which  veiy  often  yielded  but  httle  to  that
which  they  had  exhibited  in  the  magnetized  condition.  But
the  action  was  not  always  accompanied  by  a  solicitation  to
follow  the  object ;  on  the  contrary,  that  other  effect  (^5)
which  had  made  the  patient  grasp  the  magnet  convulsively
in  her  hand,  presented  itself  in  vfuious  gradations  of  force.
The  method  of  experiment  which  I  followed  here,  consisted
in  this :  I  first  placed  the  various  bodies  in  the  patient's
hand  while  in  the  cataleptic  state,  and  observed  the  effect,
then  repeated  the  same  when  he  was  in  a  state  of  perfect
consciousness^  out  of  the  catalepsy.  By  these  comparisons,
it  was  made  evident  that  the  action  was  qualitatively  the
same  in  both  cases,  but  it  showed  itself  incomparably
stronger  quantitatively  in  the  catalepsy  than  out  of  it.  The
effect  essentially  consisted  in  this  :  that  the  various  bodies,
when  placed  in  the  hand  of  the  unconscious  patient,  either —

a.  Detennined  an  actual  tonic  spasm  in  the  fingers,  as
the  magnet  did,  and  compelled  an  involuntary  clenching  of
the  hand  which  held  the  bodies. These  again  could  be


RRLATfOX  TO  THE  HFMAX  0110 AN9.


dtvifled  into  such  as  siTiiultaiieoiisIy  solicited  the  hand  to
follow  them,  and  siidi  as  no  longer  visibly  produced  this
effect;  or

6.  Those  which  appeared  inactive,  and  left  the  hand  at
rert ;  the  former  effect  presented  itself  in  various  degrees
of  energy.  It  either  ensued  suddenly,  directly  the  hand
came  in  contact  wth  the  bodies,  or  it  followed  gradually,
iwly,  or  rapidly-  The  fingers  began  to  curl,  by  degrees
ere  drawn  more  inw^ard,  after  some  time  closed  into  a
clenched  hand,  and  then  remained  in  a  state  of  tonic  cramp.
Tills  was  precisely  the  effect  produced  by  placing  a  very
weakly  magnetic  rod  in  the  patient's  hand  while  in  the  un-
conscious state  of  catalepsy.

CJomparing  the  applied  bodies  one  with  another,  they  ar-
ranged themselves  in  this  respect,  not  according  to  the  cha-
racter of  their  substance,  nor  even  in  the  electro-chemical
series ;  in  fact,  the  same  chemical  substances  in  specimens
of  different  kinds  sometimes  produced  the  effect,  sometimes
did  not :  for  example,  calcareous  spar,  sugar,  quartz,  &c.
First  of  all  I  perceived  that  there  was  not  a  single  amor-
phonn  body  among  those  which  re-acted  so  as  to  make  the
hand  close  upon  them ;  and,  on  the  other  side,  thai  all
bodies  which  did  m  fim^e  crystallized.  There  were,  never-
thelesSp  a  good  many  crystalline  bodies  witliout  the  power.
When,  now,  excluding  all  amorphous  substances,  I  arranged
the  whole  of  the  crystalline  bodies  in  two  groups,  o[>posing
those  which  show^ed  themselves  powerless  to  those  which
eierted  the  magnet-like  influence  upon  the  hand,  I  found
upon  the  former,  the  inefficient  side,  all  the  confusedhj  crys-
ialUzed — such  m  loaf  sugar,  carrara  marble,  and  dolomite ;
and  further,  the  substances  composed  of  many  opposilely
direded groups  ofenfstals\  such  as  prehnite,  w^avellite,  lumps
of  SBgW  of  lead,  masses  of  Konigsberg  crystathzed  silver ;  on
the  latter^  the  effective  side,  all  simple,  free  crystals,  and  all
those  where  the  crystalline  masses  had  parallel  priuctpal


62


CRYSTALS  AND  THR  MAONBT  IN


axes,— sudi  as  oelestine,  many  spedmens  <^  gypsum,  and
fibrous  red  and  brown  ironstone.  For  the  sake  of  distinct-
ness, I  give  here  a  list  of  the  bodies  with  which  I  made  the
experiments.


I.  Inactive  bodies.

a.  Amorphous : —
Ivory,  wood,  &c.
Anthracite.
Canuel  coid.
Bitumen.
Amber.

Glass  of  aU  kinds.
Osmium,  rhodium.
Palladium.
Mercury.

Silver,  gold  in  coin.
Copper,  brass.
Bar  iron.

Zinc,  lead,  cadmium.
Dense  limestone.
Red  copper  ore,  dense.
Fotassiiun,  sodium.
Hydrate  of  potash,  dried.

6.  Crystalline : —
Granular  limestone.
Dolomite.
Orpiment.
WaveUite.
Kakoxene.
Loaf  sugar.


Chromate  of  iron.

Selenium.

liver  of  sulphur  (sulphuret

of  potassium).
Melted  sulphur.
Talc,  dense.
"  Gurhofian."
Magnesite.
Pumice-stone.
Obsidian.
Menilite.
Opal,  conunon.
Fossil  wood.
Egyptian  jasper.
Quartz,  dense  with  fatty

lustre.


Native  silver  from  Konigs-
berg  (an  irregular  mass
of  crystals).

Speiss-glance  ore.

Prehnite.

Natrolite.


II.  Active  bodies,  all  crystalline,  good,  mostly  large
and  splendid,  free  crystals  from  the  imperial  collection  ^t
Vienna.


-ATIOK  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.


a.


P


Those  which  compelled
grasp  the  object,  with  scarcely

Rough  Diamond,  very  small

Antimony,  metallic.

Mesotype,

Witherite.

Tin  ore.

Mica.

Corundum.

Ferrocyauide  of  potassium.

Sugar-candy,

Leucite.

Granite.

Augite.

Hornblende.

Staurolite.

Sulphate  of  copper.

Graphite,  lamellar.

Wolfram.

Bismuth,  metallic.


the  fingers  to  close  up  and
sensible  cramp.  ■

Argentiferous  copper-ore.

Rutile.

LievTite.

"  Spargelstein.**

Sphene.

Iron  pyrites,

Analzim.

Adular.

Felspar.

Boracite,

Celestine.

Topas.

Apatite.

White  lead  ore.

Crystallized gold, hsdf an

inch  thick*
Alum,


b. Those  which  caused  the  hand  to  close  upon  them
convulsively,  but  did  not  attract  it.

Pistacite.  Magnetic  non-ore.

Glance  cobalt.*  Rock  salt.*

Zinc-blende.  Rock  crystal*
Iron*glanoe.


*  I  am  dear  thii  witen  these  experiments  are  repeatedli  tnaDy  modi-
fieitioiis  of  their  reaulta  will  be  found  according  to  the  degrees  of  sua-
ctptibtlity  ID  the  iiidividnala  selected  for  the  experimenta.  1  have  foand
•ome  owes  in  which  glance-cobalt,  rock-salt,  and  rock-crystal,  not
oaly  cauaed  the  hand  to  close  upon  them  convulsivelyt  but  attracted  it
90  powerfully  as  to  produce  an  appearaDce  of  fatuity  in  the  patients
^o  followed  the  articles  in  my  hand  about  the  room  iti  order  to  grasp
tb«m  with  afidity. The  attraction  of  these  and  many  other  substances


««  .M«r.^l«S  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

t^<Mc  Hhich  iKtcd  SO  strongly  that  they  caused  the
if^u  IV  %  iCtKii  u(KHi  them  with  violent  spasm,  and  attracted
\  'W4ivi4  lH\Highl  uear.

HckiViUv.  fnnu  Macao.  Tommaline,  cold  as  well  as

viunuu crvstal,  from  Fon- warm.

UuiicblcHU.  Beryl.

lalcArtvu^  8|Nir.  Selenite.

.Vi'iti^utc.  Fluor  spar.

Heavy  spar.

All  tht^'  comparisons  may  be  finally  concentrated  bito
tho  &i*bi,  that  finely  granular  crystalline  carbonate  of  lime,
Ui^iuA)  quarts,  and  loaf  sugar,  were  inactive ;  but  a  free
crystal  of  calcareous  spar,  a  prism  of  rock  crystal,  or  a  good
crystal  of  sugar-candy,  therefore  every  perfectly  firee  crystal,
when  phuTd  in  the  patient's  hand,  irresistibly  and  arbitrarily
cxcitinl  tho  fingers,  attracted  them  and  drew  them  inward
90  as  to  gnisp  tho  crystal,  and  this  in  some  of  the  cases  with
the  most  violent  tonic  spasms.  Consequently,  simple  crys-
tats  heir  furnished  a  pectdiar  means  of  detecting  a  primary
force,  which  had  hitherto  been  altogether  unknown.  So
far  as  is  at  present  made  out,  this  property  does  not  belong
to  matter,  as  such,  hut  to  its  form,  and  in  fad  to  its  con-
ditioH  of  aggregation,  Pouillet,  in  MUUer's  translation  of
his  "  Mamial  of  Physics,"  p.  167,  says  expressly,  that  "  it
has  never  yet  l)een  observed  in  ponderable  matter,  that  the
form,  the  amuigemont  of  the  molecules,  can  be  the  cause
of  new  forces  acting  at  a  distance."  But  this  is  exactly  the
(laso  here ;  the  matter  must  be  crystallized,  otherwise  it  does
not  ro-act  in  this  manner.*

vhioh  act  energetically  on  certain  indiTidaals,  induces  a  desire  of  pos-

Ifttion  of  the  object  which  amounts  to  ccstacy. The  consummation  of

Jitire  constituting  temporary  fatuity  .  .  .  Orgasm.

*  All  crystallized  matter  is  essentially  and  ultimately  composed  of

r,  spherical,  or  spheroidal  molecules  ;  and  by  a  number  of  simple


RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  OHOAN8.


M


* 32. WJieii  I  now  tested  one  of  these  bodies  separately,
1  found  that  the  capability  of  producing  spasms  of  living


^


erpenmenU  wbich  I  liaTe  performed  on  mme  very  impreasionable
caaea^  I  have  been  led  to  tbe  conclaaion  that  all  gaBeoua  and  fluid  bodies
»rc  flusceptible  of  a  fiEbmiBsiou  to  those  lawa  whicb  regulate  crystalline
foriDB  of  matter.  Reasoning  on  the  Baron  von  Eeichenbach*B  factHi  and
ha?iug  previously  arrived  at  certain  analogous  coDclusions  before  I  had
aeen  Profeasor  Gregory's  abstract  of  hia  rcsearcbes  ;  from  reasoning,  too,
upon  the  facta  in  Petetio,  upon  the  facta  detailed  by  Tardy  de  Mon-
travel,  and  by  De  Ptty84fgur  and  Deleuze,  and  especially  on  the  influence
of  magnetized  or  meainerized  water,  examples  of  which  infltience  in  tbe
aenae  indicated  by  the  older  writers  as  wcU  as  id  that  of  our  author  I
had  aeen  aome  huadreds  of  times,  I  arranged  a  number  of  Snger-glasses
Tarjing  from  three  to  twelve,  containing  alwayi  the  same  description
of  fluid,  whether  it  was  water  or  a  solution  of  some  salt  in  water.
These  I  connected  together  by  means  of  cotton  moistened  in  the  con-
tained fluid,  and  then  passed  a  current  of  electricity  through  it*  A
few  minutes  of  the  current  from  a  dozen  of  Smec  s  plates  ten  inches  by
five,  sufficed  to  give  tlie  fluid  properties  which  it  had  not  before  poa-
acaaed  to  ao  striking  an  extent.  Plain  water  treated  in  this  manner
waa  taken  from  the  current  into  another  room,  into  which  were  sepa-
rately introduced  one  of  six,  eight,  or  sometimes  ten  patients  awake.
PUin  water  not  electrised  was  at  the  aame  time  introduced  to  the  notice
of  each,  separately,  of  the  same  individuals.  The  effects  were  very
remarkable,  for  the  degrees  of  impressionability  of  the  subjects  were
clearly  brought  out ;  not  one  was  affected  by  the  unelectrised  water,  and
the  electrised  water  produced  diflerent  degrees  of  attraction  of  the  hands
or  of  the  head  in  each  patient,  and  each,  in  different  periods  of  time,
varying  from  half  a  minute  to  five  minutes,  fell  into  a  deep  sleep,  the
fingers  being  in  the  fluid.  Electrised  solutions  of  four  neutral  salts —
aolphates  of  magnesia^  soda,  and  potass,  and  nitrate  of  potass,  in  each
eanaed  almost  immediate  deep  sleep,  while  unelectrised  solutions  were
weaker  in  effiect,  varying  the  access  of  sleep  from  three  or  four  minutes
to  twelve,  and  in  two  cases  there  was  no  sleep  at  all,  although  the  taste
of  the  salt  was  perceived  in  the  mouth.  I  inferred  that  the  electric
current  had  estabUabed  a  polar  arrangement  of  tbe  moleculea  of  these
flnida  wttich  developed  the  Baron's  new  force,  aince,  like  mesmerised
r,  eadi  was  easily  detected  by  the  impressionable  persons,  and
each  was  attended  with  mesmeric  consequences.

Some  common  air  not  electrised  was  contained  in  a  bottle,  and  the
tiofftr  being  removed,  the  wide  mouth  of  the  bottle  was  applied  to


56  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

(»'gaiis  did  uot  reside  in  equal  d^ree  in  all  parts  of  its
surface.  Points  were  formed,  and  the  patient  readily  de-
tected those  which  possessed  the  power  either  veiy  weakly
or  not  at  all ;  others,  on  the  contrary,  where  it  manifested
itself  in  increased  strength.  It  was  discovered  that  every
crystal  presented  especially  two  such  points,  in  which  the
force  peculiarly  resided.  And  these  points  lay  diametrically
opposite  to  each  other  in  every  crystal ;  they  were  the  poles
of  a  primainf  axis  of  tlie  crystal.  Both  acted  in  the  same
way,  but  one  always  much  more  strongly  than  the  other,
and  with  the  distinction  that  from  one  appeared  to  issue  a
cool,  from  the  other  a  softer,  gently  warm  (seeming)  current
of  air.

33.  Endeavouring  to  trace  the  expressions  of  this  force  in
various  directions,  I  now  made  the  experiment  of  drawing
the  stronger  pob  of  a  moderate  sized  crystal  which  I  had
at  disposal,  a  rock-crystal  two  inches  thick  and  eight  inches

the  uape  of  the  neck  of  a  highly  susceptible  patient.  No  perceptible
effect.  Into  the  same  bottle  removed  into  another  room,  an  iode  and
a  cathode  were  introduced,  and  the  air  was  electrised.  Now  the  ap-
plication, as  before,  of  the  open  mouth  of  the  bottle,  was  prodacti?e
of  deep  sleep  and  rigid  spasm  : — both  quickly  dispelled  by  the  appli-
cation of  unmagnetised  iron.

A  wooden,  a  porcelain,  and  a  glass  tube  were  successively  used  in
four  cases,  selected  for  their  very  delicate  impressionability,  for  the
following  experiment.  One  extremity  of  the  tube  was  held  close  upon
the  organ  of  sympathy,  without  touching  it.  I  blew  through  the  tabe»
and  deep  sleep  with  rigidity  immediately  supervened.  The  tube  was
turned,  and  the  other  extremity  was  held  at  a  little  distance  from  the
organ  of  sympathy.  The  patient  wakened  up,  the  muscles  slowly
relaxing.  The  tonic  result  was  more  rapid  than  the  clonic.  This  ex-
periment having  been  frequently  repeated  with  the  same  resulu  upon
four  different  individuab,  I  inferred  that  the  air  bbwn  through  the
tube  in  one  direction  had  a  polarity  among  its  molecules  diametrically
opposed  to  the  polarity  acquired  by  the  molecules  of  the  air  passing
soon  after  through  the  same  tube.  If  any  of  the  tubes  were  laid
down  for  a  few  minutes,  it  became  indifferent  which  end  was  first
used.


HELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.


57


longt  a  certaiu  distance  down  aloog  the  inside  of  the  hand,
tu  the  same  way  as  is  customary  with  the  magnet,  when  it
is  intended  to  throw  the  patient  into  the  usual  sleep.  It
was  found  ihiit  the  effect  ft^as  exactly  the  same  as  that  pro-
duced by  a  small  marfneiic  needle,  such  as  is  used  in  a  cmn-
pasSy  which  I  had  at  hand  for  comparison.  This  needle  was
nearly  six  inches  long,  one-eiglitli  of  an  inch  broad,  and
one  tweuty-tifth  of  an  inch  thick,  weighed  about  one  hun-
dred and  eighty-five  grains,  and  supported  about  twice  its
own  weight.  When  I  drew  the  point  of  the  crystal  along
downward  from  the  wrist,  slowly  through  the  palm  of  the
Imnd  to  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  the  patient  had  the  sensation
of  a  pleasant,  light,  cool  breeze  directed  over  her ;  when  I
took  the  little  magnetic  needle,  it  produced  the  same  in  the
like  degree.  When  I  reversed  the  experiment,  so  that  1
carried  the  pass  from  the  middle  finger  upwards  to  the
wrist,  the  magnetic  needle  produced  a  coutraiy,  luke-warm
sensation,  evidently  disagreeable  to  the  patient ; — the  point
of  the  crystal  produced  exactly  the  same  when  the  reverse
pass  was  made  with  it  in  the  same  way.  Another  time  I
brought  a  crystal  three  times  as  large :  when  drawn  down-
ward over  the  hand,  it  behaved  like  a  magnetic  bar  capable
of  supporting  a  pound  and  a  quarter  of  iron ;  but  the
rev^wd  pass,  up  the  hand,  acted  so  violently,  that  the  spaa-
modic  condition  produced  by  it  ascended  along  the  arm  as
far  as  the  arm-pit,  continued  for  several  minutes,  and  by  its
violence  rendered  a  repetition  improper.

34.  Furnished  with  these  facts,  I  repaired  to  the  hospital
of  our  University,  with  a  view  to  try  whether  the  observa-
tious  which  1  had  gathered  from  Miss  Nowotny  could  be
repeated  on  other  similar  patients,  confirmed,  and  brought
to  gome  degree  of  generality.  Under  the  kind  permission
of  Dr.  lippich  1  again  directed  my  attention  to  Miss  An-
gelica Stnrmann.  1  made  the  pass  over  her  hand  with  the
apex  of  a  rock  crystal  six  inches  long  and  two  inches  thick.


68


CRTSTALS  AND  TOE  MAOIfKT  IN


The  effect  easued  immediately,  the  patient  felt  the  wanu
and  cool  sensations  very  distinctly  wlien  the  passes  were
made  over  the  hand.  When  I  applied  the  other  pole  of
the  crystal  in  the  same  manner,  the  sensations  were  just  of
the  same  kind,  but  weaker  and  reversed :  these  two  patients
therefore  agreed  with  each  other*  The  action  on  the  sick
Miss  Sturnmnn  was  so  strong  that  it  aflected  the  whole  arm
as  far  as  the  shoiddcr,  tiie  warm  and  cold  sensations  being
prulunged  all  the  way  up.  When  I  subsetjuenUy  applied
a  crystal  three  times  us  large,  tliis  acted  so  powerfidly  upon
the  hand,  immediately  upon  the  first  pass,  that  her  colour
came  and  went  suddenly,  so  that  I  did  not  venture  upon  a
second  experiment  with  it  here.

I  now  tried  the  pass  from  the  head  down  over  the  face ;
fhiliilfirtibi  li  everything  here  exactly  in  the  same  way,  and
Ite  BeoBation  was  espcciidly  perceived  along  the  temples.
Counter-experiments  with  the  above-mentioned  magnetic
needle  pmduccd  exactly  suiiilar  effects,  only  the  needle  was
here  evidently  felt  more  weakly  than  the  rock  crystal.
Final ly,  I  afterwards  made  the  same  experiments  on  Mm
Maix.  On  this  very  sensitive  patient,  who,  however^  always
rfinuiirud  fully  conscious,  the  crjstals  acted  not  merely  on
tlie  line  of  the  ])ass,  but  over  a  broad  strip  up  and  down  the
liand,  which  action  ascended  all  up  the  arm.  Two  months
later,  1  tried  Miss  ReicheL  This,  to  outward  appcai-anoe,
hcYiithy  and  strong  girl,  possessed  such  sensibility  to  the
crystal  pole,  that  she  perceived  its  approach  even  at  con-
8ideral>k'  distances.  Like  her  predecessors,  she  found  the
pai*»  downward  cool,  upward  warm,  with  the  northward
pole  (  — M);  with  the  southward  (+  M),  on  the  contrary,
that  downward  warm,  that  ujiward  cool.  Lastly,  I  be-
came acquainted  with  Miss  Maria  Atzmannsdorfer,  and
found  in  her  a  svusithe  subject,*  who  felt  the  pass  of  the

*  1  Imrrow  llie  Urm  *'  sensitive/'  for  magiiflo-pliyMologiml  rcftclioo.
From  vegetable  [jliyaiology,  iu  which  phmts  of  defiaite  irritability —^ucli


UKLATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORQANS.


89


€iy»tals^  strongest  of  aM*  Even  little  crystals  of  fluor  spar,
seleiiite,  sulphuret  of  iron,  &r.,  an  iiicli  or  so  long,  produced
a  sensation  of  cold  when  passed  down  the  hand  ;  with  rather
thin  acicular  crystals,  I  coidd,  so  to  speak,  describe  lines
upon  tlie  liand ;  but  the  |>ass  upward  produced  warmth  of
the  hand,  and  so  adversely  upon  her,  that  it  affected  her
whole  body  unpleasantly,  and  began  to  produce  spasms  as
60on  as  I  repeated  it.

35.  As  I  was  recounting  all  this  to  a  friend,  and,  in  order
to  show  him  distinctly  how  I  had  operated  upon  my  patients,
drew  the  same  rock-crystals  along  over  his  hand,  he  looked
at  me  with  wondering  eyes,  and  said  that  he  himself  felt
the  game  that  I  had  been  describing  to  him  of  my  patients,
— the  cool  bi'eeze,  quite  distinctly, — as  often  as  I  passed
the  point  of  the  crystal  over  his  hand.  He  was  a  stiTing
healthy  man,  in  the  prime  of  Ufe,  w  ho  allowed  me  to  name
him  ojxjidy,  and  to  call  upon  him,  as  a  witness,— Mr.  Carl
Schuh,  a  private  gentleman  residing  here,  well  known  for
his  great  knowledge  in  natural  sciences.  After  that,  I  made
tim  <siperiment  on  all  my  own  circle  of  acquaintance,  and
on  many  strangers,  among  whom  were  physicians,  physi-
dgts,  and  chemists.  1  have  permission  to  name  especially
among  these,  our  renowned  natiu'alist.  Prof.  Endlichcr,  chief
of  all  the  public  botanical  institutions.  It  appeared  that  not
only  my  sick  patients,  but  a  great  many  other  persons,  shared
i?»e  sensations,  and  that  a  large  crystal  of  quartz,  selenitc,
avy  spar,  fluor-spar,  and  other  substances,  carried  along
sufficiently  close  over  an  open  hand,  produced,  and  rendered
evident  to  the  consciousness,  in  a  tolerably  large  number  of
(leriioiis,  certain  peculiar  sensations,  w4iich  manifest  them-
^ves  in  the  first  place  as  heat  and  cold.  This  was  equally
ttlic  case  when  I  previously  heated  the  crystal  to  the  tera-

1*  certain  MImoeas,  Berbem,  Dioticea,  Hcdysarum,  &c.,  arc  called  '*  «en-
•iti*e»*'  in  dbtiactiou  to  **  nemihle,*'  belonginp  to  the  tlieories  of  animal
life,  «hi^«  M  i»  ^t{[  known,  involve  a  more  general  idea, — Author,


m


¥KMl


pcrttture  of  the  blood,  to  meet  the  objection,  that  the  seosa-
tiou  might  be  acGounted  for  by  the  radiation  of  heat  from
the  hand  to  the  stone.  Many  could  tell  me  at  once,  with
the  face  averted,  whether  I  had  made  the  pass  over  the  hand
with  the  positive  or  negative,  i.  e,  with  the  weaker  or
stronger  pole.

It  results  from  all  this,  that  the  fbllo\^ing  laws  exist  in
natui'e  :—

a.  A  peculiar,  hitherto  overlooked  force  ^  resides  in  matter
fvhich,  when  the  latter  has  taken  the  farm  of  a  crplal,  ap*
pears  effectiveltj  in  the  direction  of  the  axes,

b.  It  mani/ests  if  self  most  strongly  at  the  tn'o  poles,  but
differentlij^  and  in  an  opposite  manner,  at  each.

c.  Its  effect  agrees  perfectly  with  that  of  the  magnet,  and
the  magnetic  poleSy  in  every  case,  wftere  it  is  directed  upon
sensitive  human  orgatis.

36.  In  order  to  put  every  one  in  a  position  to  repeat  the
expcrimunts  on  his  own  acquaintance,  I  observe  expressly,
that  a  large  free  crystal,  with  a  natural  point,  is  requisite ;
larger  in  proportion  as  the  person  is  less  sensitive.  Heavy
spar,  fluor  spar,  and  selenite,  are  especially  well  adapted.
It  makes  no  difl'erence  whether  the  skin  is  delicate  or  coarse ;
I  have  sometimes  found  the  roughest  mechaijic's  hand  more
sensitive  than  the  softest  skin  of  a  professional  pei*son.  The
point  of  the  crystal  must  be  carried  slowly,  as  closely  as
possible  without  actual  contact,  sweeping  from  the  end
of  the  arm  over  the  inside  of  the  expanded  hand,  tlirough
the  palm,  and  over  the  middle  finger  as  far  as  the  tip,  at
auch  a  rate  that  one  pass  occupies  some  five  seconds.  The
crystal  is  to  be  held  perpendicularly  to  the  siu*face  of  the
hand.  Among  my  own  acquaintance  I  have  found  more
than  half  the  pei*sons  sensitive.  I  never  told  them  whal'lH
had  in  view  ;  I  asked  for  the  liartd,  passed  the  crystal  a  few
times  over  it,  and  then  asked  whether  any  effect  was  felt,
and  of  what  kind? The  answer  usually  was,  a  cool  or  a


ItLATtON  fO  THE  HfTMAN  Om&AW B,


u


warm  breeM) it  need  scarcely  be  mentioned,  that  this
sensation  is  very  delicate  and  tine ; for,  if  it  affected the
hand  m  strongly  as  not  to  require  any  particular  attention,  it
would  not  have  remained  to  be  discovered,  and  brought
forward  now,  but  would  have  been  long  since  generally
known. Persons  who  do  not  feel  it  one  day  often  feel  it
the  next,  or  the  day  after,  or  a  week  later. I  met  with  a
remarkable  instance  in  my  own  younger  daughter,  Ottone*
She  always  felt  a  large  selenite  crystal  very  distinctly,  while
her  brothers  and  sisters  could  scarcely  feel  anything. She
suffered  for  some  time  from  head-ache,  which  gradually  in-
creased; at  last  she  was  obUged  to  lie  down. Two  days
after,  she  was  seized  for  the  first  time  in  her  liie  with
fiolent  spasms,  lay  sick  a  fortnight,  and  then  recovered.
Now,  however,  she  scarcely  felt  the  selenite  crystal  at  all ;
the  attack  of  illness  had  wholly  removed  the  sensitiveness
to  it. Thus  this  sensitiveness  varied  even in  the  same
persons  at  different  times,  and  witli  theii-  state  of  health.
Very  frequently  the  sensation  did  not  become  evident  at  the
first,  but  at  the  second  or  tliird  pass. Sometimes  a  person
felt  the  first  pass  most  strongly,  the  second  and  third  were
not  perceived,  while  with  the  fourth  and  fifth  the  sensation
igiain  distinctly  presented  itself. It  would  not  do  to  make
the  pass  too  rapidly ; the  full action  requires  some  little
time. It  occurred,  also,  that  it  preceded  tlie  crystal,  and
was  felt  at  the  points  of  the  fingers  when  the  crystal  had
only  reached  the  palm  of  the  hand  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  only
manifested  itself  distinctly  in  other  persons,  after  the  crystal
had  completely  passed  off  the  hand. In  some  places  the
eyes  of  the  persons  have  been  bound,  and  then  varying
statements  have  been  received. This  c^nnuot  astonish,  after
what  has  just  been  said ;  the  answers  will  always  be  the
i  from  sensitive  persons  ;  from  pei'sons  but  slightly  sen-
sitnne  they  will  be the  most  uncertain : the  binding  of
the  ey^  places  people  in  an unnatural  and  inquiet  con-


0S


HIM  fkJ


HthUt  w  Uiat  their  attentioa  is  dkided  and  difltneted,  and
tlie  requisite  calm  for  tiuch  deVicate  obaervataom  b  wnalljr
wanting.  If  many  persons  are  present,  sa^rii^  and  ukteg
all  kinclM  of  IbtngB,  walkii^  to  and  fro,  and  the  agiteticm
and  distraction  are  increased,  it  is  natural  that  the  anawen
to  the  qtie»tions  should  be  incoherent  eonceming  a
which  doea  not  sweep  over  the  hand  like  a  wire  brush.
many  persons  the  reversed  pass,  frt>m  tlie  hand  upward
toward  the  arm,  is  more  evident  than  the  downward  pass.
But  some  persons  are  absolutely  insensible ;  and  these  per*
haps  are  the  healthiest.  The  one,  the  northward  pole,*
usually  actjs  more  strongly  than  the  other,  the  southward
pole :  the  slight  warmth  is  generally  less  perceptible  than
the  coolness.  It  almost  always  contributes  to  increase  the
distinctness  and  strength  when  the  hand  is  extended  in  the
direction  of  tlic  meridian,  with  the  fingers  directed  to  the
south,  Unfoilunately,  no  further  contacts  may  be  allawed
to  exist  dm"ing  this,  because  they  injure  the  delicacy  of  sen-
sation, and  divert  the  attention,  which  must  be  wholly  con-
centrated here. It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  this,  Uke  evejfy


*  On  ftcconnt  of  the  dilBculty  of  language,  to  name  the  polet  of  |
magnets  in  contrast  to  the  poles  of  the  earth,  in  so  far  that  the  latter
poa8?8s  a  magnetiBin  of  the  rcver»e  direction  to  that  of  the  osdllaLing
needle,  and  in  order  briefly  to  dismiss  all  circumlocutions  and  miscon-
ceptions, I  shall  in  this  work  name  that  pole  of  the  needles  which
freely  turns  to  the  north,  the  "  northward  pole"  (gen  Nordpof),  and
that  which  points  to  the  south,  the  '^southward  pole"  (g^en  Sudpof).
These  terms  will  perhaps  be  found  fmilt  with  here  and there ;  bat  ia»
their  compressed  brevity,  they  will  everywhere  be  readily  undemiood,,
Even  in  the  newest  German  text-books  of  physics,  those  just  issued
fVom  the  press,  that  of  MM.  Poiiillet  and Miiller,  and  that  of  M/
Bautngartner,  the  terms  are  in  direct  opposition;  and  what  the  former'
called  north  polar,  the  latter  speaks  of  as  south  polar. Tbat  the
German  and  French  an  tiie  one  hand,  and  the  French  on  the  other,
liave  long  usedoppoBed  cxpreseionB,  is  otlierwise  well  known* Hence
rennltn  difficulty  and  confuaion,  and  this  may  justify  the  proposition  ofj
an  expedient. — Author's  Note.


RltATTON  TO  THU  mm XV  OROANS.

other  Mil9e«  becomes  improved  by  j>racticc.  A  persoii  who
never  drinks  wine,  coflPee,  or  tea,  can  seldom  distinguish  the
ditferent  kinds  of  them  ;  while  a  pracrlised  drinker  discovers
the  slightest  difference  at  once  and  distinctly*  Mr.  Sclmh
prepftred  for  me  in  a  short  time  series  of  crystals  completely
agreeing  with  those  which  the  sensitive  patients  had  formed.
The  same  was  speedily  effected  by  Mr.  Stnder,  a  young  man
from  Ziirich,  staying  here,  and  his  series  agreed  ahnost  per-
fectly with  that  of  Mr.  St^huh*

37.  Up  to  this  point  it  was  made  out  that  in  crystals
resides  a  force  of  a  polar  nature,  which  they  possess  in  com-
mon with  magnets.  It  was  next  to  be  inquired  whetlier  this
was  of  the  same  kind,  and  perhaps  only  quantitatively  diffe-
rent, or  was  qualitatively  difierent  from  that  whicli  we  have
hitlifirto  understood  by  the  term  magnetism.  If  the  former,
it  must  be  capable  of  being  reduced  to  the  same  laws.  It
should  attract  iron  filings,  like  not  only  magnetic  nickel
(chromium,  manganinm,  cobalt*),  but  also  oxidised  bodies,
even  impure  ores  like  magnetic  iron-stone.  Moreover,  it
ought  in  like  manner,  in  quartz,  seleuite,  &c*,  as  it  does  in
steel,  not  only  to  influence  organic  living  bodies,  but  also
convert  bodies  capable  of  becoming  magnetic,  such  as  steel,
iron,  nickel  (cobalt,  &c.),  into  magnets,  when  applied  to
them  in  the  same  way.  When  I  dipped  the  polar  end  of
roy  crystal  into  fine  u'on  filings  I  could  not  detect  finy
attraction.  In  order  to  have  at  my  disposal  the  crystalline
foicei  in  it^  greatest  possilile  strength,  I  bought  the  largest
ciy«t»l  that  I  could  obtain,  a  prism  of  rock  crjstal  from
Gtvtthard,  of  eight  inches  in  diameter,  a  six-sided  colossus,
with  pyramidal  ends,  which  I  had  some  ditficulty  in  using,
and  the  action  of  which  on  the  hand  of  the  most  sensitive
of  my  healthy  friends,  Mr.  Schuh,  was  bo  strong  that  he


^  It  most  be  borne  m  miod  tliat  the  prese&t  IrentiBc  wa»  written  more
m  ye»r  before  Mr  Faraday'^  reae arches  appeared. — Jut/iors  Note,


mm


u


CRTOTAI.S  AND  THE  MAGKOT  IH


described  it  as  feeling  as  if  cold  air  were  gently  blown  npon
him  through  a  straw.  I  placed  a  fine  sewing-needle  before
this  jx>werfxd  crystal,  and  rubbed  this  mth  it  in  the  same
way  as  we  do  with  a  magnetic  bar  when  desiring  to  convert
it  into  a  magnet.  I  made  a  dozen  passes  over  it,  and  tried
it  with  iron  fiUngs ;  it  did  not  attract  any.  I  rejieated  the
passes  more  than  a  hundred  times  :  hut  still  it  did  not  lift
even  the  most  minute  of  the  iron  filings.  As  a  counter-
experiment,  I  made  a  single  pass  over  the  sewing  needle
with  the  small  magnetic  needle  which  Miss  Stumiann  had
found  weaker  than  the  little  rock  crj'stal  previously  apphed
to  her,  and  it  at  once  took  up  a  long  beard  of  filings  from
them.  Therefore  ihe  points  of  the  crysials  could  not  ino-
culate the  needle  by  rubbhff,  witfi  a  force  capable  of  acting
on  iron.  However,  wei*e  this  the  case,  it  wm  still  possible
to  excite  such  on  it,  after  the  manner  of  magnetic  distribu-
tion, under  the  immediate  influence  of  a  crystal  pole,  and
to  render  it  capable  of  attracting  iron  fiUngs  in  the  sanie
way  that  an  iron  rod  is  made  to  do  so,  by  placing  the  pole
of  a  magnet  upon  it.  To  try  this,  I  attached  a  fine  steel
needle  to  the  points  of  various  large  crystals,  and  dipped
it,  in  this  connexion,  into  tihngs.  //  did  not  take  up  the
least  trace  of  them.

38,  When  I  approached  tlie  polar  points  of  any  crystal,
even  of  the  great  rock  crystal,  to  the  most  sensitive  sus-
pended magnetic  needle,  they  never  disturbed  it  in  the
least;  it  remained  motionless.  On  the  other  hand,  I  sus-
pended a  large  crystal  (free  from  iron),  for  instance  one  of
selenite,  by  the  middle,  with  a  t\iisled,  very  fine,  silkworm
thread,  so  that  it  swung  with  its  long  axis  horizontal,
placed  it  under  a  glass  shade,  and  laid  a  magnet  quite  close
to  it;  but  this  exhibited  no  action,  and  no  kind  of  turning
occurred.

39.  I  wished  to  see  whether  a  polar  wire  wonkl  act  upon
a  suspended  crjst^l  as  upon  a  magnetic  needle. 1  aimnged


RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS,


a  small  voltaic  pile  of  a  few  elements,  each  of  about  ten
square  iaches  surface,  and  connected  the  |>oIes  by  a  stout
copper  wire.  I  then  suspended  a  selenite  crystal,  free  from
iron,  and  about  four  inches  long,  by  a  silkworm  thread,  so
that  both  poles  were  free  to  move  in  the  horizontal  direc-
tion*  When  approached  to  a  horizontal  part  of  the  polar
wire,  the  crystal  and  wire  were  indifferent,  and  not  the
slightest  visible  reaction  took  place.

40.  It  fttiU  remained  to  be  investigated  wliether  the
crystal  would  induc43  a  momentary  current,  like  a  magnet,
when  brought  near  a  conducting  wire. I  formed  a  helix

about  twenty-five  turns  of  strong,  covered  copper  wire,
id  connected  it  with  the  couplings  of  an  extremely  delicate
Schweigger*8  multiplier,  the  well-known  differential  gal-
vnaameter :  when  1  rapidly  inserted  into  the  helix  a  selenite
or  rock  crystal,  each  of  several  inches  long,  the  astatic
needle  did  not  exhibit  tlie  sUghtest  divergence.  When
withdrawn  the  case  was  similar,  the  needle  was  motionless ;
t|ie  weakest  magnetic  needle  that  I  substituted  for  the
cnstals,  in  a  counter-experiment,  immediately  produced  a
divergence  of  twenty-five  degrees,

41.  The  relation  to  terrestrial  magnetism  was  here  a
question  of  the  greatest  importance*  We  have  some  old
researches  by  Ilauy,  Biot,  and  especially  Coulomb,  in  which,
not  indeed  the  proof,  but  the  possibility  is  made  good,  that
ail  Ixxiies  may  possess  magnetism  to  some  extent,  or  are
capable  of  acquiring  it.  Those  of  Hauy  (Mem.  du  Mus.
?ar,  1817,  p.  167)  may  be  passed  over. M.  Biot,  in  his

IfjOp  this  subject  (Gilbert's  Annal,  v.  Ixiv.  395,  1820,)
iiiuv-rfjun  vvl.*'tlier  it  is  magnetism ;  or,  as  he  interroga-
li.  ^  it,  **  some  other  analogous  force,'^  which

acts  upon  bodies.  But  in  this  treatise  also  we  find  through*
out  only  such  bodies  denoted  as  more  or  less  evidently
contain  iron.  An  experiment  was  made  with  two  silver
needles,  one  ^(,4j()^c^^,wfta  made  of  chemically  pure  silver*

F


V»  CKT8TALS  AXD  THE  M AGXET  Hi

tbe  <Alier  of  silver  which  had  been  melted  with  iroD,  and
which,  at>  no  trace  of  iron  could  be  detected  in  it  bjr  che-
roical  analysos,  was  also  r^arded  as  perfectly  pine.  But
the  latter  acted  416  times  as  strongly  upon  the  magnet  as
the  fcHiner.  It  was  thence  concluded  that  tins  also  iQust
contain  iron,  even  though  it  could  not  be  detected  chemi-
cally, and  that,  as  a  general  rule,  inconoeiyeably  small
<juaiitities  of  iron  are  always  sufficient  to  give  a  body  the
capsaaty  to  acquire  magnetism ;  indeed,  that,  consequently,
even  the  needle  made  of  chemically  refined  silver  must  have
retained  traces  of  iron.  The  most  detailed  account  of
these  matters  was  read  by  Coulomb,  before  the  French
National  Institute,  in  the  year  1802  (ext.  in  Gilbert's  Ann.
xii,  194) :  in  this  he  left  the  question  unsettled  whether
the  liodies  which  he  tried  were  free  from  iron  or  not,  and
Gilliert  remarks,  with  reason,  that  they  scarcely  could  be.
The  ex[)erLments  consisted  essentially  in  this:  needles  of
about  one-third  of  an  inch  long,  suspended  by  silk  fila-
ments, were  brought  between  the  magnetic  poles,  and  made
to  oscillate  previously  and  afterwards.  The  number  of
oscillations  in  the  same  time  was  always  smaller  previously
than  when  they  were  coimted  between  the  poles ;  and  thus
the  effect  of  the  magnet  was  indicated.  But  what  effect  ?  one
must  ask.  And  every  one  must  see  that  it  may  be  one  of
three  kinds : — 1.  Dependent  on  the  presence  of  iron  in  the
bodies.  2.  On  the  bodies  themselves.  3.  On  "another
analogous  force,"  as  M.  Biot  conjecturally  expressed  himself.
The  decision  of  these  questions,  so  far  as  they  bear  refer-
ence here,  appeared  to  me  to  require  a  new  direct  experi-
ment. I  possessed  crystals,  especially  of  selenite,  which
acted  upon  all  the  patients  as  strongly  as  a  magnetic  bar
capable  of  supporting  five  to  seven  lbs.  A  bar  of  this  kind^
suspended  by  a  common  linen  thread,  invariably  arranged
itself  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  meridian.  If,  then,
the  peculiar,  equally  powerful  force,  which  resided  in  the


KELATTOTf  TO  TUB  HtTlTAW  ORGANS.


cTTBtals,  were  the  same  as  that  in  the  magnet,  the  cr}^stal
when  freely  suspended  ought  to  arrange  itself  in  the  nieri-
clian.  To  ascertain  this  I  freely  suspended  various  crystals,
free  from  uon,  and  in  particulai*  the  sclenite  of  two  uiehes
long,  by  a  silk  tliread,  tlirce  twenty-fifths  of  an  inch  long,
and  untwisted,  just  as  it  had  been  wound  off  from  the
cocoon,  and  I  brought  these  under  a  glass  shade*  They
stood  at  rc8t  for  several  hours,  but  never  in  a  direction  to-
ward  the  north,  or  indeed  in  any  determinate  direction
whatever.  Wlien  I  turned  the  point  of  suspension  a  quarter
of  a  circle,  the  crystal  was  also  diverted  ninety  degrees  after
some  hours*  rest.  I  could  tlius  bring  it  completely  into  any
direction  I  pleased.  Therefore  not  the  slightest  opposition
to  the  force  of  torsion  of  the  finest  silk  filament  occurred,
and  the  crystal  force  does  not  endow  ifs  conductor  with  ike
sliffhiesi  direciive  power  ;  it  does  not  stand  in  any  relation
of  direction  to  terrestrial  magnetism.

Coksequentlij,  as  on  the  one  hand  the  behaviour  of  the
magnet  and  of  the  crystal  to  animal  nerves  was  exactly  the
same,  so  mi  the  other  hand,  to  iron^  to  the  electric  current^

ihe  opposite  poles  of  the  may  net  and  to  terrestrial  may-

twn^  ii  was  wholly  different.

'42,  It  is  therefore  established  that,  the  polar  force  which
teMides  in  crystals,  and  renders  its  existence  manifest  by  sen-
snous  excitations  of  a  pecidiar  kind,  in  the  healthy  and  dis-
caibed  animal  nerv^es  is  not  identical  with  the  maynetic
force,  as  we  at  present  know  it.  It  does  not  attract  iron,
does  not  act  upon  the  magnetic  needle,  is  in  its  strongest
concentration  incapable  of  exerting  the  slightest  power  of
magnetically  attracting  iron,  in  the  smallest  steel  fibres,
does  not  inj9uence  the  polar  wire  when  placed  in  the  helix,
does  not  produce  any  induced  current,  and  does  not  obey
tcrrcstrial  magnetism.

43.  On  the  other  side  it  holds  good  that,  the  maynetic
p,  as  we  at  present  know  it  in  maynetic  iron-ore  and


68  OtTSTAI^  AND  THE  MAGNET  19

in  the  magnetic  needle,  is  associated  niih  thai  force  which
n'f  have  just  become  acquainted  with  in  crystals.  For  fiinoe
the  magnet  acts  upon  animal  nerves  in  the  same  way  as
crystals,  it  possesses,  in  addition  to  its  own  properties,  which
are  wanting  in  crystals,  at  the  same  time  that  force  *bIso
which  resides  in  crystals.

44.  From  which  it  further  necessarily  follows,  that  the
force  of  the  magnet  is  not,  as  has  been  hitherto  assumed,
single  in  its  nature,  hut  of  two  kinds,  since  to  the  older
knonm  one  is  now  added  a  nen'  unknown  one,  distinctly
different  from  the  former, — that  of  the  crystal.  It  may
appear  divested  of  the  other  properties  of  the  magnet,  and
in  nature  is  displayed  in  a  separate  condition  by  the
crystal.

The  phenomena  which  the  magnet  presents  may  be
divided  therefore  into  two  sections,  which  become  compli-
cated with  each  other  in  their  manifestations ;  and  it  will  be
necessary  to  subject  a  portion  of  the  great  stwe  of  them
which  science  has  accumulated,  to  a  process  of  revision.

45.  I  now  instituted  investigations  as  to  the  nature  of
these  new  properties  of  crystals.  In  the  first  place,  I  sought
to  make  out  whether  this  force  might  be  transferred,  con-
veyed, or  accumulated  ?  Whether,  and  what  analogies,  it
possessed  in  these  respects  to  magnetism  and  electricity,
which  can  be  conveyed,  displaced,  conducted,  and  concen-
trated. Since  first  of  all  I  possessed  no  other  magnet  but
the  excited  animal  nerves  of  healthy  and  nervously  diseased
persons,  while  the  excitability  of  the  healthy  persons  I  hare
hitherto  met  with  is  so  weak  that  a  distinction  by  degrees
did  not  warrant  sufficient  accuracy,  I  was  compelled  to
apply  myself  to  the  more  acute  sensations  of  the  siok.  For
since  the  persons  with  whom  I  undertook  the  researches,
placed  in  the  most  varied  circumstances  and  suffering  from
different  diseases,  not  only  were  consistent  in  their  sensa-
tions, but  also  the  statements  they  made,  when  arranged


RELATTO?!  TO  THK  HUMAN  ORGANS.


iinfior  a  theoretical  point  of  view,  harmonized  with  earft
other,  every  reason  existed  to  attribute  vahie  to  them.  I
fin  fully  aware  of  the  nbje€tioiis  I  shall  meet  with  here ;
wmt  witli  the  cmitioiis  naturalist,  who  keeps  his  certain  steps
within  the  bonndaries  of  experience,  they  have  no  weiglit.
All  that  we  investigate  of  the  outer  material  world  we  must,
to  the  end,  gather  by  our  senses ;  we  have  no  other  histru-
ment  of  perception.* We  count  five  senses  and  no  more  ;

•  Even  with  the  reueratioii  thitt  attends  our  regard  for  such  clear-
QCfls  and  power  as  are  in  every  page  evinced  by  the  philosophical
author,  occaaioDfi  arise  to  strike  us  with  wonder  that  he  has  not  studied
the  grrat  work  of  Gall,  the  doctrines  of  which  w^ould  have  given  so
decided  a  direclion  to  hia  extraordinary  powers,  that  passages  like  those
in  the  paragraph  above  could  not  have  escaped  from  his  pen.  It  la
most  true  that  in  e?ery  infinitely  small  interval  of  time,  counllesa  elec-
trical movementA  proceed  around  us,  but  if  we  study  the  phrenological
stnicture  of  onr  heads,  and  apply  the  experience  whicii  numerous  trials
with  cryBtala  have  given  us,  we  shall  easily  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that
the  pointed  end  of  a  rock  cryatal,  or  of  selcuite,  or  of  etilpljate  of  alu-
miua^  or  of  nitrate  of  potass,  or  indeed  of  many  more  which  have  been
tried,  applied  to  tbe  attractive  organs  of  the  brain,  will  excite  the  indi-
vidual to  actions  agreeable  to  his  neighbour,  while  the  same  termination
applied  to  a  repulsive  organ  of  the  brain  will  excite  the  victini  to  an
action  disagreeable  to  his  neighbour.  Tlds  is  not  a  simple  matter  of
IheiMrjr.  Numerous  repetitions  of  the  experiments  have  ct^tabhshed  the
matter  of  fact*  Take,  for  instance,  a  female  of  imprcssionahihty  in  a
condition  of  lucid  somnambulism  :  apply  to  her  organs  of  adhesive*
licaa  or  of  pure  affection  tbe  points  of  rock  crystals,  and  she  is  excited
to  tbe  t^nderest  manifestations  of  pure  affection.  Change  the  direction
of  the  crystals,  point  to  araativeness,  and  the  woman,  if  ber  organs
are  at  all  full,  is  unable  to  control  her  actions.  She  burns  with  desire.
Reverse  the  ends  of  the  cr^^stals,  the  feelings  are  calmed,  or  perhaps
the  reaction  is  attended  with  head-ache.  Blowing  or  breathing  on  the
organs  equally  dispels  the  feelings.  Now  try  the  points  of  the  crj^stals
OD  the  orgaoit  of  sclf-esteem^ — most  repulsive  organs,  and  the  woman
iwcovea  imperious,  angry,  egotistical,  and  desires  you  to  stnnd  off,  for
ihe  detests  you.  Does  all  tliis  power  reside  in  the  optical  axes  of  crys^
lata  ^  The  Baron  von  Reichenbach  has  bejond  all  doubt  established
Uie  existence  of  a  force  residing  in  the  principal  axes  of  crystals,  and
iW  manifold  relattons  of  this  great  fact  have  yet  to  he  fully  developed


70  CRYSTALS  AND  THC  MAONIT  IN

but  we  are  already  sufGciently  aware  that  things  go  on  in
nature,  and,  in  fact,  around  and  in  us,  which  we  are  unable

by  thonsands  apon  thousands  of  experiments.  If  these  crystals  can
excite  the  organs  of  the  brain  in  man,  and  can  oblige  him  to  act
according  to  the  impulse  he  has  received,  is  he  not  the  victim  of  im-
pulses ?  **  Electrical  and  magnetical  morements !"  What  are  crystals
but  spherical  or  spheroidal  molecules  arranged  by  electrical  currents
according  to  determinate  laws  of  aggregation  ?  What  are  those  globular
molecules  but  imitations  of  the  spheres  which  occupy  space>  each  having
its  polarity,  each  its  north  and  south,  its  east  and  west ;  each  its  mag-
netic, each  its  diamagnetic  relations.  If  the  crystals  of  Yon  Reichen-
bach  can  excite  these  phenomena,  they  can  do  much  more.  Many  an
impressionable  individual  may  be  put  into  a  profound  sle^  by  pointing
such  crystalhne  apices  to  the  eyes>  and  awakened  again  with  rapidity
by  applying  the  positive  or  butt  end  of  the  crystal  to  the  eyes  or  to  the
pit  of  the  stomach.  I  have  done  this  upon  numerous  patients  hun-
dreds of  times.  Some  individuals  are  so  easily  impressed,  that  I  have
often  put  them  to  sleep  with  the  point  of  a  small  crystal  of  Bpsom  salt,
and  as  often  awakened  them  with  the  flat  end.  This  force  of  mokcnlar
arrangement  suggested  to  me  some  experiments  on  very  susceptible
patients,  the  details  of  which  ought  to  be  full  of  interest  to  philoaophical
physicians,  for  they  open  up  fields  of  inquiry  that  should  lead  to  the
modus  operandi  of  all  medicinal  agents.  I  dissolved  different  neutral
salts  in  water,  and  experimented  upon  one  at  a  time.  I  took  chloride
of  sodium  first ;  and  a  solution  of  this  substance  being  poured  into  ten
finger-glasses,  they  were  connected  together  by  cotton  moistened  in  the
solution,  and  a  couroune  des  tasses  was  completed.  A  current  of  elec-
tricity from  four  of  Smee's  elements  was  passed,  and  sensitive  persons,
who  could  be  readily  put  into  mesmeric  sleep  by  crystals,  were  desired
to  put  the  fore-finger  into  one  of  the  glasses  so  as  to  allow  it  to  be
moistened  by  the  solution.  In  the  first  trial,  seven  young  women  tried
the  experiment.  In  different  periods  of  time,  varying  from  half  a
minute  to  five  minutes,  each  fell  into  mesmeric  sleep,  previously  com-
plaining of  a  strong  taste  of  brine  in  the  mouth.  The  next  trial  was
with  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  alumina.  Sleep  came  on  in  each  case,
varying  from  one  to  three  minutes.  Each  tasted  alum  in  the  mouth.
Two  had  intense  head-ache.  These  in  the  next  experiment  I  placed
first  for  trial.  The  solution  was  nitrate  of  potass ;  the  taste  of  which
was  very  cooling  and  agreeable.  Sleep  did  not  supervene  in  one  for
four  minutes ;  in  the  other  for  seven  minutes  and  a  half.  Some  of  the
others  slept  more  quickly,  varying  from  three  to  six  minutes. The


RELATION  TO  THE  HOMAN  OKGAKS.

to  detect,  only  because  we  jxissess  no  instrument  for  their
perception.  In  every  infinitely  small  interval  of  time
countless  electrical  movements  proceed  around  us ;  we  do
not  perceive  the  slightest  trace  of  theiu.  If  any  one  were  to
come  down  from  the  clouds  who  had  a  sixth,  an  electrical
seode,  with  which  he  could  detect  and  could  describe  the
finest  electrical  changes  around  us,  with  the  accuracy  that
'  do  the  phenomena  of  hght  by  means  of  our  optical  organs,
Itiould  we  not  eagerly  listen  to  his  teachings,  and  ask  him
tliuusands  of  questions,  to  clear  up  and  extend  oui*  know-


nitre  cured  the  head-aches.  Sulphate  of  ioda,  of  magncsiai  of  potass,
were  tried  separately  ;  then  together.  Sleep  in  a  com  para  ti  rely  short
time.  In  eome,  weight  about  the  head  ;  iu  others,  head-ache.  These
results  made  me  try  the  etfecta  of  variouB  suh^tauces  in  solution.  In
one  trial  wiih  sulphate  of  copper,  finding  fearful  Rickness  and  ulceration
of  the  Duooth,  which  was  cured  with  great  difticulty,  1  was  induced  to
reflect  on  the  danger  of  such  trials  with  poisonous  metallic  salts  ;  and
I  left  off  for  a  time,  inferring  that  mercury  might  he  adviintageously  i
employed  where  ptyalism  was  desired  by  these  means  of  operating.  I  ,
had  already  in  several  cases  of  Bomnamhules  made  the  mouth  very  sore,
and  induced  salivatinn,  by  simply  placing  a  mimjte  globule  of  mercury
in  the  piilm  of  each  hand ;  eBtablifihing,  by  producing  the  rigid  spasm
in  the  first  place,  the  dictum  of  my  two  revered  masters,  Abernethy
and  Macartneyr  that  mercury,  among  its  many  properties,  was,  judi-
CtOQsly  applied,  a  tonic  medicine.  The  further  reflections  on  the
ili#a«iice  of  two  poles  of  crystalline  agency  led  me  to  pass  currents  of
riertriciiy  through  baths,  which  I  afterwards  found  more  extensively  and
ingeniously  applied  by  Mr,  Tylee,  of  Bath.  The  first  experiments  I  tried  ,
were  on  myself.  The  currents  being  passed  from  the  head  towards  the
fett,  tlie  bath  was  tonic  and  exhilarating  ;  but  being  induced  on  one
to  try  the  current  in  the  inverse  direction,  I  had  a  most  in-
'  bead-ache. Mr.  Tylee,  and  Mr.  Bagahaw,  at  Bath,  have  had  great

in  the  treatment  of  intractable  forma  of  disease  by  means  of  :
» agency. We  are  as  yet  but  at  the  threshold  of  the  practical  appli-

of  this  subject.  In  every  point  of  riew,  the  existence  of  the
which  Von  Reichenbach  has  estabUshed  is  a  vast  advance  upon
owr  old  stock  of  knowledge.  There  is,  to  the  reflective  mind,  uo  limit
10  tlie  relations  which  the  force  he  has  indic4ited  has  to  all  the  objecta
JQ  natoiv*


72  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNBT  Ilf

l<j(lf?(r  ?  One  born  blind,  who  has  never  had  a  conception
of  light  and  colour,  allows  himself  to  be  led  by  one  that
HvrH  ;  and  when  be  always  finds  the  stone,  by  feeling,  which
ili(*  Hr(*ing  guide  had  forewarned  him  of,  he  believes  that  the
Hwr  hiiH  vyvH,  which  enable  him  to  see  things.  Now,  a
nrrvouH  pntidit  is  one  of  this  kind,  in  whom  a  sensitiveness
Inr  flcf'tricnl  and  magnetic  movements  exists,  and  with
wliicli  \h  nnfoldiHl  to  a  certain  extent  a  peculiar  sense,  so  to
Rpi'iik,  of  wliirli,  a8  it  will  appear,  the  healthy  are  deficient.
Aninng  tlir  nervously  diseased,  referable  here,  I  do  not  mean
Hirrrlly  Honnmnibulists,  sleep-walkers,  &c.,  but,  as  a  general
nile.  mimmI  pri'Hons  who  suffer  violently  from  spasms.  The
NnMinMiiilMilJHlM  lire  only  those  in  whom  these  disturbances  of
Hm-  nniiiiiil  eimdition  of  the  ncn'ous  system  have  reached  the
lil|flM>M|  de|iree,  and  in  whom  the  excitability  has  reached  its
MMoiiniini  Tlu^y  give  us  the  strongest  testimony  of  the  re-
mllMiiM.  Hiid  mIhiw  us  the  most  delicate  diflferences ;  but  they
nil-  Mill  iili'inlnlelv  nivessun-  in  the  researches  to  which  I
d»  ''«l»il  tii^Mi'ir  Miss  Nowotny,  on  whom  I  made  my  ex-
|<»  HhmmIm,  uiim  Tiir  (www  InMug  a  somnambulist*  during  the

'  h  h  I  liHi  iltitl  ()iou|tlt  lhr»r  |>Aticnt8  were  not  somnambiiliBts,  not
Ml  Mini  Hhhli  hi  l^lliolmm  iHilU  tlic  glocp -waking  state,  they  were  in
Mil  ili»|t  iHKHhiiiti*  »l«v|M«f  ^hiohtlic  other  is  only  a  condition.  In
Hm  liMihli  Ml  HH  »s|»»n«'iuMM  monworint,  MiM  Nowotuy  would  not  have
^HImI  III  i*|iiltii  Hit  ImniouKO  uiimWr  of  phenomena  known  as  mesmeric
rli>  iiMMiMiti  I  ihN|Mih>  \\x\\  I  hr  IUin>irs  right  to  establish  a  sUnd  point;
ImM  mIiiIi  I  )iilil  hi  him  Uic  «Wp  r<^|Kvt  which  is  due  to  so  philosophic
«  miMmI.  I  i»|iifi  \%\  «»hrnMxe  hi»  tartly  aow^ptauoe  of  the  truths  to  every
tiM  III  « iiii  It  Iii>  tK  ill  \w  \M\p\\  on  oiilargtni  ex|>oriencc  to  yield  his  assent.
^  MliHiil  MiiHiMi  lit*  nliM'p,  llio  nsr^^n'ik  avx"  jui^t  the  cases  which  could  not
liMl  III  iiMMliiii  lilm  of  !l\o  \v\\\\\n  of  lUU's  phrenology.  His  fingers
M|  |)lh  il  MM  llti  li  \\vi\An  (o  UnWn  organic  tar  a  i^hort  time,  would  produce
MtMMlliMhiilMiiN  iliHl  foiiM  iio<  fftil  to  iitnkt»  nucha  mind  as  his  that  he  has
h  >  11  iMiiMhfi  tliNlliiHionn  \ii«l\ou(  (Utlx^rrnocs,  while  he  has  bestowed  the
*'tii»Mii|i  iiiiiHiltii  in  Hio  Mhoxr  psimgrsph  on  the  physicians  who  have
lfi>!Mi»lil  ii|ihmili  on  !ln«  philixiophx  of  magnetism.  Every  thing  does
I«*IIh\i  iiilr  Hhil  Um  i' Inii  iln'ike  rnle»  and  laws  are  to  be  traced  by  all


RRtrATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS,

whole  time  of  my  six  weeks'  study  ;  she  only  suffered  from
cataleptic  sjiasms.  Miss  Maix  never  e\bibitecl  a  trace  of
somuambulism.  Tlie  surgeon,  Mr.  Schmidt,  of  Vienna,  who
experienced  the  most  striking  effect  from  the  crystals  and
I  he  magnet,  as  well  as  tlie  terrestrial  magnetism,  was  a
young,  otherwise  perfectly  healthy  man,  ^vlio  merely  was
attacked  by  cramps  in  one  arm  for  a  short  time,  through
exposure  of  one  side  to  cold.  And  the  sensLtiveness  might
be  thus  traced  onwiu'd  to  the  healthy,  who  oidy  felt  the
pass  of  large  crystals  upon  sensitive  parts,  like  a  cool  breeze.
Finally,  there  was  a  further  distinction  even  among  these,
that  some  felt  the  cooling  strongly,  othei's  more  weakly,
some  not  at  all.

If,  therefore,  all  this  stands  in  regular  connection,  cause
and  oSiict  cannot  be  disputed  away,  and,  in  my  opinion,
it  would  not  be  well  done  to  throw  away  results  which  may
become  so  valuable  a  key  for  the  investigation  of  truths  of
nature,  in  those  branches  of  physics  and  chemistry  where  she
seems  to  wish  to  conceal  her  mysteries  from  us  most  obsti-
nately. The  singular  sense,  the  peculiai*  irritability  of
nervous  patients,  is  chiefly  directed  to  magnetic  plienomena ;
they  are  an  invaluable  reagent  while  we  possess  no  other.
They  are  not  vague  sensations,  as  has  hitherto  Ijeen  often
believed,  and  as  like  those  by  which  many  physicians  and
visionaries  have  brought  reproach  upon  themselves;  but
everything  follows  rule  and  law,  and  these  arc  soon  dis-
covered, when  one  does  but  investigate  them  intelligently,
trace  them  with  the  aids  of  physical  and  chemical  know-


^Jto^  ligbti  that  can  be  brgugbt  to  bear  upon  tbem,  aari  when  certainty
WDniit  be  aUaiucd  in  scleucc  at  first,  we  must  be  contented  witb  pro-
biibiiity.  Wben  we  cannot  establish  a  theory,  we  muat  satisfy  ouraeUes
wirtb  the  amusiug  baziuess  of  nn  hypothesis.  If  wc,  at  hist,  arrive  at  the
irutb,  we  nbiill  not  rrgret  the  toil  it  hm  coet  us,  albeit  miieh  of  it  iuiH
bom  demoted  to  stem  tlie  torrents  of  prejudices^  and  tbe  foregone  con-
dniioa*  directed  against  as.


74


CRT81»AM  AND  ^Hl


ledge,  aud  apply  to  them  the  touchstone  of  experiiiieiital
criticism.

I  coidd  not  avoid  this  digression  ;  it  is  indispensable  to

the  definition  of  the  stand-point  of  these  researches.  I
now  turn  again  to  the  questions,  whether  the  peculiar  force
which  displays  itself  in  crystals  is  communicable,  con-
ductible,  and  condensible?  When  the  most  incongruous
things,  a  piece  of  wood,  a  glass  of  water,  leather  gloves,
paper  cuttings,  or  any  thing  else,  were  rubbed  with  the  fK>l6
of  a  crystal,  every  sick  patient  detected  without  delay,  when
placed  before  them,  the  difference  between  such  and  others
which  had  not  l}een  rubbed.  The  sensation  was  sometimes
a  cool,  sometimes  a  wann  feeling,  perceived  by  the  hand  in
which  the  object  was  placed ;  and  this  gradually  increased
until  it  became  unpleasant.  The  conveyance  ujion  paper
was  found  to  be  the  weakest.  Miss  Stm-mann  did  not  feel
a  book  which  had  been  once  rubbed  with  the  large  rock
crystal ;  often  rubbed,  sc^'ccly  at  all,  Fhially,  when  I  had
held  it  for  a  time  in  contact  with  the  \yo\ni  of  the  ciy^stal,
and  at  once  quickly  placed  it  in  her  open  hand,  she  felt  a
slight  warmth.  A  piece  of  porcelain  touched  \^ith  the
crystal-poiut,  felt  cool  to  her,  A  German  silver  conductor
of  an  electTO-magnetic  apparatus,  when  treated  in  the  same
way,  she  felt  very  wm*m.  A  piece  of  soft  iron,  a  piece  of  a
blue  steel  saw  blade,  a  hard  steel  file,  all  at  first  found
indifferent,  produced  a  sensation  of  heat  in  her  hand  after
the  crystal  point  had  been  drawn  over  them.  I  placed  my
hand  in  her*s,  first  let  her  get  accustomed  to  it,  then  took  it
away,  and  drew  it  backward  and  forward  a  few  times  above
the  point  of  the  great  rock  crystal,  and  then  again  laid  it  in
hcr's :  the  patient  at  onc^^  felt  a  gre^t  diftcrence  ;  she  now
found  it  far  warmer ;  and  this  apparent  elevation  of  tempera-
ture endured,  decreasing,  for  more  than  four  minutes,  during
which  I  repeatedly  extended  it  to  her  for  trial.  A  similar
series  of  experiments  were  gone  throiigh  witli  Miss  Maix,


RELATION  TO  THE  HtJMAN  OEGAKi*

mid  suheequeiitly  with  Miss  Reicliel  The  charge  was  here
conveyed  to  copper,  ziuc-plates,  linen,  silk  stuffs,  and  water.
Thq^  gave  wholly  siniilar  results.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer
perceived  immediately  whetlier  the  Geroimi  silver  conductor
bad  been  previously  in  contact  with  a  selenite  crystal  or  an
auiorphoixs  body,  and  particularly  whether  with  the  warmmg
or  cooling  end  of  a  crystal  the  heat  conveyed  was  stronger
W  wedker,  or  replaced  by  cold.  The  crystallic  force  may
tfccrelbge  be  transfen*ed  or  conveyed  to  other  liudies.  It
may  be  transferred  to  iron  and  steel,  and,  at  the  same  time,
these  bodies,  so  charged,  do  not  attract  ii'on  filings,  as  I  have
ilitttdy  shown  above,*


*  The  BaroD  very  ftadsfactorily  eatablishca  his  poaitioos. But  I  bave
tried  all  llieae  experimeulB  with  great  care  ou  impressionable  patieiiU,  and
have  frtquently  been  disappointed  in  the  results. I  have  repeated  them
on  soamambules,  and  have  found  every  cue  of  tbem  come  out  as  above
described. Then  I  am  bound  to  value  the  testi monies  ailbrded  by  good
ileeping-wakiDg  persona. I  am  often  told  that  confusion  ariacs  from
the use  of  such  caaea. Yea,  in  the  bands  of  boiher-licaded  persona,
confusion  naturally  takes  place  ;  but  with  due  precautious the  results
obtained  are  far  more  interesting,  because  more  definite. Having  pre-
pared a  case  for  such  experimenta  as  those  detailed  above  in  the  cme  ]
uf  Mi*a  Sturmann^  I  passed  the pointed  end  of  a  rock  crystal  on  a
smooth  disal  board,  on  a  piece  of  writing  paper,  on  the  bound  leather
cvT^r  of  a  book  sucees&ively. Each in  turn  wnjs oficred  to the  right  ■
band  of the  patient,  Miss J» D*, who had  been eight limes put]
Into  a  atalc  of  pladd  tle/p,  undisturbed  by  the  influence  of  other  mes- 1
■lamrn* Each  object  felt  warm  and  agreeable. I  repeated  the  crya*  I
uUine  apphcations  a  Josten  times  on  each  ohjeet ;  the  effect  was  to  make  '
Ujc  patient  »mile  contentedly » aud  to  place  the  band  eagerly  on  the  object:
la*t,  by  repetitions  of  the  experiment,  the  sleep  was  deepened. Now

applied  the  opposite  pole  of  the  crystal  to  the  board,  the  paper,  and
tbr  book  tuccesaively,  and  the  patient  being  in  a  deep  sleep,  the  hand  waa

cntly  laid upon  the  objects  in  turn* First,  from  the  deep  sleep,  the

ate  of  sleep-waking  took  place^  and  the  hand  was  speedily  drawn  away
Trom  each  object  as  if  it  were  disagreeable  ;  and  on  beiiig  asked  as  to  the
nature  of  tJie  aeoaation  produced,  ahe  said  it  was  cold,  and  made  her
eltilly  all  over.  1  repeated  the  application  of  tbia  repulsive  end  of  the
cnaul  mauy  limea  to  the  paper«  ami  on each  renewed  application  of


76  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

I  endeavoured  to  ascertain  whether  this  conveyance  could
be  eflFected,  like  that  of  magnetism,  by  rubbing  from  pole  to

the  hand  the  Bensation  hecame  more  unpleasant,  and  at  last  the  pa-
tient woke  up  suddenly.  A  piece  of  porcelain  touched  with  the  pointed
end  of  the  large  rock  crystal  was  warm  and  agreeable  to  ber,  but  did
not  put  her  to  sleep.  I  held  the  point  of  the  crystal  to  the  forehead ;
she  fell  deeply  asleep  instantly.  I  touched  the  porcelain  cup  with  the
blunt  end  of  the  crystal,  passing  it  a  dozen  times,  and  then  touched  the
fingers  of  the  right  hand  with  the  cup :  the  hand  was  hastily  withdrawn,
with  an  exclamation  of  *'  dorCt — it  U  like  ice,''*  The  patient  had  inatantly
passed  into  sleep-waking.  The  iron  poker  was  treated  with  the  pointed
end  of  the  crystal,  and  the  application  of  it  to  the  hand  deepened  the
sleep.  The  same  result  took  place  when  it  was  applied  to  the  nape  of
the  neck.  When  the  opposite  end  of  the  crystal  was  applied,  the  iron
being  well  charged  with  the  crystallic  force,  the  patient  on  feeling  it  got
up  suddenly  wide  awake.  A  three-cornered  file,  and  a  pair  of  large
polished  scissors,  similarly  treated,  produced  identical  effects.  To
detail  the  repetitions  of  the  experiments  on  this  patient,  and  on  two
others  where  identical  results  were  obtained,  would  be  tedious.  Insist-
ing upon  the  fact  which  Dr.  Elliotson's  experience  has  fully  established,
and  which  mine  and  that  of  several  other  experienced  students  in  mes-
merism sufficiently  corroborate,  that  no  phenomenon  is  observed  in
artificially  induced  mesmeric  states  which  has  not  occurred  in  Nature,
I  am  induced  to  draw  attention  to  some  cases  in  which  the  polar  rela-
tions would  appear  to  be  reversed.  In  general,  when  I  took  the  hand
of  a  patient  mesmerised  into  sleep  by  myself,  with  a  piece  of  pure
gold,  in  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  according  to  circumstances  of  impres-
sionability, the  hand  and  arm  became  rigid.  If  I  apply  the  gold  to  the
nape  of  the  neck,  the  whole  body  becomes  rigid,  and  the  sleep  is  so
deep  that  the  patient  is  insensible  to  all  impressions.  If,  in  this  state,
any  of  the  metals  easily  oxidable  are  applied  to  the  same  spot,  the
sleep  and  rigidity  in  times  varying  according  to  circumstances  are  dis-
solved, and  the  patient  is  restored  to  the  vigilant  and  conscious  state.  I
have  performed  analogous  experiments  with  different  metals  hundreds  of
times ;  but  I  have  occasionally  met  with  cases  of  a  high  degree  of  im-
pressionability, in  which  most  unexpectedly  the  phenomena  were  nearly
all  reversed.  By  the  induction  of  the  rigid  state  with  gold  and  plati-
num, I  have  repeatedly  cured  menorrhagia  in  females.  A  married
woman,  aged  23,  with  dark  hair  and  eyes,  higlily  nervous  temperament,
afflicted  with  passive  haemorrhage,  occurring  for  a  fortnight  at  each
catamenial  penod,  was  mesmerized  easily  into  a  sleep-waking  state,  in


RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  01


77


pole,  or,  like  that  of  electricity,  by  single  points.  It  proved
to  be  indifferent  whether  I  nibbed  the  object  in  the  direc-
tion of  its  length,  or  kept  any  point  whatever  for  a  short '
time  in  contact  with  the  jioiut  of  the  crystal ;  the  warmth  or
coolness  thus  produced  were  not  found  to  differ,  A  large
crystal,  when  the  point  was  applied  to  a  glass  of  water,  pro-
duced magnetized  w^ater,  as  well  as  a  horse-shoe  magnet.

46*  The  question  now^  was, whether  a  coercive  power
exiidted  in  matter,  whether  this  charge  was  persistent  or*
tiBnsieut,  and  after  what  intervals  of  time? I  charged
various  objects, — ^the  German-silver  conductor,  the  steel  file, ,


which  the  remained  qaiet  and  comfortable  for  a  couple  of  hours  each  I
morning  for  a  week. She was  cured, and  remained  well  for  fourj
nianiha. Tlie  vexations  arising from  questions  relating  to  a  dninkea  I
haeibftnd made  her  anffer  mucb  from  beadache*  and  1  applied  a  disc  of  j
pun?  gold  lo  tUe  back  of  ber  neck. Instead  of  tileep  and  ri^d  fipaam  ]
increiuiog,  she  waa  affected  with  the  clone  of  hysteria,  and  auddea  j
paMivc  haemorrhage* I  applied  soft  iron  to  the  neck  and  soles  of  the]
ahoes,  and  in  half  an  hour  &he  was  quite  well,  and  in  high  apirita, 1 1
pemaaded  ber  to  come  the  next  day,  and put  her  to  fileep  by  passea,
after  which  I  applied  a  disc  of  platinum  to  the  nape  of  the  neck» The  I
fiame  results  as  with gold  immediately  supervened. Waking  up  sud*-
dienly,  she  became  very  hysterical,  and  hsemorrhage  quickly  came  on.  1
The  cure  waa  just  as  soon  effected  as  before,  by  the  application  of  iron
to  the  neck  and  soles  of  the  feet. The  general  couclusion  at  which  I  j
have  arrived,  that  all  attractive  agencies  tend  to  produce  a  state  of  j
nerroua  system  favonring  tone,  and  thai  all  repulsive  agencies  tend  to
produce  on  opposite  state  favouring  clone,  was  here  subverted  by  an  ex-
ception ;  but  what  does  it  evince?  only  that  cases  exist  in  which  thi  ]
relations  to  the  metals,  and  to  the  poles  of  crystals,  are  directly  the  re-
verie of  thoae  usually  met  with* I  have  seen  two  other  cases,  in  which,
tkoogh  not  identical,  yet  very  analogous  facts  were  exhibited,  in  which  j
tl-  i!  extremity  of  crystals  induced  wakefnluess and  headache;

w  ilunt  or  butt  end  being  offered  to  the  eyes  or  to  the  pit  of  the

itomacb,  deep  sleep  was  immediately  brought  on  ;  in  which  magnetiged  j
wat£r  induced  no  attraction  of  the  hand,  and  in  which  the  presence  of
a  powerful  magnet  brought  on  hysteria  and  Iieadachc  ;  but  no  sub-
sequent rigidity  or  sleep. Tlicy  were  of  a  nervo-bilions  temperament,
liah^.to  fre^^^^  attacka  of  nervous  and  sick  headache*


76  CmT8TAL8  AND  THS  M AOKR  Of

the  soft  iron,  the  piece  of  porodain,  and  the  book.  Hie
last  soon  lost  its  power.  The  piece  of  poroelam  tried  on
Miss  Sturmann  retained  it  two  minutes,  the  conductor  five
minutes,  the  iron  the  same,  and  the  steel  ten  minutes.
In  this  operation  I  did  not  take  the  objects  in  the  free
hand,  but  moved  them  backwards  and  forwards  in  a  fold
of  paper ;  when  the  patient  had  taken  hold  of  them,  I
made  her  lay  them  down,  and  wait  till  the  sensation  which
contiimcd  to  thrill  through  her  hand  had  disappeared,
'riiis  requiivd  about  a  minute.  Then  I  made  her  take  the
object  up  again,  without  haring  touched  it  myself,  and  con-
tinued thus  imtil  the  sensations  of  heat  or  cold  were  no
longer  produced.  From  this  it  foUows  that  the  retention  of
the  chai^,  under  the  above  drcumstances,  is  not,  even  at
night,  of  k)ng,  but  of  short  duration,  and,  indeed,  at  most
of  ten  minutes  i  that  the  diaige  soon  disappears  again,
and,  unlike  magnetism,  it  cannot  be  pmnauently  ingrafted
upon  steel.  Sinw  the  iron  filings  fidl  firom  an  iron  bar
which  has  been  placed  within  the  sphere  of  distribution  of
the  magnet  directly  and  instantaneously  when  the  magnet
is  n  moved,  but  here  an  effect  of  accumulation  does  occur,
rtlth<Migh  Uit  for  a  short  time,  the  question  must  be  answ^ed
thtts :  that  some,  even  if  weak,  caeirive  power  over  the
rrvstallio  force  d^w  actually  exist  in  all  bodies,  which  for
mftgi\*^tism,  so  far  as  wc  know  it  at  piesent  by  its  pohir
rflxvtH,  \i^  not  the  case,  since  the  coercive  power,  according
to  onr  ni  tnni  knot\  IMge,  is  limited  to  an  exceedingly  small
swmhx'V  of  \^^^^\^^^ .  <^^  fiHA>  according  to  the  most  recent
iv«»ni^vl^rj*.  !*fvtrll)  to  inw  and  nickel,*

i;  U  th,MV\Mrt«^  toiwcapableofbciBigi8olated,arTCsted,
ht !«»»  \o^»\v^'«»rtU\'bM«lwt<HUhroiush matter?  Thefirstexpe-
Hu\»^^f  •^  ^^  v^v  \^\rt^<o  » <H\  Mw  5^mnaiiTi,wbo, though  sensitive
\\\  \\\v  \\\^\i\ss>'^\y'  \^\v\\y>\\\<^\\^.  ^^  V«  cJear  in  her  peroeption

• W  UMvw  *  >^M  lwl\^v  f^^  wsx^i  h^wi«kW»  rf  Mr.  hnday.

ifvTAar.


IIKLATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.


79


I


I


of  it  as  to  the  distinction  between  warmth  and  cold.  When
I  placed  a  book  upon  her  hand,  and  brought  the  point  of
the  large  rock  crystal  upon  it,  the  hand  felt  nothing  of  it
through  the  book.  Since  she  had  previonsly  felt  the  ap-
proach of  the  crystal  to  the  inside  of  the  bare  hand  at  a
distance  of  18  or  20  inches,  while  now  the  distance  was  no
greater  than  the  thickness  of  the  book,  that  is,  four-fifths  of
an  inch,  this  experiment  showed  that  a  thick  mass  of  paper
was  a  substance  capable  of  aiTcsting,  at  least  for  a  short
time,  the  action  of  the  crystallic  force  upon  the  nerves  of
this  patient.  A  piece  of  deal  board  acted  in  a  similar  way,
but  less  perfectly.*  After  a  short  interval  the  alteration
of  temperature  began  to  be  weakly  perceptilile  beneath  it.
£ight  folds  of  printing  paper  soon  allowed  t!ie  force  to  act
through  them ;  fom-  folds  of  woollen  stuff  scarcely  offered
any  perceptible  obstacle. A  porcelain  dish,  lying  in  her

*  The  cryataUic  force,  residing  moat  probably  in  the  optical  axis  of
the  crystals  since  it  hm  80  close  a  relation  to  light  in  some  form,  in
procluciog  sleep  and  vigilance,  according  to  the  pole  of  the  crystal
oilereil  to  the  face  or  pit  of  the  stomach  of  a  very  impressionable  sub-
ject, lutt  been  demonstrated  here  very  frequently,  I  have  seen  cases
in  which  the  pointed  end  of  a  large  rock  crystal  has,  by  being  presented
in  the  chrection  of  the  individual,  whose  back  lias  been  titraed  to  the
operator,  induced  sleep  iostantly  at  the  distance  of  42  (vet.  The  other
end  immediately  caused  wakefulnesa ;  and  in  this  manner  sleep  and
Vikeftilness  were  alternated  jnst  as  often  as  the  crystal  was  tnnicJ
itMUid.  But  even  in  less  susceptible  cases,  the  point  of  a  rock  crystal
would*  with  its  attractive  or  repukive  pole  to  the  individual,  induce
a]eep»  and  the  other  pole  would  awaken*  Often  and  often  has  the
experiment  been  satisfactoriiy  performed  by  an  operator  going  into
one  roam,  leiiving  the  patient  in  the  adjoining  apartment,  separated  by
a  pATtitioQ  of  deal  wood  painted,  which  was  covered  on  one  side  by
prints  framed  and  glazed.  As  often  as  the  respective  ends  of  the  crystal
were  held  towards  the  patient,  instant  sleep  or  instant  vigilance  were
produced.  Any  person  standing  in  the  door-way,  so  as  to  observe  both
the  operator  and  patient,  could  at  once  see  that  there  was  no  possible
touree  of  fallacy  in  the  experiments.  Many  patients  have  been  sub-
mitted to  $he  teat  of  thia  experiment,  and  the  results  have  been  identical.


80


CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN


hand, touched  on  the  upjier  side  with the  \yoiut  of  the
crystal,  was  felt  to  be  cool  whi^u  I  turned  it  over  after  the ,
cont^t. On  the  contrary,  an  iron  plate  gave  a  warm  sen-
sation, when  placed  on  the  hand,  as  soon  iw  1  brought  the
crystal  ne^r ;  when  I  put  it  in  contact  the  effect  was  like  a|
shock,  ascending  through  the  elbow-joint  to  the  shoidder.*  1
Various  metallic  wires,  held  in  the  hand  by  one  end  aii4J
touched  with  crystal  i>oints  at  the  other,  gave  sunietimeaj
warm,  sometimes  cool sensations, without  exception. Il
placed  one  end  of  the  German  silver  conductor  in her
liand,  and  placed  tlie  other  end  in  contact  mth  the  point
of  a  small  crystal ;  the  sensation  of  an  iteration  of  tem-
perature shot  instantaneously  from  the  hand  to  the  elbow
joint ;  when  I  operated  in  the  same  w^ay  with  the  large  rock
ci'ystal,  it  ran  up  as  far  as  the  shoulder,  and  produced
crampdike  sensations.

When  I  subsequently  repeated  the  same  cxi>eriments  on
Miss  Marie  Maix,  action  took  place  through  all  bodies
without  exception,  only  it  was  more  mpid  through  metallic,
more  hke  a  shock,  so  to  speak,  than  with  vegetable  sub-
stances, tissues,  &c.,  which  required  a  short  interval  of
time  for  the  effect. [  made  experiments  with  wool,  silk,

*  These  experiment«  I  have  repeated  ou  somiiambules  witb  precisely
the  «ame  resultR ;  but  in  sleep-waking  persona,  ac»  in  those  qtiite  wide
awake,  there  are  many  varieties  in  the  degrees  of  susceptibiJity,  A
piece  of  cylindrical  wood  haa  been  held  iu  the  two  haada  of  a  aleep-
waking  patient ;  it  has  been  touched  with  the  pointed  ends  of  a  rock
crystal ;  immediately  the  wood  has  been  strongly  grasped  by  tht  patient,
in  some  cases  with»  and  in  some  without,  the  shock  being  expcrieoced«
but  deeper  sleep  has  sujiervened.  The  opposite  end  of  the  crystal
touching  the  wood,  wakefulness  has  taken  place,  and  the  piece  of  wood
has  dropped  from  ihe  relaxed  lingers.  If  an  iron  rod,  of  tlic  diameter
of  an  inch  and  a  half,  has  been  used  insteail  of  the  wood,  the  aenae  of
shock  up  the  amis  has  been  more  decided,  and  some  hare  complained
of  its  burning  the  hands,  i^ome  ha?e  slept  only  more  deeply.  The
taw  regulniing  the  results  I  Mi€?e  to  b#  dependent  upon  the  preaence
of  attractive  and  repalaire  ageociea  ewtmmd  by  the  crystals*


ftl'TUN  TO  THE  nUMAK  ORGANS.


81


i&itic  on  Miss  Rcichel.  The  transmission  through
wixil  reqtiired  a  short  moment  of  time  in  a  cord  40  inches
lotig;  but  with  silk,  ghiss,  and  zinc,  it  was  instantaneous,
md  of  imnie^isurable  rapidity.  My  experiments  on  the
fcrjr  sensitive  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  furnished  similar  re-
it« ;  brass  wire,  the  German  silver  condnctor,  glass  tubes,

den  bars,  platina  foil,  bar  iron,  gold  threads,  and  copper
))lates»  which  I  placed  in  her  hand,  were  instantaneously
traversed  by  the  force  w^hich  passed  into  them  by  con-
tact with  the  crystal*  The  conclusion  is,  that  the  ctystallic
farce  acts  through  all  btHlies,  but  in  different  degrees*
FiiiKT,  wool,  and  wootl»  render  the  passage  difficult,  at  least
for  a  short  time  ;  porcelain  less  so ;  silk  and  glass  are  per-
fe^  conductors.  Metals  permit  the  passage  not  only  on
msbml  contact,  but  in  slight  degrees  even  before  the  contact,
on  mere  approximation ;  but  on  contact  an  immediate
action  ensties*  So  far  as  these  preliminary  tests  allow  of
a  conclusion,  they  indicate  that  tlie  difference  of  conducting
poirer  of  bodies  depends  less  upon  their  nature  than  on
their  continuity.  All  tissues  conduct  worse  than  solid
bodies ;  cotton  and  wool  worse  than  wire,  silk,  &c.  The
completeness  and  rapidity  of  the  conduction  were  ex-
perienced in  different  degrees  by  patients  of  different  states
of  sensitiveness,  in  such  a  way  that  while  to  the  more  sen-
sitive cverjlhing  is  i>ermeable,  with  the  less  sensitive  oceux
distinctions  among  the  bodies  in  the  degrees  of  the  per*
meobility  by  the  crystallic  force.

48-  I  still  wished  to  test  the  magnitude  of  the  capacity
for  being  charged.  I  made  passes  and  contacts  on  tlie
conductor  and  the  steel  file  a  varying  nuiidjer  of  times.
One  pa^  acted  evidently  more  weakly  than  several;  but
when  I  had  occupied  a  minute  in  the  charging,  it  attained


m^  A  |oAi  condttstOQ,  stroo^ly  corroborated  by  numerous  fncU  ob*
«trTfd  in  itie  coitrae  of  es|irnm«uU  on  sleep- waken.


S2  CEfSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNkT  IK

a  magmtiule  which,  under  the  giveo  cnaunrtances,  was
iiiHifieeptible  ol  further  increase,  at  least  of  an  increase  of
strength  of  the  sensations  o(  warmth  and  cold  tlierdbjr
produced  cm  the  hand  of  the  patient ;  to  which  cQircBponded
the  frequently  repeated  trials  of  the  penistenoe  of  the
charge,  which  never  endured  more  than  about  five  minutes,
however  much  time  I  might  have  consumed  in  it,  excepting
only  on  steel  and  water,  where  it  was  felt  about  ten
minutes*  The  charge  was  not  effected  instantaneously,  but
increased  during  the  contact  for  a  short  time,  and  then
attained  its  maximum.  This  capacity  far  a  charge  was
$ati$fted  in  a  few  minutes*

49.  In  reference  to  the  magnitude  of  the  force  and  its
rriation  to  the  size  of  the  crystals,  the  experiments  showed
that  a  small  crystal,  from  the  size  of  a  lentil  to  two  inches
long,  if  of  gold,  rock  crystal,  selenite,  diamond,  or  horn-
blende, was  weak,  and  only  actively  perceived  in  the  reversed
pass  upward ;  that  from  this  paint  the  force  increased  with
the  size  of  the  crystals.  The  exponent,  of  course^  could
not  be  made  out  as  yet.f

^  The  Mine  oondasion  is  arrived  at  in  relation  to  chaigiixg  bodies
with  the  mesmeric  fluid.  Water  holds  only  a  definite  charge,  according
to  the  concurrent  testimony  of  many  lucid  sleep-waking  indiYidnala,
taken  at  separate  times.  Thus,  I  have  darted  my  fingers  two  hundred
times  on  the  surface  of  a  tumbler  of  water,  and  have  been  tdd  tfist
tbe  blue  basiness  has  overflowed  the  tumbler.  Sevenl  persons  ksfe
said  precisely  the  same  thing.  In  mesmerizing  a  decanter  of  water,  I
have  placed  a  watch  before  me  while  I  held  the  tips  of  my  ri^t-hand
fingers  in  the  mouth  of  the  decanter.  Several  locid  individuals  have
separately  indicated  the  precise  height  of  the  blue  hase  in  the  water  at
the  same  interval  of  time.  A  few  minutes  were  sufficient  to  charge  a
quart  decanter.  All  concur  in  the  fact  that  the  fluid  sinks  in  the  water.
Is  it,  then,  imponderable  ? Has  it  not  a  specific  gravity  ?

f  Experiments  in  sufficient  numbers  are  wanting  to  determine  the
relative  powers  of  dissimilar  crystals.  There  is  no  doubt  of  the  crya*
talline  force  being,  cseteris  paribus,  augmented  in  a  ratio  to  the  volume
of  the  same  kind  of  crystal ;  but  the  force  willl  be  found  to  vary  much


EELATIOX  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.

The  distinction  of  the  poles,  in  reference  to  their
power  of  fiftecting  the  nerves,  was  expressed  by  an  opposi-
tion  of  cold  and  heat.  Almost  in  everj^  case  the  crystal
produced  cooling  with  one  pole  and  warmth  with  the  other
when  drawn  over  the  hand.  Miss  Nowotny,  and  the  sur-
geon Mr,  Schmidt,  in  the  upward  pass  felt,  like  the  healthy,
a  cool  pleasant  breeze ;  in  the  downward  pass  a  not  dis-
agreeable gentle  warmth.  I  tried  crystals  of  tourmaline,
arragonite,  rock  crystal,  selenite,  and  cleavage  forms  of
Iceland  spar  and  tellurium,  on  Miss  Sturmann.  All  pre-
rented  a  stronger  cooling  pole,  and  a  weaker  warming  one.
This  ditference  was  very  clearly  marked  with  Miss  Reichel,
who  distinguished  tlie  poles  of  all  crystals,  even  at  some
distance,  by  a  sensation  of  cold  and  heat ;  and  this  with
vety  great  accuracy.  As  I  have  already  mentioned,  Miss
AtXTuannsdorfer  felt  it  most  strongly.  But  even  healthy
petisotis,  e  (f.  Prof.  Endlicher,  as  already  mentioned,  Mr.
Stnder,  my  servant  Joliann  Klaiber,  and  others,  distin-
gtuRhed  the  two  poles  of  all  crystals  very  accurately,  even
of  very  small  ones»  T7ie  apposition  of  the  tmo  poles  of
cry^ioh,  therefore,  expressed  itself  upoti  the  netves  at  once
by  stiffht  heat  and  cold.  I  shall  hereafter  detail  some  other
contnats.

in  power  aooordiog  to  the  nature  of  the  constitnent  eubstancea  of  the
eryital*  Clear  rock  cryBtaU  are  more  agreeable  to  patients  than  fatty
crfVtak*  A  rock  crystal  containing  tltanite  waa  disagreeable,  but  it
pert  paiienta  into  a  deeper  sleep  than  the  clearer  gpecimeoB,  A  very
small  crystal  of  cobalt  is  more  powerful  than  a  large  rock  crystal.  In
highly  snaceptible  caaet,  the  pointed  end  of  a  very  small  crystal  of
KpMmi  salt  held  to  the  forehead  or  to  any  part  of  the  face  has  been
laffieicnt  to  induce  sleep  immedialely,  and  wakefulness  has  been
tpeedily  produced  by  holding  the  opposite  pole  of  the  same  substance
in  the  same  direction.  A  crystal  of  morphine  held  in  the  samt;  man.
ner  ha^  been  attended  with  the  same  results,  but  accompanied  by
he«dache<  *'  The  opposition  of  the  two  poles  of  crystals  expresaed
iudf  upoa  the  nerrea  at  once  by  theae  striking  contrasts.**


hi  ^:M¥i^iM  A%y  mc  ajbiGsn  dk


^1 7>i^  hifdi  ^yr^rtf:  of

^M^v-f  ^Vy  n^f  fy^';^^ve  it  oniTeisalhr  on  tkc  i

»Ai^lik  ^^,  lyf/'ivi^lt  t/>  Ui^u,  Ua  thej  dodk

fijUM  Ai^^,  pf^$ftik  sA  whu:h  the  fiwce  i§  <

>\^^^*Auy  \ffHHh'A  fnii  to  me  veiy  ckfiiiitdjr^mci«iT<

(»IH*^  *^y(Uf  #U#!rft  4^4vfri\\t  poles  were

>a:#/  ^f'^ii'^ily  #)U<^m?n^l  with  the  tips  of  her  finpis. b

^^^^^U^  ^^y^9^  ttM;  axiii  always  passes  throng  the  Ene  of

^M>^v^^i^i>  //f  ti^  two  rrrystals. Miss  Maix,  Miss  Smmaui.

;()|m  iU^if^4,  mui  Minn  Atzmannsdorfer,  had  theame pown;

'^  ^^^Mr  f-m^  with  fttill  greater  readiness. Eien  Hr.Sdi«h

AM^t  11  # ^«mW  M^'^:firnt<!ly  felt  out  the  pmits  od  hige

A-^)k4j4jt^  Mui  i\mr  olHM;rvatioDs  aU  agree  accuntdy  wilh

t/X  77//'  arytiial'tUriricHy,  as  excited  in  toaimaliiie  and
^Ak^i^  u^Uii^fiiU  Uy  \unl,  i\wm  not  exhibit  any  perceptible
MtM.1  h^Mm  iiui  lu^rvfiUM  itxcitement  produced  by  the  ciya^
U4i^:  ^/^/^.  i  ii$iuttu\  thime  l>odies  to  different  degrees^  but
ii^y  imnU^-^il  mt  tividnU  modificatians  in  the  effects.*

(hi.  Ihaia  lUii  i^ryitilnllu)  force  stand  in  no  relation  of
dhu:ium  Ui  iumi^iml  mugiictism?  Starting  from  the
miU^M'  in  wliirli  nyiitulH  are  built  up,  one  would  be  in-
timtiui  to  niuju:liiii)  lliitt  tlu)  two  forces  are  really  to  a  certain
Liili'Mi  m\ii\HMii\ml  of  moll  other.  Whoever  has  se^i  a
nm:UmUu\  urnHH  of  quiirtz  cryHttila  broken  into,  in  a  mine^
mni  Motiu.il  luiw  limy  utAUcl  iu  all  directions,  cannot  have

*  1  Imvii  m\ci\  m\i\wr  wiit)  anclonfd  In  lilk  thread  round  eight  large
ruck  aryniuin,  anil  hiivit  iliun  produciMl  nn  inatronient  lika  sn  el«ctro-
dyimiDiti  m\,  t\mM\tA  with  a  pUtiuum  keeper.  The  crystallic  force
wim  Uiii  unifiiiUinl  in  the  luait  peri*eptib1e  degree,  nor  have  I  fonnd  the
cryMUilii!  force  muiliiitid  hy  heating  or  cooling  cryatals.  Aa  mesmeric
Mliu'pwHkum  of  high  MUHCuptihiUty  are  ao  much  more  delicate  than  any
pcrtfuu  awttkc  c«n  poBHihly  he,  the  teatimony  derived  horn  ezperimenta
uii  UiiMu  luuMt  he  puwerfidly  i^itrrohomtive  of  the  Baron'a  conclnaioBa.


rki.ati<)n  to  the  human  organs.


85


overlooked  that  the  entire  cavity  is  clotlietl  on  all  sides,
al>ove  and  below,  with  crystals  whose  axes  are  directed  in
erery  possible  direction.  But  without  going  into  a  mine,
tliis  observation  may  1»e  made  iit  once  in  a  cabinet  of  mine-
rals,  upon  the  welUknown  balls  of  chalcedony,  the  cavity  of
whidi,  I-  e.  the  nucleus,  is  clothed  all  over  with  crystals  of
quartz  and  amethyst :  I  have  never  been  able  to  detect  any-
thing like  an  uniform  direction.  Other  cry stalHzat ions,
again^  which  are  grouped  in  stalk-like  heaps  around  a  com-
mon central  point,  like  natrolite,  zeolite,  mesotj^e,  arrago-
nite,  pharmacolite,  &c.,  form  tubercular  globules,  the  rays
of  which  spread  out  in  all  directions,  and  no  indications  lead
U8  to  imagine  an  influence  or  any  kind  of  external  durcting
force  on  their  formation.  Our  own  crystfoltizations,  as  they
g0  on  in  our  laboratories  and  manufactories,  are  in  Uke
manner  usually  altogether  confused;  pmssiate  of  potash,
ahnn,  sugar  of  lead»  sugar-candy,  &c.,  deposit  their  cr)^stals,
in  large  vessels,  without  any  choice  of  direction.  This  ap-
pears to  agree  with  the  indifference  which  free  crystals
observe  towards  the  mrignetic  needle  and  the  polar  wires.
On  ihh  side,  ihet'e/ore,  (he  cryslaUk  force  is  independent
of  terrestrial  magnetism^  in  reference  to  the  direction  of  its
struriures*

54,  Since  now  the  crj^stallic  force  shows  itself  to  be  free
from  that  attraction  to  inorganic  substances  which  so  re-
markably distinguii^hes  the  magnet  from  all  terrestrial  things,
,it  must^  on  the  other  hand,  prove  the  more  striking, — nay  it
IS  to  claim  the  highest  degree  of  interest  in  natural
science, — that  it  sharea  with  (he  matjnet  the  singular  power
of  attracting  Iwing  organic  bodies.  For  as  I  have  already
minutely  described,  I  saw  the  eftect  producetl  by  the  magnet
upon  the  cataleptic  Miss  Nowotny,  repeated  when  she  was
brought  in  contact  with  the  points  of  large  crystals.  It
contracted  her  hand,  in  some  cases  produced  cramp,  and
tod  her  hand  to  follow  it,  not  so  strongly  as  a  large


66  CSXRJLLi'  ^3^


wbdi  ve  oil  life,  nd
gradr  Tiiifitf  ^  it
ipofftaot  rendto.

wfakhisaafromtliepoksctf  asoo^iMfpei.  AArrtbit
obtenntioii,  k  w  inexTmnml  ii  JMn^im  ihr  pMihflHjnf
theameat  the  pointB  of  orstak ;  iodecd,  tkae  itk  grait
probabifitT  in  the  antifiprtioo.  I  ^ocfere  Jm^UMboA  an
experiment  with  the  heightened  Tiaon  of  Miaa  Stannann.
A  room  was  made  as  dark  m  poaable ;  she  cntcnd,  le-
mained  aome  time,  till  her  ejes  became  acgMDomed  to  Ac
obicority,  and  then  I  placed  bcfinne  her  die  large  lodL  cmtaL
She  actnaDj  ai  cmce  ptrcewed  a  fltnmtMke  JSfAf  oeer  iiy
half  the  size  of  a  hand^  blue,  passii^  into  white  abore,  le*
marfcalilj  different  from  the  magnetic  ligfat,  whidi  she
deicrilied  as  mueh  yellower  and  redder.  The  experiment
was  repeated  twice  on  the  fdlowing  night.  In  ord»  to
rilitain  as  complete  conviction  as  possible  before  Miss  Stor-
niaiin  catne  into  the  darkened  room,  I  placed  the  large
eight  inches  thick  rock  crystal  upon  a  place  which  she  coold
not  t>e  aware  of.  As  soon  as  the  obscnritv  was  foUy  re-
stored tiy  shutting  the  door,  she  in  every  case  immediatdy
detected  the  phice  where  the  crystal  stood,  and  saw  the
flaming  light  exactly  the  same  m  dl  these  three  experiments.
Hhe  di»M!ribed  it  as  somewhat  resembling  a  tulip  in  shape,
and  beginning  below  with  a  curve  directed  outward,  like
one  of  the  petals,  ax  like  a  candle-flame,  but  then  soon  taking


RBLATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  UKOANS.


W


an  erect  position  ami  risiug  to  about  the  height  of  her
finger's  length.  She  again  spoke  of  the  colour  as  blue,
passing  into  perfect  white  above,  and  in  such  a  manner  that
isolated  sciitteretl  streaks  or  filaments  of  a  reddish  colour
ran  uji  in  the  upper  part  of  the  white.  Tbc  flame  was
moveable,  in  a  waving  and  sparkhng  condition,  and  threw
a  Ught  glare  over  the  support  on  which  the  crystal  rested,
of  tlie  diameter  of  ahuost  forty  inches,  jnst  as  a  magnet  had
done,  when  flame-like  appearance  and  light  radiating  from
it  could  be  clearly  distinguished.  From  her  1  tm*ned  to
Miss  Reichel,  and  placed  various  crjstals  before  her  in  the
dark.  She  everywhere  found  the  flaming  appearances  bright,
surpassing  tliose  of  the  magnet  in  brilliancy  of  colour  and
regularity  of  form.  The  light  was  with  her  visible  not  only
over  the  poles  of  the  crystals,  but  even  in  the  interior  of
their  substance*  She  described  the  flame  over  the  poles
much  in  the  same  way  as  Miss  Stin*mann,  but  the  appear-
ances of  light  in  the  interior  essentially  diflerent  from  this.
She  said  that  they  were  of  pecidiar,  star4ike  forms,  which
aaattmed  diflerent  shapes  when  the  crj^stals  were  turned.
It  was  evidently  the  crystalline  structure  of  the  stone,  its
lamination  in  diflerent  directions,  which  caused  the  produc-
tion of  luminous  appearances  and  internal  reflections,  such
m  of  course  could  not  exist  in  this  way  in  a  steel  magnet.
She  furnished  me  with  drawings  of  the  lights  of  large  and
small  crystals,  which  represented  most  astonishing  appear-
ances. I  reserve  all  the  various  magnetic  luminosities,
which  I  became  acquainted  with,  to  bring  them  together
bareafler  in  a  special  comparison,  and  shall  give  Hgures  of
Mxm  Reichel's  drawings  of  the  crystalMc  luminosities  with
that*  Miss  Maix  also,  whose  calm  and  accurate  mode  of
observation  I  especially  valued,  for  many  nights  that  I  left
the  great  rock  crystal  upon  her  stove,  beheld  in  her  sleepless
lioars  the  lieautiful  spectacle  of  a  whitish  star,  half  the  size
of  her  hand,  on  the  apiculated  sunnnit. Miss  Atzmanns-


88  CftTSTJLLS  XSD  TUK  MAQXJR  IK

dorfer  in  ail  cases  pointed  oat  the  lominoiis  pole  in  the
(brk,  in  a  number  of  diffefent  crystals,  and  placed  them  in
a  series  for  me^  according  to  thdr  strength.

SiiK^>  then,  all  the  crystals,  which  I  had  subjected  in  snch
great  uumb^  to  the  test,  exhibited  the  same  reactions  in
rt'fereuce  to  that  peculiar  finrce,  which  they  manifested  at
their  pi4ts,  as  occurred  in  its  maximum  in  a  large  rock
crystal,  one  b  led  to  the  condusion  that  crysiaU  in  general,
like  ike  moffnei^  emit  a  Jine^^amimg  tiyhi  /rom  their  poleSy
iisiuUly  invisible  to  healthy  eyes,  but  seen  by  those  of  ex-
citetl  iMMTvous  patients,  in  whom  all  the  senses  exist  in  an
miusually  acute  condition.  I  need  scarcely  mention  that
this  bears  relation  to  the  luminous  af^iearances  fi:equently
observed  during  cry»talIijatioD  itself  by  chemists^  which
have  long  found  {dace  in  the  text-books.  The  nature  of
these  radiations  has  not  yet  been  explained ;  they  have  gene-
rally been  assumed  to  be  electrical,  because  they  look  like
snch,  but  no  direct  proof  exists.  IW.  H.  Rose,  however,
has  lately  shown  that  this  light  b  not  connected  eith^  with
heat  or  electricity,  since  neither  the  air-thermometer  nor  the
telescope  is  affected  in  the  least  when  dipped  in  a  crystal-
lizing solution  of  substances  which  exhibit  the  highest  known
degree  of  evolution  of  light  in  the  moment  of  crystallization ;
for  example,  sulphate  of  potass  and  soda  (Pc^end.  Annal.
LII.  443,  5S5).  But  now  that  we  have  become  acquainted
with  the  permanent  huuinosity  of  crystal  poles,  which  at
present  exhibits  no  agreement  with  electricity,  but  indeed
a  great  difference,  it  becomes  highly  probable  that  the  said
light  is  dependent,  not  on  electricity,  but  on  the  evolution
of  phenomena  of  crystallie  light,  and  that  circumstances
arise  in  the  sudden  conveyance  of  the  molecules  suspended
in  the  fluids  into  solid  crystalline  bodies,  under  which  the
cryHtftllic  light  becomes  so  concentrated  as  to  be  visible  to
roiiiinon  eyes.  What  this  light  is,  which  like  sunlight  beams
voiilinuouHhj,  without  in  the  least  diminishing  the  body


EELATION  ro  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.


from  whicli  it  raili»te»,  wbetber  it  is  a  vibration  propiOgatedl
in  the  surmunding  fiuitls,  I  leave  bere  uiitoutbotL  We
a^suijie  that  the  atoms,  still  more  tbe  molecules  of  matter,
HTt*  [mlar  ;  we  regard  them  as  tbe  elements  for  the  construc-
tion of  tbe  crystal.  Is  tbeir  arrangement  into  a  large  solid
crystal,  which  again  has  its  own  polarity  and  is  luminous  at]
its  poles,  a  sum  of  all  these  little  polaiities,  and  are  its  poles
II  expression  of  this,  as  the  open  poles  of  a  voltaic  pile
ford  the  sum  of  tbe  shares  of  electricity  of  all  the  indivi-
dual elements  ?  Is  a  crystal  a  pile  for  tbe  cryatallic  force,
us  the  voltaic  is  for  the  electrical  ?  These  arc  approaching
questions  reserved  for  fm-tber  investigation  ;  meanwhile  the
conastent  observ^ations  here  made,  and  often  repeated,  on
five  different  sick  persons,  will  soon  find  confirmation  in
other  places  and  by  other  observers  ;  only  1  caution  them  ]
not  to  undertake  the  experiments  with  somnambulists  in
the  sleep- waking  condition,  but  either  with  others,  not  som-
nambulist, nervous  patients,  or,  if  none  such  can  be  found
sufficiently  sensitive,  to  take  the  somnambuUsts  only  in  th6
awake,  conscious  condition,  when  their  senses  are  clear  i]
and  not  to  make  use  of  the  sleep-waking  condition  at  all,
ur  at  most  solely  for  the  control  of  tlic  former.  I  have  ncvtT
employed  the  patients  in  the  magnetic  sleep  or  somnam-
bulism in  my  physical  investigations,  but  when  in  this  con-
iition  liave  left  them  in  the  hands  of  their  physicians,  andj
sontcnted  myself  with  tiie  position  of  a  spectator.  To  pre*]
vent  errors,  I  again  remark,  that  when  it  is  wished  to  repeat
uiy  experiments,  the  place  must  be  completely  darkened,  so
densely  that  even  after  a  long  stay  in  it,  after  one  or  two
hours,  no  trace  whatever  of  light  can  be  detected ;  iiually,
the  crystal  nmst  be  very  large,  for  mine,  as  I  have  tdready
utentiooed,  was  not  less  than  eight  inches  thick,  and  pro-
portionately long.  With  those,  however,  who  are  strongly
Esnsitive,  smaller  crystals  will  answer  the  purpose,  since
Miss  Reichel  and  Miss  Atzniamisdorfcr  saw  light  issue  from


90  CRYSTALS  AND  THK  MAGNET  IN

almost  every  crystal,  especially  from  compounds  of  sul-
phuric and  fluoric  acids,  which  in  all  cases  surpass  rock
crystal  of  the  same  size.

56.  All  these  researches  finally  unite  to  show,  that  the
peculiar  force  of  crystals  here  developed,  opens  a  new  page
in  the  book  of  dynamics, — that  it  certainly  falls  within  the
general  laws  of  these,  but  possesses  its  special  code,  to  study
which,  and  bring  their  axioms  to  mathematical  expressions,
must  be  henceforth  one  of  the  tasks  of  physics.  It  will  be
above  all  desirable  to  find  some  universal  inorganic  re-agent
upon  it,  to  discover  an  instrument  of  detection  and  measure-
ment, which  shall  firee  us  from  the  often  worse  than  painful
dependence  on  sick  persons,  hospital  patients,  and  unscien-
tific persons  of  all  kinds.*

*  The  reflection  tb(it  it  would  be  desirable  to  find  sucb  a  reagent  is
natural.  It  is  not  so  difficult  to  measure  beat,  light,  electricity,  and  mag-
netism. These  are  agencies  that  are  common  to  inorganic  and  organic
matter.  But  it  is  a  question  whether  it  is  easy  to  devise  a  test  for  a  force
owing  its  existence  to  a  combination  of  molecules  that  constitutes  an  oi^
gauic  arrangement,  which  in  its  own  nature  shall  not  be  organic.  Is  it
possible  to  find  an  inorganic  test  for  an  organic  force  ?  We  may  pro-
bably, by  tracing  the  laws  regulating  organic  forces,  be  enabled  to  find
out  the  means  by  which  the  human  being  can  be  stimulated  to  become  so
highly  sensitive  as  to  detect  the  presence  of  very  subtle  re-agents,  odours,
metallic  lodes,  streams  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  but  it  may  be  pro-
blematical whether,  per  contra,  we  shall  be  able  to  frame  an  inorganic
instrument  sufficiently  delicate  to  detect  thought,  the  impulses  of  ambi-
tion, hate,  or  cunning ;  the  bewitching  influences  of  love,  benevolence,
veneration,  or  conscientiousness.  These  depend  upon  organization;
upon  arrangements  of  living  matter,  so  distributed  in  the  brain  as  to  have
their  own  attractive  and  repulsive  relations,  but  having  no  corresponding
antagonistic  forces  in  inanimate  matter.  In  order  to  study  the  physics
of  organic  arrangements,  we  must  lay  aside  our  repugnance  to  the  nu-
merous delicate  phenomena  ofifered  to  us  in  organic  nature,  and  be  content
to  enlarge,  though  in  a  degree  hazilj',  our  bounds  of  enquiry,  paying
respect  to  classes  of  facts  that  appear,  and  appear  to  proud  ignorance
only,  the  creations  of  fancy.  Phrenology  teaches  us  the  causes  of  the
philosopher's  repugnance  to  new  classes  of  ideas.  Mostly,  it  is  to  pride
that  he  is  indebted  for  his  refusal  t>f  truth,  aud  the  silly  institutions  of


RILATION  TO  THE  HtMAN  ORTJANS.


RETROSPECT.


a.  Every  crystal,  imtiu*al  or  artificial,  exercises  a  specific
exciting  power  on  the  animal  nerves,  weak  in  the  healthy,
strong  in  the  diseased,  strongest  of  all  in  the  cataleptic.

«ockty  foster  and  encourage  the  act|tii9itit'e»  ike  appiobative,  and  the  pride-
ating  organ ization^s  of  iiiaii  to  habiiuaie  him  lo  a  Itive  of  contempt,  aud  i
adhesion  lo  errors  and  fallat'k'S,  A  most  eminent  Professor,  justly
oelebmted  for  much  thai  he  has  nobly  wrought  in  science^  was  heard  to
wmy  openly  before  a  large  audience,  "  Had  I  been  sharp,  I  should  have
hit  upon  the  discovery  on  which  my  coujpetiior  has  stumbled :"  by  no
ioean«  ashamed  to  acknowledge  publicly,  that  he  did  not  rejoice  in  the
Miceess  of  a  fel tow- labourer,  who  bad  poured  the  blessings  of  a  new  truth
mi  nuinkind,  to  elevate  the  thoughts,  to  exalt  the  aspirations  of  beings
whose  organisations  improve  by  an  hidulgence  in  noble  aims.  However
vulgar  and  absurd,  because  perhaps  not  severely  exact,  to  habitually
eittmeoua  thinkers  themselves,  may  appear  much  of  the  knowledge  {
lliiilillg  Bmong*  boors  and  ]>eas&nts,  a  very  remarkable  proof  of  the  im-
pofiance  of  some  of  it  may  be  traced  to  a  singular  though  rude  antici  •
ptlMNl  of  a  part  of  the  most  brilliant  of  Professor  Faraday  s  discoveries
00  magnetisin  and  diamagnetisni,  by  means  of  ao  instrument,  the  namo
•f  which  has  been  sufficient  to  excite  the  couiempL  of  some  so-styled
MMii#  of  repute.  If  knowledge  be  not  in  the  range  of  the  thougtits  of
oirtftin  severe  cogitators,  it  is  then,  forsooth,  no  knowledge  at  all.  The
mUMfctftU  contempt  which  has  been  cast  on  the  divining  rod — virgula
dnm^  or  baguette  divinatoire — by  certain  colrivators  of  science,  may  be
Mdnuiled  by  a  reference  to  the  earlier  editions  of  a  translation,  by  Or.
Uotton,  of  Moniuclas  improvement  ot  Ozanam's  Mathematical  Recrea-
tions, a  hook  full  of  most  interesting  matter.  In  the  last  edition  of  that
work,  however,  Dr«  Hutton  proved  himself  to  be,  what  he  always  was,  a
pincere  lover  of  truth.  Led  into  error  at  an  earlier  period »  he  was  open
ini|uiry,  and  became,  ifiubsetjuently,  convinced  of  facts  on  the  existence
«f  which  he  had  at  one  time  doubled.  My  friend,  Mr,  Charles  Hutton
Gregory,  lent  me  a  copy  of  the  Speculum  Anni  for  the  year  lfc*:i8,  in
which  he  pointed  out  some  passages  relatiug  to  ihi^  matter,  which  1  can-
not avoid  extracting  here,  premisuig  a  few  observations  on  the  instrumeni
.  WPiihffd  ihe  divining  rod,  virgula  divvna.  baculus  divinatorius,  bagueile
ilifiuatnire.  This  has  been  supposed  lo  be  a  branch  of  a  tree  or  shrub
fily  af  a  forked  or  letter  Y  shape,  by  the  a.'isistauce  of  which
gifted  persons  were  enabled  to  discover  minen,  springs  of  water


02  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IS

b.  The  force  manifests  its  abode  principally  at  the  axes  of
the  crystals,  most  actively  at  its  opposite  extremities ;  it
therefore  exhibits  polarity.

under  ground,  hidden  treasure,  and  to  practise  other  occnh  doings.  This,
with  regard  to  shape,  is  just  as  vulgar  an^rror  as  that  which  supposes  that
a  stick  of  any  kind  of  wood  held  in  the  hand  serves  as  well  as  the  hazel
or  the  whitethorn  for  the  production  of  the  phenomena.  In  the  counties
of  Somerset,  Devon,  and  Cornwall,  the  facts  on  this  subject  are  well
known,  and  the  practice  of  dowsing,  as  it  is  called^  has  been  cultivated
time  out  of  mind.  In  France  the  men  of  scientific  pursuits  have  for  the
most  part  ridiculed  the  use  of  the  baguette,  nolyrithstanding  abundant
evidence  in  various  parts  of  the  country  being  extant  of  the  success  which
had  attended  the  practice  of  the  sourciers.  The  Barun  von  Reichenbach
has  established  facts  regarding  the  emanations  of  light  from  graves,  which
are  quite  as  remarkable  as  the  proofs  of  emanations  taking  place  from
metals  or  from  running  water.  Now  that  the  Baron's  researches,  and  the
concurrent  testimony  of  the  cultivators  of  mesmeric  science,  have  esta-
blished that  certain  individuals  are  more  susceptible  of  magnetic  impre^
sions  than  others,  it  will  not  be  pronounced  impossible  that  subterraneous
running  water  may  influence  some  persons,  aud  not  others.  In  different
classes  of  animals  the  sensitive  powers  are  known  to  vary  p^reatly,  as  they
do  indeed  among  those  of  the  same  species.  "  But,"  it  has  been  asked,
*'  granting  that  emanations  from  subterraneous  waters  may  powerfully
affect  certain  persons,  what  connection  is  there  between  this  impression
and  the  motion  or  rotation  of  the  hazel  rod,  which  is  held  in  the  person's
hand  or  laid  over  his  fingers  P"  What  I  is  it  fact  that  the  hazel  rod  moveB
or  rotates  in  the  hand  of  a  person  of  a  certain  impressionability,  wlien
that  person  passes  over  any  ground,  underneath  his  footsteps  on  which
there  happens  to  be  a  metallic  lode,  or  a  subterraneous  stream  of  water,
which  we  call  a  spring  ?  I  have  been  informed  by  highly  respectable
persons  who  have,  in  the  West  of  England,  witnessed  the  facts,  that  imder
these  circumstances  a  hazel  or  a  whitethorn  rod  does  rotate  and  does
move,  and  occasionally  dips  with  so  energetic  a  force,  that  on  one  occamoii
the  bark  of  a  fresh  hazel  rod  was  stripped  from  the  stick  and  left  in  the
grasp  of  the  operator's  hand.

The  following  extracts  will  further  illustrate  this  subject : —
"  Although  the  effects  or  motion  of  the  divining  rod,  when  in  the
proximity  of  springs,  has  been  and  is  to  this  day  considered  by  most
philosophers  a  mere  illusion,  yet  I  think  the  following  brief  observations
relating  to  this  subject,  aud  which  were  communicated  to  Dr.  Hntton  by
a  lady  of  rank,  with  the  accouut  of  her  subsequent  experiments  performed


HttATIOlt  to  THE  HITMAN  OR6ANS.


M


€,  It  emits  ligljt  at  tbc  poles  visible  to  acutely  sensitively
eyes  in  the  dark.


h^tof^  liim,  hh  fiunily,  and  a  number  nf  friends  (as  jpven  in  the  doctor's
tfvtiskiiioii  of  Montucla*s  edilion  of  Ozatiam's  Recreations),  must  con-
rmce  ihe  moat  iucredulou«^  that  in  ibe  hands  of  some  persons,  in  certain
aitimtjons,  the  baguette  i«  forcibly  acted  upon  by  some  hitherto  unknowa
invistbte  cause,  Notwithatanding  the  incredulity  expressed  by  Montucla
relative  to  the  indication  of  springs  by  the  baguette  or  divining  rod,  there
appears  to  exist  such  evidences  of  the  reality  of  that  motion  as  it  seems
nc3cl  to  imposfdble  to  be  questioned.  This  endence  was  brought  about
tn  the  following  mamier*  Soon  after  the  publication  of  the  former  edi*
lion  of  the  Recreations,  the  editor  received  by  the  post  the  following  well-
«miten  pseudonymous  letter  on  the  subject  of  this  problem.  The  letter
ill  question  is  dated  Feb,  10,  1805,  and  as  with  the  whole  of  the  corres-
pondence it  would  be  too  long  for  our  limits,  1  shall  select  such  parts
only  aa  are  immediately  essential  to  a  right  understanding  of  the  subject*

**  Tbe  lady  observes, '  In  llie  year  1772  (I  was  then  nineteen)  I  passed
iix  iDOtitfas  at  Aix  in  Provence. I  there  heard  the  popular  story  of  one

tl^  foim tains  in  that  city  having  been  discovered  some  generations
'  by  a  boy  who  always  expressed  an  aversion  from  passing  one  par^
tioilir  lipol,  crying  out  th^re  was  waitr.  This  was  held  by  myself  and
the  family  I  was  with,  in  utter  contempt.

•*  *  In  the  course  of  the  spring,  the  family  went  to  pass  a  week  at  the
Chaieau  d'Ansonis,  situated  a  few  miles  to  the  north  of  the  Durance,  a  ■
met  of  country  very  mountainous,  and  where  water  was  ill  supplied*
We  found  the  Marquis  d*Ansonis  busied  in  erecting  what  might  be
temed  a  miniature  aqueduct^  to  convey  a  spring  the  distance  of  half  a
lei^or,  or  nearly  as  much,  to  his  chateau,  which  spring  he  asserted  had
beoD  fbond  out  by  a  peasant,  who  made  the  discover)'  of  water  his  occu-
mtioa  is  that  country »  and  maintained  himself  by  it^  and  was  known  by
tlifl  appellation  of  t  Homme  a  la  Ba^ette, This  account  was  received
wttk  unbelief,  almost  amounting  to  derision. The  Mai'quiSf  piqued  ati
hdm^  diaeiediied,  sent  fot  the  man,  and  requested  we  would  witness  the  I
dperiment. A  large  perty  of  French  and  English  accordingly  attended*!
Tbe  ivan  was  quite  a  peasant  in  manners  and  appearance  :  be  produced  1
tome  twtgs  cat  from  a  hazel,  of  diOerent  sizes  and  strength,  only  they
vera  ibvked  bfanchea,  and  hazel  was  preferred^  as  forking  more  equally
thas  most  other  tre«^  \  but  it  is  not  requisite  that  the  angle  should  be  of
afty  iMMTticnlar  number  of  degrees. He  held  the  ends  of  the  twigs  be-
UPCea  each  fore  6nger  and  thumb,  with  the  vertex  pointing  downwards^  i
iing  where  tliere  was  no  water,  tbe  ba^ette  remained  motjonleasfl


94


CRYSTAl^  AND  TUK  M  \GNKT  IN


d.  In  particular  diseases,  it  attracts  thelianian  hand  to  a
peculiar  kind  of  adhesion,  like  that  of  iron  to  the  magnet.


walking  gradiiaJIv  to  the  spot  where  the  sjiring  was  under  gr-jund,  the
twig  w«A  sensibly  aifecied ;  aod  a«  he  approached  the  !»pol,  began  to  turn
round ;  llial  is,  llie  veriex  nu«ed  itself,  and  tuiTi«»d  towards  hia  body,  and
continued  to  turn  till  the  point  was  vertical ;  it  then  again  descended
outwards,  and  continued  to  lum,  de«<cribinR  a  circle  as  long  as  he  remained
standing  over  the  spring,  or  till  one  or  both  Uie  branches  were  broken  by
the  twisting,  the  ends  being  finnly  grasped  by  ibe  fingers  and  thumbs^
and  the  bands  kept  stationary,  so  that  the  rotatoiy  motion  must  of  course
twist  ibein.  After  seeing  hira  do  this  n;pedtedly,  the  whole  party  tried
the  baguette  in  succession,  but  wiihowt  effect.  1  chanced  to  be  the  last.
No  sooner  did  I  hold  the  twig  as  directed,  than  it  began  to  move  as  with
him,  which  startled  me  so  much  that  I  dropt  it,  and  felt  considerably
agitated.  I  was,  however,  induced  to  resume  the  experiment.  Mid  fecund
the  eifect  perfect,  I  was  then  told  it  was  no  very  unnsnai  thing,  many
having  that  faculty,  which,  from  what  has  since  come  to  my  knowledge,
I  have  reason  to  believe  is  true*  On  my  rctiini  to  England  I  forbore  to
let  this  faculty  (or  whatever  you  may  term  it)  be  known,  fearing  to  be-
come the  topic  uf  conversation  or  discussion*  Est  two  years  afterwards,
being  on  a  vi»it  to  a  uoblemans  house,  Kimholion,  Huntingdonshire,
and  bis  lady  lamenting  that  she  was  disappointed  of  huildinj?  a  dairy-
house  in  a  spot  she  particularly  wished,  because  there  was  no  *pattr  \o
be  found — a  supply  slio  looked  on  as  essential — under  ftromise  of  itcrt*y
I  told  her  I  would  endeavour  to  find  a  spring.  I  accordingly  procured
some  hazel  twigs,  and  in  the  presence  of  herself  and  husband,  walked
over  the  ground  proposed,  till  the  twig  turned  with  comiderabU /orc€»
A  stake  was  immediately  driven  into  the  gromid  to  mark  the  spot,  which
was  not  very  distant  from  where  they  had  before  sunk.  They  then  took
ine  to  another  and  distant  building  in  the  park,  and  desired  me  to  try
tliere ;  I  found  the  baguette  turn  very  strong ,  so  that  it  soon  twisted  and
broke :  the  gentleman  persisted  that  there  was  no  water  there,  unless  at
a  great  depth,  the  foundation  heing  very  deep,  (a  considerable  stone
cellar),  and  that  no  water  appeared  when  they  dug  for  it*  I  could  only
reply  that  1  knew  no  more  than  from  the  baguette  turning,  and  that  I
had  too  little  experience  of  its  powet^  or  certainty  to  answer  for  the  truth
of  i\&  indication.  He  then  acknowledged  that  when  that  building  was
erected  they  were  obliged  to  drive  piles  for  the  whole  foundation,  as  they
met  with  nothing  but  a  t^uicksand.  This  induced  him  to  dig  hi  the  spot
I  first  directed ;  they  met  with  a  very  fluent  spring  ;  the  dairy  was  built,
and  it  is  at  thia  time  supplied  by  it* I  rould  give  a  long  detail  of  other


RRLATtON  TO  THK  HFMAH  OR0AW8.


H


e. It  does  Dot  attract  iron,  does  not  cause  any  freely
moving  body  to  assume  directions  referable  to  the  terrestrial


nisU  I  hftve  made,  ill  of  which  have  been  coti>'iDcing  of  the  tntth,  but
tliey  iraald  be  tedioiis.  For  some  years  past  I  have  been  indiHerent
iboot  tts  becoming  known^  and  have  conFet^uenily  been  froqiiently  re-
fnaiteil  to  show  ihe  experiuient,  wi»ich  has  often  been  done  to  persons  of
high  eatimalion  for  underUAiiding  and  knowledge,  and  I  believe  they
hava  •//  heen  convinced.  Three  people  I  have  met  with,  who  have,  on
IfjfiBg,  found  themselves  possessed  of  the  same  faculty.  I  shall  only  add
I  pftitxcular  incident*  Having  once  shown  it  to  a  party,  we  re-
I  fioto  the  bouse  to  a  room  on  the  grouur]  floor;  I  was  again  asked
k^m  /  htU  ihe  twi^  ;  taking  one  in  my  hand  I  found  it  turned  immedi-
ately ;  cm  which  an  old  lady,  mother  to  the  gentleman  of  the  house,  said
tkmi  rvom  was  formed  out  of  an  old  cloister,  in  which  cloister  was  a  w^ll,
aiaiply  boarded  over  when  they  made  the  room.

*•  *  L'Homme  i  ia  Ba^^uetre,  from  experience,  could  with  tolerable  accu-
iicy  idl  tiie  depth  at  which  the  springs  were,  and  their  volume  from  tlie
fipree  wiib  which  the  baguette  turns ;  I  ran  only  give  a  rough  gnesa.  In
stiDfig  /r&U  I  think  its  powers  not  fo  great ;  on  a  bridge  or  in  a  boat  it
haft  «0  fj'^ff  the  water  must  be  underground  to  fiffect  the  baguette,  and
;  ihrDUgb  wooden  pipes  acts  the  same  as  a  spring.  I  can  neither
the  baguette  turn  where  there  Is  no  water,  nor  prevent  it  from
where  there  b  any,  and  I  am  perfectly  ignorant  of  the  came  why
4i  imrm.  The  onl^*  sensation  I  am  conscious  of  is  an  emotion  similar  to
felt  on  being  it&rtled  by  sudden  noise,  or  surprise  of  any  kind.

***%  generally  use  a  baguette  about  six  inches  from  the  vertex  to  the
i  of  the  twigs  where  they  are  cut  off.

*"  I  shall  most  probably  be  in  London  next  winter,  and  will  (if  you
wiab  it)  a0brd  you  an  opportunity  of  making  your  own  observations  on
this  ctinoua  fact.'

•*  Tba  lady  havmg  arrived  in  London,  urote  to  Dr.  Button  to  inform
him  that  she  proposed  being  at  Woolwich  on  Friday  the  30lh  inst,
(May  1806)  at  eleven  in  the  (brenooii.

"  Acoordingly/  aaya  Dn  H,,  "  at  the  time  appointed,  the  lady  with
ftS  bar  latnily  anived  at  my  bouse  at  Woolwich  Common,  where  after
IMCpanng  the  rods,  &€.,  they  walked  out  to  the  grounds,  aceoinpanied  by

lh«  ilHbviduats  of  my  own family  and  some  friends,  when Lady •

ahowed  Ibe  experiment  several  times  in  different  places,  holding  the  rods,
Sfj^  m  ihe  mamief  as  doscribe«l  in  her  Ladyship  s  first  letter  above  given.
In  the  places  where  I  had  good  reason  to  know  that  no  water  was  to  be
fnondy  the  lod  was  always  quiescent ;  but  in  other  places,  where  I  knew


96  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

poles,  does  not  affect  the  magnet,  does  not  induce  a  gal-
vanic current  in  wires,  and  consequently  it  is  not  a  mag-
netism.

there  was  water  below  the  surface,  the  rods  turned  slowly  and  regularly,
in  the  manner  above  described,  till  the  twigs  twisted  themselves  off  below
her  fingers,  which  were  considerably  indented  by  so  forcibly  holding  the
rods  between  them.

*'  All  the  company  present  stood  close  round  the  lady,  with  all  eyes
intently  fixed  on  her  hands  and  the  rods,  to  watch  if  any  particular
motion  might  be  made  by  the  fingers ;  but  in  vain ;  nothing  of  the
kind  was  perceived,  and  all  the  company  could  observe  no  cause  or  reason
why  the  rods  should  move  in  the  manner  as  they  were  seen  to  do.  After
the  experiments  were  ended,  every  one  of  the  company  tried  the  rods  in
the  same  manner  as  they  saw  the  lady  had  done,  but  without  the  least
motion  from  any  of  them.  And  in  my  family,  among  ourselves,  we  have
since  then,  several  times,  tried  if  we  could  possibly  cause  the  rod  to  turn
by  means  of  any  trick,  or  twisting  of  the  fingers,  held  in  the  manner  the
lady  did  ;  but  in  vain,  we  had  no  power  to  accomplish  it.

*'  The  annexed  figure  represents  the  form  and  position  of  the  rod,  about
six  inches  in  length,  cut  off  just  below  the  joint  or  junction  of  the  two
twigs.**


There  can  be  no  impropriety  in  stating  now  that  the  lady  in  question
was  the  Honourable  Lady  Milbanke,  wife  of  Sir  Ralph  Milbanke,  Bart,
(afterwards  Noel)  and  mother  of  the  present  Dowager  Lady  Byron,  the
wife  and  widow  of  the  great  poet.  A  very  interesting  analogous  state-
ment relating  to  the  same  person  will  be  found  in  the  Quarterly  Review
for  March,  1820 :  No.  xUv.  Vol.  22.

Lately  in  France,  the  Count  de  Tristan  has  published  a  work  on  the
subject,  which  I  have  been  unable  to  procure;  but  I  have  a  most  interest-
ing volume  conuiining  two  memoirs  by  M.  Thouvenel,  a  physician  of
reputation  in  France,  who  was  commissioned,  in  the  year  1781,  by  the
king,  to  analyse  and  report  upon  the  mineral  and  medicinal  waters  of  the
kingdom.  The  author  undertakes  a  patient  and  laborious  investigation
in  the  spirit  of  a  philosopher,  and  regards  his  inquiries  as  leading  to  a
new  thread  in  the  tangled  skein  of  physics,  which,  like  any  single  &ct  of
science,  may  lead  to  the  discovery  of  a  thousand  others ;  a  hat  which


HBIiATIOftl  TO  THE  HimAlf  OROANS.

y. It  may  \\q  chai'ged  and  tninsterred  upon  other  bodies
by  mere  contact.


I


may  have  escaped  the  vigilant  sagacity  of  observers,  or  wliicii  may  have
been  loialtv  abandoned  to  the  blind  tTedtililj  of  worthy  soft- beaded  persons,
Cf  in  stUort,  since  ibe  reign  of  a  kind  of  fuliie  philosophy  ihe  offspring
of  scieiitiJiL'  pride,  may  have  been  deiivered  over  to  the  presmuptuous  dis-
4laiti  of  men  of  (alse  wisdom.  Thouvenel  found  a  man  named  Bl^ton«
wliuae  business  was  that  of  a  sourcier,  or  discoverer  of  springs  by  means
of  a  dmningrody  and  upon  ibis  man  he  made  more  than  six  hundred
observations,  many  of  ibem  in  the  presence  of  iibo\e  150  persons,  mostly
of  imponaut  stations,  and  very  credible  from  their  high  character,  who
letttfy  to  ihi^  truth  of  the  observed  phenomena.  Among  others  was  M.
Jadclet,  Pri>fessor  of  Physic  at  Nancy,  a  man  eminent  for  his  abilities,
who  waa  not  only  a  witness  of  the^e  experiments,  but  was  actually  con-
irenied  in  ihe  g^atest  part  of  them.  As  in  the  case  of  Lady  Milbanke^
with  fileton,  an  inUrnai  ferilH^  was  coincident  witli  the  moveraenl  of
tine  rod*  Whenever  ibis  man  was  in  a  place  where  there  existed  subter-
Iftoeoos  waters,  he  was  immediately  sensible  of  a  lively  impression,  refer-
ftUe  to  the  diaphragm,  which  he  culled  his  "  commolio^n"  This  was  followed
by  a  sense  of  oppression  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest  j  at  the  same
tiBio  hm  fell  a  Kbock,  with  general  tremor  and  cliilliness,  staggering  of  the
lags»  slilTiiesa  of  the  wrists  with  twitching^,  a  concentrated  pul«e,  which
gnbdxudly  diminished.  All  these  symptoms  were  more  or  less  strong
•COOrdilig  to  the  volume  and  depih  of  the  water,  and  they  were  more
HWMJbly  felt  when  Bleton  went  in  a  direction  againnf  the  sublerranean
cttfreni,  than  where  he  followed  i7*  couru.  Stagnant  water  underground
did  not  affect  him  ;  nor  did  open  sheets  of  water,  ponds,  lakes,  or  risers
aiibci  him.  The  nervous  system  of  ibis  man  must  have  been  susceptible,
siiic?  b6  iraa  more  sensibly  affected  by  change  of  weather  and  variations
in  die  state  of  tba  atmosphere  than  other  persons :  otherwise  he  appeared
henltby^  A  severe  acute  disorder  had  absolutely  at  one  time  deprived
him  of  the  faculty  of  perceiving  water,  and  his  sensibilily  in  ibis  respect
did  not  return  until  three  months  after  his  recovery;  so  that  if  he  were
leoaitire^  be  could  not  be  classed  among  the  sick  sensitive.  But  how-
rrer  remarkable  these  constitutional  peculiarities  may  have  been^  there
wwm  in  Bleton *§  ca^^  a  more  than  usual  distinctness  in  the  behaviour  of
llie  dmuiug  rod.  Unlike  many  soui-ciers,  be  did  not  grasp  it  closely  ;
lit  did  not  warm  it  in  his  hands ;  he  did  not  prefer  a  young  hard  branch
forked^  D€w'y  plucked,  and  full  of  sap.  His  custom  was  to  place  liori-
sontiliy  on  bis  forefinger  and  thumb  a  rod  of  any  kind  of  wood  (except
ddcf)^  freah  or  dry«  ooi  forked,  otdy  a  little  curved  or  bent,  A  very
■Iratgfat  rod  &Oed  to  turn  oti  its  axis,  but  a  bent  rod  turned  on  its  axis^
~  H


98  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNIST  IN

g.  Matter  possesses  a  certain  coercive  power  over  it,  but
only  for  a  limited  time,  dming  which  the  transferred  force
disappears.

with  more  or  less  rapidity,  according  to  the  quantity  of  the  water  and
the  force  of  the  cunient.  Thouvenel  counted  from  thirty-five  to  eighty
revolutions  in  a  minute,  and  always  noted  an  exact  proportion  between
the  rotation  of  the  rod  and  the  convulsive  motions  of  Bleton.  If  these
memoirs  be  critically  examined,  it  will  be  found  that  the  author  experi-
mented with  full  care  to  avoid  every  source  of  fallacy.  The  natural
motions  of  tlie  rod  on  Bl^ton*s  fingers  was  backwards,  but  as  soon  as  he
withdrew  from  the  spring  over  which  he  stood,  in  any  direction  whatever,
the  rod,  which  instantly  ceased  to  turn,  was  subject  to  a  new  law,  for  at
a  determinate  distance  from  the  spring  an  action  of  rotation  in  a  direction
contrary  to  the  fonner  one  took  place.  This  was  invariable,  and  upon
measuring  the  distance  of  the  spot,  where  this  retrograde  phenomenon  took
place,  from  the  spring,  its  depth  could  generally  be  found.

I  pass  over  an  account  of  numerous  experiments  made  by  this  intelli-
gent and  careful  observer,  pointing  out  the  analogies  of  the  known  pheno-
mena of  electricity  and  magnetism,  by  modifications  resulting  to  the
sensibility  of  Bl^ton,  and  the  rotation  of  the  rod  by  various  ingenious
electrical  and  magnetic  trials  suggested  by  the  inventive  sagacity  of
Thouvenel,  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  curious  anticipations  of  some  of
Professor  Faraday *s  discoveries,  by  means  of  the  sensibility  of  Bl^ton
and  the  invariable  laws  which  regulated  the  rotation  of  the  divining  rod,
when  the  experiments  were  made  over  places  where  varions  substances
had  been  concealed  under  the  ground.  It  was  found  that  whether  the
trials  were  made  in  this  manner  or  over  masses  of  coal,  subterraneous
currents  of  water,  or  metallic  veins,  the  divining  rod  indicated  a  deter-
mined sphere  of  electric  activity,  and  was  in  fact  an  electrometrical  rod.
"Of  all  the  phenomena  relating  to  the  distinctions  of  fossil  bodies,"  say^
Thouvenel,  "acting  by  their  electric  emanations,  doubtless  the  most
surprising  is  this ;  upon  the  mines  of  iron,  of  whatever  kind  they  may
be,  the  rods  supported  by  the  fingers  of  Bl^ton  tunied  constantly  upon
their  axis,  from  behind  forward,  as  upon  the  mines  of  coal ;  while  upon
other  metallic  mines,  as  upon  other  metals  extracted  from  their  mines,
the  rotary  movement  took  place  in  the  contrary  direction,  that  is  to  say,
from  before  backwards.  This  circular  movement,  which  never  varied
while  Billon  is  in  a  perpendicular  position  over  mines  or  upon  metals,
presents  revolutions  as  rapid  and  as  regular  as  the  revolutions  iA  the  con-
trary direction  upon  the  mines  of  iron  and  of  coal."

The  constitutional  effects  of  spasms  and  convulsive  twitchings  took
place  more  or  less  in  all  the  veins,  but  copper  emanations  excited  very


RBLATTON  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.

h. Matter  has  a  power  of  conducting  it,  in  different  de-
m  proportion  to  the  continuity  of  bodies.


stfiMtg  and  disiigreeaUle  spasmodic  symptoms,  acfompanitd  by  pains
iliout  the  lieiirf,  bv  flaliilenl  movemenls  in  the  bowels,  and  by  abundant
enictAtioDa  of  air*  On  lead,  there  seemed  to  be  less  unpleamnt  con-
wmpmcei^M  but  atrooger  again  on  the  mines  of  antimony.  Having  pre-
rionftly  detcnttined  that  for  Blkon,  on  aU  the  metals^  except  iron,  there
jphere  of  electric  aclinty,  which  propagated  itself  towards  the
,  a  great  number  of  exp*?ri meats  were  made  which  always  had  the
1  results.  At  the  depth  of  two,  throe,  or  four  feet  under  ground  were
,  gold»  sil?6r«  copjier,  tin,  lead,  and  iron.  The  weight  of  each  was
only  Grom  fire  to  eight  pounds.  In  other  similar  pits  pyiites  of  all  kinds,
ialphurt  coal,  resin,  wax,  and  lard,  were  btiried.  All  these  different
deposits  were  made  at  distances  from  each  other,  in  gardens  or  in  open
oountjy^  mud  they  were  so  well  covered  orer  and  concealed  that  nothing
coold  be  perceived  except  private  marks  lo  be  known  only  to  certnin
oMtanla.  Over  the  re^sin,  wax,  and  lard,  Bleton  experienced  nothing ;
Qwer  the  coal  there  wa«  a  decided  effect ;  the  convulsive  tremor  of  muscle
mm  ntanifcf^t,  and  the  rod  rotated  from  behind  forwards.  Over  the  iron,
ihe  Mine  indications,  but  more  energetic.  A  feeble  impression  from  the
atlpliitr,  hut  sufficient  to  establish  a  difference  between  it  and  the  two
preceding,  and  the  rod  over  the  sulphur  turned  from  before  backward.
IHrites  produced  the  same  rotation  as  the  sulphur,  and  a  slight  tendency
of  dfte  electric  sphere  towards  tlie  west.  Gold  and  copper  especially
eachlUted  strongly  this  singular  tendency  of  the  active  electric  emanations.
Ovw  silver,  tin,  and  lead  also*  it  was  more  remarkable.  It  extends  itself
01019  or  l&BB  from  the  focus  of  the  metals,  according  to  their  depth  and
lltfif  maae*  For  exam|)le,  in  describing  a  circle  having  a  radius  of  ihre**
Of  four  feet  from  tliin  focus,  Bleton  felt  absolutely  no  action  except  on
the  line  of  the  west.  It  was  the  same  when,  in  proceeding  from  the
vcnicai  point  of  the  focus,  he  successively  traversed  all  the  radii  of  the
csreic ;  or  even  if  he  went  from  all  the  points  of  the  circumference  to  pro-
ceed to  die  centre.  In  these  two  inverse  proceedings  it  was  always  only
OB  the  radii  going  westward  that  his  person  and  the  rods  were  affected
bjr  movcmoDts  more  or  less  intense,  according  to  the  kinds  of  metal.

it  mB9t» however,  he  admitted  that  the  action  of  these  metats  presenting
only  the  dtflerences  of  greater  or  leas  in  degree,  either  in  the  nervous  and
migcilltf  inipreasiotis  of  the  body,  or  in  the  circular  revolutions  of  the
rods,  eoDStmtJy  moved  from  before  backward,  these  differences  do  not
yield  a  certain  means  of  distinguishing  the  five  metals  one  from  tlie  other.
The  objeri  Tbouvenel  liad  in  view  was  nevertheless  fulfilled,  for  he  had


100  CEYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

f .  The  capacity  of  bodies  to  receive  a  charge  is  in  direct
relation  to  the  strength  of  the  crystallic  force.

established  the  extent  and  the  determination  of  a  sphere  of  electric  activity
towards  the  west,  in  certain  metals  and  on  sulphur,  which  does  not  exist'
in  the  same  manner  on  iron,  on  coal,  or  on  streams  of  water.

To  give  a  summary,  then,  of  the  relations  of  these  phenomena  to  those
established  by  Professor  Faraday,  it  may  be  said  that  over  iron  mines  the
divining  rod  assumes  a  movement  of  rotation  diametrically  opposite  to
that  which  it  exhibits  over  all  other  mines.  When  iron  and  other  metals
are  extracted  from  their  ores  and  deposited  under  gronnd,  the  phenomenon
occurs  with  the  same  distinction;  that  is  to  say,  with  iron  it  rotates
towards  the  north.  With  all  the  other  metals  submitted  to  trial,  its  action
is  from  east  to  west.  The  influence  of  the  red  metals  appears  to  be  more
energetic  than  that  of  the  white.  But  with  regard  to  this  divining  rod  let
one  condition  be  remarked — ^the  relation  of  the  organic  substance  to
another  organic  and  living  power  of  matter ;  to  a  human  being  in  a  cer-
tain susceptible  state  of  nervous  system.  Thouvenel  describes  the
symptoms  which  affected  Bl^ton  when  he  was  in  the  sphere  of  metallic
action,  and  the  rod  becomes  the  secondary  part  of  the  philosophical  hi-
strument,  composed  of  an  impressionable  human  being  and  a  piece  of
stick.  Some  of  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach's  subjects  would  have  been
just  the  persons  to  illustrate  the  facts  of  Bl^tonism.

A  highly  susceptible  girl,  the  lady's  maid  of  a  very  clever  and  intelli-
gent friend  of  mine,  residing  in  Hertfordshire,  offers,  when  she  is  mes-
merised, a  great  many  deeply  interesting  phenomena. I  have  repeatedly

mentioned  her  as  Harriet  P . She  is  as  guileless  and  as  good  a

being  as  can  be  met  with,  and  is  much  beloved  by  her  excellent  and
amiable  mistress,  who  has  repeatedly  addressed  me  on  her  case.  If  a
piece  of  hazel  stick  or  whitethorn  be  presented  to  Harriet,  she  grasps  it
and  sleeps  mesmerically  in  less  than  a  minute.  The  sleep  is  at  first  very
intense  and  deep,  and  then  the  stick  is  held  so  firmly  that  the  spasmodic
state  of  the  muscles  renders  it  very  difiicult  for  even  a  powerful  bystander
to  turn  it  in  her  hand.  Mary  Anne  Douglas  and  several  others  of  my
patients  have  exhibited  the  same  phenomena.  In  two  of  the  cases  a  very
curious  point  has  been  remarked.  If  the  hazel  or  whitethorn  stick  be
held  with  the  pmnted  end  upwards,  that  end  which  is  upwards  when  it
grows  from  the  ground,  a  force  of  attraction  is  so  energetic  that  these  in-
dividuals cannot  resist  their  inclination  to  grasp  it  with  both  hands.  One
of  them  will  rush  towards  it  from  a  considerable  distance,  and  will  with
extreme  eagerness  run  frtim  the  bottom  to  the  top  of  the  house  in  order
to  have  the  pleasure  of  grasping  it. If  she  succeed  in  getting  bold  of  it


RKtATTON  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.


101


k. It 'expresses  itself  quantitatively  different  at  the  two
|K>l€s ;  SO  that,  like  the  maguet^  it  produces,  as  a  rule,  scn-


before  its  difecdoo  is  Tever»ed,  her  delight  is  titibotinded  ;  bhe  becomes
inlojriciited,  and  soon  passes  into  a  staio  of  deep  uucuujscious  Asleep.  If,
liowetrer,  the  stick  be  titmcd  rapidly  with  ils  pointed  end  downwards,  a
frpalsirc  force  operate^  and  each  patient  feels  a  repugnance  to  it.  If
the  stick  be  allowed  to  be  held  in  both  hands^  and  a  piece  of  gold,  or  of
|»btinum,  or  of  cobalt,  or  of  nickel,  or  the  pointed  end  of  a  rock  rryslal
b^  held  to  ii»  in  each  experiiuent  tbeie  h  a  btiniing  sensation  complained
of,  and  an  eudoarour  is  made  to  loosen  the  hold  on  the  stick,  with  ludi-
I  histe*  A  gentleman  who  had  been  often  pnt  into  mesmeric  sleep,
d,  on  holding  successively  several  pieces  of  these  sticks,  that  a
of  beat  i^'as  communicated  to  his  hand  in  each  in<}tance,  and  he
felt  s  strong  tendency  to  sleep.  Susan  L,,  a  highly  susceptible  person,
«3cchiu]cd.  while  in  a  slee|)-waking  state,  "  tlmt  a  shower  of  fine  smi\li
i|Mirits  of  fire*'  caine  from  a  piure  of  hajsel  wldch  hajipened  to  be  in  njy
Ikftiid.  She  did  not  see  this  from  ash  or  from  fir,  but  invariably  saw  it
font  every  piece  of  hazel  or  from  whiietbem  thai  was  brought  near  ber-
0  i'Mis  experiincnls were  made  to lest  the  accuracy  of

fc. ^  iMTviug  these  things,  and  <>he  invuriubly  gave  the  same

JDttwera  to  the  questions  on  the  same  objects.  Subsequently,  eight  other
iiidividnals  were  s<'j>arately  examined  as  to  iheir  susceptibilities  to  difTerent
kinds  of  wood.  Each  gave  the  same  results  and  saw  the  sparks  of  fire.
In  many  other  case?,  the  impressionability  being  ditferent,  the  hazel  and
wbitetbuni  bad  no  perceptible  eflects ;  the  patients  handling  I  fie  bits  of
*tick  williout  observing  heat  or  sparks,  and  failing  to  grusp  then*  spas-

Bodically. But  Harriet  P r's  impression  ability  waii  put  lo  a  very

rful  purpose.  Her  mistress  had  heard  of  tlie  practice  of  dowsing  for
wtt«r,  and  tn  a  letter  to  a  corre^ndent,  now  before  nie,  writes  thus  under
tiaicofjuly  184-5: — ^'*  We  made  a  curious  experiment  here  some  days

•ifice  with  Harriet  F * We  have  very  bad  water  here,  and  have

loDg  been  unable  to  find  a  good  spring.  Mr.  G.  has  in  \*ain  dug  and
du|^  and  dog  for  one,  I  proposed  the  divining  rod;  foresaid  I,  Dr*
Mllklilier  would  not  ihhjk  it  a  foolish  experiment.  Harriet  P— —  was
mlliug,  so  we  went  forth  lo  a  field  ilie  most  likely  one  for  a  spring  ;  Mr,
tm4  Mm.  O.,  mys*  If,  iind  two  friends  staying  here.  We  put  Hamet  to
•lecfi  by  the  hazel  stick ;  she  grasped  it  so  tightly  we  were  obliged  to
the  gold  chain  ; — ^she  then  held  it  only  in  one  hand,  and  imme-
diately bcgiuj  to  walk,  taking  her  own  way*  She  went  very  carefully  for
about  twenty  yards;  then  suddenly  sttqjped  as  if  she  had  been  shot.
N»t  «  wurd  was  uttered  by  any  one. We  all  looked  on,  and  were  not  a


102  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IK

sations  of  cold  at  the  pole  corresponding  to  —  M,  at  the  pole
corresponding  to  +  M  of  gentle  heat.  In  regard  to  quantity
the  northward  pole  is  stronger,  the  southward  pole  weaker.

little  surprised  to  see  the  rod  slowly  turn  round  until  her  hand  was
almost  twisted  backwards.  It  looked  as  if  it  must  pain  her.  Still  no
one  spoke.  Suddenly  she  exclaimed,  *  There !  there  !  don't  you  see  the
stick  turn  ?  the  water  is  here— under  my  hand.  I  see,  oh  I  see — ^let  me
look — don't  speak  to  me — I  like  to  look.'  '  How  deep  is  the  water  ?'  said
Mrs.  G.,  speaking  to  Harriet's  fingers.  *  Oh,  about  three  feet ;  I  can't  quite
tel],  but  it  is  here.'  In  a  moment,  to  our  astonishment,  she  sunk  down
on  the  grass,  took  the  stick  again  in  both  her  hands,  and  seemed  to  like
it  as  if  it  could  feel.  We  made  a  strange  group  round  her,  as  we  were
all  much  astonished  to  see  what  we  had  come  there  to  see,  but  still  it
astonished  us :  she  seemed  so  like  a  little  witch.  We  marked  the  phice,
And  after  a  few  minutes  we  awoke  her.  In  the  evening  she  was  again
mesmerized  to  sleep,  and  we  asked  her  what  she  saw  at  the  spring.
*  Why  I  saw  water— water  erery where.*  'Then,'  said  I,  'how  do  you
know  where  the  spring  is  V  '  Oh,  because  it  goes  trinkle,  trinkle — I  know
it  is  there.'  '  Why  did  you  sit  down  P*  '  Why,  because  I  was  so  giddy  ;
it  seemed  as  if  all  was  water  but  the  little  piece  of  ground  I  stood  upon ;
— oh  I  saw  so  much  water,  all  fresh,  but  no  sea ;  I  tried  to  see  the  sea,
but  I  could  not— -I  could  not  at  all.'  Mr.  G.  caused  a  large  hole  to  be
dug  at  the  place ;  and  just  at  the  depth  of  three  feet  the  water  was  found.
A  brick  well  has  been  constructed,  and  there  is  a  good  supply  of  ex-
cellent water.  No  one  could  doubt  of  the  action  of  the  rod,  it  turned  so
evidently  of  iiseff  in  her  hand.  Of  course  when  awake  Harriet  knew
nothing  of  the  circumstance."  So  many  and  so  various  are  the  testi*
monies  and  the  facts  relating  to  the  divining  rod,  that  it  would  be  tedious
to  recite  the  hundreds  of  respectable  documents  offered  by  those  authors
who  have  written  on  this  subject.  Lately,  a  work  by  Tardy  de  Mou-
iravel,  printed  in  1781,  entitled  "  Memoire  Physique  et  Medicinale  sur
la  Baguette  Divinatoire,"  has  fallen  into  my  hands,  and  it  abounds  in
testimonies  as  to  the  truth  of  the  same  class  of  facts.  One  of  the  most
curious  works  I  have  seen  on  the  subject  is  a  little  book  with  the  title  of
"  La  Physique  occulte,  ou  Traile  de  la  Baguette  Divinatoire,  et  de  son
Utilite  pour  la  decouverte  des  sources  d'eaux,  des  minieres,  des  tr^sors
cachez,  des  voleurs,  et  des  meurtriers  fugitifs,  avec  des  principes  qui
expliquent  les  phenomcnes  les  plus  obscurs  de  la  Nature,"  par  M.  L.  L.
de  Vallemont,  Ph.  D.  et  Ph.,  &c.  This  work,  embellished  with  plates
illustrating  the  different  kinds  of  divining  rods,  with  the  various  modes  of
holding  them  for  use,  appeared  at  the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth  cen-


HBLATTON  TO  THE  HUMAN  OEOANS.


103


L Waraiijig  the  crystal  has  hitliertu  produced  no  es-
Juential  modification.


tttiyj  and  passed  throngh  several  edilions  in  France  as  well  m  m  Holland.
ll  is  remarkable  for  much  curious  literary  and  bisioncal  leamingi  audi
lor  abJe  slalements  of  the  argunienls  wbicU  were  used  in  tlie  eaiilroversiesj
rif©  at  tbat  period,  on  the  realities  of  ibe  facts  under  consideraiiou.  It
coutains  a  curiotis  catalogue  of  a  great  iniuaber  of  mines  di&coFered,  in
France,  by  means  of  the  divining  rod,  made  out  by  a  Gennan  niirieralo-
^ist  rmployed  for  the  purpose  by  the  Cardinal  do  RicheUeu,  Bui  iho
tnoiat  singular  part  of  the  book  is  the  powerfully  auihemicaied  history  of  j
Jact|ae9  Ay  mar,  a  peasant,  who,  constitutionally  impressionable,  guided
by  xhe  divining  rod,  followed  a  murderer  for  more  lb  an  forty- five  leagues
an  land,  and  more  ihan  thirty  leagues  by  sea  :  —

On  liie  otb  of  July,  1692,  a  dealer  in  wine  and  his  wife  residing  at
Lyons  were  murdered  in  a  cellar,  for  the  sake  of  rubbing  ibem  of  a  sum
of  mtmey  kept  in  a  shop  bard  by,  whii-h  was  a^  the  some  time  th<.^ir
chamber. All  this  was  executed  with  such  promptitude  and  secresy  that  '
lie  one  liad  witnessed  the  crime,  and  the  assassins  escaped.

A  ueighbour,  i*iruck  with  horror  ai  ihe  enormiiy  of  ibe  crime,  having
rvmeiobcred  that  htJ  knew  a  man  named  Jacques  Ay mur,  a  wealthy  pea-
•rbo  couhl  follow  the  track  of  thieves  and  murderers,  induced  him  to
to  Lyons,  and  introduced  him  to  the  king's  attoniey-c^encrah  This
t  assured  the  functionary  that  if  they  would  lead  him  to  the  place
here  iJie  murder  wa^  connnitted,  in  order  that  be  might  aceive  from  it
certain  iuUuetice^  be  would  assuredly  trace  the  steps  of  the  guilty  parties,
«iid  would  point  ihem  out  wherever  they  were.  He  adde  l,  that  for  hb
purpose  he  should  make  use  of  a  rod  of  wood  such  as  he  was  in  the  habit
of  Qsiiig  to  find  springs  of  water,  metals,  tiiid  hidden  treasure.  The  man
wms  conducted  to  the  cellar  where  the  murders  were  cummitied.  There
be  was  seized  with  emotion  ;  hh  pulse  rose  as  if  he  were  sufTering  from  a
violent  ferer,  and  the  forked  rod  which  he  held  in  his  hands  turned  rapidly
the  two  places  where  the  murdered  bodies  had  lain*
HavlDg  received  the  impression,  Aymar,  guided  by  his  rod,  passed
ihrmugb  ihe  streets  through  which  llie  assassins  had  Hed,  He  entered
itt  court  yard  of  the  aichbishop's  palace.  Arriving  at  the  gate  of  the
ue,  which  was  shut,  it  being  night,  he  could  then  proceed  no  further.
The  next  day  he  went  out  of  the  town  by  the  bri<lge  of  the  Rone,  and
dways  guided  by  llio  rod,  he  went  to  il»e  right  ahmg  the  bank  of  the
river.  Three  pereons,  who  accompanied  bim,  were  witnesses  that  he
s^  Tiised  the  tracks  of  llinje  accomplices,  and  that  sometimes

Ll _^,.  i..,:^  uvo. Ill  ihjb , uncertainly  be  was  led  by  the  rod  to  tijo


104  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET.

fit.  This  force  of  crystals  is  contained  in  those  exhibited
by  the  magnet ;  it  constitutes  therefore  a  separable  part  of
them^  capable  of  being  isolated.

house  of  a  gardener,  where  he  was  enlightened  as  to  the  nnmher  of  the
criminals.  Fur  on  his  arrival  he  maintained  that  they  had  touched  a
table,  and  that  of  three  bottles  which  were  in  the  room  they  had  touched
one,  over  which  the  rod  visibly  rotated.  In  short,  two  boys  of  nine  and
ten  years  of  age,  who,  fearing  their  father's  anger,  had  at  first  denied  the
fact,  at  last  acknowledged  that  three  men,  whom  they  described,  had
entered  the  house,  and  had  drunk  the  wiue  which  was  contained  in  the
bottles  indicated  by  the  peasant.  As  they  were  assured  by  the  declara-
tion of  the  children,  they  did  not  hesitate  to  go  forward  with  Aymar,
half  a  league  lower  than  the  bridge  on  the  bank  of  the  Rhone.  All  along
the  bank  for  this  distabce  the  footsteps  of  the  criminals  were  traced.
Then  they  must  have  entered  a  boat.  Aymar  followed  in  another  on
their  track  as  clearly  by  water  as  by  land ;  and  his  boat  was  made  to  go
through  an  arch  of  the  bridge  of  Vienna  which  is  never  used,  upon  which
it  was  concluded  that  these  wretches  had  no  boatman,  since  they  wan.
dered  out  of  their  way.

Ou  the  voyage,  Aymar  went  ashore  at  all  the  places  where  the  fugitives
had  landed,  went  straight  to  their  coverts,  and  recognised,  to  the  grea
stuprise  of  the  hosts  and  spectators,  the  beds  on  which  they  had  sleptf
the  tables  on  which  they  had  eaten,  and  the  pots  and  glasses  they  had
touched.

He  arrived  at  the  camp  of  Sablon,  where  he  was  considerably  agitated.
He  believed  that  in  the  crowd  of  soldiers  he  should  find  the  murderers.
Lest  the  soldiers  should  ill-treat  him,  he  feared  to  operate  with  his  rod.
He  returned  to  Lyons,  whence  they  made  him  go  back  to  the  camp  of
Sablon  by  water,  having  furnished  him  with  letters  of  recommendation.
The  criminals  were  no  longer  to  be  found  there.  He  followed  them  to
the  fair  of  Beaucaire  in  Languedoc,  and  always  remarked  in  his  course
the  beds,  the  tables,  the  seats  where  they  had  been.

At  Beaucaire  the  rod  conducted  him  to  the  gate  of  a  prison,  where  he
was  positive  one  of  the  wretches  would  be  found.  Fourteen  of  the  pri-
soners were  paitided  before  him,  and  the  rod  turned  on  a  num  with  a
humped  back,  who  had  been  sent  to  the  prison  about  one  hour  before  for
a  petty  larceny.  The  peasant  did  not  hesitate  to  declare  his  conviction
that  the  hump-backed  man  was  one  of  the  assassins ;  but  he  continued  to
search  for  the  others,  and  found  that  they  had  gone  towards  Nismes.
No  more  was  done  at  that  time.  They  transferred  the  hump-backed  man
U>  Lyons. Ou  the  journey  he  asseverated  his  innocence ;  but  finding  that


105


THIRD  TREATISE,


expkrime:^t8  to  establish  some  fixed  physical  laws  in
thb  varying  phenomena  whicu  have  hitherto  been
called  animal  magnetism*

58.  In  the  first  place  I  shall  endeavour  to  apply  the  laws
obtained  in  the  two  preceding  treatises  to  another  series  of

&n  the  hosts  At  whose  inus  he  had  lodged  recognised  blni,  he  BFOwed

that  he  hud  been  the  sen*anl  of  two  men  of  Pioveme  who  bad  engaged

htui  lo  jom  ihein  in  this  foul  deed  :  lliat  these  men liad  com  mi  tied  the

tuurder  and  had  taken  the  TDoney^  giving  him  but  mx  crowns  und  a  half

from  their  booty  of  one  hundred  and  thiny  crowns. He  cormbonited

ibc  accuracy  of  the  iitdications  of  the  pea^aui  us  to  ibe  garden er'ii  bonsei

%he  cmnp  of  the  Sablon,  the  fair  of  Beaucaire,  and  ihe  other  places  through

Mrhich  the  three  had  passed,  extending  over  for(y-five  French  lengiies.

Ul  tliese  things  of  course excited immense  interest. At  Lyons  many

etitions  of  the  observations  respeeiing  the  luniing  of  llie  rod  iii  ihe

rlkr  were  made  in  presence  of  many  persons* Monsieur  TAbb^  Bignon

;itfc»  hts  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  stateinenl  of  facts*  in  a  letter,  in-

ted  by  Val lemon t  in his  work* There  can  be  o»>  ilnnbt tbiU  such

r«tAtnneDt8  require  very  strong  corrobonition,  and  here  ibey  a|T|>areftiJy

obtain  ilp Vallemont,  quoting  the  authority  of  the  Royal  Society  of

ndoD,  in  the  second  part  of  the  history,  seventeenth  section,  one  bun-

Ified  tnd  twenty-fifth  page,  says,  that  in  a))  countries  where  men  are

ned  by  laws,  the  testimony  in  a  matter  of  life  and  death,  of  otiTy

iro  or  three  witnesses,  is  required  ;  but  is  it,  then,  treating  an  affair  of

kityiics  equitably,  when  the  concurrence  of  sixty  or  a  hundred  persons

lb  insufficient  P It  is  difficult  to  define  the  just  boundaries  of  credulity ;

^  but  hi  all  these  recitals  of  histories  of  events,  there  is  this  general  con-

rnnit  that  in  those  who  can  make  use  of  llie  rod,  there  is  always  an

ritAtioin,  a  fever,  or  some  sensation  which  indicates  a  ner\'ous  coramo-

liat] ;  and  the  be:»t  evidence  of  the  closest  investigation  goes  to  ihe  point

bai  most  frequently  the  rod  is  of  ha2el  wood* How  far  these  stories

rtid  U>  ihe  conclusion  that  organic  test^  upjieur  lo  require  the  reagencies

organic  force  is  at  pii^bcnt  a  tuultcr  ol  bpccuJatiun  ^  but  it  is  to  be


106  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

investigations  which  have  reference  here,  and  to  give  them
a  wider  extension  and  better  foundation.  Beyond  the
memory  of  man,  have  been  known  certain  enigmatical  phe-
nomena, produced  by  the  magnet,  in  its  effect  on  many  sick
persons,  especially  on  somnambulists.  In  the  last  century,
and  indeed  earlier,  it  was  found  that  similar  phenomena
might  be  brought  about  by  bare  hands,  and  without  a  mag-
net. In  the  condition,  up  to  this  time,  of  our  physical
knowledge,  it  was  impossible  to  discover  any  certain  con-
nexion between  that  force  of  the  magnet,  and  this  of  the
human  hands,  feet,  &c.,  and  equally  in  vain  was  it  attempted
to  detect  any  regularity  and  subjection  to  law.  The  con-
sequence of  this  was,  that  all  those  who  were  occupied  with
natural  science  passed  by  these  subjects,  and  gave  them  no
place  in  the  school  of  physics.  Isolated  physicians  and
dilettante  kept  aUve  the  tradition,  or  increased  the  heap  of
unconnected  observations.  For  want  of  a  better  word,  they
called  it  animal  magnetism — an  expression  which  is  the  more
unsuitable,  the  less  the  phenomena  signified  by  it  agree
with  that  which  constitutes  magnetism  in  the  proper  sense
of  the  word.  In  the  meantime,  books  have  been  written ;
few  are  good,  many  appear  altogether  one-sided,  many  are
actually  unreadable.

At  first  I  avoided  entering  upon  this  literature ;  I  wished
to  retain  my  powers  of  observation  and  judgment  free  and
unbiassed,  and  to  build  my  work  from  the  beginning  solely
on  the  foundation  of  my  own  experience. It  seemed  to  me

hoped  that  the  effort  to  attract  serious  attention  to  this  class  of  facts  is
not  uninteresting  or  unimportant

There  are  many  facts  connected  with  the  Baron *s  new  force  which
may  be  used  to  illustrate  the  influence  of  water  and  of  shining  surfaces
in  producing  the  clonic  spasms  of  hydrophobia.  The  phenomena  oflfered
by  certain  somnambules  are  highly  illustrative  of  the  eflects  of  water  in
certain  diseased  or  susceptible  states  of  the  human  system.  Running
water,  a  constantly  changing  series  of  crystalline  molecules,  perpetually
discharges  positive  or  negative  odic  force.


OF  TBt  OKOANIC  TOUCE,


to  select  my  own  path  in  the  direction  in  which
natural  science  usually  advances,  and  which  is  never  that
of  medicine.  The  medical  man  is  chiefly  concerned  for  a
remedial  agent,  but  the  physicist  Icxjks  solely  for  natui'td
tmths  ;  one  seeks  the  concrete,  the  other  the  absti*act,'
Olid  it  18  from  this  primary  divergence  that  the  two  have
hitherto  been  able  to  combine  so  little  in  their  researches.

59.  After  1  had  demonstrated  a  force  in  crystals,  which,  ^
with  all  its  diCFerencc,  at  the  same  tunc  bears  an  nnmis-
takeable  analogy  to  magetism ;  while  the  so-called  animal
niagnetism,  appearing  in  a  shape  similar  to  the  former,  on

^c  other  hand,  allows  us  to  perceive  in  certain  resemblances
astonishing  paralleUsm  w^th  magnetism,  in  spite  of  par-
ticidar  essential  diflerences  ;  this  atRnity  of  the  conditions
led  me  to  the  inqnh'ies — ^whether  and  how  much  might  be

>uiid  to  be  common  to  all  the  phenomena,  antl  whether  at
some  law^s  might  not  be  discovered,  upon  which  animal
aaignetism  might  rest,  in  the  same  way  as  the  ci^stalhc '
force*  Since  we  imagine  crystallization  to  be  the  connect-
ing Uiik  between  the  inorganic  and  organic,  the  dead  and
the  hving,  I  believed  I  might  encourage  some  liopc  finally ,
to  obtain,  by  way  of  experiment,  a  point  of  connection
between  animal  magnetism  and  physics — perhaps  even  to
procure  it  a  resting-place  for  which  it  has  hitherto  striven
in  vain.

00.  To  open  a  path  to  this,  it  seemed  to  me  above  all
things  necessary  to  make  out,  as  clearly  as  possible,  the
part  which  the  terrestrial  magnetism  plays  in  these  matters.
Since  the  magnet,  since  the  crystallic  force,  exercises  so
decided  an  influence  on  sensitive  persons,  the  power  of  the
terrestrial  magnetism,  which  durects  the  magnetic  needle,
cannot  be  without  influence  on  the  animal  ncr\Ts.  And
1  thus  saw  clearly  that  it  was  imfwssible  to  draw  any
scientific  conclusion  from  any  experiments,  so  long  tis
tliis  jiowerful  factor,  which  must  always  interfciv  in  tlic


I  OS  PHYSICAL  ASD  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

phenomena,  was  not  considered,  measured,  and  brought
into  the  account.

With  this  view  I  now  tested  both  healthy  and  sick,  in
particular  Mr.  Schuh,  Mr.  Schmidt  the  su^eon,  and  blisses
Nowotnjr,  Sturmann,  Maix,  Reichel,  Atzmannsdorfer,  and
others,  under  different  circumstances  and  at  different  times.

61.  Mr.  Schuh,  in  his  present  dwelling,  had  the  strange
custom  of  regularly  turning  round  in  bed,  when  he  woke
early  in  the  morning;  that  is,  he  then  placed  his  head
where  his  feet  had  been  during  the  night,  after  which  he
always  went  to  sleep  again.  This  sleep  was  always  more
refreshing  than  all  the  preceding  night's  sleep,  contrary  to
the  general  rule,  according  to  which,  the  earlier  sleep,
especially  that  before  midnight,  is  the  most  strengthening.
When  he  had  not  this  after-sleep,  he  felt  weaker  all  day ;
and  thus  this  strange  custom  had  for  a  long  time  been  a
necessity  to  him.  I  inquired  about  the  position  of  the  bed,
and  learned  that  the  head  was  turned  to\ivtird  the  south,  and
the  foot  toward  the  north.  By  my  advice  he  assumed  the  op-
posite position  when  he  went  to  bed  at  night ;  that  is,  Avith
the  head  to  the  north  and  the  feet  to  the  south.  From  this
day  fonvard  he  never  found  the  morning  after-sleep  ncccs-
sarj'  ;  the  sk*c[)  was  good,  and  strengthening  ;  and  he
thenceforward  gave  up  that  aistom.

62.  Mr.  Schmidt,  the  surgeon,  of  Vienna,  had  received  a
chill  of  the  right  arm  on  a  railway  journey,  and  for  some  time
had  suffered  from  acute  rheunintism,  with  the  most  painful
crani])s  running  from  the  shoulder  to  the  fingers.  His
physician  treated  him  with  the  magnet,  which  rapidly  quieted
the  cramps,  but  they  always  returned.  I  found  him  lying
with  his  head  directed  toward  the  south.  On  my  remark-
ing this,  they  turned  him  round  and  brought  him  into  the
Erection  of  the  magnetic  meridian,  with  his  head  to  the
IKirth.  Directly  ho  came  into  this  ])osition  he  uttered  ex-
MOrisionK  of  pl(*ii.surr;  he  declared  that  he  felt  refreshed


OF  THE  ORGANIC


109


atid  strengthened,  A  |>lcasant  uniform  waraitb  diffused
itself  forthwith  in  the  chilled  part,^ic  felt  the  pass  of  the
magnet  incomparably  more  cooling  and  agreealjle  than
before,  and  before  I  went  away  the  stifiencd  arm  and  tlie
fingers  became  moveable,  and  the  pain  had  wholly  dis*
ap[)eaied.

63*  When  I  tried  the  position  of  Miss  Nowotny  with
the  magnetic  needle,  I  foimd  her  almost  exactly  in  the
magnetic  meridian — the  head  lying  to  the  north.  She  had
herself  instinctively  sought  and  wished  for  tliis  diixiction,
and  it  had  been  necessary  to  break  down  a  stove  to  satisfy
ter  desire.  I  asked  her  to  lie  with  her  head  to  the  south,
by  way  of  experiment,  to  ascertain  the  result.  It  required
some  pains  to  induce  her  to  do  it,  for  I  was  obhged  to
repeat  my  wish  three  or  fom*  days  running,  and  to  make
her  appreciate  the  weight  I  laid  upon  this  change,  before  I
brought  her  to  it.  At  length  I  found  her  one  morning  in
this  reversed  position  ;  she  had  assumed  it  a  short  time
(before  my  arrival.  A  very  little  time  elapsed  before  the
patient  began  to  complain.  She  was  uncomfortable;  she
k turned  over  restlessly  ;  her  face  became  flushed  ;  her  pulse
became  fuller  ^  flow  of  Ijlood  to  the  head  increased
the  lieadache ;  and  discomfort  of  the  stomach  soon  ensued.
Tlie  bedstead,  ^ith  the  patient,  was  quickly  turned  round
iiii,  but  stopped  when  moved  a  quarter  of  a  circle.  She
lay  in  the  magnetic  parallel,  with  her  head  to  the  west.
This  direction  was  completely  imbcarable  to  her,  and  still
more  adverse  than  the  south-north  position  she  had  just

eft. This  was  at  half-past  ten  a.  m. Slie  feared  from  her
atious^  that  if  she  remained  she  would  soon  faint,  aiul
cd  to  be  quickly  removed  from  this  situation. She  was
[^en  brought  back  into  her  original  north  and  south  direc-

ion.  Immediately  after  this  all  the  adverse  conditions
[decreased,  and  in  a  few  minutes  had  disappeared  so  per-
|fiyj(f*tiy  that  the  patient  became  cheerful  again. But  not


1 10  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

mendy  an  extieiiie  disamifort  seized  the  patient  in  the
altered  directioD  toward  Uie  heayens, — her  reactioiiaiy
aenaations  to  all  external  things  were  tzansfonned  in  the
nost  striking  manner.  The  usual  passes  of  the  magnet,
performed  hj  her  physician,  which  she  always  foond  agree-
able, then  became  unpleasant, — stronger  ones  intcdarable ;
Milivtanees  at  other  times  disagreeable,  like  sulphur,
were  then  almost  indifferent;  others,  such  as  lead,  even
agreeable;  in  short,  aU  diseased  conditions  assumed  an
altered  fiorm.

These  observations  were  too  full  of  import,  and  held  out
too  great  a  prospect  of  immediate  value  for  medical  purposes,
to  be  passed  over  without  farther  and  more  careful  investi-
gation. I  concerted,  therefore,  with  her  physician  for  a
farther  inquiry  on  a  future  day.  This  took  place  on  the
4th  of  April,  1844.  When  we  came  to  the  patient  in  the
morning,  we  found  that  she  had  already  been  lying  half  an
hour  in  the  south-north  position.  She  anxiously  longed  for
our  coming,  and  earnestly  begged  to  be  speedily  released
from  her  painful  situation.  All  the  above-mentioned  phe-
nomena were  repeated  in  the  same  order  of  succession ;  her
hand  no  longer  followed  the  magnet,  but  was  only  weakly
attracted  by  it — even  the  strongest  did  not  produce  any
spasmodic  clenching  of  the  hand,  and  the  reactions  to  dif-
ferent substances  were  disturbed  just  in  the  same  way  as
before.  In  order  to  enable  us  to  trace  all  these  things  con-
veniently by  experiments,  we  had  the  patient  dressed,  and
taken  out  of  bed.  I  now  placed  her  alternately  on  four
clmirH,  which  1  had  arranged  in  a  square  in  the  N.S.,  S.N.,
K.W,,  and  W.E.  positions,  the  feet  being  extended,  the  head
thrown  hack,  so  that  her  position  was  half  reclining.  The
norlfhMoulh  pcmition  was,  as  before,  comfortable  and  pleasant;
thn  Moul/Miorlh  furnished,  step  by  step,  the  same  results  as
in  tlu)  two  pnuuuling  trials ;  they  followed  gradually,  one
after  anollicr,  in  tho  course  of  about  half  an  hour. But


OF  THB  ORGANIC  FORCE.


Ill


when  the  pntient  was  brought  into  the  ivesf-easi  position,

phenomena  presented  themselves  most  ctistinetly,  and  so

[)idly,  that  this  position  C43nld  scarcely  be  endured  for  a

minute* The  efiect  of  the  magnet  on  the  senses  ceased

almost  wholly  at  once ;  at  the  moment  of  entrance  into  the

position,  disagreeable  heat  came  over  her ;  then  quickly  fol-

^H  lowed,  in  order,  an  univei'sal  external  and  interna!  shivering,

^M  disquiet,  flushing,  acceleration  of  the  pulse,  deterniination  of

^m  blood  to  the  head,  headache ;  finally,  pain  in  the  stomach,

^■■■iiimings in the ears,  loss  of  sense,  and appi^oaching

^^^ncoj)e. It  was  necessary  to  hasten  to  bring  her  back  into

the  north-south  position,  unless  we  would  run  the  risk  of

seeing  her  fall  from  the  chair. The  rapid  disappearance  of

all  these  adverse  symptoms  after  her  return  to  the  latter

position  was  astonishing ;  in  a  few  minutes  her  face  became

cheerful  again,  although  it  had  just  before  expressed  the

most  distressing  sensations. After  some  interval  of  rest,

we  tried  the  east-Tvest. I  held  my  watch  in  my  hand,  and

!■  found  that  not  more  than  a  minute  had  elapsed  before  all

^"  the  phenomena  appcai^ed  in  the  same  way  and  in  the  same

%f order  as  they  had  in  the  west-east  position »  only  somewhat

^1  milder. For  the  greater  confirmation  and  more  accurate

^1  observation  of  all  these  ocGiurences,  the  experiments  were

^F  finally  repeated,  as  we  induced  the  patient  to  place  herself

once  more  in  each  of  the  different  dii'cctions ; the  residt

,^ was  just  the  same.

|H  Since  Miss  Nowotny's  sickness  had  been  protracted,
^^  slowly  increasing,  for  eight  ycai's,  I  asked  whether  she  had
^L  not  observed,  while  the  disease  was  in  its  milder  stages,
^m  that  she  had  felt  more  or  less  comfortable  in  different  places.
^P  Inquiry  was  made,  and  it  was  remembered  that  in  some  of
^  the  houses  in  which  she  had  resided  during  that  inten^al,
1^  her  condition  had  been  either  more  quiet  or  more  strikingly
^P  insupportable*  I  gave  her  brother  a  conqiass,  and  bade
him  see  in  what  positions  her  bedstead,  sofas,  or  working-


112  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

seats  had  been  placed  in  the  various  farmer  residences.  He
actually  found  that  in  the  Wohl-Ieben  Street,  her  bedstead
and  sofa  had  accidentally  been  placed  almost  exactly  in
the  magnetic  meridian,  and  she  herself  had  lain  in  the
north-south  position ;  while  in  the  Marokaner  Street  her
direction  had  been  north-eastward  and  south-westward.  In
the  Wohl-leben  Street  she  had  been  comparatively  easy,
while  in  the  Marokaner  Street  she  had  never  been  well,  but
had  constantly  struggled  with  the  most  painful  illness.
Even  now,  she  knew  not  why,  she  could  never  bear  to  sit
either  across  the  bed,  nor  on  her  couch,  nor  yet  to  lie  down
on  the  latter :  she  could  only  remain  lying  in  bed.  The
first  brought  her  into  the  west-east  position,  the  second  into
the  east-west,  the  third  into  the  south-north,  and  the
fourth  alone  insured  to  her  the  indispensable  north-south
direction.

As  between  north  and  south,  so  also  between  east  and
west,  a  not  inconsiderable  distinction  was  subsequently  dis-
covered. In  June,  namely  when  she  was  already  so  much
improved  that  she  could  sit  up  the  greater  part  of  the  day,
I  tried  her  once  more  in  the  four  positions.  She  could  now
remain  for  a  good  while  in  the  south-north  position ;  in  the
east- west  also  she  was  tolerably  well  for  a  little  time ;  but  in
the  west-east  position  she  could  not  remain  more  than  a
minute  without  feeling  the  attacks,  even  to  the  irritation  of
the  stomach.  A  few  minutes'  rest  in  the  north-south
direction  wholly  removed  the  evil  effects  of  the  few  minutes
in  the  west-east  position.  Tlie  tvest-east  position  was  there-
fore  by  far  the  worst  and  most  exciting  of  all,  I  add  the
remark,  in  reference  to  the  position  of  the  sun  and  terres-
trial thermo-magnetism,  that  this  last  experiment  was  made
about  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.

64.  Furnished  with  these  experiences,  I  visited  the  sick
Miss  Sturmann  at  the  hospital  of  the  Vienna  University.
She  was  suffering  from  tubercle  of  the  lungs,  and  they  called


or  THE  ORGANIC  FORCE.


113


her  condition  ekiampsia*  According  to  her  account,  her
illneds  had  commenced  about  three  years  previously,  when
s1l6  was  iu  her  sixteenth  year,  after  dancing  very  violently
at  several  balls.  I  found  her  lying  in  a  bed,  in  the  west-
east  position.  I  tried  a  very  strong  magnet  upon  her,  one
which  would  support  50  lbs. ;  I  passed  it  over  her,  laid  it
upon  her  head,  and  under  her  feet.  It  produced  some  weak
reactions,  but  of  little  importance.  I  then  asked  her  phy-
sician. Professor  Lippich,  to  allow  her  bed  to  be  moved  into
the  north-south  position  of  the  magnetic  meridian,  which
he  was  kiiul  enough  to  order.  In  a  moment  everything
changed.  The  patient  immediately  evinced  pleasure ;  her
former  disquiet  left  her;  a  painful  biu-aing  of  the  eyes,
which  she  had  suffered  uncea.^ingly»  disappeared ;  instead
of  the  previous  insufferable  heat,  she  felt  only  a  comfortable
coolness,  and  a  general  relief  was  visible,  A  night  of  un-
usually peaceful  sleep  followed,  such  as  slie  had  not  expe-
rienced for  a  long  time.  Her  bed  was  now  kept  permanently
in  this  position,  as  she  herself  also  earnestly  requested.
Anolhcr  time  I  induced  her  to  turn  round  in  bed,  and  thus
brought  her  into  the  south-north  position ;  just  as  quickly
ai  efer)'thing  had  turned  to  good  before,  all  now  retiu'ned
tkffdn  to  evil ;  general  disquiet  and  heat  ensued,  flushing  of
the  hfx,  determination  to  the  head,  followed,  and  the  pecu-
liar bumiuif  in  the  eyes  at  once  I'eappeaix^,  All  this  was
mnoved  again  as  soon  as  I  allowed  her  to  return  to  her
north-south  position.  Now,  when  she  was  in  the  normal
direction,  I  again  took  up  the  magnet.  But  what  a  differ-
ence !  She,  who  coidd  scarcely  feel  it  before,  coidd  not
bear  it  now,  when  1  removed  the  armature  at  a  considerable
ice  from  her. I  placed  myself  with  it  at  a  distance


*  Convaliive  movetwenta  of  the  eyes,  of  the  musclej*  of  the  abdomen,
And  of  the  extrenuties,  now  rucI  then  witli  pnin,  atkd  sometirncd  with
t^ndciTCT  Co  a  Je^p  unheftUhy  sleep ;  a  description  of  case  easily  Mad
completely  curahle  by  continued  meamerUtu.

I


I  14  PHYSTCAIi  AND  PHYSlOLOOfOAt  tAWS

of  four  paces  from  her  head ;  the  patient  gave  me  no  answer,
and  when  I  examined  her  I  found  her  in  a  state  of  nncon-
sciousness,  in  tonic  spasms.  After  her  recovery  from  this.
I  took  my  place  seven  paces  from  the  foot  of  her  bed,  and
removed  the  arniatm-e :  and  here  also  she  had  scarcely
spoken  a  word,  before  she  became  senseless,  and  fell  into
the  same  condition.  A  third  time  I  removed,  in  the
prolonged  direction  of  the  magnetic  meridian,  the  whole
length  of  the  ward,  which  amonnted  to  more  than  thiily
feet  from  her  bedstead  and  her  feet.  Not  quite  so  quickly
a»  before,  she  felt  the  magnet  in  some  degree  after  I  bad
removed  the  armature  ;  but  after  I  bad  remained  about  a
minute  in  this  position,  she  stopped  speaking  in  the  middle
of  a  word  that  was  upon  her  tongue.  She  had  half  said  it,  the
rest  died  away  on  her  lips.  She  bad  been  suddenly  attacked,
and  I  found  her  lying  rigid  with  spasms,  and  with  clenched
hands,  her  eyes  open  and  cast  upwai*d,  so  nnconscious  that  I
could  place  iuy  finger  on  her  eyeballs  without  the  bds  moving.
What  an  unexpected  difference  in  the  effect !  The  same
magnet  which  I  had  placed  above  her  head  and  under  her
feet  witliout  any  remarkable  effect,  so  long  as  she  lay  in  the
magnetic  ptu*allel,  now,  when  she  was  in  the  meridian,  threw
her  into  a  state  of  unconsciousness  at  a  distance  of  ten  yards  1
at  a  distance  of  thirty  feet  attacked  her  in  a  deadly  manner.*

*  If  ihe  Baron  had  accustoiratfd  himself  to  mesmeric  experiments,  he
would  have  discoFered  that  the  magnet,  m  this  caae,  had  induced  tliat
kind  of  tonic  spasm  which  constituted  a  true  mesmeric  deep  sleep,  from
which  the  apph cation  of  un magnetised  iron  to  the  nape  of  the  neck,  the
magnet  being  removed  to  a  suitable  distance,  would  have  roused  hemp.
Instead  of  any  fear  of  the  "  deadly  manner"  of  the  magnet's  action,  the
probabilities  are  tliat  the  frequent  and  prolonged  exercise  of  the  mag-
netic or  mesmeric  practice,  the  rigid  spasms  being  repeatedly  produced,
the  eclampsia  would  speedily  have  vanished,  and  health  would  have
been  restored.  The  worthy  and  talented  Baron  has  operated  with
mesmeric  patients,  while  he  haa  deprecated  the  tisc  of  these  in  hia
reaearche!;.


OF  THE  OROANir  FORCE,


115


05,  Mm  Maix,  unable  to  walk,  was  kind  enough  to
grant  my  request  of  allowing  herself  to  be  moved  in  a  chair
into  the  four  directions.  She  is  neither  cataleptic  nor
somnambulist ;  never  was  so,  but  suffers  fi"om  paralysis  of
the  lower  part  of  her  body.  In  spite,  therefore,  of  the
cases  being  of  totally  different  kinds  in  these  sensitive
patients,  I  nevertheless  obtained  exactly  similar  results
liere ;  the  patient  could  only  bear  the  north  south  direction,
and  the  west-east  was  the  most  insupportable.  This  experi-
ment was  not  performed  in  the  morning,  as  with  Miss
Nowotny,  but  about  4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,

60.  In  Miss  Reichers  case,  the  physician  took  no  notice
of  the  position  in  regard  to  tlie  heavens,  and  when  I
remarked  about  this  to  him,  he  said  he  thought  the  patient
strong  enough  to  be  indifferent  to  its  effects.  I  was  not
of  the  same  opinion,  and  when  1  tested  the  patient,  and
made  her  occupy  the  four  chairs,  one  after  another,  as  great
a  difference  presented  itself  m  in  most  of  the  other  sen-
sitive patients.  Finding  her  bed  in  the  south-north  position,
I  counselled  her  to  have  it  moved  into  the  north- south.  She
followed  my  advice,  and  found  her  night's  rest  much
improved  ;  now  she  could  sleep,  which  had  been  extremeiy
ditficult  before.

67.  With  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  I  tried  the  experiment  at
two  different  hom's;  once  in  the  morning,  when  her  illness
waa  on  the  increase,  the  other  time  in  the  evening,  in  her
recovery.  In  both  cases  the  north-south  position  was  the
easiest,  the  west*east  the  most  insupportable,

6S»  All  these  patients  now  recaUed  to  mind  how  uncom-
fortable they  always  were  in  clnuTh,  although  they  knew  not
the  reason  why.  Catholic  churches  are  all  l>nilt  from  west
to  east,  so  that  the  congregation  before  the  altar  are  in  the
west-east  position  ;  therefore  in  that  direction  which  is  the
moat  insupportable  to  the  sensitive.  In  this  situation,
therefore,  they  all often  fainted,  and  were  obliged  to  be


PIITSICAL  AND  rnTSIOLOGtrAT.  LAWS


carried  out  of  the  cbiircli.  Miss  Nowotny  subsequently
could  not  bear  to  walk  in  the  garden  or  in  the  streets  Irom
west  to  east,  for  any  length  of  time.

69.  These  eight  completely  different  cases  all  agreed  in
this  point, — that  for  sensitive  persons  of  the  most  varied
kind,  any  other  position  but  that  with  the  head  to  the
north  and  the  feet  to  the  south  is  in  the  highest  degree
uncomfortable,  but  the  position  in  the  parallel,  with  the
head  to  the  west  in  our  northern  lienTispherc,  is  almost
insufferable  :  perhaps  the  conditions  are  different  in  the
southern  hcniiephere.  The  causes  of  these  phenomena,  as
is  seen  at  a  glance,  can  only  lie  in  the  effect  of  that  magnet,
which  is  constituted  by  the  terrestrial  globe  and  its  atmos-
phere ;  ID  other  words,  of  the  terrestrial  magnetism.  It
here  affects  just  like  any  other  magnet,  and  from  the
present  investigation  we  arrive  at  a  law,  w^hich  1  will  com*
prise  in  the  following  terms  : — The  terrestrial  mafjnetimn
exercises  in  seusilive  persons,  healthy  and  sick,  a  peculiar
exciting  action,  strong  enouffh  to  interfere  with  their  rest ;
in  the  healthy,  to  niodify  their  sleep  ;  in  the  sicl\  to  disturb
the  circulation  of  the  blood,  the  Junctions  of  the  nerves,  and
tfie  equilibrium  of  the  vital  force,

70*  And  since  the  magnetic  conditions  of  the  enrth  are
subject  to  variations,  and  these  variations  arc  connected  with
the  phases  of  the  moon,  among  other  things,  in  such  a  way
that,  as  is  well  known,  the  intensity  of  the  terrestrial  mag-
netism in  relation  to  that,  attains  its  niininumi  when  the
raoon  is  full ;  here  evidently  emerges  from  obscurity  one  of
the  causes  to  which  the  phenomena  of  smmtambtdism  (ntond-
sticht)  are  to  be  attributed.  I  cannot  express  myself  on
this  until  I  have  advanced  to  some  more  special  develop*
raents.

71.  If,  then,  terrestrial  magnetism  thus  displays  itself  as  a
wonderfully  powerful  reagent  upon  our  bodily  condition,
and  more  or  less  upon  our  health  in  general,  its  action  in


117


tte  eight  iavestigated  cases  being  so  great,  that  it  tu  a  great
extent  (leteriiiined  the  heahliy  and  sick  condition,  we  are
irtamly  justitied — nay,  compelled — to  reason  from  these  to
her  cases  of  sensitive  diseiise,  and  nmst  recognize  that  in
many,  perhaps  all  these  cases,  it  will  be  impossible  to  effect
cure  by  means  of  magnetism,  when  the  patient  is  not  tii-st
of  all  placed  in  the  proper  position  towards  the  teiTcstrial
magnetism :  that  tliis  mnst,  before  all  things,  be  sought  out
and  borne  in  mind  in  all  kinds  of  curative  treatment,  and
that  aU  magnetic  phenomena  in  nen^ous  patients — nay,
perhaps  in  many  other  diseases — are  greatly  mfluenced  by  it*
It  furnishes  the  key  to  a  \  ast  number  of  errors  and  contra-
dictions,  which  have  presented  themselves  througiiout  tlie
field  of  animal  magnetism,  from  the  time  of  Paracelsus  and
Mesmer  to  our  own  days,  which  were  a  stumbliug-block  to
the  best  thinkers,  and  have  everywhere  brought  contra-
diction into  the  tacts  and  discord  into  opinions.  For,  when
one  and  the  same  disease  was  treated  in  Vienna  in  the
Dorth'South  position,  in  Berlin  in  the  east-west,  and  at
Stuttgait  in  the  soutli-north,  ditfercnt  results  were  obtained
in  each  case:  no  agreement  coidd  be  arrived  at  in  the
experiments.  Nay,  even  when  the  same  ])hysieian  treats
ly  the  same  complaint  at  cbtlbrent  times,  or  siniul-
lancously,  but  in  different  places,  with  the  same  magnetic
means,  if  the  beds  of  his  patients  happen  accidentally  to
ba  pkced  in  different  directions,  he  necessarily  will  find
eflfects  produced  ditibring  as  widely  as  possible  from  each
other ;  he  must  be  led  away,  and  be  wholly  mistaken  about
luaguetism ;  he  must  consider  it  full  of  caprice,  and  from
the  impossibihty  of  foreseeing  and  regulating  the  results,  at
length  throw  it  aside  as  an  intractable  and  unntamigeublu
instrument.  This,  therefore,  has  been  the  melancholy  his-
tory of  magnetism,  Dmiug  ages,  i*epeatedly  taken  up  and
laid  aside  again,  now  lies,  almost  unused,  so  remarkable,  so
pr^^aundly  efficient — nay,  one  may  say,  an  incomparable


118


pyyslCAL  AND  PHTSIOLOGf^rxf?


means  of  allajiiig  stitt'eritig,  where  the  human  hand  is  so
seldom  capable  of  affording  help.  Physicians  themselves
call  nervous  diseases  the  scamhda  medicorum.  At  a  not
far  distant  tiuie  1  confidently  hope  this  will  not  be.  Hence-
forth the  all-powerful  influence  of  teiTestrial  magnetism  will
be  estimated  and  taken  into  accoimt,  and  the  whole  question
of  magnetism  will  be  subjected  to  regular  study  in  its  rela-
tion to  medicine  ;  progress  w^ill  be  made,  and  a  clear  under-
standing arrived  at.  The  world  w^ill  at  length  be  able  to
hope  for  healing  powders  to  be  drawn  from  these  extraor-
dinai*y  things,  whence  it  has  so  long  justly  expected  them.
If  any  physician  have  here  and  there  i-emarked,  that  his
patients  generally  found  themselves  better  in  a  position
wherf  the  head  was  directed  to  any  particidar  point  of  the
compass,  the  matter,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  never  been
reasoned  upon  to  any  extent ;  least  of  all,  has  its  peculiar
and  mighty  import  been  educed,  or  been  traced  back  to  its
physical  basis.  Here,  however,  where  I  have  merely  to  do
with  the  relations  of  the  subject  to  physics,  beyond  the
limits  of  whicli  it  would  be  beside  my  purpose  to  stray*  I
have  merely  to  remark,  in  reference  to  ^  GO,  that  after
I  had  establishetl  by  the  foregoing  ex{)6rimcnts,  the  powerful
co-operation  of  terrestrial  magnetism  in  the  magnetic  influ-
ences tipon  sensitive  persons,  /  made  all  the  succeeditiff
invesiitfations  with  them  solely  in  the  wrtf/neiic  north^souih
position,  and  that  I  rvtjard  (his  as  the  normal  direction  Jor
all  redactions  on  living,  sensitive,  nerronshj  diseased  human
bodies,

72.  Now  that  by  the  researclies  from  ^  fiO  to  this  point,
we  have  arrived  at  the  theoretically  and  jjractically  imjxjr-
tant  fact,  that  terrestrial  magnetism  exercises  uninterrupt-
edly and  universally  a  powerful  influence  on  all  sensitive
bodies,  and  have  been  fortunate  enough  to  bring  the^e  new
deductions  respecting  the  inward  powers  of  dead  and  living
nature  under  rule  and  law,  we  may  retmn  to  §  'i\),  and  take


OF  THE  ORGANIC  FORCE.


no


up  the  thi^^d  to  extend  it  fiirtlier  in  another  direction.
This  will  be  eifccted  by  tracing  the  eft'ects  of  the  magnet
aud  crystals  on  sensitive  organisms.

It  is  well  known  that  a  piece  of  pnre  iron,  free  from  car-
bon, however  often  it  may  be  rubbed  with  a  magnet,  will
not  acquire  an  independent  power  of  attracting  iron,  will
not  even  hft  np  iron-filings.  It  therefore  docs  not  receive
aoy  endurhig  magnetic  power  from  the  magnet,  and  i>hy-
sicists  agree  that  the  iron  rc^tiirns  unchanged  into  its  former
condition,  so  soon  as  the  magnet  is  removed.  But  this  is
not  absolutely  the  case.  Hitherto,  it  is  tnie,  we  have  pos-
sessed no  reagent  that  woukl  inflicate  any  alteration  in  the
condition  of  iron  which  had  been  in  contact  with  a  magnet ;.
but  the  sensitive  human  nerves  furnisli  one.  For  when  1
allowed  Miss  Nowotny  to  take  in  her  hand  a  md  of  pure
iron  before  it  was  touched  with  a  maguct,  I  myself  not  in-
terfering, it  was  periectly  inditiercnt  to  her ;  but  when  I
brought  it  into  contact  with  a  magnet,  aud  then  keeping
my  hands  away  removed  this  (wni  the  iron  and  again  allowed
her  to  t4ike  it,  she  found  it  very  different  from  what  it  had
been  before ;  for  now  it  was  no  longer  indifferent,  but  gave
her  the  same  sensation  as  a  weak  magnet,  some  heat  and
curling  of  the  fingers,  and  this  persisted  decreasingly  for
some  time,  till  after  eight  or  ten  minutes  it  lost  its  newly
gained  strength »  aud  again  became  indifferent.  Miss  Reichel
felt  a  magnetic  rod  twenty  inches  long  when  removed  to
several  rooms  off.  Tbis  was  connected  by  cross  pieces  with
an  iron  armature  of  exactly  the  same  shape  and  size.  When
I  removed  the  latter  from  the  magnet  aud  tried  its  unaided
effect  on  Miss  Ileichers  sensations,  1  was  not  a  little  asto-
nished to  sec  that  when  just  removed  froiu  the  magnet  it
was  perceived  almost  at  the  same  distance,  reacting  mag-
netically upon  the  sensitive  patient  even  as  the  large  mag-
netic rod  itself. I  made  suuilar  experiments  witli  other


120  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

sensitive  persons  at  various  times.  The  cnrling  of  the
fingers  did  not  occur  in  all,  but  the  other  reactions  of  the
magnet  were  met  with  univOTsally,  the  patients  finding  the
force  of  the  latter  conveyed  to  the  iron  in  a  weaker  degree,
yet  still  of  considerable  strength  when  the  magnet  was
powerful.  Therefore  something  must  he  left  behind  in  the
iron  by  the  magnet ;  but  this  is  not  magnetism,  and  at
present  we  are  ignorant  of  its  real  nature.

78.  When,  as  may  be  read  in  all  books  on  animal  mag-
netism, a  glass  of  water  is  placed  between  the  poles  of  a
horse-shoe  magnet,  consequently  in  the  magnetic  current,
and  is,  as  it  is  called,  magnetized,  every  sensitive  patient
can  not  only  at  once  distinguish  it  from  common  water,  but
the  glass  brought  immediately  after  the  magnetization  to
the  hand  of  a  cataleptic  patient,  attracts  this  like  a  magnet,
and  soUcits  it  to  follow,  just  as  I  have  described  in  my
treatise  on  the  peculiar  fundamental  force  of  crystals,  ^^27
and  28.  Something  must  there/ore  have  passed  from  the
magnet  into  the  water  and  remained  bound  there,  something
which  is  not  a  magnet,  which  we  cannot  detect  by  any
known  chemical  means,  and  cannot  be  recognised  by  any  of
the  common  senses.

74.  Our  celebrated  botanist,  Pirof.  Endlicher,  visited  the
patient  Miss  Nowotny,  and  witnessed  a  curious  experiment
performed  by  her  physician.  Prof.  Endlicher  advised  the
latter  to  pass  the  magnet  over  himself,  and  then  to  react
upon  the  patient.  To  bis  surprise,  he  now,  as  had  never
happened  before,  could  attract  the  hand  of  the  patient
with  his  hand,  cause  it  to  attach  itself,  and  follow  every-
where, just  as  the  magnetised  glass  of  water  had  done.  He
retained  this  power  for  almost  a  quarter  of  an  hour ;  by
that  time  it  had  by  degrees  disappeared.  The  same  un-
known  something,  which  had  been  left  in  the  iron  rod  by
the  magnet,  and  had  likewise  passed  into  the  glass  of  water.


OF  THE  ORGANIC  FORCE.


121


must  therefore  have  heen  conveyed  into  the  whole  person  of
the  phi/sieian  ;  it  manifested  itself  here,  from  the  same  cause
to  the  same  effect,  in  his  fingers.

75-  Tliis  experiment  was  subsequently  repeated  in  a  va*
riety  uf  forms ;  in  particular  cases  the  physician  let  his  hand
lie  in  Miss  Nowotny's,  while  he  nibljed  the  back  of  it  with
s  strong  njngnet.  The  patient  here  said  that  she  felt  force
increase  in  the  hand  of  the  physician,  by  starts,  with  each
pass  of  the  magnet,  I  have  repeated  the  experiment  with  '
Miss  MaLx,  and  while  I  rubbed  the  back  of  my  hand  with
the  magnet  as  it  lay  in  hers,  I  received  the  same  ac>count
from  her.  I  here  recal  to  notice  that  this  patient  is  not  6y. .
any  means  a  somnambulist,  nor  ever  was,

76.  In  an  earUer  treatise  (^  29)  1  was  obliged  to  men-
tion*  for  the  sake  of  historical  consistency  in  niy  memoir,
that  a  number  of  ohjeefs  of  all  kinds,  when  rubbed  w  ith  a
magnet,  sul>sef|uently  exercised  a  reaction  upon  the  patient,
which  w^as  indeed  weaker,  but  wholly  of  the  same  kind,  as'
that  wliich  the  magnet  itself  produced  upon  them.  1  spoke
there  merely  of  one  patient ;  since  then,  I  have  had  oppor-
tunities of  testing  many  nervous  patients  in  diflerent  con-
ditions, among  them  many  who  considered  themselves
healthy  and  followed  their  occupations  ;  they  are  easily  de-
tected, for  all  feel  the  magnet  directly  a  single  pass  is  made
over  them  with  the  horse-shoe.  All  ihe^e  persons,  however,
who  may  be  found  in  hundreds  in  a  large  city  by  merely
seeking,  felt  themsrlvcs  affected  exaclhj  in  the  same  way  by
all  the  objects  which  had  been  once  rnbbed  over  with  the
maynet,  only  in  a  weaker  deyree  than  by  the  magnet  itself
Any  one  wlio  chooses  may  confirm  this  in  any  place,  for
there  can  scarcely  be  a  country  village  so  small  as  not  to
eontain  a  nervously  irritable  person,

77.  Since,  then,  it  appears  certain,  and  warranted  by  expe-
fiments  and  trials  of  very  various  kinds,  that  all  persons  wiio
possess  a  certain  degree  of  irritability  of  tlie  nerves  distinctly


122


feel  the  magnet  like  a  cool  or  gently  warm  wind,  without
toucbing  or  seeing  it,  but  on  mere  approximation,  and  by
passes  made  in  their  \icinity ;  furtlier,  that  all  these  feel
in  like  manner,  only  weaker,  dJ  miiterial  objects,  of  whatso-
ever kindj  when  they  have  been  pi^evioiisly  placed  for  some
time  in  the  line  of  the  magnetic  current, — that  is  to  say,
have  been  inngnetised ;  from  these  two  inductions  a  thu-d
immediately  follows,  which  hitherto  there  has  been  an
objection  to  drawing, — nay,  which  some  have,  in  anticipa-
tion, Insisted  with  all  their  mighty  and  which  seems  to  be
especially  an  abomination  to  chemists, — namely,  that  all
mat/nt*tisc(t  ohjecfs  suffer  same  unknoirn  tempontnj  alt  era-
Hon  thrnut/h  ike  fnat/net,  be  this  what  it  may.  Therefore^
magnetised  water  even,  however  stranye  it  may  sound  at
Jirst,  i$  altered  water.

78.  If  we  now  compare  the  effects  of  crystalUc  force,  as
I  have  explained  them  in  my  preceding  treatise,  with  the
above  of  the  magnet  upon  other  bodies,  we  see  that  the
influence  of  both  upon  a  third  body  is  ea'actly  the  same,  and
80  identical,  that  no  character  ea:ists/or  any  kindofdlstinc-
Hon,  I  have  there  sho\ni  that  the  magnetic  force  and  the
rjrystallic  force — each  taken  in  its  totality — are  essentially
diflferent,  and  deport  themselves,  iu  reference  to  their  simi-
larity, like  a  part  to  the  whole;  for  example,  like  the
heating  ray  to  the  sunbeam,  like  sulphuric  acid  to  alum  ;
but  the  modification  which  they  leave  behind  in  other
bodies,  wlien  these  are  withdrawn  from  their  sphere  of
action,  is  exactly  the  same  in  both  cases ;  and  since  these
ai*e  perfectly  exercised  by  the  pail,  that  is,  by  the  ciystallic
force  alone,  we  are  compelled  to  conclude  that  this  is  wholly
effected  in  the  may  net  by  the  cry  staUic  force  residiny  in  it:
iherefore  by  this  pari  o/ its  force.  We  find,  consequently,
(he  magnetic  potes  and  the  crystal  poles  agree  wholly,  and
are  perfectly  alike  in  reference  to  their  reaction  on  (he
animal  nerves.


OF  THB  OEeUiaC  FORCE.


79.  And  now  our  investigations  have  bi-ouglit  us  to  the
portal  of  the  so-called  animal  magnetism,  this  noli-me*
ian^ere  may  now  be  seized.  When  I  passed  a  magnet
down  twice  from  head  to  foot,  over  the  patient,  Miss  Stuj-
mann,  she  lost  consciousness,  and  fell  into  convulsions,
mostly  with  rigid  spasms.  When  I  did  the  same  with  my
larffe  rock'vrystal,  the  same  result  followed.  But  I  could
produce  lite  same  effect,  when,  instead  of  either  of  these,
I  used  tnerely  my  empty  hand.  Therefore  the  crysinllic
force  of  the  may  net  and  the  crystal  must  reside  in  my
kand^

8Uv  To  test  this  further,  1  midertook  a  series  of  re-
searches which  I  will  now  recount.  If  this  were  the  ease,
the  force  of  my  hand  must  protluce  all  the  same  eflecta
which  the  crystallic  force  can  bring  to  pass,  as  I  have  re-
counted them  in  my  last  treatise ;  from  the  similarity  of
the  propeilies  nuist  be  concluded  tlie  difference  or  identity.
Before  all,  it  nmst  he  inquired  whether  and  what  agree-
ment exists  between  the  effect  of  crystals  upon  healthy  and
jtfick  human  bodies,  and  that  of  tlie  hnman  hand  oo  the
same.  The  results  of  passing  my  magnetic  rod  or  my  large
rock-crj^stal  over  a  sensitive  person,  have  already  been
many  times  detailed  ;  I  may  here  confine  myself  to  a  com-
pmsou  of  tlie  two  effects  upon  the  hand  WTicn,  on  those
persons  who  were  sensitive  enough  to  feel  distinctly  the
passage  of  a  large  crystal  along  the  inside  of  the  hand,  I
slowly  cai^ried  my  right  hand,  with  the  fingers'  points
turned  sideways,  down  through  their  left  hands,  in  such  a
manner  that  one  finger  followed  another,  and  thus  so  swept
over  them  that  all  passed  over  \\\  one  and  the  same  line,
which  wiis  flrawn  from  the  wrist  to  the  point  of  the  middle
finger,  I  found  none  who  did  not  feel  tliis  in  the  same  way»
usually  as  a  cool,  more  rarely  as  a  warm  wind,  and  not
only  as  strongly,  luit  usimlly  even  evidently  more  so  than
thev  had  felt  the  passage  of  a  crystal I shall  not  si>eak


124


PHYSICAL  ANB  P«Y 810 LOGICAL  LAWS


of  the  sick  patients,  for  all  whom  1  have  named  iu  my
researches  felt  this  as  remarkably  strongly  as  they  usnally
did  every  magnetic  pass  of  the  hand.  Miss  Muix  and  Miss
Nowotny  felt  each  single  linger.  But  even  among  the
healthy  there  were  not  a  few  who  displayed  a  very  con-
siderable sensibility  to  tliis  reaction  ;  nay,  I  even  found  some
who,  while  they  could  not  detect  the  passage  of  ciystals
with  certainty,  were  so  clearly  aware  of  tlic  successive  passage
of  the  fingers,  that  they  could  always  m^curately  state  it,
with  the  face  turned  away,  I  am  empowered  to  refer  by
name  to  my  friend,  M.  Cai'l  Schnh,  here.  lie  is  a  healthy
and  strong  mun,  and  felt  the  jiass  of  the  crystals  very  dis-
tinctly. When  I,  unnecessarily,  and  against  my  own  rule,
bound  his  eyes^  and  carried  the  raw  of  fitigers  of  my  right
hand  slowly  down  over  his  left,  he  telt  this  so  strongly  and
so  distinctly,  like  a  crystal,  that  he  could  accurately  mark
each  single  pass,  and  each  time  spoke  precisely  when  my
fingers  bad  passed  over  a  third  part  of  the  distance.  Mr,
Studer,  whom  I  have  ah^eady  mentioned,  perceived  this  just
as  distinctly  ;  and  many  other  pei'sons,  among  whom  1  have
permission  to  name  one  of  the  most  vigorous,  well-inured,
and  tinest  men,  who  has  traversed  Pei-sia  and  Kurdistan,
and  twice  penetrated  from  Egj'pt  into  the  heart  of  Asia,
therefore  is  a  rare  example  of  an  u'on  constitution,  namely,
Mr,  Kotschy,  sometime  fcllovv-traveller  with  Mr.  Knsseger.
The  effect  showed  itself  more  strongly  upon  him  ;  the  more
agreeable  temperature  of  the  air  was  increased  as  soon  as  it
became  cold.  The  fingers^  there/ore,  act  upon  the  nerves
f^xnctly  like  a  mothrairli/  strong  crystal,

81,  I  next  wished  to  undertiike  the  compai^ative  exami-
nation of  the  somxes  of  the  two  forces  as  io  the  capal>ility
of  being  conducted  thmngh  other  bodies.  I  made  Miss
Sturmann  grasp  one  end  of  a  German  silver  conductor  in
lier  right  hand,  without  having  previously  touched  it  myself,
1  first  allowed  her  a  little  time  to  accustom  herself  to  the


OT  THE  OROANrC  POHCl.


125


feel  of  the  conductor ;  then  1  placed  upon  the  other  end
the  slightly  moistened  tips  of  the  fingers  of  my  right  hand,
InstaDtaneoiisIy  she  experienced  a  warm  sensation  in the
part in contact with her  hand, whicli  passed upwards
through  this  and  ascended  to  Iier  elbow, I  placed  the
five  fingers  of  my  other  hand  n]>on  it ;  the  sensation  was
strikingly  strengthened,  and  now  propagated  to  the  shoulder,
I  took  my  fingers  away  ; the  sensation  rapidly  decreased,
not,  however,  disappearing  suddenly  ;  I  put  my  fingers  on
tlvid  off  alternately  ;  the  increase  and  decrease  of  the  sensa-
tions produced  kept  pace. Another  day I  induced  Dr.
Lippieh  to  do  the  same  ; his  fingers  produced  the  same
effect. I  made  the  same  experiment  with  Miss  Maix. I
made  her  gi*asp  the  same  conductor,  without  my  interfe-
rence, and,  after  some  pause  to  accustom  her  to  the  metal,
laced  first  my  five,  then  ten,  fingers  upon  it.  The  warm  sen-
station  appeared  and  disappeared  as  I  put  my  fingers  on  and
took  them  off;  with  all  ten  it  was  so  strong  that  it  ascemled
through  the  whole  arm  to  the  head. I  bade  her  physician
make the  same  experiment ; he  did  so,  with  the  same
IMttlts ; however,  although  he  was  ten  years  younger  than
■Wfself,  the  eflect  of  his  fingers  was  evidently  weaker  than
that  of  minc» By  accident,  Father  Lambert,  of  the  Fran-
ciscans, her  confessor,  was  present ; I  bade  him  try  his
power. She  found  his  power  e*|ual  to  mine. I  also  de-
sired  the matron.  Miss Barbara  Pschicrl,  to  try. Her
fingers  produced  the  same  effect,  but much  weaker,  than
those  of  men. I  repeated  this  experiment  another  time,
with  the modification of  taking  an  iron  wire,  five  feet
long,  instead  of  the  German  silver  conductor. One  end
was  grasped  by  the  patient,  accustomed  to  it  for  a  few
minutes ;  then  the  other  end  was  touched  with  my  five
fingers,  and  the  patient  immediately  said  she  felt  a  sensa-
tion of  a  flow  of  strong  heat :  wlien  I  placed  t^en  fingers  on
it  the  sensation  increased,  whde  every  time  I  let  the  wii*e


126


PHYSICAL  Al


TOT/OOtCAl


.AW8


out  of  my  hand


?  petit


lisappeared  again. This  was  tested  by

ions* A


'  that,  I  had  the  ten  fir


of  I


numerous

young  lady,  her  sister,  who  was  also  weak  and  nen^ous,
placed,  instead  of  nune,  upon  the  end  of  the  wire  ;  the
effect  w as  remaikably  weak.  The  ten  fingers  of  another  girl
were  added :  the  effect  was  observably  stronger,  hut  all  the
twenty  together  tlid  not  act  nearly  so  strongly  as  five  of  my
fingers,  although  I  have  long  been  grey  and  bald.  I  also
tested  these  conditions  wnth  a  copper  wire.  It  w^as  ten
feet  long,  and  also  conducted  the  force,  but  more  slowly
and  rather  more  weakly  than  the  iron  wire.  The  same  ex-
periments, varied  in  many  ways,  were  repeated  by  rae,
with  the  same  results,  on  Miss  Reicheh  The  effect  was
very  strongly  exhibited  in  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer.  But  even
the  healthy  Mr.  Studer  possessed  so  much  sensibility,  that
he  clearly  felt  the  vffeci  of  my  hands  upon  met^l  wires.
Tt  follows  from  all  these  experiments,  that  the  force  of  the
hitman  hand  mat/  be  conducted  throui/h  othtr  bodies,  exact hj
like  the  vn/stallic  force,  and  that  these  bodies  are  capable
of  conductivq  the  two  forces  in  the  same  way.

82,  I  now  wislied  to  investigate  the  capability  of  accu-
mulation. First,  in  Miss  Stunnann,  1  placed  the  German
silver  conductor  near  her,  and  let  it  remain  a  quarter  of  an
hour.  Then  1  told  her  to  grasp  it,  and  to  accustom  her  full
hand  to  it.  She  laid  it  down  near,  and  left  it,  I  now  held
it  for  some  seconds  in  my  hand,  and  again  laid  it  down.
When  she  grasped  it  again,  she  felt  itw^arni,  and  so  strongly
chargeiL  that  the  well-known  sensation  which  the  crystals
had  produced  under  other  cii^cum stances,  ascended  along
the  whole  hand  n|)  to  the  elbow-joint.  This  w^as  of  course
repeated,  for  confirmation,  under  different  modifications.
Her  physician,  l)r,  Lippich,  made  a  similar  experiment.  At
my  request,  two  exactly  similar  porcelain  saucers  were  placed
on  a  distant  table ;  one  he  left  untouched,  the  other  he  held
for  a  short  time  in  his  fingers,  and  then  laid  it  down,  where


OP  THE  ORGANIC  FORCE.  127

it  remained  a  few  iniautes. Tliey  were  now  brought  to  the
patients She  named  the  saucer  which  had  l>een  subjected
t£ft  the  eftect  of  contact  of  the  fingers,  with  the  greatest  ease
and  certainty. After  about  ten  minutes  the  eftect  had  dis-
appeared, and  the  two  saucers  felt  exactly  the  same. I  re-
peated the  experiment  with  the  conductor,  in  the  same  way,
on  Miss  Maix. It  afforded  perfectly  similar  results;  it  was
dmrged  by  my  fingers,  and  the  charge  which  had  been  foimd
to  endure  five  minutes  by  Miss  Sturraaun,  was  detected^
gra<lually  decreasing,  for  twenty  minutes,  by  the  more  sen-
sitive Miss  Maix. The  eSect  was  [lerfectly  similar  in  both,
a  sensation  of  warmth  ascending  from  the  hand  to  the  arm,
•nd  agreeing  completely  witli  that  which  tlie  rock  crystal
had  produced  under  similar  circumstances. I  found  just
the  same  in  Miss  R<^iehel  and  Miss  Atzraannsdorfer  some
months  later* But  a  glass  of  water  ever  remained  the  most
remarkable. \Yhcn  this  was  taken  in  the  hand,  enclosed
below  in  the  fingers,  the  other  hand  placed  above,  and  the
inside  also  closed  by  the  fingers,  and  thus  held  for  some
ten  minutes,  it  acquired  for  sensitive  nervous  [latients  the
smell,  the  taste,  and  all  the  remarkable  properties  of  the  so-
called  magnetised  water,  which  those  may  make  a  foolish
outcry  against  who  have  never  investigated  the  matter,  to
which  number  I  myself  once  belonged,  but  of  which  all  who
have  examined  it  and  seen  its  effect  can  only  speak  with
astonishment. This  water  wholly  agreed  in  its  essential
properties  with  that  which  had  been  treated  with  the  magnet
or  with  crystals;  therefore  received  an  abundant  charge  from
the  fingers  and  hands,  of  that  peculiar  force  residing  in
them,  and  retained  it  for  some  little  time. Finally,  I  could,
without  selection,  take  any  p<38sihle  object  in  my  liand,  keep
it  there  for  some  time,  and  give  it  to  the  patients  :  they  then
aflBrmed,  of  all  which  they  liad  previously  had  in  their
hands,  that  they  had  undergone  the  same  change  as  when
they  had  been  rubbed  with  magnet  or  crystal  poles ;  and


128  PffYSiCALAND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

this  whether  they  knew  of  niy  interference,  or  it  had  been
kept  se<Tct,  From  all  these  things  it  undoubtedly  folh^ws,
that  the  force  of  the  hands  possesses  the  same  capability  of
accumulation  as  the  crystallic  force,

83.  That  this  charge /7rat/wa%  ilisappeai*$  aqain^  appears
from  w4iat  has  been  stated  already,  and  recjuircs  no  especial
pit)of.  From  these  two  things  it  further  follows,  that  in  the
bodies  which  acquire  a  charge,  and  lose  it  gradually,  must
reside  the  same  potver  of  coercion  for  the  force  of  the  hands
which  they  have  shown  for  tfte  crystallic  force.  The  magni-
tude of  the  charye  of  other  bodies  increased  with  the  strength
of  the  liand,  and  the  capacity  for  chat  ye  displayed  no  limits
but  the  proportionate  strength  of  the  charging  body.

84.  The  question  whether  there  exists  a  duaUsni  of  this
force  in  animal  bodies,  as  in  the  crystals,  required  to  be
subjected  to  comparative  tests.  Crystals  are  known  to  pos-
sess, in  ciystallographical  respects,  several  axes,  main  and
secondary,  and  in  the  compound  systems  several  main  axes.
WTjen  I  tried  the  sensitiveness  of  the  patients  on  them,  they
all,  as  I  have  already  stated  in  the  preceding  treatise,  after
a  sliort  investigation  foimd  me  the  main  axes  and  its  pole^, —
those  two  points,  namely,  at  which  the  action  of  the  crys-
tallic force  on  the  tips  of  their  fingers  was  most  strongly
and  strikingly  concentrated.  But  in  many,  esixxially  iii
sulphuret  of  iixin,  selenite,  fluor  spur,  heavy  spar,  sphene,
granite,  &c.^  they  w^ould  also  discover  other  axes,  the  poles
of  which  were  much  less  strongly  o[)|>osed,  but  still  gave
evidence  of  a  marked  dualism.  AU  the  patients  agreed  in
these  perceptions ;  and  a  selenite,  which  I  t(X»k  from  one  to
the  other  in  succession,  and  allowed  them  to  feel  between
the  fingers  of  both  hands  as  it  lay  upon  a  table,  aflbrded  me
Uie  same  results  in  all :  each  described  a  strong  main  axis»
with  its  stronger  and  weaker  |M)le,  and  far  weaker  secondary
axes,  anil  all  at  exactly  the  same  points  and  lines :  very  fre-
quently the  main  axis  was  not  the  longest,  but  a  shorter*


•


k^i


Of  THK  ORGANIC  FORCK.


120


iciilarly  in  selenitc ;  and  this  agreement  among  all  these
mutually  unknown  observers  was  here  the  best  possible
warrant  of  the  reab^ty  and  correctness  of  their  statements.
Mareover,  they  may  readily  be  tested  elsewhere,  for  no
populous  town  can  be  withont  suitable  nervous  patients.
But  even  healthy  sensitive  pei-sons,  Mr,  Sluder  in  particular^
cx)uld,  without  mnch  trouble,  disc  over  the  poles  of  crystals
with  his  fingers.  The  axes  and  poles  always  coincided  with
the  fixes  and  poles  of  crystallograplty,  and  thus  it  became
more  than  probalile  that  the  crystallic  force  takes  part  in
{if  it  does  not  wholly  etfect)  the  construction  of  crystals.
Perhaps  it  is  to  crystals  what  the  vittd  force  is  to  organic
stnictiu^s.  Yet  I  will  not  venture  into  conjectures  here,
but  hold  to  that  which  displays  itself  as  fact:  the  crystallic
force  exists  in  a  polai*  condition  in  crystals,  and  contenipo-
nineously  in  several  axes  of  a  crystal,  only  in  unequal  degrees
of  strength.

86.1  next  met  with  similar  conditions  in  animal  lile  itficlf.
It  lias  been  asstmied  that  in  man  there  is  a  main  axis,  from
above  downwards,  and  the  brain  and  the  genitals  have  been
regarded  as  the  opposite  poles.  If  I  xentnred  to  draw  a  con-
clusion from  observations  of  the  so-called  animal  magnetism,
I  should  say  that  it  is  not  the  main  axis,  but  a  secondary.  In
the  first  place,  it  has  been  show^n  above  that  patients  on
whom  the  magnet  acts,  bear  that  position  w^orst  of  all  which
gives  a  longitudinal  direction  in  the  magnetic  parallel ;  the
body  becomes  thus  magnetically  differenced  according  to  the
latitude,  which  it  appears  unable  to  bear.  We  know  of
something  similar  in  exposure  to  cold ;  when  it  comes  late-
raUy,  it  is  at  once  much  more  injurious  and  powerful  than
when  it  comes  in  front  or  behind.  This  has  become  more
evident  to  me,  through  other  circumstances,  which  I  may  here
notice.  When  I  gave  the  very  sensitive  Miss  Maix  my  right
hand,  and  placed  it  in  her  left,  she  felt  it  in  the  same  manner
as  when  I  placed  upright  on  her  hand  a  little  magnetic  rod,
or  selenitc  four  inches  long,  both  with  tlie  northward  pole,

K


in  PHTSIOLOOlCAt


IMIViImi  I  ;(ii\e  her  my  left  liand,  slie  found  it  very  mncli

H  le, If  I  laid  my  right  hand  in  her  left,  and,  at

1^  ^ciUJbi'  nmi\  my  left  in  her  riglit,  as  is  usual  when  one
fP^ltHMli  hcAh  tiands  at  once  to  a  friend,  she  said  it  seemed
1^  ki^r  io  mn  m  in  the  "  ring-game,"  (the  name  given  in
ViiHlUH  111  lilting)  11])  the  right  arm,  through  the  heart  and
•haukHH'i*,  dtiwii  tlie  left  arm  again,  and  tln-ough  me  till  it
Khu^umI  brr  again,  and  thus  incessantly  around  in  a  circle
ttUMit  immfully  to  hiT,  and  making  her  giddy.  When  I  now
(itcimihI  my  hands,  so  that  my  right  was  in  her  right,  and
my  left  in  Iut  left,  she  would  not  bear  it,  and  said  that  it
ptXHlu(M^d  Huch  a  painful  sensation  of  a  strange  kind  of  con-
lout  nnd  Hirife  in  her  arms  and  through  the  heart,  a  sort  of
WttV0  np  tht?  arras  nnd  down  again,  that  it  was  altogether
iniUp[H>rtahle.  And  after  she  had  snatched  her  hands  from
iMino,  nhe  HO  decidedly  refused  to  give  them  a  second  time,
that  I  wan  oljliged  to  give  np  the  critical  repetition  which  I
iilwayn  niiido  in  all  other  experiments.*

•  TUu  llarcm  ha»  been  very  fortunate  in  8onie  of  his  eAses*  The
pbitfiainonoii  lierc  noticed  is  a  very  rare  one,  and  many  casei  of  sick
tiHiiUfep  nnd  many  others  well  mMmeriscd,  might  be  most  closely  ex-
iHiiun)  without  yielding  the  facts  stated  in  this  paragraph.  Nature  is
fflNidy  til  indulge  her  ^otartes  with  abnndauee  of  truths,  but  they  are  not
IMiMird  out  at  once  to  even  the  most  industrious,  the  most  ingenious,
and  llu*  nu*i»t  closely  logical  investigators.  Man  most  wait  his  oppor-
tiMill>'t  and  garner  patiently.  By  these  bints,  can  it  be  supposed  that  a
lluiiiit  i*  entertained  as  to  the  facts  detailed  ?  By  no  means.  But  while,
•n  (hv  oaf  hand,  there  is  a  desire  to  show  that  there  must,  in  the  present
ilatK  of  our  knowledge,  be  a  vagueness,  inseparable  from  the  very  con-
llilioriA  of  inquiries  into  organic  laws,  in  arriving  at  a  conclusion  on
•noh  M  matter  a«  that  of  llie  polarities  of  the  two  sides  of  the  body ;  on
lllf  othrrjhcrc  is  abundant  reason  to  bcheve  that,  although  a  hundred
ini|tiirer«  may  not  find*  may  not  be  able  lo  corroborate  the  accuracy  of
iht  Baron's  statcraenU,  there  arc  facts  enough  to  prove  the  existence  of
iW  eliaa  of  phenomena  which  must  in  time  prove  all  his  positions.
lUrein  lies  the  value  of  his  logic  ;  of  his  patient,  unwearying  powers  of
iuvv»tiga(ion.  Stnrms  may  arise,  clouds  may  darken  the  horizon,  the
fj'jinmon  ken  may  not  see  the  progress  of  the  vessel  he  is  steering — but
aJlo  tt  guided  by  a  genius,  and  must  emerge  from  amid  the  dark  doubts


I


Since,  then,  it  clcai'ly  results  from  all  tliese  experi-
ments that  it  is  by  no  means  indifferent  which  of  the  hands  is
offered  to  a  nervous  patient  in  the  viirious  contacts,  it  follows
with  certainty  that  the  two  hands  are  not  in  the  same  con-
dition in  reference  to  the  hidden  power  that  resides  in  them;
and,  if  I  do  not  altogether  misimderstand  the  last  experi-
inent,  there  existed  a  kind  of  coni'se,  like  that  of  the  galvanic
current,  from  my  left  hand  to  her  right,  and  onward  from
her  left  to  my  riglit — a  motion  which  could  not  force  its
way,  or,  meeting  wth  considerable  olistacles,  tried  to  break
through  in  spite  of  them,  when  I  placed  the  left  hand  in  her
left^nd  the  right  iu  her  right.  This  dtOerence  of  the  two
band.-i;  can  hr.  nothing  else  but  the  well-known  polariisation,


ol  l^actAuce  iato  the  light  of  truth.  There  ars  personB  who  may  exhibit
inui«i£Qtly  the  decided  fiymptoma  of  Misa  Maix's  case — perhflps  Borae
for  m  few  week8»  lome  for  moDths,  and  there  the  pectiHarities  may
finlili.  Tlie  facta  are  not,  however,  the  less  valuable.  They  are  to  be
ll0lld  for  useful  pur])oaei.  I  have  examined  mnny  impressionable  nub'
jecU,  in  order  to  witness  the  p!ienomena  determiiuTig  the  fact  of  the
opposite  polarities  of  the  two  aides  of  the  body,  1  am  conviuced  of  iti
existence,  as  I  know  there  are  yea  and  uo»  positive  and  negative,  plui  1
»tid  minus,  attraction  and  repulsion,  &c.  But  though  !  liaTe  seen  the
|>benomena  slightly  hut  clearly  defined  occn«ioiially,  and  but  rarely^
smong  tho«e  I  hate  had  under  my  own  Ireatnienl,  I  have  never  had  the
liarou^a  good  fortune  to  witness  the  striking  facts  he  describe.^.  In
one  of  Dr.  Elliotson'B  cases,  however,  I  »&w  an  eicample  even  more  re-
tnarkahie  than  that  of  Miss  Maix.  It  occurred  in  a  young  man  subject
to  epilepsy,  and  I  refer  the  reader  to  some  details  of  it  which  may  be
found  in  the  second  volume  of  the  ZoUi,  at  pp.  53,  215,  216 ;  and  in
the  third  volume  at  p.  53.  The  young  man  could  not  suffer  his  feetj
ankles,  knees,  hands,  or  elbows,  to  touch  each  olhcr.  lie  could  not
endure  the  application  of  a  fiuger  of  hiu  right  hand  lightly  to  the  lefi
»ide  of  his  face,  or  any  part  of  that  aide  of  bis  body  ;  nor  could  he  allow  i
any  finger  of  his  left  hand  to  be  ever  m  lightly  applied  to  any  jiart  right
of  the  mesial  Hue  of  hi^  body.  If  Dr.  Elliotson  touched  with  his  left
hand  young  A»'s  right  hand,  he  in^^tantly  showed  signs  of  uneaamessi  ,
and  the  same  if  his  right  hand  were  placed  in  contact  witli  any  part  of
"ite  left  side  of  the  young  man's  hudy.  Many  of  Dr.  Elliotson*s  observa-
tions and  details  of  facts  given  iu  the  volumes  of  the  Zoist  arc  curiously,
because  unintentionally,  corroborative  of  the  Baron's  facts.


Mm


132


PHYSICAL  AWD  PHYSTOLOaiCAL  LAWS


such  as  we  are  acquainted  with  in  the  magnet,  and  has  been
long  known  to  us  in  crystals*  In  this  point  of  view^  the
main  axis  passes  transversely  through  man,  and  indeed
through  all  animals  ;  the  longitudinal  axis  is  to  he  regarded
only  as  a  secxindary  axis.  In  reahiy,  w^e  are  transverse,  and
composed  of  two  symmetrical  halves.  All  cerebral  organs,
organs  of  sense,  masticating  apparatus,  arms  and  hands,
testicles,  and  feet,  stand  transversely  opposed,  and  in  this
direction  principally  are  we  universally  polar.

87.  I  subsequently  investigated  these  interesting  condi*
tions  in  the  same  manner  in  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  The
same  results  were  presented  in  the  same  way  as  those
just  detailed ;  when  I  took  her  two  opposite  hands,  she  felt
the  current  up  the  right  arm  and  down  the  left  still  more
strongly  than  Miss  Maix.  When  I  gave  her  my  crossed
hands,  scarcely  a  minute  elapsed  before  she  w^as  so  affected
that  she  l>ecame  quite  ill  When  1  gave  into  her  hand  one
of  the  German  silver  conductors  on  a  long  brass  wire,  and
touched  this  with  my  right  hand,  she  had  the  pecidiar  se-
condary sensation,  w^hich  I  liad  also  met  with  in  Miss  Stur-
mann,  that  this  body  seemed  to  her  to  become  light,  almost
like  dowm;  on  tlie  other  hand,  when  I  touched  it  with  the  left,
it  became  heavy,  and  seemingly  much  heavier  than  it  naturally
was.  Without  wishing  to  enter  more  minutely  into  this  at
this  moment,  I  nevertheless  must  mention  it,  insomuch
that  it  furnishes  another  character  to  the  opposition  of  the
hands,  in  a  kind  of  attraction  and  repulsion.  Yet,  different
as  she  found  my  hands  in  their  effect  upon  her,  she  per-
ceived no  less  difference  in  her  own.  When  I  placed  in  one
of  her  hands  things  like  iron  pyrites,  selenite,  reguline  metals,
charcoal,  &c.,  they  produced  sensations  very  unlike  those
which  they  caused  w  hen  I  bade  her  transfer  them  into  the
other,  although  no  kind  of  weakening  of  one  or  other  half  of
the  body  in  any  way  existed  in  her.

88.  I  have  very  recently  gone  through  an  investigation  of
thii  particular  with  Miss  Reichel,  and  traced  it  to  further  de-


OT  THE  ORGANIC  FOECE.


velopment  than  in  any  of  the  former  sensitive  persons.  She
found  not  only  her  right  hand,  but  the  whole  right  side,  from
head  to  foot,  opjx)sed  in  all  its  properties  to  the  left ;  nay,
the  mere  approximation  towards  her  of  my  right  or  left  hand
affected  her  in  an  essentially  different  manner.  I  shall
detail  this  more  fully  in  a  subsequent  treatise  ;  here,  where
we  are  concerned  merely  with  the  proof  by  facts  of  a  mag-
netic polar  difference  in  the  transverse  direction  in  the
human  body,  I  must  be  content  to  state  that  the  observa-
tknis  on  Miss  Maix  were  repeated,  found  the  same,  and  con-
firmed anew.

89.  It  appears  from  all  these  investigations,  that  all  the
symmetrically  placed  organs  of  the  animal  body,  so  far  as
they  were  here  investigated,  but  especially  the  hands,  exhi^
biied  a  difference  which  is  earned  by  a  viagnetic  polar
opposition,  and  thai  consequenily  a  dualism  of  the  funda-
mental force  now  under  consideration  exists  between  them^
wholly  in  the  nay  that  ne  have  found  it  to  occur  in  aystals.

90.  I  have  shown  above,  ^41  and  ^  53,  that  the  terres-
trial magnetism  has  no  observable  influence  upon  crystals,
and  not  the  shghtest  directing  power.  The  same  holds
good  in  relation  to  the  force  of  the  hands.  The  force  which
I  exert  actively  with  my  hands  is  always  equally  effective  in
all  places  and  positions  that  I  assume.  Neither  can  I  {)er-
^ve  any  influence  upon  me  passively  :  I  have  tried  lying
down  to  sleep  in  various  directions,  but  to  whatever  quarter
of  the  heavens  I  turned,  I  slept  equally  well :  and  tlie  per-
fectly healthy  man,  who  perhaps  never  is  sensitive,  im-
doulitedly  never  feels  the  least  influence  of  the  terrestrial
magnetism,  however  actively  and  variously  this  re-acts  upon
the  sick.  Neither  can  I  detect  in  animals  anything  which
indicates  the  least  dependence  upon  terrestrial  magnetism.  If
a  free  sense  were  devoted  to  this  influence,  we  might  expect
to  tind  it  in  larva^,  which  are  blind.  As  silk  is  cultivated  on
ray  estates,  1  had  many  opportunities  of  obsening  the  de-
portment of  these  so  low  organisms  in  all  stages  and  con-


PHYSICAL  XyV  rHTSlOLOGICAL  LAWS


ditious.  Yet,  even  in  spi lining  and  clianging  into  the
chrysalis,  the  animal  never  selected  any  definite  direction,
but  placed  its  ccxroon  irregularly  in  all  possible  directions ;
not  even  a  majority  exhibited  a  prefei-ence  for  any  part icnlar
direction  daring  then*  dormant  state.  Therefore,  the  crys-
tallic  force  and  the  force  of  the  hands  agree  perfectly  in  this
insensibility  to  the  univei^sal  magnetic  force  of  the  earth.

91.  In  refereiK'c  to  the  remarkalile  direct  attmction  of
the  patients'  hands,  exerted  so  stranguly  by  the  magnet  and
crystals,  it  has  ah^eady  been  stated,  ^  74,  that  a  man's  hand
actually  effects  this,  but  only  when  it  has  previously  been
mbbed  for  some  time  with  a  strong  magnet  i  he  could  not
do  it  by  his  own  force.  But  it  has  also  appeared  that  he
was  not  very  strong  ui  magnetic  force.  At  least,  Miss
Maix  had  found  his  appreciably  w  eaker  than  those  of  Father
Lambert  and  mine.  I  neglected,  myself,  to  make  a  proper
trial  upon  the  cataleptic  Miss  Nowotny  at  the  right  time,
because  I  was  not  then  sufficiently  awai"e  of  the  value  of  it.
On  the  other  hand,  I  have  seen  this  phenomenon  in  Miss
Reichel  and  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  many  times,  in  the
liigher  stiiges  of  their  diseases,  and  in  particular  in  the
former,  in  the  presence  of  many  other  persons*  In  the
catalepsy  which  usually  preceded  her  convulsive  fits,  her
hand  followed  pretty  readily  the  fingers  of  my  vigorous
young  man,  as  also  my  own.  I  have  often  made  her  rise
from  the  seat  in  a  state  of  unconsciousness,  and  follow  my
fingei^  a  considerable  distance  along  the  room.  Even  when
I  held  before  her,  in  this  condition,  thmgs  w^hich  possessed
no  polar  distribution  of  their  own,  such  as  a  piece  of  chalk
cut  to  a  point,  I  could  lift  up  her  hand  with  it,  and  if  she,
by  chance,  stood  up  in  the  cataleptic  state,  in  her  room,  I
could  le4id  her  some  pac^  on.  In  this  case  it  w^as  the
force  of  ray  fingers  conducted  through  the  chalk,  and  con-
centrated at  its  point,  (according  to  the  laws  developed
abovc»  §  81)  where  the  chalk  represented  the  sum  of  myfin-
gci-s,  antl  so  perfectly  took  on  their  force  and  action^  that  it


d


OK  THE  ORGANIC  FORCK.


135


attrm^ted  aud  drew  on  the  hund  of  the  patient,  when  I
walked  backward  with  it^  just  as  my  fingers  liad  theniselvra
dune.  I  observed  this  attraction  by  my  fingers  in  the  same
way  during  Miss  Atzniannsdorfer's  attacks.  Miss  Stur-
inauii's  attraction  I  did  not  witness  myself,  but  it  occurred
in  exactly  the  same  degree  in  her,  and  I  can  trust  the
statements  of  her  pliysician,  Professor  Liiipich,  as  fully  as
my  own  experience.  From  all  these  difiereut  discoveries,  it
is  certain  that  a  mecfmnically  ativaeilveforve.acthig  ujwn  the
hands  of  cataleptic paitettis^  reuides  hi  ike  hands  andjinffers  \
of  healthy  men ^  just  as  in  the  poles  of  cnjslah,

92.  But  the  hnninous  phenomena,  wliich  I  have  still  to  *
enter  into,  fonu  a  brilliant  point  in  this  comparative  exami-
nation. As  I  saw  Miss Reichel  for  the  first  time  after [
violent  spasms,  witli  closed  eyes,  playing  in  a  sort  of  half!
sleep  with  the  magnet  flame,  which  always  gave  her  great  [
pleasure,  I  interposed  my  out*stretclietl  hand,  in  the  darkness^
lictwecn  the  magnet  and  the  patient. She  inmied lately  |
l>egan  to  play  in  the  same  manner  with  the  tips  of  my '
fingers,  and  to  talk  to  the  bystanders  of  five  little  flames,
which  leaped  up  and  down  in  the  air. iShe  did  not  perceive
my  hand  itself,  and  took  the  movement  of  my  fingers,  on
the  j)oints  of  wliich  she  saw  the  flames,  for  an  independent
movement  of  the  latter. All present,  one  after  another,
raised  their  hands,  and  each  desired  to  know  whether  fij^^
issued  from  his  fingers. The  patient  saw  it  on  all  men's
fingers,  more  or  less  strongly ; but  not  one  single  girrs
fingers  emitted  sufficient  light,  or  at  most  but  a  feeble
luminosity,  and  her  own  none. As  long  as  Miss  Reichel
remained  ill,  these  experiments  were  often  repeated,  fre-
quently for  the  alleviation  of  her  spasms,  or  even  for  the
mere  anmsemcnt  of  many  spectators. But  w^hen  she  had  <
got  well,  it  appeared,  as  had  not  been  reported  at  all  befoi'e,
that  not  only  dming  sickness,  but  in  health,  slic  saw  the
magnet  flames,  the  crystallic  light,  and  the  tlames  on  the
hand,  whenever  it  was  dark  enough. In  fiicrt,  she  had  pos-


13«


PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS


sessed  tliis  power  fi"om  lier  earliest  age ;  even  as  a  child  her
mother  had  often  hfted  her  ii]>,  to  let  her  conviDce  herself
tliat  the  imaginary  fire  which  she  often  cried  out  ahout,  did
not  renlly  exist  on  the  nails  and  hooks  sticking  in  the  walls.
She  even  had  two  sisters  who  in  like  manner  saw  hmvinous
appearances,  in  all  places,  of  which  other  people  could  per-
ceive nothing.  Now,  while  I  am  writing,  she  serves  me
daily  for  investigations  which  1  am  making  in  this  subject,
on  the  connexion  with  electricity  and  magnetism,  and  of
which  we  shall  see  after  a  time,  from  my  reports,  to  what
conclusions  this  has  led,  and  will  fnrtlier  lead.  I  was  thus
j)laccd  in  a  position  to  examine  the  luminous  phenomena  on
the  hands  in  the  coolest  and  most  comprehensive  manner
during  a  long  period,  and  I  am  still  daily  continuing  this
examination.

93.  The  investigation  on  Miss  Atzniannsdorfer  gave
essentially  the  same  results,  only  she  saw  all  the  flame-like
appearances  larger  :  while  the  former  patient,  according  to
the  degree  of  her  diseased  excitement,  saw  the  finger  flames
from  a  little  less  to  a  little  more  than  an  inch  long,  the
latter  saw  them,  in  the  dark,  two  inches  and  more  in  length  ;
thus  almost  the  whole  lengtli  of  a  finger.  1  shall  give,  with
one  of  the  succeeding  essays,  drawings  of  these  beautiful
ap|H?arances,  as  I  obtained  them  from  Miss  RcicheK  Here
the  purpose  is  fidfilled  by  the  facts,  warranted  by  several
observers,  that  J^ery  brushes  of  lufhi  issue  from  the  points
ef  the  fingers  of  healthy  men,  in  the  same  ma  finer  as  frofn
the  poles  of  crystals,

94.  I  have  now  compared  the  properties  of  the  crystallic
force,  without  exception,  as  enumerated  in  my  earliest  trea-
tise, with  the  force  that  the  human  hand  is  capable  of  exer-
cising :  the  parallel  between  the  two  is,  as  is  evident,  com-
plete, and  the  agreement  of  the  two  forces,  in  tlieir  general
expression,  so  perfect,  that  they  evidently  become  identified.
For  the  sake  of  clearness  I  here  give  the  principal  rcsulUs
seriatim,  in  a  compressed  forn)  : —


Of  THK  0R0AT91C  FORCE,

Hands,  passed  over  the  sensitive,  act  upon  them  like  crystal
poles,  §  79.

Tlie  force  that  here  niles  is  condnctible  through  all
bodies,  like  the  force  of  the  ciystal,  ^  80.

It  may  be  accumulated  on  other  matters,  Uke  the  others,  ^81,

It  disappears  from  the  charged  substance  in  a  short  time,
like  the  other,  ^  S2.

Matter  has  a  coercive  power  over  it,  as  over  the  other,  §  83,

The  capacity  of  bodies  to  receive  a  charge  is,  for  this;  like
that  for  the  other,  ^  83,

It  has  a  polar  arrangement  in  the  human  body,  as  the
other  has  in  crystals,  ^  S9.

It  is  as  httle  influenced  by  terrestrial  magnetism  as  the
other,  ^  90,

It  exerts  mechanical  attraction  on  the  hands  of  the  sen-
sitive, like  the  other,  ^91.  It  displays  luminosity  of  the
same  natiu-e  and  power  as  the  other,  §  93.

And  thus  we  come  back  to  the  starting  point  of  this
section,  ^79,  namely,  that  the  same  force  really  resides  in
the  human  hands  as  manifests  itself  in  crystals ;  that  thus
the  crysfallic  force  and  the  so-calfed  animal  inagnelisni
are  thorouijhhj  identicaf^  and  (here/ore  that  the  same  laws
which  rule  the  fanner  are  also  fully  applicable  la  the  latter,

RETROSPECT.

a.  Not  only  crystals  exert  a  peculiar  kind  of  exciting  jwwer
upon  healthy  and  diseased  sensitive  persons,  but  the  like
occurs  with  the  terrestrial  magnetism.  This  is  so  strong,
that  highly  sensitive  patients  can  only  sustain  it  in  a  certain
direction,  namely,  when  placed  with  the  head  to  the  north
and  the  feet  to  the  south,  and  that  cveiy  other  dii'ection  is
jyainful ;  in  many  cases,  that  from  west  to  east  wholly  insup-
portable, and  even  dangerous,

b.  All  magnetic,  crystalHc,  and  similar  re-aetions  on  such
ner\'onsly  excitable  pei*sons,  are  essentially  moditied  by  altera-
tion of  their  direction  in  regard  to  the  terrestrial  magnetisin.


138*


PHYSICAL  LAI


c.  Pure  iron,  devoid  of  carbon,  and  which  contains  no
intermixture  of  pm-ticles  of  steel,  nibbed  with  a  magnet  and
then  removed  from  it,  does  not,  as  is  well  known,  acquire  any
pennaneut  magnetism;  but  it  nevertheless  acquires  a  pecuhar
force,  by  means  of  which  it  becomes  capable  of  exerting  a
distinct  and  powerful  action  on  very  sensitive  persons.

(L  The  magnet  imparts  this  miknown  something,  not
merely  to  iron,  but  to  all  other  metals,  stones,  salts,  water,
plants,  and  animals,  even  to  living  men  ;  in  short,  to  all
soHd  material  objects,  without  exception.

e.  This  something  acts  in  all  objects  either  immediately
charged  with  it,  or  rendered  active  by  the  so-called  distri-
bution, on  the  sensitive  nervous  persons,  exactly  in  the  same
manner  as  the  magnet  itself  and  as  crystals,  and  must
therefore  be  identical  with  the  jjeculiar  agent  of  these.

J\  Living  men  are  able  to  affect  sensitive,  healthy,  and
diseased  jK^rsons,  exactly  in  the  same  way,  especially  with
their  hands  and  fingers.

ff.  This  force,  which  physicians  ha\e  called  animal  mag-
netism, possesses  the  follow  ing  properties  : — It  is  eonductible
through  all  other  bodies  ;  it  is  capable  of  being  either  di-
rectly accumulated  on,  or  transferred  l)y  distribution  to
other  lx>dies  ;  it  dtsappeui's  from  them  in  a  short  time  ;  it  is
Jixablc  on  them  for  some  time  by  their  capacity  for  accumu-
lation and  by  tlieir  coercive  power ;  it  is  arranged  in  a
polar  nuuuHT  in  animal  bodies  through  its  dualism  ;  it  is
without  a[»preeiable  relation  to  the  terrestrial  magnetism  ;
itiscapahieof  mechanically  attracting  the  hands  of  cataleptic
patients,  and  is  (combined  with  luminous  phenomena ;  all
exactly  as  the  crystallic  force  is,  with  which  it  thus  coin-
cidt^s,  and  in  all  particidars  obeys  the  same  physical  laws.

h.  The  part  of  the  force  residing  in  the  magnet,  the
ciy  stallic  force,  and  the  force  which  is  the  basis  of  the  so-
called  animal  magnetism  :  these  three  forces,  therefore,
coincide  in  tlieir  essential  uatui-c,  under  one  common  point
of  view,


13!)


FOURTH TREATISE,


rURTHER SOiniCISS  OF  THE FORCE  WHICH RESIDES IN  CRYS-
TALS, THE  MAGNET,  AND  THE  HUMAN  HANDS,

95,  What  I  have  already  brought  forward  here  htos  by  no
means  exhausted  the  soorccs  from  which  the  eiiigtimtical
force  now  under  examination  flows ;  in  fact,  1  have  not  yet
mentioned  the  prinei|Ml  of  them.  Following  np  the  sub-
ject, I  met  with  new  and  important  facts.  Physicists  have,
as  is  well  know^n,  for  many  yeai's  debated  the  question
whether  or  no  the  sun*s  rays  are  capable  of  magnetizuig  a
eel  needle.  Since  Moricliini,  wlio  pubhshed  the  first  ob-
sensations,  Mrs,  Somerville,  Bauragarteu,  Contigliaghi,  and
others,  have  taken  the  j>rincipal  share  in  tlie  discussion  of
this  subject.  RecoUection  of  the  treatises  on  this  point  led
me  to  reflect  on  the  part  the  sun  might  possibly  play  in  the

.  iwbjects  of  my  present  researches,  and  which  acquired  some
probabihty  from  the  undeniable  and  well-known  influence
exercised  by  the  moon  in  ceitain  nervous  diseases.

97,  I  availed  myself  of  the  first  cloudless  sky  to  experi-
ment in  this  direction  on  Miss  Maix.  I  placed  the  cud  of
a  copper  wire  eleven  yards  long  in  her  hand,  and  as  usual
allowed  her  a  little  time  to  become  accustomed  U^  it.  I
then  put  the  otiier  longer  end  out  of  the  window  into  the

^mm -shine  The  eflccts  of  the  crystallic  force  became  inmie-
diately  jjerceptible,  in  a  weak  degree,  but  distinctly.  I
next  connected  with  the  wire  a  plate  of  copper,  sixteen
sfpiare  inches  in  extent,  m  the  shade,  allowed  the  patient
to  get  used  to  the  end  of  the  wire,  and  put  the  plate  iu
front  of  the  window  in  the  sun's  rays. Scarcely  was  this


140


KAYS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  &C.


done  wheu  an  unexpected  cry  of  pleasure  gi-eeted  me  from
the  sick-bed.  Immediately  the  rays  fell  upon  the  plate,  a
strong  inanifestatioo  of  the  crystallic  force  made  itself  felt
in  the  hand,  by  the  known  pecuhar  sensation  of  warmth,
which  then  ascended  through  the  arm  to  the  head.  But
this  well-know  n  and  not  unexpected  result  w  as  accompanied
by  a  simultaneous  sensation  of  cooling,  and  this  so  strong
and  predominant,  and  with  an  experience  of  strengthening
refreshment  through  all  the  limbs,  that  the  patient  declared
herself  greatly  revived  and  cheered  by  it.  Heat  and  cold
were  felt  together.

98.  In  a  modified  experiment,  with  the  view  to  attain
tlie  results  less  complicated  with  the  eftect  of  heat,  I  sub-
stituted a  white  cloth  for  the  coppcr-platc.  I  first  attended
to  the  accustoming  in  the  shade,  and  then  carried  the  stiff
wire  with  the  linen  cloth  att-ached  to  it  into  the  sunshme.
The  chamber  was  warm,  the  outer  air  was  cooL  Never-
theless, efifects  presented  themselves  to  the  sensations  of  the
patient  as  rjiuckly,  though  more  weakly,  as  from  the  ooppc^r
plate ;  a  dull  feeling  of  increasing  crystallic  force  in  the
wire,  then  the  striking  cooling  and  reviving  sensation :  the
latt^T,  however,  tolerably  vivid,

99.  I  varied  this  experiment  by  placing  a  w^et  cloth,
instead  of  a  dry  one,  upon  the  copper  wire,  which  was  lield
in  the  hand  of  the  patient  till  she  was  used  to  it,  and  then
jilaced  in  the  sun.  The  effect  was  accompanied  by  a  dis-
agreeable ttccessoiT  sensation,  like  damp  air  w'ould  have
produced  upon  her ;  but  the  principal  sensation,  which  is
pecidiar  to  the  sun — increasing  heat  in  the  wire,  and  tlie
refreshing  cohl  which  presented  itself  and  spread  over  her
whole  body — was  manifested  in  the  most  vivid  manner.

100.  I  now  sought  for  confirmation  and  warranty  of
tlie^e  oliservations.  Some  days  later  I  undertook  the  same
experiments  with  Miss  Nowotuy.  She  hatl  nuw^  so  far  p©i
covered  that  she  had  (juitc  left  her  bed  for  some  weeks ;


AS  smmcEfi  OP  thi  new  PORCI!.


141


but  I  nevertlieless  wished  to  test  the  influence  upon  her.
One  end  of  a  wire  was  placet!  in  her  Imnd,  the  other  in  the
stinsbine  before  a  window.  She  immediately  felt  alterations
in  that  part  which  she  held  in  her  hand  :  it  became  cooler
to  her.  I  brought  it  back  into  the  shade, — the  coolness
disappeared ;  I  again  placed  it  in  the  sunshine, — the  coolness
returned.  I  now  attached  about  a  square  foot  of  tinned
iron  plate  to  the  wire,  and  placed  it  in  the  sun.  The  cooling
not  only  quickly  manifested  itself,  bnt  increased  fur  two  or
three  minutes  to  sucli  a  degree  that  I  received  the  assurance
that  the  wire  had  become  icy  cold  and  begun  to  make  the
hand  stiff'.  The  plate  was  brought  back  into  the  shade,  and
the  experiment  repeated;  but  the  sensation  of  cold  imme-
diately l>egan  to  decrease,  and  in  a  few  mitmtes  disappeared ;
while,  when  the  plate  was  bronglit  back  into  the  sun,  it
returned  forthwith,  and  increased  till  it  had  attained  the
same  intensity.  I  have  already  remarked  upon  the  point
that  the  peculiar  sensation  which  the  crystallic  force  pro-
duces in  the  hands  of  the  sensitive  sometimes  expresses
it^lf  like  heat,  sometimes  like  cold  ;  the  particular  differ-
ences of  both  will  be  specially  elucidated  hereafter.  Here,
where  the  culd  depends  on  the  sun,  which  other  wise  is  the
source  of  warmth  to  all  nature,  it  is  pre-eminently  cha-
racteristic of  a  specitie  activity.  This  was  expressed  so
powerfully  and  clearly  that  the  distinction  was  fomid  to  be
remarkable,  according  as  I  let  the  sun's  rays  fall  obliquely
on  the  metal  plates,  when  the  effect  was  weaker,  or  as
they  struck  vertically  upon  thera,  in  which  case  it  was  much
more  strongly  perceived  ; — whether  I  made  the  experiment,
in  this  way,  morning  or  evening,  or  at  noon  ;  whether  I
performed  them  in  July,  or  repeated  them  under  the  same
conditions  in  November.

101.  I  had  no  opportunity  to  institute  very  circum-
stantial experiments  on  this  point,  on  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer ;
but  1  heard  from  her,  in  couveraatiou,  tliat  in  general  the  I


RAYS  OF  TJIE  SUN, MOOX,  &C,


Min  exercised  a  very  agreeable  yet  not  warming  hut  plea-
aautly  cooling  influence  over  her  whole  l>ody.

102.  In  hke  manner  formerlv,  before  I  had  become
acquainted  with  this  peculiarity  of  the  sun's  rays,  1  had
often  heard  from  Miss  Sturmanu  the  then  enigmatical  state-
ment that  the  sun  made  her  cold.

103.  But  I  was  enabled  to  investigate  this  subject  most
minutely  by  means  of  Miss  Reichel.  The  sun's  rays  not
only  produced  the  peculiar  sensation  of  cold  when  a  win^
was  connected  with  iron,  copper,  or  zinc  plate,  tin-foil,  lead-
foil,  strips  of  silver,  gold  leaf,  German  silver,  brass  plate,  &c.,
hut  idso  when  linen,  woollen  cloth,  cotton  or  silk  stutf  con-
nected with  it,  were  brought  into  the  direct  light  of  the  sun.
Nay,  every  other  substance,  porcelain,  glass,  ^tone,  wood,
water,  lamp-oil,  alcohol,  sulphur ;  in  short,  everything  I
chose  to  select,  when  connected  with  the  wire  which  the
girl  took  into  her  hand,  hi  the  shade,  and  moved  into  the
sim^s  rays,  produced  in  her  that  striking  sensation  of  in-
creasing cold,  to  which  the  sensitive  all  unanimously  and
uniformly  testiticd,  as  much  surprised  at  the  apparent  con-
tradiction which  lay  thereui,  as  I  was  niyseli':  whieh,  how-
ever, the  sequel  will  very  clearly  solve,

104.  If  it  were  actually  the  force  of  crystals,  of  the  mag-
net, of  the  human  hand,  as  I  have  identified  them  in  the
preceding  treatises,  which  I  now  again  met  with  in  the  8un*s
rays,  this  could  only  be  proved  by  the  same  methods  I  had
pursued  in  similar  cases  with  the  crystals,  &c,,  by  comimrison
of  the  effects.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  niise  and  dis-
cuss the  questions  :  Are  the  sim's  rays  capable  of  producing
the  same  conditions  in  matter  as  the  poles  of  crystals,  the
magnet,  and  the  huniau  hand  are  ?  Will  mere  sunshine
impart  to  a  piece  of  iron  the  force  which  is  conveyed  into
it  by  the  magnet?  Has  it  tlie  capacity  to  imbue  all  sub-
stances with  the  p<iwer  of  reacting  upon  sensitive  sick  per-
sons? Can  it  produce  a  magnetised  glass  of  water? Can


143


the  sun's  iiiys,  ao  often  investigated,  possess  a  new  and
mighty  force,  whicli  has  hitherto  wholly  escaped  the  glnnee
of  physical  science?  I  scarcely  ventured  to  admit  such
t-bouglits,  but  my  desire  for  an  explanation  acquii^ed  strength
daily.

The  first  thing  curiosity  led  me  to  try  was  a  glass  of
water.  I  let  it  stand  five  minutes  in  the  sun,  and  then
directed  the  waiting-woman,  who  possessed  very  little  niag-
iieiic  force,  to  give  it  to  Miss  Maix,  without  informing  her
for  what  purpose  it  was  r  without  having  been  asked,  she
said  that  it  was  magnetised  water  directly  she  had  put  it  to
her  lips.  It  produced  the  peculiar  pepper-hke  burning,  well
known  to  the  sensitive,  on  her  tongue,  palate,  thmat,  down
the  oesophagus  to  the  stomach,  at  every  point  arousing
spasmodic  symptoms,  I  allowed  another  glass  of  water  to
stand  twenty  minutes  in  the  sun's  rays  before  it  was  given
to  the  patient ;  this  time  also  by  the  weak  hands  of  a  girl,  to
avoid  the  stronger  eff'ect  of  mine*  This  was  found  as
strongly  magnetised  as  ever  one  could  be  by  the  large  nine-
layered  magnet.

106.  It  was  possible  that  a  moi*e  considerable  portion  of
the  force  might  adliere  to  the  glass  than  was  contained  in
the  water.  To  test  this,  and  at  the  same  time  to  obtain
information  of  the  internal  condition  of  the  water,  whether
or  not  it  might  be  somewhat  in  the  same  relation  as  a  tube
full  of  steel -tilings  stands  to  the  magnet,  I  had  the  solarized
water  poured  into  another  glass>  which  was  then  given  to
the  patient.  The  result  was  similar  to  what  had  often  been
experienced  with  magnetized  water  by  Miss  Sturmanu  and
Miss  Nowotny — ^that  the  transferred  water  was  just  as  mag-
netic (as  it  is  called)  in  the  second  glass  as  in  the  first,  and
that  consequently  the  complete  revolution  of  all  its  molecules
had  httle  or  not  at  all  modiBcd  the  internal  condition  which
coustitntes  what  is  called  its  magnetization.  Even  an  hour
after,  when  the  remaiuder  was  drank,  the  so-called  mag-


144


BAVS  OF  THE  SIJN,  MOON,  &C.


netism  had  not  wholly  disai)]>eared,  and  though  weaker
than  at  first,  it  Avas  still  perceptilily  charged.  In  this,  as
in  all  other  characters,  the  solarized  water  agreed  most  per-
fectly with  that  which  had  been  impregnated  by  the  magnet,
crystals,  or  the  human  hand.

For  security,  I  subsefjucotly  followed  out  these  experi-
ments with  Miss  Stunnann  and  Miss  Reicliel  I  shall  t^ke
the  liberty  to  omit  an  account  of  the  a'^cessory  circumstances,
which  would  otdy  cause  tiresome  re{>etitions.

107.  To  follow  out  the  parallel,  I  took  the  often-men-
tioned German  silver  conductor,  and  first  placed  it  in  the
patient's  hands  to  accustom  her  to  it,  then  allowed  the  sun's
rays  to  fall  upon  it  for  a  few  seconds,  and  immediately  gave
it  back  to  Miss  Maix,  She  found  it  rendered  active  just  as
when  it  had  been  jjlaced  in  contact  with  a  magnet,  crj^stals,
or  the  human  hand  j  but  at  the  same  time  she  at  once  per-
ceived the  pleasant  sunuy  feeling  with  which  the  conductor
also  had  been  charged,  and  which  it  retainecL  According  to
repeated  experiments,  this  persisted  to  her  senses  for  five  or
six  minutes,  after  u^hich  it  became  imperceptible;  wliile, on
the  other  hand,  the  crystallic  force,  with  w^hich  the  sun  had
imbued  it,  was  felt  ranch  longer,  and  in  fact  for  the  same
period  of  tw^enty  minutes  that  the  same  conductor  had  re-
tained the  force  of  my  two  hands,  ^  82.  The  rays  of  the
sun,  therefore,  exactly  equalled  here  the  force  of  my  ten  fin-
gers, and  acted  just  as  permanently  by  accumidation  as  the
latter.

108.  I  allowed  Miss  Reichel  to  become  used  to  the  feeUng
of  my  hand,  and  then  went  out  into  the  sunshine.  After
ten  minutes  had  elapsed,  during  which  1  had  exposed  myself
on  all  sides  to  the  sun's  rays,  I  went  back  and  gave  her  the
same  hand.  She  was  much  astonished  at  the  rapid  altera-
tion in  the  great  increase  of  force  w^hich  she  experienced  in
it,  the  cause  of  which  was  unknown  to  her.  The  sunsliine
had  evidently  impregnated  me  in  exactly  the  same  way  i


AS  SOXTRCBS  OV  THE  HEW  FORCE.


146


the  tnagnct  had  charged  (^  741  the  body  of  a  man,  and  in
other  experime Jits  my  own  person.  Miss  Maix  had  already
ji'  '  Iv  in  fori  lied  me  that  she  could  not  bear  anyone
ct,,— .-^  uut  of  strong  sniishine  to  approach  her  bed.  Some
time  before,  a  party  of  friends  liad  entered  her  room  after  a

Ik  in  powerful  sunshine ;  this  had  produced  so  much  pain
"find  uneasiness,  that  she  could  not  sustain  it,  and  had  be<*!i
obliged  to  beg  her  friends  to  leave  her ;  and  this  had  Ijcen
merely  the  action  of  the  sue,  not  the  coohng,  but  that
warming  the  hand-wire,  ^  m.

109*  After  1  had  given  up  the  experiments  with  the  sun*s
rays  an  Miss  Maix,  the  girls  of  her  neighbourhood  amused
themselves  with  them.  When  I  revisited  her,  they  told  me
that  the  patient  had  found  an  iron  key  which  they  had  laid
in  Uie  sunshine,  after  a  short  interval,  magnetic,  and  as
stmngly  as  a  magnetic  rod  which  they  possessed.  It  did
not  attract  iron,  but  Miss  MaLx  declared  tliat  it  acted  upon
bcr  exactly  like  a  magnet.  The  key  had  therefore  acquired
a  magnet-liko  charge  from  the  sun.  It  had  not  endured,
but  disapjieiu'cd  from  the  key  after  some  time,  as  the  crys-
tallic  foi*ce  does  from  bodies.

no.  This  observation  led  the  girls  at  once  to  further
experiments,  with  astonishing  results. Tliey  took  a  horse-
shoe magnet  which  had  become  weak,  and  instead  of  ndjbingi
it  to  strengthen  it,  hiid  it  in  the  sunshine,  and  they  had  the !
jileasure  to  sec  their  expectation  fully  contirmed. The  horse*  i
shoe  became  so  much  strengthened  and  newly  magnetically'
active  upon  the  patient,  that  thereafter,  whenever  a  magnet
became  weak,  it  was  only  necessary  to  lay  it  in  the  sun  to  ]
make  it  good  again. This  is  a  kind  of  confirmation  of  Zan-
tcdeschi's  observations.

111.  1  now  sought  to  complete  these  experiments. by  a
rial,  with  Miss  Rciehel,  of  tiie  brhaviom*  of  crystals  in  the

mshiue. The  fact  appeiired  that  a  rock  crystal  and  a  sele-
had  scarcely  been  exposed  tu  the  rays  of  the  sun  five

I.


146  RAYS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  &C.,

minutes  before  the  girl  felt  the  peculiar  nervous  excitement
fix)m  it  greatly  strengthened.

112.  All  these  facts  at  once  combine  to  afford  the  law :
TT^  force  of  the  sun,  corresponding  to  the  crystallic  force,
&c.,  is  capable  of  being  accumulated  in  other  bodies.  And
since  they  acquire  this,  charge  and  retain  it  for  some  time,
they  possess  a  certain  degree  of  coercive  power  over  it.

113.  Its  conductibiUty  through  other  bodies  has  ahready
been  demonstrated  by  the  conduction  to  the  patient's  hands
by  copper  and  iron  wires ;  I  will  only  subjoin  a  few  more
facts.  When  I  placed  the  end  of  a  linen  cloth  in  Miss
Reichel's  hand,  gave  her  the  usual  interval  to  get  used  to  it,
and  exposed  the  other  end  to  the  sim's  rays,  while  the  hand
remained  in  the  shade,  the  sensation  of  the  crystallic  force
soon  advanced  gradually  from  the  linen  to  the  hand,  and
produced  cold  in  it.  The  same  occurred  when  I  gave  her  a
woollen  cloth,  a  piece  of  cotton  or  silk  stuff,  and  let  her
handle  it  in  the  same  way.  When  I  drew  the  cloth  back
out  of  the  sunshine,  it  lost  its  coolness  in  a  few  minutes,  and
recovered  it  again  as  often  as  I  brought  it  back  into  the
sun's  rays.  The  conduction  was  most  rapid  through  silk,
next  through  linen,  slower  through  wool,  and  slowest  of  all
through  cotton.  A  wooden  rod,  twenty  inches  long,  con-
ducted the  solar  force  pretty  rapidly ;  a  measuring  rod,  six
feet  eight  inches  long,  required  more  than  half  a  minute  for
the  effect  to  penetrate  from  one  end  to  the  other.  But  a
glass  tube  conveyed  the  sensation  to  the  other  end,  directly
one  end  was  placed  in  the  rays  of  the  sun.  Therefore,  sub-
stances of  every  kind,  whether  good,  imperfect,  or  non-con-
ductors of  electricity,  manifest,  without  exception,  the  ponder
of  conducting  that  force  of  the  suns  rays  ;  those  which  are
continuous,  easily  and  rapidly;  others,  which  are  composed  of
distinct  parts,  like  woollen  and  cotton  stuffs,  with  more  dif-
ficulty, and  more  slowly.

114.  I  pass  over  the  confirmatory  experiments,  and,  in


PHB  SOW,  MOON,  &C.


147


^
P


order  not  to  dwell  longer  on  tliese  compai-isons,  hasten  to
the  luminous  phenomena.  It  was  here  an  especial  concern,
and  a  veiy  necessaiy  trial,  to  examine  whether  the  force  of
the  sun  was  in  the  same  way  capable  of  endowing  the
objects  with  the  power  of  emitting  luminous  flame  in  the
dark.  The  lawsof  phosphorescence  are  known, and,  according
to  these,  it  was  impossible  to  bring  one  of  the  bodies  upon
which  the  sun  had  sliined,  at  once  into  darkness  :  we  know
from  Heinrich  that  in  such''  a  case  a  great  proportion  of
solid  bodies  are  luminous*  The  contrivance  which  I  arranged
for  carr}dng  on  experiments,  in  perfect  dfu*kness,  while  the
8Un  was  shining,  was  as  follows.  In  my  laboratoiy,  a  covered
staircase  leads  down  to  a  lower  story,  where  my  collections
and  instruments  are  kept :  I  had  the  windows  of  this  closed
up :  when  I  closed  both  doors,  I  had  perfect  darkness
upon  the  staircase.  Communication  was  easy  with  this,
and  ever}ihing  could  be  understood  that  was  spoken  both
in  it  and  in  the  adjacent  rooms  on  the  two  floors.  Miss
Reichel  expressed  her  wilEngness  to  allow  herself  to  be  shut
up  here ;  and  I  mention  these  accidental  circumstances
especially,  because  a  great  number  of  experiments  on  light
were  performed  on  this  staircase :  these  will  all  be  men-
tioned in  their  place,  and  bear  reference  to  the  locality  just
described.  At  the  same  time,  this  arrangement  gave  the  best
control  to  ensure  the  acciuracy  of  the  sensitive  observer,  who,
shut  up  here  far  above  or  below  the  room  where  the  opera-
tions were  carried  on,  could  never  know  what  modifications
the  experiments  underwent  there ;  she  could  ordy  be  aware
of  their  effects,  and  simply  state  how  and  where  she  perceived
them.  Up  stairs^  in  the  room,  I  had  prepared  several  large
^ets,  half  a  square  yard  in  extent,  of  copper,  iron,  and
aino»  plates  covered  with  gold  leaf,  large  pieces  of  lead  foil,
linen  dipped  in  melted  sulphiu-,  &c.  I  connected  these,
one  after  another,  with  an  iron  wire,  about  one-twelfth  of  an
inch  thick,  thirtetni  yards  long,  carried  this  through  the  key-


>  liO*  or  THE  SVX,  MOON,  &C.

V\^  ,v  *K  .i.x'ir.  which  was  stopped  closely  all  around  it,  and
xJk^>fcr  ^V  sl3un^  whore  the  observer  grasped  it  in  her  hand,
Kw^^^V^  \i\c  cud  of  the  wire  turned  upwards.  After  she
Kml  iviuaiiuxi  quiet  in  the  dark  long  enough  for  her  eyes  to
Ixwnio  aocustouied  to  it,  I  placed  the  objects  above  named,
one  after  another,  in  the  rays  of  the  sun.  Before  quite  a
minute  had  elapsed,  a  slender  column  of  flame,  from  ten  to
twelve  inches  high,  and  only  two-thirds  of  an  inch  thick,
ascended  before  her  eyes  from  the  end  of  the  wire.  It  was
gradually  attenuated  upwards,  almost  like  a  knitting  needle
at  the  end,  and  spread  an  agreeable  coolness  all  around.
When  the  air  was  distiu-bed  by  speaking,  it  flickered  back-
wnnis  and  forwards  with  it,  as  I  have  described  of  the  flame
of  the  magnetic  needle.  As  the  metal  plates  above  were
uiovihI  into  the  sunshine  or  into  the  shade,  the  flame  in  the
darkness  below  rose  and  fell  upon  the  wire,  an  interval  of
half  a  niiiuite  or  more  always  elapsing  before  the  manifes-
tation of  the  change.  I  substituted  a  human  being  for  the
metal  plates,  and  placed  the  end  of  the  wire  in  her  left  hand.
It  wiiH  my  (hnighter.  Hy  her  own  force,  while  still  standing
in  the  shades,  she  proihiced  a  little  flame  on  the  wire,  which
dilVnwil  warmth  aroim<l,  in  accordance  with  facts  alreadv
dofiiih'd.  When  she  plac(xl  herself  in  the  simshine,  the
rtnnH'  «»!»  th<^  «*»d  of  the  wire  shortly  rose  to  a  height  of
noinlv  nine  inches,  and  now  diffused  a  pleasant  so^ar
nuihnK  As  often  as  j^Ih;  removed  out  of  the  sunshine,  ihi-
l^iinti'  •'^iuik  to  its  iinvions  ineonsiderable  size,  and  agnin
^^ntiH(d  iieat.  I  n(v\t.  brought  Honn;  m(*tal  plates  and  otht-r
\\b|i«'<a,  by  wiiy  of  exjirrinient,  iis  rapidly  as  possible  out  of
\\\\\  Mui'h  ni>.^  into  tlic  darkness,  before  the  eyes  of  the
^\bai  i\i  I  Without  wislijng  to  take  aecoimt  of  the  luminous
\\^\\\i'  v^hirh  hpiejid  over  them,  sinecj  this,  though  not  pro-
\^M>'»''I'  »'*'l^''^  '>*'  '»»*''**'  *>»'  ^f^sinilnenced  by  phosi)horescencc,
^  f.1  {.(ill  to  llir|MiJ'|)os4!  to  mention  here  that  from  the  sharp
^|t:a  til  tlje  platen,  ojjeeiiilly  those  turned  upward,  issued


Ai  SOURCES  OF  THE  KEW  ibkttE.


149


tufts  of  flame  in  the  manner  of  the  magnet  and  crystals  ;
green  and  blue  from  copper,  clear  white  from  gold  and
silver,  dull  white  from  tin,  dirty  bhie  from  lead,  reddish
white  ftrjia  zinc,  white  from  a  qnicksilvered  mirror,  and
blue  with  white  points  from  a  mass  of  crystals  of  sulphate
of  potass.  Lastly,  I  brought  a  glass  tube  forty  inches  long
aud  two  inches  wide  out  of  the  sunshitie  into  the  darkness ;
it  was  enveloped  on  the  upper  lialf,  as  held  vertically,  by
fine  white  lambent  flame,  which  passed  at  the  upper  end
into  a  tube  about  thi-ee  inches  long,  playing  around  the  top.
I  applied  alternately  polarized  light,  which  fell  at  an  angle
of  about  35°  into  the  room  through  the  window,  and  the
direct  rays  of  the  sun,  for  which  purpose  w^as  used  a  roomy
balcony,  to  which  there  w^as  ready  access  from  the  work-
room ;  however,  no  distinction  in  the  results  could  be  per-
ceived. All  tliese  experiments  prove  that  the  force  Jlowln;)  on
to  mnlti'i\  wUh  ihe  ftnns  rtn/s,  produees  the  sttme  beautiful
luminous  pherwmemt  as  the  in/stallic  and  other  forces  do,
'  '115,  Therefore,  in  every  respect  related  here,  the  action
of  the  sun  agrees  with  those  of  crystals,  (he  mat/net,  and  the
human  hand;  and  this,  our  f, red  star,  must  he  received ds
the  fourth  source  of  cryataflic  force,
'  These  observations,  as  is  evident  at  the  first  glance,  lead
far  in  their  more  distant  ramifications.  I  avoid,  however,
in  the  outset,  entering  into  the  infinite  multiplicity  of  their
relations  in  universal  nature,  because  I  wish  in  the  first  place
to  tnice  out  and  establish  successively  all  the  sources  I  have
become  acquainted  with  of  the  force  now  imder  considera-
tion, and  then  afterwards  to  elucidate  each  singly,  so  far  as
I  have  been  able  hitherto  to  detect  its  peculiarity.  Never-
tlieless,  I  cannot  help  casting  a  fcw^  glances  at  one  of  these
many  sides,  because  it  is  this  very  one  which  more  directly
establishes  the  mode  of  action  of  the  sun.  This  is  the
spectrum.  Since  the  sun's  rays  manifest  tlie  force  in  ques-
tion, the  question  at  once  presents itself — whether this


Ai'^ r VHfc:  >IN, HOON,  &C.

!,.».  •.c*o:.>  I  ii'iu—rt\s ',1^' the  coloured  spectrum,  only  in
,1,..  »^  IV  I  .>ci  11  particular  of  them?  I  made  a  pre-
iu..i..i^  vjiiiiiKiii  in  this  direction  on  Miss  Maix.  I
III .»  K  nKLiiuiu  u[X)u  a  wall  Avith  a  glass  prism,  placed
,  ..^.|\i  suK  II  'iic  putiont^s  hand,  allowed  her  to  become
.vAv»>.'  'ucii  o  '{.  and  then,  holding  it  near  the  other
.  ,ui  a  ♦-:  uukI,  uio\cd  it  slowly  from  colour  to  colour
.,vi».x>  iic  xjKvtruin.  She  could  not  see  me,  for  we  were
M|».ii«*ii\i  Ih  u  tolding  screen.  Many  and  repeated  experi-
ui\ii;v,  K»tu  with  hor,  and  afterwards  with  several  other
\%iu>aiiu'  |vi-sv>ns,  lal  to  the imiform results ;  violet-blue  and
hhu' w^'i^'  the  principal  seat  of  the  solar  agreeable  influence,
:in\l  oliUal  iv\  ixiuj;:  ciA)lncss  w^hich  diffused  itself  throughout
\\w  IhhIv  i»l'  the  patient;  consequently,  that  part  of  the
\|HV(niui  ui  which  exists  the  least  intensity  of  light.  On
\\w  K^llu^r  hand,  the  crystallic  force,  apparent  warmth — ^nay,
houHiituMi  (>r  heating  of  the  wire,  although  it  was  some  six
\HV%U  h»»K'  »w'J'**H'*<**l  continually  from  the  middle,  from
\sA\\^\\  to  orange,  sotliatitwas  most  distinct  and  deep  in  the
\\A  lleiv  we  intd  the  maximum  of  the  heating  rays;  the
(me  wiMiiilh  of  whicit,  however,  was  far  from  being  able  to
\y\\\'\\  tlie  pati(*nl.  These  observations  support  the  state-
ments of  Moriehini  and  Mrs.  Somerville,  and  place  new
wein'*'  •**  ''**^  ^*'"'*'  ^^^  *'^^  probability  of  their  assertions,
\\\\\v\\  iue  ixn  \v\  l>y  no  means  universally  received.

1 1  /  iWh  riitl  of  the  spectrum,  therefore,  had  its  specific
ji/M>«»i//iy  t'liuYSMrd  influence  upon  the  excitability  of  the
«r  imiIh  1  /Ml  «(ii«A  ;  I  h(^  more  minute  and  detailed  examination
,t|  ^^lihli  uill  iillurd  interesting  further  conclusions,  and  the
rlniiilnliiMi  III  whu'h  will  form  the  subject  of  one  of  the  suc-

lirlldlli llinlinif*

1 1 M I' 1  lliiM  point  it  was  but  a  step  to  the  moon,  the

\\V\\  ♦•!  wlmh  ncrrssurily  pressed  the  more  urgently  upon
,,„,  liMiii  iIm^  writ  known  fact  that  countless  terrestrial
•thHiHiiM  nil  iHiioii|j;  the  healthy  and  diseased  show  them-


AS  SOURCES  OP  THE  NEW  FORCE.


IW


to  depend  more  or  less  upon  our  satellite,  the  causes
of  which  we  as  yet  know  not. I  made  the  fii'st  experiment
on  Miss  Maix. It  was  not  carried  out  without  sorni*  diffi-
culty. Her  window  looked  toward  the  north,  and the
moon  could  not  be  got  at  on  any  side. In  this  difficulty  I
resolved  to  carry  an  ii*on  wire  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  thick
through  two  rooms,  then  over  an  area,  and  from  these,
again,  through tln*ce  roouis»  in  all  about 100  feet;  thus
alone  could  I  obtain  some  of  the  moon's  rays. I  plaf:ed
one  end  of  the  wire  in  the  patient's  hand,  the  other  was
connected  with  a  large  copper  plate,  which,  with  the  usual
precautions,  was  moved  into  the  moonlight. After  a  short
pause  the  sensation  in  tlie  hand  began  to  alter  very  much.
Iron  wire  and  copper  ph\te  had  alone  produced  a  warm
sensation,  as  they  always  did. The  effect  of  the  moon,
which  became  associated  mth  this,  was  described  l)y  the
patient  as  of  a  very  violent  and  mixed  kind,  so  that  her
acriounts  of  it  did  not  evince  her  usual  clearness. Without
delaying  vvith  the  particulars  of  the  present  merely  pre-
liminary experiment,  the  fact  will  suffice  here,  that  active
iufluence  of  the  moon,  conducted  to  the  patient  through  a
long  wire,  did  really  present  itself. The  sensation  on  her
right  hand  was  much  more  pleasant  than  on  the  left. But
a  point  which  did  not  occur  in  the  sunshine,  and  manifested
itself  as  peculiar  to  the  moon,  was  a  distinct  kind  of  attrac-
tion toward  the  wii*e  thrfnigh  the  whole  arm,  so  that  she
fdt  inducx^d  to  follow  along  the  wire  with  her  hand- She
nm  her  finger  slowly  along  the  wire,  when  she  felt  the
attraction,  and  woidd  have  been  inclined,  if  not  in  bed,  to
trace  it  out  along  its  whole  length. We  meet  here  with
something  similar  to  that  strange  attraction  which  we  have
obfierved  in  the  magnet  for  cataleptic  persons,  and  from
which  little  doubt  remains  that  it  is  the  iiTcsistible  attrac-
tion which  so  powerfully  seizes  somnambulists,  and  which,
therefoi'e,  being  conductible,  may  be  conveyed  by  metals.


152  RATS  OP  THE  SUN,  MOON,  &C.

The  patient  regarded  it  as  really  magnetic^  only  she  said
that  this  attraction  was  much  stronger  than  that  of  the
magnet.  Yet  I  must  repeat  what  I  have  abeady  men-
tioned, that  Miss  Maix's  hand  never  was  perceptibly  soli-
cited by  the  magnet  to  motion  or  adhesion.  The  special
local  difficulties  which  prevailed  here  of  continuing  noctur-
nal observations  of  this  kind,  rendered  it  impossible  to
investigate  these  interesting  phenomena  more  minutely ;  I
therefore  was  compelled  to  turn  to  other  sensitive  persons
to  collect  confirmations.

119.  This  I  did  in  the  first  place  with  Miss  Reichel,
who  afibrded  me  abundance  of  help  in  variously-modified
experiments.  Whatever  object  I  placed  in  her  hand,  and,
after  she  had  become  accustomed  to  it,  desired  her  to  hold
in  the  moonlight,  she  always  immediately  assured  me  of  the
access  of  exactly  the  same  sensation  as  was  caused  in  her
when  I  placed  the  points  of  the  crystals,  poles  of  magnets,
or  my  fingers  upon  it,  or  when  the  sun  had  shone  upon  it.
All  substances  made  use  of  exhibited  this  susceptibility  and
conducting  power.  Her  sensation,  however,  was  not  cool-
ing, but  of  gentle  warmth ;  and  the  sequel  will  show  that  this
girl,  of  all  those  with  whom  I  experimented,  distinguished
most  definitely  and  most  uniformly,  with  objective  reasons,
between  cool  and  warm,  between  which  the  sensations  of  the
sensitive  constantly  fluctuated .  When  I  put  the  German  silver
conductor  into  her  hand,  laid  it  down,  and  then  moved  it
into  the  moonUght,  immediately  covered  it  with  a  shade,  and,
after  some  pause,  let  her  grasp  it  again,  she  found  it
filled  with  the  force  with  which  the  moon  endowed  it^  i.  e.
warm;  passive  and  active  capacity  for  accumulation  were
thus  proved.  When  I  allowed  copper  plates,  lead  and  tin
foil,  zinc  plate,  silver  and  gilded  surfaces,  to  remain  some
time  in  the  moon's  rays,  and  then  conveyed  them  to  her  on
the  darkened  staircase,  she  found  their  pointed  angles
flaming  with  tufts  of  white,  red,  green,  and  blue  light.


AS  ROUKCBS  OT  THE  KBW  POECE.


I  arranged  a  metallic  plate,  half  a  square  yard  in

mt,  so  that  I  could  at  pleasure  bring  it  into  the  luoou-
ihiiie  and  the  shade,  connected  a  long  wii-e  with  it,  and
cai'ricd  ttiis  through  the  keyhole  down  the  darkened  stairs
into  tlie  hands  of  Miss  Kcichel,  who  remained  there,  sAt^  saw
in  every  insiance^  as  often  as  I  lei  the  moon^s  rays  faU
upon  it,  a  slevder  flame  arke^  scarcely  as  thick  as  ones
finger^  perjecily  straight,  to  a  height  of  ten  inches,  and
'*<iisappear  after  a  short  space  as  often  as  I  removed  the
plate  from  the  moonhght*  She  always  felt  this  flame  wai-m  :
I  repeated  ttie  experiments  tlirough  thrto  diHerent  full
moons,  and  always  with  the  same  results.

120.  From  the  foregoing,  it  follows  that  the  moonlight
18  not  mere  moonshine;  that,  even  though  it  brings  no
ivarmth  to  us,  it  brings  together  with  its  hght  another
pm?erfnl,  hidden  force,  tvhich  exhilnts  exactly  the  same

ravters  as  that  which  resides  in  crystals,  Sfc>  There-
}re  the  moon  is  thejijlh  source  of  this  force.

12L  Since  the  heating  rays  of  the  spectrum  had  so
strikingly  strengthened  the  peculiar  eflect  of  the  force  now
imdcr  investigation,  I  made  it  my  care  to  follow  out  this
phenomenon.  Formerly  1  had  observed  that  force  in  a  kind
of  e^jnilibrium,  so  in  crystals,  on  the  magnet  and  in  the
human  body.  Now,  however,  in  the  sun  and  moon,  I  no
longer  found  it  at  rest,  but  in  motion  ;  it  appeared  to  flow
from  the  heavenly  bodies,  in  the  same  way  as — putthig  the
midulatory  things  out  of  sight— we  may  imagine  rays  of
liglit  and  heat  to  flow.  1  could  not  but  be  led  by  this  to  an
examination  of  analogous  fiicts  in  nature, — in  the  first
place  to  heat.  To  this  end  I  laid  a  large  copper  plate  upon
a  broad  piece  of  earthenware,  arranged  the  usual  connection
by^a  long  copper  wire  with  Miss  Maix's  hand,  put  a  cold
brass  tailor's  goose  upon  it,  with  the  heater  in,  and  placed
my  right  hand  upon  it.  I  allowed  her  to  become  accus-
tomed to  it  in  this  condition- Then  the  iron  heater  was


154


RATS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON^  &C.


taken  out,  a  similar  one,  heated  so  as  to  glow  weakly,  Rub-
stituted  for  it,  and  the  case  again  closed.  I  now  held  it  a
h'ttle  cEstaiice  above  the  copper  plate,  without  letting  it
touch.  At  first,  therefore,  it  only  acted  by  radiant  heat
upon  the  metal  plate.  An  increase  of  the  known  warm
sensation,  which  is  caused  by  the  crystals,  &c.,  at  once
came  to  the  observer's  hand  from  the  wire.  When  I  then
placed  the  heated  iron  lirmly  upon  the  copper  plate,  and
slid  it  slowly  over  the  sinrface  to  diffuse  the  heat  over  a
greater  space,  the  sensation  increased  rapidly  and  stmngly
in  proportion  as  the  heat  spread.  The  patient  complained
at  the  same  time  of  a  striking  sense  of  weight  in  the  hand.
With  the  removal  of  the  hot  instrument,  tlierefore  with  the
cooling,  the  sensation  decreased  and  increased  again  alter-
nately as  I  renewed  the  heating  or  cooling.

122.  In  another  experiment  of  the  same  kind  I  placed
one  end  of  a  strong  iron  v^ire  in  the  patient's  hand,  and
grasped  it  not  far  from  the  other  end  with  mine,  letting
her  get  accustomed  to  this.  Then  I  brought  the  flame  of
a  candle  to  the  extremity,  and  heated  it  gradually  till  the
bhie  shades  were  pmduced.  The  heating  by  conduction
did  not  reach  my  hand,  and  there  was  a  length  of  forty
inches  between  this  and  the  patient's  at  the  other  end;
therefore  communication  of  common  heat  was  out  of  the
cjuestion.  The  sense  of  the  force  appeared  immediately,
grew  wath  the  increase  of  the  heat,  and  soon  attained  such
a  degree  that  it  penetrated  tlurough  the  patient's  arm  up  to
her  head.  It  slowly  disappeared  on  the  removal  of  the
flame,  and  was  reproduced  every  time  the  flame  was  again
applied  in  the  same  manner  to  the  whe.  I  repeated  the
experiment  with  copper  wire,  in  this  way :  I  rolled  it  up
closely  ten  times,  and  placed  two  burning  wax  candles  under
the  coil  of  wire.  The  residts  were  quantitatively  greater,
but  quahtatively  exactly  similai'  to  the  preceding ;  and  this
in  every  repetition. I  had  a  wooden  vessel  filled  with  cold


«


AS  SOURCES  OF  TlIK  NEW  POUCE.


155


water,  the  wire  smik  in  it,  and  then  acciistoiBcd  the  obsei*ver
to  this.  The  cold  water  was  poured  out,  and  boihiig  water
poiired  in.  She  imuied lately  felt  the  impression  of  warm
crj'stalhc  force  flowing  into  her  hand.

123.  I  now  gave  the  experiments  the  reverse  direction.
I  placed  a  piece  of  ice  in  the  hot  water,  from  which  the  wire
led  to  the  patient's  hand. The  form  of  the  phenomena  was

imediatcly  changed.  The  sensation  of  heat  and  the  other
fcymptoms  rapidly  decreased*  a  long  drawing  occurred
through  the  ami  and  hand,  the  disagreeable  warm  sensa-
tion gave  place  to  the  entrance  of  that  coohng  which  the
sun's  rays  produced,  and  which  diffused  itself  gradually
over  the  breast,  back,  and  whole  person.  Ice  placed  in  the
patient's  hand  at  once  produced  cramps,  and  allowed  no
minute  obser\^ations.

124.  I  went  through  controlling  experiments  with  Miss
RcicheL  I  heated  mth  the  flame  of  a  candle  one  end  of  an
iron  wire  above  six  feet  long,  to  the  other  end  of  which  her
hand  had  been  accustomed.  Common  heat  could  not  reach
her  at  this  distance,  legist  of  all  from  such  a  weak  flame  and  in
the  space  of  but  a  few  minutes.  Nevertheless,  the  wire  imme-
diately appeared  to  become  ?varm,  ami  then  so  hot,  that  she
wondered  that  I,  who  was  so  near  the  flame,  could  hold
it  in  my  hand  ;  but  with  my  healthy  senses  I  did  not  feel  the
shght^st  rise  of  temperature ;  she  at  the  same  time  felt
cool  mnd  iAowfrom  the  end  of  the  wire^ — the  well-known
characteristic  of  excited  crystallic  force,  &c.  1  repeated  the
same  with  an  iron  wire  of  equal  thickness,  but  more  than  six-
teen yards  long ;  I  obtained  the  same  effects,  but  observably
more  slowly.

125.  The  question  of  luminous  appearances  was  now
examined.  I  placed  Miss  Reichel  on  the  dark  httle  stair-
case, conveyed  a  thick  copper  wire  to  her,  and  heated  the
further  end  of  it  with  an  argand  lamp,  A  reddish-greeu
flame  four  inches  high  rose  from  the  end  of  the  wire  with


156  RATS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  &C.

the  greatest  heating,  and  fell  and  rose  as  I  moved  the  lamp
from  and  back  to  the  wire.  I  performed  a  similar  experi-
ment with  thick  iron  wire  five  feet  long,  one  end  of  which
was  heated  to  redness  in  the  lamp.  At  the  other  end  a
flame  six  inches  long  arose  in  the  dark,  and  slowly  sank
with  the  coohng.  A  longer  iron  wire,  over  sixteen  yards,
with  one  end  heated  to  redness  and  the  other  carried  into
the  darkened  staircase,  gave  a  flame  of  a  finger's  length.
Luminous  phenomena  produced  by  heat  are  here  placed
beyond  doubt,

126.  With  these  evidences  I  was  for  the  time  content.
They  proved,  by  the  feehng  and  sight  of  different  observers,
effects  of  both  radiant  and  conducted  heat,  which  agree  in
all  respects  with  those  that  demonstrate  the  existence  of  tJve
peculiar  force  of  crystals,  8(c,  Heat,  therefore,  is  the  sixth
source  of  the  same.

127.  Friction  is  of  complex  character  in  its  effect ;  heat,
electricity,  galvanism,  &c.,  take  part  in  producing  it.  At
the  same  time  I  thought  it  right  to  investigate  its  partici-
pation in  the  circumstances  now  under  consideration.  At
the  residence  of  Miss  Maix  I  placed  a  copper-plate  upon  the
deal  floor,  connected  it  with  her  hand  by  a  copper  long
wire,  and  rubbed  it  gently  vnth  a  piece  of  wood.  A  sensa-
tion of  increasing  warmth  was  immediately  developed  in  the
wire,  and  rose  to  apparent  heat  when  I  rubbed  on  the  wood
with  greater  pressure  and  rapidity.  This  sensation  increased
and  diminished  as  I  rubbed  more  or  less.  When  I  substi-
tuted my  woollen  coat  for  the  wood,  the  same  effect  was
obtained,  but  strengthened.  With  a  silk  handkerchief  it
was  stronger  still.

128.  I  connected  Miss  Reichel,  by  means  of  a  brass
wire,  with  a  copper-plate  which  lay  upon  a  wax-polished
oaken  floor.  I  placed  a  piece  of  wood  on  the  copper,  and
rubbed  it.  She  at  once  felt  the  effect  of  the  excited  force
through  the  wire  which  she  held  in  her  hand. Tin-plate


OF  THE  NEW  FORCE.


157


acted  in  the  same  way  tinder  like  circumstances,  but  more
weakly  than  copper. The  end  of  the  wire  emitted  flame
visible  in  the  dark  in  both. I  sawed  a  piece  of  wood  in  the
dark  with  a  thin-bhidetl  liand-saw. The  observer  beheld'
nothmg  unusual  in  the  sawdust  which  flew  about,  but  the
blade  of  the  saw,  to  the  extent  in  which  it  was  in  action,  soon
eniitted  a  reddish  light,  as  if  glowing  with  heat,  and  a  little
flame  sprouted  from  every  tooth  of  it. Copper  and  zmc
platej?  nd:)bed  together  with  the  hands  only  exhibited  sparks
here  and  there. Zinc  upon  zinc  and  copper  upon  coppejT]
in  like  manner  emitted  httle  visible  light. Gypsum  rubbed
ujx>n  gypsum  emitted  no  light  at  alb Pieces  of  chtu*cod
rubbed  together  appeared  as  if  glowing  red,  fixsm  their
jKjiuts  of  cxmt^ict  down  into  their  substance  to  the  extent  of  I
n  finger's  breadth.  Pieces  of  siigar  rubbed  together  afibrded)
ue  usual  connnonly  visilile  lyminosity,  but  the  sensitive  i
ftw  in  addition  to  this  a  flaming  light  one  inch  and  a  half'
in  extent  surrounding  the  former. I  saw  two  glass  flasks
rubbed  against  each  other  liecoiue  fiery  at  the  points  of  con*
tact  ;  but  she  saw  these  parts  surrounded  by  flames  as  large
as  one's  fist, Unglazed,  therefore  rough  ]jorcelain  capsules,  i
gave  bright  emissions  of  light  visible  to  me,  but  only  imme-
diately on  the  fiat  parts  strongly  rubbing  upon  each  other  j
the  patient  saw  flames  the  size  of  an  expanded  hand  oa  j
them. At  this  period  she  was  so  well  that  she  daily,  with'
out  hesitation,  went  about  her  employment  through  thej
crowded  streets  of  Vienna.

121). I  rubbed  two  glass  tubes,  forty  inches  long,  across]
one  another. I  saw  a  long  luminous  streak  on  the  hne  of  j
friction  in  the  dark. Miss  Reichel  saw  besides  this,  around
those  parts  of  the  tubes  where  they  had  been  rubbed,  deli-
cate flame-hke  lights  of  a  finger's  breadth,  which  were  so
expanded  laterally  tliat  they  had  the  appearance  of  a  fiery .
band. As  long  as  the  ndibing  was  continued,  she  felt  thd
end  of  the  glass  tubes,  more  than  twenty  inches  distant  from  j


15$  RAT8  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  &C.

tht^  nibbed  |>arts,  become  apparently  very  hot,  which  effect
vmibheil  iiumediately  I  ceased  rubbing.  She  saw  Uttle
flimtei  «8  large  as  a  finger  issue  from  the  borders,  firom
which  flowed  out  to  some  distance  a  gently  warm  wind.  A
niiiiilar  result  was  obtained  by  rubbing  two  iron  rods  to-
gether :  light  on  the  line  of  friction,  which  however  I  did
iMitp  though  she  did  see ;  sensation  of  apparent  warming
during  the  rubbing,  and  immediate  rapid  cooling  when  I
<i4;iiiiod  to  rub ;  flaming  emissions  from  the  ends  of  the  rods,
mid  warm  wind  flowing  therefirom.

1 80.  In  none  of  these  experiments  were  the  rubbed  ob-
Ji»et«  isolated,  but  lay  sometimes  on  the  floor,  sometimes
ill  ifiy  hands  or  in  those  of  an  assistant ;  there  was  therefore
IVm  piiMMagc  for  the  escape  of  any  electricity  that  might  have
liMsii  oxcitcd.  It  was  impossible,  again,  that  the  heat  pro-
diU3«Kl  by  the  friction  of  the  objects  could  disappear  so
rufiidly,  m  the  ap{>earance3  of  flame  vanished  every  time  the
ruliliing  was  arrested ;  the  contact  electricity  excited,  pro-
iUuH^A  in  ahnost  all  the  cases  enumerated  by  the  rubbing
iitgatltiir  of  bodies  of  wholly  identical  substance,  must  have
hmi  m  nlight  that  it  may  be  passed  over ;  and  in  the  very
itiUM5  wlien  zinc  and  copper  were  rubbed  together,  and  it
ttiareforc  must  have  been  excited,  scarcely  a  trace  of  lumi-
uoiiity  was  manifested,  so  that  galvanism  can  have  had  just
as  little  influential  share  in  this  action  as  frictional  elec-
tricity :  from  similar  reasons  I  hold  that  the  influence  of
theruio-cloctricity  could  not  have  been  strong  enough  here,
to  allow  of  the  observed  phenomena  of  such  magnitude
iHiing  attributed  to  it,  but  I  am  of  opinion  that  in  addition  to
M»u  iHU'tial  influence  which  these  agents  may  have  had,  to
Ihu  IVii^tion  itself  is  to  be  assigned  the  greater  part  of  the
|im)uliar  liiininous  appearances  which  the  sensitive  persons
\m^  pc*rc4)ived.  And  so  I  believe,  though  perhaps  with  less
imrtaiufy,  that  fnction  must  he  regarded  as  tlie  seventh
Mimrvv  uf  the  forvv  divAling  in  crystals,  i^c.


mem  OF  TH»  NBW  FOECE,


159


131.  In  the  researches  on  the  sun's  rays  and  moonlight,
we  have  abeady  seen  that  light  assunics  an  important  posi-
tian  when  we  enter  upon  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the
pecuhar  force  with  whicti  we  are  now  dealing.  Whether
this  inheres  by  and  for  itself  in  light,  or  is  only  associated
with  it,  or  whether  it  depends  on  other  radiations  occurring
simultaneously  with  light,  are  questions  certainly  of  essential
moment,  but  winch,  however,  I  do  not  regard  as  in  place
here,  where  the  bushiess  is  in  the  first  place  to  determine
the  sources  generally,  the  analysis  of  the  inner  nature  of
these  sources  necessarily  remaining  as  the  object  of  fntnre
inquiry.  I  will  therefore  merely  investigate  whether  light
in  general  is  to  be  counted  among  them.  The  examination
of  aiiiticial  light  still  remained  to  be  done.  When  in  broad
idaylight  I  brought  a  hghted  wax  candle  near  Miss  Maix,
tie  felt  that  it  produced  a  pecuhar  coldness  in  her.  Severa*
ch  candles  increased  this  cold,  which  then  attacked  her
whole  body.  I  removed  the  candles  from  her,  going  a  step^
at  a  time,  to  a  distance  of  the  length  of  tw  o  rooms,  amounting
altogether  to  nearly  eight  yards.  The  cold  produced  by ,
them  w^as  diminished  very  much  at  this  distance,  but  did
not  entirely  disappear.  She  remarked  that  this  cold  ])er-
ceptibly  resembled  that  which  was  diffused  from  the  wire
ranied  to  her  from  the  sunshine.  Tliis,  to  her  unexpected
observation,  reminded  her  that  she  had  never  been  able  to
iTmain  at  certain  ceremonies  customary  at  times  among
catholics,  consisting  of  strong  illuminations  at  night  with
hundreds  of  burning  candles ;  for  instance,  illuminations  of
the  rcpreaentation  of  the  holy  sepulchre,  &c. ;  the  biu-niog
hghts  had  always  so  thoroughly  chilled  her,  that  she  had  been
cfjmpelled  to  leave.  But  Miss  Mabt  had  suffered  in  a
slighter  degree  from  her  at  present  greatly  heightened  com-
plaint, during  her  whole  lite,  and  is  to  be  regarded  as  one
iKjrn  sensitive,  who  at  every  age  has  been  subject  to  the
ftennations  dependent  on  it,  even  when  she  appeared  healthy


1(10


EATS  OF  TOE  TOK,  MC


mid  went  about.  The  peculiar  influence  of  light  upon  Tier,
from  distances  at  which  even  radiant  heat  could  be  but  ex*
tremely  weak,  and  producing  a  sensation  on  the  nerves
diametrically  opposed  to  that  of  lieat,  had  therefore  been
always  clearly  manifested,  even  at  a  time  wlien  no  one
imagined  that  there  was  anything  abnormal  in  it.

132.  Counter-experiments  on  Miss  Reiehel  led  to  the
same  results.  She  felt  a  burning  candle  to  give  out  cokl  at
a  considerable  distance ;  two  candles  acted  at  almost  twice
as  far;  an  argand  lamp  stdl  farther  off  j  at  the  greatest  dis-
tance when  a  ground  glass  globe  w^as  placed  over  the  flamc-

133.  I  tested  by  tlie  often-adopted  methods,  whether  the
causes  of  these  direct  sensations  were  transferable  to  third
bodies,  conductible  through  them,  &c.  In  front  of  a  copper
plate,  which  was  connected  wdth  Miss  Maix  by  a  wire  cun-
di\ctor,  I  placed  two  burning  ivax  candles  in  such  a  manner
that  she  could  not  see  them,  and  consequently  could  not
njceive  rays  from  them.  She  experienced  simultaneously-
increased  warmth  in  the  wire,  and  the  pleasant  cooling  sen-
sntion  which  tlie  sun's  rays  gave  her,  only  nnieh  M'eaker
here  than  from  the  sun.  This  was  repeated  at  different
tiiues  with  the  same  resuhi=5.  The  same  was  performed  with
Miss  Reichel.  I  placed  eight  burning  stearine  candles  near
a  large  cojiper  plate ;  the  observer  was  in  the  next  room,
her  hand  connected  with  the  copper  plate  by  a  copper  wire
conductor.  She  perceived  the  efleet  ver}^  strongly,  in  the
known  way,  and  felt  the  coolness  flowing  from  the  end  of
the  wire  at  a  considerable  distance.  In  a  second  experiment,
in  order  to  moderate  the  action  of  the  lieat  I  interposed  a
glass  plate  between  the  candles  and  the  copper  plate ;  the
effect  was  very  little  diminished.

134.  These  results,  according  to  which  rays  of  fire-light
on  the  one  hand  directly  afiirt  the  sensitive,  and,  on  the
other,  imbue  other  bodies  with  tlie  peculiar  force  acting  on
them,  producing  therel>y  apparent  alterations  of  teuiperatm-e,


AS  SOURCES  OP  THE  NEW  FOBOE.  161

moreover  showed  themselves  to  be  conductible,  and  affoinkd
flame^like  appearances  in  the  dark,  led  me  to  the  conviction
that  not  only  the  sun  with  the  moon,  but  light  generally,  is
a  source  of  the  force  detected  in  crystals,  8fc.^  and  is  the
eighth  of  these  sources.


RETROSPECT.

a.  The  sun's  rays  carry  with  them  a  power  to  affect  sen-
sitive patients,  which  agrees  perfectly  with  the  force  residing
in  crystals,  the  magnet,  and  the  human  hands.

h.  The  greatest  influence  in  reference  to  a  force  cor-
responding to  that  of  crystals  is  manifested  in  the  outer
borders  of  the  red  and  violet-blue  rays  of  the  solar  spectrum.

c.  The  light  of  the  moon  possesses  the  force  now  under
consideration  in  a  strong  degree.

d.  Heat  is  a  source  of  it.

e.  It  occurs  with  friction,  and

/!  It  appears  as  a  result  of  the  light  of  flame.


M


162


FIFTH  TREATISE.


CHEMICAL  FORCE — ELECTRICITY.

135.  If  we  take  a  glance  at  the  condition  of  chemistry  in
the  times  of  Agricola,  Kunkel,  and  Brand,  we  acquire  some
conception  of  the  relations  in  which  this  science  at  present
stands  to  the  subjects  of  the  present  researches.  Scattered
isolated  fragments  of  observations  lie  around,  but  in  what  a
condition  !  To  give  an  idea  of  this,  I  will  select  merely  one
example.  For  more  than  seventy  years  an  instrument  has
been  used  in  medicine,  which  bears  the  name  of  a  magnetic
tub  {baquet) ;  I  scarcely  dare  describe  it,  for  it  will  be  an
abomination  to  every  one  accustomed  to  a  scientific  treat-
ment of  natural  knowledge.  A  small  wooden  tub  is  filled
with  a  medley  of  the  most  absurd  and  senseless  kind,  stirred
up  with  magnetized  water,  an  iron  rod  inserted  in  it,  and
from  this  woollen  threads  are  carried  out  to  sick  persons  of
various  sorts,  to  whom  is  to  fiow  healing  vital  magnetism.
And  this  mixture  consists  of  iron  slag,  broken  glass,  ham-
merings of  iron  from  a  forge,  steel  filings,  roots,  iron  ore,
grains  of  com,  sulphur,  sawdust,  glass  plates,  wool,  pieces
of  old  iron,  aromatic  vegetables,  quicksilver,  all  magnetized
and  mystically  stratified  one  above  another.  What  that  is
pure  and  healing  can  come  out  of  such  a  devil's  kitchen  ?  is
the  reasonable  question.  How  any  real  magnetizing  effect
can  be  produced  from  a  mess  of  this  kind,  will  certainly  be
as  incomprehensible  to  every  physicist  as  it  is  to  me.  And
yet  all  who  have  occupied  themselves  with  magnetic  cures
agree  that  it  is  a  constantly  persisting  fountain  of  magnetism
which  may  be  made  to  flow  to  the  patients  through  the
conductors,  &c.


CHEMTCAi  FORCE — ^ELECTBICTTY.


168


136.  Every  one  who  is  acquainted  merely  with  the  rudi-
ments of  such  matters,  sees  that  this  cannot  be  a  galvanic,
electrical,  still  less  a  magnetic  apparatus  ;  and  yet  it  has  an
effect  which,  recognised  now  for  seventy  years,  has  some
analogy  to  these  reagents,  and  must  be  based  upon  a  hidden
something,  whatever  this  may  be ;  otherwise  it  could  not
have  spun  out  its  obscure  existence  to  the  present  day.
Asking  myself  what  really  might  operate  in  it,  only  one
thing  seemed  to  have  any  clear  relation,  namely,  chemical '
actiofi ;  room  was  blindly  given  for  a  planless  play  of  affiui-
ties,  and  decompositions  and  combinations  must  go  on
slowly  in  the  tub.  In  my  previous  researches  I  had  disco-
vered eight  very  different  scairccs  of  one  and  the  same  force;
the  said  force  here  flowed,  according  to  the  statements  of
the  pliysicians,  from  a  mixture  of  substances  attacking  and
decomposing  one  another  in  most  opposite  ways :  might  not
the  chemical  disturbance  alone  excite  the  same  imf>ondcrable
agent  ?  Might  not  chemical  force  also  be  a  8om*ce  of  that
asflociated  with  crystals,  the  magnet,  living  organisms,  the
sun,  heat,  &:c,  ?  *

137.  To  investigate  tliis,  I  took  a  glass  of  w^ater,  tlissolved
bicarbonate  of  soda  in  it,  inseited  the  end  of  a  wire  five  feet
long,  gave  Miss  Maix  the  other  end  into  her  hand,  and
placed  a  pinch  of  pow  dercd  tartaric  acid  upon  the  edge  of
the  glass ;  then  gave  the  patient  the  usual  inten  al  to  accus-
tom herself  t^o  the  arrangement,  and  scattered  the  acid  in  the
solution.  As  soon  as  the  decomposition  commenced,  the
same  sensation  of  heat,  then  of  cooling,  came  to  the  observer's
hand,  as  when  I  had  touched  the  end  of  the  wire  with  my
ten  fingers,  with  a  large  crjstal,  or  with  a  magnetic  rod.

*  I  muet  protest  against  the  imputation  of  a  medical  yereration  for
the  de?il*»  kitchen  on  ihe  part  of  the  invealigatore  into  mesmeric  phe-
nomena in  England,  I  never  saw  a  baquet,  nor  ever  thought  of  makiog
one,  bat  I  rejoice  that  the  ideas  connected  with  aach  an  absurdity  hare
oecaaiitDed  the  Baron  to  produce  thi«  treatise.


184  CHEMICAL  FORCE — ELECTRICITY.

This  result  displayed  itself  so  quickly  and  powerfully,  that  it
made  the  girl  grow  quite  red.  It  uniformly  persisted  as
long  as  the  chemical  disturbance  continued  in  the  glass,  and
subsided  when  this  ceased.

138.  I  had  thus  seized  the  clue  lo  crystallic  force,  &c.,  in
chemical  action ;  my  next  business  was  to  acquire  assurance
of  its  certainty.  I  might,  in  the  first  place,  be  met  by  the
objection  that  the  electricity  developed  in  the  process  of  de-
iDomposition  had  acted  on  the  sensitive  patient.  Lavoisier
and  Laplace,  and  more  recently  L,  Gmelin,  beUeved  that
they  observed  evolution  of  free  negative  electricity  in  the  de-
composition of  carbonate  of  lime  by  sulphuric  acid ;  Pfaff
and  others  contest  this.  Without  delaying  with  the  dis-
cussion of  authorities,  I  thought  it  safest  for  the  concrete
case,  to  apply  myself  to  direct  experiment.  I  connected  a
conducting  wire  with  a  Bohnenberger's  electroscope,  and
carried  it  into  the  isolated  fluid  contained  in  a  long-stemmed
glass,  in  which  I  prepared  a  mixture  of  tartaric  acid  with
carbonate  of  soda.  The  gold-leaf  did  not  move.  I  applied
the  condensing  plates,  and  added  new  portions  of  the  salt
land  acid  to  the  water  in  the  glass  ;  but  not  even  now,  after
the  separation  of  the  plates,  could  any  trace  of  movement  of
the  gold  leaf  be  detected.  If  free  electricity  did  present
itself  in  such  a  tumultuary  action  as  this,  it  is  not  very  pro-
bable in  itself  that  it  would  appear  in  insensible  amount,
certainly  least  of  all  such  as  arose  from  the  purely  chemical
share  in  it.  I  am,  therefore,  obliged  to  conclude  that  elec-
tricity here,  where  no  current  of  it  can  be  set  up,  is  not  set
free ;  while  that  which  might  take  part  in  the  process,  is,  by
known  laws,  again  confined  by  the  products  in  the  moment
of  origin,  through  the  chemical  act  itself.  The  effect  upon
the  hand  of  the  patient,  therefore,  cannot  be  produced  by  a
current  of  electricity,  and  consequently  it  belongs  entirely
to  those  results  which  constitute  the  object  of  the  present
researches.


CEEMlCAl  rORCK — ELECTRICITY.


ISO.  1  return  to  the  detail  of  the  collected  observations.
I  |)1iiced  in  Miss  Maix's  hands  a  glass  of  diluted  sulphuric
iicid  and  an  ii*ou  wire.  After  a  pause,  the  wire  was  intro-
duced into  the  acid,  and  the  solution  proceeded  with  an
cvulution  of  hydrogen  gas.  She  immediately  found  the  wire
grow  warmer  until  apparently  very  hot ;  while  cool  air  was
diffused  all  I'ound  the  glass,

140.  I  placed  in  lier  hands  a  glass  of  water,  upon  which
lay  a  paper  cuntaiiung  suaie  comuiuu  salt,  and  after  a  short
pause  the  salt  was  thrown  into  the  water,  which  she  gently
agitated.  She  felt  the  glass  acquire  crystallic  force  for  some
time  during  the  solution,  then  remain  at  rest ;  the  sensation
ilowed  upward  to  the  arm.

141.  Contn>Uing  experiments  were  made  on  Miss  Rei-
chcL  First,  the  trial  with  the  bicarbonate  of  soda  and  tar-
taric acid,  then  the  dilute  sulphuric  acid  with  an  iron  rod
inserted  ui  it ;  lastly,  also  with  the  water  and  connnon  salt :
they  all  succeeded  in  the  same  way,  I  made  further  expe-
riments wth  the  following  mixtures  t — sulphuric  acid  with
caustic  soda; acetic,  tartaiic^  fumaric,  citric  and  hippiu-ic

^id,  successively,  in  excess  upon  iron  filings ;  sidphuric  acid
"^•in  excess  upon  carbonate  of  soda,  &c. We  had,  at  that
time,  freshly  pressed  wiuc-niust  in  full  fenuentation,  and  I
tried  this ;  all  these  chemical  actions  gave  abundant  evolu-
tion of  cr}'stalhc  force.

142.  1  then  took  some  weak  solutions :  sugar,  alcohol,
crystallized  borax,  crystallized  carbonate  of  soda  and  jxjtass,
in  water ;  then  borax  and  sub-carbonate  of  potash  which
had  been  exi>08cd  to  the  air  -  sulphmet  of  calcium  and  of
potai5^ium;  lastly,  freshly-burnt  lime.  All  these,  when  passed
into  water,  produced  either  coolness  or  warmtli  in  the  wire,
continuing  until  the  solutions  were  complete,  when  the
peculiar  eflects  immediately  vanished. In  every  case,  ihere^

Jore^  even  when  only  fij:aiwn  o/ water  of  crystatlization  or


166  CHEMICAL  FORCE ELECTEICITT.

wiere  uAuiion  in  water  occurred^  the  chemical  action  dfvo^
loped  a  free  mnni/e$tatian  of  crystallic  force,  ifc.

145.  I  was  curious  to  see  whether  a  glass  of  water  could
be  magnetized,  as  it  is  called,  by  means  of  chemical  action.
Here  mere  conduction  through  a  wire  could  scarcely  convey
Mifficient  force ;  I  required  the  chemical  action  in  the  un-
divided expression  of  its  power.  To  obtain  this,  I  placed
one  glass  within  another.  Into  the  inner  1  poured  spring
water,  into  the  outer  a  solution  of  bicarbonate  of  soda.  I
threw  some  tartaric  acid  into  the  latter,  and  had  it  slowly
stirred  by  a  female  hand,  until  the  effervescence  subsided.
'Fbe  inner  glass  was  then  taken  out,  and  handed  to  Miss
Maix,  to  drink.  The  water  was  found  as  strongly  mag-
netized as  if  it  had  been  exposed  five  minutes  to  the  sun's
rays,  but  not  so  strongly  as  in  the  earlier  experiments  with
twenty  minutes  of  sunshine.  After  she  had  tasted  it,  I  sub-
yxUid  the  same  glass  of  water  to  the  same  process  a  second
time ;  when  she  drank  of  it  again,  she  found  it  almost  twice
as  strongly  magnetic.  I  afterwards  repeated  a  similar  trial
with  MiHS  R<;ichel,  in  which  I  used  caibonate  of  potass  and
sulpliuric  aind  with  the  same  results.  Consequently,  we  can
render  water  magnetic  by  chemical  force,  as  n^ellas  by  the
mnynel  itnelf

144.  During  the  above  experiments,  I  made  both  Miss
Maix  nrul  Miss  llcichel  hold  separate  copper  conducting
wires,  th(5  ends  of  which  were  dipped  in  dilute  sulphuric
acid.  One  of  thcHc  was  nearly  1 00  yards  long.  But  the
effect  was  nianifc;Ht(i(l  even  at  this  great  distance,  and  Miss
Ueichcl  jKirceivcd  at  the  end  of  the  wire  which  she  held  in
her  hand  every  insertion  and  removal  of  the  opposite  end,
which  were  evident  to  the  hand,  not  instantaneously,  but
after  a  little  interval  of  from  fifteen  to  twenty  seconds.

145.  There  still  remain  the  investigations  on  the  lumi-
nous phonomenn,  abundance  of  which  I  went  through  care-


eHRMICAL  FORCE — BLRCTRICITY.


167


fully  with  Miss  Reichel  On  the  one  hand,  I  tried  a  series
of  chemical  and  mechanical  solutions  alone ;  on  the  other
hand,  according  to  their  etlect  ujion  the  opposite  end  of  the
conducting  wue  dipped  in  them,  in  the  daik.  Sugar,
CM'bonat€  of  soda,  borax,  &c.  were  dissolved  separately  in
glasses  of  water.  A  glass  rod  was  nsed  to  stir  them.  Even
before  this  was  applied,  the  contents  of  the  glass  emitted  a
red  light  in  the  dai*k. A  fine  Imninosity  began  to  sweep

jover  the  fluid,  flowing  upwards.  A  largish  tuft  of  Ught
Bcended  from  the  further  end  of  the  glass  rod*  As  I
dropi)ed  the  pieces  of  sugar  into  the  w^ater,  and  they  became
wetted,  they  emitted  a  red  light,  according  to  the  observer,
and  sank  in  the  water  hke  red  fragments. Therefore,  the

involution  of  light  produced  by  the  process  of  solution  com-
menced instantly  the  sugar  came  in  contact  with  the  water*
As  I  stUTed  it  slowly  in  the  dark,  1  myself  saw  very  strongly
luminous  flashes  from  the  sugar,  at  each  gentle  friction  witli

Jhe  glass  ix>d,  and  hem,  in  water  where  tlie  whole  outer
face  of  the  sugar  was  half  dissolved,  it  could  scarcely,  or
only  by  a  great  stretch,  be  assumed  to  be  electrical,  as  the
flashes  produced  1)y  rul)bing  loaf  sugar,  chalk,  &c.  in  the
air,  arc  commonly  imagined  to  be,  although  there  is  not  the
slightest  evidence  for  it.  I  placed  some  freshly-biu^nt  time
in  a  porcelain  capsule,  and  dropi>cd  some  water  on  to  it.  As
^oon  as  the  internal  disturbance  connected  with  solution
began*  and  steam  appeared,  the  entire  mass  of  hme  appeared
to  the  observer  to  glow  with  a  white  light,  and  a  dull  blue
flame  rose  above  it  to  the  height  of  a  hand  She  imagined
the  dull  appeanmce  to  be  caused  by  tlie  atjueous  vapour.
Xbese  flames  endured  of  the  same  size  for  about  a  fpiarter
of  811  hour  after  the  chemical  action  had  ceased  ;  they  then
began  to  sink,  and  ceased  m  half  an  hour.  Sulphmric  acid
poured  into  water  at  once  fonncd  red  flames  in  the  glass,
waving  on  the  water.  When  I  stured,  these  inci*eased  so
ujueh,  that  they  rose  to  the  height  of  a  full  span  aliovc  the


1081


CW^tmrXh  rORCE — ^EL^CTRICIfT.


^tts.  *Hie  etfect  of  heat  was  here  evidently  associated  with
that  of  chemical  action.  The  glass  stirring  rod  also  acquired
a  tuft  of  flame  on  its  upper  end.  Fermeuting  mne-must
emitted  a  continuous  yellowish,  doll  flame.

140.  An  iron  wire  30  yards  long  was  led  in  the  day-time
to  the  observer,  placed  on  the  darkened  staircase,  and  the
outer  end  dipped  into  dilute  sulphuric  acid.  After  the  lapse
of  half  a  minute,  she  saw  a  slender  column  of  fire,  a  span  and
a  half  long,  ascend  from  the  extremity,  and  this  r^jse  and
sank  as  the  wire  was  moved  in  and  out  of  the  acid.  The
same  recurred  with  a  solution  of  sugar  in  water  ;  the  flame
at  the  end  of  the  long  wire  was  even  somewhat  larger  than
from  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  upon  iron  wire.  In  another
experiment,  a  biuss  wire  4  yards  long  was  employed ;  it  gave
the  same  result,  with  the  slight  ditterence  that,  where  the
iiTin  wire  flame  had  appeared  white  and  reddish-blue,  the
l)rass  wire  emitted  a  white  and  green  Ught.  Dried  Unie  stirred
up  in  excels  of  water  gave  a  flame  a  span  high  on  iron  wm^.
Thus  in  every  case,  wheti  chemical  actio7i  occiitTed^  light
and  flame  aim  appeared  to  the  sensitive  in  the  dark,

147,  In  an  examination  of  the  chemical  causes  of  the
potential  essence  hei'e  investigated,  1  would  not  omit  the
flame  of  burning  bodies,  which  is  in  the  highest  degree  a
chemical  process.  But  since  it  is  associated  with  heat  and
the  development  of  liglit,  there  did  not  at  first  appear  any
prospect  of  obtaining  simple  results.  I  might  have  included
the  exprriments  made  ui  this  respect  just  as  well  mider  the
treatment  of  heat  or  light.  I  brought  a  pan  fidl  of  glowing
charcoal  near  Miss  Reichel  At  a  distance  of  a  yard  she
found  it  cold  ;  she  felt  it  cool  at  the  whole  length  of  the
room.  I  have  already  detailed  the  efiects  of  the  flame  of
candles  on  the  sensitive.  1  hghted  a  shallow  capsule  of
spirits  of  \vine,  then  of  pure  alcohol,  and  allowed  them  to
biu*n  away ;  she  felt  cold  from  both  flames  at  a  sUght  dis-
tance. 1 burned  various substances,  both positive and


GifSncriIti  fOBeE — ILECfTRIClTY.


160


negative, in her  presence, such as resin,  sulphur,  and
globules  of  potassium ;  all  of  these,  especially  the  last  two,
were  found  cold. But  it  cannot  be  simply  detennined  here
what  emanation  it  was  that  produced  coolness  to  the  sensitive,
and  was  the  ultimate  cause  of  this  crystalHc  force* Light  I
appears  to  take  pitiportionally  little  pari  in  it,  for  the  effects
of  alcohol  and  of  sidphm*,  from  wiiicli  there  Ls  little  evolu-
tion of  light,  wei'e  not  found  weaker  than  that  of  stearine
candles. Real  lieat  almost  always  afforded  sensations  of
apparent  lieat,  as  we  see  by  the  last  treatise. Since,  there-
fore, the  flame  here  always  emitted  predominant  cold,  the
reason  of  this  must  be  either  in  the  products,  or,  as  is  most  j
probable,  iu  the  chemictd  action  itself,  as  this  does  so  iaJ
all  decompositions  without  flame,

14ti»  From  the  present  investigation  of  chemical  force,
we  will  pass  immediately  to  one  on  the  voltaic  pile.  Since-
the  hydro-electric  chain  is  one  of  the  most  important  foci
of  diemical  force,  I  shall  take  the  liberty  to  anticipate  the
final  result  of  this,  namely,  that  there,  also,  a  great  spring
of  cr^'stalline  force  flows  from  the  interchange  of  matter,
with  all  the  attributes  which  we  have  observed  in  it  elsc-
where*  This  invasion  of  the  system  of  the  present  w^ork
must  he  excused,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  necessaiy  to  col-
lect all  kinds  of  chemical  processes  in  the  subjoined  de-
duction.

149.  The  parallelism  of  the  properties  of  the  so-called
magnetic  phenomena  associated  with  chemical  force,  with)
those  which  we  have  found  in  crystals,  the  magnet,  human
liands,  heat,  light,  &c.,  is  complete,  and  chemhm  declares
itself  as  the  ninth  in  the  series  oj  sources  of  this  force.

150.  The  field  of  these  reseaix'hes  here  opens  out  to  an
immeasurable  extent ;  but  this  can  scarcely  surprise  ;  such
a  result  must  have  shown  itself  in  the  distance  with  the
carUest  disc^overies  in  crystals.  Chemical  action,  solution^
decomposition,  combination,  intercliangc  in  the  groupmgs  -


170  CBEMJCAL  rORCE — ^ELICTUCITT.

of  the  eiements,  stand  in  such  close  connection  with  the
da^TDCiMm  and  reocmstniction  of  crystalline  forms,  that  as
aocffi  as  a  £aroe  like  this  dedares  its  presence  in  crystals,  it
most  be  placed  almost  in  necessary  connection  with  the
Ibffces  and  actions  which  bring  about  the  separation  and
reunion  of  the  molecules.  It  was  therefore  to  be  anticipated
that  chi^nical  force  would  and  must  be  reactive  here.  I
hope  that  it  will  fumL^^h  us  with  the  means  of  concentrating
the  force  in  question,  and  facilitating  further  investigations
to  a  greater  extent  than  has  yet  been  accomplished,  where
I  have  been  almost  wholly  restricted  to  the  irritabihty  of
sensitive  persons,  and,  above  all,  that  it  will  afiSnd  what  I
have  hitherto  wanted — a  more  convenient  reagent,  and  a
more  certain  measure  for  its  relative  amount.

151.  And  now  let  us  turn  our  eyes  back  to  the  magnetic
tub ;  the  strange  affair  loses  its  mysteiy :  truly  at  the  pain  of
still  greater  ridicule.  It  is  merely  an  accidentally  aroused,
slowly  proceeding,  chemical  action,  which  gives  out  the
desired  force,  exactly  as  a  slowly  burning  fire  gives  out
gradual  and  continued  heat.  It  is  a  current  of  the  force  of
the  magnet,  crystals,  and  human  hands,  flowing  slowly  from
the  chemical  action,  which  is  thus  very  improperly  called
animal  magnetism.  It  is  now  comprehensible  why  the
"  baquet/'  as  it  gradually  becomes  inert,  acquires  new  force
when  stirred  up  again  months  after,  since  new  surfaces  are
exposed  to  fresh  solution ;  conceivable,  moreover,  why  every
new  practitioner  can  make  a  new  medley,  and  yet  always
attain  the  same  effect,  because  it  does  not  matter  at  all
what  things  they  arc  that  act  upon  one  another,  if  they  will
only  ferment  and  decompose  each  other.  Finally,  we  can
understand  why  one  who  fills  a  tub  with  water  and  glass
alone  can  produce  little,  another  who  succeeds  him  no  mag-
netic effect  at  all,  since  glass  and  water,  let  any  amount  of
magnetic  conjurations  be  said  over  them,  will  not  enter  into
chemical  action,  &c. All  the  wonderful  sni}erstructure  of


CHEMICAL  POROE ^^II.ECTRICITY-


171


the  magnetic  tub,  which,  from  the  time  of  Mesmcr,  has  not
a  little  contributed  to  render  animal  magnetism  ridiculous,
and  to  expose  it  to  shame,  vnW  consequently  be  cleared
away  for  the  futm^c,  and  any  simple,  slowly  proceccUng
chemical  opemtion,  perhaps  best  of  all  an  open  voltaic  cir-
cuit, will  take  its  place,  by  which  means  the  power  mil  be
acquired  of  arranging  it  stronger  or  weaker  as  may  be  most
desirable,  with  a  choice  of  very  varied  modiiications  in  the
smallest  possible  space,

152.  But  the  examination  of  chemical  forces  leads  us
into  another  still  more  interesting  path.  It  leads  us  to  the
source  from  which,  to  all  appearance,  organic  life  itself
derives  its  so-called  magnetic  force,  to  the  focus  at  which
the  flaming  forces  are  lighted,  which  emerge  from  our
finger-ends,  and,  as  we  shall  hereatler  see,  from  still  moi-e
noble  parts  of  our  curious  corporeal  structure.  This  is
dif/estion.  It  being  proved  that  a  main  source  of  that
magnet-like  force  lies  in  chemism,  in  the  phiy  of  interchang-
ing aiiinitie'S,  while  digestion  is  nothing  else  but  an  ex-
change, a  constant  separation  and  recom|>osition  of  matters,
enduring  uuintemiptcdly  so  long  as  we  live,  under  the
influence  of  vitality — -it  follows  necessarily  that,  like  as  we
have  seen  in  ever}%  even  such  weak  chemical  action  as  the
simple  solution  of  sugar,  common  salt,  alcohol  or  suli>huric
acid  in  mere  water,  magnet-like  force  will  be  uninter-
ruptedly evolved  along  our  intestinal  canal^  and  must  be
placed  by  this  gi*eat  organ  at  the  ser\  ice  of  tlie  whole  or-
ganism. But  this  is  not  all.  The  nutriment  digested  in
the  stomach,  and  then  elaborated  in  the  intestines,  becomes
absorbed,  chylitied,  in  its  turthcr  coiu^e,  carried  to  the
lymph  and  blood  by  countless  large  and  small  vessels,  here
again  chemically  changed,  carried  fiulher  and  further,  more'
and  more  altered  chemicaliy,  and  thus  onward,  ever  fnrther
ttuned to account  in  innumerable  decompositions  as  an


m^im


172  CHEMICAL  FORCE — ELECTRICITY.

inexhaustible  reservoir  of  ciystallic  force,  till  at  last it
leaves  the  body.

153.  All  that  I  have  just  said  of  digestion  holds  good,  in
altered  terms,  but  to  the  same  value,  of  respiration.  It
impregnates  us  with  oxygen,  carries  on  the  blood  to  every
comer  of  our  body,  sustains  on  every  hand  the  universal
interchange  of  substances,  and  secures  to  us,  as  one  of  its
chief  products,  the  animal  heat.  The  so-called  animal  mag-
netism stands  beside  this,  comes,  goes,  flows,  and  vanishes
with  it.  That  which  aflFords  heat,  the  chemical  action  in
the  body,  aflFords,  also,  as  we  have  seen,  crystallic  force,
magnetism,  or  whatever  we  please  to  call  this  potential
essence.  The  d3mamics,  which  constitute  the  inmost  life,
be  they  material  or  immaterial,  condition  one  another,  are
perhaps  one  and  the  same  in  the  ultimate  analysis;  and
when  they  here  appear  to  us  going  hand  in  hand,  this  is
but  one  more  warranty  that  we  are  on  the  right  track  oi
their  pursuit.

We  thus  obtain  explanation  whence  the  force  comes
which  issues  in  a  polar  condition  from  our  hands  and
fingers  as  from  a  magnet,  whence  it  is  continually  renewed,
and  why  it  unceasingly  flames  forth  from  us.  Chemical
action,  which  is  infinitely  busied  in  our  whole  structure,
produces,  sets  free,  and  delivers  it ;  and  when  we  meet
with  it,  we  see  it  already  subject  to  the  laws  of  its  in-
dwelling duaUsm.

154.  By  one  of  the  most  ingenious  combinations  of  pro-
foundly grasped  thoughts  the  present  century  has  produced,
Liebig  has  led  us  to  the  conception  that  all  motive  force  of
which  we  partake  is  aflForded  through  digestion,  all  the  heat
which  we  possess  through  respiration ;  that  is,  force  and  heat
are  the  results  of  chemical  action.  Though  this  cannot  yet
be  laid  down  either  in  an  algebraic  formula,  or  in  chemical
symbols,  although  the  form  of  the  expression  of  such  a  vast


oRn


178


idea  may  he  criticised  on  many  hands,  yet  its  profound
conception  strikes  so  forcibly  ou  our  understanding,  tinds
Bucli  ft  mighty  echo  in  tlie  totality  of  all  that  wc  at  present
know  of  nature,  tliat  its  final  triumph  stands  in  tolerably
certain  prospect.  And  since  nature  affords  fur  our  mainte-
nance nothing  but  air  and  nutriment,  we  can  scarcely
imagine  otherwise  than  that  she  has  db*ectly  appointed  us
to  draw  from  air  luul  food  all  tliat  is  necessaiy  to  tins  our
maintenance.  If,  then,  for  example,  it  happens,  and  cxilcu-
lation  shews  it»  that  we  daily,  on  the  one  hand,  Qppro|)riate
fourteen  ounces  of  carbou  from  the  food,  and,  ou  the  other
hiiud,  give  it  ofl'  again  by  respiration ;  when  w^e  further
find  that  we  daily  iuspire  forty-seven  ounces  of  oxygeUj
and  expire  just  as  many  ounces;  finally,  when  we  find  that|
the  carbou  and  oxygen  emerge  combined,  and  this  coud)i»|
nation  corresponds  to  exactly  as  great  an  evolution  of  heat
ns  we  requii'e  daily  :  so  much  striking  testimony  is  furnished
for  such  deduction,  that  all  scruples  must  soon  prudently
submit  to  be  overcome,

155.  I  regard  it  a  no  small  w^arrant  of  the  profound
natural  truth  of  my  resem^ches,  that,  as  is  seen,  I  have,  by
a  totally  different  series  of  observations  and  deductions,
arrived  at  the  same  new  field  on  w  hich  I  nnw^  meet  Liebig.!
Chemical  action  al)undantly  furnishes  the  active  principle  of
crj^stallic  force ;  the  human  body  overflows  with  this  circu-
lating potential  essence, — man  digests,  breathes,  decomposer,
combines,  and  interchanges  matter,  therefure  performs
chemical  action  evQTy  moment :  thus  is  it  not  only  clear,  it
is  necessary,  it  is  logically  inevitable,  that  man  derives  that
still  mysterious  force,  the  existence  of  which  is  made  know^n
by  these  researches,  from  the  play  of  rdfinitics ;  in  a  word,
from  chemism.  It  is  possible  to  doubt  wdicther  the  sun
lights  usj  since  it  is  often  day  while  yet  no  sun  is  to  be
seen ;  I  know  this  w-cll  enough,  and  do  not  fight  agauist  it.

156.  As  a  conclusion  to  this  section,  one  more  pimrtical


174  CHEMICAL  FORCE — ELECTBICITT.

application,  indeed  the  more  welcome  to  me  that  it  tears  op
one  of  the  deepest  roots  of  superstition,  the  most  hateful  foe
of  the  development  of  human  enlightment  and  freedom.
An  occurrence  which  took  place  in  Pfeffers  Garden  at
Golmar  is  tolerably  well  known,  and  has  been  spread  about
by  many  published  accounts. I  will  mention  the  most  im-
portant points  briefly. He  had  appointed  a  young  evange-
lical clergyman,  Billing,  as  his  amanuensis. The  blind
German  poet  was  led  by  the  arm  by  this  person  when  he
walked  out. This  occurring  in  his  garden,  which  lay  at
some  distance  from  the  town,  Pfeffel  remarked  that  every
time  they  came  to  a  particular  place,  Billing's  arm  trembled,
and  he  manifested  uneasiness. Some  conversation  about
this  ensued,  and  the  young  man  at  length  unwillingly  stated
that  as  often  as  he  came  over  that  spot  certain  sensations
attacked  him,  which  he  could  not  overcome,  and  which  he
always  experienced  at  places  where  human  bodies  were
buried. When  he  came  to  such  places  at  night  he  usually
saw  strange  sights.  With  a  view  to  cure  the  man  of  his  delu-
sion, Pfeffel  returned  with  him  to  the  garden  the  same  night.
When  they  approached  this  place  in  the  dark.  Billing  at
once  perceived  a  weak  light,  and  when  near  enough  the
appearance  of  a  form  of  immaterial  flame  waving  in  the  air
above  the  spot. He  described  it  as  resembling  a  woman's
form, one  arm  laid  across  the  body,  the  other  hanging
down ;  wavering,  erect,  or  at  rest ;  the  feet  elevated  about
two hands' breadth above  the  surface  of  the ground.
Pfeffel  walked  up  to  it  alone,  as  the  young  man  would  not
follow  him,  struck  about  at  random  with  his  stick,  and  ran
across  the  place,  but  the  spectre  did  not  move  or  alter ;  it
was  as  when  one  passes  a  stick  through  flame,  the  fiery  shape
always  recovered  the  same  form. Many  things  were  done,
during  several  months  ;  parties  taken  thither,  but  the  mat-
ter remained  always  the  same,  and  the  ghost-seer  always  held
to  his  earnest  assertion,  consequently  to  the  supposition


CHEMICAL  FORCE — ELECTRICITV.


175


I


tlmt  some  one  must  lie  Ijurietl  there.  At  last  Pfeffcl  had
the  place  dug  up.  At  some  de|)th  a  solid  layer  of  white
litne  wa<%  met  with,  about  as  long  and  as  broad  as  a  grave,
tolerably  thick,  and  when  this  was  broken  through  they  dis-
covered the  skeleton  of  a  hmiian  body.  It  was  found,  there-
fore,  that  a  human  being  had  been  biu-ied  there,  and  had
been  covered  with  a  layer  of  fjiiicklime,  hs  is  the  custom  at
the  time  of  pestilence,  earthquakes,  or  similar  occurrences.
The  bones  were  taken  out,  the  hole  tilled  up  again,  and  the
surffice  levelled.  When  Billing  was  again  taken  there  the
ap]K*arance  was  gone,  and  the  uoctiurual  spirit  had  vanished
for  ever.

157.  I  need  scarcely  indicate  to  the  reader  what  I  now
thought  of  this  history,  which  has  given  rise  to  much  dis-
cussion in  Germany,  since  it  came  from  the  most  trust-
worthy man  hving,  and  theologists  and  psychologists  have
given  it  a  thousand  ih*eadfid  interpretations.  In  my  opinion
it  belongs  entirely  to  the  domain  of  chemistryi  and  finds  a
simple  and  clear  explanation  in  natiu-al  science,  A  human
body  affords  fruitful  material  for  chemical  decomposition,
for  fermentation,  putrescence,  vaporizations,  and  play  of
affinities  of  all  kinds.  A  layer  of  dry  quicklime  pressed
into  a  deep  hole,  unites  its  own  active  affinities  with  those
of  organic  substances,  and  gives  rise  to  a  long-continued
operation  of  them.  Rain  water  joins  from  above;  the  lime
first  falls  into  a  pulverulent  mass,  and  afterwards,  through
the  rain-water  oozing  into  it,  becomes  a  pasty  mass,  to  which
the  external  aur  has  only  very  slow  access.  Pits  of  slacked
lime  have  been  found  in  the  ruins  of  castles,  decayed  for
centmies,  still  so  well  presei*ved  that  it  could  be  used  for
mortar  of  new  buildings.  The  carbonic  acid,  therefore,
penetrates  constantly,  but  so  slowly,  that  in  such  spots  a
chemical  process  goes  on  through  many  years.  This  event,
therefore,  had  its  usual  natural  course  in  Pfeffers  garden ;
and  since  we  know  that  a  constant  emanation  of  the  flame


176  CHKMICAL  FORCE — ELECTRICITY.

of  ciystallk  force  accoiBpanies  it,  this  was  a  fieiy  ^^)earaiiC6,
which  must  necessarily  endure  until  the  affinities  of  the
corpse  and  the  lime  for  carbonic  acid,  &c.  were  brought  into
a  state  of  rest.  Whenever  a  living  man,  who  was  sensitive
to  a  certain  degree,  but  might  appear  to  be  otherwise  healthy,
came  there  and  entered  into  the  sphere  of  these  physi<»J
forces,  he  necessarily  would  feel,  by  day,  like  Miss  Maix,  and
by  night,  see  like  Miss  Reichel.  Ignorance,  fear,  and  super-
stition, then  shaped  the  luminous  appearance  into  the  spectral
figure  of  a  human  being,  and  furnished  it  with  arms,  head,
feet,  &c.,  as,  when  we  like,  we  may  shape  every  cloud  passing
ov^  a  bright  sky  into  a  man,  or  a  goblin.

1 58.  The  desire  to  deal  a  mortal  blow  to  the  monst^
superstition — ^which  a  few  centuries  since  poured  from  such
sources  so  inexpressible  a  number  of  miseries  over  European
society,  when,  in  unhappy  trials  for  witchcraft,  not  hundreds,
nor  thousands,  but  hundreds  of  thousands  of  innocent  per-
sons breathed  out  their  lives  miserably  on  the  rack  or  at  the
stake — ^led  me  to  the  experiment  of  bringing  a  highly  sen-
sitive person,  by  night,  into  a  cemetery.  I  thought  it  might
be  possible,  where  mouldering  corpses  thus  lay,  to  see  some-
thing of  the  kind  that  Billing  had  observed.  Miss  Reichel
had  the  courage,  unusual  in  her  sex,  to  promise  the  fulfil-
ment of  my  wish.  She  consented  to  be  taken,  on  two  dif-
ferent very  dark  nights,  from  Reisenbcrg  Castle,  where  she
was  residing  with  me,  to  the  cemetery  of  the  neighbouring
village  of  Griinzing.  The  result  actually  fulfilled  my  expec-
tation most  perfectly.  She  soon  saw  a  brightness,  and  per-
ceived along  one  of  the  mounds  a  fine  exhalation  of  flame ;
she  found  the  same  in  a  slighter  degree  on  a  second  grave.
However,  she  did  not  suppose  them  to  be  either  witches  or
ghosts,  but  recognised  the  fiery  appearance  from  one  to  two
spans  high,  as  a  luminous  vapour,  waving  over  the  graves
and  extending  over  the  ground,  the  length  of  the  latter.
Some  time  after  she  was  taken  to  two  large  grave-yai-ds,  near


CitEMtCAL  FORCET-mECrilTrttY.

Vienna,  where  SLweral  burials  occnn'ed  daily,  and  the  mounds
lay  around  in  tbousaiids. She  saw  oiany  graves  furnished
with  such  luminositiea. WHierever  she  looked,  she  found
herself  surrounded  by  fieiy  masses. But  these  showed
themselves  more  partieularly  over  all  new  graves  ;  while  on  i
very  old  ones  they  were  extinguished. She  described  the
appearance  as  less  like  clear  flame  than  a  dense  vapour-like  <
mass  of  fire,  intermediate  between  flame  and  mist. On
many  graves  this  fiery  light  was  as  nmeh  as  four  feet  high,
80  that  when  she  walked  into  it,  it  reached  up  to  her  neck,  ]
When  she  placed  her  hand  in  it,  it  was  as  though  she  hat!  I
brought  it  into  a  dense  fiery  cloud. She  did  not  manifest  i
the  least  imcasiness  at  it,  since  slie  had  been  accustomed  to

^^^ch  emanations  all  her  life,  and  had  seen  them  produced
in  countless  forms,  in  a  natural  way,  in  my  house. I  ami
convinced  that  all  persons  to  a  certain  degree  sensitive  willj
see  these  in  grave-yards,  and  in  those  very  much  used  always  ]
in  great  number's,  and  that  this  observatiou  may  readily  be
repeated  and  confirmed, (Postscript,  1847. — Since  these,
experiments,  which  were  made  in  the  year  1844,  I  have]
taken  five  other  sensitive  persons  to  grave-yards,  in  the  dark;  f
of  whom  two  were  invalids,  three  perfectly  healthy. All
these  confirmed,  word for  word,  the  statements  of  Miss
Reichel,  and  saw  the  lights  more  or  less  distinctly  over  all]
new  graves ;  so  that  the  fact  can  no  longer  be  open  to  the  I
slightest  doubt,  and  may  be  tested  anywhere,) Thousands!

^f  ghost  stories  will  now  meet  with  their  natural  explanation/j
id  thus  with  their  end. It  will  be  now  seen,  too»  that  ourT
old  women  were  not  so  far  wrong  when  they  asserted,  as  is"
well  known,  that  it  is  not  granted  to  every  one  to  see  the
spirits  of  the  departed  wander  over  the  graves;  for  in  fact
it  is  only  the  sensitive  who  can  see  in  the  dark  the  lumino-
sity of  the  imponderable  effluvia  from  chemical  decomposi*
tion  of  corpses. And  tlius  I  hope  I  have  succeeded  ii


178


CHEMICAL FOmCB — ELECTRTCITT,


tearing  down  one  of  the  thickest  veils  of  dark  ignorance  and
human  delusion.*


*  Again,  through  mesmerism,  we  obtain  a  strong  corroboration  of  a
fact,  which,  until  the  recent  importance  given  to  the  poisonous  influ*
encea  of  grave-yards,  would  bardly  in  this  country  have  been  credited.
JaDe  M.,  whose  case  has  offered  many  striking  j>eculiAritic»,  is  a  peraon
of  a  very  impressionable  nervous  constitution.  Among  other  curious
phenomena  developed  in  her  ca«ie,  was  that  of  a  very  powerful  agitation
and  sense  of  attraction  to  running  water ;  and  this  was  occasionally  so
sirong,  that,  in  riding  in  an  omnibus  along  the  Bayswater  road  for  a
couple  of  miles,  ahe  was,  always,  for  some  montlvs,  strongly  iucliiied  to
get  out  of  the  carriage  and  ruflh  towards  the  water.  It  htL%  now  and
then,  required  considerable  force  to  remove  her  from  the  sphere  of  the
influence  of  a  cistern,  where  the  water  was  rushing  into  it  tlirough
tlie  supply  pipes.  This  tendency  to  strong  attraction  by  springs,  or  by
water  in  moving  curcenta,  gradually  became  less  ;  but  was  succeeded  by
an  alarming  sense  of  sickneaa  whenever  ahe  passed  the  St.  Oeorge*a
bmTing  ground  in  the  Bayswater  Road.  She  assured  the  ladies  with
whom  she  lived  that  she  saw  blue  hghta  or  blue  hazy  clouds  of  light
OTiT  the  graves  in  that  ground  i — that  these  were  of  various  heigh  ts»
•ome  of  them  high  enough  to  envelope  a  person  who  should  stand  up-
right on  the  graves.  On  the  fresh  graves  the  hght  was  more  vivid,
higher  and  more  voluminouR,  than  on  those  not  so  recent.  These  lights
were  very  attractive,  and  notwirh»tanding  the  sickness  they  caused,
which  amounted  to  vomiting,  the  young  woman  had  a  great  desire  to
go  and  lie  down  on  the  graves.  All  this  I  had  learned,  before  1  thought
of  undertaking  to  supply  notes  to  this  work,  and  I  at>certained  that  no
one  of  the  parties  had  read  Gregory's  Abstract  of  Reichenbach's  re-
searches, or  was  cognizant  of  the  facts  therein  noticed  on  this  subject.
My  servant  George  Thacker,  now  the  husband  of  the  young  woman,
had  been  in  the  habit  of  walking  home  to  Bayswater,  from  my  houae^
with  her.  Having  heard  tliat  he  had  repeatedly  witnessed  tlio  pheno^*
mena  connected  with  the  grave  groundf^,  1  requested  bim  to  make  notes
of  what  he  had  seen.  He  has  i-omphed  with  the  request,  and  I  aub-
join  extracts  from  his  statement  i —

'*  One  evening  last  autumn,  I  accompanied  Jane  when  she  had  to
pa«s  Paddington  Church-yard.  She  appeared  at  the  tima  well  and
cheerful,  but  as  we  approached  the  burial-ground,  and  were  yet  lialf  a
atrcei's  length  from  it,  she  was  uncomfortable  and  fell  into  a  meam«ric
ilMp. Not  suspecting  the  cause,  I  went  on,  having  her  oo  my  left

il»  roy  right  being  towards  the  ccnirtory. I  could  not  prevent  her


J


eiTFKlCAL  FORCtt — ^BLECTRKITY


179


159,  We  now  come  to  the  Aonmiii  of  Elect nr Hi/,

By  a  superficial  consideration  of  tbe  foregoing  researches,

from  goiDg  round  behind  roe  and  takiug  my  other  arm,  and  then  trying
to  disengage  herself  from  me  altogether,  I  stared,  with  nstoniabment,
to  see  ber  so  attracted  towards  the  burial-gfound  :  I  coyld  compare  it
to  nothing  but  the  power  of  a  strong  magnet  over  a  needle*  I  recol-
lected that  a  stream  of  water  had  the  same  power  of  attraction  over  her
a  short  time  before.  We  walked  on,  or  rather  I  dragged  her  from  the
ground,  and  when  I  thought  she  was  sufficiently  recovered,  I  aj^kcd
her  what  had  so  atrangely  affected  her.  She  said  the  dead  attracted
her ;  one  in  particular,  lately  buried,  who  had  died  of  a  malignaut
ferer ;  and  if  t  had  not  been  with  her,  the  influence  of  that  body  would
have  drawn  her  to  the  grave,  and  she  should  have  laid  down  upon  it
and  died,  and  do  one  would  have  been  able  to  remove  her  till  she  was
dead.  As  it  was,  she  had  taken  much  of  the  disorder  inwardly*  and
felt  that  she  should  be  very  ilL  I  took  her  home,  and  was  much
grief ed  to  hear,  the  next  day,  that  she  had  had  a  miserable  niglit.  She
continued  ill  for  some  days.  Nothing  remained  on  her  stomach.  With
her  food  she  brought  up  what  appeared  to  be  the  skin  of  her  throat
and  stomach  ;  and  her  mouth  and  tongue,  which  were  parched,  and  of
a  white  colour,  peeled  off  their  skin  in  the  same  manner.  Some  time
after  tliis  she  accompanied  me  into  tbe  country,  on  a  short  visit  to  my
family^  and  she  was  similarly  affected  on  walking  with  mc  at  tbe  dis-
tance of  a  field* 8  length  from  the  church- yard.  Whenever  we  walked
in  Ijondon,  if  we  came  near  a  body  ready  for  intermeut,  or  if  we  passed
tbe  corrupting  ma^a  of  a  buriid-grouud,  it  mattered  not,  the  same  at-
t  seized  her. At  length,  determined,  if  possible,  to  find  a  remedy

Df  tJie  evil,  I  one  day  put  ber  to  sleep  aiid  excited  her  organ  of  ideality,
digging  her  to  endeavour,  by  the  use  of  her  clairvoyance,  to  point  out
vome  means  of  overcoming  the  evil.  After  thinking  some  time,  she
told  roe  a  small  bottle  of  mesmerized  water  earned  in  her  pocket,  or  in
'  hand,  would  have  tbe  required  effect,  and  would  draw  all  the  inju-

"ious  influence  into  itself,  and  she  should,  for  tbe  lime,  remain  unhurt.
On  trpng  the  experiment,  I  was  overjoyed  to  find  it  fully  successful ;
-And  ever  since  have  been  careful  to  keep  her  constantly  supplied  with
ah  phials  of  mesmerized  water.  Some  other  person  has  always  to
fipty  the«€  phials,  into  the  earth,  at  a  distance  from  Jane  ;  otherwise
Itie  Imd  influence  escaping  from  the  wziter  would  attack  her :  and  if  at
any  time  another  person  should  have  touched  these  bottles,  Jane  can
perceive  it  by  the  contents  looking  black  instead  of  blue  ;  and  in  this


CHTHTCAL  FORCE — ELECTRTCTTT.

it  nuiy  here  and  there  seem  m  if  electricity  alone,  exeitt»d
sometliiies  in  one  way  sometimes  in  another,  bc^re  the
greatest  share,  if  it  were  not  the  whole  basis,  of  the  phe-
nomena which  are  here  detailed.  The  following  results  will
show  what  is  to  be  thought  of  this-

160.  The  first  experinieut  was  for  the  purpose  of  seeing
what  amount  of  sensibility  for  galvanism  existed  in  the
patients  who  are  highly  excitable  by  steel  magnetism.  It
was  undertaken  with  Miss  Nowotny,  in  the  presence  of
M.  Baumgartner,  the  physicist.  I  brought  in  a  zinc  and
copper  element  of  about  twelve  square  inches,  between  the
members  of  which  was  placed  a  piece  of  linen,  moistened
with  salt  and  water,  Tlie  patient  took  in  her  hands  two
Gennan-silver  conductors,  which  were  connected  with  the
two  electrodes  by  short  copper  wires.  She  did  not  expe-
rience the  shghtest  eensatiou  from  the  current  thus  con-
ducted, although  it  gave  a  shock  with  the  multiplier.  She  did


case  their  virtae,  for  her,  ig  lost*  She  deBcribeft  the  appearance  of  this
perDieiouft  influence  rising  from  the  graves,  more  particularly  of  thos^
recently  buried,  aa  locking  like  beautiful  blue  vapoury  llames,  rising  to
a  great  height ;  or  like  the  mist  of  a  waterfall,  minted  with  thousands
of  bright  sparkhng  drops,  but  all  blue.  When  this  bad  iuflueuce  comes
over  her,  she  is  seized  with  a  violent  cough,  which  lasts  until  she  nearly
or  quite  sinks  with  the  exhaustion  produced  by  it."

Here  are  materials  for  reflection  on  the  force  yielded  by  the  chemism
of  dead  organic  matter.  When  will  man  be  wise  enough  to  dispose  of
the  dead  so  that  they  may  be  extensively  useful  to  the  Hving !  We
must  hope  for  good  by  the  progress  of  intelligence  among  the  masses.
I  can  remember  the  time  when  gentlemen,  students  of  anatomy,  were
obliged  to  risk  their  lives  in  exhumating  bodies  for  dissection.  Thirty-five
years  ago,  1  had  the  honour  of  putting  niy  name,  near  that  of  the  cele-
brated Lady  Morgan,  on  a  list  proposed  to  be  publi^jihed  by  Professor
Macartney,  for  the  good  of  mankind,  of  those  willing  to  cede  their  bodies
for  dissection^  in  order  to  oppose  the  ignonint  superstition  of  the  age.
The  glorious  Reichenbach  has,  in  this  treatise,  done  good  service  against
the  vile  demon  of  superstition.


IICAL  FOROE  —  MrECTBICI'


IBl


not  feci  tlie  sourish  taste  of  tlie  positive  couductor  on  her
tongue  more  strongly  or  differentl}^  from  us  who  were
hralttiy.  I  tried  Miss  Sturmaiin  with  a  soldered  zinc  aii^
I  tTjtj»cr  ch-ment  uf  nearly  four  squai'e  inches.  She  found  httlc
difference  between  this  element  when  I  placed  it  between
her  moistened  fingers,  and  separate  pieces  of  copper  or
zluc ;  at  most  the  metals  seemed  a  little  stronger  then,  but
hardly  decidedly  so.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfcr  did  not  feel  a
similar  element,  taken  in  her  moistened  rtugers,  any  more
strongly.  Miss  Mnix  could  just  distinguish  the  zinc  of  the
element  when  shr  held  it  in  her  fingers,  moistened  with  sal]t
and  water,  from  tree  zinc,  but  this  little  with  no  ccrtaintyj
A  large  scjnare  element  of  twelve  inches  on  a  side  she  found
httle  stiTtnger,  even  when  her  fingers  were  wetted  witli  a
saline  solution.  Miss  Reichel  found  this  reaction  just  the
same  as  her  predecessors ;  she  experienced  no  observable
inffuence  from  the  union  of  the  zmc  and  copper  into  one  ele-
ment, whether  this  were  large  or  small,  her  fingers  wetted
with  water,  or  a  saline  solution.  The  current  produced  ik
a  single  element,  nfter  the  subtraction  of  the  obstacles  to
the  passage,  nnd  with  the  little  tension  it  has,  is  indeed  very
weak  ;  but  if  the  reagent  in  which  it  has  to  act  be  in  a  high
degree  sensible,  it  is  fully  sufficient  to  produce  effects.  It
makes  the  nerves  of  frogs  contract,  diverts  the  needle,  de-
composes weak  iodide  of  potassium, &c.,  and  therefore  we  were
led  to  exj>ect  that  it  would  act  perceptibly  to  the  feelings
ni>on  the  nerves  of  the  sensitive.

161.  Yet  it  follows  from  these  experiments^  carried  out
rith  every  care,  in  every  case  freiiuently  repeated,  all  insti-
tntrd  on  highly  sensitive  jiersons,  and  all  responded  to  in
the  same  way, — t/ia(  a  tceak  hydro-vleciric  current  in  itself
does  fiat  net  ohservahhj  more  powerfully  on  sick  per smis^
even  when  they  possess  a  very  hiyh  degree  of  exciiahility  by
the  sliyhtest  inat/netlstn,  than  npon  the  healthy.  This,
therefore^  proves  convei'sely  that  it  cannot  be  gfdvanism,  for


182


CHEMICAL  FORCE ELECTRICITY,


which  exists  in  them  the  exalted  sensitiveness  which  we
have  become  acquainted  with,

162»  Compound  circuits,  of  coui-se,  acted  more  strongly
upon  them.  I  brought  a  Uttlu  pile  of  soldered  zinc  and
copper  elements,  almost  four  inches  square,  to  Miss  Nowotoy.
The  intermediate  layers  were  of  felted  cloth,  moistened  with
solution  of  common  salt.  The  zinc  surfaces  were  not  very
clean,  and  I  let  this  be  so  on  piu'pose,  so  as  to  retain  power
over  slighter  modifications  of  the  strengtli  of  the  current.  I
piled  op  ten  pairs  bcfoi-e  she  and  others  perceived  anything
at  all  from  it.  At  fifteen  elements  she  began  to  trace  a  Uttle
eifect,  but  some  of  the  most  cxcit-able  of  the  healthy  spec-
tators also  already  found  it.  With  twenty  pairs  the  tremu-
lous motion  from  the  discharge  reached  fioni  both  hands
to  the  elbows,  while  I  could  now  feel  it  myself  the  length
of  my  finger.  Other  girls  present  felt  the  shock  beyond  the
wrist.  Miss  Nowotny  was,  mdced,  the  most  sensitive  among
us>  but  did  nut  exceed  the  usual  greater  excitability  of  other
healthy  persons.  With  Miss  MaLx  1  arranged  a  pUe  of  nine
of  the  same  elements.  The  result  was  about  the  same  as
the  last.  The  zinc  plates  were  made  somewhat  cleaner  this
tune ;  she  therefore  felt  the  nine  pairs  about  as  strongly  as
her  predecessor  had  felt  the  twenty;  but  healthy  persons  felt
them  almost  as  strongly.  A  certain  degree  of  increased
irritability  must  be  attributed  to  the  general  diseased  condi-
tion,  dependent,  not  upon  the  sensitiveness,  but  upon  stnsi-
biUty.  With  Miss  Reichel  I  tried  from  two  to  fifteen
elements,  in  different  stages  of  her  disease,  on  occasions
several  months  apart,  in  July,  September,  and  November.
She  did  not  feel  a  few  elements  at  all ;  with  from  fifteen  to
twenty  she  perceived  the  effect  so  little,  that  she  never  men-
tioned it  when  discharges  jmssed  through  her  accidentaDy*
in  the  course  of  the  oi>erations  on  the  pile  ;  forty  to  fifty
pairn  she  felt  vividly,  but  she  rcgiu*ded  it  as  sport  to  take
«luK!ks  from  them  when  nilwi^  hesitated  to  vcntiurc. And


*


:


CHEMICAL  FORCE ELECTRICITY.


isa


subsetiueutly,  neither  on  the  days  mentioned  nor  on  any
others,  were  any  results  to  be  observed.  iMiss  Atzmauns-
dorfer  felt  no  difference  between  a  zinc-copper  elemeutj
held  in  her  finger's,  wetted  with  a  saline  solution,  and  a
piece  of  one  of  these  metals  taken  by  itself;  she  fonnd  the
reaction  of  the  copper  warinish,  that  of  the  zinc  rather  cool-
ing, but  without  other  notable  eSect,  I  applied  to  her  feet
three,  then  sixteen  elements,  in  a  circuit.  She  perceived  the
electric  cm'rent  just  Uke  healthy  persons  ;  at  length  she
detected  that  with  the  increase  of  the  number  of  elenienta  i
the  zinc  began  to  act  more  coolingly,  the  copper  witli  more
heat,  upon  her  tingers.  This  was  the  tii-st  trace  of  the  ex-
citement of  erystalUe  forces  by  the  voltaic  element.

16'i.  When  Miss  Reicliel  allowed  the  current  from  fifty
elements  to  pass  continuously  through  her  for  some  time,
holding  the  polar  wu'cs  in  her  two  liands,  the  sensations
IVom  it  increased  gradmilly  in  strength,  becoming  felt  on
the  one  hand  in  the  head,  and  on  the  other  extending  to  the '
knees ; but  this  was  the  first  character  of  galvanic  action
upon  her,  which  necessarily  presented  it^If  after  a  certain
time,  since  a  persistent  current  brings  with  it  as  a  conse-
quence direct  magnetic  motion. It  was  therefore  not  gal-  '
vanism  alone  acting  directly  here,  but  because  by  its  en-
trance it  according  to  known  laws  converted  the  conductor
more  or  less  into  a  magnet,  which  w^as  here  tlie  tranverse .
axis  of  the  patient  herself;  namely,  the  path  from  one  hand,
tlirough  the  arms  and  breast,  to  the  other.

164.  When  I  had  recoiu-se  to  the  electrical  machine,  and
let  frictioual  electricity  strike  upon  her  from  the  conductor,
it  amused  her ;  she  drew  dozens  of  sparks  from  it  for  mere
pleasiu-e ;  no  special  scnsatiun  presented  itself  distuiguish-
able  from  those  of  healthy  persons.  Subsecjuently,  electric
shocks  were  ordered  her  by  her  physician,  to  be  dehvered  |
at  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  carried  along  the  spine.  I
undertook  to  provide  this  rough  medicament. In  accordance


18i  CHEMICAL  FOKCL — ELECTWCITI.

with  the  prcscriptiou,  I  charged  to  saturation  a  Leyden  jar
having  about  a  square  foot  of  coating,  and  gave  her  daily
eight  Hucli  shocks,  which  were  not  pleasant  to  sustain.  But
hIio  did  not  find  anytliing  different  in  them  from  what  we
others  should  have  experienced.

1G5.  The  conclusion  which  I  believe  these  experiments
to  warrant  is,  that  an  electric  discharge,  curried  through
the  hodgy  either  from  the  voltaic  plle^  the  conductor,  or  tlie
Legdenjar,  passes  over  too  quickig  to  allojv  it  to  $et  in  per^
cepilhle  motion  the  force  which  prevails  in  human  beings,  as
in  crgstalsj  agreeing  perfectly  with  well-known  analogous
electrical  effects.

1C6.  However,  it  will  immediately  appear  that  we  may
by  no  means  deduce  from  this  the  conclusion  that  all  other
kinds  of  electrical  operations  are  as  ineffectual  as  the  shock
or  the  discharge  from  a  weak  pile.  When  I  placed  in  the
patient's  hands  a  thick  copper  wire  connected  with  a  weak
pil(»,  aiul  allowed  her  to  become  accustomed  to  it,  then  com-
plt»ted  the  circuit  with  tliis  wire,  so  that  the  whole  current
was  made  to  pass  through  her,  without  by  any  means  pene-
trating into  the  substance  of  the  hand,  she  at  once  felt
apiNirent  heat—/.  (\,  crystallic  force— increase  in  the  wire.  The
hand  was  in  this  case  hi  immediate  contact  with  conducting
will',  and  the  lattor  was  so  tliick,  one-twelfth  of  an  inch,
that  \vi\\  heating  of  it  was  out  of  the  question.

Siniv,  however,  the  hydix)-ekvtric  circuit  is  a  complication
nf  (luMni(*al.  magnetic,  and  electried  activity,  and  thus  no
instrui'tive  conclusions  i\)uld  W  o\jKX?ted  from  it  here,  I
dirtuttul  the  i>l>ser\atii)ns  to  frictional  electricity,  and  made
I  hi'  juiheut  i  lu^lose  a  tliseharging  wiix'  from  the  conductor
with  \wv  hand,  in  sm^h  a  manner  that  she  did  not  actually
iimch  thi^  nu  tal.  but  tliat  this  passed  freely  through  her
hult'cltiMil  hand.  As  s(H)n  as  I  set  the  glass  plate  in  motion,
^\s\  \u\\\  \\\is  sensation  ot'  a  waiin  atnuKsphere  ta\>und  the  wire,
wk^U'h  flu'  clearU  distin&^nished  front  tlio  woU-known  aura.


CntmCXt  TOHCE^XLbCtRTCtl


^


167.  I  pass  over  the  experiments  on  conduction,  accnmu-
latbti,  polarization,  &c.,  which  arc  all  involved  in  the  fol-
lowing, and  hasten  to  the  }>henomena  of  light. I  placed
Miss  Reichel  on  the  doi'kened  staircase^  gave  a  brass  wire
BIX  yartls  long  into  her  hand,  the  point  l>eii]g  held  free. '
The  rest  of  it  lay  on  the  ground,  passing  through  the  door,
and  ending  at  the  conductor. The  machine  worked  bo
weakly,  that  only  sparks  about  half  a  fiuger's  breadth  long
could  be  drawn  from  the  conductor. Soon  after  the  tirst
revolutions  of  the  plate,  a  slender  column  of  ilame  ascended
&om  the  end  of  the  wire,  snch  as  we  have  already  met  with
in  other  similar  circumstances,  ten  inches  high,  about  the
thickness  of  one's  thumb  below%  and  mnning  up  to  a  \ery
tine  point. When  I  turned  the  plate  rapidly,  of  which  the
patient  on  the  staircase  could  not  be  aware,  the  fianic  rose
higher,  and  sank  again  as  often  as  I  ceased. The  point  of
wire  had  no  visible  trace  whatever  of  an  electric  brush  to
healthy  eyes,  w  hich  of  course  was  rendered  impossible  by
the  many  points  of  deliveiy  that  occm'red  along  the  wire.
As  often  as  I  ceased  to  move  the  machine,  the  flame  on  the
wire  endured  of  the  same  form  for  more  than  a  minute,  and
then  first  began  to  diminish  slowly. An  action  therefore
took  place  here  whieli  did  not  agree  in  any  way  with  the
known  phenomena  of  an  electrified  w  ire. Every  repetition,
at  diflerent  times  and  with  change  of  the  wires,  always  re-
prodnciHl  the  same  phenomenon.

168.  Instead  of  fiustening  the  wire  on  to  the  conductor,
1  detached  it,  and  applied  to  the  same  end  of  it  a  hoUow
polished  ball  two  inches  in  diameter,  I  took  hold  of  this
by  the  wire^  and  approached  it  to  within  two  inches,  side-
ways, of  the  electrified  condnctor,  the  sparks  of  w^hich  only
equalled  a  tenth  part  of  this  distance  in  length.  The  ball
was  therefore  placed  in  the  electrical  atmosptiere  of  the  con-
ductor as  soon  as  the  macliine  was  turned,  but  amained
imisidated  in  my  hand. A  fidl  minute  elapsed  lx?fore  the


1*^  CanOCAL  POBCE — mLECTEICtWT.

citiKsrver  Am  up  in  ibt  dark  perooTed  a&  ahemioD  at  the
end  of  tbe  wire  viodi  die  held  in  her  hand ;  thm,  however,
the  itaioe  Legwi  dcndr  to  lide  before  ber,  abore  a  «pan  in
heighL  and  I  tonied  the  plate  of  the  marhiiie  far  four
minutffi  before  il,  br  degrees,  reached  its  TuaTimnrn^  at  whidi
k  there  TmifbmilT  nudntaioed  itadf.  When  the  macfaioe
V3u»  XKiir  Stopped  and  the  ball  removed  om  of  the  qihere  of
itfi  actkm,  the  flame  again  remained  for  more  than  a  minute
of  imaitered  size,  and  thca  began  to  disappear,  vhich  it  did
eoiupksielT  within  sereral  minutes.

Uyj.  I  modified  this  expeiiment  br  remonng  the  brass
ball  to  a  greater  distance  fitt>m  the  ccmdnc^CH'.  I  now  held
it  eigiit  inches  above  the  oondoctor.  The  ohsen  er  descnbed
the  phenomena  in  the  same  order  and  inteirals  of  time;  the
iame  in  her  hand  was  now  even  somewhat  bigger.  I  then
held  the  brass  ball  at  a  distance  ci  fartr  inches  from  the
oondoctw,  kteralk.  The  phenomena  actoally  recoired  in
the  same  space  of  time,  and  onhr  changed  in  that  the  flame
was  now  about  one-fourth  shorter.  FmaOr,  I  remorod  die
baU  eigfatr  inches  fniOTe  than  a  fathom)  from  the  conductor,
but  again,  zfter  a  pause  of  two  minutes,  the  flame  at  the
end  of  the  wire  on  the  staircase  rose  up,  increased  for  five
miDutes,  and  when  the  machine  was  stopped  slowly  sunk
away  in  the  course  of  several  minutes.  This  time,  howe\  er,
it  only  attained  half  the  size.

1 70.  I  placed  the  ball  firmly  upon  the  conductor,  so  that
it  was  no  longer  in  the  electrical  atmosphere,  but  directly
received  positive  electricity:  under  these  conditions  the
same  phenomena  presented  themselves,  but  now  in  less  than
half  a  minute,  instead  of  not  for  two  minutes.  The  dum-
ticm  of  its  increase,  however,  and  tbe  slowness  of  its  subee-
quent  djing  away,  remained  the  same  as  before.  When
any  one  touched  the  conductor  with  the  finger,  or  took  hold
of  tbe  Imes  ball  itself,  during  this,  the  size  of  the  flame  was
not  ob\  iously  altered ;  it  came,  went,  and  vanished  in  the


CHEMICAL  fORCE — ELECTRICITY*


187


saiiie  times,  and  with  no  jjerceptible  difference  of  size.  But
wkcii,  iastead  of  this,  I  placed  the  ball  so  iieai'  to  the  con-
ductor that  a  rapid  succession  of  sparks  passed  over  to  it,
the  etiect  wa^  not  produced ;  the  observer  lelt  tlie  succes-
sive shocks  in  her  hand  at  the  passage  of  the  spai'ks,  but
perceived  no  flame  at  the  end  of  the  wire.  The  rapidity  of
the  electrical  action  was  so  great  that  the  flaming  principle,
more  sluggish  than  it,  was  not  set  in  motion.  Finally,  I
repeated  all  these  experiments  with  negative  electricity,
the  apparatus  being  in  connection  with  tlie  isokited  cushion,
which,  however,  was  connected  with  the  earth.  There  was,
however,  little,  or  rather  no  distinction  in  the  results,  on  tlie
darkened  staircase.  In  all  these  experiments  not  a  word
was  spoken  ;  the  observer,  who  sat  in  darkness,  was  sepa-
rated from  nie  by  a  wall,  and  knew  nothing  of  all  the  various
modifications  and  repetitions,  did  nothing  but  call  out,  from
time  to  time,  like  a  clock,  so  loud  that  it  coidd  be  heard
through  the  closed  door,  the  changes  as  she  saw  them  origi-
nate, endure,  and  pass  away,  on  the  wire.  So  that  there
could  lie  no  question  of  any  kind  of  deception  here, —
on  the  contrary,  this  exact  coincitlence  of  the  phenomena
with  the  experiments  and  the  theory,  was  an  expressive
evidence  of  the  correctness  of  all  the  operations.

171.  These  experiments  speak  so  clearly  that  I  shall  pass
over  the  enumeration  of  a  number  of  others.  I  have  only
to  add,  that  all  those  sleiulcr  flames  which  presented  them-
selves in  the  darkness  diftused  coolness.  When  the  sensi-
tive girl  was  near  the  electrical  machhie,  the  positive  charge
of  the  brass  conductor  gave  her  a  feeling  of  heat ;  but  when
ahe  stood  some  paces  distant  from  it  she  always  experienced
coolness.  I  shall  be  able  to  clear  up  the  cause  of  this  dis-
tinction in  the  suceeeding  treatises,

172,  I  afterwai'ds  brought  over  the  conductor  a  tin
electrophonis  plate  of  about  a  foot  in  diameter,  on  a  wooden
handle^  in  such  a  manner  that  it  was  placed,  id  a  distance.


188


<?0Bari€^L  renci-^iPLErTiiTcmf.


in  the  atmosphere  of  the  coiuluctor  for  about  a  miiinte.
\VTien,  having  first  touched  it  freely  with  a  wet  finger,  I
brought  it  near  the  face  of  Miss  Reichel,  she  felt  coohiess
issue  from  it  strongly  and  for  several  minutes,  whieli  seems
to  csowfirm,  in  a  different  way,  the  experiments  of  tlie  pre-
ceding article.  I  did  the  same  also  with  an  isolated  body  ;
I  susjiended  the  otlen-mentioned  German-silver  conductor
over  the  conductor  of  the  machine,  by  a  silk  band;  its  effect,
when  brought  near  the  face  of  the  patient,  was,  as  might
have  been  foreseen,  exactly  the  same  fis  that  of  the  iiniscM
lated  tin  plate :  as  yet  no  isolator  has  been  fouud  for  the
crystallie  force.  Similar  experiments  were  also  made,  with
the  same  results,  on  Miss  Atzuianusdorfer,  The  same  un-
isiilated  tin  plate  was  first  brought  nenr  her  face  before
having  been  placed  in  the  electrical  atmosphere.  She  felt
it,  as  she  did  most  metals,  to  emit  heat.  It  was  now  held
a  baud's  length  above  a  weakly-charged  conductor,  and
then  touchefl  for  a  moment  with  my  wetted  hand,  so  that
if  it  shoidd  possibly  have  abstracted  any  trace  of  electricity
this  might  thus  be  fidly  removed.  When  I  now  held  it
again  Ix^fore  her  face,  I  found  that  it  had  become  remarka-
bly coo]»  spreading  cold  around  it*

173.  In  every  case>  therefore,  in  which  electricity  is  ex*
cited  to  any  permanent  extent,  that  pccidiar  force  appears
which  I  am  enileavouring  to  clear  up  in  these  essays,  and
nvcoyitintjly  devtrivUtj  presents  the  tenth  source  of  it,

RETROSPKCT*


fl,  Chemism  is  a  widely-comprehensive  source  of  mag-
netic-likc  force,  btith  when  j^imple  and  when  produced  by
combustion  and  the  voltaic  pile,

h.  The  slightest  chemical  action  suffices  to  produce  it
abundantly,  to  charge  the  vicinity  with  it,  to  fonu  polarities,
produce  Ught,  &c.


CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.  189

c  The  magnetic  tub  is  nothing  but  a  chemical  opera->
tion.

d.  Digestion  and  respiration,  and  the  interchange  of
matters  generally,  as  chemical  processes,  are  the  sources
d[  the  magnetic  force  which  exists  and  acts  in  the  human
body.

e.  The  spectral  luminous  phenomena  which  have  been
observed  over  graves,  but  denied  to  exist  by  all  healthy
persons,  are  really  of  a  purely  chemical,  physical  nature,  but
can  only  be  seen  by  highly  sensitive  eyes.

/.  Electricity  also  is  a  source  of  the  force  which  dwells  in
crystals,  &c.,  both  frictional  electricity,  positive  and  n^a*
tive,  and  contact  electricity.

ff.  Even  the  electrical  atmosphere  is  capable  of  setting  it
in  full  motion  at  considerable  distances.


190


SIXTH  TREATISE.


THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAIi.

147.  We  have  now  seen  the  force  we  are  investigating
produced  from  ten  different  but  always  particular  sources ;
we  will  now  seek  a  more  universal  occurrence  of  it, — ^we  will
look  for  it  in  the  whole  material  world,  and  seek  to  make
out  something  of  the  great  part  which  it  plays  in  the  wide
totality  of  things.

175.  Every  one  is  aware  that  many  persons  exist  on
whom  particular  substances  exert  a  peculiar,  usually  disa-
greeable effect,  which  often  seems  to  border  on  the  ridiculous.
I  will  not  speak  here  of  the  strange  things  to  which  instinct
urges  pregnant  woman.  But  when  we  find  peoj^  who
cannot  bear  to  touch  skins,  others  who  cannot  bear  to  see
feathers, — nay,  such  as  cannot  endure  the  sight  <rf  butter,
&c.,  this  may  be  regarded  simply  as  a  result  of  defective
education ;  but  experience  shows  that  definite  antipathies
of  this  kind  recur  in  exactly  the  same  form,  and  against
the  same  objects,  in  different  persons,  and  in  the  most  dis-
tant countries.  This  proves  that  they  are  by  no  means
always  outbreaks  of  a  want  of  good  breeding,  but  that  some
equally  definite  cause,  be  it  of  objective  or  subjective  nature,
must  often  lie  at  the  bottom,  and  that  when  it  occurs  it
must  not  be  chidingly  reproved,  but  frequently  deserves
that  its  origin  should  be  investigated  and  taken  into  ac-
count.

More  accurate  observation  shows  that  these  strange  anti-
pathies, often  expressed  in  a  very  active  manner,  present
themselves  most  frequently  in  those  persons  who,  to  outward
appearance  healthy,  are  more  or  less  sensitive,  and  that  the


THK  matehtat.  wob^d  tn  genkral.


degree  of  their  strength  and  variety  increases  in  proportion
as  the  |)erson8  are  more  diseased,  and  snbject  to  nen^ons
eoraj)laint5,  spasms,  and  similar  aficctions.  This  is  sonuieh
the  case  in  Miss  Stnrmann,  for  example,  that  sometimes  she
Ciinnot  take  hold  of  a  key  or  bolt  of  a  door,  witlioiit  her  fin-
gers being  seized  with  cramps  ;  while,  nt  tlie  same  time,  she
nevertheless  walks  about  the  house,  garden,  or  even  in  the
streets,  like  a  healthy  person.

Ill  the  course  of  oiy  numerous  Investigations  on  highly
Msnsitive  persons,  I  soon  became  aware  that  these  antipathies
had  some  points  in  common,  that  some  agreement  was  to
be  found,  the  further  tracing  and  comparison  of  which  could
not  but  afford  hope  of  discovering  some  relation  of  cause  and
effect  in  the  phenomena,  and  thus  possibly  supi>lying  the
meaost  of  penetrating  the  common,  deeper-lying  natural
eauBe*  I  found  that  certain  definite  sensations  always  re-
turned, and  that  when  the  feelings  of  the  patients  were
clearly  made  out  and  distinguislied  by  similar  names,  their
apparent  multiplicity  might  be  traced  back  to  a  few  which
were  continually  recurring.  And  these  few  I  soon  found
to  obey  settled  rules.  They  consisted  of  feelings  of  apparent
heat  or  cold  received  from  various  substances  of  exactly
equal  temperature ;  of  more  or  less  decidedly  pleasant  or
dhagreeahle  character,  increasing  so  far  as  to  the  produetiou
of  couvulsions,  of  sensations  of  pricking,  throbbing,  or  draw-
ing, affecting  the  skin  nnd  extremities,  and  of  painless  tonic
spasms.  In  the  second  of  these  treatises,  where  I  have  ex-
plained the  character  of  the  force  of  crystals,  I  have  already
pointed  out  that  in  the  case  of  Miss  Nowotny,  the  last  phe-
nomena, the  painless  tonic  spasms,  were  produced  by  the
emanations  of  the  poles  of  the  axes  of  crystallized  bodies,
I  and  that  the  capacity  for  producing  this  effect  was  imparted
H  in  different  degrees  of  strength  to  different  bodies,  but  was
^M  never  wanting  in  those  which  are  capable  of  forming  free
^H crystals,  whether  they  e^msist  of  a  simple  or  any  ever  so


192


TH«  MATERIAti  WORLD  IN


greatly  compound  substance.  This  kind  of  sensation  hMt
therefore,  been  to  a  certain  extent  discussed,  and  f»  the
present  settled :  there  only  remain  to  be  exaniined,  thei*-
fore,  the  sensations  of  apparent  difference  of  temi^miure^
those  of  unpfeasanlru'ss,  and  the  seeming  mecJmuical  affiia*
lions,  of  the  pricking,  &c. :  and  we  will  here  apply  the  test
to  some  of  them*

Some  of  these  sensations  extend  to  the  healthy,  hut  the  highly
sensitive  experience  them  more  strongly  or  weakly,  according
to  the  nature  of  the  disease,  and  to  the  standard  of  exalta-
tion of  their  sufferings.  I  was  led  to  the  first  investigation
in  thin  direction  l>y  the  recognition,  in  Miss  Nowotny,  tliat
all  amorphous  bodies,  which  arc  devoid  of  the  peculiar  effi*
cacy  of  crystallized,  had  nevertheless  a  reactionary  influence
of  a  disagreeable  kind,  as  well  as  sometimes  an  additional
one  of  heat  or  cold, — that  this  was  attached,  with  a  certain
constancy,  to  particular  substances,  and  possessed  different
degrees  of  strength  in  dirt'erent  suhstanccs ;  while,  in  the  j
former  case,  the  crystiillic  force  seemed  to  proceed  from  the
kind  of  condition  of  aggregation  :  here  something  dynamical,
of  a  different  kind,  showed  itself  in  the  matter  itself:  form
and  substance,  therefore,  exhibited  a  strongly  marked  differ-
ence in  theii*  power  of  affecting  external  things.

176.  As  it  was  evident  that  something  lay  hidden  here,  j
which  must  possess  either  physiological  or  physical  interest,
I  undertook  the  no  small  laljonr  of  testing  the  sensation  of '
discomfort  of  the  patients,  with  more  than  (>00  substances ;.
namely,  the  gi'eater  portion  of  ray  collection  of  chemical  pre-
parations. It  was  found  that  there  were  in  these  veiyii
clearly  marked  gradations,  and  that  the  patient  was  able  Uii
istinguish  these  gi'adations  with  such  delicacy,  that  shewasf^
[)le  to  assign  to  every  substance  its  place  between  two^
others. Tliis  she  could  do  with  such  certamty,  that  when  I
gave  her  again  on  the  third  or  fourth  day  the  substai
which  she  had  previously  ananged  in  series,  she  again  pl«


rUi  MATERIAL  XtOiitD  IX  GENKRAt^


-'It


rtirtii  in  exactly  the  same  places  in  the  arrungeraeiit,  as  she
hiidgiventhem  in  the  first  iiisfcincc;  while  it  is  clear  here  that
she  could  neither  recognise  or  understand  anything  in  this
nnnierous  collection  of  white  and  coloured  ]>owders.  She
had  an  equal  degree  of  clearness  in  lier  feeling,  to  anything
that  we  meet  with  in  the  vision,  for  the  distinction  of  tints
of  colour,  or  with  the  ear,  for  the  distinction  of  harmonious
ordiscordant  tx>nes.  When  we  rrcollect  thatjn  MissNowotny.
this  feeling  had  received  none  of  that  practice  by  which
the  sight,  the  hearing,  and  other  senses  gradually  accjuire,
with  constant  exercise,  their  full  development  and  suscepti-
hility  in  the  course  of  a  long  hfe,  and  of  which  we  have
learned,  in  the  psychological  field,  the  overwhelming  influence
on  the  clearness  and  distinctness  of  sensual  perceptions, —
«>nie  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  extraordinary  inner  acute-
m^  with  which  ihk  peculiar  abnormal  feeling  must  be
raptrienced  ;  and  by  which  we  shall  hereafter  clear  up  much
thflft  ftt  present  Ues  in  complete  obscurity,

177.  Scarcely  a  couple  of  dozen  substances  had  been
broftght  into  a  series  in  this  examination,  when  I  already
SAW  a  law  develope  itself :  the  substances  became  arranged
according  to  their  electro-chcniical  values,  in  such  a  man-
ner that  those  standing  highest  canie  to  the  top  of  the
list,  the  indifferent  lielow,  and  with  a  striking  (Usregard  of
fJieir  polar  opposition  I  will  not  venture  to  tire  the  reader
with  the  enumeration  of  the  whole  series  of  more  than  (500
bubstances,  but  still  I  wish  to  select  a  small  number : — tlie
highest,  i\  e,  tliose  substances  acting  most  strongly,  were  ;
ojiygen  gas,  sulphur,  caft'eine,  sulphuric  acid,  potassium,
pltosphorus,  sodium,  selenium,  iodine,  cinnabar,  lead,  and
|Kitas(&.  Between  the  numbers  :iO  and  100  occurred — bis-
muth, arsenic,  mercury,  morjihia,  zinc,  iodide  of  potassium,
tellurium,  chloride  of  calcium,  chromium,  lithium,  oxide  of
gald,  oxide  of  nickel,  tin,  iridium,  nickel,  alcohol,  chlorine
gu. Between  200 and  400  came — paraffine,  rhodium,

o


TfflE  MjlTKIiTAL  WaRT>n  IN  GENERAL.

iHjrn|i3Jii«i,  jii|>eriiie,  creimotje,  comraon  salt,  quinine,  brucine,
fHitllMimdiue,  utryclmine,  ftuhydrous  acetic  acid.  From  500  j
(o  fiOO — cinehornnc,  quartz, hippuric  acid,  mastic,  chalk, gum,
nlfjjofcil  fill  vegetabli!  acids,  sugar,  sugar  of  milk,  mannite.
At  I  |je  end  of  the  series  stood  palladium,  platinum,  silver, .
n)|)pr,  iron,  gold,  amber,  and  water.  These  last  were  I
almost  j)erfectly  indiftferent  to  this  sensitive  patient.  With
the  small  exception  of  a  few  rare  metals,  which  very  probably
wen*  not  |>erfectly  pure,  all  highly  polar  bodies  appeared  at
one  end  of  the  scale,  the  indifferent  at  the  other ;  among
which  iron,  with  its  magnetic  capacities,  makes  the  only
exc*eption.  Strangely  enough,  she  could  make  out  any  dis-
tinction between  the  substances  of  the  positive  and  the  ne-
gative pcjie,  in  spite  of  my  endeavouring  at  the  end  to  make
her  aware  of  imjmrtant  differences  in  these,  and  conse-
quently directing  her  attention  particularly  to  this.  Oxygen
ga*i,  «ul[>liur,  phosphorus,  stood  co-ordinated  with  potassium,
sodium,  lead,  &c,

178.  This  task,  which  occupied  a  whole  week,  was  per-
formed with  the  patient  in  a  perfectly  clear  state  of  con-
sciousness, I  now  sought  to  control  it  by  examinations
during  her  unconscious  cataleptic  condition.  Whenever  I
laid  any  body  in  her  motionless  hand,  it  reacted  upon  her;
the  indifferent,  when  not  crystalUzed,  left  her  tolerably  quiet;
substances  occurring  nearer  to  the  middle  of  the  series  made
the  hand  restless  ;  those  bodies  past  the  middle  produced
trembling  and  abnormal  twitchings  in  the  hand;  and  when  I
placed  in  her  hand  the  highest  substances,  such  as  sulphur,
caffeine^  lead  ore,  iodine,  cinnabar,  or  even  the  higher  stand-*
ing  minerals,  like  heavy  spar,  fluor  spar,  pyrites,  or  selenite,
the  whole  arm  was  seized  with  such  violent  cramps  that  it
rose  up  quite  mechanically — ^just  like  a  frog*s  thigh  through
which  a  galvanic  current  passes,  and  flung  far  away  the
body  held  in  the  hand,  and  then,  in  the  cataleptic  manner,
remaint^d  outstretched  in  this  unndtiu'al  position, The^e


THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  CtEKERAL.


counter-tests  prove  that  the  uiikiiowii  eftfect  of  these  sub-
stances is  exactly  the  same  in  catalepsy,  in  their  relation  to
each  other, and  qualitatively  in  general,  as  in  the  awake  con-
dition, but  that  quantitatively  tlie  strength  of  the  action  is
considerably  exalted.  What  she  only  experienced  as  very  dis-
agreeable when  awake,  produced  violent  spasms  in  the
cataleptic  condition*  Wlien  she  recovered,  after  some  time,
from  these  conditions,  and  regained  her  consciousness,  she
invariably  complained  of  pain  and  deadness  in  one  arm  :
this  was  always  that  one  with  which  the  experiment  had
been  tried»  of  which  she  knew  nothing,  and  of  which  she
was  not  informed.  The  spasms  were,  thei*efore,  connected
with  violent  excitement  and  tension,  which  left  behind  a
state  of  exhaustion*  From  all  this  we  have  to  set  it  down,
that  all  mild  bodies^  in  contdci  with  this  sensitive  person^
produced  reaclions  upon  the  feelings  of  a  peculiar  kind,
differ inff  in  a  graduated  series  according  to  (heir  di^erent
chemical  composition.

179.  In  the  course  of  these  matters,  I  often  made  the
striking  observation,  that  certain  of  these  bodies  began  to
act,  to  set  the  hand  in  motion,  before  1  had  actually  dropped
tlieni  into  it,  and  while  I  still  held  them  over  it. Devoting

ae  attention  to  this  phenomenon,  I  found  that  many  sub-
stances only  required  to  be  laid  upon  the  bed  at  a  little
distance  from  the  hand,  in  order  to  produce  reaction  upon
the  patient.  Of  this  kind  were  sulphur,  lead  ore,  fluor
spar,  rock  salt,  cinnabar,  grain  tin,  selenite,  arsenic,  sal-
ammoniac,  prussiate  of  potash,  antimony,  telluric  acid,  wol-
fram, apatite,  celestine,  white  lead  ore,  cyanide  of  potassium,
sulpho-cyanide  of  potassium,  orpiment.  The  hand  lying
near  these  began  to  tremble;  this  soon  increased,  and  very
often  became  so  violent  that  it  approached  towards  the  sub-
stance, then  dashed  this  away  or  became  fixed  in  a  tonic
spasm. Here,  therefore,  was  distinctly  manifested  action


196  THB  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GBNXRAL.

at  a  distance,  ev£n  of  amorphous  bodies,  providing  only
that  they  were  of  high  electro-chemical  rank.

180.  To  try  how  these  reagents  would  act  upon  the
sensitive,  while  conscious  and  out  of  the  catalepsy,  I  made
the  same  experiments  the  next  morning,  at  the  hours  in
which  she  usually  was  in  the  greatest  degree  of  suflTering.
All  the  above  substances  were  brought  near  her  hand,  but
made  no  impression  on  her,  even  none  whatever  after
repeated  trials.  She  herself  covered  her  closed  eyes,  to
be  quite  sure  whether  she  did  not  feel  anjrthing  when
those  substances  were  brought  as  close  as  possible  to  the
hand,  which  had  produced  contractions  and  cramps  the
evening  before ;  but  it  was  in  vain  :  not  until  actual  con-
tact took  place  did  those  very  disagreeable  sensations  begin
which  I  have  described  above.  Catalepsy  itself  is  there-
fore  a  condition  which  exalts  in  a  disproportionate  degree
the  sensitiveness  of  the  patient  to  certain  unknonm  qualities
of  matter,  and  matter  possesses  some  hidden  quality,  by
means  of  which  it  affects  the  cataleptic  peculiarly  in  an  ex-
alted degree,  even  at  a  distance,  in  a  manner  analogous  to
tliat  in  which  it  affects  patients  in  the  awakened  condition,
free  from  the  catalepsy,  by  actual  contact.

181.  These  observations  soon  received  wider  develop-
ment in  Miss  Maix.  Most  of  the  substances  which  I  placed
in  her  hand  affected  her  as  warm  or  cold,  as  I  have  already
mentioned  ;  but  together  with  this  feeUng,  which  she  only
received  at  the  touching  surface  by  actual  contact,  another
very  frequently  presented  itself,  and  this  was  a  simultaneous
cooling,  like  that  cool  wind  which  was  diffused  from  many
of  the  bodies  I  tried  (resembling  that  from  the  positively
electric  touch  to  healthy  persons).  Sulphur  was  one  of  the
first  of  these  bodies.  When  I  laid  a  Uttle  piece  in  her  hand,
she  felt  both  warmth  at  the  point  of  contact  and  a  coolness
which  spread  itself  all  over  the  hand  like  a  gentle,  cool


THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL,


197


breeze.  This  sooa  increased,  extended  from  tlie  band  up
uver  the  whole  arm,  the  face,  became  perceptible  in  the
other  hand,  and  also  seized  that  arm  ;  then  it  penetrated
thn:>ugh  the  dress,  and  was  felt  ou  the  breast ;  at  last  it
flowed,  thmugh  the  co\erlet,  all  over  the  lower  parts  of  the
body,  and  at  length  even  the  feet  felt  the  cool  einaiiatioii
which  proceeded  from  the  sulphur.

183.  I  laid  tlic  snlphur  in  an  open  drinking-glass  with  a
thin  bottom,  and  placed  tlvis  in  the  hand  of  the  sensitive.
She  thus  grasped  the  sulphur  without  touching  it,  and  was
at  the  same  time,  at  all  events  in  my  expectation,  cut  off
from  its  du-ect  radiation.  The  drmking-glass,  when  pre*
viously  tested,  had  felt  vMirni,  without  any  emanation.  As
soon  as  the  sulphur  w^as  placed  in  it,  the  point  of  contact
of  the  glass  and  tlie  hand  remained  w^arm,  as  before,  but  a
cool  wind  now  issued  from  the  glass,  on  all  sides,  diffusing
itself  over  the  haiuL  It  flowed  from  all  parts  of  the  bottom
rlrf  the  glass  w Inch  were  not  in  contact  with  the  hand,  it
rflemed  to  sink  down  from  the  sides,  and  to  flow*  over  from
the  month  of  the  glass,  thus  streaming  down  upon  the  hand.
This  cooling  influence,  which  appeared  to  penetrate  through
the  glass,  w^as,  however,  ranch  more  agreeable  than  that
coming  immediately  from  the  bare  sulphur ;  finer,  as  if  more
trauspai'ent,  the  patient  said, — purer,  and  more  ethcrial.  It
soon  penetrated  the  whole  hand,  made  it  cold,  then  stiff,
and  persisted  for  a  considerable  time  after  I  had  taken  the
glass  away.  It  had  at  the  same  time  been  felt  on  the  face,
the  other  hand,  and  the  neighbouring  parts.  A  piece  of
selenite,  substituted  for  the  sulphur,  produced  exactly  the
same  effects.

183.  Whin  1  had  removed  the  sulphur  from  the  glass,
and  laid  it,  for  the  momejit,  on  a  tidie  standing  by  the  bed,
in  order  to  perform  another  experiment,  Miss  Maix  veiy
soon  said  tome  that  she  could  stdl  trace  thence  the  presence
of  the  piece  of  sulphur, I  then  removed  it  to  a  greater


198  THK  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  QKNERAL.

duttance,  about  a  yard  away ;  she  still  perceived  its  piesenoe.
Even  at  the  distance  of  two  yards,  she  oould  detect  traces  of
the  coolness  from  a  piece  of  sulphur  not  larger  than  one's
finger.  I  now  prepared  a  surface  of  sulphur,  measoiing  half
a  square  foot,  in  this  way :  1  sent  for  six  of  the  sticks  of
sulphur  which  are  used  for  branding  wine-casks,  and  fastened
them,  side  by  side,  u[>on  a  board.  With  this  improvised
apparatus,  held  opposite  to  the  patient,  I  could  remove,  step
by  step,  the  whole  length  of  the  room,  nearly  eight  yards,
and  the  observer  still  felt — weakly,  it  is  true,  but  dis-
tinctly — the  so-called  cool  wind  flowing  on  to  her  fixHn  the
surface  of  the  sulphur.  At  this  distance  she  found  the  sen-
sation to  agree  exactly  with  that  which  was  produced  on
her  by  the  point  of  a  large  rock  crystal  or  small  open  mag-
net. The  effect  of  the  last  two  was  somewhat  stronger,  but
tolerably  similar  in  its  kind.

184.  The  sulphur  produced  a  sensation  of  warmth,  both
in  the  immediate  contact  and  when  glass  was  interposed :  I
therefore  sought  for  some  other  substance  which  appeared
cold.  Concentrated  sulphuric  acid  was  one.  When  given
to  her  in  a  glass,  she  felt  great  cold  at  the  point  of  contact ;
but  when  it  was  removed,  she  felt  the  cold  air  from  the  acid
a{  a  distance  of  several  paces.  Nitric  acid  was  also  cold  in
contact :  its  action  at  a  distance  extended  half  as  fEur  again
as  that  of  an  equal  quantity  of  sulphuric  acid.

185.  I  had  still  to  seek  out  some  body  which  was  neither
warm  nor  cold,  but  indifferent,  when  lying  bare  upon  the
hand.  I  found  such  in  parafline  and  cane  sugar.  Cold
wind  nevertheless  issued  from  both  ;  from  the  paraffine  to
two  yards  distance,  from  the  cane  sugar  about  one  yard.

186.  I  now  went  through  a  quantity  of  the  most  different
substances  with  the  patient,  to  collect  conflrmations  and
extensions  of  this  phenomenon.  A  flask  of  oxygen  gas  was
felt  hot,  especially  when  waved  about ;  it  soon  made  the
hand  and  arm  stifl'  and  cramped,  was  in  the  highest  degree


THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.


199


disagreeable,  and  spread  a  cool  wind  to  the  distance  of  halt*
a  yard.  A  so  extremely  small  quantity  of  a  concentrated
substance,  in  which  we  yet  in  part  constantly  live,  had  here,
as  with  Miss  Nowutuy,  such  a  strongly-marked  action  !  I
possessed  a  portion  of  chromic  acid  in  a  glass  tube  about
three  quarters  of  au  inch  thick,  sealed  tip  at  both  ends.
She  found  it  burning  hot  through  the  hermetically  closed
glass,  but  diffusing  cool  wind  to  a  distance  of  several  yards.
Phosphorus  in  water  hke  sulphur,  only  weaker,  coohng  at
three  yards.  Selenium  almost  like  sulphur,  radiating  cool-
ness to  six  yards  from  some  small  fragments.  Tellurium
behaved  very  hke  sulphur,  but  gave  a  cold  wind  the  whole
length  of  the  room.  Charcoal  had  the  same  properties  in
disproportionately  weaker  degree.  An  empty  drinking-
glass  felt  warm  to  the  hand,  without  any  wind.  When
covered  with  a  watch-glass,  however,  a  cool  breath  flowed
dovm  from  the  glass  over  the  hand ;  when  the  watch-glass
was  removed,  the  coohng  again  ceased.  It  was  therefore
the  enclosed  air  which  pmdnced  the  cold  to  the  hand.  I
modified  this  experiment  in  various  ways,  but  it  always
yielded  the  same  result.  The  oxygen  of  the  air  somewhat
warmed,  when  at  rest,  by  the  hand,  here  acquired  some
little  excess  of  free  force  over  the  outer  cold  and  moving
air ;  and  since  the  oxygen  always  acted  strongly  here — nay,
is  even  far  the  most  active  of  all  bodies,  the  very  slight
elevation  of  temperature,  the  effect  of  which  we  have  ab*eady
become  acquainted  i^ith  (§  177),  was  sufficient  to  produce
a  perceptible  manifestation.

167.  Almost  all  the  metals  felt  w^arni  by  dii*ect  contact,
but  at  the  same  time  all  tUtfused  emanations  of  what  the
patient  called  cold  wind.  They  follow  one  another,  in  the
order  of  decreasing  strength,  about  in  this  manner :  chro-
mium, osmimn,  nickel,  iridium,  le^d,  tin,  cadmium,  zinc,
titanium,  mercury,  palladium,  copper,  silver,  gold,  iron,  pla-
timmi. A  plate  of  copi>er  of  about  half  a  scjuare  yard  sm-


^Ol)  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IS

tttiv.  placvil  near  the  bed  of  the  patient  and  oppoole  to  her,
[.uxKiiuvii  a  lively,  cool,  fresh  wind,  which  gndua&r  appeared
to  Avw  very  agreeably  through  the  whole  of  the  bed.  A
AUK*  plate  of  equal  size  produced  the  same  effect  less  strooglj.
Still  weaker  was  the  action  of  a  lead  and  an  inn  plate.  But
when  1  placed  lK»foreher  a  quicksilvered  minor,  at  first  with
mecal  wmt  next  her,  this  worked  veiy  strongly  upon  the
obeiiTser  ;  the  glass  side  of  the  mirror,  however,  acted  still
iHuiv  stix)ngly,  the  eniauations  from  this  bein;r  again  that
line,  altogi'ther  agreeable  coolness,  which  we  became  ac-
quiunteil  with  alxwe  (^  1S2),  when  the  effects  of  sulphur  and
selenite  weiv  conveyed  through  glass ;  the  patient  felt  her-
\i;lt  nnbiuHl  with  the  agreeable  feelings  from  head  to  foot.

l^^  I  instituted  less  extensive  experiments  with  Mt^s
Miuiuiiinn.  Itnt  the  few  were  decided  enough  to  afford  posi-
ii\r  (i>nlirniati«Hi.  Oxygen  gas  was  found  veiy  hot  in  con-
Uu  \  )nl|»liui\  N(*leninin,  iodine,  bismuth,  chloride  of  gold,
iniliiini.  (>M(I(-  ot  gold,  and  morphia,  were  all  found  warm  in
M.hi.iil  \^»lh  the  hand;  antimony,  mercury,  zinc,  copper,
i(  lliiuiiiii,  Innar  caustic,  bismuth,  gold,  lead,  tin,  and  iron,
.j|.,..  .„,  a  .  t.hl  ni  Iheir  tlillerent  gradations.  Potass  gave  an
uit  ui.mi  u  »nll  Crystals  of  calcareous  spar,  double  spar,
.,,,,,^Mi.iir..  h.uiniahne.  and  rock  oystal,  were  polar,  wann

.nil.iiiiltvpl  at  the  other. I  tested  with  her  surfaces

.., K.ii  a .»,»hHe  liHit  of  snlpluir,  lead,  zinc,  copper,  silver,

I .1,1 .uiil  all  thenr  substances  she  foimd  to  radiate

I ,  I,  .1 vwnin.  Ie|»ul.  or  cool  emanations,  at  distances  of

.,  I .,,,,1 iin.K ralladimn  diffused  a  fine  cool  wind,

'  , '  ,^'  ^ ,„,!  It, .III  It on  all  sides. When  I  went  to  her

','^  *' ,,* ..,,.»,  K  .  -I  « .»l»de|»s\ .  and  i)laced  in  her  hand  sulphur,

*"' '■ ,  ||„» 1.  ninrnry  in  a  glass,  antimony,  or  zinc,

' , ^,,1 .^^ Min,  Nowotny  had  done  under  similar

'' "I  I ^  !/•.> cind  thivw  the  objects  awajr. But

' ,  I",  ,|.,,» iM.i.  her  hand,  without  touching  it,  this

"  *  " /"u.ii.hK .ii»il :hake.  and  gradually  became  con-


Tfl«  MATERIAL  WORLD  IS  OENlRAAi

tract^d,  and  in  some  degree  cramped  ;  thus  exactly  as  in
Mifis  Nowotny,  ^179.  i

189.  Miss  Atzmiinnsdorfcr  found  a  cold  feeling  frotu
sulphur,  seleniutn,  pyrites,  antimony,  zinc,  lead,  Egyptian
jasper,  common  salt,  alum,  potash,  and  brucine  ;  on  the
other  hand,  platinum,  silver,  iron-bar,  copper,  gold,  and  mer-
cur)%  warm.  A  cool  wind  was  dtli'osed  to  her  from  some
distance  by  selcnite,  tluor  spai',  jiyrites,  ahiiu,  tellurium,
lead,  conmion  granite,  and  gallic  acid.  The  wind  seemed
to  her  to  flow  out  from  all  sides  of  the  objects.

190,  Mr.  Schnh  fonnd  fragments  of  sulphur  and  (x^wder
of  it  equally  warm  on  contact.  Oxygen,  iodine,  bromine,
kupfer-nickeK  cyanide  of  gold,  cyanide  of  potassium,  he
found  warm,  and  quickly  exciting  head-ache,  which  gradually
increased  to  an  insupportable  degree.  He  arranged  a  small
nundjer  of  minerals  according  to  his  feeling  of  the  progress
from  cold  to  warm,  in  the  foIlo\Wng  order :  pyrites,  liaor
spar,  calcareous  spar,  iron  glance,  staiu'olite,  rock  crystal,
tungsten,  Schorl  sandy  calcareous  spai*  from  I'ontainebleau,
heavy  spar,  topaz,  common  salt,  analcim,  and  felspar.  On
sulphate  of  copper  and  carbonate  of  soda,  he  found  points
from  which  coolness  seemed  to  issue.  To  guard  himself
from  any  possible  delusion  he  had  them  wrapped  in  paper,
and  then  tried  whether  he  could  find  the  cool  pieces  again
in  these  envelopes.  Wlien  he  opened  them  he  was  fully
satisfied  that  he  had  found  out  exactly  the  same  points  again.
He  felt  distinct  coolness  to  issue  from  sticks  of  brimstone
at  a  distance  of  ten  inches,  as  also  from  a  little  layer  of
oxalic  acid  ;  on  the  other  hand,  warmth  flowed  to  a  simOar
distance  from  leaves  of  eight  square  inches  surface  of  tin,
lead,  copper,  silver,  and  gold.  Silver  and  gold  money  also,
and  steel  instruments,  w^ere  warm  to  liira,  when  held  at
some  distance  above  the  hand.  He  could  not  bear  to  stay
long  before  a  large  c/teral  looking-gla<*s,  extending  do\^T)  to
the  ground  ;  the  emanations  from  it  soon  affected  him  with


iiA  THX  XATUIAL  WORLD  IX  GEXKEAL.

hcadachet  stupefaction,  then  with  pain  in  the  stcnnach;
when  he  went  to  the  back  of  the  miircnr,  the  disagreeable
feelings  setxed  him  much  more  quicklv.  Two  hours  later
he  tried  the  same  before  a  large  mirror  attached  to  a  wall ;
iU  the  same  discomfort  presented  itself  still  more  quickly
and  «tn>Dgly.

191.  Mr.  Studer  surrounded  with  his  hollow  hand  a
number  of  substances,  or  held  them  near  to  Ins  eyes,  with
whk*h  he  was  far  more  sensitive  than  with  his  hands,  since
he  n>iild  well  distinguish  coolness  and  warmth.  In  this
way  ho  felt,  without  contact,  coolness  from  sulphur,  pyrites,
9elenite.  triluriuin,  chloride  of  calcium,  sulphate  of  oxide  of
in^i.  i^ulphurrt  of  potassium,  oxalate  of  potass,  Seignette's
mil.  r<K^k  crystAK  and  sugar;  warmth  at  a  distance  from
pAi\,  silver,  (X>p|KT,  tin,  lead,  zmc,  potassium,  and  solution

of  |MitflW.

Thr  joiner  Klailier  felt  sulphur,  sulphuric  add,  selenite,
r<if'k  rryMfit,  &c.,  cool  at  a  distance  of  ten  inches;  on  the
iithfT  lifind.  gold,  silver,  copper,  tin,  zinc,  lead,  solution  of
|ffi|tYNA,  t/Vu,  wurni.

I  toil  ininiy  other  {lersons  who  visited  me  to  these  objects,
rtiiil  riiiiilo  m>nu)  of  thcin  go  through  them  by  way  of  test;
IM  l\w  nu\  I  n^gnnliul  two  selected  substances  as  the  repre-
4iirilMlivrH  of  all  \\w  rt^st,  and  of  the  two  principal  classes
fff  llMnr,  tiiitiioly.  Hulphur  and  gold.  I  kept  by  me  a  surface
l4  nu'U  iilfoiil  f«ix  inrhoM  Hquare.  Every  one  whose  hand  I
iJ^^I  iilfovi*.  Mirmi  lit  li  (liHtance  of  about  three-quarters  of
HH  nff  ii.  'l^'lMriiL  filiiioMt  without  exception,  that  the  sulphur
h'Ofi  f**i  //^JiM'tifl  Mill!  tlir  gold  warmth.  I  have  permission  to
iiHHf*  «^/MH  ttt  l^wM^  prrfionH.  M.  Kotschy,  the  well-known
liH^ff^^i  hf9ft\Ut,  Mi  II  very  marked  cold  from  the  sulphur
^7/^^^//.  ^ift\  i^iiiMilli  IVoiii  the  gold  leaf.  Without  knowing
HHjh^^h'^  **^f*t't^  l^  Im-  I'ottipliiiiird  of  a  strange  pricking  which
\\th  "-'rr^h'^^  \fpnAiiiii\  \u  liJM  ImiimI,  iiltliough  hc  did  uot  touch
1/ ih y*f*/i,  Mm  ^'11  known  diHtinguished  botanist,  felt


THE  MATERIAL  WOULD IN GENERAL.


20S


the  distinction  of  cold  and  lieat  between  the  two  bodies
very  clearly.  Mr,  Incledon,  an  English  private  teacher  io
Vienna,  not  only  experienced  the  same  in  a  very  lively
manner,  but  described  the  pricking  winch  the  sulphur  gave
him  as  veiy  similar  to  the  sensation  when  the  hand  is  re-
covering from  what  is  called  being  asleij},  and  gives  only
isolated,  scattered  pricks.

192.  Up  to  this  point  the  phenomena  exhibit  a  mass  of
variations ;  but  among  these  inconstancies  something  very
constant  is  seen  to  exist.  The  alternation  of  heat  and
cold  appears  inconstant  in  substances  of  one  kind  with
diftbrent  observers.  This  part  of  the  subject  requires  a
special  investigation  to  clear  it  up  more  exactly.  I  there-
fore exclude  it  from  the  present  treatise,  keeping  it  for  an
early  task,  and  here  only  lay  down  the  general  but  constant]
Jaci,  thai  all  the  substances  subjecled  io  the  trial  reacted
with  apparent  dilferences  of  temperature  upon  the  sensitive
persons,  without  respect  to  beimf  cool  or  warm.

I  next  succeeded  in  bringing  these  phenomena  more
clearly  to  hght  than  with  any  of  the  former  witnesses,  with
Miss  Reichel,  and  in  making  them  so  clear  that  all  that  I
have  said  about  the  other  sensitive  persons  might  be  passed
over,  were  it  not  that  observations  of  the  kind  can,  frora^
their  nature,  only  acquire  stability  by  a  greater  muuber  of
repetitions  of  the  most  varied  kind.  Miss  Reichel  consented
to  come  and  pass  some  time  here  at  my  country  residence.
Castle  Reisenberg,  near  Vienna,  and  thus  gave  me  an  oppor*
tunity  of  carrying  out  numerous  experiments,  with  the  help
of  physical  apparatus,  in  a  much  more  regular  and  complete
manner,  than  could  be  done  in  strange  houses  and  sick-
chambci's,  often  under  very  inconvenient  circumstances.

1 93,  In  order  to  i-ender  the  following  experiments  com-
]>rchensible,  I  must  give  some  little  account  of  the  localities
of  my  residence,  in  which  they  were  made. The  castle,  as


204 THK  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  OKNSRAL.

it  is  called,  is  so  built  that  in  front  there  are  two  rows  of
nine  rooms,  connected  with  one  another  by  doors  in  a
straight  line.  Each  of  the  rows  is  about  fifty-three  yards
long,  and  ends  at  both  sides  with  bal(X)nies,  each  of
which  are  about  ten  feet  broad,  giving  together  a  length  of
twenty  feet ;  so  that  since  the  doors  to  the  balconies  are
in  a  line  with  the  doors  of  the  rooms,  a  straight  space  of
nearly  sixty  yards  can  be  obtained  for  experiment,  in  a
place  where  the  air  is  calm.  Working  with  wires  which
require  to  be  held  at  some  distance,  the  length  of  the  line
may  be  doubled  by  means  of  the  other  series  of  rooms ;  thus
giving  convenient  use  of  almost  120  yards.  1  placed  Miss
Beichel  at  one  eud  of  this  line,  and  began  to  experiment
with  her  on  the  extent  of  the  action,  at  a  distance,  of  the
substances.  With  a  small  horse-shoe  magnet  of  about  two
and  a  ht^  inches  length  of  limb,  it  was  necessary  for  me
to  remove  more  than  eight  feet  fi-om  the  observer  before
the  action  upon  her  began  to  decrease.  With  another  horse-
shoe magnet,  eight  inches  long  in  the  limbs,  and  about  one
and  a  half  inch  broad,  I  was  obliged  to  remove  to  a  dis-
tance of  twenty  yards  from  her.  A  heavy  nine-fold  horse-
shoe, which  at  that  time  would  support  about  forty  pounds,
required  me  to  go  thirty-three  yards  from  the  observer,
therefore  to  six  rooms  off.  Comparative  experiments  with
a  magnetic  rod  of  forty-two  inches  long,  afforded  as  its
distance  of  action  on  the  patient,  for  the  positive  (south-
ward) pole,  twenty-six  yards ;  for  the  negative  (northward)
pole,  twenty  yards.

194.  In  the  next  place  I  wished  to  examine  the  iron
rods  which  served,  in  a  wooden  case,  as  a  parallelogram-
matic  annature  to  the  last-mentioned  magnet.  One  of
these  was  quite  like  the  magnetic  rod  itself  in  shape  and
size ;  the  two  others  were  of  the  same  sectional  magnitude,
but  each  only  about  one-fifth  part  of  the  length. When


THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  *205

lapproaclied to iron-filings they exhibited iiotliing, and
Ibehaved  merely  like  uomagneHc  iron  \ hut  the  sensitive
patient,  nevertheless,  felt  the  large  armature —

One  end  at 26  yards.

The  other  end  at . .  , 22 „

The  cross  pieces —

One  end  at 9

Both  together  at . . . .  17  ,,

The  other  end .....  12  „

Both  together 23  „


The  simple  armatures,  therefore,  acted  nearly  as  strongly

.upon  the  patient  as the magnetic  rod itself,  and  must,

therefore,  be  placed  almost  in  the  same  rank  for  crystallic

force. Any  delusion,  which  might  be  suspected  from  this

surprising  result,  is  out  of  the  question,  since  it  was  im-

Ipossible  that  the  observer  could  distinguish  at  the  distance

[whether  the  object  was  a  few  yards  nearer  or  further  off,

id  the  results  all  harmonise  imder  a  common  point  of

[view,  and  are  thus  controlled.

195.  Three  days  later  her  excitability  became  much  in-

Icre^isrd  with  the  advent  of  meustniation. 1  repeated  the

[measurement  of  the distance  at  which  the patient was

faffcrted  by  the  magnet. But  it  was  necessary  now  to  make

use  of  all  the  rooms  and  both  the  balconies,  and  after  I  had

used  up  the  sixty  yards  of  my  reetOincar  space,  she  felt  the

effect  of  the  large  nine-fold  magnet  still  so  vividly,  that  she

estimated  that  double  the  length  would  hardly  suffice  to

reach  the  limit  of  the  sensation. I  now  tried  the  half-

tsquare  foot  of  brimstone. It  had  affected  Miss  Maix  at  a

[distance  of  eight  yards,  hut  the  length  of  the  chamber  did

pot  allow  of  its  being  removed  to  a  greater  distance  in  that

[case.  Here,  however,  the  sulphur  now  produced  a  sensation  of


iOii  THE  MLATE&IAL  WOBLD  IN  OXBXIUL.

<XK>Uug  at  distanoes  up  to  forty  yards.  Ajstonifihed  i^  this,
I  tried  a  oopper  plate  of  about  four  square  fert  of  surface ;
tbe  efftsct  of  this  extended,  as  warmth,  to  thirty-one  yards.

All  iron  plate  of  six  square  feet  gave

warmth  at  a  distance  of  ....  49  yards.
Ixad  foil,  such  as  is  used  for  packing

tobacco,  six  square  feet ....  25 „

1'in  foil,  six  wjuare  feet 28t „

Zinc  plate,  six  square  feet . . . .  21 J „
Silvered  |)a|)er,  pure,  one  square  foot  .  7f „
(ioM  pai)er,  pure,  three  square  feet  2S „
Au  eWtrophorus  cake  of  about  six-
teen inches  diameter S3 „

A  common  mirror containing  about

ten  square  feet  of  surface . . .  35^ ,,

A  small  flask  of  oxygen  gas ...  6

A  quantity  of  other  things, — brass  objects,  poroelain
vessels,  glass  work,  stone  tables,  bright-coloured  wooden
plates,  outspread  linen,  open  or  closed  flaps  of  doors,  chan-
deliers on  the  ceiling  of  the  room,  entire  trees,  approaching
human  beings,  horses,  dogs,  cats,  pools  of  water,  especially
when  they  had  been  shone  on  a  short  time  by  the  sun ;  in
short,  all  and  everything  that  presents  itself  as  material  in
space,  acted  upon  the  sensitive  girl,  flowing  either  as  a  cod-
ing or  warming  influence  on  to  her, — in  many  so  strong  that
it  attracted  her  attention  and  became  burdensome,  in  many
so  weak  that  when  she  had  become  accustomed  to  it  she
thought  no  more  about  it.

196.  This  extraordinary  phenomenon,  where  a  human
being  became  distinctly  aware  of  the  presence  of  a  bit  of  metal
plate,  a  couple  of  leaves  of  gold,  or  a  piece  of  tin  foil,  without
seeing  it,  at  a  distance  of  a  hundred  paces,  was  so  astonish-
ing to  me,  that  I  could  not  repress  my  great  amazement.


THK  MATORTAL  WOELD  TN  GENERAL.


which,  however,  only  prachicetl  a  laogh  from  Miss  Reichel,
who  had  been  accustomed  to  all  this,  without  interruption,
during  her  whole  life.  All  my  sensitive  patients,  sick  and
healthy,  had,  without  exception,  experienced  the  same  sensa-
tions and  perceptions,  under  favoimible  circumstances,
more  strongly  or  more  weakly,  in  a  wider  or  narrower
extent,  according  to  the  subjective  excitability  of  the  indi-
vidual Apparently  all  this  was  nothing  else  than  a  mani-
festation of  the  often -mentioned  so-called  ciystallic  force  in
a — ^perhaps  modified — more  general  form,  and  the  conclu-
sion which  was  drawn  above  (§178),  from  the  investigations
with  Miss  Nowotny  alone,  now  obtains  its  extension  and
validity  for  all  the  persons  subjected  to  the  trial : — ^namely,
that  Aix  solid  substances,  in  contact  with  suffidenily  sensi-
tive persons, produce  reactionary  sensations  of  a  peculiar
kind^  differimf  in  degree  according  to  their  different  chemical
composition  ;  that  l/wse  reactions  are  principcdbf  expressed
in  apparent  differences  of  temperature^  such  as  cool  and
tepid^  nnih  which  a  sensation  advances  by  more  or  less
equal  steps  from  pleasant  and  disagreeable  ;  and  that
Jinally  these  reactions  have  every  resemblance  to  the  sensa-
Hans  which  are  produced  by  the  force  of  crystals,  magnets^
hands,  S(c.

The  essential  matter  now,  in  order  to  demonstrate  the
identity  of  the  cause  with  the  crystal  lie  force,  is  to  investi-
gate  the  rest  of  its  characteristics.

197,  Is  this  universally-distributed  force  transferable
from  one  body  to  others  ?  capable  of  being  accumulated,  as
I  have  often  expressed  it,  without  by  any  means  intending
to  pledge  myself  to  regard  it  as  material  ?  I  made  a  strange
first  experiment,  which  led  to  the  answer  to  this  question,  on
Miss  Maix,  She  received  a  visit  from  her  sister,  Miss
Barbara  Maix.  The  latter  was  healthy  to  outward  appear*
ance,  but  suffered  from  a  variety  of  nen  ous  affections.  She  I
took  the  hand  of  the  patienti  but  had  not  held  it  long  before '


S08


^SiitA^Mi


^.nm.


sh«  lee  it  go  again,  suddenly,  mth  a  shudder,  *'  Wlmt  ih
Horld  have  you  in  yam  hand  that  pricks  me  bo ?''  she  crietff
flitfre  ATEB  nothing  there.  Immediately  before  this  the
IMtteot  had  been  holding  a  piece  of  sulphur  in  her  hand.
This  pricking  was  repeated  as  often  as  the  hand' w^s
reached  out*  And  when  it  gradually  died  away,  it  oould
be  renewed,  at  will  by  the  patient  holding  a  piece  of  sulphur
again  in  her  hand  for  some  time.  This  shows  clearly  tlmt
the  imaginary  pricking,  which  subsequently  presented  itself
very  often,  was  nothing  else  than  a  transfer  of  certain  un*
known  qualities  of  the  sidphur  into  the  hand  which  held  iti;
and  whi(*.h  w^ere  then  reflected  to  the  second  hand  possessing'
the  same  excitability  for  sulphur  and  similar  things.  When
I  myself  grasped  sulphiu*  for  some  time  in  my  hand,  and,  after
ftpause^  took  Miss  Maix's,  she  experienced  the  pricking  sefi^^
tion  from  me,  and  recognised  what  I  had  previously  held;  *  •'

198.  This  was  shown  more  distinctly  by  experinfientft;
derived  by  reasoning  from  the  above.  I  placed  ttrt
German  silver  conductor  in  Miss  Maix^s  hand,  and  allowed'
her  to  become  accustomed  to  it  in  the  usual  way.  '•  li
then  made  her  lay  it  dowTi  anywhere,  and  placed  a  pieeitf'
of  sulphur  upon  it»  After  some  minutes  I  again  took
this  away,  and  allowed  the  sensitive  girl  to  grasp  the
conductor  again.  She  immediately  recoguised  acutely
the  feeUngs  which  the  sulphur  always  produced  in  her,
and  therefore  something  had  passed  from  the  sulphur  into
the  conductor,  became  fixed  there,  allowed  itself  to  be
carried  forward  by  the  conductor,  and  reacted  ujwn  the
hand  of  the  sensitive.

199.  The  experiments  with Miss  Reichel  gave  exactly
similar  results. In  the  first  place,  I  repeated  with  her  th*/ '
hand  experiment  of  the  sisters  Maix,  without  telling  her
anything  about  it. 1  took  a  roll  of  sulphur  in  my  hand/*
and  grasped  it  for  five  minutes. I  then  laid  it  down,  and
with  this  hand  took  hold  of  tlmt  of  Missi  Reichel T  had


THB  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  ORNERAL.


not  held  it  long,  before  she  cried  out,  aod  complained  that
my  hand  was  full  of  needles.  She  experienced  the  sensa^
tion  of  innumerable  fine  prickings  all  over  the  surfaces  in
contact, — an  exact  confirmation  of  Miss  MaLt'a  observation
by  the  hands  of  two  other  persons,  and  thus  a  striking
proof  of  the  extent  to  which  objective  reality  lies  at  the
bottom  of  these  phenomena.  This  hand  of  uiine,  which  I
carefully  kept  from  touching  anything  else  in  the  meanwhile,
had  not  become  piure  again,  arter  a  full  quarter  of  an  hoin\
but  felt  prickly  still,  though  in  a  weaker  degree.  It  had,
therefore,  received  an  accumulation  of  the  force  of  the
sulphur,  which  it  retained  for  a  considerable  time,  and  which
it  lost  very  slowly.

I  placed  a  pair  of  steel  scissars,  which  she  simply  found
warm,  upon  some  sulphur,  and  let  her  take  hold  of  these
after  some  time.  The  scissars  had  now  become  cold,  and
prii^ked  the  hand  of  the  observ^er,  as  above,  I  took  a  glass
tube,  forty  inches  long,  wliich  was  very  slightly  warm  to
her,  touched  one  end  for  a  minute  with  sulphur,  then  took
it  away  and  gave  the  other  end  to  the  sensitive  girl  t-o  feel.
She  now  found  this  very  cool ;  after  five  miimtes,  I  let  her
take  hold  of  it  again  ;  the  coohicss  was  diminished,  hut  still
existed  distinctly.  After  the  lapse  of  half  an  horn  the  glass
was  felt  again,  and  liad  again  acquired  its  original  sliglit
degree  of  heat.  Sidphuric  acid  applied  in  a  similar  manner
to  another  glass  tube,  not,  however,  brought  immediately  in
contact  with  the  tube,  but  with  llie  interposition  of  the
side  of  the  glass  bottle,  had  the  same  effect.

Caffeine,  in  quantity  not  more  than  a  few  hundredths  of
a  grain,  placed  in  a  small  thin  glass  tube,  and  after  n  short
time  taken  out  again,  left  the  tube  considerably  warmed.

My  young  daugliter  O.  laid  one  hand,  which  had  been
tested  previously »  for  a  short  time  upon  a  number  of  layers
of  gold  paper,  and  tlien  gave  it  to  the  [latient.  She  found
its  warmth  greatly  incRnised, Felt  again  at  the  end  of  three

p


THE  MATERIAL  WORLB  IH  GlKERilL,


nunutes,  she  found  half  of  the  warmth-exciting  cause  still  lu
the  hand ;  but  after  seven  minutes  there  was  none,  and  the
hand  had  regained  its  natiu*al  condition,

A  glass  full  of  powdered  gum,  itself  weakly  cooling,  was
placed  close  beside  a  bottle  containing  potassium  in  naphtha^
which  belonged  to  the  strongly  warming  bodies.  After  the
lapse  of  a  few  minutes  it  gave  a  sensation  of  alternating
cold  and  heat ;  it  seemed  as  if  a  part  of  the  gum  had  been
overpowered  by  the  potassium,  while  the  rest,  perhaps  the
inner  portion,  was  not  affected  in  the  given  time.

Gold  leaf  always  gave  her  warmth  in  a  sti'ong  degree,  I
placed  an  empty  glass  bottle,  which  by  itself  she  found  cool,
upon  the  gold  leaf, — pure,  be  it  mvderstood,  not  the  alloyed^
which  generally  occurs  in  commeire.  I  turned  it  about  on
all  sides,  from  time  to  time,  to  make  contact  at  all  parts.
I  then  made  the  observer  grasp  the  bottle*  She  no  longer
found  it  cool,  but  very  remarkably  warm.  The  gold  leaf
had  inoculated  the  glass  with  its  warming  quality.

I  held  selenite,  itself  cold,  for  some  time  in  my  right  hand  ;^|
it  did  not  notably  alter. Enclosed  in  my  left  fingers,  it^l
acquired  the  power  of  giving  out  warmth. Oxide  of  copper-
in  ft  glass  bottle,  cold  by  itself,  undent  ent  a  similar  change,]
in  ray  left  hand*  A

I  placed  jx^tassium  in  naphtha,  warm  by  itself,  in  dose;
contact  with  a  quantity  of  fragments  of  sulphur. After,  j
some  minutes  it  had  become  perfectly  cold,  as  cold  now  as,]
it  had  been  warm  before. The  sulphur  had  therefore  not*
merely  removed  the  apparent  heat  of  one  of  the  strongesty
bodies,  but  so  overpowered  it  that  in  addition  it  had  im-t|
planted  in  it  its  own  peculiar  coldness. This  accumulation^
also  manifested a  dunUion  of  several  minutes  after  the^
separation*  u

The  German-silver  conductor,  itself  slightly  warm,  waj
placed  in  common  salt. After  a  short  pause  it  came  from  J
it  cold, Fluor  spar  was  then  laid  upon  it ;  this  made  it  still


raE  MATERr\L  WORLD  IS  GEKERAT..


w


colder.  I  next  covered  it  with  abundance  of  bits  of  sulpbiir'
ft^  a  minute;  again,  when  it  had  been  taken  out,  it  pi^^
sented  an  increase  of  its  coldness.

Finally,  a  roU  of  sulpliur  was  apphed  against  potassium
for  a  short  time.  After  the  separation  it  was  observably
less  cold.  Left  longer  in  contact  it  liecanie  cold  and  warm,
simultaneously,  in  different  parts.  Then,  laid  upon  my  left
hand  for  some  time,  it  completely  lost  all  its  coolness ;  and
when  I  at  last  enveloped  it  in  the  gold  leaves,  and  kept  it
there  for  a  while,  the  roll  of  sulphur  even  became  hot,

200»  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  always  found  copper  rather
t«pid.  One  day,  however,  that  I  gave  it  her  to  try,  she
said  that  she  felt  it  cooling.  This  was  in  opposition  to  the
earlier  observations ;  I  therefore  waited  a  moment  to  seek
what  might  be  the  cause.  The  copper  was  a  thin,  smooth
plate,  and  lay  upon  a  polished  table  of  walnut-wood.  I
made  her  feel  the  table,  on  different  parts  of  the  leaf,  of  the
edge,  and  of  the  feet ;  she  found  it  cool  m  all  parts.  I  took
the  ci>pper  plate  away,  and  left  it  for  a  while  on  a  seat
cushioned  with  silk  stuff.  When  she  again  took  hold  of
the  copper  she  found  it  tepid,  as  all  other  copper  always
was.  I  now  placed  it  on  the  table  again ;  at  the  end  of
five  minutes  she  found  it  cold  again.  I  stretched  the  copper
between  the  cheeks  of  a  little  vice ;  after  a  short  interval  it
felt  warm  again.  Whenever  it  was  brought  back  on  the
table  for  a  little  while  it  became  cold  again.  It  was  evident
that  the  great  mass  of  the  cold-reitcting  table  overpowered
the  magnetic  heat  of  the  weak  copper  plate,  and  the  latter
b^ibame  cool,  by  accumulation  of  charge,  every  time  it  was
itrvolved  for  a  certain  period,  in  the  sphere  of  action  of  the

Iwlihmt-wood.  By  a  great  number  of  experiments,  therefore,
I  established,  that  the  pyopetty  of  bodies  here  in  question
fH^y  be  (ransferred  from  one  to  anotfwr  by  mere  contact^
exactly  like  the  so-called  crystallic  force.
—


Ms


VAVfeA'f At  mUht^  i^  -tJijtfferfJtt-


bf  tictiiig  at  a  distaoce,  in  the  magnet,  crystals,  tli^  ftng^f^J  |
the  heavenly  bodies,  &c.,  excercised  by  the  force  unt?er
discussion  ;  we  have  even  seen  matter  in  general  exercise  iij
on  the  cat-aleptic  Misses  Nowotny.  Sturuiann.  and  Atzmanns'-
dorfer;  also  on  Miss  Maix  and  Miss  Reichel  in  the  freeJ
conscious  state  :  the  qnestion  now  arises,  whether  the  forc<»j
is,  in  like  manner,  capable  of  transference  from  one  body  to  I
another,  at  distances,  without  contact?  To  decide  this  ij
placed  beside  the  German-silver  conductor  a  roll  of  snlphurj
of  equal  length,  at  a  distance  of  three  quarters  of  an  inch,]
Without  contact  at  any  point.  After  a  few  minutes  the
snl[)hur  was  removed,  and  the  conductor  grasped  by  Misa]
ReicheL  It  was  warm  before,  but  now  she  felt  it  pctfectlyj
cold,  as  much  so  as  if  it  had  been  in  immediate  contnct  withj
the  sulphur.  At  tlie  end  of  four  minutes  it  still  retainedj
almost  half  its  coolness,  which  did  not  wholly  disappfeilrj
under  a  good  quarter  of  an  hour.

Sulphate  of  copper,  broken  small  ami  in  paper,  waft  laid]
beside  the  broad  40-inch  glass  tube,  at  the  distance  dfl
t^n  inches,  all  contact  being  avoided.  In  five  minutes^  ttl
was  taken  away,  and  the  tube  taken  hold  of  at  both  ends  by]
tin*  sensitive  observ^er.  In  spite  of  this  relatively  considerablej
distance  she  found  the  glass  to  have  been  rendered  cool  byj
the  sulphuric  acid  salt ; and  this  persisted  several  minutes.]

I  learnt  from  these  experiences  that  1  must  avoid  usit^j
uiy  own  hands  in  these  delicate  experiments,  on  account  of
their  magnetic  power,  to  guard  against  any  complication  ;j
at  the  same  time  I  recognised  here  hints  for  the  explanntioii
of  many  anomalies  in  my  previous  researches,  wherein
sensitive  observers  so  frequently  did  not  agree  together  in]
their  statements  of  heat  and  cold  :  it  might  often  have  beenj
my  own  hands  which  altered  the  natural  condition  of  bodic
by  conveying  their  own  force  on  to  them. On  this  account
I  let  my  daughter  H,  place  her  hand  in  that  of  Miss  ReiclirT
and  accustomed  the  latter  to  it ;  then  helil  tlie  same  hand^


THE  MATEEIAL  WORLD  IN  GENEB^l*.


surfacu  of  sulphur,  without  contact.  At  the  end  of
t>fp  miuutos  she  offered  it  to  the  observer.  That  needle-
like  pridvijig  which  actual  contact  with  sulphur  had  pro-
duced ill  all  the  other  cases,  immediately  presented  itself  in
the  hand,  together  w  ith  coolness.  The  same  experiment
was  made  with  the  same  results  by  my  daughter  O.  Tho  i
patient  experienced  the  pricking  fmrn  the  hand  of  the  Uttle
girl  that  had  been  waved  over  sulphur,  at  tlie  end  of  half  |
a  quarter  of  an  horn*.  I  pass  over  other  similar  experi-
ments.

:202, This  proves,  that  the  (ransfer  of  the  ojhn  mai^
thined  essential  force  from  one  body  to  anolker  in  effech'd  I
mihoul  contact  by  (he  mere  approximalkm  of  them  toivard  \
0ch  other.

I,.,,  203- The  conduction  of  it  through  other  bodies  is  cer-
^wXy  sufficiently  demonstrated  by  all  the  preceding  experi-
ments ;  but  1  will  here  insert  a  couple  of  remarkable  con-
firmutpry  examples. I  connected  Miss  Rcichel  with  a  copper '
iplate  by  an  iron  wire  thirty-three  yards  long  and  one-twelfth
of  an  inch  thick,  she  holding  the  other  extremity  in  her
hand. I  brought  successively  on  to  the  copper  plate,  zinc,
tirip  lead,  gold,  mcrciu^y,  potassium,  potash,  potash  ley,  and
iniiiimn  ; all  delivered  waiiuth  to  the  hand  through  th©
plate  and  along  the  w iie  after  the  lapse  of  half  a  minute :
on  the  contrary,  sidphur,  carbon,  oxalic  acid,  aqua  regia,
,  aulphate  of  ii^ou,  and  common  salt,  gave  cold  in  the  same
$pace  of  time. The  sensation  Ukewise  began  to  vanish  after
^,|)je  interval  of  half  a  minute,  when  the  objects  were  removed,
and  required  several  miniitcs  for  its  complete  disappearance.
jjSulphur  gave  a  sensation  of  cold  when  only  brought  into
,,tjlie  ueighbomliood  of  this  long  conductor. The  German-
^v€^r  conductor  alone,  laid  upon  the  copper  plate,  gave
j,^f*Mrnith;  but  when  I  previously  kept  it  for  a  few  minutes
,l}|^  sulphur,  and  then  brought  it  upon  the  copper  plate
jjiypH^^^vith  my  right  hand,  it  gave  a  persisting  cold. I


iU


THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GEKKRAL.


rolled  up  an  empty  glass  bottle,  which  hy  iUelf  delivered
alight  cold  (diflbrent  glasses  always  varied  between  cold  and
warm),  for  a  few  minutes  in  gold  leaf;  freed  from  this,  and
brought  with  my  left  hand  on  to  the  copper  plate,  it  delivered
lively  waniith  to  the  distant  hand  of  the  observer.  Taking
a  large  glass  tube  forty  inches  long,  and  wide  enough  to
admit  the  hand,  1  introduced,  one  after  another,  a  quantity
of  chemical  preparations  of  the  most  varied  kinds,  soUd  and
fluid,  together  with  the  glass  bottles  containing  them*  The
sensitive  patient  described,  as  occurring  at  the  other  end  of
the  tube,  which  sht;  held  in  her  hand,  sensations  exactly  the
same,  in  order,  as  those  I  had  marked  down  from  her
in  the  earlier  experiments,  with  the  immediate  contact  of
them  with  the  hand.  In  another  way,  I  gave  her  a  thin
glass  stirring  rod  like  a  thermometer  tube,  but  solid,  be-
Iw^een  her  fingers,  and  made  her  dip  this,  in  order,  into  the
cont>cnts  of  many  gkiss  bottles  of  amorphous  chemical  pre-
parations of  all  kinds.  Her  account  of  the  sensations  pro-
duced by  the  glass  rod  in  her  fingers,  agreed,  word  for  word,
with  those  on  the  broad  glass  tube ;  so  that  a  rod  of  this
kind  affords  the  most  convenient  of  all  means  for  the  pur-
pose, as  dry.  fluid,  volatile  or  bad-smelling  tilings  can  be
tested  w  ith  it,  as  to  their  magnetic  value,  rapidly  and  without
the  least  difficulty.  Miss  Maix  also  fmnished  me  with  t)
few  proofs  referable  here.  I  had  connected  a  copper  plate
with  her  hand,  by  means  of  a  copper  wire.  As  I  placed
u[ion  its  surface,  partly  immediately,  partly  in  bottles,  sid*
phnr,  sulphmic  acid,  selenium,  sugar,  silk,  wet  linea,  Ac.,
she  described,  successively,  the  same  sensations  as  she  had
experienced  when  she  had  the  same  substances  inmiediateJy
in  her  hand.

My  daughter  Ottone  gave  one  hand  to  Miss  Reichel,  and
held  the  other  over  a  siu-face  of  sulphur,  without  touching
it*  After  the  lapse  of  half  a  mumte  the  latter  found  the
hand  of  the  former  become  cokl ;  and  at  the  end  of  a  whole


THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.


215


minute  the  pricking  sensation  from  siilpliiir,  already  often
mentioned,  made  it^  appearance.  An  hoiur  later  this  expe-
riment was  repeated,  with  the  modification  that  the  hand
was  held  over  a  number  of  layers  of  gold  leaf  instead  of
snlphnr,  this  time  also  with  careful  avoidance  of  contact.  At
the  end  of  about  half  a  minute  again,  a  sensation  of  warmth
passed  from  the  hand  of  the  healthy  person  into  that  of  the
patient,  which  continued  to  increase  for  a  minute,  and  then
remained  steady.

204,  All  this  testifies  that  the  force  which  emanates  from
amorphous  substances  of  all  kinds,  is  conducted  and  carries
its  efficiency  with  it  throuffh  matter  of  every  kind,  even
through  liviny  human  beings ;  nay,  (hat  this  holds  good
not  only  in  case  of  aclmd  contact ,  but  et*en  with  mere  ap-
proximation of  one  substance  to  another,

205.  Capacity  of  accumulation,  coercive  power,  &c.  need
no  further  illustration,  since  these  are  already  discussed  by
implication  in  the  foregoing.

20G,  Consequently  only  the  luminous  phenomena  remain
to  be  tested.  Tliese  have  actually  shown  themselves  con-
vincingly  enough.  When  I  undertook  experiments  on  the
luminosity  of  crystals  in  the  dark,  with  Miss  Rcichel,  she
led  me  to  notice,  by  remarks  upon  the  bolts  of  the  doors,
the  fastenings  of  the  windows,  and  other  metaUic  objects
of  which  she  spoke,  that  she  saw  all  such  things.  When  I
brought  a  freshly-cleaned  copper  vessel  to  her,  I  accordingly
heard  timt  she  saw^  it  Imninous  all  over,  and  that  a  fine  green
nebulous  flame  waved  immediately  above  it,  streaming  out
beyond  the  borders  of  the  copper.  I  at  once  undertook  a
long  investigation  of  this,  which  I  continued  and  repeated
for  confirmation  at  ditFereut  times,  partly  in  Vienna,  partly
here,  in  my  summer  residences.  From  this  it  resulted  that
all  metals,  generally  speaking  all  simple  bodies,  without  any
H  crystalline  condition,  appeai'ed  liuuinous  in  sufficient  dark-
^^ ness  to  the  eyes  of  the  highly  sensitive ; that  compound


^
P


fSflni  tM^^lso,  but  weaker  and  weaker  the  mate  c<»m|iiex
th^y  become.  To  test  this  on  different  sides,  I  brought^ ii
iber  of  things  into  the  dark,  one  after  another.
.ui>>  ivru  liel  saw  the  substance  of  most  metak  with  a  red
luminosity,  as  if  glowing  ;  some  of  them  white,  some  yellow.
Ovdr  all  wa%  ed  a  delicate  flarac,  which  moved  backwards
and  forwards  over  them,  was  of  different  colour  in  different
metuls,  but  was  deHiiite  for  each,  and  could  be  driven  alx)ut
by  a  current  of  air  caused  by  the  hand  or  the  breath.  The
more  complex  bodies  only  exhibited  flames  at  their  points,
xnIicji  they  were  crystallized,  otherwise  they  were  mostly
either  surrounded  by  a  luminons  va|X)ur,  or  even  only  them-
selves bright  and  luminous,  as  if  glowing.  The  darkness
gave  me  an  excellent  opportunity  of  controlling  tlie  state-
ments rigidly.  I  brought  to  her  in  the  dark,  at  different
tunes,  different,  and  then,  alternately,  agtiiu  the  same  sub-
stances, which  no  one  could  recognise  in  the  dark,  and  it
was  necessarily  clearly  manifest  in  this  way  whether  her
later  statements  agreed  mth  the  earlier.  This  was  per-
fectly the  case  in  reference  to  the  luminous  phenon\ena
gencnilly  ;  their  strength  and  their  form  ;  also  on  the  simple
substunces,  in  rcfcreucc  to  their  colour;  but  not  quite  so  in
the  mure  coiij|K>iunl  The  coloiu-  of  the  luminosity  nppe-ars,
like  that  of  tlic  flame  of  combustion,  to  depend  U{)on  the
quality  of  the  matter  fi^oiu  which  it  issues,  and  upon  every
Hij^nificant  intermixture.  Miss  Reichcl  always  found  the
following  siibstunces  ahke,  as  often  as  I  held  thera  before
her  in  the  chirk  : —

Copper  plate,  red  luminous,  wth  green  flames*  over  the
whole  surface,  jnirticularly  at  the  borders,  flowing  over  the
breadth  of  three-cjuarters  of  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half,
the  flames  rolling  in  from  the  middle  toward  both  sides.

Iron  plate,  red  luminous,  the  flame  of  the  entire  surface
rolling  in  toward  the  middle,  and  somewhat  elevated  thei%,
half  a  hand  high,  brilliantly  playitig  in  ncl,  blue,  and  white.


TOE  If ATERIAt  WORLD  IN  GEN^RAX.


217


[jj  ,t^isnnitli, red luminous flames, and  maigiiial flames
||*hu$lM'ed.

Ziiic  plates,  pale  red  luminaus,  the  flame  ppa(iuc-white,

I  fcddisli-hlue  at  the  poiuls,  jagged  at  the  edges,  unitiug  ietp
1 1^  tuft  at  the  corners.

l)jiTili>  cuttings  of tm foil, flames dirty blidsh white,
[jitreamitig  out  weakly  at  the  edges,  with  tufts  at  the  coruers.

I I  Lead,  blue  huuiuous,  fl^mic  dull  blue,  little  weaker  thuu
[Jthe  tin  at  tlie  borders,  without  tufts  at  the  comers.

Cadmium,  white,  somewhat  bluish  flame.
tiJCobalt,  we^  blue*

Silver,  upou  paper  tind  burnished,  white  lumiuous,  flame'
-white,  a  fiiiger*s  length  high,  not  roUiug  together,  the  same
at  the  borders  as  in  the  midiUe,  without  tufts  at  the  corners.

Gold,  upon  paper  and  burnished,  white  luminous,  flames
^irliite,  two  fingers'  length  high,  not  rolling  together,  border
ftkc  tlie  midtUe,  no  corner  tufts.

Palhulium,  strongly blue  luminous, with  a  pale  blue
yapour.

Platinum,  white  luminous,  with  p«le  Ijhie  flames.

Autiniony,  white  hnninous,  with  bluish  flames.

Rhodium,  red,  w  ith  pale  yellow.

Tellunum,  red  luminous,  \\  liitc  at  the  border,  no  flames,^

Osmium,  red  luminous,  with  greyish  red  vapour.

Mercurj,  red  luminous,  with  strong  white  flames  and
^irhite  vapour*

Chromium,  green,  passing  into  yeIlow\

Nickel,  red,  rising  up  to  greenish  yellow.

Titanium,  brilhant  red,  passing  into  violet

Arsenic,  blue-red,  pale  red  vapour.
.Jridium,  blue  luminous,  flames  redcUsh  blue.

Sodium,  red  luminous,  flames  dull  white,  towards  lilac.

Potassium,  red  luminous,  ycUovv-red  on  the  cut  surface

les  large*


THir  ITATERt AL  UTORLD  w  et?rfeHJit:


Charcoal,  red  lumiuous,  red  mat^iual  flames.  '*

Diamond,  flames  white,  blue  interaally,  upper  points  re^i
Iodine,  red luminous, when shaken passiug  in  some
degree  into  green.

Selenium,  bluish  red,  flames  blue.
Sulphiu*,  flames  blue,  with  opaque  white  vapour*  *

A  glass  box  set  with  silver  fittings  appeared  to  the  ob-
sener  as  if  ftdl  of  fire  at  night ;  white  flames  flowed  from
the  whole  frame-work  all  over  the  surface.

All  these  results  I  found  always  the  same  in  numerous
trials,  when  the  darkness  was  [perfect :  when  this  was  im-^
jx^rfcct, however, slight variations of the ap{)eanince8
occurred,  bluish  red  became  blue,  and  the  Hke. On  the
other  hand,  the  coloured  luminosities  did  not  agree  so  cora-
I  ]detely  in  cxnnpoued  bodies,  often  even  varying,  and  there-
fore I  can  give  no  account  of  them  until  I  have  subjected
them  to  fresh  and  more  fundamental  trials. In  particular,
'the  same  alkaloids,  prepared  by  different  hands,  often  pre*
iMnted  essentially  diflerent colom^  in  their  hght,  which
apparently  depended,  therefore,  upon  their  diiferent  degrees
of  purity.

in  general  these  lights  and  flames  had  always  sometliing
of  electrical  light,  so  that  the  colour,  which  like  the  latter
varied  about  between  red,  blue,  green,  and  yellow,  was
frequently  very  difticult  to  determine  with  accuracy.  It
had  every  resemblance  of  aspect  to  tlie  magnetic  and  crys-
tallic  flame,  and  was  regarded  by  the  observer  only  as  a
lower  degree  of  those  to  her  so  well-known  appearances,  to
which  she  had  been  accustomed  from  her  childhood,  and  of
which  she,  at  the  advice  of  her  dead  mother,  had  hitherto
never  comimmicated  anything  to  any  one,  for  fear  of  being
regarded  by  other  jieople  as  supernatural  and  haunted.

207.  It  follows,  consequently^  ^Afl/  all  fluid  and  solid^
thet^Jore  all  bodies  of  any  density  yenerally,  give  out  ewwi*


THE  HATIRIAL  WORLD  IN  OEKERAt,


nations  of  tiff  hi  in  (hejmfn  o/Jiames,  appearance  of  glow-
intf^  and  vitporom  luminosity,  in  the  same  manner  as  the
uuiguet>  crystals,  &c.  &c.

208.  In  order  to  complete  these  examinations  of  tho
whole  of  material  things,  it  was  necessary  to  turn  a  glance
to  the  starry  heavens.  We  have  seen  in  the  fourth  treatise
the  important  influence  exercised  by  the  sun  and  moon  ;
this  necessarily  led  me  to  the  idea  of  investigating  whether
all  the  stars  which  shine  in  the  heavens,  collectively,  were
wholly  without  action,  and  whether  some  weaker  display  of
farce,  proportionate  to  the  distance,  which  possibly  might  be
detected  in  a  smaller  degree,  niiglit  not  perhaps  correspond
to  the  mighty  influence  exercised  on  our  planet  by  the  former  j
larger  and  more  proximate  heavenly  bodies.  »

209.  At  the  windows  of  my  dwelling,  which  afforded  an
uninterrupted  prospect  toward  the  east  and  soutfi  of  from
twenty  to  thirty  miles,  where  i  placed  Miss  Reichel  at  night,
when  the  sky  was  clear,  she  at  once  recognised  an  undoubted
iflfluence,  as  I  had  conjectiu^ed.  I  repaired  with  her  at
eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  in  the  middle  of  October,  to
the  neighbouring  free  mountain  heights,  where  there  w^as  a,
wide  pi-ospect  all  round.  There  was  no  moon,  and  the  air
was  perfectly  still. She  found  coohiess  to  come  to  her  irom

)me  parts  of  the  sky,  and  warmth  from  others.  This  wa
'repeated  on  difl'erent  nights  and  at  diflerent  hours ;  soon
after  sunset,  then  at  nine  o'clock  ?.  m.,  tw^ice  at  midnight,
once  in  the  morning  about  four  o'clock,  and  just  before  sun*
rise.  Generally  speaking,  she  stated  that  soon  after  sunset,
namely,  at  six  o'clock,  the  direction  toward  the  west
was  most  vividly  cold ;  but  just  before  sunrise,  likewise  at
SLX  o'clock,  the  direction  toward  the  east;  that  long
after  suuset,  about  nine  o'clock,  north  and  north-west  were
the  cooler,  south  and  south-east  the  wanner  parts  of  the
sky  i  but  some  time  betbre  sunrise,  about  four  a.  m.,  north
and  nurth-eai!f were  the  cooler,  south  and  south-west  the


km^  Um  iMde  betvuoi
did  001  take  fiaot,  vwid
pRttf  Marijr  <if  <

(ifdbrpfaceoftkeaB. Wei
tlMK  tinttK»  tlHtt  tfe  nn  of  the  i
mr  it  WH  MDcrt;  tb^  vcit  ib  tfe <
die  maming,  the  greatest  •
night,  vhen  the  siui  was  id  its  kynr  <
enoe  was  almost  eflSMxd;  but  there  stiD  icmaiiiedaQiiie  a&er-
cffsd  of  the  suo  in  the  west,  lAich  it  left  behind  sp  to  that
time,  and  a  eoiD|dete  nentialiation  was  not  to  be  ciqpectad
faefiure  three  o'clock  A.X. That  this  akenation  between  east
and  west  is  leaUy  to  be  ascribed  to  no  other  caase^  is  |m¥ed
bgr  the  obaenration  that  these  wsisatinns  devchqped  tfaemsdves
Justin  the  same  way  when  the  d^was  covered  with  ckMid&
In  all  these  cases,  however,  the  noith  remained  onistautlj
cold,  the  south  wann ;  and  when  I  qnestimied  her  minutely
as  to  the  direction  of  the  two,  she  always  pointed  with  b^
hand  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic,  and  never  of  the
astronomical  meridian. In  particular,  she  assarted  that  a
clearly  defined  streak  of  the  greatest  warmth  was  to  be
detected  towards  the  south,  projecting  itself  finom  the  re-
maining space. Even  at  noon  she  found  the  directicm  of
the  magnetic  south  the  warmest,  and  the  diametrically  oppot-
site,  that  is,  the  north,  the  coolest  of  all  the  points  of  tbp
comptiss. This  affords  a  clear  index  how  these  results  ans
to  Ik5  interpreted  in  a  theoretical  examination  of  them.

211.  But  these  half  telluric,  half  sokur  phenomena,  mi^t
tint  Ihj  confounded  with  the  astral,  with  which  they  are  cow-
|»lirii((Ml  in  our  sensations. When  I  stood  at  night  with


TW«  trvfEKTAt  IfOmo  m  fll^TlERAt.


w


Mfes  Reicliel  iiiKlcr  r  hrij^ht  starry  8ky»  she  desi^ribed  the
^lilky  way  ds  afllcting  her  distinctly  with  coolness ;  as  also
the  proiip  of  the  Pleiades,  the  region  of  the  Cin*at  Ifenr,  and
^hers,  and  tlie  broad  starry  vault  in  general  as  cooling;  par-
tkuilnr  st^rs  alone,  on  the  contrary,  wann  -,  these  were  always
«fcRrs  of  the  first  magnitude ;  and  when  I  examined  her
about  them  with  the  dyalite,  I  found  Saturn  with  his  rings.
Jupiter  with  his  four  satellites,  Venus, — in  short,  in  every
ca^^e  a  planet.  Kxperienee,  therefore,  shows  that  all  stars
with  reflect^<l  light  appear  warm  to  the  sensitive,  while  all
Whers  with  pro|>er  hght  are  cool  This  ranges  itself,  then.
i^ry  l>eautiftilly  with  the  experiments  made  liefore,  when  the
moon  gave  warmth,  the  sun (that  is,  the  tixed  star)  cooK

^*tl212/  It  was  even  possible  to  warrant  this  by  certain  re*
liWJionf?.  Gazing  at  Jupiter,  as  at  all  brilliant  light,  was
^mbe^rable  to  her  fur  any  letigth  of  time.  Of  all  the  stars
together,  she  said  that  they  acted  upon  her  iu  combination
Wkt  a  rather  weak  magnet,  not  meix^ly  in  front,  but  behiiuK
rtpon  tlie  spine ;  principally,  however,  on  the  head,  where
she  was  most  highly  sensitive  to  all  magnetic  influences.  I
connected  a  copper  plate  of  about  a  ftx>t  stpiire  with  a  long
hniiis  wire,  which  led  to  the  sensitive,  whom  I  had  shut  up
in  darkness  on  the  staircase.  The  wire  gave  out  at  its  ex-
tremity, from  the  copper  and  from  itself,  a  small  flame ;  but
when  I  let  the  light  of  the  stars  fall  on  the  copper  plate,
without  making  this  known  to  tlie  patient,  she  informed  me
ftfter  ft  short  pause  of  the  risitig  of  a  slender  flame  to  the
fieight  of  more  than  a  span.  It  rose  and  sank  again  m  I
placed  the  cf>i>per  plate,  in  the  stailiglit,  or  removed  it.  When
1  t(X)k  a  zinc  plate  instead  of  the  copper  plate,  I  had  the
same  results  with  the  same  alternation,  oidy  weaker.  The
plate  furnished  cxjrresponding  efleets  upon  the  feeling.  The
wire  earned  from  it  became  cfK>ler,  when  the  starliglit  fell
ujion  it,  more  when  no  large  planet  could  shine  upon  the


llliite^  iIms  tribal  «e  of  dbcv  p«tk

vfVf  mmfnmif  ^tbn^kt  caataAM  of  tiie  fucJiiig  ImiliacA;
ibit  dbier  nnt  ontainhr  t  beiiitifiil  Toaeher  on  fte  one  Imul
for  eoBCnMtioD  of  that  whidi  we  hafe  afafmlr  ohnrred  in
dhe  ioo  and  moon ;  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  fret  that  the
irhole  material  world,  even  that  extonal  to  the  eaidi,  acta
upon  U0  with  just  that  same  force,  which  fispkfed  itself  as
eiiating  in  all  terrettrial  matter :  finally,  tiiat  we  JtamI  im
emmexUm  wUh  the  unwene  hy  a  nem,  kUkerio  wumspeeted
rmnprocation  ;  that  oonteqnentl j  the  atan,  abo,  are  actuafljr
not  altogether  without  influence  upon  onr  anbhmaiy,  per*
liapM  even  practical  world,  and  the  proceedings  of  manjr
beiida.

SIS.  Thus  we  arrive  at  the  concluding  result  of  this  trea^
tiie  '-^Ifi  the  same  manner  as  the  capacUy  dw€&  in  the
magnet,  crystals,  organic  beings,  the  sun's  rays,  heat,  elec-
trknty,  ftc.,  which  have  been  recognised  as  spedal  somtes;
to  display  characters  of  an  unknown  force  common  to  them,
so  has  this  force  U$  $efU  in  all  the  investigated,  mast  dis-
similar t  and  thus  doubtless  also  in  all  even  aeriform  amor*
phaus  matter,  the  heavenly  bodies  themselves  included,  and
takes  its  place,  therefore,  as  a  perfectly  universal  and  all'
pervading  force  of  Nature.  In  the  first  ten  sources,  we  scte
it  apiMMT  concentrated  in  isolated  points  of  the  material
HHfrldi  here,  however,  wo  recognise  it  as  an  universal  adjunct
oftUl  matter  in  iHiriahle,  unequal  dislribution.

SI  4.  Whothrr  now  this  natural  force  extending  over  tkt^
univers0  m  n  tulully  new,  or  a  hitherto  hidden  modification
of  n  known  out),  or  whether  it  is  a  complication  of  some  of
t\w  iilmuly  known,  in  a  atill  unoomprehended  collocation-^
ihiii,  mi\  iiiiioli  ^Uti  ol'  iui|Kirtan(>e  that  still  remains  in  ques-
tion, 1  luMV0  uiitoiu'litHl  for  the  present.  I  have  now  arrived
ut  tliu  |Miiut,  ^lii^i'i)  hII  thi)  Miuiroes  from  which  I  have  seen  it


THE  SCATRBIAL  WORLD  IS  OKNBRAb.


223


I


evolved,  are  combined  and  included.  lo  the  8uc<;eeding
treatises,  I  shall  compare  thera  one  with  another,  and  strive
^Jto  develope  them  in  many  relations  which  I  have  as  yet  only
partially  indicated ;  higher  judges  wtU  then  perhaps  under-
$ske  to  pronounce  judgment  on  the  whole.

215-  In  conclusion,  I  will  further  venture  to  make  an
effort  towiurd  the  removal  of  the  difficnitiea  of  language
connected  with  subjects  of  this  kind,  and  w  ith  wliich  I  have
manifestly  been  stniggting  all  thmugh  this  work. In  the
[isases  where  the  force,  now^  in  question,  has  been  seen  to
present  itself,  in  isolated  manifestations,  during the last
seventy  years,  it  has  had  the greatest  variety  of  names
applied  to  it»  almost  all  of  w  hich  have  been  derived  from
certain  resemblances  or  complications  with  magnetism. It
has  always  been  regarded  as  more  or  less  identical  with  the
latter. But,  from  what  I  have  unfolded,  it  is  seen  that  it
has  no  more  identity  with  this, than  magnetism  has  with  crys-
tuiliKatiun,  than  crystallization  with  electricity,  electricity  with
affinity,  than  lieat  with  light,  &e. We  do,  indeed,  8usi>ect
the  final  unity  of  all  these  dynamics  in  the  ultimate,  higlier
instance  ;  but  at  present  we  are  far  distant  from  this  desired
goal  of  natural  science :  we  caimot  even  till  up  the  gap
which  exists Ijetween magnetism and  electricity,  which
appears  so  small  that  one  imagines  that  one  can  reach  with
the  hands  from  one  side  to  the  other. But  so  long  as  an
empty  nron  rod,  wliich  will  not  snp|x>rt  an  iron  tiling,  dis-
plays as  much  power  in  regard  to  the  force,  of  which  we  are
treating,  as  a  powerful  steel  magnet  of  equal  size,  ^  1 94 ;  so
long  as  nmgnets  and  ci^  stals  are  met  with  acting  with  equal
strength  upon  the  nerves,  the  former  of  which  will  support
masses  of  iron,  while  the  latter  will  not  hft  up  a  filing,
§^  37,  42,  43,  44,  and  no  scientific  account  can  be  offered
of this  vast  distinction,  so  long  will  the  two forces  re-
main essentially  different,  so  that  we  cannot  examine  them


imi.  woir.D


il  of  ¥iew ;  and  thtwfopc^


iiuittg


be


Irie'


*!.'


name  ^peaia  to

'* — 1  -— -]  deiivatiQin  to  be ;
Il  Miwilte  a|ip«  lake  the  hlyes^  to

iim  ilmr^  Wiirtl  Od  Tor  the  force  which  we  afe  aqpfgitti  in
i$K  KviTy  one  will  admit  it  to  be  desinible  thai

liiliir  word beginning  with  a  vowel  shoukLilH
,  I  lui  ohject  which  occurs  univerBallj  in  an  infinitjr

i4  iHiiMnliMi  ixmchtionn  of  the  material  world,  for  the  sake  of
i^uuVNiii^iit  conjunction  in  the  manifold  compound  words.
IV  Wi>rd»  nuignc^tinm,  cl(*4*tricuiy,  &c.,  arc  by  far  too  long
l^r  "-'^^»  fui^nl  um  in  the  hingnage  of  science.  When  tliejr
M>i  M  lunl  by  additions,  as  in  vital  magnetism*  aiiiniai

lUHKtM'tlftiH,  &C,  it  becomes  as  burdensome  as  it  is  false,  for
t\\im\  ihntgM  (In  not  hrlong  exchisively  or  even  principally
tit  \iU\  M\\\  IrHH  n\v  tliey  identical  with  magnetism.  To
\\u\\  wUwh  Hiipport,s  ii'on»  and  constitutes  the  compass,  let
Vli  Imw  \\w  old  name,  with  the  original  concq)tion  of  a
i|l|l|^nr  of  itt>n,  which  belongs  to  it.  If,  then,  the  term
(>il  fthitll  be  ri>uiid  atTi  ptablc,  in  general  uae,  for  the  force
^\\\i\{  dm'»  not  HupjKirt  iron,  and  for  which  we  require  and
MHik  a  name*  the  n<»mcnclature  for  all  its  various  kinds  of
(Wrtvation  may  be  eiisily  fonned  by  composition :  artrMhiB
ail  eiiTuudoiHitions,  instead  of  saying,  "the  Od  derived
(Vmiu  m>tnlli*iUiou,"  we  may  name  this  product  erjfH(dhd^
Una  lo»'>  '»>oMal  life  ^W,  that  Crum  heat  M^fimad^^Jkife
l^^iiu  il  ^  brielly  aa  elati^  from  light  piotul^  and  80  0ii^>

liN^i«rliM<  ^kftma^t,  Mimt^  mlrmmi^  Irihod^  and  for  tlie
A  Horhl  genemlly.  iHinUnt  &c. I  am  i|nte*«wMi

tHiiin  mav  W  urgi^i  litw  ain)  then^  aporft  llw

^1  mvunnn  i  iiv^ it mighty  poffh^a^  W  <iiiife^
til  M^Y  ll^mmd.  9m, Neviotbifos^  wliaft  .i  iti
unWil  I  Kill  m^  wtwiW  JlmmU  vmkm  llMar  mw^  *


fll  xm^  \\M%M  mA  pmstrnf^i^"^  ntfoin  llaui  Ife  ^dmilt


TRl  IfATKHTAt  WORT^O'


ce  some  of  the  strictness  of  gmmmaticiil  nkm*
ricy  to  eupboiiy.  It  is  possible,  indeed  very  probable,  {hat
In  shall  one  day  succeed  in  bringing  the  incximmensurable
Upetionc  which  we  now  comprehend  under  the  names  of
nag  ..  electricity,  crjstaUiziition,  Ught,  heat,  affinity,

&c,,  under  a  common  denominator ;  but  the  numerators
will  always  remain  unlike,  and  therefore  it  udll  always  be
to  coimect  and  retain  groups  of  phenomena,
e  cdl  magnetism,  electricity,  &c. ;  and  thus,  what-
ever may  be  the  ultimate  scientific  fate  of  this  which  I  now
think  it  necessary  to  comprise  under  a  new  expression,  we
flfaill  scarcely  at  any  time  be  able  to  dispense  with  such  a
taid  as  Od,  or  some  synonymous  one  in  its  place.

vi
Retrospect.  ••

ft.  Not  only  magnets,  crystals,  hands,  chemism,  &c.,  but
all  soUd  and  fluid  matters  without  exception,  produce  sen-
ttlaons  of  coolness  and  tepid  heat  ecpiivalent  to  pleasure
and  inconvenience.

/>.  The  effective  force,  therefore,  does  not  appertain  to
particular  forms  or  especial  quaUties  of  matter,  but  it  dwells
in  matter  in  and  by  itself,

e.  This  force  not  only  manifests  itself  in  contact,  but  also
flt  distances, — as  from  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  ;  so.  also,
bom  all  matter.

-nirf.  Substances  arrange  themselves  in  the  order  of  the
electro-chemical  series.

'^iC  In  this,  the  electro-positive  substances  stand  on  one
with  potassium  at  their  head,  the  electro-negative  on
other  with  oxygen  in  the  fiuthest  limit:  all  electro-
metals  occur  among  those  giving  warmth,  and  pro*
dncing  unpleasaot  sensations ;  all  metalloids  on  the  cooling,  ^
agreeable  side*


^ihfe  wii
Htflie  oth


226  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.

/.  We  find  here  conductibility,  transferability,  and  lumi-
nosity with  glowing,  vapour  and  flames.

g.  Finally,  this  force  is  one  that  extends  over  the  entire
universe.

h.  Nomenclature.  The  word  Od,  odic,  with  inflexions
and  compositions.


2?7


SEVENTH  TREATISE.


DtlALlSM IN THE PHKNOMKNA.


216,  The  polar  opposition  in  ma^iets,  the  dualism  in
every  crystalline  form,  the  symmetriciil  and  sexual  oppo-
sition in  all  living  organization,  made  me  conceive,  even  at
the  beginning  of  the  present  researches,  that  something  of
the  kind  might  prevaU  here.  The  first  and  most  evident
character  of  this  was  afforded  by  the  constantly  recurring
sensations  of  he^t  and  cold,  of  pleasure  and  discomfort,
which  healthy  and  sick  sensitive  persons  imagined  they  felt
from  all  material  objects.  I  did  not,  indeed,  find  all  these
persons  agreeing  as  to  those  sensations  from  the  same  snb-
stratmn,  l)ut  as  to  the  quality  of  any,  wiien  once  they  had
determined  its  place  among  the  warm  or  cold  materials,  all
the  sensitive  almost  always  persisted  in  their  first  opinion.
There  must,  therefore,  necessarily  exist  here  objective  causes
in  respect  to  the  substance,  and  subjective  causes  referable
to  tlie  form  of  disease,  w  hich  detennined  the,  on  one  hand,
constant,  on  the  other,  inconstant  statements.  An  attempt
gradually  to  advance  along  the  trace  of  warm  and  cold,
in  order  to  arrive,  by  further  investigation,  at  a  certain
scientific  truth,  was  consequently  surrounded  by  difficulties
of  manifold  and  pecidiar  kinds.  They  were  only  to  be
overcome  by  patience.

217.  The  first  question  was:  T\Tiat  does  the  expression
warm  signify  in  the  mouth  of  the  sensitive  ?  What  the
term  cold  ?  All  the  objects  which  they  thus  designate  are,
in  every  case,  of  equal  thermomctrical  temperature  ;  these
words,  therefore,  cannot  mark  an}^hing  real,  but  must  indi-
cate an  apparent  temperature,  and  the  expression  is  there-


2d8  AUftM  i%  THE  FHEKOKEKA.

foixi  to  be  taken  in  a  figiinitiv«
upon  the  $ense  offeelimg^  mhiek
ofcoldf  depending  upon  some  nuknovn

218.  Miii  Stumuum  fioond  bodi  a  flask  «f
and  a  piaoe  of  sulphur  hot ;  Wm  Bathd  baui
cold ;  and  Miss  Maix  fioond  both  hot  wUe  Ijfii^  m  Iht
handi  but  diffusing  a  cold  air  aroond :  in  die  coBtUiw  Urn
of  difference  of  temperature  in  relation  to  the  i
of  the  air,  at  each  time  they  all  agreed ;  bntastoi
fttination  of  the  degree  I  received  voy  diftmit  aoossnte;
horn  tliree  observers  three  diffinrat  itifrnwiri^  aid  ail
thnni  kopt  constantly  to  the  same  statements  at  all  tBMoa
and  in  every  repetition.

1119.  Vnm  this  it  clearly  followed,  that  m*
Urn  obJM^tive  cause  residing  in  the  matter  preaa
iH|iial ilegrees  in  different  substances,  but  that
Irritabilitiifs  existed  in different "  ~

Alfain,  roulil  either  establish  merely  qoantitative  <
m$  that  n  sulistance  reacted  more  strongly
u|triii  n  )»atient,  which  would,  however,  over-emte  i
itr  (|iialiUttivo  distincTtions  might  exist  where,  in  one  d^eMe,
a  parlMMilar  NiibNtance  had  always  a  warm  reaction,  in  ano-
i\m  ulwayM  i^M,

^)H).  To  K<)t  nearer  to  the  natural  laws  lying  conoealed
linns  tlui  i|U(iMlion  required  to  be  stated  hmmc  aimpty;  it
i^iiiilil  iMil  «lo  to  lie((iii  with  substances  of  differrat  kinds,  it
iMMmi  Ihi  allitiMpMl  with  those  identical.  I  ther^bte  i^
MhihmI  Mi  my  nn^k  oryHtal  and  selenite,  in  which  I  nugfali
iMHMt  to  liriiiK  to  oliMirvation,  in  one  and  the  same  egamptej
tint  illin<r«tMt  t4iiii|iemtureH  which  appeared  to  the  sensitive
Im  run  tlinMiKJi  all  niitims  and  from  this  point  to  cany  oat
tlM«  imiMpurlwoiis.  With  Miss  Nowotny,  therefore,  I  took  a
MitjitMUo  ftiur  iiiolies  long  with  a  natural  point,  and  drew  it
iImwm  ovur  IIm»  iMniiln  of  hor  hand  from  the  wrfet  to  the  tip
iiC  tliM  iiiiihll**  llo((*^r.  iHMir  the  skin,  but  without  touching  it.


DUALISM  IN  Tllfc:  FHKNOMfiNA.


229


while  she  wtis  in  the  north-south  position.  She  felt  a  cool
wind  pass  over,  as  if  one  had  blown  on  her  hand  tlimngh  a
straw,  as  has  already  been  mentioned  in  ^  33.  I  then
reversed  the  crystal,  and  took  the  same  coiurse  over  the
hand  with  the  opposite  point  of  tlie  ciystal ;  she  now  ex-
perienced no  cold,  but  a  tepid  warmth,  which  was,  besides,
disagreeable.  A  rock  crystal,  rather  longer,  carried  down
over  the  hand  in  the  same  way  with  both  ends,  gave  the
same  results.  Miss  Sturmann  felt  the  downward  pass  over
the  hand  of  one  pole  of  a  tonrnmline,  warm  ;  of  the  other
pole,  cold,  Iceland  double  spar  acted  upon  her  exactly  in
the  same  way.

221.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  expressed  herself  in  the  same
way  :  the  above  selenite,  passed  down  over  her  right  hand,
gAve  coolness  to  her  with  the  same  end  that  had  given  it  to
Miss  Nowotny,  Wlien  I  passed  the  same  point  down  over
h^r  left  hand,  she  felt  it  still  cooler.  Reversing  the  crystal,
the  pass  down  the  right  hand  was  warm,  down  the  left
unpleasantly  tepid.  I  made  the  same  experiment  with  Miss
ileichel.  I  passed  the  same  selenite  over  her  hands.  The
same  end  which  had  caused  coolness  to  the  above  dilFerent
sensitive  persons  also  produced  coolness  in  the  downward
pass  over  her  right  hand ;  in  like  manner  over  the  left  also
dool,  but  more  strongly  and  more  agreeably.  When  I
reversed  the  crystal,  and  operated  in  the  same  way  with  the
other  end,  she  found  the  pass  down  over  the  right  hand
scarcely  cool,  on  the  left  hand  wai*m.  She  said,  when
passing  downward,  it  seemed  as  if  something  was  taken
{mm  her ;  when  upwards,  as  if  something  was  given.
Miss  Maix  expressed  herself  just  in  the  same  manner  hi
similar  experiments.*

U ^1*  it 1 VT' 1

♦  Thi»  otpenm^nt  I  have  m»de  tiumy  timea,  and  the  fltriking  corro-
boratiou  aflbrded  by  my  owu  experience  to  this  fact  U  very  agreeable ;
for  not  ouly  cioea  it  afford  us  a  general  rule  an  U)  the  dii'erence  between
the  elfects  from  the  two  etids  uf  the  cryslaU,  but  it  tendii  to  establiih


tMt  M'AUsii  H  ns  rmtsoMMSA.


at.  Himhr  actoonts  iMnre  been  ghncn  at  H  S3,  S4,  S5,
in  nguA  to  M.  Sclioh  md  rhifeawff  Endlicker.  In  the
mmntiftm  many  Uha  penons  who  have  expenenced  the
mofm  nenmitknm  have  given  roe  permianon  to  cite  their
UMlitmmy:  M.  Theodore  Kotacfar,  Dr.  Yenxl,  M.  Voigt-
iHttiiifr  the  optician,  Mr.  Incledon,  M.  Stnder;  the  joiner
TmsMiff  muit  aluo  be  named  among  the  healthy  aenaitive.
M.  Koticby,  as  well  aa  Mr.  Incledon,  eonld  only  bear  a  few
nstMditiiiim  of  the  pass  of  the  cold  end  of  the  krge  rock
eryntitl  from  tlic  h^  down  over  the  body,  as  they  then  felt
Msftsihiy  aifkttcd  in  the  stomach,  and  I  was  compelled  to
Amnt

228.  (icnerally,  therefore,  did  all  the  experiments  and
ivitneMieH  agree,  that  one  pole  of  the  ctystaU  gave  a  eddy
the  other  a  warm  pass.  I  say  expressly,  generally,  since
here  and  there  single  persons  occur  who  cannot  settle  pro-
perly alx)ut  cold  and  heat,  fancying  the  same  passes  ta  fed
sometimes  cold,  sometimes  warm,  varying  between  the  two
feelings  in  different  dispositions,  or  only  becoming  certainly
clr4ir  and  consistent  as  to  the  quality  of  the  sensation  after
n^peatcd  passes.  But  there  are  in  all  cases  healthy  or
men^ly  slightly  indisposed  persons;  the  properly  highly
sensitive  arc  but  seldom  in  doubt.  Novices  in  the  experi-
ments are,  in  particular,  less  clear  at  first.  The  special
(*as<'s,  however,  in  which  the  decision  between  cold  and
warmth  was  variable  in  them,  I  shall  discuss  hereafter,  and
tmw  them  Imck  to  definite  clear  cases.

2«S't.  When  a  dualism  in  the  crystallized  bodies  had
iHvn  Mul)stantiat(Hi  lH)th  by  these  facts  and  through  much
of  that  which  was  dctaiUnl  in  the  second  of  these  treatises,
a  ilnalism  which  follou^s  in  an  unmistakeable  parallelism
with  that  of  cr}*stullixation  itself,  the  questions  arose,  what
18  the  nature  o(  this  dualism? Docs  it  consist  of  a  dupli-

\ht  «Ulltrivn«v  %\(  \ht  ^ctwitii  of  Mihrr  emi  of  the  crrstml  when  pwsrd
«lir«Hil\  tvr  ia\ri«<'lv  in  i^Uiion  ti>  tlir  bnun.


DVALI8H  IN  THE  PHBKOMBXA.


231


^


city  P  Or  does  it  correspoud  to  a  real  preseucc  and  ab*
sence  ?  Or  is  it  like  a  positive  aud  negative  upixjsition  ?
I  acknowledge  that  I  can  as  little  give  a  definite  answer  to
tliese,  as  we  can  find  a  certain  intelligence  of  cold  and  heat,
of  -f  E  and  —  E,  of  +  M  and  —  M,  &c.  1  was  obliged
to  be  content,  for  the  present  state  of  matters,  to  make  cer-
tain of  a  parallelism  which  I  might  perhaps  hope  to  discover
between  Od  and  crystallization,  magnetism  and  electricity*

326.  We  know,  from  what  has  gone  before,  that  Od  has
much  agreement  with  magnetism,  leaving  out  of  considera-
tion the  capacity  of  the  latter  to  attract  iron,  to  take  a
direction  from  the  terrestrial  magnetism,  &c. ;  in  particulai%
that  it  affects  the  sensitive  exa<:tly  in  the  same  way.  When
I  passed  a  magnetic  needle  down  over  the  hands  of  dillerent
highly  sensitive  persons,  they  received  exactly  the  same
sensations  as  from  a  crystal  of  selenite,  calcaieous  spar,
topaz»  &c.  As  a  rule,  the  northward  pole,  that  is,  the
negative  end  of  the  needle,  declared  itself  cool;  the
southward  pole,  the  opposite  positive  end  of  it,  warm.
When  a  perfect  agreement  of  certain  poles  of  crystals  with
certain  others  of  the  magnet  was  thns  brought  to  evidence,
a  right  was  acquired  to  conclude  a  similarity  of  cause,  and
to  apply  a  similar  nomenclatiue  to  those  poles  of  crystals
which  exercised  effects  w^holly  homologous  to  determinate
poles  of  the  magnet,  and  were  gifted  with  corresponding
fundamentiil  qualities;  so  that  when  +  M  agreed  with  Od,
we  could  apply  the  term  -f  Od,  and  in  reverse  in  the  same
way  —  Od.*

226.  In  order  to  work  this  out,  I  first  mvestigated,  more
dtniltely,  the  relations  of  the  sensitive  to  the  pt)les  of  the
I  placed  a  small  magnetic  rod  in  the  hands  of
\iiMaB  Maix ;  it  was  about  four  times  as  long  as  the  breadth

*  I  have  repeated  thcae  experimentii  on  maDy  impreaeionable  subjects,
and  can  a0brd  a  strong  corroboration  of  tbe  facts.  In  some  cases  sleep
and  Tigilance  result  according  to  the  pole  offered  to  the  patient.


DfJArtSM  m  TM«  FinSNOirEKA.


of  ber  hand,  1  first  made  her  place  lx)th  lisU  close  together
in  the  middle  of  the  rod,  so  that  the  latter  passed  tbrough
both,  the  northward  pole  being  turned  toward  the  left  side.
She  experienced  a  moderate  amount  of  distiu*bance  from
thi*i.  I  then  made  her  advance  her  two  fists  along  the  rod,
the  left  toward  the  left,  till  it  enclosed  the  northward  pole ;
the  right  toward  the  right  till  it  enclosed  the  southward
pole,  briefly,  in  such  a  manner  that  she  had  one  jx>le  in
each  fist.  The  effect  of  this  alteration  was  very  perceptible  ;
she  now  experienced  a  very  active  disturbance  through  both
arms,  the  breast,  and  head.  When  she  removed  one  hand  from
the  rod,  the  disturbance  ceased  suddenly ;  it  returned  and
vanished  alternately,  as  she  alternately  grasped  and  let  go
one  pole,  retaining  the  other  in  the  other  hand.  The  same
occurred  when  she  repeated  the  operation  with  the  other
pole.  Therefore,  there  was  a  condition  like  a  crnm^nt,  a
kind  of  circuit,  as  was  observed  before  on  the  occasion  of
the  contact  with  both  my  hands,  of  which  I  have  already
given  an  ac>count  in  the  third  of  these  treatises,  ^  86.  For
the  control  of  this,  I  repeated  it  with  a  large  horse-shoe
magnet,  placing  one  of  her  liands  upon  each  pole,  the  left
upon  the  northward.  She  immediately  became  pained  and
oppressed  in  the  breast,  by  the  circuit  which  she  felt  through
this  from  the  arras ;  the  head  was  involved  and  soon  rendered
giddy,  and  the  patient  was  again  reminded  of  the  "ring-
game''  which  she  had  spoken  of  in  tlie  former  case,  &c.
The  moment  I  let  her  take  one  hand  away  from  the  magnet,
she  felt  at  once  the  in  term pt  ion  of  the  circuit,  and  again
breathed  freely.  Ever)^  repetition  afforded  a  similar  result.
In  both  experiment,^,  especially  the  latter,  stronger  one,  it
was  requisite  that  the  northward  pole  should  lie  in  the  left
hand,  the  southward  in  the  right,  for  the  sensations  to  be  in
any  degree  supportable:  when  I  reversed  the  poles  the
patient  could  not  bear  it ;  she  again  experienced  the  strange
conflict  within  her,  ah'eady  described,  and  evinced  so  great


intern^  torment,  tlmt  I  wm  ob%ed  to  give  up  the  expemi
mciit  immediately. If  I  venture  to  asBiime  the  axistence  of
a  circuit  here,  hke  that  of  tlie  galvanic  current*  I  am  obliged
to  courlude  that  it  here  flowed  from  the  positive  southward
pole,  through  the  right  ami  and  upper  part  of  the  body
toward  the  left  side,  and  then  tlirough  the  left  ami  and
hand  down  to  the  negative  northward  pole  of  the  magnet*
Then,  the  left  hand  of  the  patient  corresponded  to  the  south*
fvard  pole,  and  h^'r  riffht  hand  to  the  northward  pole  of  tfie
mttffnHic  needle :  in  other  words,  her  leJX  would  be  positive^
her  ritfhl  ne<jfative^  in  relation  to  ma(/neti$m  in  the  old  unr^
altered  sense  of  the  terms,  and  the  qnaltty  of  the  left  hand?
would  have  to  be  indicated  by  ^  Od  (here  =  +  biod),  and
that  uf  the  right  by  —  Od  (here  = —  biod),
1  5S7.  It  will  be  remembered  from  ^  8G,  that  when  I  \u
placed  my  riglit  hand  in  her  left,  aiul  my  left  in  her  right,  ^
ammilar  cii'cuit  was  felt  by  the  patient,  which  she  was  al)le
to  sustain  ;  but  that  when  I  crassed  ray  Iiands,  so  that  the
hanils  of  the  same  name  came  together,  namely  my  right  in
her  right,  and  her  left  in  my  left,  the  often  mentioned
90-called  struggle  arose  within  her,  which  she  could  not^
sustain,  since  it  was  insutFcrably  painful  to  her. From  tl
it  follows,  that  ray  male  hands  corresponded  perfectly,
qualitative  magnetic  resi>ects»  with  the  female  hands  of  Miss
Maix,  that  ray  right  took  the  place  of  the  negative,  north-
ward  pole,  and  my  left  of  the  positive,  southward  jjole,  and
therefore  they  possessed  magnetism,  with  positive  and  nega-
tive properties,  in  just  the  same  order  as  those  of  the  [)atient ;
cansequently,  that  men  and  women  are  orfjanized  exacllr/
ff*fih  th*»  same  polarity  in  these  points*


*  Dn  EUioUon  had  a  very  remarkftble  case  (Adlard)  illoitrative  of]
tluB  coDclusiun. When  the  patient,  a  male,  waa  in  meBineric  sleep,  the  |
two  aidea  of  the  body  were  so  different  one  to  the  other  that  he  could
not  BotTer  hin  legs  or  hi«  Brma  to  be  croRsed- He  eoiiM  not  nllow  hii ,
r^bt  hand  fiDgera  to  touch  his  left  cheeky  or  his  left  hand  fingers  to  i


234


IB  PHK9


228,  After  I  had  cleared  this  up,  I  placed  the  maguetic
rod  in  the  left  hand  of  Miss  Maix,  iu  such  a  manner  that  it
extended  fmm  the  tip  of  the  middle  finger  upwards  to
beyoud  the  hand,  aud  on  to  a  part  of  the  ami.  The  north-
ward pole  lay  above  upon  the  ann,  the  southwai'd  below  on
the  tips  of  the  fingers  :  thus  all  remained  in  its  natural
arrangement.  When  I  reversed  the  rod,  discomfort  com-
menced ;  the  so-called  struggle  began  fi*om  the  wrist  to  the
fingers,  I  now  pushed  the  magnetic  rod  up  her  sleeve,  so
that  it  lay  upon  her  fore-arm.  When  I  kept  the  airange-
ment  such  that  the  northward  pole  lay  above  at  the  elbow
and  the  southward  below  at  tlie  wrist,  the  patient  found  its
position  in  accordance  with  the  natural  conditions ;  w^hen  I
reversed  the  rod,  the  disagreeable  contest  at  once  became
felt  again*

I  repeat  here  the  observ^ation  winch  I  have  already  made
in  an  earlier  place,  and  which  must  not  be  left  out  of  conside-
ration in  the  critical  examination  of  these  phenomena,  that
the  patient  lay  in  the  magnetic  meridian  ;  the  head  to  the
north,  the  feet  to  the  south,  and  the  face  looking  southward.

229.  If,  now,  as  all  up  to  this  point  has  testified,  the
same  force  and  influence  uiKjn  the  livmg  organism  oc*curs  in
crystals  as  in  the  magnet,  a  simple  crystal  brought  into  the
same  cux'um stances  as  the  magnetic  rod  ought  to  produce
the  same  results,  I  placed  a  crystal  of  selenite  between  the
two  hands  of  the  [jatient.  It  soon  appeared,  however,  that
it  was  anythmg  rather  than  indifibrent  how  it  lay  between
the  tips  01  the  fingers  of  the  two  opposite  hands.  First,
she  soon  felt  out  that  the  two  most  distant  |X)ints  of  the
rhombohedi^on  were  indeed  part  of  an  internal  Ibri^  of  the
crystal,  but  not  the  strongest,  for  there  were  two  others  in


toucli  Ilia  riglit  cbcek.  In  either  caw  he  sturted  as  if  he  were  buraed.
He  could  not  endure  the  Doctor* b  right  hand  to  touch  his  left  side,  or
the  contrary, — ^See  Zoi^t,  vol.  iii,,  page  53 ;  where  some  other  particulars
of  tiiis  young  man's  case  will  be  found.


BUAIiWII  m  THIS  PHEKOMKKA.


285


the  direction  of  the  short  diagonal,  which  were  much
stronger,  and  coincided  with  the  polar  main  axes.  Neither
were  the  poles  of  their  axes  alike,  for  she  found  one  dis-
tinctly wanner,  the  other  cooler,  just  as  the  patients  had
always  found.  Wlien  she  now  held  the  crystals  between
her  tw^o  middle  fingers,  so  that  the  cool  pole  lay  on  the  left
middle  tiuger  and  the  warm  on  the  right,  the  condition  of
matters  was  in  certain  respects  accordant ;  but  when  1  re*
versed  the  crj^st^il  tlie  often-mentioned  discomfort  appeared. '
The  cool  pole  of  the  crjstal,  therefore,  corresponded  to  the
northward  pole  of  the  magnet';  the  warm  to  tlie  southward.
When  I  placed  the  crjstal  in  the  patient's  left  hand,  short
as  it  was,  for  the  main  axis  only  measured  four  inches,  it
was  by  no  means  indifltrent  to  her  in  what  direction  the
axis  lay.  If  the  cool  pole  was  directed  upward  toward  the
wrist,  the  warmer  toward  the  fingers,  the  patient  found  it
pleasant,  but  if  I  reversed  the  direction  of  the  poles,  the
disturbance  of  the  intenuil  conflict  commenced,  even  though
over  a  small  extent.  Similar  experiments  with  granite,  stau-
rolite,  and  heavy  spar,  furnished  exactly  the  same  results.

230.  I  should  scarcely  have  ventured  to  lay  so  much
,  weight  upon  these  observations  if  I  had  made  them  upon
liss  Maix  alone. It  might  have  been  a  peculiar,  perhaps
raiiable,  residt  of  disease. But  I  always  obtained  exactljr i
the  same  effect  in  repetitions  of  it  in  very  different  condi-
tions of  disease. When  I extended  to  Miss Nowotny,
ahready  far  advanced  in  convalescence,  one  of  my  hands,  she
felt  each  singly,  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  Miss  Maix;  and
when  1  gave  her  both  hands,  she  felt  herself  subjected,  in^
like  manner,  to  the  sensation  of  a  circuit,  which  she  could
not  long  sustain. Miss  Atzmannsdt>rftn-  found  my  right'
hand  warmish  in  her  left,  my  left  hot  in  her  left ;  when  I
gave  her  both  hands,  she  at  once  felt  the  cutruit,  which |
affected  her  whole  l)ody,  and  rendered  her  head  giddy. But!
when  1  extended  my  crossed  hands  to  her,  1  was  not  veiy  1


236  DUALISM  IN  TUl  PHENOMJDCA.

successful,  for  the  effect  was  so  viol^it,  that  ahe  b^pa  %^

lose  consciousness,  even  in  a  few  secands^  and  I

to  pause. With  Miss  Reichel  my  right  haod

disagreeable  in  her  left,  but  my  right  was  paiiifiilly  i

in  her  right. She  felt  the  two  oppositdy

hands  through  the  whole  arms,  and  soon  in  the

not  nearly  so  strongly  and  insupportably

when  I  grasped  her  crossed  hands. AU  thia  ia  in

agreement  with  what  I  have  circumstantiafly  detailed  ef

Miss  Maix.

231.  Thus  the  law  is  evolved,  that  dft^yminatft  polea
of  crystals  and  of  living  organized  structures  oone^Mnd  to
the  poles  of  the  magnet  in  relation  to  Od,  that  ciyatab  i«M
in  this  sense  a  clearly  displayed  north  and  south  pole;  thmi
the  cooler  always  corresponds  to  the  north  pole  ofthemag^
net,  the  warmer  to  its  south  pole,  and  finaUy  that,  of  the
human  hands,  the  right  corresponds  in  kind  to  the  Uiorthmtard'
pole,  the  left  to  the  southward,  both  in  the  male  andfetmalfi
sex.  Therefore  -f  Od  (here  4-  ciystallod,  or  +  biod)  pn^ ;
sents  itself  ecjuivalent  to  -i-  M,  and  —  M  parallel  to  —  Od»  Sac^

232.  For  the  further  confirmation  of  the  facts  here  ub^
folded,  I  will  include  in  my  report  some  other  similar  condi-
tions, which  have  presented  themselves  in  healthy  persons,
in  particular  in  M.  Carl  Schuh,  the  private  physicist. A
man  of  healthy,  powerful  as^^ect,  thirty  years  of  age,  and  o[
vividly  sensitive  temperament,  he  exhibited  far  more  excita-
bility by  Od,  than  many  other  persons,  so  that  he  thus  ooor*^
stituted a  certain medium  between  unsensitive  healthy  i
persons  and  excitable  nervous  patients. He  had  hardly. ev^i
been  ill,  but  when  he  over-applied  himself  to  his  labours^  hff
sometimes  suffered  for  some  hours  from  headache.  He  vividi^  ]
experienced  the  influence  of  all  crystals; laige  lUjBgnfft^,
affected  him  distinctly,  even  at  the  distance  of  a  yard.  WheA:
I  placed  my  right  hand  in  his  left,  he  felt  a  disagreeablq
efl'ect,  in  a  few  minutes,  in  his  head;  and  when  I  took  hia


DFAllfW  ly  Till:  PITRXOMFWIf;


287


right  hand  with  iny  left,  the  disorder  increased  rapidly ;  it
rtise  in  a  few  minutes  from  the  temples  towards  the  brows,
and  in  half  a  minute  produced  a  thrr^bhing  headache,  which
soon  liecanie  almost  insupportable,  and  remained  for  almost
light  minutes  after  I  had  set  his  hands  free,  disappearing
gradually  and  slowly ;  when  I  crossed  my  hands  with  him»
ft»  I  had  done  with  the  hif^hly  sensitive,  he  found  it  exceed-
ingly unpleasant.  Starting  from  the  later  obsenations»
namely,  that  the  right  and  the  left  stand,  in  the  relation  to
one  another,  of  negative  and  positive,  I  proposed  to  him  to
ii8€  his  own  right  and  left  hands  instead  of  mine,  and  to
plane  his  hands  one  within  the  other,  without  the  interposi-
tion of  mine.  To  the  no  small  astonishment  of  himself  and
theresrt  of  the  company,  he  found  that  his  headache  came
on  immediately  and  just  as  strongly  as  when  I  had  given
h\f\\  my  two  hands ;  that  it  remitted  and  gradually  disap-
[jear<?d  when  he  separated  his  hands,  but,  every  time,  re-
turned directly  he  folded  them  together  again.  His  nega-
tive right  on  his  positive  left  formed  a  kind  of  '*  element,"
if  I  may  borrow  this  expression  from  galvanism ;  the  arc  was
completed  by  the  arms  and  body,  and  the  polarization,  or,
if  the  word  may  be  admitted  for  once  in  subsiclium,  the  cir-
cuit commenced,  and  then  acted  upon  the  brain.  Several
nionths  later,  when  we  again  came  to  speak  on  the  subject,
he  told  me  that  at  no  time  does  he  dare  to  leave  the  hands
tt^ther:  since  he  has  known  the  effects,  the  commence^
ment  of  the  disturbance  at  once  remiuds  him  to  separate  his
hands  whenever  he  accidentally  brings  them  together.  Other
healthy  sensitive  persons  exhibited  wholly  similar  results.
M,  Kotsehy  at  once  felt  affected  by  my  hands,  and  when  I
reached  him  both,  he  desmbed  the  effect  as  a  kind  of  cir-
Hfit,  which  flowed  from  and  to  me,  through  the  arms  and
ch^:^  When  I  gave  the  two  hands  ei'ossed,  he  represented
hi^  f^ni*ations  as  annoying  painful  shocks  in  the  arms  and
head,  almost  in the  same  words  as Miss  Maix. But


238


llT!ALTS!»ff  TN  THl  PHINOMEW A.


M.  Kotschy  never  suffered  fi^ni  headache,  Mr.  Incledon
received  a  quite  unbearable  headache  from  my  two  hands;
especially,  however,  wlien  they  were  given  to  hiui  crossed,

233.  We  ai-e  now  in  a  position  to  cast  a  retrospective
glance  over  the  most  striking  phenomena  in  all  the  sensitive;
namely,  that  when  lyhig  on  the  back  in  bed,  or  in  a  similar
position  on  a  seat,  they  were  of  all  tUrections  least  able  to
hear  the  west-easterly  position.  This  is  the  position  with
the  head  to  the  west  and  the  feet  to  the  east,  the  face  turned
towai*ds  the  east.  In  this  position,  the  whole  right  side  is
tunied  towards  the  south,  wliile  the  entire  left  is  directed
t^  the  north ;  or  in  other  words,  the  positive  side  of  their
bodies  is  turned  towards  the  positive  pole  of  the  earth,  and
their  negative  to  the  negative.  Equivalent,  therefore  hos-
tile poles,  are  turned  directly  towards  each  other,  and  since
these  nintually  repel  each  other,  it  becomes  to  some  extent
comprehensible  why  such  a  position  must  become  so  e3t-
ceedingly  injurious  to  the  patients  so  highly  sensitive  in
these  points.  In  July,  when  Miss  Nowotoy  endeavoured  to
go  out  again,  she  was  utterly  unal>le,  even  out  of  doors,  to
hear  a  walk  fi*om  the  west  towards  the  east.  It  would  ba
impossible  to  find  more  perfect  confirmation  of  my  pre-
ceding observations ;  and  M,  Schuh  is  no  bedridden  and
obscure  patient,  but  an  active  man  known  and  seen  by  half
Vienna  and  half  Berhn.

234.  I  undertook  a  thorough  control  of  the  law  obtained
with  Miss  Reichel  It  is  known  from  the  preceding  treatise
that  I  possessed  series  of  simple  substances  and  preparations,
prepared  by  Miss  Novvotny  and  Miss  Maix,  an*anged  by
them  according  to  the  degree  of  discomfort  they  ex[)erienced
from  them.  But  in  their  graduated  series,  although  they
ran  by  regular  degrees  from  the  electro-chemically  strongest
substances  to  the  weakest,  no  regard  at  all  was  had  to  their
negative  or  positive  relation  in  the  electro-chemical  series ;
only  the  quantity  of  their  effect  upon  the  sensitive  had  been


4

4
4
n


nUALISM  IN  THF  PHKXOMBNA.

tiiken  note  of,  and  not  their  quality.  If,  then,  as  had  every
appearance,  the  distinction  between  cold  and  warmth,  in  the
feehngs  of  the  sensitive,  be  founded  upon  a  distinction  be-
tween negative  and  positive,  in  the  same  way  as  between  the
poles  of  magnets  and  of  crystals,  the  above-mingled  series
should  be  capable  of  being  divided  into  two  halves,  accord-
ing to  tlieir  difl'erence  of  cold  and  warmth  l>y  those  who  felt
this,  one  of  Avhich  halves  should  comprise  the  negative,  the
other  the  positive  substances.  In  this  experiment  I  used
Uie  series  of  substances  Miss  Moix  had  formed  as  a  basis,
and  made  Miss  Reichel  bring  this  into  two  groups,  according
to  cold  and  heat.  I  here  give  the  result.  The  series  pro-
ceeds from  the  greatest  strength  down  to  the  least.  The
numbers  denote  the  order  in  which  they  were  originally
placed  in  Miss  Maix's  series,  before  it  had  lyeen  divided  into
two  Hv  Miss  Reichel.


WARM.

COLD.

2.

Potnsaium.

1.

Oxygen  gas.

X

CAfibine.

4,

Sulphnvic  acid.

f».

Ptirplcof  CiusinA.

6.

Iodide  of  gold.

7.

Bnicia*

8.

Diamond.

15,

Chromic  acid.

9.

Chloride  of  gold.

19.

Picarnanite  of  lime«

10.

Sulphur.

21.

Bromide  of  nilTer.

IL

Bromine.

22.

Iodide  of  silfer.

12.

Tellurium.

23.

Iodide  of  bismuth.

13.

Osmic  acid.

26.

Picaniar.

14.

Selenite.

27.

AtropiDe.

16.

Lunar  oiuatic.

28.

Acrolcine.

17.

Orpiment.

31.

Rhodium.

18.

Chloride  of  mercury

32.

Narcotine-

20.

Oxide  of  platinum.

35-

Strychnine.

24.

Iodide  of  carbon.

37.

Se«qui'Oxide  of  lead.

25,

Iodide  of  mercury*

38.

Alloxan.

29.

Iodine.

40.

PicrotoTcine.

30.

Telluric  acid.

41.

UlimmariDe.

33.

Cyanide  of  mercury.

43.

Mesite.

34.

Selenium.

46.

Cittonyie.

36.

Paracyanogen.

240


DVAUSM  n  TU  nwsii


WAUf.
47.
48.

62.  CicMoCe.

63.  PolM.

67.  lithwni.

68.  CmDihmndiae.
61.  Cetme.

64.  jEicofiiie.
66.  BvyU.
70.  Meknune.
74.  Grejpiginm.
76.  Mamide.

76.  Protozide  of  mangaiwae.

78.  H  jdrmte  of  oil  of  Inrpeotiiie.

79.  Cholestcriiie.

80.  Aspangiiie.
82.  Hjoacjamine.
85.  Allozmntioe.

88.  Caryophjlline.

89.  AUftotaine.

90.  Salphoret  of  i

91.  lime.
94.  Gold.

97.  Zinc.

98.  Stearine.

99.  Chromium.
101.  Otmiam.
104.  Pftlkdiam.

107.  Mcrcory.

108.  Delphinine.

109.  Datarine.
no.  Leml.
113.  Oleic  acid.

116.  Cadmimn.

117.  Sodium.

118.  Antimonj.
121.  Red  lead.

124.  Morphia.

125.  Benxamide.

126.  Veratria.

127.  Indigo  bine.


39.

42.  Snlpkoelor

44.  Araeiue.

46.  Ozideor

49.  Iodide  of  IcdL

60.  Chlondeof

51.  Chlonde  of  line.

54.  Oxide  of  eoppcr.

65.  Cyanide  of  poCaanni.

56.  Salphafctofcalflina.

59.  Sulphate  of  Boqilna.

60.  ifoomideof

62.  Cjanic  add.

63.  Andmonie  acid.
65.  Solphoretof

67.  Hydrate  of  baiyta.

68.  Pkrabanic  add.

69.  Borax.

71.  Acetate  of  morphia.

72.  Hydrochloniteofcitiaiyle.

73.  I%oephuret  of  nitrogen.
77.  Oxide  of  cobah.

81.  Titanic  add.

83.  Uric  add.

84.  Neutral  phosphate  of  lime.

86.  Chloride  of  carhon.

87.  Carbazotic  add.

92.  Phoephorus.

93.  Bichromate  of  potass.

95.  Oxide  of  nickel.

96.  Alcohol.

100.  Chloride  of  chromium.

102.  Albumen.

103.  Anunoniochlorideofplatii

105.  Protoxide  of  chromium.

106.  BUcklead.

111.  Oxide  of  silver.

112.  Common  salt.

114.  Molybdic  add.

115.  Iodide  of  potassium.
1 1 9.  Sulphate  of  iron.


^^^^^^^^^D^tI9M  Tiff PRKNOMCKA. ^^f ^H

H WARM.

^^H

H 129.  Tiuniiim.

120.  Nitric  acid. ^^^|

■ 132.  NapliibaHue.

122.  Oxide  of  nianganeiic. ^^^H

H 133.  Coal  wax.

123.  Sebacic  acid, ^^^|

H 137.  Nickel.

128.  Stearic  acid. ^^H

H 138.  Copt>er.

130.  Maflsicoe. ^^^|

H t3£».  Saotamne.

131.  Oxamifle. ^^H

^M 140.  Iridmm.

134*  CiDchonitie. ^^^H

H 141.  Tin.

135.  MeUn. ^^H

H 142.  CohitU.

136. H  i  p pii  ri c  acid . ^^^H

^1 148.  Amygdaliue.

143.  Funiaric  acid, ^M

H 149.  MeUon€.

144.  Malic  acid. 1

^1 li>0.  Quiiune.

145,  Benzoic  acid. ^^^J

^H 151.  Piperine.

146.  Lactic  acid. ^^^H

^B 156.  Benzoyle.

147.  CiunamoLiic  acid. ^^^^|

" 157.  Urea.

152.  Peroxide  oflead, ^^H

1 158.  Plutioym,

153.  Gallic  acid. ^^H

^ 159.  SiWer.

154.  Tannic  acid. ^^^H

H 163.  EupioLK

155,  Succinic  acid. ^^^H

^H 167*  Bar-iron.

1  GO.  Spring  water. ^^^H

^ I7K  Pwnffinc.

16L  Mannite. ^^^H

W2,  Charcoil. ^^H

164.  Starch. ^^H

165.  Gum. ^^^H

166.  Sugar. ^^^H

16H.  Vinegar. ^^^|

169.  Sugar  of  miik. ^^^|

170.  Citric  acid. ^^^|

1 72.  Diatilled  wat^r. ^^^|

^ 235.  When  this  arran

gement  is  exnuiined,  it  is  seen  that ^|

almost  all  riictals,  potassium  at  the  head,  mtli  the  isolated ^|

exceptions  of  tellurium  and  arsenic,  are  on  the  side  of  the ^|

^K  twrra  bodies, — therefore^

on  the  especially  negative:  we  find, ^M

^V  further,  under  this  head.

almost  all  organic  substances,  and ^H

H  orjcanic  bases;  the  compounds  of  carbon,  rich  in  hydrogen, ^|

H  and  barely  a  couple  of  acids,  chromic  and  oleic. On  the ^H

H  other  hand,  we  observe  in  the  opposite,  cold  side,  all  bodies ^|

H  like  sulphur,  bromine,  iodine^  selenium,  all  rompotmds  of ^|

H  rhlorine,  the  oxides  of  the  metals,  all  compounds  of  cyano- ^M

242


DUALISM  IN  TH£  PHENOMENA.


gen,  aod  almost  the  whole  of  the  acids.  So  far  as  we  caii
judge  of  the  substances,  we  perceive  on  the  wtirm  side
scarcely  anything  but  electro-positive — on  the  cold  side,
scarcely  anything  but  electro-negative.  It  is  certainly  sur-
prising, and  in  the  highest  degree  worthy  of  notice,  that  a
human  being — a  girl  perfectly  ignorant  of  such  things — ^is  i
capable  of  classifying  with  certainty  atul  accuracy,  according
to  one  of  their  innermost,  profoundcst,  and  most  obscure  pecu*
liarities — their  electro-chemictj  character,  all  the  substances
of  this  world,  without  seeing  them, and  by  mere  dull  sensation.

23fi.  As  we  have  been  compelled  to  infer  of  the  magnet,
crystals,  and  human  hands,  all  wannih-tjlvint/  suhstances
are  positive^  so  ai*e  we  now  obliged  to  conclude  that  all  pasi-
tive  bodies  (five  out  heal.  This  holds  good  in  the  rever&ed
formula  of  the  negative,  and  thus  we  arrive,  in  a  different
way  from  that  already  known,  at  the  electro-chemical  series
of  bodies,  whicli,  from  this  poiut  of  view,  we  may  call  the
Od-chemic^l  series,

237.  As  to  the  manner  and  circumstances  by  which  I  ob-
tained this  result,  I  may  add,  that  I  gave  the  observer  all
the  Ijodies  which  consisted  of  solid  substance,  into  her  bare
left  hand ;  the  pulverulent  on  a  fine,  very  thin  tissue  paj)er,
wliich  did  not  require  to  be  taken  into  account ;  and  the
fluid  in  the  bottles  in  which  I  usually  kept  them.  I  did  i
not  neglect  to  control  this  operation  repeatedly,  and  most
minutely,  l)y  making  the  same  trials  over  again,  in  modified
ways.  At  one  time  I  placed  all  the  bodies  at  one  end  of  m
long  and  wide  glass  tube,  while  Miss  Reichel  grasped  the
other  in  her  whole  hand.  When  I  inserted  one  body  after
another  into  the  tube,  the  feeling  of  warmth  and  cold
changed  in  a  moment.  Another  time,  I  selected  a  glasa '
rod  of  such  condition  that  it  was  not  felt  either  warm  or
cold.  With  this  I  let  her  touch  the  substance,  inserting  it
into  the  |K)wders  aiul  fluids,  and  placing  it  against  the  side
of  the  solids. With  this  kind  of  feeler  she  very  acciiratelf


nrAfitsM"  iTf  rnn  fh BtwMfiNA.


US


distinguished  the  warm  or  cold  condition  of  bodies  every
time;  and  I  can,  from  experience,  especially  recommend
this  mode  of  testing,  as  readily  |>rovided  for,  everywhere  ap-
plicable, and  very  clear  to  the  observer.  By  means  of  two
such  rods  of  equal  thickness  very  acctu*ate  comparisons  be-
tween two  diflerent  bodies  could  be  made.  The  exinnina-
tlon  of  bodies,  by  placing  tliem,  together  with  ihe  bottles  in
which  they  are  contained,  in  the  hands  of  the  patients,  is
only  possible  with  substances  of  great  strength;  as  with  sul-
phuric acid,  potass,  calfeine,  &c.  In  the  weaker,  it  is  inad-
missible, because  the  glass  itself  has  very  diflerent  projicr-
tie«,  feeling,  ficcording  to  its  chemical  condition  of  admLx-
tui^e,  sometimes  warni»  sometimes  cold,  and  sumetimes
inditterent,  and  thus  readily  rendering  the  result  incorrect.
This  frequently  goes  so  far,  tliat  weak  substances,  which  by
themselves  feel  cool,  are  thereby  made  to  feel  warm,  and
rhe  vrrsd  ;  and  then  errors  will  be  produced.  Salts  and
other  preparations,  which  o(*cur  in  a  crystalline  condition,
must  be  powdered  before  testing,  even  if  only  coarsely.
For,  since  the  erptals  are  polar,  no  pure  residt  of  quantity
an  be  obtained  from  a  group,  as  isolated  crystals  aflcct  the
n^ult  by  their  poles,  and  render  it  complex,  I  henitated  a
long  time,  for  instance,  with  saltpetre  and  bichromate  of
potass,  between  warm  and  cold,  until  I  powdered  them,
when  a  constant  coolness  presented  itself.  And  when  a
substance  is  powdered,  it  must  not  be  examined  imme-
diately, but  after  some  hoiu^.  For,  the  mortar  and  pestle
in  which  it  has  been  powdered  influence  it  fur  a  long  time,
through  transference :  in  like  manner,  the  rubbing  in  the
trituration  alters  the  natural  odic  value,  since  it  brings  in
accumulation  from  friction,  i>erhaps  also  fwm  electricity,
that  may  be  thereby  set  in  motion.  Finally,  the  substances
to  be  examined  must  not  be  allowed  to  remain  previously
for  any  time  near  other,  especially  much  stronger  or  much
weaker  ones,  because  they  will,  in  that  case,  become  altered


244  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

by  transference  ;  moreover,  they  must  not  have  stood  in  the
smishine,  nor  in  the  moon's  rays ;  they  must  not  have  re-
mained long  in  the  hand  ;  when  several  are  to  be  compared
together  they  must  be  tolerably  equal  in  temperature,  &c.
All  these  things  would  interfere  with  the  purity  of  the  result,
as  is  abundantly  evident  from  the  preceding  treatise.

238.  I  need  scarcely  observe  that  the  series  which  I  have
above  given  is  not  to  serve  as  the  normal,  but  only  as  an
example,  and  as  a  help  to  tlie  argument.  For  to  have  been
laid  down  as  the  type,  it  would  liave  I'equircd  the  previous
most  accurate  investigation  of  the  chemical  purity  of  the  sub-
stances, a  labour  for  which  neither  time  nor  circumstances
have  yet  afforded  sufficient  opportunity.  I  merely  intended
to  seek  out  and  lay  down  the  law ;  its  ac*<;urate  application
will  belong  to  another  time.  Countless  other  preliminary
investigations  are  also  requisite  here,  the  infinity  of  which  I
fully  feel  and  recognize ;  in  the  first  place  of  all,  these  test-
ings of  positive  and  negative  character  of  bodies,  which  I
was  here  first  able  to  carry  through  with  Miss  Reichel,  must
be  undertaken  with  several  other  sensitive  persons  in  dif"-
ferent  conditions ;  thereby  must  be  found  the  key  to  the
distinction  of  their  sensations,  as  also  the  results  of  more
exalted  or  lower  excitability,  in  comparison  with  Miss
Reichel,  who,  since  her  sensations  coincided  so  accurately
with  the  general  electric  condition  of  bodies,  as  it  has  been
made  out  previously  in  other  ways  by  physics  and  che-
mistry, must  have  been  in  a  remarkable  equilibrium, — one
might  say,  of  purity  of  diseased  condition.

239.  We  will  now  make  some  applications  of  the  disco-
vered law,  that  substances  which  affect  the  sensitive  as  warm
or  cool,  the  thus  od-positive  or  od-negative,  correspond  to
the  electro-positive  and  electro-negative.  First  of  all,  we
found  the  sun  strikingly  cool,  but  the  moon  strongly  warm
on  the  sensitive ;  the  fixed  stars  ranged  themselves  vnth  the
sun,  the  planets  with  the  moon. I  do  not  know  whether


inULISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


245


itetrononiers  have  yet  made  out  anything  positive  on  this
subject ;  so  far  as  niy  knowledge  goes,  nothing  has  been
tnade  known  on  this  point,  except  what  M.  Kreil*  traced
itito  the  qnalities  of  Hie  moon,  from  the  interference  with
the  dechnation  of  the  magnetic  needle,  It  is  then  certainly
in  some  degree  interesting,  that  the  hnman  feelings  should
be  able  to  carry  us  so  far  as  to  recognize  tliat  the  fixed  stars
take  their  place  all  on  the  eleetro^negative,  tlie  moon  and
the  planets  on  tlie  electro-positive  side  :  Unninous  and  ilhi-
minatcd  stiu*s  ai*e  thus  opposed  in  a  polar  manner  to  each
other.  Perhaps  we  shall  one  day  succeed,  if  not  in  deciding,
yet  in  raising  a  probability,  that  a  comet  which  only  sends
us  |K)Iarized  light  is  actually  a  reflecting  and  not  an  illu-
minating body.  Subjecting  this  to  rigid  criticism,  it  may
indeed  be  objected  that  the  feelings  do  not  necessarily  point
here  to  the  electro-chemical  condition  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  but  only  the  influence  of  their  emanations ;  their
rays  of  light,  of  heat,  &c.  are  perceived  in  the  feelings  of  the
patient.  I  do  not  at  all  oppose  this  ;  at  the  same  time,  all
that  we  have  yet  succeeded  in  discovering  about  the  heavenly
bodies  is  perceived  through  emanations  of  each  kind,  by
means  of  onr  senses ;  all  that  we  know  of  them  relates  to
that  alone  which  arrives  to  us  through  their  emissions,  and
thus  we  arc  in  the  same  position  with  the  odic  emanations,
which  tell  us  that  the  sun  is  od-negative,  and  the  moon
od-positive,  as  the  emanations  of  light  teach  us  that  the  sun
is  warm,  the  moon  almost  without  heat,  &c.

S40.  From  ^147,  hi  the  examination  of  the  chemical
activity,  we  ah*eady  know  that  all  fire  eflects  the  feelings
of  the  sensitive  with  cold.  This  is  so  tar  worthy  of  regard,
that  we  know  from  the  researches  of  Pouillet  (AnnaL  de
Phys,  et  de  Chim.,  torn,  xxxv.,  p.  402),  that  the  exterior  of
flames,  which  depend  upon  oxygen  combinations,  possessea


*  Aslrom.  metcoroL  JnlirUuch.  1842.


:^6  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

much  free  positive  electricity.  This  cold  is  not  only  dif-
fused from  the  free  fire  of  od-positive  or  od-negative  bodies,-^
as  from  potassium,  stearine,  oil,  alcohol,  and  sulphur,  but  it
may  also  be  detected  when  the  fire  is  inclosed,  whether  it
be  in  positive  or  negative  bodies.  For  when  Miss  Reichel
approached  a  stove  warmed  by  the  fire  inclosed  in  it,  she
found  it  indeed  warm  at  the  greatest  proximity,  so  long  as
its  real  heat  acted  in  a  preponderating  degree  upon  her,
especially  with  iron  stoves;  but  when  she  drew  back,
scarcely  a  couple  of  steps,  it  caused  her  vivid  sensations  of
coolness,  and  the  stronger  the  more  actively  the  fire  burnt
in  the  stove.  When  she  was  chilled  in  the  winter  time,
and  went  to  warm  herself  at  the  heated  iron,  it  now  chilled
her  through  and  through,  and  her  fingers,  which  previously
were  rather  stiff,  became  perfectly  so ;  she  was  compelled
to  go  away,  and  endeavour  to  warm  herself  by  walking  up
and  down  the  room  and  rubbing  her  hands.  It  was  pretty
nearly  the  same  thing  whether  the  stove  was  of  earthenware
or  of  iron.  In  judging  this  strange  effect,  it  must  not  be
overlooked  what  a  complex  phenomenon  this  is  of  what  is
given  out  by  lieat,  light,  chemism,  the  electricity  thereby
excited,  the  substance  of  the  burning  materials,  and,  finally,
of  the  stove  itself  The  resultant,  however,  of  all  these  com-
ponents is,  in  all  the  cases  hitherto  observed,  an  uncommon
degree  of  cold  to  a  distance  of  many  paces,  so  that  it  drove
MissMaix  out  of  the  illuminated  churches,  ^181,  and  Miss
Reichel,  when  she  remained  only  a  short  time  in  the  vicinity
of  a  burning  wood  fire,  was  in  rapid  succession  first  attacked
in  the  head,  then  rendered  giddy,  and  at  last  felt  so  seized
with  pain  in  the  stomach  that  unless  she  hurried  away  she
fainted.  Ftre,  therefore,  acts  od-negativdy  on  the  sensitive
in  all  cases,

241.  The  question  suggests  itself  here,  what  apparent
temperature  may  be  shown  by  flames  of  that  kind  which  the
Od  itself  produces,  and  which,  invisible  to  healthy  i}ersons,


DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA-


247


aiB  fftweived  by  the  sensitive  on  the  polar  ends  of  wires
from  all  the  variaus  sources  of  Od.  To  solve  this  I  inserted
first  a  gla^s  rod*  which  itself  felt  cool,  and  an  iron  one,
which  felt  warm,  in  a  nuniher  of  substances,  and  let  Miss
Reichel  feel  the  flames  issuing  from  the  extremities  at  a
dist^ice  of  two  inches,  I  obtained  the  following  series,
exactly  similar,  £i"om  the  glass  and  iron  rods : —


COLD  OD-FLAMES.

WARM  OO'FLAMES.

Bichromate  of  potasa.

Gold.

Sugar.

PlatitiuEi*

Sugar  of  tnilk.

Potass.

Citric  acid.

Narcotinc.

Oxalic  ttcitL

Mioium.

Chloride  of  lime.

Oxide  of  lead.

Sulphur.

Cast  iron.

Bromitie.

Parafline.

Graphite.

Mercury*

CbarcoaJ*

Till.

Arsenic.

Cndmiuro,

Manganese.

Iridium.

Alcohol

Creosote.

Sulphate  of  iron.

Iron-fUiDgs.

p

^V  The  apparent  temperatine  of  the  flames  agreed  accurately,
therefore,  with  the  temperature  which  the  substances,  on  which
they  depended,  had  shown,  by  feeling  in  immediate  contact,
by  feeling  through  a  long  glass-tube,  and  with  a  glass  rod  :

eatl  od-negative  sttbstances  (five  cold,  all  od-posilive  warm
^flames.  The  temperature  of  thejlames,  there/ore,  affords
an  cjcpression  of  the  odic  quality  of  bodies  in  general.
242.  This  sensitive  patient  also  felt  all  radiations  from
electrified  bodies  cold,  especially  those  positivt  ly  electrified.
The  conductor,  glasses,  and  wood-work,  all  gave  heat  by  them-
^Ives;  as  soon  as  I  electrified  them,  and  only  to  a  strength
capable  of  yielding  jx)sitive  sparks  one-fifth  of  an  inch  long,
and  in  the  moist  air  of  cloudy  weather,  she  felt  all  these


243


BtJALISM  IK  THE  PHEXOMENA,


mfastanoes  perfectly  cold  at  distauoes  of  from  ten  to  fittecn
paces.  This  feeling  of  cx)ld  increased  rapidly,  the  faster  1
turned  tlie  plate  of  the  machine,  yet  was  nut  inimechate,
but  always  became  first  pei"ceptible  several  seconds  later
than  the  electric  charge  upon  the  bodies,  A  fox-skin,  by
itself  waini,  gave  great  cold,  wlien  I  had  beaten  an  electro-
phorus  cake  with  it.  The  same  occurred  when  I  let  the
electricity  flow  from  the  ecjuduetor  into  the  air  through
points,  instead  of  clcctrifyiug  bodies  with  extended  surface.

When,  on  the  other  hand,  I  placed  negatively  clecti'ificd
bodies  opposite  the  observer,  she  found  them  warm  ;  an
electrophoms  composed  of  pm-e  resin,  warm  by  itself,
emitted  far  greater  heat  after  it  had  been  beaten  with
the  fox-skin,  and  became  observably  wanner  with  ahuost
every  stroke,  up  to  a  certain  degree,  \\  here  it  remained
stationary*

After  these  observ^ations  the  conclusion  was  warmnted,
that  positively  electritied  bodies  produced  cold,  negatively
electrified  wainn  sensations.  Since  this  ran  counter  to  the
general  ascertainetl  theory,  the  cause  of  such  eiffect  must  be
derived  froui  tlie  electricxd  distribution,  whci-cby  the  air,
sun-ounding  the  positively  electriticd  bodies  in  which  the
observer  was  placed^  was  negative  by  distribution,  and  cou-
sequcntly  as  the  nearest  substance  must  act  negatively  upun
her  sensations, — that  is,  in  opposition  to  the  condition  of
the  electritied  body.

243.  A  great  number  of  experiments  were  made  witli
the  voltaic  battery,  and  this  would  be  the  proper  place  to
give  an  accomit  of  the  temperature  of  the  odic  flames  pro-
duced by  it ;  but,  as  the  results,  on  this  point,  api>ear  Uio
complicated  to  admit  of  dismissal  with  a  passing  notice,  I
must  reserve  the  regular  description  of  them  for  a  special
treatise.

244.  The  odic  flames  which  were  produced  by  ctmdle-
light,  as  by  sun-light  at  the  end  of  long  wires,  all  felt  cold.


DUAX.1SM  IN  THE  I'HENOMKNA*


Ud


Mttli^eit'hel  felt  ilie  couluesa  of  the  odic^flanies  issuing  fmai
the  further  eud  of  a  long  wire,  twenty  yards  long,  which  wa
attached  to  a  copper  plate,  iUuoiinated  by  eight  candles.
Here,  indeed,  both  heat  and  cliemical  action  infliieucedi,
Suubght,  directed  upon  a  large  phite  of  iron,  and  thenca
lAirnecl  towards  her  with  the  point  of  a  wire,  gave  a  flame
of  which  the  coolness  reached  very  far;  moonlight,  on  the
euntmry,  thrown  upon  the  same  ])]ate,  produced  heat  in  the
flame  at  the  point  of  the  wire  directed  toward  the  ol»scrver ;
and  tiiis,  always  alike  in  many  repetitions,  at  very  different
times.

245.  The  following  experiment,  similar  to  those  m4
^^  122  and  123,  may  indicate  the  condition  of  the  Odl
prodnccd  by  heat.  With  Miss  Maix,  I  had  an  earthen  pot
tilled  with  cold  water,  inserted  a  wire  ten  feet  long  into  it>
placed  the  other  end  in  her  hand,  put  a  cover  over  the  water,
and  allowed  the  patient  to  become  accustomed  to  this  ar-
rungenient.  1  then  poui^ed  the  cold  out,  and  replaced  it
with  boiling  water.  She  at  once  felt  the  wire  increase  in
a[>{iarent  heat, — that  is,  in  odic  heat ;  this  acquired  a  steady
maximimi  in  a  few  seconds. I  now  threw  some  pieces  of

into  the  boiling-hot  water  :  the  heat  of  the  wiie  in  the
md  immediately  began  to  decrease;  it  sank  continually
till  it  wholly  disappeared,  and  now  the  temperature  wa»J
reversed.  The  disagreeable  heat  of  the  wire  vanished
entirely,  and  in  its  place  apjK-ared  the  beginning  of  a  cool-
ne^,  which  continnally  increased,  and  soon  became  very
pleasant  to  the  observer,  affecting  the  hand,  then  by  degrees'
the  arm,  and  so  on,  the  whole  person,  even  to  the  back.
Judging  from  this,  1  must  assume  that  the  warming  pro-
duced positive,  the  cooling  negative,  movements  of  Od  in  the
bodies.

246.  Rubbing  a  copper  plate  with  a  piece  of  wood  gavei
warm  +  od  in  the  copper  wire  seven  yards  long,  ^  125.

247.  *l%c  chemical  polarization  is  usually  decided  by  the


in  TttE  rmwMomMXA,


coMtilQeiit,  whidi  eatien  into  liie
fliidiiiiieiitnlixmbaiitiini^  and

of  these  m  die  od^bemical  flems.  A  number  of  exfiert*
meMs^  rekting  to  this,  hare  already  been  dt*scnbed  in  Uie
ifth  treatise,  from  ^  137,  139—142.  I  will  add  a  few
other  instanoes  here.  I  placed  iron-fiUngs  in  a  glass  cop^
and  pouied  aorae  water  on  thenL  A  glaas  rod  imserted  in
tUa  felt  rather  warm.  I  pomed  some  vinegar  in,  and  ibe
rod  at  once  gave  cold.  Vinegar,  like  almoat  all  vegetable
acida^  ia  od-negative.  But  the  rod  soon  became  warm  again ;
the  vinegar  had  been  neutralized  by  tbe  iron,  and  a  great
exoeaa  of  iron-fiUngs  remained.  1  then  added  citric  add  :
the  same  course  was  followed :  in  particiilar,  after  I  bad
stiired  up  the  mixture  a  bttle,  the  rod  became  wholly  warm
a^un.  I  next  took,  seriatim,  a  few  other  organic  ackfe\;
all  produced  the  same  effect.  In  another  experiment,  I  uaed
strong  solution  of  potass,  as  base,  which,  being  od-poskive,
made  the  glass  rod  warm ;  sulphuric  acid  poured  into  this
fendered  it  cold  for  a  moment,  then  followed  great  heat,  the
alkali  remaining  in  excess.  Sulphuric  acid  added,  to  neu*
trahzation,  produced  warmth  for  some  moments  during  the
eombination,  but  permanent  cold  followed ;  sulphate  of
potaas,  like  all  sulphuric  acid  salts,  is  an  od-negative  body.
Effloresced  carbonate  of  soda,  placed  in  water,  evinced  at
once  an  uncommon  degree  of  cold  ;  the  imbibition  of  water
of  cr}^stallization,  iu  the  place  of  that  lost  by  effiorescence,
was,  therefore,  an  act  expressing  itself  externally  as  negar
tive.  By  stirring  this,  cold  was  increased  for  a  short  time,
then  it  was  moderated  ;  carbonate  of  soda  is  itself  od-nega-
tive. Addition  of  strong  diluted  sulphiu*ic  acid  did  not
act  upon  the  thermometer  standing  in  the  fluid,  but  the
glass  rod,  nevertheless,  became  very  warm  dialing  the  evo-
lution of  carbonic  acid :  as  soon  as  the  efiFervescenoe  ceased,
it  again  became  cold.  Sulphate  of  soda  is  od-negative,  but
in  the  driving  out  and  gasification  of  the  carbonic  acid,


^


DUALISM IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


251


]^ontive  Od  was  neoesiirily  set  free.  The  observer  oftan
said  that  she  felt  the  sensations  like  shocks  duriug  the
decompositions ;  as  the  bubbles  were  formed,  she  fancied
nhe  felt  reflex  effect  in  the  glass  rod.  We  slmll  hereafter
return  to  similar  phenoniena  ;  for  in  these  matters^  there  is
nowhere  effect  without  cjiuse.

All  chemical  action,  therefore,  moves  in  manifokl  alterna-
tions of  +  and  —  ud,  dependent  on  the  position  of  the  sub-
stHuces  entering  into  it,  in  the  odic  series  ;  so  that  the  rtsult
may  always  be  predicted  so  soon  as  the  rehitive  value  and
quantity  of  these  are  known,

248.  We  now  come  to  the  examination  of  living  organic
structures :  in  the  first  place,  of  plants.  1  brought  to  Miss
Maiv  some  flower-pots,  containing  a  Calla  Aifhiapica,  a
Pelnrganium  mosekatnm,  and  an  Afoe  depirssa.  I  rolletl
up  one  end  of  a  long  stout  wire  into  several  coils,  and  gave
the  other  end  into  the  bauds  of  the  patient,  to  allow  her  to
get  aeiiistomed  to  it, I  tlien  laid  the  coils  over  the  plants,

^•o  Uiat  these  were  surrounded  and  involved  in  them.  An
imexpected  vivid  effect  displayed  itself.  The  ^nre  imme-
diately l>ecame  hot  in  the  obsen^r's  hand,  and  this  so  much
that  it  ran  up  the  whole  arm.  At  the  same  time,  the  point
[of  the  wire  diffiisicd  cool  wind.  The  Calla  manifested  the
atest  strength,  the  Aloe  the  least ;  so  that  it  seemed  likely
that  the  measure  of  the  strength  increases,  in  equal  degrees,
[  with  the  rapidity  of  growth  of  the  plant.  The  qiiick  grow-
ling (alia  showed  itself  incomparably  more  active  than  the
llow  Alois  in  spite  of  its  greater  mass ;  while  the  Pelargonium
tttechatum  always  kept  the  medium.  Perhaps  the  observa-
ticm  is  not  out  of  place  here,  that  the  Calla  belongs  to  the
laiiiily  of  the  Aroide^e,  in  which  it  is  well  known  that  the
strongest  evolutions  of  heat,  therefore  esj>ecial  manifestations
of  intense  vital  activity,  occur.

249.  In  the  end  of  September,  I  walked  in  the  fields
with  Miss  Reiehel We  noticed  all  the  flowering  plants


25S


D0ALTSM  IN HiE  PHENOMENA.


vre  met  with.  Entire  ti-ees  producsed  a  total  hnpressioii  of
coolness ;  single  plants  in  pots,  the  same,  collectively ;  iii  pari-
ticiilm-,  however,  she  found  most  of  them  wann  on  the  stem.
but  the  flowers  cool  :  e. //,,  in  Gtntinfin  cUiata,  Inula  sali*
eina,  Euphrasia  o/fidnalis,  Ofhmtitis  lufea,  Orohanvhe
truenta,  Linum  fluvum,  Hordeum  disiichum,  CvronlUa
varin,  Hftsa  lk***<}ahmis^  Pelargonium  roseuin,  Ihetis,  fm-
jyalitvis,  Alvhemilla,  Campanida,  Dnucus,  &c.  Trees  were
also  cokl  at  the  upper  end,  and  win^m  near  the  ground  :  e.  r/.,
Pinus  picea,  Abies  nif/ricans,  PraTiuHS  excflsior^  HippO'
phae  rhamnoides.Lannis  nohiUs^Punicayranatum^  Quercm
ausiriaca,  Behda  alha.  Morns  morettiana,  Saliihuria
hihha,  Hedera  quinquefoUa,  Cassia  corymbosa,  Jttylans
reyiuy  cSfc.  Among  the  C(jmix>siUe,  she  fouml  the  rnv-flowers
of  many  cool,  those  of  the  disk  warm, — e,y..  Pier  is  hiera-
cioideSt  Centaurea  paniculata,  Aster  sinensis^  Amellus,
Dahlia  pHrpnrea,  Senecio  eleyans,  Coreopais  hi  col  or,  Astei^t}-
tephalus  ovhrolmvus,  Scabiom  columbaria  and  atropur-
purea,  &c.  Some  were  cool  in  the  stem  tlie  inflorescence
warm;  as  PlaniayoUmceolata  and  Salvia  vert iviUatn  ;  she
experienced  a  mixtiu'e  of  cold  and  heat  from  families  of
Clematis  ritalha,  and  the  capsules  of  Papaver  sotnnifcrum
where,  indeed,  she  may  have  felt  through  the  alkaloids  and
oil  of  the  seed.  It  results  from  this,  that  dijf'erent  parts
ofdijfererit  plants  behave  differenthj  in  relation  to  Od.

250,  To  come  closer  to  the  facts.  I  pulled  up  a  large
turnip,  and  made  Miss  Reichcl  examine  it.  She  found  the
fibrils  of  the  root  od-positive,  but  the  tul>er  od-negativc
below,  and  od-jKisitive  alxive ;  the  wliole  head  of  the  thick-'
cned  tap-root,  especially  the  neck,  where  the  buds  amf
leaves  are  produced,  very  warm ;  all  the  leaves  warm  at  the
base,  slightly  warm  at  the  points,  but  aliove  the  luiddle
zone,  where  they  are  most  widely  expanded,  very  <Jold.  A
plant  of  Heraclenm  sphondylium,  m  high  as  a  man,  had
the  root  warm,  the  stem,  up  to  inunediately  liclow  the


DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


25S


[|imbcl,  warm,  round  the  iiivolucre  still  warmer,  the  luubel
itself  cold.  A  ripe  cucumber  aud  a  melou  Avcre  found  cool
iibove,  on  the  remains  of  the  flower,  but  cold  below  at  the
point  of  attachment  to  the  stem.

25L  Hence  it  followed,  that  no  nuiversal  |Kjkrization  in
regard  to  Od,  according  in  any  way  with  Caudex  ascemlcns
and  descendem,  somewhat  a.s  in  crystals,  occurs  in  plaut-s,
hut  that  positive  aud  negative  conditions  altcniatc  at  difle-
rent  points :  however,  intanodes  of  ike  same  name,  and
fviihin  these^  tigain,  parts  of  Ike  same  name,  possessed  tikv
odic  disposition  :  I  therefore  turned  to  the  investigation  of
the  single  organs.  First,  with  Miss  Maix,  on  a  young  AloU
depressa.  She  found  the  point  of  the  main  axis  sti^ongest  \
on  the  other  hand,  in  detail,  tlie  lai'ger,  lower  leaves  acting
more  strongly, — that  is,  diftiising  more  cold  w  ind  than  the
smalktr  upper  ones  ;  stronger  in  the  axils  than  at  the  points ;
the  niid-ribs,  with  their  vascidar  bundles,  stronger  than  the
rest  of  the  parenchymatous  mass ;  lastly,  the  under  surface
of  the  leaves  stronger  than  the  upper.  The  same  plant,  as
well  m  an  At/ave  Americana^  when  gone  through  with  Miss
Rcichel,  gave  the  same  results  :  the  little  stem  cooler  at  the
apex,  than  at  the  l)ase ;  each  leaf  stronger  at  the  base  and

^  ©n  the  under  face,  than  at  the  point  and  upper  face,  and  the
mid-rib  stronger  than  the  borders  and  parenchyma.  The
two  plants  were  of  about  equcl  size,  and  bore  from  ten  to
twelve  leaves*  A  leaf  of  Ulmus  campeslris,  of  Lanrns
nohdis,  and  of  Puniva  granalum,  all  still  upon  the  tree,

1 1/ierc  each  warmer  on  the  vmder  face  than  ou  the  upper ;
and  again,  w  armer  at  the  point  of  attachment  than  at  the
tip*  Ixjavcs  of  Cantanea  resca,  taken  from  the  tree,  were
compai'ed  in  three  different  stages  of  grow  ths, — when  green,
when  become  yellow,  and  when  wintery  brown ;  in  all  of
which  conditions  they  could  be  obtained  in  October.  The
green  and  yellow  acted  in  general  as  cooling  to  the  hands
of  the  sensitive, — the  green  stronger,  the  yellow  weaker,  the


254


fT«


IB  PlfBl«


IRNA,


brown  not  at  aJl,  and  behaved,  like  a  sheet  of  paper,  ahucMt

indifferently,  with  a  slight  intlieatiou  of  tepid  warmth.  ^
252.  The  general  results  of  the  experiments  on  vege^
tation,  so  far  as  they  have  been  thus  made  in  a  pre*
lirainary  manner,  would,  therefore,  allow  of  oiu-  summing
them  up  as  follows  : — The  root-tibres  are  warm,  therefore
od-i)ositive ;  the  ends  of  the  leaves,  above,  are  cold,  there-
fore od-negative.  The  pnint  of  the  stem  loses*  itself  in
leaves  and  leaf-buds  j  it  therefore  eomes  to  the  negative
side.  We  may  say,  then,  with  some  grounds,  posiihe  Oil
preduminaies  in  the  deacentlinff  axis ;  neya/ive  Od  in  the
ascendim/.  This  nnist,  however,  he  accepted  with  gi'cat
limitation  ;  for  uuuunerable  individual  conditions  pre-
vailed within  these  principal  states,  an  infinitely  distributed
duplicity,  in  which  +  and  —  od  alternate  a  thousand  times.
The  rule  peeped  forth,  liowever,  here,  that  where  tmtnre  iff
ieasl  btist/^ — where  the  t/rofritu/  activity  is  slackened^  ner/a-
fivily  jrrn'tiils, — where  propulsion  sftows  it$elj\  posilivity.
Thus  the  vascular  bundles  in  the  mid-ribs,  the  under  face
of  the  leiives,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  leaves  toward  the
point  of  attachment,  were  always  found  more  positive;
while  the  more  parenchymatous  mass,  the  u|>per  face  of  the
leaves,  and  the  part  toward  the  tip,  were  constantly  more
negative.  Physiology  teaches  us  that  the  leaf  does  not  grow
principally  at  the  point,  but  toward  tlie  point  of  attachment,
that  the  apex  is  perfect  very  soon  after  it  emerges  from  the
bud ;  while  at  the  stem  end, — that  is,  the  lower  half, —
the  leaf  continues  to  grow  for  a  long  time,*  The  vegetative
pi-opulsion,  therefore,  soon  ceases  in  front,  but  remains
active  behind.  Here,  then,  it  appears  that  it  is  in  league
with  positivity  of  the  imponderables,  light,  heat,  and  Od,  that
creative  nature  erects  her  structure ;  and  when  she  gives  up


4


*  Endliclier  and  ITnger,  Grunttz.  der  Botanik,  §  330,^Scli1eiden,
Gntndt.  der  wins.  Bnfanik^  torn.  ii.  157-


ISM  m  THE  PHBirOMBNA.


255


Uie  field  to  negativity,  she  cames  away  life  with  her  in  her
retreat.

253.  We  have  still  to  direct  our  view  to  the  animal
kingdom.  How  iiimieasiirably  great  the  part  is  which  Odi
her«^  plays,  is  best  shewn  us  by  the  profound  and  enigmatical
phenomena  of  8omuamt)iilism.  The  question,  however,
here,  is  not  of  this,  but  of  certain  reactions  of  healthy  life
upon  the  sensitive.  When  I  placed  a  livhig  animal  upon  a
copper  plate,  connected  by  a  copper  wire  several  yards  long,
with  Miss  MaL\*s  hand,  tliough  it  was  very  small — ^for
iuatatice,  a  rose-beetle  {Celfrnia  auraia)  or  a  moth  {Bombyx
nwri),  or  any  similar  creature,^!  was  astonished  to  perceive
that  she  instantly  recognized  this,  after  a  few  seconds,  by  the
apparent  temperature  of  the  wire,  whether  she  saw  it  or  not.
When  I  placed  a  larger  animal  on  it,  such  as  a  cat,  she  felt
it  verj'  vividly.  The  effect  of  my  own  hand,  when  I  placed
it  upon  the  plate,  spread  all  over  this,  as  has  been  already
detailed  in  other  places.  I  have  examined  the  reactions
countless  times,  in  hundreds  of  modifications ;  they  gave  the
always  a  constant  result,  that  every  living  creature  at  once

ites  an  influence,  not  only  immediately,  but  even
ely,  through  vaiious  kinds  of  bodies  and  long  wires,
which  Miss  Maix  found  as  warmth,  ditl'using  at  the  same
time  a  cool  wind,  like  all  the  od-diffusing  objects  of  inor-
ganic natm'e.  When  I  removed  the  aniuuds,  the  effect  soon
ceased,  and  the  wire  sank  back  to  its  natural  peculiar  tera-
perature.  I  made  similar  experiments  with  beetles,  moths,
and  cats,  on  Miss  Reichel,  which  confirmed  the  preceding
m  all  their  results.

254.  Wlien  I  elevated  my  hands  towards  Miss  Reichel,
she  felt,  even  at  a  distance,  warmth  flow  to  her  from  my  left,
and  coolness  from  my  right  hand,  as  from  a  distant  magnet.
Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  felt  the  same  still  more  strongly.  When
I  approached  Miss  Reichel  sideways,  so  that  I  only  tmiied  my
right  side  to  her,  she  felt  coolness  from  me  as  soon  as  I


25C


DUALISM  IN  THE  PI


caiue  in  at  the  door  of  the  rooin ;  when  I  came  forward  with
my  left  side,  she  felt  me  warm.  Not  only  the  hands,  but
the  whole  sides  of  human  beings,  are,  left  od-positive,  right
od*negative.  Next  to  the  hands,  she  found  the  head  espe-
cially strongly  odic,  on  the  right  side  negative,  on  the
left  positive.  The  toes  were  in  the  same  way  greatly
strengthened.  With  regard  to  front  and  back,  the  front  of
the  head  was  always  fouiul  rooler,  tlie  back  of  the  head
warmer  dawn  towai*ds  the  neck.  In  the  arms  and  hand,  both
she  and  Misses  Maix  and  Nowotny  fonnd  the  following  ar-
rangement. The  tips  of  tlie  fingers  were  the  strongest ;  then
followed  those  partes  of  the  hands  where  the  fingers  arise;
then  the  tendinous  part,  at  the  wrist,  i\  e,  where  the  hand  is
attached  inside  to  the  fore  arm ;  lastly,  the  parts  of  the
inside  of  the  upper  arm,  to  which  the  fore-arm  joins.  In
the  fingers  themselves,  agaui,  there  were  |ilaces  of  different
amounts  of  sensibility  ;  but  in  all  places  where  a  finger-joint
ended  downwards,  it  lay  inside.  Nature,  therefore,  evidently
proceeds  according  to  the  following  rule  here.  From  the
shoulder  to  the  tips  of  the  fingei^s,  the  point  of  t/rmiest
irritability,  in  every  joint,  alwat/s  lies  on  the  itiside  at  the
distal  end  of  the  joint.  There  are,  consequently,  six  places
from  the  shoidder  to  tlie  fore  arm  increasing  in  sensibility
downwards ;  the  lower  end  of  the  upper  arm,  of  the  fore
arm,  of  the  hand,  of  the  joints  of  the  fingers,  always  lying
in  the  inside :  on  the  outside  there  is  no  especially  sensitive
point.

255,  The  mouth,  with  the  tongue,  is  a  point  of  very  pe-
culiar strength.  It  is  veiT  cool;  that  is,  od-negative.  The
sensitive  feel  all  tliat  they  touch  with  the  mouth  with  especial
distinctness  and  strength  in  reference  to  its  odic  value  ;
on  the  other  hand,  the  mouth  of  the  healthy  is  a  point  from
which  all  objects  can  be  charged  more  strongly,  odically,
than  with  the  hands.  Whe!i  I  held  a  glass  tube,  a  metallic
tuhe,  a  silver  spooUj  a  wooden  stick,  &c,,  in  ray  mouth,  and


W  THE  PHENOMlifAl  257

let  the  various  sensitives  feel  the  other  end ;  they  all  found
them  very  strongly  odificd.  When  I  put  a  glass  of  water
to  my  mouth,  as  if  I  had  intended  to  drink,  and  then  after
a  i^hort  time  gave  it  to  the  sensitive  patient,  she  took  it  for
magnetiied  water.  When  I  passed  ray  mouth,  closed  and
without  breathing,  along  the  German-silver  conduetor,  \iith-
out  touching  it,  keeping  my  mouth  only  about  a  minute
very  close  to  it,  and  then  allowed  Misses  Maix,  Reichel,
AUmaiiii8d<»fer,  or  Sturmann  to  grasp  it,  they  found  it  as
perfectly  charged  as  if  it  had  been  in  contact  with  a  magnet,
the  8un*8  rays,  the  point  of  a  crystaJ,  or  my  hands.

Wo  here  arrive  at  a  not  unintcTesting  explanation  of  a
hitherto  obscure  matter — the  import  of  the  kiss.  The  lips
form  one  of  the  foci  of  the  biod,  and  the  flames  which  our

Hpoets  describe,  do  actually  blaze  there. This  will  be  clearly

Helucidftted  in  the  next  treatise.

"  It  may  be  asked>  how  this  can  agree  with  the  circ^imstanoe
that  the  mouth  is  od-negativc?  This,  however,  does  harmoniae
very  well  with  the  fact ;  for  the  kiss  gives  nothmg,  it  desires

(^nd  strives  merely,  it  sucks  in  and  sips,  and  while  it  revels,
longing  and  desire  incxease.  The  kiss  is  therefore  not  a
negation,  but  a  physical  and  moral  negativity,

256.  As  the  Od  is  unequally  distributed  in  space  over  the
human  body,  so  also,  I  concluded,  will  it  deport  itself  in

■  iime.  I  conjectured  from  many  reasons,  that  the  Od  might
change  its  distribution,  and  displace  its  relative  intensities,
in  the  diflPerent  bodily  and  mental  conditions  wliich  we  pass
through  in  the  twenty -four  hours.  If  such  a  guess  should
tve,  from  experiment,  to  be  well  grounded,  I  hoped  we
;ht  gain  highly  interesting  hints,  even  if  not  explanation,
i  sleep,  digestion,  hunger,  growing  hot,  chilling,  the  mental
ges  in  their  physical  effects,  and  so  on  as  to  the  ques-
iOHB  bordering  on  physics.  And  if|  in  the  first  instance
only,  inconsiderable  data  could  be  discovered  in  this  way,  it
would  certainly  indicate  to  us  a  new  and  promising  direction

s


f
^


?58


[/I8M  IN  THE  PHEWOMENA.


<


for  the  investigation  of  tliuigs  which  are,  in  all  respects,  so
difficult  to  throw  light  upon. With  this  view,  I  commenced
by  letting  Miss  Reichel  make  hourly  observations  ou  myself^
and  representing  these  by  graphic  lines,  in  which  the  times
were  expressed  by  the  abscisses,  and  the  strength  of  the  Od
by  the  ordinates. I  completed  the  investigations  on  myself,
on  my  daughter  II.,  and  on  Miss  Reichel  herself. A  period
occurred  to  the  last,  in  winch  she  remained  perfectly  sleepless
for  three  weeks,  and  I  availed  myself  of  tliis  time  for  carry-
ing on  the  testings,  through  the  night,  without  interruption.
They  were arranged in this  way : my  right  hand  w^as
grasped  by  the  sensitive  every  hour,  and  tested  for  its
strength  at  that  time,  measured,  and  then  the  | joint  marked
upon  the  table,  which  proportionately  corresponded  to  the
condition  of  force  foimd. This  was  continued  for  twelve,
eighteen,  to  twenty-six  hours,  in  various  experiments. My
usual  habit  of  hfe  during  this  was,  to  wake  at  from  6  to
7  in  the  morning,  to  read  in  bed  till 9-10, rise, and
breakfast  on  cold  weak  tea  at  11-12,  dine  at  3  p.m.,  to  eat
a  very  httle  confectionary  at  10  p.m.,  and  go  to  l>ed  between
11  and  12. I  drank  neither  wine  nor  beer,  toast  and  water,  ^
coffee,  nor  tea,  and  did  not  smoke, I  took  no  exercise  be»  H
yond  a  moderate  walk,  which  did  not  extend  fiu*ther  than
through  the  park  of  the  castle ; and  I  passed  my  time,
chiefly,  riuietly  at  the  reading-desk. In  other  respects,  I
was  in  good  health,  tran<[uil  frame  of  mind,  and  at  the  age
of  fifty-six.  So  much  for  the  circumstances  which  might  have
had  influence  on  the  experiments. In  all  casc^,  I  avoided^
touching  with  my  hand  every  metaUic  object,  even  the  lock"
of  the  door,  which  I  let  others  open  for  me,  for  a  quarter  of
an  hour  before  the  trial  of  the  feeling ;  after  meals,  when
had  used  silver  instruments,  I  always  let  some  time  clapi
before  I  gave  my  hand  to  be  examined.  ' I  also  avoided
lowing  the  sun's  rays  to  fall  upon  me,  or  going  near  tin
fire.


1ALI8W  IN  THK  ?TfENOMKNA.


m


257.  Since  the  standard  which  could  be  taken  depended
merely  npin  feeling,  that  is,  upon  the  nppreeiatioii  of  a  sen-
sation, which  could  uot  l>e  eoutrolled  by  any  scale,  it  can
oidy  lay  daini  to  a  moderate  auionut  of  accnracy*  To  ap-
proach as  nearly  to  the  truth,  as  was  possible,  under  such
circunistanres,  I  repeated  the  same  experiments  five  or  six
times;  those,  rnnnely,  in  which  I  let  my  haml  be  felt,  and
marked  down  the  result,  hourly,  from  tlie  niorninfc  till  late  at
night.  This  operation  is  illustrated  in  fig.  l,and  (he  various


Moniin^^  hour


Ni'/irii.


FIvpiiinff.


Midnight,


AJS 7  f  S  fOit.U-4-lJ-


Dttio

Itid*t  lui)«l»  fighl
»*•  hand,  tighil

Man'i  hand,  lea


mwm

isaai


JRBfll
■■^■■Kl


■BttBPB


■■^■■■■■■l


vsmmmmemm
wemmmisasssr


nieia(9iBa!!SK  ■■■■■


WBIQtfaBHBaeiM


IBBfiBBBBBBBUHMBil BB

.JlBBBBBBflBliOBBIBH BB„.^

IBBBBBKBBB^BSaBBi BBBflB


!aiBBBBSfl«BBBI


results  collocated,  llie  agreeinent  which  is  tbiind  between
the  various  series  of  observations  is  almost  astonislmig,
and  proves  that  the  sense  of  feeling  of  the  obsrr\'er,  as  I
have  already  fi'cqncntly  noticed,  jrosscsstd  a  very  high
degree  of  clearness.


260  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


^-^nnd  conviction  from  this,  that  observa-
■' ' ■  'iiv  he  obtained  in


DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


bre


found  my  hands  to  influence  them  more  powerfuBy  after
dinner  than  before.

There  will  be  observed  on  the  diagram  a  slight  tendency

decline  about  9  or  10  a.m.  This  relates  clearly  to  the
^breakfast,  the  desire  for  which  then  arises; this  case  is

appendix  to  the  greater  decline  before  dinner,  and  serves

oorroborate  it.

259*  In  order  to  make  certain  of  the  correctness  of  the
view  which  I  had  formed  on  these  points,  I  caused  the  ex-
periments to  be  performed  by  a  person  who  took  meals  at
different  toues  of  the  day.  Miss  Reichel  herself  dined  at
my  house  at  I  o'clock  instead  of  3.  She  could  observe  her
own  right  hand  very  well  with  her  left,  and  so  undertook


i
I


'S


Morutng  hour.


Noon.


s

1

i

g

cS

s

Evening^.

Mi«3iiig!]L

u

Moming.


lifht  bauil.


The  same  increase  of  the  force  appeared  generally  from
moming  to  noon ;  its  decline,  however,  which  also  com-
menced now,  did  not  endure  till  3  o'clock,  but  extended
only  till  1,  the  hour  of  her  dinner-time,  and  then  ceased  at
once,  to  make  way  for  a  new  ascent  of  the  odic  force,  which
then  continued  to  increase  for  exactly  the  same  time,  and
reached  its  cuhnination,  when  the  day  began  to  disappear.


2C2


DUAUHM m  THE  PHENOMENA.


A  little  decline  was  also  observable  w

gave  place  to  au  ineit:ase  (


her  at  the  period


lireetly


before  bi\?akfast,  which
she  hud  ttikeii  tlie  meal

2G(K  From  these  coiiipanitivc  cxpeririieiits  it  follows,
therefore,  that  kunt/er  diminishes  the  sirent/ik  of  ike  Od  in
ike  right  hand;  taUm/  food  inct^eases  it.  We  here  clearly
come  upon  the  effects  of  chemism,  as  they  have  been  eluci-
dated in  the  fifth  of  these  treatises.  The  food  received
becomes  the  ]}rey  of  cheniiciil  force  ;  digestion,  that  is,  de-
composition, begins,  and  odic  action  is  produced ;  chymod
becomes  free,  if  we  like  so  to  express  it.  It  makes  no
difference  whatever,  how  mych  or  how  little  share  may  be
attril)uted  or  denied  to  vitality,  in  these  decoinimsitions, —
decomjjositions  they  remain,  and  from  them  arise  manifesta-
tions of  Od,  which  ditt\ise  themselves  over  the  organism,  and
strengthen  its  members.

20 L  The  cpiestion  of  tlic  day  being  answered,  that  of
the  night  remains.  What  is  our  odic  disposition  during
the  tune  when  the  luminary  of  the  day,  with  its  vast  source
of  Od,  is  wanting,  and  the  powerful  iufiuence  of  sleep  comes
aver  us  ?  To  investigate  this,  the  sick  observer  must  keep
awake,  and  the  healthy  subject  sleep,  and  the  examination
must  be  continued  hour  by  hour;  so  that  the  affair  was
dearly  not  without  its  diHicuIties,  However,  1  succeeded
in  persuading  Miss  Rcichel,  by  explaining  to  her  the  scien*
title  value  of  such  an  investigation,  aiul  the  undoubted
merit  attaching  to  her  for  it,  to  come,  siucc  she  did  not
sleep,  hour  by  hoin*  through  the  night  to  my  bedside,  to
examine  the  ooncOtioTi  of  my  hand,  and  note  the  result.
There  was  no  other  means,  since,  in  order  to  obtain  a  true
result,  it  was  indispensable  that  I  should  lie  and  sleep  in  my
usual  Ixjd,  as  on  other  nights.  Fig.  3  shows  the  result  of
various  modified  observations  on  myself  and  other  persons,
From  the  morning  forward,  the  Od  increased  on  my  right


I


hand,  some  interruptions  through  hunger  being  left  out  of
view,  through  the  whole  day  till  at  least  6  o'clock  in  the
evening,  at  latest  tiJl  9.  It  now  most  distinctly  turned,
and  fell  continually  till  2  or  3  a,m.,  when  it  attained  a  stable
minimura,  which  endured  to  break  of  day ;  at  the  time  of
the  experiment  aljout  5  to  6  o'clock.  Then,  however,  as
the  grey  dawn  drove  away  the  darkness,  the  force  was  at
once  aroused,  and  fresh  life  reinforced  the  organic  world ;
Od  and  vital  force  increased  anew  througliout  the  whole  day
as  long  as  the  sun  sent  down  rays  from  heaven.

262*  Here,  also,  I  was  permitted  to  find  confirmation  of
a  law  discoveretl  eai'lier  in  a  different  way.  The  sun,  the
one  great  source  of  Od,  sends  it  to  us  with  light  and  heat,
and  thus,  throughout  the  whole  day,  imbues  with  it  all  that
it  shines  upon.  Directly  the  sun  sinks  below  the  horizon^
the  odic  tension  sinks  in  the  human  organs,  and  with  com-
mencement of  this  change  comes  also  to  living  human
lieings,  weariness,  dulness  of  the  senses,  and  sleep.  Ulien
the  Oil-spring  of  day  ceases  to  Jtow,  the  fountain  of  con*


^^2  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


Fig  3.

Ifftii*!  hand,  right
Uiii't  haml;  t^gh

Maii*t  hBnd,  \efi


band^  some  interruptions  through  hunger  being  left  out  of

view,  through  the  whole  day  till  at  least  6  o'clock  in  the

evening,  at  latest  till  9. It  now  most  distinctly  turned,

and  fell  continually  till  2  or  3  a.m.,  when  it  attained  a  stable

^minimum,  which  endured  to  break  of  day;  at  the  time  of

■the  experiment  about  5  to  6  o'clock. Then,  however,  as

the  grey  dawn  drove  away  the  darkness,  the  force  was  at

Honce  aroused,  and  fresh  life  reinforced  the  organic  world ;

HOd  and  vital  force  increased  anew  throughout  the  whole  day

mts  long  m  the  sun  sent  down  rays  from  heaven.

m 262.  Here,  also,  I  was  permitted  to  find  confirmation  of

a  law  discovered  earlier  in  a  different  way. The  sun,  the

one  great  source  of  Od,  scuds  it  to  us  with  light  and  heat,

and  thus,  throughout  the  whole  day,  imbues  with  it  all  that

it  shines  upon* Directly  the  sun  sinks  below  the  horizon^

the  odic  tension  sinks  in  the  human  organs,  and  with  com*

mencement  of  this  change  comes  also  to hving  human

beings,  weariness,  dulness  of  the  senses,  and  sleep. Mlien

the  od-sprinff  of  day  ceases  to  Jhn^  the  fountain  ofcon^


264


BtTAlilSM  ni  THl  PHETrOME!<rA.


scions  fvaking  life  becomes  dried  up.  Not  by  ligbt  and
heat  alone  does  the  sun  call  all  life  into  existence,  but  it
uses  another  potentiality  us  a  lever,  the  Od,  with  which  it
impenetrates  all  things,  even  as  with  heat,  and  the  fluctua-
tions of  which  we  arc  now  beginning  to  learn  how  to  com-
pare and  measure  with  the  conditions  of  sleeping  and  wak-
ing. That  it  makes  little  difference  here,  in  general,  whether
the  sun*s  rays  fall  upon  us  directly,  or  we  are  in  the  shade,
follows  from  the  law  of  conductibility  and  distrilmtion,  as
we  have  already  learned  ;  and  wherever  we  may  be,  a  pro-
portionate share  of  the  Od  which  the  day  brings  will  fall
upon  us.

2 OS.  But  what  are  the  conditions  of  the  left  hand  here,
which  is  oppositely  polai- ?  Will  it  increase  and  decrease
in  positivity  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  right  gained  and
lost  negativity  ?  This  can  only  l>e  made  out  by  making
both  hands  the  subjects  of  observation  simultaneously,  and
noting  down  their  odic  condition  at  the  same  time.  Fig,  4
shows  how  this  was  carried  out. The  lower  line  shows  the


Pig.  4.


M»a'«  r  left
nda  i  righi


course  of  the  negative  right  hand,  the  upper  that  of  the
positive  left* This  latter  exhibits  a  more  rapid  increase  of


DTTALTSM  IK  THE  PHENOMENA;

|>08itive  od  in  the  moniiiig,  mid  again  a  higher  elevation  in
the  afternoon,  till  7  o'clock,  than  the  negative  riglit.  The
midday  hiuiger  period  does  not  show  so  deep  a  deeline  as
in  the  right.  It  makes  the  smaller  maximum,  at  mid-day,
somewhat  later,  the  evening  one  somewhat  earlier,  than  the
right.  It  appears  to  correspond  to  a  greater  energy  of
development  of  Od.

The  od^posiiive  Ivft  kond,  therefore^  does  not  follow  ex-
actly the  same^  but  siilt  a  very  similar  adic  course,  nnth  the
od-negalive  riff  hi,  taken  in  the  prolensive  point  ofviem  (in
regard  to  changes  of  tension. — Ed.)

264.  The  bmin  has  so  symmetrical  a  structnre  that  when
such  great  inner  difterences  appeared  in  the  symmetrical
hands  as  to  form  a  perfect  contrast,  I  could  not  but  reflect
on  the  deeper  lying  mechanism  of  human  beings,  of  which
the  hands  are  but  the  outstretched  levere.  The  brain,
which  many  try,  not  always  veiy  happily,  to  plan  out  ac-
jrding  to  its  bony  shell,*  might  it  not,  pei-chance,  be  also


*  Thase  who,  from  a  ^ery  oumerous  senes  of  facU,  have  posaeasion
of  a  truth,  however  much  they  may  be  in  advance  of  the  convictions  of
iheir  age,  can  afford  to  allow  tbe  pleasure  and  the  priYilege  of  a  sneer  to
even  ao  profound  a  thinker  as  the  Baron  von  Keidienbach.  The  tea-
lence,  to  which  thia  note  refers,  is  unworthy  of  him ;  but  we  must  remain
content  that  the  time  must  come,  when  further  experimental  with  the
odic  force«j  will  convince  him  of  tbe  absolute  truth  of  GalFs  ideas,
pubtiahed  in  the  great  work  which,  for  its  vast  display  of  genius^  sheds
a  lustre  on  the  nation  claiming  him  among  its  offspring,  The  odic
flames  emitted  from  Gall's  brain  have  reverberated  from  countless  orh»
in  space,  and  will  enlighten  the  philosophy  of  the  1 9th  century  in  thia
our  planet;  (see  a  httle  brochure  entitled,  the  Stars  and  the  Earth,  pub-
liahed  hyBailliere:  also  Deleuze,  Memoire  but  la  Faculte  de  Prevision,
Farii,  \  836,  page  33,)  No  case  could  be  better  calculated  to  ensure  %
conviction  of  the  truth  of  phrenology  than  that  of  Miss  Reichel-^odt-
cally  teated,  in  a  state  of  full  vigilance,  on  several  organs  of  the  brain.
It  is  not  every  one  who  has  the  power  of  concentrating  his  ideas,  and
of  willing  intensely.  1  have  this  power  to  a  limited  degree,  but  it  ia
combined  with  a  heavy  influence  from  the  brain,  which  overpowers


mukunn  in  the  phehoi


gpAed  and  iiiiboed  with  the  delicate  potentiality  oC  Od,
make  itaelf  as  perceptible  to  bucIi  delicate  reageota  aa
aaontives  are? Miss  Reichel  found  the  right  side  of  mjr  i

moct  impreMionsble  «Qhjectt«  to  a  condition  of  heaTiness  mod  itnpiifitys]
int^rfenng  with  the  clearaets,  and  cIeanneRA»  or  sharpoeaft  of  the  i
My  friend  Mr.  ThompM>n,  of  Fairfield  Lodge,  on  the  contrmrf,  1
light  and  agreeable  an  influencei  when  be  ailently  exercisea  hia  witl^  ihaAi
obedience  it  jieldeil  to  bim,  by  a  patient,  without  a  knowledge  of  tlkt'
pfeaeoee  of  any  remarkable  change  of  condition.  1  Irnve  seen  hint  wiH
a  gentleman,  in  a  room  where  eight  pertsonft  were  present,  to  perceive  no
one  but  himaelf,  and  the  si  lent  mandate  has  been  obeyed*  He  has,  by
hi«  wili,  placed  the  tame  individual,  then  in  the  light  of  broad  day,  in
complete  darkneaa.  He  haa  made  him  sit  down  and  sleep  in  a  chairs
to  wlaeh  he  waa  obliged  to  adhere  by  an  ungovernable  force,  and  thco
he  haa  played  with  hia  will  upon  several  of  the  organs  of  hia  brain  in
■nceesaion,  obliging  liim  to  nianifetit  the  pathognomy  of  ^urh  in  ita
turn«  If  the  tlutd  of  the  hnman  will,  the  odic  force,  can  do  ihia  in
the  caae  of  Mr.  i<  B>  C  ,  will  it  not  be  equally  poaslble  to  perform  the
sameexperiinent^on  the  phrenological  organa  of  Miss  Reichel,  in  Vienna  ?
A  large  crystal,  held  with  \U  point,  iu  turn^towarda  each  individual  organ«
would  make  Mias  Reichel  manifest  the  faculty  of  that  organ*  It  ia  ea-
nential  with  aome, — ao  dehcate  an  instrument  ia  the  human  brain,  ereii
with  the  protection  of  "  i7*  ifony  shell,** — not  to  perfonn  such  cxperi'
menta  as  these  for  too  long  a  period  at  one  time,  and  to  avoid  too  hastj
a  transference  of  the  Od  force  from  an  attractive  to  a  reptdsive  organ.
luflanity  has  retnlted,  from  eager  or  careless  ignorance,  where  the  subject
haa  been  very  impressionable.  I  have  known  melancholy  inetaneca  of
thia  fact.  The  obvious  cure  bears  out  the  Baron's  philosophy,  that  in
Nature,  the  Od  force  positive  (or,  according  to  my  view/  attractive)  is
engaged  in  growth  or  progress  in  advancing  life.  It  has  energy  for
ita  type,  while  the  contrary  pole  tends  to  death,  or  retardation— sluggish-
neaa  of  action.  The  march  of  healthy  progress  has  the  aOied  forces  of
our  amiable  feehngs,  sacred  morals,  and  good  intellects,  characterised
by  vivacity,  cheerfulnesa,  benevolence,  and  charity ;  while  the  repulsive
agenciea  of  bigotry,  tyranny,  and  the  evil  influences  of  pride,  cunning,
and  suspicion,  are  characterised  by  a  melancholy  desire  to  coerce  and
deatroy  all  opposed  to  their  leaden  powers*  The  Baron,  an  enemy  to
superstition,  should  study  Gall's  Philosophy,  which  lie  will  find  to  be
a  aeries  of  truths,  ia  full  harmony  with  all  other  noble  truths  capable
of  being  illustrated  by  the  brilliant  light  of  the  Odic  force.


^  Zoisti  vol.  iv.,  p.  254»  ei  seq.


266


DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


BUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


2fi7


skiill  cool,  exactly  like  my  right  bund,  but  much  stronger,
wliile  the  left  side  was  warm.  This  was  the  case,  not  only
in  me,  but  in  all  other  jx^rsoiis  whom  I  subjected  to  the
investigation,  male  and  female,  all  alike.  I  may  especially
mention  M.  Th.  Kotschy,  who  allowed  Miss  Reichel  to
make  an  accurate  examination,  and  whose  head,  sides,  and
hands,  she  found  to  agree  exactly  qualitatively  with  mine.
This  appeared  to  me  really  much  more  worthy  of  a  Eunda-
mentiil  examination  than  the  hands  could  be,  and  therefore
1 1  repeated  the  24  hoiu^*  inquiry  on  two  different  days  and
nights,  on  the  IStb  and  the  23d  of  October,  1844. Kg.  6


b


I


Moniing  tiour.


Noon.


EveniDf^,


Mulnight. MorniD^.


3L4^  JM'-9u-f  f  t  f  f-H+^^^,'  f  f  M  r-f  *-r-^-


I


shows  the  course,  the  continuous  hne  indicates  the  path  of
the  first  investigation,  the  dotted  of  the  second,  which  could
only  be  carried  to  1 0  o'clock  in  the  evening.

265.  This  operation  furnished  remarkable  acquisitions.
It  showed  that  as  an  une(|ual  course  occurred  at  the  same
times  in  the  hands,  so,  also,  did  it  to  a  far  greater  extent  in
the  two  sides  of  the  bram.  The  left  side  increased  in
strength  much  more  slowly  than  the  right  in  the  morning ;
till  toward  3  o'clock,  it  was  scarcely  of  importance  ;  w  hile
the  right  had  already  attained  its  first  maximum  at  1  o'clock,
which  was  scarcely  interior  to  that  it  attained  in  the  evening.


k


268


THB  PHBKOMIWA,


The  weakness  fi*om  hmiger,  before  dinner,  existed  on  both
sides,  but  far  smaller  than  it  showed  itself  in  the  hands.
While  the  riglit  side  advanced  almost  on  a  level  till  9  o'clock,
the  left  rose  unceasingly  from  3  till  11  p,m.  The  right
began  to  siuk  already  about  8  p.m.,  to  cross  the  left  and
fall  deep  below  it,  while  the  left  did  not  begin  to  descend
from  its  cnlmination  till  1  a.m,  ;  that  is,  five  hoiu*s  later*
The  morning  rise  was,  however,  almost  simultaneous.

The  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  this,  are :  tlie  course  of
the  brain  is,  on  the  whole,  analogous  to  that  ojihe  head :  in-
crease in  the  morning ;  at  noon,  a  temporary  decline ;  upper
culmination  in  the  evening,  and  lower  culmination  about
4  A.M.,  agree  pretty  nearly  \^ith  each  other,  and  thus  pro-
bably with  the  daily  course  of  the  whole  organism,  in  a  mode
of  life  hke  mine.  But  the  brain  exhibits  a  difference  from
the  hands,  in  the  far  smaller  participation  in  the  influence
from  hunger,  and  the  satiation  of  the  stomach.  The  organs
of  the  understandintj  and  soul  appear  to  take  less  notice  of
Ifie  crude  mUrient  operations,  than  tJie  matter-rnling  hands  J*

*  Again,  to  direct  attention  to  tbe  philosopbical  views  of  Gall.  '*  The
crjfamo/the  understanding,*^  uniler  the  circumst&ocei  here  detailed,
h»Te  no  greater  relation  to  "  the  crud^  nutrient  operatiom  "  than  the
organs  of  sight,  hearing,  smell,  taste,  and  touch.  Each  portion  of  the
brain  has  its  destination,  and  the  presence  and  emission  of  the  odic  force,
beautifully  shown,  with  the  Baron's  usual  ingenuity,  to  be  dependent
on  the  relative  circumstances  of  tbe  individual^  may  be  inferred  to  be
accumulated  or  increaaed  in  parts,  accortling  to  the  energy  with  which
those  parts  act»  at  various  periods  of  the  day,  or  under  various  circum-
stances,  stimulating  the  parts  to  actinty.  The  progreas  and  culmination
in  the  two  opposite  courses  are  just  those  which  are  observed  in  the
activity  or  lethargy  of  the  organs  at  the  fore  and  back  parts  of  tbe  head,
Ucichenbach  tells  us,  §  266,  that  **  the  fore  and  hind  parts  of  tbe  bead  are
more  different,  anatomically,  than  tbe  right  and  left  sides  of  tbe  brain,**
and  hia  researches  have  estabbshed  just  that  which  might  have  been
expected  from  Gall's  demonstrations  of  the  functions  of  these  two  parta.
Gall  doubled  tbe  discovery  of  Meanicr*  Reicbenbach  appears  to  be
ignorant  of  the  deep  truths  contained  in  tbe  works  of  Gall ;  and  yet,  by
estabhshing  the  existence  of  tbe  odic  force,  be  has  placed  his  Viennese
real  on  tbe  most  important  science  that  can  occupy  tbe  attention  of  map.


4


4


270


DUALISM IN  rm  PHENOKKNA,


of  the  matutinal  and  mid -day  periods  of  hunger,  and  reachof
its  culmination  after  sunset.  During  the  whole  of  tins  time
the  back  of  the  head  remained  almost  unchanged,  so  that  at
six  o'clock  in  the  evening  it  was  exactly  in  the  same  place  as
at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning.  But  then  it  suddenly  arose,
almost  at  the  same  time  that  the  foreliead  began  to  enter
opon  its  retrograde  course.

From  this  point  forward,  they  are  seen  to  cross  diagonally,
and  while  the  back  of  the  head  continually  rises  until  3  a.m.,
the  forehead  falls  incessantly  till  about  the  same  hour ;  the
one  to  reach  its  upper,  the  other  its  lower  culmination,
almost  at  the  same  moment.  From  this  point,  ag^iin,  the
opposite  course  commenced,  and  w^hile,  after  three  o'clock,
the  exalted  back  of  the  head  fell  rapidly,  toward  4  o'clock
the  deeply  depressed  forehead  began  in  like  manner  to  rise
quickly.

267.  This  motion  is  a  representation  of  our  waking  and
sleeping.  The  forehead  represents  th'!  functions  of  waking
life ;  the  back  of  the  head,  of  sleep.  The  forche^id  advances
with  increasing  odic  invigomtion  and  operative  activity,  from
5  in  the  morning,  with  break  of  dawn,  to  sunset;  then  it  loses
the  od-spring  of  the  luminary  of  the  day,  and  sinks  again
incessantly  from  its  height,  until  the  new  day  begins  to  break,
when  the  force  comes  anew  to  rejoin  it.  The  back  of  the  head,
on  the  contrary,  passes  quietly  through  the  whole  day,  almost
without  motion  ;  but  so  soon  as  the  sun  has  sunk  below  the
horizon,  the  hour  of  its  nightly  labour  has  struck.  Now  arises
the  Morpheus,  and  with  rapid  steps  he  advances,  until  the
first  traces  of  morning's  light  remind  him  the  forehead  is  on
its  way  to  free  him  from  his  w^ork  ;  the  back  of  the  head  sinks
from  its  greatest  to  its  low^est  elevation,  at  the  close  of  night,
just  as  rapidly  and  unintcmiptedly  as  the  forehead  sunk
from  its,  at  the  close  of  day.  Thus  the  two  not  only  shew
themselves  opposed  in  polarity,— since  one  is  warm,  that  is
positive,  and  the  other  cold,  consequently  wl-negative, —


THE  PIT  EN  OMEN  A.


271


but  they  are  as  dianietricallv  opposed  to  e^u^h  other  in  their
operations  as  are  day  and  night,  waking  and  sleeping.

268-  From  this  comparison  it  is  seen,  that  l>etween
waking  and  sleeping,  in  relation  to  Od  at  least,  there  Ls  not
an  opposition  like  that  between  activity  and  rest,  like  that
between  motion  and  stillness ;  but  only  that  i/ie  focus  of
activity  is  cham/ed.  The  force  does  not  cease  to  act ;  it
does  not  diminish,  but  it  removes  merely  from  the  frant  of
the  brain  to  the  back,  and  in  projwrtion  as  the  front  gives
up  intensity,  the  back  seizes  it.  Sleep  thus  declares  itself,
not  as  a  decline  of  the  vital  activity,  but  only  as  a  displace*
ment  of  it.  In  just  the  same  measiure  as  the  vital  force  is
active  in  the  forehead  in  the  day,  does  it  rule  in  the  hinder
part  of  the  head  during  night.  Sleep,  therefore,  is  only  an
alternation  in  the  functions  of  our  organs  and  powers  ;  in  no
way  an  introduction  of  any  kind  to  a  state  of  rest  of  them ;
and  the  poets  may  use  the  comparison  of  sleep  with  death
as  a  metaphor,  but  the  physiologist  cannot,  in  the  considera-
tion of  organic  Ufe.*  Vitality  is  exactly  as  energetically
active  in  another  direction  during  sleep,  as  in  the  waking


^  Dr.  EHiaUon  says,  "I  bate  often  seen  the  eyet  doae  fordbly  in  the
mesmeric  sleep-waking.  It  is  usually  thought  that  in  «lecp  the  eye*  clo»e
from  the  relaxation  of  the  muscleH  of  the  lids,  exactly  as  the  head  drops,
and  the  whole  body  ceases  to  support  itself.  But  I  believe  that  they
dose  from  the  contraction  of  the  muscles,  just  as  the  iris  somewhat
contracts  at  the  moment  of  falling  asleep,  or  of  shutting  the  eyes,  and
remains  contracted,  and  the  raising  muscle  of  the  eye  (lerator  ocuh)
contracts  at  this  moment,  rolling  the  eye  somewhat  upward,  and  re-
mains contracted  :  two  circumstances  proying  that  sleep  is  not  a  purely
paasiTC  state,  but  active  in  regard  to  the  musciUar  portions  of  the  eye
itself*  In  falling  asleep  and  on  first  wakings  we  feel  not  a  weakness,
but  a  stiffness  of  the  Eds ;  the  lids  appear  to  close  actively,  and  tlie
under  lid  ascends  a  little  at  the  moment  of  6nal  closure  ;  and  this  can-
not be  the  effect  of  rehuation,  hut  must  result  from  contraction,  and
the  case  of  the  upper  Ud  cannot  be  supposed  to  be  different  from  that
of  the  lower,  which  conspires  to  the  same  purpose  with  it.** — See  ZoUt,
No-  iX*t  Tol.  iii*i  pp-  4  4-^15* Ob^erruHons  h^  Dr.  EUiotsmt,


272


HVALIBM  IK  TUB  FHEHOMKKA*


condition.  The  bnsiness  of  sleep  is  governed  by  the  cere*
liellum:  while  the  forehead  suspends  its  mental  labour,  and
wlien  it  takes  to  it  again,  to  which  it  is  aroused  and  quali-
fied by  the  radiations  of  the  sun^  the  back  of  the  bead  lowers
ita  clatms  upon  the  vital  force.

269.  A  small  accessory,  but  yet  not  contemptible sup-
port to  this,  is  afforded  also  by  Fig.  7* I  had  become


MofttiBg  boor.
Fig.  7.


Mflii'i  Imid,  rigfall


Ereuinie,


MidaiebL Momme.


sleepy  soon  after  dinner,  and  resting  my  head  on  the  back
of  my  chair,  I  slept  for  ten  minutes.  During  this,  and
shortly  before  and  after,  the  sensitive  observer  felt  ray  right
hand.  Tlie  ri*sult  is  shown  in  the  diagram,  marked  dis-
tinctly between  four  and  five  o'clock.  While  on  all  other
days,  the  force  increased  continually  during  this  time,  it
here  made  an  anomalous  leap  downward,  but  then  rose
again  normally.  Therefore,  the  short  sleep  into  which  I  had
fallen  had  sufficed  to  produce  a  very  perceptible  change  in
the  distribution  of  the  Od  in  me ;  as  long  as  it  endured,  the
manifestation  of  odic  force  in  the  hand  rapidly  diminished ;
the  ordinate  of  the  force  was  shortened,  and  then  incre^ised
again  when  I  awoke,  and  all  the  vittil  functions  again  took
up  their  previous  dii'cctions.

270.  The  pit  of  the  stomach  is  a  region  of  the  human
body  which  plays  a  very  peculiar  part  in  the  somnambulists.
Anatomical  investigations  have  been  made  by  many,  to  find
a  peculiar  organ  there,  and  it  has  been  surprising  that


BtTALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


DC

Pliu


W^


notfaing  special  has  been  met  with,  to  which  could  be  attri-
liuted  the  extraordinary  effects,  that  very  often  occur,  at  the

t  of  the  stomach,  in  the  so-called  clairvoyants.  Neither
liave  Pacini's  corpuscles,  which  have  been  the  most  recent
things  referred  to  in  this  question,  any  distribution  in  the
body,  of  such  an^angement  as  to  correspond  with  the  relative
strength  of  the  sensitive  parts  of  he  body.  But  it  is  not  at
all  necessarj'  that  a  special  organ  shoukl  exist,  in  whicli
special  concentration  of  udic  phenomena  should  be  met  with.

t  such  points,  where  natiu-e  acts  with  the  all-penetrating
dynamics,  no  such  palpable  ajiparatus  is  requisite.  They
are  the  conibini'd  results  of  innumerable many-branched

mponcnts,  constituted  by  the  nerves,  plexuses,  ganglia,

the  point  of  most  concentrated  affectiveness  may  fall,

;herefore,  where  it  will,  be  it  the  most  unimportant  part  of

he  belly. My  desire  to  become  acquainted  with  the  course

the  Od  followed  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  was  very  great.

I  succeeded  in  bringing  alx>ut  a  twenty-four  hours'  investi-

tion  on  myself. Figure  8  chows  the  result. The  line,


Iforuing  hoar,


which  represents  this,  varies  but  httle  in  its  cur\'es  from
that  of  the  hands.  The  distinction  is  shown  merely  in  some
changes  of  time  and  partial  postponement.  The  effect  of
hunger  began  first  at  two  o'clock,  but  extended  far  beyond


^


274


DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


dinner-time,  to  five  o'clock.  The  evening  culmination,  too
did  not  happen  at  simset,  but  at  10  p.m.  The  course  of.
the  pit  of  the  stomach  thus  did  not  aflford  anything  special,
but  supported  the  doctrine  that  the  series  of  effects  of  the
sunrifie,  hunger,  satiety,  and  sunset,  are  extended  in  the
same  way  over  the  lower  part  of  the  body.  Phenomena  of
another  kind,  however,  which  were  produced  by  emotions  of
the  mind,  and  reflected  on  the  physical  functions,  were  ex-
pressed the  more  distinctly  and  definitely  at  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  I  cannot  speak  of  these  until  some  future  period,
and  must  be  content  here  to  give  a  preliminary  indica-
tion.

271.  In  order  to  see  whether  the  course  of  the  develop-
ment of  Od  was  at  all  different  in  the  female  from  that  in
the  male  sex,  1  caused  a  24  hours*  investigation  to  be  made
on  the  right  hand  of  my  daughter  Hermine, Figiure


i i


Mornisg  hour.


Nixm.


V5

Kvi'iiitie.


MofTiing.


Fig.  9.


right)


leaiUiE!!


rrrtT


shows  that  it  varies  so  little  from  that  of  my  right  hand,
that  the  diff'erence  might  almost  be  attributed  to  the  inevi-
table inaccuracies  of  observation.  Therefore  in  this  respect
there  is  no  difference  between  the  two  sexes.

272.  Figure 10  is  a  second  supix)rt  to  what  has  just
been  said. It  is  the  line  of  the  right  hand  of  Miss  Reichel,


273


MoftliQg  honr.

Fic.  10.


Noon.


Evftninir.


Midnight, MominET.


±m


lie,  Adchel,
right  haodl


h


»


which  she  laid  down  from  feeling  it  with  her  own  left  dnring
twenty-four  hours.  It  is  to  me  of  value  to  get  possession
of  the  course  of  the  odic  phenomena  in  a  highly  sensitive
person  during  her  diseased  condition*  The  diagram  shows
that  it  does  not  differ  in  any  respect  from  that  of  the
healthy,  and  merely  deviates  in  the  order  of  time  of  the
phenomena,  in  so  far  as  Miss  Reichel  dined  at  a  different
time,  two  hours  earlier  than  myself  and  children*

273.  On  the  other  hand,  there  occurred  an  accessory
observation  which  appears  deserving  of  mention.  On  the
diagram  is  seen  a  fresh,  sudden,  and  rapid  decline  of  the
force  at  5  o'clock  a.m.,  just  at  sunrise.  At  the  very
moment  when  this  began,  she  was  suddenly  seized  with  an
attack  of  pain  in  the  stomach,  which  lasted  till  7  o'clock.
The  appearance  of  this  pain  not  only  at  once  restrained  the
appearance  of  odic  development,  but  quickly  depressed  it  to
a  much  greater  extent.  As  soon  as  it  disappeared,  the  force
increased  normally.

274.  It  ia  also  deserving  of  remark,  that  although  Miss
Reichel  was  never  quiet  during  the  whole  of  this  night,  but
got  only,  now  and  then,  some  seven  or  eight  minutes  of  Ught
sleep ;  nevertheless,  as  the  figure  shows,  the  entire  nocturnal


276


DVALISH IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


4


period,  from  sunset  to  sunrise,  afforded  the  eame  contrast  of
daily  increose,  and  nightly  decline,  as  in  the  healthy,  who
are  completely  buried  in  sleep.

275.  From  this  last  series  of  investigations  many  further
physiological  truths  may  be  deduced ;  I  will  here  only  bring
forward  a  dietetical  theory.  If  the  day  with  the  simhght
and  the  increasing  Od  in  the  forehead  and  hands  is  ap-
pointed for  the  volnntary  intellectual  functions,  and  the
night  with  the  then  dechning  Od,  which  now  removes  to  the
back  of  the  head,  to  the  more  unconscious  vegetative  func-
tions, all  of  what  we  do  and  suffer  that  corresponds  to  this
arrangement  of  nature  must  be  favourable  to  our  consti-
tutions and  to  om*  health ;  on  the  contrary,  all  that  contra-
dicts it  must  be  obstructive  and  iujmious  to  our  welfare.
Taking  food  is,  as  we  have  seen,  favourable  to  the  increasing
Od  in  the  forehead  and  hands  ;  the  effect  of  the  chemical
action  arising  from  this  unites  itself  with  that  of  the  smi's
rays,  and,  in  conjunction,  they  elevate  the  development  of  g
Od,  and  with  that  the  active  force  of  daily  Ufe,  We  there-  ^|
fore  promote  our  welfare  when  we  eat  in  the  day,  even  as  "
nature  has  appointed  the  day-time  for  it.  But  the  chemicd
action  of  digestion  continues  for  several  hours ;  it  may
therefore  happen,  that  we  shall  take  food  at  such  a  time  of
the  day,  that  the  digestion  will  be  prolonged  into  that  time
when  the  sun's  rays  have  already  disappeared,  and  the  Od,
consequently,  is  sinking  in  the  hands  and  forehead.  Then,
the  effect  of  the  increasing  Od,  from  the  chemical  decom-
position, would  run  directly  counter  to  that  declining  from
the  absence  of  the  sun.  This  would  cause  a  C4>nflict  in  the
organic  actions.  Thus,  a  new  theoretical  groimd,  that  is,
an  explanation,  is  afforded  of  the  old  practical  experience,
that  one  should  not  eat  in  the  evening,  and  in  general  not
for  several  hours  before  going  to  bed  ;  and  that  if  this  be
done,  imperfect  sleep,  with  restless  dreams,  i.  e,  half-con-


DUALISM  IN  THK  PH£NOMKNA.


277


p


^


sciousness,  semi-activity  of  the  front  of  the  head,  will  be
the  consequence.  It  might  be  thought  that  the  developed
Od  would  thcu  withdraw  to  the  back  of  the  head,  and  thus
favour  sleep  ;  this,  liowever,  not  only  contradicts  the  general
experience,  but  also  the  special  observation  here  upon  me.
For,  by  the  experiments  and  diagrams,  it  is  shewn  that  in
Miss  Reichel,  who  took  dinner  at  1  o'clock,  the  decline  of
the  Od  in  the  hands,  together  with  that  in  the  front  of  the
head  going  purallel  with  it,  commenced  exactly  at  sunset ;
while  m  myself  and  my  daughter,  who  did  not  dine  until
5  P.M.,  the  same  decline  began  about  8  or  10  o'clock ;  thus
just  as  much  later  as  we  had  taken  our  meal.  In  Miss
Reichel,  therefore,  the  stronger  development  of  Od  from  the
chemical  action  of  digestion  had  already  ceased  when  even-
ing  arrived;  while  in  myself  and  my  family  it  endured
some  hours  beyond,  and  in  some  cases  made  equilibrium
against  the  decline  of  that  Od  coming  with  the  sun  (hcliod) ;
sometimes  exceeded  it  in  strength.  Therefore,  whoever
wishes  to  go  late  to  sleep  will  do  well  to  take  the  principal
meal  at  a  proportionately  late  hour  of  the  day.

276.  But  he  who  does  this  acts  in  opposition  to  the
natural  arrangements  of  the  animal  fimctions,  and  certainly
injimously  affects  the  duration  of  his  health.  It  is  kuo\>Ti
from  other  experience  that  the  sleep  before  midnight  is  the
deepest,  soundest,  and  most  strengthening,  and  cannot  be
replaced,  to  equal  benefit,  by  any  arbitrary  supplement  in
other  hours.  The  above  researches  indicate  strengthened
reasons  for  the  explanation  of  this.  Nature  has  appointed
the  order  for  the  whole  animal,  and  apparently  the  vegetable
world  also,  with  few  exceptions,  that  with  the  departure  of
the  sun's  rays,  with  the  reversal  of  direction  of  Od  in  the
organism,  sleep  also  should  appear ;  and  vice  versd  that  it
should  cease  when  the  sunbeams  and  Od  return  to  the  fore-
head. If  we  go  to  bed  late  at  night,  we  must  sleep  long
into  the  day  next  morning. But  then  we  have  the  couise


278


DUALISM  IN  TU£  PHlNOIOQrA.


of  the  heavens,  and  with  this  the  odic  direction,  against  us,
and  the  morning  sleep  does  and  must,  for  the  same  reason,
be  bad  and  unrefreahing ;  which  it  will  also  be,  when  we
go  to  8lee|3  with  a  newly-filled  stomach  :  we  are  under  the
influence  of  a  false  direction  of  the  odic  development.
People  who  go  to  bed  and  rise  late,  are,  on  this  account,
generally  more  languid,  and  more  deficient  in  cheerfulness
in  the  morning,  than  those  who  accommodate  their  mode  of
life  to  the  order  of  nature.  From  aU  this  it  results,  that
whoever  wishes  to  insure  the  duration  of  his  health,  with
regard  to  the  course  of  nature,  which  has  such  a  profound
influence  therein,  must  rise  at  latest  with  the  first  rays  of
the  sun,  take  the  principal  meal  best  at  1 1  or  12  o'clock,  but
never  after  1,  eat  little  or  no  more  later  in  the  day,  and  go
to  bed  at  twilight.  Thus  do  all  animals,  thus  does  half
savage  man  in  the  state  of  natiu^e,  thus  do  ail  the  poor  and
needy  in  the  country ;  only  the  so-called  enlightened  people
of  our  towns  do  better :  they  sup  at  1 0  or  1 1  at  night,  go
to  bed  at  2  or  8  o'clock,  and  afterwards  send  for  the  pbysi*
cian  for  gout,  scrofula,  and  spleen.

Throughout  the  present  treatise,  we  meet,  in  all  the
observed  phenomena,  without  exception,  a  condition  in
which  the  Od  displays  itself  through  excitation  of  sensa-
tions either  of  tepid  warmth  or  coolness.  We  are  able  to
distinguish  four  kinds  of  modification,  in  the  conditions  in
which  we  are  able  to  detect  and  discover  it,  by  means  of
these  impressions  on  the  sense  of  feeling*  First,  namely,
it  occurs  introduced  into  bodies  from  without  %  transfer ,
and  then  depends  upon  other  odic  objects,  through  the
actual  contact  or  mere  approximation  of  which,  the  Od  has
been  conveyed  to  or  excited  in  it;  to  which  belong,  there-
fore, reception  of  the  rays  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  as  well  as
alteration  of  aggregation  by  friction,  chemical  activity,  or
heat.  Odic  quaUty  derived  in  this  way  is  but  temporary,
and  of  short  duration. Secondly,  it  resides  in  amorphous


1I0ALI8M  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.


279


muHer  as  an  independent  quality,  and  then  is  not  very
BtroDgly  expressed.  Thirdly,  it  occurs  in  amorphous  sub-
stances^  as  in  magnetized  steel,  impregnated  by  transfer
in  conjunction  with  vuiynetism ;  not,  however,  escaping
rapidly,  but  holding  to  the  object  as  long  as  it  remains
magnetic  (^  23>  note).  Fourthly,  it  appears  accumulated
in  particular  points;  as  in  crystals,  plants,  and  animals,
and  is  then  of  constant  duration.

In  the  first  two  cases  the  Od  presents  itself  like  the  simple
electrical  charge,  uniformly  distributed  in  the  bodies  ;  in
the  two  last  we  find  it  like  tfie  voltaic  pile,  presenting  a
polarity  in  bodies,  and  not  merely  in  the  direction  of  one
single  axis,  but,  and  especially  in  organic  structures,  in  those
of  many  intersecting  ones.

The  Od,  therefore,  possesses  a  manifest  dualism,  which
presents  an  unmistakeable  resemblance  in  kind  to  elec-
tiiciiy.


KETROSPECT.


a.  The  terms  "  tepid"  and  "  cool,"  **  warm'*  and  "  cold,"
in  the  mouths  of  the  sensitive,  are  not  to  be  taken  literally,
but  figuratively.  They  express  a  sensuous  perception,  which
is  simOar  to  those  which  tepid  warmth  and  coolness  usually
produce  in  us.

&.  In  crystals  and  magnets,  one  pole  almost  always  gave
them  a  warm,  the  other  a  cool  sensation.

c.  The  warm  pole  is,  as  a  rule,  Od-positive,  and  may  be
denoted  +  od  ;  the  cool  pole  is  Od-negative ;  therefore  in
like  manner  by  —  Od.

d.  The  lifeless,  amorphous,  material  world  forms  a  great
series,  at  one  end  of  which  occurs  the  most  od-positive  body,
(as  yet  potassium),  at  the  other  end  the  most  od-negative
(as  yet  oxygen),  and  which  proceeds  from  the  greatest  odic


OtTAXTSM  IX  THl  PHZKOUFKA.

tepid  heat  to  the  greatest  odic  coolness,  and  thus  represents
an  odic  series  of  all  matter.

e.  Positively  electrified  bodies  diffuse  odic  coolness ;
negatively  electrified,  odic  warmth,  or  els€  diminished  cool-

f.  Heating  a  body  produces  manifestations  of  +  od ;
coolings  of  *-  od»

g.  Friction  produces  +  od.
A-  All  kinds  of  fire  diffuse  —  od.
f.c  From  the  effect  of  chemical  activity,  as  such,  —  od  is

always  immediately  given  out.

k\  All  odic  flames  emitted  from  od-positive  bodies  feel
warrn^  all  from  od-negative  cool ;  the  odic  temperature  of
their  flame-Uke  emissions,  therefore,  gives  a  measure  of  thdr
odic  value.

•-  I,  In  plants  the  caudex  descendens  has  been  found,  on  the
whole,  to  be  od-positive ;  the  caudex  ascmdetis  od-negative ;
but  in  detail,  each  single  organ  is  polarized.

m.  In  man,  the  whole  left  side  is  od-positive,  the  whole
right  od-negative.  This  polar  opposition  is,  especially,  dis*
tinctly  manifested  in  the  hands,  and  ends  of  the  fingers.

j»*  Men  and  women  are  polarized  in  the  same  way.

a.  In  human  beings,  both  male  and  female,  the  odic  in-
tensity displays  a  difference,  at  different  times,  and  in  different
dispositions,  arising  from  hunger,  satieW,  sleep,  disease,  &c.,
sometimes  increasing,  sometimes  declining.

p.  When  brought  into  the  sphere  of  action  of  the  objects
diffusing  Od,  sensitive  human  beings  are  only  comfortable
when  their  own  od-polar  parts  are  placed  opposite  to  theforeign
od-poles  of  the  opposite  name  ;  when  opposed  to  those  of
the  same  name,  discomfort,  and  then  indisposition,  arise.

q.  There  exist  in  bodies  conditions  of  enduring  and
temporary  odic  charging,  similar  to  analogous  electrical
conditions ;  in  the  first  is  found  a  decided,  but  in  the
«>econd  no  perceptible  dualism.


281


CONCLUSION.


The  experiments  and  observations  detailed  in  the  foregoing
seven  treatises,  and  the  deductions  drawn  from  them,  when
briefly  summed  up,  yield  the  following  axioms  in  physics
and  physiology : —

L  The  world-old  obsen^ation,  that  the  magnet  reacts
sensibly  on  the  human  organism,  is  neither  **  he,  deceit,  nor
superstition,"  as  many  naturahsts  at  present  think  and
declare  j  but  is  a  well-grounded  fact,  a  manifest  physico-
physiological  law  of  nature.

2*  It  is  a  tolerably  easy  matter,  one  that  may  be  carried
out  anywhere,  to  attain  conviction  of  the  correctness  and
accuracy  of  this  ;  for  people  arc  to  be  met  with  everywhere
whose  sleep  is  more  or  less  disturbed  by  the  moon,  or  who
suffer  from  nervous  indispositions ;  almost  all  these  expe-
rience the  peculiar  excitation  by  the  magnet,  to  a  con-
siderable extent,  when  it  passes  down  them  from  the  head
over  the  body.  Still  more  frequent  are  healthy  and  vigo-
rous persons,  who  feel  the  magnet  very  vividly ;  many  feel
it  more  weakly  ;  many  detect  it,  but  in  a  very  shght  degree ;
finally,  the  majority  cannot  perceive  it  at  all  All  those
who  detect  tliis  reaction,  and  they  appear  to  constitute  a
quarter  or  a  third  of  the  human  race,  are  here  denoniinated
by  the  general  term  of  "  sensitive/'  (^  66.)

3.  The  perceptions  of  that  influence  present  themselves,
chiefly,  to  the  two  senses  of  feeling  and  sight :  to  the  feel-
ing, by  a  sensation  of  apparent  (§  217)  coolness  or  tepid
warmth  (^  225) ;  to  the  sight,  by  appearances  of  Ught  issuing
from  the  poles  and  sides  of  magnets  (^§  8,  9,  15,)  when  the
patients  remain,  for  a  long  tune,  in  deep  obscurity.


CONCLtT8I05.


4.  The  capacity  to  exercise  such  influence  presents  itself
Dot  only  in  the  steel  magnet,  which  we  produce  in  our
workshops,  or  in  natural  magnetic  iron,  but  nature  gives
evidence  of  it  in  an  infinitely  varied  numl>er  of  cases.  In
the  first  place,  there  is  the  entire  globe,  which,  through  ter-
restrial magnetism,  acts  more  or  less  powerfully  upon  sensi-
tive persons  (^  60,  &c.)

5.  Then  there  is  the  moon,  which,  by  means  of  exactly
the  same  force,  reacts  towards  the  earth,  and  thus  towards
the  sensitive  (^  118).

0.  Further,  all  crjstals,  natiu*al  and  artificial,  and  those
in  the  direction  of  their  axes,  ^  31,  33,  35,  50,  55.
7-  In  like  manner  heat,  ^121,

8.  Friction,^  127.

9.  Electricity,  ^  169.

10.  Light,  ^  131.

11.  The  rays  of  the  sun  and  stars,  ^  97,  208.

12.  Chemism,  to  an  especial  extent,  ^  187,  142.

13.  Then  the  organic  vital  force,  both  in  a,  Plants,  §  25  ;
and  also  in  b,  animals,  particularly  man,  ^79.

14.  Finally,  the  total  material  world,  ^  174,  213.

15.  The  cause  of  these  phenomena  is  a  peculiar  natural
force,  wliich  extends  over  the  whole  universe,  (^  213,  214)
diflerent  from  all  hitherto  known  forces,  and  here  designated
by  the  word"  Od,'*  ^  215.

16.  It  is  essentially  different  from  that  to  which  we  have
hitherto  applied  the  name  of  *'  Magnetism,"  (^  42)  for  it
does  not  attract  iron,  (§  87)  nor  magnets  (^  24,  38) ;  bodies
charged  with  it  are  not  determined  in  particular  directions  by
the  terrestrial  magnetism,  (^  42) ;  they  do  not  affect  the  sus-
pended magnetic  needle,  (^  38) ;  theyare  not  disturbed,  when
suspended,  by  the  vicinity  of  an  electric  current,  (^  39) ;  md
they  do  not  induce  any  galvanic  current  in  metallic  wires,
(i  40).

17.  Though  different  from  what  we  call  magnetism,  it


CONCLUSION.


283


presents  itself  in all places where magnetism appears,

M3.

18.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  magnetism  by  no  means
appears  eveiy where  that  Od  presents  itself :  this  force,  there-
fore, has  a  proper  existence,  independently  of  nmgnetism  :
magnetism,  however,  is  never  free  from  a  connection  with
Od,  ^  43,  44,

19.  The  cKiic  force  possesses  polarity.  It  appears  at  the
tw  o  poles  of  the  magnet  with  constantly  different  properties :
at  the  northward  (^  225,  Note)  it  produces  a  sensation  of
coolness  in  the  feeling,  as  a  rule,  in  the  pass  downward,  and
in  darkness  a  blue  and  bluish-grey  hght  j  the  southward
pole,  on  the  other  hand,  a  sensation  of  tepid  warmth,  (^  225)
and  a  red,  reddish-yellow,  and  reddish-grey  hght.  The
former  is  connected  with  a  decided  pleasure,  the  latter  with
discomfort  and  uneasy  pains*  Next  to  magnets,  ciystals
m  32,  50,  55,  220,  221)  and  living  organic  beings
(^^  84  to  81),  253)  exhibit  the  odic  polarity  most  distinctly.

20.  In  crjstals,  the  odic  poles  ocxur  at  the  jK)les  of  the
axes  (i  82) ;  in  cr}stal3  with  several  axes,  there  are  several
odic  axes,  of  unequal  strength*

21.  In  plants,  the  ascending  tmnk  is,  as  a  whole,  opposed
in  polar  quality  to  the  descending ;  but  there  are  coimtless
other  subordinate  polarities  in  all  the  separate  organs,
(i  248,  et  seq.)

22.  In  animals,  at  least  in  man,  the  entire  left  side
stands  in  odic  opposition  to  the  entire  right  (^  22G)  The
force  is  concentrated  into  poles  at  the  extremities,  in  the
hands  and  fingers  (^  254) ;  and  in  the  two  feet  (^  23) ;  more
atrongly  in  the  former,  more  weakly  in  the  latter.  Within
these  general  polarities,  however,  occur  countless  minor
subordinate  special  polarities  of  the  individual  organs  as
opposed  to  each  other,  and  as  exhibiting  an  independent
bi-polar  condition  in  themselves  (^  254).  Men  and  women
do  not  diifer  quahtatively  in  the  odic  characters  (^  227.)


284


CONCLUSION.


33.  Oq  the  globe,  the  north  pole  is  regarded  as  positively
magnetic,  the  south  pole  as  negatively ;  in  accordance  with
this,  the  northward  pcle  of  the  suspended  needle  as  negative,
the  southward  as  positive*  In  agreement  with  this,  I  have
taken  the  south  pole,  which  goes  with  the  negative  magnetic
pole,  in  like  manner  for  negative,  ''  od-negative,"  ==  —  od ;
the  other,  opposite  pole,  for  **  od-positive,"  —  -h  od.  (§  231  )
In  crystals,  therefore,  the  pole  giving  the  cold  downward
pass,  is  od-negativc,  the  wannth-giving,  od-positive  (^  231.)
In  plants,  on  the  whole,  tlie  root  is  od-positive,  the  stem
and  its  apex  od-negative  (^  252,)  In  man,  the  left  side,  its
hand  and  finger-ends,  are  warm,  disagreeable,  and  red-lumi-
nous ;  therefore  od-positive :  the  right  side,  hand  and
finger-ends,  are  cool,  pleasant,  and  emit  a  blue  hght ;  there-
fore are  od-negative  (^§  226,  23L)  It  will  not  differ  in
any  animals  (^  253).

24,  In  dkect  sunlight,  the  red  ray  and  those  below  it
appear  od-positive,  the  blue  and  those  above  it — that  is,  the
so-called  chemical  ray — od-negative ;  the  spectrum  is,  there-
fore, odically  polarized  (^  llfi.)

25.  Amorphous  bodies,  without  crystalline  arrangement
of  their  integral  com|X)nents,  exhibit  no  separate  polarity ;
but  each  acts  singly,  within  its  hmits,  as  odically  warm  or
cold  to  the  feehng;  and  this  reaction  exhibits  different
degrees  of  intensity  in  different  substances,  so  that  they
thus  arrange  themselves  in  succession,  and  form  a  con-
tmuous  chain  of  gradations,  in  the  same  way  as  they  form
a  series  according  to  their  electrical  nature,  which  w^e  call  •
the  "  electro-chemical"  Exactly  in  the  same  manner  do
all  simple  substances  combine  in  an  odic  series,  which  has
the  strongest  positively  od-polar  bodies  at  one  end,  as  potas-
sium,  &c,,  and  at  the  other,  the  strongest  od-negativc,  like
oxygen,  &c.  And  since  this  natural  grouping  appears
almost  to  coincide  with  the  electro-chemical,  it  may  be
called  the  od-cheoiical  scries  (^  236).


CONCLUSION.


285


26.  Heating  (H  122,  245)  and  friction  (H  129,  246)
I  display  4-  od  ;  celling  (§  123)  and  the  light  of  fire  — od.

{^^  131,  240,  244.)  —  Chemical  action  varies,  in  its  odic
value,  according  to  the  character  of  the  substances  brought
into  action  {^  139,  142,  247.)  But,  in  far  the  greater
number  of  cases,  they  have  hitherto  been  found  od-negative.

27.  Of  the  heavenly  bodies,  those  wliich  have  no  proper
light,  as  the  moon  and  the  planets,  appear  od-positive  iu
their  principal  effect  f§^  111),  208,  239) ;  those  which  are
illuminating,  like  the  sun  and  fixed  stars,  od-negative  in
their  chief  effect  (H  100,  208,  239),  But  the  siiectmni
of  them,  again,  shew^  itself  (x^larized  (^  116).

28.  The  odic  forc^  can  be  conducted  in  bodies ;  all  solid
and  fluid  bodies  conduct  Od  to  distances  as  yet  unmeasured.
Not  only  metals,  but  also  glass,  resin,  silk,  and  v^-ater,  are
perfect  conductors  (H  47,  81,  113,  118,  121,  141,  167,
203),  In  a  somewhat  smaller  degree  only  do  less  connected
bodies  conduct :  such  as  wood,  paper,  cotton  stuffs,  wool,
&c.  There  are,  therefore,  some,  though  otdy  weak,  obstacles
to  the  transition  from  one  body  to  another.

29.  The  conduction  of  Od  is  effected  much  more  slowly
than  that  of  electricity,  but  much  more  rapidly  than  that  of
heat ;  it  may  almost  be  followed,  on  a  long  wire,  by  making

[  haste.

30.  Od  may  be  transferred,  be  brought  from  one  body
on  to  others;  or  at  least  a  body  in  which  exists  a  manifestation
of  free  Od,  will  produce  a  similarly  odically  excited  condi-
tion in  another  (H  29,  45,  72,  82,  105,  118, 143,  198,
202)-

31.  The  transfer  is  effected  through  contact.  But  a
mere  approximation,  without  actual  contact,  suffices  for  it,
though  with  weaker  effect  (^  202),

32.  The  transference  is  not  performed  very  quickly,  but
requires  some  time,  several  minutes,  for  its  completion  (§  48)*

33.  Neither  in  conduction,  nor  in  transference,  does
polarity  appear  in  the  establishment  of  Od  in  the  bodies  ;


286


CONCLUSION.


this  appears  rather  to  be  an  application  of  a  certain  mole-
cular arrangement  to  the  uiatter.

34-  The  duration  of  the  odic  condition  in  bodies,  after
complete  charging,  and  the  removal  of  the  cliarging  object,
is  brief,  different  according  to  the  quality  of  the  material,
sddom  perceptible,  beyond  a  few  minutes,  to  healthy  vigo-
rous, sensitive  persons  (§§  82,  167,  169) ;  sometimes
sensible,  even  after  some  hours,  to  diseased,  highly  sensitive
persons ;  for  instance,  in  magnetised  water.  Matter,  there-
fore, possesses  a  certain  coercive  power  over  Od  (^  46,
83,  112,  205).

35*  Bodies  which  have  been  odized  by  conduction,  or
charging, — e.  g.  metallic  wires, — afford  sensible  emanations
of  Od  at  their  opposite  extremities;  warm  or  cool,  positive
or  negative,  like  the  poles  from  which  they  issue  f^^  107,
114,  119).

26.  Od  shares  with  heat  the  peculiarity  of  two  different
conditions:  one  inert,  slowly  making  its  way  through
matter,  a  radiation  (^^  193,  254),  In  the  last  condition
the  Od  from  magnets,  crystals,  human  bodies  (^  254),  and
hands,  is  felt,  by  healthy  sensitive  persons,  instantaneously,
and  without  any  perceptible  interval  of  time,  at  the  distance
of  a  long  suite  of  rooms.  All  the  processes  which  the
inert  Od  diffuses  slowly  over  bodies  are  radiated  by  it,  siniul*
taneously,  in  all  directions,  but  with  varying  strength  ;  thus
friction,  electricity,  heat,  chemical  action,  matter  in  general
(^  201).  The  rays  of  Od  penetrate  clothes,  beds,  boards,
and  walls  (^  23,  note),  but  evidently  less  easily  and  quickly
than  magnetism,  and  with  a  certain  slowness.  The  conduc-
tion and  transfer  by  means  of  mere  approximation  of  the
poles  of  crystals  and  magnets,  the  hands,  amorphous  bodies
of  high  od-polar  rank,  &c.,  appear  all  to  depend  on  radiation
of  Od;  to  which,  therefore,  belongs  also  the  so- called  mag-
netization of  sensitive  human  beings.

87.  Electric  cun^enta,  conducted  through  sensitive  pei*sotis.
produce  no  observable  odic  excitement,  nor  do  they  affect


CONCLUStOJi.


them  immediately,  perceptibly  differently  from  all  other
persons  (^  160) ;  but  Eiediatcly,  more  strongly  in  propor-
tion as  they  produce  odic  disturbances  in  other  bodies
(I  167).  Metals  placed  witliin  the  sphere  of  electrical  action
exhibit  the  most  vivid  phenomena  of  Od  (^  168).

38.  The  light,  which  odically  excited  bodies  emit,  is
always  weak,  and  from  this  weakness,  is  not  visible  to  every
eye.  Persons  who  are  not  exceedingly  sensitive,  are  obliged
to  remain  for  a  whole  hoiu:,  or  even  two,  in  absolute  dark-
ness, before  their  eyes  were  sufficiently  prepared  to  be  fit
to  perceive  the  odic  light,  and  it  was  necessary  that  they
should  not,  during  this  time,  have  received  a  trace  of  other
light.  But  the  cause  of  this  cannot  lie  in  a  special  acute*
ness  of  the  eye  alone,  because  all  who  aee  Od  light  are,
without  exception,  gifted  with  the  peculiar  excitability  to
detect  the  odic  impressions  by  feeling,  to  distinguish  them
according  to  apparent  warmth  or  coolness,  according  to
agreeable  or  unpleasant  sensations,  which  are  not  subject  to
change.  Since  these  different  capacities  are  always  all
present,  sinuiltaneously,  in  particular  persons,  or  are  all
simultaneously  absent,  they  must  be  i*egarded  as  connected,
and  appear  to  depend  upon  a  peculiar  disposition  of  the
whole  nervous  system,  which  we  are  unacquainted  with,  and
not  upon  a  special  quality  of  separate  organs  of  sense.

69.  The  odic  light  of  amorphous  bodies  is  a  kind  of
inward  and  outward  glow,  showing  through  the  entire  mass,
like  phosphorescence,  and  perhaps  depending  on  the  same
caiise ;  a  thin  luminous  veil,  like  a  delicate  down-like  flame,
surrounds  it  (^  207).  In  different  bodies  this  light  occurs
of  different  colours — blue,  red,  yellow,  green,  purple,  mostly
white  and  grey.  Simple  l>odies,  especially  metals,  are  most
brightly  luminous  (^  206) ;  compounds,  like  oxides,  sul-
phurets,  iodides,  hydrocarbons,  silicates,  salt^  of  all  kinds,
glasses,  nay  even  the  walls  of  a  room,  are  all  luminous
(§  206).

40,  Where  the  odic  light  occurs  polarized,  as  in  the


288


CONCLUSION,


magnet  (§  3,6),  and  in  crystals  (^  55),  itformsaflarae-lifee
stream,  issuing  from  the  poles,  proceeding  almost  in  a
right  line  from  the  arms  of  the  magnet,  and  the  axes  of  the
crystids,  and  spreading  out  somewhat  at  a  disUnce  from
the  poles,  while  it  diminishes  in  intensity  of  light.  It  dis-
plays all  the  brilliant  colours  of  the  rainbow  (^^  9,  13)
but  remains  predominantly  red,  at  the  positive  poles,  and
blue,  at  the  negative.  At  the  same  time,  magnets,  crystals,
aud  hands,  like  the  amorphous  lodies,  remain  luminous,
glowing  odically  throughout  their  mass,  and  in  like  manner
siuTounded  by  a  fine  luminous  vapoury  veil  (^  8).

41.  Human  beings  are  luminous  almost  all  over  the  sur-
face of  their  bodies,  but  especially  on  the  hands  (^  92),  the
palms  of  the  bands,  the  points  of  the  fingers  (§  93),  the
eyes,  diflerent  parts  of  the  head,  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  the
toes,  &c.  Flame*like  streams  of  light  of  relatively  greater
intensity  flow  from  the  points  of  all  the  fingers,  in  a  straight
direction  from  where  they  are  stretched  out*

42.  Electricity,  even  the  mere  electrical  atmosphere,  pro-
duces and  strengthens  the  odic  luminous  phenomena  in  a
high  degree  (^  167);  not,  Imwevcr,  instantaneously,  but
after  a  short  pause  of  a  couple  of  minutes  (^  169).

43.  The  electro-raagnct  behaves  like  the  common  magnet
in  regard  to  the  odic  light  emanations  (§  12);  and  it  U
capable  of  strengthening  the  luminous  phenomena,  simul-
taneously, in  just  the  proportion  that  it  is  susceptible  of  mag-
netic exaltation.

44.  The  rays  of  the  sun  and  moon  produce  odic  charging
in  all  bocUes  on  w  hich  they  fall ;  and  this,  conducted  by
wires  into  the  dark,  gives  odic  flames  at  their  points
(H  114,  119.)

45.  Heat  (^  125),  friction  {^  129),  and  the  light  of  fire
(^  134),  produce  visible  luminosity  on  wires  and  their  points
carried  into  the  dark;  a  flame  resembhng  that  of  the  candle.

46.  Every  chemical  action,  though  merely  a  simple  solu-
tion in  water,  or  a  resumption  of  water  of  crystallization  by


CONCLUSIO?^,


^
^


effloresced  salts,  effects  exactly  the  same,  in  a  strong  degree,
on  wires  inserted  in  them  (^  146).  But  processes  of  de-
composition independently  emit  odic  flames,  and  diffuse  odic
glow  (^  145).

47.  The  positive  pole  gives  the  smaller,  but  more  lumi-
nous flame ;  the  negative,  the  larger  but  less  intense :  the
former  became  yellow  and  red ;  the  latter  became  blue  and
grey.  The  odic  flame  radiates  light  wliich  illuminates  other
bodies  in  the  vicinity.  It  may  be  collected  by  glass  lenses,
and  concentrated  into  a  focus  (^  18).  The  luminous  odic
emanations  of  bodies,  and  their  poles  generally,  must  there-
fore be  distinguished  from  odic  light,  in  the  narrower  and
more  |)ecidiar  sense  of  the  word.

49,  All  odic  flame  may  be  made  to  flicker  by  currents  of
air ;  be  diverted,  caused  to  wave,  blow  about,  and  broken
up  by  blowing  on  it  (^  20) ;  meeting  with  soUd  IxRlics,  it
l}ends  round  them,  follows  their  surface,  and  streams  for-
ward on  them,  like  flames  of  common  fire  (§  20) ;  it  Ls  evi-
dently of  wholly  material  natm*e.

60.  We  can  give  it  any  direction  we  please, — upward,
downward,  toward  any  side  ;  it  is,  therefore,  up  to  a  certain
point,  independent  of  the  influence  of  terrestrial  magnetism
(^  20,  23),

51.  The  emanations  of  odic  light  seek  plane  and  sohd
angles,  and  points  (§  3),  and,  like  electricity,  find  more  ready
issue  there,  agreeing  with  the  obstacles  to  transition  ob-
served in  conduction  ;  at  such  places  the  diflercnces  of  tem-
perature and  luminous  phenomena  arc  always  manifested  in
greatest  strength  (^  114).

52.  The  odic  flames  issidng  from  opposite  poles  exhibit
no  tendency  to  unite  with  each  other :  no  perceptible  mutual
attraction  occurs,  and  thus  there  is  here  a  total  difference
from  the  magnetic  agent  (^^  3,  9).

53.  All  od-positivc  bodies  emit  warm,  all  od-negative  cool
o(Uc  flames  (^  223). The  odic  flames,  therefore,  bear,  in

V


290  CONCLUSION.

reference  to  the  apparent  temperature,  the  character  of  their
pole ;  and  this  consequently  aflforda  an  expression  of  the
o<lic  quality  of  the  body  to  which  they  belong  (§  241).

54.  In  many  conditions  of  disease,  especially  in  cataleptic
attacks,  a  peculiar  kind  of  attraction  has  been  observed,
exercised  by  the  od-pole  of  magnets,  crystals,  and  the  hands,
for  the  abnormally  sensitive  hand  (§  23).  It  is  similar  to
that  of  the  magnet  for  iron,  but  is  not  reciprocal  (§  24,  54) ;
i.e.,  the  sensitive  hand  does  not  on  the  other  side  exercise  any
perceptible  attraction  for  the  od-poles  (§  23,  91).  Even  ob-
jects rendered  odic  by  conduction  and  transfer,  produced
this  striking  effect  to  Rome  extent  (§  28).

55.  In  the  animal  organism,  night,  sleep,  and  hunger
diminish  the  odic  emissions ;  food,  dayhght,  and  activity
elevate  and  increase  them  (^  260,  262).  In  sleep,  the  focus
of  odic  activity  is  removed  to  different  parts  of  the  nervous
system  (^  268).  Within  the  twenty-four  hours  of  the  day
and  night,  a  periodical  fluctuation,  a  decrease  and  increase
of  it,  occurs  in  the  human  body  (^  265).

56.  Certain  appUcations  of  the  odic  laws,  discovered  in
the  present  researches,  have  been  made,  in  the  partial  ex-
planation— of  the  so-called  magnetized  water  (^  27, 28,  73,
105,  112);  of  the  light  in  rapid  crystallization  (^  55);  of
the  luminous  appearance  observed  over  graves  (^  158) ;  of
the  mysterious  affairs  in  Pfcffcl's  garden  at  Colmar  (^  156) ;
of  the  so-called  magnetic  tub  m  135,  151);  of  certain
effects  of  digestion  (^  152) ;  of  respiration  (^  153) ;  of  many
strange  antipathies  of  mankind  (^  175) ;  of  the  necessity  of
placing  sensitive  diseased  persons  in  the  magnetic  meridian
(^§69,  71);  of  the  attraction  of  magnets  and  hands  for
cataleptic  persons  (^  23) ;  of  the  odic  condition  of  the
human  body  (^  79,  et.  seq.) ;  of  the  daily  and  hourly  altera-
tions of  this  (§  256) ;  and  lastly,  of  some  of  the  peculiarities
and  causes  of  the  aurom  borealis  (§  21).

KND  OF  PART  I.


PHY8IC0-PHYSI0L0GICAL  RESEABCHES

ov

THE  DYNAMICS


OF


MAGNETISM,  ELECTRICITY,  HEAT,  LIGHT,
CRYSTALLIZATION,  AND  CHEMISM,

IN  THSIB  RELATiOKS  TO

Hital  /0m.

BY

BARON  CHARLES  VON  REICHENBACH.

THE  COMPLETE  WORK,

FROM THS GERMAN SECOND EDITION.

WITH  THE  ADDITION  OF  A  PREFACE  AND  CRITICAL  NOTES,

BY

JOHN  A8HBURNER,  M.D.


LONDON:
HIPPOLYTE  BAILLIERE.  219,  REGENT  STREET,

AND  169,  FULTON  STEEET,  NEW  TORK,  V.  8.

PARIS:  J.-B.  BAILLIERE,  RUE  HAUTEFEUILLB.

MADRID :  BAILLTBAILLEBRE,  CALLE  DEL  PRINCIPE.

1851.


"  Eincr  neuen  Wahrheit  i8t  nicbts  schadlicher,  als  ein  alter  Iirthum."

"  Nothing  is  more  injurious  to  a  new  truth  than  an  old  error.''

Qotke.

'  In  science,  nothing  may  be  built  upon  uncertain  possibilities;  science
may  not  be  a  tissue  of  conjectures :  it  must  consist,  as  far  as  possible,
of  a  Kystem  of  demonstrated  realities."

Berzeliut.


WiltoB  tad  Of^lry,  07,  Skinscr  Str«rt,  HnowbiU,  London.


THE  AUTIIOR^S  PREFACE

TO  THE

SECOND  EDITION.


The  following  Ireatises  were  originally  destined  to  appear
singly  in  the  montlily  parts  of  Liebig's  "  Annalen  der
Cheniie/*  and  slionld,  from  the  time  they  were  given  in,
bave  been  commenced  in  July  1844.  Accidental  circnm-
stances  delayed  their  publication,  and  thus  it  happened  that
several  of  them  became  united  in  entire  parts  of  that  work,
and  then  were  first  given  to  the  public  in  March  and  May
1845. This  will  explain  their  somewhat  unusual  form.

In  the  present  Second  Edition  there  are  some  corrections,
but,  as  a  whole,  the  principal  contents  have  remained  im-
altered ;  my  researches,  continued  w  ithout  inteiruption
during  the  several  years  that  have  elapsed,  have  strength-
ened and  con  firmed  the  earlier  observations.  I  have  consi-
dered that  I  could  not  abandon  the  half-historical,  half-
[systematic  course  of  the  enumeration  of  my  observations,
and  the  detail  of  my  judgments  ui>on  them,  since  it  is  that
of  natiu-al  science  generally,  in  which  the  correction  of
earlier  experiments  always  keeps  pace  with  the  extension  of
om-  knowledge.

It  w^as  to  be  expected  that  a  subject  of  so  unusual  and
peculiar  a  kind  as  the  present  researches  would  meet  with
objections ;  and  I  was  aware  beforehand  that  I  should  have
to  defend  my  experiments,  and  the  deductions  I  had  drawn
from  them,  against  ill-founded  and  groundless  opposition.


lY  AUTHOR  8  PBSFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.

The  new  field  of  research  which  was  laid  open  pnshes  its
lines  too  near  the  bastions  of  established  formulae,  fre-
quently involves,  in  too  many  convolutions,  all  that  exists  in
the  present  doctrines  of  natural  dynamics,  for  the  ne-
cessary space  to  be  freely  allowed  to  it.  Yet  I  thought
only  of  reasonable  criticism  of  my  observations,  per-
haps of  unsuccessful  repetitions  of  my  experiments,  arising
here  and  there  from  faulty  arrangement ;  that  my  conclu-
sionis  might  be  contested,  or  other  views  built  upon  the  facts
brought  forward :  but  I  was  not  prepared  for  an  attack,
which  every  true  friend  of  science  will  unite  with  me  in  calUng
unprovoked,  such  as  was  made  upon  my  work,  and  upon
myself  personally,  by  a  Dr.  Dubois-Reymond,  in  Karsten's
"  Forischritte  der  Physik  im  Jahre  1845."  This  naturalist
does  not  find  it  at  all  necessary  to  go  into  my  experiments,
and  the  conclusions  deduced  from  them,  but  briefly  and
supei-ficially  designates  my  book  as  an  "  absurd  romance,"
the  details  of  which  "  it  would  be  fruitless  and  to  him  im-
possible to  enter."  I  believe  both  of  these  assertions.
Fruitless ;  because  he  has  not  understood  them,  and  an  un-
comprehended  and  incomprehensible  criticism  is  fruitless.
Impossible ;  because  he  has  not  read  them  in  connection ;
and  to  enter  into  a  matter  of  which  one  has  acquired  no
knowledge,  is  impossible.  And  that  he  really  has  not  read
them,  but  turned  over  the  leaves  in  the  fashion  of  a  superfi-
cial and  unscrupulous  reviewer,  is  proved  by  his  calling  my
work  "  the  New  Testament  of  Mesmerism  :"  thus  he  has
not  seen  that  it  is  the  very  first,  in  this  field,  which  runs
counter  to  Mesraer's  views  in  most  points,  and  places  the
phenomena  on  wholly  different  ground.  With  silly  jests  he
says,  he  "  is  greeted  by  the  magnetic  tub  and  complex
magic  wares  of  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach,"  &c. :  thus  he
has  not  read  that  it  is  myself  who  makes  an  end  of  that  tub
and  Mesmer's  magnetic  wares,  in  tearing  down  the  veil  from
the  mysteries, tracing  them  back  to  their  bare  physical


AFTHOR  8  PRFPACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EBITTON,


contents,  ami  replacing  all  previous  plmiitasniagoiia  by  sober
investigation  of  nature.  But  as  long  as  science  exists,
ignorance  will  have  tlie  luost  dogmatic  judgment.  This
IK)lished  Berlincse  then  further  pleases  to  throw  eomnion-
places  in  my  face,  such  as, — my  ti-catise  is  one  of  the  "  most
melancholy  aberrations  whicli  liave  for  a  long  time  settled
on  u  human  brain  ;"  they  arc  *'  fables,"  w^hich  deser\^c  "  to
be  thrown  behind  the  fire  J'  and  more  of  the  like  learnetl
vulgarity.  Whoever  assumes  publicly  to  sit  in  judgment
and  pronounce  sentence  on  a  scientific  work,  is  subject,  first
of  all,  to  the  duty  of  making  himself  thoroughly  acquainted
with  its  contents  ;  he  has,  moreover,  like  every  other  jiulge,
to  support  the  decision  with  the  motives  upon  which  he
believes  he  is  justified  in  grounding  the  same.  This  duty
is  the  more  irremissible  in  him,  that  his  judgment  is
but  one-sided,  and  requires  the  control  of  public  opinion,
while  the  attacked  party  may,  if  necessary,  take  arms
against  it.  But  a  slanderous  criticism,  which  is  not
asliamcd  to  strip  itself  of  all  these  conditions,  is  nothing
else,  iu  one  word,  than  literary  insolence,  and  of  such
rntMisure,  tliat  is  perhaps  unexanipled  in  ancient  or  mo-
dern literature  ;  for  it  certainly  has  never  and  nowlicR*
occurred  that  a  reporter  has  had  the  boldness,  or  rather  the
silHuess,  to  pass  over  a  scientific  production  jieremptorily,
Hud  with  unprovoked  insults,  without  any  accomit,  or  any
statement  of  his  reasons, — ^witliout  a  single  syilabie  of  analy-
sis of  its  contents,  I  have  said  silhiiess,  beeause  it  is  silly
to  throw  stones  which  one  can  see  wilt  rebound  on  one's
own  head.  Either  my  statements  contained  truths,  which
Imve  existence  and  consistence  in  the  physical  world, — ^-on-
setpiently  nuist  sooner  or  later  be  recognized,  and  put  the
ignorant  reviewer  to  shame ;  or  they  are  based  upon  great
errors,  and  in  that  case  it  nmst  be  an  easy  thing  for  him,  in
accordance  with  his  duty,  to  disclose  and  elucidate  them,
and  thereby  to  put  away  from  himself  the  accusation  of  un-


m author's  preface  to  the  second  edition.

fair  trifling  with  the  fame  of  his  fellow-citizens:  only,
narrow-mindedness  and  silliness  expose  themselves  thought-
lessly to  both  these  dangers  at  once.

M.  Dubois  further  says,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  details
of  my  treatise,  "  because  it  would  be  altogether  impossible
for  him  to  avoid  unparliamentary  language  in  so  doing."
The  insolence  he  had  poured  out  upon  me  was  not  unpar-
liamentary, not  rude  enough ;  he  had  store  of  still  coarser
quality.  He  has  given  a  specimen  of  the  delicacy  of  his
manners,  which  restrains  him  from  the  use  of  it.  I  will
relieve  him  from  the  necessity  of  any  hypocrisy,  and  tell  the
truth ;  he  had  not  (he  courage  to  venture  on  a  discttssiou
cf  the  details  of  my  treatises.  The  matter  does  not  lie
upon  the  surface  ;  the  facts  collected  cannot  be  briefly  set
down  by  a  fluent  tongue  ;  and  the  conclusions  dra^^n  con-
sequently from  them  cannot  be  washed  away  with  watery
ink*  A  fundamental  investigation,  however,  requii-es  pains,
and  costs  labour;  this  is  inconvenient,  perhaps  fruitless^
and  perchance  leads  to  scruples.  And  since,  \*ithout  such
trouble,  the  matter  cannot  be  thoroughly  gone  into,  except
at  the  risk  of  unripe  judgments,  the  details  are  warily  avoided,
lest  the  critic  should  get  rapped  on  the  knuckles,  or  should
subsequently  be  made  to  feel  the  scourge  of  the  au-
thor. It  is  much  easier  and  cheaper  to  skip  away  over
the  outside  of  a  subject  mth  a  worthless  superficiality,  and
by  casting  sliu^  upon  it,  to  decade  it  in  public  opi-
nion, and  then  to  shuffle  out  of  it,  in  a  cowardly  way.  M.
Dubois  need  not  lay  the  slightest  compulsion  upon  liim-
self  to  enter  into  the  details  o!  my  treatise  :  I  call  him  out
into  the  arena,  witli  his  "  unparliamentary  language"  of  the
Spree,  and  give  him  my  word  that  he  shall  meet  me,  and  I
will  give  him  just  such  an  answer  as  he  deserves.

The  very  nature  of  an  experimental  vi-ork  renders  it
subject  to  defects  ;  it  is  just  because  we  feel  these  defects
in  our  knowledge,  that  we  institute  experiments,  to  perfect


ATfTHOa  9  FBRFACE  TO  TTTE  8«?0NB  EDITION.


vn


i


it,  through  the  discovery  of  new  facts,  \Vhile  we  nre
engaged  in  these,  we  again  become  aware  of  ten,  nay  a
hnndrcd,  new  deficiencies;  the  reader,  too,  on  his  part,
pix)l)ably  desires  another  dozen,  which  have  escaped  the
author;  and  the  reviewer  perhajis  still  more.  It  is  qnite
right,  then,  that  they  should  be  piibhcly  indicated  and  be
brought  iuto  discussion,  so  that  the  matters  may  be  further
worked  out  in  new  directions,  or  that  what  has  already
been  obtained  be  safely  placed  l)eyond  all  doubt.  This
benefits  every  one,  including  the  first  discoverer  of  each  new
scientific  fact.

Mv  works  will  !»e  as  little  free  from  defects  as  those  of
much  more  exalted  men  than  I  ever  could  be,  least  of  all  in
Ifthe natural  sciences. No one  can  have  felt  this  more
strongly  than  myself. Every  criticism  expressed  in  a  good
spirit  I  sliall  receive  with  thanks,  and  try  to  improve  my
work  accordingly. But  imperious  abuse,  from  one  who  is
profoundly  ignorant  of  the  work  he  reviews,  must  be  re-
pelled, and  the  reviewer  must  be  taught  to  know  the  limits
I  of  decency. It  is  the  interest,  not  only  of  myself,  but  of
all  who  work  and  write,  that  weeds  of  tliis  kind  should  not
be  left  to  flourish,  but  be  raked  out  and  cleared  away.
That  much  more  exalted  men  than  myself  do  really  fall
into  the  greatest  mistakes  in  their  scientific  works,  1  will  not
be  content  merely  to  have  said,  in  my  own  defence,  but  I  will
^at  once  prove  it.  AL  Johannes  Miiller,  our  great  physiologist.
Hand  the  pride  of  Germany,  whose  excellent  works  are  theoraclc
of  his  contemporaries, in  his  Handbook  of  Ihmmn  Physiology
(4th  edition,  i.  20),  where  he  mentions  the  "  so-called  annual
magnetism,  the  passes,  imposition  of  hands,  transfer  of  tlie  so-
-called magnetic  fluid,"  says,  word  for  word :  *'  Their  stories
Hare,  however,  a  lament  able  maze  of  Ues,  deceit,  and  super-
stition  ;  and  it  has  only  proved  how  incapable  most  physi-
cians arc  of  cmpiricBl  investigation,  and  how  little  concep-
tion they  have  of  a  mode  of  exauiination  which  has  Ijccumu


I


Vlll  AUTHOR  8  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.

the  universal  method  in  the  other  natural  sciences."  But
how,  if  it  now  turn  out  that  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  M.  Miiller
himself  who  is  and  moves  in  that  lamentable  inaze?
How,  if  in  my  treatises  exactly  that  mode  of  proof  be  ap-
phed  which  is  carried  out  in  the  now  universal  method  of
the  other  natural  sciences  P  And  how,  finally,  if  exactly
these  tests  have  demonstrated  and  established  by  evidence,
through  hundreds  of  facts,  the  actual  existence  of  such  a
fluid  or  dynamic,  that  produces  surprising  physical  and
physiological  effects,  by  passes^  impositian  of  /landsy  and
transference,  as  distinctly  as  any  other  physical  or  physio-
logical truth  can  be  established  in  the  same  way  ?  Then,
one  would  and  must  say,  that  the  great  Miiller  had  consi-
derably erred  in  a  matter  on  which,  without  a  previous
examination,  he  had  allowed  himself  to  pronounce  an  inju-
rious and  hasty  judgment,  and  that  in  a  new  edition  of  his
Handbook  he  will  expand  those  parts  so  hurried  over.  It
will  be  noted  as  a  striking  instance  of  how  the  most  distin-
guished men  may  fall  into  the  greatest  errors  through  preju-
dice or  preoccupation  ;  may  be  subject  to  mistakes  of  such
magnitude,  that  exactly  that  which  they  bitterly  and  unspar-
ingly attribute  to  other  people,  finds  its  most  accurate
application  in  their  very  selves,  and  falls  back  upon  their
own  heads.

M.  Dubois,  meanwhile,  is  under  the  scientific  influence  of
M.  J.  Miiller,  as  he  tells  us  himself  in  the  58th  volume  of
''Poifgendorff's  Annalen,'' — is  indeed  his  pupil, — and  thinks
that  in  proper  respect  to  his  exalted  master  he  must  swear
**  in  verba  magistri^''  for  it  is  evident  that  his  attack,  where
he  honours  me  with  "  the  most  melancholy  aberration  of  a
human  brain,"  agrees  almost  verbatim  with  M.  Miiller's
"  lamentable  maze,"  (both  appear  to  have  a  store  of  compas-
sion for  lamentably  erring  authors) ;  and  where  the  latter
speaks  of  Ues  and  deceit,  the  former  thinks  to  hurt  me  with
obscure  and  suspicious  hhits,  as, — of  concealed  "  peculiar


ATJTHOR  S  PRF.KArK  TO  TOE  8EC0XD  EDITION.


P


and  hidden  ground  of  my  treatise."  .  .  .  But  these  gentle-
men **  cannot  see  the  forests  for  the  trees"  this  time.  An  un-
connected mass  of  tlie  strangest  phenomena,  in  nervous  pa-
tients, is  reported  to  them  ;  tliere  is  no  rubric  for  such  facts
in  the  ''system;*'  and  while  the  spectators  were  regarding
theastonished  faces  and  the  embarrassment  of  the  doctors,  a
Berlin  grisette  has  made  one  of  the  learned  gentlemen  the
sport  of  her  wantonness*  Wlien  he  at  last  saw,  iji  the  mirror,
tliat  his  ears  were  growing  too  long,  he  cried  ** Treason  !'*  and
all  the  thousand  truths  that  now  came  crowding  to  the  door
for  examination  and  recognition,  were  pitilessly  hurled.
unheard,  from  to[>  to  bottom  of  the  staii-s,  as  'Mying,  deceit,
and  superstition/'  This  is,  indeed,  a  convenient  way  of
getting  over  the  trouble  of  a  fundametital  investigation,  but
it  is  at  the  same  time  as  one-sided  and  hastv,  as  unscientific
and  unconscientious.

Natural  science,  and  all  its  branches,  have  originally  run
tbrongb  a  period  of  obscurity  and  eiTor :  physics  were  pre-
ceded by  magic  ;  chemistry,  by  alchemy  ;  medicine,  by  the
philosopher's  stone ;  astronomy,  by  astrology,  &c. ;  philo-
sophy,  theologj%  and  jurisprudence,  have  passed  through
their  phases  of  extravagance.  Our  first  conceptions  are
always  unclear,  confused ;  hence  adapted  to  the  wonderful,
the  mysterious,  and  so  on  to  superstition  and  misuse.  But
it  does  not  follow  from  this,  that  the  enigmatic  shell  conceals
no  solid  kernel.  It  is  cjuite  in  character  with  the  matter,
and  anything  but  unexpected,  that  the  subject  of  sensitive-
ness, and  the  peculiar  force  on  wliich  it  depends,  should
have  to  go  through  such  a  period  of  infancy  in  our  notions ;
and  tlic  more  so  in  proportion  as  it  shows  itself,  on  the  one
hand,  the  less  capable  of  limitation,  and  on  the  other,  to
have  a  deeper  hold  on  the  hidden  sphere  of  the  nerves.
That  these  days  of  rudeness  should  have  endured  for  seventy
years,  is  really  rather  long  in  these  enlightened  times,  but
in  great  part  owing  to  the  almost  cinminal  naiTow-minded


X AUTHOR  8  PREVACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.

opposition  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  "  exact  sciences,"  who
have  turned  to  it,  not  only  deaf  ears,  but  even  a  kind  of
foolish  hostility.  BerzeUus,  who,  as  is  known,  accepted  my
researches  with  ardour,  has  assured  me  that  for  forty  years
he  has  always  nourished  the  desire  that  some  one  would
undertake  this  matter — which  could  not  be  groundless,
— who  would  make  it  the  subject  of  a  special  and  funda«
mental  examination,  according  to  the  present  methods  of
investigation  in  the  natural  sciences ;  and  he  rejoiced  at
last  to  have  found,  in  me,  one  who  would  make  a  rational
inquiry  into  it.  The  reason  why  this  has  been  so  long  de-
layed, why  the  groping  round  about  has  come  to  no  end,
lies  moreover  in  the  fact  that  people  so  often  begin  to  build
the  pyramid  at  the  point ;  they  would  wish  to  do  first  what
they  should  do  last — undertake  to  cure  diseases  !  Before
striving  for  the  slightest  knowledge  of  the  inner  nature  of
the  hidden  force,  they  made  a  trade  of  the  matter !  Then
somnambulists  and  clairvoyants  were  met  with,  everywhere
manifestations  of  force  at  its  maximum,  and  in  complication
with  inexplicable  exalted  conditions  of  disease.  While
struck  with  the  phenomena  on  a  large  scale,  and  feeling
unable  to  find  an  explanation  of  them,  people  neglected  to
inquire  after  the  small  beginnings,  on  which  alone  the
basis  of  a  scientific  structure  could  be  raised.  Not  from  the
lightning  and  the  thunder  have  we  gathered  the  theories  of
electricity  and  of  sound ;  not  from  the  eruption  of  volcanoes
have  we  drawn  our  knowledge  of  the  expansive  force  of
steam  ;  but  just  as  our  forefathers  fabled  about  these  natural
phenomena,  because  they  did  not  understand  them,  even  so
have  the  modem  savans  of  the  category  to  which  M.  Dubois
belongs,  talked  nonsense  about  the  so-called  animal  mag-
netism, because  they  did  not  know  it.  I  will  not  speak  of
medical  men,  but  it  is  no  better  with  the  physicists  and
physiologists ;  the  majority  of  the  former  have  rejected  all
cognizance  of  it,  because  they  cannot  understand  the  con-


:*OKD  EDITION.


*


I


nection  of  cause  and  effect ;  and  of  the  latter  because  they
wiUnot.  However,  tliis  is  iK>ttlie  path  of  the  investigation
of  nature,  and  the  offence  against  enhghtennient  is  really
greater  in  the  latter  than  the  former.  It  does  not  redound
to  the  honour  of  our  eon  temporaries  to  stand  obstinately
finn  in  that  primitive  condition  of  blind  ignorance,  and  to
refuse  to  see  at  all  how  monstrously  they  lay  themselves
open  on  this  side.

Yet  I  have  not  found  the  difficidty  of  penetrating  to  the
truth  of  these  matters  nearly  so  insurmountable  as  it  is
generally,  timidly,  asserted  to  be.  All  that  gossip  about
lies  and  deceit  is  in  reality  quite  misplaced ;  when  we  exa-
mine more  closely,  it  lies  essentially  not  in  the  sensitive,
but,  on  the  contrary,  in  the  suhjectiveness  of  the  pre-oct*u-
pied,  or  not  unfrecpiently  incompetent  inquirer.  One  must
understand  how  to  nivcstigate,  one  must  know  how  to
question  nature,  if  one  would  obtain  a  clear  and  instructive
answer ;  but  it  is  not  every  one  w^ho  can  do  this,  so  far  as
we  know.  I  nuist  say  it,  to  the  credit  of  the  mixed  popu-
lation of  Vienna,  that  among  some  hundreds  of  jiersons
whom  I  have,  up  to  this  time,  received  more  or  less  deeply
into  the  sphere  of  my  researches,  and  sixty  of  whom  are
publicly  named  iu  my  wiitings,  that  there  was  scarcely  a
single  one  who  gave  me  more  than  one  or  two  exaggerated
answers,  and  this  rather  from  misapprehension  than  from
dishonest  intention,  l>ut  which  were  iuunedialely  discovered
and  refonucd  by  mc.  From  tlie  intimate,  natural,  aiul
regular  connection  in  which  all  these  phenomena  stand  with
each  other,  the  threads  of  which  I  now  hold  siu*ely  in  my
hand,  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  continue  to  answer
me  falsely,  even  for  a  few  minutes,  without  my  at  once  de-
tecting it  None  of  these  people  think  of  lying  and  deceiv-
ing ;  lliey  simply  express  what  they  see  and  feel,  w  hen  I
react  upon  them  ;  most  of  them  evince  a  sincere  and  encou-
raging desire  to  make  as  cleax*  as  possible,  to  me,  what  they


XU  AUTHOR  8  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.

perceive  and  detect,  in  which  zeal  I  find  some  compensation
for  the  mortifications  from  parties  who  ought  rather  to  feel
that  they  have  reason  to  be  thankful  for  my  endeavours.  All
these  almost  countless  answers  to  my  questions  agree  in  every
case  so  perfectly,  that  all  reasonable  doubt  must  disappear
before  the  evidence  of  the  truth ;  and  in  this  beautiful  agree-
ment lies  the  warrant  of  their  thorough  credibihty.  When,
however,  the  inquirer  does  not  know  how  to  put  the  questions,
from  want  of  skill  how  to  manipulate  with  the  apparatus,  from
ignorance  of  the  conditions  how  to  arrange  the  experiments,
fipom  want  of  tact  to  comprehend  the  answers,  and  from
want  of  acuteness  of  understanding  how  to  discover  the  re-
lations of  the  observations  to  each  other :  then  confusion
and  perplexity  begin,  misinterpreted  results  contradict  each
other ;  and  rather  than  look  in  the  face  his  own  weakness,
and  confess  it  to  himself  and  others,  he,  a  thousand  times
sooner,  takes  the  dishonest  subterfuge  of  accusing  the  ob-
served person  of  deceit.  But  the  betrayer  of  nature  and
science  is  no  other  than  the  man  who,  from  incapacity,
has  the  rashness  and  foolishness  to  desire  to  stamp  the  truth
with  the  mark  of  a  lie.

REICHENBACH.

Castle  lleisenhergy  near  Vieptna,
February  1848.


This  work  was  already  completed  and  printed  in  the  spring
of  last  year,  but  the  occurrence  of  the  German  revolution
threw  obstacles  in  the  way  of  its  publication.  These  are
now  removed,  and  communication  is  re-established.  It  was
necessary  to  make  this  note,  in  order  to  enable  the  reader
to  understand  some  dates  which  occur  in  the  book,  and
which  could  not  be  reprinted,

R.


291


PREFACE.


It  was  objected,  that  the  five  girls  whom  I  employed
as  re-agents  in  my  foruier  reseairlirs,  wen*  iiistifficient,  where
the  (juestion  was  the  estiililishmcot  beyond  donbt  of  important
scientific  truths.  I  admitted  that  this  might  be  the  caso»
and  endeavoured  to  extend  my  investigations  over  a  greater
number  of  persons,  who  shouhl  furnish  a  great  variety  of
conditions.  In  this  way  more  than  two  years  have  passed
by,  during  which,  on  that  account,  the  present  treatise  has
ne^cessiunly  been  delayed*  Now,  however,  it  appears  with  the
support  uf  almost  sijcly  sensitive  persons,  men  and  w^omen,
mothers  and  maidens,  chiklren  and  aged  persons,  low  and
high,  poor  and  rich,  weak  and  strong,  sick  and  heaUhy,  men-
struating and  pregnant  w^omen, — a  muUiphcity  of  conditions
is  now  represented  which  can  leave  little  more  to  be  desired.
But  the  most  essential  accession  which  the  work  has  received
tlmnigli  tliese,  Hes  in  the  fact  that  pvrfecUy  healthy,  stroity
petsoHs  hm  included  in  considerable  numbers  in  the  list ;
tliat  men  who  liave  never  suffered  illness, and  who  have  parsed
thtir  lives  in  continued  hard  liotiily  labour,  have  percei\ed
the  peculiar  sensations  and  the  huuiuous  appearances  whicli
constitute  the  object  of  these  researches,  exactly  in  the  same
manner  as  young  ladies  who  pass  half  their  lives  upon  a  sofa;
that  neither  youth  nor  age,  sex  nor  position  in  hfe,  make
any  difference,  and  that  the  sensitiveness  is  not  a  diseased
condition,  but  rather  a  peculiarity  of  many  persons,  which
merely  appears  more  or  less  strongly,  or  becomes  impercep-
tible, under  various  circumslnnces.  The  subjoined  hst  will
sliow  that  even  more  tJian  half  the  persons  who  have  had
the  good  wdl  tuwards  me  and  towards  the  cause  of  science^  to


292  PREFACB.

devote  themselves  to  these  investigations,  consists  of  perfectly
healthy  individuals.  I  have  found,  to  my  great  astonish-
ment, that  the  number  of  the  sensitive  surpasses  all  expecta-
tion among  mankind  generally ;  that  a  number  of  persons,
who  are  far  from  even  suspecting  anything  of  the  kind  them-
selves, clearly  perceive  the  odic  sensations,  and  the  luminous
phenomena,  after  having  remained  a  sufficient  length  of
time  in  the  dark.  In  fact,  this  holds  now  to  such  an  extent,
that  at  present  I  scarcely  ever  require  sick  persons  for  my
experiments ;  and  it  not  only  suffices  to  employ  the  healthy,
but  I  am  nearly  in  a  position  entirely  to  exclude  the  sick,
and  especiaUy  somnambulists.  The  objection,  therefore,
that  the  observations  are  not  supported  by  sufficient  testi.
roony,  as  well  as  a  second,  that  the  evidence  of  diseased
observers  does  not  deserve  full  trust,  will  be  answered  in  the
following  pages,  and  must  henceforth  be  given  up.

As  to  the  reason  why  I  have  not  earlier  brought  forward
a  greater  nimiber  of  witnesses  for  my  observations,  I  have
already  explained  this  above,  ^  6 ;  I  have  feared  to  weary
the  reader  by  a  superabundance  of  material.  Now,  how-
ever, that  this  is  pointed  to  as  an  imperfection  of  my  work,
I  no  longer  hesitate  to  make  use  of  all  the  evidence  at  my
command,  and  thus  to  place  my  thesis  on  the  broadest
foundation ;  the  same  phenomena  will  be  seen  to  present
themselves  under  the  most  varied  circumstances,  and  the
reader  will  now  be  in  a  better  position  than  before  to  repeat
them  everywhere  and  with  facility.  For  convenience  of  re-
viewal,  I  subjoin  the

LIST  OF  NAMES  OF  THE  PERSONS

Who,  from  their  capacity  for  sensitive  perceptions,  have
supported  me  in  my  labours  by  their  co-operation  and
observations.

Mrs.  Cecilie  Bauer,  wife  of  an  inn-keeper,  No.  IGl,  Braun-
hirschengrund,  Vienna.


FHEFACE.


Miss Leopokline Rcichcl,  daugbtcr  of  a  civil officer  of

Schonbninn.
Miss  Maria  Atzinaniisdorfer.  dmigliter  of  a  military  sur-

geoii.
Miss  Angelica  Stiirmaiiu,  daughter  of  the  director  of  an  hotel.
Miss  Fmncisca  Weigand,  daughter  of  a  hatter,  No,  60,

Wiiidraiihl,  Vienna.
Friediich  Wcidiich,  naval  invalid.
Miss  Josephine  Winter,  daughter  of  a  painter  at  Gratz.
Mis8  Marie  Nowotny,  daughter  of  a  subaltern  civil  officer.
Mifls  Clementine  Girtlcr,  daughter  of  a  merchant.
Mrs.  Francisca  Kienesberger,  wife  of  a  steward  of  a  manor.
Mrs,  Johanna  Lederer,  widow  of  a  government  otlicinl.
Miss  Maria  Maix,  daughter  of  an  official,  No.  200,  Koklmai*kt,

Vienna.
Miss  Josepha  Zinkel,  daughter  of  a  hoiuieholdcr  at  Nutzdorf,

neur  Vienna.
Baron  August  von  Oberlander,  at  Schebetau,  in  Moravia*
Mr.  Niculaus  Rabe,  goveniment  official  of  the  Montun  ex-
chequer.
Miss  Amalic  KrUger,  daughter  of  the  superintendent  of

an  hotel,  No.  27,  in  the  Leojjoldstadt,  Vienna.
Miss  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  daughter  of  an  innkeeper  at  Boch-

titz,  in  Momvia.
Alois  Baicr,  tradesman  in  Vienna,
Mrs.  Johanna  Anschutz,  wife  of  M.  Gustav  Anschiitz.
Dr.  Nied,  physician  in  practice,  No,  390,  Erdberg,  Vienna.
Mr  Sebastian  Zinkel,  householder  in  Nussdorf,  near  Vienna.
Rliss  Johanna  Kyuast,  daughter  of  a  baker,  of  Waidhofen,  in

Austria.
Miss  Leopokline  Atzniannsdortbr,  called  Dorfer,  daughter  of

a  military  surgeon.
Mrs.  von  Peichich-Zirnanyi,  widow  of  a  Hungarian  noble.
Johann  Klaiber,  joiner,  in  my  service.
Miss  Wilhehniuc  von  Wcigelsberg,  No.  451  .Wicden,  Vienna.


294  PREFACE.

Baroness  Maria  von  Augiistin,  wife  of  Baron  von  Augiistin,

major  in  the  Imperial  service.
Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  daughter  of  the  Consistorial  Counsellor

Pauer,  Vienna.
Professor  Dr.  Stephan  Endlicher,  Director  of  the  Imperial

Botanic  Garden,  member  of  the  Vienna  Academy.
Mr.  Franz  Femolendt,  chemical  manufacturer  in  Vienna.
Anka  Hetmanek,  field  labourer  on  my  estate,  Reisenberg.
Miss  Ernestine  Anschiitz,  and  her  brother,
Mr.  Gustav.  Anschiitz,  artist,  No. 268,  Ferdinandsgasse,
Wieden,  Vienna.
Mr.  Stephan  KoUar,  junior.
Friedrich  Bollmann,  cabinet-maker,  (blind).
Mrs.  Josephine  Fenzl,  wife  of  Dr.  Fenzl,  curator  in  the  Im-
perial Museum.
Mrs.  von  Varady,  wife  of  the  Aulic  Counsellor  von  Varady.
Mr.  Johann  Studer,  agricidturist,  of  Ziirich.
Baroness  Pauline  von  Natorp,  wife  of  Baron  Natorp,  Vienna.
Chevalier  Hubert  von  Rainer,  barrister  of  Klagenfurth.
Mr.  Ernst  Pauer,  Consistorial  Counsellor,  and  superintendant

of  the  Evangelical  Commimion  in  Vienna.
Mr.  Wilhelm  Hochstetter,  of  Esslingen,  gardener  at  Schon-

brunn.
Baroness  Isabella  von  Tesscdik,  widow  of  a  Hungarian  noble

and  court  secretary.
Mr.  Demeter  Tirka,  merchant  in  Vienna,  (a  Greek).
Miss  Elise  von  Seckendorf,  at  Sondershausen,  Saxony.
Mr.  Constantine  Delhez,  philologist,  Vienna,  (from  Belgium.)
Mr.  Theodore  Kotschy,  the  well-known  traveller  in  Africa,

Persia,  &c.
Maximilian  Kriiger,  orphan  from  the  Asylum,  Vienna.
Ilermine  Fenzl,  infant  daughter  of  Dr.  Fenzl.
Mr.  Karl  Schuh,  physicist,  from  Berlin.
Dr.  Friedrich,  from  Munich.
Dr.  Rngsky,  professor  of  chemistry  in  Vienna.


PREFACE.


295


Mr.  Matliius  Mauch,  veterinary  surgeon,  from  Wirteinbiirg.

Professor  Russner,  imperial  counsellor  at  the  Academy  of
Fine  Arts,  Vienna.

Mr,  Edward  Hiitter,  bookseller  in  Vienna.

Mr,  Franz  Ki^atochwila,  government  otticiaL

Mr.  Franz  Kollar,  curator  in  the  Imperial  Natural  History
Museum.

Miiis  Susunnu  Nather,  daughter,  of  an  ullicer  of  Basle,  now
in  A^ienna.

Pmfessor  Dr.  Ilnss,  physician  in  ordinary  to  the  King  of
Sweden,  Stockholm,

My  daughter  llermine.

Dr.  Diesuig,  Ciuntor  in  the  Imperial  NutiU'al  History  Mu-
seum.


Almost  all  these  persons  are  in  Vienna,  and  may  at  any
time  l>e  (piestioned  or  lieurd.  The  urder  in  which  they  are
here  enumerated,  corresponds  pretty  nearly  to  a  decreasing

lie  of  the  intensity  of  their  sensitive  irritability.

278.  In  the  first  plac^e  I  have  to  premise  a  word  or  two
upon  another  subject.  In  the  w  hole  course  of  the  preceding
seven  treatises,  I  have  everywhere  (^^  34,  225,  &c.)  assumed
the  north  pole  of  the  earth  to  be  positively  magnetic,  and
the  south  pole  of  om*  planet  negative,  and  considered  all
other  polarities,  of  steel  bars,  crj^stals,  living  organs,  &c.,  in
accordance  with  this  prc-supposition.  Since  physicists  are
not  agreed  which  of  the  two  poles  of  the  earth  and  the
magnet  to  regard  as  positive  and  negative,  and  the  text-
books are  either  wholly  silent  on  this  head  {liiot,  PouUlrl^
Mulhr,  fiaumf/artner,  and  others),  or  directly  contradict
one  another  {Eiscnhhr,  Physics,  3rd  edit,  p,  4GI ;  Eychtm,
Electricity  and  Magnetism,  p.  152),  one  calling  +  M  what
tiie  utlier  sets  forth  as  -  M,  and  since  uncertainty  thus
prevails  over  the  value  of  both  powers,  it  a|)[>eai*s  necessary


296  PRKFACE.

that  I  should  briefly  explain  the  reasons  which  determined
me  in  my  choice.

In  the  electro-chemical  system  which  BerzeUus  introduced
into  natural  science,  and  thereby  gave  its present form
to  chemistry,  the  voltaic  zinc  and  copper  pile  is,  it  is  well
known,  taken  as  the  basis,  and  the  electricity  of  the  zinc
pole  is  regarded  as  positive,  because  it  agrees  in  its  pro-
perties with  those  which  glass  rubbed  with  zinc  amalgam
presents,  and  which  have  been  called  positive. It  is  further
agreed  to  consider  all  those  bodies,  which  collect  in  pre-
ference around  the  positive  pole,  in  the  voltaic  current,  as
electro-negative,  and  vice  versd. With  this  clue,  I  have
endeavoured  to  investigate  the  odic  properties  which  present
themselves,  on  the  one  hand  in  the  electro-negative,  and  on
the  other  in  the  electro-positive  bodies. Tlie  great,  strongly
expressed  odic  distinctions  between  the  two,  as  I  have  made
them  out  and  detailed  them  in  the  preceding  treatises,  I
have  again  perceived  in  a  similar  manner  at  the  poles  of
crystals,  in  organic  beings,  in  magnets,  &c. A  parallel  has.
thus  been  distinctly  evolved,  to  be  drawn  between  certain
properties  of  one  pole  of  these  natural  objects,  and  those  of
the  other. Those,  therefore,  which  are  parallel  to  the  pro-
perties of  the  electro-negative  bodies,  I  have  assumed  to  be
equivalent  with  these  as  to  their  jjolar  value,  and  called
od-negative,  and  vice  versd. That  pole  of  our  magnetic
needles  which  turns  to  the  south,  and  which  I  have  every-
where denominated  the  southward  pole,  is  the  one  which
in  odic  respects  produces  the  same  reactions  as  the  electro-
positive bodies. This,  however,  is  the  magnetism  of  the
north  pole  of  the  earth. Under  the  general  hypothesis,
therefore,  that  in  the  electro-chemical  series,  the  metalloids
are  actually  negatively  electrical, — most  metals,  on  the  other
hand,  positively  electrical, — I  have  been  compelled  to  decide
in  favour  of  those  who  regard  the  north  pole  of  the  earth  as
positively  magnetic,  to  indicate  it  as  +  M,  and  consequently


297


to  mark  all  analogous  odic  properties  with  +  Od*  In  like
tiianncr  I  have  necessarily  assumed  tlie  south  pole  of  the
cfirth  to  be  negatively  magnetic,  indicated  it  l>y  —  M,  and
called  tlic  odic  phenomena  going  parallel  with  it  —  Od.

Although  I  have  declared  for  the  electro-chemical  thef>ry
now  prevailing  in  my  judgment  as  to  the  nature  of  the
magnetic  poles,  and  have  deduced  their  value  by  conclusions
from  tliii*,  I  am  jjcrfcctly  aware  that  the  polar  signitieation
of  natural  bodies  is  still  an  unsettled  subject,  that  doubts
may  be  urged  against  the  negativcness  of  the  acids  and  tho
|K>sitivencss  of  the  alkalies  when  we  see  the  two  iji  ccmtact
polariised  in  a  tlirectly  opposite  manner,  &c. ;  in  the  coiu^c
of  my  iuvestigations  also  I  have  in  many  [ikiccs  perceive*!
obstacles  to  it ;  but  I  have  submitted  to  the  gencmlly  re-
ceived opinion,  and  in  compUance  with  this  the  north  puhi
of  the  glubc  must  be  calletl  jiositive  and  tlie  s^juth  |)oIe  ne-
gative, so  long  as  j)otassiuni  is  ackntiwlcdged  to  Ik;  positive
and  oxygen  negative.  If,  as  is  not  altogether  im[»os8ib]e,
this  should  ever  be  altered,  it  will  be  necessai-y  to  revci'se
the  signs  throughout  my  work.

27U.  -1  ihird  and  last  subject  on  wliieh  some  prelimi-
nary remaiks  arc  retiuisite,  is  the  nord  Od,  There  is  evi-
dently a  tolcralile  pmbability  that  the  definition  of  it  1  have
bid  down  at  §  215  includes  that  which  Dr.  Faraday  ii
year  later  introduced  to  the  scientific  public  as  a  new  iiia-
terial  force,  imder  the  name  of  cUamagnetism.  The  BriLi.sh
physicist  was  doulitless  unaware  of  my  researches,  whieh
have  appeared  in  an  English  translation  in  London,  or  he
probably  woidd  not  have  ignored  them.  Uiuler  the  defini-
tion uf  the  word  Od  1  have  comprehended  the  final  causes
of  all  the  phenomena  described  by  me,  in  so  far  as  they
have  been  found  urreconcileable  with  our  previous  know-
ledge of  the  natui*e  of  the  magnet  and  the  other  dynaniies,
and  arc  in  particular  capable  of  being  cxtemlfd  from  mag-
uetic  bodies  to  the  so-called  uoii-magnetic,  to  metuH  ijlaj^s.


298  PREFACE.

silk>  water,  salts,  and  all  the  rest.  Diamagnetism  was,
indeed,  discovered  and  made  known  twenty  years  ago  by
Seebeck,  Munke,  Buchner,  and  Becquerel,  which  was  also
unknown  to  Dr.  Faraday ;  and  I  have  not  met  in  my
labours  with  the  transverse  position  of  freely  moving  non-
magnetic bodies  in  i*egard  to  the  magnetic  current,  and  for
the  present  a  gap  remains  between  the  subjects  of  our
labours ;  at  the  same  time  it  is  in  my  opinion  not  impossible
that  we  are  both  journeying  toward  the  same  point,  only  by
different  roads.  If  I  am  not  deceived  by  appearances,  Dr.
Faraday  has  seized  one  of  the  many  odic  threads,  one  in  all
cases  favourable,  and  will  help  onward  the  question  with
the  force  of  his  fertile  talent.  This  cannot  be  otherwise
than  advantageous  to  the  progress  of  science.  Whether
magnetism,  diamagnetism,  and  Od,  shall  one  day  prove
identical,  or  solid  distinctions  shall  remain  between  them,
is  a  question  of  which  the  solution  appears  to  me  to  lie  at
present  at  a  considerable  distance.  In  any  case  they  col-
lectively include  totally  new  qualities  of  all  dead  and  living
matter,  and  from  their  generality  and  all-pervadence  through-
out the  universe,  are  of  the  highest  physical  importance.

Since  the  interest  of  the  subject  will  be  increased  by  the
clearness  and  distinctness  of  the  definitions,  /.  e.  by  the
settlement  of  the  extent  of  their  compass  and  the  determina-
tion of  the  boundaries  of  their  component  parts,  I  think  it
opportune  to  insert  here  a  condensed  sketch  of  the  dis-
tinctions which  appear  to  me  to  hold  between  the  now
established  allied  dynamics,  and  that  for  which  I  liave  found
it  necessary  to  propose  the  term  Od.  In  this  manner,  on  the
one  hand,  what  I  regard  as  the  pecuUarities  of  this  will  appear
better  exhibited  than  they  have  been  hitherto,  while  on  the
other  it  will  be  more  clearly  seen,  whether  and  what  hope
exists  of  bringing  the  new  phenomena  enumerated  into
already  known  categories,  and  thus  eventually  rendering
the  new  word  superfluous,  or,  whether  the  necessity  of


DI8TTNCTI0NS  FROM  RRAT:


estalilisliiiig  mnl  maintaining  it  is  inevitable.  Tlie  distinc-
tions,— so  far,  namely,  as  they  have  been  made  known  in  my
earlier,  and  will  be  detailed  in  the  present  and  future  publi-
cations, — are  as  follows  : —


A.^ DISTINCTIONS  FEOM  HEAT.

n.  Odic  emanations  canse  feelings  of  eold  and  warmth
in  all  the  sensitive, — indeed  sometimes  produce  icy  cold  and*
bnrning  heat ;  that  is  to  say,  excite  sensations  stH*mhtf/hf  hke
these.  But  when  they  are  dii-e^ted  upon  the  tliermometer,
they  have  not  the  slightest  influence  upon  it ;  even  Nobih's
thernioscopc  remains  motionless.  Neither  the  cold-givinjT
nor  heat-exciting  pole  of  a  crystal  affects  this  instrument  in
the  least*

6,  Many  cases  occur  in  which  heat  and  Od  cause  dia-
metrical ly  opposite  effects.  A  right  hand  produces  a  feeling
of  cold  in  the  sensitive  ;  but  it  has  always  a  reverse,  heating
eftecl,  npon  a  delicate  thernioscope-  The  rays  of  the  snn
produce  a  feeling  of  cold  in  the  sensitive ;  on  the  contrary,
they  warm  the  thermometer  Moonhght  is  felt  distinctly
warm  ;  but  not  indicated  perceptibly  by  the  thcrniosw|>e.
Cilowing  chareoab  flame  of  burning  bodies  of  all  kinds,
radiate  a  renuirkablc  degree  of  cold  to  sensitive  ncrv  es  :  the
tlicrmometer,  on  the  contrarv,  exhibits  the  effect  of  heatincj
rays.  Chemical  combinations  give  rise  to  sensations  of
cold,  while  liberation  of  heat  is  often  indicated  by  the  ther-
raoscope.

r.  The  conductibility  of  Od  by  metals  surpasses  all  the
limits  of  the  conductibility  of  heat,  A  copper  wii-e  of  con-
siderable length,  more  than  sixty  feet,  charged  odically  at
one  end,  delivered  variations  of  odic  sensation  at  the  other.
A  wooden  rod  did  the  same,  also  a  glass  rod,  a  silk  ribbon,
a  strip  of  linen  or  cotton  cloth  many  yards  long ;  bodies
which  are  far  from  being  capable  of  conducting  heat  in
this  manner.


300  BISTINCnOKS  FROM  HEAT.

d.  Od  penetrates  very  readily  through  solid  bodies :  the
sensitive  feel  a  crystal^  a  man,  or  a  magnet,  behind  thick
walls,  in  a  few  seconds,  without  being  aware  of  their  pre-
sence :  the  greatest  heat  requires  many  hours  before  it
begins  to  be  even  perceptible  on  the  other  side.  No  one
feels  the  sun*s  rays  through  a  wall,  least  of  all  in  cooling ;
but  the  sensitive  distinguish  in  a  moment,  inside  a  building,
a  wall  on  which  the  sun  is  shining,  from  another  which  is
in  the  shade.

€.  C!oncentrated  odic  rays  are  felt  by  the  exceedingly
sensitive  at  incredible  distances ;  magnets,  poles  of  crystals,
human  hands,  and  trees,  at  distances  of  more  than  a  hun-
dred yards ;  weak  rays  of  heat,  proceedhig  fix)m  bodies  at
the  common  temperature  of  the  air,  are  not  indicated  by
any  instrument  at  such  distances,  and  the  sensitive  perceive
the  latter  just  as  little.

f.  Neither  odic  heat  nor  odic  cold  alter  the  density  or
volume  of  bodies.  Even  a  thermometer  may  be  perfectly
charged  odically,  positively  warm  or  negatively  cold,  and
the  index  will  not  alter  in  the  least.  Every  one  knows  the
effect  of  heat  upon  a  thermometer.

ff.  We  know  already  that  great  distinctions  df  odic  con-
dition exist  between  the  different  colours  of  the  luminous
spectrum,  and  we  shall  become  more  minutely  acquainted
with  them  in  this  and  the  succeeding  treatises ;  but  when  I
caused  the  rays  of  the  sun,  moon,  or  fire,  to  fall  at  less  than
thirty-five  degrees  upon  a  ten-fold  glass  disk,  and  decom-
posed the  transmitted  Ught  into  an  iris  with  the  prism,  the
even  tolerably  sensitive  all  felt  very  great  differences  of
temperature  between  the  different  colours;  thus  in  places
where,  as  far  as  we  know,  no  trace  of  free  positive  or  nega-
tive heat  can  reach.

h.  MetaUic  wires,  which  appear  to  the  sensitive  to  glow
odically,  remain  quite  at  the  surrounding  temperature  to
common  sensation  and  the  thermoscope.


mSTTKCTTONS  FROM  ELECTRiriTT.


301


t.  When  of  two  glassy  of  water,  one  was  left  in  the
shade,  the  other  exposed  for  a  few  minutes  to  the  sun's
rays,  every  sensitive  person  distinguished  that  which  had
been  subjeeted  to  the  warm  rays  as  cooler. §  105.

k\  Further  than  this ;  a  porcelain  rod  heated  directly
over  the  fire  at  one  end,  as  well  as  a  Hghted  stick  of  wood,
were  held  in  the  hand  by  the  other  ends  ;  they  were  felt  to
become  much  cooler  by  the  sensitive.  I  shall  detail  this
more  minutely  hereafter.

Heatj  therefore,  is,  under  given  ch-cumstances,  a  means  of
odic  couluig.  And  therefore  heat  must  be  Jundumefitally
different /ram  Od,


1&, — DISTINCTIONS  FROM  ELECTRICITY.

Odic  phenomena  very  often  occur  where  clectrial  pheno-
mena either  do  not  exhibit  outward  manifestations,  or,  as
far  as  we  know,  do  not  at  all  exist.  Under  this  head
belong  sun-light,  moondight,  sjxjctra  of  hglit  transmitted
through  ten  glass  plates,  crystals,  hands,  and  in  part,  also,
chemical  processes,  &c,

a.  Od  is  distributed  throughout  the  mass  of  matter;
a  hollow  metallic  sphere  is  seen  to  be  per\^aded  with
light  internally  as  well  as  externally.  A  glass  of  water
tastes  odized  tbroughuut  its  mass;  even  when  poiu^d
into  another  vessel,  (^  107)  it  remains  wholly  odic;  free
electricity  lies  only  on  the  surface  of  bodies.  Od  may
l>e  tmnsported  in  the  inside  of  a  chamber  on  to  all
objects,  even  to  the  air,  for  some  tune.  Dr.  Faraday  could
not  accumulate  electricity  anywhere  in  a  chamber  especially
prepared  for  the  purpose ;  it  all  escaped  immediately  over
the  surface  of  it.

h.  When  free  Od  is  accumulated  in  a  body,  it  is  retained
in  it  in  such  a  manner  that  it  cannot  readily  l>e  removed
from  it;  but  some  time — a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  an  hour —
is  required  before  it  disappears  again  by  contact  with  other


802  DISTINCTIONS  FROM  ELKCTRICITT.

bodies;  free  electricity  is  immediately  conveyed  away  by
contact  from  any  charged  body.

c.  Od  may  be  transmitted  to  unisolated  bodies,  and  accu-
mulated in  them  to  a  certain  extent.  Electricity  can  be
conveyed  and  condensed  only  upon  isolated,  by  no  means
upon  unisolated  bodies.

d.  All  bodies  which  possess  merely  continuity  are  almost
equally  good  conductors  of  Od;  the  incoherent  are  only
somewhat  worse:  electricity  is  only  conducted  by  metals
well ;  by  many  other  bodies,  badly ;  by  some,  not  at  all.  The
transmission  of  Od  in  the  best  conductors,  as  in  metallic
wires,  goes  on  slowly — twenty  to  forty  seconds  are  required
for  a  wire  fifty  yards  long ;  electricity  traverses  a  milUon
times  longer  spaces  in  immeasurably  shorter  time.

€.  PermeabiUty  by  Od  is  a  character  of  all  bodies  ;  slight
distinctions  do  occur  in  this  respect  among  difierent  bodies ;
but  they  are  of  little  importance.  Electricity,  on  the  other
hand,  is  arrested  by  a  great  many  bodies,  which  are  almost
incapable  of  being  penetrated  by  it,  and  oppose  insuperable
obstacles  to  its  course.

/  The  action  of  electricity  upon  Od  takes  place  at  much
greater  distances,  and  more  strongly,  than  that  of  electricity
upon  electricity.  A  weak  electrical  charge  from  a  spark  of
one-fifth  of  an  inch,  produces  an  active  odic  current  in  a
metalUc  wire  at  a  distance  of  two  yards,  (^  169)  where  a
conductor  would  no  longer  produce  any  observable  distribu-
tion to  the  other.

ff.  The  excitement  of  Od  by  electricity  does  not  follow
instantaneously,  but  always  requires  an  appreciable  time —
often  thirty  seconds  or  more.  This  holds  both  in  the  pro-
duction of  sensations  and  of  light.  A  resinous  elcctro-
phorus  is  electrical  long  before  the  odic  flame  becomes  visible
on  it.  An  electrified  and  a  galvanized  wire  only  begin  to
glow  odically  after  the  ciu-rcnt  has  continued  to  flow  for
some  time  through  them,  or  after  the  Leyden  jar  discharge


DtSTINCTIONS  TKOM  ELICTRTCITT.


303


has  passed  some  seconds.  In  a  Schweigger's  multiplier,
the  odic  light  did  not  appear  for  ten  to  fifteen  seconds  after
the  deflection  of  the  needle :  all  manifestations  and  effects  of
electricity  are  instautaneons.

h.  The  duration  of  odic  phenomena,  on  the  other  liand^
is  incomparably  longer  than  that  of  electrical  transmissions.
When  a  wire  rendered  odically  incandescent  in  the  electrical
way  is  brought  out  of  the  current,  its  lumhiosity  endures  for
half  or  a  whole  minute, — imy,  after  strong  dischtirge  of  a  Ley-
den  jar,  two  minutes,  and  then  slowly  dies  away.  In  the  mnl-
tipher,  the  magnetic  needle  returns  fi-om  its  divergence  back
into  the  meridian,  a  long  time  l>efore  the  cod  of  \sire  ceases
to  emit  odic  light.  Certain  flaming  odic  plienomena  in
conductors,  metal  plates,  or  wire  communicators,  do  not  all
begin  at  once,  when  electrified,  at  the  moment  of  receiving
their  maximum  electric  charge,  but  after  the  escape  has
continued  for  some  time  ;  when  the  supply  ceases,  the  odic
phenoniet\a  disappear  but  gradually  and  slowly,  even  from
unisolatcd  conductors;  their  odic  condition,  however,  en*
dm^s  for  the  sensitive  in  many  cases  —  for  instance,  in
water,  persons,  &c. — for  an  hour,

i\  But  cases  of  the  reverse  kind  also  occm*,  in  which
odic  liglit  disappears  sooner  than  the  excited  electricity  ;  an
electrophorus  loses  iii  odic  luminosity  after  the  rubbing  with
fur,  after  a  few — *perhaps  ten— minutes  have  elapsed ;  while
the  electrical  charge  of  the  cake  lasts  for  days  and  weeks.
It  follows  from  tliis,  that  Od  is  indeed  excited  by  every
electrical  action,  but  then  takes  its  own  independent  course.

At.  Many  flaming  odic  appearances  exhibit  a  constant
tendency  upwards,  and  ascend  vertically  :  electricity  does
not  manifest  any  such  tendency,  either  when  in  motion  or
at  rest.

/.  Appearances  of  odic  light  of  great  size  appearing  over
nnisijlatcd  electrified  metal  plates,  do  not  adhere  to  the
metal,  but  flow  over  it,  like  the  aurora  over  the  earth  :


804


ISTmCTTOKS  FROM  ELECTRIC!


electric  currents  always  remain  close  upon  the  metal,  wher-
ever it  comes  in  their  way.  The  experiments  affording  this
nxiom  wiU  be  given  in  the  next  treatise.

m.  Eflkiences  of  Od  are  not  exchisively  confined  to
points  where  these  are  at  hand,  but  rise  out  of  the  sides  even
of  toothed  bodies ;  this  is  the  case  even  in  large  crystals.
In  similar  cases,  electricity  never  flows  but  from  the  [wints.
In  the  hydro-electric  chain,  all  the  elements  diffuse  light
ami  sensations  of  Od :  in  its  electric  currents,  we  are  only
aware  of  the  internal  activity  and  complete  circumscriptiou
of  the  electric  circuit  when  the  eliain  is  closed,

n.  Odic  ciu^rents  exhibit  a  remarkatile  degree  of  inde-
pendence of  electricity,  even  when  excited  by  that  agent ;
the  isolated  metal  plates  on  which  the  two  appear  togethex
may  be  grasped  in  the  hand,  or  electrified  wires  ffiay  be
allowed  to  lie  loosely  and  touch  the  ground,  without  altera-
tion of  the  streams  of  odic  light,  while  the  electric  currents
are  thereby  diverted  in  totally  cUfferent  du*ections,

o.  Odic  flames,  from  whatsoever  bodies  they  issue,  posi-
tive or  negative,  exhibit  no  tendency  to  unite  or  neutralize
each  other  when  approximated ;  when  they  cross,  they  go
on  together ;  when  they  are  brought  into  diametrical  oppo-
sition, they  repulse  one  another*  (See  infra,  ^  401.)  Unlike
electricities  neutralize  each  other  with  violent  attraction,

p.  Influence  and  induction,  which  produce  such  rcniark-
able  efleets  in  electricity,  I  have  hitherto  never  been  able  to
detect  with  certainty  in  ocUc  phenomena.

q.  Electrical  tourmaline,  like  every  other  ciystid,  vividly
excites  the  sensitive  with  its  poles ;  but  is  not  altered  by
warming,  does  not  become  stronger,  and  the  electricity
thereby  excited  is  nut  perceptibly  felt.

r.  Perhaps  the  most  striking  thing  is  the  contrast  between
the  violent  effect  of  the  Od  upon  the  excitabiUty  of  sensitive
persons,  and  the  insensibility  which  the  same  sliow  to  clec-
triea,!  eflects,  and  wliicli  is  such  that  even  the  highly  sensitive


I


4


DISTINCTION  FROM  MAONETTSM.


305


do  not  feel  them  more  than  the  healthy.  Hydro-electrical
aijil  frictional  electrical  currents,  or  the  dischurge  of  the
Lcydcn  jar,  are  l)ome  by  them  as  easily  as  liy  any  other
j>erson.  Stroking  a  cat,  the  approfich  of  a  thundcrstonii,  the
tricks  [>layed  with  an  isolating  stool,  arc  agreeable  to  many
of  them.

All  this  manifests  ihai  the  yap  whivh  separates  Od  from
eUxtricity  is  very  yreat.


C, — DISTINCTION  FROM  MAGNETISM.

Od  is  formed,  or  manifested  vividly,  in  a  number  of  cases
in  which  magnetism  never  gives  evidence  of  it.s  presence,  or
is  yet  unknown  to  us ;  in  many  chemical  processes,  in
vitality»  in  crystals,  in  friction,  in  the  spectra  of  sun,  moon,
and  candledight,  in  polarized  light,  and  in  the  amorphous
material  world  in  general,

a.  Development  of  Od  occurs  independently  and  without
magnetism  in  the  majority  of  cases :  magnetism  never  occui's
alone,  but  always  associated  with  Od,

Ik  In  things  w^hcrc  magnetism  appears  to  give  token  of
its  presence,  but  as  yet  is  not  iucontestibly  admitted  by
science  to  reside,  as  in  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  in  moonlight,
it  is  manifested  in  a  so  extremely  weak  degree,  that  its  pre-
sence is  still  highly  doubtful ;  but  in  these  very  cases  Od
appears  with  a  force  and  a  variety  of  cSects  wliirli  are  quite
astonisliing,  and  seems  capable,  in  particular  instances,  of
shaking  the  very  foundations  of  life,

e.  The  interposition  of  a  mist  or  cloud  before  the  light  of
the  sun  or  moon  at  once  weakens  their  effects  upon  the
sensitive  \cTy  considerably  ;  magnetism  is  not  restrained  by
anything — least  of  all  by  vapour,

rf.  The  transfer  of  Od  may  be  effected  in  an  exactly  homo-
logous manner  upon  all  solid  and  ffuid  matter;  metals,
steel,  salts,  glass,  milk,  rcsiu,  water,  may  all,  with  shght
distinctions,  be  charged  with  Od; magnetism  can  oidy


306  DISTINCTION  FROM  MAGNETISM.

be  conveyed  to  a  certain  few  bodies;  nothing,  however,
is  yet  known  concerning  the  transferability  of  diamag-
netism.

e.  When  things  of  that  kind  are  charged  with  Od,  they
react  upon  the  sensitive  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  the
magnet :  but  not  the  least  perceptible  trace  of  magnetism
resides  in  them  ;  iron  is  not  attracted,  even  in  the  shape  of
filings,  &c.

f.  The  coercive  power  over  Od  has  been  observed  in
steel  for  at  most  something  under  an  hour ;  therefore  not  for
much  longer  than  in  water,  iron,  &c.  But  for  magnetism,
it  is  enduring  for  many  years,  while  it  is  quite  indiscernible
in  water,  iron,  &c.  Thus  magnetism  remains  in  steel ;  Od
cannot  persist  in  it  by  itself,  but  disappears.

g.  Od  is  also  conductible  by  substances  like  resin,  glass,
wood,  silk  strings,  cotton  bands,  &c.,  to  the  distance  of
many  yards. We  know  of  nothing  similar  in  the  magnet.

h,  Od  may  be  conducted  many  yards  on  a  long  iron  wire,
and  made  perceptible  to  the  sensitive  (^  47, 118) :  an  iron
wire  about  sixteen  yards  long  and  one-twelfth  of  an  inch
thick,  stretched  in  the  parallels,  and  put  in  contact  with
the  northward  pole  of  a  nine-layer  horse-shoe  magnet,
did  not  exhibit  to  me,  at  the  other  end,  any  trace  of  mag-
netic reaction.

I.  The  distance  of  action  for  Od  of  the  diffusing  bodies —
such  as  hands,  crystals,  or  electrified  bodies,  reaches  at
least  as  far  as  with  magnetic  bars  of  the  same  size;  in
many  cases  farther.  I  have  tested  and  compared  both  to  a
distance  of  160  feet  tlux)ugh  the  air.  We  know  of  nothing
at  all  like  this,  in  regard  to  distances  of  effective  action  of
such  magnets  in  exerting  magnetic  influences.

k.  Emanations  of  Od  are  found  to  be  subject  to  a  kind
of  refraction,  at  least  certainly  in  the  cases  in  which
they  are  accompanied  by  rays  of  hght.  I  have  abready
shown,  and  in  a  subsequent  treatise  shall make  known


BtSTINCTTON  PROM  MAGNETISM,


801


many  new,  certainly  very  remarkable  obser\ations,  in
which  I  have  found  that  while  a  glass  prism  separates
colours,  it  also  produces  similar  divisions  in  Od,  which,  with
the  rays  of  light,  is  subject  to  refraction  by  the  glass.  And
since  it  so  completely  accotnpanies  Hght,  that  in  each  colour
of  the  spectnim  appears  a  different  (if  I  may  so  express  myself)
odic  colour,  it  is  clear  that  tlie  rays  of  Od  are  refracted  sinml*
taneously  and  exactly  with  the  rays  of  light;  consequently,
that  odic  emanations,  whatever  they  consist  of,  are  refran-
gible by  glass,  like  the  rays  of  light.  Bnt  this  property  is
wholly  wanting  in  magnetism,  which  is  not  arrested  by
anything,  and  cannot  be  deflected,  as  Haldat  has  recently
shown  ns  convincingly  by  means  of  his  magnetic  measuring
instniment.  He  expressly  asserts  that  emissions  of  mag-
netism from  bodies  are  neither  refracted  nor  reflected.
(LImiiluf,  May  27, 1846,  p.  647.)

L  The  distribution  of  Od  in  bodies  is  demonstrated,  for
example,  in  water,  to  be  effected  throughout  the  mass .
magnetised  water  may  be  poured  from  one  glass  into
another,  and  when  dnuik  is  found  to  be  all  eqnally  strongly
odized  up  to  the  last  drops ;  odically  luminous  metals  appear
to  be  translncid,  and  to  glow  through  and  through ;  odized
hollow  spheres  manifest  strong  expressions  of  odic  action  in
their  interior;  but  magnetism,  accoHing  to  Barlow's  re-
searches, is  restricted  exclnsively  to  the  siuface  of  bodies

m.  It  is  found,  and  will  be  explained  at  length  hereafter,
that  Od  diffuses  around  itself  spherical  zones  of  alternating
opposed  polarities,  similar  to  electricity :  nothing  of  this
kind  has  ever  been  observed  in  the  magnet.

n.  Od  has  no  attraction  for,  or  power  of  snpporting  iron,
not  even  the  smallest  filing.  The  most  striking  effect  of  the
magnet  consists  in  this  very  mighty  power.  But  in  regard
to  odic  capabilities,  crjstals  and  hands  of  equal  size  with  the
magnet  are  not  only  efjual  to  it,  but  frequently  surpass  it  in
strength,  especially  the  hitter.


308


BI8TINCTTON  FTtOM  MAGNUTISM.


0.  Suspended  odic  bodies  do  not  acquire  any  particular
direction  from  the  influence  of  terrestrial  magnetism ;  but
it  turns  magnetic  bodies  into  the  meridian,  &c.

p.  In  the  inorganic  kingdom,  the  flames  of  the  Od-poles
exhibit  no  measurable  attraction  toward  each  other ;  poles
of  magnets,  however,  and  their  hues  of  force,  reciprocally,
the  most  powerfiil.  The  odic  flames,  even  when  they  blaze
forth  side  by  side  from  the  poles  of  a  horse-shoe  magnet.
display  no  attraction ;  nay,  even  when  the  unlike  polar
flames  are  directed  immediately  toward  one  another,  not
only  are  they  not  attracted  when  brought  close,  but  are
even  mutually  repelled  at  the  places  where  they  are  forced
to  meet.  This  is  directly  contradictory  to  all  we  know  of
magnetism.

q.  When  the  two  arms  of  a  horse-shoe  magnet  are  both
placed  in  a  horixoutal  direction,  the  odic  flame  also  flows
straight  out  from  them,  but  it  then  ascends  upwards  in  an
arc  from  both  poles :  no  such  tendency  has  ever  been  per-
ceived in  magnetism.

r.  A  certain  amount  of  odic  flame  still  flows  from  the
magnetic  poles  of  a  horse-shoe  (vide  infra,  ^458)  after  the
poles  have  been  long  rendered  magnetically  indifferent  ex-
ternally, by  the  application  of  the  armatio'e  :  the  magnetic
efflux  is  stopped,  but  the  odic  persists  still,  althongh
weakened.

s.  Even  when  two  strong  imhke  magnetic  poles  are
joined,  §  401,  402,  404,  405,  retain  and  neutralize  each
other,  an  emanation  of  odic  flames  nevertheless  persists  un-
interruptedly, although  rendered  weaker.

/.  Magnets  brought  into  the  electrical  atmosphere  of  the
conductor  may  have  their  odic  polarity  reversed,  while  the
magnetic  remains  quite  unaUered,  Electricity  thus  exerts
a  power  over  the  former,  which  it  in  no  case  possesses
over  the  latter. (Vide  infra,  ^  373,  4360

II.  The  appearance  of  Od  and  that  of  magnetism  ne^^er


DrSTTNCTION  FROM  MAONRTrSM.


309


occur  simultaneously  in  their  production  When  a  galvanic
current  acts  upon  a  niuUiplicr  or  a  rotating  apparatus,  the
reaction  on  the  magnetic  bar  is  instantaneous:  the  odic
luminosity  and  the  effects  Ujwn  the  sense  of  feehng  do  not
appear  until  after  the  lapse  of  several  seconds,  and  tlie  more
slowly  and  later,  the  longer  the  conducting  wires  are.  The
same  is  the  case  with  the  cessation  ;  the  magnetic  reaction
ceases  immediately  on  the  interniption  of  tlie  galvanic
current,  but  the  odic  effects  last  a  good  while  longer.

t\  WTien  a  crystal,  a  finger,  or  a  rod  dipping  in  any
chemically-acting  substances,  is  placed  within  a  wire  coO,  no
induction  is  caused,  even  when  these  bodies  are  much
larger  and  more  odically  potent,  much  stronger  in  emana-
tion of  light  and  excitation  of  sensations,  than  a  magnetic
bar;  this  last  maybe  ten  times  smaller  and  a  hundred
times  odically  weaker,  and  yet  will  instantaneously  induce
a  current  in  the  wire  coil (Vide  §  40.)

w.  When  a  magnetic  bar  is  held  in  the  hand  in  such  a
manner  that  the  magnetic  pole  of  the  same  name  as  the  odic
polarity  of  the  hand  is  outwards,  its  odic  flames  and  odic  force
increase ;  but  it  does  not  support  a  grain  more  iron  on  that
account.  Exactly  the  same,  mutatis  ynutmulh,  is  caused  in
magnetic  bars  by  the  poles  of  crystals.  The  magnetic  bar
gains  Od  from  the  odic  hand  or  cr}stal  pole,  but  it  does
not  receive  the  least  accession  of  magnetism,  (Vide  hifra,
^  442  and  444.)

*r.  The  above-mentioned  influence  may  go  so  far  that  the
odic  force  of  the  bar  may  be  even  reversed,  w  hile  the  mag-
netic polarity  remains  altogether  unaffected.  When  a  weak
magnetic  bar  is  grasped  by  the  southward  pole  in  the  left
hand,  the  projecting  northward  pole  not  only  loses  its  blue
negative  flame,  but  a  red  positive  one  immediately  begins  to
issue  from  it,  while  its  negative  magnetic  character  remains
unaltered. (Vide  infra,  ^  446.)


310


DISTINCTION  PROM  MAGNKTISM.


ij.  In the course  of  tliese  treatises,  we  shall become
acquainted  with  remarkable  cases  where  the  udic  flames
magnets  are  extinguished  hy  the  approxiniation  of  organize
living beings ; their  magnetic  force  is  not  in the least
changed  by  this. (Vide  infra ^  ^448.)

z.  The  moon  also  affords  a  beautiful  proof  of  the  distinctiou
between  magnetism  and  Od,  I  have  sliown  in  an  earlier
treatise,  ^119,  that  the  moon  acts  od-positively  upon  all  the
sensitive.  On  the  other  hand,  M.  Kreil,  the  Prague  astro- ^J
nomer,  distinguished  for  his  scientific  discoveries,  informs  us^^
in  tlie  fii^t  volume  of  his  Astronomico-meteorological  Year-
book, p.  104,  that  the  moon  exerts  an  attraction  on  the
southward  pole  of  the  magnetic  needle,  consequently  must
have,  on  the  side  turned  towards  us,  the  magnetism  of  the
south  pole  of  the  earth,  and  this,  according  to  my  ride  of
deduction,  is  negative  magnetism.  This  looks  like  a  contra-
diction when  superficially  considered,  but  is  solved  by  raor*e
accurate  examination.  For  the  magnetic  effect  which  the
moon  exerts  on  the  needle  is  so  weak,  that  it  can  only  be
detected  by  observations  like  those  of  a  physicist  as  accurate
as  M.  Krcil ;  but  it  is  not  nearly  strong  enough  to  react]
j>erceptibly  on  moderately  and  healthy  sensitive  persons.
Now  all  the  sensitive  feel  the  moon  od-positive,  and  this
very  vividly.  It  is  the  rays  of  light  of  the  moon  that  pro-
duce the  active  effects  we  meet  with.  This  is  proved  most
clearly  by  the  circumstance,  that  the  effects  of  the  moon  upon
the  sensitive  may  be  in  great  part  removed  by  keeping  away
the  direct  radiation  or  the  reflection  of  the  rays,  by  good
window  shutters ;  magnetic  influence,  wliich  penetrates
everjlhing,  could  nut  be  turned  away  by  iiiteiTcpting  the
rays.  Tims,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  half  of  the  moon
turned  towards  us  has  been  |)roved  to  be  negatively  magnetic,
it  nevertheless  diffiises  abundance  of  positive  Od  to  the  earth.

it  a.  Of  diamagnetism  we  at  present  know  only  the  repul-


I


DISTINCTION  PROM MAGNETISM.


311


sions,  which,  from  llaldat's  observations,  may  in  the  end
range  themselves  with  tlie  true  magnetic  phcnomeiia.

b  6.  But  the  distinction  between  Od  and  mtignetism
conies  to  Ught  most  strikingly  in  the  following  experiment :
— Let  an  iron  rod  of  about  twenty  inches  long  be  fixed  in  a
wooden  holder  of  any  kind,  which  shall  be  attached  to  its
axis.  AMien  this  is  so  directed  that  it  lies  horizontally  in
the  nnignetic  meridian,  every  sensitive  person  feels  its  north-
ward end  cool,  its  southward  end  tepidly  warm.  If  the
northward  end  be  declined  till  it  be  placed  in  the  magnetic
dip,  i.  e,  if  the  rod  be  tnnicd  till  its  temporaiy^  northward
end  make  an  angle  of  about  65"  with  the  horizon,  it  then
will  attain  its  maximum  magnetic  condition ;  the  coolness
of  its  northward  pole  should  in  hke  manner  increase  to
its  greatest  height,  the  southward  pole  also  in  warmth.
But,  instead  of  this,  we  find  exactly  the  opposite.  The
magnetic  northward  pole  now  becomes  odically  warm,  the
magnetically  southward  pic  odically  cold.  Od  and  magnet-
ism, which  othei-wise  proceed  side  by  side  in  a  certain  paral-
lelism of  manifestations,  here  meet  diametrically  opposed,
the  neyaiivi'ty  mai/netic  northward  pole  is  od-positive,  the
positively  magnetic  southward  pole  is  od-neyative, — under
the  circumstafices  here  introduced  ;  the  twojhllotv  direct ty
contrary  paths.

c  c.  We  shall  meet  below  with  cases  where  superimposed
layers  of  steel  of  like  magnetism  are  reversed  one  above
the  other ;  so  that,  while  all  possess  one  kind  of  magnetism,
there  occurs  an  alternation  of  positive  and  negative  odic
layers.  This  may  be  strengthened  by  approximation  of
crystals  and  hands,  but  is  removed  by  that  of  magnet  poles.
(Vide  ^  340 and  344)

d  rf.  We  shall  actually  meet  further  on  with  an  exi>eri-
ment  in  which  positive  magnetism  and  emanations  of  nega-
tive odic  light  occurred  simultaneously  in  a  particular  element


312


DISTINCTION  FROM  MAGNETISM.


of  the  arms  of  a  horse-shoe  while  passmg  over  another
magnet. (^  433.)

Therefore,  at  present  the  identity  of  Od  and  magnetism
is  aUogether  out  of  the  question.

Consequently,  the  distinctions  which  exist  between  heat,
electricity,  magnetism^  and  Od,  have  not  meixjly  remained
undiminished  by  the  ulterior  reseai'ches  continued  since
^  270,  but  have  rather  made  themselves  more  strongly
nianii'est ;  and  they  will  become  still  more  so  in  the  follow-
ing treatises.  They  are  expressed  so  definitely  and  clearly
in  many  points,  that  the  necessity  of  a  special  terminology
appears  more  inevitable  than  ever.  Under  the  definition  of
the  word  Od  I  include  all  the  physical  phemrnienn  presenting
themselves  in  these  researches,  which  cannot  be  brought
under  the  definition  of  the  dynamics  hitherto  acknowledged,
tagether  with  the  vis  occulta,  on  which  they  depend.
Whether,  and  to  what  extent,  they  will,  in  the  course  of
time,  be  distributed  and  transferred  into  the  provinces  of
the  latter,  remain  questions  for  future  research,  and  are
deferred  till  the  acquirement  of  a  deeper  insight  into  the
essence  of  these  things.

Every  one  is  almost  convinced  that  electricity  and  mag-
netism are  of  one  natiu'e ;  no  one  doubts  that  here  essential
force  of  one  kind  acts  on  the  one  side  in  a  half-free,  on  the
other,  half-confined  condition  ;  we  ^re  all  in  hourly  expec-
tation of  the  approaching  discovery,  through  which  their
identity  shall  be  demonstrated,  and  the  two  be  made  capable
of  comprehension  under  a  common  definition  :  yet  we  shall
never  be  able  to  dispense  with  either  of  these  words.  In
the  same  way  it  will  happen  with  the  word  Od,  or  any  other
that  it  may  be  agreed  to  receive  in  its  place ;  it  will  be
necessary,  in  order  to  comprehend  a  certain  complicatiou  of
phenomena,  which  cannot  be  otherwise  registered  than  as  a
special  group.


813


EIGHTH  TREATISE.


LUMINOUS PHENOMENA.


7%e  Odic  Luminous  Phenomena  on  the  Magnet.


280.  I  COMMENCED  the  present  series  of  treatises  with
the  most  striking  of  the  luminous  phenomena — those  of
the  magnet;  those  of  crystals  followed;  then  I  made
known  those  of  certain  human  organs,  such  as  the  hands ;
and  thus  I  proceeded  onwai'd  to  those  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  heat,  friction,  light,  electricity,  of  chemism,  and
finally  of  matter  in  general.  In  all  these  cases,  however,  I
have  only  made  mention  of  them  generally,  in  so  far  as  I  en-
deavoured to  obtain  signs  of  the  existence  and  activity  of  Od,
and  could  establish  these  through  the  evidence  of  the  exist-
ence of  the  luminous  phenomena.  I  have  confined  myself
to  this  in  all  places,  and  reserved  a  discussion  of  the  latter
in  particular  for  a  special  treatise.  Such  mil  be  the  object
of  this,  the  eighth,  and  the  succeeding  essays,  and  I  thus
perform  the  promise  made  in  ^  55  and  §  93.

281.  Hitherto,  in  the  many  cases  mentioned,  I  have  only
reported  the  sensuous  perceptions  on  which  the  detection
of  the  odic  Hght  depends,  as  derived  from  the  statements
of  the  highly  sensitive ;  the  following  pages  will  show,  how-
ever, that  it  is  by  no  means  only  these  who  detect  it,  but  that
the  odic  light  presents  itself  in  innumerable  cases  so  dis-
tinctly and  prominently,  that  not  merely  also  the  slightly
sensitive,  but,  fifftat  notv  becomes  of  the  greaiesi  importance ,
a  large  number  of  perfectly  healthy  persons,  are  capable
of  seeing  it,

282.  I  shall  now  in  the  first  place  give  the  physical  fact.


314


LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA


the  existence  of  the  odic  light,  new  and  more  extensive  cx>u-
firmation  by  a  great  addition  of  observed  cases;  then  examine
these  more  closely  in  the  different  forms  of  their  occurrence ;
compare  their  relations  both  with  each  other  and  with  allied
natural  phenomena ;  deduce  certain  new  laws  for  Od  from
them  ;  and  from  all  this  seek  to  make  out  some  fixed  points
for  establishing  its  place  in  tlie  domain  of  physics.


HISTORICAL  ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FACT  OK  ODIC  LIGHT
ON  MAGNETS  IN  GENERAL.

283.  In  the  earlier  treatises  it  w^as  shown  that  the  odic
light  was perceived  by  all  the  highly  sensitive,  without
exception,  who  were  included  mthin  the  sphere  of  my  inves-
tigations, and  thus its  actual existence established  and
placed  beyond  reasonable  doubt,  by  a  series  of  testimonies
agreeing  in  all  essential  particulars. It  wt^s  further  demon-
strated that  the  different  degrees  of  strength  in  which  dif-
ferent persons  saw  it,  depended  on  the  varjiug  conditions
of  disease  of  the  observers,  and  finally  that  in  one  and
the  same  observer,  different  stages  of  diseased condition
caused a different degree of sensuous receptivity, and
thereby  a  different  appreciation  of  the  impression  of  the
light  upon  the  senses. This  must  be  cleai*ly  understood.
Miss  Nowotuy,  when  nearly  well,  no  longer  saw  any  Ught,
even  on  the  strongest  magnet  (§  3), Some  days  earlier,
when  her  recovery  was  not  so  far  advanced,  she  still  saw
momentary  flashes, disappearing immediately,  when the
armature  was  removed  from  a  magnet  in  the  dark. Two
days  before  this,  she  had  seen  a  luminous  tlu"ead  along  the
edges  of  the  steel,  and  a  week  previously,  a  bcHiitifiil  shining
flame  at  each  pole  of  the  open  magnet,  the  ray-like  emana-
tions of  which  were  from  three  quarters  of  an  inch  to  one
inch  and  a  quarter  long. Miss  Sturmann  (§  4)  saw  the
flames  of  the  same  magnet  about  fom*  inches  in  lengtl


I


ON  MAGNETS.


315


I


more  than  three  times  as  long.  Miss  Rtnchel  drew  me  these,
from  her  obseiTatioiis,  of  the  length  of  the  ai'iii  of  the  horse-
shoe, that  is,  twelve  inches  long.  Miss  Maix  (^  6),  in  her
usual  condition,  saw  them  only  a  hand's  breadth,  bnt  when-
ever she  was  seized  with  an  attack  of  spasms,  the  same
magnet  appeared  to  her  wholly  enveloped  in  fire,  and  the
flame  in  places  several  spans  long.  Miss  Reichel  (§  7)  saw
the  magnet  in  moderate  obscurity,  not  merely  emit  flames
from  the  poles  as  long  as  the  arms  of  the  horse-shoe,  bnt
also  a  delicate  light  spread  all  over  the  magnet,  and  this
latter  even  while  the  armature  remained  applied.  But
Miss  Atmiannsdorfer  {^  IS)  told  me  that  the  flame  of  my
large  nine-layered  magnet  attained  almost  the  size  of  a  man
in  her  eyes  when  it  was  very  dark,  so  that  she  freq\iently
saw  herself  wholly  enveloped  in  it,  as  if  she  were  being  bunit.
She  saw  both  this  and  smaller  magnetos  enveloped  between
and  aroimd  the  arms  by  delicate  doi^ii-like  flame ;  the  poles,
each  flaming,  especially  at  its  four  corners,  in  blue  ancl  red^
yellow  and  green  intermingled,  and  each  layer  of  the  com-
pound magnet  possessing  its  own  latend  flames  (like  ^  9).
Bar  magnets  always  flamed  more  strongly  at  the  northward
pole  tlian  ut  the  southward  in  this  case.

2S4.  These  observations  all  belong  to  the  year  1844.  I
collected  a  much  greater  number  of  them  in  the  years  1845,
1846,  and  1847,  during  which  I  devoted  myself  with  un-
ceasing efforts  to  the  pursuit  of  this  attractive  subject.  Those
of  the  results  simply  serving  to  the  further  confirmation
and  establishment  of  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  the  odic
light  over  the  magnet,  I  subjoin  here  seriatim.  1  remark,
however,  expressly,  that  this  is  done  chiefly  for  those  readers
whom  the  previously  reported  observations  do  not  suflSce  to
convince,  and  who  consider  a  greater  number  of  testimonies
necessary  for  the  establishment  of  the  physical  phenomena
of  the  diff^usion  of  light  from  the  magnet ;  all  those,  on  the
contrary,  who  are  satisfied  by  what  has  abready  been  brought


LUH1KOU8  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGJTltS

forward,  and  who  consider  the  accuracy  of  my  mode  of  in-
vestigation sufficient,  can,  without  any  great  loss,  pass  over
these,  ajid  turn  from  tiere  immediately  to  ^  334,  where,
leaving  behind  all  the  concrete  cases  and  specialities,  they
will  arrive  immediately  at  the  conclusions  deduced  from
them.

I  follow  the  order  of  rising  from  the  w^eakest  powers  of
vision  to  the  strongest,  proceeding  from  the  healthy  sensitive
to  the  sickly,  and  ending  with  the  permanently  diseased,
highly  sensitive  persons.

a. Healthy  SensUives.

285.  Among  these  I  met  with  a  few  who  possessed  the
odic  feeling  very  strongly  marked,  but  were  unable  to  re-
cognise the  magnetic  Hght ;  others  who  saw  it  weakly ;  lastly,
some  who  saw  it  with  greater  facihty,  and  with  a  clearness
and  distinctness  which  excelled  not  only  that  of  many  in-
valids, but  even  ofachiul  samimmbufists.

286.  Dr.  Friedrich,  from  Munich,  a  young,  healthy  phy*
sician,  from  whom  I  learnt  that  he  was  sometimes  subject
to  w^alking  in  iiis  sleep,  had  the  kindness  to  allow  me  a
trial,  and  to  place  himself  in  my  own  dark  chamber  pre-
pared for  these  researches.  I  found  him  distinctly  sensitive,
but  in  a  weak  degree ;  he  saw  other  objects  emit  light,  but
never  magnets.

287.  M,  Edward  Htittcr,  bookseller,  grandson  of  Anton
Doll,  in  Vienna,  a  fine,  young,  and  perfectly  healthy  man,
was  excitable  in  many  ways  to  the  odic  sensations,  but  had
no  power  of  seeing  the  magnetic  huninosity  beyond  a  weak
and  uncertain  appearance  on  a  small,  strong,  horse-shoe
magnet,  in  the  dark.

288.  MaximiUan  Kriiger,  a  boy  of  twelve  years,  in  the
Orphan  Asylum  at  Vienna,  sensitive  to  a  considerable  de-
gree to  the  impressions  of  the  odic  feeling,  was  unable  to
detect  any  impression  of  magnetic  light  hi  the  dark.


317


280.  Mi%  Carl  Rossner,  Imperial  Counsellor  and  Pro-
fessor of  Architecture  in  the  Academy  of  the  Plastic  Arts,
at  Vienna,  forty-two  yeai^  of  age,  remarkably  sensitive  to
all  impi'essions  on  the  feeling  that  can  be  excited  by  odic
influence,  could  not  detect  a  trace  of  luminous  appearances
dming  three  hours  which  he  was  kind  enough  to  devote  to
nie  in  niv  diu'kened  chamber,

1  met  with  the  like  frequently,  especially  in  men ;  most
remarkably  in  Dr.  Diesing,  Keeper  of  the  Imperial  Museum
of  Natural  History  in  Vienna.  Although  very  highly
sensitive  to  all  impressions  on  tlie  feeling,  he  was  totally
insensible  to  luminous  phenomena  of  all  kinds  in  the  dark,
where  he  remained  for  four  hoiu^.

We  thus  have  here  five  decided  sensitives  in  livhom  the
light  which  issues  from  the  magnet  coidd  not  be  brought
to  evidence.  This  w^arrants  our  concluiling  that  the  sensi-
tiveness is  not  always  necessarily  connected  with  the  power
of  seeing  and  perceiving  the  magnetic  light.  These  cases  '
are  undoubtedly  the  rarer.

290.  Mention  has  already  been  made  frequently  of  Mr.
C,  Schuh,  in  speaking  of  sensitive  perceptions  of  feeling ;
he  stands  on  the  outermost  limit  in  the  hmiinous  pheno-
mena ;  he  does  not  see  the  magnet  flames,  but  he  distinctly
recognises  the  shape  of  horse-shoes  and  magnets  in  com-
plete darkness,  and  thus  sees  w^eakly  the  emanations  of  light
from  the  magnetic  metal  itself.  This  is  what  I  have  called
the  odic  incandcscetice,  and  constitutes  the  first  degree  of
perception  of  light.

291.  Mr.  Hubert  voe  Rainer,  of  Klagenfurt,  twenty-four
years  old,  barrister,  a  man  of  exuberant  health  and  strength^
has  never  been  ill,  and  know^s  neither  head-ache  nor  dis-
order of  the  stomach.  His  sensitiveness  in  the  sphere  of
feeling  is  strongly  marked,  but  he  only  detected  the  mag-
netic  light  with  certainty  when  I  pulled  off*  the  armature


318


LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS


from  the  hors€-ahoe, whereupon he saw  a  flash  at  the
moment  of  separation.

292.  Dr.  Ragsky,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  Joseph
Medico-Chinirgical  Academy  at  Vienna,  a  very  healthy,
unusually  tall  and  powerful  man,  thirty-two  years  old,
exhibited  every  sensitive  excitability.  He  did  not  see  a
bar  magnet  in  the  dark,  but  he  saw  horse-shoes,  if  they
were  single  and  strong,  so  far  tow^ards  the  poles,  that  he
was  able  to  distinguish  the  shape  of  the  steel  With  inter-
missions, he  detected  appearances  of  blue  hght  at  the  north-
ward pole,  at  the  southward  pole  notliing.

293.  fl.  Dr.  Huss,  Professor  in  the  Hospital  at  Stock-
holm, Physician  to  the  King  of  Sweden,  saw  only  the  more
powerful  phenomena  of  odic  light  in  the  dark  cliatnber,  but
not  common  magnets.  Yet  when  I  placed  before  him  a
strong  electro-magnet,  with  a  Smee's  battery  of  some  400
square  inches  of  zinc  and  silver  siirfat^e,  he  perceived  at  one
of  the  two  poles,  the  negative,  the  formation  of  a  pale  lights
which  developed  abundance  of  smoke,  ascending  upwards
like  a  cloud.

293.  b,  Hermine  Fenzl,  eight  years  of  age,  the  daughter
of  Dr.  Ed.  Fenzl,  Chief  of  the  Botanical  Department  of  the
Imperial  Museum  of  Natural  History  at  Vienna,  a  child  of
slender  make  and  active  mind,  healthy  and  gay,  showed
strongly  all  the  reactions  of  sensitiveness  to  feeling ;  but
she  did  not  perceive  the  luminous  phenomena  in  the  dark
so  w^ll.  She  saw^  three  large  and  one  small  horse-shoe
magnets  emit  gray  hght,  the  last  most  brightly ;  she  de-
scribed the  northward  pole  as  more  strongly  luminous  than
the  southward.  Of  bars,  she  saw  only  some  three-fourths
of  an  inch  long,  illuminated,  others  eight  inches  long  she  did
not  perceive.  She  could  not  detect  flames  or  smoke.  She
did  not  see  brightness  of  any  kind  on  larger  magnets.

294.  Baroness  Isabella  von  Tesscdik,  the  young  widow


W!TH  HEAtTHY  SENSITIVES,


uf  Mr.  Frail z  von  Tessedik,  of  Pesth,  a  mother,  of  cahn  tern*
[leranicnt,  a  lady  of  renmrkably  intellectual  cultivation,  saw
a  magnetic  rod  twenty-eight  inches  long,  and  all  horse-shoe
magnets  with  the  steel  weakly  luminous,  so  that  she  could
distinguish  their  figures,  glowing  odically,  in  the  ohscurity  of
the  dark  chamber.  She  saw  a  one-layered,  a  three-layered,
and  a  nine-layered  horse-shoe,  furnished  with  a  luminous
cloud  four  to  eight  inches  lung  on  each  pole.  She  detected
the  same  on  a  horse-shoe  electro-magnet.  On  this,  how-
ever, and  some  other  horse^shoe  magnets,  she  could  only
jierceive  the  luminous  vapour  on  the  northward  pole.  She
saw  the  magnetic  light  more  brightly  when  1  pulled  the
annature  ofl'  quickly  ;  this  caused  a  momentar)^  flash,  like
lightniltg.

295.  Mr.  Constantine  Delhez,  forty  years  old,  a  French
philologist,  at  present  residing  in  Vienna,  healthy  but  dis-
tinctly sensitive,  saw,  after  a  sojourn  of  an  hour  and  a  half
in  the  dark  chamber,  magnetic  rods  glowing,  and  a  one-,  a
three-,  and  a  five-fold  horse-shoe,  emit  lights  from  one-third
of  an  inch  to  four  inches  long  from  the  open  pole^ ;  from  a
nine-fold  horse-shoe  they  rose  more  than  twenty  inches  ;
from  an  electro-iuagnet  they  attained  almost  forty  inches ;
and  both  produced  illumiuated  sjiots  on  the  ceiling  more  than
forty  inches  in  diameter.  Both  the  appearances  of  odic
incandescence  upon  the  steel  magneto,  and  the  flame-like
emanations  flowing  from  the  poles,  always  seemed  to  hiin
somewhat  vapourous,  as  is  described  by  all  the  sensitive  of
inferior  degrees  of  excitability.

296.  Our  revered  Cousistorial  coimsellor  and  Superin-
tendent  of  the  Evangelical  Communion  in  Vienna,  Mr,  Ernst
Pauer,  to  whose  congregation  1  and  my  family  belong,  of
tall  and  imposing  form,  but  of  delicate  make,  fifty-four  years
of  age,  whose  sensitiveness  is  especially  strongly  marked  in
the  effects  on  the  feeUng,  saw  all  magnets  luminous  all  over
the  metal :  on  some  of  the  smaller,  the  flashes  when  I  removed


320


L¥MINOTJ9  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNKTS


the  armature,  and  emanations  of  odic  light  from  the  poles  of
small  bars,  as  well  as  particular  horse  shoes ;  in  some  only
from  the  northward  pole,  in  a  five-fold  horse-shoe  from  both
poles,  stronger  at  the  negative  and  weaker  at  the  positive.
He  saw  an  electm-magnet  furnished  witli  pale  lights  over
both  poles,  two  inches  high  and  of  the  same  breadth*

297.  Baroness  Pauline  von  Natorp,  of  Vienna,  mother  of
two  ch'ddren,  young  and  intelligent,  blonde,  saw  the  flashing
lights  of  small  horse-shoes  when  the  armatures  were  taken
off,  and  the  permanent  light  on  the  northward  arm.  On
larger  magnets,  she  sometimes  saw  the  light  only  of  one,
always  the  northward,  anu,  sometimes  of  both,  as  a  lumi-
nous cloud  almost  four  inches  long.  On  larger  magneto  of
relatively  weaker  intensity  she  saw  only  a  weakly  illumi-
nated dehcate  vapour  over  the  jx^les.

298.  Mr.  Demeter  Tirka,  a  Greek  merchant  in  Vienna,
forty  years  old,  distinguished  for  his  love  of  objects  of  plastic
art,  of  powerful  build,  and,  witli  the  exception  of  occasional
head-aches,  healthy  all  his  life,  saw  light  flash  firom  a  small
and  a  large  horse-shoe  when  I  pulled  off  the  armatures,  each
time  over  the  northward  pole ;  he  saw  a  permanent  light
over  the  same  pole  of  a  three-fold  horse-shoe,  but  nothing
on  the  southward  pole.  He  saw  no  distinct  flaming  on  a
heavy  nine-fold  horse-shoe,  but  he  perceived  all  objects  in
the  immediate  vicinity  to  be  illuminated  by  it,

299.  Mrs.  Sylvia  von  Varady,  wife  of  the  Imperial  coun-
sellor Mr.  von  Varady,  a  young,  blooming  lady,  lively,
healthy,  of  Italian  family,  saw  all  rods  and  horse-shoes  dully
luminous  in  the  dark.  She  saw  a  one-fold  horse-shoe  emit
vapourous  lights  two  inches  long,  and  the  ninc*fold  horse-
shoe five  feet  high  over  the  poles,  when  the  armature  was
removed*  Strongly  magnetic  rods  of  eight  inches  in  length
bore  lights  on  their  poles  three  quarters  of  an  inch  long.

300.  Mr  Theodore  Kotschy,  evangelical  minister,  the
botanist, the renowned and vigorous traveller thmugh


WITH  nEALTHY  8EN8TTTTES.


Africa  and  Asia»  of  wliom  mention  has  been  made  already
in  ^^  80,  191,  222,  232,  saw  flashing  flames,  which  soon
disappeared,  on  the  northward  pole  of  simple  horse-shoes
when  the  armature  was  pidled  off.  On  three-fold  ones  he
saw  thin,  vaponroiis  Hglits  blaze  continuously,  one  to  two
inches  high  ;  when  I  applied  the  armature  and  pulled  it  ofl*
again,  they  flashed  up  brighter  for  a  moment,  but  sank
again  directly  to  their  previous  permanent  state.  A  nine-
fold horse-shoe  he  did  not  see  at  first,  but  soon  recognised
on  extremely  thin,  widely  diffused  luminosity  over  the
open  arms,  playing  over  them,  more  than  sixteen  inches
broad  and  almost  forty  high.  He  did  not  find  it  like  a
flame,  but  like  an  extremely  delicate  glinunering  of  light  in
the  general  darkness.  He  saw  a  small  pocket  horse-shoe
more  brightly  and  distinctly  endowed  with  light  than  the
nine-fold;  its  magnetism  had  greater  intensity.  He  saw
light  only  on  the  northward  pole  of  a  three-fold  horse-shoe.
SOL  Miss  Ernestine  Anschiitz,  daughter  of  oiu-  celebrated
I  oourt  actor  Mr.  Anschiitz,  a  young  lady  of  quiet  and  reserved
disposition,  at  present  perfectly  healthy,  but  in  her  earlier
years  occasionally  suffering  from  spasms  and  headache,  saw
the  steel  substance  of  all  magnets  weakly  luminous.  On
the  poles  of  two  magnetic  needles,  each  four  inches  long,
she  saw  flames  on  the  one  side  yellowish,  on  the  other  bluish,
but  mere  incandescence  along  their  steel  substance,  more  weak
in  the  middle,  stronger  towards  each  pole.  Of  the  poles  of  a
pocket  horse-shoe  she  saw  the  northward  pole  furnished
with  a  deUcate  flame  more  than  one  inch  long,  on  the  south-
ward pole  nothing,  A  five-fold  horse-shoe  she  saw  with
flames  of  a  finger*s  length  on  both  poles,  that  on  the  positive
side  yeUowish,  that  on  the  negative  bluish.  She  also  per-
ceived a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  to  be  furnished  at  both  poles
with  delicate  emanations  of  bght,  which  were  from  twelve  to
sixteen  inches  long,  one  a  little  shorter  and  yellomsh,  the
other  larger,  and  rather  bluish  or  greyish.


322


LtTMTNOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MA«F


802,  Mrs*  Josephine  Fenzl,  wife  of  our  botanist,  known
throughout  Europe  by  his  literary  lalK>m*s,  the  already  named
Dr,  Fenzl,  a  young  mother  of  several  children,  healthy  and
blooming,  saw  a  magnetic  rod  twenty-four  inches  long  glow*
ing  odieally  in  the  dark  chamber,  and  emitting  flames  at
both  ends.  She  described  a  one-fold,  a  tliree-fold,  a  five-
fold, and  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  as  limiinous  and  giving  out
huninous  vajx>ur  in  different  degrees.  Some  months  later,
she  saw  a  nine-fold  horse-skoe  flame  twenty  inches  high,  and
luminous  smoke  rise  half  the  height  of  the  chamber  above
it.  At  the  same  time  she  described  smaller  and  larger
rotls  as  odieally  incandescent,  and  furnished  with  j>oIar
flames,  those  of  the  northward  pole  longer,  duller,  and  bluish,
those  of  the  southward  pole  shorter,  brighter,  and  yellowish-
red.

303,  Mr.  Franz  Fernolendt,  from  Transylvania,  proprietor
of  a  chemical  manufactory  in  Vienna,  i*esiding  at  825,  in  the
Kumpfgasse,  54  years  old,  perceived  the  magnet  less  by  its
odic  incandescence  than  by  its  polai*  flames.  He  saw  very
few  of  them  glowing  brightly,  only  the  small  rods  and  a
pocket  horse-shoe ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  lie  saw  a  bright
cloud  over  alt,  which  apj>cared  to  him  as  a  light  glare  sweep-
ing over  the  poles.  Somethnes  he  saw  a  flame  flash  up
when  I  pulled  off  the  armature.  He  perceived  the  stream-
ing brightness  over  a  one-fold  horse-shoe,  a  three-fold  and  a
five-fold,  but  always  either  exclusively  upon  the  north  pole,  or
else  more  distinctly  than  upon  the  south,  and  frequently  in
the  form  of  a  grey  cloud.  On  a  large  nine- fold  horse-«hoe
he  perceived  the  issuing  Ught  twenty  inches  high  ;  but  when
I  acted  upon  its  emanations  by  the  approximation  of  a  posi-
tive clec*trical  atmosphere,  he  saw  a  mass  of  odic  light  rise
up  gradually  over  it,  ascending  with  a  thickness  equalling  a
man's  body,  up  to  theceUing  of  the  room.

304.  Mr*  W-  Hochsi^tt^r,  son  of  Professor  Hochstetter,  of
Esslingen,  in  Wirtemburg,  (the  distinguished  botanist  pre-


I


WITH HEALTHY  SENSITIVES.


323


siding  over  the  "  Unio  Itineraria"),  twenty -one  years  of  age,
engaged  in  the  study  of  horticulture  in  the  Imperial  Gardens
at  Schonbmnn,  of  very  florid  aspect,  mo\ing  about  all  day
in  the  open  air,  saw  all  magnets,  down  to  the  smallest  bar,
odically  incandescent  in  the  darkened  chamber.  He  saw
the  tkmes  issue  from  the  poles,  not  like  flames,  but  as
a  luminous  halo,  only  from  rather  less  to  rather  more  than
an  inch  long  from  the  smaller,  and  increasing  with  their
size,  till,  on  the  nine-fold  horse-shoe,  they  attained  a  length
of  twenty  inches.  These  lights  he  saw  larger  and  brighter  on
all  the  north  wai'd  poles  of  bars  and  horse-shoes ;  at  the
southward,  sometimes  very  small  and  duU,  and  scarcely
visible  ;  but  always  accompanied  liy  abundance  of  snjoke,

305.  Mi\  Nicolas  llabe,  about  forty  years  of  age,  a  higher
official  in  the  Imperial  Magazine  of  Mining  Products  at

j  Vienna,  who,  throughout  his  life,  has  been  perfectly  healthy,
i  vigorous,  and  of  lively,  cheerful,  and  warm  temperament,
I  discerned  the  metallic  substance  of  all  magnets  laid  before
I  him  in  the  dark,  by  a  delicate  luminosity,  more  eiipecially
iHthe  horse-shoes,  while  their  armatmres  remained  applied.
I^B  From  a  magnet  bar,  hu  saw  lights  issue  from  both  poles ;  he
l^baw  a  magnetic  rod  about  five  feet  long  furnished  at  the  north-
^BSrord  pole  with  a  flame  twenty  inches  long,  the  southward
I  with  one  of  twelve ;  the  extremities  of  these  passing  hito  a
■  luminous  vapour,  which  was  stronger  and  thicker  at  the  posi-
H  tive  pole  than  at  the  negative.  He  saw  all  horse^shoes
"  flame  at  both  poles,  after  the  removal  of  the  armature,  more
I  strongly  or  weakly  according  to  the  intensity  of  their  mag-
netism. The  ends  of  the  flames  always  lost  themselves  above
I  in  a  luminous,  smoke-hke  vapoiu',  wliich  ascended  slowly
upwards.

306.  Johann  Klaiber*  cabinet-maker,  whose  name  has  al-
ready been  mentioued  in  the  earlier  treatises  (§^  50,  191)
on  the  odic  sensations,  distinguished  a  magnet  laid  before
him  by  a  brightness  extending  through  the  whole  mass  of


324  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

the  slccl.  A  long  horse-shoe,  too  weakly  magnetic  to  support
its  own  weight,  appeared  to  him  to  possess  a  scarcely  percep-
tible luminosity,  hardly  connected  with  the  northward  pole,
but  discernible  about  four  inches  above,  as  if  waving  gently
over  it.  Other  witnesses  have  perceived  the  like,  of  which
I  shall  give  the  details  hereafter.  A  three-fold  horse-shoe
seemed  to  him  to  have  a  j)ale  bluish  flame  on  the  northward
pole,  of  variable  size,  sometimes  about  an  inch,  sometimes
full  four  inches  long,  changing  with  the  recei)tivity  of  the
observer.  The  end  was  always  lost  in  luminous  odic  vapour,
intermingled  with  isolated  brilliant  little  sparks.  The  south-
ward pole  he  saw  sometimes  wholly  without  flames ;  some-
times with  but  a  weak  light,  alternately  appearing  and
vanishing.  A  nine-fold  horse-shoe  did  not  appear  at  all
luminous  to  him  at  the  poles,  at  the  first  moment,  when
quite  close  to  it ;  but  when  he  drew  back  a  step,  he  dis-
cerned that  it  glowed  odically,  and  that  luminous  appear-
ances blazed  up  over  it  to  the  distance  of  an  arm's  length,
issuing  from  both  poles,  coming  to  a  point  above,  mostly  as
a  blue  flame,  passing  into  a  broad  slightly  luminous  vapour,
which  rolled  upward  in  the  air,  carrying  with  it  many
isolated  sparks,  which  were  soon  extinguished.

307.  Mrs.  Elcanore  von  Peichich-Zimanjd,  the  young
widow  of  the  Imperial  Secretary  of  State,  Mr.  von  Peichich,
of  Hungarian  family,  really  healthy,  but  with  rather  weak
nerves  and  excitable,  detected  the  odic  incandescence  of  all
magnets :  bars  eight  inches  long  emitted  vapourous  light
two  inches  in  length ;  horse-shoes  of  a  single  layer  displayed
to  her  emanations  of  light  as  long  as  one's  hand  from  the
northward  pole ;  half  as  long  from  the  southward.  A  nine-
fold horse-shoe  emitted  light,  more  than  forty  inches  long,
from  the  northward  pole.  In  all  ca^es  the  northward  pole
seemed  to  her  to  have  stronger  flames  than  the  southward,
usually  double  the  size.  The  removal  of  the  armature  pro-
duced a  momentarily  stronger  flash  of  the  light. The  poles


Wlifl HEALTHY  SENSITIVES.


325


of  all  horse-shoes  appeared  to  her  to  liave  stmiiger  light  than
those  of  bars.

308.  Stephan  Kollar,  son  of  the  keeper  of  the  Imperial
Mnseuiii  of  Niitiirn!  History,  Mr.  F.  Kollar,  fourteeu  years
old,  slender,  lively,  jiealtliy,  often  restless  in  the  night,  and
a  talkex  in  his  sleep,  saw  all  bar  magnets,  horse-shoes,  and
electro-magnets  odically  ineaiuk^eent,  and  fiu-nished  with
flaming  lights,  stronger  at  the  northward  \m\e,  the  weakest
ahont  three-qnarlera  of  im  inch  long,  the  large  and  strong
twenty  inches  and  more.  These  terminated  in  elonds  of
smoky  vapom' ascending  npwaids.  The  investigations  were
made  ia  the  presence  of  his  fatlier

30y,  Miss  Sophie  I'aiier,  daughter  of  the  Superintendent
above  mentioned,  wbo  was  kind  enougli  to  be  present  at  the
experiments,  is  very  young,  and  in  perfeit  health,  tall  and
sleiuler,  and  of  sensitive  temperament.  She  was  good
enough  to  devote  herself  to  the  re[>etitiou  of  these  researches
several  times,  at  intervals  of  a  few  months.  When,  after
allowing  sutlicicnt  time  for  her  eyes  to  become  aceustojncd
to  the  darkness,  I  placed  before  her  a  row  of  magnets,  the
horse-slioes  among  them  being  still  closed  by  their  armatures,
she  saw  them  in  their  natural  form  and  luminous  ;  i.  e,
odically  incandescent,  ami  she  expressed  pleiisnie  at  the
peculiarly  delicate  beauty  of  the  appearance.  As  1  removed
tlie  armatures  one  after  another,  she  saw  the  odic  flames
blaze  np  over  the  iHules,  and  always  strnnger,  larger  and
brighter  at  the  northward  tlian  at  tlie  southward  poles.  The
flames  always  became  brighter  when  I  pulled  oif  the  arma-
ture, and  then  I'etiU'ned  l)ack  to  their  constant  nmgnitude.
They  appeared  to  her  one  and  a  quarter,  two  and  a  halt,  fom\
and  eight  inches  long,  according  to  the  difierent  strength  of
the  bar  and  horse-shoe  magnets.  She  saw  tlie  nine-fold
horse-shoe  with  flames  twenty  inches  high,  and  above  these
^ft  a  delicate  vapourous  column  rising  up  to  the  ceiling  of  the
^■room,  the  northward  pole  having  a  bine,  the  southward  a


P


i


LUMINOUB  PHEKOMEKA  ON  MAGNETS


reddish-yellow  flame.  She  found  a  |>ocket  horse-shoe  glow
most  intensely  when  it  lay  upon  her  extended  hand,  its  light
l)cing  strengthened  by  her  own  odic  force.

310.  Dr.  Endlicher,  Professor  of  Botany,  Director  of  the
Botanical  Garden  of  Vienna,  forty- three  years  of  age,  so
well  known  and  celebrated  thronghoiit  Europe  as  a  natu-
ralist that  I  need  say  no  more  of  him  or  speak  of  his  fitness
fur  physiological  researches,  favoured  me  with  his  presence
for  some  hours  in  my  darkened  cliamber.  He  saw,  besides
the  light  wdiich  parts  of  the  human  body,  organs  of  plants,
crystals  and  aniorjihons  substances,  gave  out  abundantly  and
distinctly,  whitish  luminosity  of  magnetic  bars  eight  inches
long,  and  elongated  flames  issuing  from  both  the  poles  ;  he
also  saw  one-fold,  three-fold,  and  five-fold  horse-shoes  sur-
rounded by  a  halo  of  light  as  long  as  they  remained  closed,
and  when  opened  emitting  vapourous  flames  two  to  four
inches  long  from  both  poles  ;  while  the  nine-fold  horse-shoe,
turned  upwards,  sent  out  streams  of  light  w^hich  were  almost ^J
forty  inches  high,  and  produced  a  light  spot  upon  the  ceiling^^
of  the  room.  lie  saw  the  same  in  a  larger  and  stronger
degree  from  the  poles  of  a  strong  electro-magnet ;  viz.  forty
inches  high,  brilliantly  coloured,  stronger  from  the  north-
ward than  the  southward  pole,  and  producing  a  bright  circle
of  greater  extent  upon  the  ceiling.

311,  Mr,  Gustav  Anschiitz,  pahiter,  of  Vienna,  residing
in  his  owTi  house,  No.  2(58,  Ferdinandsgasse,  in  the  suburb
of  Wieden,  was  the  first  sensitive  in  wliom  I  discovered  that
even  perfectly  healthy  persons  were  capable  of  seeing  the
odic  light.  This  was  a  great  and  unexpected  discovery  for
my  researches,  and  for  the  position  of  the  subject  in  the
domain  ofphysics,  attacked  by  such  a  variety  of  adversaries.
From  this  moment  the  chain  w'as  loosened  which  had  hitherto
bound  me  to  the  diseased ;  no  one  could  now  obstinately
regard  sensitiveness  altogether  as  a  natm-al  phenomenon
dependent  either  mediately  or  immediately  upon  somnam-


WITH HEALTH!  SENSITIVES.


S27


^V  btilism,  whatever  I  might  say  to  the  contrary  ;  it  overcame
I  the  often -heard,  untenable  objection  >  that  no  faith  was  to  be
placed  in  the  gtateiueiits  of  diseased  persons, — ^as  if  every
one  became  ripe  for  the  mad-house  directly  sickness
L^  attacked  him !  Now  Mr.  Anschiitz  entered  the  circle,  a
^P  healthy,  vigorous  man,  of  35  years,  thoroughly  inured
^  by  a  thousand  hard  marches  and  dangers  dnring  his  former
military  life,  who  had  never  sufifered  from  real  illness,
^H  oi  moderate  stature,  rather  fair  than  dark,  very  muscular,
^1  a  distinguished  gj^nnasiast,  of  lively  and  excitable,  but
sensitive  and  sympathetic  temperament,  and  completely  an
artist  by  nature.  I  found  every  form  of  wcll-mtirked  sensi-
tiveness in  him;  and  he  was  the  point  of  departure  from  which,
in  my  odic  researches,  leaving  the  diseased,  I  turned  toward
the  healtliysensitiveiWhom  Ithen  met  with  in  such  abundance
in  all  directions,  that  I  was  enabled  to  dis|>euse  altogether
with  the  sick,  and  to  solve  the  physical  questions  of  sensi-
tiveness with  the  healthy  alone.  After  remaining  about  an
hour  in  |>erfect  darkness,  Mr,  Anschiitz  saw  all  the  odic
luminous  phenomena  as  clearly  and  accurately  as  any  dis-
eased sensitive.  I  shall  return  to  this  in  all  the  categories,
but  here  only  make  use  of  what  he  told  me  respecting  the
magnetic  light.  He  saw  all  steel  magnets  in  a  whitish-
gray  odic  incandescence  in  the  blackness  of  the  general
obscurity,  especially  at  the  edges,  and  more  distinctly  to-
wards the  poles  than  toward  the  axes  of  the  magnets.  He
found  on  two  magnetic  needles  four  inches  long,  hmiinous
emanations  at  the  |>oles.  He  saw^  all  horse-shoes  emit  light
from  the  poles  after  the  removal  of  the  armatures,  some-
times from  one  alone,  the  northward,  sometimes  from  both ;
in  which  case  the  soutljward  pole  always  appeared  weaker,
smaller,  and  didlcr,  sometimes  with  ouly  little  luminous
specks  seeming  to  lie  upon  the  very  poles,  visible  at  one  time,
and  then  vanishing  again  from  his  eyes.  Magnets  which
I  had  brought  to  his  residence  and  left  with  him  for  some


hfc


828


LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS


time  for  observation,  alJ  appeared  luminous  to  him  in  less  com-
plete darkness  than  was  afforded  by  my  darkened  chamber.
He  saw  both  a  pocket  horse-shoe  and  a  three-fold  magnet
never  flame  but  at  one  pole, — the  flame  not  constant,  !nit
appearing  to  increase  strongly  every  now  and  then,  and
diiiapjjcaring  again  ;  after  a  lialf  or  whole  minute's  inter-
mittenoe  it  again  emerged  from  the  darkness,  became  large,
then  small  again,  sometimes  concentrated,  at  others  resem-
bling a  large  light  cloud.  The  cause  of  these  variations  is
wholly  subjective,  and  I  shall  explain  them  further  on.
The  nine-fold  horse-shoe  appeared  to  him  only  to  have  a
luminous  cloud  on  its  northward  pole,  in  the  imperfect
darkness.  But  this  does  not  exhaust  the  interest  that
attaches  the  reader  and  myself  to  Mr.  AnschUtz.  He  Ls  a
painter.  In  him  was  the  right  man  found,  not  merely  to
relate  and  describe  what  he  saw,  but  capable  of  what  no
one  else  was, — namely,  of  r(*producing  for  us  in  forms  and
colours  what  he  saw,  and  placing  before  oiu*  eyes  a  picture
of  that  which,  from  our  want  of  vision,  we  longed  in  vfuu
to  see  ourselves.  One  morning  that  I  visited  him,  he  sur-
prised me  with  a  black  picture  :  at  the  first  moment  I  saw
nothing  in  it,  in  the  light  in  which  he  exhibited  it  to  me ;
but  when  lie  turned  it,  a  cloudy  figure  rose  delicately  and
phantom-like  from  the  darkness:  it  was  the  face  of  his
beautiful  wife,  as  it  had  apj>eared  to  him  in  its  odic  light  in
deep  darkness.  It  was  surrounded  by  crj^stals,  magnets,
flowers,  and  bands,  and  I  saw  before  me  a  picture  of  natural
phenomena  such  as  human  eyes  had  never  met  before.  The
delight  which  I  felt  with  this  I  try  to  convey  to  the  reader  by
gi\dng  a  representation  of  this  remarkable  picture  in  the  Plate
opposite.  Unfortunately,  no  art  of  the  printer  is  capable
of  giving  more  than  an  approximation  to  such  an  extremely
delicate  object.  It  will  lie  seen  by  it  that  Mi\  Auschiitz's  illus-
trations agree  in  all  points  with  the  accounts  of  the  disc;iscd
sensitives,  as  laid  down  m  my  previous  treatises,  and  that  his


i


Witn  HEALTHY  SENSITIVES,


329


drawings,  founded  on  the  one  hand  on  actual  inspection,  and
on  the  other  on  his  knowledge  of  drawing,  do  not  deviate

from  them  in  any  essential  points.  I  have  often  been  coni-
]>elled  to  meet  the  objection,  that  my  conchisions  are  inad-
niissihle,  because  the  statements  of  the  sick  are  not  to  be
depended  on.*  While,  now,  such  objections  against  patients
whose  minds  arc  perfectly  clear,  and  who  i^egularly  perform
their  daily  duties,  are  groundless,  and  easy  to  be  rebutted,
evei'y  pretext  against  the  reception  of  my  observations  is  now
for  ever  removed  through  Mr.  Auschiitz.  In  the  same  way,
the  drawings  of  the  luminous  phenomena  which  I  gave  in
the  earlier  treatises  have  been  many  times  attacked  because
they  wxTe  fountlcd  in  [jart  upon  descriptions,  more  than  upon
iictual  sight ;  and  the  wish  has  been  expressed,  that  they
could  be  made  by  an  inunediate  observer,  himself  a  draughts-


♦  This  clumsy  objection  may  often  be  met  with  among  unreasoning
sceptics.  The  brains  of  «ome  persons  are,  in  various  respects,  analo-
go  us  to  those  of  idiots,  inasmuch  as  they  are  deficient,  either  wholly  or
in  part,  of  certain  portions  of  the  organization  necessary  to  the  cora-
pletenesa  of  this  very  important  viscus.  With  such  individuulH,  where
they  are  dbcovered,  it  is  useless  to  spend  time  in  endeavours  to  ekar
up  points  of  newly  discovered  facts.  They  revert  with  tenacity  to
their  own  conceits,  and  are  for  the  moat  part  so  much  like  the  fool  of
Shakspeare's  thought,  that  they  are  beUcr  left  lo  their  own  kind  of
wisdom*  where  ignorance  ii  bhss.  In  a  case  of  a  lady  willed  to  aleep
at  a  distance  of  two  miles,  there  occurred  during  her  state  of  somnam-
bulism some  facts  corroborative  of  the  impressions  made  on  Mr.
Anschutz,  and  reproduced  by  the  power  of  Ms  art  upon  the  minds  of
others.  The  patient  saw  her  sister  wherever  she  moved  about  the
house,  w^ith  a  face  emitting  the  odic  light,  more  especially  from  the
tycs,  month,  and  forehead.  A  lady  residing  at  the  Mesmeric  In-
finnary  is  of  the  class  of  the  Baron  von  Iteichcnhach's  healthy  sensi-
tives* She  baa  afibrded,  in  her  waking  stale,  striking  corroboration ■
of  the  accuracy  of  Mr.  Anschutz  in  the  deLineatious  of  the  facts  he
wiineiaed,  as  well  as  of  the  truth  of  the  atatementa  of  several  of  the
Baroa*8  other  casea.


830  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

man.  Now,  then,  I  introduce  an  observer  and  draughtsman,
armed  lege  artis,  to  the  physical  world,  in  Mr.  Anschiitz,
whose  sensitiveness  will  doubtless  endure  as  long  as  his  life,
and  whose  ready  kindness  will  afiford  every  stranger  repeti-
tions and  confirmations  of  all  that  is  here  said.

312.  Baroness  Maria  von  Augustin,  wife  of  Baron  von
Augustin,  Major  in  the  Imperial  Army  of  Austria,  a  lady
of  distinguished  scientific  culture,  very  healthy,  soon  dis-
cerned in  the  dark  room  all  magnets,  bars,  and  horse-shoes
in  a  luminous  odic  glow,  at  first  only  as  a  luminous  cloud,
afterwards  appearing  with  the  true  outlines  of  the  objects.
On  bars  eight  inches  long  she  saw  light  streaming  out  as  a
continuation  at  the  ends  of  both  poles;  on  one,  three,
and  five-fold  horse-shoes,  alter  the  removal  of  the  arma-
tures, fine  vaporous  emanations  of  light,  four  to  eight  inches
long,  larger  and  stronger  at  the  north  than  at  the  south
poles.  On  a  nine-fold,  and  still  more  on  a  strong  electro-
magnet, she  saw  flame-like  appearances  of  light  as  high  as  a
man,  rising  up,  giving  colours,  sparks  and  smoke,  ascending
to  the  ceiling,  and  diffiising  a  light  over  it.

313.  Wilhelniine  Glaser,  24  years  of  age,  daughter  of  an
innkeeper  at  Bachtitz  in  Moravia,  at  present  a  chambermaid
in  Vienna,  somewhat  short,  but  stoutly  made,  always  healthy
and  strong,  who  had  been  uninterruptedly  engaged  in  labo-
rious service  for  six  years,  saw  all  odically  luminous  ob-
jects after  an  hour's  sojourn  in  the  darkened  chamber  :  for
instance,  she  saw  all  magnets  in  a  white  glow,  and  the  poles
with  flames  blue  on  the  northward  side,  and  reddish-yellow
and  brownish-red  on  the  southward.  She  found  the  flames
on  a  round  magnetic  rod  twenty  inches  long,  four  inches
in  length  at  the  former,  two  inches  at  the  latter.  The  nine-
layered  horse-shoe,  standing  upright,  gave  vertically  ascend-
ing flames,  twenty  inches  long,  pnle  yellow  and  blue  at  the
northward  pole ;  and  ten  inches  long,  yellowish-red,  at  the


WITH  HEALTHY  SENSITIVES.


331


k


»


southward,  both  terminating  in  smoke  streaming  up  to  a
long  distance.  She  beheld  flames  forty  inches  high  upon  an
electro-magnet,

314.  Mr.  Sebastian  Zinkel,  an  old  man  in  his  77th  year,
who  had  been  all  his  lite  healthy  and  vigorous,  formerly  an
innkeeper,  at  present  living  retired  in  his  own  house,  No,
87,  Nnssdorf,  near  Vienna,  received  from  me  magnets,  crys-
tals, &e.,  to  take  home  and  exaniine  during  the  darkness
of  night.  As  he  enjoyed  but  little  sleep,  lie  occupied  Inrn-
self  with  these  for  uuniy  huiu^  in  the  dark,  and  gave  me
very  exact  accounts  of  what  he  saw.  He  saw"  a  one-fold  horse-
shoe incandescent,  both  when  closed  by  the  armature  and
open  ;  when  open,  the  light  was  stronger  at  the  poles  than
at  the  bend ;  when  it  was  closed^  the  reverse.  He  saw  lumi-
nous, flarae4ike,  continually  moving  streams  of  light  issue
from  the  poles  of  the  open  magnet  on  both  sides ;  from  the
southward  pole,  dull  and  yellowish  red,  about  two  inches
long ;  from  the  northward  pole,  four  inches  long»  bright
and  blue.  They  both  ended  in  a  smoky,  vapourous  essence,
which  reached  to  three  or  four  times  the  length,  and  ttien
was  lost.  He  saw  the  entire  horse-shoe  enveloped  in  a
luminous  cloud  as  thick  as  one's  finger,  stronger  when  the
armature  was  removed,  weaker  when  it  was  in  its  place.
In  the  latter  case  the  armature  partook  of  the  incandes-
cence of  the  magnet,  and  appeared  red  where  it  was  in
contact  w ith  the  northward  pole,  and  daik  grey  where  it
touched  the  southward  pole.  Thus  an  old  man,  of  77  years,
saw  the  odic  light  over  the  magnet  quite  as  well  as  a  youth
at  the  period  of  the  development  of  puberty,  or  a  young
pregnant  woman,

315.  Dr,  Nied,  a  physician  practising  in  Vienna  (No.
396,  Suburb  of  Erdberg),  32  years  old,  was  an  invaluable
discovery  for  me,  since  he  is  a  physician,  and  a  witness  of
the  odic  luminous  phenomena  from  a  caste, — that  of  the
medical  profession,  namely, — in  which  my  researches,  con-


332  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

trary  to  all  expectation,  have  frequently  met  with  very
unfriendly  reception.  Dr.  Nied  is  a  strong  healthy  man,
kept  in  constant  exercise  throughout  the  day  by  a  large
practice,and  of  lively  temperament.  He  nevertheless  saw  odic
light  of  all  kinds  well  in  all  directions ;  in  particular,  magnets
with  the  metal  luminous,  large  and  small  bars  as  well  as  sim-
ple and  many-layered  horse-shoes.  He  perceived  smoke-like
and  flame-like  emanations  over  a  rod  eight  inches  long,  and
one  twenty-four  inches  long,  and  also  over  a  one-fold,  a  seven-
fold, and  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe.  He  always  fowid  them  half
as  long  again  on  the  negative  pole  as  on  the  positive.  Open
horse-shoes  were  enveloped  in  a  luminous  down-like  va-
pour. He  saw  the  flame-like  appearance  over  the  nine-fold
horse-shoe  blaze  up  forty  inches  high,  the  flames  of  both
poles  united  into  a  colunm,  and  the  bright  vapour  rising
above  this  to  the  ceiling  of  the  room.  And  even  the  steel
hands  of  his  watch,  which  were  doubtless  strongly  mag-
netic, appeared  in  a  luminous  glow  so  strong,  in  the  abso-
lute darkness  of  the  profound  chamber,  that  he  could  read
the  time  on  the  dial  plate.

816.  Baron  von  Oberlaiider,  of  Schebetau  in  Moravia,
about  35  years  of  age,  continually  on  horse-back  in  his
duties  as  Ranger  of  Forests,  and  engaged  in  the  woods  in  all
weathers,  of  strong  constitution,  iron  health,  and  free  from
illness  all  his  life,  accustomed  to  every  vicissitude  of  cold
and  heat,  rain  and  storm,  found  all  magnets  luminous  that
I  placed  before  him  in  the  dark.  He  saw  the  perfect
form  of  strong  and  weak  needles  of  four  inches  length
weakly  incandescent,  and  emitting  flames  an  inch  or  more
in  length  from  both  polar  extremities.  A  pocket  hoi-se-
shoe  a])pearcd  to  him  to  possess  little  flames  on  the  poles
from  two-fifths  to  four-fifths  of  an  inch  in  length,  the  smaller
at  the  southward  pole,  the  larger  at  the  northward.  He  per-
ceived a  three-fold  horse-shoe  odically  incandescent  through-
out its  steel  substance,  and  enveloped  entirely  in  a  dehcate


WITH HEAT.TIIY  SENSITTVTIS.


88»


I


t


»


liglit,  which  was  stronger  towartl  tlu^  poles,  and  weaker
toward  the  Ik'imI  ;  flickcTUig,  unsteady  flames  on  both  sidrs,
iridescent  in  lirillinnt  colours,  at  the  northward  pole  bhie,
green,  whitish,  and  purple,  of  a  Imnd's  length ;  at  the
southward  pole  yellowish-red,  and  of  a  tinji;er's  length,  all
of  such  beauty  that  he  delighted  to  remain  looking  at  the
novel  Sight.  A  large  nine-fold  horse-shoe,  examined  at  a
distance  of  one  or  two  paces,  appeared  to  him  to  have  a
powerful  blazing  liglit,  nearly  as  broad  as  a  man,  and  rising
to  such  a  height  that  it  almost  reached  the  ceiling,  and
tlu^owing  him  into  a  state  of  astonishment  from  wdiich  he
conld  not  recover  himself,  until  I  told  him  that  many  others
had  previously  seen  this  light  as  large  at  my  house.  This
pr^at  luminous  appearance  seemed  to  him  yellowish-grey,
moving  aljout,  of  a  dehcat^*,  etherial  nature,  and  capable  of
being  diverted  by  blowing  on  it.  He  could  not  examine  it
closely ;  it  was  so  delicate  and  weakly  luminous  that  it  then
disap|>earrd  from  his  eyes,  but  w^as  always  perceptible  again
as  soon  as  he  stepped  I)aek  a  pace.  The  nine-fold  horse-shoe
emitted  flasliing  sparks  laterally  lielow  its  poles,  flying  off
and  whu-ling  round  to  the  side  like  extremely  minute  stars  r
he  compared  them  to  the  sparks  of  crackling  pine  char-
coal. This  is  the  same  observation  that  had  ahx^ady
been  noted  down  from  the  statements  of  Miss  Reichel,
and  was  figiured  in  the  illustrations  to  the  first  of  these
ti'eatises.

But  nnfjuestionably  the  most  remarkable  individual  of
all  the  healthy  sensitives,  whose  perceptious  exceeded  those
even  of  many  diseased  observers,  in  strength,  distinctness,
and  dnration,  was —

317.  Josepha  Zinkel,  a  girl  of  23  years,  daughter  of
Mr.  Zinke!  of  Nussdorf,  near  Vienna,  She  is  of  the  tall
powerful  race  of  the  Austrian  stock,  different  from  anything
else  I  have  ever  met  with  in  Germany,  perfectly  he^ilthy,
and  of  a  (piiet, reserved  temperament. She  always  saw


334


LUMINOUS  PHEXOBTBNA  ON  MAGNETS


steel  magnets  with  tlieir  form  distinctly  marked  out  by  lumi-
nosity. Two  needles,  each  four  inches  long,  appeared  to

her  to  possess  blue  flames  ncai^ly  or  quite  two  inches  long  at
the  northward  poles,  and  reddish  flames  tour-fifths  to  six-fifths
of  an  inch  long  at  the  southward  poles.  She  found  a  rod
eight  inches  long  to  have  a  blue  flame  four  inches  long  at
the  northward  pole,  and  a  reddish  one,  six-fifths  of  an  inch
long,  at  the  southw^ard  pole  :  a  rod  twenty-four  inches  long,
blue  for  a  hand's  length  l)eyond  the  northwaid  pole ;  red,
and  half  as  long  on  the  southward,  with  smoke.  She  saw
a  flaming  light  ten  inches  long  on  a  rod  five  feet  long.
Medium  hoi'se -shoes  presented  sometimes  flames,  sometimes
luminous  clouds,  fmin  a  hand's  to  an  arm*s  length,  over  the
poles ;  very  strong  ones,  such  as  a  nine- fold,  flaming  and
vapourous  masses  of  light,  wiiich  ascended  to  the  ceiling  of
the  chamber,  always  larger,  stronger,  and  brighter  at  the
northward  than  at  the  southward  poles.  These  exj)eri-
ments  were  repeated  hundreds  of  times,  with  countless
modifications,  in  the  course  of  a  daily  pm*suit  of  them
during  a  long  time,  and  were  accompanied  by  weaker  and
stronger  results, — of  which  I  could  not  emimerate  half, —
according  to  the  fluctuating  sensibility  of  her  subjective-
ness  depending  upon  her  physical  and  mental  condition  at
the  particidar  e[K>ch8.

318,  Pregnancy  must  be  regarded  as  a  particular  kind
of  condition  of  health.  I  have  luckily  been  abk  to  obtain
a  few  representatives  of  this  among  the  sensitive,  Airs.
Cecilia  Bauer,  wife  of  the  innkeeper  Bauer,  of  the  suburb
Braunhirschengnmd,  Vienna,  26  yeara  of  age,  in  the  sixth
month  of  pregnancy,  of  tall,  powerful  frame,  lively,  open
temperament,  is  a  perfectly  healthy  person,  and  has  been
80  aU  her  life.  But  she  is  sensitive  to  a  degree  that  I  have
seldom  found,  so  that  she  exceeds  even  many  somnamlni-
lists  in  excitability,  and  leaves  all  the  other  healthy  persons
fer  behind  hen Scarcelyi  after  she  had  entered  the  dark


4


WITH  nEALTIlT  SENSITIVES.


335


chaiiil>er,  hnd  I  excluded  the  light  and  directed  her  atten-
tion to  her  hands,  when  she  began  to  describe  appearances
of  light  appearing  before  her,  at  first  weak,  but  soon  so
strong,  that  it  was  a  real  delight  to  cany  on  the  investiga-
tion with  her.  She  saw  all  steel  magnets  odically  inc4in-
descen  t,  and  red  and  blue  flames  flicker  at  the  poles,  usually
half  the  length  of  the  steel  itself.  Weak  hoi'se-shoes  seemed
to  her  to  have  yellow  and  blue,  stronger  ones  red  and  bine
flames  over  the  pcjles,  mostly  passing  above  into  a  bciintiful
iridescent  play  of  colour,  which  she  described  wnth  vivid
delight :  the  large  nine-fold  horse-shoe,  which  was  then
somewhat  more  w^eakly  magnetic,  appeared  to  blaze  with  a
flame  forty  inches  long,  and  from  this  smoke  ascended  to  the
ceiling,  I  never  heard  eitlier  a  healthy  or  diseased  sensitive
speak  with  more  decision  and  certainty  of  the  odic  luminous
phenomena  before  them,  than  did  this  pregnant  w^oman.

I  must  here  also  mention  one  more, — Mrs.  Josephine
Fenzl,  who  has  already  been  named,  ^  302.  During  the
ex[)erimcnts  made  with  her  in  the  year  184G,  she  was  in  her
usual  condition  of  health:  those  of  1847,  however,  diu-ing
a  period  in  which  she  was  pregnant,  and  gave  opportunity
for  comparison  of  the  two  conditions  in  one  and  the  same
sensitive.

a  19.  None  of  these  perfectly  healthy  persons  knew  any-
thing about  their  most  remarkable  and  interesting  pecu-
liarities, and  they  were  not  a  little  astonished  at  the  disco-
very, under  my  guidance,  of  powers  of  which  they  had
never  before  cbcamt.  The  manner  in  which  1  come  upon
the  trace  of  them,  which  I  at  once  take  up  and  follow,  is
now  situply  this :  1  inquire  among  my  acquaintance  whe-
ther  they  know  any  one  who  is  frequently  troubled  with
periodical  he^idaches,  especially  with  megrim,  who  com-
plains of  temporary  oppression  of  the  stomach,  or  who
often  sleeps  badly  without  apparent  cause,  talks  in  the
sleep,  rises  up  or  even  gets  out  of  bed;  or  is  restless  at


886  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

night  during  the  period  of  full  moon,  or  in  whom  the
moonlight  in  general  is  disagreeable;  or  who  is  readily
disordered  in  chiux;hes  or  theatres,  or  very  sensitive  to
strong  smells,  grating  or  shrill  noises,  &c. ;  all  such  people,
who  may  be  otherwise  healthy,  I  seek  after,  and  make  a
pass  with  a  finger  over  the  palm  of  their  hands,  and  I
scarcely  ever  miss  finding  them  sensitive.  When  they
follow  me  into  the  obscurity  of  my  dark  chamber,  and
remain  there  an  hour  or  two,  their  surprise  is  excited
by  the  perception  of  a  quantity  of  luminous  appearances  of
which  they  had  not  previously  the  slightest  idea.  The
great  number  of  people  who  are  in  this  state  of  excitability
does  actually  exceed  belief,  and  I  btate  it  below  rather  than
above  the  reality,  when  I  say  that  at  least  a  third  part  of  the
population  are  sensitive :  for  on  every  side  on  which  I
turn  I  meet  with  healthy  sensitives,  and  I  could  in  a  few
days  collect  not  dozens,  but  hundreds,  if  it  were  requi-
site. It  will,  and  must,  soon  be  proved  how  httle  ground
there  is  to  doubt  these  asseverations.  Sensitiveness  is
not  a  rarity  among  human  beings,  as  I  myself  thought
some  years  ago,  but  a  very  generally  distributed  quahty,
which,  after  my  accounts,  will  soon  be  discovered  in  every
direction,  and  will  tlirow  open  a  new  and  not  unimportant
page  of  the  human  condition.

But  let  us  follow  the  appointed  course,  and  come  now
to  the

b.  Sickly  Sensitives.

320.  Under  this  denomination  I  comprise  all  those  who
are  able,  like  the  healthy,  to  follow  their  occupations,  but
from  time  to  time  suffer  from  indisposition  and  disorders
which  confine  them  to  their  room  or  to  bed.

321.  Miss  Susanna  Nather,  37  years  of  age,  daughter
of  an  officer  of  Basle :  I  met  with  her  sick  in  a  convent  in
Vienna,  with  all  the  symptoms  of  strongly  marked  sensi-


WITH  SKKI.V  SENSITIVES.


837


^


tivciiess.  Wlicn  she  was  so  far  recovei'ed  as  to  be  able  to
leave  the  infirmary,  she  accepted  my  invitation  to  visit  me
for  some  weeks  at  my  estate,  where  T  snbjected  her  to  daily
ex|)erinients,  to  wlneh  we  shall  fre{|ueatly  reeiir.  It  was
reinurkahle  that,  with  great  sensitive  excitability  to  all  that
afiected  the  feeling,  she  never  could  see  the  magnetic  hght
in  the  dark.  We  thus  find,  on  the  one  hand,  very  exalted
sensitiveness,  in  persons  who  occasionally  suflcr  from  ner-
vons  disease,  but  w^liose  optical  apparatus  does  not  enable
thcni  to  detect  the  odic  light ;  w^hile  on  the  other  side  w^e
)>08sess  perfectly  healthy  persons,  in  great  number,  w^ho  see
these  luminous  phenomena  with  the  greatest  ease  and  dis*
tinctness.

322.  Miss  Josephine  Winter,  at  present  in  Vienna,  No,
80,  Suburb  St.  Ulrich,  step-daughter  to  Mr.  Sclnnal,  the
painter,  of  Gratz,  19  years  of  age,  tall,  of  a  full  habit,
strong,  healtliy,  full  of  gaiety,  and  at  present  perfectly  healthy,
passed  throngli  a  violent  nervous  disease  two  years  ago,
during  w4iieh  she  for  some  time  suffered  from  spasms  and
somnambulism.  A  sensitive  excitability  has  been  left  be-
hind by  this,  which  may  be  readily  called  out  by  reactions.
She  saw  all  magnets  laid  liefore  her  in  the  dark  in  a  whitish
odic  incandescence.  Needles  eight  inches  long  flained  at
both  ends  to  a  k-ngth  of  an  inch  or  more,  both  more  strongly
and  blue  at  the  northward  pole,  red  at  the  southward.  A
long  one-layer  horse-shoe  appeared  to  her  to  have  a  flame
at  the  negative  pole  six  inches,  at  the  positive  foiu:
inches  long,  both  being  themselveii  in  a  delicate  luminous
vapour,  She  found  a  three-fold  horse-shoe  odicaUy  iu-
eandcsceut,  white,  enveloped  in  light,  and  flaming  to  a
height  of  eight  to  twelve  inches  at  the  poles ;  on  one  bright
blue,  on  the  other  yellowish-red.  The  flames  flared  back-
ward and  forward  when  she  blew  upon  them.

323.  Mrs.  Johanna  Anschiitz  {nee  Steiner),  wife  of  the
above-mentioned  Mr.  Gustav.  Anschiitz,  23  years  of  age.


S33


LPMINOU8  PHKKOMF,^fA  ON  HAONETt


4


mother  of  two  children,  a  lady  of  tlclicatc  nature,  readily
thrown  in  a  state  of  reserve,  susceptible  as  she  was  excitable
to  all  impressions  on  the  feeling,  had  suft'ered  ahnost
throughout  her  life  from  various  acute  diseases,  which
always  terminated  in  a  spasmodic  condition,  and  not  un-
frequently  brought  on  fits  of  somnamboUsra,  For  some
years  she  has  been  healthy,  but  very  slight  mental  shocks
suffice  to  reproduce  the  latter  at  once.  She  was  kind
enough  to  submit  to  the  trouble  of  testing  her  vision  on  the
luminous  phenomena,  and  saw  a  great  number  of  them,  ^j
both  in  my  darkened  chamber  and  at  night  in  her  own  house.  ^M
She  saw  two  magnetic  needles,  four  inches  long,  flame  to  '
a  length  of  two-fifths  to  four-fiftlis  of  an  inch  at  both  poles.
She  saw  a  pocket  horse-shoe  emit  light  at  both  poles*
She  [lerceived  a  one-layered  horse-shne,  twenty  inches  long,
luminous  in  its  perfect  figure,  and  diffusing  moving,  lumi-
nous, flame-like  vapour  at  both  poles.  She  saw  a  tliree-fold
horse-shoe  !uniinou3  throughout  its  mass,  and  seamed  with
intense  light  at  all  the  edges,  especially  at  the  edges  of  the
poles.  Another  time,  during  menstruation,  she  saw  a  delicatp
luminosity  flaming  up  eight  inches  long  over  both  poles  of
the  same  three-fold  horse-shoe.  A  five*foUl  horse-slioe  seemed
to  her  to  have  a  himioous  vnjKJUr  of  a  hand's  length  at  both
poles.  A  seven-fold  gave  light  only  at  the  northward  pole.
She  found  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  principally  luminous  at  the
edges,  and  delicate  flames  sweeping  up  sixteen  inches  above
the  poles,  which,  according  to  her  statement,  required  to  be
held  at  some  distance  fi^m  the  eyes  to  be  seen  distinctly,
be€X>mijig  indistinct  when  brought  too  close,  and  disappear-
ing when  in  iuunediate  proximity  to  the  eye.  She  described
the  flames  themselves  as  so  extraordinarily  delicate  and
etherial,  that  she  coidd  not  compare  them  with  a  common
flame ;  they  seemed  only  a  pallid  luminosity,  so  immaterial
that  they  could  not  be  looked  close  at  mthout,  so  to  speak,
dissolving  into  nothing. They  were  only  to  be  perceived


4


I


WITH  SICKLY  SENSITIVES.  389

once  only  four-fifths  of  an  inch,  at  another  time  ten  inches
long,  tlisapj>caring  when  I  applied  tlie  arniatiires,  and  flash-
uig  upwhen  I  removed  them;  moving  nnsteadily,  sparkling,
always  larger  and  blue  at  the  northward  pule,  smaller,
duller,  and  reddish-yellow  at  the  southward ;  in  all  cases
marked  sfjmewhat  more  brightly  and  distinctly  at  the  edges
and  comers  of  the  poles.

335.  Mjbs  \\  ilhchnine  von  Weigelsberg,  about  twenty-
three  years  of  age,  residing  in  Vienna,  No.  451,  FleisclV
mannsgassc,  in  the  suburb  of  Wieden,  with  her  aunt,
sufters  much  from  spasms  and  uncertam  health,  jJthongh
she  looks  vvclb  She  saw  miignetic  needles  four  iuclies
long  glowing  [mle  white  tlu'oughout  their  steel  substance,
brighter  towards  the  poles  on  botli  sides  than  in  the  mag-
netic axes.  She  found  all  the  i>olcs  furnishctl  with  httie
flames,  bluish  on  one  side,  and  yellowish-red  on  the  other.
She  also  peiteived  horsu-shoe  niaguets  in  an  odie  incan-
descence ;  a  pocket  horse-shoe,  which  I  bad  given  her,  ap-
peared to  her  at  night,  at  her  own  house,  to  have  sniokc-Hke
delicate  flames  on  both  arms,  four-fifths  to  sLv-fifths  of  an
inch  long,  a  little  smaller  at  one  pole  than  at  the  other,
unsteady,  sometimes  brighter,  sometimes  more  cluutly,  now
larger,  now  smaller,  occasionally  blazing  only  at  one  anu.
In  my  darkened  chandler  she  saw,  on  a  five-fold  horse-shoe,
only  a  short,  weakly  luminous  spot  on  the  southward  polo,
and  a  restless  va|x>urou6  flame,  an  inch  and  a  haU'  long,
on  the  northward  ix»le.  She  perceived  flame-like  hghts
blazing  to  a  height  of  almost  twenty  inches  on  the  large
nine-fold  magnet,  illuminating  the  immediate  vicinity.

326.  A  strange  phenomenon  referable  here  is  that  of  a
blind  sensitive,  the  master  cabinet-iuaker,  Johann  Frieth'ich
Bollman.  of  No.  268,  Ferdinandsgasse,  subiu-b  of  Wieden,
Vienna,  a  tenant  there  of  a  house  belonging  to  Mr.  Gustav.
Anschiit^,  to  whose  friendly  interest  I  owe  the  knowledge
of  this  remaikablc  man. lie  is  fifty-six  years  of  age,  liom

A  A


340


LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS


at  Kiel,  in  Holstein was,  thirty  years  ago,  servant  in  th€
laboratory  of  our  distiogiiishcd  physicist  Pfafl',  in  that  place ;
suficrcd  for  a  long  time  from  affection  of  the  hmgs,  got,
cataract,  and  was  unsuccessfully  operated  on  by  Prof,  Jager,  1
and  has  now  been  blind  for  some  years :  that  is,  uncon-
ditionally lillnd  for  all  shapes  and  material  forms  of  things,.]
bnt  not  altogether  insensible  to  the  general  impression  of
light. The  pcHur  man  no  longer  possesses  a  crystal  line  lens,
but  his  retina  is  still  healthy. Thus,  rays  of  light  which
now  fall  u|>on  his  disordered  eyes  can  no  longer  be  collectedj
into  a  regnlar  picture,  bnt,  penetrating  diffnsedly  through
the  opaque  fluids  of  the  eye,  they  airive  at  the  retina,  and
are  conveyed  to  the  mind  by  the  power  of  sensuous  percep-
tion. The  necessary  residt  of  this  is,  that  he  can  perceivaj
light  and  colour,  but  not  fonn. When  any  one  has  oal
bright-yellow  or  bright-blue  clothes,  a  young  lady  a  green
or  red  shawl,  he  detects  the  colom-s  if  they  are  strongly
illuminated  ;  but  a  green  branch  or  a  red  door  would  pro-
duce the  same  effects  upon  him. Now  this  ]>lind  man
happens  to  be  sensitive. He  was  brought  to  me  at  Castle '
Reisenberg ;  1  kept  him  there  all  night,  and  took  him  next
Tuorning  to  my  apparatus  in  the  darkened  chamber. After
remaining  quiet  in  the  dark  for  an  hour,  he,  this  blind  raan»
saw  a  quantity  of  luminous  phcTiomena,  which  I,  who  could
see,  was  unable  to  discern  ;  and  when  we  necessarily  moved
backwards  and  forwards  among  the  odically  luminous  ob-.
jects,  it  happened,  jwrhaps  for  the  Jirsi  lime  since  men  have
existed,  that  the  blind  ted  the  seeing  ;  namely,  Mr.  BoUtnan
led me. Our parts  were exchanged. The  daylight  in
which  I  was  able  to  act  w\as  taken  from  me,  but  for  himj
the  odic  light,  which  reacted  upon  him  and  not  upon  nic
w^as  increased. I  shall  return  to  all  the  details  in  ther
proper  place  ;  here  I  have  only  to  notice  that  he  perceived
a  little  pocket  horse-shoe  lying  upon  a  table  as  a  luminous
spot; that  he  did  not  at  once  observe  a  long  one-layer.


WITH  SICKLT  SENSITTVEB.


341


I


P

W


horse-shoe  when  close  to  him,  but  when  I  removed  it  a  step
from  him,  and  took  oft*  the  armature,  he  discerned  a  sudden
flash  of  Ught,  which  gradually  disappeared  after  a  few
seconds,  lie  observed  this  only  at  one  pole,  which  1,  when
he  directed  my  hand  to  it,  recognised  in  the  dark,  by  the
marks  upon  it,  as  the  northward  pole,  A  three-fold  horse-
shoe remained  permanently  luminous  to  him.  He  could
not  see  the  iron  substance  in  its  weak  odic  incandescence ;
but  as  soon  as  the  armature  was  removed  he  detected  a
permanent  light,  and  this  again  at  the  northward  pole  only.
He  descnbed  it  as  a  roundish  luminous  spot,  of  about  an
inch  and  a  half  in  diameter.  A  nine-fold  horse-shoe  pro-
duced a  large  lominous  cloud,  which  spread  its  light  almost
forty  inches  round  upon  the  neighbouring  objects.  Thus,
odic  hght  traversed  the  \itreous  humour  of  his  eyes,  and  was
received  by  the  nerx^ous  plexuses  of  the  retina,  like  other
light,  but  did  not  impai-t  to  him  any  configm-ation  of  the
shape  of  magnets,  odic  flames,  vapoiu',  or  sparks,  but  only
an  impression  of  difl'ased  light.  The  present  case  certainly
affords  a  most  rare  and  certain  |X)int  of  support  as  to  the
nature  of  the  odic  Hght.

327.  One  of  the  sensitive  young  women  had  told  me
that  she  had  suflered  from  chlorosis  in  her  childhood,  and
had  taken  particular  fancies  to  certain  kinds  of  food,  espe-
cially to  all  raw  substances.  Since  I  already  knew  from
other  quarters  how  fond  all  the  more  highly  sensitive  are  of
raw  food,  I  was  led  to  the  idea  that  chlorosis  might  perhaps
be  accompanied,*among  other  things,  by  distinctly-marked
sensitiveness.  In  order  to  test  this,  I  looked  about  for
chlorotic  patients,  and  soon  learned  that  among  my  own
work-people  at  Reisenberg  Farm,  there  was  a  girl  who  had
suflered  unceasingly  for  three  years  from  chlorosis.  I  at
once  subjected  her  to  investigation.  Anka  Hetmauek,
twenty-one  years  of  age,  short,  but  stoutly  made,  corpulent,
esteemed  as  a  spirited  and  industrious  girl,  of  quiet  character.


342


LITMINOUS  PHIKOMINA  ON  MAOfT^TS.


a  clever  silk-spinner :  has  only  menstruated  once  in  her  life :
18  free  from  headache,  but  suffers  much  from  disorder  of  the
stomach  as  well  as  chlorosis,  and  is  attacked  by  the  pain  at
all  times.  At  the  very  first  reactions  she  proved  to  be
perfectly  sensitive.  Every  sensation  that  characterises  this
appeared  in  her  to  its  full  degree.  She  saw  all  magnets
odirally  incandescent  in  the  dark,  with  a  whitish  light,  even
when  the  armature  was  applied.  When  it  was  removed,
she  discerned  the  odic  flames  over  the  poles,  stronger  and
l>lae  at  the  northward  pole,  smoking  strongly  at  the  south*
ward  pole  ;  the  electro-magnet  with  coloured  odic  flames,  &a
328.  Mrs.  Francisca  Kicncsberger,  thirty-nine  years  old,
wife  of  a  land-steward,  mother  of  two  grown-up  sons,  living,
at  No.  97,  Mittelgasse,  suburb  of  Schaumbiu'gergrundj
Vienna,  is  very  well-looking  and  stout,  exceedingly  livelyj
excitable,  and  unreserved.  She  suffers  very  fretjuently  from
headache,  slight  pains  in  the  stomach,  and  occasionally  fi*o;
attacks  of  spasms.  She  is  sensitive  in  a  high  degree,
my  request,  she  stayed  at  my  house,  from  time  to  time,  for
several  weeks.  She  saw  all  magnets  strongly  incande^cen
Two  steel  needles,  four  inches  long,  appeared  to  have  flam
nearly  an  inch  long  at  both  poles,  A  magnetic  rod,  fiv<
feet  long,  almost  as  high  as  a  man,  seemed  to  have  a  fl
eight  inches  long  at  the  northward  pole.  All  horse-sb
were  huninous,  both  when  the  armatiu'e  was  applied,  i
which  case  the  magnets  were  enveloped  in  tine  lumino
mist,  as  has  been  already  described  by  Miss  Reichcl,  and
also  when  I  took  the  armature  off,  in  which  case  the  poles
exhibited  flames.  She  saw  a  pocket  horse-shoe  four  inches
long,  with  flames  of  four-fifths  of  an  inch.  She  saw  a  on^
fold  horse-shoe  in  a  whitish  glow,  with  flames  as  long  as
finger  on  the  poles,  passing  into  luminous  vapour,  A  seven-
fold horse-shoe  appeared  to  have  lanibent  yellomsh  flame
as  large  as  a  walnut,  on  both  jkiIc^s,  waving  about  on  them
another  time,  during  menstniatioii,  !>ho  saw  the  same  cove]


I


WITH  DISEASED  SENSITIVES.


343


eiglit  to  twelve  inches  high  with  Uiminous  flame-iikc  vapour ;
lauiiic-fold  horse-shoe  appeared  to  her,  in  her  usual  con-
dition, in  a  white  odic  incimdescence,  and  to  have  flames
twelve  inches  high,  which  rose  up  in  luminous  vapour  m
the  room :  at  the  period  of  her  menstruation,  the  flanic-like
(light  seemed  to  blaze  up  five  feet  above  the  poles,  ending  at
I  the  top  in  bright  vapour,  which  stretched  up  to  the  ceiling,
I  When  I  opi'UL'd  the  large  magnet  befoix)  her  in  the  dark,
I  she  uttered  an  exclamation  of  surprise  and  delight  at  the
'splendour  of  the  flames,  the  flying  sparks  and  variegated
lights  of  winch  then  suddenly  burst  forth.

c.  Diseased  SemUives.

329;  Miss  Amalie  Kriiger,  thirty-seven years  of  age,

daughter  of  a  head-waiter  of  an  hotel,  resident  at  No.  27,

Grossc  Ankcrgassc,  Lcopoldstadt,  Vienna,  a  woman  of  gentle

,  tUsposition,  serious  tastes,  well  educated  in laugnagos,  and

tlnis  more  capable  than  many  others  of  expressing  herself

clearly  respecting  her  observations ;  of  liealthy  appearance,

and  full  habit.  From  youth  she  has  suffered  from  many  kinds

I  of  nervous  affection  ; has,  at  various  times,  been  a  sleep-

walker,  which  condition  came  and  left  her  at  intervals,  and

[she  has  suffered  much  from  spasms,  which  were  very  readUy

Ire-pnKiuced.  At  such  periods  she  saw  the  magnetic  flame  very

I  vividly,  to  a  length  of  from  four  to  eight  inches* Slie  visited

me  now  and  then  for  a  few  days,  and  very  kindly  devoted

herself  to  the  odic  investigations,  various  reports  of  which  I

shall  give  in  the  sequel. In  the  dai*kcncd  chamber  she  al-

I  ways  saw  the  hght  flash  up  from  the  magnets  most  distinctly

when  I  pulled  ofl'  the  armature,  and  at  the  moment  w^hen

[I  apphed  it  again, ^fhc  vapoiu'ous  hghts  w^bich  she  dis-

Icenicd  upon  open  horse-shoes  were  not  large  in  proportion

[to  her great sensitiveness,  usually only  about an inch

[long,  and  always  visible  on  one  pole  alone,  which  constantly

proved  to  be  the  northward This  was  the  case  with  a


344


LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS


pocket  horse-shoe^  a  large  one-layer,  a  three-fold,  and  a  five-
fold magnet.

330,  Friedrich  Weidlieh,  thirty-two  years  of  age,  formerly
in  the  English  navy,  now  an  invalid,  staying  in  Vienna,
severely  and  incnrably  affected  with ij^crtrophy  of  the  heart,
accompanied  with  spasms  and  periodical  attacks  of  somnam-
bulism. This  man,  I  know  not  whether  by  his  own  fault
or  not,  is  in  bad  credit  among  the  physicians  of  Vienna ;  I  do
not  inquire  into  such  matters,  but  I  have  seen  that  in  the
tests  which  I  applied  to  his  sensitiveness  he  always  adhered
to  the  truth,  and  gave  me  genuine  accounts.  From  the
abundance  of  experiments  and  observations  1  have  now  col-
lected on  the  subject,  it  is  wholly  impossible  for  a  sensitive
to  deliver  me  even  a  single  untrue  sentence  without  imme-
diate detection,  since  with  every  new  patient  I  again  go
through  all  settled  questions  from  the  beginning,  and  they
arc  controlled  beforehand,  or,  wliatever  any  one  tells  me
new  one  day,  I  repeat  upon  other  sensitives  the  next  morn-
hig  ;  not  to  say  that  such  a  person,  even  if  he  were  a  gra-
duate of  physics,  would  be  unable  to  see  or  guess  the  sense
and  puq>osc  of  the  cross-questioning  to  which  1  subject  hiiu.
At  all  events,  all  and  every  statement  Weidlieh  gave  me  h
hore  the  stamp  of  exact  rectitude,  and  held  good  in  all  cases^H
under  manifold  controls :  1  have  nothing  to  do  with  any
othrr  attairs  he  may  be  concemcd  in.  He  saw  all  magnets
glowing  palely  with  a  whitish-red  light  throughout  the  sub-
stance of  the  steel,  brighter  toward  the  poles,  almost  dark
in  the  axis.  He  found  magnetic  needles  four  inches  long
emit  little  flames  from  both  poles,  larger  from  the  northward
than  from  the  southward  pole.  In  a  subsequent  experiment,
he  gave  the  size  of  the  former  m  two  inches  long,  and  the
eolom*  bluish  ;  the  latter  an  inch  and  a  half  long,  and  yeU
lowislu  He  descriljed  a  long  single-layer  horse-shoe  as
having  very  thiu  tlanies  at  both  poles :  somewhat  stronger,
UvgeTt  end  blue  at  the  northward  pie ;  smaller,  duller,  and


WITH  DISEASED  SKKSITIVES.


34&


redtlish  yellow  at  the  southward  pole.  A  tliree-layered  horse-
shoe possessed  a  flame  on  the  northward  pole  of  a  hand's
length,  iridescent,  but  predominantly  hlue  ;  and  at  the  south
pole  a  soniewliat  duller,  smaller,  reddish-yellow  flame,  and
these  rose  up  side  by  side,  terminating  in  strong  smoke.  A
large  uine-kiyered  horse-shoe  seemed  at  first,  when  very  close,
to  have  a  fiame  about  eiglit  inches  high,  with  mucli  vapour
over  it ;  but  when  I  removed  him  a  step  back  from  it,  he
perceived  the  great  tall  column  of  light,  which  he  had  not
seen  before.  He  now  described  this  as  equalling  the  height
and  breadth  of  a  man,  intermingled  with  smoke  above,
which  curled  up  to  the  ceihng  of  the  room,  and  Ughted  up
eveiy  thing,  lie  stated  the  colour  to  be  yellowish-red  and
bluish,  and  that  it  was  in  constant  motion :  when  1  blew
upon  it,  the  column  was  distorted,  but  soon  restored  itself
again  :  in  a  subsequent  experiment,  he  gave  the  size  some-
what less,  but  all  in  proportion ;  thus  corresi>onding  cither  to
subjectively  weaker  power  of  visiou,  or  objectively  less
intensity  of  the  magnet,

831.  Miss  Clementine  Girtler,  eighteen  years  of  age,
daughter  of  a  draper,  residing  at  No,  03,  Ilauptstrasse,
Wiedcn,  Vienna,  a  delicate  impressionable  girl,  had  suf-
fered for  a  long  time  from  liver-complain  I,  and  had  fallen
into  active  somnambulism ;  dming  this,  the  moon  acted
uncommouly  strongly  upon  her,  and,  through  the  good
offices  of  her  physician^  Dr.  Horst^  junior,  who  completely
cured  her,  1  was  fretiucntly  eye-witness  of  the  strangest
abnurmul  aflectiuus.  Slie  saw  luminous  appearances  issue
from  open  horse-shoes  in  the  dark,  both  from  a  small  one,
and  from  a  seven-fold  horse-shoe.  I  was  not  able  to  get
her  to  my  darkened  chamber ;  I  was  therefore  unable  to
institute  more  circumstantial  trials  with  her ;  nevertheless,
the  above  facts  arc  sufficient  here.

tiS2.  Johamm  Kyuast,  twenty-two  years  old,  daught  r  of
a  baker  at  Waidhofen,  Uviug  with  a-lutions  at  No.  127,


S4


WnWOm  PHEIfOMENA  ON  MAOKETS


Schmidtgasse,  Braunliirschciigrund,  an  extremely  well-look-
ing and  stout  girl,  was  laid  up  with  a  nervous  fever  five
years  ago,  and  since  then  has  constantly  suffered  trom
nen'ous  attacks,  and  from  time  to  time  fallen  into  a  state  of
somnambulism,  which  continues  for  some  weeks,  then  dis-
appears for  weeks  or  months,  returns,  and  so  goes  on.
She  paid  me  a  visit,  and  remained  some  days.  At  first  she
did  not  see  nmcb  in  the  dark  chamber,  and  that  little  with
a  remarkable  degree  of  intermittence,  although  she  remained
almost  an  hour  in  the  dark.  Quite  unexpectedly,  she  now
fell  spontaneously  into  the  somnambulistic  sleep.  It  en-
dured for  half  an  hour,  and  I  let  her  continue  it  qiuetly  until
she  desired  me  to  awaken  her  at  once.  As  soon  as  this  was
done,  she  saw  well  all  odic  light  of  human  beings,  crystals,
substances,  &c, ;  and  magnets,  even  when  the  armatures
were  applied,  all  appeared  to  her  in  a  delicate  whitish  light
of  odic  incxindescence.  She  saw  both  needles  and  bars  of
different  sizes,  as  well  as  horse-shoes,  with  flames  at  the
poles.  A  long  one-layer  horse-shoe  had  a  flame  two  and  a
half  to  three  iTiches  long  at  both  pules ;  medium  horse-slioes
longer  and  brighter  in  proportion  to  their  strength ;  the
nine-layered  appeared  to  have  a  flame  more  than  twenty
inches  liigh  upon  the  northward  pole,  less  than  twenty
inches  at  the  southwai*d  ;  luminous  grayish  smoke  streamed
up  more  than  five  feet  high  above  these.  She  described  the
flame  of  the  northward  pole  as  larger  and  ratlier  bluish;
that  of  the  southward  poks  as  smaller  and  reddish,  passmg
into  red. The  whole  vicinity  was  lighted  by  them.

333.  l>ancisca  Weigand,  twenty-seven  years  old,  sister
of  the  hatter  Weigand,  residing  at  No.  30,  Obcre  Pfarr-
gasse,  Wiiidmiild,  Vienna,  bora  in  the  district  of  Konigs-
hofen  in  Franconia,  With  an  afilction  of  the  bronchi,  she
fell  into  a  periodical  sonmambulisnL  This  gii'I  possessed  a
remarkable  power  of  vision  for  the  odic  hght,  and  through
her  obliging  readiness  most  interesting  results  might  have


WITH  mSEASEB  8ENSIT^^^ES.


347


been  arrived  at.  Unfortunately,  I  was  opposed  iii  every
way  by  a  qiiackiug  physician,  without  any  idea  of  the  sci-
^tifie  value  of  the  case  which  had  unluckily  Mhn  into  his
lands ;  the  poor  somnambulist  was  allowed  to  tell  fortunes,
and  make  a  source  of  i)rofit  of  her  misfortune,  and  soon
acquired  a  lamentable  celebrity  all  over  Vienna.  This  is
just  the  way  in  wliidu  in  Tranc^}  and  Gi^rmany,  the  most
interesting  phenomena  of  somnambulism  have  had  a  stigma
caiit  upon  them,  and  been  brought  into  discredit  in  public
opinion.  I  myself  was  present  at  one  earnest  rcprcx)f  that
was  given  ki  him  by  the  worthy  Professor  Lippich  on  Urn
account,  but  without  effect,  as  the  set|ucl  only  showed  too
well.  I  brought  her  some  smtdl  magnetic  rods  and  horse-
shoes. She  saw  the  metallic  substance  of  all  very  well  in
the  dark,  glowing,  duller  around  the  axes,  brighter  towards
the  poles ;  a  httlc  rod  foiu*  inches  long  exhibited  to  her  a
flame  of  two  inches  at  the  southward  pole,  of  six  inches  at
the  northward  pole.  The  horse-shoe,  the  ainiature  of  which
she  saw  glowing,  emitted  flames  from  both  jxjles  when  this
was  removed ;  that  from  the  southward  jjole  as  long  as  the
arm  of  the  magnet,  that  from  the  northwaril  etjual  to  twice
the  length.  Moreover,  the  entire  horse-shoe  was  enveloped
in  a  delicate  mist  of  fire,  as  had  been  described  by  Misses
Reichelf  Atzmannsdorfer,  Maix,  and  some  of  the  most  re-
markable sensitives.

S34.  I  have  now  added  Jijlff  new  nntnesses  to  the  sir  or
seven  oritfinal  tmes,  and,  like  the  reader,  I  begin  to  the  of
always  relatmg  one  and  the  same  thing,  and  wasting  myself
in  r€j)etitions.  I  could  easily  go  on  bringuig  forward  many
fresh  sensitives  and  their  statements ;  I  think,  however,  that
we  have  more  than  sufficient.  Every  reasmiahle  doubt  to
which  the  five  sensitive  ghls  first  named  might  have  been
exposed,  must  disappcai*  before  the  multiformity  and  credi-
bihty  of  the  facts,  vouched  for  by  persons  differing  most


LTJHTKOUS  PHBNOMBNA  ON

widely  in  age,  sex,  residence,  position  in  life,  and  occupation,
and  by  persons  of  the  highest  respectabihty,— facts,  for  the
contml  and  repetition  of  which,  in  otlier  places,  I  have  al-
ways furnished  the  most  complete  facihtics.  I  know  that,
in  spite  of  this,  there  will  remain  plenty  of  people  who  will
not  yet  be  satisfied — since  there  is  such  a  thing  as  unrea-
sonable doubt ;  there  is  such  a  thing  as  absurd  scepticism  ;
and,  finally,  there  is  also  such  a  thing  as  malevolent  scep-
ticism.*

This  T  cannot  and  may  not  refute ;  I  here  have  to  do
only  with  sensible,  reasonably-judging  jjeojile ;  Mith  the
friends  of  peaceful,  scientific  progress ;  and  these  will,  I
hope,  have  been  satisfied  with  what  I  liave  brought  forward,
that  is,  so  far  as  the  estabhshment  of  the  fundaiueutal  fact


*  A  small  frociety  of  pbysirians  in  Yi^nna  lately  afibrded  oa  a  lamen-
table example  of  tlm.  After  half  a  year's  coutmued  iDvesUgatiou,  these
came  to  the  edifying  re«idi  that  ^fisaea  lieicbel,  Kriiger,  Nather«  and
others,  were  nothing  better  than  open  liars  and  deceivers  !  I  really  pity
these  gentlemee,— nltogetber  not  Jess  than  three-and-twenty  Doctors  and
Profesaora  of  Medicine, — that  in  twenty-two  sittings  they  could  not  get
nearer  to  the  truth,  and  gradually  went  so  monstrously  astray  with
their  sensitives,  that  at  last  all  lost  tliemselves  together  in  open  lying
and  deceit,  I  will  not  mention  names.  No  one  who  reads  the  report
which  they  published  under  the  legis  of  the  Journal  of  the  Medienl
Society  of  Vienna,  in  November  and  December,  1846,  can  avoid  feeling
a  aengatioii  of  sorrow  that  powers  which  might  have  rendered  essential
service  to  science,  if  they  had  so  willed,  should  have  been  wasted  in  so
sad  and  useless  a  manner,  even  to  the  manifest  prejudice  of  enlighten*
ment,  For»  iustcad  of  ascertaining  and  bringing  to  light  tmths,  the
most  contrary  conclusions  are  dragged  forward  through  a  series  of  badly-
arranged  experiments;  and  facts,  which  were  already  to  be  regarded  aa
aecnred,  again  enveloped  in  mystery.  1  will  correct  these  mistakes^  iti
Botes,  flii  often  as  I  have  opportunity  in  the  course  of  my  treatises  ;  not
because  1  believe  that  they  require  refutation  with  persons  who  know
anything  of  such  matters,  for  they  refute  themselves  in  the  eyes  of  the
initiated  bytheir  own  complete  emptiness,  but  because  nnscienti  tic  persons
and  foreigner!  must  be  guarded  against  deception* — Authors  Noie^


HBNERAL  SITMMAIIT.


is  concerned,  that  magnets  emit  lifjht  in  the  dark,  which  not
all,  but  very  many  health/  and  diseased  persons  are  able  to
see  with  complete  distinctness  and  certainty.

Uniting  all  these  observations  and  depositions  of  evidence
into  a  kind  of  collective  testimony,  we  obtain  the  following
fveU-f/rounded  aximm : —

#1*  All  steel  magnets  independently  emit  light,— odic
light,  in  the  mder  acceptation  of  the  term.  This  light
appears  under  different  forms,  which  exhibit  unequal  inten-
sities, unlike  colours,  unlike  densities,  unlike  motions,  &c.

b.  Not  every  eye  is  fitted  to  detect  this.  A  certain  class
a/  persons  have  the  capacity;  the  indi\iduals  may  be
healthy  or  diseased.  Certain  diseased  conditions  raise  this
power  to  a  high  pitch ;  but  it  is  also  met  with,  here  and
there,  ahnost  as  strong  in  healthy  persons,

c.  The  odic  light  is  extremely  neah,  and  is  so  much  sur-
passed by  every  other  known  Ught,  as  to  be  thus  rendered
invisitile.  In  order  to  discern  it,  the  eye  must  be  prepared
beforehand  by  sojourn  in  absolute  darkness  for  hours.  The
very  sHghtest  trace  of  light  penetrating  into  a  darkened
space  ahnost  always  renders  the  observation  impossible  ;  in
any  case  quite  uncertain.

335.  The  estabhshment  as  firmly  as  possible  of  the  fun-
damental proposition,  that  from  the  magnet  emanates  light —
that  is  to  suy,  a  new,  hitherto  unknown  something,  wliich
cannot  be  brought  into  connection  with  our  existing  con-
ceptions of  magnetism,  whether  or  not  it  be  luminous,  or
other  peculiar  properties  inherent  in  it — was  a  point  about
wliich  I  could  not  spare  any  pains ;  and  it  was  the  more
necessary  that  I  should  substantiate  it  by  all  the  means  in
my  power,  since  at  present  I  have  no  method  of  material
proof  for  the  force,  which  can  be  used  for  universal  illus-
tration, of  the  kinds  which  exist  in  other  physical  experi-
■jnents.  But  having  once  established  it,  and  follomng  the
path  of  induction,  by  the  emuneration  of  a  superabundant


360  FORMS  OF  THE  LUMII^OUS  EMANATIONS  OF

amount  of  incontestible  individual  cases,  given  it  the  rank
of  a  natural  law,  I  have  considered  it  unnecessary,  and  that
it  would  be  thought  a  tiresome  and  useless  superfluity,  for
me  to  give  the  detail  of  all  the  further  investigation  of  this
subject  in  its  immeasurable  field,  and  every  development  of
its  specialities  and  individual  parts,  in  the  same  way,  through
severd  dozens  of  nothing  but  repetitional  and  confirmatory
experiments  on  firesh  persons.  I  have,  therefore,  given  this
up  fix)m  this  point,  and  contented  myself  with  supporting
the  rest  of  my  observations  by  a  less  extended  collection  of
testimonies ;  yet  in  all  things  in  any  degree  important  it
will  be  found  that  I  have  never  taken  less  than  ten  or  twelve
different  persons  for  witnesses.  I  beg  that  the  account  of
my  further  researches  may  be  criticised  according  to  this
principle ; — these  treating  of  the  appearances  of  the  odic
light  in  its  difiercnt  forms.

FORMS  OF  THE  LUMINOUS  EMANATIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.

886.  So  far  as  my  researches  extend  at  present,  the  odic
light,  in  the  wider  sense  of  the  term,  appears  in  five  forms,
producing  difiercnt  sensuous  impressions,  namely,  in  the
condition  of : —

1.  Incandescence.

2.  Flame.

3.  Threads,  streaks,  and  nebulae.

4.  Smoke.  ^

5.  Sparks.

Wc  will  examine  each  of  the  various  kinds  of  ap|)caranco
in  turn.

1. ODIC  INCANDESCENCE  ON  THE  STEEL  MAGNET.

387.  We  have  seen  that  a  peculiar  kind  of  luminous  con-
dition, in  which  the  magnetic  steel  seems  in  a  weak  glow,
and  for  which  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  a  better  term
than  "  odic  incandescence/'  is  one  of  the  coinraoncst  and


THE  MAGNET. — OBIC  mCANDESCENCE,


S51


first  phenomena,  which  almost  nil  sensitives  pcrciiive  in  deep
and  long  eontinucd  darkness.  I  have  expressed  my  opinion
on  the  nature  of  this  Hght  in  the  prceeding  treatises,  and
now  brought  fonvard  altogether,  with  the  old  and  new,
more  than  fifty  cye-mtuesses  of  the  ftict  of  its  existence.
The  next  question  is,  whether  the  odic  incandescence  re-
mains the  same  under  all  external  circumstances  ;  whether,
and  if  any,  what  modifications  it  is  subject  to,

338.  A  simple  bar  magnet,  twenty  inches  long,  lying
in  the  meridian,  its  northward  pole  carefully  turned  to  the
north,  was  shown  to  the  youth  Stephen  Kollar,  in  my
darkened  chamber ;  he  saw  only  a  thu'd  part  of  the  bar  in
distinct  odic  incandescence,  this  occupying  the  northward
end ;  the  other  two-thirds  almost  escaped  him,  so  that  lie  oidy
discerned  slight  indications  of  it.  I  showed  the  same  rod,
under  the  same  circumstances,  to  the  healthy  maid  Zinkel,
Mrs.  Bauer,  Dr.  Nied,  Baron  Oberlander,  Mi^.  von  Varady,
Mr.  Rabe,  Mrs.  von  Peichich,  and  many  others.  They  saw
it  hmiinously  incandescent  throughout,  strongest  at  the  two
poles,  and  decreasing  towtml  the  middle.  But  they  did
not  find  the  colour  of  tliese  hghts  the  same  in  all  parts ;  the
half  tunied  toward  the  north  had  bUiish,  that  toward  the

[)uth  a  yellowish  red  light,  agreeing  with  the  coloui^s  of

"Uie  fiames  emitted  by  the  two  poles. Moreover,  Joseplm

Zinkel  did  not  finti  the  division  of  the  bar  into  two  parts

equal ;  the  bluish  half  was  somewhat  shorter,  the  reddisli

Knewhat  longer.  I  turned  "the  bar  roimd,  laid  it  in  the
reverse  direction, ^namely,  with  the  northward  pole  t-owards
the  south,  mul  the  southward  towards  the  north,  so  that  the
poles  of  the  bar  and  those  of  the  earth  coincided.  The
colonrs  of  the  bar  now  became  dulled  and  somewhat  modi-
fied.  The  reddish  half  was  now  tunied  toward  the  north,
the  bluish  toward  the  south  ;  but  the  blue  was  duller,  and
lind  assumed  a  tinge  of  red,  while  the  yellow  was  dulled,
with  a  great  intermixtiu*e  uf  gmy  ;  1  la  hall  turned  tuwarda


354


ODIC  INCANDESCENrE.


redclisli-vvhitc.  When  I  turned  it  the  other  way  up,  with
the  southward  pole  at  the  top,  slie  found  the  upjx^r  half
yellowish-white,  the  lower  reddish  bluc-gx^y*  When  the
same  waa  done  with  a  horse-shoe,  both  poles  retained  their
colour,  whetlier  tiu-ned  upwards  or  downwards,  but  they
varied  in  coloiu'  and  hitensity  of  light.  Bui  the  magnetism
of  the  steel,  and  the  odic  condition  complicated  with  it,
always  exerted  a  certain  degree  of  pi'epondcrancc  over  tlic
terrestrial  uiagnetism,  in  each  case  the  niorc  marked  the
stronger  the  magnet  was.

340.  These  conditions  exhibited  greater  complexity  in  a
campouml  mat/ net.  I  went  through  many  careftd  experi-
ments on  this  ixjint  with  Miss  Zinkel.  I  placed  before
her,  in  the  dai*kcned  chaml>er,  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  of
great  power,  upriglit,  the  [)oles  turned  upward  and  in  the
Cionfonuable  position,  the  armature  removed.  She  saw  the
side  of  the  northward  pole  in  blue,  that  of  the  southward  in
red  odic  incandescence.  This  was  the  case  when  she  looked
at  the  broad  surface  of  the  layers.  But  when  she  placed
herself  before  the  magnet  iji  such  a  way  that  she  looked  at
Fig.  IK  ^^^  narrow,  long  side,  so  as  to  see  the  edges
^»^  of  all  the  layers,  as  in  fig.  11,  the  picture

^  [mI  IL  of  the  odic  incandescence  changed.  She
now  peixreived  that  the  layers  did  not  all
glow  in  the  same  colours ;  the  middle,
longest  layer,  which  projected  beyond  the
rest,  and  was  the  agent  of  the  magnetism
'  if  the  entire  luminous  bundle,  was  now  seen
lo  be  blue  in  its  odic  incandescence  on  the
north  side.  But  the  layer  in  immediate
contact  on  each  side  had  a  different  ap-
pearance— it  appeared  red.  The  next  layers,
that  is  the  second  from  the  middle,  were
blue  again,  the  third  red ;  and  the  fourth
and  last,  that  h,  the  outer  one  ou  each  side.


ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.


355


I


I


were  again  l)lue.  Thus  the  niidtlle,  and  the  second  and
fourth  corresponding  pairs  of  layers  alone  were  blue ;  the
inteniiediate,  fir.st  and  third  pairs,  were  red.  And  the  odic
conditions  were  found  exactly  rc\'ersed  on  the  soutliward  side.
Here  the  incandescent  middle  layer  was  red.  The  layer  imme-
diately applied  to  this  on  each  side  was  blue,  the  second
pair  red  ;  again,  the  third  lihie,  and  the  fourth  and  outermost
pair  I'cd,  The  colours  of  the  odic  incandescence  of  each  parti-
cular layer  were  thus  regularly  opposed  on  the  south  and
north  sides,  hut  in  alternate  order  with  those  to  which  they
were  appHcd  by  their  faces.  Now,  since  all  the  layers
were  originally  arranged  and  attached  together  with  mag-
netism of  the  same  kind,  (*onse(|Ucntly  with  odic  charge  of
the  same  kind,  a  reversal  of  the  polar  condition,  a  change
into  the  opposite  polarity,  must  have  taken  place  in  the  tirst
pair  of  layers  during  the  conjunction.  But  when  I  examined
the  layers  with  the  magnetic  needle,  I  never  met  with  any
corresponding  change  of  the  magnetic  polarity ;  this  re-
mained invariably  northward  in  all  the  layers  of  one  pole,
southward  in  all  those  of  the  other,  Thus  it  was  not  the
magnetic,  but  only  the  odic  polarities,  that  had  been  re-'
versed  ;  and  tlie  odic  polaiities  clianged,  not  hecausf  the
odic  {wlarities  had  been  reversed,  l)ut  in  spite  of  their  re-
maining constant*  The  strength  of  the  light  was  greatest
near  the  poles,  and  decreased  gradually  toward  the  bend  ;
in  this  direction  the  bhie  beo«mc  dniler  luid  duller,  and
passed  into  gray  at  the  middle  of  the  hmb,  the  hght  disap-
jiearing  wliolly  from  the  eyes  of  the  observer  at  the  bend  ;
the  red  passed  through  reddish-yellow  into  yellow  at  the
middle  of  the  limb,  then  into  gray,  and  became  impercep-
tible at  the  curvature.  Of  the  layers  individually,  the
large  middle,  and  the  fomrth,  outermost  pair,  were  most
strongly  luminous  at  the  two  jwles,  the  intermediate  pairs
the  weakest.  Finally,  when  1  placed  the  horse-shoe  with
both  limbs  in  parallels,  so  that  the  flat  sides  of  the  layei's

a  B


366  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

were  turned  towards  the  terrestrial  poles,  the  dissimilar
poles  of  the  nearest  layers,  turned  towards  the  terrestrial
poles,  were  in  every  case  more  brightly  luminous,  at  both
poles,  than  the  more  distant  poles  tiumed  in  the  other  direc-
tion, which  gave  a  duller  light.

841.  I  find  an  account  of  these  experiments,  as  performed
on  Madame  CaeciUe  Bauer,  given  in  the  following  words  in  my
journal : — "  She  saw  the  lai^e  nine-layer  magnet  in  bands  of
odic  incandescence,  like  Mile.  Zinkel,  both  limbs  of  the  large
middle  layer  blue  on  one  side  and  red  on  the  other ;  in  like
manner  both  limbs  of  the  outermost  pair  of  layers  uniformly
blue  and  red,  when  the  entire  horse-shoe  stood  conformably
vertical,  and  with  the  poles  turned  upwards." Further :

**  a.  On  the  entire  northward  limb :  the  first  pair  of  each
side,  next  the  middle  layer,  appeared  red ;  and  the  eastward
layer  more  cloudy  and  more  dull ;  the  western  brighter,
and  with  a  tinge  of  violet.

"  The  second  pair,  that  is  the  intermediate  pair  on  each
side,  gray  all  over,  more  dull  on  the  eastward  layer,  brighter
and  yellowish-gray  on  the  westward.

"  The  third  pair  again  seemed  red,  grayish-red  on  the
eastward  layer,  pale  orange  on  the  westward.

"  The  fourth,  last,  and  outermost  pair  on  each  side,  blue ;
dark  grayish-blue  on  the  east  side,  sky-blue  to  pale-yellow
on  the  west  side.

"  6.  Tlie  entire  south  limb,  where  the  middle  layer  was
red :  the  first  pair,  applied  on  each  side  to  the  middle  layer,
were  blue ;  the  layer  situated  on  the  east  side  being  rather
grayish-blue,  that  on  the  west  light  blue.

"  The  second  pair,  that  is  the  intermediate,  gray ;  more
dull  to  the  east,  and  brighter,  with  a  yellowish-red  tinge,
toward  the  west.

"  The  third  pair  blue  again,  toward  the  east,  passing  rather
into  dull-gray ;  toward  the  west  lighter,  passing  from  blue
into  yellow.


ODIC  INCANDBSCENCK.


357


I


"The  fourth,  outermost  pair,  red  on  both  sides;  on  the
east  side  gmyish-red,  on  the  west  side  yellowish-red.

"The  handing  was  a  distinct  alternation  of  inciindescent
layers  of  brighter  to  diu'ker,  but  not  of  bhie  and  red  alone,
as  Josephine  Zinkul  had  seen,  but  an  alternation  of  these
colours,  eombincd  with  ageneral  admixture  of  gray  on  the  east,
and  of  yellow  on  the  west ;  so  that  all  these  tints  were  imbued
on  the  east  side  of  tlie  middle,  prineipal  layer,  both  on  the
north  and  south  lin»b.  with  a  shade  of  gray  ;  while  all  those
on  the  west  side  had  a  yellow  cast — slight,  but  quite  per-
ceptible ;  this  wm  a  kind  i>f  transversality,  therefore  a  fur-
ther complication*  On  the  grayish,  east  side,  the  vividness
of  the  colouring  was  generally  troubled,  diluted,  and  dulled  ;
on  the  yellowish,  west  side,  strengthenetl,  heightened,  and
rendered  more  brilliant/'  We  shall  return  to  this  hereafter,
when  I  speak  of  the  colours  of  the  odic  light.

342.  I  traced  the  prineipal  phenomena  of  this  experi-
ment also  on  the  far  less  sensitive  Miss  Josephine  FenzL
She  did  not  see  any  clear  distinction  of  colour  between  the
layers,  but  an  evident  change  fitini  brighter  to  more  dull,
alternating.  Tlie  brighter  layers  seemed  to  her  pale
reddish-gray  ;  the  duller,  pale  bluish*gray.  Thus,  her
observation  was  sutficient  to  afford  a  certain  amount  of  con-
firmation to  that  which  her  predecessors  had  seen,

343*  The  same  phenomenon  was  produced  in  another
way.  1  placed  four  magnetic  bars  of  ecjual  size,  as  an
armature,  upon  the  large  nine4ayered  horse-shoe.  I  had
proportioned  the  length  and  breadth  that  each  fitted  exactly,
like  an  armature,  on  the  ix)les  of  the  magnet,  and  all  four
were  so  laid  upon  the  poles,  that  in  closing  it  they  were  pUed
one  upon  another,  all  their  northward  poles  turned  toward
the  southward,  all  tlieir  southward  ixiks  toward  the  north-
ward Uuib  of  the  horse-shoe.  I  allowed  them  to  remain,
thus  arranged,  for  twenty-four  hours,  with  the  poles  of  the
horse-shoe  turned  upwards  and  confonnable. When  I  led


358


ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.


Fig.  12.


^

t^'^


1


I  ,


the  maidJosephine  Zinkelto  this,  in  the  darkened  room,  she  saw
these  bars  varying  among  themselves  in  the
banded  condition,  alternately  red  and  gray
incandescent,  as  in  fig.  12.  Immediately
on  the  blue  pole  of  the  horse-shoe  lay  a
red,  and  red-flaming  bar;  upon  the  red
pole  of  the  horse-shoe  the  same  bar,  at  its
other  end,  exhibited  gray  odic  incandes-
cence and  blue  flame.  The  succeeding  bar
had  the  reverse  coloured  light,  the  third
the  same  as  the  first,  and  the  fourth  the
same  as  the  second.  When  I  removed  all
the  little  bars  and  examined  them,  I  found
them  all  southward  polar  at  the  one  end,  where  they  had
lain  upon  the  blue  pole  of  tlie  horse-shoe,  and  all  northward
polar  at  the  opposite  end.  Thus  there  was  no  magnetic  alter-
nation of  the  poles  of  the  bars,  as  they  lay  upon  the  poles  of
the  horse-shoe,  but  nevertheless  an  od-polar  alternation  of
colouring.

*  844.  Thus  the  odic  polarities  are  reversed  when  several
like  poles  are  placed  side  by  side  and  coupled  together.
They  then  form  alternating  layers,  and  this  in  spite  of  the
magnetism,  which  remains  unchanged.  Therefore  we  had
here  negative  magnetic  poles  in  red  odic  incandescence ^  and
positive  magnetic  poles  in  blue  incandescence,  alternately
stratified  \nth  negative  magnetic  poles  of  the  usual  blue,  and
positive,  with  the  usual  red  odic  incandescence.

This  surprising  phenomenon  is  one  of  the  very  striking
distinctions  between  magnetism  and  Od.

With  a  view  to  strengthen  this  appearance,  I  placed  a
bar  magnet,  twenty  inches  long,  near  the  side  of  the  nine-
layered  horse-shoe,  with  the  tinlike  poles.  But  the  result
did  not  correspond  to  my  expectation.  When  I  brought  the
northward  pole  of  the  bar  to  within  about  two  inches  of  the
side  of  the  southward  pole  of  the  horse-shoe,  the  red  odic


ODIC INCANDHSCENCK,


35U


incandescence  of  the  letter  was  certainly  evidently  increased,
but  the  V>anding  vanished,  and  Josephine  Zinkcl  now  saw
nothing  hut  full  red  layers,  without  any  buuils  at  alh  Wlieii
I  vuade  the  same  experiment  at  the  other  pole,  with  the
correHponding  modifications,  she  saw^  the  compound  horse-
shoe simply  iu  a  blue  odie  incandescence.  Tims  the  increase
of  tlie  magnetism  l>y  magnetic  influence  removed  the  hand-
ing, the  odic  alternation  of  the  layers,  and  raised  one  pole
to  cxclusivo  power  odically  as  well  as  magnetically.

When  I  in  like  manner  brought  the  like  poles  near
togetiier,  the  result  was  still  more  nnfavonrable ;  all  odic
incandescence  was  extinguished,  both  red  and  l)hie  colour
vanished.

1  now  wished  to  test  the  influence  which  the  poles  of
crystals  might  exert  in  such  cafles* Since  the  magnet  act-
ing npon  magnetism  disturbed  the  odic  luminous  pheno-
niena  there,  it  was  quite  conecivable  that  a  pure  odic  influ-
ence, without  magnetism,  might  influence  in  n  diflferent
way  the  odic  phenomena  which  the  compound  horse-shoe
attbrded A  totnlly  different  result  was  really  pmduced ;
for  when  1  brought  the  positive  pole  of  a  very  large  rock
crystal,  sideways,  to  within  four  inches  of  the  northward
jiole  of  the  horse-shoe,  not  only  did  the  l>anding  of  the  light
ad  ditlerence  of  colour  not  decrease,  but  the  blue  of  the
ftlternate  layers  increased  considerably  in  distinctness  and
beauty,  while  the  red  became  grayish-red. The  same  took
place  when  I  brought  the  southward  pole  and  the  negative
pole  of  the  large  ro«?k  crystal  near  together,  the  red  layers
now  becoming  of  a  far  brighter  red  than  before,  and  the
blue  ones  between  them  perceptibly  of  a  more  dull  grayish-
blue.

But  when  I  approximated  the  positive  crystal  pole  and
the  southward  pole  of  the  magnet,  or  the  negative  crj^stal
pole  and  the  northward  pnlc  of  the  magnet, — that  is,  like
|ioles  together, — ^all  odic  liglit  of  the  same  polar  quality  was


860  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

dulled,  and  disappeared  from  the  eyes  of  Josephine  Zinkel
aknost  entirely ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  opposite  kind
of  light  was  rendered  more  vivid  and  stronger.

This  led  me  to  investigate  the  influence  of  the  animal
odic  poles.  I  turned  my  right  and  then  my  left  side  to  the
positive  limb  of  the  compound  horse-shoe :  the  odic  incan-
descence was  not  extinguished  in  either  case ;  on  the  con-
trary, in  the  first  the  odic  incandescence,  and  the  luminous
force  of  the  red  layers,  increased,  and  the  blue  ones  became
duller ;  in  the  second  the  blue  increased,  and  the  red  was
rendered  less  bright.  When  I  did  the  same  with  the  ne^a-
tive  limb  of  the  horse-shoe^  my  right  side  produced  an  ex-
altation of  the  red  and  a  dim  condition  of  the  blue  layers,
while  my  left  rendered  the  blue  brighter  and  the  red  more
dull.  Thus,  each  pole  increased  the  odic  colour  of  the
opposite  pole,  and  depressed  that  of  the  same  pole ;  and
thereby  it  especially  called  out  the  banded  condition  of  the
layers  of  the  magnet  with  great  distinctness  to  the  eyes  of
Josephine  Zinkel.

From  all  this  it  follows,  that  the  magnet  acts  quite  dif-
ferently from  crystal-od  and  biod,  ^c,  upon  the  colours  of
the  odic  incandescence  of  steel  magnets  ;  i.  e.,  that  the  Od
associated  with  magnetism  affects  the  phenomena  of  odic
incandescence  in  the  steel  magnet  in  a  way  essentially
different  from  Od  unassociated  with  magnetism^  such  as
emanates  from  crystals  and  living  organisms.

346.  The  completion  of  the  magnetic  circle  by  the  appli^
cation  of  the  armature  exhibits  great  influence  on  the
strength  and  distribution  of  the  odic  incandescence  of  the
steel  magnet.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  several  times
that  the  strength  of  the  light  of  the  odic  incandescence  is
greatest  toward  the  poles,  and  least  toward  the  middle  in  the
magnetic  axis.  This  is  the  case  when  the  magnet  is  open  ;
but  when  the  armature  is  applied,  the  luminous  appearances
are  altered. 1  placed  the  armature  upon  a  one-layer  horse-


I N(  ANDES


861


Josejiliine  Zinkel  io  the  darkened  chamber.  The
first  thing  she  i-euiarked  was,  that  this  armature,  which  was
previously  only  whitish,  like  all  iron,  and  weakly  illumined,
became  at  once  much  more  strongly  hghted ;  next,  that  the
oloiir  changed  and  divided  into  two,  namely,  into  bluish
and  reddish,  The  side  lying  toward  the  north  became
reddish,  that  toward  the  south  bluish.  This  experiment
was  repeated  some  months  hiter  with  a  five-layered  horse-
shoe, the  poles  being  turned  upw  ards.  The  same  clifl'erence
of  colour  was  produced  in  the  armatiu^.  The  direction
toward  the  west  also  produced  this  result*  In  like  manner
M.  Sebfistiau  Zinkel  saw  the  armature  red  at  the  negative
{X)le  of  the  horsc-shm%  and  bhnsh-gray  at  the  positive.  This
was  repeated  with  Madame  Bauer,  Miss  Whiter,  and  others.
Miss  Sophie  Bauer  scarcely  perceived  the  armatiu^  so  long
OS  it  lay  free ;  but  when  1  applied  it  to  the  poles  of  a  horse-
ihoe,  she  at  once  saw  it  become  illmniiiated  more  strongly
at  the  two  sides  than  in  the  middle.  Tlicsc  observations
ure  explained  by  the  circumstance  that  an  armature  is  not
a  mei*e  conductor  of  magnetism,  but  that  it  becomes  itself  a
magnet  by  the  magnetic  induction  as  soon  as  it  is  applied
to  the  poles  of  another  magnet,  and  that  the  poles  of  the
two  nmst  be  opposed  to  one  another.  This  proposition,
deduced  from  theorj,  here  found  its  practic*al  confirmation
in  the  direct  observation  of  the  sensitive.

ytG.  The  eft'cct  upon  the  onedayeixd  horse-shoe  magnet
was,  that  the  poles  immediately  decreased  in  luminosity ;
while  light,  which  had  been  scarcely  perceptible  at  the
curve,  increased  rapidly  considerably  in  strength,  so  that
a  kind  of  eqmilization  of  the  odic  incandescence  over
the  entire  horse-shoe  resulted,  with  distinctly  predominant
brightness  at  the  curvature.  The  bluish  incandescence  of
the  negative  limb,  and  reddish  of  the  positive,  now  reached,
in  almost  nuiforni  distribution,  down  to  the  curvature,  and
apj>eai*ed  dmost  to  touch  at  tlie  (K^iot  of  transitioii. Even


3fi2  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

the  curvature  itself  now  shared  in  these  disturbances  of
colouring.  Its  two  halos,  red  and  blue,  were  subjected  to
the  same  influences  as  the  corresponding  limbs,  and  were
charged  in  the  same  way  as  their  like  poles.  Repeated
another  time,  for  control,  with  a  five-layered  horse-shoe  mag-
net, the  open  poles,  originally  far  surpassing  the  curvature
in  odic  incandescence,  became  more  dull  through  the  applica-
tion of  the  armatm^,  while  the  curvature  became  brighter
than  the  latter.  M.  Delhez  saw  the  polar  region  of  the  two
limbs  of  an  open  horse-shoe  magnet  much  more  brightly  incan-
descent than  the  curvature ;  but  when  I  appUed  the  armature
the  light  became  much  more  equalized  over  the  whole  horse-
shoe, without,  however,  becoming  perfectly  uniform.  These
statements  agree  well  with  the  theoretical  notions  which  we
form  of  the  processes.  The  accumulation  of  the  magnetic
essence  at  the  poles  is  relieved  by  the  armature,  and  thus  is
allowed  to  become  in  some  degree  equahzed  throughout  the
space  of  its  field  of  action.

347.  As  to  the  intensiiy  of  the  light  of  these  odic  lummous
phenomena,  its  distribution  over  the  different  parts  of  the
magnet  is  not  constant,  but  exceedingly  variable, — so  far,  on
the  one  hand,  as  the  terrestrial  magnetism,  and  indeed
other  agents  also,  such  as  the  electricity  of  the  earth  and
air,  sunlight,  human  hands,  and  other  neighbouring  Od-
emitting  objects,  more  or  less  affect  it ;  on  the  other  hand,
as  magnetism  and  Od  are  distributed  in  unequal  accumula-
tions in  the  parts  of  a  magnetic  bar,  in  consequence  of  their
peculiar  attractive  or  repulsive  forces.  All  these  influences
act,  sometimes  in  one,  sometimes  in  another  direction,
more  or  less  dislocating  the  odic  poles  and  the  focus  of  their
luminous  forms.  To  calculate  all  the  factors  interfering
here  will  not  be  a  light  task  in  any  time  to  come.  Never-
theless, I  have  collected  a  few  observations,  and  will  set
them  down  here.

348.  Madame  CseciUe  Bauer  saw  a  number  of  magnets


oniC  INCANDESCENCE.


»63


Ij/ing  upon  a  table  in  the  dark,  but  found  the  strength  of
hght  of  their  odic  incandescence  very  unequal :  she  de-
scribed iimnVt  at  tlic  first  gUnice,  as  very  beautiful  and
brilhiint ;  othci^  (iliiii,  obscure,  aud  dull.  1  arranged  them
in  a  row,  proceeding  in  order  from  tlie  dullest  to  the
brightest.  Tiicn  I  tried  them  by  dayHght.  It  was  found
that  the  strength  of  the  Ught  did  not  keep  pace  with  the
amouut  of  weight  the  uiagnets  of  different  sizes  woidd  sup-
port, but  in  all  cases  with  tiie  magnetic  iuteusity.  Simple
horse-shoes,  which  acted  upon  a  magnetic  needle  at  a  great
(bstance,  were  more  strongly  incandescent  than  a  uine-fohl
horse-shoo,  which  would  support  ten  times  the  weight,  but
did  not  act  upon  the  needle  at  so  great  a  distance.  77i^
intenaily  of  the  odic  inciuuk'sccn^e^  thenjbre,  kept  pace  rvitk
(he  matfHetic  intensity,

349,  All  the  sensitives  who  possessed  any  distinctness  of
vision  saw^  the  two  poles  of  bar  magnets  more  luminous
than  the  iL\is.  blisses  Keichel,  Weigand,  Atzniannsdorfer,
Glaser,  Madame  von  Varady,  M.  Rabe,  Baron  August  von
OberiLindcr,  Baroness  Natorp,  M,  Anschiitz,  and  others,
saw  this  with  the  greatest  clearness.

350.  The  same  was  the  case  with  the  liorse-shoe  magnets.
Among  the  observing  witnesses  for  this  I  find  marked  in  my
papers  are  M.  Delhcz,  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl,  Madame
von  Peichich,  Misses  Sophie  Pauer,  Ernestine  Anschiitz,
Weigand,  (ilascr,  Baroness  von  Augustin,  Madame  Bauer,
M,  Sebastian  Zinkcl,  Ur.  Nied,  Baron  von  Obcrliinder,
Madame  von  Varady,  M.  Johann  Klaiber,  Prof.  Ragsky,  and
M.  Hochstetter.  All  agreed  in  this, — that  in  an  open  horse-
shoe ma(jnel  the  limbs  arc  most  luminous  near  the  poles,
and  dullest  at  the  curvature,  towards  which  the  odic  incan-
descence gradually  decreases*  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl
observed  this  on  a  simple  pocket  horse-shoe,  on  a  five-
layered  and  on  a  nine-layered  magnet :  Madame  Bauer  on
a single-layered;  Miss Pauer  on a  three-layered and a


364  ODIC  INCANDE8CENCK.

pocket  horse-shoe  magnet ;  Klaiber  and  M.  Hochstetter  on
several  horse-shoes.

35  L .  I  showed  to  Madame  Bauer,  Josephine  Zinkel^Baroness
von  Natorp,  Madame  von  Tessedick,  Madame  Kienesbei^r,
Baroness  von  Augustin,  and  Johanna  Kienast,  in  the  dark,  a
lai^e  electro-magnet  produced  by  a  voltaic  clement.  Here,
also,  all  found  the  open  poles  more  brightly  incandescent ;
the  curvature,  indeed,  luminous,  but  with  far  less  strength.

352.  The  condition  was  altered  when  I  closed  the  mag-
net  with  the  armature.  All  the  witnesses  just  named  then
immediately  saw  the  strength  of  the  light  diminish  at  both
poles,  and  rapidly  increase  at  the  curvature ;  while  the  in-
tensity of  the  light  over  the  entire  horse-shoe,  including  the
armature,  was  simultaneously  exalted,  and  in  some  degree
approached  to  an  uniform  distribution  through  the  mag-
netically-acting mass.  In  most  cases  this  went  so  far  that
the  curvature  surpassed  the  poles  in  luminosity  in  particular.
Miss  Pauer,  the  girl  Zinkel,  and  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl,
decided  most  absolutely  that  there  was  stronger  light  at  the
curvature.  The  experiments  were  modified  and  frequently
tested  on  the  two  latter  with  three-fold,  five-fold,  and  nine-
fold magnets.

353.  At  the  same  time  the  odic  incandescence  was
heightened  in  the  armature  also,  brighter  at  both  ends  when
it  lay  upon  the  poles,  duller  in  the  middle,  between  the  two
poles,  where  it  was  free.  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  and  the  girl
Zinkel  saw,  in  some  cases  the  poles,  in  some  others  the
armature,  most  brightly  illumined.  Madame  Kienesberger,
Baroness  von  Augustin,  and  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  saw  the
I>oles  brighter  than  the  ainuature  in  all  the  cases  submitted
to  them.  It  appeared  to  me  as  if,  in  all  cases  where  the
armature  was  sufficiently  polished,  and  fitted  the  ends  of
the  poles  well,  thus  offered  many  i)oints  of  contact,  the
poles  were  duller,  and  the  armature  brighter,  and  this  inas-
much as  it  then  conducted  the  magnetism  better  and  more


O01C  INCANDKSCraCl.


perfectly ;  thus,  more  euuiplctely  and  nipiiUy  removed  it
irom  the  j>oles.  The  more  rapid  the  conduction,  the  duller
the  poles ;  the  slower  the  condnction,  the  greater  the  ac-
cunnilatioii  of  magnetism  and  Od  at  the  ]X)les,  and  therefore
the  brighter  there  :  the  light  of  the  armature  is  proI)a!>ly
always  the  same,  hut  is  in  some  cases  smrpassed  by  the
jioles  ;  in  others,  the  intensity  of  the  light  at  the  poles  is
inferior,

354.  Wien  I  closed  a  horse-shoe  magnet  witli  another
one  instead  of  an  armature,  the  results  were  modified  in
some  degree.  The  curvatures  of  both  rapidly  became
brighter  than  when  they  were  open,  and  the  poles  more  dull :
but  this  did  not  go  so  far  as  that  the  cnrvutarcs  surpassed
the  poles  in  intensity  of  light ;  the  four  combined  [.Mites  had
rather  the  preponderance  of  brightness.  This  was  seen  by
Miss  Sophie  Fauer  and  the  girl  Zinkel,  both  perfectly
healthy,  exact,  and  trustworthy  observers.  While  in  the
magnets  closed  by  an  armature,  the  cio^^Htm*e  had  acquired
the  greatest  pio|K)rtion  of  light ;  here,  in  those  closed  by
another  horse-shoe,  the  poles  alwa}s  retained  it,

355.  The  reason  of  this  (httbrencc  may  be  conceived.
When  two  horse-shoe  magnets  are  joined,  double  the  (pian-
tity  of  magnetism  and  Od  must  be  at  once  conducted
tlirongh  each.  Moreover,  a  greater  quantity  of  magnetism
liecomes  induced  and  put  into  activity  by  the  opposition  of
the  poles.  Therefore  there  is,  on  the  one  hand,  a  far  greater
(|Uantity  of  the  dynamic  bi^ouglit  into  the  circuit ;  while,  on
the  other,  the  channel  for  this  is  obstructed,  since  iron  is  a
much  better  conductor  of  it  than  the  hardened  steel,  en-
dowed with  so  strong  a  coercive  power :  now  an  armature
is  made  of  iron,  while  a  hoi-se-shoe  magnet  is  made  of
liardened  steel.  Then  the  armature  is  also  ten  times  smaller
than  a  horse-shoe ;  thus,  rapid  conduction  can  take  place
ihi-ough  I  he  former,  it  being  ten  times  slower  through  the
latter. Thus,  a  much  greater quantity  of  the  dynamic


366  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

essence  must  pass  through  a  much  less  easy  path  when  a
horse-shoe  is  closed  by  another  horse-shoe,  mstead  of  an
armature.  The  consequence  of  this  is  that  the  dynamic,
partially  obstructed  in  its  conduction  away,  becomes  concen-
trated around  the  poles,  and  thus  becomes  more  clearly
evident  there  by  odic  light.  This  state  of  a  certain  degree
of  limitation  approaches  to  the  totally  arrested,  namely,  that
when  the  horse-shoe  is  not  closed  at  all :  and  we  saw  there
that  the  light  of  the  poles  is  the  greatest,  and  always  sur-
passes that  of  the  curvature  in  strength.  All  this,  therefore,
agrees  very  well  with  theoretical  deduction.

356.  We  have  already  seen  what  a  powerful  influence
the  position  of  the  magnet,  as  to  north  or  south,  exercises
over  the  colours  of  the  odic  incandescence ;  it  afiects  in  like
manner  the  degree  of  intensity  of  its  light.  All  the  sen-
sitive found  every  magnetic  bar,  lying  conformably,  in  the
meridian,  incomparably  more  brilliantly  luminous  at  the  two
poles,  than  one  lying  unconformably,  in  which  the  odic  in-
candescence appeared  dull  and  troubled.  The  terrestrial
magnetism  and  the  Od  of  the  terrestrial  poles  co-operate  in
the  one  case,  and  thus  strengthen  the  odic  emanations ;  in
the  other,  they  are  adverse,  and  weaken  them,  thus  inter-
fering with  the  double  force  of  the  earth.  This  shnple  case
has  been  repeated  so  many  hundreds  of  times,  and  so
often  occurs  incidentally  to  other  experiments  in  the  course
of  these  pages,  that  I  will  not  waste  room  by  special  enume-
rations here.  It  is  somewhat  more  complicated  now  and
then  in  the  application  of  horse-shoe  magnets;  we  have
already  examined  them  in  the  open  condition  in  respect  to
this,  when  speaking  of  the  colours  (^  33(S) :  I  will  here
relate  the  experiments  which  I  made  in  a  similar  manner
with  horse-shoe  magnets  closed  by  their  armatures.

A.  When  an  armed  horse-shoe  lay  in  the  meridian,  with
the  poles  turned  to  the  norths  the  northward  limb  was
brighter,  the  southward  limb  duller. When  in  the  reverse


367


position,  with  the  poles  tomird  (he  souths  the  intensity  of
the  liglit  was  distribiitetl  in  the  rcvei^se  way  in  the  hnibs  ;  the
southward  was  l>rij^htet\  the  northward  more  dull

B.  "W  hen  a  horse-shoe  stfX)d  ereet,  armed,  the  limbs  con-
furmable,  with  the  pwles  turned  upward,  Josephine  Zinkcl
found  the  poles  become  bright  in  the  dark,  the  curvature  grow
dull.

C.  When  the  closed  horse*shoe,  in  the  conformable  posi-
tion, was  turned  the  other  way  upward,  so  that  the  armed
poles  were  directed  downwards,  and  the  curvature  upwards,
the  points  of  most  intense  Hght  were  changed.  They  left  the*
vicinity  of  the  poles,  and  established  themselves  at  both
sides  near  tlie  beiul,  just  where  the  curvatures  began.  Thus,
that  part  of  a  rloscd  magnet  which  was  turned  downward
(whether  pole  or  bend)  was  somewhat  less  luminous,  while
thai  luruf'd  upward  was  alwat/s  smuf^what  more  so.

I).  When  an  armed  horse-shoe  lay,  with  the  limbs  con-
formable, hi  the  magnetic  parallel,  Josephine  Zinkel  saw  in
the  dark  that  w  hen  the  poles  were  turned  tow^ard  the  east
they  became  more  dull,  while  the  curve  became  brighter.  But
when  I  turned  the  horse-shoe  round,  and  directed  the  poles
toward  the  west,  she  saw  them  become  lu'ighter,  and  the
curve  duller.  Thus,  that  part  of  a  closed  magnet  which  was
turned  toward  the  east  (no  matter  whether  cm've  or  poles)
was  teiiS  luminous,  white  that  turned  toward  the  west  was
alwat/s  more  so.  She  also  perceived  the  armature  to  be
brighter  when  lying  in  the  west,  duller  when  in  the  east,
confoiinable  to  its  substitution  for  a  curvature.  Taken  to-
gether, therefore  :  77*^  bend  and  poles  of  an  armed  horse-shoe
matjnet  were  more  luminous  when  they  were  turned  upwards,
toward  the  sky  or  toward  the  west ;  the  luminosity  was
weaker  when  they  had  the  direction  toward  the  ground  or
toward  the  east. (Vide  ^  536.)

357.  These  experiments  were  repeated  at  various  timesl
with simple  aiul  compound  hoi*se-shoe^,  and  the  results


368  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

always  described  in  the  same  way  by  the  beholder.  At  the  last
time  of  trial  she  added  a  new,  but  slight  distinction,  namely,
when  the  poles  of  the  horse-shoe  lay  to  the  east,  she  found
the  north  limb  lying  on  the  north  side  sfrmewhat  duller,  and
the  south  limb,  on  the  south  side,  brighter ;  on  the  other
hand,  when  the  poles  were  turned  toward  the  west,  she
found  the  north  limb  lying  on  the  north  side  brighter,  and
the  south  limb  lying  on  the  south  side  duller.  Neither  dis-
tinction was  great,  but  still  quite  evident.  These  distinctions
are  in  all  cases  delicate,  and  require  for  their  examination
good^  quiet,  and  exact  sensitives,  and  stiU  more,  a  truth-
loving,  unprejudiced,  careful  and  patient  physicist.  Persons
with  whom  dogmatism  is  better  than  truth,  who  preconceive
an  opinion  and  seek  to  obtain  a  triumph  for  this  over  all
others,  are  not  fitted  for  such  investigations ;  they  entangle
a  matter  so  deUcate,  and  tear  the  intenningled  threads  in-
stead of  separating  them.*

*  ThuB  it  happened  in  Vienna.  It  was  thought  to  make  an  end  of
the  trouhlesome  Magnetism  with  one  blow.  Finding  a  Buitable  oppor-
tunity, all  the  medical  men  who  had  pronounced  themselves  quite  unfa-
Tourable  to  it,  collected  together,  and  called  themselves  a  Commission  of
the  Medical  Society,  and  began  a  presumed  annihilation  of  it.  Even
the  title  of  the  Commission  was  an  assumption  ;  for  the  Medical  Society
did  not  commission  any  one,— in  fact,  had  no  knowledge  whatever  of  the
matter ;  nay,  having  heard  of  it  at  last,  after  the  irregularly-effected
insertion  and  printing  in  the  "  Vienna  Medical  Journal,"  the  Society
formally  disclaimed  it  in  the  Report  of  the  Meeting  of  the  1 6th  of  No-
Tember,  1846,  denying  any  share  in  this  one-sided  and  arbitrary  conduct
of  certain  of  its  members.  I  myself,  although  an  honorary  member  of
this  Society,  heard  of  it  accidentally  long  after,  when  many  trials  had
been  made  with  Miss  Reichel.  Indirectly,  and  under  cover  of  some
apparent  civilities,  my  treatises  were  made  the  objects  of  attack :  but
near  as  I  was,  it  was  not  thought  fit  to  invite  me  to  the  trials ;  it  was
feared  that  I  might  in  some  measure  solve  and  correct  the  contradic-
tions and  incongruities  of  their  labours.  But  it  was  not  explanation
and  scientific  truth  that  were  wanted  here ;  only  dogmatism  in  the
opinions  of  a  coterie  of  practising  physicians.  An  impartial  commission ,
chosen  by  scrutiny,  by  and  from  the  Medical  Society  itself,  to  represent.


ODIC  mCAKBMCRKCU.


809


358.  Wlien  I  closed  a  horse-shoe  magnet  again  with  a
horse-shoe,  instead  of  an  armature,  like  poles  being  brought
together,  the  results  of  the  odic  incandescence  were  again
somewhat  diflerent.  The  poles  at  onee  became  more  dull,
and  the  curvatiu-es  brighter^  than  they  had  been  before ;  but
Josephine  Zinkel  saw  the  limbs  of  both  horse-shoes,  when
lying  with  their  longitudinal  direction  conformable,  in  the
parallels  still  always  somewhat  more  brightly  incfiudesccut  at
the  four  poles  than  at  the  two  curvatures.  On  both  sides,  the
light  was  strongest  one-seven  fk  pari  of  the  distance  inward
from  the  poles,  running  on  in  decreasing  amount  to  the
eun^ature.  Thus,  the  poles  had  lost  less  in  incandescence
toward  the  eurvatiu-c,  than  when  the  magnet  was  closed
with  the  armatiu'e.  In  a  sid)sequent  experiment,  she  com-
pared the  luminous  condition  of  the  many-layered  curvature
to  a  white  jelly ;  that  is,  the  translucent  white  odic  incan-


hy  eompeieni  perwns,  all  difTerent  opinions,  would  have  been  ft  very
good  nnd  praiseworthy  things  would  doubtless  bare  brought  valuable
tnitbs  to  light,  and  establbhed  tliem  by  its  weight ;  a  one-sided,  party
club  of  mostly  young,  almo<»t  wholly  uniuformed  peraons,  interested  in
their  views  of  the  question  at  issup,  had  no  niithority,  and  deserved
none.  I  eball  throw  some  hght  upon  the  value  of  their  labours  here
and  there. — Author  s  Note*

If  the  Baron  required  analogies  to  assure  him  of  the  identity  of
feelings  prompting  the  actions  of  medical  practitioners,  we  could
alFord  him  not  a  few  specimens  from  our  London  physician s,  sur-
geons, and  apothecaries.  The  pbiloBOpher,  in  his  capacity  of  human
being,  may  oceasjoually  Bud  himself  Htung  aud  teamed  by  the  couduct
of  men  of  paltry  habits  and  unworthy  feelings.  Ilia  contempt  for  the
opponents  of  truth  should,  however,  melt  into  pity,  and,  instead  of
regarding  men  as  reptiles  and  vermin,  he  should  deplore  the  existence
of  those  repulsive  agencies  in  their  brnina  which  incapBcitate  them  for
the  more  transcendental  thoughts  and  enjoyments  of  science.  Em-
pirics by  habil»  how  can  they  at  once  emerge  into  the  higher  grade  of
thinkers?  The  Baron,  whose  discoveries  are  leading  to  a  more  ex-
panded mental  philosophy  than  any  hitherto  conceived,  can  afford  a
large  chanty  towards  those  who  oppose  tbemselfea  to  the  progress  of  ^
enlightenment.


370


ODIC  INCANDESCENCR.


descence  of  the  steel  substance  resembled  in  the  dark  a
transparent  himinous  jelly.

359.  When  I  pulled  the  horse-shoes  asunder,  all  the
poles  became  brighter,  but  soon  reassumed  their  natural
luminosity,  and  the  ciurvatures  recovered  their  duluess.
This  was  confirmed  in  all  experiments,  made  at  far  distant
intervals.

360.  I  obtained  greater  distinctness  and  corroboration  of
the  foregoing  when  I  Fig.  13.

closed  the  horse-shoe,
not  with  the  poles  of
another,  but  with  its
curvature,  as  in  Fig.

13.  The  result  on  the
horse-shoe  lying  flat
was  exactly  as  when  I
had  closed  it  with  an
armature:  dullerpoles
and  brighter  curva-
ture downward  until
the  poles  made  the
arming,  as  in  Figure

14,  I  again  obtained
brighter  poles  and
a  duller  curvature  on
the  horizontal  mag-
net. Both  phenomena
are  confirmations  of
the  above-mentioned
observations,  and
were  gone  through
three  months  later
withJosephineZinkel.

361.  The  cause  maybe  traced  back  to  two  reasons.  One
is  the  shorter  road,  which  the  magnetism  or  the  Od  has  to


Fig.  14.


Omc  tKCANDESCEXCl.


take  in  its  circuit  when  it  is  closed  by  a  curvature  instead  of
an  entire  horse-shoe;  the  other  is  the  stronger  mutual  effect
and  greater  quantity  of  magnetism,  which  are  set  in  action
and  circulation  by  the  conjunction  of  two  magnets,  where
the  magnetism  is  then  more  accumulated  at  the  poh^^,  and,
on  account  of  its  greater  quantity,  cannot  be  conducted  away
so  rapidly,  which  finally  also  leads  on  to  diminished  conduc-
tioih  And  since  tlie  Od  advances  somewhat  slowly  through
matter,  tliis  streugtliens  the  theoretical  probability.  How-
ever, it  is  not  yet  time  for  this ;  we  will  first  merely  collect
and  arrange  facts.

302,  Tlie  delicacy  of  the  distinctions  which  may  exist  in
these  subjects  is  proved  by  the  further  rennu*k  that  the
observer  could  also  detect  a  distinction  in  the  degree  of
strength  of  light  where  the  limbs  of  both  horse-shoes  were
placed  together  so  as  to  form  straight  lines,  as  in  Figure  15  ;
or  when  they  were  in  contact  at  right  angles,  as  in  Figure  14.
In  the  tirst  cmt  she  saw
the  pules  glow  some-
what more  brightly,  in .
the  second  more  diudy  ;
while  the  curvature  was
rather  brighter.  It  must,  in  fact,  be  assumed  that  when
attached  in  a  line,  the  two  horse-shoes  exerted  greater  pro-
vocation upon  each  other  than  when  they  made  an  angle
together,  and  the  directions  of  the  force  crossed.  The  rec-
tilinear protraction  of  the  magnetic  bars  by  their  odic  flame
shows  that  the  projectile  force  is  propagated  in  a  straight
line  in  the  direction  of  the  bars  and  limb.

363.  Let  ns  now  turn  oiu*  attention  to  tlie  course  of  the
intensity  of  the  odic  incandescence  on  the  oOier  horse-shoe  ;
that  used  m  the  armature.  When  its  curve  was  placed
against  the  poles  of  the  horizontal  magnet,  as  seen  in  Fig.  13,
though  previously  scarcely  perceptible  to  Josephhie  Zinkel
in  the  dark,  it  rapidly  became  odically  incandescent,  blue  on

c  c


Fig.  15.
I

"1~


372  OPIC  INCANDESCENCE.

one  side,  red  on  the  other.  At  the  same  time,  its  poles  above
glowed  more  brightly.  As  I  now  drew  it  slowly  down  the
poles  of  the  horizontal  horse-shoe,  the  curvature  gradually
became  still  brighter,  while  its  poles  became  step  by  step
more  dull.  When  I  at  length  brought  the  poles  to  the  poles,
as  in  Figure  14,  the  curvature  attained  its  greatest,  and  the
poles  their  least  brightness,  although  they  still  remained
always  tolerably  strongly  luminous ;  and  then  the  curve  was
brightest,  the  poles  less  brilliant,  the  limbs  dullest,  yet  the
first  never  so  bright  as  when  the  poles  were  closed  by  an
armature.  All  this  agrees  exactly  with  the  various  observa-
tions related  in  the  last  paragraphs.

864.  The  intensity  of  the  odic  incandescence  also  showed
differences  at  different  points  of  the  steel  magnet,  even  at
equal  distances  from  the  poles.  Madame  Johanna  Anschiitz,
Misses  Atzmannsdorfer,  Winter,  Weigand,  Nowotny,  Glaser,
Reicbel^  and  others,  always  saw  the  edgea  more  luminous  than
the  surfaces  of  steel  bars ;  all  comers  again  more  luminous
than  the  edges ;  and  all  points  still  more  so  than  mere  comers.
This  they  found  to  be  the  case  also  in  the  applied  armatures ;
the  edges  and  comers  were  always  brighter  than  the  faces  :
indeed,  they  often  saw  the  edges  emit  light  when  the  sur-
faces were  still  dark  and  invisible.  I  showed  Miss  Atz-^
mannsdorfer,  in  the  dark,  a  magnetic  bar  twenty  inches
long,  brought  into  a  narrow  parallelogram,  and  thus  closed
by  means  of  three  armatures  ;  she  saw  the  entire  quadrangle
emit  light,  the  magnetic  bar  more  strongly  than  the  arma-^
tures,  but  all  seamed  round,  as  it  were,  at  all  the  edges,
with  threads  of  hght.  The  healthy  Miss  Pauer,  M.  Rabe,
Sebastian  Zinkel,  and  others,  described  the  same  thing
many  times.  Madame  Bauer  saw  a  one-layer  horse-shoe  more
strongly  and  brightly  seamed  when  it  was  open  than  when
the  armature  was  apphed,  on  which  the  threads  of  light
round  the  edges  at  once  became  duller.  She  perceived  the
seams  both  on  the  inner  and  outer  edges  of  the  horse-shoe.


UDIC  INCANDE9CENCR.


373


I
I


hut  the  outer  were  lighter  than  the  inner.  Moreover,  she
fouiul  them  brighter  on  the  positive  than  on  the  negative
Hnib.  The  girl  Zinkel  described  these  phenomena  most
accLirately.  I  showed  her  a  one-layer  and  a  tlu'ee-layer
horse-shoe,  eaeh  both  open  and  closed  with  the  armature.
She  saw  the  single-layered,  when  opeti,  bounded  by  a  seam
of  strong  hght  at  all  the  edges ;  the  seam  of  the  outer  edges
w^as  lighter,  botli  around  the  curvnture  and  at  the  poles ;  so
that  in  the  opeu,  single-layer  horse-shoe,  the  greatest  in-
tensity of  light  ran  round  the  outer  boundary  edges.  When
the  one4ayer  wm  closed^  it  was  likewise  seamed  with  hght
on  the  inner  and  outer  edges.  But  in  this  case  the  edges
of  the  curvature  were  somewhat  hghter  inside  than  outside;
but  this  greater  light  vanished  by  degrees  towards  the  poles,
and  gave  way  to  another  similar,  which  now^  displayed  itself
on  the  edges  of  the  limbs,  and  attained  its  maximum  of
hght  about  a  seventh  part  of  the  length  of  the  hmb  below
the  poles.  On  the  ihreeAayer  horse-shoe,  when  open,  the
border  of  the  inside  of  the  curvature  was  always  brighter,
decreasing  and  disappearing  toward  the  poles ;  and  here
again  the  outer  edge  poles  acquiring  the  greatest  light,  in-
stead of  the  cmvature.  When  the  three-Uiyer  was  closed,
she  saw  all  its  outer  edges  more  brightly  seamed  than  the
inner,  even  on  the  outer  edges  of  the  amiatiu-e  We  nnist
not  forget  here  that  the  three-layer  horse-shoe  is  only  armed
on  the  middle  layer,  and  not  on  the  two  shorter  side  layers ;
this  gives  rise  to  the  diflerences  in  tlie  strength  of  light  of
the  seaming  between  this  and  the  one-layered  magnet.  She
always  saw  every  armature  with  lighter  seams  on  the  outer
edges,  and  duller  on  the  inner.

365.  From  the  foregoing  may  be  deduced  the  rule  that
the  seams  of  light  at  the  edges  are  more  infetise  when  the
magnet  is  open,  and  its  odic  tension  tliroughout  the  entire
mass  of  steel  thereby  (probably^  exalted  ;  on  the  other  hand,
that  thpv  dpcrease  in  intensity  of  light  outside  when  the


374


ODXC  nrCANDESCENCl.


magnet  is  armed,  their  odic  tension  being  lowered,  and  the
dynamic  activity  set  in  motion,  thus  turned  more  inward^
so  that  the  seams  of  the  inner  edges  then  increase  in  in-
tensity of  light,

366.  Madame  Jos.  Fend,  Madame  Bauer,  Madame  Kienes-
befger,  Sebastian  Zinkel,  and  Wilhclmine  Glaser,  stated  that
the  most  brightly  luminous  place,  both  of  bars  and  open
horse*shoes,  was  aJways  a  sjxjt,  not  on  the  poles  themselves,
but  some  distance  down  from  them,  about  one-seren//*  o/7/ie
length  of  the  limb  tarvard  the  oris.  This  was  the  case  with
magnets,  open  or  closed  by  armatiu-es,  magnets  closed  by
magnets,  or  any  other  arrangement ;  wheu  they  were  closed,
the  curvature  as  a  rule  was  brighter  than  the  poles,  but
the  spot  always  remahied  brighter  than  the  curv^atnre.
It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  focus  of  the  magnetic
attraction  is  situated  exactly  at  that  point :  thus  this  mag-
netic point  and  the  focus  of  the  greatest  iiiteusity  of  odic
incandescence  coincide,  Josephine  Zinkel  observed  a  re-
markable case  of  change  of  position  of  the  brightest  spot  of
light.  WTien  I  had  placed  a  horse-shoe,  closed  by  an  arma-
ture, in  the  vertical  position,  but  with  the  armature  and
poles  downwards,  and  the  ciu"vaturc  upwards,  these  maxima
of  Ught  lost  their  position  near  the  }x>les  and  changed  to
the  curvature,  to  both  sides  of  this,  at  its  junction  with  the
hmbs,  that  is,  about  one-seventh  of  the  distance  down  from
the  ciur^^e,  which  here  took  tlie  place  of  the  armature.  When
I  closed  one  horse-shoe  magnet  with  another,  the  pheno-
menon appeared  at  the  poles  of  both  magnets,  about  one-
seventh  inwards  upon  each,  and,  indeed,  more  distinctly
here  than  when  the  armature  was  used,  for  the  poles  thus
closed  remained  brighter  near  the  curve.  This  even  passed
into  mimagnetised  iron  bars  ;  when  they  had  become  mag*
netic  by  induction,  the  girl  Zinkel  always  saw  the  focns  of
light  one-seventh  of  the  half-length  inward  from  the  poles
towards  the  middle.


ODIC  INCANDKSCENCB.


376


P


307.  An  artiJhyiaUy  excited ,  very  bright  point  of  odic
incandescence^  is  pnnlHced  by  rubbing  one  maynet  with
another.  At  these  points,  namely,  where  the  poles  of  the
rubbiDg  magnet  come  iu  contact  with  the  rubbed  one,  each
time  a  very  intensely  luminous  spot  is  formed  on  the  latter,
which  moves  forward  over  it  very  exactly  with  the  former.
The  point  of  the  rubbed  magnet  which  is  touched  is  set  in
luminous  odic  incandescence  by  the  rubbing;  but  this  is  ex-
tinguished again  as  the  rubber  advances,  and  goes  on  along
with  this.  This  observation  was  repeated,  with  many  mo-
difications, with  Josephine  Zinkel.

368.  But  every  other  od-emitting  object  pro^luced  similar
effects.  When  I  slowly  drew  the  point  of  a  crystal  of
chrome,  ulum,  arragooite,  rock  crystal,  or  heavy  spar,  over
the  surface  of  a  magnetic  layer  of  steel,  the  parts  touched
became  much  more  strongly  odically  incandescent,  to  a
diameter  of  two  to  four-fifths  of  an  inch.  Nay,  even  human
hands  were  capable  of  producing  this  phenomenon.  When
I  laid  my  right  liand  on  the  curvature  of  a  horse-shoe,  and
moved  it  along  toward  the  southward  pole,  a  luminous  patch
was  produced  on  all  parU  when  I  touched  the  iron,  ad-
vancing along  with  my  hand.  The  same  occurred  when  I
drew  my  left  hand  along  the  northward  hmb.  The  girl
Zinkel  was  a  frequent  witness  of  this ;  but  Wilhelmine
Glaser,l)r.  Nied,  and  Madame  von  Pis^chich-Zimauyi,  also  saw
these  illuminations  with  full  distinctness.  Anka  Hetmanck
saw  it  on  a  steel  magnet.  When  1  placed  a  jx^cket  horse-
shoe magnet,  which  the  beholders  saw  in  strong  odic  incan-
de8cenc43  at  the  i>oles  alone,  upon  the  flat  hand  of  Miss
Sophie  Pauer,  moreover  of  Miss  Weigand,  of  Josephine
Zinkel,  of  WiUiclmine  Glaser,  and  of  Madame  Caecihe
Bauer,  they  saw  the  whole  of  the  steel  slowly  increase  iti
brightness,  and  iu  the  course  of  a  few  minutes  rise  to  a  full
odic  incandescence.  We  shall  hereafter  meet  with  corre-
sponding effects  of  the  magnet  U{X)n  other  luminous  bodies.


376  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

369.  Heat  did  prove  to  me  a  means  of  aiding  the  odic
laminous  phenomena.  I  laid  before  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  and
Wilbelmine  Glaser,  small  magnetic  bars  and  horse-shoes,
which  they  saw  incandescent,  and  emitting  flame  weU,  while
cold,  and  then  placed  these  upon  the  heated  stove  in  the
dark  chamber.  When  they  had  acquired  about  the  heat  of
one's  hand,  both  observers  found  that  the  incandescence
bad  become  much  more  cloudy  and  dull.  Josephine  Zinkel
saw  a  large  horse-shoe  magnet  gradually  lose  the  brightness
of  its  incandescence  as  it  became  warmer ;  and  when  I  had
heated  it  to  about  167°  Fahr.,  the  odic  incandescence  had
decreased  considerably ;  but  it  was  recovered  as  I  let  the
armed  horse-shoe  cool.  We  know  that  magnetic  intensity
exhibits  a  similar  course  under  Uke  circumstances ;  therefore
the  intensity  of  odic  Ught,  as  it  appears,  is  here  parallel  to
magnetic  intensity.

370.  When  I  brought  a  steel  magnet  into  the  electrical
atmosphere  of  the  conductor  of  a  machine,  at  a  distance  of
forty  inches,  the  length  of  the  sparks  being  equal  to  two
inches,  the  odic  incandescence  increased  considerably  in
strength  of  light,  even  when  it  was  not  isolated,  but  merely
held  in  the  hand,  or  placed  upon  a  table ;  and  this  was
increased  in  proportion  as  the  magnet  was  brought  nearer  to
the  conductor.  Whether  it  at  last  became  actually  electrified
itself,  or  not,  its  luminosity  did  not  perceptibly  alter  further.
This  is  according  to  a  series  of  experiments  which  were  made
on  Josephine  Zinkel.  They  were  gone  through  with  short
bars,  with  longer,  and  with  one  five  feet  long ;  then  with
smaller  ones,  as  well  as  with  a  large  nine-layer  horse-shoe ;
and  then  with  weak  and  strong  electric  charges.

371.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  influence  which  electricity
exerts,  and  this  merely  by  means  of  its  atmosphere,  upon
the  odic  polarities,  deserves  greater  attention,  so  far  as  it  is
exhibited  in  the  colours  of  their  incandescence ;  when,
for  example,  I  turned  the  northward,  negative,  blue-glowing


omv  INCANDKUCEMeE.


877


side  uf  u  maguel,  no  matter  whether  bar  or  liurse-sboe,  to
the  positively  charged  eouductor,  the  io tensity  of  the  Ught
was  exalted,  the  blue  becauie  brighter.  When  1  turned
the  magnet  round,  and  directed  the  simihnard,  ijositive,
red,  lighted  side,  to  the  positive  conductor,  not  only  did
all  the  red  quickly  disap|>ear,  but  it  shortly  turned  into
blue.  The  odic  pohwitirs  were  reversed ;  the  +  Od  turned
towaitl  -f-  E,  was  converted  into  —  Od,  and  in  correspond-
ence with  this  the  blue  —  Od  of  the  distant  side  of  the  mag-
net  was  changed  into  red-glowing  +  Od.  The  Baronesa
von  Augustin  witnessed  thijs  in  addition  to  Josephine
ZinkeL

372.  I  i-eversed  the  experiments  by  electrifying  the  con-
ductor negatively.  It  now^  acted  in  the  reverse  way  upon
the  odic  \X)\es  of  the  magnets.  It  changed  the  od-ncgative,
blue-glowing  pole,  turned  towards  it,  into  a  red-glowing ;
the  od-positive  pole,  at  that  time  turned  away  from  it,  into  a
l)lue-gIowing,  od-negative,  all  ut  the  di^stance  of  forty  inches.
But  so  soon  as  I  ceased  to  electrily  the  conductor,  only  a  few
seconds  elapsed  before  the  poles  on  both  sides  became  pale,
and  returned  into  their  original  polar  colours  of  odic  incan-
descence, corresponding  to  the  magnetic  polai'ities  of  the  bai\
I  could  repeat  this  play  of  alternations  at  will,  baekwarda  1
and  fonvaids,  in  a  minute  each  time.  Thus  the  power  of
electricity,  by  its  mere  atmosphere,  and  unisolated,  was
shown  to  strengthen  considerably  the  odic  polarities  of  mag-
nets w*hen  placed  conformably,  and  at  once  to  revei'se  them]
temporarily  when  placed  nnconlbrmubly,

373,  Since  everj^  one,  who  is  at  all  acquainted  with  these
branches  of  physics,  is  aware  that  the  magnetic  poles  of  a
magnet  are  not  subject  to  reversal  under  these  circum-
stances, it  will  be  almost  unnecessar}^  to  detail  the  ex-
periments which  I  undertook  to  attain  the  very  fullest  con-
viction, from  facts,  of  the  accuracy  of  this  truth.  Since
the  approximation  of  another  needle  could  not  be  decisive


878


O0IC  INCAIf DEtClKCT.


here,  inasmuch  as  it  would  itself  become  suspected  of  in-
duction, I  took  another  path.  I  appended  a  Uttle  bar  to
the  further  end  of  the  twenty-inch  long  bar  in  such  a  way
thatj  being  attached  to  the  outermost  point,  it  could  only
just  hold  on,  and  fell  off  on  the  slightest  sliakiug  of  tlie
floor  of  the  room.  If  the  force  by  which  it  was  held  up
had  diminished  in  the  least,  it  would,  necessarily,  have  fallen
off,  long  before  this  sunk  down  to  nothing.  Now  this
decrease,  and  final  entry  into  a  condition  of  indifference,
must  have  occurred  if  there  had  been  a  reversal  of  the  poles.
I  now  charged  the  conductor  and  discharged  it  again ;  the
odic  incandescence  of  the  rod  was  slowly  changed  now  into
the  same  direction  as  the  electrical  atmosphere  ;  now  into  the
direction  of  the  original  magnetism,  repeate<Uy,  but  the
Uttle  bar  did  not  move,  much  less  tall  off.  Thus  the  mag-
netic polarity  of  the  bar  did  not  undergo  any  jK»rccptible
change,  while  the  odical  polarity,  as  evinced  Ijy  the  colours
of  the  incandescence  of  the  poles,  changed  completely.

In  these  facts  exist  the  strongest  proof  of  the  difference
between  Od  and  magnetism,  since  they  afford  cases  in  which
the  two  appear  in  diametrically  opposed  polarities  in  one
and  the  same  iron  bar.  More  on  this  point  will  follow  in
the  section  on  odic  flame.

As  the  armature  becomes  incandescent  by  hxduction,  it
also  becomes  an  etvcfro^maf/mt  I>y  induction.  I  coimected
a  soft  iron  horsc-sboe,  the  limbs  thirteen  inches  long,  and
one  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter,  wound  romid  with  a  copper
wire,  four  lines  thick,  with  a  little  pile  of  six  zinc  and  silver
elements  of  Srnee's  battery,  each  having  sixty  square  inches
of  surface.  All  the  sensitives  to  whom  I  showed  this  in  the
dark,  in  particulai*  Madame  Kienesberger,  Anka  Hctmanck,
Josephine  Zinkel,  Stephen  Kollar,  Madame  von  Tessedicki
Professor  EndUcher,  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl,  M  Delhex,
&c.,  saw  the  iron,  as  well  as  the  annature  when  I  applied
thi.s»  immediately  become  moi*c  or  less  odically  incandescent*


ODIV  INCAX


379


Tltc  open  poles  {flowed  most  strongly,  decreasing  gradually
downwards  to  the  cunatiire.  The  colour  of  the  incan-
descence was  bluish  at  tlic  negative  uorthwiud  pole,  reddish-
yellow  at  the  |KJsitive  soutfiward  pole,  exactly  as  in  the
steel  magnet  w  hen  acted  on  by  rubbing.  When  tlie  arma-
ture was  applied,  it  exhibited  contrary  colouring,  red  at  the
northward  poh^  of  the  magnet,  blue  at  the  southward ;  it
had  thus  l^ecome  an  induced  magnet  by  the  induction  of  the
other  induced  magnet.

875.  And  not  only  did  the  iron  magnet  thus  produced
become  incandescent,  but  the  other  parts  of  the  apparatus
hereby  tlirown  into  the  magnetic  condition  with  it,  namely,
the  copper  coil,  even  the  conducting  wiivs,  and  finally  the
battery  it^self  I  merely  mention  this  here  to  make  the
Section  on  the  odic  incandescence  complete.  1  must  leave
the  detailed  account  of  it  until  hereafter.

376.  Even  an  empty  iron  fmi\  although  independently
constantly  glowhig  weakly,  as  all  bodies  do  more  or  less,  is
not  ijisensible  to  the  influence  of  ditlerence  of  position
toward  the  meridian  on  its  odic  incandescence.  Josephine
Zinkel  saw  an  iron  bar  twenty  inches  long,  which  1  brought
to  her  in  the  meridian,  increase  in  odic  incandesoence,  be-
coming bluer  tow^ard  the  north  and  more  reddish-yellow
toward  the  south.  Wiien  1  now^  turned  it  round,  the  colours
were  reversed,  so  tlmt  the  half  turned  toward  the  north
always  remained  bluish.  When  I  set  it  in  the  erect  posi-
tion, contrary  to  all  expectation,  she  saw  it,  at  the  distance
of  a  yard,  a  blue-grey  incandescent  above  and  whitish-red
below,  frixesc  apparent  anomalies  mil  be  discussed  here-
after,)

377.  We  are  already  quite  aware,  fnmi  my  earlier  trea-
tises, that  the  magnet  possesses  the  capacity  of  imparting
its  indwelling  otlic  force  to  other  bodies.  But  that  its  power
io  prodnc*^  odic  fight  was  at  the  same  time  trans/ erred  (a
ether  fwdirs.  was  tirst  discovered  by  strbsctjucnt  researchei*,


380  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

Madame  Kienesberger,  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  Wilhelmine
Glaser,  Zinkel,  and  Friedrich  Weidlich,  went  through  a
variety  of  experiments,  in  which  I  brought  on  to  flaring
magnet  poles  iron  and  copper  wires  twisted  together  into
flat  coils,  with  one  end  projecting  out  about  four  inches.
These  wires  immediately  absorbed  the  odic  flames,  and
themselves  at  once  acquired  a  greatly  exalted  odic  incan-
descence. Further  on,  ^  485,  when  giving  the  details
respecting  odic  flame,  I  will  give  a  circumstantial  account
of  these  experiments.  Glass  objects  also,  large  lenses,  the
l>ells  of  an  air-pump,  acquired  odic  incandescence  when
placed  upon  the  poles  of  strong  magnets. See  ^481.

378.  If  we  now  briefly  sum  up  what  has  been  stated
concerning  the  odic  incandescence,  we  obtain  the  following
compressed  resumi : —

a.  The  peculiar  light,  the  odic  incandescence,  of  all  mag-
nets, whatever  shape  it  may  possess,  appears  in  the  dark
dull  gray  in  the  lowest  degrees  of  luminosity ;  it  then  rises
progressively  towards  whitish  and  yellowish,  and  generally
assumes  a  bluish  colour  at  the  northward  pole,  and  a  reddish
at  the  southward.

b.  This  colouring  is  modified  through  a  great  number  of
shades,  according  as  the  poles  of  the  magnet  are  open  or
closed,  conformable  or  unconformable,  turned  to  the  east  or
to  the  west,  upwards  or  downwards,  i.  e.,  according  to  the
different  conditions  under  which  its  conflict  with  the  ter-
restrial magnetism  takes  place.  But  it  always  follows  a
law  which  gives  the  rule  of  action  hi  each  position,  and  in
every  case  makes  good  its  influence.

c.  An  electro-magnet  obeys  the  same  law  in  all  essential
particulars.

d.  A  bundle  of  bars  or  horse-shoes  which  are  placed  with
like  poles  together,  becomes  reversed  internally  into  unlike
odic  poles.

e.  The  armature  shares  in  this  process ;  it  acts  passively


381


and  actively  as  au  iiuluced  magnet,  and  modifies  the  pbe-
uomena  of  light  and  cokmr,

/'  An  empty  iron  bar  plays  the  part  of  a  terrestrially
induced  magnet,  and  gives  the  corresponding  pheiiomeoa  of
odic  incandescence.

g.  The  intensities  of  odic  incandescence  keep  pace  witb  j
the  magnetic  intensities  in  one  and  the  same  magnet.  They
exhibit  variations  of  magnitude  among  dillerent  magnets,
and  in  each  particular  magnet  itself,  and  this  accorduig  to
their  position,  as  they  are  open  or  closed,  or  have  the  poles  {
directed  conformably  or  uneonformal)Iy  towards  east  or  west,
upwards  or  downwards.  They  change  theu^  positions  on
the  poles  and  axes  of  magnets  according  to  these  cii'cmu-
stances.  The  light  is  strong  enough  to  bear  reflection
from  common  mirrors.

h.  Magnets  closed  with  magnets  instead  of  armatures
have  the  lights  of  the  odic  incandescence  displaced  according
to  the  same  laws,  but  in  a  different  way.

/.  Wherever  magnet  poles  are  applied  upon  magnetic
bars,  they  produce  partial  exaltation  of  the  odic  incan-
descence, spots  of  light, Ciystals  and  hands  do  the  same.

h\  The  electrical  atmosphere  causes  exaltation  of  the  odic
incandescence.

L  It  acts  so  strongly  upon  the  odic  light,  that  it  is  capable
of  producing  a  reversal  of  the  odic  poles  where  no  change  of
the  magnetic  value  occurs.

ni.  Heat  weakens  the  phenomena  of  odic  incandescence
in  steel  magnets*

n.  The  odic  ;ncandescencc  is  capable  of  being  trans-
ferred from  magnets  to  other  non-magnetic  bodies,  copper
wires,  &c.

0,  Although  the  odic  intensities  rise  parallel  with  the
magnetic,  the  values  of  the  two  do  not ;  cases  often  oc-
curred where  -f  M  appeared  combined  with  —  Od,  or  —  M
with  -f  Od ;  and  tliese  contrasts  strongly  testify  to  the  dif*
ference  existing  between  them.


382  ODIC  FLAME  ON  ST££L  MAGNETS.


II. — Odic  Flame  on  Steel  Magnets.

379.  The  odic  flame  which  issues  from  magnets  always  keeps
pace  with  the  odic  incandescence.  It  forms  the  second  de-
gree in  the  scale  of  strength  of  the  odic  luminous  phenomena,
and  consists  of  a  brightness  which  the  weaker  sensitives  only
see  as  a  luminous  halo  over  the  poles  of  the  magnets,  but
which,  to  those  more  highly  sensitive,  assumes  progressively
more  of  the  external  aspect  of  a  real  flame,  in  proportion  to
their  power  of  vision,  and  is  described  by  them  as  such.
There  are  incandescent  magnets  without  visible  flame,  but
no  odic  flames  without  visible  incandescence.  The  incan-
descence is  always  the  first  appearance  of  Ught.  I  had  once
a  horse-shoe  magnet  which  had  become  so  weak  that  it
would  no  longer  support  its  armature,  although  it  was  still
perceptibly  magnetic.  I  showed  it  to  Josephine  Zinkel  in
the  darkened  chamber,  at  a  period  when  her  power  of  vision
had  a  high  degree  of  sensibility.  She  saw  the  whole  mass
of  steel  lighted  with  odic  incandescence,  but  could  distin-
guish no  flame  at  the  poles,  only  a  little  smoke.  When  the
odic  intensity  was  increased,  the  flame  became  visible.  It
exists,  as  we  are  justified  in  assuming,  evet^wherc  ;  but  we
can  only  speak  of  it  where  it  becomes  visible.  We  will
follow  its  appearances,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  hitherto  to
make  out  its  traces,  beyond  what  has  already  been  told,  by
running  through  the  series  of  experiments  upon  magnets
which  I  instituted  for  this  puq)ose.

380.  We  have  in  the  first  place  to  take  up  the  thread  of
the  details  given  in  the  first  of  these  treatises,  from  ^  3  to
^  20,  to  which  I  refer  the  reader.  A  year  later,  namely  in
1845,  I  went  through  a  scries  of  investigations  with  Miss
Reichel,  while  she  was  residing  with  nic,  which  served  both
to  confirm  what  was  before  stated,  and  to  mifold  new  matter


Ome  FLAVE  ON  STRET*  MAONETS.


383


which  must  be  appended  to  the  former.  She  saw  all  mag-
nets,  without  exception,  furnished  with  flames  of  different
size  and  intensity  of  Ught ;  the  former  according  to  the  dif-

^fe^ent  sizes  of  the  magnets,  the  latter  according  as  they  pos-
sessed diflerent  strength  of  magnetic  or  odic  charge,  as  w*ell
■  pitjportioned  to  her  power  of  sensitive  vision,  more  exalted
or  more  depressed  by  fluctuations  of  her  disease. I  shall
here  select  only  a  few^  out  of  hundreds  of  experinrents. Lute
in  the  summer,  when  she  is  usually  somewhat  better  in
health,  she  saw  a  weak  bar,  tw^enty  inches  long,  with  a
flame  rather  more  than  one  inch  long. At  the  same  time
she  saw  a  seven-layered  horse-shoe  with  a  flarae  of  eight
I inches  at  its  jioles. At  a  subsequent  period,  during  more
H highly  excited  sensitiveness,  the  largest  of  my  steel  maguet«,
^M a  heavy  horse-shoe  made  of  nine  cast  steel  layers,  was  placed
i^ before  her  in  the  dark. This  tune,  as  in  the  year  before,
^^ although  she  did  not  know  of  the  magnet^  she  saw  flames
H six  feet  high  blaze  up  from  both  poles. They  were  so  vast,
that,  as  the  horse-shcie  had  the  poles  turned  upwards,  the
flames  blended  together,  as  they  rose,  into  one  column  of
fire. With  regard  to  the  different  colours  which  were  given

I  out  along  each  pole,  she  j)erceived  that  the  column  of  light
was  composed  of  two  trunks,  one  yellowish-white,  the  other
bluish;  the  first  smaller,  the  second  larger.  The  entire
chamber  was  so  strongly  lighted  by  it  that  she  conld  detect
the  outlines  of  everj^  object.  All  the  space  between  the
white  odically  incandescent  limbs  was  full  of  streaks  of
I  flame,  and  the  outside  of  the  steel  was  enveloped  in  a  lumi-

H  nous  mist,  which  seemed  to  flow  onward  in  waves,  sorae-
^H  times  towards  one  pole,  sometimes  towards  the  other.  At
^V  the  ends  of  the  layers,  tlieir  edges  and  corners,  where  they
i  formed  the  polar  ends,  special  little  flames  streamed  out

^B  sideways,  strongest  from  the  outer  angles,  when  they  finally
^^  terminated  in  isolated  spreading  cjparks.  Suice  all  this
L^ agrees  exactly  in  every  particular  with  what  Miss  Ucichel


384  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

had  described  a  year  before,  on  a  smaller  scale,  of  a  weaker
magnet,  I  showed  to  Miss  Atzraannsdorfer,  after  her  ob-
servations and  the  descriptions  were  completed,  the  draw-
ings which  are  appended  to  the  first  part  of  this  work.  She
fomid  all  to  agree  pretty  exactly  with  what  she  herself  had
seen,  and  thus  confirmed  the  accuracy  of  my  earlier  re-
searches. She  added  only,  in  correction,  that  the  flame-like
phenomena  were  in  reality  all  much  more  deUcate  and
Ughter  than  those  represented  in  the  drawing,  but  at  the
same  time  moving  about,  uniting  together,  and  intermingling
with  varying  coloiu^  with  every  breath  of  air.

881.  I  have  to  state  in  almost  the  same  words  from  a
healthy  patient,  the  girl  Zinkcl,  what  I  have  just  conmiuni-
cated  from  a  diseased  sensitive.  She  also  saw  more  dis-
tinctly, under  certain  circumstances,  the  odic  flame  flow  from
half  an  inch  to  four  inches  from  bar  magnets,  and  blaze  from
three  to  five  feet  high  from  the  nine-layer  magnet ;  among
these  circumstances  was  the  occurrence  of  the  catamenia.
She  then  detected  also  the  little  lateral  flames  on  the  edges
and  comers  of  the  bars,  as  well  as  of  horse-shoes,  the  play
of  colours,  the  great  illumination,  the  scattered  sparks,  all
nearly  word  for  word  as  Miss  Reichel  had  described  it  two
years  previously.

It  has  already  been  mentioned,  ^  316,  that  the  healthy
Baron  von  Oberlander  saw  the  odic  flame  as  large  over
the  nine-layer  horse-shoe  magnet.  The  same  was  said
of  Friedrich  Wcidlich,  ^  330,  as  well  as  at  ^  328  of
Madame  Kiencsberger,  at  ^  313  of  the  healthy  sensitive
Wilhelmine  Glnser,  ^  315  of  Dr.  Nied,  M12  of  the
Baroness  von  Augustin,  ^  303  of  M.  Franz  Vernolendt,
^  299  of  Madame  von  Varady,  and  only  a  little  less
strongly,  ^  309,  of  the  thoroughly  healthy  Miss  Sopliie
Pauer.  All  these  persons  saw  flames  blaze  up  to  the  height
of  a  man  over  the  nine-layer  horse-shoe  magnet.

382.  Let us now  examine  some  of  the  properties  of


ON  STl


inn


38ii


^


the  odic  flames  of  the  magiiet ;  in  the  first  place;  their
ejrteni.

We  have  seen  that  the  size  of  the  ftamps  depends  objec-
tively on  the  size  of  the  magnet  and  its  magnetic  intensity
or  strength  of  change  ;  and  that  the  perception  and  recog-
nittoD  of  it  is  also  subjectively  conditioned  by  the  excita-
bility of  the  observer.  As  there  exist  among  mankind,  in
respect  to  common  sight,  such  great  diflerences  that  one
man  does  not  recognise  liis  brother  passing  by  him,  while
the  eagle  eye  of  another  enables  him  to  count  the  sky-larks
in  the  air ;  as,  moreover,  there  are  some  who  cannot  see  at
all  in  moderate  darkness,  while  othei-s  can  see  their  way  in
the  dtu^keyt  night  ;  as,  in  more  striking  cases,  those  siiffering
from  lieniii^algia  can  only  see  in  the  strongest  light,  and
are  quite  bhnd  in  a  dim  light,  thus  directly  opposed
to  the  sensitive;  as  there  are  albinos,  and  indeed  such
as  cannot  see  colours,  and  to  whom  the  world  looks  like
a  copper-plate  engraving; — so  is  it  also  with  the  power
of  seeing  odic  phenomena  ;  in  proportion  to  their  power  of
vision,  the  odic  flames  of  one  and  the  same  magnet  appear
more  extensive  or  more  limited  ;  and  this  is  not  merely  dif-
ferent in  diflferent  individuals,  but  varies  in  one  and  the
same  on  different  days,  at  different  hours,  nay  even  most
surprisingly  from  minute  to  minute,  so  that  at  three  rapidly
succeeding  moments  one  and  the  same  odic  flame  may  be
imperceptible,  immediately  afterwards  visible,  though  small,
atjd  then,  directly  after  this,  large  and  expanded,  without
any  change  in  the  object,  by  mere  change  of  the  suscepti-
bility of  the  observer.  The  cause  of  this  will  be  made  known
circumstantially  in  the  succeeding  treatises,  when  we  come  to
speak  specially  of  the  power  of  odic  vision,

383.  The  perception  of  a  sudden  and  rapidly  vanishing
flash  of  light  when  the  armature  is  pulled  off  ike  horse-shoe
quickly,  constitntes  the  lowest  degree  of  recognition  of  the
odic  flame  upon  magnets. This  was  seen  by  Dr. Nied,


386  ODIC  FLAME  OX  STEEL  MAGNETS.

Baroness  Pauline  von  Natori),  M.  Kotschy,  Madame  von
Varady,  M.  von  Rainer,  Baroness  von  Peiehich,  M.  Amalie
Kreiiger,  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  M.  Emst  Pauer,  Prof.  End-
licher,  M.  Delhez,  Baroness  von  Augustin,  as  well  as  Miss
Nowotny,  ^  3.  Madame  Caecilie  Bauer  gave  a  more  accurate
account  of  this  process.  At  the  moment  when  the  arma-
ture was  pulled  off  she  saw  a  sparkling  flash  of  light,  almost
like  that  produced  by  flint  and  steel,  disappearing  instanta-
neously. The  flame  over  the  poles  of  the  horse-shoe  was
not  largest  then ;  on  the  contrary,  smallest,  and  at  the  first
moment  almost  ini|)erceptible.  Immediately  on  this  it
began  to  form,  at  first  small,  then  increasing,  and  soon  ris-
ing to  its  permanent  magnitude.  About  a  minute  was  re-
quired for  this.  Some  months  later  I  received  exactly  the
same  description  of  this  phenomenon  from  Josephine  Zinkel.

The  different  degrees  of  strength  of  the  light  from  a  mere
halo  to  distinct  fiames,  presented  by  the  luminosity  appearing
at  the  poles  of  magnets,  were  described  a  little  differently  by
almost  every  observer.  We  found  MM.  Hiitter  and  Schuh,
and  Prof.  Ragsky,  at  the  bottom  of  the  scale.  Next  to  them
stands  Prof.  Husz  of  Stockholm,  who  only  saw  the  light
over  the  elcctro-niagnct.  In  the  middle  degree  occurred
the  observations  of  Prof.  Endlicher,  among  others,  to  whom
the  luminous  emanations  exhil)ited  more  general  distribu-
tion and  great  substantiality ;  then  the  physician  Dr.  Nied,
M.  Rabe,  Baroness  von  Augustin,  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,
Baron  Oberlander,  Anka  Hitmanck,  and  the  painter  M.
Anschiitz.  Above  these  stood  Madame  Caxrilie  Bauer  and
Josephine  Zinkel,  and  at  the  top  of  the  scries  the  somnam-
buUst  sensitives,  to  whom  the  Hghts  over  magnets  always
appeared  as  distinct  flames.

384.  Among  the  obj(icting  conditions  of  the  magnitttde
of  the  odic  Jlame,  is  the  distinction  between  the  northward
and  southward  poles  of  the  magnet.  The  two  flames  are  in
most  cases  of  different  size ;  at  least  in  the  48°  of  N.  lat.,  in


ODIC  FLAMl  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


387


which  my  resideBce  lies,  when  the  horse-shoe  stands  up-
right, or  when  thin  poles  are  turned  toward  the  north,  or
when  bars  He  conformably  in  the  meridian.  It  must  be
relatively  ditTerent  in  othur  places.  Under  the  tropics,  the
distinction  in  the  conformably  placed  magnets  wall  become
imperceptible,  and,  in  the  magnetic  equator,  disappear  alto-
gether. On  the  other  side  of  the  tropics,  e.  g,  at  the  Cape,
at  Van  Diemen's  Land,  or  in  Buenos  Ajtcs,  these  conditions
will  be  reversed  ;  the  flames  of  the  southward  pole  will  have
the  upper  hand  in  those  cases  where  the  northward  pole  pre-
vails with  us.  When  a  bar  magnet  lies  in  the  meridian,
the  northward  (wle  turned  toward  the  north,  all  my  sensi-
tives, sick  or  healthy,  have,  in  innumerable  experiments,
found  the  flames  of  the  northward  pole  larger  than  those  of
the  southward  pole  directed  to  the  south.  Taking  the
mean  of  all  the  accounts,  the  difference  amounted  to  about
one-half,  so  that  the  northward  flame  was  about  double  the
length  of  the  southward,  I  say,  about ;  for  the  innume-
rable questions  I  put  could  not  be  answered  in  the  dark
According  to  a  regular  standard  ;  in  most  coses  they  used
the  assistance  of  the  span,  and  explained  themselves  by  such
t«rms  as  hand's  lengthy  hand's  breadth,  thickness  of  one's
thumb,  &c.  And  there  is  no  occasion  for  great  accuracy
here,  where,  for  the  present,  we  are  only  seeking  the  general
outhnes  of  the  phenomena.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  the
concordant  testimony  of  all  the  sensitives  gives  the  relation
of  magnitude  of  the  northward  flame  to  the  southward  as
2  to  I ,  This  is  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of
the  odic  incandescence  of  bars,  since  in  these  the  blue  north-
ward side  is  shorter  than  the  red  southward.  (Still  the
latter  may  easily  depend  upon  some  deception ;  for  the  blue
odic  incandescence  is  much  less  luminous  than  the  yellowish-
red,  and  thus  in  the  lower  degrees  becomes  invisible  to  the
eyes  sooner,  Tvithout  being  really  shorter).  To  support  thi«
by  the  testimony  of  experiments,  it  would  be  necessary  to  call

D  D


388


QDIC  H.AME  ON  BTEKt  MAQ^


over  again  almost  all  the  persons  named,  which  would  cause
useless  ditfiisuness.  I  confine  myself,  therefore,  to  mention-
ing the  healthy  Dr*  Nied  and  Baron  von  Oberliindcr,  Madame
von  Varady,  Madame  von  Peichich,  Prof.  Endlicher,  M.  Con-
stantin  Delhez.  Baroness  von  Augnstin,  Miss  Sophia  Paner,
also  Madame  Kieiiej^berger,  Misses  Atzmannsdoifer,  Reichel,
Weigand,  AVinter,  and  in  particular  the  healthy  and  strong
Josephine  Zmkcl,  and  the  healthy  Klaiba  the  joiner,  on
which  latter  I  have  repeated  this  experiment  especially
often.

385.  The  residt  is  modified,  though  similar,  when  a
mayntik  har  lies  not  in  the  normal  direction  in  the  meri-
dian,  not  coiiformaljly,  but  is  placed  in  such  a  position  that
its  northward  pole  is  tunied  toward  the  south  and  its  south*
ward  pole  to  the  north ;  that  is,  imconformably.  In  this
case  the  sensitives  observe  a  diminution  of  the  odic  flames  ;
they  both  become  of  duller  aspect,  less  luminous,  more  dim,
shorter  and  nanower,  and  moreover  modified  in  colour.
This  is,  on  the  one  hand,  deducible  from  the  general
theory  of  magnetism,  aud  has  also  been  observed  in  nu-
merous experiments  with  Madame  Kionesbcrger,  Misses
Atzmannsdorfer,  Wilhelmme  Glaser,  Reichel,  Winter,  and
Josephine  Zinkel,

38 6,  To  these  sensitives  a  horse-shoe  wels  submitted  iB
the  same  way,  ^vhile  lying  horizontally  in  the  meridian,  as
described  above,  ^  333  ;  that  is  to  say,  once  with  both  poles
tm-ned  to  the  north,  another  time  with  both  toward  the
south.  In  the  first  position  the  northw^ard  flame  appeared
larger  and  more  briOiant,  while  that  of  tlie  south  pole  seemed
diminished,  of  a  dirty  almost  bluish  red  ;  in  the  second  case
the  northward  flame  appeared  dim,  greyish-blue,  with  a
tinge  of  yellowish,  and  diminished  about  one-third  ;  while,
on  the  contrary,  the  red  was  enlarged  about  half,  enlivened
and  brilliantly  red  luminous.

387*  When  I  placed  an  open  five-layer  horse-shoe  magnet


ODIC  FLAMK  ON  STKEL  MAGVBTS.


389


^
^


vertically,  the  poles  turned  upwarda,  and  the  liniljs  confor-
ma!)Iy, — ^nainely,  in  such  a  aianiicr  that  the  oorthward  polar
limb  stood  on  the  north  side,  and  the  southward  polar  limb
on  the  south  side, — ^thc  flames  of  both  poles  appeared  to
Josephine  Ziukel  vivified,  large,  and  brilliant ;  wlien  I  placed
the  lind}s  unconformably, — the  northward  polar  !ind>  on  the
south  side,  and  the  southward  polar  limb  on  the  north  side,
— both  flames  were  dtill,  dirumislied,  dim,  and  discoloiirefl.

388.  When  I  turned  a  lioi*se-sboe  the  other  way  upwards,
ill  the  same  vertical  direction,  so  that  the  poles  were  directed
downward,  suspending  it  by  the  curvature  to  a  copper  rod,
and  thus  keeping  it  in  the  conformable  position,  the  flames
of  the  northward  pole  were  shorter,  those  of  the  southward
longer.

When  I  gave  both  poles  the  obhquc  direction  of  the
magnetic  inclination,  the  conditions  were  about  the  same.

389.  Transverse  positions  of  all  kinds,  where  the  poles
were  placed  east  and  west,  gave  intermediate  conditions
with  numerous  modifications,  iu  which,  however,  the  rela-
tive sizes  of  the  two  poles  exhibited  less  diflereucc.  And
this  in  the  following  manner,

390.  When  the  two  poles  of  a  horse-shoe  lay  to  the  west,
the  same  observer  described  both  flames  as  short ;  when  iu
the  reverse  position,  with  both  poles  toward  the  east,  they
were  somewhat  longer.  But  both  parallel  positions  always
possessed  shorter  flames  than  the  vertical  with  the  poles
turned  upwards.

891.  The  further  observation  comes  under  examiuation,
that  the  flames  appeared  t —


At  the  northward  pole,  ia  the  eftstwArd  direction,  longer  but  duller.

,»  „ ID  the  westward „ broader btit  raore Iu-

mioous.
At  the  southward  jpole,  in  the  eastward „ broader  but more  la*

minous.
»»  „ in  the  westward », longer  but  duller.


S90


OBTC  FT.AME  ON  STEKL  MAGXKTS,


We  shall  see  hereafter  (§  405,  where  we  shall  speak  of  the
conflict  between  two  odic  flames,)  what  the  conditions  are  of
these  distinctions  of  longer  and  broader,  and  then  find  the
proof  that  the  former  belongs  to  an  attraction,  the  latter  to
a  repulsion  of  the  odic  flames ;  and  we  may  take  this  oppor-
tunity of  anticipating  the  iui[K>rtant  discovery,  which  must
be  discussed  more  circumstantially  elsewhere,  that  the  eaat
siamfs  in  some  degree  on  (he  side  of  the  north,  the  west  an
that  of  (he  south,  in  (heir  relations  to  Od,  vide  §  536.

392.  In  like  manner  1  tested,  by  numerous  experiments
on  the  highly  sensitive,  the  influence  which  the  magnetic
inclination  must  necessarily  have  upon  the  character  and  size
of  the  odic  flames  depcudiug  upon  tlie  steel  magnet.  Misses
Atzmannsdorfer  and  Reielicl,  iladame  Kienesberger,  and  tlie  ^^
healthy  sensitive  Josephine  Zinkel,  took  the  greatest  share  in  ^|
these.  It  was  first  seen  that  the  experiments  which  I  described
in  the  first  treatise,  \  11,  were  not  unconditionally  but  only
conditionally  correct.  There,  namely,  I  stated  on  the  autho-
rity of  Miss  Reichel  that  the  terrestrial  magnetism  does  not
appeal*  to  exert  any  important  influence  upon  the  size  of  the
odic  flame.  This  statement  is  correct,  when,  as  hapi>cned
in  that  experiment,  the  change  of  poles  and  iiielinations  is
effected  rather  quickly,  and  no  time  is  allowed  Jor  (he  deve--
lopment  of  (he  polar  flames.  At  that  time  I  was  unaware
of  a  certain  degree  of  slowness  with  which  nature  effects  the
odic  operations,  for  the  full  completion  of  which  some  little
time — a  half,  a  whole,  or  in  many  cases  several  minutes,  are
required;  on  which  point  I  shall  hereafter  find  an  opportu-
nity to  say  more.  When  the  experiments  of  ^  11  were
made  with  greater  slowness,  and  subjected  to  examina-
tion, it  was  certainly  seen  that  the  odic  flames  altered^
not  only  in  size  but  even  in  form,  according  as  the  position
assumed  was  larger  or  smaller,  and  that  the  terrestrial  mag-
netism did  certainly  exert  an  influence  upon  it,  which,  though
slowly,  was  most  decisively  and  considerably  manifested.  The


01)1C  ifLAME  ON  STEEL  MAQKETS.


391


N


I

i


fiuapended  nmgiietic  ueedle,  as  is  well  kuown,  clianges  its
position  instantaneously  whenever  the  terrestrial  magnetism
can  exert  influence  on  it ;  and  this  influence  shews  its  effect
at  once  in  its  whole  force.  I  was  formerly  led  away  by
this  usual  manner  of  looking  at  it,  but  longer  experience
has  taught  me  another  in  reference  to  odic  effects,  which
only  rise  slowly  to  their  maximmu.  When  I  subsequently
modified  the  experiujents  with  Miss  Reichel  in  such  a  way
that  I  no  longer  held  the  bar  magnet  in  my  hand,  whereby
the  polar  flames  wx^re  complicated  and  rendered  untrue,  but
fixed  it  in  a  wooden  Guidoni's  holder,  and  then  brought  it
into  the  magnetic  inclination,  in  which  I  let  it  remain  a
minute,  I  expected  that  tlie  bhie  north  polar  flame  would
increase  in  size,  strength  of  light,  and  in  colour,  and  that
the  northern  reaction  which  I  had  been  previously  acquainted
with  woidd  necessarily  increase  in  intensity  of  every  kind.
But  the  result  did  not  in  the  slightest  (legrce  confirm  my
preconceived  opinion.  On  the  direct  contrary,  the  beholder
of  the  phenomena  told  me  that  the  flame  of  the  northward
pole  had  acquired  the  very  reverse  colour,  and  decreased
considerably  in  strength  of  light.  The  blue  colour  became
dull,  opa(pie,  gray,  and  dwindled  away  till  it  was  impercep-
tible. When  I  turned  the  steel  round,  and  brought  its
northward  pole  into  the  opposite  direction,  in  the  iucUuation,
seen  at  the  distance  of  a  yard  and  more,  the  flame  appeared
bluish,  large,  and  vivid.  The  same  experiment,  made  at  a
diflerent  time,  with  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  furnished  the
same  unexpected  residt ;  not  only  did  not  the  northward
flame  increase  in  the  inclination,  but  it  disappeai^d  in  great
part  from  her  eyes :  but  when  the  steel  was  reversed  the
sensitive  saw  the  bluish  flame  again  of  almost  double  size,
Finally,  I  tested  these  most  strange  and  striking  re^sults
with  the  greatest  exactness,  in  Josephine  Ziukel,  and  devoted
many  days  to  a  thorough  investigation  of  them  with  her  in
the  dark. Here  also  my  experiments  had  the  same  result ;


392


OUtO  FLAMK  UN  JiTEItL  MAGNETS.


iu  the  inclination,  where  it  might  have  beeD  expected  that
the  flame  of  the  north  pole  would  appear  at  its  maximuiu,  it
on  the  coDtmry  sank  down  into  a  sort  of  minimum;  instead
of  rising  to  the  most  vivid  blue,  it  lost  all  colomr,  and
remained  nothing  but  a  dim  grey.  We  shall  sec  hereafter
that  these  astonishing  visual  phenomena  were  perceived  and
coutirmed  iu  like  manner  through  corresponding  phenomena
of  sensiitiou,  by  all  the  sensitives,  even  v^rhen  of  much  lower
degree  uf  excitability.  Since,  then,  this  appears  to  be
directly  op[X)sed  to  the  attraction  of  terrestrial  magnetism,
by  which,  iu  oiu^  hemisplicrc,  the  negative  pole  of  the  needle,
brought  downtu  the  direction  of  the  inclination,  is  attracted,
not  repulsed,  by  the  positive  north  pole  of  the  earthy  we  seo
fii>m  this,  as  distinctly  as  from  ttie  preceding  experiments,
that  the  odic  flume,  or  the  odic  phenomena  in  general,  are  I
indeed  influenced  by  the  magnetic  attraction,  but  by  no
means  imconditionally  governed  by  it,  and  that  the  fflobe
eonlains  ofhvr  qtialtlUs  uetitu/  upun  Od  mid  its  characters
besides  mat/net  ism.  I  shall  bring  forward  all  that  I  have
been  able  hitherto  to  make  out  on  this  subject  in  the  details
in  the  odic  colours,  §  489,  &c. ;  here,  where  we  have  merely
to  do  with  the  ettects  of  maguetism  on  the  odic  flame  of  the
ncx'dlc  in  the  direction  of  the  inclination,  I  am  contented  to
announce  the  results.

893.  When  I  applied  horse-shoe  magnets  to  these  ex-
periments the  case  was  somewhat  modified*  If  the  two
|)ok's  were  turned  toward  the  north,  the  blue  flume  of  the
northward  pule  appeared  iu  its  fidl  length ;  hut  the  reddish
flame  of  the  southward  pole  seemed  repressed,  bedimmed,
bluish-red,  and  diminished  in  size.  On  the  other  hand,
when  the  poles  were  turned  toward  the  south,  the  red  flame
of  the  southward  pole  was  enlarged  ;  while  that  of  the
northward  pole  became  duller,  reddish-blue,  and  diminished
iu  size.  When  the  two  poles  stood  dbccted  upwards,  the
northward |)nle was strengthened, the southward |K)k


ODIC  PLAMK  ON  STKia>  MAGNETS.


393


^

I


^


lesseued  (thus  giving  a  new  support  to  what  was  stated  in
the  li^st  paragraphs).  Nay,  this  went  so  far  that  it  afforded
a  circumstance  worthy  of  notice  in  a  practiciil  point  of  view —
nanicly  this,  that  the  odic  flame  of  tlie  unconformably  placed
pole  was  not  unfrequently  wholly  repressed  ;  that  is,  became
no  longer  perceptible  to  the  eyes  of  particular  observers,
and  thus  nrnde  it  appear  as  if  only  one  pole  possessed  an
odic  flame.  My  note-books  swarm  witli  indications  of  this
case,  and  there  was  scarcely  one  of  my  numerous  sensitives
to  whom  it  did  not  frequently  occur  under  the  projier  cir-
cunistances,  especially  those  of  weaker  power  of  sight,  or
in  iuiperfect  darkness,  or  when  the  observing  person  had
not  remained  long  enough  in  the  dark.  As  witnesses,  I
mention  the  Baroness  Natorp,  Miss  Dorfer,  Madame  von
Tessedick,  Madame  Fenzl,  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  MM.  Hoeh-
stetter,  Femoleudt,  and  the  chlorotic  Ilctmanek.

394.  There  was  a  difference  produced  in  the  size  of  the
odic  flame,  whether  a  magnet  stood  free  with  the  poles  in
the  air,  or  lay  flat  upon  a  table.  In  the  latter  case,  all  the
observers  perceived  the  flames  observably  larger,  sometimes
expanded  to  twice  the  size.  Wilhelmine  Glaser  saw  the
flames  of  botli  the  poles  of  a  bar  become  as  long  again  upon  a
table  of  |K)Ushed  walnut  wood.  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  looked
at  magnets  upon  an  un|>olislied  deal  table ;  they  formed  a
long  stream  of  light  flowing  in  waves  upon  it,  at  the  south-
ward pole  shorter,  thicker,  and  red  ;  at  the  northward,  long,
slender,  and  blue.  The  wavmg  motion  could  be  seen  most
distinctly  in  profile  ;  when  seen  fmm  above,  it  enveloped
the  poles  Uke  a  halo,  which  also  rose  up  in  the  air  imme-
diately above  tliera.  Madame  Ciecilie  Bauer  and  Josephine
Zinkel,  especially  the  latter,  werc  frequent  witnesses  of  this
phenomenon,  according  to  which  it  appears  as  if  the  table
formed  a  kind  of  tixed  point  whence  the  odic  flame  flowed
forth,

395.  The  results  remained thv  surnc  whether  I  applie<I


^


394


ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


the  largest,  the  middle-sized,  or  the  smallest  magnets,  even
such  as  might  be  hidden  between  two  fingers*  The  phe-
nomena were,  indeed,  on  a  proportionately  smaller  scale,
but  remained  exactly  the  same  in  kind.  Thus,  immense
masses  arc  quite  unuecessary  here^  for  very  much  can  be
done  with  small  iustmments,  and  with  these  the  greater
part  of  my  observations  may  be  repeated  and  confirmed  on
a  small  scale.  A  smaU  magnvi  charged  to  saturation  ap-
pears  to  possess  as  much  odic  tension  as  one  out  of  all  pro-
portion larger.  The  luminous  phenomena  occur  in  a  more
limited  space,  but  the  efiects  remain  qualitatively  the
same.

396.  The  same  phenomena  of  which  I  have  already  given
an  account  at  ^  310,  &c.  when  speaking  of  the  odic  incan-
descence, and  to  which  I  must  refer  for  the  sake  of  brevity,
namely,  the  banded  colourings,  occur  also  with  the  odic
flame  on  conipuuud  bur  and  horse-shoe  magnets.  ITie
middle  layer  of  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  magnet  emitted  blue
flumes  at  the  negative  pole  ;  the  pair  next  to  it  in  front  and
behind,  gave  out  red ;  the  second  pair  blue  again,  the  third
red,  and  the  fourth  and  outermost  blue.  The  red  flames
of  the  two  enclosed  red  layers  were  here  somewhat  re-
pressed, especially  when  placed  with  the  northward  side
toward  the  north.  All  these  phenomena  were  repeated
with  the  reversed  arrangement  of  colours  at  the  southward
pole ;  and  here  the  two  enclosed  blue  layers  had  repressed
flames  which  looked  rather  gray  than  blue.  Looking  side-
ways, the  flame  had  a  l>anded  red  and  blue  appearance  for
a  short  space  just  above  the  steel  plates.  Yet  this  could'
not  be  traced  fiu'  up  beyond  the  poles  with  any  distinctness,
for  the  colours  soon  became  iiitcrmlngled  and  lost  in  the
general  stronger  colour  of  the  predominant  pole,  so  that  at
the  negative  pole  the  red  flame  which  issued  from  the  mag*
netically  reversed  layers  was  lost  at  a  little  distance  on  the
predominant  blue,  and  vice  vcrs^t. Only  the  red  and  l>lue


4


ODIC  fLAMF  on  ST££t  MAGNETS.


895


streaks  and  sparks  ascending  in  them,  of  which  I  shall  soon
(^  454)  have  to  speak,  retained  their  colours.

397*  The  phenomenon  here  described  also  includes  in
itself  that  which  is  described  in  §  9,  and  illustrated
by  Fig,  9,  but  which  was  less  cnxrumstantially  related
by  Miss  Reichel  than  in  this  case  by  Josephine  Zinkel.
The  latter  also  saw,  from  the  side,  the  flame-like  streaks
ascendinji:  from  each  separate  layer ;  but  she  found  the
interspaces  between  them  nut  empty,  but  also  filled  with
odic  flame,  only  of  paler  luminosity,  iliss  Reichel's  ob-
8er\'ations  were  made  in  an  improvised  much  less  perfectly
darkened  chamber  than  those  of  Josephine  Zinkel ;  I  subse-
quently hud  a  perfectly  dark  chamber  prepared.  The  former,
therefore,  saw  only  the  more  luminous  streaks,  and  the  less
hmiinous  interspaces  appeared  to  her  void  ;  the  latter  found
the  entire  space  above  the  poles  of  the  nine-layered  magnet
flaming,  witli  brighter  flames  from  the  edges  of  the  layers,
which  were  prolonged  upwards,  clearly  distinguishable
through  the  bundle  of  flame.  The  banded  appearance  of
the  magnet-flame  at  the  side  was  thereby  still  more  in-
creased.

398,  The  infensttt/  of  liyht  of  the  odic  flame  varies  ex-
tremely, and  runs  Imm  a  weakness  in  which  it  appears  as
but  a  vapour,  even  to  the  highly  sensitive,  to  a  bright,  and
finally  to  so  brilliant  a  flame,  that  it  was  often  wholly  in-
comprehensible to  them  why  I  could  not  also  see  it.  At
the  same  time,  it  never  attained  to  such  an  intensity  that  I  was
enabled  to  perceive  the  slightest  trace  of  it,  which  certainly
conld  not  have  been  trom  want  of  attention  in  my  frequent
and  long-enduring  sojourns  in  the  dark.  When  the  flame
was  gently  blown  upon,  esijecially  in  the  direction  of  its
flow,  the  intensity  of  the  light  increased,  in  particular  at  the
I  places  which  w  ere  acted  on.  This  was  witnessed  by  Josephine

H Zinkel,  WilhclmineGlaser,  Miss  So[)hiePauer,Prof.  Endlicher,
H M.  Hochstetter,  M.  Dehlez,  and  Baroness  von  Augustin,  on

^^^^ 1


396


ODIC  FT^AME  ON  STBkL  Mi


bars,  boree-shoes,  and  electro-magnets  of  various  forms.
More  ivUl  be  said  of  this  below  at  ^  409.

399*  The  atjifaiion  and  consiani  moiimi  which  prevail  in
the  odic  flames  of  the  magnet  were  confirmed  in  many  new
experimenU  by  Miss  Atxmannsdorfer,  Josqihine  Zinkel,
Madame  Kienesberger,  Weigand,  Dorfer,Friedrich  Weidlich,
the  healtliy  M.  Jsikolas  Rabe,  Baron  Oberlander,  Miss  Sophie
Pauer,  Madame  von  Peichich,  Baroness  von  Natorp,  Madame
von  Varady,  Madame  vonTesscdik,Prof.EndUcher,M.Delhez>
Baroness  von  Augustin,  Dr.  Nied,  Johann  Kynast,  Klaiber»
and  others.  Tlic  tirst  and  last  compared  it  in  some  degree
to  the  |jositive  brush  from  the  points  of  an  electrical  ma-
chine, only  they  described  it  as  mncli  more  dehcatc,  fuller,
the  uortlnvard  flame  bluer,  but  in  like  manner  mobile  and
flickering*  cool,  weakly  luminous,  sometimes  almost  of  a
beaded  appearance.  It  partook  of  every  little  agitation  of
the  air  in  which  it  was.

400.  I  often  made  the  dincHon  which  the  flame  look
the  object  of  investigation  with  the  sensitives.  In  place  of  a
nundjer  of  their  statements,  I  will  confine  myself  to  two
examples,  which  include  in  themselves  all  the  rest.  I
placed  a  D-layer  horse-shoe  upon  a  stool  before  Miss  Atz*
mannsdorfer,  with  the  poles  turned  toward  the  south.  She
saw  tlie  odic  flame  flow  out  of  this  to  about  an  arm's  length,
in  the  dark.  It  first  shot  out  some  cUstance  horizontally
in  the  direction  of  the  limb  of  the  magnet,  then  rose  in  a
curve  upwaids  and  formed  a  quadrant,  so  that  it  at  length
flowed  vertically  upwards  at  its  point.  The  same  observa-
tion was  made  by  Josephine  Zinkel  on  flames  of  horse-shoes
and  bars.  Thus,  the  odic  flame  is  sent  out  from  the  poles  of
the  magnet  with  a  certain  force,  an  impetus  is  communi-
cated to  it,  which  drives  it  forth  from  the  poles ;  but,  on
the  other  hand,  a  tendency  is  implanted  in  it  to  ascend  in
the  air,  and  its  material  ba^^is  is  consequently  evidently
Ughtcr  than  aimoisphcric  air  ui  tlie  earth's  surface. From


OmC  fLAMK  ON  STKKL  MAGNETS.


tllfteQUipositiou  of  them  two  forces  there  n^sulls  the  ascend-
ii)g  quadrant  curve  of  the  odtc  flame.  This  experiment,
however,  is  only  to  be  acconipUshcd  with  very  strong
magnets,  the  flames  of  w^hich  have  considerable  length;
otherwise,  in  short  flames,  all  observ'ers  see  the  polar  flames
only  in  the  straight  direction,  forming  a  prolongation  of  the
limb  of  the  magnet.  From  the  multiplicity  of  directions
toward  the  various  points  of  the  compass  which  may  be
given  to  the  magnet,  and  the  various  inclinations  toward  the
horizon  into  which  it  may  be  brought,  residt  complex  en-
largements and  dinunntions  of  the  odic  flame,  according  as
the.se  directions  are  conformable  or  unconformable  to  the
normal  position.

40  L  I  here  note  a  series  of  experiments  with  several
gensitives,  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  reciprocal
eBcct  w^hich  different  magnetic  odic  flames  could  exert
upon  each  other  wlien  brought  in  contact.  This  might
ntibrd  fnrtlier  conclusions  respecting  the  relations  of  mag-
netism to  the  odic  flame.  We  regard  positive  and  negative
magnetism  as  endowed  with  an  active  tendency  to  attract
each  other,  and  then  liy  a  mutnal  confluence  to  neutralize  one
another.  But  when  we  consider  the  cur%X"d  ascent  men-
tioned in  the  last  paragraph,  and  place  in  the  scale  the
phenomena  of  the  odic  flame  related  in  ^  392,  where  it
occurred  unconfornably  to  th<!  inclination,  it  seems  that
no  such  recipnx'iil  attraction  dwells  in  the  odic  flames ;  we
meet  with  distinctions  between  the  two  in  their  special
manifestations.  To  the  valetudinarian  Miss  von  Weigels-
berg,  Miss  Winter^  and  Madame  Johanne  Anschiitz  ;  also  to
her  healthy  relatives,  Miss  Ernestine  and  M.  Gustav,  Ans-
chiitz,  M.  Dclhez,  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl,  Madame  von
Peichich,  M,  Hochstetter,  Dr.  Nied,  and  the  Baroness  von
Augustin,  I  exliibited  two  magnetic  bars  in  the  darkened
chamber,  each  fuin^  inches  long,  liohling  them  in  the  magnetic
parallel  horizontally,  with  Ihe  nidikc  polcM  held  toward  each


398


ODIC  PLAME  OK  STEEL  MAQNBT8.


other,  at  the  distance  of  twice  the  length  of  the  bars  apart.
At  the  same  time  I  obser\^ed  the  indispensable  precaution
of  holding  the  bars  in  such  a  manner  that  my  right  hand
enclosed  a  southward  pole,  while  the  north  pole  belonging
to  it  projected  out ;  on  the  other  side  a  northward  pole  was
enclosed  in  my  left  hand,  while  the  south  pole  belonging
to  it  was  outward,  the  reason  of  which  will  shortly  be  evi-
dent.  All  those  witnesses  saw  the  originaDy  small  odic
flames  of  both  bars  become  more  slender,  and  increase  in
length,  as  sotm  as  the  bars  were  brought  near  together  in
the  above  direction,  as  if  they  w^ere  striving  to  reach  one
another.  When  I  hronght  the  bars  really  nearer  together,
the  flames  went  back  to  their  original  shorter  thicker
size,  which  increased  still  more  and  more  the  nearer  I  ap-
proximated the  poles.  Hie  intensity  of  the  light  increased
at  the  same  time.  When  I  joined  the  magnetically  attract-
ing poles,  both  flames  in  great  part  disappeared,  l)ut  they
immediately  became  stronger  on  the  opposite  poles,  and
now  attained  double  the  size  that  they  Imd  before.  Dr.
Nied  and  M-  Hochstetter  added,  that  the  thickness  of  the
odic  flames  much  exceeded  that  of  the  steel  when  the  poles
came  near,  and  that  theii*  brightness  was  greatest  when  the
ends  of  the  bars  were  closest  together.  Miss  Reichel  saw
these  phenomena  better  and  more  distinctly.  In  1S44,  I
placed  two  little  magnetic  bars,  of  almost  equal  length »  in
her  haiuls,  led  her  into  the  dark,  and  made  her  hold  the
unlike  pules  of  both  bars  in  a  straight  hne,  bringing  them
from  a  cUstance  nearer  together.  Even  at  the  distance  of
three  times  their  length,  she  saw  the  flames  between  the
poles  pointing  to  one  another,  acquire  a  greater  size  than
those  of  the  two  outer  poles  turned  away ;  they  became
narrower,  longer,  thinner,  and  stretched  out  toward  each
other,  as  if  trying  to  refich  one  another.  On  her  then
bringing  the  magnets  nearer  together,  these  inner  flames
increased  in  size  at  the  expense  of  the  outer,  and  just  in


ODtC  ThkMt  UX  STEEL  MAGNETS.


^
^
^
^


proportion  to  the  approximation.  But  when,  by  the  in-
creaaing  approTimation^  thejtames  at  length  met,  they  did
not  neutralize  one  anoiher  ;  they  increased  in  thickness
while  they  lost  length  by  the  approach  of  the  poles  emitting
them.  At  the  opposite  external  poles  they  shrank  up  to  a
ver)^  weak  and  dull  flame.  Finally,  when  the  friendly  poles
became  joined,  the  middle  flame  was  almost  entirely  extin-
guished, but  at  the  outer  pole  of  each  bar  there  immediately
arose  an  odic  flame  far  larger  than  had  existed  on  either  of
tlie  separate  bars  :  the  two  bars  were  now  converted  into  a
single  one  twice  as  large,  and  this  emitted  flames  twice  as
long  from  both  poles.  Thus  the  odic  flame  increased  in
eqmd  measure  with  the  growing  strength  of  the  magnetism,
both  in  the  approaching  poles,  and,  after  their  union,  in
those  tm-ned  away.  Prof.  Eiullicher  saw  the  flames  of
both  bars,  when  held  at  some  distance  apart,  increase
rather  in  length,  but  on  approximation  to  within  two-
fifths  of  an  inch  contract  into  a  thsk  around  their  poles  ;  then,
on  actual  contact  of  the  poles,  disappear.  M.  Pauer  ob-
8er\ed  the  same  experiment.  He  saw  the  two  polar  flames
when  I  had  brought  the  poles  within  two  inches  of  each  other.
They  increased  in  size  up  to  the  contact  of  the  poles.  Then
the  light  sank  considerably  in  intensity, — not,  however,
disappearing  entirely ;  but  the  two  touching  steel  poles  now
apjieared  enclosed  in  vaporous  haloes  of  light,  each  about
four-fifths  of  an  inch  long.  Madame  von  Varady  observed
the  same,  Willielniine  Glaser  perceived  the  same  phenomena,
and  added  to  the  acxrount,  that  she  saw  the  thickening  and
mutual  repression  of  the  polar  flames  increase  so  much
just  before  the  actual  contact  of  tlie  two  magnet  poles,  that
she  perceived  a  partial  introversion  of  the  magnetic  flames.
This  description  of  the  process  was  made  still  more  com-
plete by  the  experiments  which  I  made  in  this  direction,  in
1845.  on  Misses  Sophia  Pauer  and  Atzmannsdorfer,  and  in
1846  with  Madame  Kienesberger  and  Friedrick  Weigand.


400


ODTC  FLAME  OK  STEEL  MAGMSR.


In  each  case  I  used  the  same  small  magnetic  bars,  and  carried '
out  the  experiments  in  the  darkened  chamber,  the  beholder
sitting  with  the  back  to  the  north,  holding  the  bars  bori-
aontally  in  the  magnetic  parallel. The  phenomena  pre-
sented themselves  all  in  the  same  order,  and  of  the  same
kind  as  above  given ;  first,  at  a  distance,  elongation  and
attenuation  of  the  approximated  odic  flames,  as  though  they
were  exerting  an  active  endeavour  to  reach  one  another, .
But  this  meeting  did  not  come  to  pass  when  the tlamea]
came  near  enoughj  for  a  return  to  the  original  shape  nowj
occiured :  with  the  increasing  approximation,  this  thickness
became  greater  and  greater  at  the  cost  of  the  continually
diminishing  length,  and  when  the  flames  should  actually
have  met,  they  were  so  far  fmm  exhibiting  any  desire  to
join»  that  they  exerted  mutual  repulsion,  drove  one  another  I
back,  and  hec^ame  continually  shorter  and  more  repressed.
They  behaved  as  if  seized  with  a  nnitual  fear,  became  accu-
mulated around  their  own  poles,  like  the  flame  of  a  candlel
blown  upon  gently  frtom  above;  and  when,  at  the  distance!
of  only  a  few  lines  apart,  each  flame  formed  a  kind  of  broad  j
flattened  coil  around  its  pole,  distinctly  repulsed  by  the  odic
flame  standing  opposite  to,  and  pressing  upon  it. This
lepreasion  went  so  far  that,  wlien  only  Atha  of  an  incli
interspace  existed  between  the  poles  of  the  two  bars,  both
flames  appeared  ihromn  backwards  upon  their  own  poles,
and,  to  a  certain  extent,  introverted  ai"ound  it. This  took
place  in  particular  sooner  with  the  flames  of  the  comers
than  with  the  flames  f>f  the  middle  of  the  ends  of  the  poles,
which  were  compressed  into  a  sort  of  disk  around  the  poles,^
at  length  apphed  one  upon  the  other. When  the  poles
came  at  length  into  contact,  and became  attached,  this
state  of  things  continued  for  two  or  tliree  seconds,  decreas-
ing in  such  a  manner  that  the  curved  flames  appeared  to
become gradually  shorter until  they  were extinguished.
But  this  extinction  was  not  actual,  being  only  a  decrease  I


ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MACKETS.


401


I


I

I
I


of  intensity  of  the  lif^ht  of  the  odic  flames :  careful  observers,
M.  Fauer,  like  his  daughter  Sophie,  and  Madame  Kienes-
berger,  deteeted  its  persistence  in  a  weaker  eondition,  en-
veloping the  joined  magnet  poles.  In  the  meanwhile  the
flames  of  the  two  opposite  ends  of  the  bars  became  so  much
the  stronger,  and  doubled  their  size.

402.  I  used  magnetic  bars  twice  the  length  with  Madame
Cfccilie  Bauer.  She  saw  the  positive  red  pole  and  the
negative  blue  pole  flaming  beaut ifidly,  the  former  two,  the
latter  four  inches  long.  As  I  brought  the  friendly  poles
of  the  rods  nearer  together,  with  the  hands  properly  selected,
in  tlie  parallels,  the  flames  stretched  out  toward  eat^h  other,
became  thickened  and  expanded  as  I  approached  them
nearer,  tlien  were  introverted  in  some  degi-ee  around  their
poles,  and,  when  I  had  completed  the  miion,  the  intro-
version vanished,  and  was  succeeded  by  envelopment  of
the  poles  lying  against  each  other  in  the  opposed  odic
flames,

403.  When,  however,  the  similar y  thus  hostile  jjoft's,
mere  approximated  in  the  same  fvay  in  lite  dark^  especially
the  two  negative,  the  original  elongation  and  attenuation
did  not  occur ;  but,  where  the  poles  eatne  near  together,
the  flames,  if  the  magnets  were  strong,  were  drawn  back,
and  finally  introverted  around  their  own  poles  in  the  same
way  as  with  the  unlike  poles*  But  if  they  were  of  unequal
strength,  the  stronger  flame  of  the  larger  magnet  drove
back  the  weaker  one  of  the  smaller  sooner,  heaped  it  up
against  its  pole,  when  it  expanded  in  the  form  uf  a  disk  or
Uttle  wheel,  the  plane  of  which  was  at  right  angles  to  the
axis  of  the  magnet.  One  of  the  beholders.  Miss  Atzmaims-
dorfer,  compared  this  phenomenon  also,  among  other  things,
with  the  experiinout  of  blowing  down  upon  the  flame  of  a
candle,  so  as  to  drive  it  down  upon  its  wick,  where  it  is  also
compelled  to  expand  sideways  by  the  current  of  air  oppos-
ing  the  draught  of  the  flame.


402


ODIC  FLAMX  ON  STKEL  MAGNETS.


404.  These  experitnents  were  carried  through  the  most
varied  modifications  with  the  healthy  Madame  Caecihe  Bauer
and  Josephine  Zinkel,  and  the  resiJts  are  shown  most  clearly
here.  In  the  first  experiments  with  the  latter,  when
her  power  of  vision  was  not  particularly  strong,  she  did  not
perceive  any  distinct  flame  on  the  little  magnetic  bars  in
the  dark,  but  only  a  hmiinous  mist  or  smoke.  But  these
went  througli  the  same  course  as  the  others  had  seen  the
flames  do ;  elongation  of  the  smoke  at  a  distance,  with
apparent  endeavoiu'  to  reach  and  blend  with  one  another,
non-efiectuation  of  this  when  sufficiently  close  but  expansive
in  thickness,  then  repression  and  division  tlirough  introver-
sion around  their  own  poles  ;  finally,  on  contact  of  tlie  poles
of  the  magnets,  a  slow  disappeai^ance  of  the  luminous  smoke
and  a  doubhng  of  it  at  the  opposite  free  poles.  In  another
experiment  I  made  use  of  the  epoch  of  her  menstruation,
when  she  saw  incomparably  better  in  the  dark,  and  I  applied
two  small  magnetic  liars,  one  of  which  was  ratlier  larger
and  stronger  than  the  other.  The  arrangement  was  the
same  as  in  the  preceding  cases.  I  extract  the  passages  re-
lating to  this  from  my  journal :  *'  Zinkel,  experiment  No.
453. — a.  The  two  southward  poles  approximated,  the  flame
of  the  smaller  bar  disappeared  almost  entirely  fi^om  her  per-
ception ;  that  on  the  larger  became  weiiker,  and  what  re-
mained was  introverted  around  its  pole.  fc.  The  two
northward  ]X)les  approximated,  both  became  introverted,
c.  Friendly  poles  approximated,  the  northward  pole  of  the
larger  bar  being  brought  to  the  southward  pole  of  the
smaller ;  the  flame  of  the  smaller  southward  pole  was  ex-
tinguished, that  of  the  larger  northward  pole  weakened  and
introverted,  rf.  The  same,  only  the  northward  pole  of  the
smaller  bar  approximated  to  the  southward  pole  of  the
larger ;  both  flames  extinguished  on  contact  of  the  poles.
Thus  the  stronger  pole  always  overcame  the  weaker,  and
the  remnant  of  odic  flame  became  introverted. But  the


■


ODIC  fLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


aouthwartl  pole  is  always  weaker  in  proportion  than  the
northward/*  In  these  experiments  the  weakly  liiniiiious
envelope,  or  ttainc  remaining*  eseaped  obserA'ation.

404.  B,  In  some  later  experimcuts  with  her  the  phenomena
were  more  distinct ;  and  in  one  the  results  accorded  exactly
With  Madame  Bauer. With  bai's  eight  inches  long —

a.  Similar  poles  first  mutually  repelled  the  odic  flames,
but  on  contact  of  the  steel  both  were  tntally  extinguished,

Ik  Unhke  poles  at  first  attracted  each  other  at  a  distance,
their  flames  becoming  elongated,  but  on  approximation  they
were  contractedi  thickened,  and  at  length  so  much  so  that
the  Hitrovcrsion  on  both  sides  followed.

c.  When  the  contact  of  the  poles  of  the  magnets  was
completed  the  introversion  disappeared,  and  the  odic  flames
of  the  two  opposite  poles  became  perfectly  immersed  in  each
ather,

rf.  This  immersion  was  much  deeper  than  the  introver-
sion, indeed  five  or  six  times  as  deep.  An  introversion  of
1-3 5th  of  an  inch  in  depth  was  followed,  on  contact  of  the
steel,  by  an  immersion,  in  which  the  blue  was  one-fifth  of  an
inch  long,  the  red  shorter,  but  more  than  half  the  length,

*-,  Tlie  intensity  of  light  of  the  luminous  envelope  pro-
ducing the  immersion  was  so  strong  that  the  odic  incan-
descence of  the  bars  could  not  be  seen  through  it ;  the
observers  saw  nothing  of  the  steel  bars  at  the  part  where
they  were  encircled  by  the  envelope  of  flame,  and  first  per-
ceiveil  their  ends  again  wlien  they  were  drawn  out  of  it :
this  surrounded  them  as  a  dense  luminous  cloud,  invoKiTig
the  bar  to  such  an  extent  as  to  render  it  invisible,

/  So  long  as  I  made  the  experiments  in  the  |mmllcls,
the  girl  Zinkel  perceived  the  introversion  of  the  red  flame
only ;  that  of  the  blue  she  was  uncertain  of.  But  when  I
brought  the  bars  into  the  mcriihan,  conformably,  the  inten-
sity  of  the  light  was  exalted,  and  the  blue  flame  also  now
became  visible.


404  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

g.  Approximation  of  the  poles  of  smaller  magnetic  bars,
of  four  inches  length  but  of  greater  magnetic  intensity,
brought  together  in  the  parallels  with  unlike  poles,  gave
proportionately  greater  enlargement  in  space  of  the  blue
polar  flame  than  of  the  red :  on  the  other  hand,  the  red
polar  flame  acquired  greater  intensity  of  light  than  the  blue.
Thus  the  light  did  not  increase  to  any  great  extent  in  the
one,  nor  did  the  size  in  the  other.

405.  I  also  traced  this  subject  with  horseshoe  magnets
on  various  sensitives.  M.  Hochstetter  observed,  in  the
darkened  chamber,  the  gradual  approximation  of  a  three  and
a  five-layered  horse-shoe.  At  some  distance  he  perceived
the  elongated ;  when  they  came  near,  the  abbreviated,  re-
pulsed, thickened  flames,  much  thicker  than  the  limb  itself
of  the  magnet;  when  the  poles  were  joined,  the  flames
vanished  from  his  sight,  which  had  only  a  moderate  degree
of  sensibility  to  odic  Kght.  With  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  all
these  observations  were  repeated  with  greater  clearness  and
more  circumstantiality ;  she  saw  the  odic  flames  introverted
around  the  poles,  become  converted,  on  the  union  of  these,
into  an  envelope  of  the  intermingled  flames  of  the  adjoining
poles.  I  went  most  carefully  to  work  with  Josephine  Zinkel.
I  laid  two  five-layer  magnets  upon  a  table,  in  the  meridian,
the  four  unlike  poles  directed  toward  each  other.  I  will
here  give  a  full  account  of  the  whole  process,  in  all  its  parts,
for  the  sake  of  summing  up  the  results.

a.  At  a  distance  of  two  feet  between  the  poles  the  be-
holder saw  the  northward  poles  of  both  magnets  in  a  blue,
the  southward  in  a  red  light ;  those  lying  conformably
clearer  than  the  unconformable,  and  the  limbs  odically  in-
candescent as  well  as  flaming ;  the  blue  negative  emitted
horizontal  streams  almost  eight  inches  long  over  the  table ;
the  red  positive  about  six  inches  long.  h.  The  flames  of
the  two  magnets  did  not  meet  at  first ;  in  the  interspace
between  them  she  saw  a  luminous  smoke  rising  up  to  a


OUIC  FLAME  ON  STXEL  MAGNETS.


405


n

^

I

P
^


height  of  aljoiit  two  incbt^,  and  tlien  vanishing,  c.  A  light
was  difl'used  some  diBtance  round  upon  the  table,  some
twelve  or  sixteen  inches  on  every  side,  and  the  haninosity
rose  upwards  above  the  table,  so  that  the  {x>les  of  the  horse-
shoe appeared  to  be  surrounded  with  a  glory,  rf.  The
limhs  were  wholly  covered  with  luminous  flame  m  far  as  the
curvatiu*es,  reddish  ujwn  the  southw  ard  limbs,  bluish  on  the
northward,  e.  Wlien  the  poles  were  moved  far  enough
apart,  the  nnilluminated  interspace  appeared  gray  in  the
dark ;  but  when  the  smoke  of  the  two  horse-shoes  met,
a  transverse  bright  streak,  prochiced  by  this,  became
visible  upon  the  table.  /.  When  I  moved  both  horse-shoea
to  a  distance  of  sixteen  inches,  the  lights  of  the  two  streams
of  flame  met  upon  the  surface  of  the  table ;  the  now  imited
smokes  ascended  a  haiurs  breadth  and  a  span  high.  y.
Brought  to  twelve  inches  distance,  the  opposite  flames  met,
acted  upon  each  other,  and  began  to  grow  thicker,  /l  Ap-
proximated to  eight  inches,  the  flames  Ciime  more  strongly
together,  rose  up  more  from  the  table,  on  account  of  be-
coming thicker,  to  a  height  of  about  two  inches  and  a  half,
and  luminous  smoke  ascended  six  inches  high  over  them.
f.  On  approximation  to  four  inches,  the  odic  flames  grew
thicker  and  rose  continually  higlier  above  the  table,  espe-
cially that  of  the  northward  pole ;  the  smoke  went  on  in-
creasing in  height.  k%  At  an  approximation  of  two  inches,
the  phenomenon  of  introvei^ion  of  the  odic  flames  around
their  own  poles  presented  itself,  and  in  such  a  manner  that
it  wns  repulsed  and  introverted  about  two  inches  on  the
north  side.  The  smoke  now  nolouf/er  ascended  in  front  of
(ht  poles,  but  behind  them,  directed  upward  towards  the
curvatiu-e.  /.  When  brought  to  a  distance  of  four-fifths  of
an  inch,  the  introversion  became  so  great  that  the  inverted
flame  of  each  pole  passed  back  over  the  limb  from  which  it
issued  beyond  the  curvature,  to  a  distance  of  not  less  than
full  four  inches. The  smoke  now  rose  from  both  horse-


40G  ODTC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

shoes  far  behind  the  curvatures,  and  indeed  did  not  begin
to  ascend  at  a  less  distance  than  four  inches  from  it.  tit.
Finally,  on  actual  contact  of  all  four  magnet-poles  all  these
introversions  suddenly  vanished,  and  a  complete  immersion
of  the  opposite  polar  flames  succeeded :  the  mixed  flame
presented  itself.  ITiis  extended  almost  to  the  opposite
curvatures,  and  so  veiled  the  Umbs  that  they  could  only  be
seen  with  difficulty.  The  blqe  limbs,  which  just  before  were
in  blue  introverted  flames,  were  now  suddenly  desert^  by
them,  and  enveloped  in  red  mixed  flames,  while  the  red
Umbs  became  enclosed  in  blue  mixed  flame :  thus  all  four
changed  their  colours  hi  a  moment.  The  curvatures  of  the
horse-shoes  at  the  same  time  seemed  to  become  more
brightly  incandescent,  and  the  beholder  again  compared
them  to  a  white  translucent  jelly.  The  smoke  had  then
disappeared,  and  was  nowhere  to  be  seen  in  profile.

I  shall  return  to  several  of  these  particular  phenomena
(which  have  been  touched  upon,  in  part,  under  the  head  of
odic  incandescence),  where  they  necessarily  come  into  their
own  sections :  they  are  not  separated  from  each  other  here,
as  I  wished  to  give  a  general  view  of  tliis  experiment.

406.  When  the  united  poles  of  the  magnets  were  sepa-
rated again,  the  somewhat  strange  observation  was  made,
that  the  mixed  flames  did  not  disappear  immediately.  As
I  parted  the  horse-shoes  again  in  the  last  experiment,  the
beholder  saw  the  mixed  flames  still  persist,  and  not  vanish
until  they  were  removed  ncai-ly  an  inch  away  from  each
other.  Then  the  smoke  began  to  rise  again,  and  the  curva-
tures became  dimmer.  A  similar  experiment,  with  unlike
horse-shoe  magnets — a  three-layered,  and  a  five  layered —
gave  the  same  results  with  Josephine  Zinkel ;  the  mixed
flames  persisted  when  I  had  drawn  the  two  poles  about  one-
twenty-fifth  of  an  inch  apart.  This  was  repeated,  even  with
bar  magnets,  which  lay  in  the  meridian.  Both  were  about
two  feet  long,  and  one  inch  square  in  substance.  When  both


iHil* TLAMK  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


lay  with  their  imhke  poles  joined  in  the  meridian,  Josephine
Zinkel  coukl  not  detect  the  mixed  flauies  in  the  dark,  pro-
l)ably  on  aeconnt  of  too  little  stivngtli  of  the  magnets,  and
ttjo  weak  intensity  of  odie  light  for  her  power  of  vision  at
that  time.  As  soon,  however,  as  I  had  separated  the  two
bars  only  to  the  distance  of  the  thickness  of  paper,  the
mixed  flames  inmiediately  became  visible ;  the  northward
pole  of  the  one  enveloped  the  southward  pole  of  the
other  blue,  and  vice  vend,  and  to  a  length  of  about  four
inches.

407.  All  this  shows  with  much  probability  that  the  odic
flame  is  a  true  ejection  of  some  kind  of  substance,  which
beconies  odieally  accumulated  immediately  upon  the  outer
surface  of  the  magnet  thus  brought  into  a  luminous  condi-
tion, and  then  thrown  out.  When  it  meets  with  obstacles,
it  becomes  diverted  or  repelled.  An  opposite  stream  meet-
ing it  may  be  an  obstacle  of  this  kind ;  but  when  tha
poles  of  the  two  magnets  arc  joined,  the  obst^icle  is  rt^movcd,
and  the  mixed  flames  result.  The  rabted  flame  is  the  ac-
tion of  the  residuum  of  the  magnetism  arc!  Od  arrested  in
their  couiise  at  the  poles,  which,  on  accomit  of  insufficient
contact  of  the  steel  substance,  cannot  become  conducted
away  quickly  and  perfectly  enough.  The  path  once  opened,
the  current  may  persist  for  some  time,  from  one  to  another,
even  in  the  opposite  direction,  iji  its  channel  The  nearer
the  opposite  poles  remain  to  each  other,  the  more  easily  will
the  current  be  maintaiued,  and  be  carried  on  from  one  to  the
other ;  we  have  already  perceived  on  many  occasions  that
they  have  no  continuity,  And  the  better  the  ends  of  the
poles  fit,  the  more  numerous  and  intimate  are  the  i>oints  ot^
cuutiict  of  the  two  poles,  so  much  the  more  perfectly  does
the  magnetism  appear  to  be  conducted,  and  to  be  confined
within  its  own  circuit ;  so  much  the  weaker  then  are  the
phenomena  of  odie  light ;  the  introverted  and  iutermingkd
flames  then  approach  to  invisiliility. We  shall  hereafter


O0IC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAG5Ef».


have  to  examiue  siniilar  pbeuomeua  in  the  odic  light  of  cr}*s-
tals,  and  shall  there  arrive  at  fuiiher  deductions.

40S.  When  flames  of  magnetic  bars,  no  matter  whether
positive  or  negative,  pass  over  each  crosswise,  quite  close,
nay,  so  as  actually  to  touch,  without,  however,  running
directly  against  each  other,  neilher  attraction  nor  repulsion
is  exhibited  by  them,  We  have  seen  the  like  in  the  pre-
ceding experiments  with  the  flames  over  horse-shoe  magnets ;
they  flowed  side  by  side  from  negative  and  positive  poles^
in  parallel  direction,  without  attracting,  still  less  lifting  up,
each  other.  But  when  the  two  flames  did  actually  come  into
opposition,  both  Miss  Reichel  and  Miss  Atzmanusdorfer
observed  that  the  sironyer  flame  always  carried  away  the
weaker  miih  it,  yet  only  when  the  stream  jKDSsessed  superior
force.  However,  according  to  a  variety  of  indications  from
the  statements  of  both  observers,  that  odic  flame  always
possesses  the  strongest  propulsion  which  lies  nearest  to  its
source,  that  is,  the  emitting  pole  of  the  magnetic  bar,  and
this  always  carries  away  with  it  the  other,  which,  at  the  point
of  crossing,  is  further  removed  from  its  source.  In  these
circumstances  it  makes  no  difference  which  of  the  flames  is
the  larger :  under  the  given  conditions  the  flame  of  a  small
magnet  carries  away  that  of  a  larger,  and  rules  its  course.

409.  The  motion  which  is  communicated  to  the  odic
flame  by  blowiny  upon  it  has  already  been  touched  upon
(Part  L  ^  20).  Since  that  time  I  have  endeavoured  to  esta-
blish it  more  certainly  by  repeated  experiments  with  a  great
number  of  persons.  Miss  Sturmanu,  in  the  very  earliest
experiments,  remarked  that  draughts  moved  the  flame  back-
wards and  forwards.  Miss  Reichel  amused  herself  dui-ing
her  sick  nights,  with  making  the  flames  flicker,  by  waving
her  hand  and  giving  them  aU  kinds  of  forms,  by  blowing
upon  them*  Miss  Winter  made  the  flames  flare  backward
and  forward  by  blowing  on  them  ;  and  so  also  did  Dr.
Nied. M.  Ilochstetter  blew  them  apart,  strcngtlicncd,  drove


ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


409


tlicm  about,  and  split  them  up.  Miss  Sophie  Paucr  scat-
tered them  among  each  other  by  blowing  ou  them,  and  saw
them  more  luminous  as  long  as  she  continued  to  blow.  In
the  presence  of  Friedricli  Weidlich,!  blew  upon  a  horse-shoe
magnet  in  the  dark,  at  a  part  where  J  Imd  reason  to  expect
the  existence  of  odic  flames  ;  he  told  me  directly  that  they
had  become  interrupted  and  scattered,  but  recovered  them-
selves immediately.  Tlie  healthy  joiner  Klaiber  often
moved  the  magnetic  flame  in  my  presence  by  blowing  on  it.
Professor  EndUcher  saw  tlie  hghts,  which  flowed  to  a  length
of  foiu:  inches  from  the  poles  of  a  five-layer  horse-shoe,
become  brighter  by  being  blown  ui>on  ;  when  he  blew  along
the  horse-shoe, — that  is,  in  the  direction  of  the  current  of
flame^ — they  both  bi'came  brighter  and  longer ;  at  the  same
time,  however,  flickering  unsteadily.  M.  Delhez  lircatlied
upon  the  flames  of  the  nhie-layered  horse-shoe,  and  sawi
thorn  become  brighter  and  flare  about.  Madame  Josephine
Fenzl  blew  into  the  flume  (jf  an  electro-mngnet,  and  saw  the
flame  cmrl  round.  Stephan  Kolhu*  produced  splitting  up
and  flickering  of  the  electro-magnetic  current  of  flame  by
blowing  into  it.  WiOielmine  Glascr  breathed  upon  a  bar
lying  conformably  parallel  with  its  direction ;  she  saw  the
flame  enlarge,  and  grow  Ijrighter,  Another  time  she  did
this  with  a  nine-layered  magnet,  and  scattered,  enlarged^
and  whirled  about  the  flame,  Josephine  Zinkel  blew  down ;
upon  the  flume  of  the  nine-layer  horse-shoe,  and  made  it
pass  ofl'to  all  sides ;  directly  she  ceased,  the  flames  gathered
up  and  arranged  themselves  again.  When  she  blew  gently
along  a  bar,  conformably,  she  saw  the  flame  become  brighter  |
and  lai*ger,  and  spread  out  like  a  jet  of  a  gas-hght,  to  which
she  closely  compared  it.  The  Biu^ness  von  Augustin  blew
down  along  the  limb  of  a  five-layer  horse-shoe.  She  then  not
only  saw  the  odic  flame  become  considerably  brighter,  and
flure,  but  remarked,  that,  when  she  did  it  in  sudden  pufis,  a
little  piece  of  odic  flame  was  detached  every  time  from  the


410  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

pole,  and  flew  on  a  little  distance,  independently,  before  it
became  extinguished ;  just  as,  in  a  common  fire,  little  portions
of  flame  separate,  and  sweep  upwards  in  the  air  alone  for  a
moment.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  likewise  observed,  when
she  blew  in  pufis,  that  httle  pieces  of  flame  were  sometimes
detached  from  theu*  connection  with  the  steel,  and
swept  on  a  moment  free  in  the  air.  Thus  the  observation
is  confirmed  in  all  quarters,  that  the  odic  flame  may  be
affected,  and  set  in  mechanical  motion,  by  tfie  breath,  and
the  movement  of  the  air.

410.  This  is  the  proper  place  to  explain  more  clearly  an
observation  which  was  related  in  Part  I.  ^  18.  It  is  there
stated,  on  the  information  of  Miss  Reichel,  that  the  flame  of
the  common  magnet  was  diverted  by  that  of  an  electro-magnet.
This  was  actually  the  case ;  yet  not  in  a  stationary  condi-
tion of  the  apparatus,  but  during  the  rotation  of  the  electro-
magnet, which  I  neglected  to  note  expressly  in  that  place.
By  the  rapid  rotation  is  produced  an  active  draught  of  air ;
and  it  was  this  which  blew  aside,  and  drove  outwards,  the
horse-shoe,  as  in  the  cases  just  described.  The  fact  remains
the  same  ;  the  inteq^rctation  of  it,  however,  requires  more
accurate  definition  here.*

*  On  this,  as  on  every  occasion,  the  accuracy  of  Miss  Reichel's  state-
ments is  seen,  even  proving  to  be  right  when  1  at  first  imagined  them
to  be  incorrect.  And  this  is  tliat  same  Lcopokline  Reichel,  whom  her
countrymen,  the  Vienna  physicians,  have  not  been  ashamed  to  describe
pubhcly  as  a  liar  and  deceiver.  This  Leopoldine  is  a  plain  but  sensible
and  correct  girl,  belonging  to  a  religious  order,  who,  during  the  three
months  she  resided  in  my  house,  behaved  in  the  most  blameless  manner,
and  so  indeed  as  to  acquire  the  good  will  of  every  one.  There  is  no
easier  way  of  covering  one's  ignorance,  than  briefly  to  dispose  of  every
abstruse  phenomenon,  which,  from  want  of  knowledge,  cannot  be  un-
derstood, and  from  want  of  skill  in  research  cannot  be  made  out,  with
the  presumptuous  explanation  that  it  is  a  deception  ;  but  there  is  also
nothing  more  unmanly  and  dishonourable — 1  must  say  it  straight  out —
than  to  misuse  one's  power  in  lightly  and  ignorantly  robbing  a  poor,
sick,  and  defenceless  girl  of  her  only  possession,  her  good  name,  and  to


Omc  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


411


»


I


411.  If  we  now  collect  the  observations  from  ^  399  to
this  point,  we  obtain,  in  a  variety  of  ways,  coufiriiiatiou  of
the  frec|uently-expr€sscd  hypothesis  that  the  odic  flame  in

It  does  not  follow  its  laws  of


itself  is  not  magnetism.


brand  her  vith  lUe  mnrk  of  ehame*  When  this  accuafttian  is  an  un-
truth,  a  flat  calumny,  as  I  wiJl  prove  to  theae  gentlemen  by  evidence
from  their  own  account  of  ihcir  lamentable  B€t  of  investigatioDs,  it  is
moat  atrocious,  and  every  honeat  heart,  feeling  for  trutli  and  duty,  will
join  in  my  indignation  against  such  unwortbiness.  I  will  give  them  one
of  these  proofs  at  once  here.  It  is  8aid  to  be  a  lie,  that  Miaa  ReieUel  saw
magnetic  light  anywhere.  This  at  once  stamped  my  accounts  on  this  head
with  untrulh,  since  they  rested  at  first  in  great  part  on  the  ob&erva-
tione  of  this  sensitive  person,  I  now  invite  these  scientific  gentlemen
of  the  self-styled  committee  of  Ticnna  physicians,  to  yisit  M.  Pauer  and
his  daughter,  two  persons  whose  good  faith  no  one  in  Vienna  will  ven-
ture to  question,  and  to  ask  them  what  they  saw  in  the  dark,  when  I
placed  a  dozen  di^erent  magoeta  before  them  ?  If  this  does  not  suffice,
I  further  invite  them  to  ask  Baron  August,  ton  Oberlandcr,  M*  Niko-
lous  Rahe,  M,  Gustav  Anschiitss,  M*  Sebastian  Zinkel,  whether  they
saw  flames  over  magnets,  or, not?  1  deure  them  to  visit  Baroness
von  Teasedik,  Madame  Ceecilie  Bauer,  Madame  Johanna  AnschiitZf
Baroness  von  Xatorp,  Madame  Kieneaberger,  Miss  Winter^  the  Baroness
vou  Auguslin,  and  to  hear  what  they  saw  blazing  upon  magnets  in  the
dark  ?  Then  tbey  may  be  so  good  as  to  inquire  of  Prof.  Endltcber,
Messrs.  Kotschy,  Tirka,  von  Rainer,  Femolendt,  Kollar,  Schuh,  and
llochstettcr,  whether  or  not  they  saw  luminous  phenomena  upon
magnets  ?  I  beg  them  to  compare  with  this  what  they  can  obtain  on
the  same  subject  from  the  mouths  of  Madame  Jos.  Fenzl,  Misses  von
Weigelsberg,  Dorfer,  Giaser,  Weigand,  Zinkcl,  Kynast,  the  joiner
Klaiber,  Bollmnn,  &c.  &c.,  well  known  persons  living  in  Vienna,  daily
to  be  met  and  spoken  with.  And  if  all  this  prove  insufficient,  1  finally
direct  them  to  one  of  their  own  colleagues  in  Vienna,  Dr.  Nied,  the
physician,  of  whom  they  may  inquire  about  the  phenomena  which
were  presented  to  him  in  my  darkened  chamber ;  also  of  the  Stockholm
court -physician,  Dr.  Huss.  May  they  obtain  the  truth  they  require !  If
these  honourable  persons  do  not  all  unanimously  say  that  they  have
teen  ejctraordiuary  luminous  phenomena,  partly  luminous  vapour,
partly  coloured  flames  of  considerable  size  over  magnets  in  the  dark,
then  will  I  own  that  Miss  Reichel  never  saw  hght,  that  she  is  a  liar  and
deceiver,  and  that  I  have  really  heeu  fooled  by  her,  and  thus  the
true  though  veiled  purpose  of  these  physicians  will  be  attained. But


412  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

attraction  and  repulsion,  and  is  of  so  material  a  nature  that
it  may  be  driven  backward  and  forward  like  a  common
flame  by  movements  of  the  air.  It  rather  manifests  the
character  of  an  associated  phenomenon  of  magnetism^  which
scarcely  follow  s  its  current  even  partially ;  it  resembles  a
projectile  of  it,  which,  when  thrown  oflf,  continues  its  own
course  in  the  direction  of  the  impulse  which  it  originally
receives,  and  of  obstacles  and  new  impulses  it  meets  in  its
way.

412.  It  appeared  to  me  interesting  to  apply  ihib  observa-
tions gathered  on  the  subject  of  the  odic  incandescence  and
odic  flame,  to  the  common  rubbing  of  steel  magnets.  All
the  hghts  here  described  must  in  this  necessarily  come  to
view,  and  be  confirmed  in  various  ways  ;  and  there  seemed
hope  of  deriving  new  information  respecting  the  processes
of  producing  steel  magnets,  and  of  the  transfer  in  general  of
magnetism  and  Od  from  one  body  to  another.  For  this
purpose  the  following  operations  were  performed  with  Jose-
phine Zinkel.

413.  I  commenced  with  bar-magnets,  and  then  proceeded
to  horse-shoes.

The  first  manifestation  of  light  which  was  afforded  to  the

if  the  rcverBC  happens,  aud  the  testimony  of  all  these  persons  incon-
testibly  estabhshes  the  fact  of  the  magnetic  light,  then  I  beg  these  gen-
tlemen not  to  be  angry  with  me  if  I  say  before  all  the  world  that  they
are  either  miserable  experimenters,  incapable  of  performing  the  simplest
physical  research  with  even  the  appearance  of  accuracy,  or  that  they
must  suffer  the  contempt,  which  is  the  reward  of  unprincipled  conduct,
to  fall  away  from  Leopoldine  Reichel,  and  descend  upon  themselves.
Nature  is  eternal.  After  thousand  millions  of  years  will  the  odic  light
flow  and  shine  as  it  does  to-day.  But  the  endeavours  to  overcome
such  a  truth,  when  it  has  once  happily  been  found  aud  disclosed,  are
paltry  and  poor. — Author's  Note.

Some  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  London  practitioners  of  physic  and
surgery  have  great  need  for  lessons  like  the  above  to  be  read  to  them.
Charlatanism  in  professions,  like  cowardice  in  rank  and  file,  shelters  its
dishonour  in  the  fellow-feehng  of  numbers.


O0IC  FLAME  0!f  9TBEL  MAGNBT9.


I

I
I


Fto.  16.


beholder  was,  thai  always  when  1  placed  the  rubbing  magnet
perpendicularly  upon  the  rubbed,  the  latter  became  far
more  highly  incandescent  at  the  part  touched.  The  polar
extremity  of  the  rubber  thus  acted  with  its  whole  magnetic
and  odic  force,  so  strongly  uiK)n  the  rubbed  steel  bar,  that
it  made  it  much  more  luminous  w^herc  it  was  in  contact
with  it.  Fig,  1 G  may  render  this  more  clear.  This  luminous
phenomenon  oc-
curred in  every
case^  whether  the  i
contact  was  made  I
upon  the  poles,
tlic  axis,  ur  any
other  part  of  the
rubbed  magnet.
And  since  it  was
also  extinguished
directly  the  nibber
was  taken  away  or  carried  along,  it  was  consequently  found
that  as  the  rubber  was  drawn  along  from  one  pole  to
the  other  of  tlie  rubbed  magnet,  in  tlie  usual  pass,  the
bright  patch  also  moved  from  pole  to  pole  of  the  rubbed
bar,  always  aceompanjing  the  pole  of  the  rubber  as  it  passed
over  the  rubbed  one.  And  since  the  nibbed  bar,  especially
wlien  it  lay  in  the  meridian,  as  wc  have  seen  above,  ^  338,
has  blue  odic  incandescence  on  its  northward  half,  and  red
on  its  southward,  the  wandering  patch  of  incandescence  also
upjicars  with  bluish  light  on  the  former  and  reddish  on
the  latter  half.  With  regard,  therefore,  to  the  action  which
a  rubbing  magnet  exerts  on  a  nibbed  one  in  r<^.spcct  to  odic
incnmU'Hccncc,  this  presents  itself  to  the  eye  as  a  lovfd  action^
which  tB  connected  with  the  immediate  presence  of  the
rubbing  pole,  and  is  not  diffused  over  the  whole  extent  of
the  rul>bed  bar,  at  k-ast  not  visibly.  Here  there  apfKars  to
be  a  ditfcrence  l>etween  udic  and  piu*e  magnetic  action,  aa


414  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

the  latter  is  diffused  over  the  whole  of  the  rubbed  bar  in
every  pass,  and  so  not  only  appears  over  its  totality,  but  re-
mains attached  to  it.

In  these  exi)eriinents  I  used  two  bars,  of  which  the
rubbed  one  was  eighteen  inches ;  the  rubber,  rather  larger
and  stouter,  twenty-four  inches  long.  Let  us  now  examine
the  process  of  rubbing,  first  upon  the  rubbed  bar,  then  on
the  rubber ;  and  in  the  first  place  wth  regard  to  the  odic
incandescence,  and  after\vard8  to  the  odic  flame.

414.  A. — Odic  incandescence  of  the  rubbed  bar,  I  laid
a  steel  bar,  which  was  only  weakly  magnetic,  upon  a  table,
in  the  meridian.  It  possessed  weak  odic  incandescence  in
the  dark,  so  that  its  northward  half  seemed  to  have  merely
gray  instead  of  blue  light,  its  southward  half  only  whitish-
yellow  instead  of  yellowish  red,  both  opaque  and  dull.

I  laid  the  rubber,  westward  of  the  former,  in  the  parallel,
upon  the  same  table,  and  moved  the  northward  poles  of  both
towards  each  other,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  two  magnets
enclosed  a  right  angle  between  them.  Then  I  began  to  do
exactly  as  one  does  when  wishing  to  rub  one  bar  with  the
other,  only  with  the  distinction  that  I  brought  both  bars
into  the  horizontal  positioi),  while  it  is  usual  to  bring  them
together  in  a  vertical  plane,  which  might  not  be  exactly  the
same  thing  in  the  essentials  of  the  matter.

The  behaviour  was  as  follows :

a.  First,  on  contact  of  the  two  negative  poles,  the  north-
ward pole  of  the  rubbed  bar  appeared  blue  odically  incan-
descent over  half  its  length  toward  the  south ;  the  southern,
sonicwliat  shorter  half,  red  incandescent.

b.  When  the  rubber  had  been  moved  a  quarter  of  the
length  along  the  rubbed  bar,  the  same  condition  appeared,
but  now  almost  three-fifths  of  its  northern  pai-t  were  blue,
and  only  two-fifths  remained  red  at  the  south.

c.  When  the  rubber  reached  the  middle,  the  blue  incan-
descence had  grown  to  three-fourths  of  the  rubbed  l)ar;  in


ODir  FLA  Ml  ON  STEKL  MAHNETS,


another  experiment,  however,  in  which  the  latter  aboady
possessed  some  magnetic  strength  from  former  passes,  the
blue  northern  incandeseonee  terminated  at  the  middle  and
the  red,  the  southward  began  thenec.

d.  The  rubber,  advanced  three  fourths,  now  reaehed  the
red  odic  ineandescence  of  the  rubbed*

e.  The  rubber  arrived  at  the  southern  end,  the  blue
appeared  to  have  become  shorter,  and  carried  back  one  half
of  the  lengtli  of  the  rubbed  bar,  and  the  red  increased  at  the
other  end.  The  red  had  now  grown  much  more  luminous
and  intense.

4)5^  B^ — Odic  flame  of  the  ruhhed  bar ;  and  first,  the

1 .  Blue  nortluiavd  Jlame,  w Inch  was  originally  weak,  and
only  two  inches  long.

a.  When  the  northward  polcs^  of  the  rubber  and  nibbed
were  brought  into  contact,  this  blue  flame  vanished  entirely.

b.  Wlien  the  rubber  had  advanced  only  two-fifths  of  an
inch  along  the  rubbed  l)ar,  the  bbie  flame  again  made  its
ajji)carance  on  the  latter,  at  first  only  two-fifths  of  an  inch
long.

c.  The  rubber  advanced  one  quarter ;  the  blue  had  in-
creased to  about  an  inch  and  a  half  long,

d.  The  rubber  in  the  middle  :  it  had  elongated  to  nearly
two  inches  and  a  half,

e.  The  nibber  advanced  three-fifths  :  it  had  risen  to  three
inches,

J\  The  rubber  aiTived  at  the  southward  extremity  of  the
rubbed  bar :  the  blue  flame  of  the  northward  end  attained
its  maximum,  namely,  five  inches,

2.  Now"  tlic  red  southward  flame,  which  originally  was
only  about  an  inch  and  a  quarter  long.

a.  Wlien  the  northward  poles  of  the  rubber  and  rubbed
were  brought  together,  the  size  reached  three  inches,  wliich
was  its  maximum.


416  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

b.  The  rubber  arrived  at  one  fourth  the  length  of  the
rubbed  bar :  the  red  flame  appeared  only  two  inches  long.

c.  The  rubber,  advancing  from  north  to  south,  and  arrived
at  the  middle  of  the  rubbed  bar ;  the  red  flame  had  dimi-
nished to  a  little  more  than  one  inch.

rf.  The  rubber  advanced  to  three-fourths :  the  red  flame
diminished  to  four-fifths  of  an  inch.

€.  The  rubber  at  the  southward  pole  of  the  rubbed  bar :
all  red  colour  had  disappeared.

The  course  of  development  in  the  red  southward  flame
was  thus  exactly  opposed  to  that  of  the  blue  northward
flame.

We  now  pass  to  the  rubber.

416.  c. — Odic  incandescence  of  the  rubber.  As  it  lay
originally,  and  before  the  contact  with  the  rubbed  bar,  in
the  magnetic  parallel,  it  was  bluish  incandescent  in  its  nega-
tive northward  half,  and  reddish  in  its  positive  southward
half;  the  two  halves  were  about  equal  in  size.

a.  When  the  northward  poles  of  the  two  bars  (as  above
stated,  forming  a  right  angle  in  the  horizontal  plane,  since
the  rubbed  bar  lay  in  the  meridian)  were  brought  in  contact,
there  appeared  at  the  point  of  contact  of  the  nibber,  which
was  originally  blue,  a  small  patch  of  red  about  four-fifths  of
an  inch  long ;  further  up  it  was  blue  incandescent  for  about
six  inches ;  then  followed  a  length  of  two  inches  of  gray, —
that  is,  a  weak  indifferent  point, — and  beyond  this  a  red  in-
candescent tract,  which  occupied  all  the  rest  of  the  bar ;
therefore  about  seventeen  inches.  It  is  striking,  and  worthy
of  note,  that  in  this,  the  stronger  of  the  two  magnets,  the
odic  polarity  was  nevertheless  reversed  at  its  northward  pole  a
certain,  although  but  a  short,  distance  from  the  rubbed  bar,
and  blue  changed  into  red,  so  that  a  series  of  patches  or
zones  appeared  upon  the  rubber;  its  northward  polarity
was  thus  enclosed  between  two  southward  polarities.  There


ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  BfAONETS.


I


^


was  consequcutly  the  commencement  of  a  triple  condition  in
the  rubber,

A.  As  soon  as  the  rubber  had  advanced  but  about  two-
thirds  of  its  own  diameter,  that  is  about  two-thirds  of  an
inch,  along  the  mljbed  bar,  so  that  it  was  no  longer  applied
against  it  as  in  Fig.  17,  but  as  in  Fig.  18,  the  red  terminal
spot had disap-
peared from the  I^ig-  !?•  ^«o.  is.
rubber, but at
the  same  time  a
blue coating, of
the diameter of
the rubbed bar,
was  formed,  which
then,  with  the  fur-
ther advance  of  tlie  rubber,  grew  up  into  the  little  bhie
flame  of  B  a,  and  then  into  a  larger  flame. As  soon  as
this  terminal  red  spot  disappeared,  the  nibber  was  only
divided  into  two  fields  of  odic  incandescence ;  the  blue  one
of  its  northward  half,  and  the  red  of  its  southward,

r.  Advanced  to  a  quarter  of  the  nibbed  bar :  the  blue
part  of  tlic  rublicr  amoimted  to  two-fifths,  the  red  to  three-
fifths  of  its  length.

d.  Brought  to  the  middle :  the  blue  amounted  to  some-
what more.

Carried  three-fourths  of  the  distance  over  the  nibbed
bar :  the  bkie  sliare  made  thrcr-fnnrHis,  the  red  only  one-
fourth  of  its  length.

417.  B. — Odic  flame  of  the  rubber .

Its  blue  northward  flame,  originally  four  inches  long,  was
extinguished  by  the  contact  with  the  rubbed  bar,  over
which  this  pole  passed :  we  have  therefore  only  to  examine
its  southward  flame,  the  red  one.  In  all  these  ex[)eriment3
it  lay  as  has  been  stated  in  the  parallels,  its  southward  pole
turned  toward  the  west.


418  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

a.  The  two  northward  poles  being  brought  together,  the
southward  flame  of  the  rubber  appeared  three  inches  long.

h.  The  rubber  advanced  to  one  fourth  of  the  rubbed  bar:
the  red  flame  was  shortened  and  brought  to  two  inches.

c.  When  the  rubber  arrived  at  the  middle,  it  bore  a  flame
only  an  inch  and  a  quarter  long.

d.  When  the  rubber  had  passed  over  three  fourths,  its
flame  rapidly  increased  in  strength  again,  and  rose  to  three
inches.

e.  When  the  rubber  had  reached  the  southward  pole  of
the  rubbed  bar,  its  terminal  red  flame  attained  its  maximum ;
namely,  a  length  of  nearly  four  inches.

When  I  now  made  a  movement  with  the  rubber  out  of
the  parallel,  into  the  meridian  of  the  rubbed  bar,  and
brought  it  into  straight  line  with  it — the  north  pole  of  the
rubber  in  contact  with  the  south  pole  of  the  rubbed  bar,  so
that  the  latter  was  made  to  have  twice  the  length — ^both  the
northward  flame  of  the  latter,  and  the  southward  of  the
former,  increased  to  double  their  original  length ;  in  accord-
ance with  experiments  and  laws  already  unfolded,  §  401.
These  laws  will  be  seen  to  declare  themselves  in  all  places
throughout  the  whole  series  of  these  paragraphs.

418.  A  further  application  of  these  occiu^  in  the  pre^
paration  of  horse-shoe  magnets  hy  rubbing  ;  to  which  we
now  come.  I  used  as  rubber  a  strong  five-layered  horse-
shoe,  and,  as  the  rubbed,  a  one-layered  horse-shoe,  which
had  in  great  part  lost  its  magnetism.  Tlie  manner  in  which
I  proceeded  consisted  simply  in  this :  I  laid  the  five-layered
rubber  upon  the  table  in  such  a  manner  that  both  its  poles
projected  over  the  edge,  and  its  curvature  was  turned  toward
the  middle  of  the  table.  The  horse-shoe  was  heavy  enough
to  remain  motionless  in  this  position  during  the  passes,  and
so  strong  that  it  held  the  singlc-layer-nibbed  magnet  fast  in
any  position ;  this  was  applied  to  its  poles.  I  held  the
single  horse-shoe  vertical,  with  the  curvature  constantly  di-


ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


419


reeled  doTJVTiwards,  and  the  j)olcs  upwards.  The  single  magnet
had  originally  and  inde])endently  in  the  dark  (that  is,  to  the
sight  at  that  time  of  Josephine  Zinkel),  a  little  blue  flame  of
about  twO'fifths  of  an  inch  high  on  its  northward  pole,  but
only  a  redtUsh  smoke  on  the  southward*  The  five-layered
horse-shoe  had  a  noilhwaid  flame  a  hand*s  length,  and  a
southward  a  finger's  length.  Both  steel  magnets  were
luminous,  on  the  one  side  with  bhiish,  on  the  other
with  yellowish-red  odic  incandescence ;  the  smaller  duller,
the  larger  inoomparably  more  vi\  id.  This  incandescence
was  almost  imperceptible  at  the  curvature,  and  increased
continually  to  its  greatest  intensity  at  the  poles,

I  began  with  applying  the  curvature  of  the  single  magnet
to  the  two  poles  of  the  five-loyered,  friendly,  unlike  poles
upon  each  other ;  it  was  immediately  held  fast  in  the  up-
right position. The  result  was,  that

419.  A. — ^The  odic  incamfescence  of  the  rubbed  inaqnet
(the  single  horse-shoe)  apjicared  in  greater  brightness  at
the  curvature,  {a)  distinctly  separated  into  two  halves,  into
a  red  and  a  blue,  the  first  lying  on  the  negative,  the  second
on  the  positive  pole  of  the  rulibcr ;  that,  moreover,  both  the
limbs  of  the  rubbed  magnet  at  the  same  time  came  into
stronger  incandescence,  and  of  the  same  colours  in  the  said
sides,  but  with  increased  strength  of  luminosity.  When  I
now  drew  the  single  magnet  down  upon  the  rubber,  till
poles  were  apphed  to  poles,  the  incandescence  of  the  curva-
ture increased  in  both  coloiu's,  which  met  in  the  middle,  and
passed  into  each  other :  on  the  other  hand,  the  incandescent
light  was  weakened  on  both  limbs,  became  didler  and  grayer ;
but  all  this  did  not  alter  the  colours  of  the  odic  incan-
descence  ;  the  northward  limb  of  the  rubbed  magnet  always
remained  blue,  the  southward  Hrab  red*  The  odic  quality  thus
remained  equally  negative  in  all  these  cases — namely,  first,
when  the  single  magnet  was  free ;  secondly,  when  it^  cur-
vature was  applied  to  the  five-layered,  north  to  south  ;  and


p  K


420


OBIC  ?LAME  ON  STlEIi  MAGNETS.


thirdly,  when  pole  was  applied  to  pole  iii  like  manner.  But
the  quantitative  distribution  of  Od  and  magnetism  did  not
remain  the  same,

420.  B. — Tite  odic  flame  of  the  rubbed  (single  hor
shoe). Wlien  the  ciinature  of  this  was  applied  to  the  five-
layered,  and  it  thus  closed  it  Uke  an  armature,  the  little  blue
flame  of  its  northward  pole,  which  had  been  only  two-fifths
of  an  inch  high,  rapidly  grew  to  five  inches  long,  and  the
reddish  smoke  of  its  southward  pole  simultaneously  changed
into  a  red  flame  one  to  one  and  three-quarters  of  an  inch
long,  with  dense  yellowish-gray  smoke  above  it. In  the
succeeding  experiments,  in  which  the  single  horse-shoe  had^^
become  magnetically  charged  by  the  rubbing,  and  its  indc-^^
pendent  otlic  flame  was  two  and  a  half  inches  long,  this
rose  on  the  application  of  the  curvature  to  the  rubber  to
nearly  five  inches  on  the  blue  side,  and  then  to  two  and  a
half  on  the  red.

Wieu  I  now  drew  the  nibbed  single  magnet  slowly  down
the  rubbing  five-layered,  its  iK)lar  flames  were  gradual!
diminished  ;  tliat  on  the  southward  'pole  soon  vanished,  that
on  the  northward  decreased,  and  became  duller,  while  the
curvature  began  to  get  brighter.  When  the  poles  of  hot
magnets  were  applied  together,  all  the  flames  wera  eX'
tinguishcd.

In  these  processes^  in  whichever  of  their  diSerent  phi
they  might  be  examined,  whatever  part  of  the  nibbed  mag-
net was  applied  to  the  poles  of  the  nibber,  every  part  of  each
limb  retained  its  colour.  The  halves  of  the  cunature,  the
hmbs  above  and  below  the  part  rubbed,  the  odic  flamei
over  the  poles,  the  sjiarks,  streaks,  and  fiery  mist  around  the
limbs,  all  without  exception  remained  blue  on  the  onej
red  on  the  other  limb,  dming  the  whole  procedure.  In
no  case  did  polar  quality,  but  only  the  intensity  of  the
light — that  is,  the  odic  quantity — suffer  modification  from
the  rubber.


OUtC  FI.AME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


421


I
I


42  L  c, — Odic  incandescence  of  the  rubber,  the  five-fold
[horse- shoe.  As  soon  as  the  curvature  of  the  single  horse-
was  laid  before  it,  and  coiinected  its  poles,  the  odic
Piijcandesccuce  was  heightened  in  the  curvatnrc  of  the  five-
[fold  magnet,  and  became  more  brilhant ;  but  the  hght  of
the  odic  incandescence  of  its  two  Hmbs— and  still  mom
f  its  two  poles  —  becanie  weakened  in  proportion,
the  northward  limb  gray-blue,  and  the  southward
yellowish-red.  Here,  also,  the  curvature  possessed  both
colours,  which  passed  suddenly  intx)  each  other  in  tlie
centre.  When  I  drew  the  nibbed  magnet  slowly  down-
wards, the  two  poles  of  the  rubber  became  gradually  more
incandescent.  They  attained  tlieir  greatest  tn-lghtness  when
^11  the  poles  were  applied  together ;  but  still  this  did  not
come  up  to  the  brightness  of  the  curvatiu*e.  The  odic  m-
candescence  of  the  rubbing  magnet  tlms  took  an  almost
convei*se  course  from  that  of  the  rubbed,  at  the  same  time
agreeing  with  the  general  rules  already  known.

As  soon  as  I  pulled  oft'  the  rubbed  magnet  from  the  poles
of  the  rubber,  the  curvature  and  limbs  of  the  latter  decreased
in  incandescence,  but  its  poles  increased  in  luminosity.  No
odic  flame  of  the  rubber  can  here  be  subjected  to  examina-
tion ;  since,  as  neither  of  its  poles  were  ever  free,  but  always
appUed  to  the  rubl)ed  mtignet,  no  odic  flame  existed.

422.  An  experiment  of  rubbing  horse-shoes  with  their
poles  together,  in  the  manner  adopted  with  the  mag-
ic bars  mentioned  at  ^  403,  gave  similar  results,  and
served  to  confirm  the  former.  I  laid  the  northward  pole  of
the  single  horse-shoe  on  the  nortliward  pole  of  the  five-fold
one  ;  the  southward  poles  in  like  manner  together,  at  right
angles,  as  before,  and  now  rubl>ed  fmm  tlie  j>ole8  toward
the  ciu^atnre  :  the  pole^  having  l>oen  previously  reversed,
w  hen  the  pass  was  also  reversed,  the  effect  should  coincide
with  the  precedmg  one.  The  behavioiu-  of  the  odic  incan-
descence here  was  as  follows  ; — ^As  soon  as  the  comers  of


422


ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


the  like  poles  came  in  contact,  a  little  patch  of  red  odic  in
candescence,  only  two-fifths  of  an  inch  long,  appeared  on
the  blue  northward  pole  of  the  rubbed  single  magnet ;  an
on the  red southward  pole  of  the  same  a  similar  littl^
patch  of  blue  odic  incandescence,  likewise  two-fifths  of  an
inch  long. As  soon  as  I  had  pushed  the  single  magnet
two-fifths  of  an  inch  forward,  these  spots of  light  both
vanished,  and  the  northward  pole  became  blue,  the  south-
ward red,  exactly  in  their  regular  way,  and  they  remained
so  during  the  remainder  of  the  passage  of  the  magnet*
These  two  terminal  patches  of  reverse  odic  incandescence
are  the  same  that  wo  became  acquainted  with  on  one  side
at  the  negative  poles  of  the  liai'  magnet — a  reversal  of  the
polarity  of  one  pole  by  means  of  the  other  of  hke  quality
The single  magnet  was  thus many-poled  at the first
moment ;  two-fifths  blue,  then  the  whole  length  of  a  lim
red,  the  other  limb  blue,  and  lastly,  two-fifths  red  at  the
other  extremity.  ^^

423,  The  force  which  prevails  in  these  objects  is  ron-^H
sequmthj  never  uniformly  dislrihuted ;  not  even  when  ike
maf/uetic  cinuit  appears  closed.  The  state  of  continuity,
as  we  have  seen  above  in  the  intcrmLxtnre  of  the  poles  i
the  magnetic  flames^  ^  404  to  407,  is  probably  never  perfect ;
and  hence,  leaving  out  of  the  question  the  disturbances  of
equilibrium  through  the  influence  of  terrestrial  magnetism,
these  constant  iucqunlitics  in  tlic  distribution  of  the  force*
New  examples  of  this  ai*c  afforded  by  some  investigations
on  the

424*  Injlnence  of  the  armature  on  the  phenomena  of  I
odic  fame  of  magnets. We  have  seen  above,  that  the  armaJ
turc,  applied  to  the  horsc-shoc,  weakens  the  odic  incandes*
cence  of  this,  while  at  the  same  time  it  heightens  that  of  the
curvature. But  the  odic  flames,  according  to  all  the  sensi
tives  who  possessed  the  power  of  seeing  these  Ughts,  wei
immediately  extinguished  when  an  armature  was  applied


•St

he \


O0IC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


a  horse-shoe :  observatioos  particularly  bearing  this  out
are  noticed  in  my  journal  on  experiments,  from  Madame
Kieiiesberger,  Misses  Winter,  Dorfer,  Friedrich  Weidlieli,  the
healthy  Josephine  Zinkel,  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl,  Barou
von  Obcrliinder,  Professor  Kndlicher,  Baroness  von  Augustin,
and  others.

425*  W  hen  I  oppHed  the  armature  to  the  horse-shoe^
low  down,  on  the  ciurvature,  before  the  fixst  of  the  above-
named  ubsurvers,  in  the  darkened  chamber,  this,  as  was  to
be  expected,  had  no  particular  influence  upon  the  flames  of
the  poles.  But  as  I  moved  the  armature  slowly  up  along
the  horse-shoe  toward  the  poles,  keeping  it  always  across
the  limbs,  a  continual  weakening  of  the  odic  flame  of  both
poles  resulted,  these  always  diniinislimg  until  I  brought  the
armature  to  the  poles^  when  the  flames  were  wholly  ex-
tiiig\iished,  and  the  armature  covered  them.  "Wlien  I  pro-
ceeded in  the  opposite  dkection,  that  is,  passing  the  arma-
ture gi'udually  down  from  the  poles  to  the  curvature,  a
similarly  gradual  restoration  of  the  odic  flames  of  the  poles
resulted.  The  eoiu^e  was  as  follows ;  as  the  armature
I>assed  upward  the  beholder  saw  the  polar  flames  at  first
become  duller,  the  blue  became  grayish,  while  the  red  passed
into  a  dull  yellowish  ;  during  this  the  length  of  the  flames
was  gradually  diminished,  WTien  it  eame  to  the  middle  of
the  limb  and  went  above  this,  the  reddish  yellow  of  the
southward  pole  disappeared,  and  now  only  a  reddish  smoke
remained  over  it ;  the  diminished  bluish  northward  flame
was  discoloured  quite  into  gi*ay.  When  it  arrived  near  the
poles,  this  was  also  extinguished  and  converted  into  gray
smoke,  and  this  finallv  vanished  altof^ether  when  the  arma*
ture  was  apphed  upon  the  poles*  In  the  passage  downward
all  the^e  phenomena  occurred  in  the  reverse  order :  at  first
a  gray  smoke  api>eared  at  the  negative  pole ;  then  followed
gray  flame,  next  red  smoke  at  the  ix)9itive,  after  that  the
blue,  and  then  the  red  flame,  at  first  small,  growing  larger ;


424


ODIC  FLAME  ON  8TEEI*  MAGKBTS


finally,  when  the  armature  arrived  at  the  curvature,  all  the
origioal  phenomena  of  the  odic  light  were  fully  represented.
The  odic  incandescence  of  the  hoi*se-shoe  was  originally  very
weak  at  the  cur\  atnre,  strong  at  the  poles  ;  but,  with  the
removal  of  the  ainmture  upwards,  the  curvature  gradually
became  visible,  and  as  the  poles  were  rendered  more  dull  in
their  incandescence  by  the  advance  of  the  armature,  the
incandescence  of  the  curvature  was.  step  by  step,  increased,
till  at  last,  when  the  armature  covered  the  poles,  it  almost
eijualled  the  limbs  and  poles  in  brightness*

426.  But  the  armature  itself  also  gained  and  lost  odic
incandescence  during  tliis,  WTien  it  lay  upon  the  curvatiu'c
it  was  grey  and  scarcely  visible ;  when  it  lay  upon  tlie  pole
it  had  become  more  strongly  incandescent  and  coloured,  on
the  side  turned  toward  the  northward  pole  of  the  horse-shoe
reddish,  on  that  toward  the  southward  pole  bluish ;  at  all
the  intermediate  stages  it  possessed  conTsponding  transit
tional  luminosities :  it  was  itself  converted  into  an  induced
magnet,  and  bore  the  colours  of  odic  iucandeseence  regidariy
corresponding  to  this.  But  they  were  always  rather  duller
than  those  of  the  inducing  magnet  poles.  These  pheno-
mena explain  themselves,  if  we  in  each  case  regard  the  part
of  the  horse-shoe  from  the  curvatiu'c  to  the  armatxu-e  as  a
piece  cut  ott*  from  the  whole.  The  larger  this  is,  the  smaller
remains  the  residuum  of  the  limb ;  the  shorter,  therefore,
will  be  the  polar  flames  remaining  to  it,  and  vice  vernA,

427.  I  endeavoured  to  test  the  conditions  and  effccta  of\
the  annature  upon  the  horse-shoe  magnet  during  the  pass.
This  was  doue  with  Josephine  Zinkel,  iu  the  opportunity
aJibrded  by  the  experiments  just  now  discussed,  with  a
five-layered  rubber  and  a  single  rubbed  horse-shoe,  when
under  the  above  described  conditions  (^  418,  at  the  end)^  I
while  the  curvature  of  the  rubbed  magnet  waa  attached  to
the  poles  of  the  rubber,  and  this  was  thus  closed  by  it  as
bv  an  armatmc  ; the  odic  flames  then  blazed  most  vividiv


ODIC  FLAKE  ON  8TCKL  MAONITS.


^
n


•■^^Mgf^**'igyr


above  the  poles  of  the  rubbed  magnet.  I  applied  the  arma-
ture to  them;  it  adhered  tirmly,  was  converted  into  au
ioduced  magnet,  with  strong  odic  incandescence,  the  colours
being  opj>osed  to  those  of  the  jjolcs  of  the  horse-shoe.  The
hmba  themselves  were  considerably  weakened  iu  their  in-
candescence, the  negative  blue  became  bluish  gray,  the
positive  red  dullish  yellow-red.

42 S.  When  I  drew  the  rubbed  horsc-shoc  dowii  the
rubber  till  their  poles  met  and  the  armature  Wiis  again
apphed  to  the  rubbed  magnet,  as  is  shown  in  fig,  1 9,  it  in
like  manner  became
firmly  attached ,  and  was  ^'**'  ^  ^'

again  converted  into  an
induced  magnet  with
stronger  odic  incandes-
cence, but  the  colours
of  the  incandescence
were  now  reversed,  no
longer  opposed  to  the
coloiurs  of  the  poles  of
the  rubbed  horse-shoe,
but  of  the  same  colour  as  them,  and  therefore  opposed  to
those  of  the  mhber.  From  tliis  it  follows,  that  the  arma-
ture w^as  no  longer  within  the  influence  of  the  rubbed
magnet  on  which  it  lay,  but  had  come  under  dominion  of  the
rubber  r  and  this  not,  indeed,  immediately,  but  by  means
of  the  little  tract  of  steel  constituting  the  polar  extremities
of  the  rubbed  horse-shoe.  These  must  have  been  first  con-
verted into  short  induced  magnets,  and  then,  from  these,
was  the  armature  changed  into  an  induction  magnet  of  the
rubber.  Here  all  these  processes  presented  themselves  quite
clearly  to  the  eyes  of  the  sensitive,  which  the  science  that
would  hitherto  make  no  use  of  the  capacities  of  the  sensitive,
could  only  discover  by  tedious  and  uncertain  methods.

429.  The  question  now  presented  itself,  when  and  where


426


OK  8TEKL  MAGNETS*


does  this  retnarkable  rei^ersal  of  the  poles  in  the  annature
of  the  rubbed  shigle  horseshoe  take  place  P To  fiud  this

out,  I  closed  the  five-layer  with  the  curvature  of  the  single
horse-shoe,  closed  the  upward  dii-ected  poles  of  the  latter
with  the  arxuature,  and  drew  it  slowly  down  the  rubber^
allowing  the  sensitives  to  observe  and  describe  the  armature
to  me  from  time  to  time. When  the  single  horse-shoe  had
passed  down  two-thirds  of  its  length,  so  that  only  one-third
stood  above  the  rubber,  the  armature,  which  when  first
applied  had  been  attracted  very  strongly,  fell  off  of  its  own
accord. 1  applied  it  again,  but  found  that  it  did  not  adliere
in  the  least,  and  the  single  hoi^e-shoe  had  lost  all  attraction
for  it* This  continued  until  I  had  drawn  down  the  single
horse-shoe  three-fourths  of  its  length. Then  the  armature
again  began  to  acquire  attraction  toward  the  poles  of  the
single  horse-shoe,  which  went  on  increasing  as  I  drew  it
farther  down,  and  \^'as  strongest  when  I  applied  it  to  the
poles  of  the  rubber. Diuing  this  the  behaviour  of  the
colours  of  the  odic  incandescence  was  as  follows :  at  first
tlie  armature  was  coloured  oppositely  to  the  single  horse-
shoe,^ — ^it  formed  an  induction  magnet  of  it. As  I  drew  the
single  magnet  downwards  the  intt^nsity  of  the  hght  and
colours  of  the  armature  decreased,  became  duller,  the  colours
more  indistinct,  confused ;  and  when  I  had  moved  it  down
two-thirds,  all  the  colour  had  disappeared  from  the  arma-
ture; it  now  possessed  only  a  dim  uniform  gray,  like  any
other  piece  of  iron. Thus  it  remained  till  I  had  passed  it
more  than  three-fourths  down  ;  from  hence  it  again  began
to get brighter,  then  its  two  halves  to  acquire  distinct  ^B
colom^s,  but  now  the  reverse  of  what  they  had  before  ;  its  ^^
red  and  blue  were  now  no  longer  opposed,  as  Ijcfore,  to  the
rubbed  single  horse-shoe  to  which  it  was  applied,  but  to
the  rubbing  five-layered  magnet,  to  the  poles  of  which  it  had
now approached. Thus the iiicHiierence point of thej
colouring  coincided  with  the  iudittcrcncc  point  of  the  polar j


ODTC  FLAME  ON  STEKL  MAGNETS.


427


attractions ;  and  these  results  beautifully  support  the  paral-
lelism of  these  two  pheuomena  under  commoD  circum-
stances.

430.  It  is  also  found  that  in  the  condition  of  the  arma-
ture, in  which  it  has  no  attraction  for  the  single  magnet,
and  remains  uncolourcd  in  gray  odic  incaudescence,  thai
curvature  of  the  same  horse-shoe  has  also  become  light
again  on  one  side,  but  has  only  an  uniformly  gray  lumino-
sity. Thus  (here  appears  io  be  a  condiiion  of  netitralized
imliffireuce  both  above  in  the  armature  and  below  in  the
curvature,  when  the  single  horse-shoe  adheres  at  two- thirds
to  three-fourths  of  the  length  of  its  Umbs  to  the  five-layered
rubber.

431.  Once,  in  the  condition  of  menstruation,  when  the
sight  of  the  observer  was  three  or  four  times  stronger  than
usual,  she  saw  the  single  horse-shoe,  which,  from  the  re-
peated passes,  was  now  in  the  magnetic  condition,  with  a
blue  flame  of  six  inches  long  at  the  northward  pole,  and  a
reddish  of  two  inches  and  a  half  at  the  southwaid.  When
I  DOW  laid  its  curvature  on  the  poles  of  the  five-layer,
friendly,  unlike  sides  together,  both  the  blue  and  the  red
flames  at  once  increased  about  one-half.  When  I  drew  the
single  magnet  downwards,  its  polar  flames  decreased ;  and
by  the  time  they  had  come  back  to  their  original  lengths  of
six  and  two  and  a  half- inches,  I  had  moved  down  one-third
of  the  limb  ;  in  this  position,  therefore,  the  effect  of  the
rubber  upon  the  odie  Jlame  of  the  rubbed  magnet  equals  O  :
the  flames  were  thus  brought  into  a  certain  equilibrium,
that  of  the  rubber  upon  the  poles  of  the  rubbed  horse-shoe  j
being  removed,  at  least  in  odic  respects.  When  I  drew  the
single  horse-shoe  further  down,  to  two-thirds  of  the  length
of  its  limbs,  I  arrived  at  the  point  of  nuupietic  indifference,
where  the  magnetic  forces  were  removed  from  the  poles  of
the  rubt>ed  magnet  on  to  the  rubber.

432.  But  the  direrf/ence  between  the  mlic  and  maynelic


428  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

activitieSy  which  manifested  itself  in  these  processes,  was
very  remarkable.  In  the  experiment  just  detailed  (which
was  also  repeated  at  various  times,  also  that  of  the  menstru*
ating  period),  when  the  magnetism  of  the  rubbed  horse-shoe
was  =  O  at  the  poles,  and  the  armature  fell  off,  this  was
by  no  means  the  case  with  the  odic  flame.  It  was,  indeed,
depressed  and  diminished  on  the  blue  side  down  to  one  and
a  quarter  inch ;  and  on  the  red,  reduced  to  red  smoke ;
thus  altogether  brought  down  to  about  a  fourth  or  fifth  of
its  original  and  proper  size,  but  not  by  any  means  destroyed
as  the  magnetic  attraction  was.  Nay,  more ;  when  I  drew
the  single  magnet  down  three-quarters  and  more,  and  the
colour  of  the  armature  lying  upon  it  changed  in  such  a
manner  that  its  side  lying  on  the  negative  limb  of  the  single
magnet  became  blue  (according  to  §  427),  yet  the  residue
of  the  odic  flame  remained  permanently  blue.  This  little
flame  decreased  as  I  brought  the  poles  of  the  single  horse-
shoe down  to  those  of  the  five-layered,  from  one  and  a
quarter  to  four-fifths,  two-fifths,  one-fifth,  one-twenty-fiflh,
to  the  thickness  of  a  sheet  of  paper,  at  last  waving  as  a
delicate  blue  mist  over  the  negative  polar  extremity ;  but
always  blue  and  blue  gray  down  to  the  last  moment,  when
pole  joined  pole,  and  all  flame  vanished  entirely.

433.  Here  the  difference  between  the  behaviour  of  Od
and  magnetism  conies  strongly  into  view.  While  the  nega-
tive magnetism  of  the  northward  limb  of  the  single  magnet
was  reversed  above  into  +  M,  the  flame  attached  to  it
remained  blue,  and  persisted  in  —  Od ;  from  steel  which
gave  out  -f  M,  and  induced  —  M  in  the  armature  in  contact
with  it,  issued  the  blue  manifestation  of  —  Od,  unre-
strainedly, so  long  as  the  armature  remained  off :  positive
magnetism  and  negative  Od  may  thus  co-exist  Hmul-
taneously  in  one  and  the  same  steel  bar,

434.  As  electro-magnetism  is  a  means  of  producing  odic
incandescence  in  iron,  (see  above,  ^  374),  so  it  is  also  of


OBie  FLAHE  ON  ftTKm.  MAGNETS*


I


P


calling  forth  odic  flame,  and  this  in  an  imcommoDly  high
degree  (^  12)*  In  the  experiment  just  cited,  and  to  which
I  refer  for  the  siike  of  brevity,  the  healthy  and  imperfect
seer  of  odic  h'ght,  Baroness  Ftudine  von  Natorp,  perceived
on  a  large  iron  horse-shoe  converted  into  an  electro-magnet,
not,  indeed,  flame,  but  an  appearance  of  luminous  vapour
rising  a  hand's  length  liigh,  in  the  dark.  Madame  von  Tesse-
dik  detected  the  same  subsequently  in  about  equal  degree.
M.  Pauer  saw  a  luminous  flame,  from  twelve  to  sixteen
inches,  like  a  mass  of  luminous  vapour,  ujion  each  pole,
Madame  Josepliine  Fenzl  saw  flames  ascent]  from  both  poles
of  the  same  elect ro-maguet,  the  stronger  ten  inches  high,  the
negative  more  gray,  the  positive  more  yellowish.  Baroness
von  Augustin  saw  at  both  poles  a  fiame-like  luminosity,
about  twenty  inches  broad^  and  almost  of  a  man's  height,
ascending  perpendicularly  toward  the  ceiling  of  the  dark
chamber ;  their  upper  halves  were  blue,  the  middles  brighter
and  whitish,  and  the  lower  parts  duller  again.  They  were
unstciidy,  and  passed  above  into  clouds  of  smoke.  Stcphan
Kollar,  with  a  simple  Smee's  apparatus,  at  first  saw  only
the  negative  pole,  but  with  two  pairs,  both  poles,  flaming
about  twenty  inches  high,  and  with  smoke  ascending  a  long
distance.  The  for  more  sensitive  Madame  Kienesberger  saw
a  coloiu^d  flame  of  eighteen  to  twenty  inches  blaze  perpen-
dicidarly  upward  on  the  negative  pole,  and  on  the  positive
a  smaller  red  one  of  six  inches,  both  vanishmg  into  smoke.
She  described  both  flames  as  rather  more  unsteady  than
those  of  the  common  permanent  magnet,  and  somewhat
jumping,  like  the  light  of  a  tallow  candle.  This  jumping,
a  constant  alteration  of  size,  a  continual  vibration  between
greater  and  less  height,  was  doul)tless  caused  by  the  varying
quantity  of  electricity  developed  from  the  Smee's  battery  and
conducted  through  the  wire  coil  at  difl'crent  intervals ;  that
is,  by  an  ebb  and  flow  in  the  inducing  agent,  de}>ending
U]K)u  inequality  of  chemical  activity  among  the  elements  of


Jh


430  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS,

the  battery.  I  must  observe  here— ^what  I  shall  return  to
subsequently — that  both  the  conducting  polar  wire,  and
the  coil  upon  the  iron  horse-shoe,  were  enveloped  in
flaming  appearances  of  odic  light.  And  these  flames  were
more  luminous  towards  the  poles,  and  duller  towards,  and
at  the  curvature  of,  the  electro-magnet.  In  the  order  of
time  she  first  saw  odic  incandescence ;  then,  after  the  lapse
of  more  than  a  minute,  sometimes  two  minutes  or  more,  the
flames  were  found  at  the  poles ;  at  first  grayish  and  weak,
and  then  developing  into  colours  as  they  increased.  The
reverse  occurred  when  the  voltaic  current  was  interrupted  :
first  the  colours  of  the  flames  disappeared,  then  their  gray
shape  became  invisible ;  at  length  the  odic  incandescence
vanished.  Professor  EndUcher  saw  an  electro-magnet  decked
with  vertically  ascending  emissions  of  light  at  both  poles,
forty  inches  high,  moving  unsteadily,  variously  coloured,
and  sending  up  dimly  luminous  smoke  to  the  ceiling,  which
appeared  lighted  up  by  it.  M.  Delhez  saw  flames  almost
as  large,  but  he  could  scarcely  distinguish  colours ;  he  found
the  columns  of  light  duller  (red)  below,  brighter  (yellow)
in  the  middle,  and  duller  again  (blue)  above.  Wilhelmine
Glaser  saw  the  same  electro-magnet  furnished  with  flames
sixty  inches  high  at  its  poles.  Smoke  ascended  from  these
up  to  the  ceiUng,  and  the  flames  displayed  the  most  brilliant
colouring, — blue  prevailing  at  the  northward  pole,  and  red-
dish yellow  at  the  southward.  The  odic  flames  of  the  elec-
tro-magnet were  observed  more  accurately  and  more  fre-
quently by  Josephine  Zinkel.  Under  the  circumstances
above  described,  she  saw  flames  forty  inches  long  upon  the
northward  pole,  and  about  thirteen  inches  upon  the  south-
ward, both  coloured  ;  the  first  with  predominance  of  blue ;
in  the  second  more  red.  She  described  the  flaming  appear-
ances upon  the  polar  wires,  the  coil,  the  voltaic  battery,  and
the  order  of  succession  of  the  appearance  and  disappearance  of
these  phenomena,  always  exactly  like  Madame  Kienesberger.


OBIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


She  once  found,  however,  five  or  six  minutes  necessary  for
the  complete  development  of  the  odic  flames  ;  another  time
she  drclared  that  they  did  not  unfold  to  their  persistent  size
until  after  about  ten  mioutes.  In  the  last  experiment  with
her  1  had  used  a  Smee's  apparatus,  with  five  square  feet  of
zinc  and  silver  surface.  The  columns  of  light  ascending
from  the  two  poles  astonished  the  observer  \iith  their  beauty
and  size.  The  negative  flame  was  higher  than  a  man  ;  the
positive,  of  an  arm's  length,  They  constantly  trembled  and
leaped  up  and  down,  like  a  monstrous  candle  flame,  deco-
rated with  the  most  beautiful  prismatic  colours.  Sparks
flew  ofl'  in  streams  into  the  smoke,  and  off  to  tlie  sides.
The  smoke  came  in  contact  with  the  ceiling,  and  was
diverted  by  it.*

I  showed  to  Miss  Reichel  a  Schweigger's  mTdtiplier  in
the  dark,  sending  a  weak  voltaic  cwrent  through  the  coil.
She  saw  the  wire,  and  then  the  steel  needle,  become  odi-
cally  incandescent,  and  next  a  delicate  stream  of  odic  flame
break  out  from  the  points  of  both  its  poles,  flo^nng  onwards
in  the  direction  of  their  length  on  each  side ;  but,  as  the
case  was  too  narrow  to  allow  of  their  flowing  straight  out,
they  ran  against  the  sides,  turned  upwards  on  them,  then
again  met  the  glass  cover,  were  diverted  once  more,  and,
finally,  flowed  over  the  surface  of  the  glass  till  they  vanished
from  the  eye.

435.  The  part  which  the  efectncal  atmosphere  plays  in
odic  phenomena,  we  already  know,  from  the  odic  incan-
deneence  (^  370),  to  be  influential ;  but  in  the  flaming  ap-
pearances it  asserts  especial  importance.  Miss  Rcichel
found  the  flames  increase  whenever  I  brought  a  magnet

*  Many  remarkable  corroborations  of  the  facta  in  this  paragrapli
have  bc«n  Tiitnessed,  at  my  house,  by  seTeral  peraons  who  have  seen
my  experimeDte  upon  at  least  twenty  somnamboles  with  Smee*8  batte-1
rica,  electro-magnets,  and  helices.


482  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STERL  MAGNETS.

within  the  electrical  sphere  of  action. Miss  Atzmanns-
dorfer  showed  me  the  same  on many  occasions  ; the
account  was  already  different  from  these  two. M.  Hoch-
stetter  saw  the  usually  twelve-inches  high  flame  of  the  9-Iayer
magnet  rise  to  twenty-four  inches. Miss  Sophie  Pauer
saw  the  same  9-layer  magnet  triple  its  odic  flames  in  the
electrical atmosphere, in some degree  illuminating  the
ceiling. M.  Femolendt  saw  the  sixteen-inch  flame  of  the
same  rise  to  thirty-six  inches,  and  throw  light  upon  the
ceiling. Wilhelmine  Glaser  saw  the  flame  of  a  bar-magnet
twenty- five  inches long, when the negative pole was
brought  within  forty  inches  of  the  conductor  of  the  elec-
trical machine,  become  four  times  as  long, — namely,  in-
crease from  three inches to twelve. She  observed  the
common  flame  of  sixteen  inches  upon  the  9-layer  magnet ;
when  I  brought  it  into  the  vicinity  of  the  electrical  con-
ductor, she  discovered  an  elevation  to  sixty-four  inches —
thus  to  the  height  of  a  man,  with  illumination  of  the
ceiling. Madame  Bauer  saw  pretty  nearly  the  same  phe-
nomena under  the  same circumstances. Baroness von
August  in,  when  the  9-laycr  magnet  was  brought  with  its
negative  side  to  within  about  twenty  inches  of  the  electrical
conductor,  saw  its  blue  flame  enlarge  to  twice  or  three
times  the  size,  and  Ught  up  the  ceiling  of  the  room. I
laid  the  9-layer  horse-shoe  before  the  girl  Zinkel,  in  the
dark  chamber,  at  a  distance  of  forty  inches  from  the  con-
ductor of  a  powerful  electrical  machine,  which  I  set  in
motion. It  stood  with  the  jx)les  tiu'ned  upwards,  and  the
Umbs  equidistant  from  the  conductor. The  odic  flame  was
originally  four  inches  on  the  negative  pole,  and  about  one
and  a  half  on  the  positive  ;  the  former  now  rose  to  twenty,
and  the  latter  to  six  inches. The  size  of  both  was  thus
increased  from  four  to  five  times. The colouring  was
rendered  more  vivid  in  the  blue,  and  bedimmed  in  the  red.


OniC  PtAMB  ON  9TEE1  MA6KET8.


433


I


imwoon  as  I  stopped  turning  the  plate  of  the  machine,  the
odic  flames  sank  down  to  their  previous  size, Thiswaaf
frequently  repeated  at  different  times.

43fi.  After  the  Baroness  von  Augustin  had  seen  the
great  increase  of  the  blue  magnetic  flame  on  the  negative
pole  in  the  vicinity  of  the  charged  conductor,  I  turned  the
9- fold  horse-shoe  round  in  such  a  way  that  the  south-
ward pole  was  towards  the  conductor,  both  poles  pointing
upwards.  In  a  short  tune  she  no  longer  saw  reddisli  odic
flame  over  it,  but  bine.  In  this  arrangement  the  odic
colours  of  the  two  poles  were  reversed.  When,  in  other  ex-
periments with  Josephine  Zinkel,  I  turned  the  blue,  negative
pole  of  the  y-fokl  magnet  to  the  conductor,  so  tlmt  the
positive  red  flame  was  ttirned  away,  the  latter  appeared
grayish  red,  the  former  brilUant  blue,  and  develo|)ed  pris-
matic colours,  above  which  smoke  and  sparks  ascended
almost  to  the  ceiling.  The  flame  was  so  brightly  luminous
that  the  lieholdcr  could  not  conceive  how  it  was  tliat  I  saw
nothing  of  it.  But  when  I  turned  the  magnet  round,  so
that  the  red-flaming  positive  side  was  turned  towards  the
positively  charged  conductor,  while  the  blue,  negative  side
was  tm-ned  away  in  the  opposite  cUrection ;  the  former,  the
red,  first  quickly  became  dull  gray,  and  then,  in  half  a
minute,  changed  to  blue,  whilst  the  opposite  blue  upon  the
negative  pole  became  violet  gray ;  the  blue  of  the  former
tlien  increased,  and  that  which  had  become  reddish  gray,
shrank  away  :  thus  here,  as  in  the  odic  incandescence
(§  371),  there  was  a  reversal  of  ike  odic  polarity  of  the
odic  flame,  without  this  being  accompanied  by  any  simul-
taneous reversal  of  the  magnetic  polarity.  The  electrical
polarity  here  dictated  the  law ;  it  reversed  the  odic,  but  was
not  capable  of  reversing  the  magnetic  polarity.  When  I
now  reversed  the  electricity,  and  charged  the  conductor  nega-
tively, 1  obtained  the  same,  only  correspondingly  reversed,
manifestations  of  odic  light : now  the  red  flame  tiu'ued


434  ODIC  FLAMB  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

toward  the  conductor  became  exalted,  and  when  I  turned
the  negative  side  of  the  magnet  to  it,  the  blue  was  changed
into  red,  the  —  Od  was  converted  into  +  Od,  and  this  at
the  negative  pole  of  the  magnet.

437.  To  work  out  these  facts  more  clearly,  I  repeated
them  with  the  application  of  bar-magnets  instead  of  horse-
shoes. Two  bars,  one  twenty-six  inches,  and  the  other
six  inches  long,  were  placed,  unisolated,  on  the  parallels,
lying  upon  a  table  at  a  distance  of  forty  inches  from  the
conductor.  When  I  turned  the  blue-flamed  poles  to  it,
the  blue  flames  flowing  from  these  grew  to  three  or  four
times  their  length,  stretching  out  towards  the  positive
electrical  conductor ;  when  I  turned  the  red-flamed  poles
to  it,  the  flame  first  became  bedimmed  and  weakened,  and
then,  after  a  contest  of  the  dynamics  here  in  action,
rendered  visible  by  lambent  flames  playing  up  and  down
upon  the  bars,  it  was  converted  into  blue,  and  within  two
minutes  raised  to  considerable  size  and  thickness.  As
often  as  I  discharged  the  conductor  the  flame  sprang  back,
and  returned  to  its  original  condition  of  polarity  and
magnitude  ;  the  struggling,  lambent  flames,  resembling
dying  flames  of  spirit  of  wine,  played  up  and  down  upon
the  steel  rods,  till  all  was  carried  back  into  the  true  condi-
tion in  which  magnetism  ruled.

438.  The  phenomenon  displayed  itself  still  more  beauti-
fully when  I  brought  the  magnetic  bars  nearer  to  the
conductor.  1  did  this  both  with  a  rod  of  square  and  one
of  equal  size  of  circular  section,  both  held  in  a  wooden
Guidoni's  holder.  While  they  remained  at  some  distance,
the  polar  flames  were  always  blue  on  one  side  and  red  on
the  other.  But  as  I  approached  the  bars  gradually  towards
the  conductor,  and  the  vividness,  luminosity,  and  brilliancy
of  the  flame  increased  with  this,  other  colours  were  by
degrees  developed  out  of  these  two,  till  at  length,  when  I
had  brought  them  within  about  a  foot  of  the  conductor,  all


ODIC  rhXKt  ON  STEBt  MAONKTB.


435


I


the  prismatic  colours  displayed  themselves  in  full  splendour
to  the  eyes  of  the  sensitive  observers,  I  shall  recur  to  this,
for  more  complete  details,  wlim  I  sjKak  of  the  odic  colours.

438,  A.  We  thus  see  hei^e  the  odic  llanies  subject  to  the
same  effect  from  the  electrical  atmosphere  as  occurs  in  a
siniilar  nnmner  to  the  otlic  incandescence ;  and,  as  in  most
of  the  phenomena,  hitherto,  wc  have  seen  mmfnethm  holdinrj
to  a  certain  extent  the  vpper  hand  over  Od,  we  here  see
tU*c(rieilf/f  alone,  vhtlming  dominion  over  ity  nnth  if  renter
force.  It  is  evident  Od  is  more  intimately  connected  with
electricity  than  with  magnetism, — tliat  the  dependence  upon
the  poles  of  magnetism  is  soluble,  variable,  and  not  one  of
necessity, — that  it  shows  the  mol>ility  of  electricity  rather
than  the  fixity  of  magnetism,  that  it  only  so  tar  partakes
of  the  fixity  of  the  latter  at  the  |>oles  of  magnets,  as  this
fixity  dwells  in  the  magnetism, — to  which  the  Od  is  to  a
certain  extent  connected.  Therefore  Or/  here  shows  itself
more  clearly  than  anywhere  else,  in  a  kind  of  mean  between
tteetririty  and  mayneiism,

439.  The  injttience  of  terreiitrial  mat/netism  upon  the
size  and  brilliancy  of  the  odic  flame  of  the  magnet  is
manifested  pretty  strongly,  and  pr<x:eeds  pamllel  with  its
influence  upon  the  odic  incandescence.  When  a  bar
magnet  lies  confommlily  in  the  magnetic  meridian,  its
flames  are  longest  and  most  luminous.  When  turned
nmnd  and  placed  unconformably,  with  its  northward  jjolc
toward  the  south,  the  blue  northward  flame  was  depressed,
dull,  inclined  toward  grey,  dim,  misty,  less  ai>pareut,  more
ditiicult  to  sec,  and  diminished  in  size  ;  the  reddish  south-
ward polar  flame  we^ikened  in  like  manner;  rather  yellowish
gray  than  red.  Josephine  Zinkcl  saw  the  flames  somewhat
modified  in  every  point  of  the  compass.  The  same  was
the  case  when  I  placed  a  horse-slioe  magnet  before  her
with  its  poles  upward ;  if  the  northward  limb  was  then
turned  to  the  north,  the  blue  and  red  flames  were  then

0 G


436  ODIC  FLAME  ON  8TEEL  MAGNETS.

vivid  and  brilliant ;  but  if  the  southward  polar  limb  was
on  the  north  side,  and  consequently  the  northward  polar
limb  on  the  south  side,  the  beholder  perceived  only  dull,
troubled,  and  weakly-coloured  odic  flames,  sometimes  both
only  grey,  or  even  passing  into  mere  grey  smoke.

440.  The  same  circumstances  presented  themselves
when  I  brought  the  magnets — in  the  vertical  plane  of  the
meridian — into  different  angles  with  the  dip.  The  con-
dition of  the  odic  flame  altered  in  size  and  colouring  with
each  position :  this  was  the  case  even  when  horse-shoes
were  closed  by  their  armatures.

441.  Even  mere  pieces  of  iron  turned  upon  their  axes  in
the  plane  of  the  meridian,  exhibited  odic  flames,  and  modi-
fications of  them  according  to  the  difference  of  the  direc-
tions. I  shall  enter  more  minutely  into  this  subject  in
its  proper  place.  Madame  Kienesberger  woke  up  one  very
dark  night.  Looking  round  the  room,  she  perceived  a
flaming  appearance  at  the  window.  She  started  up  in  a
fright  to  extinguish  it,  under  the  apprehension  that  some-
thing had  taken  fire.  But  when  she  came  close  to  the
window,  she  could  see  nothing ;  the  appearance  of  fire  had
vanished.  Returning  to  her  bed,  she  saw  the  fiery  bright-
ness again  at  the  same  spot ;  she  went  towards  it  again,
and  again  lost  sight  of  it.  It  was  an  iron  window-bar,
which,  standing  perpendicular,  emitted  odic  flame  at  the
top.

442.  But  not  only  do  magnetic  and  electrical  influences
affect  the  odic  flame,  even  purely  odic  react  independently
upon  it.  To  these  belong,  in  the  first  place,  crystals  of
all  kinds,  of  earthy  or  saline  compounds,  in  which  we  have
never  hitherto  known  of  properties  of  the  kind  which  occur
in  magnets  in  the  strict  sense.  We  have  seen  above  that
when  a  magnetic  bar  is  appended  to  another  of  equal  size
and  strength,  the  intermediate  flames  become  dull,  and  the
flames  of  the  extremities  increase  almost  to  twice  the  size.


ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS,


437


tal  produces  the  same  effect,  Wien  I  applied  to  a
bar  magnet,  a  crystal  of  equal  length  of  mck  crj^stal,
selenite,  or  heavy  spar,  the  negative  pole  of  the  crystal  to
the  southwai*d  pole  of  the  magnet,  holding  the  two  in  a
straight  line,  Josephine  Zinkt^l,  Mr.  Kiesnesbcrger,  Miss  Atz-
mannsdorfcr,  Freidrich  Weidleeh,  and  Wilhelnjine  G laser,
saw  the  blue  flame  of  the  northward  pole  of  the  magnetic
bar  almost  double  its  length.  Wien  I  did  this  at  the  other
end  of  the  magnetic  bar,  with  the  positive  [>n1o  of  the
crj^stal,  the  same  sensitives  saw  the  end  flame  of  the  south-
ward pole  of  the  nmgnetic  bar  become  elongated.  Thus,
the  crystal  acted  jusl  as  ponrrfnUy  upon  the  odic  flames
of  the  maf/net  as  a  may  net  itself  although  it  did  not
increase the  support  iny  power of  the may  net a sinyle

'  grain. The  independence  of  the  odic  action  is  thus  most
evident  here.

13.  If  this  experiment  were  accurate,  it  shoidd  be
trraed  by  a  controlling  experiment  ;  namely,  the  be-
luiviour  of  the  magnet  flames  when  crystal  flames  wers
held  against,  and  approximated  to  them,  in  the  way  the
flames  of  the  magnetic  poles  were  brought  together,  de-
scribed above,  ^  40L  To  test  this,  I  placed  before  Josephine
Zinkel  a  magnetic  bar  six  inches  long,  brought  it  into  con-
formity with  the  meridian,  and  approached  its  southward
pole  to  the  negative  pole  of  a  selenite,  the  blue  fliuuc  of
which  measiurd  about  two  inches.  As  soon  as  the  two
poles (the polar oljjects  being  in  a  straight  line)  came

.within  about  a  foot  of  each  other,  liuth  flames  became  more
ader  and  elongated,  flowed  towards  and  appeared  to
seek  one  another.  When,  by  a  closer  approximation,  they
should  have  met,  this  did  not  take  place;  they  did  not  join,
but  gradually  became  thicker  and  sliorter  again,  accumu-
lated amund  their  own  poles,  and  went  out  as  soon  as
these  came  in  contact.  But  when  I  brought  together
tile, — that  is,  like  ijoles,  the  beholder  saw  no  elongation


438  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MA0NST8.

of  the  approximated  polar  flames,  but  a  speedy  contraction ;
and,  finally,  on  the  complete  contact  of  the  two  solid  bodies,
an  introversion  of  the  odic  flames  around  their  own  poles, —
all  agreeing  with  the  luminous  phenomena  of  two  approxi-
mated steel  magnets,  one  of  the  magnets  being  here  com-
pletely replaced  by  a  crystal  of  selenite.

444.  Animal  organs*  especially  the  human  lutnds,  con-

*  There  is  no  subject,  in  the  range  of  philosophy,  whiih  admits  more
extensive  application  of  thought  than  that  of  light.  Its  relations  are
quite  universal.  The  most  sublime  idea  of  the  theologian  when  he  en-
deavours to  embrace  an  impossibility,  the  boundary  of  time,  space,  and
eternity,  is  that  magniBcent  sentence,  "  God  said,  let  there  be  light,  and
there  was  light."  A  sentence  pregnant  with  the  ^rms  of  all  the  laws
regulating  the  universe,^-of  all  the  clearness  of  radiant  matter,  and  of  all
the  darkness  which  envelops  the  confusions  of  mental  and  physical  philo-
sophy.

The  finest  devotion  of  the  humble  moralist  to  the  best  idol  of  poetic
fancy,  is  the  attempted  imagining  of  tmth  in  the  shape  of  etherial  light,
an  impersonation  of  the  Deity.  It  is  absolute  humility  in  the  worship
of  peifect  goodness  and  perfect  intelligence ;  the  seal  upon  the  fiat,  that
without  the  whole  truth  to  enlighten  our  judgments,  all  our  conclusions
must  swerve  more  or  less  from  the  standard  of  pure  justice.

Pride  cannot  guide  the  search  for  truth,  although  it  lead  the  chamois
to  desire  the  mountain  top,  and  the  votary  of  severe  physical  science  to
the  highest  altitude  of  ambitious  man  s  enjoyment, — the  pinnacle  of  human
fame  !  The  natural  philosopher,  whose  researches  dive  into  all  depths,
is  not  permitted,  by  the  laws  of  justice,  to  arrogate  to  himself  the  habits
of  the  bigot,  or  the  claims  of  scientific  authority.  Happy  he,  if  where
his  studies  lead  to  thoughts  which  establish  numerous  important  facts,  he
be  permitted  to  approach  in  his  speculations  the  lamps  illuminating  the
temples  of  truth.  An  unsettled  wanderer,  his  is  never  the  privilege,  for
petty  selfish  advantage,  to  fix  his  abode.  Like  the  humble  miner  he
gropes,  and  helps,  with  his  dark  lantern,  to  find  the  ore  which  enriches
him  who  has  not  tasted  of  the  labour  expended  in  its  production.  If  it
be  thought  that  Newton,  who  poured  floods  of  mental  light  into  optics,
was  an  exception  to  this  rule,  that  thought  is  erroneous,  for  never  was
humility  more  tenderly  striking  than  in  his  character,  and,  when  the
extent  and  importance  of  his  discoveries  are  regarded,  never,  in  his  own
time,  did  man  reap  less  personal  reward.  So  striking  is  the  inference,  in
fact,  that  in  the  yearnings  and  efforts  made  for  the  summit  of  felicity.


OmC  FLAME  ON  BWEL  MAGNETS.


439


stitute,  perhaps,  a  still  luore  striking  means  of  strengtlien-
iDg  the  odic  flames, I  fastened  a  magnetic  bar  of  about


by  even  the  moM  exaliod  hanmti  character  of  several  a^es,  ibet  middle
canne  which  lies  belween  two  extremes  or  poles,  the  happy  medhini  of
tnoderaie  desires,  the  pnrsint  of  truih  in  hnmiliiy,  the  indulgence  in  the
love  of  science  for  iu  own  pleasures,  in  the  calm  light  of  a  contented
mind,  ia  more  to  be  coveted  than  any  brilliant  blaze  uf  dazzling  fame.
It  is  evident  that  in  tlie  researches  of  the  Baron  von  Reiclienbachj  the
bold  lo?e  of  iruih  has  siimuJaled  an  industry  gnided  by  the  severe  train-
ing of  a  correct  logic;  and  if  in  these  notes  any  passages  are  found  re-
flecting on  the  Baron *s  tbou^rhts,  their  aim  is  more  to  guide  the  attention
to  facts, — which  are  sneered  at  only  by  those  whose  brains  are  unfortn-
nately  formed,  or  by  those  in  whom  the  happier  influences  of  ju^jiice  have
failed  to  correct  the  pressure  of  silly  prejudices, — than  to  evince  tlie  very
slightest  disrespect  to  extensive  acquirement  guided  by  moral  excel-
lence*

To  show  here  that  "  animal  or^am*^  have  been  observed  tinder
various  circumstances  to  emit  light,  and  Umt  there  exist  probabilities  of
the  analogies  afforded  by  plienomena,  long  ago  observed  by  incjuiring
jihilosophers^  to  those  which  have  been  the  subject  of  oor  author's  inves-
tigations, will  not  be  irrelevant,  how  much  soever  some  of  the  speculations
naturally  arising  may  be  distasteful  to  that  school  of  philosophy,  which
ictaius  the  right  of  rejecting  all  knowledge,  not  based  on  those  founda-
tions, laid  by  certain  instruments  and  toob,  in  common  use,  by  its  own
aiUficers.  The  Baron  von  Reichenbach  has  done  well  in  admitting  oral
iiMltiinoi»y  into  science,  for  now  the  germs  of  much  future  progress  in
knowledge  may  be  watched  by  greater  numbers  in  their  development.
The  combined  music  of  truth  from  such  sources  may,  in  choral  hannony
aa  it  were,  be  attuned  and  reverberated  by  many  statistical  aids.  If  the
relation  of  single  or  isolated  (acts  be  rejected, — though  wise  students  would
never  rudely  or  heedlessly  pass  them  by, — the  repetitions  of  a  thousand
d t Cerent  observers,  each  bavmg  had  multiplied  opportunities  of  veriflca-
lion,  would  conMiiute  a  statistical  value,  which  the  severest  devotee  to
prt^judice  could  not  wholly  underrate.  In  drawing  attention  to  facts
long  ago  noticed,  perhaps  then  isolated,  but  since  observed  by  very
numerous  persons,  the  importance  of  the  stale  of  somnambulism  in
such  researches  as  those  recorded  in  our  author  s  text  must  be  again
vindicated.  In  the  interesting  **  Journal  du  Traitement  Magnetique  de
la  Demoiselle  N.'*  (j>p.  5<>-57),  M.  Tardy  de  Montravel  relates  that
on  Ihe  13ih  of  April*  1785,  the  lady  who  was  the  subject  of  his  obser-
vatioDd  perceived,  \i\you  the  surface  of  the  baquet,  a  very  light  vapour,


440  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

eight  inches  length  into  a  wooden  Guidoni'^  holder,  brought
it  into  the  conformable  direction  vdth  the  meridian,  and

which  appeared  to  be  in  motioD,  and  which,  rising  along  the  inni  rods
then  used  in  the  practice  of  animal  magnetism,  seemed  to  be  attracted  by
the  patients.  At  first  she  was  interested  by  this  phenomenon,  but  soon
her  head  became  heavy,  and  she  had  a  sensation  of  movement  about  the
frontal  sinuses.  She  had  no  desire  to  sleep,  but  bad  a  palpitation  which
was  perceived  by  the  bystanders.  Here  was  a  case  in  which,  according
to  my  view,  the  vapour  contained  Reicheubach's  odic  force  negative,  or
the  mesmeric  imponderable  agent  repulsive,  increased  in  its  unpleasant
effects  by  an  iron  conductor.  In  other  cases  the  same  description  of
vapour  has  been  observed  of  a  grey  colour.  M.  Tardy,  in  trying  to  get
his  patient  to  observe  the  mesmeric  fluid  emanating  from  himself,  learned
from  her,  when  she  was  asleep,  that  his  thumbs  shed  brilliant  sparks  of
light  (p.  63),  that  the  palms  of  his  hands  shed  a  vapour,  not  brilliant,
(p.  64.)  In  repeating  his  observations  and  varying  his  experiments,  he
arrived  at  the  Baron  von  Reicheubach  s  conclusion,  that  the  light  ema-
nating from  the  thumb  of  the  right  hand  was  rather  larger  in  volume  than
that  from  the  left  (p.  70.)  With  his  face  to  the  north  M.  Tardy  mes-
merised some  milk,  and  his  patient  saw  the  sparks  of  light  proceeding
from  his  thumbs,  and  the  surface  of  the  milk  glittering  with  sparks,
(p.  72.)  Various  other  experiments  were  made,  the  results  of  which
were,  that  the  light  was  seen  conveyed  along  rods  of  steel,  through  planks
of  wood,  at  the  spots  corresponding  with  those  touched  on  the  side  proxi-
mate to  himself.  On  other  occasions  she  indicated  the  season  of  the
year  when  the  fluid  had  the  greatest  amount  of  force.  Less  in  winter
than  in  summer.  Then,  as  to  particular  times  of  the  day,  more  from
eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning  until  three  in  the  afternoon  (p.  12.)
The  sources  of  the  fluid  ?  The  earth  and  the  air.  That  from  the  air
is  the  purer,  &c.  &c.  The  sun  is  the  most  abundant  source  of  this
fluid  (12G.)  lis  direction  is  influenced  by  currents  of  air  (p.  127.)  It
can  traverse  glass  (p.  137.)  Disregarding  the  hypothesis  of  an  uni-
versal fluid,  so  fashionable  for  a  time  among  the  cultivators  of  mesmeric
science,  the  remark  may  be  allowed,  that  the  Od  of  Reichenbacli  is  em-
braced in  an  idea,  somewhat  analogous  in  some  of  its  properties  and
relations  to  that  supposition,  based,  however,  upon  a  very  difl'erent  course
of  investigation.  We  are  constrained,  nevertheless,  to  allow  that  al-
though the  Baron  is  more  close  in  his  train  of  philosophy,  the yizc/s
brought  out  are,  in  many  cases,  analogous — almost  identical.  Jthas
been  on  purpose  that  Tardy  has  been  selected,  on  account  of  the  date  of
works,  but  from  his  period  to  the  present  day  the  facts  on  the  emission


ODIC  7LAMB  OH  STEAt  KAGHITS.

led  Miss  Atziiianiisdorfer  to it  in  the dark. When I
let  her  grasp  the  southward  [xjle  of  the  little  bar  with  the


of  light  from  the  fingers,  pit  of  ibe  stomach,  eyes,  tioslrils,  mouth,  and,
in  a  less  remarkable  degree,  from  ilw  whole  surftice  of  the  hmimu  skio,  as
seen  by  iimiiy  somnambulists,  are  loo  numerous,  aud  too  well  vouched
for»  lo  admit  of  any  reasonable  doubt.  I  have,  myself,  been  very  fre-
quently present,  ou  oceasioiiH  when  tutmerous  persons,  un  other  occasions
when  individuals  knmving  nothing  of  each  other,  and  in  pre^nce  of  my*
self  atone,  having  been  placed  hi  a  condition  of  sleep-waking,  have  stated
(acts  carroborating  evcnj  ^tatemtni  made  by  Tardy  de  Moulravel.  I
have  seen  many  individuals,  male  and  female,  who  could,  in  ordinary
wakefulness,  in  full  vigilance,  perceive  blue,  green,  or  yellow  emanations
of  light  from  the  ends  of  the  fingers  of  other  persons,  from  the  eyes,  and
during  the  expiration  of  breathing  from  ihe  mouth  and  nostrils.  Persons
of  a  very  highly  sensitive  nervous  organization  are  not  uncommon,  whu^
in  tlie  shade  of  a  sombre  room,  have  the  power  of  perceiving  these  ap-
pearances* A  lady  lately  residing  at  the  Mesmeric  Infirmary  is  a  re-
markable exajiiple  of  ihe  possession  of  this  faculty.  Long  ago  such
things  ought  to  have  excited  greater  attentiou,  for  the  facts  connected
with  animal  light  are  irell  knov^iii  and  have  aitmeted  ibe  notice  of
phUoisopherB  of  no  common  calibre  of  intellect.  My  late  levered  friend
and  preceptor,  Dr.  James  Macartney,  professor  of  anatomy  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Dublin,  published  in  the  year  1610,  in  the  Transactions  of  the
Royal  Society,  a  remarkable  memoir  on  this  subject,  so  full  of  the  just
feeling  for  hivestigution  which  distinguished  him  as  an  active  aud  inge-
nious philosopher,  that  any  one  who  knew  of  the  Tasl  amoimt  of  know-
ledge he  had  accumulated  could  not  but  deeply  regret  his  not  having
left  behind  him,  in  some  printed  form,  the  maiTow  of  a  most  extensive
course  of  lectures  which  annually  stimulated  the  intellects  of  a  large
concourse  of  admiring  aud  affectionate  pupils.  His  copious  fund  of
original  faciji,  aud  his  novel  and  correct  trains  of  reasojiing,  impressed
convictions  on  the  minds  of  many  a  student  who  has  gone  forth  to  contri-
bute his  master^s  ideas,  as  well  as  sometimes  his  own  share  of  information,
to  the  general  slock  of  useful  knowledge,  but  the  venerated  preceptor  has
left  little  thai  could  add  lo  his  own  fame,  besides  the  remarkably  original
thoughts  in  his  work  on  Inflammation;  the  translation  of  Cuvier's  Com-
parative Anatomy ;  and  a  few  papers  communicated  to  learned  associa-
tions, and  I  should  add,  the  noble  museum  of  anatomy  now  in  the
University  of  Cambridge.  Macartney  eslrablished  by  his  discoveries
on  the  evolution  of  light  from  the  b*^dies  of  living  animals,  certain  pro-
positions that  were  highly  important,  which  must,  in  due  course,  meet


442  OpiC  FLAME  ON  8T££L  MAGNET8.

fingers  of  her  right  hand,  she  saw  the  odic  flame  ot  the
northward  pole  of  the  magnet  grow  longer^  and  the  in-

our  atteution;  but  subsequent  labourers  hi  the  same  field  have  much
advanced  our  knowledge  of  the  natural  history  of  auimals  emitting  light.
The  researches  of  Professor  E.  Forbes,  published  by  the  Ray  Society,  in
his  Monagraph  of  the  British  Naked-eyed  Medusse,  is  a  work  remark-
able for  extensive  erudition,  and  evincing  the  power  of  the  author's  uiiud
in  the  exercise  of  deep  thought.  The  student  investigating  this  subject
will  find  an  interesting  bibliography  in  this  work.  The  beat  summary
of  the  knowledge  on  animal  luminousness  is  to  be  found  in  Todd*8  Cy-
clopedia of  Anatomy  and  Physiology,  from  the  masterly  pen  of  Dr.
Coldstream.

If  we  ask  ourselves  the  question,  what  is  light  ?  what  do  we
know  of  light?  shall  we,  reflecting  upon  the  facts  of  Reichenbach,
or  upon  the  luminousness  of  animals,  leap  to  the  conclusions  that  we
may  search  for  the  essential  causes  of  this  imponderable  pheno-
menon in  the  natural  history  of  organised  beings?  or  shall  we  be
content,  in  treading  the  beaten  path  of  knowledge,  to  conclude
that  a  proper  definition  of  light  is,  that  it  is  "  the  cause  of  those
sensations  which  we  refer  to  the  eyes,  or  that  which  produces  the  sense
of  seeing,*' — ^aware  that  thus  we  shall  discard  from  our  attention  all  the
curious  facts  connected  with  mesmeric  science,  and  others  relating  to
animal  light.  To  define  a  matter,  we  should  give  some  account  of  its
characteristic  properties.  Is  it  a  property  of  light  to  cause  the  pain  in-
flicted by  the  sharp  end  of  a  pair  of  scissors  upon  the  eye,  or  that  of  an
ulcer  loft  by  small-pox  or  any  other  morbific  poison  ?  Each  may  be
"  the  cause"  or  antecedent  to  "  the  sensations  we  may  justly  refer  to  the
eye.'*  But  is  it  not  absurd  to  admit  that  light  can  be  thus  defined  f  We
cannot  see  without  light ;  but  then,  in  such  case,  we  acknowledge  it  only
as  one  of  the  conditions  necessary  to  the  exercise  of  the  faculty  of
vision,  Jane  M.,  a  clairvoyante,  was  for  several  weeks  an  inmate  at  my
house  in  Grosvenor  Street.  I  have  now  narrowly  watched  her  for  more
than  two  years.  Hundreds  of  persons  have  witnessed  many  curious  and
delicate  mesmeric  phenomena  in  her  case.  I  have  occasionally  sbut  her
up  in  a  dark  chamber,  in  which  she  has  occupied  herself  with  great  per-
severance in  the  darkness  of  night,  without  the  possibility  of  getting  at  a
candle,  or  any  other  source  of  incident  light,  in  making  a  very  large
patchwork  quilt,  containing  many  hundreds  of  lozenge-shaped  pieces  of
printed  calico.  She  threaded  her  needles,  and  worked  night  after  night,
in  her  sleep,  at  this  quilt,  until  she  had  completed  it.  She  has,  under
the  same  conditions,  written  letters. She  has  carefully  folded them.


ODXC  FLAME  ON  STKEL  MA0NET8.


^
^


tensity  of  its  liglit  increase.  Wheu  she  did  the  same  with
her  left  hand  at  the  negative  pole,  the  flame  of  the  south-
ward pole  increased.  Wlien  she  took  liokl  of  tlie  same
poles  with  the  reverse  hands — the  southward  pole  with  the
left  hand,  and,  vice  versA — she  saw  the  odic  flame  of  the

closed  lUem  with  wafers,  and,  afier  writing  the  adcii^ss,  has  anached  a
pu^l-oflSco  stamp  in  the  proper  pLice,  The  Marquis  de  Puys^gur  (^e
Mem,  pi)ur  servir,  &c.)  has  j^iven  I  he  cose  of  a  country  man  whom  be
locked  up  in  a  dark  room,  without  the  poj^sihilily  of  his  gelling  al  any
source  of  incident  light ;  aud^  on  several  occasions,  this  man^  having
pens,  ink,  and  paper,  wrote  essays  evincing  philosophical  power  of
thought.  It  cannot  he  conleiided  that  light  was  in  these  cases  the  cause
of  the  faculty  of  seeing ;  unless,  indeed,  it  was  light  invi^dble  lo  persons
in  the  coiiditiou  of  ordiuaiy  vigilance, — light  emanating  from  the  brain
Of  nerves  of  the  individuals  in  fjaestiim,^-ceriainly  not  light  incident  from
^uiirces  external  to  the  individuals.  To  deny  ibe  existence  of  such
phenomena  is  to  attempt  stupidly  and  mulishly  to  arrest  the  progress  of
science.  1  myself  ha\e  so  often  seen  what  1  have  related,  that  there  can
be  no  mistake  ahout  the  mailer.  1  hiive,  at  various  hours  of  tlie  nigbl,
gone  upstain}  to  watch  Jane  at  her  operations,  and  have  stood  with  ibe
door  in  one  hand,  and,  with  a  candle  in  the  other,  giving  only  sufficient
light  lo  cnahle  me  lo  see  her  at  needle-work  or  writing  during  her  sleep.
How  many  well-aitthentieated  caaes  of  a  simitar  kind  are  exiant  in  the
works  of  Sauvages,  of  Wienhoh,  and  of  others  I  The  individual  who
exclaims,  as  some  poor  creamres  ilo,  *'  /  do  iw(  MUve  Hi'  is  an  object  of
pity,  as  a  rude  denial  of  the  truth  proceed!*  from  vulgar  arrogance,^ — itself
the  product  of  an  ilUeducated  or  a  badly -organized  brain  ;  perhaps  of  one
unforumaiely  incapahle  of  the  expansion  enjoyed  by  refined  iutellecls.
h  is  not  contended  that  clainoyiuits  see  mthout  light,  but  thai,  seeing
with  a  light  emanating  from  ihemjielves,  the  ordinary  definition  of  this
imponderable  is  not  suifieienl  lo  enable  us  to  form  a  clear  idea.  The
difficulty  of  defining  light  is  not  denied,  for  truly  we  are  lost  in  our
conjectures  and  speculations  as  to  its  essence.  How  much  of  light  or  of
lumine  is  there  in  what  we  call  darkness  or  opacity  P  We  say  that  light
TBdiates  in  all  directions  from  luminous  bodies.  We  think  we  know  ihat>
in  homogeneous  media,  it  moves  La  straight  lines ;  that,  however  great  its
velocity,  time  is  necessary  for  its  journey  from  one  point  to  another;
ihat,  all  Ihin^s  bein^  relative,  the  relation  of  light  lo  time  and  space,
under  present  clrcumHlances,  is  very  nearly  that  of  one  second  to  200,000
miles*  We  are  aware  that  when,  during  its  passage,  light  meets  with
any  obstacle,  its  direction  and  i[uantity  are  modified  by  the  nature  of  the


444


ODIC  FLAME  OK  8T£EL  MAGNETS.


other  end  become  weaker  and  duller. I  repeated  the  same
experiments  a  year  later  with  Josephine  Zinkel^  with  the  same


obstmctiug  medium.^  If  it  bo  incident  on  a  smooth  and  polished  sar-
face,  a  portion  of  it  is  reflected  or  thrown  off  from  that  surface  at  an  angle
equal  to  the  angle  at  which  it  impinged,  and  that  then  it  again  follows

*  My  friend  Mr.  Crosse,  of  Bromfield,  has  devised  a  very  pretty  illus-
tration of  this  fact,  which  at  once  exhibits  the  modifications  effected  by
an  obstructing  medium  on  light^  and  the  material  nature  of  this  impon-
derable agent. He  takes  three  sufficiently  strong  cylinders  of  glaas»


/m»u


X


A


properly  capped  with  brass,  and  furnished  with  convenient  stop-cocks ;
each  cylinder  being  at  least  sixteen  inches  long  and  five  inches  in  dia-
meter. These  are  each  first  placed  in  relation  with  an  air-pump.  Then,
A  is  to  be  exhausted  by  the  greatest  power  of  the  pump ;  B  to  a  degree
suflicient  to  give  one  inch  greater  pressure  of  the  barometric  gauge  ;
C  to  give  two  inches  greater  pressure  than  A,  and  one  inch  greater  than
B.  They  are  to  be  screwed  one  on  another,  A  being  uppennost.  An
electric  shock  is  to  be  passed  through  the  whole,  from  A  downwards,  iii
the  dark.  A  will  appear  filled  with  one  uniform  cylinder  of  purple  flame  ;
B  with  parallel  columns  of  a  reddish  purple  flame ;  and  through  C  will
pass  a  falling  star.


ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


445


P


$


results*  Their  hamk  ihvs  acted  upon  the  Jlame  exactly
like  %nagmt$. The  applicatiou  of  their  own  negative  hands

its  course  in  a  siraiglit  line.  The  nature  of  ihe  surface  on  which  ihe
light  iniinnges,  together  uilh  its  angle  of  incidence,  deiennines  the
qanniity  rejected.  Supposing  a  beam  of  iigbt,  having  an  hitensiiy  to
be  represented  by  lOW,  to  f,Ul  on  water,  so  as  lo  make  on  angle  of  inci-
dence LHjual  to  0*^  30'",  ihe  inlenaity  of  the  reflected  light  would  be  re-
presented by  7:3).  If  the  angle  formed  at  the  .surlace  of  the  water  were
15^^  the  intetiaity  of  the  reflected  light  would  be  reduced  to  21 1  j  ut  an
angle  of  30^»  to  65 ;  at  an  angle  of  from  60<^  to  90^,  to  18.  Mercurjr,
an  opaque  body  with  a  very  bright  surface,  may  not  reflect  more  than
ihree-lburdis  of  the  light  incident  on  it  even  ut  a  very  small  angle.

Light,  regarded  as  subject  lo  laws  regulating  its  reflection,  must  arrest
the  attention  of  deep  ihinkers  \  for  in  this  fact  alone  of  tiie  subtraction
of  some  degree  uf  its  intensity,  mucli  is  left  unaccounted  for.  But  how
vast  a  held  iipeuM  up  when  we  regard  the  laws  regiUaiing  the  refraction  of
light  I  or  ilie  deviation  which  occurs  when  a  ray  of  lights  baling  travelled
iu  a  siiiught  line  through  one  medium^  enters  another  of  a  diflerent
density.  The  divergence  from  its  original  path  develops  phenomena,
which,  however  wild  the  idea  may  appear,  would  seem  to  warrant  tlie
speculation  that  there  may  exist  crystalline  fonns  of  lumine.  U  is  not
tlie  pur^>osc  now  to  follow  up  the  elements  of  dioptrics,  to  trace  the
philosophy  of  the  refractive  powers  of  diflerent  media,  their  influence  on
the  titffmnion  of  light,  tlieir  powers  in  determining  the  relations  of  the
primitive  colours,  although  this  last  part  of  the  subject  has  an  intimate
relation  to  the  chemism  of  light  proper  or  lumine,  and  to  the  unexplored
field  of  the  influence  of  colour  associated  with  various  cr>'3talliue  agencies
on  the  human  organism  under  the  condition  of  mesmeric  clairvoyance, —
a  subject  which  must  be  studied  in  order  to  hberate  from  its  crudities  the
relations  of  the  interference  of  light  to  ilie  theories  proposed  to  account
for  its  nature.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  of  the  extent  to  which  scientific
knowledge  may  he  corrected,  when  a  Just  faith  is  established  in  the  laws
i-egulating  phrenological  and  mesmeric  science.  Philosophers  have
laboured  bard  to  account  for  the  extinction  of  hght  under  the  lawa
of  ila  own  interferenct, — a  phenomenon  most  remarkable,  but  one  not
more  calculated  to  arrest  attention  and  to  excite  inquiry  than  the  fact
establiidied  by  Macartney  of  the  **  lumint»us  exhibitions  of  hving  animals
being  not  only  independent  of  all  foreign  light,  but  being  frequently
destroyed  by*'  tlio  impingement  or  incidence  on  these  animals  of  any
foreign  light. "  I  have  always  found  the  shining  of  the  Medusie,"  he


44&  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEBL  MAGNETS.

to  the  positive  pole  of  the  magnet  considerably  increased
the  odic  current  at  the  opposite  negative  pole  of  the  magnet,

says, "  to  cease  upon  the  rising  of  the  moon,  or  at  the  approach  of  day  ;
and,  when  out  of  the  sea,  I  never  could  excite  them  to  throw  oat  light
until  they  had  heen  kept  for  some  time  in  the  dark ;  all  the  Inminotis
iusects  likewise  secrete  themselves  as  much  as  possible  during  the  day-
time, and  go  abroad  only  at  night."  An  exception  to  this  general  fact
occurs  in  the  Scolopendra  eUctrica,  which  does  not  shine  unless  it  haa
been  previously  exposed  to  solar  light.  The  chemist  who  observes
that  camphor  appears  to  require  the  presence  of  light  for  its  crys-
tallization has  only  to  try  Mr.  Crosse's  experiment  of  endeavour^
ing  to  form,  by  means  of  electrical  aid,  crystals  of  sulphate  of
strontia  in  the  broad  glare  of  daylight.  He  will  inevitably  fail;  but
in  the  darkened  cellars  of  the  house  at  Bromfield  there  has  been
great  success  in  crystallizing  this  substance.  In  the  experiments  of  the
Baron  von  Reichenbach,  the  darkened  chamber  ^ve  him  results  which
appear  incredible  to  persons  who  have  not  faith  in  the  goodness  of  the
Baron's  character,  or  who  have  not  reflected  on  the  strong  analogies  of
phenomena  pi'eviously  observed  by  other  philosophers.  The  electric
relations  of  the  Scolopendra  may  in  some  measure  account  for  its  aberra-
tions from  a  norma ;  and  this  consideration  introduces  a  difficulty  in
tracing  the  laws  relating  to  the  luminous  properties  of  animals,  of  no
mean  importance,  derived  from  the  modifications  which  complicated
organisms  may  introduce  into  the  associations  of  imponderable  agencies.
If  we  consult  the  essay  of  Dr.  Coldstream  (Todd's  Cyclopaedia  of  Ana-
tomy and  Physiology,  vol.  iii.  p.  197, article  Luminousness,  Animal),  »e
shall  find  that,  according  to  the  obseiTations  hitherto  made,  "  the  animals
which  possess  the  properly  of  emitting  light  are  almost  entirely  inverte-
brate, and  chiefly  marine."  Those  which  manifest,  constantly  and  dis-
tinctly, this  function,  belong  to  the  Mollusca,  Crustacea,  Insecta,  Myria-
poda,  Annelida,  Echiuodermata,  Acalephse,  Zoophyta,  and  Infusoria.
Though  nearly  seventy  species  among  these  classes  have  been  observed  to
emit  light,  it  seems  that  the  colour  of  the  light,  with  exceptions  easily
accounted  for,  has  belonged  to  one  or  other  of  those  named  primitive  by
Tobias  Mayer,  and  since  acknowledged  to  be  such  by  the  reasonings  of
Sir  David  Brewster.  The  same  animal  may  at  di/Ferent  times  emit  different
colours,  and  of  different  degrees  of  intensity.  The  Pholas  dactylus  has  been
observed  to  shed  a  bluish  white  light.  In  the  Lampyris  noctiluca  the  light
has  been  observed  to  be  greenish  with  a  shade  of  blue, — the  green  owing,  pro-
bably, to  the  yellow  rings  of  integument  covering  the  light-emitting  organ


ODTC  FLAME  IN  STEEL  MAGNETS,

but  without  increasing  in  the  least  its  raagnetic  power  of
Rupjiortiog  iron ;  it  was  an  addition  of  (sit  venia  verho)


of  tlie  insect.  The  Elater  iiociilucus  sheds  a  gi'een  lij^ht,  with  spi»(5  of
"  the  most  beautiful  golden  blue."  The  Falgora  pyrrhoryo*-bus  eraits  a
deep  purple  and  scarlet  lighL  In  the  manue  animals,  the  light  is  ot
various  shades  of  blue«  The  Lampvris  italics,  I  he  glow-worm  of  Italy*
emits  bright  blue  %A/*  A  curious  phenomenon  attaches  (o  tliis,  as  well
as  to  another  beetle  in  New  Bolland,  that  thi^re  are  alternate  emissions
and  extinclions  of  light,  apparently  synchronous  with  its  circukiing  cur-
rent, visible  in  the  wing  cases  of  the  insect*  Have  these  any  relation  to
the  polarities  derived  from  the  cry*.lttliine  spheroidal  or  globular  mole-
cules of  the  rirculating  <hiid  ?  The  Baron  von  Reichenhach'^  discove-
ve^t  backed  by  the  aid  of  mesmeric  researches,  tend  to  the  hypotiicsis
ihat  crystalline  light  belongs  to  the  odic  proprties  of  organized  bein;^s.

In  the  sea  of  the  Straits  of  Malacca,  near  Penang  and  Queda,  I  have

repeatedly  hut  coarsely  examined  tlie  tninnie  Mediisie  scintil  [antes,  and

can  fully  lesiijy  to  the  accuracy  of  the  account  given  by  my  old  friend

Mr,  Langsralf,  quoted  by  Dr.  Macartney  at  page  269  of  the  volume

of  the  PiiiloHophical  Transactions  for  1816, If,  while  in  a  boat  passing

[through  a  surface  of  the  tiliuie  covering  the  sea«  souye  of  this  substance

[be  caught  in  the  hand,  sheets  of  light  will  be  perceived  wherever  the

luid  mucus  is  spread  over  the  surface  of  the  skin  ;  and  sometimes  num*

of  the  medusas,  most  of  them  not  so  large  as  a  pin's  head,  may  be

[distinguished ;  at  others,  the  quantity  of  slimy  fluid  will  preponderate,

ith  litile  or  no  evolution  of  light, 1  never  could  bring  myself  lo  believe

Itliat  the  masses  of  U^hl  I  have  so  often  witnessed,  on  the  milky  surface  of

[m  tropical  sea,  were  wholly  owing  to  the  shining  of  the  tentacles  of  a  few

Janimalft  like  Thaumantias  Hemispherica,  though in  a  diflerent  kitjd  of

[night,  when  the  milky  slime  is  not  present ;  hut  when  tlie  sea  is  unusually

tlearj  and  iu  depths  are  magnificently  studded  with those beautiful

[jewels  with which Nature  adonis  her  in  the  shape  of (he  luminous

rHololhuria  and  other  Mollusca,  in  thousands,  and  when  Thaumantias,

Ittiinulated  by  the  moving  water,  send  forth  brilliant  glittering  light  fmm

tentacles  ;  when  the  bows  of  the  ship,  in  rolling  the  salt  water  over,

fplough  up,  as it  were,  sheets  of  sparkling  light,  there  is  no  doubt  but

f  that  more  than  one  little  animal  contributes  itii  share  to  the  illuminations

I  Dr.  Macculloch,  in his  work on  the  Westeni  Islands  of  Scotland,  as

rell  as  in  the  article  Phosphorescence  in  the  Edinburgh  Encyclopedia,

[has,  among some  philosophtcat  ideas  and curious  facts  on  luminous

[  animals,  some  that  are  crude  and  ill-digested  ;  but  he  has  started  the

btghly  probable  conjecture  thAt  there  exist  some  marine  animals  which.


448  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

Biod  to  Magnetod ;  and  the  result  was  doubled  odic  flame.
And  in  the  present  experiments  the  human  hands  iKd  ex^
actly  what  crystals  had  done  in  the  hut  experiments.

in  their  dimensions,  resemble  some  of  the  Infusorial ;  and  that  these,
whether  in  the  state  of  spawn  or  fully  grown,  may  be  possessed  of  the
iacnlty  of  emitting  light ;  and  he  distinguishes  with  respect  to  the
nature  of  the  light,  as  appearing  in  two  distinct  forms,  and  in  these  cases
apparently  arising  from  two  sources.  "  The  twinkling  appearance  seems
always  to  proceed  from  the  animals,  and  to  be  the  result  of  their  own
actions,*'  taking  place  when  the  water  is  at  rest.  "  The  diffused  light
appears  to  originate  rather  from  detached  luminous  matter  dispersed
through  the  water."  MaccuUoch  calls  the  diffused  light  fainter ;  but  if
he  had  witnessed  the  great  variety  in  this  respect  that  obtains  at  night  in
the  waters  of  the  Straits  of  Malacca  at  ceitain  seasons  of  the  year,  he
would  not  have  arrived  at  this  conclusion.  The  diffused  light  is  often
very  brilliant,  and  may  oflen  be  compared  to  an  illuminated  blue  sky  re-
flected on  the  water  ;  while  on  other  nights  the  green  water  of  the  sea
is  seen  clear  at  certain  limited  depths,  if  watched  out  of  the  stem  cabins
of  a  ship,  "  illuminated  by  the  pale  blue  light,  shed  off  numerous  points,
from  thousands  of  animals  of  various  sizes  belonging  to  the  genera  Hole-
thuria  and  Beroe."  Macculloch,  anxious  to  find  uses  for  all  that  the
great  Planner  of  the  universe  has  arranged,  supposed  that  the  power  of
emitting  light  belongs  to  the  marine  animals  of  the  lower  grades  for  the
purpose  of  their  serving  as  link-lights  to  guide  other  animals  to  prey  upon
them :  he  thought,  considering  the  absolute  darkness  that  exists  in  the
ocean  at  eight  hundred  or  one  thousand  feet  deep,  owing  to  the  light  of
the  Sim  ceasing  to  be  transmitted  to  such  depths,  the  luminousness  of
marine  animals  may  be  "  a  substitute  for  the  light  of  the  sun,"  and  may
be  a  means  of  their  discovering  one  another,  as  well  as  their  prey.  It  is
remarkable  that  some  philosophic  minds  love  to  wander  from  the  path  of
obvious  facts  to  the  captivating  speculations  of  false  secondary  causes.
All  the  facts  tend  to  conclusions  diametrically  opposed  to  those  calculated
to  infer  a  wisdom  for  God  other  than  his  own.  The  greatest  brilliancy
of  light,  a  point  on  which  Macculloch  insisted,  is  given  out  by  those
very  inferior  animals  that  scintillate  their  flashes  on  the  surface,  and  give
out  no  light  in  the  deep.  The  numerical  proportion  of  those  that  shine
in  the  deep,  and  those  at  no  great  distance  from  the  surface,  bear  a  very
trifling  ratio  to  the  scintillating  medusae. Dr.  Macculloch  was  more

»  Dr.  Coldstream  states  that  many  species  of  the  Infusoria  belonging
to  the  genera  Cerearea,  Volvox,  Vibrio,  Trichoda,  Lincophoea,  emit  light.


ODIC  PLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS,


449


445.  I  subsequently  made  a  controlling  experiment  with
the  healthy  Wilhclmine  Glusci\ In  the  dark  chamber  I


exttct  wbeii  lie  stated  that  he  had  himself  obsen'cd  (ho  laminoui  properly
in  cenain  fishes,  the  larger  and  more  perfect  of  ihe  marine  animals.  "  I
have  hilhprto  obaen^ed  it/'  he  stales,  '*  only  iu  the  piKhard,  the  stardine*
the  whitings  the  mackerel,  and  ihe  gar,  but  have  liiile  doubt  that  it  h  fi*r
more  widely  diffused*  1 1  has  been  remarked,  by  diflerr'nt  navigators,  ihat  the
genus  Scpialus  shines  at  ni^ht ;  and  ihe  flying-6sh  has  also  been  observed
lo  emit  a  pale  light,  which  Captain  Ross  compares  to  thai  of  the  moon.**
"  Great  flashes  have  been  described  as  seen  at  a  considerable  depth  in  the
sea,  a  phenomenon  which  I  have  oflen  T^ilnessed  among  the  Weslem
Islands  :"  after  the  obser^'ations  on  tlie  sources  of  fallacy  in  snch  mailers^
he  concludes  that  there  is  '*  ihe  probability,  however,  that  fish  acinally
poisesa  the  luminous  property,  which  is  strengthened  by  our  knowledge
of  the  light  they  so  readily  yield  after  death ;  a  phenomenon  by  do  means
connected  with  putrefaction,  hnl  independent  of  that  process;"  a  point
Dr,  Hnl  me  had  long  ago  esiablished.  In  traversing  the  ocean  I  have
scjen  several  fish  caught,  which,  while  dying,  have  exhibited  numerous
changes  in  their  huea  of  colour,  and  I  have  inferred  that  the  organized
vital  surfaces^  capable  of  disaecling  or  of  evanescenlly  rryslallizing  inci-
dent light  to  such  a  remarkable  extent^  might  under  other  circumstances
possess  the  power  of  emitting  their  own  tight.  Dr.  I^facculluch  has
stated  the  fact  that  '*  if  a  noise  be  made  by  striking  ihe  gunwale  of  a  boat
when  a  shoal  of  pilchards  is  under  it,  the  whole  will  in  an  instant  become
Uiminotis^  exhibiting  the  splendid  appearance  of  a  continuous  sheet  of
light,  momentarvp  but  renewable  on  repeating  the  same  alarming  sound »"
Notwithstanding  this  direct  testimony,  it  is  right  to  observe  that  Dr.
Coldstream  has  hesitated  lo  admit  fishes  on  the  list  of  truly  luminous
animals.  Dr.  Macartney,  before  Dr.  Macculloeh'a  time,  had  withheld
his  assent  lo  the  fact,  repeatedly  asserted. Again,  the  analogies  afforded

I  by  the  investigations  of  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach  may  be  indicated.
and  the  probability  hinted  at  that  Dr.  Moccullnch  was  righu
It  is  possible  that  animal  light  may  be  emitted,  under  certain  circum-
stances, by  hII  organised  living  beings ;  but  the  question  as  to  whether
there  exist  varieties  in  the  power  of  exercising  on  animal  function,  or  of
manifesting  such  a  projierty  as  belonging  to  vital  structures,  is  quite
a  dififerent  ttifuir*  Certain  moUusca,  and  some  of  llie  species  of  elater^
appear  to  shine  without  intermission.  In  Italy,  and  in  various  parts  of
the  tropics,  tiie  illuminating  powers  of  this  insect,  the  fire-fly,  is  so  great
that  I  have  known  a  beautiful  star-like  picture  produced  by  enclosing
numbers  of  them  in  meshes  of  thin  black  crape,  which  was  thrown  ns  a


450  ODIC  FLAHE  ON  STEEL  HAGN1T8.

grasped  a  magnetic  bar  eight  inches  long  in  my  own  hand ;
when  I  did  this  below,  at  the  southward  pole>  with  my  right

?ei1  over  a  lady,  who  desired  to  appear  in  the  character  of  Night*  Id  the
West  Indies  (particularly  at  St.  Domingo,  where  they  are  ahundant).  Dr.
Coldstream  states  **  that  the  natives  use  them  instead  of  candles  in  their
houses.  They  also  tie  them  to  their  feet  and  heads  in  travelling  at  night,
to  give  light  to  their  path  through  the  forest.'*  But  most  of  the  lights
emitting  animals  ^pear  to  use  their  peculiar  function  only  occasionally,
and  in  most  instances  under  the  stimulus  of  some  exciting  cause*  One
ly^^arkahle  fact,  that  is  striking  in  its  analogies,  appears  to  he  dependent
on  temperature  and  climate.  The  greater  numher  of  luminous  animals
m  found  in  warm  climates ;  and  though  among  the  marine  animals  some
u^  seen  in  all  latitudes,  even  the  coldest,  yet  these  are  not  so  numerous,
and  their  light  is  not  so  splendid.  It  is  well  known  from  the  concurrent
testimony  of  all  voyagers,  that  they  are  more  abundant  and  shine  with
gieater  brilliancy  in  tropical  regions.  The  glowworms  of  temperate
countries  shine  only  in  summer  and  autumn.  In  England  it  is  found
between  June  and  September.  It  seems  that  "  no  aerial  insects  give  out
light  under  a  temperature  of  about  6(f  Fahrenheit  and  upwards ;  and  the
higher  the  natural  temperature,  the  brighter  is  the  light  emitted."  But
whether  the  animals  be  insects  or  belong  to  marine  families,  chany^es  in
the  state  of  the  medium  in  which  they  live,  derived  from  altered  conditions
of  temperature  or  of  electricity,  appear  to  affect  them  manifestly.  I  have
myself  seen  sudden  changes  in  the  appearance  of  ihe  surface  in  tropi-
cal seas,  which  have  gone  off  in  the  course  of  half  an  hour,  occasioned  by
the  appearance  of  luminous  animals,  \^bich  have  retreated  as  suddenly  as
they  appeared.  During  the  rainy  monsoon,  a  few  degrees  distance  from
the  coast  of  Malabar,  at  midnight,  the  weather  being  cloudy,  and  the
night  very  dark,  Captain  Horsbnrgh  saw  the  sea  suddenly  assume  a  milky
white  appearance,  and  then  a  flaming  colour  all  around :  a  similar  appear-
ance occasionally  occurs  in  the  Banda  Sea, — (Macartney's  Paper.)  On
these  occasions,  various  observers  have  testified  to  the  suddenness  of  the
changes  that  have  occurred  either  in  the  atmoj»phere  or  in  the  water.
Before  storms  it  has  frequently  been  observed  that  the  marine  luminons
animals  are  excited  to  give  out  their  light  with  unusual  splendour.  Dr.
Macartney,  in  experimenting  upon  the  light  of  the  medusse,  placed  some  of
the  individuals  of  Thaumantias  Hemispherica  in  a  glass  vessel,  and  passed
shocks  of  electricity  through  the  water.  At  the  moment,  there  was  no  appear-
ance of  light,  but  immediately  afterwards  they  shone  like  illuminated  wheels
for  some  seconds,  and  with  greater  brilliancy  than  before.  Humboldt
corroborates  this  fact. It  appears  that  the  condition  of  an  electric  circuit


ODtC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS*

hand,  the  bhie  iiortlnvard  fliuiie  at  the  top  grew  to  twice
the  size ; when 1 cUd  it  at  the  <  >j)posite,  the  northward


is  essentkl  far  the  pitnlucuuri  uf  an  iiicii^aed  liglil  in  glowworms;  for
Mocaire,  qnoled  by  Dr,  Coklsircain,  found  that  one  polo  only  of  the  giil-
vanic  battery  produced  no  <  ffect.  1  have  been  UhI  to  infer  that  there  in
ati  induced  imponderable  ageucy  fvon>  the  closed  circle  of  a  sin^jle  electio-
dynamic  coil,  as  illustrated  by  certain  mesmeric  phenomenaf  which »  in
rery  susceptible  cases^  are  rendered  evident  by  that  rigeucy.  It  would  be
ver\'  interesting  to  communicate  this  agency  to  glowworm??,  and  to  fluids
in  which  manne  luminous  animals  were  presenL

It  is  fashionable  to  sneer  at  isolated  facts,  and  lo  withhold  belief  from
any  which  appear  extraordinary,  and  that  can  be  accounted  for  only  by
ihe  h>^othesis  of  the  existence  of  imknowi)  or  unexamined  imponderable
agencies*  Dr.  Coldstream  must  have  attached  a  certain  value  to  "  an
extraordinary  series  of  phenomena,  connected  with  a  particular  display  of
the  InininiKisness  of  the  sea,"  which  were  rcjMirted  by  Mr.  Henderson  in
A  paper  published  in  the  1st  volume  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Medical
and  Physical  Society  of  Calcutta*  In  the  year  1821,  c»Q  the  5tb  March,
Mr*  Henderson  was  on  board  of  a  ship  in  the  Atlantic  (lal.  2^,  long,
2r20'  VV.)  mid  about  9  p.  m.  the  sea  became  **  unusually  luminous*
Every  person  who  kepi  his  eye  fixed  upon  it,  but  for  a  short  time,wasimme-
diately  affected  with  giddinessi,  headache,  pain  in  the  eyeballs,  and  slight
stcltness*  Although  these  symptoms  varied  in  intensity  amongst  ilit>
s|jeclatoni,  yet  there  was  not  one  on  board  who  did  not  feel  some  degree
ol  them ;  and  all  imputed  iheoi  to  the  effect  of  the  light  proce^^ding  from
surface  of  iho  ocean/*  Mr,  Henderson  remarks,  "  For  my  own  poj-t,
the  headache,  &ic.,  which  followed  immediately  on  my  looking  at  the  wutcr,
was  piinicularly  »«vere,  nor  did  it  go  off  until  morning.  The  efiects  I
experienced  were  like  those  produced  by  smoking  too  much  tobacco/'
Although  this  be  an  isolated  case  of  the  physical  effects  of  very  intense
light  from  this  imusual  source,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  ^Ive  full  credence  to
Mr.  Hendersons  statement.  Having  resided  in  Calcutta,  where,  at
oertain  seasons,  the  light  of  day  is  most  intense,  and  where  the  repuUine
mfmtcy  of  this  imponderable  may  be  associated  with  other  nocent  powers,
I  have  repeatedly  suifered  the  illness  so  well  described  by  Mr.  Henderson,
ou  the  too  sudden  admission  of  the  glare  into  jx%y  sitting-room,  or  on
going  out,  too  suddenly,  from  a  darkened  house,  into  the  fierce  light
abroad.  fUfmhU^fi  sun-light,  aa  well  as  heat,  is  no  unusual  source  of  the
biliary  derangements  of  India.

We  are  apt  to  be  startled  by  relations  of  things  that  are  new  To  us,  and
repulsive  agency  of  certain  organs  in  the  brain  is,  in  some  persons,

H ti


452  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

pole,  with  my  left,  the  odic  flame  at  the  free  southward
pole  was  doubled. When  I  did  the  same  at  both  poles  with

called  into  operation.  In  standing  on  the  defensive,  it  is  sometimes  a
property  of  our  structures  that  we  should  become  offensive ;  and  in  refus-
ing belief  to  things  thought  to  be  unusual,  our  self-esteem,  and  love  of
opposition,  and  cunning,  and  jealousy,  and  envy,  derived  from  love  of
possession,  the  true  gluttony  of  selfishness, — our  cultivated  obstinate
vanity,  assuring  us  that  in  piggish  scepticism  resides  the  philosophy  which
really  buds  only  from  the  highest  and  most  delicate  organization,  not
allowing  us  to  perceive  how  frequently  we  become  illogical,  teaches
us  to  reject  truths  presented  to  us  by  our  fellows  in  the  best  faith  of  their
sincere  feelings.  I  could  mention  the  names  of  men,  having  high  repu-
tations in  the  world,  who  either  have  forgotten  that  love  of  justice  which
belongs  to  conscientiousness,  and  that  love  of  truth  that  belongs  to  high
moral  natures,  or  who  have  laboured  under  such  obliquity  of  intellect  as
to  have  been  unaware  that,  in  some  cases,  the  arriving  hastily  at  disgusting
conclusions  is  the  characteristic  of  the  narrow  intellect  of  low-bred  black-
guards,  and  not  of  polite  gentlemen.  But  the  charity  that  springs  from  a
conviction  of  man  being  the  creature  of  his  organization,  and  the  circum-
stances which  impel  him  to  his  actions,  covers  such  beings  with  the  pity  that
falls  to  their  share.  Why  should  the  relation  of  an  extraordinary  fact  like
that  stated  by  Mr.  Henderson  not  be  believed  ?  It  could  not  have  resulted
from  fanc},  although  our  judgment  might  tnily  lead  us,  in  reading  Mr.
Bonnycastle's  glowing  accounts  of  the  '*  blazing  sheets  ofau^/and  most
brilliant  light*'  exhibited  by  the  marine  animals  in  a  certain  portion  of  the
ocean,  and  in  describing  "many  large  fishes  darting  about  <m  i/in  consterna-
tion at  the  scene/*  to  the  conclusion  that  in  describing  a  tnith,  the  author,
being  a  person  of  ardent  temperament,  had  given  a  fanciful  colouring  to  his
picture.  So,  if  we  had  often  handled  light-emitting  marine  animals,  and
had  never  experienced  an  odour  at  all  similar  to  that  perceived  around  a
highly  charged  electrical  apparatus,  we  should  hardly  be  guilty  of  philo-
sophic stupidity,  or  of  a  want  of  good  breeding,  if  we  adjudged  Messrs.
Quoy  and  Gaimard  to  be  occasionally  influenced  by  fanciful  ideas.

The  fact  of  the  luminosity  of  certain  animals  being  admitted,  let  us
inquire  into  the  ideas  that  have  been  entertained  as  to  the  circumstances
on  which  this  phenomenon  depends.  It  will  hardly  be  necessary  to
discuss  the  insufficiency  of  the  facts  that  might  be  adduced  to  prove  that
luminous  animals  imbibe  light  from  the  suu*s  rays,  and  give  it  out  in  the
dark ;  or  to  combat  the  idea,  advanced  by  Spallanzani,  that  the  light  is
produced  by  a  kind  of  combustion  of  atmospheric  air;  or  that  of  Brag-
natelli,  that  the  light  is  swallowed  with  the  food,  and  disengaged  by


OmC  FLAHE  ON  STEEL  MAGXETS,


p


I


the  reverse  hands,  the  fl^unes  of  the  free  extremities  were
dulled. Only  weak  magnets  can  be  used  iu  these  experi-

peoul'mr  organs.  Hul  when  we  niui^t  with  the  view  thiit  ihe  light  is
deperidetil  iu  some  way  on  pboaiilioric  aj^eiicy*  we  must  exaiuine  if  such
ail  hv^ulhesis  will  uccount  fur  all  ihe  lucbi  on  the  atibject.  Tiedeinanii
iliinks  that  the  luiiiiiious  plit-nuuicnoii  h  dependent  on  a  matter^  rhu
pKiduLt  of  a  secretion  :  a  liquid  secretion » probablif  containing  phoipho-
fUM,  or  an  Analogous  comhustibie  substance,  whiirli  conibincii  with  the
oxygen  of  the  airj  or  of  aerated  water  at  a  inediuuj  (tinpcmiuie,  and  ihufi
producer  the  diBengagemeni  of  liyht*  Henue  his  infereuL-e  is,  that  the
evolution  of  light  in  animals  is  a  chi-mical  operation,  and  as,  on  uveral
ifccaaiofu,  thi'  phenomejion  has  continued  for  whulc  ilays,  and  eveu  after
the  death  of  tlie  animal,  it  ought  not  to  be  regmded  as  a  vital  act  (Com-
fiarativc  rhysiolog)%  translated  by  Drs.  Gully  and  Lane,  i.  270.),  Dt*
Coldstream  justly  observes  that  this  opiniuii  coincides  pretty  nearly  with
those  held  by  Darwin,  Sir  Humphry  Davy,  Htinrich,  and  some  others  who
conjectured  tbui  a  Huid  cojjiaining  phosphorus  was  seL-reted  by  the  hnni-
nous  organs^  and  shone  on  being  exposed  to  the  oxygen  of  the  air  iiiito-
ditced  by  respiration.  Tiedcmann,  nowith^tanding  his  high  reputation,
uiusfl  be  regarded  more  as  an  observer  than  an  u  correct  ihiiikt-r,  and  it  is
owing  to  the  natural  homage  man  is  apt  to  ]>ay  to  great  industry,  thai  the
capacity  of  his  mind  has  been  overrated.  One  has  only  to  read  both  sides
of  the  conirovei^y  in  which  he  was  engaged  with  Gall,  to  esUmale  those
mental  forces  whiuh  belong  to  the  close,  tiie  logical,  the  clear  and  correctly
ieajH)ning  head,  and  those  i|ualities  which  di^dnguish  the  mere  obsener
and  collector  of  factjt :  a  character  so  often  proudly  asserting  it&  right
to  reason,  while  the  clear  piiTception  of  imjKjriant  relations  is  abso-
lutely wanting,  \^  hen  will  man  kam  to  be  humble,  and  to  know  thai
be  la  the  victim  of  necessity  P  If  his  brain  be  not  formed  to  allow  of  bis
possessing  the  power  of  correct  reasoning,  of  seizing  the  aalient  points  of
a  compltcated  st-ries  of  questions,  and  of  elucidaiing^,  with  happy  illustra-
tion, the  relations  of  a  vast  mass  of  facts,  the  crowding  those  ikcts  toge-
ther, without  arrangement  and  without  keys  to  their  relations,  is  to  ofler
them  comprehensively  for  the  put  pose  of  reducing  them  to  a  mass  of
confusion-  The  givat  genius  of  Gall,  like  that  of  the  wondrous  Miltx*n,
sbono  in  his  power  of  illustrating  truth,  iu  controversy,  when  obscured  by
the  cloudings  of  common  minds.  Spallanzani,  in  entertaining  the  idea
of  animal  light  being  dependent  on  a  combustion  in  the  atmospheric
oxygen,  approached  moie  nearly  to  the  illogical  chemical  thoughts  of
Tiedeinann.  No  explanation  of  a  multiplicity  of  various  phenomena  caw
deserve  the  name  ot  theory  which  is  based  on  visionary  conjecture,  and
which  is  insufficient  to  account  for  at  bast  a  majority  of  ascertained  farts.


454  ODIC  FLAME  ON  8TEEL  MAGNETS.

ments,  or  the  results  are  not  suflSciently  distinct.  They
confirmed  in  every  respect  the  result  of  the  preceding
paragraph.

What  relations  can  the  momentary  flashes  of  light  from  the  scintillating^
medusae  have  with  the  combustion  of  ])hosphorus  ?  What  proof  is  there
of  phosphorus  in  the  shining  of  the  Holothuria,  which  continues  for
hours  without  emitting  any  luminous  secretion  into  the  sea-water  sur-
rounding it  ?  This,  and  several  other  mollusca  that  inhabit  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Coralline  Islands,  may  be  handled  without  the  discorery  of
any  luminous  matter  adhering  to  the  hands.  In  one  of  Dr.  Macartney's
experiments,  luminous  medusae  in  salt  water  were  submitted  to  the  heat  of
a  burning  candle.  The  light  ceased  with  the  life  of  the  animal,  instead  of
being  increased  by  heat  and  flaring  up,  as  phosphorus  would  have  done.
From  all  his  experiments  it  is  easy  to  conclude  that,  when  the  strongest
and  most  constant  light  was  present,  the  presence  of  oxygen  was  wanting.
In  no  circumstances  did  the  animal  light  exhibit  anything  like  combus-
tion, or  a  capability  of  being  inflamed.

Instances  have  been  adduced  of  luminous  appearances  on  the  human
body  resulting  from  a  large  admixture,  in  certain  cases  of  disease,  of
phosphoric  matter  with  the  perspiration ;  and  when  luminous  appear-
ances have  been  observed  in  particular  conditions  of  urine,  there  can  be
little  doubt  that  the  ])resence  of  phosphorus  may  possibly  have  been  per-
ceived by  means  of  chemical  manipulations.  Dr.  Coldstream  affirms  that
it  is  said  the  urine  of  Viverra  nephitis  and  of  Viverra  pulorius  is  always
luminous.  This  may  be  true,  and  the  light  in  urine  may  not  improbably
be  owing  to  the  ])resence  of  phosphorus ;  but  the  presence  of  this  sub-
8tan(!e,  because  it  may  have  been  detected  in  a  few  isolated  and  quite  ex-
ceptional cases,  cannot  be  yielded  as  the  one  sole  and  sufficient  mode  of
acconiiiiiig  for  all  animal  lipht,  in  most  instances  of  the  presence  of  which
not  a  trace  of  phosphorus  has  been  discovered.  Dr.  Macartney's  re-
searches have  established  the  more  logical  inference  that  animal  lumi-
nousness  emitted  from  animal  organs  is  the  efl^ect  solely  of  the  action  of
vital  forces.  But  it  may  be  asked — How,  in  those  instances  in  which
Macartney  himself  allowed  the  existence  of  a  light-emitting  fluid,  could
the  influence  of  vital  forces  alone  account  for  the  presence  of  light  ?
and  how  in  the  glowworm  and  fire-fly,  in  which  it  has  been  asserted
that  the  luminous  organs  may  be  cut  out  without  the  destruction  of  the
light-emitting  property  which  belongs  to  them  ?  It  is  no  argument
against  the  existence  of  vitality  in  an  organized  fluid,  that,  for  a  certain
time  after  its  emission  from  the  animal,  it  does  not  exhibit  the  chemical
changes  caused  by  death  ;  nor  does  the  mutilation  of  an  animal  of  the
lower  grades  establish  the  fact  of  death  at  once  in  all  its  parts. "  Macaire


ODIC  I'LAMk:  ON  STEEL  HAOVBTS.


455


I


I


446.  A  souiev^htit  moditied  hut  essentially  KiuHlar  ex-
l>eriment  was  gone  through  frequently  with  the  girl  Zinkel

look  Hoine  glowwomis  thai  had  been  kept  for  some  time  ol  a  tctripemtiire
oi60^  Fiih.»  piimged  them  into  waitr  al  56^,  and  m^adually  raised  ihtj
teni|ieraturt*.  Light  wan  eunilt^d  for  (he  Cnni  time  at  77<^,  and  increased
in  iutenisity  until  the  water  «ia!»  at  ltl5°.  At  thi^  temperature  the  ani-
nxals  died,  but  the  light  continued  until  the  leinperainre  had  reached
134**  o,  when  it  wholly  disappeared ;"  the  Jight-emiiiin*;  organs  retain-
ing their  viiality  for  some  lime  after  the  su*<pension  of  life  by  other  parts
of  the  animal,  "  When  glowworms  are  thrown  alive  into  water  at  1 10»
and  U]>ward9,lhey  emit  for  a  moment  a  brillrant  lighl»  and  die  instanily-*'
Under  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump,  a  glowwonn  emits  a  faded  light
varying  in  degree  of  intensity  as  ihe  air  ia  abstracted,  and  the  light  in  re*
established  as  tht!  air  is  readmitted.  Kirby  and  Kpence  (Entomology,
ii.  42ti)  state  that  the  luminous  matter  was  by  Mr.  Shcppard  removed
from  a  glowworm.  The  wounds  healed  within  two  days,  and  the  light-
emitting  organs  were  reproduced.  These  organs  were  first  anatomically
exatiiincd  by  Dr.  Macartney,  in  whose  paper  ajipears  tliis  statement : —
**  The  only  rtninmls  which  n]ipfared  to  mo  lo  puni^ess  a  distinct  orguniza-
iion  for  the  |iroduction  of  light  are  the  luminous  t»pecies  of  Lampyris,
Elaler^  FuJgora,  atMi  Pausns.

*'  The  light  of  the  lampyrides  is  known  to  pn>cced  from  some  of  the
la«it  ring*  of  the  abdomen,  which,  when  not  illuminated,  are  of  a  pale
yellow  colour.  Upon  the  internal  surface  of  thei^  rings  there  is  spread  a
layer  of  a  peculiar  soft  yellow  substance,  which  has  been  compared  to
paste,  but,  by  examination  with  a  lens,  1  found  it  fo  be  organized,  like
the  common  interstitial  aubsiance  of  the  inject »  body,  except  that  it  is
of  a  closer  texture,  and  of  a  paler  yellow  colour/'  &c.  Macartney  has
remarked,  that  in  the  glowworm  this  peculiar  substance  b  absorbed  after
the  season  for  emitting  light,  and  that  its  place  is  supplied  by  common
intemtiiial  sub«tance.

In  order  lo  allow  of  the  internal  illumination  being  exposed,  the  seg-
ments of  ihe  abdomen  are  thin  and  transparent.  In  diiferent  sjiecies  of
kmpyri*  there  is  a  variety  in  the  number  of  the  luminous  rings.  Dr,
Macartney  discovered  "  in  the  common  glowwonn,  besides  tlje  luminous
substance,  on  the  inner  side  of  the  last  abdominal  rliig,  two  bodies,  which
to  the  naked  eye  appear  more  minute  than  the  head  of  tl)e  smallest  pin.
These  were  saes,  containing  a  soft  yellow  substance.  They  wtire  fonned
of  two  layers  of  silvery  membrane,  disposed  in  a  circular  diret:tion,  very
elastic,  although  so  delicate  in  structure.  The  light  from  iheae  bodies  is
less  under  the  control  of  the  insect  than  tliat  of  the  luminous  substance


456  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MA0NST8.

I  let  her  bring  her  fingers  near  the  poles  of  the  magnetic
bar. When  she  approached  the ooUected  points  of  the

spread  under  the  rings :  it  is  rarely  ever  extinguished  in  the  season  in
which  the  glowworm  gives  out  light,  even  daring  the  day :  and  when  al)
the  other  rings  are  dark,  these  sacs  often  shine  hrightly."

In  the  genus  Rlater,  the  light-producing  organs,  consisting  of  a  pecu-
liar yellow  suhstance,  are  placed  in  the  corcelet. In  the  dissection  of
the  Elater  noctilucus.  Dr.  Macartney  found  a  "  soft  yellow  substance  of
an  oval  figure  lodged  in  the  concavity  of  the  yellow  spots  in  the  corceleu"
A  lens  enabled  him  to  establish  its  organic  nature :  it  was  composed  of
very  minute  lobules,  closely  packed  together. In  the  Pausus  sphero-
cerus,  the  globes  of  the  antennae  form  the  organs  of  light. Carradori
thought that the  lampyrides  were  enabled  to  moderate  or  extinguish
their  light  by  retracting  the  luminous  substance  under  a  membrane;
but  neither  in  this  nor  in  any  other  luminous  insect  could  Macartney
detect  an  apparatus  for  such  a  purpose,  and  he  observes  tbat  "  the  regu-
lation of  the  kind  and  degree  of  the  luminous  appearance  does  not  depend
on  any  visible  uiechanism,  but,  like  the  production  of  the  light  itself,  is
accomplished  by  some  inscrutable  change  in  the  luminous  matter,  which
in  some  animals  is  a  simple  operation  of  organic  life,  in  others  is  subject
to  the  will."

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  in  all  the  dissections  of  luminous  insects
made  by  Dr.  Macartnoy,  be  did  not  find  that  the  organs  of  light  were
better  or  differently  supplied  with  either  nerves  or  air-tubes  than  the  other
parts  of  the  body.  Dr.  Coldstream  says  that  "  the  luminous  proboscis
or  snout  of  the  Fulgora  is  hollow,  and  has  a  free  communication  with
the  exienial  air  by  a  narrow  slit  situated  near  the  base  of  the  organ.  Its
cavity  is  lined  with  a  fine  membrane,  between  which  and  the  outer  trans-
lucent corneous  crust  there  is  interspersed  a  soft  tissue,  of  a  pale  reddish
colour,  arranged  in  lines  longitudinally,  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  seat
of  luminousness  in  this  insect.*'

In  those  luminous  insects,  then,  in  which  there  is  found  a  peculiar  or-
ganization for  the  production  of  the  light,  there  does  not  appear  to  be  a
question  as  to  the  existence  of  a  fluid,  from  which  the  light  emanates.
There  is  a  peculiar  organic  substance,  consisting  in  some  cases  of  aggre-
gated lobulos,  but  no  proof  exists  as  to  the  presence  of  so  highly  com-
bustible a  substaijce  as  phosphorus.

Dr.  Macartney  asserts  that  with  the  exception  of  the  animals  above
mentioned  the  exhibition  of  light  depends  upon  the  presence  of  a  fluid
matter.  Ho  adduces  the  Pholas  dactylus,  in  which  the  luminous  fluid
is  very  evident,  and  in  vast  quantity. Some  naturalists  assert  that  it  is


ODIC  FLAMB  ON  8TBEL  MAGNETS.


457


fingers  of  her  left  baud  to  the  nortliward  pole,  the  flames
of  hoth  sides  flowed tuwaids  each  other,  beeoniing  more


from  ibe  intenial  surrace  of  iu  respiralory  tubes  thai  thi.'^  Phulas  gtvts
oul  lis  li[;ht  must  strongly,  and  ai  course  secretes  the  f4rt?ate*tl  abuudaiice
of  this  fluid.  Pliuy  h  ati  auihorily  llmt  ibis  fliiiil  is  like  phospliorus,
rendering  every  object  lumhiuus  wiib  w  bich  ii  comeji  in  cuuiacl.  Reaumur,
acc^ordiiig  to  Macariuey,  found  ii  diiTuBible  in  water  or  any  ulber  fluid  in
Hhieh  ihc  anhntil  mii;bi  be  iinmerised*

Macai  toey  observed  iLui  ibo  shining  of  the  Scg1o}>ondra  elcctrica  was
iJways  accompanied  by  the  appearance  of  on  elFusioii  of  a  luminous  fluid
nf>on  the  surface  of  the  aniinali  more  p^irticularly  about  the  head  ;  and
this  fluid  inuy  be  received  ii{>ou  ihe  baud  or  other  bodies  bruught  in
coulact  with  the  insect  at  tbe  moment,  and  the  light  thna  transferred
remains  for  a  few  seconds  afterwards.  "  This  fluid,  however**  adds  the
Doclofj  **  /  neffer  cottfd  discaver  in  (he  form  of  a  moisture,  even  upon
Ik  vfenrext  y/aw,  alfhau^k  examitied  immediately  with  the  most  scru'
puhuji  attention  lt\f  a  Uns, Hmust^  thereforf ,  he  extremely  attenuated  **

The  same  a[»peurati€o  waa  obsen'ed  during  the  illuniitiatiun  of  tfie
Nereis  nocliluca,  by  Foiit;ert>ax  de  Bonduroy.  (I^Ium^  de  IVVcad*  des  Sc.
171)7.)  Godehue  de  Rivillp,  in  the  3d  vohnne  of  ihe  »uine  Memoirs,
gives  an  account  of  a  luminous  animal  he  had  seen  on  the  coast  of
Malabar,  wheru  he  »aw  the  seu  having  the  same  appearance  of  a  plain  of
snow  which  Horsburgh  and  others  liave  witnessed.  lu  expeiimenls
with  this  animal,  he  observed  it  to  emit  a  blue  liquor  which  iUutuinaled  the
water  for  several  lines.  Spallanzani  relates  (Memoria  sopra  le  Meduse
forforiscbe  Mem.  delln  Soc.  ItaU  lomo  7)  that  the  medusa,  which  he
examined,  communicated  the  property  of  shining  to  water,  milk,  and  other
fluids,  on  being  rubbed  or  squeezed  in  ihem.  Professor  Forbes,  in  his
monograph  on  the  Naked-eyed  Meduste,  quotes  Ehrenberg  and  others
to  show  that  the  medusae  give  out  their  light  from  the  bulbs  of  the  ten-
tacles, and  particularly  the  Thaumautias  hemispherica^  noticed  by
Macartney  \  and  he  compares  the  tight  lo  a  garland  of  sparks  aroimd
the  circumference  of  the  umbrella-  Ehrenberg  regards  the  production
of  tbe  light  as  an  act  of  organic  life,  and  he  observes  that  it  **  appears
fTe([uently  periodically  produced  either  spontaneously  or  by  excitement,
frequently  as  rapidly  produced  sparks,  resembling  small  electric  dis-
charges. This  repeated  sparkliug  converts  a  iTiiicaiif  gelatinous  Jluid,
which  is  discharged  more  abundantly  d tiring  the  operation,  into  a  secon*

Idary  slate  of  phos|>hore3cence,  which  continues  for  a  time,  even  afier  the
dealli  of  the  organism,  or  after  the  severing  of  its  parts."
Macartney  had  prefioudly  noticed  that  in  this  animal  the  light  was


458  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

slender  and  larger ;  when  she  came  nearer,  however,  they
drew  back,  became  shorter,  contracted,  and  both  disappeared

given  out  from  the  same  spots,  aud,  he  adds,  from  the  centre  also.  He
says :  '^  The  central  part  and  the  spots  roond  the  margin  are  commonly
seen  to  shine  on  lifting  the  animal  out  of  the  water  into  the  air,  present-
ing the  appearance  of  an  illuminated  wheel,  and  when  it  is  exposed  to
the  water  the  transparent  parts  of  its  body  are  alone  luminous,"  Forbes
states  that  from  DionoDa  appendiculata,  which  is  always  a  luminoas
species,  the  light  proceeds  from  the  reproductive  glands.  Ebrenberg
found  that  in  Cydippe  pileus,  and  Oceana  pileata,  of  the  Baltic,  the  light
issued  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ovaries,  and  in  Oceana  hernia-
pherica  from  the  basis  of  the  cirri ;  corroborating  the  idea  of  Professor
Forbes,  that  "  the  light  of  the  naiced-eyed  medusee  is  developed  by  the
reproductive  and  motor  systems."

Dr,  Coldstream  says,  "  The  luminous  mucus  is  sometimes  poured  out
even  by  very  small  animals  in  such  quantity  as  to  leave  a  luminoas
wake  behind  ihem,  as  in  the  instance  mentioned  by  Quoy  and  Gaimard*
These  observers  saw  such  luminous  lines  formed  in  the  paths  of  certain
extremely  small  creatures,  so  transparent  that  their  forms  could  not  be
distinctly  made  out.  The  positions  of  their  bodies  were  marked  in  the
water  by  bright  spots,  which  were  followed  in  their  course  by  luminous
wakes,  at  first  about  an  inch  in  breadth,  but  afterwards  by  the  movements
of  the  water  spread  out  to  the  breadth  of  two  or  three  inches.  This
luminous  mucus  is  supposed  to  be  the  seat  also  of  the  remarkable  sting-
ing property  possessed  by  many  of  the  acalepha.  It  retains  its  luminous
ness  in  some  instances  for  a  day  or  two  after  being  emitted  by  the
animal,  but  loses  it  whenever  putrefaction  commences^'  Dr.  Macullocb*
who  paid  much  attention  to  the  subject,  thought  that  in  marine  animals
generally  the  coats  of  the  stomach  and  intestines  were  the  real  light-
emitting  organs.  Whatever  differences  of  opinion  may  have  existed  on
this  part  of  the  inquiry,  it  seems  certain  that  from  the  momentary  or
from  the  sudden  and  periodical  sparklike  gleams  or  flashes,  the  light
proceeds  from  the  internal  organs  of  the  animal  under  conditions  of  an
exalted  or  stimulated  vitalitj/,  or  from  tentacles  capable  of  assuming  a
spheroidal  shape;  that  it  would  seem  to  depend  on  the  agency  of  son*  e
imponderable ;  that  this  can  attach  itself  to  a  vitalized  mucus,  which
ceases  to  shine  when  death  produces  putrefaction  ;  that  in  the  luminous
insects  this  imponderable  does  not  necessarily  attach  itself  to  a  palpably
moist  fluid ;  that  in  many  cases  there  is  no  evidence  of  a  fluid  further
than  the  presumption  of  a  slight  moisture  accompanying  the  presence  of
the  fatty  matter  belonging  to  the  organs  of  light ; that  in  some  of  the


OI>fC  FLAM


MAGNBT8-


459


m  soon  as  the  finger-points  came  in  contact  with  the  poles
of  the  magnet. But  this  did  not  always  succeed  equally

mcdusre  and  some  other  lumiiiou!)  animals,  there  are  fitful  flushes  of  light
without  the  appearance  of  aubsequeni  trains  or  wakes  of  a  li^ht-coniaiu-
iij^  rtiiid,  utToniiiig  the  presuinpiion  that  some  stimulating  influence  may
im[M?l  the  c»r^;anism  in  such  animali^  to  Hash  a  vivid  gleam  of  ii^ht  which
is  not  necessarily  home  along  on  a  vitalized  mucus*  It  might  be  very
logically  contt^nded  that  the  ces^sation  of  the  phenomena  of  li^hi  on  the
commencement  of  the  process  of  putrefaction  was  a  strong  argument  in
favour  of  tjio  vital  origin  of  the  light ;  but  it  is  at  the  same  Lime  a  cogent
reason  why  the  light  is  not  necessarily  connected  with  the  presence  of  a
nervous  system.  The  desire  to  coimect  vital  phenomena  necessarily
with  certain  kiiow-n  conditions  of  organization  is  n  testimony  of  an  in-
elastic mind,  wanting  the  capacity  of  yielding,  with  duliiacy,  to  numennw
factB  tliat  mtist  be  ignored  by  stubborn  refusals  to  embrace  knowledge
inconsistent  with  the  conclusions  established  during  the  existence  of  a
criiJe  and  unripe  philosophy.  An  exalted  state  of  vitality  may  be  a
necessary  condition  for  the  exercise  of  the  functions  of  reproduction,  but
the  presence  of  the  organs  of  reproduction  does  not  necessarily  imply  the
eil*5teDce  of  a  nervous  system,  and  the  light- bearing  mucus  I  hat  is  nhtd
from  certain  medusae  may  ser\*e  as  a  nidus  for  ova  which  escape  from
their  ovaries.  The  lamp\Tides  depoMt  eggs  which  have  been  said  to
be  frequently  luminous,  and  iheir  luminosity  has  persisted  for  several
days*

The  experiments  of  the  Baron  von  Heichenbach  would  lend  to  show
that  nature  has  a  law  of  type  in  many  of  her  operations  b«'sides  tboa^^
strictly  anatomical,  and  the  animal  function  of  emiitin<y  light,  belonging  |
to  the  crystalline  type,  may  be found to  be  a  pro|><?riy  of  all  organic  i
spheroidal  molecular  matter. A  strong  analogy  to  the  facts  discovered
and  recorded  by  the  Baron,  I  find  in  Dr,  Coldsirtaiu*s  article,  relating  to
the StfctipUhtcus  irivirgatwi,  a  South  Anierican aj>e,  quoted from  a
Genn«u  work  by  Rtnjgger  (Naturg**sch*  der  Sangthiere  von  Pamguay,.
S,  383.) This  anima) is  nociunia), and when the  observations  were
made^  it  was  under  circumstances  of  t4}tal  darkness. Reugger  states  that
then,  the  luinitiousness  of  the  ape*s  eye  was  distinctly  seen,  and  the  light  J
jias  so  brilliant,  that  objects  could  be  clearly  seen  at  the  distance

ghteen  inches  from  the  eye  which  was  illuminating  ih«nn.  Tn:viranus
fBiologie,  i.  439)  endeavours  lo  show  the  impossibiliiy  of  this  phenome-
non, notwithstanding  an  admissiun  that  some  dogs  have  an  analogous
power  of  generating  light  within  the  eyes  ;  and  he  think!i  he  grants
enough  if  he  modilies  the  ciicumsianccii,  under  which  the  light  is  pcr-
ci  tved,  to  those  in  which  intpi'os>>ions  are  made  tliat  aroiiMi  the  feelings  of


460  ODIC  FLAMB  ON  STKBL  MAGNETS.

well.  If  the  magnet  was  small  or  weak  its  odic  flame  was
extinguished,  that  of  the  hand  not  completely ;  in  other

the  animal,  and  that  betray  him  into  the  expression  of  some  instinct  or  pas-
sion. This  physiologist  had  not  been  at  the  pains  to  have  the  fact,  stated  by
Reugger,  either  subverted  or  corroborated.  Nor  had  the  reflection  upon
the  similarity  of  structure  in  the  brain  of  the  dog  and  monkey  families
passed  through  his  mind.  The  value  of  isolated  observations  is,  iu
philosophy,  often  enhanced  by  the  curious  and  subsequent  corroborations
afforded  to  them  by  the  labours  of  inquirers  who  work  with  quite  diflfer-
ent  objects,  as  we  perceive  by  the  Baron's  new  investigations.  Dr.
Coldstream  has  ver}'  pertinently  remarked,  that  '*  If  it  should  be  proved
that  some  of  the  higher  animals  really  do  emit  light  from  their  eyes,  in-
dependently of  the  incidence  and  reflection  of  that  from  without,  it  will
go  far  to  render  it  probable  that  in  luminous  animals  generally  the
development  of  light  depends  more  upon  the  movements  of  some  impon-
derable agent  iu  and  from  their  nervous  system,  than  upon  the  nature  and
composition  of  the  fluids  poured  out  by  the  luminous  organs."  Modi-
fying the  conclusions  to  which  my  revered  and  lamented  friend  Dr.
Macartney,  had  arrived,  I  would  seize  the  admissions  of  Dr.  Coldstream  as
a  step  towards  a  progress  in  the  belief  of  facts  established  by  mesmerism,
while  I  would  point  to  the  hypothesis  of  my  friend  Ignotus,  as  to  the  possi-
bility of  all  lumine  being  subject  to  the  laws  of  chemism,  imponderable,
in  itself  the  minulest  form  of  spheroid  developed  from  organic  spheroidal
matter ;  the  lowest  condition  of  which,  within  our  ken,  is  that  from  the
crystallization,  which  exists  in  the  form  of  pure  metallic  aggregation  ;
the  highest,  the  form  of  light  which  emanates  from  the  human  being  as
the  result  of  will  or  of  thought.  In  this  view,  of  course,  there  is  no  ad-
mission of  the  hypothesis  assumed  as  a  conjecture  by  Dr.  Coldstream,
that  the  development  of  light  may,  in  luminous  animals  generally,  de]>end
upon  some  agency  from  their  nervous  systems,  since  in  many  of  them  it
would  be  diflScult  to  prove  the  existence  of  such  systems.  As  easy  niij^ht
it  be  to  prove  the  existence  of  blood-vessels  in  the  medusae^  asserted  to
liLve  been  observed  by  Will.  I  should  be  inclined  to  advocate  the
severity  with  which  Professor  Forbes  rejects  all  unproved  assertions  of
the  existence  of  certain,  a])parently  to  us,  essential  organs  of  living
beings.  The  eagerness  to  establish  the  presence  of  vascular  circulating
systems  in  mollusca,  because,  in  the  highest  classes,  more  exalted  vital
phenomena  could  not  exist  without  them,  is  an  example  of  the
desire  lo  account  for  every  thing  before  we  have  sufficient  evidence
to  guide  our  judgment.  The  logician  is  often  heard  to  mix  sneers
with  lidicule  on  the  arguments  derived  from  analogies.  How,  with-
out analogy, are we to classify  ? How, without  classification,  are


OBIC  FLAME  ON  STEKt  HAayiTB*

I  the  finger  poiute  were  extinguished  and  the  flame  of
the  magiiet-|)oIe  remaijied ;  this  was  the  case  with  larger


I


we  ro  form  categories  ?  It  is  the  abuse  of  instniments  that  is  prodactive
of  confusion  in  re&floniug,  and  of  the  diOiculty  of  arriving  at  just  conclu-
sions. The  Ittws  regnlaiinn;  nnirition,  as  well  as  reproduction,  have  ret
to  be  carefiiOy  studied  before  we  arrive  at  final  decisions  as  to  the  means
by  which  the  etids  are  accomplished.  To  a  certain  extent  we  most  con-
fide in  analof]^y  ;  but  as  evcnis  chunge  our  points  of  view,  we  must  sus-
pend judgment  until  more  complete  knowledge  be  acquired.  The  re-
aearcbes  of  the  Baron  von  Reichenhath,  as  well  as  the  daily  developing
new  facts  in  mesmerism,  are  establishing  the  existence  of  the  odic  force  ;
and  the  phenomena  produced  by  this  power  in  controllitjg  diseased
growths^  many  of  which  may  he  regarded  as  subject  to  the  Jaws  regulat-
ing the  existtcnco  of  the  lowest  organisms^  may  leadj  in  future  time»
to  the  inference  that  those  changes  we  now  consider  as  essentially  de-
pendent on  ahsorinion  nnd  drpomition,  hy  means  of  a  vascular  apparatus,
are  but  rhemical  componitious  and  decompositions  effected  by  ihe  agency
of  lights  develo|)cd  into  activity  from  some  latent  fonn,  or  liberated  from
its  assoiriniion  with  that  hitherto  occult  power,  upon  which  the  Baron  von
Reichenbttch  is  shi^ddiug  the  hnninons  rays  etnanating  from  the  crystollic
arrangements  of  his  highly  organized  brain*

II  is  uvmecessary  to  nsk  the  qtiesiion  as  to  the  constitution  of  vitality;
for  our  knowledge  is  not  sufDciently  advanced  to  enable  us  to  give  a  satis-
faclorj'  reply.  Chemical  changes  of  a  certain  nature  are  the  sources  of
the  clearest  definite  idea  we  can  form  on  the  subj«'ct.  The  phenomena
of  life  are  dependent,  probably*  upon  some  imponderable  agencies*  the
nature  of  which,  man,  in  the  present  bmtal  condition  of  hi»  civilization,
studies  at  his  peril  j  for  so  keen  is  the  biiteme^  of  comiHniiion,  that  even
the  dignity  of  coiporate  bodies  is  occasionally  conqiromised  by  the  tacit
countenance  yielded  to  slander  and  calumny  original ini^  in  the  efTuri  to
distract  public  attention  Irom  gross  private  and  individual  professional
incon»peience;  and  men  are  found,  with  pretensions  to  science  and  to
social  positioTi,  who  can,  in  their  eager  desire  to  crush  the  truth,  utter
deplorable  falsehoods,  and  quite  forget  the  becoming  characterislica  of
gentlemen.  It  is  not  to  such  judges  that  the  renearches  into  the  curious
phenomena  of  new  imponderable  agencies  are  submitted.  With  humble
aasttnuure  that  the  ini^estigations  recorded  are  put  forth  to  the  world
in  the  philosophic  spirit  of  justice,  t^e  virulent  attacks  of  tnalice  are  re-
garded with  iho  pttv  to  which  their  authors  are  entitled.

The  authority  of  Humboldt  has  \yrten  adduced  to  affix  some  ftmioie
probability  to  the  idea  that  dntd  fish  may  be  an  occusionul  source  of  the


462  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

and  stronger  bars. The  equilibrium  was  displayed  soonest
in  bars  of  four  to  six  inches  long. But  this  shewed  itself

luminous  appearances  met  with  on  the  ocean ;  for  this  celebrated  philo-
sopher "  saw  a  great  extent  of  the  surface  of  the  sea  rendered  almost  gela-
tinous by  the  admixture  of  numbers  of  dead  Da^sm  and  Medus^t**  We
have  seen  that  there  is  the  testimony  of  Macculloch  for  the  fact  that
living  fish  in  shoals  occasionally  under  conditions  of  excitement  emit
light.  Whether,  at  the  moment,  their  bodies  yield  a  luminous  fluid  or
not,  is  a  question  to  which  no  reply  can  be  given  i  but  it  is  well  known
that  the  pilchard  and  the  whiting,  for  a  short  time  afler  what  is  called
death,  shed  forth  a  shining  light,  which  creases  before  the  truly  putrefac-
tive process  has  commenced.  I  have  seen  a  large  area  of  fields  on  which
pilchards,  destitute  of  odour,  at  all  events  at  a  short  distance,  have  been
spread  for  manure,  shining  brilliantly  one  night,  and  the  next  all  was
dark,  when  the  offensive  effluvium  from  (hem  became  quite  sickening.  If
the  fish  be  examined  during  the  process  of  death,  an  oily  moisture  can
be  scraped  oflf,  which  in  the  dark,  for  a  very  short  time,  is  found  to  be
luminous  even  on  the  surface  of  water ;  but  it  is  said  that  the  light  may
be  observed  dififused  through  the  water  if  the  mass  of  it  be  agitated.
Those  fish  which  are  known  to  become  ))utrid  soonest  are  those  which
earliest  shine.  In  Tuckey*s  voyage.  Professor  Smith's  account  of  his
own  observations  made  in  the  Atlantic  corroborates  those  of  other
voyagers,  that  the  bright  sparkling  light  of  the  surface  of  the  ocean  is
always  emitted  by  living  animals,  and  that  the  duller  light  which  Hors-
burgh  and  others,  as  well  as  I  myself,  have  seen  emanating  from  a  milky
appearance  on  the  water,  is  the  result  of  "  a  dissolved  slimy  matter.'*
Professor  Smith  examined  this  slimy  fluid  under  a  powerful  micro-
scope, and  lie  detected  "  the  most  minute  glittering  particles  having  the
appearance  of  solid  spherules,*'  In  what  kind  of  spherules  can  vitality
be  said  to  reside  ? — Not  in  spherules  of  carbonates  or  sulphates  of  metals
or  metalloids, — not  in  siliceous  spheroids  aggregated  in  rock  crystal, —
not  in  the  diamond ;  but  in  those  belonging  to  organized  matter,  whether
in  the  lower  or  higher  states  of  organization, — in  the  slime  of  the  ocean,
in  which  occasionally  dead  Dagysa  and  Meduste  may  sometimes  be  found,
but  in  which,  in  luminous  states,  it  may  safely  be  predicated  living
spherules  are  always  present:  in  dying  fish,  oil,  constituted  of  living
spherules,  but  \*hich,  exhausted  of  the  presence  of  the  imponderable
agency  giving  it  the  power  of  shedding  a  light,  not  incident  upon  it,
becomes  dead  matter,  no  longer  having  living  phenomena,  dead  matter
once  organic,  once  crystnllic  ;  now  resolved  by  the  laws  of  chemism  into
inorganic  elements. Are  we  to  deny  the  existence  of  living  spherules.


owe  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS,


463


clitterently  with  diffei*ent  persons,  aud  doubtless  in  different
degrees  in  the  same  persons  in  different  odic  conditions ;


because  we  are  not  yet  gified  mih  the  power  of  tlistingutsbing  the  vanettes
in  the  size  of  their  dijiincters  und  the  relative  posilious  of  iheir  molecules?
Are  we  to  admit  the  probability  of  their  existence  in  the  slime  on  the
ocean }  m  the  abundant  fluid  from  the  Pholas  dactylua  ?  In  the  mucus
%hed  by  certain  lutntnous  centipedes  inhabiting  the  islanda  of  the  Pacific,
which,  on  beinaf  rubbed  off  by  the  fingers,  leaves  an  odour  behind  not
unlike  that  of  niuriaiic  acid  ?  and  to  deny  that  there  can  pos^iibly  exist
sphemles  in  the  li^ki  which  Macartney  wiped  olT  from  the  Scolopendra
electrica,  and  which  astonished  him  because  he  could  detect  no  moisture?
In  nature  is  there  no  variety  in  de^rte  in  the  qualities  of  her  phenomena?
Is  it  not  notorious  that  in  our  susceptibilities  to  impressions  there  is
e? ery  variety  of  degree  ?  Some  can  see,  in  ordinal}'  wakefulness,  and  in
daylight,  the  blue  sparks  emanating  from  human  fingers.  Some  can  see  a
blue  or  violet  halo  surrounding  a  person  under  certain  conditions,  Othere
can,  in  the  ordinary  waking  state,  see  none  of  these  things,  but  are  en-
abled to  perceive  them  immediately  by  being  put  into  mesmeric  sleep  by
llie  agency  of  the  human  will,—  by  passes,  by  pointing  of  the  fingers,  or
by  presenting  the  apex  of  a  crystal  to  the  face  or  eyes.  This  light  so
perceived  is  like  all  other  light ;  in  some  cases  it  dazzles  by  its  brilliancy
and  diffusion,  or  is^  under  other  circumstances,  subdued  and  limited.  In
persons  it  is  aFsociated  with  a  cloud, — blue,  grey,  or  silvery ;  in
rs  it  is  clear,  and  hke  the  shining  of  the  sun. Such  great  variety  is

red  by  the  phenomena  of  animal  light,  and  so  many  facts  to  evince
its  intensity,  its  concentration,  or  its  attenuation.  Some  medusa*  have
been  known  to  shine  with  a  light  so  intense  that  the  human  eye  could
not  long  be  directed  upon  it.  It  dazzled  like  the  sun,  and  yet  the  point
whence  tliis  illumination  was  distributed  was  not,  in  diameter,  equal  to
U200th  of  that  of  the  animal  itself.  Animal  light,  then,  is  manifestly
subject  to  the  laws  which  regulate  all  other  matter ;  it  is  condeusible  and
expansible,  Ci>pable  ot  being  very  intetise  or  very  much  attenuated,  ac-
cording to  the  structure  whence  it  is  liberated.  The  phenomena  oflered  by
light  emanating  from  inorgani;;ed  matter  are  quite  analogous*  Varieties
tn  degree  may  be  traced  from  the  light  emitted  by  electricd  agency  from
the  points  of  charcoal  to  that  emitted  in  the  dark  from  the  poles  of  the
magneU  Nor  are  there  wanting  facts  to  shew  the  probability  of  this  im-
ponderable matter,  as  we  call  it,  being  subservient  Co  the  laws  of  attraction
and  repulsion ;  and  if  this  could  be  eslablbhed,  imponderability  would
no  totiger  be  a  characteristic  of  light.

There  is  a  strong  probability  tlmt  all  spheroidal  particles  have  their


464  ODIC  FLAM£  OK  STEEL  MAGNETS.

my  own  finger  often  extinguished  the  same  magnet  which
that  of  Zinkel  would  not  wholly  put  out :  this  was  equally

polar  and  equatorial  relatious  operating  wKh  pltu  or  mintu  energy ;
capable  of  being  modified  by  forces  powerful  euougb  to  couurol  them.
Tbe  proofs  of  the  existence  of  this  probability  should  be  offered  ouly  to
minds  thai  can  admit  the  truths  of  mesmerism.  To  others,  as  they  are
incapable  of  appreciating  the  subtleties  of  fine  reasoning  upon  subjects  of
an  extremely  delicate  nature,  it  is  loss  of  time  to  waste  facts.  To  pigs,
to  some  adult  agricultural  binds,  to  the  majority  of  members  of  medical
colleges,  a  grunt,  a  meal,  or  a  sneer,  would  be  more  appropriate  to  their
tastes  and  capacities.  In  all  classes,  the  stupidities  and  the  cunning
sordid  must  be  separated  from  the  rest,  that  progress  may  not  be  ob*
stnicted.  The  Baron  von  Reichenbach  had  had  the  opposition  of  the
unphilosophical  to  contend  with  in  Germany,  as  we  have  here ;  and  if  he
would  make  himself  master  of  Galls  works,  he  would  find  many  reasons  to
pity  his  opponents,  and  some  facts  to  shew  that  Gall,  in  his  day,  met
with  gtupiditiet !

Mesmeric  agencies  allow  us  to  place  very  susceptible  and  delicate  sub*
jccts  in  such  relations  as  to  enable  us  to  regard  them  as  excellent  tests
for  the  elimination  of  facts  which  the  state  of  our  knowledge  does  not  at
present  permit  us  to  arrive  at  by  any  other  mode  of  investigation.  If
we  lake  a  certain  number  of  such  testing  subjects  and  obtain  from  them
the  same  testimony,  we  may  feel  satisfied  that  we  have  as  good  evidence
as  if  we  had  a  galvanometer  applied  for  tbe  testing  of  electriciiy.  If  we
find  that  in  these,  certain  stimulants  or  excitants,  whether  applied  in
the  form  of  a  train  of  actions  or  in  the  fonn  of  the  application  to  certain
organs  of  the  body  of  a  magnet — a  piece  of  pure  gold,  of  pure  platinum,
of  titanium,  of  nickel,  of  cobalt,  or  other  definite  substance,  produce  in-
variably a  rigid  condition  of  the  muscles, — atonic  spasm,  and  that  other

stimulants  or  excitants  produce  immediate  relaxation  of  that  rigidity, a

clonic  condition,  we  have  a  right  to  class  our  agents  or  reagents  accord-
ingly. My  experience  having  led  me  to  infer  that  tonic  agencies  are
to  be  classed  as  attractive,  and  clonic  agencies  as  repulsive,  I  arrive  at
the  conclusion  that  that  train  of  actions  which  induces  rigidity  in  my
testing  subject  belongs  to  an  attractive  pole,  and  the  contrary  to  one  re-
pulsive. If  I  take  a  tube  of  glass,  of  porcelain,  of  hard  wood,  or  of
paper,  and  blow  through  it  upon  the  upper  part  of  the  forehead  of  a
testing  subject,  and  produce  instant  rigidity,  I  infer  that  the  particles  of
air  passing  through  the  tube  have  a  plus  polarity  ;  a  force  attractive.  If
now  I  reverse  the  lube,  and  by  blowing  through  it  hi  I  he  direction  op-
posed to  that  of  the  first  blast  I  produce  an  almost  immediate  relaxation


OmC  FLAMl  ON  STERL  MAGNETO*

when  her  finger  was  more  strongly  luminous  than
mine,  which  occurred  not  un frequently. She  was  tall  and


of  ihe  rigid  state  of  muscles,  I  infer  that  an  infliieiice  was  left  in  the
liihe  which,  mi  the  first  occaiuony  detennined  a  molecular  arrangement  of
ihe  gaaeou!*  particles  that  gave  them  one  polar  amnigemeTit — plus^  and
I  hat  on  the  second  occasion  the  polar  arrangement  was  reversed  and  be-
came fntnia*  If  now,  without  the  knowledge  of  the  subject  who  is
u.^lcop,  hut  in  the  condition  of  relaxed  muscles,  I  pour  on  tlie  brad  a
pljial  full  of  mesmen^ed  air,  I  render  the  muscles  immediately  rigid;
and  iheniexhiitisting  the  phial  of  the  air  i%hich  has  diqikced  the  mesme-
Tmi\  air,  X  quickly  apply  it  to  ihe  ht>ad,  I  relax  the  muscles  and  Kouie-
times  suJdt-nly  awaken  the  subject;  thus  showing  that  the  polarity  of  the
particles  rushing  into  the  holUe,  communicated  by  an  influence  derived
from  the  person  of  the  subject,  has  been  opposite  to  that  polar  stale  which
has  been  productive  of  the  tonic  conditions  of  sleep  and  rigidity.  But
several  somnambnliBts  in  anoiher  room  have  witnessed  the  filling  of  the
phial  with  blue  mesmeric  light,  so  that  Reichenbach  s  odic  force  has  been
the  source  of  these  phenomena;  and  ihe  light  which  has  been  associated
with  that  force  has  heen  subjecred  to  ihe  same  polarities.  How  is  this  as-
certained ?  By  blowing  strongly  in  a  direction  across  the  stream  of
raesmeris4id  air  while  it  is  poured  out  of  the  phial :  no  rigidity  is  pro-
duced, and  a  somnambnlisl  sees  the  blue  lii;ht  blown  away  from  ihe  test-
ing subject.  Light  is  in  these  cases  associated  with  some  agency  that
cominunic4iles  a  specific  giiivity  to  the  air*  May  be  a  minute  dose  of
carbon  or  nitrogen  from  the  animal  textures.

It  may  be  argued  in  opposition  to  such  facts  and  such  Tiews  that  the
results  obtained  by  each  raesmeriser  differ  from  those  obtained  by  any
other  person.  This  is  a  very  curious  part  of  the  affair,  and  is  an  addi-
Ijonal  motive  for  further  inquiry.  It  is  very  true  that  Major  Buckley
can  make  my  somnambules  exhibit  phenomena  of  high  clainoyauce,
which  1  cannot  succeed  in  producing.  I  can,  by  my  will,  e/Tect  several
phenomena  which  Dr,  FJliotson  doea  nrit  seem  cajmble  of  producing;
and  I  have  at  his  house  in  vuin  tried  to  produce  rigidity  of  the  musclea
in  one  of  his  patients,  in  whom  a  touch  of  bis  finger  has  at  once  effected
tlie  object.  The  differences  between  the  mesmeric  forces  of  my  friend
Mr.  H«  S«  Thonqison  and  myself  hare  been  repeatedly  pointed  out.
Mr.  Joseph  Hands  had  a  patient  (Garman)  in  whom  he  could  produce
several  phenomena  that  baHled  me  when  I  attempted  them.  These  mo-
difications are  important  fuels  for  investigation,  but  they  do  not  invali-
date any  series  of  established  truths*  It  b  a  fact  that  upwards  of  thirty
persons,  who  have  been  in  a  clairvoyant  state,  have  seen  blue  sparks  in


466  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

stout,  but  had  small  hands,  in  which  the  result  was  con-
centrated, and  thus  appeared  with  more  intensity. TV  hen,

great  numbers  issuing  from  hazel  sticks,  but  because  not  more  than
seven  of  these  have  exhibited  the  phenomenon  of  being  forcibly  attracted
to  a  hazel  stick  when  it  has  been  held  in  the  direction  of  its  growth,  and
have  been  repelled  by  it  when  it  has  been  held  with  its  smaller  end  down-
wards, is  that  a  reason  why  the  established  fact  as  to  a  highly  curious
phenomenon  should  be  completely  thrown  away  ?

The  relations  of  the  subject  of  light  emitted  from  the  hazel  stick  and
from  some  other  vegetable  organisms  to  that  of  clairvoyance  are  curious
and  important.  In  a  previous  note  I  have  endeavoured  to  call  attention
to  this  point.  Lately  I  have  had  opportunities  of  making  experiments
upon  an  analogous  set  of  phenomena  relative  to  the  influence  of  odic
light  emanating  from  water,  from  glass,  or  from  crystals,  upon  the  nervous
systems  of  certain  sensitive  persons,  which  tend  to  illustrate  clairvojrance.
They  are  so  easily  repeated  that  time  only  is  required  for  thousands  of
corroborations  of  the  events  I  have  noticed ;  and  although  we  have  in
England  many  stupidities,  yfho,  like  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach*s  critics,
will  carp  at  facts  which  their  maladroit  minds  will  turn  to  ridicule  and
calumny,  the  simplicity  of  the  apparatus  required  for  these  phenomena
will  speedily  ensure  a  sufficient  number  of  verifications.  The  persons  who
form  the  subjects  of  these  experiments  should  be  of  highly  sensitive
nervous  systems,  and,  as  far  as  I  have  observed,  should  have  heads  well
developed  about  the  organs  of  ideality,  marvel,  veneration,  and  hope ;
comparison,  tune,  time,  and  constructiveness  ;  adhesiveness,  philoproge-
nitiveness,  and  caution  ;  and  rather  the  contrary'  as  respects  amativeness,
combativeness,  self-esteem,  cunning,  and  acquisitiveness.  A  phial  of
clear  colourless  glass,  capable  of  containing  eight,  ten,  twelve,  or  more
ounces  of  filtered  water,  or  a  clear  globe  holding  a  pint  and  a  half  or  a
quart  of  water,  answers  the  purpose  well.  The  vessel  should  be  completely
filled  with  water,  clean  and  clear.  It  should  be  mesmerized  by  some
healthy  |>erson  with  a  large  brain,  by  darting  the  odic  sparks  from  the
fingers  upon  the  surface  of  the  water,  at  several  hundred  strokes,  and  by
breathing  upon  it  for  some  minutes.  The  vessel  should  then  be  closed,
so  that  no  bubbles  of  air  are  admitted,  and  when  properly  secured,  should
be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  sensitive  person,  who  is  to  look  continuously
into  it,  uninteiTupted  by  the  proximity  of  too  many  persons,  whose  odic
forces  may  tend  to  spoil  the  experiment.  The  mesraeriser  of  the  water
may  be  near,  but  it  is  better  that  not  more  than  one  or  two  persons
besides,  agreeable  to  the  sensitive  person,  should  be  present.  I  have
placed  vessels  of  water  so  prepared  iu  the  hands  of  numerous  sensitive


O0IC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


407


however,  she  carried  the  pomts  of  the  fingers  of  her  right
hand  towards  the  northward  pole  of  the  bar,  there  was  no


pctsons,  ID091  of  ihein  qtute  unaware  of  the  objtci  of  my  requesting  them
to  look  steadily  at  the  water.  Some,  in  the  course  of  a  few  minutes,
have  seeu  beautiful  visions  of  persons  aad  thin^^s  that  have  given  them
delight.  Others  have  seen  objectj*  which  have  terrified  them*  Some
have  described,  Yividly,  charming  country  scenes,  with  elegant  companies
of  ladi&s  and  gentlemen  gaily  attired,  at  boat  races  on  a  river.  Oihet^
have  aeen  hunting  gentlemen,  in  scarlet  uniforms,  on  tine  horses.  Some
have  aeen  funerals  and  diuichyarda;  others,  sick  rooms,  with  death's
heads  flitting  about  the  tsurface  of  the  bed  of  sickness.  Some  have  truly
|»r«;dictcd  to  me  the  upproach,  to  the  hou^,  of  fiicuds  who  were  to  knock
at  tny  door  at  stated  times.  On  oue  occasion,  a  visit  from  my  frioijd
Mr.  Hoirmann,  of  May euce,  was  predicted  by  a  person,  who  dcsciibod
him  acctiralely  without  ever  having  seen  hiui,  except  by  thw  ng^ucy  of
the  er^'stalline  bottle  of  watcr^  which  %he  then  held  in  her  hand  for  the
first  time  in  her  life»  uud  without  knowing  the  object  1  had  in  view  in
requesting  her  to  look  inio  it.  At  the  moment  1  had  a  conviction  that
Mr,  Ho^maiiu  wa»  either  at  Macclesfield  or  at  Liverpool,  but  he  made
his  appearance  in  tny  room  in  teu  minutes, — the  litnc  my  i^cnsitive  subject
had  indicated.  A  nimiber  of  people  have  now  repeated  such  experiments,
and  1  am  (old  that  several  persons  who  had  failed,  at  first,  in  perceiving
anything  in  the  vessels  of  mebmerised  water,  hatl,  by  dint  of  patience  and
perseverance, after  many  repetitions  of  trials  for  half  an  hour  and  au  hour  at  a
tjine,  become  highly  clairvoyant*  If  my  health  and  my  various  pursuits  had
nitted,  I  should  have  instituted  many  experiments  upon  this  subject
with  vessels  of  gU^^s  of  various  colours,  and  containing  fiuids  of  various
compositions.  The  curious  facts  that  have  excited  so  much  at  lent  ion  in
relation  to  a  aysial  ball,  bought  by  Mr.  Morrison  at  Lady  Blessiugton's
sale,  and  those  relating  to  the  numerous  fiu  of  clairvoyance  induced  iu
Mr^.  Woodard,  by  her  looking  into  an  oval  piccj  of  polished  gkss,  are
analogous  to  those  1  ha^e  stated.  The  stupidities  rely,  iu  oppoAitiou,
upon  the  numerous  failures  that  occur  in  the  attempts  to  repeal  ibe
exhibitions  of  these  phenomena.  If  it  were  pos6ible  that  such  persons
id  praetiso  humility,  I  would  refer  them  to  the  study  of  the  Uaroi/a
arches,  in  order  to  prepare  ihem  fur  a  proper  s|>iril  of  investigatioti.
A  Her  witneaaing  very  numerous  insuuices  of  clahvoyance,  I  can  have  no
doubt  but  that  the  brain,  apt  for  the  purposes  is  stimulated  to  the  produc-
tion of  the  phenomena  by  some  relation  which  it  bears  to  light ;  j>erhaps
t4>  this  imponderable  niattei  in  combination  with  the  odtc  force.  What
tliat  relation  is,  itiuat  be  determined  by  future  invesUgaiion.  Why  ccrtaia

1 I


bi


468  QDIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

attenuatidiy  no  approach  of  the  flames ;  the  like-named  polea
did  not  attract  one  another. As  the  approximation  waa

individuals  should  feel  the  influence  of  currents  of  water  to  be  highly
pleasurable,  and  others  should  shudder  at  them ;  wby  running  streams,
and  mountain  rills,  and  sheets  of  falling  water,  should  have  such  powerful
attractions  for  some,  and  be  indifferent  or  even  repulsire  to  others,  aie
questions  that  have  relations  to  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism,  odic  forces^
light,  and  clairvoyance ;  perhaps  to  the  theories  entertained  by  our  greatest
philosophers  on  the  essence  of  light.  The  most  extraordinary  of  chdr-
Toyants,  Andrew  Jackson  Davis,  the  American,  has  spoken  of  the  ezisi*
ence  of  unpartided  matter,  as  Huygens  and  his  followers  have  thought  of
an  elastic  medium.  It  is  admitted  that  philosophers  should  not  seek  for
too  many  hcts  to  accoimt  for  a  satisfactory  result :  a  surplus  of  truth
would  appear  unnecessary.  The  human  mind  has  the  capacity  only  for
a  limited  quantity.  Among  the  ideas  it  cannot  embrace  is  that  of  spacs
being  filled  with  particles,  and  still  requhring  the  existence  of  an  unpar-
tided or  an  elastic  medium  in  which  to  contain  these  particles.  Why  is
not  the  elastidty  of  the  myriads  of  infinitely  minute  molecular  spherules,
attenuated  to  the  requisite  degree,  suffideut  to  fill  up  space  without  leaving
vacuum  ?  Constructed  as  we  are,  the  organization  of  the  brain  is  inca>
pable  of  framing  the  idea  of  a  vacuum.  If  pumps  could  be  constructed  to
remove  from  a  scooped  ball  even  the  imponderable  matter  which  occupied
its  internal  area,  the  noun  space  would  remain,  and  it  is  impossible  to
make  nonentity  of  that.  But  space  in  itself  must  necessarily  be  made
up  of  an  infinite  multiplication  of  points, — "  of  nothings,"  some  mathe-
maticians would  reply.  He  who  would  intrude  such  a  thought  must  have
a  confused  idea  of  the  relations  of  numbers  to  matter.  All  is  ratio.
All  elements,  all  forces,  are  pins  or  minus  ;  and  however  subtle  may  be
the  power  of  ratiocination  in  any  man,  his  brain  is  quite  incapable  of  con-
ceiving of  the  multiplication  of  any  definite  surface  without  the  idea  of
increase,  or  the  sense  of  thickness ;  or  of  the  multiplication  of  a  line  with-
out the  idea  of  increase  relative  to  the  sense  of  width.  The  negative
series  of  decimals  can  never  come  to  absolute  nothing.  A  mathematical
point,  however  minute,  is  susceptible  of  multiplication,  as  well  as  atte-
nuated matter  of  further  division  of  attenuation.

The  diflliculty  in  allowing  of  the  complete  occupation  of  space  by  most
extremely  minute  molecular  particles  arises  from  the  limited  nature  of
our  organs ;  and  very  few  philosophers  have  been  at  the  pains  of  obeying
Locke's  direction  on  the  examination  of  the  degree  to  which  habits  of
thought  have  influenced  their  assent  to  the  adoption  of  a  theory.  If  I
place  Jane  M.  or  Mary  D.  on  a  couch  or  in  a  chair,  and  imagine  a  cirde


OBIC  FtAMl  OH  STrat  MAOKRW-


469


carried  further,  tlie  flames  both  became  contracted  ut  tlicir
own poles,  assumed  a  globular form, and finally were


around  lh«t  couch  or  chair,  «lly  p^ple  would  say  that  1  had  environed
thfl  lAdividual  by  a  magic  circle*  for  she  has  doU  unliJ  I  remove  that
imagiuary  circk»  ihe  power  of  moving  fmni  the  poBiiion  in  which  I  hare
placed  her.  I  am  told  by  clainoyanls,  and  by  the  subject  herself,  that
the  circle  is  one  of  blue  Earning  lighL  tf  this  be  so,  the  light  has  re-
sulted from  an  o|>enitiou  of  certain  organs  of  my  brain ;  and  whether  it
has  reached  the  door,  on  which  it  is  prceived,  by  the  transmiitsion  of  a
certain  number  of  spheroidal  niobcules  from  my  brain,  or  that  the  brain
has  commuuicaled  an  iiiipiili*e  lo  certain  pre-existing  undulatory  elastic
matter,  fhe  effect  is  the  eslablishuieiil  in  that  circle  o(  a  force  which
directly  influences  the  subject.  That  light  and  that  force  have  remained
for  hours,  on  repeated  occasions;  and  Jane  has,  when  afBicted  with  serious
delirium,  been  calmed  at  once  by  my  will,  and  has  remained  quiet  in
bed  tlie  whole  night,  under  the  inauence  of  the  luminous  circle.  When
I  perceive  the  fact  of  so  highly  attenuated  and  subtle  an  agent  as  a  /lame
of  light  from  the  brain,  issuing  to  a  circular  line,  remaining  there,  exert-
ing a  [K>wer  over  the  organic  operations  of  another  individuul,  I  find  it
difficult  to  bead  my  habits  of  thought  to  absent  to  the  proposiiion,  that
tliat  circular  flame  is  undulatory  elastic  matter  exerting  a  force  which
reverberates  on  Jane.  It  is  easier  for  me  lo  embrace  the  idea  that  the
light  is  composed  of  tery  minute  spherules,  which,  b}'  attractive  aflinilies
not  yet  understood,  excejH  in  so  far  as  the  researches  in  the  text  are  ehi-
eidating  tliem^  have  a  relation  lo  certain  forms  of  animal  light  residing
hi  the  nervous  system  of  another  hnman  being.  Undalations  and  curves,
[  necaaaiy  conditions,  requisite  path. %  for  the  passage  of  even  the  mo^t
!  •ttenumted  fluids  through  one  another,  ore  convenient  ideas,  as  expedients,
to  enable  us  to  apply  calculation  to  the  relations  of  dynamics.

To  apply  the  words  spiritual  and  immaterial  to  the  elaiw  of  phenomt»na
'  under  discussion,  is  to  remove  them  from  the  domain  of  pliysics  into  the
fSgiou  of  the  absence  of  ideas, — into  a  territory  in  which  the  existence  of
^  non-entities  must  be  affirmed. The  instant  the  human  mind  loses  the
idea  of  matter,  it  wanders  in  a  haze  in  which  clear  consciousness  is  no
longer  present, — it  approaches;,  in  a  decree,  the  state  to  which  narcoticsreduce
the  perceptive  faculties,  and  which,  carried  to  its  extreme  limits,  proceeds
to  fatuity  and  uuconsciousnesa,^ — a  condition  incompatible  with  immorta-
lity, and  thus  involving  an  absurdity. One  can  conceive  that  however
light  may  be  hidden  by  combination  with  other  forms  of  mutter,  it  may
,  Teap|»ear,  but  can  never  be  annihilated  aa  long  as  f^iace  exists. For  all
I  we  knoM,  its  destiny  may  be  imuioital ;  tts  nature  may  be  to  become


470  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

partially  introverted  when  the  fingers  and  the  poles  carae^
in  contact,  bat  both  flames  were  at  the  same  time  in  a/
diminished,  dull  condition.  At  other  poles  the  result  was
exactly  the  same  in  the  reverse  order.  But  the  multifa-
riously modified  experiments  prove  the  same  thing ;  namely,
that  the  points  ofjingers  act  upon  the  polar  odic  flames  like
crystals  and  like  magnets,  and  may  in  all  cases  he  subsfi^
luted  for  them.

446.  h.  The  variations  just  mentioned,  produced  by
unequal  strength  of  the  reacting  odic  poles,  went  so  far,
that  in  one  particular  case  I  found  the  polarity  of  the  odic
flames  of  a  weak  magnet  directly  reversed  by  powerful
hands.  This  observation  merits  attention,  because  it  affords,
a  further  proof  of  the  independence  of  Od  in  contrast  to
magnetism,  similar  to  that  which  we  had  just  now  at  §  436.
I  gave  to  Josephine  Zinkel  a  magnetic  needle  four  inches
long,  which  was  not  strongly  magnetic ;  she  held  it  by  the
middle,  between  two  fingers,  conformably  in  the  meridian.
When  I  took  hold  of  its  positive  end,  turned  toward  the
south,  with  the  points  of  the  fingers  of  my  right  hand,  the
blue  odic  flame  at  the  other  pole  of  the  needle  became
twice  as  long  as  it  was  originally.  This  great  increase
proved  the  weakness  of  the  needle  in  proportion  to  my
hand.  But  when  I  took  hold  of  the  positive  end  of  the
needle  with  the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  my  left  hand,  the  blue
colour  of  the  northward  flame  was  lost,  and  a  red  flame  half
the  length  took  its  place.  When  I  made  the  experiment
the  other  way,  and  put  the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  my  left
hand  to  the  negative  end  of  the  needle  directed  to  the  north,
the  red  flame  at  the  other  pole  became  more  luminous  and

hifinitely  attenuated  and  purified.  But  whetliov  il  exists  associated  with
heat,  electricity,  niagnelisni,  chemism,  or  odism,  the  niesmeiic  facts  of
clairvoyance  show  that  it  is  the  vehicle  in  which  thought  isco.ivoyed,  and
may  be  the  punctum  saliens  of  the  lowest  animated  spherule,  as  well  as  of
the  highest  organized  being.


ODIC  I'LAMli  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.


471


three  times  as  long. But  when  I  took  hold  of  the  same

negative  end  of  the  ncx^dle  with  the  right  hand  finger-tips,

the  red  colour  of  the  southward  flame  was  lost,  and  a  blue

flame  took  its  place. It  clem'ly  results  from  tills  that  the

odic  force  of  my  hands  far  exceeded  that  of  the  weakly  mag-

\  iietic  needle  in  reference  to  odic  polar  quaHty ;  so  much  so,

that  it  converted  its  red  or  blue  polar  flames  into  blue  or

Ted,  when  its  Od  w*as  opposed  to  that  of  the  magnet  at  the

uHicr  pole,  and  without in  the  Icasl  distarbiny  the  true

fnat/nelic  polarity  of  the  ends  of  the  needle. My  hands,

whicli  possessed  no  mtiguetic  capacity  wdiatever,  acted  so

etrongly  odically  upon  the  needle^  that  its  Magnetod  was

completely overcome by  Biod,  and the flames changed

coloiu', (It  acted  exactly  as  we  have  seen  electricity  act.)

' 447.  In  contrast  to  these  means  of  streugtlieuing  the

odic  flame,  I  have  become  acquainted  with  means  of  weak'

enintj  it,  and  as  yet  with  two. The  first  is  Heat, I

showed  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  a  horse-shoe  in  the  dark ; she

i'ouud  its  polar  flames  from  two  io  two  and  a  half  inches

long  when  cold  ;  when  I  had  warmed  it  to  the  heat  of  one's

Jjand  on  the  stove,  she  found  the  flames  diminished  to  about

four  fifths  of  an  inch. And  when  the  magnet  had  cooled

tlown  again,  she  found  its  oilic  flames  of  the  same  size  as  at

-first. On  the  following  day  I  repeated  the  experiment  with

ti  larger  magnet :  I  raised  the  temperatin^c  to  a  rather  higher

degree ; she  again  saw  its  flames  diminish  considerably  in

size  as  it  became  hot,  and  increase  again  in  proportion  as  the

cooUng  progressed.  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  in  the  dark  chamber,

saw  ft  polar  flame  of  six  inches  length  on  a  single  horse-shoe

with  limbs  ten  inches  long,  as  long  as  it  was  cold. I  hiid  it

upon  the  l*eated  stove,  and  when  it  had  reached  about

100'' Fahr  I  brought  it  to  her  again ;  she  now  found  its

flame  diminished  to  about  tliree  inches. I  placed  the  magnet

on  the  stove  once  more,  and  heated  it  to  about  141°  Falir.,

so  that  I  could  no  longer  hold  it  well  in  my  unprotected


472  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

hand.  Now,  when  I  brought  it  to  her  again,  she  saw  the
flume  reduced  to  an  inch  and  a  half.  But  when  I  had  let
the  horse-shoe  cool  down,  with  the  armature  applied,  the
flame  was  as  large  as  it  had  been  originally.  Josephine
Zinkel  made  similar  observations  on  the  same  horse-shoe
magnet.  The  diminution  of  the  odic  flame  appeared  to  her
more  strikingly  in  bars ,  when  they  were  heated,  the  lumi*
nosity  almost  entirely  disappearing.  Acoordin^y  as  the
odic  incandescence  of  magnets  is  diminished  by  elevation  of
temperature  (^  369),  so  also,  and  in  a  more  remarkable  de-
gree, is  the  odic  flame ;  by  heating  steel  magnets  to  a  little
above  the  boiling  point  of  water,  the  flame  would  perhaps
be  wholly  extinguished.  It  consequently  diminishes  &t
more  rapidly  in  steel,  with  the  increase  of  temperature,  than
the  magnetism,  which  indeed  also  sinks,  but  far  more
slowly.

448.  A  second  cause  of  diminution  ol  the  odic  flame  lies
in  another  circumstance,  of  much  more  importance  to  the
experimenter,  namely,  the  proximity  of  surrounding  objects.
We  have  already  seen  what  crystals,  hands,  and  the  like,
can  effect ;  I  shall  discuss  the  influence  exerted  by  metals,
metalloids,  alkalies,  and  acids,  brought  in  considerable
quantity  into  the  vicinity  of  flaming  magnets,  in  the  chapter
on  the  light  of  matter.  I  shall  here  only  speak  of  the  re-
markable influence  of  approaching  persons.  Miss  Atz-
mannsdorfer  often  observed  to  me  that  she  only  saw  the
magnets  I  showed  her  well,  when  I  removed  to  some  distance
from  them,  and  they  were  not  too  close  to  herself.  Madame
Kienesberger  called  my  attention  to  the  fact,  that,  when  occu-
pied in  making  a  powerful  electro-magnet,  I  came  too  near  it,
its  odic  light  became  bedimmed  and  diminished.  Mr.  Hoch-
stetter,  when  I  accidentally  went  very  close  to  an  upright
magnetic  bar,  the  flame  of  which  rose  six  inches  high,  found
this  disappear  wholly  from  his  sight,  and  reappear  as  soon
as  I  had  moved  away  again. To  control  this,  I  placed  the


ODIC  FLAMB  ON  8TKM*  MAGNETS,

nine-layer  magnet  conformably  with  poles  upward,  upon  a
table ;  he  saw  it  flame  up  about  a  foot  high.  As  I  then
approached  the  magnet,  the  flame  became  weaker ;  and
when  I  came  quite  elose,  so  that  my  body  touched  its  top,
it  entirely  (lisappeai*ed  from  his  view  ■.  he  saw  nothing  but
the  incandescent  steeh  \Mien  I  moved  away  a  step,  it
pas  restored,  and  I  could  repeat  this  as  often  as  I  wished.
Dr.  Nied  saw  exactly  the  same  with  the  nine-fold  magnet
standing  on  a  chair*  In  like  manner,  also,  Mr.  Delhez  and
the  Baroness  von  Augnstin*  Mr,  Paucr  saw  odic  flame
flowing  from  the  nine -fold  magnet  in  the  dark  chamber,  I
walked  slowly  towards  it ;  when  I  had  come  witliiu  about
half  a  foot,  he  saw  the  odic  flume  become  dull,  and  when  I
was  quite  close  to  the  steel,  the  flame  was  wholly  lost  to  his
sight.  His  daughter,  Miss  Sophie,  witnessed  this  strange
phenomenon  at  various  times.  She  saw  smaller  magnets  as
well  as  the  nine-fold  always  first  grow  paler,  then  lose  the
flame,  as  I  approached  them,  and  in  each  case  it  was  re-
stored as  soon  as  I  drew  back  from  them.  Wilhelmine  Glaser
frequently  perceived  my  approach  produce  extinction  of  the
odic  flame  on  the  nine-fold  magnet,  and  even  when  it  had
recently  been  rubbed,  and  its  magnetic  intensity  was  at  the
highest  pitch.  But  when  I  drew  back  only  a  Uttle  way
from  it,  it  immediately  began  to  form  again,  and  was  wholly
restored  when  I  had  removed  to  the  distance  of  a  pace,
jlladame  Bauer  frequently  communicated  this  observation  to
ine  unexpectedly  :  when  I  accidentally  approached  the  odic
flames  of  magnets  under  examination,  during  the  course  of
experiments,  she  complained  that  I  came  too  close  to  them,
dulled,  diminished,  or  extinguished  the  flame  by  my  proxi*
mity,  which  iut4^rfering  w  ith  her  observations  about  what  I
was  asking  her,  she  warned  me  to  move  away*  Josephine
Zinkel  explained  to  me  that  when  my  immediate  proximity
had  weakened  the  flame  of  the  nine-fold  magnet  down  to
ui visibility,  my  retreat  did  not  restore  it  directly,  but  only


474  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

gradually ;  and  it  was  requisite  for  me  to  move  to  the  dis-
tance of  about  forty  inches  for  the  flame  to  reacquire  the
full  strength  of  its  light,  and  my  vicinity  to  become  quite
imperceptible  in  the  appearance  of  the  flame.

449.  In  order  to  master  this  deceptive  phenomenon,  I
instituted  the  following  experiment.  I  placed  the  large
nine-fold  magnet  vertically,  with  its  poles  turned  upwards.
I  then  turned  the  northward  limb  to  the  east  and  the  south-
ward Umb  to  the  west ;  and  another  time  the  former  to  the
west  and  the  latter  to  the  east.  In  the  dark  chamber,  and
in  the  presence  of  Josephine  Zinkel,  I  slowly  and  alternately
approached  and  removed  from  both  poles  at  once  on  the
north  side,  with  my  face  toward  them.  As  soon  as  I  came
near,  the  flames  were  extinguished  on  both  poles,  and  re-
stored directly  I  removed  again.  When  I  so  modified  the
experiment  that  I  approached  only  my  right  side  to  the  two
poles,  their  flames  were  no  longer  both  extinguished,  but
only  one,  namely,  the  northward  blue  flame ;  the  southward
red  flame  became  brighter  and  more  intense  in  its  redness
and  luminosity.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  I  approached
both  poles  with  my  left  side,  the  reverse  occurred ;  the
southward  pole  lost  colour  and  luminosity  altogether,  while
the  northward  very  much  increased  in  bluencss  and  intensity
of  light.  This  made  the  matter  clear,  and  brings  it  under
the  regular  law.

450.  It  is,  therefore,  the  odic  quality  of  the  entire  person
which  reacts  as  strongly  upon  a  magnet,  even  on  a  very
powerful  one,  as  magnets  do  upon  each  other,  and  especially
with  their  like  poles.  We  have  seen  how  these  act  uiK)n
each  other,  depressing  and  extinguishing  flame,  and  the
biodic  poles  also  act  and  react  upon  the  poles  of  magnets,
even  when  we  cannot  at  all,  or  at  least  as  yet  not  in  every
case,  clearly  state  where  the  animal  poles  exactly  lie  in  the
particular  instances,  and  which  or  what  of  the  many  com-
plicated odic  axes  of  the  body  it  actually  is  which  causes  the


475


oKser\'ed  cxtinrtion.  But  a  rautiuus  investigator  will  per-
ceive here  a  boundless  source  of  countless  ermrs,  countless
uiisronceptioni^,  cotnitless  incomprehensibilities  and  enigmas,
which  np  to  this  time  have  pressed  like  a  uiountaiu  upon  the
so-called  animal  and  mineral  magnetism,  and  without  the
removal  of  which  it  is  clear  tliat  normal  antl  himuonious
observations  cannot  be  attained.  Every  physicist  saw  some-
thing dirterent,  and  each  met  every  day  with  something
different  from  what  he  saw  the  day  before;  nay,  during  one
and  the  same  experiment,  the  results  were  modified  muhr
the  hands  of  the  investigators  as  they  changed  their  posi-
tions or  their  assistants,  and  as  the  number  of  bystanders
incix^ased.  They  were  unaware  of  the  cause,  never  knew
how  to  attain  a  fixed  point  in  the  experiments,  the  scientific
groujid  treml)lcd  everywhere  imder  their  feet,  and  the  com-
[ilications  ran  out  into  infinity**


♦  May  my  good  friend§,  the  doetoni  nod  profesgorB  of  the  self-stylrd
commission,  take  warning,  ftnd  not  merely  learn  to  porceive  the  wefikneas
of  tlieir  experiments,  but  aUo  to  feel  the  disgrace  they  have  brought
upon  themselveB  hy  their  gronndleBS  accusations  againat  poor  Leo-
poldine  IteiehfL  Tht-y  made  a  dark  chamber^  of  which  they  tht'raaclve»
relate  that,  in  their  baste,  they  stopped  the  crack  of  the  door  with
pocket-bandkerchiefB.  (Zeitschr.  der  GeseUschaft  der  Aerzte  in  Wieo,
III,  Jahrg,  13H.)  WTioever  has  worked  long  in  a  dark  chaniher,  can
imagine  what  kind  of  darkness  it  could  have  been  thrt  wa.^  improviaed
in  this  manner!  In  the  narrow  space  of  a  small  room,  the  &enaiti?e  waa
crowded  constantly  with  ten  to  fifteen  young  men,  and  some  of  theae
went  out  and  in  every  now*  and  then  (loc.  tit,  1 19  and  139).  Wc  know
that  the  momentary  penetration  of  light,  e?en  only  through  the  smallest
crack,  reudere  the  eye  daziled  and  almott  imenMle  to  mile  li^ht  tot
more  than  half  an  hour ;  and  here  we  have,  as  at  the  beginning,  the
nide  effect  of  opening  the  door  for  persons  going  out  and  in  !  This
alooe  IS  more  than  sufficient  to  render  the  resnlta  of  such  chimsy  expe*
rimcnts  wholly  useless  and  valuelefs,  and  to  make  any  deduction  baaed
upon  them  altogether  ridjcu Ions.  If  INIiss  Reichel  saw  nothing  under
such  circumstances,  as  the  accounts  frerjucntjy  declare,  she  told  the  truth,
because  she  touid  not  see  anything  under  such  perverse  arrangementti
not  becauae  she  did  not posseas  the  capacity,  but  because  ignorantly


476  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

451.  The  odic  flame,  as  we  see,  affords  no  oonclusioiis  as
to  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  force  :  to  express  myself  in

arranged  experiments  rendered  it  impossible  to  her.  Finallj^  howerer,
she  did  see  somewhat,  gave  confused  statements,  and  on  thia  accoant
was  called  a  liar  and  a  deceiver.  Let  us  examine  the  statements  of  these
gentlemen,  and  see  where  lying  and  deceit  are  to  be  foand.  Leopoldine
Reichel  was  placed  at  a  distance  of  three  to  six  paces  from  the  magnet,
there  was  usually  a  doctor  on  each  side  of  her,  who  were  appointed  to
watch  over  her,  and  they  frequently  held  both  her  hands.  Opposite  to
her  sat  another  doctor,  holding  a  heayy  horse-shoe  magnet  in  his  hands
upon  his  knees,  and  moving  it  about.  Close  to  him,  in  like  manner,  at
each  side,  sat  a  doctor,  directed  to  control  the  movements  of  the  mag-
net. The  sensitive  was  now  to  state  how  and  where  the  magnet  was
luminous,  while  it  was  being  moved  up  and  down  ;  they  pressed  her  to
show  her  art,  laughed  at  and  mocked  her  when  her  statements  woe
incorrect,  irritated  and  angered  her  to  such  an  extent  that  she  more  than
once  struck  at  the  gentlemen,  and  once  was  in  the  ai^  of  boxing  the
ears  of  one  of  them,  &c.  In  the  first  place  it  is  impossible  that  a  mode-
rately sensitive  person,  as  Miss  Reichel  was  at  that  time,  could  perceive
any  magnetic  light  in  a  darkness  which  was  continually  interrupted  by
the  entrance  and  exit  of  spectators.  In  the  second  place,  the  distance
of  three  to  six  paces  from  the  magnet  is  far  too  great;  a  sensitive  of  this
degree  cannot  detect  magnetic  light  with  certainty  beyond  forty  inches.
In  the  third  place,  the  heavy  magnet,  a  nine-layered,  was  held  in  a
man's  hand,  quite  close  to  his  body,  and  thus  completely  extinguished
to  the  eyes  of  the  observer.  This  proves  a  triple  impoanbiUty  of  ^eing
any  emanations  of  light  from  the  magnet.  Thus  gross  errors  were
committed  in  the  experiments,  any  one  of  which  would  have  been
alone  sufficient  to  render  all  sensitive  perception  impossible.  There-
fore she  actually  saw  nothing,  or  only  scattered,  uncertain,  and  variable
appearances  of  light — doubtless  here  and  there  from  a  hand,  from  one
or  more  of  the  collected  heads,  from  collected  heads  and  hands,  from
hands  lying  upon  the  magnet,  and  thus  rendered  stronger ;  from  eyes,
from  breath,  from  the  pits  of  the  stomachs,  or  from  the  knees  of  the
crowd  of  doctors,  &c.,  where  such  things  accidentally  came  in  contact,
and  momentarily  raised  each  other's  odic  intensity.  Notwithstanding
that  I  detailed  fully,  in  my  writings,  how  very  luminous  all  these  living
organs  are,  scarcely  any  notice  was  taken  of  this  by  these  gentlemen ;
they  moved  the  magnet  about  in  every  possible  direction  before  Reichel,
and  when  she  nevertheless  perceived  light,  it  never  struck  any  one  that
there  were  such  things  as  faces,  eyes,  hands,  pits  of  stomachs,  genitals


ODIC  FLAMK  OH


477


^


Mr,  Faraday *s  words,  no  lines  of  magnetic  force  make
their  appannicc  in  any  odic  phenonienon.  In  order  to  get
some  evidence  on  tlii^^  point,  if  [lossilvlr,  I  made  an  experi-
ment with  the  magnetic  curves  which  we  obtain  by  fihngs*
I  laid  a  magnetic  btir  two  feet  long  upon  the  floor,  and
covered  it  with  a  glass  plate  four  feet  four  inches  in  dia-
meter— ttiUH  more  than  twice  as  long.  On  this  I  strewed
imn  filings,  tap{>ed  gently  with  my  liuger  on  all  sides  of  it,
and  thus  pi-oduced  the  well-known  fignrcs,  I  now  led  Alim
Reichel  to  it  in  the  dark,  without  her  having  seen  anything
of  the  arrangement  previously.  She  no  longer  saw  any
flame  nijon  the  bar,  but  the  magnetic  cunxs  were  beauti-


&e.,  all  of  frlticli  are  lumiuous,  and  ibii  usually  more  stroDgly  than  the
magnet.  In  this  confusion  of  oil  the  conUitioni  of  scientific  inTeatiga-
tions,  the  poor  tormented  girl  knew  no  possible  way  to  Ratiafy  the
questiona  that  poured  upon  her;  and  when  incongruoua  answers  were  the
result  of  such  unHkilful  experiments,  these  gentlemen  did  not  hesitate,
instead  of  owning  their  ignorance,  to  take  refuge  under  the  aaacru-
pulcma  slander,  thai  the  observer  was  a  deoeiver.  They  were  not
n^hamed  to  deeomle  this  bare  nssertion  with  stories  which  bear  the
stamp  of  improbabdity  on  their  very  face.  Thus  Miss  Reichel  is  said  to
have  slipped  slily  up  to  tbe  magnet  which  one  of  the  doctors  held  in
his  hands  in  the  dark,  and  felt  for  it  with  her  band  in  order  to  find  out
where  it  was*  This  is  clearly  false,  for  it  carries  its  own  refutation
with  it.  For  if  she  could  not  st^e  the  odic  light,  she  could  not  go
toward  the  magnet ;  and  tins  because  it  was  above  the  head,  under  the
feet»  at  the  side  of»  or  behind  the  person  who  held  it,  and  thus  she
could  not  know  where  to  look  for  it :  yet  she  was  sure  to  catch  hold  of
the  body,  the  bead,  or  the  feet  of  the  experimenter,  or  even  to  put  her
hand  to  bis  eyes.  This  accusation  is  thus  evidently  nonsensical,  and
it  will  be  vain  to  throw  dust  in  the  eyes  of  a  tliinking  reader  with  such
siiliness.  The  girl  herself  was  moved  to  tears  wheu  I  told  her  of  this
passage  in  the  medical  journal,  and  could  not  find  words  to  express  her
pain  and  indignation  at  such  calumny.  The  want  of  accuracy  which
is  here  evident  cannot  be  laid  to  the  accused,  but  to  the  accusers,  and
required  an  earnest  correction.  People  should  not  set  up  for  judges  in
a  matter  when  they  at  the  same  time  exhibit  so  much  ignorance ;  bat
to  endeavour  to  cover  this  ignorance  by  untruth,  at  the  cost  of  one  who
is  defenceleas,  is  quite  detestable  and  abominable. — Juthor't  noie.


478  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

fully  illuminated.  Each  particle  of  the  filings  appeared
luminous  to  her,  and  by  their  arrangement  they  formed  lines
of  light  exactly  in  the  direction  of  the  curves.  The  whole
appearance  sparkled  at  all  points  at  once  in  every  colour  of
the  rainbow,  and  elicited  from  her  the  exclamation  that  she
had  never  seen  anything  more  charming  in  her  hfe.

452.  Two  years  later  I  repeated  the  experiment  with  the
healthy  Josephine  Zinkel,  in  the  dark  chamber.  The  results
were  the  same  descriptions  and  the  same  pleased  astonish-
ment at  the  beauty  of  the  sight.  She  saw  miUions  of  bril-
hant  coloured  stars  lighting  up  the  plate,  all  arranged  in  the
curved  hues.  She  evinced  the  greatest  pleasure  when  I
tapped  it  gently,  and  the  little  stars  jumped  up  and  danced
about.  She  saw  the  whole  northern  half  luminous  with  a
bright  bluish  light ;  a  brilliant  red  prevailed  more  on  the
southern  half.  She  added  the  further  observation,  that  the
cntin^  glass  plate  was  bounded  all  round  its  circumference
by  a  seam  o/lh/ht,  which  was  composed  of  all  the  prismatic
colours.  Aca)rding  to  her  statements  it  was  but  narrow,
Hon  10  ono-eiglith  or  one-tenth  of  an  inch  broad,  and  the
colours  formed  parallel  streaks  in  it.  Otherwise,  neither
the  sick  nor  the  healthy  observer  saw  any  other  figiu'es  but
the  magnetic  cur\es  already  known.  Thus  nothing  obser-
vable had  occurn^d  Ix'vond  the  conversion  of  each  filing  into
an  induced  magnet  emitting  odic  flame.

453.  The  diseussion  of  odic  flame  may  be  concluded  with
a  httle  practical  a|)plication.  There  is  a  fable  widely  spread
in  Germany,  and  our  poets  have  depicted  it  in  the  most
stii-ring  scenes,  that  spirits,  witches,  and  devils,  collect  in
great  numbers  at  night,  to  dance  on  the  Blocksberg.  Everj^-
thing  has  an  origin  ;  and  now  we  see  that  this  myth  is  not
without  some  khid  of  foundation.  It  was  discovered  lonsr
ago,  that  there  are  rocky  points  on  the  Blocksberg  which
are  strongly  magnetic,  and  divert  the  magnetic  needle;
more  accurate  investigations  have  shown  that  these  rocks


rAONETS.


479


P


roiitirm  fnigments  of  magnetic  iron  ore,— for  instance,  tlie
ll(H  nstrin,  the  Snarcher,  and  others.  The  necessary  deduc-
liuij  from  this  is,  that  they  emit  odie  flames,  and  tliat  these
nnist  be  visilile  at  night  to  sensitive  eyes.  Therefore,  when
jiersous  of  strong  odic  vision  have  come  to  such  places  on
dark  nights, — hunters,  charcoal  burners,  poachers,  wood-
cut tv?rs»  &c., — theyuiiist  have  seen  delicate  flatnes  of  variolic
sizes  and  colours  blazing  all  around,  daring  haekwtirds  and
forwards  with  currents  of  air.  Who  conld  blame  them,  if  they
took  this  for  the  devil  and  all  his  train  of  spirits  ami  hags  i
dimcing  round?  Tiie  feast  of  the  Walpnrgis  Night  must
now%  alas  !  yield  to  the  sobrieties  of  pliysics,  which  have
scattered  with  their  light  that  fair  cloud-picture  of  fancy.

453.  b.  The  compressed  retrospect  on  the  odic  flame
tells  us —

a.  Very  weakly  magnetic  steel  exhibits  odic  incandescence
without  flame;  as  soon  as  the  intensity  of  the  magnetism
passes  beyond  a  certain  point,  emissions  of  light  occur,
which  displiiy  themselves  as  vaporous,  misty,  and  finally
tliune-like,  especially  at  the  poles  of  the  magnets,  and
appear  not  unfrequently  as  high  as  a  man,  even  to  healthy
eyes.

A.  Terrestrial  magnetism  exercises  great  influence  on  the
size  and  coloming  of  the  odic  flame ;  and  the  phenomena  of
thc8e  occur  ditterently  according  as  the  magnets  are  placed
with  one  or  other  pole  towards  north,  w*est,  soiith,  or  east,
turned  upwards  or  downwards,  in  the  magnetic  dip,  or  in
any  other  intermediate  direction,

r.  Iron  bars  behave  like  w  eak  magnets  in  relation  to  Od,
when  under  the  influence  of  terrestrial  magnttism.

(L  Baniling  occurs  in  the  odic  tlame,  just  as  in  the  odic
incandescence.

r.  The  direction  of  the  flame  exhibits  a  tendency  up*
wards.
/.  Magnet-flames  of  unlike  j)o]e^,  opposed  diametrically


1^1


480  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

to  each  other,  and  gradually  approximated,  exhibit  little  or
no  mutual  attraction,  do  not  lift  each  other  up,  but  repulse
one  another,  accumulate  around  their  own  poles,  and  become
introverted.  On  contact,  the  introverted  flames  disappear,
and  a  delicate  intermingled  flame  appears  enveloping  the
opposed  poles.

g,  Odic  flames  meeting  one  another  cross-ways,  cutj  one
another  onward,

h.  The  flame  obeys  currents  of  air.

i.  All  the  manifold  effects  which  one  magnet  produces
apon  others,  are  either  directly  reflected  in  accompanying
odic  phenomena,  or  give  rise  to  peculiar  appearances  of  the
odic  Ught.  The  rubbing  of  magnets  afibrds  numerous  ex-
amples of  this.

k.  The  same  occurs  when  the  armature  is  used  as  an  in-
duced magnet,  and  moved  in  different  directions  over  the
magnet.

/.  The  divergences  between  Od  and  magnetism,  which
arise  here,  not  unfrequently  go  on  to  such  a  contrast  that
-f-  Od  and  —  M.  co-exist  simultaneously  in  one  magnet
pole.

m.  Electro-magnetism  produces  the  phenomena  of  odic
flame  in  exactly  the  same  manner.

n.  The  electrical  atmosphere  strengthens  them,  and  under
certain  circumstances  reverses  the  poles.

o.  Heat  weakens  the  odic  flame.

/).  Crystals  and  animals  (human  hands)  influence  the  odic
flames  like  magnets,  strengthen  them,  weaken  them,  re-
verse or  destroy  them,  both  in  contact  and  by  mere  ap-
proximation.

q.  The  magnetic  curves  produced  with  iron  filings  over
bars,  present  to  the  eye  a  multitude  of  stars  of  minute
odically  flaming  magnets.

r.  Odic  flame  is  a  material  object,  probably  a  substance
rendered  luminous,  but  by  no  means  magnetism.


ODIC  TBRBADS,  8TI


481


I


111. OdIC  threads,  streaks,  and  NEBUL.E*

454.  It  is  already  known  from  the  accounts  of  Misses
Reichel,  Nowotny,  and  Maix,  given  in  an  earlier  part  of  this
work,  that  magnets  emit  a  Ihfht  in  the  form  of  streaky
lifminom  mist^  in  addition  to  tlie  polar  flames  of  the  edges
and  corners*  These  observations  received  confinnation,
meanwhile,  through  repeated  pei-ceptions  of  Baron  August
von  Oberlander,  who  described  the  little  lateral  flames  as
streaks  and  brushes;  of  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  who  saw,
once  between  the  limbs  of  a  nine-layered,  another  time  of  a
seven^ayered  hoi-se-shoe,  the  whole  space  filled  with  threads
of  flame,  and  the  outer  part  of  the  entire  magnet  enveloped
in  a  delicate  fiery  mist,  both  of  which  she  often  mentioned
in  the  coiu^e  of  experiments,  without  my  having  taken  note
of  it  on  every  occasion ;  of  Miss  Zinkel,  who  found  not
only  the  strongest  magnets,  like  seven-layered  and  nine*
layered,  but  also  even  a  mere  single  horse-shoe,  when  rublied
with  a  five-layered  in  the  dark,  covered  with  a  luminous  mist
two  and  a  lialf  inches  broad  between  the  hmbs,  and  two-
fifths  broad  around  the  outside.  She,  moreover,  saw  odic
conducting  wires,  the  flames  at  the  ends  of  wires,  also
on  tinned-plates,  disks,  and  globes  of  iron,  when  under  in»
duction  by  a  magnet,  the  fij^t  at  the  edge,  the  hist  two  over
their  whole  surface,  and  many  other  emanations  of  odic
light,  appear  as  streaks,  and  like  a  mist;  to  which  I  shall
recur  more  circumstantially  in  their  proper  places.  She
perceived  these  misty  luminosities  more  vividly  on  open
magnets.  When  closed  by  the  armature,  these  appearances
either  vanished  altogether,  or,  as  in  most  cases,  merely  be-
came dulled  and  diminished.  Farther,  through  those  of  Miss
Winter,  who  described  a  threeJayer  horse-shoe,  as  coated
all  over  with  delicate  fire-mist ;  of  Dr.  Nied,  who  saw  a
simple  horse-shoe,  with  its  armature  applied,  enveloped  to  a


482  ODIC  THREADS,  STR£AKS,  AND  NEBULA.

thickness  of  one  inch  and  three-quarters  with  luminous  mist,
as  also  a  seven-layer ;  of  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  who,  like  Jose-
phine Zinkel,  saw  magnetically  induced  iron  disks  and
globes  enclosed  in  luminous  mist-like  vapour;  of  Miss
Weigand,  who  perceived  a  small  strong  horse-shoe  magnet
lying  upon  her  hand  at  night,  to  be  enveloped  in  fire-mist ;
of  Madame  Bauer,  who  detected  fire-mist  over  all  bars  and
horse- shoes,  from  the  smallest  pocket  horse-shoe  to  the
nine-layer ;  of  young  Stephen  KoUar,  old  Sebastian
Zinkel,  and  Miss  Dorfer,  who  perceived  the  lambent  fire-
mist  playing  over  the  sides  of  all  horse-shoes  inside  and
out ;  finally,  of  Madame  Kienesbergcr,  who,  especially  during
menstruation,  saw  all  horse-shoes  furnished  with  luminous
streaked  fire-mist,  in  such  a  manner  that  it  was  weakest  at
the  curvature,  sometimes  almost  imperceptible,  but  fix)m
here  to  the  poles  became  continually  stronger,  exactly  as
Miss  Reichel  had  described  it  at  first.

455.  The  emissions  of  light  also  exhibited  colours.  Miss
Zinkel  saw  the  fire-mist  between  the  limbs  of  the  horse-
shoe, red  on  one  side,  and  blue  on  the  other,  the  colours
playing  into  each  other,  so  that  the  interspace  had  a  varie-
gated appearance.  This  was  still  stronger  with  compound
horse-shoes,  because  each  limb  gave  out  red  and  blue  mist
at  once,  extending  inside  and  outside  as  far  as  the  cur-
vature.

456.  This  luminous  mist  was  very  vividly  developed
along  the  magnetic  bars,  which  /  exposed  to  the  injluence
of  the  electrical  atmosphere.  The  observer  found  single
bars  enclosed  all  along  in  fire-mist  nearly  two  inches  broad.
The  interspaces  between  the  limbs  of  horse-shoes  then  be-
came completely  filled  with  it,  and  gave  the  appearance  of
masses  of  luminous  threads,  variegated  with  red  and  blue
sometimes  even  hi  the  prismatic  coloiu^.

457.  The  emissions  arc  always  stronger  from  the  corners
and  ed(/es  of  magnets  than  from  their  surfaces. In  bar  mag-


OBIC  THMA0S,  STREAKS,  AND  WmVLM.


nets  they  are  syni  metrical  on  tlie  two  opposite  sides;  almost
absent  iu  the  axis  of  the  bar,  then  increasing  gradually  to-
ward the  poles,  strongest  at  the  ends  of  tlie  poles,  not  at  the
magnetic  foci,  which,  as  is  well  known,  he  about  one-seventh
of  the  half-length  of  the  bar  below  the  poles.  But  on
hoi-se-shoe  magnets  it  is  uusymmetrical,  and  was  seen  by
Madame  Bauer,  Madame  Kienesl>erger,  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,
and  Zinkel,  fai*  more  vividly  inside  the  limb  than  outside ;  so
that  the  streaked  emissions  from  the  limbs  in  many  cases
occupied  the  greatest  part  of  the  space  between  the  limbs,  and
in  some  filled  up  the  whole  with  their  luminous  fiery  mist.
Mr.  Paucr  could  only  detect  the  fire*mist  clearly  between  the
Hmbs  of  the  magnet,

458.  When  I  applied  (he  ar  mat  arc  to  open  horse-shoes
which  possessed  the  fire-mist,  this  instantly  dmiinished
considerably,  but  did  not  disappear.  According  to  the  ob-
sei-vations  of  Jliss  Atzmannsdorfer  tmd  Miss  Zinkel,  it  became
ratJier  more  than  one-half  narrower  and  shorter,  but  more
specially  duller,  less  luminous,  and  more  opaque  ;  if  it  bad
been  yellow  and  red  previously,  the  influence  of  the  arma-
ture woulfl  make  it  greyish-yellow,  or  wholly  coloiu'less  and
grey.  This  was  also  the  case  when  I  closed  tlie  liorse-shoe
magnet  with  a  second  horse-shoe  instead  of  the  armatmre.  Dr.
Nied,  who  observed  very  strong  odic  mist  upon  open  single
magnets,  could  scarcely  sec  an}^hing  of  it,  detccthigonly  the
didl  odic  incandescence  of  the  steel,  as  s(X)n  as  I  applied
the  armature.  His  sensitiveness  is  weaker.  The  conduc*
tiou  through  the  armature  was  thus  apparently  imperfect  in
all  cases,  and  a  portion  of  the  current  of  the  dynamic  con-
stituting the  magnet  continually  passed  off  into  the  air.
These  confirmations  are  more  than  sufficient  to  warrant
the  ac5curacy  of  the  original  statements  on  this  head  given
by  Miss  Reichel,  as  set  down  in  the  first  part  of  this
work.

459.  It  is  very  probable  that  these  envelopes  of  fire-mist


K R


484  ODIC  THREADS,  STREAKS,  AND  NEBULA.

arc  constant,  spread  over  the  whole  of  the  magnet,  weak
but  intemiptedly  continuous  emanations  of  Od,  only  percep-
tible to  the  higher  sensitive,  on  account  of  their  slight  degree
of  intensity,  and  scarcely,  or  not  at  all,  to  those  of  weaker
sensitive  vision.

460.  Ahnost  all  the  liighly  sensitive  also  described  to  me
isolated  coloured  threads,  which  they  perceived  in  the  odic
Jlame. I  have  already  mentioned  this  of  Miss  Atzmanns-

dorfer  and  others.  Aladame  Bauer  also  called  my  attention
to  this  obscn^ation.  The  Baroness  von  Augustin  saw  them
rise  frequently  over  the  nine-layer,  and  a  five-layer ;  also  from
an  electnvmagnet.  I  examined  this  phenomenon  most  accu-
ratolv  with  the  healthy  girl  Zinkel.  On  nine-layer  horse-
sluH^  she  saw  many  separate,  strongly  luminous,  thread-like
stn'tiks,  rise  out  from  the  poles  into  the  odic  flame,  which
were  not  very  slender,  but  about  as  thick  as  a  common  pin,
not  taking  their  origin  below  immediately  from  the  steel,  but
first  distinctly  formed  at  some  height  above  it  in  the  odic
flame.  These  threads  she  always  found  either  blue  or  red.
They  did  not  move,  but  always  flowed  forth  uniformly  in
the  flame,  especially  in  its  upper  parts.  She  observed  this
phenomenon  most  clearly  in  the  banded  alternation  of  the
colours  of  the  odic  flame  over  the  layers  of  the  nine-fold
horse-shoe,  mentioned  at  §  396.  Here  she  distinguished
accurately,  that,  from  the  red  odically  incandescent  layers,
arose  red,  and  only  red  streaks  of  light,  from  the  blue
odically  incandescent  layers  blue  and  only  blue  in  the  flames,
which  were  always  of  just  the  same  colour.

461.  I  do  not  think  these  phenomena  are  of  special  kiiid,
but  look  upon  them  as  equivalent  to  the  rest  of  the  odic  flames
in  general.  The  cause  probably  is  inequality  of  the  issue
from  the  surface  of  the  magnet  at  very  minute  points.
Since  we  know  that  edges  and  comers  cause  stronger  emis-
sion, I  think  we  have  a  right  to  assume  that  smaller  uneven-
nesses  may  serve  as  points  of  emission,  and  thus  cause  the


OBIC  SHOKB.


548


formation  of  threads,  streaks,  and  niist-lLke  np|)earaiices*
They  ore  little  currents  of  Od  locally  concentrated  in  the
general  current,  blue  fmni  the  negative,  and  red  from  the
positive  poles.


IV,  Odic  Smoke.

402.  The  next  phenomenon  of  Hght  attaching  itself  to
the  odic  flame  of  the  magnet  is  a  pecuhar  huninons  vapour
or  smoke,  which  ascends  fmni  the  magnet,  and  is  seen  by
the  sensitive  in  the  dark.  I  made  little  or  no  mention  of
it  in  my  earlier  treatises  ;  but  as  in  the  further  prosecution
of  my  researches  it  pressed  itself  upon  me  unavoidably,
and  always  io  the  same  manner  under  Uke  circunistances,  I
have  necessarily  recognized  it  as  an  essential  part  of  the
odic  luminous  phenomena,  and  turned  attention  to  it

We  will,  in  the  first  place,  hear  and  critically  compare  the
statements  of  the  many  witnesses  I  have  met  with.

463.  Fii"st,  the  healthy  sensitives  : —

Mr.  Edward  H titter  saw  a  dim  cloudy  appearance  over  a
jMjcket  horse-shoe,  w^hich,  as  he  moved  the  magnet  in  the
dark,  was  carried  about  with  it,  and  tlius  doubtless  belonged
to  it*  The  Baroness  Paidine  vou  Natorj)  saw  five-  and
seven-layer  horse-shoe  magnets  covered  with  a  luminous
cloud  at  the  northward  pole  alone.  She  perceived  shght  marks
of  a  misty  brightness  on  the  nine-lay er»  She  discerned  a
grey  smoke  ascending  to  the  height  of  one's  hand  from  an
electro-magnet.  Professor  Ragsky  saw  the  northward  pole
I  of  a  single  horse-shoe  magnet  emit,  with  intermissions,  a
bluish,  weak,  and  vajx^rous  light.  Professor  Huss,  of  Stock-
holm, the  Court  Physician,  perceived  abundance  of  smoke
rising,  and  passiug  up  in  clouds,  from  a  strong  electro-
magnet. Mr.  Demeter  Tirka  observed  that  the  same  nine-
I  layer  was  enveloped  in  a  cloudy  lumhiosity,  which  weakly
lighted  up  its  entire  circuinfcrence. Mr.  Pauer  saw  aU


486  ODIC SMOKE.

largish  horse-shoes  exhale  vapour.  He  perceived  a  luminous
cloud  over  each  pole  of  a  strong  electro-magnet.  Mr.
Hochstetter  discerned  a  grey  smoke  ascending  forty  inches
high  over  the  nine-layer  magnet :  when  I  placed  the  horse-
shoe in  the  electrical  atmosphere  of  the  conductor,  he  saw
smoke  rise  to  the  height  of  a  man  over  the  odic  flame,
throwing  a  hght  upon  the  ceiling.  Mr.  Sebastian  Zinkel
observed  smoke  produced  over  the  odic  flame  of  a  single
horse-shoe  to  three  times  its  height.  Mr.  Femolendt  saw
luminous  opake  smoke  ascend  to  the  ceihng  over  several
horse-shoes  in  the  electrical  atmosphere  of  the  positive  con-
ductor. Madame  Josephine  Fenzl,  at  various  times,  perceived
a  cloudy  light,  like  thin  smoke,  almost  as  high  as  a  man,
over  the  flame  of  the  nine-layer  horse-shoe.  Madame  Isabella
von  Tessedik  and  the  young  Stephan  KoUar  found  all  bars,
horse-shoes,  and  electro-magnets,  to  possess  misty  lights,
either  0!ily  at  the  northward  or  at  both  poles  ;  the  latter  saw
tlio  smoke  whirling  up  in  clouds.  Mr.  Theodore  Kotschy
saw  a  wide-spreading  light  sweeping  like  a  vapour  over  the
nine-laviT,  resembling  a  delicate  halo,  more  than  forty  inches
hij:;h;  tho  sanio  was  detected  by  Madame  von  Varady  and
Madame  von  Peichich.  The  joiner  Klaiber  observed  a  lumi-
nous smoke  above  the  flame  of  a  three-layer  horse-shoe,  gra-
dually losing  itself  in  the  air  above.  Mr.  Gustav  Anschiitz
saw  a  lambent  vaporous  light  appear  on  a  three-layer  going
and  coming,  always  at  the  northward  pole  alone,  sometimes
paler,  sometimes  brighter.  Another  time  he  saw  unipolar
misty  lights  apjKjar  over  several  horse-shoes,  but  remaining
constant.  On  the  nine-layer,  in  imperfect  darkness,  at  his
own  house,  he  saw  a  misty  ball  of  light  wave  over  one  pole
alone.  Mr.  Delhez  perceived  a  column  of  smoke  above  the
efflux  of  light  from  a  large  electro-magnet  ascending  verti-
cally to  the  ceiling  of  the  dark  room,  and  then  producing
a  large  illuminated  patch,  larger  than  the  nine-layer  caused.
The  smoke  was  diverted  there,  and  flowed  visibly  along  the


ODIC  SMOKE.


^


ceiling.  Miss  Ernestine  Aiischiitz  perceived  the  odic  va|>our
over  the  nine-laj  er,  and  over  a  five-layer,  most  distinctly  when
I  approximated  the  friendly  poles  of  the  two  little  magnetic
bars  to  them.  Mr.  Nieolaus  Ihxhc  saw  every  odic  flame  that
issued  from  magnetic  poles  pass  gradually  into  a  light
vapour ;  he  estimated  this  at  four  to  five  feet  high  over  the
nine-layer  magnet,  lie  saw  a  large  bar  magnet,  four  feet
long,  with  flame  twenty  inches  long  at  the  northward  pule,
mid  twelve  inches  long  at  the  southward ;  both  flames  then
passing  into  smoke,  which  was  light  and  fine  at  the  north-
ward pole,  and  dense  and  duller  at  the  southward.  Miss
Sophie  Pauer  perceived  a  flame  twelve  to  sixteen  inches
high  over  the  nine-layer,  and  this  passuig  above  into  luminous
smoke,  which  ascended  almost  to  the  ceiling.  But  iu  the
electrical  atmosphere  she  saw  its  smoke  strike  against  the
ceiling.  Baron  von  Oberlander  detected  many  of  the
emissions  of  odic  light  as  delicate  vajxiur,  especially  the
large  columu  of  odic  flame  of  a  heavy  uine-Iayer  horse-shoe,
appeai'ed  to  him  to  pass  above,  when  it  approached  the
ceiUng,  into  a  kind  of  thin  smoke.  Professor  Endlichcr
discerned,  over  the  luminous  emissions,  forty  inches  long,  of
a  strong  electro-magnet,  a  column  of  smoke-like,  weakly

linous  vapour,  which  rose  vertically  to  the  ceiling  of  the
dark  chamber,  was  tiu*ned  aside  then,  and  flowed  onw^ards
horizontally,  lighting  it  up.  Wilhelmine  Glaser  saw  the  nine-
layer  alone,  but  still  more  when  within  the  electric^il  atmo-
sphere, as  well  as  large  bars  pour  out  smoke  above  the  odic

,e,  up  to  the  ceiling ;  also  the  electro-magnet.  These  last
-ations  were  repeated  on  a  greater  scale  with  Madame
Ceciha  Bauer ;  she  saw  smoke  above  the  odic  flame  on  aU
magnets  without  exception, — on  the  stronger  partially  brU-
liantly  coloured,  as  if  iridescent  and  containing  sparks.
She  always  saw  it  stronger,  thicker,  and  duUer  over  the
reddish  odic  flame  ;  finer,  thinner,  and  lighter,  on  the  blue.
Dr.  Nied  observed  vapourous  exalatious  over  every  flame-


observf


488  ODIC  SMOKE.

like  emission,  both  from  magnetic  bars  and  horse-shoes.
He  always  foimd  them  stronger  on  the  southward  pole
than  on  the  northward,  especially  on  a  single  and  a
seven-layered  horse-shoe, — of  an  arm's  length  in  the  latter.
He  saw  a  colmnn  of  vapour  ascending  firom  a  nine-lay^
horse-shoe  rising  to  the  ceiling,  and  luminous.  The  Baroness
von  Augustin  discerned  smoke  in  rolling  clouds  rising
vertically  to  the  ceiling,  over  the  flame-like  lights  on  the  nine-
layer,  and  stiU  more  over  an  electro-magnet.  Josephine
Zinkel,  in  a  series  of  experiments — to  enumerate  which
would  be  a  wearisome  repetition — saw  every  bar-magnet  and
every  horse-shoe  of  tolerable  strength,  change,  at  the  positive
pole,  from  reddish  flame  into  dense,  duU,  weakly  luminous,
reddish-yellow  smoke ;  at  the  negative,  firom  blue  flame  into
deUcate,  etherial,  grayish-blue  vapour.  On  the  smaller  or
simpler  horse-shoes  she  found  these  clouds  like  emanations
from  four  to  t waive  inches  long,— on  nine-layered  oflen  as
long  as  one's  arm,  and,  when  it  was  strengthened,  eighty
inches  and  more  in  length.  She  saw  magnets  of  high
intensity,  especially  at  her  periods  of  menstruation,  covered
all  over  with  delicate  vapour  close  to  the  poles :  she  saw
the  smoke  emerge  to  an  arm's  length  from  the  banded
flames  of  horse-shoes  composed  of  several  layers ;  during
the  rubbing,  and  in  the  difiereiit  relative  positions  the
two  horse-shoes  were  thereby  made  to  assume,  she  saw  a
rubbed  single  horse-shoe  throw  out  dense  clouds  of  smoke,
especially  at  the  southward  pole :  in  many  cases  she  saw
only  blue  flames  at  the  northward  pole,  and  no  flame  at  the
southward,  but  only  dull  reddish  smoke.  When,  under
such  circumstances,  the  curvature  of  a  single  horse-shoe  lay
upon  the  poles  of  a  five-layered,  whereby — as  we  have  already
seen — the  flames  on  the  poles  of  the  former  were  doubled,
there  was  also  always  a  simultaneous  marked  heightening
of  tlie  odic  smoke  at  the  positive,  and  of  the  odic  vapour
at  the  negative  ix)le,  over  the  flames  of  the  rubbed  magnet.


O01C  8MOKR.


I


But  when  this  was  so  attached  to  the  riihl)er  at  two-thirds
of  its  length,  that  it  would  no  longer  support  the  armature,
and  its  poles  thus  came  into  a  coiuUtion  of  magnetic  in-
difference, there  was  a  little blue  flame visible at the
negative  pole,  but  at  the  positive  none  whatever;  only
reddish smoke. A  horse-shoe  electro-magnet exhibited
masses  of  smoke  whirling  up  violently  above  both  polar
flames,  and  the  beholder  could  here  distinguish isolated
flocks  of  smoke  continually  detaching  themselves  from  each
other,  like  drifting  clouds,  which  was  also  frequently  de-
scribed to  me  by  the  joiner  Klaiber,  and  others. She  saw
the  nine-layer  emit  dense  smoke  from  the  flames  when  in  the
atmosphere  of  the  electriaiUy  charged  conductor  (§  436)  :
this  was  the  case  also  when  the  proximity  of  the  conductor
had  caused  a  reversal  of  the  polarity  in  bars  and  horse-shoes :
these  masses  of  smoke  rose  up  to  the  ceiling,  and  sometimes
illuminated  the  painting  upon  it,  so  that  she  was  able  to
distinguish  the  lines  of  the  pictures  here  and  there* She
always  saw  the  smoke  rise  in  greater  abundance  from  the
positive  pole  than  from  the  negative,  especially  on  electro-
magnets. Snuill  bars  or  needles  fonr  inches  long  some-
times appeared  without  flames  at  either  pole,  but  the  nega*
tive  pole  with  grey  smoke. She  saw  bu^  of  twenty-four
and  forty-eight  inches  in  length,  furnished  with  smoke  over
the  flames  of  both  poles,  weaker  and  bluish-grey  at  the
northward  pole,  stronger  and  yeUowish-red  at  the  south-
ward. When  I  placed  caps  of  different  forms  upon  bar
magnets,  so  that  the  poles  terminated  in  two,  three,  or  four
teeth,  each  tooth  delivered  its  own  weaker  ciurent  of  smoke
over  its  flame. When  I  approximated  the  friendly  poles  of
two  bars  eight  mchcs  long  to  the  beholder,  she  obsen^ed  in
the  smoke,  as  in  the  flame,  the  tendency  to  flow  out  toward
each  other,  and  meet ;  but  when  they  came  near,  the  union,
which  seemed  imminent,  did  not  come  to  pass  ;  for  the
flowing  vapours,  retracted  together  with  their  flames  around


490  ODIC SMOKE.

their  own  poles,  and  accumulated  upon  them,  were  intro-
verted with  the  flames,  as  I  have  ahready  described  of  cer-
tain odic  flames.  When  I  approximated  two  horse-shoes
together  in  a  similar  manner,  the  result  was  similar ;  when
they  lay  upon  a  table  (see  above,  ^  394,  405),  the  ascending
smoke  was  first  formed  in  the  middle  between  the  two  poles
at  the  ends  of  their  flames.  When  the  poles  came  so  close
that  the  flames  were  introverted  around  their  own  poles,  the
smoke  was  no  longer  produced  in  front  of  the  poles,  but
behind,  toward  the  cuiTature,  from  the  introverted  flames ;
and  when  the  approximation  of  the  flames  together  was
great  enough,  from  out  behind  the  curvatiu^  in  the  manner
already  explained  above ;  to  which  I  refer.  The  behaviour
of  the  smoke  is  parallel  in  all  cases,  in  size  and  intensity  of
light,  to  that  of  the  odic  flame.

464.  Now  the  sickly  and  diseased  sensitives  : —
Miss  Dorfer  saw  the  flames  pass  off*  into  smoke  on  various
magnets.  Miss  Winter  discerned  in  the  dark,  emissions  of
odic  vapour,  from  a  three-  and  a  five-fold  magnet,  not  merely
from  the  poles,  but  the  entire  horse-shoes  enveloped  in  it.
Miss  Weigaiul  saw  the  nebulous  flame  of  a  little  |X)cket  horse-
shoe wholly  enveloped  in  luminous  vapour.  Miss  von  Weigels-
bcrg  saw  the  same  horse-shoe  emit  imstcady  clouds,  an  inch
to  an  inch  and  a  half  long  at  the  poles,  longer  at  the  one  than
the  other ;  they  appeared  to  increase  and  duninish  some-
what, alternately :  at  another  time  she  found  all  magnets
that  were  presented  to  her  throw  out  clouds,  especially  at
the  poles.  Madame  Johanna  Anschiitz  observed  luminous
vapour  rise  to  the  height  of  a  hand  from  the  poles  of  a  five-
layer,  a  foot  high  from  those  of  a  nine-layer  horse-shoe  ;  in
like  manner  luminous  clouds  waving  upon  the  poles  and
between  the  limbs  of  a  large  single  horse-shoe.  Madame
Kienesberger  saw  on  all  many -layered  horse-shoe  magnets
the  polar  flames  pass  into  odic  vapour  above,  which  became
gradually  lost  further  up. She  detected  this  with  especial


OniC  SMOKK.


491


clistinctness  over  the  poles  of  the  nine-layer,  where  she  saw  the
nmty  smoke  rise  to  almost  the  height  of  a  man.  Madame
Kienesberger  also  thought  she?  could  (hstinguish  between
the  lower  and  upper  parts  of  this  emanatiou  of  light,  and
Ijelieved  the  former  to  be  more  ctherial  and  misty,  the  latter
more  like  smoke,  becoming  more  attenuated,  and  vanisliiug
some  distance  higher  up.  She  undoubtedly  saw  the  luminous
mist  below  of  the  negative  pole,  which  tdl  the  observers
perceived  to  be  shorter,  better  than  the  smoke  of  the  posi-
tive pole,  which  reached  up  l)eyoud  the  fonuer,  and
ascended  towards  the  ceiling.  Her  statements  about  the
odic  mist  and  smoke  over  a  large  electro-magnet  agreed  so
completely  \\ith  those  of  Ziukcl,  that  there  is  no  necessity
to  reijeat  tlietu :  she  also  saw  the  odic  mist  rise  to  the  ceiling ;
but  this  only  happened  in  such  a  degree  when  a  rather  strong
Smee's  battery  was  employed:  with  a  smaller  battery  the
smoke  and  flame  did  not  rise  so  high,  the  flame  not  above  eight
to  twelve  inches.  Terrestrial  magnetism  also  sufficed  to  pro-
duce similar  effects  :  a  soft  steel  md,  fastened  by  the  middle
in  a  wooden  holder,  and  j>laced  in  the  meridian,  appeared
to  her  to  Imve  little  flames  and  short  smokes  at  both  pules,
gray  at  the  northward  and  yeUowish  at  the  soutluvtu*d  pole.
When  1  Ijrought  this  rod  into  the  direction  of  the  dip,  the
remarkable  phenomenon  again  appeared  of  antagonism  of
luagnetic  and  odic  polarity,  and  reddish-grey  flame  was
displayed  at  the  lower  negative  magnetic  end,  bluish  at  the
upper  jKDfiitive,  nith  odic  mist  of  the  corresponding  colours
at  the  two  sides :  in  this  instance  the  reddish-grey  smoke,
being  shut  out  downwards,  stnick  against  the  floor,  at  the
distance  of  two  feet,  and  then  spread  itself  out  on  all  sides-
Friedrich  Weidlich  could  not  at  fii-st  see  various  magnets  I
placed  before  him  ;  but  after  he  had  remained  more  thoit
an  hour  in  the  dark  he  distinctly  [>erceivcd  the  nebulosity
next  the  odic  flames  which  werct  lost  in  it  above  :  he
described  the  flame  and  smoke  as  passing  into  one  another


492  ODIC  SMOKE.

in  such  a  manner  that  in  particular  places  they  were  in-
distinguishable. He  saw  a  five-layer  smoke  particularly
strongly ;  it  was  of  newly  and  pretty  strongly  magnetized
steel.  He  saw  dense  reddish  clouds  of  smoke  rising  in
confused  masses  from  the  flame,  as  high  as  a  man ;  from
the  nine-layer  magnet,  ascending  to  the  ceiling,  and  whirl-
ing upwards  in  constant  streaming  motion.  When  I  blew
it,  he  saw  it  driven  about  and  disturbed  for  a  few  moments,
but  soon  returning  spontaneously  into  its  former  position.
On  another  opportunity  I  made  a  new  series  of  experiments
on  the  nine-layer  magnet  with  him :  he  again  saw  the
smoke  rising  up  to  the  ceihng,  as  it  were  in  clouds  following
one  another.  Johanna  Kynast  also  perceived  that  the
flame,  of  a  man's  height,  of  the  nine-layer,  possessed
luminous  odic  smoke.  Miss  Marie  Atzmannsdorfer  saw
the  odic  smoke  over  magnets  so  very  many  times  that  I
ceased  to  set  down  any  further  notes  of  it,  and  shall  merely
observe,  that  when  her  visual  power  was  weakened  by  any
circumstance,  or  she  had  not  remained  long  enough  in  the
dark,  she  always  detected  the  odic  smoke  before  she  could
800  tho  odic  flame ;  and  that  as  her  vision  increased  and
bocaine  more  acute,  the  mists  appeared  to  yield  to  the
flames  and  took  their  place  upon  the  latter ;  yet  if  the  odic
flame  by  degrees  became  developed  with  greater  intensity
of  light,  the  smoke  appeared  to  become  paler  than  before.
She  often  saw  strong  odic  smoke,  from  the  nine-layer,
spread  out  upon  the  ceiling,  and  illuminate  the  whole
of  it  for  several  minutes.

*  Thus  we  have  here  a  dozen  new  testimonies  added  to  the  numerous
proofs  of  the  accuracy  of  all  Miss  Reichcl's  statements !  It  would  be
quite  inconceivable  how  the  Vienna  physicians  could  possibly  arrive  at
the  monstrous  declaration,  that  Miss  Reichel  had  never  seen  any  mag-
netic light  whatever,  and  therefore  was  an  impostor,  were  it  not  that
the  reader  of  their  report  sees  at  a  half-glance  how  their  experiments
swarm  with  errors  and  mistakes.  One  among  these,  and  not  the  least,
was  the  collection  of  ten  to  fifteen  young  men  in  the  space  of  a  small


ODir  SMOKE.


493


471.  That  which  more  than  twenty  witnesses  have  here
dcj>osed  is  essentially  consistent,  not  only  in  itself,  but  also
hannonizcs  with  what  we  already  know  concerning  the  odic
flame,  with  which  it  is  most  intimately  coanected ;  it  there-
room.  WlioeTcr  hm  the  least  knowledge  of  this  subject  knowa  that
human  beings  exert  a  very  strong  reciprocal  odic  iofluenee  upon  each
other ;  and  it  is  explained  at  length  in  mj  treatlftes,  that  a  human  body
ia  a  constant  Bouree  of  magnetic,  or,  more  properly  speaKing,  odic
force,  radiating  in  all  directions.  With  such  reciprocal  and  uuiverBal
active  influence  in  action,  how  could  a  dozen  doctors  and  professors
expect  and  ask  that  an  ignorant  sensitive  placed  in  the  midst  of  them
should  have  any  clear  ideas  of  the  comphcated  forces  acting  in  every
direction,  and  give  clear  and  scientitlcally  available  answers  to  the
questions  which  they  themselves  did  not  understand  how  to  put  cor-
rectly ?  Every  human  being  is  a  much  stronger  source  of  Od  than
a  steel  magnet.  The  immediate  vicinity  of  a  single  man,  in  many  caser,
on  the  one  hand,  destroys  the  vision  of  a  sensitive ;  and,  on  the  other»
interferes  with  the  visibility  of  a  magnet.  When  I  make  an  experiment
on  liglit  with  a  sensitive,  in  the  dark,  the  first  thing  I  do,  before
puttLug  my  questions,  is  to  draw  back  several  paces,  first  from  the
person,  then  from  the  object  of  the  inquiry,  to  remove  the  infiueuce
of  odic  radiations  from  my  own  body,  which  would  complicate  the
results,  and  render  them  unavailable  for  the  purposes  of  science.
Instead  of  observing  similiar  precautions,  these  gentlemen  stationed  a
doctor  on  each  side  of  Reichel,  who  sometimes  held  her  hands, — a
condition  which  no  sensitive  whatever  can  endure, — and  then  placed
the  magnet  opposite  her,  on  some  one's  knees,  &c.  It  is  impossible  to
help  laughing  at  the  idea  of  such  ejtperiments.  Reichel,  thus  put  to
the  torture,  wais  now,  on  the  one  side,  to  corroborate  the  ignorant  de-
clarations of  prejudiced  persons  who  placed  her  in  this  unsuitable  posi-
tion, and  who  were  exposed  to  shame  by  every  negative  answer  she
gave ;  she  was  further  to  answer  the  strained  expec:ations  of  the
assemblage,  who  unceasingly  irritated  her  by  mockery,  and  drove  her
to  outbreaks  of  anger  by  contemptuous  treatment ;  in  this  total  dis-
ttirbance  she  was  to  solve  with  precision  the  most  dehcatc  possible
problems  that  can  be  offered  to  touch  or  sight, — solve  them  under
physical  and  moral  conditions  in  which  they  were  absolutely  insoluble*

what else could  result,  but the miserable  confusion  with

which  the  pretended  report  of  the  butted  girFs  answers  abounds  }
Under  such  circumstances  it  is  not  worth  the  pains  to  go  into  the
e>cpartttc  slatemenU^,  whether  repented  truly  or  untruly,  understood  or


494  ODIC 8M0KE.

fore  bears  the  stamp  of  truth  so  surely  that  it  can  only  be
denied  in  random,  inconsistent  talk,  which,  however,  un-
fortunately is  met  with  in  many  persons  who  wish  to  be
called  philosophers,  but  who  very  often  do  not  possess  even
a  smattering  of  scientific  logic.  If  we  now  compare  the
above  scattered  perceptions  of  so  large  and  so  varied  a  series
of  observers,  during  a  space  of  more  than  three  years,  we
come  to  the  following  axioms : —

a.  All  magnets,  steel  permanent  rnagnets  as  well  as  soft
steel  and  iron  induced  magnets  induced  by  terrestrial  mag-
netism and  electro-magnets,  exhale  in  the  dark  a  misty  and
smoke-like  delicate  vapoury  next  to  the  odic  flame ;  it  also
flows  from  the  sides  of  magnets,  although  much  more
weakly,  and  often  imperceptibly.  The  strength  of  its  efflux
diminishes  from  the  poles  to  the  magnetic  axes ;  in  the  axes
it  is  relatively  very  small,  but  not  absolutely  wanting.

b.  The  magnitude  of  this  smokeMke  luminous  essence  is
directly  proportioned  to  the  size  of  the  odic  flames  associated
with  it.  When  this  amounts  to  an  inch  or  so,  the  longitu-
dinal extent  of  the  smoke  does  not  much  exceed  these
dimensions ;  when  the  odic  flame  rises  to  a  yard  or  more,
the  odic  smoke  ascends  to  the  height  of  a  man,  and  higher.
But  its  magnitude  is  also  proportionate  in  the  same  M^ay


not  ; the  whole  is  mingled  together  in  a  hopeless complication of
mistakes.

Reichel  was,  in  her  time,  a  most  excellent  sensitive,  the  best  that  could
be  desired  for  scientific  investigation,  had  extremely  delicate  sensation
and  excitable  vision,  at  the  same  time  was  willing,  persevering,  accu-
rate and  truthful  in  her  statements,  modest  in  expressing  her  opinions,
and  acute  in  comprehending  properly  stated  questions.  But  one  must
not  ride  rough-shod  over  such  tender  instruments  of  delicate  investi-
gation. Neither  did  these  gentlemen  know  what  they  wanted,  nor  did
the  girl  or  her  helpless  guides  what  to  do.  Science  is  not  created  in
this  way,  but  people  may  thus  expose  their  foolishness,  and  insolently
cloak  it  by  calumny,  at  the  cost  of  an  unprotected  women. — Author's
Note,


ODtC SMOKT^,


I


to  the  size  as  well  as  to  the  intensity  of  the  magnet
from  which  it  issues.  Large  magnets  of  snmll  intensity
(like  my  nine-fold  hoi'se-shoc?  in  many  cases)  gave  largo
odic  smoke  ;  small  magnets  of  greater  intensity  afforded
proportionately  long  flames,  with  abundance  of  vapour.
Bnt  no  pretensions  are  made  at  present,  in  the  very
beginning  of  the  discoveries,  to  accurate  determinations  of
dimensions,

r.  The  odic  smoke  is  thrormi  out  hy  mapiets  with  a
certain  force,  which  gives  it  the  first  direction,  but  after
that  it  exhibits  a  constant  tendency  to  ascend,  to  jimv  up-
wards. Wlieu  it  reaches  the  mof  of  a  room  it  spreads  out,
flowing  away  over  it,  illuminates  the  painting  on  it,  and
rlisplays  a  certain,  though  short,  permanence.  Whatever
material  substmtum  may  form  the  basis  of  its  manifesta-
tions, it  is  in  any  case  either  lighter  than  atmospheric  air,
or  it  suffers  some  kind  of  repulsion  from  the  earth's  suriace,
driving  it  away ;  that  is,  upwards.

rf.  It  exhibits  certain  differences,  accordijig  as  it  issues
from  the  positive  or  from  the  negative  poles  of  the  magnets ;
the  positive,  southward  pole,  gives  it  out  reddish-grey  and  yel-
lowish-red gray,  tliicker,  inclined  to  produce  cloudy  masses  ;
the  negative,  northward  pole,  affords  it  blue-gi^y  and  bluish
grey,  more  delicate,  lighter,  and  more  etheriaL  When  its
intensity  diminishes,  more  of  green  (grey  ?),  becomes  inter-
mingled in  both  kinds  of  odic  smoke  ;  at  last  they  become
wholly  grey;  Yet  there  occiu*  exceptional  cases,  when
the  odic  smoke  of  the  magnet-poles  changes,  blue  smoke
appearing  at  the  positive  j>ok%  and  red  at  the  negative  ■
this  happens  when  bars  arc  placed  in  the  direction  of
the  dip,  and  in  a  few  other  cases  of  special  nature, —
e.  <f,  where  there  is  reversal  of  the  odic  pole  while  the
magnetic  polarity  remains  unaltered,  &c.

e,  jVlthongh  always  present  above  the  odic  flame,  yet
there  are  abo  cases  when  it  is  visible  without  it. This


496  ODIC  SMOKE.

occurs  when  the  magnets  possess  no  great  intensity.  In
such  cases  the  sensitive  frequently  see  a  bhie,  uni-polar
flame  appear  over  the  northward  pole,  with  no  flame  on
the  southward ;  but  instead  of  this,  a  thick  reddish  odic
smoke  from  it.  In  still  weaker  examples  no  flame  at  all
is  seen  at  one  pole  alone ;  and,  nevertheless,  odic  smoke  ii
detected  over  either  one  or  both.

f.  The  odic  smoke  so  far  displays  a  material  nature,  that
it  may  be  disturbed  and  broken  up  by  blowing  on  it,  on
which  it  requires  a  short  space  of  time  to  recover  the  ori-
ginal shape  in  the  succeeding  waves.  It  has,  to  a  certain
extent,  the  aspect  of  the  vapour  of  phosphorus,  only  with
much  weaker  luminosity.

472.  The  relation  between  odic  flame  and  odic  smoke  is
a  question  we  now  approach ;  but  it  is  one  very  diflScult  to
answer  at  present.  Whether  they  are  really  two  specifically
different,  or  only  one  in  different  modifications,  I  cannot
now  decide.  All  the  inquiries  I  have  made  on  this  subject,
of  those  who  have  had  both  before  their  eyes,  have  been
answered  by  the  assurance  that  the  two  are  quite  as  difie-
rent  as  a  common  flame,  and  a  luminous  smoke  issuing
from  it  and  losing  itself  in  the  air  above.  Nevertheless,
when  I  reflect  that  sensitives  of  weak  vision  in  all  cases  see
only  smoke  where  the  more  highly  sensitive  perceive  flame
with  smoke  wavering  over  it ;  that  when  the  former  discern
small  flames  with  little  smoke,  the  latter  describe  much
larger  flames  wdth  much  stronger  smoke;  that  the  same
persons  also  see  the  same  things  diminished  when  their
vision  is  weaker,  which  appeared  large  before ;  that,  more-
over, while  a  blue  flame  with  grey  smoke  is  observed  upon
a  negative  pole,  on  the  positive  no  flame  at  all,  but  only
reddish  grey  smoke;  that  there  are  magnets  which  emit
only  smoke,  without  flame,  from  both  poles ;  finally,  that
sensitives,  whom  I  have  kept  for  a  long  time — say  half  a
day,  in  the  dark,  at  first  thought  all  the  magnets  possessed


ODIC  SMOKE.


497


only  smoke,  but  after  an  hour's  sojourn  perceived  flame
and  smoke  on  all,  and,  after  several  hours,  found  large
columns  of  flame  and  vast  masses  of  smoke  developed
gradually  on  particular  magnets : — by  all  this  I  am  com-
pelled  to  conjecture  that  flame  and  smoke  may  perhaps  be
only  one  and  the  same  thing, — diff'ering,  ou  the  one  hand,
only  in  the  degree  of  intensity  ;  and,  on  the  other,  detected
w  ith  different  degrees  of  clearness  according  to  the  measure
of  the  visual  power  of  the  beholders,  or  of  one  and  the
same  beholder  accordhig  as  his  or  her  sense  for  the  percep-
tion of  odic  light  is  more  or  less  perfectly  unfolded,  through
more  exalted  sensitive  disposition,  or  more  perfect  predis-
|M>sition  of  the  eye  resulting  from  long  sojourn  in  absolute
darkness.  In  this  case  the  fii'st  degree  of  perception
would  be  a  faint  luminous  cloud ;  a  second  or  more  distinct,
thicker  or  brighter  mist, — at  first  grey,  then  yellowish  red-
grey  ou  the  positive  side,  and  blue-grey  on  the  negative, —
then  reddish  on  the  former,  bluish  on  the  latter*  A  third
or  fourth  degree,  the  appearance  of  flame  accompanied  by
vapour, — first  the  blue,  next  the  red.  Lastly,  upon  these,
especially  the  latter,  the  dense  rollmg  upward  of  clouds  of
smoke,  whirling  up  to  the  roof  the  laboratory.  I  say
**I  seem  compelled  to  conjecture,*'  for  I  wish  to  keep
every  one  of  my  theoretical  views  in  all  cases  perfectly  dis-
tinct from  the  facts  of  experience,  which  I  here  set  down
from  the  concordant  statements  of  many  sensitives,  and
w  hich,  in  any  case,  are  more  certain  than  even  the  simplest
of  my  speculations.  So  long  as  we  are  ignorant  of  what
these  odic  luminous  phenomena,  taken  as  a  whole,  are, — and
I  do  not  think  it  looks  Hkely  that  we  shall  very  soon  pene-
trate into  the  depths  of  its  essence  and  origin,  in  the  face
of  the  prejudiced  opjx>sition  of  many  physicists, — so  long  will
the  whole  nature  of  these  beautiful  phenomena  remain  a
mystery,  so  long  shall  we  find  it  ditficult  to  arrive  at  a  firm
judgment  as  to  the  identity  or  intimate  diiJerence  of  their


498  ODIC  SPARKS.

manifold  kinds  ;  and  therefore  for  the  present  we  must,  in
our  study  and  nomenclature,  keep  to  the  forms  of  their
sensuously  perceptible  occurrence.

V. — Odic  Sparks.

473.  A  fifth  has  now  to  be  added  to  the  four  forms  of
the  luminous  phenomena  already  described,  of  small  com-
pass, but  of  vivid  strength.  This  consists  of  the  sparks
which  make  their  appearance  in  the  smoke,  and  are  sepa-
rately whirled  about  in  it.  Miss  Reichel  first  described
them,  and  she  saw  them  frequently,  not  merely  in  mag-
netic smoke,  of  which  alone  we  shall  speak  first  here,  but
under  many  other  circumstances,  in  relating  which  I  shall
subsequently  recur  severally  to  these.  The  first  characters  of
these  are  very  faintly  indicated  in  fig.  1  of  the  first  Treatise,
most  distinctly  at  the  sides.  They  were  seen  very  distinctly
in  this  form  by  Baron  von  Oberlander,  who  compared  them
with  the  flying  sparks  of  glowing  pine-charcoal.  Several
other  observers,  in  particular  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  and
Johann  Klaiber,  frequently  compared  them  with  fire-flies.
Miss  Girtlcr  called  them  wee  little  stars.  Miss  Winter  saw
them  fly  about  in  abundance,  especially  rushing  upwards
with  an  angular  motion  near  the  wall  of  the  room.  She
had  previously  seen  them  very  frequently  at  home  during
severe  nervous  attacks.  Mr.  Delliez  saw  them  darting
about  separately  in  the  smoke  of  the  electro-magnet,  scat-
tered without  order.  They  were  seen  in  abundance  over  a
globular  electro-magnet  (^  587)  by  Professor  Huss.  Baro-
ness von  Augustin  saw  them  rise  from  the  nine-layer,  but  in
still  greater  numbers  from  an  electro-magnet.  Miss  No-
wotny  observed  them  issue  in  greatest  number  from  mag-
nets ;  and  Madame  Kienesbcrger  remarked  them  not  only
in  the  smoke  of  the  nine-layer,  rising  singly,  and  scattered
almost  to  the  ceiling,  but  also  issuing  from  the  electro-mag-


OBTC  WARKS.


net.  Friedrioh  Wcidlirh  and  Miss  StiirnuinTi  oliservetl  them
in  tlie  smoke  of  large  and  small  magnets.  Dr.  Ncid  and
Mr.  Rabe  saw  them  stream  forth  in  tlie  misty  cinanations
of  the  nine-layer,  many  being  extinguished  in  their  passage,
hut  some  rising  to  the  ceiling.  Miss  von  Weigclsberg,
Mr,  Gustav  Anschiitz,  and  his  sister  Miss  Eniestine,  com-
pared them  to  fire-flies  flying  up  in  the  odie  vapour,  and  then
wanderinjrhere  and  there,  Madame  Bauer  saw  tliem  rise  to
the  eeiliug  ui  the  smoke  of  the  nine-fold  nmgnet.  Pmfessor
Endlicher  saw  them  rise  singly  with  the  smoke  of  a  strong
electro-magnet,  ascending  to  the  ceiling;  they  wandered
about  separately  in  the  odic  smoke,  and  in  ])art  flew  out
from  it,  and  consisted  of  larger  and  smaller,  more  and  less
brilliant  points.  Wilhchnine  Glaser  observed  such  abundance
of  them  in  the  electrical  atmosphere,  that  they  rushed  up
almr^st  in  a  stream.  She  also  saw  them  ajipear  in  great
quantity  in  the  smoke  of  a  large  electro-magnet.  Josephine
Zinkel  described  them  as  extremely  small  luminous  points,
which  moved  irregularly  upwards,  separately,  in  variable
but  always  small  nmiiber,  with  the  odic  smoke,  sometimes
also  sinking  down,  and  then  rising  up  again  in  it.  Many
times  they  disappeared  wholly  for  the  space  of  a  mumte ;  then
three,  four,  another  time  eight  to  twelve,  appeared  again
at  once  in  different  places,  and  sometimes  several  grouped
together.  It  even  happened  that  a  single  one  fell  upon
the  table,  upon  an  arm,  or  into  the  bi^d,  and  there  remained
a  few  moments  before  it  was  extinguished.  On  a  bar  mag-
net which  had  had  its  negative  pole  exposed  to  the  electri-
cal atmosphere  of  the  positive  conductor,  she  saw  them
nmch  increased  not  only  at  this  but  at  the  opposite  posi-
tive pole.  M\  these  persons  expressed  lively  pleasure  at
the  sight ;  just  sucli  as  one  hears  when  a  party  are  returning
liome  through  a  wood  at  night,  and,  meeting  with  fire-flies,
their  attention  is  suddenly  diverted  fmm  everything  else,
and  fixed  wholly  n|)o


500  ODIC  SPARKS.

474.  I  used  the  nine-layered  horse-shoe  in  an  experiment
esjHxnally  directed  to  this  point  with  the  healthy  Josephine
ZinkeL  1  tiuiied  the  poles  upwards  and  placed  them  in  diflfe-
rcnt  ix)sition$,  sometimes  in  the  meridian,  sometimes  in  the
{MiniUol  Under  all  circumstances  she  saw  the  sparks  rise,
nuviitlY  si^juirate,  sometimes  two  or  three  together,  of  very
ivmaAwably  intense  luminosity,  but  in  all  cases  small.  She
disnuguished  the  two  colours  here,  red  and  blue.  The  red
tk^wod  in  greatest  number  from  the  southward  pole,  the
blue  from  the  northward.  But  blue  sometimes  came  from
the  former,  and  also  red  sometimes  from  the  latter.  The
ivasou  of  this  apparent  anomaly,  which  at  first  was  an
enigma  to  me,  is  very  well  explained  above,  §  396,  The
blue  sparks  issued  from  the  negative  layers,  the  red  from
the  interposed,  which  had  become  positive  by  reversal ;  the
opposite  condition  occurring  at  the  other  pole.  They  ap-
peared abundantly  when  the  nine-layer  was  exposed  to  the
influence  of  the  electrical  atmosphere,  and  all  the  emana-
tions of  odic  light  were  thereby  increased ;  the  sparks  then
presented  themselves  in  greater  abundance,  and  this  the
greater  in  proportion  as  I  approached  the  magnet  nearer  to
the  conductor.  (Vide  §  436.)

475.  Miss  Zinkel  represented  this  phenomenon  as  most
beautifully  developed  when  I  formed  a  large  electro-magnet
with  a  strong  Smee's  apparatus.  Not  only  did  a  quantity
of  separate  sparks  spirt  out  on  all  sides  from  the  large,
brilliant  odic  flame,  but  they  collected  into  a  regular  stream,
and  rose  upwards  with  the  smoke  to  the  ceiling.  She
found  the  brightness  of  this  so  vivid  that  she  could  not
conceal  her  astonishment  that  I  saw  nothing  of  it.

476.  Finally,  something  similar  was  seen  when  I  rapidly
pulled  off*  the  armature  of  a  horse-shoe,  and  this  the  more
strongly  the  more  powerful  its  magnetism  was.  At  the
moment  of  separation,  Madame  Bauer,  Josepliine  Zinkel,
Leopoldine  Reichel,  Dorfer,  and  others,  saw  abundance  of


OI>IC  SPARKS,


601


rks  flash  up  like  lightning  and  disappear  again  instantly ;
immediately  after  this  the  odic  flame  began  t^  ap|^ar  and
unfold  itself.

477.  The  reality  of  this  phenomenon,  established  con-
cordantly  and  uniformly  thi-ough  so  many  healthy  and
diseased  sensitives,  and  eonfirmed  by  innumerable  experi-
ments, does  not  admit  of  doubt,  I  do  not  venture  now
upon  a  speculation  as  to  its  nature,  or  even  its  connection
with  the  other  simultaneous  magnetic  odie  luminous  pheno-
in«nft.  At  present  I  can  only  establish  the  physical  fact»
OS  represented  in  actuality  to  the  sense  of  vision  of  tho
sensitive.

478.  Now  that  we  have  made  some  acquaintance  with
the  different  kinds  of  development  of  light  from  magnets,
we  will  turn  to  the  differences  of  circumstances  in  wliich
the  magnet  may  be  placed  dicing  this  development  of  light,
and  ini[uke  hito  the  influence  they  may  be  able  to  exert
over  the  same.


ODIC  UGHT  IN  MODIFIED  KXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  Of  THE

MAGNET,


In  altered  media.

479.  We  know  how  very  differently  the  phenomena  of
electrical  hght  present  themselves  in  a  vacuum,  even  imder
less  than  the  usual  pressure  of  the  atmosphere.  Since  I
was  ignorant  of  the  share  atmaspheric  air  might  take,  in
a  similar  manner,  on  the  luminous  emanations  of  nmgriets,
I  frequently  placed  magnets  under  the  air-pump  in  the
presence  of  sensitives  in  the  dark,  I  employed  for  this
purpose  large  and  small  single  horse-shoes,  which  I  placed
with  the  |x>les  turned  upwards  under  the  bell,  in  a  large
glasa  goblet,  so  that  everything  would  be  seen  well  on  all


502  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIHED  EXTERNAL

sides,  and  small  bars  which  would  Ue  down  horizontallj
under  the  receiver.

480.  The  question  was  solved  even  by  the  blind  joiner
Tischler.  When  all  was  prepared,  but  before  I  had  begun
to  exhaust,  I  led  him  up  to  the  bell.  To  be  certain  that
his  attention  was  directed  to  the  right  place,  I  guided  his
hand  to  the  bell ;  but  he  could  not  perceive  anything,  the
magnet  emitted  too  Uttle  light  for  him  to  be  affected  by  it
through  the  glass.  I  then  began  to  exhaust.  Very  soon,
when  the  air  was  about  half  extracted,  he  became  aware  of
the  light.  And  as  the  rarefaction  increased  the  light  grew,
and  attained  its  greatest  strength  and  extent  for  his  shat-
tered visuid  powers  when  the  rarefaction  was  brought  to  a
one  or  one-and-a-half  inch  column  of  mercury.  My  air-
pump  was  incapable  of  giving  beyond  this.  When,  as  a
converse  test,  I  let  the  air  [suddenly  back  into  the  bell
without  telling  him,  he  expressed  himself  unpleasantly  sur-
prised by  the  extinction  of  all  light,  and  the  sudden  return
of  darkness.  Miss  Amalic  Kriigcr  detected  a  little  flame
only  on  one  pole,  the  northward,  aft<3r  a  certain  amount  of
rarefaction  of  the  air ;  the  brightness  evidently  increased  as
the  rarefaction  went  on,  but  only  so  long  as  the  piston  was  in
action  ;  as  soon  as  it  went  back,  the  light  became  paler,  and
she  soon  lost  sight  of  the  luminosity.  Mr.  Demeter  Tirka,
perfectly  healthy,  as  also  Johann  Klaiber  and  Madame
Kicnesberger,  in  like  manner  did  not  see  the  magnet  at  first,
but  when  the  air  was  half  pumped  out  the  magnet  appeared
odically  incandescent :  on  further  exhaustion,  Klaiber  ob-
served the  flames  over  the  poles,  at  first  dull,  then  be-
coming brighter  with  each  stroke  of  the  piston,  so  that  at
last  very  vivid  flame  flowed  about  under  the  bell.  As  soon
as  I  let  in  the  air  again  every  trace  of  light  vanished  from
all  three  observers,  but  returned  when  the  pump  had  been
in  motion  a  short  time  again.  Mr.  Hochstetter  also  saw
nothing  of  the  magnet  at  first,  under  the  bell ;  but  when  a


COFDITIOKS  OP  THK  MAGNET.


503


portitHi  of  the  air  wns  pmnpcd  out,  the  tuagiictic  bar,  the
bell,  and  all  its  cotitents,  became  himiiioua,  dUappcjiring
again  on  the  re-entrance  of  the  air  Baroness  von  /Vugustin
ilid  not  see  the  bar  magnet  under  the  nncxliansted  receiver;
but  as  soon  as  I  had  rarefied  the  air  perceptibly,  she  dis-
cerned it,  and  as  the  rarefaction  increased,  the  light  under
the  bell  also  gained  strength,  till  at  last  this  appeared
wholly  filled  with  a  liiminuus  appeai'ance,  with  the  magnet
forming  the  centre,  iliss  Dorfer  saw  little  flames  arise  on
the  poles  after  a  few  strokes  of  the  piston,  moving  and
varying  with  every  rise  of  the  piston.  When  tlic  rarefaction
was  carried  very  far,  she  saw  the  jjolar  flames  strike  against
the  vault  of  the  receiver,  curl  round  there,  and  flow  down-
wards again  on  the  glass:  she  compared  the  appearance
with  water  flowing  in  a  curve  out  of  an  inclined  pitcher.
The  whole  contents  of  the  bell  became  dark  again  on  the
opening  of  the  air-cock.  Madame  Johanna  Anschtitis,  and
Mr.Gustav  Anschiitz,  his  sister  Ernestine  Anschiitz,  and  Miss
von  Weigelsberg,  whose  degrees  of  sensitiveness  differ  but
little,  saw  the  magnet,  with  slight  modifications  of  perfection
and  intensity  of  the  phenomena,  become  more  briglitly  incan-
descent with  each  rise  of  the  piston  ;  flames  were  developed  at
the  poles, stronger  at  the  northward,  the  latter  striking  against
the  vault  of  the  receiver,  there  curving  and  turaing  downwards,
and  all  vanishing  again  the  moment  I  opened  the  air-cock;
fm  the  other  hand,  reajipearing,  step  by  step,  as  the  air  was,
stroke  by  stroke,  pumped  out  again.  Baix>n  von  Oberliindor
described  the  phenomena  in  exactly  the  same  way.  Friedrich
Weidlirh's  statements  agreed  accumtely  with  the  above  in
various  repetitions  of  the  experiments  at  distant  intervals.
Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  Madame  Cecilie  Bauer,  and  Wilhelmino
Glaser,  at  first  did  not  see  a  bar  magnet  at  all  under  the
receiver ;  but  it  l3ecame  visible,  odieully  incandescent,  by  the
time  the  rarefaction  had  been  carried  to  about  one-half.  On
further exhaustion  they  suceessively  perceived  hoth  odic


504  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

flames,  then  odic  smoke,  completely  filling  the  receiver,  the
bell  itself,  and  the  glass  knob  at  its  summit,  at  last  becom-
ing odically  incandescent.  The  last  beholders  saw  the
odic  flame  of  the  northward  pole  blue,  that  of  the  south-
ward yellowish-red,  as  in  the  open  air,  and  flowing  ob-
liquely upwards  from  both  poles,  on  the  walls  of  the  glass.
As  soon  as  I  opened  the  cork  which  let  in  the  air,  all  visible
light  vanished;  and  all  this  in  repeated  experiments  at
various  times.  Josephine  Zinkel  added  to  the  previous  obser-
vations that,  when  the  experiment  was  continued  for  some
time,  the  entire  empty  space  became  filled  with  odic  mist,
and  that  finally  the  bell  itself  became  luminous ;  eveu  the
glass  knob  which  it  had  on  the  top  acquired  white  odic
incandescence,  persisting  in  this  knob  for  some  time  afier
the  air  had  been  re-admitted  into  the  bell.  As  an  excep-
tional case,  I  first  showed  the  experiment  to  Miss  Atzmanns-
dorfer  while  she  was  in  the  somnambulistic  condition,  on
which,  otherwise,  I  do  not  readily  incline  to  make  odic  ex-
periments. She  gave  the  order  of  succession  c^  the
phenomena  in  exact  agreement  with  all  the  other  sensi-
tives :  after  a  few  strokes  of  the  pump  increasing  odic  incan-
descence, odic  flame  rising  until  it  struck  against,  and  was
diverted  by,  the  vault  of  the  receiver,  luminosity  of  the
glass,  and  sudden  extinction  on  the  opening  of  the  air-cock.
She  added,  that  the  odically  incandescent  steel  was  trans-
parent, almost  like  glass,  a  statement  which  we  have
already  met  with  before.  Two  months  later,  while  she  was
in  the  waking  condition,  in  which  she  knew  nothing  of  the
previous  experiments,  I  repeated  them  with  her  several
times.  I  always  obtained  the  same  enumeration  of  the
phenomena  of  light ;  she  also,  like  Josephine  Zinkel,  saw  the
bell,  and  even  its  knob,  become  incandescent.  She  ob-
served delicate  flames  between  the  arms  of  the  horse-shoe,
occupying  the  entire  interspace ;  the  fiery  mist  on  the  out-
side filled  the  whole  space  as  far  as  the  side  of  the  receiver.


OONDfTIONS  OP  •tun.  MAONKT.


505


^


Tlie  flamea  were  more  bluish  from  the  northward  pole,  more
reddish  from  the  southward,  but  with  prismatic  colours
iiikTUiingled,  She  gave  the  more  uiiuutc  particuku-s  as  to
tlje  odic  smoke,  that  at  the  comnieiicetnent  of  the  exhaustion
it  increased  in  light  and  tuliicss,  not,  however,  continuously,
but  only  up  to  a  certain  degree  of  rarefaction  ;  that  it  then
fcecame  didler  again,  decreased,  and  when  the  air  w^as  very
highly  rarefied  it  almost  vanished,  w^hilc  the  flame  was
most  beautifully  luminous,  and  flowed  brilliantly  do\vn  the
sides  of  the  receiver.  The  odic  smoke  was  in  continual
revolution  inside  the  bell  as  long  as  it  existed.  The  bell
itself,  though  it  became  odically  luminous  throughout,  even
in  its  knob,  produced  no  odic  smoke  externally.  These
last  statements,  of  wliich,  however,  I  have  not  any  con^obo-
ration  from  other  observers,  and,  therefore,  sliall  for  the
present  keep  back  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn  fi^om  them,
arc  evidently  of  great  interest  in  reference  to  the  judgment
of  the  distinction  between  odic  flame  and  odic  smoke.

4S1.  These  observations,  collected  into  a  regular  form,
show  : — The  pheHomena  of  odic  liyht  of  Ike  magnet  are
modified  under  varivd  aimospheric  pressure.  They  in-
crease considerably  with  rarefaction  of  the  air.  Magnets
which,  in  the  o[)eu  air  or  under  an  exhausted  receiver,
imnot  be  seen  to  emit  light  in  the  dark,  acquire  brilliant
odic  incandescence,  and  very  distinctly  visible  odic  flames
on  their  poles  and  betw  ecu  their  anus,  by  the  time  the  air
is  only  al>out  half  exhausted,  and  the  emanations  of  light,
bluish  at  the  noilhward  pole,  reddish  at  the  southward,  and
intermingled  with  prismatic  colours,  continue  to  increase
as  long  as  the  rarefaction  of  the  air  is  carried  forward.
Then  the  receiver  becomes  so  chmged  with  Od,  that  it  is
rendei-ed  luminous,  odically  incandescent,  even  to  the  glass
knob  at  its  summit.  The  odic  flame  does  not  penetrate
through  the  glass,  but  strikes,  as  it  were,  against  it,  and
curls  round upon  it  as  a  common  flame  would,  and  as


506  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

Miss  Rcichcl  had  previously  described,  under  other  circum-
stances, when  the  odic  flame  curved  round  on  the  cover  of  a
Schvveigger's  multiplier,  ^  434,  and  when  a  glass  lens  was
brought  down  upon  it,  ^  20,  like  the  fire  does  when  a  pan
is  placed  over  it.  Odic  smoke  is  also  formed,  and  increases,
but  only  up  to  a  certain  point  of  the  rarefaction,  beyond
which  it  decreases  again,  and  probably  wholly  disappears
on  complete  exhaustion.  The  odically  incandescent  glass
bell  is  not  capable  of  producing  odic  smoke  on  the  outside.

482.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  pressure  of  the  air
obstructs  the  development  of  odic  incandescence  and  odic
flame,  and  that  these  are  unfolded  more  strongly  and  in
greater  extent  when  the  pressure  is  lessened  or  removed.
In  this  respect  they  both  exhibit  a  certain  degree  of  resem-
blance to  electricity, — but  only  resemblance,  not  identity.
Tlic  development  of  odic  smoke  seems  only  to  benefit  up
to  a  certain  degree  by  the  rarefaction  of  the  air;  in  the
absence  of  air  it  appears  no  longer  to  exist,  and  conse-
quently seems  to  be  connected  with  the  presence  of  air.
The  sensitives  did  not  indicate  any  appearance  of  odic
sparks  under  the  air-pump.  The  glass  of  the  receiver
appeared  to  act  as  an  impediment  to  the  odic  lights, —
namely,  the  flame  and  smoke,  which  it  restrained  and
repulsed,  while  the  Od  itself  penetrated  it,  took  posses-
sion of  it,  and  rendered  it  independently  odically  incan-
descent.

483.  I  chose  water  as  a  medium  lying  on  the  opposite
side  of  air,  and  affording  greater  intensity.  A  little  horse-
shoe, which  had  been  freshly  magnetized,  and  from  which
the  polar  flames  flowed  vividly  in  the  dark,  was  exhibited
to  the  four  following  sensitives,  at  various  times,  alternately
in  air  and  in  water.  Madame  Kienesberger  saw  the  flame
four-fifths  of  an  inch  long  in  the  air.  As  soon  as  I  dipped
the  horstsshoe  under  water  both  smoke  and  flame  imme-
diately vanished  from  her  sight,  Init  the  odic  incandescence


COKBITIONS  OF  THE  MAOyET.


507


isted,  and  the  steel  was  luminous  as  it  lay  in  the  water*
Moa^ovcr,  according  to  her  account,  a  small  briglitly  limii-
nous  point  remained  on  one  (>ok\  biilliant,  but  very  iniiiute.
Fricdrich  Weidlieli  saw  the  polar  flames  two  inebes  loiig  in
tlie  air ;  I  then  let  him  immerse  them  in  water,  in  a  glass
dish.  He  saw  the  steel  continue  in  unchanged  odic  incan-
descence, almost  as  tmnsparent  as  the  glass  itself,  but  the
odic  flames  vanished  instantly  the  magnet  was  submerged.
At  the  same  time,  lie  assured  me  that  the  flame  did  disap-
pear entirely,  but  a  little  point,  as  if  on  a  corner,  was
permanent,  and  remained  very  bright.  As  often  as  the
magnet  was  taken  out  of  tlie  water  it  again  appeared,
thoiigh  still  drii>ping  wet,  to  be  furuished  vnth  odic  flames
two  inches  long,  and  as  often  as  it  was  replaced  in  the  water
these  vanished,  leaving  only  that  little  brightly  luminous
residuum.  Miss  Atzinannsdorfer,  in  whose  presence  I  went
through  the  same  experiment,  saw  the  magnet  instantly  lose
its  flame  in  water,  hut  retain  its  odic  incandescence,  weak
at  the  bend,  but  gradually  increasing  towards  each  pole.
The  healthy  girl  Zinkel  laid  a  horse-shoe  in  water,  the  two
flaming  poles  turned  towards  the  north.  Flame  and  smoke
vanished  insttmtly.  When  she  tcx»k  it  out  again  they
returned  to  both  poles  witliont  their  having  been  dried.
On  the  other  hand,  the  entire  magnet  remained  odiadly
incandescent  in  the  w^ater,  the  intensity  of  its  light  not
being  at  all  weakened.  At  the  same  time  a  strong  ap-
pearance of  light,  like  a  residuum  of  odic  flame,  of  concen-
trated brightness,  remained  upon  one  of  the  poles.  The
fiery  point  was  at  an  inner  corner,  that  is,  one  turned
towards  the  other  iwUs  ;  from  it  issued  also  an  exceedingly
delicate  fiery  streiik ;  when  this  was  accurately  felt  out  it  proved
to  be  the  inner  transverse  edge  of  the  same  |K)le ;  tliat  is,  the
one  lying  nearest  to  the  opposite  pole.  I  markeil,  in  the
dark,  the  pole  which  rctjiined  light  at  the  edge  and  corner
under  water. When  1  brought  thig  into  the  liglit,  it  unex-


508  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

pectedly  proved  that  this  was  not  the  magnetic  pole,  ^  I
had  conjectured,  but  the  positive,  the  southward,  pole  of
the  magnet.  It  was  doubtless  the  same  on  which  Madame
Kienesberger  and  WeidUch  had  perceived  a  residuum  of  odic
flame  in  a  concentrated  condition.  In  frequent  repetitions
of  the  experiment,  especially  during  menstruation,  she
perceived  remains  of  light  also  on  the  southward  pole,  but
less  striking  and  less  perceptible,  because  they  were  blue
and  grayish  blue,  and  had  less  intensity,  while  the  residual
light  on  the  southward  pole  appeared  reddish  yellow,  and
sometimes  red  Uke  glowing  charcoal.

484.  Thus  a  denser  medium,  like  water,  removes  the
odic  flame  and  smoke,  it  may  be,  by  absorbing  both,  and
thus  becoming  magnetized  water ;  or  it  may  be  that  it  does
not  allow  of  the  production  of  either  to  greater  extent  than
as  a  luminous  point  and  a  luminous  thread  on  the  inner
corner  and  edge  of  the  poles  of  a  horse-shoe.  Our  atten-
tion has  already  been  called  by  Miss  Nowotny  (^  3)  to  such
luminous  threads  on  the  poles  of  the  magnets,  as  the
smallest  degree  of  magnitude  of  odic  flame.

485.  I  have  not  apphed  media  of  a  third  kind  of  density,
namely,  solid  bodies,  as  materials  for  enveloping  magnets.
It  would  be  an  experiment  well  worth  trying  to  exhibit  to
a  sensitive  an  induced  magnet  fused  into  an  envelope  of
glass  of  tolerable  thickness  ;  I  have  not  hitherto  been  able
to  do  it.  As  it  would  lose  its  magnetism  at  the  tempera-
ture of  melting  glass,  it  would  be  necessary  to  re-magnetise
it  from  without,  which  would  not  be  a  matter  of  any  diffi-
culty.  Experiments  approximating  to,  but  yet  deviating
somewhat  from  the  fundamental  idea,  I  have  made  with
copper  wire.  I  set  out  wdth  the  view  of  inquiring  whether
the  transfer  of  Od — which,  as  we  learned  formerly  at  §  45
of  the  second  Treatise,  may  take  place  from  magnets  on  to
other  bodies,  and  which  we  made  acquaintance  with  through
its  influence  on  the  sense  of  feeling — might  not  perhaps


CONDITIONS  OF  THtt  MAGNET.


also  find  an  expression  in  the  phenomena  of  light,  and
thereby  be  made  capable  of  leading  to  further  conclusions
on  this  profound  subject.  With  this  iutention  I  made  a
loose  irregular  coil  of  about  ten  to  fifteen  turns  of  copjier
wire  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  thick,  so  as  to  form  a  kind  of
net,  pressed  it  flat,  and  laid  it  upon  the  northward  pole  of
a  nine-layer  horse-shoe  standing  upright,  fitting  it  to  this  to
a  certain  extent,  and  allowing  the  end  of  the  wire  to  project
eight  inches  free  at  the  side  towards  the  east.  WTicn  this  wns
done  in  the  darkened  chamber,  in  the  presence  of  Josephine
Zinkel,  whose  eyes  had  been  well  prepared,  as  soon  as  the
wire  coil  was  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  eight  inches  high
blue  odic  tianie  this  immediately  contracted,  did  not  extend
beyond  the  metal  coil,  but  was  evidently  absorbed  by  it.
On  the  other  hand,  the  wire  rapidly  increased  in  the  strength
of  its  odic  incandescence,  became  nmch  more  luminous  and
as  if  transparent.  After  a  few  seconds,  this  increased  so
much  that  it  formed  a  bright  atmosphere  around  itj  a  deli-
cute,  misty  luminous  envelope,  which  appeared  to  coat  the
wire  all  along  to  a  thickness  of  about  an  inch.  Immediately
after,  a  light  flame  rose  from  the  point  of  the  wire,  the
himinosity  of  which  w^as  much  more  intense  than  that  of
the  blue  flame  which  the  pole  of  the  magnet  possessed  at
first,  80  that  it  illimnnated  the  neighbouring  floor  of  the
room  for  the  space  of  more  than  a  yard.  It  was  almost
eight  inches  long,  and  exhibited  a  streaky  compositiun,  like
a  brush  of  light,  such  as  has  often  been  observed  on  the
magnet  itself,  and  which  therefore  appeared  to  have  been
transferred  from  this  on  to  the  wire.  The  magnet  itself
here  lost  nothing  of  its  odic  incandescence,  only  it^  odic
flame.  I  went  through  a  similar  exiK^riment,  with  similar
results,  with  Miss  Atzmanusdorfer,  but  do  not  find  it  re-
corded in  the  journal  I  kept  with  her,  and  therefore  cannot
give  any  of  the  details  of  it.  On  the  otlier  hand,  tbe  expe-
riments witli  Mud.iiiu' Kifiirslierger  are  accurately  reported.


510  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

I  brought  a  wire,  several  yards  long,  under  double  doors
and  carpets,  from  a  room  which  daylight  entered,  and  where
an  assistant  was  placed,  into  the  completely  darkened  cham-
ber, and  I  here  placed  the  sensitive  before  it.  I  now
directed  the  assistant  to  apply  the  negative  northward  pole
of  a  five-layer  horse-shoe  to  the  end  of  the  wire  in  the  light
room.  After  the  lapse  of  about  a  minute,  the  portion  of
the  wire  which  reached  into  the  dark  chamber  began  to
increase  perceptibly  in  odic  incandescence ;  it  slowly  but
continually  became  brighter,  till,  after  four  or  five  minutes,
it  attained  its  maximum  of  incandescent  light,  in  which  it
appeared  transparent  hke  glass.  Along,  the  wire  scattered
points  of  fire-rust  were  formed  here  and  there,  almost  like
sparks,  but  larger,  duller,  and  more  permanent.  They  ap-
peared to  move  backwards  and  forwards  a  Uttle,  and  to
increase  and  diminish  in  size  and  intensity  of  light.  When
blown  upon  they  were  extinguished  for  a  moment,  but  were
immediately  reproduced.  At  the  point  of  the  wire  appeared
a  luminous  patch,  also  bluish,  somewhat  larger  thwi  those
points,  more  strongly  withstanding  currents  of  air,  and  more
luminous.  When  I  had  the  southward  instead  of  the
northward  pole  of  the  magnet  applied  to  the  end  of  the
wire  in  the  outer  room,  the  luminous  phenomena  all  gradu-
ally appeared  in  the  dark  chamber  in  like  manner;  all
smaller,  however,  and  with  the  light  duller.  These  pheno-
mena were  evidently  completely  correspondent  to  those  Jo-
sc[)hine  Zinkel  had  observed,  and  only  weaker  in  proportion
as  the  magnet  was  smaller,  and  the  length  of  wire  brought  in
contact  with  it  shorter.  The  luminous  spots  here  and  there
on  the  wire  were  the  rudiments,  the  first  piecemeal  appear-
ance of  that  envelope  of  light  which  we  have  already  found
Madame  Kicnesberger  perceive.  I  modified  the  experiment
with  Friedrich  Wcidlich  by  roUing  up  the  end  of  the  wire  in
the  hghted  room,  into  a  coil  of  several  turns,  and  then
having  the  northward  pole  of  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  applied


CONDirrONB  OP  THE  tTACIKIT.


511


^


to  this,  ThuH,  the  surface  of  contact  was  increaseii  and
tbe  magnet  stronger.  In  the  dark  chamber  he  saw  the
odic  incandescence  of  the  wire  mcrease,  and  a  slender  flame,
eight  inches  long,  and  as  thick  as  one's  finger,  ri!>c  fmni  its
extremity ;  when  I  had  the  southward  [kjIc  a])[)Ued,  a
shorter,  duller,  and  rather  broader  riame  appeared  on  thi^
end  of  the  wire ;  all  agreeing  with  what  has  ahTady  lieen
re[)orted,  and  «hHering  only  in  the  greater  intensity  of  cause
antl  etieet.  With  Madame  Kienesberger  I  phiced  unuther
copper  wnre,  not  rolled  into  a  coil,  but  merely  the  end  of  it,
on  the  nine-layer  magnet,  iu  the  dark  ehauTber,  On  the
northward  pole,  the  copper  wh'c,  one-t%velfth  of  an  inch
thick,  and  one  yard  long,  became  more  strongly  incaudescent
than  before,  diifusing  light  around ;  a  flame  appeared  at  the
other  end,  which  she  compared  in  stillness,  size,  and  aspect,
to  the  flame  of  a  wax  candle,  slender,  rather  yellow  below,
more  bluish  above,  conical,  and  with  smoke  ascending  more
thtai  foiu*  inches  high  al>ove  it.  When  I  laid  the  wire  on
the  southward  pole,  the  phenomena  which  suecx^sively
appeared  were  the  same,  but  rather  weaker,  smaller,  and
less  iuniinous ;  the  tenuinal  flame  was  now  red  and  smoky.
The  progress  of  the  phenomena  was  just  as  before,  slowly
rising  one  by  one  from  the  source,  increasing,  and  then
disapj)caring  again  after  the  ware  was  removed  from  the
magnt:t.  In  a  subsequent  third  experiment  I  used  the  coil
of  wire  with  her  also,  and  in  the  same  way  as  with  Zinkcl,
only  with  the  slight  modification  that  I  made  the  projecting
free  piec^  of  wire  a  fidl  yard  long.  When  1  had  applied
the  coil  to  the  northward  pole,  the  blue  flame  of  this  imme-
diately sank  down,  only  a  small  remnant  of  it  remained
plajing  among  the  turns  of  tlie  wire  ;  these  had  apparently
absorbed  all  the  rest,  that  is  to  say,  absorbed  the  force  which
produced  the  flame.  The  odic  incandescence  of  the  wire
consequently  increased ;  it  soon  acquired  an  envelope  of
thin,  misty,  luminous  nature  over  its  whole  length,  emitting


512  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

bluish  light,  and  coating  it  almost  to  the  thickness  of  one's
finger,  Avithout  visible  motion;  at  length,  a  flame  four
inches  long  rose  from  the  end  of  the  wire,  pale-yellow
below,  and  blue  above,  terminating  in  a  stream  of  delicate
luminous  vapour.  When  I  took  the  wire  coil  away  from
the  northward  pole,  all  this  vanished  immediately,  the  flame
rose  up  from  the  pole  to  its  former  height,  and  all  returned
to  its  original  condition.  Then,  bringing  the  wire  coil  to
the  southward  pole,  similar  appearances  presented  themselves
here  also :  the  red  polar  flame  was  immediately  absorbed
by  the  copper  wire,  and  vanished  from  the  pole ;  the  pale
natural  odic  incandescence  of  the  wire  changed  into  dull
red ;  a  red,  luminous,  misty  envelope,  three-fifths  of  an  inch
in  thickness,  came  up  over  it,  and  finally  an  odic  flame,  two
inches  long,  burst  forth  from  the  distant  end  of  the  wire,
red  below  and  yellow  above,  pointed,  and  losing  itself  in
dense  and  abundant  smoke,  which  rose  up  above  it.

486.  These  experiments,  which  I  could  confirm  by  the
enumeration  of  many  similar  ones  if  it  were  necessary,  all
agree  in  teaching  us  that  the  condu4ition  of  odic  force  ikraugk
other  bodies,  such  as  we  have  become  acquainted  with  in
many  cases  in  the  seventh  Treatise,  through  the  effects  on
the  sense  of  feeling  produced  on  the  sensitive,  is  also  accom-
panied by  corresponding  luminous  phenomena  ;  that,  Uke  the
force  wliich  the  magnet  emits,  and  with  which  it  impreg-
nates  other  bodies,  so,  also,  the  flames  which  it  sends  out
can  be  infused  into  other  bodies  and  again  emitted  from
them,  exactly  as  from  the  magnet  itself.  TTie  transferable
essence  of  Od,  therefore,  carries  with  it,  besides  its  power
of  affecting  the  animal  nerves  also,  its  lumiHous  force ;  and
it  carries  over  into  other  solid  media,  its  incandescence,  its
flame,  its  smoke,  with  their  fluidity,  their  mobility,  their
light,  and  their  colours,  and,  as  we  already  know,  in  ad-
dition, their  peculiar  sensations  of  coolness,  warmth,  uneasi-
ness or  rcfi^hment.


CJOHDITIONS  OF  THB  MAONOT.


513


487.  A  retrospect  of  the  various  contents  of  this  chapter
shows  lis  that  the  phenomena  of  light  proceeding  from  the
magnet,  incandescence  and  flame,  arc  developed  most
strongly,  in  greatest  size  and  luminosity,  in  highly  rarefied
air, — perhaps  would  be  still  more  perfectly  unfolded  in  an
absolute  vacuum ;  that  odic  smoke  appears  to  have  its
gi-eatest  intensity  connected  with  a  certain  definite  density
of  the  air,  beneath  which  it  begins  to  disappear  again  ;  that
the  common  density  of  atmospheric  air  cousidcralily  di-
minishes the  odic  luminous  phenomena  j  that  the  density
of  water  so  restrains  the  odic  flame  that  it  almost  annihilates
it,  yet  without  lessening  the  odic  incandescence  ;  that  the
density  of  solid  bodies  like  glass  (the  bell  of  the  au*-pump),
absorbs  it,  and  retains  it  to  a  certain  extent  by  its  coercive
power;  but  of  such  as  metals,  especially  wires,  readily
emits  the  absorbed  essence  again  in  luminosity  and  flame,
both  along  the  surfacx;  and,  more  particularly,  at  points.
To  comprise  this  in  a  word  :  thai  the  odic  lufhi  is  subject
lo  different  conditions  in  different  media,

488.  So  far  as  wc  can  at  present  see  into  the  matter,
there  is  some  probability  that  odic  smoke  is  odizvd  air,  in
the  same  way  that  the  so-ctdled  magnetized  water  is  odized
water^  that  is»  air  and  water  charged  with  Od.  For  water
also,  when  odized,  whether  by  the  magnet,  crystals,  hands,
chemical  action,  or  any  other  means,  acquires  odic  incan-
descence, and  Ijecomes  viiisible  in  the  dark,  although  pre-
viously invisible,  exactly  as  odized  metals  acquire  or  increase
in  odic  incandescence ;  which  will  be  more  minutely  shown
hereafter,*


*  Clair?oyant  persons  have  repeatedly  declared  to  me,  as  a  fact,  the
proposition  containetl  in  thia  paragraph,  aabstituting  our  accepted  word
metmerUtd  for  odised.  They  say,  air  or  water  in  '*  thickeoed"  or  made
cloudy  by  what  they  call  the  mesmeric  JIu id  ;  and  totnetimea,  aa  it  has
emanated  from  different  indiTidaab,  the  colour  has  been  diflerent — from
one,  deep  blue  ;  from  anothorp  sihery  blue  ;  from  a  third,  ^reen. In


514  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL


Colours  ofOdic  Light.

489.  The  phenomena  of  the  colours  exhibited  by  the
different  kinds  of  odic  light  acquire  very  great  consequence
as  they  are  more  minutely  inquired  into.  From  my  fur-
ther researches  it  proves  that  they  are  not  accidental  and
irregular,  as  they  would  appear  to  be  from  the  earlier  ones,
but  that  they  are  subject  to  ordinary  physical  laws,  and,  con-
sequently, that  their  gradations  may  thus  be  used  as  a
measure,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the  polar  quality  and  the
strength  of  the  development  of  Od ;  and,  on  the  other,  of
the  degree  of  excitability  of  the  sensitive ;  not  to  speak  of
the  most  interesting  deductions  they  afford  us  respecting
magnetism  proper  and  its  intimate  characteristics. In  its

some  of  Major  Buckley's  cases,  persons  wide  awake  ha?e  seen  the  light
produced  by  his  passes  to  be  blue ;  some  ha?e  seen  them  green.  These
were  delicately  sensitive  persons,  who  have  in  my  presence  read  printed
words  and  sentences  on  slips  of  paper  previously  concealed  from  them
carefully  in  another  apartment,  in  the  innermost  of  a  nest  of  four  silver
boxes,  all  enclosed  in  a  morocco  case,  or  folded  up  in  nutshells.

Such  facts  would  lead  us  to  conclude  that  the  conditions  of  organiza-
tion  introduce  relations  into  tlie  subject  of  colour  that  require  much
careful  investigation.  The  perceptions  of  clairvoyants  on  the  colours
emanating  from  metals  are  so  much  in  accordance  with  the  facts  deve-
loped in  the  very  careful  and  curious  researches  of  the  Baron,  that  new
views  may  arise  on  the  theories  of  colour.  Our  faculties  of  perception
depend  upon  our  organizations.  From  these  emanate  odic  or  mesmeric
forces.  Many  individuals  who  can  see  very  well,  cannot  distinguish
colours.  The  organ  of  colour  is  wanting  in  these  persons.  No  fact
in  Gall's  magnificent  discoveries  is  better  established.  Colour,  then,
is  dependent  on  the  odic  force  emanating  from  Gall's  organ  of  colour.
Is  colour  dependent  essentially  on  further  relations  of  the  odic  force  ?
Have  we  not  differences  in  the  perceptions  of  colour  as  emanating  from
chlorine,  from  iodine,  from  cobalt,  from  copper?  May  not  colour  be
dependent  on  a  crystalline  arrangement  of  an  elementary  ponderable
with  lumine  and  odine  ?  The  grasp  of  chemism  on  other  sciences  is
not  yet  defined ;  and  the  influence  of  further  researches  into  molecular
forces  may  yet  widely  illuminate  other  spheres  of  knowledge.


COinJlTTONS  OF  THK  MAGXKT.


lowest  and  weakest  stage,  the  oclic  light  appears  upon  the
raagiiet  as  a  faint  grayish  elaud,  only  perceptible  after  a
sojourn  for  hom-s  in  absolute  darkness,  and  the  reality  of
wh it'll  can  only  be  aseertained  by  sJowly  moving  the  huni-
nous  body,  the  luagnct,  to  and  fro  in  tlie  dark.  A  pocket
horse-shoo  of  strong  magnetic  intensity  was  thus  seen  by
tlie  healthy  Mr.  Edward  lliitter:  the  Inminosity  was  so
faintlygrey  at  the  northward  pole,  in  the  blackness  of  night,
that  for  a  munient  he  was  in  doubt  whether  what  he  saw
was  real  or  the  effect  of  imagination  ;  but  when  the  magnet
was  moved  backwards  and  forwards,  he  saw  the  grey  light
traverse  the  same  path,  and  tliiis  beciinie  convinced  of  the
correctness  of  his  observation.  This  case  occurred  fre-
quently  with  many  of  the  less  sensitive,  always  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  experiments,  especially  with  the  healthy
Baroness  von  Natorp,  Madame  Joscpliinc  Fenzl,  Messrs,
Tirka,  Kotschy,  Schuh,  Uelhez,  &c,  I  omit  further  instances,
since  these  have  been  mentioned  often  enough  incidentally
elsewhere,

490,  This  original  delicate  gray  light,  at  first  perceived
only  at  the  northward  pole,  becomes  stronger  in  its  ascend-
ing stages.  In  the  lirst  place,  it  becomes  more  distinctly
visible,  gradually  more  dense,  more  vapoiu'ous  and  concen-
trated. A  cloud  also  appears  at  the  southward  pole.  Both
gain  strength  and  consistence  until  they  resemble  smoke.

49L  A  period  now  soon  comes  in  which  colour  begins  to
appear,  at  first  only  dull  and  faintly  tinging  the  general
gray.  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl  saw  only  a  cloudy  light
over  the  electro-magnet ;  but  at  the  northward  pole  it
seemed,  in  comparison  to  that  over  the  southward,  more  of  a
bluish  gray,  while  the  latter  was  rather  yellowish  gray.  Pro-
fessor Endliclier  gave  the  same  account  of  some  horse-shoes.
This  is  the  very  commencement  of  the  perception  of  colour.
Proceeding  onwards,  a  portion  of  the  smoke,  that  which  is
in  contact  with  the  steel,  acquires  a  flame-like  continuity;

M M


616  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTBRNaL

the  other  part  in which  the  flame  loses  itself,  remains
smoky. Mr.  Sebastian  Zinkel  (77  years  old)  saw,  rising
from  the  northward  pole  of  a  single  horse-shoe  magnet,  a
bluish  appearance,  which  he  was  doubtful  whether  to  call
flame  or  smoke ;  at  the  southward  pole  he  discerned a
similar  smaller  but  indistinctly  smoky  emission  of  light.
The  smoke  is  strongest  and  most  dense  at  that  part  where
it  is  in  contact  with  the  point  of  the  flame,  and  gradually
passes,  with  diminishing  density,  at  the  other  end  into
vapoiur  and  mist,  and  thus,  becoming  continually  weaker,  is
at  last  invisible ;  this  is  always  in  the  upward  direction.
The  flame-like  lower  portion  now  gains  more  colour. It  is
first  seen,  when  the  poles  are  directed  upwards,  that  at  the
northward  pole  the  gray  begins  to  grow  yellowish  or  bluish,
and  with  increasing  strength  it  passes  through  blue-gray
into  yellow  or  blue. The  southward  pole  fir^uently  only
possesses  smoke  at  a  time  when  the  northward  pole  has
long  shown  a  blue  flame. Finally,  the  smoke  reaches  at  the
southward  pole  the  degree  of  strength  at  which  it  passes
into  flame  ;  the  gray  incUnes  at  first  into  whitish  gray,  then
into  yellowish  gray,  and  rises  through  yellow  and  orange
into  red. The  smoke  over  the  red  is  by  this  time  at  a  very
dense,  increasingly  densely  rolling  stage,  in  which  finally
scattered  sparks,  like  fire-flies,  float  about. If,  however,
the  poles  arc  directed,  not  upward,  but  downward,  or  in
any  other  direction,  these  conditions  follow  a  different  course
(I  shall  speak  of  this  immediately). The  red  flame  of  the
southward pole, though appearing later, jK)ssesscs the
greatest  intensity  of  light ;  the  blue  of  the  northward  pole
is  always  less  luminous,  and,  when  the  two  present  them-
selves side  by  side  in  tolerably  equal  size,  the  blue  is  always
dimmer,  the  reddish  yellow  and  red  brighter :  where  this,
aa  usually  happens  with  horse-shoe  magnets,  appears  to  l>e
reversed,  it  depends  merely  on  the  fact  that  the  northw^ard
flame  is  larger  under  our latitudes  than the  southward


CONDTTTONS  OF  THE  MAfiNET.


517


flame,  and  therefore  appears  relatively  more  luminous.  This
course  of  the  phenomena  was  observed,  in  all  its  gradations,
hy  the  sickly  sensitives,  especially  by  Madame  Kienes-
lierger,  Misses  Winter,  Dorfer,  Kynart,  Weigaud,  Krligcr,
Miss  von  Weigelsberg,  Madame  Johanna  AnschiitZj  also  by
Freidrich  Weidhch  and  others,  and  by  the  healthy  Messrs.
Pauer,  Gustav  Ansehiitz,  Tirka,  Schuh,  Kot.schy,  Rjihe,
Dn  Nied,  Stcplmn  Kollar,  Baron  von  Obcrlander,  Klaiher
the  joiner,  Miss  Sophia  Pauer,  Professor  Endlicher,  Miss  Er-
nestine Ansehiitz,  the  Baroness  von  Natorp,  Mesdames
Josephine  Penzl,  Isabella  von  Tessedik,  von  Varady»  von
Peieliich,  Ca?cilie  Bauer,  the  Baroness  von  Augustin,  and
others.  I  consider  it  superfluous  to  enter  ujwn  an  enu-
meration of  countless  single  experiments,  of  which  inci-
dental mention  is  made  ever)  where,  for  the  support  of  these
most  clear  phenomena,  which  may  bo  repeated  and  con-
firuied  anywhere  with  any  sensitive  person.

4i)l  k  I  have  already  stated,  in  accordance  with  the
accounts  of  Misses  Nowotny,  Reichel,  Sturmann,  Atz-
maimsdorfer,  and  Maix,  that  in  the  further  progress  these
two  principal  colours  become  associated  with  others, — ^in
fact,  with  green,  oratige,  and  violet, — and  thus  ttie  odic
flame  ac^juires  a  variegated,  apparently  confused,  play  of
colour.  Professor  Endlicher  saw  the  lights  over  a  strong
electro-magnet  moviug  about  with  an  irregular  intermixture
of  diflerent  colours.  Baroness  von  Augustin  expressed  her-
self in  the  same  way  on  this  [xjint ;  also  Madame  Kienes-
berger,  Stephan  Kollar,  Madame  von  Varady,  Freidrich
Weidlich,  Dr.  Nied,  Misses  Winter,  Girtler,  Zinkel,  and
others ;  the  latter  frequently  in  the  casc-s  of  bars  and  horse-
shoes. All  the  more  highly  sensitive  met  with  it  in  the
first  experiments  on  light,  and  expressed  lively  astonishment
and  delight  at  it ;  but,  under  equal  circumstances,  they  saw
it  most  distinctly  l>eneath  tlie  air-pump.  Miss  Atzmanns-
dorfer  saw  the  variegated  play  of  colour  over  a  horse-shoe


618  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

magnet,  which  she  had  perceived  but  faintly  in  the  open
air,  become  more  bright  and  more  vividly  coloured  under
the  receiver  with  every  stroke  of  the  pump.

492.  There  is  yet  a  higher  stage  of  the  phenomena  of
light,  and  this  deserves  the  most  accurate  recital  of  the
experiments,  and  the  most  circumstantial  examination  of
their  details.  This  is  a  perfectly  regular  iris  or  prismatic
spectrum,  the  origin  of  which  astonished  me,  and  will  sur-
prise every  one  who  takes  the  trouble  to  enter  minutely
into  this  remarkable  subject.  The  variegated  mobile  play
of  colours  is  arranged  according  to  certain  rules,  and  is  pro-
duced in  definite  forms  when  all  conditions  unite  to  favour
its  undisturbed  development.  As  early  as  1844,  Miss
Reichel  had  mentioned  to  me  that  she  frequently  saw  a
rainbow  in  the  magnet-flame.  I  took  no  notice  of  this,
under  the  idea  that  she  meant  merely  a  variation  of  colour
in  the  movements  of  the  odic  flame,  something  like  what
we  are  accustomed  to  in  the  sparks  and  brushes  of  the
electrical  light ;  but  the  statements  of  Miss  Reichel  have
always  subsequently  proved  to  be  correct.*

*  An  avis  au  lecieur  for  the  gentlemen  of  the  so-called  Vienna
Medical  Committee.  It  has  occurred  to  me  that  it  will  perhaps  not  be
altogether  auperfluons  to  those  readers  who  are  unacquainted  with  the
journal  of  the  Vienna  Medical  Society,  to  give  a  small  specimen  of  the
contents  of  the  essay  launched  against  my  researches  :  this  will  place
them  in  a  position  to  judge  for  themselves  what  consideration  it  de-
serves. At  page  50,  for  example,  we  find  the  following  passage  : —
"Dr.  von  Eisenstein  led  her  (Miss Reichel)  in  this  condition  (supposed
magnetic  sleep)  into  a  large  room,  where  he  allowed  her  to  sit  down
upon  a  couch,  and  endeavoured  to  raise  her  state  to  that  of  clairroy-
ance  by  passes  with  his  hands  and  four  bar  magnets,  and  at  the  same
time  to  destroy  the  influence  of  the  sun,  and  give  the  preponderance  to
that  of  the  magnets.  When  he  brought  the  magnets  to  the  region  of
the  heart,  and  Reichel  started,  as  if  involuntarily,  he  cried — "  Aba  !
here  is  this  nasty  sun,  then  !  It  is  on  your  heart!  Wait  a  moment,  and
I  will  drive  it  out !"  And  then  he  made  spiral  turns  over  the  region
of  the  heart  with  considerable  energy. The  same  scene  followed  in  the


€?0!CDmONR  OP  THK  MA0WI5T.


51U


Then  Freidrich  Wcidlicli  asserted  distinctly  that  the  co-
lours formed  a  prfcct  ^ambo^v  wlien  the  air  was  stUl,  and

magnciizatioii  on  the  back  and  the  pit  of  the  etomaclu  The  6iin  was
pursued  witiiout  mercy »  and  dnven  out  of  every  lurking-plnce.  In  one
of  these  turns,  Eeichel  jumped  np  and  struck  nt  her  magnetiser ;  iht-
latter  pressed  her  into  her  «eat  again,  and  magnetised  her  lipa  with
little  circular  passes .  When  she  tried  to  oppo«€*  it«  and  held  her  hand
berore  her  face,  he  removed  it,  and  reproached  h»  r.  ibat  "she  would
not  ktsa  the  magnet,  her  benefactor,  who  made  her  well ;  the  horrid
««ii  must  be  driven  away  from  her  hps,  and  its  place  taken  by  the
ma^uelf  &c-"  Turning  over  leaf*  we  find  the  account  of  an  eiperi-
ment  lu  which  Reicliel  was  to  see  tiames  on  magnets  held  before  her
in  a  room  open  to  duyliglit,  anil  when,  as  ao  additiona]  meana,  her
eyes  were  hound  with  a  handkercnief:  this  ends  with  the  worda—
**  Dr,  von  Eiae ostein  (conductor  of  the  experiment)  gave  no  explaua-
lion  of  the  tendency  of  this  eipcriment,  Bnron  von  Reichenbach  alwaya
made  his  researches  on  tbe  emanationa  of  light  from  magnets  in  dark*
ened  places,  and  found  that  they  were  stronger  in  proportion  as  the
obscurity  was  more  complete.  Why  Dr»  von  liiiseu««tein  undertook
this  experiment  in  a  room  brightly  illuminated  by  reflected  sundight, —
why  be  chose  the  moment  when  her  eyes  were  bound, — whether  he
thereby  intended  to  test  her  gift  of  divination,  or  wliatever  elae  he
wanted  to  show  by  it, — we  know  not :  he  gave  us  no  explanation  of
the  experiment  ju»t  related/'  Nonsense  of  this  kind  is  met  with  not
nnfrequently  in  the  course  of  the  treatise :  who  could  find  patience  to
follow  two  hundred  pages  of  it? — Authors  Note*

I  must  take  this  opi>ortunity  of  expressing  my  admiration  of  the
generous  testimony  aflorded  by  Professor  Gregory  in  favour  of  the
truths  of  mearoerisni,  in  his  note  occurring  at  page  356  of  hia  translation
of  tbe  Baron's  researches.  It  is  a  service  of  some  peril,  in  these  days  of
literary  and  scientific  rnfHanism,  to  avow  a  boUcf  in  the  stiitementa
respecting  Miaa  M*Avoy;  or  in  those  recorded  by  Dr,  Elliotaon  in
Tiriaiia  ntimbers  of  tbe  Zoist,  especially  relating  to  the  facta  about  the
Okcp;  or  eyen  his  belief  in  tbe  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  which
Professor  Gregory  had  himself  obsened  in  the  case  of  IMiss  Marti-
neau*s  lervant-girl.  It  is  well  and  nobly  asserted  by  him,  that  **  it  ia
the  duty  of  every  lover  of  truth  and  of  science,  to  protest  energetically
•gainst  the  system  of  reckless  accusations  of  imposture  preferred
against  persons  of  blameless  character,  because  their  statements  ap|>e&r
to  ua  incredible,  or,  aa  has  oftcu  happened,  because  we  are  unable^
from  wont  of  knowledge  of  the  rules  of  scientific  reaearch^  to  form  a


520


O0IC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL


the  flame  of  the  magnet  was  not  broken  up  into  fragmenf
by  the  breath  of  bystanders. He  gave  me  a  rough  ac€ounf


clear  distinctioD  in  our  mmda  between  what  U  ftal,  and  what  may  be
imaginary  or  delusive,  in  the  re&ulu  obtained/*

In  Vienna,  the  squad  of  §tnpidities  who  had  undertaken  to  criticise
the  Baron  ron  Heichenbach,  have  had  reconrae  to  the  eame  expedients
against  one  of  the  subjecta  of  his  experiments  as  the  opponents  of  the
truth  had  adopted  in  England.  It  it  cnrious  to  remark  the  intluence
which  competition  exerts  in  modifying  the  moral  perceptibililiea  of
mankind.  The  struggle  for  pelf  renders  some  men,  otlierwiae  of
fine  capacities  for  generous  filings,  sordid  and  mean.  Their  organs
of  ftcquisitivenesa,  cunning,  and  self-esteem,  are  stimulated  into  nndue
action  by  the  leading  active  minds  of  the  coteries  to  which  they  happen
to  be  attached*  One  man,  perhaps,  having  nothing  to  recommend  him
but  great  activity  in  gathering  gossip,  albeit  he  may  be  in  science,  for
his  ignorance,  the  laughing-stock  of  every  society  of  which  he  is  a
member;  in  practice,  for  bis  maladroitness,  the slaughterer of  the

r  women  he  may  be  called  upon  to  assist ;  in  friendsliip,  the  backbiter
of  his  greatest  benefuetor  ;  to  the  poor,  a  brute  and  a  rulHan  ;  yet,  if  he
can  fetch  and  carry  prurient  tales,  well  paid  for,  and  gathered  from  the

.  Jowet^i  haunts  of  female  iniquity,  his  falsehoods  may  be  listened  to  and
K*tjiiled  in  low  whispers  among  petaons  pro/estint/  high  feeling.  Grregt*
nous  man  ia  long  the  victim  of  the  fallacies  among  which  he  lasily
wades  in  the  struggling  tea  of  life.  How  strange  it  would  appear  to  a
b«iietoleut  being  of  a  higher  order,  if  he  were  to  appear  amongst  os^
thatt  at  hospitals,  demonstrations  have  been  given  of  the  power  of
meemerism  to  cure  disease,  to  alleviate  suffering,  and  to  render  painleaa
tbe  most  frightful  operations  of  surgery «  and  that  ikomand^  of  facta
attest  the^e  truths,  and  yet,  that  the  professors  of  the  art  and  acienceof
medicine  have  rejected,  over  and  over,  again  all  inquiry  into  the  aubject  1
How  strange  it  would  appear  to  tliat  being,  that  no  sooner  had  ether
and  chloroform  been  propoaed  to  the  same  profeasors,  than  that,  with-
out much  inquiry,  these  dangerous  and  deadly  materials  were  bailed  aa
importaot  acquisitions  to  the  medical  knowledge  of  the  age.  The  one
agency,  when  studied,  leads  to  a  knowledge  of  the  highest  fnnctiont
that  belong  to  human  beiugs,  to  more  than  a  knowledge  of  the  alleria*
tion  of  suiering  by  innocent  means  \  to  a  corroboration  of  those  high
scientific  truths  that  tell  us  of  the  springs  of  human  action,  of  the
motives  of  human  conduct ;  and  that  lead  the  humble  philosopher  to
the  conviction,  that  large  charity  is  the  neces&ary  result  of  deep  reflce-
lion  on  mcemeric  fact^. l*he other agency, allied to the aoecal


521

€f  ^tilfr  amogemeut  of  the  colours  and  their  relative  extent
He  made  the  obsewatioii  most  distinctly  in  a  three-layer


iuHucDcei  of  uarcotici}  on  the  buman  braiji^  leads  to  the  deatraction  of
Ijealth,  either  temporarily  or  permajoeutlyj  often  to  immediate  death!
sonjetimes  to  the  encoumgemeot  of  robbery*  even  of  murder,  and  of  the
most  abject  vices  that  can  degrade  the  human  character.  What  obliquity
of  intellect  has  posaessed  these  professors  of  scieoce  ?  would  he  the
imtural  question.  Can  they  witness  the  deeply  iutere«tiijg  facts  Dr.
ElliotAon  exlubited  to  them  years  ago^  and  not  be  stimulated  to  ardent
scieutitic  inquiry?  Can  the  gloating  of  a  few  miseri*  on  the  golden
hewp*i  of  some  of  ibeir  fellows  so  obtund  all  feelings  of  noble  lionesty
as  to  leave  mesmerism,  Ijecause  it  is  tabooed  by  authority,  uneaquired
into  ?  Are  fears  for  tbe  fees  and  stipendi*  of  a  few  individuals  for  ever
to  rt'tard  the  progress  of  human  knowledge  towards  a  science  of  mental
philosophy  ?  Thanks  to  Dr.  Klliotson,  it  is  not  to  he  so.  The  ailly
surgeons  who,  in  their  ignorance,  so  greedily  grasped  the  murderous
narcotics,  like  tbe  savages  who  prefer  the  instrumenta  of  death  and
destruction  to  the  quiet  influence*  of  progressive  civilization,  may  build
monuments  of  wealth  to  their  destroying  angel ;  may  set  up  their
golden  caif,  and  worship  their  spirit  of  eviL  They  cannot  sucoeed  in
crushing  truth  I  and  posterity  will  regard  with  pity  their  weak  efforts
to  darken  the  world.

^s  to  Dr,  TOQ  Eisentein,  in  the  Baron's  note,  he  is  evidently  one  of
the  small  fry  of  those  who  endeavour  to  accomplish  the  impossible  feat
of  arriving  at  truth,  and  encompassing  it  by  the  force  of  imagination
alone.  Such  persons  are  httle  aware  that  they  call  into  play  a  combi-
nation of  several  organs  of  the  brain  opposed  to  the  reasoning  facnltiei^
and  wliich  may  lead  the  individual  to  conclnsions  as  wide  of  just  resolCa
aa  if  they  determined  at  once  to  jndgc  without  knowledge.  In  all  pro-
bability, the  Bfupitiitiea  who  have  been  the  slanderers  of  Miss  Beichel,
if  they  have  paid  any  attention  to  mesmerism^  have,  to  save  themselves
the  trouble  of  inquiry,  attached  themselves  to  the  sect  who  boast  of
their  spiritualism.  It  will  be  unnecessary  to  repeat  here  the  sources  of
fallacy  that  belong  to  ideas  which  must,  in  every  way,  tend  to  confose
the  intellects.  There  are  organs  of  the  brain,  which,  when  over  stimn^
tatcd,  leave  the  individual  a  victim  of  ecstacy.  The  imagination,  said  ta
be  a  mental  faculty,  but,  in  reality,  the  result  of  a  combination  of  the
actions  of  several  organs,  if  indulged  in  without  regulation  and  very  strict
control  by  the  intellectual  forces  about  the  forehead,  may  lead  to  an
ecatacy  as  incompatible  with  rational  conviction,  as  the  open-mouthed
fatuous  wonderment  of  the  idiot  is  with  the  higher  calm  reasoning


522  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIKD  EXTERNAL

horse-shoe  of  great  intensity  of  magnetic  chai^.  He  was
followed  by  Baron  von  Oberlander,  who  saw  a  regular  iris
over  the  same  three-layer  magnet.  Madame  von  Varady
observed  this  over  the  nine-layer.  In  like  manner  Dr.  Nied,
but  with  intermissions.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  frequently
described  to  me  the  beauty  of  the  rainbows  she  perceived
on  the  magnet,  both  on  horse-shoes  and  bars.  Madame
Bauer  gave  me  the  most  vivid  descriptions  of  rainbow-like
superposition  of  colours  over  the  poles  of  all  stronger
magnets,  in  which  she  always  found  the  red  at  the  bottom,
then  yellow,  green,  &c.  following  upwards.

493.  One  experiment  with  Josephine  Zinkel  will  serve
for  all.  When  in  her  ordinary  healthy  condition,  she  com-
monly saw  the  polar  flames  imiformly  bluish  or  reddish
over  the  poles  of  the  nine-layer  horse-shoe.  When  I  showed
her  the  same  during  menstruation,  she  saw  them  not  only
larger,  but  perceived  the  form  of  an  iris  in  both,  in  which
bluish  colour  predominuted  at  the  northward,  and  reddish
at  the  southward  pole.  This  was  the  case  when  the  horse-
shoe stood  upright,  with  poles  directed  upwards,  and  the
arms  conformable.  But  when  I  turned  both  poles  toward
the  north,  while  the  horse-shoe  was  laid  in  the  meridian,
the  iris  vanished  from  the  southward  pole,  only  a  bluish
gray  red  flame  remaining,  while  on  the  northward  pole  the
iris  is  increased  to  double,  and  attained  a  length  of  twenty
inches.  When  I  turned  the  poles  of  the  horse-shoe  to  the
south,  the  northward  pole  entirely  lost  its  iris,  retaining
only  a  dull  reddish,  gray-blue  flame,  while  the  southward
pole  acquired  a  beautiful  iris  almost  twenty  inches  long.

494.  Even  the  mere  terrestrial  magnetism  sufficed  to

power  of  the  philosopher.  Could  man  be  brought  to  the  conclusion  that
the  numerous  fallacies,  the  reiterated  falsehoods,  which  have  resulted  from
his  imagination  having  conquered  his  reasoning  faculties,  are  the  causes
of  all  the  evils  surrounding  him,  how  ready  would  he  be  to  abandon
his  errors  ! Alas ! When  is  man  to  be  enlightened  to  this  extent  ?


CONDITIONS  OF  THE  If  AGNCT.


produce  the  iris,  and  render  it  visible  to  excitable  indivi-
duals. Madame  Kieuesberger,  wht^ii  menstruaiuig,  saw
an  unijiiignetic  iron  bar,  twenty4bur  inches  long,  lying  in
ihc  iiieridian,  emit  a  red  flame  towards  the  south  and  a  blue
towards  the  north  ^  the  latter,  however,  waa  not  totally,  but
only  iiredomiuantly,  blue ;  and  she  detected,  besides  tins,
all  the  other  colours  of  the  rainbow,  wliich  possessixl  less
intensity  of  hght.  The  colours  were  so  distributed  that
they  appeared  stratified  from  below  upwards.  The  lowest
stratum  was  reddish,  the  next  yeUow  ;  then  followed  green,
and  the  uppermost  was  chiefly  blue  with  violet,

495.  The  phenomenon  was,  however,  more  beautiful  and
more  clearly  marked  on  electro-magnets.  Here  I  could  not
only  heighten  the  phenomena,  and  render  them  more  dis-
tinctly perceptible,  but  I  had  the  advantage  of  being  able  to
bring  a  single  hiyerouly  into  the  experiment,  and  to  avoid
the  manifold  disturbances  which  arise  from  the  reciprocal
action  of  the  separate  layers  of  a  strong  compound  hoi'se-
^hoe.  When  I  had  produced  an  odic  flame  of  a  span  high
u[K)n  an  electro-magnet  through  the  influence  of  a  Smee's
battery  of  one-sixth  of  a  square  foot,  Madame  Kienesberger
was  the  first  to  inform  me  that  the  flame  which  she  saw
rise  from  the  negative  northward  pole  was  not  merely  blue,
but  yellow  ami  blue,  the  yellow  colour  next  the  iron,  the
hliie  lylnt)  hovizonhtlly  over  that,  and  passing  above
into  gray  mist ;  at  the  positive  pole  she  saw  only  red  flame
with  dense  smoke  rising  from  it.  In  order  to  strengthen
the  electro-magnet,  and  perfect  the  experiment,  I  added
another  Smee's  battery,  having  about  a  square  foot  of  sur-
face, to  the  former.  The  odic  flame  of  the  poles  of  the
electro-magnet  was  now  more  than  tripled  :  that  on  the
negative  pole  was  within  a  few  niinutes  to  about  twenty
inches;  that  on  the  positive  to  eight.  The  former  now
exliibited  the  interesting  phenomenon  of  becoming  a  i>erfect
prismatic  spectrum^  in  such  a  manner  that  below,  when  it


524  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  IXTKBI9AL

touched  the  horse-shoe,  which  stood  with  its  poks  directed
upwards,  it  displayed  to  the  eyes  of  the  bdiolder  a  red
layer;  this  was  followed  by  an  orange-coloured,  then  a
yellow,  next  a  green,  a  bright  blue,  dark  blue,  finally  an
uppermost  violet  blue,  and  gray  vapour  above  this.  At  the
same  time  the  positive  flame  of  the  southward  pole  pre-
sented a  blood-red  colour  next  the  iron ;  then  came  a  light
red  layer,  at  the  top  an  orange-red,  which  lost  itself  in
thick,  heavy,  and  opake  smoke  rising  up  to  the  ceiling.
She  described  the  appearance  as  of  extraordinary  delicacy
and  splendour,  and  was  filled  with  delight  and  amazement
at  it,  like  her  predecessors  in  similar  cases.  She  found  the
intensity  of  the  colours  greater  than  that  of  any  permanent
magnet.  Some  weeks  later  I  went  through  the  same  series
of  experiments  with  Josephine  Zinkel.  She  described  the
phenomena  to  me  all  in  the  same  way  as  Madame  Kienes-*
berger,  whom  she  about  equals  in  degree  of  sensitiveness,
and  she  added  the  complementary  note  that  the  prismatic
colours  individually  are  not  simple,  but  that  each  appears
in  distinct  shades,  and  thus  seems  to  be  composed  of
several,  whereby  the  entire  spectrum  is  ultimately  com-
posed of  a  great  number  of  superincumbent  coloured  streaks
of  light.  She  also  described  a  narrow  streak  of  pure  red
above  the  violet-blue,  the  violet,  becoming  gradually  redder,,
passing  into  this  above,  and  this  then  going  off  into  smoke.
She  already  perceived  the  iris  when  the  magnet  was  first
induced  by  one  Smee's  element  of  one-sixth  of  a  square
foot,  but  the  colours  were  dull  and  indistinct,  so  that  she
could  not  give  a  certain  account  of  their  characters  at  that
time :  thus  she  believed  she  could  perceive  a  light  blue
between  yellow  and  green  ;  but  when  I  added  a  battery  of
six  Smee's  elements,  all  the  colours  became  incomparably
more  luminous,  clearer,  and  perfectly  distinct,  under  which
circumstances  the  imaginary  blue  was  foimd  to  be  a  transi-
tion tint  between  light  yellow  and  'light  green. This  expe-


COTfWITIONB  OP  THB  MAONBT.


525


N


riment  tmiinot  be  iiiado  successfiilly  with  weak  electro*
magnets :  oiiiie  measured  one  foot  in  the  length  of  the
arms,  nnd  the  iron  was  an  inch  thick.  This  experiment
was  rtpcated,  with  the  same  results,  three  months  after-
wards*

Again>  a  few  months  later,  I  appKed  a  Smee's  apparatns
having  two  and  a  half  square  feet  of  surface.  The  prismatic
spectrum  was  developed  splendidly  to  a  height  of  more  than
a  yard,  and  with  smoke  that  rose  to  the  ceiling  and  hghted
it  up.  The  api>earances  at  the  negative  pole  were  again
the  same,  only  on  a  large  scale  and  more  brilliant ;  but  the
iris  was  Ukewise  better  developed  at  the  positive  pole  ;  blue
was  now  added  above  to  its  red  and  yellow  colours.  Uy
greater  exaltation  of  the  electro-magnet,  the  green  and
violet  blue  would  certainly  be  rendered  visible.  This  ex-
peri  uient  was  also  repciited  some  months  subseqneutly.

496,  The  boy  St^phan  Kollar  also  saw  the  coloured  ap-
peitfuuccs  in  the  flame  of  the  electro-magnet.  Since  he  had
no  idea  whatever  of  what  was  going  to  appear  when  I  al-
lowed the  powerfid  voltaic  apparatus  to  act  upon  the  polar
wires,  he  was  very  much  excited  by  the  progress  of  the
phenomena^  from  the  odic  incandescence  to  the  prismatic
spcctnim,  and  its  gradual  increase  to  a  variegated  Hame,
appearing  to  him  twenty  inches  high,  with  smoke  above
wliirling  up  to  the  ceiling.

497.  Professor  Endhcher  did  not  see  a  regular  steady  iris
over  the  electro-magnet,  perhaps  because  time  and  leisure
enough  were  not  aflbrded  in  the  experiment ;  but  still  he
detected  different  colours  in  the  odic  flame ;  below  (namely
in  the  seat  of  the  red)  it  was  indistinct  and  dark ;  above
tliis  he  saw  yellow,  next  green,  ajid  lastly,  above,  blue
mingled  witli  violet,  misteady  certainly,  but,  on  the  whole,
displaymg  order  of  colours  of  the  rainbow  to  him  as  to  all
the  other  observers,  although  less  perfectly  developed.

4US 1  bmught  Wilhelmiue Ulascr^ during  tlie cata-


526  ODIC  LIGHf  IN  MODIFIED  SXTSRNAL

menia,  to  the  same  electro-magnet,  with  the  current  of  two
Smee's  batteries  passing  through  its  coils.  She  beheld  the
flame  over  the  negative  pole,  predominantly  blue,  about
four  and  a  half  feet  high,  that  of  the  positive  pole  half  the
height.  The  smoke  from  them  rose  to  the  ceiling.  Both
the  polar  flames  again  produced  the  beautiful  iris ;  the  nega-
tive with  all  the  prismatic  colours,  with  a  short  portion  of
red  Hucceeding  to  the  blue  above,  terminating  in  smoke,
but  the  positive  flame  was  only  red  and  yellow ;  the  latter
of  which  lost  itself  in  the  dense  smoke.

The  chlorotic  Anka  Hetmanck  also  saw  a  larger  odic
flame  over  the  electro-n^agnet  than  over  the  nine-layer
horse-shoe,  and  this  was  red  below  upon  the  magnet,
the  prismatic  colours  then  following,  upward,  to  blue  and
blue-red,  which  merged  into  smoke  and  so  rose  to  the
ceiling.

499.  Madame  Ca^cilie  Bauer  (during  pregnancy)  described
the  large  electro-magnet  most  brilliantly.  She  saw  nothing
over  the  poles  of  the  horse-shoe  before  it  was  connected
with  the  Smee's  apparatus ;  she  stated  it  to  have  merely
the  whitish  odic  incandescence  of  all  metals.  But  as  soon
as  1  had  connected  the  polar  wires  of  the  two  batteries  with
the  thick  wire  coil,  she  saw  the  flames  rise  over  both  poles,
small  at  first,  then  increasing,  and  continuing  to  ascend
till  they  were  half  as  high  as  the  room.  Then  they
passed  into  smoke,  which  came  in  contact  with  the  ceiling.
(Neither  of  the  Smee's  batteries  worked  at  all  well  on  the
day  of  experiment ;  they  were  very  weak).  She  saw  blue
predominate  at  the  northward  pole,  and  red  at  the  south-
ward :  but  at  the  same  tune  the  flames  of  both  poles  were
most  beautifully  prismatic.  She  even  perceived  the  iri-
descence on  other  portions  of  the  arrangement,  on  the
electro-magnet  itself,  the  Smee's  elements,  and  other  parts,
of  which  more  will  be  said  in  its  proper  place.

499  b.  On  various  occasions  I  placed  a  seven-layer  horse-


CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAOT^Trr.

shoe  magnet,  with  the  poles  turned  upwards,  iii  the  vicinity
of  the  conductor  of  the  electrical  machine^  and  showed  it
under  these  circunistnnces  to  Josejihine  ZinkeL  She  saw
the  usual  appearance  of  red  and  bhie  flames  over  the  poles.
Uut  directly  1  set  the  uiachinc  in  motion,  so  that  the  magnet
was  placed  in  the  elechical  atmosphere,  not  only  did  the
flames  increase  in  size  and  intensity  of  light,  but  they  each
changed  into  an  iris,  in  which  the  hhie  at  the  northward
pule,  and  the  red  at  the  southward,  were  now  only  the  pre-
vaihng  and  no  longer  the  sole  colours.  The  blue  was  here
found  to  he  the  stronger ;  the  red  the  weaker  and  duller ;
the  first  situated  at  the  top  of  the  iris,  the  second  at  the
bottom*

500.  In  all  these  cases  the  iris  was  seen  horizontfdly
stratified »  the  colours  lyiny  one  above  another  in  horizontal
layers  ;  the  red  cohur  Wfnt  always  at  the  bottom,  the  violet-
blue  always  at  the  top.  This  relation  to  the  terrestrial
njiignetism  must  be  kept  in  view.  During  the  first  minutes,
while  the  colours  are  being  developed,  they  are  mingled
unsteadily  together;  they  gradually  arrange  themselves  into
the  form  of  a  floating  iris.  This  does  not  take  plac^
rapidly,  but  with  remarkable  slowness ;  and  in  the  above
described  experiment,  four,  five,  to  six  minutes  were  re-
quisite for  the  production  of  the  perfect  iris  over  the  electro-
magnet.

501.  It  results  from  the  above  facts»  that  the  odic  flame
of  tfie  maynet  does  not  consist  merely  of  red  and  blue^  at
the  two  poles,  but  of  an  iris  or  prismntic  spectrnm  at  each,
in  which  bine  is  but  the  predominant  colour  at  the  neyaiive
side,  and  red  the  like  at  the  positive.  They  become  visible
when  magnetism  and  Od  attain  a  certain  strength,  and
remain  invisible,  or  limited  to  a  single  colour,  when  those
forces  are  weak,  or  the  perceptive  power  of  the  sensitive
beholder  is  of  low  degree.


i^


528


OBIC  LIGHT  W


>IfTEB


IRNAL


502.  But  we  have  another  complicated  compound  kind
of  iris  to  examine,  in  addition  to  this  simple  one.

Here  and  there  in  the  ex[}erinicnts,  as  we  have  already  seen
several  times^  a  certain  variableness  of  the  odic  colour  has
announced  itself,  frequently  threatening  to  render  the  rc&ults
uncertain.  I  was  hereby  induced  to  midertakc  along  special
inquiiy  in  this  direction,  to  carry  it  attentively  through  a
vast  nmnher  of  experiments,  and  to  endeavour  to  obtain  the
laws  of  the  phenomenon,  I  will  here  merely  bring  forw^ard
the  most  essential  of  the  results.

603.  When  I  placed  a  magnetic  bar  with  poles  in  the
direction  of  the  dip,  it  always  emitted  diflerent  colours  from
those  it  gave  in  the  meridian  ;  and  when  a  northward  pole
was  directed  towards  the  north  or  towards  the  south,  its
odic  flame  displayed  at  one  time  more  of  a  blue  tint,  and  at
another  more  of  red  and  gray.  Another  uncertaudy  ac-
companied this :  when  I  turned  a  northwaid  pole  upwards,  the
l)eholder  generally  found  it  bright  blue  in  the  dark,  some-
times again  gray,  and  not  unfrecjucntly  even  yellow ;  with
more  of  the  hke  incongruities,

504.  Seeking  the  causes  of  all  this,  I  began  hy  setting
out  from  the  idea  of  the  possibihty  of  subjective  variableness
in  the  perceptions  by  the  sensitive.  I  placed  a  raftgnetic
bar  two  feet  long  in  an  upright  position,  with  the  north-
ward  pole  directed  upwards.  When  weakly  magnetic,  and
examined  by  the  girl  Zinkel  in  the  dark  chamber  at  a  cbs-
tance  of  eight  inches,  it  appeared  to  her  opaque,  and  of  an
indisthictly  grayish-yellow  ;  when  she  tried  at  what  distance
it  displayed  its  colour  most  clearly,  and  its  general  form
most  distinctly,  to  her  eyes,  it  proved  in  every  experiment
that  this  was  about  from  seventeen  to  twenty  mches ;  then  it
appeared  of  a  pure  yellow  ;  going  fiu-ther  back  she  saw  this  |
clear  yellow  soon  become  indistinct  again,  a  shade  of  bright
gray,  not  unlike  sky-blue,  was  infused;  but  on  removing'


coNmnoHs  of  the  maokot.


529


ffurthcr  away  this  changed  into  fLill  unetiuivocal  gray,
which,  on  a  retreat  to  a  greater  distance,  grew  duller,  less
perceptible,  and  from  forty  inches,  and  over,  vanished,

505.  Making  the  same  experiment  with  Miss  Sophie
Pauer,  I  arrived  at  the  saine  resiUts,  mth  the  slight  modi-
fication only  that  in  her  the  distance  of  vision  for  distinct
and  yellow  odie  flame  did  not  auioimt  to  twenty  inches,  but
only  to  about  eight,  and  that  she  found  it  become  bluish
dircx'tly  the  distance  of  her  eyes  fi*oui  the  luminous  object
increased  beyond  this.  Miss  Pauer,  however,  is  short-
sighted ;  consequently  this  peculiarity  influenced  her  odic
vision,  and  sliowed  to  what  a  great  extent  the  apparent
variation  of  the  colour  of  odic  tlauie  at  difierent  distances
is  a  mere  subjective  phenomenon.

506.  These  observations,  made  in  all  directions  and  in
the  same  manner,  and  repeated  at  various  times  with  un-
changing results,  on  Josephine  Zinkcl,  fuxnished  the  proof
that  there  is  only  one  definitely  fixed  distance,  different  for
the  eyes  of  each  person,  at  which  the  coloiu*  of  the  odic
flame  is  seen  pun^Iy  and  distinctly ;  that  it  alwaijs  remaim
the  same,  and  has  no  varialdenrss  at  this  di stance,  for  each
individtutl ;  bat  thai  at  other  distances,  less  or  qreafer,  ft
strikes  the  eye  nith  other  tints,  dull  yellow  when  nearer,
bluish-gray  and  gray  when  further  off,  and  that  consc-
cpiently,  in  order  to  avoid  confusing  the  appearances,  tlie
eye  of  the  observer  must  always  be  kept  at  one  particular
distance.

507.  In  fact,  I  had  been  every  now  and  then  veiy  much
puzzled,  before  I  thought  of  the  last  investigation^  one
obseiTation  fiunishing  sky-bhie,  and  another,  made  under
condiUons  apparently  altogether  identical,  gray  or  yellow
colour  of  the  odic  flame.  Wiile  one  is  involved  in  such  a
complication,  the  researches,  in  which  the  facts  cannot  lie
jjcrceived  by  one's  own  senses,  but  must  be  obtained  by
questioning  in  the  dark  another  person  who  does  not  un-


530


ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EPTERNAL


derstand  the  matter,  become  wearying  to  an  indescribable
degree,  and  it  occasionally  required  all  the  attractions  of  so
interesting  a  subject  to  support  my  patience.

508.  Once  master  of  this,  perhaps  insignificant  looking
explanation  (but  the  want  of  which  opposes  an  inevitable
obstacle  to  further  inquiry),  a  portion  of  the  road  was
levelled,  and  I  began  a  wider  investigation  of  the  variable-
ness of  the  colours  of  odic  flame,  from  the  objective  point
of  view.  I  fixed  the  same  two-feet  long  magnetic  bar  by
its  middle  in  a  Guidino's  holder,  which  had  a  joint  at  the  top
rendering  it  moveable  in  all  directions.  I  brought  it
lengthways  into  the  magnetic  meridian,  comformably
toward  the  north  pole,  at  first  turned  to  the  north,  and
afterwards  inclined  at  about  95°,  in  the  dip  of  Vienna.
Starting  from  this,  I  made  the  northward  pole  pass  through
the  complete  vertical  circle,  which  could  be  described
around  the  axis  of  the  magnetic  bar  in  the  plane  of  the
meridian.

I  carried  this  into  effect  in  the  dark  chamber, — first  in
the  presence  of  Josephine  Zinkel,  who  observed  the  changes
developed  from  the  west  onward  in  the  progressive  motion
of  the  northward  pole.  From  the  perpendicular  direction
downwards  at  0°
following  series  of  colours  : —

At  25°  (in  the  line  of  the  dip)  . .
,,  45°  (ascending  toward  the  north)
„  67°


she  saw  the  odic  flame  mn  tluxHigh  the


90°

110°

127°

145°

163°

180°

200°

225°

247°

270°


.  pure  gray,
a  narrow  red  streak.
violet-blue,
dark  blue,
light  blue,
dark  green,
light  green.
greenish-yeUow.
light  yellow,
golden  yellow,
orange,
flame-red.
red.


CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAONET.


531


At  290<'  (ascending  toward  the  north)  . deep,  intense  red.

»» 325*>  „  „  grayish-red.

»» ^^^  »  „  reddish  light-gray.

To  make  these  more  distinct,  I  give  a  diagram  of  them
collected  into  a  circle  (Fig.  20).

Fig.  20.
Above.

Liffht  ydlow.
QoHaMt  y«llow.  ^  Hreeniili  ytYlow.


Whm^T^


Somh...^^


Eed«


Dt«pi«d.


^^2^  North.

Dark  blue.
Violet-bhic.


Oisf  nd,


Reddtohlifht Dip

Below.


509.  Examining  the  order  of  the  colours  of  this  circle,
we  discover  a  new  iris,  and  in  fact  one  with  the  colours  lying
in  a  circle. •

510.  It  is  peculiar  that  the  very  direction  in  which  the
greatest  magnetic  intensity  occurs,  namely,  the  magnetic
dip,  or  inclination  of  65°  to  the  horizon,  is  exactly  that  in
which  all  the  colours  disappear,  and  nothing  but  dark  gray
remains.  Is  this  gray  to  be  taken  as  white,  that  is,  a  com-
pound of  all  the  colours,  or  as  black,  the  absence  of  all  ?
Hitherto  I  have  been  unable  to  clear  this  up  with  certainty :

N  N


532  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIPIKD  SXTEBNAL

new  researches  will  soon  decide,  but  I  am  inclined  to  con-
jecture that  the  latter  will  prove  to  be  the  case.

511.  It  is  also  remarkable  that  the  colours  standing
diametrically  opposite  to  each  other  are  not  properly  com-
plementary colours:  for  red  here  stands  opposite  blue
instead  of  yellow,  and  flame-red,  instead  of  green,  opposite
violet-blue,  gray  instead  of  blue  opposite  yellow,  &c.  The
circle  is  divided  into  sections  of  90  degrees,  the  zero  of
which  must  be  fixed  at  the  dip.  Opposite  this,  at  180°,
stands  yellow ;  at  each  side,  both  at  the  distance  of  90°,  red
and  blue  are  situated  opposite  to  each  other,  so  that  these
again  are  180°  apart.  If  we  were  beneath  the  magnetic
equator,  where  the  polar  direction  and  the  dip  of  the  needle
coincide,  the  direction  and  arrangement  of  the  colours  would
be  diflferent.  I  hope  I  may  live  to  hear  of  this  experiment
being  performed  there;  it  cannot  be  a  matter  of  great
difficulty,  for  scarcely  an  European  ship  can  pass  the  line  in
which  one  or  other  of  the  crew  is  not  sensitive.

512.  Another  singularity  of  a  peculiar  kind  presented
itself  in  the  circumstance  that  the  beholder  constantly  de-
scribed what  she  called  a  narrow  red  streak  between  the
gray  of  the  dip  and  violet-blue, I  had  already  met  with
this  phenomenon  in  other  cases. Madame  Kienesberger  fre-
quently assured  me  that  the  iris,  which  presented  itself  to
her  with  the  greatest  clearness  over  the  electro-magnet,
passed  above  into  a  narrow  red  streak,  which  then gave
place to the smoke. Wilhelmine  Glaser,  also,  Stephen
Kollar,  Madame  Bauer,  and  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  gave  the
same  report. It  appears,  therefore,  as  if  the  red  was  again  so
fully  extricated  from  the  blue  or  violet  as  to  reappear  once
more  as  an  independent  colour  at  the  other  end  of  the  series,
and  consequently  red  closes  the  spectrum  on  both  sides,  cer-
tainly at  least  the  odic.

513.  Those  colours  which  lie  in  the  lower  half  of  the
circle,  namely,  within  90°  on  each  side  of  the  dip point,


CONDITIONS  OF  THl  MAONf:T.


M


remarknhle  diffet^nce  in  inivnsiiy  of  lufhi  /mm
tfum'  of  (he  other,  upper  halj\  occupying  1)0°  on  each  side
of  the  gohleii  yellow.  The  upjx^r  half,  in  the  arc  a  c  ft,
apiiciired  bright,  very  luminous,  fresh,  and  brilliant ;  while
the  lower  Avas  dull,  opiu]ue,  and  emitted  httle  light.  The
(jreatcsi  intensity  of  lifjht  lies  in  the  f/olden  yellow,  the
yreatesi  obseuriiy  in  the  gray  of  the  line  of  dip.  One
might  call  the  upper  half  the  duy  side,  the  lower,  where
almost  all  the  colours  are  veiled  with  gray  and  overcast,  the
night  mie,  Tlie  yeUow  colour,  therefore*,  wJiich  we  other-
wise know  to  be  the  most  intensely  luminous  in  the  spec-
trum, represents  noon,  blue  and  red  the  two  (n^iliffhts,  gray
the  niyht.  The  earth's  surf  we  eorrespomls  to  the  heavens
in  its  injluenee  upon  the  odic  fUime  of  the  magnet.  Vide
^  536,  a56.

514.  I  expected  o  gi'cat  change  in  the  colours  of  these
luminous  appearances  when  I  used  the  southward  pole  of
the  same  magnetic  bur,  ijistead  of  the  northward,  in  these
cx|Kjriments-  But  the  result  did  not  confirm  my  anticipa-
tion. In  the  principal  points,  it  was  almost  indifferent
which  of  the  poles  of  the  magnet  I  made  pass  through  the
vertical  circle.  The  distinctions  were  confined  to  a  few
insignificant  modifications  in  the  lesser  particulars.  The
colours,  which  displayed  themselves  nearly  equal  in  the
same  direction  at  the  two  pole^?,  always  apjx^ared  rather
TtTtiU'ded  at  the  southward  pule,  in  the  progress  of  the  pole
from  tlie  dip  point  to  the  norths  I  wris  always  obliged  to
move  the  bar  a  few  degrees  further  onward,  to  obtain  from
tJie  beholder  the  modificiition  of  the  same  colours  wliirh
had  appeared  at  any  given  degree  at  the  northward  pole.
This  retm'datiou  of  the  southward  pole  occui^  in  the  same
way  all  round  the  circle,  so  that  oven  the  gray  of  the  dip
was  at  a  smaller  angle  with  the  horizon  than  that  of  the
northward  pole. Vide  ^  334.

515,  Moreover,  the  northward  and  southward  poles  of


534  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

the  magnetic  bar  are  again  divided  into  two  other  principal
regions  of  greater  and  less  purity  of  colour.  From  the  dip
forward,  on  the  north  side,  to  the  golden  yellow^  upon  the
arc  e,  /,  rf,  the  colours  of  the  northnmrd  pole  appeared
purer  and  more  distinct ;  from  the  golden  yellow  forward,
on  the  south  side,  back  to  the  dip^  on  the  contrary,  they
were  more  degraded,  indistinct,  and  overcast.  Exactly  the
reverse  was  the  case  with  the  southward  pole;  from
the  dip,  over  north,  up  to  golden  yellow,  that  is  in  like
manner  on  the  arc  e^f,  d,  Josephine  Zinkel  described  the
colours  as  dull  and  misty ;  on  the  other  side,  from  golden
yellow,  over  south,  down  again  to  the  dip,  as  pure  and  clear.
Upwards  at  the  yellow  their  appearances  merged ;  they  were
most  strongly  manifested  in  the  directions  of  the  terrestrial
poles.  It  is  evident  that  the  conformity  or  nonconformity
of  the  position  of  the  poles  exerted  their  influence  here,  as
everywhere  else,  and  the  northward  pole,  which  could  act
with  full  force  toward  the  north,  was  brought  into  conflict
with  the  opposition  of  terrestrial  magnetism,  when  turned
to  the  south,  and  thereby  weakened.  Its  red  odic  flame
was  consequently  troubled  and  overcast  in  the  southern
direction  by  a  portion  of  blue  produced  by  its  own  magnetic
but  opposite  polarity,  and  intermingled  with  the  red ;  hence
a  red  which  was  described  to  me  sometimes  as  bluish-red,
at  others  as  grayish-red.  The  same  holds  good  of  the
southward  pole,  the  direction  and  the  expressions  being
reversed.

516.  Tlie  circle  of  colours  was  thus  twice  divided  into
halves,  through  external  influences,  in  respect  to  intensity
of  light  and  purity  of  colour ;  once  by  a  relatively  Hon-
zontal,  the  other  time  by  a  relatively  vertical  section  ;  in
the  one  case  principally  influenced  by  terrestrial  magnetistn,
in  the  other  by  the  polarities  of  the  magnet.

517.  None  of  the  single  odic  flames  ever  displayed  an
iris  to  Josephine  Zinkel,  but  appeared  simply  of  one  colour.


CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAfiNET.


535


The  most  important  of  tiiese  researches  were  repeated  vrith
Madame  Ciecilie  Bauer,  and  afforded  still  more  complete
results. When  1  showed  her  the  same  magnetic  l>ar,  free
at  hath  poles,  and  fixed  at  the  axis  in  the  moveable  holder,
ill  the  meridian,  in  the  dark,  she  found  it  to  have  longer
flames  than  Josephine  Zinkcl  had  seen,  more  than  half  as
long  agaiui  and  not  now  of  one  colour,  but  always  in  the
form  of  an  iris,  except i tit/  when  placed  in  the  direction  of
the  dip. Here  she  perceived  merely  dark  colourless  gray
issue  from  the  northwmd  jxile  of  the  magneto When  I
began  to  move  it  upwards  toward  the  north  pole,  she  soon
saw  tlie  flame  acquire  an  iris,  at  first  a  didl,  but  graduaUy
becoming more vivid. But one of  the many colours
here  always  displayed  very  much  yreater  size^  strength,
and intefisity  of  liyht, so  far as to surpa^ss  all  the
rest,  and  to  predmnimtie  so  much  that  unless  close  atten^
lion  was  paid,  the  obserrer  only  noticed  this  one  prevailiny
colour. Without reference to the  constant  presence  of
}  this  dull  iris,  she  described  the  changes  of  colour  in  the
circuit  in  the  following  order :  first,  when  I  had  moved  the
northward  pole  of  the  bar  a  little  out  of  the  vicinity  of  the
[line  of  dip,  upwards  towards  the  north,  a  short  red  place,
Lwhich  souu  changed  into  violet-blue,  and  next  with  the
toward  the  north  and  the  amval  at  this  direction,
ffirst  into  dark,  then  into  light  blue. Between  the  north
and  the  uppennost  {K>int,  or  zenith,  I  moved  the  bar,  ac-
cording to  her  accounts,  through  different  shades,  first  of
[bluish-green,  sap-green,  and  greenish-yeUow,  and,  at  the
[top,  came  to  pure  yellow. Golden  yellow  appeared  dia*
linetrically  opposite  to  the  dip  point. Downwards  to  the
jiouth,  on  the  other  side,  red  became  intermingled  with  the
I  jellovv,  increasing  continually  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the
[southern  direction,  w  hen  red,  with  the  admixture  of  a  little
[blue,  appeared  almost  pure. When  I  passed  onwards  over
khis,  and  inclined  the  pi)le  fiulhcr  downwards  below  south,


536  ODIC  LIGHT  IK  MODIPIKD  EXTERNAL

gray  joined  the  red,  increasing  as  the  latter  disappeared,  till
at  length,  in  the  dip,  this,  with  all  the  accessory  colours,
completely  disappeared,  and  gave  place  again  to  the  simple
and  pure  gray  from  which  I  had  set  out.  This  arrangement
of  the  colours  evidently  agrees  with  the  statements  of  Jose-
phine Zinkel.  The  diflference  between  the  two  beholders
lies  merely  in  Josephine  Zinkel  seeing  but  one  colour  in
each  position,  while  Madame  Bauer  perceived  everywhere  a
principal  colour  associated  with  all  the  other  prismatic
colours,  although  these  were  very  faint.  This  distinction  is
very  simply  and  satisfactorily  explained  by  the  different
powers  of  sight  of  the  two  observers.  The  girl  Zinkel,  with
weaker  vision,  saw  only  the  temporarily  prevailing  colour ;
Madame  Bauer,  with  stronger  vision,  saw  this  of  greater  size,
and  with  it  the  other  prismatic  colours.  (We  shall  meet
with  an  instance  in  crystals,  when  Zinkel  stood  exactly  in
the  same  relation  to  Wilhelmine  Glaser  as  Madame  Bauer
docs  here  to  Josephine  Zinkel.)  Accordmg  to  this  explanation,
Madame  Bauer's  observations  afford  the  most  complete  con-
firmation of  those  of  her  predecessor,  in  numerous  and  fre-
quently repeated  examinations.

518.  After  Madame  Bauer  I  tried  this  experiment  with
the  eyes  of  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  who  saw  odic  light  con-
siderably weaker  than  Josephine  Zinkel.  In  her  usual
condition  she  saw  the  magnetic  emissions  only  blue,  yellow-
ish, or  red  :  but  when  I  introduced  her  into  the  dark
chamber  during  the  catamenia,  she  distinctly  perceived  the
changes  of  colours  as  I  moved  the  pole  of  the  magnetic  bar
round  in  the  circle.  She  hesitated  now  and  then  as  to  the
intermediate  colours  ;  it  was  necessary  to  attend  strictly  to
keeping  her  eyes  at  the  ])roper  distance  from  the  pole  ;  she
sometimes  mistook  light  blue  for  gray,  pale-yellow  for  pale-
reddish,  and  vice  versa ;  but  after  a  few  repetitions  her
definitive  assertions  always  agreed  with  the  colours  which
Zinkel  and  Madame  Bauer  had  announced ;  she  was quite


coNmnoNs  of  thb  maoS


687


I


divided,  however,  as  to  the  gray  in  the  dip,  tlie  hluc  at  the
north,  the  yellow  above,  and  the  red  at  the  south.  She
fouiui  httlc  distinction  between  the  applications  of  the
northward  and  southward  poles ;  there  was  merely  rather
more  of  a  bUiish  tinge  in  the  former  case,  aiid  of  reddish  on
the  other.

519.  Miss  Sophie  Paner  saw  the  same  magnetic  bar
emit  pm*e  dark  gray  vapour  from  it^  north  pole,  at  the  dip,
when  turned  upon  its  axis  in  the  meridian ;  raised  a  little
toward  the  north,  it  became,  first,  somewhat  reddish,  then  red-
gray,  next  violet,  dark  l)hie,  and  pure  blue  when  horizontally
jjointin*;  to  the  nortli ;  higher  nji,  liglit-blue,  then  blackish-
green,  next  light  green,  and  yellow  at  the  top ;  in  the  de-
clension towards  the  south,  first  orange,  horizontally  towards
the  south  red,  and  downwai*ds  from  these  reddish  gray,  de-
creasing till  it  became  pme  gray  again  at  the  dip.  These
trials  were  made  in  the  morning,  while  slic  was  still  fasting
and  in  an  excitable  condition ;  when  I  made  the  same  ex-
periments with  her  in  the  afternoon,  after  dinner,  her  per-
ception of  colours  was  no  longer  so  certain,  and  she  was
frecjuently  deceived  in  tlie  gmy  tints  ;  her  power  of  vision
was  not  HO  acute  as  before.

620.  I  was  desirous  of  going  through  these  exi>eriments
with  much  weaker  sensitives,  to  see  how  far  the  results  would
remain  the  same.  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl  had  tlie  patiencjC
to  devote  herself  to  them,  and  to  remain  imprisoned  with
her  husband,  Dr.  Fenzl,  and  myself,  for  half  a  day,  in  my
liark  ehundjer.  Made  with  the  same  instruments,  and  in
exactly  the  same  way,  the  expiTiments  furnished  the  follow-
hig  circle,  drawn  according  to  her  statements.  devscril}ed  by
the  north  ih>Ic  in  the  plane  of  the  meridian  (fig.  21,  next  page.)

This  agrees  entirely  with  all  the  preceding ;  what  is  here
called  the  lightest  is  the  pale  yellow  of  the  la*it  obsen^crs,
brown  red  is  their  deep  gray  red,  &c.  No  agreement  could
have  been  moiX3  complete.


688


ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL


Fig.  21.
AboTe.

Grott  brifhtneM.
Yeflow. J


Reddish


South.


North.


Brown  red.


Violet

blue.


Redf^rmy


Reddish
streidt.


Reddish  lig^ht

Below.


521.  In  the  last  place  1  made  the  experiment  with  the
still  less  sensitive  Mr.  Hochstetter.  Under  the  same  cir-
cumstances as  his  predecessor,  he  saw  the  northward  pole
of  the  magnetic  bar,  on  the  meridian,  emit  dark  vapour
towards  the  north ;  lighter  and  stronger  above ;  densish
and  duller  toward  the  south  ;  darkest  of  all  in  the  dip.
His  sight  was  not  sufficient  to  determine  colours ;  but  the
various  intensities  of  light  which  he  perceived  corresponded
accurately  with  the  relative  intensity  of  light  of  the  different
colours,  which  were  named  by  the  other  witnesses  ;  lightest
above  at  yellow,  darkest  at  the  dip,  dark  at  blue,  &c.  Even
this  weakest  of  the  sensitives  to  whom  I  submitted  this  ex-
periment afforded  evidence  for  the  accuracy  of  the  observa-
tions with  the  strongest.

522.  These  results  can  be  controlled  by  comparing  with


COTffDTTTONS  OF  THE  MAGKET.


689


the  above  a  single  horse-shoe  magnet  placed  in  the  meridian^
with  both  arms  directed  one  time  to  the  north,  the  other
to  the  south.  Wicn  turned  to  the  south,  Josepliine  Zinkel,
at  a  distance  of  two  spaus,  saw  bhie  flames  at  the  northward
pok,  and  at  the  southward  grayish-violet,  and  reddish  blue
with  a  turbid  veil  over  them.  Turned  towards  the  south,  she
found  the  southward  pole  red,  the  northward  bluish  or  grayish
i^ed,  likewise  obscured  ;  all  four  cases,  therefore,  exhibited
agreement  with  the  colours  of  the  Humes  which  are  observed
on  the  poles  of  bars  under  the  same  circumstances.  Only
single  horse-shoes  can  be  used  for  this  experiment,  because
the  flames  of  strong  compound  horse-shoes  pass  into  visible
iridescence  with  reversed  intennediate  layers,  which  alone
already  comphcate  the  decision,  as  is  shown  at  §  396.

523.  AVhen  I  made  the  experiment  with  the  poles  of  the
horse-shoe  directed  downward  and  upw^ards,  the  results
were  in  great  part  such  as  I  have  already  stated,  but  I  must
repeat  them  here  in  order  to  collocate  and  compare  them,
A  horse-shoe  with  both  poles  directed  upwards  veriiaiUy
and  conformably,  gave  gray  flame  at  the  northward  pole,
and  reddish  light-gray  at  the  soutlnvard.  In  the  direction
of  the  dip  the  northward  pole  gave  darker  gray,  the  south*
ward  reddish  dark  gray.  Raised  a  few  degrees  upwards
towards  the  north,  over  the  hue  of  dip,  the  northward  pole
ifibrded  gray  with  the  entrance  of  reddish,  the  southward
pole  dark  gray.  The  retardation  of  the  southward  pole,
akeady  mentioned,  presented  itself  here  also,  in  the
advance  from  the  dip  toward  the  north ;  the  northward
pole,  namely,  ah-eady  possessed  dark  gray  flame,  while
the  southward  had  not  completely  acquired  it,  and  by
the  time  the  latter  exhibited  it  the  northward  pole  had
already  advanced  to  reddish  gray,  to  the  commencement  of
the  red  streak  next  the  nolet.  When  I  turned  the  arms
mund,  in  the  unconformable  position,  in  the  same  direction,
the  residts  were  again  diflerent  as  to  the  tints ;  as  follows,


540  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTEBNAL

indeed,  without  further  detail,  from  the  many  experiments
ahtjady  discussed.

524.  Lastly,  a  single  horse-shoe  magnet,  vertical  and
conformable,  with  the  poles  directed  upwanls,  always  gave,
at  the  northward  pole,  a  flame  which  was  described  by  the
observer  as  predominantly  gray,  bluish  or  yellowish,  accord-
ing to  the  distance  at  which  it  was  examined ;  at  the  south-
ward pole  a  flame  predominantly  reddish-gray  or  yellowish-
gray. At  a  distance  of  the  eye  of  about  two  spans,  and
when  strict  attention  was  paid  to  the  removal  of  all  other
influencing  objects  which  might  produce  odic  effects.  Miss
Zinkel,  and  many  others,  always  found  the  northward  pole
predominantly  blue,  at  greater  distances  blue,  then  gray.
Madame Kituiesberger, Misses  Reichel, Atzmannsdorfer,
Sturmann,  Klaiberalso,  Wcidlich,  Baron  vonOberlander,  and
others,  frequently  described  it  to  me  as  pale  yellow  below
and  blue  above,  like  the  colours  of  the  flame  of  a  wax
candle  reversed  :  this  was  always  the  commencement  of  the
iris. Under  the  like  circumstances  the  southward  pole
appeared  reddish-yellow  below,  and  grayish-yellow  above.
These  arc  all  merely  confirmations  and  applications  of  the
facts  before  collected  respecting  the  magnetic  bar  passin*^
through  the  vertical  circle  in  the  meridian.

525.  In  order  to  sec  what  proportion  of  all  these  results
was  to  be  placed  to  the  account  of  the  magnetic  bar,  and
what  to  that  of  the  eflect  of  the  terrestrial  poles,  I  per-
formed the  same  exixTimcnt  7rith  an  unmagnetized  soft
iron  lnn\  Having  fastened  it  by  the  middle  on  the  wooden
holder,  1  brought  it  into  the  meridian,  and  turned  it  a
(|uarter  of  a  circle  in  the  dark.  In  the  first  instance  I
showed  it  to  Miss  Zinkel.  It  presented  some  odic  flame
at  each  of  its  poles,  but  much  shorter  than  those  on  the
magnetic  bar ;  they  were  but  about  a  quarter  or  one-fifth
of  the  length,  and  at  the  same  time  duller,  with  the  colours
more  ditHcult  to  be  recognised. Nevertheless,  when  I  com-


rONBTTlOKS  OF  TTrF>  WAGNFT.


jmreil  tlie  result  of  the  ii'on  bar  with  that  of  the  niftgiictic
hiu\  I  Ibund  them  essentially  identical ;  the  colours  wore
similm-  hi  the  order,  diix^ction,  and  suceessioii ;  the  angles
alone  under  which  t!iey  appeared  varied  a  few  degrees
backward  or  forward.  This  ditfercnoe,  which,  however,
was  but  unimportant,  is  certainly  wholly  attributable  to
iniperfcctions  of  observation.  For  although  I  left  the
observer  to  find  for  herself  the  point  of  greatest  intensity
of  each  colour,  it  is  in^possibk%  until  special  instruments  have
been  devised  for  the  ptirpose,  that  this  should  be  done  so
accurately  that  the  statements  should  not  vary  a  few  degrees
in  so  delicate  a  subject,  and  with  light  so  exceedingly  weak.
U  is  sutbeieut  that  the  results  with  the  unmagnetic  inin
bar,  produced  by  terrestrial  magnetism  alone,  coincided
perfectly  in  all  essentials  with  those  which  had  been  ob-
tained with  the  magnetic  bar.

I  subsec|nently  made  the  same  experiment  with  Madame
Bauer,  She  perceived  the  colom^s  quite  distinctly  and  de-
cidedly, but  all  duller  and  smaller  on  the  iron  bar  than  on
the  magnetic  bar  previously.  The  aiTangement  was  the
same, — grey  in  the  dip,  blue  in  the  direction  towards  the
north,  yellow  al>ove,  and  red  towards  the  south.

Miss  Sojdiie  Pauer  also  went  througli  this  task.  She  saw
the  iron  bar  emit  gray  vapour  in  the  position  of  the  dip ;
the  same  when  tunied  vertically  downwards ;  yellow-red
toward  the  south ;  upwards  pale  yellow  when  near  (pale
Iihiish  when  she  was  at  some  distance),  and  towtu'ds  tlic
north  blue ;  all  the  colours  dull,  snuJl,  and  faint,  so  that
she  several  times  had  difficulty  m  detecting  the  true  colour
with  certainty  in  the  gray  regions.

Even  Wilhclmine  Glaser  gave  favourable  testimony  for
this  less-marked  experiment.  I  held  before  her  in  the
dark  an  iron  bar  supported  on  the  axis  merely  by  the
thumb  and  finger  of  my  left  liand.  She  perceived  giiiy,
blue,  yellow,  and red misty light in  the corres|)ontlinp


542


ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIEB  BXTKBNAL


directions,  and  even  drew  my  attention  to  green  between
yellow  and  blue.

626.  It  thus  appears  that  the  circular  iris  exhibited  by  a
magnetic  bar  at  its  poles  and  polar  flames  when  made  to
revolve  in  its  meridian,  is  also  formed  in  exactly  the  same
way,  though  more  faintly,  by  a  simple  unmagnetic  iron  bar,
and  consequentiy  it  can  be  produced  by  the  influence  of  the
terrestrial  poles  alone.  This  affords  an  explanation  of  the
results  of  the  uncomformable  position  of  the  magnet.

627.  I  now  proceeded  to  investigate  the  behaviour  of  the
bar-magnet  in  passing  through  a  vertical  circle  in  the  plane
of  the  magnetic  parallel  of  my  residence,  between  two  and
three  miles  north  of  Vienna.  The  arrangements  were  the
same  as  before,  and  I  directed  the  attention  of  the  observer.
Miss  Zinkel,  in  the  first  place  to  the  northward  pole  of  the
bar.  The  following  diagram  (fig.  22.)  is  derived  firom
numerous  repetitions  of  the  trial.


Orange<


We8t.<
Reddish  yeDovr.


Bloe-green.


Bluish  grnijr.

^ »^East.


Pile  red.


♦  Gray.

Reddish  Ught  jpray.

Below.


CONDITIONS  OP  THE  MAGNET.  543

528.  The  southward  pole,  in  several  experiments,  gave
fig.  23.


Oolden  fellow.


Greenish  yellow.


Dan  yellow.


Yellowert,  with  a  trace  of  red


TeOow.


Violet  gny.


Raddiihgray.


Whitish  gray.

Below.


529.  The  next  person  with  whom  this  experiment  was
made  was  Wilhelmine  Glaser.  Her  statements,  after  many
repetitions,  yielded,  as  a  general  result,  gray  in  the  east ;
yellow  above  ;  yellow  in  the  west ;  gray  again  below  ;
between  east  and  the  highest  point,  traces  of  green ;  between
west  and  the  lowest  point,  traces  of  red.  I  tried  this  soon
after  with  Madame  Csecilie  Bauer.  The  statements  of  this
lady,  so  exceedingly  sensitive,  did  not  differ  in  any  material
point ;  gray  towards  the  east  below,  and  in  the  interval
between  the  two ;  yellow  toward  the  west,  above,  and  in
the  arc  between  them.  The  slight  differences  of  tint  which
were  obtained  in  numerous  repetitions  of  the  experiment,
always  proved,  on  more  accurate  examination,  to  depend  on
slight  variations  of  distance  of  the  beholder,  or  on  deviations


644  ODIC  LTOHT  IN  MODTFIKD  BXTSRNAL

in  the  position  of  the  magnetic  bar  with  r^^rd  to  the
direction  of  the  magnetic  parallel.  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  saw
the  northward  pole  of  the  bar  gray  when  pointing  down-
wards, yellow  towards  the  west,  yellow  also  when  turned
upwards,  and  gray  again  towards  east.  Mr.  Hochstetter,
under  the  same  circumstances,  perceived  dark  vapoiur  down-
wards,  and  towards  east,  upwards  and  towards  the  west
lighter  vapour,  this  being  the  manner  in  which  weakly  sen-
sitive vision  perceives  gray  and  yellow.

530.  It  is  very  evident  that  the  colours  of  the  odic
flames  of  the  two  poles  of  the  bar  difier  but  little  here  in
the  parallels.  The  general  result  is  that,  in  both  poles,  gray
declares  itself  the  prevailing  colour  when  they  are  directed
towards  the  east,  and  yellow  when  towards  the  west.  East,
as  essentially  gray,  corresponds,  therefore,  with  the  dip;
and  west,  as  essentially  yellow,  lies  diametrically  opposite  to
the  dip,  there  in  the  meridian  circle  as  here  in  the  parallel
circle.  The  northward  pole  of  the  bar  appears  rather
bluish-gray  in  the  east,  while  its  southward  pole  has  more
red  intermingled,  violet-gray  in  the  east.  On  the  other
hand,  there  is  more  of  reddish-yellow  at  its  northward  j)ole
in  the  west,  and  a  purer  yellow  on  its  southward  pole  in  the
west.  These  slight  variations  of  colour  are,  however,  difficult
to  detennine  acciu'ately,  and  hence  are  only  approximative.

531.  To  complete  this  set  of  ox{)eriments,  it  was  requi-
site to  pass  an  unmagnetic  no/?  iron  />r/r  through  the  vertical
circle  in  the  pamllcl.  This  afforded  the  following  circle  of
colours  (tig.  24,  next  page)  with  Josephine  Zinkel,  in  the
dark  chamber.

532.  All  the  statements  of  the  colours  agree  tolerably
closely  with  the  result  of  the  magnetic  bar  in  the  parallel,
and  this  experiment  merely  differed  in  the  fact  that  the
polar  flames  were  suiallcr,  fainter,  and  duller,  demanding
some  effort  on  the  part  of  the  observer  to  recognise  tbcra
clearly.


CONDITIONS  OF  THK  MA6KKT.


545


Fig.  24.
Above.


Reddish  yellow.


Lifi:lit  (prenifth
gray.


Reddish  ydlow.


Dark  bluish  jrray.


West.


Yellow,


Dull  refldish  yellow.


East.

Light  gpray  with  a  trace
of  blue.


Opaque  reddish  gray.


Dark  gray.


Light  gray  with
reddish  tinge.

Below.


533.  Yellow  always  displayed  itself  with  traces  of  red  on
the  west  side,  gray,  with  traces  of  bine,  on  the  east  side.
Gray  and  yellow  are  opposed  here  also,  as  well  as  the  dawn-
ings  of  blue,  to  the  first  shades  of  red.

534.  The  third  direction  requiring  to  be  investigated
here,— one  which  must  serve  to  a  certain  extent  for  the
control  of  the  two  vertical  circles  already  examined,  that  in
the  meridian,  and  that  in  the  parallel — is  the  horizontal.
I  give  the  diagram  of  the  northward  pole  of  the  bar  magnet
used  here,  as  is  furnished  by  the  statements  of  Josephine
Zinkel  (fig.  25,  next  page).

The  southward  pole^  when  examined  in  this  way,  behaved
like  the  northward  pole  in  respect  to  the  emanations  of
colour,  with  only  very  minute  deviations;  on  the  former


546


ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFUD  EXTERNAL


Oranice.


South.


Red.


Lifl^bt  gjayish  red.


red  presented  itself  among  all  the  colours,  in  the  latter
the  blue  was  more  predominant,  in  both  cases  strengthening
and  vivifying  the  colours  on  the  conformable  half  of  the
circle,  weakening  and  dulling  them  on  the  unconformable.
Finally,  that  retardation  of  the  development  of  colour  at  the
southward  pole,  which  has  been  spoken  of  before  (§  514),
again  presented  itself  in  this  experiment,  and  was  noticed
on  the  advance  in  the  direction  from  east  to  west.

535.  That  agreement  presented  itself  most  satisfactorily
here,  which  one  might  expect  to  find  in  the  points  at
which  the  vertical  circles  intersect  the  horizontal  circle,
and  thus,  to  a  certain  extent,  form  nodes.  The  coincidence
in  the  direction  of  north  gave  Wwe,  that  towards  south  red^
east  gray^  and  towards  west  yellow,  exactly  and  accurately
as  we  had  found  at  the  coincidence  in  the  same  positions
of  the  two  vertical  circles.  They  thus  all  serve  for  form,
reciprocal  control,  and  confirmation.


CONDITIONS  or  THE  MACKIT.


536.  The  observations  are  rather  more  difficult  to  make
in  the  parallel  and  horizontal  circles  than  in  the  vertical ;
this  arises,  in  the  former,  principally  Ixoin  the  circumstance
tliat  north  and  south,  the  more  powcrfid  influences  upon  the
magnetic  bar,  exert  continuous  equally  strong  action  npon  its
poles  tlironghout  the  entire  citvle ;  while  east  and  west,  tlie
far  weaker  odic  points  of  the  compass,  alternate,  and  have
to  bear  the  whole  weight  of  the  conflict  above  and  below.
The  length  of  the  bar,  the  strength  of  its  charge,  &e.,  thus
all  exercise  more  influence  upon  those  colom*s  which  are
produced  by  lesser  forces  and  more  feebly  sustained.
Nevertheless,  a  little  difference  does  display  itself  in  all  cases
between  the  coloiu^  of  east  and  west ;  for,  in  the  east,  the
gray  of  the  northward  pole  approached  rather  to  blue,  and
that  of  the  southward  was  slightly  intermingled  with  violet-
blue;  in  the  west,  on  the  other  hand,  the  yellow  of  the
northward  pole  appeared  somewhat  tinged  witli  reddish ;
tlmt  of  the  southward  of  the  fidlcst  and  most  brilhaut  yel-
low, with  a  tint  of  red.  The  former  indicates  similarity
between  the  actions  of  east  and  north,  the  latter,  similarity
between  those  of  west  and  south.  Thus  we  here  arrive,
by  another  path,  at  that  result  which  w^e  have  already  onc«
met  with  above  at  ^  391,  namely,  that  east  is  inclined  to
north,  and  west  to  south,  m  odic  respects  generally.  And
since  we  have  already  seen  at  ^  326  and  ^518,  that  east  and
the  downward  direction,  as  well  as  west  and  the  upward
direction,  harmonize  with  one  another,  we  come,  altogether,
to  the  comprehensive  general  result,  that  north-east  and  the
earth*s  surface  (downward  direction)  form  a  general  con-
trast, in  odic  polarity,  to  south-west  and  the  /leavens  (the
direction  upwards),

537.  Among  all  the  experiments  in  which  the  bars  w*ere
turned  round  on  a  circle  in  this  manner  in  different  direc-
tions, it  seemed,  in  several  cases,  as  if  the  end-flames  were

o  o


Fig.  26.


548  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

not  exactly  of  the  same  colour  ou  different  corners  of  one
and  the  same  pole :  for  when  I  used  an  unmagnetic  iron
bar  of  oblong  section,  namely,  twenty  inches  long,  and  about
one  and  a  third  broad,  only  two-fifths  of  an  inch  thick,
Josephine  Zinkel  frequently  observed  that  the  polar  ex-
tremities, under  the  influence  of  terrestrial  magnetism,  gave
lateral  flames  on  both  sides,  which  were  not  exactly  alike  in
colour.  This  was  more  observable  particularly  when  the
bar  was  tiuned  round  on  its  axis  in  the  meridian  with  its
broad  side,  that  is,  so  that  its  broad  face  was  in  the  plane
of  the  parallels  during  the  whole  revolution.  A  cross  section
of  the  bar  in  this  direction  wiU  make  this  clear. When

such  a  bar  revolved

on  its  axis on the

^„^ ^^^^^^^^--^Ic:;;^'''^^^^  Eaat. "^^^dian,  it  exhibited
I  ^^^-"^^ oi.!r^^^ ^"^^'  almost  everywhere  a

.„ o,oi5- _.  ^^^^  different  oo-

loured  side  flame  on  its  east  from  that  on  its  west  edge.
The  colour  on  the  east  side  had  always  a  darker  grayish
tint,  that  on  the  west  more  of  yellowish,  reddish,  or  fre-
quently grayish  tinge.  When  1  used  a  magnetic  bar,  the
phenoincuon  was  less  strongly  marked,  and,  if  powerfullv
niagnetic,  almost  imperceptible ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  wj^
most  distinct  on  unmagnetic  iron  bars.

538.  I  met  with  the  same  in  all  resijccts  in  the  researches
with  Miss  Sophie  Pauer.  When  the  end  of  an  iron  bar
\\m  turned  upwards,  the  odic  flame  on  the  westward  comer
alone  a[)pcared  pure  yellow  to  her  in  the  dark ;  that  on  the
eastward  corner  was  bluish  gray-yellow.  The  southward
side  of  a  bar  lying  horizontally  in  the  meridian  was  almost
orange  in  the  corner  next  the  west,  but  greenish  red  on  that
next  the  cast.  And  I  found  the  eastward  comer  of  the
magnetic  j)()le  directed  towards  the  south  duller  in  all  po-
sitions, and  overcast  with  gray,  while  the  westward  corner


CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.


649


was  brighter,  clearer,  and  lighter.  When  I  made  the  ex-
periment  on  the  west  side,  with  the  nortlnvard  pole  in  the
parallels,  the  flame  always  appeared  of  greener  hne  on  the
north  corner,  and  of  more  of  a  flanic-red  tinge  on  the  south
comer.

539,  I  was  hence  led  to  conjecture  tliat  this  might  be
Me  effect  of  the  transverse  marfnethm  of  the  earth,  or  an
anaifffpus  otiic  phfnomcnon.  In  order  to  trace  this  fnrtlier
out,  I  caused  to  be  prepared  a  longish,  quadrangular,  flat
iron  plate,  of  full  a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick,  twenty  inches
long,  and  six  inches  broad,  and  1  brought  this,  supported
freely  in  the  middle,  horizontally  into  tlie  parallels,  and  into
the  meridian,  in  the  dark  chamber.  The  four  corners  ex-
hibited  dull  odic  flames  in  both  these  positions,  like  an
unmagnetized  iron  bar ;  but  a  different  colour  appeared  at
each  corner.  I  showed  it  to  Madame  Bauer  as  it  lay  length-
ways in  the  lueridian.  She  stated  that  she  saw  flames  at
the  comers  of  the  foUowing  colours : —


Fig,  27.
West*


Yellow  red.


Dark  gnca  bluet.


Soath,


North.


Dlicliiprajrnd.


Orif  red  blue.


East.


According  to  this,  blue  prevailed  at  both  north  corners,  and
red  at  both  the  south  ;  but  yellow  was  intermingled  with
both  on  the  we^st,  and  gray  on  the  east.  Thus,  yellofv  and
gray,  the  contrast,  appeared  as  transverse  in  (his  e.rperhnent.
The  dark-green  at  the  north-west  looked  almost  black,  and
the  black  grayish-red  at  the  south-east  like  black  greenish-
red,

540.  I  went  through  the  same  experiment  with  Wilbel-
miue  Glaser, The  following  are  the  results : —


550


ODIC  LIGBT  IN  MODIFIED  SXTSBNAL


Fio.  28.
We«t.


Rad-yen<m.


DtfkirrMB.


South.


North.


Ony-red.


East.


Gray  red-bloA.


These  statements  agree  essentially  with  those  of  Madame
Bauer,  and  harmonize,  as  to  the  four  predominant  oolomns,
with  the  previous  observations.

541.  I  showed  the  plate  to  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  lying
lengthways  in  the  parallel,  and  she  saw —


riG.  29.

North.

Biw-gnqr.

Wwt.

1

East

Red -yellow.


South.


Red-gray.


542.  I  repeated  the  same  experiment  many  times  with
Miss  Zinkel,  with  every  care  and  accuracy.  The  results
were —

Fig.  30.


Greenish  yellow.

North.
Edge  dark  bine-gray.

St. t

1

1

1"-

Reddish

yellow.

£d«re  brighter,  reddish.

South.

Reddish

■rhite-^ay

543.  It  was  found  that  the  colours,  though dull,  still
decidedly  followed  the  rule,  that  they  appeared  gray  towards


CONDITIONS  OP  THE  MAONET.


551


east,  and  yellow  towards  west.  And  this  was  not  all ;  for
they  became  again  subdivided  in  the  direction  of  each  of
these  points  of  the  compass  :  namely,  in  the  east  the  flame
appeared  bluish-gray  at  the  northward  comer,  reddish-gray
on  the  southward  ;  and,  if  we  subtract  the  gray  common  to
both,  there  remains  blue  at  the  former  and  red  at  the  latter ;
in  the  west,  in  hke  manner,  the  yellow  flame  appeared
greenish  yellow,  i\  e.  with  blue  intermixed,  at  the  north-
ward corner,  reddish-yellow  at  the  southward  ;  and,  if  we
again  subtract  the  like  gray  of  both  here,  we  find  once  more
blue  on  the  former  and  red  on  the  latter.  We  thus  have
all  four  principal  colours  simidtaneously  in  this  longish
quadrangle :  on  the  one  hand,  gray  and  yeUow  at  the  east
and  west ;  on  the  other,  bine  and  red  at  the  north  and
south  :  consequently,  when  we  look  close  into  it,  all  four
primary  colom^s  sinmltaneously  on  one  and  the  same  piece
of  iron,  which  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  broad  iron
bar  under  induction  by  terrestrial  magnetism  :  or,  in  other
M'ords,  the  one  polar  pair  oj* colours,  blue  and  red,  make  their
uppearanve  transversely  in  the  other  pair,  gray  and
yellow.

The  figure  shows  that  the  edges  also  agreed  with  this :
of  the  two  longitudinal  edges,  one  of  which  is  directed
towards  the  north,  the  other  to  the  south,  the  former  is,  on
the  whole,  faint  grayish-blue  ;  the  latter  rather  hghter  red-
dish  gray,  exactly  corresponding  to  their  polar  directions  :
of  the  two  cross  edges,  the  one  turned  to  the  east  is  gray ;
the  other  turned  to  the  west  yellow,  in  conformity  with
their  directions.

544.  For  the  control  of  the  foregoing  in  this  last  experi-
ment w^ith  Miss  Zinkel,  I  laid  a  bluntly  pointed  iron  rod
lengthways  on  the  u-on  plate,  and  moved  it  forward  so  as  to
project  about  a  hand's  length  beyond  one  of  the  cross
edges.  AMien  so  placed  as  to  form  a  prolongation  of  any  of
the  four  cornei-s,  it  absorbed  their  odic  fiames,  and  emitted


552  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  KXTSRNAL

them  from  its  own  point,  imchanged,  but  strengthened
by  concentration.  But  when  I  moved  it  sideways  along
the  cross  edge,  from  one  comer  to  the  other,  it  assumed  in
its  passage  mixed  colours,  compounded  of  those  of  the  two
corner  flames  between  which  it  moved ;  when  moved  in  this
way  between  greenish  yellow  and  orange  on  the  west  side,
it  passed  step  by  step  through  all  the  intermediate  tints,
while  the  colours  at  the  comers  shrank  to  a  confused  resi-
due. The  flame  on  the  pointed  bar  was  therefore  oomposed
of  two  adjacent  colours,  into  which  it  became  decomposed
transversely  when  it  had  sufficient  space.

545.  In  order  to  render  these  appearances  stronger,  I
tried  the  efiect  of  laying  lengthways  on  the  plate  of  the  last
figure  a  magnetic  bar  half  its  own  length,  and  placed  in  the
middle,  so  that  its  poles  were  at  equal  distances  from  the
two  ends  of  the  plate. The  intensity  of  light  and  distinct-


Fig.  31.

Golden  yellow.

North.

Bloeprmy.

'j^

-«!

s  ± rJ  5

^  — -^  w

Orange.  Dull  gny.

South.

ness  of  colour  were  at  once  both  increased  and  diminished.
The  northward  pole,  directed  toward  the  east,  converted
the  bluish  gray  of  the  north-east  comer  of  the  plate  to  blue-
gray,  tlie  reddish  light  gray  to  dull  gray ;  the  southward
pole,  the  greenish  yellow  to  golden  yellow,  and  the  reddish
yellow  to  orange,  on  the  west  side.  Thus  the  northward
pole  strengthened  the  blue  tints  on  the  plate,  and  weakened
the  red ;  the  southward  pole,  on  the  other  hand,  rendered
the  red  tints  more  vivid  and  the  blue  fainter.  Exactly
similar  effects  were  produced  by  laying  the  bar  magnet  the


CONDITIONS  OP  THE  MAONRT.


55S


reverse  way  on  tlie  pkite,  with  its  northward  pole  to  the
west,  and  its  southward  to  the  east.  Under  these  eirciim-
stances  the  bkie-gray  was  changed  to  violet- gray,  and  the
reddish  hglit-gi'ay  into  red-gi'ay»  at  the  east  end  of  the
plate,  wldle  on  the  west  side  the  gi-eenish-yellow  gave  place
to  dark  green-yellow,  and  the  reddish  gray  to  dull  gray-
yellow  ;  all  corresponding  to  the  effect  and  intermixture,
on  the  one  side  of  red,  on  tlie  other  of  blue,  from  the
magnet,  upon  the  colours  given  to  the  iron  plate  by  terres-
trial magnetism,

546,  One  exiierimcnt  still  remained,  which  I  wa^  un-
willing to  neglect,  tliat  of  placing  the  plnte  vertically  in  the
meridian  with  the  cross  edges  upright,  and  the  long  edges
running  from  north  to  south  at  the  top  and  bottom.  Thus
arranged,  I  showed  it  to  Josephine  Zinkel  in  the  dark,  and
was  uiformed  that  the  north  edges  were  darker^  since  they
were  bluish  ;  the  south  edges  lighter,  because  reddish ;  the
lower  edges  darker,  Ixiug  grayish  ;  the  upper  edges  lighter,
because  yellowish  ;  the  lower  south  corner  darker,  since  it
was  grayish  ;  the  upper  south  comec  lighter,  becatise  yel-
lowish ;  the  upi>er  north  corner  darker,  hecaiise  verging  to
dark  blue ;  the  lower  north  corner  lighter,  as  it  approached
to  light  gray  ; — all  clearly  corresponding  closely  and  com-
pletely with  the  principles  already  many  times  laid  down.
I  availed  myself  of  Madame  Ca?cilie  Bauer's  aid  for  further
contiirmation  of  this.  She,  capable  of  seeing  better,  found
the  two  northward  coniera  to  have  bluish  comer  flames,
the  two  southward  yellowish  red  flames.  In  the  case  of  the
two  former  the  upper  was  didled  with  dark  green,  the  lower
witli  reddish  gray ;  this  because  there  was  a  slight  admix-
ture above  of  yellow,  and  below  of  gray,  and  the  often-
mentioned  red  streak :  of  the  two  latter,  the  upper  was
bright  yellow,  the  lower  dark  gray-red,  also  because  yellow
had  become  intermixed  above,  and  gray  below;  Though  it
was  hardly  recjuisite,  I  tested  both  the  observer  and  the


554


lODiriED  EXTERN ilL


obscrvfition  by  turning  the  plate  over  several  times,  bring-
ing the  edge  which  was  the  lower  in  one  instance  to  the  top
in  the  next  trial. Madame  Bauer  assured  me  that  nothing ^J
was  changed  but  the  position  of  the  plate,  the  relative^^
situations  of  the  coloured  flames  remaining  unaltered. This
was  necessarily  the  cose. Such  a  residt  produced  tbrougli^l
the  short  vertical  in  the  long  horizontal  could  not  be  other^
than  most  pleasing  to  me,  since  it  confirmed  in  the  most
delightful  manner  the  accuracy  of  the  preceding  observa-
tions. ^M

647.  Vulxen  I  next  tunied  the  plate  thus  arranged,  a
quarter  of  a  circle  horizontally,  so  that  it  stood  in  the
magnetic  parallel,  Miss  Zhikel  gave  me  the  following  ac-
count : —

Above  and  below,  as  in  the  preceding  experiment.

The  west  edges  lighter,  because  on  the  yellow  side.

The  east  edges  darker,  because  on  the  gray  side, — thui^
all  four  sides  agreeing  with  the  results  already  obtained  on
the  bars.

During  these  observations  the  entire  mass  of  the  plat^
was  odically  incandescent,  and  the  brightness  of  this  in-
creased from  the  shorter  axis  outwards  towards  the  two
cross  edges  (or  ends).  The  maximum  intensity  of  light  here
was  not  situated  at  the  extreme  ends,  but  at  some  distance^
within  those,  as  in  magnetic  bars.  At  this  point,  also,  the^
down-like  odic  flame,  which  coats  all  the  borders  like  a  deli-
cflte  fleece,  was  strongest  and  of  greatest  length.

548.  I  combined  all  these  different  obsenations  into
single  more  comprehensive  experiment, I  had  a  snpportin
apparatus  made  on purpose,  capable  of  holding  a  platc_^
weighing  upwards  of  1 5  lbs,,  freely  moving  on  its  c^utre^l|
and  also  arranged  so  as  to  turn  round  in  a  circle on  its
short  axis. I  laid  this  with  the  long  edges  on  the  mag-
netic meridian,  while  the  cross  edges  ran  from  east  to  west
thus,  in  such  a  position  that  the  plate  could  be  ti


I


CONDITIONS  OF  THE  BfAGKBT.


555


round  ill  a  meridiaiial  circle  in  the  direction  of  its  length,
while  the  cross  edges  always  remained  in  the  parallel
during  the  niovenicnt. In  this  way  1  obtained  the  results


shown  in  Fig.  32.


Fig.  32,
Above,

Opake  yeliow  (EmI  iide),


Oniy-yellow.  iv


Yellow  fn J.
DuU  ^tllow, « tract


C^^TftfMU


Ofty-yellow,


Gny-red*


South. y/ ~


r^tivmUk  rtd.


Gny^red.


G«M  f«ltow{WtMt§id«U


Blue->rr»y.


-—7 North.


Dark  gram-himt*


Dun  rfd'tpmy.


Whiii*h  ffiny.
Below.


Dafk  gr**n,  with  «

tract  •/  rtd.

Gmy,'  I  trice  of  red.
BMittrmk^*


Most  gmy.


Tlie  Roman  letters  denote  the  colours  of  the  odic  flame  of
the  eastern  corners,  the  italics  the  western  comers,  of  the
short  edges  in  each  position.

549.  On  examination  of  this  diagram  we  find  all  the
colours  closely  corresponding,  in  general,  all  round  with  the
laws  already  discovered  ;  blue  is  found  predominating  in
the  north,  red  in  the  south,  gray  below,  and  yellow  above ;
but  when  w^e  look  to  the  particulars,  we  see,  in  all  the  posi-
tions, the  prevailing  colours  of  any  given  pair  of  comers,
somewhat  modified,  in  obedience  to  a  transversality,  at  each


560


ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTBRNAL


corner,  and  this  always  arising  from  an  approach  to  the
colour  produced  by  ea«t  or  west  side  to  which  the  comer  is
directed  :  that  is  to  say,  we  see  all  the  comers  tinged  gray
on  the  east  side,  and  all  those  on  the  west  side  affected  by
yellow ;  both  intermixtures  being  manifest  aU  round  the
circle.

556.  I  made  the  same  experiment  in  the  parallel,
curtailing  it  somewhat.  The  following  figure  gives  the
results : —


MUddUkveU^M,. Y^»^ Greenish


Fig.  33.
Above.

Gold  yellow.


Green
yellow.

West.

Orange. /


//


"7


/


Dark  yellow  jpreen.
Grrtjf  red  yellow.


/


Dark  gT>y«


I


Bed  pettow.


Reddish  li^ht  blue.

y Tdkrn.

y YeOoirrtd.


^


Durk.


^«^^'


;  Sea,  MgMer.  y/^' j.^^

/ Rtddith  xhUe  fm-


Fedditk  prajf.


Blue-RTay.


Whitish  ^ray. White  red. gray.

Below.


Red-jfray  .


The  words  in  Roman  letters  refer  to  the  odic  flames  of  the
northern  corners,  those  in  italics  to  the  southern.

551.  Here,  again,  as  in  all  the  previously-described  experi-
ments with  iron  bars  (§513  and  536),  the  ^^n^ra/ characters


OO?l0ITIOff8  OP  THK  MAGNET*


557


of  all  at  the  top  and  to  the  west  is  yellow,  of  all  below  and
to  the  east,  gray ;  but  we  fiud  red  making  good  its  presence
in  a  mixed  tint  all  round  on  the  south  side,  and  blue  ujjon
the  north  side,  the  latter  sometimes  passing  into  dark  gray,
at  others  producing  tinges  of  green.

562*  The  long  edges  of  the  plates  con*espond  to  all  this
throughout  their  whole  length  on  both  sides  ;  nay,  even
their  two  halves  become  oppositely  polarized,  especially  in
the  direction  of  the  dip, — e.^.


Below


Blue-gray.
Red-gray,


Above


Green -yellow.
Red-yellow.


It  is  impossible  that  these  contrasts  should  display  them-
selves and  divide  and  subdi\ide  more  beautifully  than  they
do  iu  these  numerous  exjierimeuts.  with  the  most  delightful
consistency.  They  make  manifest  the  most  inviolal>le  con-
stancy iu  the  action  of  the  all-ruling  natural  forces,  which
are  in  operation  here,  aud  wluch  come  clearly  to  light  as
everywhere  identical  throughout  the  modifications  of  the
experiments.

553.  And  thus  we  have  established  beyond  doubt  the
existence  of  transversaUltf  in  the  odie  phenomena^  as
was  long  since  done  in  magnetic  by  M.  Frechtrs  earliest
investigations.  The  principal  distinction  between  the  two,
so  far  as  my  researches  have  gone  at  present,  is,  as  may
be  seen  fmni  the  experiments,  that  the  magnetic  trans-
versality  has  more  independence,  while  the  odic  is  more
dependent  upon  the  triple  ]>olar  conditions  of  the  earth.

554,  After  I  had  thus  made  out,  under  conditions  very
variously  modified,  that  certain  fixed  points  of  the  compass
correspond  invariably  to  particular  odic  colovu^,  the  iris
itself,  in  which  the  whole  of  the  colomrs  always  appear
simultaneously  toward  each  point  of  the  compass,  was  still
more  puzzling. In  this  abstnise  subject  it  is,  indeed,  out


558


O01O  LIOHT  IN  MODIPU


of  the  question  at  present  to  attempt  solving  enigmas,  for
here  everything  is  enigmatical ;  but  it  is  possible  to  collect
facts,  to  arrange  them  according  to  their  resemblanc^es,  and
to  bring  the  homologous  temporarily  into  abstract  groups.
With  this  view  I  was  now  desirous  of  examining  whether
the  iris,  which  presented  itself  over  the  poles  of  stronger  fl
magnets,  had  an  independent  existence,  not  subject  to  or  ™
liable  to  modification,  by  the  influence  of  the  points  of  the
compass  beyond  a  certain  limit,  or  whether  it  might  not
perhaps  be  possible  to  separate  its  colours,  and  exhibit  each
independently*  From  the  foregoing  observations  we  know
that  the  iris  always  appears  horizontally  stratified,  in  such
a  manner  that  the  red  colour  is  always  below,  the  yellow  in
the  middle,  and  then  the  blue  above,  over  which  a  further
streak  of  red  occurs — succeeded,  however,  by  gray  smoke ;
we  know,  moreover,  that  when  the  iris  is  directed  towards
any  of  the  points  of  the  compass,  a  difierent  but  always  a
fixed  and  paiticular  colour  becomes  predominant  over  the
rest,  in  size  and  brilliancy,  in  each  position.  I  now  wished
to  see  whether,  if  I  made  the  points  of  issue  for  the
flaming  emanations  at  the  {xjles  of  difierent  shapes,  the
iris,  corresponding  to  the  position  and  direction  of  the
apparatus  at  the  time,  would  be  developed  from  all  of  these
in  one  and  the  same  way.  ^M

555.  For  this  purpose  I  had  a  nimiber  of  different  irou^l
caps  made,  fitting  upon  the  pole  of  a  large  magnetic  bar
They  were  so  constructed  that  the  lower  part  of  all  con-
sisted of  a  short  four-cornered  ferule,  which  could
slipped  on  to  the  end  of  the  pole  ;  the  upper  portions  wei
made  in  vai'ious  shapes,  just  such  as  it  seemed  worth  while
to  test  the  emanations  of  odic  Hght  with.  I  was  thus  ji
enabled  to  make  the  pole  of  the  magnetic  bar  terminate  iifl|
all  kinds  of  points.  I  now  fixed  my  strongest  bar-magnet^^
in  a  vertical  position,  and  exhibited  it,  with  the  various  caps
applied  in  succession  upon  the  upwardly  directed  pole,  to


erflM


CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.


559


Miss  Zinkel,  and  some  months  subsequently  to  the  less
sensitive  Baroness  von  Augustin  and  Dr.  Nied.

556.  The  first  was  a  hemisphere,  attached  on  the  north
pole.  It  was  rather  more  than  an  inch  in  diameter.  When
the  bar  terminated  in  a  rounded  surface  like  this,  Josephine
Zinkel  observed  a  dull  iris,  on  which  tw^o  colours — yellow
and  blue — predominated,  the  yellow  below,  the  blue  above  ;
the  rest  of  the  colours  were  opaque  and  indistinct.  In
this  case  the  usual  form  of  the  emanation  was  not  much
altered,  and  the  odic  flame  was  rather  more  than  four
inches  long,  as  it  was  without  the  cap.

557.  I  took  this  off,  and  applied  a  cap  fvhich  was  hoi-
lowed  out  in  (he  centre,  and  a  sharp  rim  all  rouml.  It
formed  a  cup,  into  which  the  hemisphere  of  the  first  cap
fitted  exactly,  and  they  were  consequently  the  reverse  of
each  other.  The  raised  margin  alone  emitted  all  the  odic
light  here,  and  the  obsener  saw  nothing  come  fmra  the
cavity  it  bounded.  The  flaming  rim  again  formed  an
iris,  but  no  longer^  as  in  the  last  experiment,  with  the
colours  horizontally  stratified,  but  arranged  side  by  side,
and  forming  a  horizontal  wreath,  which  was  but  about  two
inches  high.  This  was  seen  both  by  Josephine  Zinkel  and
Dr.  Nied.

558.  When  I  put  on  a  ring-cap  like  this,  with  the  addi-
tion of  n/ree  point  projectinp;  from  its  centre,  the  WTeath  of
colours  remained  unchanged,  and  no  coloured  odic  flame
flowed  from  the  central  point,  but  exclusively  gray  smoke.
Dr.  Nied  detected  merely  a  bright  luminous  point  in  the
middle.

559.  Substituting  a  cap  forming  h  four-sided  pyramid^
consequently  terminating  in  a  single  point,  I  obtained  an
elongated  narrow  flame,  displaying  an  iris^  in  which  the
colours  were  agmn  horizontally  stratified,  and  which  only
difiered  from  that  of  the  hemisphere  in  ha\ing  more  colours,
and  being  more  drawn  out,  so  that  it  rose  higher.


560  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  KXTEENAL

560.  With  a  cap  having  a  simple  straighi  edge  nmning
transversely  across  the  pole,  I  again  obtained  an  imperfect
iris,  with  the  colours  horizontally  stratified.  Placing  the
edge  so  as  to  coincide  with  the  meridian,  the  colouring  on
the  northward  corner  was  violet  and  blue ;  on  the  south-
ward, red.  The  rest  of  the  colours  existed  in  a  duller  con-
dition between  these.  When  I  placed  the  edge  in  the
direction  of  the  magnetic  parallel,  the  comer  on  the  east
side  exhibited  gray,  that  on  the  west  yellow,  colouring  of
the  odic  flame;  the  remaining  colours  being  irregularly
intermingled  along  the  edge  between  the  comers.

561.  With  a  cap  having  two  points  in  a  line,  I  obtained
an  odic  flame  from  each.  When  one  was  on  the  north,  the
other  on  the  south,  the  flame  at  the  former  was  blue,  at  the
latter  red.  This  was  stated  by  Dr.  Nied,  as  well  as
by  Baroness  von  Augustin.  When  placed  east  and  west,
Josephine  Zinkel  saw  the  former  gray,  the  latter  yellow.
Tuming  them  north-west  and  south-east,  I  obtained  green
and  dark  muddy  red  flames;  from  north-east  and  south-
west, reddish  violet  and  orange.

Finally,  I  applied  a  cap  with  four  points  arranged  on  a
quadrangle,  and  so  placed  that  each  was  directed  to  one  of
the  four  points  of  the  compass.  Differently  coloured  odic
lights  now  arose  from  all  four  points.  Baroness  von  Au-
gustin saw  the  flames  of  the  east  point  gray,  of  the  south
point  red,  of  the  north  point  blue,  and  those  of  the  west
lightest  of  all  and  doubtful  in  colour,  sometimes  Ught  blue,
at  other  times  whitish.  The  statements  of  Dr.  Nied  were
to  the  same  effect,  with  the  addition  that  he  observed  de-
cided yellow  flame  at  the  west  point.  Miss  Zinkel  dis-
tinctly perceived  a  blue  flame  on  the  north  point,  a  yellow
on  the  west,  a  red  on  the  south,  and  a  gray  on  the  east.

5(53.  When  I  appUed  the  caps  to  the  magnetic  bar  re-
versed, so  that  the  southward  pole  was  uppermost,  I  ob-
tained from  the  observations  of  Josephine  Zinkel  the  same


rOKDmOKfJ  OP  THE  MAGNET.


561


appearances  in  all  case»,  only  all  duller  and  fainter  than
when  the  northward  pole  was  at  the  top.

504.  I  tluis  bad  the  pleasure  of  finding  the  flame  bc»t]i
of  the  northward  iitid  southward  poles  of  a  har  magnt't,
which  had  independently  formed  an  iiis  with  colours  of  un-
ecjual  intensity,  tleiomposed  (separated)  by  ihe  applivadon
of  a  Jour-pointed  cap  into  their  Jour  primary  colours^  dis-
played  in  flames  oj  equal  size,  and  in  this  experiment  to
attain  with  a  single  magnet-pole  all  that  I  had  acquired
previously  with  much  more  complex  experiments — namely,
the  pr*x>f  that  every  magnetic  flame  contained  all  the  con-
ditions necessary  for  the  production  of  all  the  prismatic
coloms ;  and  these  may  be  called  out  simply  and  clearly  in
each  case  from  the  corresponding  part  of  the  compass,  pro-
vided oidy  that  such  an  arrangement  of  the  apparatus  be
hit  upou  that  the  colours  can  separate  from  each  other,  and
each  unobstmctcdly  develojie  itself  free  from  tlie  rest.  We
might  say,  indeed,  in  other  words,  that  a  kind  of  double
odic  trausversaUty  Is  thus  demonstrated  in  ciich  pole  of  the
magnet  dependent  ujK)n  terrestrial  polarity.

505.  From  these  results  I  proceeded  to  the  examination
of  a  circular  plate,  I  had  a  disc  of  iron  plate,  rather  more
tlmn  a  foot  in  diameter,  well  flattened  and  boi*ed  by  folding
the  edge  over  an  iron  wire,  so  as  to  obtain  a  smoother  and
tmer  edge  of  about  one-eighth  of  an  inch  thick,  A  Uttle
iron  hook  was  tivcd  in  the  middle,  so  that  it  might  be  sus-
pended with  its  surface  m  the  horizontal  pasition.  By  means
of  a  chandelier-hook  in  the  ceihng,  I  could  suspeud  the  disc
freely  by  a  silk  cord,  and  place  it  at  any  height  I  pleased,
I  placed  my  strongest  bar  magnet  upright  bcaieatli  it,  the
northward  pole  upwards,  and  lowered  the  iron  disc  down
uixjn  it.  In  this  manner  it  formed  a  kind  of  widely  ex-
panded flat  cap  to  the  pole  of  the  magnet,  or,  what  amounts
to  the  same  tilings  an  induced  magnet  only  as  long  as  tlie


662


IN  MOBIPIED  EXTERNAL


thickness  of  tlie  flat  iron  plate,  but  ynt\i  a  thickness  of  the
whole  diutiietcr  of  the  disc.

56G,  I  first  showed  the  disc  alone  to  Wilhelmine  Glaser;
she  saw  it  palely  incandescent,  of  a  light  giay,  but  couU
not  detect  colours.  I  then  lowered  it  on  the  northwi
pole  of  the  bar*  She  immediately  beheld  coloured
light  upon  it,  A  blue  patch  was  formed  in  the  centre  f
above,  the  surface  became  brighter,  and  the  border  coloured
all  round,  gray  towards  the  east,  blue  to  the  norths  yellow
to  the  west,  and  red  to  the  south,  and  these  colours  darkly
blended  together  where  they  were  in  contact.

507.  Madame  CfeciUe  Bauer  saw  the  same  appearance  o^y
the  iron  disc  under  the  same  circumstances ;  not,  howevef^B
merely  a  gray  surface  and  prismatic  colours  on  the  circum-
ference, but  with  the  latter  running  inwards  a  considerable
portion  of  the  distance  tow^ards  the  centre, \\Tien  I
versed  the  magnetic  bar,  and  placed  the  disc  in  conta
with  the  soutliwfu-d  pole,  she  found  the  arrangement
colours  on  the  plate  unchanged,  but  they  were  fainter  and
obscured.

56y.  I  showed  the  disc,  similarly  arranged,  with the
northward  pole  of  the  bar  upwards,  to  Miss  Sophie  Pauer.
She  saw  it  immediately  become  incandescent  throughoii
The  colouring  of  this  was  such  as  might  have  been  exi
pected :  at  the  centre  of  the  upper  surface,  turned  away'
from  the  northward  pole  of  the  magnetic  bar,  a  blue  spot
w^as  formed  ;  on  the  centre  of  the  under  face,  which
in  contact  with  the  magnetic  bar,  a  red  one. She  descril
the  size  of  both  as  about  half  that  of  her  hand,  i.  e.  mof
than  two  inches  in  diameter. They  merged  into  a  yellow
ring  surrounding  them,  the  lower  of  which  had a  rede
tinge,  the  upper  a  greenish,  and  these  were  lost  in
light,  which  extended  nearly  up  to  the  edge  of  the iron
disc  :  here  it  was  surrounded  by  a  kind  of  thickened  border


aoje
tadfl

the
len.

3


CONDtTIONB  OF  THE  MAONBT.


563


ft

ft


of  down-like  flame  rather  more  than  lialf  an  inch  thick  (*'  as
thick  as  her  finger,"  she  said),  and  agaiii  coloured.  Toward
the  east  it  displayed  gray,  toward  north  blue,  toward  west
yellow,  and  toward  south  red ;  the  north-west  was  green,
south-west  orange,  south-east  gray-red,  and  the  north-east
violet-blue,  with  a  short  redder  piece.  These  colours  alto-
gether formed  round  the  edge  a  continuous  wreath  of  co-
lours shaded  into  one  another,  and  thus  a  kind  of  circular
rainlK)w.

569.  Miss  Pauer  saw  a  stream  of  blue  light,  an  inch  and
a  half  high,  like  a  common  magnet  flame,  run  out  of  the
centre  of  the  upper  face :  at  its  very  summit  it  passed  into
8ulphur-yellow,  and  then  intt>  gray ;  this  was  absent  be-
neiith,  because  tlie  disc  was  applied  immediately  upon  the
magnetic  bar.  The  entire  disc  was  enveloped  in  a  lumi-
nous mist,  of  a  downy  chjiracter,  only  distinctly  visible  in
protile,  appearing  bluish  above  and  reddish-gray  beneath.
It  exhibited  throughout  a  kind  of  slowly  unduhiting  mo-
tion, and  both  on  the  upj^er  and  under  surface  flowed  gently
inwards  from  the  circuTnference  towards  the  centre  of  the
disc.  It  projected  about  lialf  an  inch  beyond  the  edge.  She
could  distm'b  it  by  lilowing,  which  caused  it  to  become
more  luminous  for  the  moment,  but  it  soon  returned  to  its
original  state.

570  I  made  a  modified  experiment  of  a  similar  kind  with
Josephine  ZinkeL  I  connected  the  iron  disc,  sus[)ended
by  its  silken  cord,  with  the  poles  of  a  zinc  and  silver  batteiy
of  about  two  and  a  half  square  feet  of  surface,  bringing  two
copper  polar  wires  in  contact  with  the  centre  of  the  disk,
so  that  they  were  merely  separated  to  the  extent  of  the
thickness  of  the  iron  plate  of  which  the  disk  was  made,
amounting  only  to  about  the  tweuty-ftfth  of  an  inch ;  which
at  the  same  time  forms  a  metallic  connection.

The  beholder  immediately  saw  a  blue  luminous  patch  of
odic  incandescence,  two  inches  in  diameter,  formed  on  the

p  p


564  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

centre  of  the  upper  surface  of  the  disc  when  the  silver  pole
of  the  voltaic  battery  joined :  a  red  patch  was  simultaneously
produced  on  the  under  face,  when  the  wire  of  the  zinc  end
touched  the  iron  plate.  No  odic  flame  was  visible  over
these  places ;  but  the  entire  plate  acquired  coloured  odic
incandescence,  not  merely  at  its  borders,  but  over  the  whole
of  both  surfaces.  The  colours  were  so  distributed  that
blue  presented  itself  towards  north,  yellow  towards  west,
red  towards  south,  and  gray  towards  east,  also  green  towards
the  north-west,  &c.  The  blue  and  red  central  patches
formed  star-like  appearances,  with  innumerable  points,  or
rather  radiating  prolongations,  which  ran  from  the  centre
towards  the  circumference  of  the  disc,  and  throughout
exhibited  those  colours  which  corresponded  to  the  points  of
the  compass  toward  which  they  ran.  The  colours  were  so
arranged  upon  the  surface  that  each  occupied  a  segment  of
a  circle,  and  the  whole  formed  a  kind  of  circular  rainbow.
The  edge  of  the  disc  was  again  enveloped  in  a  luminous
thickened  border  of  delicate  down-like  odic  light,  such  as  is
seen  on  horse-shoe  magnets  when  the  armatures  are  in
place.  This  downy  flame  extended  over  the  whole  disc,  in
a  thickness  of  about  onc-flfth  of  an  inch  ("  hardly  as  thick
as  a  quill"),  and  flowed  in  weak  undulations  from  the  edge
to  the  middle,  where  it  was  rather  thicker.  It  was  thick
enough  there  to  veil  the  brilliancy  of  the  light  of  the  disc
like  a  kind  of  mist.

571.  In  order,  if  possible,  to  add  the  key-stone  to  the
result  of  the  foregoing  experiments,  I  had  a  hollow  globe  of
sheet  iron  made,  without  any  projections  whatever.  It  was
rather  more  than  a  foot  in  diameter,  and  composed  of  two
hemispheres  fitted  smoothly  and  closely,  so  that  when  one
was  slipped  over  the  other  the  junction  could  scarcely  be
seen.  A  Uttlc  hole  was  made  through  this  joint,  in  which
was  attached  a  silken  cord,  and  the  globe  thereby  freely
suspended  in  the  air.


COKBlTIOirS  OP  THK  MAGNRT.


565


- to  ail
■It  ai

■fittiii


Weighing  all  the  preceding  discoveries,  1  indulged  the
hoi)e  of  being  aWe,  with  this  armngenieut,  to  produce
s(*iiKrthing  which  miglit,  jwrliaps,  in  some  degree,  approach
to  an  artificial  aurora, — a  northern  and  southern  jKikir  light.
It  appeared  to  me  that  an  electro-iuagnet  would  be  the
tting  means  of  givuig  my  globe,  like  the  earth,  two  mag-
poles  of  equal  strength,  the  intensity  of  w  hich  I  could
have  under  my  eontroL  I  coiled  a  round  iron  bar  of
nearly  an  inch  in  diameter,  with  si  Ik  •covered  copper  wire,
about  one-twelfth  of  an  uich  thick,  and  fixed  it  diametri-
lly  in  the  globe  ;  it  was  made  just  the  length  of  the  iiiter-
lial  diameter,  so  tlmt  it  remained  in  its  place  without  special
fastening,  so  long  as  the  two  halves  of  the  glol»e  were
applied  together.  I  placed  it  upright  within  the  iron  ball^
and  it  was  thus  in  immediate  contact  with  the  liighest  and
lowest  points  of  this.  The  two  ends  of  the  wire  were
brought  through  two  little  holes,  lined  with  pieces  of  quill,
at  the  top  and  lK)ttom  of  the  globe»  and  were  connected
with  a  Smee's  battery  of  two  and  a  half  square  feet  of  active
ailver  surface.  Thus  arranged,  the  globe  was  shown  in  the
dark  to  Professor  Uuss  of  Stockliolm,  Mr.  Ilochstctter,
Baroness  von  Augustin,  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  Wilhelniine
Glaser,  Madame  Ca^cilie  Bauer,  and  Miss  Zinkel ;  |)ersons»
therefore,  muloubtedly  quite  healthy  and  vigorous.

572.  Dr  IIuss,  the  least  sensitive  of  the  niunber,  only
diseemed  the  suspended  globe  diuing  a  few  moments,  and
this  at  first,  when  the  voltaic  battery  was  in  strongest
action  ;  but  it  now  disappeared  from  his  sight,  either  from
loss  of  strength  in  the  inducing  current,  or  through  an
intermission  f)f  his  sensitive  powers.

673.  Mr.  llochstetter  saw  a  bright  round  patch  arise  on
the  top  and  bottom  of  the  globe,  about  two  inciies  in
diameter,  ^rithout  visible  colour,  and  situated  at  the  two
points  of  the  surface  of  the  globe  w  hich  corresponded  to  the


566  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

ends  of  the  electro-magnet  touching  the  inside. He  de-
tected nothing  else.

574.  Baroness  von  Augustin  saw  the  globe  alone  feebly
luminous :  when  connected  with  the  voltaic  current,  she
saw  the  light  increase  and  become  enveloped  in  vapour.
She  discerned,  expanded  clearer  portions  of  light  above
and  below,  at  the  poles,  which  produced  dull  but  visibly
brighter  patches  on  the  ceiUng  and  floor  of  the  room.  On
the  surface  of  the  globe,  fi*om  the  upper  pole  down  to  the
lower,  she  detected  differences  of  colour,  weak  indeed,  but
distinctly  blue  upon  the  north  side,  gray  and  dark  on  the
east  side,  a  reddish  condition  on  the  south  side ;  she  found
the  west  side  the  lightest,  but  could  uot  declare  with  cer-
tainty the  nature  of  its  colour.

Anka  Hetmanck  saw  the  large  globe  in  a  whitish  odic
glow,  before  it  was  connected  with  a  Smee's  battery.  When
the  electro-magnet  was  put  in  action  she  found  the  globe
much  more  luminous,  and  covered  with  broad,  coloured
streaks  from  pole  to  pole.  She  saw  them  blue  on  the  north
side,  yellow  towards  the  west,  red  towards  south,  darker
green  (gray?)  towards  east;  she  observed  green  on  the
north-west.  The  poles  were  more  strongly  luminous,  the
upper  blue,  and  the  lower  red.

Madame  Josephine  Fenzl  saw  the  globe  become  luminous
directly  I  had  cflbcted  its  connexion  with  the  Smee*s  bat-
tery. She  perceived  the  south-west  side  to  be  incomparably
brighter  than  the  north-east,  yet  could  not  distinguish
colours.  But  both  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  the  globe  she
discerned  flames,  two  or  three  inches  broad,  radiating  from
the  polar  points,  and  then,  to  use  her  own  expression,
spreading  like  an  open  parasol  over  the  globe,  concentric
with  it,  both  above  and  below,  but  a  little  distance  from  its
surface.

575.  The  appearances  were  much  better  developed  to  the


CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.


567


eyes  of  Miss  Paiier.  Even  before  the  connection  of  the
iron  bar  inside  tlic  globe  with  the  voltaic  battery,  she  dis-
cerned  the  form  of  the  globe,  as  a  ball  of  pale  hght  floating
in  the  au\  When  I  completed  the  electric  circuit,  and  thns
converted  the  iron  bar  itito  a  strong  electro-niagnet,  the
balloon  became  highly  incandescent.  Colours  soon  appeared
in  the  incandescence.  The  beholder  saw  the  north  side
become  bhic  from  above  downwards,  the  west  side  yellow,
tlie  south  side  red,  and  the  east  side  gray.  She  detected
green  between  north  and  west,  orange  between  west  and
south,  violet  between  east  and  north.  The  light  was  most
intense  upon  the  west  side,  lea^st  upon  the  east.  The
colours  merged  gradually  and  imperceptibly  into  each  other.
But  the  hght  was  developed  most  strongly  at  the  top  and

Ilmttom,  at  the  parts  of  the  outer  surface  corres|K)nding  to
the  internal  points  of  contact  of  the  poles  of  the  enclosed
electro-magnet,  which  were  at  the  same  time  the  poles  of
the  glolic  itself:  the  upper  pole  had  a  blue  patch, the  lower
a  red ;  the  former  being  connected  with  the  silver  pole  of
the  battcr}\  the  latter  with  the  zinc.  Each  polar  patch  was
nearly  four  inches  in  diameter.  Both  passed  into  a  yellowish
colour  at  the  edge,  which  gradually  became  paler  outwards
and  lost  itself  in  gray.  Odic  flame  ran  from  the  surface  at
both  j)oles,  blue  at  the  upper  and  red  at  the  lower,  which
the  observer  estimated  at  a  height  of  nearly  fom*  inches.
She  also  saw  a  delicate  gray  misty  envelope  all  over  the
ball,  most  distinctly  to  be  discerned  in  protile,  and  rising
about  two-tifths  of  an  inch  above  the  surface  ;  it  appeared
to  be  flowing  from  the  equator  to  the  poles,  and  was  dis^
turljcd  when  she  blew  upon  it.  She  perceived  a  more
luminous,  narrow  and  whitish-yellow  ring  running  all
I round  at  the  equator.

^^ 576.  Madame  Cajcilie  Bauer  perceived  the  globe  in  a

^faint  yellow  light  before  the  bar  within  it  was  rendered

magnetic. Directly the voltaic current  began to  pass


568  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

through  the  wire  coil,  a  splendid  variegation  of  prismatic
colours  appeared  upon  the  globe.  The  greatest  intensity
of  light  displayed  itself  at  the  poles ;  blue  above,  when  the
electric  current  was  derived  firom  the  silver;  red  below,
when  it  was  in  connexion  with  the  sdnc.  Both  colours
fonned  brightly  luminous  patches  of  odic  incandescence,  six
inches  in  diameter,  at  the  polar  regions,  dividing  externally
into  innumerable  narrow,  coloured  meridians,  which  ran
straight  over  the  surface  of  the  ball,  perpendicular  to  the
equator.  On  the  side  tunied  towards  the  north  they  were
blue ;  on  the  west,  yellow ;  on  the  south,  red  ;  and  on  the
east,  gray ;  and  the  mixed  colours  appeared  between  these
in  every  intermediate  shade.  The  globe  was  darker  on  the
east  side,  ligliter  and  with  the  colours  more  brilliant  on  the
west.  The  intensity  of  the  light  of  the  colours  diminished
from  the  poles  towards  the  equator,  and  near  this  they  were
lost ;  but  in  their  place  occurred  another  phenomenon, —
the  e(iuator  itself  formed  a  narrow,  rather  brighter  band
round  the  globe.

577.  I  wns  able  to  examine  these  phenomena  most
accurately  and  circumstantially  through  Josephine  Zinkel.
The  period  of  menstruation  was  chosen  for  the  trial.  She
saw  the  globe  in  a  white  light  before  the  voltaic  ciurent
was  completed.  When  the  connection  was  made,  and  the
internal  iron  bar  converted  into  an  electro-magnet,  it  dis-
played a  bi'ight  light,  decorated  wth  the  most  beautiful
colours,  which  always  drew  expressions  of  admiration  from
the  beholders.  Josephine  Zinkel  detected  all  the  same
phenomena  as  her  predecessors : — the  pole  of  the  globe
towards  the  silver  side  of  the  battery,  blue  ;  that  towards
the  zinc,  red  ;  the  light  most  intense  at  the  poles,  forming
from  them  great  stars,  with  apparently  innumerable  j:)oints,
or  rather  radiant  thread-like  prolongations,  nmning  over
the  globe,  towards  the  equator,  in  various  colours, — blue
on  the  north,  yellow  on  the  west,  red  on  the south,  and


CONDITIONS  OP  THE  MAGNET.


569


I


^iy  on  the  aast^  and  thus  following  the  order  so  often
observed  j  the  whole  of  the  east  side  was  darker,  the  entire
west  side  brigliter,  &c.

578,  She  also  perceived  the  band  which  runs  round  the
globe  at  the  equator.  She  described  it  as  a  luminous
streak,  passing  horizontally  round  at  the  greatest  circum-
ference, and  thus  dividing  the  globe  into  two  halves,  upper
and  lower.  According  to  her  descriptions,  it  is  only  about
one-fifth  of  an  inch  I>road,  of  pale  whitish-yellow  light,  so
that  persons  of  a  lower  degree  of  sensitiveness  cannot  discern
it ;  and  benoe  it  was  not  perceived  at  all  by  Mr,  llochstetter,
only  indistinctly  by  Miss  Pauer^and  fii'st  detected  by  Madame
Uaner  and  Miss  ZinkeL  It  is  not  sharply  defined  at  the
two  edges,  but  has  countless  strong  short  teeth,  like  a  fine
comb,  at  right  angles  to  the  equator,  and  therefore  pointing
to  the  ])olc8-

579,  The  luminosity  of  the  surface  of  the  globe,  its  odic
incandescence,  appeared  to  Madame  Bauer  continuous,  but
at  the  same  time  composed  of  innumerable  clearly  distin-
guishable filaments,  which  seemed  to  her  about  one-twenty-
fifth  of  an  inch  thick  (the  size  of  a  knitting  needle),  and
ran  from  the  blue  and  red  patches  of  the  upper  and  lower
poles  perpendicularly  towards  the  equatorial  band.  She
describcil  these  filaments  as  not  so  much  independent  iso-
lated streaks,  as  rather  merely  lines  of  greater  intensity  of
hght.  alternating  with  fiiinter  lines,  so  as  to  give  a  streaked
appt^arance  to  the  whole  as  if  it  were  made  up  of  threads
mnning  down  from  the  poles.  They  were  all  of  the  colours
corresponding  to  the  points  of  the  compass  toward  which
they  were  directed,— thus,  blue  on  the  northward  side  of
the  globe,  both  above  and  below  the  equator,  yellow  on  the
west,  and  so  on.

She  saw  the  blue  and  red  patches  as  much  as  six  inches
in  diameter  (**  a  hand's  length'*) ;  that  is,  with  a  radius  of
three  inches  (''  a  finger's  length**)  from  the  poles. Beyond


670  ODIG  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

this  distance  they  became  subdivided,  and  changed  into  fila-
ments running  downwards  over  the  succeeding  zones,  which
gave  the  polar  patches  a  star-like  aspect,  and  this  the  more
since  the  different  colours  were  of  difierent  degrees  of
brightness  ;  and  the  lighter  and  darker  exhibited  repeated
alternations,  whence  arose  apparent  projections  and  hollows,
presenting  to  the  eye  the  form  of  a  kind  of  star.

580.  The  intensity  of  the  light  of  these  phenomena  of
odic  incandescence,  which  was  greatest  at  the  poles,  de-
creased in  regular  gradation  from  there  to  the  equator,  ao
that  they  at  length  became  dull  in  the  tropical  zones,  and
vanished  wholly  when  they  came  very  near  to  the  luminous
girdle.

581.  The  coloiu^  thus  collectively  forming  a  spherical
iris  around  the  globe  were  shaded  off  into  one  another  in
all  parts;  thus,  blue  through  green  into  yellow,  yellow
through  orange  into  red,  &c.  These  transitions  were  so
formed  that  every  single  filament  running  down  as  a  kind
of  meridian  over  the  globe,  was  slightly  deficient  in  colour,
from  there  on  each  side  of  it ;  no  two  were  exactly  of  the
same  colour,  and  the  difference  was  sufficiently  marked  for
the  observer  to  detect  it  clearly.  This  made  the  globe  look
as  if  it  were  composed  of  thousands  of  coloured  lines,  which
gave  it  such  a  clmriuiug  appeai-ancc  that  Madame  Bauer
and  Josephine  Zinkel  declared  that  they  had  never  seen
anything  more  beautiful.

582.  The  primary  colours  were  again  subdivided  into
several  mixed  tints,  in  their  own  special  regions,  so  that
collections  of  filaments,  all  differing  to  a  certain  extent  from
each  other,  formed  bundles  according  to  their  resemblance.
Thus  there  was  a  bundle  of  dark  blue  luminous  filaments,
and  one  of  sky-blue.  The  green,  as  it  became  extricated
from  the  sky-blue,  formed  first  a  bundle  of  blackish  green,
then  one  of  grass-green  threads  ;  the  yellow  also,  the  red,
and  the  gray,  were  subdivided  in  shades  of  this  kincj. The


CONDITIONS  or  THE  MAGNET*


571


last  fomied  in  the  middle  a  bundle  of  dark  gray  filaments,
four-fifths  of  an  iiicli  broad,  near  the  equator;  on  each
side  of  this  lay  a  bundle  of  whitish  light  gi*ay,  an  inch  and
one-fifth  to  an  inch  and  three-fifths  broad.  Between  the
violet  and  the  gray,  towards  the  north,  appeared  the  often*
mentioned  striking  phenonmnon  of  a  red  streak.  It  was
shar|}ly  defined  on  the  side  towards  the  dark  gray,  not  more
than  one-fifth  of  an  inch  broad  at  the  equator,  (or,  as  she
expressed  it,  about  twice  or  three  times  as  broad  as  the
back  of  a  knife.)  and  then  merged  rather  suddenly  into  dark
violet-blue.  This  remarkable  red  streak  was  particularly
luminous  and  of  a  bright  red,  the  intensity  of  its  light  being
much  greater  than  that  of  the  rest  of  the  red  on  the  south
side  of  the  globe.  Thus  there  was  red  at  both  sides  of  the
spectrum^  hiyhtning  and  ending  the  series  of  colours^  pro-
duced on  the  one  side  out  of  yellowy  on  the  other  out  of
blue,  and  from  this  we  distinctly  see  the  condition  of  tfie
violet,  ijenevalhj,  in  the  spectrum  ;  namely,  thai  it  is  not
a  peculiar  colour,  hut,  in  reality,  merely  a  mixture  of  blue
frith  adjacent  pure  and  independent  red.  The  fact  that
this  red  is  so  wholly  merged  into  the  blue,  in  the  common
spectrum,  as  only  to  declare  itself  in  the  violet,  while  in  the
odic  spectrum  it  is  developed  independently,  depends  on
causes  which  remain  to  be  disclosed  by  future  researches  in
other  directions-

683.  Besides  the  general  distinction  which  is  evident  in
the  intensities  of  the  light  between  the  eastern  and  western
sm'faces  of  the  globe,  a  second,  not  less  comprehensive,  was
detected  between  the  upi)er  and  lower  hemispheres.  The
upper,  mth  the  blue  pole,  tUsplayed  incomparably  stronger
hght  upon  its  red  and  yellow  [ortions,  and  was  didler  upon
its  blue  and  gi'een ;  the  lower,  on  the  other  hand,  w  hen  the
pole  was  red,  was  more  vividly  luminous  on  its  blue  and
gray  parts,  and  was  opake  at  the  red  and  yellow ;  that  is  to
say,  that  the  red  and  yellow  issued  dull  from  the  red  pole,


672  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTBKNAL

and  acquired  brilliancy  as  they  approached  the  blue  pole  on
the  further  side  of  the  equator  ;  while,  conversely,  the  blue
and  gray  were  sent  off  in  dull  threads  from  the  star  of  the
blue  pole,  but  gained  power  and  brilliancy  beyond  the
equator,  on  the  hemisphere  of  the  red  pole.  Therefore
identical  colours,  occurring  at  the  poles  and  in  the  lumi-
nous streaks,  displayed  opposition  ;  unlike  colours  were  in
agreement.

584.  The  preceding  were  merely  the  characters  of  the
odic  incandescence  of  the  globe  ;  we  have  now  to  examine
those  of  the  odic  flame,  A  flame  flowed  out  from  each  pole,
perpendicularly  to  the  surface  of  the  globe,  upwards  of  two
inches  in  height  and  about  an  inch  and  a  half  thick,  whidi
then  expanded  and  overspread  all  sides  of  the  globe  parallel
to  its  surface,  became  broken  up  into  rays  and  streaks,  and
flowed  out  at  once  into  the  air  in  filaments  of  odic  flame,
Uke  the  filaments  of  the  odic  incandescence  on  the  globe,
and  parallel  to  them,  but  only  to  a  distance  of  a  radius  of
about  three  inches  from  the  poles.  The  entire  diameter  of
the  flaming  appearance  over  each  pole  was  thus  rather  more
than  six  inches,  beyond  which  distance  it  was  lost  in  the
air.  The  observer  compared  the  whole  flame  to  a  loosely-
bound  sheaf  of  corn,  standing  upright  on  the  ground  with
the  ears  and  stalks  hanging  over  in  curves  all  round,  so  as
to  He  horizontally  upon  one  another  over  the  band.  The
streaks  of  flame  were  not  steady,  but  flickered  and  scintil-
lated constantly  backwards  and  forwards,  becoming  shorter
and  longer,  and  shooting  out  in  rays  like  the  electric  flash
on  the  positive  electrified  conductor.  The  resemblance  of
this  phenomenon  to  the  polar  light  of  the  earth  is  too  mani-
fest to  any  one  who  may  take  the  trouble  to  read  these  lines.
The  iron  si)here  became  in  this  way  a  terrelle,  analogous  to
Barlow's.

585.  A  second phenomenon connected  with  the  odic
flame  of  the  globe  is  a  thin  envelope  of  luminous vapoury


m


CONDITIONS  or  THE  MAONCT


I


a  kind  of  delicate  photosphere,  or  atmosphere  of  light,  sur-
rounding it.  This  consists  of  an  opuke  veil  of  hght,  not
in  contact  with  the  surface,  but  at  a  little  distance  from  it,
and  floating  freely  in  the  air  above  it,  like  a  spherical  shell.
The  distance  fmni  the  surface  amounts  to  about  two-fifths
of  an  inch  (the  thickness  of  the  Uttle  finger  was  the  expres-
sion), and  the  misty  envelope  itself  was  only  about  one-
twelfth  of  an  inch  thick.  This  hnninous  envelope  is
probably  similar  to  that  which  this  observer  and  many
others  have  described  as  existing  over  a  ball  or  an  electrified
conductor,  which  1  shaU  give  an  account  of  in  a  future
ttintisc.  It  diftbrs,  however,  from  this  in  the  circumstance,
that  while  the  latter  completely  envelopes  tlie  electrified
boll,  our  terretie  is  principally  clothed  with  it  when  the  blue
and  red  streaks  of  light  prevail,  while  over  the  yellow  and
gray  regions  it  becomes  fainter,  and  in  one  part  almost
entirely  vanishes.  This  envelope,  therefore,  follows  morc
especially  the  direction  of  the  terrestrial  meridian  in  which
the  iron  globe  is  placed,  abiding  in  the  northern  and
8onthern  duecticms,  and  retreating  from  the  east  and  west.
Tlie  density  of  the  shell  of  vapour  was  not  altogether  incon-
siderable there,  for  it  was  sufficient  to  obscure  the  filaments
of  light  beneath  it  perceptibly,  and  to  atfect  the  distinctness
of  their  outhnes.

686,  Odia  smoke  rose  in  abundance  from  the  globe  above
it^  polar  flames.  From  the  upper  blue  flame  it  ascended
vertically  to  the  ceiling,  enveloping  the  silken  cord  by  which
the  globe  was  suspended*  Both  this  cord  and  a  small
weight  that  was  fastened  to  it  some  distance  up,  became  lumi-
nous in  a  golden  yellow  colour,  On  the  ceiUng  above  it
formed  a  large  light  patcli  more  than  twenty-six  inches  (an
ell,  slic  said)  in  diameter,  so  light  that  she  could  dimly
discern  the  pamting  on  the  ceihng ;  it  then  turned  outwards
and  extended  over  it  visibly  for  a  distance  of  about  a  yard.


574  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTEBNAL

The  silken  cord  was  also  visible  in  faint  odic  incandescence
for  a  certain  distance  along  the  ceiling.

587.  Six  months  afterwards  I  had  another  much  larger
globe  made  of  sheet  iron.  This  was  about  twenty-one
inches  in  diameter;  the  iron  bar  placed  inside,  one  inch
thick,  with  a  triple  coil  of  covered  copper  wire  one-eighth
of  an  inch  thick.  The  zinc  and  silver  battery  connected
with  it  was  powerful  enough  to  make  this  wire  hot.  The
globe  was  observed  by  Baroness  von  Augustin  and  Miss
Wilhelmine  Glaser.  The  former  saw  the  coloured  meri-
dians running  from  pole  to  pole,  as  already  described,  ^  574,
in  speaking  of  the  odic  incandescence  of  the  globe.  In
addition  to  these,  she  discerned  short  luminous  columns
flowing  out  as  a  kind  of  vapour  from  both  poles,  reddish  at
the  positive  and  blue  at  the  negative.  The  columns  or
stalks  of  light,  as  she  called  them,  spread  out  above  and
turned  over.  She  compared  them  with  the  form  of  a  palm-
tree,  when  the  leaves  spread  out  in  all  directions  at  right
angles  to  the  stem.  Wilhelmine  Glaser  perceived  the
globe  to  be  streaked  all  over,  from  top  to  bottom,  gray  on
the  east,  red  on  the  south,  yellow  on  the  west,  and  blue  on
the  north;  also  green  at  the  north-west,  and  so  on.  The
coloured  streaks  were  about  of  a  hand's  breadth  where  they
passed  over  the  equator,  and  were  separated  from  each  other
by  opake,  indistinct,  transitional  streaks  of  the  same  breadth,
in  which  the  coIoots  were  blended  together.  She  saw  a
mass  of  light  above,  which  she  also  described  as  resembling
a  tree  with  the  stem  ascending  from  the  pole,  and  the
branches  separating  each  other,  and  overhanging  on  all
sides.  This  is  the  very  same  condition  as  that  which  Jose-
phine Zinkel  compared  to  an  overhanging  wheat-sheaf,  and
also  to  a  tassel  turned  the  wrong  way  upwards.  She  per-
ceived a  similar  appearance,  of  a  red  colour,  below,  but  this
was  less  distinct. Anka  Hetmanck  also  saw  streams  of


CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAONET.


575


t


liglit  issuing  from  the  top  and  bottom  ;  that  is,  the  two
l>ole9  of  the  globe,  spreading  out  on  aO  sides  Uke  the
branches  of  a  tree.  Joscjihine  Zinkel  observed  everything
the  same  on  the  large  as  on  the  small  globe,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  girdle  around  the  equator,  and  the  tilaments  into
wliich  each  colour  was  subdivided  on  the  smface  of  the
smaller  globe.  The  larger  globe  probably  possessed  a  some-
what less  intense  development  of  the  odic  force ;  hence  these
variations,

588.  We  see  the  statements  of  Josephine  Zinkel  con-
trolled in  all  essential  particidars  by  those  of  Madame
Bauer  ;  of  which,  indeed,  they  are  merely  an  extended  and
dttailed  ampbticution.  The  statements  of  Madame  Bauer,
again,  are  confinned  by  those  of  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  and
^\^ilhLlmiue  Glaser,  and  the  observations  of  Baroness  von
Augustin  and  Mr.  Hochstetter  form  a  basis  for  these.  All
these  sensitives  report  the  perceptions  merely  in  greater  detail
in  proportion  to  the  higher  degree  of  their  power  of  seeing
odic  phenomena.  Madame  Bauer,  it  is  true,  is  more  sensi-
tive than  Miss  Zinkel  in  lier  ordinary  condition  ;  but  the
last  experiments  with  the  latter  were  nuide  during  the
presence  of  the  catamenia,  at  which  periods  she  not  only
equalled  Madame  Bauer,  but  even  somnambulists  such  as
Misses  Reichel,  Atzmannadorfer,  &c,,  in  sensitiveness  of
vision.  The  reason  why  Madame  Bauer  did  not  report
some  of  the  characters  of  the  globe,  and  described  others  less
perfectly  than  was  done  by  Josephine  Zinkel  in  the  sub*
sequent  researches.  Is  most  probably  to  be  found  in  the
short  time  which  the  former  could  stay  with  me,  and,  on
the  other  hand,  in  the  tranquillity  and  leisiu^  mth  which  I
^  was  enabled  to  experiment  with  the  latter,  to  repeat  the
B  investigations  on  difi'erent  days,  and  carry  them  out  in
r detail

H 589*  Such  explanations,  indeed,  are  unnecessary  to  any
^m one  who  has  atteutivelv  marked  the  course  of  these  experi-

L


576  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

ments ;  the  researches  continued  now  for  more  than  three
years  demonstrate  on  every  page  that  throughout  the  whole
of  some  sixty  persons  with  whom  I  have  pursued  my  inqui-
ries, the  same  threads  of  physical  laws  run  on,  and  that
every  succeeding  ramification  affords  but  new  testimony  to
their  accuracy,  and  new  evidence  of  the  consistency  of  their
connection.  Thus,  in  the  most  recent  researches,  we  have
seen  a  yellow  odic  flame  flow  out  from  the  point  of  a  vertical
bar  of  unmagnetized  iron  (^  525),  but  from  a  magnetic  bar
(^  517)  an  iris  with  horizontally  stratified  colours,  exhibiting
red  a  second  time  over  the  violet.  When  the  upper  end
of  a  vertical  magnetic  bar  had  the  form  of  a  horizontal  line
(^  560),  it  afforded  an  iris  with  the  colours  side  by  side.  Bars
(^  517)  displayed  coloured  odic  flames  at  both  ends,  certain
predominant  colours  always  in  contrast,  those  of  one  con-
trast in  the  meridian,  those  of  the  other  in  the  parallels.
Quadrangular  iron  surfaces  (^  539  et  seq.)  exhibited  both  the
contrasts  of  colours  at  once,  predominant  colours  being  situ-
ated at  the  four  corners.  It  wes  even  possible  to  separate  and
isolate  the  colours  of  the  odic  spectrum  on  one  single  pole  ;
a  cap  with  two  points  phiced  on  the  pole  (^  561)  gave  both
the  contrasts  of  odic  colours, — one  when  placed  on  the  line
of  the  meridian,  the  other  when  arranged  in  the  parallels,
as  a  bar  does  at  its  two  ends  when  placed  in  the  same
lines  ;  and  a  foiu--poiuted  summit  (^  562)  actually  afforded
all  four  primary  colours  at  once  ;  it  displayed  to  the  eye,
simultaneously,  a  double,  crossing,  transversality,  most
beautifully  defined.  A  circular  surface  (^  565)  acquired  in
the  horizontal  position  all  the  primary  colours  of  the  pole
at  once,  producing  at  the  same  time  the  intermediate  mixed
shades.  Finally,  proceeding  from  the  circle  to  the  globe
(^  571  et  seq.),  we  arrive  at  a  combination  of  all  these
phenomena,  each  independently  marked,  but  all  collected
on  one  focus  of  activity,  the  surface  of  the  sphere,  on  which
they  might  be  seen  in  all  their  nuitual  relations  in  one


CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAONKT.


577


I
I


I


iriew.  The  nrrangenient  by  which  these  demonstrations
were  effected  was  ditterent  in  different  cases ;  sometimes  I
Blade  use  of  the  terrestrial  magnetism,  sometimes  of  a  mng-
netic  steel  Ikm*,  or  of  au  electro-magnet,  but  all  came  to  one
and  the  same  ultimate  principle,  as  will  be  readily  muler-
stood.  In  this  section  we  have  seen,  in  innumerable  modi-
ficiitions,  that,  (eH  rhum^,)

590,  «.  Tlic  light  which  the  magnet  visibly  emits  in  the
dark,  is  seen,  by  the  sensitive,  of  different  colours  at  diffe-
rent distances  ;  but  always  of  the  same  colour  to  each
particular  eye  at  a  fixed  distance.

b.  This  light  not  only  apjiears  in  a  variety  of  outward
forms,  but  assumes  every  known  kind  of  colour.

c.  These  kinds  include  all  the  primitive  colours,  all  their
intermediate  shades,  and  white  and  black  mbted  in  every
gnidation  of  gray.

t/.  In  many  cases  they  appear  singly  to  the  sensitive  eye ;
in  such  instances  they  are  gray  at  both  poles,  or  blue  at
the  southward,  and  red  at  the  southward  pole.

e.  Moat  frequently,  however,  and  always  when  of  a  certain
degree  of  intensity,  several  occur  together  ;  they  often
all  aj>pear  at  once,

J\  When  they  occur  together,  and  arrange  themselves
freely,  they  take  the  relative  positions  of  the  colours  of  the
rainbow.

ff.  The  red  end  of  the  iris  is  then  below,  the  blue  above.

h.  Above  the  blue,  the  intermediate  shade  violet  being
interposed,  a  pure  red  appears  a  second  time,  so  that  the
odic  spectrimi,  which  commences  with  red,  running  through
orange,  yellow,  green,  blue,  and  violet-blue,  terminates  in
red  again,

i.  The  phenomena  of  coloured  light  are  produced  ac-
cording to  the  same  laws  by  the  magnetism  of  steel,  electro-
magnetism,  and  terrestrial  magnetism.

k. The last, since  it  is  motionless  relatively  to  us.


578  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  HODIFISD  EXTERNAL

impresses  certain  rules  upon  them,  causing  different  results
at  each  particular  point  of  the  earth's  surface.

I.  Terrestrial  magnetism  produces  them  in  unmagnetized
iron  bars.

m.  In  all  the  observed  cases,  and  probably  universally,
the  phenomena  of  odic  light  consist  of  an  iris,  except,
perhaps,  in  certain  directions  in  which  they  appear  gray.

n.  As  a  rule,  one,  or  more  rarely  two  colours,  predomi-
nate in  size  and  intensity  in  this  iris.  In  many  instances
only  this  prevailing  colour  is  perceived  by  the  sensitive ;
the  others,  being  fainter,  escape  them.

o.  In  general,  they  are  gray  when  directed  towards  the
point  of  the  magnetic  dip ;  blue  towards  the  north,  yellow
above,  red  towards  the  south ;  they  also  appear  gray  in  the
east,  and  yellow  in  the  west.  Mixed  colours,  such  as
green,  orange,  violet-blue,  &c.,  lie  between  them.  This
holds  good  in  all  its  details  in  the  meridional  circle,  in  the
horizontal,  and  in  that  of  the  parallels.

p.  K  the  magnetism  of  steel  or  electro-magnetism  come
into  conflict  with  terrestrial  magnetism,  through  uncon-
formable position,  the  colours  of  the  odic  light  are  weakened
and  changed.  In  the  conformable  position  they  are
strengthened  and  rendered  more  vivid.  Intermediate
positions  aflbrd  intermediate  tints.

q,  Crystallod,  Biod,  and  Od,  from  any  other  source,  act
upon  the  odic  light  of  another  body  in  the  same  way  as
terrestrial  magnetism,  when  brought  into  conflict  with  it.

r.  A  magnetic  bar,  turned  round  on  its  axis,  and  flaming
at  both  ends,  does  not  exhibit  at  its  poles,  either  in  the
vertical  circle,  in  the  meridian,  or  in  the  parallels,  in  the
horizontal  circle,  or  in  any  position  whatever,  odic  flames
displaying  complementary  colours,  although  they  stand  in
polar  opposition.

s.  But  the  colours  of  the  upper  half  of  the  circle  display
more  brilhant  Ught  than  those  of  the  lower. All  colours


Hc  uom


579


produced  by  tlic  imrtliwmd  jjole  of  a  magnetic  bar  are
uioR^  brilliant  in  tlic  half  of  the  cii'clc  turned  towards  the
north,  and  duller  on  that  tiu'ocd  to  the  south  ;  the  couvei*se
holds,  with  regard  to  the  intensity  of  the  hght,  iii  the
colours  i>roduced  by  the  southward  pole*

i.  These  ooluuretl  odic  flames  uuiy  be  oouveyed  from
magnets  ou  to  other  conductors  of  Od,

u.  Magnetic  bai*s,  tertninatiug  iu  several  points,  have  the

coloui-s  distributed  among  these,  so  that  each  bears  a  difte-

rent  colour,  corres|x)ndiug  to  its  point  of  the  compass,  and

tlic  iris  of  every  flame  may  be  decomposed,  or  subdivided  into

gmiis  eiemeutary  colours.

V  I'.  A  fonr-cornered  iron  plate  hi  this  manner  shows  both
magnetism  and  Od  not  merely  as  iongitudunjl,  but  trans*
verse,  so  as  to  present  two  directions,  at  right  angles  to
.each  other.

j\  A  circuhu*  surface  of  u'on,  aiid  still  better  and  more

t^rfectly  an  iron  s|)here  with  a  strong  electro-magnet  passing

Itlnough  it,  exhibits  all  these  appearances  combined,  and

es.  in  addition,  a  number  of  new  ones,  so  as  finally

acquire  every  I'esemblance  to  the  terrestrial  globe  with

he  pular  lights  playing  over  it.

ur.  The  odic  nature  of  the  positively  magnetic  north  jx)le

of  the  earth,  the  odic  nature  of  the  east  and  of  the  earth's

K^urface  (the  nndh\  or  that  helon^  in  all  cases)  bear  a  certain

"character  of  agreement,  in  which  they  stand  in  opposition

to  the  negatively  magnetic  south  jiole  of  the  earth,  the  west

and  the  heavens  (the  zenUh,  or  that  above).


ODIC  LIGHT,  \S  TUE  MORE  RKSTRICTKD  SKNSK  OK  THE

WORD.


591.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  explain  that  odic  liijht
_^uiust  be  cai-efidly  dhfitupnuhed  from  odic  incandescence,

L


580  ODIC  LIGHT,  IN  THE

flames,  streaks,  sparks,  and  smoke,  and  that  the  latter  are
to  be  regarded  as  sources  of  the  former.  This  is  involved
in  the  circumstance  that  we  see  all  these  phenomena ;  for,
from  the  structure  of  our  eyes  we  are  only  capable  of  seeing
that  which  emits  light ;  that  is,  whenever  we  see  anything,
that  something  is  emitting  luminous  rays.  I  have  already
clearly  expressed  myself  on  this  subject  in  §  20  of  the  first
treatise,  l^he  statement  of  Miss  Reichel  there  reported,
that  she  saw  the  odic  flame  of  the  nine-layer  horse-shoe
magnet  diffuse  light  for  twenty  inches  round  over  the  tube,
as  well  as  that  of  Miss  Sturmann  at  §  55,  I  have  found
confirmed,  in  the  meantime,  by  numerous  fresh  observers.
I  will  only  name  some  of  the  more  important  here.  The
blind  joiner,  BoUmann,  discerned  that  the  fiame  of  the
nine-layer  magnet  diffused  a  brightness  to  the  distance  of
an  arm's  length  around,  which  he  compared  to  a  lai^
light  cloud.  Josephine  Zinkel  saw  a  magnetic  bar  throw
light  upon  the  armature  lying  near  it ;  when  she  placed  her
finger  and  other  objects  between  them  she  saw  the  light
intercepted  and  shadows  thrown  on  the  corresponding  parts
of  the  armature ;  moreover,  she  saw  a  light  issue  from  two
horse-shoes  which  I  brought  near  together  upon  a  table
(§  405  c),  rendering  the  surface  of  the  table  visible  for
twelve  to  sixteen  inches.  Miss  Atzuiannsdorfer  saw  not
merely  the  immediate  vicinity,  but  the  whole  room,  lighted
to  a  certain  degree  by  the  five  or  six  feet  high  fiame  of  the
nine-layer  magnet,  so  that  she  could  distinguish  all  the
larger  objects,  as  in  twilight.  I  have  already  mentioned,
on  many  occasions,  the  fact  of  several  other  sensitives
seeing  the  ceiling  of  the  room  so  much  illuminated  by  the
odic  flames  and  odic  smoke  of  magnets,  that  they  coidJ
distinguish  the  hues  of  the  painting  on  it ;  in  particular,
Dr.  Nied  and  Mr.  Delhcz  saw  a  lighted  space,  as  large  as  a
common  round  table,  upon  the  ceiling  of  the  darkened
chamber,  over  the  nine-layer  magnet four  or  five  yards


MOKE  RKSTOltTKB  SENCT  OF  THE  WORD,

distant  below.  Professor  Endlicher  nnd  Baroness  von
Augiistiu  saw  the  ceiling  illnminated  over  the  same  large  com-
|>ound  magnet,  and  to  a  slill  greater  extent  over  a  strong
eleetro-nmgnet.  liaroness  von  August  in  saw  the  larger /<*nrW/{>
throw  large  liglits,  more  than  forty  inches  in  diameter,  both
on  the  ceiling  and  the  floor.  Mr.  Hoclistetter,  standing  in
front  of  a  nine-layer  magnet  in  the  electrical  atmosphere,  saw
the  table  illtiniinated  to  the  diameter  of  forty  inches  by  its
flanie ;  and  he  discerned  a  romul  spot  on  tlie  ceiling  directly
over  it.  Both  the  terrelles  afforded  a  remarkable  oise,  and
one  which  is  the  more  worthy  of  notice,  that  it  stands  isolated,
witliout  connection  with  any  of  my  other  observations.
Besides  thi-owing  a  patch  of  light  some  twenty-six  inches  in
diameter  upon  the  ceiling,  sufficiently  bright  to  allow  the
painting  to  be  made  out,  the  globes  also  cast  a  separate,
half-moon-shaped  patch  of  light  laterally  to  the  north-east,
or  perhaps  the  north  part  of  the  ceihng,  and  this  moveable
backwards  and  forwards  with  the  globe.  This  phenomenon
is  one  which  must  lead  to  important  results  when  followed
out.

692.  On  one  occasion,  when  Josephine  Zinkel  was  in  the
dark  chamber,  she  noticed  a  little  spot  of  hght,  which  she
detected  at  some  lieight  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  room.
We  went  towards  it  to  seek  the  cause,  and,  on  counng  ne^r,
it  was  found  that  the  spot  of  light  was  on  the  ceihng,  and
that  a  slender  ray  of  light  was  running  upwards  to  it.
On  searchhig  we  found  a  magnetic  bar  twenty  inches  long,
and  about  one  inch  square,  standing  with  its  southward
pole  upwards  on  a  support.  From  this  the  streak  of  light
ran  up  vertically,  and  produced  a  spot  of  light  upon  the
ceihng,  the  size  of  which  the  obser\'er  compared  to  that  of
the  bottom  of  a  common  wine-glass.  Whenever  the  mag-
netic bar  was  moved  the  bright  spot  on  the  roof  moved  with
it ;  when  I  interposed  my  hand  it  immediately  disappeared.
This  demonstrates  the  remarkable  fact  that  the  cause  which


582  CONCENTRATION  OF  THE  ODIC  LIGHT.

produced  the  odic  light  remained  closely  aggregated^  ai  a
distance  of  more  than  Jour  yard^,  nnthout  having  suffered
dispersion,  for  the  cross  section  of  the  magnetic  bar  and
the  spot  of  light  on  the  ceiling  were  pretty  nearly  equal
in  size.

593.  I  turned  a  seven-layer  horse-shoe  magnet  towards
one  of  the  solid  walls  of  the  dark  charal^r,  at  the  short
distance  of  two  feet.  Two  spots  were  formed,  side  by  side,
one  dullish,  corresponding  to  the  northward  pole,  the
other  very  luminous  and  reddish,  opposite  the  southward
pole.  According  to  Miss  Zinkel's  statement,  both  the
spots  were  about  the  size  of  an  egg.  I  must  reserve  the
explanation  of  this  interesting  phenomenon  for  a  future
treatise ;  here  I  confine  myself  simply  to  the  fact,  that  the
flaming  phenomena  of  horse-shoe  magnets  throw  light,
which  does  not  suffer  dispersion,  on  the  side  walls  also
of  rooms.

594.  Josephine  Zinkel  observed  a  still  further  stage  of
these  phenomena :  when  I  had  coiled  a  copper  wire  one-
twelfth  of  au  inch  thick  round  the  northward  pole  of  the
nine-layer  magnet,  she  saw  a  beautiful  stream  of  odic  flame,
eight  inches  long,  issue  from  the  outer  end  of  the  wire,  so
exceedingly  luminous  that  it  lighted  up  the  floor  at  a  dis-
tance of  more  than  a  yard.  The  experiments  immediately
following  will  confirm  still  more  the  contents  of  this
paragraph.


CONCENTRATION  OF  THE  ODIC  LIGHT.

595.  I  have  since  repeated  on  many  sensitives  the  ex-
periment described  at  ^  18  of  the  first  treatise,  in  which  1
endeavoured  to  concentrate  the  magnetic  light  by  means  of
a  glass  lens,  in  the  presence  of  Miss  Reichel.  For  this
purpose  I  obtained  from  Paris  a  large  lens  a  foot  in  dia-


CONCENTRATION  OF  THE  ODlU  LIUIIT.


B83


meter,  with  a  focal  length  of  about  elovcQ  inches.  I  bad  this
heavy  glass  so  uiouiited  as  to  be  easily  mo\'eablc  iii  any
ilircctioii.  I  laid  down  a  hirge  Diiio-Iayer  horse-shoe
iuagnet  at  a  distance  of  forty  inclies  from  the  lens,  with
both  poles  directed  towaids  it.  I  could  not  well  place  the
magnet  further  off,  since  I  should  then  have  lost  too  oiuch
of  the  always  sparing  amount  of  light;  on  the  other  hand,
the  flame  of  the  magnet  was  itself  ten  or  twelve  inches
broad,  and  thus  I  could  at  all  events  reckon,  in  spite  of  the
proximity  of  the  source,  upon  a  sufficient  quantity  of  paial-
lel  rays  of  light  falling  upon  the  lens  to  admit  of  their
being  concentrated  into  one  principal  focus.  This  arrange-
ment was  suhuiitted  in  the  dark  room,  at  different  times,  to
the  sickly  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  Madame  Kicnesberger,
Jliss  Dorfer,  and  Friedrich  Weidlieh,  to  the  healthy  Messrs.
Kotschy  and  Tii^ka,  the  joiner  Klaiber,  and  the  blind  BoU-
uiann  ;  also  to  Miss  Zinkel  and  W'ilhelmiiic  Glaser.  Even
the  blind  man  could  distinguish  light  at  these  different
points ;  and  w hen  I  made  him  feel  his  way  to  them,  he
placed  his  hands,  successively,  on  the  magnet,  which  he
stated  to  have  pale  yellowish  light ;  on  the  glass  lens,  w^hich
were  reddish  ;  and,  lastly,  on  the  screen,  which  he  stated
to  be  white,  and  the  smallest  but  strongest  of  the  Ughts.
With  a  distance  of  from  twelve  to  sixteen  inches  between
the  screen  and  the  lens,  all  the  other  persons  perceived  a
round  spot  of  light  upon  the  former  from  foiu*-fifths,  one
^nd  three-fifths,  to  more  than  tliree  inches  in  diameter  j
most  aeciu'ate  observers  stated  tvirelve  inches  to  be  the
distance,  between  the  lens  and  screen,  at  which  the  focus
appeared  smallest  and  brightest ;  in  particular,  Madame  Kie*
nesbergcr,  Wilhclmine  Glascr^  and  Josephine  Zinkeb  At  the
same  time  they  all  saw  the  glass  lens  in  reddish  odic  incan-
descence, just  as  they  saw  the  bell  of  the  air-pump  when
the  magnet  w^as  beneath  it ;  hut  the  light  in  the  focus  was
white. Mr;  Kotschy  and  Miss  Atzmaansdorfer  called  my


584  CONCENTRATION  OF  THE  ODIC  LIGHT.

attention  especially  to  a  distinct  cone  of  light  which  they
saw  with  its  base  resting  against  the  lens,  the  apex  con-
verging into  the  focus.  When  I  moved  the  screen  a  little
nearer  or  farther  oflF  the  lens,  in  the  presence  of  Josephine
Zinkel  and  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  they  saw  the  size  of  the  spot
of  light  upon  the  former  increase  every  time.  Madame
Kienesberger  made  the  same  statement,  with  the  addition
that  eveiy  time  I  removed  the  screen  a  Utile  further  off,  the
enlarged  image  assumed  the  prismatic  colours,  arranged  in
the  following  order :  a  dark  red  spot  in  the  middle,  around  this
a  yellow  ring,  which  was  encompassed  by  a  broader  ring  of
blue.  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  whom  I  allowed  to  move  the  screen
backwards  and  forwards  herself,  in  the  dark,  until  she  hit  the
focus,  sometimes  saw  a  blue  ring  appear  outside  the  yellow
circle,  sometimes  a  blue  spot  arose  in  the  middle  of  it.
Josephine  Zinkel  gave  me  similar  accounts  many  times.
Thus,  an  iris  had  begun  to  develope  itself  here  also.  Al-
though I  had  entertained  some  hope  of  being  able  to  ob-
serve the  phenomena  myself  when  the  light  was  concen-
trated, I  could  not,  unfortunately,  perceive  the  slightest
trace.  I  laid  two  magnets,  a  nine-fold  and  a  seven-fold,
one  upon  the  other,  in  the  presence  of  Baroness  von  Au-
gustin,  with  the  view  of  rendering  the  effects  of  the  light
more  powerful.  She  saw  upon  the  screen  a  round  patch  of
light,  about  six  inches  in  diameter.  She  detected  in  the
middle  of  this  an  inner  round  place,  about  an  inch  in  di-
ameter, much  more  strongly  illuminated.  This  was  evi-
dently the  focus  of  the  parallel  rays  that  fell  upon  the  lens.
The  Baroness  was  kind  enough  to  make  an  oil-painting
representing  this  phenomenon  as  she  saw  it,  thus  making  it
quite  clear  to  every  one.  I  went  through  the  same  experi-
ments, pretty  nearly  in  the  same  way,  with  two  superim-
posed magnets,  in  the  presence  of  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl.
As  she  about  equals  Baroness  von  Augustin  in  the  degree  of
sensitiveness,  it  was  interesting  to  obtain  from  them  both


I

I

i


COWCTOTHATIOK  OF  THE  OBlC  LIGHT.  585

exactly  sioiilar  descriptions  of  the  size  and  intensity  of  the
hiinitious  appearances  on  the  screen.  I  tested  the  sensitive
beholders  by  making  various  aUerations  in  the  dark,  which
they  could  neither  perceive  nor  understand ;  I  moved  the
screen  backwards,  forwards,  and  sideways,  pushed  the  mag-
net to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  and  turned  the  lens  upwards
and  downwards ;  in  every  case  they  all  told  me  of  altera-
tions in  the  position  of  the  focal  image,  corresponding  to
those  it  should  sufl'er  according  to  the  known  laws  of  di-
optrics, and  which  it  would  be  quite  superfluous  to  enume-
rate here.  The  foregoing  confirms  the  experiment  with
Miss  Reichel,  formerly  made  known  by  the  testimony  of
fom*  sick  and  eight  healthy  new^  witnesses,  and  I  can  only
desire  that  other  conscientious  observers  will  soon  repeat
them,  and  establish  the  facts  I  have  recorded.*

^  Towards  the  clone  of  the  proceedings  of  the  eo-called  Committee  of
the  Vienna  PhyBiciana,  a  divUioD  arose  in  iia  owu  bosom.  Some  of
Ihcm,  particularly  Drs.  Wotzel  and  Steiner,  felt  the  tincertainty  of  the
plan  of  investigation,  and  the  wont  of  credible  fountlntioii  for  tlie  eon*
etuniona  drawn.  The  latter  toolc  the  precaution,  before  the  publication
of  the  reports  of  the  phy.Mcians,  to  inquire  of  some  of  the  sensitive
penous  whom  I  had  experimented  with  as  to  the  methods  I  pursued^
and  their  results.  As  he  received  from  the  most  trustworthy  persona
nothing  but  confirmation  of  the  experience  of  sensations  of  feeling  and
sight  exactly  such  as  1  had  described  in  my  publications,  he  expressed
a  desire  to  witness  some  of  my  experiments  for  Ids  own  conviction.
Perfectly  ready  to  accede  to  this,  I  invited  liim  to  a  trial  with  a  new
sensitive  person,  whom  I  had  never  seen  before*  Dr.  Sti'iner  could  not
but  be  convinced,  from  bis  own  inspection,  of  the  accuracy  with  whiidi
my  iuvestigatiouB  were  made ;  and  he  necessarily  felt  a  misgiving  that
the  superficial  labours  of  the  committee  might  be  refuted  with  proofs
by  me,  and  the  participators  in  the  affair  be  sooner  or  later  exposed.
This  determined  him  to  address  the  meeting  of  the  Medical  Society  on
the  1 6th  of  November,  184C,  urgently  opposing  the  publication  of  the
report  of  the  committee  against  Miss  Reichel,  and  indirectly  against
ine.  In  his  address,  which  appeared  publicly  in  the  printed  report  of
tliat  day*8  silting,  he  says,  among  other  things*  **  from  such  results**  (as
those  obtained  by  the  labours  of  the  committee)  no  absolute  proofs


686  CONCENTRATION  OF  THE  ODIC  LIGHT.

596.  Another  observation,  made  by  Professor  Endlicher,
also  refers  here.  Commonly  wearing  spectacles,  he  kept
them  on  in  the  dark  chamber.  As  I  was  showing  him
magnets,  which  he  did  not  see  so  distinctly  as  I  expected
from  what  I  knew  of  the  degree  of  his  sensitiveness,  it
struck  Dr.  Fenzl,  who  was  present,  that  the  spectacles
might  interfere.  Professor  Endlicher  removed  them.  He
immediately  saw  the  emanations  of  light  from  the  magnets
very  distinctly,  and  just  as  I  had  presupposed  from  his
sensitive  excitability.  The  glasses  had  thus  certainly  re-
flected one  portion  of  the  light,  and  absorbed  another,  and
what  remained  was  so  small  a  residuum  that  there  was
scarcely  enough  to  be  perceived  even  faintly  by  the  sensitive
eye,  while  the  collective  amount  given  out  by  the  magnet
was  very  clearly  visible,  and  displayed  a  flame  four  inches
long.

597.  Wheii  I  had  thus  established  that  the  magnetic
light  penetrates  glass,  and,  in  its  passage,  imdergoes  ab-

Rgfiinst  the  matter  could  be  drawn.  For  hia  own  part,  he  waa  com-
pelled to  declare  that  opportunity  had  been  afforded  him  of  seeing
liarou  von  Reicheubach  experiment  with  persons  for  whose  honour,
truthfulness,  and  impartiality,  he  could  ?ouch  as  for  his  own,  and  that
he  had  been  astonished  at  the  agreement  of  the  statements  of  these  with
the  assertions  contained  in  Baron  von  Reichenbach's  pamphlets.  And
other  persons,  well  known  to  him,  and  of  the  greatest  respectabihty,
had  assured  him  that  they  had  found  Reichenbach*s  experiments  con-
firmed in  their  own  persons."  He  therefore  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that
the  report  of  the  committee  would  only  compromise  the  Society,  and
that  it  would  be  much  better  not  to  publish  it  at  all,  or  at  all  events
only  within  the  circle  of  their  own  members,  which  limits,  as  a  private
matter,  it  should  not  be  allowed  to  pass.  A  violent  discussion  arose
on  the  subject  on  the  general  meeting  of  the  Society,  and  it  was  de-
cided by  a  large  majority  that  the  report  of  the  committee  should  not
he  published  iu  the  name  of  the  Society.  How  far  this  resolution  was
carried  out  by  the  officers  of  the  Society  is  seen  on  looking  at  the  title-
page  of  the  Part  of  the  Journal  in  which  the  report  appeared. — Author  i
Nolo.


CONCKNTRATION  OF  TUK  ODIC  LIGHT,


rwfcptiau,  rt'flexioH,  and  rrfmclioD,  uiiiforia  witli  those  of
common  light,  it  reiuuined  to  test  the  first  two  by  Reflecting
feurfac^s,  and  compare  their  behaviour  with  that  of  ordinary

i  light.  It  was  quite  possible  that  otlic  hght  mlj^ht  be  ab-
sorbed, and  be  incapable  of  producing  catoptric  phenomena^
in  so  far,  at  least,  that  the  Od,  from  which  it  is  derived,  is
readily  absorbed  by  all  bodies,
5US.  I  made  use  of  a  common  qnicksilvcrcd  mirror  in
I  luy  experiments  in  this  direction,  I  phiced  one  in  front  of
H  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer's  bed,  and  opposite  to  it,  in  a  suitable
|K>sition,  a  nine-layer  magnet,  standing  with  its  poles  up-
right*  She  saw  in  the  mirror  the  image  of  the  odic  incan-
descence of  the  metal,  but  she  did  not  discern  odic  flame,
tiut  even  a  trace,  during  careful  search  on  diflerent  dark
nights, I  repeated  the  same  experiment  a  year  after  with

PMiss  Zhikel ;  she  also  saw  the  odic  incandescence  of  the
horse-shoe  reflected  from  the  mirror,  but  coukl not  dis-
tinguish a  flame,  or  any  other  kind  of  emanatio!i,  fram  the
, magnet. The  hght  of  tlie  flame  of  the  nine- layer  magnet

I  was  therefore  so  weak  that  after  the  usual  absorption  by  the
glass  there  did  not  remain  enougli  for  reflexion  to  be  de-
tected by  these  two  sensitives  in  their  conditions  at  those
periods,

biid,  I  had  given  up  hope  of  finding  these  emanations
deteicted  in  the  niys  reflected  from  a  mirror,  when,  in
an  experiment  for  confirmation,  !uade  some  time  after
with  WiUielmine  Gkiser,  she  not  only  corroborated  the
statements  of  seeing  the  reflection  of  the  odic  incundeseence,
but  declared  she  saw  a  faint  appearance  of  the  flame  in  the
mirror;  weak,  it  is  true,  but  yet  a  real  representation.  I
then  repeated  the  experiment  with  Josephine  Zinkel  during
the  eatamenia.  She  also  now  saw  a  reflexion  of  the  niag-
netic  flames  very  distinctly,  although  unable  to  detect  it
before.  In  the  lust  place,  1  tested  it  with  the  very  sensi«
live  eves  uf  iMadamc  Cacilic  Bauer. She  immediatt»lv  saw


588  CONCENTRATION  OP  THE  ODIC  UOHT.

a  number  of  incandescent  objects  in  the  mirror  with  tolerable
clearness.  She  perceived  the  odic  flame  of  magnets  suffi-
ciently well  to  distinguish  pretty  accurately  between  the
blue  and  red  of  the  two  poles.  But  she  declared  that  the
image  in  the  mirror  was  far  duller  and  fainter  than  the
direct  light  of  the  flame.  In  the  ori^al  flames  of  the  two
poles  of  a  seven-layer  horse-shoe,  she  could  detect  even  a
portion  of  an  iris,  yellow  and  violet,  as  well  as  some  smoke ;
they  were  certainly  weak,  but  in  the  reflected  image  they
had  vanished  altogether  from  her  eyes.

600.  In  particular  cases  odic  Ught  is  also  capable  of
penetrating  semi-transparent  bodies.  This  is  shown  by  the
fact  that  it  is  still  detected  in  the  dark  through  closed  eye-
lids.  I  owe  this  observation  to  Madame  Josephine  Eenzl,  who
first  observed  that  she  could  to  a  certain  extent  perceive  the
odic  luminosity  in  the  dark  chamber,  even  when  she  had
closed  her  eyes.  I  repeated  the  experiment  with  Madame
Ca3cihe  Bauer  and  Misses  Zinkel  and  Atzsmannsdorfer.
They  all  perceived  odic  flame  and  incandescence  with  closed
eyes.  It  is  true  they  lost  the  form  and  shape  of  objects,
but  they  could  detect  the  presence  of  any  body  which
emitted  odic  light,  wthout  doubt,  when  it  was  brought  near
them.  They  could  point  out  the  direction  from  which  the
brightness  came,  could  state  whether  it  was  derived  from
one  or  several  detached  points,  and  they  perceived  distinctly
odic  incandescence  as  well  as  flame ;  not,  indeed,  distinguish-
ing the  two,  but  recognizing  the  character  of  emitting  light
common  to  both.

601.  The  eyeUd,  however,  is  very  transparent.  When
a  person  is  in  the  dark,  with  the  eyes  closed,  and  a  lighted
candle  is  brought  near,  the  approach  of  the  light  is  in-
stantly and  very  strongly  perceived;  indeed,  this  trans-
parency is  so  great  that  no  one  can  bear  to  keep  even  the
closed  eyes  turned  towards  the  brightly  shining  sun.  The
odic  liyht,  theii,  weak  as  it  is,  is  still  strong  enough  to


THE  NORTHERN  lAGUT,

penetrate  throtufk  closed  eyvllds,  and  hvc&me  visible  to  the
sensitive.  We  shall  hereafter  find  that  this  circumstance,
by  itself  iuisiguificaiit,  becomes  of  some  importance  when  it
comes to  be  apphed  to  the  ekieitlation of  other  rather

striking  pheoomena  of  scusitiveiicss.


THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.


I

I
I


(i()2.  And  now  I  must  beg  the  reader  to  cast  a  retro-
spective glance  back  to  §  21  of  the  first  of  these  treatises;
thus  to  the  very  beginning  of  my  labours.  I  already  ex-
pressed the  opinion  there,  at  a  time  when  I  was  in  pos-
session of  far  less  experience  of  the  odic  light,  that  it  was  the
same  thing  which,  on  a  large  scale,  constitutes  the  northern
light,  and  polar  Hght  generally.  In  the  long  intervtd  that
has  elapsed,  which  1  have  uninterruptedly  devoted  to  the
study  of  this  subject,  this  opinion  has  not  merely  remained
unshaken,  but  has  had  confirmation  and  support  forced
upon  it  on  every  side.  The  ohsen  ations  which  I  have  made
on  the  bcha\dour  of  the  odic  light  under  the  air-pump,  its
development  of  colours,  the  motions  which  the  odic  Ught
may  be  made  to  exhibit  at  will,  the  discovery  that  it  is
visible  to  great  numbers  of  perfectly  healthy  persons, —
these  things  arc  all  weighty  considerations,  not,  in  any
case,  opposed  to  my  original  view,  but  evirlently  new  and
|K)werful  supports  to  it.  Sir  Humi)hry  Davy's  idea,  that  the
nortliern  light  is  not  so  much  a  magnetic  as  an  electrical  phe-
nomenon, a  tmnquil  and  slow  neutralization  of  the  electricity
of  the  air  at  great  heights,  when  the  air,  much  rarefied,
taking  the  place  of  the  rapid  stormy  discharges  of  the  thnn*
derstorms,  occiuring  at  less  attitude  in  our  latitudes,  is
mainly  opposed  by  the  follomng  facts :  that  in  the  tempe-
rate zone  also,  as  well  as  in  tlic  arctic,  the  meteoric  changes
of  rain  and  snow  proceed  without  thunderstorms  tlu^ough


590  THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.

the  whole winter,  and  yet  no  phenomenon resembling
the  polar  light  is produced  by  an  accumulation  of  the
electricity  of  the  air; that  from  the  numerous  recorded
observations  made  since  Davy's  time,  it  is  found  that  the
polar  lights  do  not  appear  more  frequently  in  winter  than
in  summer; that  so  universal  an accumulation  of  elec-
tricity in  the  atmosphere  as would  be  necessary to  half
fill often one quarter  of  the  globe with electric  light,
through  half  the  night,  is,  from  the rest  of  our  expe-
rience of  the  laws  of  electricity,  inconceivable  under  the
constant  movement  existing  in  the  air  ;  lastly,  that  there  is
no  apparent  reason  why  such  an  accumulation  of  electrified
air,  supposing  it  to  exist,  should  occur  in  preference  at  the
magnetic  poles. Davy's  hypothesis  was  favourably  received
as  an  ingenious  idea,  but  has  not  proved  to  have  foundation
in  the  settled  laws  of  science ; it  does  not  give  sufficient
account  of  the  relations  of  cause  and  effect. But  now  that
we  know  from  our  more  recent  researches  that  flaming
lights  exist  over  the  poles  of  the  magnets^  which  are  larger
than  magnets  themselves ; since  we  have  seen  that  this
flaming  appearance  occurs  mobile,  undulating,  frequently
serpentine,  like  rolls  of  riband  blown  about  by  the  wind ;
often  varying  in  size  from  larger  to  smaller,  shooting  out
rays,  scintillating,  variegated  in  colour,  and  also  in  the  fonn
of  vapour; since  we  perceive  it  to  be  capable  of  being
made  to  flare  backwards  and  forwards  by  our  breath  ;
finally,  when  wc  now  hear  that  it  increases  in  vast  propor-
tions in  size,  as  well  as  intensity  and  brilliancy  of  light,  in
rarifled  air  ;  when  we  see  how  the  play  of  colour  of  the
rainbow  follows  it  every  step,  &c., — there  is  actually  scarcely
a  single  essential  character  of  distinction  between  magnetic
odic  light  and  the  northern  light  left,  for  it  would  be  from
the  difference  of  intensity  that  the  latter  is  visible  to  ordi-
\\i\vy  eyes,  while  the  former  can  only  be  seen  by  the  sensi-
tive. The  undulations  and  serpentine  movements  some-


THE  WORTH  ERIf'M OH T.


591


I


times  exhibited  liy  the  northcni  liglit  arc  thus  explained
simply  Ijj  the  mofioii  of  the  wind,  ^vhich  drives  the  odic
flames  about  over  one  anotlicr,  in  the  more  or  loss  nuified
higher  regions  of  the  atmosphere,  as  om*  breath  does  the
odie  flame  over  the  poles  of  magnets  i  the  constant  eliauge
by  increase  and  decrease  of  size  correspond  exactly  with
the  unsteadiness  \vhich  the  magnitude  of  the  flmne  exhibits
in  our  laboratories;  ami  the  vast  fliimes  al  gR*ut  and  unde-
termined altitudes  which  have  been  observed  by  particular
travellers  above  the  chrns  or  most  elevated  eluuds  {Uhn-
menvolken),  agree  most  beautifully  with  our  observations
under  the  air-ptnnp,  ^  481,  where  the  odic  light  increased
remarkaldy  in  size  and  hitensity  of  light  iinder  the  dina-
uished  pressure  of  half  an  atmosphere.  And  the  equally
well-attested  observations  of  other  travellers,  who  have
observed  abundance  of  auroras  wnth  the  most  scrupulous
attention  in  the  polar  regions,  where  the  altitudes  appear  to
be  very  much  less,  and  the  light  often  in  the  form  of  lumi-
nous clouds,  harmonize  perfectly  with  the  nature  of  the
magnetic  light.  In  the  foregoing  researches,  we  have
frequently  met  with  the  odic  luminous  vajKRu*,  flame-like
smoke,  or  whatever  we  may  plc^ise  to  call  this  appearance.
It  also  increased  under  the  air-pump.  This  produces  the
luminous  cloud-like  phenomena,  always  ascending  from
below  and  completing  the  parallel  between  odic  light  and
the  nortliern  light  or  aurora.  Tlie  vapourous,  clouddike,
luminous  nature  of  the  jiolar  lights  has  been  accounted  for
by  supposing  the  appearance  to  be  produced  by  illmuuiated
clouds.  These  may  have  occurred  in  many  cases  ;  but  it  is
clear,  from  my  investigations,  that  there  is  no  necessity  for
such  clouds,  and  that  aecunmlations  of  Od  develope  inde-
pendently in  the  air  smokediko,  that  is,  cloud-like  luminous
ap[)earanee4S,  whicli  in  some  of  my  experiments  illuminated
the  whole  room  up  to  the  ceiling.  Tlie  higher  the  odic
emauations  of  the  terrestrial  magnetic  poles  ascend  in  or


592  THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.

above  the  atmosphere,  the  larger,  more  luminous,  and  bril-
liant must  be  the  emissions  that  unfold  themselves,  from
the  same  cause  which  makes  them  increase  so  greatly  under
the  air-pimip,  even  with  moderate  rarefaction  of  the  air.
As  healthy  persons  who  are  not  sensitive  perceive  nothing
of  the  motions  of  magnetism  and  Od,  it  is  easy  to  explain
why  travellers  could  perceive  no  unusual  sensations,  even
at  the  very  poles  of  the  earth.  And  the  often-mentioned
observation,  that  the  aurora  has  been  seen  to  the  south  in
high  latitudes,  is  no  longer  puzzling;  the  odic  light,
wherever  developed,  shines  fix)m  its  localities  with  equal
strength  in  every  direction.

603.  Finally,  looking  at  the  rich  combination  of  odic
luminous  phenomena  displayed  by  the  iron  globe  (§  571,
et  seq.),  we  recognise  in  it  a  kind  of  terrelle,  or  miniature
earth,  exhibiting  artificial  northern  and  southern  lights  on
a  small  scale.  As  the  earth  is  a  large  magnet,  my  globe,
by  reason  of  the  electro-magnet  passing  through  its  axis,  is
a  magnet  of  the  same  form  in  miniature.  Their  poles  emit,
in  the  former  on  a  great  scale,  in  the  latter  on  a  small,  deli-
cate light  visible  only  in  the  darkness  of  night.  High
above  both  poles  it  turns  over  and  fiows  on  all  sides  towards
the  tropical  zones,  broken  up  into  filaments  and  rays  on  the
great  terrestrial  globe  as  on  the  little  terrelle ;  iridescent
with  all  the  prismatic  colours,  on  the  former  as  upon  the
latter.  If  we  may  venture  to  add,  that  the  difference  of  the
intensity  of  light  in  the  two  cases  may  probably  be  propor-
tionate, in  some  degree,  to  the  difference  of  size  of  the  two
globes,  in  which  the  mass,  of  course,  increases  as  the  cube  of
the  diameter,  while  the  surface  only  enlarges  as  the  square
of  the  same,  whereby,  consequently,  the  odic  light,  emitted
by  the  mass  but  only  poured  over  the  surface,  must  become
more  concentrated  on  the  earth,  in  a  degree  corresponding
to  this  difference  of  size,  than  at  the  poles  of  the  terrelle, —
the  greater  luminosity  of  the  aurora,  which  surpasses  the


THE  NOnTHEUN  MfillT.


593


I


I
I


I


light  of  the  tciTellc  under  common  pressures  of  the  atmo-
sphere, becomes  in  some  nieasure  incomprehensi!>le*  A
second  cansc  of  the  dijfe retire  of  intensifi/  of  the  bvo  polar
lif/hfs,  is  to  be  souffhi  in  the  odie  infiucnve  exercised  by  Ike
sun  and  moon  upon  the  earth.  In  the  fourth  treatise  (^95
€t  seq,  and  ^  118  et  seq,)  I  gave  an  account  of  some  expe-
rimeuts  which  demonstrated  that  the  two  heavenly  bodiea
strongly  charge  with  Od  all  bodies  exjioscd  to  their  rays.
The  surface  of  the  earth,  on  which  they  constiuitly  shine,
receives  accordingly  an  uninterrupted  supply  of  Od,  in  the
same  way  as  of  light  aud  heat.  Thns  it  is  not  merely  the
inherent  Od,  proper  to  the  earth  and  its  magtictisni,  that
appears  concentrated  at  its  poles,  but  this  is  continually
receiving  accessions  through  the  vtist  contributions  ponred
out  upon  the  earth  by  the  sun  and  moon,  lii  accordance
with  their  own  laws,  when  these  reach  the  surface  of  the
earth  they  not  only  tiow  to  the  regions  which  possess  a
weaker  charge,  but  at  once  liecome  polarized,  that  is  to  say,
the  current  goes  towards  the  terrestrial  poles,  and  iucrea^scs
the  intensity  of  the  odie  phenotnena  there.  The  want  of
uniformity  in  the  condition  of  the  earth's  surface,  according
as  it  is  or  is  not  covered  with  clotids,  since  in  the  former
case  the  odie  radiations  are  absorbed  Ijy  the  atmosphere,
while  in  the  latter  they  reach  the  soUd  substance  of  the
globe, — moreover,  the  differences  of  position  of  the  sun  and
moon  in  relation  to  the  earth,  the  co*operation  or  antagonism
of  these, — all  these  things  necessarily  cause  irregidaritics  in
the  appearance  of  the  northern  light,  as  they  do  in  the
weather  generally ;  and  this  explains  the  dilTerences  between
the  intensity  of  the  odie  light  of  the  Icrrelle  and  that  of
tlie  terrestrial  poles,  and  to  a  certain  extent  shows  their
necessity,

604,  If  it  should  be  objected  that  there  is  no  magnet
passing  through  the  earth  as  through  my  terrelle^  I  think  I
can  give  this  u  Buiiicieut  answer ;  for  it  does  not  set  aside


594  THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.

the  demonstrated  and  established  fact  that  the  earth  really
possesses  magnetic  poles,  whether  these  depend  on  the  sur-
face and  its  irradiation  by  the  sun,  as  the  modem  physicists
think  there  is  reason  to  assume,  or  are  derived  from
the  internal  conditions  of  the  entire  planet.  In  r^ard  to
the  latter  supposition,  however,  there  is  a  point  in  its
favour,  which,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  not  yet  been  taken
account  of  in  physics :  I  shall  take  the  liberty  to  explain  it
here.  It  is  now  pretty  generally  agreed  that  meteorites  are
of  planetary  origin,  that  they  are  minute  stars,  which  have
originated  under  the  same  laws,  and  follow  their  paths  around
the  sun,  in  the  same  way  as  the  larger  and  smaller  planets.
And  in  reality  the  difference  is  not  much  greater  between  the
vast  Jupiter  and  the  little  Vesta  or  Astraea,  which  are
scarcely  larger  than  the  Island  of  Ceylon,  than  between  an
asteroid  such  as  these  and  the  enormous  meteorites  lying  in
Senegal,  stated  to  form  small  mountains  of  iron.  And
from  these,  again,  through  those  of  Bahia,  Durango,  and
Zncatecas,  which  are  masses  of  iron  weighmg  many  tons,  to
our  ordinary  meteorites  of  a  few  pounds,  there  is  every  step
of  gradation.  Thus,  from  Jupiter  down  to  the  smallest
meteorite,  we  have  an  uninterrupted  series,  so  that  apparently
size  alone  affords  distinction  between  a  planet  and  a  meteoric
stone.  If  this  be  admitted,  and,  indeed,  it  cannot  now  be
avoided,  the  structure  of  the  meteorite  places  in  our  hands
a  key  of  extreme  value,  opening  the  way  to  the  examina-
tion and  study  of  the  probable  internal  condition  of  the
earth.  The  law  which  gave  the  rule  for  the  composition  of
the  meteorite,  gave  it,  consequently,  for  the  construction  of
our  globe.  Now,  meteorites  are  composed  chiefly  either  of
metallic  masses,  mostly  iron  with  a  portion  of  nickel,  or  of
stony  masses,  almost  always  containing  a  great  intermixture
of  this  metallic  nickeliferous  iron.  This  is  universally
known ;  but  it  is  not  known — and  this  is  of  essential  im-
portance here — that  in  the  majority  of  meteoric  stones  the


N0BTH8IIK  IJGHT.


505


abundant  proportion  of  iron  does  not  occur  in  irregnlar.
accidental,  and  isolated  fragments,  but  the  form  of  a  cmi-
$i€cted  cellular  netmyrk,  traversing  the  whole  mass.  This
may  be  seen  with  the  naked  eye  in  tlie  meteorites  of
Krasnojarsk,  of  AtaiMima,  in  the  original  mass  of  iron  at
Bittburg,  and  in  the  meteorites  from  unknown  loeahties,
rcseuibhng  these,  in  the  collection  at  Gotha,  &€,  And  in
such  also  as  are  more  minutely  intermixed,  like  those  from
Smolensk,  Seres,  Blansko,  Talx>r,  Barl>otan,  &c.,  and  have
the  game  structure,  the  stony  portion  may  be  extracted,  leav-
ing a  connected  cellular  network  of  iron.  The  specific
gravityof  these  stones  is  from  three  to  foiur  and  five.  That
of  the  earth,  as  is  well  known,  is  about  4'7,  and  all
Uik  lenders  it  probable  that  it  is  conatructed  intenially  like
a  meteorite,  of  a  congeries  of  iron  cells,  that  its  entire
stony  mass  is  interjicnetrated  I)y  cellular  metallic  iron,
efxactly  as  in  tlie  majority  of  meteoric  stones.  And  in  this
iron  fVQuld  the  muqndism  of  the  earth  dwelL  The  irregu-
larity  of  its  distribution,  as  seen  in  every  meteoric  stone,
and  therefore  to  be  assumed  in  the  earth,  renders  the
fuur-foltl  polarity  of  the  terrestrial  globe  readily  compre*
hensible.

605.  This  view  of  the  cx^nstitution  of  our  planet,  of
which  geologists  have  not  yet  made  any  use,  but  which,  as
is  seen,  rests  on  a  foundation  of  facts  in  natural  history,  is
not  contradictory  to  the  now  generally  adopted  hypothesis,
that  strata  of  molten  matter  in  igneous  fusion  may  still
exist  beneath  the  lowest  of  our  geological  formations.  That
such  strata  do  exist  is  as  certain  as  that  meteorites  arrive  at
the  surface  of  our  earth,  still  hot  and  canted  with  recently-
molten  clay.  The  remarkable  meteorit<i  of  Clairbom,
Alabama,  was  enveloped  by  a  crust  of  slag  one-fifth  to  one-
third  of  an  inch  thick,  when  I  received  it.  I  received  a
moss  of  meteoric  iron  from  Carjfort,  Decalb  County,  IIS*

R  R


596  THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.

with  a  crast  one-sixth  of  an  inch  thick.  I  possess  aerolites
from  Nanjemoy,  Maryland,  covered  in  places  with  a  porous
slag  one-seventh  of  an  inch  thick.  But  there  is  a  wide
interval  between  such  a  coating,  and  a  melting  and  a  state  of
igneous  fusion  throughout  the  entire  mass.  The  earth  has
really  an  incandescent  or  stiU  fluid  coating  some  inches
thick,  analogous  to  the  slag  crust  of  the  meteorites ;  the
abundant  proofs  are  too  strong  and  too  consistent  to  admit
of  a  doubt  of  it ;  but  it  by  no  means  follows  from  this,  that
it  must  be  in  a  state  of  incandescent  fusion  throughout  its
whole  mass,  as  is  commonly  much  too  hastily  assumed.
It  is  beyond  all  comparison  more  probable  that  its  internal
structure  is  like  that  of  a  meteorite,  and,  indeed,  of  a
meteoric  stone  containing  iron,  perhaps  of  several  united
together,  since  we  see  new  ones  becoming  united  to  it  daily
before  our  eyes.

606.  Certain  physicists,  in  particular  Mr.  Faraday,  have
asserted  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  earth  to  be  magnetic
throughout  its  mass,  if  it  be  in  igneous  fusion  in  its  interior,
as  we  know  from  experiment  that  great  heat  is  incompatible
vnth  the  presence  of  magnetism  in  bodies.  This  objection
is  only  important  so  long  as  we  regard  the  whole  contents
of  the  planet  as  a  lava.  There  is  not  only  no  strict  reason
for  so  doing,  but  a  number  of  circumstances  are  directly
opposed  to  it,  none  of  which  I  shall  bring  forward  here,
except  those  I  have  just  developed  from  the  analogy  with
meteors.  All  these  are  melted  merely  on  the  surface,  and
in  their  interior  consist  of  crystalline  structures  produced  by
a  force  which  can  be  proved  to  have  operated  wholly  and
exclusively  in  the  cold.  Meteorites  have  been  placed  in  cir-
cumstances in  which  excessive  heat  has  acted  upon  them
externally,  melted  their  surface,  and  produced  lava  upon  it,
but  this  only  for  a  short  period,  sufficient  to  melt  down  but
a  very  limited  portion  of  the  surface. The  earth  has  also


THE  NOETHERN  LIGHT.


597


I


I


once  passed  through  such  a  period,  in  the  same  way,  only  a
crust  of  the  substauce  ccfmposiiig  it  could  be  melted,  now
represented  by  that  incandescent  fluid  stratum  beneath  our
cooled  surface,  by  which  geologists  satisfactorily  explain  our
volcaiioes,  our  basalts,  trachyteSj  porphyries,  and  the  heat
increasing  with  the  depth  in  every  shaft  and  boring  ;  the
hypothetical  basis  on  which  all  this  rests  having  received
general  recognition.  But  such  a  mere  crust  of  glowing
matter,  even  if  miles  thick,  cannot  annihilate  or  even  essen-
tially affect  the  operations  of  the  magnetism  of  the  enonnous
cold,  iron -traversed,  globular  mass  more  than  8000  miles
thick.

These  considerations,  therefore,  go  to  prove  that  the
terrestrial  globe  is  traversed  by  a  magnet  just  in  the  way
I  have,  in  imitation,  placed  one  in  the  terreUe,  and  thereby
sought  to  bring  the  ktter  into  condition,  which  should  to
a  certain  extent  resemble  those  of  the  earth.

G07.  But  this  iron,  assumed,  as  it  must  be,  to  be  inter-
woven through  the  globe,  is  also  crystallized  throughout.
When  meteoric  stones  are  ground  and  polished,  and
then  very  slowly  corroded  by  diluted  nitric  acid,  crystalline
characters,  which  become  distinctly  visible  under  the  micro-
scope, make  their  appearance  in  all  the  portions  of  imn,
however  small  t!iey  may  be.  There  have  been  demonstrated
to  be  markings  identical  with  those  called  Widmanstetten's
figures,  on  masses  of  meteoric  iron,  and  they  are  nothing
else  than  crystalline  structiu-es  of  the  metallic  constituents,
I  have  investigated  a  great  many  in  my  own  collection,  and
have  fomid  they  contained  metallic  iron,  everywhere  crj^stal-
lized,  exactly  m  like  manner,  and  according  to  the  same
laws  and  figures,  as  hi  the  large  masses  of  iron.  I  have  dug
out  of  the  meteoric  stones  of  Blansko  little  particles  of  iron,
which,  when  polished  and  corroded,  small  as  they  were,
exhibited  not  only  planes  of  cleavage,  but  also  jiyrite^  en-


508  THB  NORTHERN  LIGHT.

closed  in  the  iron,  exactly  like  the  lai^  masses  of  meteoric
iron.  The  masses  of  meteoric  metal,  therefore,  have  mag-
netic and  odic  polarity  fix)m  two  causes  :  the  one  that  they
partially  consist  of  a  mass  of  iron  which  is  continuous
throughouty  although  cellular ;  the  other,  that  this  metallic
mass  is  crystaUizedy  perhaps  composed  of  one  single  vast
crystal,  irregularly  formed,  certainly,  on  the  surface,  but
cohering  intimately  according  to  the  laws  of  crystallization.
But  we  know,  from  ^66  of  my  second  treatise,  that  all
crystals  unceasingly  emit  concentrated  odic  light  from  their
poles.  The  contained  iron,  therefore,  and  ciystalUzation,
act  in  conjunction  to  produce  magnetic  odic  poles  upon  the
terrestrial  globe,  and  they  afford  the  grounds  which  render
it  probable,  in  my  eyes,  that  the  magnetism  and  Od  of  the
earth  are  not  simply  external  and  due  to  the  sun's  rays,
but  are  in  great  part,  if  not  chiefly,  to  be  ascribed  to  internal
causes ;  in  following  out  which,  the  otherwise  singular  fact
that  the  astronomiod  and  magnetic  poles  of  the  earth  do
not  coincide, — that  we  have,  not  two,  but  four,  magnetic
terrestrial  poles,  &c., — Closes  its  strangeness,  and  becomes
readily  explicable.  Thus  the  polar  light  of  the  terrestrial
globe,  like  the  odic  luminous  phenomena  of  my  terrelle,
may,  on  magnetic  and  odic  grounds,  be  confidently  attri-
buted for  the  most  part  to  intenial  action.  We  may  regard
both  as  diametrically  traversed  by  actively  magnetic  and
odic  axes.  The  analogy  between  the  entire  planet  and  the
miniature  artificial  imitation  of  it,  is,  therefore,  quite  com-
plete on  this  side  of  the  question.

608.  An  old  observation  made  in  Sweden  by  Wilke  may
also  deserve  to  be  recalled  to  recollection, — that  the  appear-
ance and  the  movements  of  the  northern  lights  are  always
PRECEDED  by  disturbances  of  the  maynetic  needle* This,

*  Oehler's  physisch-Worterbach  (Physiological  Dictionary),  i.  161.


THB  NORTHERN  LIGHT.


599


I


as  is  seen,  agrees  most  exactly  with  the  odic  phenomena :
the  latter  always  occur  later  and  more  tardily  than  the  mag-
netic and  electrical  movements  complicated  with  them,  an
observable  pause  always  intervening  befoi^e  the  commence-
ment of  the  odic  eflects.  Thus  the  same  things  wliich  I
have  made  out  as  above  described,  in  the  investigations  in
my  dark  chamber,  were  obseiTed  by  others  many  years  ago
in  the  open  sky.

009.  Finally,  I  have  to  refer  to  Wargen tin's  observation
that  tfw  northern  litffds  ivmken  the  mayneilc  needle.  This  is
now  explained  without  difficulty.  The  northern  light  is  an
odic  magnetic  emanation,  material  or  immaterial,  whichever
we  please  to  assume.  WTieu  it  issues  from  the  nortli  pole
it  is  of  positive  magnetic  nature.  But  the  northward  pole
of  the  needle  is  negative*  When  +  M  passes  over  the  nee-
dle from  north  to  south,  as  the  Borthem  light  docs,  it
amounts  to  the  same  thing  as  if  the  southward  pole  of  a
very  weak  magnetic  bar  were  passing  uninterruptedly  over
the  needle  from  north  to  south,  for  a  length  of  time  equal  to
the  duration  of  the  northern  light.  The  effect  of  this  nmst
be  like  that  of  a  weak  ordinary  rubbing;  and  every  one
knows  that  a  needle  loses  strength,  or>  as  Wargentin  ex-
presses it,  becomes  dulled,  when  so  treated,  if  rubbed  in  a
direction  contrary  to  its  polarity.  The  northeni  light
makes,  over  the  needle,  a  weak  but  not  the  less  real  re-
versed pass,  which,  from  its  nature,  tends  to  carry  tlie  south
polarity  of  the  north  point  of  the  needle  to  its  south  end, —
that  is,  to  reverse  it ;  and,  since  it  does  not  possess  intensity
sufficient  for  this,  it  merely  weakens  the  needle,  thus  dulls  it,
and  so,  as  Wargentin  adds,  renders  it  less  sensitive  to  sub-
sequent northern  hghts,

610.  Thus  everything,  without  exception,  that  has  been
made  out,  in  the  endeavour  to  extend  om*  knowledge  of  Od,
has  contributed  to  increase  the  harmony  with  wliich  all  the


600  THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.

facts  agree  to  mark  the  northern  light  as  an  enormous  manU
festatian  of  magnetic  odic  flame j  odic  vapour,  and  odic
light ;  a  miniature  representation  of  which  was  afforded  by
the  terrelle.


INDEX.


Acid,  tartaric,  experiment  with,  164.

sulphuric,  165,  169,  193.
Actiye  bodies,  52.
Air,  rarefaction  of  the,  505-6.
Aerolites,  596.
Amanuensis,  174.
Animal  kingdom,  255.

organs,  especially  the  human  hands,  438—470.
note  on,  by  Dr.  Ashbumer,  438—470.
Arsenic,  193.
Aahbnmer*s  (Dr.)  note  on  crystallic  force,  79.

secular  force  of  crystals,  90.

sensitive,  130.

poisonous  influence  of  grayeyards,  178.

animal  organs,  especially  the  human  hands,

438.
luminous  phenomena  of  the  poles,  5.
magnetic  light,  29.
cataleptic  unconsciousness,  45.
theory  of  sleep,  48.
crystal  and  magnet,  49.
odized  water,  513.
iris  or  prismatic,  519-20.
the  od  posit iye,  265.
obseryation  on  la  baguette  diyinatoire,  or  dirining

rod,  93,  104.
case  of  a  somnambulist,  22.
experiment  by  will,  3 1 .
experiments  on  luminosity,  1 1 .
with  crystals,  37.
a  magnet,  39.


602  INDEX.

Atznuuinsdorfer  (Misb),  effect  of  the  magnet  on,  115.

laminoos  phenomena  on,  136,  201.
Aarora  borealia,  the,  7.

Bagaette  divinatoire,  93.

Baquet,  power  of  the,  170.

Baumgartner's  test  with  magnet,  40.

Bicarbonate  of  soda,  ezperimenta  with,  163.

Billing's  amanuensis,  1 74.

Biod,  578.

Biot,  researches  on  terrestrial  magnetism,  65.

Bleton*s  divining  rod,  97-98.

Bodies,  inactiye,  list  of,  52.

actiye,  list  of,  52.
Borax,  experiments  with,  167.

Caffeine,  209.

Cataleptic,  attack  of.  Miss  Nowotny,  9.

Dr.  Ashbamer*s  note  on,  oiioonacioiisneas»  45.
Chemical  force,  162,  174.

action,  251.
Cold,  the  term,  279.

Coldstream,  Dr.  on  the  naked-eyed  medasse,  442.
Colours  of  odic  light,  514.

light  also  exhibits,  482.
Concentration  of  the  odic  light,  582.
Cool,  the  term,  272.

Copper  elements,  experiment  with,  180,  182,  211.
sulphate  of  212.

wire,  experiments  made  with,  509.
Coulomb,  researches  on  terrestrial  magnetism,  65.
Crosse  on  light,  444.
Crystallic  bodies,  52.
force,  78.

comparison  of,  with  the  magnet,  122.
electric  afBnity  of  the,  86.
Crystals,  37.

that  one  pole  of,  gave  a  cold  and  the  other  a  warm  pans,  230.
Dr.  Ashbumer's  experience  with,  37.

note  on,  54.
of  selenite,  234.
force  of  a  polar  nature,  63,  67.


iN0^.  608

CryBtal,  polar  point  of  a,  64.

Dr.  ABhbumer*8  note  on»  69.
electridty,  84.
rock,  228.
in  general,  like  magnets,  emit  a  fine  flaming  light  from  their

poles,  88.
effect  of,  on  animal  nerves,  91.
peculiar  force  of,  deyeloped,  90.
most  active  at  its  opposite  extremities,  92.
emite  light,  93.

action  of,  agrees  with  the  rays  of  the  sun,  149.
on  sensitive  persons,  137,  207.

Daguerreotype,  experiment  with  a,  26.

Diagram  of  odic  colours  or  light,  531,  538,  542,  545-6,  550,  555.
Diamagnetism,  298,  310.
Digestion,  171.
Divining  rod,  97—104.
Dualism  in  the  phenomena,  227.
its  nature,  230.


Electrical  machine,  183.
Electricity,  179—189,  435.

distinctions  from,  301 .
Electro-dynamic  apparatus,  experiment  with  an,  20.

magnetism,  428.
Endlicher  on  the  magnet,  123,  487,  525,  586.
Eyes,  the,  271.

Faraday,  Mr.  596.

Fingers  act  on  odic  flames  like  crystab  and  magnets,  470.
Fire  acts  Od-negatively  on  the  sensitively  in  all  cases,  246.
Flame,  positive  and  negative,  35.

mechanicaUy,  36.

magnetic,  36.

light  from  their  poles,  emit  a,  88.

i^parent  temperature  of  the,  247.

list  of  cold  and  warm  Od,  247.

blue,  northward,  415.

red,  southward,  415.
Flowers,  251,  252.


604  INBEX.

Forbes  on  the  medasse,  442.
FrictioD,  effect  of,  156.

Gas,  oxygen,  198.  200.

Oennan  silver  condactor,  152,  210.

Glass  tubesy  experiment  with  two,  157.

of  water,  experiment  with  a,  165,  166.
Gold  pi^per,  209.

leaf,  210.
Graveyards,  174—178.
Gam,  powdered,  210.

Hands,  action  of  the,  on  sensitive  patients,  132,  207,  212,  214,  233,

259,  260,  261,  269,  438,  448.
Haay's  researches  on  terrestrial  magnetism,  65.
Head,  the,  267,  269.
Heat,  all  positive  bodies  give  out,  242.

distinction  from,  299,  471.

lominoos  phenomena  produced  by,  156.

the  magnetic  light  emitted  no,  28.
Herschel,  Sir  W.,  power  of  telescopes  to  penetrate  into  space,  xv.
Honze,  262.

Ice,  experiment  with  a  piece  of,  155.

Inactive  bodies,  52.

Iris  or  prismatic,  518,  522,  527.

Iron,  pure,  action  on  sensitive  patients,  138.

wire,  experience  with  an,  154,  168.

rods,  204,  436.

exhibit  odic  flames,  436.

globe,  502.

crystallized  throughout,  597.

Kiss,  the  import  of  a,  257.
Konigsberg,  native  silver  from,  52.

Leaf,  253.

Liebig  on  digestion,  171.

respiration,  173.
Light,  the  magnetic,  6.

the,  115.

effect  of  sulphur  on  the,  196.


INDBX.  605

Light,  note  on,  by  Mr.  Crosse,  444.
abo  exhibits  colours,  482.

diagram  of  odic,  531,  538,  542^,  545-6,  550>  555.
northern,  the,  589.
List  of  simple  substances  and  preparations,  according  to  their  differ-
ence of  cold  and  warmth,  239,  240.
substances  of  warm,  cold  Od-flames,  247.
witnesses  to  my  experiments,  292 — 295.
Luminosity,  10.

Ashbumer's  experiments  on,  11.
of  Miss  Nowotny,  9.
Starmann,  14.
Maix,  15.
Reichel,  16.
Atzmannsdorfer,  24.
of  crystals,  poles,  38,  215.
Luminous  phenomena  at  the  poles  and  sides  of  strong  magnets,  5.
on  Miss  Reichel,  135.
produced  by  heat,  156.
oyer  grayes,  174 — 178.
on  the  magnet,  the  odic,  313.

Magnet,  comparison  of  the  crystallic  forces  with,  122.

action  of  the,  agrees  with  those  of  the  rays  of  the  sun,  149.
luminous  phenomena  at  the  poles  and  sides  of  strong,  5.
experiment  on  Miss  Sturmann  with  a,  14.
M.  Maix  with  a,  15.
B.  Reichel  with  a,  16.
Dayy,  Sir  U.,  on  the  influence  of  the,  on  the  electrical  cur-
rent, 32.
strength  of  a,  35.
and  crystals,  37.
Baumgartrier^s  test  on,  40.
effect  of  the,  on  Miss  Sturmann,  112.

the  Misses  Maix,  Reichel,  and  Atxmanns-
dorfer,  115,  203.
sulphur  on  the,  196.
odic  light  in  modified  external  conditions  of  the,  501.
Magnetic  light,  the,  629.

emitted  no  heat,  28,  29.
flames,  36.
rod,  20,  231,  234.
needle,  experience  with,  109.


606  isnn.

Ma^^netM  needle,  diflCnrbaiee  of  the,  Jlll.

tob,  170.
lU^[iietinii,  diafiarriooi  frooit  305.
>fegiieU,  die  odie  lamiomii  phenomeiia  ob  tliav  Ji;
ia  gBnenl,  biatorical

oo,  31  I— 340.
forau  (ii  the  Inminooe
odie  ineftndeiieeiiee  of  the  efwi,  Sa«K
ileiiie  on  rteel,  3>i2 — 180.
3faiz,  Mim,  expehmenc  on,  with  a  MgiMt,  1^.
effect  of  the  magnet  on.  Hi.
Aolphur  on,  il)6.
Matten,  iolid  or  flaid,  without  escepckMU

oeiw  and  tepid  heat,  190,  191,  19^2.
MednM,  442.

Men,  bTin^  affect  lenaitiire,  134.
Meteorite  of  Clairhom,  59^.
Moon,  thadea  of  the,  116.

rayii  of  the,  effect  6i  the,  139.
light,  effect  of,  159.
the,  310.
Month,  the,  256.


Namea  of  f^ertona,  liat  ^^  who  have  co»opccated  in  cb

20J,  2r/3.
Nftbfil«,  o<Jic,  'l>il.

Needle,  rjintarbance  of  the  magnetic,  599.
Negafive  p^>le,  experiment  with  the,  60.
Nerrcn,  action  of  the  fingerx  on  the,  124 — 130.
NerroTiii  patient,  effect  of  the  fingcn  on,  124—130.
Northern  light,  the,  529.
Nowotnj,  Miiw,  effect  of  oxjgcn  gan  on,  1 98.

caUleptic  attackii  of,  9.

experience  on,  with  the  magnetic  needk,  109

Od,  odic  reflection  on,  224.

agreement  with  magnetism,  231,  236.

list  of  rabstancca  of  cold  and  warm  Od-flamea,  247.

produced  by  heat,  249.

poritiTe,  the,  265.

note  on,  265.

remarks  on  the  word,  297.

contrast  to  magnetism,  470.


INDEX.  607

Odic  laminooB  phenomena  on  the  magnet,  the,  313.  m

Hght,314.
flame,  382—534.

incandescence  on  the  steel  magnet,  350,  422.
flame  on  steel  magnet,  382 — 480.
incandescence  of  the  mhher,  416.
flame  of  the  ruhher,  417.
incandescence  of  the  ruhbed  magnet,  419—421.
threads,  streaks,  and  nebulae,  481.
flame  from  iron,  436.
smoke,  473,  485.

is  thrown  ont  by  magnets,  495.
relation  between  odic  flame  and,  496.
sparks,  498.
hght  in  modified  external  conditions  of  the  magnet,  501.

colours  of,  514.
colour,  variableness  of,  528.

diagram  of,  531,  538,  542,  545-6,  560,  555.
light,  in  the  more  restricted  sense  of  the  word,  579.
concentration  of  the,  582.
Odized  water,  513.

Pfeffel*s  occurrence,  174.

Photosphere,  573.

Physical  and  physiological  laws  of  the  organic  force,  105.

Plants,  251.

Poisonous  influence  of  graveyards,  174 — 178.

Polar  point  of  a  crystal,  64.

wire,  64.
Polarization,  185.

chemical,  249-50.
Pole,  the,  35.
Poles  and  sides  of  strong  magnets,  luminous  phenomena  at  the,  5.

positive  or  negative,  experience  on,  60.
Potassium,  210.
Preface  by  the  Editor,  vii.
Prismatic,  518.

note  by  Dr.  Ashbumer  on,  519-20.

Bcichel,  Miss,  effect  of  the  magnet  on,  1 15,  204.

luminous  phenomena  on,  88,  135,  156,  203,  215.
experiment  with  a  brass  wire  on,  156.


608  INDEX.

Rdchel^iM,  tiew  of  t  oemetery,  176.*

effects  of  the  stars  and  sun  on,  220.
Respiration,  172.
Rubber,  the,  416.

Salt,  common,  experiment  with,  165.
Selenite,  228,
Sensitive,  124—130.

affected  by  living  men,  138.
Sensitives,  healthy,  3 1 6.
sickly,  336.
diseased,  343.
Silver  firom  Konigsberg,  52.

experiment  with  German,  152,  210.
Sleep,  theory  of,  48.

Smith,  Dr.  Pye,  Scripture  and  some  parts  of  geological  science,  xv.
Soda,  carbonate  of,  experiment  with,  164.
Solar  spectrum,  effect  of  the,  149.

Solid  and  fluid  matters,  without  exception,  produce  sensations  of  cool-
ness and  tepid  heat,  190—192.
Somnambulism,  Dr.  Ashbumer's  case  of,  22.
Stars,  effectof  the,  219.
Steel  magnet,  odic  incandescence  on  the,  350.

flame  on,  382.
Stomach,  the,  272.
Streaks,  odic,  48  K
SturmauD,  Miss,  experimeDt  on,  with  a  magnet,  14.

effect  of  the  magnet  on,  115.
Substances,  list  of  simple,  and  preparations,  according  to  their  differ-
ence of  cold  and  warmth,  239-40,  247.
Sugar,  experiment  with,  165.
Sulphur,  196—198,  201,  208,  211.
Sun,  rays  of  the,  effect  of  the,  139.

action  of  the,  agrees  with  those  of  crystals  and  magnet,  149.

the,  263.

effect  of  the,  220.

Telescopes  to  penetrate  into  space.  Sir  W.  Herschel's,  power  of,  xv.
Tepid,  the  term,  279.
Terrelle,  592.

Terrestrial  magnetism,  researches  of  Hauy,  Biot,  and  Coulomb  on,  65.
effect  of,  116.


INDEX.  609

Terrestrial  magQetism,  influence  on  senntiye  bodies  of  the.  1 18.

stand  no  relation  to  crystallic  force,  84.

influence  of,  on  odic  flame,  435.
ThouTenel,  bagaette  diTinatoire,  96.
Threads,  odic,  481.
Tin  electropborus  plate,  187.
Tongae,  the,  256.
Turnip,  252.

Unconsciousness,  Dr.  Ashbumer's  note  on  cataleptic,  45.

Vapour,  luminous,  572.

odic,  599.
Voltaic  pile,  169.

battery,  248.

Warm,  the  term,  279.

what  this  expression  signifies,  227.
Water,  experiment  with  magnetized,  165-66,  506,  513.
Will,  Dr.  Asbbumer  on,  31.
Wire,  experiment  with  an  iron,  154-55.
Witnesses,  list  of,  to  my  experiments,  292 — 295.
World,  the  material,  in  general,  1 90.

Zinc,  experiment  with,  180-82.


THK  END.


WILSOy  AND  06ILTY,  57,  SBIlf  NBS  STBBBT,  SNOWHILL,  LOJIDOM.


L
