Physico-Physiological Researches (Karl von Reichenbach, 1851)
=============================================================
Karl von Reichenbach — The discovery of the 'odic force' — the physical theory behind mesmerism's phenomena. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (physicophysiolog00reic) — 1851 Ashburner translation.

ass.

PRESENTED   BY

PHYSICO-PHYSIOLOGICAL  RESEARCHES

ON

THE  DYNAMICS

OF

MAGNETISM,  ELECTRICITY,  HEAT,  LIGHT,
CRYSTALLIZATION,   AND   CHEMISM,

S

IN    THEIR    RELATIONS   TO

bitcil  Sota.

BARON  CHARLES  VON  REICHENBACH.

<  l

THE  COMPLETE  WORK,
FROM     THE     GERMAN     SECOND     EDITION.

tBitjj  tfjB  %.Wtiim  nf  a  ^rrfart  attfr  Crittral  $n\n,

BY

JOHN    ASHBURNER,  M.D.

FIRST  AMERICAN    EDITION.

NEW-YORK :

J.    S.    RED  FIEL  D,    CLINTON-HALL

BOSTON:   B.  B.  MUSSEYACO.

185  1.


.(DsTf\54

"  Einer  neuen  Wahrheit  ist  nichts  schädlicher,  als  ein  alter  Irrthum."

"  Nothing  is  more  injurious  to  a  new  truth  than  an  old  error."

Göthe.

"  In  science,  nothing  may  be  built  upon  uncertain  possibilities ;  science  may  not
be  a  tissue  of  conjectures :  it  must  consist,  as  far  as  possible,  of  a  system
of  demonstrated  realities."

Berzehus.


CONTENTS

OF   THE   FIRST  PART,

Page.

Commentary  Preface, iv

Introduction, 17

1st  Treatise. — The  Magnetic  Light.     The  Aurora  Borealis, 20

2nd  Treatise. — Crystals  :  The  relation  of  these  and  of  the  Magnet  to  human

organs.     The  poles  of  Crystals.     Light  and  force  of  these,  43

3rd  Treatise. — Certain  Physical  and  Physiological  Laws  of  the  Organic  Force,
hitherto  called  Magnetism.  Relations  to  the  Magnet,  to
Terrestrial  Magnetism,  and  to  Crystals, 93

±th  Treatise. — The  rays  of  the  sun  and  of  the  moon,  heat,  friction,  light, — as

sources  of  the  new  force 117

5tk  Treatise. — Chemism ;  the  Magnetic  tub ;  Digestion ;  Chemical  action.
The  light  over  graves.  Voltaic  and  frictional  Electricity  ;
Electrical  Atmosphere, 133

&lh  Treatise. — Matter  in  General ;  the  Heavenly  Bodies ;  Regions  of  the
Earth.  The  new  force,  embracing  the  whole  Universe.
Nomenclature.     The  word  Od, 153

1th  Treatise. — Dualism  in  the  Odic  Phenomena.  Warmth  and  Cold.  Mag-
nets, Crystals,  Plants,  the  Human  Body ;  their  two  halves ;
all  polar.  -f  Od  and  —Od.  Variability  of  the  odic
intensity  in  time,  in  the  human  body, 1  «9

Conclusion, 220

PREFACE.

The  present  edition  of  a  translation  of  these  Researches  owes  its  existence  per-
haps to  one,  perhaps  to  a  series  of  misapprehensions,  with  which  the  public  may
have  little  concern.  Certain  it  is,  that  at  no  time,  have  I  had  the  slighest  inten-
tion to  be  guilty  of  a  want  of  courtesy  towards  the  gentleman  who  had,  by  the
publication  of  a  very  skilful  abstract  of  his  labors  in  the  year  1846,  the  merit  of
introducing  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach  to  the  British  public,  as  an  investigator
of  the  Philosophy  of  Mesmerism.  Various  efforts  have  been  made  to  convince
me  that  I  did  not  act  as  I  ought  to  have  done,  in  omitting  to  place  myself  in  com-
munication with  Professor  Gregory,  when  I  was  applied  to  by  the  Publisher,
through  a  well-known  literary  physician,  to  furnish  some  notes  to  a  complete
edition  of  these  Researches  ;  but  I  confess  my  obtuseness  shuts  out  from  my  mind
the  light  of  all  the  reasoning  that  has  been  brought  to  bear  on  this  matter.  All
that  I  can  allow  is,  that  although  I  have  no  personal  acquaintance  with  the  Pro-
fessor, I  am  very  sorry  in  any  way  to  have  injured  his  feelings,  and  I  am  grieved
to  find  myself  in  such  a  relative  position  with  a  man  for  whom  I  am  bound  to
entertain  a  deep  respect ;  for,  besides  his  high  scientific  reputation,  he  is  known
to  have  the  courage  to  avow  his  belief  in  Phrenology  and  in  Mesmerism,  "  even
in  the  spirit  of  truth,  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth  him  not,
neither  knoweth  him  ;  but,"  to  all  like  the  Professor,  it  may  be  said,  "  ye  know
him,  for  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you  !"  To  me,  feeling  quite  inno-
cent of  all  wrong  intention,  in  the  perfect  freedom  of  action  which,  under  the  cir-
cumstances, I  claim  for  myself,  it  is  sad  to  be  at  opposite  poles  with  one  who  is
of  the  salt  of  this  earth.  To  those  who  cannot  know  of  the  dire  consequences  re-
sulting from  the  aggregation  of  the  petty  and  repulsive  mental  forces  concentra-
ting and  directing  in  society  the  baneful  powers  of  their  various  influences  upon
characters  who  dare  to  think  for  themselves, — who  are  hardly  aware  that  new
truths  are  met  so  frequently  by  sneers,  taunts,  ridicule,  or  that  unworthy  social
persecution,  at  once  the  proof  of  a  want  of  capacity  to  be  noble  and  just,  and  the
disgrace  of  an  advanced  civilization, — the  exalted  courage  of  such  persons  must
be  lost.  To  those  who  know  how  to  respect  scientific  ardor,  and  a  pure  love  of
truth,  the  fortitude  of  a  faithful  and  sincere  man  is  for  high  admiration,  and  for
deep  respect.

Such  observations  are  perhaps  equally  applicable  to  the  Professor,  and  to  hi3
friend  the  Baron,  and  I  may  be  regarded  as  bold  in  remarking,  as  freely  as  I  have
done,  on  some  of  the  philosophy  in  the  following  pages.  No  one  can  entertain  a
deeper  veneration  for  large  cerebral  organizations  than  I  do.     I  am  clear,  from

PREFACE.  v

the  work  before  us,  that  so  much  patience,  so  much  ingenuity,  so  much  caution,
so  much  concentration,  so  much  ideal  resource,  so  much  just  and  honest  desire  to
be  true,  could  not  characterize  any  individual,  who  had  not  a  rare  combination  of
organs  in  his  magnificent  head.  Regarding  any  person  in  this  point  of  view,  one
is  immediately  at  liberty  to  look  out  for  all  those  inconsistencies  that  belong  to
humanity ;  deeply  respecting  the  excellencies,  and  always,  with  due  humility,
doubting  one's  own  power  of  detecting  the  weakness  that  may  belong  to  any  logi-
cal edifice  he  may  construct.

There  are  not  wanting  persons  who  doubt  entirely  of  the  Baron's  power  of
accurate  and  severe  observation.  They  doubt  some  of  his  most  striking  facts.
They  deny  the  accuracy  of  his  results  with  the  magnet  and  photographic  plate.
Some,  and  among  them  are  persons  of  no  mean  note  as  scientific  characters,  affect
to  hold  him  in  very  secondary  estimation — pitying  him  for  wild  ideas,  and  deny-
ing that  his  researches  deserve  any  rank  as  philosophy.

But  the  Baron  is  not  the  builder  up  of  a  tall  house  of  loose  cards  tobe  toppled
down  by  a  breath.  I  have  not  tried  all  his  experiments.  I  have  tried,  compara-
tively, only  a  few.  Where  I  have  found  the  suitable  cases,  the  results  have  been,
•with  few  exceptions,  identical.

Then,  because  I  have  been  disappointed  in  the  results  of  many  other  experi-
ments, I  have  no  right  to  conclude  that  the  Baron  is  at  fault,  but  rather  that  I
have  not  yet  been  fortunate  enough  to  meet  with  exactly  the  same  description
of  case  he  terms  the  "  sick  sensitive" — a  vague  expression  of  an  idea,  with  which,
surely,  it  is  not  criminal  to  disagree.  Long  before  I  had  read  Professor  Gregory's
abstract,  I  had  arrived  at  conclusions  on  differences,  as  well  as  analogies,  between
electric,  magnetic,  and  mesmeric  agencies,  and,  operating  differently,  have  wit-
nessed many  confirmations  of  the  facts  established  by  the  Baron.  Dr.  Elliotson
lias  noted  many  remarkable  analogies  in  many  pages  of  the  Zoist.  But  then,  the
greater  number  of  our  cases  have  been  in  mesmerized  persons.  How  the  Baron
would  have  fared,  as  to  his  conclusions,  if  he  had  not  taken  up  the  study  of  his
subject,  in  its  most  elemental  form,  is  another  question.  Seeing,  as  I  do,  the  con-
ditions of  his  patients,  in  a  different  puint  of  view,  from  that  in  which  he  regards
them,  I  cannot  concede  to  him  that,  professing  to  contemn  the  mesmeric  state,  as
one  unfit  for  his  purpose,  he  has  not  been  operating  with  persons,  who,  though
not  at  all  asleep,  have  actually  been  in  a  state  constituting  the  very  condition
which  distinguishes  some  of  the  phenomena  of  somnambulism.  One  mistake  has
been,  to  suppose  that  the  truthfulness  of  an  individual  depends  upon  a  certain
normal  state  of  the  general  fibres  of  the  brain,  instead  of  the  tendencies  derived
from  a  particular  relative  size,  and  combination  of  certain  organs  of  that  viscus.
A  patient,  who  is  a  sleep-waker,  may,  from  a  certain  configuration  of  organs,  be  a
most  just  and  honorable  character,  and  have  that  fine  disposition  considerably  ex-
alted by  the  state  of  somnambulism  ;  while  a  wide-awake  person  may  be  a  most
cunning  and  habitual  deceiver.  Another  mistake  is,  to  suppose  that  the  "sensi-
tive," and  "  sick  sensitive,''  form  a  category,  independent  of  all  phrenological,  and
all  mesmeric  considerations.  They  are,  in  fact,  those  most  easily  affected  by  mes-
meric and  crystallic  agencies — those  most  obedient  to  the  influence  of  the  silent
will— and  those  most  easily  stimulated  to  clairvoyance,  in  the  state  of  wide  vigi-
lauce.  Certain  I  am,  that  with  the  advantages  offered  by  the  power  of  his  head,
the  Baron  would  have  advanced  both  further  and  faster,  if,  to  all  his  other  know-
ledge, he  had  combined  a  more,  extensive  view  of  physiological  pathology,  with
a  study  of  phrenology  and  mesmerism.  They  may  oppose  the  truth  in  Germany,
as  they  do  here.  The  Author  exhibits  some  of  their  doings,  but  the  Baron  has
the  courage  flowing  from  a  sense  of  justice.  He  worships  the  spirit  of  truth,
wliich  must  eventually  prevail.     I  marvel  at  many  of  the  objectors  to  his  phil-

vi  PREFACE.

osophy,  for  in  regarding  these  researches  -with  the  eye  of  criticism,  ready  to  seize
a  weak  point,  I  feel  that  one  is  at  a  loss  which  most  to  admire, — the  plain,
straightforward,  philosophical  acumen  which  guides  each  consecutive  inquiry,  or
the  combination  of  ingenuity  and  common  sense  with  which  questions  of  great
delicacy  are  made  subservient  to  the  progress  of  severe  inquiry.  Time  and  op-
portunity only  are  required  to  corroborate  rather  than  to  correct  the  facts  he  has
advanced.  Those  who  venture  to  risk  their  own  reputations  in  throwing  doubts
on  the  Baron's  results,  should  remember  that  the  conditions  under  which  the  ex-
periments were  originally  made,  must,  in  justice,  be  strictly  repeated.  The  dis-
coverer of  creosote,  paraffine,  eupion,  and  many  other  new  compounds,  for  the
knowledge  of  which  the  world  is  indebted  to  his  laborious  researches,  is  not  a
common-place  authority ;  and  he  has  now  taken  up  a  subject,  the  truth  of  which
will  roll  with  tremendous  force  over  all  obstacles.

Those  who  regard  the  science  of  Physics,  in  the  isolated  form  in  which  it  is  gen-
erally presented  in  most  of  the  Elements  of  Natural  Philosophy,  must  necessarily
have  a  very  limited  view  of  the  importance  of  the  researches  now  presented  to
the  public.  Indeed,  it  would  be,  at  present,  almost  impossible  to  indicate  all  the
points  in  cosmogony,  to  which  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach's  commencement,  in
strict  logical  deduction,  on  imponderable  agencies,  may  not,  at  a  future  period,
have  a  positive  reference.  It  may  be  remarked,  that  the  evolution  of  each  new
fact  is  a  step  in  that  progress,  which  may  be  ultimately  connected  with  the  forces,
agencies,  fluids,  or  powers  that  pervade  space  in  universal  nature.

Undoubtedly,  the  attempt  to  place  Mesmerism  within  the  domain  of  physics
was  a  bold  conception.  It  is  an  attempt  to  bring  the  whole  of  physiology  into
the  strict  limits  of  chemical  philosophy.  The  establishment  of  the  existence  of  the
odic  force  is  that  which  was  wanting  to  reply  to  most  of  the  questions  respecting  life.
No  doubt  much  is  yet  to  be  desired  in  order  to  clear  the  obscurities  enveloping
the  innumerable  modifications  of  this  force  ;  but  enlightenment  reaches  us  from
the  enlightened,  and  the  Baron  pursues  his  continued  researches  with  a  zeal
which  promises  to  unfold  to  us  many  a  new  principle,  as  well  as  many  a  new  fact
connected  with  this  subject ;  and,  considering  the  very  curious  investigations  which
will  be  published  in  the  second  part  of  this  work,  it  is  hardly  too  much  to  antici-
pate that  we  may,  ere  long,  be  favored  with  some  insight  into  the  philosophy  of
a  subject  evidently  connected  with  the  matter  of  fight,  or  in  some  Avay  allied  with
that  of  the  development  of  either  latent  light,  or  of  some  combination  of  a  share
of  tins  principle  with  certain  organic  re-agents.  The  researches  into  odic  light  by
the  Baron  do  not  appear  yet  to  belong  immediately  to  clairvoyance,  and  yet  the
links  which  connect  the  inquiries  are  not  far  off.  Numerous  questions  suggest
themselves  in  an  examination  of  the  philosophy  of  this  subject : — Why  the  con-
dition of  brain  favorable  to  the  development  of  clairvoyance  should  belong  to  cer-
tain individuals,  and  not  to  others  ?  Why  it  should  belong  to  some  nervous  sus-
ceptible temperaments,  and  not  to  others?  Why  some  insane  persons  should  be
in  the  category,  and  not  others  ?  Why  in  some  brains  these  peculiar  developments
of  mental  lucidity  should  take  place,  quickly  and  easily,  by  peculiar  stimulants,
while  others  should  require  a  long  period  for  the  attainment  of  the  object  ?  Why,
in  some,  the  phenomena  are  not  produced  without  a  long  course  of  mesmeric  sleep,
while  in  others,  the  presence  of  certain  individuals,  or  of  certain  crystals,  or  of  clear
bottles  of  clean  mesmerized  water,  in  the  same  room,  suffice  to  excite  the  brain  to  the
requisite  condition?  In  one  and  the  same  person,  one  mesmerizer  shall  never  be
able  to  produce  clairvoyance  ;  another  mesmerizer  will  establish  it,  at  the  first
seance.  I  have  no  doubt  of  these  facts :  I  have  often  witnessed  them.  I  have
produced  the  condition  of  clairvoyance  ;  but  the  kind  and  the  degree  of  the  phe-
nomena differed,  very  remarkably,  from  those  produced  by  Major  Buckley,  in  the

PREFACE.  vü

same  patients.  Repeatedly  I  have  tried,  in  vain,  to  make  clairvoyant  somnam-
bules read  printed  words  which  were  enclosed  in  a  pill-box.  Major  Buckley,
ignorant  of  the  same  words,  has  had  them  quickly  read  in  the  innermost  of  a  nest
of  five,  four  of  them  tightly-fitting  silver  boxes.  The  stimulus  afforded  by  the
odic  lights  issuing  from  my  brain,  must  then  be  very  different  from  that  of  those
emitted  by  his.  I  have  elsewhere  said,  (Zoist,  vol.  iv.,  p.  125)  before  the  abstract
of  the  work  of  Reichenbach  appeared  here,  that  "striking  facts  may  be  adduced
which  may  tend  to  the  conclusion  that  the  exercise  of  the  faculties  of  the  human
mind,  and' particularly  that  of  the  will,  is  attended  by  the  emanation  of  a  fluid
from  the  brain,  from  the  fingers,  seats  of  the  functional  extremities  of  the  nerves,  or
from  some  part  of  the  person  who  may  be  exercising  the  mental  faculties.  I  pro-
pose to  show  that  the  same  series  of  "events  may  be  produced  in  individuals  of  a
certain  nervous  diathesis,  by  the  impingement  of  a  fluid  evolved  by  the  will  of
another  ;  or  by  manipulations  attended  by  the  emanation  of  the  same  fluid,  or  by
certain  emanations  from  magnets,  or  from  some  metallic  wires,  through  which
currents  of  electricity  are  passed  ;  or  from  the  direct  application  of  certain  metals.
I  do  not  attempt  to  establish  the  identity  of  these  fluids,  for  the  facts  daily  de-
veloping themselves  tend  to  show  that  the  distinctive  properties  of  these  fluids
are  as  various  as  the  substances  from  which  they  emanate ;  and  it  may  be  that  the
great  power,  antecedent  to  all  consequents,  may  ordain  the  simplicity  and  unity
of  one  electric,  and  gravitating  with  centrifugal  force,  evolving  an  infinite  compli-
cation and  variety  of  magnetic  cohesive  and  repulsive  agencies ;  the  entire  system
emerging  from  the  volonte  directing  '  La  Grande  Formule.'  "*  All  these  con-
siderations are  for  inquiry.  Thev  must  meet  with  scrutiny,  and  new  truths  will
be  elicited,  multiplying  the  facts"  prolonging  the  interest  and  the  fame  attached
to  the  genius  of  the  discoverer  of  the  odic  force.  We  are  but  at  the  commence-
ment of  the  wonders  of  clairvoyance,  and  can  certainly  be  in  no  position  to  esti-
mate the  great  fund  of  new  truths,  that  by  means  of  its  cultivated  agency,  are  in
store  for  us.  "We  are  so  often  met  with  objections  as  to  the  possibility  of  the
phenomena  of  clairvoyance,  that  after  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach's  arguments  on
the  varying  powers  of  various  individuals  to  perceive  the  odic  flames,  one  is
tempted  to  adduce  the  fact  discovered  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  that  the  densest  and
heaviest  metal,  gold,  has  more  poresf  in  it  than  solid  metallic  particles,  and  con-
sequently that  light  may  be  transmitted  through  it ;  and  if  so,  it  is  quite  possible

*  A  «series  of  essays,  under  the  sicnature  of  Ignotus,  appeared  in  the  London  Journal  and
Repertory  of  Arts,  Sciences,  and  Manufactures,  in  the  year  1848,  which  contained  many  very
ingenious  speculations  on  imponderable  bodies,  and  which,  though  not  founded  on  original  ex-
perimental inquiry,  are  deserving  of  attention  from  the  point  of  view  in  which  these  agencies
are  regarded,  ...  i

Ignotus  maintains  that  three  distinct  kinds  of  imponderable  matter  exist  in  nature,  namely—
magnetine,  or  the  principle  of  magnetism  ;  lumine,  or  the  principle  of  light;  and  calorine,  or
the  principle  of  heat ;  and  that  the  whole  of  these  are  capable  ol  existing  In  either  a  tree  or
latent  state  and  of  manifesting  chemical  agencies,  by  virtue  of  which  they  are  mainly  influential
in  inducing  the  various  phenomena  which  nature  exhibits,— as,  for  instance,  the  tendencies
of  the  chemical  elements  (of  which  they  are  constituents),  to  enter  into  chemical  action  and
produce  new  compounds.  Upon  their  agencies  depend  the  principle  of  gravitation,  of  the  ag-
gregation and  segregation  of  the  molecules  of  ponderable  matter;  of  ordinary  electricity  ;  of
voltaism  and  catalysis  ;  and  it  is  upon  their  operation,  but  more  particularly  on  the  influence
of  magnetine,  that  the  vital  functions,  in  all  their  modifications,  are  dependent.

With  respect  to  electricity,  Ignotus  regards  this  principle  as  distinct  from  magnetism  and  vol-
taism and  attributes  its  phenomena  to  the  disengagement  of  a  hitherto  undesenbed  ponderable
chemical  element,  which  he  terms  electrine,  and  which  he  assumes  to  be  an  essential  constit-

UThave'Xreason  to  believe  that,  since  his  original  publication,  Ignotus  has  occupied  himself
with  important  alterations and'additions,  his  views  now  extending  to  the  creation  of  the  uni-
verse, and  constituting  in  fact  a  new  chemical  theory  of  nature.

t  See  "  A  Dissertation  on  the  .(Ether  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,"  by  Bryan  Robinson,  M.D.,  p.  11.

viii  PREFACE.

to  conceive  of  its  being  diaphanous  to  certain  individuals  possessed  of  a  highly
sensitive  nervous  system.  But  what  are  the  marvellous  things  of  clairvoyance,
compared  to  those  contained  in  a  supplementary  note  to  the  relation  between
Holy  Scripture  and  some  parts  of  geological  science,  by  Dr.  Pye  Smith,  to  which
I  refer  below  in  order  to  cause  reflection  on  such  matters  ?*     Here  our  object  is

*  In  the  '  Philosophical  Transactions  '  for  1800,  is  a  paper  by  the  late  Sir  William  Herschel
upon  the  Power  of  Telescopes  to  Penetrate  into  Space,  a  property  distinct  from  the  magnifying
power.  By  observations  and  calculations,  which  appear  to  have  been  corroborated  by  facts
independently  and  previously  ascertained,  the  space-penetrating  power  of  his  forty  feet  reflec-
tor is  brought  out  to  be  a  little  more  than  191  times  that  of  ordinary  natural  vision,  or  extend-
ing to  more  than  300,000  times  the  distance  of  Sirius,  which,  on  satisfactory  grounds,  is  re-
garded as  one  of  the  nearest  of  the  fixed  stars.  The  light  by  which  Sirius  is  seen  by  us,
moving  at  its  known  velocity  of  192,000  miles  in  a  second,  is  at  least  six  years  and  fourmonths
on  its  passage  from  our  system.  By  applying  the  equation  which  Sir  William  had  established,
he  brought  out  that  the  brilliant  nebulae,  which  only  that  telescope  can  reach,  are  distant  from
our  earth  such  an  immense  number  of  miles,  that  to  express  them  our  arithmetical  numeration
requires  twenty  figures,  of  which  the  first  eight  are  11,765,475,  the  eleven  denoting  trillions,
and  the  other  number  billions  ;  the  remaining  part  of  the  sum  being  much  more  than  948,000
millions.  This  almost  unmanageable  number  is  expressed  by  Sir  William  Herschel  thus —
'above  llf  millions  of  millions  of  millions  of  miles!'  It  follows  that  the  light  by  which  those
bright  objects  become  visible  to  us  cannot  have  been  less  than  one  million  and  nine  hundred
thousand  years  in  its  progress.

Yet  when  we  have  strained  our  minds  to  contemplate,  in  the  extremely  feeble  manner  to
which  our  faculties  are  competent,  this  overwhelming  distance,  we  have  no  reason  to  think
that  we  have  touched  the  circumference  of  the  astral  sphere  ;  or  that  we  have  advanced  be-
yond the  threshold  of  God's  creation.

If  it  be  objected  that,  in  accordance  with  these  deductions,  we  might  expect  new  portions  of
Jehovah's  dominion  to  be  frequently  disclosing  themselves,  stars  and  clusters  of  stars  '  blush-
ing out '  on  our  view,  new  to  us,  because  their  light  hau  now  first  arrived  at  our  earthly  abode,
I  conceive  the  following  considerations  sufficient  to  meet  the  objection  : —

1.  The  absolute  distances  of  fixed  stars  and  groups  from  each  other  may  be  such  as  to  re-
quire respective  intervals  of  years  and  even  centuries  for  the  light  of  the  more  remote  objects
to  reach  us ;  that  light  arriving  successively  from  each  according  to  the  distance.

2.  Our  case  refers  to  objects  which,  though  self-luminous,  are  not  visible  to  the  naked  eye.
They  may  '  blush  out,'  even  frequently ;  but  men  are  not  capable  of  being  their  observers.
Only  a  few  of  mankind  can  enjoy,  and  be  qualified  to  use,  such  telescopes  as  those  of  Sir  Wil-
liam Herschel,  and  his  still  more  accomplished  son.

3.  Granting  the  possession  of  these  advantages,  the  opportunities  for  observation  are  too
scanty  for  the  construction  of  a  negative  argument.  Sir  William  Herschel,  in  the  same  paper,
says  that  the  number  of  night-hours,  suited  to  this  kind  of  celestial  observation,  is  averaged
favorably  in  our  climate  atone  hundred  in  a  year  ;  and  that  to  '  sweep  '■ — to  examine  as  rapidly
as  is  consistent  with  astronomical  attention — every  zone  of  the  heavens,  for  the  two  hemis-
pheres, would  require  eight  hundred  and  eleven  of  such  favorable  years.  The  number  of  the
objects  to  be  observed  is  great  almost  beyond  conception.  Sir  William  Herschel,  by  counting
the  stars  in  a  definite  portion  of  the  field  of  view  which  he  observed  in  one  hour,  and  estima-
ting the  rest,  concluded  that  fifty  thousand  passed  under  his  review  in  that  hour.  It  is  there-
fore within  the  scope  of  probability  that  new  masses  of  light  are  achieving  their  first  arrival  in

'parts  of  our  telescopic  sphere,  frequently  without  its  being  possible  for  men  to  be  aware  of  it ;
and,  when  any  of  them  comes  to  be  discovered,  the  date  of  their  arrival  is  unknown.

I  draw  no  argument  from  the  fact  that,  within  the  short  period  of  the  last  two  or  three  cen-
turies, stars  have  been  discovered  which  earlier  catalogues  or  descriptions  had  not  noticed.
The  attention,  requisite  to  give  certainty  in  this  matter,  we  cannot  assume  to  have  been  exer-
cised ;  and  to  look  for  evidence  from  this  quarter  would  be  forgetting  that  it  can  exist  in  the  do-
main of  only  the  greatest  telescopic  powers.

These  views  of  the  antiquity  of  that  vast  portion  of  the  Creator's  works  which  astronomy
discloses,  may  well  abate  our  reluctance  to  admit  the  deductions  of  geology,  concerning  the
past  ages  of  our  planets' existence. — [Supplementary  note  to  the  relation  between  the  Holy
Scriptures  and  some  parts  of  Geological  Science.     By  Dr.  Pye  Smith.]

Nor  ought  it  to  be  forgotten  that  these  very  principles  and  deductions  of  geology,  that  have
excited  so  much  of  alarm  and  opposition  among  some  friends  of  religion,  and  so  much  of  pre-
mature and  groundless  exultation  among  its  enemies,  have  nevertheless,  when  taken  in  con-
nection with  astronomy,  developed  and  established  a  law  of  God's  natural  government  of  the
universe,  grand  beyond  all.  others  known  to  man,  and  undiscovered  or  only  dimly  seen  by  the
great  minds  of  other  generations.  I  refer  to  the  fact,  that  perpetual  change  is  made  the  grand
conservative  and  controlling  principle  of  the  universe.  Men  have  always  seen  and  felt  this  in-
stability in  respect  to  everything  on  earth  ;  and  they  have  regarded  it  as  a  defect,  rather  than
as  a  wise  law  of  the  natural  world.    But  they  now  find  it  to  be  equally  tme  of  suns  and  planets

PREFACE.  ix

not  to  display  wonders,  but  while  in  passing  we  reply  to  objectors,  we  must  con-
tinue to  illustrate  the  leading  purpose  of  these  researches,  really  and  truly  the
philosophy  of  mesmerism.  Strange  would  it  be  if  the  wonders  of  clairvoyance ;
those  of  the  phenomena  detected  by  the  telescope ;  the  events  accruing  from  the
nature  of  living  organisms,  in  all  their  infinite  varieties,  should  finally  be  depen-
dent on  the  same  force,  which  Newton  contemplated,  in  his  acute  conjecture  that
water  was  a  compound  body,  and  which  gave  rise  to  the  wild  but  important
speculations  of  Mesmer,  on  the  existence  of  an  universal  fluid,  when  he  led  the
way  to  the  facts  of  a  new  science,  which,  after  a  struggle  of  eighty  years,  has
emerged  in  the  hands  of  Von  Reichenbach  into  principles  applicable  to  all  nature.
A  remarkable  fact  connected  with  the  emergence  of  mesmerism  into  its  present
importance  is  the  serious  neglect  of  its  merits  which  has  marked  the  conduct  of
those  who  were  bound  to  encourage  them,  by  study  and  inquiry.  Really,  prac-
tically, mesmerism  has  deserved  very  different  treatment.  It  has  merited  high
civic  honors.  It  has,  under  the  patient  j^hilosophic  guidance  of  Dr.  Elliotson,
conquered  malignant  cancer.  It  has  removed  enormous  growths  known  as  poly-
pus, as  I  can  testify.  I  know  that  it  has  chased  away  large  ovarian  tumors,  and
dropsies  that  have  defied  all  medical  skill.  It  has  cured  malignant  fevers  in  their
advanced  stages.  It  has  removed  tubercles,  and  healed  abscesses.  To  enumer-
ate all  the  good  that  has  been  done  by  this  agent,  combined  with  the  essence  of
human  kindness — for  without  that  the  practice  of  mesmerism  is  useless — would
take  many  volumes.  Thousand  of  cases  are  now  extant  of  the  benefits  derived
from  this  holy  power.  The  Zoist  is  the  grand  English  work  of  testimony  on  this
subject,  and  it  is  full  of  useful  information,  as  well  as  of  noble  essays  to  advance
the  cause  of  humanity.  The  defenders  of  mesmerism  have,  in  that  work,  labored
hard  for  the  truth,  which  they  have  advocated  with  the  boldness  belonging  to
sincerity.  How  much  soever  they  have  been  opposed  by  the  sordid  and  the  mean,
by  those  systematically  opposed  to  the  progress  of  expansion — with  whatever
success  falsehood  has  retarded  the  march  of  useful  knowledge — it  is  consoling  to
the  writers  in  the  Zoist  to  know  that  the  great  cause  is  advancing.  Small-minded
men,  not  capable,  from  unfortunate  organization  of  brain,  of  believing  in  truths  at
variance  with  the  idols  they  have  been  accustomed  to  worship,  set  themselves  up
as  oracles  of  wisdom.  Too  many  implicitly  give  up  their  convictions  to  such  in-
competent leaders  !  Eight,  however,  as  they  will  against  the  truth,  it  is  always
too  strong  for  its  opponents.  Time,  which  settles  all  differences,  by  changing
old  things  and  by  bringing  forward  new,  sweeps  away  the  fallacies  of  the  obsti-
nately proud  and  ignorant.  Would  it  were  possible  for  small  minds  to  reflect,
that  all  their  efforts  to  establish  falsehood  will  not  alter  the  laws  of  nature,  and
no  folly  of  striving  to  prove  that  falsehood  is  truth  can  change  these  established
laws  !  For  nearly  eighty  years  has  the  professional  world  of  science  opposed  it-
self to  the  discovery  of  Mesmer,  yet  still  the  facts  exist.  Turn  to  the  truths  placed
before  mankind  by  the  stupendous  powers  of  observation  and  catenation  of  that
rare  genius,  Gall !  It  is  sickening  to  note  the  causes  which  have  hitherto  de-
prived society  of  the  advantages,  destined  to  accrue  to  our  race,  at  a  later  period,
by  the  cultivation  of  phrenology.  How  curiously  and  strikingly  has  mesmeric
science  verified  all  the  discoveries  of  Gall !  Still  the  flood  of  opposition  pours
on,  and  the  pretenders  to  religion,  real  enemies  of  the  spirit  of  truth,  with  awful
pride  and  cunning,  endeavor  by  sly  arts  to  crush  its  rising  lights.

ns  of  plants  and  animals.  Perpetual  change,  perpetual  progression,  increase,  and  diminution,
appear  to  be  the  rules  of  the  material  world,  and  to  prevail  without  exception. — [Professor
Whewell,  quoted  by  Or.  Pye  Smith. J  Burke  might  be  quoted  on  the  same  subject,  for  with
the  acumen  and  terseness  of  Genius,  he  says  in  a  letter  to  Sir  Henry  Langrishe,  Change  is  the
great  Law  of  Nature.

x  '    PREFACE.

It  is  remarkable  that  three  great  philosophers,  each  in  succession,  in  some
measure  contemning  the  labors  of  his  predecessor,  should  have  arisen  in  the  same
spot ;  that  each  should  have  put  forth  a  discovery  of  signal  importance  to  the
philosophy  of  mind ;  that  Vienna  should  be  the  well-spring,  whence  these  lights
should  radiate ;  that  the  sparkling,  crystalline,  luminous  knowledge  emanating
from  that  fountain,  placed  in  the  central  capital  of  European  civilization,  should
have  reflected  a  glory  round  the  names  of  three  philosophers,  which  will  em-
blazon iheir  researches  as  amongst  the  most  important  that  can  occupy  the  atten-
tion of  mankind ;  that  Mesmer,  Gall,  and  Reichenbach,  first  announced  their
grand  ideas  from  the  capital  of  the  Austrian  empire.

The  Baron  von  Reichenbach  may  not  believe  himself  complimented  by  this
allocation.  He  may  have  some  scientific  pride,  notwithstanding  the  size  and
quality  of  the  majority  of  the  organs  of  his  brain ;  nevertheless,  the  reflection
must  be  made,  that  all  knowledge  is  relative,  as  every  atom  of  matter  is  relative.
Nothing  is  fixed  and  absolute ;  but  in  the  vast  range  of  human  acquirement,  it
would  be  difficult  to  exhibit  three  sets  of  facts,  announced  at  separate  intervals
of  time,  having  so  intimate  a  relation  to  each  other,  and  which  are  so  interwoven
in  their  dependencies,  as  those  Viennese  discoveries ;  having,  moreover,  such
numerous  alliances  to  all  the  circumstances  to  which  man  can,  by  turns,  transfer
his  attentions.

Where  will  all  this  philosophy  lead  us  ?  Can  any  sincere  person  entertain  a
doubt  ?  It  is  the  spirit  of  truth  which  is  about  to  be  victorious.  It  is  not  a
question  as  to  the  appreciation,  at  the  present  moment,  of  the  best  knowledge,
of  the  soundest  philosophy.  Educated  in  selfishness,  we  five  in  a  world  of  hallu-
cinations. It  has  been  well  said  that  we  form  one  large  lunatic  establishment.
We  are  surrounded  by  influences  that  are  always  tending  to  impress  upon  us
a  desire  to  succumb  to  the  tyranny  of  falsehood.  The  conventional  habits  of  our
lives  make  us,  more  or  less,  hypocrites ;  and  according  to  the  energy,  originality,
or  some  other  individual  peculiarity  of  our  character,  we  swerve  from  the  lean-
ing of  our  fellow-men.  If  the  proposition  be  offered  to  his  innate  desire  for  jus-
tice, it  is  not  that  man  does  not  essentially  love  truth,  but  that  the  progress  of  his
organization,  through  ages,  has  not  yet  ripened  sufficiently  to  allow  that  expanded
development  which,  as  science  advances,  must  have  place  in  a  more  perfect
arrangement  of  society.  Man  cannot  yet  worship  truth  as  the  best  knowledge.
He  has  not  yet  passed  the  age  of  idols.  The  knavery  of  the  selfish  and  interested
is  always  ready  to  excite  his  lower  feelings  against  that  which  is  really  holy
and  reverential,  the  sacred  will  of  the  Most  Just.  But  the  good  time  approaches
— for  science  advances  with  immensely  rapid  strides.  Those  who  are  now  young
have  to  witness  many  improvements,  all  tending,  like  the  researches  of  the  Baron
von  Reichenbach,  to  expand  the  intellects  and  morals  of  man,  and  to  lead  liirn
finally  to  the  realms  of  light.

JOHN  ASHBURNER.

65,  Grosvenor  Street,  April  25,  1850.

THE  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE

TO   THE

SECOND  EDITION.

The  following  treatises  were  originally  destined  to  appear  singly  in  the  month-
ly parts  of  Liebig's  "  Annalen  der  Chemie,"  and  should,  from  the  time  they  were
given  in,  have  been  commenced  in  July,  1844.  Accidental  circumstances  de-
layed their  publication,  and  thus  it  happened  that  several  of  them  became  united
in  entire  parts  of  that  work,  and  then  were  first  given  to  the  public  in  March  and
May,  1845.     This  will  explain  their  somewhat  unusual  form.

In  the  present  Second  Edition  there  are  some  corrections,  but,  as  a  whole,  the
principal  contents  have  remained  unaltered ;  my  researches,  continued  without
interruption  during  the  several  years  that  have  elapsed,  have  strengthened  and
confirmed  the  earlier  observations.  I  have  considered  that  I  could  not  abandon
the  half-historical,  half-systematic  course  of  the  enumeration  of  my  observations,
ami  the  detail  of  my  judgments  upon  them,  since  it  is  that  of  natural  science  gene-
rally, in  which  the  correction  of  earlier  experiments  always  keeps  pace  with  the
extension  of  our  knowledge.

It  was  to  be  expected  that  a  subject  of  so  unusual  and  peculiar  a  kind  as  the
present  researches  would  meet  with  objections ;  and  I  was  aware  beforehand
that  I  should  have  to  defend  my  experiments,  and  the  deductions  I  had  drawn
from  them,  against  ill-founded  and  groundless  opposition.  The  new  field  of  re-
search which  was  laid  open  pushes  its  lines  too  near  the  bastions  of  established
formula;,  frequently  involves,  in  too  many  convolutions,  all  that  exists  in  the  pre-
sent doctrines  of  natural  dynamics,  for  the  necessary  space  to  be  freely  allowed
to  it.  Yet  I  thought  only  of  reasonable  criticism  of  my  observations,  perhaps  of
unsuccessful  repetitions  of  my  experiments,  arising  here  and  there  from  faulty
arrangement ;  that  my  conclusions  might  be  contested,  or  other  views  built  upon
the  facts  brought  forward :  but  I  was  not  prepared  for  an  attack,  which  every
true  friend  of  science  will  unite  with  me  in  calling  unprovoked,  such  as  was
made  upon  my  work,  and  upon  myself  personally,  by  a  Dr.  Dubois- Reymond,  in
Karstens  "Fortschritte  der  Physik  ha  Jahre  1845."  This  naturalist  does  not
find  it  at  all  necessary  to  go  into  my  experiments,  and  the  conclusions  deduced
from  them,  but  briefly  and  superficially  designates  my  book  as  an  "  absurb  ro-
mance," the  details  of  which  "  it  would  be  fruitless  and  to  him  impossible  to  en-
ter." I  believe  both  of  these  assertions.  Fruitless ;  because  he  has  not  under-
stood them,  and  an  uncomprehended  and  incomprehensible  criticism  is  fruitless.
Impossible ;  because  he  has  not  read  them  in  connection  ;  and  to  enter  into  a  mat-
ter of  which  one  has  acquired  no  knowledge,  is  impossible.     And  that  he  really

xii  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.

has  not  read  them,  but  turned  over  the  leaves  in  the  fashion  of  a  superficial  and
unscrupulous  reviewer,  is  proved  by  his  calling  my  work  "  the  New  Testament
of  Mesmerism :"  thus  he  has  not  seen  that  it  is  the  very  first,  in  this  field,  which
runs  counter  to  Mesmer's  views  in  most  points,  and  places  the  phenomena  on
wholly  different  ground.  With  silly  jests  he  says,  he  "  is  greeted  by  the  magne-
tic tub  and  complex  magic  wares  of  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach,"  <fec. :  thus  he
has  not  read  that  it  is  myself  who  makes  an  end  of  that  tub  and  Mesmer's  mag-
netic wares,  in  tearing  down  the  veil  from  the  mysteries,  tracing  them  back  to
their  bare  physical  contents,  and  replacing  all  previous  phantasmagoria  by  sober
investigation  of  nature.  But  as  long  as  science  exists,  ignorance  will  have  the
most  dogmatic  judgment.  This  polished  Berlinese  then  further  pleases  to  throw
common-places  in  my  face,  such  as, — my  treatise  is  one  of  the  "  most  melancholy
aberrations  which  have  for  a  long  time  settled  on  a  human  brain  ;"  they  are  "  fa-
bles," which  deserve  "  to  be  thrown  behind  the  fire ;"  and  more  of  the  like  learn-
ed vulgarity.  Whoever  assumes  publicly  to  sit  in  judgment  and  pronounce
sentence  on  a  scientific  work,  is  subject,  first  of  all,  to  the  duty  of  making  him-
self thoroughly  acquainted  with  its  contents  ;  he  has,  moreover,  like  every  other
judge,  to  support  the  decision  with  the  motives  upon  which  he  believes  he  is
justified  in  grounding  the  same.  This  duty  is  the  more  irremissible  in  him,  that
his  judgment  is  but  one-sided,  and  requires  the  control  of  public  opinion,  while
the  attacked  party  may,  if  necessary,  take  arms  against  it.  But  a  slanderous
criticism,  which  is  not  ashamed  to  strip  itself  of  all  these  conditions,  is  nothing
else,  in  one  word,  than  literary  insolence,  and  of  such  measure,  that  is  perhaps
unexampled  in  ancient  or  modern  literature :  for  it  certainly  has  never  and  no-
where occurred  that  a  reporter  has  had  the  boldness,  or  rather  the  silliness,  to
pass  over  a  scientific  production  peremptorily,  and  with  unprovoked  insults,
without  any  account,  or  any  statement  of  his  reasons, — without  a  single  syllable
of  analysis  of  its  contents.  I  have  said  silliness,  because  it  is  silly  to  throw
stones  which  one  can  see  will  rebound  on  one's  own  head.  Either  my  state-
ments contained  truths,  which  have  existence  and  consistence  in  the  physical
world, — consequently  must  sooner  or  later  be  recognised,  and  put  the  ignorant
reviewer  to  shame ;  or  they  are  based  upon  great  errors,  and  in  that  case  it
must  be  an  easy  thing  for  him,  in  accordance  with  his  duty,  to  disclose  and  elu-
cidate them,  and  thereby  to  put  away  from  himself  the  accusation  of  unfair
trifling  with  the  fame  of  his  fellow-citizens  :  only,  narrow-mindedness  and  silli-
ness expose  themselves  thoughtlessly  to  both  these  dangers  at  once.

M.  Dubois  further  says,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  details  of  my  treatise,  "  be-
cause it  would  be  altogether  impossible  for  him  to  avoid  unparliamentary  lan-
guage in  so  doing."  The  insolence  he  had  poured  out  upon  me  was  not  unpar-
liamentary, not  rude  enough;  he  had  store  of  still  coarser  quality.  He  has
given  a  specimen  of  the  delicacy  of  his  manners,  which  restrains  him  from  the
use  of  it.  I  will  relieve  him  from  the  necessity  of  any  hypocrisy,  and  tell  the
truth:  he  had  not  the  courage  to  venture  on  a  discussion  of  the  details  of  my
treatises.  The  matter  does  not  he  upon  the  surface ;  the  facts  collected  cannot
be  briefly  set  down  by  a  fluent  tongue ;  and  the  conclusions  drawn  consequently
from  them  cannot  be  washed  away  with  watery  ink.  A  fundamental  investi-
gation, however,  requires  pains,  and  costs  labor ;  this  is  inconvenient,  perhaps
fruitless,  and  perchance  leads  to  scruples.  And  since,  without  such  trouble,  the
matter  cannot  be  thoroughly  gone  into,  except  at  the  risk  of  unripe  judgments,
the  details  are  warily  avoided,  lest  the  critic  should  get  rapped  on  the  knuckles,
or  should  subsequently  be  made  to  feel  the  scourge  of  the  author.  It  is  much .
easier  and  cheaper  to  skip  away  over  the  outside  of  a  subject  with  a  worthless
superficiality,  and  by  casting  slurs  upon  it,  to  degrade  it  in  public  opinion,  and

AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.  xiii

then  to  shuffle  out  of  it,  in  a  cowardly  way.  M.  Dubois  need  not  lay  the  slight-
est compulsion  upon  himself  to  enter  into  the  details  of  my  treatise :  I  call  him
out  into  the  arena,  with  his  "  unparliamentary  language"  of  the  Spree,  and  give
him  my  word  that  he  shall  meet  me,  and  I  will  give  him  just  such  an  answer  as
he  deserves.

The  very  nature  of  an  experimental  work  renders  it  subject  to  defects ;  it  is
just  because  we  feel  these  defects  in  our  knowledge,  that  we  institute  experi-
ments, to  perfect  it,  through  the  discovery  of  new  facts.  While  we  are  engaged
in  these,  we  again  become  aware  of  ten,  nay  a  hundred,  new  deficiencies;  the
reader,  too,  on  his  part,  probably  discovers  another  dozen,  which  have  escaped
the  author ;  and  the  reviewer  perhaps  still  more.  It  is  quite  right,  then,  that
they  should  be  publicly  indicated  and  be  brought  into  discussion,  so  that  the
matters  may  be  further  worked  out  in  new  directions,  or  that  what  has  already
been  obtained  be  safely  placed  beyond  all  doubt.  This  benefits  every  one,  in-
cluding the  first  discoverer  of  each  new  scientific  fact.

My  works  will  be  as  little  free  from  defects  as  those  of  much  more  exalted
men  than  I  ever  could  be,  least  of  all  in  the  natural  sciences.  No  one  can  have
felt  this  more  strongly  than  myself.  Every  criticism  expressed  in  a  good  spirit  I
shall  receive  with  thanks,  and  try  to  improve  my  work  accordingly.  But  impe-
rious abuse,  from  one  who  is  profoundly  ignorant  of  the  work  he  reviews,  must
be  repelled,  and  the  reviewer  must  be  taught  to  know  the  limits  of  decency.  It
is  the  interest,  not  only  of  myself,  but  of  all  who  work  and  write,  that  weeds  of
this  kind  should  not  be  left  to  flourish,  but  be  raked  out  and  cleared  away.

That  much  more  exalted  men  than  myself  do  really  fall  into  the  greatest  mis-
takes in  their  scientific  works,  I  will  not  be  content  merely  to  have  said,  in  my
own  defence,  but  I  will  at  once  prove  it.  M.  Johannes  Müller,  our  great  phy-
siologist, and  the  pride  of  Germany,  whose  excellent  works  are  the  oracle  of  his
contemporaries,  in  his  Handbook  of  Human  Physiology  (4th  edition,  i.  26,)  where
he  mentions  the  "  so-called  animal  magnetism,  the  passes,  imposition  of  hands,
transfer  of  the  so-called  magnetic  fluid,"  says,  word  for  word:  "  Their  stories  are,
however,  a  lamenlaSle  maze  of  lies,  deceit,  and  superstition;  and  it  has  only
proved  how  incapable  most  physicians  are  of  empirical  investigation,  and  how
little  conception  they  have  of  a  mode  of  examination  which  has  become  the  uni-
versal method  in  the  other  natural  sciences."  But  how,  if  it  now  turn  out  that
it  is,  on  the  contrary,  M.  Müller  liimself  who  is  and  moves  in  that  lamentable
maze?  How,  if  in  my  treatises  exactly  that  mode  of  proof  be  applied  which  is
carried  out  in  the  now  universal  method  of  the  other  natural  sciences?  And
how,  finally,  if  exactly  these  tests  have  demonstrated  and  established  by  evidence,
through  hundreds  of  facts,  the  actual  existence  of  such  a  fluid  or  dynamic,  that
produces  surprising  physical  and  physiological  effects,  by  passes,  imposition  of
hands,  and  transference,  as  distinctly  as  any  other  physical  or  physiological  truth
can  be  established  in  the  same  way  )  Then,  one  would  and  must  say,  that  the
great  Müller  had  considerably  erred  in  a  matter  on  which,  without  a  previous
examination,  he  had  allowed  himself  to  pronounce  an  injurious  and  hasty  judg-
ment, and  that  in  a  new  edition  of  his  Handbook  he  will  expand  those  parts  so
hurried  over.  It  will  be  noted  as  a  striking  instance  of  how  the  most  distin-
guished men  may  fall  into  the  greatest  errors  through  prejudice  or  preoccupa-
tion ;  may  be  subject  to  mistakes  of  such  magnitude,  that  exactly  that  which
they  bitterly  and  unsparingly  attribute  to  other  people,  finds  its  most  accurate
application  in  their  very  selves,  and  falls  back  upon  their  own  heads.

M.  Dubois,  meanwhile,  is  under  the  scientific  influence  of  M.  J.  Midler,  as  he
tells  us  himself  in  the  58th  volume  of  "  Poggcndorff's  Annalen" — is  indeed  his
pupil, — and  thinks  that  in  proper  respect  to  his  exalted  master  he  must  swear

xiv  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION".

"  in  verba  magisfrif  for  it  is  evident  that  his  attack,  where  he  honors  me  with
"  the  most  melanchol)r  aberration  of  a  human  brain,"  agrees  almost  verbatim  with
M.  Müller's  "  lamentable  maze,"  (both  appear  to  have  a  store  of  compassion  for
lamentably  erring  authors ;)  and  where  the  latter  speaks  of  lies  and  deceit,  the
former  thinks  to  hurt  me  with  obscure  and  suspicious  hints,  as,— of  concealed
"peculiar  and  hidden  ground  of  my  treatise."  .  .  .  But  these  gentlemen
"  cannot  see  the  forests  for  the  trees"  this  time.  An  unconnected  mass  of  the
strangest  phenomena,  in  nervous  patients,  is  reported  to  them ;  there  is  no  rubric
for  such  facts  in  the  "  system  ■"  and  while  the  spectators  were  regarding  the
astonished  faces  and  the  embarrassment  of  the  doctors,  a  Berlin  grisette  has
made  one  of  the  learned  gentlemen  the  sport  of  her  wantonness.  When  he  at
last  saw,  in  the  mirror,  that  his  ears  were  growing  too  long,  he  cried  "  Treason  !"
and  all  the  thousand  truths  that  now  came  crowding  to  the  door  for  examination
and  recognition,  were  pitilessly  hurled,  unheard,  from  top  to  bottom  of  the  stairs,
as  "lying,  deceit,  and  superstition."  This  is,  indeed,  a  convenient  way  of  getting
over  the  trouble  of  a  fundamental  investigation,  but  it  is  at  the  same  time  as
one-sided  and  hasty,  as  unscientific  and  unconscientious.

Natural  science,  and  all  its  branches,  have  originally  run  through  a  period  of
obscurity  and  error  ;  physics  were  preceded  by  magic ;  chemistry,  by  alchemy  ;
medicine,  by  the  philosopher's  stone  ;  astronomy,  by  astrology,  (fee. ;  philosophy,
theology,  and  jurisprudence,  have  passed  through  their  phases  of  extravagance.
Our  first  conceptions  are  always  unclear,  confused ;  hence  adapted  to  the  won-
derful, the  mysterious,  and  so  on  to  superstition  and  misuse.  But  it  does  not  fol-
low from  this,  that  the  enigmatic  shell  conceals  no  solid  kernel.  It  is  quite  in
character  with  the  matter,  aud  anything  but  unexpected,  that  the  subject  of  sen-
sitiveness, and  the  peculiar  force  on  which  it  depends,  should  have  to  go  through
such  a  period  of  infancy  in  our  notions ;  and  the  more  so  in  proportion  as  it  shows
itself,  on  the  one  hand,  the  less  capable  of  limitation,  and  on  the  other,  to  have  a
deeper  hold  on  the  hidden  sphere  of  the  nerves.  That  these  days  of  rudeness
should  have  endured  for  seventy  years,  is  really  rather  long  in  these  enlightened
times,  but  in  great  part  owing  to  the  almost  criminal  narrow-minded  opposition
of  the  gentlemen  of  the  "  exact  sciences,"  who  have  turned  to  it,  not  only  deaf
ears,  but  even  a  kind  of  foolish  hostility.  Berzelius,  who,  as  is  known,  accepted
my  researches  with  ardor,  has  assured  me  that  for  forty  years  he  has  always
nourished  the  desire  that  some  one  would  undertake  this  matter — Which  could
not  be  groundless, — who  would  make  it  the  subject  of  a  special  and  fundamental
examination,  according  to  the  present  methods  of  investigation  in  the  natural
sciences ;  and  he  rejoiced  at  last  to  have  found,  in  me,  one  who  would  make  a
rational  inquiry  into  it.  The  reason  why  this  has  been  so  long  delayed,  why
the  groping  round  about  has  come  to  no  end,  lies  moreover  in  the  fact  that  peo-
ple so  often  begin  to  build  the  pyramid  at  the  point ;  they  would  wish  to  do  first
what  they  should  do  last — undertake  to  cure  diseases  !  Before  striving  for  the
slightest  knowledge  of  the  inner  nature  of  the  hidden  force,  they  made  a  trade
of  the  matter !  Then  somnambulists  and  clairvoyants  were  met  with,  every-
where manifestations  of  force  at  its  maximum,  and  in  complication  with  inexpli-
cable exalted  conditions  of  disease.  While  struck  with  the  phenomena  on  a  large
scale,  and  feeling  unable  to  find  an  explanation  of  them,  people  neglected  to  in-
quire after  the  small  beginnings,  on  which  alone  the  basis  of  a  scientific  structure
could  be  raised.  Not  from  the  lightning  and  the  thunder  have  we  gathered  the
theories  of  electricity  and  of  sound ;  not  from  the  eruption  of  volcanoes  have  we
drawn  our  knowledge  of  the  expansive  force  of  steam  ;  but  just  as  our  forefathers
fabled  about  these  natural  phenomena,  because  they  did  not  understand  them,
even  so  have  the  modern  savans  of  the  category  to  which  M.  Dubois  belongs,

AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.  xv

talked  nonsense  about  the  so-called  animal  magnetism,  because  they  did  not
know  it.  I  will  not  speak  of  medical  men,  but  it  is  no  better  with  the  physicists
and_  physiologists  ;  the  majority  of  the  former  have  rejected  all  cognizance  of  it,
because  they  cannot  understand  the  connection  of  cause  and  effect ;  and  of  the
latter  because  they  will  not  However,  this  is  not  the  path  of  the  investigation
of  nature,  and  the  offence  against  enlightenment  is  really  greater  in  thecal  ter
than  the  former.  It  does  not  redound  to  the  honor  of  our  contemporaries  to  stand
obstinately  firm  in  that  primitive  condition  of  blind  ignorance,  and  to  refuse  to
see  at  all  how  monstrously  they  lay  themselves  open  on  this  side.

Yet  I  have  not  found  the  difficulty  of  penetrating  to  the  truth  of  these  mat-
ters nearly  so  insurmountable  as  it  is  generally,  timidly,  asserted  to  be.  All
that  gossip  about  lies  and  deceit  is  in  reality  quite  misplaced  :  when  we  examine
more  closely,  it  lies  essentially  not  in  the  sensitive,  but,  on  the  contrary,  in  the
subjectiveness  of  the  pre-occupied,  or  not  unfrequently  incompetent  inquirer.
One  must  understand  how  to  investigate,  one  must  know  how  to  question  nature,
if  one  would  obtain  a  clear  and  instructive  answer ;  but  it  is  not  every  one  who
can  do  this,  so  far  as  we  know.  I  must  say  it,  to  the  credit  of  the  mixed  popu-
lation of  Vienna,  that  among  some  hundreds  of  persons  whom  I  have,  up  to  this
time,  received  more  or  less  deeply  into  the  sphere  of  my  researches,  and  sixty  of
whom  are  publicly  named  in  my  writings,  that  there  was  scarcely  a  single  one
who  gave  me  more  than  one  or  two  exaggerated  answers,  and  this  rather  from
misapprehension  than  from  dishonest  intention,  but  which  were  immediately
discovered  and  reformed  by  me.  From  the  intimate,  natural,  and  regular  con-
nection in  which  all  these  phenomena  stand  with  each  other,  the  threads  of  which
I  now  hold  surely  in  my  hand,  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  continue  to  answer
me  falsely,  even  for  a  few  minutes,  without  my  at  once  detecting  it.  None  of  these
people  think  of  lying  and  deceiving ;  they  simply  express  what  they  see  and
feel,  when  I  react  upon  them;  most  of  them  evince  a  sincere  and  encouraging
desire  to  make  as  clear  as  possible,  to  me,  what  they  perceive  and  detect,  in
which  zeal  I  find  some  compensation  for  the  mortifications  from  parties  who
ought  lather  to  feel  that  they  have  reason  to  be  thankful  for  my  endeavors.  All
these  almost  countless  answers  to  my  questions  agree  in  every  case  so  perfectly,
that  all  reasonable  doubt  must  disappear  before  the  evidence  of  the  truth ;  and  in
this  beautiful  agreement  lies  the  warrant  of  their  thorough  credibility.  '  When,
however,  the  inquirer  does  not  know  how  to  put  the  questions,  from  want  of  skill
how  to  manipulate  with  the  apparatus,  from  ignorance  of  the  conditions  how  to
arrange  the  experiments,  from  want  of  tact  to  comprehend  the  answers,  and  from
want  of  acuteness  of  understanding  how  to  discover  the  relations  of  the  observa-
tions to  each  other :  then  confusion  and  perplexity  begin,  misinterpreted  results
contradict  each  other;  and  rather  than  look  in  the  face  his  own  weakness,  and
confess  it  to  himself  and  others,  he,  a  thousand  times  sooner,  takes  the  dishonest
subterfuge  of  accusing  the  observed  person  of  deceit.  But  the  betrayer  of  na-
ture and  science  is  no  other  than  the  man  who,  from  incapacity,  has  the  rashness
and  foolishness  to  desire  to  stamp  the  truth  with  the  mark  of  a  lie.

REICHENBACH.

Castle  Reisenberg,  near  Vienna,  February,  1848.

This  work  was  already  completed  and  printed  in  the  spring  of  last  year,  but
the  occurrence  of  the  German  revolution  threw  obstacles  in  the  way  of  its  publi-
cation. These  are  now  removed,  and  communication  is  re-established.  It  was
necessary  to  make  this  note,  in  order  to  enable  the  reader  to  understand  some
dates  which  occur  in  the  book,  and  which  could  not  be  reprinted.  R.

DYNAMICS

OF

MAGNETISM,  ELECTRICITY,

&c.

INTRODUCTION.

If  a  strong  magnet,  capable  of  supporting  about  ten  pounds,  be
drawn  downward  over  the  bodies  of  fifteen  or  twenty  persons,  with-
out actually  touching  them,  some  among  them  will  always  be  found
to  be  excited  by  it  in  a  peculiar  manner.  The  number  of  people
who  are  sensitive  in  this  way  is  greater  than  is  generally  imagined  :
sometimes  three  or  four  are  met  with  in  such  a  number  as  above
mentioned  :  indeed,  I  know  an  establishment  where  the  experiment
was  tried,  and  of  twenty-two  young  ladies  who  were  collected  there
no  less  than  eighteen  felt  more  or  less  distinctly  the  passage  of  the
magnet.  The  kind  of  impression  produced  on  these  excitable  people,
who  otherwise   may  be  regarded   as  in  perfect  health,*  is  scarcely

*  What  is  meant  by  this  expression  ?  Ordinary  health  would  be  more  consonant
to  the  Baron's  meaning.  Great  or  even  modified  impressionability  is  not  a  condi-
tion of  perfect  health.  A  nervous  system  which  gives  a  proclivity  to  disorder  from
keen  susceptibility  to  external  impressions,  is  not  one  which  belongs  to  an  organ-
ism in  every  part  of  which  the  configuration  is  the  most  convenient  for  the  perfeot
performance  of  the  functions  to  which  that  organism  or  any  of  its  parts  is  destined.
Perfect  health  belongs  only  to  a  body  in  which  no  part  is  unduly  developed.  A
law  exists  which  establishes  the  fact  that  every  undue  development  of  a  part  is  at
the  expense  of  some  other  part ;  and  it  will  be  found,  hi  endeavoring  to  establish
most  incontrovertible  facts,  that  all  individuals  who  have  an  impressionable  nervous
fabric  are  the  subjects  of  more  or  less  imperfect  development.  At  page  3,  the  Baron
says,  "vigorous  men  and  healthy  women  usually  feci  nothing  of  these  sensations."
Sedentary  occupations,  and  a  variety  of  the  circumstances  surrounding  man  in  his
present  imperfect  state  of  civilization,  render  him  more  impressionable,  because
they  irregulate  and  unbalance  the  harmony  of  his  system.  It  is  more  difficult  to
induce  anaesthesia,  or  any  of  the  nervous  states  analogous  to  it,  in  a  perfectly
healthy  and  vigorous  person  than  in  one  who  is  susceptible  of  the  influence  of  those
poisons  which  unbalance  the  accounts  between  the  two  systems  of  blood-vessels.

18  INTRODUCTION.

describable ;  it  is  rather  disagreeable  than  pleasant,  and  combined
with  a  slight  sensation  either  of  cold  or  warmth,  resembling  a  cool
or  gently  warm  breath  of  air,  wbich  the  patients  imagine  to  blow
softly  upon  them.  Sometimes  they  feel  sensations  of  drawing,  prick-
ing, or  creeping ;  some  complain  of  sudden  attacks  of  headache.
Not  only  women,  but  men  in  the  very  prime  of  life,  are  found  dis-
tinctly susceptible  of  this  influence  ;  in  children  it  is  sometimes  very
active.

To  produce  this  effect,  it  is  essentially  indifferent  whether  we  use
a  horse-shoe  magnet  or  a  straight  iron  bar,  with  either  pole,  if  it  be
but  strong  enough  and  possess  something  like  the  sustaining  power
above  mentioned.  The  passes  must  be  made  from  head  to  foot,  and
not  with  too  great  rapidity.  The  magnet  must  be  carried  as  near
the  body  as  possible  without  actually  touching  the  clothes  ;  and  to
ensure  the  absence  of  deception  on  either  side,  the  pass  may  be  made
downward  from  the  back  of  the  head  over  the  neck  and  back.  The
person  magnetized  is  then  unaware  of  the  passage  of  the  magnet,
and  his  movement  must  be  unconstrained.

Vigorous  men  and  healthy  strong  women  usually  feel  nothing  of
these  sensations.     Nevertheless,  I  have  met  with  individuals   who

A  man  in  the  last  stage  of  typhus,  or  the  fever  of  unhealthy  venous  congestion,
may  be  saved  by  mesmerism,  as  has  happened  in  several  cases  :  while  in  a  person
under  the  condition  of  perfect  health  the  mesmeric  passes  produce  little  or  no  ef-
fect for  a  great  length  of  time.  It  is  the  same  with  the  impressionability  to  mag-
nets. Those  who  feel  the  influence  of  the  magnet  are  in  a  greater  or  in  a  less  degree
in  the  same  category  of  the  imperfectly  developed  and  unduly  balanced.  "The
sensations  of  drawing,  {kicking,  or  creeping,"  from  the  application  of  the  hands  to
a  strong  magnet,  which  I  caused  to  be  repeated  daily  in  two  impressionable  cases,
terminated  in  one  in  rigidity  and  deep  mesmeric  sleep  in  four  days  ;  in  the  other,
in  nine  days.

Since  the  above  was  written  (24th  of  March,  1850),  I  have  a  strong  corroboration
of  the  view  given  in  this  note.  A  young  woman  had  applied  to  me  six  weeks  ago
for  a  set  of  symptoms  which  indicated  great  debility.  She  had  passive  hemorrhage,
under  which,  complicated  with  hysteria,  leucorrhcea,  &c,  she  had  labored  for  some
months  previously.  It  was  a  case  which  mesmerism  would  have  cured  rapidly.  I
tried  some  passes ;  the  pupils  dilated,  and  other  symptoms  of  mesmeric  sleep  were
present.  She  felt  a  warm  ah-  from  the  large  magnet.  I  tried  the  pointed  end  of  a
large  crystal,  which  made  her  very  sleepy.  At  last  I  put  her  to  sleep  by  the  gaze.
She  awoke  in  an  hour,  refreshed  and  strengthened.  Finding  that  she  could  not
be  mesmerized  at  home,  I  prescribed  a  solution  of  persulphate  of  iron  in  diluted
sulphuric  acid,  to  be  taken  three  times  a  day.  I  find  she  has  strictly  attended  to
my  directions,  and  she  is  quite  well,  with  a  healthy  florid  complexion.  I  try  her
with  the  same  large  magnet,  and  she  experiences  no  sensation.  I  try  for  half  an
hour  to  make  her  sleep  mesmericahy :  in  vain.  The  pupils  of  the  eyes  refuse  to
dilate.  She  says  if  I  proceeded  with  my  experiments  she  is  sure  I  should  make
her  head  ache.  Here  has  been  a  clonic  state  of  system,  in  which  the  nerves  and
blood-vessels  have  induced  "a  temporary  derangement  of  organization,"  in  which
some  parts  have  suffered  a  while  at  the  expense  of  others,  in  which  a  "  sick  sensi-
WAty  "  has  supervened,  in  which  the  individual  has  become  unduly  impressionable,
and  in  which  restored  health  has  removed  the  liability  to  be  influenced  by  mag-
netism and  by  mesmerism.

INTRODUCTION.  1  g

have  been  distinctly  affected  by  the  passage  of  the  magnet  when  in
the  full  enjoyment  of  health,  and  these,  active  light-hearted  men  and
women.  But  the  excitability  presents  itself  more  frequently  in  peo-
ple of  sedentary  habits,  who  may  otherwise  be  considered  as  healthy,
especially  in  men  who  are  occupied  continuously  in  writing,  or  girls
who  pass  the  greater  part  of  their  time  at  needle-work ;  moreover,
in  those  who  are  depressed  by  secret  troubles,  anxiety  respecting
their  means  of  support,  neglect,  or  the  loss  of  relatives.  Next  to
these  imperfectly  healthy,  the  slightly  diseased  are  very  frequently
the  most  sensitive  to  the  magnet,  especially  those  persons  of  whom
it  is  commonly  said  they  suffer  from  weak  nerves,  who  are  readily
frightened,  or  have  received  a  shock  from  some  fright  they  have  ex-
perienced ;  besides  these,  the  truly  sick  in  innumerable  cases,  espe-
cially in  those  whose  complaints  are  accompanied  by  local  or  general
cramps ;  during  abnormal  developments  of  puberty  ;  many  hypo-
chondriacs, valetudinarians  as  they  are  called  ;  persons  who  are  very
disagreeably  affected  by  odors  ;  but  above  all,  those  suffering  from
catalepsy,  St.  Vitus's  dance,  palsy,  many  of  the  hysterical,  and  lastly,
those  who  walk  in  their  sleep,  and  the  true  somnambulists  without
exception.  Thus  from  the  healthy  person  to  the  sleep-walker  a  chain
is  formed,  at  one  end  of  which  stands  a  powerful  man,  and  at  the
other  a  weak  somnambulist.  Any  one  may  readily  convince  himself
of  those  facts  in  every  large  hospital.

The  magnet  thus  declares  itself  as  a  general  agent  upon  the  vital
principle-;  a  property  of  it  which  individual  physicians  have  indeed
endeavored,  though  as  yet  without  solid  results,  to  bring  into  more
extensive  application,  in  reference  to  the  possibility  of  deriving  from
it  a  curative  treatment  in  cases  of  disease, — which,  however,  has  not
yet  been  received  by  natural  philosophers  into  the  realm  of  physics ;  and
from  the  uncertainty  of  the  observations,  hitherto,  has  been  altogether
passed  over  by  natural  science  generally.  Nevertheless,  magnetism,
when  more  closely  examined,  presents  an  infinitely  varied  and  exalted
interest  on  this  side.  If  a  portion  of  the  phenomena  here  assert  an
influence  upon  life,  this  occurs  exactly  and  especially  at  the  point
where  the  boundaries  of  the  organic  and  inorganic  are  intermingled.
Since  a  doubt  exists  whether  it  shall  be  attributed  to  the  domain  of
physiology  or  of  physics,  it  is  neglected  on  both  sides.  Thus  it  is
left  over  to  medicine,  and  has  not  always  fallen  into  the  best  hands
there.  I  hope,  in  the  following  pages,  to  disentangle  some  of  the
threads  of  this  knot,  and  to  combine  a  number  of  phenomena  under
a  common  point  of  view,  at  the  same  time  arranging  them  uuder
fixed  physical  laws.

FIRST   TREATISE.

LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  AT  THE  POLES  AND  SIDES  OF  STRONG  MAGNETS.

1.  Sensitive  persons,  who  are  actually  or  apparently  healthy,
perceive  nothing  particular  in  the  magnet  beyond  the  excitement
above  mentioned,  and  bear  the  circuit  of  it  without  injurious  influ-
ence.    But  this  is  not  the  case  with  the  sick  sensitive.*     The  effect

*  There  are  many  persons  in  the  category  of  the  sfck  sensitive  upon  whom,  in
England,  these  experiments  have  been  repeated,  and  they  have  not  always  exhib-
ited the  phenomena  detailed.  In  affording  a  most  willing  and  respectful  testi-
mony corroborative  of  the  greatest  part  of  the  facts  reported  above,  whenever  I
have  had  it  in  my  power  to  repeat  the  experiments  with  strong  magnets,  I  never-
theless believe  it  to  be  of  importance  that  the  class  of  the  sick  sensitive  to  whom
these  facts  are  applicable  should  be  more  strictly  defined.  I  have  no  doubt  that
many  of  the  individuals  above  described  could  be  most  easily  mesmerized  into
sleep  ;  and  of  those  who  would  not  readily  sleep,  some  would  probably,  by  repeti-
tions of  mesmeric  passes,  be  rendered  more  favorable  for  the  development  of  the
phenomena  which  the  Baron  has  noted.  The  very  impressionable  conditions  some-
times present  without  sickness  or  disease  is  not  one  of  perfect  health — certainly
not  usually  of  vigorous  health  :  but  there  are  many  states  of  disease  in  which  that
impressionability  not  only  does  not  exist,  but  in  which  a  sensitiveness  of  some-  or-
gans is  present  without  any  of  others.  If  it  be  absolutely  necessary  to  yield  to
party  considerations  for  the  sake  of  advancing  truth  by  a  side  route ;  if  it  be  re-
quisite to  assume,  in  order  to  meet  the  silly  prejudices  of  the  ignorant,  that  experi-
ments of  the  nature  described  in  the  text  are  valueless  unless  they  be  performed
upon  persons  awake.,  who  happen  to  have  "  an  extraordinary  exaltation  of  (he  sensu-
ous perceptions"  then  many  of  the  very  numerous  corroborations  here,  of  the  facts
established  by  the  Baron  Von  Beiehenbach  hi  Vienna,  must  be  thrown  aside.  -  But
I  am  incliued  to  contend  for  their  value ;  and  no  one  can  read  the  review  in  the  4th
volume  of  the  Zoist,  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  of  the  Abstract  of  the  Baron  Von  Keichen-
bach's  Papers,  by  Professor  Gregory,  without  being  struck  by  the  strong  analogies
adduced  from  mesmeric  experience  of  the  Baron's  facts.  When  it  becomes  more
known  that  the  mesmeric  condition  is  simply  a  state  of  nervous  system,  sometimes
artificially  produced,  sometimes  spontaneously  present,  of  an  "exalted  sensuous''''
state,  or  the  very  reverse,  and  that  at  pleasure,  in  many  individuals,  can  be  produced
those  conditions  which  the  Baron  endeavors  to  indicate  at  pages  6,  7,  8,  there  will
be  no  more  hesitation  in  preparing  a  mesmeric  test  than  the  chemist  now  experi-
ences in  producing  a  litmus  test.  The  truth  is,  that  we  are  at  all  times,  while  life
remains  in  us,  in  a  mesmeric  condition,  each  varying  in  degree  ;  and  without  the
agency  of  the  mesmeric  forces  we  neither  think,  nor  move,  nor  have  our  being.

It  is  a  want  of  sufficient  reflection  on  the  use  of  terms  that  leads  us  astray  from
clear  ideas  on  the  various  conditions  of  the  nervous  system.  Because  the  matter
has  not  been  studied  as  it  ought  to  be,  the  Baron  Von  Beiehenbach  deprecates  ex-
periments on  subjects  who  have  been  mesmerized.  Suppose,  which  is  actually  the
case,  that  the  same  phenomena  are  offered  to  our  observation  in  the  persons  who

THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT,  ETC.  21

upon  these  is  either  pleasant,  unpleasant,  or  fearfully  adverse,  accord-
ing to  the  nature  of  their  disease ;  and  the  last  sometimes  to  such  a

have  been  made,  by  artificial  expedients,  highly  sensitive — very  impressionable,
the  facts  are  really  .just  as  valuable  as  if  they  had  been  displayed  in  those  naturally
impressionable.  The  only  question  is  as  to  the  numbers  of  mankind  readily  influ-
enced to  exhibit  phenomena  which  prove  the  existence  of  the  Baron's  new  force.
If  all  men  could  conduct  investigations  as  logically,  as  clearly,  as  philosophically  as
the  Baron,  we  should  now  have  it  in  our  power  to  arrange  the  characters  of  each
condition  of  the  nervous  system  in  an  nmnistakeable  category.  They  would  easily
be  tabulated.  They  would  present  a  very  interesting  series.  I  have  attempted  to
sketch  my  meaning  in  Essays  on  Mesmeric  Phenomena,  and  on  the  Theory  of
Sleep  (Zoist,  Vol.  iv.)  Whatever  may  hereafter  prove  to  be  the  varieties  of  the
states  in  which  individuals  may  be,  when  aberrant  from  the  condition  of  "  perfect
health" — a  condition  upon  the  definition  of  which  physiologists  as  yet  might  not
agree — it  is  clear,  to  those  who  have  studied  tliis  matter,  that  the  gradations  in  the
series  of  the  phenomena  have  some  connection  with  attraction  and  repulsion.  If  I
observe  in  a  hospital  a  patient  who,  in  result  of  an  accident,  has  been  deprived  of  a
portion  of  the  frontal  or  parietal  bone  of  his  skull,  so  that  the  brain  is  exposed,  I
shall  find,  what  Boerhaave  long  ago  found,  that  this  viscus,  during  sleep,  occupies
less  space  than  in  the  vigilant  condition.  The  particles  of  brain-matter  are  approx-
imated, and  an  attraction  is  active  among  them.  If  this  patient  be  awake,  and  I
apply  very  gentle  pressure  on  the  surface  of  the  brain,  I  induce  a  tendency  to  sleep.
If  I  increase  the  pressure,  I  occasion  coma;  I  continue  to  increase,  and  the  stertor
accompanying  coma  may  cease,  but  the  nervous  condition  is  one  of  tonic  spasm.
The  simple  paralysis  goes  on  to  a  rigid  condition  of  the  muscles.  Convulsions
supervene  when  the  surface  of  brain  pressed  upon  is  not  extensive  enough,  be-
cause partial  irritation  is  produced  upon  certain  nerves.  I  have  made  these  exper-
iments on  several  human  beings;  but  the  fairest  mode  of  obtaining  accurate
results  is  to  expose  the  brain  in  a  rabbit,  cat,  or  dog.  Tickle  the  brain  with  a  soft
brush,  and  clonic  spasms  ensue.  The  brain  appears  to  swell  out,  it  occupies  more
space  under  irritation,  and  is  subjected  to  a  repulsive  agency  among  its  particles.
So  that  the  state  of  sleep  and  of  coma,  quietude,  paralysis,  rigid  tonic  spasm,  are
degrees  of  a  condition  influenced  to  exist  under  attraction  :  the  state  of  vigilance,
restlessness,  activity,  agitation,  clonic  spasm,  are  varieties  of  a  condition  influenced
by  repulsion.  In  "  perfect  health,"  there  is  no  extreme  state  of  attraction  or  of  re-
pulsion. But  if  health  be  disturbed  by  some  poison,  the  inconvenience  produces
an  improper  state  of  the  balance  between  the  attractive  and  repulsive  forces ;  the
brain  and  nerves  influence  a  want  of  due  balance  hi  the  arterial  and  venous  sys-
tems. With  arterial  fulness  there  is  inflammation ;  with  venous  fulness  there  is
congestion.  The  degrees  of  variety  in  nervous  phenomena  dependent  on  these
opposite  states  are  very  numerous  ;  but  still  a  law  exists  which  we  have  vet  to
trace  out.  The  varieties  of  those  nervous  phenomena  called  psychological,  closely
allied  to  the  varieties  of  the  conditions  of  the  arterial  and  venous  systems,  fall  par-
ticularly as  subjects  of  inquiry  into  the  province  of  the  student  in  mesmerism  and
phrenology  ;  and  the  satisfactory  solution  of  many  problems  suggested  by  facts  in
the  text  of  the  Baron  Von  Eeichenbach  can  never  be  arrived  at  without  arranging
all  the  gradations  of  facts  belonging  to  the  nervous  system,  under  a  scale  of  which
the  extremes  are  the  deep  tonic,  and  the  deep  clonic  spasms.  Complicated  as  the
human  nervous  system  becomes  by  the  many  varieties  in  cerebral  structure  offered
by  varieties  in  development  of  size,  delicacy,  or  coarseness,  and  other  characters
and  relations  of  phrenological  organs,  there  nevertheless  exist  certain  salient  pa-
thognomonic sign3  by  which  to  establish  the  distinctions  on  which  logicians  may
reason  with  accuracy  ;  and  in  time  it  will  be  found  that  the  condition  of  sleep  mixed
up  with  the  second  consciousness  usually  accompanying  the  modified  waking  state
(the  sleep-waking  of  Elliotson)  is  no  obstacle  to  the  attainment  of  truth  in  such  ex-
periments as  those  instituted  by  the  Baron  Von  Eeichenbach.  Indeed,  one  is
sometimes  convinced,  in  reading  liis  details  of  experiments,  that,  however  strenu-
ous he  is  to  avoid  the  imputation  of  mesmerism,  he  is  all  the  while  describing  facts

22  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT—

degree  that  fainting,  cataleptic  attacks,  and  cramps,  arise  of  such  vio-
lence that  they  may  at  last  become  dangerous.  In  the  latter  cases,
among  which  somnambulists  also  are  found,  an  extraordinary  exalta-
tion of  the  sensuous  perceptions  is  usually  met  with  ;  the  sick  smell
and  taste  with  uncommon  delicacy  and  acuteness, — many  kinds  of
food  become  as  insufferable  to  them  as  the  at  other  times  most  plea-
sant odors  of  flowers  become  disagreeable  ;  they  hear  and  understand
what  is  spoken  three  or  four  rooms  off,  and  are  often  so  sensitive  to
light  that,  on  the  one  hand,  they  cannot  bear  the  light  of  the  sun  or
of  a  fire,  while,  on  the  other,  they  are  able,  in  great  darkness,  not
only  to  perceive  the  outlines  of  objects,  but  to  distinguish  colors
clearly,  when  the  healthy  can  no  longer  perceive  anything.  These
things  are  to  a  great  extent  well  known,  and  require  no  further  proof
here.  The  intelligibility  and  possibility  of  them  are  by  no  means  so
far  off  as  they  appear,  at  first  sight,  to  many  who  mistrust  all  such
things  as  supernatural  or  incredible.  Not  only  do  most  animals  sur-
pass civilized  man  in  the  delicacy  of  particular  senses,  but  savages —
therefore  man  himself — not  unfrequently  equal  dogs  and  other  ani-
mals in  smell  and  hearing :  as  to  sight,  horses,  cats,  and  owls  are
ready  examples  of  capacity  to  see  tolerably  well  with  the  optical  ap-
paratus in  dark  night.

2.  Through  the  kindness  of  a  surgeon  practising  in  Vienna,  I  was
introduced,  in  March,  1844,  to  one  of  his  patients,  the  daughter  of
the  tax-collector  Nowotny,  No.  4*71,  Landstrasse,  a  young  woman
of  25  years  of  age,  who  had  suffered  for  eight  years  from  increasing
pains  in  the  head,  and  from  these  had  fallen  into  cataleptic  attacks,
with  alternate  tonic  and  clonic  spasms.  In  her  all  the  exalted  in-
tensity of  the  senses  had  appeared,  so  that  she  could  not  bear  sun  or
caudle-light,  saw  her  chamber  as  in  a  twilight  in  the  darkness  of
night,  and  clearly  distinguished  the  colors  of  all  the  furniture  and
clothes  in  it.  On  this  patient  the  magnet  acted  with  extraordinary
violence  in  several  ways,  and  she  manifested  the  sensitive  peculiarity,
in  every  respect,  in  such  a  high  degree,  that  she  equalled  the  true
somnambulists  (which  she  herself,  however,  was  not)  in  every  par-
ticular relating  to  the  acuteness  of  sensuous  irritability.

At  the  sight  of  all  this,  and  in  recalling  to  mind  that  the  northern
light  appeared  to  be  nothing  else  but  an  electrical  phenomenon  pro-
occurring  in  what  is  commonly  and  vulgarly  called  the  mesmeric  state.  Here  is  the
mischief  of  the  want  of  definite  terms.  Certain  events  occur  in  a  condition  of  the
nervous  system  accompanied  by  full  vigilance,  identical  with  those  which  take
place  in  the  condition  of  sleep-waking.  The  Baron  is  quite  content  with  the  fact
in  vigilance,  hut  thinks  that  in  sleep-waking  unsatisfactory.  Deeper  reflection  and
further  experience  would  convince  him  that  in  a  vast  majority  of  cases,  as  a  testing
meter,  the  state  of  sleep-waking  is  the  more  complete — the  more  delicate.

THE  AURORA  BOREALIS.  23

duced  through  the  terrestrial  magnetism,  the  intimate  nature  of
which  is  still  inexplicable,  in  so  far  that  no  direct  emanation  of  light
from  the  magnet  is  known  in  physics,  I  came  to  the  idea  of  making
a  trial  whether  a  power  of  vision  so  exalted  as  that  of  Miss  Nowotny
might  not  perhaps  perceive  some  phenomena  of  light  on  the  magnet
in  perfect  darkness.  The  possibility  diu  not  appear  to  me  so  very
distant,  and  if  it  did  actually  present  itself,  the  key  to  the  explana-
tion of  the  aurora  borealis  seemed  in  ray  hands.

3.  I  allowed  the  father  of  the  girl  to  make  the  first  preparatory
experiment  in  my  absence.  In  order  to  profit  by  the  greatest  dark-
ness, and  the  maximum  dilatation  of  the  pupil,  from  the  eye  having
been  long  accustomed  to  the  total  absence  of  light,  I  directed  him  to
hold  before  the  patient,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  the  largest  exist-
ing magnet,  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  capable  of  supporting  about  ninety
pounds  of  iron,  with  the  armature  removed.  This  was  done,  and  on
the  following  morning  I  was  informed  that  the  girl  had  really  'per-
ceived a  distinct  continuous  luminosity  as  long  as  the  magnet  was
kept  open,  but  that  it  disappeared  every  time  the  armature  was
placed  on  it.

To  convince  myself  more  completely,  and  study  the  matter  more
closely,  I  made  preparations  to  undertake  the  experiment  with  modi-
fications myself.  I  devoted  the  following  night  to  this,  and  selected
for  it  the  period  when  the  patient  had  just  awakened  from  a  cata-
leptic fit,  and,  consequently,  was  most  excitable.  The  windows  were
covered  with  a  supei abundance  of  curtains,  and  the  lighted  candles
removed  from  the  room  long  before  the  termination  of  the  spasms.

The  magnet  wras  placed  upon  a  table  about  ten  yards  from  the
patient,  with  both  poles  directed  toward  the  ceiling,  and  then  freed
from  its  armature.  No  one  present  could  see  in  the  least ;  but  the
girl  beheld  two  luminous  appearances,  one  at  the  extremity  of  each
pole  of  the  magnet.  When  this  was  closed  by  the  application  of  the
armature,  they  disappeared,  and  she  saw  nothing  more ;  when  it  was
opened  again,  the  lights  re-appeared.  They  seemed  to  be  somewhat
stronger  at  the  moment  of  lifting  up  the  armature,  then  to  acquire  a
permanent  condition,  which  was  weaker.  The  fiery  appearance  was
about  equal  in  size  at  each  pole,  and  without  perceptible  tendency  to
mutual  connection.  Close  upon  the  steel  from  which  it  streamed,  it
appeared  to  form  a  fiery  vapor,  and  this  was  surrounded  by  a  kind
of  glory  of  rays.  But  the  rays  were  not  at  rest ;  they  became
shorter  and  longer  without  intermission,  and  exhibited  a  kind  of
darting  rays  and  active  scintillation,  which  the  observer  assured  us
was  uncommonly  beautiful.  The  whole  appearance  was  more  deli-
cate and  beautiful  than  that  of  common  fire  ;  the  light  was  far  purer,

24  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT—

almost  white,  sometimes  intermingled  with  iridescent  colors,  the
whole  resembling  the  light  of  the  sun  more  than  that  of  a  fire.  The
distribution  of  the  light  in  rays  was  not  uniform ;  in  the  middle  of
the  edges  of  the  horse-shoe  they  were  more  crowded  and  brilliant
tban  toward  the  corners,  but  at  the  corners  they  were  collected  in
tufts,  which  projected  further  than  the  rest  of  the  rays.  I  showed
her  a  little  electric  spark,  which  she  had  never  seen  before,  and  had
no  conception  of;  she  found  it  much  more  blue  than  the  magnetic
light.  It  left  a  peculiar  lasting  impression  on  the  eye,  which  disap-
peared very  slowly.

The  interest  with  which  the  subject  necessarily  inspired  me,  made
me  wish  to  multiply  my  observations,  and  to  test  them  by  repetition
and  by  carrying  them  further  out.  The  patient  had  already  began
to  recover ;  her  irritability  diminished  daily,  and  there  was  therefore
no  time  to  be  lost.  Two  days  after,  I  joined  her  relations  in  a  re-
sumption of  the  experiment.  It  proceeded  exactly  in  the  same  way
and  with  the  same  results.  Allowing  a  day  to  elapse,  we  repeated
the  experiment  in  the  first  instance  with  a  weaker  magnet,  without
informing  her  of  the  alteration ;  the  observer  did  not  see  the  phe-
nomenon in  the  same  manner  now  as  at  first,  but  only  perceived
what  she  called  two  fiery  threads.*     These  were  evidently  the  edges

*  In  repeating  these  experiments  with  persons  of  great  impressionability,  I  have
not  been  so  fortunate  at  any  time  as  to  witness  in  a  wide-awake  person  any  other
phenomenon  than  the  appearance  of  one  or  sometimes  two  fiery  threads,  said  to
have  been  seen,  in  a  room  perfectly  darkened,  emanating  from  the  poles  of  a  pow-
erful horse-shoe  magnet.  Some  ladies  have  clearly  distinguished  these  beautiful
bluish  threads  of  light  proceeding  upwards  to  the  height  of  a  foot  or  more.  Some
have  seen  a  hazy  cloud  at  a  little  distance  on  each  side,  "  like  that  of  a  wet«ww»."
One  gentleman  saw  a  hazy  light  very  distinctly ;  another  something  like  a  piece  of
red-hot  iron  wire,  varying  from  six  inches  to  a  foot  in  length.  These  persons  were
brought  into  my  dining-room,  which  had  been  previously  darkened  and  prepared,
without  being  informed  of  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  introduced.

Into  the  same  room,  and  under  the  same  conditions,  I  have  introduced  persons
who  instantly  fell  asleep,  became  clonically  convulsed,  and  passed  rapidly  into  the
deeply  rigid  or  tonic  spasm,  so  that  I  have  withdrawn  them  into  another  room  while
they  have  been  as  stifl  as  it  they  were  frozen  ;  and  there  I  have  gradually  produced
a  relaxation  of  the  muscular  system,  and  complete  wakefulness,  by  the  application
of  unmagnetized  iron  to  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  to  the  soles  of  the  feet.  Some
individuals  under  these  experiments  wake  up  by  the  ordinary  mesmeric  manipula-
tions, remaining  fixed  with  tonic  spasm  until  I  applied  the  unmagnetized  iron.  In
the  same  individuals,  twelve  in  number,  I  have  produced  the  same  phenomena
without  the  previous  clonic  spasm,  by  touching  the  nape  of  the  neck  with  pure
gold,  or  with  platinum,  or  with  rhodium,  or  with  nickel,  or  with  cobalt,  or  with  an-
timony, or  with  bismuth.  In  every  case,  except  in  one  (M.  A.  D.),  I  was  always
able  to  dissipate  the  spasm  and  awaken  the  patient  by  means  of  iron  applied  to  the
nape  of  the  neck.  In  that  one — the  case  will  be  well  remembered  by  Mrs.  Charles
Lushington  and  by  Dr.  Thomas  Mayo,  who  were  present — I  held  a  newly-cast  disk
of  cobalt  about  two  yards  off,  without  the  patient's  knowledge,  directed  towards
her  back.  She  fell  forward  insensible  upon  Mrs.  C.  Lushington,  who  was_  talking
to  her.    She  was  rigid  and  insensible.    The  pulse  was  for  a  time  imperceptible.    Ä

THE  AURORA  BOREALIS.  25

of  two  polos  of  the  mageet,  which  were  all  that  her  eyes  could  per-
ceive of  the  weaker  luminosity.  AVhen  we  then  opened  before  her
tbe  stronger  90lbs.  magnet,  she  at  once  recognised  the  former  lumi-
nosity, of  the  form  and  color  already  known.  After  another  interval
of  several  days,  during  which  her  convalescence  had  greatly  ad-
vanced, we  renewed  the  experiment;  but  tbe  light  no  longer  made
its  appearance,  even  with  the  large  magnet.  The  patient  saw  it  less
distinctly  than  before,  smaller  and  rather  unsteady  :  often  it  seemed
to  sink,  then  to  brighten  up  again  ;  sometimes  almost  to  disappear,
and  then  after  a  short  time  to  return  again.  On  the  following  eve-
ning she  perceived  in  the  large  magnet  only  the  two  luminous
threads  ;  and  the  night  after,  the  phenomenon  was  so  imperceptible  to

current  from  a  single-coil  electro-dynamic  apparatus,  which  happened  to  he  in
action,  was  passed  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  to  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Golor
gradually  returned  to  her  cheek,  and  her  pulse  and  breathing  removed  our  alarm.
She  slept  on  that  occasion  fifty-six  hours.  A  fortnight  afterwards  1  was  induced
to  repeat  the  experiment,  and  she  slept  forty-seven  hours.  If  I  endeavored  to
ay  ake  her  by  mesmerism,  I  found  her  idiotic,  and  1  restored  her  to  the  influence
of  deep  sleep,  out  of  which  she  always  awoke  spontaneously,  much  refreshed  and
unproved  in  vigor.  This  experiment,  repeated  in  this  case  very  often,  has  been
attended  with  beneficial  results  to  the  patient's  health ;  hut  she  now  never  sleeps
under  the  cobalt  influence  more  than  three  hours.  I  have  performed  many  of  the
Baron's  experiments  with  magnets  of  different  numbers  of  layers  and  with  various
powers.  When  the  subjects  of  the  experiments  remain  in  tbe  sleep-waking  state,
they  describe  almost  exactly  what  the  Baron  has  stated  as  fact  regarding  Miss  No-
wotny, and  his  other  cases.

For  some  remarkable  experiments  with  a  large  apparatus  thirty-three  inches
high,  made  of  iron  wire  a  quarter  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  coiled  fifty-six  times  in  a
circumference  of  eight  feet,  1  refer  to  page  137  of  the  4th  volume  of  the  Zoist.  This
coil  was  fit' an  oval  form,  so  constructed  in  order  to  enable  me  to  place  it  with  ease
over  any  individual  seated  in  an  arm-chair.  By  means  of  one,  two,  three,  or  four
of  tsniee's  elements,  each  ten  inches  by  five,  a  more  or  less  powerful  current  was
established,  enabling  me  to  use  a  magnetic  force  adapted  to  different  susceptibilities.
For  nearly  six  months  daily,  for  two  hours,  a  nervous,  highly  sensitive,  and  stru-
mous young  man,  aged  17,  who  had  been  twelve  or  thirteen  years  lame  from  an
ununited  fracture  of  his  right  leg,  used  to  sit  within  this  coil  urged  by  four  pairs  of
Smee's  plates.  He  never  was  sensible  of  any  light  or  of  any  cloud.  He  was  very
somnolent,  but  became  wide  awake  again  on  bemg  removed  from  the  magnetic  in-
fluence. Under  this  treatment  he  became  stronger,  and  the  bones  of  his  leg  were
united.  Acupuncture  was  occasionally  practised  where  the  local  appearance  indi-
cated the  measure.  If,  when  he  came  out  of  his  cage,  he  went  into  the  next  apart-
ment, where  six  or  seven  young  women  were  waiting,  he  touched  any  of  them,
instantly  sleep  and  rigidity  supervened.  Sometimes  in  sport  he  would  touch  every
one  of  them,  and  leave  them  all  in  deep  sleep.  I  have  myself  often  obtained  this
same  result  in  various  persons,  male  and  female,  who,  being  of  impressionable  con-
stitutions, have  gone  into  a  deep  sleep  upon  my  touching  them,  after  having  in
another  room,  without  their  knowledge,  rubbed  my  hands  upon  the  poles  of  a
powerful  magnet.  I  have  notes  of  three  lads,  of  different  ages,  cured  of  epilepsy
by  mesmerism,  who  could  be  instantly  put  to  sleep  and  rendered  rigid  in  this  man-
ner. Dr.  Elliotson's  celebrated  ease  of  cancer  cured  by  mesmerism,  became  rigid
on  touching  a  magnet.  I  know  three  different  females  so  susceptible  of  magnetic
influence  that  they  are  made  ill,  being  seized  with  painful  spasms,  if  I  bring  a  mid-
dle-sized magnet  concealed  in  my  coat  pocket  into  the  room.  These  persons  do
not  know  each  other.

2

•26  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT—

her  vision  that  she  -beheld  only  two  flashes,  vanishing  rapidly  like
lightning,  Avhich  appeared  and  disappeared  every  time  the  armature
was  pulled  off.

4.  So  far  Miss  Maria  Nowotny.  Her  rapidly  increasing  health
had  now  so  far  lessened  her  sensitiveness  that  no  further  experiments
were  practicable,  or  productive  of  new  results.  I  had  every  reason
to  consider  her  statement  as  true  and  exact,  since  she  was  an  intelli-
gent girl,  and,  for  her  station,  well  educated  and  sensible  ;  at  the
same  time,  to  give  it  certainty  and  scientific  reality,  it  was  indispen-
sable to  seek  about  for  corroboration  from  other  quarters.  Through
the  present  investigations  I  had  become  acquainted  with  an  accom-
plished physician,  Dr.  Lippich,  House  Physician  to  the  Hospital,
Clinical  Professor  in  Ordinary  in  the  Vienna  University,  and  by  his
kindness  I  was  introduced  to  a  patient  lying  under  his  treatment  in
the  hospital.  This  was  Miss  Angelica  Sturmann,  nineteen  years  of
age,  daughter  of  an  inspector  of  farms  in  Prague,  suffering  from  tu-
bercular affection  of  the  lungs,  and  long  subject  to  somnambulism  in
its  slighter  stages,  with  attacks  of  tetanus  and  cataleptic  fits.  The
influence  of  the  magnet  displayed  itself  so  powerfully  in  her,  after  a
few  experiments,  that  she  far  surpassed  Miss  Nowotny  in  sensitive-
ness. When  I  stood  in  the  darkened  ward,  holding  the  90lb.  mag-
net open  at  a  distance  of  six  paces  from  the  feet  of  the  patient,  while
Professor  Lippich  stood  beside  her,  and  she  was  previously  perfectly
conscious  of  what  was  going  on  around  her,  the  patient  ceased  to
answer.  She  fell  into  tetanic  spasms  and  complete  unconsciousness,
from  the  action  of  the  magnet,  immediately  I  had  pulled  off  the
armature.  This  did  not  hold  out  a  very  hopeful  prospect  of  the  re-
sults of  my  experiments  ;  but  they  were  not  in  vain.  After  a  while.
the  girl  came  to  herself  again,  and  said  that  at  the  moment  I  re-
moved the  armature  from  the  large  magnet  she  had  seen  a  flame
flash  over  it,  about  the  length  of  a  small  hand,  and  of  a  white  color
mingled  with  red  and  blue.  She  had  wished  to  look  at  it  more
closely,  when  suddenly  the  action  of  the  opened  magnet  took  away
her  consciousness.  I  had  an  intense  desire  to  repeat  the  experiment,
to  obtain  more  exact  information  of  the  circumstances.  The  patient,
also,  was  perfectly  willing  ;  but  the  physician  considered  it  injurious
to  the  complaint  of  his  patient,  and  I  was  therefore  forced  to  aban-
don any  further  investigation  of  the  matter.  At  the  same  time,  I
had  attained  my  principal  aim  :  a  confirmation  of  Miss  Nowotny's
statements  respecting  the  luminosity  over  the  magnet  was  obtained  :
it  had  now  been  seen  by  a  second  person  suffering  from  quite  a  dif-
ferent disease,  without  any  communication  with  the  first.

5.  In  another  ward  of  the  hospital,  Dr.  Lippich  took  me  to  a

THE  AURORA  BOREALIS.  27

young  lad  of  some  eighteen  years,  a  journeyman  glover,  suffering
from  intermittent  spasms,  produced  by  fright  and  ill-usage.  When
I  approached  him  with  the  magnet  he  at  once  spoke  of  fire  and
flames  appearing  before  him,  and  which  returned  every  time  I
removed  the  armature.  But  the  lad  was  so  uneducated  that  it  would
have  been  impossible  to  make  any  accurate  experiments  with  him  ;
and  in  the  meantime  I  found  more  interesting  opportunities  of  tracing
out  my  subject  in  detail.

6.  Miss  Maria  Mai.v,  25  years  old,  daughter  of  a  groom  of  the
chambers  in  the  Imperial  Palaces,  residing  at  No.  260  in  the  Kohl-
market,  was  the  next  person  who  was  brought  to  me,  through  the
kindness  of  her  phvsician.  He  was  treating  her  for  a  paralytic  affection
of  the  lower  extremities,  with  occasional  attacks  of  spasms.  She  was
neither  a  somnambulist,  nor  did  she  talk  in  her  sleep;  she  had  never
experienced  any  attacks  of  insanity,  and  was  in  all  respects  a  young  wo-
man of  clear  good  sense.  When  a  large  magnet  was  opened  before  her
in  the  night  time,  which  was  often  done,  she  always  immediately  beheld
a  luminosity  over  it,  resting  on  the  poles,  about  a  hand's  breadth  in
height.  But  when  she  was  laboring  under  spasms,  the  phenomena
increased  most  extraordinarily  to  her  eyes.  She  then  saw  the  mag-
netic light,  which  now  appeared  greatly  increased  in  size,  not  merely
on  the  poles,  but  also  perceived  rays  of  light  flowing  from  all  over
the  outer  sides  of  the  steel,  weaker  indeed  than  at  the  poles,  but
spread  universally  over  the  whole  horse-shoe,  which  appeared  as  a
bright  light,  and,  as  in  the  case  of  Miss  Nowotny,  left  a  dazzling
brightness  before  her  eyes,  which  would  not  disappear  for  a  long
time.  We  shall  see  the  meaning  and  connection  of  all  this.  Mean-
time I  had  now  obtained  the  fourth  confirmation  of  the  observation
of  the  magnetic  light.  But  by  far  the  most  remarkable  and  clearest
of  the  observers  was  vet  to  come.

7.  This  was  Miss  Barbara  Keichel,  29  years  old,  stoutly  made,
daughter  of  a  servant  in  the  Imperial  Palace  at  Luxemburg.  When
a  child  of  seven  years,  she  had  fallen  from  the  window  of  the  second
floor  of  her  dwelling,  and  from  that  time  forward  had  suffered  from
nervous  attacks,  which  passed  in  some  degree  into  true  somnambu-
lism, and  into  talking  in  her  sleep,  and  wandering  in  her  dreams.
The  complaint  was  intermittent,  coming  and  going  at  long  intervals.
The  girl  had  just  recovered  from  a  violent  spasmodic  attack,  but  still
retained  all  the  irritability  of  her  sharpened  power  of  vision.  She
was  at  the  same  time  quite  strong,  clearly  conscious,  looking  well,
and,  moreover,  walked  alone  through  all  the  bustle  of  the  town,  to
visit  her  relations.  I  invited  her  to  my  house,  and  received  visits
from  her  as  often  as  I  wished,  in  order  to  make  use  of  her  extraordi-

28  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT—

nary  sensitiveness  to  the  magnet,  in  investigations  with  physical
apparatus  which  could  not  well  be  taken  to  other  houses.

This  person  united  in  herself  the  rare  gifts,  that  she  saw  the  mag-
netic light  as  strongly  as  any  exhausted,  helpless,  sick  patient,  while
she  was  outwardly  health}',  active,  and  sensible,  and  that,  with  the
greatest  sensitiveness  to  the  luminous  appearances,  she  could  bear  the
circuit  of  the  magnet  almost  as  well  as  a  healthy  person  ;  which,
with  most  of  the  sensitive,  as  we  have  an  example  of  in  Miss  Stur-
mann,  and  as  also  occurred  in  a  slight  degree  in  Miss  Nowotny,  is  so
far  from  being  the  case,  that  an  open  magnet  is  liable  to  throw  them
into  convulsions,  and  even  render  them  senseless.  Little  can  be
done  with  such  ;  but  with  Miss  Eeichel  I  could  follow  every  investi-
gation quietly  to  the  end.  Individuals  like  her  are  invaluable  for
scientific  inquiries  :  and  thus  I  have  through  her  been  able  to  obtain
most  valuable  elucidations  of  the  electro-magnetic  theory.  In  this
place  I,  shall  in  the  first  instance  only  indicate  those  observations
which  relate  to  the  emission  of  light  from  magnets.

She  saw  the  magnetic  light  not  only  in  darkness,  but  in  the  dim
light  which  I  required  to  perceive  all  objects,  and  thus  manipulate,
to  modify,  and  repeat  the  experiments.  If  the  obscurity  was  mode-
rate, the  magnetic  light  appeared  shorter  and  smaller,  she  saw  less
of  it ;  that  is,  those  parts  in  which  the  light  was  weakest  were  first
overpowered  by  day-light ;  but  she  saw  the  flaming  effluences  most
brilliantly,  their  size  greatest,  their  definition  sharpest,  and  the  play
of  color  most  distinct,  when  the  darkness  was  perfect.

8.  When  a  magnet  was  laid  before  her  in  darkness,  she  saw  it
emit  light,  not  merely  when  open,  but  when  it  toas  closed,  like  a  horse-
shoe, by  the  armature.  This  may  at  first  sight  appear  surprising;
but  the  sequel  will  show  that  this  statement  of  the  observer  corres-
ponds perfectly  with  the  intimate  nature  of  the  matter.  The  two
luminous  pictures  were  naturally  different  in  every  respect.  On
the  closed  horse-shoe  she  could  not  detect  any  place  at  which  the
flaming  appearances  were  especially  concentrated,  as  they  were  at
both  poles  when  it  was  open  ;  but  the  magnet  emitted  from  all  its
edges,  points  of  junction  of  the  plates,  and  angles,  a  short  flame-like
luminosity,  with  a  constant  undulating  motion.  With  a  horse-shoe
composed  of  nine  layers,  capable  of  supporting  ninety  pounds,  this
was  not  longer  than  about  a  finger's  breadth.

9.  AVhen  the  horse-shoe  was  opened,  it  exhibited  the  beautiful
appearance  represented  in  fig.  1.  The  drawing  was  prepared  by  Miss
Reichel  herself,  as  well  as  she  could  execute  it ;  but  she  lamented  that
she  was  not  able  to  attain  an  exact  imitation  of  nature.  While  an
arm  of  the  horse-shoe  measured  ten  inches,  the  flaming  light  reached

THE  AURORA  BOREALIS.

29

up  almost  to  an  equal  length,  and  arose  of
greater  breadth  than  the  stael.  At  every
break  formed  by  the  layers  of  the  magnet,
smaller  flames  stood  around  the  edges  and
angles,  terminating  in  sparkling  brushes.
She  described  these  little  flames  as  blue,  the
main  light  as  white  below,  becoming  yellow
above,  passing  then  into  red,  and  terminating
at  the  top  with  green  and  blue.  This  light
did  not  remain  still,  but  flickered,  waved
and  darted  continually,  so  as  to  produce,  as
it  were,  shooting  rays.  But  here  also,  as
had  occurred  in  the  observation  of  Miss
Nowotny,  there  was  no  attraction,  no  inter-
mingling of  the  flames,  not  even  an  indication
of  a  tendency  to  this,  from  pole  to  pole  ;
and  as  there,  too,  no  observable  distinction
between  the  condition  of  the  two  poles  of  the
horse-shoe.  Fig.  2  gives  a  side  view,  in
which  a  separate  tuft,  of  a  lighter,  flame-
like  appearance,  spreads  out  from  the  edge
of  each  component  layer  of  the  magnet.
This  Avas  necessarily  omitted  in  fig.  1,  for  the  sake
of  distinctness.  Along  the  back  and  inner  sides
of  the  steel,  weaker  lights  streamed  out  univer-
sally, like  those  which  had  been  partially  described
by  Miss  Maix  ;  on  the  inside  they  were  all  curved
upward,  but  on  the  outside  they  were  only  turned
upward  for  a  short  space,  then  were  straight  for  a
moment,  and  next  took  the  directly  opposite  direc-
tion downwards.  They  were  shortest  at  the  low-
est part,  on  the  curvature  of  the  steel ;  therefore
on  the  magnetically  indifferent  space.  These
shorter  weaker  rays  are  very  delicate,  and  also
more  fixed.  They  are  drawn  from  a  single  layer
of  steel,  in  fig.  10.  The  condition  of  the  lumi-
nosity along  the  four  longitudinal  edges  of  each
of  the  nine  layers  of  steel  fitted  upon  one  another,
is  worthy  of  remark.  At  places  where  the  edges
of  two  lamellae  are  accurately  and  closely  fitted
alongside  one  another,  and  almost  form  a  con-
tinuous line,  they  were  still  clearly  distin-
guished  by  the   emission,   on  each  side,  of  lines

Fia.  1.

k

Fig.  2.

30

THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT—

Fig
of  flame,  which  one  must  suppose  were  neces-
sarily confluent  at  the  bottom.  Directly  above
their  point  of  origin  they  diverged,  conse-
quently converged  toward  the  other  lateral
radiation  of  the  same  lamella ;  whence  it  fol-
lows, that  a  transverse  section  would  exhibit
such  a  figure  as  is  represented  in
fig.  3. — Weaker  magnets,  from
which  Miss  Reichel  made  draw-
ings, gave  the  same  picture,
but  the  emitted  rays  were
shorter.

10.  I  laid  before  her  a  straight  magnetic  rod.  It  was  about  I3
feet  long,  quadrangular,  and  about  1^  inches  broad,  like  common
bar  iron.     She  made  from  this  the  drawing  subjoined  in  fig.  4.     At

FIG.    3.

the  pole  directed  towards  the  north,  therefore  at  the
negative  end  of  the  magnet,  she  saw  a  large  flame  ;  at
the  opposite,  positive  end,  a  smaller,  about  half  as  large,
waving,  dancing,  and  shooting  out  rays,  as  in  the  horse-
shoe, red  below,  green  in  the  middle,  and  blue  above.
From  each  of  the  four  edges  of  either  polar  extremity
issued  a  strong  light,  each  independently  flowing  out
at  an  angle  of  45°  to  the  plane  of  the  base,  and  having
a  somewhat  rotatory  motion,  not  exhibited  by  the  chief,
central,  flickering  flame ;  thus  there  was  a  twofold  dis-
tribution at  each  pole.  A  similarity  exists  in  the  state-
ments of  Miss  Nowotny,  who  also  perceived  a  stronger
and  more  elongated  flame  at  each  solid  angle  of  the
horse-shoe.  The  four  edges  of  the  rod  were  clothed
with  a  weaker  light,  just  like  the  individual  layers  of
the  horse-shoe  ;  this  exhibiting  the  red,  green,  and  blue
colors,  but  otherwise  issuing  steadily  and  without  mo-
tion. It  did  not  present  any  decrease  along  its  whole
extent,  and  neither  edges  nor  indifferent  points  could
be  recognised,  as  was  the  case  in  the  horse-shoe.

11.  Placing  the  magnetic  bar  in  the  meridian  or  in
the  magnetic  parallel,  with  the  poles  directed  forward
or  backward  or  in  the  direction  of  the  dip,  did  not  ap-
pear to  exert  any  important  influence  in  the  shape  or
direction  of  the  flames,  the  terrestrial  magnetism  not
being  strong  enough  to  effect  any  considerable  opposing
action.

12.  I  now  took  an  electro-dynamic  apparatus,  on
the  one  hand  to  make   an  electro-magnet  before  her

Fig.  4.

I
m

THE  AURORA  BOREALIS.  SI

eyes,  on  tlie  other  to  bring  to  observation  the  action  which  this  and
a  common  steel  magnet  would  produce  upon  one  another  in  reference
to  the  luminous  phenomena,  it  consisted  of  a  horse-shoe  magnet
with  tin:  poles  widely  separated,  between  which  a  horizontal  coiled
electro  magnet  could  be  made  to  rotate.  The  magnet  itself,  the
poles  of  which  were  directed  upwards,  had  legs  of  square  section
measuring  about  three-fourths  of  an  inch  on  a  side.  In  a  dim  light
it  exhibited  a  condition  essentially  similar  in  all  respects  to  that
which  the  large  horse-shoe  magnet  had  presented  ;  at  the  four  solid
angles  of  the  polar  extremities  obliquely  ascending  flames,  but  in  the
middle  of  them,  issuing  from  the  centre  of  the  plane  of  the  base,  a
longer,  erect,  ascending  flame.  But  this  latter  was  not  a  dense  fiery
mass  here,  for  it  had  assumed  the  shape  of  a  thin,  straight,  and  ver-
tically erected  needle;  a  modification  of  the  condition  which  might
depend  on  the  relative  strength  of  the  magnet,  on  its  size,  or  on  other
accessory  circumstances  of  its  form.  It  is  possible  that  a  very  slight
excavation,  which  had  been  drilled  in  the  two  ends  ot'  the  steel,  for
the  rotation  of  tine  points  fitting  on  to  them,  may  have  contributed
to  this.  The  luminous  appearance  was  stationary  in  this  form,  and,
with  a  slight  difference  in  size,  almost  exactly  the  same  at  both  poles.
When  I  caused  a  current  from  a  single  pair  of  Grove's  elements  to
pasa  through  the  stout  siik-covered  wire  coiled  around  the  iron  which
served  for  the  electro-magnet,  this  emitted  flaming  lights  from  both
ends,  and  exhibited  in  an  instant  all  the  luminous  phenomena  of  a
magnetic  rod.  Nay  more  ;  when  it  was  removed  out  of  the  voltaic
current,  and  had  thus  ceased  to  be  a  magnet,  it  continued  to  emit
magnetic  light  from  the  poles,  and,  as  regards  luminosity,  like  the
Hitter's  pile,  went  on  acting  after  the  removal  of  the  cause.  (I  shall
return  to  the  reason  and  explanation  of  this  phenomenon  in  one  of
the  succeeding  treatises).  Consequently,  in  the  eyes  of  a  sensitive
on,  an  electro-magnet  exhibit*  exactly  ike  same  behavior  in  it*
mission  of  flaming  light,  as  lie  <-oii>n/<>i/.  steel  viagmL*

*I  had  five  years  ago  ;t  beautiful  case  et'  somnambulism,  in  a  female,  who  could
in  her  sleep  see  the  light  from  the  poles  of  magnets,  exactly  as  in  this  case:  even
where  the  armature  was  applied,  Bhe  saw  lambent  bine  flumes  issuing  from  between
the  magnet  and  the  armature-,  and  between  the  plates  of  which  the  magnet  was
composed.  Awake,  she  saw  nothing;  but  on  looking  at  the  magnet  awhile,  she
fell  asleep,  and  then  saw  the  light  again.  If  she  touched  the  magnet,  instantly  a
deep  sleep  and  rigidity  seized  her.  When  1  operated  with  an  elee:  ro-magnetoc  sin-
gle-coil apparatus,  the  same  phenomena  occurred  us  in  the  magnet.  While  the
keeper  or  contact-breaker  continued  its  action,  she  -aw  volumes  of  blue  light  and
cload  emanating  from  the  ooilaround  the  bobbin;  if  the  circle  were  closed,  the  cur-
rent still  passing,  she  still  saw  :!  subdued  light,  bul  tin-  grej  cloud  as  before;  and
if  in  this  state  she  touched  the  c  '\\.  instantly  she  became  unconscious  and  rigid.
From  this  it  is  manifest,  that  be:  ides  that  force  which  can  influence  the  galvanome-
ter, Bome  other  agent  powerfully  influences  the  hnman  system;  and  that  certain

82

THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT—

13.  But  the  reciprocal  action  exerted  by  the  two  flames  upon  each
other  was  remarkable.  The  flame  of  the  steel  magnet  'was  completely
turned  aside  by  that  of  the  electro-magnet,  and  that  as  distinctly  as
the  current  of  a  blowpipe  directs  the  flame  of  a  candle.  To  shorten
as  much  as  possible  the  descriptions,  which  are  tedious  to  read  and
at  the  same  time  difficult  to  comprehend,  I  briefly  direct  attention  to

Fig.  5.

Fig.  6.

Fig.  7.

Fig.  8.

individuals  in  the  mesmeric  sleep-waking;  are  as  good  tests  of  the  presence  of  this
agent  as  any  sensitive  individuals  in  an  analogous  condition  of  nerves,  who  may
happen  to  he  awake.    Since  the  time  above  mentioned,  several  of  my  somnambules,

THE  AURORA  BOREALIS.

33

figures  5,  6,  7,  and  9.  Fig.  5  represents  the  steel  magnet  with  its
luminosity  alone,  fig.  6,  a  and  6,  the
electro-magnet  underneath  the  poles  of
the  latter,  with  the  outline,  fig.  7,  beside
it,  fig.  8,  close  above  it,  fig.  9  high  over
it,  and  showing  the  remarkable  diverg-
ence of  the  flame  of  the  steel  magnet.
The  question  whether  this  is  to  be  at-
tributed to  a  difference  of  strength  or  to
some  other  cause,  is  reserved  for  future
investigation.

Thus  in  Miss  Reichel  we  have  the
fifth  and  at  the  same  time  the  clearest
testimony  for  the  luminous  phenomena
at  the  poles  of  the  magnet.

Lastly,  I  must  mention  a  Miss  Maria
Atzmannsdorfer,  a  girl  26  years  old
(Golden  Lamb,  in  the  suburb  Alte  Wieden).  She  is  the  daughter
of  a  pensioned  military  surgeon.  She  has  an  affection  of  the  head,
with  spasms  and  sleep-walking,  but  walks  about  the  streets  looking
like  a  healthy  person.  I  brought  her  to  my  house  late  in  the  eve-
ning, when  it  was  getting  very  dark,  and  into  a  room  which  I  could
darken  perfectly  by  closing  inside  shutters.  She  was  sensitive  ma
high  degree,  and  saw  the  magnetic  poles  flame  here  in  a  most  lively
manner.&  She  described  the  luminous  appearance  as  still  larger  than
Miss  Reiche!,  from  the  nine-layered  horse-shoe  more  than  twice  the
height,  and  gave  an  exactly  similar  account  of  the  light,  the  colors,
and  the  mobility  of  the  flame;  like  her  she  saw  the  whole  magnet
luminous,  and  its  entire  surface  clothed  with  a  delicate  light.  She
makes  the  sixth  witness.

14.  Let  us  now  briefly  compare  the  different  statements:  the
same  nine-layered  horse-shoe  magnet  displayed  at  its  poles,  to  the
eyes  of  the  greatly  convalescent —

a.  Miss  Nowotny,  a  kind  of  luminous  vapor,  surrounded  and  inter-
mingled with  rays  of  shining,  moving,  darting,  white  and  sometimes
iridescent  light,  about  one  half  to  three  quarters  of  an  inch  long.

b.  Miss  Maix,  when  free  from  spasms,  saw  a  white  flame  about  a
hand's  breadth  high.

separated  from  one  another,  each  ignorant  of  the  purpose  äS^SSiSraS
been,  at  different  times,  introduced  to  a  room  where  an  f^^Pf^^Si
has  been  in  action,  and  they  have  seen  an  emanation  from  the  co  1  e.  %  as  im the
above  case.  Moreover,  in  corroboration  oi  the  tut. noticed  by •  the  Bu  on  each  ot
these  persons  has  repeatedly  been  put  to  sleep  by  touching  the  helix,  at  various
intei :  val,  from  one  hour  to  two  horns  after  the  Smee's  battery  has  been  removed.

34  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT—

c.  Miss  Sturmann,  a  white  flame  as  high  as  the  length  of  a  small
hand,  with  an  intermixture  of  colors.

d.  The  journeyman  glover,  a  flame  a  hand's  length  in  height.

e.  Miss  Maix,  in  a  spasmodic  state,  a  general  light,  distributed  all
over  the  magnet,  dazzling  her  eyes,  and  issuing  largest  and  strong-
est from  the  poles.

/.  Miss  Reichel,  a  variously  colored,  flickering,  radiating  flame,  as
large  as  the  whole  horse-shoe  magnet,  therefore  10  inches  long  ;
lateral  flames  out  from  each  layer  of  the  magnet;  a  general  weaker
efflux  of  light  along  all  the  edges  of  the  layers  inward  over  the
whole  horse-shoe.

g.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  the  same  appearances  more  strongly
marked,  and  the  entire  magnet  in  a  delicate  glow.

15.  From  all  this  it  follows,  that  those  sensitive  persons,  who  are
so  in  a  high  degree,  perceive  in  the  dark,  at  the  poles  of  powerful
magnets,  a  luminous  appearance  of  a  waving,  flame-like  nature,  less
or  more  according  to  the  degree  of  their  diseased  sensibility,  or  the
more  or  less  perfect  degree  of  darkness  ;  that  they  do  indeed  differ
in  their  observations  as  to  its  size,  in  consequence  of  their  varying
powers  of  perception,  but  agree  unconditionally  in  all  their  general
statements  ;  such  a  luminous  appearance  of  considerable  magnitude,
of  which  healthy  persons  see  nothing,  does  therefore  actually  exist  on
magnets.  Since,  with  the  exception  of  an  acquaintance  between
Miss  Maix  and  Miss  Reiche!,  none  of  the  witnesses  had  any  commu-
nication with  each  other,  or  did  even  know  one  another,  but  lived
leagues  apart,  and  in  my  innumerable  experiments  never  contradicted
one  another,  much  less  themselves  ;  and  since  they  never  stated  any-
thing opposed  to  the  fixed  laws  of  electricity  and  magnetism  ;  lastly,
conscious  of  the  precaution  and  accuracy  of  my  own  method  of  in-
vestigation,— I  feel  no  hesitation  in  expressing  the  conviction  I  have
arrived  at, — that  I  regard  the  reality  of  the  perception,  by  persons
of  exalted  sensibility,  of  luminous  phenomena  at.  the  magnetic  poles,
as  incontestible,  and  as  an  ascertained  and  settled  fact  of  science ;  so
far,  that  is,  as  an  individual  observer  is  in  a  position  to  complete  it.
I  am  certain  that  we  shall  not  have  to  wait  long  for  its  confirmation
from  other  quarters.  The  sensitive  are  not  indeed  so  numerous  in
small  towns,  that  they  may  be  found  almost  everywhere,  if  sought ;
but  in  large  cities  they  are  far  from  rare,  and  I  do  not  consider  it  a
difficult  task  to  find  hundreds  at  once,  if  requisite,  in  a  place  like
Vienna.  My  statements  may  therefore  be  readily  tested  in  Berlin,
Hamburgh,  or  Paris.

16.  We  will  now  turn  to  some  of  the  properties  of  the  magnectic
light.     That  it  is  invisible  to  healthy  eyes,  is  not  in  itself  very  won-

THE  AURORA  BOREALIS.  85

derfid.  When  we  consider  the  difference  between  sun-light  and
candle-light,  the  former  of  which  Wollaston  found  5560,  Leslie  even

12,000  tunes  stronger  than  the  hitter;  when  we  see  how  very  weak
is  the  luminosity  of  alcohol,  wood-spirit,  carbonic-oxide  gas,  pure
hydrogen,  and  other  combustiblus,  the  fumes  of  which  are  not  only
wholly  invisible  in  strong  sun-light,  but  become  to  a  certain  extent
imperceptible  in  strong  reflected  daylight,  we  are  aware  already  of
such  extreme  differences  between  the  luminosities  of  different  flames,
that  the  step  to  the  complete  invisibility  to  our  eyes  is  no  longer  a
great  one,  and  hence  the  possibility  as  well  as  the  comprehensibility
lies  tolerably  near.  It  therefore  cannot  be  regarded  as  strange,  that
other  lights' exist,  which  fall  beneath  our  powers  of  vision,  and  that
a  luminosity  pervades  magnets,  which,  from  its  weakness,  we  are
usually  unable  to  see.

17.  To  convince  myself,  where  possible,  whether  it  was  actually
light  then,  and  not  some  different  kind  of  appearance,  that  was  per-
ceived by  the  sensitive  persons,  1  wished  to  make  an  experiment  with
the  daguerreotype,  and  to  see  if  an  impression  could  be  produced
upon  the  ibdized  silver  plate.  To  carry  out  this  experiment,  I  in-
vited my  obliging  friend,  M.  Karl  Schuh,  a  private  teacher  of  physics
in  Vienna,  known  by  his  improvements  in  the  gas-microscope  and
his  skill  in  daguerreolypiug.  lie  shut  up  an  iodized  plate,  in  front  of
which  an  open  magnet  was  placed,  in  a  dark  box,  and  at  the  same  time
deposited  another  plate  in  another  dark  case,  without  a  magnet.  After
some  hours  he  found  the  former,  when  it  had  been  treated  with  mer-
curial vapor,  affected  by  light,  the  other  not;  but  the  distinction  was
not  very  strong.  In  order  to  make  it  perfectly  clear,  he  took  the
magnet,  turned  towards  an  iodized  plate,  with  extreme  precautions
for  keeping  out  every  trace  of  light  during  the  manipulation,  of  which
I  was  witness,  and  placed  it  in  a  case  in  a  thick  bed,  and  left  it  there
sixty-four  hours.  Taken  out  in  darkness  and  exposed  to  mercurial
vapor,  the  plate  now  exhibited  the  full  effect  of  the  light  which  it
had  received,  over  the  entire  surface.  It  was  clear  from  this,  that
unless  other  causes  are  capable  of  affecting  the  photographic  plate,
after  considerable  time,  it,  in  fact,  must  be  light,  real,  though  weak
and  acting  but  slowly,  which  issues  from  the  magnet.

18.  I  made  another  experiment,  with  a  similar  view,  -with  a  large
burning  glass.  The  lens  was  about  eight  inches  across,  and  had  a
focal  distance  of  about  twelve  inches  for  a  candle  standing  about  five
feet  behind  it.  In  a  completely  darkened  room,  I  brought  Uie_  mag-
net, of  which  the  flame  was  ten  inches  long,  about  twenty-five  inches
behind  the  lens,  and  directed  it  against  the  wall,  calling  Miss  Keiehel's
attention  to  it.     The  clever  mechanist   of  this  city,  Mr.  Ekling,  was

36  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT—

present.  "We  removed  the  lens  gradually  four  feet  six  inches  from
the  wall,  during-  which  the  observer  saw  the  picture  of  the  light  con-
tinually diminish  in  size,  and  first  at  that  distance  contract  to  about
one-eighth  of  an  inch.  But  in  spite  of  this,  no  one  present  was  able
to  perceive  a  trace  of  the  light,  even  under  this  considerable  concen-
tration. Yet  it  furnished  us  with  a  sure  means  of  testing  the  accu-
racy of  the  observer  in  a  variety  of  ways.  Among  others,  she  laid
her  finger  on  the  spot  where  she  saw  the  focal  point ;  I  followed  her,
and,  by  feeling  in  the  dark,  placed  mine  upon  it.  Mr.  Ekling,  who
held  the  lens,  now  altered  its  direction  a  little,  without  saying  in
what  way.  The  position  of  the  focus  on  the  wall  was  thus  of  course
altered  in  the  same  direction.  The  observer  immediately  gave  ano-
ther, which  I  traced  out  with  my  finger,  and  then  made  Mr.  Ekling
state  in  what  direction  he  had  diverted  the  axis.  Whether  he  said
to  the  right,  downward  or  upward,  my  finger  was  in  every  case  al-
ready on  the  right,  below  or  above.  The  exactitude  and  genuineness
of  the  observation  was  consequently  beyond  all  doubt.  She  de-
scribed the  color  of  the  focal  point  as  red  ;  and  she  also  said  that  the
whole  of  the  large  glass  lens  was  illumined  red  by  the  magnet.

19.  The  magnetic  light  emitted  no  heat;  at  least  none  appre-
ciable by  our  most  delicate  instruments.  Directed  on  to  a  Nobili's
thermoscope,  I  could  not  detect  any  movement  of  the  astatic  needle
of  the  differential  galvanometer,  even  after  a  lengthened  trial.

20.  It  was  very  desirable  to  obtain  some  more  intimate  know-
ledge as  to  the  substantiality  of  the  flame,  light,  or  whatever  we  may
please  to  call  it,  waving  over  the  magnetic  poles.  Since  it  did  not
issue  in  a  radiant  form  from  its  source,  but  in  a  flickering  shape,
forming  all  sorts  of  curved  and  changing  lines,  it  could  not  well  con-
sist of  a  simple  and  pure  emission  of  light.  In  fact,  when  I  turned
the  poles  of  the  magnet  downward,  it  flowed  downward  in  the  iden-
tical shape  in  which  it  flowed  upward  when  I  reversed  them,  and  in
each  direction  sideways  as  I  held  them  to  either  side.  This  testifies
strongly  to  its  more  than  probable  imponderability,  but  proves  no-
thing positive  as  to  its  nature.  But  the  answer  I  obtained  to  the
question,  how  the  magnetic  flame  behaved  when  blown  upon,  seemed
to  me  more  important  in  this  respect.  The  observer  said  that  it
flared  divergently  to  the  side  like  any  other  flame.  When  a  solid  is
brought  too  near,  the  points  curl  round  it :  when  in  the  last  experi-
ments, also,  the  large  glass  lens  had  been  brought  too  near  the  open
magnet,  the  flames  had  applied  themselves  upon  the  glass  exactly  in
the  same  manner  as  happens  when  another  glass  is  placed  in  the
flame  of  a  candle  to  blacken  it ;  when  the  hand  was  placed  on  the
magnet,  the  flames  passed  between  the  fingers  and  out  behind  the

THE  AURORA  BOREALIS.  37

hand,  etc.  It  follows  from  this,  that  the  magnetic  fame  is  evidently
either  itself  something  wholly  material,  or  has  such  for  a  substrat-
um ;  further,  that  the  magnetic  light  is  something  different  from  it,
and  the  magnetic  fame  is  a  compound,  in  which  some  kind  of  mate-
riality  is   united  with   the  immaterial  essence   of  the   light.*     The

*  In  a  logical  work,  the  meaning  of  such  words' as  material  and  immaterial
should  be  strictly  defined.  The  question  relate::  not  here  to  Theology,  but  to
Natural  Science.  Great  confusion  of  ideas  must  inevitably  result  from  misap-
prehension of  the  accurate  import  of  terms.  If  I  understand  the  adjective  ma-
terial, it  relates  to  matter — something.  On  the  other  hand,  immaterial  relates  to
immatter — nothing.  Divisibility  is  infinite.  The  attenuation  of  any  substance
in  space  is  bounded  only  by  the  opposition  offered  to  its  expansion  by  the  pres-
sure of  other  matter  ;  otherwise  its  expansibility  would  be  infinite.  It  is  impos-
sible to  conceive  of  its  annihilation— of  its  being  reduced  to  nothing.  Without
clear  ideas,  logic  is  nothing — philosophy  is  nothing — reason  is  nothing — truth  is
nothing.  Their  provinces  are  in  entity.  It  is  absurd  to  speak  of  reasoning  upon
nothing.  We  cannot  conceive  ef  nothing.  Our  faculties  have  no  relations  to
nothing.  Being  in  themselves  something,  we  can  have  no  faith  in  nothing.  Move
for  an  instant  from  physics  to  theology.  It  is  the  atheist  who  believes  in  nothing.
The  believer  in  a  God,  clearer  in  his  logic,  confessing,  in  great  humility,  his  per-
fect and  complete  inability  to  grasp  the  idea  of  nothing,  can  never  measure  more
than  the  attributes  of  an  all-wise,  all-just,  all-holy,  and  all-powerful  Being;  still,
cannot. believe  that  being  non-existent.  He  talks  perhaps  of  that  Being  being
immaterial.  He  dees  cot  for  one  moment  mean  constituted  of  nothing  I  He
would'  be  wiser  to  avoid  the  use  of  terms  which  have  no  meaning.  .  .  .  Real
humility,  which  characterizes  real  philosophy,  leads  him  to  say — "  1  do  not  know,
but  in  future  I  will  not  talk  nonsense  about  immaterialism.  I  will  not  get  an-
gry, I  will  not  dispute  about  what  no  imagination  can  conceive.  A  being  must
be  something,  although  I  may  be  quite  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  that  thing."  It
is  highly  important  that,  in  all  considerations  on  those  agencies  which  are  some-
times designated  as  imponderable  forms  of  matter,  we  should  not  use  such  terms
as  immaterial.  The  term  can  be  used  only  when  there  is  an  absence  of  a  clear
idea,  or  a  willingness  to  envelop  the  mind  in  hazy  cloudy  clothing.

It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  accurate  definition  is  necessary  only  in  meta-
physics. All  the  phenomena  relating  to  the  subject  of  light  may  one  day  be
proved  to  belong  to  the  science  of  psychology;  and  the  researches  now  pre-
sented to  public  notice  may  indeed  be  regarded  as  the  commencement  of  very
numerous  investigations  hereafter  by  men  of  science,  which  must  establish  the
relations  of  light  to  the  phenomena  of  the  human  mind.  It  is  silly  and  idle  to
oppose  to  the  progress  of  clear  ideas  the  confused  nonsense  which  pervades  the
brains  of  men  who  cannot  help  hating  all  new  truths.  Those  who  are  really
honest  and  sincere  in  their  religious  faith,  need  never  fear  the  advance  of  science.
A  wise  and  just  God,  permitting  the  developments  of  truth,  decrees  that  man
cannot  alter  the  laws  which  regulate  Nature  in  her  operations.  The  repulsive
agencies  of  his  brain  may  malignantly  oppose  the  revelations  of  science,  which
are  the  revelations  of  God's  will  to  man  given  out  at  progressively  advancing
periods  of  that  time  which  is  a  fragment  of  Eternity  ;  but  they  cannot  overwhelm
the  truth,  and  are  able  to  stay  its  progress  only  as  the  midge  intercepts  the  pro-
gress of  the  sun's  light  for  a  moment.  To  our  limited  ken,  all  Nature's  truths
are  material.     Mathematics  have  enabled  wondrous  philosophers  to  calculate  the

38  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT—

sensitive  person  actually  sees  the  magnetic  flame  curve  round  the
glass  lens,  while  the  light  itself  passes  through,  and  its  rays  may  be

speed  at  which  light  travels,  and  the  admirable  observations  hi  paragraph  16
of  the  text  are  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  materiality  of  all  light,  when  man's
ken  shall  be  enlarged  by  science,  may  come  to  be  easily  established.  I  have
known  at  least  fifty  persons  who  have  seen  a  grey  silvery,  or  a  blue  light  ema-
nating from  my  hand  and  fingers,,  when  they  have  been  wide  awake.  I  have
known  a  great  many  persons  who  having  been  put  into  mesmeric  sleep  have  de-
clared that  they  have  seen  blue  light  issuing  in  copious  streams  from  my  eyes,
when  I  have  concentrated  my  thoughts  in  the  acts  of  volition  or  study.  This  is
so  common,  that  as  the  investigations  into  mesmerism  proceed,  I  know  there
must  be  thousands  of  corroborations  of  the  fact,  instead  of  hundreds,  as  at  pres-
ent. Will  any  one  venture  to  say  that  a  force  having  relation  to  such  a  light  is
not  a  material  power  ?  The  light  proceeds  from  the  brain  of  a  person  willing,
and  impinges  on  a  sleeper — sent  to  sleep  by  a  magnet — or  by  a  crystal.  The
light  is  sent  forth  by  the  will  of  that  person,  and  becomes  a  motive  power,  for
the  recipient  sleeper  moves  and  obeys  the  mandate  received  through  the  lumin-
ous agency.  I  have  repeatedly  performed  an  experiment  under  these  circum-
stances, and  the  results  have  been  as  above  stated.  But  though  I  have  often
willed  persons  awake  as  well  as  sleep-wakers,  and  even  magnetic  and  crystallic-
sleepers,  to  do  my  silent  bidding,  proving  that  the  light  from  my  brain  is  a  mo-
tive power,  I  regard  some  other  experiments  on  rare  subjects  to  be  still  more
conclusive  as  to  the  material  agency  of  the  light  which  emanates  from  the  human
brain.  I  have  caused  it  to  travel  72  miles,  producing  immediate  effects.  I  have
witnesses  who  can  testify  that  I  have  repeatedly  willed  an  individual  to  come  to
me  when  at  the  distance  of  nearly  two  miles.  I  have  witnesses  who  can  testify
that  a  patient  for  some  month's  required  the  force  of  the  light  emanating  from
my  brain  by  the  exertion  of  the  will,  to  enable  her  to  sleep  at  all.  when  she  was
at  the  distauce  of  nearly  two  miles  from  me.

Hundreds  xif  persons  have  seen  an  individual  made  insensible  and  rigid  by  my
imagining  a  circle  round  her.  In  her  delirium,  which  made  her  muscles  enor-
mously powerful,  she  would  occasionally  master  several  persons.  My  will,  im-
pinging its  light  upon  her,  rendered  her  not  only  tractable  for  a  time,  but  set  her
fast,  for  hours,  in  a  deep  sleep  and  rigid  spasm.  If  I  imagined  a  bar  on  the  car-
pet, she  could  indicate  with  accuracy  the  position  and  limits  of  that  bar.  She
described  it  as  a  bar  of  blue  fight  on  the  carpet ;  and  if  she  were  desired  to  get
up  and  pass  over  it,  she  became  insensible,  and  fell  on  the  floor  like  any  inani-
mate object.  Sometimes  I  have  placed  this  bar  of  light  across  the  threshold  of  a
door,  and  it  has  been  impossible  for  her  to  pass  over  it.  The  sight  of  the  blue
bar  of  light,  placed  by  an  effort  of  my  will,  even  after  many  repetitions  of  the
experiment,  made  her  fall  down  insensible  ;  and  she  has  remained  insensible  to
all  external  impressions,  like  a  person  dead  asleep  on  the  floor,  until  I  have  willed
the  bar  to  disappear.  Hundreds  of  persons  have  seen  me  perform  this  experi-
ment. On  one  occasion  I  left  the  bar  for  one  hour  and  a  half,  and  she  remained
quite  unconscious,  getting  up  instantly  when  I  willed  its  disappearance.  Though
not  a  common,  this  has  not  been  a  solitary  case  illustrative  of  such  a  striking
fact.  Charpignon  (Etudes  Phys.  sur  le  Magn.  Anim.  Paris,  1843)  has  proposed
physical  tests  to  establish  the  existence  of  the  mesmeric  fluid.  One  of  them  con-
sisted in  collecting  the  fluid  from  the  ends  of  the  fingers  into  a  glass  tumbler,  and
then  getting  patients  to  inhale  the  air  collected  in  that  glass  vessel.  This  put
the  individuals  to  sleep.     Several  persons  have  seen  while  awake  the  blue  light

THE  AURORA  BOREALIS.  39

collected  in  a  focus.  Miss  Nowotny  and  Miss  Sturmann  both  as-
sured me  that  the  light  spread  a  brightness  around  it,  and  illumi-
nated neighboring  objects  ;  and  Miss  JUciehel  marked  the  exact  dis-
tance to  which  the  visible  light  of  the  magnetic  flame  spread  over
the  table  on  which  it  lay  ;  I  measured  this,  and  found  it  to  extend
to  about  nineteen  inches  in  diameter.  Whether  that  which  issues
from  the  magnet  in  the  form  of  flame  is  really  a  substantial  emission,
or  only  indicates  an  alteration  of  condition  which  the  magnet  pro-
duces in  the  surrounding  air,  or  according  to  the  newer  theories,  in
the  ether,  which  then  in  farther  progress  becomes  associated  with  an
evolution  of  light,  are  questions  to  solve  which  many  more  things,
among  others  the  slow  spontaneous  loss  of  power  of  the  steel  magnet,
must  be  placed  in  the  balance,  and  they  must  remain  as  subjects  for
further  research.  For  the  present,  only  this  much  is  established  ; —
that  the  magnetic  flame,  turning  aside  before  mechanical  obstacles,
is  not  identical  with  the  independent,  simultaneously  issuing  magnetic
light,  which  possesses  a  higher  radiant  nature.

21.  And  now  I  return  to  the  introductory  consideration  of  §  2.
The  first  practical  use  to  be  made  of  these  observations  would  be  an
endeavor  to  apply  them  to  the  elucidation  of  the  aurora  borealis.
We  are  in  possession  of  the  valuable  explanations  given  by  Sir  Hum-
phry Davy,  who  applied  the  influence  of  the  magneton  the  electrical
current  in  rarified  air,  to  the  aurora,  and  endeavored  to  make  out  the
probability  that  this  phenomenon  was  produced  by  a  current  of  this
kind  on  the  outermost  limits  of  the  atmosphere.  But  since,  through
the  recent  polar  expeditions,  it  has  been  found  how  deeply  this  fre-
quently descends  in  the  atmosphere,  Davy's  ingenious  comparison  has
lost  much  of  its  certainty  ;  the  rarified  space,  the  ground  on  which  he
based  it,  has  disappeared,  and  with  it  the  diffusion  of  the  free  elec-
tricity, which,  derived  from  our  thunder-storms,  he  claimed  for  the
aurora.     The  certainty  which  we   possess   that   the   aurora  is   only

proceeding  from  my  fingers,  and  collecting  in  the  glass.  I  have  directed  their
attention  to  other  objects  so  that  they  could  not  be  aware  of  my  resuming  hold
of  the  glass  I  had  left,  and  have  been  unawares  put  to  sleep  by  my  pouring  the
fluid  on  the  back  of  their  necks.  On  several  occasions  lately,  I  have  sat  in  one
room  willing  the  mesmeric  light  into  a  wide-mouthed  phial  of  a  pint  capacity,
and  have  taken  it  into  another  room,  where,  pouring  the  substance  on  a  patient's
head,  she  has  instantly  fallen  asleep.  These  experiments,  performed  with  every
precaution  to  avoid  sources  of  fallacy,  can  succeed  only  in  cases  of  most  extreme
susceptibility.  Repeated  occurrences  of  these  facts,  and,  as  they  are  easily  re-
produced, we  shall  have  accounts  of  many  of  them,  will  establish  the  conclusion
that  a  force  which  is  a  muff  rial  agent,  attended  by  or  constituting  a  colored  light,
animates  from  the  brain  of  man,  when  he  thinks— that  his  will  can  direct  its  im-
pingement— and  that  it  in  a  motive  vower.

40  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT—

formed  under  the  influence  of  the  magnetic  poles  of  the  earth,  the
total  absence  of  any  direct  phenomena  of  light  on  the  magnets,  which
we  have  hitherto  assumed  ;  the  facts  now  gained,  that,  although  in-
visible to  common  eyes,  colored,  especially  white,  yellow,  and  red
emissions  of  light  do  issue  from  magnets,  certainly  must  lead  us  to
surmise  that  the  aurora  may  be  either  actually  the  magnetism  itself
issuing  from  the  polar  regions,  or  else  a  direct  effect  of  it.  It  is  known
that  the  aurora,  when  it  appears,  affects  and  disturbs  the  magnetic
needles  of  whole  countries,  as  does  the  magnetic  flame,  or  the  magnet
producing  it,  at  a  certain  distance  :  lastly,  it  is,  in  fact,  only  the  em-
anation from  the  magnet,  and  not  the  magnet  itself,  which  produces
the  movements  at  a  distance  ;  and  thus,  therefore,  the  deflecting  ac-
tion of  the  aurora  upon  the  needle  completely  agrees  with  those  of  the
magnet.  Finally,  if  we  compare  the  special  phenomena  in  the  ap-
pearance of  the  magnetic  light  and  the  magnetic  flame,  with  those  of
the  aurora,  the  probability  of  such  an  assumption  evidently  increases.
The  aurora  is  known  as  a  white  arc,  according  to  others  as  a  white
vapory  or  cloud-like  mass  on  the  polar  horizon,  from  wdiich  shoot  out
towards  the  equator  flickering,  brush-like,  wandering  rays,  the  lines
of  which  have  indeed  a  principal  direction,  but  are  not  parallel  to  each
other,  nor  straight,  but  appear  curved  slightly  in  various  ways,  and
sometime  scintillate.  Their  color  changes  from  the  white  of  the  arc
to  bluish,  emerald  green,  yellow,  and  above  all,  red,  which  light  they
then  spread  over  whole  zones.  The  same  mobility  of  emitted  rays,
the  same  flickering  flame  running  incurved  lines,  the  same  brilliant
play  of  color,  the  same  reddening  of  illuminated  objects,  we  find  de-
scribed in  exactly  the  same  way  by  the  observers  of  the  magnetic
phenomena.  The  observations,  it  is  true,  do  not  agree  perfectly  with
each  other,  but  they  coincide  in  all  important  points.  The  distinctions
between  them  depend  chiefly  on  the  different  size  of  the  flaming  ob-
jects, which  is  of  minor  importance  ;  it  is  explicable  by  the  differ-
ent degrees  of  sensibility  to  the  magnetic  light  of  different  observers.
In  particular  we  see  two  different  pictures  of  light  appear  in  the  eyes
of  Miss  Maix,  according  as  she  was  either  in  a  quiet  condition  or  in
an  attack  of  spasms  :  in  the  former  case,  a  flame  of  only  a  hand's
breadth  rested  on  the  poles  ;  in  the  latter,  not  only  had  this  much
increased  and  become  more  brilliant,  but  the  entire  large  ho-rse-shoe
was  covered  with  gushes  of  light.  In  the  same  way  we  find  with
Miss  Nowotny,  that  the  apparent  size  of  the  magnetic  light,  in  her
observation,  kept  pace  with  her  convalescence,  and  that  the  picture  of
it  appeared  to  become  smaller,  from  period  to  period,  in  the  same  pro-
portion as  her  disease  diminished,  till  at  last  it  became  wholly  imper-
ceptible to  her  senses.     At  one  particular  period  she  recognised  a  kind

THE  AURORA  BOREALIS.  41

of  luminous  vapor  immediately  over  the  steel,  which  the  far  more
sensitive  Miss  Reichel  never  saw  ;  from  this  cloud  of  vapor  she  saw
the  tufts  of  light  issue  in  the  same  way  as  the  latter  perceived  the
tufts  of  light  "from  the  corners  of  weaker  magnets.  This  vaporous
cloud,  immediately  upon  the  steel,  resembled  in  a  high  degree  the
polar  luminous  arc  of  the  aurora  ;  and  if  Miss  Reiche],  as  she  stated,
saw  nothing  of  it,  the  reason  certainly  is,  that  in  her  sight,  which
perceived  the  far  more  flickering  light  and  the  flames  ascending  from
the  shorter  layers  of  the  magnet,  the  vaporous  cloud  was  covered  or
eclipsed  by  these  so  that  she  could  not  possibly  see  them.  It  might
be  expected  that,  with  the  progress  of  her  recovery,  a  period  would
ensue  in  which  the  flames  of  the  sides  of  the  layers  would  disappear,
and  then  the  vaporous  cloud  would  be  free  to  her  eyes,  and  would  be
seen  as  well  by  her  as  by  Miss  Nowotny.

It  is  this  calm,  bright,  cloud-like  appearance,  however,  which  brings
the  resemblance  to  northern  light  to  such  a  high  degree  of  agree-
ment, that  one  is  involuntarily  led  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the
complete  identity  of  the  aurora  and  the  magnetic  light.  But  I  must
not  be  misapprehended :  I  do  not  wish  to  say  that  I  regard  the  iden-
tity of  the  two  phenomena  as  proved;  for  between  lights  visible  and
invisible  to  healthy  eyes  lies  a  chasm  which  is  not  yet  tilled  up,  and
cannot  even  be  tilled  up  by  the  hyp'othesis  of  a  different  intensity  of
the  two  phenomena  :  but  I  believe  this  much  to  be  certain,  and  that  I
may  venture  to  express  it,  that  an  astonishing  analogy  exists  between
the  two;  so  great,  that  the  identity  of  the  magnetic  flame  and  the
aurcra  rises  unmistakeably  to  a  high  degree  of  probability.

22.    RETROSPECT.

a.  A  strong  magnet  exercises  a  peculiar  action  upon  the  senses  of
many  healthy  and  sick  persons  ;  it  is  an  agent  upon  the  vital  force.

b.  Those  who  manifest  this  sensibility  in  a  high  degree  frequently
exhibit  a  great  exaltation  of  the  acuteness  of  the  senses,  and  are  then
in  a  condition  to  perceive  light  and  flamedike  appearances  upon  the
magnet.  The  strength  and  distinctness  of  this  perception  increases
with  the  sensibility  of  the  observer  and  the  obscurity  of  the  place.

c.  The  pole  —  M  gives  the  larger,  the  +m  the  smaller  flame,  in  the
northern  latitude  of  Vienna.  Its  form  and  color  change  according  as
the  magnet  is  open  or  closed, — a  magnet  made  by  touch,  or  an  elec-
tro-magnet,— free,  or  under  the  influence  of  other  magnets.

d.  Positive  and  negative  flames  display  no  tendency  to  unite.

e.  The  flame  may  be  mechanically  diverted  in  various  directions,
just  like  the  flame  of  a  fire.

42  THE  MAGNETIC  LIGHT.

/.  It  emits  a  light  which  is  red,  that  acts  upon  the  daguerreotype,
and  may  be  concentrated  by  a  glass  lens,  but  is  without  perceptible
heat.

g.  Magnetic  flames  and  their  light  exhibit  such  complete  resem-
blance to  the  aurora,  that  I  believe  myself  compelled  to  consider  the
two  as  identical.

SECOND  TREATISE.

23.  Previously  to  my  visits,  Miss  Nowoljny's  physician  had  re-
peated some  of  the  observations  of  the  older  physicians  in  cataleptic
cases,  in  particular  those  which  Dr.  Petetin,  at  Lyons,  in  1788,  as
well  as  other  persons,  had  investigated  and  made  known  ; — that  when
a  powerful  magnet  was  placed  upon  the  hand,  it  adhered  to  it  in  the
same  way  as  a  piece  of  iron  to  the  magnet ;  moreover,  that  water
through  which  the  magnet  had  been  passed  a  few  times,  was  accu-
rately distinguished  by  the  patients  from  common  water.  The  latter
was  first  observed  and  made  known  by  Mesmer,  often  enough  ridi-
culed, and  as  often  re-asserted.  AVe  shall  see  in  the  course  of  the
present  investigation  how  much  of  it  is  found  true,  and  how  much
false,  by  the  test  of  physics.  The  adhesion"  of  a  living  member  to  a
magnet  is  a  fact  totally  unknown  both  in  physic  and  physiology,  and
few  persons  have  satisfied  themselves  on  the  point  by  inspection  ;  it
is  necessary,  therefore,  to  examine  and  elucidate  it  in  some  measure

*  I  have  seen  two  persons  whose  hands,  when  the  individuals  have  been
awake,  could  not  be  kept  away  from  the  poles  of  a  powerful  horse-shoe  magnet
presented  to  them  at  a  distance  of  six  feet.  The  attractive  power  of  the  magnet
always  induced  these  ladies  to  move  the  head  and  to  incline  the  body  forward.
But  I  have  witnessed  the  phenomenon  of  the  attraction  of  the  hands  to  a  magnet
in  more  than  twenty  cases  of  individuals  in  a  condition  of  sleep-waking.  A  boy,
;i^ed  14,  who  occasionally  came  to  my  house  in  Wimpole  Street,  used  to  rush
forward  from  a  distance  of  six  feet  to  a  magnet  with  a  ten  pounds  sustaining
power;  if  I  took  off  the  armature  while  I  sat  opposite  to  him,  the  poles  being  di-
rected towards  him,  he  would  fall  asleep  on  his  way  to  the  magnet,  and  remain
unconscious  while  his  hand  adhered  to  it,  I  must  continue  to  regard  the  sleep-
waking  state  as  no  obstacle  to  the  conclusions  arrived  at  by  (lie  Baron,  and  I
look  upon  the  facts  in  mesmerism  as  corroborative  of  the  establishment  of  truths
erroneously  imagined  to  be  arrived  at  in  a  condition  of  system  non-mesmeric.
The  simple  act  of  falling  asleep  may  establish  the  existence  of  a  tonic  state  of
nerves,  but  that  tonic  state  of  nerves  is  not  incompatible  with  acuteness  of  per-
ception in  perceptive  organs — with  acuteness  of  apprehension  in  intellectual  or-
gans— with  extreme  delieacy  of  conviction,  refinement,  and  grace  in  the  moral
organs  ;  and  of  great  increase  of  sensibility  and  force  in  the  organs  of  passion  and
desire.  It  is  phrenology  that  must  be  studied  to  enlighten  us  on  the  relations  of
physics  to  the  phenomena  of  vitality.

44  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

in  this  place.  When  the  sick  Miss  Nowotny  lay  unconscious  and
motionless  in  a  cataleptic  condition,  but  free  from  spasms,  and  a  horse-
shoe magnet,  capable  of  sustaining  some  22  lbs.,  was  brought  near
her  hand,  this  adhered  to  it  in  such  a  manner  that  when  the  magnet
was  raised,  or  moved  sideways,  backward,  or  in  any  desired  position,
the  hand  remained  constantly  attached  to  it,  as  if  it  had  been  a  piece
of  iron  cleaving  to  it.  The  patient  remained  perfectly  unconscious-  all
the  while ;  but  the  attraction  was  so  strong,  that  when  the  magnet
was  drawn  down  in  the  direction  of  the  feet,  beyond  the  reach  of  the
patient's  arm,  she  not  only  did  not  leave  it,  but,  in  an  unconscious
state,  rose  up  in  the  bed  and  followed  the  magnet  with  her  hand  as
long  as  it  was  at  all  within  her  reach  :  thus  it  looked  as  if  the  patient
had  been  grasped  by  the  hand,  and  her  body  thus  been  drawn  toward
her  feet.  Finally,  when  the  magnet  was  removed  beyond  its  distance
of  attraction,  she  was  indeed  compelled  to  leave  it,  but  then  remain-
ed unalterable  and  immoveable  in  the  position  in  which  she  had  been
placed,  according  to  the  well-known  manner  of  cataleptic  patients.
This  I  saw  daily,  between  six  and  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when
the  patient  had  her  fits  ;  and  eight  or  ten  persons,  physicians,  phy-
sicists, chemists,  and  friends  of  science,  were  usually  witnesses  of  it,  to
name  whom  can  be  of  no  essential  use  to  me.

When  I  visited  the  girl  at  other  times  of  the  day,  in  the  morning
for  instance,  I  found  that  the  phenomena  were  still  the  same  at  the
time  of  her  best  and  clearest  consciousness.  Her  hand  followed  the
magnet  which  I  placed  on  it,  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  when  she
was  in  the  unconscious  cataleptic  condition.  The  account  of  the  mat-
ter which  I  obtained  from  her  added  little  to  the  explication  of  this
physical  singularity  ;  she  described  her  sensation  as  an  irresistible
attraction,  which  she  felt  compelled  to  follow  unconditionally  and  in-
voluntarily, and  which  she  was  obliged  to  obey  even  against  her  will.
It  was  an  agreeable  sensation,  as  if  connected  with  a  cool  gentle  wind,
issuing  from  the  magnet  on  to  the  hand,  which  seemed  to  be  attach-
ed to  it  as  by  a  thousand  fine  threads,  and  to  be  drawn  along  by  it.
In  other  respects  she  knew  of  nothing  at  all  like  in  life,  and  the
whole  was  a  peculiar,  indescribable  sensation,  in  which  lay  a  refresh-
ing, infinite  pleasure,  when  the  magnet  was  of  the  right  size  and  not
too  strong.*

*  Since  the  thing  appeared  for  too  strange,  and  stood  too  completely  in
contradiction  to  the  known  laws  and  powers  of  the  magnet,  for  me  to  see  my
way  clearly,  I  confess  that,  at  first,  doubts  arose  in  my  mind  whether  all  was
quite  right  here,  and  whether  some  intentional  deception  was  not  going  on,  how-
ever much  this  might  stand  in  opposition  to  the  visible  manifest  honesty  of  all
around,  and  the  respectability  of  the  patient.     I  therefore  took  various  measures

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  45

I  subsequently  had  opportunity  to  observe  exactly  the  same  phe-
nomenon in  Miss   Reiche!.     The  complaint   was    different  here,  but

of  precaution, — bound  up  the  eyes  of  die  patient  in  the  cataleptic  state,  operated
in  variously  modified  ways  with  the  magnet,  &c.\  but  the  reactions  were  always

the  same.  It  will  be  necessary  to  mention  here  some  of  the  tests  to  which  I
subjected  the  patient.  Among  others,  I  concerted  with  a  friend,  that  while  I
stood  beside  the  bed  and  observed  the  patient,  he  should  stand  at  the  other  side
of  the  stone  wall  against  which  the  bed  was  placed,  and  at  an  appointed  sign
should  alternately  open  and  close  with  the  armature  a  strung  magnet  capable  of
sustaining  On  lbsTkeeping  it  directed  toward  the  patient  when  open.  It  was
easy  to  find  the  place  of  her  head  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall  in  the  next  room.
Scarcely  was  the  armature  removed  when  the  patient  became  restless,  and  com-
plained that  a  magnet  must  he  open  somewhere,  desiring  that  some  one  would
look,  and  relieve  her  from  the  pain;  for  large  magnets  always  caused  her  great  un-
easiness from  over-excitement,  while  smaller  ones  were  pleasantly  cooling.  The
armature  was  replaced  without  her  knowledge,  and  she  became  quiet  again.
When  this  was  secretly  repeated  she  became  perplexed,  and  could  not  conceive
the  cause  of  this  changeable  uneasiness  which  seized  her  and  left  her  again,  just
as  if  a  magnet  had  been  turned  towards  her.  The  magnet  had,  therefore,  acted
through  a  stone  wall  without  the  patient  being  aware  of  its  vicinity,  exactly  in
the  same  way  as  it  did  when  lying  open  before  her,  in  correspondence  With  the
known  laws  of  magnetism,  which  penetrates  irresistibly  through  all  bodies.
Lastly,  the  riddle  was  explained  to  her.  and  the  experiment  repeated  with  her
conscious  participation  ;  every  time  the  large  magnet  was  opened  it  produced  the
same  varying  unnatural  redness  in  her  countenance  as  I  had  seen  appear  and  dis-
appear during  the  secret  treatment.  Another  exceedingly  well  selected  test  was
undertaken  by  it.  Baumgartner,  well  known  in  his  former  capacity  of  Professor
of  Physics,  at  a  visit  for  his  own  satisfaction.  When  the  phenomena  with  the.
magnet  had  been  exhihited  to  him,  and  their  strange  effects  upon  the  patient  re-
peated one  after  another  before  his  eyes,  he  took  from  his  pocket  a  horse-shoe
magnet  of  his  own,  which  he  told  the  bystanders,  in  the  presence  of  the  patient,
was  the  most  remarkable  of  all  the  magnets  in  his  collection  of  apparatus,  and
that  which  had  always  proved  itself  (he  strongest;  he  was  desirous,  therefore,  of
knowing  the  strength  of  the  action  it  would  exercise  upon  the  patient.  To  our
astonishment,  however,  Miss  Nowotny  declared  that  she  could  not  confirm  this;
on  the  contrary,  she  not  only  found  it  much  weaker  than  any,  even  than  the
weakest  of  the  magnets  present,  but  it  seemed  to  her  almost  without  influence  ;
she  did  not  smell  it,  she  did  not  taste  it,  it.did  not  make  her  hot,  and  it  did  not
attract  her  hand  at  all.  M.  Baumgartner  laughed  at  our  astonishment,  and  now
told  us  that  the  horse-shoe,  which  was  indeed  his  best  magnet,  had  been  deprived
of  its  magnetism  before  he  left  home  by  friction  in  the  reverse  direction,  and,
therefore,  its  power  had  been  reduced  almost  to  nothing;  that  it,  therefore,  was
little  else  than  a  mere  plain  piece  of  iron;  in  fact,  it  no  longer  evinced  any  at-
traction for  its  armature.*  M.  Baumgartner  had  desired  to  assure  himself  of  the
truth  of  all  that  took  place  here,  and  thus  furnished  us  all  with  a  new  warranty
of  it.  After  such  tests,  of  which  I  could  mention  others  similar  in  their  nature,  I
hope  I  shall  not  be  required  to  give  new  securities  for  the  truth  of  these  things,
the  accuracy  of  which  will,  moreover,  be  sufficiently  tested  by  itself  in  the  course
of  that  which  I  am  here  endeavoring  to  explain. — Author's  Note.

*  Among  several  other  remarkable  instances  in  my  own  experience  corroborating  this  fact,  1
may  notice  a  striking  case  of  a  lady  who  felt  very  unpleasant  effects  when  a  powerful  mag-

46  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

also  connected  with  periodical  cataleptic  fits,  and  both  in  these  and  in
the  awake  condition  her  hand  followed  a  strong  magnet,  exactly  in
the  way  I  have  described  it  in  Miss  Nowotny.  Professor  Lippich  re-
ported the  same  to  me  of  a  stage  of  the  disease  of  Miss  Sturmann,
which  I  was  prevented  from  examining  myself;  and  I  have  every
reason  to  place  unconditional  trust  in  the  accuracy  of  the  statement.
These  different  cases,  compared  with  those  of  a  similar  kind  which
Petetin,  Rick,  and  others  furnish  from  past  times,  leave  no  doubt  of
the  correctness  of  the  fact,  that  in  certain  diseases,  especially  those  in
tuhich  catalepsy  exists,  a  distinct  attraction  occurs  between  the  human
hand  and  strong  magnets*

I  also  made  an  experiment  on  the  feet  of  Miss  Nowotny ;  there

*  The  Baron  is  most  correct  in  this  conclusion, — that  in  cons' itutions  of  a  ten-
dency to  catalepsy,  "  a  distinct  attraction  occurs  between  the  human  hand  and  a
magnet ;"  and  he  enlarges  the  jiroposition  by  the  words,  "  in  certain  diseases"
Now,  what  are  these  diseases  ?  All  affections  of  the  nervous  system  which  fall
under  a  great  class  of  those  exhibiting  proclivity  to  clonic  spasms,  may  be  con-
sidered as  opposed  to  another  of  those  evincing  a  tendency  to  tonic  spasms.  In
the  one  set  there  is  an  attraction  between  the  particles  of  nerve  matter,  and  in
the  other  there  is  a  repulsion  between  those  particles.  In  the  opposite  conditions
of  brain  and  nerves  which  obtain  in  sleep  and  in  vigilance,  we  have  illustrations
of  this  idea.  Constitutions  vary  according  to  degrees  of  tone  and  clone,  and  there
are  thousands  of  grades  of  these  opposite  states.  If,  in  vigilance,  tone  gives  a
character  to  the  frame,  and  is  habitually  carried  to  its  extreme  point  short  cf
sleep,  with  rigid  spasm,  the  individual  is  in  perfect  health,  and  is  in  a  condition
bordering  on  that  which  is  characterized  by  a  Avant  of  sensibility  to  magnetic  im-
pressions. Remark  the  opposite  extreme ;  hysteria, — fragile  frame,  with  debility
and  very  delicate  susceptibility  to  impressions.  Inflict  the  poison  of  hydrophobia
on  the  tonic  individual,  and  the  extreme  clonic  spasms  are  not  loug  before  they
become  evident.  A  reversal  of  polarities  ensues,  which  makes  the  person  more
extremely  susceptible  than  the  most  fragile  hysterical  female.  The  brain  and
nerves  in  tone  are  compact  and  tense ;  in  clone,  loose  and  wanting  in  firmness.
In  the  course  of  a  long  mesmeric  treatment,  patients  exhibit  in  some  cases  various
phases  in  degrees  of  sensibility  to  impressions.  The  organs  of  the  five  senses  may
become  more  acute,  and  their  powers  exalted.  The  intellectual,  the  moral,  or  the
lower  auimal  nervous  functions,  according  to  the  individual  peculiarity  of  fabric,
may  be  more  strikingly  manifested.  A  time  arrives  when  tone  assumes  the
mastery.  Deep  sleep,  the  best  test  of  the  progress  toAvards  tonic  health,  balances
the  relations  between  nerve  and  blood,  and  the  patient  is  restored  to  a  state  of
mind  and  body  in  which  neither  mesmeric  manipulations  nor  powerful  magnets
have  much  more  than  the  slightest  influence  in  producing  attraction  or  repulsion.
The  diseases,  then,  in  which  the  magnet  influences  the  hand  by  attraction  towards
it,  are  those  in  which  a  proclivity  to  clone  preponderates,  and  in  which  a  due
course  of  mesmerism  or  magnets  have  not  perfectly  conquered  this  disposition.

net,  in  my  possession,  happened  to  be  in  the  room  where  she  was  present.  It  was  accidental-
ly upon  my  table  one  day  that  she  came  in,  and  seeing  it  she  remarked  that  her  constitution
must  have  undergone  a  change,  since  she  perceived  that  without  inconvenience  she  could  re-
main in  the  room  with  that  magnet:  in  fact  it  had  been  deprived  of  its  magnetism.

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  47

also  I  found  a  like  attraction,  but  far  weaker ;  but  no  other  place,
sensitive  in  this  way,  existed  in  any  part  of  the  body.

24.  The  first  a^jd  most  immediate  question  that  arose  now  was,
whether  the  attraction  which  the  magnet  exercised  upon  the  patient
was  reciprocal,  or  whether  it  was  exerted  by  it  upon  bodies  capable
of  participating  in  the  diffusion  of  magnetism,  and,  like  iron,  tempo-
rarily converted  into  magnets  by  the  approximation  of  a  magnetic
body ;  in  other  words,  whether,  through  her  diseased  condition,
magnetism,  and,  with  this,  magnetic  attraction,  resided  in  herself?
To  decide  this  I  took  some  iron  filings  and  brought  the  patient's
finger  over  them  ;  they  did  not  adhere  in  the  slightest  degree,  even
when  she  was  in  contact  with  the  magnet,  and  might  thus  have  been
more  strongly  influenced  than  she  might  have  been  naturally.  A
suspended  magnetic  needle  which  I  brought  to  her,  and  which  I
bade  her  hold  her  finger  close  to  at  both  poles,  and  in  variously
modified  alternating  ways,  was  not  caused  to  diverge  or  oscillate  in
the  least.  Another  experiment  in  reference  to  this  point  was  made
at  the  desire  and  in  the  presence  of  M.  Baumgartner.  When  the
baud,  and  with  it  the  whole  arm,  were  lifted  up  by  the  magnet,  it
seemed  to  many  that  the  horse-shoe  became  as  much  heavier  as  the
weight  of  the  attached  burden,  the  arm,  amounted  to.  I  could  not
find  this  myself,  but  many  persons  believed  that  they  felt  it  dis-
tinctly. The  horse-shoe  was  therefore  attached  to  the  beam  of  a
pair  of  scales,  and  its  weight  balanced  by  a  counterpoise.  After  the
patient's  hand  had  been  spread  out  fiat,  with  the  back  on  a  firm  sup-
port, I  held  it  fast  down  upon  this  by  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  and  the
freely  suspended  magnet  was  brought  near  to  it  :  the  hand  strove
to  move  toward  this,  and  I  was  obliged  to  exert  some  force  to  keep
it  back  ;  but  the  index  of  the  balance  did  not  stir  in  the  least,  even
when  the  magnet  almost  touched  the  fingers,  and  then  strove  so
convulsively  to  contract,  that  I  had  much  trouble  to  retain  them  in
their  fiat  position.

While  I  was  busied  with  these  investigations,  the  known  state-
ment of  Thilorier,  that  he  had  magnetised  steel  by  induction  from
nervous  patients,  appeared  in  the  journals  :  whether  the  induction
here  depended  solely  or  only  in  part  upon  the  disease,  I  must  leave
unsettled  :  the  result  in  Vienna  was,  that  I  soon  received  news  from
their  physician  that  both  Miss  Reichel  and  Miss  Maix  converted  every
steel  needle  into  a  magnet,  by  holding  it  in  the  hand  for  some  time.
I  went  to  see  the  patients,  who  assured  me  of  the  correctness  of  the
matter,  and  showed  me  knitting  needles  which  supported  common
sewing  needles.  I  made  the  experiment  with  them  myself;  pro-
cured knitting  needles  which  were  not  at  all  magnetic,  removed  all

48  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  LN

magnets  from  the  vicinity  of  the  patients,  and  gave  them  the  needles.
At  my  desire  they  held  them  in  the  hand,  first  the  same  length  of
time,  then  twice  as  long  as  in  the  previous  experiments,  in  which
their  medical  attendant  stated  he  had  produced  magnets  with  them,
but  the  needles  were  not  magnetic  now,  and  all  endeavor  to  make
them  so  was  in  vain.  Doubtless  it  had  been  neglected  before  to
examine  the  condition  of  the  needles  previously  to  the  experiment,
for  among  a  dozen  knitting  needles  always  half  are  more  or  less  mag-
netic. Lastly,  I  was  assured  that  Miss  Sturmann  was  so  magnetic
that  she  caused  the  magnetic  needle  to  diverge  from  twenty  to  thirty
degrees.  I  was  invited  to  a  trial  by  Professor  Lippich,  and  really
saw  a  freely  suspended  needle  considerably  deflected.  As  the  needle
was  not  sufficiently  secured  from  currents  of  air,  I  undertook  the  ex-
periment next  day,  with  the  precaution  of  placing  the  needle  in  a
vessel  which  was  covered  by  a  glass  plate  at  the  top,  so  that  we
could  see  all  that  took  place.  At  the  side  I  had  made  a  round  hole
just  large  enough  to  admit  a  finger.  By  this  means  the  patient  could
bring  her  finger  quite  close  to  the  needle  without  setting  the  air  in
motion,  while  the  breath  of  those  standing  round  could  no  longer
exert  any  influence  on  the  experiment.  When  the  finger  was  intro-
duced, it  appeared  this  time  that  some  attraction  occurred.  I  ex-
amined the  tip  of  the  finger,  and  as  it  seemed  rather  moist,  I  rubbed
it  over  with  flour  for -another  trial  :  then  all  attraction  for  the  mag-
net was  at  once  at  an  end  ;  the  needle  remained  motionless.  It  was
evident  that  in  the  former  case  the  very  mobile  needle  had  adhered  to
the  finger  from  the  presence  of  slight  perspiration,  and  when  the
slight  stickiness  of  this  was  removed  by  the  flour,  all  attraction  ceased
directly.  It  was  not  of  magnetic  nature,  but  an  effect  of  adhesion.
Quite  superfluously  I  afterwards  introduced  Miss  Sturmann's  finger
into  the  helix  of  a  differential  galvanometer  :  neither  when  inserted
or  taken  out  was  any  induced  current  perceptible,  and  the  astatic
needle  remained  immoveable.

25.  From  the  preceding  it  follows,  that  the  attraction  exercised  by
the  magnet  upon  the  hands  and  feet  of  cataleptic  patients  is  nothing
ponderable  ;  it  has  no  supporting  power,  cannot  even  raise  iron
filings,  and  is  equally  incapable  of  affecting  the  magnetic  needle  and
inducing  a  magnetic  current.  The  arm  lifted  up  in  catalepsy  there-
fore supported  itself,  and  its  passive  attraction  was  quite  different  in
its  import  from  that  of  iron  toward  the  magnet,  or,  more  accurately,
toward  magnetically  opposite^  polarized  matter  in  the  sense  hitherto
received.

It  is  known  well  enough  that  we  are  not  acquainted  in  physics
with  any  attraction  which  is  not  reciprocal.     On  the  other  hand,  it  is

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  40

equally  well  known  that  a  person  in  a  state  of  cataleptic  unconscious-
ness, which  cannot  he  feigned,  not  only  has  no  free  will,  but  in  fact
no  will  at  all  :*  since,  therefore,  the  magnetic  mechanical  attraction

*  This  is  the  subject  which  is  the  keystone  of  all  the  objections  to  the  applica-
tion of  magnetism  or  of  mesmerism  to  the  human  system.  To  shew  that  man  is
not  a  free  agent  is  bad  enough,  but  to  prove  it  by  physical  facts  should  be  atro-
cious. The  instinct  of  those  who  have  large  organs  of  cunning,  acquisitiveness,
and  self-esteem,  is  instantly  on  the  alert;  and  forgetting  that  they  do  not  wholly
belong  to  the  baser  animals,  they  give  way  to  the  lower  feelings  of  their  nature.

Instinctive  feelings  operate  powerfully  upon  mankind  as  well  as  upon  the  ani-
mals not  gifted  with  the  organs  of  the  reasoning  faculties,  and  the  condition  of  the
brain  of  the  man  who  anticipates  disagreeable  change,  or  something  adverse  to
his  foregone  conclusions,  is  just  that  which  is  analogous  to  the  magnetized  brain
which  lias  no  free  will.  The  being  of  prejudice  with  his  very  limited  power  of
understanding  is,  of  necessity,  no  free  agent ;  he  is  not  more  so  than  the  tiger,
who,  following  the  law  of  his  organization,  flares  his  eyes  witli  ecstatic  delight
while  he  mangles  his  prey.  It  is  the  decree  of  such  th'at  Man  is  not  to  know  of
his  brain  being  influenced  by  external  agencies.  With  a  penalty  before  him,  the
risk  of  disease,  or  of  death,  he  may  be  permitted  to  indulge  in  the  dead-drunken-
ness of  chloroform,  of  opium,  or  of  brandy,  in  its  many  shapes,  for  then  he  is  not
placed  in  those  gradations  which  excite-  in  his  fellow  man  the  reasoning  faculties.
Sinners  have  free  will,  and  are  accountable  beings,  even  when  drunk  ;  but  a  man
rendered  fatuous,  ecstatic,  or  unconscious  by  a  magnet,  is  too  evidently  a  being
without  a  will.  There  are  various  degrees  of  the  influence  exerted  by  magnets
on  the  brain.  It  is  not  a  necessary  consequence  that  unconsciousness  should  ac-
company the  catalepsy  which  results  from  this  agency.  A  man  may  be  quite
conscious,  and  yet  be  unable  to  exercise  will:  or  the  organs  of  his  brain,  influ-
enced byr  a  force  analogous  to  the  magnetic  power,  may  be  placed  in  a  condition
such  that  the  individual  is  unable  to  act,  except  at  the  bidding  of  another.  Ap-
parently there  are  other  influences,  but  a  stricter  study  of  the  philosophy  of  this
subject  will  show  us  that  they  are  really  what  were  formerly  called  magnetic,  but
which  Reichenbach's  discoveries  will  establish  as  crystallic  or  mesmeric,  operat-
ing upon  the  brain  of  man,  and  obliging  him  to  form  convictions,  to  do  deeds,
that  prove  him  as  much  a  machine  without  free  will  as  if  he  had  actually  been
the  victim  of  the  Baron's  largest  magnets.  All  influences,  all  impelling  forces,  act-
ing upon  the  phrenological  organs  of  man,  are  motive  powers.  Do  we  not  in
common  parlance  speak  of  the  influence  of  motives'?  No  one  acts  without  a  mo-
tive: so  that  the  immediate  antecedent  motive  or  force  is  the  necessary  impellent
to  the  production  of  the  consequent  action.  The  will  of  the  Jesuit,  like  that  of
(he  snake  persuading  Eve,  i<  as  much  an  overpowering  magnetism  as  the  flames
from  the  light-spreading  magnet:  they  both  act  by  an  influence  of  attraction.
The  serpentine  luring  is  attractive,  like  the  rattlesnake's,  to  destruction,  to  arrie-
ratiorj,  and  perdition.  This  magnetic  light,  a  symbol  of  Baron  von  Reichenbach's
illumination  against  superstition,  attracts  to  the  establishment  of  health — the  pa-
rent of  many  blessings.  But  in  each  case  the  victim  is  the  creature  of  a  neces-
sity. To  speak  of  his  free  will  is  an  absurdity.  He  is  trained  to  his  actions  as
much  as  a  vine  is  trained  against  a  wall  to  grow  in  a  direction  about  which  it  has
no  choice.  The  Negro  victim  to  the  superstition  of  Obi  is  in  a  magnetic  groove,
in  which  he  runs  his  course  and  dies.  Then,  is  man  in  all  his  actions  to  be  con-
sidered as  a  machine  obeying  the  impulses  received  upon  his  brain  from  the
fhousands  of  crystallic  forces  that  are  plaving  upon  him  incessantly?  Look  at
3

50  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

by  the  magnet  is  a  fact,  which  is  not  only  established  here  by  suffi-
cient experiments,  but  may  readily  be  tested  and  confirmed  in  every
large  town,  where  such  patients  are  never  wanting,  it  acquires,  in
spite  of  all  its  apparent  strangeness,  a  solid,  scientific  certitude,  and
imperiously  claims  further  investigation.  Not  in  order  to  explain  it,
but  to  render  it  provisionally  in  some  degree  comprehensible,  I  ven-
ture to  refer  to  all  the  attractions  and  repulsions  which  the  vegeta-
tive life  of  animals  and  plants  unceasingly  brings  to  pass,  in  thou-
sand-fold variety,  without  our  being  able  at  present  either  to  perceive
or  even  to  infer  a  counter  attraction.  A  root  penetrates  strongly
into  the  hard  soil,  breaks  and  bursts  powerful  mechanical  obstacles  :
we  perceive  no  cause  for  the  counter-attraction  or  counter-expulsion
which  so  powerfully  impels  it  thereto,  and  yet  it  happens.  Similar
conditions  lead  the  hand  of  the  patient  toward  the  magnet,  whether
we  now  comprehend  it  oi'  not.

26.  When,  instead  of  a  middle-sized  magnet  of  some  201b.  capa-
city, we  took  a  strong  one  capable  of  bearing  90lb.  and  placed  this
on  the  flat  hand  of  Miss  Nowotny,  she  grasped,  both  in  the  conscious
and  unconscious  state,  the  presented  ends  of  the  horse-shoe,  and  laid
hold  of  it  so  firmly  that  it  could  not  be  taken  away  from  her  without
great  effort.  She  herself  was  unable  to  loosen  her  hold.  The  whole
hand  was  clenched  spasmodically,  and  the  cramp  knitted  the  fingers
round  the  magnet,  and  contracted  the  whole  hand  so  violently  that
all  voluntary  power  of  motion  ceased.*

him  proceeding  along  a  crowded  thoroughfare  ; — is  he  not  receiving  from  a  plane
below  the  axis  of  the  sphere  in  which  his  brain  may  be  supposed  to  be  placed,  a
constant  series  of  varied  impressions,  acting  in  the  sense  of  the  centrifugal  forces,
which  are  repellent  and  have  the  tendency  to  keep  him  awake  and  thinking  ?
and  his  thoughts  under  such  circumstances,  are  they  not  without  his  control
forced  upon  his  attention  ?  A  carriage  goes  over  a  child ; — can  he  help  the  start
of  sympathy?  He  could  have  helped  it,  if  .  .  .  if  he  had  had  other  motives
offered  to  him,  more  powerful  than  those  which  obliged  him  to  act  as  he  did  ;but
the  impulse  he  received  had  its  legitimate  consequences.  Regard  him  under  the
influence  of  centripetal  forces.  They  are,  like  the  large  magnet,  attractive.  He
is  so  fatigued  he  cannot  keep  his  eyes  open.  Does  his  free  will  prevent  him  from
.sleeping  ?  The  attractive  forces  are  too  much  for  him.  AH  resistance  is  in  vain.
He  yields,  and  he  sleeps.

Will  man  never  learn  the  principle  upon  which  all  real  charity  depends?  Will
man  always  acknowledge  that  he  is  truly  the  victim  of  the  power  of  surrounding
circumstances,  and  yet  constantly  act  towards  his  brother  man  as  if  he  were  free
to  command  the  events  that  control  him  ?  Glorious  Von  Reichenbach  !  the  lights
that  emanate  from  your  magnets,  from  your  crystals,  and  from  your  crystalline
brain,  are  destined  to  aid  in  liberating  your  fellow-beings  from  their  irreligious
thraldom  of  superstition.

_  *  This  has  been  witnessed  here  very  frequently,  and  we  consider  the  patient
to  be  in  a  deep  mesmeric  sleep,  with  the  addition  of  strong  spasm.     In  my  paper

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  51

27.  I  have  already  (§  2)  mentioned  the  magnetized  water  which
the  patient  immediately  distinguished  from  common  water,  when
ignor.  nt  of  what  had  been  done  to  it.  Nothing  could  be  more  dis-
agreeable than  the  reappearance  of  an  apparently  so  absurd  thing,
which  all  physicists  and  chemists  are  horrified  even  to  hear  of.  But
in  spite  of  this,  I  could  not  refuse  to  admit  what  I  saw  before  my
eyes  as  often  as  I  tried  it;  namely,  that  the  girl  always  determined,
and  unfailingly  distinguished,  a  magnetized  glass  of  water  from  an
unmagnetized.  The  force  of  facts  cannot  be  combatted  by  any  rea-
soning ;  I  was  compelled  to  recognise  what  I  was  by  no  means  able
to  comprehend.  But  when  I  again  met  with  the  same  subsequently
in  Misses  Sturmann,  Maix,  Reiche!,  Atzmannsdorfer,  and  others,  and
saw  it  in  a  still  stronger  degree,  I  gave  up  all  doubt  and  opposition
to  a  phenomenon,  the  actuality  of  which  no  longer  admitted  of  con-
tradiction in  any  reasonable  manner.*

28,  But  the  singularity  seemed  to  reach  the  height  of  incomprehen-
sibility when  it  proved  that  not  merely  the  magnet,  but  even  a  simple
glass  of  magnetized  water,  possessed  the  power  of  drawing  along  the
hand  of  Miss  Nowotny.  It  is  true  that  this  occurred  in  a  much
weaker  degree,  but  her   hand   was   unmistakeably  attracted,  both  in

on  the  Theory  of  Sleep  (see  the  Zoist,  vol.  4,  pages  260  to  267,  passim)  I  have
endeavored  to  show  that  however  the  cerebral  tissues  may  be  arranged  to  pro-
duce results  analogous  to  those  caused  by  our  artificial  electric  and  magnetic
agencies,  attractive  forces  tend  to  soothe  the  individual,  and,  by  degrees,  induce
quietude,  somnolence,  sleep,  and  the  ionic  spasm  ;  while  inquietude,  pain  and  rest-
lessness, wakefulness,  full  vigilance,  delirium  tremens,  clonic  spasms,  result  from
repulsive  forces.  To  illustrate  the  facts  here  stated,  cases  analogous  to  those
selected  by  the  Baron  should  be  chosen ;  but  the  confusion  ought  not  to  arise  in
the  mind  that  the  individuals  do  not  exhibit  mesmeric  phenomena.  Brown
study,  reverie,  absence  of  mind,  are  slighter  degrees  of  the  state  exhibited  in  Miss
Nowotny's  case,  and  are  to  be  produced  by  a  magnet  in  some  individuals.

*  These  admissions  are  the  proofs  of  the  greatness  of  Von  Reichenbach's  mind.
This  man  must  have  a  large  brain,  with  well-developed  organs  of  causality,  com-
parison, and  conscientiousness.  The  facts  stated  in  this  and  the  next  paragraph
have  been  exhibited  in  my  house  hundreds  of  times.  Water  has  been  magnetized
with  magnets,  mesmerized  by  the  fingers,  by  breathing,  by  the  exertion  of  the
will:  over  and  over  again,  the  tumblers  in  which  these  specifically  treated  quanti-
ties of  water  have  been  contained  have  been  instantly  detected  by  somnambulists
in  the  lucid  state  of  sleep- waking,  who  have  been  in  another  room  when  the  fluid
was  charged  ;  and  yet  most  absurd  nonsense  has  been  talked  by  even  Fellows  of
the  Royal  Society,  let  alone  those  of  other  scientific  or  learned  bodies,  as  to  the
impossibility  of  the  phenomenon.  "  I  won't  believe  it,"  and  "  I  would  not  believe
it  if  I  saw  it,"  has  been  a  very  common  mode  of  expression  with  these  wise
leaders  of  public  opinion.  It  would  be  a  glorious  immortality  for  them  to  hand
their  names  to  posterity,  with  a  proper  measure  of  the  circumference  of  the  head
of  each  individual.  But  Mesmer,  Gall,  and  Reichenbach  will  be  remembered
when  they  are  forgotten.

52  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

the  catalepsy  and  at  every  other  time,  by  a  magnetized  glass  of
water,  in  such  a  manner  that  a  tendency  to  follow  this  in  every  di-
rection made  itself  evident.

29.  Contemplating  this,  and  convinced  that  so  strange  a  pheno-
menon could  not  exist  isolated  in  nature,  I  was  desirous  of  trying
whether  the  same  effect  as  that  of  the  water  might  not  be  brought
about  by  means  of  some  other  body  ;  if  this  proved  to  be  so,  I  hoped
to  see  cases  occur  with  various  modifications,  from  which  some  laws
might  be  deduced.  With  this  view,  all  sorts  of  minerals,  prepara-
tions, drugs,  and  other  things,  were  rubbed  with  the  magnet,  and
the  patient  was  tried  with  them  in  the  same  way  as  with  the  mag-
netized water ;  and  it  actually  happened  that  all  reacted  at  once
upon  her,  more  or  less,  in  the  same  way  as  the  magnetized  water  :
they  attracted  the  patient's  hand  more  strongly  or  weakly,  but  in
variously  modified  ways.  Some  produced  spasms  throughout  the
whole  body,  others  only  in  the  arms,  others  only  in  the  hand,  others
scarcely  caused  any  effect,  although  all  had  been  equally  strongly
magnetized.  It  was  evident,  therefore,  that  some  difference  lay  in
the  matter  itself,  and  required  to  be  taken  into  account  here.

30.  To  investigate  this,  I  now  tried  to  bring  the  same  substances
into  contact  with  the  patient,  ivithout  having  been  previously  mag-
netized, in  their  natural  condition.  To  my  great  surprise,  they  also
acted  now  upon  the  patient,  wirh  a  force  which  very  often  yielded
but  little  to  that  which  they  had  exhibited  in  the  magnetized  condi-
tion. But  the  action  was  not  always  accompanied,  by  a  solicitation
to  follow  the  object ;  on  the  contrary,  that  other  effect  (§  5)  which
had  made  the  patient  grasp  the  magnet  convulsively  in  her  hand,
presented  itself  in  various  gradations  of  force.  The  method  of  exper-
iment which  I  followed  here,  consisted  in  this  :  I  first  placed  the
various  bodies  in  the  patient's  hand  while  in  the  cataleptic  state,  and
observed  the  effect,  then  repeated  the  same  when  he  was  in  a  state  of
perfect  consciousness,  out  of  the  catalepsy.  By  these  comparisons,
it  was  made  evident  that  the  action  was  qualitatively  the  same  in
both  cases,  but  it  showed  itself  incomparably  stronger  quantitatively
in  the  catalepsy  than  out  of  it.  The  effect  essentially  consisted  in
this  :  that  the  various  bodies,  when  placed  in  the  hand  of  the  uncon-
scious patient,  either —

a.  Determined  an  actual  tonic  spasm  in  the  fingers,  as  the  magnet
did,  and  compelled  an  involuntary  clenching  of  the  hand  which  held
the  bodies.  These  again  could  be  divided  into  such  as  simultaneously
solicited  the  hand  to  follow  them,  and  such  as  no  longer  visibly  pro-
duced this  effect ;  or

b.  Those  which  appeared  inactive,  and  left  the  hand  at  rest ;  the

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN"  ORGANS.  53

former  effect  presented  itself  in  various  degrees  of  energy.  It  either
ensued  suddenly,  directly  the  hand  came  in  contact  with  the  bodies,
or  it  followed  gradually,  slowly,  or  rapidly.  The  fingers  began  to
curl,  by  degrees  were  drawn  more  inward,  after  some  time  closed
into  a  clenched  hand,  and  then  remained  in  a  state  of  tonic  cramp.
This  was  precisely  the  effect  produced  by  placing  a  very  weakly
magnetic  rod  in  the  patient's  hand  while  in  the  unconscious  state  of
catalepsy.

Comparing  the  applied  bodies  one  with  another,  they  arranged
themselves  in  this  respect,  not  according  to  the  character  of  their
substance,  nor  even  in  the  electrochemical  series ;  in  fact,  the  same
chemical  substances  in  specimens  of  different  kinds  sometimes  pro-
duced the  effect,  sometimes  did  not :  for  example,  calcareous  spar,
sugar,  quartz,  etc.  First  of  all  I  perceived  that  there  was  not  a  sin-
gle amorphous  body  among  those  which  re-acted  so  as  to  make  the
hand  close  upon  them  ;  and,  on  the  other  side,  that  all  bodies  which
did  so  were  crystallized.  There  were,  nevertheless,  a  good  many
crystalline  bodies  without  the  power.  When,  now,  excluding  all
amorphous  substances,  I  arranged  the  whole  of  the  crystalline  bodies
in  two  groups,  opposing  those  which  showed  themselves  powerless
to  those  which  exerted  the  ruagnetdike  influence  upon  the  hand,  I
found  upon  the  former,  the  inefficient  side,  all  the  confusedly  crys-
tallized— such  as  loaf  sugar,  carrara  marble,  and  dolomite  ;  and
further,  the  substances  composed  of  many  oppositely  directed  groups
of  crystals  ;  such  as  prehnite,  wavellite,  lumps  of  sugar  of  lead,
masses  of  Königsberg  crystallized  silver;  on  the  latter,  the  effective
side,  all  simple,  free  crystals,  and  all  those  where  the  crystalline
masses  had  parallel  principal  axes, — such  as  celestine,  many  speci-
mens of  gypsum,  and  fibrous  red  and  brown  ironstone.  For  the  sake
of  distinctness,  I  give  here  a  list  of  the  bodies  with  which  I  made
the  experiments.

I.  Inactive  bodies.
a.  Amorphous : —

Ivory,  wood,  &c,  Zinc,  lead,  cadmium.

Anthracite.  Dense  limestone.

Cannel  coal.  Red  copper  ore,  dense.

Bitumen.  Potassium,  sodium.

Amber.  Hydrate  of  potash,  dried.

Glass  of  all  kinds.  Chromate  of  iron.

Osmium,  rhodium.  Selenium.

Palladium.  Liver  of  sulphur  (sulphuret  of  potassium).

Mercury.  Melted  sulphur.

Silver,  gold  in  coin.  Talc,  dense.

Copper,  brass.  "  Gurhofian.''

Bar  iron.  Magnesite.

54  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

Pumice-stone.  Fossil  wood

Obsidian.  Egyptian  jasper.

Menilite.  Quartz,  dense  with  fatty  lustre.

Opal,  common.

b.  Crystalline  : —

G-ranular  limestone.  Native  silver  from  Königsberg  (an
Dolomite.  irregular  mass  of  crystals).

Orpiment.  Speiss-glance  ore.

Wavellite.  Prehnite.

Kakoxene.  Natrolite.
Loaf  sugar.

II.  Active  bodies,  all  crystalline,  good,  mostly  large  and  splendid,
free  crystals  from  the  imperial  collection  at  Vienna.

a.  Those  which  compelled  the  fingers  to  close  up  and  grasp  the
object,  with  scarcely  sensible  cramp.

Rough  Diamond,  very  small.  Bismuth,  metallic.

Antimony,  metallic.  Argentiferous  .copper-ore.

Mesotype.  Rutile.

Witherite.  Lievrite.

Tin  ore.  "  Spargelstein."

Mica.  Sphene.

Corundum.  Iron  pyrites.

Ferrocyanide  of  potassium.  Analzim.

Sugar-candy.  Adular.

Leucite.  Felspar.

Granite.  Boracite.

Augite.  Celestine.

Hornblende.  Topas.

Staurolite.  Apatite.

Sulphate  of  copper.  White  lead  ore.

Graphite,  lamellar.  Crystallized  gold,  half  an  inch  thick.

Wolfram.  Alum.

b.  Those  which  caused  the  hand  to  close  upon  them  convulsively,
but  did  not  attract  it.

Pistacite.  Magnetic  iron- ore.

Glance  cobalt*  Rock  salt.*

,  Zinc-blende.  Rock  crystal*
Iron-glance.

*  I  am  clear  that  when  these  experiments  are  repeated,  many  modifications  of
their  results  will  be  found  according  to  the  degrees  of  susceptibility  in  the  indi-
viduals selected  for  the  experiments.  I  have  found  some  cases  in  which  glance-
cobalt,  rock-salt,  and  rock-crystal,  not  only  caused  the  hand  to  close  upon  them
convulsively,  but  attracted  it  so  powerfully  as  to  produce  an  appearance  of  fa-
tuity in  the  patients  who  followed  the  articles  in  my  hand  about  the  room  in
order  to  grasp  them  with  avidity.  The  attraction  of  these  and  many  other  sub-
stances which  act  energetically  on  certain  individuals,  induces  a  desire  of  posses-
sion of  the  object  which  amounts  to  ecstacy.  The  consummation  of  desire  con-
stituting temporary  fatuity  .  .  .  Organism.

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  55

c.  Those  which  acted  so  strongly  that  they  caused  the  hand  to
clench  upon  them  with  violent  spasm,  and  attracted  it  when  brought
near.

Meteorite,  from  Macao.  Tourmaline,  cold  as  well  as  warm.

Quartz  crystal,  from  Fontainebleau.  Beryl.

Calcareous  spar.  Selenite.

Arragonite.  yiu"v  sPar-

Heavy  spar.

All  these  comparisons  may  be  finally  concentrated  into  the  facts,
that  finely  granular  crystalline  carbonate  of  lime,  dense  quartz,  and
loaf  sugar,  were  inactive  ;  but  a  free  crystal  of  calcareous  spar,  a
prism  of  rock  crystal,  or  a  good  crystal  of  sugar-candy,  therefore
every  perfectly  five  crystal,  when  placed  in  the.  patient's  hand,  irre-
sistibly and  arbitrarily  excited  the  fingers,  attracted  them  and  drew
them 'inward  so  as  to  grasp  the  crystal,  and  this  in  some  of  the  cases
with  the  most  violent  tonic  spasms.  Consequently,  simple  crystals
here  furnished  a  peculiar  means  of  detecting  a  primary  force,  which
had  hitherto  been  altogether  unknown.  So  far  as  is  at  present  made
out,  this  property  does  not  belong  to  matter,  as  such,  but  to  its  form,
and  in  fact  to  its  condition  of  aggregation.  Pouillet,  in  Müller's
translation  of  his  "Manual  of  Physics,"  p.  16V,  says  expressly,  that
"  it  has  never  yet  been  observed  in  ponderable  matter,  that  the  form,
the  arrangement  of  the  molecules,  can  be  the  cause  of  new  forces
acting-  at  a  distance."  But  this  is  exactly  the-  ease  here  ;  the  matter
must  be  crystallized,  otherwise  it  does  not  re-act  in  this  manner.*

*  All  crystallized  matter  is  essentially  and  ultimately  composed  of  globular,
spherical,  or  spheroidal  molecules;  and'  by  a  number  of  simple  experiments
which  I  have  performed  on  some  very  impressionable  cases,  I  have  been  led  to
the  conclusion  that  all  gaseous  and  fluid  bodies  are  susceptible  of  a  submission
to  those  laws  which  regulate  crystalline  forms  of  matter.  Reasoning  on  the
Baron  Von  Reichenbach's  tacts,  and  having  previously  arrived  at  certain  analo-
gous conclusions  before  1  had  seen  Professor  Gregory's  abstract  of  his  researches;
from  reasoning,  too.  upon  the  facts  in  Petetin,  upon  the^facts  detailed  by  Tardy
de  Montravel,  and  by  De  Puysegur  and  Deleuze,  and  especially  on  the  influence
of  magnetized  or  mesmerized'  water,  examples  of  which  influence  in  the  sense  in-
dicated by  the  older  writers  as  well  as  in  that  of  our  author  I  had  seen  some
hundreds  of  times,  I  arranged  a  number  of  finger-glasses  varying  from  three  to
twelve,  containing  always  the  same  description  of  fluid,  whether  it  was  water  or
a  solution  of  some  salt  in  water.  These  I  connected  together  by  means  of  cotton
moistened  in  the  contained  fluid,  and  then  passed  a  current  of  electricity  through
it.  A  few  minutes  of  the  current  from  a  dozen  of  Smee's  plates  ten  inches  by
five,  sufficed  to  give  the  fluid  properties  which  it  had  not  before  possessed  to  so
striking  an  extent.  Plain  water  treated  in  this  manner  was  taken  from  the  cur-
rent into  another  room,  into  which  were  separately  introduced  one  of  six,  eight,
or  sometimes  ten  patients  awake.  Plain  water'not  electrized  was  at  the  same
time  introduced  to  the  notice  of  each,  separately,  of  the  same  individuals.    The

66  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

32.  When  I  now  tested  one  of  these  bodies  separately,  I  found
that  the  capability  of  producing  spasms  of  living  organs  did  not  re-
side in  equal  degree  in  all  parts  of  its  surface.  Points  were  formed,
and  the  patient  readily  detected  those  which  possessed  the  power
either  very  weakly  or  not  at  all  ;  others,  on  the  contrary,  where  it
manifested  itself  in  increased  strength.  It  was  discovered  that  every
crystal  presented  especially  two  such  points,  in  which  the  force  pe-
culiarly resided.  And  these  points  lay  diametrically  opposite  to  each
other  in  every  crystal ;  they  were  the  poles  of  a  primary  axis  of  the
crystal.  Both  acted  in  the  same  way,  but  one  always  much  more
strongly  than  the  other,  and  with  the  distinction  that  from  one  ap-
peared to  issue  a  cool,  from  the  other  a  softer,  gently  warm  (seem-
ing) current  of  air.

33.  Endeavoring   to  trace  the  expressions  of  this  force  in  various

effects  were  very  remarkable,  for  the  degrees  of  impressionability  of  the  subjects
were  clearly  brought  out ;  not  one  was  affected  by  the  unelectrized  water,  and
the  electrized  water  produced  different  degrees  of  attraction  of  the  hands  or  of
the  head  in  each  patient,  and  each,  in  different  periods  of  time,  varying  from  half
a  minute  to  five  minutes,  fell  into  a  deep  sleep,  the  fingers  being  in  the  fluid.
Electrized  solutions  of  four  neutral  salts — sulphates  of  magnesia,  soda,  and  potass,
and  of  nitrate  potass,  in  each  caused  almost  immediate  deep  sleep,  while  unelec-
trized solutions  were  weaker  in  effect,  varying  the  access  of  sleep  from  three  or
four  minutes  to  twelve,  and  in  two  cases  there  was  no  sleep  at  all,  although  the
taste  of  the  salt  was  perceived  in  the  mouth.  I  inferred  that  the  electric  current
had  established  a  polar  arrangement  of  the  molecules  of  these  fluids  which  de-
veloped the  Baron's  new  force,  since,  like  mesmerized  water,  each  was  easily
detected  by  the  impressionable  persons,  and  each  was  attended  with  mesmeric
cunsequences.

Some  common  air  not  electrized  was  contained  in  a  bottle,  and  the  stopper
being  removed,  the  wide  mouth  of  the  bottle  was  applied  to  the  nape  of  the  neck
of  a  highly  susceptible  patient.  No  perceptible  effect.  Into  the  same  bottle
removed  into  another  room",  an  iode  and  a  cathode  were  introduced,  and  the  air
was  electrized.  Now  the  application,  as  before,  of  the  opeti  mouth  of  the  bottle,
was  productive  of  deep  sleep  and  rigid  spasm : — both  quickly  dispelled  by  the
application  of  unmagnetized  iron.

A  wooden,  a  porcelain,  and  a  glass  tube  were  successively  used  in  four  cases,
selected  for  their  very  delicate  impressionability,  for  the  following  experiment.
One  extremity  of  the  tube  was  held  close  upon  the  organ  of  sympathy,  without
touching  it  I  blew  through  the  tube,  and  deep  sleep  with  rigidity  immediately
supervened.  The  tube  was  turned,  and  the  other  extremity  was  held  at  a  little
distance  from  the  organ  of  sympathy.  The  patient  wakened  up,  the  muscles
slowly  relaxing.  The  tonic  result  was  more  rapid  than  the  clonic.  This  experi-
ment having  been  frequently  repeated  with  the  same  results  upon  four  different
individuals,  I  inferred  that  the  air  blown  through  the  tube  in  one  direction  had  a
polarity  among  its  molecules  diametrically  opposed  to  the  polarity  acquired  by
the  molecules  of  the  air  passing  soon  after  through  the  same  tube.  If  any  of  the
tubes  were  laid  down  for  a  few  minutes,  it  became  indifferent  which  end  was  first
used.

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  57

directions,  I  now  made  the  experiment  of  drawing  the  stronger  pole
of  a  moderate  sized  crystal  which  I  had  at  disposal,  a  rock-crystal
two  inches  thick  and  eight  inches  long,  a  certain  distance  down  along
the  inside  of  the  hand,  in  the  same  way  as  is  customary  with  the
magnet,  when  it  is  intended  to  throw  the  patient  into  the  usual  sleep.
It  was  found  thai  the  effect  was  exactly  the  same  as  that  -produced  by
a  small  magnetic  needle,  such  as  is  used  iu  a  co7)ipass,  which  I  had  at
hand  for  comparison.  This  needle  was  nearly  six  inches  long,  one-
eighth  of  an  inch  broad,  and  one  twenty-fifth  of  an  inch  thick,  weighed
about  one  hundred  and  eighty-five  grains,  and  supported  about  twice
its  own  weight.  "When  I  drew  the  point  of  the  crystal  along  down-
ward from  the  wrist,  slowly  through  the  palm  of  the  hand  to  the  tips
of  the  fingers,  the  patient  had  the  sensation  of  a  pleasant,  light,  cool
breeze  directed  over  her;  when  I  took  the  little  magnetic  needle,  it
produced  the  same  in  the  like  degree.  "When  I  reversed  the  experi-
ment, so  that  I  carried  the  pass  from  the  middle  finger  upwards  to
the  wrist,  the  magnetic  needle  produced  a  contrary,  luke-warm  sensa-
tion, evidently  disagreeable  to  the  patient; — the  point  of  the  crystal
produced  exactly  the  same  when  the  reverse  pass  was  made  with  it
in  the  same  way.  Another  time  I  brought  a  crystal  three  times  as
large  :  when  drawn  downward  over  the  hand,  it  behaved  like  a  mag-
netic bar  capable  of  supporting  a  pound  and  a  quarter  of  iron  ;  but
the  reversed  pass,  up  the  hand,  acted  so  violently,  that  the  spasmodic
condition  produced  by  it  ascended  along  the  arm  as  far  as  the  arm-
pit, continued  for  se\eial  minutes,  and  by  its  violence  rendered  a  re-
petition improper.

34,  Furnished  with  these  facts,  I  repaired  to  the  hospital  of  our
University,  with  a  view  to  try  whether  the  observations  which  I  had
gathered  from  Miss  Nowotny  could  be  repeated  on  other  similar  pa-
tients, confirmed,  and  brought  to  some  degree  of  generality.  Under
the  kind  permission  of  Dr.  Lippich  I  again  directed  my  attention  to
Miss  Angelica  Sturmann.  I  made  the  pass  over  her  hand  with  the
apex  of  a  rock  crystal  six  inches  long  and  two  inches  thick.  The
effect  ensued  immediately,  the  patient  felt  the  warm  and  cool  sensa-
tions very  distinctly  when  the  passes  were  made  over  the  hand.
When  I  applied  the  other  pole  of  the  crystal  in  the  same  manner,
the  sensations  were  just  of  the  same  kind,  but  weaker  and  reversed  :
these  two  patients  therefore  agreed  with  each  other.  The  action  on
the  sick  Miss  Sturmann  was  so  strong  that  it  affected  the  whole
arm  as  far  as  the  shoulder,  the  warm  and  cold  sensations  being  pro-
longed all  the  way  up.  When  I  subsequently  applied  a  crystal  three
times  as  large,  this  acted  so  powerfully  upon  the  baud,  immediately

58  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

upon  the  first  pass,  that  her  color  came  and  went  suddenly,  so  that
I  did  not  venture  upon  a  second  experiment  with  it  here.

I  now  tried  the  pass  from  the  bead  down  over  the  face;  she  de-
scribed everything  here  exactly  in  the  same  way,  and  the  sensation
was  especially  perceived  along  the  temples.  Counter-experiments
with  tbe  above-mentioned  magnetic  needle  produced  exactly  similar
effects,  only  the  needle  was  here  evidently  felt  more  weakly  tban  the
rock  crystal.  Finally,  I  afterwards  made  the  same  experiments  on
Miss  Maix.  On  this  very  sensitive  patient,  wbo,  however,  always
remained  fully  conscious,  the  crystals  acted  not  merely  on  tbe  line  of
the  pass,  but  over  a  broad  strip  up  and  down  the  hand,  which  action
ascended  all  up  the  arm.  Two  months  later,  I  tried  Miss  Reiche!.
This,  to  outward  appearance,  healthy  and  strong  girl,  possessed  such
sensibility  to  the  crystal  pole,  that  she  perceived  its  approach  even
at  considerable  distances.  Like  her  predecessors,  she  found  the
pass  downward  cool,  upward  warm,  with  the  northward  pole  ( —  M) ;
Avith  tbe  southward  (-f-  M),  on  the  contraiy,  that  downward  warm,
that  upward  cool.  Lastly,  I  became  acquainted  with.  Miss  Maria
Atzmannsdorfer,  and  found  in  her  a  sensitive  subject,*  who  felt  the
pass  of  the  crystals,  strongest  of  all.  Even  little  crystals,  of  fiuor
spar,  selenite,  sulphuret  of  iron,  &c,  an  inch  or  so  long,  produced  a
sensation  of  cold  when  passed  down  the  hand  :  with  rather  thin  aci-
cular  crystals,  I  could,  so  to  speak,  describe  lines  upon  the  hand  ;  but
the  pass  upward  produced  warmth  of  the  hand,  and  so  adversely
upon  her,  that  it  affected  her  whole  body  unpleasantly,  and  began  to
produce  spasms  as  soon  as  I  repeated  it.

35.  As  I  was  recounting  all  this  to  a  friend,  and,  in  order  to  show
him  distinctly  how  I  had  operated  upon  my  patients,  drew  the  same
rock-crystals  along  over  his  hand,  he  looked  at  me  with  wrondering
eyes,  and  said  that  he  himself  felt  the  same  that  I  had  been  describing
to  him  of  my  patients, — the  cool  breeze  quite  distinctly, — as  öfter,
as  I  passed  the  point  of  the  costal  over  his  hand.  He  was  a  strong
healthy  man,  in  the  prime  of  life,  who  allowed  me  to  name  him
openly,  and  to  call  upon  him,  as  a  witness, — Mr.  Carl  Schuh,  a  pri-
vate gentleman  residing  here,  well  known  for  his  great  knowledge  in
natural  sciences.  After  that,  I  made  the  experiment  on  all  my  own
circle  of  acquaintance,  and  on  many  strangers,  among  whom  were
physicians,  physicists,   and   chemists.     I  have  permission  to  name

*  I  borrow  the  term  "  sensitive,"  for  magneto-physiological  reaction,  from
vegetable  physiology,  in  which  plants  of  definite  irritability — such  as  certain
Mimosas,  Berberis,  Dioncea,  Hedysarum,  &c,  are  called  "  sensitive,"  in  distinction
to  "  sensible,"  belonging  to  the  theories  of  animal  life,  which,  as  is  well  known,
involve  a  more  general  idea. — Author.

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  59

especially  among  these,  our  renowned  naturalist,  Prof.  Endlicher,
chief  of  all  the  public  botanical  institutions.  It  appeared  that  not
ouly  my  sick  patients,  but  a  great  many  other  persons,  shared  these
sensations,  and  that  a  large  crystal  ol  quartz,  selenite,  heavy  spar,
fluor-spar,  and  other  substances,  carried  along  sufficiently  close  over
an  open  hand,  produced,  and  rendered  evident  to  the  consciousness,
in  a  tolerably  large  number  of  persons,  certain  peculiar  sensations,
which  manifest  themselves  in  the  first  place  as  heat  and  cold.  This
was  equally  the  case  when  I  previously  heated  the  crystal  to  the
temperature  of  the  blood,  to  meet  the  objection,  that  the  sensation
might  be  accounted  for  by  the  radiation  of  heat  from  the  hand  to
the  stone.  Many  could  tell  me  at  once,  with  the  face  averted,
whether  I  had  made  the  pass  over  the  hand  with  the  positive  or
negative,  i.  e.  with  the  weaker  or  stronger  pole.

It  results  from  all  this,  that  the  following  laws  exist  in  nature  : —

a.  A  peculiar,  hitherto  overlooked  force,  resides  in  matter  which,
when  the  latter  has  taken  the  for  hi  of  a  crystal,  appears  effectively  in
the  direction  of  the  axes.

b.  It  manifests  itself  most  strongly  at  the  two  poles,  but  differently,
and  in  an  opposite  manner,  at  each.

c.  Its  effect  agrees  perfectly  with  that  of  the  magnet,  and  the  mag-
netic poles,  in  every  case,  where  it  is  directed  upon  sensitive  human
organs.

36.  In  order  to  put  every  one  in  a  position  to  repeat  the  experi-
ments on  his  own  acquaintance,  1  observe  expressly,  that  a  large  free
crystal,  with  a  natural  point,  is  requisite  ;  larger  in  proportion  as  the
person  is  less  sensitive.  Heavy  spar,  fluov  spar,  and  selenite,  are
especially  well  adapted.  It  makes  no  difference  whether  the  skin  is
delicate  or  coarse  ;  I  have  sometimes  found  the  roughest  mechanic's
hand  more  sensitive  than  the  softest  skin  of  a  professional  person.
The  point  of  the  crystal  must  be  carried  slowly,  as  closely  as  possible
without  actual  contact,  sweeping  from  the  end  of  the  arm  over  the
inside  of  the  expanded  hand,  through  the  palm,  and  over  the  middle
finger  as  far  as  the  tip,  at  such  a  rate  that  one  pass  occupies  some
five  seconds.  The  crystal  is  to  he  held  perpendicularly  to  the  sur-
face of  the  hand.  Among  my  own  acquaintance  I  have  found  more
than  half  the  persons  sensitive.  I  never  told  them  what  I  had  in
view  ;  I  asked  for  the  hand,  passed  the  crystal  a  few  times  over  it,
and  then  asked  whether  any  effect  was  felt,  and  of  what  kind  ?  The
answer  usually  was,  a  cool  or  a  warm  breeze.  It  need  scarcely  be
mentioned,  that  this  sensation  is  very  delicate  and  fine ;  for,  if  it
affected  the  hand  so  strongly  as  not  to  require  any  particular  atten-
tion, it  would  not  have  remained  to  be  discovered,  and  brought  for-

60  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

ward  now,  but  would  have  been  long  since  generally  known.  Per-
sons who  do  not  feel  it  one  day  often  feel  it  the  next,  or  the  day
after,  or  a  week  later.  I  met  with  a  remarkable  instance  in  my  own
younger  daughter,  Ottone.  She  always  felt  a  large  selenite  crystal
very  distinctly,  while  her  brothers  and  sisters  could  scarcely  feel  any-
thing. She  suffered  for  some  time  from  head-ache,  which  gradually
increased  ;  at  last  she  was  obliged  to  lie  down.  Two  days  after,  she
was  seized  for  the  first  time  in  her  life  with  violent  spasms,  lay  sick
a  fortnight,  and  then  recovered.  Now,  however,  she  scarcely  felt  the
selenite  crystal  at  all ;  the  attack  of  illness  had  wholly  removed  the
sensitiveness  to  it.  Thus  this  sensitiveness  varied  even  in  the  same
persons  at  different  times,  and  with  their  state  of  health.  Very  fre-
quently the  sensation  did  not  become  evident  at  the  first,  but  at  the
second  or  third  pass.  Sometimes  a  person  felt  the  first  pass  most
strongly,  the  second  and  third  were  not  perceived,  while  with  the
fourth  and  fifth  the  sensation  again  distinctly  presented  itself.  It
would  riot  do  to  make  the  pass  too  rapidly  ;  the  full  action  requires
some  little  time.  It  occurred  also,  that  it  preceded  the  crystal,  and
was  felt  at  the  points  of  the  fingers  when  the  crystal  had  only  reached
the  palm  of  the  hand ;  on  the  contrary,  it  only  manifested  itself  dis-
tinctly in  other  persons,  after  the  crystal  had  completely  passed  off
the  hand.  In  some  places  the  eyes  of  the  persons  have  been  bound,
and  then  varying  statements  have  been  received.  This  cannot  aston-
ish, after  what  has  just  been  said;  the  answers  will  always  be  the
same  from  sensitive  persons  ;  from  persons  but  slightly  sensitive  they
will  be  the  most  uncertain  ;  the  binding  of  the  eyes  places  people
in  an  unnatural  and  unquiet  condition,  so  that  their  attention  is
divided  and  distracted,  and  the  requisite  calm  for  such  delicate
observations  is  usually  wanting.  If  many  persons  are  present,  say-
ing and  asking  all  kinds  of  things,  walking  to  and  fro,  and  the  agi-
tation and  distraction  are  increased,  it  is  natural  that  the  answers  to
the  questions  should  be  incoherent  concerning  a  sensation  which  does
not  sweep  over  the  hand  like  a  wire  brush.  To  many  persons  the
reversed  pass,  from  the  hand  upward  toward  the  arm,  is  more  evi-
dent than  the  downward  pass.  But  some  persons  are  absolutely
insensible  ;  and  these  perhaps  are  the  healthiest.  The  one,  the  north-
ward pole,*  usually  acts  more  strongly  than  the  other,  the  southward

*  On  account  of  the  difficulty  of  language,  to  name  the  poles  of  magnets  in
contrast  to  the  poles  of  the  earth,  in  so  far  that  the  latter  possess  a  magnetism
of  the  reverse  direction  to  that  of  the  oscillating  needle,  and  in  order  briefly  to
dismiss  all  circumlocutions  and  misconceptions,  I  shall  in  this  work  name  that
pole  of  the  needles  which  freely  turns  to  the  north,  the  "  northward  pole"  {gen
Nordpol),  and  that  which  points  to  the  south,  the  "  southward  pole"  {gen  Sud-

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  61

pole  ;  the  slight  warmth  is  generally  less  perceptible  than  the  cool-
ness, it  almost  always  contributes  to  increase  the  distinctness  and
strength  when  the  hand  is  extended  in  the  direction  of  the  meridian,
with  the  fingers  directed  to  the  south.  Unfortunately,  no  further
contacts  may  be  allowed  to  exist  during  this,  because  they  injure  the
delicacy  of  sensation,  and  divert  the  attention,  which  must  be  wholly
concentrated  here.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  this,  like  every  other
sense,  becomes  improved  by  practice.  A  person  who  never  drinks
wine,  coffee,  or  tea,  can  seldom  distinguish  the  different  kinds  of
them  ;  while  a  practised  drinker  discovers  the  slightest  difference  at
once  and  distinctly.  Mr.  Schuh  prepared  for  me  in  a  short  time
series  of  crystals  completely  agreeing  with  those  which  the  sensitive
patients  had  formed.  The  same  was  speedily  effected  by  Mr.  Stu-
der,  a  young  man  from  Zurich,  staying  here,  and  his  series  agreed
almost  perfectly  with  that  of  Mr.  Schuh.

37.  Up  to  this  point  it  was  made  out  that  in  crystals  resides  a
force  of  a  polar  nature,  which  they  possess  in  common  with  magnets.
It  was  next  to  be  inquired  whether  this  was  of  the  same  kind,  and
perhaps  only  quantitatively  different,  or  was  qualitatively  different
from  that  which  we  have  hitherto  understood  by  the  term  magnet-
ism. If  the  former,  it  must  be  capable  of  being  reduced  to  the  same
laws.-  It  should  attract  iron  filings,  like  not  only  magnetic  nickel
(chromium,  manganium,  cobalt*),  but  also  oxidized  bodies,  even
impure  ores  like  magnetic  iron-stone.  Moreover,  it  ought  in  like
manner,  in  quartz,  seleuite,  <kc,  as  it  does  in  steel,  not  only  to  influ-
ence organic  living  bodies,  but  also  convert  bodies  capable  of  becoming
magnetic,  such  as  steel,  iron,  nickel  (cobalt,  &c),  into  magnets,  when
applied  to  them  in  the  same  way.  When  I  dipped  the  polar  end  of
my  crystal  into  fine  iron  filings  I  could  not  detect  any  attraction.  In
order  to  have  at  my  disposal  the  crystalline  force,  in  its  greatest  pos-
sible strength,  I  bought  the  largest  crystal  that  I  could  obtain,  a
prism  of  rock  crystal  from  Gotthard,  of  eight  inches  in  diameter,  a
six-sided  colossus,  with  pyramidal  ends,  which  I  had  some  difficulty

pol).  These  terms  will  perhaps  be  found  fault  with  here  and  there ;  but  in  their
compressed  brevity,  they  will  everywhere  be  readily  understood.  Even  in  the
newest  German  text-books  of  physics,  those  just  issued  from  the  press,  that  of
MM.  Pouillet  and  Müller,  and  that  of  M.  Baumgartner,  the  terms  are  in  direct
opposition ;  and  what  the  former  called  north  poiar,  the  latter  speaks  of  as  south
polar.  That  the  German  and  French  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  French  on  the
other,  have  long  used  opposed  expressions,  is  otherwise  well  known.  Hence
results  difficulty  and  confusion,  and  this  may  justify  the  proposition  of  an  expe-
dient.— Avihofi  Note.

*  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  present  treatise  was  written  more  than
a  year  before  Mr.  Faraday's  researches  appeared. —  Author's  Note.

62  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

in  using,  and  the  action  of  which  on  the  hand  of  the  most  sensitive
of  my  healthy  friends,  Mr.  Schuh,  was  so  strong  that  he  described  it
as  feeling  as  if  cold  air  were  gently  blown  upon  him  through  a  straw.
I  placed  a  fine  sewing-needle  before  this  powerful  crystal,  and  rub-
bed this  with  it  in  the  same  way  as  we  do  with  a  magnetic  bar  when
desiring  to  convert  it  into  a  magnet.  I  made  a  dozen  passes  over  it,
and  tried  it  with  iron  filings  ;  it  clid  not  attract  any.  I  repeated  the
passes  more  than  a  hundred  times  ;  but  still  it  did  not  lift  even  the
most  minute  of  the  iron  filings.  As  a  countei'-experiment,  I  made  a
single  pass  over  the  sewing  needle  with  the  small  magnetic  needle
which  Miss  Sturmaun  had  found  weaker  than  the  little  rock  crystal
previously  applied  to  her,  and  it  at  once  took  up  a  long  beard  of
filings  from  them.  Therefore  the  -points  of  the  crystals  could  not
inoculate  the  needle  by  rubbing,  with  a  force  capable  of  acting  on  iron.
However,  were  this  the  case,  it  was  still  possible  to  excite  such  on  it,
after  the  manner  of  magnetic  distribution,  under  the  immediate  influ-
ence of  a  ciystal  pole,  and  to  render  it  capable  of  attracting  iron
filings  in  the  same  way  that  an  iron,  rod  is  made  to  do  so,  by  placing
the  pole  of  a  magnet  upon  'it.  To  try  this,  I  attached  a  fine  steel
needle  to  the  points  of  various  large  crystals,  and  dipped  it,  in  this
connexion,  into  filings.     It  did  not  take  up  the  least  trace  of  them.

38.  When  I  approached  the  polar  points  of  any  crystal,  even  of
the  great  rock  crystal,  to  the  most  sensitive  suspended  magnetic
needle,  they  never  disturbed  it  in  the  least ;  it  remained  motionless.
On  the  other  hand,  I  suspended  a  large  crystal  (free  from  iron),  for
instance  one  of  selenite,  by  the  middle,  with  a  twisted,  very  fine,  silk-
worm thread,  so  that  it  swung  with  its  long  axis  horizontal,  placed
it  under  a  glass  shade,  -and  laid  a  magnet  quite  close  to  it ;  but  this
exhibited  no  action,  and  no  kind  of  turning  occurred.

39.  I  wished  to  see  whether  a  polar  wire  would  act  upon  a  sus-
pended crystal  as  upon  a  magnetic  needle.  I  arranged  a  small  vol-
taic pile  of  a  few  elements,  each  of  about  ten  square  inches  surface,
and  connected  the  poles  by  a  stout  copper  wire.  I  then  suspended  a
selenite  crystal,  free  from  iron,  and  about  four  inches  long,  by  a  silk-
worm thread,  so  that  both  poles  were  free  to  move  in  the  horizontal
direction.  When  approached  to  a  horizontal  part  of  the  polar  wire,
the  crystal  and  wire  were  indifferent,  and  not  the  slightest  visible
reaction  took  place.

40.  It  still  remained  to  be  investigated  whether  the  crystal  would
induce  a  momentary  current,  like  a  magnet,  when  brought  near  a
conducting  wire.  I  formed  a~  helix  of  about  twenty-five  turns  of
strong,  covered  copper  wire,  and  connected  it  with  the  couplings  of
an  extreme] v  delicate  Schweigger's  multiplier,  the  wfll-known  differ-

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  C8

ential  galvanometer  ;  when  I  rapidly  inserted  into  the  helix  a  selenite
or  rock  crystal,  each  of  several  inches  long,  the  astatic  needle  did  not
exhibit  the  slightest  divergence.  When  withdrawn  the  case  was
similar,  the  needle  was  motionless  ;  the  weakest  magnetic  needle  that
I  substituted  for  the  crystals,  in  a  counter-experiment,  immediately
produced  a  divergence  of  twenty-five  degrees.

-11.  The  relation  to  terrestrial  magnetism  was  here  a  question  of
the  greatest  importance.  We  have  some  old  researches  by  Hauv,
Biot,  and  especially  Coulomb,  in  which,  not  indeed  the  proof,  but  the
possibility  is  made  good,  that  all  bodies  may  possess  magnetism  to
some  extent,  or  are  capable  of  acquiring  it.  Those  of  Hauy  (Mem.
du  Mus.  Par.  1817,  p.  167)  may  be  passed  over.  M.  Biot,  in  his
essay  on  this  subject  (Gilbert's  Annal.  v.  lxiv.  395,  1820,)  is  uncer-
tain whether  it  is  magnetism  ;  or,  as  he  interrogatively  expresses  it,
"  some  other  analogous  force,"  which  acts  upon  bodies.  But  in  this
treatise  also  we  rind  throughout  only  such  bodies  denoted  as  more  or
less  evidently  contain  iron.  An  experiment  was  made  with  two  sil-
ver needles,  one  of  which  was  made  of  chemically  pure  silver,  the
other  of  silver  which  had  been  melted  with  iron,  and  which,  as  no
trace  of  iron  could  be  detected  in  it  by  chemical  analysis,  was  also
regarded  as  perfectly  pure.  But  the  latter  acted  416  times  as
strongly  upon  the  magnet  as  the  former.  It  was  thence  concluded
that  this  also  must  contain  iron,  even  though  it  could  not  be  detected
chemically,  and  that,  as  a  general  rule,  inconceivably  small  quantities
of  iron  are  always  sufficient  to  give  a  body  the  capacity  to  acquire
magnetism  ;  indeed,  that,  consequently,  even  the  needle  made  of
chemically  refined  silver  must  have  retained  traces  of  iron.  The  most
detailed  account  of  these  matters  was  read  by  Coulomb,  before  the
French  National  Institute,  in  the  year  1802  (ext.  in  Gilbert's  Ann.
xii.  194):  in  this  he  left  the  question  unsettled  whether  the  bodies
which  he  tried  were  free  from  iron  or  not,  and  Gilbert  remarks,  with
reason,  that  they  scarcely  could  be.  The  experiments  consisted
essentially  in  this  :  needles  of  about  one-third  of  an  inch  long,  sus-
pended by  silk  filaments,  were  brought  between  the  magnetic  poles,
and  made  to  oscillate  previously  and  afterwards.  The  number  of
oscillations  in  the  same  time  was  always  smaller  previously  than
when  they  were  counted  between  the  poles  ;  and  thus  the  effect  of  the
magnet  was  indicated.  But  what  effect  ?  one  must  ask.  And  every
one  must  see  that  it  may  be  one  of  three  kinds  : — 1.  Dependent  on
the  presence  of  iron  in  the  bodies.  2.  On  the  bodies  themselves.
3.  On  "  another  analogous  force,"  as  M.  Biot  conjecturally  expressed
himself.  The  decision  of  these  questions,  so  far  as  they  bear  refer-
ence here,  appeared  to  me  to  require  a  new  direct  experiment.     I

64  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

possessed  crystals,  especially  of  selenite,  which  acted  upon  all  the
patients  as  strongly  as  a  magnetic  bar  capable  of  supporting  five  to
seven  pounds.  A  bar  of  this  kind,  suspended  by  a  common  linen
thread,  invariably  arranged  itself  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic
meridian.  If,  then,  the  peculiar,  equally  powerful  force,  which
resided  in  the  crystals,  were  the  same  as  that  in  the  magnet,  the
crystal  when  freely  suspended  ought  to  arrange  itself  in  the  meri-
dian. To  ascertain  this  I  freely  suspended  various  crystals,  free  from
iron,  and  in  particular  the  selenite  of  two  inches  long,  by  a  silk
thread,  three  twenty-fifths  of  an  inch  long,  and  untwisted,  just  as  it
had  been  wound  off'  from  the  cocoon,  and  I  brought  these  under  a
glass  shade.  They  stood  at  rest  for  several  hours,  but  never  in  a
direction  toward  the  north,  or  indeed  in  any  determinate  direction
whatever.  When  I  turned  the  point  of  suspension  a  quarter  of  a
circle,  the  crystal  was  also  diverted  ninety  degrees  after  some  hours'
rest.  I  could  thus  bring  it  completely  into  any  direction  I  pleased.
Therefore  not  the  slightest  opposition  to  the  force  of  torsion  of  the
finest  silk  filament  occurred,  and  the  crystal  force  does  not  endow  its
conductor  with  the  slightest  directive  power  ;  it  does  not  stand  in  any
relation  of  direction  to  terrestrial  magnetism.

Consequently,  as  on  the  one  hand  the  behavior  of  the  magnet  and
of  the  crystal  to  animal  nerves  ivas  exactly  the  same,  so  on  the  other
hand,  to  iron,  to  the  electric  current,  to  the  opposite  poles  of  the  mag-
net and  to  terrestrial  magnetism,  it  was  loholly  different.

42.  It  is  therefore  established  that,  the  polar  force  tohich  resides  in
crystals,  and  renders  its  existence  manifest  by  sensuous  excitations
of  a  peculiar  kind,  in  the  healthy  and  diseased  animal  nerves  is  not
identical  with  the  magnetic  force  as  we  at  present  know  it.  It  does
not  attract  iron,  does  not  act  upon  the  magnetic  needle,  is  in  its
strongest  concentration  incapable  of  exerting  the  slightest  power  of
magnetically  attracting  iron,  in  the  smallest  steel  fibres,  does  not
influence  the  polar  wire  when  placed  in  the  helix,  does  not  produce
any  induced  current,  and  does  not  obey  terrestrial  magnetism.

43.  On  the  other  side  it  holds  good,  that,  the  magnetic  force,  as.
we  at  present  knoio  it  in  magnetic  iron-ore  and  in  the  magnetic  needle,
is  associated  with  that  force  which  we  have  just  become  acquainted
with  in  crystals.  For  since  the  magnet  acts  upon  animal  nerves  in
the  same  way  as  crystals,  it  possesses  in  addition  to  its  own  proper-
ties, which  are  wanting  in  crystals,  at  the  same  time  that  force  also
which  resides  in  crystals.

44.  From  which  it  further  necessarily  follows,  that  the  force  of  the
magnet  is  not,  as  has  been  hitherto  assumed,  single  in  its  nature,  but
of  two  kinds,  since  to  the  older  known  one  is  now  added  a  new  un-

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  66

known  one,  distinctly  different  from  the  former, — that  of  the  crystal.
It  may  appear  divested  of  the  other  properties  of  the  magnet,  and
in  nature  is  displayed  in  a  separate  condition  by  the  crystal.

The  phenomena  which  the  magnet  presents  may  be  divided  there-
fore into  two  sections,  which  become  complicated  with  each  other  in
their  manifestations  ;  and  it  will  be  necessary  to  subject  a  portion  of
the  great  store  of  them  which  science  has  accumulated  to  a  process
of  revision.

45.  I  now  instituted  investigations  as  to  the  nature  of  these  new
properties  of  crystals.  In  the  rirst  place,  I  sought  to  make  out
whether  this  force  might  be  transferred,  conveyed,  or  accumulated  ?
Whether,  and  what  analogies,  it  possessed  in  these  respects  to  magnet-
ism and  electricity,  which  can  be  conveyed,  displaced,  conducted,  and
concentrated.  Since  first  of  all  I  possessed  no  other  magnet  but  the
excited  animal  nerves  of  healthy  and  nervously  diseased  persons,  while
the  excitability  of  the  healthy  persons  I  have  hitherto  met  with  is  so
weak  that  a  distinction  by  degrees  did  not  warrant  sufficient  accu-
racy, I  was  compelled  to  apply  myself  to  the  more  acute  sensations
of  the  sick.  Fur  since  the  persons  with  whom  1  undertook  the  re-
searches, placed  in  the  most  varied  circumstances  and  suffering  from
different  diseases,  not  only  were  consistent  in  their  sensations,  but
also  the  statements  they  made,  when  arranged  under  a  theoretical
point  of  view ,  harmonized  with  each  other,  every  reason  existed  to
attribute  value  to  them.  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  objections  I  shall
meet  with  here  ;  but  with  the  cautious  naturalist,  who  keeps  his
certain  steps  within  the  boundaries  of  experience,  they  have  no
weight.  All  that  we  investigate  of  the  outer  material  world  we
must,  to  the  end,  gather  by  our  senses  ;  we  have  no  other  instrument
of  perception.*     We   count  five  senses  and  no  more ;  but  we  are

*  Even  witli  the  veneration  that  attends  our  regard  for  such  clearness  and
power  as  are  in  every  page  evinced  by  the  philosophical  author,  occasions  arise
to  strike  us  with  wonder  that  he  has  not  studied  the  great  work  of  Gall,  the  doc-
trines of  which  would  have  given  so  decided  a  direction  to  his  extraordinary
powers,  that  passages  like  those  in  the  paragraph  above  could  not  have  escaped
from  liis  pen.  It  is  most  true  that  in  every  infinitely  small  interval  of  time,  count-
less electrical  movements  proceed  around  us,  but  if  we  study  the  phrenological
structure  of  our  heads,  and  apply  the  experience  which  numerous  trials  with  crys-
tals have  given  us,  we  shall  easily  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  the  pointed  end
of  a  rock  crystal,  or  of  selenite,  or  of  sulphate  of  alumina,  or  of  nitrate- of  potass,
or  indeed  of  many  more  which  have  been  tried,  applied  to  the  attractive  organs
of  the  brain,  will  excite  the  individual  to  actions  agreeable  to  his  neighbor,  while
the  same  termination  applied  to  a  repulsive  organ  of  the  brain  will  excite  the  vic-
tim to  an  action  disagreeable  to  his  neighbor.  This  is  not  a  simple  matter  of
theory.  Numerous  repetitions  of  the  experiments  have  established  the  matter  of
feci  '  Take,  for  instance,   a  female  of  impressionability  in  a  condition  of  lucid

6G  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

already  sufficiently  aware  that  things  go  on  in  nature,  and,  in  fact,
around  and.  in  us,  which  we  are  unable  to  detect,  only  because  we

somnambulism  :  apply  to  her  organs  of  adhesiveness  or  of  pure  affection  the
points  of  rock  crystals,  and  she  is  excited  to  the  tenderest  manifestations  of  pure
affection.  Change  the  direction  of  the  crystals,  point  to  amativeness,  and  the  wo-
man, if  her  organs  are  at  all  full,  is  unable  to  control  her  actions.  She  burns
with  desire.  Reverse  the  ends  of  the  crystals,  the  feelings  are  calmed,  or  per-
haps the  reaction  is  attended  with  headache.  Blowing  or  breathing  on  the  or-
gans equally  dispels  the  feelings.  Now  try  the  points  of  the  crystals  on  the
organs  of  self-esteem — most  repulsive  organs,  and  the  woman  becomes  imperious,
angry,  egotistical,  and  desires  you  to  stand  off,  for  she  detests  you.  Does  all  this
power  reside  in  the  optical  axes  of  crystals  ?  The  JBaron  von  Reichenbach  has
beyond  all  doubt  established  the  existence  of  a  force  residing  in  the  principal
axes  of  crystals,  and  the  manifold  relations  of  this  great  fact  have  yet  to  be  fully
developed  by  thousands  upon  thousands  of  experiments..  If  these  crystals  can
excite  the  organs  of  the  brain  in  man,  and  can  oblige  him. to  act  according  to  the
impulse  he  has  received,  is  he  not  the  victim  of  impulses  ?  "  Electrical  and  mag-
netical  movements !"  What  are  crystals  but  spherical  or  spheroidal  molecules
arranged  by  electrical  currents  according  to  determinate  laws  of  aggregation  ?
What  are  those  globular  molecules  but  imitations  of  the  spheres  which  occupy
space,  each  having  its  polarity,  each  its  north  and  south,  its  east  and  west ;  each
its  magnetic,  each  its  diamagnetic  relations.  If  the  crystals  of  Von  Reichenbach
can  excite  these  phenomena,  they  can  do  much  more.  Many  an  impressionable
individual  may  be  put  into  a  profound  sleep-by  pointing  such  crystalline  apices
to  the  eyes,  and  awakened  again  with  rapidity  by  applying  the  positive  or  butt
end  of  the  crystal  to  the  eyes  or  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  I  have  done  this
upon  numerous  patients  hundreds  of  times.  Some  individuals  are  so  easily  im-
pressed, that-I  have  often  put  them  to  sleep  with  the  point  of  a  small  ciystal  of
Epsom  salt,  and  as  often  awakened  them  with  the  fiat  end.  This  force  of  mole-
cular arrangement  suggested  to  me  some  experiments  on  very  susceptible  pa-
tients, the  details  of  which  ought  to  be  full  of  interest  to  philosophical  physicians,
for  they  open  up  fields  of  inquiry  that  should  lead  to  the  modus  operandi  of  all
medicinal  agents.  I  dissolved  different  neutral  salts  in  water,  and  experimented
upon  one  at  a  time.  I  took  chloride  of  sodium  first ;  and  a  solution  of  this  sub-
stance being  poured  into  ten  finger-glasses,  they  were  connected  together  by  cot-
ton moistened  in  the  solution,  and  a  couroune  des  tasses  was  completed.  A
current  of  electricity  from  four  of  Smee's  elements  was  passed,  and  sensitive  per-
sons, who  could  be  readily  put  into  mesmeric  sleep  by  crystals,  were  desired  to
]Diit  the  fore-finger  into  one  of  the  glasses  so  as  to  allow  it  to  be  moistened  by  the
solution.  In  the  first  trial,  seven  young  women  tried  the  experiment.  In  dif-
ferent periods  of  time,  varying  from  half  a  minute  to  five  minutes,  each  fell  into
mesmeric  sleep,  previously  complaining  of  a  strong  taste  of  brine  in  the  mouth.
The  next  trial  was  with  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  alumina.  Sleep  came  on  in
each  case,  varying  from  one  to  three  minutes.  Each  tasted  alum  in  the  mouth.
Two  had  intense  headache.  These  in  the  next  experiment  I  placed  first  for  trial.
The  solution  was  nitrate  of  potass;  the  taste  of  which  was  very  cooling  and
agreeable.  Sleep  did  not  supervene  in  one  fur.  four  minutes ;  in  the  other  for
seven  minutes  and  a  half.  Some  of  the  others  slept  more  quickly,  varying  from
three  to  six  minutes.  The  nitre  cured  the  headaches.  Sulphate  of  soda,  of  mag-
nesia, of  potass,  were  tried  separately  ;  then  together.  Sleep  in  a  comparatively
short  time.     In  some,  weight  about  the  head ;  in  others,   headache.     These  re-

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  07

possess  no  instrument  for  their  perception.  In  every  infinitely  small
interval  öf  time  countless  electrical  movements  proceed  around  us  ;  we
do  not  perceive  the  slightest  trace  of  them.  If  any  one  were  to  come
down  from  the  clouds  who  had  a  sixth,  an  electrical' sense;  with  which
he  could  detect  and  Could  describe  the  finest  electrical  changes  around
us,  with  the  accuracy  that  we  do  the  phenomena  of  light  by  means
of  our  optical  orgaas,  should  we  not  eagerly  listen  to  his  teachings,
and  ask  him  thousands  of  questions,  to  dear  up  and  extend  our
knowledge  ?  One  born  blind,  who  has  never  had  a  conception  of
light  and  color,  allows  himself  to  be  led  by  one  that  sees ;  and  when
he  always  finds  .'the  stone,  by  feeling,  which  the  seeing  guide  had
forewarned  him  of,  he  beheves  that  the  seer  has  eyes,  which  enable
him  to  see  things.  Now,  a  nervous  patient  is  one  of  this  kind,  in
whom  a  sensitiveness  for  electrical  and  magnetic  movements  exists,
and  with  which  is  unfolded  to  a  certain  extent  a  peculiar  sense,  so  to
speak,  of  which,  as  it  will  appear,  the  healthy  are  deficient.  Among
the  nervously  diseased,  referable  here,  I  do  not  mean  directly  som-
nambulists, sleep-walkers,  «fee,  but,  as  a  general  rule,  most  persons
who  suffer  violently  from  spasms.  The  somnambulists  are  only  those
in  whom  these  disturbances  of  the  normal  condition  of  the  nervous
system  have  reached  the  highest  degree,  and  in  whom  the  excita-
bility has  reached  its  maximum.  They  give  us  the  strongest  t
mony  of  the  reactions,  and  show  us  the  most  delicate  differences  ;  but
they  are  not  absolutely  necessary  in  the  researches  to  which  I  de-

sults  made  me  try  the  effects  of  various  substances  in  solution.  In  one  trial  with
.sulphate  of  copper,  finding  fearful  sickness  and  ulceration  of  the  mouth,  which
was  cured  with  great  difficulty,  I  was  induced  to  reflect  on  the  danger  of  such
trials  with  poisonous  metallic  .-alts;  and  I  left  off  for  a  time,  inferring  that  mer-
cury might  be  advantageously  employed  where  ptyalism  was  desired  by  these
means  of  operating.  1  had  already  in  several  cases  of  somnambules  made  the
mouth'very  sore,  and  induced  salivation,  by  simply  placing  a  minute  globule  of
mercury  in  the  palm  of  each  hand  ;  establishing,  by  producing  the  rigid  spasm  in
the  first  place,  the  dictum  of  my  two  revered  masters,  Abernethy  and  Macartney,
that  mercury,  among  its  many  properties,  was.  judiciously  applied,  a  tonic  medi-
cine. The  further  reflections  on  the  influence  ciktwo  poles  of  crystalline  agency
led  me  to  pass  currents  of  electricity  through  baths,  which  I  afterwards  found  more
extensively  and  ingeniously  applied  by  Mr.  Tvlee,  of  Bath.  The.  first  experiments
I  tried  were  on  myself.  The  currents  being  passed  from  the  head  towards  the  feet,
the  bath  was  tonic  and  exhilarating;  but  being  induced  on  one  occasion  to  try  the
current  in  the  inverse  direction,  1  had  a  mo>t  intense  headache.  Mr.  Tylee,  and
Mr.B&gshaw,  at  Bath,  have  had  great  sucoess  in  the  treatment  of  intractable  forms
of  disease  by  means  of  this  ageaey.  We  are  as  yet  but  at  the  threshold  of  the
practical  applications  of  this  subject.  In  every  point  of  view,  the  existence  of  the
force  which  Von  Reichenbaeh  has  established  is  a  vast  advance  upon  our  old
stock  of  knowledge.  There  is,  to  the  reflective  mind,  no  limit  to  the  relations
which  the  force  he  has  indicated  has  to  all  the  objects  in  nature.

68  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

voted  myself.  Miss  Nowotny,  on  whom  I  made  my  experiments,
was  far  from  being  a  somnambulist*  during  the  whole  time  of  my
six  weeks'  study  she  only  suffered  from  cataleptic  spasms.  Miss  Maix
never  exhibited  a  trace  of  somnambulism.  The  surgeon,  Mr.  Schmidt,
of  Vienna,  who  experienced  the  most  striking  effect  from  the  crystals
and  the  magnet,  as  well  as  the  terrestrial  magnetism,  was  a  young,
otherwise  perfectly  healthy  man,  who  merely  was  attacked  by  cramps
in  one  arm  for  a  short  time,  through  exposure  of  one  side  to  cold.
And  the  sensitiveness  might  be  thus  traced  onward  to  the  healthy,
who  only  felt  the  pass  of  large  crystals  upon  sensitive  parts,  like  a
cool  breeze.  Finally,  there  was  a  further  distinction  even  among
these,  that  some  felt  the  cooling  strongly,  others  more  weakly,  some
not  at  all.

If,  therefore,  all  this  stands  in  regular  connection,  cause  and  effect
cannot  be  disputed  away,  and,  in  my  opinion,  it  would  not  be  well
done  to  throw  away  results  which  may  become  so  valuable  a  key  for
the  investigation  of  truths  of  nature,  in  those  branches  of  physics
and  chemistry  where  she  Seems  to  wish  to  conceal  her  mysteries  from
us  most  obstinately.  The  singular  sense,  the  peculiar  irritability  of
nervous  patients,  is  chiefly  directed  to  magnetic  phenomena ;  they
are  an  invaluable  reagent  while  we  possess  no  other.  They  are  not
vague  sensations,  as  has  hitherto  been  often  believed,  and  as  like
those  by  which  many  physicians  and  visionaries  have  brought  re-
proach upon  themselves ;  but  everything  follows  rule  and  law,  and
these  are  soon  discovered,  when  one  does  but  investigate  them  intel-

*  It  is  clear  that  though  these  patients  were  not  somnambulists,  not  in  that
which  Dr.  Elliotson  calls  the  sleep- waking  state,  they  were  in  the  deep  mesmeric
sleep,  of  which  the  other  is  only  a  condition.  In  the  hands  of  an  experienced
mesmerist,  Miss  Nowotny  would  not  have  failed  to  exhibit  an  immense  number
of  phenomena  known  as  mesmeric  phenomena.  I  dispute  not  the  Baron's  right
to  establish  a  stand  point ;  but  while  I  yield  to  him  the  deep  respect  which  is
due  to  so  philosophic  a  mind,  I  regret  to  observe  his  tardy  acceptance  of  the  truths
to  every  one  of  which  he  will  be  obliged  on  enlarged  experience  to  yield  his  as-
sent. "Without  mesmeric  sleep,  the  Baron's  are  just  the  cases  which  could  not
fail  to  convince  him  of  the  truths  of  Gall's  phrenology.  His  fingers  applied  on
their  heads  to  Gall's  organs  for  a  short  time,  would  produce  manifestations  that  ■
could  not  fail  to  strike  such  a  mind  as  his  that  he  has  been  making  distinctions
without  differences,  while  he  has  bestowed  the  sneering  remarks  in  the  above
paragraph  on  the  physicians  who  have  brought  reproach  on  the  philosophy  of
magnetism.  Everything  does  "  follow  rule  and  law ;"  but  these  rules  and  laws
are  to  be  traced  by  all  the  lights  that  can  be  brought  to  bear  upon  them,  and
when  certainty  cannot  be  attained  in  science  at  first,  we  must  be  contented  with
probability.  When  we  cannot  establish  a  theory,  we  must  satisfy  ourselves  with
the  amusing  haziness  of  an  hypothesis.  If  we,  at  last,  arrive  at  the  truth,  we
shall  not  regret  the  toil  it  has  cost  us,  albeit  much  of  it  has  been  devoted  to  stem
the  torrents  of  prejudices,  and  the  foregone  conclusions  directed  against  us.

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  69

ligentlv,  trace  them  with  the  aids  of  physical  and  chemical  know-
ledge, and  apply  to  them  the  touchstone  of  experimental  criticism.

I  could  not  avoid  this  digression  ;  it  is  indispensable  to  the  defini-
tion of  the  stand-point  of  these  researches.  I  now  turn  again  to  the
questions,  whether  the  peculiar  force  which  displays  itself  in  crystals
is  communicable,  conductible,  and  condensible  ?  When  the. most
incongruous  things,  a  piece  of  wood,  a  glass  of  water,  leather  glows,
paper  cuttings,  or  any  thing  else,  were  rubbed  with  the  pole  of  a
crystal,  every  sick  patient  detected  without  delay,  when  placed  before
them,  the  difference  between  such  and  others  which  had  not  been
rubbed.  The  sensation  was  sometimes  a  cool,  sometimes  a  warm
feeling,  perceived  by  the  hand  in  which  the  object  was  placed  ;  and
this  gradually  increased  until  it  became  unpleasant.  The  conveyance
upon  paper  was  found  to  be  the  weakest.  Miss  Sturmann  did  not
feel  a  book  which  had  been  once  rubbed  with  the  large  rock  crystal;
often  rubbed,  scarcely  at  all.  Finally,  when  I  had  held  it  for  a  time
in  contact  with  the  point  of  the  crystal,  and  at  once  quickly  placed  it  in
her  open  hand,  she  felt  a  slight  warmth.  A  piece  of  porcelain  touched
with  the  crystal-point,  felt  cool  to  her.  A  German  silver  conductor
of  an  electro-magnetic  apparatus,  when  treated  in  the  same  way,
she  felt  very  warm.  A  piece  of  soft  iron,  a  piece  of  a  blue  steel  saw
blade,  a  hard  steel  tile,  all  at  first  found  indifferent,  produced  a  sensa-
tion of  heat  in  her  hand  after  the  crystal  point  had  been  drawn  over
them.  I  placed  my  hand  in  hers,  first  let  her  get  accustomed  to  it,
then  took  it  away,  and  drew  it  backward  and  forward  a  few  times
above  the  point  of  the  great  rock  crystal,  and  then  again  laid  it  in
hers  :  the  patient  at  once  felt  a  great  difference  ;  she  now  found  it
far  warmer ;  and  this  apparent  elevation  of  temperature  endured,
decreasing,  for  more  than  four  minutes,  during  which  I  repeatedly
extended  it  to  her  for  trial.  A  similar  series  of  experiments  were
gone  through  with  Miss  Maix,  and  subsequently  with  Miss  Keichel.
The  cha/ge  was  here  conveyed  to  copper,  zinc-plates,  linen,  silk  stuffs,
and  water.  They  gave  wholly  similar  results.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer
perceived  immediately  whether  the  German  silver  conductor  had
been  previously  in  contact  with  a  selenite  crystal  or  an  amorphous
body,  and  particularly  whether  with  the  warming  or  cooling  end  of
a  crystal  the  heat  conveyed  was  stronger  or  weaker,  or  replaced  by
cold.  The  crystallic  force  may  therefore  be  transferred  or  conveyed
to  other  bodies.  It  may  be  transferred  to  iron  and  steel,  and,  at  the
same  time,  these  bodies,  so  charged,  do  not  attract  iron  filings,  as  T
have  already  shown  above.*

*  The  Baron  very  satisfactorily  establishes  his  positions.  But  I  have  tried  all
these  experiments  with  great  care  on  impressionable  patients,  ami  have  frequent-

70  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

I   endeavored   to    ascertain    whether   this    conveyance    could    be
effected,  like  that  of  magnetism,  by  rubbing  from  pole  to  pole,  or,

ly  been  disappointed  in  the  results.     I  have  repeated  them  on  somnambules,  and
have  found  every  one  of  them  come  out  as  above  described.     Then  1  am  bound
to  value  the  testimonies  afforded  by  good  sleeping-waking  persons.     I  am  often
told  that  confusion  arises  from  the  use  of  such  cases.    Yes,  in  the  hands  of  bother-
headed  persons,  confusion  naturally  takes  place  ;  but  with  due  precautions  the  re-
sults obtained  are  far  more  interesting,  because  more  definite.     Having  prepared
a  case  for  such  experiments  as  those  detailed  above  in  the  case  of  Miss  Sturmann,
I,  passed  the  pointed  end  of  a  rock  crystal  on  a  smooth  deal  board,  on  a  piece  of
writing  paper,  on  the  bound  leather  cover  of  a  book  successively.     Each  in  turn
was  ottered  to  the  right  hand  of  the  patient,  Miss  J.  D.,  who  had  been  eight  times
put  into  a  state  of  placid  sleep,  undisturbed  by  the  influence  of  other  mesmerizers.
Each  object  felt  warm  and  agreeable.     I  repeated  the  crystalline  applications  a
dozen  times  on  each  object ;  the  effect  was  to  make  the  patient  smile  contented-
ly, and  to  place  the  hand  eagerly  on  the  object :  at  last,  by  repetitions  of  the  ex-
periment, the  sleep  was  deepened.     Now  I  applied  the  opposite  pole  of  the  crys-
tal to  the  board,  the  paper,  and  the  book  successively,  and  the  patient  being  in  a
deep  sleep,  the  hand  was  gently  laid  upon  the  objects  in  turn.     First,  from  the
deep  sleep,  the  state  of  sleep-waking  took  place,  and  the  hand  was  speedily  drawn
away  from  each  object  as  if  it  were  disagreeable;  and  on  being  asked  as  to  the
nature  of  the  sensation  produced,  she  said  it  was  cold,  and  made  her  chilly  all
over.     I  repeated  the  application  of  this  repulsive  end  of  the  crystal  many  times
to  the  paper,  and  on  each  renewed  application  of  the  hand  the  sensation  became
more  unpleasant,  and  at  last  the  patient  woke  up  suddenly.     A  piece  of  porce-
lain touched  with  the  pointed  end  of  the  large  rock  crystal  was  warm  and  agree-
able to  her,  but  did  not  put  her  to  sleep.     I  held  the  point  of  the  crystal  to  the
forehead  ;  she  fell  deeply  asleep  instantly.     I  touched  the  porcelain  cup  with  the
blunt  end  of  the  crystal,  passing  it  a  dozen  times,  and  then  touched  the  fingers
of  the  right  hand  with  the  cup :  the  hand  was  hastily  Avithdrawn,  with  an  excla-
mation of  "  don't — it  is  like  ice."     The  patient  had  instantly  passed  into  sleep-
waking.     The  iron  poker  was  treated  with  the  pointed  end  of  the  crystal,  and  the
application  of  it  to  the  hand  deepened  the  sleep.     The  same  result  took  place
when  it  was  applied  to  the  nape  of  the  neck.    When  the  opposite  end  of  the  crys-
tal was  applied,  the  iron  being  well  charged  with  the  crystallic  force,  the  patient
on  feeling  it  got  up  suddenly  wide  awake.     A  three-cornered  file,  and  a-  pair  of
large  polished  scissors,  similarly  treated,  produced  identical  effects.    To  detail  the
repetitions  of  the  experiments  on  this  patient,  and  on  two  others  where  identical
results  were  obtained,  would  be  tedious.     Insisting  upon  the  fact  which  Dr.  El-
liotson's  experience  lias  fully  established,  and  which  mine  and  that  of  several
other  experienced  students  in  mesmerism  sufficiently  corroborate,  that  no  pheno-
menon is  observed  iu  artificially  induced  mesmeric  states  which  has  not  occurred
in  Nature,  I  am  induced  to  draw  attention  to  some  cases  in  which  the  polar  re-
lations would  appear  to  be  reversed.     In  general;  when  I  took  the  hand  of  a  pa-
tient mesmerized  into  sleep  by  myself,  with  a  piece  of  pure  gold,  in  a  longer  or
shorter  time,  according  to  circumstances  of  impressionability,  the  hand  and  arm
became  rigid.     If  I  apply  the  gold  to  the  nape  of  the  neck,  the  whole  body  be-
comes rigid,  and  the  sleep  is  so  deep  that  the  patient  is  insensible  to  all  impres-
sions.    If,  in  this  state,  any  of  the  metals  easily  oxidable  are  applied  to  the  same
spot,  the  sleep  and  rigidity  in  times  varying  according  to    circumstances  are
dissolved,  and  the  patient  is  restored  to  the  vigilant  and  conscious  state.     I  have

RELATION  TO  THE  HU-MAX  ORGANS.  71

like  that  of  electricity,  by  single  points.     It  proved  to  be  indifferent

whether  I  rubbed  the  object  in  the  direction  of  its  length,  or  kept
any  point  whatever  for  a  short  time  in  contact  with  the  point  of  the
crystal;  the  warmth  or  coolness  thus  produced  were  not  found  to
differ.  A  large  crystal,  when  the  point  was  applied  to  a  glass  of
water,  produced  magnetized  water,  as  well  as  a  horse-shoe  magnet.

46.  The  question  now  was,  whether  a  coercive  power  existed  in
matter,  whether  this  charge  was  persistent  or  transient,  and  after
what  intervals  of  time  ?  I  charged  various  objects,— the  German-
silver  conductor,  the  steel  iil",  the  soft  iron,  the  piece  of  porcelain,  and
the  book.  The  last  soon  lost  its  power.  The  piece  of  porcelain  tried
on  Miss  Sturmann  retained  it  two  minute--,  the  conductor  five  minutes,
the  iron  the  same,  and  the  steel  ten  minutes.  In  this  operation  I
did  not  take  the  objects  in  the  free  hand,  but  moved  them  backwards
and  forwards  in  a  fold  of  paper  ;  when  the  patient  had  taken  hold  of
them,  I  made  her  lay  them  down,  and  wait  till  the  sensation  which

performed  analogous  experiments  with  different  metals  hundreds  of  times ;  but  I
have  occasionally  met  with  cases  of  a  high  degree  of  impressionability,  in  which
must  unexpectedly  the  phenomena  were  nearly  all  reversed.  By  the  induction
of  the  rigid  slate  with  gold  and  platinum,  J  have  repeatedly  cured  menorrhagia
in  females.  A  married  woman,  aged  23,  with  dark  hair  and  eves,  highly  nerv-
ous temperament,  afflicted  with  passive  haemorrhage,  occurring  for  a  fortnight  at
each  catamenial  period,  was  mesmerized  easily  into  a  sleep-waking  state,  in
which  she  remained  quiet  and  comfortable  foracouple  of  hours  each  morning  for
a  week.  She  was  cured,  and  remained  well  for  four  months.  The  vexations
arising  from  questions  relating  to  a  drnnken  husband  made  her  suffer  much  from
headache,  and  I  applied  a  disc  ofpure  gold  to  the  back  other  neck.  Instead  of
sleep  and  rigid  spasm  increasing,  she  was  affected  with  the  clone  of  hysteria,  and
sudden  passive  haemorrhage,  I  applied  söfl  iron  to  the  neck  and  soles  of  the
shoes,  and  in  halt  an  hour  she  was  quite  wed,  and  in  high  spirits.  I  persuaded
her  to  come  the  next  day,  and  put  tier  to  sleep  by  passes,  after  which  I  applied
a  disc  of  platinum  to  the  nape  of  the  neck.  The  same  results  as  with  gold  im-
mediately supervened.  Waking  up  suddenly,  she  became  very  hysterical,  and
haemorrhage  quickly  came  on.  The  cure  was  just  as  'soon  effected  as  before,  by
the  application  of  iron  to  the  neck  and  soles  of  the  feet.  The  general  conclusion
at  which  I  have  arrived,  that  all  attractive  agencies  tend  to- produce  a  state  of
nervous  system  favoring  tone,  and  that  all  repulsive  agencies  tend  to  produce  au
opposite  state  favoring  clone,  was  here  subverted  by  an  exception;  hut  what
it  evince?  only  that  cases  exist  in  which  the  relations  to  the  metals,  and
to  the  poles  of  crystal-,  are  directly  the  reverse  of  those  usually  met  with.  I
have  seen  two  other  cases,  in  which,  though  not  identical,  vet  very  analogous  facts
were  exhibited,  in  which  the  pointed  extremity  of  crystals  induced  wakefulness
and  headache;  while  the  blunt  or  butt  end  being  offered  to  the  eyes  or  to  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  deep  sleep  was  immediately  brought  on;  in  which  magnetized
water  induced  no  attraction  of  the  hand,  and  in  which  the  presence  of  a  powerful
magnet  brought  on  hysteria  and  headache  ;  but  no  subsequent  rigidity  or  sleep.
They  were  of  a  nervo-bilious  temperament,  liable  to  frequent  attacks  of  nervous
and  sick  headache.

•72  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

continued  to  thrill  through  her  hand  had  disappeared.  This  required
about  a  minute.  Then  I  made  her  take  the  object  up  again,  without
having  touched  it  myself,  and  continued  thus  until  the  sensations  of
heat  or  cold  were  no  longer  produced.  From  this  it  follows  that  the
retention  of  the  charge,  under  the  above  circumstances,  is  not,  even
at  night,  of  long,  but  of  short  duration,  and,  indeed,  at  most  of  ten
minutes  ;  that  the  charge  soon  disappears  again,  and,  unlike  magnet-
ism, it  cannot  be  permanently  ingrafted  upon  steel.  Since  the  iron
filings  fall  from  an  iron  bar  which  has  been  placed  within  the  sphere
of  distribution  of  the  magnet  directly  and  instantaneously  when  the
magnet  is  removed,  but  here  an  effect  of  accumulation  does  occur,
although  but  for  a  short  time,  the  question  must  be  answered  thus  :
that  some,  even  if  weak,  coercive  power  over  the  crystallic  force  does
actually  exist  in  all  bodies,  which  for  magnetism,  so  far  as  we  know
it  at  present  by  its  polar  effects,  is  not  the  case,  since  the  coercive
power,  according  to  our  actual  knowledge,  is  limited  to  an  exceed-
ingly small  number  of  bodies  ;  in  fact,  according  to  the  most  recent
researches,  strictly  to  iron  and  nickel.*

47.  Is  the  crystallic  force  capable  of  being  isolated,  arrested,  or  is
it  universally  distributed  through  matter  ?  The  first  experiments
were  made  with  Miss  Sturmann,  who,  though  sensitive  to  the  magnetic
excitement,  was  less  clear  in  her  perception  of  it  as  to  the  distinction
between  warmth  and  cold.  When  I  placed  a  book  upon  her  hand,
and  brought  the  point  of  the  large  rock  crystal  upon  it,  the  hand  felt
nothing  of  it  through  the  book.  Since  she  had  previously,  felt  the
approach  of  the  crystal  to  the  inside  of  the  bare  hand  at  a  distance
of  18  or  20  inches,  while  now  the  distance  was  no  greater  than  the
thickness  of  the  book,  that  is,  four-fifths  of  an  inch,  this  experiment
showed  that  a  thick  mass  of  paper  was  a  substance  capable  of  arrest-
ing, at  least  for  a  short  time,  the  action  of  the  crystallic  force  upon
the  nerves  of  this  patient.  A  piece  of  deal  board  acted  in  a  similar
way,   but  less   perfectly. f     After  a  short  interval  the   alteration  of

*  "Written  a  year  before  the  recent  researches  of  Mr.  Faraday. — Author.

\  The  crystallic  force,  residing  most  probably  in  the  optical  axis  of  the  crystal,
since  it  has  so  close  a  relation  to  light  in  some  form,  in  producing  sleep  and  vigi-
lance, according  to  the  pole  of  the  crystal  offered  to  the  face  or  pit  of  the  stomach
of  a  very  impressionable  subject,  has  been  demonstrated  here  very  frequently.
I  have  seen  cases  in  "which  the  pointed  end  of  a  large  rock  crystal  has,  by  being
presented  in  the  direction  of  the  individual,  whose  back  has  been  turned  to  the
operator,  induced  sleep  instantly  at  the  distance  of  42  feet.  The  other  end  im-
mediately caused  wakefulness;  and  in  this  manner  sleep  and  wakefulness  were
alternated  just  as  often  as  the  crystal  was  turned  round.  But  even  in  less  sus-
ceptible cases,  the  point  of  a  rock  crystal  would,  with  its  attractive  or  repulsive
pole  to  the  individual,  induce  sleep,  and  the  other  pole  would  awaken.     Often

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  73

temperature  began  to  be  weakly  perceptible  beneath  it.  Eight  folds
of  printing  paper  soon  allowed  the  force  to  act  through  them  ;  four
folds  of  woollen  stuff'  scarcely  offered  any  perceptible  obstacle.  A
porcelain  dish,  lying  in  her  hand,  touched  on  the  upper  side  with
the  point  of  the  crystal,  was  felt  to  be  cool  when  I  turned  it  over
after  the  contact.  On  the  contrary,  an  iron  plate  gave  a  warm  sen-
sation, when  placed  on  the  hand,  as  soon  as  I  brought  the  crystal
near ;  when  I  put  it  in  contact  the  effect  was  like  a  shock,  ascending
through  the  elbow-joint  to  the  shoulder.*  Various  metallic  wires,
held  in  the  hand  by  one  end  and  touched  with  crystal  points  at  the
other,  gave  sometimes  warm,  sometimes  cool  sensations,  without  ex-
ception. I  placed  one  end  of  the  German  silver  conductor  in  her
hand,  and  placed  the  other  end  in  contact  with  the  point  of  a  small
crystal  ;  the  sensation  of  an  alteration  of  temperature  shot  instan-
taneously from  the  hand  to  the  elbow  joint ;  when  I  operated  in  the
same  way  with  the  large  rock  ciystal,  it  ran  up  as  far  as  the  shoulder,
and  produced  cramp-like  sensations.

When  I  subsequently  repeated  the  same  experiments  on  Miss
Maria  Maix,  action  took  place  through  all  bodies  without  exception,
only  it  was  more  rapid  through  metallic,  more  like  a  shock,  so  to
speak,  than  with  vegetable  substances,  tissues,  &c,  which  required
a  short  interval  of  time  for  the  effect.  I  made  experiments  with
wool,  silk,  glass,  and  zinc  on  Miss  Reich  el.     The  transmission  through

and  often  has  the  experiment  been  satisfactorily  performed  by  an  operator  going
into  one  room,  leaving  the  patient  in  the  adjoining  apartment,  separated  by  a
partition  of  deal  wood  painted,  which  was  covered  on  one  side  b}~  prints  framed
and  glazed.  As  often  as  the  respective  ends  of  the  crystal  were  held  toward*
the  patient,  instant  sleep  or  instant  vigilance  were  produced.  Any  person  stand-
ing in  the  door-way,  so  as  to  observe  both  the  operator  and  patient,  could  at  once
see  that  there  was  no  possible  source  of  fallacy  in  the  experiments.  Many  pa-
tients have  been  submitted  to  the  test  of  this  experiment,  and  the  results  have
been  identical

*  These  experiments  I  have  repeated  on  somnambules  with  precisely  the  same
results ;  but  in  sleep-waking  persons,  as  in  those  quite  wide  awake,  there  are
many  varieties  in  the  degrees  of  susceptibility.  A  piece  of  cylindrical  wood  has
been  held  in  the  two  hands  of  a  sleep-waking  patient ;  it  has  been  touched  with
the  pointed  ends  of  a  rock  crystal ;  immediately  the  wood  has  been  strongly
grasped  by  the  patient,  in  some  cases  with,  and  in  some  without,  the  shock  being
experienced,  but  deeper  sleep  has  supervened  The  opposite  end  of  the  crystal
touching  the  wood,  wakefulness  has  taken  place,  and  the  piece  of  wood  has
dropped  from  the  relaxed  fingers.  If  an  iron  rod,  of  the  diameter  of  an  inch  and
a  half,  has  been  used  instead  of  the  wood,  the  sense  of  shock  up  the  arms  has
been  more  decided,  and  some  have  complained  of  its  burning  the  hands.  Some
have  slept  only  more  deeply.  The  law  regulating  the  results  I  believe  to  be
dependent  upon  the  presence  of  attractive  and  repulsive  agencies  exercised  by
the  crystals.

4

71  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

wool  required  a  short  moment  of  time  in  a  cord  40  inches  long  ;  but
with  silk,  glass,  and  zinc,  it  was  instantaneous,  and  of  immeasurable
rapidity.  My  experiments  on  the  very  sensitive  Miss  Atzmanns-
dorfer  furnished  similar  results ;  brass  wire,  the  German  silver  con-
ductor, glass  tubes,  leaden  bars,  platina  foil,  bar  iron,  gold  threads,
and  copper  plates,  which  I  placed  in  her  hand,  were  instantaneously
traversed  by  the  force  which  passed  into  them  by  contact  with  the
crystal.  The  conclusion  is,  that  the  cry  stallte  force  acts  through  all
bodies,  but  in  different  degrees*  Paper,  wool,  and  wood,  render  the
passage  difficult,  at  least  for  a  short  time  ;  porcelain  less  so ;  silk
and  glass  are  perfect  conductors.  Metals  permit  the  passage  not
only  on  actual  contact,  but  in  slight  degrees  even  before  the  contact,
on  mere  approximation;  but  on. contact  an  immediate  action  ensues.
So  far  as  these  preliminary  tests  allow  of  a  conclusion,  they  indicate
that  the  difference  of  conducting  power  of  bodies  depends  less  upon
their  nature  than  on  their  continuity.  All  tissues  conduct  worse
than  solid  bodies ;  cotton  and  wool  worse  than  wire,  silk,  &c.  The
completeness  and  rapidity  of  the  conduction  were  experienced  in  dif-
ferent degrees  by  patients  of  different  states  of  sensitiveness,  in  such
a  way  that  while  to  the  more  sensitive  everything  is  permeable,  with
the  less  sensitive  occur  distinctions  among  the  bodies  in  the  degrees
of  the  permeability  by  the  crystallic  force.

48.  I  still  wished  to  test  the  magnitude  of  the  capacity  for  being
charged.  I  made  passes  and  contacts  on  the  conductor  and  the  steel
file  a  varying  number  of  times.  One  pass  acted  evidently  more
weakly  than  several  ;  but  when  I  had  occupied  a  minute  in  the
charging,  it  attained  a  magnitude  which,  under  the  given  circum-
stances, was  insusceptible  of  further  increase,  at  least  of  an  increase
of  strength  of  the  sensations  of  warmth -and  cold  thereby  produced
on  the  hand  of  the  patient ;  to  which  corresponded  the  frequently
repeated  trials  of  the  persistence  of  the  charge,  which  never  endured
more  than  about  five  minutes,  however  much  time  I  might  have  con-
sumed in  it,  excepting  only  on  steel  and  water,  where  it. was  felt
about  ten  minutes.  The  charge  was  not  effected  instantaneously,
but  increased  during  the  contact  for  a  short  time,  and  then  attained
its  maximum.  This  capacity  for  a  charge  loas  satisfied  in  a  few
minutes. \

*  A  just  conclusion,  strongly  corroborated  by  numerous  facts  observed  in  the
course  of  experiments  on  sleep-wakers.

\  The  same  conclusion  is  arrived  at  in  relation  to  charging  bodies  with  the
mesmeric  fluid.  Water  holds  only  a  definite  charge,  according  to  the  concurrent
testimony  of  many  lucid  sleep-waking  individuals,  taken  at  separate  times.
Thus,  I  have  darted  my  fingers  two  hundred  times  on  the  surface  of  a  tumbler
of  water,  and  have  been  told  that  the  blue  haziness  has  overflowed  the  tumbler.

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  75

49.  In  reference  to  the  magnitude  of  the  force  and  its  relation  to
the  size  of  the  crystals,  the  experiments  showed  that  a  small  crystal,
from  the  size  of  a  lentil  to  two  inches  long,  if  of  gold,  rock  crystal,
selenite,  diamond,  or  hornblende,  was  weak,  and  only  actively  per-
ceived in  the  reversed  pass  upward  ;  that  from  this  point  the  force
increased  with  the  size  of  the  crystals.  The  exponent,  of  course,  could
not  be  made  out  as  yet.*

50.  The  distinction  of  the  poles,  in  reference  to  their  power  of  af-
fecting the  nerves,  was  expressed  by  an  opposition  of  cold  and  heat.
Almost  in  every  case  the  crystal  produced  cooling  with  one  pole  and
warmth  with  the  other  when  drawn  over  the  hand.  Miss  Nowotny,
and -the  surgeon  Mr.  Schmidt,  in  the  upward  pass  felt,  like  the  healthy,
a  cool  pleasant  breeze;  in  the  downward  pass  a  not  disagreeable
gentle  warmth.  I  tried  crystals  of  tourmaline,  arragonite,  rock  crys-
tal, selenite,  and  cleavage  forms  of  Iceland  spar  and  tellurium,  on
Miss  Sturmann.  All  presented  a  stronger  cooling  pole,  and  a  weaker
warming  one.  This  difference  was  very  clearly  marked  with  Miss
Reichel,  who  distinguished  the  poles  of  all  crystals,  even  at  some  dis-
tance, by  a  sensation  of  cold  and  heat ;  and  this  with  very  great  ac-
curacy. As  I  have  already  mentioned,  Miss  Atz  in  a  nns  dorfer  felt  it
most  strongly.  But  even  healthy  persons,  e.  y.  Prof.  Endlicher,  as
already  mentioned,  Mr.  Studer,  my  servant  Johann  Klaiber,  and
others,  distinguished  the  two  poles  of  all  crystals  very  accurately,
even  of  very  small  ones.      The  opposition  of  the  two  po'es  of  crystals,

Several  persons  have  said  precisely  the  same  tiling-.  In  mesmerizing  a  decanter
of  water,  I  have  placed  a  watch  before  me  while  I  held  the  tips  of  my  right-
hand  fingers  in  the  mouth  of  the  decanter.  Several  lucid  individuals  have  sepa-
rately indicated  the  precise  height  of  the  blue  haze  in  the  water  at  the  same
interval  of  time.  A  few  minutes  were  sufficient  to  charge  a  quart  decanter.  All
concur  in  the  fact  that  the  fluid  sinks  in  the  water.  Is  it,  then,  imponderable  ?
Has  it  not  a  specific  gravity  i

*  Experiments  in  sufficient  numbers  are  wanting  to  determine  the  relative
powers  of  dissimilar  crystals.  There  is  no  doubt  of  the  crystalline  force  being,
carteris  paribus,  augmented  in  a  ratio  to  the  volume  of  the  same  kind  of  crystal ;
but  the  force  will  be  found  to  varv  much  in  power  according  to  the  nature  of  the
constituent  substances  of  the  crystal.  Clear  rock  crystals  are  more  agreeable  to
patients  than  fatty  crystals.  A  rock  crystal  containing  titanite  was  disagreeable,
but  it  put  patients  into  a  deeper  sleep  than  the  clearer  specimens.  A  very
small  crystal  of  cobalt  is  more  powerful  than  a  large  rock  crystal.  In  highly
susceptible  cases,  the  pointed  end  of  a  very  small  crystal  of  Epsom  salt  held  to
the  forehead  or  to  any  part  of  the  face  has  been  sufficient  to  induce  sleep  imme-
diately, and  wakefulness  has  been  speedily  produced  by  holding  the  opposite
pole  of  the  same  substance  in  the  same  direction.  A  crystal  of  morphene  held
in  the  same  manner  has  been  attended  with  the  same  results,  but  accompanied
by  headache.  "  The  opposition  of  the  two  poles  of  crystals  expressed  itself  upon
the  nerves  at  once  by  the.se  striking  contrast'-."

76  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

therefore,  expressed  itself  upon  the  nerves  at  once  by  slight  heat  and
cold.     I  shall  hereafter  detail  some  other  contrasts.

51.  The  high  degree  of  distinctness  which  the  excitement  possessed
in  sick  persons  is  worthy  of  notice.  Not  only  do  they  perceive  it
universally  on  the  masses  of  bodies  which  are  brought  to  them,  but
they  clearly  perceived  that  there  are  points  at  which  the  force  is  con-
centrated. Miss  Nowotny  pointed  out  to  me  very  definitely,  in
every  crystal,  the  spots  where  effective  poles  were  situated,  which
she  very  quickly  discovered  with  the  tips  of  her  fingers.  In  double
crystals  the  axis  always  passes  through  the  line  of  junction  of  the
two  crystals.  Miss  Maix,  Miss  Sturmann,  Miss  Reichel,  and  Miss
Atzmannsdorfer,  had  the  same  power,  in  some  cases  with  still  greater
readiness.  Even  Mr.  Schuh  and  Mr.  Studer  accurately  felt  out  the
points  on  large  crystals,  and  their  observations  all  agree  accurately
with  one  another.

52.  The  crystal-electricity,  as  excited  in  tourmaline  and  other
minerals  by  heat,  does  not  exhibit  any  perceptible  effect  upon  the
nervous  excitement  produced  by  the  crystallic  force.  I  heated  these
bodies  to  different  degrees,  but  they  produced  no  evident  modifica-
tions in  the  effects.*

53.  Does  the  crystallic  force  stand  in  no  relation  of  direction  to
terrestrial  magnetism  ?  Starting  from  the  manner  in  which  crystals
are  built  up,  one  would  be  induced  to  conjecture  that  the  two  forces
are  really  to  a  certain  extent  independent  of  each  other.  Whoever
has  seen  a  nucleated  mass  of  quartz  crystals  broken  into,  in  a  mine,
and  noticed  how  they  stand  in  all  directions,  cannot  have  overlooked
that  the  entire  cavity  is  clothed  on  all  sides,  above  and  below,  with
crystals  whose  axes  are  directed  in  every  possible  direction.  But
without  going  into  a  mine,  this  observation  may  be  made  at  once  in
a  cabinet  of  minerals,  upon  the  well-known  balls  of  chalcedony,  the
cavity  of  which,  i.  e.  the  nucleus,  is  clothed  all  over  with  crystals  of
quartz  and  amethyst ;  I  have  never  been  able  to  detect  anything
like  an  uniform  direction.  Other  crystallizations,  again,  which  are
grouped  in  stalk-like  heaps  around  a  common  central  point,  like  na-
trolite,   zeolite,  mesotype,  arragonite,  pharmacolite,  &c,  form  tuber-

*  I  have  coiled  copper  wire  enclosed  in  silk  thread  round  eight  large  rock
crystals,  and  have  thus  produced  an  instrument  like  an  electro-dynamic  coil,
furnished  with  a  platinum  keeper.  The  crystallic  force  was  not  increased  in  the
least  perceptible  degree,  nor  have  I  found  the  crystallic  force  modified  by  heating
or  cooling  crystals.  As  mesmeric  sleep- wakers  of  high  susceptibility  are  so  much
more  delicate  than  any  person  awake  can  possibly  be,  the  testimony  derived
from  experiments  on  these  must  be  powerfully  corroborative  of  the  Baron's  con-
clusions.

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  ^

cular  globules,  the  rays  of  winch  spread  out  in  all  directions,  and  no
indications  lead  us  to  imagine  an  influence  or  any  kind  of  external
directing  force  on  their  formation.  Our  own  crystallizations,  as  they
go  on  m  our  laboratories  and  manufactories,  are  in  like  manner  usu-
ally altogether  confused  ;  prussiate  of  potash,  alum,  sugar  of  lead,
sugar-candy,  &c,  deposit  their  crystals,  in  large  vessels,  without  any
choice  of  direction.  This  appears  to  agree  with  the  indifference
which  tree  crystals  observe  towards  the  magnetic  needle  and  the
polar  wires.  On  this  side,  therefore,  the  crgstallic  force  is  independ-
ent 0/  terrestrial  magnetism,  in  reference  to  the  direction  of  its  struc-
tures.

54.  Since  now  the  crystallic  force  shows  itself  to  be  free  from  that
attraction  to  inorganic  substances  which  so  remarkably  disthjguistea
the  magnet  from  all  terrestrial  things,  it  must,  on  the  other  hand,
prove  the  more  striking,— nay  it  seems  to  claim- the  highest  decree
ot  interest  in  natural  science,— that  it  shares  with  the  magnet  the  sin-
gular  power  of  attracting  living  organic  bodies.  For  as  I  have
already  minutely  described,  I  saw  the  effect  produced  by  the  magnet
upon  the  cataleptic  Miss  Nowotny,  repeated  when  she  was  brought  in
contact  with  the  points  of  large  crystals.  It  contracted  her  hand,  in
some  cases  produced  cramp,  and  attracted  her  hand  to  follow  it,  'not
so  strongly  as  a  large  magnet,  but  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  a
weak  one.  I  am  certain  that  if  I  had  possessed  a  crystal  laro-e
enough,  her  hand  would  have  adhered  to  it,  both  in  the  unconscious
and  conscious  state,  just  in  the  same  way  as  it  did  to  a  strong
magnet.  This  elective  affinity  of  the  crystallic  force  to  attract  living
and  not  dead  matter  is  the  most  extraordinary  character  it  display«,
and  points  to  the  powerful  connection  in  which  it  stands  with  the
inmost  essence  of  that  which  we  call  life,  and  respecting  which,  if  I
am  not  most  grossly  mistaken,  it  promises  closely  imminent'  and
most  important  results.

55.  In  a  former  treatise  I  gave  an  account  of  the  light  which
issues  from  the  poles  of  a  strong  magnet.  After  that  observation,  it
was  very  natural  to  imagine  the  possibility  of  the  same  at  the  points
of  crystals  ;  indeed,  there  was  great  probability  in  the  anticipation.
1  therefore  instituted  an  experiment  with  the  heightened  vision  of
Miss  Sturmann.  A  room  was  made  as  dark  as  possible;  she  en-
tered, remained  some  time,  till  her  eves  became  accustomed  to  the
obscurity,  and  then  I  placed  before  her  the  large  rock  crystal.  She
actually  at  once  perceived  a  fame-like  light  over  it,  half  the  size  of  a
hand,  blue,  passing  into  white  above,  remarkably  different  from  the
magnetic  light,  which  she  described  as  much  yellower  and  redder.
The  experiment  was  repeated  twice  on  the  following  night.    In  order

78  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

to  obtain  as  complete  conviction  as  possible  before  Miss  Sturmann
came  into  the  darkened  room,  I  placed  the  large  eight  inch  thick
rock  crystal  upon  a  place  which  she  could  not  be  aware  of.  As  soon
as  the  obscurity  was  fully  restored  by  shutting  the  door,  she  in  every
case  immediately  detected  the  place  where  the  crystal  stood,  and  saw
the  flaming  light  exactly  the  same  in  all  these  three  experiments.
She  described  it  as  somewhat  resembling  a  tulip  in  shape,  and  begin-
ning below  with  a  curve  directed  outward,  like  one  of  the  petals,  or
like  a  candle-flame,  but  then  soon  taking  an  erect  position  and  rising
to  about  the  height  of  her  finger's  length.  She  again  spoke  of  the
color  as  blue,  passing  into  perfect  white  above,  and  in  such  a  maimer
that  isolated  scattered  streaks  or  filaments  of  a  reddish  color  ran  up
in  the  upper  part  of  the  white.  The  flame  was  moveable,  in  a  waving
and  sparkling  condition,  and  threw  a  light  glare  over  the  support  on
which  the  crystal -rested,  of  the  diameter  of  almost  forty  inches,
just  as  a  magnet  had  done,  when  flame-like  appearance  and  light
radiating  from  it  could  be  clearly  distinguished.  From  her  I  turned
to  Miss  Reichel,  and  placed  various  crystals  before  her  in  the  dark.
She  everywhere  found  the  flaming  appearances  bright,  surpassing
those  of  the  magnet  in  brilliancy  of  color  and  regularity  of  form.
The  light  was  with  her  visible  not  only  over  the  poles  of  the  crystals,  but
even  in  the  interior  of  their  substance.  She  described  the  flame  over
the  poles  much  in  the  same  way  as  Miss  Sturmann,  but  the  appear-
ances of  light  in  the  interior  essentially  different  from  this.  She  said
that  they  were  of  peculiar  star-like  forms,  which  assumed  different
shapes  when  the  crystals  were  turned.  It  was  evidently  the  crystal-
line structure  of  the  stone,  its  lamination  in  different  directions,  which
caused  the  production  of  luminous  appearances  and  internal  reflec-
tions, such  as  of  course  could  not  exist  in  this  way  in  a  steel  magnet.
She  furnished  me  with  drawings  of  the  lights  of  large  and  small  crys-
tals, which  represented  most  astonishing  appearances.  I  reserve  all
the  various  magnetic  luminosities,  which  I  became  acquainted  with,
to  bring  them  together  hereafter  in  a  special  comparison,  and  shall
give  figures  of  Miss  Reichel's  drawings  of  the  crystallic  luminosities
with  that.  Miss  Maix  also,  whose  calm  and  accurate  mode  of  obser-
vation I  especially  valued,  for  many  nights  that  I  left  the  great  rock
crystal  upon  her  stove,  beheld  in  her  sleepless  hours  the  beautiful
spectacle  of  a  whitish  star,  half  the  size  of  her  hand,  on  the  apicula-
ted  summit.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  in  all  cases  pointed  out  the
luminous  pole  in  the  dark,  in  a  number  of  different  crystals,  and
placed  them  in  a  series  for  me,  according  to  their  strength.

Since,  then,  all  the  crystals,  which  I  had  subjected  in  such  great
number  to  the  test,  exhibited  the  same  reactions  in  reference  to  that

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  79

peculiar  force,  which  they  manifested  at  their  poles,  as  occurred  in
its  maximum  in  a  large  rock  crystal,  one  is  led  to  the  conclusion  that
crystals  in  general,  like  the  magnet,  emit  a  fine  flaming  light  from
their  poles,  usually  invisible  to  healthy  eyes,  but  seen  by  those  of
f-xcited  nervous  patients,  in  whom  all  the  senses  exist  in  an  unusually
acute  condition.  I  need  scarcely  mention  that  this  bears  relation  to
the  luminous  appearances  frequently  observed  during  crystallization
itself  by  chemists,  which  have  long  found  place  in  the  textd^ooks.
The  nature  of  these  radiations  has  not  yet  been  explained  ;  they  hftve
generally  been  assumed  to  be  electrical,  because  they  look  like  such,
but  no  direct  proof  exists.  Prof.  H.  Rose,  however,  has  lately  shown
that  this  light  is  not  connected  either  with  heat  or  electricity,  since
neither  the  air-thermometer  nor  the  telescope  is  affected  in  the  least
when  dipped  in  a  crystallizing  solution  of  substances  which  exhibit
the  highest  known  degree* of  evolution  of  light  in  the  moment  of
crystallization  :  for  example,  sulphate  of  potass  and  soda  (Pog<i-end.
Annal.  LII.  443,  585).  But  now  that  we  have  become  acquainted
with  the  permanent  luminosity  of  crystal  poles,  which  at  present  ex-
hibits no  agreement  with  electricity,  but  indeed  a  great  difference,  it
becomes  highly  probable  that  the  said  light  is  dependent,  not  on
electricity,  but  on  the  evolution  of  phenomena  of  crystallic  light,  and
that  circumstances  arise  in  the  sudden  conveyance  of  the  molecules
suspended  in  the  fluids  into  solid  crystalline  bodies,  under  which  the
crystallic  light  becomes  so  concentrated  as  to  be  visible  to  common
eyes.  What  this  light  is,  which  like  sunlight  beams  continuously,
without  in  the  least  diminishing  the  body  from  which  it  radiates,
whether  it  is  a  vibration  propagated  in  the  surrounding  fluids,  I
leave  here  untouched.  We  assume  that  the  atoms,  still  more  the
molecules  of  matter,  are  polar ;  we  regard  them  as  the  elements  for
the  construction  of  the  crystal.  Is  their  arrangement  into  a  large
solid  crystal,  which  again  has  its  own  polarity  and  is  luminous  at  its
poles,  a  sum  of  all  these  little  polarities,  and  are  its  poles  an  expres-
sion of  this,  as  the  open  poles  of  a  voltaic  pile  afford  the  sum  of  the
shares  of  electricity  of  all  the  individual  elements  ?  Is  a  crystal  a  pile
for  the  crystallic  force,  as  the  voltaic  is  for  the  electrical  ?  These  are
approaching  questions  reserved  for  further  investigation  ;  meanwhile
the  consistent  observations  here  made,  and  often  repeated,  on  live
different  sick  persons,  will  soon  find  confirmation  in  other  places  and
by  other  observers  ;  only  I  caution  them  not  to  undertake  the  experi-
ments with  somnambulists  in  the  sleep-walking  condition,  but  either
with  others,  not  somnambulist,  nerrous  patients,  or,  if  none  such  can
be  found  sufficiently  sensitive,  to  take  the  somnambulists  only  in  the
awake,  conscious  condition,  when  their  senses  are  clear ;  and  not  to

80  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

make  use  of  the  sleep-waking  condition  at  all,  or  at  most  solely  for
the  control  of  the  former.  I  have  never  employed  the  patients  in
the  magnetic  sleep  or  somnambulism  in  my  physical  investigations,
but  when  in  this  condition  have  left  them  in  the  hands  of  their  phy-
sicians, and  contented  myself  with  the  position  of  a  spectator.  To
prevent  errors,  I  again  remark,  that  when  it  is  wished  to  repeat  my
experiments,  the  place  must  be  completely  darkened,  so  densely  that
even  after  a  long  stay  in  it,  after  one  or  two  hours,  no  trace  what-
ever of  light  can  be  detected  :  finally,  the  crystal  must  be  very  large,
for  mine,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  was  not  less  than  eight  inches
thick,  and  proportionately  long.  With  those,  however,  who  are
strongly  sensitive,  smaller  crystals  will  answer  the  purpose,  since  Miss
Reichel  and  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  saw  light  issue  from  almost  every
crystal,  especially  from  compounds  of  sulphuric  and  fluoric  acids,
which  in  all  cases  surpass  rock  crystal  of  the  same  size.

56.  All  these  researches  finally  unite  to  show,  that  the  peculiar
force  of  crystals  here  developed,  opens  a  new  page  in  the  book  of
dynamics, — that  it  certainly  falls  within  the  general  laws  of  these,
but  possesses  its  special  code,  to  study  which,  and  bring  their  axioms
to  mathematical  expressions,  must  be  henceforth  one  of  the  tasks  of
physics.  It  will  be  above  all  desirable  to  find  some  universal  inor-
ganic re-agent  upon  it,  to  discover  an  instrument  of  detection  and
measurement,  which  shall  free  us  from  the  often  worse  than  painful
dependence  on  sick  persons,  hospital  patients,  and  unscientific  per-
sons of  all  kinds/'"'

*  The  reflection  that  it  would  be  desirable  to  find  such  a  re-agent  is  natural.
It  is  not  so  difficult  to  measure  heat,  light,  electricity,  and  magnetism.  These
are  agencies  that  are  common  to  inorganic  and  organic  matter.  But  it  is  a  ques-
tion whether  it  is  easy  to  devise  a  test  for  a  force  owing  its  existence  to  a  combi-
nation of  molecules  that  constitutes  an  organic  arrangement,  which  in  its  own  na-
ture shall  not  be  organic.  Is  it  possible  to  find  an  inorganic  test  for  an  organic
force  ?  We  may  probably,  by  tracing  the  laws  regulating  organic  forces,  be  en-
abled to  find  out  the  means  by  which  the  human  being  can  be  stimulated  to  be-
come so  highly  sensitive  as  to  detect  the  presence  of  very  subtle  re-agents,  odors,
metallic  lodes,  streams  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  but  it  may  be  problematical
whether,  per  contra,  we  shall  be  able  to  frame  an  inorganic  instrument  sufficient-
ly delicate  to  detect  thought,  the  impulses  of  ambition,  hate,  or  cunning ;  the  be-
witching influences  of  love,  benevolence,  veneration,  or  conscientiousness.  These
depend  upon  organization ;  upon  arrangements  of  living  matter,  so  distributed  in
the  brain  as  to  have  their  own  attractive  and  repulsive  relations,  but  having  no
corresponding  antagonistic  forces  in  inanimate  matter.  In  order  to  study  the
physics  of  organic  arrangements,  we  must  lay  aside  our  repugnance  to  the  nu-
merous delicate  phenomena  offered  to  us  in  organic  nature,  and  be  content  to  en-
large, though  in  a  degree  hazily,  our  bounds  of  inquiry,  paying  respect  to  classes
of  facts  that  appear,  and  appear  to  proud  ignorance  only,  the  creations  of  fancy.
Phrenology  teaches  us  the  causes  of  the  philosopher's  repugnance  to  new  classes

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  81

tUSTBOSPKCT.

a.  Every  crystal,  natural  or  artificial,  exercises  a  specific  exciting
power  on  the  animal  nerves,  weak  in  the  health}*,  strong-  in  the  dis-
eased, strongest  of  all  in  the  cataleptic.

of  ideas.  Mostly,  it  is  to  pride  that  lie  is  indebted  for  his  refusal  of  truth,  and
the  silly  institutions  of  society  foster  and  encourage  the  acquisitive,  the  approba-
tive,  and  the  pride-creating  organizations  of  man  to  habituate  him  to  a  love  of
contempt,  and  an  adhesion  to  errors  and  fallacies.  A  most  eminent  Professor,
justly  celebrated  for  much  that  he  has  nobly  wrought  in  science,  was  beard  to
say  openly  before  a  large  audience,  "  Had  I  been  sharp,  I  should  have  hit  upon
the  discovery  on  which  my  competitor  has  stumbled:"  by  no  means  ashamed  to
acknowledge  publiclv.  that  he  did  not  rejoice  in  the  success  of  a  fellow-laborer,
who  had  poured  the  blessings  of  a  new  truth  on  mankind,  to  elevate  the  thoughts,
to  exalt  the  aspirations  of  beings  whose  organizations  improve  by  an  indulgence
in  noble  aims.  However  vulgar  and  absurd,  because  perhaps  not  severely  exact,
to  habitually  erroneous  thinkers  themselves,  may  appear  much  of  the  knowledge
floating  among  boors  and  peasants,  a  very  remarkable  proof  of  the  importance  of
some  of  it  may  be  traced  to  a  singular  though  rude  anticipation  of  a  part  of  the
most  brilliant  of  Professor  Faraday's  discoveries  on  magnetism  arid  diauiagnetism,
by  means  of  an  instrument,  the  name  of  which  has  been  sufficient  to  excite  the
contempt  of  some  sö-styled  savans  of  repute.  If  knowledge  be  not  in  the  range
of  the  thoughts  of  certain  severe  cogitators,  it  is  then,  forsooth,  no  knowledge  at
all.  The  unmerciful  contempt  which  has  been  cast  on  the  divining  rod— virgula
divina,  or  baguette  divinatoire — by  certain  cultivators  of  science,  may  be  esti-
mated by  a  reference  to  the  earlier  editions  of  a  translation,  by  Dr.  Huttön,  of
Montucla's  improvement  of  Ozanam's  Mathematical  Recreations,  a  book  full  of
most  interesting  matter.  In  the  last  edition  of  that  work,  however,  Dr.  lliuton
proved  himself  to  be,  what  he  always  was,  a  sincere  lover  of  truth.  Led  into
error  at  an  earlier  period,  he  was  open  to  inquiry,  and  became,  subsequently,
convinced  of  tacts  on  the  existence  of  which  he  had  at  one  time  doubted.  My
friend,  Mr.  Charles  Huttön  Gregory,  lent  me  a  copy  of  the  Speculum  Anni  for
the  year  1828,  in  which  he  pointed  out  some  passages  relating  to  this  matter,
which  I  cannot  avoid  extracting  here,  premising  a  few  observations  on  the  instru
ment  called  the  divining  rod,  virgula  divina,  baculus  divinatorius,  baguette  divi-
natoire. This  has  been  supposed  to  be  a  branch  of  a  tree  or  shrub  necessarily  of
a  forked  or  letter  Y  shape,  by  the  assistance  of  which  certain  gifted  persons  were
enabled  to  discover  mines,  springs  of  water  under  ground,  hidden  treasure,  and
to  practise  other  occult  doings.  This,  with  regard  to  shape,  is  just  as  vulgar  an
error  as  that 'which  supposes  that  a  stick  of  any  kind  of  wood  held  in  the  hand
serves  as  well  as  the  hazel  or  the  whitethorn  for  the  production  of  the  phenomena.
In  the  counties  of  (Somerset,  Devon,  and  Cornwall,  the  facts  on  this  subject  are
well  known,  and  the  practice  of  dowsing,  as  it  is  called,  has  been  cultivated  time
out  of  mind.  In  France  the  men  of  scientific  pursuits  have  for  the  most  part
ridiculed  the  use  of  the  baguette,  notwithstanding  abundant  evidence  in  various
parts  of  the  country  being  extant  of  the  success  which  had  attended  the  practice
of  the  sourciers.  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach  has  established  facts  regarding  the
emanations  of  light  from  graves,  which  are  quite  as  remarkable  as  the  proofs  of
emanations  raking  place  from  metals  or  from  running  water.  Now  that  the  Ba-
-i*

82  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

b.  The  force  manifests  its  abode  principally  at  the  axes  of'the
crystals,  most  actively  at  its  opposite  extremities  :  it  therefore  exhib-
its polarity.

ron's  researches,  and  the  concurrent  testimony  of  the  cultivators  of  mesmeric
science,  have  established  that  certain  individuals  are  more  susceptible  of  magnetic
impressions  than  others,  it  will  not  be  pronounced  impossible  that  subterraueous
running  water  may  influence  some  persons,  and  not  others.  In  different  classes
of  animals  the  sensitive  powers  are  known  to  vary  greatly,  as  they  do  indeed
among  those  of  the  same  species.  "  But,"  it  has  been  asked,  "  granting  that  ema-
nations from  subterraueous  waters  may  powerfully  affect  certain  persons,  what
connection  is  there  between  this  impression  and  the  motion  or  rotation  of  the
hazel  rod,  which  is  held  in  the  person's  hand  or  laid  over  his  fingers  ?"  What !
is  it  fact  that  the  hazel  rod  moves  or  rotates  in  the  hand  of  a  person  of  a  certain
impressionability,  when  that  person  passes  over  any  ground,  underneath  his  foot-
steps on  which  there  happens  to  be  a  metallic  lode,  or  a  subterraneous  stream
of  water,  which  we  call  a  spring?  I  have  been  informed  by  highly  respectable
persons  who  have,  in  the  West  of  England,  witnessed  the  facts,  that  under  these
circumstances  a  hazel  or  a  whitethorn  rod  does  rotate  and  does  move,  and  occa-
sionally dips  with  so  energetic  a  force,  that  on  one  occasion  the  bark  of  a  fresh
hazel  rod  was  stripped  from  the  stick  and  left  in  the  grasp  of  the  operator's
hand.

The  following  extracts  will  further  illustrate  this  subject : —

"  Although  the  effects  or  motion  of  the  divining  rod,  when  in  the  proximity  of
springs,  has  been  and  is  to  this  day  considered  by  most  philosophers  a  mere  illu-
sion, yet  I  think  the  following  brief  observations  relating  to  this  subject,  and
which  were  communicated  to  Dr.  Hutton  by  a  lady  of  rank,  with  the  account  of
her  subsequent  experiments  performed  before  him,  his  family,  and  a  number  of
friends  (as  given  in  the  doctor's  translation  of  Montucla's  edition  of  Ozanam's
Recreations,)  must  convince  the  most  incredulous  that  in  the  hands  of  some  per-
sons, in  certain  situations,  the  baguette  is  forcibly  acted  upon  by  some  hitherto
unknown  invisible  cause.  Notwithstanding  the  incredulity  expressed  by  Montu-
cla  relative  to  the  indication  of  springs  by  the  baguette  or  divining  rod,  there  ap-
pears to  exist  such  evidences  of  the  reality  of  that  motion  as  it  seems  next  to
impossible  to  be  questioned.  This  evidence  was  brought  about  in  the  following
manner.  Soon  after  the  publication  of  the  former  edition  of  the  Recreations,  the
editor  received  by  the  post  the  following  well-written  pseudonymous  letter  on
the  subject  of  this  problem.  The  letter  in  question  is  dated  Feb.  10,  1805,  and
as  with  the  whole  of  the  correspondence  it  would  be  too  long  for  our  limits,  I
shall  select  such  parts  only  as  are  immediately  essential  to  a  right  understand-
ing of  the  subject.

"  The  lady  observes, '  In  the  year  1*7 T2,  (I  was  then  nineteen)  I  passed  six
months  at  Aix  in  Provence.  I  there  heard  the  popular  story  of  one  of  the  foun-
tains in  that  city  having  been  discovered  some  generations  before  by  a  boy  who
always  expressed  an  aversion  from  passing  one  particular  spot,  crying  out  there
ivas  water.  This  was  held  by  myself  and  the  family  I  was  with,  in  utter  con-
tempt.

"  '  In  the  course  of  the  spring,  the  family  went  to  pass  a  week  at  the  Chateau
d'Ansonis,  situated  a  few  miles  to  the  north  of  the  Durance,  a  tract  of  country
very  mountainous,  and  where  water  was  ill  supplied.  We  found  the  Marquis
d'Ansonis  busied  in  erecting  what  might  be  termed  a  miniature  aqueduct,  to  con-
vey a  spring  the  distance  .of  half  a  league,  or  nearly  as  much,  to  his  chateau,

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  S3

c.  It  emits  light  at  the  poles   visible   to  acutely  sensitive   eyes   in
the  dark.

•which  spring  he  asserted  had  been  found  out  by  a  peasant,  who  made  the  dis-
covery of  water  his  occupation  in  that  country,  and  maintained  himself  by  it,  and
was  known  bv  the  appellation  of  I'Homme  a  fa  Bogmtte.  This  account  was  re-
ceived with  unbelief,  almost  amounting  to  derision.  The  Marquis,  piqued  at  he-
ing  discredited,  sent  for  the  man,  and  requested  we  would  witness  the  experiment.
A  large  party  of  French  and  English  accordingly  attended.  The  man  was  quite
a  peasant  in  manners  and  appearance :  he  produced  some  twigs  cut  from  a  hazel,
of  different  sizes  and  strength,  only  they  were  forked  branches,  and  hazel  was
preferred,  as  forking  more  equally  than  most  other  trees;  but  it  is  not  requisite
that  the  angle  should  be  of  any  particular  number  of  degrees.  He  held  the  ends
of  the  twigs  between  each  fore  finger  and  thumb,  with  the  vertex  pointing  down-
wards. Standing  where  there  was  no  water,  the  baguette  remained  motionless ;
walking  gradually  to  the  spot  where  the  spring  was  wtder  yrouml  the  twig  was
sensibly  affected ;  and  as  he  approached  the  spot,  began  to  turn  round;  that  is,
the  vertex  raised  itself,  and  turned  toward«  his  body,  and  continued  to  turn  till
the  point  was  vertical ;  it  then  again  descended  outwards,  and  continued  to  turn,
describing  a  circle  as  long  as  he  remained  standing  over  the  -spring,  or  till  one  or
both  the  branches  were  broken  by  the  twisting,  the  ends  being  firmly  grasped
bv  the  fingers  and  thumbs,  and  the  hands  kept  stationary,  so  that  the  rotatory
motion  must  of  course  twist  them.  After  seeing  him  do  this  repeatedly,  the
whole  party  tried  the  baguette  in  succession,  but  without  effect.  I  chanced  to
be  the  last."  No  sooner  did  I  hold  the  twig  as  directed,  titan  it  began  to  move
as  with  him,  which  startled  me  so  much  that  1  dropt  it,  and  felt  considerably
agitated.  1  was,  however,  induced  to  resume  the  experiment,  and  found  the
effect  perfect.  I  was  then  told  it  was  no  very  unusual  thing,  many  having  that
faculty,  which,  from  what  has  since  come  tu  toy  knowledge,  I  have  reason  to  be-
lieve is  true.  On  mv  return  to  England  I  forbore  to  let  this  faculty,  (or  whatever
you  may  term  it.)  be  known,  fearing  to  become  the  topic  of  conversation  or  dis-
cussion. But  two  vears  afterwards,  being  on  a  visit  to  a  nobleman's  house,  Knu-
bolton,  Huntingdonshire,  and  his  lady  lamenting  that  she  was  disappointed  «f
building  a  daily-house  in  a  spot  she' particularly  wished,  because  there  was  no
water  to  be  found — a  supply  she  looked  on  as  essential— under  promise  of  secrecy
I  told  her  I  would  endeavor  to  lind  a  spring.  1  accordingly  procured  some  hazel
twicrs,  and  in  the  presence  of  herself  and  husband,  walked  over  the  ground  pro-
posed, till  the  twig  turned  with  considerable  foree.  A  stake  was  immediately
driven  into  the  ground  to  mark  the  spot,  which  was  not  very  distant  from  where
they  had  before  sunk.  They  then  took  me  to  another  and  distant  building  in  the
park,  and  desired  me  to  trv  there:  I  found  the  baguette  turn  very  strong,  so  that
it  soon  twisted  and  broke":  the  gentleman  persisted  that  there  was  no  water
there,  unless  at  a  great  depth,  the  foundation  being  very  deep,  (a  considerable
stone  cellar,)  and  that  no  water  appeared  when  they  dug  for  i'.  I  could  only-
reply  that  I  knew  no  more  than  from  the  baguette  turning,  and  that  I  had  too
little  experience  of  its  powers  or  certainty  to  answer  for  the  truth  of  its  indica-
tion. He  then  acknowledged  that  when  that  building  was  erected  they  were
obliged  to  drive  piles  for  the  whole  foundation,  as  they  met  with  nothing  but  a
quicksand.  This  induced  him  to  dig  in  the  spot  I  first  directed  ;  they  met  witr
a  very  fluent  .spring ;  the  dairy  was  built,  and  it  is  at  this  time  supplied  by  it.
I  could  give  a  long  detail  of  other  trials  I  have  made,  all  of  which  have  been
convincing  of  the  truth,  but  they  would  be  tedious.     For  some  years  past  I  have

64  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

d.  In  particular  diseases,  it  attracts  the  human  hand  to  a  peculiar
kind  of  adhesion,  like  that  of  iron  to  the  magnet.

e.  It  does  not  attract  iron,  does  not  cause  any  freely  moving  body

been  indifferent  about  its  becoming  known,  and  have  consequently  been  fre-
quently requested  to  show  the  experiment,  which  has  often  been  done  to  persons
of  high  estimation  for  understanding  and  knowledge,  and  I  believe  they  have  all
been  convinced.  Three  people  I  have  met  with,  who  have,  on  trying,  found  them-
selves possessed  of  the  same  faculty.  I  shall  only  add  one  more  particular  in-
cident. Having  once  shown  it  to  a  party,  we  returned  into  the  house  to  a  room
on  the  ground  floor ;  I  was  again  asked  how  I  held  the  twig ;  taking  one  in  my
hand  I  found  it  turned  immediately ;  on  which  an  old  lady,  mother  to  the  gen-
tleman of  the  house,  said  that  room  was  formed  out  of  an  old  cloister,  in  which
cloister  was  a  well,  simply  boarded  over  when  they  made  the  room.

"  '  L'Homme  a  la  Baguette,  from  experience,  could  with  tolerable  accuracy  tell
the  depth  at  which  the  springs  were,  and  their  volume  from  the  force  with  which
the  baguette  turns ;  I  can  only  give  a  rough  guess.  In  strong  frost  I  think  its
powers  not  so  great ;  on  a  bridge  or  in  a  boat  it  has  no  effect,  the  water  must  be
under  ground,  to  affect  the  baguette,  and  running  through  wooden  pipes  acts  the
same  as  a  spring.  I  can  neither  make  the  baguette  turn  where  there  is  no  water,
nor  prevent  it  from  turning  where  there  is  any,  and  I  am  perfectly  ignorant  of
the  cause  why  it  turns.  The  only  sensation  I  am  conscious  of  is  an  emotion  simi-
lar to  that  felt  on  being  startled  by  sudden  noise,  or  surprise  of  any  kind.

"  '  I  generally  use  a  baguette  about  six  inches  from  the  vertex  to  the  ends  of
the  twigs  where  they  are  cut  off.

" '  I  shall  most  probably  be  in  London  next  winter,  and  will  (if  you  wish  it)
afford  you  an  opportunity  of  making  your  own  observations  on  this  curious  fact.'

"  The  lady  having  arrived  in  London,  wrote  to  Dr.  Hutton  to  inform  him  that
she  proposed  being  at  Woolwich  on  Friday  the  30th  inst.  (May,  1806)  at  eleven
in  the  forenoon.

"  Accordingly,"  says  Dr.  H.,  "  at  the  time  appointed,  the  lady  with  all  her
family  arrived  at  my  house  at  Woolwich  Common,  where  after  preparing  the  rods,
&c,  they  walked  out  to  the  grounds,  accompanied  by  the  individuals  of  my  own

family  and  some  friends,  when  Lady showed  the  experiment  several  times

in  different  places,  holding  the  rods,  (fee.  in  the  manner  as  described  in  her  Lady-
ship's first  letier  above  given.  In  the  places  where  I  had  good  reason  to  know
that  no  water  was  to  be  found,  the  rod  was  always  quiescent ;  but  in  other
places,  where  I  knew  there  was  water  below  the  surface,  the  rods  turned  slowly
and  regulaHy,  in  the  manner  above  described,  till  the  twigs  twisted  themselves
off  below  her  fingers,  which  were  considerably  indented  by  so  forcibly  holding
the  rods  between  them.

"  All  the  company  present  stood  close  round  the  lady,  with  all  eyes  intently
fixed  on  her  hands  and  the  rods,  to  watch  if  any  particular  motion  might  be
made  by  the  fingers ;  but  in  vain  ;  nothing  of  the  kind  was  perceived,  and  all  the
company  could  observe  no  cause  or  reason  why  the  rods  should  move  in  the
manner  as  they  were  seen  to  do.  After  the  experiments  were  ended,  every  one
of  the  company  tried  the  rods  in  the  same  manner  as  they  saw  the  lady  had
done,  but  without  the  least  motion  from  any  of  them.  And  in  my  family,  among
ourselves,  we  have  since  then,  several  times,  tried  if  we  could  possibly  cause  the
rod  to  turn  by  means  of  any  trick,  or  twisting  of  the  fingers,  held  in  the  manner
the  lady  did  ;  but  in  vain,  we  had  no  power  to  accomplish  it

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  65

to  assume  directions  referable  to  the  terrestrial  poles,  does  not  affect
the  magnet,  does  not  induce  a  galvanic  current  in  wires,  and  conse-
quently it  is  not  a  magnetism.

"  The  annexed  figure  represents  the  form  and  position  of  the  rod,  about  six
inches  iu  length,  cut  off  just  below  the  joint  or  junction  of  the  two  twigs."

There  can  be  no  impropriety  in  stating  now  that  the  lady  in  question  was  the
Honorable  Lady  Milbanke,  wife  of  Sir  Ralph  Milbanke,  Bart,  (afterwards  Noel)
and  mother  of  the  present  Dowager  Lady  Byron,  the  wife  and  widow  of  the
great  poet.  A  very  interesting  analogous  statement  relating  to  the  same  person
will  be  found  in  the  Quarterly  Review  for  March,  1820:  No.xliv.  Vol.  22.

Lately  in  France,  the  Count  de  Tristan  has  published  a  work  on  the  subject,
which  I  have  been  unable  to  procure  ;  but  I  have  a  most  interesting  volume  con-
taining two  memoirs  by  M.  Thouvenel,  a  physician  of  reputation  in  France,  who
was  commissioned,  in  the  year  1781,  by  the  king,  to  analyze  and  report  upon  the
mineral  and  medicinal  waters  of  the  kingdom.  The  author  undertakes  a  patient
and  laborious  investigation  in  the  spirit  of  a  philosopher,  and  regards  his  inquiries
as  leading  to  a  new  thread  in  the  tangled  skein  of  physics,  which,  like  any  single
fact  of  science,  may  lead  to  the  discovery  of  a  thousand  others  ;  a  fact  which  may
have  escaped  the  vigilant  sagacity  of  observers,  or  which  may  have  been  totally
abandoned  to  the  blind  credulity  of  worthy  soft-headed  persons,  or  in  short,  since
the  reign  of  a  kind  of  false  philosophy  the  offspring  of  scientific  pride,  may  have
been  delivered  over  to  the  presumptuous  disdain  of  men  of  false  wisdom.
Thouvenel  found  a  man  named  Bleton,  whose  business  was  that  of  a  sourcier,  or
discoverer  of  springs  by  means  of  a  divining  rod;  and  upon  this  man  he  made
more  than  six  hundred  observations,  many  of  them  in  the  presence  of  above  150
persons,  mostly  of  important  stations,  and  very  creditable  from  their  high  charac-
ter, who  testify  to  the  truth  of  the  observed  phenomena.  Among  others  was  M.
Jadelet,  Professor  of  Physic  at  Nancy,  a  man  eminent  for  his  abilities,  who  was
not  only  a  witness  of  these  experiments,  but  was  actually  concerned  in  the
greatest  part  of  them.  As  in  the  case  of  Lady  Milbanke,  with  Bleton,  an  inter-
nal feeling  was  coincident  with  the  movement  of  the  rod.  Whenever  this  man
was  in  a  place  where  there  existed  subterraneous  waters,  he  was  immediately
sensible  of  a  lively  impression,  referable  to  the  diaphragm,  which  he  called  his
"  commotion."  This  was  followed  by  a  sense  of  oppression  in  the  upper  part  of
the  chest;  at  the  same  time  he  felt  a  shock,  with  general  tremor  and  chilliness,
staggering  of  the  legs,  stiffness  of  the  wrists  with  twitchings,  a  concentrated
pulse,  which  gradually  diminished.  All  these  symptoms  were  more  or  less
strong  according  to  the  volume  and  depth  of  the  water,  and  they  were  more  sen-
siblv  felt  when  Bleton  ivent  in  a  direction  against  the  subterranean  current,  than
where  he  followed  its  course.  Stagnant  water  under  ground  did  not  affect  him ;
nor  did  open  sheets  of  water,  ponds,  lakes,  or  rivers  affect  him.  The  nervous
system  of  this  man  must  have  been  susceptible,  since  he  was  more  sensibly
affected  by  change  of  weather  and  variations  in  the  statu  of  the  atmosphere  than

86  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

/.  It  may  be  charged  and  transferred  upon  other  bodies  by  mere

contact.

other  persons ;  otherwise  he  appeared  healthy.  A  severe  acute  disorder  had  ab-
solutely at  one  -time  deprived  him  of  the  faculty  of  perceiving  water,  and  his
sensibility  in  this  respect  did  not  return  until  three  months  after  his  recovery ;  so
that  if  he  were  sensitive,  he  could  not  be  classed  among  the  sick  sensitive.  But
however  remarkable  these  constitutional  peculiarities  may  have  been,  there  was
in  Bleton's  case  a  more  than  usual  distinctness  in  the  behavior  of  the  divining
rod.  Unlike  many  sourciers,  he  did  not  grasp  it  closely  ;  he  did  not  warm  it  in
his  hands ;  he  did  not  prefer  a  young  hard  branch  forked,  newly  plucked,  and
full  of  sap.  His  custom  was  to  place  horizontally  on  his  forefinger  and  thumb  a
rod  of  any  kind  of  wood  (except  elder),  fresh  or  dry,  not  forked,  only  a  little
curved  or  bent.  A  very  straight  rod  failed  to  turn  on  its  axis,  but  a  bent  rod
turned  on  its  axis,  with  more  or  less  rapidity,  according  to  the  quantity  of  the
water  and  the  force  of  the  current.  Thouvenel  counted  from  thirty-five  to  eighty
revolutions  in  a  minute,  and  always  noted  an  exact  proportion  between  the  rota-
tion of  the  rod  and  the  convulsive  motions  of  Bleton.  If  these  memoirs  be  criti-
cally examined,  it  will  be  found  that  the  author  experimented  with  full  care  to
avoid  every  source  of  fallacy.  The  natural  motions  of  the  rod  on  Bleton's  fingers
was  backwards,  but  as  soon  as  he  withdrew  from  the  spring  over  which  he  stood,
in  any  direction  whatever,  the  rod,  which  instantly  ceased  to  turn,  was  subject  to
a  new  law,  for  at  a  determinate  distance  from  the  spring  an  action  of  rotation  in
a  direction  contrary  to  the  former  one  took  place.  This  was  invariable,  and  upon
measuring  the  distance  of  the  spot,  where  this  retrograde  phenomenon  took  place,
from  the  spring,  its  depth  could  generally  be  found.

I  pass  over  an  account  of  numerous  experiments  made  by  this  intelligent  and
careful  observer,  pointing  out  the  analogies  of  the  known  phenomena  of  electricity
and  magnetism,  by  modifications  resulting  to  the  sensibility  of  Bleton,  and  the  ro-
tation of  the  rod  by  various  ingenious  electrical  and  magnetic  trials  suggested  by
the  inventive  sagacity  of  Thouvenel,  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  curious  anticipations
of  some  of  Professor  Faraday's  discoveries,  by  means  of  the  sensibility  of  Bleton
and  the  invariable  laws  which  regulated  the  rotation  of.  the  divining  rod,  when
the  experiments  were  made  over  places  where  various  substances  had  been  con-
cealed under  the  ground.  It  was  found  that  whether  the  trials  were  made  in
this  manner  or  over  masses  of  coal,  subterraneous  curreuts  of  water,  or  metallic
veins,  the  divining  rod  indicated  a  determined  sphere  of  electric  activity,  and  was
in  fact  an  electromedical  rod.  "  Of  all  the  phenomena  relating  to  the  distinc-
tions of  fossil  bodies,"  says  Thouvenel,  "  acting  by  their  electric  emanations,
doubtless  the  most  surprising  is  this ;  upon  the  mines  of  iron,  of  whatever  kind
they  may  be,  the  rods  supported  by  the  fingers  of  Bleton  turned  constantly  upon
their  axis,  from  behind  forward,  as  upon  the  mines  of  coal ;  while  upon  other  me-
tallic mines,  as  upon  other  metals  extracted  from  their  mines,  the  rotary  move-
ment took  place  in  the  contrary  direction,  that  is  to  say,  from  before  backwards.
This  circular  movement,  which  never  varies  while  Bleton  is  in  a  perpendicular
position  over  mines  or  upon  metals,  presents  revolutions  as  rapid  and  as  regu-
lar as  the  revolutions  in  the  contrary  direction  upon  the  mines  of  iron  and  of
coal."

The  constitutional  effects  of  spasms  and  convulsive  twitchings  took  place  more
or  less  in  all  the  veins,  but  copper  emanations  excited  very  strong  and  disagree-
able spasmodic  symptoms,  accompanied  by  pains  about  the  heart,  by  flatulent
movements  in  the  bowels,  and  by  abundant  eructations  of  air.     On  lead,  there

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  87

g.  Matter  possesses  a  certain  coercive  power  over  it,  but  only  for
a  limited  time,  during  which  the  transferred  force  disappears.

seemed  to  be  less  unpleasant  consequences,  but  stronger  again  on  the  mines  of
antimony.  Having  previously  determined  that  for  Bleton,  on  all  the  metal-,  ex-
cept iron,  there  existed  a  sphere  of  electric  activity,  which  propagated  itself  to-
wards the  west,  a  great  number  of  experiments  were  made  which  always  had
the  same  results.  At  the  depth  of  two,  three,  or  four  feet  under  ground  were
buried  gold,  silver,  conper,  tin,  lead,  and  iron.  The  weight  of  each  was  only  from
five  to  eight  pounds,  'in  other  similar  pits  pyrites  of  all  kinds,  sulphur,  coal,  resin,
wax,  and  lard,  were  buried.  All  these  different  deposits  were  made  at  distances
from  each  other,  in  gardens  or  in  open  country,  and  they  Were  so  well  covered
over  and  concealed  that  nothing  could  be  perceived  except  private  marks  to  be
known  onlv  to  certain  assistants.  Over  the  resin,  wax,  and  lard,  Bleton  expe-
rienced nothing;  over  the  coal  there  was  a  decided  effect;  the  convulsive  tremor
of  muscle  was  manifest,  and"  the  rod  rotated  from  behind  forwards.  Over  the
iron  the  same  indications,  but  more  energetic.  A  feeble  impression  from  the  sul-
phur, but  sufficient  to  establish  a  difference  between  it  and  the  two  preceding,
and  the  rod  over  the  sulphur  turned  from  before  backward.  Pyrites  produced
the  same  rotation  as  the  sulphur,  and  a  slight  tendency  of  the  electric  sphere  to-
wards the  west.  Gold  and  copper  .'specially  exhibited  strongly  this  singular
tendency  of  the  active  electric  emanations.  Over  silver,  tin,  and  lead  also,  it  was
more  remarkable.  It  extends  itself  more  or  less  from  the  focus  of  the  metals,
according  to  their  depth  and  their  mass.  For  example,  in  describing  a  circle
having  r  radius  of  three  or  four  feet  from  this  focus,  Bleton  felt  absolutely  no  ac-
tion except  on  the  line  of  the  west.  It  was  the  same  when,  in  proceeding  from  the
vertical  point  of  the  focus,  he  successively  traversed  all  the  radii  of  the  circle ;  or
even  if  he  went  from  all  the  points  of  the  circumference  to  proceed  to  the  centre.
In  these  two  inverse  proceedings  it  was  always  only  on  the  radii  going  westward
that  his  person  and  the  rods  were  affected  by  movements  more  or  less  intense,
Recording  to  the  kinds  of  metal.

It  must,  however,  be  admitted  that  the  action  of  these  metals  presenting  only
the  differences  of  greater  or  less  in  degree,  either  in  the  nervous  and  muscular
impressions  of  the  body,  or  in  the  circular  revolutions  of  the  rods,  constantly-
moved  from  before  backward,  these  differences  do  not  yield  a  certain  means  of
distinguishing  the  live  metals  one  from  the  other.  The  object  Thouvenel  had  in
view  was  nevertheless  fulfilled,  for  he  had  established  the  extent  and  the  deter-
mination of  a  sphere  of  electric  activity  towards  the  west,  in  certain  metals  and
on  sulphur,  which  does  not  exist  in  the  same  manner  on  iron,  on  coal,  or  on
streams  of  water.

To  give  a  summary,  then,  of  the  relations  of  these  phenomena  to  those  estab-
lished^}' Professor  JWaday,  it  may  be  said  that  over  iron  mines  the  divining  rod
assumes"  a  movement  of  rotation  diametrically  opposite  to  that  which  it  exhibits
over  all  other  mines.  When  iron  and  other  metals  are  extracted  from  their  ores
and  deposited  under  ground,  the  phenomenon  occurs  with  the.  same  distinction ;
that  is  to  say,  with  iron  it  rotates  towards  the  north.  With  all  the  other  metals
submitted  to  trial,  its  action  is  from  east  to  west.  The  influence  of  the  red  metals
appears  to  be  more  energetic  than  that  of  the  white.  But  with  regard  to  this
divining  rod  let  one  condition  be  remarked— the  relation  of  the  organic  substance
to  another  organic  and  living  power  of  matter ;  to  a  human  being  in  a  certain
susceptible  state  of  nervous  system.  Thouvenel  describes  the  symptoms  which
affected  Bleton  when  he  was  in  the  sphere  of  metallic  action,  and  the  rod  becomes

88  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

h.  Matter  has  a  power  of  conducting  it,  in  different  degrees,  in
proportion  to  the  continuity  of  bodies.

the  secondary  part  of  the  philosophical  instrument,  composed  of  an  impres-
sionable human  being  and  a  piece  of  stick.  Some  of  the  Baron  von  Reichen-
bach's  subjects  would  have  been  just  the  persons  to  illustrate  the  facts  of
Bletonism.

A  highly  susceptible  girl,  the  lady's  maid  of  a  very  clever  and  intelligent  friend
of  mine,  residing  in  Hertfordshire,  offers,  when  she  is  mesmerized,  a  great  many
deeply  interesting  phenomena.     I  have  repeatedly  mentioned  her  to  Harriet

P .     She  is  as  guileless  and  as  good  a  being  as  can  be  met  with,  and  is  much

beloved  by  her  excellent  and  amiable  mistress,  who  has  repeatedly  addressed  me
on  her  case.  If  a  piece  of  hazel  stick  or  whitethorn  be  presented  to  Harriet,  she
grasps  it  and  sleeps  mesmerically  in  less  than  a  minute.  The  sleep  is  at  first  very
intense  and  deep,  and  then  the  stick  is  held  so  firmly  that  the  spasmodic  state  of
the  muscles  renders  it  very  difficult  for  even  a  powerful  bystander  to  turn  it  in
her  hand.  Mary  Anne  Douglas  and  several  others  of  my  patients  have  exhibited
the  same  phenomena.  In  two  of  the  cases  a  very  curious  point  has  been  remarked.
If  the  hazel  or  whitethorn  stick  be  held  with  the  pointed  end  upwards,  that  end
which  is  upwards  when  it  grows  from  the  ground,  a  force  of  attraction  is  so  ener-
getic that  these  individuals  cannot  resist  their  inclination  to  grasp  it  with  both
hands.  One  of  them  will  rush  towards  it  from  a  considerable  distance,  and  will
with  extreme  eagerness  run  from  the  bottom  to  the  top  of  the  house  in  order  to
have  the  pleasure  of  grasping  it.  If  she  succeed  in  getting  hold  of  it  before  its
direction  is  reversed,  her  delight  is  unbounded  ;  she  becomes  intoxicated,  and  soon
passes  into '  a  state  of  deep  unconscious  sleep.  If,  however,  the  stick  be  turned
rapidly  with  its  pointed  end  downwards,  a  repulsive  force  operates,  and  each
patient  feels  a  repugnance  to  it.  If  the  stick  be  allowed  to  be  held  in  both  hands,
and  a  piece  of  gold,  or  of  platinum,  or  of  cobalt,  or  of  nickel,  or  the  pointed  end
of  a  rock  crystal  be  held  to  it,  in  each  experiment  there  is  a  burning  sensation
complained  of,  and  an  endeavor  is  made  to  loosen  the  hold  on  the  stick,  with  ludi-
crous haste.  A  gentleman  who  had  been  often  put  into  mesmeric  sleep,  remark-
ed, on  holding  successively  several  pieces  of  these  sticks,  that  a  sensation  of  heat
was  communicated  to  his  hand  in  each  instance,  and  he  felt  a  strong  tendency  to
sleep.  Susan  L ,  a  highly  susceptible  person,  exclaimed,  while  in  a  sleep-
waking  state,  "  that  a  shower  of  fine  small  sparks  of  fire-'  came  from  a  piece  of
hazel  which  happened  to  be  in  my  hand.  She  did  not  see  this  from  ash  or  from
fir,  but  invariably  saw  it  from  every  piece  of  hazel  or  from  whitethorn  that  was
brought  near  her.  On  numerous  occasions  experiments  were  made  to  test  the
accuracy  of  her  repetitions  on  observing  these  things,  and  she  invariably  gave
the  same  answers  to  the  questions  on  the  same  objects.  Subsequently,  eight
other  individuals  were  separately  examined  as  to  their  susceptibilities  to  different
kiuds  of  wood.  Each  gave  the  same  results  and  saw  the  sparks  of  fire,  In  many
other  cases,  the  impressionability  being  different,  the  hazel  and  whitethorn  had
no  perceptible  effects ;  the  patients  handling  the  bits  of  stick  without  observing

heat  or  sparks,  and  failing  to  grasp  them  spasmodically.     But  Harriet  P r's

impressionability  was  put  to  a  very  useful  purpose.  Her  mistress  had  heard  of
the  practice  of  dowsing  for  water,  and  in  a  letter  to  a  correspondent,  now  before
me,  writes  thus  under  date  of  July,  1845: — "We  made  a  curious  experiment

here  some  days  since  with  Harriet  P .     We  have  very  bad  water  here,  and

have  long  been  unable  to  find  a  good  spring.  Mr.  G.  has  in  vain  dug  and  dug
and  dug  for  one.     I  proposed  the  divining  rod ;  for,  said  I,  Dr.  Ashburner  would

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  8»

t.  The  capacity  of  bodies  to  receive  a  charge  is  in  direct  relation
to  the  strength  of  the  crystallic  force.

not  think  it  a  foolish  experiment.  Harriet  P.  was  willing,  so  we  went  forth  to  a
field  the  most  likely  one  for  a  spring;  Mr.  and  Mis.  G.,  myself,  and  two  friends
staying  here.  We  put  Harriet  to  sleep  by  the  hazel  stick;  she  grasped  it  so
tightly  we  were  obliged  to  use  the  gold  chain ;— she  then  held  it  only  in  one
hand,  and  immediately  began  to  walk,  taking  her  own  way.  She  went  very
carefully  for  about  twenty  vards;  then  suddenly  stopped  as  if  she  had  been  shot.
Not  a  word  was  uttered  by  any  one.  We  all  looked  on,  and  were  not  a  little  sur-
prised to  see  the  rod  slowly  turn  round  until  her  hand  was  almost  twisted  back-
wards. It  looked  as  if  it  must  pain  her.  Still  no  one  spoke.  Suddenly  she  ex-
claimed, 'There!  there!  don't  vou  see  the  stick  turn?  the  Avater  is  here— under
my  hand.  I  see,  oh  I  see— let  me  look— don't  speak  to  me— I  like  to  look.'
'  How  deep  is  the  water  V  said  Mrs.  G.,  speaking  to  Harriet's  fingers.  '  Oh,  about
three  feet;  I  can't  quite  tell,  but  it  is  here.'  In  a  moment,  to  our  astonishment,
she  sunk  down  on  the  grass,  took  the  stick  agajnin  both  her  hands,  and  seemed
to  like  it  as  if  it  could  feel.  We  made  a  strange  gfcup  round  her,  as  we  were  all
much  astonished  to  see  what  we  had  come  there  to  see,  but  still  it  astonished
us :  she  seemed  so  like  a  little  witch.  We  marked  the  place,  and  after  a  fe\v
minutes  we  awoke  her.  In  the  evening  she  was  again  mesmerized  to  sleep,  and
we  asked  her  what  she  saw  at  the  spring.  'Why  I  saw  water— water  every-
where.' '  Then,'  said  I,  '  how  do  you  know  where  the  spring  is  V  '  Oh,  because
it  goes  trinkle,  trinkle— I  know  it  is  there.'  '  Why  did  you  sit  down  ¥  '  \\  by,
because  I  was  so  giddy :  it  seemed  as  if  all  was  water  but  the  little  piece  ot
ground  I  stood  upon ;— oh  I  saw  so  much  water,  all  fresh,  but  no  sea ;  I  tried  to
see  the  sea,  but  I  could  not— I  could  not  at  all.'  Mr.  G.  caused  a  large  hole  to  be
dug  at  the  place  ;  and  just  at  the  depth  of  three  feet  the  water  was  found.  A
brick  well  has  been  constructed,  and  there  is  a  good  supply  of  excellent  water.
No  one  could  donbt  of  the  action  of  the  rod,  it  turned  so  evidently  of  itself  in  her
hand.     Of  course  when  awake  Harriet  knew  nothing  of  the  circumstance.

So  many  and  so  various  are  the  testimonies  and  the  facts  relating  to  the
divining  rod,  that  it  would  be  tedious  to  recite  the  hundreds  of  respectable  docu-
ments offered  by  those  authors  who  have  written  on  this  subject.  Lately,  a  work
by  Tardy  de  Montravel,  printed  in  1781,  entitled  "  Memoire  Physique  et  Medi-
cinale  sur  la  Baguette  Divinatoire,"  has  fallen  into  my  hands,  and  it  abounds  in
testimonies  as  to  the  truth  of  the  same  class  of  facts.  One  of  the  most  curious
works  I  have  seen  on  the  subject  is  a  little  book  with  the  title  of  "  La  I  hysique
occulte,  ou  Traite  de  la  Baguette  Divinatoire,  et  de  son  Utilite  pour  la  decou-
verte  des  sources  d'eaux,  des  minieres,  des  tresors  cachez,  des  voleurs  et  des
meurtriers  fugiiifs,  avec  des  principes  qui  expliquent  les  phenomenes  les  plus
obscursde  la  Nature,"  par  M.  L.  L.  do  Yallemont,  Ph.  D.  et  Ph.,  etc.  Ihis  work,
embellished  with  plates  illustrating  the  different  kinds  of  divining  rods  with  the
various  modes  of  holding  them  for  use,  appeared  at  the  latter  part  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  and  passed  through  several  editions  in  France  as  well  as  in  Hol-
land. It  is  remarkable  for  mufti  curious  literary  and  historical  learning,  and  tor
able  statements  of  the  arguments  which  were  used  in  the  controversies,  rite  at
that  period,  on  the  realities  of  the  facts  under  consideration.  It  contains  a  curi-
ous catalogue  of  a  great  number  of  mines  discovered,  in  France,  by  means  ot  the
divining  rod,  made  out  by  a  German  mineralogist  employed  for  the  purpose  by
the  Cardinal  de  Richelieu.     But  the  most  singular  part  of  the  book  is  the  power-

90  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET  IN

k.  It  expresses  itself  quantitatively  different  at  the  two  poles  ;  so
that,  like  the  magnet,  it  produces,  as  a  rule,  sensations  of  cold  at  the

fully  authenticated  liiatory  of  Jacques  Aymar,  a  peasant,  who,  constitutionally
impressionable,  guided  by  the  divining  rod,  followed  a  murderer  for  more  than
forty-five  leagues  on  land,  and  more  than  thirty  leagues  by  sea : —

On  the  5th  of  July,  1692,  a  dealer  in  wine  and  his  wife,  residing  at  Lyons,
were  murdered  in  a  cellar,  for  the  sake  of  robbing  them  of  a  sum  of  money  kept
in  a  shop  hard  by,  which  was  at  the  same  time  their  chamber. ,  All  this  was
executed  with  such  promptitude  and  secrecy  that  no  one  had  witnessed  the
crime,  and  the  assassins  escaped*

A  neighbor,  struck  with  horror  at  the  enormity  of  the  crime,  having  remem-
bered that  he  knew  a  man  named  Jacques  Aymar,  a  wealthy  peasant  who  could
follow  the  track  of  thieves  and  murderers,  induced  him  to  come  to  Lyons,  and
introduced  him  to  the  king's  attorney -general.  This  peasant  assured  the  func-
tionary that  if  they  would  lead  him  to  the  place  where  the  murder  was  commit-
ted, in  order  that  he  might  recede*  from  it  a  certain  influence,  he  would  assuredly
trace  the  steps  of  the  guilty  parties,  and  would  point  them  out  wherever  they
were.  He  added,  that  for  his  purpose  lie  should  make  use  of  a  rod  of  wood  such
as  he  was  in  the  habit  of  using  to  find  springs  of  water,  metals,  and  hidden  trea-
sure. The  man  was  conducted  to  the  cellar  where  the  murders  were  committed.
There  he  was  seized  with  emotion ;  his  pulse  rose  as  if  he  were  suffering  from  a
violent  fever,  and  the  forked  rod  wliich  he  held  in  his  hands  turned  rapidly  over
the  two  places  where  the  murdered  bodies  had  lain.

Having  received  the  impression,  Aymar,  guided  by  his  rod,  passed  through  the
streets  through  which  the  assassins  had  fled.  He  entered  the  court-yard  of  the
archbishop's  palace.  Arriving  at  the  gate  of  the  Rone,  which  was  shut,  it  being
night,  he  could  then  proceed  no  further.  The  next  day  he  went  out  of  the  town
b£  the  bridge  of  the  Rone,  and  always  guided  by  the  rod,  he  went  to  the  right
along  the  bank  of  the  river.  Three  persons,  who  accompanied  him,  were  wit-
nesses that  he  sometimes  recognised  the  tracks  of  three  accomplices,  and  that
sometimes  he  found  only  two.  In  this  uncertainty,  he  was  led  by  the  rod  to  the
house  of  a  gardener,  where  he  was  enlightened  as  to  the  number  of  the  criminals.
For  on  his  arrival  he  maintained  that  they  had  touched  a  table,  and  that  of  three
bottles  which  were  in  the  room  they  had  touched  one,  over  which  the  rod  visibly
rotated.  In  short,  two  boys  of  nine  and  ten  years  of  age,  who,  fearing  then-
father's  anger,  had  at  first  denied  the  fact,  at  last  acknowledged  that  three  men,
whom  they  described,  had  entered  the  house,  and  had  drunk  the  wine  which  was
contained  in  the  bottles  indicated  by  the  peasant.  As  they  were  assured  by  the
declaration  of  the  children,  they  did  not  hesitate  to  go  forward  with  Aymar,  half
a  league  lower  than  the  bridge  on  the  bank  of  the  Rhone.  All  along  the  bank
for  this  distance  the  footsteps  of  the  criminals  were  traced.  Then  they  must
have  entered  a  boat.  Aymar  followed  in  another  on  their  track  as  clearly  by
water  as  by  land ;  and  his  boat  was  made  to  go  through  an  arch  of  the  bridge
of  Vienna  which  is  never  used,  upon  which  it  Avas,  concluded  that  these  wretches
had  no  boatman,  since  they  wandered  out  of  their  way.

On  the  voyage,  Aymar  went  ashore  at  all  the  places  where  the  fugitives  had
landed,  went  straight  to  their  coverts,  and  recognised,  to  the  great  surprise  of  the
hosts  and  spectators,  the  beds  on  which  they  had  slept,  the  tables  on  which  they
had  eaten,  and  the  pots  and  glasses  the}  had  touched.

He  arrived  at  the  camp  of  Sablon,  where  he  was  considerably  agitated     He

RELATION  TO  THE  HUMAN  ORGANS.  91

pole  corresponding  to  —  M,  at  the  pole  corresponding  to  -f- M  of
gentle  heat.  In  regard  to  quantity  the  northward  pole  is  stronger,
the  southward  pole  weaker.

believed  that  in  the  crowd  of  soldiers  he  should  find  the  murderers.  Lest  the
soldiers  should  ill-treat  him,  he  feared  to  operate  with  bis  rod.  He  returned  to
Lyons,  whence  they  made  him  go  hack  to  the  camp  of  Sablou  by  water,  having
furnished  him  with' letters  of  recommendation.  The  criminals  were  no  longer  to
be  found  there.  He  followed  them  to  the  fair  of  Beaueaire  in  Languedoc,
and  always  remarked  in  his  course  the  beds,  the  tables,  the  seats  where  they
had  been.

At  Beaueaire  the  rod  conducted  him  to  the  gate  of  a  prison,  where  he  was
positive  one  of  the  wretches  would  be  found.  Fourteen  of  the  prisoners  were
paraded  before  him,  and  the  rod  turned  on  a  man  with  a  humped  back,  who  had
been  sent  to  the  prison  about  one  hour  before  for  a  petty  larceny.  The  peasant
did  not  hesitate  to  declare  his  conviction  that  the  hump-backed  man  was  one  of
the  assassins  ;  but  he  continued  to  search  for  the  others,  and  found  that  they  had
gone  towards  Nismes.  No  more  was  done  at  that  time.  They  transferred  the
hump-backed  man  to  Lyons.  On  the  journey  he  asseverated  his  innocence;  but
finding  that  all  the  hosts  at  whose  inns  he  had  lodged  recognised  him,  he  avowed
that  he  had  been  the  servant  of  two  men  of  Provence  who  had  engaged  him  to
join  them  in  this  foul  deed  :  that  these  men  had  committed  the  murder  and  had
taken  the  money,  giving  him  but  six  crowns  and  a  half  from  their  booty  of  one
hundred  and  thirty  crowns.  He  corroborated  the  accuracy  of  the  indications  of
the  peasant  as  to  the  gardener's  house,  the  camp  of  the  Sablon,  the  fair  of  Beau-
eaire, and  the  other  places  through  which  the  three  had  passed,  extending  over
forty-rive  French  leagues.  All  these  things  of  course  excited  immense  interest.
At  Lyons  many  repetitions  of  the  observations  respecting  the  turning  of  the  rod
in  the  cellar  were  made  in  presence  of  many  persons.  Monsieur  l'Abbe  Bignou
gives  his  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  statement  of  facts,  in  a  letter,  inserted  by
Vallemont  in  his  work.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  statements  require
very  strong  corroboration,  and  here  they  apparently  obtain  it,  Vallemont,  quot-
ing the  authority  of  the  Royal  Society" of  London,  in  the  second  part  of  the  his-
tory', seventeenth  section,  one  hundred  and  twenty-fifth  page,  says,  that  in  all
countries  where  men  are  governed  by  laws,  the  testimony  in  a  matter  of  life  and
death,  of  only  two  or  three  witnesses,  is  required  ;  but  is  it,  then,  treating  an
affair  of  physics  equitably,  when  the  concurrence  of  sixty  or  a  hundred  persons
is  insufficient  ?  It  is  difficult  to  define  the  just  boundaries  of  credulity  ;  but  in
all  these  recitals  of  histories  of  events,  there  is  this  general  consent,  that  in  those
who  can  make  use  of  the  rod,  there  is  always  an  agitation,  a  fever,  or  some  sen-
sation which  indicates  a  nervous  commotion  ;  and  the  best  evidence  of  the  closest
investigation  goes  to  the  point  that  most  frequently  the  rod  is  of  hazel  wood.
How  far  these  stories  tend  to  the  conclusion  that  organic  tests  appear  to  require
the  re-agencies  of  organic  force  is  at  present  a  matter  of  speculation  ;  but  it  is  to
be  hoped  that  the  effort  to  attract  serious  attention  to  this  class  of  facts  is  not  un-
interesting or  unimportant.

There  are  many  facts  connected  with  the  Baron's  new  force  which  may  be  used
to  illustrate  the  influence  of  water  and  of  shining  surfaces  iu  producing  the  clonic
spasms  of  hydrophobia.  The  phenomena  offered  by  certain  somnambules  are
highly  illustrative  of  the  effects  of  water  in  certain  diseased  or  susceptible  states
of  the  human  system.  Running  water,  a  constantly  changing  series  of  crystalline
molecules,  perpetually  discharges  positive  or  negative  odic  force.

92  CRYSTALS  AND  THE  MAGNET.

I.  Warming  the  crystal  has  hitherto  produced  no  essential  modi-
fication.

m.  This  force  of  crystals  is  contained  in  those  exhibited  by  the
magnet ;  it  constitutes  therefore  a  separable  part  of  them,  capable  of
being  isolated.

THIRD  TREATISE.

EXPERIMENTS  TO  ESTABLISH  SOME  FIXED  PHYSICAL  LAWS  IN  THE
VARYING  PHENOMENA  WHICH  HAVE  HITHERTO  BEEN  CALLED  ANI-
MAL   MAGNETISM.

58.  In  the  first  place  I  shall  endeavor  to  apply  the  laws  obtained
in  the  two  preceding  treatises  to  another  series  of  investigations  which
have  reference  here,  and  to  give  them  a  wider  extension  and  better
foundation.  Beyond  the  memory  of  man,  have  been  known  certain
enigmatical  phenomena,  produced  by  the  magnet,  in  its  effect  on
many  sick  persons,  especially  on  somnambulists.  In  the  last  century,
and  indeed  earlier,  it  was  found  that  similar  phenomena  might  be
brought  about  by  bare  hands,  and  without  a  magnet.  In  the  condi-
tion, up  to  this  time,  of  our  physical  knowledge,  it  was  impossible  to
discover  any  certain  connection  between  that  force  of  the  magnet,  and
this  of  the  human  hands,  feet,  &c,  and  equally  in  vain  was  it  at-
tempted to  detect  any  regularity  and  subjection  to  law.  The  conse-
quence of  this  was,  that  all  those  who  were  occupied  with  natural
science  passed  by  these  subjects,  and  gave  them  no  place  in  the
school  of  physics.  Isolated  physicians  and  dilettante  kept  alive  the
tradition,  or  increased  the  heap  of  unconnected  observations.  For
want  of  a  better  word,  they  called  it  animal  magnetism — an  expres-
sion which  is  the  more  unsuitable,  the  less  the  phenomena  signified
by  it  agree  with  that  which  constitutes  magnetism  in  the  proper
sense  of  the  word.  In  the  meantime,  books  have  been  written  ;  few
are  good,  many  appear  altogether  one-sided,  many  are  actually  un-
readable.

At  first  I  avoided  entering  upon  this  literature  ;  I  wished  to  retain
my  powers  of  observation  and  judgment  free  and  unbiassed,  and  to
build  my  woTk  from  the  beginning  solely  on  the  foundation  of  my
own  experience.  It  seemed  to  me  better  to  select  my  own  path  in
the  direction  in  which  natural  science  usually  advances,  and  which  is
never  that  of  medicine.  The  medical  man  is  chiefly  concerned  for  a
remedial  agent,  but  the  physicist  looks  solely  for  natural  truths  ;  one
seeks  the  concrete,  the  other  the  abstract,  and  it  is  from  this  primary

94  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

divergence  that  the  two  have  hitherto  been  able  to  combine  so  little
in  their  researches.

59.  After  I  had  demonstrated  a  force  in  crystals,  which,  with  all
its  difference,  at  the  same  time  bears  an  unmistakeable  analogy  to
magnetism  ;  while  the  so-called  animal  magnetism,  appearing  in  a
shape  similar  to  the  former,  on  the  other  hand,  allows  us  to  perceive
in  certain  resemblances  an  astonishing  parallelism  with  magnetism,
in  spite  of  particular  essential  differences  ;  this  affinity  of  the  condi-
tions led  me  to  the  inquiries — whether  and  how  much  might  be
found  to  be  common  to  all  the  phenomena,  and  whether  at  last  some
laws  might  not  be  discovered,  upon  which  animal  magnetism  might
rest,  in  the  same  way  as  the  crystallic  force.  Since  we  imagine  crys-
tallization to  be  the  connecting  link  between  the  inorganic  and  or-
ganic, the  dead  and  the  living,  I  believed  I  might  encourage  some
hope  finally  to  obtain,  by  way  of  experiment,  a  point  of  connection
between  animal  magnetism  and  physics — perhaps  even  to  procure  it
a  resting-place  for  which  it  has  hitherto  striven  in  vain.

60.  To  open  a  path  to  this,  it  seemed  to  me  above  all  things  ne-
cessary to  make  out,  as  clearly  as  possible,  the  part  which  the  terres-
trial magnetism  plays  in  these  matters.  Since  the  magnet,  since  the
ciystallic  force,  exercises  so  decided  an  influence  on  sensitive  persons,
the  power  of  the  terrestrial  magnetism,  which  directs  the  magnetic
needle,  cannot  be  without  influence  on  the  animal  nerves.  And  I
thus  saw  clearly  that  it  was  impossible  to  draw  any  scientific  conclu-
sion from  any  experiments,  so  long  as  this  powerful  factor,  which  must
always  interfere  in  the  phenomena,  was  not  considered,  measured,  and
brought  into  the  account.

With  this  view  I  now  tested  both  healthy  and  sick,  in  particular
Mr.  Schuh,  Mr.  Schmidt  the  surgeon,  and  Misses  Nowotny,  Sturmann,
Maix,  Reichel,  Atzmannsdorfer,  and  others,  under  different  circum-
stances and  at  different  times.

61.  Mr.  Schuh,  in  his  present  dwelling,  had  the  strange  custom  of
regularly  turning  round  in  bed,  when  he  woke  early  in  the  morning ;
that  is,  he  then  placed  his  head  where  his  feet  had  been  during  the
night,  after  which  he  always  went  to  sleep  again.  This  sleep  was
always  more  refreshing  than  all  the  preceding  night's  sleep,  contrary
to  the  general  "rule,  according  to  which,  the  earlier  sleep,  especially
that  before  midnight,  is  the  most  strengthening.  When  he  had  not
this  after-sleep,  he  felt  weaker  all  day  :  and  thus  this  strange  custom
had  for  a  long  time  been  a  necessity  to  him.  I  inquired  about  the
position  of  the  bed,  and  learned  that  the  head  was  turned  toward  the
south,  and  the  foot  toward  the  north.  By  my  advice  he  assumed  the
opposite  position  when  he  went  to  bed  at  night ;  that  is,  with  the

OF  THE  ORGANIC    FORCE.  96

head  to  the  north  and  the  feet  to  the  south.  From  this  day  for-
ward he  never  found  the  morning  after-sleep  necessary ;  the  sleep
was  good,  and  strengthening;  and  he  thenceforward  gave  up  that
custom.

02.  Mr.  Schmidt,  the  surgeon,  of  Vienna,  had  received  a  chill  of
the  right  arm  on  a  railway  journey,  and  for  some  time  had  suffered
from  acute  rheumatism,  with  the  most  painful  cramps  running  from
the  shoulder  to  the  fingers.  His  physician  treated  him  with  the
magnet,  which  rapidly  quieted  the  cramps,  but  they  always  returned.
1  found  him  lying  with  his  head  directed  toward  the  south.  On  my
remarking  this,  they  turned  him  round  and  brought  him  into  the  di-
rection of  the  magnetic  meridian,  with  his  head  to  the  north.  Directly
he  came  into  this  position  he  uttered  expressions  of  pleasure  ;  he  de-
clared that  he  felt  refreshed  and  strengthened.  A  pleasant  uniform
warmth  diffused  itself  forthwith  in  the  chilled  part,— he  felt  the  pass
of  the  magnet  incomparably  more  cooling  and  agreeable  than  before,
and  before  I  went  away  the  stiffened  arm  and  the  fingers  became
moveable,  and  the  pain  had  wholly  disappeared.

63.  When  I  tried  the  position  of  Miss  Nowotny  with  the  magnetic
needle,  I  found  her  almost  exactly  in  the  magnetic  meridian— the
head  lying  to  the  north.  She  had  herself  instinctively  sought  and
wished  for  tins  direction,  and  it  had  been  necessary  to  break  down  a
stove  to  satisfy  her  desire.  I  asked  her  to  lie  with  her  head  to  the
south,  by  way  of  experiment,  to  ascertain  the  result.  It  required
some  pains  to' induce  her  to  do  it,  for  I  was  obliged  to  repeat  my
wish  three  or  four  days  running,  and  to  make  her  appreciate  the
weight  I  laid  upon  this  change,  before  I  brought  her  to  it.  At  length
I  found  her  one  morning  in  this  reversed  position  :  she  had  assumed
it  a  short  time  before  my  arrival.  A  very  little  time  elapsed  before
the  patient  began  to  complain.  She  was  uncomfortable  ;  she  turned
over  restlessly  ;  her  face  became  flushed  ;  her  pulse  rose,  became
fuller  ;  flow  of  blood  to  the  head  increased  the  headache  ;  and  dis-
comfort of  the  stomach  soon  ensued.  The  bedstead,  with  the  patient,
was  quickly  turned  round  again,  but  stopped  when  moved  a  quarter
of  a  circle.  She  now  lay  in  the  magnetic  parallel,  with  her  head  to
the  west.  This  direction  was  completely  unbearable  to  her,  and  still
more  adverse  than  the  south-north  position  she  had  just  left.  This
was  at  half-past  ten  a.  m.  She  feared  from  her  sensations,  that  if  she
remained  she  would  soon  faint,  and  begged  to  be  quickly  removed
from  this  situation.  She  was  then  brought  back  into  her  original
north  and  south  direction.  Immediately  after  this  all  the  adverse
conditions  decreased,  and  in  a  few  minutes  had  disappeared  so  per-
fectly that  the  patient  became  cheerful  again.     But  not  merely  an

96  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

extreme  discomfort  seized  the  patient  in  the  altered  direction  toward
the  heavens, — her  reactionary  sensations  to  all  external  things  were
transformed  in  the  most  striking  manner.  The  usual  passes  of  the
magnet,  performed  by  her  physician,  which  she  always  found  agree-
able, then  became  unpleasant,— -stronger  ones  intolerable  ;  substances
at  other  times  disagreeable,  like  sulphur,  were  then  almst  indifferent ;
others,  such  as  lead,  even  agreeable  ;  in  short,  all  diseased  conditions
assumed  an  altered  form.

These  observations  were  too  full  of  import,  and  held  out  too  great
a  prospect  of  immediate  value  for  medical  purposes,  to  be  passed
over  without  farther  and  more  careful  investigation.  I  concerted,
therefore,  with  her  physician  for  a  farther  inquiry  on  a  future  day.
This  took  place  on  the  4th  of  April,  1844.  When  we  came  to  the
patient  in  the  morning,  we  found  that  she  had  already  been  lying
half  an  hour  in  the  south-north  position.  She  anxiously  longed  for
our  coming,  and  earnestly  begged  to  be  speedily  released  from  her
painful  situation.  All  the  above-mentioned  phenomena  were  repeated
in  the  same  order  of  succession ;  her  hand  no  longer  followed  the
magnet,  but  was  only  weakly  attracted  by  it — even  the  strongest  did
not  produce  any  spasmodic  clenching  of  the  haudr  and  the  reactions
to  different  substances  were  disturbed  just  in  the  same  way  as  before.
In  order  to  enable  us  to  trace  all  these  things  conveniently  by  experi-
ments, we  had  the  patient  dressed,  and  taken  out  of  bed.  I  now
placed  her  alternately  on  four  chairs,  which  I  had  arranged  in  a
square  in  the  N.S.,  S.N.,  E.W.,  and  W.E.  positions,  the  'feet  being
extended,  the  head  thrown  back,  so  that  her  position  was  half  re-
clining. The  north-south  position  was,  as  before,  comfortable  and
pleasant  ;  the  south-north  furnished,  step  by  step,  the  same  results
as  in  the  two  preceding  trials;  they  followed  gradually,  one  after
another,  in  the  course  of  about  half  an  hour.  But  when  the  patient
was  brought  into  the  west-east  position,  the  phenomena  presented
themselves  most  distinctly,  and  so  rapidly,  that  this  position  could
scarcely  be  endured  for  a  minute.  The  effect  of  the  magnet  on  the
senses  ceased  almost  wholly  at  once  ;  at  the  moment  of  entrance  into
the  position,  disagreeable  heat  came  over  her ;  then  quickly  followed,
in  order,  an  universal  external  and  internal  shivering,  disquiet,  flush-
ing, acceleration  of  the  pulse,  determination  of.  blood  to  the  head,
headache ;  finally,  pain  in  the  stomach,  hummings  in  the  ears,  loss
of  sense,  and  approaching  syncope.  It  was  necessary  to  hasten  to
bring  her  back  into  the  north-south  position,  unless  we  would  run
the  risk  of  seeing  her  fall  from  the  chair.  The  rapid  disappearance
of  all  these  adverse  symptoms  after  her  return  to  the  latter  position
was  astonishing;   in  a  few  minutes  her  face  became  cheerful  again,

OF  THE  ORGANIC  FORCE.  97

although  it  had  just  before  expressed  the  most  distressing  sensations.
After  some  interval  of  rest,  we  tried  the  east-west.  I  held  my  watch
in  my  hand,  and  found  that  not  more  than  a  minute  had  elapsed
before  all  the  phenomena  appeared  in  the  same  way  and  in  the  same
order  as  they  had  in  the  west-east  position,  only  somewhat  milder.
For  the  greater  confirmation  and  more  accurate  observation  of  all
these  occurrences,  the  experiments  were  finally  repeated,  as  we  in-
duced the  patient  to  place  herself  once  more  in  each  of  the  different
directions  ;  the  result  was  just  the  same.

Since  Miss  Nowotny's  sickness  had  been  protracted,  slowly  in-
creasing, for  eight  years,  I  asked  whether  she  had  not  observed,
while  the  disease  was  in  its  milder  stages,  that  she  had  felt  more  or
less  comfortable  in  different  places.  Inquiry  was  made,  and  it  was
remembered  that  in  some  of  the  houses  in  which  she  had  resided
during  that  interval,  her  condition  had  been  either  more  quiet  or
more  strikingly  insupportable.  I  gave  her  brother  a  compass,  and
bade  him  see  in  what  positions  her  bedstead,  sofas,  or  working-seats
had  been  placed  in  the  various  former  residences.  He  actually  found
that  in  the  Wohl-leben  Street,  her  bedstead  and  sofa  had  accidental-
ly been  placed  almost  exactly  in  the  magnetic  meridian,  and  she  her-
self had  lain  in  the  north-south  position  ;  while  in  the  Marokaner
Street  her  direction  had  been  north-eastward  and  south-westward.
In  the  Wohl-leben  Street  she  had  been  comparatively  easy,  while  in
the  Marokaner  Street  she  had  never  been  well,  but  had  constantly
struggled  with  the  most  painful  illness.  Even  now,  she  knew  not
why,  she  could  never  bear  to  sit  either  across  the  bed,  nor  on  her
couch,  nor  yet  to  lie  down  on  the  latter :  she  could  only  remain  lying
in  bed.  The  first  brought  her  into  the  west-east  position,  the  second
into  the  east-west,  the  third  into  the  south-north,  and  the  fourth  alone
insured  to  her  the  indispensable  north-south  direction.

As  between  north  and  south,  so  also  between  east  and  west,  a  not
inconsiderable  distinction  was  subsequently  discovered.  In  June,
namely,  when  she  was  already  so  much  improved  that  she  could  sit
up  the  greater  part  of  the  day,  I  tried  her  once  more  in  the  four  po-
sitions. She  could  now  remain  for  a  good  while  in  the  south-north
position  ;  in  the  east-west  also  she  was  •  tolerably  well  for  a  little
time ;  but  in  the  west-east  position  she  could  not  remain  more  than
a  minute  without  feeling  the  attacks,  even  to  the  irritation  of  the
stomach.  A  few  minutes'  rest  in  the  north-south  direction  wholly
removed  the  evil  effects  of  the  few  minutes  in  the  west-east  position.
The  west-east  position  xuas  therefore  by  far  the  worst  and  most  ex-
citing of  all.     I  add  the  remark,  in  reference  to  the  position  of  the

5

98  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

sun  and  terrestrial  thermo-rnagnetism,  that  this  last  experiment  waa
made  about  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.

64.  Furnished  with  these  experiences,  I  visited  the  sick  Miss  Stur-
mann  at  the  hospital  of  the  Vienna  University.  She  was  suffering
from  tubercle  of  the  lungs,  and  they  called  her  condition  ehlampsia*
According  to  her  account,  her  illness  had  commenced  about  three
years  previously,  when  she  was  in  her  sixteenth  year,  after  dancing
very  violently  at  several  balls.  I  found  her  lying  in  a  bed,  in  the
west-east  position.  I  tried  a  very  strong  magnet  upon  her,  one
which  would  support  50  lbs. ;  I  passed  it  over  her,  laid  it  upon  her
head,  and  under  her  feet.  It  produced  some  weak  reactions,  but  of
little  importance.  I  then  asked  her  physician,  Professor  Lippich,  to
allow  her  bed  to  be  moved  into  the  north-south  position  of  the  mag-
netic meridian,  which  he  was  kind  enough  to  order.  In  a  moment
everything  changed.  The  patient  immediately  evinced  pleasure;  her
former  disquiet  left  her;  a  painful  burning  of  the  eyes,  which  she  had
suffered  unceasingly,  disappeared ;  instead  of  the  previous  insuffer-
able heat,  she  felt  only  a  comfortable  coolness,  and  a  general  relief
was  visible.  A  night  of  unusually  peaceful  sleep  followed,  such  as
she  had  not  experienced  for  a  long  time.  Her  bed  was  now  kept
permanently  in  this  position,  as  she  herself  also  earnestly  requested.
Another  time  I  induced  her  to  turn  round  in  bed,  and  thus  brought
her  into  the  south-north  position  ;  just  as  quickly  as  everything  had
turned  to  good  before,  all  now  returned  again  to  evil ;  general  dis-
quiet and  heat  ensued,  flushing  of  the  face,  determination  to  the  head,
followed,  and  the  peculiar  burning  in  the  eyes  at  once  reappeared.
All  this  was  removed  again  as  soon  as  I  allowed  her  to  return  to  her
north-south  position.  Now,  when  she  was  in  the  normal  direction,
I  again  took  up  the  magnet.  But  what  a  difference !  She,  who
could  scarcely  feel  it  before,  could  not  bear  it  now,  when  I  removed
the  armature  at  a  considerable  distance  from  her.  I  placed  myself
with  it  at  a  distance  of  four  paces  from  her  head ;  the  patient  gave
me  no  answer,  and  when  I  examined  her  I  found  her  in  a  state  of
unconsciousness,  in  tonic  spasms.  After  her  recovery  from  this,  I
took  my  place  seven  paces  from  the  foot  of  her  bed,  and  removed
the  armature  :  and  here  also  she  had  scarcely  spoken  a  word,  before
she  became  senseless,  and  fell  into  the  same  condition.  A  third  time
I  removed,  in  the  prolonged  direction  of  the  magnetic  meridian,  the

*  Convulsive  movements  of  the  eyes,  of  the  muscles  of  the  abdomen,  and  of
the  extremities,  now  and  then  with  pain,  and  sometimes  with  tendency  to  a  deep
unhealthy  sleep ;  a  description  of  case  easily  and  completely  curable  by  continued
mesmerism.

OF  THE  ORGANIC  FORCE.  99

whole  length  of  the  ward,  which  amounted  to  more  than  thirty  feet
from  her  bedstead  and  her  feet.  Not  quite  so  quickly  as  before,  she
felt  the  magnet  in  some  degree  after  I  had  removed  the  armature ;
but  after  I  had  remained  about  a  minute  in  this  position,  she  stopped
speaking  in  the  middle  of  a  word  that  was  upon  her  tongue.  She
had  half  said  it,  the  rest  died  away  on  her  lips.  She  had  been  sud-
denly attacked,  and  I  found  her  lying  rigid  with  spasms,  and  with
clenched  hands,  her  eyes  open  and  cast  upward,  so  unconscious  that
I  could  place  my  finger  on  her  eyeballs  without  the  lids  moving.
What  an  unexpected  difference  in  the  effect !  The  same  magnet
which  I  had  placed  above  her  head  and  under  her  feet  without  any
remarkable  effect,  so  long  as  she  lay  in  the  magnetic  parallel,  now,
when  she  was  in  the  meridian,  threw  her  into  a  state  of  unconscious-
ness at  a  distance  of  ten  yards  !  at  a  distance  of  thirty  feet  attacked
her  in  a  deadly  manner.*

65.  Miss  Maix,  unable  to  walk,  was  kind  enough  to  grant  my  re-
quest of  allowing  herself  to  be  moved  in  a  chair  into  the  four  direc-
tions. She  is  neither  cataleptic  nor  somnambulist ;  never  was  so,
but  suffers  from  paralysis  of  the  lower  part  of  her  body.  In  spite,
therefore,  of  the  cases  being  of  totally  different  kinds  in  these  sensi-
tive patients,  I  nevertheless  obtained  exactly  similar  results  here  ;
the  patient  could  only  bear  the  north-south  direction,  and  the  west-
east  was  the  most  insupportable.  This  experiment  was  not  performed
in  the  morning,  as  with  Miss  Nowotny,  but  about  four  o'clock  in
the  afternoon.

66.  In  Miss  Reichel's  case,  the  physician  took  no  notice  of  the  po-
sition in  regard  to  the  heavens,  and  when  I  remarked  about  this  to
him,  he  said  he  thought  the  patient  strong  enough  to  be  indifferent
to  its  effects.  I  was  not  of  the  same  opinion,  and  when  I  tested  the
patient,  and  made  her  occupy  the  four  chairs,  one  after  another,  as
great  a  difference  presented  itself  as  in  most  of  the  other  sensitive
patients.  Finding  her  bed  in  the  south-north  position,  I  counselled
her  to  have  it  moved  into  the  north-south.     She  followed  my  advice,

*  If  the  Baron  had  accustomed  himself  to  mesmeric  experiments,  he  would
have  discovered  that  the  magnet,  in  this  case,  had  induced  that  kind  of  tonic
spasm  which  constituted  a  true  mesmeric  deep  sleep,  from  which  the  application
of  unmagnetized  iron  to  the  nape  of  the  neck,  the  magnet  being  removed  to  a
suitable  distance,  would  have  roused  her  up.  Instead  of  any  fear  of  the  "  dead-
ly manner"  of  the  magnet's  action,  the  probabilities  are  that  the  frequent  and
prolonged  exercise  of  the  magnetic  or  mesmeric  practice,  the  rigid  spasms  being
repeatedly  produced,  the  eclampsia  would  speedily  have  vanished,  and  health
would  have  been  restored.  The  worthy  and  talented  Baron  has  operated  with
mesmeric  patients,  while  he  has  deprecated  the  use  of  these  in  his  researches.

100  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

and  found  her  night's   rest  much  improved  ;  now  she  could  sleep,
which  had  been  extremely  difficult  before.

6*7.  With  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  I  tried  the  experiment  at  two  dif-
ferent hours  ;  once  in  the  morning,  when  her  illness  was  on  the  in-
crease, the  other  time  in  the  evening,  in  her  recovery.  In  both  cases
the  north-south  position  was  the  easiest,  the  west-east  the  most  in-
supportable.

68.  All  these  patients  now  recalled  to  mind  how  uncomfortable
they  always  were  in  church,  although  they  knew  not  the  reason
why.  Catholic  churches  are  all  built  from  west  to  east,  so  that  the
congregation  before  the  altar  are  in  the  west-east  position ;  therefore
in  that  direction  which  is  the  most  insupportable  to  the  sensitive.
In  this  situation,  therefore,  they  all  often  fainted,  and  were  obliged
to  be  carried  out  of  the  church.  Miss  Nowotny  subsequently  could
not  bear  to  walk  in  the  garden  or  in  the  streets  from  west  to  east,
for  any  length  of -time.

69.  These  eight  completely  different  cases  all  agreed  in  this  point,
— that  for  sensitive  persons  of  the  most  varied  kind,  any  other  posi-
tion but  that  with  the  head  to  the  north  and  the  feet  to  the  south  is
in  the  highest  degree  uncomfortable,  but  the  position  in  the  parallel,
with  the  head  to  the  west  in  our  northern  hemisphere,  is  almost  in-
sufferable :  perhaps  the  conditions  are  different  in  the  southern
hemisphere.  The  causes  of  these  phenomena,  as  is  seen  at  a  glance,
can  only  lie  in  the  effect  of  that  magnet,  which  is  constituted  by  the
terrestrial  globe  and  its  atmosphere ;  in  other  words,  of  the  terres-
trial magnetism.  It  here  affects  just  like  any  other  magnet,  and
from  the  present  investigation  we  arrive  at  a  law,  which  I  will  com-
prise in  the  following  terms  : — The  terrestrial  magnetism  exercises
in  sensitive  persons,  healthy  and  sick,  a  peculiar  exciting  action,
strong  enough  to  interfere  with  their  rest ;  in  the  healthy,  to  modify
their  sleep ;  in  the  sick,  to  disturb  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  the
functions  of  the  nerves,  and  the  equilibrium  of  the  vital  force.

70.  And  since  the  magnetic  conditions  of  the  earth  are  subject
to  variations,  and  these  variations  are  connected  with  the  phases  of
the  moon,  among  other  things,  in  such  a  way  that,  as  is  well  known,
the  intensity  of  the  terrestrial  magnetism  in  relation  to  that,  attains
its  minimum  when  the  moon  is  full ;  here  evidently  emerges  from
obscurity  one  of  the  causes  to  which  the  phenomena  of  somnambu-
lism (mondsucht)  are  to  be  attributed.  I  cannot  express  myself  on
this  until  I  have  advanced  to  some  more  special  developments.

71.  If,  then,  terrestrial  magnetism  thus  displays  itself  as  a  won-
derfully powerful  re-agent  upon  our  bodily  condition,  and  more  or
less  upon  our  health  in  general,  its  action  in  the  eight  investigated

OF  THE  ORGANIC   FORCE.  101

cases  beino-  so  great,  that  it  to  a  great  extent  determined  the  healthy
and  sick  condition,  we   are   certainly  justified — nay,   compelled — to
reason  from  these  to  other  cases  of  sensitive  disease,  and  must  recog-
nise that  in  many,  perhaps  all  these  cases,  it  will  be  impossible  to
effect  cure  by  means  of  magnetism,  when  the  patient  is  not  first  of  all
placed  in  the  proper  position  towards  the  terrestrial  magnetism  :  that
this  must,  before  all  things,  be  sought  out  and  borne  in   mind  in  all
kinds   of  curative  treatment,  and   that   all  magnetic  phenomena  in
nervous  patients — nay,  perhaps  in  many  other  diseases — are  greatly
influenced  by  it.     It  furnishes  the  key  to  a  vast  number  of  errors  and
contradictions,  which  have  presented  themselves  throughout  the  field
of  animal  magnetism,  from  the  time  of  Paracelsus  and  Mesmer  to  our
own  days,  which  were   a  stumbling-block   to  the  best  thinkers,  and
have  everywhere  brought  contradiction  into  the  facts  and  discord
into  opinions.     For,  when  one  and  the  same  disease  was  treated  in
Vienna  in  the  north-south  position,  in  Berlin  in  the  east-west,  and  at
Stuttgart  in  the  south-north,  different  results  were  obtained  in  each
case :  no  agreement  could  be  arrived  at  in  the  experiments.      Nay,
even  when  the  same  physician  treats  exactly  the  same  complaint  at
different  times,  or  simultaneously,  but  in  different  places,  with  the
same  magnetic  means,  if  the  beds  of  his  patients  happen  accidentally
to   be  placed  in  different  directions,  he  necessarily  will  find  effects
produced  differing  as  widely  as  possible  from  each  other :  he  must
be  led  away,  and  be  wholly  mistaken  about  magnetism :  he  must
consider  it  full  of  caprice,  and  from  the  impossibility  of  foreseeing
and  regulating  the  results,  at  length  throw  it  aside  as  an  intractable
and  unmanageable  instrument.     This,  therefore,  has  been  the  melan-
choly history  of  magnetism.     During  ages,  repeatedly  taken  up  and
laid  aside  again,  now  lies,  almost  unused,  so  remarkable,  so  profound-
ly efficient — nay,  one  may  say,  an   imcornparable  means  of  allaying
suffering,  where  the  human  hand  is   so  seldom  capable   of  affording
help.     Physicians  themselves  call  nervous  diseases  the  scandala  me-
dicorum.     At  a  not  far  distant  time  I  confidently  hope  this  will  not
be.     Henceforth   the  all-powerful  influence  of  terrestrial  magnetism
will  be  estimated  and  taken  into  account,  and  the  whole  question  of
mao-netism  will  be  subjected  to  regular  study  in  its  relation  to  medi-
cine;  progress  will  be  made,  and   a  clear  understanding  arrived  at.
The  world  will  at  length   be  able  to  hope  for  healing  powers  k>  be
drawn  from  these  extraordinary  things,  whence  it  has  so  long  justly
expected  them.     If  any  physician  have  here  and  there  remarked,  that
his  patients  generally   found  themselves  better  in  a  position  where
the  head  was  directed  to  any  particular  point  of  the  compass,  the
matter,  so  far  as  I  know,  has   never  been  reasoned  upon  to  any  ex-

102  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

tent ;  least  of  all,  has  its  peculiar  and  mighty  import  been  educed,  or
been  traced  back  to  its  physical  basis.  Here,  however,  where  I  have
merely  to  do  with  the  relations  of  the  subject  to  physics,  beyond  the
limits  of  which  it  would  be  beside  my  purpose  to  stray,  I  have  mere-
ly to  remark,  in  reference  to  §  60,  that  after  I  had  established  by  the-
foregoing  experiments,  the  powerful  co-operation  of  terrestrial  mag-
netism in  the  magnetic  influences  upon  sensitive  persons,  I  made  all
the  succeeding  investigations  with  them  solely  in  the  magnetic  north-
south  position,  and  that  I  regard  this  as  the  normal  direction  for  all
re-actions  on  living,  sensitive,  nervously  diseased  human  bodies.

72.  Now  that  by  the  researches  from  §  60  to  this  point,  we  have
arrived  at  the  theoretically  and  practically  important  fact,  that  ter-
restrial magnetism  exercises  uninterruptedly  and  universally  a  power-
ful influence  on  all  sensitive  bodies,  and  have  been  fortunate  enough
to  bring  these  new  deductions  respecting  the  inward  powers  of  dead
and  living  nature  under  rule  and  law,  we  may  return  to  §  59,  and
take  up  the  thread  to  extend  it  further  in  another  direction.  This
will  be  effected  by  tracing  the  effects  of  the  magnet  and  crystals  on
sensitive  organisms.

It  is  well  known  that  a  piece  of  pure  iron,  free  from  carbon,  how-
ever often  it  may  be  rubbed  with  a  magnet,  will  not  acquire  an
independent  power  of  attracting  iron,  will  not  even  lift  up  iron-filings.
It  therefore  does  not  receive  any  enduring  magnetic  power  from  the
magnet,  and  physicists  agree  that  the  iron  returns  unchanged  into  its
former  condition,  as  soon  as  the  magnet  is  removed.  But  this  is  not
absolutely  the  case.  Hitherto,  it  is  true,  we  have  possessed  no  re-
agent that  would  indicate  any  alteration  in  the  condition  of  iron
which  had  been  in  contact  with  a  mag-net ;  but  the  sensitive  human
nerves  furnish  one.  For  when  I  allowed  Miss  Nowotny  to  take  in
her  hand  a  rod  of  pure  iron  before  it  was  touched  with  a  magnet,  I
myself  not  interfering,  it  was  perfectly  indifferent  to  her  ;  but  when
I  brought  it  into  contact  with  a  magnet,  and  then  keeping  my  hands
away,  removed  this  from  the  iron,  and  again  allowed  her  to  take  it,
she  found  it  very  different  from  what  it  had  been  before ;  for  now  it
was  no  longer  indifferent,  but  gave  her  the  same  sensation  as  a  weak
magnet,  some  heat  and  curling  of  the  fingers,  and  this  persisted  de-
creasingly  for  some  time,  till  after  eight  or  ten  minutes  it  lost  its
newly  gained  strength,  and  again  became  indifferent.  Miss  Reichel
felt  a  magnetic  rod  twenty  inches  long  when  removed  to  several
rooms  off.  This  was  connected  by  cross  pieces  with  an  iron  arma-
ture of  exactly  the  same  shape  and  size.  When  I  removed  the  lat-
ter from  the  magnet  and  tried  its'" unaided  effect  on  Miss  Reichel's
sensations,  I  was  not  a  little  astonished  to  see  that  when  just  remov-

OF  THE  ORGANIC  FORCE.  103

ed  from  the  magnet  it  was  perceived  almost  at  the  same  distance,
reacting  magnetically  upon  the  sensitive  patient  even  as  the  large
magnetic  rod  itself.  I  made  similar  experiments  with  other  sensitive
persons  at  various  times.  The  curling  of  the  fingers  did  not  occur  in
all,  but  the  other  reactions  of  the  magnet  were  met  with  universally,
the  patients  finding  the  force  of  the  latter  conveyed  to  the  iron  in  a
weaker  degree,  vor  still  of  considerable  strength  when  the  magnet
was  powerful  Therefore  something  must  be  left  behind  in  the  iron
by  the  magnet;  but  this  is  not  magnetism,  and  at  present  ice  are  ig-
norant of  its  real  nature.

73.  When,  as  may  be  read  in  all  books  on  animal  magnetism,  a
glass  of  water  is  placed  between  the  poles  of  a  horse-shoe  magnet,
consequently  in  the  magnetic  current,  and  is,  as  it  is  called,  magnet-
ized, every  sensitive  patient  can  not  only  at  once  distinguish  it  from
common  water,  but  the  glass  brought  immediately  after  the  mag-
netization to  the  hand  of  a  eataleptie  patient,  attracts  this  like  a  mag-
net, and  solicits  it  to  follow,  just  as  1  have  described  in  my  treatise
on  the  peculiar  fundamental  force  of  crystals,  §§  27  and  28.  Some-
thing must  therefore  have  passid  from  the  magnet  into  the  water,  and
remained  bound  there,  something  which  is  not  a  magnet,  Which  we
cannot  detect  by  any  known  chemical  means,  and  cannot  be  recog-
nised by  any  of  the  common  senses.

74.  Our  celebrated  botanist,  Prof.  Endlicher,  visited  the  patient
Miss  Nowotny,  and  witnessed  a  curious  experiment  performed  by
her  physician.  Prof.  Endlicher  advised  the  latter  to  pass  the  mag-
net over  himself,  and  then  to  react  upon  the  patient.  To  his  sur-
prise, he  now,  as  had  never  happened  before,  could  attract  the  hand
of  the  patient  with  his  hand,  cause  it  to  attach  itself,  and  follow
everywhere,  just  as  the  magnetized  glass  of  water  had  done.  He
retained  this  power  for  almost  a  quarter  of  an  hour  :  by  that  time  it
had  by  degrees  disappeared.  The  same  unknown  something,  which
had  been  left  in  the  iron  rod  by  the  magnet,  and  had  likewise  passed
into  the  glass  of  water,  must,  therefore,  have  been  conveyed  into  the
whole  person  of  the  physician  ;  it  manifested  itself  here,  from  the
same  cause  to  the  same  effect,  in  his  fingers.

75.  This  experiment  was  subsequently  repeated  in  a  variety  of
forms  ;  in  particular  cases  the  physician  let  his  hand  lie  in  Miss
Nowotny'?,  while  he  rubbed  the  back  of  it  with  a  strong  magnet  —
The  patient  here  said  that  she  felt  force  increase  in  the  hand  of  the
physician,  by  starts,  with  each  pass  of  the  magnet.  I  have  re-
peated the  experiment  with  Miss  Maix,  and  while  I  rubbed  the  back
of  my  hand  with  the   magnet  as  it  lay  in  her?,  I  received  the  same

104  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

account  from  her.     I  here  recal  to  notice  that  this  patient  is  not  by
any  means  a  somnambulist,  nor  never  was.

76.  In  an  earlier  treatise  (§  29)  I  was  obliged  to  mention,  for  the
sake  of  historical  consistency  in  my  memoir,  that  a  member  of  objects
of  all  kinds,  when  rubbed  with  a  magnet,  subsequently  exercised  a
reaction  upon  he  patient,  which  was  indeed  weaker,  but  wholly  of
the  same  kind  as  that  which  the  magnet  itself  produced  upon  them.
I  spoke  there  merely  of  one  patient ;  since  then,  I  have  had  oppor-
tunities of  testing  many  nervous  patients  in  different  conditions,
among  them  many  who  considered  themselves  healthy  and  followed
their  occupations  ;  they  are  easily  detected,  for  all  feel  the  magnet
directly  a  single  pass  is  made  over  them  with  the  horse-shoe.  All
these  persons,  however,  who  may  be  found  in  hundreds  in  a  large
city  by  merely  seeking,  felt  themselves  affected  exactly  in  the  same
way  by  all  the  objects  which  had  been  once  rubbed  over  with  the  mag-
net, only  in  a  weaker  degree  than  by  the  magnet  itself  Any  one  who
chooses  may  confirm  this  in  any  place,  for  there  can  scarcely  be  a
country  village  so  small  as  not  to  contain  a  nervously  irritable  person.

77.  Since,  then,  it  appears  certain,  and  warranted  by  experiments
and  trials  of  very  various  kinds,  that  all  persons  who  possess  a  cer-
tain degree  of  irritability  of  the  nerves  distinctly  feel  the  magnet  like
a  cool  or  gently  warm  wind,  without  touching  or  seeing  it,  but  on
mere  approximation,  and  by  passes  made  in  their  vicinity  ;  further,
that  all  these  feel  in  like  manner,  only  weaker,  all  material  objects,
of  whatsoever  kind,  when  they  have  been  previously  placed  for  some
time  in  the  line  of  the  magnetic  current, — that  is  to  say,  have  been
magnetized  ;  from  these  two  inductions  a  third  immediately  follows,
which  hitherto  there  has  been  an  objection  to  drawing, — nay,  which
some  have,  in  anticipation,  resisted  with  alb  their  might,  and  which
seems  to  be  especially  an  abomination  to  chemists, — namely,  that
all  magnetized  objects  suffer  some  unknown  temporary  alteration
through  the  magnet,  be  this  what  it  may.  Therefore,  magnetized  wa-
ter even,  however  strange  it  may  sound  at  first,  is  altered  water.

78.  If  we  now  compare  the  effects  of  crystallic  force,  as  I  have
explained  them  in  my  preceding  treatise,  with  the  above  of  the  mag-
net upon  other  bodies,  we  see  that  the  influence  of  both  upon  a  third
body  is  exactly  the  same,  and  so  identical  that  no  .character  exists  for
any  kind  of  distinction.  I  have  there  shown  that  the  magnetic  force
and  the  crystallic  force — each  taken  in  its  totality — are  essentially
different,  and  deport  themselves,  in  reference  to  their  similarity,  like
a  part  to  the  whole  ;  for  example,  like  the  heating  ray  to  the  sun-
beam, like  sulphuric  acid  to  alum;  but  the  modification  which  they
leave  behind  in  other  bodies,  when  these  are  withdrawn  from  their

OF  THE  ORGANIC  FORCE.  105

sphere  of  action,  is  exactly  the  same  in  both  cases  ;  and  since  these
are  perfectly  exercised  by  the  part,  that  is,  by  the  crystallic  force
alone,  we  are  compelled  to  conclude  that  this  is  wholly  effected  in  the
magnet  by  the  crystallic  force  residing  in  it :  therefore  by  this  part
of  its  force.  We  find,  consequently,  the  magnetic  ])oles  and  the
crystal  poles  agree  wholly,  and  are  perfectly  alike  in  reference  to  their
reaction  on  the  animal  nerves.

79.  And  now  our  investigations  have  brought  us  to  the  portal  of
the  so-called  animal  magnetism,  this  noli-metangere  may  now  be
seized.  When  I  passed  a  magnet  down  twice  from  head  to  fool,
over  the  patient,  Miss  Sturmann,  she  lost  consciousness,  and  fell  into
convulsions,   mostly  with  rigid  spasms.     When  I  did  the  same  with

'my  large  rock-crystal,  the  same  result  followed.  But  I  could  pro-
duce the  same  effect,  when,  instead  of  either  of  these,  I  used  merely
my  empty  hand.  Therefore  the  crystallic  force  of  the  magnet  and  the
crystal  must  reside  in  my  hand.

80.  To  test  this  further,  I  undertook  a  series  of  researches  which
I  will  now  recount.  If  this  were  the  case,  the  force  of  my  hand  must
produce  all  the  same  effects  which  the  crystallic  force  can  bring  to
pass,  as  I  have  recounted  them  in  my  last  treatise :  from  the  simi-
larity of  the  properties  must  be  concluded  the  difference  or  identity.
Before  all,  it  must  be  inquired  whether  and  what  agreement  exists
between  the  effect  of  crystals  upon  healthy  and  sick  human  bodies,
and  that  of  the  human  hand  on  the  same.  The  results  of  passing
my  magnetic  rod  or  my  large  rock-crystal  over  a  sensitive  person,
have  already  been  many  times  detailed  ;  I  may  here  confine  myself
to  a  comparison  of  the  two  effects  upon  the  hand.  When,  on  those
persons  who  were  sensitive  enough  to  feel  distinctly  the  passage  of  a
large  crystal  along  the  inside  of  the  hand,  I  slowly  carried  my  right
hand,  with  the  fingers'  points  turned  sideways,  down  through  their
left  hands,  in  such  a  manner  that  one  finger  followed  another,  and
thus  so  swept  over  them  that  all  passed  over  in  one  and  the  same
line,  which  was  drawn  from  the  wrist  to  the  point  of  the  middle  fin-
ger, I  found  none  who  did  not  ieel  this  in  the  same  way,  usually  as
a  cool,  more  rarely  as  a  warm  wind,  and  not  only  as  strongly,  but
usually  even  evidently  more  so  than  they  had  felt  the  passage  of  a
crystal.  1  shall  not  speak  of  the  sick  patients,  for  all  whom  I  have
named  in  my  researches  felt  this  as  remarkably  strongly  as  they
usually  did  every  magnetic  pass  of  the  hand.  Miss  Maix  and  Miss
Nowotny  felt  each  single  finger.  But  even  among  the  healthy  there
were  not  a  few  who  displayed  a  very  considerable  sensibility  to  this
reaction  ;  nay,  I  even  found  some  who,  while  they  could  not  detect
the  passage   of  crystals  with   certainty,  were  so  clearly  aware  of  the

5*

106  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

successive  passage  of  the  fingers,  that  they  could  always  accurately
state  it,  with  the  face  turned  away.  I  am  empowered  to  refer  by
name  to  my  friend,  M.  Carl  Schuh,  here.  He  is  a  healthy  and  strong
man,  and  felt  the  pass  of  the  crystals  very  distinctly.  When  I,  un-
necessarily, and  against  my  own  rule,  bound  his  eyes,  and  carried
the  row  of  fingers  of  my  right  hand  slowly  down  over  his  left,  he  felt
this  so  strongly  and  so  distinctly,  like  a  crystal,  that  he  could  accu-
rately mark  each  single  pass,  and  each  time  spoke  precisely  when  my
fino-ers  had  passed  over  a  third  part  of  the  distance.  Mr.  Studer,
whom  I  have  already  mentioned,  perceived  this  just  as  distinctly  ;
and  many  other  persons,  among  whom  I  have  permission  to  name
one  of  the  most  vigorous,  well-inured,  and  finest  men,  who  has  tra-
versed Persia  and  Kurdistan,  and  twice  penetrated  from  Egypt  into
the  heart  of  Asia,  therefore  is  a  rare  example  of  an  iron  constitution,
namely,  Mr.  Kotschy,  sometime  fellow-traveller  with  Mr.  Russeger.
The  effect  showed  itself  more  strongly  upon  him  ;  the  more  agree-
able temperature  of  the  air  was  increased  as  soon  as  it  became  cold.
The  fingers,  therefore,  act  upon  the  nerves  exactly  like  a  moderately
strong  crystal.

81.  I  next  wished  to  undertake  the  comparative  examination  of
the  sources  of  the  two  forces  as  to  the  capability  of  being  conducted
through  other  bodies.  I  made  Miss  Sturmann  grasp  one  end  of  a
German  silver  conductor  in  her  right  hand,  without  having  previously
touched  it  myself.  I  first  allowed  her  a  little  time  to  accustom  her-
self to  the  feel  of  the  conductor ;  then  I  placed  upon  the  other  end
the  slightly  moistened  tips  of  the  fingers  of  my  right  hand.  Instan-
taneously she  experienced  a  warm  sensation  in  the  part  in  contact  with
her  hand,  which  passed  upwards  through  this  and  ascended  to  her
elbow.  I  placed  the  five  fingers  of  my  other  hand  upon  it ;  the  sen-
sation was  strikingly  strengthened,  and  now  propagated  to  the  shoul-
der. I  took  my  fingers  away ;  the  sensation  rapidly  decreased,  not,
however,  disappearing  suddenly  ;  I  put  my  fingers  on  and  off  alter-
nately ;  the  increase  and  decrease  of  the  sensations  produced  kept
pace.  Another  day  I  induced  Dr.  Lippich  to  do  the  same  ;  his  fin-
gers produced  the  same  effect.  I  made  the  same  experiment  with
Miss  Maix.  I  made  her  grasp  the  same  conductor,  without  my  in-
terference, and,  after  some  pause  to  accustom  her  to  the  metal,  placed
first  my  five,  then  ten,  fingers  upon  it.  The  warm  sensation  appeared
and  disappeared  as  I  put  my  fingers  on  and  took  them  off ;  with  all
ten  it  was  so  strong  that  it  ascended  through  the  whole  arm  to  the
head.  I  bade  her  physician  make  the  same  experiment  ;  he  did  so,
with  the  same  results  ;  however,  although  he  was  ten  years  younger
than  myself,  the  effect  of  his  fingers  was  evidently  weaker  than  that

OF  THE  ORGANIC  FORCE.  107

of  mine.  By  accident,  Father  Lambert,  of  the  Franciscans,  her  con-
fessor, was  present;  I  bade  him  try  his  power.  She  found  his  power
equal  to  mine.  I  also  desired  the  matron,  Miss  Barbara  Pachierl,  to
try.  Her  fingers  produced  the  same  effect,  but  much  weaker,  than
those  of  men.  I  repeated  this  experiment  another  time,  with  the
modification  of  taking-  an  iron  wire,  five  feet  long,  instead  of  the  Ger-
man silver  conductor.  One  end  was  grasped  by  the  patient,  accus-
tomed to  it  for  a  few  minutes ;  then  the  other  end  was  touched  with
my  five  fingers,  and  the  patient  immediately  said  she  felt  a  sensation
of  a  flow  of  strong  heat :  when  I  placed  ten  fingers  on  it  the  sensa-
tion increased,  while  every  time  I  let  the  wire  out  of  my  hand  it  dis-
appeared again.  This  was  tested  by  numerous  repetitions.  After
that,  I  had  the  ten  fingers  of  a  young  lady,  her  sister,  who  was  also
weak  and  nervous,  placed,  instead  of  mine,  upon  the  end  of  the  wire  ;
the  effect  was  remarkably  weak.  The  ten  fingers  of  another  girl  were
added  :  the  effect  was  observably  stronger,  but  all  the  twenty  to-
gether did  not  act  nearly  so  strongly  as  five  of  my  fingers,  although
I  have  long  been  grey  and  bald.  I  also  tested  these  conditions  with
a  copper  wire.  It  was  ten  feet  long,  and  also  conducted  the  force,
but  more  slowly  and  rather  more  weakly  than  the  iron  wire.  The
same  experiments,  varied  in  many  ways,  were  repeated  by  me,  with
the  same  results,  on  Miss  Reichel.  The  effect  was  very  strongly  ex-
hibited in  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer.  But  even  the  healthy  Mr.  Studer
possessed  so  much  sensibility,  that  he  clearly  felt  the  effect  of  my
hands  upon  metal  wires.  It  follows  from  all  these  experiments,  that
the  force  of  the  human,  hand  mat/  be  conducted  through,  other  bodies,
exactly  like  the  crystallic  force,  and  that  these  bodies  are  capable  of
conducting  the  two  forces  in  the  same  way.

82.  I  now  wished  to  investigate  the  capability  of  accumulation.
First,  in  Miss  Sturinaim,  1  placed  the  German  silver  conductor  near
her,  and  let  it  remain  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Then  I  told  her  to
grasp  it,  and  to  accustom  her  full  hand  to  it.  She  laid  it  down  near,
and  left  it.  I  now  held  it  for  some  seconds  in  my  hand,  and  again
laid  it  down.  When  she  grasped  it  again,  she  felt  it  warm,  and  so
strongly  charged,  that  the  well-known  sensation  which  the  crystals
had  produced  under  other  circumstances,  ascended  along  the  whole
hand  up  to  the  elbow-joint.  This  was  of  course  repeated,  for  confirm-
ation, under  different  modifications.  Her  physician,  Dr.  Lippich,
made  a  similar  experiment.  At  my  request,  two  exactly  similar
porcelain  saucers  were  placed  on  a  distant  table  ;  one  he  left  un-
touched, the  other  he  held  for  a  short  time  in  his  fingers,  and  then
laid  it  down,  where  it  remained  a  few  minutes.  They  were  now
brought  to  the  patient.     She  named  the  saucer  which  had  been  sub-

108  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

jected  to  the  effect  of  the  contact  of  the  fingers,  with  the  greatest
ease  and  certainty.  After  about  ten  minutes  the  effect  had  disap-
peared, and  the  two  saucers  felt  exactly  the  same.  I  repeated  the
experiment  with  the  conductor,  in  the  same  way,  on  Miss  Maix.  It
afforded  perfectly  similar  results  ;  it  was  charged  by  my  fingers,  and
the  charge  which  had  been  found  to  endure  five  minutes  by  Miss
Sturmann,  was  detected,  gradually  decreasing,  for  twenty  minutes,
by  the  more  sensitive  Miss  Maix.  The  effect  was  perfectly  similar  in
both,  a  sensation  of  warmth  ascending  from  the  hand  to  the  arm,  and
agreeing  completely  with  that  which  the  rock  crystal  had  produced
under  similar  circumstances.  I  found  just  the  same  in  Miss  Reichel
and  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  some  months  later.  But  a  glass  of  water
ever  remained  the  most  remarkable.  When  this  was  taken  in  the
hand,  enclosed  below  in  the  fingers,  the  other  hand  placed  above,
and  the  inside  also  closed  by  the  fingers,  and  thus  held  for  some  ten
minutes,  it  acquired  for  sensitive  nervous  patients  the  smell,  the  taste,
and  all  the  remarkable  properties  of  the  so-called  magnetized  water,
which  those  may  make  a  foolish  outcry  against  who  have  never  in-
vestigated the  matter,  to  which  number  I  myself  once  belonged,  but
of  which  all  who  have  examined  it  and  seen  its  effect  can  only  speak
with  astonishment.  This  water  wholly  agreed  in  its  essential  proper-
ties with  that  which  had  been  treated  with  the  magnet  or  with  crys-
tals ;' therefore  received  an  abundant  charge  from  the  fingers  and
hands,  of  that  peculiar  force  residing  in  them,  and  retained  it  for
some  little  time.  Finally,  I  could,  without  selection,  take  any  possi-
ble object  in  my  hand,  keep  it  there  for  some  time,  and  give  it  to  the
patients  :  they  then  affirmed,  of  all  which  they  had  previously  had
in  their  hands,  that  they  had  undergone  the  same  change  as  when
they  had  been  rubbed  with  magnet  or  crystal  poles  ;  and  this  whether
they  knew  cf  my  interference,  or  it  had  been  kept  secret.  From  all
these  things  it  undoubtedly  follows,  that  the  force  of  the  hands  pos-
sesses the  same  capability  of  accumulation  as  the  cry stallic  force.

83.  That  this  charge  gradually  disappears  again,  appears  from
what  has  been  stated  already,  and  requires  no  especial  proof.  From
these  two  things  it  further  follows,  that  in  the  bodies  which  acquire
a  charge,  and  lose  it  gradually,  must  reside  the  same  power  of  coercion
for  the  force  of  the  hands  which  they  have  shown  for  the  crystallic
force.  The  magnitude  of  the  charge  of  other  bodies  increased  with
the  strength  of  the  hand,  and  the  capacity  for  charge  displayed  no
limits  but  the  proportionate  strength  of  the  charging  body.

84.  The  question  whether  there  exists  a  dualism  of  this  force  in
animal  bodies,  as  in  the  crystals,  required  to  be  subjected  to  compara-
tive   tests.     Crystals    are    known    to    possess,    in    crystal lographical

OF  THE  ORGANIC   FORCE.  109

respects,  several  axes,  main  and  secondary,  and  in  the  compound
systems,  several  main  axes.  When  I  tried  the  sensitiveness  of  the  pa-
tients on  them,  they  all,  as  I  have  already  stated  in  the  preceding  treat-
ise, after  a  short  investigation  found  me  the  main  axes  and  its  poles, —
those  two  points,  namely,  at  which  the  action  of  the  crystallic  force  on
the  tips  of  their  fingers  was  most  strongly  and  strikingly  concentrated.
But  in  many,  especially  in  sulphuret  of  iron,  selenite,  fiuor  spar,
heavy  spar,  sphene,  granite,  &c,  they  would  also  discover  other  axes,
the  poles  of  which  were  much  less  strongly  opposed,  but  still  gave
evidence  of  a  marked  dualism.  All  the  patients  agreed  in  these  per-
ceptions ;  and  a  selenite,  which  I  took  from  one  to  the  other  in  suc-
cession, and  allowed  them  to  feel  between  the  fingers  of  both  hands
as  it  lay  upon  a  table,  afforded  me  the  same  results  in  all :  each
described  a  strong  main  axis,  with  its  stronger  and  weaker  pole,  and
far  weaker  secondary  axes,  and  all  at  exactly  the  same  points  and
lines  ;  very  frequently  the  main  axis  was  not  the  longest,  but  a
shorter,  particularly  in  selenite ;  and  this  agreement  among  all  these
mutually  unknown  observers  was  here  the  best  possible  warrant  of
the  reality  and  correctness  of  their  statements.  Moreover,  they  may
readily  be  tested  elsewhere,  for  no  populous  town  can  be  without
suitable  nervous  patients.  But  even  healthy  sensitive  persons,  Mr.
Studer  in  particular,  could,  without  much  trouble,  discover  the  poles
of  crystals  with  his  fingers.  The  axes  and  poles  always  coincided
with  the  axes  and  poles^ of  crystallography,  and  thus  it  became  more
than  probable  that  the  crystallic  force  takes  part  in  (if  it  does  not
wholly  effect)  the  construction  of  crystals.  Perhaps  it  is  to  crystals
what  the  vital  force  is  to  organic  structures.  Yet  I  will  not  venture
into  conjectures  here,  bu.t  hold  to  that  which  displays  itself  as  fact :
the  crystallic  force  exists  in  a  polar  condition  in  crystals,  and  contem-
poraneously in  several  axes  of  a  crystal,  only  in  unequal  degrees  of
strength.

85.  I  next  met  with  similar  conditions  in  animal  life  itself.  It  has
been  assumed  that  in  man  there  is  a  main  axis,  from  above  down-
wards, and  the  brain  and  the  genitals  have  been  regarded  as  the  op-
posite poles.  If  I  ventured  to  draw  a  conclusion  from  observations
of  the  so-called  animal  magnetism,  I  should  say  that  it  is  not  the
main  axis,  but  a  secondary,  "in  the  first  place,  it  has  been  shown
above  that  patients  on  whom  the  magnet  acts,  bear  that  position
worst  of  all  which  gives  a  longitudinal  direction  in  the  magnetic
parallel;  the  body  becomes  thus  magnetically  differenced  according
to  the  latitude,  which  it  appears  unable  to  bear.  We  know  of
something  similar  in  exposure  to  cold  ;  when  it  comes  laterally,  it  is
at  once  much  more  injurious  and  powerful  than  when  it  comes  in

110  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

front  or  behind.  This  has  become  more  evident  to  me,  through
other  circumstances,  which  I  may  here  notice.  When  I  gave  the
very  sensitive  Miss  Maix  my  right  hand,  and  placed  it  in  her  left,
she  felt  it  in  the  same  manner  as  when  I  placed  upright  on  her  hand
a  little  magnetic  rod,  or  selenite,  four  inches  long,  both  with  the
northward  pole.  But  when  I  gave  her  my  left  hand,  she  found  it
very  much  more  agreeable.  If  I  laid  my  right  hand  in  her  left,  and,
at  the  same  time,  my  left  in  her  right,  as  is  usual  when  one  extends
both  hands  at  once  to  a  friend,  she  said  it  seemed  to  her  to  run  as  in
the  "  ring-game,"  (the  name  given  in  Vienna  to  tilting)  up  the  right
arm,  through  the  heart  and  shoulders,  down  the  left  arm  again,  and
through  me  till  it  reached  her  again,  and  thus  incessantly  around  in
a  circle  most  painful  to  her,  and  making  her  giddy.  When  I  now
crossed  my  hands,  so  that  my  right  was  in  her  right,  and  my  left  in
her  left,  she  would  not  bear  it,  and  said  that  it  produced  such  a  pain-
ful sensation  of  a  strange  kind  of  contest  and  strife  in  her  arms  and
through  the  heart,  a  sort  of  wave  up  the  arms  and  down  again,  that
it  was  altogether  insupportable.  And  after  she  had  snatched  her
hands  from  mine,  she  so  decidedly  refused  to  give  them  a  second
time,  that  I  was  obliged  to  give  up  the  critical  repetition  which  I  al-
ways made  in  all  other  experiments.*

*  The  Baron  has  been  very  fortunate  in  some  of  his  cases.  The  phenomenon
here  noticed  is  a  very  rare  one,  and  many  cases  of  sick  sensitive,  and  many  oth-
ers well  mesmerized,  might  be  most  closely  examined  without  yielding  the  facts
stated  in  this  paragraph.  Nature  is  ready  to  indulge  her  votaries  with  abundance
of  truths,  but  they  are  not  poured  out  at  once  to  even  the  most  industrious,  the
most  ingenious,  and  the  most  closely  logical  investigators.  Man  must  wait  his
opportunity,  and  garner  patiently.  By  these  hints,  can  it  be  supposed  that  a
doubt  is  entertained  as  to  the  facts  detailed  ?  By  no  means.  But  while,  on  the
one  hand,  there  is  a  desire  to  show  that  there  must,  in  the  present  state  of  our
knowledge,  be  a  vagueness,  inseparable  from  the  very  conditions  of  inquiries  into
organic  laws,  in  arriving  at  a  conclusion  on  such  a  matter  as  that  of  the  polari-
ties of  the  two  sides  of  the  body ;  on  the  other,  there  is  abundant  reason  to  be-
lieve that,  although  a  hundred  inquirers  may  not  find,  may  not  be  able  to  corro-
borate the  accuracy  of  the  Baron's  statements,  there  are  facts  enough  to  prove
the  existence  of  the  class  of  phenomena  which  must  in  time  prove  all  his  posi-
tions. Herein  lies  the  value  of  his  logic  ;  of  his  patient,  unwearying  powers  of
investigation.  Storms  may  arise,  clouds  may  darken  the  horizon,  the  common
ken  may  not  see  the  progress  of  the  vessel  he  is  steering — but  she  is  guided  by
a  genius,  and  must  emerge  from  amid  the  dark  doubts  of  ignorance  into  the  light
of  truth.  There  are  persons  who  may  exhibit  transiently  the  decided  symptoms
of  Miss  Maix's  case — perhaps  some  for  a  few  weeks,  some  for  months,  and  there
the  peculiarities  may  vanish.  The  facts  are  not,  however,  the  less  valuable.  They
are  to  be  stored  for  useful  purposes.  I  have  examined  many  impressionable
subjects,  in  order  to  witness  the  phenomena  determining  the  fact  of  the  opposite
polarities  of  the  two  sides  of  the  body.  I  am  convinced  of  its  existence,  as  I
know  there  are  yes  and  no,  positive  and  negative,  plus  and  minus,  attraction  and

OF  THE  ORGANIC  FORCE.  Ill

86.  Since,  then,  it  clearly  results  from  all  these  experiments,  that
it  is  by  no  means  indifferent  which  of  the  hands  is  offered  to  a
nervous  patient  in  the  various  contacts,  it  follows  with  certainty  that
the  two  hands  are  not  in  the  same  condition  in  reference  to  the  hid-
den power  that  resides  in  them  ;  and,  if  I  do  not  altogether  misun-
derstand the  last  experiment,  there  existed  a  kind  of  course,  like  that
of  the  galvanic  current,  from  my  left  hand  to  her  right — and  on-
ward from  her  left  to  my  right — a  motion  which  could  not  force  its
way,  or,  meeting  with  considerable  obstacles,  tried  to  break  through
in  spite  of  them,  when  I  placed  the  left  hand  in  her  left,  and  the  right
hand  in  her  right.  This  difference  of  the  two  hands  can  be  nothing  else
but  the  well-known  polarization,  such  as  we  are  acquainted  with  in
the  magnet,  and  has  been  long  known  to  us  in  crystals.  In  this
point  of  view,  the  main  axis  passes  transversely  through  man,  and
indeed  through  all  animals  ;  the  longitudinal  axis  is  to  be  regarded
only  as  a  secondary  axis.  In  reality,  we  are  transverse,  and  com-
posed of  two  symmetrical  halves.  All  cerebral  organs,  organs  of
sense,  masticating  apparatus,  arms  and  hands,  testicles,  and  feet,
stand  transversely  opposed,  and  in  this  direction  principally  are  we
universally  polar.

87.  I  subsequently  investigated  these  interesting  conditions  in  the
same  manner  in  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer.  The  same  results  were  pre-
sented in  the  same  way  as  those  just  detailed  ;  when  I  took  her  two
opposite  hands,  she  felt  the  current  up  the  right  arm  and  down  the
left  still  more  strongly  than  Miss  Maix.  When  I  gave  her  my
crossed  hands,  scarcely  a  minute  elapsed  before  she  was  so  affected
that  she  became  quite  ill.  When  I  gave  into  her  hand  one  of  the
German   silver   conductors   on  a  long  brass  wire,   and   touched  this

repulsion,  &c.  But  though  I  have  seen  the  phenomena  slightly  but  clearly  de-
fined occasionally,  and  but  rarely,  among  those  I  have  had  under  my  own  treat-
ment, I  have  never  had  the  Baron's  good  fortune  to  witness  the  striking  facts  he
describes.  In  one  of  Dr.  Elliotson's  cases,  however,  I  saw  an  example  even  more
remarkable  than  that  of  Miss  Maix.  It  occurred  in  a  young  man  subject  to  epi-
lepsy, and  I  refer  the  reader  to  some  details  of  it  which  may  be  found  in  the
second  volume  of  the  Zoist,  at  pp.  53,  215,  216  ;  and  in  the  third  volume  at  p.  53.
The  young  man  could  not  suffer  his  feet,  ankles,  knees,  hands,  or  elbows,  to  touch
each  other.  He  could  not  endure  the  application  of  a  finger  of  his  right  hand
lightly  to  the  left  side  of  his  face,  or  any  part  of  that  side  of  his  body ;  nor  could
he  allow  any  finger  of  his  left  hand  to  be  ever  so  lightly  applied  to  any  part  right
of  the  mesial  line  of  his  body.  If  Dr.  Elliotson  touched  with  his  left  hand
young  A.'s  right  hand,  he  instantly  showed  signs  of  uneasiness  ;  and  the  same  if
his  right  hand  were  placed  in  contact  with  any  part  of  the  leftside  of  the  young
man's  body.  Many  of  Dr.  Elliotson's  observations  and  details  of  facts  given  in
the  volumes  of  the  Zoist  are  curiously,  because  unintentionally,  corroborative  of
the  Baron's  facts.

112  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

with  my  right  hand,  she  had  the  peculiar  secondary  sensation,  which
I  had.  also  met  with  in  Miss  Sturmann,  that  this  body  seemed  to  her
to  become  light,  almost  like  down ;  on  the  other  hand,  when  I
touched  it  with  the  left,  it  became  heavy,  and  seemingly  much
heavier  than  it  naturally  was.  Without  wishing  to  enter  more  mi-
nutely into  this  at  this  moment,  I  nevertheless  must  mention  it,  in-
somuch that  it  furnishes  another  character  to  the  opposition  of  the
hands,  in  a  kind  of  attraction  and  repulsion.  Yet,  different  as  she
found  my  hands  in  their  effect  upon  her,  she  perceived  no  less  differ-
ence in  her  own.  "When  I  placed  in  one  of  her  hands  things  like
iron  pyrites,  selenite,  reguline  metals,  charcoal,  &c,  they  produced
sensations  very  unlike  those  which  they  caused  when  I  bade  her
transfer  them  into  the  other,  although  no  kind  of  weakening  of  one
or  other  half  of  the  body  in  any  way  existed  in  her,

88.  I  have  very  recently  gone  through  an  investigation  of  this
particular  with  Miss  Reichel,  and  traced  it  to  further  development
than  in  any  of  the  former  sensitive  persons.  She  found  not  only
her  right  hand,  but  the  whole  right  side,  from  head  to  foot,  opposed
in  all  its  properties  to  the  left  ;  nay,  the  mere  approximation  to-
wards her  of  my  right  or  left  hand,  affected  her  in  an  essentially  dif-
ferent manner.  I  shall  detail  this  more  fully  in  a  subsequent  trea-
tise ;  here,  where  we  are  concerned  merely  with  the  proof  by  facts  of
a  magnetic  polar  difference  in  the  transverse  direction  in  the  human
body,  I  must  be  content  to  state,  that  the  observations  on  Miss  Maix
were  repeated,  found  the  same,  and  confirmed  anew.

89.  It  appears  from  all  these  investigations,  that  all  the  symmetri-
cally placed  organs  of  the  animal  body,  so  far  as  they  were  here  in-
vestigated, but  especially  the  hands,  exhibited  a  difference  which  is
caused  by  a  magnetic  polar  opposition  ;  and  that  consequently  a
dualism  of  the  fundamental  force  now  under  consideration  exists
between  them,  wholly  in  the  way  that  xoe  have  found  it  to  occur  in
crystals.

90.  I  have  shown  above,  §  41  and  §  53,  that  the  terrestrial  mag-
netism has  no  observable  influence  upon  crystals,  and  not  the  slight-
est directing  power.  The  same  holds  good  in  relation  to  the  force
of  the  hands.  The  force  which  I  exert  actively  with  my  hands  is
always  equally  effective  in  all  places  and  positions  that  I  assume. —
Neither  can  I  perceive  any  influence  upon  me  passively  :  I  have  tried
lying  down  to  sleep  in  various  directions,  but  to  whatever  quarter  of
the  heavens  I  turned,  I  slept  equally  well  :  and  the  perfectly  healthy
man,  who  perhaps  never  is  sensitive,  undoubtedly  never  feels  the
least  influence  of  the  terrestrial  magnetism,  however  actively  and  va-
riously this  re-acts  upon  the  sick.     Neither  can  I  detect  in  animals

OF  THE  ORGANIC   FORCE.  113

anything  which  indicates  the  least  dependence  upon  terrestrial  mag-
netism. If  a  free  sense  were  devoted  to  this  influence,  we  might
expect  to  find  it  in  larvae,  which  are  blind.  As  silk  is  cultivated  on
my  estates,  I  had  many  opportunities  of  observing  the  deportment
of  these  so  low  organisms  in  all  stages  and  conditions.  Yet,  even
in  spinning  and  changing  into  the  chrysalis,  the  animal  never  selected
any  definite  direction,  but  placed  its  cocoon  irregularly  in  all  possible
directions  ;  not  even  a  majority  exhibited  a  preference  for  any  parti-
cular direction  during  their  dormant  state.  Therefore,  the  crystallic
force  and  the  force  of  the  hands  agree  perfectly  in  this  insensibility
to  the  universal  magnetic  force  of  the  earth.

91.  In  reference  to  the  remarkable  direct  attraction  of  the  patient's
hands,  exerted  so  strangely  by  the  magnet  and  crystals,  it  has  al-
ready been  stated,  §  74,  that  a  man's  hand  actually  effects  this,  but
only  when  it  has  previously  been  rubbed  for  some  time  with  a  strong
magnet :  he  could  not  do  it  by  his  own  force.  But  it  has  also  ap-
peared that  he  was  not  very  strong  in  magnetic  force.  At  least,
Miss  Maix  has  found  his  appreciably  weaker  than  those  of  Father
Lambert  and  mine.  I  neglected,  myself,  to  make  a  proper  trial
upon  the  cataleptic  Miss  Nowotny  at  the  right  time,  because  I  was
not  then  sufficiently  aware  of  the  value  of  it.  On  the  other  hand,  I
have  seen  this  phenomenon  in  Miss  Reichel  and  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer
many  times,  in  the  higher  stages  of  their  diseases,  and  in  particular
in  the  former,  in  the  presence  of  many  other  persons.  In  the  cata-
lepsy which  usually  preceded  her  convulsive  fits,  her  hand  followed
pretty  readily  the'  fingers  of  my  vigorous  young  man,  as  also  my
own.  I  have  often  made  her  rise  from  the  seat  in  a  state  of  uncon-
sciousness, and  follow  my  fingers  a  considerable  distance  along  the
room.  Even  when  I  held  before  her,  in  this  condition,  things  which
possessed  no  polar  distribution  of  their  own,  such  as  a  piece  of  chalk
cut  to  a  point,  I  could  lift  up  her  hand  with  it,  and  if  she,  by  chance,
stood  up  in  the  cataleptic  state,  in  her  room,  I  could  lead  her  some
paces  on.  In  this  case  it  was  the  force  of  my  fingers  conducted
through  the  chalk,  and  concentrated  at  its  point,  (according  to  the
laws  developed  above,  §  81,)  where  the  chalk  represented  the  sum
of  my  fingers,  and  so  perfectly  took  on  their  force  and  action,  that  it
attracted  and  drew  on  the  hand  of  the  patient,  when  I  walked  back-
ward with  it,  just  as  my  fingers  had  themselves  done.  I  observed
this  attraction  by  my  fingers  in  the  same  way  during  Miss  Atzmanns-
dorfer's  attacks.  Miss  Sturmann's  attraction  I  did  not  witness  my-
self, but  it  occurred  in  exactly  the  same  degree  in  her,  and  I  can
trust  the  statements  of  her  physician,  Professor  Lippich,  as  fully  as
my  own  experience.     From  all  these  different  discoveries,  it  is  cer-

114  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS

tain  that  a  mechanically  attractive  force,  acting  upon  the  hands  of
cataleptic  patients,  resides  in  the  hands  and  fingers  of  healthy  men,
just  as  in  the  poles  of  crystals.

92.  But  the  luminous  phenomena,  which  I  have  still  to  enter  into,
form  a  brilliant  point  in  this  comparative  examination.  As  I  saw
Miss  Reichel  for  the  first  time  after  violent  spasms,  with  closed  eyes,
playing  in  a  sort  of  half  sleep  with  the  magnet  flame,  which  always
gave  her  great  pleasure,  I  interposed  my  outstretched  hand,  in  the
darkness,  between  the  magnet  and  the  patient.  She  immediately  be-
gan to  play  in  the  same  manner  with  the  tips  of  my  fingers,  and  to
talk  to  the  bystanders  of  five  little  flames,  which  leaped  up  and  down
in  the  air.  She  did  not  perceive  my  hand  itself,  and  took  the  move-
ment of  my  fingers,  on  the  points  of  which  she  saw  the  flames,  for  an
independent  movement  of  the  latter.  All  present,  one  after  another,
raised  their  hands,  and  each  desired  to  know  whether  fire  issued  from
his  fingers.  The  patient  saw  it  on  all  men's  fingers,  more  or  less
strongly  ;  but  not  one  single  girl's  fingers  emitted  sufficient  light,
or  at  most  but  a  feeble  luminosity,  and  her  own  none.  As  long  as
Miss  Reichel  remained  ill,  these  experiments  were  often  repeated,
frequently  for  the  alleviation  of  her  spasms,  or  even  for  the  mere
amusement  of  many  spectators.  But  when  she  had  got  well,  it  ap-
peared, as  had  hot  been  reported  at  all  before,  that  not  only  during
sickness,  but  in  health,  she  saw  the  magnet  flames,  the  crystallic
light,  and  the  flames  on  the  hand,  whenever  it  was  dark  enough.  In
fact,  she  had  possessed  this  power  from  her  earliest  age ;  even  as  a
child  her  mother  had  often  lifted  her  up,  to  let  her  convince  herself
that  the  imaginary  fire  which  she  often  cried  out  about,  did  not  really
exist  on  the  nails  and  hooks  sticking  in  the  walls.  She  even  had
two  sisters  who  in  like  manner  saw  luminous  appearances,  in  all
places,  of  which  other  people  could  perceive  nothing.  Now,  while  I
am  writing,  she  serves  me  daily  for  investigations  which  I  am  making
in  this  subject,  on  the  connection  with  electricity  and  magnetism,  and
of  which  we  shall  see  after  a  time,  from  my  reports,  to  what  conclu-
sions this  has  led,  and  will  further  lead.  I  was  thus  placed  in  a  po-
sition to  examine  the  luminous  phenomena  on  the  hands  in  the
coolest  and  most  comprehensive  manner  during  a  long  period,  and  I
am  still  daily  continuing  this  examination.

93.  The  investigation  on  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  gave  essentially  the
same  results,  only  she  saw  all  the  flame-like  appearances  larger :
while  the  former  patient,  according  to  the  degree  of  her  diseased  ex-
citement, saw  the  finger-flames  from  a  little  less  to  a  little  more  than
an  inch  long,  the  latter  saw  them,  in  the  dark,  two  inches  and  more
in  length ;  thus  almost  the  whole  length  of  a  finger.     I   shall  give,

OF  THE  ORGANIC  FORCE.  115

with  one  of  the  succeeding  essays,  drawings  of  these  beautiful  ap-
pearances, as  I  obtained  them  from  Miss  Reichel.  Here  the  purpose
is  fulfilled  by  the  facts,  warranted  by  several  observers,  that  fiery
brushes  of  light  issue  from  the  points  of  the  fingers  of  healthy  men,
in  the  same  manner  as  from  the  poles  of  crystals.

94.  I  have  now  compared  the  properties  of  the  ciystallic  force,
without  exception,  as  enumerated  in  my  earliest  treatise,  with  the
force  that  the  human  hand  is  capable  of  exercising  :  the  parallel  be-
tween the  two  is,  as  is  evident,  complete,  and  the  agreement  of  the
two  forces,  in  their  general  expression,  so  perfect,  that  they  evidently
become  identified.  For  the  sake  of  clearness  I  here  give  the  princi-
pal results  seriatim,  in  a  compressed  form  : —

Hands,  passed  over  the  sensitive,  act  upon  them  like  crystal
pMes,  §  79.

The  force  that  here  rules  is  conductible  through  all  bodies,  like
the  force  of  the  crystal,  §  80.

It  may  be  accumulated  on  other  matters,  like  the  others,  §  81.

It  disappears  from  the  charged  substance  in  a  short  time,  like  the
other,  §  82.

Matter  has  a  coercive  power  over  it,  as  over  the  other,  §  83.

The  capacity  of  bodies  to  receive  a  charge  is,  for  this,  like  that  for
the  other,  §  83.

It  has  a  polar  arrangement  in  the  human  body,  as  the  other  has
in  crystals,  §  89.

It  is  as  little  influenced  by  terrestrial  magnetism  as  the  other,  §  90.

It  exerts  mechanical  attraction  on  the  hands  of  the  sensitive,  like
the  other,  §  91.

It  displays  luminosity  of  the  same  nature  and  power  as  the  other,
§  93-

And  thus  we  come  back  to  the  starting  point  of  this  section,  §  79,
namely,  that  the  same  force  really  resides  in  the  human  hands  as
manifests  itself  in  crystals;  that  thus  the  crystallic  force  and  the  so-
called  animal  magnetism  are  thoroughly  identical,  aud  therefore  that
the  same  laws  which  rule  the  fortner  are  also  fully  applicable  to  the
latter.

RETROSPECT.

a.  Not  only  crystals  exert  a  peculiar  kind  of  exciting  power  upon
healthy  and  diseased  sensitive  persons,  but  the  like  occurs  with  the
terrestrial  magnetism.  This  is  so  strong,  that  highly  sensitive  patients
can  only  sustain  it  in  a  certain  direction,  namely,  when  placed  with
the  head  to  the  north  and  the  feet  to  the  south,  aud  that  every  other

116  PHYSICAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  LAWS.

direction  is  painful ;  in  many  cases,  that  from  Avest  to  east  wholly  in-
supportable, and  even  dangerous.

b.  All  magnetic,  crystallic,  and  similar  re-actions  on  such  nervous-
ly excitable  persons,  are  essentially  modified  by  alteration  of  their
direction  in  regard  to  the  terrestrial   magnetism.

c.  Pure  iron,  devoid  of  carbon,  and  which  contains  no  intermixture
of  particles  of  steel,  rubbed  with  a  magnet  and  then  removed  from
it,  does  not,  as  is  well  known,  acquire  any  permanent  magnetism  ;
but  it  nevertheless  acquires  a  peculiar  force,  by  means  of  which  it
becomes  capable  of  exerting  a  distinct  and  powerful  action  on  very
sensitive  persons.

d.  The  magnet  imparts  this  unknown  something,  not  merely  to
iron,  but  to  all  other  metals,  stones,  salts,  water,  plants,  and  animals,
even  to  living  men ;  in  short,  to  all  solid  material  objects,  without
exception.

e.  This  something  acts  in  all  objects  either  immediately  charged
with  it,  or  rendered  active  by  the  so-called  distribution,  on  the  sensi-
tive nervous  persons,  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  the  magnet  it-
self and  as  crystals,  and  must  therefore  be  identical  with  the  peculiar
agent  of  these.

f.  Living  men  are  able  to  affect  sensitive,  healthy,  and  diseased
persons,  exactly  in  the  same  way,  especially  with  their  hands  and
fingers.

g.  This  force,  which  physicians  have  called  animal  magnetism,  pos-
sesses the  following  properties  : — It  is  conductible  through  all  other
bodies ;  it  is  capable  of  being  either  directly  accumulated  on,  or
transferred  by  distribution  to  other  bodies  ;  it  disappears  from  them
in  a  short  time  ;  it  is  fixable  on  them  for  some  time  by  their  capa-
city for  accumulation  and  by  their  coercive  power  ;  it  is  arranged  in.
a  polar  manner  in  animal  bodies  through  its  dualism  ;  it  is  without
appreciable  relation  to  the  terrestrial  magnetism  ;  it  is  capable  of
mechanically  attracting  the  hands  of  cataleptic  patients,  and  is  com-
bined with  luminous  phenomena;  all  exactly  as  the  crystallic  force
is,  with  which  it  thus  coincides,  and  in  all  particulars  obeys  the  same
physical  laws.

h.  The  part  of  the  force  residing  in  the  magnet,  the  crystallic  force,
and  the  force  which  is  the  basis  of  the  so-called  animal  magnetism  :
these  three  forces,  therefore,  coincide  in  their  essential  nature,  under
one  common  point  of  view.

FOURTH  TREATISE.

FURTHER  SOURCES  OF    THE  FORCE  WHICH  RESIDES  IN  CRYSTALS,  THE
MAGNET,  AND  THE  HUMAN  HANDS.

95.  What  I  have  already  brought  forward  here  has  by  no  means
exhausted  the  sources  from  which  the  enigmatical  force  now  under
examination  flows ;  in  fact,  I  have  not  yet  mentioned  the  principal
of  them.  Following  up  the  subject,  I  met  with  new  and  important
facts.  Physicists  have,  as  is  well  known,  for  many  years  debated
the  question  whether  or  no  the  sun's  rays  are  capable  of  magnetizing
a  steel  needle.  Since  Morichini,  who  published  the  first  observations,
Mrs.  Somerville,  Baumgarten,  Configliaghi,  and  others,  have  taken
the  principal  share  in  the  discussion  of  this  subject.  Recollection  of
the  treatises  on  this  point  led  me  to  reflect  on  the  part  the  sun  might
possibly  play  in  the  subject  of  my  present  researches,  and  which  ac-
quired some  probability  from  the  undeniable  and  well-known  influ-
ence exercised  by  the  moon  in  certain  nervous  diseases.

97.  I  availed  myself  of  the  first  cloudless  sky  to  experiment  in  this
direction  on  Miss  Maix.  I  placed  the  end  of  a  copper  wire  eleven
yards  long  in  her  hand,  and  as  usual  allowed  her  a  little  time  to  be-
come accustomed  to  it.  I  then  put  the  other  longer  end  out  of  the
window  into  the  sun-shine.  The  effects  of  the  crystallic  force  became
immediately  perceptible,  in  a  weak  degree,  but  distinctly.  I  next
connected  with  the  wire  a  plate  of  copper,  sixteen  square  inches  in
extent,  in  the  shade,  allowed  the  patient  to  get  used  to  the  end  of
the  wire,  and  put  the  plate  in  front  of  the  window  in  the  sun's  rays.
Scarcely  was  this  done  when  an  unexpected  cry  of  pleasure  greeted
me  from  the  sick-bed.  Immediately  the  rays  fell  upon  the  plate,  a
strong  manifestation  of  the  crystallic  force  made  itself  felt  in  the
hand,  by  the  known  peculiar  sensation  of  warmth,  which  then  as-
cended through  the  arm  to  the  head.  But  this  well-known  and  not
unexpected  result  was  accompanied  by  a  simultaneous  sensation  of
cooling,  and  this  so  strong  and  predominant,  and  with  an  experience
of  strengthening  refreshment  through  all  the  limbs,  that  the  patient

118  RAYS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  &c.

declared  herself  greatly  revived  and  cheered  by  it.     Heat  and  cold
were  felt  together.

98.  In  a  modified  experiment,  with  the  view  to  attain  the  results
less  complicated  with  the  effect  of  heat,  I  substituted  a  white  cloth
for  the  copper-plate.  I  first  attended  to  the  accustoming  in  the
shade,  and  then  carried  the  stiff  wire  with  the  linen  cloth  attached  to
it  into  the  sunshine.  The  chamber  was  warm,  the  outer  air  was  cool.
Nevertheless,  effects  presented  themselves  to  the  sensations  of  the
patient  as  quickly,  though  more  weakly,  as  from  the  copper  plate  ;  a
dull  feeling  of  increasing  crystallic  force  in  the  wire,  then  the
striking  cooling  and  reviving  sensation  :  the  latter,  however,  tole-
rably vivid.

99.  I  varied  this  experiment  by  placing  a  wet  cloth,  instead  of  a
dry  one,  upon  the  copj)er  wire,  which  was  held  in  the  hand  of  the
patient  till  she  was  used  to  it,  and  then  placed  in  the  sun.  The  effect
was  accompanied  by  a  disagreeable  accessory  sensation,  like  damp
air  would  have  produced  upon  her ;  but  the  principal  sensation,
which  is  peculiar  to  the  sun — increasing  heat  in  the  wire,  and  the
refreshing  cold  which  presented  itself  and  spread  over  her  whole
body — was  manifested  in  the  most  vivid  manner.^

100.  I  now  sought  for  confirmation  and  warranty  of  these  observa-
tions. Some  days  later  I  undertook  the  same  experiments  with  Miss
Nowotny.  She  had  now  so  far  recovered  that  she  had  quite  left  her
bed  for  some  weeks  ;  buf  I  nevertheless  wished  to  test  the  influence
upon  her.  One  end  of  a  wire  was' placed  in  her  hand,  the  other  in
the  sunshine  before  a  window.  She  immediately  felt  alterations  in
that  part  which  she  held  in  her  hand  :  it  became  cooler  to  her.  I
brought  it  back  into  the  shade, — the  coolness  disappeared  ;  I  again
placed  it  in  the  sunshine, — the  coolness  returned.  I  now  attached
about  a  square  foot  of  tinned  iron  plate  to  the  wire,  and  placed  it  in
the  sun.  The  cooling  not  only  quickly  manifested  itself,  but  increased
for  two  or  three  minutes  to  such  a  degree  that  I  received  the  assu-
rance that  the  wire  had  become  icy  cold  and  begun  to  make  the  hand
stiff.  The  plate  was  brought  back  into  the  shade,  and  the  experi-
ment repeated ;  but  the  sensation  of  cold  immediately  began  to  de-
crease, and  in  a  few  minutes  disappeared  ;  while,  when  the  plate  was
brought  back  into  the  sun,  it  returned  forthwith,  and  increased  till
it  had  attained  the  same  intensity.  I  have  already  remarked  upon
the  point  that  the  peculiar  sensation  which  the  crystallic  force  pro-
duces in  the  hands  of  the  sensitive  sometimes  expresses  itself  like
heat,  sometimes  like  cold ;  the  particular  differences  of  both  will  be
specially  elucidated  hereafter.  Here,  where  the  cold  depends  on  the
sun,  which  otherwise  is  the  source  of  warmth  to  all  nature,  it  is  pre-

AS  SOURCES  OF  THE  NEW  FORCE.  n9

eminently  characteristic  of  a  specific  activity.  This  was  expressed  so
powerfully  and  clearly  that  the  distinction  was  found  to  be  remarka-
ble, according  as  I  let  the  sun's  rays  fall  obliquely  on  the  metal
plates,  when  the  effect  was  weaker,  or  as  they  struck  vertically  upon
them,  m  which  case  it  was  much  more  strongly  perceived  ; — whether
I  made  the  experiment,  in  this  way,  morning  or  evening,  or  at  noon  •
whether  I  performed  them  in  July,  or  repeated  them  under  the  same
conditions  in  November.

101.  I  had  no  opportunity  to  institute  very  circumstantial  experi-
ments on  this  point,  on  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer ;  but  I  heard  from  her
in  conversation,  that  in  general  the  sun  exercised  a  very  agree-
able yet  not  warming  but  pleasantly  cooling  influence  over  her  whole
body.

102.  In  like  manner  formerly,  before  I  had  become  acquainted
with  this  peculiarity  of  the  sun's  rays,  I  had  often  heard  from
Miss  bturmann  the  then  enigmatical  statement  that  the  sun  made
her  cold.

103.  But  I  was  enabled  to  investigate  this  subject  most  minutely
by  means  of  Miss  Reichel.  The  sun's  rays  not  only  produced  the
peculiar  sensation  of  cold  when  a  wire  was  connected  with  iron,  cop-
per, or  zinc  plate,  tin-foil,  lead-foil,  strips  of  silver,  gold  leaf,  German
silver,  brass  plate,  &c,  but  also  when  linen,  woollen  cloth,  cotton  or
silk  stuff  connected  with  it,  were  brought  into  the  direct  light  of  the
sun.  Nay,  every  other  substance,  porcelain,  glass,  stone,  wood,
water,  lamp-oil,  alcohol,  sulphur;  in  short,  everything  I  chose  to
select,  when  connected  with  the  wire  which  the  girl  took  into  her
hand,  in  the  shade,  and  moved  into  the  sun's  rays,  produced  in  her
that  striking  sensation  of  increasing-  cold,  to  which  the  sensitive  all
unanimously  and  uniformly  testified,  as  much  surprised  at  the  ap-
parent contradiction  which  lay  therein,  as  I  was  myself:  which,  how-
ever, the  sequel  will  very  clearly  solve.

104.  If  it  were  actually  the  force  of  crystals,  of  the  magnet,  of  the
human  hand,  as  I  have  identified  them  in  the  preceding  treatises,
which  I  now  again  met  with  in  the  sun's  rays,  this  could  onlv  be
proved  by  the  same  methods  I  had  pursued  in  similar  cases  with  the
crystals,  <fcc,  by  comparison  of  the  effects.  It  was  necessary,  there-
tore,  to  raise  and  discuss  the  questions  :  Are  the  sun's  rays"  capable
ot  producing  the  same  conditions  in  matter  as  the  poles  of  crystals,
the  magnet,  and  the  human  hand  are  ?  Will  mere  sunshine  impart
to  a  piece  of  iron  the  furce  which  is  conveyed  into  it  by  the  magnet?
Has  it  the  capacity  to  imbue  all  substances  with  the  power  of  react-
ing upon  sensitive  sick  persons  ?  Can  it  produce  a  magnetized  glass
ot  water  ?     Can  the  sun's  rays,  so  often  investigated,  possess  a  new

120  RAYS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  etc.

and  mighty  force  which  has  hitherto  wholly  escaped  the  glance  of
physical  science  ?  I  scarcely  ventured  to  admit  such  thoughts,  but
my  desire  for  an  explanation  acquired  strength  daily.

The  first  thing  curiosity  led  me  to  try  was  a  glass  of  water.  I  let
it  stand  five  minutes  in  the  sun,  and  then  directed  the  waiting-woman,
who  possessed  very  little  magnetic  force,  to  give  it  to  Miss  Maix,
without  informing  her  for  what  purpose  it  was  :  without  having  beeu
asked,  she  said  that  it  was  magnetized  water  directly  she  had  put  it
to  her  lips.  It  produced  the  peculiar  pepper-like  burning,  well  known
to  the  sensitive,  on  her  tongue,  palate,  throat,  down  the  oesophagus
to  the  stomach,  at  every  point  arousing  spasmodic  symptoms.  I  al-
lowed another  glass  of  water  to  stand  twenty  minutes  in  the  sun's
rays  before  it  was  given  to  the  patient ;  this  time  also  by  the  weak
hands  of  a  girl,  to  avoid  the  stronger  effect  of  mine.  This  was  found
as  strongly  magnetized  as  ever  one  could  be  by  the  large  nine-layered
magnet.

106.  It  was  possible  that  a  more  considerable  portion  of  the  force
might  adhere  to  the  glass  than  was  contained  in  the  wTater.  To  test
this,  and  at  the  same  time  to  obtain  information  of  the  internal  con-
dition of  the  water,  whether  or  not  it  might  be  somewhat  in  the  same
relation  as  a  tube  full  of  steel-filings  stands  to  the  magnet,  I  had  the
solarized  water  poured  into  another  glass,  which  was  then  given  to
the  patient.  The  result  was  similar  to  what  had  often  been  experi-
enced with  magnetized  water  by  Miss  Sturmann  and  Miss  Nowotny —
that  the  transferred  water  was  just  as  magnetic  (as  it  is  called)  in  the
second  glass  as  in  the  first,  and  that  consequently  the  complete  revo-
lution of  all  its  molecules  had  little  or  not  at  all  modified  the  internal
condition  which  constitutes  what  is  called  its  magnetization.  Even
an  hour  after,  when  the  remainder  was  drank,  the  so-called  magnet-
ism had  not  wholly  disappeared,  and  though  weaker  than  at  first,  it
was  still  perceptibl}7  charged.  In  this,  as  in  all  other  characters,  the
solarized  water  agreed  most  perfectly  with  that  which  had  been  im-
pregnated by  the  magnet,  crystals,  or  the  human  hand.

For  security,  I  subsequently  followed  out  these  experiments  with
Miss  Sturmann  and  Miss  Reichel.  I  shall  take  the  liberty  to  omit  an
account  of  the  accessory  circumstances,  which  would  only  cause  tire-
some repetitions.

107.  To  follow  out  the  parallel,  I  took  the  often-mentioned  Ger-
man silver  conductor,  and  first  placed  it  in  the  patient's  hands  to  ac-
custom her  to  it,  then  allowed  the  sun's  rays  to  fall  upon  it  for  a  few
seconds,  and  immediately  gave  it  back  to  Miss  Maix.  She  found  it
rendered  active  just  as  when  it  had  been  placed  in  contact  with  a
magnet,  crystals,  or  the  human  hand ;  but  at  the  same  time  she  at

AS  SOURCES  OF  THE  NEW  FORCE.  121

once  perceived  the  pleasant  sunny  feeling  with  which  the  conductor
also  had  been  charged,  and  which  it  retained.  According  to  repeated
experiments,  this  persisted  to  her  senses  for  five  or  six  minutes,  after
which 'it  became  imperceptible  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  crystal-
lie  force  with  which  the  sun  had  imbued  it,  was  felt  much  longer,  and
in  fact  for  the  same  period  of  twenty  minutes  that  the  same  conductor
had  retained  the  force  of  my  two  hands,  §  82.  The  rays  of  the  sun,
therefore,  exactly  equalled  here  the  force  of  my  ten  fingers,  and  acted
just  as  permanently  by  accumulation  as  the  latter.

108.  I  allowed  Miss  Beichel  to  become  used  to  the  feeling  of  my
hand,  and  then  went  out  into  the  sunshine.  After  ten  minutes  had
elapsed,  during  which  I  had  exposed  myself  on  all  sides  to  the  sun's
rays,  I  went  back  and  gave  her  the  same  hand.  She  was  much  as-
tonished at  the  rapid  alteration  in  the  great  increase  of  force  which
she  experienced  in  it,  the  cause  of  which  was  unknown  to  her.  The
sunshine  had  evidently  impregnated  me  in  exactly  the  same  way  as
the  magnet  had  charged  (§  74)  the  body  of  a  man,  and  in  other
experiments  my  own  person.  Miss  Maix  had  already  previously  in-
formed me  that  she  could  not  bear  anyone  coming  out  of  strong  sun-
shine to  approach  her  bed.  Some  time  before,  a  party  of  friends  had
entered  her  room  after  a  walk  in  powerful  sunshine ;  this  had  pro-
duced so  much  pain  and  uneasiness,  that  she  could  not  sustain  it,  and
Lad  been  obliged  to  beg  her  friends  to  leave  her ;  and  this  had  been
merely  the  action  of  the  sun,  not  the  cooling,  but  that  wanning  the
hand- wire,  §  97.

109.  After  I  had  given  up  the  experiments  with  the  sun's  rays  on
Miss  Maix,  the  girls  of  her  neighborhood  amused  themselves  with
them.  When  1  revisited  her,  they  told  me  that  the  patient  had
found  an  iron  key  which  they  had  laid  in  the  sunshine,  after  a  short
interval,  magnetic,  and  as  strongly  as  a  magnetic  rod  which  they
possessed.  It  did  not  attract  iron,  but  Miss  Maix  declared  that  it
acted  upon  her  exactly  like  a  magnet.  The  key  had  therefore  ac-
quired a  magnet-like  charge  from  the  sun.  It  had  not  endured,  but
disappeared  from  the  key  after  some  time,  as  the  crystallic  force  does
from  bodies.

110.  This  observation  led  the  girls  at  once  to  further  experiments,
with  astonishing  results.  They  took  a  horse-shoe  magnet  which  had
become  weak,  and  instead  of  rubbing  it  to  strengthen  it,  laid  it  in
the  sunshine,  and  they  had  the  pleasure  to  see  their  expectation  fully
confirmed.  The  horse-shoe  became  so  much  strengthened  and  newly
magnetically  active  upon  the  patient,  that  thereafter,  whenever  a
magnet  became  weak,  it  was  only  necessary  to  lay  it  in  the  sun  to
make  it  good  again.  This  is  a  kind  of  confirmation  of  Zantedeschi's
observations.  6

122  RAYS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  &c.

111.  I  now  sought  to  complete  these  experiments,  by  a  trial,  with
Miss  Reichel,  of  the  behavior  of  crystals  in  the  sunshine.  The  fact
appeared  that  a  rock  crystal  and  a  selenite  had  scarcely  been  ex-
posed to  the  rays  of  the  sun  five  minutes  before  the  girl  felt  the  pe-
culiar nervous  excitement  from  it  greatly  strengthened.

112.  All  these  facts  at  once  combine  to  afford  the  law  :  The  force
of  the  sun,  corresponding  to  the  crystallic  force,  &c,  is  capable  of  be-
ing accumulated  in  other  bodies.  And'since  they  acquire  this,  charge
and  retain  it  for  some  time,  they  possess  a  certain  degree  of  coercive
power  over  it.

113.  Its  couductibility  through  other  bodies  has  already  been  de-
monstrated by  the  conduction  to  the  patient's  hands  by  copper  and
iron  wires  ;  1  will  only  subjoin  a  few  more  facts.  When  I  placed  the
end  of  a  linen  cloth  in  Miss  Reichel's  hand,  gave  her  the  usual  inter-
val to  get  used  to  it,  and  exposed  the  other  end  to  the  sun's  rays,
while  the  hand  remained  in  the  shade,  the  sensation  of  the  crystallic
force  soon  advanced  gradually  from  the  linen  to  the  hand,  and  pro-
duced cold  in  it.  The  same  occurred  when  I  gave  her  a  woollen
cloth,  a  piece  of  cotton  or  silk  stuff,  and  let  her  handle  it  in  the  same
way.  When  I  drew  the  cloth  back  out  of  the  sunshine,  it  lost  its
coolness  in  a  few  minutes,  and  recovered  it  again  as  often  as  I  brought
it  back  into  the  sun's  rays.  The  conduction  was  most  rapid  through
silk,  next  through  linen,  slower  through  wool,  and  slowest  of  all
through  cotton.  A  wooden  rod,  twenty  inches  long,  conducted  the
solar  force  pretty  rapidly  ;  a  measuring  rod,  six  feet  eight  inches
long,  required  more  than  half  a  minute  for  the  effect  to  penetrate
from  one  end  to  the  other.  But  a  glass  tube  conveyed  the  sensation
to  the  other  end,  directly  one  end  was  placed  in  the  rays  of  the  sun.
Therefore,  substances  of  every  hind,  whether  good,  imperfect,  or  non-
conductors of  electricity,  manifest,  without  exception,  the  power  of
conducting  that  force  of  the  "surfs  rays  ;  those  which  are  continuous,
easily  and  rapidly  ;  others,  which  are  composed  of  distinct  parts,  like
woollen  and  cotton  stuffs,  with  more  difficulty,  and  more  slowly.

114.  I  pass  over  the  confirmatory  experiments,  and,  in  order  not
to  dwell  longer  on  these  comparisons,  hasten  to  the  luminous  pheno-
mena. It  was  here  an  especial  concern,  and  a  very  necessary  trial,
to  examine  whether  the  force  of  the  sun  was  in  the  same  way  capa-
ble of  endowing  the  objects  with  the  power  of  emitting  luminous
Harne  in  the  dark.  The  laws  of  phosphorescence  are  known,  and,
according  to  these,  it  was  impossible  to  bring  one  of  the  bodies  upon
which  the  sun  had  shined,  at  once  into  darkness  :  we  know  from
Heinrich  that  in  such  a  case  a  great  proportion  of  solid  bodies  are
luminous.     The  contrivance  which  I  arranged  for  carrying  on  expe-

AS  SOURCES  OF  THE  NEW  FORCE.  123

riments,  in  perfect  darkness,  while  the  sun  was  shining,  was  as  fol-
lows. In  my  laboratory,  a  covered  staircase  leads  down  to  a  lower
story,  where  my  collections  and  instruments  are  kept :  I  had  the
windows  of  this  closed  up  :  when  I  closed  both  doors,  I  had  perfect
darkness  upon  the  staircase.  Communication  was  easy  with  this,
and  everything  could  be  understood  that  was  spoken  both  in  it  and
in  the  adjacent  rooms  on  the  two  floors.  Miss  Reichel  expressed  her
willingness  to  allow  herself  to  be  shut  up  here  ;  and  I  mention  these
accidental  circumstances  especially,  because  a  great  number  of  expe-
viments  on  light  were  performed  on  this  staircase  :  these  will  all  be
mentioned  in  their  place,  and  bear  reference  to  the  locality  just  de-
scribed. At  the  same  time,  this  arrangement  gave  the  best  control
to  ensure  the  accuracy  of  the  sensitive  observer,  who,  shut  up  here
far  above  or  below  the  room  where  the  operations  were  carried  on,
could  never  know  what  modifications  the  experiments  underwent
there  ;  she  could  only  be  aware  of  their  effects,  and  simply  state  how
aud  where  she  perceived  them.  Up  stairs,  in  the  room,  I  had  pre-
pared several  large  sheets,  half  a  square  yard  in  extent,  of  copper,
iron,  and  zinc,  plates  covered  with  gold  leaf,  large  pieces  of  lead  foil,
linen  dipped  in  melted  sulphur,  &c.  I  connected  these,  one  after  an-
other, with  an  iron  wire,  about  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  thick,  thirteen
yards  long,  carried  this  through  the  key-hole  of  the  door,  which  was
stopped  closely  all  around  it,  and  down  the  stairs,  where  the  observer
grasped  it  in  her  hand,  keeping  the  end  of  the  wire  turned  upwards.
After  she  had  remained  quiet  in  the  dark  long  enough  for  her  eyes
to  become  accustomed  to  it,  I  placed  the  objects  above  named,  one
after  another,  in  the  rays  of  the  sun.  Before  quite  a  minute  had
elapsed,  a  slender  column  of  flame,  from  ten  to  twelve  inches  high,
and  only  two-thirds  of  an  inch  thick,  ascended  before  her  eyes  from
the  end  of  the  wire.  It  was  gradually  attenuated  upwards,  almost
like  a  knitting-needle  at  the  end,  and  spread  an  agreeable  coolness  all
around.  When  the  air  was  disturbed  by  speaking,  it  flickered  back-
wards and  forwards  with  it,  as  I  have  described  of  the  flame  of  the
magnetic  needle.  As  the  metal  plates  above  were  moved  into  the  sun-
shine or  into  the  shade,  the  flame  in  the  darkness  below  rose  and  fell
upon  the  wire,  an  interval  of  half  a  minute  or  more  always  elapsing
before  the  manifestation  of  the  change.  I  substituted  a  human  being
for  the  metal  plates,  and  placed  the  end  of  the  wire  in  her  left  hand.
It  was  my  daughter.  By  her  own  force,  while  still  standing  in  the
shade,  she  produced  a  little  flame  on  the  wire,  which  diffused  warmth
around,  in  accordance  with  facts  already  detailed.  When  she  placed
herself  in  the  sunshine,  the  flame  on  the  end  of  the  wire  shortly  rose
to  a  height  of  nearly  nine  inches,  and  now  diffused  a  pleasant  solar

124  RAYS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  <fec.

cooling.  As  often  as  she  removed  out  of  the  sunshine,  the  flame
sank  to  its  previous  inconsiderable  size,  and  again  emitted  heat.  I
next  brought  some  metal  plates  and  other  objects,  by  way  of  experi-
ment, as  rapidly  as  possible  out  of  the  sun's  rays  into  the  darkness,
before  the  eyes  of  the  observer.  Without  wishing  to  take  account  of
the  luminous  flame  which  spread  over  them,  since  this,  though  not
produced,  might  be  more  or  less  influenced  by  phosphorescence,  it  is
still  to  the  purpose  to  mention  here  that  from  the  sharp  angles  of
the  plates,  especially  those  turned  upward,  issued  tufts  of  flame  in  the
manner  of  the  magnet  and  crystals  ;  green  and  blue  from  copper,
clear  white  from  gold  and  silver,  dull  white  from  tin,  dirty  blue  from
lead,  reddish  white  from  zinc,  white  from  a  quicksilvered  mirror,
and  blue  with  white  points  from  a  mass  of  crystals  of  sulphate  of  pot-
ass. Lastly,  I  brought  a  glass  tube  forty  inches  long  and  two  inches
wide  out  of  the  sunshine  into  the  darkness ;  it  was  enveloped  on  the
upper  half,  as  held  vertically,  by  fine  white  lambent  flame,  which
passed  at  the  upper  end  into  a  tube  about  three  inches  long,  playing
around  the  top.

I  applied  alternately  polarized  light,  which  fell  at  an  angle  of  about
35°  into  the  room  through  the  window,  and  the  direct  rays  of  the
sun,  for  which  purpose  was  used  a  roomy  balcony,  to  which  there
was  ready  access  from  the  work-room  ;  however,  no  distinction  in  the
results  could  be  perceived.  All  these  experiments  prove  that  the
force  flowing  on  to  matter,  with  the  surfs  rays,  produces  the  same
beautiful  luminous  phenomena  as  the  crystallic  and  other  forces  do.

112.  Therefore,  in  every  respect  related  here,  the  action  of  the  sun
agrees  with  those  of  crystals,  the  magnet,  and  the  human  hand  ;  and
this,  our  fixed  star,  must  be  received  as  the  fourth  source  of  crystallic
force.

These  observations,  as  is  evident  at  the  first  glance,  lead  far  in  their
more  distant  ramifications.  I  avoid,  however,  in  the  outset,  entering
into  the  infinite  multiplicity  of  their  relations  in  universal  nature,  be-
cause. I  wish  in  the  first  place  to  trace  out  and  establish  successively
all  the  sources  I  have  become  acquainted  with  of  the  force  now  under
consideration,  and  then  afterwards  to  elucidate  each  singl}T,  so  far  as
I  have  been  able  hitherto  to  detect  its  peculiarity.  Nevertheless,  I
cannot  help  casting  a  few  glances  at  one  of  these  many  sides,  because
it  is  this  very  one  which  more  directly  establishes  the  mode  of  action
of  the  sun.  This  is  the  spectrum.  Since  the  sun's  rays  manifest  the
force  in  question,  the  question  at  once  presents  itself — whether  this
force  resides  in  all  the  rays  of  the  colored  spectrum,  only  in  one,  or
more  or  less  in  particular  of  them  ?  I  made  a  preliminary  experi-
ment in  this  direction  on  Miss  Maix.     I  threw  the  spectrum  upon  a

AS  SOURCES  OF  THE  NEW  FORCE.  125

wall  with  a  glass  prism,  placed  a  copper  wire  in  the  patient's  hand,
allowed  her  to  become  accustomed  to  it,  and  then,  holding  it  near  the
other  end  in  my  hand,  moved  it  slowly  from  color  to  color  across  the
spectrum.  She  could  not  see  me,  for  we  were  separated  by  a  folding
Bcrfeea.  Many  and  repeated  experiments,  both  with  her,  and  after-
wards with  several  other  sensitive  persons,  led  to  the  uniform  results  ;
violet  blue  and  blue  were  the  principal  seat  of  the  solar  agreeable  in-
fluence, and  of  that  reviving  coolness  which  diffused  itself  throughout
the  body  of  the  patient  ;  consequently,  that  part  of  the  spectrum  in
whioh  exists  the  least  intensity  of  light,  On  the  other  hand,  the
erystallic  force,  apparent  warmth — nay,  sensation  of  heating  of  the
wire,  although  it  was  some  six  yards  long,  increased  continually  from
the  middle,  from  yellow  to  orange,  so  that  it  was  most  distinct  and
deep  in  the  red.  Here  we  find  the  maximum  of  the  heating  rays;
the  true  warmth  of  which,  however,  was  far  from  being  able  to  reach
the  patient.  These  observations  support  the  statements  of  Morichini
and  Mrs.  Somerville,  and  place  new  weight  in  the  scale  of  the  proba-
bility of  their  assertions,  which  are  as  yet  by  no  means  universally
received.

11*7.  Each  end  of  the  spectrum,  therefore,  had  its  specific  strongly
expressed  influence  upon  the  excitability  of  the  sensitive  persons  ;  the
more  minute  and  detailed  examination  of  which  will  afford  interest-
ing further  conclusions,  and  the  elucidation  of  which  will  form  the
subject  of  one  of  the  succeeding  treatises.

118.  From  this  point  it  was  but  a  step  to  the  moon,  the  trial  of
which  necessarily  pressed  the  more  urgently  upon  me,  from  the  well-
known  fact  that  countless  terrestrial  phenomena  among  the  healthy
and  diseased  show  themselves  to  depend  more  or  less  upon  our  satel-
lite, the  causes  of  which  we  as  yet  know  not.  I  made  the  first  ex-
periment on  Miss  Maix.  It  was  not  carried  out  without  some  diffi-
culty. Her  window  looked  toward  the  north,  and  the  moon  could
not  be  got  at  on  any  side.  In  this  difficulty  I  resolved  to  carry  an
iron  wire  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  thick  through  two  rooms,  then  over
an  area,  and  from  these,  again,  through  three  rooms,  in  all  about
100  feet ;  thus  alone  could  I  obtain  some  of  the  moon's  rays.  I
placed  one  end  of  the  wire  in  the  patient's  hand,  the  other  was  con-
nected with  a  large  copper  plate,  which,  with  the  usual  precautions,  was
moved  into  the  moonlight.  After  a  short  pause  the  sensation  in  the
hand  began  to  alter  very  much.  Iron  wire  and  copper  plate  had
alone  produced  a  warm  sensation,  as  they  always  did.  The  effect  of
the  moon,  which  became  associated  with  this,  was  described  by  the
patient  as  of  a  very  violent  and  mixed  kind,  so  that  her  accounts  of
it  did  not  evince  her  usual  clearness.     Without  delaying  with  the

126  RAYS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  Ac.

particulars  of  the  present  merely  preliminary  experiment,  the  fact  will
suffice  here,  that  active  influence  of  the  moon,  conducted  to  the  pa-
tient through  a  long  wire,  did  really  present  itself.  The  sensation  on
her  right  hand  was  much  more  pleasant  than  on  the  left.  But  a
point  which  did  not  occur  in  the  sunshine,  and  manifested  itself  as
peculiar  to  the  moon,  was  a  distinct  kind  of  attraction  toward  the
wire  through  the  whole  arm,  so  that  she  felt  induced  to  follow  along
the  wire  with  her  hand.  She  ran  her  finger  slowly  along  the  wire,
when  she  felt  the  attraction,  and  would  have  been -inclined,  if  not  in
bed,  to  trace  it  out  along  its  whole  length.  We  meet  here  with
something  similar  to  .that  strange  attraction  which  we  have  observed
in  the  magnet  for  catahptic  persons,  and  from  which  little  doubt  re-
mains that  it  is  the  irresistible  attraction  which  so  powerfully  seizes
somnambulists,  and  which,  therefore,  being  conductible,  may  be  con-
veyed by  metals.  The  patient  regarded  it  as  really  magnetic,  only
she  said  that  this  attraction  was  much  stronger  than  that  of  the
magnet.  Yet  I  must  repeat  what  I  have  already  mentioned,  that
Miss  Maix's  hand  never  was  perceptibly  solicited  by  the  magnet  to
motion  or  adhesion.  The  special  local  difficulties  which  prevailed
here  of  continuing  nocturnal  observations  of  this  kind,  rendered  it
impossible- to  investigate  these  interesting  phenomena  more  minutely  ;
I  therefore  was  compelled  to  turn  to  other  sensitive  persons  to  collect
confirmations.

119.  This  I  did  in  the  first  place  with  Miss  Eeichel,  who  afforded
me  abundance  of  help  in  variously  modified  experiments.  Whatever
object  I  placed  in  her  hand,  and  after  she  had  become  accustomed  to
it,  desired  her  to  hold  in  the  moonlight,  she  always  immediately  as-
sured me  of  the  access  of  exactly  the  same  sensation  as  was  caused  in
her  when  I  placed  the  points  of  the  crystals,  poles  of  magnets,  or  my
fingers  upon  it,  or  when  the  sun  had  shone  upon  it.  All  substances
made  use  of  exhibited  this  susceptibility  and  conducting  power.  Her
sensation,  however,  was  not  cooling,  but  of  gentle  warmth  ;  and  the
sequel  will  show  that  this  girl,  of  all  those  with  whom  I  experimented,
distinguished  most  definitely  and  most  uniformly,  with  objective  rea-
sons, between  cool  and  warm,  between  Avhich  the  sensations  of  the
sensitive  constantly  fluctuated.  When  I  put  the  German  silver  con-
ductor into  her  hand,  laid  it  down,  and  then  moved  it  into  the  moon-
light, immediately  covered  it  with  a  shade,  and  after  some  pause,  let
her  grasp  it  again,  she  found  it  filled  with  the  force  with  which  the
moon  endowed  it,  i.  e.  warm  ;  passive  and  active  capacity  for  accumu-
lation were  thus  proved.  When  I  allowed  copper  plates,  lead  and
tin  foil,  zinc  plate,  silver  and  gilded  surfaces,  to  remain  some  time  in
the  moon's  rays,  and  then  conveyed  them  to  her  on  the  darkened

AS  SOURCES  OF  THE  NEW  FORCE.  127

staircase,«  she  found  their  pointed  aagles  flaming  with  tufts  of  white,
red,  green,  and  blue  light.  When  I  arranged  a  metallic  plate,  half
a  square  yard  in  extent,  so  that  I  could  at  pleasure  bring  it  into  the
moonshine  and  the  shade,  connected  a  long  wire  with  it,  and  carried
this  through  the  keyhole  down  the  darkened  stairs  into  the  hands  of
Miss  Reiche],  who  remained  there,  she  saw  in  every  instance-,  as  often
as  I  let  the  moon's  rays  fall  upon  it,  a  sit  rider  flame  arise,  scarcely  as
thick  as  one's  finger,  perfectly  straight,  to  a  height  of  ten  inches,  and
disappear  after  a  short  space  as  often  as  I  removed  the  plate  from  the
moonlight.  She  always  felt  this  flame  warm  :  1  repeated  the  experi-
ments through  three  different  full  moons,  and  always  with  the  same
results.

120.  From  the  foregoing,  it  follows  that  the  moonlight  is  not  mere
moonshine  ;  that,  even  though  it  brings  no  warmth  to  us,  it  brings
together  with  its  light  another  powerful,  hidden  force,  which  exhibits
exact!//  the  same  characters  as  that  which  resides  in  crystals,  t&c.
Therefore  the  moon,  is  the  fifth  source  of  this  force.

121.  Since  the  heating  rays  of  the  spectrum  had  so  strikingly
strengthened  the  peculiar  effect  of  the  force  now  under  investigation,
I  made  it  my  care  to  follow  out  this  phenomenon.  Formerly  I  had
observed  that  force  in  a  kind  of  equilibrium,  so  in  crystals,  on  the
magnet  and  in  the  human  body.  Xow,  however,  in  the  sun  and
moon,  I  no  longer  found  it  at  rest,  but  in  motion  ;  it  appeared  to  flow
from  the  heavenly  bodies,  in  the  same  way  as — putting  the  undula-
tory  things  out  of  sight — we  may  imagine  rays  of  light  and  heat  to
flow.  I  could  not  but  be  led  by  this  to  an  examination  of  analogous
facts  in  nature, — in  the  first  place  to  heat.  To  this  end  1  laid  a  large
copper  plate  upon  a  broad  piece  of  earthenware,  arranged  the  usual
connection  by  a  long  copper  wire  with  Miss  Maix's  hand,  put  a  cold
brass  tailor's  goose  upon  it,  with  the  heater  in,  and  placed  my  right
hand  upon  it.  I  allowed  her  to  become  accustomed  to  it  in  this  con-
dition. Then  the  iron  heater  was  taken  out,  a  similar  one,  heated  so
as  to  glow  weakly,  substituted  for  it,  and  the  case  again  closed.  I
now  held  it  a  little  distance  above  the  copper  plate,  without  letting  it
touch.  At  first,  therefore,  it  only  acted  by  radiant  heat  upon  the
metal  plate.  An  increase  of  the  known  warm  sensation,  which  is
caused  by  the  crystals,  <fce.,  at  once  came  to  the  observer's  hand  from
the  wire.'  When  I  then  placed  the  heated  iron  firmly  upon  the  cop-
per plate,  and  slid  it  slowly  over  the  surface  to  diffuse  the  heat  over  a
greater  space,  the  sensation  increased  rapidly  and  strongly  in  propor-
tion as  the  heat  spread.  The  patient  complained  at  the  same  time
of  a  striking  sense  of  weight  in  the  hand.      With  the  removal  of  the

128  RAYS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  &c.

hot  instrument,  therefore  with  the  cooling,  the  sensation   decreased
and  increased  again  alternately  as  I  renewed  the  heating  or  cooling.

122.  In  another  experiment  of  the  same  kind  I  placed  one  end  of
a  strong  iron  wire  in  the  patient's  hand,  and  grasped  it  not  far  from
the  other  end  with  mine,  letting  berget  accustomed  to  this.  Then
I  brought  the  flame  of  a  candle  to  the  extremity,  and  heated  it  grad-
ually till  the  blue  shades  were  produced.  The  heatino-  by  conduction
did  not  reach  my  hand,  and  there  was  a  length  of  forty  inches  between
this  and  the  patient's  at  the  other  end  ;  therefore  communication  of
common  heat  was  out  of  the  question.  The  sense  of  the  force  ap-
peared immediately,  grew  with  the  increase  of  the  heat,  and  soon  at-
tained such  a  degree  that  it  penetrated  through  the  patient's  arm  up
to  her  head.  It  slowly  disappeared  on  the  removal  of  the  flame,  and
was  reproduced  every  time  the  flame  was  again  applied  in  the  same
manner  to  the  wire.  I  repeated  the  experiment  with  copper  wire,  in
this  way:  I  rolled  it  up  closely  ten  times,  and  placed  two  burning-
wax  candles  under  the  coil  of  wire.  The  results  were  quantitatively
greater,  but  qualitatively  exactly  similar  to  the  preceding  ;  and  this
in  every  repetition.  I  had  a  wooden  vessel  filled  with  cold  water,  the
wire  sunk  in  it,  and  then  accustomed  the  observer  to  this.  The  cold
water  was  poured  out,  and  boiling  water  poured  in.  She  immediately
felt  the  impression  of  warm  crystallic  force  flowing  into  her  hand.

123.  I  now  gave  the  experiments  the  reverse  direction.  I  placed
a  piece  of  ice  in  the  hot  water,  from  which  the  wire  led  to  the  pa-
tient's hand.  The  form  of  the  phenomena  was  immediately  changed.
The  sensation  of  heat  and  the  other  symptoms  rapidly  decreased,  a
long  drawing  occurred  through  the  arm  and  hand,  the  disagreeable
warm  sensation  gave  place  to  the  entrance  of  that  cooling  which  the
sun's  rays  produced,  and  which  diffused  itself  gradually  over  the
breast,  back,  and  whole  person.  Ice  placed  in  the  patient's  hand  at
once  produced  cramps,  and  allowed  no  minute  observations.

124.  I  went  through  controlling  experiments  with  Miss  Reichel.
I  heated  with  the  flame  of  a  candle  one  end  of  an  iron  wire  above  six
feet  long,  to  the  other  end  of  which  her  hand  bad  been  accustomed.
Uommon  heat  could  not  reach  her  at  this  distance,  least  of  all  from
such  a  weak  flame  and  in  the  space  of  but  a  few  minutes.  Never-
theless, the  wire  immediately  appeared  to  become  warm,  and  then  so
hot,  that  she  wondered  that  I,  who  was  so  near  the  flame,  could  hold
it  in  my  hand  ;  but  with  my  healthy  senses  I  did  not  feel  the  slightest
rise  of  temperature  ;  she  at  the  same  time  felt  cool  wind  flow  from
the  end  of  the  wire — the  well-known  characteristic  of  excited  crystallic
force,  &c.     I  repeated  the  same  with  an  iron  wire  of  equal  thickness,

5

AS  SOURCES  OF  THE  NEW  FORCE.  129

but  more  than  sixteen  yards  long ;  I  obtained  the   same  effects,  but
observably  more  slowly.

125.  The  question  of  luminous  appearances  was  now  examined.
I  placed  Miss  Reichel  on  the  dark  little  stair  case,  conveyed  a  thick
copper  wire  to  her,  and  heated  the  further  end  of  it  with  an  argacd
lamp.  A  reddish-green  flame  four  inches  high  rose  from  the  end  of
the  wire  with  the  greatest  heating,  and  fell  and  rose  as  I  moved  the
lamp  from  and  back  to  the  wire.  I  performed  a  similar  experiment
with  thick  iron  wire  five  feet  long,  one  end  of  which  was  heated  to
redness  in  the  lamp.  At  the  other  end  a  flame  six  inches  long  arose
in  the  dark,  and  slowly  sank  with  the  cooling.  A  longer  iron  wire,
over  sixteen  yards,  with  one  end  heated  to  redness  and  the  other  car-
ried into  the  darkened  staircase,  gave  a  flame  of  a  finger's  length.
Luminous  phenomena  produced  by  heat  are  here  placed  beyond  doubt.

126.  With  these  evidences  I  was  for  the  time  content.  They
proved,  by  the  feeling  and  sight  of  different  observers,  effects  of  both
radiant  and  conducted  heat,  which  agree  in  all  respects  with  those  that
demonstrate  the  existence  of  the  peculiar  force  of  crystals,  <&c.  Heut,
therefore,  is  the  sixth  source  of  the  same.    •

127.  Friction  is  of  complex  character  in  its  effect ;  heat,  electricity,
galvanism,  etc.,  take  part  in  producing  it.  At  the  same  time  I
thought  it  right  to  investigate  its  participation  in  the  circumstances
now  under  consideration.  At  the  residence  of  Miss  Maix  1  placed  a
copper-plate  upon  the  deal  floor,  connected  it  with  her  hand  by  a  cop-
per long  wire,  and  rubbed  it  gently  with  a  piece  of  wood.  A  sensa-
tion of  increasing  warmth  was  immediately  developed  in  the  wire,
•sud  rose  to  apparent  heat  when  I  rubbed  on  the  wood  with  greater
pressure  and  rapidity.  This  sensation  increased  and  diminished  as  I
rubbed  more  or  less.  When  I  substituted  my  woollen  coat  for  the
wood,  the  same  effect  was  obtained,  but  strengthened.  With  a  silk
handkerchief  it  was  stronger  still.

128.  I  connected  Miss  Reichel,  by  means  of  a  brass  wire,  with  a
copper-plate  which  lay  upon  a  wax-polished  oaken  floor.  I  placed  a
piece  of  wood  on  the  copper,  and  rubbed  it.  She  at  once  felt  the
effect  of  the  excited  force  through  the  wire  which  she  held  in  her
hand.  Tin-plate  acted  in  the  same  way  under  like  circumstances,  hut
more  weakly  than  copper.  The  end  of  the  wire  emitted  flame  visible
in  the  dark  in  both.  I  sawed  a  piece  of  wood  in  the  dark  with  a  thin-
bladed  hand-saw.  The  observer  beheld  nothing  unusual  in  the  saw-
dust which  flew  about,  but  the  blade  of  the  saw,  to  the  extent  in
which  it  was  in  action,  soon  emitted  a  reddish  light,  as  if  glowing
with  heat,  and  a  little  flamesprouted  from  every  tooth  of  it.  Copper
and  zinc  plates  rubbed  together  with  the  hands  only  exhibited  sparks

0*

130  RAYS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  &c.

here  and  there.  Zinc  upon  zinc  and  copper  upon  copper  in  like  man-
ner emitted  little  visible  light.  Gypsum  rubbed  upon  gypsum  emitted
no  light  at  all.  Pieces  of  charcoal  rubbed  together  appeared  as  if
glowing  red,  from  their  points  of  contact  down  into  their  substance
to  the  extent  of  a  finger's  breadth.  Pieces  of  sugar  rubbed  together
afforded  the  usual  commonly  visible  luminosity,  but  the  sensitive  saw
in  addition  to  this  a  flaming  light  one  inch  and  a  Laif  in  extent  sur-
rounding the  former.  I  saw  two  glass  flasks  rubbed  against  each
other  become  fiery  at  the  points  of  contact ;  but  she  saw  these  parts
surrounded  by  flames  as  large  as  one's  fist.  Unglazed,  therefore
rough  porcelain  capsules,  gave  bright  emissions  of  light  visible  to  me,
but  only  immediately  on  the  flat  parts  strongly  rubbing  upon  each
other  ;  the  patient  saw  flames  the  size  of  an  expanded  hand  on  them.
At  this  period  she  was  so  well  that  she  daily,  without  hesitation,  went
about  her  employment  through  the  crowded  streets  of  Vienna.

129.  I  rubbed  two  glass  tubes,  forty  inches  long,  across  one  an-
other. I  saw  a  long  luminous  streak  on  the  line  of  friction  in  the
dark.  Miss  Beichel  saw  besides  this,  around  those  parts  of  the  tubes
where  they  had  been  rubbed,  delicate  flame-like  lights  of  a  finger's
breadth,  which  were  so  expanded  laterally  that  they  had  the  appear-
ance of  a  fiery  band.  As  long  as  the  rubbing  was  continued,  she  felt
the  end  of  the  glass  tubes,  more  than  twenty  inches  distant  from  the
rubbed  parts,  become  apparently  very  hot,  which  effect  vanished  im-
mediately I  ceased  rubbing.  She  saw  little  flames  as  large  as  a  fin-
ger issue  from  the  borders,  from  which  flowed  out  to  some  distance  a
gently  warm  wind.  A  similar  result  was  obtained  by  rubbing  two
iron  rods  together  :  light  on  the  line  of  friction,  which  however  I  did
not,  though  she  did  see ;  sensation  of  apparent  warming  during  the
rubbing,  snd  immediate  rapid  cooling  when  I  ceased  to  rub;  flaming-
emissions  from  the  ends  of  the  rods,  and  warm  wind  flowing  there-
from.

130.  In  none  of  these  experiments  were  the  rubbed  objects  isolated,
but  lay  sometimes  on  the  floor,  sometimes  in  my  hands  or  in  those
of  an  assistant ;  there  was  therefore  free  passage  for  the  escape  of  any
electricity  that  might  have  been  excited.  It  was  impossible,  again,
that  the  heat  produced  by  the  friction  of  the  objects  could  disappear
so  rapidly,  as  the  appearances  of  flame  vanished  every  time  the  rub-
bing was  arrested  ;  the  contact  electricity  excited,  produced  in  al-
most all  the  cases  enumerated  by  the  rubbing  together  of  bodies  of
wholly  identical  substance,  must  have  been  so  slight  that  it  may  be
passed  over ;  and  in  the  very  case  when  zinc  and  copper  were  rub-
bed together,  and  it  therefore  must  have  been  excited,  scarcely  a
trace  of  luminosity  was  manifested,  so  that  galvanism  can  have  had

AS  SOURCES  OF  THE  NEW  FORCE.  131

just  as  little  influential  share  in  tins  action  as  frictional  electricity  :
from  similar  reasons  I  bold  that  the  influence  of  thermo-electricity
could  not  have  been  strong-  enough  here,  to  allow  of  the  observed
phenomena  of  such  magnitude  being  attributed  to  it,  but  1  am  of
opinion  that  in  addition  to  the  partial  influence  which  these  agents
may  have  had,  to  the  friction  itself  is  to  be  assigned  the  greater  part
of  the  peculiar  luminous  appearances  which  the  sensitive  persons  here
perceived.  And  so  I  believe,  though  perhaps  with  less  certainty,
that  friction  must  be  regarded  an  the  seventh  source  of  the  force
dwelling  in  crystals,  d'c.

131.  In  the  researches  on  the  sun's  rays  and  moonlight,  we  have
already  seen  that  light  assumes  an  important  position  when  we  enter
upon  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the  peculiar  force  with  which  we
are  now  dealing.  Whether  this  inheres  by  and  for  itself  in  light,  or
is  only  associated  with  it,  or  whether  it  depends  on  other  radiations
occurring  simultaneously  with  light,  are  questions  certainly  of  essen-
tial moment,  but  which,  however,  I  do  not  regard  as  in  place  here,
where  the  business  is  in  the  first  place  to  determine  the  sources  gene-
rally, the  analysis  of  the  inner  nature  of  these  sources  necessarily  re-
maining as  the  object  of  future  inquiry.  I  will  therefore  merely
investigate  whether  light  in  general  is  to  be  counted  among  them.
The  examination  of  artificial  light  still  remained  to  be  done.  When
in  broad  daylight  1  brought  a  lighted  wax  candle  near  Miss  Maix,
she  felt  that  it  produced  a  peculiar  coldness  in  her.  Several  such
candles  increased  this  cold,  which  then  attacked  her  whole  body.  I
removed  the  candles  from  her,  going  a  step  at  a  time,  to  a  distance
of  the  length  of  two  rooms,  amounting  altogether  to  nearly  eight
yards.  The  cold  produced  by  them  was  diminished  very  much  at
this  distance,  but  did  not  entirely  disappear.  She  remarked  that
this  cold  perceptibly  resembled  that  which  was  diffused  from  the  wire
carried  to  her  from  the  sunshine.  This,  to  her  unexpected  observa-
tion, reminded  her  that  she  had  never  been  able  to  remain  at  certain
ceremonies  customary  at  times  among  catholics,  consisting  of  strong
illuminations  at  night  with  hundreds  of  burning  candles;  for  instance,
illuminations  of  the  representation  of  the  holy  sepulchre,  <fcc. ;  the
burning  lights  had  always  so  thoroughly  chilled  her,  that  she  had
been  compelled  to  leave.  But  Miss  Maix  had  suffered  in  a  slighter
degree  from  her  at  present  greatly  heightened  complaint,  during  her
whole  life,  and  is  to  be  regarded  as  one  born  sensitive,  who  at  every
age  has  been  subject  to  the  sensations  dependent  on  it,  even  when
she  appeared  healthy  and  went  about.  The  peculiar  influence  of
light  upon  her,  from  distances  at  which  even  radiant  heat  could  be
but  extremely  weak,  and  producing  a  sensation  on  the  nerves  diame-
trically opposed  to  that  of  heat,    had  therefore  been  always  clearly

132  RAYS  OF  THE  SUN,  MOON,  <fec.

manifested,  even  at  a  time  when  no  one  imagined  that  there  was  any-
thing- abnormal  in  it.

132.  Counter-experiments  on  Miss  Reichel  led  to  the  same  results.
She  felt  a  burning  candle  to  give  out  cold  at  a  considerable  distance  ;
two  candles  acted  at  almost  twice  as  far ;  an  argand  lamp  still  far-
ther off;  at  the  greatest  distance  when  a  ground  glass  globe  was
placed  over  the  flame.

133.  I  tested  by  the  often-adopted  methods,  whether  the  causes
of  these  direct  sensations  were  transferable  to  third  bodies,  conducti-
ble  through  them,  &c.  In  front  of  a  copper  plate,  which  wa,s  con-
nected with  Miss  Maix  by  a  wire  conductor,  I  placed  two  burning-
wax  candles  in  such  a  manner  that  she  could  not  see  them,  and  con-
sequently could  not  receive  rays  from  them.  She  experienced  simul-
taneously, increased  warmth  in  the  wire,  and  the  pleasant  cooling
sensation  which  the  sun's  rays  gave  her,  only  much  weaker  here  than
from  the  sun.  This  was  repeated  at  different  times  with  the  same
results.  The  same  was  performed  with  Miss  Reichel.  I  placed  eight
burning  Stearine  candles  near  a  large  copper  plate  ;  the  observer  was
in  the  next  room,  her  hand  connected  with  the  copper  plate  by  a
copper  wire  conductor.  She  perceived  the  effect  very  strongly,  in
the  known  way,  and  felt  the  coolness  flowing  from  the  end  of  the
wire  at  a  considerable  distance.  In  a  second  experiment,  in  order  to
moderate  the  action  of  the  heat  I  interposed  a  glass  plate  between
the  candles  and  the  copper  plate  ;  the  effect  was  very  little  diminished.

134.  These  results,  according  to  which  rays  of  fire-light  on  the
one  hand  directly  affect  the  sensitive,  and,  on  the  other,  imbue  other
bodies  with  the  peculiar  force  acting  on  them,  producing  thereby
apparent  alterations  of  temperature,  moreover  showed  themselves  to
be  conductible,  and  afforded  flame-like  appearances  in  the  dark,  led
me  to  the  conviction  that  not  only  the  sun  with  the  moon,  but  light
generally,  is  a  source  of  the  force  detected  in  crystals,  &c,  and  is
the  eighth  of  these  sources.

RETROSPECT.

o.  The  sun's  rays  carry  with  them  a  power  to  affect  sensitive  pa-
tients, which  agrees  perfectly  with  the  force  residing  in  crystals,  the
magnet,  and  the  human  hands.

b.  The  greatest  influence  in  reference  to  a  force  corresponding  to
that  of  crystals  is  manifested  in  the  outer  borders  of  the  red  and  vio-
let-blue rays  of  the  solar  spectrum.

c.  The  light  of  the  moon  possesses  the  force  now  under  considera-
tion in  a  strong  degree.

d.  Heat  is  a  source  of  it.

e.  It  occurs  with  friction,  and

/.  It  appears  as  a  result  of  the  light  of  flame.

FIFTH   TREATISE,

CHEMICAL    FORCE ELECTRICITY.

135.  If  we  take  a  glance  at  the  condition  of  chemistry  in  the
times  of  Agricola,  Kunkel,  and  Brand,  we  acquire  some  conception
of  the  relations  in  which  this  science  at  present  stands  to  the  subjects
of  the  present  researches.  Scattered  isolated  fragments  of  observa-
tions lie  around,  but  in  what  a  condition  !  To  give  an  idea  of  this,  I
will  select  merely  one  example.  For  more  than  seventy  years  an  in-
strument has  been  used  in  medicine,  which  bears  the  name  of  a  mag-
netic tub  (baquet) ;  I  scarcely  dare  describe  it,  for  it  will  be  an  abomi-
nation to  every  one  accustomed  to  a  scientific  treatment  of  natural
knowledge.  A  small  wooden  tub  is  filled  with  a  medley  of  the  most
absurd  and  senseless  kind,  stirred  up  with  magnetized  water,  an  hon  rod
inserted  in  it,  and  from  this  woollen  threads  are  carried  out  to  sick  per-
sona of  various  sorts,  to  whom  is  to  flow  healing  vital  magnetism.
And  this  mixture  consists  of  iron  slag,  broken  glass,  hammerings  of
iron  from  a  forge,  steel  filings,  roots,  iron  ore,  grains  of  corn,  sulphur,
sawdust,  glass  "plates,  wool,  pieces  of  old  iron,  aromatic  vegetables,
quicksilver,  all  magnetized  and  mystically  stratified  one  above  another.
What  that  is  pure'and  healing  can  come  out  of  such  a  devil's  kitchen  ?
is  the  reasonable  question.  How  any  real  magnetizing  effect  can  be
produced  from  a  mess  of  this  kind,  will  certainly  be  as  incomprehen-
sible to  every  physicist  as  it  is  to  me.  And  yet  all  who  have  occu-
pied themselves  with  magnetic  cures  agree  that  it  is  a  constantly
persisting  fountain  of  magnetism  which  may  be  made  to  flow  to  the
patients  through  the  conductors,  <kc.

13G.  Every  one  who  is  acquainted  merely  with  the  rudiments  of
such  matters,  sees  that  this  cannot  be  a  galvanic,  electrical,  still
less  a  magnetic  apparatus  ;  and  yet.  it  has  an  effect  which,  r
nised  now  for  seventy  years,  has  some  analogy  to  these  reagents,
and  must  be  based  upon  a  hidden  something,  whatever  this  may  be;
otherwise  it  could  not  have  spun  out  its  obscure  existence^  the  pre-
sent day.  Asking  myself  what  really  might  operate  in  it,  only  one
thing  seemed  to  have  any  clear  relation,  namely  chemical  action ;
room  was  blindly  given  for  a  planless  play  of  affinities,  and  decompo-

184  CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.

sitions  and  combinations  must  go  on  slowly  in  the  tub.  In  my  pre-
vious researches  I  had  discovered  eight  very  different  sources  of  one
and  the  same  force  ;  the  said  force  here  flowed,  according  to  the
statements  of  the  physicians,  from  a  mixture  of  substances  attacking
and  decomposing  one  another  in  most  opposite  ways  :  might  not  the
chemical  disturbance  alone  excite  the  same  imponderable  agent  ?
Might  not  chemical  force  also  be  a  source  of  that  associated  with  crys-
tals, the  magnet,  living  organisms,  the  sun,  heat,  &6.  ?*  .

137.  To  investigate  this,  I  took  a  glass  of  water,  dissolved  bicarbo-
nate of  soda  in  it,  inserted  the  end  of  a  wire  five  feet  long,  gave  Miss
Maix  the  other  end  into  her  hand,  and  placed  a  pinch  of  powdered
tartaric  acid  upon  the  edge  of  the  glass  ;  then  gave  the  patient  the
usual  interval  to  accustom  herself  to  the  arrangement,  and  scattered
the  acid  in  the  solution.  As  soon  as  the  decomposition  commenced,
the  same  sensation  of  heat,  then  of  cooling,  came  to  the  observer's
hand,  as  when  I  had  touched  the  end  of  the  wire  with  my  ten  fingers,
with  a  large  crystal,  or  with  a  magnetic  rod.  This  result  displayed
itself  so  quickly  and  powerfully,  that  it  made  the  girl  grow  quite  red.
It  uniformly  persisted  as  long  as  the  chemical  disturbance  continued
in  the  glass,  and  subsided  when  this  ceased.

138.  I  had  thus  seized  the  clew  to  crystallic  force,  &c,  in  chemical
action ;  my  next  business  was  to  acquire  assurance  of  its  certainty*
I  might,  in  the  first  place,  be  met  by  the  objection  that  the  electricity
developed  in  the  process  of  decomposition  had  acted  on  the  sensitive
patient.  Lavoisier  and  Laplace,  and  more  recently  L.  Gmelin,  be-
lieved that  they  observed  evolution  of  free  negative  electricity  in  the
decomposition  of  carbonate  of  lime  by  sulphuric  acid;  Pfaff  and
others  contest  this.  Without  delaying  with  the  discussion  of  author-
ities, I  thought  it  safest  for  the  concrete  case,  to.  apply  myself  to
direct  experiment.  I  connected  a  conducting  wire  with  a  Bohnen-
berger's  electroscope,  and  carried  it  into  the  isolated  fluid  contained
in  a  long-stemmed  glass,  in  which  I  prepared  a  mixture  of  tartaric
acid  with  carbonate  of  soda.  The  gold-leaf  did  not  move.  I  applied
the  condensing  plates,  and  added  new  portions  of  the  salt  and  acid  to
the  water  in  the  glass  ;  but  not  even  now,  after  the  separation  of  the
plates,  could  any  trace  of  movement  of  the  gold  leaf  be  detected.  If
free  electricity  did  present  itself  in  such  a  tumultuary  action  as  this,
it   is  not   very  probable  in  itself  that  it  would  appear  in  insensible

*  I  must  protest  against  the  imputation  of  a  medical  veneration  for  the  devil's
kitchen  on  the  part  of  the  investigators  into  mesmeric  phenomena  in  England.
I  never  saw  a  baquet,  nor  ever  thought  of  making  one,  but  T  rejoice  that  the
ideas  connected  with  such  an  absurdity  have  occasioned  the  Baron  to  produce
this  treatise.

CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.  135

amount,  certainly  least  of  all  such  as  arose  from  the  purely  chemical
share  in  it.  I  am,  therefore,  obliged  to  conclude  that  electricity  here,
where  no  current  of  it  can  be  set  up,  is  not  set  free  ;  while  that  which
might  take  part  in  the  process,  is,  by  known  laws,  again  confined  by
the  products  in  the  moment  of  origin,  through  the  chemical  act  itself.
The  effect  upon  the  hand  of  the  patient,  therefore,  cannot. be  pro-
duced by  a  current  of  electricity,  and  consequently  it  belongs  en-
tirely to  those  results  which  constitute  the  object  of  the  present
researches.

139.  I  return  to  the  detail  of  the  collected  observations.  I  placed
in  Miss  Maix's  bauds  a  glass  of  diluted  sulphuric  acid  and  an  iron
wire.  After  a  pause,  the  wire  was  introduced  into  the  acid,  and  the
solution  proceeded  with  an  evolution  of  hydrogen  gas.  She  imme-
diately found  the  wire  grow  warmer  until  apparently  very  hot;  while
cool  air  was  diffused  all  round  the  glass.

140.  I  placed  in  her  hands  a  glass  of  water,  upon  which  lay  a  pa-
per containing  some  common  salt,  and  after  a  short  pause  the  salt
was  thrown  into  the  water,  which  she  gently  agitated.  She  felt  the
glass  acquire  crystallic  force  for  some  time  during  the  solution,  then
remain  at  rest  ;  the  sensation  flowed  upward  to  the  arm.    .

141.  Controlling  experiments  were  made  on  Miss  Reichel.  First,
the  trial  with  the  bicarbonate  of  soda  and  tartaric  acid,  then  the  di-
lute sulphuric  acid  with  an  iron  rod  inserted  in  it;  lastly,  also  with
the  water  and  common  salt :  they  all  succeeded  in  the  same  way.  I
made  further  experiments  with  the  following  mixtures  : — sulphuric
acid  with  caustic  soda;  acetic,  tartaric,  fumaric,  citric  and  hippuric
acid,  successively,  in  excess  upon  iron  filings ;  sulphuric  acid  in  ex-
cess upon  carbouate  of  soda,  &c.  We  had,  at  that  time,  freshly
pressed  wine-must  in  full  fermentation,  and  I  tried  this  ;  all  these
chemical  actions  gave  abundant  evolution  of  crystallic  force.

142.  I  then  took  some  weak  solutions  :  sugar,  alcohol,  crystallized
borax,  crystallized  carbonate  of  soda  and  potass,  in  water ;  then
borax  and  sub-carbonate  of  potash  which  had  been  exposed  to  the
air  ;  sulphuret  of  calcium  and  of  potassium  ;  lastly,  freshly-burnt
lime.  All  these,  when  passed  into  water,  produced  either  coolness  or
warmth  in  the  wire,  continuing  until  the  solutions  were  complete,
when  the  peculiar  effects  immediately  vanished.  In  e ee ry  case,  there-
fore, even  when  only  fixation  of  water  of  crystallization,  or  mere  solu-
tion in  water  occwrred,  the  chemical  action  developed  a  free  manifes-
tation of  crystallic  force,  &c.

143.  I  was  curious  to  see  whether  a  glass  of  water  could  be  mag-
netized, as  it  is  called,  by  means  of  chemical  action.  Here  mere  con-
duction through  a   wire   could   scarcely  convey  sufficient    force ;  1

136  CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.

required  the  chemical  action  in  the  undivided  expression  of  its  power.
To  obtain  this,  I  placed  one  glass  within  another.  Into  the  inner  I
poured  spring  water,  into  the  outer  a  solution  of  bicarbonate  of  soda.
I  threw  some  tartaric  acid  into  the  latter,  and  had  it  slowly  stirred
by  a  female  hand,  until  the  effervescence  subsided.  The  inner  glass
was  then  taken  out,  and  handed  to  Miss  Maix,  to  drink.  The  water
was  found  as  strongly  magnetized  as  if  it  had  been  exposed  five
minutes  to  the  sun's  rays,  but  not  so  strongly  as  in  the  earlier  expe-
riments with  twenty  minutes  of  sunshine.  After  she  had  tasted  it,
I  subjected  the  same  glass  of  water  to  the  same  process  a  second
time ;  when  she  drank  of  it  again,  she  found  it  almost  twice  as
strongly  magnetic.  I  afterwards  repeated  a  similar  trial  with  Miss
Reichel,  in  which  I  used  carbonate  of  potass  and  sulphuric  acid  with
the  same  results.  Consequently,  we  can  render  'water  magnetic  by
chemical  force  as  vjell  as  by  the  magnet  itself.

144.  During  the  above  experiments,  I  made  both  Miss  Maix  and
Miss  Reichel  hold  separate  copper  conducting  wires,  the  ends  of
which  were  dipped  in  dilute  sulphuric  acid.  One  of  these  was  near-
ly 100  yards  long.  But  the  effect  was  manifested  even  at  this  great
distance,  and  Miss  Reichel  perceived  at  the  end  of  the  wire  which
she  held  in  her  hand  every  insertion  and  removal  of  the  opposite  end,
which  were  evident  to  the  hand,  not  instantaneously,  but  after  a  little
interval  of  from  fifteen  to  twenty  seconds.

145.  There  still  remain  the  investigations  on  the  luminous  phe-
nomena, abundance  of  which  I  went  through  carefully  with  Miss
Reichel.  On  the  one  hand,  I  tried  a  series  of  chemical  and  mechan-
ical solutions  alone  ;  on  the  other  hand,  according  to  their  effect  upon
the  opposite  end  of  the  conducting  wire  dipped  in  them,  in  the  dark.
Sugar,  carbonate  of  soda,  borax,  &c.  were  dissolved  separately  in
glasses  of  water.  A  glass  rod  was  used  to  stir  them.  Even  before
this"  was  applied,  the  contents  of  the  glass  emitted  a  red  light  in  the
dark.  A  fine  luminosity  began  to  sweep  over  the  fluid,  flowing  up-
wards. A  largish  tuft  of  light  ascended  from  the  further  end  of  the
glass  rod.  As  I  dropped  the  pieces  of  sugar  into  the  water,  and  they
became  wetted,  they  emitted  a  red  light,  according  to  the  observer,  and
sank  in  the  water  like  red  fragments.  Therefore,  the  evolution  of  light
produced  by  the  process  of  solution  commenced  instantly  the  sugar
came  in  contact  with  the  water.  As  I  stirred  it  slowly  in  the  dark,
I  myself  saw  very  strongly  luminous  flashes  from  the  sugar,  at  each
gentle  friction  with  the  glass  rod,  and  here,  in  water  where  the
whole  outer  surface  of  the  sugar  was  half  dissolved,  it  could  scarcely,
or  only  by  a  great  stretch,  be  assumed  to  be  electrical,  as  the  flashes
produced  by  rubbing  loaf  sugar,  chalk,  &c.  in  the  air,  are  commonly

CHEMICAL   FORCE— ELECTRICITY.  137

imagined  to  be,  although  there  is  not  the  slightest  evidence  for  it.  I
placed  some  freshly-burnt  lime  in  a  porcelain  capsule,  and  dropped
some  water  on  to  it.  As  soon  as  the  internal  disturbance  connected
with  solution  began,  and  steam  appeared,  the  entire  mass  of  lime  ap-
peared to  the  observer  to  glow  with  a  white  light,  and  a  dull  blue
flame  rose  above  it  to  the  height  of  a  hand.  She  imagined  the  dull
appearance  to  be  caused  by  the  aqueous  vapor.  These  flames  en-
dured of  the  same  size  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  chemi-
cal action  had  ceased  ;  they  then  began  to  sink,  and  ceased  in  half
an  hour.  Sulphuric  acid  poured  into  water  at  once  formed  red
flames  in  the  glass,  waving  on  the  water.  When  I  stirred,  these  in-
creased so  much,  that  they  rose  to  the  height  of  a  full  span  above  the
glass.  The  effect  of  heat  was  here  evidently  associated  with  that  of
chemical  action.  The  glass  stirring  rod  also  acquired  a  tuft  of  flame
on  its  upper  end.  Fermenting  wine-must  emitted  a  continuous  yel-
lowish dull  flame.

146.  An  iron  wire  30  yards  long  was  led  in  the  day-time  to  the
observer,  placed  on  the  darkened  staircase,  and  the  outer  end  dipped
into  dilute  sulphuric  acid.  After  the  lapse  of  half  a  minute,  she  saw
a  slender  column  of  fire,  a  span  and  a  half  long,  ascend  from  the  ex-
tremity, and  this  rose  and  sank  as  the  wire  was  moved  in  and  out  of
the  acid.  The  same  recurred  with  a  solution  of  sugar  in  water ;  the
flame  at  the  end  of  the  long  wire  was  even  somewhat  larger  than
from  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  upon  iron  wire.  In  another  experi-
ment, a  brass  wire  four  yards  long  was  employed  ;  it  gave  the  same
result,  with  the  slight  difference  that,  where  the  iron  wire  flame  had
appeared  white  and  reddish-blue,  the  brass  wire  emitted  a  white  and
greeq  light.  Dried  lime  stirred  up  in  excess  of  water  gave  a
flame  a  span  high  on  iron  wire.  Thus  in  every  case,  when  chemi-
cal action  occurred,  light  and  flame  aho  appeared  to  the  sensitive  in
the  dark.

147.  In  an  examination  of  the  chemical  causes  of  the  potential
essence  here  investigated,  I  would  not  omit  the  flame  of  burning
bodies,  which  is  in  the  highest  degree  a  chemical  process.  But  since
it  is  associated  with  heat  and  the  development  of  light,  there  did  not
at  first  appear  any  prospect  of  obtaining  similar  results.  I  might
have  included  the  experiments  made  in  this  respect  just  as  well  under
the  treatment  of  heat  or  light.  I  brought  a  pan  full  of  glowing  char-
coal near  Miss  Reichel.  At  a  distance  of  a  yard  she  found  it  cold  ;
she  felt  it  cool  at  the  whole  length  of  the  room.  I  have  already  de-
tailed the  effects  of  the  flame  of  candles  on  the  sensitive.  I  lighted
a  shallow  capsule  of  spirits  of  wine,  then  of  pure  alcohol,  and  allowed
them  to  burn  away  ;  she  felt  cold  from  both  flames  at  a  slight  dis-

138  CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.

tance.  I  burned  various  substances,  both  positive  and  negative,  in
her  presence,  such  as  resin,  sulphur,  and  globules  of  potassium ;  all
of  these,  especially  the  last  two,  were  found  cold.  But  it  cannot  be
simply  determined  here  what  emanation  it  was  that  produced  cool-
ness to  the  sensitive,  and  was  the  ultimate  cause  of  this  crystallic
force.  Light  appears  to  take  proportionally  little  part  in  it,  for  the
effects  of  alcohol  and  of  sulphur,  from  which  there  is  little  evolution
of  light,  were  not  found  weaker  than  that  of  stearine  candles.  Real
heat  almost  always  afforded  sensations  of  apparent  heat,  as  we  see
by  the  last  treatise.  Since,  therefore,  the  flame  here  always  emitted
predominant  cold,  the  reason  of  this  must  be  either  in  the  products,
or,  as  is  most  probable,  in  the  chemical  action  itself,  as  this  does  so
in  all  decompositions  without  flame.

148.  From  the  present  investigation  of  chemical  force,  we  will  pass
immediately  to  one  on  the  voltaic  pile.  Since  the  hydro-electric
chain  is  one  of  the  most  important  foci  of  chemical  force,  I  shall  take
the  liberty  to  anticipate  the  final  result  of  this,  namely,  that  there,
also,  a  great  spring  of  crystalline  force  flows  from  the  interchange  of
matter,  with  all  the  attributes  which  we  have  observed  in  it  else-
where. This  invasion  of  the  system  of  the  present  work  must  be
excused,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  necessary  to  collect  all  kinds  of
chemical  processes  in  the  subjoined  deduction.

149.  The  parallelism  of  the  properties  of  the  so-called  magnetic
phenomena  associated  with  chemical  force,  with  those  which  we  have
found  in  crystals,  the  magnet,  human  hands,  heat,  light,  «fee,  is  com-
plete, and  ckemism  declares  itself  as  the  ninth  in  the  series  of  sources
of  this  force.

150.  The  field  of  these  researches  here  opens  out  to  an  immeasur-
able extent ;  but  this  can  scarcely  surprise  ;  such  a  result  must  have
shown  itself  in  the  distance  with  the  earliest  discoveries  in  crystals.
Chemical  action,  solution,  decomposition,  combination,  interchange
in  the  groupings  of  the  elements,  stand  in  such  close  connection  with
the  destruction  and  reconstruction  of  crystalline  forms,  that  as  soon
as  a  force  like  this  declares  its  presence  in  crystals,  it  must  be  placed
almost  in  necessary  connection  with  the  forces  and  actions  which  bring
about  the  separation  and  reunion  of  the  molecules.  It  was  therefore
to  be  anticipated  that  chemical  force  would  and'must  be  reactive  here.
I  hope  that  it  will  furnish  us  with  the  means  of  concentrating  the
force  in  question,  and  facilitating  further  investigations  to  a  greater
extent  than  has  yet  been  accomplished,  where  I  have  been  almost
wholly  restricted  to  the  irritability  of  sensitive  persons,  and,  above
all,  that  it  will  afford  what  I  have  hitherto  wanted — a  more  con-
venient reagent,  and  a  more  certain  measure  for  its  relative  amount.

CHEMICAL   FORCE— ELECTRICITY.  189

151.  And  now  let  us  turn  our  eyes  back  to  the  magnetic  tub ;  the
strange  affair  loses  its  mystery  :  truly  at  the  pain  of  still  greater  ridi-
cule. It  is  merely  an  accidentally  aroused,  slowly  proceeding,  chemi-
cal action,  which  gives  out  the  desired  force,  exactly  as  a  slowly
burning  fire  gives  out  gradual  and  continued  heat.  It  is  a  current
of  the  force  of  the  magnet,  crystals,  and  human  hands,  flowing  slowly
from  the  chemical  action,  which  is  thus  very  improperly  called  ani-
mal magnetism.  It  is  now  comprehensible  why  the  "  baquet"  a>  it
gradually  becomes  inert,  acquires  new  force. when  stirred  up  again
months  after,  since  new  surfaces  are  exposed  to  fresh  solution  ;  con-
ceivable, moreover,  why  every  new  practitioner  can  make  a  new  med-
ley, and  yet  always  attain  the  same  effect,  because  it  does  not  matter
at  all  what  things  they  are  that  act  upon  one  another,  if  they  will
only  ferment  and  decompose  each  other.  Finally,  we  can  under-
stand why  one  who  fills  a  tub  with  water  and  glass  alone  can  pro-
duce little,  another  who  succeeds  him  no  magnetic  effect  at  all,  since
glass  and  water,  let  any  amount  of  magnetic  conjurations  be  said
over  them,  will  not  enter  into  chemical  action,  &c.  All  the  wonder-
ful superstructure  of  the  magnetic  tub,  which,  from  the  time  of  Mes-
nier,  has  not  a  little  contributed  to  render  animal  magnetism  ridicu-
lous, and  to  expose  it  to  shame,  will  consequently  be  cleared  away
for  the  future,  and  any  simple,  slowly  proceeding  chemical  operation,
perhaps  best  of  all  an  open  voltaic  circuit,  will  take  its  place,  by  which
means  the  power  will  be  acquired  of  arranging  it  stronger  or  weaker
as  may  be  most  desirable,  with  a  choice  of  very  varied  modifications
in  the  smallest  possible  space.

152.  But  the  examination  of  chemical  forces  leads  us  into  another
still  more  interesting  path.  It  leads  us  to  the  source  from  which,  to
all  appearance,  organic  life  itself  derives  its  so-called  magnetic  force,
to  the  focus  at  which  the  flaming  forces  are  lighted,  which  emerge
from  our  finger-euds,  and,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  from  still  more
noble  parts  of  our  curious  corporeal  structure.  This  is  digestion.  It
being  proved  that  a  main  source  of  that  magnet-like  force  lies  in
chemism,  in  the  play  of  interchanging  affinities,  while  digestion  is
nothing  else  but  an  exchange,  a  constant  separation  and  recomposi-
tion  of  matters,  enduring  uninterruptedly  so  long  as  we  live,  under
the  influence  of  vitality — it  follows  necessarily  that,  like  as  we  have
seen  in  every,  even  such  weak  chemical  action  as  the  simple  solution
of  sugar,  common  salt,  alcohol  or  sulphuric  acid  in  mere  water,  mag-
net-like force  will  be  uninterruptedly  evolved  along  our  intestinal
canal,  and  must  be  placed  by  this  great  organ  at  the  service  of  the
whole  organism.  But  this  is  not  all.  The  nutriment  digested  in
the  stomach,  and  then  elaborated  in  the  intestines,  becomes  absorbed,

140  CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.

chylified,  in  its  further  course,  carried  to  the  lymph  and  blood  by
countless  large  and  small  vessels,  here  again  chemically  changed,  car-
ried further  and  further,  more  and  more  altered  chemically,  and  thus
onward,  ever  further  turned  to  account  in  innumerable  decomposi-
tions as  an  inexhaustible  reservoir  of  crystallic  force,  till  at  last  it
leaves  the  body.

153.  All  that  I  have  just  said  of  digestion  holds  good,  in  altered
terms,  but  to  the  same  value,  of  respiration.  It  impregnates  us  with
oxygen,  carries  on  the  blood  to  every  corner  of  our  body,  sustains  on
every  hand  the  universal  interchange  of  substances,  and  secures  to
us,  as  one  of  its  chief  products,  the  animal  heat.  The  so-called  ani-
mal magnetism  stands  beside  this,  comes,  goes,  flows,  and  vanishes
with  it.  That  which  affords  heat,  the  chemical  action  in  the  body,
affords,  also,  as  we  have  seen,  crystallic  force,  magnetism,  or  what-
ever we  please  to  call  this  potential  essence.  The  dynamics,  which
constitute  the  inmost  life,  be  they  material  or  immaterial,  condition
one  another,  are  perhaps  one  and  the  same  in  the  ultimate  analysis ;
and  when  they  here  appear  to  us  going  hand  in  hand,  this  is  but
one  more  warranty  that  we  are  on  the  right  track  of  their  pursuit.

We  thus  obtain  explanation  whence  the  force  comes  which  issues
in  a  polar  condition  from  our  hands  and  fingers  as  from  a  magnet,
whence  it  is  continually  renewed,  and  why  it  unceasingly  flames
forth  from  us.  Chemical  action,  which  is  infinitely  busied  in  our
whole  structure,  produces,  sets  free,  and  delivers  it ;  and  when  we
meet  with  it,  we  see  it  already  subject  to  the  laws  of  its  in-dwelling
dualism.

154.  By  one  of  the  most  ingenious  combinations  of  profoundly
grasped  thoughts  the  present  century  has  produced,  Liebig  has  led
us  to  the  conception  that  all  motive  force  of  which  we  partake  is  af-
forded through  digestion,  all  the  heat  which  we  possess  through
respiration  ;  that  is,  force  and  heat  are  the  results  of  chemical  action.
Though  this  cannot  yet  be  laid  down  either  in  an  algebraic  formula,
or  in  chemical  symbols,  although  the  form  of  the  expression  of  such
a  vast  idea  may  be  criticised  on  many  hands,  yet  its  profound  con-
ception strikes  so  forcibly  on  our  understanding,  finds  such  a  mighty
echo  in  the  totality  of  all  that  we  at  present  know  of  nature,  that  its
final  triumph  stands  in  tolerably  certain  prospect.  And  since  nature
affords  for  our  maintenance  nothing  but  air  and  nutriment,  we  can
scarcely  imagine  otherwise  than  that  she  has  directly  appointed  us
to  draw  from  air  and  food  all  that  is  necessary  to  this  our  mainten-
ance. If,  then,  for  example,  it  happens,  and  calculation  shows  it,
that  we  daily,  on  the  one  hand,  appropriate  fourteen  ounces  of  car-
bon from  the  food,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  give  it  off  again  by  re-

CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.  141

spiration  ;  when  we  further  find  that  we  daily  inspire  forty-seven
ounces  of  oxygen,  and  expire  just  as  many  ounces  ;  finally,  when  we
find  that  the  carbon  and  oxygen  emerge  combined,  and  this  com-
bination corresponds  to  exactly  as  great  an  evolution  of  heat  as  we
require  daily  :  so  much  striking  testimony  is  furnished  for  such
deduction,  that  all  scruples  must  soon  prudently  submit  to  be  over-
come.

155.  I  regard  it  a  no  small  warrant  of  the  profound  natural  truth
of  my  researches,  that,  as  is  seen,  I  have,  by  a  totally  different  series
of  observations  and  deductions,  arrived  at  the  same  new  field  on  which
I  now  meet  Liebig.  Chemical  action  abundantly  furnishes  the  active
principle  of  crystallic  force  ;  the  human  body  overflows  with  this  cir-
culating potential  essence, — man  digests,  breathes,  decomposes,  com-
bines, and  interchanges  matter,  therefore  performs  chemical  action
every  moment:  thus  is  it  not  only  clear,  it  is  necessary,  it  is  logically
inevitable,  that  man  derives  that  still  mysterious  force,  the  existence
of  which  is  made  known  by  these  researches,  from  the  play  of  affini-
ties ;  in  a  word,  from  chemism.  It  is  possible  to  doubt  whether  the
sun  lights  us,  since  it  is  often  day  while  yet  no  sun  is  to  be  seen  ;  I
know  this  well  enough,  and  do  not  fight  against  it.

156.  As  a  conclusion  to  this  section,  one  more  practical  application,
indeed  the  more  welcome  to  me  that  it  tears  up  one  of  the  deepest
roots  of  superstition,  the  most  hateful  foe  of  the  development  of  hu-
man enlightment  and  freedom.  An  occurrence  which  took  place  in
Pfeffel's  Garden  at  Colmar  is  tolerably  well  known,  and  has  been
spread  about  by  many  published  accounts.  I  will  mention  the  most
important  points  briefly.  He  had  appointed  a  young  evangelical
clergyman,  Billing,  as  his  amanuensis.  The  blind  German  poet  was
led  by  the  arm  by  this  person  when  he  walked  out.  This  occurring
in  his  garden,  which  lay  at  some  distance  from  the  town.  Pfeffel  re-
marked that  every  time  they  came  to  a  particular  place,  Billing's  arm
trembled,  and  he  manifested  uneasiness.  Some  conversation  about
this  ensued,  and  the  young  man  at  length  unwillingly  stated  that  as
often  as  he  came  over  that  spot  certain  sensations  attacked  him,
which  he  could  not  overcome,  and  which  he  always  experienced  at
places  where  human  bodies  were  buried.  When  he  came  to  such
places  at  night  he  usually  saw  strange  sights.  "With  a  view  to  cure
the  man  of  his  delusion,  Pfeffel  returned  with  him  to  the  garden  the
same  night.  AVhen  they  approached  this  place  in  the  dark,  Billing
at  once  perceived  a  weak  light,  and  when  near  enough  the  appear-
ance of  a  form  of  immaterial  flame  waving  in  the  air  above  the  spot.
He  described  it  as  resembling  a  woman's  form,  one  arm  laid  across
the  body,  the  other  hanging  down;  wavering,  erect,  or  at  rest;  the

142  CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.

feet  -elevated  about  two  hands'  breadth  above  the  surface  of  the  ground.
Pfeffel  walked  up  to  it  alone,  as  the  young  man  would  not  follow  him,
struck  about  at  random  with  his  stick,  and  ran  across  the  place,  but
the  spectre  did  not  move  or  alter ;  it  was  as  when  one  passes  a'  stick
through  flame,  the  fiery  shape  always  recovered  the  same  form.
Many  things  were  done,  during  several  months  ;  parties  taken  thither,
but  the  matter  remained  always  the  same,  and  the  ghost-seer  always
held  to  his  earnest  assertion,  consequently  to  the  supposition  that
some  one  must  lie  buried  there.  At  last  Pfeffel  had  the  place  dug
up.  At  some  depth  a  solid  layer  of  wdiite  lime  was  met  with,  about
as  long  and  as  broad  as  a  grave,  tolerably  thick,  and  when  this  was
broken  through  they  discovered  the  skeleton  of  a  human  body.  It
was  found,  therefore,  that  a  human  being  had  been  buried  there,  and
had  been  covered  with  a  layer  of  quicklime,  as  is  the  custom  at  the
time  of  pestilence,  earthquakes,  or  similar  occurrences.  The  bones
were  taken  out,  the  hole  filled  up  again,  and  the  surface  levelled.
When  Billing  was  again  taken  there  the  appearance  Was  gone,  and
the  noctural  spirit  had  vanished  for  ever.

15*7.  I  need  scarcely  indicate  to  the  reader  what  I  now  thought  of
this  history,  which  has  given  rise  to  much  discussion  in  Germany,
since  it  came  from  the  most  trustworthy  man  living,  and  theologists
and  psychologists  have  given  it  a  thousand  dreadful  interpretations.
In  my  opinion  it  belongs  entirely  to  the  domain  of  chemistry,  and
finds  a  simple  and  clear  explanation  in  natural  science.  A  human
body  affords  fruitful  material  for  chemical  decomposition,  for  fermen-
tation, putrescence,  vaporizations,  and  play  of  affinities  of  all  kinds.
A  layer  of  dry  quicklime  pressed  into  a  deep  hole,  unites  its  own  ac-
tive affinities  with  those  of  organic  substances,  and  gives  rise  to  a  long-
continued  operation  of  them.  Rain  water  joins  from  above  ;  the  lime
first  falls  into  a  pulverulent  mass,  and  afterwards,  through  the  rain-
water oozing  into  it,  becomes  a  pasty  mass,  to  which  the  external
air  has  only  very  slow  access.  Pits  of  slacked  lime  have  been  found  in
the  ruins  of  castles,  decayed  for  centuries,  still  so  well  preserved  that
it  could  be  used  for  mortar  of  new  buildings.  The  carbonic  acid,
therefore,  penetrates  constantly,  but  so  slowly,  that  in  such  spots  a
chemical  process  goes  on  through  many  years.  This  event,  therefore,
had  its  usual  natural  course  in  Pfeffel's  garden  ;  and  since  we  know
that  a  constant  emanation  of  the  flame  of  crystallic  force  accompanies
it,  this  was  a  fiery  appearance,  which  must  necessarily  endure  until
the  affinities  of  the  corpse  and  the  lime  for  carbonic  acid,  &c,  were
brought  into  a  state  of  rest.  Whenever  a  living  man,  who  was  sen-
sitive to  a  certain  degree,  but  might  appear  to  be  otherwise  healthy,
came  there  and  entered  into  the  sphere  of  these   physical  forces,  he

CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.  143

necessarily  would  feel,  by  day,  like  Miss  Maix,  and  by  night,  see  like
Miss  Reichel.  Ignorance,  fear,  and  superstition,  then  shaped  the
luminous  appearance  into  the  spectral  figure  of  a  human  beinn-,  and
furnished  it  with  arms,  head,  feet,  etc.,  as,  when  we  like,  we.  may
shape  every  cloud  passing  over  a  bright  sky  into  a  man,  or  a  goblin.

158.  The  desire  to  deal  a  mortal  blow  to  the  monster  superstition —
which  a  few  centuries  since  poured  from  such  sources  so  inexpressible
a  number  of  miseries  over  European  society,  when,  in  unhappy  trials
for  witchcraft,  not  hundreds,  nor  thousands,  but  hundreds  of  thou-
sands of  innocent  persons  breathed  out  their  lives  miserably  on  the  rack
or  at  the  stake — led  me  to  the  experiment  of  bringing  a  highly  sen-
sitive person,  by  night,  into  a  cemetery.  I  thought  it  might  be  possi-
ble, where  mouldering  corpses  thus  lay,  to  see  something  of  the  kind
that  Billing  had  observed.  Miss  Reichel  had  the  courage,  unusual
in  her  sex,  to  promise  the  fulfilment  of  my  wish.  She  consented  to
be  taken,  on  two  different  very  dark  nights,  from  Reisenberg  Castle,
where  she  was  residing  with  me,  to  the  cemetery  of  the  neighboring
village  of  Griinzing.  The  result  actually  fulfilled  my  expectation
most  perfectly.  She  soon  saw  a  brightness,  and  perceived  along  one
of  the  mounds  a  fine  exhalation  of  flame  ;  she  found  the  same  in  a
slighter  degree  on  a  second  grave.  However,  she  did  not  suppose
them  to  be  either  witches  or  ghosts,  but  recognised  the  fiery  appear-
ance from  one  to  two  spans  high,  as  a  luminous  vapor,  waving  over
the  graves  and  extending  over  the  ground,  the  length  of  the  latter.
Some  time  after  she  was  taken  to  two  large  grave-yards,  near  Vien-
na, where  several  burials  occurred  daily,  and  the  mounds  lay  around
in  thousands.

She  saw  many  graves  furnished  with  such  luminosities.  Wherever
she  looked,  she  found  herself  surrounded  by  fiery  masses.  But  these
showed  themselves  more  particularly  over  all  new  graves  ;  while  on
very  old  ones  they  were  extinguished.  She  described  the  appearance
as  less  like  clear  flame  than  a  dense  vapor-like  mass  of  fire,  interme-
diate between  flame  and  mist.  On  many  graves  this  fiery  light  was
as  much  as  four  feet  high,  so  that  when  she  walked  into  it,  it  reached
up  to  her  neck.  When  she  placed  her  hand  in  it,  it  was  as  though
she  had  brought  it  into  a  dense  fiery  cloud.  She  did  not  manifest
the  least  uneasiness  at  it,  since  she  had  been  accustomed  to  such  em-
anations all  her  life,  and  had  seen  them  produced  in  countless  forms,
in  a  natural  way,  in  my  house.  I  am  convinced  that  all  persons  to
a  certain  degree  sensitive,  will  see  these  in  grave-yards,  and  in  those
very  much  used  always  in  great  numbers,  and  that  this  observation
may  readily  be  repeated  and  confirmed.  (Postscript,  18-17. — Since
these  experiments,  which  were  made  in  the  year  1844,  I  have  taken

1-14  CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.

five  other  sensitive  persons  to  grave-yards,  in  the  dark,  of  whom  two
were  invalids,  three  perfectly  healthy.  All  these  confirmed,  word  for
word,  the  statements  of  Miss  Reichel,  and  saw  the  lights  more  or  less
distinctly,  over  all  new  graves  ;  so  that  the  fact  can  no  longer  be
open  to  the  slightest  doubt,  and  may  be  tested  anywhere.)  Thous-
ands of  ghost  stories  will  now  meet  with  their  natural  explanation,
and  thus  with  their  end.  It  will  be  now  seen,  too,  that  our  old
women  were  not  so  far  wrong  when  they  asserted,  as  is  well  known,
that  it  is  not  granted  to  every  one  to  see  the  spirits  of  the  departed
wander  over  the  graves ;  for  in  fact  it  is  only  the  sensitive  who  can
see  in  the  dark  the  luminosity  of  the  imponderable  effluvia  from
chemical  decomposition  of  corpses.  And  thus  I  hope  I  have  suc-
ceeded in  tearing  down  one  of  the  thickest  veils  of  dark  ignorance
and  human  delusion/*

*  Again,  through  mesmerism,  we  obtain  a  strong  corroboration  of  a  fact,
which,  until  the  recent  importance  given  to  the  poisonous  influences  of  grave-
yards, would  hardly  in  this  country  have  been  credited.  Jane  M.,  whose  case
has  offered  many  striking  peculiarities,  is  a  person  of  a  very  impressionable  nerv-
ous constitution.  Among  other  curious  rjhenomena  developed  in  her  case,  was
that  of  a  very  powerful  agitation  and  sense  of  attraction  to  running  water ;  and
this  was  occasionally  so  strong,  that,  in  riding  in  an  omnibus  along  the  Bayswater
road  for  a  couple  of  miles,  she  was,  always,  for  some  months,  strongly  inclined  to
get  out  of  the  carriage  and  rush  towards  the  water.  It  has,  now  and  then,  re-
quired considerable  force  to  remove  her  from  the  sphere  of  the  influence  of  a  cis-
tern, where  the  water  was  rushing  into  it  through  the  supply  pipes.  This  ten-
dency to  strong  attraction  by  springs,  or  by  water  in  moving  currents,  gradually
became  less ;  but  was  succeeded  by  an  alarming  sense  of  sickness  whenever  she
passed  the  St.  George's  burying  ground  in  the  Bayswater  Road.  She  assured
the  ladies  with  whom  she  lived  that  she  saw  blue  lights  or  blue  hazy  clouds  of
light  over  the  graves  in  that  ground  ; — that  these  were  of  various  heights,  some
of  them  high  enough  to  envelope  a  person  who  should  stand  upright  on  the
graves.  On  the  fresh  graves  the  light  was  more  vivid,  higher  and  more  volumi-
nous, than  on  those  not  so  recent.  These  lights  were  very  attractive,  and  not-
withstanding the  sickness  they  caused,  which  amounted  to  vomiting,  the  young
woman  had  a  great  desire  to  go  and  he  down  on  the  graves.  All  this  I  had
learned,  before  I  thought  of  undertaking  to  supply  notes  to  this  work,  and  I  ascer-
tained that  no  one  of  the  parties  had  read  Gregory's  Abstract  of  Reichenbach's
researches,  or  was  cognisant  of  the  facts  therein  noticed  on  this  subject.  My  ser-
vant Geoige  Thacker,  now  the  husband  of  the  young  woman,  had  been  in  the
habit  of  walking  home  to  Bayswater,  from  my  house,  with  her.  Having  heard
that  he  had  repeatedly  witnessed  the  phenomena  connected  with  the  grave
grounds,  I  requested  him  to  make  notes  of  what  he  had  seen.  He  has  complied
with  the  request,  and  I  subjoin  extracts  from  his  statement : —

"  One  evening  last  autumn,  I  accompanied  Jane  when  she  had  to  pass  Pad-
dington  Church-yard.  She  appeared  at  the  time  well  and  cheerful,  but  as  we
approached  the  burial-ground,  and  were  yet  half  a  street's  length  from  it,  she  was
uncomfortable  and  fell  into  a  mesmeric  sleep.  Not  suspecting  the  cause,  I  went
on,  having  her  on  my  left  arm,  my  right  being  towards  the  cemetery.     I  could

CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.  145

159.  We  now  come  to  the  domain  of  Electricity.
By  a  superficial  consideration  of  the  foregoing  researches,  it  may
here  and  there  seem  as  if  electricity  alone,  excited  sometimes  in  one

not  prevent  her  from  going  round  behind  me  and  taking  my  other  arm,  and  then
trying  to  disengage  herself  from  me  altogether.  I  stared,  with  astonishment,  to
see  her  so  attracted  towards  the  burial-ground:  I  could  compare  it  to  nothing
but  the  power  of  a  strong  magnet  over  a  needle.  I  recollected  that  a  stream  of
water  had  the  same  power  of  attraction  over  her  a  short  time  before.  We  walked
on,  or  rather  I  dragged  her  from  the  ground,  and  when  I  thought  she  was  suffi-
ciently recovered,  I  asked  her  what  had  so  strangely  affected  her.  She  said  the
dead  attracted  her ;  one  in  particular,  lately  buried,  who  had  died  of  a  malignant
fever ;  and  if  I  had  not  been  with  her,  the  influence  of  that  body  would  have
drawn  her  to  the  grave,  and  she  should  have  laid  down  upon  it  and  died,  and  no
one  would  have  been  able  to  remove  her  till  she  was  dead.  As  it  was,  she  had
taken  much  of  the  disorder  inwardly,  and  felt  that  she  should  be  very  ill.  I  took
her  home,  and  was  much  grieved  to  hear,  the  next  day,  that  she  had  had  a  mise-
rable night.  She  continued  ill  for  some  days.  Nothing  remained  on  her  stomach.
With  her  food  she  brought  up  what  appeared  to  be  the  skin  of  her  throat  and
stomach ;  and  her  mouth  and  tongue,  which  were  parched,  and  of  a  white  color,
peeled  off  their  skin  in  the  same  manner.  Some  time  after  this  she  accompanied
me  into  the  country,  on  a  short  visit  to  my  family,  and  she  was  similarly  affected
on  walking  with  me  at  the  distance  of  a  field's  length  from  the  church-yard.
Whenever  we  walked  in  London,  if  we  came  near  a  body  ready  for  interment,
or  if  we  passed  the  corrupting  mass  of  a  burial-ground,  it  mattered  not,  the  same
attacks  seized  her.  At  length,  determined,  if  possible,  to  find  a  remedy  for  the
evil,  I  one  day  put  her  to  sleep  and  excited  her  organ  of  ideality,  begging  her  to
endeavor,  by  the  use  of  her  clairvoyance,  to  point  out  some  means  of  overcoming
the  evil.  After  thinking  some  time,  she  told  me  a  small  bottle  of  mesmerized
water  carried  in  her  pocket,  or  in  her  hand,  would  have  the  required  effect,  and
would  draw  all  the  injurious  influence  into  itself,  and  she  should,  fur  the  time,  re-
main unhurt.  On  trying  the  experiment,  I  was  overjoyed  to  find  it  fully  success-
ful ;  and  ever  since  have  been  careful  to  keep  her  constantly  supplied  with  fresh
phials  of  mesmerized  water.  Some  other  person  has  always  to  empty  these
phials,  into  the  earth,  at  a  distance  from  Jane ;  otherwise  the  bad  influence  escap-
ing from  the  water  would  attack  her :  and  if  at  any  time  another  person  should
have  touched  these  bottles,  Jane  can  perceive  it  by  the  contents  looking  black
instead  of  blue ;  and  in  this  case  their  virtue,  for  her,  is  lost.  She  describes  the
appearance  of  this  pernicious  influence  rising  from  the  graves,  more  particularly
of  those  recently  buried,  as  looking  like  beautiful  blue  vapory  flames,  rising  to
a  great  height ;  or  like  the  mist  of  a  waterfall,  mixed  with  thousands  of  bright
sparkling  drops,  but  all  blue.  When  this  bad  influence  comes  over  her,  she  is
seized  with  a  violent  cough,  which  lasts  until  she  nearly  or  quite  sinks  with  the
exhaustion  produced  by  it."'

Here  are  materials  for  reflection  on  the  force  yielded  by  the  chemism  of  dead
organic  matter.  When  will  man  be  wise  enough  to  dispose  of  the  dead  so  that
they  may  be  extensively  useful  to  the  living  ?  We  must  hope  for  good  by  the
progress  of  intelligence  among  the  masses.  I  can  remember  the  time  when  gen-
tlemen, students  of  anatomy,  were  obliged  to  risk  their  lives  in  exhumating
bodies  for  dissection.  Thirty-five  years  ago,  I  had  the  honor  of  putting  my  name,
near  that  of  the  celebrated  Lady  Morgan,  on  a  list  proposed  to  be  published  by
Professor  Macartney,  for  the  good  of  mankind,  of  those  willing  to  cede  their

1

146  CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.

way,  sometimes  in  another,  bore  the  greatest  share,  if  it  were  not  the
whole  basis,  of  the  phenomena  which  are  here  detailed.  The  follow-
ing results  will  show  what  is  to  be  thought  of  this.

160.  The  first  experiment  was  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  what
amount  of  sensibility  for  galvanism  existed  in  the  patients  who  are
highly  excitable  by  steel  magnetism.  It  was  undertaken  with  Miss
Nowotny,  in  the  presence  of  M.  Baumgartner,  the  physicist.  I
brought  in  a  zinc  and  copper  element  of  about  twelve  square  inches,
between  the  members  of  which  was  placed  a  piece  of  linen,  moisten-
ed with  salt  and  water.  The  patient  took  in  her  hands  two  German-
silver  conductors,  which  were  connected  with  the  two  electrodes  by
short  copper  wires.  She  did  not  experience  the  slightest  sensation
from  the  current  thus  conducted,  although  it  gave  a  shock  with  the
multiplier.  She  did  not  "feel  the  sourish  taste  of  the  positive  con-
ductor on  her  tongue  more  strongly  or  differently  from  us  who  were
healthy.  I  tried  Miss  Sturmann  with  a  soldered  zinc  and  copper  ele-
ment of  nearly  four  square  inches.  She  found  little  difference  be-
tween this  element  when  I  placed  it  between  her  moistened  fingers,
and  separate  pieces  of  copper  or  zinc ;  at  most  the  metals  seemed  a
little  stronger  then,  but  hardly  decidedly  so.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer
did  not  feel  a  similar  element,  taken  in  her  moistened  fingers,  any
more  strongly.  Miss  Maix  could  just  distinguish  the  zinc  of  the  ele-
ment when  she  held  it  in  her  fingers,  moistened  with  salt  and  water,
from  free  zinc,  but  this  little  with  no  certainty.  A  large  square  ele-
ment of  twelve  inches  on  a  side  she  found  little  stronger,  even  when
her  fingers  were  wetted  with  a  saline  solution.  Miss  Reichel  found
this  re-action  just  the  same  as  her  predecessors ;  she  experienced  no
observable  influence  from  the  union  of  the  zinc  and  copper  into  one
element,  whether  this  were  large  or  small,  her  fingers  wetted  with
water,  or  a  saline  solution.  The  current  produced  in  a  single  ele-
ment, after  the  subtraction  of  the  obstacles  to  the  passage,  and  with
the  little  tension  it  has,  is  indeed  very  weak ;  but  if  the  re-agent  in
which  it  has  to  act  be  in  a  high  degree  sensible,  it  is  fully  sufficient
to  produce  effects.  It  makes  the  nerves  of  frogs  contract,  diverts  the
needle,  decomposes  weak  iodide  of  potassium,  &c,  and  therefore  we
were  led  to  expect  that  it  would  act  perceptibly  to  the  feelings  upon
the  nerves  of  the  sensitive.

161.  Yet  it  follows  from  these  experiments,  carried  out  with  every
care,  in  every  case  frequently  repeated,  all  instituted  on  highly  sensi-
tive persons,  and  all  responded  to  in  the  same  way, — that  a  weak

bodies  for  dissection,  in  order  to  oppose  the  ignorant  superstition  of  the  age.  The
glorious  Reichenbach  has,  in  this  treatise,  done  good  service  against  the  vile  de-
mon of  superstition.

CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.  U7

hydro-electric  current  in  itself  does  not  act  observably  more  power-
fully on  sick  persons,  even  to  hen  they  possess  a  very  high  degree  of
excitability  by  the  slightest  magnetism,  than  upon  the  healthy.  This,
therefore,  proves  conversely  that  it  cannot  be  galvanism,  tor  which
exists  in  them  the  exalted  sensitiveness  which  we  have  become  ac-
quainted with.

162.  Compound  circuits,  of  course,  acted  more  strongly  upon
them.  I  brought  a  little  pile  of  soldered  zinc  and  copper  elements,
almost  four  inches  square,  to  Miss  Nowotny.  The  intermediate  layers
were  of  felted  cloth,  moistened  with  solution  of  common  salt.  The
zinc  surfaces  were  not  very  clean,  and  I  let  this  be  so  on  purpose,  so
as  to  retain  power  over  slighter  modifications  of  the  strength  of  the
current.  I  piled  up  ten  pairs  before  she  and  others  perceived  any-
thing at  all  from  it.  At  fifteen  elements  she  began  to  trace  a  little
effect,  but  some  of  the  most  excitable  of  the  healthy  spectators  also
already  found  it.  With  twenty  pairs  the  tremulous  motion  from  the
discharge  reached  from  both  hands  to  the  elbows,  while  I  could  now
feel  it  myself  the  length  of  my  finger.  Other  girls  present  felt  the
shock  beyond  the  wrist.  Miss  Nowotny  was,  indeed,  the  most  sen-
sitive among  us,  but  did  not  exceed  the  usual  greater  excitability  of
other  healthy  persons.  With  Miss  Maix  I  arranged  a  pile  of  nine  of
the  same  elements.  The  result  was  about  the  same  as  the  last.  The
zinc  plates  were  made  somewhat  cleaner  this  time  ;  she  therefore
felt  the  nine  pairs  about  as  strongly  as  her  predecessor  had  felt  the
twenty  ;  but  healthy  persons  felt  them  almost  as  strongly.  A  cer-
tain degree  of  increased  irritability  must  be  attributed  to  the  general
diseased  condition,  dependent,  not  upon  the  sensitiveness,  but  upon
sensibility.  With  Miss  Reichel  I  tried  from  two  to  fifteen  elements,
in  different  stages  of  her  disease,  on  occasions  several  months  apart,
in  July,  September,  and  November.  She  did  not  feel  a  few  elements
at  all ;  with  from  fifteen  to  twenty  she  perceived  the  effect  so  little,
that  she  never  mentioned  it  when  discharges  passed  through  her  ac-
cidentally, in  the  course  of  the  operations  on  the  pile  ;  forty  to  fifty
pairs  she  felt  vividly,  but  she  regarded  it  as  sport  to  take  shocks
from  them  Avhen  others  hesitated  to  venture.  And  subsequently,
neither  on  the  days  mentioned  nor  on  any  others,  were  any  results
to  be  observed.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  felt  no  difference  between  a
zinc-copper  element,  held  in  her  fingers,  wetted  with  a  saline  solu-
tion, and  a  piece  of  one  of  these  metals  taken  by  itself;  she  found
the  reaction  of  the  copper  warmish,  that  of  the  zinc  rather  cooling,
but  without  other  notable  effect.  I  applied  to  her  feet  three,  then
sixteen  elements,  in  a  circuit.  She  perceived  the  electric  current  just
like  healthy  persons ;  at  length  she  detected  that  with  the  increase

148  CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.

of  the  number  of  elements  the  zinc  began  to  act  more  coolingly,  the
copper  with  more  heat,  upon  her  fingers.  This  was  the  first  trace  of
the  excitement  of  crystallic  forces  by  the  voltaic  element.

163.  When  Miss  Reichel  allowed  the  current  from  fifty  elements
to  pass  continuously  through  her  for  some  time,  holding  the  polar
wires  in  her  two  hands,  the  sensations  from  it  increased  gradually  in
strength,  becoming  felt  on  the  one  hand  in  the  head,  and  on  the
other  extending  to  the  knees ;  but  this  was  the  first  character  of  gal-
vanic action  upon  her,  which  necessarily  presented  itself  after  a  cer-
tain time,  since  a  persistent  current  brings  with  it  as  a  consequence
direct  magnetic  motion.  It  was  therefore  not  galvanism  alone  acting
directly  here,  but  because  by  its  entrance  it  according  to  known  laws
converted  the  conductor  more  or  less  into  a  magnet,  which  was  here
the  transverse  axis  of  the  patient  herself;  namely,  the  path  from  one
hand,  through  the  arms  and  breast,  to  the  other.

164.  When  I  had  recourse  to  the  electrical  machine,  and  let  fric-
tional  electricity  strike  upon  her  from  the  conductor,  it  amused  her ;
she  drew  dozens  of  sparks  from  it  for  mere  pleasure  ;  no  special  sen-
sation presented  itself  distinguishable  from  those  of  healthy  persons.
Subsequently,  electric  shocks  were  ordered  her  by  her  physician,  to
be  delivered  at  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  carried  along  the  spine.  I
undertook  to  provide  this  rough  medicament.  In  accordance  with
the  prescription,  I  charged  to  saturation  a  Leyden  jar  having  about
a  square  foot  of  coating,  and  gave  her  daily  eight  such  shocks,  which
were  not  pleasant  to  sustain.  But  she  did  not  find  anything  different
in  them  from  what  we  others  should  have  experienced.

165.  The  conclusion  which  I  believe  these  experiments  to  warrant
is,  that  an  electric  discharge,  carried  through  the  body,  either  from
the  voltaic  pile,  the  conductor,  or  the  Leyden  jar,  passes  over  too
quickly  to  allow  it  to  set  in  perceptible  motion  the  force  which  pre-
vails in  human  beings,  as  in  crystals  ;  agreeing  perfectly  with  well-
known  analogous  electrical  effects.

166.  However,  it  will  immediately  appear  that  we  may  by  no
means  deduce  from  this  the  conclusion  that  all  other  kinds  of  electri-
cal operations  are  as  ineffectual  as  the  shock  or  the  discharge  from  a
weak  pile.  When  I  placed  in  the  patient's  hands  a  thick  copper  wire
connected  with  a  weak  pile,  and  allowed  her  to  become  accus-
tomed to  it,  then  completed  the  circuit  with  this  wire,  so  that  the
whole  current  was  made  to  pass  through  her,  without  by  any  means
penetrating  into  the  substance  of  the  hand,  she  at  once  felt  apparent
heat — i.  e.,  crystallic  force — increase  in  the  wire.  The  hand  was  in
this  case  in  immediate  contact  with  conducting  wire,  and  the  latter

CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.  149

was  so  thick,  one-twelfth  of  an  inch,  that  real  heating  of  it  was  out
of  the  question.

Since,  however,  the  hydro-electric  circuit  is  a  complication  of
chemical,  magnetic,  and  electrical  activity,  and  thus  no  instructive
conclusions  could  be  expected  from  it  here,  I  directed  the  observa-
tions to  frictional  electricity,  and  made  the  patient  enclose  a  dis-
charging wire  from  the  conductor  with  her  hand,  in  such  a  manner
that  she  did  not  actually  touch  the  metal,  but  that  this  passed  freely
through  her  half-closed  hand.  As  soon  as  I  set  the  glass  plate  in
motion,  she  had  the  sensation  of  a  warm  atmosphere  around  the  wire,
which  she  clearly  distinguished  from  the  well-known  aura.

167.  I  pass  over  the  experiments  on  conduction,  accumulation,  po-
larization, &c,  which  are  all  involved  in  the  following,  and  hasten  to
the  phenomena  of  light.  I  placed  Miss  Reichel  on  the  darkened
staircase,  gave  a  brass  wire  six  yards  long  into  her  hand,  the  point
being  held  free.  The  rest  of  it  lay  on  the  ground,  passing  through
the  door,  and  ending  at  the  conductor.  The  machine  worked  so
weakly,  that  only  sparks  about  half  a  finger's  breadth  long  could  be
drawn  from  the  conductor.  Soon  after  the  first  revolutions  of  the
plate,  a  slender  column  of  flame  ascended  from  the  end  of  the  wire,
such  as  we  have  already  met  with  in  other  similar  circumstances,  ten
inches  high,  about  the  thickness  of  one's  thumb  below,  and  running
up  to  a  very  fine  point.  When  I  turned  the  plate  rapidly,  of  which
the  patient  on  .he  staircase  could  not  be  aware,  the  flame  rose  higher,
and  sank  again  as  often  as  I  ceased.  The  point  of  wire  had  no  visi-
ble trace  whatever  of  an  electric  brush  to  healthy  eyes,  which  of
course  was  rendered  impossible  by  the  many  points  of  delivery  that
occurred  along  the  wire.  As  often  as  I  ceased  to  move  the  machine,
the  flame  on  the  wire  endured  of  the  same  form  for  more  than  a
minute,  and  then  first  began  to  diminish  slowly.  An  action  therefore
took  place  here  which  did  not  agree  in  any  way  with  the  known  phe-
nomena of  an  electrified  wire.  Every  repetition,  at  different  times
and  with  change  of  the  wires,  always  reproduced  the  same  phe-
nomenon.

168.  Instead  of  fastening  the  wire  on  to  the  conductor,  I  detached
it,  and  applied  to  the  same  end  of  it  a  hollow  polished  ball  two  inches
in  diameter.  I  took  hold  of  this  by  the  wire,  and  approached  it  to
within  two  inches,  sideways,  of  the  electrified  conductor,  the  sparks
of  which  only  equalled  a  tenth  part  of  this  distance  in  length.  The
ball  was  therefore  placed  in  the  electrical  atmosphere  of  the  con-
ductor as  soon  as  the  machine  was  turned,  but  remained  unisolated  in
my  hand.  A  full  minute  elapsed  before  the  observer  shut  up  in  the
dark  perceived  an  alteration  at  the  end  of  the  wire  which  she  held  in

150  CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.

her  hand ;  then,  however,  the  flame  began  slowly  to  rise  before  her,
above  a  span  in  height,  and  I  turned  the  plate  of  the  machine  for
four  minutes  before  it,  by  degrees,  reached  its  maximum,  at  which  it
there  uniformly  maintained  itself.  When  the  machine  was  now
stopped  and  the  ball  removed  out  of  the  sphere  of  its  action,  the
flame  again  remained  for  more  than  a  minute  of  unaltered  size,  and
then  began  to  disappear,  which  it  did  completely  within  several
minutes.

169.  I  modified  this  experiment  by  removing  the  brass  ball  to  a
greater  distance  from  the  conductor.  I  now  held  it  eight  inches
above  the  conductor.  The  observer  described  the  phenomena  in  the
same  order  and  intervals  of  time ;  the  flame  in  her  hand  was  now
even  somewhat  larger.  I  then  held  the  brass  ball  at  a  distance  of
forty  inches  from  the  conductor,  laterally.  The  phenomena  actually
recurred  in  the  same  space  of  time,  and  only  changed  in  that  the
flame  was  now  about  one-fourth  shorter.  Finally,  I  removed  the  ball
eighty  inches  (more  than  a  fathom)  from  the  conductor,  but  again,
after  a  pause  of  two  minutes,  the  flame  at  the  end  of  the  wire  on  the
staircase  rose  up,  increased  for  five  minutes,  and  when  the  machine
"was  stopped  slowly  sunk  away  in  the  course  of  several  minutes.  This
time,  however,  it  only  attained  half  the  size.

170.  I  placed  the  ball  firmly  upon  the  conductor,  so  that  it  was  no
longer  in  the  electrical  atmosphere,  but  directly  received  positive  elec-
tricity :  under  these  conditions  the  same  phenomena  presented  them-
selves, but  now  in  less  than  half  a  minute,  instead  of  not  for  two
minutes.  The  duration  of  its  increase,  however,  and  the  slowness  of
its  subsequent  dying  away,  remained  the  same  as  before.  When  any
one  touched  the  conductor  with  the  finger,  or  took  hold  of  the  brass
ball  itself,  during  this,  the  size  of  the  flame  was  not  obviously  altered  ;
it  came,  went,  and  vanished  in  the  same  times,  and  with  no  percepti-
ble difference  of  size.  But  when,  instead  of  this,  I  placed  the  bail  so
near  to  the  conductor  that  a  rapid  succession  of  sparks  passed  over
to  it,  the  effect  was  not  produced;  the  observer  felt  the  successive
shocks  in  her  hand  at  the  passage  of  the  sparks,  but  perceived  no
flame  at  the  end  of  the  wire.  The  rapidity  of  the  electrical  action
was  so  great  that  the  flaming  principle,  more  sluggish  than  it,  was
not  set  in  motion.  Finally,  I  repeated  all  these  experiments  with
negative  electricity,  the  apparatus  being  in  connection  with  the  iso-
lated cushion,  which,  however,  was  connected  with  the  earth.  There
was,  however,  little,  or  rather  no  distinction  in  the  results,  on  the
darkened  staircase.  In  allthese  experiments  not  a  word  was  spoken  ;
the  observer,  who  sat  in  darkness,  was  separated  from  me  by  a  wall,
and  knew  nothing  of  all  the  various  modifications  and  repetitions,  did

CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.  151

nothing  but  call  out,  from  time  to  time,  like  a  clock,  so  loud  that  it
could  be  heard  through  the  closed  door,  the  changes  as  she  saw  them
originate,  endure,  and  pass  away,  on  the  wire.  So  that  there  could
be  no  question  of  any  kind  of  deception  here, — on  the  contrary,  this
exact  coincidence  of  the  phenomena  with  the  experiments  and  the
theory,  was  an  expressive  evidence  of  the  correctness  of  all  the
operations.

171.  These  experiments  speak  so  clearly  that  I  shall  pass  over  the
enumeration  of  a  number  of  others.  I  have  only  to  add,  that  all
those  slender  flames  which  presented  themselves  in  the  darkness  dif-
fused coolness.  When  the  sensitive  girl  was  near  the  electrical  ma-
chine, the  positive  charge  of  the  brass  conductor  gave  her  a  feeling
of  heat ;  but  when  she  stood  some  paces  distant  from  it  she  always
experienced  coolness.  I  shall  be  able  to  clear  up  the  cause  of  this
distinction  in  the  succeeding  treatises.

172.  I  afterwards  brought  over  the  conductor  a  tin  electrophorus
plate  of  about  a  foot  in  diameter,  on  a  wooden  handle,  in  such  a
manner  that  it  was  placed,  at  a  distance,  in  the  atmosphere  of  the
conductor,  for  about  a  minute.  When,  having  first  touched  it  freely
with  a  wet  finger,  I  brought  it  near  the  face  of  Miss  Reichel,  she  felt
coolness  issue  from  it  strongly  and  for  several  minutes,  which  seems
to  confirm,  in  a  different  way,  the  experiments  of  the  preceding  arti-
cle. I  did  the  same  also  with  an  isolated  body ;  I  suspended  the
often-mentioned  German-silver  conductor  over  the  conductor  of  the
machine,  by  a  silk  band  ;  its  effect,  when  brought  near  the  face  of
the  patient,  was,  as  might  have  been  foreseen,  exactly  the  same  as
that  of  the  unisolated  tin  plate  :  as  yet  no  isolator  has  been  found  for
the  crystallic  force.  Similar  experiments  were  also  made,  with  the
same  results,  on  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer.  The  same  unisolated  tin  plate
was  first  brought  near  her  face  before  having  been  placed  in  the  elec-
trical atmosphere.  She  felt  it  as  she  did  most  metals,  to  emit  heat.
It  was  now  held  a  hand's  length  above  a  weakly-charged  conductor,
and  then  touched  for  a  moment  with  my  wetted  hand,  so  that
if  it  should  possibly  have  abstracted  any  trace  of  electricity  this
might  thus  be  fully  removed.  When  I  now  held  it  again  before
her  face,  I  found  that  it  had  become  remarkably  cool,  spreading  cold
around  it.

173.  In  every  case,  therefore,  in  which  electricity  is  excited  to  any
permanent  extent,  that  peculiar  force  appears  which  I  am  endeavor-
ing to  clear  up  in  these  essays,  and  accordingly  electricity  presents
the  tenth  source  of  it.

152  CHEMICAL  FORCE— ELECTRICITY.

RETROSPECT.

a.  Chemism  is  a  widely-comprehensive  source  of  magnetic-like
force,  both  when  simple  and  when  produced  by  combustion  and  the
voltaic  pile.

b.  The  slightest  chemical  action  suffices  to  produce  it  abun-
dantly, to  charge  the  vicinity  with  it,  to  form  polarities,  produce
light,  &c.

c.  The  magnetic  tub  is  nothing  but  a  chemical  operation.

d.  Digestion  and  respiration,  and  the  interchange  of  matters  gene-
rally, as  chemical  processes,  are  the  sources  of  the  magnetic  force
which  exists  and  acts  in  the  human  body.

e.  The  spectral  luminous  phenomena  which  have  been  observed
over  graves,  but  denied  to  exist  by  all  healthy  persons,  are  really  of
a  purely  chemical,  physical  nature,  but  can  only  be  seen  by  highly
sensitive  eyes.

/.  Electricity  also  is  a  source  of  the  force  which  dwells  in  crystals,
&c,  both  frictional  electricity,  positive  and  negative,  and  contact
electricity.

g.  Even  the  electrical  atmosphere  is  capable  of  setting  it  in  full
motion  at  considerable  distances.

SIXTH  TREATISE.

THE    MATERIAL    WORLD    IN    GENERAL.

147.  We  have  now  seen  the  force  we  are  investigating  produced
from  ten  different  but  alwa}-s  particiliar  sources  ;  we  will  now  seek  a
more  universal  occurrence  of  it, — we  will  look  for  it  in  the  whole
material  world,  and  seek  to  make  out  something  of  the  great  part
which  it  plays  in  the  wide  totality  of  things.

175.  Everyone  is  aware  that  many  persons  exist  on  whom  par-
ticular substances  exert  a  peculiar,  usually  disagreeable  effect,  which
often  seems  to  border  on  the  ridiculous.  I  will  not  speak  here  of  the
strange  things  to  which  instiuct  urges  pregnant  woman.  But  when
we  find  people  who  cannot  bear  to  touch  skins,  others  who  cannot
bear  to  see  feathers, — nay,  such  as  cannot  endure  the  sight  of  butter,
<fec,  this  may  be  regarded  simply  as  a  result  of  defective  education ;
but  experience  shows  that  definite  antipathies  of  this  kind  recur  in
exactly  the  same  form,  and  against  the  same  objects,  in  different  per-
sons, and  in  the  most  distant  countries.  This  proves  that  they  are
by  no  means  always  outbreaks  of  a  want  of  good  breeding,  but  that
some  equally  definite  cause,  be  it  of  objective  or  subjective  nature,
must  often  lie  at  the  bottom,  and  that  when  it  occurs  it  must  not  be
chidingly  reproved,  but  frequently  deserves  that  its  origin  should  be
investigated  and  taken  into  account.

More  accurate  observation  shows  that  these  strange  antipathies,
often  expressed  in  a  very  active  manner,  present  themselves  most  fre-
quently in  those  persons  who,  to  outward  appearance  healthy,  are
more  or  less  sensitive,  and  that  the  degree  of  their  strength  and  va-
riety increases  in  proportion  as  the  persons  are  more  diseased,  and
subject  to  nervous  complaints,  spasms,  and  similar  affections.  This
is  so  much  the  case  in  Miss  Sturmann,  for  example,  that  sometimes
she  cannot  take  hold  of  a  key  or  bolt  of  a  door,  without  her  fingers
tieing  seized  with  cramps ;  while,  at  the  same  time,  she  nevertheless
walks  about  the  house,  garden,  or  even  in  the  streets,  like  a  healthy
person.

In  the  course  of  my  numerous  investigations  on  highly  sensitive
persons,  I  soon  became  aware  that  these  antipathies  had  some  points

154  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.

in  common,  that  some  agreement  was  to  be  found,  the  further  tracing
and  comparison  of  which  could  not  but  afford  hope  of  discovering
some  relation  of  cause  and  effect  in  the  phenomena,  and  thus  possibly
supplying  the  means  of  penetrating  the  common,  deeper-lying  natu-
ral cause.  I  found  that  certain  definite  sensations  always  returned,
and  that  when  the  feelings  of  the  patients  were  clearly  made  out  and
distinguished  by  similar  names,  their  apparent  multiplicity  might  be
traced  back  to  a  few  which  were  continually  recurring.  And  these
few  I  soon  found  to  obey  settled  rules.  They  consisted  of  feelings  of
apparent  heat  or  cold  received  from  various  substances  of  exactly
equal  temperature  ;  of  more  or  less  decidedly  pleasant  or  disagreea-
ble character,  increasing  so  far  as  to  the  production  of  convulsions,
of  sensations  of  pricking,  throbbing,  or  drawing,  affecting  the  skin
and  extremities,  and  of  painless  tonic  spasms.  In  the  second  of  these
treatises,  where  I  have  explained  the  character  of  the  force  of  crystals,
I  have  already  pointed  out  that  in  the  case  of  Miss  Nowotny,  the  last
phenomena,  the  painless  tonic  spasms,  were  produced  by  the  emana-
tions of  the  poles  of  the  axes  of  crystallized  bodies,  and  that  the  ca-
pacity for  producing  this  effect  was  imparted  in  different  degrees  of
strength  to  different  bodies,  but  was  never  wanting  in  those  which
are  capable  of  forming  free  crystals,  whether  they  consist  of  a  simple
or  any  ever  so  greatly  compound  substance.  This  kind  of  sensation
has,  therefore,  been  to  a  certain  extent  discussed,  and  for  the  present
settled :  there  only  remain  to  be  examined,  therefore,  the  sensations
of  apparent  difference  of  temperature,  those  of  unpleasantness,  and
the  seeming  mechanical  agitations,  of  the  pricking,  &c. :  and  we  will
here  apply  the  test  to  some  of  them.

Some  of  these  sensations  extend  to  the  healthy,  but  the  highly
sensitive  experience  them  more  strongly  or  weakly,  according  to  the
nature  of  the  disease,  and  to  the  standard  of  exaltation  of  their  suf-
ferings. I  was  led  to  the  first  investigation  in  this  direction  by  the
recognition,  in  Miss  Nowotny,  that  all  amorphous  bodies,  which  are
devoid  of  the  peculiar  efficacy  of  crystallized,  had  nevertheless  a  re-
actionary influence  of  a  disagreeable  kind,  as  well  as  sometimes  an
additional  one  of  heat  or  cold, — that  this  was  attached,  with  a  certain
constancy,  to  particular  substances,  and  possessed  different  degrees  of
strength  in  different  substances ;  while,  in  the  former  case,  the  crys-
tallic  force  seemed  to  proceed  from  the  kind  of  condition  of  aggrega-
tion :  here  something  dynamical,  of  a  different  kind,  showed  itself  iu
the  matter  itself:  form  and  substance,  therefore,  exhibited  a  strongly
marked  difference  in  their  power  of  affecting  external  things.

176.  As  it  was  evident  that  something  lay  hidden  here,  which
must  possess  either  physiological  or  physical  interest,  I  undertook  the

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  155

no  small  labor  of  testing  the  sensation  of  discomfort  of  the  patients,
with  more  than  GOO  substances  ;  namely,  the  greater  portion  of  my
collection  of  chemical  preparations.  It  was  found  that  there  were  in
these  very  clearly  marked  gradations,  and  that  the  patient  was  able
to  distinguish  these  gradations  with  such  delicacy,  that  she  was  able
to  assign  to  every  substance  its  place  between  two  others.  This  she
could  do  with  such  certainty,  that  when  I  gave  her  again  on  the  third
or  fourth  day  the  substances  which  she  had  previously  arranged  in
series,  she  again  placed  them  in  exactly  the  same  places  in  the  ar-
rangement, as  she  had  given  them  in  the  first  instance ;  while  it  is
clear  here  that  she  could  neither  recognise  or  understand  anything  in
this  numerous  collection  of  white  and  colored  powders.  She  had  an
equal  degree  of  clearness  in  her  feeling,  to  anything  that  we  meet
with  in  the  vision,  for  the  distinction  of  tiuts  of  color,  or  with  the  ear,
for  the  distinction  of  harmonious  or  discordant  tones.  When  we
recollect  that,  in  Miss  Nowotny,  this  feeling  had  received  none  of  that
practice  by  which  the  sight,  the  hearing,  and  other  senses  gradually
acquire,  with  constant  exercise,  their  full  development  and  suscepti-
bility in  the  course,  of  a  long  life,  and  of  which  we  have  learned,  in
the  psychological  field,  the  overwhelming  influence  on  the  clearness
and  distinctness  of  sensual  perceptions, — some  idea  may  be  formed  of
the  extraordinary  inner  acuteness  with  which  this  peculiar  abnormal
feeling  must  be  experienced ;  and  by  which  we  shall  hereafter  clear
up  much  that  at  present  lies  in  complete  obscurity.

177.  Scarcely  a  couple  of  dozen  substances  had  been  brought  into
a  series  in  this  examination,  when  I  already  saw  a  law  develope  it-
self: the  substances  became  arranged  according  to  their  electro-
chemical values,  in  such  a  manner  that  those  standing  highest  came
to  the  top  of  the  list,  the  indifferent  below,  and  with  a  striking  dis-
regard of  their  polar  opposition.  I  will  not  venture  to  tire  the  reader
with  the  enumeration  of  the  whole  series  of  more  than  600  substances,
but  still  I  wish  to  select  a  small  number  : — the  highest,  i.  e.,  those
substances  acting  most  strongly,  were  :  oxygen  gas,  sulphur,  caffeine,
sulphuric  acid,  potassium,  phosphorus,  sodium,  selenium,  iodine,  cin-
nabar, lead,  and  potass.  Between  the  numbers  30  aud  100  occurred
— bismuth,  arsenic,  mercury,  morphia,  zinc,  iodide  of  potassium,  tel-
lurium, chloride  of  calcium,  chromium,  lithium,  oxidd  of  gold,  oxide
of  nickel,  tin,  iridium,  nickel,  alcohol,  chlorine  gas.  Between  200
and  400  came — paraffine,  rhodium,  acrolein«,  piperiue,  creasote,  com-
mon salt,  quinine,  brucine,  cantharadine,  strychnine,  anhydrous  acetic
acid.  From  500  to  600 — cinchonine,  quartz,  hippuric  acid,  mastic,
chalk,  gum,  almost  all  vegetable  acids,  sugar,  sugar  of  milk,  mannite.
At   the  end  of  the  series  stood  palladium,  platinum,  silver,  copper,

156  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.

iron,  gold,  amber,  and  water.  These  last  were  almost  perfectly  in-
different to  this  sensitive  patient.  With  the  small  exception  of  a
few  rare  metals,  which  very  probably  were  not  perfectly  pure,  all
highly  polar  bodies  appeared  at  one  end  of  the  scale,  the  indifferent
at  the  other  ;  among  which  iron,  with  its  magnetic  capacities,  makes
the  only  exception.  Strangely  enough,  she  could  make  out  any  dis-
tinction between  the  substances  of  the  positive  and  the  negative  pole,
in  spite  of  my  endeavoring  at  the  end  to  make  her  aware  of  impor-
tant differences  in  these,  and  consequently  directing  her  attention
particularly  to  this.  Oxygen  gas,  sulphur,  phosphorus,  stood  co-
ordinated with  potassium,  sodium,  lead,  &c.

178.  This  task,  which  occupied  a  whole  week,  was  performed  with
the  patient  in  a  perfectly  clear  state  of  consciousness.  I  now  sought
to  control  it  by  examinations  during  her  unconscious  cataleptic  con-
dition. Whenever  I  laid  any  body  in  her  motionless  hand,  it  reacted
upon  her ;  the  indifferent,  when  not  crystallized,  left  her  tolerably
quiet ;  substances  occurring  nearer  to  the  middle  of  the  series  made
the  hand  restless ;  those  bodies  past  the  middle  produced  trembling
and  abnormal  twitchings  in  the  hand  ;  and  when  I  placed  in  her
hand  the  highest  substances,  such  as  sulphur,  caffeine,  lead  ore,  io-
dine, cinnabar,  or  even  the  higher  standing  minerals,  like  heavy  spar,
fiuor  spar,  pyrites,  or  selenite,  the  whole  arm  was  seized  with  such
violent  cramps  that  it  rose  up  quite  mechanically — just  like  a  frog's
thigh  through  which  a  galvanic  current  passes,  and  flung  far  away
the  body  held  in  the  hand,  and  then,  in  the  cataleptic  manner,  re-
mained outstretched  in  this  unnatural  position.  These  counter-tests
prove  that  the  unknown  effect  of  these  substances  is  exactly  the  same
in  catalepsy,  in  their  relation  to  each  other,  and  qualitatively  in  gen-
eral, as  in  the  awake  condition,  but  that  quantitatively  the  strength
of  the  action  is  considerably  exalted.  What  she  only  experienced  as
very  disagreeable  when  awake,  produced  violent  spasms  in  the  cata-
leptic condition.  When  she  recovered,  after  some  time,  from  these
conditions,  and  regained  her  consciousness,  she  invariably  complained
of  pain  and  deadness  in  one  arm  :  this  was  always  that  one  with
which  the  experiment  had  been  tried,  of  which  she  knew  nothing,
and  of  which  she  was  not  informed.  The  spasms  were,  therefore,
connected  with  violent  excitement  and  tension,  which  left  behind  a
state  of  exhaustion.  From  all  this  we  have  to  set  it  down,  that  all
solid  bodies,  in  contact  with  this  sensitive  person,  produced  reactions
upon  the  feelings  of  a  peculiar  kind,  differing  in  a  graduated  series
according  to  their  different  chemical  composition,

179.  In  the  course  of  these  matters,  I  often  made  the  striking  ob-
servation, that  certain  of  these  bodies  began  to  act,  to  set  the  hand

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  157

in  motion,  before  I  had  actually  dropped  them  into  it,  and  while  I
still  held  them  over  it.  Devoting  some  attention  to  this  phenome-
non, I  found  that  many  substances  only  required  to  be  laid  upon  the
bed  at  a  little  distance  from  the  hand,  in  order  to  produce  reaction
upon  the  patient.  Of  this  kind  were  sulphur,  lead  ore,  fluor  spar,
rock  salt,  cinnabar,  grain  tin,  selenite,  arsenic,  salammoniac,  prussiate
of  potash,  antimony,  telluric  acid,  wolfram,  apatite,  celestine,  white
lead  ore,  cyanide  of  potassium,  sulpho-cyanide  of  potassium,  orpi-
ment.  The  hand  lying  near  these  began  to  tremble;  this  soon  in-
creased, and  very  often  became  so  violent  that  it  approached  towards
the  substance,  then  dashed  this  away  or  became  fixed  in  a  tonic
spasm.  Here,  therefore,  was  distinctly  manifested  action  at  a  dis-
tance, even  of  amorphotis  bodies,  providing  only  that  they  were  of
high  electro-chemical  rank.

180.  To  try  how  these  reagents  would  act  upon  the  sensitive,
while  conscious  and  out  of  the  catalepsy,  I  made  the  same  experi-
ments the  next  morning,  at  the  hours  in  which  she  usually  was  in
the  greatest  degree  of  suffering.  All  the  above  substances  were
brought  near  her  hand,  but  made  no  impression  on  her,  even  none
whatever  after  repeated  trials.  She  herself  covered  her  closed  eyes,
to  be  quite  sure  whether  she  did  not  feel  anything  when  those  sub-
stances were  brought  as  close  as  possible  to  the  hand,  which  had
produced  contractions  and  cramps  the  evening  before  ;  but  it  was  in
vain  :  not  until  actual  contact  took  place  did  those  very  disagreeable
sensations  begin  which  I  have  described  above.  Catalepsy  itself  is
therefore  a  condition  which  exalts  in  a  disprop>ortionate  degree  the
sensitiveness  of  the  patient  to  certain  unknown  qualities  of  matter,  and
matter  possesses  some  hidden  quality,  by  means  of  which  it  affects
the  cataleptic  peculiarly  in  an  exalted  degree,  even  at  a  distance,  in  a
manner  analogous  to  that  in  which  it  affects  patients  in  the  awakened
condition,  free  from  the  catalepsy,  by  actual  contact.

181.  These  observations  soon  received  wider  development  in  Miss
Maix.  Most  of  the  substances  which  I  placed  in  her  hand  affected
her  as  warm  or  cold,  as  I  have  already  mentioned  ;  but  together  with
this  feeling,  which  she  only  received  at  the  touching  surface  by  actual
contact,  another  very  frequently  presented  itself,  and  this  was  a  simul-
taneous cooling,  like  that  cool  wind  which  was  diffused  from  many
of  the  bodies  I  tried  (resembling  that  from  the  positively  electric
touch  to  healthy  persons).  Sulphur  was  one  of  the  first  of  these
bodies.  When  I  laid  a  little  piece  in  her  hand,  she  felt  both  warmth
at  the  point  of  contact  and  a  coolness  which  spread  itself  all  over  the
hand  like  a  gentle,  cool  breeze.  This  soon  increased,  extended  from
the  hand  up  over  the  whole  arm,  the  face,  became  perceptible  in  the

158  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN   GENERAL.

other  hand,  and  also  seized  that  arm  ;  then  it  penetrated  through
the  dress,  and  was  felt  on  the  breast ;  at  last  it  flowed,  through  the.
coverlet,  all  over  the  lower  parts  of  the  body,  and  at  length  even  the
feet  felt  the  cool  emanation  which  proceeded  from  the  sulphur.

182.  I  laid  the  sulphur  in  an  open  drinking-glass  with  a  thin  bot-
tom, and  placed  this  in  the  hand  of  the  sensitive.  She  thus
grasped  the  sulphur  without  touching  it,  and  was  at  the  same  time,
at  all  events  in  my  expectation,  cut  off  from  its  direct  radiation.  The
drinking-glass,  when  previously  tested,  had  felt  warm,  without  any
emanation.  As  soon  as  the  sulphur  was  placed  in  it,  the  point  of
coutact  of  the  glass  and  the  hand  remained  warm,  as  before,  but  a
cool  wind  now  issued  from  the  glass,  on  all  sides,  diffusing  itself  over
the  hand.  It  flowed  from  all  parts  of  the  bottom  of  the  glass  which
were  not  in  contact  with  the  hand,  it  seemed  to  sink  down  from  the
sides,  and  to  flow  over  from  the  mouth  of  the  glass,  thus  streaming
down  upon  the  hand.  This  cooling  influence,  which  appeared  to
penetrate  through  the  glass,  was,  however,  much  more  agreeable  than
that  coming  immediately  from  the  bare  sulphur ;  finer,  as  if  more
transparent,  the  patient  said, — purer,  and  more  ethereal.  It  soon  pen-
etrated the  whole  hand,  made  it  cold,  then  stiff,  and  persisted  for
a  considerable  time  after  I  had  taken  the  glass  away.  It  had  at
the  same  time  been  felt  on  the  face,  the  other  hand,  tind  the  neigh-
boring parts.  A  piece  of  selenite,  substituted  for  the  sulphur,  pro-
duced exactly  the  same  effects.

183.  When  I  had  removed  the  sulphur  from  the  glass,  and  laid  it,
for  the  moment,  on  a  tube  standing  by  the  bed,  in  order  to  perform
another  experiment,  Miss  Maix  very  soon  said  to  me  that  she  could
still  trace  thence  the  presence  of  the  piece  of  sulphur.  I  then  re-
moved it  to  a  greater  distance,  about  a  yard  away  ;  she  still  perceived
its  presence.  Even  at  the  distance  of  two  yards,  she  could  detect
traces  of  the  coolness  from  a  piece  of  sulphur  not  larger  than  one's
finger.  I  now  prepared  a  surface  of  sulphur,  measuring  half  a  square
foot,  in  this  way  :  I  sent  for  six  of  the  sticks  of  sulphur  which  are
used  for  branding  wine-casks,  and  fastened  them,  side  by  side,  upon  a
board.  With  this  improvised  apparatus,  held  opposite  to  the  patient,
I  could  remove,  step  b}'  step,  the  whole  length  of  the  room,  nearly
eight  yards,  and  the  observer  still  felt — weakly,,  it  is  true,  but  dis-
tinctly— the  so-called  cool  wind  flowing  on  to  her  from  the  surface  of
the  sulphur.  At  this  distance  she  found  the  sensation  to  agree  ex-
actly with  that  which  was  produced  on  her  by  the  point  of  a  large
rock  crystal  or  small  open  magnet.  The  effect  of  the  last  two  was
somewhat  stronger,  but  tolerably  similar  in  its  kind.

184.  The  sulphur  produced  a  sensation   of  warmth,  both  in  the

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  159

immediate  contact  and  when  glass  was  interposed  :  I  therefore  sou g] it
for  some  other  substance  which  appeared  cold.  Concentrated  sul-
phuric acid  was  one.  When  given  to  her  in  a  glass,  she  felt  great  cold
at  the  point  of  contact ;  but  when  it  was  removed,  she  felt  the  cold
air  from  the  acid  at  a  distance  of  several  paces.  Nitric  acid  was  also
cold  in  contact :  its  action  at  a  distance  extended  half  as  far  again  as
that  of  an  equal  quantity  of  sulphuric  acid.

185.  I  had  still  to  seek  out  some  body  which  was  neither  warm
nor  cold,  but  indifferent,  when  lying  bare  upon  the  hand.  I  found
such  in  paraffine  and  cane  sugar.  Cold  wind  nevertheless  issued
from  both  ;  from  the  paraffine  to  two  yards  distance,  from  the  cane
sugar  about  one  yard.

186.  I  now  went  through  a  quantity  of  the  most  different  substan-
ces with  the  patient,  to  collect  confirmations  and  extensions  of  this
phenomenon.  A  flask  of  oxygen  gas  was  felt  hot,  especially  when
waved  about;  it  soon  made  the  hand  and  arm  stiff  and  cramped,  was
in  the  highest  degree  disagreeable,  and  spread  a  cool  wind  to  the  dis-
tance of  half  a  yard.  A  so  extremely  small  quantity  of  a  concentra-
ted substance,  in  which  we  yet  in  part  constantly  live,  had  here,  as
with  Miss  Nowotny,  such  a  strongly-marked  action  !  I  possessed  a
portion  of  chromic  acid  in  a  glass  tube  about  three  quarters  of  an
inch  thick,  sealed  up  at  both  ends.  She  found  it  burning  hot  through
the  hermetically  closed  glass,  but  diffusing  cool  wind  to  a  distance  of
several  yards.  Phosphorus  in  water  like  sulphur,  only  weaker,  cool-
ing at  three  yards.  Selenium  almost  like  sulphur,  radiating  coolness
to  six  yards  from  some  small  fragments.  Tellurium  behaved  very
like  sulphur,  but  gave  a  cold  wind  the  whole  length  of  the  room.
Charcoal  had  the  same  properties  in  disproportionately  weaker  degree.
An  empty  drinking-glass  felt  warm  to  the  hand,  without  any  wind.
When  covered  with  a  watch-glass,  however,  a  cool  breath  flowed
down  from  the  glass  over  the  hand  ;  when  the  watch-glass  was  re-
moved, the  cooling  again  ceased.  It  was  therefore  the  enclosed  air
which  produced  the  cold  to  the  hand.  I  modified  this  experiment
in  various  ways,  but  it  always  yielded  the  same  result.  The  oxygen
of  the  air  somewhat  warmed,  when  at  rest,  by  the  hand,  here  acquired
some  little  excess  of  free  force  over  the  outer  cold  and  moving  air;
and  since  the  oxygen  always  acted  strongly  here — nay,  is  even  far  the
most  active  of  all  bodies,  the  very  slight  elevation  of  temperature,  the
effect  of  which  we  have  already  become  acquainted  with  (§  1*77,)  was
sufficient  to  produce  a  perceptible  manifestation.

187.  Almost  all  the  metals  felt  warm  by  direct  contact,  but  at  the
same  time  all  diffused  emanations  of  what  the  patient  called  cold
wind.     They  follow  one  another,  in  the  order  of  decreasing  strength,

160  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.

about  in  this  manner  :  chromium,  osmium,  nickel,  iridium,  lead,  tin,
cadmium,  zinc,  titanium,  mercury,  palladium,  copper,  silver,  gold,  iron,
platinum.  A  plate  of  copper  of  about  half  a  square  yard  surface,
placed  near  the  bed  of  the  patient  and  opposite  to  her,  produced  a
lively,  cool,  fresh  wind,  which  gradually  appeared  to  flow  very  agreea-
bly through  the  whole  of  the  bed.  A  zinc  plate  of  equal  size  pro-
duced the  same  effect  less  strongly.  Still  weaker  was  the  action  of  a
lead  and  an  iron  plate.  But  when  I  placed  before  her  a  quicksilvered
mirror,  at  first  with  metal  coat  next  her,  this  worked  very  strongly
upon  the  observer ;  the  glass  side  of  the  mirror,  however,  acted  still
more  strongly,  the  emanations  from  this  being  again  that  fine,  alto-
gether agreeable  coolness,  which  we  became  acquainted  with  above
(§  182,)  when  the  effects  of  sulphur  and  selenite  were  conveyed
through  glass ;  the  patient  felt  herself  imbued  with  the  agreeable
feelings  from  head  to  foot.

188.  I  instituted  less  extensive  experiments  with  Miss  Sturmann,
but  the  few  were  decided  enough  to  afford  positive  confirmation.
Oxygen  gas  was  found  very  hot  in  contact ;  sulphur,  selenium,  iodine,
bismuth,  chloride  of  gold,  iridium,  oxide  of  gold,  and  morphia,  were
all  found  warm  in  contact  with  the  hand ;  antimony,  mercury,  zinc,
copper,  tellurium,  lunar  caustic,  bismuth,  gold,  lead,  tin,  and  iron,
appeared  cold  in  their  different  gradations.  Potass  gave  an  uncer-
tain result.  Crystals  of  calcareous  spar,  double  spar,  arragonite,  tour-
maline, and  rock  crystal,  were  polar,  warm  at  one  end  and  cool  at  the
other.  I  tested  with  her  surfaces  of  half  a  square  foot  of  sulphur,
lead,  zinc,  copper,  silver,  and  gold  ;  and  all  these  substances  she  found
to  radiate  either  hot,  warm,  tepid,  or  cool  emanations,  at  distances  of
a  yard  and  more.  Palladium  diffused  a  fine  cool  wind,  which  issued
from  it  on  all  sides.  When  I  went  to  her  during  attacks  of  catalepsy,
and  placed  in  her  hand  sulphur,  selenium,  tellurium,  mercury  in  a
glass,  antimony,  or  zinc,  she  struck  out,  as  Miss  Nowotny  had  done
under  similar  circumstances,  (§  178,)  and  threw  the  objects  away.
But  when  I  laid  them  near  her  hand,  without  touching  it,  this  began
to  tremble  and  shake,  and  gradually  became  contracted,  and  in  some
degree  cramped;  thus  exactly  as  in  Miss  Nowotny,  §  179.

189.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  found  a  cold  feeling  from  sulphur,  se-
lenium, pyrites,  antimony,  zinc,  lead,  Egyptian  jasper,  common  salt,
alum,  potash,  and  brucine  ;  on  the  other  hand,  platinum,  silver,  iron-
bar,  copper,  gold,  and  mercury,  warm.  A  cool  wind  was  diffused  to
her  from  some  distance  by  selenite,  fluor  spar,  pyrites,  alum,  tellu-
rium, lead,  common  granite,  and  gallic  acid.  The  wind  seemed  to
her  to  flow  out  from  all  sides  of  the  objects.

190.  Mr.  Schuh  found  fragments  of  sulphur  and  powder   of  it

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  161

equally  warm  on  contact.  Oxygen,  iodine,  bromine,  kupfer-nickel,
cyanide  of  gold,  cyanide  of  potassium,  he  found  warm,  and  quickly
exciting  head-ache,  which  gradually  increased  to  an  insupportable
degree.  He  arranged  a  small  number  of  minerals  according  to  his
feeling  of  the  progress  from  cold  to  warm,  in  the  following  order : —
pyrites,  fluor  spar,  calcareous  spar,  iron  glance,  staurolite,  rock  crys-
tal, tungsten,  Schorl,  sandy  calcareous  spar  from  Fontainebleau,
heavy  spar,  topaz,  common  salt,  analcim,  and  ftlspar.  On  sulphate
of  copper  and  carbonate  of  soda,  he  found  points  from  which  coolness
seemed  to  issue.  To  guard  himself  from  any  possible  delusion,  he
had  them  wrapped  in  paper,  and  then  tried  whether  he  could  find
the  cool  places  again  in  these  envelopes.  When  he  opened  them  he
was  fully  satisfied  that  he  had  found  out  exactly  the  same  points
again.  He  felt  distinct  coolness  to  issue  from  sticks  of  brimstone,  at
a  distance  of  ten  inches,  as  also  from  a  little  layer  of  oxalic  acid ;  on
the  other  hand,  warmth  flowed  to  a  similar  distance  from  leaves  of
eight  square  inches  surface  of  tin,  lead,  copper,  silver,  and  gold. —
Silver  and  gold  money  also,  and  steel  instruments,  were  warm  to  him,
when  held  at  some  distance  above  the  hand.  He  could  not  bear  to
stay  long  before  a  large  cheval  looking-glass,  extending  down  to  the
ground  ;  the  emanations  from  it  soon  affected  him  with  head-ache,
stupefaction,  then  with  pain  in  the  stomach  ;  when  he  went  to  the
back  of  the  mirror,  the  disagreeable  feelings  seized  him  much  more
quickly.  Two  hours  later  he  tried  the  same  before  a  large  mirror
attached  to  a  wall ;  all  the  same  discomfort  presented  itself  still
more  quickly  and  strongly.

191.  Mr.  Studer  surrounded  with  his  hollow  hand  a  number  of
substances,  or  held  them  near  to  his  eyes,  with  which  he  was  far
more  sensitive  than  with  his  hands,  since  he  could  well  distinguish
coolness  and  warmth.  In  this  way  he  felt,  without  contact,  coolness
from  sulphur,  pyrites,  selenite,  tellurium,  chloride  of  calcium,  sulphate
of  oxide  of  iron,  sulphuret  of  potassium,  oxalate  of  potass,  Seignette's
salt,  rock  crystal,  and  sugar  ;  warmth  at  a  distance  from  gold,  silver,
copper,  tin,  lead,  zinc,  potassium,  and  solution  of  potass.

The  joiner  Klaiber  felt  sulphur,  sulphuric  acid,  selenite,  rock  crys-
tal, &c,  cool  at  a  distance  of  ten  inches ;  on  the  other  hand,  gold,
silver,  copper,  tin,  zinc,  lead,  solution  of  potass,  &c,  warm.

I  led  many  other  persons  who  visited  me  to  these  objects,  and
made  some  of  them  go  through  them  by  way  of  test ;  in  the  end,  I
regarded  two  selected  substances  as  the  representatives  of  all  the  rest,
and  of  the  two  principal  classes  of  these,  namely,  sulphur  and  gold,
I  kept  by  me  a  surface  of  each  about  six  inches  square.  Every  one
whose  hand  I  placed  above  these  at  a  distance  of  about  three-quar-

162  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.

ters  of  an  inch,  declared,  almost  without  exception,  that  the  sulphur
evolved  coolness  and  the  gold  warmth.  I  have  permission  to  name
some  of  these  persons.  M.  Kotschy,  the  Well-known  oriental  travel-
ler, felt  a  very  marked  cold  from  the  sulphur  surface,  and  warmth
from  the  gold  leaf.  Without  knowing  anything  about  it,  he  com-
plained of  a  strange  pricking  which  the  sulphur  produced  in  his
hand,  although  he  did  not  touch  it.  Dr.  Fenzl,  the  well-known  dis-
tinguished botanist,  felt  the  distinction  of  cold  and  heat  between  the
two  bodies  very  clearly.  Mr.  Incledon,  an  English  private  teacher  in
Vienna,  not  only  experienced  the  same  in  a  very  lively  manner,  but
described  the  pricking  which  the  sulphur  gave  him  as  very  similar  to
the  sensation  when  the  hand  is  recovering  from  what  is  called  being
asleep,  and  gives  only  isolated,  scattered  pricks.

192.  Up  to  this  point  the  phenomena  exhibit  a  mass  of  variations;
but  among  these  inconstancies  something  very  constant  is  seen  to
exist.  The  alternation  of  heat  and  cold  appears  inconstant  in  sub-
stances of  one  kind  with  different  observers.  This  part  of  the  sub-
ject requires  a  special  investigation  to  clear  it  up  more  exactly.  I
therefore  exclude  it  from  the  present  treatise,  keeping  it  for  an  early
task,  and  here  only  lay  down  the  general  but  constant  fact,  that  all
the  substances  subjected  to  the  trial  reacted  with  apparent  differences
of  temperature  upon  the  sensitive  persons,  without  respect  to  being
cool  or  warm.

I  next  succeeded  in  bringing  these  phenomena  more  clearly  to  light
than  with  any  of  the  former  witnesses,  with  Miss  Reiche],  and  in
making  them  so  clear,  that  all  that  I  have  said  about  the  other  sen-
sitive persons  might  be  passed  over,  were  it  not  that  observations  of
the  kind  can,  from  their  nature,  only  acquire  stability  by  a  greater
number  of  repetitions  of  the  most  varied  kind.  Miss  Reichel  con-
sented to  come  and  pass  some  time  here  at  my  country  residence,
Castle  Reisenberg,  near  Vienna,  and  thus  gave  me  an  opportunity  of
carrying  out  numerous  experiments,  with  the  help  of  physical  ap-
paratus, in  a  much  more  regular  and  complete  manner,  than  could
be  done  in  strange  houses  and  sick-chambers,  often  under  very  incon-
venient circumstances.

193.  In  order  to  render  the  following  experiments  comprehensible,
I  must  give  some  little  account  of  the  localities  of  my  residence,  in
which  they  were  made.  The  castle,  as  it  is  called,  is  so  built,  that
in  front  there  are  two  rows  of  nine  rooms,  connected  with  one  another
by  doors  in  a  straight  line.  Each  of  the  rows  is  about  fifty-three
yards  long,  and  ends  at  both  sides  with  balconies,  each  of  which  are
about  ten  feet  broad,  giving  together  a  length  of  twenty  feet ;  so  that
since  the  doors  to  the  balconies  are  in  a  line  with  the  doors  of  the

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  103

rooms,  a  straight  space  of  nearly  sixty  yards  can  be  obtained  for  ex-
periment, in  a  place  where  the  air  is  calm.  Working  with  wires
which  require  to  be  held  at  some  distance,  the  length  of  the  line  may
be  doubled  by  means  of  the  other  series  of  rooms ;  thus  giving  con-
venient use  of  almost  120  yards.  1  placed  Miss  Reiche!  at  one  end
of  this  line,  and  began  to  experiment  with  her  on  the  extent  of  the
action,  at  a  distance,  of  the  substances.  With  a  small  horse-shoe
magnet  of  about  two  and  a  half  inches  length  of  limb,  it  was  neces-
sary for  me  to  remove  more  than  eight  feet  from  the  observer  before
the  action  upon  her  began  to  decrease.  With  another  horse-shoe
magnet,  eight  inches  long  in  the  limbs,  and  about  one  and  a  half
inch  broad,  I  was  obliged  to  remove  to  a  distance  of  twenty  yards
from  her.  A  heavy  nine-fold  horse-shoe,  which  at  that  time  would
support  about  forty  pounds,  required  me  to  go  thirty-three  yards
from  the  observer,  therefore  to  six  rooms  off.  Comparative  experi-
ments with  a  magnetic  rod  of  forty-two  inches  long,  afforded  as  its
distance  of  action  on  the  patient,  for  the  positive  (southward)  pole,
twenty-six  yards  ;  for  the  negative  (northward)  pole,  twenty  yards.

194.  In  the  next  place,  I  wished  to  examine  the  iron  rods  which
served,  in  a  wooden  case,  as  a  parallelogrammatic  armature  to  the
last-mentioned  magnet.  One  of  these  was  quite  like  the  magnetic
rod  itself  in  shape  and  size  ;  the  two  others  were  of  the  same  sec-
tional magnitude,  but  each  only  about  one-fifth  part  of  the  length. —
When  approached  to  iron-filings  they  exhibited  nothing,  and  behaved
merely  like  unmagnetic  iron  ;  but  the  sensitive  patient,  nevertheless,
felt  the  large  armature —

One  end  at 26  yards.

The  other  end  at 22       "

The  cross  pieces —

One  end  at 9  "

Both  together  at 17  "

The  other  end 12  "

Both  together 23  "

The  simple  armatures,  therefore,  acted  nearly  as  strongly  upon  the
patient  as  the  magnetic  rod  itself,  and  must,  therefore,  be  placed  al-
most in  the  same  rank  for  crystallic  force.  Any  delusion,  which
might  be  suspected  from  this  surprising  result,  is  out  of  the  question,
since  it  was  impossible  that  the  observer  could  distinguish  at  the
distance  whether  the  object  was  a  few  yards  nearer  or  further  off,
and  the  results  all  harmonize  under  a  common  point  of  view,  and  are
thus  controlled.

195.  Three  days  later  her  excitability  became  much  increased  with  the

164  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN   GENERAL.

advent  of  menstruation.  I  repeated  the  measurement  of  the  distance
at  which  the  patient  was  affected  by  the  magnet.  But  it  was  neces-
sary now  to  make  use  of  all  the  rooms  and  both  the  balconies,  and
after  I  had  used  up  the  sixty  yards  of  my  rectilinear  space,  she  felt
the  effect  of  the  large  nine-fold  magnet  still  so  vividly,  that  she  esti-
mated that  double  the  length  would  hardly  suffice  to  reach  the  limit
of  the  sensation.  I  now  tried  the  half-square  foot  .of  brimstone.  It
had  affected  Miss  Maix  at  a  distance  of  eight  yards,  but  the  length
of  the  chamber  did  not  allow  of  its  being  removed  to  a  greater  dis-
tance in  that  case.  Here,  however,  the  sulphur  now  produced  a  sen-
sation of  cooling  at  a  distance  up  to  forty  yards.  Astonished  at  this,
I  tried  a  copper  plate  of  about  four  square  feet  of  surface ;  the  effect
of  this  extended,  as  warmth,  to  thirty-one  yards.

An  iron  plate  of  six  square  feet  gave  warmth  at  a  distance  of  49  yards.

Lead  foil,  such  as  is  used  for  packing  tobacco,  six  square  feet  25  "

Tin  foil,  six  square  feet 23^-  "

Zinc  plate,  six  square  feet 21jJ  "

Silvered  paper,  pure,  one  square  foot 7f  "

Gold  paper,  pure,  three  square  feet 23  "

An  electropborus  cake  of  about  sixteen  inches  diameter 33  "

A  common  mirror  containing  about  ten  square  feet  of  surface  35^-  "

A  small  flask  of  oxygen  gas 6  "

A  quantity  of  other  things, — brass  objects,  porcelain  vessels,  glass
work,  stone  tables,  bright-colored  wooden  plates,  outspread  linen,
open  or  closed  flaps  of  doors,  chandeliers  on  the  ceiling  of  the  room,
entire  trees,  approaching  human  beings,  horses,  dogs,  cats,  pools  of
water,  especially  when  they  had  been  shone  on  a  short  time  by  the
sun  ;  in  short,  all  and  everything  that  presents  itself  as  material  in
space,  acted  upon  the  sensitive  girl,  flowing  either  as  a  cooling  or
warming  influence  on  her, — in  many  so  strong  that  it  attracted  her
attention  and  became  burdensome,  in  many  so  weak  that  when  she
had  become  accustomed  to  it  she  thought  no  more  about  it.

196.  This  extraordinary  phenomenon,  where  a  human  being  be-
came distinctly  aware  of  the  presence  of  a  bit  of  metal  plate,  a  couple
of  leaves  of  gold,  or  a  piece  of  tin  foil,  without  seeing  it,  at  a  distance
of  a  hundred  paces,  was  so  astonishing  to  me,  that  I  could  not  repress
my  great  amazement,  which,  however,  only  produced  a  laugh  from
Miss  Reichel,  who  had  been  accustomed  to  all  this,  without  interrup-
tion, during  her  whole  life.  All  my  sensitive  patients,  sick  and
healthy,  had,  without  exception,  experienced  the  same  sensations  and
perceptions,  under  favorable  circumstances,  more  strongly  or  more
weakly,  in  a  wider  or  narrower  extent,  according  to  the  subjective
excitability  of  the  individual.     Apoarently  all  this  was  nothing  else

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  165

than  a  manifestation  of  the  often-mentioned  so-called  crystallic  force
in  a — perhaps  modified — more  general  form,  and  the  conclusion
which  was  drawn  above  (§  17  8),  from  the  investigations  with  Miss
Nowotny  alone,  now  obtains  its  extension  and  validity  for  all  the  per-
sons subjected  to  the  trial : — namely,  that  all  solid  substances,  in
contact  with  sufficiently  sensitive  persons,  produce  reactionary  sensa-
tions of  a  peculiar  kind,  differing  in  degree  according  to  their  differ-
ent chemical  composition ;  that  these  reactions  are  principally  e.v-
2^ressed  in  apparent  differences  of  temperature,  such  as  cool  and  tepid,
with  which  a  sensation  advances  by  more  or  less  equal  steps  from
pleasant  and  disagreeable ;  and  that  finally  these  reactions  have  every
resemblance  to  the  sensations  which  are  produced  by  the  force  of  crys-
tals, magnets,  hands,  &c.

The  essential  matter  now,  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  identity
of  the  cause  with  the  crystallic  force,  is  to  investigate  the  rest  of  its
characteristics.

197.  Is  this  universally  distributed  force  transferable  from  one
body  to  others  ?  capable  of  being  accumulated,  as  I  have  often  ex-
pressed it,  without  by  any  means  intending  to  pledge  myself  to  regard
it  as  material  ?  I  made  a  strange  first  experiment,  which  led  to  tlie
answer  to  this  question,  on  Miss  Maix.  She  received  a  visit  from  her
sister,  Miss  Barbara  Maix.  The  latter  was  healthy  to  outward  appear-
ance, but  suffered  from  a  variety  of  nervous  affections.  She  took  the
hand  of  the  patient,  but  had  not  held  it  long  before  she  let  it  go
again,  suddenly,  with  a  shudder.  "  What  in  the  world  have  you  in
your  hand  that  pricks  me  so  V  she  cried.  There  was  nothing  there.
Immediately  before  this  the  patient  had  been  holding  a  piece  of  sul-
phur in  her  hand.  This  pricking  was  repeated  as  often  as  the  hand
was  reached  out.  And  when  it  gradually  died  away,  it  could  be  re-
newed, at  will,  by  the  patient  holding  a  piece  of  sulphur  again  in  her
hand  for  some  time.  This  shows  clearly  that  the  imaginary  pricking,
which  subsequently  presented  itself  very  often,  was  nothing  else  than
a  transfer  of  certain  unknown  qualities  of  the  sulphur  into  the  hand
which  held  it,  and  which  were  then  reflected  to  the  second  hand  pos-
sessing the  same  excitability  for  sulphur  and  similar  things.  When
I  myself  grasped  sulphur  for  some  time  in  my  hand,  and,  after  a
pause,  took  Miss  Maix's,  she  experienced  the  pricking  sensation  from
me,  and  recognised  what  I  had  previously  held.

198.  This  was  shown  more  distinctly  by  experiments  derived  by
reasoning  from  the  above.  I  placed  the  German  silver  conductor  in
Miss  Maix's  hand,  and  allowed  her  to  become  accustomed  to  it  in  the
usual  way.  I  then  made  her  lay  it  down  anywhere,  and  placed  a
piece  of  sulphur  upon   it.     After  some  minutes  I  again  took  this

166  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.'

away,  and  allowed  the  sensitive  girl  to  grasp  the  conductor  again.
She  immediately  recognised  acutely  the  feelings  which  the. sulphur
always  produced  in  her,  and  therefore  something  had  passed  from  the
sulphur  into  the  conductor,  became  fixed  there,  allowed  itself  to  be
carried  forward  by  the  conductor,  and  reacted  upon  the  hand  of  the
sensitive.

199.  The  experiments  with  Miss  Reichel  gave  exactly  similar  re-
sults. In  the  first  place,  I  repeated  with  her  the  hand  experiment
of  the  sisters  Maix,  without  telling  her  anything  about  it.  I  took  a
roll  of  sulphur  in  my  hand,  and  grasped  it  for  five  minutes.  I  then
laid  it  down,  and  with  this  hand  took  hold  of  that  of  Miss  Reichel.
I  had  not  held  it  long,  before  she  cried  out,  and  complained  that  my
hand  was  full  of  needles.  She  experienced  the  sensation  of  innumera-
ble fine  prickings  all  over  the  surfaces  in  contact, — an  exact  confirma-
tion of  Miss  Maix's  observation  Jby  the  hands  of  two  other  persons,
and  thus  a  striking  proof  of  the  extent  to  which  objective  reality  lies
at  the  bottom  of  these  phenomena.  This  hand  of  mine,  which  I
carefully  kept  from  touching  anything  else  in  the  meanwhile,  had  not
become  pure  again,  after  a  full  quarter  of  an  hour,  but  felt  prickly
still,  though  in  a  weaker  degree.  It  had  therefore,  received  an  accu-
mulation of  the  force  of  the  sulphur,  which  it  retained  for  a  consider-
able time,  and  which  it  lost  very  slowly.

I  placed  a  pair  of  steel  scissors,  which  she  simply  found  warm,
upon  some  sulphur,  and  let  her  take  hold  of  these  after  some  time.
The  scissors  had  now  become  cold,  and  pricked  the  hand  of  the  ob-
server, as  above.  I  took  a  glass  tube,  forty  inches  long,  which  was
very  slightly  warm  to  her,  touched  one  end  for  a  minute  with  sul-
phur, then  took  it  away  and  gave  the  other  end  to  the  sensitive  girl
to  feel.  She  now  found  this  very  cool ;  after  five  minutes,  I  let  her
take  hold  of  it  again ;  the  coolness  was  diminished,  but  still  existed
distinctly.  After  the  lapse  of  half  an  hour  the  glass  was  felt  again,
and  had  again  acquired  its  original  slight  degree  of  heat.  Sulphuric
acid  applied  in  a  similar  manner  to  another  glass  tube,  not,  however,
brought  immediately  in  contact  with  the  tube,  but  with  the  interposi-
tion of  the  side  of  the  glass  bottle,  had  the  same  effect.

Caffeine,  in  quantity  not  more  than  a  few  hundredths  of  a  grain,
placed  in  a  small  thin  glass  tube,  and  after  a  short  time  taken  out
again,  left  the  tube  considerably  warmed.

My  young  daughter  O.  laid  one  hand,  which  had  been' tested  pre-
viously, for  a  short  time  upon  a  number  of  layers  of  gold  paper,  and
then  gave  it  to  the  patient.  She  found  its  warmth  greatly  increased.
Felt  aa:ain  at  the  end  of  three  minutes,  she  found  half  of  the  warmth-

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  167

exciting  rause  still  in  the  hand  ;  but  after  seven  minutes  there  was
none,  and  the  hand  had  regained  its  natural  condition.

A  glass  full  of  powdered  gum,  itself  weakly  cooling,  was  placed
close  beside  a  bottle  containing  potassium  in  naphtha,  which  belonged
to  the  strongly  warming  bodies.  After  the  lapse  of  a  few  minutes  it
gave  a  sensation  of  alternating  cold  and  heat ;  it  seemed  as  if  a  part
of  the  gum  bad  been  overpowered  by  the  potassium,  while  the  rest,
perhaps  the  inner  portion,  was  not  affected  in  the  given  time.

Gold  leaf  always  gave  her  warmth  in  a  strong  degree.  I  pläeed
an  empty  glass  bottle,  which  by  itself  she  found  cool,  upon  the  gold
leaf, — pure,  be  it  understood,  not  the  alloyed,  which  generally  occurs
in  commerce.  I  turned  it  about  on  all  sides,  from  time  to  time,  to
make  contact  at  all  parts.  I  then  made  the  observer  grasp  the  bottle.
She  no  longer  found  it  cool,  but  very  remarkably  warm.  The  »'old
leaf  had  inoculated  the  glass  with  its  warming  quality.

I  held  selenite,  itself  cold,  for  some  time  in  my  right  hand  ;  it  did
not  notably  alter.  Enclosed  in  my  left  fingers,  it  acquired  the  power
of  giving  out  warmth.  Oxide  of  copper  "in  a  glass  bottle,  cold  by
itself,  underwent  a  similar  change  in  my  left  hand.

I  placed  potassium  in  naphtha,  warm  by  itself,  in  close  contact
with  a  quantity  of  fragments  of  sulphur.  After  some  minutes  it  had
become  perfectly  cold,  as  cold  now  as  it  had  been  warm  before.  The
sulphur  had  therefore  not  merely  removed  the  apparent  heat  of  one
of  the  strongest  bodies,  but  so  overpowered  it  that  in  addition  it  had
implanted  in  it  its  own  peculiar  coldness.  This  accumulation  also
manifested  a  duration  of  several  minutes  after  the  separation.

The  German-silver  conductor,  itself  slightly  warm,  was  placed  in
common  salt.  After  a  short  pause  it  came  from  it  cold.  Fluor  spar
was  then  laid  upon  it ;  this  made  it  still  colder.  I  next  covered  it
with  abundance  of  bits  of  sulphur  for  a  minute  ;  again,  when  it  had
been  taken  out,  it  presented  an  increase  of  its  coldness.

Finally,  a  roll  of  sulphur  was  applied  against  potassium  for  a  short
time.  After  the  separation  it  was  observably  less  cold.  Left  longer
in  contact  it  became  cold  and  warm,  simultaneously,  in  different
parts.  Then,  laid  upon  my  left  hand  for  some  time,  it  completely
lost  all  its  coolness  ;  and  when  I  at  last  enveloped  it  in  the  gold
leaves,  and  kept  it  there  for  a  while,  the  roll  of  sulphur  even  be-
came hot.

200.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  always  found  copper  rather  tepid.  One
day,  however,  that  I  gave  it  her  to  try,  she  said  that  she  felt  it  cool-
ing. This  was  in  opposition  to  the  earlier  observations  ;  I  therefore
waited  a  moment  to  seek  what  might  be  the  cause.  The  copper  was
a  thin,  smooth  plate,  and  lay  upon  a  polished  table  of  walnut-wood.

168  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.

I  made  her  feel  the  table,  on  different  parts  of  the  leaf,  of  the  edge,
and  of  the  feet ;  she  found  it  cool  in  all  parts.  I  took  the  copper
plate  away,  and  left  it  for  a  while  on  a  seat  cushioned  with  silk  stuff.
When  she  again  took  hold  of  the  copper  she  found  it  tepid,  as  all
other  copper  always  was.  I  now  placed  it  on  the  table  again  ;  at  the
end  of  five  minutes  she  found  it  cold  again.  I  stretched  the  copper
between  the  cheeks  of  a  little  vice  ;  after  a  short  interval  it  felt  warm
again.  Whenever  it  was  brought  back  on  the  table  for  a  little  while
it  became  cold  again.  It  was  evident  that  the  great  mass  of  the  cold-
reacting  table  overpowered  the  magnetic  heat  of  the  weak  copper
plate,  and  the  latter  became  cool,  by  accumulation  of  charge,  every
time  it  was  involved  for  a  certain  period,  in  the  sphere  of  action  of
the  walnut-wood.  By  a  great  number  of  experiments,  therefore,  I
established,  that  the  'property  of  bodies  here  in  question  may  be  trans-
ferred from  one  to  another  by  mere  contact,  exactly  like  the  so-called
crystallic  force.

201.  We  have  already  become  acquainted  with  the  power  of  act-
ing at  a  distance,  in  the  magnet,  crystals,  the  fingers,  the  heavenly
bodies,  &c,  exercised  by  the  force  under  discussion  ;  we  have  even
seen  matter  in  general  exercise  it  on  the  cataleptic  Misses  Nowotny,
Sturmann,  and  Atzmannsdorfer  ;  also  on  Miss  Maix  and  Miss  Reichel
in  the  free,  conscious  state  :  the  question  now  arises,  whether  the
force  is,  in  like  manner,  capable  of  transference  from  one  body  to  an-
other, at  distances,  without  contact  ?  To  decide  this,  I  placed  beside
the  German-silver  conductor  a  roll  of  sulphur  of  equal  length,  at  a
distance  of  three-quarters  of  an  inch,  without  contact  at  any  point.
After  a  few  minutes  the  sulphur  was  removed,  and  the  conductor
grasped  by  Miss  Reichel.  It  was  warm  before,  but  now  she  felt  it
perfectly  cold,  as  much  so  as  if  it  had  been  in  immediate  contact  with
the  sulphur.  At  the  end  of  four  minutes  it  still  retained  almost  half
its  coolness,  which  did  not  wholly  disappear  under  a  good  quarter  of
an  hour.

Sulphate  of  copper,  broken  small  and  in  paper,  was  laid  beside  the
broad  40-inch  glass  tube,  at  the  distance  of  ten  inches,  all  contact
being  avoided.  In  five  minutes  it  was  taken  away,  and  the  tube
taken  hold  of  at  both  ends  by  the  sensitive  observer.  In  spite  of  this
relatively  considerable  distance,  she  found  the  glass  to  have  been
rendered  cool  by  the  sulphuric  acid  salt ;  and  this  persisted  several
minutes.

I  learnt  from  these  experiences  that  I  must  avoid  using  my  own
hands  in  these  delicate  experiments,  on  account  of  their  magnetic
power,  to  guard  against  any  complication  ;  at  the  same  time  I  recog-
nised here  hints  for  the  explanation  of  many  anomalies  in  my  pre-

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  169

vious  researches,  wherein  my  sensitive  observers  so  frequently  did  not
agree  together  in  their  statements  of  heat  and  cold  :  it  might  often
have  been  my  own  hands  which  altered  the  natural  condition  of
bodies,  by  conveying  their  own  force  on  to  them.  On  this  account  I
let  my  daughter  H.  place  her  hand  in  that  of  Miss  Reichel,  and  ac-
customed the  latter  to  it ;  then  held  the  same  hand  over  a  surface  of
sulphur,  without  contact.  At  the  end  of  two  minutes  she  offered  it
to  the  observer.  That  needle-like  pricking  which  actual  contact  with
sulphur  had  produced  in  all  the  other  cases,  immediately  presented
itself  in  the  hand,  together  with  coolness.  The  same  experiment  was
made  with  the  same  results  by  my  daughter  0.  The  patient  expe-
rienced the  pricking  from  the  hand  of  the  little  girl  that  had  been
waved  over  sulphur,  at  the  end  of  half  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  I  pass
over  other  similar  experiments.

202.  This  proves,  that  the  transfer  of  the  often  mentioned  essential
force  from  one  body  to  another  is  effected  without  contact  by  the  mere
approximation  of  them  toward  each  other.

203.  The  conduction  of  it  through  other  bodies  is  certainly  suffi-
ciently demonstrated  by  all  the  preceding  experiments  ;  but  I  will
here  insert  a  couple  of  remarkable  confirmatory  examples.  I  con-
nected Miss  Reichel  with  a  copper  plate  by  an  iron  wire  thirty-three
yards  long  and  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  thick,  she  holding  the  other
extremity  in  her  hand.  I  brought  successively  on  to  the  copper
plate,  zinc,  tin,  lead,  gold,  mercury,  potassium,  potash,  potash  ley,
and  minium  ;  all  delivered  warmth  to  the  hand  through  the  plate
and  along  the  wire  after  the  lapse  of  half  a  minute  ;  on  the  contrary,
sulphur,  carbon,  oxalic  acid,  aqua  regia,  sulphate  of  iron,  and  com-
mon salt,  gave  cold  in  the  same  space  of  time.  The  sensation  like-
wise began  to  vanish  after  the  interval  of  half  a  minute,  when  the
objects  were  removed,  and  required  several  minutes  for  its  complete
disappearance.  Sulphur  gave  a  sensation  of  cold  when  only  brought
into  the  neighborhood  of  this  long  conductor.  The  German-silver
conductor  alone,  laid  upon  the  copper  plate,  gave  warmth  ;  but  when
I  previously  kept  it  for  a  few  minutes  upon  sulphur,  and  then  brought
it  upon  the  copper  plate  again  with  my  right  hand,  it  gave  a  persist-
ing cold.  I  rolled  up  an  empty  glass  bottle,  which  by  itself  delivered
slight  cold  (different  glasses  always  varied  between  cold  and  warm),
for  a  few  minutes  in  gold  leaf;  freed  from  this,  and  brought  with  my
left  hand  on  to  the  copper  plate,  it  delivered  lively  warmth  to  the
distant  hand  of  the  observer.  Taking  a  large  glass  tube  forty  inches
long,  and  wide  enough  to  admit  the  band,  I  introduced,  one  after
another,  a  quantity  of  chemical  preparations  of  the  most  varied  kinds,
solid  and  fluid,  together  with  the  glass  bottles  containing  them.     The

170  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.

sensitive  patient  described,  as  occurring  at  the  other  end  of  the  tube,
which  she  held  in  her  hand,  sensations  exactly  the  same,  in  order,  as
those  I  had  marked  down  from  her  in  the  earlier  experiments,  with
the  immediate  contact  of  them  with  the  hand.  In  another  way,  I
gave  her  a  thin  glass  stirring-rod  like  a  thermometer  tube,  but  solid,
between  her  fingers,  and  made  her  dip  this,  in  order,  into  the  con-
tents of  many  glass  bottles  of  amorphous  chemical  preparations  of  all
kinds.  Her  account  of  the  sensations  produced  by  the  glass  rod  in
her  fingers,  agreed,  word  for  word,  with  those  on  the  broad  glass
tube  ;  so  that  a  rod  of  this  kind  affords  the  most  convenient  of  all
means  for  the  purpose,  as  dry,  fluid,  volatile  or  bad-smelling  things
can  be  tested  with  it,  as  to  their  magnetic  value,  rapidly  and  without
the  least  difficulty.  Miss  Maix  also  furnished  me  with  a  few  proofs
referable  here.  I  had  connected  a  copper  plate  with  her  hand,  by
means  of  a  copper  wire.  As  I  placed  upon  its  surface,  partly  imme-
diately, partly  in  bottles,  sulphur,  sulphuric  acid,  selenium,  sugar,
silk,  wet  linen,  &c,  she  described,  successively,  the  same  sensations
as  she  had  experienced  when  she  had  the  same  substances  immedi-
ately in  her  hand.

My  daughter  Ottone  gave  one  hand  to  Miss  Reichel,  and  held  the
other  over  a  surface  of  sulphur,  without  touching  it.  After  the  lapse
of  half  a  minute  the  latter  found  the  hand  of  the  former  become  cold ;
and  at  the  end  of  a  whole  minute  the  pricking  sensation  from  sul-
phur, already  often  mentioned,  made  its  appearance.  An  hour  later
this  experiment  was  repeated,  with  the  modification  that  the  hand
was  held  over  a  number  of  layers  of  gold  leaf  instead  of  sulphur,
this  time  also  with  careful  avoidance  of  contact.  At  the  end  of  about
half  a  minute  again,  a  sensation  of  warmth  passed  from  the  hand  of
the  healthy  person  into  that  of  the  patient,  which  continued  to  in-
crease for  a  minute,  and  then  remained  steady.

204.  All  this  testifies  that  the  force  which  emanates  from  amor-
phous substances  of  all  kinds,  is  conducted  and  carries  its  efficiency
with  it  through  matter  of  every  kind,  even  throxigh  living  human  be-
ings ;  nay,  that  this  holds  good  not  only  in  case  of  actual  contact,
bat  even  with  mere  approximation  of  one  substance  to  another.

205.  Capacity  of  accumulation,  coercive  power,  &c,  need  no  fur-
ther illustration,  since  these  are  already  discussed  by  implication  in
the  foregoing.

206.  Consequently  only  the  luminous  phenomena  remain  to  be
tested.  These  have  actually  shown  themselves  convincingly  enough.
When  I  undertook  experiments  on  the  luminosity  of  crystals  in  the
dark,  with  Miss  Reiche],  she  led  me  to  notice,  by  remarks  upon  the
bolts  of  the  doors,  the  fastenings  of  the  windows,  and  other  metallic

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL  171

objects  of  which  she  spoke,  that  she  saw  all  such  things.  When  I
brought  a  freshly-cleaned  copper  vessel  to  her,  I  accordingly  heard
that  she  saw  it  luminous  all  over,  and  that  a  fine  green  nebulous
flame  waved  immediately  above  it,  streaming  out  beyond  the  borders
of  the  copper.  I  at  once  undertook  a  long  investigation  of  this,
which  I  continued  and  repeated  for  confirmation  at  different  times,
partly  in  Vienna,  partly  here,  in  my  summer  residences.  From  this
it  resulted  that  all  metals,  generally  speaking  all  simple  bodies,  with-
out any  crystalline  condition,  appeared  luminous  in  sufficient  dr.vk-
ness  to  the  eyes  of  the  highly  sensitive  ;  that  compound  bodies  do
also,  but  weaker  and  weaker  the  more  complex  they  become.  To
test  this  on  different  sides,  I  brought  a  great  number  of  things  into
the  dark,  one  after  another.  Miss  Reichel  saw  the  substance  of  most
metals  with  a  red  luminosity,  as  if  glowing ;  some  of  them  white,
some  yellow.  Over  all  waved  a  delicate  flame,  which  moved  back-
wards and  forwards  over  them,  was  of  different  color  in  different
metals,  but  was  definite  for  each,  and  could  be  driven  about  by  a
current  of  air  caused  by  the  hand  or  the  breath.  The  more  complex
bodies  only  exhibited  flames  at  their  points,  when  they  were  crystal-
lized, otherwise  they  were  mostly  either  surrounded  by  a  luminous
vapor,  or  even  only  themselves  bright  and  luminous,  as  if  glowing.
The  darkness  gave  me  an  excellent  opportunity  of  controlling  the
statements  rigidly.  I  brought  to  her  in  the  dark,  at  different  times,
different,  and  then,  alternately,  again  the  same  substances,  which  no
one  could  recognise  in  the  dark,  and  it  was  necessarily  clearly  mani-
fest in  this  way  whether  her  later  statements  agreed  with  the  earlier.
This  was  perfectly  the  case  in  reference  to  the  luminous  phenomena
generally ;  their  strength  and  their  form  ;  also  on  the  simple  sub-
stances, in  reference  to  their  color ;  but  not  quite  so  in  the  more
compound.  The  color  of  the  luminosity  appears,  like  that  of  the
flame  of  combustion,  to  depend  upon  the  quality  of  the  matter  from
which  it  issues,  and  upon  every  significant  intermixture.  Miss  Reichel
always  found  the  following  substances  alike,  as  often  as  I  held  them
before  her  in  the  dark  : —

Copper  plate,  red  luminous,  with  green  flames  over  the  whole  surface,  particu-
larly at  the  borders,  flowing  over  the  breadth  of  three-quarters  of  an  inch  to  an
inch  and  a  half,  the  flames  rolling  in  from  the  middle  toward  both  sides.

Iron  plate,  red  luminous,  the  flame  of  the  entire  surface  rolling  in  toward  the
middle,  and  somewhat  elevated  there,  half  a  hand  high,  brilliantly  playing  in  red,
blue,  and  white.

Bismuth,  red  luminous  flames,  and  marginal  flames  bluish-red.

Zinc  plates,  pale  red  luminous,  the  flame  opaque-white,  reddish-blue  at  the
points,  jagged  at  the  edges,  uniting  into  a  tuft  at  the  corners.

Tin,  cuttings  of  tin  foil,  flames  dirty  bluish-white,  streaming  out  weakly  at  the
edges,  with  tufts  at  the  corners.

172  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.

Lead,  blue  luminous,  flame  dull  blue,  little  weaker  than  the  tin  at  the  borders,
■without  tufts  at  the  corners.

Cadmium,  white,  somewhat  bluish  flame.

Cobalt,  weak  blue.

Silver,  upon  paper  and  burnished,  white  luminous,  flame  white,  a  finger's
length  high,  not  rolling  together,  the  same  at  the  borders  as  in  the  middle,  with-
out tufts  at  the  comers.

Gold,  upon  paper  and  burnished,  white  luminous,  flames  white,  two  fingers'
length  high,  not  rolling  together,  border  like  the  middle,  no  corner  tufts.

Palladium,  strongly  blue  luminous,  with  a  pale  blue  vapor.

Platinum,  white  luminous,  with  pale-blue  flames.

Antimony,  white  luminous,  with  bluish  flames.

Rhodium,  red,  with  pale  yellow.

Tellurium,  red  luminous,  white  at  the  border,  no  flames.

Osmium,  red  luminous,  with  greyish  red  vapor.

Mercury,  red  luminous,  with  strong  white  flames  and  white  vapor.

Chromium,  green,  passing  into  yellow.

Nickel,  red,  rising  up  to  greenish  yellow.

Titanium,  brilliant  red,  passing  into  violet.

Arsenic,  blue-red,  pale  red  vapor.

Lidium,  blue  luminous,  flames  reddish  blue.

Sodium,  red  luminous,  flames  dull  white,  towards  lilac.

Potassium,  red  luminous,  yellow-red  on  the  cut  surface,  flames  large.

Charcoal,  red  luminous,  red  marginal  flames.

Diamond,  flames  white,  blue  internally,  upper  points  red.

Iodine,  red  luminous,  when  shaken  passing  in  some  degree  into  green.

Selenium,  bluish  red,  flames  blue.

Sulphur,  flames  blue,  with  opaque  white  vapor.

A  glass  box  set  with  silver  fittings  appeared  to  the  observer  as  if
full  of  fire  at  night ;  white  flames  flowed  from  the  whole  frame-work
all  over  the  surface.

All  these  results  I  found  always  the  same  in  numerous  trials,  when
the  darkness  was  perfect :  when  this  was  imperfect,  however,  slight
variations  of  the  appearances  occurred,  bluish  red  became  blue,  and
the  like.  On  the  other  hand,  the  colored  luminosities  did  not  agree
so  completely  in  compound  bodies,  often  even  varying,  and  therefore
I  can  give  no  account  of  them  until  I  have  subjected  them  to  fresh
and  more  fundamental  trials.  In  particular,  the  same  alkaloids,  pre-
pared by  different  hands,  often  presented  essentially  different  colors
in  their  light,  which  apparently  depended,  therefore,  upon  their  dif-
ferent degrees  of  purity.

In  general  these  lights  and  flames  had  always  something  of  elec-
trical light,  so  that  the  color,  which  like  the  latter,  varied  about  be-
tween red,  blue,  green,  and  yellow,  was  frequently  very  difficult  to
determine  with  accuracy.  It  had  every  resemblance  of  aspect  to  the
magnetic  and  crystallic  flame,  and  was  regarded  by  the  observer  only
as  a  lower  degree  of  those  to  her  so  well-known  appearances,  to
which  she  had  been  accustomed  from  her  childhood,  and  of  which

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  173

she,  at  the  advice  of  her  dead  mother,  had  hitherto  nevgr  communi-
cated anything  to  any  one,  for  fear  of  being  regarded  by  other  peo-
ple as  supernatural  and  haunted.

207.  It  follows,  consequently,  that  all  fluid  and  solid,  therefore  all
bodies  of  any  density  generally,  give  out  emanations  of  light  in  the
form  of  flames,  appearance  of  glowing,  and  vaporous  luminosity,  in
the  same  manner  as  the  magnet,  crystals,  <fec.  <fcc.

208.  In  order  to  complete  these  examinations  of  the  whole  of  ma-
terial things,  it  was  necessary  to  turn  a  glance  to  the  starry  heavens.
We  have  seen  in  the  fourth  treatise  the  important  influence  exer-
cised by  the  sun  and  moon  ;  this  necessarily  led  me  to  the  idea  of
investigating  whether  all  the  stars  which  shine  in  the  heavens,  collec-
tively, were  wholly  without  action,  and  whether  some  weaker  display
of  force,  proportionate  to  the  distance,  which  possibly  might  be  de-
tected in  a  smaller  degree,  might  not  perhaps  correspond  to  the
mighty  influence  exercised  on  our  planet  by  the  former  larger  and
more  proximate  heavenly  bodies.

209.  At  the  windows  of  my  dwelling,  which  afforded  an  uninter-
rupted prospect  toward  the  east  and  south  of  from  twenty  to  thirty
miles,  where  I  placed  Miss  Reichel  at  night,  when  the  sky  was  clear,
she  at  once  recognised  an  undoubted  influence,  as  I  had  conjectured.
I  repaired  with  her  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  in  the  middle  of
October,  to  the  neighboring  free  mountain  heights,  where  there  was
a  wide  prospect  all  round.  There  was  no  moon,  and  the  air  was
perfectly  still.  She  found  coolness  to  come  to  her  from  some  parts
of  the  sky,  and  warmth  from  others.  This  was  repeated  on  different
nights  and  at  different  hours  ;  soon  after  sunset,  then  at  nine  o'clock,
p.  m.,  twice  at  midnight,  once  in  the  morning  about  four  o'clock,  and
just  before  sunrise.  Generally  speaking,  she  stated  that  soon  after
sunset,  namely  at  six  o'clock,  the  direction  toward  the  west  was
most  vividly  cold  ;  but  just  before  sunrise,  likewise  at  six  o'clock,
the  direction  toward  the  east ;  that  long  after  sunset,  about  nine
o'clock,  north  and  north-west  were  the  cooler,  south  and  south-east
the  warmer  parts  of  the  sky ;  but  some  time  before  sunrise,  about
four,  A.  m.,  north  and  north-east  were  the  cooler,  south  and  south-
west the  warmer  directions  ;  lastly,  that  at  midnight  the  north  was
cool,  the  south  warm,  but  east  and  west  so  nearly  of  an  equal  appa-
rent temperature,  that  the  east  could  only  be  felt  a  little  warmer  than
the  west.  An  observation  which  was  to  have  been  made  between
two  and  three,  a.  m.,  but  which  did  not  take  place,  would  most  likely
have  given  east  and  west  pretty  nearly  of  equal  temperature.

210.  This  alternation  of  the  results  was  evidently  an  effect  of  the
place  of  the  sun.     We  know  from  the  fourth  of  these  treatises,  that

174  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.

the  rays  of  the  sun  give  out  cold  wherever  it  was  nearest ;  the  west
in  the  evening,  the  east  in  the  morning,  the  greatest  coolness  always
existed  ;  at  midnight,  when  the  sun  was  in  its  lower  culmination,
the  difference  was  almost  effaced  ;  but  there  still  remained  some  af-
ter-effect of  the  sun  in  the  west,  which  it  left  behind  up  to  that  time,
and  a  complete  neutralization  was  not  to  be  expected  before  three
o'clock,  a.  m.  That  this  alternation  between  east  and  west  is  really
to  be  ascribed  to  no  other  cause,  is  proved  by  the  observation  that
these  sensations  developed  themselves  just  in  the  same  way  when  the
sky  was  covered  with  clouds.  In  all  these  cases,  however,  the  north
remained  constantly  cold,  the  south  warm  ;  and  when  I  questioned
her  minutely  as  to  the  direction  of  the  two,  she  always  pointed  with
her  hand  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic,  and  never  of  the  astrono-
mical meridian.  In  particular,  she  asserted  that  a  clearly  defined
streak  of  the  greatest  warmth  was  to  be  detected  towards  the  south,
projecting  itself  from  the  remaining  space.  Even  at  noon  she  found
the  direction  of  the  magnetic  south  the  warmest,  and  the  diametri-
cally opposite,  that  is,  the  north,  the  coolest  of  all  the  points  of  the
compass.  This  affords  a  clear  index  how  these  results  are  to  be  in-
terpreted in  a  theoretical  examination  of  them.

211.  But  these  half  telluric,  half  solar  phenomena,  must  not  be
confounded  with  the  astral,  with  which  they  are  complicated  in  our
sensations.  When  I  stood  at  night  with  Miss  Reiche],  under  a  bright
starry  sky,  she  described  the  milky  way  as  affecting  her  distinctly
with  coolness  ;  as  also  the  group  of  the  Pleiades,  the  region  of  the
Great  Bear,  and  others,  and  the  broad  starry  vault  in  general  as
cooling ;  particular  stars  alone,  on  the  contrary,  warm  :  these  were
always  stars  of  the  first  magnitude  ;  and  when  I  examined  her  about
them  with  the  dyalite,  I  found  Saturn  with  his  rings,  Jupiter  with
his  four  Satellites,  Venus, — in  short,  in  every  case  a  planet.  Experi-
ence, therefore,  shows  that  all  stars  with  reflected  light  appear  warm
to  the  sensitive,  while  all  others  with  proper  light  are  cool.  This
ranges  itself,  then,  very  beautifully  with  the  experiments  made  be-
fore, when  the  moon  gave  warmth,  the  sun  (that  is,  the  fixed  star,)
coolness.

212.  It  was  even  possible  to  warrant  this  by  certain  re-actions.
Gazing  at  Jupiter,  as  at  all  brilliant  light,  was  unbearable  to  her  for
any  length  of  time.  Of  all  the  stars  together,  she  said  that  they  acted
upon  her  in  combination  like  a  rather  weak  magnet,  not  merely  in
front,  but  behind,  upon  the  spine  ;  principally,  however,  on  the  head,
where  she  was  most  highly  sensitive  to  all  magnetic  influences.  I
connected  a  copper  plate  of  about  a  foot  square  with  a  long  brass
wire,  which  led  to  the  sensitive,  whom  I  had  shut  up  in  darkness  on

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  175

the  staircase.  The  wire  gave  out  at  its  extremity,  from  the  copper
and  from  itself,  a  small  flame ;  but  when  I  let  the  light  of  the  stars
fall  on  the  copper  plate,  without  making  this  known  to  the  patient,
she  informed  me  after  a  short  pause  of  the  rising  of  a  slender  flame
to  the  height  of  more  than  a  span.  It  rose  and  sank  again  as  I  placed
the  copper  plate,  in  the  starlight,  or  removed  it.  When  I  took  a
zinc  plate  instead  of  the  copper  plate,  I  had  the  same  results  with  the
same  alternation,  only  weaker.  The  plate  furnished  corresponding
effects  upon  the  feeling.  The  wire  carried  from  it  became  cooler,
when  the  starlight  fell  upon  it,  more  when  no  large  planet  could  shine
upon  the  plate,  less  when  one  of  these  partly  neutralized  the  collec-
tive action  of  the  stars.

In  these  observations  there  is  nothing  which  should  be  very  sur-
prising after  the  contents  of  the  preceding  treatises  ;  but  they  are
certainly  a  beautiful  voucher  on  the  one  hand  for  confirmation  of
that  which  we  have  already  observed  in  the  sun  and  moon  ;  on  the
other  hand,  of  the  fact  that  the  whole  material  world,  even  that  ex-
ternal to  the  earth,  acts  upon  us  with  just  that  same  force,  which  dis-
played itself  as  existing  in  all  terrestrial  matter  :  finally,  that  we  stand
in  connection  with  the  universe  by  a  new,  hitherto  unsuspected  recipro-
cation ;  that  consequently  the  stars,  also,  are  actually  not  altogether
without  influence  upon  our  sublunary,  perhaps  even  practical  world,
and  the  proceedings  of  many  heads.

213.  Thus  we  arrive  at  the  concluding  result  of  this  treatise  : — In
the  same  manner  as  the  capacity  dwells  in  the  magnet,  crystals,  or-
ganic beings,  the  sun's  rays,  heat,  electricity,  &c,  which  have  been
recognised  as  special  sources,  to  display  characters  of  an  unknown
force  common  to  them,  so  has  this  force  its  seat  in  all  the  investigated,
most  dissimilar,  and  thus  doubtless  also  in  all  even  aeriform  amor-
phous  matter,  the  heavenly  bodies  themselves,  included,  and  takes  its
place,  therefore,  as  a  perfectly  universal  and  all-pervading  force  of
Nature.  In  the  first  ten  source-,  we  see  it  appear  concentrated  in
isolated  points  of  the  material  tvorld  ;  here,  however,  we  recognise
it  as  an  universal  adjunct  of  all  matter  in  variable,  unequal  distribu-
tion.

214.  Whether  now  this  natural  force  extending  over  the  universe
is  a  totally  new,  or  a  hitherto  hidden  modification  of  a  known  one,  or
whether  it  is  a  complication  of  some  of  the  already  known,  in  a  still
uncomprehended  collocation — this,  and  much  else  of  importance  that
still  remains  in  question,  I  leave  untouched  for  the  present.  I  have
now  arrived  at  the  point,  where  all  the  sources  from  which  I  have
seen  it  evolved,  are  combined  and  included.  In  the  succeeding  trea-
tises, I  shall  compare  them  one  with   another,  and  strive  to  develope

176  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  W  GENERAL.

them  in  many  relations  which  I  have  as  yet  only  partially  indicated  ;
higher  judges  will  then  perhaps  undertake  to  pronounce  judgment  on
the  whole.

215.  In  conclusion,  I  will  further  venture  to  make  an  effort  toward
the  removal  of  the  difficulties  of  language  connected  with  subjects  of
this  kind,  and  with  which  I  have  manifestly  been  struggling  all
through  this  work.  In  the  cases  where  the  force,  now  in  question,
has  been  seen  to  present  itself,  in  isolated  manifestations,  during  the
last  seventy  years,  it  has  had  the  greatest  variety  of  names  applied
to  it,  almost  all  of  which  have  been  derived  from  certain  resemblan-
ces or  complications  with  magnetism.  It  has  always  been  regarded
as  more  or  less  identical  with  the  latter.  But,  from  what  I  have  un-
folded, it  is  seen  that  it  has  no  more  identity  with  this,  than  magnetism
has  with  crystallization,  than  crystallization  with  electricity,  electri-
city with  affinity,  than  heat  with  light,  «fee.  We  do,  indeed,  suspect
the  final  unity  of  all  these  dynamics  in  the  ultimate,  higher  instance  ;
but  at  present  we  are  far  distant  from  this  desired  goal  of  natural
science ;  we  cannot  even  fill  up  the  gap  which  exists  between  mag-
netism and  electricity,  which  appears  so  small  that  one  imagines  that
one  can  reach  with  the  hands  from  one  side  to  the  other.  But  so
long  as  an  empty  iron  rod,  which  will  not  support  an  iron-filing,  dis-
plays as  much  power  in  regard  to  the  force,  of  which  we  are  treat-
ing, as  a  powerful  steel  magnet  of  equal  size,  (§  194  ;)  so  long  as  mag-
nets and  crystals  are  met  with  acting  with  equal  strength  upon  the
nerves,  the  former  of  which  will  support  masses  of  iron,  while  the  lat-
ter will  not  lift  up  a  filing,  (§§  37,  42,  43,  44,)  and  no  scientific  ac-
count can  be  offered  of  this  vast  distinction,  so  long  will  the  two
forces  remain  essentially  different,  so  that  we  cannot  examine  them
under  a  common  point  of  view  ;  and  therefore,  for  the  present,  a  pe-
culiar fitting  name  appears  to  be  necessarily  required.  Leaving
the  entymological  derivation  to  be  justified  at  some  other  opportuni-
ty, I  will  take  the  liberty  to  propose  the  short  word  Od  for  the  force
which  we  are  engaged  in  examining.  Every  one  will  admit  it  to  be
desirable  that  an  uni-syllabic  word  beginning  with  a  vowel  should  be
selected  for  an  object  which  occurs  universally  in  an  infinity  of  com-
plex conditions  of  the  material  world,  for  the  sake  of  convenient  con-
junction in  the  manifold  compound  words.  The  words  magnetism,
electricity,  «fee,  are  by  far  too  long  for  convenient  use  in  the  language
of  science.  When  they  are  lengthened  by  additions,  as  in  vital  mag-
netism, animal  magnetism,  «fee,  it  becomes  as  burdensome  as  it  is
false,  for  these  things  do  not  belong  exclusively  or  even  principally  to
life,  still  less  are  they  identical  with  magnetism.  To  that  which  sup-
ports iron,  and  constitutes  the  compass,  let  us  leave  the  old  name,

THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.  177

with  the  original  conception  of  a  supporter  of  iron,  which  belongs  to
it.  If,  then,  the  term  Od  shall  be  found  acceptable  in  general  use,
for  the  force  which  does  not  support  iron,  and  for  which  we  require
and  seek  a  name,  the  nomenclature  for  all  its  various  kinds  of  deri-
vation may  be  easily  formed  by  composition  :  avoiding  all  circumlo-
cutions, instead  of  saying,  "  the  Od  derived  from  crystallization,"  we
may  name  this  product  crystallod,  that  from  animal  life  biod,  that
from  heat  thermod,  that  from  electricity  briefly  as  elod,  from  light
photod,  and  so  on,  magnetod,  chymod,  heliod,  artemod,  tribod,  and
for  the  material  world  generally,  pantod,  &c.  I  am  quite  aware  tliat
objections  may  be  urged,  here  and  there,  against  the  grammatical
accuracy  ;  that  it  might,  perhaps,  be  more  correct  to  say  thermood,  &c.
Nevertheless,  when  it  is  intended  that  new  words  should  make  their
way  into  practical  use,  custom  and  convenience  require  that  the
schools  should  sacrifice  some  of  the  strictness  of  grammatical  accu-
racy to  euphony.  It  is  possible,  indeed  very  probable,  that  we  shall
one  day  succeed  in  bringing  the  incommensurable  fractions  which  we
now  comprehend  under  the  names  of  magnetism,  electricity,  crystal-
lization, light,  heat  affinity,  &c,  under  a  common  denominator  ;  but
the  numerators  will  always  remain  unlike,  and  therefore  it  will  al-
ways be  necessary  to  connect  and  retain  groups  of  phenomena,  which
we  call  magnetism,  electricity,  <fec. ;  and  thus,  whatever  may  be
the  ultimate  scientific  fate  of  this  which  I  now  think  it  necessary  to
comprise  under  a  new  expression,  we  shall  scarcely  at  any  time  be
able  to  dispense  with  such  a  word  as  Od,  or  some  synonymous  one
in  its  place.

RETROSPECT.

a.  Not  only  magnets,  crystals,  hands,  chemism,  &c,  but  all  solid
and  fluid  matters  without  exception,  produce  sensations  of  coolness
and  tepid  heat  equivalent  to  pleasure  and  inconvenience.

b.  The  effective  force,  therefore,  does  not  appertain  to  particu-
lar forms  or  especial  qualities  of  matter,  but  it  dwells  in  matter  in
and  by  itself.

c.  This  force  not  only  manifests  itself  in  contact,  but  also  at  dis-
tances,— as  from  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars ;  so,  also,  from  all
matter.

d.  Substances  arrange  themselves  in  the  order  of  the  electro-
chemical series.

e.  In  this,  the  electro-positive  substances  stand  on  one  side  with
potassium  at  their  head,  the  electro-negative  on  the  other  with  oxygen

8*

178  THE  MATERIAL  WORLD  IN  GENERAL.

in  the  furthest  limit :  all  electro-positive  metals  occur  among  those
giving  warmth,  and  producing  unpleasant  sensations ;  all  metalloids
on  the  cooling,  agreeable  side.

/.  We  find  here  conductivity,  transferability,  and  luminosity,  with
glowing  vapor  and  flames.

g.  Finally,  this  force  is  one  that  extends  over  the  entire  universe.

h.  Nomenclature.  The  word  Od,  odic,  with  inflexions  and  com-
positions.

SEVENTH   TREATISE,

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

216.  The  polar  opposition  in  magnets,  the  dualism  in  every  crys-
talline form,  the  symmetrical  and  sexual  opposition  in  all  living  or-
ganization, made  me  conceive,  even  at  the  beginning  of  the  present
researches,  that  something  of  the  kind  might  prevail  here.  The  first
and  most  evident  character  of  this  was  afforded  by  the  constantly  re-
curring sensations  of  heat  and  cold,  of  pleasure  and  discomfort,  which
healthy  and  sick  sensitive  persons  imagined  they  felt  from  all  mate-
rial objects.  I  did  not,  indeed,  find  all  these  persons  agreeing  as  to
those  sensations  from  the  same  substratum,  but  as  to  the  quality  of
any,  when  once  they  had  determined  its  place  among  the  warm  or
cold  materials,  all  the  sensitive  almost  always  persisted  in  their  first
opinion.  There  must,  therefore,  necessarily  exist  here  objective
causes  in  respect  to  the  substance,  and  subjective  causes  referable  to
the  form  of  disease,  which  determined  the,  on  one  hand,  constant,
on  the  other,  inconstant  statements.  An  attempt  gradually  to  ad-
vance along  the  trace  of  warm  and  cold,  in  order  to  arrive,  by  further
investigation,  at  a  certain  scientific  truth,  was  consequently  surrounded
by  difficulties  of  manifold  and  peculiar  kinds.  They  were  onlv  to  be
overcome  by  patience.

217.  The  first  question  was  :  What  does  the  expression  warm  sig-
nify in  the  mouth  of  the  sensitive  ?  What  the  term  cold  ?  All  the
objects  which  they  thus  designate  are,  in  every  case,  of  equal  ther-
mometrical  temperature ;  these  words,  therefore,  cannot  mark  any-
thing real,  but  must  indicate  an  apparent  temperature,  and  the  ex-
pression is  therefore  to  be  taken  in  a  figurative  sense ;  it  signifies  an
effect  upon  the  sense  of  feeling,  ivhich  resembles  that  of  heat  and  of
cold,  depending  upon  some  unknown  cause.

218.  Miss  Sturmann  found  both  a  flask  of  oxygen  gas  and  a  piece
of  sulphur  hot ;  Miss  Reichel  found  them  both  cold  ;  and  Miss  Maix
found  both  hot  while  lying  in  her  hand,  but  diffusing  a  cold  all-
around  :  in  the  collective  idea  of  difference  of  temperature  in  relation
to  the  temperature  of  the  air,  at  each  time  they  all  agreed ;  but
as  to  the  determination  of  the  degree  I  received  very  different  ac-

180  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

counts  ;  from  three  observers  three  different  statements,  and  all  three
kept  constantly  to  the  same  statements  at  all  times  and  in*  every
repetition.

219.  From  this  it  clearly  followed,  that  not  only  was  the  objective
cause  residing  in  the  matter  present  in  unequal  degrees  in  different
substances,  but  that  unequal  irritabilities  existed  in  different  diseases.
These  latter,  again,  could  either  establish  merely  quantative  distinc-
tions, so  that  a  substance  reacted  more  strongly  or  more  weakly  upon
a  patient,  which  would,  however,  over-excite  another ;  or  qualitative
distinctions  might  exist  where,  in  one  disease,  a  particular  substance
had  always  a  warm  reaction,  in  another  always  cold.

220.  To  get  nearer  to  the  natural  laws  lying  concealed  here,  the
question  required  to  be  stated  more  simply  ;  it  would  not  do  to  be-
gin with  substances  of  different  kinds,  it  must  be  attempted  with
those  identical.  I  therefore  returned  to  my  rock  crystal  and  selenite,
in  which  I  might  hope  to  bring  to  observation,  in  one  and  the  same
example,  the  different  temperatures  which  appeared  to  the  sensitive
to  run  through  all  nature,  and  from  this  point  to  carry  out  the  com-
parisons. With  Miss  Nowotny,  therefore,  I  took  a  selenite  four
inches  long  with  a  natural  point,  and  drew  it  over  the  inside  of  her
hand  from  the  wrist  to  the  tip  of  the  middle  finger,  near  the  skin,  but
without  touching  it,  while  she  was  in  the  north-south  position.  She
felt  a  cool  wind  pass  over,  as  if  one  had  blown  on  her  hand  through
a  straw,  as  has  already  been  mentioned  in  §  33.  I  then  reversed  the
crystal,  and  took  the  same  course  over  the  hand  with  the  opposite
point  of  the  crystal ;  she  now  experienced  no  cold,  but  a  tepid
warmth,  which  was,  besides,  disagreeable.  A  rock  crystal,  rather
longer,  carried  down  over  the  hand  in  the  same  way  with  both
ends,  gave  the  same  results.  Miss  Sturmann  felt  the  downward
pass  over  the  hand  of  one  pole  of  a  tourmaline,  warm ;  of  the  other
pole,  cold.  Iceland  double  spar  acted  upon  her  exactly  in  the
same  way.

221.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  expressed  herself  in  the  same  way  :  the
above  selenite,  passed  down  over  her  right  hand,  gave  coolness  to  her
with  the  same  end  that  had  given  it  to  Miss  Nowotny.  When  I
passed  the  same  point  down  over  her  left  hand,  she  felt  it  still  cooler.
Reversing  the  crystal,  the  pass  down  the  right  hand  was  warm,  down
the  left  unpleasantly  tepid.  I  made  the  same  experiment  with  Miss
Reiche!.  I  passed  the  same  selenite  over  her  hands.  The  same  end
which  had  caused  coolness  to  the  above  different  sensitive  persons
also  produced  coolness  iu  the  downward  pass  over  her  right  hand ;
in  like  manner  over  the  left  also  cool,  but  more  strongly  and  more
agreeably.     When  I  reversed  the  crystal,  and  operated  in  the  same

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  181

way  with  the  other  end,  she  found  the  pass  down  over  the  right  hand
scarcely  cool,  on  the  left  hand  wann.  She  said,  when  passing  down-
ward, it  seemed  as  if  something  was  taken  from  her ;  when  upwards,
as  if  something  was  given.  Miss  Maix  expressed  herself  just  in  the
same  manner  in  similar  experiments.*

222.  Similar  accounts  have  been  given  at  §§  33,  34,  35,  in  regard
to  M.  Schuh  and  Professor  Endlicher.  In  the  meantime  many  other
persons  who  have  experienced  the  same  sensations  have  given  me
permission  to  cite  their  testimony  :  M.  Theodore  Kotschy,  Dr.  Venzl,
M.  Voigtländer  the  optician,  Mr.  Incledon,  M.  Studer  ;  the  joiner
Tischler  must  also  be  named  among  the  healtby  sensitive.  M.  Kotschy,
as  well  as  Mr.  Incledon,  could  only  bear  a  few  repetitions  of  the  pass
of  the  cold  end  of  the  large  rock  crystal  from  the  head  down  over  the
body,  as  they  then  felt  sensibly  affected  in  the  stomach,  and  I  was
compelled  to  desist.

223.  Generally,  therefore,  did  all  the  experiments  and  witnesses
agree,  that  one  pole  of  the  crystals  gave  a  cold,  the  other  a  warm
jmss.  I  say  expressly,  generally,  since  here  and  there  single  persons
occur  who  cannot  settle  properly  about  cold  and  heat,  fancying  the
same  passes  to  feel  sometimes  cold,  sometimes  warm,  varying  between
the  two  feelings  in  different  dispositions,  or  only  becoming  certainly
clear  and  consistent  as  to  the  quality  of  the  sensation  after  repeated
passes.  But  there  are  in  all  cases  healthy  or  merely  slightly  indis-
posed persons  ;  the  properly  highly  sensitive  are  but  seldom  in  doubt.
Novices  in  the  experiments  are,  in  particular,  less  clear  at  first.  The
special  cases,  however,  in  which  the  decision  between  cold  and  warmth
was  variable  in  them,  I  shall  discuss  hereafter,  and  trace  them  back
to  definite  clear  cases.

234.  When  a  dualism  in  the  crystallized  bodies  had  been  substan-
tiated both  by  these  facts  and  through  much  of  that  which  was
detailed  in  the  second  of  these  treatises,  a  dualism  which  follows  in
an  unmistakeable  parallelism  with  that  of  crystallization  itself,  the
questions  arose,  what  is  the  nature  of  this  dualism  ?  Does  it  consist
of  a  duplicity  ?  Or  does  it  correspond  to  a  real  presence  and  ab-
sence ?  Or  is  it  like  a  positive  and  negative  opposition  ?  I  acknowl-
edge that  I  can  as  little  give  a  definite  answer  to  these,  as  we  can
find  a  certain  intelligence  of  cold  and  heat,  of  +  e  and  —  E,  of  +

*  This  experiment  I  have  made  many  times,  and  the  striking  corroboration
afforded  by  my  own  experience  to  this  fact  is  very  agreeable ;  for  not  only  does
it  afford  us  a  general  rule  a9  to  the  difference  between  the  effects  from  the  two
ends  of  the  crystals,  but  it  tends  to  establish  the  difference  of  the  agencies  of
either  end  of  "the  crystal  when  passed  directly  or  inversely  in  relation  to  the
brain.

182  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

M  and  —  M,  &c.  I  was  obliged  to  be  content,  for  the  present  state
of  matters,  to  make  certain  of  a  parallelism  wbicb  I  might  perhaps
hope  to  discover  between  Od  and  crystallization,  magnetism  and
electricity.

225.  We  know,  from  what  has  gone  before,  that  Od  has  much
agreement  with  magnetism,  leaving  out  of  consideration  the  capacity
of  the  latter  to  attract  iron,  to  take  a  direction  from  the  terrestrial
magnetism,  &c. ;  in  particular,  that  it  affects  the  sensitive  exactly  in
the  same  way.  When  I  passed  a  magnetic  needle  down  over  the
hands  of  different  highly  sensitive  persons,  they  received  exactly  the
same  sensations  as  from  a  crystal  of  selenite,  calcareous  spar,  topaz,
&c.  As  a  rule,  the  northward  pole,  that  is,  the  negative  end  of  the
needle,  declared  itself  cool ;  the  southward  pole,  the  opposite  positive
end  of  it,  warm.  When  a  perfect  agreement  of  certain  poles  of
crystals  with  certain  others  of  the  magnet  was  thus  brought  to  evi-
dence, a  right  was  acquired  to  conclude  a  similarity  of  cause,  and  to
apply  a  similar  nomenclature  to  those  poles  of  ciystals  which  exer-
cised effects  wholly  homologous  to  determinate  poles  of  the  magnet,
and  were  gifted  with  corresponding  fundamental  qualities  ;  so  that
when  +  M  agreed  with  Od,  we  could  apply  the  term  +  Od,  and  in
reverse  in  the  same  way  —  Od.*

226.  In  order  to  work  this  out,  I  first  investigated,  more  minutely,
the  relations  of  the  sensitive  to  the  poles  of  the  magnet.  I  placed  a
small  magnetic  rod  in  the  hands  of  Miss  Maix  ;  it  was  about  four
times  as  long  as  the  breadth  of  her  hand.  I  first  made  her  place
both  fists  close  together  in  the  middle  of  the  rod,  so  that  the  latter
passed  through  both,  the  northward  pole  being  turned  toward  the
left  side.  She  experienced  a  moderate  amount  of  disturbance  from
this.  I  then  made  her  advance  her  two  fists  along  the  rod,  the  left
toward  the  left,  till  it  enclosed  the  northward  pole ;  the  right  toward
the  right  till  it  enclosed  the  southward  pole,  briefly,  in  such  a  manner
that  she  had  one  pole  in  each  fist.  The  effect  of  this  alteration  was
very  perceptible  ;  she  now  experienced  a  very  active  disturbance
through  both  arms,  the  breast,  and  head.  When  she  removed  one
hand  from  the  rod,  the  disturbance  ceased  suddenly  ;  it  returned  and
vanished  alternately,  as  she  alternately  grasped  and  let  go  one  pole,
retaining  the  other  in  the  other  hand.  The  same  occurred  when  she
repeated  the  operation  with  the  other  pole.  Therefore,  there  was  a
condition  like  a  current,  a  kind  of  circuit,  as  was  observed  before  on
the  occasion  of  the  contact  with  both  my  hands,  of  which  I  have  al-

*  I  have  repeated  these  experiments  on  many  impressionable  subjects,  and
can  afford  a  strong  corroboration  of  the  facts.  In  some  cases  sleep  and  vigilance
result  according  to  the  pole  offered  to  the  patient.

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  18S

ready  given  an  account  in  the  third  of  these  treatises,  §  86.  For  the
control  of  this,  I  repeated  it  with  a  large  horse-shoe  magnet,  placing
one  of  her  hands  upon  each  pole,  the  left  upon  the  northward.  She
immediately  became  pained  and  oppressed  in  the  breast,  by  the  cir-
cuit which  she  felt  through  this  from  the  arms ;  the  head  was  in-
volved and  soon  rendered  giddy,  and  the  patient  was  again  reminded
of  the  "  ring-game"  which  she  had  spoken  of  in  the  former  case,  &c.
The  moment  I  let  her  take  one  hand  away  from  the  magnet,  she  felt
at  once  the  interruption  of  the  circuit,  and  again  breathed  freely.
.Every  repetition  afforded  a  similar  result.  In  both  experiments,  es-
pecially the  latter,  stronger  one,  it  was  requisite  that  the  northward
pole  should  lie  in  the  left  hand,  the  southward  in  the  right,  for  the
sensations  to  be  in  any  degree  supportable :  when  I  reversed  the
poles  the  patient  could  not  bear  it ;  she  again  experienced  the  strange
conflict  within  her,  already  described,  and  evinced  so  great  internal
torment,  that  I  was  obliged  to  give  up  the  experiment  immediately.
If  I  venture  to  assume  the  existence  of  a  circuit  here,  like  that  of  the
galvanic  current,  I  am  obliged  to  conclude  that  it  here  flowed  from
the  positive  southward  pole,  through  the  right  arm  and  upper  part
of  the  body  toward  the  left  side,  and  then  through  the  left  arm  and
hand  down  to  the  negative  northward  pole  of  the  magnet.  Then,
the  left  hand  of  the  patient  corresponded  to  the  southward  pole,  and
her  right  hand  to  the  northward  pole  of  the  magnetic  needle :  in  other
words,  her  left  would  be  positive,  her  right  negative,  in  relation  to
magnetism  in  the  old  unaltered  sense  of  the  terms,  and  the  quality  of
the  left  hand  would  have  to  be  indicated  by  +  Od  (here  =  +  biod),
and  that  of  the  right  by  —  Od  (here  = —  biod).

227.  It  will  be  remembered  from  §  86,  that  when  I  had  placed
my  right  hand  in  her  left,  and  my  left  in  her  right,  a  similar  circuit
was  felt  by  the  patient,  which  she  was  able  to  sustain  ;  but  that
when  I  crossed  my  hands,  so  that  the  hands  of  the  same  name  came
together,  namely,  my  right  in  her  right,  and  her  left  in  my  left,  the
often  mentioned  so-called  struggle  arose  within  her,  which  she  could
not  sustain,  since  it  was  insufferably  painful  to  her.  From  this  it  fol-
lows, that  my  male  hands  corresponded  perfectly,  in  qualitative  mag-
netic respects,  with  the  female  hands  of  Miss  Maix,  that  my  right
took  the  place  of  the  negative,  northward  pole,  and  my  left  of  the
positive,  southward  pole,  and  therefore  they  possessed  magnetism,
with  positive  and  negative  properties,  in  just  the  same  order  as  those
of  the  patient ;  consequently,  that  men  and  women  are  organized  ex-
actly with  the  same  polarity  in  those  points*

-  Dr.  Elliotson  had  a  very  remarkable  case  (Adlard)  illustrative  of  this  con-
clusion.    When  the  patient,  a  male,  was  in  mesmeric  sleep,  the  two  sides  of  the

184  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

228.  After  I  had  cleared  this  up,  I  placed  the  magnetic  rod  in
the  left  hand  of  Miss  Maix,  in  such  a  manner  that  it  extended  from
the  tip  of  the  middle  finger  upwards  to  beyond  the  hand,  and  on  to
a  part  of  the  arm.  The  northward  pole  lay  above  upon  the  arm,  the
southward  below  on  the  tips  of  the  fingers  :  thus  all  remained  in  its
natural  arrangement.  When  I  reversed  the  rod,  discomfort  com-
menced ;  the  so-called  struggle  began  from  the  wrist  to  the  fingers.
I  now  pushed  the  magnetic  rod  up  her  sleeve,  so  that  it  lay  upon
her  fore-arm.  When  I  kept  the  arrangement  such  that  the  north-
ward pole  lay  above  at  the  elbow  and  the  southward  below  at  the.
wrist,  the  patient  found  its  position  in  accordance  with  the  natural
conditions  ;  when  I  reversed  the  rod,  the  disagreeable  contest  at  once
became  felt  again.

I  repeat  here  the  observation  which  I  have  already  made  in  an
earlier  place,  and  which  must  not  be  left  out  of  consideration  in  the
critical  examination  of  these  phenomena,  that  the  patient  lay  in  the
magnetic  meridian  ;  the  head  to  the  north,  the  feet  to  the  south,  and
the  face  looking  southward.

229.  If,  now,  as  all  up  to  this  point  has  testified,  the  same  force
and  influence  upon  the  living  organism  occurs  in  crystals  as  in  the
magnet,  a  simple  crystal  brought  into  the  same  circumstances  as  the
magnetic  rod  ought  to  produce  the  same  results.  I  placed  a  crystal
of  selenite  between  the  two  hands  of  the  patient.  It  soon  appeared,
however,  that  it  was  anything  rather  than  indifferent  how  it  lay  be-
tween the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  the  two  opposite  hands.  First,  she
soon  felt  out  that  the  two  most  distant  points  of  the  rhombohedron
were  indeed  part  of  an  internal  force  of  the  crystal,  but  not  the  strong-
est, for  there  were  two  others  in  the  direction  of  the  short  diagonal,
which  were  much  stronger,  and  coincided  with  the  polar  main  axes.
Neither  were  the  poles  of  their  axes  alike,  for  she  found  one  distinctly
warmer,  the  other  cooler,  just  as  the  patients  had  always  found.
When  she  now  held  the  crystals  between  her  two  middle  fingers,  so
that  the  cool  pole  lay  on  the  left  middle  finger  and  the  warm  on  the
right,  the  condition  of  matters  was  in  certain  respects  accordant ;  but
when  I  reversed  the  crystal  the  often-mentioned  discomfort  appeared.
The  cool  pole  of  the  crystal,  therefore,  corresponded  to  the  north-
ward pole  of  the  magnet ;  the  warm  to  the  southward.     When   I

body  were  so  different  one  to  the  other  that  he  could  not  suffer  his  legs  or  his
arms  to  be  crossed.  He  could  not  allow  his  right  hand  fingers  to  touch  his  left
cheek,  or  his  left  hand  fingers  to  touch  his  right  cheek.  In  either  case  he  started
as  if  he  were  burned.  He  could  not  endure  the  Doctor's  right  hand  to  touch  his
left  side,  or  the  contrary. — See  Zoist,  vol.  iii.,  page  53  ;  where  some  other  parti-
culars of  this  young  man's  case  will  be  found.

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  185

placed  the  crystal  in  the  patient's  left  hand,  short  as  it  was,  for  the
main  axis  only  measured  four  inches,  it  was  by  no  means  indifferent
to  ber  in  what  direction  the  axis  lay.  If  the  cool  pole  was  directed
upward  toward  the  wrist,  the  warmer  toward  the  lingers,  the  patient
found  it  pleasant,  but  if  I  reversed  the  direction  of  the  poles,  the  dis-
turbance of  the  internal  conflict  commenced,  even  though  over  a
small  extent.  Similar  experiments  with  granite,  staurolite,  and  heavy
spar,  furnished  exactly  the  same  results.

230.  I  should  scarcely  have  ventured  to  lay  so  much  weight  upon
these  observations  if  1  had  made  them  upon  Miss  Maix  alone.  It
might  have  been  a  peculiar,  perhaps  variable,  result  of  disease.  But
I  always  obtained  exactly  the  same  effect  in  repetitions  of  it  in  very
different  conditions  of  disease.  When  I  extended  to  Miss  Nowotny,
already  far  advanced  in  convalescence,  one  of  my  hands,  she  felt  each
singly,  in  exaetty  the  same  way  as  Miss  Maix ;  and  when  I  gave  her
both  hands,  she  felt  herself  subjected,  in  like  manner,  to  the  sensa-
tion of  a  circuit,  which  she  could  not  long  sustain.  Miss  Atzmanns-
dorfer  found  my  right  hand  warmish  in  her  left,  my  left  hot  in  her
left ;  when  I  gave  her  both  hands,  she  at  once  felt  the  circuit,  which
affected  her  whole  body,  and  rendered  her  head  giddy.  But  when  I
extended  my  crossed  hands  to  her,  I  was  not  very  successful,  for  the
effect  was  so  violent,  that  she  began  to  lose  consciousness,  even  in  a
few  seconds,  and  I  was  obliged  to  pause.  With  Miss  Reichel  my
right  hand  was  never  disagreeable  in  her  left,  but  my  right  was  pain-
fully unpleasant  in  her  right.  She  felt  the  two  oppositely  corres-
ponding hands  through  the  whole  arms,  and  soon  in  the  head,  but
not  nearly  so  strongly  and  insupportably  disagreeable  as  when  I
grasped  her  crossed  hands.  All  this  is  in  perfect  agreement  with
what  I  have  circumstantially  detailed  of  Miss  Maix.

231.  Thus  the  law  is  evolved,  that  determinate  poles  of  crystals
and  of  living  organized  structures  correspond  to  the  poles  of  the
magnet  in  relation  to  Od,  that  crystals  have  in  this  sense  a  clearly
displayed  north  and  south  pole ;  that  the  cooler  always  corresponds
to  the  north  pole  of  the  mac/net,  the  warmer  to  its  south  pole,  and
finally  that,  of  the  human  hands,  the  right  corresponds  in  kind  to
the  northward  pole,  the  left  to  the  southward,  both  in  the  male  and
female  sex.  Therefore  -f  Od  (here  +  crystallod,  or  +  biod)  pre-
sents itself  equivalent  to  -f-  M,  and  —  M  parallel  to  —  Od,  &c.

232.  For  the  further  confirmation  of  the  facts  here  unfolded,  I
will  include  in  my  report  some  other  similar  conditions,  which  have
presented  themselves  in  healthy  persons,  in  particular  in  M.  Carl
Schuh,  the  private  physicist.  A  man  of  healthy,  powerful  aspect,
thirty  years  of  age,  and  of  vividly  sensitive  temperament,  he  exhibit-

186  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

ed  far  more  excitability  by  Od,  tban  many  other  persons,  so  that  he
thus  constituted  a  certain  medium  between  unsensitive  healthy  per-
sons and  excitable  nervous  patients.  He  had  hardly  ever  been  ill,
but  when  he  over-applied  himself  to  his  labors,  he  sometimes  suf-
fered for  some  hours  from  headache.  He  vividly  experienced  the
influence  of  all  crystals  ;  large  magnets  affected  him  distinctly,  even
at  the  distance  of  a  yard.  When  I  placed  my  right  hand  in  his  left,
he  felt  a  disagreeable  effect,  in  a  few  minutes,  in  his  head ;  and  when
I  took  his  right  hand  with  my  left,  the  disorder  increased  rapidly ;  it
rose  in  a  few  minutes  from  the  temples  towards  the  brows,  and  in
half  a  minute  produced  a  throbbing  headache,  which  soon  became
almost  insupportable,  and  remained  for  almost  eight  minutes  after  I
had  set  his  hands  free,  disappearing  gradually  and  slowly ;  when  I
crossed  my  hands  with  him,  as  I  had  done  with  the  highly  sensitive,
he  found  it  exceedingly  unpleasant.  Starting  from  the  later  obser-
vations, namely,  that  the  right  and  the  left  stand,  in  the  relation  to
one  another,  of  negative  and  positive,  I  proposed  to  him  to  use  his
own  right  and  left  hands  instead  of  mine,  and  to  place  his  hands  one
within  the  other,  without  the  interposition  of  mine.  To  the  no  small
astonishment  of  himself  and  the  rest  of  the  company,  he  found  that
his  headache  came  on  immediately  and  just  as  strongly  as  when  I
had  given  him  my  two  hands  ;  that  it 'remitted  and  gradually  disap-
peared when  he  separated  his  hands,  but,  every  time,  returned  di-
rectly he  folded  them  together  again.  His  negative  right  on  his
positive  left  formed  a  kind  of  "  element,"  if  I  may  borrow  this  ex-
pression from  galvanism ;  the  arc  was  completed  by  the  arms  and
body,  and  the  polarization,  or,  if  the  word  may  be  admitted  for  once
in  subsidium,  the  circuit  commenced,  and  then  acted  upon  the  brain.
Several  months  later,  when  we  again  came  to  speak  on  the  subject,
he  told  me  that  at  no  time  does  he  dare  to  leave  the  hands  together :
since  he  has  known  the  effects,  the  commencement  of  the  distur-
bance at  once  reminds  him  to  separate  his  hands  whenever  he  acci-
dentally brings  them  together.  Other  healthy  sensitive  persons  ex-
hibited wholly  similar  results.  M.  Kotschy  at  once  felt  affected  by
my  hands,  and  when  I  reached  him  both,  he  described  the  effect  as  a
kind  of  circuit,  which  flowed  from  and  to  me,  through  the  arms  and
chest.  When  I  gave  the  two  hands  crossed,  he  represented  his  sen-
sations as  annoying  painful  shocks  in  the  arms  and  head,  almost  in
the  same  words  as  Miss  Maix.  But  M.  Kotschy  never  suffered  from
headache.  Mr.  Incledon  received  a  quite  unbearable  headache  from
my  two  hands ;  especially,  however,  when  they  were  given  to  him
crossed.

233.  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  cast  a  retrospective  glance  over

DUALISM  m  THE  PHENOMENA.  187

the  most  striking-  phenomena  in  all  the  sensitive  ;  namely,  that  when
lying  on  the  back  in  bed,  or  in  a  similar  position  on  a  seat,  they
were  of  all  directions  least  able  to  bear  the  west-easterly  position.
This  is  the  position  with  the  head  to  the  west  and  the  feet  to  the  east,
the  face  turned  towards  the  east.  In  this  position,  the  whole  right
side  is  turned  towards  the  south,  while  the  entire  left  is  directed  to
the  north  ;  or  in  other  words,  the  positive  side  of  their  bodies  is
turned  towards  the  positive  pole  of  the  earth,  and  their  negative  to
the  negative.  Equivalent,  therefore  hostile  poles,  are  turned  directly
towards  each  other,  and  since  these  mutually  repel  each  other,  it  be-
comes to  some  extent  comprehensible  why  such  a  position  must  be-
come so  exceedingly  injurious  to  the  patients  so  highly  sensitive  in
these  points.  In  July,  when  Miss  Nowotny  endeavored  to  go  out
again,  she  was  utterly  unable,  even  out  of  doors,  to  bear  a  walk  from
the  west  towards  the  east.  It  would  be  impossible  to  find  more  per-
fect confirmation  of  my  preceding  observations  ;  and  M.  Schuh  is  no
bedridden  and  obscure  patient,  but  an  active  man  known  and  seen  by
half  Vienna  and  half  Berlin.

234.  I  undertook  a  thorough  control  of  the  law  obtained  with
Miss  Reichel.  It  is  known  from  the  preceding  treatise  that  I  pos-
sessed series  of  simple  substances  and  preparations,  prepared  by  Miss
Nowotny  and  Miss  Maix,  arranged  by  them  according  to  the  degree
of  discomfort  they  experienced  from  them.  But  in  their  graduated
series,  although  they  ran  by  regular  degrees  from  the  electro-chemi-
cally  strongest  snbstances  to  the  weakest,  no  regard  at  all  was  had
to  their  negative  or  positive  relation  in  the  electro-chemical  series  ;
only  the  quantity  of  their  effect  upon  the  sensitive  had  been  taken
note  of,  and  not  their  quality.  If,  then,  as  had  every  appearance,
the  distinction  between  cold  and  warmth,  in  the  feelings  of  the  sensi-
tive, be  founded  upon  a  distinction  between  negative  and  positive,  in
the  same  way  as  between  the  poles  of  magnets  and  of  crystals,  the
above-mingled  series  should  be  capable  of  being  divided  into  two
halves,  according  to  their  difference  of  cold  and  warmth  by  those
who  felt  this,  one  of  which  halves  should  comprise  the  negative,  the
other  the  positive  substances.  In  this  experiment  I  used  the  series
of  substances  Miss  Maix  had  formed  as  a  basis,  and  made  Miss  Reichel
bring  this  into  two  groups,  according  to  cold  and  heat.  I  here  give
the  result.  The  series  proceeds  from  the  greatest  strength  down  to
the  least.  The  numbers  denote  the  order  in  which  they  were  origi-
nally placed  in  Miss  Maix's  series,  before  it  had  been  divided  into  two
by  Miss  Reichel.

188

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

"WARM.

2.  Potassium.  1.

3.  Caffeine.  4.
5.  Purple  of  Cassius.  6.
7.  Brucia.  8.

15.  Chromic  acid.  9.

19.  Picarnarate  of  lime.  10.

21.  Bromide  of  silver.  -      11.

22.  Iodide  of  silver.  12.

23.  Iodide  of  bismuth.  13.
26.  Picamar.  14.
27  Atropine.  16.
28.  Acroleine.  17.

31.  Rhodium.  18.

32.  Narcotine  20.
35.  Strychnine.  24.

37.  Sesqui-oxide  of  lead.  25.

38.  Alloxan.  29.

40.  Picrotoxine.  30.

41.  Ultramarine.  33.
43.  Mesite.  34.

46.  Citronyle.  36.

47.  Draconine.  39.

48.  Bismuth.  42.

52.  Creasote.  44.

53.  Potass.  45.

57.  Lithium.  49.

58.  Cantharadine.  50.
61.  Cetine.  51.
64.  ^Esculine.  54.
66.  Baryta.  55.
70.  Melamine.  56.

74.  Grey  pig  iron.  59.

75.  Murexide.  60.

76.  Protoxide  of  manganese.  62.

78.  Hydrate  of  oil  of  turpentine.  63.

79.  Cholesterine.  65.

80.  Asparagine.  67.
82.  Hyoscyamine.  68.
85.  Alloxantine.  69.

88.  Caryophylline.  71.

89.  Allan taine.  72.

90.  Sulphuret  of  ammonia.  73.

91.  Lime.  77.
94.  Gold.  81.

97.  Zinc.  83.

98.  Stearine.  84.

99.  Chromium.  86.
101.  Osmium.  87.
104.  Palladium.  92.

107.  Mercury.  93.

108.  Delphinine.  95.

COLD.

Oxygen  gas.

Sulphuric  acid.

Iodide  of  gold.

Diamond.

Chloride  of  gold.

Sulphur.

Bromine.

Tellurium.

Osmic  acid.

Selenite.

Lunar  caustic.

Orpiment.

Chloride  of  mercury.

Oxide  of  platinum.

Iodide  of  carbon.

Iodide  of  mercury.

Iodine.

Telluric  acid.

Cyanide  of  mercury.

Selenium.

Paracyanogen.

Prussic  acid.

Sulphuret  of  potassium.

Arsenic.

Oxide  of  mercury.

Iodide  of  lead.

Chloride  of  cyanogen.

Chloride  of  lime.

Oxide  of  copper.

Cyanide  of  potassium.

Sulphuret  of  calcium.

Sulphate  of  morphia.

Bromide  of  potassium.

Cyanic  acid.

Antimonic  acid.

Sulphuret  of  cyanogen.

Hydrate  of  baryta.

Parabauic  acid.

Borax.

Acetate  of  morphia.

Hydrochlorate  of  citronyle.

Phosphuret  of  nitrogen.

Oxide  of  cobalt.

Titanic  acid.

Uric  acid.

Neutral  phosphate  of  lime.

Chloride  of  carbon.

Carbazotic  acid.

Phosphorus.

Bichromate  of  potass.

Oxide  of  nickel.

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

189

WARM.

109.  Daturine.

110.  Lead.
113.  Oleic  acid.

116.  Cadmium.

117.  Sodium.

118.  Antimony.
121.  Red  lead.

124.  Morphia.

125.  Benzamide.

126.  Veratria.

127.  Indigo  blue.
129.  Titanium.

132.  Naphthaline.

133.  Coal  wax.

137.  Nickel.

138.  Copper.

139.  Santonine.

140.  Iridium.

141.  Tin.

142.  Cobalt.

148.  Amygdaline.

149.  Mellone.

150.  Quinine.

151.  Piperine.

156.  Benzoyle.

157.  Urea.

158.  Platinum.

159.  Silver.
163.  Eupion.
167.  Bar-iron.
171.  Paraffine.

COLD.

96.  Alcohol.
100.  Chloride  of  chromium.

102.  Albumen.

103.  Ammonio  chloride  of  platinum.

105.  Protoxide  of  chromium.

106.  Black  lead.

111.  Oxide  of  silver.

112.  Common  salt.

114.  Molybdic  acid.

115.  Iodide  of  potassium.

119.  Sulphate  of  iron.

120.  Nitric  acid.

122.  Oxide  of  manganese.

123.  Sebacic  acid.
128.  Stearic  acid.

130.  Massicot.

131.  Oxamide.

134.  Cinchonine.

135.  Melan.

136.  Hippuric  acid.

143.  Fumaric  acid.

144.  Malic  acid.

145.  Benzoic  acid.

146.  Lactic  acid.

147.  Cinnamonic  aid.

152.  Peroxide  of  lead.

153.  Gallic  acid.

154.  Tannic  acid.

155.  Succinic  acid.

160.  Spring  water.

161.  Mannite.

162.  Charcoal.

164.  Starch.

165.  Gum.

166.  Sugar.

168.  Vinegar.

169.  Sugar  of  milk.

170.  Citric  acid.
172.  Distilled  water.

235.  When  this  arrangement  is  examined,  it  is  seen  that  almost
all  metals,  potassium  at  the  head,  with  the  isolated  exceptions  of
tellurium  and  arsenic,  are  on  the  side  of  the  warm  bodies, — therefore,
on  the  especially  negative  :  we  find,  further,  under  this  head,  almost
all  organic  substances,  and  organic  bases  ;  the  compounds  of  carbon,
rich  in  hydrogen,  and  barely  a  couple  of  acids,  chromic  and  oleic.
On  the  o'ther  hand,  we  observe  in  the  opposite,  cold  side,  all  bodies
like  sulphur,  bromine,  iodine,  selenium,  all  compounds  of  chlorine,
the  oxides  of  the  metals,  all  compound  of  cyanogen,  and  almost  the

190  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

whole  of  the  acids.  So  far  as  we  can  judge  of  the  substances,  we
perceive  on  the  warm  side  scarcely  anything  but  electro-positive — on
the  cold  side,  scarcely  anything  but  electro-negative.  It  is  certainly
surprising,  and  in  the  highest  degree  worthy  of  notice,  that  a  human
being — a  girl  perfectly  ignorant  of  such  things — is  capable  of  classi-
fying with  certainty  and  accuracy,  according  to  one  of  their  inner-
most, profoundest,  and  most  obscure  peculiarities — their  electro-
chemical character,  all  the  substances  of  this  world,  without  seeing
them,  and  by  mere  dull  sensation.

236.  As  we  have  been  compelled  to  infer  of  the  magnet,  crystals,
and  human  hands,  all  warmth-giving  substances  are  positive,  so  are
we  now  obliged  to  conclude  that  all  positive  bodies  give  out  heat.
This  holds  good  in  the  reversed  formula  of  the  negative,  and  thus  we
arrive,  in  a  different  way  from  that  already  known,  at  the  electro-
chemical series  of  bodies,  which,  from  this  point  of  view,  we  may  call
the  Od-chemical  series.

237.  As  to  the  manner  and  circumstances  by  which  I  obtained
this  result,  I  may  add,  that  I  gave  the  observer  all  the  bodies  which
consisted  of  solid  substance,  into  her  bare  left  hand  ;  the  pulverulent
on  a  fine,  very  thin  tissue  paper,  which  did  not  require  to  be  taken
into  account ;  and  the  fluid  in  the  bottles  in  which  I  usually  kept
them.  I  did  not  neglect  to  control  this  operation  repeatedly,  and
most  minutely,  by  making  the  same  trials  over  again,  in  modified
ways.  At  one  time  I  placed  all  the  bodies  at  one  end  of  a  long  and
wide  glass  tube,  while  Miss  Reichel  grasped  the  other  in  her  whole
hand.  When  I  inserted  one  body  after  another  into  the  tube,  the
feeling  of  warmth  and  cold  changed  in  a  moment.  Another  time,  I
selected  a  glass  rod  of  such  condition  that  it  was  not  felt  either  warm
or  cold.  With  this  I  let  her  touch  the  substance,  inserting  it  into
the  powders  and  fluids,  and  placing  it  against  the  side  of  the  solids.
With  this  kind  of  feeler  she  very  accurately  distinguished  the  warm
or  cold  condition  of  bodies  every  time  ;  and  I  can,  from  experience,
especially  recommend  this  mode  of  testing,  as  readily  provided  for,
everywhere  applicable,  and  very  clear  to  the  observer.  By  means  of
two  such  rods  of  equal  thickness,  very  accurate  comparisons  between
two  different  bodies  could  be  made.  The  examination  of  bodies,  by
placing  them,  together  with  the  bottles  in  which  they  are  contained,
in  the  hands  of  the  patients,  is  only  possible  with  substances  of  great
strength  ;  as  with  sulphuric  acid,  potass,  caffeine,  &c.  In  the  weaker,
it  is  inadmissible,  because  the  glass  itself  has  very  different  proper-
ties, feeling,  according  to  its  chemical  condition  of  admixture,  some-
times warm,  sometimes  cold,  and  sometimes  indifferent,  and  thus
readily  rendering  the  result  incorrect.     This  frequently  goes  so  far,

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  191

that  weak  substances,  which  by  themselves  feel  cool,  are  thereby
made  to  feel  warm,  and  vice  versa  ;  and  then  errors  will  be  produced.
Salts  and  other  preparations,  which  occur  in  a  crystalliue  condition,
must  be  powdered  before  testing,  even  if  only  coarsely.  For,  since
the  crystals  are  polar,  no  pure  result  of  quantity  can  be  obtained
from  a  group,  as  isolated  crystals  affect  the  result  by  their  poles,  and
render  it  complex.  I  hesitated  a  long  time,  for  instance,  with  salt-
petre and  bichromate  of  potass,  between  warm  and  cold,  until  I  pow-
dered them,  when  a  constant  coolness  presented  itself.  And  when  a
substance  is  powdered,  it  must  not  be  examined  immediately,  but
after  some  hours.  For,  the  mortar  and  pestle  in  which  it  has  been
powdered  influence  it  for  a  long  time,  through  transference  :  in  like
manner,  the  rubbing  iu  the  trituration  alters  the  natural  odic  value,
since  it  brings  in  accumulation  from  friction,  perhaps  also  from  elec-
tricity, that  may  be  thereby  set  in  motion.  Finally,  the  substances
to  be  examined  must  not  be  allowed  to  remain  previously  for  any
time  near  other,  especially  much  stronger  or  much  weaker  ones,  be-
cause they  will,  in  that  case,  become  altered  by  transference  ;  more-
over, they  must  not  have  stood  in  the  sunshine,  nor  iu  the  moon's
rays  ;  they  must  not  have  remained  long  in  the  hand  ;  when  several
are  to  be  compared  together  they  must  be  tolerably  equal  in  temper-
ature, (fee.  All  these  things  would  interfere  with  the  purity  of  the
result,  as  is  abundantly  evident  from  the  preceding  treatise.

238.  I  need  scarcely  observe  that  the  series  which  I  have  above
given  is  not  to  serve  as  the  normal,  but  only  as  an  example,  and  as  a
help  to  the  argument.  For  to  have  been  laid  down  as  the  type,  it
would  have  required  the  previous  most  accurate  investigation  of  the
chemical  purity  of  the  substances,  a  labor  for  which  neither  time  nor
circumstances  have  yet  afforded  sufficient  opportunity.  I  merely  in-
tended to  seek  out  and  lay  down  the  law  ;  its  accurate  application
will  belong  to  another  time.  Countless  other  preliminary  investiga-
tions are  also  requisite  here,  the  infinity  of  which  I  fully  feel  and  re-
cognise ;  in  the  first  place  of  all,  these  testings  of  positive  and  nega-
tive character  of  bodies,  which  I  was  here  first  able  to  carry  through
with  Miss  Reichel,  must  be  undertaken  with  several  other  sensitive
persons  iu  different  conditions  ;  thereby  must  be  found  the  key  to
the  distinction  of  their  sensations,  as  also  the  results  of  more  exalted
or  lower  excitability,  in  comparison  with  Miss  Keichel,  who,  since  her
sensations  coincided  so  accurately  with  the  general  electric  condition
of  bodies,  as  it  has  been  made  out  previously  in  other  ways  by  phy-
sics and  chemistry,  must  have  been  in  a  remarkable  equilibrium, —
one  might  say,  of  purity  of  diseased  condition.

239.  We  will  now  make  some  applications  of  the  discovered  law,

192  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

that  substances  which  affect  the  sensitive  as  warm  or  cool,  the  thus
od -positive  or  od-negative,  correspond  to  the  electro-positive  and
electro-negative.  First  of  all,  we  found  the  sun  strikingly  cool,  but
the  moon  strongly  warm  on  the  sensitive ;  the  fixed  stars  ranged
themselves  with  the  sun,  the  planets  with  the  moon.  I  do  not  know
whether  astronomers  have  yet  made  out  anything  positive  on  this
subject ;  so  far  as  my  knowledge  goes,  nothing  has  been  made
known  on  this  point,  except  what  M.  Kreil*  traced  into  the  qualities
of  the  moon,  from  the  interference  with  the  declination  of  the  mag-
netic needle.  It  is  then  certainly  in  some  degree  interesting,  that
the  human  feelings  should  be  able  to  carry  us  so  far  as  to  recognise
that  the  fixed  stars  take  their  place  all  on  the  electro-negative, — the
moon  and  the  planets  on  the  electro-positive  side  :  luminous  and
illuminated  stars  are  thus  opposed  in  a  polar  manner  to  each  other.
Perhaps  we  shall  one  day  succeed,  if  not  in  deciding,  yet  in  raising  a
probability,  that  a  comet  which  only  sends  us  polarized  light  is  ac-
tually a  reflecting  and  not  an  illuminating  body.  Subjecting  this  to
rigid  criticism,  it  may  indeed  be  objected  that  the  feelings  do  not
necessarily  point  here  to  the  electro-chemical  condition  of  the  heav-
enly bodies,  but  only  the  influence  of  their  emanations  ;  their  rays
of  light,  of  heat,  &c.  are  perceived  in  the  feelings  of  the  patient.  I
do  not  at  all  oppose  this ;  at  the  same  time,  all  that  we  have  yet
succeeded  in  discovering  about  the  heavenly  bodies  is  perceived
through  emanations  of  each  kind,  by  means  of  our  senses ;  all  that
we  know  of  them  relates  to  that  alone  which  arrives  to  us  through
their  emissions,  and  thus  we  are  in  the  same  position  with  the  odic
emanations,  which  tell  us  that  the  sun  is  od-negative,  and  the  moon
od-positive,  as  the  emanations  of  light  teach  us  that  the  sun  is  warm,
the  moon  almost  without  heat,  &c.

240.  From  §  147,  in  the  examination  of  the  chemical  activity,  we
already  know  that  all  fire  affects  the  feelings  of  the  sensitive  with
cold.  This  is  so  far  worthy  of  regard,  that  we  know  from  the  re-
searches of  Pouillet  (Anal,  de  Phys.  et  de  Chim.,  torn,  xxxv.,  p.  402,)
that  the  exterior  of  flames,  which  depend  upon  oxygen  combinations,
possesses  much  free  positive  electricity.  This  cold  is  not  only  dif-
fused from  the  free  fire  of  od-positive  or  od-negative  bodies, — as  from
potassium,  Stearine,  oil,  alcohol,  and  sulphur,  but  it  may  also  be  de-
tected when  the  fire  is  inclosed,  whether  it  be  in  positive  or  negative
bodies.  For  when  Miss  Reichel  approached  a  stove  warmed  by  the
fire  inclosed  in  it,  she  found  it  indeed  warrn  at  the  greatest  proximi-
ty, so  loug  as  its  real  heat  acted  in  a  preponderating  degree  upon

*  Astrom.  meteorol.  Jahrbuch,  1842.

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  193

her,  especially  with  iron  stoves ;  but  when  she  drew  back,  scarcely  a
couple  of  steps,  it  caused  her  vivid  sensations  of  coolness  ;  and  the
stronger  the  more  actively  the  fire  burnt  in  the  stove.  When  she
was  chilled  in  the  winter  time,  and  went  to  warm  herself  at  the
heated  iron,  it  now  chilled  her  through  and  through,  and  her  finders,
which  previously  were  rather  stiff,  became  perfectly  so  ;  she  was
compelled  to  go  away,  and  endeavor  to  warm  herself  by  walking  up
and  down  the  room  and  rubbing  her  hands.  It  was  pretty  nearly
the  same  thing  whether  the  stove  was  of  earthenware  or  of  iron.  In
judging  this  strange  effect,  it  must  not  be  overlooked  what  a  com-
plex phenomenon  this  is  of  what  is  given  out  by  heat,  light,  chem-
ism,  the  electricity  thereby  excited,  the  substance  of  the  burning  ma-
terials, and,  finally,  of  the  stove  itself.  The  resultant,  however,  of  all
these  components  is,  in  all  the  cases  hitherto  observed,  an  uncommon
degree  of  cold  to  a  distance  of  many  paces,  so  that  it  drove  Miss
Maix  out  of  the  illuminated  churches,  (§  131,)  and  Miss  Reiche],  when
she  remained  only  a  short  time  in  the  vicinity  of  a  burning  wood
fire,  was  in  rapid  succession  first  attacked  in  the  head,  then  rendered
giddy,  and  at  last  felt  so  seized  with  pain  in  the  stomach,  that  unless
she  hurried  away  she  fainted.  Fire,  therefore,  acts  od-negatively  on
the  sensitive  in  all  cases.

241.  The  question  suggests  itself  here,  what  apparent  temperature
may  be  shown  by  flames  of  that  kind  which  the  Od  itself  produces,
and  which,  invisible  to  healthy  persons,  are  perceived  by  the  sensi-
tive on  the  polar  ends  of  wires  from  all  the  various  sources  of  Od.
To  solve  this  I  inserted  first  a  glass  rod,  which  itself  felt  cool,  and  an
iron  one,  which  felt  warm,  in  a  number  of  substances,  and  let  Miss
Reichel  feel  the  flames  issuing  from  the  extremities  at  a  distance  of
two  inches.  I  obtained  the  following  series,  exactly  similar,  from  the
glass  and  iron  rods  :

COLD    OD-FLAMES.  WARM    OD-FLAMES.

Bichromate  of  potass.  Gold.

Sugar.  Platinum.

Sugar  of  milk.  Potass.

Citric  acid.  Narcotine.

Oxalic  acid.  Minium.

Chloride  of  lime.  Oxide  of  lead.

Sulphur.  Cast  iron.

Bromine.  Paraffine.

Graphite.  Mercury.

Charcoal.  Tin.

Arsenic.  Cadmium.

Manganese.  Iridium.

Alcohol.  Creosote.

Sulphate  of  iron.  Iron-filings.

194  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

The  apparent  temperature  of  the  flames  agreed  accurately,  there-
fore, with  the  temperature  which  the  substances,  on  which  they  de-
pended, had  shown,  by  feeling  in  immediate  contact,  by  feeling
through  a  long  glass-tube,  and  with  a  glass  rod  :  all  od-negative  sub-
stances give  cold,  all  od-positive  warm  flames.  The  temperature  of
the  flames,  therefore,  affords  an  expression  of  the  odic  quality  of  bodies
in  general.

242.  This  sensitive  patient  also  felt  all  radiations  from  electrified
bodies  cold,  especially  those  positively  electrified.  The  conductor,
glasses,  and  wood-work,  all  gave  heat  by  themselves  ;  as  soon  as  I
electrified  them,  and  only  to  a  strength  capable  of  yielding  positive
sparks  one-fifth  of  an  inch  long,  and  in  the  moist  air  of  cloudy
weather,  she  felt  all  these  substances  perfectly  cold  at  distances  of  from
ten  to  fifteen  paces.  This  feeling  of  cold  increased  rapidly,  the  faster  I
turned  the  plate  of  the  machine,  yet  was  not  immediate,  but  always
became  first  perceptible  several  seconds  later  than  the  electric  charge
upon  the  bodies.  A  fox- skin,  by  itself  warm,  gave  great  cold,  when
I  had  beaten  an  electrophorus  cake  with  it.  The  same  occurred
when  I  let  the  electricity  flow  from  the  conductor  into  the  air
through  points,  instead  of  electrifying  bodies  with  extended  surface.

When,  on  the  other  hand,  I  placed  negatively  electrified  bodies
opposite  the  observer,  she  found  them  warm  ;  an  electrophorus  com-
posed of  pure  resin,  warm  by  itself,  emitted  far  greater  heat  after
it  had  been  beaten  with  the  fox-skin,  and  became  observably  warmer
with  almost  every  stroke,  up  to  a  certain  degree,  where  it  remained
stationary.

After  these  observations  the  conclusion  was  warranted,  that  posi-
tively electrified  bodies  produced  cold,  negatively  electrified,  warm
sensations.  Since  this  ran  counter  to  the  general  ascertained  theory,
the  cause  of  such  effect  must  be  derived  from  the  electrical  distribu-
tion, whereby  the  air,  surrounding  the  positively  electrified  bodies  in
which  the  observer  was  placed,  was  negative  by  distribution,  and  con-
sequently as  the  nearest  substance  must  act  negatively  upon  her
sensations, — that  is,  in  opposition  to  the  condition  of  the  electrified
body.

243.  A  great  number  of  experiments  were  made  with  the  voltaic
battery,  and  this  would  be  the  proper  place  to  give  an  account  of  the
temperature  of  the  odic  flames  produced  by  it ;  but,  as  the  results,  on
this  point,  appear  too  complicated  to  admit  of  dismissal  with  a  passing
notice,  I  must  reserve  the  regular  description  of  them  for  a  special
treatise.

244.  The  odic  flames  which  were  produced  by  candle-light,  as  by
sun-light  at  the  end  of  long  wires,  all  felt  cold.    Miss  Reichel  felt  the

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  195

coolness  of  the  odic-flaraes  issuing  from  the  further  end  of  a  long
wire,  twenty  yards  long,  which  was  attached  to  a  copper  plate,  illumi-
nated by  eight  candles.  Here,  indeed,  both  heat  and  chemical  action
influenced.  Sunlight,  directed  upon  a  large  plate  of  iron,  and  thence
turned  towards  her  with  the  point  of  a  wire,  gave  a  flame  of  which
the  coolness  reached  very  far ;  moonlight,  on  the  contrary,  thrown
upon  the  same  plate,  produced  heat  in  the  flame  at  the  point  of  the
wire  directed  toward  the  observer  ;  and  this,  always  alike  in  many
repetitions,  at  very  different  times.

245.  The  following  experiment,  similar  to  those  in  §§  122  and  123,
may  indicate  the  condition  of  the  Od  produced  by  heat.  With  Miss
Maix,  I  had  an  earthen  pot  filled  with  cold  water,  inserted  a  wire  ten
feet  long  into  it,  placed  the  other  end  in  her  hand,  put  a  cover  over
the  water,  and  allowed  the  patient  to  become  accustomed  to  this  ar-
rangement. I  then  poured  the  cold  out,  and  replaced  it  with  boiling
water.  She  at  once  felt  the  wire  increase,  in  apparent  heat, — that  is,
in  odic  heat ;  this  acquired  a  steady  maximum  in  a  few  seconds.  I
now  threw  some  pieces  of  ice  into  the  boiling-hot  water :  the  heat  of
the  wire  in  the  hand  immediately  began  to  decrease  ;  it  sank  contin-
ually till  it  wholly  disappeared,  and  now  the  temperature  was  reversed.
The  disagreeable  heat  of  the  wire  vanished  entirely,  and  in  its  place
appeared  the  beginning  of  a  coolness,  which  continually  increased,  and
soon  became  very  pleasant  to  the  observer,  affecting  the  hand,  then
by  degrees  the  arm,  and  so  on,  the  whole  person,  even  to  the  back.
Judging  from  this,  I  must  assume  that  the  warming  produced  posi-
tive, the  cooling  negative,  movements  of  Od  in  the  bodies.

246.  Rubbing  a  copper-plate  with  a  piece  of  wood  gave  warm
-r  od  in  the  copper  wire  seven  yards  long,  (§  125.)

247.  The  chemical  polarization  is  usually  decided  by  the  predomi-
nant constituent,  which  enters  into  the  compound,  and  in  neutral
combinations,  by  specific  quality  and  position  of  these  in  the  od-
chemical  series.  A  number  of  experiments,  relating  to  this,  have  al-
ready been  described  in  the  fifth  treatise,  from  §§  137,  139 — 142.  I
will  add  a  few  other  instances  here.  I  placed  iron-filings  in  a  glass
cap,  and  poured  some  water  on  them.  A  glass  rod  inserted  in  this
felt  rather  warm.  I  poured  some  vinegar  in,  and  the  rod  at  once
gave  cold.  Vinegar,  like  almost  all  vegetable  acids,  is  od-negative.
But  the  rod  soon  became  warm  again  ;  the  vinegar  had  been  neutral-
ized by  the.  iron,  and  a  great  excess  of  iron-filings  remained.  I  then
added  citric  acid  ;  the  same  course  was  followed  :  in  particular,  after
I  had  stirred  up  the  mixture  a  little,  the  rod  became  wholly  warm
again.  I  next  took,  seriatim,  a  few  other  organic  acids  ;  all  produ-
ced the  same  effect.     In  another  experiment,  I  used  strong  solution

196  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

of  potass,  as  base,  which,  being  od-positive,  made  tbe  glass  rod  warm  ;
sulphuric  acid  poured  into  this  rendered  it  cold  for  a  moment,  then
followed  great  heat,  the  alkali  remaining  in  excess.  Sulphuric  acid
added,  to  neutralization,  produced  warmth  for  some  moments  during
the  combination,  but  permanent  cold  followed ;  sulphate  of  potass,
like  all  sulphuric  acid  salts,  is  an  od-negative  body.  Effloresced  car-
bonate of  soda,  placed  in  water,  evinced  at  once  an  uncommon  degree
of  cold  ;  the  imbibition  of  water  of  crystallization,  in  the  place  of  that
lost  by  efflorescence,  was,  therefore,  an  act  expressing  itself  externally
as  negative.  By  stirring  this,  cold  was  increased  for  a  short  time,
then  it  was  moderated  ;  carbonate  of  soda  is  itself  od-negative.  Ad-
dition of  strong  diluted  sulphuric  acid  did  not  act  upon  the  ther-
mometer standing  in  the  fluid,  but  the  glass  rod,  nevertheless,  became
very  warm  during  the  evolution  of  carbonic  acid ;  as  soon  as  the  ef-
fervescence ceased,  it  again  became  cold.  Sulphate  of  soda  is  od-
negative,  but  in  the  driving  out  and  gasification  of  the  carbonic  acid,
positive  Od  was  necessarily  set  free.  The  observer  often  said  that  she
felt  the  sensations  like  shocks  during  the  decompositions  ;  as  the  bub-
bles were  formed,  she  fancied  she  felt  reflex  effect  in  the  glass  rod.
We  shall  hereafter  return  to  similar  phenomena ;  for  in  these  mat-
ters, there  is  nowhere  effect  without  cause.

All  chemical  action,  therefore,  moves  in  manifold  alternations  of
+  and  —  od,  dependent  on  the  position  of  the  substances  entering
into  it,  in  the  odic  series  ;  so  that  the  result  may  always  be  predicted
so  soon  as  the  relative  value  and  quantity  of  these  are  known.

248.  We  now  come  to  the  examination  of  living  organic  structures  :
in  the  first  place,  of  plants.  I  brought  to  Miss  Maix  some  flower-
pots, containing  a  Calla  ^jEthiopica,  a  Pelargonium  moschatum,  and
an  Aloe  depressa.  I  rolled  up  one  end  of  a  long  stout  wire  into  sev-
eral coils,  and  gave  the  other  end  into  the  hands  of  the  patient,  to
allow  her  to  get  accustomed  to  it.  I  then  laid  the  coils  over  the
plants,  so  that  these  were  surrounded  and  involved  in  them.  An
unexpected  vivid  effect  displayed  itself.  The  wire  immediately  be-
came hot  in  the  observer's  hand,  and  this  so  much  that  it  ran  up  the
whole  arm.  At  the  same  time,  the  point  of  the  wire  diffused  cool
wind.  The  Calla  manifested  the  greatest  strength,  the  Aloe  the
least ;  so  that  it  seemed  likely  that  the  measure  of  the  strength  in-
creases, in  equal  degrees,  with  the  rapidity  of  growth  of  the  plant.
The  quick  growing  Calla  showed  itself  incomparably  more  active  than
the  slow  Aloe,  in  spite  of  its  greater  mass ;  while  the  Pelargonium
moschatum  always  kept  the  medium.  Perhaps  the  observation  is
not  out  of  place  here,  that  the  Calla  belongs  to  the  family  of  the

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  197

Aroideae,  in  which  it  is  well  known  that  the  strongest  evolutions  of
heat,  therefore  especial  manifestations  of  intense  vital  activity,  occur.

249.  In  the  end  of  September,  I  walked  in  the  fields  with  Miss
Reiche!.  We  noticed  all  the  flowering  plants  we  met  with.  Entire
trees  produced  a  total  impression  of  coolness ;  single  plants  in  pots,
the  same,  collectively ;  in  particular,  however,  she  found  most  of
them  warm  on  the  stem,  but  the  flowers  cool  :  e.  g.,  in  Gentiana
cilia ta,  Inula  salicina,  Euphrasia  officinalis,  Odontitis  lutea,  Oro-
banche  cruenta,  Linum  flavum,  Hordeum  distichum,  Coronilla  varia,
Posa  Bengalensis,  Pelargonium  roseum,  Iberis,  Impatiens,  Alchem-
illa,  Campanula,  Daucus,  &c.  Trees  were  also  cold  at  the  upper
end,  and  warm  near  the  ground:  e.  g.,  Pinus picea,  Abies  nigricans,
Fraxinus  excelsior,  Hippophde  rhamnoides,  Laurus  nobilis,  Punica
granatum,  Quercus  austriaca,  Betula  alba,  Morus  morettiana,  Sal-
■isburid  biloba,  Hedera  quinquefolia,  Cassia  corymbosa,  Juglans
regia,  &c.  Among  the  Compositae,  she  found  the  ray-flowers  of
many  cool,  those  of  the  disk  warm, — e.  g.,  Picris  hieracioides,  Cen-
taurea  paniculata,  Aster  sinensis,  Amellus,  Dahlia  purpurea,  Senecio
elegans,  Coreopsis  bicolor,  Aster ocephalus  ochroleucus,  Scabiosa
columbaria  and  atropurpurea,  &c.  Some  were  cool  in  the  stem,  the
inflorescence  warm  ;  as  Plantago  lanceolata  and  Salvia  verticillata  ;
she  experienced  a  mixture  of  cold  and  heat  from  families  of  Clematis
vitalba,  aud  the  capsules  of  Papaver  somniferum,  where,  indeed,  she
may  Lave  felt  through  the  alkaloids  and  oil  of  the  seed.  It  results
from  this,  that  different  parts  of  different  plants  behave  differently  in
relation  to  Od.

250.  To  come  closer  to  the  fects,  I  pulled  up  a  large  turnip,  and
made  Miss  Keichel  examine  it.  She  found  the  fibrils  of  the  root  od-
positive,  but  the  tuber  od-negative  below,  and  od-positive  above ;  the
whole  head  of  the  thickened  tap-root,  especially  the  neck,  where  the
buds  and  leaves  are  produced,  very  warm  ;  all  the  leaves  warm  at
the  base,  slightly  warm  at  the  points,  but  above  the  middle  zone,
where  they  are  most  widely  expanded,  very  cold.  A  plant  of  Hera-
cleum  sphondylium,  as  high  as  a  man,  had  the  root  warm,  the  stem,
up  to  immediately  below  the  umbel,  warm,  round  the  involucre  still
wanner,  the  umbel  itself  cold.  A  ripe  cucumber  and  a  melon  were
found  cool  above,  on  the  remains  of  the  flower,  but  cold  below  at  the
point  of  attachment  to  the  stem.  <

251.  Hence  it  followed,  that  no  universal  polarization  in  regard  to  '
Od,  according  in  any  way  with    Caudex  ascendens  and  descendens,
somewhat  as  in  crystals,  occurs  in  plants,  but  that  positive  and  nega-
tive conditions  alternate  at  different  points:  however,  intemodes  of
the  same  name,  and  within  these,  again,  parts  of  the  same  name,  pos-

198  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

sessed  like  odic  disposition  :  I  therefore  turned  to  the  investigation  of
the  single  organs.  First,  with  Miss  Maix,  on  a  young  Aloe  depressa.
She  found  the  point  of  the  niain  axis  strongest;  on  the  other  hand,
in  detail,  the  larger,  lower  leaves  acting  more  strongly, — that  is,  dif-
fusing more  cold  wind  than  the  smaller  upper  ones  ;  stronger  in  the
axils  than  at  the  points ;  the  mid-ribs,  with  their  vascular  bundles,
stronger  than  the  rest  of  the  parenchymatous  mass  ;  lastly,  the  under
surface  of  the  leaves  stronger  than  the  upper.  The  same  plant,  as
well  as  an  Agave  Americana,  when  gone  through  with  Miss  Reiche],
gave  the  same  results :  the  little  stem  cooler  at  the  apex  than  at  the
base ;  each  leaf  stronger  at  the  base  and  on  the  under  face,  than  at
the  point  and  upper  face,  and  the  mid-rib  stronger  than  the  borders
and  parenchyma.  The  two  plants  were  of  about  equal  size,  and  bore
from  ten  to  twelve  leaves.  A  leaf  of  Ulmus  campestris,  of  Laurus
nobilis,  and  of  Punica  granatum,  all  still  upon  the  tree,  were  each
warmer  on  the  under  face  than  on  the  upper  ;  and  again,  warmer  at
the  point  of  attachment  than  at  the  tip.  Leaves  of  Castanea  vesca,
taken  from  the  tree,  were  compared  in  three  different  stages  of
growths, — when  green,  when  become  yellow,  and  when  wintery
brown  ;  in  all  of  which  conditions  they  could  be  obtained  in  October.
The  green  and  yellow  acted  in  general  as  cooling  to  the  hands  of  the
sensitive, — the  green  stronger,  the  yellow  weaker,  the  brown  not  at
all,  and  behaved,  like  a  sheet  of  paper,  almost  indifferently,  with  a
slight  indication  of  tepid  warmth.

252.  The  general  results  of  the  experiments  on  vegetation,  so  far
as  they  have  been  thus  made  in  a  preliminary  manner,  would,  there-
fore, allow  of  our  summing  them  up  as  follows  : — The  root-fibres 'are
warm,  therefore  od-positive  ;  the  ends  of  the  leaves,  above,  are  cold,
therefore  od-negative.  The  point  of  the  stem  loses  itself  in  leaves
and  leaf-buds  ;  it  therefore  comes  to  the  negative  side.  We  may  say,
then,  with  some  grounds,  positive  Od  predominates  in  the  descending
axis  ;  negative  Od  in  the  ascending.  This  must,  however,  be  accept-
ed with  great  limitation ;  for  innumerable  individual  conditions  pre-
vailed within  these  principal  states,  an  infinitely  distributed  duplicity,
in  which  +  and  —  od  alternate  a  thousand  times.  The  rule  peeped
forth,  however,  here,  that  where  nature  is  least  busy — where  the
growing  activity  is  slackened,  negativity  prevails — where  propulsion
shows  itself,  positivity.  Thus  the  vascular  bundles  in  the  mid-ribs,
the  under  face  of  the  leaves,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  leaves  toward
the  point  of  attachment,  were  always  found  more  positive ;  while  the
more  parenchymatous  mass,  the  upper  face  of  the  leaves,  and  the  part
toward  the  tip,  were  constantly  more  negative.  Physiology  teaches
us  that  the  leaf  does  not  grow  principally  at  the  point,  but  toward

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  199

the  point  of  attachment,  that  the  apex  is  perfect  very  soon  after  it
emerges  from  the  bud ;  while  at  the  stem  end — that  is,  the  lower
half — the  leaf  continues  to  grow  for  a  long  time.*  The  vegetative
propulsion^  therefore,  soon  ceases  in  front,  but  remains  active  behind.
Here,  then,  it  appears  that  it  is  in  league  with  positivity  of  the  im-
ponderables, light,  heat,  and  Od,  that  creative  nature  erects  her
structure;  and  when  she  gives  up  the  field  to  negativity,  she  carries
away  life  with  her  in  her  retreat.

253.  We  have  still  to  direct  our  view  to  the  animal  kingdom.
llow  immeasurably  great  the  part  is  which  Od  here  plays,  is  best
shown  us  by  the  profound  and  enigmatical  phenomena  of  somnam-
bulism. The  question,  however,  here,  is  not  of  this,  but  of  certain
reactions  of  healthy  life  upon  the  sensitive.  When  1  placed  a  living-
animal  upon  a  copper  plate,  connected  by  a  copper  wire,  several  yards
long,  with  Miss  Maix's  hand,  though  it  was  very  small — for  instance,
a  rose-beetle  (Cetonia  aurata)  or  a  moth  (Bombyx  mori),  or  any
similar  creature, — I  was  astonished  to  perceive  that  she  instantly
recognised  this,  after  a  few  seconds,  by  the  apparent  temperature  of
the  wire,  whether  she  saw  it  or  not.  When  I  placed  a  larger  animal
on  it,  such  as  a  cat,  she  felt  it  very  vividly.  The  effect  of  my  own
hand,  when  I  placed  it  upon  the  plate,  spread  all  over  this,  as  has
been  already  detailed  in  other  places.  I  have  examined  the  reactions
countless  times,  in  hundreds  of  modifications  ;  they  gave  the  always
constant  result,  that  every  living  creature  at  once  propagates  an  in-
fluence, not  only  immediately,  but  even  mediately,  through  various
kinds  of  bodies  and  long  wires,  which  Mi>s  Maix  found  as  warmth,
diffusing  at  the  same  time  a  cool  wind,  like  all  the  od-diffusing  ob-
jects of  inorganic  nature.  When  1  removed  the  animals,  the  effect
soon  ceased,  and  the  wire  sank  back  to  its  natural  peculiar  tempera-
ture. I  made  similar  experiments  with  beetles,  moths,  and  cats,  on
Miss  Reiche!,  which  confirmed  the  preceding  in  all  their  results.

251.  When  I  elevated  my  hands  towards  Miss  Reiche),  she  felt,
even  at  a  distance,  warmth  flow  to  her  from  my  left,  and  coolness
from  my  right  hand,  as  from  a  distant  magnet.  Miss  Atzmanns
dorfer  felt  the  same  still  more  strongly.  When  I  approached  Miss
Reiche!  sideways,  so  that  I  only  turned  my  right  side  to  her,  she
felt  coolness  from  me  as  soon  as  1  came  in  at  the  door  of  the  room  ;
when  I  came  forward  with  my  left  side,  she  felt  me  warm.  Not  only
the  hands,  but  the  whole  sides  of  human  beings,  are,  left  od-positive,
right  od-negative.  Next  to  the  hands,  she  found  the  head  especially
strongly  odic,  on  the  right  side  negative,  on   the   left  positive.     The

*  Endlicher  and  Unger,  Grundz.  der  Botanik,  §  330. — Schleiden,  Grundz.  der
wins.  Botanik,  torn.  ii.  167.

200  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

toes  were  in  the  same  way  greatly  strengthened.  With  regard  to
front  and  back,  the  front  of  the  head  was  always  found  cooler,  the  back
of  the  head  warmer  down  towards  the  neck.  In  the  arms  and  hand,
both  she  and  Misses  Maix  and  Nowotny  found  the  following  arrange-
ment. The  tips  of  the  fingers  were  the  strongest ;  then  followed
those  parts  of  the  hands  where  the  fingers  arise ;  then  the  tendinous
part,  at  the  wrist,  i.  e.,  where  the  hand  is  attached  inside  to  the  fore
arm  ;  lastly,  the  parts  of  the  inside  of  the  upper  arm,  to  which  the
fore-arm  joins.  In  the  fingers  themselves,  again,  there  were  places
of  different  amounts  of  sensibility  ;  but  in  all  places  where  a  finger-
joint  ended  downwards,  it  lay  inside.  Nature,  therefore,  evidently
proceeds  according  to  the  following  rule  here.  From  the  shoulder
to  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  the  point  of  greatest  irritability,  in  every
joint,  always  lies  on  the  inside  at  the  distal  end  of  the  joint.  There
are,  consequently,  six  places  from  the  shoulder  to  the  fore-arm  in-
creasing in  sensibility  downwards  ;  the  lower  end  of  the  upper  arm,
of  the  fore  arm,  of  the  hand,  of  the  joints  of  the  fingers,  always  lying
in  the  inside  :  on  the  outside  there  is  no  especially  sensitive  point.

255.  The  mouth,  with  the  tongue,  is  a  point  of  very  peculiar
strength.  It  is  very  cool ;  that  is,  od-negative.  The  sensitive  feel
all  that  they  touch  with  the  mouth  with  especial  distinctness  and
strength  in  reference  to  its  odic  value ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  mouth
of  the  healthy  is  a  point  from  which  all  objects  can  be  charged  more
strongly,  odically,  than  with  the  hands.  When  I  held  a  glass  tube,
a  metallic  tube,  a  silver  spoon,  a  wooden  stick,  &c,  in  my  mouth,  and
let  the  various  sensitives  feel  the  other  end  ;  they  all  found  them
very  strongly  odified.  When  I  put  a  glass  of  water  to  my  mouth,
as  if  I  had  intended  to  drink,  and  then  after  a  short  time  gave  it  to
the  sensitive  patient,  she  took  it  for  magnetized  water.  When  I
passed  my  mouth,  closed  and  without  breathing,  along  the  German-
silver  conductor,  without  touching  it,  keeping  my  mouth  only  about
a  minute  very  close  to  it,  and  then  allowed  Misses  Maix,  Reiche!,  Atz-
mannsdorfer,  or  Sturmann  to  grasp  it,  they  found  it  as  perfectly
charged  as  if  it  had  been  in  contact  with  a  magnet,  the  sun's  rays,  the
point  of  a  crystal,  or  my  hands.

We  here  arrive  at  a  not  uninteresting  explanation  of  a  hitherto  ob-
scure matter— -the  import  of  the  kiss.  The  lips  form  one  of'  the  foci
of  the  biod,  and  the  flames  which  our  poets  describe,  do  actually
blaze  there.     This  will  be  clearly  elucidated  in  the  next  treatise.

It  may  be  asked,  how  this  can  agree  with  the  circumstance  that
the  mouth  is  od-negative  ?  This,  however,  does  harmonize  very  well
with  the  fact ;  for  the  kiss  gives  nothing,  it  desires  and  strives  merely,
it  sucks  in  and  sips,  and  while  it  revels,  longing  and  desire  increase.

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  201

The  kiss  is  therefore  not  a  negation,  but  a  physical  and  moral  nega-
tivity. °

256.  As  the  Od  is  unequally  distributed  in  space  over  the  human
body,  so  also,  I  concluded,  will  it  deport  itself  in  time.     I  conjectured
from  many  reasons,  that  the  Od   might   change  its  distribution,  and
displace  its   relative  intensities,  in   the  different  bodily  and  mental
conditions  which  we  pass  through  in  the  twenty-four  hours.     If  such
a  guess  should  prove,  from  experiment,  to  be  well  grounded,  I  hoped
we  might  gain  highly  interesting  hints,  even   if  not   explanation   of
sleep,  digestion,  hunger,  growing  hot,  chilling,  the  mental   changes
in  their  physical  effects,  and  so  on  as  to  the  questions  bordering  on
physics.     And  if,  in  the  first  instance  only,  inconsiderable  data  could
be  discovered  in  this  way,  it  would  certainly  indicate  to  us  a  new  and
promising  direction  for  the  investigation  of  things   which  are  in  all
respects,  so  difficult   to  throw  light  upon.     With  this  view   I  com-
menced by  letting  Miss  Keichel  make  hourly  observations  on  myself
and  representing  these  by  graphic  lines,  in  which  the  times  were  ex-
pressed by  the  abscisses,  and  the  strength  of  the  Od  by  the  ordinates.
I  completed  the  investigations  on  myself,  on  my  daughter  II.,  and  on
Miss  Keichel  herself.     A  period   occurred  to  the  last,  in  which  she
remained  perfectly  sleepless  for  three  weeks,  and  I  availed  myself  of
this  time   for  carrying  on  the  testings,  through  the  night,  without
interruption.     They  were  arranged  in  this  way  :  my  right  hand  was
grasped   by  the   sensitive   every  hour,  and  tested  for  its  strength  at
that  time,  measured,  and  then  the  point  marked  upon  the  table
winch  proportionately  corresponded  to  the  condition  of  force  found'
lhis  was  continued  for  twelve,  eighteen,  to  twenty-six  hours,  in  vari-
ous experiments.     My  usual  habit  of  life  during  this  was,  to  wake  at
from  six  to  seven  in  the  morning,  to  read  in  bed   till  nine-ten,  rise,
and  breakfast  on  cold  weak  tea  at  eleven-twelve,  dine  at  three  P  M
to  eat  a  very  little  confectionary  at  ten,  P.  M.,  and  go  to  bed  between
eleven  and  twelve.     I  drank  neither  wine  nor  beer,  toast  and  water
corlee,  nor  tea,  and  did  not   smoke.     I   took  no  exercise  beyond  a
moderate  walk,  which  did  not  extend  further  than  through  the  park
ot  the  castle;  and  I  passed  my  time,  chiefly,  quietly  at  The  reading-
desk.     In  other  respects,  I  was  in  good  health,   tranquil   frame  of
mind   and  at  the    age   of  fifty-six.     So  much  for  the  circumstances
which  might  have  had  influence  on  the  experiments.     In  all  cases,  I
avoided  touching  with  my  hand  every  metallic  object,  even  the  lock
of  the  door,  which  I  let  others  open  for  me,  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour
before  the  trial   of  the  feeling;  after  meals,  when  I  had  used  silver
instruments,  I  always  let  some  time  elapse  before  I  gave  my  hand  to

9*

202

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

be   examined.     I   also   avoided   allowing  the  sun's  rays  to  fall  upon
me,  or  going  near  the  fire.

257.  Since  the  standard  which  could  be  taken  depended  merely
upon  feeling,  that  is  upon  the  appreciation  of  a  sensation,  which
could  not  be  controlled  by  any  scale,  it  can  only  lay  claim  to  a  mo-
derate amount  of  accuracy.  To  approach  as  nearly  to  the  truth,  as
was  possible,  under  such  circumstances,  I  repeated  the  same  experi-
ments five  or  six  times  ;  those,  namely,  in  which   I  let  my  hand  be

Mori

Fig.  1.

Man's  hand,  )  B
right     J

Ditto. .  .
Ditto. .  .

Ditto.

Girl's  hand,
right.

Man's  hand,
right.

Man's  hand,
left.

felt,  and  marked  down  the  result,  hourly,  from  the  morning  till  late
at  night.  This  operation  is  illustrated  in  fig.  1,  and  the  various  re-
sults collocated.  The  agreement  which  is  found  between  the  various
series  of  observations  is  almost  astonishing,  and  prove  that  the  sense
of  feeling  of  the  observer,  as  I  have  already  frequently  noticed,  pos-
sessed a  very  high  degree  of  clearness.

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  203

As  soon  as  I  attained  conviction  from  this,  that  observations  of
conformable  conditions  could  really  be  obtained  in  this  way,  I  ex-
tended the  operation  in  various  directions.  I  continued  them  through
the  night,  had  them  made  by  females,  among  others  by  the  observer
on  herself,  <fec.  I  then  caused  the  particular  organs  of  one  and  the
same  person  to  be  investigated,  and  finally,  the  similar  organs  of  the
same  persons  to  be  compared  with  each  other.

258.  We  will  bring  to  light  the  particulars  of  this.  In  the  first
figure  are  a  number  of  observations  upon  my  right  hand,  mark«  d  by
the  right  hand  of  Miss  Reiche!.  My  right  is,  of  course,"  od-negative,
and  continued  so  for  the  whole  time,  since  this  quality  never  does
alter.  But  the  quantity  of  it  does  change,  and  is  subject  to  a  con-
tinual rising  and  falling.  1  call  this  the  magnitude  of  the  force.  It
is  shown  in  the  drawing,  that  from  six,  A.M.  forward,  at  which  time
the  observation  mostly  began,  a  growing  increase  of  the  force  oc-
curred till  the  hours  of  ten  or  twelve.  Then  commenced  a  decline,
going  on  till  three,  P.M.  From  here  started  a  new  ascent,  and  it  be-
came greater  until  seven  to  nine,  P.  M.  ;  then  followed  a  continual
decrease  until  late  in  the  night.

This  plate,  with  its  often-repeated  observations,  proves,  that  from
the  time  of  awaking,  although  I  remained  for  hours  reading  in  bed,
the  Od  increased  in  strength  in  my  right  hand,  growing  greater  con-
tinually after  breakfast  until  toward  noon.  The  rising  day,  there-
fore, strengthened  the  hand.  The  decline  which  now  appeared,
endured  exactly  till  dinner-time,  and  it  hence  became  evident,  that  it
was  the  awakening  of  hunger  which  brought  on  the  decrease  of
strength.  For  scarcely  had  this  been  appeased  by  the  dinner,  when,
with  the  first  spoonful  of  warm  soup,  the  decline  ceased,  and  the
force  immediately  began  to  rise,  and  so  on  to  its  maximum,  which
was  attained  in  the  evening  at  the  time  of  the  departure  of  daylight.
Similar  experiments  with  Miss  Maix  and  M.  Schuh  yielded  similar
results  ;  both  found  my  hands  to  influence  them  more  powerfully
after  dinner  than  before.

There  will  be  observed  on  the  diagram  a  slight  tendency  to  decline
about  nine  or  ten,  A.  M.  This  relates  clearly  to  the  breakfast,  the  desire
for  which  then  arises  ;  this  case  is  an  appendix  to  the  greater  decline
before  dinner,  and  serves  to  corroborate  it.

259.  In  order  to  make  certain  of  the  correctness  of  the  view  which
I  had  formed  on  these  points,  I  caused  the  experiments  to  be  performed
by  a  person  who  took  meals  at  different  times  of  the  day.  Miss
Reichel  herself  dined  at  my  house  at  one  o'clock  instead  of  three.  She
could  observe  her  own  right  hand  very  well  with  her  left,  and  so  un-
dertook this  task.     A  wholly  different  line  was  now  formed.  (Fig.  2.)

204

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

pq

Morning  hour.

Fig.  2.

Noon.

m
Evening.

pq  Q

Midnight.     Morning.

The  same  increase  of  the  force  appeared  generally  from  morning  to
noon  ;  its  decline,  however,  which  also  commenced  now,  did  not  en-
dure till  three  o'clock,  but  extended  only  till  one,  the  hour  of  her  din-
ner-time, and  then  ceased  at  once,  to  make  way  for  a  new  ascent  of  the
odic  force,  which  then  continued  to  increase  for  exactly  the  same  time,
and  reached  its  culmination,  when  the  day  began  to  disappear.  A
little  decline  was  also  observable  with  her  at  the  period  before  break-
fast, which  gave  place  to  an  increase  directly  she  had  taken  the  meal.

260.  From  these  comparative  experiments  it  follows,  therefore,  that
hunger  diminishes  the  strength  of  the  Od  in  the  right  hand  ;  talcing
food  increases  it.  We  here  clearly  come  upon  the  effects  of  chemism,
as  they  have  been  elucidated  in  the  fifth  of  these  treatises.  The  food
received  becomes  the  prey  of  chemical  force ;  digestion,  that  is,  de-
composition, begins,  and  odic  action  is  produced ;  chymod  becomes
free,  if  we  like  so  to  express  it.  It  makes  no  difference  whatever,
how  much  or  how  little  share  may  be  attributed  or  denied  to  vitality,
in  these  decompositions, — decompositions  they  remain,  and  from
them  arise  manifestations  of  Od,  which  diffuse  themselves  over  the
organism,  and  strengthen  its  members.

261.  The  question  of  the  day  being  answered,  that  of  the  night
remains.  What  is  our  odic  disposition  during  the  time  when  the  lu-
minary of  the  day,  with  its  vast  source  of  Od,  is  wanting,  and  the
powerful  influence  of  sleep  comes  over  us  ?  To  investigate  this,  the
sick  observer  must  keep  awake,  and  the  healthy  subject  sleep,  and

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

205

the  examination  must  be  continued  Lour  by  hour ;  so  that  the  affair
was  clearly  not  without  its  difficulties.  However,  I  succeeded  in  per-
suading Miss  Reichel,  by  explaining  to  her  the  scientific  value  of  such
an  investigation,  and  the  undoubted  merit  attaching  to  her  for  it,  to
come,  since  she  did  not  sleep,  hour  by  hour  through  the  night  to  my
bedside,  to  examine  the  condition  of  my  hand,  and  note  the  result.
There  was  no  other  means,  since,  in  order  to  obtain  a  true  result,  it
was  indispensable  that  I  should  lie  and  sleep  in  my  usual  bed,  as  on
other  nights.  Fig.  3  shows  the  result  of  various  modified  observa-
tions on  myself  and  other  persons.     From  the  morning  forward,  the

Morning  hour.

Fig  3.

Noon.

3  <u  rt

m  PQ  P

Evening.  Midnight.       Morning.

Man's  hand,    [
right      \

G  irl's  hand,    )
right      )

Man's  hand,
left...

% — \Mm

Od  increased  on  my  right  hand,  some  interruptions  through  hunger
being  left  out  of  view, "through  the  whole  day  till  at  least  six  o'clock
in  the  evening,  at  latest  till  nine.  It  now  most  distinctly  turned,  and
fell  continually  till  two  or  three,  A.  M.,  when  it  attained  a  stable  mini-
mum, which  endured  to  break  of  day  ;  at  the  time  of  the  experiment
about  five  to  six  o'clock.  Then,  however,  as  the  grey  dawn  drove
away  the  darkness,  the  force  was  at  once  aroused,  and  fresh  life  rein-
forced the  organic  world  ;  Od  and  vital  force  increased  anew  through-
out the  whole  day  as  long  as  the  sun  sent  down  rays  from  heaven.
262.    Here,  also,  I  was  permitted  to  find  confirmation  of  a  law  dis-

206

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

covered  earlier  in  a  different  way.  The  sun,  the  one  great  source  of
Od,  sends  it  to  us  with  light  and  heat,  and  thus,  throughout  the
whole  day,  imbues  with  it  all  that  it  shines  upon.  Directly  the  sun
sinks  below  the  horizon,  the  odic  tension  sinks  in  the  human  organs,
and  with  commencement  of  this  change  comes  also  to  living  human
beings,  weariness,  dulness  of  the  senses,  and  sleep.  When  the  od-
spring  of  day  ceases  to  flow,  the  fountain  of  conscious  leaking  life
becomes  dried  up.  Not  by  light  and  heat  alone  does  the  sun  call
all  life  into  existence,  but  it  uses  another  potentiality  as  a  lever,  the
Od,  with  which  it  impenetrates  all  things,  even  as  with  heat,  and  the
fluctuations  of  which  we  are  now  beginning  to  learn  how  to  compare
and  measure  with  the  conditions  of  sleeping  and  waking.  That  it
makes  little  difference  here,  in  general,  whether  the  sun's  rays  fall
upon  us  directly,  or  we  are  in  the  shade,  follows  from  the  law  of  con-
ductibility  and  distribution,  as  we  have  already  learned ;  and  wher-
ever we  may  be,  a  proportionate  share  of  the  Od  which  the  day  brings
will  fall  upon  us.

263.  But  what  are  the  conditions  of  the  left  hand  here,  which  is
oppositely  polar  %  Will  it  increase  and  decrease  in  positivity  in  the
same  proportion  as  the  right  gained  and  lost  negativity  ?  This  can
only  be  made  out  by  making  both  hands  the  subjects  of  observation
simultaneously,  and  noting  down  their  odic  condition  at  the  same
time.    Fig.  4,  shows  how  this  was  carried  out.    The  lower  line  shows

Mora

the  course  of  the  negative  right  hand,  the  upper  that  of  the  positivem

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  207

left.  This  latter  exhibits  a  more  rapid  increase  of  positive  od  in  the
morning,  and  again  a  higher  elevation  in  the  afternoon,  till  seven
o'clock,  than  the  negative  right.  The  midday  hunger  period  duos
not  show  so  deep  a  decline  as  in  the  right.  It  makes  the  smaller
maximum,  at  midday,  somewhat  later,  the  evening  one  somewhat
earlier,  than  the  right.  It  appears  to  correspond  to  a  greater  energy
of  development  of  Od.

The  od-positive  left  hand,  therefore,  does  not  follow  exactly  the
same,  but  still  a  very  similar  odic  course,  ivith  the  od-neyative  right,
taken  in  the  protensive  point  of  view  (in  regard  to  changes  of  tension.
—Ed.)

264.  The  brain  has  so  symmetrical  a  structure  that  when  such
great  inner  differences  appeared  in  the  symmetrical  hands  as  to  form
a  perfect  contrast,  I  could  not  but  reflect  on  the  deeper  lying  mech-
anism of  human  beings,  of  which  the  hands  are  but  the  outstretched
levers.  The  brain,  which  many  try,  not  always  very  happily,  to  plan
out  according  to   its  bony  shell,*  might   it   not,   perchance,  be  also

*  Those  who,  from  a  very  numerous  series  of  facts,  have  possession  of  a  truth,
however  much  they  may  be  in  advance  of  the  convictions  of  their  age,  cau  afford
to  allow  the  pleasure  and  the  privilege  of  a  sneer  to  even  so  profound  a  thinker
as  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach.  The  sentence,  to  which  this  note  refers,  is  un-
worthy of  him;-  but  we  must  remain  content  that  the  time  must  come,  when  fur-
ther experiments,  with  the  odic  forces,  will  convince  him  of  the  absolute  truth  of
Gall's  ideas,  published  in  the  great  work  which,  for  its  vast  display  of  genius,
sheds  a  lustre  on  the  nation  claiming  him  among  its  offspring.  The  odic  flames
emitted  from  Gall's  brain  have  reverberated  from  countless  orbs  in  space,  and  will
enlighten  the  philosophy  of  the  19th  century  in  this  our  planet;  (see  a  little
brochure  entitled,  the  Stars  and  the  Earth,  published  by  Bailliere:  also  Deleuze,
Memoire  sur  la  Faeulte  de  Prevision,  Paris,  L886,  page  33.)  No  case  could  be
better  calculated  to  ensure  a  conviction  of  the  truth  of  phrenology  than  that  of
Miss  Reichel — odically  tested,  in  a  state  of  full  vigilance,  on  several  organs  of  the
brain.  It  is  not  every  one  who  has  the  power  of  concentrating  his  ideas,  and  of
willing  intensely.  I  have  this  power  to  a  limited  degree,  but  it  is  combined  with
a  heavy  influence  from  the  brain,  which  overpowers  most  impressionable  subjects,
to  a  condition  of  heaviness  and  stupidity,  interfering  with  the  clearness,  and  clean-
ness, or  sharpness  of  the  results.  My  friend  Mr.  Thompson,  of  Fairfield  Lodge,
(.•a  the  contrary,  has  so  light  and  agreeable  an  influence,  when  he  silently  exercises
his  will,  that  obedience  is  yielded  to  him,  by  a  patient,  without  a  knowledge  of
the  presence  of  any  remarkable  change  of  condition.  1  have  seen  him  will  a  gen-
tleman, in  a  room  where  eight  persons  were  present,  to  perceive  no  one  but  him-
self, and  the  silent  mandate  has  been  obeyed.  He  has,  by  his  will,  placed  the
same  individual,  then  in  the  light  of  broad  day,  in  complete  darkness.  He  has
made  him  sit  down  and  sleep  in  a  chair,  to  which  he  was  obliged  to  adhere  by
an  ungovernable  force,  and  then  he  has  played  with  his  will  upon  several  of  the
organs  of  his  brain  in  succession,  obliging  him  to  manifest  the  pathögnomy  of
each  in  its  turn.  If  the  fluid  of  the  human  will,  the  odic  force,  can  do  this  in  the
case  of  Mr.  J.  B.  C,  will  it  not  be  equally  possible  to  perform  the  same  experi-
ment, on  the  phrenological  organs  of  Miss"  Reichel,  in  Vienna  ?     A  large  crystal,

208

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

gifted  and  imbued  with,  the  delicate  potentiality  of  Od,  and  make
itself  as  perceptible  to  such  delicate  reagents  as  our  sensitives  are  ?
Miss  Reichel  found  the  right  side  of  my  skull  cool,  exactly  like  my
right  hand,  but  much  stronger,  while  the  left  side  was  warm.  This
was  the  case,  not  only  in  me,  but  in  all  other  persons  whom  I  sub-
jected to  the  investigation,  male  and  female,  all  alike.  I  may  espe-
cially mention  M.  Th.  Kotschy,  who  allowed  Miss  Reichel  to  make  an
accurate  examination,  and  whose  head,  sides,  and  hands,  she  found  to
agree  exactly  qualitatively  with  mine.  This  appeared  to  me  really
much  more  worthy  of  a  fundamental  examination  than  the  hands
could  be,  and  therefore  I  repeated  the  twenty-four  nours'  inquiry  on
two  different  days  and  nights,  on  the  eighteenth  and  the  twenty-third
of  October,  1844.     Fig.  5  shows  the  course,  the  continuous  line  indi-

held  with  its  point,  in  turn,  towards  each  individual  organ,  would  make  Miss
Reichel  manifest  the  faculty  of  that  organ.  It  is  essential  with  some, — so  deli-
cate an  instrument  is  the  human  brain,  even  with  the  protection  of  "  its  bony
shell" — not  to  perform  such  experiments  as  these  for  too  long  a  period  at  one
time,  and  to  avoid  too  hasty  a  transference  of  the  Od  force  from  an  attractive  to
a  repulsive  organ.  Insanity  has  resulted,  from  eager  or  careless  ignorance,  where
the  subject  has  been  very  impressionable.  I  have  known  melancholy  instances
of  this  fact.  The  obvious  cure  bears  out  the  Baron's  philosophy,  that  in  Nature,
the  Od  force  positive  (or,  according  to  my  view,"  attractive)  is  engaged  in  growth
or  progress  in  advancing  life.  It  has  energy  for  its  type,  while  the  contrary  pole
tends  to  death,  or  retardation — sluggishness  of  action.  The  march  of  healthy
progress  has  the  allied  forces  of  our  amiable  feelings,  sacred  morals,  and  good  in-

*  Zoist,  vol.  iv.,  p.  254,  et  seq.

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  209

cates  the  path  of  the  first  investigation,  the  dotted  of  the  second,  which
could  only  be  carried  to  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening.

265.  This  operation  furnished  remarkable  acquisitions.  It  showed
that  as  an  unequal  course  occurred  at  the  same  times  in  the  hands,
so,  also,  did  it  to  a  far  greater  extent  in  the  two  sides  of  the  brain.
The  left  side  increased  in  strength  much  more  slowly  than  the  right
in  the  morning  ;  till  toward  three  o'clock,  it  was  scarcely  of  import-
ance ;  wdiile  the  right  had  already  attained  its  first  maximum  at  one
o'clock,  which  was  scarcely  inferior  to  that  it  attained  in  the  evening.
The  weakness  from  hunger,  before  dinner,  existed  on  both  sides,  but
far  smaller  than  it  showed  itself  in  the  hands.  While  the  right  side
advanced  almost  on  a  level  till  nine  o'clock,  the  left  rose  unceasingly
from  three  till  eleven,  P.  M.  The  right  began  to  sink  already  about
eight,  P.  M.,  to  cross  the  left  and  fall  deep  below  it,  while  the  left  did
not  begin  to  descend  from  its  culmination  till  one,  A.  M. ;  that  is,  five
hours  later.     The  morning  rise  was,  however,  almost  simultaneous.

The  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  this,  are :  the  course  of  the
brain  is,  on  the  tohole,  analogous  to  that  of  the  head  :  increase  in  the
morning ;  at  noon  a  temporary  decline  ;  upper  culmination  in  the
evening,  and  lower  culmination  about  four,  A.  M.,  agree  pretty  nearly
with  each  other,  and  thus  probably  with  the  daily  course  of  the
whole  organism,  in  a  mode  of  life  like  mine.  But  the  brain  exhibits
a  difference  from  the  hands,  in  the  far  smaller  participation  in  the  in-
fluence from  hunger,  and  the  satiation  of  the  stomach.  The  organs
of  the  understanding  and  soul  appear  to  take  less  notice  of  the  crude
nutrient  operations,  than  the  matter-ruling  hands*

tellecis,  characterized  by  vivacity,  cheerfulness,  benevolence,  and  charity ;  while
the  repulsive  agencies  of  bigotry,  tyranny,  and  the  evil  influences  of  pride,  cun-
ning, and  suspicion,  are  characterized  by  a  melancholy  desire  to  coerce  and  destroy
all  opposed  to  their  leaden  powers.  The  Baron,  an  enemy  to  superstition,  should
study  Gall's  Philosophy,  which  he  will  find  to  be  a  series  of  truths,  in  full  har-
mony with  all  other  noble  truths  capable  of  being  illustrated  by  the  brilliant
light  of  the  Odic  force.

*  Again,  to  direct  attention  to  the  philosophical  views  of  Gall.  "  The  organs
of  the  understanding"  under  the  circumstances  here  detailed,  have  no  greater
relation  to  "  the  crude  nutrient  operations"  than  the  organs  of  sight,  hearing,
smell,  taste,  and  touch.  Each  portion  of  the  brain  has  its  destination,  and  the
presence  and  emission  of  the  odic  force,  beautifully  shown,  with  the  Baron's  usual
ingenuity,  to  be  dependent  on  the  relative  circumstances  of  the  individual,  may
be  inferred  to  be  accumulated  or  increased  in  parts,  according  to  the  energy
with  which  those  parts  act,  at  various  periods  of  the  day,  or  under  various  cir-
cumstances, stimulating  the  parts  to  activity.  The  progress  and  culmination  in
the  two  opposite  courses  are  just  those  which  are  observed  in  the  activity  or
lethargy  of  the  organs  at  the  fore  and  back  parts  of  the  head.  Reichenbach  tells
us.  §'266,  that  "  the  fore  and  hind  parts  of  the  head  are  more  different,  anatomi-
cally, than  the  right  and  left  sides  of  the  brain,"  and  his  researches  have  estab-

210

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

In  fact,  nature  has  clone  well  to  provide  that  the  forces  of  the  soul,
pre-occupied  with  cares,  should  not  decline  immediately  that  food  is
wanting.  The  difference  of  the  two  sides  of  the  brain  between  them-
selves, shows  us  that  the  right  side  inclines  to  sleep  much  earlier
than  the  left,  as  well  as  rises  to  the  strongest  animation  much  earlier
in  the  morning  than  the  latter  :  therefore,  betrays  generally  a  greater
excitability,  but  not  greater  strength,  than  the  left.

266.  The  fore  and  hind  parts  of  the  head  are  more  different,  ana-
tomically, than  the  right  and  left  sides  of  the  brain,  and  I  was  desir-
ous of  bringing  this  opposition  also  to  the  test  of  the  present  researches.
This  operation  was  also  performed  twice,  on  the  19th  and  20th  of
October,  each  time  through  twenty-four  consecutive  hours,  and  it  is
expressed  in  Fig.  6.     Here  the  differences  offered  a  stronger  contrast.

Morning
hour.

R

P

Noon.

Evening.  Midnight.       Morning.

7:    S    S •10 1  -  7f  i'Z     1    2    5

The  forehead  in  general  manifested  cold,  the  back  of  the  head  consi-
derable heat,  and  this  not  only  in  men,  but  in  animals  ;  it  occurred
so  in  the  house-cat,  and  when  from  the  hint  this  afforded,  I  led  the
observer  to  my  stables,  she  found  it  also  in  the  horses  and  cows,
especially  a  strong  warmth  in  the  hollow  of  the  neck  of  the  last.  The
forehead  of  human  beings  became  in  like  manner  greatly  exalted  in
the  morning,  with  the  dawning  of  clay,  took  but  small  share  in  the
effects  of  the  matutinal  and  mid-day  periods  of  hunger,  and  reached

lished  just  that  which  might  have  been  expected  from  Gall's  demonstrations  of
the  functions  of  these  two  parts.  Gall  doubted  the  discovery  of  Mesmer
Reichenbach  appears  to  be  ignorant  of  the  deep  truths  contained  in  the  works
of  Gall :  and  yet,  by  establishing  the  existence  of  the  odic  force,  he  has  placed
his  Viennese  real  on  the  most  important  science  that  can  occupy  the  atten-
tion of  man.

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  211

its  culmination  after  sunset.  During  the  whole  of  this  time  the  back
of  the  head  remained  almost  unchanged,  so  that  at  six  o'clock  in  the
evening  it  was  exactly  in  the  same  place  as  at  six  o'clock  in  the
morning.  But  then  it  suddenly  arose,  almost  at  the  same  time  that
the  forehead  began  to  enter  upon  its  retrograde  course.

From  this  point  forward,  they  are  seen  to  cross  diagonally,  and
while  the  back  of  the  head  continually  rises  until  three,  A.  M.,  the
forehead  falls  incessantly  till  about  the  same  hour  ;  the  one  to  reach
its  upper,  the  other  its  lower  culmination,  almost  at  the  same  mo-
ment. From  this  point,  again,  the  opposite  course  commenced,  and
while,  after  three  o'clock,  the  exalted  back  of  the  head  fell  rapidly,
toward  four  o'clock  the  deeply  depressed  forehead  began  in  like  man-
ner to  rise  quickly.

267.  This  motion  is  a  representation  of  our  waking  and  sleeping.
The  forehead  represents  the  functions  of  waking  life  ;  °he  back  of  the
head,  of  sleep.  The  forehead  advances  with  increasing  odic  invigo-
ration  and  operative  activity,  from  five  in  the  morning,  with  break
of  dawn,  to  sunset ;  then  it  loses  the  od-spring  of  the"  luminary  of
the  day,  and  sinks  again  incessantly  from  its  height,  until  the  new
day  begins  to  break,  when  the  force  comes  anew  to  rejoin  it.  The
back  of  the  head,  on  the  contrary,  passes  quietly  through  the  whole
day,  almost  without  motion  :  but  so  soon  as  the  sun  has  sunk  below
the  horizon,  the  hour  of  its  nightly  labor  has  struck.  Now  arises  the
Morpheus,  and  with  rapid  steps  he  advances,  until  the  first  traces  of
morning's  light  remind  him  the  forehead  is  on  its  way  to  free  him
from  his  work ;  the  back  of  the  head  sinks  from  its  greatest  to  its
lowest  elevation,  at  the  close  of  night,  just  as  rapidly  and  uninter-
ruptedly as  the  forehead  sunk  from  its,  at  the  close  of  day.  Thus  the
two  not  only  shew  themselves  opposed  in  polarity,— since  one  is
warm,  that  is,  od-positiw,  and  the  other  cold,  consequently  od-nega-
tive,— -but  they  are  as  diametrically  opposed  to  each  other  in  their
operations  as  are  day  add  night,  waking  and  sleeping.

268.  From  this  comparison  it  is  seen,  that  between  waking  and
sleeping,  in  relation  to  Od  at  least,  there  is  not  an  opposition  like
that  between  activity  and  rest,  like  that  between  motion  and  stillness;
but  only  that  the  focus,  of  activity  is  changed.  The  force  does  not
cease  to  act ;  it  does  not  diminish,  but  it  removes  merely  from  the
front  of  the  brain  to  the  back,  and  in  proportion  as  the  front  gives
up  intensity,  the  back  seizes  it.  Sleep  thus  declares  itself,  not  as  a
decline  of  the,  vital  activity,  but  only  as  a  displacement  of  it.  In
just  the  same  measure  as  the  vital  force  is  active  in  the  forehead
in  the  day,  does  it  rule  in  the  hinder  part  of  the  head  during
night.     Sleep,  therefore,  is  only  an  alternation   in  the  functions  of

212

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

our  organs  and  powers ;  in  no  way  an  introduction  of  any  kind  to  a
state  of  rest  of  them ;  and  the  poets  may  use  the  comparison  of
sleep  with  death  as  a  metaphor,  but  the  physiologist  cannot,  in  the
consideration  of  organic  life.*  Vitality  is  exactly  as  energetically
active  in  another  direction  during  sleep,  as  in  the  waking  condition.
The  business  of  sleep  is  governed  by  the  cerebellum  :  while  the  fore-
head suspends  its  mental  labor,  and  when  it  takes  to  it  again,  to
which  it  -is  aroused  and  qualified  by  the  radiations  of  the  sun,  the
back  of  the  head  lowers  its  claims  upon  the  vital  force.

269.   A  small  accessory,  but  yet  not  contemptible  support  to  this,
is  afforded  also  by  Fig.  7.     I  had  become  sleepy  soon  after  dinner,

Moraine:  hour.

Fig.  1.

Morning.

Man's  hand,
ria;ht

and  resting  my  head  on  the  back  of  my  chair,  I  slept  for  ten  min-
utes. During  this,  and  shortly  before  and  after,  the  sensitive  ob-
server felt  my  right  hand.  The  result  is  shown  in  the  diagram,
marked  distinctly  between  four  and  five  o'clock.  While  on  all  other
days,  the  force  increased  continually  during  this  time,  it  here  made

*  Dr.  Elliotson  says,  "  I  have  often  seen  the  eyes  close  forcibly  in  the  mes-
meric sleep-waking.  It  is  usually  thought  that  in  sleep  the  eyes  close  from  the
relaxation  of  the  muscles  of  the  lids,  exactly  as  the  head  drops,  and  the  whole
body  ceases  to  support  itself.  But  I  believe  that  they  close  from  the  contraction
of  the  muscles,  just  as  the  iris  somewhat  contracts  at  the  moment  of  falling
asleep,  or  of  shutting  the  eyes,  and  remains  contracted,  and  the  raising  muscle  of
the  eye  (levator  oculi)  contracts  at  this  moment,  rolling,  the  eye  somewhat  up-
ward, and  remains  contracted:  two  circumstances  proving  that  sleep  is  not  a
purely  passive  state,  but  active  in  regard  to  the  muscular  portions  of  the  eye
itself.  In  falling  asleep  and  on  first  waking,  we  feel  not  a  weakness,  but  a  stiff-
ness of  the  lids ;  the  lids  appear  to  close  actively,  aud  the  under  lid  ascends  a  little
-at  the  moment  of  final  closure;  and  this  cannot  be  the  effect  of  relaxation,  but
must  result  from  contraction,  and  the  case  of  the  upper  lid  cannot  be  supposed
to  be  different  from  that  of  the  lower,  which  conspires  to  the  same  purpose  with
it."_See  Zoist,  No.  IX.,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  44-45.     Observations  by  Br.  Elliotson.

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  213

an  anomalous  leap  downward,  but  then  rose  again  normally.  There-
fore, the  short  sleep  into  which  I  had  fallen  had  sufficed  to  produce
a  very  perceptible  change  in  the  distribution  of  the  Od  in  me ;  as
long  as  it  endured,  the  manifestation  of  odic  force  in  the  hand  rapidly
diminished ;  the  ordinate  of  the  force  was  shortened,  and  then  in-
creased again  when  I  awoke,  and  all  the  vital  functions  again  took
up  their  previous  directions.

270.  The  pit  of  the  stomach  is  a  region  of  the  human  body  which
plays  a  very  peculiar  part  in  the  somnambulists.  Anatomical  inves-
tigations have  been  made  by  many,  to  find  a  peculiar  organ  there,
and  it  has  been  surprising  that  nothing  special  has  been  met  with,  to
which  could  be  attributed  the  extraordinary  effects,  that  very  often
occur,  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  so-called  clairvoyants.  Nei-
ther have  Pacini's  corpuscles,  which  have  been  the  most  recent  things
referred  to  in  this  question,  any  distribution  in  the  body,  of  such  ar-
rangement as  to  correspond  with  the  relative  strength  of  the  sensitive
parts  of  the  body.  But  it  is  not  at  all  necessary  that  a  special  organ
should  exist,  in  which  special  concentration  of  odic  phenomena  should
be  met  with.  At  such  points,  where  nature  acts  with  the  all-pene-
trating dynamics,  no  such  palpable  apparatus  is  requisite.  They  are
the  combined  results  of  innumerable  many-branched  components,
constituted  by  the  nerves,  plexuses,  ganglia,  &c. ;  the  point  of  most
concentrated  affectiveness  may  fall,  therefore,  where  it  will,  be  it  the
most  unimportant  part  of  the  belly.  My  desire  to  become  acquainted
with  the  course  the  Od  followed  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  was  very
great.  I  succeeded  in  bringing  about  a  twenty-four  hours'  investi-
gation on  myself.     Figure  8  shows   the  result.     The  line,  which  re-

2  -3  5  3       *  S

«  ft         m  M  O

Morning  hour.  Noon.  Evening.         Midnight.        Morning

Fig.  8.

Pit  of
torn
in  m.in

il

presents  this,  varies  but  little  in  its  curves  from  that  of  the  hands.

214

DUALISM  LN  THE  PHENOMENA.

The  distinction  is  shown  merely  in  some  changes  of  time  and  partial
postponement.  The  effect  of  hunger  began  first  at  two  o'clock,  but
extended  far  beyond  dinner-time,  to  five  o'clock.  The  evening  cul-
mination, too,  did  not  happen  at  sunset,  but  at  ten,  P.  M.  The
course  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach  thus  did  not  afford  anything  special,
but  supported  the  doctrine  that  the  series  of  effects  of  the  sunrise,
hunger,  satiety,  and  sunset,  are  extended  in  the  same  way  over  the
lower  part  of  the  body.  Phenomena  of  another  kind,  however,
which  were  produced  by  emotions  of  the  mind,  and  reflected  on  the
physical  functions,  were  expressed  the  more  distinctly  and  definitely
at  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  I  cannot  speak  of  these  until  some  future
period,  and  must  be  content  here  to  give  a  preliminary  indication.

271.  In  order  to  see  whether  the  course  of  the  development  of
Od  was  at  all  different  in  the  female  from  that  in  the  male  sex,  I
caused  a  twenty-four  hours'  investigation  to  be  made  on  the  right
hand  of  my  daughter  Hermine.     Figure  9,  shows  that  it  varies  so

Morniner  hour.

Fig.?

little  from  that  of  my  right  hand,  that  the  difference  might  almost
be  attributed  to  the  inevitable  inaccuracies  of  observation.  There-
fore in  this  respect  there  is  no  difference  between  the  two  sexes.

2*72.  Figure  10  is  a  second  support  to  what 'has  just  been  said.
It  is  the  line  of  the  right  hand  of  Miss  Reichel,  which  she  laid  down
from  feeling  it  with  her  own  left  during  twenty-four  hours.  It  is  to
me  of  value  to  get  possession  of  the  course  of  the  odic  phenomena  in
a  highly  sensitive  person  during  her  diseased  condition.  The  dia-
gram shows  that  it  does  not  differ  in  any  respect  from  that  of  the
healthy,  and  merely  deviates  in  the  order  of  time  of  the  phenomena,

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

215

Morning  hour.

Fig.  10

Noon.

xn
Evening.

a

Midnight.      Morning.

in  so  far  as  Miss  Reichel  dined  at  a  different  time,  two  hours  earlier
than  myself  and  children.

273.  On  the  other  hand,  there  occurred  an  accessory  observation
which  appears  deserving  of  mention.  On  the  diagram  is  seen  a
fresh,  sudden,  and  rapid  decline  of  the  force  at  five  o'clock,  A.  M.,  just
at  sunrise.  At  the  very  moment  when  this  began,  she  was  sudden-
ly seized  with  an  attack  of  pain  in  the  stomach,  which  lasted  till  seven
o'clock.  The  appearance  of  this  pain  not  only  at  once  restrained  the
appearance  of  odic  development,  but  quickly  depressed  it  to  a  much
greater  extent.  As  soon  as  it  disappeared,  the  force  increased  nor-
mally.

274.  It  is  also  deserving  of  remark,  that  although  Miss  Reichel
was  never  quiet  during  the  whole  of  this  night,  but  got  only,  now
and  then,  some  seven  or  eight  minutes  of  light  sleep ;  nevertheless,
as  the  figure  shows,  the  entire  nocturnal  period,  from  sunset  to  sun-
rise, afforded  the  same  contrast  of  daily  increase,  and  nightly  decline,
as  in  the  healthy,  who  are  completely  buried  in  sleep.

275.  From  this  last  series  of  investigations  many  further  physio-
logical truths  may  be  deduced  ;   I   will  here  only  bring  forward  a

tical  theory.  If  the  day  with  the  sunlight  and  the  increasing
Od  in  the  forehead  ami  hands  is  appointed  for  the  voluntary  intellec-
tual functions,  and  the  night  with  the  then  declining  Od,  which  now
removes  to  the  back  of  the  head,  to  the  more  unconscious  vegetative
functions,  all  of  what  we  do  and  suffer  that  corresponds  to  this
arrangement  of  nature  must  be  favorable  to  our  constitutions  and  to
our  health  ;  on  the  contrary,  all  that  contradicts  it  must  be  obstruc-
tive and  injurious  to  our  welfare.  Taking  food  is,  as  we  have  seen,
favorable  to  the  increasinc:  Od  in  the  forehead  and  hands;  the  effect

216  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

of  the  chemical  action  arising-  from  this  unites  itself  with  that  of  the
sun's  rays,  and,  in  conjunction,  they  elevate  the  development  of  Od,
and  with  that  the  active  force  of  daily  life.  We  therefore  promote
our  welfare  when  we  eat  in  the  day,  even  as  nature  has  appointed  the
day-time  for  it.  But  the  chemical  action  of  digestion  continues  for
several  hours ;  it  may  therefore  happen,  that  we  shall  take  food  at
such  a  time  of  the  day,  that  the  digestion  will  be  prolonged  into  that
time  when  the  sun's  rays  have  already  disappeared,  and  the  Od,  con-
sequently, is  sinking  in  the  hands  and  forehead.  Then,  the  effect  of
the  increasing  Od,  from  the  chemical  decomposition,  would  run
directly  counter  to  that  declining  from  the  absence  of  the  sun.  This
would  cause  a  conflict  in  the  organic  actions.  Thus,  a  new  theoreti-
cal ground,  that  is,  an  explanation,  is  afforded  of  the  old  practical
experience,  that  one  should  not  eat  in  the  evening,  and  in  general  not
for  several  hours  before  going  to  bed ;  and  that  if  this  be  done,  im-
perfect sleep,  with  restless  dreams,  i.  e.  half-consciousness,  semi-acti-
vity of  the  front  of  the  head,  will  be  the  consequence.  It  might  be
thought  that  the  developed  Od  would  then  withdraw  to  the  back  of
the  head,  and  thus  favor  sleep ;  this,  however,  not  only  contradicts
the  general  experience,  but  also  the  special  observation  here  upon
me.  For,  by  the  experiments  and  diagrams,  it  is  shown  that  in  Miss
Beichel,  who  took  dinner  at  one  o'clock,  the  decline  of  the  Od  in  the
hands,  together  with  that  in  the  front  of  the  head  going  parallel  with
it,  commenced  exactly  at  sunset ;  while  in  myself  and  my  daughter,
who  did  not  dine  until  three,  P.  M.,  the  same  decline  began  about
eight  or  ten  o'clock ;  thus  just  as  much  later  as  we  had  taken  our
meal.  In  Miss  Reichel,  therefore,  the  stronger  development  of  Od
from  the  chemical  action  of  digestion  had  already  ceased  when  even-
ing arrived  ;  while  in  myself  and  my  family  it  endured  some  hours
beyond,  and  in  some  cases  made  equilibrium  against  the  decline  of
that  Od  coming  with  the  sun  (heliod ;)  sometimes  exceeded  it  in
strength.  Therefore,  whoever  wishes  to  go  late  to  sleep  will  do  well
to  take  the  principal  meal  at  a  proportionately  late  hour  of  the  day.

276.  But  he  who  does  this  acts  in  opposition  to  the  natural  arrange-
ments of  the  animal  functions,  and  certainly  injuriously  affects  the
duration  of  his  health.  It  is  known  from  other  experience  that  the
sleep  before  midnight  is  the  deepest,  soundest,  and  most  strengthen-
ing, and  cannot  be  replaced,  to  equal  benefit,  by  any  arbitrary  supple-
ment in  other  hours.  The  above  researches  indicate  strengthened
reasons  for  the  explanation  of  this.  Nature  has  appointed  the  order
for  the  whole  animal,  and  apparently  the  vegetable  world  also,  with
few  exceptions,  that  with  the  departure  of  the  sun's  rays,  with  the
reversal  of  direction  of  Od  in  the  organism,  sleep  also  should  appear;

DUALISM  JE  THE  PHENOMENA.  217

and  vice  versa  that  it  should  cense  when  the  sunbeams  and  Od  re-
turn to  the  forehead.  If  we  go  to  bed  late  at  night,  we  must  sleep
long  into  the  day  next  morning.  But  then  we  have  the  course  of
the  heavens,  and  with  this  the  odic  direction,  against  us,  and  the
morning  sleep  does  and  must,  for  the  same  reason,  be  bad  and  unre-
freshing;  which  it  will  also  be,  when  we  go  to  sleep  with  a  newly-
filled  stomach  :  we  are  under  the  influence  of  a  false  direction  of  the
odic  development.  People  who  go  to  bed  and  rise  late,  are,  on  this
account,  generally  more  languid,  and  more  deficient  in  cheerfulness
in  the  morning,  than  those  who  accommodate  their  mode  of  lite  to
the  order  of  nature.  From  all  this  it  results,  that  whoever  wishes  to
insure  the  duration  of  his  health,  with  regard  to  the  course  of  nature,
which  has  such  a  profound  influence  therein,  must  rise  at  latest  with  the
first  rays  of  the  sun,  take  the  principal  meal  best  at  eleven  or  twelve
o  clock,  but  never  after  one,  eat  little  or  no  more  later  in  the  day,  and
go  to  bed  at  twilight.  Thus  do  all  animals,  thus  does  half  savage
man  in  the  state  of  nature,  thus  do  all  the  poor  and  needy  in  the
country  ;  only  the  so-called  enlightened  people  of  our  towns  do  bet-
ter :  they  sup  at  ten  or  eleven  at  night,  go  to  bed  at  two  or  three
o  clock,  and  afterwards  send  for  the  physician  for  gout,  scrofula  and
spleen.

Throughout  the  present  treatise,  we  meet,  in  all  the  observed  phe-
nomena, without  exception,  a  condition  in  which  the  Od  displays  it-
self through  excitation  of  sensations  either  of  tepid  warmth  or  cool-
ness. We  are  able  to  distinguish  four  kinds  of  modification,  in  the
conditions  in  which  we  are  able  to  detect  and  discover  it,  bv  means
of  these  impressions  on  the  sense  of  feeling.  First,  namely,  it  occurs
introduced  into  bodies  from  without  by  transfer,  and  then  depends
upon  other  odic  objects,  through  the  actual  contact  or  mere  approx-
imation of  which,  the  Od  has  been  conveyed  to  or  excited  in  it ;  to
which  belong,  therefore,  reception  of  the  rays  of  the  heavenly  bodies,
as  well  as  alteration  of  aggregation  by  friction,  chemical  activity,  or
heat.  Odic  quality  derived  in  this  way  is  but  temporary,  and  of
short  duration.  Secondly,  it  resides  in  amorphous  matter  as  an  in-
dependent qualify,  and  then  is  not  very  strongly  expressed.  Thirdly,
it  occurs  in  amorphous  substances,  as 'in  magnetized  steel,  impregna-
ted by  transfer  in  conjunction  with  magnetism  ;  not,  however,  escaping
rapidly,  but  holding  to  the  object  as  long  as  it  remains  magnetic
(§  23,  note).  Fourthly,  it  appears  accumulated  in  piarticular  points  ;
as  in  crystals,  plants,  and  animals,  and  is  then  of  constant  duration.

In  the  first  two  cases  the  Od  presents  itself  like  the  simple  electrical
charge,  uniformly  distributed  in  the  bodies;  in  the  two  last  we  find
it  hke  the  voltaic  pile,  presenting  a  polaritv  in  bodies,  and  not  merely

10

218  DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.

in  the  direction  of  one  single  axis,  but,  and  especially  in  organic
structures,  in  those  of  many  intersecting  ones.

The  Od,  therefore,  possesses  a  manifest  dualism,  which  presents  an
unmistakeable  resemblance  in  kind  to  electricity.

RETROSPECT.

a.  The  terms  "  tepid"  and  "  cool,"  "  warm''  and  "  cold,"  in  the
mouths  of  the  sensitive,  are  not  to  be  taken  literally,  but  figuratively.
They  express  a  sensuous  perception,  which  is  similar  to  those  which
tepid  warmth  and  coolness  usually  produce  in  us.

b.  In  crystals  and  magnets,  one  pole  almost  always  gave  them  a
warm,  the  other  a  cool  sensation.

c.  The  warm  pole  is,  as  a  rule,  Od-positive,  and  may  be  denoted
-f-  Od ;  the  cool  pole  is  Od-negative ;  therefore  in  like  manner  by

—  Od.

d.  The  lifeless,  amorphous,  material  world,  forms  a  great  series,  at
one  end  of  which  occurs  the  most  od-positive  body  (as  yet  potassium),
at  the  other  end  the  most  od-negative  (as  yet  oxygen),  and  which
proceeds  from  the  greatest  odic  tepid  heat  to  the  greatest  odic  cool-
ness, and  thus  represents  an  odic  series  of  all  matter.

e.  Positively  electrified  bodies  diffuse  odic  coolness  ;  negatively
electrified,  odic  warmth,  or  else  diminished  coolness.

f.  Heating  a  body  produces  manifestations  of  +  od ;  cooling,  of

—  od.

ff.  Friction  produces  +  od.

h.  All  kinds  of  fire  diffuse  —  od.

i.  From  the  effect  of  chemical  activity,  as  such,  —  od  is  always
immediately  given  out.

k.  All  odic  flames  emitted  from  od-positive  bodies  feel  warm,  all
from  od-negative,  cool ;  the  odic  temperature  of  their  flame-like  emis-
sions, therefore,  gives  a  measure  of  their  odic  value.

I.  In  plants  the  caudex  descendens  has  been  found,  on  the  whole,  to
be  od-positive  ;  the  caudex  ascendens  od-negative  ;  but  in  detail,  each
single  organ  is  polarized.

m.  In  man,  the  whole  left  side  is  od-positive,  the  whole  right  od-
negative.  This  polar  opposition  is,  especially,  distinctly  manifested
in  the  hands,  and  ends  of  the  fingers.

n.  Men  and  women  are  polarized  in  the  same  way.

o.  In  human  beings,  both  male  and  female,  the  odic  intensity  dis-
plays a  difference,  at  different  times,  and  in  different  dispositions,
arising  from  hunger,  satiety,  sleep,  disease,  &c,  sometimes  increasing,
sometimes  declining.

DUALISM  IN  THE  PHENOMENA.  219

•p.  When  brought  into  the  sphere  of  action  of  tie  objects  diffusing
Od,  sensitive  human  beings  are  only  comfortable  when  their  own  öd-
polar  parts  are  placed  opposite  to  the  foreign  od-poles  of  the  opposite
name;  when  opposed  to  those  of  the  same  name,  discomfort,  and
then  indisposition,  arise.

q.  There  exist  in  bodies  conditions  of  enduring  and  temporary  odic
charging,  similar  to  analogous  electrical  conditions ;  in  the  first  is
found  a  decided,  but  in  the  second  no  perceptible  dualism.

CONCLUSION,

The  experiments  and  observations  detailed  in  the  foregoing  seven
treatises,  and  the  deductions  drawn  from  them,  when  briefly  summed
up,  yield  the  following  axioms  in  physics  and  physiology  : —

1.  The  world-old  observation,  that  the  magnet  reacts  sensibly  on
the  human  organism,  is  neither  "  lie,  deceit,  nor  superstition,"  as
many  naturalists  at  present  think  and  declare  ;  but  is  a  well-ground-
ed fact,  a  manifest  physico-physiological  law  of  nature.

2.  It  is  a  tolerably  easy  matter,  one  that  may  be  carried  out  any-
where, to  attain  conviction  of  the  correctness  and  accuracy  of  this  ;
for  people  are  to  be  met  with  everywhere  whose  sleep  is  more  or  less
disturbed  by  the  moon,  or  who  suffer  from  nervous  indispositions  ;
almost  all  these  experience  the  peculiar  excitation  by  the  magnet,  to
a  considerable  extent,  when  it  passes  down  them  from  the  head  over
the  body.  Still  more  frequent  are  healthy  and  vigorous  persons,
who  feel  the  magnet  very  vividly  ;  many  feel  it  more  weakly  ;  many
detect  it,  but  in  a  very  slight  degree ;  finally,  the  majority  cannot
perceive  it  at  all.  All  those  who  detect  this  reaction,  and  they  ap-
pear to  constitute  a  quarter  or  a  third  of  the  human  race,  are  here
denominated  by  the  general  term  of  "  sensitive."  (§  66.)

3.  The  perceptions  of  that  influence  present  themselves,  chiefly,  to
the  two  senses  of  feeling  and  sight :  to  the  feeling,  by  a  sensation  of
apparent  (§  217)  coolness  or  tepid  warmth  (§  225) ;  to  the  sight,  by
appearances  of  light  issuing  from  the  poles  and  sides  of  magnets
(§§  8,  9,  15,)  when  the  patients  remain,  for  a  long  time,  in  deep  ob-
scurity.

4.  The  capacity  to  exercise  such  influence  presents  itself  not  only
in  the  steel  magnet,  which  we  produce  in  our  workshops,  or  in  na-
tural magnetic  iron,  but  nature  gives  evidence  of  it  in  an  infinitely
varied  number  of  cases.  In  the  first  place,  there  is  the  entire  globe,
which,  through  terrestrial  magnetism  acts  more  or  less  powerfully
upon  sensitive  persons  (§  60,  &c.)

5.  Then  there  is  the  moon,  which,  by  means  of  exactly  the  same
force,  reacts  towards  the  earth,  and  thus  towards  the  sensitive  (§  118.)

6.  Further,  all  crystals,  natural  and  artificial,  and  those  in  the  di-
rection of  their  axes,  (§§  31,  33,  35,  50,  55.)

CONCLUSION.  221

7.  In  like  manner,  beat,  (§  121.)

8.  Friction,  (§  127.)

9.  Electricity,  (§  159.)

10.  Light,  (§131.)

11.  The  rays  of  the  sun  and  stars,  (§§  97,  208.)

12.  Chernism,  to  an  especial  extent,  (§§  137,  142.)

13.  Then  the  organic  vital  force,  both  in  a,  Plants,  (§  25)  ;  and  also
in  b,  animals,  particularly  man,  (§  79.)

14.  Finally,  the  total  material  world,  (§§  174,  213.)

15.  The  cause  of  these  phenomena  is  a  peculiar  natural  force,  which
extends  over  the  whole  universe,  (§§  213,  214,)  different  from  all
hitherto   known  forces,   and  here   designated   by  the  word  "  Od,''

(§215-)    ...

16.  It  is  essentially  different  from  that  to  which  we  have  hitherto

applied  the  name  of  "  Magnetism,"  (§  42,)  for  it  does  not  attract
iron,  (§  37,)  nor  magnets,  (§§  24,  38) ;  bodies  charged  with  it  are
not  determined  in  particular  directions  by  the  terrestrial  magnetism,
(§  42) ;  they  do  not  affect  the  suspended  magnetic  needle,  (§  38)  ;
they  are  not  disturbed,  when  suspended,  by  the  vicinity  of  an  elec-
tric current,  (§  39) ;  and  they  do  not  induce  any  galvanic  current  in
metallic  wires,  (§  40.)

17.  Though  different  from  what  we  call  magnetism,  it  presents  it-
self in  all  places  where  magnetism  appears,  (§  43.)

18.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  magnetism  by  no  means  appears  every-
where that  Od  presents  itself;  this  force,  therefore,  has  a  proper  ex-
istence, independently  of  magnetism  :  magnetism,  however,  is  never
free  from  a  connection  with  Od,  (§  43,  44.)

19.  The  odic  force  possesses  polarity.  It  appears  at  the  two  poles
of  the  magnet  with  constantly  different  properties  :  at  the  northward
(§  225,  Note)  it  produces  a  sensation  of  coolness  in  the  feeling,  as  a
rule,  in  the  pass  downward,  and  in  darkness  a  blue  and  bluish-grey
light ;  the  southward  pole,  on  the  other  hand,  a  sensation  of  tepid
warmth,  (§  225)  and  a  red,  reddish-yellow,  and  reddish-grey  light.
The  former  is  connected  with  a  decided  pleasure,  the  latter  with  dis-
comfort and  uneasy  pains.  Next  to  magnets,  crystals  (§§  32,  50,
55,  220,  221)  and  living  organic  beings' (§§  84  to  89,  253)  exhibit
the  odic  polarity  most  distinctly.

20.  In  crystals,  the  odic  poles  occur  at  the  poles  of  the  axes  (§  32) ;
in  crystals  with 'several  axes,  there  are  several  odic  axes,  of  unequal
strength.

21.  In  plants,  the  ascending  trunk  is,  as  a  whole,  opposed  in  polar
quality  to  the  descending ;  but  there  are  countless  other  subordinate
polarities  in  all  the  separate  organs.     (§  248,  et  seq.)

222  CONCLUSION.

22.  In  animals,  at  least  in  man,  the  entire  left  side  stands  in  odic
opposition  to  the  entire  right  (§  226).  The  force  is  concentrated  into
poles  at  the  extremities,  in  the  hands  and  fingers  (§  254)  ;  and  in
the  two  feet  (§  23) ;  more  strongly  in  the  former,  more  weakly  in
the  latter.  Within  these  general  polarities,  however,  occur  countless
minor  subordinate  special  polarities  of  the  individual  organs  as  op-
posed to  each  other,  and  as  exhibiting  an  independent  bi-polar  con-
dition in  themselves  (§  254.)  Men  and  women  do  not  differ  quali-
tatively in  the  odic  characters  (§  227.)

23.  On  the  globe,  the  north  pole  is  regarded  as  positively  mag-
netic, the  south  pole  as  negatively  ;  in  accordance  with  this,  the  north-
ward pole  of  the  suspended  needle  as  negative,  the  southward  as
positive.  In  agreement  with  this,  I  have  taken  the  south  pole,  which
goes  with  the  negative  magnetic  pole,  in  like  manner  for  negative,
"  od-negative,"  =  — od;  the  other,  opposite  pole,  for  "  od-posi-
tive,''  =  +  od.  (§231.)  In  crystals,  therefore,  the  pole  giving  the
cold  downward  pass,  is  od-negative,  the  warmth-giving,  od-positive
(§  231.)  In  plants,  on  the  whole,  the  root  is  od-positive,  the  stem
and  its  apex  od-negative  (§  252.)  In  man,  the  left  side,  its  hand  and
finger-ends,  are  warm,  disagreeable,  and  red-luminous  ;  therefore  od-
positive  :  the  right  side,  hand  and  finger-ends,  are  cool,  pleasant,  and
emit  a  blue  light ;  therefore  are  od-negative  (§§  226,  231.)  It  will
not  differ  in  any  animals  (§  253.)

24.  In  direct  sunlight,  the  red  ray  and  those  below  it  appear  od-
positive,  the  blue  and  those  above  it — that  is,  the  so-called  chemical
ray — od-negative ;    the   spectrum    is,    therefore,    odically    polarized

25.  Amorphous  bodies,  without  crystalline  arrangement  of  their  in-
tegral components,  exhibit  no  separate  polarity  ;  but  each  acts  singly,
within  its  limits,  as  odically  warm  or  cold  to  the  feeling ;  and  this
reaction  exhibits  different  degrees  of  intensity  in  different  substances,
so  that  they  thus  arrange  themselves  in  succession,  and  form,  a  con-
tinuous chain  of  gradations,  in  the  same  way  as  they  form  a  series
according  to  their  electrical  nature,  which  we  call  the  "electro-chemi-
cal.'' Exactly  in  the  same  manner  do  all  simple  substances  combine
in  an  odic  series,  which  has  the  strongest  positively  od-polar  bodies
at  one  end,  as  potassium,  &c,  and  at  the  other,  the  strongest  od-nega-
tive, like  oxygen,  &c.  And  since  this  natural  grouping  appears  almost
to  coincide  with  the  electro-chemical,  it  may  be  called  the  od-chemical
series  (§  236.)

26.  Heating  (§§  122,  245)  and  friction  (§§  129,  246)  display  +
od  ;  cooling  (§  123)  and  the  light  of  fire  —  od.  (§§  131,  240,  244.)
—  Chemical  action  varies,  in  its  odic  value,  according  to  the  charac-

CONCLUSION.

223

ter  of  the  substances  brought  into  action  (§§  139,  142,  247.)  But
in  far  the  greater  number  of  cases,  they  have  hitherto  been  found  od-
negative.

27.  Of  the  heavenly  bodies,  those  which  have  no  proper  light,  as
the  moon  and  the  planets,  appear  od-positive  in  their  principal- effect
(§§  U9,  208,  239);  those  which  are  illuminating,  like  the  sun  and
fixed  stars,  od-negative  in  their  chief  effect  (§§  100,  208,  239).  But
the  spectrum  of  them,  again,  shows  itself  polarized  (§  116).

28.  The  odic  force  can  be  conducted  in  bodies ;  all  solid  and  fluid
bodies  conduct  Od  to  distances  as  yet  unmeasured.  Not  only  metals,
but  also  glass,  resin,  silk,  and  water,  are  perfect  conductors  (§§  47'
81,  113,  118,  121,  141,  167,  203).  In  a  somewhat  smaller  degree
only  do  less  connected  bodies  conduct :  such  as  wood,  paper,  cotton
stuffs,  wool,  <fec.  There  are,  therefore,  some,  though  only  weak,  ob-
stacles to  the  transition  from  one  body  to  another.

29.  The  conduction  of  Od  is  effected  much  more  slowly  than  that
of  electricity,  but  much  more  rapidly  than  that  of  heat ;  it  may  al-
most be  followed,  on  a  long  wire,  by  making  haste.

30.  Od  may  be  transferred,  be  brought  from  one  body  on  to  oth-
ers ;  or  at  least  a  body  in  which  exists  a  manifestation  of  free  Od,  will
produce  a  similarly  odically  excited  condition  in  another  (88  29,  45
72,  82,  105,  118,  143,  19S,  202).

31.  The  transfer  is  effected  through  contact.  But  a  mere  approx-
imation, without  actual  contact,  suffices  for  it,  though  with  weaker
effect  (§202).

32.  The  transference  is  not  performed  very  quickly,  but  requires
some  time,  several  minutes,  for  its  completion  (§  48).

33.  Neither  in  conduction,  nor  in  transference,  does  polarity  ap-
pear in  the  establishment  of  Od  in  the  bodies;  this  appears  rather  to
be  an  application  of  a  certain  molecular  arrangement  to  the  matter.

34.  The  duration  of  the  odic  condition  in  bodies,  after  complete
charging,  and  the  removal  of  the  charging  object,  is  brief  different
according  to  the  quality  of  the  material,  seldom  perceptible,  beyond
a  few  minutes,  to  healthy,  vigorous,  sensitive  persons  (§§  82,  167,
169);  sometimes  sensible,  even  after  some  hours,  to  diseased,  highly
sensitive  persons  ;  for  instance,  in  magnetized  water.  Matter,  there-
fore, possesses  a  certain  coercive  power  over  Od  (§§  46,  83,  112,  205).

35.  Bodies  which  have  been  odized  by  conduction  or  charging, — ■
e.  fj.  metallic  wires, — afford  sensible  emanations  of  Od  at  their  oppo-
site extremities ;  warm  or  cool,  positive  or  negative,  like  the  poles
from  which  they  issue  (§§  107,  114,  119.)

26.  Od  shares  with  heat  the  peculiarity  of  two  different  conditions  ;
one  inert,  slowly  making  its  way  through*  matter,  a  radiation  (§§  193,

224  CONCLUSION.

254).  In  the  last  condition  the  Od  from  magnets,  crystals,  human
bodies  (§  254),  and  hands,  is  felt,  by  healthy  sensitive  persons,  in-
stantaneously, and  without  any  perceptible  interval  of  time,  at  the  dis-
tance of  a  long  suite  of  rooms.  All  the  processes  which  the  inert  Od
diffuses  slowly  over  bodies  are  radiated  by  it,  simultaneously,  in  all
directions,  but  with  varying  strength  ;  thus  friction,  electricity,  heat,
chemical  action,  matter  in  general  (§201).  The  rays  of  Od  penetrate
clothes,  beds,  boards,  and  walls  (§  23,  note),  but  evidently  less  easily
and  quickly  than  magnetism,  and  with  a  certain  slowness.  The  con-
duction and  transfer  by  means  of  mere  approximation  of  the  poles  of
crystals  and  magnets,  the  hands,  amorphous  bodies  of  high  od-polar
rank,  &c,  appear  all  to  depend  on  radiation  of  Od ;  to  which,  there-
fore, belongs  also  the  so-called  magnetization  of  sensitive  human
beings.

37.  Electric  currents,  conducted  through  sensitive  persons,  produce
no  observable  odic  excitement,  nor  do  they  affect  them  immediately,
perceptibly  differently  from  all  other  persons  (§  160)  ;  but  mediately,
more  strongly  in  proportion  as  they  produce  odic  disturbances  in
other  bodies  (§  167).  Metals  placed  within  the  sphere  of  electrical
action  exhibit  the  most  vivid  phenomena  of  Od  (§  168).

38.  The  light,  which  odically  excited  bodies  emit,  is  always  weak,
and  from  this  weakness,  is  not  visible  to  every  eye.  Persons  who  are
not  exceedingly  sensitive,  are  obliged  to  remain  for  a  whole  hour,  or
even  two,  in  absolute  darkness,  before  their  eyes  were  sufficiently  pre-
pared to  be  fit  to  perceive  the  odic  light,  and  it  was  necessary  that
they  should  not,  during  this  time,  have  received  a  trace  of  other
light.  But  the  cause  of  this  cannot  lie  in  a  special  acuteness  of  the
eye  alone,  because  all  who  see  Od  light  are,  without  exception,  gifted
with  the  peculiar  excitability  to  detect  the  odic  impressions  by  feel-
ings, to  distinguish  them  according  to  apparent  warmth  or  coolness,
according  to  agreeable  or  unpleasant  sensations,  which  are  not  subject
to  change.  Since  these  different  capacities  are  always  all  present,  si-
multaneously, in  particular  persons,  or  are  all  simultaneously  absent,
they  must  be  regarded  as  connected,  and  appear  to  depend  upon  a
peculiar  disposition  of  the  whole  nervous  system,  which  we  are  un-
acquainted with,  and  not  upon  a  special  quality  of  separate  organs
of  sense.

39.  The  odic  light  of  amorphous  bodies  is  a  kind  of  inward  and
outward  glow,  showing  through  the  entire  mass,  like  phosphores-
cence, and  perhaps  depending  on  the  same  cause  ;  a  thin  luminous
veil,  like  a  delicate  downdike  flame  surrounds  it  (§  207).  In  differ-
ent bodies  this  light  occurs  of  different  colors — blue,  red,  yellow,
green,    purple,    mostly  white  and  grey.     Simple  bodies,  especially

CONCLUSION.  2.,5

metals,  are  most  brightly  luminous  (§  206) ;  compounds,  like  oxide«
sulphurets,  iodides,  hydrocarbons,  silicates,  salts  of  all  kinds,  glasses!
nay  even  the  walls  of  a  room,  are  all  luminous  (§  206).

40.  Where  the  odic  light  occurs  polarized,  as  in  the  magnet
(§  3,  6),  and  in  crystals  (§  55),  it  forms  a  flame-like  stream,  issuing
from  the  poles,  proceeding  almost  in  a  right  line  from  the  arms  of  the
magnet,  and  the  axes  of  the  crystals,  and  spreading  out  somewhat  at  a
distance  from  the  poles,  while  it  diminishes  in  intensity  of  light.
It  displays  all  the  brilliant  colors  of  the  rainbow  (§§  9,  13)  but  t e-
mains  predominantly  red,  at  the  positive  poles,  and  blue,  at  the  nega-
tive. At  the  same  time,  magnets,  crystals,  and  hands,  like  the  amor-
phous bodies,  remain  luminous,  glowing  odically  throughout  their
mass,  and  in  like  manner  surrounded  by  a  fine  luminous  vapory
veil  (§  8).  l     "

41.  Human  beings  are  luminous  almost  all  over  the  surface  of  their
bodies,  but  especially  on  the  hands  (§  92).  the  palms  of  the  hands
the  points  of  the  fingers  (§  93),  the  eyes,  different  parts  of  the  head,
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  the  toes,  &c.  Flame-like  streams  of  light  of
relatively  greater  intensity  flow  from  the  points  of  all  the  fingers,  in  a
straight  direction  from  where  they  are  stretched  out.

42.  Electricity,  even  the  mere  electrical  atmosphere,  produces  and
strengthens  the  odic  luminous  phenomena  in  a  high  degree  (§  167) ;
not,  however,  instantaneously,  but  after  a  short  pause  of  a  couple  of
minutes  (§  169).  l

43.  The  electro-magnet  behaves  like  the  common  magnet  in  regard
to  the  odic  light  emanations  (§  12) ;  and  it  is  capable  of  strengthen-
ing the  luminous  phenomena,  simultaneously,  in  just  the  proportion
that  it  is  susceptible  of  magnetic  exaltation.

44.  The  rays  of  the  sun  and  moon  produce  odic  charging  in  all
bodies  on  which  they  fall ;  and  this,  conducted  by  wires  into  the
dark,  gives  odic  flames  at  their  points  (§§  114,  119.)

45.  Heat  (§  125),  friction  (§  129),  and  the  light  of  fire  (§  134,),
produce  visible  luminosity  on  wires  and  their  points  carried  into  the
dark  ;  a  flame  resembling  that  of  the  candle.

46.  Every  chemical  action,  though  merely  a  simple  solution  in
water,  or  a  resumption  of  water  of  crystallization  by  effloresced  salts,
effects  exactly  the  same,  in  a  strong  degree,  on  wires  inserted  in  them
%  146).  But  processes  of  decomposition  independently  emit  odic
flames,  and  diffuse  odic  glow  (§  145).

47.  The  positive  pole  gives  the  smaller,  but  more  luminous  flame  ;
the  negative,  the  larger  but  less  intense ;  the  former  became  yellow
and  red  ;  the  latter  became  blue  and  grey.  The  odic  flame  radiates
light  which  illuminates  other  bodies -in  the  vieinitv.     It  may  be  col-

10*

226  CONCLUSION.

lected  by  glass  lenses,  and  concentrated  into  a  focus  (§  1 8).  The
luminous  odic  emanations  of  bodies,  and  their  poles  generally,  must
therefore  be  distinguished  from  odic  light,  in  the  narrower  and  more
peculiar  sense  of  the  word.

49.  Allodic  flame  may  be  made  to  flicker  by  currents  of  air;  be
diverted,  caused  to  wave,  blow  about,  and  broken  up  by  blowing  on
it  (§  20) ;  meeting  with  solid  bodies,  it  bends  round  them,  follows
their  surface,  and  streams  forward  on  them,  like  flames  of  common
fire  (§  20) ;  it  is  evidently  of  wholly  material  nature.

50.  We  can  give  it  any  direction  we  please, — upward,  downward,
toward  any  side  ;  it  is,  therefore,  up  to  a  certain  point,  independent
of  the  influence  of  terrestrial  magnetism  (§  20,  23.)

51.  The  emanations  of  odic  light  seek  plane  and  solid  angles,  and
points  (§  3),  and,  like  electricity,  find  more  ready  issue  there,  agree-
ing with  the  obstacles  to  transition  observed  in  conduction  ;  at  such
places  the  differences  of  temperature  and  luminous  phenomena  are
always  manifested  in  greatest  strength  (§  114).

52.  The  odic  flames  issuing  from  opposite  poles  exhibit  no  ten-
dency to  unite  with  each  other  :  no  perceptible  mutual  attraction
occurs,  and  thus  there  is  here  a  total  difference  from  the  magnetic
agent  (§§  3,  9).

53.  All  od-positive  bodies  emit  warm,  all  od-negative  cool,  odic
flames  (§  223).  The  odic  flames,  therefore,  bear,  in  reference  to  the
apparent  temperature,  the  character  of  their  pole  ;  and  this  conse-
quently affords  an  expression  of  the  odic  quality  of  the  body  to  which
they  belong  (§  241).

54.  In  many  conditions  of  disease,  especially  in  cataleptic  attacks,
a  peculiar  kind  of  attraction  has  been  observed,  exercised  by  the  od-
pole  of  magnets,  crystals,  and  the  hands,  for  the  abnormally  sensitive
hand  (§  23).  It  is  similar  to  that  of  the  magnet  for  iron,  but  is  not
reciprocal  (§  24,  54) ;  i.  <?.,  the  sensitive  hand  does  not  on  the  other
side  exercise  any  perceptible  attraction  for  the  od-poles  (§  23,  91).
Even  objects  rendered  odic  by  conduction  and  transfer,  produced  this
strking  effect  to  some  extent  (§  28).

55.  In  the  animal  organism,  night,  sleep,  and  hunger  diminish  the
odic  emissions  ;  food,  daylight,  and  activity  elevateand  increase  them
(§  260,  262).  In  sleep,  the  focus  of  odic  activity  is  removed  to  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  nervous  system  (§  268).  Within  the  twenty-four
hours  of  the  day  and  night,  a  periodical  fluctuation,  a  decrease  and
increase  of  it,  occurs  in  the  human  body  (§  265).

56.  Certain  applications  of  the  odic  laws,  discovered  in  the  present
researches,  have  been  made,  in  the  partial  explanation — of  the  so-
called  magnetized  water  (§§  27,  28,  73,  105,  112);  of  the  light  in

CONCLUSION.  227

rapid  crystallization  (§  55) ;  of  the  luminous  appearance  observed
over  graves  (§  158);  of  the  mysterious  affairs  in  fcfeflfeli  garden  at
Lolmar  (£  156);  of  the  so-called  magnetic  tub  (§§  135  151)  •  of
certain  efiects  of  digestion  (§  152) ;  of  respiration  (§153) ;'  of  many
strange  antipathies  of  mankind  (§  175);  of  the  necessity  of  placing
sensitive  diseased  persons  in  the  magnetic  meridian  (§§  69,  71)-  of
the  attraction  of  magnets  and  hands  for  cataleptic  persons  (8  23)'-  of
the  odic  condition  of  the  human  body  (§  79,  et.  seq.) ;  of  the  daily
and  hourly  alterations  of  this  (§  256)  ;  and  lastly,  of  some  of  the
peculiarities  and  causes  of  the  aurora  borealis  (§  21.)

END    OF    PART    I.

PREFACE,

2*77.  It  was  objected,  that  the  five  girls  whom  I  employed  as  re-
agents in  rny  former  researches,  were  insufficient,  where  the  question
was  the  establishment  beyond  doubt  of  important  scientific  truths. —
I  admitted  that  this  might  be  the  case,  and  endeavored  to  extend  my
investigations  over  a  greater  number  of  persons,  who  should  furnish
a  greater  variety  of  conditions.  In  this  way  more  th#n  two  years
have  passed  by,  during  which,  on  that  account,  the  present  treatise
has  necessarily  been  delayed.  Now,  however,  it  appears,  with  the
support  of  almost  sixty  sensitive  persons,  men  and  women,  mothers
and  maidens,  children  and  aged  persons,  low  and  high,  poor  and
rich,  weak  and  strong,  sick  and  healthy,  menstruating  and  pregnant
women, — a  multiplicity  of  conditions  is  now  represented  which  can
leave  little  more  to  be  desired.  But  the  most  essential  accession
which  the  work  has  received  through  these,  lies  in  the  fact  that  per-
fectly healthy,  strong  persons  are  included  in  considerable  numbers
in  the  list ;  that  men  who  have  never  suffered  illness,  and  who  have
passed  their  lives  in  continued  hard  bodily  labor,  have  perceived  the
peculiar  sensations  and  the  luminous  appearances  which  constitute
the  object  of  these  researches,  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  young
ladies  who  pass  half  their  lives  upon  a  sofa ;  that  neither  youth  nor
age,  sex  nor  position  in  life,  make  any  difference,  and  that  the  sen-
sitiveness is  not  a  diseased  condition,  but  rather  a  peculiarity  of  many
persons,  which  merely  appears  more  or  less  strongly,  or  becomes  im-
perceptible, under  various  circumstances.  The  subjoined  list  wilL
show  that  even  more  than  half  the  persons  who  have  had  the  good
will  towards  me  and  towards  the  cause  of  science,  to  devote  them-
selves to  these  investigations,  consists  of  perfectly  healthy  indivi-
duals. I  have  found,  to  my  great  astonishment,  that  the  number  of
the  sensitive  surpasses  all  expectation  among  mankind  generally, —
that  a  number  of  persons,  who  are  far  from  even  suspecting  anything
of  the  kind  themselves,  clearly  perceive  the  odic  sensations,  and  the
luminous  phenomena,  after  having  remained  a  sufficient  length  of
time  in  the  dark.     In  fact,  this  holds  now  to  such  an  extent,  that  at

PREFACE.  229

present  I  scarcely  ever  require  sick  persons  for  my  experiments  ;  and
it  not  only  suffices  to  employ  the  healthy,  but  I  am  nearly  in  a  posi-
tion entirely  to  exclude  the  sick,  and  especially  somnambulists.  The
objection,  therefore,  that  the  observations  are  not  supported  by  suffi-
cient testimony,  as  well  as  a  second,  that  the  evideuce  of  diseased  ob-
servers does  not  deserve  full  trust,  will  be  answered  in  the  following
pages,  and  must  henceforth  be  given  up.  °

Äs  to  the  reason  why  I  have  not  earlier  brought  forward  a  greater
number  ot  witnesses  for  my  observations,  I  have  already  explained
t  us  above,  (|  6)  ;  I  have  feared  to  weary  the  reader  by  a  super-
abundance of  material.  Now,  however,  that  this  is  pointed  to  as
an  imperfection  of  my  work,  I  no  longer  hesitate  to  make  use  of  all
the  evidence  at  my  command,  and  thus  to  place  my  thesis  on  the
broadest  foundation  ;  the  same  phenomena  will  be  seen  to  present
themselves  under  the  most  varied  circumstances,  and  the  reader  will
now  be  in  a  better  position  than  before  to  repeat  them  everywhere
and  with  facility.     For  convenience  of  revie-wal,  I  subjoin  the

LIST    OF    NAMES    OF    THE    PERSONS

Who,  from  their  capacity  for  sensitive  perceptions,  have  supported
me  in  my  labors  by  their  co-operation  and  observations.

Mrs.  Cecilie  Bauer,  wife  of  an  inn-keeper,  No.  161,  Braunhirschen-

grund,  V  lenna.
Miss  Leopoldine  Reiche!,  daughter  of  a  civil  officer  of  Schönbrunn.
Mies  Mana  Atzmannsdorfer,  daughter  of  a  military  surgeon.
Miss  Angelica  Sturmann,  daughter  of  the  director  of  an  hotel
Miss  trancisca  Weigand,  daughter  of  a  hatter,  No.  60,  Windmuhl

Vienna.  ■  '

Friedrich  Weidlich,  naval  invalid.
Miss  Josephine  Winter,  daughter  of  a  painter  at  Gratz.
Miss  Mane  Nowotny,  daughter  of  a  subaltern  civil  officer
Miss  Clementine  Girtler,  daughter  of  a  merchant.
Mrs.  Francisca  Kienesberger,  wife  of  a  steward  of  a  manor.
Mrs.  Johanna  Lederer,  widow  of  a  government  official.
Miss  Mana  Maix,  daughter  of  an  official,  No.  260,  Kohlmarkt,  Vienna.
Miss  Josepha  Zmkel,  daughter  of  a  householder  at  Nutzdorf,  near

\  lenna.

Baron  August  von  Oberländer,  at  Schebetau,  in  Moravia.
Mr.  Aicolaus  Rabe,  government  official  of  the  Montan  exchequer.
Miss  Amahe  Krüger  daughter  of  the  superintendent  of  an  hotel,  No.
27,  in  the  Leopoldstadt,  Vienna.

230  PREFACE.

Miss  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  daughter  of  an  innkeeper  at  Bochtitz,  in

Moravia.
Alois  Baier,  tradesman  in  Vienna.
Mrs.  Johanna  Anschiitz,  wife  of  M.  Gustav  Anschütz.
Dr.  Nied,  physician  in  practice,  No.  396,  Erdberg,  Vienna.
Mr.  Sebastian  Zinkel,  householder  in  Nussdorf,  near  Vienna.
Miss  Johanna  Kynast,  daughter  of  a  baker,  of  Waidbofen,  in  Austria.
Miss  Leopoldine  Atzmannsdorfer,  called  Dorfer,  daughter  of  a  mili-
tary surgeon.
Mrs.  von  Peichich-Zimanyi,  widow  of  a  Hungarian  noble.
Johann  Klai'ber,  joiner,  in  my  service.

Miss  Wilhelmine  von  Weigelsberg,  No.  451,  Wieden,  Vienna.
Baroness  Maria  von  Augustin,  wife  of  Baron  von  Augustin,  major  in

the  imperial  service.
Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  daughter  of  the  Consistorial  Counsellor  Pauer,

Vienna.
Professor  Dr.  Stephan  Endlicher,  Director  of  the  Imperial  Botanic

Garden,  member  of  the  Vienna  Academy.
Mr.  Franz  Fernolendt,  chemical  manufacturer  in  Vienna.
Anka  Hetmanek,  field  laborer  on  my  estate,  Reisenberg.
Miss  Ernestine  Anchütz,  and  her  brother.
Mr.   Gustav.   Anschiitz,  artist,   No.  268,  Ferdinandsgasse,  Wieden,

Vienna.
Mr.  Stephan  Kollar,  junior.
Friedrich  Bollmann,  cabinet-maker,  (blind.)
Mrs.  Josephine  Fenzl,  wife  of  Dr.   Fenzl,  curator  in   the   Imperial

Museum.
Mrs.  von  Varady,  wife  of  the  Aulic  Counsellor  von  Varady.
Mr.  Johann  Studer,  agriculturist,  of  Zürich.
Baroness  Pauline  von  Natorp,  wife  of  Baron  Natorp,  Vienna.
Chevalier  Hubert  von  Rainer,  barrister  of  Klagenfurth.
Mr.  Ernst  Pauer,  Consistorial  Counsellor,  and  superintendant  of  the

Evangelical  Communion  in  Vienna.
Mr.  Wilhelm  Hochstetter,  of  Esslingen,  gardener  at  Schönbrunn.
Baroness  Isabella  von  Tessedik,  widow  of  a   Hungarian  noble   and

court  secretary.
Mr.  Demeter  Tirka,  merchant  in  Vienna,  .(a  Greek.)
Miss  Elise  von  Seckendorf,  at  Sondershausen,  Saxony.
Mr.  Constantine  Delhez,  philologist,  Vienna,  (from  Belgium.)
Mr.  Theodore  Kotschy,  the  well-known  traveller  in  Africa,  Persia,  <fec.
Maximilian  Krüger,  orphan  from  the  Asylum,  Vienna.
Hermine  Fenzl,  infant  daughter  of  Dr.  Fenzl.
Mr.  Karl  Schuh,  physicist,  from  Berlin.

PREFACE.  231

Dr.  Friedrich,  from  Munich.

Dr.  Rag-sky,  professor  of  chemistry  in  Vienna.

Mr.  Mathias  Mauch,  veterinary  surgeon,  from  Wirtemburg.

Professor  Rössner,  imperial  counsellor  at  the  Academy  of  Fine  Arts,

Vienna.
Mr.  Edward  Hütter,  bookseller  in  Vienna.
Mr.  Franz  Kratochwila,  government  official.

Mr.  Franz  Kollar,  curator  in  the  Imperial  Natural  History  Museum.
Miss  Susanna  Nather,  daughter  of  an  officer  of  Basle,  now  in  Vienna.
Professor  Dr.  Huss,  physician   in  ordinary  to  the  King  of  Sweden.
My  daughter  Hermine.
Dr.  Diesing,  curator  in  the  Imperial  Natural  History  Museum.

Almost  all  these  persons  are  in  Vienna,  and  may  at  any  time  be
questioned  or  heard.  The  order  in  which  they  are  here  enumerated,
corresponds  pretty  nearly  to  a  decreasing  scale  of  the  intensity  of
their  sensitive  irritability.

278.  In  the  first  place  I  have  to  premise  a  word  or  two  upon  an-
other subject.  In  the  whole  course  of  the  preceding  seven  treatises,
I  have  everywhere  (§§  34,  225,  &c.)  assumed  the  north  pole  of  the
earth  to  be  positively  magnetic,  and  the  south  pole  of  our  planet
negative,  and  considered  all  other  polarities,  of  steel  bars,  crystals,
living  organs,  tfcc.,  in  accordance  with  this  pre-supposition.  Since
physicists  are  not  agreed  which  of  the  two  poles  of  the  earth  and  the
magnet  to  regard  as  positive  and  negative,  and  the  text-books  are
either  wholly  silent  on  this  head  (Biot,  Pouillet-M'uller,  Baumgart-
ner,  and  others),  or  directly  contradict  one  another  (Uisenlohr,
Physics,  3rd  edit,  p  461  ;  B'gdam,  Electricity  and  Magnetism,  p.  152),
one  calling  +  M  what  the  other  sets  forth  as  —  M,  and  since  un-
certainty thus  prevails  over  the  value  of  both  powers,  it  appears
necessary  that  I  should  briefly  explain  the  reasons  which  determined
me  in  my  choice.

In  the  electro-chemical  system  which  Berzelius  introduced  into
natural  science,  and  thereby  gave  its  present  form  to  chemistry,  the
voltaic  zinc  and  copper  pile  is,  it  is  well  known,  taken  as  the  basis,
and  the  electricity  of  the  zinc  pole  is  regarded  as  positive,  because  it
agrees  in  its  properties  with  those  which  glass  rubbed  with  zinc
"amalgam  presents,  and  which  have  been  called  positive.  It  is  further
agreed  to  consider  all  those  bodies,  Avhich  collect  in  preference  around
the  positive  pole,  in  the  voltaic  current,  as  electro-negative,  and  vice
versa.  With  this  clue,  I  have  endeavored  to  investigate  the  odic
properties  which  present  themselves,  on  the  one  hand  in  the  electro-
negative, and  on  the  other  in  the  electro-positive  bodies.     The  great,

232  PREFACE.

strongly  expressed  odic  distinctions  between  the  two,  as  I  have  made
them  out  and  detailed  them  in  the  preceding  treatises,  I  have  again
perceived  in  a  similar  manner  at  the  poles  of  crystals,  in  organic  be-
ings, in  magnets,  &c.  A  parallel  has  thus  been  distinctly  evolved,
to  be  drawn  between  certain  properties  of  one  pole  of  these  natural
objects,  and  those  of  the  other.  Those,  therefore,  which  are  parallel
to  the  properties  of  the  electro-negative  bodies,  I  have  assumed  to  be
equivalent  with  these  as  to  their  polar  value,  and  called  od-negative,
and  vice  versa.  That  pole  of  our  magnetic  needles  "which  turns  t-o
the  south,  and  which  I  have  everywhere  denominated  the  southward
pole,  is  the  one  which  in  odic  respects  produces  the  same  reactions  as
the  electro-positive  bodies.  This,  however,  is  the  magnetism  of  the
north  pole  of  the  earth.  Under  the  general  hypothesis,  therefore,
that  in  the  electro-chemical  series,  the  metalloids  are  actually  nega-
tively electrical, — most  metals,  on  the  other  hand,  positively  electrical,
— I  have  been  compelled  to  decide  in  favor  of  those  who  regard  the
north  pole  of  the  earth  as  positively  magnetic,  to  indicate  it  as  +  M,
and  consequently  to  mark  all  analogous  odic  properties  with  +  Od.
In  like  manner  I  have  necessarily  assumed  the  south  pole  of  the  earth
to  be  negatively  magnetic,  indicated  it  by  —  M,  and  called  the  odic
phenomena  going  parallel  with  it  —  Od.

Although  I  have  declared  for  the  electro-chemical  theory  now  pre-
vailing in  my  judgment  as  to  the  nature  of  the  magnetic  poles,  and
have  deduced  their  value  by  conclusions  from  this,  I  am  perfectly
aware  that  the  polar  signification  of  natural  bodies  is  still  an  unsettled
subject,  that  doubts  may  be  urged  against  the  negativeness  of  the
acids  and  the  positiveness  of  the  alkalies  when  we  see  the  two  in  con-
tact polarized  in  a  directly  opposite  manner,  &c. ;  in  the  course  of
my  investigations  also  I  have  in  many  places  perceived  obstacles  to
it ;  but  I  have  submitted  to  the  generally  received  opinion,  and  in
compliance  with  this  the  north  pole  of  the  globe  must  be  called  posi-
tive and  the  south  pole  negative,  so  long  as  potassium  is  acknowledged
to  be  positive  and  oxygen  negative.  If,  as  is  not  altogether  impossi-
ble, this  should  ever  be  altered,  it  will  be  necessary  to  reverse  the
signs  throughout  my  work.

279.  A  third  and  last  subject  ou  which  some  preliminary  remarks
are  requisite,  is  the  tvord  Od.  There  is  evidently  a  tolerable  proba-
bility that  the  definition  of  it  I  have  laid  down  at  §  215  includes  that'
which  Dr.  Faraday  a  year  later  introduced  to  the  scientific  public  as
a  new  material  force,  under  the  name  of  diamagnetism.  The  British
physicist  was  doubtless  unaware  of  my  researches,  which  have  ap-
peared in  an  English  translation  in  London,  or  he  probably  would  not
have  ignored  them.     Under  the  definition  of  the   word  Od  I  have

DISTINCTIONS  FROM  HEAT.  233

comprehended  the  final  causes  of  all  the  phenomena  described  by  me,
in  so  far  as  they  have  been  found  irreconcileable  with  our  previous
knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the  magnet  and  the  other  dynamics,  and
are  in  particular  capable  of  being  extended  from  magnetic  bodies  to
the  so-called  non-magnetic,  to  metals,  glass,  silk,  water,  salts,  and  all
the  rest.  Diamagnetism  was,  indeed,  discovered  and  made  known
twenty  years  ago  by  Seebeck,  Munke,  Büchner,  and  Becquerel,  which
was  also  unknown  to  Dr.  Faraday  ;  and  I  have  not  met  in  my  labors
with  the  transverse  position  of  freely  moving  non-magnetic  bodies  in
regard  to  the  magnetic  current,  and  for  the  present  a  gap  remains
between  the  subjects  of  our  labors  ;  at  the  same  time  it  is  in  my
opinion  not  impossible  that  we  are  both  journeying  toward  the  same
point,  only  by  different  roads.  If  I  am  not  deceived  by  appearances,
Dr.  Faraday  has  seized  one  of  the  many  odic  threads,  one  in  all  cases
favorable,  ami  will  help  onward  the  question  with  the  force  of  his  fer-
tile talent.  This  cannot  be  otherwise  than  advantageous  to  the  pro-
gress of  science.  Whether  magnetism,  diamagnetism,  and  Od,  shall
one  day  prove  identical,  or  solid  distinctions  shall  remain  between
them,  is  a  question  of  which  the  solution  appears  to  me  to  lie  at  pre-
sent at  a  considerable  distance.  In  any  case  they  collectively  include
totally  new  qualities  of  all  dead  and  living  matter,  and  from  their
generality  and  all-pervadence  throughout  the  universe,  are  of  the
highest  physical  importance.

Since  the  interest  of  the  subject  will  be  increased  by  the  clearness
and  distinctness  of  the  definitions,  i.  e.  by  the  settlement  of  the  extent
of  their  compass  and  the  determination  of  the  boundaries  of  their  compo-
nent parts,  I  think  it  opportune  to  insert  here  a  condensed  sketch  of  the
distinctions  which  appear  to  me  to  hold  between  the  now  established
allied  dynamics,  and  that  for  which  I  have  found  it  necessary  to  pro-
pose  the  term  Od.  In  this  manner,  on  the  one  hand,  what  I  regard
as  the  peculiarities  of  this  will  appear  better  exhibited  than  they  have
been  hitherto,  while  on  the  other  it  will  be  more  clearly  seen,  whether
and  what  hope  exists  of  bringing  the  new  phenomena  enumerated
into  already  known  categories,  and  thus  eventually  rendering  the  new
word  superfluous,  or,  whether  the  necessity  of  establishing  and  main-
taining it  is  inevitable.  The  distinctions, — so  far,  namely,  as  they
have  been  made  known  in  my  earlier,  and  will  be  detailed  in  the  pre-
sent and  future  publications, — are  as  follows  : —

A. DISTINCTIONS  FROM  HEAT.

a.  Odic  emanations  cause  feelings  of  cold  and  warmth  in  all  the
sensitive, — indeed  sometimes  produce  icy  cold  and  burning  heat ;
that  is  to  say,  excite  sensations  seemingly  like  these.     But  when  they

234  DISTINCTIONS  FROM  HEAT.

are  directed  upon  the  thermometer,  they  have  not  the  slightest  in-
fluence upon  it ;  even  Nobili's  thermoscope  remains  motionless.
Neither  the  cold-giving  nor  heat-exciting  pole  of  a  crystal  affects  this
instrument  in  the  least.

b.  Many  cases  occur  in  which  heat  and  Od  cause  diametrically  op-
posite effects.  A  right  hand  produces  a  feeling  of  cold  in  the  sensi-
tive ;  but  it  has  always  a  reverse,  heating  effect,  upon  a  delicate  ther-
moscope. The  rays  of  the  sun  produce  a  feeling  of  cold  in  the  sensi-
tive ;  on  the  contrary,  they  warm  the  thermometer.  Moonlight  is
felt  distinctly  warm  ;  but  not  indicated  perceptibly  by  the  thermo-
scope. Glowing  charcoal,  flame  of  burning  bodies  of  all  kinds,  radiate
a  remarkable  degree  of  cold  to  sensitive  nerves  :  the  thermometer,  on
the  contrary,  exhibits  the  effect  of  heating  rays.  Chemical  combina-
tions give  rise  to  sensations  of  cold,  while  liberation  of  heat  is  often
indicated  by  the  thermoscope.

c.  The  conductibility  of  Od  by  metals  surpasses  all  the  limits  of
the  conductibility  of  heat.  A  copper  wire  of  considerable  length,
more  than  sixty  feet,  charged  odically  at  one  end,  delivered  varia-
tions of-  odic  sensation  at  the  other.  A  wooden  rod  did  the  same,
also  a  glass  rod,  a  silk  ribbon,  a  strip  of  linen  or  cotton  cloth  many
yards  long  ;  bodies  which  are  far  from  being  capable  of  conducting
heat  in  this  manner.

d.  Od  penetrates  very  readily  through  solid  bodies  :  the  sensitive
feel  a  crystal,  a  man,  or  a  magnet,  behind  thick  walls,  in  a  few  seconds,
without  being  aware  of  their  presence :  the  greatest  heat  requires
many  hours  before  it  begins  to  be  even  perceptible  on  the  other  side.
No  one  feels  the  sun's  rays  through  a  wall,  least  of  all  in  cooling  ;
but  the  sensitive  distinguish  in  a  moment,  inside  a  building,  a  wall
on  which  the  sun  is  shining,  from  another  which  is  in  the  shade.

e.  Concentrated  odic  rays  are  felt  by  the  exceedingly  sensitive  at
incredible  distances ;  magnets,  poles  of  crystals,  human  hands,  and
trees,  at  distances  of  more  than  a  hundred  yards  ;  weak  rays  of  heat,
proceeding  from  bodies  at  the  common  temperature  of  the  air,  are
not  indicated  by  any  instrument  at  such  distances,  and  the  sensitive
perceive  the  latter  just  as  little.

/.  Neither  odic  heat  nor  odic  cold  alter  the  density  or  volume  of
bodies.  Even  a  thermometer  may  be  perfectly  charged  odically,  posi-
tively warm  or  negatively  cold,  and  the  index  will  not  alter  in  the
least.     Every  one  knows  the  effect  of  heat  upon  a  thermometer.

g.  We  know  already  that  great  distinctions  of  odic  condition  exist
between  the  different  colors  of  the  luminous  spectrum,  and  we  shall
become  more  minutely  acquainted  with  them  in  this  and  the  succeed-
ing treatises  ;  but  when  I  caused  the  rays  of  the  sun,  moon,  or  fire,

DISTINCTIONS  FROM  ELECTRICITY.  235

to  fall  at  less  than  thirty-five  degrees  upon  a  ten-fold  glass  disk,  and
decomposed  the  transmitted  light  into  an  iris  with  the  prism,  the
even  tolerably  sensitive  all  felt  very  great  differences  of  temperature
between  the  different  colors  ;  thus  in  places  where,  as  far  as  we  know,
no  trace  of  free  positive  or  negative  heat  can  reach.

h.  Metallic  wires,  which  appear  to  the  sensitive  to  glow  odically,
remain  quite  at  the  surrounding  temperature  to  common  sensation
and  the  thermoscope.

i.  When  of  two  glasses  of  water,  one  was  left  in  the  shade,  the
other  exposed  for  a  few  minutes  to  the  sun's  rays,  every  sensitive  per-
son distinguished  that  which  had  been  subjected  to  the  warm  rays  as
cooler,  (§  105.)

k.  Further  than  this  :  a  porcelain  rod  heated  directly  over  the  fire
at  one  end,  as  well  as  a  lighted  stick  of  wood,  were  held  in  the  hand
by  the  other  ends  ;  they  were  felt  to  become  much  cooler  by  the  sen-
sitive.    I  shall  detail  this  more  minutely  hereafter.

Heat,  therefore,  is,  under  given  circumstances,  a'  means  of  odic
cooling.  And,  therefore,  heat  must  be  fundamentally  different
from  Od,

B. DISTINCTIONS    FROM    ELECTRICITY.

Odic  phenomena  very  often  occur  where  electrical  phenomena
either  do  not  exhibit  outward  manifestations,  or,  as  far  as  we  know,
do  not  at  all  exist.  Under  this  head  belong  sundight,  moon-light,
spectra  of  light  transmitted  through  ten  glass  plates,  crystals,  hands,
and  in  part,  also,  chemical  processes,  <fec.

a.  Od  is  distributed  throughout  the  mass  of  matter  ;  a  hollow  me-
tallic sphere  is  seen  Lo  be  pervaded  with  light,  internally  as  well  as
externally.  A  glass  of  water  tastes  odized  throughout  its  mass  ;
even  when  poured  into  another  vessel,  (§107,)  it  remains  wholly
odic  ;  free  electricity  lies  only  on  the  surface  of  bodies.  Od  may  be
transported  in  the  inside  of  a  chamber  on  to  all  objects,  even  to  the
air,  for  some  time.  Dr.  Faraday  could  not  accumulate  electricity
anywhere  in  a  chamber  especially  prepared  for  the  purpose  ;  it  all
escaped  immediately  over  the  surface  of  it.

b.  When  free  Od  is  accumulated  in  a  body,  it  is  retained  in  it  in
such  a  manner  that  it  cannot  readily  be  removed  from  it ;  but  some
time — a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  an  hour — is  required  before  it  disap-
pears again  by  contact  with  other  bodies  ;  free  electricity  is  imme-
diately conveyed  away  by  contact  from  any  charged  body.

c.  Od  may  be  transmitted  to  unisolated  bodies,  and  accumulated
in  them  to  a  certain  extent.  Electricity  can  be  conveyed  and  con-
densed only  upon  isolated,  by  no  means  upon  unisolated  bodies.

236  DISTINCTIONS  FROM  ELECTRICITY.

d.  All  bodies  which  possess  merely  continuity  are  almost  equally
good  conductors  of  Od ;  the  incoherent  are  only  somewhat  worse  :
electricity  is  only  conducted  by  metals  well ;  by  many  other  bodies,
badly  ;  by  some,  not  at  all.  The  transmission  of  Od  in  the  best  con-
ductors, as  in  metallic  wires,  goes  on  slowly — twenty  to  forty  seconds
are  required  for  a  wire  fifty  yards  long  ;  electricity  traverses  a  million
times  longer  spaces  in  immeasurably  shorter  time.

e.  Permeability  by  Od  is  a  character  of  all  bodies  ;  slight  distinc-
tions do  occur  in  this  respect  among  different  bodies  ;  but  they  are
of  little  importance.  Electricity,  on  the  other  hand,  is  arrested  by  a
great  many  bodies,  which  are  almost  incapable  of  being  penetrated
by  it,  and  oppose  insuperable  obstacles  to  its  course.

/.  The  action  of  electricity  upon  Od  takes  place  at  much  greater
distances,  and  more  strongly,  than  that  of  electricity  upon  electricity.
A  weak  electrical  charge  from  a  spark  of  one-fifth  of  an  inch,  pro-
duces an  active  odic  current  in  a  metallic  wire  at  a  distance  of  two
yards,  (§  169,)  where  a  conductor  would  no  longer  produce  any  ob-
servable distribution  to  the  other.

g.  The  excitement  of  Od  by  electricity  does  not  follow  instan-
taneously, but  always  requires  an  appreciable  time — often  thirty  se-
conds or  more.  This  holds  both  in  the  production  of  sensations  and
of  light.  A  resinous  electrophorus  is  electrical  long  before  the  odic
flame  becomes  visible  on  it.  An  electrified  and  a  galvanized  wire
only  begin  to  glow  odically  after  the  current  has  continued  to  flow
for  some  time  through  them,  or  after  the  Leyden  jar  discharge  has
passed  some  seconds.  In  a  Schweigger's  multiplier,  the  odic  light
did  not  appear  for  ten  to  fifteen  seconds  after  the  deflection  of  the
needle  :  all  manifestations  and  effects  of  electricity  are  instantaneous.

h.  The  duration  of  odic  phenomena,  on  the  other  hand,  is  incom-
parably longer  than  that  of  electrical  transmissions.  When  a  wire
rendered  odically  incandescent  in  the  electrical  way  is  brought  out  of
the  current,  its  luminosity  endures  for  half  or  a  whole  minute, — nay,
after  strong  discharge  of  a  Leyden  jar,  two  minutes,  and  then  slowly
dies  away.  In  the  multiplier,  the  magnetic  needle  returns  from  its
divergence  back  into  the  meridian,  a  long  time  before  the  coil  of  wire
ceases  to  emit  odic  light.  Certain  flaming  odic  phenomena  in  con-
ductors, metal  plates,  or  wire  communicators,  do  not  all  begin  at
once,  when  electrified,  at  the  moment  of  receiving  their  maximum
electric  charge,  but  after  the  escape  has  continued  for  some  time  ;
when  the  supply  ceases,  the  odic  phenomena  disappear  but  gradually
and  slowly,  even  from  unisolated  conductors  ;  their  odic  condition,
however,  endures  for  the  sensitive  in  many  cases — for  instance,  in
water,  persons,  &c. — for  an  hour.

DISTINCTIONS  FROM  ELECTRICITY.  231

i.  But  cases  of  the  reverse  kind  also  occur,  in  which  odic  lio-ht  dis-
appears sooner  than  the  excited  electricity  ;.  an  electrophorus  loses  in
odic  luminosity  after  the  rubbing  with  fur,  after  a  few— perhaps  ten
—minutes  have  elapsed  ;  while  the  electrical  charge  of  the  cake  lasts
for  days  and  weeks.  It  follows  from  this,  that  Od  is  indeed  excited
by  every  electrical  action,  but  then  takes  its  own  independent  course.
k  Many  flaming  odic  appearances  exhibit  a  constant  tendency  up-
wards, and  ascend  vertically  :  electricity  does  not  manifest  any  such
tendency,  either  when  in  motion  or  at  rest.

I.  Appearances  of  odic  light  of  great  size  appearing  over  unisolated
electrified  metal  plates,  do  not  adhere  to  the  metal,  but  flow  over  it
like  the  aurora  over  the  earth  :  electric  currents  always  remain  close
upon  the  metal,  wherever  it  comes  in  their  way.  The  experiments
affording  tins  axiom  will  be  given  in  the  next  treatise.

m.  Effluences  of  Od  are  not  exclusively  confined  to  points  where
these  are  at  hand,  but  rise  out  of  the  sides  even  of  toothed  bodies  •
this  is  the  case  even  in  large  crystals.  In  similar  cases,  electricity
never  flows  but  from  the  points.  In  the  hydro-electric  chain,  all  the
elements  diffuse  light  and  sensations  of  Od  :  in  its  electric  currents
we  are  only  aware  of  the  internal  activity  and  complete  circumscrip-
tion of  the  electric  circuit  when  the  chain  is  closed.

n  Odic  currents  exhibit  a  remarkable  degree  of  independence  of
electricity,  even  when  excited  by  that  agent ;  the  isolated  metal
plates  on  which  the  two  appear  together  may  be  grasped  in  the  hand,
or  electrified  wires  may  be  allowed  to  lie  loosely  and  touch  the  -round
without  alteration  of  the  streams  of  odic  light,  while  the  electric  cur-
rents are  thereby  diverted  in  totally  different  directions.

o.  Odic  flames,  from  whatsoever  bodies  they  issue,  positive  or  ne-
gative, exhibit  no  tendency  to  unite  or  neutralize  each  other  when  ap-
proximated ;  when  they  cross,  they  go  on  together;  when  they  are
brought  into  diametrical  opposition,  they  repulse  one  another.  (See
infra,  £  401.)  Unlike  electricities,  neutralize  each  other  with  violent
attraction.

.  P\  Influence  and  induction,  which  produce  such  remarkable  effects
in  electricity,  I  have  hitherto  never  been  able  to  detect  with  certainty
in  odic  phenomena.  J

q.  Electrical  tourmaline,  like  every  other  crystal,  vividly  excites
the  sensitive  with  its  poles  ;  but  is  not  altered  by  wanning,  does  not
become  stronger,  and  the  electricity  thereby  excited  is  not  percepti-

.  r;  fGT}^s  the  most  striking  thing  is  the  contrast  between  the
violent  effect  of  the  Od  upon  the  excitability  of  sensitive  persons,  and
the  insensibility  which  the  same  show  to  eiectrical  effects,  and  which

238  DISTINCTION  FROM  MAGNETISM.

is  such  that  even  the  highly  sensitive  do  not  feel  them  more  than  the
healthy.  Hydro-electrical  and  frictional  electrical  currents,  or  the
discharge  of  the  Leyden  jar,  are  borne  by  them  as  easily  as  by  any
other  person.  Stroking  a  cat,  the  approach  of  a  thunderstorm,  the
tricks  played  with  an  isolating  stool,  are  agreeable  to  many  of  them.
All  this  manifests  that  the  gap  which  separates  Od  from  electricity
is  very  great.

C. DISTINCTION    FROM    MAGNETISM.

Od  is  formed,  or  manifested  vividly,  in  a  number  of  cases  in  which
magnetism  never  gives  evidence  of  its  presence,  or  is  yet  unknown
to  us ;  in  many  chemical  processes,  in  vitality,  in  crystals,  in  friction,
in  the  spectra  of  sun,  moon,  and  candle-light,  in  polarized  light,  and
in  the  amorphous  material  world  in  general.

a.  Development  of  Od  occurs  independently  and  without  magnet-
ism in  the  majority  of  cases ;  magnetism  never  occurs  alone,  but  al-
ways associated  with  Od.

b.  In  things  where  magnetism  appears  to  give  token  of  its  presence,
but  as  yet  is  not  incontestibly  admitted  by  science  to  reside,  as  in  the
rays  of  the  sun  and  in  moonlight,  it  is  manifested  in  a  so  extremely
weak  degree,  that  its  presence  is  still  highly  doubtful ;  but  in  these
very  cases  Od  appears  with  a  force  and  a  variety  of  effects  which  are
quite  astonishing,  and  seems  capable,  in  particular  instances,  of  shak-
ing the  very  foundations  of  life.

c.  The  interposition  of  a  mist  or  clould  before  the  light  of  the  sun
or  moon  at  once  weakens  their  effects  upon  the  sensitive  very  con-
siderably :  magnetism  is  not  restrained  by  anything — least  of  all  by
vapor.

d.  The  transfer  of  Od  may  be  effected  in  an  exactly  homologous
manner  upon  all  solid  and  fluid  matter  ;  metals,  steel,  salts,  glass,  milk,
resin,  water,  may  all,  with  slight  distinctions,  be  charged  with  Od :
magnetism  can  only  be  conveyed  to  a  certain  few  bodies  ;  nothing,
however,  is  yet  known  concerning  the  transferability  of  diamag-
netism.

e.  When  things  of  that  kind  are  charged  with  Od,  they  react  upon
the  sensitive  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  the  magnet :  but  not  the
least  perceptible  trace  of  magnetism  resides  in  them ;  iron  is  not  at-
tracted, even  in  the  shape  of  filings,  &c.

/.  The  coercive  power  over  Od  has  been  observed  in  steel  for  at
most  something  under  an  hour  ;  therefore  not  for  much  longer  than
in  water,  iron,  &c.  But  for  magnetism,  it  is  enduring  for  many
years,  while  it  is  quite  indiscernible  in  water,  iron,  &c.     Thus  mag-

DISTINCTION  FROM  MAGNETISM.  239

netism  remains  in  steel ;  Od  cannot  persist  in  it  by  itself,  but  disap-
pears.

g.  Od  is  also  conductible  by  substances  like  resin,  glass,  wood,  silk
strings,  cotton  bands,  &c,  to  the  distance  of  many  yards.  We  know
of  nothing  similar  in  the  magnet.

h.  Od  may  be  conducted  many  yards  on  a  long  iron  wire,  and
made  perceptible  to  the  sensitive  (§  47,  118)  ;  an  iron  wire  about
sixteen  yards  long  and  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  thick,  stretched  in  the
parallels,  and  put  in  contact  with  the  northward  pole  of  a  nine-layer
horse-shoe  magnet,  did  not  exhibit  to  me,  at  the  other  end,  any  trace
of  magnetic  reaction.

*.  The  distauce  of  action  for  Od  of  the  diffusing  bodies — such  as
hands,  crystals,  or  electrified  bodies,  reaches  at  least  as  far  as  with
magnetic  bars  of  the  same  size  ;  in  many  cases  farther.  I  have  tested
and  compared  both  to  a  distance  of  160  feet  through  the  air.  We
know  of  nothing  at  all  like  this,  in  regard  to  distances  of  effective  ac-
tion of  such  magnets  in  exerting  magnetic  influences.

k.  Emanations  of  Od  are  found  to  be  subject  to  a  kind  of  refrac-
tion, at  least  certainly  in  the  cases  in  which  they  are  accompanied  by
iavs  of  light.  I  have  already  shown,  and  in  a  subsequent  treatise
shall  make  known  many  new,  certainly  very  remarkable  observations,
in  which  I  have  found  that  while  a  glass  prism  separates  colors,  it
also  produces  similar  divisions  in  Od,  which,  with  the  rays  of  light,
is  subject  to  refraction  by  the  glass.  And  since  it  so  completely  ac-
companies light,  that  in  each  color  of  the  spectrum  appears  a  differ-
ent (if  I  may  so  express  myself)  odic  color,  it  is  clear  that  the  rays
of  Od  are  refracted  simultaneously  and  exactly  with  the  rays  of  light;
consequently,  that  odic  emanations,  whatever  they  consist  of,  are  re-
frangible by  glass,  like  the  rays  of  light.  But  this"  property  is  wholly
wanting  in  magnetism,  which  is  not  arrested  by  anything,  and  can-
not be  deflected,  as  Haldat  has  recently  shown  us  convincingly  by
means  of  his  magnetic  measuring  instrument.  lie  expressly  asserts
that  emissions  of  magnetism  from  bodies  are  neither  refracted  nor  re-
flected.— L'lnstitut,  May  27,  1846,  p.  647.

I.  The  distribution  of  Od  in  bodies  is  demonstrated,  for  example,
in  water,  to  be  effected  throughout  the  mass  ;  magnetized  water  may
be  poured  from  one  glass  into  another,  and  when  drunk  is  found  to
be  all  equally  strongly  odized  up  to  the  last  drops  ;  odically  luminous
metals  appear  to  be  translucid,  and  to  glow  through  and"  through  ;
odized  hollow  spheres  manifest  strong  expressions'of  odic  action  in
their  interior :  but  magnetism,  according  to  Barlow's  researches,  is
restricted  exclusively  to  the  surface  of  bodies.

m.  It  is  found,  and  will  be  explained  at  length  hereafter,  that  Od

240  DISTINCTION  FROM  MAGNETISM.

diffuses  around  itself  spherical  zones  of  alternating  opposed  polarities,
similar  to  electricity :  nothing  of  this  kind  has  ever  been  observed  in
the  magnet.

n.  Od  has  no  attraction  for,  or  power  of  supporting  iron,  not  even
the  smallest  filing.  The  most  striking  effect  of  the  magnet  consists
in  this  very  mighty  power.  But  in  regard  to  odic  capabilities,  crys-
tals and  hands  of  equal  size  with  the  magnet  are  not  only  equal  to
it,  but  frequently  surpass  it  in  strength,  especially  the  latter.

o.  Suspended  odic  bodies  do  not  acquire  any  particular  direction
from  the  influence  of  terrestrial  magnetism  ;  but  it  turns  magnetic
bodies  into  the  meridian,  &c.

p.  In  the  inorganic  kingdom,  the  flames  of  the  Od-poles  exhibit  no
measurable  attraction  toward  each  other  ;  poles  of  magnets,  however,
and  their  lines  of  force,  reciprocally,  the  most  powerful.  The  odic
flames,  even  when  they  blaze  forth  side  by  side  from  the  poles  of  a
horse-shoe  magnet,  display  no  attraction ;  nay,  even  when  the  unlike
polar  flames  are  directed  immediately  toward  one  another,  not  only
are  they  not  attracted  when  brought  close,  but  are  even  mutually  re-
pelled at  the  places  where  they  are  forced  to  meet.  This  is  directly
contradictory  to  all  we  know  of  magnetism.

q.  When  the  two  arms  of  a  horse-shoe  magnet  are  both  placed  in
a  horizontal  direction,  the  odic  flam«  also  flows  straight  out  from
them,  but  it  then  ascends  upwards  in  an  arc  from  both  poles  :  no
such  tendency  has  ever  been  perceived  in  magnetism.

r.  A  certain  amount  of  odic  flame  still  flows  from  the  magnetic
poles  of  a  horse-shoe  (vide  infra,  §  458)  after  the  poles  have  been
long  rendered  magnetically  indifferent  externally,  by  the  application
of  the  armature  :  the  magnetic  efflux  is  stopped,  but  the  odic  persists
still,  although  weakened.

s.  Even  when  two  strong  unlike  magnetic  poles  are  joined,  (§  401,
402,  404,  405,)  retain  and  neutralize  each  other,  an  emanation  of
odic  flames  nevertheless  persists  uninterruptedly,  although  rendered
weaker.

t.  Magnets  brought  into  the  electrical  atmosphere  of  the  conductor
may  have  their  odic  polarity  reversed,  while  the  magnetic  remains
quite  unaltered.  Electricity  thus  exerts  a  power  over  the  former,
which  it  in  no  case  possesses  over  the  latter.  (Vide  infra,  §  373,
436.)

u.  The  appearance  of  Od  and  that  of  magnetism  never  occur  simul-
taneously in  their  production.  When  a  galvanic  current  acts  upon
a  multiplier  or  a  rotating  apparatus,  the  reaction  on  the  magnetic  bar
is  instantaneous  :  the  odic  luminosity  and  the  effects  upon  the  sense
of  feeling  do  not  appear  until  after  the  lapse  of  several  seconds,  and

DISTINCTION  FROM  MAGNETISM.  241

the  more  slowly  and  later,  the  longer  the  conducting  wires  are.  The
same  is  the  case  with  the  cessation  ;  the  magnetic  reaction  ceases
immediately  on  the  interruption  of  the  galvanic  current,  but  the  odic
effects  last  a  good  while  longer.

v.  When  a  crystal,  a  finger,  or  a  rod  dipping  in  any  chemically-
acting  substances,  is  placed  within  a  wire-coil,  no  induction  is  caused,
even  when  these  bodies  are  much  larger  and  more  odically  potent,
much  stronger  in  emanation  of  light  and  excitation  of  sensations,  than
a  magnetic  bar ;  this  last  may  be  ten  times  smaller  and  a  hundred
times  odically  weaker,  and  yet  will  instantaneously  induce  a  current
in  the  wire  coil.     (Vide  §  40.)

w.  "When  a  magnetic  bar  is  held  in  the  hand  in  such  a  manner
that  the  magnetic  pole  of  the  same  name  as  the  odic  polarity  of  the
hand  is  outwards,  its  odic  flames  and  odic  force  increase ;  but  it  does
not  support  a  grain  more  iron  on  that  account.  Exactly  the  same,
mutatis  mutandis,  is  caused  in  magnetic  bars  by  the  poles  of  crystals.
The  magnetic  bar  gains  Od  from  the  odic  hand  or  crystal  pole,  bu*
it  does  not  receive  the  least  accession  of  magnetism.  (Vide  infra,
§  442  and  444.)

x.  The  above-mentioned  influence  may  go  so  far  that  the  odic  force
of  the  bar  may  be  even  reversed,  while  the  magnetic  polarity  remains
altogether  unaffected.  When  a  weak  magnetic  bar  is  grasped  by  the
southward  pole  in  the  left  hand,  the  projecting  northward  pole  not
only  loses  its  blue  negative  flame,  but  a  red  positive  one  immediately
begins  to  issue  from  it,  while  its  negative  magnetic  character  remains
unaltered.    (Vide  infra,  §  446.)

y.  In  the  course  of  these  treatises,  we  shall  become  acquainted
with  remarkable  cases  where  the  odic  flames  of  magnets  are  extin-
guished by  the  approximation  of  organized  living  beings ;  their
magnetic  force  is  not  in  the  least  changed  by  this.  (Vide  infra,
§  448.)

z.  The  moon  also  affords  a  beautiful  proof  of  the  distinction  be-
tween magnetism  and  Od.  I  have  shown  in  an  earlier  treatise,
(§  119,)  that  the  moon  acts  od-positively  upon  all  the  sensitive.  On
the  other  hand,  M.  Kreil,  the  Prague  astronomer,  distinguished  for
his  scientific  discoveries,  informs  us  in  the  first  volume  of  his  Astro-
nomico-meteorological  Year-book,  p.  104,  that  the  moon  exerts  an
attraction  on  the  southward  pole  of  the  magnetic  needle,  consequently
must  have,  on  the  side  turned  towards  us,  the  magnetism  of  the
south  pole  of  the  earth,  and  this,  according  to  my  rule  of  deduction,
is  negative  magnetism.  This  looks  like  a  contradiction  when  super-
ficially considered,  but  is  solved  by  more  accurate  examination.  For
the  magnetic  effect  which  the  moon  exerts  on  the  needle  is  so  weak,
11

242  DISTINCTION  FROM  MAGNETISM.

that  it  can  only  be  detected  by  observations  like  those  of  a  physicist
as  accurate  as  M.  Kreil ;  but  it  is  not  nearly  strong  enough  to  react
perceptibly  on  moderately  and  healthy  sensitive  persons.  Now  all
the  sensitive  feel  the  moon  od-positive,  and  this  very  vividly.  It  is
the  rays  of  light  of  the  moon  that  produce  the  active  effects  we  meet
with.  This  is  proved  most  clearly  by  the  circumstance,  that  the  ef-
fects of  the  moon  upon  the  sensitive  may  be  in  great  part  removed
by  keeping  away  the  direct  radiation  or  the  reflection  of  the  rays,  by
good  window  shutters ;  magnetic  influence,  which  penetrates  every-
thing, could  not  be  turned  away  by  intercepting  the  rays.  Thus,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  the  half  of  the  moon  turned  towards  us  has
proved  to  be  negatively  magnetic,  it  nevertheless  diffuses  abundance
of  positive  Od  to  the  earth.

a  a.  Of  diamagnetism  we  at  present  know  only  the  repulsions,
which,  from  Haldat's  observations,  may  in  the  end  range  themselves
with  the  true  magnetic  phenomena.

b  b.  But  the  distinction  between  Od  and  magnetism  comes  to  light
most  strikingly  in  the  following  experiment : — Let  an  iron  rod  of
about  twenty  inches  long  be  fixed  in  a  wooden  holder  of  any  kind,
which  shall  be  attached  to  its  axis.  When  this  is  so  directed  that  it
lies  horizontally  in  the  magnetic  meridian,  every  sensitive  person
feels  its  northward  end  cool,  its  southward  end  tepidly  warm.  If  the
northward  end  be  declined  till  it  be  placed  in  the  magnetic  dip,  i.  e.,
if  the  rod  be  turned  till  its  temporary  northward  end  make  an  an-
gle of  about  65°  with  the  horizon,  it  then  will  attain  its  maximum
magnetic  condition  ;  the  coolness  of  its  northward  pole  should  in
like  manner  increase  to  its  greatest  height,  the  southward  pole  also
in  warmth.  But,  instead  of  this,  we  find  exactly  the  opposite.  The
magnetic  northward  pole  now  becomes  odically  warm,  the  magneti-
cally southward  pole  odically  cold.  Od  and  magnetism,  which  oth-
erwise proceed  side  by  side  in  a  certain  parallelism  of  manifestations,
here  meet  diametrically  opposed,  the  negatively  magnetic  northward
pole  is  od-positive,  the  positively  magnetic  southward  pole  is  od-nega-
tive — under  the  circumstances  here  introduced  ;  the  two  follow  di-
rectly contrary  paths.

c  c.  We  shall  meet  below  with  cases  where  superimposed  layers
of  steel  of  like  magnetism  are  reversed  one  above  the  other  ;  so  that,
while  all  possess  one  kind  of  magnetism,  there  occurs  an  alternation
of  positive  and  negative  odic  layers.  This  may  be  strengthened  by
approximation  of  crystals  and  hands,  but  is  removed  by  that  of  mag-
net poles.     "(Vide  §§  340  and  344.)

dd.  We  shall  actually  meet  further  on  with  an  experiment  in
which   positive  magnetism  and   emanations  of  negative  odic  light

DISTINCTION  FROM  MAGNETISM.  243

occurred  simultaneously  in  a  particular  element  of  the  arms  of  a
horse-shoe  while  passing  over  another  magnet,  (§  433.)

Therefore,  at  present  the  identity  of  Od  and  magnetism  is  alto-
gether ott  t  of  the  question.

Consequently,  the  distinctions  which  exist  between  heat,  electri-
city, magnetism,  and  Od,  have  not  merely  remained  undiminished  by
the  ulterior  researches  continued  since  §  276,  but  have  rather  made
themselves  more  strongly  manifest;  and  they  will  become  still  more
so  in  the  following  treatises.  They  are  expressed  so  definitely  and
clearly  in  many  points,  that  the  necessity  of  a  special  terminology
appears  more  inevitable  than  ever.  Under  the  definition  of  the  word
Od,  I  include  all  the  physical  phenomena  presenting  themselves  in
these  researches,  tvhick  cannot  be  brought  under  the  definition  of  the
dynamics  hitherto  acknowledged,  together  with  the  vis  occulta,  on
which  they  depend.  Whether,  and  to  what  extent,  they  will,  in  the
course  of  time,  be  distributed  and  transferred  into  the  provinces  of
the  latter,  remain  questions  for  future  research,  and  are  deferred  till
the  acquirement  of  a  deeper  insight  into  the  essence  of  these  things.

Every  one  is  almost  convinced  that  electricity  and  magnetism  are
of  one  nature ;  no  one  doubts  that  here  essential  force  of  one  kind
acts  on  the  one  side  in  a  half-free,  on  the  other,  half-confined  condi-
tion ;  we  are  all  in  hourly  expectation  of  the  approaching  discovery,
through  which  their  identity  shall  be  demonstrated,  and" the  two  be
made  capable  of  comprehension  under  a  common  definition :  yet  we
shall  never  be  able  to  dispense  with  either  of  these  words.  In  the
same  way  it  will  happen  with  the  word  Od,  or  any  other  that  it  may
be  agreed  to  receive  in  its  place  ;  it  will  be  necessary,  in  order  to
comprehend  a  certain  complication  of  phenomena,  which  cannot  bo
otherwise  registered  than  as  a  special  group.

EIGHTH  TREATISE,

LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA.

The  Odic  Luminous  Phenomena  on  the  Magnet.

280.  I  commenced  the  present  series  of  treatises  with  the  most
striking  of  the  luminous  phenomena — those  of  the  magnet ;  those  of
crystals  followed  ;  then  I  made  known  those  of  certain  human  organs,
such  as  the  hands ;  and  thus  I  proceeded  onward  to  those  of  the
heavenly  bodies,  heat,  friction,  light,  electricity,  of  chemism,  and
finally  of  matter  in  general.  In  all  these  cases,  however,  I  have  only
made  mention  of  them  generally,  in  so  far  as  I  endeavored  to  obtain
signs  of  the  existence  and  activity  of  Od,  and  could  establish  these
through  the  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  luminous  phenomena.
I  have  confined  myself  to  this  in  all  places,  and  reserved  a  discussion
of  the  latter  in  particular  for  a  special  treatise.  Such  will  be  the
object  of  this,  the  eighth,  and  the  succeeding  essays,  and  I  thus  per-
form the  promise  made  in  §  55  and  §  93.

281.  Hitherto,  in  the  many  cases  mentioned,  I  have  only  reported
the  sensuous  perceptions  on  which  the  detection  of  the  odic  light  de-
pends, as  derived  from  the  statements  of  the  highly  sensitive ;  the
following  pages  will  show,  however,  that  it  is  by  no  means  only  these
who  detect  it,  but  that  the  odic  light  presents  itself  in  innumerable
cases  so  distinctly  and  prominently,  that  not  merely  also  the  slightly
sensitive,  but,  what  noio  becomes  of  the  greatest  importance,  a  large
number  of  perfectly  healthy  persons,  are  capable  of  seeing  it.

282.  I  shall  now  in  the  first  place  give  the  physical  fact,  the  ex-
istence of  the  odic  light,  new  and  more  extensive  confirmation  by  a
great  addition  of  observed  cases  ;  then  examine  these  more  closely  in
the  different  forms  of  their  occurrence ;  compare  their  relations  both
with  each  other  and  with  allied  natural  phenomena  ;  deduce  certain
new  laws  for  Od  from  them  ;  and  from  all  this  seek  to  make  out  some
fixed  points  for  establishing  its  place  in  the  domain  of  physics.

LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA.  245

HISTORICAL    ESTABLISHMENT    OF    THE     FACT     OF    ODIC    LIGHT    ON    MAG-
NETS   IN    GENERAL.

283.  In  the  earlier  treatises  it  was  shown  that  the  odic  light  was
perceived  by  all  the  highly  sensitive,  without  exception,  who  were
included  within  the  sphere  of  my  investigations,  and  thus  its  actual
existence  established  and  placed  beyond  reasonable  doubt,  by  a  series
of  testimonies  agreeing  in  all  essential  particulars.  It  was  further
demonstrated  that  the  different  degrees  of  strength  in  which  different
persons  saw  it,  depended  on  the  varying  conditions  of  disease  of  the
observers,  and  finally  that  in  one  and"  the  same  observer,  different
stages  of  diseased  condition  caused  a  different  degree  of  sensuous  re-
ceptivity, and  thereby  a  different  appreciation  of  the  impression  of
the  light  upon  the  senses.  This  must  be  clearly  understood.  Miss
Nowotny,  when  nearly  well,  no  longer  saw  any  light,  even  on  the
strongest  magnet  (§  3).  Some  days  earlier,  when  her  recovery  was
not  so  far  advanced,  she  still  saw  momentary  flashes,  disappearing
immediately,  when  the  armature  was  removed  from  a  magnet  in  the
dark.  Two  days  before  this,  she  had  seen  a  luminous  thread  along
the  edges  of  the  steel,  and  a  week  previously,  a  beautiful  shining
flame  at  each  pole  of  the  open  magnet,  the  ray-like  emanations  of
which  were  from  three  quarters  of  an  inch  to  one  inch  and  a  quarter
long._  Miss  Sturmann  (§  4)  saw  the  flames  of  the  same  magnet  about
four  inches  in  length,  thus  more  than  three  times  as  long.  Miss
Reiche]  drew  me  these,  from  her  observations,  of  the  length  of  the
arm  of  the  horse-shoe,  that  is,  twelve  inches  long.  Miss  Maix  (§  6),
in  her  usual  condition,  saw  them  only  a  hand's  breadth,  but  when-
ever she  was  seized  with  an  attack  of  spasms,  the  same  magnet  ap-
peared to  her  wholly  enveloped  in  fire,  and  the  flame  in  places' several
spans  long.  Miss  Keichel  (§  V)  saw  the  magnet  in  moderate  obscuri-
ty, not  merely  emit  flames  from  the  poles  as  long  as  the  arms  of  the
horse-shoe,  but  also  a  delicate  light  spread  all  over  the  magnet,  and
this  latter  even  while  the  armature  remained  applied.  But  Miss
Atzmannsdorfer  (§  13)  told  me  that  the  flame  of  my  large  nine-lay-
ered magnet  attained  almost  the  size  of  a  man  in  her  eyes  when  it
was  very  dark,  so  that  she  frequently  saw  herself  wholly  enveloped
in  it,  as  if  she  were  being  burnt.  She  saw  both  this  and  smaller
magnets  enveloped  between  and  around  the  arms  by  delicate  down-
ike  flame ;  the  poles,  each  flaming,  especially  at  its  four  corners,  in
blue  and  red,  yellow  and  green  intermingled,  and  each  layer  of  the
compound  magnet  possessing  its  own  lateral  flames  (like  §  9).  Bar
magnets  always  flamed  more  strongly  at  the  northward  pole  than  at
the  southward  in  this  case.

246  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

284.  These  observations  all  belong  to  the  year  1844.  I  collected
a  much  greater  number  of  them  in  the  years  1845,  1846,  and  184*7,
during  which  I  devoted  myself  with  unceasing  efforts  to  the  pursuit
of  this  attractive  subject.  Those  of  the  results  simply  serving  to  the
further  confirmation  and  establishment  of  the  fact  of  the  existence  of
the  odic  light  over  the  magnet,  I  subjoin  here  seriatim.  I  remark,
however,  expressly,  that  this  is  done  chiefly  for  those  "readers  whom
the  previously  reported  observations  do  not  suffice  to  convince,  and
who  consider  a  greater  number  of  testimonies  necessary  for  the  es-
tablishment of  the  physical  phenomena  of  the  diffusion  of  light  from
the  magnet ;  all  those,  on  the  contrary,  who  are  satisfied  by  what  has
already  been  brought  forward,  and  who  consider  the  accuracy  of  my
mode  of  investigation  sufficient,  can,  without  any  great  loss,  pass  over
these,  and  turn  from  here  immediately  to  §  334,  where,  leaving  be-
hind all  the  concrete  cases  and  specialities,  they  will  arrive  imme-
diately at  the  conclusions  deduced  from  them.

I  follow  the  order  of  rising  from  the  weakest  powers  of  vision  to
the  strongest,  proceeding  from  the  healthy  sensitive  to  the  sickly,  and
ending  with  the  permanently  diseased,  highly  sensitive  persons.

a.     Healthy  Sensitives.

285.  Among  these  I  met  with  a  few  who  possessed  the  odic  feel-
ing very  strongly  marked,  but  were  unable  to  recognise  the  magnetic
light ;  others  who  saw  it  weakly ;  lastly,  some  who  saw  it  with
greater  facility,  and  with  a  clearness  and  distinctness  which  excelled
not  only  that  of  many  invalids,  but  even  of  actual  somnambulists.

286.  Dr.  Friedrich,  from  Munich,  a  young,  healthy  physician,  from
whom  I  learnt  that  he  was  sometimes  subject  to  walking  in  his  sleep,
had  the  kindness  to  allow  me  a  trial,  and  to  place  himself  in  my  own
dark  chamber  prepared  for  these  researches.  I  found  him  distinctly
sensitive,  but  in  a  weak  degree ;  he  saw  other  objects  emit  light,  but
never  magnets.

287.  M.  Edward  Hütter,  bookseller,  grandson  of  Anton  Doll,  in
Vienna,  a  fine,  young,  and  perfectly  healthy  man,  was  excitable  in
many  ways  to  the  odic  sensations,  but  had  no  power  of  seeing  the
magnetic  luminosity  beyond  a  weak  and  uncertain  appearance  on  a
small,  strong,  horse-shoe  magnet,  in  the  dark.

288.  Maximilian  Krüger,  a  boy  of  twelve  years,  in  the  Orphan
Asylum  at  Vienna,  sensitive  to  a  considerable  degree  to  the  impres-
sions of  the  odic  feeling,  was  unable  to  detect  any  impression  of  mag-
netic light  in  the  dark.

289.  Mr.  Carl  Kössner,  Imperial  Counsellor  and  Professor  of  Archi-
tecture in  the  Academy  of  the  Plastic  Arts,  at  Vienna,  forty-two

WITH  HEALTHY  SENSITIVES.  247

years  of  age,  remarkably  sensitive  to  all  impressions  on  the  feeling
that  can  be  excited  by  odic  influence,  could  not  detect  a  trace  of  lu-
minous appearances  during  three  hours  which  he  was  kind  enough
to  devote  to  me  in  my  darkened  chamber.

I  met  with  the  like  frequently,  especially  in  men ;  most  remarka-
bly in  Dr.  Diesing,  Keeper  of  the  Imperial  Museum  of  Natural  His-
tory in  Vienna.  Although  very  highly  sensitive  to  all  impressions
on  the  feeling,  he  was  totally  insensible  to  luminous  phenomena  of
all  kinds  in  the  dark,  where  he  remained  for  four  hours.

We  thus  have  here  five  decided  sensitives  in  whom  the  light  which
issues  from  the  magnet  could  not  be  brought  to  evidence.  This
warrants  our  concluding  that  the  sensitiveness  is  not  always  neces-
sarily connected  with  the  power  of  seeing  and  perceiving  the  mag-
netic light.     These  cases  are  undoubtedly  the  rarer.

290.  Mention  has  already  been  made  frequently  of  Mr.  C.  Schuh,
in  speaking  of  sensitive  perceptions  of  feeling  ;  he  stands  on  the  out-
ermost limit  in  the  luminous  phenomena ;  he  does  not  see  the  mag-
net flames,  but  he  distinctly  recognises  the  shape  of  horse-shoes  and
magnets  in  complete  darkness,  and  thus  sees  weakly  the  emanations
of  light  from  the  magnetic  metal  itself.  This  is  what  I  have  called
the  odic  incandescence,  and  constitutes  the  first  degree  of  perception
of  light.

291.  Mr.  Hubert  Von  Rainer,  of  Klagenfurt,  twenty -four  years
old,  barrister,  a  man  of  exuberant  health  and  strength,  has  never
been  ill,  and  knows  neither  headache  nor  disorder  of  the  stomach.
His  sensitiveness  in  the  sphere  of  feeling  is  strongly  marked,  but  he
only  detected  the  magnetic  light  with  certainty  when  I  pulled  off  the
armature  from  the  horse-shoe,  whereupon  he  saw  a  flash  at  the  mo-
ment of  separation.

292.  Dr.  Ragsky,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  Joseph  Medico-
Chirurgical  Academy  at  Vienna,  a  very  healthy,  unusually  tall  and
powerful  man,  thirty-two  years  old,  exhibited  every  sensitive  excita-
bility. He  did  not  see  a  bar  magnet  in  the  dark,  but  he  saw  horse-
shoes, if  they  were  single  and  strong,  so  far  towards  the  poles,  that
he  was  able  to  distinguish  the  shape  of  the  steel.  With  intermis-
sions, he  detected  appearances  of  blue  light  at  the  northward  pole,  at
the  southward  pole  nothing.

293.  a.  Dr.  Huss,  Professor  in  the  Hospital  at  Stockholm,  Physi-
cian to  the  King  of  Sweden,  saw  only  the  more  powerful  phenomena
of  odic  light  in  the  dark  chamber,  but  not  common  magnets.  Yet
when  I  placed  before  him  a  strong  electro-magnet,  with  a  Smee's
battery  of  some  400  square  inches  of  zinc  and  silver  surface,  he  per-
ceived at  one  of  the  two  poles,  the  negative,  the  formation  of  a  pale

248  LUMINOUS   PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

light,  which,  developed  abundance  of  smoke,  ascending  upwards  like
a  cloud.

293.  b.  Hermine  Fenzl,  eight  years  of  age,  the  daughter  of  Dr.
Ed.  Fenzl,  Chief  of  the  Botanical  Department  of  the  Imperial  Muse-
um of  Natural  History  at  Vienna,  a  child  of  slender  make  and  active
mind,  healthy  and  gay,  showed  strongly  all  the  reactions  of  sensitive-
ness to  feeling  ;  but  she  did  not  perceive  the  luminous  phenomena
in  the  dark  so  well.  She  saw  three  large  and  one  small  horse-shoe
magnets  emit  grey  light,  the  last  most  brightly  ;  she  described  the
northward  pole  as  more  strongly  luminous  than  the  southward.  Of
bars,  she  saw  only  some  three-fourths  of  an  inch  long,  illuminated,
others  eight  inches  long  she  did  not  perceive.  She  could  not  detect
flames  or  smoke.  She  did  not  see  brightness  of  any  kind  on  larger
magnets.

294.  Baroness  Isabella  Von  Tessedik,  the  young  widow  of  Mr.
Franz  Von  Tessedik,  of  Pesth,  a  mother,  of  calm  temperament,  a  lady
of  remarkably  intellectual  cultivation,  saw  a-  magnetic  rod  twenty-
eight  inches  long,  and  ail  horse-shoe  magnets  with  the  steel  weakly
luminous,  so  that  she  could  distinguish  their  figures,  glowing  odi-
cally,  in  the  obscurity  of  the  dark  chamber.  She  saw  a  one-layered,
a  three-layered,  and  a  nine-layered  horse-shoe,  furnished  with  a  lu-
minous cloud  four  to  eight  inches  long  on  each  pole.  She  detected
the  same  on  a  horse-shoe  electro-magnet.  On  this,  however,  and
some  other  horse-shoe  magnets,  she  could  only  perceive  the  luminous
vapor  on  the  northward  pole.  She  saw  the  magnetic  light  more
brightly  when  I  pulled  the  armature  off  quickly ;  this  caused  a  mo-
mentary flash,  like  lightning.

295.  Mr.  Constantine  Delhez,  forty  years  old,  a  French  philolo-
gist, at  present  residing  in  Vienna,  healthy  but  distinctly  sensitive,
saw,  after  a  sojourn  of  an  hour  and  a  half  in  the  dark  chamber,  mag-
netic rods  glowing,  and  a  one,  a  three,  and  a  five-fold  horse-shoe,
emit  lights  from  one-third  of  an  inch  to  four  inches  long  from  the
open  poles ;  from  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  they  rose  more  than  twenty
inches ;  from  an  electro-magnet  they  attained  almost  forty  inches ;
and  both  produced  illuminated  spots  on  the  ceiling  more  than  forty
inches  in  diameter.  Both  the  appearances  of  odic incandescence  upon
the  steel  magnets,  and  the  flame-like  emanations  flowing  from  the
poles,  always  seemed  to  him  somewhat  vaporous,  as  is  described  by
all  the  sensitive  of  inferior  degrees  of  excitability.

296.  Our  revered  Consistorial  Counsellor  and  Superintendent  of
the  Evangelical  Communion  in  Vienna,  Mr.  Ernst  Pauer,  to  whose
congregation  I  and  my  family  belong,  of  tall  and  imposing  form,  but
of  delicate  make,  fifty-four  years  of  age,  whose  sensitiveness  is  espe-

WITH  HEALTHY  SENSITIVES.  249

cially  strongly  marked  in  the  effects  on  the  feeling,  saw  all  magnets
luminous  all  over  the  metal :  on  some  of  the  smaller,  the  flashes
when  I  removed  the  armature,  and  emanations  of  odic  light  from  the
poles  of  small  bars,  as  well  as  particular  horse-shoes  ;  in  some  onlv
from  the  northward  pole,  in  a  five-fold  horse-shoe  from  both  poles,
stronger  at  the  negative  and  weaker  at  the  positive.  He  saw  an
electro-magnet  furnished  with  pale  lights  over  both  poles,  two  inches
high  and  of  the  same  breadth.

297.  Baroness  Pauline  von  Natorp,  of  Vienna,  mother  of  two
children,  young  and  intelligent,  blonde,  saw  the  flashing  lights  of
small  horse-shoes  when  the  armatures  were  taken  off,  and  the  per-
manent light  on  the  northward  arm.  On  larger  magnets,  she  some-
times saw  the  light  only  of  one,  always  the  northward,  arm,  some-
times of  both,  as  a  luminous  cloud  almost  four  inches  long.  On
larger  magnets  of  relatively  weaker  intensity  she  saw  only  a  weakly
illuminated  delicate  vapor  over  the  poles.

298.  Mr.  Demeter  Tirka,  a  Greek  merchant  in  Vienna,  forty  years
old,  distinguished  for  his  love  of  objects  of  plastic  art,  of  powerful
build,  and,  with  the  exception  of  occasional  headaches,  healthy  all
his  life,  saw  light  flash  from  a  small  and  a  large  horse-shoe  when  I
pulled  off  the  armatures,  each  time  over  the  northward  pole  ;  he  saw
a  permanent  light  over  the  same  pole  of  a  three-fold  horse-shoe,  but
nothing  on  the  southward  pole.  He  saw  no  distinct  flaming  on  a
heavy  nine  fold  horse-shoe,  but  he  perceived  all  objects  in  the  imme-
diate vicinity  to  be  illuminated  by  it.

299.  Mrs.  Sylvia  von  Varady,  wife  of  the  imperial  counsellor  Mr.
von  Varady,  a  young,  blooming  lady,  lively,  healthy,  of  Italian
family,  saw  all  rods  and  horse-shoes  dully  luminous  in  the  dark.  She
saw  a  one-fold  horse-shoe,  emit  vaporous  lights  two  inches  long,  and
the  nine-fold  horse-shoe  five  feet  high  over  the  poles,  when  the  arma-
ture was  removed.  Strongly  magnetic  rods  of  eight  inches  in  length
bore  lights  on  their  poles  three-quarters  of  an  inch  long.

300.  Mr.  Theodore  Kotschy,  evangelical  minister,  the  botanist,
the  renowned  and  vigorous  traveller  through  Africa  and  Asia,  of
whom  mention  has  been  made  already  in  §§  80,  191,  222,  232,  saw
flashing  flames,  which  soon  disappeared,  on  the  northward  pole  of
simple  horse-shoes  when  the  armature  was  pulled  off.  On  three-fold
ones  he  saw  thin,  vaporous  lights  blaze  continuously,  one  to  two
inches  high ;  when  I  applied  the  armature  and  pulled  it  off  again,
they  flashed  up  brighter  for  a  moment,  but  sank  again  directly  to
their  previous  permanent  state.  A  nine-fold  horse-shoe  he  did  not
see  at  first,  but  soon  recognised  an  extremely  thin,  widely  diffused
luminosity  over  the  open  arms,  playing  over  them,  more  than  six-

11*

250  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

teen  inches  broad  and  almost  forty  high.  He  did  not  find  it  like  a
flame,  but  like  an  extremely  delicate  glimmering  of  light  in  the  gene-
ral darkness.  He  saw  a  small  pocket  horse-shoe  more  brightly  and
distinctly  endowed  with  light  than  the  nine-fold  ;  its  magnetism  had
greater  intensity.  He  saw  light  only  on  the  northward  pole  of  a
three-fold  horse-shoe.

301.  Miss  Ernestine  Anschtitz,  daughter  of  our  celebrated  court
actor  Mr.  Anschiitz,  a  young  lady  of  quiet  and  reserved  disposition,
at  present  perfectly  health)-,  but  in  her  earlier  years  occasionally
suffering  from  spasms  and  headache,  saw  the  steel  substance  of  all
magnets  weakly  luminous.  On  the  poles  of  two  magnetic  needles,
each  four  inches  long,  she  saw  flames  on  the  one  side  yellowish,  on
the  other  bluish,  but  mere  incandescence  along  their  steel  substance,
more  weak  in  the  middle,  stronger  towards  each  pole.  Of  the  poles
of  a  pocket  horse-shoe  she  saw  the  northward  pole  furnished  with  a
delicate  flame  more  than  one  inch  long,  on  the  southward  pole  nothing.
A  five-fold  horse-shoe  she  saw  with  flames  of  a  finger's  length  on
both  poles,  that  on  the  positive  side  yellowish,  that  on  the  negative
bluish.  She  also  perceived  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  to  be  furnished  at
both  poles  with  delicate  emanations  of  light,  which  were  from  twelve
to  sixteen  inches  long,  one  a  little  shorter  and  yellowish,  the  other
larger,  and  rather  bluish  or  greyish.

302.  Mrs.  Josephine  Fenzl,  wife  of  our  botanist,  known  through-
out Europe  by  his  literary  labors,  the  already  named  Dr.  Fenzl,  a
young  mother  of  several  children,  healthy  and  blooming,  saw  a  mag-
netic rod  twenty-four  inches  long  glowing  odically  in  the  dark  cham-
ber, and  emitting  flames  at  both  ends.  She  described  a  one-fold,  a
three-fold,  a  five-fold,  and  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  as  luminous  and
giving  out  luminous  vapor  in  different  degrees.  Some  months  later,
she  saw  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  flame  twenty  inches  high,  and  lumin-
ous smoke  rise  half  the  height  of  the  chamber  above  it.  At  the  same
time  she  described  smaller  and  larger  rods  as  odically  incandescent,
and  furnished  with  polar  flames,  those  of  the  northward  pole  longer,
duller,  and  bluish,  those  of  the  southward  pole  shorter,  brighter,  and
yellowish-red.

303.  Mr.  Franz  Fernolendt,  from  Transylvania,  proprietor  of  a
chemical  manufactory  in  Vienna,  residing  at  825,  in  the  Kumpfgasse,
54  years  old,  perceived  the  magnet  less  by  its  odic  incandescence
than  by  its  polar  flames.  He  saw  very  few  of  them  glowing  brightly,
only  the  small  rods  and  a  pocket  horse-shoe ;  but  on  the  other  hand,
he  saw  a  bright  cloud  over  all,  which  appeared  to  him  as  a  light  glare
sweeping  over  the  poles.  Sometimes  he  saw  a  flame  flash  up  when
I  pulled  off  the  armature.     He  perceived  the  streaming  brightness

WITH  HEALTHY  SENSITIVES.  251

over  a  one-fold  horse-shoe,  a  three-fold  and  a  five-fold,  but  always
either  exclusively  upon  the  north  pole,  or  else  more  distinctly  than
upon  the  south,  and  frequently  in  the  form  of  a  grey  cloud.  On  a
large  nine-fold  horse-shoe  he  perceived  the  issuing  light  twenty
inches  high ;  but  when  I  acted  upon  its  emanations  by  the  approxi-
mation of  a  positive  electrical  atmosphere,  he  saw  a  mass  of  odic  light
rise  up  gradually  over  it,  ascending  with  a  thickness  equalling  a
man's  body,  up  to  the  ceiling  of  the  room.

304.  Mr.  W.  Hochstetter,  son  of  Professor  Hochstetter,  of  Esslin-
gen, in  "vYirternburg,  (the  distinguished  botanist  presiding  over  the
"  Unio  Intineraria,'')  twenty-one  years  of  age,  engaged  in  the  study
of  horticulture  in  the  Imperial  Gardens  at  Schönbrunn,  of  very  florid
aspect,  moving  about  all  day  in  the  open  air,  saw  all  magnets,  down
to  the  smallest  bar,  odically  incandescent  in  the  darkened  chamber.
He  saw  the  flames  issue  from  the  poles,  not  like  flames,  but  as  a  lu-
minous halo,  only  from  rather  less  to  rather  more  than  an  inch  long
from  the  smaller,  and  increasing  with  their  size,  till,  on  the  nine-fold
horse-shoe,  they  attained  a  length  of  twenty  inches.  These  lights  he
saw  larger  and  brighter  on  all  the  northward  poles  of  bars  and  horse-
shoes ;  at  the  southward,  sometimes  very  small  and  dull,  and  scarcely
visible  ;  but  always  accompanied  by  abundance  of  smoke.

305.  Mr.  Nicholas  Rabe,  about  forty  years  of  age,  a  higher  official
in  the  Imperial  Magazine  of  Mining  Products  at  Vienna,  who,  through-
out his  life,  has  been  perfectly  healthy,  vigorous,  and  of  lively,  cheer-
ful, and  warm  temperament,  discerned  the  metallic  substance  of  all
magnets  laid  before  him  in  the  dark,  by  a  delicate  luminosity,  more
especially  the  horse-shoes,  while  their  armatures  remained  applied.
From  a  magnet  bar,  he  saw  lights  issue  from  both  poles  ;  he  saw  a
magnetic  rod  about  five  feet  long  furnished  at  the  northward  pole
with  a  flame  twenty  inches  long,  the  southward  with  one  of  twelve;
the  extremities  of  these  passing  into  a  luminous  vapor,  which  was
stronger  and  thicker  at  the  positive  pole  than  at  the  negative.  He
saw  all  horse-shoes  flame  at  both  poles,  after  the  removal  of  the  ar-
mature, more  strongly  or  weakly  according  to  the  intensity  of  their
magnetism.  The  ends  of  the  flames  always  lost  themselves  above  in
a  luminous,  smoke-like  vapor,  which  ascended  slowly  upwards.

306.  Johann  Klaiber,  cabinet-maker,  whose  name  has  already  been
mentioned  in  the  earlier  treatises  (§§  50,  191)  on  the  odic  sensations,
distinguished  a  magnet  laid  before  him  by  a  brightness  extending
through  the  whole  mass  of  the  steel.  A  long  horse-shoe,  too  weakly
magnetic  to  support  its  own  weight,  appeared  to  him  to  possess  a
scarcely  perceptible  luminosity,  hardly  connected  with  the  northward
pole,  but  discernible   about  four  inches  above,  as  if  waving  gently

252  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

over  it.  Other  witnesses  have  perceived  the  like,  of  which  I  shall
give  the  details  hereafter.  A  three-fold  horse-shoe  seemed  to  him
to  have  a  pale  bluish  flame  on  the  northward  pole,  of  variable  size,
sometimes  about  an  inch,  sometimes  full  four  inches  long,  changing
with  the  receptivity  of  the  observer.  The  end  was  always  lost  in
luminous  odic  vapor,  intermingled  with  isolated  brilliant  little  sparks.
The  southward  pole  he  saw  sometimes  wholly  without  flames  ;  some-
times with  but  a  weak  light,  alternately  appearing  and  vanishing.
A  nine-fold  horse-shoe  did  not  appear  at  all  luminous  to  him  at  the
poles,  at  the  first  moment,  when  quite  close  to  it ;  but  when  he  drew
back  a  step,  he  discerned  that  it  glowed  odically,  and  that  luminous
appearances  blazed  up  over  it  to  the  distance  of  an  arm's  length,
issuing  from  both  poles,  coming  to  a  point  above,  mostly  as  a  blue
flame,  passing  into  a  broad  slightly  luminous  vapor,  which  rolled
upward  in  the  air,  carrying  with  it  many  isolated  sparks,  which  were
soon  extinguished.

307.  Mrs.  Eleanore  von  Peichich-Zimanyi,  the  young  widow  of
the  Imperial  Secretary  of  State,  Mr.  von  Peichich,  of  Hungarian
family,  really  healthy,  but  with  rather  weak  nerves  and  excitable,
detected  the  odic  incandescence  of  all  magnets  :  bars  eight  inches
long  emitted  vaporous  light  two  inches  in  length ;  horse-shoes  of  a
single  layer  displayed  to  her  emanations  of  light  as  long  as  one's
hand  from  the  northward  pole  ;  half  as  long  from  the  southward.  A
nine-fold  horse-shoe  emitted  light,  more  than  forty  inches  long,  from
the  northward  pole.  In  all  cases  the  northward  pole  seemed  to  her
to  have  stronger  flames  than  the  southward,  usually  double  the  size.
The  removal  of  the  armature  produced  a  momentarily  stronger  flash
of  the  light.  The  poles  of  all  horse-shoes  appeared  to  her  to  have
stronger  light  than  those  of  bars.

308.  Stephan  Kollar,  son  of  the  keeper  of  the  Imperial  Museum
of  Natural  History  ;  Mr.  F.  Kollar,  fourteen  years  old,  slender,  lively,
healthy,  often  restless  in  the  night,  and  a  talker  in  his  sleep,  saw  all
bar  magnets,  horse-shoes,  and  electro-magnets  odically  incandescent,
and  furnished  with  flaming  lights,  stronger  at  the  northward  pole, —
the  weakest  about  three  quarters  of  an  inch  long,  the  large  and  strong
twenty  inches  and  more.  These  terminated  in  clouds  of  smoky  va-
por ascending  upwards.  The  investigations  were  made  in  the  pre-
sence of  his  father.

309.  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  daughter  of  the  Superintendent  above
mentioned,  who  was  kind  enough  to  be  present  at  the  experiments,
is  very  young,  and  in  perfect  health,  tall  and  slender,  and  of  sensi-
tive temperament.  She  was  good  enough  to  devote  herself  to  the
repetition   of  these   researches   several  times,  at  intervals  of  a  few

WITH  HEALTHY  SENSITIVES.  253

months.  When,  after  allowing  sufficient  time  for  her  eyes  to  become
accustomed  to  the  darkness,  I  placed  before  her  a  row  of  magnets,
the  horse-shoes  among  them  being  still  closed  by  their  armatures,
she  saw  them  in  their  natural  form  and  luminous  ;  i.  e.,  odieally  in-
candescent, and  she  expressed  pleasure  at  the  peculiarly  delicate
beauty  of  the  appearance.  As  I  removed  the  armatures  one  after
another,  she  saw  the  odic  flames  blaze  up  over  the  poles,  and  always
stronger,  larger  and  brighter  at  the  northward  than  at  the  southward
poles.  The  flames  always  became  brighter  when  I  pulled  off  the  ar-
mature, and  then  returned  back  to  their  constant  magnitude.  They
appeared  to  her  one  and  a  quarter,  two  and  a  half,  four,  and  eight
inches  long,  according  to  the  different  strength  of  the  bar  and  horse-
shoe magnets.  She  saw  the  nine-fold  horse-shoe  with  flames  twenty
inches  high,  and  above  these  a  delicate  vaporous  column  rising  up  to
the  ceiling  of  the  room,  the  northward  pole  having  a  blue,  the  south-
ward a  reddish-yellow  flame.  She  found  a  pocket  horse-shoe  glow
most  intensely  when  it  lay  upon  her  extended  hand,  its  light  being
strengthened  by  her  own  odic  force.

310.  Dr.  Endlicher,  Professor  of  Botany,  Director  of  the  Botanical
Garden  of  Vienna,  forty-three  years  of  age,  so  well  known  and  cele-
brated throughout  Europe  as  a  naturalist,  that  I  need  say  no  more
of  him  or  speak  of  his  fitness  for  physiological  researches,  favored  me
with  his  presence  for  some  hours  in  my  darkened  chamber.  He  saw,
besides  the  light  which  parts  of  the  human  body,  organs  of  plants,
crystals,  and  amorphous  substances,  gave  out  abundantly  and  dis-
tinctly, whitish  luminosity  of  magnetic  bars  eight  inches  long,  and
elongated  flames  issuing  from  both  the  poles  :  he  also  saw  one-fold,
three-fold,  and  five-fold  horse-shoes  surrounded  by  a  halo  of  light  as
long  as  they  remained  closed,  and  when  opened  emitting  vaporous
flames  two  to  four  inches  long  from  both  poles  ;  while  the  nine-fold
horse-shoe,  turned  upwards,  sent  out  streams  of  light  which  were
almost  forty  inches  high,  and  produced  a  light  spot  upon  the  ceiling
of  the  room.  He  saw  the  same  in  a  larger  and  stronger  decree
from  the  poles  of  a  strong  electro-magnet ;  viz.,  forty  inches  high,
brilliantly  colored,  stronger  from  the  northward  than  the  southward
pole,  and  producing  a  bright  circle  of  greater  extent  upon  the
ceiling.

311.  Mr.  Gustav  Anschütz,  painter,  of  Vienna,  residing  in  his  own
house,  No.  268,  Ferdinandsgasse,  in  the  suburb  of  Wieden,  was  the
first  sensitive  in  whom  I  discovered  that  even  perfectly  healthy  per-
sons were  capable  of  seeing  the  odic  light.  This  was  a  great  and
unexpected  discovery  for  my  researches,  and  for  the  position  of  the
subject  in  the  domain  of  physics,  attacked  by  such  a  variety  of  ad-

254  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

versaries.  From  this  moment  the  chain  was  loosened  which  had
hitherto  hound  me  to  the  diseased  ;  no  one  could  now  obstinately
regard  sensitiveness  altogether  as  a  natural  phenomenon  dependent
either  mediately  or  immediately  upon  somnambulism,  whatever  I
might  say  to  the  contrary ;  it  overcame  the  often-heard,  untenable
objection,  that  no  faith  was  to  be  placed  in  the  statements  of  diseased
persons, — as  if  every  one  became  ripe  for  the  mad-house  directly
sickness  attacked  him !  Now,  Mr.  Anschütz  entered  the  circle,  a
healthy,  vigorous  man,  of  thirty-five  years,  thoroughly  inured  by  a
thousand  hard  marches  and  dangers  during  his  former  military  life,  who
had  never  suffered  from  real  illness,  of  moderate  stature,  rather  fair
than  dark,  very  muscular,  a  distinguished  gymnasiast,  of  lively  and
excitable,  but  sensitive  and  sympathetic  temperament,  and  com-
pletely an  artist  by  nature.  I  found  every  form  of  well-marked  sen-
sitiveness in  him  ;  and  he  was  the  point  of  departure  from  which,  in
my  odic  researches,  leaving  the  diseased,  I  turned  toward  the  healthy
sensitive,  whom  I  then  met  with  in  such  abundance  in  all  directions,
that  I  was  enabled  to  dispense  altogether  with  the  sick,,  and  to  solve
the  physical  questions  of  sensitiveness  with  the  healthy  alone.  After
remaining  about  an  hour  in  perfect  darkness,  Mr.  Anschütz  saw  all
the  odic  luminous  phenomena  as  clearly  and  accurately  as  any  dis-
eased sensitive.  I  shall  return  to  this  in  all  the  categories,  but  here
only  make  use  of  what  he  told  me  respecting  the  magnetic  light.
He  saw  all  steeh  magnets  in  a  whitish-grey  odic  incandescence  in  the
blackness  of  the  general  obscurity,  especially  at  the  edges,  and  more
distinctly  towards  the  poles  than  toward  the  axes  of  the  magnets. —
He  found  on  two  magnetic  needles  four  inches  long,  luminous  eman-
ations at  the  poles.  He  saw  all  horse-shoes  emit  light  from  the
poles  after  the  removal  of  the  armatures,  sometimes  from  one  alone,
the  northward — sometimes  from  both  ;  in  which  case  the  southward
pole  always  appeared  weaker,  smaller,  and  duller, — sometimes  with
only  little  luminous  specks  seeming  to  lie  upon  the  very  poles,  visible
at  one  time,  and  then  vanishing  again  from  his  eyes.  Magnets  which
I  had  brought  to  his  residence  and  left  with  him  for  some  time  for
observation,  all  appeared  luminous  to  him  in  less  complete  darkness
than  was  afforded  by  my  darkened  chamber.  He  saw  both  a  pocket
horse-shoe  and  a  three-fold  magnet  never  flame  but  at  one  pole, —
the  flame  not  constant,  but  appearing  to  increase  strongly  every  now
and  then,  and  disappearing  again  :  after  a  half  or  whole  minute's  in-
termittence,  it  again  emerged  from  the  darkness,  became  large,  then
small  again,  sometimes  concentrated,  at  others  resembling  a  large,
light  cloud.  The  cause  of  these  variations  is  wholly  subjective,  and
I  shall  explain  them  further  on.     The  nine-fold  horse-shoe  aj>peared

WITH  HEALTHY  SENSITIVES.  255

to  him  only  to  have  a  luminous  cloud  on  its  northward  pole,  in  the
imperfect  darkness.  But  this  does  not  exhaust  the  interest  that  at-
taches the  reader  and  myself  to  Mr.  Anschütz.  He  is  a  painter.  In
him  was  the  right  man  found,  not  merely  to  relate  and  describe  what
he  saw,  but  capable  of  what  no  one  else  was, — namely,  of  reproduc-
ing for  us  in  forms  and  colors  what  he  saw,  and  placing  before
our  eyes  a  picture  of  that  which,  from  our  want  of  vision,  we  longed
in  vain  to  see  ourselves.  One  morning  that  I  visited  him,  he  sur-
prised me  with  a  black  picture  :  at  the  first  moment  I  saw  nothing
iu  it,  in  the  light  in  which  he  exhibited  it  to  me ;  but  when  he  turn-
ed it,  a  cloudy  figure  rose  delicately  and  phantom-like  from  the  dark-
ness :  it  was  the  face  of  his  beautiful  wife,  as  it  had  appeared  to  him
in  its  odic  light  in  deep  darkness.  It  was  surrounded  by  crystals,
magnets,  flowers,  and  bands,  and  I  saw  before  me  a  picture  of  na-
tural phenomena  such  as  human  eyes  had  never  met  before.  The
delight  which  I  felt  with  this  I  try  to  convey  to  the  reader  by  giving
a  representation  of  this  remarkable  picture  in  the  Plate  opposite. —
Unfortunately,  no  art  of  the  printer  is  capable  of  giving  more  than
an  approximation  to  such  an  extremely  delicate  object.  It  will  be
seen  by  it  that  Mr.  Anschütz's  illustrations  agree  in  all  points  with
the  accounts  of  the  diseased  sensitives,  as  laid  down  in  my  previous
treatises,  and  that  his  drawings,  founded  on  the  one  hand  on  actual
inspection,  and  on  the  other  on  his  knowledge  of  drawing,  do  not  de-
viate from  them  in  any  essential  points.  I  have  often  been  compelled
to  meet  the  objection,  that  my  conclusions  are  inadmissible,  because
the  statements  of  the  sick  are  not  to  be  depended  on.*  While,  now,
such  objections  against  patients  whose  minds  are  perfectly  clear,  and

*  This  clumsy  objection  may  often  be  met  with  among  unreasoning  skep-
tics. The  brains  of  some  persons  are,  in  various  respects  analogous  to  those
of  idiots,  inasmuch  as  they  are  deficient,  wholly  or  in  part,  of  certain  portions
of  the  organization  necessary  to  the  completeness  of  this  very  important  viscus.
With  such  individuals,  where  they  are  discovered,  it  is  useless  to  spend  time
in  endeavors  to  clear  up  points  of  newly  discovered  facts.  They  revert  with
tenacity  to  their  own  conceits,  and  are  for  the  most  part  so  much  like  the  fool
of  Shakspeare's  thought,  that  they  are  better  left  to  their  own  kind  of  wisdom,
where  ignorance  is  bliss.  In  a  case  of  a  lady  willed  to  sleep  at  a  distance  of
two  miles,  there  occurred  during  her  state  of  somnambulism  some  facts  cor-
roborative of  the  impressions  made  on  Mr.  Anschütz,  .and  reproduced  by  the
power  cf  his  art  upon  the  minds  of  others.  The  patient  saw  her  sister  wher-
ever she  moved  about  the  house,  with  a  face  emitting  the  odic  light,  more
especially  from  the  eyes,  mouth  and  forehead.  A  lady  residing  at  the  Mesmeric
Infirmary,  is  of  the  class  of  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach's  healthy  sensitives.  She
has  afforded,  in  her  waking  state,  striking  corroborations  of  the  accuracy  of  Mr.
Anschütz  in  the  delineations  of  the  facts  he  witnessed,  as  well  as  of  the  truth  of
the  statements  of  several  of  the  Baron's  other  cases.

256  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

who  regularly  perform  their  daily  duties,  are  groundless,  and  easy  to
be  rebutted,  every  pretext  against  the  reception  of  my  observations,
is  now  for  ever  removed  through  Mr.  Anschütz.  In  the  same  way,
the  drawings  of  the  luminous  phenomena,  which  I  gave  in  the  earlier
treatises,  have  been  many  times  attacked  because  they  were  founded
in  part  upon  descriptions,  more  than  upon  actual  sight ;  and  the
wish  has  been  expressed,  that  they  could  be  made  by  an  immediate
observer,  himself,  a  draughtsman.  Now,  then,  I  introduce  an  obser-
ver and  draughtsman,  armed  lega  artis,  to  the  physical  world,  in  Mr.
Anschütz,  whose  sensitiveness  will  doubtless  endure  as  long  as  his  life,
and  whose  ready  kindness  will  afford  every  stranger  repetitions  and
confirmations  of  all  that  is  here  said.

312.  Baroness  Maria  von  Augustin,  wife  of  Baron  von  Augustin,
Major  in  the  Imperial  Army  of  Austria,  a  lady  of  distinguished  sci-
entific culture,  very  healthy,  soon  discerned  in  the  dark  room  all
magnets,  bars,  and  horse-shoes  in  a  luminous  odic  glow,  at  first  only
as  a  luminous  cloud,  afterwards  appearing  with  the  true  outlines  of
the  objects.  On  bars  eight  inches  long  she  saw  light  streaming  out
as  a  continuation  at  the  ends  of  both  poles ;  on  one,  three,  and  five-
fold horse-shoes,  after  the  removal  of  the  armatures,  fine  vaporous
emanations  of  light,  four  to  eight  inches  long,  larger  and  stronger
at  the  north  than  at  the  south  poles.  On  a  nine-fold,  and  still  more
on  a  strong  electro-magnet,  she  saw  flame-like  appearances  of  light
as  high  as  a  man,  rising  up,  giving  colors,  sparks  and  smoke,  ascend-
ing to  the  ceiling,  and  diffusing  a  light  over  it.

313.  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  24  years  of  age,  daughter  of  an  inn-
keeper at  Bachtitz  in  Moravia,  at  present  a  chambermaid  in  Vienna,
somewhat  short,  but  stoutly  made,  always  healthy  and  strong,  who
had  been  uninterruptedly  engaged  in  laborious  service  for  six  years,
saw  all  odically  luminous  objects  after  an  hour's  sojourn  in  the  dark-
ened chamber :  for  instance,  she  saw  all  magnets  in  a  white  glow,
and  the  poles  with  flames  blue  on  the  northward  side,  and  reddish-
yellow  and  brownish-red  on  the  southward.  She  found  the  flames
on  a  round  magnetic  rod  twenty  inches  long,  four  inches  in  length  at
the  former,  two  inches  at  the  latter.  The  nine-layered  horse-shoe,
standing  upright,  gave  vertically  ascending  flames,  twenty  inches
long,  pale  yellow  and  blue  at  the  northward  pole;  and  ten  inches
long,  yellowish-red,  at  the  southward,  both  terminating  in  smoke
streaming  up  to  a  long  distance.  She  beheld  flames  forty  inches
high  upon  an  electro-magnet.

314.  Mr.  Sebastian  Zinkel,  an  old  man  in  his  77th  year,  who  had
been  all  his  life  healthy  and  vigorous,  formerly  an  innkeeper,  at  pre-
sent living  retired  in  his  own  house,  No.  87,  Nussdorf,  near  Vienna,

■Af>V  -A:  V.'

WITH  HEALTHY  SENSITIVES.  257

received  from  me  magnets,  crystals,  &c,  to  take  home  and  examine
during  the  darkness  of  night.  As  he  enjoyed  but  little  sleep,  he  oc-
cupied himself  with  these  for  many  hours  in  the  dark,  and  gave  me
very  exact  accounts  of  what  he  saw.  He  saw  a  one-fold  horse-shoe
incandescent,  both  when  closed  by  the  armature  and  open ;  when
open,  the  light  was  stronger  at  the  poles  than  at  the  bend  ;  when  it
was  closed,  the  reverse.  He  saw  luminous,  flame-like,  continually
moving  streams  of  light  issue  from  the  poles  of  the  open  magnet  on
both  sides  ;  from  the  southward  pole,  dull  and  yellowish  red,  about
two  inches  long ;  from  the  northward  pole,  four  inches  long,  bright
and  blue.  They  both  ended  in  a  smoky,  vaporous  essence,  which
reached  to  three  or  four  times  the  length,  and  then  was  lost.  He
saw  the  entire  horse-shoe  enveloped  in  a  luminous  cloud  as  thick  as
one's  finger,  stronger  when  the  armature  was  removed,  weaker  when
it  was  in  its  place.  In  the  latter  case  the  armature  partook  of  the  in-
candescence of  the  magnet,  and  appeared  red  where  it  was  in  contact
with  the  northward  pole,  and  dark  grey  where  it  touched  the  south-
ward pole.  Thus  an  old  man,  of  77  years,  saw  the  odic  light  over
the  magnet  quite  as  well  as  a  youth  at  the  period  of  the  development
of  puberty,  or  a  young  pregnant  woman.

315.  Dr.  Nied,  a  physician  practising  in  Vienna  (No.  396,  Suburb
of  Erdberg),  32  years  old,  was  an  invaluable  discovery  for  me,  since
he  is  a  physician,  and  a  witness  of  the  odic  luminous  phenomnafrom
a  caste, — that  of  the  medical  profession,  namely, — in  which  my  re-
researches,  contrary  to  all  expectation,  have  frequently  met  with  very
unfriendly  reception.  Dr.  Nied  is  a  strong  healthy  man,  kept  in  con-
stant exercise  throughout  the  day  by  a  large  practice,  and  of  lively
temperament.  He  nevertheless  saw  odic  light  of  all  kinds  well  in
all  directions ;  in  particular,  magnets  with  the  metal  luminous,  large
and  small  bars  as  well  as  simple  and  many-layered  horse-shoes.  He
perceived  smoke-like  and  flame-like  emanations  over  a  rod  eight
inches  long,  and  one  twenty -four  inches  long,  and  also  over  a  one-
fold, a  seven-fold,  and  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe.  He  always  found  them
half  as  long  again  on  the  negative  pole  as  on  the  positive.  Open
horse-shoes  were  enveloped  in  a  luminous  down-like  vapor.  He  saw
the  flame-like  appearance  over  the  nine-fold  horse-shoe  blaze  up  furty
inches  high,  the  flames  of  both  poles  united  into  a  column,  and  the
bright  vapor  rising  above  this  to  the  ceiling  of  the  room.  And  even
the  steel  hands  of  his  watch,  which  were  doubtless  strongly  mag-
netic, appeared  in  a  luminous  glow  so  strong,  in  the  absolute  dark-
ness of  the  profound  chamber,  that  he  could  read  the  time  on  the
dial  plate.

316.  Baron  von  Oberländer,  of  Schebetau  in  Moravia,  about  35

258  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

years  of  age,  continually  on  horseback  in  his  duties  as  Ranger  of
Forests,  and  engaged  in  the  woods  in  all  weathers,  of  strong  consti-
tution, iron  health,  and  free  from  illness  all  his  life,  accustomed  to
every  vicissitude  of  cold  and  heat,  rain  and  storm,  found  all  magnets
luminous  that  I  placed  before  him  in  the  dark.  He  saw  the  perfect
form  of  strong  and  weak  needles  of  four  inches  length  weakly  incan-
descent, and  emitting  flames  an  inch  or  more  in  length  from  both
polar  extremities.  A  pocket  horse-shoe  appeared  to  him  to  possess
little  flames  on  the  poles  from  two-fifths  to  four-fifths  of  an  inch  in
length,  the  smaller  at  the  southward  pole,  the  larger  at  the  north-
ward. He  perceived  a  three-fold  horse-shoe  odically  incandescent
throughout  its  steel  substance,  and  enveloped  entirely  in  a  delicate
light,  which  was  stronger  toward  the  poles,  and  weaker  toward  the
bend  ;  flickering,  unsteady  flames  on  both  sides,  iridescent  in  brilliant
colors,  at  the  northward  pole  blue,  green,  whitish,  and  purple,  of  a
hand's  length  ;  at  the  southward  pole  yellowish-red,  and  of  a  finger's
length,  all  of  such  beauty  that  he  delighted  to  remain  looking  at  the
novel  sight.  A  large  nine-fold  horse-shoe,  examined  at  a  distance
of  one  or  two  paces,  appeared  to  him  to  have  a  powerful  blazing
light,  nearly  as  broad  as  a  man,  and  rising  to  such  a  height  that  it
almost  reached  the  ceiling,  and  throwing  him  into  a  state  of  astonish-
ment from  which  he  could  not  recover  himself,  until  I  told  him  that
many  others  had  previously  seen  this  light  as  large  at  my  house.
This  great  luminous  appearance  seemed  to  him  yellowish-grey,
moving  about,  of  a  delicate,  ethereal  nature,  and  capable  of  being
diverted  by  blowing  on  it.  He  could  not  examine  it  closely  ;  it  was
so  delicate  and  weakly  luminous  that  it  then  disappeared  from  his
eyes,  but  was  always  perceptible  again  as  soon  as  he  stepped  back  a
pace.  The  nine-fold  horse-shoe  emitted  flashing  sparks  laterally  be-
low its  poles,  flying  off  and  whirling  round  to  the  side  like  extremely
minute  stars :  he  compared  them  to  the  sparks  of  crackling  pine
charcoal.  This  is  the  same  observation  that  had  already  been  noted
down  from  the  statements  of  Miss  Reichel,  and  was  figured  in  the
illustrations  to  the  first  of  these  treatises.

But  unquestionably  the  most  remarkable  individual  of  all  the
healthy  sensitives,  whose  perceptions  exceeded  those  even  of  many
diseased  observers,  in  strength,  distinctness,  and  duration,  was —

317.  Josepha  Zinkel,  a  girl  of  twenty-three  years,  daughter  of  Mr.
Zinkel  of  Nussdorf,  near  Vienna.  She  is  of  the  tall  powerful  race  of
the  Austrian  stock,  different  from  anything  else  I  have  ever  met  with
in  Germany,  perfectly  healthy,  and  of  a  quiet,  reserved  temperament.
She  always  saw  steel  magnets  with  their  form  distinctly  marked  out
by  luminosity.     Two  needles,  each  four  inches  long,  appeared  to  her

WITH  HEALTHY  SENSITIVES.  259

to  possess  blue  flames  nearly  or  quite  two  inches  long  at  the  northward
poles,  and  reddish  flames  four-fifths  to  six-fifths  of  an  inch  long  at
the  southward  poles.  She  found  a  rod  eight  inches  long  to  have  a
blue  flame  four  inches  long  at  the  northward  pole,  and  a  reddish  one,
six-fifths  of  an  inch  long,  at  the  southward  pole  :  a  rod  twenty-four
inches  long,  blue  for  a  hand's  length  beyond  the  northward  pole ;
red,  and  half  as  long  on  the  southward,  with  smoke.  She  saw  a
flaming  light  ten  inches  long  on  a  rod  five  feet  long.  Medium  horse-
shoes presented  sometimes  flames,  sometimes  luminous  clouds,  from
a  hand's  to  an  arm's  length,  over  the  poles ;  very  strong  ones,  such
as  a  nine-fold,  flaming  and  vaporous  masses  of  light,  which  as-
cended to  the  ceiling  of  the  chamber,  always  larger,  stronger,  and
brighter  at  the  northward  than  at  the  southward  poles.  These  ex-
periments were  repeated  hundreds  of  times,  with  countless  modifica-
tions, in  the  course  of  a  daily  pursuit  of  them  during  a  long  time,
and  were  accompanied  by  weaker  and  stronger  results, — of  which  I
could  not  enumerate  half, — according  to  the  fluctuating  sensibility  of
her  subjectiveness  depending  upon  her  physical  and  mental  condition
at  the  particular  epochs.

318.  Pregnancy  must  be  regarded  as  a  particular  kind  of  condition
of  health.  I  have  luckily  been  able  to  obtain  a  few  representatives
of  this  among  the  sensitive.  Mrs.  Cecilia  Bauer,  wife  of  the  inn-
keeper Bauer,  of  the  suburb  Braunhirschengrund,  Vienna,  twenty-six
years  of  age,  in  the  sixth  month  of  pregnancy,  of  tall,  powerful  frame,
lively,  open  temperament,  is  a  perfectly  healthy  person,  and  has  been
so  all  her  life.  But  she  is  sensitive  to  a  degree  that  I  have  seldom
found,  so  that  she  exceeds  even  many  somnambulists  in  excitability,
and  leaves  all  the  other  healthy  persons  far  behind  her.  Scarcely,
after  she  had  entered  the  dark  chamber,  had  I  excluded  the  light
and  directed  her  attention  to  her  hands,  when  she  began  to  describe
appearances  of  light  appearing  before  her,  at  first  weak,  but  soon  so
strong,  that  it  was  a  real  delight  to  carry  on  the  investigation  with
her.  She  saw  all  steel  maguets  odically  incandescent,  and  red  and
blue  flames  flicker  at  the  poles,  usually  half  the  length  of  the  steel
itself.  Weak  horse-shoes  seemed  to  her  to  have  yellow  and  blue,
stronger  ones  red  and  blue  flames  over  the  poles,  mostly  passing-
above  into  a  beautiful  iridescent  play  of  color,  which  she  described
with  vivid  delight ;  the  large  nine-fold  horse-shoe,  which  was  then
somewhat  more  weakly  magnetic,  appeared  to  blaze  with  a  flame
forty  inches  long,  and  from  this  smoke  ascended  to  the  ceiling.  I
never  heard  either  a  healthy  or  diseased  sensitive  speak  with  more
decision  and  certainty  of  the  odic  luminous  phenomena  before  them,
than  did  this  pregnant  woman.

260  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

I  must  here  also  mention  one  more, — Mrs.  Josephine  Fenzl,  who
has  already  been  named,  (§  302).  During  the  experiments  made
with  her  in  the  year  1846,  she  was  in  her  usual  condition  of  health ;
those  of  1847,  however,  during  a  period  in  which  she  was  pregnant,
and  gave  opportunity  for  comparison  of  the  two  conditions  in  one
and  the  same  sensitive.

319.  None  of  these  perfectly  healthy  persons  knew  anything  about
their  most  remarkable  and  interesting  peculiarities,  and  they  were
not  a  little  astonished  at  the  discovery,  under  my  guidance,  of  pow-
ers of  which  they  had  never  before  dreamt.  The  manner  in  which  I
come  upon  the  trace  of  them,  which  I  at  once  take  up  and  follow,  is
now  simply  this :  I  inquire  among  my  acquaintance  whether  they
know  any  one  who  is  frequently  troubled  with  periodical  headaches,
especially  with  megrim,  who  complains  of  temporary  oppression  of
the  stomach,  or  who  often  sleeps  badly  without  apparent  cause,  talks
in  the  sleep,  rises  up  or  even  gets  out  of  bed,  or  is  restless  at  night
during  the  period  of  full  moon,  or  in  whom  the  moonlight  in  general
is  disagreeable ;  or  who  is  readily  disordered  in  churches  or  theatres,
or  very  sensitive  to  strong  smells,  grating  or  shrill  noises,  &c. ;  all
such  people,  who  may  be  otherwise  healthy,  I  seek  after,  and  make
a  pass  with  a  finger  over  the  palm  of  their  hands,  and  I  scarcely  ever
miss  finding  them  sensitive.  When  they  follow  me  into  the  obscu-
rity of  my  dark  chamber,  and  remain  there  an  hour  or  two,  their
surprise  is  excited  by  the  perception  of  a  quantity  of  luminous  ap-
pearances of  which  they  had  not  previously  the  slightest  idea.  The
great  number  of  people  who  are  in  this  state  of  excitability  does  ac-
tually exceed  belief,  and  I  state  it  below  rather  than  above  the  reality,
when  I  say  that  at  least  a  third  part  of  the  population  are  sensitive  :
for  on  every  side  on  which  I  turn  I  meet  with  healthy  sensitives,
and  I  could  in  a  few  days  collect  not  dozens,  but  hundreds,  if  it  were
requisite.  It  will,  and  must,  soon  be  proved  how  little  ground  there
is  to  doubt  these  asseverations.  Sensitiveness  is  not  a  rarity  among
human  beings,  as  I  myself  thought  some  years  ago,  but  a  very  gen-
erally distributed  quality,  which  after  my  accounts,  will  soon  be  dis-
covered in  every  direction,  and  will  throw  open  a  new  and  not  un-
important page  of  the  human  condition.

But  let  us  follow  the  appointed  course,  and  come  now  to  the

b.  Sickly   Sensitives.

320.  Under  this  denomination  I  comprise  all  those  who  are  able,
like  the  healthy,  to  follow  their  occupations,  but  from  time  to  time
suffer  from  indisposition  and  disorders  which  confine  them  to  their
room  or  to  bed.

WITH  SICKLY  SENSITIVES.  261

321.  Miss  Susanna  Nather,  thirty-seven  years  of  age,  daughter  of
an  officer  of  Basle  :  I  met  with  her  sick  in  a  convent  in  Vienna,  with
all  the  symptoms  of  strongly  marked  sensitiveness.  When  she  was
so  far  recovered  as  to  be  able  to  leave  the  infirmary,  she  accepted  my
invitation  to  visit  me  for  some  weeks  at  my  estate,  where  I  subjected
her  to  daily  experiments,  to  which  we  shall  frequently  recur.  It  was
remarkable  that,  with  great  sensitive  excitability  to  all  that  affected
the  feeling,  she  never  could  see  the  magnetic  light  in  the  dark.  We
thus  lind,  on  the  one  hand,  very  exalted  sensitiveness,  in  persons  who
occasionally  suffer  from  nervous  disease,  but  whose  optical  apparatus
does  not  enable  them  to  detect  the  odic  light ;  while  on  the  other
side  we  possess  perfectly  healthy  persons,  in  great  number,  who  see
these  luminous  phenomena  with  the  greatest  ease  and  distinctness.

322.  Miss  Josephine  Winter,  at  present  in  Vienna,  No.  60,  Suburb
St.  Ulrich,  step-daughter  to  Mr.  Schmal,  the  painter,  of  Grätz,  nine-
teen years  of  age,  tall,  of  a  full  habit,  strong,  healthy,  full  of  gaiety,
and  at  present  perfectly  healthy,  passed  through  a  violent  nervous
disease  two  years  ago,  during  which  she  for  some  time  suffered  from
spasms  and  somnambulism.  A  sensitive  excitability  has  been  left
behind  by  this,  which  may  be  readily  called  out  by  reactions.  She
saw  all  magnets  laid  before  her  in  the  dark  in  a  whitish  odic  incan-
descence. Needles  eight  inches  long  flamed  at  both  ends  to  a  length
of  an  inch  or  more,  both  more  strongly  and  blue  at  the  northward
pole,  red  at  the  southward.  A  long  one-layer  horse-shoe  appeared
to  her  to  have  a  flame  at  the  negative  pole  six  inches,  at  the  positive
four  inches  long,  both  being  themselves  in  a  delicate  luminous  va-
por. She  found  a  three-fold  horse-shoe  odically  incandescent,  white,
enveloped  in  light,  and  flaming  to  a  height  of  eight  to  twelve  inches
at  the  poles  ;  on  one  bright  blue,  on  the  other  yellowish-red.  The
flame  flared  backward  and  forward  when  she  blew  upon  them.

323.  Mrs.  Johanna  Anschütz  (nee  Steiner),  wife  of  the  above-men-
tioned Mr.  Gustav.  Anschütz,  twenty-eight  years  of  age,  mother  of
two  children,  a  lady  of  delicate  nature,  readily  thrown  in  a  state  of
reserve,  susceptible  as  she  was  excitable  to  all  impressions  on  the  feel-
ing, had  suffered  almost  throughout  her  life  from  various  acute  dis-
eases, which  always  terminated  in  a  spasmodic  condition,  and  not  un-
frequently  brought  on  fits  of  somnambulism.  For  some  years  she
has  been  healthy,  but  very  slight  mental  shocks  suffice  to  reproduce
the  latter  at  once.  She  was  kind  enough  to  submit  to  the  trouble  of
testing  her  vision  on  the  luminous  phenomena,  and  saw  a  great  number
of  them,  both  in  my  darkened  chamber  and  at  night  in  her  own  house.
She  saw  two  magnetic  needles,  four  inches  long,  flame  to  a  length  of
two-fifths  to  four-fifths  of  an  inch  at  both  poles.     She  saw  a  pocket

262  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

horse-shoe  emit  light  at  both  poles.  She  perceived  a  one-layered
horse-shoe,  twenty  inches  long,  luminous  in  its  perfect  figure,  and  dif-
fusing, moving,  luminous,  flame-like  vapor  at  both  poles.  She  saw  a
three-fold  horse-shoe  luminous  throughout  its  mass,  and  seamed  with
intense  light  at  all  the  edges,  especially  at  the  edges  of  the  poles.
Another  time,  during  menstruation,  she  saw  a  delicate  luminosity
flaming  up  eight  inches  long  over  both  poles  of  the  same  three-fold
horse-shoe.  A  five-fold  horse-shoe  seemed  to  her  to  have  a  lumin-
ous vapor  of  a  hand's  length,  at  both  poles.  A  seven-fold  gave  light
only  at  the  northward  pole.  She  found  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  prin-
cipally luminous  at  the  edges,  and  delicate  flames  sweeping  up  six-
teen inches  above  the  poles,  which,  according  to  her  statement,  re-
quired to  be  held  at  some  distance  from  the  eyes  to  be  seen  distinctly,
becoming  indistinct  when  brought  too  close,  and  disappearing  when
in  immediate  proximity  to  the  eye.  She  described  the  flames  them-
selves as  so  extraordinarily  delicate  and  ethereal,  that  she  could  not
compare  them  with  a  common  flame  ;  they  seemed  only  a  pallid  lu-
minosity, so  immaterial  that  they  could  not  be  looked  close  at  with-
out, so  to  speak,  dissolving  into  nothing.  They  were  only  to  be
perceived  once  only  four-fifths  of  an  inch,  at  another  time  ten  inches
long,  disappearing  when  I  applied  the  armatures,  and  flashing  up
when  I  removed  them  ;  moving  unsteadily,  sparkling,  always  larger
and  blue  at  the  northward  pole,  smaller,  duller,  and  reddish-yellow
at  the  southward  ;  in  all  cases  marked  somewhat  more  brightly  and
distinctly  at  the  edges  and  corners  of  the  poles.

325.  Miss  Wilhelmine  von  Weigelsberg,  about  twenty-three  years
of  age,  residing  in  Vienna,  No.  451,  Fleischmannsgasse,  in  the  suburb
of  Wieden,  with  her  aunt,  suffers  much  from  spasms  and  uncertain
health,  although  she  looks  well.  She  saw  magnetic  needles  four
inches  long  glowing  pale  white  throughout  their  steel  substance,
brighter  towards  the  poles  on  both  sides  than  in  the  magnetic  axes.
She  found  all  the  poles  furnished  with  little  flames,  bluish  on  one
side,  and  yellowish-red  on  the  other.  She  also  perceived  horse-shoe
magnets  in  anodic  incandescence ;  a  pocket  horse-shoe,  which  I  had
given  her,  appeared  to  her  at  night,  at  her  own  house,  to  have  smoke-
like delicate  flames  on  both  arms,  four-fifths  to  six-fifths  of  an  inch
long,  a  little  smaller  at  one  pole  than  at  the  other,  unsteady,  some-
times brighter,  sometimes  more  cloudy,  now  larger,  now  smaller,  oc-
casionally blazing  only  at  one  arm.  In  my  darkened  chamber  she
saw,  on  a  five-fold  horse-shoe,  only  a  short,  weakly  luminous  spot  on
the  southward  pole,  and  a  restless  vaporous  flame,  an  inch  and  a  half
long,  on  the  northward  pole.     She  perceived  flame-like  lights  blazing

WITH  SICKLY  SENSITIVES.  263

to  a  height  of  almost  twenty  inches  on  the  large  nine-fold  magnet,
illuminating  the  immediate  vicinity.

32G.  A  strange  phenomenon  referable  here  is  that  of  a  blind  sensi-
tive, the  master  cabinet-maker,  Johann  Friedrich  Bollman,  of  No.  268,
Ferdinandsgasse,  suburb  of  Wieden,  Vienna,  a  tenant  there  of  a
house  belonging  to  Mr.  Gustav.  Anschütz,  to  whose  friendly  interest
1  owe  the  knowledge  of  this  remarkable  man.  He  is  fifty-six  years
of  age,  born  at  Kiel,  in  Holstein,  was,  thirty  years  ago,  servant  in  the
laboratory  of  our  distinguished  physicist  Piaff,  in  that  place  ;  suffered
for  a  long  time  from  affection  of  the  lungs,  got  cataract,  and  was  un-
successfully operated  on  by  Prof.  Jäger,  and  has  now  been  blind  for
some  years  :  that  is,  unconditionally  blind  for  all  shapes  and  material
forms  of  things,  but  not  altogether  insensible  to  the  general  impres-
sion of  light.  The  poor  man  no  longer  possesses  a  crystalline  lens,
but  his  retina  is  still  healthy.  Thus,  rays  of  light  which  now  fall
upon  his  disordered  eyes  can  no  longer  be  collected  into  a  regular
picture,  but,  penetrating  diffusedly  through  the  opaque  fluids  of  the
eye,  they  arrive  at  the  retina,  and  are  conveyed  to  the  mind  by  the
power  of  sensuous  perception.  The  necessary  result  of  this  is,  that
he  can  perceive  light  and  color,  but  not  form.  AVhen  any  one  has
on  bright-yellow  or  bright-blue  clothes,  a  young  lady  a  green  or  red
shawl,  he  detects  the  colors  if  they  are  strongly  illuminated  ;  but  a
green  branch  or  a  red  door  would  produce  the  same  effects  upon  him.
Now  this  blind  man  happens  to  be  sensitive.  He  was  brought  to
me  at  Castle  Reisenberg ;  I  kept  him  there  all  night,  and  took  him
next  morning  to  my  apparatus  in  the  darkened  chamber.  After  re-
maining quiet  in  the  dark  Cor  an  hour,  he,  this  blind  man,  saw  a
quantity  of  luminous  phenomena,  which  I,  who  could  see,  was  unable
to  discern  ;  and  when  we  necessarily  moved  backwards  and  forwards
among  the  odically  luminous  objects,  it  happened,  perhaps  for  the
first  time  since  men  have  existed,  that  the  blind  led  the  seeing  ;  name-
ly, Mr.  Bollman  led  me.  Our  parts  were  exchanged.  The  daylight
in  which  I  was  able  to  act  was  taken  from  me,  but  for  him  the  odic
light,  which  reacted  upon  him  and  not  upon  me,  was  increased.  [
shall  return  to  all  the  details  in  their  proper  place ;  here  I  have  only
to  notice  that  he  perceived  a  little  pocket  horse-shoe  lying  upon  a
table  as  a  luminous  spot;  that  he  did  not  at  once  observe  a  long
one-layer  horse-shoe  when  close  to  him,  but  when  I  removed  it  a  step
from  him,  and  took  off  the  armature,  he  discerned  a  sudden  flash  of
light,  which  gradually  disappeared  after  a  few  seconds.  He  observed
this  only  at  one  pole,  which  I,  when  he  directed  my  hand  to  it,
recognised  in  the  dark,  by  the  marks  upon  it,  as  the  northward  pole.
A   three-fold   horse-shoe   remained   permanently   luminous   to   him.

264  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

He  could  not  see  the  iron  substance  in  its  weak  odic  incandescence ;
but  as  soon  as  the  armature  was  removed  he  detected  a  permanent
light,  and  this  again  at  the  northward  pole  only.  He  described  it  as
a  roundish  luminous  spot,  of  about  an  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter..
A  nine-fold  horse-shoe  produced  a  large  luminous  cloud,  which  spread
its'  light  almost  forty  inches  round  upon  the  neighboring  objects.
Thus,  odic  light  traversed  the  vitreous  humor  of  his  eyes,  and  was
received  by  the  nervous  plexuses  of  the  retina,  like  other  light,  but
did  not  impart  to  him  any  configuration  of  the  shape  of  magnets,
odic  flames,  vapor,  or  sparks,  but  only  an  impression  of  diffused  light.
The  present  case  certainly  affords  a  most  rare  and  certain  point  of
support  as  to  the  nature  of  the  odic  light.

327.  One  of  the  sensitive  young  women  had  told  me  that  she
had  suffered  from  chlorosis  in  her  childhood,  and  had  taken  particu-
lar fancies  to  certain  kinds  of  food,  especially  to  all  raw  substances.
Since  I  already  knew  from  other  quarters  how  fond  all  the  more
highly  sensitive  are  of  raw  food,  I  was  led  to  the  idea  that  chlorosis
might  perhaps  be  accompanied,  among  other  things,  by  distinctly
marked  sensitiveness.  In  order  to  test  this,  I  looked  about  for
chlorotic,  patients,  and  soon  learned  that  among  my  own  work-people
at  Reisenberg  Farm,  there  was  a  girl  who  had  suffered  unceasingly
for  three  years  from  chlorosis.  I  at  once  subjected  her  to  investiga-
tion. Anka  Hetmanek,  twenty-one  years  of  age,  short,  but  stoutly
made,  corpulent,  esteemed  as  a  spirited  and  industrious  girl,  of  quiet
character,  a  clever  silk-spinner  :  has  only  menstruated  once  in  her
life :  is  free  from  headache,  but  suffers  much  from  disorder  of  the
stomach  as  well  as  chlorosis,  and  is  attacked  by  the  pain  at  all  times.
At  the  very  -first  re-actions  she  proved  to  be  perfectly  sensitive.
Every  sensation  that  characterizes  this  appeared  in  her  to  its  full  de-
gree. She  saw  all  magnets  odically  incandescent  in  the  dark,  with
a  whitish  light,  even  when  the  armature  was  applied.  When  it  was
removed,  she  discerned  the  odic  flames  over  the  poles,  stronger  and
blue  at  the  northward  pole,  smoking  strongly  at  the  southward  pole;
the  electro-magnet  with  colored  odic  flames,  &c.

328.  Mrs.  Francisca  Kienesberger,  thirty-nine  years  old,  wife  of  a
land-steward,  mother  of  two  grown-up  sons,  living  at  No.  9*7,  Mittel-
gasse, suburb  of  Schaumburgergrund,  Vienna,  is  very  well-looking
and  stout,  exceedingly  lively,  excitable,  and  unreserved.  She  suffers
very  frequently  from  headache,  slight  pains  in  the  stomach,  and  occa-
sionally from  attacks  of  spasms.  She  is  sensitive  in  a  high  degree.
At  my  request,  she  stayed  at  my  house,  from  time  to  time,  for  seve-
ral weeks.  She  saw  all  magnets  strongly  incandescent.  Two  steel
needles,  four  inches  long,  appeared  to  have  flames  nearly  an  inch  long

WITH  DISEASED  SENSITIVES.  265

at  both  poles.  A  magnetic  rod,  five  feet  long,  almost  as  high  as  a
man,  seemed  to  have  a  flame  eight  inches  long  at  the  northward  pole.
All  horse-shoes  were  luminous,  both  wheii  the  armature  was  applied,
in  which  case  the  magnets  were  enveloped  in  fine  luminous  mist,  as
has  been  already  described  by  Miss  Reichel,  and  also  when  I  took
the  armature  off,  in  which  case  the  poles  exhibited  flames.  She  saw
a  pocket  horse-shoe  four  inches  long,  with  flames  of  four-fifths  of  an
inch.  She  saw  a  one-fold  horse-shoe  in  a  whitish  glow,  with  flames
as  long  as  a  finger  on  the  poles,  passing  into  luminous  vapor.  A
seven-fold  horse-shoe  appeared  to  have  lambent  yellowish  flames,  as
large  as  a  walnut,  on  both  poles,  waving  about  on  them  ;  another
time,  during  menstruation,  she  saw  the  same  covered  eight  to  twelve
inches  high  with  luminous  flame-like  vapor ;  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe
appeared  to  her,  in  her  usual  condition,  in  a  white  odic  incandescence,
and  to  have  flames  twelve  inches  high,  which  rose  up  in  luminous
vapor  in  the  room:  at  the  period  of  her  menstruation,  the  flame-liko
light  seemed  to  blaze  up  five  feet  above  the  poles,  ending  at  the  top
in  bright  vapor,  which  stretched  up  to  the  ceiling.  When  I  opened
the  large  magnet  before  her  in  the  dark,  she  uttered  an  exclamation
of  surprise  and  delight  at  the  splendor  of  the  flames,  the  flying  sparks
and  variegated  lights  of  which  then  suddenly  burst  forth.

c.     Diseased  Sensitives.

329.  Miss  Amalie  Krüger,  thirty-seven  years  of  age,  daughter  of
a  head- waiter  of  an  hotel,  resident  at  No.  27,  Grosse  Ankergasse,
Leopoldstadt,  Vienna,  a  woman  of  gentle  disposition,  serious  tastes,
well  educated  in  languages,  and  thus  more  capable  than  many  others
of  expressing  herself  clearly  respecting  her  observations  ;  of  healthy
appearance,  and  full  habit.  From  youth  she  has  suffered  from  many
kinds  of  nervous  affection  ;  has,  at  various  times,  been  a  sleep-walker,
which  condition  came  and  left  her  at  intervals,  and  she  has  suffered
much  from  spasms,  which  were  very  readily  re-produced.  At  such
periods  she  saw  the  magnetic  flame  very  vividly,  to  a  length  of  from
four  to  eight  inches.  She  visited  me  now  and  then  for  a  few  days,
and  very  kindly  devoted  herself  to  the  odic  investigations,  various
reports  of  which  I  shall  give  in  the  sequel.  In  the  darkened  cham-
ber she  always  saw  the  light  flash  up  from  the  magnets  most  dis-
tinctly when  I  pulled  off  the  armature,  and  at  the  moment  when  I
applied  it  again.  The  vaporous  lights  which  she  discerned  upon
open  horse-shoes  were  not  large  in  proportion  to  her  great  sensitive-
ness, usually  only  about  an  inch  long,  and  always  visible  on  one  pole
alone,  which  constantlv  proved  to  be  the  northward.     This  was  the

12

266  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

case  with  a  pocket  horse-shoe,  a  large  one-layer,  a  three-fold,  and  a
five-fold  magnet.

330.  Friedrich  Weidlich,  thirty-two  years  of  age,  formerly  in  the
English  navy,  now  an  invalid,  staying  in  Vienna,  severely  and  in-
curably affected  with  hypertrophy  of  the  heart,  accompanied  with
spasms  and  periodical  attacks  of  somnambulism.  This  man,  I  know
not  whether  by  his  own  fault  or  not,  is  in  bad  credit  among  the
physicians  of  Vienna ;  I  do  not  inquire  into  such  matters,  but  I  have
seen  that  in  the  tests  which  I  applied  to  his  sensitiveness  he  always
adhered  to  the  truth,  and  gave  me  genuine  accounts.  From  the
abundance  of  experiments  and  observations  I  have  now  collected  on
the  subject,  it  is  wholly  impossible  for  a  sensitive  to  deliver  me  even
a  single  untrue  sentence  without  immediate  detection,  since  with  ev-
ery new  patient  I  again  go  through  all  settled  questions  from  the
beginning,  and  they  are  controlled  beforehand,  or,  whatever  any  one
tells  me  new  one  day,  I  repeat  upon  other  sensitives  the  next  morn-
ing ;  not  to  say  that  such  a  person,  even  if  he  were  a  graduate  of
physics,  would  be  unable  to  see  or  guess  the  sense  and  purpose  of
the  cross-questioning  to  which  I  subject  him.  At  all  events,  all  and
every  statement  Weidlich  gave  me  bore  the  stamp  of  exact  rectitude,
and  held  good  in  all  cases  under  manifold  controls :  I  have  nothing
to  do  with  any  other  affairs  he  may  be  concerned  in.  He  saw  all
magnets  glowing  palely  with  a  whitish-red  light  throughout  the  sub-
stance of  the  steel,  brighter  toward  the  poles,  almost  dark  in  the  axis.
He  found  magnetic  needles  four  inches  long,  emit  little  flames  from
both  poles,  larger  from  the  northward  than  from  the  southward  pole.
In  a  subsequent  experiment  he  gave  the  size  of  the  former  as  two
inches  long,  and  the  color  bluish  ;  the  latter  an  inch  and  a  half  long,
and  yellowish.  He  described  a  long  single-layer  horse-shoe  as  having
very  thin  flames  at  both  poles :  somewhat  stronger,  larger,  and  blue
at  the  northward  pole ;  smaller,  duller,  and  reddish  yellow  at  the
southward  pole.  A  three-layered  horse-shoe  possessed  a  flame  on
the  northward  pole  of  a  hand's  length,  iridescent,  but  predominantly
blue ;  and  at  the  south  pole  a  somewhat  duller,  smaller,  reddish-
yellow  flame,  and  these  rose  up  side  by  side,  terminating  in  strong
smoke.  A  large  nine-layered  horse-shoe  seemed  at  first,  when  very
close,  to  have  a  flame  about  eight  inches  high,  with  much  vapor  over
it ;  but  when  I  removed  him  a  step  back  from  it,  he  perceived  the
great  tall  column  of  light,  which  he  had  not  seen  before.  He  now
described  this  as  equalling  the  height  and  breadth  of  a  man,  inter-
mingled with  smoke  above,  which  curled  up  to  the  ceiling  of  the
room,  and  lighted  up  everything.  He  stated  the  color  to  be  yellow-
ish-red and  bluish,  and  that  it  was  in  constant  motion :  when  I  blew

WITH  DISEASED  SENSITIVES.  267

upon  it,  the  column  was  distorted,  but  soon  restored  itself  again :  in
a  subsequent  experiment,  he  gave  the  size  somewhat  less,  but  all  in
proportion  ;  thus  corresponding  either  to  subjectively  weaker  power
of  vision,  or  objectively  less  intensity  of  the  magnet.

331.  Miss  Clementine  Girtler,  eighteen  years  of  age,  daughter  of
a  draper,  residing  at  No.  63,  Hauptstrasse,  Wieden,  Vienna,  a  deli-
cate impressionable  girl,  had  suffered  for  a  long  time  from  liver  com-
plaint, and  had  fallen  into  active  somnambulism  :  during  this,  the
moon  acted  uncommonly  strongly  upon  her,  and  through  the  good
offices  of  her  physician,  Dr.  Horst,  junior,  who  completely  cured  her,
I  was  frequently  eye-witness  of  the  strangest  abnormal  affections.
She  saw  luminous  appearances  issue  from  open  horse-shoes  in  the
dark,  both  from  a  small  one,  and  from  a  seven-fold  horse-shoe.  I  was
not  able  to  get  her  to  my  darkened  chamber ;  I  was  therefore  unable
to  institute  more  circumstantial  trials  with  her ;  nevertheless  the
above  facts  are  sufficient  here.

332.  Johanna  Kynast,  twenty-two  years  old,  daughter  of  a  baker
at  Waidhofen,  living  with  relations  at  No.  127,  Schmidtgasse,  Braun-
hirschengrund,  an  extremely  well-looking  and  stout  girl,  was  laid  up
with  a  nervous  fever  five  years  ago,  and  since  then  has  constantly
suffered  from  nervous  attacks,  and  from  time  to  time  fallen  into  a
state  of  somnambulism,  which  continues  for  some  weeks,  then  disap-
pears for  weeks  or  months,  returns,  and  so  goes  on.  She  paid  me  a
visit,  and  remained  some  days.  At  first  she  did  not  see  much  in  the
dark  chamber,  and  that  little  with  a  remarkable  degree  of  intermit-
tence,  although  she  remained  almost  an  hour  in  the  dark.  Quite
unexpectedly,  she  now  fell  spontaneously  into  the  somnambulistic
sleep.  It  endured  for  half  an  hour,  and  I  let  her  continue  it  quietly
until  she  desired  me  to  awaken  her  at  once.  As  soon  as  this  was
done,  she  saw  well  all  odic  light  of  human  beings,  crystals,  substances,
&c. ;  and  magnets,  even  when  the  armatures  were  applied,  all  ap-
peared to  her  in  a  delicate  whitish  light  of  odic  incandescence.  She
saw  both  needles  and  bars  of  different  sizes,  as  well  as  horse- shoes,
with  flames  at  the  poles.  A  long  one-layer  horse-shoe  had  a  flame
two  and  a  half  to  three  inches  long  at  both  poles ;  medium  horse-
shoes longer  and  brighter  in  proportion  to  their  strength  ;  the  nine-
layered  appeared  to  have  a  flame  more  than  twenty  inches  high  upon
the  northward  pole,  less  than  twenty  inches  at  the  southward  ;  lumi-
nous greyish  smoke  streamed  up  more  than  five  feet  high  above
these.  She  described  the  flame  of  the  northward  pole  as  larger  and
rather  bluish ;  that  of  the  southward  poles  as  smaller  and  reddish,
passing  into  red.     The  whole  vicinity  was  lighted  by  them.

268  LUMINOUS  PHENOMENA  ON  MAGNETS

333.  Francisca  Weigand,  twenty-seven  years  old,  sister  of  the  hat-
ter Weigand,  residing  at  No.  30,  Obere  Pfarrgasse,  Windmühl,  Vi-
enna, born  in  the  district  of  Königshofen  in  Franconia.  With  an
affection  of  the  bronchi,  she  fell  into  a  periodical  somnambulism.  This
girl  possessed  a  remarkable  power  of  vision  for  the  odic  light,  and
through  her  obliging  readiness  most  interesting  results  might  have
been  arrived  at.  Unfortunately  I  was  opposed  in  every  way  by  a
quacking  physician,  without  any  idea  of  the  scientific  value  of  the
case  which  had  unluckily  fallen  into  his  hands  ;  the  poor  somnambu-
list was  allowed  to  tell  fortunes,  and  make  a  source  of  profit  of  her
misfortune,  and  soon  acquired  a  lamentable  celebrity  all  over  Vienna.
This  is  just  the  way  in  which,  in  France  and  Germany,  the  most  in-
teresting phenomena  of  somnambulism  have  had  a  stigma  cast  upon
them,  and  been  brought  into  discredit  in  public  opinion.  I  myself
was  present  at  one  earnest  reproof  that  was  given  to  him  by  the
worthy  Professor  Lippich  on  this  account,  but  without  effect,  as  the
sequel  only  showed  too  well.  I  brought  her  some  small  magnetic
rods  and  horse-shoes.  She  saw  the  metallic  substance  of  all  very
well  in  the  dark,  glowing,  duller  around  the  axes,  brighter  towards
the  poles  ;  a  little  rod  four  inches  long  exhibited  to  her  a  flame  of
two  inches  at  the  southward  pole,  of  six  inches  at  the  northward  pole.
The  horse-shoe,  the  armature  of  which  she  saw  glowing,  emitted
flames  from  both  poles  when  this  was  removed ;  that  from  the  south-
ward pole  as  long  as  the  arm  of  the  magnet,  that  from  the  north-
ward equal  to  twice  the  length.  Moreover,  the  entire  horse-shoe  was
enveloped  in  a  delicate  mist  of  fire,  as  had  been  described  by  Misses
Reichel,  Atzmannsdorfer,  Maix,  and  some  of  the  most  remarkable
sensitives.

334.  I  have  now  added  fifty  new  witnesses  to  the  six  or  seven  ori-
ginal ones,  and,  like  the  reader,  I  begin  to  tire  of  always  relating  one
and  the  same  thing,  and  wasting  myself  in  repetitions.  I  could  easily
go  on  bringing  forward  many  fresh  sensitives  and  their  statements  ;
I  think,  however,  that  we  have  more  than  sufficient.  Every  reason-
able doubt  to  which  the  five  sensitive  girls  first  named  might  have
been  exposed,  must  disappear  before  the  multiformity  and  credibility
of  the  facts,  vouched  for  by  persons  differing  most  widely  in  age,  sex,
residence,  position  in  life,  and  occupation,  and  by  persons  of  the  high-
est respectability, — facts,  for  the  control  and  repetition  of  which,  in
other  places,  I  have  always  furnished  the  most  complete  facilities.  I
know  that,  in  spite  of  this,  there  will  remain  plenty  of  people  who
will  not  yet  be  satisfied — since  there  is  such  a  thing  as  unreasonable

WITH  DISEASED  SENSITIVES.  269

doubt ;  there  is  such  a  thing  as  absurd  skepticism  ;  and  finally,  there
is  also  such  a  thing  as  malevolent  skeptism.*

This  I  cannot  and  may  not  refute ;  I  here  have  to  do  only  with
sensible,  reasonably-judging  people;  with  the  friends  of  peaceful,  sci-
entific progress  ;  and  these  will,  I  hope,  have  been  satisfied  with
what  I  have  brought  forward,  that  is,  so  far  as  the  establishment  of
the  fundamental  fact  is  concerned,  that  magnets  emit  light  in  the
dark,  which  not  all,  but  very  many  healthy  and  diseased  persons  are
able  to  see  with  complete  distinctness  and  certainty.

Uniting  all  these  observations  and  depositions  of  evidence  into  a
kind  of  collective  testimony,  we  obtain  the  following  well-grounded
axioms  : —

a.  All  steel  magnets  independently  emit  light, — odic  light,  in  the
wider  acceptation  of  the  term.  This  light  appears  under  different
forms,  which  exhibit  unequal  intensities,  unlike  colors,  unlike  densities,
unlike  motion^,  &c.

b.  Not  every  eye  is  fitted  to  detect  this.  A  certain  class  of  persons
have  the  capacity  ;  the  individuals  may  be  healthy  or  diseased.  Cer-
tain diseased  conditions  raise  this  power  to  a  high  pitch  ;  but  it  is
also  met  with,  here  and  there,  almost  as  strong  in  healthy  persons.

c.  The  odic  light  is  extremely  weak,  and  is  so  much  surpassed  by
every  other  -known  light,  as  to  be  thus  rendered  invisible.  In  order
to  discern  it,  the  eye  must  be  prepared  beforehand  by  sojourn  in  ab-
solute darkness  for  hours.     The  very  slightest  trace  of  light  pene-

*  A  small  society  of  physicians  in  Vienna  lately  afforded  us  a  lamentable
example  of  this.  After  half  a  year's  continued  investigation,  these  came  to  the
edifying-  result  that  Misses  Reichel,  Krüger,  Nather,  and  others,  were  nothing
better  than  open  liars  and  deceivers  !  I  really  pity  these  gentlemen, — alto-
gether not  less  than  three-and-twenty  Doctors  and  Professors  of  Medicine, — that
in  twenty -two  sittings  they  could  not  get  nearer  to  the  truth,  and  gradually
went  so  monstrously  astray  with  their  sensitives,  that  at  last  all  lost  themselves
together  in  open  lying  and  deceit.  I  will  not  mention  names.  No  one  who
reads  the  report  which  they  published  under  the  a^gis  of  the  Journal  of  the  Med-
ical Society  of  Vienna,  in  November  and  December,  1846,  can  avoid  feeliDg  a
sensation  of  sorrow  that  powers  which  might  have  rendered  essential  service  to
science,  if  they  had  so  willed,  should  have  been  wasted  in  so  sad  and  useless  a
manner,  even  to  the  manifest  prejudice  of  enlightenment.  For,  instead  of  ascer-
taining and  bringing  to  light  truths,  the  most  contrary  conclusions  are  dragged
forward  through  a  series  of  badly-arranged  experiments  ;  and  facts,  which  were
already  to  be  regarded  as  secured,  again  enveloped  in  mystery.  I  will  correct
these  mistakes,  in  notes,  as  often  as  I  have  opportunity  in  the  course  of  my
treatises  ;  not  because  I  believe  that  they  require  refutation  with  persons  who
know  anything  of  such  matters,  for  they  refute  themselves  in  the  eyes  of  the
initiated  by  their  own  complete  emptiness,  but  because  unscientific  persons  and
foreigners  must  be  guarded  against  deception. — Authors  Note.

2*70  FORMS  OF  THE  LUMINOUS   EMANATIONS  OF

trating  into  a  darkened  space  almost  always  renders  the  observation
impossible  ;  in  any  case  quite  uncertain.

335.  The  establishment  as  firmly  as  possible  of  the  fundamental
proposition,  that  from  the  magnet  emanates  light — that  is  to  say,  a
new,  hitherto  unknown  something,  which  cannot  be  brought  into
connection  with  our  existing  conceptions  of  magnetism,  whether  or
not  it  be  luminous,  or  other  peculiar  properties  inherent  in  it — was  a
point  about  which  I  could  not  spate  any  pains  ;  and  it  was  the  more
necessary  that  I  should  substantiate  it  by  all  the  means  in  my  power,
since  at  present  I  have  no  method  of  material  proof  for  the  force,  which
can  be  used  for  universal  illustration,  of  the  kinds  which  exist  in  other
physical  experiments.  But  having  once  established  it,  and  following
the  path  of  induction,  by  the  enumeration  of  a  superabundant  amount
of  incontestible  individual  cases,  given  it  the  rank  of  a  natural  law,  I
have  considered  it  unnecessary,  and  that  it  would  be  thought  a  tire-
some and  useless  superfluity,  for  me  to  give  the  detail  of  all  the  fur-
ther investigation  of  this  subject  in  its  immeasurable  field,  and  every
development  of  its  specialities  and  individual  parts,  in  the  same  way,
through  several  dozens  of  nothing  but  repetitional  and  confirmatory
experiments  on  fresh  persons.  I  have,  therefore,  given  this  up  from
this  point,  and  contented  myself  with  supporting  the  rest  of  my  ob-
servations by  a  less  extended  collection  of  testimonies;  yet  in  all
things  in  any  degree  important  it  will  be  found  that  I  have  never
taken  less  than  ten  or  twelve  different  persons  for  witnesses.  I  beg
that  the  account  of  my  further  researches  may  be  criticised  according
to  this  principle  ; — these  treating  of  the  appearances  of  the  odic  light
in  its  different  forms.

FORMS  OF  THE  LUMINOUS  EMANATION'S  OF  THE  MAGNET.

336.  So  far  as  my  researches  extend  at  present,  the  odic  light,  in
the  wider  sense  of  the  term,  appears  in  five  forms,  producing  different
sensuous  impressions,  namely,  in  the  condition  of: —

1.  Incandescence.

2.  Flame.

3.  Threads,  streaks,  and  nebulae.

4.  Smoke.

5.  Sparks.

We  will  examine  each  of  the  various  kinds  of  appearance  in  turn.

1.       ODIC  INCANDESCENCE  ON  THE  STEEL  MAGNET.

337.  We  have  seen  that  a  peculiar  kind  of  luminous  condition,  in
which  the  magnetic  steel  seems  in  a  weak  glow,  and  for  which  I  have

THE  MAGNET.— ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.  211

not  been  able  to  find  a  better  term  than  "  odic  incandescence,"  is  one
of  the  commonest  and  first  phenomena,  which  almost  all  sensitives
perceive  in  deep  and  long-  continued  darkness.  I  have  expressed  my
opinion  on  the  nature  of  this  light  in  the  preceding  treatises  and  now
brought  forward  altogether,  with  the  old  and  new,  more  than  fifty
eye-witnesses  of  the  fact  of  its  existence.  The  next  question  is,
whether  the  odic  incandescence  remains  the  same  under  all  external
circumstances  ;  whether,  and  if  any,  what  modifications  it  is  subject  to.
338.  A  simple  bar  magnet,  twenty  inches  long,  lying  in  the  meri-
dian, its  northward  pole  carefully  turned  to  the  north,  was  shown  to
the  youth  Stephen  Kollar,  in  my  darkened  chamber;  he  saw  only  a
third  part  of  the  bar  in  distinct  odic  incandescence,  this  occupying
the  northward  end  ;  the  other  two-thirds  almost  escaped  him,  so
that  he  only  discerned  slight  indications  of  it.  I  showed  the  same
rod,  under  the  same  circumstances,  to  the  healthy  maid  Zinkel,  Mrs.
Bauer,  Dr.  Nied,  Baron  Oberländer,  Mrs.  von  Varady,  Mr.  Rabe,
Mrs.  von  Peichich,  and  many  others.  They  saw  it  luminously  in-
candescent throughout,  strongest  at  the  two  poles,  and  decreasing
toward  the  middle.  But  they  did  not  find  the  color  of  these  lights
the  same  in  all  parts;  the  half  turned  toward  the  north  had  bluish,
that  toward  the  south  a  yellowish  red  light,  agreeing  with  the  colors
of  the  flames  emitted  by  the  two  poles.  Moreover,  Josepha  Zinkel
did  not  find  the  division  of  the  bar  into  two  parts  equal ;  the  bluish
half  was  somewhat  shorter,  the  reddish  somewhat  longer.  I  turned
the  bar  round,  laid  it  in  the  reverse  direction, — namely,  with 'the
northward  pole  towards  the  south,  and  the  southward  towards  the
north,  so  that  the  poles  of  the  bar  and  those  of  the  earth  coincided.
The  colors  of  the  bar  now  became  dulled  and  somewhat  modified.
The  reddish  half  was  now  turned  toward  the  north,  the  bluish  toward
the  south  ;  but  the  blue  was  duller,  and  had  assumed  a  tinge  of  red,
while  the  yellow  was  dulled,  with  a  great  intermixture  of  grey  ;  the
half  turned  towards  the  north  here  again  presented  itself  as  shorter,
that  towards  the  south  as  the  longer.  Thus,  however  the  position
might  be  changed,  and  the  colors  altered  in  intensity,  the  luminous
half  of  the  steel  magnet  turned  towards  the  north  always  remained
the  shorter.  Instead  of  a  bar,  I  took  an  open  horse-shoe ;  Prof.
Ragsky,  Mr.  Schuh,  Mr.  Von  Rainer,  Mr.  Hütter,  and  Mr.  Delhez,
saw  the  arms  merely  with  a  weak,  dull,  great  light  toward  the  poles.
With  stronger  sensitives  I  placed  both  the  poles  in  the  meridian,
sometimes  towards  the  north,  sometimes  towards  the  south  :  in  the
first  case  the  blue  incandescence  of  the  northward  pole  appeared  en-
larged and  brighter,  that  of  the  southward  subdued  and  dull  red,
passing  into  greyish-blue  ;  in  the  second  case,  on  the  other  hand,  the

272  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE;

blue  incandescence  of  the  northward  pole  was  weakened,  dull,  and
had  a  tinge  of  reddish-grey  ;  but  the  red  light  was  heightened,  more
brilliant,  and  increased  in  size.  The  like  was  met  with  in  some  other
experiments,  in  which  I  placed  before  Josepha  Zinkel  a  horse-shoe
magnet,  sometimes  standing  with  the  poles  turned  upward,  sometimes
lying  flat  with  the  poles  turned  to  the  east  or  toest.  In  the  first
place,  she  said  the  poles  of  both  sides  were  less  luminous  when  lying
in  the  parallels  than  when  turned  vertically  upwards.  And  it  proved
that  the  poles  appeared  to  have  more  of  a  greyish-blue  light  when
turned  toward  the  east,  and  rather  a  tinge  of  reddish-yellow  when
turned  toward  the  west.  Moreover,  whenever  in  these  arrangements
the  northward  arm  of  the  magnet  came  to  be  on  the  north  side,  and
the  southward  toward  the  south,  the  odic  incandescence  became  more
brilliantly  blue  and  red  ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  whenever  the  arms
were  in  the  unconformable  position,  the  flames  were  discolored  and
dull.  (I  borrow  the  terms  conformable  and  unconformable  from
geologists  and  miners,  who  call  a  stratification  which  runs  in  a  direc-
tion contrary  to  the  general  lamination  of  a  mine,  unconformable,  in
contradistinction  to  conformable,  which  coincides  with  the  general
parallelism.  In  the  application  of  this,  I  call  that  position  of  a  mag-
netic bar,  horse-shoe,  or  other  shape,  conformable  where  the  north-
ward pole  is  turned  towards  the  north,  and  the  southward  towards
the  south  ;  the  reverse  position  unconformable).  I  made  the  same
experiments  on  Mrs.  Kienesberger,  with  a  three-fold  horse-shoe,  with
the  poles  turned  upward  and  the  curvature  downward ;  the  north-
ward pole  sometimes  toward  the  north,  sometimes  toward  the  south.
In  like  manner  I  repeated  them  with  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  on  Miss
Atzmannsdorfer,  not  to  mention  many  occasional  repetitions  on  other
sensitives.  The  results  were  always  exactly  the  same ;  I  therefore
omit  repeating  the  description.  These  phenomena  were  in  some
measure  parallel  with  the  respective  intensities  of  the  magnetism  of
the  earth,  and  of  a  magnetic  bar,  of  which  we  know  from  M.  Gauss
that  under  our  latitude  they  bear  the  inverse  proportion  of  the  weight
of  the  eighth  part  of  a  cubic  meter  of  the  earth's  mass  and  a  steel  bar
weighing  one  pound.  In  other  words,  the  magnetism  of  a  common
magnetic  bar  is,  as  a  rule,  more  intense  than  the  magnetism  of  the
earth  ;  and  the  former  so  much  exceeds  the  latter  that  it  cannot  be
overcome  by  it  within  the  duration  of  an  experiment ;  but  at  the
same  time  the  terrestrial  magnetism  acts  so  far  that  it  visibly  de-
creases the  clearness  and  purity  of  the  odic  luminous  phenomena  of
the  magnetic  bar,  placed  in  the  unconformable  position ;  however,
from  the  connection  that  exists  between  magnetism  and  Od,  the  allied
phenomena  accompany  each  other,  as  we  have  seen  in  many  instances.

DIRECTION  OF  THE  MAGNETS.

273

339.  The  result  of  a  subsequent  case,  in  which  I  placed  before
Josepha  Zinkel  a  strong  magnetic  bar,  twenty  inches  long,  in  a  ver-
tical position,  with  the  northward  pole  turned  upward,  was  similar.
She  saw  the  upper  half  of  the  steel  incandescent  in  a  yellowish  blue-
grey,  the  lower  half  reddish-white.  When  I  turned  it  the  other  way
up,  with  the  southward  pole  at  the  top,  she  found  the  upper  half
yellowish-white,  the  lower  reddish  blue-grey.  Wheu  the  same  was
done  with  a  horse-shoe,  both  poles  retained  their  color,  whether
turned  upwards  or  downwards,  but  they  varied  in  color  and  intensity
of  light.  But  the  magnetism  of  the  steel,  and  the  odic  condition
complicated  with  it,  always  exerted  a  certain  degree  of  preponderance
over  the  terrestrial  magnetism,  in  each  case  the  more  marked  the
stronger  the  magnet  was.

340.  These  conditions  exhibited  greater  complexity  in  a  compound
mar/net.  I  went  through  many  careful  experiments  on  this  point
with  Miss  Zinkel.  I  placed  before  her,  in  the  darkened  chamber,  a
nine-fold  horse-shoe  of  great  power,  upright,  the  poles  turned  upward
and  in  the  conformable  position,  the  armature  removed.  She  saw
the  side  of  the  northward  pole  in  blue,  that  of  the  southward  in  red
odic  incandescence.  This  was  the  case  when  she  looked  at  the  broad
surface  of  the  layers.     But  when  she  placed  herself  before  the  mag-

net in  such  a  way  that  she  looked  at  the  narrow,
long  side,  so  as  to  see  the  edges  of  all  the  layers,
as  in  fig.  11,  the  picture  of  the  odic  incandescence
changed.  She  now  perceived  that  the  layers  did
not  all  glow  in  the  same  colors ;  the  middle,
longest  layer,  which  projected  beyond  the  rest,
and  was  the  agent  of  the  magnetism  of  the  entire
luminous  bundle,  was  now  seen  to  be  blue  in  its
odic  incandescence  on  the  north  side.  But  the
layer  in  immediate  contact  on  each  side  had  a
different  appearance — it  appeared  red.  The  next
layers,  that  is,  the  second  from  the  middle,  were
blue  again,  the  third  red  ;  and  the  fourth  and  last,
that  is,  the  outer  one  on  each  side,  were  again
blue.  Thus  the  middle,  and  the  second  and
fourth  corresponding  pairs  of  layers  alone  were
blue  ;  the  intermediate,  first  and  third  pairs,  were
red.  And  the  odic  conditions  were  found  exactly
reversed  on  the  southward  side.  Here  the  incan-
descent middle  layer  was  red.  The  layer  imme-
diately applied  to  this  on  each  side  was  blue,  the
second  pair  red  ;  ao-ain,  the  third  blue,  and  the

12*

Fig.  11.

[

'

-

i

1

h

:-r-

i

[

U    tVV

.  b

..L

274  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

fourth  and  outermost  pair  red.  The  colors  of  the  odic  incandescence
of  each  particular  layer  were  thus  regularly  opposed  on  the  south  and
north  sides,  but  in  alternate  order  with  those  to  which  they  were
applied  by  their  faces.  Now,  since  all  the  layers  were  originally  ar-
ranged and  attached  together  with  magnetism  of  the  same  kind,
consequently  with  odic  charge  of  the  same  kind,  a  reversal  of  the
polar  condition,  a  change  into  the  opposite  polarity,  must  have  taken
place  in  the  first  pair  of  layers  during  the  conjunction.  But  when  I
examined  the  layers  with  the  magnetic  needle,  I  never  met  with  any
corresponding  change  of  the  magnetic  polarity ;  this  remained  inva-
riably northward  in  all  the  layers  of  one  pole,  southward  in  all  those
of  the  other.  Thus  it  was  not  the  magnetic,  but  only  the  odic  polar-
ities, that  had  been  reversed  ;  and  the  odic  polarities  changed,  not
because  the  odic  polarities  had  been  reversed,  but  in  spite  of  their  re-
maining constant.  The  strength  of  the  light  was  greatest  near  the
poles,  and  decreased  gradually  toward  the  bend ;  in  this  direction  the
blue  became  duller  and  duller,  and  passed  into  grey  at  the  middle  of
the  limb,  the  light  disappearing  wholly  from  the  eyes  of  the  observer
at  the  bend  ;  the  red  passed  through  reddish-yellow  into  yellow  at
the  middle  of  the  limb,  then  into  grey,  and  became  imperceptible  at
the  curvature.  Of  the  layers  individually,  the  large  middle,  and  the
fourth,  outermost  pair,  were  most  strongly  luminous  at  the  two  poles,
the  intermediate  pairs  the  weakest.  Finally,  when  I  plaeed  the
horse-shoe  with  both  limbs  in  parallels,  so  that  the  flat  sides  of  the
layers  were  turned  towards  the  terrestrial  poles,  the  dissimilar  poles
of  the  nearest  layers,  turned  towards  the  terrestrial  poles,  were  in
every  case  more  brightly  luminous,  at  both  poles,  than  the  more
distant  poles  turned  in  the  other  direction,  which  gave  a  duller  light.

341.  I  find  an  account  of  these  experiments,  as  performed  on
Madame  Csecilie  Bauer,  given  in  the  following  words  in  my  journal :
— "  She  saw  the  large  nine-layer  magnet  in  bands  of  odic  incandes-
cence, like  Mile.  Zinkel,  both  limbs  of  the  large  middle  layer  blue  on
one  side  and  red  on  the  other  ;  in  like  manner  both  limbs  of  the  out-
ermost pair  of  layers  uniformly  blue  and  red  when  the  entire  horse-
shoe stood  conformably  vertical,  and  with  the  poles  turned  upwards."
Further  :

"  a.  On  the  entire  northward  limb :  the  first  pair  of  each  side,
next  the  middle  layer,  appeared  red ;  and  the  eastward  layer  more
cloudy  and  more  dull ;  the  western  brighter,  and  with  a  tinge  of
violet.

"  The  second  pair,  that  is,  the  intermediate  pair  on  each  side,  grey
all  over,  more  dull  on  the  eastward  layer,  brighter  and  yellowish-
grey  on  the  westward.

ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.  275

"  The  third  pair  again  seemed  red,  greyish-red  on  the  eastward
layer,  pale  orange  on  the  westward.

"  The  fourth,  last,  and  outermost  pair  on  each  side,  blue  ;  dark
greyish-blue  on  the  east  side  ;  sky-blue  to  pale-yellow  on  the  west
side.

"  b.  The  entire  south  limb,  where  the  middle  layer  was  red  :  the
first  pair,  applied  on  each  side  to  the  middle  layer,  were  blue ;  the
layer  situated  on  the  east  side  being  rather  greyish-blue,  that  on  the
west  light  blue.

"  The  second  pair,  that  is  the  intermediate,  grey  ;  more  dull  to
the  east,  and  brighter,  with  a  yellowish-ied   tinge,  toward  the  west.

"  The  third  pair  blue  again,  toward  the  east, — passing  rather
into  dull  grey  :  toward  the  west,  lighter, — passing  from  blue  into
yellow.

"  The  fourth,  outermost  pair,  red  on  both  sides  ;  on  the  east  side
greyish-red  ;  on  the  west  side  yellowish-red.

"  The  banding  was  a  distinct  alternation  of  incandescent  layers  of
brighter  to  darker,  but  not  of  blue  and  red  alone  as  Josephine  Zinkel
had  seen,  but  an  alternation  of  these  colors,  combined  with  a  general
admixture  of  grey  on  the  east,  and  of  yellow  on  the  west ;  so  that
all  these  tints  were  imbued  on  the  east  side  of  the  middle,  principal
layer,  both  on  the  north  and  south  limb,  with  a  shade  of  grey  ;  while
all  those  on  the  west  side  had  a  yellow  cast — slight,  but  quite  per-
ceptible ;  this  was  a  kind  of  transversality,  therefore  a  further  com-
plication. On  the  greyish,  east  side,  the  vividness  of  the  coloring
was  generally  troubled,  diluted,  and  dulled  ;  on  the  yellowish,  west
side,  strengthened,  heightened,  and  rendered  more  brilliant."  We
shall  return  to  this  hereafter,  when  I  speak  of  the  colors  of  the  odic

342.  I  traced  the  principal  phenomena  of  this  experiment  also  on
the  far  less  sensitive  Miss  Josephine  Fenzl.  She  did  not  see  any
clear  distinction  of  color  between  the  layers,  but  an  evident  change
from  brighter  to  more  dull,  alternating.  The  brighter  layers  seemed
to  her  pale  reddish-grey  ;  the  duller,  pale  bluish-grey.  Thus,  her  ob-
servation was  sufficient  to  afford  a  certain  amount  of  confirmation  to
that  which  her  predecessors  had  seen.

343.  The  same  jmenomena  was  produced  in  another  way.  I
placed  four  magnetic  bars  of  equal  size,  as  an  armature,  upon  the
large  nine-layered  horse-shoe.  I  had  proportioned  the  length  and
breadth  that  each  fitted  exactly,  like  an  armature,  on  the  poles  of  the
magnet,  and  all  four  were  so  laid  upon  the  poles,  that  in  closing  it
they  were  piled  one  upon  another,  all  their  northward  poles  turned
toward  the  southward,  all  their  southward  poles  toward  the  north-

276

ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

ward  limb  of  the  horse-shoe.  I  allowed  them  to  remain,  thus  ar-
ranged, for  twenty-four  hours,  with  the  poles  of  the  horse-shoe  turned
upwards  and  conformable.  When  I  led  the  maid,  Josephine  Zinkel,
to  this,  in  the  darkened  room,  she  saw  these
bars  varying  among  themselves  iu  the  banded
condition,  alternately  red  and  grey  incandescent,
as  in  fig.  12.  Immediately  on  the  blue  pole  of
the  horse-shoe  lay  a  red,  and  red-flaming  bar  ;
upon  the  red  pole  of  the  horse-shoe  the  same
bar,  at  its  other  end,  exhibited  grey  odic  incan-  p
descence  and  blue  flame.  The  succeeding  bar
had  the  reverse  colored  light ;  the  third  the
same  as  the  first ;  and  the  fourth  the  same  as
the  second.  When  I  removed  all  the  little  bars
and  examined  them,  I  found  them  all  south-
ward polar  at  the  one  end  where  they  had  lain
upon  the  blue  pole  of  the  horse-shoe,  and  all
northward  polar  at  the  opposite  end.  Thus
there  was  no  magnetic  alternation  of  the  poles
of  the  bars,  as  they  lay  upon  the  poles  of  the  horse-shoe,  but  never-
theless an  od -polar  alternation  of  coloring.

344.  Thus  the  odic  polarities  are  reversed  when  several  like  poles
are  placed  side  by  side  and  coupled  together.  They  then  form  alter-
nating layers,  and  this  in  spite  of  the  magnetism,  which  remains  un-
changed. Therefore  we  had  here  negative  magnetic  'poles  in  red  odic
incandescence,  and  positive  magnetic  poles  in  blue  incandescence,  alter-
nately stratified  with  negative  magnetic  poles  of  the  usual  blue,  and
positive,  with  the  usual  red  odic  incandescence.

This  surprising  phenomenon  is  one  of  the  very  striking  distinctions
between  magnetism  and  Od.

With  a  view  to  strengthen  this  appearance,  I  placed  a  bar  magnet,
twenty  inches  long,  near  the  side  of  the  nine-layered  horse-shoe,  with
the  unlike  poles.  But  the  result  did  not  correspond  to  my  expecta-
tion. When  I  brought  the  northward  pole  of  the  bar  to  within
about  two  inches  of  the  side  of  the  southward  pole  of  the  horse-shoe,
the  red  odic  incandescence  of  the  latter  was  certainly  evidently  in-
creased, but  the  banding  vanished,  and  Josephine  Zinkel  now  saw
nothing  but  full  red  layers,  without  any  bands  at  all.  When  I  made
the  same  experiment  at  the  other  pole,  with  the  corresponding  modi-
fications, she  saw  the  compound  horse-shoe  simply  in  a  blue  odic  in-
candescence. Thus  the  increase  of  the  magnetism  by  magnetic  influ-
ence removed  the  banding,  the  odic  alternation  of  the  layers,  and
raised  one  pole  to  exclusive  power  odically  as  well  as  magnetically.

ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.  211

When  I  in  like  manner  brought  the  like  poles  near  together,  the
result  was  still  more  unfavorable;  all  odic  incandescence  was  extin-
guished, both  red  and  blue  color  vanished.

I  now  wished  to  test  the  influence  which  the  poles  of  crystals
might  exert  in  such  cases.  Since  the  magnet  acting  upon  magnet-
ism disturbed  the  pdic  luminous  phenomena  there,  it  was  quite  con-
ceivable that  a  pure  odic  influence,  without  magnetism,  might  influ-
ence in  a  different  way  the  odic  phenomena  which  the  compound
horse-shoe  afforded.  A  totally  different  result  was  really  produced  ;
for  when  I  brought  the  positive  pole  of  a  very  large  rock  crystal,
sideways,  to  within  four  inches  of  the  northward  pole  of  the  horse-
shoe, not  only  did  the  banding  of  the  light  and  difference  of  color
not  decrease,  but  the  blue  of  the  alternate  layers  increased  con-
siderably in  distinctness  and  beauty,  while  the  red  became  greyish-
red.  The  same  took  place  when  I  brought  the  southward  pole  and
the  negative  pole  of  the  large  rock  crystal  near  together,  the  red
layers  now  becoming  of  a  far  brighter  red  than  before,  and  the  blue
ones  between  them  perceptibly  of  a  more  dull  greyish-blue.

But  when  I  approximated  the  positive  crystal  pole  and  the  south-
ward pole  of  the  magnet,  or  the  negative  crystal  pole  and  the  north-
ward pole  of  the  magnet, — that  is,  like  poles  together, — all  odic  light
of  the  same  polar  quality  was  dulled,  and  disappeared  from  the  eyes
of  Josephine  Zinkel  almost  entirely ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the
opposite  kind  of  light  was  rendered  more  vivid  and  stronger.

This  led  me  to  investigate  the  influence  of  the  animal  odic  poles.
I  turned  my  right  and  then  my  left  side  to  the  positive  limb  of  the
compound  horse-shoe  ;  the  odic  incandescence  was  nob  extinguished
in  either  case  ;  on  the  contrary,  in  the  first  the  odic  incandescence,
and  the  luminous  force  of  the  red  layers,  increased,  and  the  blue  ones
became  duller  ;  in  the  second  the  blue  increased,  and  the  red  was
rendered  less  bright.  When  I  did  the  same  with  the  negative  limb
of  the  horse-shoe,  my  right  side  produced  an  exaltation  of  the  red  and
a  dim  condition  of  the  blue  layers,  while  my  left  rendered  the  blue
brighter  and  the  red  more  dull.  Thus,  each  pole  increased  the  odic
color  of  the  opposite  pole,  and  depressed  that  of  the  same  pole  ;  and
thereby  it  especially  called  out  the  banded  condition  of  the  layers
of  the  magnet  with  great  distinctness  to  the  eyes  of  Josephine
Zinkel.

From  all  this  it  follows,  that  the  magnet  acts  quite  differently  from
crystal-od  and  biod,  Sc,  upon  the  colors  of  the  odic  incandescence  of
steel  magnets  ;  i.  e.,  that  the  Od  associated  with  magnetism  affects
the  phenomena  of  odic  incandescence  in  the  steel  magnet  in  a  way  es-

278  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

sentially  different  from   Od  unassociated  with  magnetism,  such  as
emanates  from  crystals  and  living  organisms.

345.  The  completion  of  the  magnetic  circle  by  the  application  of
the  armature  exhibits  great  influence  on  the  strength  and  distribution
of  the  odic  incandescence  of  the  steel  magnet.  It  has  already  been
mentioned  several  times  that  the  strength  of  the  light  of  the  odic  in-
candescence is  greatest  toward  the  poles,  and  least  toward  the  middle
in  the  magnetic  axis.  This  is  the  case  when  the  magnet  is  open  ;
but  when  the  armature  is  applied,  the  luminous  appearances  are  al-
tered. I  placed  the  armature  upon  a  one-layer  horse-shoe  before
Josephine  Zinkel  in  the  darkened  chamber.  The  first  thing  she  re-
marked was,  that  this  armature,  which  was  previously  only  whitish,
like  all  iron,  and  weakly  illumined,  became  at  once  much  more
strongly  lighted ;  next,  that  the  color  changed  and  divided  into  two,
namely,  into  bluish  and  reddish.  The  side  lying  toward  the  north
became  reddish,  that  toward  the  south  bluish.  This  experiment  was
repeated  some  months  later  with  a  five-layered  horse-shoe,  the  poles
being  turned  upwards.  The  same  difference  of  color  was  produced
in  the  armature.  The  direction  toward  the  west  also  produced  this
result.  In  like  manner  M.  Sebastian  Zinkel  saw  the  armature  red  at
the  negative  pole  of  the  horse-shoe,  and  bluish-grey  at  the  positive.
This  was  repeated  with  Madame  Bauer,  Miss  Winter,  and  others.-
Miss  Sophie  Bauer  scarcely  perceived  the  armature  so  long  as  it  lay
free ;  but  when  I  applied  it  to  the  poles  of  a  horse-shoe,  she  at  once
saw  it  become  illuminated  more  strongly  at  the  two  sides  than  in  the
middle.  These  observations  are  explained  by  the  circumstance  that
an  armature  is  not  a  mere  conductor  of  magnetism,  but  that  it  be-
comes itself  a  magnet  by  the  magnetic  induction  as  soon  as  it  is  ap-
plied to  the  poles  of  another  magnet,  and  that  the  poles  of  the  two
must  be  opposed  to  one  another.  This  proposition,  deduced  from
theory,  here  found  its  practical  confirmation  in  the  direct  observation
of  the  sensitive.

346.  The  effect  upon  the  one-layered  horse-shoe  magnet  was,  that
the  poles  immediately  decreased  in  luminosity  ;  while  light,  which
had  been  scarcely  perceptible  at  the  curve,  increased  rapidly  con-
siderably in  strength,  so  that  a  kind  of  equalization  of  the  odic  in-
candescence over  the  entire  horse-shoe  resulted,  with  distinctly  pre-
dominant brightness  at  the  curvature.  The  bluish  incandescence  of
the  negative  limb,  and  reddish  of  the  positive,  now  reached,  in  almost
uniform  distribution,  down  to  the  curvature,  and  appeared  almost  to
touch  at  the  point  of  transition.  Even  the  curvature  itself  now
shared  in  these  disturbances  of  coloring.  Its  two  halos,  red  and  blue,
were  subjected  to   the  same  influences  as  the  corresponding  limbs,

ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.  279

and  were  charged  in  the  same  way  as  their  like  poles.  Repeated  ano-
ther time,  fur  control,  with  a  five-layered  horse-shoe  magnet,  the  open
poles,  originally  far  surpassing  the  curvature  in  odic  incandescence,
became  more  dull  through  the  application  of  the  armature,  while
the  curvature  became  brighter  than  the  latter.  M.  Delhez  saw  the
polar  region  of  the  two  limbs  of  an  open  horse-shoe  magnet  much
more  brightly  incandescent  than  the  curvature  ;  but  when  I  applied
the  armature  the  light  became  much  more  equalized  over  the  whole
horse-shoe,  without,  however,  becoming  perfectly  uniform.  These
statements  agree  well  with  the  theoretical  notions  which  we  form  of
the  processes.  The  accumulation  of  the  magnetic  essence  at  the
poles  is  relieved  by  the  armature,  and  thus  is  allowed  to  become  in
some  degree  equalized  throughout  the  space  of  its  field  of  action.

3-47.  As  to  the  intensity  of  the  light  of  these  odic  luminous  phe-
nomena, its  distribution  over  the  different  parts  of  the  magnet  is  not
constant,  but  exceedingly  variable, — so  far,  on  the  one  hand,  as  the
terrestrial  magnetism,  and  indeed  other  agents  also,  such  as  the  elec-
tricity of  the  earth  and  air,  sunlight,  human  bauds,  and  other  neigh-
boring Od-emitting  objects,  more  or  less  affect  it ;  on  the  other  hand,
as  magnetism  and  Od  are  distributed  in  unequal  accumulations  in
the  parts  of  a  magnetic  bar,  in  consequence  of  their  peculiar  attractive
or  repulsive  forces.  All  these  influences  act,  sometimes  in  one,  some-
times in  another  direction,  more  or  less  dislocating  the  odic  poles  and
the  focus  of  their  luminous  forms.  To  calculate  all  the  factors  inter-
fering here  will  not  be  a  light  task  in  any  time  to  come.  Neverthe-
less, I  have  collected  a  few  observations,  and  will  set  them  down
here.

348.  Madame  Caecilie  Bauer  saw  a  number  of  magnets  lying  upon
a  table  in  the  dark,  but  found  the  strength  of  light  of  their  odic  in-
candescence very  unequal :  she  described  many,  at  the  first  glance,  as
very  beautiful  and  brilliant ;  others  dim,  obscure,  and  dull.  I  ar-
ranged them  in  a  row,  proceeding  in  order  from  the.  dullest  to  the
brightest  Then  I  tried  them  by  daylight,  It  was  found  that  the
strength  of  the  light  did  not  keep  pace  with  the  amount  of  weight
the  magnets  of  different  sizes  would  support,  but  in  all  cases  with
the  magnetic  intensity.  Simple  horse-shoes,  which  acted  upon  a
magnetic  needle  at  a  great  distance,  were  more  strongly  incandescent
than  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe,  which  would  support  ten  times  the
weight,  but  did  not  act  upon  the  needle  at  so  great  a  distance.  The
intensity  of  the  odic  incandescence,  therefore,  kept  pace  tuith  the  mag-
netic intensity.

349.  All  the  sensitives  who  possessed  any  distinctness  of  vision
e:»w  the  two   poles  of  bar  magnets   more   luminous  than  the  axis.

280  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

Misses  Reiche],  Weigand,  Atzmannsdorfer,  Glaser,  Madame  von  Var-
ady,  M.  Rabe,  Baron  August  von  Oberländer,  Baroness  Natorp,  M.
Anschiitz,  and  others,  saw  tbis  with  the  greatest  clearness.-

350.  The  same  was  the  case  with  thehorse-shoe  magnets.  Among
the  observing  witnesses  for  this  I  find  marked  in  my  papers  are  M.
Delbez,  Madame  Josepbine  Fenzl,  Madame  von  Peichich,  Misses
Sophie  Pauer,  Ernestine  Anschiitz,  Weigand,  Glaser,  Baroness  von
Augustin,  Madame  Bauer,  M.  Sebastian  Zinkel,  Dr.  Nied,  Baron  von
Oberländer,  Madame  von  Varady,  M.  Jobann  Klaiber,  Prof.  Ragsky,
and  M.  Hocbstetter.  All  agreed  in  this, — that  in  an  open  horse-shoe
magnet  the  limbs  are  most  luminous  near  the  poles,  and  dullest  at
the  curvature,  towards  which  the  odic  incandescence  gradually  de-
creases. Madame  Josepbine  Fenzl  observed  this  on  a  simple  pocket
horse-sboe,  on  a  five-layered  and  on  a  nine-layered  magnet;  Madame
Bauer  on  a  single-layered  ;  Miss  Pauer  on  a  three-layered  and  a
pocket  horse-shoe  magnet ;  Klaiber  and  M.  Hocbstetter  on  several
horse-shoes.

351.  I  showed  to  Madame  Bauer,  Josephine  Zinkel,  Baroness  von
Natorp,  Madame  von  Tessedick,  Madame  Kienesberger,  Baroness  von
Augustin,  and  Jobanna  Kienast,  in  the  dark,  a  large  electro-magnet
produced  by  a  voltaic  element.  Here,  also,  all  found  the  open  poles
more  brightly  incandescent;  the  curvature,  indeed,  luminous,  but
with  far  less  strength.

352.  The  condition  was  altered  when  I  closed  the  magnet  with  the
armature.  All  the  witnesses  just  named  then  immediately  saw  the
strength  of  the  light  diminish  at  both  poles,  and  rapidly  increase  at
the  curvature  ;  while  the  intensity  of  the  light  over  the  entire  horse-
shoe, including  the  armature,  was  simultaneously  exalted,  and  in  some
degree  approached  to  an  uniform  distribution  through  the  magneti-
cally-acting mass.  In  most  cases  this  went  so  far  that  the  curvature
surpassed  the  poles  in  luminosity  in  particular.  Miss  Pauer,  the  girl
Zinkel,  and  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl,  decided  most  absolutely  that
there  was  stronger  light  at  the  curvature.  The  experiments  were
modified  and  frequently  tested  on  the  two  latter  with  three-fold,  five-
fold, and  nine-fold  magnets.

353.  At  the  same  time  the  odic  incandescence  was  heightened  in
the  armature  also,  brighter  at  both  ends  when  it  lay  upon  the  poles,
duller  in  the  middle,  between  the  two  poles,  where  it  was  free.  Miss
Sophie  Pauer  and  the  girl  Zinkel  saw,  in  some  cases,  the  poles,  in
some  others  the  armature,  most  brightly  illumined.  Madame  Kienes-
berger, Baroness  von  Augustin,  and  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  saw  the
poles  brighter  than  the  armature  in  all  the  cases  submitted  to  them.
It  appeared  to  'me  as  if,  in  all  cases  where  the  armature  was  suffi-

ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.  281

ciently  polished,  and  fitted  the  ends  of  the  poles  well,  thus  offered
many  points  of  contact,  the  poles  were  duller,  and  the  armature
brighter,  and  this  inasmuch  as  it  then  conducted  the  magnetism  bet-
ter and  more  perfectly  ;  thus,  more  completely  and  rapidly  removed
it  from  the  poles.  The  more  rapid  the  conduction,  the  duller  the
poles ;  the  slower  the  conduction,  the  greater  the  accumulation  of
magnetism  and  Od  at  the  poles,  and  therefore  the  brighter  there :
the  light  of  the  armature  is  probably  always  the  same,  but  is  in  some
cases  surpassed  by  the  poles ;  in  others,  the  intensity  of  the  light  at
the  poles  is  inferior.

354.  When  I  closed  a  horse-shoe  magnet  with  another  one  instead
of  an  armature,  the  results  were  modified  in  some  degree.  The  cur-
vatures of  both  rapidly  became  brighter  than  when  they  were  open,
and  the  poles  more  dull  :  but  this  did  not  go  so  far  as  that  the  curva-
tures surpassed  the  poles  in  intensity  of  light ;  the  four  combined
poles  had  rather  the  preponderance  of  brightness.  This  was  seen  by
Miss  Sophie  Pauer  and  the  girl  Zinkel,  both  perfectly  healthy,  exact,
and  trustworthy  observers.  While  in  the  magnets  closed  by  an  ar-
mature, the  curvature  had  acquired  the  greatest  proportion  of  light;
here,  in  those  closed  by  another  horse-shoe,  the  poles  always  re-
tained it.

355.  The  reason  of  this  difference  may  be  conceived.  When  two
horse-shoe  magnets  are  joined,  double  the  quantity  of  magnetism  and
Od  must  be  at  once  conducted  through  each.  Moreover  a  greater
quantity  of  magnetism  becomes  induced  and  put  into  activity  by  the
opposition  of  the  poles.  Therefore  there  is,  on  the  one  hand,  a  far
greater  quantity  of  the  dynamic  brought  into  the  circuit ;  while,  on
the  other,  the  channel  for  this  is  obstructed,  since  iron  is  a  much  bet-
ter conductor  of  it  than  the  hardened  steel,  endowed  with  so  strong  a
coercive  power :  now  an  armature  is  made  of  iron,  while  a  horse-
shoe magnet  is  made  of  hardened  steel.  Then  the  armature  is  also
ten  times  smaller  than  a  horse-shoe ;  thus,  rapid  conduction  can  take
place  through  the  former,  it  being  ten  times  slower  through  the  lat-
ter. Thus,  a  much  greater  quantity  of  the  dynamic  essence  must
pass  through  a  much  less  easy  path  when  a  horse-shoe  is  closed  by
another  horse-shoe,  instead  of  an  armature.  The  consequence  of  this
is  that  the  dynamic,  partially  obstructed  in  its  conduction  away,  be-
comes concentrated  around  the  poles,  and  thus  becomes  more  clearly
evident  there  by  odic  light.  This  state  of  a  certain  degree  of  limi-
tation approaches  to  the  totally  arrested,  namely,  that  when  the
horse-shoe  is  not  closed  at  all  :  and  we  saw  there  that  the  light  of
the  poles  is  the  greatest,  and  always  surpasses  that  of  the  curvature

282  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE,

in  strength.     All  this,  therefore,  agrees  very  well   with  theoretical
deduction.

356.  We  have  already  seen  what  a  powerful  influence  the  position
of  the  magnet,  as  to  north  or  south,  exercises  over  the  colors  of  the
odic  incandescence  ;  it  affects  in  like  manner  the  degree  of  intensity
of  its  light.  All  the  sensitive  found  every  magnetic  bar,  lying  con-
formably, in  the  meridian,  incomparably  more  brilliantly  luminous  at
the  two  poles,  than  one  lying  unconformably,  in  which  the  odic  in-
candescence appeared  dull  and  troubled.  The  terrestrial  magnetism
and  the  Od  of  the  terrestrial  poles  co-operate  in  the  one  case,  and
thus  strengthen  the  odic  emanations  ;  in  the  other,  they  are  adverse,
and  weaken  them,  thus  interfering  with  the  double  force  of  the  earth.
This  simple  case  has  been  repeated  so  many  hundreds  of  times,  and
so  often  occurs  incidentally  to  other  experiments  in  the  course  of
these  pages,  that  I  will  not  waste  room  by  special  enumerations  here.
It  is  somewhat  more  complicated  now  and  then  in  the  application  of
horse-shoe  magnets ;  we  have  already  examined  them  in  the  open
condition  in  respect  to  this,  when  speaking  of  the  colors  (§  338)  :  I
will  here  relate  the  experiments  which  I  made  in  a  similar  manner
with  horse-shoe  magnets  closed  by  their  armatures.

A.  When  an  armed  horse-shoe  lay  in  the  meridian,  with  the  poles
turned  to  the  north,  the  northward  limb  was  brighter,  the  southward
limb  duller.  When  in  the  reverse  position,  with  the  poles  toward
the  south,  the  intensity  of  the  light  was  distributed  in  the  reverse
way  in  the  limbs  ;  the  southward  was  brighter,  the  northward  more
dull.

B.  When  a  horse-shoe  stood  erect,  armed,  the  limbs  conformable
with  the  poles  turned  upward,  Josephine  Zinkel  found  the  poles  be-
come bright  in  the  dark,  the  curvature  grow  dull.

C.  When  the  closed  horse-shoe,  in  the  conformable  position,  was
turned  the  other  way  upward,  so  that  the  armed  poles  were  directed
doionwards,  and  the  curvature  upwards,  the  points  of  most  intense
light  were  changed.  They  left  the  vicinity  of  the  poles,  and  estab-
lished themselves  at  both  sides  near  the  bend,  just  where  the  curva-
tures began.  Thus,  that  part  of  a  closed  magnet  which  was  turned
downward,  (whether  pole  or  bend,)  was  somewhat  less  luminous,
while  that  turned  upward  was  aliuays  somewhat  more  so.

D.  When  an  armed  horse-shoe  lay,  with  the  limbs  conformable,  in
the  magnetic  parallel,  Josephine  Zinkel  saw  in  the  dark  that  when
the  poles  were  turned  toward  the  east  they  became  more  dull,  while
the  curve  became  brighter.  But  when  I  turned  the  horse-shoe  round,
and  directed  the  poles  toward  the  west,  she  saw  them  become  brighter,
and  the  curve  duller.     Thus,  that  part  of  a  closed  magnet  which  was

ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.  283

turned  toward  the  east,  (no  matter  whether  curve  or  poles,)  was  less
luminous,  while  that  turned  toward  the  west  was  always  more  so. —
She  also  perceived  the  armature  to  be  brighter  when  lying  in  the
west,  duller  when  in  the  east,  conformable  to  its  substitution  for  a
curvature.  Taken  together,  therefore  :  The  bend  and  poles  of  an
armed  horse-shoe  magnet  were  more  luminous  when  they  were  turned
upwards,  toward  the  sky  or  toward  the  west ;  the  luminosity  was
weaker  when  they  had  the  direction  toward  the  ground  or  toward  the
east.     (Vide  §  536.)

357.  These  experiments  were  repeated  at  various  times  with  sim-
ple and  compound  horse-shoes,  and  the  results  always  described  in
the  same  way  by  the  beholder.  At  the  last  time  of  trial  she  added
a  new,  but  slight  distinction,  namely,  when  the  poles  of  the  horse-
shoe lay  to  the  east,  she  found  the  north  limb  lying  on  the  north  side
somewhat  duller,  and  the  south  limb,  on  the  south  side,  brighter  ;  on
the  other  hand,  when  the  poles  were  turned  toward  the  west,  she
found  the  north  limb  lying  on  the  north  side  brighter,  and  the  south
limb  lying  on  the  south  side  duller.  Neither  distinction  was  great,
but  still  quite  evident.  These  distinctions  are  in  all  cases  delicate,
and  require  for  their  examination  good,  quiet,  and  exact  sensitives ;
and  still  more,  a  truth-loving,  unprejudiced,  careful  and  patient  phy-
sicist. Persons  with  whom  dogmatism  is  better  than  truth,  who  pre-
conceive an  opinion  and  seek  to  obtain  a  triumph  for  this  over  all
others,  are  not  fitted  for  such  investigations  ;  they  entangle  a  matter
so  delicate,  and  tear  the  intermingled  threads  instead  of  separating
them.*

*  Thus  it  happened  in  Vienna.  It  was  thought  to  make  an  end  of  the  trou-
blesome Magnetism  with  one  blow.  Finding  a  suitable  opportunity,  all  the  med-
ical men  who  had  pronounced  themselves  quite  unfavorable  to  it,  collected  to-
gether, and  called  themselves  a  Commission  of  the  Medical  Society,  and  began  a
presumed  annihilation  of  it.  Even  the  title  of  the  Commission  was  an  assump-
tion ;  for  the  Medical  Society  did  not  commission  any  one, — in  fact,  had  no
knowledge  whatever  of  the  matter ;  nay,  having  heard  of  it  at  last,  after  the
irregularly-effected  insertion  and  printing  in  the  "  Vienna  Medical  Journal,"  the
Society  formally  disclaimed  it  in  the  Report  of  the  Meeting  of  the  16th  of  No-
vember, 1846,  denying  any  share  in  this  one-sided  and  arbitrary  conduct  of  cer-
tain of  its  members.  I  myself,  although  an  honorary  member  of  this  Society,
heard  of  it  accidentally,  long  after,  when  many  trials  had  been  made  with  Miss
Reichel.  Indirectly,  and  under  cover  of  some  apparent  civilities,  my  treatises
were  made  the  objects  of  attack  :  but  near  as  I  was,  it  was  not  thought  fit  to  in-
vite me  to  the  trials ;  it  was  feared  that  I  might  in  some  measure  solve  and  cor-
rect the  contradictions  and  incongruities  of  their  labors.  But  it  was  not  explana-
tion and  scientific  truth  that  were  wanted  here  ;  only  dogmatism  in  the  opiuions
of  a  coterie  of  practising  physicians.  An  impartial  commission,  chosen  by  ecru-
tiny,  by  and  from  the  Medical  Society  itself,  to  represent,  by  competent  persons,
all  different  opinions,  would  have  been  a  very  good  and  praiseworthy  thing, —

284  O'DIO  INCANDESCENCE.

358.  When  I  closed  a  horse-shoe  magnet  again  with  a  horse-shoe,
instead  of  an  armature,  like  poles  being  brought  together,  the  results
of  the  odic  incandescence  were  again  somewhat  different.  The  poles
at  once  became  more  dull,  and  the  curvatures  brighter,  than  they
had  been  before  ;  but  Josephine  Zinkel  saw  the  limbs  of  both  horse-
shoes, when  lying  with  their  longitudinal  direction  conformable,  in
the  parallels  still  always  somewhat  more  brightly  incandescent  at  the
four  poles  than  at  the  two  curvatures.  On  both  sides,  the  light  was
strongest  one-seventh  part  of  the  distance  inward  from  the  poles,
running  on  in  decreasing  amount  to  the  curvature.  Thus,  the  poles
had  lost  less  in  incandescence  toward  the  curvature,  than  when  the
magnet  was  closed  with  the  armature.  In  a  subsequent  experiment,
she  compared  the  luminous  condition  of  the  many-layered  curvature
to  a  white  jelly  ;  that  is,  the  translucent  white  odic  incandescence  of
the  steel  substance,  resembled  in  the  dark  a  transparent  luminous

jelly.

359.  When  I  pulled  the  horse-shoes  asunder,  all  the  poles  became
brighter,  but  soon  reassumed  their  natural  luminosity,  and  the  curva-
tures recovered  their  dulness.  This  was  confirmed  in  all  experiments,
made  at  far  distant  intervals.

360.  I  obtained  greater  distinctness  and  corroboration  of  the  fore-
going when  I  closed  the  horse-shoe,  not  with  the  poles  of  another,  but
with  its  curvature,  as  in  Fig.  13.  The  result  on  the  horse-shoe  lying  flat
was  exactly  as  when  I  had  closed  it  with  an  armature :  duller  poles
and  brighter  curvature  downward,  until  the  poles  made  the  arming,
as  in  Fig.  14,  I  again  obtained  brighter  poles  and  a  duller  curvature
on  the  horizontal  magnet.     Both  phenomena  are  confirmations  of  the

would  doubtless  have  brought  valuable  truths  to  light,  and  established  them  by
its  weight ;  a  one-sided,  party  club,  of  mostly  young,  almost  wholly  uninformed
persons,  interested  in  their  views  of  the  question  at  issue,  had  no  authority,  and
deserved  none.  I  shall  throw  some  light  upon  the  value  of  their  labors  here  and
there. — Author's  Note.

If  the  Baron  required  analogies  to  assure  him  of  the  identity  of  feelings  prompt-
ing the  actions  of  medical  practitioners,  we  could  afford  him  not  a  few  specimens
from  our  London  physicians,  surgeons,  and  apothecaries.  The  philosopher,  in  his
capacity  of  human  being,  may  occasionally  find  himself  stung  and  teazed  by  the
conduct  of  men  of  paltry  habits  and  unworthy  feelings.  His  contempt  for  the
opponents  of  truth  should,  however,  melt  into  pity ;  and,  instead  of  regarding
men  as  reptiles  and  vermin,  he  should  deplore  the  existence  of  those  repulsive
agencies  in  their  brains  which  incapacitate  them  for  the  more  transcendental
thoughts  and  enjoyments  of  science.  Empirics  by  habit,  how  can  they  at  once
emerge  into  the  higher  grade  of  thinkers  ?  The  Baron,  whose  discoveries  are
leading  to  a  more  expanded  mental  philosophy  than  any  hitherto  conceived,  can
afford  a  large  charity  towards  those  who  oppose  themselves  to  the  progress  of
enlightenment.

ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

285

above-mentioned  obser-  Fl£>-  ^

vations,  and  were  gone
hrough  three  months
later  with  Josephine
Zink  el.

361.  The  cause  may
be  traced  back  to  two
reasons.  One  is  the
shorter  road,  which  the
magnetism  or  the  Od
has  to  take  in  its  cir-
cuit when  it  is  closed
by  a  curvature  instead
of  an  entire  horse-shoe;
the  other  is  the  stronger
mutual  effect  and  great-
er quantity  of  magnet-
ism, which  are  set  in
action  and  circulation
by  the  conjunction  of
two  magnets,  where  the
magnetism  is  then  more
accumulated  at  the
poles,  and,  on  account
of  its  greater  quantity,
cannot  be  conducted
away  so  rapidly,  which
finally  also  leads  on  to
diminished  conduction.
And,  since  the  Od  ad-
vances somewhat  slowly
through  matter,  this
strengthens  the  theoret-
ical probability.  How
ever,  it  is  not  yet  time
for  this  ;  we  will  first  merely  collect  and  arrange  facts.

362.  The  delicacy  of  the  distinctions  which  may  exist  in  these
subjects  is  proved  by  the  further  remark  that  the  observer  could  also
detect  a  distinction  in  the  degree  of  strength  of  light  where  the  limbs
of  both  horse-shoes  were  placed  together  so  as  to  form  straight  lines,
as  in  Figure  15  ;  or  when  they  were  in  contact  at  right  angles,  as  in
Figure  14.  In  the  first  case  she  saw  the  poles  glow  somewhat  more
brightly,  in  the  second  more  dimly  ;   while  the  curvature  was  rather

286  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

brighter.      It    must,    in  Fig.  15.

fact,    be     assumed    that

when  attached  in  a  line,
the  two  horse-shoes  ex-
erted greater  provocation
upon  each  other  than
when  they  made  an  angle  together,  and  the  directions  of  the  force
crossed.  The  rectilinear  protraction  of  the  magnetic  bars  by  their
odic  flame  shows  that  the  projectile  force  is  propagated  in  a  straight
line  in  the  direction  of  the  bars  and  limb.

363.  Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  course  of  the  intensity
of  the  odic  incandescence  on  the  other  horse-shoe  ;  that  used  as  the
armature.  When  its  curve  was  placed  against  the  poles  of  the  hor-
izontal magnet,  as  seen  in  Fig.  13,  though  previously  scarcely  per-
ceptible to  Josephine  Zinkel  in  the  dark,  it  rapidly  became  odically
incandescent,  blue  on  one  side,  red  on  the  other.  At  the  same  time,
its  poles  above  glowed  more  brightly.  As  I  now  drew  it  slowly
down  the  poles  of  the  horizontal  horse-shoe,  the  curvature  gradually
became  still  brighter,  while  its  poles  became  step  by  step  more  dull.
When  I  at  length  brought  the  poles  to  the  poles,  as  in  Figure  14,
the  curvature  attained  its  greatest,  and  the  poles  their  least  bright-
ness, although  they  still  remained  always  tolerably  strongly  luminous  ;
and  then  the  curve  was  brightest,  the  poles  less  brilliant,  the  limbs
dullest,  yet  the  first  never  so  bright  as  when  the  poles  were  closed  by
an  armature.  All  this  agrees  exactly  with  the  various  observations
related  in  the  last  paragraphs.

364.  The  intensity  of  the  odic  incandescence  also  showed  differ-
ences at  different  points  of  the  steel  magnet,  even  at  equal  distances
from  the  poles.  Madame  Johanna  Auschütz,  Misses  Atzmannsdorfer,
Winter,  Weigand,  Nowotny,  Glaser,  Reichel,  and  others,  always  saw
the  edges  more  luminous  than  the  surfaces  of  steel  bars  ;  all  corners
again  more  luminous  than  the  edges ;  and  all  points  still  more  so
than  mere  corners.  This  they  found  to  be  the  case  also  in  the  ap-
plied armatures ;  the  edges  and  corners  were  always  brighter  than
the  faces :  indeed,  they  often  saw  the  edges  emit  light  when  the  sur-
faces were  still  dark  and  invisible.  I  showed  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,
in  the  dark,  a  magnetic  bar  twenty  inches  long,  brought  into  a  nar-
row parallelogram,  and  thus  closed  by  means  of  three  armatures ;
she  saw  the  entire  quadrangle  emit  light,  the  magnetic  bar  more
strongly  than  the  armatures,  but  all  seamed  round,  as  it  were,  at  all
the  edges,  with  threads  of  light.  The  healthy  Miss  Pauer,  M.  Rabe,
Sebastian  Zinkel,  and  others,  described  the  same  thing  many  times.
Madame  Bauer  saw  a  one-layer  horse-shoe  more  strongly  and  brightly

ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.  287

seamed  when  it  was  open  than  when  the  armature  was  applied,  on
which  the  threads  of  light  round  the  edges  at  once  became  duller.
She  perceived  the  seams  both  on  the  inner  and  outer  edges  of  the
horse-shoe,  but  the  outer  were  lighter  than  the  inner.  Moreover,
she  found  them  brighter  on  the  positive  than  on  the  negative  limb.
The  girl  Zinkel  described  these  phenomena  most  accurately.  I
showed  her  a  one-layer  and  a  three-layer  horse-shoe,  each  both  open
and  closed  with  the  armature.  She  saw  the  single-layered,  when
open,  bounded  by  a  seam  of  strong  light  at  all  the  edges ;  the  seam
of  the  outer  edges  was  lighter,  both  around  the  curvature  and  at  the
poles  ;  so  that  in  the  open,  single-layer  horse-shoe,  the  greatest  in-
tensity of  light  ran  round  the  outer  boundary  edges.  When  the  one-
layer  was  closed,  it  was  likewise  seamed  with  light  on  the  inner  and
outer  edges.  But  in  this  case  the  edges  of  the  curvature  were  some-
what lighter  inside  than  outside  ;  but  this  greater  light  vanished  by
degrees  towards  the  poles,  and  gave  way  to  another  similar,  which
now  displayed  itself  on  the  edges  of  the  limbs,  and  attained  its  max-
imum of  light  about  a  seventh  part  of  the  length  of  the  limb  below
the  poles.  On  the  three-layer  horse-shoe,  when  open,  the  border  of
the  inside  of  the  curvature  was  always  brighter,  decreasing  and  dis-
appearing toward  the  poles  ;  and  here  again  the  outer  edge  poles  ac-
quiring the  greatest  light,  instead  of  the  curvature.  When  the  three-
layer  was  closed,  she  saw  all  its  outer  edges  more  brightly  seamed
than  the  inner,  even  on  the  outer  edges  of  the  armature.  We  must
not  forget  here  that  the  three-layer  horse-shoe  is  only  armed  on  the
middle  layer,  and  not  on  the  two  shorter  side  layers  ;  this  gives  rise
to  the  differences  in  the  strength  of  light  of  the  seaming  between  this
and  the  one-layered  magnet.  She  always  saw  every  armature  with
lighter  seams  on  the  outer  edges,  and  duller  on  the  inner.

365.  From  the  foregoing  may  be  deduced  the  rule  that  the  seams
of  light  at  the  edges  are  more  intense  when  the  magnet  is  open,  and
its  odic  tension  throughout  the  entire  mass  of  steel  thereby  (proba-
bly)  exalted  ;  on  the  other  hand,  that  they  decrease  in  intensity  of
light  outside  when  the  magnet  is  armed,  their  odic  tension  being-
lowered,  and  the  dynamic  activity  set  in  motion,  thus  turned  more
inward,  so  that  the  seams  of  the  inner  edges  then  increase  in  intensity
of  light.

366.  Madame  Jos.  Fenzl,  Madame  Bauer,  Madame  Kienesberger,
Sebastian  Zinkel,  and  WTilhelmine  Glaser,  stated  that  the  most  bright-
ly luminous  place,  both  of  bars  and  open  hoi-se-shoes,  was  always  a
spot,  not  on  the  poles  themselves,  but  some  distance  down  from
them,  about  one-seventh  of  the  length  of  the  limb  toward  the  axis.
This  was  the  case  with  magnets,  open  or  closed  by  armatures,  mag-

288  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

nets  closed  by  magnets,  or  any  other  arrangement ;  when  they  were
closed,  the  curvature  as  a  rule  was  brighter  than  the  poles,  but  the
spot  always  remained  brighter  than  the  curvature.  It  is  a  well-
known  fact  that  the  focus  of  the  magnetic  attraction  is  situated  ex-
actly at  that  point :  thus  this  magnetic  point  and  the  focus  of  the
greatest  intensity  of  odic  incandescence  coincide.  Josephine  Zinkel
observed  a  remarkable  case  of  change  of  position  of  the  brightest  spot
of  light.  When  I  had  placed  a  hoi'se-shoe,  closed  by  an  armature,
in  the  vertical  position,  but  with  the  armature  and  poles  downwards,
and  the  curvature  upwards,  these  maxima  of  light  lost  their  position
near  the  poles  and  changed  to  the  curvature,  to  both  sides  of  this,  at
its  junction  with  the  limbs,  that  is,  about  one-seventh  of  the  distance
down  from  the  curve,  which  here  took  the  place  of  the  armature.
When  I  closed  one  horse-shoe  magnet  with  another,  the  phenomenon
appeared  at  the  poles  of  both  magnets,  about  one-seventh  inwards
upon  each,  and,  indeed,  more  distinctly  here  than  when  the  arma-
ture was  used,  for  the  poles  thus  closed  remained  brighter  near  the
curve.  This  even  passed  into  unmagnetized  iron  bars ;  when  they
had  become  magnetic  by  induction,  the  girl  Zinkel  always  saw  the
focus  of  light  one-seventh  of  the  half-length  inward  from  the  poles
towards  the  middle.

367.  An  artificially  excited,  very  bright  point  of  odic  incandescence,
is  produced  by  rubbing  one  magnet  with  another.  At  these  points,
namely,  where  the  poles  of  the  rubbing  magnet  come  in  contact  with
the  rubbed  one,  each  time  a  very  intensely  luminous  spot  is  formed
on  the  latter,  which  moves  forward  over  it  very  exactly  with  the
former.  The  point  of  the  rubbed  magnet  which  is  touched  is  set  in
luminous  odic  incandescence  by  the  rubbing  ;  but  this  is  extinguished
again  as  the  rubber  advances,  and  goes  on  along  with  this.  This
observation  was  repeated,  with  many  modifications,  with  Josephine
Zinkel.

368.  But  every  other  od-emitting  object  produced  similar  effects.
When  I  slowly  drew  the  point  of  a  crystal  of  chrome,  alum,  arrago-
nite,  rock  crystal,  or  heavy  spar,  over  the  surface  of  a  magnetic  layer
of  steel,  the  parts  touched  became  much  more  strongly  odically  in-
candescent, to  a  diameter  of  two  to  four-fifths  of  an  inch.  Nay,  even
human  hands  were  capable  of  producing  this  phenomenon.  When
I  laid  my  right  hand  on  the  curvature  of  a  horse-shoe,  and  moved  it
along  toward  the  southward  pole,  a  luminous  patch  was  produced  on
all  parts  when  I  touched  the  iron,  advancing  along  with  my  hand.
The  same  occurred  when  I  drew  my  left  hand  long  the  northward
limb.  The  girl  Zinkel  was  a  frequent  witness  of  this ;  but  Wilhel-
mine  Glaser,  Dr.  Nied,  and  Madame  von  Pischich-Zimanyi,  also  saw

0D1C  INCANDESCENCE.  289

these  illuminations  with  full  distinctness.  Anka  Hetmanck  saw  it
on  a  steel  magnet.  When  I  placed  a  pocket  horse-shoe  magnet,
which  the  beholders  saw  in  strong  odic  incandescence  at  the  poles
alone,  upon  the  flat  hand  of  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  moreover  of  Miss
Weigand,  of  Josephine  Zinke],  of  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  and  of  Madame
Caecilie  Bauer,  they  saw  the  whole  of  the  steel  slowly  increase  in
brightness,  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  minutes  rise  to  a  full  odic  in-
candescence. We  shall  hereafter  meet  with  corresponding  effects  of
the  magnet  upon  other  luminous  bodies.

369.  Heat  did  prove  to  me  a  means  of  aiding  the  odic  luminous
phenomena,  I  hud  before  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  and  Wilhelmine  Glaser,
small  magnetic  bars  and  horse-shoes,  which  they  saw  incandescent,
and  emitting  flame  well,  while  cold,  and  then  placed  these  upon  the
heated  stove  in  the  dark  chamber.  When  they  had  acquired  about
the  heat  of  one's  hand,  both  observers  found  that  the  incandescence
had  become  much  more  cloudy  and  dull.  Josephine  Zinkel  saw  a
large  horse-shoe  magnet  gradually  lose  the  brightness  of  its  incan-
descence as  it  became  warmer ;  and  when  I  had  heated  it  to  about
167°  Fahr.,  the  odic  incandescence  had  decreased  considerably  ;  but
it  was  recovered  as  I  let  the  armed  horse-shoe  cool.  We  know  that
magnetic  intensity  exhibits  a  similar  course  under  like  circumstauces  ;
therefore,  the  intensity  of  odic  light,  as  it  appears,  is  here  parallel  to
magnetic  inten-ity.

370.  When  I  brought  a  steel  magnet  into  the  electrical  atmosphere
of  the  conductor  of  a  machine,  at  a  distance  of  fort}'  inches,  the
length  of  the  sparks  being  equal  to  two  inches,  the  odic  incandes-
cence increased  considerably  in  strength  of  light,  even  when  it  was
not  isolated,  but  merely  held  in  the  hand,  or  placed  upon  a  table  ;
and  this  was  increased  in  proportion  as  the  magnet  was  brought
nearer  to  the  conductor.  Whether  it  at  last  became  actually  electri-
fied itself,  or  not,  its  luminosity  did  not  perceptibly  alter  further.
This  is  according  to  a  series  of  experiments  which  were  made  on
Josephine  Zinkel.  They  were  gone  through  with  short  bars,  with
longer,  and  with  one  five  feet  long;  then  with  smaller  ones,  as  well
as  witli  a  large  nine-layer  horse-shoe  ;  and  then  with  weak  and  strong
electric  charges.

371.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  influence  which  electricity  exerts,  and
this  merely  by  means  of  its  atmosphere,  upon  the  odic  polarities,  de-
serves greater  attention,  so  far  as  it  is  exhibited  in  the  colors  of  their
incandescence  ;  when,  for  example,  I  turned  the  northward,  negative,
blue-glowing  side  of  a  magnet,  no  matter  whether  bar  or  horse-shoe,
to  the  positively  charged  conductor,  the  intensity  of  the  light  was
exhalted,   the   blue  became  brighter.     When   I   turned  the  magnet

13

290  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

round,  and  directed  the  southward,  positive,  red,  lighted  side,  to  the
positive  conductor,  not  only  did  all  the  red  quickly  disappear,  but  it
shortly  turned  into  blue.  The  odic  polarities  were  reversed  ;  the  +
Od  turned  toward  +  E,  was  converted  into  —  Od,  and  in  correspond-
ence with  this  the  blue  —  Od  of  the  distant  side  of  the  magnet  was
changed  into  red-glowing. -f  Od.  The  Baroness  von  Augustin  wit-
nessed this  in  addition  to  Josephine  Zinkel.

3*72.  I  reversed  the  experiments  by  electrifying  the  conductor
negatively.  It  now  acted  in  the  reverse  way  upon  the  odic  poles  of
the  magnets.  It  changed  the  od-negative,  blue-glowing  pole,  turned
towards  it,  into  a  red-glowing ;  the  od-positive  pole,  at  that  time
turned  away  from  it,  into  a  blue-glowing,  od-negative,  all  at  the  dis-
tance of  forty  inches.  But  so  soon  as  I  ceased  to  electrify  the  con-
ductor, only  a  few  seconds  elapsed  before  the  poles  on  both  sides
became  pale,  and  returned  into  their  original  polar  colors  of  odic  in-
candescence, corresponding  to  the  magnetic  polarities  of  the  bar.  I
could  repeat  this  play  of  alternations  at  will,  backwards  and  forwards,
in  a  minute  each  time.  Thus  the  power  of  electricity,  by  its  mere
atmosphere,  and  unisolated,  was  shown  to  strengthen  considerably
the  odic  polarities  of  magnets  when  placed  conformably,  and  at  once
to  reverse  them  temporarily  when  placed  unconformably.

373.  Since  every  one,  who  is  at  all  acquainted  with  these  branches
of  physics,  is  aware  that  the  magnetic  poles  of  a  magnet  are  not  sub-
ject to  reversal  under  these  circumstances,  it  will  be  almost  unneces-
sary to  detail  the  experiments  which  I  undertook  to  attain  the  very
fullest  conviction,  from  facts,  of  the  accuracy  of  this  truth.  Since  the
approximation  of  another  needle  could  not  be  decisive  here,  inasmuch
as  it  would  itself  become  suspected  of  induction,  I  took  another  path.
I  appended  a  little  bar  to  the  further  end  of  the  twenty-inch  long  bar
in  such  a  way  that,  being  attached  to  the  outermost  point,  it  could
only  just  hold  on,  and  fell  off  on  the  slightest  shaking  of  the  floor  of
the  room.  If  the  force  by  which  it  was  held  up  had  diminished  in
the  least,  it  would,  necessarily,  have  fallen  off,  long  before  this  sunk
down  to  nothing.  Now  this  decrease,  and  final  entry  into  a  condition
of  indifference,  must  have  occurred  if  there  had,  been  a  reversal  of  the
poles.  I  now  charged  the  conductor  and  discharged  it  again ;  the
odic  incandescence  of  the  rod  was  slowly  changed  now  into  the  same
direction  as  the  electrical  atmosphere ;  now  into  the  direction  of  the
original  magnetism,  repeatedly,  but  the  little  bar  did  not  move,  much
less  fall  off.  Thus  the  magnetic  polarity  of  the  bar  did  not  undergo
any  perceptible  change,  while  the  odical  polarity,  as  evinced  by  the
colors  of  the  incandescence  of  the  poles,  changed  completely.

In  these  facts  exist  the  strongest  proof  of  the  difference  between

ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.  291

Od  and  magnetism,  since  they  afford  cases  in  which  the  two  appear
in  diametrically  opposed  polarities  in  one  and  the  same  iron  bar.
More  on  this  point  will  follow  in  the  section  on  odic  flame.

As  the  armature  becomes  incandescent  by  induction,  it  also  be-
comes an  electro-mac/net  by  induction.  I  connected  a  soft  iron  horse-
shoe, the  limbs  thirteen  inches  long,  and  one  inch  and  a  half  in  di-
ameter, wound  round  with  a  copper  wire,  four  lines  thick,  with  a  little
pile  of  six  zinc  and  silver  elements  of  Smee's  battery,  each  having
sixty  square  inches  of  surface.  All  the  sensitives  to  whom  I  showed
this  in  the  dark,  in  particular  Madame  Kienesberger,  Anka  Ilet-
manck,  Josephine  Zinkel,  Stephen  Kollar,  Madame  von  Tessedick,
Professor  Endlicher,  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl,  M.  Delhez,  <fec,  saw
the  iron,  as  well  as  the  armature  when  I  applied  this,  immediately
become  more  or  less  odically  incandescent.  The  open  poles  glowed
most  strongly,-  decreasing  gradually  downwards  to  the  curvature.
The  color  of  the  incandescence  was  bluish  at  the  negative  northward
pole,  reddish-yellow  at  the  positive  southward  pole,  exactly  as  in  the
steel  magnet  when  acted  on  by  rubbing.  When  the  armature  was
applied,  it  exhibited  contrary  coloring,  red  at  the  northward  pole  of
the  magnet,  blue  at  the  southward  ;  it  had  thus  become  an  induced
magnet  by  the  induction  of  the  other  induced  magnet.

375.  And  not  only  did  the  iron  magnet  thus  produced  become
incandescent,  but  the  other  parts  of  the  apparatus  hereby  thrown
into  the  magnetic  condition  with  it,  namely,  the  copper  coil,  even
the  conducting  wires,  and  finally  the  battery  itself.  I  merely  mention
this  here  to  make  the  Section  on  the  odic  incandescence  complete.  I
must  leave  the  detailed  account  of  it  until  hereafter.

376.  Even  an  empty  iron  bar,  although  independently  constantly
glowing  weakly,  as  all  bodies  do  more  or  less,  is  not  insensible  to  the
influence  of  difference  of  position  toward  the  meridian  on  its  odic  in-
candescence. Josephine  Zinkel  saw  an  iron  bar  twenty  inches  long,
which  I  brought  to  her  in  the  meridian,  increase  in  odic  incandes-
cence, becoming  bluer  toward  the  north  and  more  reddish-yellow
toward  the  south.  When  I  now  turned  it  round,  the  colors  were
reversed,  so  that  the  half  turned  toward  the  north  always  remained
bluish.  When  I  set  it  in  the  erect  position,  contrary  to  all  expecta-
tion, she  saw  it,  at  the  distance  of  a  yard,  a  blue-grey  incandescent
above  and  whitish-red  below.  (These  apparent  anomalies  will  be
discussed  hereafter.)

377.  We  are  already  quite  aware,  from  my  earlier  treatises,  that
the  magnet  possesses  the  capacity  of  imparting  its  indwelling  odic
force  to  other  bodies.  But  that  its  power  to  produce  odic  light  was
at  the  same  time  transferred  to  other  bodies,  was  first  discovered  by

292  ODIC  INCANDESCENCE.

subsequent  researches.  Madame  Kienesberger,  Miss  Atzraannsdorfer,
Wilhelmine  Glaser,  Zinkel,  and  Friedrich  Weidlich,  went  through  a
variety  of  experiments,  in  which  I  brought  on  to  flaring  magnet  poles
iron  and  copper  wires  twisted  together  into  flat  coils,  with  one  end
projecting  out  about  four  inches.  These  wires  immediately  absorbed
the  odic  flames,  and  themselves  at  once  acquired  a  greatly  exalted
odic  incandescence.  Further  on,  (§  485,)  when  giving  the  details
respecting  odic  flame,  I  will  give  a  circumstantial  account  of  these
experiments.  Glass  objects  also,  large  l-enses,  the  bells  of  an  air-
pump,  acquired  odic  incandescence  when  placed  upon  the  poles  of
strong  magnets.     (See  §  481.)

378.  If  we  now  briefly  sum  up  what  has  been  stated  concern-
ing the  odic  incandescence,  we  obtain  the  following  compressed
resume : —

a.  The  peculiar  light,  the  odic  incandescence,  of  all  magnets,
whatever  shape  it  may  possess,  appears  in  the  dark  dull  grey  in  the
lowest  degrees  of  luminosity  ;  it  then  rises  progressively  towards
whitish  and  yellowish,  and  generally  assumes  a  bluish  color  at  the
northward  pole,  and  a  reddish  at  the  southward.

b.  This  coloring  is  modified  through  a  great  number  of  shades,
according  as  the  poles  of  the  magnet  are  open  or  closed,  conformable
or  unconformable,  turned  to  the  east  or  to  the  west,  upwards  or
downwards,  i.  e.,  according  to  the  different  conditions  under  which
its  conflict  with  the  terrestrial  magnetism  takes  place.  But  it  always
follows  a  law  which  gives  the  rule  of  action  in  each  position,  and  in
every  case  makes  good  its  influence.

c.  An  electro -magnet  obeys  the  same  law  in  all  essential  par-
ticulars.

d.  A  bundle  of  bars  or  horse-shoes  which  are  placed  with  like
poles  together,  becomes  reversed  internally  into  unlike  odic  poles.

e.  The  armature  shares  in  this  process  ;  it  acts  passively  and  ac-
tively as  an  induced  magnet,  and  modifies  the  phenomena  of  light
and  color.

/.  An  empty  iron  bar  plays  the  part  of  a  terrestrially  induced
magnet,  and  gives  the  corresponding  phenomena  of  odic  incan-
descence.

(j.  The  intensities  of  odic  incandescence  keep  pace  with  the  mag-
netic intensities  in  one  and  the  same  magnet.  They  exhibit  varia-
tions of  magnitude  among  different  magnets,  and  in  each  particular
magnet  itself,  and  this  according  to  their  position,  as  they  are  open
or  closed,  or  have  the  poles  directed  conformably  or  unconformably
towards  east  or  west,  upwards  or  downwards.  They  change  their
positions  on  the  poles  and  axes  of  magnets  according  to  these  cir-

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  293

cumstances.  The  light  is  strong  enough  to  bear  reflection  from
common  mirrors.

h.  Magnets  closed  with  magnets  instead  of  armatures  have  the
lights  of  the  odic  incandescence  displaced  according  to  the  same  laws,
but  in  a  different  way.

t,  Wherever  magnet  poles  are  applied  upon  magnetic  bars,  they
produce  partial  exaltation  of  the  odic  incandescence,  spots  of  light.
Crystals  and  hands  do  the  same.

k.  The  electrical  atmosphere  causes  exaltation  of  the  odic  incan-
descence.

I.  It  acts  so  strongly  upon  the  odic  light,  that  it  is  capable  of  pro-
ducing a  reversal  of  the  odic  poles  where  no  change  of  the  magnetic
value  occurs.

m.  Heat  weakens  the  phenomena  of  odic  incandescence  in  steel
magnets.

n.  The  odic  incandescence  is  capable  of  being  transferred  from,
magnets  to  other  non-magnetic  bodies,  copper  wires,  &c.

o.  Although  the  odic  intensities  rise  parallel  with  the  magnetic,
the  values  of  the  two  do  not ;  cases  often  occurred  where  -f-  M  ap-
peared combined  with  —  Od,  or  —  M  with  +  Od  ;  and  these  con-
trasts strongly  testify  to  the  difference  existing  between  them.

IT.    ODIC    FLAME    ON    STEEL    MAGNETS.

379.  The  odic  flame  which  issues  from  magnets  always  keeps  pace
with  the  odic  incandescence.  It  forms  the  second  degree  in  the  scale
of  strength  of  the  odic  luminous  phenomena,  and  consists  of  a
brightness  which  the  weaker  sensitives  only  see  as  a  luminous  halo
over  the  poles  of  the  magnets,  but  which,  to  those  more  highly  sen-
sitive, assumes  progressively  more  of  the  external  aspect  of  a  real
flame,  in  proportion  to  their  power  of  vision,  and  is  described  by
them  as  such.  There  are  incandescent  magnets  without  visible  flame,
but  no  odic  flames  without  visible  incandescence.  The  incandescence
is  always  the  first  appearance  of  light.  I  had  once  a  horse-shoe
magnet  which  had  become  so  weak  that  it  would  no  longer  support
its  armature,  although  it  was  still  perceptibly  magnetic.  I  showed
it  to  Josephine  Zinkel  in  the  darkened  chamber,  at  a  period  when
her  power  of  vision  had  a  high  degree  of  sensibility.  She  saw  the
whole  mass  of  steel  lighted  with  odic  incandescence,  but  could  dis-
tinguish no  flame  at  the  poles,  only  a  little  smoke.  When  the  odic
intensity  was  increased,  the  flame  became  visible.  It  exists,  as  we
are  justified  in  assuming,  everywhere  ;  but  we  can  only  speak  of  it
where  it  becomes  visible.     We  will  follow  its  appearances,  so  far  as  I

294  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

have  been  able  hitherto  to  make  out  its  traces,  beyond  what  has  al-
ready been  told,  by  running  through  the  series  of  experiments  upon
magnets  which  I  instituted  for  this  purpose.

380.  We  have  in  the  first  place  to  take  up  the  thread  of  the  de-
tails given  in  the  first  of  these  treatises,  from  §  3  to  §  20,  to  which  I
refer  the  reader.  A  year  later,  namely  in  1845,  I  went  through  a
series  of  investigations  with  Miss  Reichel,  while  she  was  residing
with  me,  which  served  both  to  confirm  what  was  before  stated,  and  to
unfold  new  matter  which  must  be  appended  to  the  former.  She  saw
all  magnets,  without  exception,  furnished  with  flames  of  different
size  and  intensity  of  light ;  the  former  according  to  the  different
sizes  of  the  magnets,  the  latter  according  as  they  possessed  different
strength  of  magnetic  or  odic  charge,  as  well  as  proportioned  to  her
power  of  sensitive  vision,  more  exalted  or  more  depressed  by  fluctua-
tions of  her  disease.  I  shall  here  select  only  a  few  out  of  hundreds
of  experiments.  Late  in  the  summer,  when  she  is  usually  some-
what better  in  health,  she  saw  a  weak  bar,  twenty  inches  long,  with
a  flame  rather  more  than  one  inch  long.  At  the  same  time  she  saw
a  seven-layered  horse-shoe  with  a  flame  of  eight  inches  at  its  poles.
At  a  subsequent  period,  during  more  highly  excited  sensitiveness,
the  largest  of  my  steel  magnets,  a  heavy  horse-shoe,  made  of  nine
cast  steel  layers,  was  placed  before  her  in  the  dark.  This  time,  as  in
the  year  before,  although  she  did  not  know  of  the  magnet,  she  saw
flames  six  feet  high  blaze  up  from  both  poles.  They  were  so  vast,
that,  as  the  horse-shoe  had  the  poles  turned  upwards,  the  flames
blended  together,  as  they  rose,  into  one  column  of  fire.  With  re-
gard to  the  different  colors  which  were  given  out  along  each  pole,
she  perceived  that  the  column  of  light  was  composed  of  two  trunks,
one  yellowish-white,  the  other  bluish  ;  the  first  smaller,  the  second
larger.  The  entire  chamber  was  so  strongly  lighted  by  it  that  she
could  detect  the  outlines  of  every  object.  All  the  space  between  the
white  odically  incandescent  limbs  was  full  of  streaks  of  flame,  and
the  outside  of  the  steel  was  enveloped  in  a  luminous  mist,  which
seemed  to  flow  onward  in  waves,  sometimes  towards  one  pole,  some-
times towards  the  other.  At  the  ends  of  the  layers,  their  edges  and
corners,  where  they  formed  the  polar  ends,  special  little  flames
streamed  out  sideways,  strongest  from  the  outer  angles,  when  they
finally  terminated  in  isolated  spreading  sparks.  Since  all  this  agrees
exactly  in  every  particular  with  what  Miss  Reichel  had  described  a
year  before,  on  a  smaller  scale,  of  a  weaker  magnet,  I  showed  to  Miss
Atzmannsdorfer,  after  her  observations  and  the  descriptions  were
completed,  the  drawings  which  are  appended  to  the  first  part  of  this
work.     She  found  all  to  agree  pretty  exactly  with  what  she  herself

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  295

had  seen,  and  thus  confirmed  the  accuracy  of  my  earlier  researches.
She  added  only,  in  connection,  that  the  flame-like  phenomena  were
in  reality  all  much  more  delicate  and  lighter  than  those  represented
in  the  drawing-, — but  at  the  same  time  moving  about,  uniting  to-
gether, and  intermingling  with  varying  colors  with  every  breath
of  air.

381.  I  have  to  state  in  almost  the  same  words  from  a  healthy  pa-
tient, the  girl  Zinkel,  what  I  have  just  communicated  from  a  dis-
eased sensitive.  She  also  saw  more  distinctly,  under  certain  circum-
stances, the  odic  flame  flow  from  half  an  inch  to  four  inches  from  bar
magnets,  and  blaze  from  three  to  five  feet  high  from  the  nine-layer
magnet ;  among  these  circumstances  was  the  occurrence  of  the  cata-
meuia.  She  then  detected  also  the  little  lateral  flames  on  the  edges
and  corners  of  the  bars,  as  well  as  of  horse-shoes,  the  play  of  colors,
the  great  illumination,  the  scattered  sparks,  all  nearly  word  for  word
as  Miss  Reichel  had  described  it  two  years  previously.

It  has  already  been  mentioned,  (§  316,)  that  the  healthy  Baron
von  Oberländer  saw  the  odic  flame  as  large  over  the  nine-layer
horse-shoe  magnet.  The  same  was  said  of  Friedrich  Weidlich, —
(§  330,)  as  well  as  at  §  328  of  Madame  Kienesberger,  at  §  313  of
the  healthy  sensitive  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  §  315  of  Dr.  Nied,  §  312
of  the  Baroness  von  Augustin,  §  303  of  M.  Franz  Vernolendt,  §  299
of  Madame  von  Varaday,  and  only  a  little  less  strongly,  §  309  of  the
thoroughly  healthy  Miss  Sophie  Bauer.  All  these  persons  saw
flames  blaze  up  to  the  lieight  of  a  man  over  the  nine-layer  horse-shoe
magnet.

382.  Let  us  now  examine  some  of  the  properties  of  the  odic  flames
of  the  magnet ;  in  the  first  place,  their  extent.

We  have  seen  that  the  size  of  the  flames  depends  objectively  on
the  size  of  the  magnet  and  its  magnetic  intensity  or  strength  of
change  ;  and  that  the  perception  and  recognition  of  it  is  also  sub-
jectively conditioned  by  the  excitability  of  the  observer.  As  there
exist  among  mankind,  in  respect  to  common  sight,  such  great  differ-
enc  s,  that  one  man  does  not  recognise  his  brother  passing  by  him,
while  the  eagle  eye  of  another  enables  him  to  count  the  sky-larks  in
the  air;  as,  moreover,  there  are  some  who  cannot  see  at  all  in  mo-
derate darkness,  while  others  can  see  their  way  in  the  darkest  night;
as,  in  more  striking  cases,  those  suffering  from  hemiralgia  can  only
see  in  the  strongest  light,  and  are  quite  blind  in  a  dim  light,  thus
directly  opposed  to  the  sensitive  ;  as  there  are  albinos,  and  indeed
such  as  cannot  see  colors,  and  to  whom  the  world  looks  like  a  cop-
per-plate  engraving ; — so  is  it  also  with  the  power  of  seeing  odic
phenomena ;  in  proportion  to  their  power  of  vision,  the  odic  flames

296  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

of  one  and  the  same  magnet  appear  more  extensive  or  more  limited;
and  this  is  not  merely  different  in  different  individuals,  hut  varies  in
one  and  the  same  on  different  days,  at  different  hours,  nay  even
most  surprisingly  from  minute  to  minute,  so  that  at  three  rapidly
succeeding  moments  one  and  the  same  odic  flame  may  he  impercep-
tible, immediately  afterwards  visible,  though  small,  and  then,  di-
rectly after  this,  large  and  expanded,  without  any  change  in  the  ob-
ject, by  mere  change  of  the  susceptibility  of  the  observer.  The
cause  of  this  will  be  made  known  circumstantially  in  the  succeed-
ing treatises,  when  we  come  to  speak  specially  of  the  power  of  odic
vision.

383.  The  perception  of  a  sudden  and  rapidly  vanishing  flash  of
light,  when  the  armature  is  pulled  off  the  horse-shoe  quickly,  con-
stitutes the  lowest  degree  of  recognition  of  the  odic  flame  upon  mag-
nets. This  was  seen  by  Dr.  Nied,  Baroness  Pauline  von  Natorp,  M.
Kotschy,  Madame  von  Varady,  M.  von  Rainer,  Baroness  von  Peich-
ich,  M.  Amalie  Kreüger,  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  M.  Ernst  Pauer,  Prof.
Endlicher,  M.  Delhez,  Baroness  von  Augustin,  as  well  as  Miss  No-
wotny, (§3.)  Madame  Csecilie  Bauer  gave  a  more  accurate  account
of  this  process.  At  the  moment  when  the  armature  was  pulled  off,
she  saw  a  sparkling  flash  of  light,  almost  like  that  produced  by  flint
and  steel,  disappearing  instantaneously.  The  flame  over  the  poles
of  the  horse-shoe  was  not  largest  -then ;  on  the  contrary,  smallest,
and  at  the  first  moment  almost  imperceptible.  Immediately  on  this
it  began  to  form,  at  first  small,  then  increasing,  and  soon  rising  to  its
permanent  magnitude.  About  a  minute  was  required  for  this.  Some
months  later,  I  received  exactly  the  same  description  of  this  pheno-
menon from  Josephine  Zinkel.

The  different  degrees  of  strength  of  the  light  from  a  mere  halo  to
distinct  flames,  presented  by  the  luminosity  appearing  at  the  poles
of  magnets,  were  described  a  little  differently  by  almost  every  ob-
server. We  found  MM.  Hütter  and  Schuh,  and  Prof.  Ragsky,  at  the
bottom  of  the  scale.  Next  to  them  stands  Prof.  Husz  of  Stockholm,
who  only  saw  the  light  over  the  electro-magnet.  In  the  middle  de-
gree occurred  the  observation  of  Prof.  Endlicher,  among  others,  to
whom  the  luminous  emanations  exhibited  more  general  distribution
and  great  substantiality  ;  then  the  physician  Dr.  Nied,  M.  Rabe,
Baroness  von  Augustin,  Miss  Sojmie  Pauer,  Baron  Oberländer,  Anka
Hitmanck,  and  the  painter  M.  Anschütz.  Above  these  stood  Mad.
Csecilie  Bauer  and  Josephine  Zinkel,  and  at  the  top  of  the  series  the
somnambulist  sensitives,  to  whom  the  lights  over  magnets  always  ap-
peared as  distinct  flames.

384.  Among  the  objecting  conditions  of  the  magnitude  of  the  odic

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  297

flame,  is  the  distinction  between  the  northward  and  southward  poles
of  the  magnet.  The  two  flames  are  in  most  cases  of  different  size  :  at
least  in  the  48°  of  N.  hit.,  in  which  my  residence  lies,  when  the
horse-shoe  stands  upright,  or  when  thin  poles  are  turned  toward  the
north,  or  when  bars  lie  conformably  in  the  meridian.  It  must  be
relatively  different  in  other  places.  Under  the  tropics,  the  distinction
in  the  conformably  placed  magnets  will  become  imperceptible,  and,
in  the  magnetic  equator,  disappear  altogether.  On  the  other  side
of  the  tropics,  e.  g.  at  the  Gape,  at  Van  Diemen's  Land,  or  in  Buenos
Ay  res,  these  conditions  will  be  reversed  ;  the  rlames  of  the  southward
pole  will  have  the  upper  hand  in  those  cases  where  the  northward
pole  prevails  with  us.  When  a  bar  magnet  lies  in  the  meridian,  the
northward  pole  turned  toward  the  north,  all  my  sensitives,  sick  or
healthy,  have,  in  innumerable  experiments,  found  the  flames  of  the
northward  pole  larger  than  those  of  the  southward  pole  directed  to
the  south.  Taking  the  mean  of  all  the  accounts,  the  difference
amounted  to  about  one-half,  so  that  the  northward  flame  was  about
double  the  length  of  the  southward.  I  say,  about ;  for  the  innu-
merable questions  I  put  could  not  be  answered  in  the  dark  according
to  a  regular  standard  ;  in  most  cases  they  used  the  assistance  of  the
span,  and  explained  themselves  by  such  terms  as  hand's  length,
hand's  breadth,  thickness  of  one's  thumb,  &c.  And  there  is  no  occa-
sion for  great  accuracy  here,  where,  for  the  present,  we  are  only
seeking  the  general  outlines  of  the  phenomena.  It  is  sufficient  to
say  that  the  concordant  testimony  of  all  the  sensitives  gives  the  rela-
tion of  magnitude  of  the  northward  flame  to  the  southward  as  2  to  1.
This  is  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  the  odic  incandes-
cence of  bars,  since  in  these  the  blue  northward  side  is  shorter  than
the  red  southward.  (Still  the  latter  may  easily  depend  upon  some
deception  ;  for  the  blue  odic  incandescence  is  much  less  luminous
than  the  yellowish-red,  and  thus  in  the  lower  degrees  becomes  invis-
ible to  the  eyes  sooner,  without  being  really  shorter.)  To  support
this  by  the  testimony  of  experiments,  it  would  be  necessary  to  call
over  again  almost  all  the  persons  named,  which  would  cause  useless
diftuseness.  I  confine  myself,  therefore,  to  mentioning  the  healthy
Dr.  Nied  and  Baron  von  Überländer,  Madame  von  Varady,  Madame
von  Peichich,  Prof.  Endlicher,  M.  Constantin  Delhez,  Baroness  von
Augustin,  Miss  Sophia  Pauer,  also  Madame  Kienesberger,  Misses
Atzmannsdorfer,  Reichel,  Weigand,  Winter,  and  in  particular  the
healthy  and  strong  Josephine  Zinkel,  and  the  healthy  Klaiba  the
joiner,  on  which  latter  I  have  repeated  this  experiment  especially
often.

385.  The  result  is  modified,  though  similar,  when  a  magnetic  bar

13*

298  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

lies  not  in  the  normal  direction  in  the  meridian,  not  conformably,
but  is  placed  in  such  a  position  that  its  northward  pole  is  turned  to-
ward the  south  and  its  southward  pole  to  the  north  ;  that  is,  uncon-
formably.  In  this  case  the  sensitives  observe  a  diminution  of  the
odic  flames  ;  they  both  become  of  duller  aspect,  less  luminous,  more
dim,  shorter  and  narrower,  and  moreover  modified  in  color.  This  is,
on  the  one  hand,  deducible  from  the  general  theory  of  magnetism,
and  has  also  been  observed  in  numerous  experiments  with  Madame
Kienesberger,  Misses  Atzmannsdorfer,  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  Reiche!,
Winter,  and  Josephine  Zinkel.

386.  To  these  sensitives  a  horse-shoe  was  submitted  in  the  same
way,  while  lying  horizontally  in  the  meridian,  as  described  above,
(§  338,)  that  is  to  say,  once  with  both  poles  turned  to  the  north,
another  times  with  both  toward  the  south.  In  the  first  position  the
northward  flame  appeared  larger  and  more  brilliant,  while  that  of
the  south  pole  seemed  diminished,  of  a  dirty  almost  bluish  red  ;  in
the  second  case  the  northward  flame  appeared  dim,  greyish-blue,
with  a  tinge  of  yellowish,  and  diminished  about  one-third  ;  while,  on
the  contrary,  the  red  was  enlarged  about  half,  enlivened  and  brilliant-
ly red  luminous.

387.  When  I  placed  an  open  five-layer  horse-shoe  magnet  verti-
cally, the  poles  turned  upwards,  and  the  limbs  conformably, — name-
ly, in  such  a  manner  that  the  northward  polar  limb  stood  on  the
north  side,  and  the  southward  polar  limb  on  the  south  side — the
flames  of  both  poles  appeared  to  Josephine  Zinkel  vivified,  large,  and
brilliant ;  when  I  placed  the  limbs  unconformably, — the  northward
polar  limb  on  the  south  side,  and  the  southward  polar  limb  on  the
north  side, — both  flames  were  dull,  diminished,  dim,  and  discolored.

388.  When  I  turned  a  horse-shoe  the  other  way  upwards,  in  the
same  vertical  direction,  so  that  the  poles  were  directed  downward,
suspending  it  by  the  curvature  to  a  copper  rod,  and  thus  keeping  it
in  the  conformable  position,  the  flames  of  the  northward  pole  were
shorter,  those  of  the  southward  longer.

When  I  gave  both  poles  the  oblique  direction  of  the  magnetic  in-
clination, the  conditions  were  about  the  same.

389.  Transverse  positions  of  all  kinds,  where  the  poles  were  placed
east  and  west,  gave  intermediate  conditions  with  numerous  modifica-
tions, in  which,  however,  the  relative  sizes  of  the  two  poles  exhibited
less  difference.     And  this  in  the  following  manner.

390.  When  the  two  poles  of  a  horse-shoe  lay  to  the  west,  the  same
observer  described  both  flames  as  short ;  when  in  the  reverse  position,
with  both  poles  toward  the  east,   they  were  somewhat  longer.     But

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  299

both  parallel  positions  always  possessed  shorter  flames  than  the  ver-
tical with  the  poles  turned  upwards.

391.  The  further  observation   comes  under  examination,  that  the
flames  appeared  : —

At    the    northward   pole,   in  the  eastward  direction,  longer  but  duller.

"              "      in  the  westward         '

'         broader    but    more    lu-

minous.

the   southward   pole,  in   the  eastward        '

broader    but    more    lu-

minous.

"      in  the  westward         '•

longer  but  duller.

We  shall  see  hereafter  (§  405,  where  we  shall  speak  of  the  conflict
between  two  odic  flames,)  what  the  conditions  are  of  these  distinc-
tions of  longer  and  broader,  and  then  find  the  proof  that  the  former
belongs  to  an  attraction,  the  latter  to  a  repulsion  of  the  odic  flames  ;
and  we  may  take  this  opportunity  of  anticipating  the  important  dis-
covery, which  must  be  discussed  more  circumstantially  elsewhere,
that  the  east  stands  in  some  degree  on  the  side  of  the  north,  the  west
on  that  of  the  south,  in  their  relations  to  Od,  vide  §  536.

392.  In  like  manner  I  tested,  by  numerous  experiments  on  the
highly  sensitive,  the  influence  which  the  magnetic  inclination  must
necessarily  have  upon  the  character  and  size  of  the  odic  flames  de-
pending upon  the  steel  magnet.  Misses  Atzmanusdorfer  and  Reichel,
Madame  Kienesberger,  and  the  healthy  sensitive  Josephine  Zinkel,
took  the  greatest  share  in  these.  It  was  first  seen  that  the  experi-
ments which  I  described  in  the  first  treatise,  (§  11,)  were  not  uncon-
ditionally but  only  conditionally  correct.  There,  namely,  I  stated  on
the  authority  of  Miss  Reichel  that  the  terrestrial  magnetism  does  not
appear  to  exert  any  important  influence  upon  the  size  of  the  odic
flame.  This  statement  is  correct,  when,  as  happened  in  that  experi-
ment, the  change  of  poles  and  inclinations  is  effected  rather  quickly,
and  no  time  is  allowed  for  the  development  of  the  polar  flames.  At
that  time  I  was  unaware  of  a  certain  degree  of  slowness  with  which
nature  effects  the  odic  operations,  for  the  full  completion  of  which
some  little  time — a  half,  a  whole,  or  in  many  cases  several  minutes,
are  required :  on  which  poiut  I  shall  hereafter  find  an  opportunity
to  say  more.  When  the  experiments  of  §  11  were  made  with  greater
slowness,  and  subjected  to  examination,  it  was  certainly  seen  that  the
odic  flames  altered,  not  only  in  size  but  even  in  form,  according  as
the  position  assumed  was  larger  or  smaller,  and  that  the  terrestrial
magnetism  did  certainly  exert  an  influence  upon  it,  which,  though
slowly,  was  most  decisively  and  considerably  manifested.  The
suspended  magnetic  needle,  as  is  well  known,  changes  its  position  in-
stantaneously whenever  the  terrestrial  magnetism  can  exert  influence

800  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

on  it ;  and  this  influence  shows  its  effect  at  once  in  its  whole  force.  I
was  formerly  led  away  by  this  usual  manner  of  looking  at  it,  but
longer  experience  has  taught  me  another  in  reference  to  odic  effects,
which  only  rise  slowly  to  their  maximum.  When  I  subsequently
modified  the  experiments  with  Miss  Reichel  in  such  a  way  that  I  no
longer  held  the  bar  magnet  in  my  hand,  whereby  the  polar  flames
"were  complicated  and  rendered  untrue,  but  fixed  it  in  a  wooden  Gui-
doni's  holder,  and  then  brought  it  into  the  magnetic  inclination,  in
which  I  let  it  remain  a  minute,  I  expected  that  the  blue  north  polar
flame  would  increase  in  size,  strength  of  light,  and  in  color,  and  that
the  northern  reaction  which  I  had  been  previously  acquainted  with
would  necessarily  increase  in  intensity  of  every  kind.  But  the  result
did  not  in  the  slightest  degree  confirm  my  preconceived  opinion.  On
the  direct  contrary,  the  beholder  of  the  phenomena  told  me  that  the
flame  of  the  northward  pole  had  acquired  the  very  reverse  color,  and
decreased  considerably  in  strength  of  light.  The  blue  color  became
dull,  opaque,  grey,  and  dwindled  away  till  it  was  imperceptible.
"When  I  turned  the  steel  round,  and  brought  its  northward  pole  into
the  opposite  direction,  in  the  inclination,  seen  at  the  distance  of  a  yard
and  more,  the  flame  appeared  bluish,  large,  and  vivid.  The  same  ex-
periment, made  at  a  different  time,  with  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  fur-
nished the  same  unexpected  result ;  not  only  did  not  the  northward
flame  increase  in  the  inclination,  but  it  disappeared  in  great  part  from
her  eyes  :  but  when  the  steel  was  reversed  the  sensitive  saw  the  bluish
flame  again  of  almost  double  size.  Finalty,  I  tested  these  most
strange  and  striking  results  with  the  greatest  exactness,  in  Josephine
Zinkel,  and  devoted  many  days  to  a  thorough  investigation  of  them
with  her  in  the  dark.  Here  also  my  experiments  had  the  same  re-
sult :  in  the  inclination,  where  it  might  have  been  expected  that  the
flame  of  the  north  pole  would  appear  at  its  maximum,  it  on  the  con-
trary sank  down  into  a  sort  of  minimum  ;  instead  of  rising  to  the
most  vivid  blue,  it  lost  all  color,  and  remained  nothing  but  a  dim
grey.  We  shall  see  hereafter  that  these  astonishing  visual  pheno-
mena were  perceived  and  confirmed  in  like  manner  through  corres-
ponding phenomena  of  sensation,  by  all  the  sensitives,  even  when  of
much  lower  degree  of  excitability.  Since,  then,  this  appears  to  be
directly  opposed  to  the  attraction  of  terrestrial  magnetism,  by  which,
in  our  hemisphere,  the  negative  pole  of  the  needle,  brought  down  to
the  direction  of  the  inclination,  is  attracted,  not  repulsed,  by  the  pos-
itive north  pole  of  the  earth,  we  see  from  this,  as  distinctly  as  from
the  preceding  experiments,  that  the  odic  flame,  or  the  odic  phenomena
in  general,  are  indeed  influenced  by  the  magnetic  attraction,  but  by
no  means  unconditionally  governed  by  it,  and  that  the  globe  contains

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  SOI

other  qualities  acting  upon  Od  and  its  characters  besides  magnetism.
I  shall  Bring  forward  all  that  I  have  been  able  hitherto  to  make  out
on  this  subject  in  the  details  in  the  odic  colors,  §  4S9,  &c. ;  here,  where
we  have  merely  to  do  with  the  effects  of  magnetism  on  the  odic  flame
of  the  needle  in  the  direction  of  the  inclination,  I  am  contented  to
announce  the  results.

393.  When  I  applied  horse-shoe  magnets  to  these  experiments  the
case  was  somewhat  modified.  If  the  two  poles  were  turned  toward
the  north,  the  blue  flame  of  the  northward  pole  appeared  in  its  full
length  ;  but  the  reddish  flame  of  the  southward  pole  seemed  re-
pressed, bedimmed,  bluish-red,  and  diminished  in  size.  On  the  other
hand,  when  the  poles  were  turned  toward  the  south,  the  red  flame  of
the  southward  pole  was  enlarged;  while  that  of  the  northward  pole
became  duller,  reddish-bine,  and  diminished  in  size.  When  the
two  poles  stood  directed  upwards,  the  northward  pole  was  strength-
ened, the  southward  pole  lessened  (thus  giving  a  new  support  to  what
was  stated  in  the  last  paragraphs.)  Nay,  this  went  so  far  that  it
afforded  a  circumstance  worthy  of  notice  in  a  practical  point  of  view —
namely,  this,  that  the  odic  flame  of  the  unconformably  placed  pole
was  not  unfrequently  wholly  repressed  ;  that  is,  became  no  longer
perceptible  to  the  eyes  of  particular  observers,  and  thus  made  it  ap-
pear as  if  only  one  pole  possessed  an  odic  flame.  My  uote-books
swarm  with  indications  of  this  case,  and  there  was  scarcely  one  of  my
numerous  sensitives  to  whom  it  did  not  frequently  occur  under  the
proper  circumstances,  especially  those  of  weaker  power  of  sight,  or
in  imperfect  darkness,  or  when  the  observing  person  had  not  remain-
ed long  enough  in  the  dark.  As  witnesses,  I  mention  the  Baroness
Natorp,  Miss  Dorfer,  Madame  von  Tessedick,  Madame  Fenzl,  Miss
Sophie  Pauer,  MM.  Hochstetter,  Fernolendt,  and  the  chlorotic  Het-
mauek.

394.  There  was  a  difference  produced  in  the  size  of  the  odic  flame,
whether  a  magnet  stood  free  with  the  poles  in  the  air,  or  lay  flat  upon
a  table.  In  the  latter  case,  all  the  observers  perceived  the  flames  ob-
servably larger,  sometimes  expanded  to  twice  the  size.  Wilhelmine
Glaser  saw  the  flames  of  both  the  poles  of  a  bar  become  as  long  again
upon  a  table  of  polished  walnut  wood.  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  looked  at
magnets  upon  an  unpolished  deal  table  ;  they  formed  a  long  stream
of  light  flowing  in  waves  upon  it,  at  the  southward  pole  shorter,
thicker,  and  red  ;  at  the  northward,  long,  slender,  and  blue.  The
waving  motion  could  be  seen  most  distinctly  in  profile  ;  when  seen
from  above,  it  enveloped  the  poles  like  a  halo,  which  also  rose  up  in
the  air  immediately  above  them.  Madame  Crecilie  Bauer  and  Jose-
phine Zinkel,  especially  the  latter,  were  frequent  witnesses  of    this

S02  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

phenomenon,  according  to  which  it  appears  as  if  the  table  formed  a
kind  of  fixed  point  whence  the  odic  flame  flowed  forth.

395.  The  results  remained  the  same  whether  I  applied  the  largest,
the  middle-sized,  or  the  smallest  magnets,  even  such  as  might  be  hid-
den between  two  fingers.  The  phenomena  were,  indeed,  on  a  propor-
tionately smaller  scale,  but  remained  exactly  the  same  in  kind.  Thus,
immense  masses  are  quite  unnecessary  here,  for  very  much  can  be
done  with  small  instruments,  and  with  these  the  greater  part  of  my
observations  may  be  repeated  and  confirmed  on  a  small  scale.  A
small  magnet  charged  to  saturation  appears  to  possess  as  much  odic
tension  as  one  out  of  all  proportion  larger.  The  luminous  jmenornena
occur  in  a  more  limited  space,  but  the  effects  remain  qualitatively  the
same.

396.  The  same  phenomena  of  which  I  have  already  given  an  ac-
count at  §  340,  <fec,  when  speaking  of  the  odic  incandescence,  and  to
which  I  must  refer  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  namely,  the  banded  color-
ings, occur  also  with  the  odic  flame  on  compound  bar  and  horse-shoe
magnets.  The  middle  layer  of  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  magnet  emitted
bine  flames  at  the  negative  pole  ;  the  pair  next  to  it  in  front  and  be-
hind, gave  out  red  ;  the  second  pair  blue  again,  the  third  red,  and  the
fourth  and  outermost  blue.  The  red  flames  of  the  two  enclosed  red
layers  were  here  somewhat  repressed,  especially  when  placed  with  the
northward  side  toward  the  north.  All  these  phenomena  were  re-
peated with  the  reversed  arrangement  of  colors  at  the  southward
pole ;  and  here  the  two  enclosed  blue  layers  had  repressed  flames
which  looked  rather  grey  than  blue.  Looking  sideways,  the  flame
had  a  banded  red  and  blue  appearance  for  a  short  space  just  above
the  steel  plates.  Yet  this  could  not  be  traced  far  up  beyond  the  poles
with  any  distinctness,  for  the  colors  soon  became  intermingled  and
lost  in  the  general  stronger  color  of  the  predominant  pole,  so  that  at
the  negative  pole  the  red  flame  which  issued  from  the  magnetically
reversed  layers  was  lost  at  a  little  distance  on  the  predominant  blue,
and  vice  versa.  Only  the  red  and  blue  streaks  and  sparks  ascending
in  them,  of  which  I  shall  soon  (§  454)  have  to  speak,  retained  their
colors.

397.  The  phenomenon  here  described  also  includes  in  itself  that
which  is  described  in  §  9,  and  illustrated  by  Fig.  9,  but  which  was
less  circumstantially  related  by  Miss  Reichel  than  in  this  case  by  Jo-
sephine Zinkel.  The  latter  also  saw,  from  the  side,  the  flame-like
streaks  ascending  from  each  separate  layer  ;  but  she  found  the  inter-
spaces between  them  not  empty,  but  also  filled  with  odic  flame,  only
of  paler  luminosity.  Miss  Reichel's  observations  were  made  in  an
improvised  much  less  perfectly  darkened  chamber  than  those  of  Jo-

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  303

sephine  Zinkel  ;  I  subsequently  had  a  perfectly  dark  chamber  pre-
pared. The  former,  therefore,  saw  only  the  more  luminous  streaks,
and  the  less  luminous  interspaces  appeared  to  her  void  ;  the  latter
found  the  entire  space  above  the  poles  of  the  nine-layered  magnet
flaming,  with  brighter  flames  from  the  edges  of  the  layers,  which  were
prolonged  upwards,  clearly  distinguishable  through  the  bundle  of
flame.  The  banded  appearance  of  the  magnet-flame  at  the  side  was
thereby  still  more  increased.

398.  The  intensity  of  light  of  the  odic  flame  varies  extremely,
and  runs  from  a  weakness  in  which  it  appears  as  but  a  vapor,  even
to  the  highly  sensitive,  to  a  bright,  and  finally  to  so  brilliant  a  flame,
that  it  was  often  wholly  incomprehensible  to  them  why  I  could  not
also  see  it.  At  the  same  time,  it  never  attained  to  such  an  intensity
that  I  was  enabled  to  perceive  the  slightest  trace  of  it,  which  cer-
tainly could  not  have  been  from  want  of  attention  in  my  frequent
and  long-enduring  sojourns  in  the  dark.  When  the  flame  was  gently
blown  upon,  especially  in  the  direction  of  its  flow,  the  intensity  of  the
light  increased,  in  particular  at  the  places  which  were  acted  on.  This
was  witnessed  by  Josephine  Zinkel,  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  Miss  Sophie
Pauer,  Prof.  Endlicher,  M.  Hochstetter,  M.  Delhez,  and  Baroness  von
Augustin,  on  bars,  horse-shoes,  and  electro-magnets  of  various  forms.
More  will  be  said  of  this  below,  at  §  409.

399.  The  agitation  and  constant  motion  which  prevail  in  the  odic
flames  of  the  magnet,  were  confirmed  in  many  new  experiments  by
Miss  Atzmaunsdorfer,  Josephine  Zinkel,  Madame  Kienesberger,  Weig-
and,  Dorfer,  Friedrich  Weidlich,  the  healthy  M.  Nikolas  Rabe,  Baron
Oberländer,  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  Madame  von  Peichich,  Baroness  von
Natorp,  Madame  von  Varady,  Madame  von  Tessedik,  Prof.  End-
licher, M.  Delhez,  Baroness  von  Augustin,  Dr.  Nied,  Johann  Kynast,
Klaiber,  and  others.  The  first  and  last  compared  it  in  some  degree
to  the  positive  brush  from  the  points  of  an  electric  machine,  only
they  described  it  as  much  more  delicate,  fuller,  the  northward  flame
bluer,  but  in  like  manner  mobile  and  flickering,  cool,  weakly  lumin-
ous, sometimes  almost  of  a  beaded  appearance.  It  partook  of  every
little  agitation  of  the  air  in  which  it  was.

400.  I  often  made  the  direction  which  the  flame  took  the  object
of  investigation  with  the  sensitives.  In  place  of  a  number  of  their
statements,  I  will  confine  myself  to  two  examples,  which  include  in
themselves  all  the  rest.  I  placed  a  nine-layer  horse-shoe  upon  a  stool
before  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  with  the  poles  turned  toward  the  south.
She  saw  the  odic  flame  flow  out  of  this  to  about  an  arm's  length,  in
the  dark.  It  first  shot  out  some  distance  horizontally  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  limb  of  the  magnet,  then  rose  in  a  curve  upwards  and

304  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

formed  a  quadrant,  so  that  it  at  length  flowed  vertically  upwards  at
its  point.  The  same  observation  was  made  by  Josephine  Zinkel  on
flames  of  horse-shoes  and  bars.  Thus,  the  odic  flame  is  sent  out
from  the  poles  of  the  magnet  with  a  certain  force,  an  impetus  is
communicated  to  it,  which  drives  it  forth  from  the  poles ;  but,  on  the
other  hand,  a  tendency  is  implanted  in  it  to  ascend  in  the  air,  and  its
material  basis  is  consequently  evidently  lighter  than  atmospheric  air
at  the  earth's  surface.  From  the  composition  of  these  two  forces
there  results  the  ascending  quadrant  curve  of  the  odic  flame.  This
experiment,  however,  is  only  to  be  accomplished  with  very  strong
magnets,  the  flames  of  which  have  considerable  length ;  otherwise,
in  short  flames,  all  observers  see  the  polar  flames  only  in  the  straight
direction,  forming  a  prolongation  of  the  limb  of  the  magnet.  From
the  multiplicity  of  directions  toward  the  various  points  of  the  com-
pass which  may  be  given  to  the  magnet,  and  the  various  inclinations
toward  the  horizon  into  which  it  may  be  brought,  result  complex
enlargements  and  diminutions  of  the  odic  flame,  according  as
these  directions  are  conformable  or  unconformable  to  the  normal
position.

401.  I  here  note  a  series  of  experiments  with  several  sensitives,  for
the  purpose  of  investigating  the  reciprocal  effect  which  different
magnetic  odic  flames  could  exert  upon  each  other  when  brought  in
contact.  This  might  afford  further  conclusions  respecting  the  rela-
tions of  magnetism  to  the  odic  flame.  We  regard  positive  and  neg-
ative magnetism  as  endowed  with  an  active  tendency  to  attract  each
other,  and  then  by  a  mutual  confluence  to  neutralize  one  another.
But  when  we  consider  the  curved  ascent  mentioned  in  the  last  para-
graph, and  place  in  the  scale  the  phenomena  of  the  odic  flame  related
in  §  392,  where  it  occurred  unconformably  to  the  inclination,  it
seems  that  no  such  reciprocal  attraction  dwells  in  the  odic  flames  ;
we  meet  with  distinctions  between  the  two  in  their  special  manifesta-
tions. To  the  valetudinarian  Miss  von  Weigelsberg,  Miss  Winter,  and
Madame  Johanne  Anschütz  ;  also  to  her  healthy  relatives,  Miss  Er-
nestine and  M.  Gustav.  Anschütz,  M.  Delhez,  Madame  Josephine
Fenzl,  Madame  von  Peichich,  M.  Hochstetter,  Dr.  Nied,  and  the
Baroness  von  Augustin,  I  exhibited  two  magnetic  bars  in  the  dark-
ened chamber,  each  four  inches  long,  holding  them  in  the  -magnetic
parallel  horizontally,  with  the  unlike  poles  held  toward  each  other,
at  the  distance  of  twice  the  length  of  the  bars  apart.  At  the  same
time  I  observed  the  indispensable  precaution  of  holding  the  bars  in
such  a  manner  that  my  right  hand  enclosed  a  southward  pole,  while
the  north  pole  belonging  to  it  projected  out ;  on  the  other  side  a
northward  pole  was  enclosed  in  my  left  hand,  while  the  south  pole

ODIC  FLAME  ON"  STEEL  MAGNETS.  305

belonging  to  it  was  outward,  the  reason  of  which  will  shortly  be  evi-
dent. All  these  witnesses  saw  the  originally  small  odic  flames  of
both  bars  become  more  slender,  and  increase  in  length,  as  soon  as  the
bars  were  brought  near  together  in  the  above  direction,  as  if  they
were  striving  to  reach  one  another.  When  I  brought  the  bars  really
nearer  together,  the  flames  weut  back  to  their  original  shorter,  thicker
size,  which  increased  still  more  and  more  the  nearer  I  approximated
the  poles.  The  intensity  of  the  light  increased  at  the  same  time.
When  I  joined  the  magnetically  attracting  poles,  both  flames  in  great
part  disappeared,  but  they  immediately  became  stronger  on  the  op-
posite poles,  and  now  attained  double  the  size  that  they  had  before.
Dr.  Isied  and  M.  Hochstetter  added,  that  the  thickness  of  the  odic
flames  much  exceeded  that  of  the  steel  when  the  poles  came  near,
and  that  their  brightness  was  greatest  when  the  ends  of  the  bars
were  closest  together.  Miss  Reichel  saw  these  phenomena  better  and
more  distinctly.  In  1844,  I  placed  two  little  magnetic  bars,  of  al-
most equal  length,  in  her  hands,  led  her  into  the  dark,  and  made  her
hold  the  unlike  poles  of  both  bars  in  a  straight  line,  bringing  them
from  a  distance  nearer  together.  Even  at  the  distance  of  three  times
their  length,  she  saw  the  flames  between  the  poles  pointing  to  one
another,  acquire  a  greater*  size  than  those  of  the  two  outer  poles
turned  away  ;  they  became  narrower,  longer,  thinner,  and  stretched
out  toward  each  other,  as  if  trying  to  reach  one  auother.  On  her
then  bringing  the  magnets  nearer  together,  these  inner  flames  in-
creased in  size  at  the  expense  of  the  outer,  and  just  in  proportion  to
the  approximation.  But  when,  by  the  increasing  approximation,  the
flames  at  length  met,  they  did  not  neutralize  one  another  ;  they  in-
creased in  thickness  while  they  lost  length  by  the  approach  of  the
poles  emitting  them.  At  the  opposite  external  poles  they  shrank  up
to  a  very  weak  and  dull  flame.  Finally,  when  the  friendly  poles  be-
came joined,  the  middle  flame  was  almost  entirely  extinguished,  but
at  the  outer  pole  of  each  bar  there  immediately  arose  an  odic  flame
far  larger  than  had  existed  on  either  of  the  separate  bars  :  the  two
bars  were  now  converted  into  a  single  one  twice  as  large,  and  this
emitted  flames  twice  as  long  from  both  poles.  Thus  the  odic  flame
increased  in  equal  measure  with  the  growing  strength  of  the  magnet-
ism, both  in  the  approaching  poles,  and,  after  their  union,  in  those
turned  away.  Prof.  Endlicher  saw  the  flames  of  both  bars,  when
held  at  some  distance  apart,  increase  rather  in  length,  but  on  approx-
imation to  within  two-fifths  of  an  inch  contract  into  a  disk  around
their  poles  ;  then,  on  actual  contact  of  the  poles,  disappear.  M.
Pauer  observed  the  same  experiment.  He  saw  the  two  polar  flames
when  I  had  brought  the  poles  within  two  inches  of  each  other.    They

306  ODIO  PLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

increased  in  size  up  to  the  contact  of  the  poles.  Then  the  light  sank
considerably  in  intensity, — not,  however,  disappearing  entirely  ;  but
the  two  touching  steel  poles  now  appeared  enclosed  in  vaporous
halos  of  light,  each  about  four-fifths  of  an  inch  long.  Madame  von
Varaday  observed  the  same.  Wilhelmine  Glaser  perceived  the  same
phenomena,  and  added  to  the  account,  that  she  saw  the  thickening
and  mutual  repression  of  the  polar  flames  increase  so  much  just  be-
fore the  actual  contact  of  the  two  magnet  poles,  that  she  perceived  a
partial  introversion  of  the  magnetic  flames.  This  description  of  the
process  was  made  still  more  complete  by  the  experiments  which  I
made  in  this  direction,  in  1845,  on  Misses  Sophia  Pauer  and  Atz-
mannsdorfer,  and  in  1846  with  Madame  Kienesberger  and  Friedrick
"Wiegand.  In  each  case  I  used  the  same  small  magnetic  bars,  and
carried  out  the  experiments  in  the  darkened  chamber,  the  beholder
sitting  with  the  back  to  the  north,  holding  the  bars  horizontally  in
the  magnetic  parallel.  The  phenomena  presented  themselves  all  in
the  same  order,  and  of  the  same  kind  as  above  given ;  first,  at  a  dis-
tance, elongation  and  attenuation  of  the  approximated  odic  flames,  as
though  they  were  exerting  an  active  endeavor  to  reach  one  another.
But  this  meeting  did  not  come  to  pass  when  the  flames  came  near
enough,  for  a  return  to  the  original  shape  now  occurred  :  with  the
increasing  approximation,  this  thickness  became  greater  and  greater
at  the  cost  of  the  continually  diminishing  length,  and  when  the
flames  should  actually  have  met,  they  were  so  far  from  exhibiting  any
desire  to  join,  that  they  exerted  mutual  repulsion,  drove  one  another
back,  and  became  continually  shorter  and  more  repressed.  They  be-
haved as  if  seized  with  a  mutual  fear,  became  accumulated  around
their  own  poles,  like  the  flame  of  a  candle  blown  upon  gently  from
above ;  and  when,  at  the  distance  of  only  a  few  lines  apart,  each
flame  formed  a  kind  of  broad  flattened  coil  around  its  pole,  distinctly
repulsed  by  the  odic  flame  standing  opposite  to,  and  pressing  upon
it.  This  repression  went  so  far  that,  when  only  two  twenty-fifths  of
an  inch  interspace  existed  between  the  poles  of  the  two  bars,  both
flames  appeared  thrown  backioards  upon  their  own  poles,  and,  to  a
certain  extent,  introverted  around  it.  This  took  place  in  particular
sooner  with  the  flames  of  the  corners  than  with  the  flames  of  the
middle  of  the  ends  of  the  poles,  which  were  compressed  into  a  sort
of  disk  around  the  poles,  at  length  applied  one  upon  the  other.
When  the  poles  came  at  length  into  contact,  and  became  attached,
this  state  of  things  continued  for  two  or  three  seconds,  decreasing  in
such  a  manner  that  the  curved  flames  appeared  to  become  gradually
shorter  until  they  were  extinguished.  But  this  extinction  was  not
actual,  being  only  a  decrease  of  intensity  of  the  light  of  the  odic

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  307

flames :  careful  observers,  M.  Pauer,  like  bis  daughter  Sopbie,  and
Madame  Kienesberger,  detected  its  persistence  in  a  weaker  condition,
enveloping  the  joined  magnet  poles.  In  tbe  meanwhile  the  flames
of  the  two  opposite  ends  of  the  bars  became  so  much  the  stronger,
and  doubled  their  size.

402.  I  used  magnetic  bars  twice  tbe  length  with  Madame  Csecilie
Bauer.  She  saw  the  positive  red  pole  and  the  negative  blue  pole
flaming  beautifully,  the  former  two,  tbe  latter  four  inches  long.  As
I  brought  the  friendly  poles  of  the  rods  nearer  together,  with  the
hands  properly  selected,  in  the  parallels,  the  flames  stretched  out  to-
ward each  other,  became  thickened  and  expanded  as  I  approached
them  nearer,  then  were  introverted  in  some  degree  around  their  poles,
and,  when  1  had  completed  the  union,  the  introversion  vanished,  and
was  succeeded  by  envelopment  of  the  poles  lying  against  each  other
in  the  opposed  odic  flames.

403.  When,  however,  the  similar,  thus  hostile  poles,  were  approxi-
mated in  the  same  way  in  the  dark,  especially  the  two  negative,  the
original  elongation  and  attenuation  did  not  occur;  but,  where  the
poles  came  near  together,  the  flames,  if  the  magnets  were  strong,
were  drawn  back,  and  finally  introverted  around  their  own  poles  in
the  same  way  as  with  the  unlike  poles.  But  if  they  were  of  unequal
strength,  the  stronger  flame  of  the  larger  magnet  drove  back  the
weaker  one  of  the  smaller  sooner,  heaped  it  up  against  its  pole,  when
it  expanded  in  the  form  of  a  disk  or  little  wheel,  the  plane  of  which
was  at  right  angles  to  tbe  axis  of  the  magnet.  One  of  the  beholders,
Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  compared  this  phenomenon  also,  among  other
things,  wTith  the  experiment  of  blowing  down  upon  the  flame  of  a
candle,  so  as  to  drive  it  down  upon  its  wick,  where  it  is  also  com-
pelled to  expand  sideways  by  the  current  of  air  opposing  the  draught
of  the  flame.

404.  These  experiments  were  carried  through  the  most  varied
modifications  with  the  healthy  Madame  Csecilie  Bauer  and  Josephine
Zinkel,  and  the  results  are  shown  most  clearly  here.  In  the  first  ex-
periments with  the  latter,  when  her  power  of  vision  was  not  particu-
larly strong,  she  did  not  perceive  any  distinct  flame  on  the  little
magnetic  bars  in  the  dark,  but  only  a  luminous  mist  or  smoke.  But
these  went  through  the  same  course  as  the  others  had  seen  the  flames
do  ;  elongation  of  the  smoke  at  a  distance,  with  apparent  endeavor
to  reach  and  blend  with  one  another,  non-efiectuatiou  of  this  when
sufficiently  close  but  expansive  in  thickness,  then  repression  and  di-
vision through  introversion  around  their  own  poles  ;  finally,  on  con-
tact of  the  poles  of  the  magnets,  a  slow  disappearance  of  the  lumin-
ous smoke  and  a  doubling  of  it  at  the  opposite  free  poles.    In  another

308  ODIO  PLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

experiment  I  made  use  of  the  epoch  of  her  menstruation,  when  she
saw  incomparably  better  in  the  dark,  and  I  applied  two  small  mag-
netic bars,  one  of  which  was  rather  larger  and  stronger  than  the
other.  The  arrangement  was  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  cases.  I
extract  the  passages  relating  to  this  from  my  journal :  "  Zinkel,  ex-
periment No.  453. — a.  The  two  southward  poles  approximated,  the
flame  of  the  smaller-  bar  disappeared  almost  entirely  from  her  per-
ception ;  that  on  the  larger  became  weaker,  and  what  remained  was
introverted  around  its  pole.  b.  The  two'  northward  poles  approxi-
mated, both  became  introverted,  c.  Friendly  poles  approximated,
the  northward  pole  of  the  larger  bar  being  brought  to  the  southward
pole  of  the  smaller  ;  the  flame  of  the  smaller  southward  pole  was  ex-
tinguished, that  of  the  larger  northward  pole  weakened  and  intro-
verted, d.  The  same,  only  the  northward  pole  of  the  smaller  bar
approximated  to  the  southward  pole  of  the  larger ;  both  flames  ex-
tinguished on  contact  of  the  poles.  Thus  the  stronger  pole  always
overcame  the  weaker,  and  the  remnant  of  odic  flame  became  intro-
verted. But  the  southward  pole  is  always  weaker  in  proportion  than
the  northward."  In  these  experiments  the  weakly  luminous  envel-
ope, or  flame  remaining,  escaped  observation.

404.  b.  In  some  later  experiments  with  her  the  phenomena  were
more  distinct ;  and  in  one  the  results  accorded  exactly  with  Madame
Bauer.     With  bars  eight  inches  long —

a.  Similar  poles  first  mutually  repelled  the  odic  flames,  but  on
contact  of  the  steel  both  were  totally  extinguished.

b.  Unlike  poles  at  first  attracted  each  other  at  a  distance,  their
flames  becoming  elongated,  but  on  approximation  they  were  con-
tracted, thickened,  and  at  length  so  much  so  that  the  introversion  on
both  sides  fo'lowed.

c.  When  the  contact  of  the  poles  of  the  magnets  was  completed
the  introversion  disappeared,  and  the  odic  flames  of  the  two  opposite
poles  became  perfectly  immersed  in  each  other.

d.  This  immersion  was  much  deeper  than  the  introversion,  indeed
five  or  six  times  as  deep.  An  introversion  of  l-25th  of  an  inch  in
depth  was  followed,  on  contact  of  the  steel,  by  an  immersion,  in
which  the  blue  was  one-fifth  of  an  inch  long,  the  red  shorter,  but
more  than  half  the  length.

e.  The  intensity  of  light  of  the  luminous  envelope  producing  the
immersion  was  so  strong  that  the  odic  incandescence  of  the  bars  could
not  be  seen  through  it ;  the  observers  saw  nothing  of  the  steel  bars
at  the  part  where  they  were  encircled  by  the  envelope  of  flame,  and
first  perceived  their  ends  again  when  they  were  drawn  out  of  it ;  this

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  309

surrounded   them  as  a  dense  luminous  cloud,  involving  the  bar  to
such  an  extent  as  to  render  it  invisible.

/.  So  long  as  I  made  the  experiments  in  the  parallels,  the  girl
Zinkel  perceived  the  introversion  of  the  red  flame  only  ;  that  of  the
blue  she  was  uncertain  of.  But  when  I  brought  the  bars  into  the
meridian,  conformably,  the  intensity  of  the  light  was  exalted,  and  the
blue  flame  also  now  became  visible.

g.  Approximation. of  the  poles  of  smaller  magnetic  bars,  of  four
inches  length  but  of  greater  magnetic  intensity,  brought  together  in
the  parallels  with  unlike  poles,  gave  proportionately  greater  enlarge-
ment in  space  of  the  blue  polar  flame  than  of  the  red  ;  on  the  other
hand,  the  red  polar  flame  acquired  greater  intensity  of  light  than  the
blue.  Thus  the  light  did  not  increase  to  any  great  extent  in  the  one,
nor  did  the  size  in  the  other.

405.  I  also  traced  this  subject  with  horse-shoe  magnets  on  various
sensitives.  M.  Hochstetter  observed,  in  the  darkened  chamber,  the
gradual  approximation  of  a  three  and  a  five-layered  horse-shoe.  At
some  distance  he  perceived  the  elongated ;  when  they  came  near,  the
abbreviated,  repulsed,  thickened  flames,  much  thicker  than  the  limb
itself  of  the  magnet ;  when  the  poles  were  joined,  the  flames  van-
ished from  his  sight,  which  had  only  a  moderate  degree  of  sensibility
to  odic  light.  With  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  all  these  observations  were
repeated  with  greater  clearness  and  more  circumstantiality  ;  she  saw
the  odic  flames  introverted  around  the  poles,  become  converted,  on
the  union  of  these,  into  an  envelope  of  the  intermingled  flames  of  the
adjoining  poles.  I  went  most  carefully  to  work  with  Josephine
Zinkel.  I  laid  two  five-layer  magnets  upon  a  table,  in  the  meridian,
the  four  unlike  poles  directed  toward  each  other.  I  will  here  give  a
full  account  of  the  whole  process,  in  all  its  parts,  for  the  sake  of  sum-
ming up  the  results.

a.  At  a  distance  of  two  feet  between  the  poles,  the  beholder  saw
the  northward  poles  of  both  magnets  in  a  blue,  the  southward  in  a
red  light ;  those  lying  conformably  clearer  than  the  unconformable,
and  the  limbs  odically  incandescent  as  well  as  flaming ;  the  blue  ne-
gative emitted  horizontal  streams  almost  eight  inches  long  over  the
table  ;  the  red  positive  about  six  inches  long.  b.  The  flames  of  the
two  magnets  did  not  meet  at  first ;  in  the  interspace  between  them
she  saw  a  luminous  smoke  rising  up  to  a  height  of  about  two  inches,
and  then  vanishing,  c.  A  light  was  diffused  some  distance  round
upon  the  table,  some  twelve  or  sixteen  inches  on  every  side,  and  the
luminosity  rose  upwards  above  the  table,  so  that  the  poles  of  the
horse-shoe  appeared  to  be  surrounded  with  a  glory,  d.  The  limbs
were  wholly  covered  with  luminous  flame  as  far  as  the  curvatures  ;

310  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

reddish  upon  the  southward  limbs  ;  bluish  on  the  northward.
e.  When  the  poles  were  moved  far  enough  apart,  the  unilluminated
interspace  appeared  grey  in  the  dark  ;  but  when  the  smoke  of  the
two  horse-shoes  met,  a  transverse  bright  streak,  produced  by  this,
became  visible  upon  the  table,  f.  When  I  moved  both  horse-shoes
to  a  distance  of  sixteen  inches,  the  lights  of  the  two  streams  of  flame
met  upon  the  surface  of  the  table ;  the  now  united  smokes  ascended
a  hand's  breadth  and  a  span  high.  g.  Brought  to  twelve  inches  dis-
tance, the  opposite  flames  met,  acted  upon  each  other,  and  began  to
grow  thicker.  h.  Approximated  to  eight  inches,  the  flames  came
more  strongly  together,  rose  up  more  from  the  table,  on  account  of
becoming  thicker,  to  a  height  of  about  two  inches  and  a  half,  and  lu-
minous smoke  ascended  six  inches  high  over  them.  i.  On  approxi-
mation to  four  inches,  the  odic  flames  grew  thicker  and  rose  continu-
ally higher  above  the  table,  especially  that  of  the  northward  pole  ;
the  smoke  went  on  increasing  in  height,  k.  At  an  approximation
of  two  inches,  the  phenomenon  of  introversion  of  the  odic  flames
around  their  own  poles  presented  itself,  and  in  such  a  manner  that
it  was  repulsed  and  introverted  about  two  inches  on  the  north  side.
The  smoke  now  no  longer  ascended  in  front  of  the  poles,  but  behind
them,  directed  upward  towards  the  curvature.  I.  When  brought  to
a  distance  of  four-fifths  of  an  inch,  the  introversion  became  so  great,
that  the  inverted  flame  of  each  pole  passed  back  over  the  limb  from
which  it  issued  beyond  the  curvature,  to  a  distance  of  not  less  than
full  four  inches.  The  smoke  now  rose  from  both  horse-shoes  far  be-
hind the  curvatures,  and  indeed  did  not  begin  to  ascend  at  a  less
distance  than  four  inches  from  it.  m.  Finally,  on  actual  contact  of
all  four  magnet-poles,  all  these  introversions  suddenly  vanished,  and
a  complete  immersion  of  the  opposite  polar  flames  succeeded  :  the
mixed  flame  presented  itself.  This  extended  almost  to  the  opposite
curvatures,  and  so  veiled  the  limbs  that  they  could  only  be  seen  with
difficulty.  The  blue  limbs,  which  just  before  were  in  blue  introverted
flames,  were  now  suddenly  deserted  by  them,  and  enveloped  in  red
mixed  flames,  while  the  red  limbs  became  enclosed  in  blue  mixed
flame  :  thus  all  four  changed  their  colors  in  a  moment.  The  curva-
tures of  the  horse-shoes  at  the  same  time  seemed  to  become  more
brightly  incandescent,  and  the  beholder  again  compared  them  to  a
white  translucent  jelly.  The  smoke  had  then  disappeared,  and  was
nowhere  to  be  seen  in  profile.

I  shall  return  to  several  of  these  particular  phenomena,  (which
have  been  touched  upon,  in  part,  under  the  head  of  odic  incandes-
cence,) where  they  necessarily  come  into  their  own  sections  :  they

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  311

are  not  separated  from  each  other  here,  as  I  wished  to  give  a  general
view  of  this  experiment.

406.  When  the  united  poles  of  the  magnets  were  separated  again,
the  somewhat  strange  observation  was  made,  that  the  mixed  flames
did  not  disappear  immediately.  As  I  parted  the  horse-shoes  again
in  the  last  experiment,  the  beholder  saw  the  mixed  flames  still  per-
sist, and  not  vanish  until  they  were  removed  nearly  an  inch  away
from  each  other.  Then  the  smoke  began  to  rise  again,  and  the  curv-
atures became  dimmer.  A  similar  experiment,  with  unlike  horse-
shoe magnets — a  three-layered  and  a  live-layered — gave  the  same  re-
sults with  Josephine  Zinkel ;  the  mixed  flames  persisted  when  I  had
drawn  the  two  poles  about  one-tvventy-fifth  of  an  inch  apart.  This
was  repeated,  even  with  bar  magnets,  which  lay  in  the  meridian.
Both  were  about  two  feet  long,  and  one  inch  square  in  substance.
When  both  lay  with  their  unlike  poles  joined  in  the  meridian,  Jo-
sephine Zinkel  could  not  detect  the  mixed  flames  in  the  dark,  proba-
bly on  account  of  too  little  strength  of  the  magnets,  and  too  weak
intensity  of  odic  light  for  her  power  of  vision  at  that  time.  As  soon,
however,  as  I  had  separated  the  two  bars  only  to  the  distance  of
the  thickness  of  paper,  the  mixed  flames  immediately  became  visi-
ble ;  the  northward  pole  of  the  one  enveloped,  the  southward  pole
of  the  other  blue,  and  vice  versa,  and  to  a  length  of  about  four
inches.

407.  All  this  shows  with  much  probability  that  the  odic  flame  is
a  true  ejection  of  some  kind  of  substance,  which  becomes  odically
accumulated  immediately  upon  the  outer  surface  of  the  magnet  thus
brought  into  a  luminous  condition,  and  then  thrown  out.  When  it
meets  with  obstacles,  it  becomes  diverted  or  repelled.  An  opposite
stream  meeting  it  may  be  an  obstacle  of  this  kind  ;  but  when  the
poles  of  the  two  magnets  are  joined,  the  obstacle  is  removed,  and  the
mixed  flames  result.  The  mixed  flame  is  the  action  of  the  residuum
of  the  magnetism  and  Od  arrested  in  their  course  at  the  poles,  which,
on  account  of  insufficient  contact  of  the  steel  substance,  cannot  be-
come conducted  away  quickly  and  perfectly  enough.  The  path  once
opened,  the  current  may  persist  for  some  time,  from  one  to  another,
even  in  the  opposite  direction,  in  its  channel.  The  nearer  the  oppo-
site poles  remain  to  each  other,  the  more  easily  will  the  current  be
maintained,  and  be  carried  on  from  one  to  the  other  ;  we  have  al-
ready perceived  on  many  occasions  that  they  have  no  continuity.
And  the  better  the  ends  of  the  poles  fit,  the  more  numerous  and  in-
timate are  the  points  of  contact  of  the  two  poles,  so  much  the  more
perfectly  does  the  magnetism  appear  to  be  conducted,  aud  to  be  con-
fined within  its  own  circuit ;  so  much  the  weaker  then  are  the  phe-

312  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

nomena  of  odic  light ;  the  introverted  and  intermingled  flames  then
approach  to  invisibility.  We  shall  hereafter  have  to  examine  similar
phenomena  in  the  odic  light  of  crystals,  and  shall  there  arrive  at  fur-
ther deductions.

408.  When  flames  of  magnetic  bars,  no  matter  whether  positive  or
negative,  pass  over  «ach  crosswise,  quite  close,  nay,  so  as  actually  to
touch,  without,  however,  running  directly  against  each  other,  neither
attraction  nor  repulsion  is  exhibited  by  them.  We  have  seen  the
like  in  the  preceding  experiments  with  the  flames  over  horse-shoe
magnets  ;  they  flowed  side  by  side  from  negative  and  positive  poles,
in  parallel  direction,  without  attracting,  still  less  lifting  up  each  other.
But  when  the  two  flames  did  actually  come  into  opposition,  both
Miss  Reichel  and  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  observed  that  the  stronger
flame  always  carried  away  the  weaker  with  it,  yet  only  when  the
stream  possessed  superior  force.  However,  according  to  a  variety  of
indications  from  the  statements  of  both  observers,  that  odic  flame  al-
ways possesses  the  strongest  propulsion  which  lies  nearest  to  its
source,  that  is,  the  emitting  pole  of  the  magnetic  bar,  and  this  always
carries-  away  with  it  the  "other,  which,  at  the  point  of  crossing,  is
further  removed  from  its  source.  In  these  circumstances,  it  makes
no  difference  which  of  the  flames  is  the  larger :  under  the  given
conditions,  the  flame  of  a  small  magnet  carries  away  that  of  a  larger,
and  rules  its  course.

409.  The  motion  which  is  communicated  to  the  odic  flame  by  blow-
ing upon  it  has  already  been  touched  upon  (Part  I.  §  20.)  Since  that
time  I  have  endeavored  to  establish  it  more  certainly  by  repeated  ex-
periments with  a  great  number  of  persons.  Miss  Sturmann,  in  the
very  earliest  experiments,  remarked  that  draughts  moved  the  flame
backwards  and  forwards.  Miss  Reiche!  amused  herself  during  her
sick  nights,  with  making  the  flames  flicker,  by  waving  her  hand  and
giving  them  all  kinds  of  forms,  by  blowing  upon  them.  Miss  Win-
ter made  the  flames  flare  backward  and  forward  by  blowing  on  them  ;
and  so  also  did  Dr.  Nied.  M.  Hochstetter  blew  them  apart,  strength-
ened, drove  them  about,  and  split  them  up.  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  scat-
tered them  among  each  other  by  blowing  on  them,  and  saw  them  more
luminous  as  long  as  she  continued  to  blow.  In  the  presence  of  Frie-
drich Weidlich,  I  blew  upon  a  horse-shoe  magnet  in  the  dark,  at  a
part  where  I  had  reason  to  expect  the  existence  of  odic  flames  ;  he
told  me  directly  that  they  had  become  interrupted  and. scattered,  but
recovered  themselves  immediately.  The  healthy  joiner  Klaiber  often
moved  the  magnetic  flame  in  my  presence  by  blowing  on  it.  Pro-
fessor Endlicher  saw  the  lights,  which  flowed  to  a  length  of  four
inches  from  the  poles  of  a  five-layer  horse-shoe,  become  brighter  by

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  313

being  blown  upon  ;  when  he  blew  along  the  horse-shoe, — that  is,  in
the  direction  of  the  current  of  flame, — they  both  became  brighter
and  longer  ;  at  the  same  time,  however,  flickering  unsteadily.  M.
Delhez  breathed  upon  the  flames  of  the  nine-layered  horse-shoe,  and
saw  them  become  brighter  and  flare  about.  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl
blew  into  the  flame  of  an  electro-magnet,  and  saw  the  flame  curl
round.  Stephen  Kollar  produced  splitting  up  and  flickerino-  of  the
electro- magnetic  current  of  flame  by  blowing  into  it.  Wilhelmine
Glaser  breathed  upon  a  bar  lying  conformably  parallel  with  its  di-
rection ;  she  saw  the  flame  enlarge,  and  grow  brighter.  Another
time  she  did  this  with  a  nine-layered  magnet,  and  scattered,  enlarged,
and  whirled  about  the  flame.  Josephine  Zinkel  blew  down  upon  the
flame  of  the  nine-layer  horse-shoe,  and  made  it  pass  off  to  all  sides,
directly  she  ceased,  the  flames  gathered  up  and  arranged  themselves
again.  When  she  blew  gently  along  a  bar,  conformably,  she  saw  the
flame  become  brighter  and  larger,  and  spread  out  like  a  jet  of  a  gas-
liglrt,  to  which  she  closely  compared  it.  The  Baroness  von  Augustin
blew  down  along  the  limb  of  a  five-layer  horse-shoe.  She  then  not
only  saw  the  odic  flame  become  considerably  brighter,  and  flare,  but
remarked,  that,  when  she  did  it  in  sudden  puffs,  a  little  piece  of  odic
flame  wa>  detached  every  time  from  the  pole,  and  flew  on  a  little  dis-
tance, independently,  before  it  became  extinguished)  just  as,  in  a
common  tire,  little  portions  of  flame  separate,  and  sweep  upwards  in
the  air  alone  for  a  moment.  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  likewise  observed,
when  she  blew  in  puffs,  that  little  pieces  of  flame  were  sometimes  de-
tached from  their  connection  with  the  steel,  and  swept  on  a  moment
free  in  the  air.  Thus  the  observation  is  confirmed  in  all  quarters,
that  the  odic  flame  may  be  affected,  und  set  in  mechanical  motion,  by
the  breath,  and  the  movement  of  the  air.

410.  This  is  the  proper  place  to  explain  more  clearly  an  observation
which  was  related  in  Part  I,  §  13.  It  is  there  stated,  on  the  infor-
mation of  Miss  Reiche!,  that  the  flame  of  the  common  magnet  was
diverted  by  that  of  an  electro-magnet.  This  was  actually  the  case ;
yet  not  in  a  stationary  condition  of  the  apparatus,  but  during  the  ro-
tation of  the  electro-magnet,  which  I  neglected  to  note  expressly  in
that  place.  By  the  rapid  rotation  is  produced  an  active  draught  of
air  ;  and  it  was  this  which  blew  aside,  and  drove  outwards,  the  horse-
shoe, as  in  the  cases  just  described.  The  fact  remains  the  same  ;  the
interpretation  of  it,  however,  requires  more  accurate  definition  here.*

*  On  this,  as  on  every  occasion,  the  accuracy  of  Miss  Reichel's   statement  is

seen,  even  proving  to  be  right  -when  I  at  first  imagined  them  to  be  incorrect.

And  this  is  that  same  Leopold  ine  Reichel,  whom  her  countrymen,  the  Vienna

physicians,  have  not  been  ashamed  to  describe  publicly  as  a  liar  and  deceiver.

14

314  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

411.  If  we  now  collect  the  observations  from  §  399  to  this  point,
we  obtain,  in  a  variety  of  ways,   confirmation   of  the  frequentJy-ex-

Tliis  Leopoldine  is  a  plain  hut  sensible  and  correct  girl,  belonging  to  a  religious
order,  who,  during  the  three  months  she  resided  in  my  house,  behaved  in  the  most
blameless  manner,  and  so  indeed  as  to  acquire  the  good  will  of  every  one.  There
is  no  easier  way  of  covering  one's  ignorance,  than  briefly  to  dispose  of  every  ab-
struse phenomenon,  which,  from  want  of  knowledge,  cannot  be  understood,  and
from  want  of  skill  in  research  cannot  be  made  out,  with  the  presumptuous  expla-
nation that  it  is  a  deception ;  but  there  is  also  nothing  more  unmanly  and  dis-
honorable— I  must  say  it  straight  out — than  to  misuse  one's  power  in  lightly  and
ignorantly  robbing  a  poor,  sick,  and  defenceless  girl  of  her  only  possession,  her
good  name,  and  to  brand  her  with  the  mark  of  shame.  When  this  accusation  is
an  untruth,  a  flat  calumny,  as  I  will  prove  to  these  gentlemen  by  evidence  from
their  own  account  of  their  lamentable  set  of  investigations,  it  is  most  atrocious,
and  every  honest  heart,  feeling  for  truth  and  duty,  will  join  in  my  indignation
against  such  unworthiness.  I  will  give  them  one  of  these  proofs  at  once  here.  It
is  said  to  be  a  lie,  that  Miss  Reichel  saw  magnetic  light  anywhere.  This  at  once
stamped  my  accounts  on  this  head  with  untruth,  since  they  rested  at  first  in  great
part  on  the  observations  of  this  sensitive  person.  I  now  invite  these  scientific
gentlemen,  of  the  self-styled  committee  of  Vienna  physicians,  to  visit  M.  Pauer
and  his  daughter,  two  persons  whose  good  faith  no  one  in  Vienna  will  venture  to
question,  and  to  ask  them  what  they  saw  in  the  dark,  when  I  placed  a  dozen
different  magnets  before  them  ?  If  this  does  not  suffice,  I  further  invite  them  to
ask  Baron  August,  von  Oberländer,  M.  Nikolas  Rabe,  M.  Gustav.  Anschütz,  M.
Sebastian  Zinkel,  whether  they  saw  flames  over  magnets,  or  not  ?  I  desire  them
to  visit  Baroness  ven  Tessedik,  Madame  Cascilie  Bauer,  Madame  Johanna  Ans-
chütz, Baroness  vco  Natorp,  Madame  Kienesberger,  Miss  Winter,  the  Baroness
von  Augustin,  and  to  hear  what  they  saw  blazing  upon  magnets  in  the  dark  2
Then  they  may  be  so  good  as  to  inquire  of  Prof.  Endlicher,  Messrs.  Kotschy,
Tirka,  von  Rainer,  Fernolendt,  Kollar,  Schuh,  and  Hochstetter,  whether  or  not
they  saw  luminous  phenomena  upon  magnets  ?  I  beg  them  to  compare  with  this
what  they  can  obtain  on  the  same  subject  from  the  mouths  of  Madame  Jos.  Fenzl,
Misses  von  Weigelsberg,  Dörfer,  Glaser,  Weigand,  Zinkel,  Kynast,  the  joiner  Klai-
ber,  Bollman,  &c,  &c,  well  known  persons  living  in  Vienna,  daily  to  be  met  and
spoken  with.  And  if  all  this  prove  insufficient,  I  finally  direct  them  to  one  of
their  own  colleagues  in  Vienna,  Dr.  Nied,  the  physician,  of  whom  they  may  in-
quire about  the  phenomena  which  were  presented  to  him  in  my  darkened  cham-
ber ;  also  of  the  Stockholm  court-physician,  Dr.  Huss.  May  they  obtain  the  truth
they  require  !  If  these  honorable  persons  do  not  all  unanimously  say  that  they
have  seen  extraordinary  luminous  phenomena,  partly  luminous  vapor,  partly  co-
lored flames  of  considerable  size  over  magnets  in  the.  dark,  then  will  I  own  that
Miss  Reichel  never  saw  light,  that  she  is  a  liar  and  deceiver,  and  that  I  have  really
been  fooled  by  her,  and  thus  the  true  though  veiled  purpose  of  these  physicians
will  be  attained.  But  if  the  reverse  happens,  and  the  testimony  of  all  these  per-
sons incontestibly  establishes  the  fact  of  the  magnetic  light,  then  I  beg  these  gen-
tlemen not  to  be  angry  with  me  if  I  say  before  all  the  world  that  they  are  either
miserable  experimenters,  incapable  of  performing  the  simplest  physical  research
with  even  the  appearance  of  accuracy,  or  that  they  must  suffer  the  contempt,
which  is  the  reward  of  unprincipled  conduct,  to  fall  away  from  Leopoldine  Reichel,
and  descend  upon  themselves.  Nature  is  eternal.  After  thousand  millions  of
years  will  the  odic  light  floAV  and  shine  as  it  does  to-day.     But  the  endeavors  to

ODIG  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  315

pressed  hypothesis  that  the  odic  flame  in  itself  is  not  magnetism.  It
does  not  follow  its  laws  of  attraction  and  repulsion,  and  is  of  so  ma-
terial a  nature  that  it  may  be  driven  backward  and  forward  like  a
common  flame  by  movements  of  the  air.  It  rather  manifests  the  cha-
racter of  an  associated  phenomenon  of  magnetism,  which  scarcely  fol-
lows its  current  even  partially  ;  it  resembles  a  projectile  of  it,  which,
•when  thrown  off,  continues  its  own  course  in  the  direction  of  the  im-
pulse which  it  originally  receives,  and  of  obstacles  and  new  impulses
it  meets  in  its  way.

412.  It  appeared  to  me  interesting  to  apply  the  observations  gather-
ed on  the  subject  of  the  odic  incandescence  and  odic  flame,  to  the  com-
mon rubbing  of  steel  magnets.  All  the  lights  here  described  must  in
this  necessarily  come  to  view,  and  be  confirmed  in  various  ways  ;  and
there  seemed  hope  of  deriving  new  information  respecting  the  pro-
cesses of  producing  steel  magnets,  and  of  the  transfer  in  general  of
magnetism  and  Od  from  one  body  to  another.  For  this  purpose  the
following  operations  were  performed  with  Josephine  Zinkel.

413.  I  commenced  with  bar-magnets,  and  then  proceeded  to  horse-
shoes.

The  first  manifestation  of  light  which  was  afforded  to  the  beholder
was,  that  always  when  I  placed  the  rubbing  magnet  perpendicularly
upon  the  rubbed,  the  latter  became  far  more  highly  incandescent  at
the  part  touched.  The  polar  extremity  of  the  rubber  thus  acted
with  its  whole  magnetic  and  odic  force,  so  strongly  upon  the  rubbed
steel  bar,  that  it  made  it  much  more  luminous  where  it  was  in  con-
tact with  it.     Fig.  10  may  render  this  more  clear.     This  luminous

Fig.  16.

overcome  such  a  truth,  when  it  has  once  happily  been  found  and  disclosed,  are  pal-
try and  poor. — Authors  Kote.

Some  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  London  practitioners  of  physic  and  surgery

316  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

phenomenon  occurred  in  every  case,  whether  the  contact  was  made
upon  the  poles,  the  axis,  or  any  other  part  of  the  ruhbed  magnet.
And  since  it  was  also  extinguished  directly  the  rubber  was  taken
away  or  carried  along,  it  was  consequently  found  that  as  the  rubber
was  drawn  along  from  one  pole  to  the  other  of  the  rubbed  magnet,
in  the  usual  pass,  the  bright  patch  also  moved  from  pole  to  pole  «f
the  rubbed  bar,  always  accompanying  the  pole  of  the  rubber  as  it
passed  over  the  rubbed  one.  And  since  the  rubbed  bar,  especially
when  it  lay  in  the  meridian,  as  we  have  seen  above,  (§  338,)  has  blue
odic  incandescence  on  its  northward  half,  and  red  on  its  southward,
the  wandering  patch  of  incandescence  also  appears  with  bluish  light
on  the  former  and  reddish  on  the  latter  half.  With  regard,  therefore,
to  the  action  which  a  rubbing  magnet  exerts  on  a  rubbed  one  in  re-
spect to  odic  incandescence,  this  presents  itself  to  the  eye  as  a  local
action,  which  is  connected  with  the  immediate  presence  of  the  rub-
bing pole,  and  is  not  diffused  over  the  Avhole  extent  of  the  rubbed
bar,  at  least  not  visibly.  Here  there  appears  to  be  a  difference  be-
tween odic  and  pure  magnetic  action,  as  the  latter  is  diffused  over
the  whole  of  the  rubbed  bar  in  every  pass,  and  so  not  only  appears
over  its  totality,  but  remains  attached  to  it.

In  these  experiments  I  used  two  bars,  of  which  the  rubbed  one
was  eighteen  inches  ;  the  rubber,  rather  larger  and  stouter,  twenty-
four  inches  long.  Let  us  now  examine  the  process  of  rubbing,  first
upon  the  rubbed  bar,  then  on  the  rubber  ;  and  in  the  first  place  with
regard  to  the  odic  incandescence,  and  afterwards  to  the  odic  flame.

414.  a. —  Odic  incandescence  of  the  rubbed  bar.  I  laid  a  steel  bar,
which  was  only  weakly  magnetic,  upon  a  table,  in  the  meridian.  It
possessed  weak  odic  incandescence  in  the  dark,  so  that  its  northward
half  seemed  to  have  merely  grey  instead  of  blue  light,  its  south-
ward half  only  whitish  yellow  instead  of  yellowish  red,  both"  opaque
and  dull.

I  laid  the  rubber,  westward  of  the  former,  in  the  parallel,  upon
the  same  table,  and  moved  the  northward  poles  of  both  towards  each
other,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  two  magnets  enclosed  a  right  angle
between  them.  Then  I  began  to  do  exactly  as  one  does  when  wish-
ing to  rub  one  bar  with  the  other,  only  with  the  distinction  that  I
brought  both  bars  into  the  horizontal  position,  while  it  is  usual  to
bring  them  together  in  a  vertical  plane,  which  might  not  be  exactly
the  same  thing  in  the  essentials  of  the  matter.

The  behavior  was  as  follows  :

have  great  need  for  lessons  like  the  above  to  be  read  to  them.  Charlatanism  in
professions,  like  cowardice  in  rank  and  file,  shelters  its  dishonor  in  the  fellow-feel-
ing of  numbers.

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  317

a.  First,  on  contact  of  the  two  negative  poles,  the  northward  pole
of  the  rubbed  bar  appeared  blue  odically  incandescent  over  half  its
length  toward  the  south  ;  the  southern,  somewhat  shorter  half,  red
iucan  descent.

b.  When  the  rubber  had  been  moved  a  quarter  of  the  length  along
the  rubbed  bar,  the  same  condition  appeared,  but  now  almost  three-
fifths  of  its  northern  part  were  blue,  and  only  two-fifths  remained
red  at  the  south.

c.  When  the  rubber  reached  the  middle,  the  blue  incandescence
had  grown  to  three-fourths  of  the  rubbed  bar  ;  in  another  experi-
ment, however,  in  which  the  latter  already  possessed  some  magnetic
strength  from  former  passes,  the  blue  northern  incandescence  termi-
nated at  the  middle  and  the  red,  the  southward  began  thence.

d.  The  rubber,  advanced  three-fourths,  now  reached  the  red  odic
incandescence  of  the  rubbed.

e.  The  rubber  arrived  at  the  southern  end,  the  blue  appeared  to
have  become  shorter,  and  carried  back  one  half  of  the  length  of  the
rubbed  bar,  and  the  red  increased  at  the  other  end.  The  red  had
now  grown  much  more  luminous  and  intense.

415.  b. —  Odic  flame  of  the  rubbed  bar  ;  and  first,  the

1.  Blue  northward  flame,  which  was  originally  weak,  and  only  two
inches  long.

a.  When  the  northward  poles  of  the  rubber  and  rubbed  were
brought  into  contact,  this  blue  flame  vanished  entirely.

b.  When  the  rubber  had  advanced  only  two-fifths  of  an  inch  along
the  rubbed  bar,  the  blue  flame  again  made  its  appearance  on  the  lat-
ter, at  first  only  two  fifths  of  an  inch  long.

c.  The  rubber  advanced  one-quarter  ;  the  blue  had  increased  to
about  an  inch  and  a  half  long.

d.  The  rubber  in  the  middle :  it  had  elongated  to  nearly  two
inches  and  a  half.

e.  The  rubber  advanced  three-fifths  :  it  had  risen  to  three  inches.
/.  The  rubber  arrived  at  the  southward  extremity  of  the  rubbed

bar  :  the  blue  flame  of  the  northward  end  attained  its  maximum,
namely,  five  inches.

2.  Now  the  red  southward  flame,  which  originally  was  only  about
an  inch  and  a  quarter  long.

a.  When  the  northward  poles  of  the  rubber  and  rubbed  were
brought  together,  the  size  reached  three  inches,  which  was  its
maximum.

b.  The  rubber  arrived  at  one-fourth  the  length  of  the  rubbed  bar  :
the  red  flame  appeared  only  two  inches  long.

c.  The   rubber,  advancing  from  north  to  south,  and  arrived  at  the

318

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

middle  of  the  rubbed  bar ;  the   red  flame  had  diminished  to  a  little
more  than  one  inch.

d.  The  rubber  advanced  to  three-fourths  :  the  red  flame  diminished
to  four-fifths  of  an  inch.

e.  The  rubber  at  the  southward  pole  of  the  rubbed  bar :  all  red
color  had  disappeared.

The  course  of  development  in  the  red  southward  flame  was  thus
exactly  opposed  to  that  of  the  blue  northward  flame.

We  now  pass  to  the  rubber.
416.  c. —  Odic  incandescence  of  the  rubber.  As  it  lay  originally,
and  before  the  contact  with  the  rubbed  bar,  in  the  magnetic  parallel,
it  was  bluish  incandescent  in  its  negative  northward  half,  and  reddish
in  its  positive  southward  half;  the  two  halves  were  about  equal
in  size.

a.  When  the  northward  poles  of  the  two  bars  (as  above  stated,
forming  a  right  angle  in  the  horizontal  plane,  since  the  rubbed  bar
lay  in  the  meridian)  were  brought  in  contact,  there  appeared  at  the
point  of  contact  of  the  rubber,  which  was  originally  blue,  a  small
patch  of  red  about  four-fifths  of  an  inch  long  ;  further  up  it  was  blue
incandescent  for  about  six  inches ;  then  followed  a  length  of  two
inches  of  grey, — that  is,  a  weak  indifferent  point, — and  beyond  this
a  red  incandescent  tract,  which  occupied  all  the  rest  of  the  bar  ;
therefore  about  seventeen  inches.  It  is  striking,  and  worthy  of  note,
that  in  this,  the  stronger  of  the  two  magnets,  the  odic  polarity  was
nevertheless  reversed  at  its  northward  pole  a  certain,  although  but  a
short,  distance  from  the  rubbed  bar,  and  blue  changed  into  red,  so
that  a  series  of  patches  or  zones  appeared  upon  the  rubber ;  its
northward  polarity  was  thus  enclosed  between  two  southward  polari-
ties. There  was  consequently  the  commencement  of  a  triple  condi-
tion in  the  rubber.

b.  As  soon  as  the  rubber  had  advanced  but  about  two-thirds  of  its
own  diameter,  that  is,  about  two  thirds  of  an  inch,  along  the  rubbed
bar,  so  that  it  was  no  longer  applied  against  it  as  in  Fig.  17,  but  as

Fig.  17.  Fig.  18.

in  Fig.  18,  the  red  terminal  spot  had  disappeared  from  the  rubber,

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  319

but  at  the  same  time  a  blue  coating,  of  the  diameter  of  the  rubbed
bar,  was  funned,  which  then,  with  the  further  advance  of  the  rubber,
grew  up  into  the  little  blue  flame  of  13  a,  and  then  into  a  larger  flame.
As  soon  as  this  terminal  red  spot  disappeared,  the  rubber  was  only-
divided  into  two  fields  of  odic  incandescence  ;  the  blue  one  of  its
northward  half,  and  the  red  of  its  southward.

c.  Advanced  to  a  quarter  of  the  rubbed  bar :  the  blue  part  of  the
rubber  amounted  to  two-fifths,  the  red  to  three-fifths  of  its  length.

d.  Brought  to  the  middle  :  the  blue  amounted  to  somewhat  more,
c.   Carried  three-fourths  of  the   distance  over  the  rubbed  bar  :  the

blue  share  made  three-fourths,  the  red  only  one-fourth  of  its  length.

417.  d. —  Odic  flame  of  the  rubber.

Its  blue  northward  flame,  originally  four  inches  long,  was  extin-
guished by  the  contact  with  the  rubbed  bar,  over  which  this  pole
passed  :  we  have  therefore  only  to  examine  its  southward  flame,  the
red  one.  In  all  these  experiments  it  lay  as  has  been  stated  in  the
parallels,  its  southward  pole  turned  toward  the  west.

a.  The  two  northward  poles  being  brought  together,  the  south-
ward flame  of  the  rubber  appeared  three  inches  long.

b.  The  rubber  advanced  to  one-fourth  of  the  rubbed  bar  :  the  red
flame,  was  shortened  and  brought  to  two  inches.

c.  When  the  rubber  arrived  at  the  middle,  it  bore  a  flame  only  an
inch  and  a  quarter  long.

d.  When  the  rubber  had  passed  over  three-fourths,  its  flame  rap-
idly increased  in  strength  again,  and  rose  to  three  inches.

e.  When  the  rubber  had  reached  the  southward  pole  of  the  rubbed
bar,  its  terminal  red  flame  attained  its  maximum  ;  namely,  a  length
of  nearly  four  inches.

When  1  now  made  a  movement  with  the  rubber  out  of  the  paral-
lel, into  the  meridian  of  the  rubbed  bar,  and  brought  it  into  straight
line  with  it — the  north  pole  of  the  rubber  in  contact  with  the.  south
pole  of  the  rubbed  bar,  so  that  the  latter  was  made  to  have  twice  the
length — both  the  northward  flame  of  the  latter,  and  the  southward
of  the  former,  increased  to  double  their  original  length  ;  in  accordance
with  experiments  and  laws  already  unfolded  (§  401).  These  laws
will  be  seen  to  declare  themselves  in  all  places  throughout  the  whole
scries  of  these  paragraphs.

418.  A  further  application  of  these  occurs  in  the  preparation  of
horse-shoe  mar/nets  by  rubbing  ;  to  which  we  now  come.  I  used  as
rubber  a  strong  five-layered  horse-shoe,  and,  as  the  rubbed,  a
one-layered  horse-shoe,  which  had  in  great  part  lost  its  magnet-
ism. The  manner  in  which  I  proceeded  consisted  simply  in  this  :
I   laid   the   five-layered    rubber   upon   the   table   in   such  a  manner

820  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

that  both  its  poles  projected  over  the  edge,  and  its  curvature  was
turned  toward  the  middle  of  the  table.  The  horse-shoe  was  heavy
enough  to  remain  motionless  in  this  position  during  the  passes,  and
so  strong  that  it  held  the  single-layer-rubbed  magnet  fast  in  any  po-
sition ;  this  was  applied  to  its  poles.  I  held  the  single  horse-shoe
vertical,  with  the  curvature  constantly  directed  downwards,  and  the
poles  upwards.  The  single  magnet  had  originally  and  independently
in  the  dark  (that  is,  to  the  sight  at  that  time  of  Josephine  Zinkel),  a
little  blue  flame  of  about  two-fifths  of  an  inch  high  on  its  northward
pole,  but  only  a  reddish  smoke  on  the  southward.  The  five-layered
horse-shoe  had  a  northward  flame  a  hand's  length,  and  a  southward
a  finger's  length.  Both  steel  magnets  were  luminous,  on  the  one
side  with  bluish,  on  the  other  with  yellowish-red  odic  incandescence  ;
the  smaller  duller,  the  larger  incomparably  more  vivid.  This  incan-
descence was  almost  imperceptible  at  the  curvature,  and  increased
continually  to  its  greatest  intensity  at  the  poles.

I  began  with  applying  the  curvature  of-  the  single  magnet  to  the
two  poles  of  the  five-layered,  friendly,  unlike  poles  upon  each  other ;
it  was  immediately  held  fast  in  the  upright  position.  The  result
was,,  that

419.  a. — The  odic  incandescence  of  the  rubbed  magnet  (the  single
horse-shoe)  appeared  in  greater  brightness  at  the  curvature  (a),  dis-
tinctly separated  into  two  halves,  into  a  red  and  a  blue,  the  first  lying
on  the  negative,  the  second  on  the  positive  pole  of  the  rubber ;  that,
moreover,  both  the  limbs  of  the  rubbed  magnet  at  the  -same  time
came  into  stronger  incandescence,  and  of  the  same  colors  in  the  said
sides,  but  with  increased  strength  of  luminosity.  When  I  now  drew
the  single  magnet  down  upon  the  rubber,  till  poles  were  applied  to
poles,  the  incandescence  of  the  curvature  increased  in  both  colors,
which  met  in  the  middle,  and  passed  into  each  other  :  on  the  other
hand,  the  incandescent  light  was  weakened  on  both  limbs,  became
duller  and  greyer ;  but  all  this  did  not  alter  the  colors  of  the  odic
incandescence  ;  the  northward  limb  of  the  rubbed  magnet  always  re-
mained blue,  the  southward  limb  red.  The  odic  quality  thus  re-
mained equally  negative  in  all  these  cases — namely,  first,  when  the
single  magnet  was  free ;  secondly,  when  its  curvature  was  applied  to
the  five-layered,  north  to  south;  and  thirdly,  when  pole  was  applied
to  pole  in  like  manner.  But  the  quantitative  distribution  of  Od  and
magnetism  did  not  remain  the  same.

420.  b. —  The  odic  flame  of  the  rubbed  (single  horse-shoe).  When
the  curvature  of  this  was  applied  to  the  five-layered,  and  it  thus
closed  it  like  an  armature,  the  little  blue  flame  of  its  northward  pole,
which  had  been  only  two-fifths  of  an  inch  high,  rapidly  grow  to  five
inches  long,  and  the  reddish  smoke  of  its  southward  pole  simultane-

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  321

ously  changed  into  a  red  flame,  one  to  one  and  three-quarters  of  an
inch  long,  with  dense  yellowish-grey  smoke  above  it.  In  the  suc-
ceeding experiments,  in  which  the  single  horse-shoe  had  become
magnetically  charged  by  the  rubbing,  and  its  independent  odic  flame
was  two  and  a  half  inches  long,  this  rose  on  the  application  of  the
curvature  to  the  rubber  to  nearly  rive  inches  on  the  blue  side,  and
then  to  two  and  a  half  on  the  red.

When  I  now  drew  the  rubbed  single  magnet  slowly  down  the  rub-
bing live-layered,  its  polar  flames  were  gradually  diminished  ;  that
on  the  southward  pole  soon  vanished,  that  on  the  northward  decreased,
and  became  duller,  while  the  curvature  began  to  get  brighter.  When
the  poles  of  both  magnets  were  applied  together,  all  the  flames  were
extinguished.

In  these  processes,  in  whichever  of  their  different  phases  they  might
be  examined,  whatever  part  of  the  rubbed  magnet  was  applied  to  the
poles  of  the  rubber,  every  part  of  each  limb  retained  its  color.  The
halves  of  the  curvature,  the  limbs  above  and  below  the  part  rubbed,
the  odic  flames  over  the  poles,  the  sparks,  streaks,  and  fiery  mist
around  the  limbs,  all  without  exception  remained  blue  on  the  one,
red  on  the  other  limb,  during  the  whole  procedure.  In  no  case  did
polar  quality,  but  only  the  intensity  of  the  light — that  is,  the  odic
quantity — suffer  modification  from  the  rubber.

421.  c. —  Odic  incandescence  of  the  rubber,t\\Q  five-fold  horse-shoe.
As  soon  as  the  curvature  of  the  single  horse-shoe  was  laid  before  it,
and  connected  its  poles,  the  odic  incandescence  was  heightened  in
the  curvature  of  the  five-fold  magnet,  and  became  more  brilliant  ;
but  the  light  of  the  odic  incandescence  of  its  two  limbs — and  still
more  of  its  two  poles — became  weakened  in  proportion,  the  north-
ward limb  grey-blue,  and  the  southward  yellowish-red.  Here,  also,
the  curvature  possessed  both  colors,  which  passed  suddenly  into  each
other  in  the  centre.  When  I  drew  the  rubbed  magnet  slowly  down-
wards, the  two  poles  of  the  rubber  became  gradually  more  incandes-
cent. They  attained  their  greatest  brightness  when  all  the  poles
were  applied  together  ;  but  still  this  did  not  come  up  to  the  bright-
ness of  the  curvature.  The  odic  incandescence  of  the  rubbing  mag-
net thus  took  an  almost  converse  course  from  that  of  the  rubbed,  at
the  same  time  agreeing  with  the  general  rules  already  known.

As  soon  as  I  pulled  off  the  rubbed  magnet  from  the«  poles  of  the
rubber,  the  curvature  and  limbs  of  the  latter  decreased  in  incandes-
cence, but  its  poles  increased  in  luminosity.  No  odic  flame  of  the
rubber  can  here  be  subjected  to  examination;  since,  as  neither  of  its
poles  were  ever  free,  but  always  applied  to  the  rubbed  magnet,  no
odic  flame  existed.

14*

322  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

422.  An  experiment  of  rubbing  horse-shoes  with  their  like  poles
together,  in  the  manner  adopted  with  the  magnetic  bars  mentioned,
at  §  403,  gave  similar  results,  and  served  to  confirm  the  former.  I
laid  the  northward  pole  of  the  single  horse-shoe  oa  the  northward
pole  of  the  five-fold,  one ;  the  southward  poles  in  like  manner  toge-
ther, at  right  angles,  as  before,  and  now  rubbed  from  the  poles  to-
ward the  curvature  :  the  poles  having  been  previously  reversed,  when
the  pass  was  also  reversed,  the  effect  should  coincide  with  the  pre-
ceding one.  The  behavior  of  the  odic  incandescence  here  was  as
follows  : — As  soon  as  the  corners  of  the  like  poles  came  in  contact,  a
little  patch  of  red  odic  incandescence,  only  two-fifths  of  an  inch  long,
appeared  on  the  blue  northward  pole  of  the  rubbed  single  magnet ;
and  on  the  red  southward  pole  of  the  same  a  similar  little  patch  of
blue  odic  incandescence,  likewise  two-fifths  of  an  inch  long.  As  soon
as  I  had  pushed  the  single  magnet  two-fifths  of  an  inch  forward,
these  spots  of  light  both '  vanished,  and  the  northward  pole  became
blue,  the  southward  red,  exactly  in  their  regular  way,  and  they  re-
mained so  during  the  remainder  of  the  passage  of  the  magnet.  These
two  terminal  patches  of  reverse  odic  incandescence  are  the  same  that
we  became  acquainted  with  on  one  side  at  the  negative  poles  of  the
bar  magnet —  a  reversal  of  the  polarity  of  one  pole  by  means  of  the
other  of  like  quality.  The  single  magnet  was  thus  many-poled  at
the  first  moment ;  two-fifths  blue,  then  the  whole  length  of  a  limb
red,  the  other  limb  blue,  and  lastly,  two-fifths  red  at  the  other  ex-
tremity.

423.  The  force  which  prevails  in  these  objects  is  consequently  never
uniformly  distributed ;  not  even  when  the  magnetic  circuit  appears
closed.  The  state  of  continuity,  as  we  have  seen  above  in  the  inter-
mixture of  the  poles  in  the  magnetic  flames,  §  404  to  407,  is  proba-
bly never  perfect ;  and  hence,  leaving  out  of  the  question  the  disturb-
ances of  equilibrium  through  the  influence  of  terrestrial  magnetism,
these  constant  inequalities  in  the  distribution  of  the  force.  New  ex-
amples of  this  are  afforded  by  some  investigations  on  the

424.  Influence  of  the  armature  on  the  phenomena  of  the  odic  flame
of  magnets.  We  have  seen  above,  that  the  armature,  applied  to  the
horse-shoe,  weakens  the  odic  incandescence  of  this,  while  at  the  same
time  it  heightens  that  of  the  curvature.  But  the  odic  flames,  according
to  all  the  sensitives  who  possessed  the  power  of  seeing  these  lights,
were  immediately  extinguished  when  an  armature  was  applied  to  a
horse-shoe ;  observations  particularly  bearing  this  out  are  noticed  in
my  journal  on  experiments,  from  Madame  Kienesberger,  Misses  Win-
ter, Dorfer,  Friedrich  Weidlich,  the  healthy  Josephine  Zinkel,  Ma-

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  323

dame   Josephine   Fenzl,  Baron  von  Oberländer,  Professor  Endlicher,
Baroness  von  Augustin-,  and  others.

425.  When  I  applied  the  armature  to  the  horse-shoe,  low  down,
on  the  curvature,  before  the  first  of  the  above-named  observers,  in
the  darkened  chamber,  this,  as  was  to  1  e  expected,  had  no  particular
influence  upon  the  flames  of  the  poles.  But  as  I  moved  the  arma-
ture slowly  up  along-  the  horse-shoe  toward  the  poles,  keeping  it  al-
ways across  the  limbs,  a  continual  weakening  of  the  odic  flame  of
both  poles  resulted,  these  always  diminishing  until  1  brought  the  ar-
mature to  the  poles,  when  the  flames  were  wholly  extinguished,  and
the  armature  covered  them.  When  I  proceeded  in  the  opposite  di-
rection, that  is,  passing  the  armature  gradually  down  from  the  poles
to  the  curvature,  a  similarly  gradual  restoration  of  the  odic  flames
of  the  poles  resulted.  The  course  was  as  follows  :  as  the  arma-
ture passed  upward,  the  beholder  saw  the  polar  flames  at  first  be-
come duller,  the  blue  became  greyish,  while  the  red  passed  into  a
dull  yellowish  ;  during  this  the  length  of  the  flames  was  gradually
diminished.  When  it  came  to  the  middle  of  the  limb  and  went
above  this,  the  reddish  yellow  of  the  southward  pole  disappeared,
and  now  only  a  reddish  smoke  remained  over  it ;  the  diminished
bluish  northward  flame  was  discolored  quite  into  grey.  When  it
arrived  near  the  poles,  this  was  also  extinguished  and  converted  into
grey  smoke,  and  this  finally  vanished  altogether  when  the  armature
was  applied  upon  the  poles.  In  the  passage  downward,  all  these
phenomena  occurred  in  the  reverse  order  :  at  first  a  grey  smoke  ap-
peared at  the  negative  pole  :  then  followed  grey  flame  ;  next  red
smoke  at  the  positive ;  after  that  the  blue,  and  then  the  red  flame,
at  first  small,  growing  larger :  finally,  when  the  armature  arrived  at
the  curvature,  all  the  original  phenomena  of  the  odic  light  were  fully
represented.  The  odic  incandescence  of  the  horse-shoe  was  originally
very  weak  at  the  curvature,  strong  at  the  poles  ;  but  with  the  re-
moval of  the  armature  upwards,  the  curvature  gradually  became
visible,  and  as  the  poles  were  rendered  more  dull  in  their  incandes-
cence by  the  advance  of  the  armature,  the  incandescence  of  the  curv-
ature was,  step  by  step,  increased,  till  at  last,  when  the  armature
covered  the  poles,  it  almost  equalled  the  limbs  and  poles  in  brightness.

426.  But  the  armature  itself  also  gained  and  lost  odic  incandes-
cence during  this.  When  it  lay  upon  the  curvature  it  was  grey  and
scarcely  visible  ;  when  it  lay  upon  the  pole,  it  had  become  more
strongly  incandescent  and  colored, — on  the  side  turned  toward  the
northward  pole  of  the  horse-shoe  reddish, — on  that  toward  the  south-
ward pole  bluish  ;  at  all  the  intermediate  stages  it  possessed  corres-
ponding transitional  luminosities  :  it  was  itself  converted  into  an  in-

824

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

duced  magnet,  and  bore  the  colors  of  odic  incandescence  regularly
corresponding  to  this.  But  they  were  always  rather  duller  than
those  of  the  inducing  magnet  poles.  These  phenomena  explain  them-
selves, if  we  in  each  case  regard  the  part  of  the  horse-shoe  from  the
curvature  to  the  armature  as  a  piece  cut  off  from  the  whole.  The
larger  this  is,  the  smaller  remains  the  residuum  of  the  limb  ;  the
shorter,  therefore,  will  be  the  polar  flames  remaining  to  it,  and  vice
versa.

427.  I  endeavored  to  test  the  conditions  and  effects  of  the  arma-
ture upon  the  horse-shoe  mac/net  during  the  pass.  This  was  done
with  Josephine  Zinkel,  in  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  experiments
just  now  discussed,  with  a  five-layered  rubber  and  a  single  rubbed
horse-shoe,  when  under  the  above  described  conditions,  (§418,  at  the
end.)  while  the  curvature  of  the  rubbed  magnet  was  attached  to  the
poles  of  the  rubber,  and  this  was  thus  closed  by  it  as  by  an  armature;
the  odic  flames  then  blazed  most  vividly  above  the  poles  of  the  rubbed
magnet.  I  applied  the  armature  to  them ;  it  adhered  firmly,  was
converted  into  an  induced  magnet,  with  strong  odic  incandescence,
the  colors  being  opposed  to  those  of  the  poles  of  the  horse-shoe.  The
limbs  themselves  were  considerably  weakened  in  their  incandescence,
the  negative  blue  became  bluish  grey,  the  positive  red  dullish  yel-
low-red.

4281  When  I  drew  the  rubbed  horse-shoe  down  the  rubber  till
their  poles  met  and  the  armature  was  again  applied  to  the  rubbed
magnet,  as  is  shown  in  fig.  19,  it  in  like  manner  became  firmly  at-

Fig.  19.

tached  and  was  again  converted  into  an  induced  mao-net  with  stronger
odic  incandescence,  but  the  colors  of  the  incandescence  were  now  re-
versed, no  longer  opposed  to  the  colors  of  the  poles  of  the  rubbed

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  S25

horse-shoe,  but  of  the  same  color  as  them,  and  therefore  opposed  to
those  of  the  rubber.  From  this  it  follows  that  the  armature  was  no
longer  within  the  influence  of  the  rubbed  magnet  on  which  it  lay,
but  had  come  under  dominion  of  the  rubber :  and  this  not,  indeed,
immediately,  but  by  means  of  the  little  tract  of  steel  constituting  the
polar  extremities  of  the  rubbed  horse-shoe.  These  must  have  been
first  converted  into  short  induced  magnets,  and  then,  from  these,  was
the  armature  changed  into  an  induction  magnet  of  the  rubber.  Here
all  these  processes  presented  themselves  quite  clearly  to  the  eyes  of
the  sensitive,  which  the  science  that  would  hitherto  make  no  use  of
the  capacities  of  the  sensitive,  could  only  discover  by  tedious  and
uncertain  methods.

429.  The  question  now  presented  itself,  when  and  where  does  this
remarkable  reversal  of  the  poles  in  the  armature  of  the  rubbed  single
horse-shoe  take  place?  To  rind  this  out,  I  closed  the  five-layer  with
the  curvature  of  the  single  horse-shoe,  closed  the  upward  directed
poles  of  the  latter  with  the  armature,  and  drew  it  slowly  down  the
rubber,  allowing  the  sensitives  to  observe  and  describe  the  armature
to  me  from  time  to  time.  When  the  single  horse-shoe  had  passed
down  two-thirds  of  its  length,  so  that  only  one-third  stood  above  the
rubber,  the  armature,  which  when  first  applied  had  been  attracted
very  strongly,  fell  off  of  its  own  accord.  I  applied  it  again,  but
found  that  it  did  not  adhere  in  the  least,  and  the  single  horse-shoe
had  lost  all  attraction  for  it.  This  continued  until  I  had  drawn  down
the  single  horse-shoe  three-fourths  of  its  length.  Then  the  armature
again  began  to  acquire  attraction  toward  the  poles  of  the  single
horse  shoe,  which  went  on  increasing  as  I  drew  it  farther  down,  and
was  strongest  when  I  applied  it  to  the  poles  of  the  rubber.  During
this  the  behavior  of  the  colors  of  the  odic  incandescence  was  as  fol-
lows :  at  first  the  armature  was  colored  oppositely  to  the  single
horse-shoe, — it  formed  an  induction  magnet  of  it.  As  I  drew  the
single  magnet  downwards,  the  intensity  of  the  light  and  colors  of  the
armature  decreased,  became  duller,  the  colors  more  indistinct,  con-
fused ;  and  when  I  had  moved  it  down  two- thirds,  all  the  color  had
disappeared  from  the  armature  ;  it  now  possessed  only  a  dim  uni-
form grey,  like  any  other  piece  of  iron.  Thus  it  remained  till  I  had
passed  it  more  than  three-fourths  down ;  from  hence  it  again  began
to  get  brighter,  then  its  two  halves  to  acquire  distinct  colors,  but  now
the  reverse  of  what  they  had  before  ;  its  red  and  blue  were  now  no
longer  opposed,  as  before,  to  the  rubbed  single  horse-shoe  to  which
it  was  applied,  but  to  the  rubbing  five- layered  magnet,  to  the  poles
of  which  it  had  now  approached.  Thus  the  indifference  point  of  the
coloring  coincided  with  the  indifference  point  of  the  polar  attractions  ;

326  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

and  these  results  beautifully  support  the  parallelism  of  these  two  phe-
nomena under  common  circumstances.

430.  It  is  also  found  that  in  the  condition  of  the  armature,  in
which  it  has  no  attraction  for  the  single  magnet,  and  remains  un-
colored  in  grey  odic  incandescence,  the  curvature  of  the  same  horse-
shoe has  also  become  light  again  on  one  side,  but  has  only  an  uni-
formly grey  luminosity.  Thus  there  appears  to  be  a  condition  of
neutralized  indifference  both  above  in  the  armature  and  below  in  the
curvature,  when  the  single  horse-shoe  adheres  at  two-thirds  to  three-
fourths  of  the  length  of  its  limbs  to  the  five-layered  rubber.

431.  Once,  in  the  condition  of  menstruation,  when  the  sight  of  the
observer  was  three  or  four  times  stronger  than  usual,  she  saw  the
single  horse-shoe,  which,  from  the  repeated  passes,  was  now  in  the
magnetic  condition,  with  a  blue  flame  of  six  inches  long  at  the  north-
ward pole,  and  a  reddish  of  two  inches  and  a  half  at  the  southward.
"When  I  now  laid  its  curvature  on  the  poles  of  the  five-laj-er,  friendly,
unlike  sides  together,  both  the  blue  and  the  red  flames  at  once  in-
creased about  one-half.  When  I  drew  the  single  magnet  downwards,
its  polar  flames  decreased  ;  and  by  the  time  that  they  had  come  back
to  their  original  lengths  of  six  and  two  and  a  half  inches,  I  had  moved
down  one-third  of  the  limb ;  in  this  position,  therefore,  the  effect  of
the  rubber  upon  the  odic  flame  of  the  rubbed  magnet  equals  0  :  the
flames  were  thus  brought  into  a  certain  equilibrium,  that  of  the  rub-
ber upon  the  poles  of  the  rubbed  horse-shoe  being  removed,  at  least
in  odic  respects.  When  I  drew  the  single  horse-shoe  further  down,
to  two-thirds  of  the  length  of  its  limbs,  I  arrived  at  the  point  of  mag-
netic indifference,  where  the  magnetic  forces  were  removed  from  the
poles  of  the  rubbed  magnet  on  to  the  rubber.

432.  But  the  divergence  behoeen  the  odic  and  magnetic  activities,
which  manifested  itself  in  these  processes,  was  very  remarkable.  In
the  experiment  just  detailed  (which  was  also  repeated  at  various
times,  also  that  of  the  menstruating  period),  when  the  magnetism  of
the  rubbed  horse-shoe  was  =  O  at  the  poles,  and  the  armature  fell
off,  this  was  by  no  means  the  case  with  the  odic  flame.  It  was,  in-
deed, depressed  and  diminished  on  the  blue  side  down  to  one  and  a
quarter  inch  ;  and  on  the  red,  reduced  to  red  smoke  ;  thus  altogether
brought  down  to  about  a  fourth  or  fifth  of  its  original  and  proper
size,  but  not  by  any  means  destroyed,  as  the  magnetic  attraction
was.  Nay,  more  ;  when  I  drew  the  single  magnet  clown  three-quar-
ters and  more,  and  the  color  of  the  armature  lying  upon  it  changed
in  such  a  manner  that  its  side  lying  on  the  negative  limb  of  the
single  magnet  became  blue  (according  to  §  427),  yet  the  residue  of
the  odic  flame  remained  permanently  blue.     This  little  flame  de-

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  327

creased  as  I  brought  the  poles  of  the  single  horse-shoe  down  to  those
of  the  five-layered,  from  one  and  a  quarter  to  four-fifths,  two-fifths,
one-fifth,  one-twenty-fifth,  to  the  thickness  of  a  sheet  of  paper,  at  last
waving  as  a  delicate  blue  mist  over  the  negative  polar  extremity  ;
but  always  blue  and  blue  grey  down  to  the  last  moment,  when  pole
joined  pole,  and  all  flame  vanished  entireby.

433.  Here  the  difference  between  the  behavior  of  Od  and  magnet-
ism comes  strongly  into  view.  While  the  negative  magnetism  of  the
northward  limb  of  the  single  magnet  was  reversed  above  into  -f-  M,
the  flame  attached  to  it  remained  blue,f  and  persisted  in  —  Od  ;
from  steel  which  gave  out  -+-  M,  and  induced  —  M  in  the  armature
in  contact  with  it,  issued  the  blue  manifestation  of  —  Od,  unre-
strainedly, so  long  as  the  armature  remained  off:  positive  magnetism
and  negative  Od  may  thus  co-exist  simultaneously  in  one  and  the
same  steel  bar.

434.  As  electro-magnetism  is  a  means  of  producing  odic  incan-
descence in  iron  (see  above,  §  374),  so  it  is  also  of  calling  forth  odic
flame,  and  this  in  an  uncommonly  high  degree  (§  12).  In  the  ex-
periment just  cited,  and  to  which  I  refer  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  the
healthy  and  imperfect  seer  of  odic  light,  Baroness  Pauline  von  Na-
torp,  perceived  on  a  large  iron  horse-shoe  converted  into  an  electro-
magnet, not,  indeed,  flame,  but  an  appearance  of  luminous  vapor
rising  a  hand's  length  high,  in  the  dark.  Madame  von  Tess<  dik  de-
tected the  same  subsequently  in  about  equal  degree.  M.  Pauer  saw
a  luminous  flame,  from  twelve  to  sixteen  inches,  like  a  mass  of  lu-
minous vapor,  upon  each  pole.  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl  saw  flames
ascend  from  both  poles  of  the  same  electro-magnet,  the  stronger  ten
inches  high,  the  negative  more  grey,  the  positive  more  yellowish.
Baroness  von  Augustin  saw  at  both  poles  a  flame-like  luminosity,
about  twenty  inches  broad,  and  almost  of  a  man's  height,  ascending
perpendicularly  toward  the  ceiling  of  the  dark  chamber  ;  their  upper
halves  were  blue,  the  middles  brighter  and  whitish,  and  the  lower
parts  duller  again.  They  were  unsteady,  and  passed  above  into
clouds  of  smoke.  Stephen  Kollar,  with  a  simple  Smee's  apparatus,
at  first  saw  only  the  negative  pole,  but  with  two  pairs,  both  poles,
flaming  about  twenty  inches  high,  and  with  smoke  ascending  a  long
distance.  The  far  more  sensitive  Madame  Kienesberger  saw  a  col-
ored flame  of  eighteen  to  twenty  inches  blaze  perpendicularly  upward
on  the  negative  pole,  and  on  the  positive  a  smaller  red  one  of  six
inches,  both  vanishing  into  smoke.  She  described  both  flames  as
lather  more  unsteady  than  those  of  the  common  permanent  magnet,
and  somewhat  jumping,  like  the  light  of  a  tallow  candle.  This
jumping,  a  constant  alteration  of  size,  a  continual  vibration  between

828  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

greater  and  less  height,  was  doubtless  caused  by  the  varying  quantity
of  electricity  developed  from  the  Smee's  battery  and  conducted
through  the  wire  coil  at  different  intervals ;  that  is,  by  an  ebb  and
flow  in  the  inducing  agent,  depending  upon  inequality  of  chemical
activity  among  the  elements  of  the  battery.  I  must  observe  here — -
what  I  shall  return  to  subsequently — that  both  the  conducting  polar
wire,  and  the  coil  upon  the  hon  horse-shoe,  were  enveloped  in  flaming
appearances  of  odic  light.  And  these  flames  were  more  luminous
towards  the  poles,  and  duller  towards,  and  at  the  curvature  of,  the
electro  magnet.  In  the  owder  of  time  she  first  saw  odic  incandescence  ;
then,  after  the  lapse  of  more  than  a  minute,  sometimes  two  minutes
or  more,  the  flames  were  found  at  the  poles ;  at  first  greyish  and
weak,  and  then  developing  into  colors  as  they  increased.  The  re-
verse occurred  when  the  voltaic  current  was  interrupted  ;  first  the
colors  of  the  flames  disappeared,  then  their  grey  shape  became  invis-
ible ;  at  length  the  odic  incandescence  vanished.  Professor  Endlicher
saw  an  electro-magnet  decked  with  vertically  ascending  emissions  of
light  at  both  poles,  forty  inches  high,  moving  unsteadily,  variously
colored,  and  sending  up  dimly  luminous  smoke  to  the  ceiling,  which
appeared  lighted  up  by  it.  M.  Delhez  saw  flames  almost  as  large,
but  he  could  scarcely  distinguish  colors;  he  found  the  columns  of
light  duller  (red)  below,  brighter  (yellow)  in  the  middle,  and  duller
again  (blue)  above.  Wilhelmine  Glaser  saw  the  same  electro-magnet
furnished  with  flames  sixty  inches  high  at  its  poles.  Smoke  ascend-
ed from  these  up  to  the  ceiling,  and  the  flames  displayed  the  most
brilliant  coloring, — blue  prevailing  at  the  northward  pole,  and  red-
dish-yellow at  the  southward.  The  odic  flames  of  the  electro-magnet
were  observed  more  accurately  and  more  frequently  by  Josephine
Zinkel.  Under  the  circumstances  above  described,  she  saw  flames
forty  inches  long  upon  the  northward  pole,  and  about  thirteen  inches
upon  the  southward,  both  colored ;  the  first  with  predominance  of
blue ;  in  the  second  more  red.  She  described  the  flaming  appear-
ances upon  the  polar  wires,  the  coil,  the  voltaic  battery,  and  the  or-
der of  succession  of  the  appearance  and  disappearance  of  these  phe-
nomena, always  exactly  like  Madame  Kienesberger.  She  once  found,
however,  five  or  six  minutes  necessary  for  the  complete  development
of  the  odic  flames  ;  another  time  she  declared  that  they  did  not  un-
fold to  their  persistent  size  until  after  about  ten  minutes.  In  the  last
experiment  with  her  I  had  used  a  Smee's  apparatus,  with  five  square
feet  of  zinc  and  silver  surface.  The  columns  of  light  ascending  from
the  two  poles,  astonished  the  observer  with  their  beauty  and  size.
The  negative  flame  was  higher  than  a  man  ;  the  positive,  of  an  arm's
length.     They  constantly  trembled  and  leaped  up  and  down,  like  a

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  329

monstrous  candle  flame,  decorated  with  the  most  beautiful  prismatic
colors.  Sparks  flew  off  in  streams  into  the  smoke,  and  off  to
the  sides.  The  smoke  came  in  contact  with  the  ceiling,  and  was  di-
verted by  it.'"

I  showed  to  Miss  Reichel  a  Schweigger's  multiplier  in  the  dark,
sending  a  weak  voltaic  current  through  the  coil.  She  saw  the  wire,
and  then  the  steel  needle,  become  odically  incandescent,  and  next  a
delicate  stream  of  odic  flame  break  out  from  the  points  of  both  its
poles,  flowing  onwards  in  the  direction  of  their  length  on  each  side ;
but,  as  the  case  was  too  narrow  to  allow  of  their  flowing  straight  out,
they  ran  against  the  sides,  turned  upwards  on  them,  then  again  met
the  glass  cover,  were  diverted  once  more,  and,  finally,  flowed  over
the  surface  of  the  glass  till  they  vanished  from  the  eye.

435.  The  part  which  the  electrical  atmosphere  plays  in  odic  phe-
nomena, we  already  know,  from  the  odic  incandescence  (§  370),  to
be  influential  ;  but  in  the  flaming  appearances  it  asserts  especial  im-
portance. Miss  Reichel  found  the  flames  increase  whenever  I  brought
a  magnet  within  the  electrical  sphere  of  action.  Miss  Atzmanusdorfer
showed  me  the  same  on  many  occasions  ;  the  account  was  already
different  from  these  two.  M.  Hochstetter  saw  the  usually  twelve-
inches  high  ilame  of  the  nine-layer  magnet  rise  to  twenty-four  inches.
Miss  Sophie  Pauer  saw  the  same  nine  layer  magnet  triple  its  odic  Harnes
in  the  electrical  atmosphere,  in  some  degree  illuminating  the  ceiling.
M.  Fernolendt  saw  the  sixteen-inch  flame  of  the  same  rise  to  thirty-
six  inches,  and  throw  light  upon  the  ceiling.  Wühelmine  Glaser
saw  the  flame  of  a  bar-magnet  twenty-five  inches  long,  when  the
negative  pale  was  brought  within  forty  inches  of  the  conductor  of  the
electrical  machine,  become  four  times  as  long,— namely,  increase
from  three  inches  to  twelve.  She  observed  the  common  flame  of  six-
teen inches  upon  the  nine-layer  magnet ;  when  I  brought  it  into  the
vicinity  of  the  electrical  conductor,  she  discovered  an  elevation  to  six-
ty-four inches — thus  to  the  height  of  a  man,  with  illumination  of  the
ceiling.  Madame  Bauer  saw  pretty  nearly  the  same  phenomena  un-
der the  same  circumstances.  Baroness  von  Augustin,  when  the
nine-layer  magnet  was  brought  with  its  negative  side  to  within  about
twenty  inches  of  the  electrical  conductor,  saw  its  blue  flame  enlarge
to  twice  or  three  times  the  size,  and  light  up  the  ceiling  of  the  room.
I  laid  the  nine-layer  horse-shoe  before  the  girl  Zinkel,  in  the  dark  cham-
ber, at  a  distance  of  forty  inches   from  the  conductor  of  a  powerful

*  Many  remarkable  corroborations  of  the  facts  in  this  paragraph  have  been
Witnessed,  at  my  house,  by  several  persons  who  have  seen  my  experiments
upon  at  least  twenty  somnambules  with  Smee's  batteries,  electro-magnets,  and
helices.

330  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

electrical  machine,  which  I  set  in  motion.  It  stood  with  the  poles
turned  upwards,  and  the  limbs  equidistant  from  the  conductor.  The
odic  flame  was  originally  four  inches  on  the  negative  pole,  and  about
one  and  a  half  on  the  positive ;  the  former  now  rose  to  twenty,  aud
the  latter  to  six  inches.  The  size  of  both  was  thus  increased  from
four  to  five  times.  The  coloring  was  rendered  more  vivid  in  the
blue,  and  bedimmed  in  the  red.  As  soon  as  I  stopped  turning  the
plate  of  the  machine,  the  odic  flames  sank  down  to  their  previous
size.     This  was  frequently  repeated  at  different  times.

436.  After  the  Baroness  von  Augustin  had  seen  the  great  increase
of  the  blue  magnetic  flame  on  the  negative  pole  in  the  vicinity  of  the
charged  conductor,  I  turned  the  nine-fold  horse-shoe  round  in  such  a
way  that  the  southward  pole  was  towards  the  conductor,  both
poles  pointing  upwards.  In  a  short  time  she  no  longer  saw  reddish
odic  flame  over  it,  but  blue.  In  this  arrangement  the  odic  colors  of
the  two  poles  were  reversed.  When,  in  other  experiments  with
Josephine  Zinkel,  I  turned  the  blue,  negative  pole  of  the  nine-fold  mag-
net to  the  conductor,  so  that  the  positive  red  flame  was  turned  away,
the  latter  appeared  greyish  red,  the  former  brilliant  blue,  and  devel-
oped prismatic  colors,  above  which  smoke  and  sparks  ascended  al-
most to  the  ceiling.  The  flame  was  so  brightly  luminous  that
the  beholder  could  not  conceive  how  it  was  that  I  saw  nothing  of  it.
But  when  I  turned  the  magnet  round,  so  that  the  red-flaming  posi-
tive side  was  turned  towards  the  positively  charged  conductor,  while
the  blue,  negative  side  was  turned  away  in  the  opposite  direction ;
the  former,  the  red,  first  quickly  became  dull  grey,  and  then,  in  half
a  minute,  changed  to  blue,  whilst  the  opposite  blue  upon  the  negative
pole  became  violet  grey ;  the  blue  of  the  former  then  increased,  and
that  which  had  become  reddish  grey,  shrank  away  :  thus  here,  as  in
the  odic  incandescence  (§  371),  there  was  a  reversal  of  the  odic  po-
larity of  the  odic  flame,  without  this  being  accompanied  by  any
simultaneous  reversal  of  the  magnetic  polarity.  The  electrical  polar-
ity here  dictated  the  law ;  it  reversed  the  odic,  but  was  not  capable
of  reversing  the  magnetic  polarity.  When  I  now  reversed  the  elec-
tricity, and  charged  the  conductor  negatively,  1  obtained  the  same,
only  correspondingly  reversed,  manifestations  of  odic  light :  now  the
red  flame  turned  toward  the  conductor  became  exalted,  and  when  I
turned  the  negative  side  of  the  magnet  to  it,  the  blue  was  changed
into  red,  the  —  Od  was  converted  into  +  Od,  and  this  at  the  nega-
tive pole  of  the  magnet,

437.  To  work  out  these  facts  more  clearly,  I  repeated  them  with
the  application  of  bar-magnets  instead  of  horse-shoes.  Two  bars,  one
twenty -six   inches,  and  the  other  six  inches  long,  were  placed,  uniso-

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  331

lated,  on  the  parallels,  lying  upon  a  table  at  a  distance  of  forty  inches
from  the  conductor.  When  I  turned  the  blue-flamed  poles  to  it,  the
blue  flames  flowing  from  these  grew  to  three  or  four  times  their
length,  stretching  out  towards  the  positive  electrical  conductor;
^vhen  I  turned  the  red-flamed  poles  to  it,  the  flame  first  became  be-
dimmed  and  weakened,  and  then,  after  a  contest  of  the  dynamics
here  in  action,  rendered  visible  by  lambent  flames  playing  up  and
down  upon  the  bars,  it  was  converted  into  blue,  and  within  two
minutes  raised  to  considerable  size  and  thickness.  As  often  as  I  dis-
charged the  conductor  the  flame  sprang  back,  and  returned  to  its
original  condition  of  polarity  and  magnitude  ;  the  struggling,  lam-
bent flames,  resembling  dying  flames  of  spirit  of  wine,  played  up  and
down  upon  the  steel  rods,  till  all  was  carried  back  into  the  true  con-
dition in  which  magnetism  ruled.

438.  The  phenomenon  displayed  itself  still  more  beautifully  when
I  brought  the  magnetic  bars  nearer  to  the  conductor.  I  did  this  both
with  a  rod  of  square  and  one  of  equal  size  of  circular  section,  both
held  in  a  wooden  Guidoni's  holder.  While  they  remained  at  some
distance,  the  polar  flames  were  always  blue  on  one  side  and  red  on
the  other.  But  as  I  approached  the  bats  gradually  towards  the  con-
ductor, and  the  vividness,  luminosity,  and  brilliancy  of  the  flame  in-
creased with  this,  other  colors  were  by  degrees  developed  out  of  these
two,  till  at  length,  when  I  had  brought  them  within  about  a  foot  of
the  conductor,  all  the  prismatic  colors  displayed  themselves  in  full
splendor  to  the  eyes  of  the  sensitive  observers.  ^  shall  recur  to  this,
for  more  complete  details,  when  I  speak  of  the  odic  colors.

438.  b.  We  thus  see  here  the  odic  flames  subject  to  the  same  effect
from  the  electrical  atmosphere  as  occurs  in  a  similar  manner  to  the
odic  incandescence  ;  and,  as  in  most  of  the  phenomena,  hitherto,  we
have  seen  magnetism  holding  to  a  certain  extent  the  upper  hand,  over
Od,  we  here  see  electricity,  alone,  claiming  dominion  over  it,  tvith
greater  force.  It  is  evident  Od  is  more  intimately  connected  with
electricity  than  with  magnetism, — that  the  dependence  upon  the  poles
of  magnetism  is  soluble,  variable,  and  not  one  of  necessity, — that  it
shows  the  mobility  of  electricity  rather  than  the  fixity  of  magnetism,
that  it  only  so  far  partakes  of  the  fixity  of  the  latter  at  the  poles  of
magnets,  as  this  fixity  dwells  in  the  magnetism, — to  which  the  Od  is
to  a  certain  extent  connected.  Therefore  Od  here  shows  itself  more
clearly  than  anywhere  else,  in  a  kind  of  mean  between  electricity  and
magnetism.

439.  The  influence  of  terrestrial  magnetism  upon  the  size  and  bril-
liancy of  the  odic  flame  of  the  magnet  is  manifested  pretty  strongly,
and  proceeds  parallel  with  its  influence  upon  the  odic  incandescence.

832  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

When  a  bar  magnet  lies  conformably  in  the  magnetic  meridian,  its
flames  are  longest  and  most  luminous.  When  turned  round  and
placed  unconformäbly,  with  its  northward  pole  toward  the  south,  the
blue  northward  flame  was  depressed,  dull,  inclined  toward  grey,  dim,
misty,  less  apparent,  more  difficult  to  see,  and  diminished  in  size ;  the
reddish  southward  polar  flame  weakened  in  like  manner  ;  rather  yel-
lowish grey  than  red.  Josephine  Zinkel  saw  the  flames  somewhat
modified  in  every  poiut  of  the  compass.  The  same  was  the  case  when
I  placed  a  horse-shoe. magnet  before  her  with  its  poles  upward  ;  if  the
northward  limb  was  then  turned  to  the  north,  the  blue  and  red  flames
were  then  vivid  and  brilliant ;  hut  if  the  southward  polar  limb  was
on  the  north  side,  and  consequently  the  northward  polar  limb  on  the
south  side,  the  beholder  perceived  only  dull,  troubled,  and  weakly-
colored  odic  flames,  sometimes  both  only  grey,  or  even  passing  into
mere  grey  smoke.

440.  The  same  circumstances  presented  themselves  when  I  brought
the  magnets — in  the  vertical  plane  of  the  meridian — into  different
angles  with  the  dip.  The  condition  of  the  odic  flame  altered  in  size
and  coloring  with  each  position  :  this  was  the  case  even  when  horse-
shoes were  closed  by  their  armatures.

441.  Even  mere  pieces  of  iron  turned  upon  their  axes  in  the  plane
of  the  meridian,  exhibited  odic  flames,  and  modifications  of  them  ac-
cording to  the  difference  of  the  directions.  I  shall  enter  more  min-
utely into  this  subject  in  its  proper  place.  Madame  Kienesberger
woke  up  one  very  dark  night.  Looking  round  the  room,  she  per-
ceived a  flaming  appearance  at  the  window.  She  started  up  in  a
fright  to  extinguish  it,  under  the  apprehension  that  something  had
taken  fire.  But  when  she  came  close  to  the  window,  she  could  see
nothing  ;  the  appearance  of  fire  had  vanished.  Returning  to  her  bed,
she  saw  the  fiery  brightness  again  at  the  same  spot ;  she  went  to-
wards it  again,  and  again  lost  sight  of  it.  It  was  an  iron  window-
bar,  which,  standing  perpendicular,  emitted  odic  flame  at  the  top.

442.  But  not  only  do  magnetic  and  electrical  influences  affect  the
odic  flame,  even  purely  odic  react  independently  upon  it.  To  these
belong,  in  the  first  place,  crystals  of  all  kinds,  of  earthy  or  saline
compounds,  in  which  we  have  never  hitherto  known  of  properties  of
the  kind  which  occur  in  magnets  in  the  strict  sense.  We  have  seen
above  that  when  a  magnetic  bar  is  appended  to  another  of  equal  size
and  strength,  the  intermediate  flames  become  dull,  and  the  flames  of
the  extremities  increase  almost  to  twice  the  size.  A  crystal  produces
the  same  effect.  When  I  applied  to  a  bar  magnet,  ^  crystal  of  equal
length  of  rock  crystal,  selenite,  or  heavy  spar,  the  negative  pole
of  the  crystal  to  the  southward  pole  of   the  magnet,  holding  the

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  333

two  in  a  straight  line,  Josephine  Zinkel,  Mr.  Kienesberger,  Miss  Atz-
mannsdorfer,  Freidrich  Weidlech,  and  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  saw  the
blue  flame  of  the  northward  pole  of  the  magnetic  har  almost  double
its  length.  When  I  did  this  at  the  other  end  of  the  magnetic  bar,
with  the  positive  pole  of  the  crystal,  the  same  sensitives  saw  the  ejad
flame  of  the  southward  pole  of  the  magnetic  bar  become  elongated.
Thus,  the  crystal  acted  just  as  'powerfully  upon  the  odic  flames  of  the
magnet  as  a  magnet  itself  although  it  did  not  increase  the  sup  par  ting
poiver  of  the  magnet  a  single  grain.  The  independence  of  the  odic
action  is  thus  most  evident  here.

443.  If  this  experiment  "were  accurate,  it  should  be  confirmed  by  a
controlling  experiment ;  namely,  the  behavior  of  the  magnet  flames
when  crystal  flames  were  held  against,  and  approximated  to  them,  in
the  way  the  flames  of  the  magnetic  poles  were  brought  together,  de-
scribed above,  §  401.  To  test  this,  I  placed  before  Josephine  Zinkel
a  magnetic  bar  six  inches  long,  brought  it  into  conformity  with  the
meridian,  and  approached  its  southward  pole  to  the  negative  pole  of
a  selenite,  the  blue  flame  of  which  measured  about  two  inches.  As
soon  as  the  two  poles  (the  polar  objects  being  in  a  straight  line)  came
within  about  a  foot  of  each  other,  both  flames  became  more  slender
and  elongated,  flowed  towards  and  appeared  to  seek  one  another.
When,  by  a  closer  approximation,  they  should  have  met,  this  did  not
take  place  ;  they  did  not  join,  but  gradually  became  thicker  aad
shorter  again,  accumulated  around  their  own  poles,  and  went  out  as
soon  as  these  came  in  contact.  But  when  I  brought  together  hos-
tile,— that  is,  like  poles,  the  beholder  saw  no  elongation  of  the  ap-
proximated polar  flames,  but  a  speedy  contraction  ;  and,  finally,  on
the  complete  contact  of  the  two  solid  bodies,  an  introversion  of  the
odic  flames  around  their  own  poles, — all  agreeing  with  the  luminous
phenomena  of  two  approximated  steel  magnets,  one  of  the  magnets
being  here  completely  replaced  by  a  crystal  of  selenite.

444.  Animal  organs*  especially  the  human  hands,  constitute,  per-

*  There  is  no  subject,  in  the  range  of  philosophy,  which  admits  more  extensive
application  of  thought  than  that  of  light.  Its  relations  are  quite  universal.  The
most  sublime  idea  of  the  theologian  when  he  endeavors  to  embrace  an  impossi-
bility, the  boundary  of  time,  space,  and  eternity,  is  that  magnificent  sentence,
"  God  said,  let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light."  A  sentence  pregnant  with
the  germs  of  all  the  laws  regulating  the  universe, — of  all  the  clearness  of  radiant
matter,  and  of  all  the  darkness  which  envelops  the  confusions  of  mental  and
physical  philosophy.

The  finest  devotion  of  the  humble  moralist  to  the  best  idol  of  poetic  fancy,  is
the  attempted  imagining  of  truth  in  the  shape  of  ethereal  light,  an  impersonation
of  the  Deity.  It  is  absolute  humility  in  the  worship  of  perfect  goodness  and
perfect  intelligence  ;  the  seal  upon  the  fiat,  that  without  the  whole  truth  to  en-

3.34  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

haps,  a  still  more  striking  means  of  strengthening  the  odic  flames.
I  fastened  a  magnetic  bar  of  about  eight  inches  length  into  a  wooden

lighten  our  judgments,  all  our  conclusions  must  swerve  more  or  less  from  the
standard  of  pure  justice.

Pride  cannot  guide  the  search  for  truth,  although  it  lead  the  chamois  to  desire
the  mountain  top,  and  the  votary  of  severe  physical  science  io  the  highest  alti-
tude of  ambitious  man's  enjoyment, — the  pinnacle  of  human  fame  !  The  natural
philosopher,  whose  researches  dive  into  all  depths,  is  not  permitted,  by  the  laws
of  justice,  to  arrogate  to  himself  the  habits  of  the  bigot,  or  the  claims  of  scientific
authority.  Happy  he,  if  where  his  studies  lead  to  thoughts  which  establish  nu-
merous important  facts,  he  be  permitted  to  approach  in  his  speculations  the
lamps  illuminating  the  temples  of  truth.  An  unsettled  wanderer,  his  is  never
the  privilege,  for  petty  selfish  advantage,  to  fix  his-  abode.  Like  the  humble
miner  he  gropes;  and  helps,  with  his  dark  lantern,  to  find  the  ore  which  enriches
him  who  has  not  tasted  of  the  labor  expended  in  its  production.  If  it  be  thought
that  Newton,  who  poured  floods  of  mental  light  into  optics,  was  an  exception  to
this  rule,  that  thought  is  erroneous,  for  never  was  humility  more  tenderly  striking
than  in  his  character,  and,  when  the  extent  and  importance  of  his  discoveries  are
regarded,  never,  in  his  own  time,  did  man  reap  less  personal  reward.  So  striking
is  the  inference,  in  fact,  that  in  the  yearnings  and  efforts  made  for  the  summit  of
felicity,  by  even  the  most  exalted  human  character  of  several  ages,  that  middle
course  which  lies  between  two  extremes  or  poles,  the  happy,  medium  of  moderate
desires,  the  pursuit  of  truth  in  humility,  the  indulgence  in  the  love  of  science  for
its  own  pleasures,  in  the  calm  light  of  a  contented  mind,  is  more  to  be  coveted
than  any  brilliant  blaze  of  dazzling  fame.  It  is  evident  that  in  the  researches  of
the  Baron  von  Reichenbach,  the  bold  love  of  truth  has  stimulated  an  industry
guided  by  the  severe  training  of  a  correct  logic ;  and  if  in  these  notes  any  pas-
sages are  found  reflecting  on  the  Baron's  thoughts,  their  aim  is  more  to  guide  the
attention  to  facts, — which  are  sneered  at  only  by  those  whose  brains  are  unfor-
tunately formed,  or  by  those  in  whom  the  happier  influences  of  justice  have  failed
to  correct  the  pressure  of  silly  prejudices, — than  to  evince  the  very  slightest  dis-
respect to  extensive  acquirement  guided  by  moral  excellence.

To  show  here  that  "  animal  organs  "  have  "been  observed  under  vaiious  cir-
cumstances to  emit  light,  and  that  there  exist  probabilities  of  the  analogies  af-
forded by  phenomena,  long  ago  observed  by  inquiring  philosophers,  to  those
which  have  been  the  subject  of  our  author's  investigations,  will  not  be  irrelevant,
how  much  soever  some  of  the  speculations  naturally  arising  may  be  distasteful
to  that  school  of  philosophy,  which  retains  the  right  of  rejecting  all  knowledge,
not  based  on  those  foundations,  laid  by  certain  instruments  and  tools,  in  common
use,  by  its  own  artificers.  The  Baron  von  Reichenbach  has  done  well  in  admit-
ting oral  testimony  into  science,  for  now  the  germs  of  much  future  progress  in
knowledge  may  be  watched  by  greater  numbers  in  their  development.  The
combined  music  of  truth  from  such  sources  may,  in  choral  harmony  as  it  were,
be  attuned  and  reverberated  by  many  statistical  aids.  If  the  relation  of  single
or  isolated  facts  be  rejected, — though  wise  students  would  never  rudely  or  heed-
lessly pass  them  by, — the  repetitions  of  a  thousand  different  observers,  each  hav-
ing had  multiplied  opportunities  of  verification,  would  constitute  a  statistical
value,  which  the  severest  devotee  to  prejudice  could  not  wholly  underrate.  In
drawing  attention  to  facts  long  ago  noticed,  perhaps  then  isolated,  but  since  observed
by  very  numerous  persons,  the  importance  of  the  state  of  somnambulism  in  such
researches  as  those  recorded  in  our  author's  text  must  be  again  vindicated.     In

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  335

Guidoni's  holder,  brought  it  into  the  conformable  direction  with  the
meridian,  and  led  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  to  it  in  the  dark.      When  I

the  interesting  "Journal  du  Traitement  Magnetique  de  la  Demoiselle  N."  (pp.
66-57),  M.  Tardy  de  Montravel  relates  that  on  the  13th  of  April,  17S5,  the  lady
who  was  the  subject  of  his  observations  perceived,  upon  the  surface  of  the  ba-
quet,  a  very  light  vapor,  which  appeared  to  be  in  motten,  and  which,  rising  along
the  iron  rods  then  used  in  the  practice  of  animal  magnetism,  seemed  to  be  at-
tracted by  the  patients.  At  rir.^t  she  was  interested  by  this  phenomenon,  but
S  'on  her  head  became  heavy,  and  she  had  a  sensation  of  movement  about  the
frontal  sinuses.  She  had  no  desire  to  sleep,  but  had  a  palpitation  which  was  per-
ceived by  the  bystanders.  Here  was  a  case  in  which,  according  to  my  view,  the
vapor  contained  Reichenbach's  odic  force  negative,  or  the  mesmeric  impondera-
ble agent  repulsive,  increased  in  its  unpleasant  -effects  by  an  iron  conductor.  In
other  cases  the  same  description  of  vapor  has  been  observed  of  a -grey  color.  M.
Tardy,  in  trying  to  get  his  patient  to  observe  the  mesmeric  fluid  emanating  from
himself,  learned  from  her,  when  she  was  asleep,  that  his  thumbs  shed  brilliant
sparks  of  light  (p.  631,  that  the  palms  of  his  hands  shed  a  vapor,  not  brilliant,  (p.
04.)  In  repeating  his  observations  and  varying  his  experiments,  he  arrived  at
the  Baron  von  Reichenbach's  conclusion,  that  the  light  emanating  from  the  thumb
of  die  right  hand  was  rather  larger  in  volume  than  that  from  the  left  (p.  70.)  With
his  face  to  the  north  M.  Tardy  mesmerized  some  milk,  and  his  patient  saw  the
sparks'  of  light  proceeding  from  his  thumbs,  and  the  surface  of  the  milk  glittering
with  sparks  (p.  72).  Various  other  experiments  were  made,  the  results  of  which
were,  that  the  light  was  seen  conveyed  along  rods  of  steel,  through  planks  of
Avood,  at  the  spots  corresponding  with  those  touched  on  the  side  proximate  to
himself.  On  other  occasions  she  indicated  the  season  of  the  year  when  the  fluid
had  the  greatest  amount  of  force.  Less  in  winter  than  in  summer.  Then,  as  to
particular  times  of  the  day,  more  from  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning  until  three
in  the  afternoon  (p.  12.)  The  sources  of  the  fluid  \  The  earth  and  the  air.  That
from  the  air  is  the  purer,  <frc,  &c.  The  sun  is  the  most  abundant  source  of  this  fluid
(p.  126.)  Its  direction  is  influenced  by  currents  (kf  air  (p.  127.)  It  can  traverse
glass  (p.  137.)  Disregarding  the  hypothesis  of  an  universal  fluid,  so  fashionable
fir  a  time  among  the  cultivators  of  mesmeric  science,  the  remark  may  be  al-
lowed, that  the  Od  of  Reichenbach  is  embraced  in  an  idea,  somewhat  analogous
in  some  of  its  properties  and  relations  to  that  supposition,  based,  however,  upon
a  very  different  course  of  investigation.  We  are  constrained,  nevertheless,  to  al-
low that  although  the  Baron  is  more  close  in  his  train  of  philosophy,  the  facts
brought  out  are,  in  many  cases,  analogous — almost  identical.  It  has  been  on
purpose  that  Tardy  has  been  selected,  on  account  of  the  date  of  works,  but  from
his  period  to  the  present  day  the  facts  on  the  emission  of  light  from  the  fingers,
pit,  of  the  stomach,  eyes,  nostrils,  mouth,  and  in  a  less  remarkable  degree,  from
the  whole  surface  of  the  human  skin,  as  seen  by  many  somnambulists,  are  too
numerous,  and  too  well  vouched  for,  to  admit  of  any  reasonable  doubt.  I  have,
myself,  been  very  frequently  present,  ou  occasions  when  numerous  persons,  on
other  occasions  when  individuals  knowing  nothing  of  each  other,  and  in  presence
of  myself  alone,  having  been  placed  in  a  condition  of  sleep-waking,  have  stated
facts  corroborating  every  statement  made  by  Tardy  de  Montravel.  I  have  seen
many  individuals  male  and  female,  wdio  could,  in  ordinary  wakefulness,  in  full
vigilance,  perceive  blue,  green,  or  yellow  emanations  of  light  from  the  ends  of  the
fingers  of  other  persons,  from  the  eyes,  and  during  the  expiration  of  breathing
from  the  mouth  and  nostrils.     Persons  of  a  very  highly  sensitive  nervous  orgau-

336  ODIC  FLAME  ON"  STEEL  MAGNETS.

let  her  grasp  the  southward  pole  of  the  little  bar  with  the  fingers  of
her  right  hand,  she  saw  the  odic  flame  of  the  northward  pole  of  the

■  ization  are  not  uncommon,  who,  in  the  shade  of  a  sombre  room  room,  have  the
power  of  perceiving  these  appearances.  A  lady  lately  residing  at  the  Mesmeric
Infirmary  is  a  remarkable  example  of  the  possession  of  this  faculty.  Long  agu
such  things  ought  to  have  excited  greater  attention,  for  the  facts  connected  with
animal  light  are  well  known,  and  have  attracted  the  notice  of  philosophers  of  no
common  calibre  of  intellect.  My  late  revered  friend  and  preceptor,  Dr.  Jame3
Macartney,  professor  of  anatomy  in  the  University  of  Dublin,  published  in  the
year  1810,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society,  a  remarkable  memoir  on
this  subject,  so  full  of  the  just  feeling  for  investigation  Avhich  distinguished  him  as
an  active  and  ingenious  philosopher,  that  any  one  who  knew  of  the  vast  amount
of  knowledge  he  had  accumulated  could  not  but  deeply  regret  his  not  having
left  behind  him,  in  some  printed  form,  the  marrow  of  a  most  extensive  course  of
lectures  which  annually  stimulated  the  intellects  of  a  large  concourse  of  admiring
and  affectionate  pupils.  His  copious  fund  of  original  facts,  and  his  novel  and
correct  trains  of  reasoning,  impressed  convictions  on  the  minds  of  many  a  student
who  has  gone  forth  to  contribute  his  master's  ideas  as  well  as  sometimes  his  own
share  of  information,  to  the  general  stock  of  useful  knowledge,  but  the  venerated"
preceptor  has  left  little  that  could  add  to  his  own  fame,  besides  the  remarkably
original  thoughts  in  his  work  on  Inflammation ;  the  translation  of  Cuvier's  Com-
parative Anatomy  ;  and  a  few  papers  communicated  to  learned  associations,  and
I  should  add,  the  noble  museum  of  anatomy  now  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.
Macartney  established  by  his  discoveries  on  the  evolution  of  light  from  the  bodies
of  living  animals,  certain  propositions  that  were  highly  important,  which  must,
in  due  course,  meet  our  attention ;  but  subsequent  laborers,  in  the  same  field
have  much  advanced  our  knowledge  of  the  natural  history  of  animals  emitting
light.  The  researches  of  Professor  E.  Forbes,  published  by  the  Ray  Society,  in
his  Monograph  of  the  British  Naked-eyed  Medusas,  in  a  work  remarkable  for  ex-
tensive erudition,  and  evincing  the  power  of  the  author's  mind  in  the  exercise  of
deep  thought.  The  student  investigating  this  subject  will  find  an  interesting-bibli-
ography in  this  work.  The  best  summary  of  the  knowledge  on  animal  lumin-
ousness  is  to  be  found  in  Todd's  Cyclopedia  of  Anatomy  and  Physiology,  from
the  masterly  pen  of  Dr.  Coldstream.

If  we  ask  ourselves  the  question,  what  is  light  ?  what  do  we  know  of  light  ?
shall  we,  reflecting  upon  the  facts  of  Reichenbach,  or  upon  the  lumihousness  of
animals,  leap  to  the  conclusions  that  we  may  search  for  the  essential  causes  of
this  imponderable  phenomenon  in  the  natural  history  of  organized  beings  ?  or
shall  we  be  content,  in  treading  the  beaten  path  of  knowledge,  to  conclude  that  a
proper  definition  of  light  is,  that  it  is  "  the  cause  of  those  sensations  which  we
refer  to  the  eyes,  or  that  which  produces  the  sense  of  seeing," — aware  that  thus
we  shall  discard  from  our  atteution  all  the  curious  facts  connected  with  mesmeric
science,  and  others  relating  to  animal  light.  To  define  a  matter,  we  should  give
some  account  of  its  characteristic  properties.  Is  it  a  property  of  light  to  cause
the  pain  inflicted  by  the  sharp  end  of  a  pair  of  scissors  upon  the  eye,  or  that  of
an  ulcer  left  by  small-pox  or  any  other  morbific  poison  ?  Each  may  be  "  the
cause  "  or  antecedent  to  "  the  sensations  we  may  justly  refer  to  the  eye."  But  is
it  not  absurd  to  admit  that  light  can  be  thus  defined?  We  cannot  see  without
light ;  but  then,  in  such  case,  we  acknowledge  it  only  as  one  of  the  conditions
necessary  to  the  exercise  of  the  faculty  of  vision'.  Jane  M.,  a  clairvoyante,  was
for  several  weeks  an  inmate  at  my  house  in  Grosvenor  Street.     I  have  now  nar-

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  337

magnet  grow  longer,  and  the  intensity  of  its  light  increase.  When
she  did  the  same  with  her  left  hand  at  the  negative  pole,  the  flame  of
the  southward  pole  increased.  When  she  took  hold  of  the  same
poles  with  the  reverse  hands — the  southward  pole  with  the  left  hand,
and,  vice  versa — she  saw  the  odic  flame  of  the  other  end  become
weaker  and  duller.  I  repeated  the  same  experiments  a  year  later
with  Josephine  Ziukel,  with  the  same  results.  Their  hands  thus  act-
ed upon  the  flame  exactly  like  magnets.  The  application  of  their  own
negative   hands  to  the   positive   pole  of  the   magnet  considerably  in-

rowly  -watched  her  for  more  than  two  years.  Hundreds  of  persons  have  wit-
nessed many  curious  and  delicate  mesmeric  phenomena  in  her  case.  I  have  oc-
casionally shut  her  up  in  a  dark  chamber,  in  which  she  has  occupied  herself  with
great  perseverance  in  the  darkness  of  night,  without  the  possibility  of  getting  at
a  candle,  or  any  other  source  of  incident  light,  in  making  a  very  large  patchwork
quilt,  containing  many  hundreds  of  lozenge-shaped  pieces  of  printed  calico.  She
threaded  her  needles,  and  worked  night  after  night,  in  her  sleep,  at  this  quilt,
until  she  had  completed  it.  She  has,  under  the  same  conditions,  written  letters.
She  has  carefully  folded  them,  closed  them  with  wafers,  and,  after  writing  the
address,  has  attached  a  post-office  stamp  m  the  proper  place.  The  Marquis  de
Puysegur  (see  Mem.  pour  servir,  <tc.)  has  given  the  case  of  a  countryman  whom
he  locked  up  in  a  dark  room,  without  the  possibility  of  his  getting  at  any  source
of  incident  light ;  and,  on  several  occasions,  this  man,  having  pens,  ink,  and  pa-
per, wrote  essays  evincing  philosophical  power  of  thought.  It  cannot  be  con-
tended that  light  was  in  these  cases  the  cm/sc  of  the  faculty  of  seeing;  unless,
indeed,  it  was  light  invisible  to  persons  in  the  condition  of  ordinary  vigilance, —
light  emanating  from  the  brain  or  nerves  of  the  individuals  in  question, — certainly
not  light  incident  from  sources  external  to  the  individuals.  To  deny  the  exist-
ence of  such  phenomena  is  to  attempt  stupidly  and  mulishly  to  arrest  the  pro-
gress of  science.  I  myself  have  so  often  >een  what  I  have  related,  that  there
can  be  no  mistake  about  the  matter.  I  have,  at  various  hours  of  the  Bight,
gone  upstairs  to  watch  Jane  at  her  operations,  and  have  stood  with  the  door  in
one  hand,  and,  with  a  candle  in  the  other,  giving  only  sufficient  light  to  enable
me  to  see  her  at  needle-work  or  writing  during  her  sleep.  How  many  well-
aulhentirated  cases  of  a  similar  kind  are  extant  in  the  works  of  Sauvages,  of
Wienholt,  and  of  others!  The  individual  who  exclaims,  as  some  poor  creatines
do,  "I do  not  believe  it"  is  an  object  of  pity,  as  a  rude  denial  of  the  truth  pro-
ceeds from  vulgar  arrogance, — itself  the  product  of  an  ill-educated  or  a  badly-
organized  brain;  perhaps  of  one  unfortunately  incapable  of  the  expansion
enjoyed  by  refined  intellects.  It  is  not  contended  that  clairvoyants  see  without
light,  but  that,  seeing  with  a  light  emanating  from  themselves,  the  ordinary
definition  of  this  imponderable  is  not  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  form  a  clear  idea.
The  difficulty  of  denning  light  is  not  denied,  for  truly  we  are  lost  in  our  con-
jectures and  speculations  as  to  its  essence.  How  much  of  light  or  of  lumine  is
there  in  what  we  call  darkness  or  opacity  ?  We  say  that  light  radiates  in  all
direct  ions  from  luminous  bodies.  We  think  we  know  that,  in  homogeneous
media,  it  moves  in  straight  lines  ;  that,  however  great  its  velocity,  time  is  neces-
sary for  its  journey  from  one  point  to  another  ;  that,  all  things  being  relative,  the
relation  of  light  to  time  and  space,  under  present  circumstances,  is  very  nearly
that  of  one  second  to  200,000  miles.  We  are  aware  that  when,  during  its  pas-
sage, light  meets  with   any  obstacle,  its  direction  and  quantity  are  modified  by

15

338

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

creased  the  odic  current  at  the  opposite  negative  pole  of  the  magnet,  but
without  increasing  in  the  least  its  magnetic  power  of  supporting  iron  ;

the  nature  of  the  obstructing  medium.*  If  it  be  incident  on  a  smooth  and  pol-
ished surface,  a  portion  of  it  is  reflected  or  thrown  off  from  that  surface  at  an
angle  equal  to  the  angle  at  which  it  impinged,  and  that  then  it  again  follows  its
course  in  a  straight  line.  The  nature  of  the  surface  on  which  the  light  impinges,
together  with  its  angle  of  incidence,  determines  the  quantity  reflected.  Sup-
posing a  beam  of  light,  having  an  intensity  to  be  represented  by  1000,  to  fall  on
water,  so  as  to  make  an  angle  of  incidence  equal  to  0°  30",  the  intensity  of  the
reflected  light  would  be  represented  by  721.  If  the  angle  formed  at  the  sur-
face of  the  water  were  15°,  the  intensity  of  the  reflected  light  would  be  reduced
to  211 ;  at  an  angle  of  30°,  to  65  ;  at  an  angle  of  from  60°  to  90°,  to  18.  Mer-
cury, an  opaque  body  with  a  very  bright  surface,  may  not  reflect  more  than
three-fourths  of  the  light  incident  on  it  even  at  a  very  small  angle.

Light,  regarded  as  subject  to  laws  regulating  its  reflection,  must  arrest  the  at-
tention of  deep  thinkers;  for  in  this"  fact  alone  of  the  subtraction  of  some  degree
of  its  intensity,  much  is  left  unaccounted  for.  But  how  vast  a  field  opens  up
when  we  regard  the  laws  regulating  the  refraction  of  light ;  or  the  deviation
which  occurs  when  a  ray  of  light,  having  travelled  in  a  straight  line  through  one
medium,  enters  another  of  a  different  density.  The  divergence  from  its  original
path  develops  phenomena,  which,  however  wild  the  idea  may  appear,  would
seem  to  warrant  the  speculation  that  there  may  exist  crystalline  forms  ^_q_^
of  lumine.  It  is  not  the  purpose  now  to  follow  up  the  elements  of
dioptrics,  to  trace  the  philosophy  of  the  refractive  powers  of  different
media,  their  influence  on  the  dispersion  of  light,  their  powers  in  de-
termining the  relations  of  the  primitive  colors,  although  this  last  part
of  the  subject  has  an  intimate  relation  to  the  chemism  of  light  proper
or  lumine,  and  to  the  unexplored  field  of  the  influence  of  color  asso-
ciated with  various  crystalline  agencies  on  the  human  organism  under  finlxs
the  condition  of  mesmeric  clairvoyance, — a  subject  which  must  be  stu-
died in  order  to  liberate  from  its  crudities  the  relations  of  the  inter-
ference of  light  to  the  theories  proposed  to  account  for  its  nature.  It
is  impossible  to  conceive  of  the  extent  to  which  scientific  knowledge
may  be  corrected,  when  a  just  faith  is  established  in  the  laws  regulating
phrenological  and  mesmeric  science.  Philosophers  have  labored  bard
to'  account  for  the  extinction  of  light  under  the  laws  of  its  own  inter-
ference,— a  phenomenon  most  remarkable,  but  one  not  more  calculated
to  arrest  attention  and  to  excite  inquiry  than  the  fact  established  by
Macartney  of  the  ''luminous  exhibitions  of  living  animals  being  not

*  My  friend  Mr.  Crosse,  of  Bromfield,  has  devised  a  very  pretty  illustration  of  this
fact,  which  at  once  exhibits  the  modifications  effected  by  an  obstructing  medium
on  light,  and  the  material  nature  of  this  imponderable  agent.  He  takes  three  suffi-
ciently strong  cylinders  of  glass,  properly  capped  with  brass,  and  furnished  with
convenient  stop-cocks  ;  each  cylinder  being  at  least  sixteen  inches  long  and  five
inches  in  diameter.  These  are  each  first  placed  in  relation  with  an  air-pump.
Then  A  is  to  be  exhausted  by  the  greatest  power  of  the  pump;  B  to  a  degree  suffi-
cient to  give  one  inch  greater  pressure  of  the  barometric  gauge  ;  C  to  give  two  inches
greater  pressure  than  A,  and  one  inch  greater  than  B.  They  are  to  be  screwed
one  on  another,  A  being  uppermost.  An  electric  shock  is  to  be  passed  through  the
whole,  from  A  downwards,  in  the  dark.  A  will  appear  filled  with  one  uniform
cylinder  of  purple  flame  ;  B  with  parallel  columns  of  a  reddish  purple  flame:  and
through  C  will  pass  a  falling  star.

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  339

it  was  an  addition  of  (sit  venia  verbo)  Biod  to  Magnetod  ;  nnd  the  re-
sult was  doubled  odic  flame.     And  in  the  present  experiments  the  hu-

only  independent  of  all  foreign  light,  but  being  frequently  destroyed  by"  the
impingement  or  incidence  on  these  animals  of  any  foreign  light.

'•  I  have  always  found  t lie  shining  of  the  Medusa),"  he  says,  "  to  cease  upon
the  rising  of  the  moon,  or  at  the  approach  of  day  ;  and,  when  out  of  the  sea,
I  never  could  excite  them  to  throw  out  light  until  they  had  been  kept  for  some
time  in  the  dark;  all  the  luminous  insects  likewise  secrete  themselves  as  much
as  possible  during  the  day-time,  and  go  abroad  only  at  night."  An  exception  to
this  general  fact  occurs  in  the  Scolopendra  electrica,  which  does  not  shine  unless
il  has  been  previously  exposed  to  solar  light.  The  chemist  who  observes  that
camphor  appears  to  require  the  presence  of  light  for  its  crystallization  has  only
to  try  Mr.  Crosse's  experiment  of  endeavoring  to  form,  by  means  of  electrical
aid,  crystals  of  sulphate  of  strontia  in  the  broad  glare  bf  daylight.  He  will  in-
evitably fail ;  but  in  the  darkened  cellars  of  the  house  at  Bromfield  there  has
been  great  success  in  crystallizing  this  substance.  In  the  experiments  of  the  Ba-
ron von  Reichenbach,  the  darkened  chamber  gave  him  results  which  appear
incredible  to  persons  who  have  not  faith  in  the  goodness  of  the  Baron's  character,
or  who  have  not  reflected  on  the  strong  analogies  of  phenomena  previously  ob-
served by  other  philosophers.  The  electric  relations  of  the  Scolopendra  may  in
sinne  measure  account  for  its  aberrations  from  a  norma ;  and  this  consideration
introduces  a  difficulty  in  tracing  the  laws  relating  to  the  luminous  properties  of
animals,  of  no  mean  importance,  derived  from  the  modifications  which  complica-
ted organisms  may  introduce  into  the  associations  of  imponderable  agencies.

If  we  consult  the  essay  of  Dr.  Coldstream  (Todd's  Cyclopaedia  of  Anatomy
and  Physiology,  vol.  iii.  p.  197,  article  Luminousness,  Annual,)  we  shall  find  that,
according  to  the  observations  hitherto  made,  "  the  animals  which  possess  the  pros-
perty  of  emitting  light  are  almost  entirely  invertebrate,  and  chiefly  marine."
Those  which  manifest,  constantly  and  distinctly,  this  function,  belong  to  the  Mol-
lusca, Crustacea,  Inseeta,  Myriapoda,  Annelida,  Echinodermata,  Acalepha3,  Zoo-
phyta,  and  Infusoria,  Though  nearly  seventy  species  among  these  classes  have
been  observed  to  emit  light,  it  seems  that  the  color  of  the  light,  with  exceptions
easily  accounted  for,  has  belonged  to  one  or  other  of  those  named  primitive  by
Tobias  Mayer,  and  since  acknowledged  to  be  such  by  the  reasonings  of  Sir  David
Brewster.  The  same  annual  may  at  different  times  emit  different  colors,  and  of
different  degrees  of  intensity.  The  Pholas  daetylus  lias  been  observed  to  shed  a
bluish  white  light.  In  the  Lampyris  noctiluca  the  light  has  been  observed  to  be
greenish  with  a  shade  of  blue, — the  green  owing,  probably,  to  the  yellow  rings  of
integument  covering  the  light-emitting  organ  of  the  insect.  The  Elater  noctilucus
sheds  a  green  light,  with  spots  of  "  the  most  beautiful  golden  blue."  The  Fulgora
pyrrhorynchuH  emits  a  deep  purple  and  scarlet  light.  In  the  marine  animals,  the
light  is  of  various  shades  of  blue.  The  Lampyris  italica,  the  glow-worm  of  Italy,
emits  bright  blue  light.  A  curious  phenomenon  attaches  to  this,  as  well  as  to  an-
other beetle  in  New  Holland,  that  there  are  alternate  emissions  and  extinctions
of  light,  apparently  synchronous  with  its  circulating  current,  visible  in  the  wing-
Gases  of  the  insect.  Have  these  any  relation  to  the  polarities  derived  from  the
crystalline  spheroidal  or  globular  molecules  of  the  circulating  fluid  ?  The  Baron
vi  m  Reichenbacb's  discoveries,  backed  by  the  aid  of  mesmeric  researches,  tend  to
the  hypothesis  that  crystalline  light  belongs  to  the  odic  properties  of  organized
beings.

In  the  sea  of  the  Straits  of  Malacca,  near  Penang  and  Queda,  I  have  re-

340  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

human  hands  did  exactly  what  crystals  had  done  in  the  last  experi-
ments.

peatedly  but  coarsely  examined  the  minute  Medusae  scintillantes,  and  can  fully
testify  to  the  accuracy  of  the  account  given  by  my  old  friend  Mr.  Langstaff,
quoted  by  Dr.  Macartney  at  page  269  of  the  volume  of  the  Philosophical  Trans-
actions for  1816.  If,  while  in  a  boat  passing  through  a  surface  of  the  slime  co-
vering the  sea,  some  of  this  substance  be  caught  in  the  hand,  sheets  of  light  will
be  perceived  wherever  the  fluid  mucus  is  spread  over  the  surface  of  the  skin ;
and  sometimes  numbers  of  the  medusae,  most  of  them  not  so  large  as  a  pin's
head,  may  be  distinguished ;  at  others,  the  quantity  of  slimy  fluid  will  prepon-
derate, with  little  or  no  evolution  of  light.  I  never  could  bring  myself  to  believe
that  the  masses  of  light  I  have  so  often  witnessed,  on  the  milky  surface  of  a  tro-
pical sea,  were  wholly  owing  to  the  shining  of  the  tentacles  of  a  few  animals  like
Thaumantias  Hemispherica,  though  in  a  different  kind  of  night,  when  the  milky
slime  is  not  present ;  but  when  the  sea  is  unusually  clear,  and  its  depths  are  mag-
nificently studded  with  those  beautiful  jewels  with  which  Nature  adorns  her  in  the
shape  of  the  luminous  Holothuria  and  other  Mullusca,  in  thousands,  and  when
Thaumantias,  stimulated  by  the  moving  water,  send  forth  brilliant  glittering  light
from  its  tentacles ;  when  the  bows  of  the  ship,  in  rolling  the  salt  water  over,
plough  up,  as  it  were,  sheets  of  sparkling  light,  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  more
than  one  little  animal  contributes  its  share  to  the  illumination.  Dr.  Macculloch,
in  his  work  on  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland,  as  well  as  in  the  article  Phos-
phorescence in  the  Edinburgh  Encyclopaedia,  has,  among  some  philosophical  ideas
and  curious  facts  on  luminous  animals,  some  that  are  crude  and  ill-digested  ;  but
he  has  started  the  highly  probable  conjecture  that  there  exist  some  marine  ani-
mals which,  in  their  dimensions,  resemble  some  of  the  Infusoria ;  *  and  that  these,
whether  in  the  state  of  spawn  or  fully  grown,  may  be  possessed  of  the  faculty  of
emitting  light ;  and  he  distinguishes  with  respect  to  the  nature  of  the  light,  as
appearing  in  two  distinct  forms,  and  in  these  cases  apparently  arising  from  two
sources.  "The  twinkling  appearance  seems  always  to  proceed  from  the  animals,
and  to  be  the  result  of  their  own  actions,"  taking  place  when  the  water  is  at  rest.
"  The  diffused  light  appears  to  originate  rather  from  detached  luminous  matter
dispersed  through  the  water."  Macculloch  calls  the  diffused  light  fainter ;  but  if
he  had  witnessed  the  great  variety  in  this  respect  that  obtains  at  night  in  the
waters  of  the  Straits  of  Malacca  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year,  he  would  not
have  arrived  at  this  conclusion.  The  diffused  light  is  often  very  brilliant,  and
may  often  be  compared  to  an  illuminated  blue  sky  reflected  on  the  water;  while
on  other  nights,  the  green  water  of  the  sea  is  seen  clear  at  certain  limited  depths,
if  watched  out  of  the  stern  cabins  of  a  ship,  "  illuminated  by  the  pale  blue  light,
shed  off  numerous  points,  from  thousands  of  animals  of  various  sizes  belonging
to  the  genera  Holothuria  and  Beroe."  Macculloch,  anxious  to  find  uses  for  all
that  the  great  Planner  of  the  universe  has  arranged,  supposed  that  the  power  of
emitting  light  belongs  to  the  marine  animals  of  the  lower  grades  for  the  purpose
of  theh  serving  as  link-lights  to  guide  other  animals  to  prey  upon  them  ;  he
thought,  considering  the  absolute  darkness  that  exists  in  the  ocean  at  eight  hun-
dred or  one  thousand  feet  deep,  owing  to  the  light  of  the  sun  ceasing  to  be  trans-
mitted to  such  depths,  the  luminousness  of  marine  animals  may  be  "  a  substitute
for  the  light  of  the  sun,"  and  may  be  a  means  of  their  discovering  one  another,  as
well  as  their  prey.     It  is  remarkable  that  some  philosophic  minds  love  to  wander

*  Dr. Coldstream  states  that  many  species  of  the  Infusoria  belonging  to  the  genera  Cerearea,
Volvox,  Vibrio,  Trichoda,  Lincophcea,  emit  light.

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  341

445.  I  subsequently  made  a  controlling  experiment  with  the
healthy  Wilhelmine  Glaser.     In  the  dark  chamber  I  grasped  a  mag-

from  the  path  of  obvious  facts  to  the  captivating  speculations  of  false  secondary
causes.  All  the  facts  tend  to  conclusions  diametrically  opposed  to  those  calcu-
lated to  infer  a  wisdom  for  God  other  than  his  own.  The  greatest  brilliancy  of
light,  a  point  on  which  Macculloch  insisted,  is  given  out  by  those  very  inferior
animals  that  scintillate  their  flashes  on  the  surface,  and  give  out  no  light  in  the
deep.  The  numerical  proportion  of  those  that  shine  in  the  deep,  and  those  at  no
great  distance  from  the  surface,  bear  a  very  trifling  ratio  to  the  scintillating  me-
dusa1. Dr.  Maecidloch  was  more  exact  when  he  stated  that  he  had  himself  ob-
served the  luminous  property  in  certain  fishes,  the  larger  and  more  perfect  of  the
marine  animals.  "  I  have  hitherto  observed  it,"  he  states,  "  only  in  the  pilchard,
the  sardine,  the  whiting,  the  mackerel,  and  the  gar,  but  have  little  doubt  that  it
is  far  more  widely  diffused.  It  has  been  remarked,  by  different  navigators,  that
the  genus  Squalus  shines  at  night ;  and  the  flying-fish  has  also  been  observed  to
emit  a  pale  light,  which  Captain  Ross  compares  to  that  of  the  moon."  "  Great
flashes  have  been  described  as  seen  at  a  considerable  depth  in  the  sea,  a  pheno-
menon which  I  have  often  witnessed  among  the  Western  Islands :"  after  the  ob-
servations on  the  sources  of  fallacy  in  such  matters,  he  concludes  that  there  is
"  the  probability,  however,  that  fish  actually  possess  the  luminous  property,  which
is  strengthened  by  our  knowledge  of  the  light  they  so  readily  yield  after  death ;
a  phenomenon  by  no  means  connected  with  putrefaction,  but  independent  of  that
process ;"  a  point  Dr.  Hulme  had  long  ago  established.  In  traversing  the  ocean
I  have  seen  several  fish  caught,  which,  while  dying,  have  exhibited  numerous
changes  in  their  hues  of  color,  and  I  have  inferred  that  the  organized  vital  sur-
faces, capable  of  dissecting  or  of  evanescently  crystallizing  incident  light  to  such
a  remarkable  extent,  might  under  other  circumstances  possess  the  power  of  emit-
ting their  own  light.  Dr.  Macculloch  has  stated  the  fact  that  "  if  a  noise  be  made
by  striking  the  gunwale  of  a  boat  when  a  shoal  of  pilchards  is  under  it,  the
whole  will  in  an  instant  become  luminous,  exhibiting  the  splendid  appearance  of
a  continuous  sheet  of  light,  momentary,  but  renewable  on  repeating  the  same
alarming  sound.  Not-withstanding  this  direct  testimony,  it  is  right  to  observe  that
Dr.  Coldstream  has  hesitated  to  admit  fishes  on  the  list  of  truly  luminous  ani-
mals. Dr.  Macartney,  before  Dr.  Macculloch's  time,  had  withheld  his  assent  to
the  fact,  repeatedly  asserted.  Again,  the  analogies  afforded  by  the  investigations
of  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach  may  be  indicated,  and  the  probability  hinted  at
that  Dr.  Macculloch  was  right.

It  is  possible  that  animal  light  may  be  emitted,  under  certain  circumstances,
by  all  organized  living  beings;  but  the  question  as  to  whether  there  exist  varie-
ties in  the  power  of  exercising  an  animal  function,  or  of  manifesting  such  a  pro-
perty as  belonging  to  vital  structures,  is  quite  a  different  affair.  Certain  mollusca,
and  some  of  the  species  of  elater,  appear  to  shine  without  intermission.  In  Italy,
and  in  various  parts  of  the  tropics,  the  illuminating  powers  of  this  insect,  the  fire-
fly, is  so  great  that  I  have  known  a  beautiful  star-like  picture  produced  by  en-
closing numbers  of  them  in  meshes  of  thin  black  crape,  which  was  thrown  as  a
veil  over  a  lady,  who  desired  to  appear  in  the  character  of  Night.  In  the  West
Indies  (particularly  at  St.  Domingo,  where  they  are  abundant),  Dr.  Coldstream
states  "  that  the  natives  use  them  instead  of  candles  in  their  houses.  They  also
tie  them  to  their  feet  and  heads  in  travelling  at  night,  to  give  light  to  their  path
through  the  forest."  But  most  of  the  light-emitting  animals  appear  to  use  their
peculiar  function   only  occasionally,  and  in  most  instances  under  the  stimulus  of

342  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

netic  bar  eight  inches  long  in  my  own  hand  ;  when  I  did  this  below,
at  the  southward  pole,  with  my  right  hand,  the  blue  northward  flame

some  exciting  cause.  One  remarkable  fact,  that  is  striking  in  its  analogies,  ap-
pears to  be  dependent  on  temperature  and  climate.  The  greater  number  of  lu-
minous animals  are  found  in  warm  climates ;  and  though  among  the  marine  ani-
mals some  are  seen  in  all  latitudes,  even  the  coldest,  yet  these  are  not  so  numer-
ous, and  their  light  is  not  so  splendid.  It  is  well  known  from  the  concurrent
testimony  of  all  voyagers,  that  they  are  more  abundant  and  shine  with  greater
brilliancy  in  tropical  regions.  The  glowworms  of  temperate  countries  shine  only
in  summer  and  autumn.  In  England  it  is  found  between  June  and  September.
It  seems  that  "  no  aerial  insects  give  out  light  under  a  temperature  of  about  50°
Fahrenheit  and  upwards ;  and  the  higher  the  natural  temperature,  the  brighter
is  the  light  emitted."  But  whether  the  animals  be  insects  or  belong  to  marine
families,  changes  in  the  state  of  the  medium  in  which  they  live,  derived  from
altered  conditions  of  temperature  or  of  electricity,  appear  to  affect  them  manifest-
ly. I  have  myself  seen  sudden  changes  in  the  appearance  of  the  surface  in  trop-
ical seas,  which  have  gone  off  in  the  course  of  half  an  hour,  occasioned  by  the
appearance  of  luminous  animals,  which  have  retreated  as  suddenly  as  they  ap-
peared. During  the  rainy  monsoon,  a  few  degrees  distance  from  the  coast  of
Malabar,  at  midnight,  the  weather  being  cloudy,  and  the  night  very  dark,  Captain
Horsburgh  saw  the  sea  suddenly  assume  a  milky  white  appearance,  and  then  a
flaming  color  all  around :  a  similar  appearance  occasionally  occurs  in  the  Banda
Sea. — (Macartney's  Paper.)  On  these  occasions,  various  observers  have  testified
to  the  suddenness  of  the  changes  that  have  occurred  either  in  the  atmosphere  or
in  the  water.  Before  storms  it  has  frequently  been  observed  that  the  marine
luminous  animals  are  excited  to  give  out  their  light  with  unusual  splendor.  Dr.
Macartney,  in  experimenting  upon  the  light  of  the  medusae,  placed  some  of  the
individuals  of  Thaumantias  Hemispherica  in  a  glass  vessel,  and  passed  shocks  of
electricity  through  the  water.  At  the  moment,  there  was  no  appearance  of  light,
but  immediately  afterwards  they  shone  like  illuminated  wheels  for  some  seconds,
and  with  greater  brilliancy  than  before.  Humboldt  corroborates  this  fact.  It
appears  that  the  condition  of  an  electric  circuit  is  essential  for  the  production  of
an  increased  light  in  glowworms ;  for  Macaire,  quoted  by  Dr.  Coldstream,  found
that  one  pole  only  of  the  galvanic  battery  produced  no  effect.  I  have  been  led
to  infer  that  there  is  an  induced  imponderable  agency  from  the  closed  circle  of  a
single  electro-dynamic  coil,  as  illustrated  by  certain  mesmeric  phenomena,  which,
in  very  susceptible  cases,  are  rendered  evident  by  that  agency.  It  would  be  very
interesting  to  communicate  this  agency  to  glowworms,  and  to  fluids  in  which
marine  luminous  animals  were  present.

•  It  is  fashionable  to  sneer  at  isolated  facts,  and  to  withhold  belief  from  any
which  appear  extraordinary,  and  that  can  be  accounted  for  only  by  the  hypothesis
of  the  existence  of  unknown  or  unexamined  imponderable  agencies.  Dr.  Cold-
stream must  have  attached  a  certain  value  to  "  an  extraordinary  series  of  phe-
nomena," connected  with  a  particular  display  of  the  luminousness  of  the  sea,"
which  were  reported  by  Mr.  Henderson  in  a  paper  published  in  the  first  volume
of  the  Transactions  of  the  Medical  and  Physical  Society  of  Calcutta.  In  the
year  1821,  on  the  fifth  March,  Mr.  Henderson  was  on  board  of  a  ship  in  the  At-
lantic (lat.  2°,  long.  21°  20'  W.)  and  about  nine  P.  M.  the  sea  became  "  unusually
luminous.  Every  person  who  kept  his  eye  fixed  upon  it,  but  for  a  short  time,
was  immediately  affected  with  giddiness,  headache,  pain  in  the  eyeballs,  and
slight  sickness.     Although  these  symptoms  varied  in  intensity  amongst  the  spec-

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  343

at  the  top  grew  to  twice  the  size ;  when  I  did  it  at  the  opposite,  the
northward  pole,  with  my  left,  the  odic  flame  at  the  free  southward

tators,  yet  there  was  not  one  on  board  who  did  not  feel  some  degree  of  them ;  and
all  imputed  them  to  the  effect  of  the  light  proceeding  from  the  surface  of  the
ocean.''  Mr.  Henderson  remarks,  "For  my  own  part,  the  headache,  &c,  which
followed  immediately  on  my  looking  at  the  water,  was  particularly  severe,  nor
did  it  go  off  until  morning.  The  effects  I  experienced  were  like  those  produced
by  smoking  too  much  tobacco.''  Although  this  be  an  isolated  case  of  the  physical
effects  of  very  intense  light  from  this  unusual  source,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  give  full
credence  to  Mr.  Henderson's  statement.  Having  resided  in  Calcutta,  where,  at
certain  seasons,  the  light  of  day  is  most  intense,  and  where  the  repulsive  agency
of  this  imponderable  may  be  associated  with  other  nocent  powers,  I  have  repeat-
edly suffered  the  illness  so  well  described  by  Mr.  Henderson,  on  the  too  sudden
admission  of  the  glare  into  my  sitting-room,  or  on  going  out,  too  suddenly,  from
a  darkened  house,  into  the  fierce  light  abroad.  Repulsive  sun-light,  as  well  as
heat,  is  no  unusual  source  of  the  biliary  derangements  of  India.

We  are  apt  to  be  startled  by  relations  of  things  that  are  ne"w  to  us,  and  the
repulsive  agency  of  certain  organs  in  the  brain  is,  in  some  persons,  called  into  op-
eration. In  standing  on  the  defensive,  it  is  sometimes  a  property  of  our  struc-
tures that  we  should  become  offensive ;  and  in  refusing  belief  to  things  thought
to  be  unusual,  our  self-esteem,  and  love  of  opposition,  and  cunning,  and  jealousy,
and  envy,  derived  from  love  of  possession,  the  true  gluttony  of  selfishness, — our
cultivated  obstinate  vanity,  assuring  us  that  in  piggish  skepticism  resides  the
philosophy  which  really  buds  only  from  the  highest  and  most  delicate  organiza-
lion.  not  allowing  us  to  perceive  how  frequently  we  become  illogical,  teaches  us
fo  reject  truths  presented  to  us  by  our  fellows  in  the  best  faith  of  their  sincere
feelings.  I  could  mention  the  names  of  men,  having  high  reputations  in  the
world,  who  either  have  forgotten  that  love  of  justice  which  belongs  to  conscien-
tiousness, and  that  love  of  truth  that  belongs  to  high  moral  natures,  or  who  have
labored  under  such  obliquity  of  intellect  as  to  have  been  unaware  that,  in  some
cases,  the  arriving  hastily  at  disgusting  conclusions  is  the  characteristic  of  the
narrow  intellect  of  low-bred  blackguards,  and  not  of  polite  gentlemen.  But  the
charity  that  springs  from  a  conviction  of  man  being  the  creature  of  Ins  organiza-
tion, and  the  circumstances  which  impel  him  to  his  actions,  covers  such  beings
with  the  pity  that  falls  to  their  share.  Why  should  the  relation  of  an  extraordi-
nary fact  like  that  stated  by  Mr.  Henderson  not  be  believed  ?  It  could  not  have
resulted  from  fancy,  although  our  judgment  might  truly  lead  us,  in  reading  Mr.
Bonnycastle's  glowing  accounts  of  the  "  blazing  sheets  of  awful  and  most  briiliant
light"  exhibited  by  the  marine  animals  in  a  certain  portion  of  the  ocean,  and  in
describing  "  many  large  fishes  darting  about  «■?  if  in  consternation  at  the
scene,"  to  the  conclusion  that  in  describing  a  truth,  the  author,  being  a  person  of
ardent  temperament,  had  given  a  fanciful  coloring  to  his  picture.  So,  if  we  had
often  handled  fight-emitting  marine  animals,  and  had  never  experienced  an  odor
at  all  similar  to  that  perceived  around  a  highly  charged  electrical  apparatus,  we
should  hardly  be  guilty  of  philosophic  stupidity,  or  of  a  want  of  good  breeding,
if  we  adjudged  Messrs.  Quoy  and  Gaimard  to  be  occasionally  influenced  by  fan-
ciful ideas.

The  fact  of  the  luminosity  of  certain  animals  being  admitted,  let  us  inquire
into  the  ideas  that  have  been  entertained  as  to  the  circumstances  on  which  this
phenomenon  depends.  It  will  hardly  be  necessary  to  discuss  the  insufficiency  of
the  facts  that  might  be  adduced  to  prove  that  luminous  animals  imbibe  light

344  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

pole  was  doubled.  When  I  did  the  same  at  both  poles  with  the  re-
verse hands,  the  flames  of  the   free   extremities  were  dulled.     Only

from  the  sun's  rays,  and  give  it  out  in  the  dark  ;  or  to  combat  the  idea,  advanced
by  Spallanzani,  that  the  light  is  produced  by  a  kind  of  combustion  of  atmospheric
air ;  or  that  of  Bragnatelh,  that  the  light  is  swallowed  with  the  food,  and  disen-
gaged by  peculiar  organs.  But  when  we  meet  with  the  view  that  the  light  is
dependent  in  some  way  on  phosphoric  agency,  we  must  examine  if  such  an  hy-
pothesis will  account  for  all  the  facts  on  the  subject.  Tiedemann  thinks  that  the
luminous  phenomenon  is  dependent  on  a  matter,  the  product  of  a  secretion :  a
liquid  secretion,  probably  containing  phosphorus,  or  an  analogous  combustible  sub-
stance, which  combines  with  the  oxygen  of  the  air,  or  of  aerated  water  at  a  me-
dium temperature,  and  thus  produces  the  disengagement  of  light.  Hence  his
inference  is,  that  the  evolution  of  light  in  animals  is  a  chemical  operation,  and
as,  on  several  occasions,  the  phenomenon  has  continued  for  whole  days,  and  even
after  the  death  of  the  animal,  it  ought  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  vital  act  (Compa-
rative Physiology,  translated  by  Drs.  Gully  and  Lane,  i.  270.)  Dr.  Coldstream
justly  observes  that  this  opinion  coincides  pretty  nearly  with  those  held  by  Dar-
win, Sir  Humphry  Davy,  Heinrich,  and  some  others  who  conjectured  that  a  fluid
containing  phosphorus  was  secreted  by  the  luminous  organs,  and  shone  on  being
exposed  to  the  oxygen  of  the  air  introduced  by  respiration.  Tiedemann,  not-
withstanding his  high  reputation,  must  be  regarded  more  as  an  observer  than  as
a  correct  thinker,  and  it  is  owing  to  the  natural  homage  man  is  apt  to  pay  to
great  industry,  that  the  capacity  of  his  mind  has  been  overrated.  One  has  only
to  read  both  sides  of  the  controversy  in  which  he  was  engaged  with  Gall,  to  esti-
mate those  mental  forces  which  belong  to  the  close,  the  logical,  the  clear  and
correctly  reasoning  head,  and  those  qualities  which  distinguish  the  mere  observer
and  collector  of  facts :  a  character  so  often  proudly  asserting  its  right  to  reason,
while  the  clear  perception  of  important  relations  is  absolutely  wanting.  When
will  man  learn  to  be  humble,  and  to  know  that  he  is  the  victim  of  necessity  ?  If
his  brain  be  not  formed  to  allow  of  his  possessing  the  power  of  correct  reason-
ing, of  seizing  the  salient  points  of  a  complicated  series  of  questions,  and  of  eluci-
dating, with  happy  illustration,  the  relations  of  a  vast  mass  of  facts,  the  crowd-
ing those  facts  together,  without  arrangement  and  without  keys  to  their  rela-
tions, is  to  offer  them  comprehensively  for  the  purpose  of  reducing  them  to  a
mass  of  confusion.  The  great  genius  of  Gall,  like  that  of  the  wondrous  Milton,
shone  in  his  power  of  illustrating  truth,  in  controversy,  when  obscured  by  the
cloudings  of  common  minds.  Spallanzani,  in  entertaining  the  idea  of  animal
light  being  dependent  on  a  combustion  in  the  atmospheric  oxygen,  approached
more  nearly  to  the  illogical  chemical  thoughts  of  Tiedemann.  No  explanation
of  a  multiplicity  of  various  phenomena  can  deserve  the  name  of  theory  which  is
based  on  visionary  conjecture,  and  which  is  insufficient  to  account  for  at  least  a
majority  of  ascertained  facts.  What  relations  can  the  momentary  flashes  of  light
from  the  scintillating  medusa  have  with  the  combustion  of  phosphorus  ?  What
proof  is  there  of  phosphorus  in  the  shining  of  the  Holothuria,  which  continues  for
hours  without  emitting  any  luminous  secretion  into  the  sea-water  surrounding  it  ?
This,  and  several  other  mollusca  that  inhabit  the  neighborhood  of  Coralline
Islands,  may  be  handled  without  the  discovery  of  any  luminous  matter  adhering
to  the  hands.  In  one  of  Dr.  Macartney's  experiments,  luminous  medusas  in  salt
water  were  submitted  to  the  heat  of  a  burning  caudle.  The  light  ceased  with
the  hfe  of  the  animal,  instead  of  being;  increased  by  heat  and  flaring  up,  as
phosphorus  would  have  done.     From  all  his  experiments  it  is  easy  to  conclude

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  345

weak  magnets  can  be  used  in  these  experiments,  or  the  results  are  not
sufficiently  distinct.  They  confirmed  in  every  respect  the  result  of
the  preceding  paragraph.

that,  when  the  strongest  and  most  constant  light  was  present,  the  presence  of  oxy-
gen was  wanting.  In  no  circumstances  did  the  animal  light  exhibit  anything  like
combustion,  or  a  capability  of  being  inflamed.

Instances  have  been  adduced  of  luminous  appearances  on  the  human  body  re-
sulting from  a  large  admixture,  in  certain  cases  of  disease,  of  phosphoric  matter
with  the  perspiration  ;  and  when  luminous  appearances  have  been  observed  in
particular  conditions  of  urine,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  presence  of
phosphorus  may  possibly  have  been  perceived  by  means  of  chemical  manipula-
tions. Dr.  Coldstream  affirms  that  it  is  «aid  the  urine  of  Viverra  nSpkitis  and  of
Viverra.  putorvus  is  always  luminous.  This  may  be  true,  and  the  light  in  urine
may  Dot  improbably  be  owing  to  the  presence  of  phosphorus;  but  the  presence
of  this  substance,  because  it  may  have  been  detected  in  a  few  isolated  and  quite
exceptional  cases,  cannot  be  yielded  as  the  one  sole  and  sufficient  mode  of  ac-
counting for  all  animal  light,  in  most  instances  of  the  presence  of  which  not  a
trace  of  phosphorus  has  been  discovered.  Dr.  Macartney's  researches  have  es-
tablished the  more  logical  inference,  that  animal  luminousness,  emitted  from
animal  organs,  is  the  etfect  solely  of  the  action  of  vital  forces.  But  it  may  be
asked — How,  in  those  instances  in  which  Macartney  himself  allowed  the  exist-
ence of  a  light-emitting  fluid,  could  the  influence  of  vital  forces  alone  account
for  the  presence  of  light  ?  and  how,  in  the  glowworm  and  fire-fly,  in  which  it
has  been  asserted  that  the  luminous  organs  may  be  cut  out  without  the  destruc-
tion of  the  light-emitting  property  which  belongs  to  them  ?  It  is  no  argument
against  the  existence  of  vitality  in  an  organized  fluid,  that,  for  a  certain  time
after  its  emission  from  the  animal,  it  does  not  exhibit  the  chemical  changes
caused  by  death ;  nor  does  the  mutilation  of  an  animal  of  the  lower  grades  es-
tablish the  fact  of  death  at  once  in  all  its  parts.  "  Macaire  took  some  glow-
worms that  had  been  kept  for  some  time  at  a  temperature  of  50°  Fah  plunged
them  into  water  at  55°,  and  gradually  raised  the  temperature.  Light  was  emit-
ted for  the  first  time  at  77°,  and  increased  in  intensity  until  the  water  was  at
105°.  At  this  temperature  the  animals  died,  but  the  light  continued  until  the
temperature  had  reached  134°-5,  when  it  wholly  disappeared  f  the  light-emit-
ting organs  retaining  their  vitality  for  some  time  after  the  suspension  of  life  by
other  parts  of  the  animal.  "  When  glowworms  are  thrown  alive  into  water  at
110°  and  upwards,  they  emit  for  a  moment  a  brilliant  light,  and  die  instantly."
U  nder  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump,  a  glowworm  emits  a  faded  light,  varying  in
degree  of  intensity  as  the  air  is  abstracted,  and  the  light  is  re-established  as  the
air  is  readmitted.  Kirby  and  Spence  (Entomology,  ii.  426)  state  that  the  lu-
minous matter  was  by  Mr.  Sheppard  removed  from  a  glowworm.  The  wounds
healed  within  two  days,  and  the  light-emitting  organs  were  reproduced.  These
organs  were  first  anatomically  examined  by  Dr.  Macartney,  in  whose  paper  ap-
pears this  statement :  "  The  only  animals  which  appeared  to  me  to  possess  a  dis-
tinct organization  for  the  production  of  light  are  the  luminous  species  of  Lampyris,
Elater,  Fulgora,  and  Pausus.

"  The  fight  of  the  lampyrides  is  known  to  proceed  from  some  of  the  last  rings
of  the  abdomen,  which,  when  not  illuminated,  are  of  a  pale  yellow  color.  Upon
the  internal  surface  of  these  rings  there  is  spread  a  layer  of  a  peculiar  soft  yel-
low substance,  which  has  been  compared  to  paste,  but,  by  examination  with  a
lens,  I  found  it  to  be  organized,  like  the  common  interstitial  substance  of  the  in-
15*

346  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

446.  A  somewhat  modified  but  essentially  similar  experiment  was
gone  through,  frequently  with  the  girl  Zinkel.     I  let  her  bring  her

seet's  body,  except  that  it  is  of  a  closer  texture,  and  of  a  paler  yellow  color,"  &c.
Macartney  has  remarked,  that  in  the  glowworm  this  peculiar  substance  is  absorb-
ed after  the  season  for  emitting  light,  and  that  its  place  is  supplied  by  common
interstitial  substance.

In  order  to  allow  of  the  internal  illumination  being  exposed,  the  segments  of
the  abdomen  are  thin  and  transparent.  In  different  species  of  lampyris  there
is  a  variety  in  the  number  of  the  luminous  rings.  Dr.  Macartney  discovered
"  in  th«  common  glowworm,  besides  the  luminous  substance,  on  the  inner  side
of  the  last  abdominal  ring,  two  bodies,  which  to  the  naked  eye  appear  more
minute  than  the  head  of  the  smallest  pin.  These  were  sacs,  containing  a  soft
yellow  substance.  They  were  formed  of  two  layers  of  silvery  membrane,  dis-
posed in  a  circular  direction,  very  elastic,  although  so  delicate  in  structure.  The
light  from  these  bodies  is  less  under  the  control  of  the  insect  than  that  of  the  lu-
minous substance  spread  under  the  rings :  it  is  rarely  ever  extinguished  in  the  sea-
son in  which  the  glowworm  gives  out  light,  even  during  the  day :  and  when  all
the  other  rings  are  dark,  these  sacs  often  shine  brightly."

In  the  genus  Elater,  the  light-producing  organs,  consisting  of  a  peculiar  yellow
substance,  are  placed  in  the  corcelet.  In  the  dissection  of  the  Elater  noctilucus,
Dr.  Macartney  found  a  "  soft  yellow  substance  of  an  oval  figure  lodged  in  the
concavity  of  the  yellow  spots  in  the  corcelet."  A  lens  enabled  him  to  esta-
blish its  organic  nature :  it  was  composed  of  very  minute  lobules,  closely  packed
together.  In  the  Pausus  spberocerus,  the  globes  of  the  antenna?  form  the  organs
of  light.  Carradori  thought  that  the  lampyrides  were  enabled  to  moderate  or
extinguish  their  light  by  retracing  the  luminous  substance  under  a  membrane ;
but  neither  in  this  nor  in  any  other  luminous  insect  could  Macartney  detect  an  ap-
paratus for  such  a  purpose,  and  he  observes  that  "  the  regulation  of  the  kind  and
degree  of  the  luminous  appearance  does  not  depend  on  any  visible  mechanism, —
but,  like  the  production  of  the  light  itself,  is  accomplished  by  some  inscrutable
change  in  the  luminous  matter,  which  in  some  animals  is  a  simple  operation  of
organic  life,  in  others  is  subject  to  the  will."

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  in  all  the  dissections  of  luminous  insects  made  by
Dr.  Macartney,  he  did  not  find  that  the  organs  of  light  were  better  or  differently
supplied  with  either  nerves  or  air-tubes  than  the  other  parts  of  the  body.  Doctor
Coldstream  says  that  "  the  luminous  proboscis  or  snout  of  the  Fulgora  is  hollow,
and  has  a  free  communication  with  the  external  air  by  a  nai'row  slit  situated  near
the  base  of  the  organ.  Its  cavity  is  lined  with  a  fine  membrane,  between  which
and  the  outer  translucent  corneous  crust  there  is  interspersed  a  soft  tissue,  of  a
pale  reddish  color,  arranged  in  lines  longitudinally,  which  is  supposed  to  be  the
seat  of  luminousness  in  this  insect."

In  those  luminous  insects,  then,  in  which  there  is  found  a  peculiar  organ-
ization for  the  production  of  the  light,  there  does  not  appear  to  be  a  question
as  to  the  existence  of  a  fluid,  from  which  the  light  emanates.  There  is  a  pe-
culiar organic  substance,  consisting  in  some  cases  of  aggregated  lobules,  but
no  proof  exists  as  to  the  presence  of  so  highly  combustible  a  substance  as  phos-
phorus.

Dr.  Macartney  asserts  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  animals  above  mentioned,
the  exhibition  of  light  depends  upon  the  presence  of  a  fluid  matter.  He  adduces
the  Pholas  dactylus,  in  which  the  luminous  fluid  is  very  evident,  and  in  vast  quan-
tity.    Some  naturalists  assert  that  it  is  from  the  internal  surface  of  its  respiratory

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  347

fingers  near  the  poles  of  the  magnetic  bar.  "When  she  approached
the  collected  points  of  the  fingers  of  her  left  hand  to  the  northward

tubes  that  this  Pholas  gives  out  its  light  most  strongly,  and  of  course  secretes  the
greatest  abundance  of  this  fluid.  Pliny  is  an  authority  that  this  fluid  is  like  phos-
phorus, rendering  every  object  luminous  with  which  it  comes  in  contact.  Reaumur,
according  to  Macartney,  found  it  diffusable  in  water  or  any  other  fluid  in  which
the  animal  might  be  immersed.

Macartney  observed  that  the  shining  of  the  Scolopendra  electrica  was  always
accompanied  by  the  appearance  of  an  effusion  of  a  luminous  fluid  upon  the  sur-
face of  the  animal,  more  particularly  about  the  head ;  and  this  fluid  may  be  re-
ceived upon  the  hand  or  other  bodies  brought  in  contact  with  the  insect  at  the
moment,  and  the  light  thus  transferred  remains  for  a  few  seconds  afterwards.
"  This  fluid,  however"  adds  the  Doctor,  "  I  never  could  discover  in  (he  form  of  a
moisture,  even  upon  the  clearest  glass,  although  examined  immediately  with  the
most  scrupulous  attention  bit  a  hns.     It  must,  t/i  ere  fore,  be  extremely  attenuated."

The  same  appearance  was  observed  during  the  illumination  of  the  Nereis  noc-
tiluca,  by  Fougeroux  de  Bonduroy.  (Mem.  de  l'Acaci.  des  Sc.  1767.)  Godehue
de  Riville,  in  the  3d  volume  of  the  same  Memoirs,  gives  an  account  of  a  luminous
animal  he  had  seen  on  the  coast  of  Malabar,  where  he  saw  the  sea  having  the
same  appearance  of  a  plain  of  snow  which  Horsburgh  and  others  have  witnessed.
In  experiments  with  this  animal,  he  observed  it  to  emit  a  blue  liquor  which  illu-
minated the  water  for  several  lines.  Spallanzi  relates  (Memoria  sopra  le  Meduse
forforische  Mem.  della  Soc.  Ital.  tomo  7)  that  the  medusa,  which  he  examined,
communicated  the  property  of  shining  to  water,  milk,  and  other  fluids,  on  being
rubbed  or  squeezed  in  them.  Professor  Forbes,  in  his  monograph  on  the  Naked-
eyed  Medusa3,  quotes  Ehrenberg  and  others  to  show  that  the  medusfe  give  out
their  light  from  the  bulbs  of  the  tentacles,  and  particularly  the  Thaumantias  hemis-
pherica,  noticed  by  Macartney  ;  and  he  compares  the  light  to  a  garland  of  sparks
around  the  circumference  of  the  umbrella.  Ehrenberg  regards  the  production  of
the  light  as  an  act  of  organic  life,  and  he  observes  that  it  "  appears  frequently  pe-
riodically produced  either  spontaneously  or  by  excitement,  frequently  as  rapidly
produced  sparks,  resembling  small  electric  discharges.  This  repeated  sparkling
converts  a  viucous  gelatinous  Jl  uid,  which  is  discharged  more  abundantly  during
the  operation,  into  a  secondary  state  of  phosphorescence,  which  continues  for  a
time,  even  after  the  death  of  the  organism,  or  after  the  severing  of  its  parts."

Macartney  had  previously  noticed  that  in  this  animal  the  light  was  given  out
from  the  same  spots,  and  he  adds,  from  the  centre  also.  He  says  :  "  The  central
part  and  the  spots  round  the  margin  are  commonly  seen  to  shine  on  lifting  the
animal  out  of  the  water  into  the  air,  presenting  the  appearance  of  an  illuminated
wheel,  and  when  it  is  exposed  to  the  water  the  transparent  parts  of  its  body  are
alone  luminous."  Forbes  states  that  from  Dioncea  appendiculata,  which  is  always
a  luminous  species,  the  light  proceeds  from  the  reproductive  glands.  Ehrenberg
found  that  in  Cydippe  pileus,  and  Oceana  pileata,  of  the  Baltic,  the  light  issued
from  tire  neighborhood  of  the  ovaries,  and  in  Oceana  hemispherica  from  the  basis
of  the  cirri ;  corroborating  the  idea  of  Professor  Forbes,  that  "  the  light  of  the
naked-eyed  medusa?  is  developed  by  the  reproductive  and  motor  systems.1'

Dr.  Coldstream  says,  "  The  luminous  mucus  is  sometime?  poured  out  even  by
very  small  animals  in  such  quantity  as  to  leave  a  luminous  wake  behind  them,  as
in  the  instance  mentioned  by  Quoy  and  Gaimard.  These  observers  saw  such
luminous  lines  formed  in  the  paths  of  certain  extremely  small  creatures,  so  trans-
parent that  their  forms  could  not  be  distinctly  made  out.     The  positions  of  their

348  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

pole,  the  flames  of  both  sides  flowed  towards  each  other,  becoming
more  slender  and  larger ;  when  she  came  nearer,  however,  they  drew

bodies  were  marked  in  the  water  by  bright  spots,  which  were  followed  in  their
course  by  luminous  wakes,  at  first  about  an  inch  in  breadth,  but  afterwards  by
the  movements  of  the  water  spread  out  to  the  breadth  of  two  or  three  inches.
This  luminous  mucus  is  supposed  to  be  the  seat  also  of  the  remarkable  stinging
property  possessed  by  many  of  the  acalephce.  It  retains  its  luminousness  in
some  instances  for  a  day  or  two  after  being  emitted  by  the  animal,  but  loses  it
whenever  putrefaction  commences!'  Dr.  Maculloch,  who  paid  much  attention  to
the  subject,  thought  that  in  marine  animals  generally  the  coats  of  the  stomach
and  intestines  were  the  real  light-emitting  organs.  Whatever  differences  of  opin-
ion may  have  existed  on  this  part  of  the  inquiry,  it  seems  certain  that  from  the
momentary  or  from  the  sudden  -and  periodical  sparklike  gleams  or  flashes,  the
light  proceeds  from  the  internal  organs  of  the  animal  under  conditions  of  an  exalt-
ed or  stimulated  vitality,  or  from  tentacles  capable  of  assuming  a  spheroidal
shape ;  that  it  would  seem  to  depend  on  the  agency  of  some  imponderable ;  that
this  can  attach  itself  to  a  vitalized  mucus,  which  ceases  to  shine  when  death  pro-
duces putrefaction  ;  that  in  the  luminous  insects  this  imponderable  does  not  ne-
cessarily attach  itself  to  a  palpably  moist  fluid ;  that  in  many  cases  there  is  no
evidence  of  a  fluid  further  than  the  presumption  of  a  slight  moisture  accompany-
ing the  presence  of  the  fatty  matter  belonging  to  the  organs  of  light ;  that  in
some  of  the  medusae  and  some  other  luminous  animals,  there  are  fitful  flashes  of
light  without  the  appearance  of  subsequent  trains  or  wakes  of  a  light-containing
fluid,  affording  the  presumption  that  some  stimulating  influence  may  impel  the
organism  in  such  animals  to  flash  a  vivid  gleam  of  light  which  is  not  necessarily
borne  along  on  a  vitalized  mucus.  It  might  be  very  logically  contended  that  the
cessation  of  the  phenomena  of  light  on  the  commencement  of  the  process  of  pu-
trefaction was  a  strong  argument  in  favor  of  the  vital  origin  of  the  light ;  but  it
is  at  the  same  time  a  cogent  reason  why  the  light  is  not  necessarily  connected
with  the  presence  of  a  nervous  system.  The  desire  to  connect  vital  phenomena
necessarily  with  certain  known  conditions  of  organization  is  a  testimony  of  an  in-
elastic mind,  wanting  the  capacity  of  yielding,  with  delicacy,  to  numerous  facts
that  must  be  ignored  by  stubborn  refusals  to  embrace  knowledge  inconsistent  with
the  conclusions  established  during  the  existence  of  a  crude  and  unripe  philosophy.
An  exalted  state  of  vitality  may  be  a  necessaiy  condition  for  the  exercise  of  the
functions  of  reproduction,  but  the  presence  of  the  organs  of  reproduction  does
not  necessarily  imply  the  existence  of  a  nervous  system,  and  the  light-bearing
mucus  that  is  shed  from  certain  medusas  may  serve  as  a  nidus  for  ova  which  es-
cape from  their  ovaries.  The  lampyrides  deposit  eggs  which  have  been  said  to
be  frequently  luminous,  and  their  luminosity  has  persisted  for  several  days.

The  experiments  of  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach  would  tend  to  show  that  na-
ture has  a  law  of  type  in  many  of  her  operations  besides  those  strictly  anatomi-
cal, and  the  animal  function  of  emitting  light,  belonging  to  the  crystalline  type,
may  be  found  to  be  a  property  of  all  organic  spheroidal  molecular  matter.  A
strong  analogy  to  the  facts  discovered  and  recorded  by  the  Baron,  I  find  in  Dr.
Coldstream's  article,  relating  to  the  JVyctipithecus  trivirgatus,  a  South  American
ape,  quoted  from  a  German  work  by  Reugger  (Naturgesch.  der  Saugthiere  von
Paraguay,  S.  383.)  This  animal  is  nocturnal,  and  when  the  observations  were
made,  it  was  under  circumstances  of  total  darkness.  Reugger  states  that  then,
the  luminousness  of  the  ape's  eye  was  distinctly  seen,  and  the  light  was  so  bril-
liant, that  objects  could  be  clearly  seen  at  the  distance  of  eighteen  inches  from  the

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  349

back,  became  shorter,  contracted,  and   both   disappeared  as  soon  as
the  finger-points  came  in  contact  with  the  poles  of  the  magnet. .   But

eye  which  was  illuminating  them.  Treviranus  (Biologie,  i.  439)  endeavors  to
show  the  impossibility  of  this  phenomenon,  notwithstanding  an  admission  that
some  dogs  have  an  analogous  power  of  generating  light  within  the  eyes ;  and  lie
thinks  he  grants  enough  if  he  modifies  the  circumstances,  under  which  the  light
is  perceived,  to  those  in  which  impressions  are  made  that  arouse  the  feelings  of
the  animal,  and  that  betray  him  into  the  expression  of  some  instinct  or  passion.
This  physiologist  had  not  been  at  the  pains  to  have  the  fact,  stated  by  Reugger,
either  subverted  or  corroborated.  Nor  had  the  reflection  upon  the  similarity  of
structure  in  the  brain  of  the  dog  and  monkey  families  passed  through  his  mind.
The  value  of  isolated  observations  is,  in  philosophy,  often  enhanced  by  the  curious
and  subsequent  corroborations  afforded  to  them  by  the  labors  of  inquirers  who
work  with  quite  different  objects,  as  we  perceive  by  the  Baron's  new  investiga-
tions. Dr.  Coldstream  has  very  pertinently  remarked,  that  "  If  if  should  be
proved  that  some  of  the  higher  animals  really  do  emit  light  from  their  eyes,  in-
dependently of  the  incidence  and  reflection  of  that  from  -without,  it  will  go  far  to
render  it  probable  that  in  luminous  animals  generally  the  development  of  light
depends  more  upon  the  movements  of  some  imponderable  agent  in  and  from  their
nervous  system,  than  upon  the  nature  and  composition  of  the  fluids  poured  out  by
the  luminous  organs."  Modifying  the  conclusions  to  which  my  revered  and  la-
mented friend  Dr.  Macartney,  had  arrived,  I  would  seize  the  admissions  of  Dr.
Coldstream  as  a  step  towards  a  progress  in  the  belief  of  facts  established  by
mesmerism,  while  I  would  point  to  the  hypothesis  of  my  friend  Ignotus,  as  to  the
possibility  of  all  lumine  being  subject  to  the  laws  of  chemism,  imponderable,  in
itself  the  minutest  form  of  spheroid  developed  from  organic  spheroidal  matter  ;
the  lowest  condition  of  wliich,  within  our  ken,  is  that  from  the  crystallization,
which  exists  iu  the  form  of  pure  metallic  aggregation  ;  the  highest,  the  form  of
light  which  emanates  from  the  human  being  as  the  result  of  mil  or  of  thought.
In  this  view,  of  course,  there  is  no  admission  of  the  hypothesis  assumed  as  a
conjecture  by  Dr.  Coldstream,  that  the  development  of  light  may,  in  luminous
animals  generally,  depend  upon  some  agency  from  their  nervous  systems,  since  in
many  of  them  it  would  be  difficult  to  prove  the  existence  of  such  systems.  As
easy  might  it  be  to  prove  the  existence  of  blood-vessels  in  the  medusae,  asserted
to  have  been  observed  by  Will.  I  should  be  inclined  to  advocate  the  severity
with  which  Professor  Forbes  rejects  all  unproved  assertions  of  the  existence  of
certain,  apparently  to  us,  essential  organs  of  kving  beings.  The  eagerness  to  es-
tablish the  presence  of  vascular  circulating  systems  in  mullusca.  because,  in  the
highest  classes,  more  exalted  vital  phenomena  could  not  exist  without  them,  is  an
example  of  the  desire  to  account  for  everything  before  we  have  sufficient  evidence
to  guide  our  judgment.  The  logician  is  often  heard  to  mix  sneers  with  ridicule
on  the  arguments  derived  from  analogies.  How,  without  analogy,  are  we  to
classify  ?  How,  without  classification,  are  we  to  form  categories  ?  It  is  the
abuse  of  instruments  that  is  productive  of  confusion  in  reasoning,  and  of  the  diffi-
culty of  arriving  at  just  conclusions.  The  laws  regulating  nutrition,  as  well  as
reproduction,  have  yet  to  be  carefully  studied  before  we  arrive  at  final  decisions
as  to  the  means  by  which  the  ends  are  accomplished.  To  a  certain  extent  we
must  confide  in  analogy;  but  as  events  change  our  points  of  view,  we  must  sus-
pend judgment  until  more  complete  knowledge  be  acquired.  The  researches  of
the  Baron  von  Reichenbach,  as  well  as  the  daily  developing  new  facts  in  mes-
merism, are  establishing  the  existence  of  the  odic  force ;  and  the  phenomena  pro

350  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

this  did  not  always  succeed  equally  well.  If  the  magnet  was  small
or  weak  its  odic  flame  was  extinguished,  that  of  the  hand  not  com-

duced  by  this  power  in  controlling  diseased  growths,  many  of  which  may  be  re-
garded as  subject  to  the  laws  regulating  the  existence  of  the  lowest  organisms,
may  lead,  in  future  time,  to  the  inference  that  those  changes  we  now  consider  as
essentially  dependent  on  absorption  and  deposition,  by  means  of  a  vascular  ap-
paratus, are  but  chemical  compositions  and  decompositions  effected  by  the  agency
of  light,  developed  into  activity  from  some  latent  form,  or  liberated  from  its  as-
sociation with  that  hitherto  occult  power,  upon  which  the  Baron  von  Reichenbach
is  shedding  the  luminous  rays  emanating  from  the  crystallic  arrangements  of  his
highly  organized  brain.

It  is  unnecessary  to  ask  the  question  as  to  the  constitution  of  vitality  ;■  for  our
knowledge  is  not  sufficiently  advanced  to  enable  us  to  give  a  satisfactory  reply.
Chemical  changes  of  a  certain  nature  are  the  sources  of  the  clearest  definite  idea
we  can  form  on  the  subject.  The  phenomena  of  life  are  dependent,  probably,
upon  some  imponderable  agencies,  the  nature  of  which,  man,  in  the  present  bru-
tal condition  of  his  civilization,  studies  at  his  peril ;  for  so  keen  is  the  bitterness
of  competition,  that  even  the  dignity  of  corporate  bodies  is  occasionally  compro-
mised by  the  tacit  countenance  yielded-  to  slander  and  calumny  originating  in  the
effort  to  distract  public  attention  from  gross  private  and  individual  professional
incompetence  ;  and  men  are  found,  with  pretensions  to  science  and  to  social  posi-
tion, who  can,  in  their  eager  desire  to  crush  the  truth,  utter  deplorable  false-
hoods, and  quite  forget  the  becoming  characteristics  of  gentlemen.  It  is  not  to
such  judges  that  the  researches  into  the  curious  phenomena  of  new  impondera-
ble agencies  are  submitted.  With  humble  assurance  that  the  investigations
recorded  are  put  forth  to  the  world  in  the  philosophic  spirit  of  justice,  the
virulent  attacks  of  malice  are  regarded  with  the  pity  to  which  their  authors  are
entitled.

The  authority  of  Humboldt  has  been  adduced  to  affix  some  remote  probability
to  the  idea  that  dead  fish  may  be  an  occasional  source  of  the  luminous  appear-
ances met  with  on  the  ocean;  for  this  celebrated  philosopher  "saw  a  great
extent  of  the  surface  of  the  sea  rendered  almost  gelatinous  by  the  admixture  of
numbers  of  dead  Dagi/sce  and  Medusae.  We  have  seen  that  there  is  the  testi-
mony of  Macculloch  for  the  fact  that  living  fish  in  shoals  occasionally  under
conditions  of  excitement  emit  light.  Whether,  at  the  moment,  their  bodies  yield
a  luminous  fluid  or  not,  is  a  question  to  which  no  reply  can  be  given-;  but  it  is
well  known  that  the  pilchard  and  the  whiting,  for  a  short  time  after  what  is
called  death,  shed  forth  a  shining  light,  which  ceases  before  the  truly  putrefac-
tive process  has  commenced.  I  have  seen  a  large  area  of  fields  on  which  pil-
chards, destitute  of  odor,  at  all  events  at  a  short  distance,  have  been  spread  for
manure,  shining  brilliantly  one  night,  and  the  next  all  was  dark,  when  the  offen-
sive effluvium  from  them  became  quite  sickening.  If  the  fish  be  examined
during  the  process  of  death,  an  oily  moisture  can  be  scraped  off,  which  in  the
dark,  for  a  very  short  time,  is  found  to  be  luminous  even  on  the  surface  of  the
water;  but  it  is  said  that  the  light  may  be  observed  diffused  through  the'water
if  the  mass  of  it  be  agitated.  Those  fish  which  are  known  to  become  putrid
soonest  are  those  which  earliest  shine.  In  Tuckey's  voyage,  Professor  Smith's
account  of  his  own  observations  made  in  the  Atlantic  corroborates  those  of  other
voyagers,  that  the  bright  sparkling  light  of  the  surface  of  the  ocean  is  always
emitted  by  living  animals,  and  that  the  duller  light  which  Horsburgh  and  others,
as  well  as  I  myself,  have  3een  emanating  from  a  milky  appearance  on  the  water,

ODIO  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  351

pletely ;  in  other  cases  the  finger  points  were  extinguished  and  the
flame  of  the  magnet-pole  remained  ;  this  was  the  case  with  larger

is  the  result  of  a  "  dissolved  slimy  matter."  Professor  Smith  examined  this
slimy  fluid  under  a  powerful  microscope,  and  he  detected  "  the  most  minute
glittering  particles  having  the  appearance  of  solid  spherules"  In  what  kind  of
spherules  can  vitality  be  said  to  reside  \ — Not  in  spherules  of  carbonates  or  sul-
phates of  metals  or  metalloids, — -not  in  siliceous  spheroids  aggregated  in  rock
crystal, — not  in  the  diamond;  but  in  those  belonging  to  organized  matter,
whether  in  the  lower  or  higher  states  of  organization, — in  the  slime  of  the  ocean,
iu  which  occasionally  dead  Dagysce  and  Medusa  may  sometimes  be  found,  but
in  which,  iu  luminous  states,  it  may  safely  be  piedicated  living  spherules  are  al-
ways present:  ia  dving  fish,  oil,  constituted  of  living  spherules,  but  which,
exhausted  of  the  presence  of  the  imponderable  agency  giving  it  the  power  of
shedding  a  light,  not  incident  upon  it,  becomes  dead  matter,  no  longer  having
living  phenomena,  dead  matter  once  organic,  once  crystallic;  now  resolved  by
the  laws  of  chemism  into  inorganic  elements.  Are  we  to  deny  the  existence  of
living  spherules  because  we  are  not  yet  gifted  with  the  power  of  distinguishing
the  varieties  in  the  size  of  their  diameters  and  the  relative  positions  of  their
molecules?  Are  we  to  admit  the  probability  of  their  existence  in  the  slime  on
the  ocean  l  in  the  abundant  fluid  from  the  Pholas  dactylus  ?  iu  the  mucus  shed
by  certain  luminous  centipedes  inhabiting  the  islands  of  the  Pacific,  which,  on
being  rubbed  off  by  the  fingers,  leaves  an  odor  beliind  not  unlike  that  of  muriatic
acid  '.  and  to  deny  that  there  can  possibly  exist  spherules  in  the  light  which  Ma-
cartney wiped  otf  from  the  Scolopendra  electrica,  and  which  astonished  him  be-
cause lie  could  detect  no  moisture  ?  In  nature  is  there  no  variety  in  degree  in  the
qualities  of  her  phenomena  ?  Is  it  not  notorious  that  in  our  susceptibilities  to
impressions  there  is  every  variety  of  degree  ?  Some  can  see,  iu  ordinary  wake-
fulness, and  in  daylight,  the  blue  sparks  emanating  from  human  fingers.  Some
can  see  a  blue  or  violet  halo  surrounding  a  person  under  certain  conditions.  Others
can,  in  the  ordinary  waking  state,  see  none  of  these  things,  but  are  enabled  to
perceive  them  immediately  by  being  put  into  mesmeric  sleep  by  the  agency  of
the  human  will, — by  passes,  by  pointing  of  the  fingers,  or  by  presenting  the  apex
of  a  crystal  to  the  face  or  eyes.  This  fight  so  perceived  is  like  all  other  light ;  in
some  cases  it  dazzles  by  its  brilliancy  and  diffusion,  or  is,  under  other  circum-
stances, subdued  and  limited.  In  some  persons  it  is  associated  with  a  cloud, —
blue,  grey,  or  silvery ;  in  others  it  is  clear,  and  like  the  shining  of  the  sun.  Such
great  variety  is  offered  by  the  phenomena  of  animal  light,  and  so  many  facts  to
evince  its  intensity,  its  concentration,  or  its  attenuation.  Some  medusae  have
been  known  to  shine  with  a  light  so  intense  that  the  human  eye  could  not  long
be  directed  upon  it.  It  dazzled  like  the  sun,  and  yet  the  point  whence  this  illu-
mination was  distributed  was  not,  in  diameter,  equal  to  one-two-hundredth  of  that
animal  itself.  Animal  light,  then,  is  manifestly  subject  to  the  laws  which  regu-
late all  other  matter ;  it  is  condeusible  and  expansible,  capable  of  being  very
intense  or  very  much  attenuated,  according  to  the  structure  whence  it  is  liberated.
The  phenomena  offered  by  light  emanating  from  inorganized  matter  are  quite
analogous.  Varieties  in  degree  may  be  traced  from  the  light  emitted  by  electri-
cal agency  from  the  points  of  charcoal  to  that  emitted  in  the  dark  from  the  poles
of  the  magnet.  Nor  are  there  wanting  facts  to  show  the  probability  of  this  im-
ponderable matter,  as  we  call  it,  being  subservient  to  the  laws  of  attraction  and
repulsion  ;  and  if  this  could  be  established,  imponderability  would  no  longer  be
a  characteristic  of  lieht.

352  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

and  stronger  bars.     The  equilibrium  was  displayed  soonest  in  bars
of  four  to  six   inches  long.     But  this  showed  itself  differently  with

There  is  a  strong  probability  that  all  spheroidal  particles  have  their  polar  and
equatorial  relations  operating  with  plus  or  minus  energy  ;  capable  of  being-
modified  by  forces  powerful  enough- to  control  them.  The  proofs  of  the  existence
of  this  probability  should  be  offered  only  to  minds  that  can  admit  the  truths  of
mesmerism.  To  others,  as  they  are  incapable  of  appreciating  the  subtleties  of
fine  reasoning  upon  subjects  of  an  extremely  delicate  nature,  it  is  a  loss  of
time  to  waste  facts.  To  pigs,  to  some  adult  agricultural  hinds,  to  the  majority
of  members  of  medical  colleges,  a  grunt,  a  meal,  or  a  sneer,  would  be  more  ap-
propriate to  their  tastes  and  capacities.  In  all  classes,  the  stupidities  and  the
cunning  sordid  must  be  separated  from  ,  the  rest,  that  progress  may  not  be  ob-
structed. The  Baron  von  Reichenbach  had  had  the  opposition  of  the  unphiloso-
phical  to  contend  with  in  Germany,  as  we  have  here  ;  and  if  he  would  make
himself  master  of  Gall's  works,  he  would  find  many  reasons  to  pity  his  oppo-
nents, and  some  facts  to  show  that  Gall,  in  his  day,  met  with  stupidities !

Mesmeric  agencies  allow  us  to  place  very  susceptible  and  delicate  subjects  in
such  relations  as  to  enable  us  to  regard  them  as  excellent  tests  for  the  elimination
of  facts  which  the  state  of  our  knowledge  does  not  at  present  permit  us  to  arrive
at  by  any  other  mode  of  investigation.  If  we  take  a  certain  number  of  such
testing  subjects  and  obtain  from  them  the  same  testimony,  we  may  feel  satisfied
that  we  have  as  good  evidence  as  if  we  had  a  galvanometer  applied  for  the  test-
ing of  electricity.  If  we  find  that  in  these,  certain  stimulants  or  excitants,
whether  applied  in  the  form  of  a  train  of  actions  or  in  the  form  of  the  applica-
tion to  certain  organs  of  the  body  of  a  magnet — a  piece  of  pure  gold,  of  pure
platinum,  of  titanium,  of  nickel,  of  cobalt,  .or  other  definite  substance,  produce
invariably  a  rigid  condition  of  the  muscles, — a  tonic  spasm,  and  that  other  stim-
ulants or  excitants  produce  immediate  relaxation  of  that  rigidity, — a  clonic  con-
dition, we  have  a  right  to  class  our  agents  or  reagents  accordingly.  My  experi-
ence having  led  me  to  infer  that  tonic  agencies  are  to  be  classed  as  attractive,
and  clonic  agencies  as  repulsive,  I  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  that  train  of
actions  which  induces  rigidity  in  my  testing  subject  belongs  to  an  attractive  pole,
and  the  contrary  to  one  repulsive.  If  I  take  a  tube  of  glass,  of  porcelain,  of
hard  wood,  or  of  paper,  and  blow  through  it  upon  the  upper  part  of  the  fore-
head of  a  testing  subject,  and  produce  instant  rigidity,  I  infer  that  the  particles
of  air  passing  through  the  tube  have  a  plus  polarity  ;  a  force  attractive.  If  now
I  reverse  the  tube,  and  by  blowing  through  it  in  the  direction  opposed  to  that  of
the  first  blast  I  produce  an  almost  immediate  relaxation  of  the  rigid  state  of  mus-
cles, I  infer  that  an  influence  was  left  in  the  tube  which,  on  the  first  occasion,
determined  a  molecular  arrangement  of  the  gaseous  particles  that  gave  them
one  polar  arrangement — plus,  and  that  on  the  second  occasion  the  polar  arrange-
ment was  reversed  and  became  minus.  If  now,  without  the  knowledge  of  the
subject  who  is  asleep,  but  in  the  condition  of  relaxed  muscles,  I  pour  on  the
head  a  phial  full  of  mesmerized  air,  I  render  the  muscles  immediately  rigid ;
and-then,  exhausting  the  phial  of  the  air  which  has  displaced  the  mesmerized
air,  I  quickly  apply  it  to  the  head,  I  relax  the  muscles  and  sometimes  suddenly
awaken  the  subject ;  thus  showing  that  the  polarity  of  the  particles  rushing  into
the  bottle,  communicated  by  an  influence  derived  from  the  person  of  the  subject,
has  been  opposite  to  that  polar  state  which  has  been  productive  of  the  tonic
conditions  of  sleep  and  rigidity.  But  several  somnambulists  in  another  room
have  witnessed  the  filling  of  the  phial  with  blue  mesmeric  light,  so  that  Reichen-

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  353

different- persons,  and  doubtless  in  different  degrees  in  the  same  per-
sons in  different  odic  conditions :  my  own  finger  often  extinguished

bach's  odic  force  has  been  the  source  of  these  phenomena ;  and  the  light  -which
has  been  associated  with  that  force  has  been  subjected  to  the  same  polarities.
How  is  this  ascertained  ?  By  blowing  strongly  in  a  direction  across  the  stream
of  mesmerized  air  while  it  is  poured  out  of  the  phial :  no  rigidity  is  produced,
and  a  somnambulist  sees  the  blue  light  blown  away  from  the  testing  subject.
Light  is  in  these  cases  associated  with  some  agency  that  communicates  a  specific
gravity  to  the  air.  May  be  a  minute  dose  of  carbon  or  nitrogen  from  the  animal
textures.

It  may  be  argued  in  opposition  to  such  facts  and  such  views,  that  the  results
obtained  by  each  mesmerizer  differ  from  those  obtained  by  any  other  person.
This  is  a  very  curious  part  of  the  affair,  and  is  an  additional  motive  for  further
inquiry.  It  is  very  true  that  Major  Buckley  can  make  my  somnambules  exhibit
phenomena  of  high  clairvoyance,  which  I  cannot  succeed  in  producing.  I  can,
by  my  will,  effect  several  phenomena  which  Dr.  Elliotson  does  not  seem  capable
of  producing;  and  I  have  at  his  house  in  vain  tried  to  produce  rigidity  of  the
muscles  in  one  of  his  patients,  in  whom  a  touch  of  his  finger  has  at  once  effected
the  object.  The  differences  between  the  mesmeric  forces  of  my  friend  Mr.  H.  S.
Thompson  and  myself,  have  been  repeatedly  pointed  out.  Mr.  Joseph  Hands
bad  a  patient  (Garman)  in  whom  he  could  produce  several  phenomena  that  baf-
fled me  when  I  attempted  them.  These  modifications  are  important  facts  for
investigation,  but  they  do  not  invalidate  any  series  of  established  truths.  It  is  a
fact  that  upwards  of  thirty  persons,  who  have  been  in  a  clairvoyant  state,  have
6een  blue  sparks  in  great  numbers  issuing  from  hazel  sticks,  but  because  not  more
than  seven  of  these  have  exhibited  the  phenomenon  of  being  forcibly  attracted
to  a  hazel  stick  when  it  has  been  held  in  the  direction  of  its  growth,  and  have
been  repelled  by  it  when  it  has  been  held  with  its  smaller  end  downwards,  is
that  a  reason  why  the  established  fact  as  to  a  highly  curious  phenomenon  should
be  completely  thrown  away  ?

The  relations  of  the  subject  of  light  emitted  from  the  hazel  stick  and  from
some  other  vegetable  organisms  to  that  of  clairvoyance,  are  curious  and  import-
ant. In  a  previous  note  I  have  endeavored  to  call  attention  to  this  point.  Lately
I  have  had  opportunities  of  making  experiments  upon  an  analogous  set  of  phe-
nomena relative  to  the  influence  of  odic  light  emanating  from  water,  from  glass,
or  from  crystals,  upon  the  nervous  systems  of  certain  sensitive  persons,  which  tend
to  illustrate  clairvoyance.  They  are  so  easily  repeated  that  time  only  is  required
for  thousands  of  corroborations  of  the  events  I  have  noticed;  and  although  we
have  in  England  many  stupidities,  who,  like  the  Baron  von  Keichenbach's  critics,
will  carp  at  facts,  which  their  maladroit  minds  will  turn  to  ridicule  and  calumny,
the  simplicity  of  the  apparatus  required  for  these  phenomena  will  speedily  en-
sure a  sufficient  number  of  verifications.  The  persons  who  form  the  subjects  of
these  experiments  should  be  of  highly  sensitive  nervous  systems,  and,  as  far  as  I
have  observed,  should  have  heads  well  developed  about  the  organs  of  ideality,
marvel,  veneration,  and  hope ;  comparison,  tune,  time,  and  constructiveness ;  ad-
hesiveness, philoprogenitiveness,  and  caution  ;  and  rather  the  contrary  as  respects
amativeness,  combativeness,  self-esteem,  cunning,  and  acquisitiveness.  A  phial
of  clear  colorless  glass,  capable  of  containing  eight,  ten,  twelve,  or  more  ounces
of  filtered  water,  or  a  clear  globe  holding  a  pint  and  a  half  or  a  quart  of  water,
answers  the  purpose  well.  The  vessel  should  be  completely  filled  with  water,
clean  and  clear.     It  should  be  mesmerized  by  some  healthy  person  with  a  large

354  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

the  same  magnet  which  that  of  Zinkel  would  not  wholly  put  out :
this  was  equally  the  case  when  her  finger  was  more  strongly  luminous

brain,  by  darting  the  odic  sparks  from  the  fingers  upon  the  surface  of  the  water,
at  several  hundred  strokes,  and  by  breathing  upon  it  for  some  minutes.  The
vessel  should  then  be  closed,  so  that  no  bubbles  of  air  are  admitted,  and  when
properly  secured,  should  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  sensitive  person,  who  is  to
look  continuously  into  it,  uninterrupted  by  the  proximity  of  too  many  persons,
whose  odic  forces  may  tend  to  spoil  the  experiment.  The  mesmerizer  of  the
water  may  be  near,  but  it  is  better  that  not  more  than  one  or  two. persons  be-
sides, agreeable  to  the  sensitive  person,  should  be  present.  I  have  placed  vessels
of  water  so  prepared  in  the  hands  of  numerous  sensitive  persons,  most  of  them
quite  unaware  of  the  object  of  my  requesting  them  to  look  steadily  at  the  water.
Some,  in  the  course  of  a  few  minutes,  have  seen  beautiful  visions  of  persons  and
things  that  have  given  them  delight.  Others  have  seen  objects  which  have  terri-
fied them.  Some  have  described,  vividly,  charming  country  scenes,  with  elegant
companies  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  gaily  attired,  at  boat  races  on  a  river.  Oth-
ers have  seen  hunting  gentlemen,  in  scarlet  uniforms,  on  fine  horses.  Some  have
seen  funerals  and  churchyards ;  others,  sick  rooms,  with  death's  heads  flitting
about  the  surface  of  the  bed  of  sickness.  Some  have  truly  predicted  to  me  the
approach,  to  the  house;  of  friends,  who  were  to  knock  at  my  door  at  stated  times.
On  one  occasion,  a  visit  from  my  friend  Mr.  Hoffmann,  of  Mayence,  was  predicted
by  a  person,  who  described  him  accurately  without  ever  having  seen  him,  except
by  the  agency  of  the  crystalline  bottle  of  water,  which  she  then  held  in  her  hand
for  the  first  time  in  her  life,  and  without  knowing  the  object  I  had  in  view  in
requesting  her  to  look  into  it.  At  the  moment  I  had  a  conviction  that  Mr.
Hoffmann  was  either  at  Macclesfield  or  at  Liverpool,  but  he  made  his  appearance
in  my  room  in  ten  minutes, — the  time  my  sensitive  subject  had  indicated.  A
number  of  people  have  now  repeated  such  experiments,  and  I  am  told  that  sev-
eral persons  who  had  failed,  at  first,  in  perceiving  anything  in  the  vessels  of
mesmerized  water,  had,  by  dint  of  patience  and  perseverance,  after  many  repe-
titions of  trials  for  half  an  hour  and  an  hour  at  a  time,  become  highly  clairvoyant.
If  my  health  and  my  various  pursuits  had  permitted,  I  should  have  instituted
many  experiments  upon  this  subject  with  vessels  of  glass  of  various  colors,  and
containing  fluids  of  various  compositions.  The  curious  facts  that  have  excited  so
much  attention  in  relation  to  a  crystal  ball,  bought  by  Mr.  Morrison  at  Lady
Blessingtön's  sale*  and  those  relating  to  the  numerous  fits  of  clairvoyance  induced
in  Mrs.  Woodard,  by  her  looking  into  an  oval  piece1  of  polished  glass,  are  analo-
gous to  those  I  have  stated.  The  stupidities  rely,  in  opposition,  upon  the  numer-
ous failures  that  occur  in  the  attempts  to  repeat  the  exhibitions  of  these  phenom-
ena. If  it  were  possible  that  such  persons  could  practise  humility,  I  would  refer
them  to  the  study  of  the  Baron's  researches,  in  order  to  prepare  them  for  a  proper
spirit  of  investigation.  After  witnessing  very  numerous  instances  of  clairvoyance,
I  can  have  no  do'ubt  but  that  the  brain,  apt  for  the  purpose,  is  stimulated  to  the
production  of  the  phenomena  by  some  relation  which  it  bears  to  fight;  perhaps
to  this  imponderable  matter  in  combination  with  the  odic  force."  What  that  re-
lation is,  must  be  determined  by  future  investigation.  "Why  certain  individuals
should  feel  the  influence  of  currents  of  water  to  be  highly  pleasurable,  and  others
should  shudder  at  them ;  why  running  streams,  and  mountain  rills,  and  sheets  of
falling  water,  should  have  such  powerful  attractions  for  some,  and  be  indifferent
or  even  repulsive  to  others,  are  questions  that  have  relations  to  the  phenomena
of  mesmerism,  odic  forces,  light,  and  clairvoyance ;  perhaps  to  the  theories  enter-

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  355

than  mine,  which  occurred  not  unfrequontly.  She  was  tall  and  stout,
bat  had  small  hands,  in  which  the  result  was  concentrated,  and  thus

tcrtained  by  our  greatest  philosophers  on  the  essence  of  light.  The  most  extra-
ordinary of  clairvoyants,  Andrew  Jackson  Davis,  the  American,  has  spoken  of
the  existence  of  unparticled  matter,  as  Huygeus  and  Ins  followers  have  thought
of  an  elastic  medium.  It  is  admitted  that  philosophers  should  not  seek  for  too
many  facts  to  account  for  a  satisfactory  result:  a  surplus  of  truth  would  appear
unnecessary.  The  human  mind  has  the  capacity  only  for  a  limited  quantity.
Among  die  ideas  it  cannot  embrace  is  that  of  space  being  filled  with  particles,
and  still  requiring  the  existence  of  an  unparticled  or  an  elastic  medium  in  which
to  contain  these  particles.  Why  is  not  the  elasticity  of  the  myriads  of  infinitely
minute  molecular  spherules,  attenuated  to  the  requisite  dryree,  sufficient  to  fill  up
space  without  leaving  vacuum  ?  Constructed  as  we  are,  the  organization  of  the
brain  is  incapable  of  framing  the  idea  of  a  vacuum.  If  pumps  could  be  con-
structed to  remove  from  a  scooped  ball  even  the  imponderable  matter  which
occupied  its  internal  area,  the  noun  space  would  remain,  and  it  is  impossible  to
make  nonentity  of  that.  But  space  in  itself  must  necessarily  be  made  up  of  an
infinite  multiplication  of  points, — "of  nothings,''  some  mathematicians  would
reply.  He  who  would  intrude  such  a  thought  must  have  a  confused  idea  of  the
relations  of  numbers  to  matter.  All  is  ratio.  All  elements,  all  forces,  are  plies
or  hi  in  us ;  and  however  subtle  may  be  the  power  of  ratiocination  in  any  man,  his
brain  is  quite  incapable  of  conceiving  of  the  multiplication  of  any  definite  surface
without  the  idea  of  increase,  or  the  sense  of  thickness ;  or  of  the  multiplication
of  a  line  without  the  idea  of  increase  relative  to  the  sense  of  width.  The  nega-
tive series  of  decimals  can  never  come  to  absolute  nothing.  A  mathematical
point,  however  minute,  is  susceptible  of  multiplication,  as  well  as  attenuated
matter  of  further  division  of  attenuation.

The  difficulty  in  allowing  of  the  complete  occupation  of  space  by  most  extreme-
ly minute  molecular  particles,  arises  from  the  limited  nature  of  our  organs;  arid
very  few  philosophers  have  been  at  the  pains  of  obeying  Locke's  direction  on  the
examination  of  the  degree  to  which  habits  of  thought  have  influenced  their  assent
to  the  adoption  of  a  theory.  If  I  place  Jane  M.  or  Mary  D.  on  a  couch  or  in  a
chair,  and  imagine  a  circle  around  that  couch  or  chair,  silly  people  would  say  that
I  had  environed  the  individual  by  a  magic  circle,  for  she  has  not,  until  I  remove
that  imaginary  circle,  the  power  of  moving  from  the  position  in  which  I  have
placed  her.  I  am  told  by  clairvoyants,  and  by  the  subject  herself,  that  the  circle
is  one  of  blue  flaming  light.  If  this  be  so,  the  light  has  resulted  from  an  opera-
tion of  certain  organs  of  my  brain ;  and  whether  it  has  reached  the  floor,  on
which  it  is  perceived,  by  the  transmission  of  a  certain  number  of  spheroidal
molecules  from  my  brain,  or  that  the  brain  has  communicated  an  impulse  to  cer-
tain pre-existing  undulatory  elastic  matter,  the  effect  is  the  establishment  in  that
circle  of  a  force  which  directlyT  influences  the  subject.  That  hght  and  that  force
have  remained  for  hours,  on  repeated  occasions ;  and  Jane  has,  when  afflicted
wiili  serious  delirium,  been  calmed  at  once  by  my  will,  and  has  remained  quiet
in  bed  the  whole  night,  under  the  influence  of  the  luminous  circle.  When  I  per-
ceive the  fact  of  so  highly  attenuated  and  subtle  an  agent  as  a  flame  of  light  from
the  brain,  issuing  to  a  circular  line,  remaining  there,  exerting  a  power  over  the
organic  operations  of  another  individual,  I  find  it  difficult  to  bend  my  habits  of
thought  to  assent  to  the  proposition,  that  that  circular  flame  is  undulatory  elastic
matter  exerting  a  force  which  reverberates  on  Jane.  It  is  easier  for  me  to  em-
brace the  idea  that  the  hght  is  composed  of  very  minute  spherules,  which,  by

356  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

appeared  with  more  intensity.  When,  however,  she  carried  the
points  of  the  fingers  of  her  right  hand  towards  the  northward  pole
of  the  bar,  there  was  no  attenuation,  no  approach  of  the  flames  ;  the
like-named  poles  did  not  attract  one  another.  As  the  approximation
was  carried  further,  the  flames  both  became  contracted  at  their  own
poles,  assumed  a  globular  form,  and  finally  were  partially  introverted
when  the  fingers  and  the  poles  came  in  contact,  but  both  flames  were
at  the  same  time  in  a  diminished,  dull  condition.  At  other  poles
the  result  was  exactly  the  same  in  the  reverse  order.  But  the  mul-
tifariously modified  experiments  prove  the  same  thing  ;  namely,  that
the  points  of  fingers  act  upon  the  polar  odic  flames  like  crystals  and
like  magnets,  and  may  in  all  cases  be  substituted  for  them.

446.  b.  The  variations  just  mentioned,  produced  by  unequal
strength  of  the  reacting  odic  poles,  went  so  far,  that  in  one  particu-
lar case  I  found  the  polarity  of  the  odic  flames  of  a  weak  magnet
directly  reversed  by  powerful  hands.  This  observation  merits  atten-
tion, because  it  affords  a  further  proof  of  the  independence  of  Od  in
contrast  to  magnetism,  similar  to  that  which  we  had  just  now  at
§  436.  I  gave  to  Josephine  Zinkel  a  magnetic  needle  four  inches
long,  which  was  not  strongly  magnetic  ;  she  held  it  by  the  middle,
between  two  fingers,  conformably  in  the  meridian.  When  I  took  hold
of  its  positive  end,  turned  toward  the  south,  with  the  points  of  the
fingers  of  my  right  hand,  the  blue  odic  flame  at  the  other  pole  of
the  needle  became  twice  as  long  as  it  was  originally.  This  great  in-
crease proved  the  weakness  of  the  needle  in  proportion  to  my  hand.

attractive  affinities  not  yet  understood,  except  in  so  far  as  the  researches  in  the
text  are  elucidating  them,  have  a  relation  to  certain  forms  of  animal  light  residing
in  the  nervous  system  of  another  human  being.  Undulations  and  curves,  neces-
sary conditions,  requisite  paths,  for  the  passage  of  even  the  most  attenuated  fluids
through  one  another,  are  convenient  ideas,  as  expedients,  to  enable  us  to  apply
calculation  to  the  relations  of  dynamics.

To  apply  the  words  spiritual  and  immaterial  to  the  class  of  phenomena  under
discussion,  is  to  remove  them  from  the  domain  of  physics  into  the  region  of  the
absence  of  ideas, — into  a  territory  in  which  the  existence  of  non-entities  must  be
affirmed.  The  instant  the  human  mind  loses  the  idea  of  matter,  it  wanders  in
a  haze  in  which  clear  consciousness  is  no  longer  present, — it  approaches,  in  a  de-
gree, the  state  to  which  narcotics  reduce  the  perceptive  faculties,  and  which,  car-
ried to  its  extreme  limits,  proceeds  to  fatuity  and  unconsciousness, — a  condition
iucompatible  with  immortality,  and  thus  involving  an  absurdity.  One  can  con-
ceive that  however  light  may  be  hidden  by  combination  with  other  forms  of  mat-
ter, it  may  reappear,  but  can  never  be  annihilated  as  long  as  space  exists.  For
all  we  know,  its  destiny  may  be  immortal ;  its  nature  may  be  to  become  infinitely
attenuated  and  purified.  But  whether  it  exists  associated  with  heat,  electricity,
magnetism,  chemism,  or  odism,  the  mesmeric  facts  of  clairvoyance  show  that  it  is
the  vehicle  in  which  thought  is  conveyed,  and  may  be  the  punctum  saliens  of  tire
lowest  animated  spherule,  as  well  as  of  the  higher  organized  being.

ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  Sot

But  when  I  took  hold  of  the  positive  end  of  the  needle  with  the  tips
of  the  fingers  of  my  left  hand,  the  blue  color  of  the  northward  flame
was  lost,  and  a  red  flame  half  the  length  took  its  place.  When  I
made  the  experiment  the  other  way,  and  put  the  tips  of  the  fingers
of  my  left  hand  to  the  negative  end  of  the  needle  directed  to  the
north,  the  red  flame  at  the  other  pole  became  more  luminous  and
three  times  as  long.  But  when  I  took  hold  of  the  same  negative
end  of  the  needle  with  the  right  hand  finger-tips,  the  red  color  of  the
southward  flame  was  lost,  and  a  blue  flame  took  its  place.  It  clearly
results  from  this  that  the  odic  force  of  my  hands  far  exceeded  that
of  the  weakly  magnetic  needle  in  reference  to  odic  polar  quality  ;  so
much  so,  that  it  converted  its  red  or  blue  polar  flames  into  blue  or
red,  when  its  Od  was  opposed  to  that  of  the  magnet  at  the  other
pole,  and  without  in  the  least  disturbing  the.  true  magnetic  polarity
of  the  ends  of  the  needle.  My  hands,  which  possessed  no  magnetic
capacity  whatever,  acted  so  strongly  odically  upon  the  needle,  that
its  Magnetod  was  completely  overcome  by  Biod,  and  the  flames
changed  color.      (It  acted  exactly  as  we  have  seen  electricity  act.)

447.  In  contrast  to  these  means  of  strengthening  the  odic  flame,  I
have  become  acquainted  with  means  of  weakening  it,  and  as  yet  with
two.  The  first  is  Heat.  I  showed  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  a  horse-shoe
in  the  dark  ;  she  found  its  polar  flames  from  two  to  two  and  a  half
inches  long  when  cold ;  when  I  had  warmed  it  to  the  heat  of  one's
hand  on  the  stove,  she  found  the  flames  diminished  to  about  four-
fifths  of  an  inch.  And  when  the  magnet  had  cooled  down  again,
she  found  its  odic  flames  of  the  same  size  as  at  first.  On  the  follow-
ing day  I  repeated  the  experiment  with  a  larger  magnet  :  I  raised
the  temperature  to  a  rather  higher  degree  ;  she  again  saw  its  flames
diminish  considerably  in  size  as  it  became  hot,  and  increase  again  in
proportion  as  the  cooling  progressed.  AVilhelmine  Glaser,  in  the
dark  chamber,  saw  a  polar  flame  of  six  inches  length  on  a  single
horse-shoe  with  limbs  ten  inches  long,  as  long  as  it  was  cold.  I  laid
it  upon  the  heated  stove,  and  when  it  had  reached  about  100°  Fahr.
1  brought  it  to  her  again  ;  she  now  found  its  flame  diminished  to
about  three  inches.  I  placed  the  magnet  on  the  stove  once  nwre,
and  heated  it  to  about  144°  Fahr.,  so  that  I  could  no  longer  hold  it
well  in  my  unprotected  hand.  Now,  when  I  brought  it  to  her  again,
she  saw  the  flame  reduced  to  an  inch  and  a  half.  But  when  1  had
let  the  horse-shoe  cool  down,  with  the  armature  applied,  the  flame
was  as  large  as  it  had  been  originally.  Josephine  Zinkel  made  similar
observations  on  the  same  horse-shoe  magnet.  The  diminution  of  the
odic  flame  appeared  to  her  more  strikingly  in  bars  ;  when  they  were
heated,  the  luminosity  almost  entirely  disappearing.     Accordingly  as

358  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

the  odic  incandescence  of  magnets  is  diminished  by  elevation  of  tem-
perature, (§  369,)  so  also,  and  in  a  more  remarkable  degree,  is  the
odic  flame ;  by  heating  steel  magnets  to  a  little  above  the  boiling-
point  of  water,  the  flame  would  perhaps  be  wholly  extinguished.  It
consequently  diminishes  far  more  rapidly  in  steel,  with  the  increase
of  temperature,  than  the  magnetism,  which  indeed  also  sinks,  but  far
more  slowly.

448.  A  second  cause  of  diminution  of  the  odic  flame  lies  in  ano-
ther circumstance,  of  much  more  importance  to  the  experimenter,
namely,  the  proximity  of  surrounding  objects.  We  have  already
seen  what  crystals,  hands,  and  the  like,  can  effect ;  I  shall  discuss
the  influence  exerted  by  metals,  metalloids,  alkalies  and  acids,  brought
in  considerable  quantity  into  the  vicinity  of  flaming,  magnets,  in  the
chapter  on  the  light  of  matter.  I  shall  here  only  speak  of  the  re-
markable influence  of  approaching  persons.  Miss  Atzrnannsdorfer
often  observed  to  me  that  she  only  saw  the  magnets  I  showed  her
well,  when  I  removed  to  some  distance  from  them,  and  they  were
not  too  close  to  herself.  Madame  Kienesberger  called  my  attention
to  the  fact,  that,  when  occupied  in  making  a  powerful  electro-mag-
net, I  came  too  near  it,  its  odic  light  became  bedimmed  and  dimin-
ished. Mr.  Hochstetter,  when  I  accidentally  went'  very  close  to  an
upright  magnetic  bar,  the  flame  of  which  rose  six  inches  high,  found
this  disappear  wholly  from  his  sight,  and  reappear  as  soon  as  I  had
moved  away  again.  To  control  this,  I  placed  the  nine-layer  magnet
conformably  with  poles  upward,  upon  a  table ;  he  saw  it  flame  up
about  a  foot  high.  As  I  then  approached  the  magnet,  the  flame  be-
came weaker ;  and  when  I  came  quite  close,  so  that  my  body  touched
its  top,  it  entirely  disappeared  from  his  view  :  he  saw  nothing  but  the
incandescent  steel.  When  I  moved  away  a  step,  it  was  restored,
and  I  could  repeat  this  as  often  as  I  wished.  Dr.  Nied  saw  exactly
the  same  with  the  nine-fold  magnet  standing  on  a  chair.  In  like
manner,  also,  Mr.  Delhez  and  the  Baroness  von  Augustin.  Mr.
Pauer  saw  odic  flame  flowing  from  the  nine-fold  magnet  in  the  dark
chamber.  I  walked  slowly  towards  it ;  when  I  had  come  within
about  half  a  foot,  he  saw  the  odic  flame  become  dull,  and  when  I  was
quite  close  to  the  steel,  the  flame  was  wholly  lost  to  his  sight.  His
daughter,  Miss  Sophie,  witnessed  this  strange  phenomenon  at  various
times.  She  saw  smaller  magnets  as  well  as  the  nine-fold  always  first
grow  paler,  then  lose  the  flame  as  I  approached  them,  and  in  each
case  it  was  restored  as  soon  as  I  drew  back  from  them.  Wilhelmine
Glaser  frequently  perceived  my  approach  produce  extinction  of  the
odic  flame  on  the  nine-fold  magnet,  and  even  when  it  had  recently
been  rubbed,  and  its  magnetic  intensity  was  at  the  highest  pitch.

ODIG  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.  359

But  when  I  drew  back  only  a  little  way  from  it,  it  immediately  be-
gan to  form  again,  and  was  wholly  restored  when  I  had  removed  to
the  distance  of  a  pace.  Madame  Bauer  frequently  communicated  this
observation  to  me  unexpectedly  :  when  I  accidentally  approached
the  odic  flames  of  magnets  under  examination,  during  the  course  of
experiments,  she  complained  that  I  came  too  close  to  them,  dulled,
diminished,  or  extinguished  the  flame  by  my  proximity,  which  inter-
fering with  her  observations  about  what  I  was  asking  her,  she  warn-
ed me  to  move  awav.  Josephine  Zinkel  explained  to  me  that  when
my  immediate  proximity  had  weakened  the  flame  of  the  nine-fold
magnet  down  to  invisibility,  my  retreat  did  not  restore  it  directly,
but  only  gradually  :  and  it  was  requisite  for  meto  move  to  the  dis-
tance of  about  forty  inches  for  the  flame  to  reacquire  the  full  strength
of  its  light,  and  my  vicinity  to  become  quite  imperceptible  in  the  ap-
pearance of  the  flame.

449.  In  order  to  master  this  deceptive  phenomenon,  I  instituted
the  following  experiment.  I  placed  the  large  nine-fold  magnet  verti-
cally, with  its  poles  turned  upwards.  I  then  turned  the  northward
limb  to  the  east  and  the  southward  limb  to  the  west ;  and  another
time  the  former  to  the  west  and  the  latter  to  the  east.  In  the  dark
chamber,  and  in  the  presence  of  Josephine  Zinkel,  I  slowly  and  alter-
nately approached  and  removed  from  both  poles  at  once  on  the  north
side,  with  my  face  toward  them.  As  soon  as  I  came  near,  the  flames
were  extinguished  on  both  poles,  and  restored  directly  I  removed
again.  When  I  so  modified  the  experiment  that  I  approached  only
my  light  side  to  the  two  poles,  their  flames  were  no  longer  both  ex-
tinguished, but  only  one,  namely,  the  northward  blue  flame  ;  the
southward  red  flame  became  brighter  and  more  intense  in  its  redness
and  luminosity.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  I  approached  both  poles
with  my  leftside,  the  reverse  occurred  ;  the  southward  pole  lost  color
and  luminosity  altogether,  while  the  northward  very  much  increased
in  blueness  and  intensity  of  light.  This  made  the  matter  clear,  and
brings  it  under  the  regular  law.

450.  It  is,  therefore,  the  odic  quality  of  the  entire  person  which
reacts  as  strongly  upon  a  magnet,  even  on  a  very  powerful  one,  as
magnets  do  upon  each  other,  and  especially  with  their  like  poles.  We
have  seen  how  these  act  upon  each  other,  depressing  and  extinguish-
ing flame,  and  the  biodic  poles  also  act  and  react  upon  the  poles  of
magnets,  even  when  we  cannot  at  all,  or  at  least  as  yet  not  in  every
case,  clearly  state  where  the  animal  poles  exactly  lie  in  the  particular
instances,  and  which  or  what  of  the  many  complicated  odic  axes  of
the  body  it  actually  is  which  causes  the  0.1  »served  extinction.  But  a
cautious  investigator  will  perceive  here  a  boundless  source  of  count-

360  ODIC  FLAME  ON  STEEL  MAGNETS.

less  errors,  countless  misconceptions,  countless  incomprehensibilities
and  enigmas,  which  up  to  this  time  have  pressed  like  a  mountain  upon
the  so-called  animal  and  mineral  magnetism,  and  without  the  removal
of  which  it  is  clear  that  normal  and  harmonious  observations  cannot
be  attained.  Every  physicist  saw  something  different,  and  each  met
every  day  with  something  different  from  what  he  saw  the  day  before  ;
nay,  during  one  and  the  same  experiment,  the  results  were  modified
under  the  hands  of  the  investigators  as  they  changed  their  positions
or  their  assistants,  and  as  the  number  of  bystanders  increased.  They
were  unaware  of  the  cause,  never  knew  how  to  attain  a  fixed  point  in
the  experiments,  the  scientific  ground  trembled  everywhere  under
their  feet,  and  the  complications  ran  out  into  infinity.*

*  May  my  good  friends,  the  doctors  and  professors  of  the  self-styled  commis-
sion, take  warning,  and  not  merely  learn  to  perceive  the  weakness  of  their  expe-
riments, but  also  to  feel  the  disgrace  they  have  brought  upon  themselves  by  their
groundless  accusations  against  poor  Leopoldine  Reichet.  They  made  a  dark
chamber,  of  which  they  themselves  relate  that,  in  their  haste,  they  stopped  the
crack  of  the  door  with  pocket-handkerchiefs.  (Zeitschr.  der  Gesellschaft  der
Aerzte  in  Wien,  III.  Jahrg.  138.)  Whoever  has  worked  long  in  a  dark  chamber,
can  imagine  what  kind  of  darkness  it  could  have  been  that  was  improvised  in  this
manner !  In  the  narrow  space  of  a  small  room,  the  sensitive  was  crowded  con-
stantly with  ten  to  fifteen  young  men,  and  some  of  these  went  out  and  in  every
now  and  then  iloc.  cit.  119  and  139.)  We. know  that  the  momentary  penetration
of  light,  even  only  through  the  smallest  crack,  renders  the  eye  dazzled  and  almost
insensible  to  odic  light  for  more  than  half  an  hour ;  and  here  we  have,  as  at  the
beginning,  the  rude  effect  of  opening  the  door  for  persons  going  out  and  in  !  This
alone  is  more  than  sufficient  to  render  the  results  of  such  clumsy  experiments
wholly  useless  and  valueless,  and  to  make  any  deduction  based  upon  them  alto-
gether ridiculous.  If  Miss  Reichel  saw  nothing  under  such  circumstances,  as  the
accounts  frequently  declare,  she  told  the  truth,  because  she  could  not  see  any-
thing under  such  perverse  arrangements,  not  because  she  did  not  possess  the  ca-
pacity, but  because  ignorautly  arranged  experiments  rendered  it  impossible  to
her.  Finally,  however,  she  did  see  somewhat,  gave  confused  statements,  and  on
this  account  was  called  a  liar  and  a  deceiver.  Let  us  examine  the  statements  of
these  gentlemen,  and  see  where  lying  and  deceit  are  to  be  found.  Leopoldine
Reichel  was  placed  at  a  distance  of  three  to  six  paces  from  the  magnet,  there
was  usually  a  doctor  on  each  side  of  her,  who  were  appointed  to  watch  over  her,
and  they  frequently  held  both  her  hands.  Opposite  to  her  sat  another  doctor,
holding  a  heavy  horse-shoe  magnet  in  his  hands  upon  his  knees,  and  moving  it
about.  Close  to  him,  in  like  manner,  at  each  side,  sat  a  doctor,  directed  to  con-
trol the  movements  of  the  magnet.  The  sensitive  was  now  to  state  how  and
where  the  magnet  was  luminous,  while  it  was  being  moved  up  and  down ;  they
pressed  her  to  show  her  art,  laughed  at  and  mocked  her  when  her  statements  were
incorrect,  irritated  and  angered  her  to  such  an  extent  that  she  more  than  once
struck  at  the  gentlemen,  and  once  was  in  the  act  of  boxing  the  ears  of  one  of
them,  Ac.  In  the  first  place  it  is  impossible  that  a  moderately  sensitive  person,
as  Miss  Reichel  was  at  that  time,  could  perceive  any  magnetic  light  in  a  darkness
which  was  continually  interrupted  b}1-  the  entrance  and  exit  of  spectators.  In  the
second  place,  the  distance  of  three  to  six  paces  from  the  magnet  is  far  too  great ;

ODIC  FLAME  OX  STEEL  MAGNETS.  361

451.  The  odic  flame,  as  we  see,  affords  no  conclusions  as  to  the
direction  of  the  magnetic  force  ;  to  express  myself  in  Mr.  Faraday's
words,  no  lines  of  magnetic  force  make  their  appearance  in  any  odic
phenomenon.  In  order  to  get  some  evidence  on  this  point,  if  possi-
ble, I  made  an  experiment  with  the  magnetic  curves  which  we  obtain
by  tilings.  I  laid  a  magnetic  bar  two  feet  long  upon  the  floor,  and
covered  it  with  a  glass  plate  four  feet  four  inches  in  diameter— thus
more  than  twice  as  long.  On  this  I  strewed  iron  tilings,  tapped
gently  with  my  finger  on  all  sides  of  it,  and  thus  procured   the  well-

a  sensitive  of  this  degree  cannot  detect  magnetic  light  with  certainty  beyond
furt  v  inches.  In  the  third  place,  the  heavy  magnet,  a  nine-layered,  was  held  in
a  man's  hand,  quite  close  to  his  body,  and  thus  completely  extinguished  to  the
eyes  of  the  observer.  This  proves  a  triple  impossibility  of  seeing  an>/  emana-
tions of  light  from  the  magnet.  Thus  gross  errors  were  committed  in  the  experi-
ments, any  one  of  which  would  have  been  alone  sufficient  to  render  all  sensitive
perception  impossible.  Therefore  she  actually  saw  nothing,  or  only  scattered,
uncertain,  and  variable  appearances  of  light — doubtless  here  and  there  from  a
hand,  from  one  or  mure  of  the  collected  heads,  from  collected  heads  and  hands,
from  hands  lying  upon  the  magnet,  and  thus  rendered  stronger  ;  from  eyes,  from
breath,  from  the  pits  of  the  stomachs,  or  from  the  knees  of  the  crowd  of  doctors,
«fcc,  where  such  things  accidentally  came  in  contact,  and  momentarily  raised  each
others  odic  intensity.  Notwithstanding  that  I  detailed  fully,  in  my  writings,  how
very  Luminous  all  the^e  living  organs  are,  scarcely  any  notice  was  taken  of  this
by  these  gentlemen  ;  they  moved  the  magnet  about  in  every  possible"  direction
before  Reiche!  and  when  she  nevertheless  perceived  light,  it  never  struck  any  one
that,  there  were  such  things  as  faces,  eyes,  hands,  pits  of  stomachs,  genitals,  etc.,  all
of  which  are  luminous,  and  this  usually  more  strongly  than  the  magnet.  In  this
confusion  of  all  the  conditions  of  scientific  investigations,  the  poor  tormented  girl
knew  no  possible  way  to  satisfy  the  questions  that  poured  upon  her;  and  when
incongruous  answers  were  the  result  ef  such  unskilful  experiments,  these  gentle-
men did  not  hesitate,  instead  of  owning  their  ignorance,  to  take  refuge  under  the
unscrupulous  slander,  that  the  observer  was  a  deceiver.  They  were  not  ashamed
to  decorate  this  bare  assertion  with  stories  which  bear  the  stamp  of  improbability
on  their  very  face.  Thus  Miss  Reichel  is  said  to  have  slipped  slily  up  to  the
magnet  which  one  of  the  doctors  held  in  his  hands  in  the  dark,  and  felt  for  it  with
her  hand  in  order  to  find  out  where  it  was.  This  is  clearly  false,  for  it  carries  its
own  refutation  with  it.  For  if  she  could  not  see  the  odic  light,  she  could  not  go
toward  the  magnet;  and  this  because  it  was  above  the  head,  under  the  fett,  at
the  side  of,  or  behind  the  person  who  held  it,  and  thus  she  could  not  know  where
to  look  for  it :  yet  she  was  sure  to  catch  hold  of  the  body,  the  head,  or  the  feet
of  the  experimenter,  or  even  to  put  her  hand  to  his  eyes.  This  accusation  is  thus
evidently  nonsensical,  and  it  will  be  vain  to  throw  dust  in  the  eyes  of  a  thinking
reader  with  such  silliness.  The  girl  herself  was  moved  to  tears  when  I  told  her
of  this  passage  in  the  medical  journal,  and  could  not  find  words  to  express  her
pain  and  indignation  at  such  calumny.  The  want  of  accuracy  which  is  here  evi-
dent cannot  be  laid  to  the  accused,  but  to  the  accusers,  and  required  an  earnest
correction.  People  should  not  set  up  for  judges  in  a  matter  when  they  at  the
same  time  exhibit  so  much  ignorance  ;  but  to  endeavor  to  cover  this  ignorance
by  untruth,  at  the  cost  of  one  who  is  defenceless,  is  quite  detestable  and  abomi-
nable.— Author's  note.

16

362  0D1C  FLAME  ON  STEEL   MAGNETS.

known  figures.  I  now  led  Miss  Reichel  to  it  in  the  dark,  without  her
having  seen  anything  of  the  .arrangement  previously.  She  no  longer
saw  any  flame  upon  the  bar,  but  the  magnetic  curves  were  beautifully
illuminated.  Each  particle  of  the  filings  appeared  luminous  to  her,
and  by  their  arrangement  they  formed  lines  of  light  exactly  in  the
direction  of  the  curves.  The  whole  appearance  sparkled  at  all  points
at  once  in  every  color  of  the"  rainbow,  and  elicited  from  her  the
exclamation  that  she  had  never  seen  anything  more  charming  in  her
life.

452.  Two  years  later  I  repeated  the  experiment  with  the  healthy
Josephine  Zinkel,  in  the  dark  chamber.  The  results  were  the  same
descriptions  and  the  same  pleased  astonishment  at  the  beauty  of  the
sight.  She  saw  millions  of  brilliant  coloi'ed  stars  lighting  up  the
plate,  all  arranged  in  the  curved  lines.  She  evinced  the  greatest  plea-
sure when  I  tapped  it  gently,  and  the  little  stars  jumped  up  and
danced  about.  She  saw  the  whole  northern  half  luminous  with  a
bright  bluish  light :  a  brilliant  red  prevailed  more  on  the  southern
half.  She  added  the  further  observation,  that  the  entire  glass  plate
was  bounded  all  round  its  circumference  by  a  sea?n  of  light,  which
was  composed  of  all  the  prismatic  colors.  According  to  her  state-
ments it  was  but  narrow,  some  one-eighth  or  one-tenth  of  an  inch
broad,  and  the  colors  formed  parallel  streaks  in  it.  Otherwise,  neither
the  sick  nor  the  healthy  observer  saw  any  other  figures  but  the  mag-
netic curves  already  known.  Thus  nothing  observable  had  occurred
beyond  the  conversion  of  each  filing  into  an  induced  magnet  emitting
odic  flame.

453.  The  discussion  of  odic  flame  may  be  concluded  with  a  little
practical  application.  There  is  a  fable  widely  spread  in  Germany,
and  our  poets  have  depicted  it  in  the  most  stirring  scenes,  that  spirits,
witches,  and  devils,  collect  in  great  numbers  at  night,  to  dance  on
the  Blocksberg.  Everything  has  an  origin  ;  and  now  we  see  that
this  myth  is  not  without  some  kind  of  foundation.  It  was  discover-
ed long  ago,  that  there  are  rocky  points  on  the  Blocksberg  which  are
strongly  magnetic,  and  divert  the  magnetic  needle  :  more  accurate  in-
vestigations have  shown  that  these  rocks  contain  fragments  of  mag-
netic iron  ore, — for  instance,  the  Floenstein,  the  Snarcher,  and  others.
The  necessary  deduction  from  this  is,  that  they  emit  odic  flames,  and
that  these  must  be  visible  at  night  to  sensitive  eyes.  Therefore,  when
persons  of  strong  odic  vision  have  come  to  such  places  on  dark
nights, — hunters,  charcoal  burners,  poachers,  wood-cutters,  &c , —
they  must  have  seen  delicate  flames  of  various  sizes  and  colors  blazing
all  around,  flaring  backwards  and  forwards  with  currents  of  air.
Who  could  blame  them,  if  they  took  this  for  the  devil  and  all  his

ODIC  FLAME  OX  STEEL  MAGXETS.  363

train  of  spirits  and  hags  dancing  round  ?     The  feast  of  the  Walp«r-
gia  Night  must  now,  alas  !  yield  to  the  sobrieties  of  physics,  which
have  scattered  with  their  light  that  fair  cloud-picture  of  fancy.
453.   b.  The  compressed  retrospect  on  the  odic  flame  tells  us —

a.  Very  weakly  magnetic  steel  exhibits  odic  incandescence  without
flame  ;  as  soon  as  the  intensity  of  the  magnetism  passes  beyond  a
certain  point,  emissions  of  light  occur,  which  display  themselves  as
vaporous,  misty,  and  finally  flamedike,  especially  at  the  poles  of  the
magnets,  and  appear  not  unfrequently  as  high  as  a  man,  even  to
healthy  eyes.

b.  Terrestrial  magnetism  exercises  great  influence  on  the  size  and
coloring  of  the  odic  flame  ;  and  the  phenomena  of  these  occur  differ-
ently according  as  the  magnets  are  placed  with  one  or  other  pole
towards  north,  west,  south,  or  east,  turned  upwards  or  downwards,  in
the  magnetic  dip,  or  in  any  other  intermediate  direction.

c.  Iron  bars  behave  like  weak  magnets  in  relation  to  Od,  when  un-
der the  influence  of  terrestrial  magnetism.

d.  Banding  occurs  in  the  odic  flame,  just  as  in  the  odic  incandescence.

e.  The  direction  of  the  flame  exhibits  a  tendency  upwards.

/.  Magnet-flames  of  unlike  poles,  opposed  diametrically  to  each
other,  and  gradually  approximated,  exhibit  little  or  no  mutual  attrac-
tion, do  not  lift  each  other  up,  but  repulse  one  another,  accumulate
around  their  own  poles,  and  become  introverted.  On  contact,  the
introverted  flames  disappear,  and  a  delicate  intermingled  flame  ap-
pears enveloping  the  opposed  poles.

g.  Odic  flames  meeting  one  another  cross-ways,  carry  one  auother
onward.

h.  The  flame  obeys  currents  of  air.

i.  All  the  manifold  effects  which  one  magnet  produces  upon  oth-
ers, are  either  directly  reflected  in  accompanying  odic  phenomena,  or
give  rise  to  peculiar  appearances  of  the  odic  light.  The  rubbing  of
magnets  affords  numerous  examples  of  this.

k.  The  same  occurs  when  the  armature  is  used  as  an  induced  mag-
net, and  moved  in  different  directions  over  the  magnet.

/.  The  divergences  between  Od  and  magnetism,  which  arise  here,
not  unfrequently  go  on  to  such  a  contrast  that  -f-  Od  and  —  M  co-
exist simultaneously  in  one  magnet  pole.

m.  Electro-magnetism  produces  the  phenomena  of  odic  flame  in
exactly  the  same  manner.

n.  The  electrical  atmosphere  strengthens  them,  and  under  certain
circumstances  reverses  the  poles.

o.  Heat  weakens  the  odic  flame.

■p.  Crystals  and  animals  (human  hands)  influence  the  odic  flames

364  ODIC  THREADS,  STREAKS,  AND  NEBULAE.

like  magnets,  strengthen  them,  weaken  them,  reverse  or  destroy
them,  both  in  contact  and  by  mere  approximation.

q.  The  magnetic  curves  produced  with  iron  tilings  over  bars,  pre-
sent to  the  eye  a  multitude  of  stars  of  minute  odically  flaming  magnets.

r.  Odic  flame  is  a  material  object,  probably  a  substance  rendered
luminous,  but  by  no  means  magnetism.

III. — Odic  threads,  streaks,  and  nebulae.

454.  It  is  already  known  from  the  accounts  of  Misses  Reichel,  No-
wotny, and  Maix,  given  in  an  earlier  part  of  this  work,  that  magnets
emit  a  light  in  the  form  of  streaky  luminous  mist,  in  addition  to  the
polar  flames  of  the  edges  and  corners.  These  observations  received
confirmation,  meanwhile,  through  repeated  perceptions  of  Baron
August  von  Oberländer,  who  described  the  little  lateral  flames  as
streaks  and  brushes  ;  of  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  who  saw,  once  between
the  limbs  of  a  nine-layered,  another  time  of  a  seven-layered  horse-
shoe, the  whole  space  filled  with  threads  of  flame,  and  the  outer  part
of  the  entire  magnet  enveloped  in  a  delicate  fiery  mist,  both  of  which
she  often  mentioned  in  the  course  of  experiments,  without  my  having
taken  note  of  it  on  every  occasion ;  of  Miss  Zinkel,  who  found  not
only  the  strongest  magnets,  like  seven-layered  and  nine-layered,  but
also  even  a  mere  single  horse-shoe,  when  rubbed  with  a  five-layered
in  the  dark,  covered  with  a  luminous  mist  two  and  a  half  inches  broad
between  the  limbs,  and  two-fifths  broad  around  the  outside.  She,
moreover,  saw  odic  conducting  wires,  the  flames  at  the  ends  of  wires,
also  on  tinned-plates,  disks,  and  globes  of  iron,  when  under  induction
by  a  magnet,  the  first  at  the  edge,  the  last  two  over  their  whole  sur-
face, and  many  other  emanations  of  odic  light,  appear  as  streaks,  and
like  a  mist;  to  which  I  shall  recur  more  circumstantially  in  their
proper  places.  She  perceived  these  misty. luminosities  more  vividly
on  open  magnets.  When  closed  by  the  armature,  these  appearances
either  vanished  altogether,  or,  as  in  most  cases,  merely  became  dulled
and  diminished.  Farther,  through  those  of  Miss  Winter,  who  de-
scribed a  three-layer  horse-shoe,  as  coated  all  over  with  delicate  fire-
mist ;  of  Dr.  Nied,  who  saw  a  simple  horse-shoe,  with  its  armature
applied,  enveloped  to  a  thickness  of  one  inch  and  three-quarters  with
luminous  mist,  as  also  a  seven-layer  ;  of  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  who,  like
Josephine  Zinkel,  saw  magnetically  induced  iron  disks  and  globes  en-
closed in  luminous  mist- like  vapor;  of  Miss  Wiegand,  who  perceived
a  small  strong  horse-shoe  magnet  lying  upon  her  hand  at  night,  to
be  enveloped  in  fire-mist ;  of  Madame  Bauer,  who  detected  fire-mist
over  all  bars  and  horse-shoes,  from  the  smallest  pocket  horse-shoe  to

ODIC  THREADS,  STREAKS,  AND  NEBULAE.  365

the  nine-layer  ;  of  young  Stephen  Kollar,  old  Sebastian  Zinkel,  and
Miss  Dorfer,  who  perceived  the  lambent  fire-mist  playing  over  the
sides  of  all  horse-shoes,  inside  and  out ;  finally,  of  Madame  Kienes-
berger,  who,  especially  during  menstruation,  saw  all  horse-shoes
furnished  with  luminous  streaked  fire-mist,  in  such  a  manner  that  it
was  weakest  at  the  curvature,  sometimes  almost  imperceptible,  but
from  here  to  the  poles  became  continually  stronger,  exactly  as  Miss
Reiehel  had  described  it  at  first.

455.  The  emissions  of  light  also  exhibited  colors.  Miss  Zinkel  saw
the  fire-mist  between  the  limbs  of  the  horse-shoe,  red  on  one  side,  arid
blue  on  the  other,  the  colors  playing  into  each  other,  so  that  the  in-
terspace had  a  variegated  appearance.  This  was  still  stronger  with
compound  horse-shoes,  because  each  limb  gave  out  red  and  blue  mist
at  once,  extending  inside  and  outside  as  far  as  the  curvature.

456.  This  luminous  mist  was  very  vividly  developed  along  the
magnetic  bars,  which  /  exposed  to  the  influence  of  the  electrical  at-
mosphere. The.  observer  found  single  bars  enclosed  all  along  in  fire-
mist  nearly  two  inches  broad.  The  interspaces  between  the  limbs  of
horse-shoes  then  became  completely  filled  with  it,  and  gave  the  ap-
pearance of  masses  of  luminous  threads,  variegated  with  red  and  blue
sometimes  even  in  the  prismatic  colors.

457.  The  emissions  are  always  stronger  from  the  corners  and  edges
of  magnets  than  from  their  surfaces.  In  bar  magnets  they  are  sym-
metrical on  the  two  opposite  sides ;  almost  absent  in  the  axis  of  the
bar,  then  increasing  gradually  toward  the  poles,  strongest  at  the  ends
of  the  poles,  not  at  the  magnetic  foci,  which,  as  is  well  known,  lie
about  one-seventh  of  the  half-length  of  the  bar  below  the  poles.  But
on  horse-shoe  magnets  it  is  unsymmetrical,  and  was  seen  by  Madame
Bauer,  Madame  Kienesberger,  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  and  Zinkel,  far
more  vividly  inside  the  limb  than  outside  ;  so  that  the  streaked  emis-
sions from  the  limbs  in  many  cases  occupied  the  greatest  part  of  the
space  between  the  limbs,  and  in  some  filled  up  the  whole  with  their
luminous  fiery  mist.  Mr.  Pauer  could  only  detect  the  fire-mist  clear-
ly between  the  limbs  of  the  magnet.

458.  When  I  applied  the  armature  to  open  horse-shoes  which
possessed  the  fire-mist,  this  instantly  diminished  considerably,  but  did
not  disappear.  According  to  the  observations  of  Miss  Atzmannsdor-
fer and  Miss  Zinkel,  it  became  rather  more  than  one-half  narrower  '
and  shorter,  but  more  especially  duller,  less  luminous,  and  more
opaque  ;  if  it  had  been  yellow  and  red  previously,  the  influence  of
the  armature  would  make  it  greyish-yellow,  or  wholly  colorless  and
grey.  This  was  also  the  case  when  I  closed  the  horse-shoe  magnet
with  a  second  horse-shoe  instead  of  the  armature.     Dr.  Nied,  who

366  ODIC  THREADS,  STREAKS,  AND  NEBULiE.

observed  very  strong  odic  mist  upon  open  single  magnets,  could
scarcely  see  anything  of  it,  detecting  only  the  dull  odic  incandescence
of  the  steel,  as  soonas  I  applied  the  armature.  His  sensitiveness  is
weaker.  The  conduction  through  the  armature  was  thus  apparently
imperfect  in  all  cases,  and  a  portion  of  the  current  of  the  dynamic
constituting  the  magnet,  continually  passed  off  into  the  air.  These
confirmations  are  more  than  sufficient  to  warrant  the  accuracy  of  the
original  statements  on  this  head  given  by  Miss  ReicheL  as  set  down
in  the  first  part  of  this  work.

*  459.  It  is  very  probable  that  these  envelopes  of  fire-mist  are  con-
stant, spread  over  the  whole  of  the  magnet,  weak  but  interruptedly
continuous  emanations  of  Od,  only  perceptible  to  the  higher  sensitive,
on  account  of  their  slight  degree  of  intensity,  and  scarcely,  or  not  at
all,  to  those  of  weaker  sensitive  vision.

460.  Almost  all  the  highly  sensitive  also  described  to  me  isolated
colored  threads  which  they  perceived  in  the  odic  flame.  I  have  al-
ready mentioned  this  of  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  and  others.  Madame
Bauer. also  called  my  attention  to  this  observation. _  The  Baroness
von  Augustin  saw  them  rise  frequently  over  the  nine-layer,  and  a
five-layer ;  also  from  an  electro-magnet.  I  examined  this  phenome-
non most  accurately  with  the  healthy  girl  Zinkel.  On  nine-layer
horse-shoes  she  saw  many  separate,  strongly  luminous,  thread-like
streaks,  rise  out  from  the  poles  into  the  odic  flame,  which  were  not
very  slender,  but  about  as  thick  as  a  common  pin,  not  taking  their
origin  below  immediately  from  the  steel,  but  first  distinctly  formed
at  some  height  above  it  in  the  odic  flame.  These  threads  she-  al-
ways found  either  blue  or  red.  They  did  not  move,  but  always
flowed  forth  uniformly  in  the  flame,  especially  in  its  upper  parts.
She  observed  this  phenomenon  most  clearly  in  the  banded  alterna-
tion of  the  colors  of  the  odic  flame  over  the  layers  of  the  nine-fold
horse-shoe,  mentioned  at  §  396.  Here  she  distinguished  accurately,
that,  from  the  red  odically  incandescent  layers,  arose  red,  and  only
red  streaks  of  light,  from  the  blue  odically  incandescent  layers  blue
and  only  blue  in  the  flames,  which  were  always  of  just  the  same
color.  .    ,  .

461.  I  do  not  think  these  phenomena  are  of  special  kind,  but  look
upon  them  as  equivalent  to  the  rest  of  the  odic  flames  in  general.
The  cause  probably  is  inequality  of  the  issue  from  the  surface  of  the
magnet  at  very  minute  points.  Since  we  know  that  edges  and  cor-
ners cause  stronger  emission,  I  think  we  have  a  right  to  assume
that  smaller  unevenesses  may  serve  as  points  of  emission,  and  thus
cause  the  formation  of  threads,  streaks,  and  mist-like  appearances.

ODIC   SMOKE.  367

They  are  little  currents  of  Od  locally  concentrated  in  the  general  cur-
rent, blue  from  the  negative,  and  red  from  the  positive  poles.

IV.  Odic  Smoke.

462.  The  next  phenomenon  of  light  attaching  itself  to  the  odic
flame  of  the  magnet  is  a  peculiar  luminous  vapor  or  smoke,  which
ascends  from  the  magnet,  and  is  se>ju  by  the  sensitive  in  the  dark.
I  made  little  or  no  mention  of  it  in  my  earlier  treatises  ;  but  as  in  the
further  prosecution  of  my  researches  it  pressed  itself  upon  me  un-
avoidably, and  alwayä  in  the  same  manner  under  like  circumstances,
I  have  necessarily  recognised  it  as  an  essential  part  of  the  odic  lu-
minous phenomena,  and  turned  attention  to  it.

We  will,  in  the  first  place,  hear  and  critically  compare  the  state-
ments of  the  many  witnesses  I  have  met  with.

463.  First,  the  healthy  sensitives  : —

Mr.  Edward  Flutter  saw  a  dim,  cloudy  appearance  over  a  pocket
horse-shoe,  which,  as  he  moved  the  magnet  in  the  dark,  was  carried
about  with  it,  and  thus  doubtless  belonged  to  it.  The  Baroness
Pauline  von  Natorp  saw  five  and  seven-layer  horse  shoe  magnets
covered  with  a  luminous  cloud  at  the  northward  pole  alone.  She
perceived  slight  marks  of  a  misty  brightness  on  the  nine-layer.  Sh«
discerned  a  grey  smoke  ascending  to  the  height  of  One's  hand  from
an  electro-magnet.  Professor  Ragsky  saw  the  northward  pole  of  a
single  horse-shoe  magnet  emit,  with  intermissions,  a  bluish,  weak,
and  vaporous  light.  Professor  Huss,  of  Stockholm,  the  Court  Phy-
sician, perceived  abundance  of  smoke  rising,  arid  passing  up  in  clouds,
from  a  strong  electro-magnet.  Mr.  Demeter  Tirka  observed  that  the
same  nine-layer  was  enveloped  in  a  cloudy  luminosity,  which  weakly
lighted  up  its  entire  circumference.  Mr.  Pauer  saw  all  largish  horse-
shoes exhale  vapor.  He  perceived  a  luminous  cloud  over  each  pole
of  a  strong  electro-magnet.  Mr.  Hochstetter  discerned  a  grey  smoke
ascending  forty  inches  high  over  the  nine-layer  magnet  :  when  I
placed  the  horse-shoe  in  the  electrical  atmosphere  of  the  conduc-
tor, he  saw  smoke  rise  to  the  height  of  a  man  over  the  odic  flame,
throwing  a  light  upon  the  ceiling.  Mr.  Sebastian  Zinkel  observed
smoke  produced  over  the  odic  flame  of  a  single  horse-shoe  to  three
times  its  height.  Mr.  Fernolendt  saw  luminous  opaque  smoke
ascend  to  the  ceiling  over  several  horse-shoe^  in  the  electrical  atmos-
phere of  the  positive  conductor.  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl,  at  vari-
ous times,  perceived  a  cloudy  light,  like  thin  smoke,  almost  as  high
as  a  man,  over  the  flame  of  a  nine-layer  horse-shoe.  Madame  Isa-
bella von   Tessedik  and   the  young  Stephen  Kollar  found  all  bars,

368  ODIC  SMOKE.

horse- shoes,  and  electro-magnets,  to  possess  misty  lights,  either
only  at  the  northward  or  at  both  poles  ;  the  latter  saw  the  smoke
whirling  up  in.  clouds.  Mr.  Theodore  Kotschy  saw  a  wide-spread-
ing light  sweeping  like  a  vapor  over  the  nine-layer,  resembling  a
delicate  halo,  more  than  forty  inches  high  ;  the  same  was  detected
by  Madame  von  Varady  and  Madame  von  Peichich.  The  joiner,
Klaiber,  observed  a  luminous  smoke  above  the  flame  of  a  three-
layer  horse-shoe,  gradually  losing  itself  in  the  air  above.  Mr.
Gustav.  Anschütz  saw  a  lambent  vaporous  light  appear  on  a  three-
layer  going  and  coming,  always  at  the  northward  pole  alone,  some-
times paler,  sometimes  brighter.  Another  time  he  saw  unipolar
misty  lights  appear  over  several  horse-shoes,  but  remaining  constant.
On  the  nine-layer,  in  imperfect  darkness,  at  his  own  house,  he  saw  a
misty  ball  of  light  wave  over  one  pole  alone.  Mr.  Delhez  perceived  a
column  of  smoke  above  the  efflux  of  light  from  a  large  electro-mag-
net ascending  vertically  to  the  ceiling  of  the  dark  room,  and  then
producing  a  large,  illuminated  patch,  larger  than  the  nine-layer
caused..  The  smoke  was  diverted  there,  and  flowed  visibly  along  the
ceiling.  Miss  Ernestine  Anschütz  perceived  the  odic  vapor  over  the
nine-layer,  and  over  a  five-layer,  most  distinctly  when  I  approximated
the  friendly  poles  of  the  two  little  magnetic  bars  to  them.  Mr.
Nicolaus  Rabe  saw  every  odic  flame  that  issued  from  magnetic  poles
pass  gradually  into  a  light  vapor  ;  he  estimated  this  at  four  to  five
feet  high  over  the  nine-layer  magnet.  He  saw  a  large  bar  magnet,
four  feet  long,  with  flame  twenty  inches  long  at  the  northward  pole,
and  twelve  inches  long  at  the  southward  ;  both  flames  then  passing
into  smoke,  which  was  light  and  fine  at  the  northward  pole,  and
dense  and  duller  at  the  southward.  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  perceived  a
flame  twelve  to  sixteen  inches  high  over  the  nine-layer,  and  this
passing  above  into  luminous  smoke,  which  ascended  almost  to  the
ceiling.  But  in  the  electrical  atmosphere  she  saw  its  smoke  strike
against  the  ceiling.  Baron  von  Oberländer  detected  many  of  the
emissions  of  odic  light  as  delicate  vapor,  especially  the  large  column
of  odic, flame  of  a  heavy  nine-layer  horse-shoe,  appeared  to  him  to
pass  above,  when  it  approached  the  ceiling,  into  a  kind  of  thin  smoke.
Professor  Endlicher  discerned,  over  the  .luminous  emissions,  forty
inches  long,  of  a  strong  electro-magnet,  a  column  of  smoke-like,
weakly  luminous  vapor,  which  rose  vertically  to  the  ceiling  of  the
dark  chamber,  was  turned  aside  then,  and  flowed  onwards  horizon-
tally, lighting  it  up.  Wilhelmine  Glaser  saw  the  nine-layer  alone,
but  still  more  when  within  the  electrical  atmosphere,  as  well  as  large
bars  pour  out  smoke  above  the  odic  flame,  up  to  the  ceiling ;  also
the  electro-magnet.     These  last  observations  were    repeated   on    a

ODIC   SMOKE.  369

greater  scale  with  Madame  Cecilia  Bauer;  she  saw  smoke  above  the
odic  flame  on  all  magnets  without  exception, — on  the  stronger  par-
tially brilliantly  colored,  as  if  iridescent  and  containing  sparks.  She
always  saw  it  stronger,  thicker,  and  duller  over  the  reddish  odic
flame  ;  finer,  thinner,  and.  lighter,  on  the  blue.  Dr.  Nied  Observed
vaporous  exalations  over  every  flame-like  emission,  both  from  mag-
netic bars  and  horse-shoes.  He  always  found  them  stronger  on  the
southward  pole  than  on  the  northward,  especially  on  a  single  and  a
seven-layered  horse-shoe, — of  an  arm's  length  iu  the  latter.  He  saw
a  column  of  vapor  ascending  from  a  nine-layer  horse-shoe  rising  to
the  ceiling,  and  luminous.  The  Baroness  von  Augustin  discerned
smoke  in  rolling  clouds  rising  vertically  to  the  ceiling,  over  the  flame-
like lights  on  the  nine-layer,  and  still  more  over  an  electro-mag-
net. Josephine  Zinkel,  in  a  series  of  experiments — to  enumerate
which  would  be  a  wearisome  repetition — saw  every  bar-magnet  and
every  horse-shoe  of  tolerable  strength,  change,  at  the  positive  pole,
from  reddish  flame  into  dense,  dull,  weakly  luminous,  reddish-yellow
smoke;  at  the  negative,  from  blue  flame  into  delicate,  ethereal,  grey-
ish-blue vapor.  On  the  smaller  or  simpler  horse-shoes  she  found
these  clouds  like  emanations  from  four  to  twelve  inches  long, — on
nine-layered  often  as  long  as  one's  arm,  and,  when  it  was  strength-
ened, eighty  inches  and  more  in  length.  She  saw  magnets  of  high
intensity,  especially  at  her  periods  of  menstruation,  covered  all  over
with  delicate  vapor  close  to  the  poles  :  she  saw  the  smoke  emerge
to  an  arm's  length  from  the  banded  flames  of  horse-shoes  composed
of  several  layers  ;  during  the  rubbing,  and  in  the  different  relative
positions  the  two  horse-shoes  were  thereby  made  to  assume,  she
saw  a  rubbed  single  horse-shoe  throw  out  dense  clouds  of  smoke,
especially  at  the  southward  pole  :  in  many  cases  she  saw  only  blue
flames  at  the  northward  pole,  and  no  flame  at  the  southward, -but
only  dull  reddish  smoke.  When,  under  such  circumstances,  the  cur-
vature of  a  single  horse-shoe  lay  upon  the  poles  of  a  five-layered,
whereby — as  we  have  already  seen — the  flames  on  the  poles  of  the
former  were  doubled,  there  was  also  always  a  simultaneous  marked
heightening  of  the  odic  smoke  at  the  positive,  and  of  the  odic  vapor
at  the  negative  pole,  over  the  flames  of  the  rubbed  magnet.  But
when  this  was  so  attached  to  the  rubber  at  two-thirds  of  its  length,
that  it  would  no  longer  support  the  armature,  and  its  poles  thus
came  into  a  condition  of  magnetic  indifference,  there  was  a  little  blue
flame  visible  at  the  negative  pole,  but  at  the  positive  none  whatever ;
only  reddish  smoke.  A  horse-shoe  electro-magnet  exhibited  masses
of  smoke  whirling  up  violently  above  both  polar  flames,  and  the  be-
holder could  here  distinguish  isolated  flocks  of  smoke  continually
16*

870  ODIC  SMOKE.

detaching  themselves  from  each  other,  like  drifting  clouds,  which  was
also  frequently  described  to  me  by  the  joiner  Klaiber,  and  others.
She  saw  the  nine-layer  emit  dense  smoke  from  the  flames  when  in
the  atmosphere  of  the  electrically  charged  conductor  (§  436)  :  this
was  the  case  also  when  the  proximity  of  the  conductor  had  caused  a
reversal  of  the  polarity  in  bars  and  horse-shoes  :  these  masses  of
smoke  rose  up  to  the  ceiling,  and  sometimes  illuminated  the  painting
upon  it,  so  that  she  was  able  to  distinguish  the  lines  of  the  pictures
here  and  there.  She  always  saw  the  smoke  rise  in  greater  abun-
dance from  the  positive  pole  than  from  the  negative,  especially  on
electro-magnets.  Small  bars  or  needles  four  inches  long  sometimes
appeared  without  flames  at  either  pole,  but  the  negative  pole  with
grey  smoke.  She  saw  bars  of  twenty-four  and  forty-eight  inches  in
length,  furnished  with  smoke  over  the  flames  of  both  poles,  weaker
and  bluish-grey  at  the  northward  pole,  stronger  and  yellowish-red  at
the  southward.  When  I  placed  caps  of  different  forms  upon  bar
magnets,  so  that  the  poles  terminated  in  two,  three,  or  four  teeth,
each  tooth  delivered  its  own  weaker  current  of  smoke  over  its  flame.
"When  I  approximated  the  friendly  poles  of  two  bars  eight  inches
long  to  the  beholder,  she  observed  in  the  smoke,  as  in  the  flame,  the
tendency  to  flow  out  toward  each  other,  and  meet ;  but  when  they
came  near,  the  union,  which  seemed  imminent,  did  not  come  to  pass  ;
for  the  flowing  vapors,  retracted  together  with  their  flames  around
their  own  poles,  and  accumulated  upon  them,  were  introverted  with
the  flames,  as  I  have  already  described  of  certain  odic  flames.  When
I  approximated  two  horse-shoes  together  in  a  similar  manner,  the
result  was  similar  ;  whjsn  they  lay  upon  a  table  (see  above,  §§  394,
405),  the  ascending  smoke  was  first  formed  in  the  middle  between
the  two  poles  at  the  ends  of  their  flames.  When  the  poles  came  so
close  that  the  flames  were  introverted  around  their  own  poles,  the
smoke  was  no  longer  produced  in  front  of  the  poles,  but  behind,  to-
ward the  curvature,  from  the  introverted  flames  ;  and  when  the
approximation  of  the  flames  together  was  great  enough,  from  out
behind  the  curvature  in  the  manner  already  explained  above ;  to
which  I  refer.  The  behavior  of  the  smoke  is  parallel  in  all  cases,
in  size  and  intensity  of  light,  to  that  of  the  odic  flame.

464.  Now  the  sickly  and  diseased  sensitives  : —

Miss  Dorfer  saw  the  flames  pass  off  into  smoke  on  various  magnets.
Miss  Winter  discerned  in  the  dark,  emissions  of  odic  vapor,  from  a
three  and  a  five-fold  magnet,  not  merely  from  the  poles,  but  the  en-
tire horse-shoes  enveloped  in  it.  Miss  Weigland  saw  the  nebulous
flame  of  a  little  pocket  horse-shoe  wholly  enveloped  in  luminous  va:
por.     Miss  von  Weigelsberg  saw  the  same  horse-shoe  emit  unsteady

ODIC  SMOKE.  371

clouds,  an  inch  to  an  iucli  and  a  half  long  at  the  poles,  longer  at  the
one  than  the  other  ;  they  appeared  to  increase  and  diminish  some-
what, alternately  ;  at  another  time,  she  found  all  magnets  that  were
presented  to  her  throw  out  clouds,  especially  at  the  poles.  Madame
Jobanna  Anschütz  observed  luminous  vapor  rise  to  the  height  of  a
hand  from  the  poles  of  a  five-layer,  a  foot  high  from  those  of  a  airie-
laytT  horse-shoe  ;  in  like  manner  luminous  clouds  waving  upon  the
poles  and  between  the  limbs  of  a  large  single  horse-shoe.  Madame
Kienesberger  saw  on  all  many-layered  horse-shoe  magnets  the  polar
flames  pass  into  odic  vapor  above,  which  became  gradually  lost
further  up.  She  detected  this  with  especial  distinctness  over  the
poles  of  the  nine-layer,  where  she  saw  the  misty  smoke  rise  to  almost
the  height  of  a  man.  Madame  Kienesberger  also  thought  she  could
distinguish  between  the  lower  and  upper  parts  of  this  emanation  of
light,  and  believed  the  former  to  be  more  ethereal  and  misty,  the  latter
more  like  smoke,  becoming  more  attenuated,  and  vanishing  some  dis-
tance higher  up.  She  undoubtedly  saw  the  luminous  mist  below  of
the  negative  pole,  which  all  the  observers  perceived  to  be  shorter,
better  than  the  smoke  of  the  positive  pole,  which  reached  up  beyond
the  former,  and  ascended  towards  the  ceiling.  Her  statements  about
the  odic  mist  and  smoke  over  a  large  electro-magnet  agreed  so' com-
pletely with  those  of  Zinkel,  that  there  is  no  necessity  to  repeat
them  :  she  also  saw  the  odic  mist  rise  to  the  ceiling-;  but  this  only
happened  in  such  a  degree  when  a  rather  strong  Smee's  battery  was
employed  :  with  a  smaller  battery  the  smoke  and  flame  did  not  rise
so  high,  the  flame  not  above  eight  to  twelve  inches.  Terrestrial  mag-
netism also  sufficed  to  produce  similar  effects :  a  soft  steel  rod,  fas-
tened by  the  middle  in  a  wooden  holder,  and  placed  in  the  meridian,
appeared  to  her  to  have  little  flames  and  short  smokes  at  both  poles,
grey  at  the  northward  and  yellowish  at  the  southward  pole.  When
1  brought  this  rod  into  the  direction  of  the  dip,  the  remarkable  phe-
nomenon again  appeared  of  antagonism  of  magnetic  and  odic  po-
larity, and  reddish-grey  flame  was  displayed  at  the  lower  negative
magnetic  end,  bluish  at  the  upper  positive,  with  odic  mist  of  the  cor-
responding colors  at  the  two  sides  ;  in  this  instance  the  reddish-grey
smoke,  being  shut  out  downwards,  struck  against  the  floor,  at  the  dis-
tance of  two  feet,  and  then  spread  itself  out  on  all  sides.  Friedrich
Weidlich  could  not  at  first  see  various  magnets  1  placed  before  him  ;
but  after  he  had  remained-more  than  an  hour  in  the  dark  he  distinctly
perceived  the  nebulosity  next  the  odic  flames  which  were  lost  in  it
above  :  he  described  the  flame  and  smoke  as  passing  into  one  another
in  such  a  manner  that  in  particular  places  they  were  indistinguish-
able.    He  saw-a  five-layer  smoke  particularly  strongly;  it  was  of

372  ODIC   SMOKE.

newly  and  pretty  strongly  magnetized  steel.  He  saw  dense  reddish
clouds  of  smoke  rising  in  confused  masses  from  the  flame,  as  high
as  a  man  ;  from  the  nine-layer  magnet,  ascending  to  the  ceiling,  and
whirling  upwards  in  constant  streaming  motion.  When  I  blew  it,  he
saw  it  driven  about  and  disturbed  for  a  few  moments,  but  soon  re-
turning spontaneously  into  its  former  position.  On  another  oppor-
tunity I  made  a  new  series  of  experiments  on  the  nine-layer  magnet
with  him  ;  he  again  saw  the  smoke  rising  up'to  the  ceiling,  as  it  were
in  clouds  following  one  another.  Johanna  Kynast  also  perceived  that
the  flame,  of  a  man's  height,  of  the  nine-layer,  possessed  luminous
odic  smoke.  Miss  Marie  Atzmannsdorfer  saw  the  odic  smoke  over
magnets  so  very  many  times  that  I  ceased  to  set  down  any  further
notes  of  it,  and  shall  merely  observe,  that  when  her  visual  power  was
weakened  by  any  circumstance,  or  she  had  not  remained  long  enough
in  the  dark,  she  always  detected  the  odic  smoke  before  she  could  see
the  odic  flame  ;  and  that  as  her  vision  increased  and  became  more
acute,  the  mists  appeared  to  yield  to  the  flames  and  took  their  place
upon  the  latter ;  yet  if  the  odic  flame  by  degrees  became  developed
with  greater  intensity  of  light,  the  smoke  appeared  to  become  paler
than  before.  She  often  saw  strong  odic  smoke,  from  the  nine-layer,
spread  out  upon  the  ceiling,  and  illuminate  the  whole  of  it  for  several
minutes.*

*  Thus  we  have  here  a  dozen  new  testimonies  added  to  the  numerous  proofs
of  the  accuracy  of  all  Miss  Reichel's  statements  !  It  would  be  quite  inconceiva-
ble how  the  Vienna  physicians  could  possibly  arrive  at  the  monstrous  declaration,
that  Miss  Reich  el  had  never  seen  any  magnetic  light  whatever,  and  therefore  was
an  impostor,  were  it  not  that  the  reader  of  their  report  sees  at  a  half-glance  how
their  experiments  swarm  with  errors  and  mistakes.  One  among  these,  and  not
the  least,  was  the  collection  of  ten  to  fifteen  young  men  in  the  space  of  a  small
room.  Whoever  has  the  least  knowledge  of  this  subject  knows  that  human  be-
ings exert  a  very  strong  reciprocal  odic  influence  upon  each  other  ;  and  it  is  ex-
plained at  length  in  my  treatises,  that  a  human  body  is  a  constant  source  of  mag-
netic, or,  more  properly  speaking,  odic  force,  radiating  in  all  directions.  With
such  reciprocal  and  universal  active  influence  in  action,  how  could  a  dozen  doc-
tors and  professors  expect  and  ask  that  an  ignorant  sensitive  placed  in  the  midst
of  them  should  have  any  clear  ideas  of  the  complicated  forces  acting  in  every  di-
rection, and  give  clear  and  scientifically  available  answers  to  the  questions  which
they  themselves  did  not  understand  how  to  put  correctly  ?  Every  human  being
is  a  much  stronger  source  of  Od  than  a  steel  magnet.  The  immediate  vicinity  of
a  single  man,  in  many  cases,  on  the  one  hand,  destroys  the  vision  of  a  sensitive ;
and,  on  the  other,  interferes  with  the  visibility  of  a  magnet.  When  I  make  an
experiment  on  light  with  a  sensitive,  in  the  dark,  *the  first  thing  I  do,  before  put-
ting my  questions,  is  to  draw  back  several  paces,  first  from  the  person,  then  from
the  object  of  the  inquiry,  to  remove  the  influence  of  odic  radiations  from  my  own
body,  which  would  complicate  the  results,  and  render  them  unavailable  for  the
purposes  of  science.  Instead  of  observing  similiar  precautions,  these  gentlemen
stationed  a  doctor  on  each  side  of  Reiche!,  who  sometimes  held  her  hands, — a

ODIC  SMOKE.  373

471.  That  which  more  than  twenty  witnesses  have  here  deposed
is  essentially  consistent,  not  only  in  itself,  but  also  harmonizes  with
what  we  already  know  concerning  the  odic  flame,  with  which  it  is
most  intimately  connected  ;  it  therefore  bears  the  stamp  of  truth  so
surely  that  it  can  only  be  denied  in  random,  inconsistent  talk,  which,
however,  unfortunately  is  met  with  in  many  persons  who  wish  to  be
called  philosophers,  but  who  very  often  do  not  possess  even  a  smat-
tering of  scientific  logic.  If  we  now  compare  the  above  scattered
perceptions  of  so  large  and  so  varied  a  series  of  observers,  during  a
space  of  more  than  three  years,  we  come  to  the  following  axioms  :  —

a.  All  magnets,  steel  permanent  magnets  as  well  as  soft  steel  and
iron  induced  magnets  induced  by  terrestrial  magnetism  and  electro-
magnets, exhale  in  the  dark  a  misty  and  smoke-like  delicate  vapor,
next  to  the  odic  flame  ;  it  also  flows  from  the  sides  of  magnets,  al-
though much  more  weakly,  and  often  imperceptibly.  The  strength
of  its  efflux  diminishes  from  the  poles  to  the  magnetic  axes  ;  in  the
axes  it  is  relatively  very  small,  but  not  absolute!}-  wanting.

b.  The  magnitude  of  this  smoke-like  luminous  essence  is  directly
proportioned  to  the  size  of  the  odic  flames  associated  with  it.  When
this  amounts  to  an  inch  or  so,  the  longitudinal  extent  of  the  smoke
does  not  much  exceed  these  dimensions ;  when  the  odic  flame  rises
to  a  yard  or  more,  the  odic  smoke  ascends  to  the  height  of  a  man,

condition  which  no  sensitive  whatever  can  endure, — and  then  placed  the  magnet
opposite  her,  on  some  one's  knees,  &c.  It  is  impossible  to  help  laughing  at  the
idea  of  such  experiments.  Reichel,  thus  put  to  the  torture,  was  now,  on  the  one
side,  to  corroborate  the  ignorant  declarations  of  prejudiced  persons  who  placed
her  in  this  unsuitable  position,  and  who  were  exposed  to  shame  by  every  negative
answer  she  gave  ;  she  was  further  to  answer  the  strained  expectations  of  the  as-
semblage, who  unceasingly  irritated  her  by  mockery,  and  drove  her  to  outbreaks
of  anger  by  contemptuous  treatment;  in  this  total  disturbance  she  was  to  solve
with  precision  the  most  delicate  possible  problems  that  can  be  offered  to  touch  or
sight, — solve  them  under  physical  and  moral  conditions  in  which  they  were  ab-
solutely insoluble, what  else  could  result,  but  the  miserable  confusion

with  which  the  pretended  report  of  the  butted  girl's  answers  abounds?  Under
such  circumstances  it  is  not  worth  the  pains  to  go  into  the  separate  statements,
whether  repeated  truly  or  untruly,  understood  or  not ;  the  whole  is  mingled  to-
gether in  a  hopeless  complication  of  mistakes.

Reichel  was,  in  her  time,  a  most  excellent  sensitive,  the  best  that  could  be  de-
sired for  scientific  investigation,  had  extremely  delicate  sensation  and  excitable
vision,  at  the  same  time  was  willing,  persevering,  accurate  and  truthful  in  her
statements,  modest  in  expressing  her  opinions,  and  acute  in  comprehending  pro-
perly stated  questions.  But  one  must  not  ride  rough-shod  over  such  tender  in-
struments of  delicate  investigation.  Neither  did  these  gentlemen  know  wdiat
they  wanted,  nor  did  the  girl  or  her  helpless  guides  what  to  do.  Science  is  not
created  in  this  way,  but  people  may  thus  expose  their  foolishness,  and  insolently
cloak  it  by  calumny,  at  the  cost  of  an  unprotected  woman. — Authors  Note.

3*74  0D1C   SMOKE.

and  higher.  But  its  magnitude  is  also  proportionate  in  the  same  way
to  the  size  as  well  as  to  the  intensity  of  the  magnet  from  which  it
issues.  Large  magnets  of  small  intensity  (like  my  nine  fold  horse-
shoe in  many  cases)  gave  large  odic  smoke  ;  small  magnets  of  greater
intensity  afforded  proportionately  long  flames,  with  abundance  of  va-
por. But  no  pretensions  are  made  at  present,  in  the  very  beginning
of  the  discoveries,  to  accurate  determinations  of  dimensions.

c.  The  odic  smoke  is  thrown  out  by  magnets  with  a  certain  force,
which  gives  it  the  first  direction,  but  after  that  it  exhibits  a  constant
tendency  to  ascend,  to  flow  upwards.  When  it  reaches  the  roof  of  a
room  it  spreads  out,  flowing  away  over  it,  illuminates  the  painting
on  it,  and  displays  a  certain,  though  short,  permanence.  -Whatever
material  substratum  may  form  the  basis  of  its  manifestations,  it  is  in
any  case  either  lighter  than  atmospheric  air,  or  it  suffers  some  kind  of
repulsion  from  the  earth's  surface,  driving  it  away ;  that  is,  upwards.

d.  It  exhibits  certain  differences,  according  as  it  issues  from  the
positive  or  from  the  negative  poles  of  the  magnets ;  the  positive,
southward  pole,  gives  it  out  reddish-grey  and  yellowish-red  grey,
thicker,  inclined  to  produce  cloudy  masses ;  the  negative,  northward
pole,  affords  it  blue-grey  and  bluish-grey,  more  delicate,  lighter,  and
more  ethereal.  When  its  intensity  diminishes,  more  of  green  (grey  ?)
becomes  intermingled  in  both  kinds  of  odic  smoke ;  at  last  they  be-
come wholly  grey.  Yet  there  occur  exceptional  cases,  when  the  odic
smoke  of  the  magnet-poles  changes,  blue  smoke  appearing  at  the
positive  pole,  and  red  at  the  negative ;  this  happens  when  bars  are
placed  in  the  direction  of  the  dip,  and  in  a  few  other  cases  of  special
nature, — e.  g.,  where  there  is  reversal  of  the  odic  pole  while  the  mag-
netic polarity  remains  unaltered,  &c.

e.  Although  always  present  above  the  odic  flame,  yet  there  are
also  cases  when  it  is  visible  without  it.  This  occurs  when  the  mag-
nets possess  no  great  intensity.  In  such  cases  the  sensitive  frequent-
ly see  a  blue,  uni-polar  flame  appear  over  the  northward  pole,  with
no  flame  on  the  southward  ;  but  instead  of  this,  a  thick  reddish  odic
smoke  from  it.  In  still  weaker  examples  no  flame  at  all  is  seen  at
one  pole  alone ;  and,  nevertheless,  odic  smoke  is  detected  over  either
one  or  both.

f.  The  odic  smoke  so  far  displays  a  material  nature,  that  it  may
he  disturbed  and  broken  up  by  blowing  on  it,  on  which  it  requires  a
short  space  of  time  to  recover  the  original  shape  in  the  succeeding
waves.  It  has,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  aspect  of  the  vapor  of  phos-
phorus, only  with  much  weaker  luminosity.

472.  The  relation  between  odic  flame  and  odic  smoke  is  a  question
we  now  approach  ;  but  it  is  one  very  difficult  to  answer  at  present.

ODIC   SMOKE.  375

Whether  they  are  really  two  specifically  different,  or  only  one  in  dif-
ferent modifications,  I  cannot  now  decide.  All  the  inquiries  I  have
made  on  this  subject,  of  those  who  have  had  both  before  their  eyes,
have  been  answered  by  the  assurance  that  the  two  are  quite  as  differ-
ent as  a  common  flame,  and  a  luminous  smoke  issuing  from  it  and
losing  itself  in  the  air  above.  Nevertheless,  when  I  reflect  that  sen-
sitives of  weak  vision  in  all  cases  see  only  smoke  where  the  more
highly  sensitive  perceive  flame  with  smoke  wavering  over  it;  that
when  the  former  discern  small  flames  with  little  smoke,  the  latter  de-
scribe much  larger  flames  with  much  stronger  smoke ;  that  the  same
persons  also  see  the  same  things  diminished  when  their  vision  is
weaker,  which  appeared  large  before  ;  that,  moreover,  while  a  blue
flame  with  grey  smoke  is  observed  upon  a  negative  pole,  on  the  posi-
tive no  flame  at  all,  but  only  reddish  grey  smoke;  that  there  are
magnets  which  emit  only  smoke,  without  flame,  from  both  poles ;
finally,  that  sensitives,  whom  I  have  kept  for  a  long  time — say  half  a
day — in  the  dark,  at  first  thought  all  the  magnets  possessed  only
smoke,  but  after  an  hour's  sojourn  perceived  flame  and  smoke  on  all,
and,  after  several  hours,  found  large  columns  of  flame  and  vast  masses
of  smoke  developed  gradually  on  particular  magnets : — by  all  this  I
am  compelled  to  conjecture  that  flame  and  smoke  may  perhaps  be
only  one  and  the  same  thing, — differing,  on  the  one  hand,  only  in
the  degree  of  intensity ;  and,  on  the  other,  detected  with  different
degrees  of  clearness  according  to  the  measure  of  the  visual  power  of
the  beholders,  or  of  one  and  the  same  beholder  according  as  his  or
her  sense  for  the  perception  of  odic  light  is  more  or  less  perfectly  un-
folded, through  more  exalted  sensitive  disposition,  or  more  perfect
predisposition  of  the  eye  resulting  from  long  sojourn  in  absolute  dark-
ness. In  this  case  the  first  degree  of  perception  would  be  a  faint
luminous  cloud;  a  second  or  more  distinct,  thicker  or  brighter  mist,
—  at  first  grey,  then  yellowish  red-grey  on  the  positive  side,  and  blue-
grey  on  the  negative, — then  reddish  on  the  former,  bluish  on  the  lat-
ter. A  third  or  fourth  degree,  the  appearance  of  flame  accompanied
by  vapor, — first  the  blue,  next  the  red.  Lastly,  upon  these,  especiall}''
the  latter,  the  dense  rolling  upward  of  clouds  of  smoke,  whirling  up
to  the  roof  of  the  laboratory.  I  say  "  I  seem  compelled  to  conjec-
ture," for  I  wish  to  keep  every  one  of  my  theoretical  views  in  all
case s  perfectly  distinct  from  the  facts  of  experience,  which  I  here  set
down  from  the  concordant  statements  of  many  sensitives,  and  which,
in  any  case,  are  more  certain  than  even  the  simplest  of  my  specula-
tions. So  long  as  we  are  ignorant  of  what  these  odic  luminous  phe-
nomena, taken  as  a  whole,  are, — and  I  do  not  think  it  looks  likely
that  we  shall  very  soon  penetrate  into  the  depths  of  its  essence  and

376  ODIC   SPARKS.

origin,  in  the  face  of  the  prejudiced  opposition  of  many  physicists, —
so  long  will  the  whole  nature  of  these  beautiful  phenomena  remain  a
mystery,  so  long  shall  we  find  it  difficult  to  arrive  at  a  firm  judgment
as  to  the  identity  or  intimate  difference  of  their  manifold  kinds ;  and
therefore  for  the  present  we  must,  in  our  study  and  nomenclature,
keep  to  the  forms  of  their  sensuously  perceptible  occurrence.

V. — Odic  Sparks.

473.  A  fifth  has  now  to  be  added  to  the  four  forms  of  the  lumin-
ous phenomena  already  described,  of  small  compass,  but  of  vivid
strength.  This  consists  of  the  sparks  which  make  their  appearance
in  the  smoke,  and  are  separately  whirled  about  in  it.  Miss  Reichel
first  described  them,  and  she  saw  them  frequently,  not  merely  in
magnetic  smoke,  of  which  alone  we  shall  speak  first  here,  but  under
many  other  circumstances,  in  relating  wdiich  I  shall  subsequently  re-
cur severally  to  these.  The  first  characters  of  these  are  very  faintly
indicated  in  fig.  1  of  the  first  Treatise,  most  distinctly  at  the  sides.
They  were  seen  very  distinctly  in  this  form  by  Baron  von  Oberländer,
who  compared  them  with  the  flying  sparks  of  glowing  pine-charcoal.
Several  other  observers,  in  particular  Miss  Atzmansdorfer  and  Johann
Klaiber,  frequently  compared  them  with  fire-flies..  Miss  Girtler  called
them  wee  little  stars.  Miss  Winter  saw  them  fly  about  in  abundance,
especially  rushing  upwards  with  an  angular  motion  near  the  wall  of
the  room.  She  had  previously  seen  them  very  frequently  at  home
during  severe  nervous  attacks.  Mr.  Delhez  saw  them  darting  about
separately  in  the  smoke  of  the  electro-magnet,  scattered  without  or-
der. They  were  seen  in  abundance  over  a  globular  electro-magnet
(§  587)  by  Professor  Huss.  Baroness  von  Augustin  saw  them  rise
from  the  nine-layer,  but  in  still  greater  numbers  from  an  electro-
magnet. Miss  Nowotny  observed  them  issue  in  greatest  number
from  magnets  ;  and  Madame  Kienesberger  remarked  them  not  only
in  the  smoke  of  the  nine-layer,  rising  singly,  and  scattered  almost  to
the  ceiling,  but  also  issuing  from  the  electro-magnet.  Friedrich
Weidlich  and  Miss  Sturmann  observed  them  in  the  smoke  of  large
and  small  magnets.  Dr.  Neid  and  Mr.  Rabe  saw  them  stream  forth
in  the  misty  emanations  of  the  nine-layer,  many  being  extinguished
in  their  passage,  but  some  rising  to  the  ceiling.  Miss  von  Weigels-
berg,  Mr.  Gustav.  Anschütz,  and  his  sister  Miss  Ernestine,  compared
them  to  fire-flies  flying  up  in  the  odic  vapor,  and  then  wandering  here
and  there.  Madame  Bauer  saw  them  rise  to  the  ceiling  in  the  smoke
of  the  nine-fold  magnet.  Professor  Endlicher  saw  them  rise  singly
with  the  smoke  of  a  strong  electro-magnet,  ascending  to  the  ceiling ;

ODIC   SPARKS.  377

they  wandered  about  separately  in  the  odic  smoke,  and  in  part  flew
out  from  it,  and  consisted  of  larger  and  smaller,  more  and  less  bril-
liant points.  Wilhelmine  Glaser  observed  such  abundance  of  them
in  the  electrical  atmosphere,  that  they  rushed  up  almost  in  a  stream.
She  also  saw  them  appear  in  great  quantity  in  the  smoke  of  a  large
electro-magnet.  Josephine  Zinkel  described  them  as  extremely  small
luminous  points,  which  moved  irregularly  upwards,  separately,  in
variable  but  always  small  number,  with  the  odic  smoke,  sometimes
also  sinking  down,  and  then  rising  up  again  in  it.  Many  times  they
disappeared  wholly  for  the  space  of  a  minute  ;  then  three,  four,  an-
other time  eight  to  twelve,  appeared  again  at  once  in  different  places,
and  sometimes  several  grouped  together.  It  even  happened  that  a
single  one  fell  upon  the  table,  upon  an  arm,  or  into  the  bed,  and
there  remained  a  few  moments  before  it  was  extinguished.  On  a  bar
magnet  which  had  had  its  negative  pole  exposed  to  the  electrical  at-
mosphere of  the  positive  conductor,  she  saw  them  much  increased
not  only  at  this  but  at  the  opposite  positive  pole.  All  these  persons
expressed  lively  pleasure  at  the  sight;  just  such  as  one  hears  when
a  party  are  returning  home  through  a  wood  at  night,  and,  meeting
with  tire-flies,  their  attention  is  suddenly  diverted  from  everything
else,  and  fixed  wholly  upon  these.

474.  I  used  the  nine-layered  horse-shoe  in  an  experiment  especi-
ally directed  to  this  point  with  the  healthy  Josephine  Zinkel.  I
turned  the  poles  upwards  and  placed  them  in  different  positions, —
sometimes  in  the  meridian,  sometimes  in  the  parallel.  Under  all
circumstances,  she  saw  the  sparks  rise,  mostly  separate,  sometimes
two  or  three  together,  of  very  remarkably  intense  luminosity,  but  in
all  cases  small.  She  distinguished  the  two  colors  here,  red  and  blue.
The  red  flowed  in  greatest  number  from  the  southward  pole,  the  blue
from  the  northward.  But  blue  sometimes  came  from  the  former,
and  also  red  sometimes  from  the  latter.  The  reason  of  this  apparent
anomaly,  which  at  first  was  an  enigma  to  me,  is  very  well  explained
above,  (§  396.)  The  blue  sparks  issued  from  the  negative  layers,  the
red  from  the  interposed,  which  had  become  positive  by  reversal  ;  the
opposite  condition  occurring  at  the  other  pole.  They  appeared
abundantly  when  the  nine-layer  was  exposed  to  the  influence  of  the
electrical  atmosphere,  and  all  the  emanations  of  odic  light  were
thereby  increased ;  the  sparks  then  presented  themselves  in  greater
abundance,  and  this  the  greater  in  proportion  as  I  approached  the
magnet  nearer  to  the  conductor.  (Vide  §  43G.)

475.  Miss  Zinkel  represented  this  phenomenon  as  most  beauti-
fully developed,  when  1  formed  a  large  electro-magnet  with  a  strong
Smee's  apparatus.     Not  only  did  a  quantity  of  separate  sparks  spirt

378  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

out  on  all  sides  from  the  large,  brilliant  odic  flame,  but  they  collected
into  a  regular  stream,  and  rose  upwards  with  the  smoke  to  the  ceil-
ing. She  found  the  brightness  of  this  so  vivid  that  she  could  not
conceal  her  astonishment  that  I  saw  nothing  of  it.

476.  Finally,  something  similar  was  seen  when  I  rapidly  pulled
off  the  armature  of  a  horse-shoe,  and  this  the  more  strongly  the  more
powerful  its  magnetism  was.  At  the  moment  of  separation,  Madame
Bauer,  Josephine  Zinkel,  Leopoldine  Reiche!,  Dorfer,  and  others,
saw  abundance  of  sparks  flash  up  like  lightning  and  disappear  again
instantly  ;  immediately  after  this  the  odic  flame  began  to  appear  and
unfold  itself.

477.  The  reality  of  this  phenomenon,  established  concordantly
and  uniformly  through  so  many  healthy  and  diseased  sensitives,
and  confirmed  by  innumerable  experiments,  does  not  admit  of
doubt.  I  do  not  venture  now  upon  a  speculation  as  to  its  nature,
or  even  its  connection  with  the  other  simultaneous  magnetic  odic
luminous  phenomena.  At  present,  I  can  only  establish  the  physi-
cal fact,,  as  represented  in  actuality   to  the  sense  of  vision  of  the

sensitive.

%  *  *  *  *  *

478.  Now  that  we  have  made  some  acquaintance  with  the  differ-
ent kinds  of  development  of  light  from  magnets,  we  will  turn  to  the
differences  of  circumstances  in  which  the  magnet  may  be  placed  dur-
ing this  development  of  light,  and  inquire  into  the  influence  they  may
be  able  to  exert  over  the  same.

ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.

In  altered  media.

479.  We  know  how  very  differently  the  phenomena  of  electrical
light  present  themselves  in  a  vacuum,  even  under  less  than  the  usual
pressure  of  the  atmosphere.  Since  I  was  ignorant  of  the  share  at-
mospheric air  might  take,  in  a  similar  manner,  on  the  luminous  ema-
nations of  magnets,  I  frequently  placed  magnets  under  the  air-pump
in  the  presence  of  sensitives  in  the  dark.  I  employed  for  this  pur-
pose large  and  small  single  horse-shoes,  which  I  placed  with  the
poles  turned  upwards  under  the  bell,  in  a  large  glass  goblet,  so  that
everything  would  be  seen  well  on  all  sides,  and  small  bars  which
would  lie  down  horizontally  under  the  receiver.

4 SO.  The  question  was  -solved  even  by  the  blind  joiner  Tischler.
When  all  was  prepared,  but  before  I  had  begun  to  exhaust,  I  led
him  up  to  the  bell.     To  be  certain  that  his  attention  was  directed  to

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  379

the  right  place,  I  guided  bis  band  to  the  bell ;  but  be  could  not  per-
ceive anything,  the  magnet  emitted  too  little  light  for  him  to  be  af-
fected by  it  through  the  glass.  I  then  began  to  exhaust.  Very  soon,
when  the  air  was  about  half  extracted,  he  became  aware  of  the  light.
And  as  the  rarefaction  increased  the  light  grew,  and  attained  its
greatest  strength  and  extent  for  his  shattered  visual  powers  when  the
rarefactiofl  was  brought  to  a  one  or  one  and  a-half  inch  column  of
mercury.  My  air-pump  was  incapable  of  giving  beyond  this.  When,
as  a  converse  test,  I  let  the  air  suddenly  back  into  the  bell  without
telling  him,  he  expressed  himself  unpleasantly  surprised  by  the  ex-
tinction of  all  light,  and  the  sudden  return  of  darkness.  Miss  Ama-
He  Krüger  detected  a  little  flame  only  on  one  pole,  the  northward,
after  a  certain  amount  of  rarefaction  of  the  air  ;  the  brightness  evi-
dently increased  as  the  rarefaction  went  on,  but  only  so  long  as  the
piston  was  in  action  ;  as  soon  as  it  went  back,  the  light  became  paler,
and  she  soon  lost  sight  of  the  "luminosity.  Mr.  Demeter  Tirka,  per-
fectly healthy,  as  also  Johann  Klaiber  and  Madame  Kienesberger,  in
like  manner  did  not  see  the  magnet  at  first,  but  when  the  air  was  half
pumped  out  the  magnet  appeared  odically  incandescent :  on  further
exhaustion,  Klaiber  observed  the  flames  over  the  poles,  at  first  dull,
then  becoming  brighter  with  each  stroke  of  the  piston,  so  that  at  last
very  vivid  flame  flowed  about  under  the  bell.  As  soon  as  I  let  in
the  air  again,  every  trace  of  light  vanished  from  all  three  observers,
but  returned  when  the  pump  had  been  in  motion  a  short  time  again.
Mr.  Ilochstetter  also  saw  nothing  of  the  magnet  at  first,  under  the
bell ;  but  when  a  portion  of  the  air  was  pumped  out,  the  magnetic
bar,  the  bell,  and  all  its  contents,  became  luminous,  disappearing
again  on  the  re-entrance  of  the  air.  Baroness  von  Augustin  did  not
see  the  bar  magnet  under  the  exhausted  receiver  ;  but  as  soon  as  I
bad  rarefied  the  air  perceptibly,  she  discerned  it,  and  as  the  rarefac-
tion increased,  the  light  under  the  bell  also  gained  strength,  till  at
last  this  appeared  wholly  filled  with  a  luminous  appearance,  with  the
magnet  forming  the  centre.  Miss  Dorfer  saw  little  flames  arise  on  the
poles  after  a  few  strokes  of  the  piston,  moving  and  varying  with
every  rise  of  the  piston.  When  the  rarefaction  was  carried  very  far,
she  saw  the  polar  flame  strike  against  the  vault  of  the  receiver,  curl
round  there,  and  flow  downwards  again  on  the  glass  :  she  compared
the  appearance  with  water  flowing  in  a  curve  out  of  an  inclined
pitcher.  The  whole  contents  of  the  bell  became  dark  again  on  the
opening  of  the  air-cock.  Madame  Johanna  Anschiitz,  and  Mr.  Gus-
tav. Anschütz,  his  sister  Ernestine  Anschiitz,  and  Miss  von  Weigels-
berg,  whose  degrees  of  sensitiveness  differ  but  little,  saw  the  magnet,
with  slight  modifications  of  perfection  and  intensity  of  the  pheno-

380  ODIC  LIGHT  IN"  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

mena,  become  more  brightly  incandescent  with  each  rise  of  the  pis-
ton ;  flames  were  developed  at  the  poles,  stronger  at  the  northward,
the  latter  striking  against  the  vault  of  the  receiver,  there  curving  and
turning  downwards,  and  all  vanishing  again  the  moment  I  opened
the  air-cock ;  on  the  other  hand,  reappearing,  step  by  step,  as  the  air
was,  stroke  by  stroke,  pumped  out  again.  Baron  von  Oberländer
described  the  phenomena  in  exactly  the  same  way.  Friedrich  Weid-
lich's  statements  agreed  accurately  with  the  above  in  various  repeti-
tions of  the  experiments  at  distant  intervals.  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,
Madame  Cecilie  Bauer,  and  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  at  first  did  not  see
a  bar  magnet  at  all  under  the  receiver ;  but  it  became  visible,  odically
incandescent,  by  the  time  the  rarefaction  had  been  carried  to  about
one-half.  On  further  exhaustion,  they  successively  perceived  both
odic  flames,  then  odic  smoke,  completely  filling  the  receiver,  the  bell
itself,  and  the  glass  knob  at  its  summit,  at  last  becoming  odically  in-
candescent. The  last  beholders  saw  the  odic  flame  of  the  northward
pole  blue,  that  of  the  southward  yellowish  red,  as  in  the  open  air,
and  flowing  obliquely  upwards  from  both  poles,  on  the  walls  of
the  glass.  As  soon  as  I  opened  the  cork  which  let  in  the  air,  all
visible  light  vanished  ;  and  all  this  in  repeated,  experiments  at  va-
rious times.  Josephine  Zinkel  added  to  the  previous  observations,
that,  when  the  experiment  was  continued  for  some  time,  the  entire
empty  space  became  filled  with  odic  mist,  and  that  finally  the  bell
itself  became  luminous ;  even  the  glass  knob  which  it  had  on  the
top,  acquired  white  odic  incandescence,  persisting  in  this  knob  for
some  time  after  the  air  had  been  re-admitted  into  the  bell.  As
an  exceptional  case,  I  first  showed  the  experiment  to  Miss  Atz-
mannsdorfer,  while  she  was  in  the  somnambulistic  condition,  on
which,  otherwise,  I  do  not  readily  incline  to  make  odic  experi-
ments. She  gave  the  order  of  succession  of  the  phenomena  in
exact  agreement  with  all  the  other  sensitives  :  after  a  few  strokes
of  the  pump  increasing  odic  incandescence,  odic  flame  rising  until
it  struck  against,  and  was  diverted  by,  the  vault  of  the  receiver,
luminosity  of  the  glass,  and  sudden  extinction  on  the  opening  of
the  air-cock.  She  added,  that  the  odically  incandescent  steel
was  transparent,  almost  like  glass, — a  statement  which  we  have
already  met  with  before.  Two  months  later,  while  she  was  in
the  waking  condition,  in  which  she  knew  nothing  of  the  previous
experiments,  I  repeated  them  with  her  several  times.  I  always  ob-
tained the  same  enumeration  of  the  ^phenomena  of  light ;  she
also,  like  Josephine  Zinkel,  saw  the  bell,  and  even  its  knob,  become
incandescent.  She  observed  delicate  flames  between  the  arms  of
the  horse-shoe,  occupying  the  entire  interspace  ;    the  fiery  mist  on

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  381

the  outside  filled  the  whole  space  as  far  as  the  side  of  the  receiver.
The  flames  were  more  bluish  from  the  northward  pole,  more  reddish
from  the  southward,  but  with  prismatic  colors  intermingled.  She
gave  the  more  minute  particulars  as  to  the  odic  smoke,  that  at  the
commencement  of  the  exhaustion  it  increased  in  light  and  fulness,
not,  however,  continuously,  but  only  up  to  a  certain  degree  of  rare-
faction ;  that  it  then  became  duller  again,  decreased,  and  when  the
air  was  very  highly  rarefied  it  almost  vanished,  while  the  flame  was
most  beautifully  luminous,  and  flowed  brilliantly  down  the  sides  of
the  receiver.  The  odic  smoke  was  in  continual  revolution  inside  the
bell  as  long  as  it  existed.  The  bell  itself,  though  it  became  odically
luminous  throughout,  even  in  its  knob,  produced  no  odic  smoke  ex-
ternally. These  last  statements,  of  which,  however,  I  have  not  any
corroboration  from  other  observers,  and,  therefore,  shall  for  the  pre-
sent keep  back  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  them,  are  evidently
of  great  interest  in  reference  to  the  judgment  of  the  distinction  be-
tween odic  flame  and  odic  smoke.

481.  These  observations,  collected  into  a  regular  form,  show  : —
The  phenomena  of  odic  light  of  the  magnet  are  modified  tinder
varied  atmospheric  jwessure.  They  increase  considerably  with  rare-
faction of  the  air.  Magnets  which,  in  the  open  air  or  under  an  ex-
hausted receiver,  cannot  be  seen  to  emit  light  in  the  dark,  acquire
brilliant  odic  incandescence,  and  very  distinctly  visible  odic  flames  on
their  poles  and  between  their  arms,  by  the  time  the  air  is  only  about
half  exhausted,  and  the  emanations  of  light,  bluish  at  the  northward
pole,  reddish  at  the  southward,  and  intermingled  with  prismatic
colors,  continue  to  increase  as  long  as  the  rarefaction  of  the  air  is
carried  forward.  Then  the  receiver  becomes  so  charged  with  Od,
that  it  is  rendered  luminous,  odically  incandescent,  even  to  the  glass
knob  at  its  summit.  The  odic  (lame  does  not  penetrate  through  the
glass,  but  strikes,  as  it  were,  against  it,  and  curls  round  upon  it  as  a
common  flame  would,  and  as  Miss  Reichel  had  previously  described,
under  other  circumstances,  when  the  odic  flame  curved  round  on  the
cover  of  a  Schweiggers  multiplier,  (§  434,)  and  when  a  glass  lens  was
brought  down  upon  it,  (§  20,)  like  the  fire  does  when  a  pan  is  placed
over  it.  Odic  smoke  is  also  formed,  and  increases,  but  only  up  to  a
certain  point  of  the  rarefaction,  beyond  which  it  decreases  again,  and
probably  wholly  disappears  on  complete  exhaustion.  The  odically
incandescent  glass  bell  is  not  capable  of  producing  odic  smoke  on  the
outside.

482.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  pressure  of  the  air  obstructs  the
development  of  odic  incandescence  and  odic  flame,  and  that  these  are
unfolded  more  strongly  and  in  greater  extent   when  the  pressure  is

382,  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

lessened  or  removed.  In  this  respect  they  both  exhibit  a  certain  de-
gree of  resemblance  to  electricity, — but  only  resemblance,  not  iden-
tity. The  development  of  odjc  smoke  seems  only  to  benefit  up  to  a
certain  degree  by  the  rarefaction  of  the  air ;  in  the  absence  of  air  it
appears  no  longer  to  exist,  and  consequently  seems  to  be  connected
with  the  presence  of  air.  The  sensitives  did  not  indicate  any  appear-
ance of  odic  sparks  under  the  air-pump.  The  glass  of  the  receiver
appeared  to  act  as  an  impediment  to  the  odic  lights, — namely,  the
flame  and  smoke,  which  it  restrained  and  repulsed,  while  the  Od  it-
self penetrated  it,  took  possession  of  it,  and  rendered  it  independent-
ly odically  incandescent.

483.  I  chose  water  as  a  medium  lying  on  the  opposite  side  of  air,
and  affording  greater  intensity.  A  little  horse-shoe,  which  had  been
freshly  magnetized,  and  from  which  the  polar  flames  flowed  vividly
in  the  dark,  was  exhibited  to  the  four  following  sensitives,  at  various
times,  alternately  in  air  and  in  water.  Madame  Kienesberger  saw
the  flame  four-fifths  of  an  inch  long  in  the  air.  As  soon  as  I  dipped
the  horse-shoe  under  water  both  smoke  and  flame  immediately
vanished  from  her  sight,  but  the  odic  incandescence  persisted,  and
the  steel  was  luminous  as  it  lay  in  the  water.  Moreover,  according
to  her  account,  a  small  brightly  luminous  point  remained  on  one
pole,  brilliant,  but  very  minute.  Friedrich  Weidlich  saw  the  polar
flames  two  inches  long  in  the  air ;  I  then  let  him  immerse  them  in
water,  in  a  glass  dish.  He  saw  the  steel  continue  in  unchanged  odic
incandescence,  almost  as  transparent  as  the  glass  itself,  but  the  odic
flames  vanished  instantly  the  magnet  was  submerged.  At  the  same
time,  he  assured  me  that  the  flame  did  disappear  entirely,  but  a  little
point,  as  if  on  a  corner,  was  permanent,  and  remained  very  bright.
As  often  as  the  magnet  was  taken  out  of  the  water  it  again  appeared,
though  still  dripping  wet,  to  be  furnished  with  odic .  flames  two
inches  long,  and  as  often  as  it  was  replaced  in  the  water  these
vanished,  leaving  only  that  little  brightly  luminous  residuum.  Miss
Atzmannsdorfer,  in  whose  presence  I  went  through  the  same  experi-
ment, saw  the  magnet  instantly  lose  its  flame  in  water,  but  retain  its
odic  incandescence,  weak  at  the  bend,  but  gradually  increasing
towards  each  pole.  The  healthy  girl  Zinkel  laid  a  horse-shoe  in  wa-
ter, the  two  flaming  poles  turned  towards  the  north.  Flame,  and
smoke  vanished  instantly.  AVhen  she  took  it  out  again  they  return-
ed to  both  poles  without  their  having  been  dried.  On  the  other
hand,  the  entire  magnet  remained  odically  incandescent  in  the  water,
the  intensity  of  its  light  not  being  at  all  weakened.  At  the  same
time  a  strong  appearance  of  light,  like  a  residuum  of  odic  flame,  of
concentrated  brightness,  remained  upon  one  of  the  poles.     The  fiery

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  ,883

point  was  at  an  inner  corner,  that  is,  one  turned  towards  the  other
poles  ;  from  it  issued  also  an  exceedingly  delicate  fiery  streak  ;  when
this  was  accurately  felt  out  it  proved  to  be  the  inner  transverse  edge
of  the  same  pole  ;  that  is,  the  one  lying  nearest  to  the  opposite  pole.
I  marked,  in  the  dark,  the  pole  which  retained  light  at  the  edge  and
corner  under  water.  When  I  brought  this  into  the  light,  it  unex-
pectedly proved  that  this  was  not  the  magnetic  pole,  as  I  had  con-
jectured, but  the  positive,  the  southward,  pole  of  the  magnet.  It  was
doubtless  the  same  on  which  Madame  Kienesberger  and  Weidlich
had  perceived  a  residuum  of  odic  flame  in  a  concentrated  condition.
In  frequent  repetitions  of  the  experiment,  especially  during  men-
struation, she  perceived  remains  of  light  also  on  the  southward  pole,
but  less  striking  and  less  perceptible^  because  they  were  blue  and
greyish  blue,  and  had  less  intensity,  while  the  residual  light  on  the
southward  pole  appeared  reddish  yellow,  and  sometimes  red  like
glowing  charcoal.

484.  Thus  a  denser  medium,  like  water,  removes  the  odic  flame
and  smoke,  it  may  be,  by  absorbing  both,  and  thus  becoming  mag-
netized water  ;  or  it  may  be  that  it  does  not  allow  of  the  production
of  either  to  greater  extent  than  as  a  luminous  point  and  a  luminous
thread  on  the  inner  corner  and  edge  of  the  poles  of  a  horse-shoe.
Our  attention  has  already  been  called  by  Miss  Nowotny  (§  3)  to  such
luminous  threads  on  the  poles  of  the  magnets,  as  the  smallest  degree
of  magnitude  of  odic  flame.

485.  -I  have  not  applied  media  of  a  third  kind  of  density,  namely,
solid  bodies,  as  materials  for  enveloping  magnets.  It  would  be  an
experiment  well  worth  trying,  to  exhibit  to  a  sensitive  an  induced
magnet  fused  into  an  envelope  of  glass  of  tolerable  thickness  ;  I  have
not  hitherto  been  able  to  do  it.  As  it  would  lose  its  magnetism  at
the  temperature  of  melting  glass,  it  would  be  necessary  to  re-mag-
netize it  from  without,  which  would  not  be  a  matter  of  any  difficulty.
Experiments  approximating  to,  but  vet  deviating  somewhat  from  the
fundamental  idea,  I  have  made  with  copper  wire.  I  set  out  with  the
view  of  inquiring  whether  the  transfer  of  Od — which,  as  we  learned
formerly  at  §  45  of  the  second  Treatise,  may  take  place  from  magnets
on  to  other  bodies,  and  which  we  made  acquaintance  with  through
its  influence  on  the  sense  of  feeling— might  not  perhaps  also  find  an
expression  in  the  phenomena  of  light,  and  thereby  be  made  capable
of  leading  to  further  conclusions  on  this  profound  subject.  \\  ith
this  intention  I  made  a  loose  irregular  coil  of  about  ten  to  fifteen
turns  of  copper  wire  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  thick,  so  as  to  form  a  kind
of  net,  pressed  it  flat,  and  laid  it  upon  the  northward  pole  of  a  nine-
layer  horse-shoe  standing  upright,  fitting  it  to  this  to  a  certain  ex-

384  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

tent,  and  allowing  the  end  of  the  wire  to  project  eight  inches  free  at
the  side  towards  the  east.  When  this  was  done  in  the  darkened
chamber,  in  the  presence  of  Josephine  Zinkel,  whose  eyes  had  been
well  prepared,  as  soon  as  the  wire  coil  was  placed  in  the  middle  of
the  eight  inches  high  blue  odic  flame  this  immediately  contracted,
did  not  extend  beyond  the  metal  coii,  but  was  evidently  absorbed  by
it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  wire  rapidly  increased  in  the  strength  of
its  odic  incandescence,  became  much  more  luminous  and  as  if  trans-
parent. After  a  few  seconds,  this  increased  so  much  that  it  formed
a  bright  atmosphere  around  it,  a  delicate,  misty  luminous  envelope,
which  appeared  to  coat  the  wire  all  along  to  a  thickness  of  about  an
inch.  Immediately  after,  a  light  flame  rose  from  the  point  of  the
wire,  the  luminosity  of  which  was  much  more  intense  than  that  of
the  blue  flame  which  the  pole  of  the  magnet  possessed  at  first,  so  that
it  illuminated  the  neighboring  floor  of  the  room  for  the  space  of
more  than  a  yard.  It  was  almost  eight  inches  long,  and  exhibited  a
streaky  composition,  like  a  brush  of  light,  such  as  has  often  been  ob-
served on  the  magnet  itself,  and  which  therefore  appeared  to  have
been  transferred  from  this  on  to.  the  wire.  The  n^agnet  itself  here
lost  nothing  of  its  odic  incandescence,  only  its  odic  flame.  I  went
through  a  similar'  experiment,  with  similar  results,  with  Miss  Atz-
mannsdorfer,  but  do  not  find  it  recorded  in  the  journal  I  kept  with
her,  and  therefore  cannot  give  any  of  the  details  of  it.  On  the  other
hand,  the  experiments  with  Madame  Kienesberger  are  accurately  re-
ported. I  brought  a  wire,  several  yards  long,  under  double  doors
and  carpets,  from  a  room  which  daylight  entered,  and  where  an  as-
sistant was  placed,  into  the  completely  darkened  chamber,  and  I  here
placed  the  sensitive  before  it.  I  now  directed  the  assistant  to  apply
the  negative  northward  pole  of  a  five-layer  horse-shoe  to  the  end  of
the  wire  in  the  light  room.  After  the  lapse  of  about  a  minute,  the
portion  of  the  wire  which  reached  into  the  dark  chamber  began  to
increase  perceptibly  in  odic  incandescence  ;  it  slowly  but  continually
became  brighter,  till,  after  four  or  five  minutes,  it  attained  its  maxi-
mum of  incandescent  light,  in  which  it  appeared  transparent  like
glass.  Along  the  wire,  scattered  points  of  fire-rust  were  formed  here
and  there,  almost  like  sparks,  but  larger,  duller,  and  more  permanent.
They  appeared  to  move  backwards  and  forwards  a  little,  and  to  in-
crease and  diminish  in  size  and  intensity  of  light.  When  blown
upon  they  were  extinguished  for  a  moment,  but  were  immediately
reproduced.  At  the  point  of  the  wire  appeared  a  luminous  patch,
also  bluish,  somewhat  larger  than  those  points,  more  strongly  with-
standing currents  of  air,  and  more  luminous.  When  I  had  the
southward  instead  of  the  northward  pole  of  the  magnet  applied  to

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  385

the  end  of  the  wire  in  the  outer  room,  the  luminous  phenomena  all
gradually  appeared  in  the  dark  chamber  in  like  manner;  all  smaller,
however,  and  with  the  Hgh-t  duller.  These  phenomena  were  evidently
completely  correspondent  to  those  Josephine  Zinkel  had  observed,
and  only  weaker  in  proportion  as  the  magnet  was  smaller,  and  the
length  of  wire  brought  in  contact  with  it  shorter.  The  luminous
spots  here  and  there  on  the  wire  were  the  rudiments,  the  first  piece-
meal appearance  of  that  envelope  of  light  which  we  have  already
found  Madame  Kienesberger  perceive.  I  modified  the  experiment
with  Friedrich  Weidlich  by  rolling  up  the  end  of  the  wire  in  the
lighted  room,  into  a  coil  of  several  turns,  and  then  having  the  north-
ward pole  of  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  applied  to  this.  Thus,  the  sur-
face of  contact  was  increased,  and  the  magnet  stronger.  In  the  dark
chamber  he  saw  the  odic  incandescence  of  the  wire  increase,  and  a
slender  flame,  eight  inches  long,  and  as  thick  as  one's  finger,  rise
from  its  extremity;  when  I  had  the  southward  pole  applied,  a  short-
er, duller,  and  rather  broader  flame  appeared  on  the  end  of  the  wire  ;
all  agreeing  with  what  has  already  been  reported,  and  differing  only
in  the  greater  intensity  of  cause  and  effect.  With  Madame  Kienes-
berger I  placed  another  copper  wire,  not  rolled  into  a  coil,  but  merely
the  end  of  it,  on  the  nine-layer  magnet,  in  tke  dark  chamber.  On
the  northward  pole,  the  copper  wire,  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  thick,
and  one  yard  long,  became  more  strongly  incandescent  than  before,
diffusing  light  around;  a  flame  appeared  at  the  other  end,  which  she
compared  in  stillness,  size,  and  aspect,  to  the  flame  of  a  wax  candle,
slender,  rather  yellow  below,  more  bluish  above,  conical,  and  with
smoke  ascending  more  than  four  inches  high  above  it.  When  I  laid
the  wire  on  the  southward  pole,  the  phenomena  which  successively
appeared  were  the  same,  but  rather  weaker,  smaller,  and  less  lumin-
ous ;  the  terminal  flame  was  now  red  and  smoky.  The  progress  of
the  phenomena  was  just  as  before,  slowly  rising  one  by  one  from  the
source,  increasing,  and  then  disappearing  again  after  the  wire  was
removed  from  the  magnet.  In  a  subsequent  third  experiment  I  used
the  coil  of  wire  with  her  also,  and  in  the  same  way  as  with  Zinkel,
only  with  the  slight  modification  that  I  made  the  projecting  free
piece  of  wire  a  full  yard  long.  When  I  had  applied  the  coil  to  the
northward  pole,  the  blue  flame  of  this  immediately  sank  down,  only
a  small  remnant  of  it  remained  playing  among  the  turns  of  the  wire ;
these  had  apparently  absorbed  all  the  rest,  that  is  to  say,  absorbed
the  force  which  produced  the  flame.  The  odic  incandescence  of  the
wire  consequently  increased ;  it  soon  acquired  an  envelope  of  thin,
misty,  luminous  nature  over  its  whole  length,  emitting  bluish  light,
and  coating  it  almost  to  the  thickness  of  one's  finger,  without  visible

17

386  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

motion  ;  at  length,  a  flame  four  inches  long  rose  from  the  end  of  the
wire,  pale-yellow  below,  and  blue  above,  terminating  in  a  stream  of
delicate  luminous  vapor.  When  I  took  the  wire  coil  away  from  the
northward  pole,  all  this  vanished  immediately,  the  flame  rose  up
from  the  pole  to  its  former  height,  and  all  returned  to  its  original
condition.  Then,  bringing  the  wire  coil  to  the  southward  pole,  sim-
ilar appearances  presented  themselves  here  also :  the  red  polar  flame
was  immediately  absorbed  by  the  copper  wire,  and  vanished  from  the
pole ;  the  pale  natural  odic  incandescence  of  the  wire  changed  into
dull  red ;  a  red,  luminous,  misty  envelope,  three-fifths  of  an  inch  in
thickness,  came  up  over  it,  and  finally  an  odic  flame,  two  inches  long,
burst  forth  from  the  distant  end  of  the  wire,  red  below  and  yellow
above,  pointed,  and  losing  itself  in  dense  and  abundant  smoke,  which
rose  up  above  it.

486.  These  experiments,  which  I  could  confirm  by  the  enumera-
tion of  many  similar  ones  if  it  were  necessary,  all  agree  in  teaching  us
that  the  conduction  of  odic  force  through  other  bodies,  such  -as  we
have  become  acquainted  with  in  many  cases  in  the  seventh  Treatise,
through  the  effects  on  the  sense  of  feeling  produced  on  the  sensitive,
is  also  accompanied  by  corresponding  luminous  phenomena  ;  that,
like  the  force  which  the  magnet  emits,  and  with  which  it  impregnates
other  bodies,  so,  also,  the  flames  which  it  sends  out  can  be  infused
into  other  bodies  and  again  emitted  from  them,  exactly  as  from  the
magnet  itself.  The  transferable  essence  of  Od,  therefore,  carries  unth
it,  besides  its  power  of  affecting  the  animal  nerves  also,  its  luminous
force  ;  and  it  carries  over  into  other  solid  media,  its  incandescence,  its
fame,  its  smoke,  with  their  fluidity,  their  mobility,  their  light,  and
their  colors,  and,  as  we  already  know,  in  addition,  their  peculiar  sen-
sations of  coolness,  warmth,  uneasiness  or  refreshment.

487.  A  retrospect  of  the  various  contents  of  this  chapter  shows  us
that  the  phenomena  of  light  proceeding  from  the  magnet,  incandes-
cence and  flame,  are  developed  most  strongly,  in  greatest  size  and
luminosity,  in  highly  rarefied  air, — perhaps  would  be  still  more  per-
fectly unfolded  in  an  absolute  vacuum ;  that  odic  smoke  appears  to
have  its  greatest  intensity  connected  with  a  certain  definite  density
of  the  air,  beneath  which  it  begins  to  disappear  again  ;  that  the  com-
mon density  of  atmospheric  air  considerably  diminishes  the  odic  lu-
minous phenomena  ;  that  the  density  of  water  so  restrains  the  odic
flame  that  it  almost  annihilates  it,  yet  without  lessening  the  odic  in-
candescence ;  that  the  density  of  solid  bodies,  like  glass,  (the  bell  of
the  air-pump,)  absorbs  it,  and  retains  it  to  a  certain  extent  by  its  co-
ercive power ;  but  of  such  as  metals,  especially  wires,  readily  emits
the  absorbed  essence  again  in  luminosity  and  flame,  both  along  the

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  887

surface,  and,  more  particularly,  at  points.  To  comprise  this  in  a
word  :  that  the  odic  light  is  subject  to  different  conditions  in  different
media.

488.  So  far  as  we  can  at  present  see  into  the  matter,  there  is
some  probability  that  odic  sinoke  is  odized  air,  in  the  same  way  that
the  so-called  magnetized  water  is  odized  water, — that  is,  air  and  wa-
ter charged  with  Od.  For  water  also,  when  odized,  whether  by  the
magnet,  crystals,  hands,  chemical  action,  or  any  other  means,  acquires
odic  incandescence,  and  becomes  visible  in  the  dark,  although  pre-
viously invisible,  exactly  as  odized  metals  acquire  or  increase  in  odic
incandescence  ;  which  will  be  more  minutely  shown  hereafter.*

Colors  of  Odic  Light.

489.  The  phenomena  of  the  colors  exhibited  by  the  different  kinds
of  odic  light  acquire  very  great  consequence  as  they  are  more  mi-
nutely inquired  into.  From  my  further  researches,  it  proves  that
they  are  not  accidental  and  irregular,  as  they  would  appear  to  be
from  the  earlier  ones,  but  that  they  are  subject  to  ordinary  physical
laws,  and,  consequently,  that  their  gradations  may  thus  be  used  as  a

*  Clairvoyant  persons  have  repeatedly  declared  to  me  as  a  fact,  the  proposi-
tion contained  in  this  paragraph,  substituting  our  accepted  word  mesmerized  for
odized.  They  say  air  or  water  is  "  thickened"  or  made  cloudy  by  what  they  call
the  mesmeric  fluid;  and  sometimes,  as  it  has  emanated  from  different  individuals,
the  color  has  been  different — from  one,  deep  blue  ;  from  another,  silvery  blue  ;  from
a  third,  green.  In  some  of  Major  Buckley's  cases,  persons  wkle  awake  have  seen
the  light  produced  by  his  passes  to  be  blue ;  some  have  seen  them  green.  These
were  delicately  sensitive  persons,  who  have  in  my  presence  read  printed  words
and  sentences  on  slips  of  paper  previously  concealed  from  them  carefully  in  ano-
ther apartment,  in  the  innermost  of  a  nest  of  four  silver  boxes,  all  enclosed  in  a
morocco  case,  or  folded  up  in  nutshells.

Such  facts  would  lead  us  to  conclude  that  the  conditions  of  organization  intro-
duce relations  into  the  subject  of  color  that  require  much  careful  investigation.
The  perceptions  of  clairvoyants  on  the  colors  emanating  from  metals  are  so  much
in  accordance  with  the  facts  developed  in  the  very  careful  and  curious  researches
of  the  Baron,  that  new  views  may  arise  on  the  theories  of  color.  Our  faculties
of  perception  depend  upon  our  organizations.  From  these  emanate  odic  or  mes-
meric forces.  Many  individuals  who  can  see  very  well,  cannot  distinguish  colors.
The  oru.m  of  color  is  wanting  in  these  persons.  No  fact  in  Gall's  magnificent
discoveries  is  better  established.  Color,  then,  is  dependent  on  the  odic  force
emanating  from  Gall's  organ  of  color.  Is  color  dependent  essentially  on  further
relations  of  the  odic  force  ?  Have  we  not  differences  in  the  perceptions  of  color
as  emanating  from  chlorine,  from  iodine,  from  cobalt,  from  copper?  May  not  co-
lor be  dependent  on  a  crystalline  arrangement  of  an  elementary  ponderable  with
lumiue  and  odine  ?  The  grasp  of  chemism  on  other  sciences  is  not  yet  defined ;
and  the  influence  of  further  researches  into  molecular  forces  may  yet  widely  illu-
minate other  spheres  of  knowledge.

388  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

measure,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the  polar  quality  and  the  strength  of
the  development  of  Od  :  and,  on  the  other,  of  the  degree  of  excita-
bility of  the  sensitive  ;  not  to  speak  of  the  most  interesting  deduc-
tions they  afford  us  respecting  magnetism  proper  and  its  intimate
characteristics.  In  its  lowest  and  weakest  stage,  the  odic  light  ap-
pears upon  the  magnet  as  a  faint  greyish  cloud,  only  perceptible  after
a  sojourn  for  hours  in  absolute  darkness,  and  the  reality  of  which  can
only  be  ascertained  by  slowly  moving  the  luminous  body,  the  mag-
net, to  and  fro  in  the  dark.  A  pocket  horse-shoe  of  strong  magnetic
intensity  was  thus  seen  by  the  healthy  Mr.  Edward  Hütter  :  the  lu-
minosity was  so  faintly  grey  at  the  northward  pole,  in  the  blackness
of  night,  that  for  a  moment  he  was  in  doubt  whether  what  he  saw
was  real  or  the  effect  of  imagination  ;  but  when  the  magnet  was
moved  backwards  and  forwards,  he  saw  the  grey  light  traverse  the
same  path,  and  thus  became  convinced  of  the  correctness  of  his  ob-
servation. This  case  occurred  frequently  with  many  of  the  less  sen-
sitive, always  at  the  commencement  of  the  experiments,  especially
with  the  healthy  Baroness  von  Natorp,  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl,
Messrs.  Tirka,  Kotschy,  Schuh,  Delhez,  &c.  I-  omit  further  in-
stances, since  these  have  been  mentioned  often  enough  incidentally
elsewhere.

490.  This  original  delicate  grey  light,  at  first  perceived  only  at  the
northward  pole,  becomes  stronger  in  its  ascending  stages.  In  the
first  place,  it  becomes  more  distinctly  visible,  gradually  more  dense,
more  vaporous  and  concentrated.  A  cloud  also  appears  at  the  south-
ward pole.  Both  gain  strength  and  consistence  uutil  they  resemble
smoke.

491.  A  period  now  soon  comes,  in  which  color  begins  to  appear,
at  first  only  dull,  and  faintly  tinging  the  general  grey.  Madame  Jo-
sephine Fenzl  saw  only  a  cloudy  light  over  the  electro-magnet ;  but
at  the  northward  pole  it  seemed,  in  comparison  to  that  over  the
southward,  more  of  a  bluish  grey,  while  the  latter  was  rather  yel-
lowish grey.  Professor  Endlicher  gave  the  same  account  of  some
horse-shoes.  This  is  the  very  commencement  of  the  perception  of
color.  Proceeding  onwards,  a  portion  of  the  smoke,  that  which  is
in  contact  with  the  steel,  acquires  a  flame-like  continuity  ;  the  other
part  in  which  the  flame  loses  itself,  remains  smoky.  Mr.  Sebastian
Zinkel  (77  years  old,)  saw,  rising  from  the  northward  pole  of  a
single  horse-shoe  magnet,  a  bluish  appearance,  which  he  was  doubt-
ful whether  to  call  flame  or  smoke  ;  at  the  southward  pole  he  dis-
cerned a  similar  smaller  but  indistinctly  smoky  emission  of  light.
The  smoke  is  strongest  and  most  dense  at  that  part  where  it  is  in
contact  with  the  point  of  the  flame,  and  gradually  passes,  with  dimi-

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  389

nishing  density,  at  the  other  end  into  vapor  and  mist,  and  thus,  be-
coming continually  weaker,  is  at  last  invisible  ;  this  is  always  in  the
upward  direction.  The  flame-like  lower  portion  now  gains  more
color.  It  is  first  seen,  when  the  poles  are  directed  upwards,  that  at
the  northward  pole  the  grey  begins  to  grow  yellowish  or  bluish,  and
with  increasing  strength  it  passes  through  blue-grey  into  yellow  or
blue.  The  southward  pole  frequently  only  possesses  smoke  at  a  time
when  the  northward  pole  has  long  shown  a  blue  flame.  Finally,  the
smoke  reaches  at  the  southward  pole  the  degree  of  strength  at  which
it  passes  into  flame  ;  the  grey  inclines  at  first  into  whitish-grey,  then
into  yellowish-grey,  and  rises  through  yellow  and  orange  into  red.
The  smoke  over  the  red  is  by  this  time  at  a  very  dense,  increasingly
densely  rolling  stage,  in  which  finally  scattered  sparks,  like  fire-flies,
float  about.  If,  however,  the  poles  are  directed,  not  upward,  but
downward,  or  in  any  other  direction,  these  conditions  follow  a  differ-
ent course.  (I  shall  speak  of  this  immediately.)  The  red  flame  of
the  southward  pole,  though  appearing  later,  possesses  the  greatest
intensity  of  light;  the  blue  of  the  northward  pole  is  always  less  lu-
minous, and,  when  the  two  present  themselves  side  by  side,  in  toler-
ably equal  size,  the  blue  is  always  dimmer,  the  reddish-yellow  and
red  brighter  :  where  this,  as  usually  happens  with  horse-shoe  mag-
nets, appears  to  be  reversed,  it  depends  merely  on  the  fact  that  the
northward  flame  is  larger  under  our  latitudes  than  the  southward
flame,  and  therefore  appears  relatively  more  luminous.  This  course
of  the  phenomena  was  observed,  in  all  its  gradations,  by  the  sickly
sensitives,  especially  by  Madame  Kienesberger,  Misses  Winter,  Dor-
fer, Kynart,  Weigand,  Krüger,  Miss  von  Weigelsberg,  Madame  Jo-
hanna Anschiitz,  also  by  Freidrich  Weidlich  and  others,  and  by  the
healthy  Messrs.  Pauer,  Gustav.  Anschiitz,  Tirka,  Schuh,  Kotschy,
Habe,  Dr.  Nied,  Stephen  Kollar,  Baron  von  Oberländer,  Klaiber  the
joiner,  Miss  Sophia  Pauer,  Professor  Endlicher,  Miss  Ernestine  Ans-
chiitz, the  Baroness  von  Natorp,  Mesdames  Josephine  Fenzl,  Isabella
von  Tessedik,  von  Varady,  von  Peichich,  Caecilie  Bauer,  the  Baroness
von  Augustin,  and  others.  I  cousider  it  superfluous  to  enter  upon  an
enumeration  of  countless  single  experiments,  of  which  incidental  men-
tion is  made  everywhere,  for  the  support  of  these  most  clear  pheno-
mena, which  may  be  repeated  and  confirmed  anywhere  with  any  sen-
sitive person.

491  b.  I  have  already  stated,  in  accordance  with  the  accounts  of
Misses  Nowotny,  Reichel,  Sturinann,  Atzmannsdorfer,  and  Maix,  that
in  the  further  progress  these  two  principal  colors  become  associated
with  others, — in  fact,  with  green,  orange,  and  violet, — and  thus  the
odic  flames  acquires  a  variegated,  apparently  confused,  play  of  color.

890  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

Professor  Endlicher  saw  the  lights  over  a  strong  electro-magnet
moving  about  with  an  irregular  intermixture  of  different  colors.  Ba-
roness von  Augustin  expressed  herself  in  the  same  way  on  this  point ;
also  Madame  Kienesberger,  Stephen  Kollar,  Madame  von  Varady,
Freidrich  Weidlich,  Dr.  Nied,  Misses  Winter.  Girtler,  Zinkel,  and
others  ;  the  latter  frequently  in  the  cases  of  bars  and  horse-shoes.  All
the  more  highly  sensitive  met  with  it  in  the  first  experiments  on  light,
and  expressed  lively  astonishment  and  delight  at  it ;  but,  under  equal
circumstances,  they  saw  it  most  distinctly  beneath  the  air-pump.
Miss  Atzmannsdorfer  saw  the  variegated  play  of  color  over  a  horse-
shoe magnet,  which  she  had  perceived  but  faintly  in  the  open  air,  be-
come more  bright  and  more  vividly  colored  under  the  receiver  with
every  stroke  of  the  pump.

492.  There  is  yet  a  higher  stage  of  the  phenomena  of  light,  and
this  deserves  the  most  accurate  recital  of  the  experiments,  and  the
most  circumstantial  examination  of  their  details.  This  is  a  perfectly
regular  iris  or  prismatic  spectrum,  the  origin  of  which,  astonished
me,  and  will  surprise  every  one  who  takes  the  trouble  to  enter  minute-
ly into  this  remarkable  subject.  The  variegated  mobile  play  of  colors
is  arranged  according  to  certain  rules,  and  is  produced  in  definite
forms  when  all  conditions  unite  to  favor  its  undisturbed  development.
As  early  as  1844,  Miss  Reichel  had  mentioned  to  me  that  she  fre-
quently saw  a  rainbow  in  the  magnet-flame.  I  took  no  notice  of  this,
under  the  idea  that  she  meant  merely  a  variation  of  color  in  the
movements  of  the  odic  flame,  something  like  what  we  are  accustomed
to  in  the  sparks  and  brushes  of  the  electrical  light ;  but  the  state-
ments of  Miss  Reichel  have  always  subsequently  proved  to  be  cor-
rect.*

*  An  avis  au  lecteur  for  the  gentlemen  of  the  so-called  Vienna  Medical  Com-
mittee. It  has  occurred  to  me  that  it  will  perhaps  not  be  altogether  superfluous
to  those  readers  who  are  unacquainted  with  the  journal  of  the  Vienna  Medical
Society,  to  give  a  small  specimen  of  the  contents  of  the  essay  launched  against
my  researches  :  this  will  place  them  in  a  position  to  judge  for  themselves  what
consideration  it  deserves.  At  page  50,  for  example,  we  find  the  following  pas-
sage : — Dr.  von  Eisenstein  led  her  (Miss  Reichel)  in  this  condition  (supposed  mag-
netic sleep)  into  a  large  room,  where  he  allowed  her  to  sit  down  upon  a  couch,
and  endeavored  to  raise  her  state  to  that  of  clairvoyance  by  passes  with  his
hands  and  four  bar  magnets,  and  at  the  time  to  destroy  the  influence  of  the  sun,
and  give  the  preponderance  to  that  of  the  magnets.  When  he  brought  the  mag-
nets to  the  region  of  the  heart,  and  Reichel  started,  as  if  involuntarily,  he  cried —
"  Aha  !  here  is  this  nasty  sun,  then  !  It  is  on  your  heart !  "Wait  a  moment,  and
I  will  drive  it  out !"  And  then  he  made  spiral  turns  over  the  region  of  the  heart
with  considerable  energy.  The  same  scene  followed  in  the  magnetization  on  the
back  and  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  The  sun  was  pursued  without  mercy,  and
driven  out  of  every  lurking-place.  In  one  of  these  turns,  Reichel  jumped  up
and  struck  at  her  magnetizer ;  the  latter  pressed  her  into  her  seat  again,  and

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  391

Then  Freidiicli  Weidlich  asserted  distinctly  that  the  colors  formed
a  perfect  rainbow  when  the  air  was  still,  and  the  flame  of  the  magnet

magnetized  her  hps  with  little  circular  passes.  When  she  tried  to  appose  it,  and
held  her  hand  before  her  face,  he  removed  it,  and  reproached  her,  that  "she
would  not  kiss  the  magnet,  her  benefactor,  who  made  her  well ;  the  horrid  sun
must  be  driven  away  from  her  lips,  and  its  place  taken  by  the  magnet,  ifce."
Turning  over  leaf,  we  find  the  account  of  an  experiment  in  which  Reirhel  was  to
see  flames  on  magnets  lull  before  her  in  a  room  open  to  daylight,  and  when,  as
an  additional  means,  her  eyes  were  bound  with  a  handkerchief:  this  ends  with
the  words — "  Dr.  von  Eisenstein  (conductor  of  the  experiment)  gave  no  explana-
tion of  the  tendency  of  this  experiment  Baron  rofl  Reichenbach  always  made
his  researches  on  the  emanations  of  ligbi  from  magnets  in  darkened  places,  and
found  that  they  were  stronger  in  proportion  as  the  obscurity  was  more  complete.
Why  Dr.  von  Eisenstein  undertook  this  experiment  in  a  room  brightly  illuminated
by  reflected  sun-light, — why  he  chose'  the  moment  when  her  eyes  were  bound, —
whether  he  thereby  intended  to  test  her  gift  of  divination,  or  whatever  else  he
wanted  to  show  by  it. — we  know  not:  he  gave  us  no  explanation  of  the  experi-
ment just  related."  Nonsense  of  this  kind  is  met  with  not  unfrequently  m  the
course  of  the  treatise  :  who  could  find  patience  to  follow  two  hundred  pages  of
it? — Author  s  Note.

I  must  take  this  opportunity  of  expressing  my  admiration  of  the  generous  tes-
timony afforded  by  Professor  Grcgoiy  in  favor  of  the  truths  of  mesmerism,  in  his
note  occurring  at  page  356  of  his  translation  of  the  Baron's  researches.  It  is  a
service  of  some  peril,  in  these  days  of  literary  and  scientific  ruffianism,  to  avow
a  belief  in  the  statements  respecting  Miss  M'Avov ;  or  in  those  recorded  by  Dr.
Elliotson  in  various  numbers  of  the  Zoist,  especially  relating  to  the  facts  about
the  Okeys;  or  even  his  belief  in  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  which  Pro-
fessor Gregory  had  himself  observed  in  the  case  of  Miss  Martineau's  servant-girl.
It  is  well  and  nobly  asserted  by  him,  that  "it  is  the  duty  of  every  lover  of  truth
and  of  science,  to  protest  energetically  against  the  system  of  reckless  accusations
of  imposture  preferred  against  persons  of  blameless  character,  because  their
statements  appear  to  us  incredible,  or,  as  has  often  happened,  because  we  are  un-
able, from  want  of  knowledge  of  the  rules  of  scientific  research,  to  form  a  clear
distinction  in  our  minds  between  what  is  real,  and  what  may  be  imaginary  or  de-
lusive, in  the  results  obtained.''

In  Vienna,  the  squad  of  stupidities  who  had  undertaken  t<>  criticise  the  Baron
von  Reichenbach,  have  had  recourse  to  the  same  expedients  against  one  of  the
subjects  of  his  experiments  as  the  opponents  of  the  truth  had  adopted  in  England.
It  is  curious  to  remark  the  influence  which  competition  exerts  in  modifying  the
moral  perceptibilities  of  mankind.  The  struggle  for  pelf  renders  some  men,
otherwise  of  fine  capacities  for  generous  feelings,  sordid  and  mean.  Their  organs
of  acquisitiveness,  cunning,  and  self-esteem,  are  stimulated  into  undue  action  by
the  leading  active  minds  of  the  coteries  to  which  they  happen  to  be  attached.
One  man,  perhaps,  having  nothing  to  recommend  him  but  great  activity  in  ga-
thering gossip,  albeit  he  may  be  in  science,  for  his  ignorance,  the  laughing-stock
of  every  society  of  which  he  is  a  member;  in  practice,  for  his  maladroitness,  the
slaughterer  of  the  women  he  may  be  called  upon  to  assist ;  in  friendship,  the
backbiter  of  his  greatest  benefactor ;  to  the  poor,  a  brute  and  a  ruffian  ;  yet,  if  he
can  fetch  and  carry  prurient  tales,  well  paid  for,  and  gathered  from  the  lowest
haunts  of  female  iniquity,  his  falsehoods  may  be  listened  to  and  retailed  in  low
whispers   among  persons  professing  Bigfa  feeling.     Gregarious  man  is  long  the

392  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

was  not  broken  up  into  fragments  by  the  breath  of  bystanders.  He
gave  me  a  rough  account  of  the  arrangement  of  the  colors  and  their

victim  of  the  fallacies  among  which  he  lazily  wades  in  the  struggling  sea  of  life.
How  strange  it  would  appear  to  a  benevolent  being  of  a  higher  order,  if  he  were
to  appear  amongst  us,  that,  at  hospitals,  demonstrations  have  been  given  of
the  power  of  mesmerism  to  cure  disease,  to  alleviate  suffering,  and  to  render
painless  the  most  frightful  operations  of  surgery,  and  that  thousands  of  facts  at-
test these  truths,  and  yet,  that  the  professors  of  the  art  and  science  of  medicine,
have  rejected,  over  and  over,  again  all  inquiry  into  the  subject !  How  strange  it
would  appear  to  that  being,  that  no  sooner  had  ether  and  chloroform  been  pro-
posed to  the  same  professors,  than  that,  without  much  inquiry,  these  dangerous
and  deadly  materials  were  hailed  as  important  acquisitions  to  the  medical  know-
ledge of  the  age.  The  one  agency,  when  studied,  leads  to  a  knowledge  of  the
highest  functions  that  belong  to  human  beings,  to  more  than  a  knowledge  of  the
alleviation  of  suffering  by  innocent  means ;  to  a  corroboration  of  those  high  scien-
tific truths  that  tell  us  of  the  springs  of  human  action,  of  the  motives  of  human
conduct ;  and  that  lead  the  humble  philosopher  to  the  conviction,  that  large  chari-
ty is  the  necessary  result  of  deep  reflection  on  mesmeric  facts.  The  other  agency,
allied  to  the  nocent  influences  of  narcotics  on  the  human  brain,  leads  to  the  de-
struction of  health,  either  temporarily  or  permanently,  often  to  immediate  death  !
sometimes  to  the  encouragement  of  robbery,  even  of  murder,  and  of  the  most  ab-
ject vices  that  can  degrade  the  human  character.  What  obliquity  of  intellect  has
possessed  these  professors  of  science  ?  Avould  be  the  natural  question.  Can  they
witness  the  deeply  interesting  facts  Dr.  Elliotson  exhibited  to  them  years  ago,
and  not  be  stimulated  to  ardent  scientific. inquiry  ?  Can  the  gloating  of  a  few
misers  on  the  golden  heaps  of  some  of  their  fellows  so  obtund  all  feelings  of  no-
ble honesty  as  to  leave  mesmerism,  because  it  is  tabooed  by  authority,  uninquir-
ed  into  ?  Are  fears  for  the  fees  and  stipends  of  a  few  individuals  forever  to  re-
tard the  progress  of  human  knowledge  towards  a  science  of  mental  philosophy  ?
Thanks  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  it  is  not  to  be  so.  The  silly  surgeons  who,  in  their  igno-
rance, so  greedily  grasped  the  murderous  narcotics,  like  the  savages  who  prefer
the  instruments  of  death  and  destruction  to  the  quiet  influences  of  progressive
civilization,  may  build  monuments  of  wealth  to  their  destroying  angel ;  may  set
up  their  golden  calf,  and  worship  their  spirit  of  evil.  They  cannot  succeed  in
crushing  truth  !  and  posterity  will  regard  with  pity  their  weak  efforts  to  darken
the  world.

As  to  Dr.  von  Eisenstein,  in  the  Baron's  note,  he  is  evidently  one  of  the  small
fry  of  those  who  endeavor  to  accomplish  the  impossible  feat  of  arriving  at  truth,
and  encompassing  it  by  the  force  of  imagination  alone.  Such  persons  are  little
aware  that  they  call  into  play  a  combination  of  several  organs  of  the  brain  op-
posed to  the  reasoning  faculties,  and  which  may  lead  the  individual  to  conclusions
as  wide  of  just  results  as  if  they  determined  at  once  to  judge  without  knowledge.
In  all  probability,  the  stupidities  who  have  been  the  slanderers  of  Miss  Reichel,
if  they  have  paid  any  attention  to  mesmerism,  have,  to  save  themselves  the
trouble  of  inquiry,  attached  themselves  to  the  sect  who  boast  of  their  spiritual-
ism. It  will  be  unnecessary  to  repeat  here  the  sources  of  fallacy  that  belong  to
ideas  which  must,  in  evei-y  way,  tend  to  confuse  the  intellects.  There  are  organs
of  the  brain,  which,  when  over  stimulated,  leave  the  individual  a  victim  of  ecstacy.
The  imagination,  said  to  be  a  mental  faculty,  but,  in  reality,  the  result  of  a  com-
bination of  the  actions  of  several  organs,  if  indulged  in  without  regulation  and
very  strict  control  by  the  intellectual  forces  about  the  forehead,  may  lead  to  an

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  393

relative  extent.  He  made  the  observation  most  distinctly  in  a  three-
layer  horse-shoe  of  great  intensity  of  magnetic  charge.  He  was  fol-
lowed by  Baron  von  Oberländer,  who  saw  a  regular  iris  over  the  same
three-layer  magnet.  Madame  von  Varady  observed  this  over  the
nine-layer.  In  like  manner  Dr.  Nied,  but  with  intermissions.  Miss
Atzmannsdorfer  frequently  described  to  me  the  beauty  of  the  rain-
bows she  perceived  on  the  magnet,  both  on  horse-shoes  and  bars.
Madame  Bauer  gave  me  the  most  vivid  descriptions  of  rainbow-like
superposition  of  colors  over  the  poles  of  all  stronger  magnets,  in
which  she  always  found  the  red  at  the  bottom,  then  yellow,  green,
&c,  following  upwards.

493.  One  experiment  with  Josephine  Zinkel  will  serve  for  all.
When  in  her  ordinary  healthy  condition,  she  commonly  saw  the  polar
flames  uniformly  bluish  or  reddish  over  the  poles  of  the  nine-layer
horse-shoe.  When  I  showed  her  the  same  during  menstruation,  she
saw  them  not  only  larger,  but  perceived  the  form  of  an  iris  in  both,
in  which  bluish  color  predominated  at  the  northward,  and  reddish  at
the  southward  pole.  This  was  the  case  when  the  horse-shoe  stood
upright,  with  poles  directed  upwards,  and  the  arms  conformable.
But  when  I  turned  both  poles  toward  the  north,  while  the  horse-shoe
was  laid  in  the  meridian,  the  iris  vanished  from  the  southward  pole,
only  a  bluish  grey  red  flame  remaining,  while  on  the  northward  pole
the  iris  is  increased  to  double,  and  attained  a  length  of  twenty
inches.  When  I  turned  the  poles  of  the  horse-shoe  to  the  south,  the
northward  pole  entirely  lost  its  iris,  retaining  only  a  dull  reddish,
grey-blue  flame,  while  the  southward  pole  acquired  a  beautiful  iris
almost  twenty  inches  long.

494.  Even  the  mere  terrestrial  magnetism  sufficed  to  produce  the
iris,  and  render  it  visible  to  excitable  individuals.  Madame  Kienes-
berger,  when  menstruating,  saw  an  unmagnetic  iron  bar,  twenty-four
inches  long,  lying  in  the  meridian,  emit  a  red  flame  towards  the  south
and  a  blue  towards  the  north  ;  the  latter,  however,  was  not  totally,
but  only  predominantly,  blue  ;  and  she  detected,  besides  this,  all  the
other  colors  of  the  rainbow,  which  possessed  less  intensity  of  light.
The  colors  were  so  distributed  that  they  appeared  stratified  from  be-

ecstacy  as  incompatible  with  rational  conviction,  as  the  open-mouthed  fatuous
wonderment  of  the  idiot  is  with  the  higher  calm  reasoning  power  of  the  philoso-
pher. Could  man  be  brought  to  the  conclusion  that  the  numerous  fallacies,  the
reiterated  falsehoods,  which  have  resulted  from  his  imagination  having  conquered
his  reasoning  faculties,  are  the  causes  of  all  the  evils  surrounding  him,  how  ready
would  he  be  to  abandon  his  errors !  Alas !  When  is  man  to  be  enlightened  to
this  extent  ?  •

17*

394  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

low  upwards.    The  lowest  stratum  was  reddish,  the  next  yellow  ;  then
followed  green,  and  the  uppermost  was  chiefly  blue  with  violet.

495.  The  phenomenon  was,  however,  more  beautiful  and  more
clearly  marked  on  electro-magnets.  Here  I  could  not  only  heighten
the  phenomena,  and  render  them  more  distinctly  perceptible,  but  I
had  the  advantage  of  being  able  to  bring  a  single  layer  only  into  the
experiment,  and  to  avoid  the  manifold  disturbances  which  arise  from
the  reciprocal  action  of  the  separate  layers  of  a  strong  compound
horse-shoe.  When  I  had  produced  an  odic  flame  of  a  span  high  upon
an  electro-magnet,  through  the  influence  of  a  Smee's  battery  of  one-
sixth  of  a  square  foot,  Madame  Kienesberger  was  the  first  to  inform
me  that  the  flame  which  she  saw  rise  from  the  negative  northward
pole  was  not  merely  blue,  but  yellow  and  blue,  the  j^ellow  color  next
the  iron,  the  blue  lying  horizontally  over  that,  and  passing  above  into
grey  mist;  at  the  positive  pole  she  saw  only  red  flame  with  dense
smoke  rising  from  it.  In  order  to  strengthen  the  electro-magnet,  and
perfect  the  experiment,  I  added  another  Smee's  battery,  having  about
a  square  foot  of  surface,  to  the  former.  The  odic  flame  of  the  poles
of  the  electro-magnet  was  now  more  than  tripled :  that  on  the  nega-
tive pole  was  within  a  few  minutes  to  about  twenty  inches  ;  that  on
the  positive  to  eight.  The  former  now  exhibited  the  interesting  phe-
nomenon of  becoming  a  perfect  prismatic  spectrum,  in  such  a  manner
that  below,  when  it  touched  the  horse-shoe,  which  stood  with  its
poles  directed  upwards,  it  displayed  to  the  eyes  of  the  beholder  a  red
layer ;  this  was  followed  by  an  orange-colored,  then  a  yellow,  next  a
green,  a  bright  blue,  dark  blue,  finally  an  uppermost  violet  blue,  and
grey  vapor  above  this.  At  the  same  time  the  positive  flame  of  the
southward  pole  presented  a  blood-red  color  next  the  iron  ;  then  came
a  light  red  layer,  at  the  top  an  orange-red,  which  lost  itself  in  thick,
heavy,  and  opaque  smoke  rising  up  to  the  ceiling.  She  described  the
appearance  as  of  extraordinary  delicacy  and  splendor,  and  was  filled
with  delight  and  amazement  at  it,  like  her  predecessors  in  similar
cases.  She  found  the  intensity  of  the  colors  greater  than  that  of  any
permanent  magnet.  Some  weeks  later  I  went  through  the  same  se-
ries of  experiments  with  Josephine  Zinkel.  She  described  the  phe-
nomena to  me  all  in  the  same  way  as  Madame  Kienesberger,  whom
she  about  equals  in  degree  of  sensitiveness,  and  she  added  the  com-
plementary note  that  the  prismatic  colors  individually  are  not  simple,
but  that  each  appears  in  distinct  shades,  and  thus  seems  to  be  com-
posed of  several,  whereby  the  entire  spectrum  is  ultimately  composed
of  a  great  number  of  superincumbent  colored  streaks  of  light.  She
also  described  a  narrow  streak  of  pure  red  above  the  violet-blue,  the
violet,  becoming  gradually  redder,  passing  into  this  above,  and  this

CONDITIONS  OF  Till-:  MAGNET.  395

then  going  off  into  smoke.  She  already  perceived  the  iris  when  the
magnet  was  first  induced  by  one  Smee's  element  of  one-sixth  of  a
square  foot,  but  the  Colors  were  dull  and  indistinct,  so  that  she  could
not  give  a  certain  account  of  their  characters  at  that  time  :  thus  she
believed  she  could  perceive  a  light  blue  between  yellow  and  green  ;
but  when  I  added  a  battery  of  six  Smee's  elements,  all  the  colors  be-
came incomparably  more  luminous,  clearer,  and  perfectly  distinct,
under  which  circumstances  the  imaginary  blue  was  found  to  be  a
transition  tint  between  light  yellow  and  light  green.  This  experiment
cannot  be  made  successfully  with  weak  electro-magnets  ;  mine  meas-
ured one  foot  in  the  length  of  the  arms,  and  the  iron  was  an  inch
thick.  This  experiment  was  repeated,  with  the  same  results,  three
months  afterwards.

Again,  a  few  months  later,  I  applied  a  Smee's  apparatus  having
two  and  a  half  square  feet  of  surface.  The  prismatic  spectrum  was
developed  splendidly  to  a  freight  of  more  than  a  yard,  and  with
smoke  that  rose  to  the  ceiling  and  liglfted  it  up.  The  appearances  at
the  negative  pole  were  again  the  same,  only  on  a  large  scale  and
more  brilliant;  but  the  iris  was  likewise  better  developed  at  the  pos-
itive pole  ;  blue  was  now  added  above  to  its  red  and  yellow  colors.
■By  greater  exaltation  of  the  electro-magnet,  the  green  and  violet-blue
would  certainly  be  rendered  visible.  This  experiment  was  also  re-
peated some  months  subsequently.

496.  The  boy  Stephen  Kollar  also  saw  the  colored  appearances  in
the  flame  of  the  electro-magnet.  Since  he  had  no  idea  whatever  of
what  was  going  to  appear  when  I  allowed  the  powerful  voltaic  appa-
ratus to  act  upon  the  polar  wires,  he  was  very  much  excited  by  the
progress  of  the  phenomena,  from  the  odic  incandescence  to  the
prismatic  spectrum,  and  its  gradual  increase  to  a  variegated  flame,
appearing  to  him  twenty  inches  high,  with  smoke  above  whirling  up
to  the  ceiling.

497.  Professor  Endlicher  did  not  see  a  regular  steady  iris  over  the
electro-magnet,  perhaps  because  time  and  leisure  enough  were  not
afforded  in  the  experiment ;  but  still  he  detected  different  colors  in
the  odic  flame ;  below  (namely  in  the  seat  of  the  red)  it  was  indis-
tinct and  dark  ;  above  this  he  saw  yellow,  next  green,  and  lastly,
above,  blue  mingled  with  violet,  unsteady  certainly,  but,  on  the  whole,
displaying  order  of  colors  of  the  rainbow  to  him  as  to  all  the  other
observers,  although  less  perfectly  developed.

498.  I  brought  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  during  the  catamenia,  to  the
same  electro-magnet,  with  the  current  of  two  Smee's  batteries  passing
through  its  coils.  She  beheld  the  flame  over  the  negative  pole,  pre-
dominantly blue,  about  four  and  a  half  feet  high,  that  of  the  positive

896  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

pole  half  the  height.  The  smoke  from  them  rose  to  the  ceiling1.
Both  the  polar  flames  again  produced  the  beautiful  iris  ;  the  negative
with  all  the  prismatic  colors,  with  a  short  portion  of  red  succeeding
to  the  blue  above,  terminating  in  smoke,  but  the  positive  flame  was
only  red  and  yellow  ;  the  latter  of  which  lost  itself  in  the  dense
smoke.

The  chlorotic  Anka  Hetmanck  also  saw  a  larger  odic  flame  over
the  electro-magnet  than  over  the  nine-layer  horse-shoe,  and  this  was
red  below  upon  the  magnet,  the  prismatic  colors  then  following,  up-
ward, to  blue  and  blue-red,  which  merged  into  smoke  and  so  rose  to
the  ceiling.

499.  Madame  Csecilie  Bauer  (during  pregnancy)  described  the
large  electro-magnet  most  brilliantly.  She  saw  nothing  over  the
poles  of  the  horse-shoe  before  it  was  connected  with  the  Smee's  ap-
paratus ;  she  stated  it  to  have  merely  the  whitish  odic  incandescence
of  all  metals.  But  as  soon  as  I  had  connected  the  polar  wires  of  the
two  batteries  with  the  thick  *ire  coil,  she  saw  the  flames  rise  over
both  poles,  small  at  first,  then  increasing,  and  continuing  to  ascend
till  they  were  half  as  high  as  the  room.  Then  they  passed  into
smoke,  which  came  in  contact  with  the  ceiling.  (Neither  of  the
Smee's  batteries  worked  at  all  well  on  the  day  of  experiment;  they
were  very  weak).  She  saw  blue  predominate  at  the  northward  pole,
and  red  at  the  southward  :  but  at  the  same  time  the  flames  of  both
poles  were  most  beautifully  prismatic.  She  even  perceived  the.  iri-
descence on  other  portions  of  the  arrangement,  on  the  electro-magnet
itself,  the  Smee's  elements,  and  other  parts,  of  which  more  will  be
said  in  its  proper  place.

499.  b.  On  various  occasions  I  placed  a  seven-layer  horse-shoe
magnet,  with  the  poles  turned  upwards,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  con-
ductor of  the  electrical  machine,  and  showed  it  under  these  circum-
stances to  Josephine  Zinkel.  She  saw  the  usual  appearance  of  red
and  blue  flames  over  the  poles.  But  directly  I  set  the  machine  in
motion,  so  that  the  magnet  was  placed  in  the  electrical  atmosphere,
not  only  did  the  flames  increase  in  size  and  intensity  of  light,  but
they  each  changed  into  an  iris,  in  which  the  blue  at  the  northward
pole,  and  the  red  at  the  southward,  were  now  only  the  prevailing
and  no  longer  the  sole"  colors.  The  blue  was  here  found  to  be  the
stronger  ;  the  red  the  weaker  and  duller  ;  the  first  situated  at  the  top
of  the  iris,  the  second  at  the  bottom.

500.  In  all  these  cases,  the  iris  was  seen  horizontally  stratified,  the
colors  lying  one  above  another  in  horizontal  layers  ;  the  red  color
was  always  at  the  bottom,  the  violet-blue  always  at  the  top.  This
relation  to  the  terrestrial  magnetism  must  be  kept  in  view.     During

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  897

the  first  minutes,  while  the  colors  are  being  developed,  they  are
mingled  unsteadily  together  ;  they  gradually  arrange  themselves
into  the  form  of  a  floating  iris.  This  does  not  take  place  rapidly,
but  with  remarkable  slowness  ;  and  in  the  above  described  experi-
ment, four,  five,  to  six  minutes,  were  required  for  the  production  of
the  perfect  iris  over  the  electro-magnet.

601.  It  results  from  the  above  facts,  that  the  odic  flame  of  the
magnet  does  not  consist  merely  of  red  and  blue,  at  the  two  jiolcs,  but
of  an  iris  or  primitive  spectrum  at  each,  in  which  blue  is  but  the  pre-
dominant color  at  the  negative  side,  and  red  the  like  at  the  positive.
They  become  visible  when  magnetism  and  Od  attain  a  certain  strength,
and  remain  invisible,  or  limited  to  a  single  color,  when  those  forces
are  weak,  or  the  perceptive  power  of  the  sensitive  beholder  is  of
low  degree.

502.  But  we  have  another  complicated  compound  kind  of  iris  to
examine,  in  addition  to  this  simple  one.

Here  and  there  in  the  experiments,  as  we  have  already  seen  sev-
eral times,  a  certain  variableness  of  the  odic  color  has  announced  itself,
frequently  threatening  to  render  the  results  uncertain.  I  was  hereby
induced  to  undertake  a  long  special  inquiry  in  this  direction,  to  carry
it  attentively  through  a  vast  number  of  experiments,  and  to  endeavor
to  obtain  the  laws  of  the  phenomenon.  I  will  here  merely  bring  for-
ward the  most  essential  of  the  results.

503.  When  I  placed  a  magnetic  bar  with  poles  in  the  direction
of  the  dip,  it  always  emitted  different  colors  from  those  it  gave  in
the  meridian  ;  and  when  a  northward  pole  was  directed  towards  the
north  or  towards  the  south,  its  odic  flame  displayed  at  one  time
more  of  a  blue  tint,  and  at  another  more  of  a  red  and  grey.  Another
uncertainty  accompanied  this  :  when  I  turned  a  northward  pole  up-
wards, the  beholder  generally  found  it  bright  blue  in  the  dark,  some-
times again  grey,  and  not  unfrequently  even  yellow  ;  with  more  of
the  like  incongruities.

504.  Seeking  the  causes  of  all  this,  I  began  by  setting  out  from
the  idea  of  a  possibility  of  subjective  variableness  in  the  perceptions
by  the  sensitive.  I  placed  a  magnetic  bar  two  feet  long  in  an  up-
right position,  with  the  northward  pole  directed  upwards.  When
weakly  magnetic,  and  examined  by  the  girl  Zinkel  in  the  dark  cham-
ber at  a  distance  of  eight  inches,  it  appeared  to  her  opaque,  and  of
an  indistinctly  greyish-yellow  ;  when  she  tried  at  what  distance  it
displayed  its  color  moat  clearly,  and  its  general  form  most  distinctly,
to  her  eyes,  it  proved  in  every  experiment  that  this  was  about  from
seventeen  to  twenty  inches ;  then  it  appeared  of  a  pure  yellow  ;  go-
ing  further  back,  she  saw  this  clear  vellow  soon  become  indistinct

398  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

again,  a  shade  of  bright  grey,  not  unlike  sky-blue,  was  infused  ;  but
on  removing  further  away,  this  changed  into  full,  unequivocal  grey,
which,  on  a  retreat  to  a  greater  distance,  grew  duller,  less  percepti-
ble, and  from  forty  inches,  and  over,  vanished.

505.  Making  the  same  experiment  with  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  I  ar-
rived at  the  same  results,  with  the  slight  modification  only  that  in
her  the  distance  of  vision  for  distinct  and  yellow  odic  flame  did  not
amount  to  twenty  inches,  but  only  to  about  eight,  and  that  she  found
it  become  bluish  directly  the  distance  of  her  eyes  from  the  luminous
object  increased  beyond  this.  Miss  Pauer,  however,  is  short-sight-
ed ;  consequently,  this  peculiarity  influenced  her  odic  vision,  and
showed  to  what  a  great  extent  the  apparent  variation  of  the  color
of  odic  flame  at  different  distances  is  a  mere  subjective  phenomenon.

506.  These  observations,  made  in  all  directions  and  in  the  same
manner,  and  repeated  at  various  times  with  unchanging  results,  on
Josephine  Zinkel,  furnished  the  proof  that  there  is  only  one  definite-
ly fixed  distance,  different  for  the  eyes  of  each  person,  at  which  the
color  of  the  odic  flame  is  seen  purely  and  distinctly ;  that  it  always
remains  the  same,  and  has  no  variableness  at  this  distance,  for  each
individual ;  but  that  at  other  distances,  less  or  greater,  it  strikes  the
eye  with  other  tints,  dull  yellow  when  nearer,  bluish-grey  and  grey
when  further  off,  and  that  consequently,  in  order  to  avoid  confusing
the  appearances,  the  eye  of  the  observer  must  always  be  kept  at  one
particular  distance.

507.  In  fact,  I  had  been  every  now  and  then  very  much  puzzled,
before  I  thought  of  the  last  investigation,  one  observation  furnishing
sky-blue,  and  another,  made  under  conditions  apparently  altogether
identical,  grey  or  yellow  color  of  the  odic  flame.  While  one  is  in-
volved in  such  a  complication,  the  researches,  in  which  the  facts  can-
not be  perceived  by  one's  own  senses,  but  must  be  obtained  by  ques-
tioning in  the  dark  another  person  who  does  not  understand  the
matter,  become  wearying  to  an  indescribable  degree,  and  it  occasion-
ally required  all  the  attractions  of  so  interesting  a  subject  to  support
my  patience.

508.  Once  master  of  this,  perhaps  insignificant  looking  explana-
tion, (but  the  want  of  which  opposes  an  inevitable  obstacle  to  further
inquiry,)  a  portion  of  the  road  was  levelled,  and  I  began  a  wider  in-
vestigation of  the  variableness  of  the  colors  of  odic  flame,  from  the
objective  point  of  view.  I  fixed  the  same  two-feet  long  magnetic  bar
by  its  middle  in  a  Guidino's  holder,  which  Lad  a  joint  at  the  top
rendering  it  moveable  in  all  directions.  I  brought  it  lengthways  into
the  magnetic  meridian,  conformably  toward  the  north  pole,  at  first
turned  to  the  north,  and  afterwards  inclined  at  about  95°,  in  the

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  399

dip  of  Vienna.  Starting  from  this,  I  made  the  northward  pole
pass  through  the  complete  vertical  circle,  which  could  be  described
around  the  axis  of  the  magnetic  bar  in  the  plane  of  the  meridian.

I  carried  this  into  effect  in  the  dark  chamber, — first  in  the  pre-
sence of  Josephine  Zinkel,  who  observed  the  changes  developed
from  the  west  onward  in  the  progressive  motion  of  the  northward
pole.  From  the  perpendicular  direction  downwards  at  0°,  she  saw
the  odic  flame  run  through  the  following  series  of  colors  : — ■

At

25°

(in  the  line  of  the  dip)

pure  grey.

45°

(ascending  toward  the  north)

a  narrow  red  streak.

67°

"                          "

violet  blue.

90°

«

dark  blue.

110°

"                          "

light  blue.

127°

"                          "

dark  green.

115°

«                          «

light  green.

163°

"

greenish-yellow.

180°

"                          "

lighUyellow.

200°

"                          "

golden  yellow.

225°

"                          "

orange.

247°

"                          "

flame-red.

270°

"                          "

red.

290°

"

deep,  intense  red.

325°

"                          "

greyish-red.

360°

"                          "

reddish  light-greyr.

To  make  these  more  distinct,  I  give  a  diagram  of  them  collected
into  a  circle  (Fig.  20.)

509.  Examining  the  order  of  the  colors  of  this  circle,  we  discover
a  new  iris,  and  in  fact  one  with  the  colors  lying  in  a  circle.

510.  It  is  peculiar  that  the  very  direction  in  which  the  greatest
magnetic  intensity  occurs,  namely,  the  magnetic  dip,  or  inclination
of  G5°  to  the  horizon,  is  exactly  that  in  which  all  the  colors  disap-
pear, and  nothing  but  dark  grey  remains.  Is  this  grey  to  be  taken
as  white,  that  is,  a  compound  of  all  the  colors,  or  as  black,  the  ab-
sence of  all  \  Hitherto  I  have  been  unable  to  clear  up  this  with  cer-
tainty :  new  researches  will  soon  decide,  but  I  am  inclined  to  conjec-
ture that  the  latter  will  prove  to  be  the  case.

511.  It  is  also  remarkable  that  the  colors  standing  diametrically
opposite  to  each  other  are  not  'properly  complementary  colors :  for
red  here  stands  opposite  blue  instead  of  yellow,  and  flame-red,  in-
stead of  green,  opposite  violet-blue,  grey  instead  of  blue  opposite  yel-
low, &c.  The  circle  is  divided  into  sections  of  90  degrees,  the  zero
of  which  must  be  fixed  at  the  dip.  Opposite  this,  at  180°,  stands
yellow  ;  at  each  side,  both  at  the  distance  of  90°,  red  and  blue  are
situated  opposite  to  each  other,  so  that  these  again  are   180°  apart.

400

ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

If  we  were  beneath  the  magnetic  equator,  where  the  polar  direction
and  the  dip  of  the  needle  coincide,  the  direction  and  arrangement  of
the  colors  would  be  different.  I  hope  I  may  live  to  hear  of  this  ex-
periment being  performed  there  ;  it  cannot  be  a  matter  of  great  dif-
ficulty, for  scarcely  an  European  ship  can  pass  the  line  in  which  one
or  other  of  the  crew  is  not  sensitive.

Fig.    20.
Above.

Golden  yellow.

A

Orange.

Light  yellow.

Greenish  yellow.

t
103     Light  green.

Flame  red.

South.

Bed

Deep  Eed.

45

Grey  red  streak.

Grey  red

Grey.

Reddish  light    p)ip
grey.  l  '•

Below.

612.  Another  singularity  of  a  peculiar  kind  presented  itself  in  the
circumstance  that  the  beholder  constantly  described  what  she  called
a  narrow  red  streak  between  the  grey  of  the  dip  and  violet-blue.  I
had  already  met  with  this  phenomenon  in  other  cases.  Madame
Kienesberger  frequently  assured  me  that  the  iris,  which  presented
itself  to  her  with  the  greatest  clearness  over  the  electro-mao-net,
passed  above  into  a  narrow  red  streak,  which  then  gave  place  to  the
smoke.     Wilhelmine  Glaser,   also  Stephen  Kollar,  Madame  Bauer,

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  401

and  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  gave  the  same  report.  It  appears,  therefore,
as  if  the  red  ^vas  again  so  fully  extricated  from  the  blue  or  violet  as
to  reappear  once  more  as  an  independent  color  at  the  other  end  of
the  series,  and  consequently  red  closes  the  spectrum  on  both  sides, —
certainly  at  least  the  odic.

513.  Those  colors  which  lie  in  the  lower  half  of  the  circle,  namely,
within  90°  on  each  side  of  the  dip  point,  display  remarkable  differ-
ence in  intensity  of  light  from  those  of  the  other,  upper  half,  occupy-
ing 90°  on  each  side  of  the  golden  yellow.  The  upper  half,  in  the
arc  a  c  b,  appeared  bright,  very  luminous,  fresh,  and  brilliant ;  while
the  lower  was  dull,  opaque,  and  emitted  little  light.  The  greatest  in-
tensity of  light  lies  in  the  golden  yellow,  the  greatest  obscurity  in  the
grey  of  the  line  of  dip.  One  might  call  the  upper  half  the  day  side,
the  lower,  where  almost  all  the  colors  are  veiled  with  grey  and  over-
cast, the  night  side.  The  yelloio  color,  therefore,  which  we  other-
wise know  to  be  the  most  intensely  luminous  in  the  spectrum,  repre-
sents noon,  blue  and  red  the  two  twilights,  grey  the  night.  The  earth 's
surface  corresponds  to  the  heavens  in  its  influence  upon  the  odic  flame
of  the  magnet.     (Vide  §§  536,  356.)

514.  I  expected  a  great  change  in  the  colors  of  these  luminous  ap-
pearances when  I  used  the  southward  pole  of  the  same  magnetic
bar,  instead  of  the  northward,  in  these  experiments.  But  the  result
did  not  confirm  my  anticipation.  In  the  principal  points,  it  was
almost  indifferent  which  of  the  poles  of  the  magnet  I  made  pass
through  the  vertical  circle.  The  distinctions  were  confined  to  a  few
insignificant  modifications  in  the  lesser  particulars.  The  colors,  which
displayed  themselves  nearly  equal  in  the  same  direction  at  the  two
poles,  always  appeared  rather  retarded  at  the  southward  pole,  in  the
progress  of  the  pole  from  the  dip  point  to  the  north  ;  I  was  always
obliged  to  move  the  bar  a  few  degrees  further  onward,  to  obtain
from  the  beholder  the  modification  of  the.  same  colors  which  had  ap-
peared at  any  given  degree  at  the  northward  pole.  This  retardation
of  the  southward  pole  occurs  in  the  same  way  all  round  the  circle,  so
that  even  the  grey  of  the  dip  was  at  a  smaller  angle  with  the  horizon
than  that  of  the  northward  pole.     Vide  §  334.

515.  Moreover,  the  northward  and  southward  poles  of  the  mag-
netic bar  are  again  divided  into  two  other  principal  regions  of  greater
and  less  purity  of  color.  From  the  dip  forward,  on  the  north  side,
to  the  golden  yelloio,  upon  the  arc  e,  f,  d,  the  colors  of  the  northward
pole  appeared  purer  and  more  distinct  ;  from  the  golden  yellow
forward,  on  the  south  side,  back  to  the  dip,  on  the  contrary,  they
were  more  degraded,  indistinct,  and  overcast.  Exactly  the  reverse
was  the  case  with  the  southward  pole;  from  the  dip,  over  north,  up

402  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

to  golden  yellow,  that  is  in  like  manner  on  the  arc  e,  f,  d,  Josephine
Zinkel  described  the  colors  as  dull  and  misty;  on  .the  other  side,
from  golden  yellow,  over  south,  down  again  to  the  dip,  as  pure  and
clear.  Upwards  at  the  yellow  their  appearances  merged ;  they  were
most  strongly  manifested  in  the  directions  of  the  terrestrial  poles.
It  is  evident  that  the  conformity  or  nonconformity  of  the  position  of
the  poles  exerted  their  influence  here,  as  everywhere  else,  and  the
northward  pole,  which  could  act  with  full  force  toward  the  north,  was
brought  into  conflict  with  the  opposition  of  terrestrial  magnetism,
when  turned  to  the  south,  and  thereby  weakened.  Its  red  odic  flame
was  consequently  troubled  and  overcast  in  the  southern  direction  by
a  portion  of  blue  produced  by  its  own  magnetic  but  opposite  polarity,
and  intermingled  with  the  red ;  hence  a  red  which  was  described  to
me  sometimes  as  bluish-red,  at  others  as  greyish-red.  The  same
holds  good  of  the  southward  pole,  the  direction  and  the  expressions
being  reversed.

515.  The  circle  of  colors  was  thus  twice  divided  into  halves,
through  external  influences,  in  respect  to  intensity,  of  light  and  pu-
rity of  color  ;  once  by  a  relatively  horizontal,  the  other  time  by  a
relatively  vertical  section  ;  in  the  one  case  principally  influenced  by
terrestrial  magnetism,  in  the  other  by  the  polarities  of  the  magnet.

51*7.  None  of  the  single  odic  flames  ever  displayed  an  iris  to  Jose-
phine Zinkel,  but  appeared  simply  of  one  color.  The  most  important
of  these  researches  were  repeated  with  Madame  Csecilie  Bauer,  and
afforded  still  more  complete  results.  When  I  showed  her  the  same
magnetic  bar,  free  at  both  poles, 'and  fixed  at  the  axis  in  the  move-
able holder,  in  the  meridian,  in  the  dark,  she  found  it  to  have  longer
flames  than  Josephine  Zinkel  had  seen,  more  than  half  as  long  again,
and  not  now  of  one  color,  but  always  in  the  form  of  an  iris,  excepting
when  placed  in  the  direction  of  the  dip.  Here  she  perceived  merely
dark  colorless  grey  issue  from  the  northward  pole  of  the  magnet.
"When  I  began  to  move  it  upwards  toward  the  north  pole,  she  soon
saw  the  flame  acquire  an  iris,  at  first  a  dull,  hut  gradually  becoming-
more  vivid.  But  one  of  the  many  colors  here  always  displayed  very
much  greater  size,  strength,  and  intensity  of  light,  so  far  as  to  sur-
pass all  the  rest,  and  to  predominate  so  much  that  unless  close  atten-
tion was  paid,  the  observer  only  noticed  this  one  prevailing  color.
Without  reference  to  the  constant  presence  of  this  dull  iris,  she  de-
scribed the  changes  of  color  in  the  circuit  in  the  following  order  :  first,
when  I  had  moved  the  northward  pole  of  the  bar  a  little  out  of  the
vicinity  of  the  line  of  dip,  upwards  towards  the  north,  a  short  red
place,  which  soon  changed  into  violet-blue,  .and  next  with  the  ap-
proach toward  the  north  and  the  arrival  at  this  direction,  first  into

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  403

dark,  then  into  light  blue.  Between  the  north  and  the  uppermost
point,  or  zenith,  I  moved  the  bar,  according  to  her  accounts,  through
different  shades,  first  of  bluish-green,  sap-green,  and  greenish-yellow,
and,  at  the  top,  came  to  pure  yellow.  Golden  yellow  appeared  dia-
metrically opposite  to  the  dip  point.  Downwards  to  the  south,  on
the  other  side,  red  became  intermingled  with  the  yellow,  increasing
continually  to  the  neighborhood  of  the  southern  direction,  when  red,
with  the  admixture  of  a  little  blue,  appeared  almost  pure.'  When  I
passed  onwards  over  this,  and  inclined  the  pole  further  downwards
below  south,  gray  joined  the  red,  increasing  as  the  latter  disappeared,
till  at  length,  in  the  dip,  this,  with  all  the  accessory  colors,  completely
disappeared,  and  gave  place  again  to  the  simple  and  pure  gray  from
which  I  had  set  out.  This  arrangement  of  the  colors  evidently  agrees
with  the  statements  of  Josephine  Zinkel.  The  difference  between  the
two  beholders  lies  merely  in  Josephine  Zinkel  seeing  but  one  color  in
each  position,  while  Madame  Bauer  perceived  everywhere  a  principal
color  associated  with  all  the  other  prismatic  colors,  although  these
were  very  faint.  This  distinction  is  very  simply  and  satisfactorily
explained  by  the  different  powers,  of  sight  of  the  two  observers.
The  girl  Zinkel,  with  weaker  vision,  saw  ouly  the  temporarily  pre-
vailing color ;  Madame  Bauer,  with  stronger  vision,  saw  this  of
greater  size,  and  with  it  the  other  prismatic  colors.  (We  shall  meet
with  an  instance  in  crystals,  when  Zinkel  stood  exactly  in  the  same
relation  to  Wilhelmine  Glaser  as  Madame  Bauer  does  here  to  Josephine
Zinkel.)  According  to  this  explanation,  Madame  Bauer's  observations
afford  the  most  complete  confirmation  of  those  of  her  predecessor,  in
numerous  and  frequently  repeated  examinations.

518.  After  Madame  Bauer  I  tried  this  experiment  with  the  eyes
of  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  who  saw  odic  light  considerably  weaker  than
Josephine  Zinkel.  In  her  usual  condition  she  saw  the  magnetic
emissions  only  blue,  yellowish,  or  red  :  but  when  I  introduced  her
into  the  dark  chamber  during  the  catamenia,  she  distinctly  perceived
the  changes  of  colors  as  I  moved  the  pole  of  the  magnetic  bar  round
in  the  circle.  She  hesitated  now  and  then  as  to  the  intermediate
colors ;  it  was  necessary  to  attend  strictly  to  keeping  her  eyes  at  the
proper  distance  from  the  pole  ;  she  sometimes  mistook  light  blue  for
grey,  pale-yellow  for  pale-reddish,' and  vice  versa ;  but  after  a  few
repetitions  her  definitive  assertions  always  agreed  with  the  colors
which  Zinkel  and  Madame  Bauer  had  announced  ;  she  was  quite
divided,  however,  as  to  the  grey  in  the  dip,  the  blue  at  the  north,  the
yellow  above,  and  the  red  at  the  south.  She  found  little  distinction
between  the  applications  of  the   northward   and   southward  poles  ;

404  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

there  was  merely  rather  more  of  a  bluish  tinge  in.  the  former  case,
and  of  reddish  on  the  other.

519.  Miss  Sophie  Pauer  saw  the  same  magnetic  bar  emit  pure  dark
grey  vapor  from  its  north  pole,  at  the  dip,  when  turned  upon  its  axis
in  the  meridian ;  raised  a  little  toward  the  north,  it  became,  first,
somewhat  reddish,  then  red-grey,  next  violet,  dark  blue,  and  pure
blue  when  horizontally  pointing  to  the  north  ;  higher  up,  light-blue,
then  blackish-green,  next  light  green,  and  yellow  at  the  top  ;  in  the
declension  towards  the  south,  first  orange,  horizontally  towards  the
south  red,  and  downwards  from  these  reddish  grey,  decreasing  till  it
became  pure  grey  again  at  the  dip.  These  trials  were  made  in  the
morning,  while  she  was  still  fasting  and  in  an  excitable  conditon  ;
when  I  made  the  same  experiments  with  her  in  the  afternoon,  after
dinner,  her  perfection  of  colors  was  no  longer  so  certain,  and  she  was
frequently  deceived  in  the  grey  tints;  her  power  of  vision  was  not  so
acute  as  before.

520.  I  was  desirous  of  going  through  these  experiments  with  much
weaker  sensitives,  to  see  how  far  the  results  would  remain  the  same.
Madame  Josephine  Fenzl  had  the  patience  to  devote  herself  to  them,
and  to  remain  imprisoned  with  her  husband,  Dr.  Fenzl,  and  myself,
for  half  a  day,  in  my  dark  chamber.  Made  with  the  same  instru-
ments, and  in  exactly  the  same  way,  the  experiments  furnished  the
following  circle,  drawn  according  to  her  statements,  described  by  the
north  pole  in  the  plane  of  the  meridian  (fig.  21,  next  page.)

This  agrees  entirely  with  all  the  preceding  ;  what  is  here  called  the
lightest  is  the  pale  yellow  of  the  last  observers,  brown  red  is  their
deep  grey  red,  &c.     No  agreement  could  have  been  more  complete.

521.  In  the  last  place  I  made  the  experiment  with  the  still  less
sensitive  Mr.  Hochstetter.  Under  the  same  circumstances  as  his  pre-
decessor, he  saw  the  northward  pole  of  the  magnetic  bar,  On  the  me-
ridian, emit  dark  vapor  towards  the  north  ;  lighter  and  stronger
above ;  densish  and  duller  toward  the  south ;  darkest  of  all  in  the
dip.  His  sight  was  not  sufficient  to  determine  colors  ;  but  the  va-
rious intensities  of  light  which  he  perceived  corresponded  accurately
with  the  relative  intensity  of  light  of  th^  different  colors,  which  were
named  by  the  other  witnesses ;  lightest  above  at  yellow,  darkest  at
the  dip,  dark  at  blue,  &c.  Even  this  weakest  of  the  sensitives  to
whom  I  submitted  this  experiment  afforded  evidence  for  the  accuracy
of  the  observations  with  the  strongest.

522.  These  results  can  be  controlled  by  comparing  with  the  above
a  single  horse-shoe  magnet  placed  in  the  meridian,  with  both  arms
directed  one  time  to  the  north,  the  other  to  the  south.  When  turned
to  the  south,  Josephine  Zinkel,  at  a  distance  of  two  spans,  saw  blue

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.

405

flames  at  the  northward  pole,  and  at  the  southward  greyish-violet,
and  reddish  blue  with  a  turbid  veil  over  them.  Turned  towards  the
south,  she  found  the  southward  pole  red,  the  northward  bluish  or
greyish-red,  likewise  obscured  ;  all  four  cases,  therefore,  exhibited
agreement  with  the  colors  of  the  flames  which  are  observed  on  the
poles  of  bars  under  the  same  circumstances.  Only  single  horse-shoes
can  be  used  for  this  experiment,  because  the  flames  of  strong  com-
pound horse-shoes  pass  into  visible  iridescence  with  reversed  interme-
diate layers,  which  alone  already  complicate  the  decision,  as  is  shown
at§  396.

Fig.  21.

Yellow.

Above
Great  brightness.

Flame  color

Keddish

Green.

South

North.

Brown  red.

Red  grey.

Reddish
streak.

Reddish  light
grey.

Below.

523.  When  I  made  the  experiment  with  the  poles  of  the  horse-
shoe directed  downward  and  upwards,  the  results  were  in  great  part
such  as  I  have  already  stated,  but  I  must  repeat  them  here  in  order
to  collocate  and  compare  them.  A  horse-shoe  with  both  poles  di-
rected upwards  vertically  and  conformably,  gave  grey  flame  at  the

406  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

northward  pole,  and  reddish  light-grey  at  the  southward.  In  the  di-
rection of  the  dip  the  northward  pole  gave  darker  grey,  the  south-
ward reddish  dark  grey.  Raised  a  few  degrees  upwards  towards  the
north,  over  the  line  of  dip,  the  northward  pole  afforded  grey  with
the  entrance  of  reddish,  the  southward  pole  dark  grey.  The  retarda-
tion of  the  southward  pole,  already  mentioned,  presented  itself  here
also,  in  the  advance  from  the  dip  toward  the  north  :  the  northward
pole,  namely,  already  possessed  dark  grey  flame,  while  the  southward
had  not  completely  acquired  it,  and  by  the  time  the  latter  exhibited
it  the  northward  pole  had  already  advanced  to  reddish  grey,  to  the
commencement  of  the  red  streak  next  the  violet.  When  I  turned
the  arms  round,  in  the  unconformable  position,  in  the  same
direction,  the  results  were  again  different  as  to  the  tints  ;  as  fol-
lows, indeed,  without  further  detail,  from  the  many  experiments  al-
ready discussed.

524.  Lastly,  a  single  horse-shoe  magnet,  vertical  and  conformable,
with  the  poles  directed  upwards,  always  gave,  at  the  northward  pole,
a  flame  which  was  described  by  the  observer  as  predominantly  grey,
bluish  or  yellowish,  according  to  the  distance  at  which  it  was  ex-
amined ;  at  the  southward  pole  a  flame  predominantly  reddish-grey
or  yellowish-grey.  At  a  distance  of  the  eye  of  about  two  spans,  and
when  strict  attention  was  paid  to  the  removal  of  all  other  influencing
objects  which  might  produce  odic  effects,  Miss  Zinkel,  and  many
others,  always  found  the  northward  pole  predominantly  blue,  at
greater  distances  blue,  then  grey.  Madame  Kienesberger,  Misses
Reich  el,  Atzmannsdorfer,  Sturmann,  Klaiber,  also  Weidlich,  Baron  von
Oberländer,  and  others,  frequently  described  it  to  me  as  pale  yellow
below  and  blue  above,  like  the  colors  of  the  flame  of  a  wax  candle
reversed  :  this  was  always  the  commencement  of  the  iris.  Under  the
like  circumstances  the  southward  pole  appeared  reddish-yellow  below,
and  greyish-yellow  above.  These  are  all  merely  confirmations  and
applications  of  the  facts  before  collected  respecting  the  magnetic  bar
passing  through  the  vertical  circle  in  the  meridian.

525.  In  order  to  see  what  proportion  of  all  these  results  was  to  be
placed  to  the  account  of  the  magnetic  bar,  and  what  to  that  of  the
effect  of  the  terrestrial  poles,  I  performed  the  same  experiment  with
an  unmagnetized  soft  iron  bar.  Having  fastened  it  by  the  middle  on
the  wooden  holder,  I  brought  it  into  the  meridian,  and  turned  it  a
quarter  of  a  circle  in  the  dark.  In  the  first  instance  I  showed  it  to
Miss  Zinkel.  It  presented  some  odic  flame  at  each  of  its  poles,  but
much  shorter  than  those  on  the  magnetic  bar ;  they  were  but  about
a  quarter  or  one-fifth  of  the  length,  and  at  the  same  time  duller,  with
the  colors  more  difficult  to  be  recognised.     Nevertheless,  when  I  com-

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  407

pared  the  result  of  the  iron  bar  with  that  of  the  magnetic  bar,  I
found  them  essentially  identical  ;  the  colors  were  similar  in  the  order,
direction,  and  succession  ;  the  anodes  alone  under  which  they  appear-
ed varied  a  few  degrees  backward  or  forward.  This  difference,  which,
however,  was  but  unimportant,  is  certainly  wholly  attributable  to  im-
perfections of  observation.  For  although  I  left  the  observer  to  find
for  herself  the  point  of  greatest  intensity  of  each  color,  it  is  impossi-
ble, until  special  instruments  have  been  devised  for  the  purpose,  that
this  should  be  done  so  accurately  that  the  statements  should  not  vary
a  few  degrees  in  so  delicate  a  subject,  and  with  light  so  exceedingly
weak.  It  is  sufficient  that  the  results  with  the  unmagnetic  iron  bar,
produced  by  terrestrial  magnetism  alone,  coincided  perfectly  in  all  es-
sentials with  those  which  had  been  obtained  with  the  magnetic  bar.

I  subsequently  made  the  same  experiment  with  Madame  Bauer.
She  perceived  the  colors  quite  distinctly  and  decidedly,  but  all  duller
and  smaller  on  the  iron  bar  than  on  the  magnetic  bar  previously.  The
arrangement  was  the  same, — grey  in  the  dip,  blue  in  the  direction
towards  the  north,  yellow  above,  and  red  towards  the  south.

Miss  iSophie  Pauer  also  went  through  this  task.  She  saw  the  iron
bar  emit  grey  vapor  in  the  position  of  the  dip  ;  the  same  when  turned
vertically  downwards ;  yellow-red  toward  the  south  ;  upwards  pale
yellow  when  near  (pale  bluish  when  she  was  at  some  distance),  and
towards  the  north  blue  ;  all  the  colors  dull,  small,  and  faint,  so  that
she  several  times  had  difficulty  in  detecting  the  true  color  with  cer-
tainty in  the  grey  regions.

Even  Wilhelmine  Glaser  gave  favorable  testimony  for  this  less-
marked  experiment.  I  held  before  her  in  the  dark  an  iron  bar  sup-
ported on  the  axis  merely  by  the  thumb  and  finger  of  my  left  hand.
She  perceived  grey,  blue,  yellow,  and  red  misty  light  in  the  corres-
ponding directions,  and  even  drew  my  attention  to  green  between
yellow  and  blue.

526.  It  thus  appears  that  the  circular  iris  exhibited  by  a  magnetic
bar  at  its  poles  and  polar  flames  when  made  to  revolve  in  its  meridian,
i^  also  formed  in  exactly  the  same  way,  though  more  faintly,  by  a
simple  unmagnetic  iron  bar,  and  conseqaently  it  can  be  produced  by
the  influence  of  the  terrestrial  poles  alone.  This  affords  an  explana-
tion of  the  results  of  the  unconformable  position  of  the  magnet.

527.  I  now  proceeded  to  investigate  the  behavior  of  the  bar-mag-
net in  passing  through  a  vertical  circle  in  the  'plane  of  the  magnetic
parallel  of  my  residence,  between  two  and  three  miles  north  of  Vi-
enna. The  arrangements  were  the  same  as  before,  and  I  directed  the
attention  of  the  observer,  Miss  Zinkel,  in  the  first  place  to  the  north-
ward pole  of  the  bar.  The  following  diagram  (fig.  22)  is  derived
from  numerous  repetitions  of  the  trial.

408

ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL
Fig.  22.
Above.
Goldon  yellow.     ?  ow*   Greenish  yellow.

Orange

Blue-green.

Bluish  grey.

West«e— ^
Eeddish  yellow.

East.

Pale  red

Eeddish  light  grey.
Below.

Grey.

528.  The  southward  pole,  in  several  experiments,  gave  fig.  23.

529.  The  next  person  with  whom  this  experiment  was  made  was
Wilhelmine  Glaser.  Her  statements,  after  many  repetitions,  yielded,
as  a  general  result,  grey  in  the  east ;  yellow  above  ;  yellow  in  the
west ;  grey  again  below  ;  between  east  and  the  highest  point,  traces
of  green ;  between  west  and  the  lowest  point,  traces  of  red.  I  tried
this  soon  after  with  Madame  Csecilie  Bauer.  The  statements  of  this
lady,  so  exceedingly  sensitive,  did  not  differ  in  any  material  point ;
grey  towards  the  east  below,  and  in  the  interval  between  the  two ;
yellow  toward  the  west,  above,  and  in  the  arc  between  them.  The
slight  differences  of  tint  which  were  obtained  in  numerous  repetitions
of  the  experiment,  always  proved,  on  more  accurate  examination,  to
depend  on  slight  variations  of  distance  of  the  beholder,  or  on  devia-
tions in  the  position  of  the  magnetic  bar  with  regard  to  the  direction
of  the  magnetic  parallel.     Miss  Sophie  Pauer  saw  the  northward  pole

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.

409

of  the  bar  grey  when  pointing  downwards,  yellow  towards  the  west,
yellow  also  when  turned  upwards,  and  grey  again  towards  east.  Mr.
Hocbstetter,  under  the  same  circumstances,  perceived  dark  vapor
downwards,  and  towards  east,  upwards  and  towards  the  west  lighter
vapor,  this  being  the  manner  in  which  weakly  sensitive  vision  per-
ceives grey  and  yellow.

Fig.  23.

Golden  yellow

Greenish  yellow.

Dull  yellow.

steel  green.

West. «
Yellowest,  with

>East.

Violet  grey.

Eeddish  grey

Whitish  grey.
Below.

530.  It  is  very  evident  that  the  colors  of  the  odic  flames  of  the
two  poles  of  the  bar  differ  but  little  here  in  the  parallels.  The  gen-
eral result  is  that,  in  both  poles,  grey  declares  itself  the  prevailing
color  when  they  are  directed  towards  the  east,  and  yellow  tvhen  towards
the  west.  East,  as  essentially  grey,  corresponds,  therefore,  with  the
dip  ;  and  west,  as  essentially  yellow,  lies  diametrically  opposite  to  the
dip,  there  in  the  meridian  circle  as  here  in  the  parallel  circle.  The
northward  pole  of  the  bar  appears  rather  bluish-grey  in  the  east
while  its  southward  pole  has  more  red  intermingled,  violet-grey  in
18

410

ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

the  east.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  more  of  reddish-yellow  at  its
northward  pole  in  the  west,  and  a  purer  yellow  on  its  southward  pole
in  the  west.  These  slight  variations  of  color  are,  however,  difficult  to
determine  accurately,  and  hence  are  only  approximative.

531.  To  complete  this  set  of  experiments,  it  was  requisite  to  pass
an  unmagnetic  soft  iron  bar  through  the  vertical  circle  in  the  par-
allel. This  afforded  the  following  circle  of  colors  (fig.  24)  with  Jose-
phine Zinkel,  in  the  dark  chamber.

532.  All  the  statements  of  the  colors  agree  tolerably  closely  with
the  result  of  the  magnetic  bar  in  the  parallel,  and  this  experiment
merely  differed  in  the  fact  that  the  polar  flames  were  smaller,  fainter,
and  duller,  demanding  some  effort  on  the  part  of  the  observer  to
recognise  them  clearly.

Fig.  24.

Above.

Pale  yellow.

Keddish  yellow.

Light  greenish

grey.

Keddish  yellow

Dark  bluish  grey.

West,

Yellow.

Dull  reddish  yellow,

East.

grey,  with  a  trace
of  blue.

Opaque  reddish  grey.

Light  grey,  with

reddish  tinge.

Below.

Dark  grey.

533.   Yellow  always  displayed  itself  with  traces  of  red  on  the  west
side  ;  grey,  with  traces  of  blue,  on  the  east  side.     Grey  and  yellow

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.

411

are  opposed  here  also,  as  well  as  the  dawnings  of  blue,  to  the  first
shades  of  red.

534.  The  third  direction  requiring  to  be  investigated  here, — one
which  must  serve  to  a  certain  extent  for  the  control  of  the  two  ver-
tical circles  already  examined,  that  in  the  meridian,  and  that  in  the
parallel — is  the  horizontal.  I  give  the  diagram  of  the  northward
pole  of  the  bar  magnet  used  here,  as  is  furnished  by  the  statements
of  Josephine  Zinkel,  (Fig.  25.)

The  southward  pole,  when  examined  in  this  way,  behaved  like  the
northward  pole  in  respect  to  the  emanations  of  color,  with  only  very
minute  deviations  ;  on  the  former  red  presented  itself  among  all  the

Orange.

Green.

Dark  green.

South.

*■  North.

Light  greyish  red

Eed  streak.

Dark  grey.

Grey.
East.

colors,  in  the  latter  the  blue  was  more  predominant,  in  both  cases
strengthening  and  vivifying  the  colors  on  the  conformable  half  of  the
circle,  weakening  and  dulling  them  on  the  unconformable.  Finally,
that  retardation  of  the  development  of  color  at  the  southward  pole,

412  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

which  has  been  spoken  of  before,  (§  514,)  again  presented  itself  in
this  experiment,  and  was  noticed  on  the  advance  in  the  direction  from
east  to  west.

535.  That  agreement  presented  itself  most  satisfactorily  here,
which  one  might  expect  to  find  in  the  points  at  which  the  vertical
circles  intersect  the  horizontal  circle,  and  thus,  to  a  certain  extent,
form  nodes.  The  coincidence  in  the  direction  of  north  gave  blue,  that
towards  south  red,  east  grey,  and  totoards  west  yellow,  exactly  and
accurately  as  we  had  found  at  the  coincidence  in  the  same  positions
of  the  two  vertical  circles.  They  thus  all  serve  for  form,  reciprocal
control,  and  confirmation.

536.  The  observations  are  rather  more  difficult  to  make  in  the
parallel  and  horizontal  circles  than  in  the  vertical ;  this  arises,  in  the
former,  principally  from  the  circumstance  that  north  and  south,  the
more  powerful  influences  upon  the  magnetic  bar,  exert  continuous
equally  strong  action  upon  its  poles  throughout  the  entire  circle  ;
while  east  and  west,  the  far  weaker  odic  points  of  the  compass,  alter-
nate, and  have  to  bear  the  whole  weight  of  the  conflict  above  and
below.  The  length  of  the  bar,  the  strength  of  its  charge,  &c,  thus
all  exercise  more  influence  upon  those  colors  which  are  produced  by
lesser  forces  and  more  feebly  sustained.  Nevertheless,  a  little  differ-
ence does  display  itself  in  all  cases  between  "the  colors  of  east  and
west ;  for,  in  the  east,  the  grey  of  the  northward  pole  approached
rather  to  blue,  and  that  of  the  southward  was  slightly  intermingled
with  violet-blue  ;  in  the  west,  on  the  other  hand,  the  yellow  of  the
northward  pole  appeared  somewhat  tinged  with  reddish  ;  that  of  the
southward  of  the  fullest  and  most  brilliant  yellow,  with  a  tint  of  red.
The  former  indicates  similarity  between  the  actions  of  east  and  north,
the  latter,  similarity  between  those  of  west  and  south.  Thus  we
here  arrive,  by  another  path,  at  that  result  which  we  have  already
once  met  with  above  at  §  391,  namely,  that  east  is  inclined  to  north,
and  ivest  to  south,  in  odic  respects  generally.  And  since  we  have
already  seen  at  §  326  and  §  513,  that  east  and  the  downward  direc-
tion, as  well  as  west  and  the  upward  direction,  harmonize  with  one
another,  we  come,  altogether,  to  the  comprehensive  general  result
that  north-east  and  the  earth's  surface  (downward  direction)  form  a
general  contrast,  in  odic  polarity,  to  south-west  and  the  heavens  (the
direction  upwards).

53*7.  Among  all  the  experiments  in  which  the  bars  were  turned
round  on  a  circle  in  this  manner,  in  different  directions,  it  seemed,  in
several  cases,  as  if  the  end-flames  were  not  exactly  of  the  same  color
on  different  corners  of  one  and  the  same  pole :  for  when  I  used  an
unmagnetic  iron  bar  of  oblong  section,  namely,  twenty  inches  long,

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  413

and  about  one  and  a  third  broad,  only  two-fifths  of  an  inch  thick,
Josephine  Zinkel  frequently  observed  that  the  polar  extremities,  un-
der the  influence  of  terrestrial  magnetism,  gave  lateral  flames  on  both
sides,  which  were  not  exactly  alike  in  color.  This  was  more  observa-
ble particularly  when  the  bar  was  turned  round  on  its  axis  in  the  me-
ridian with  its  broad  side,  that  is,  so  that  its  broad  face  was  in  the
plane  of  the  parallels  during  the  whole  revolution.  A  cross  section
of  the  bar  in  this  direction  will  make  this  clear.  When  such  a  bar
revolved  on  its  axis  on  the  -p,  „fi
meridian,  it  exhibited  al-  __ _.

most  everywhere  a  rather  ,Tr    ,  ~~~~— ~-^s  i     _^-— "  i?    i

ra.       ,    J,      j  .  i    a  West.  ^  East.

different  colored  side  name  __-^o  j~~-~^_

on  its  east  from  that  on  its  I —       n^m — -.

west  edge.     The  color  on

the  east  side  had  always  a  darker  greyish  tint,  that  on  the  west  more
of  yellowish,  reddish,  or  frequently  greyish  tinge.  When  I  used  a
magnetic  bar,  the  phenomenon  was  less  strongly  marked,  and,  if  pow-
erfully magnetic,  almost  imperceptible ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  was
most  distinct  on  unmagnetic  iron  bars.

538.  I  met  with  the  same  in  all  respects  in  the  researches  with
Miss  Sophie  Pauer.  When  the  end  of  an  iron  bar  was  turned  up-
wards, the  odic  flame  on  the  westward  corner  alone  appeared  pure
yellow  to  her  in  the  dark  ;  that  on  the  eastward  corner  was  bluish
grey-yellow.  The  southward  side  of  a  bar  lying  horizontally  in  the
meridian  was  almost  orange  in  the  corner  next  the  west,  but  greenish
red  on  that  next  the  east.  And  I  found  the  eastward  corner  of  the
magnetic  pole  directed  towards  the  south  duller  in  all  positions,  and
overcast  with  grey,  while  the  westward  corner  was  brighter,  clearer,
and  lighter.  When  I  made  the  experiment  on  the  west  side  with  the
northward  pole  in  the  parallels,  the  flame  always  appeared  of  greener
hue  on  the  north  corner,  and  of  more  of  a  flame-red  tinge  on  the
south  corner.

539.  I  was  hence  led  to  conjecture  that  this  might  be  the  effect  of
the  transverse  magnetism  of  the  earth,  or  an  analogous  odic  phenome-
non. In  order  to  trace  this  further  out,  I  caused  to  be  prepared  a
longish,  quadrangular,  flat  iron  plate,  of  full  a  quarter  of  an  inch
thick,  twenty  inches  long,  and  six  inches  broad,  and  I  brought  this,
supported  freely  in  the  middle,  horizontally  into  the  parallels,  and  '
into  the  meridian,  in  the  dark  chamber.  The  four  corners  exhibited
dull  odic  flames  in  both  these  positions,  like  an  unmagnetized  iron
bar;  but  a  different  color  appeared  at  each  corner.  I  showed  it  to
Madame  Bauer  as  it  lay  lengthways  in  the  meridian.  She  stated
that  she  saw  flames  at  the  corners  of  the  following  colors  :  —

414

ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

Fig.  27.
West.

Yellow  red.

Dark  green  blue.

South.

North.

Black  grey  red.

East.

Grey  red  blue.

According  to  this,  blue  prevailed  at  both  north  corners,  and  red  at
both  the  south ;  but  yellow  was  intermingled  with  both  on  the  west,
and  grey  on  the  east.  Thus,  yellow  and  grey,  the  contrast,  appeared
as  transverse  in  this  experiment.  The  dark  green  at  the  north-west
looked  almost  black,  and  the  black  greyish-red  at  the  south-east  like
black  greenish-red.

540.  I  went  through  the  same  experiment  with  Wilhelmine  Gla-
ser.    The  following;  are  the  results  : —

Eed-yellow.

Fig.  28.
West.

Dark  green.

South.

North.

Grey-red.

East.

Grey  red-blue.

These  statements  agree  essentially  with  those  of  Madame  Bauer,
and  harmonize,  as  to  the  four  predominant  colors,  with  the  previous
observations.

541.  I  showed  the  plate  to  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  lying  lengthways
in  the  parallel,  and  she  saw —

Green-yellow.

Fig.  29.
North.

Blue-grey.

West.

East.

Bed-yellow.

South.

Bed-grey.

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  415

542.  I  repeated  the  same  experiment  many  times  with  Miss  Zin-
kel,  with  every  care  and  accuracy.     The  results  were —

Fig.  30.

North.
Greenish  yellow.  Edge  dark  blue-grey.  Dark  bluish-grey.

West.  1  «>  East

Eeddish  yellow.  Edge,  brighter,  reddish.         Eeddish  white-grey.

South.

543.  It  was  found  that  the  colors,  though  dull,  still  decidedly  fol-
lowed the  rule,  that  they  appeared  grey  towards  east,  and  yellow  to-
wards west.  And  this  was  not  all ;  for  they  became  again  subdivided
in  the  direction  of  each  of  these  points  of  the  compass  :  namely,  in
the  east  the  flame  appeared  bluish-grey  at  the  northward  corner,  red-
dish-grey on  the  southward  ;  and  if  we  subtract  the  grey  common  to
both,  there  remains  blue  at  the  former  and  red  at  the  latter ;  in  the
west,  in  like  manner,  the  yellow  flame  appeared  greenish  yellow,  i.  e.
with  blue  intermixed,  at  the  northward  corner,  reddish-yellow  at  the
southward  ;  and,  if  we  again  subtract  the  like  grey  of  both  here,  we
rind  once  more  blue  on  the  former  and  red  on  the  latter.  We  thus
have  all  four  principal  colors  simultaneously  in  this  longish  quad-
rangle :  on  the  one  hand,  grey  and  yellow  at  the  east  and  west ;  on
the  other,  blue  and  red  at  the  north  and  south  :  consequently,  when
we  look  close  into  it,  all  four  primary  colors  simultaneously  on  one
and  the  same  piece  of  iron,  which  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  a
broad  iron  bar  under  induction  by  terrestrial  magnetism"  :  or,  in  other
words,  the  one  polar  pair  of  colors,  blue  and  red,  make  their  appear-
ance transversely  in  the  other  pair,  grey  and  yellow.

The  figure  shows  that  the  edges  also  agreed  with  this  :  of  the  two
longitudinal  edges,  one  of  which  is  directed  towards  the  north,  the
other  to  the  south,  the  former  is,  on  the  whole,  faint  greyish-blue  ;
the  latter  rather  lighter  reddish  grey,  exactly  corresponding  to  their
polar  directions  :  of  the  two  cross  edges,  the  oue  turned  to  the  east
is  grey  ;  the  other  turned  to  the  west  yellow,  in  conformity  with  then-
directions.

544.  For  the  control  of  the  foregoing  in  this  last  experiment  with
Miss  Zinkel,  I  laid  a  bluntly  pointed  iron  rod  lengthways  on  the  iron
plate,  and  moved  it  forward  so  as  to  project  about  a  hand's  length
beyond  one  of  the  cross  edges.     When  so  placed  as  to  form  a  pro-

416  ODIC  LIGHT  EST  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

longation  of  any  of  the  four  corners,  it  absorbed  their  odic  flames,
and  emitted  them  from  its  own  point,  unchanged,  but  strengthened
by  concentration.  But  when  I  moved  it  sideways  along  the  cross
edge,  from  one  corner  to  the  other,  it  assumed  in  its  passage  mixed
colors,  compounded  of  those  of  the  two  corner  flames  between  which
it  moved  ;  when  moved  in  this  way  between  greenish  yellow  and
orange  on  the  west  side,  it  passed  step  by  step  through  all  the  inter-
mediate tints,  while  the  colors  at  the  corners  shrank  to  a  confused
residue.  The  flame  on  the  pointed  bar  was  therefore  composed  of  two
adjacent  colors,  into  which  it  became  decomposed  transversely  when
it  had  sufficient  space.

545.  In  order  to  render  these  appearances  stronger,  I  tried  the
effect  of  laying  lengthways  on  the  plate  of  the  last  figure  a  magnetic
bar  half  its  own  length,  and  placed  in  the  middle,  so  that  its  poles
"were  at  equal  distances  from  the  two  ends  of  the  plate.  The  intensity
of  light  and  distinctness  of  color  were  at  once  both  increased  and

Fig.  31.

North.
Golden  yellow.  Blue  grey.

3

£  ' J  p3

Orange.  Dull  grey.

South.

diminished.  The  northward  pole,  directed  toward  the  east,  converted
the  bluish  grey  of  the  north-east  corner  of  the  plate  to  blue-grey,
the  reddish  light  grey  to  dull  grey  ;  the  southward  pole,  the  greenish
yellow  to  golden  yellow,  and  the  reddish  yellow  to  orange,  on  the
west  side.  Thus  the  northward  pole  strengthened  the  blue  tints  on
the  plate,  and  weakened  the  red  ;  the  southward  pole,  on  the  other
hand,  rendered  the  red  tints  more  vivid  and  the  blue  fainter.  Exactly
similar  effects  were  produced  by  laying  the  bar  magnet  the  reverse
way  on  the  plate,  with  its  northward  pole  to  the  west,  and  its  south-
ward to  the  east.  Under  these  circumstances  the  blue-grey  was
changed  to  violet-grey,  and  the  reddish  light-grey  into  red-grey,  at
the  east  end  of  the  plate,  while  on  the  west  side  the  greenish-yellow
gave  place  to  dark  green-yellow,  and  the  reddish  grey  to  dull  grey-
yellow  ;  all  corresponding  to  the  effect  and  intermixture,  on  the  one
side  of  red,  on  the  other  of  blue,  from  the  magnet,  upon  the  colors
given  to  the  iron  plate  by  terrestrial  magnetism.

546.  One  experiment  still  remained,  which  I  was  unwilling  to  ne-

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  417

gleet,  that  of  placing  the  plate  vertically  in  the  meridian  with  the
cross  edges  upright,  and  the  long  edges  running  from  north  to  south
at  the  top  and  bottom.  Thus  arranged,  I  showed  it  to  Josephine
Zinkel  in  the  dark,  and  was  informed  that  the  north  edges  were
darker,  since  they  were  bluish ;  the  south  edges  lighter,  because  red-
dish ;  the  lower  edges  darker,  being  greyish  ;  the  upper  edges  lighter,
because  yellowish ;  the  lower  south  corner  darker,  since  it  was  greyish  ;
the  upper  south  corner  lighter,  because  yellowish  ;  the  upper  north
corner  darker,  because  verging  to  dark  blue  ;  the  lower  north  corner
lighter,  as  it  approached  to  light  grey  ; — all  clearly  corresponding
closely  and  completely  with  the  principles  already  many  times  laid
down.  I  availed  myself  of  Madame  Caecilie  Bauer's  aid  for  further  con-
firmation of  this.  She,  capable  of  seeing  better,  found  the  two  north-
ward corners  to  have  bluish  corner  flames,  the  two  southward  yellowish
red  flames.  In  the  case  of  the  two  former  the  upper  was  dulled  with
dark  green,  the  lower  with  reddish  grey  ;  this  because  there  was  a
slight  admixture  above  of  yellow,  and  below  of  grey,  and  the  often-
mentioned  red  streak  :  of  the  two  latter,  the  upper  was  bright  yellow,
the  lower  dark  grey-red,  also  because  yellow  had  become  intermixed
above,  and  grey  below.  Though  it  was  hardly  requisite,  I  tested  both
the  observer  and  the  observation  by  turning  the  plate  over  several
times,  bringing  the  edge  which  was  the  lower  in  one  instance  to  the
top  in  the  next  trial.  Madame  Bauer  assured  me  that  nothing
was  changed  but  the  position  of  the  plate,  the  relative  situations  of
the  colored  flames  remaining  unaltered.  This  was  necessarily  the
case.  Such  a  result  produced  through  the  short  vertical  in  the  long-
horizontal  could  not  be  other  than  most  pleasing  to  me,  since  it  con-
firmed in  the  most  delightful  manner  the  accuracy  of  the  preceding-
observations.

547.  When  I  next  turned  the  plate  thus  arranged,  a  quarter  of  a
circle  horizontally,  so  that  it  stood  in  the  magnetic  parallel,  Miss  Zin-
kel gave  me  the  following  account  : —

Above  and  below,  as  in  the  preceding  experiment.

The  west  edges  lighter,  because  on  the  yellow  side.
■  The  east  edges  darker,  because  on  the  grey  side, — thus  all  four  sides
agreeing  with  the  results  already  obtained  on  the  bars.

During  these  observations  the  entire  mass  of  the  plates  was  odically
incandescent,  and  the  brightness  of  this  increased  from  the  shorter
axis  outwards  towards  the  two  cross  edges  (or  ends.)  The  maximum
intensity  of  light  here  was  not  situated  at  the  extreme  ends,  but  at
some  distance  within  these,  as  in  magnetic  bars.  At  this  point,  afeo,
the  down-like  odic  flame,  which  coats  all  the  borders  like  a  delicate
fleece,  was  strongest  and  of  greatest  length.
18*

418

ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

548.  I  combined  all  these  different  observations  into  a  single  more
comprehensive  experiment.  I  had  a  supporting  apparatus  made  on
purpose,  capable  of  holding  a  plate  weighing  upwards  of  15  lbs.,
freely  moving  on  its  centre,  and  also  arranged  so  as  to  turn  round  in
a  circle  on  its  short  axis.  I  laid  this  with  the  long  edges  on  the  mag-
netic meridian,  while  the  cross  edges  ran  from  east  to  west ;  thus,  in
such  a  position  that  the  plate  could  be  turned  round  in  a  meridianal
circle  in  the  direction  of  its  length,  while  the  cross  edges  always  re-
mained in  the  parallel  duriDg  the  movement.  In  this  way  I  obtained
the  results  shown  in  Fig.  32.

Fig.  32.

Above.
Opaque  yellow,  (East  side,)

l\

yellow  (West  side)

Grey-yellow.
Red-^yellow.

Yellow-grey.
Dull  yellow,  a  trace  of  green.

South.

Bright  blue.

North.

Yellowish  red.

Grey-red.
Orange.

Dark  green-ohie.

Violetr-blue.

Dark  green,  with  a

trace  of  'red.

,,  a  trace  of  red.
lied  streaks.

Dull  red-grey.
Dull  red-yellow.

Most  grey.
Grey.

Grey,  a  trace  of  red.
Below.

The  Roman  letters  denote  the  colors  of  the  odic  flame  of  the  east-
ern corners,  the  italics  the  western  corners,  of  the  short  edges  in  each
position.

549.  On  examination  of  this  diagram,  we  find  all  the  colors  closely
corresponding,  in  general,  all  round  with  the  laws  already  discovered  ;

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.

419

blue  is  found  predominating  in  the  north,  red  in  the  south,  grey  be-
low, and  yellow  above  ;  but  when  we  look  to  the  particulars,  we  see,
in  all  the  positions,  the  prevailing  colors  of  any  given  pair  of  corners,
somewhat  modified,  in  obedience  to  a  transversality,  at  each  corner,
and  this  always  arising  from  an  approach  to  the  color  produced  by
east  or  west  side  to  which  the  corner  is  directed  :  that  is  to  say,  we
see  all  the  corners  tinged  grey  on  the  east  side,  and  all  those  on  the
west  side  affected  by  yellow  ;  both  intermixtures  being  manifest  all
round  the  circle.

556.  I  made  the  same   experiment  in  the  parallel,  curtailing  it
somewhat.     The  following  figure  gives  the  results  : —

Fig.  33.
Above.

Gold  yellow.

At

Reddish  yellmc

Yellow.

Keddish  light  blue.

Red  yellow.  .  _  „

\  ellow.

Dark  yellow  green.
Grey  red  yellow.

Blue-grey.

Whitish  grey.     White  red-grey.

Below.

Eed-grey.

The  words  in  Roman  letters  refer  to  the  odic  flames  of  the  northern
corners,  those  in  italics  to  the  southern.

420  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

551.  Here,  again,  as  in  all  the  previously-described  experiments
■with  iron  bars,  (§§  513  and  536,)  the  general  characters  of  all  at  the
top  and  to  the  west  is  yellow,  of  all  below  and  to  the  east,  grey ;  but
we  find  red  making  good  its  presence  in  a  mixed  tint  all  round  on  the
south  side,  and  blue  upon  the  north  side,  the  latter  sometimes  pass-
ing into  dark  grey,  at  others  producing  tinges  of  green.

552.  The  long  edges  of  the  plates  correspond  to  all  this  through-
out their  whole  length  on  both  sides  ;  nay,  even  their  two  halves
become  oppositely  polarized,  especially  in  the  direction  of  the  dip,
—e.g.

(  Blue  grey.  (  Green-yellow.

Below  -j  Above  -<

(  Red-grey.  (  Red-yellow.

It  is  impossible  that  these  contrasts  should  display  themselves  and
divide  and  subdivide  more  beautifully  than  they  do  in  these  numer-
ous experiments,  with  the  most  delightful  consistency.  They  make
manifest  the  most  inviolable  constancy  in  the  action  of  the  all-ruling
natural  forces,  which  are  in  operation  here,  and  which  come  clearly
to  light  as  everywhere  identical  throughout  the  modifications  of  the
experiments.

553.  And  thus  we  have  established  beyond  doubt  the  existence  of
transversality  in  the  odic  phenomena,  as  was  long  since  done  in  mag-
netic by  M.  Prechtl's  earliest  investigations.  The  principal  distinc-
tion between  the  two,  so  far  as  my  researches  have  gone  at  present,
is,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  experiments,  that  the  magnetic  transver-
sality has  more  independence,  while  the  odic  is  more  dependent  upou
the  triple  polar  conditions  of  the  earth.

554.  After  I  had  thus  made  out,  under  conditions  very  variously
modified,  that  certain  fixed  points  of  the  compass  correspond  invaria-
bly to  particular  odic  colors,  the  iris  itself,  in  which  the  whole  of  the
colors  always  appear  simultaneously  toward  each  point  of  the  com-
pass, was  still  more  puzzling.  In  this  abstruse  subject  it  is,  indeed,
out  of  the  question  at  pi'esent  to  attempt  solving  enigmas,  for  here
everything  is  enigmatical ;  but  it  is  possible  to  collect  facts,  to  ar-
range them  according  to  their  resemblances,  and  to  bring  the  homo-
logous temporarily  into  abstract  groups.  With  this  view  I  was  now
desirous  of  examining  whether  the  iris,  which  presented  itself  over
the  poles  of  stronger  magnets,  had  an  independent  existence,  not
subject  to  or  liable  to  modification,  by  the  influence  of  the  points  of
the  compass  beyond  a  certain  limit,  or  whether  it  might  not  perhaps
be  possible  to  separate  its  colors,  and  exhibit  each  independently.
From  the  foregoing   observations,  we  know  that  the  iris  always  ap-

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  421

penrs  horizontally  stratified,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  red  color  is
always  below,  the  yellow  in  the  middle,  and  then  the  blue  above,
over  which  a  further  streak  of  red  occurs — succeeded,  however,  by
oiw  smoke  :  we  know,  moreover,  that  when  the  iris  is  directed  to-
wards any  of  the  points  of  the  compass,  a  different  but  always  a  fixed
and  particular  color  becomes  predominant  over  the  rest,  in  size  and
brilliancy,  in  each  position.  I  now  wished  to  see  whether,  if  I  made
the  points  of  issue  for  the  flaming  emanations  at  the  poles  of  differ-
ent shapes,  the  iris,  corresponding  to  the  position  and  direction  of  the
apparatus  at  the  time,  would  be  developed  from  all  of  these  in  one
and  the  same  way.

555.  For  this  purpose  I  had  a  number  of  different  iron  caps  made,
fitting  upon  the  pole  of  a  large  magnetic  bar.  They  were  so  con-
structed that  the  lower  part  of  all  consisted  of  a  short  four-cornered
ferule,  which  could  be  slipped  on  to  the  end  of  the  pole  ;  the  upper
portions  were  made  in  various  shapes,  just  such  as  it  seemed  worth
while  to  test  the  emanations  of  odic  light  with.  I  was  thus  enabled
to  make  the  pole  of  the  magnetic  bar  terminate  in  all  kinds  of  points.
I  now  fixed  my  strongest  bar-magnet  in  a  vertical  position,  and  ex-
hibited it,  with  the  various  caps  applied  in  succession  upon  the  up-
wardly directed  pole,  to  Miss  Zinkel,  and  some  months  subsequently
to  the  less  sensitive  Baroness  von  Augustin  and  Dr.  Nied.

556.  The  first  was  a  hemisphere,  attached  on  the  north  pole.  It
was  rather  more  than  an  inch  in  diameter.  When  the  bar  termi-
nated in  a  rounded  surface  like  this,  Josephine  Zinkel  observed  a  dull
iris,  on  which  two  colors — yellow  and  blue — predominated,  the  yel-
low below,  the  blue  above  ;  the  rest  of  the  colors  were  opaque  and
indistinct.  In  this  case  the  usual  form  of  the  emanation  was  not
much  altered,  and  the  odic  flame  was  rather  more  than  four  inches
long,  as  it  was  without  the  cap.

557.  I  took  this  off,  and  applied  a  cap  which  was  hollowed  out  in
the  centre,  and  a  sharp  rim  all,  round.  It  formed  a  cup,  into  which
the  hemisphere  of  the  first  cap  fitted  exactly,  and  they  were  conse-
quently the  reverse  of  each  other.  The  raised  margin  alone  emitted
all  the  odic  light  here,  and  the  observer  saw  nothing  come  from  the
cavity  it  bounded.  The  flaming  rim  again  formed  an  iris,  but  no
longer,  as  in  the  last  experiment,  with  the  colors  horizontally  strati-
fied, but  arranged  side  by  side,  and  forming  a  horizontal  wreath,  which
was  but  about  two  inches  high.  This  was  seen  both  by  Josephine
Zinkel  and  Dr.  Nied.

558.  When  I  put  on  a  ring-cap  like  this,  with  the  addition  of  a
free  point  projecting  from  its  centre,  the  wreath  of  colors  remained
unchanged,  and  no  colored  odic  flame  flowed  from  the  central  point,

422  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

but  exclusively  grey  smoke.     Dr.  Nied   detected  merely  a  bright  lu-
minous point  in  the  middle.

559.  Substituting  a  cap  forming  a  four-sided  pyramid,  conse-
quently terminating  in  a  single  point,  I  obtained  an  elono-ated  narrow
flame,  displaying  an  iris,  in  which  the  colors  were  again  horizontally
stratified,  and  which  only  differed  from  that  of  the  hemisphere  in
having  more  colors,  and  being  more  drawn  out,  so  that  it  rose  higher.

560.  With  a  cap  having  a  simple  straight  edge  running  trans-
versely across  the  pole,  I  again  obtained  an  imperfect  iris,  with  the
colors  horizontally  stratified.  Placing  the  edge  so  as  to  coincide  with
the  meridian,  the  coloring  on  the  northward  corner  was  violet  and
blue ;  on  the  southward,  red.  The  rest  of  the  colors  existed  in  a
duller  condition  between  these.  When  I  placed  the  edge  in  the  di-
rection of  the  magnetic  parallel,  the  corner  on  the  east  side  exhibited
grey,  that  on  the  west  yellow,  coloring  of  the  odic  flame  ;  the  remain-
ing colors  being  irregularly  intermingled  along  the  edge  between  the
corners.

561.  With  a  cap  having  two  points  in  a  line,  I  obtained  an  odic
flame  from  each.  When  one  was  on  the  north,  the  other  on  the
south,  the  flame  at  the  former  was  blue,  at  the  latter  red.  This  was
stated  by  Dr.  Nied,  as  well  as  by  Baroness  von  Augustin.  When
placed  east  and  west,  Josephine  Zinkel  saw  the  former  grey,  the  lat-
ter yellow.  Turning  them  north-west  and  south-east,  I  obtained
green  and  dark  muddy  red  flames ;  from  north-east  and  south-west,
reddish  violet  and  orange.

Finally,  I  applied  a  cap  with  four  points  arranged  on  a  quadrangle,
and  so  placed  that  each  was  directed  to  one  of  the  four  points  of  the
compass.  Differently  colored  odic  lights  now  arose  from  all  four
points.  Baroness  von  Augustin  saw  the  flames  of  the  east  point
grey,  of  the  south  point  red,  of  the  north  point  blue,  and  those  of  the
west  lightest  of  all  and  doubtful  in  color,  sometimes  light  blue,  at
other  times  whitish.  The  statements  of  Dr.  Nied  were  to  the  same
effect,  with  the  addition  that  he  observed  decided  yellow  flame  at  the
west  point.  Miss  Zinkel  distinctly  perceived  a  blue  flame  on  the
north  point,  a  yellow  on  the  west,  a  red  on  the  south,  and  a  grey
on  the  east.

563.  When  I  applied  the  caps  to  the  magnetic  bar  reversed,  so
that  the  southward  pole  was  uppermost,  I  obtained  from  the  observa-
tions of  Josephine  Zinkel  the  same  appearances  in  all  cases,  only  all
duller  and  fainter  than  when  the  northward  pole  was  at  the. top.

564.  I  thus  had  the  pleasure  of  finding  the  flame  both  of  the
northward  and  southward  poles  of  a  bar  magnet,  which  had  inde-
pendently formed  an  iris  with  colors  of  unequal  intensity,  decomposed

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  423

{separated)  by  the  application  of  a  four-pointed  cap  into  their  four
primary  colors,  displayed  infames  of  equal  size,  and  in  this  experi-
ment to  attain  with  a  single  magnet-pole  all  that  I  had  acquired  pre-
viously with  much  more  complex  experiments — namely,  the  proof
that  every  magnetic  flame  contained  all  the  conditions  necessary  for
the  production  of  all  the  prismatic  colors;  and  these  may  be  called
out  simply  and  clearly  in  each  case  from  the  corresponding  part  of
the  compass,  provided  only  that  such  an  arrangement  of  the  appa-
ratus be  hit  upon  that  the  colors  can  separate  from  each  other,  and
each  unobstructedly  develope  itself  free  from  the  rest.  We  might
say,  indeed,  in  other  words,  that  a  kind  of  double  odic  transversality
is  thus  demonstrated  in  each  pole  of  the  magnet  dependent  upon  ter-
restrial polarity.

565.  From  these  results  I  proceeded  to  the  examination  of  a
circular  pAate.  I  had  a  disc  of  iron  plate,  rather  more  than  a  foot  in
diameter,  well  flattened  and  bored  by  folding  the  edge  over  an  iron
wire,  so  as  to  obtain  a  smoother  and  truer  edge  of  about  one-eighth
of  an  inch  thick.  A  little  iron  hook  was  fixed  in  the  middle,  so  that
it  might  be  suspended  with  its  surface  in  the  horizontal  position.  By
means  of  a  chandelier-hook  in  the  ceiling,  I  could  suspend  the  disc
freely  by  a  silk  cord,  and  place  it  at  any  height  I  pleased.  I  placed
my  strongest  bar  magnet  upright  beneath  it,  the  northward  pole  up-
wards, and  lowered  the  iron  disc  down  upon  it.  In  this  manner  it
formed  a  kind  of  widely  expanded  flat  cap  to  the  pole  of  the  magnet,
or,  what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  an  iuduced  magnet  only  as  long
as  the  thickness  of  the  flat  iron  plate,  but  with  a  thickness  of  the
whole  diameter  of  the  disc.

566.  I  first  showed  the  disc  alone  to  Wilhelmine  Glaser ;  she  saw
it  palely  incandescent,  of  a  light  grey,  but  could  not  detect  colors.  I
then  lowered  it  on  the  northward  pole  of  the  bar.  She  immediately
beheld  colored  odic  light  upon  it.  A  blue  patch  was  formed  in  the
centre ;  above,  the  surface  became  brighter,  and  the  border  colored
all  round,  grey  towards  the  east,  blue  to  the  north,  yellow  to  the
west,  and  red  to  the  south,  and  these  colors  darkly  blended  together
where  they  were  in  contact.

567.  Madame  Cyecilie  Bauer  saw  the  same  appearance  of  the  iron
disc  under  the  same  circumstances  ;  not,  however,  merely  a  grey  sur-
face and  prismatic  colors  on  the  circumference,  but  with  the  latter
running  inwards  a  considerable  portion  of  the  distance  towards  the
centre.  When  I  reversed  the  magnetic  bar,  and  placed  the  disc  in
contact  with  the  southward  pole,  she  found  the  arrangement  of  colors
on  the  plate  unchanged,  but  they  were  fainter  and  obscured.

568.  I  showed  the  disc,  similarly   arranged,  with  the  northward

404  ODIC  LIGHT  W  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

pole  of  the  bar  upwards,  to  Miss  Sophie  Pauer.  She  saw  it  imme-
diately become  incandescent  throughout.  The  coloring  of  this  was
such  as  might  have  been  expected  :  at  the  centre  of  the  upper  sur-
face, turned  away  from  the  northward  pole  of  the  magnetic  bar,  a
blue  spot  was  formed  ;  on  the  centre  of  the  under  face,  which  was  in
contact  with  the  magnetic  bar,  a  red  one.  She  described  the  size  of
both  as  about  half  that  of  her  hand,  i.  e.  more  than  two  inches  in
diameter.  They  merged  into  a  yellowish  ring  surrounding  them,  the
lower  of  which  had  a  reddish  tinge,  the  upper  a  greenish,  and  these
were  lost  in  grey  light,  which  extended  nearly  up  to  the  edge  of  the
iron  disc :  here  it  was  surrounded  by  a  kind  of  thickened  border  of
down-like  flame  rather  more  than  half  an  inch  thick  ("  as  thick  as  her
finger,"  she  said),  and  again  colored.  Toward  the  east  it  displayed
grey,  toward  north  blue,  toward  west  yellow,  and  toward  south  red ;
the  north-west  was  green,  south-west  orange,  south-east  grey-red,  and
the  north-east  violet-blue,  with  a  short  redder  piece.  These  colors
altogether  formed  round  the  edge  a  continuous  wreath  of  colors  shaded
into  one  another,  and  thus  a  kind  of  circular  rainbow.

569.  Miss  Pauer  saw  a  stream  of  blue  light,  an  inch  and  a  half
high,  like  a  common  magnet  flame,  run  out  of  the  centre  of  the  up-
per face  :  at  its  very  summit  it  passed  into  sulphur-yellow,  and  then
into  grey  ;  this  was  absent  beneath,  because  the  disc  was  applied
immediately  upon  the  magnetic  bar.  The  entire  disc  was  enveloped
in  a  luminous  mist,  of  a  downy  character,  only  distinctly  visible  in
profile,  appearing  bluish  above,  and  reddish-grey  beneath.  It  ex-
hibited throughout  a  kind  of  slowly  undulating  motion,  and  both  on
the  upper  and  under  surface  flowed  gently  inwards  from  the  circum-
ference towards  the  centre  of  the  disc.  It  projected  about  half  an
inch  beyond  the  edge.  She  could  disturb  it  by  blowing,  which
caused  it  to  become  more  luminous  for  the  moment,  but  it  soon  re^
turned  to  its  original  state.

570.  I  made  a  modified  experiment  of  a  similar  kind  with  Jo-
sephine Zinkel.  I  connected  the  iron  disc,  suspended  by  its  silken
cord,  with  the  poles  of  a  zinc  and  silver  battery  of  about  two  and  a
half  square  feet  of  surface,  bringing  two  copper  polar  wires  in  con-
tact with  the  centre  of  the  disc,  so  that  they  were  merely  separated
to  the  extent  of  the  thickness  of  the  iron  plate  of  which  the  disc  was
made,  amounting  only  to  about  the  twenty-fifth  of  an  inch  ;  which  at
the  same  time  forms  a  metallic  connection.

The  beholder  immediately  saw  a  blue  luminous  patch  of  odic  in-
candescence, two  inches  in  diameter,  formed  on  the  centre  of  the
upper  surface  of  the  disc  when  the  silver  pole  of  the  voltaic  battery
joined  :  a  red  patch  was  simultaneously  produced  on  the  under  face,

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  425

when  the  wire  of  the  zinc  end  touched  the  iron  plate.  No  odic  flame
was  visible  over  these  places ;  but  the  entire  plate  acquired  colored
odic  incandescence,  not  merely  at  its  borders,  but  over  the  whole  of
both  surfaces.  The  colors  were  so  distributed  that  blue  presented
itself  towards  north,  yellow  towards  west,  red  towards  south,  and
grey  towards  east,  also  green  towards  the  north-west,  &c.  The  blue
and  red  central  patches  formed  star-like  appearances,  with  innumer-
able points,  or  rather  radiating  prolongations,  which  ran  from  the
centre  towards  the  circumference  of  the  disc,  and  throughout  exhib-
ited those  colors  which  corresponded  to  the  points  of  the  compass  to-
ward which  they  ran.  The  colors  were  so  arranged  upon  the  surface
that  each  occupied  a  segment  of  a  circle,  and  the  whole  formed  a
kind  of  circular  rainbow.  The  edge  of  the  disc  was  again  enveloped
in  a  luminous  thickened  border  of  delicate  down-like  odic  light,  such
as  is  seen  on  horse-shoe  magnets  when  the  armatures  are  in  place.
This  downy  flame  extended  over  the  whole  disc,  in  a  thickness  of
about  one-fifth  of  an  inch,  ("  hardly  as  thick  as  a  quill,")  and  flowed
in  weak  undulations  from  the  edge  to  the  middle,  where  it  was  rather
thicker.  It  was  thick  enough  there  to  veil  the  brilliancy  of  the  light
of  the  disc  like  a  kind  of  mist.

571.  In  order,  if  possible,  to  add  the  key-stone  to  the  result  of  the
foregoing  experiments,  I  had  a  hollow  globe  of  sheet  iron  made,
without  any  projections  whatever.  It  was  rather  more  than  a  foot  in
diameter,  and  composed  of  two  hemispheres  fitted  smoothly  and
closely,  so  that  when  one  was  slipped  over  the  other,  the  junction
could  scarcely  be  seen.  A  little  hole  was  made  through  this  joint,  in
which  was  attached  a  silken  cord,  and  the  globe  thereby  freely  sus-
pended in  the  air.

Weighing  all  the  preceding  discoveries,  I  indulged  the  hope  of  be-
ing able,  with  this  arrangement,  to  produce  something  which  might,
perhaps,  in  some  degree,  approach  to  an  artificial  aurora, — a  north-
ern and  southern  polar  light.  It  appeared  to  me  that  an  electro-
magnet would  be  the  fitting  means  of  giving  mv  globe,  like  the  earth,
two  magnetic  poles  of  equal  strength,  the  intensity  of  which  I  could
have  under  my  control.  I  coiled  a  round  iron  bar  of  nearly  an  inch
in  diameter,  with  silk-covered  copper  wire,  about  one-twelfth  of  an
inch  thick,  and  fixed  it  diametrically  in  the  globe  ;  it  was  made  just
the  length  of  the  internal  diameter,  so  that  it  remained  in  its  place
without  special  fastening,  so  long  as  the  two  halves  of  the  globe  were
applied  together.  I  placed  it  upright  within  the  iron  ball,  and  it  was
thus  in  immediate  contact  with  the  highest  and  lowest  points  of  this.
The  two  ends  of  the  wire  were  brought  through  two  little  holes,
lined  with  pieces  of  quill,  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  the  globe,  and

426  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

were  connected  with  a  Smee's  battery  of  two  and  a  half  square  feet
of  active  silver  surface.  Thus  arranged,  the  globe  was  shown  in  the
dark  to  Professor  Huss  of  Stockholm,  Mr.  Iiochstetter,  Baroness  von
Augustin,  Miss  Sophie  Pauer,  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  Madame  Csecilie
Bauer,  and  Miss  Zinkel ;  persons,  therefore,  undoubtedly  quite  healthy
and  vigorous.

572.  Dr.  Huss,  the  least  sensitive  of  the  number,  only  discerned
the  suspended  globe  during  a  few  moments,  and  this  at  first,  when
the  voltaic  battery  was  in  strongest  action  ;  but  it  now  disappeared
from  his  sight,  either  from  loss  of  strength  in  the  inducing  current,
or  through  an  intermission  of  his  sensitive  powers..

573.  Mr.  Iiochstetter  saw  a  bright  round  patch  arise  on  the  top
and  bottom  of  the  globe,  about  two  inches  in  diameter,  without  visi-
ble color,  and  situated  at  the  two  points  of  the  surface  of  the  globe
Avhich  corresponded  to  the  ends  of  the  electro-magnet  touching  the
inside.     He  detected  nothing  else.

574.  Baroness  von  Augustin  saw  the  globe  alone  feebly  luminous  :
when  connected  with  the  voltaic  current,  she  saw  the  light  increase
and  become  enveloped  in  vapor.  She  discerned  expanded  clearer
portions  of  light  above  and  below,  at  the  poles,  which  produced  dull
but  visibly  brighter  patches  on  the  ceiling  and  floor  of  the  room.  On
the  surface  of  the  globe,  from  the  upper  pole  down  to  the  lower,  she
detected  differences  of  color,  weak,  indeed,  but  distinctly  blue  upon
the  noth  side,  grey  and  dark  on  the  east  side,  a  reddish  condition  on
the  south  side  ;  she  found  the  west  side  the  lightest,  but  could  not
declare  with  certainty  the  nature  of  its  color.

Anka  Hetmanck  saw  the  large  globe  in  a  whitish  odic  glow,  be-
fore it  was  connected  with  a  Smee's  battery.  When  the  electro-
magnet was  put  in  action,  she  found  the  globe  much  more  luminous,
and  covered  with  broad,  colored  streaks  from  pole  to  pole.  She  saw
them  blue  on  the  north  side,  yellow  towards  the  west,  red  towards
south,  darker  green  (grey  ?)  towards  east ;  she  observed  green  on  the
north-west.  The  poles  were  more  strongly  luminous,  the  upper  blue,
and  the  lower  red.

Madame  Josephine  Fenzl  saw  the  globe  become  luminous,  di-
rectly I  had  effected  its  connexion  with  the  Smee's  battery.  She
perceived  the  south-west  side  to  be  incomparably  brighter  than  the
north-east,  yet  could  not  distinguish  colors.  But  both  at  the  top
and  bottom  of  the  globe  she  discerned  flames,  two  or  three  inches
broad,  radiating  from  the  polar  points, — and  then,  to  use  her  own
expression,  spreading  like  an  open  parasol  over  the  globe,  concentric
with  it,  both  above  and  below,  but  a  little  distance  from  its  surface.

575.  The  appearances  were  much  better  developed  to  the  eyes  of

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  427

Miss  Pauer.  Even  before  the  connection  of  the  iron  bar  inside  the
globe  with  the  voltaic  battery,  she  discerned  the  form  of  the.  globe,
as  a  ball  of  pale  light  floating  in  the  air.  When  I  completed  the
electric  circuit,  and  thus  converted  the  iron  bar  into  a  strong  electro-
magnet, the  balloon  became  highly  incandescent.  Colors  soon  ap-
peared in  the  incandescence.  The  beholder  saw  the  north  side  be-
come blue  from  above  downward.*,  the  west  side  yellow,  the  south
side  red,  and  the  east  side  grey.  She  detected  green  between  north
and  west,  orange  between  west  and  south,  violet  between  east  and
north.  The  light  was  most  intense  upon  the  west  side,  least  upon
the  east.  The  colors  merged  gradually  and  imperceptibly  into  each
other.  But  the  light  was  developed  most  strongly  at  the  top  and
bottom,  at  the  parts  of  the  outer  surface  corresponding  to  the  inter-
nal points  of  contact  of  the  poles  of  the  enclosed  electro-magnet,
which  were  at  the  same  time  the  poles  of  the  globe  itself :  the  upper
pole  had  a  blue  patch,  the  lower  a  red ;  the  former  being  connected
with  the  silver  pole  of  the  battery,  the  latter  with  the  zinc.  Each
polar  patch  was  nearly  four  inches  in  diameter.  Both  passed  into  a
yellowish  color  at  the  edge,  Avhich  gradually  became  paler  outwards
and  lost  itself  in  grey.  Odic  flame  ran  from  the  surface  at  both  poles,
blue  at  the  upper  and  red  at  the  lower,  which  the  observer  estimated
at  a  height  of  nearly  four  inches.  She  also  saw  a  delicate  grey  misty
envelope  all  over  the  ball,  most  distinctly  to  be  discerned  in  profile,
and  rising  about  two-fifths  of  an  inch  above  the  surface ;  it  appeared
to  be  flowing  from  the  equator  to  the  poles,  and  was  disturbed  when
she  blew  upon  it.  She  perceived  a  more  luminous,  narrow  and
whitish-yellow  ring  running  all  round  at  the  equator.

576.  Madame  Csecilie  Bauer  perceived  she  globe  in  a  faint  yellow
light  before  the  bar  within  it  was  rendered  magnetic.  Directly  the
voltaic  current  began  to  pass  through  the  wire  coil,  a  splendid  varie-
gation of  prismatic  colors  appeared  upon  the  globe.  The  greatest  in-
tensity of  light  displayed  itself  at  the  poles  ;  blue  above,  when  the
electric  current  was  derived  from  the  silver  ;  red  below,  when  it  was
in  connection  with  the  zinc.  Both  colors  formed  brightly  luminous
patches  of  odic  incandescence,  six  inches  in  diameter,  at  the  polar  re-
gions, dividing  externally  into  innumerable  narrow,  colored  meridians,
which  ran  straight  over  the  surface  of  the  ball,  perpendicular  to  the
equator.  On  the  side  turned  towards  the  north  they  were  blue  ;  on
the  west,  yellow ;  on  the  south,  red ;  and  on  the  east,  grey  ;  and  the
mixed  colors  appeared  between  these  in  every  intermediate  shade.
The  globe  was  darker  on  the  east  side,  lighter  and  with  the  colors
more  brilliant  on  the  west.  The  intensity  of  the  light  of  the  colors
diminished  from  the  poles  towards  the  equator,  and  near  this  they

428  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

were  lost ;  but  in  their   place  occurred   another  phenomenon, — the
equator  itself  formed  a  narrow,  rather  brighter  band  round  the  globe.

577.  I  was  able  to  examine  these  phenomena  most  accurately  and
circumstantially  through  Josephine  Zinkel.  The  period  of  menstrua-
tion was  chosen  for  the  trial.  She  saw  the  globe  in  a  white  light  be-
fore the  voltaic  current  was  completed.  When  the  connection  was
made,  and  the  internal  iron  bar  converted  into  an  electro-magnet,  it
displayed  a  bright  light,  decorated  with  the  most  beautiful  colors,
which  always  drew  expressions  of  admiration  from  the  beholders.
Josephine  Zinkel  detected  all  the  same  phenomena  as  her  predeces-
sors : — the  pole  of  the  globe  towards  the  silver  side  of  the  battery,
blue ;  that  towards  the  zinc,  red  ;  the  light  most  intense  at  the  poles,
forming  from  them  great  stars,  with  apparently  innumerable  points,
or  rather  radiant  thread-like  prolongations,  running  over  the  globe,
towards  the  equator,  in  various  colors, — blue  on  the  north,  yellow  on
the  west,  red  on  the  south,  and  grey  on  the  east,  and  thus  following
the  order  so  often  observed  ;  the  whole  of  the  east  side  was  darker,
the  entire  west  side  brighter,  &c.

578.  She  also  perceived  the  band  which  runs  round  the  globe  at
the  equator.  She  described  it  as  a  luminous  streak,  passing  horizon-
tally round  at  the  greatest  circumference,  and  thus  dividing  the  globe
into  two  halves,  upper  and  lower.  According  to  her  descriptions,  it
is  only  about  one-fifth  of  an  inch  broad,  of  pale  whitish-yellow  light,
so  that  persons  of  a  lower  degree  of  sensitiveness  cannot  discern  it;
and  hence  it  was  not  perceived  at  all  by  Mr.  Hochstetter,  only  indis-
tinctly by  Miss  Pauer,  and  first  detected  by  Madame  Bauer  and  Miss
Zinkel.  It  is  not  sharply  defined  at  the  two  edges,  but  has  countless
strong  short  teeth,  like  a  fine  comb,  at  right  angles  to  the  equator,
and  therefore  pointing  to  the  poles.

579.  The  luminosity  of  the  surface  of  the  globe,  its  odic  incandes-
cence, appeared  to  Madame  Bauer  continuous,  but  at  the  same  time
composed  of  innumerable  clearly  distinguishable  filaments,  which
seemed  to  her  about  one-twenty-fifth  of  an  inch  thick  (the  size  of  a
knitting  needle,)  and  ran  from  the  blue  and  ,red  patches  of  the
upper  and  lower  poles  perpendicularly  towards  the  equatorial  band.
She  described  these  filaments  as  not  so  much  independent  isolated
streaks,  as  rather  merely  lines  of  greater  intensity  of  light,  alterna-
ting with  fainter  lines,  so  as  to  give  a  streaked  appearance  to  the
whole  as  if  it  were  made  up  of  threads  running  down  from  the  poles.
They  were  all  of  the  colors  corresponding  to  the  points  of  the  com-
pass toward  which  they  were  directed, — thus,  blue  on  the  northward
side  of  the  globe,  both  above  and  below  the  equator,  yellow  on  the
west,  and  so  on.

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  429

She  saw  the  blue  and  red  patches  as  much  as  six  inches  in  diame-
ter ("a  hand's  length'')  ;  that  is,  with  a  radius  of  three  inches  ("a
ringer's  length  ")  from  the  poles.  Beyond  this  distance  they  became
subdivided,  and  changed  into  filaments  running  downwards  over  the
succeeding  zones,  which  gave  the  polar  patches  a  star-like  aspect,  and
this  the  more  since  the  different  colors  were  of  different  degrees  of
brightness  ;  and  the  lighter  and  darker  exhibited  repeated  alterna-
tions, whence  arose  apparent  projections  and  hollows,  presenting  to
eye  the  form  of  a  kind  of  star.

580.  The  intensity  of  the  light  of  these  phenomena  of  odic  incan-
descence, which  was  greatest  at  the  poles,  decreased  in  regular  grada-
tion from  there  to  the  equator,  so  that  they  at  length  became  dull  in
the  tropical  zones,  and  vanished  wholly  when  they  came  very  near  to
the  luminous  girdle.

581.  The  colors  thus  collectively  forming  a  spherical  iris  around
the  globe  were  shaded  off  into  one  another  in  all  parts  ;  thus,  blue
through  green  into  yellow,  yellow  through  orange  into  red,  &c.
These  transitions  were  so  formed  that  every  single  filament  running
down  as  a  kind  of  meridian  over  the  globe,  was  slightly  deficient  in
color,  from  there  on  each  side  of  it ;  no  two  were  exactly  of  the  same
color,  and  the  difference  was  sufficiently  marked  for  the  observer  to
detect  it  clearly.  This  made  the  globe  look  as  if  it  were  composed
of  thousands  of  colored  lines,  which  gave  it  such  a  charming  appear-
ance that  Madame  Bauer  and  Josephine  Zinkel  declared  that  they
had  never  seen  anything  more  beautiful.

582.  The  primary  colors  were  again  subdivided  into  several  mixed
tints,  in  their  own  special  regions,  so  that  collections  of  filaments,  all
differing  to  a  certain  extent  from  each  other,  formed  bundles  ac-
cording to  their  resemblance.  Thus  there  was  a  budlne  of  dark
blue  luminous  filaments,  and  one  of  sky-blue.  The  green,  as  it
became  extricated  from  the  sky-blue,  formed  first  a  bundle  of  black-
ish green,  then  one  of  grass-green  threads  ;  the  yellow  also,  the
red,  and  the  grey,  were  subdivided  iu  shades  of  this  kind.  The
last  formed  in  the  middle  a  bundle  of  dark  grey  filaments,  four-
fifths  of  an  inch  broad,  near  the  equator  ;  on  each  side  of  this  lay  a
bundle  of  whitish  light  grey,  an  inch  and  one-fifth  to  an  inch  and
three-fifths  broad.  Between  the  violet  and  the  grey,  towards  the
north,  appeared  the  often-mentioned  striking  phenomenon  of  a  red
streak.  It  was  sharply  defined  on  the  side  towards  the  dark  grey,
not  more  than  one-fifth  of  an  inch  broad  at  the  equator,  (or,  as  she
expressed  it,  about  twice  or  three  times  as  broad  as  the  back  of  a
knife,)  and  then  merged  rather  suddenly  into  dark  violet-blue.  This
remarkable  red  streak  was  particularly  luminous  and  of  a  bright  red,

430  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

the  intensity  of  its  light  being  much  greater  than  that  of  the  rest  of
the  red  on  the  south  side  of  the  globe.  Thus  there  was  red  at  both
sides  of  the  spectrum,  beginning  and  ending  the  series  of  colors,  pro-
duced on  the  one  side  out  of  yellow,  on  the  other  out  of  blue,  and
from  this  we  distinctly  see  the  condition  of  the  violet,  generally,  in  the
spectrum  ;  namely,  that  it  is  not  a  peculiar  color,  but,  in  reality,  mere-
ly a  mixture  of  blue  with  adjacent  pure  and  independent  red.  The
fact  that  this  red  is  so  wholly  merged  into  the  blue,  in  the  common
spectrum,  as  only  to  declare  itself  in  the  violet,  while  in  the  odic  spec-
trum it  is  developed  independently,  depends  on  causes  which  remain
to  be  disclosed  by  future  researches  in  other  directions.

583.  Besides  the  general  distinction  which  is  evident  in  the  inten-
sities of  the  light  between  the  eastern  and  western  surfaces  of  the
globe,  a  second,  not  less  comprehensive,  was  detected  between  the
upper  and  lower  hemispheres.  The  upper,  with  the  blue  pole,  dis-
played incomparably  stronger  light  upon  its  red  and  yellow  portions,
and  was  duller  upon  its  blue  and  green  ;  the  lower,  on  the  other
hand,  when  the  pole  was  red,  was  more  vividly  luminous  on  its  blue
and  grey  parts,  and  was  opaque  at  the  red  and  yellow  ;  that  is  to  say,
that  the  red  and  yellow  issued  dull  from  the  red  pole,  and  acquired
brilliancy  as  they  approached  the  blue  pole  on  the  further  side  of  the
equator ;  while,  conversely,  the  blue  and  grey  were  sent  off  in  dull
threads  from  the  star  of  the  blue  pole,  but  gained  power  and  bril-
liancy beyond  the  equator,  on  the  hemisphere  of  the  red  pole.  There-
fore identical  colors,  occurring  at  the  poles  and  in  the  luminous
streaks,  displayed  opposition ;  unlike  colors  were  in  agreement.

584.  The  preceding  were  merely  the  characters  of  the  odic  incan-
descence of  the  globe ;  we  have  now  to  examine  those  of  the  odic
fame.  A  flame  flowed  out  from  each  pole,  perpendicularly  to  the
surface  of  the  globe,  upwards  of  two  inches  in  height  and  about  an
inch  and  a  half  thick,  which  then  expanded  and  overspread  all  sides
of  the  globe  parallel  to  its  surface,  became  broken  up  into  rays  and
streaks,  and  flowed  out  at  once  into  the  air  in  filaments  of  odic  flame,
like  the  filaments  of  the  odic  incandescence  on  the  globe,  and  parallel
to  them,  but  only  to  a  distance  of  a  radius  of  about  three  inches  frooa
the  poles.  The  entire  diameter  of  the  flaming  appearance  over  each
pole  was  thus  rather  more  than  six  inches,  beyond  which  distance  it
was  lost  in  the  air.  The  observer  compared  the  whole  flame  to  a
loosely-bound  sheaf  of  corn,  standing  upright  on  the  ground  with
the  ears  and  stalks  hanging  over  in  curves  all  round,  so  as  to  lie  hori-
zontally upon  one  another  over  the  band.  The  streaks  of  flame  were
not  steady,  but  flickered  and  scintillated  constantly  backwards  and
forwards,  becoming  shorter  and  longer,  and  shooting  out  in  rays  like

CONDITION'S  OF  THE  MAGNET.  431

the  electric  flash  on  the  positive  electrified  conductor.  The  resem-
blance of  this  phenomenon  to  the  polar  light  of  the  earth']?,  too  mani-
fest to  any  one  who  may  take  the  trouble  to  read  these  lines.  The
iron  sphere  became  in  this  way  a  terrelle,  analogous  to  Barlow's.

585.  A  second  phenomenon  connected  with  the  odic  flame  of  the
globe  is  a  thin  envelope  of  luminous  vapor,  a  kind  of  delicate  photos-
phere, or  atmosphere  of  light,  surrounding  it.  This  consists  of  an
opaque  veil  of  light,  not  in  contact  with  the  surface,  but  at  a  little  dis-
tance from  it,  and  floating  freely  in  the  air  above  it,  like  a  spherical
shell.  The  distance  from  the  surface  amounts  to  about  two-fifths  of
an  inch  (the  thickness  of  the  little  finger  was  the  expression.)  and  the
misty  envelope  itself  was  only  about  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  thick.
This  luminous  envelope  is  probably  similar  to  that  which  this  observer
and  many  others  have  described  as  existing  over  a  ball  or  an  electri-
fied conductor,  which  I  shall  give  an  account  of  in  a  future  treatise.
It  differs,  however,  from  this  in  the  circumstance,  that  while  the  lat-
ter completely  envelopes  the  electrified  ball,  our  terrelle  is  principally
clothed  with  it  when  the  blue  and  red  streaks  of  light  prevail,  while
over  the  yellow  and  grey  regions  it  becomes  fainter,  and  in  one  part
almost  entirely  vanishes.  This  envelope,  therefore,  follows  more  es-
pecially the  direction  of  the  terrestrial  meridian  in  which  the  iron
globe  is  placed,  abiding  in  the  northern  and  southern  directions,  and
retreating  from  the  east  and  west.  The  density  of  the  shell  of  vapor
was  not  altogether  inconsiderable  there,  for  it  was  sufficient  to  ob-
scure the  filaments  of  light  beneath  it  perceptibly,  and  to  affect  the
distinctness  of  their  outlines.

586.  Odic  smoke  rose  in  abundance  from  the  globe  above  its  polar
flames.  From  the  upper  blue  flame  it  ascended  vertically  to  the  ceil-
ing, enveloping  the  silken  cord  by  which  the  globe  was  suspended.
Both  this  cord  and  a  small  weight  that  was  fastened  to  it  some  dis-
tance up,  became  luminous  in  a  golden  yellow  color.  On  the  ceiling-
above  it  formed  a  large  light  patch  more  than  twenty-six  inches  (an
ell,  she  said)  in  diameter,  so  light  that  she  could  dimly  discern  the
painting  on  the  ceiling ;  it  then  turned  outwards  and,-  extended  over
it  visibly  for  a  distance  of  about  a  yard.  The  silken  cord  was  also
visible  in  faint  odic  incandescence  for  a  certain  distance  along  the
ceiling.

587.  Six  months  afterwards  I  had  another  much  larger  globe  made
of  sheet  iron.  This  was  about  twenty-one  inches  in  diameter  ;  the
iron  bar  placed  inside,  one  inch  thick,  with  a  triple  coil  of  covered
copper  wire  one-eighth  of  an  inch  thick.  The  zinc  and  silver  battery
connected  with  it  was  powerful  enough  to  make  this  wire  hot.  The
globe  was  observed  by  Baroness  von  Augustin  and  Miss  Wilhelmine

132  ODIC  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

Glaser.  The  former  saw  the  colored  meridians  running  from  pole  to
pole,  as  already  described,  (§  5*74,)  in  speaking  of  the  odic  incandes-
cence of  the  globe.  In  addition  to  these,  she  discerned  short  lumin-
ous columns  flowing  out  as  a  kind  of  vapor  from  both  poles,  reddish
at  the  positive  and  blue  at  the  negative.  The  columns  or  stalks  of
light,  as  she  called  them,  spread  out  above  and  turned  over.  She
compared  them  with  the  form  of  a  palm-tree,  when  the  leaves  spread
out  in  all  directions  at  right  angles  to  the  stem.  Wilhelmine  Glaser
perceived  the  globe  to  be  streaked  all  over,  from  top  to  bottom,  grey
on  the  east,  red  on  the  south,  yellow  on  the  west,  and  blue  on  the
north  ;  also  green  at  the  north-west,  and  so  on.  The  colored  streaks
were  about  of  a  hand's  breadth  where  they  passed  over  the  equator,
and  were  separated  from  each  other  by  opaque,  indistinct,  transitional
streaks  of  the  same  breadth,  in  which  the  colors  were  blended  to-
gether. She  saw  a  mass  of  light  above,  which  she  also  described  as
resembling  a  tree  with  the  stem  ascending  from  the  pole,  and  the
branches,  separating  each  other,  and  overhanging  on  all  sides.  This
is  the  very  same  condition  as  that  which  Josephine  Zinkel  compared
to  an  overhanging  wheat-sheaf,  and  also  to  a  tassel  turned  the  wrong
way  upwards.  She  perceived  a  similar  appearance,  of  a  red  color,
below,  but  this  was  less  distinct.  Anka  Hetmanck  also  saw  streams
of  light  issuing  from  the  top  and  boitom  ;  that  is,  the  two  poles  of
the  globe,  spreading  out  on  all  sides  like  the  branches  of  a  tree.
Josephine  Zinkel  observed  everything  the  same  on  the  large  as  on  the
small  globe,  with  the  exception  of  the  girdle  around  the  equator,  and
the  filaments  into  which  each  color  was  subdivided  on  the  surface  of
the  smaller  globe.  The  larger  globe  probably  possessed  a  somewhat
less  intense  development  of  the  odic  force ;  hence  these  variations.

588.  We  see  the  statements  of  Josephine  Zinkel  controlled  in  all
essential  particulars  by  those  of  Madame  Bauer  ;  of  which,  indeed,
they  are  merely  an  extended  and  detailed  amplification.  The  state-
ments of  Madame  Bauer,  again,  are  confirmed  by  those  of  Miss  So-
phie Pauer  and  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  and  the  observations  of  Baroness
von  Augustin  and  Mr.  Hochstetter  form  a  basis  for  these.  All  these
sensitives  report  the  perceptions  merely  in  greater  detail  in  proportion
to  the  higher  degree  of  their  power  of  seeing-  odic  phenomena.
Madame  Bauer,  it  is  true,  is  more  sensitive  than  Miss  Zinkel  in  her
ordinary  condition ;  but  the  last  experiments  with  the  latter  were
made  during  the  presence  of  the  catamenia,  at  which  periods  she  not
only  equalled  Madame  Bauer,  but  even  somnambulists  such  as  Misses
Reichel,  Atzmannsdorfer,  &c,  in  sensitiveness  of  vision.  The  reason
why  Madame  Bauer  did  not  report  some  of  the  characters  of  the
globe,  and  described  others  less  perfectly  than  was  done  by  Josephine

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  433

Zinkel  in  the  subsequent  researches,  is  most  probably  to  be  found  in
the  short  time  which  the  former  could  stay  with  me,  and,  on  the
other  hand,  in  the  tranquillity  and  leisure  with  which  I  was  enabled
to  experiment  with  the  latter,  to  repeat  the  investigations  on  different
days,  and  carry  them  out  in  detail.

589.  Such  explanations,  indeed,  are  unnecessary  to  any  one  who
has   attentively  marked  the  course  of  these   experiments;    the   re-
searches, continued   now  for  more  than  three  years,  demonstrate  on
every  page   that  throughout  the  whole  of  some  sixty  persons  with
whom  I  have  pursued  my  inquiries,  the  same  threads  of  physical  laws
run  on,  and  that  every  succeeding  ramification  affords' but  new  testi-
mony to  their  accuracy,  and  new  evidence  of  the  consistency  of  then-
connection.     Thus,  in"  the  most  recent  researches,  we  have  seen  a
yellow  odic  flame  flow  out  from  the  point  of  a  vertical  bar  of  unmag-
netized  iron  (§  525),  but  from   a  magnetic  bar  (§  517)  an  iris  with
horizontally  stratified  colors,  exhibiting  red  a  second  time  over  the
violet.     When  the  upper  end  of  a  vertical  magnetic  bar  had  the  form
of  a  horizontal  line  (§  560),  it  afforded  an  iris  with  the  colors  side  by
side.     Bars  (§517)  displayed  colored  odic  flames  at  both  ends,  cer-
tain  predominant  colors  always  in  contrast,  those  of  one  contrast  in
the  meridian,  those  of  the  other  in  the  parallels.     Quadrangular  iron
surfaces  (§  539  et  seq.)  exhibited  both  the  contrasts  of  colors  at  once,
predominant  colors  being  situated  at  the  four  corners.     It  was  even
possible  to  separate  and  isolate  the  colors  of  the  odic  spectrum  on  one
sino-le  pole;  a  cap  with   two  points  placed  on   the  pole  (§  561)  gave
both  the  contrasts  of  odic  colors,— one  when  placed  on  the  line  of  the
meridian,  the  other  when  arranged  in   the  parallels,  as  a  bar  does  at
its  two  ends  when  placed  in  the'same  lines;  and  a  four-pointed  sum-
mit (§  562)  actually  afforded  all  four  primary  colors  at  once ;  it  dis-
played to  the  eye/simultaneously,  a  double,  crossing,  transversahty,
most  beautifully  defined.     A  circular  surface  (§  565)  acquired  in  the
horizontal  position  all  the  primary  colors  of  the  pole  at  once,  pro-
ducing at  the  same  time  the  intermediate  mixed  shades.     Finally,
proceeding  from  the  circle  to  the  globe  (§  571  et  seq.),  we  arrive  at  a
combination  of  all  these  phenomena,  each  independently  marked,  but
all  collected  on  one  focus  of  activity,  the  surface  ot  the  sphere,  on
which  they  might  be  seen  in  all  their  mutual  relations  in  one  view.
The  arrangement  by  which  these  demonstrations  were  effected  was
different  in  different  cases ;  sometimes  I  made  use  of  the  terrestrial
magnetism,  sometimes  of  a  magnetic  steel  bar,  or  of  an  electro-mag-
net? but  all  came  to  one  and  the  same  ultimate  principle,  as  will  be
readily  understood.     In  this  section  we  have  seen,  in  innumerable
modifications,  that,  (en  resume,)
19

434  ODIO  LIGHT  IN  MODIFIED  EXTERNAL

590.  a.  The  light  which  the  magnet  visibly  emits  in  the  dark,  is
seen,  by  the  sensitive,  of  different  colors  at  different  distances ;  but
always  of  the  same  color  to  each  particular  eye  at  a  fixed  distance.

b.  This  light  not  only  appears  in  a  variety  of  outward  forms,  but
assumes  every  known  kind  of  color.

c.  These  kinds  include  all  the  primitive  colors,  all  their  inter-
mediate shades,  and  white  and  black  mixed  in  every  gradation  of
grey.

d.  In  many  cases  they  appear  singly  to  the  sensitive  eye ;  in  such
instances  they  are  grey  at  both  poles,  or  blue  at  the  southward,  and
red  at  the  southward  pole.

e.  Most  frequently,  however,  and  always  when  of  a  certain  de-
gree of  intensity,  several  occur  together  ;  they  often  all  appear  at
once.

f.  When  they  occur  together,  and  arrange  themselves  freely,  they
take  the  relative  positions  of  the  colors  of  the  rainbow.

g.  The  red  end  of  the  iris  is  then  below,  the  blue  above.

h.  Above  the  blue,  the  intermediate  shade  violet  being  interposed,
a  pure  red  appears  a  second  time,  so  that  the  odic  spectrum,  which
commences  with  red,  running  through  orange,  yellow,  green,  blue,
and  violet-blue,  terminates  in  red  again.

i.  The  phenomena  of  colored  light  are  produced  according  to  the
same  laws  by  the  magnetism  of  steel,  electro-magnetism,  and  terres-
trial magnetism.

k.  The  last,  since  it  is  motionless  relatively  to  us,  impresses  certain
rules  upon  them,  causing  different  results  at  each  particular  point  of
the  earth's  surface.

I.  Terrestrial  magnetism  produces  them  in  unmagnetized  iron
bars.

m.  In  all  the  observed  cases,  and  probably  universally,  the  phe-
nomena of  odic  light  consist  of  an  iris,  except,  perhaps,  in  certain  di-
rections in  which  they  appear  grey.

n.  As  a  rule,  one,  or  more  rarely  two  colors  predominate  in  size
and  intensity  in  this  iris.  In  many  instances  only  this  prevail-
ing color  is  perceived  by  the  sensitive ;  the  others,  being  fainter,
escape  them.

o.  In  general,  they  are  grey  when  directed  towards  the  point  of
the  magnetic  dip ;  blue  towards  the  north,  yellow  above,  red  towards
the  south  ;  they  also  appear  grey  in  the  east,  and  yellow  in  the  west.
Mixed  colors,  such  as  green,  orange,  violet-blue,  &c,  lie  between
them.  This  holds  good  in  all  its  details  in  the  meridianal  circle,  in
the  horizontal,  and  in  that  of  the  parallels.

p.  If  the  magnetism  of  steel  or  electro-magnetism  come  into  con-

CONDITIONS  OF  THE  MAGNET.  435

flict  with  terrestrial  magnetism,  through  unconformable  position,  the
colors  of  the  odic  light  are  weakened  and  changed.  In  the  con-
formable position  they  are  strengthened  and  rendered  more  vivid.
Intermediate  positions  afford  intermediate  tints.

q.  Crystallod,  Biod,  and  Od,  from  any  other  source,  act  upon  the
odic  light  of  another  body  in  the  same  way  as  terrestrial  magnetism,
when  brought  into  conflict  with  it.

r.  A  magnetic  bar,  turned  round  on  its  axis,  and  flaming  at  both
ends,  does  not  exhibit  at  its  poles,  either  in  the  vertical  circle,  in  the
meridian,  or  in  the  parallels,  in  the  horizontal  circle,  or  in  any  position
whatever,  odic  flames  displaying  complementary  colors,  although  they
stand  in  polar  opposition.

s.  But  the  colors  of  the  upper  half  of  the  circle  display  more  bril-
liant light  than  those  of  the  lower.  All  colors  produced  by  the
northward  pole  of  a  magnetic  bar  are  more  brilliant  in  the  half  of  the
circle  turned  towards  the  north,  and  duller  on  that  turned  to  the
south  ;  the  converse  holds,  with  regard  to  the  intensity  of  the  light,
in  the  colors  produced  by  the  southward  pole.

t.  These  colored  odic  flames  may  be  conveyed  from  magnets  on  to
other  conductors  of  Od.

u.  Magnetic  bars,  terminating  in  several  points,  have  the  colors
distributed  among  these,  so  that  each  bears  a  different  color,  cor-
responding to  its  point  of  the  compass,  and  the  iris  of  every  flame
may  be  decomposed,  or  subdivided  into  its  elementary  colors.

v.  A  four-cornered  iron  plate  in  this  manner  shows  both  magnet-
ism and  Od  not  merely  as  longitudinal,  but  transverse,  so  as  to  pre-
sent two  directions,  at  right  angles  to  each  other.

w.  A  circular  surface  of  iron,  and  still  better  and  more  perfectly,  an
iron  sphere  with  a  strong  electro-magnet  passing  through  it,  exhibits
all  these  appearances  combined,  and  possesses,  in  addition,  a  number
of  new  ones,  so  as  finally  to  acquire  every  resemblance  to  the  terres-
trial globe  with  the  polar  lights  playing  over  it.

x.  The  odic  nature  of  the  positively  magnetic  north  pole  of  the
earth,  the  odic  nature  of  the  east  and  of  the  earth's  surface  (the  nadir,
or  that  below,  in  all  cases)  bear  a  certain  character  of  agreement,  in
which  they  stand  in  opposition  to  the  negatively  magnetic  south  pole
of  the  earth,  the  west  and  the  heavens  (the  zenith,  or  that  above).

ODIC    LIGHT,    IN    THE    MORE    RESTRICTED    SENSE    OF    THE    WORD.

591.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  explain  that  odic  light  must  be
carefully  distinguished  from  odic  incandescence,  flames,  streaks,  sparks,
and  smoke,  and  that  the  latter  are  to  be  regarded  as  sources  of  the

436  ODIC  LIGHT.

former.  This  is  involved  in  the  circumstance  that  we  see  all  these
phenomena ;  for,  from  the  structure  of  our  eyes  we  are  only  capable
of  seeing  that  which  emits  light ;  that  is,  whenever  we  see  anything,
that  something  is  emitting  luminous  rays.  I  have  already  clearly
expressed  myself  on  this  subject  in  §  20  of  the  first  Treatise.  The
statement  of  Miss  Reichel  there  reported,  that  she  saw  the  odic  flame
of  the  nine-layer  horse-shoe  magnet  diffuse  light  for  twenty  inches
round  over  the  tube,  as  well  as  that  of  Miss  Sturmann  at  §  55, 1  have
found  confirmed,  in  the  meantime,  by  numerous  fresh  observers.  I
will  only  name  some  of  the  more  important  here.  The  blind  joiner,
Bollmann,  discerned  that  the  flame  of  the  nine-layer  magnet  diffused
a  brightness  to  the  distance  of  an  arm's  length  around,  which  he
compared  to  a  large  light  cloud.  Josephine  Zinkel  saw  a  magnetic
bar  throw  light  upon  the  armature  lying  near  it ;  when  she  placed
her  finger  and  other  objects  between  them,  she  saw  the  light  inter-
cepted and  shadows  thrown  on  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  arma-
ture ;  moreover,  she  saw  a  light  issue  from  two  horse-shoes  which  I
brought  near  together  upon  a  table  (§  405  c),  rendering  the  surface
of  the  table  visible  for  twelve  to  sixteen  inches.  Miss  Atzmanns-
dorfer  saw  not  merely  the  immediate  vicinity,  but  the  whole  room,
lighted  to  a  certain  degree  by  the  five  or  six  feet  high  flame  of  the
nine-layer  magnet,  so  that  she  could  distinguish  all  the  larger  ob-
jects, as  in  twilight.  I  have  already  mentioned,  on  many  occasions,
the  fact  of  several  other  sensitives  seeing  the  ceiling  of  the  room  so
much  illuminated  by  the  odic  flames  and  odic  smoke  of  magnets,  that
they  could  distinguish  the  lines  of  the  painting  on  it ;  in  particular,
Dr.  Nied  and  Mr.  Delhez  saw  a  lighted  space,  as  large  as  a  common
round  table,  upon  the  ceiling  of  the  darkened  chamber,  over  the  nine-
layer  magnet  four  or  five  yards  distant  below.  Professor  Endlicher
and  Baroness  von  Augustin  saw  the  ceiling  illuminated  over  the  same
large  compound  magnet,  and  to  a  still  greater  extent  over  a  strong
electro-magnet.  Baroness  von  Augustin  saw  the  larger  terrelle
throw  large  lights,  more  than  forty  inches  in  diameter,  both  on  the
ceiling  and  the  floor.  Mr.  Hochstetter,  standing  in  front  of  a  nine-
layer  magnet  in  the  electrical  atmosphere,  saw  the  table  illuminated
to  the  diameter  of  forty  inches  by  its  flame  ;  and  he  discerned  a  round
spot  on  the  ceiling  directly  over  it.  Both  the  terrelles  afforded  a
remarkable  case,  and  one  which  is  the  more  worthy  of  notice,  that  it
stands  isolated,  without  connection  with  any  of  my  other  observa-
tions. Besides  throwing  a  patch  of  light  some  twenty-six  inches  in
diameter  upon  the  ceiling,  sufficiently  bright  to  allow  the  painting  to
be  made  out,  the  globes  also  cast  a  separate,  half-moon-shaped  patch
of  light  laterally  to  the  north-east,  or  perhaps  the  north  part  of  the

CONCENTRATION  OF  THE  ODIC  LIGHT.  487

ceiling,  and  this  movable  backwards  and  forwards  with  the  globe.
This  phenomenon  is  one  which  must  lead  to  important  results  when
followed  out.

592.  On  one  occasion,  when  Josephine  Zinkel  was  in  the  dark
chamber,  she  noticed  a  little  spot  of  light,  which  she  detected  at  some
height  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  room.  We  went  towards  it  to
seek  the  cause,  and,  on  coming  near,  it  was  found  that  the  spot  of
light  was  on  the  ceiling,  and  that  a  slender  ray  of  light  was  running
upwards  to  it.  On  searching,  we  found  a  magnetic  bar  twenty  inches
long,  and  about  one  inch  square,  standing  with  its  southward  pole
upwards  on  a  support.  From  this  the  streak  of  light  ran  up  verti-
cally, and  produced  a  spot  of  light  upon  the  ceiling,  the  size  of  which
the  observer  compared  to  that  of  the  bottom  of  a  common  wine-
glass. Whenever  the  magnetic  bar  was  moved,  the  bright  spot  on
the  roof  moved  with  it ;  when  I  interposed  my  hand,  it  immediately
disappeared.  This  demonstrates  the  remarkable  fact  that  the  cause
which  produced  the  odic  light  remained  closely  aggregated,  at  a  dis-
tance of  more  than  four  yards,  without  having  suffered  dispersion,
for  the  cross  section  of  the  magnetic  bar  and  the  spot  of  light  on  the
ceiling  were  pretty  nearly  equal  in  size.

593.  I  turned  a  seven-layer  horse-shoe  magnet  towards  one  of  the
solid  walls  of  the  dark  chamber,  at  the  short  distance  of  two  feet.
Two  spots  were  formed,  side  by  side,  one  dullish,  corresponding  to
the  northward  pole,  the  other  very  luminous  and  reddish,  opposite
the  southward  pole.  According  to  Miss  Zinkel's  statement,  both  the
spots  were  about  the  size  of  an  egg.  I  must  reserve  the  explanation
of  this  interesting  phenomenon  for  a  future  treatise ;  here  I  confine
myself  simply  to  the  fact,  that  the  flaming  phenomena  of  horse-shoe
magnets  throw  light,  which  does  not  suffer  dispersion,  on  the  side
walls  also  of  rooms.

594.  Josephine  Zinkel  observed  a  still  further  stage  of  these  phe-
nomena :  when  I  had  coiled  a  copper  wire  one-twelfth  of  an  inch
thick  round  the  northward  pole  of  the  nine-layer  magnet,  she  saw  a
beautiful  stream  of  odic  flame,  eight  inches  long,  issue  from  the  outer
end  of  the  wire,  so  exceedingly  luminous  that  it  lighted  up  the  floor
at  a  distance  of  more  than  a  yard.  The  experiments  immediately
following  will  confirm  still  more  the  contents  of  this  paragraph.

CONCENTRATION    OF    THE    ODIC    LIGHT.

595.  I  have  since  repeated  on  many  sensitives  the  experiment
described  at  §  18  of  the  first  Treatise,  in  which  I  endeavored  to  con-
centrate the  magnetic  light  by  means  of  a  glass  lens,  in  the  presence

438  CONCENTRATION  OF  THE  ODIC  LIGHT.

of  Miss  Reicbel.  For  this  purpose  I  obtained  from  Paris  a  large
lens  a  foot  in  diameter,  with  a  focal  length  of  about  eleven  inches.
I  had  this  heavy  glass  so  mounted  as  to  be  easily  movable  in  any
direction.  I  laid  down  a  large  nine-layer  horse-shoe  magnet  at  a
distance  of  forty  inches  from  the  lens,  with  both  poles  directed  to-
wards it.  I  could  not  well  place  the  magnet  further  off,  since  I
should  then  have  lost  too  much  of  the  always  sparing  amount  of
light ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  flame  of  the  magnet  was  itself  ten  or
twelve  inches  broad,  and  thus  I  could  at  all  events  reckon,  in  spite  of
the  proximity  of  the  source,  upon  a  sufficient  quantity  of  parallel
rays  of  light  falling  upon  the  lens  to  admit  of  their  being  concentra-
ted into  one  principal  focus.  This  arrangement  was  submitted  in  the
dark  room,  at  different  times,  to  the  sickly  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer,  Ma-
dame Kienesberger,  Miss  Dorfer,  and  Friedrich  Weidlich,  to  the
healthy  Messrs.  Kotschy  and  Tirka,  the  joiner  Klaiber,  and  the  blind
Bollmann  ;  also  to  Miss  Zinkel  and  Wilhelmine  Glaser.  Even  the
blind  man  could  distinguish  light  at  these  different  points  ;  and  when
I  made  him  feel  his  way  to  them,  he  placed  his  hands,  successively,
on  the  magnet,  which  he  stated  to  have  pale  yellowish  light ;  on  the
glass  lens,  which  were  reddish  ;  and,  lastly,  on  the  screen,  which  he
stated  to  be  white,  and  the  smallest  but  strongest  of  the  lights.  With
a  distance  of  from  twelve  to  sixteen  inches  between  the  screen  and
the  lens,  all  the  other  persons  j)erceived  a  round  spot  of  light  upon
the  former  from  four-fifths,  one  and  three-fifths,  to  more  than  three
inches  in  diameter  ;  the  most  accurate  observers  stated  twelve  inches
to  be  the  distance,  between  the  lens  and  screen,  at  which  the  focus
appeared  smallest  and  brightest ;  in  particular,  Madame  Kienesberger,
Wilhelmine  Glaser,  and  Josephine  Zinkel.  At  the  same  time  they
all  saw  the  glass  lens  in  reddish  odic  incandescence,  just  as  they  saw
the  bell  of  the  air-pump  when  the  magnet  was  beneath  it ;  but  the
light  in  the  focus  was  white.  Mr.  Kotschy  and  Miss  Atzmannsdorfer
called  my  attention  especially  to  a  distinct  cone  of  light  which  they
saw  with  its  base  resting  against  the  lens,  the  apex  converging  into
the  focus.  When  I  moved  the  screen  a  little  nearer  or  farther  off
the  lens,  in  the  presence  of  Josephine  Zinkel  and  Wilhelmine  Glaser,
they  saw  the  size  of  the  spot  of  light  upon  the  former  increase  every
time.  Madame  Kienesberger  made  the  same  statement,  with  the
addition  that  every  time  I  removed  the  screen  a  little  further  off,  the
enlarged  image  assumed  the  prismatic  colors,  arranged  in  the  follow-
ing order  :  a  dark  red  spot  in  the  middle,  around  this  a  yellow  ring,
which  was  encompassed  by  a  broader  ring  of  blue.  Wilhelmine
Glaser,  whom  I  allowed  to  move  the  screen  backwards  and  forwards
herself,  in  the  dark,  until  she  hit  the  focus,  sometimes  saw  a   blue

CONCENTRATION  OF  THE  ODIC  LIGHT.  439

ring  appear  outside  the  yellow  circle,  sometimes  a  blue  spot  arose  in
the  middle  of  it.  Josephine  Zinkel  gave  me  similar  accounts  many
times.  Thus,  an  iris  had  begun  to  develope  itself  here  also.  Al-
though I  had  entertained  some  hope  of  being  able  to  observe  the
phenomena  myself  when  the  light  was  concentrated,  I  could  not,  un-
fortunately, perceive  the  slightest  trace.  I  laid  two  magnets,  a  nine-
fold and  a  seven-fold,  one  upon  the  other,  in  the  presence  of  Baroness
von  Augustin,  with  the  view  of  rendering  the  effects  of  the  light
more  powerful.  She  saw  upon  the  screen  a  round  patch  of  light,
about  six  inches  in  diameter.  She  detected  in  the  middle  of  this  an
inner  round  place,  about  an  inch  in  diameter,  much  more  strong! y
illuminated.  This  was  evidently  the  focus  of  the  parallel  rays  that
fell  upon  the  lens.  The  Baroness  was  kind  enough  to  make  an  oil-
painting  representing  this  phenomenon  as  she  saw  it,  thus  making  it
quite  clear  to  every  one.  I  went  through  the  same  experiments,
pretty  nearly  in  the  same  way,  with  two  superimposed  magnets,  in
the  presence  of  Madame  Josephine  Fenzl.  As  she  about  equals  Ba-
roness von  Augustin  in  the  degree  of  sensitiveness,  it  was  interesting  to
obtain  from  them  both  exactly  similar  descriptions  of  the  size  and  in-
tensity of  the  luminous  appearances  on  the  screen.  I  tested  the  sen-
sitive beholders  by  making  various  alterations  in  the  dark,  which  they
could  neither  perceive  nor  understand  ;  I  moved  the  screen  backwards,
forwards,  and  sideways,  pushed  the  magnet  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,
and  turned  the  lens  upwards  and  downwards  ;  in  every  case  they  all
told  me  of  alterations  in  the  position  of  the  focal  image,  correspond-
ing to  those  it  should  suffer  according  to  the  known  laws  of  dioptrics,
and  which  it  would  be  quite  superfluous  to  enumerate  here.  The  fore-
going confirms  the  experiment  with  Miss  Reichel,  formerly  made
known  by  the  testimony  of  four  sick  and  eight  healthy  new  witnesses,
and  I  can  only  desire  that  other  conscientious  observers  will  soon  re-
peat them,  and  establish  the  facts  I  have  recorded.*

*  Towards  the  close  of  the  proceedings  of  the  so-called  Committee  of  the  Vi-
enna Physicians,  a  division  arose  in  its  own  bosom.  Some  of  them,  particularly
Drs.  Wotzel  and  Steiner,  felt  the  uncertainty  of  the  plan  of  investigation,  and  the
want  of  credible  foundation  for  the  conclusions  drawn.  The  latter  took  the  pre-
caution, before  the  publication  of  the  reports  of  the  physicians,  to  inquire  of  some  of
the  sensitive  persons  whom  I  had  experimented  with  as  to  the  methods  I  pursued,
and  their  results.  As  he  received  from  the  most  trustworthy  persons  nothing  but
confirmation  of  the  experience  of  sensations  of  feeling  and  sight  exactly  such  as
I  had  described  in  my  publications,  he  expressed  a  desire  to  witness  some  of  my
experiments  for  his  own  conviction.  Perfectly  ready  to  accede  to  this,  I  invited
him  to  a  trial  with  anew  sensitive  person,  whom  I  had  never  seen  before.  Dr.
Steiner  could  not  but  be  convinced,  from  his  own  inspection,  of  the  accuracy  with
which  my  investigations  were  made ;  and  he  necessarily  felt  a  misgiving  that  the
superficial  labors  of  the  committee  might  be  refuted  with  proofs  by  me,  and  the

440  CONCENTRATION  OF  THE  ODIC  LIGHT.

596.  Another  observation,  made  by  Professor  Endlicher,  also  refers
here.  Commonly  wearing  spectacles,  he  kept  them  on  in  the  dark
chamber.  As  I  was  showing  him  magnets,  which  he  did  not  see  so
distinctly  as  I  expected  from  what  I  knew  of  the  degree  of  his  sen-
sitiveness, it  struck  Dr.  Fenzl,  who  was  present,  that  the  spectacles
might  interfere.  Professor  Endlicher  removed  them.  He  imme-
diately saw  the  emanations  of  light  from  the  magnets  very  distinctly,
and  just  as  I  had  presupposed  from  his  sensitive  excitability.  The
glasses  had  thus  certainly  reflected  one  portion  of  the  light,  and  ab-
sorbed another,  and  what  remained  was  so  small  a  residuum  that
there  was  scarcely  enough  to  be  perceived  even  faintly  by  the  sensi-
tive eye,  while  the  collective  amount  given  out  by  the  magnet  was
very  clearly  visible,  and  displayed  a  flame  four  inches  long.

597.  When  I  had  thus  established  that  the  magnetic  light  pene-
trates glass,  and,  in  its  passage,  undergoes  absorption,  reflection,  and
refraction,  uniform  with  those  of  common  light,  it  remained  to  test  the
first  two  by  reflecting  surfaces,  and  compare  their  behavior  with  that
of  ordinary  light.  It  was  quite  possible  that  odic  light  might  be  ab-
sorbed, and  be  incapable  of  producing  catoptric  phenomena,  in  so  far,
at  least,  that  the  Od,  from  which  it  is  derived,  is  readily  absorbed  by
all  bodies.

598.  I  made  use  of  a  common  quicksilvered  mirror  in  my  experi-
ments in  this  direction.  I  placed  one  in  front  of  Miss  Atzmannsdor-
fer's  bed,  and  opposite  to  it,  in  a  suitable  position,  a  nine-layer  magnet,

participators  in  the  affair  be  sooner  or  later  exposed.  This  determined  him  to
address  the  meeting  of  the  Medical  Society  on  the  16th  of  November,  1846,
urgently  opposing  the  publication  of  the  report  of  the  committee  against  Miss
Reichel,  and  indirectly  against  me.  In  his  address,  which  appeared  publicly  in
the  printed  report  of  that  day's  sitting,  he  says,  among  other  things,  "  from  such
results "  (as  those  obtained  by  the  labors  of  the  committee)  no  absolute  proofs
against  the  matter  could  be  drawn.  For  his  own  part,  he  was  compelled  to  de-
clare that  opportunity  had  been  afforded  him  of  seeing  Baron  von  Reichenbach
experiment  with  persons  for  whose  honor,  truthfulness,  and  impartiality,  he  could
vouch  as  for  his  own,  and  that  he  had  been  astonished  at  the  agreement  of  the
statements  of  these  with  the  assertions  contained  in  Baron  von  Reichenbach's
pamphlets.  And  other  persons,  well  known  to  him,  and  of  the  greatest  respecta-
bility,had  assured  him  that  they  had  found  Reichenbach's  experiments  confirmed  in
their  own  persons."  He  therefore  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  the  report  of  the  com-
mittee would  only  compromise  the  Society,  and  that  it  would  be  much  better  not
to  publish  it  at  all,  or  at  all  events  only  within  the  circle  of  their  own  members,
which  limits,  as  a  private  matter,  it  should  not  be  allowed  to  pass.  A  violent
discussion  arose  on  the  subject  on  the  general  meeting  of  the  Society,  and  it  was
decided  by  a  large  majority  that  the  report  of  the  committee  should  not  be  pub-
lished in  the  name  of  the  Society.  How  far  this  resolution  was  carried  out  by  the
officers  of  the  Society,  is  seen  on  looking  at  the  title-page  of  the  Part  of  the  Jour-
nal in  which  the  report  appeared. — Anther's  Note.

CONCENTRATION   OF  THE  ODIC  LIGHT.  441

standing  with  its  poles  upright.  She  saw  in  the  mirror  the  image  of
the  odic  incandescence  of  the  metal,  but  she  did  not  discern  odic
flame,  not  even  a  trace,  during  careful  search  on  different  dark  nights.
I  repeated  the  same  experiment  a  year  after  with  Miss  Zinkel ;  she
also  saw  the  odic  incandescence  of  the  horse-shoe  reflected  from  the
mirror,  but  could  not  distinguish  a  flame,  or  any  other  kind  of  ema-
nation, from  the  magnet.  The  light  of  the  flame  of  the  nine-layer
magnet  was  therefore  so  weak  that  after  the  usual  absorption  by  the
glass  there  did  not  remain  enough  for  reflexion  to  be  detected  by
these  two  sensitives  in  their  conditions  at  those  periods.

599.  I  had  given  up  hope  of  finding  these  emanations  detected  in
the  rays  reflected  from  a  mirror,  when,  in  an  experiment  for  confir-
mation, made  some  time  after  with  Wilhelmine  Glaser,  she  not  only
corroborated  the  statements  of  seeing  the  reflection  of  the  odic  in-
candescence, but  declared  she  saw  a  faint  appearance  of  the  flame  in
the  mirror ;  weak,  it  is  true,  but  yet  a  real  representation.  I  then
repeated  the  experiment  with  Josephine  Zinkel  during  the  catamenia.
She  also  now  saw  a  reflexion  of  the  magnetic  flames  very  distinctly,
although  unable  to  detect  it  before.  In  the  last  place,  I  tested  it  with
the  very  sensitive  eyes  of  Madame  Caäcilie  Bauer.  She  immediately
saw  a  number  of  incandescent  objects  in  the  mirror  with  tolerable
clearness.  She  perceived  the  odic  flame  of  magnets  sufficiently  well
to  distinguish  pretty  accurately  between  the  blue  and  red  of  the  two
poles.  But  she  declared  that  the  image  in  the  mirror  was  far  duller
and  fainter  than  the  direct  light  of  the  flame.  In  the  original  flames
of  the  two  poles  of  a  seven-layer  horse-shoe,  she  could  detect  even  a
portion  of  an  iris,  yellow  and  violet,  as  well  as  some  smoke  ;  they  were
certainly  weak,  but  in  the  reflected  image  they  had  vanished  altoge-
ther from  her  eyes.

600.  In  particular  cases,  odic  light  is  also  capable  of  penetrating
semi-transparent  bodies.  This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  it  is  still  de-
tected in  the  dark  through  closed  eyelids.  I  owe  this  observation  to
Madame  Josephine  Fenzl,  who  first  observed  that  she  could  to  a  cer-
tain extent  perceive  the  odic  luminosity  in  the  dark  chamber,  even
wdien  she  had  closed  her  eyes.  I  repeated  the  experiment  with  Mad-
ame Caecilie  Bauer  and  Misses  Zinkel  and  Atzmannsdorfer.  They  all
perceived  odic  flame  and  incandescence  with  closed  eyes.  It  is  true
they  lost  the  form  and  shape  of  objects,  but  they  could  detect  the
presence  of  any  body  which  emitted  odic  light,  without  doubt,  when
it  was  brought  near  them.  They  could  point  out  the  direction  from
which  the  brightness  came,  could  state  whether  it  was  derived  from
one  or  several   detached  points,  and   they  perceived  distinctly  odic

19*

442  THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.

incandescence  as  well  as  flame ;  not,  indeed,  distinguishing  the  two,
but  recognising  the  character  of  emitting  light  common  to  both.

601.  The  eyelid,  however,  is  very  transparent.  When  a  person  is
in.  the  dark,  with  the  eyes  closed,  and  a  lighted  candle  is  brought
near,  the  approach  of  the  light  is  instantly  and  very  strongly  per-
ceived ;  indeed,  this  transparency  is  so  great,  that  no  one  can  bear  to
keep  even  the  closed  eyes  turned  towards  the  brightly  shining  sun.
The  odic  light,  then,  weak  as  it  is,  is  still  strong  enough  to  penetrate
through  closed  eyelids,  and  become  visible  to  the  sensitive.  We  shall
hereafter  find  that  this  circumstance,  by  itself  insignificant,  becomes
of  some  importance  when  it  comes  to  be  applied  to  the  elucidation
of  other  rather  striking  phenomena  of  sensitiveness.

THE    NORTHERN    LIGHT.

602.  And  now  I  must  beg  the  reader  to  cast  a  retrospective  glance
back  to  §  21  of  the  first  of  these  treatises  ;  thus  to  the  very  begin-
ning of  my  labors.  I  already  expressed  the  opinion  there.,  at  a  time
when  I  was  in  possession  of  far  less  experience  of  the  odic  light,  that
it  was  the  same  thing  which,  on  a  large  scale,  constitutes  the  north-
em  light,  and  polar  light  generally.  In  the  long  interval  that  has
elapsed,  which  I  have  uninterruptedly  devoted  to  the  study  of  this
subject,  this  opinion  has  not  merely  remained  unshaken,  but  has  had
confirmation  and  support  forced  upon  it  on  every  side.  The  obser-
vations which  I  have  made  on  the  behavior  of  the  odic  light  under
the  air-pump,  its  development  of  colors,  the  motions  which  the  odic
light  may  be  made  to  exhibit  at  will,  the  discovery  that  it  is  visible
to  great  numbers  of  perfectly  healthy  persons, — these  things  are  all
weighty  considerations,  not,  in  any  case,  opposed  to  my  original  view,
but  evidently  new  and  powerful  supports  to  it.  Sir  Humphry  Davy's
idea,  that  the  northern  light  is  not  so  much  a  magnetic  as  an  electri-
cal phenomenon,  a  tranquil  and  slow  neutralization  of  the  electricity
of  the  air  at  great  heights,  when  the  air,  much  rarefied,  taking  the
place  of  the  rapid  stormy  discharges  of  the  thunderstorms  occurring
at  less  altitude  in  our  latitudes,  is  mainly  opposed  by  the  following-
facts  :  that  in  the  temperate  zone  also,  as  well  as  in  the  arctic,  the
meteoric  changes  of  rain  and  snow  proceed  without  thunderstorms
through  the  whole  winter,  and  yet  no  phenomenon  resembling  the
polar  light  is  produced  by  an  accumulation  of  the  electricity  of  the
air  ;  that  from  the'numerous  recorded  observations  made  since  Davy's
time,  it  is  found  that  the  polar  lights  do  not  appear  more  frequently
in  winter  than  in  summer ;  that  so  universal  an  accumulation  of
electricity  in  the  atmosphere  as  would  be  necessary  to  half  fill  often

THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.  44$

one  quarter  of  the  globe  with  electric  light,  through  half  the  night,
is,  from  the  rest  of  our  experience  of  the  laws  of  electricity,  inconceiv-
able under  the  constant  movement  existing  in  the  air  ;  lastly,  that
there  is  no  apparent  reason  why  such  an  accumulation  of  electrified
air,  supposing  it  to  exist,  should  occur  in  preference  at  the  magnetic
poles.  Davy's  hypothesis  was  favorably  received  as  an  ingenJou
idea,  but  has  not  proved  to  have  foundation  in  the  settled  laws  of  sci-
ence :  it  docs  not  give  sufficient  account  of  the  relations  of  cause  and
effect.  But  now  that  we  know  from  our  more  recent  researches  that
flaming  light  exists  over  the  poles  of  the  magnet,  which  are  larger
than  magnets  themselves ;  since  we  have  seen  that  this  flaming  ap-
pearance occurs  mobile,  undulating,  frequently  serpentine,  like  rolls
of  riband  blown  about  bg  the  tvind  ;  often  varying  in  size  from  larger
to  smaller,  shooting  out  rays,  scintillating,  variegated  in  color,  and
also  in  the  form  of  vapor ;  since  we  perceive  it  to  be  capable  of
being  made  to  flare  backwards  and  forwards  by  our  breath; —
finally,  when  we  now  hear,  that  it  increases  in  vast  proportions
in  size,  as  well  as  intensity  and  brilliancy  of  light,  in  ratified  air  ;
when  we  see  how  the  play  of  color  of  the  rainbow  follows  it  every
step,  &c., — there  is  actually  scarcely  a  single  essential  character  of
distinction  between  magnetic  odic  light  and  the  northern  light,
left,  for  it  would  be  from  the  difference  of  intensity  that  the  latter
is  visible  to  ordinary  eyes,  while  the  former  can  only  be  seen  by
the  sensitive.  The  undulations  and  serpentine  movements  some-
times exhibited  by  the  northern  light  are  thus  explained  simply  by
the  motion  of  the  wind,  which  drives  the  odic  flames  about  over  one
another,  in  the  more  or  less  rarified  higher  regions  of  the  atmosphere,
as  our  breath  does  the  odic  flame  over  the  poles  of  magnets  ;  the
constant  change  by  increase  and  decrease  of  size,  correspond  exactly
with  the  unsteadiness  which  the  magnitude  of  the  flame  exhibits  in
our  laboratories  ;  and  the  vast  flames  at  great  and  undetermined  al-
titudes which  have  been  observed  by  particular  travellers  above  the
cirrus  or  most  elevated  clouds  (Lämmerwolken),  agree  most  beauti-
fully with  our  observations  under  the  air-pump  (§  481),  where  the
odic  light  increased  remarkably  in  size  and  intensity  of  light  under
the  diminished  pressure  of  half  an  atmosphere.  And  the  equally
well-attested  observations  of  other  travellers,  who  have  observed
abundance  of  auroras  with  the  most  scrupulous  attention  in  the  polar
regions,  where  the  altitudes  appear  to  be  very  much  less,  and  the
light  often  in  the  form  of  luminous  clouds,  harmonize  perfectly  with
the  nature  of  the  magnetic  light.  In  the  foregoing  researches,  we
have  frequently  met  with  the  odic  luminous  vapor,  flame-like  smoke,
or  whatever  we  may  please  to  call  this  appearance.     It  also  increased

4-14  THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.

under  the  air-pump.  This  produces  the  luminous  cloud  like  phe-
nomena, always  ascending  from  below  and  completing  the  parallel
between  odic  light  and  the  northern  light  or  aurora.  The  vaporous,
cloud-like,  luminous  nature  of  the  polar  lights  has  been  accounted  for
by  supposing  the  appearance  to  be  produced  by  illuminated  clouds.
These  may  have  occurred  in  many  cases ;  but  it  is  clear,  from  my
investigations,  that  there  is  no  necessity  for  such  clouds,  and  that  ac-
cumulations of  Od  develope  independently  in  the  air  smoke-like,
that  is,  cloud-like  luminous  appearances,  which  in  some  of  my  exper-
iments illuminated  the  whole  room  up  to  the  ceiling.  The  higher
the  odic  emanations  of  the  terrestrial  magnetic  poles  ascend  in  or
above  the  atmosphere,  the  larger,  more  luminous,  and  brilliant  must
be  the  emissions  that  unfold  themselves,  from  the  same  cause  which
makes  them  increase  so  greatly  under  the  air-pump,  even  with  mode-
rate rarefaction  of  the  air.  As  healthy  persons  who  are  not  sensitive
perceive  nothing  of  the  motions  of  magnetism  and  Od,  it  is  easy  to
explain  why  travellers  could  perceive  no  unusual  sensations,  even  at
the  very  poles  of  the  earth.  And  the  often-mentioned  observation,
that  the  aurora  has  been  seen  to  the  south  in  high  latitudes,  is  no
longer  puzzling ;  the  odic  light,  wherever  developed,  shines  from  its
localities  with  equal  strength  in  every  direction.

603.  Finally,  looking  at  the  rich  combination  of  odic  luminous
phenomena  displayed  by  the  iron  globe  (§  571,  et  seq.),  we  recognise
in  it  a  kind  of  terrelle,  or  miniature  earth,  exhibiting  artificial  north-
ern and  southern  lights  on  a  small  scale.  As  the  earth  is  a  large
magnet,  my  globe,  by  reason  of  the  electro-magnet  passing  through
its  axis,  is  a  magnet  of  the  same  form  in  miniature.  Their  poles
emit,  in  the  former  on  a  great  scale,  in  the  latter  on  a  small,  delicate
light  visible  only  in  the  darkness  of  night.  High  above  both  poles  it
turns  over  and  flows  on  all  sides  toioards  the  tropical  zones,  broken
up  into  filaments  and  rays  on  the  great  terrestrial  globe  as  on  the
little  terrelle  ;  iridescent  with  all  the  prismatic  colors,  on  the  former
as  upon  the  latter.  If  we  may  venture  to  add,  that  the  difference  of
the  intensity  of  light  in  the  two  eases  may  probably  be  proportionate,
in  some  degree,  to  the  difference  of  size  of  the  two  globes,  in  which
the  mass,  of  course,  increases  as  the  cube  of  the  diameter,  while  the
surface  only  enlarges  as  the  square  of  the  same,  whereby,  consequent-
ly, the  odic  light,  emitted  by  the  mass  but  only  poured  over  the
surface,  must  become  more  concentrated  on  the  earth,  in  a  degree
corresponding  to  this  difference  of  size,  than  at  the  poles  of  the  ter-
relle,— the  greater  luminosity  of  the  aurora,  which  surpasses  the  light
of  the  terrelle,  under  common  pressures  of  the  atmosphere,  becomes
in  some  measure  incomprehensible.     A  second  cause  of  the  difference

THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.  445

of  intensity  of  the  two  polar  lights,  is  to  be  sought  in  the  odic  influence
exercised  bij  the  sun  and  moon  upon  the  earth.  In  the  fourth  Trea-
tise (§  95  et  seq.  and  §  118  et  seq.)  I  gave  an  account  of  some  experi-
ments which  demonstrated  that  the  two  heavenly  bodies  strongly
charge  with  Od  all  bodies  exposed  to  their  rays.  The  surface  of  the
earth,  on  which  the)7  constantly  shine,  receives  accordingly  an  unin-
terrupted supply  of  Od,  in  the  same  way  as  of  light  and  heat.  Thus
it  is  not  merely  the  inherent  Od,  proper  to  the  earth  and  its  magnet-
ism, that  appears  concentrated  at  its  poles,  but  this  is  continually
receiving  accessions  through  the  vast  contributions  poured  out  upon
the  earth  by  the  sun  and  moon.  In  accordance  with  their  own  laws,
when  these  reach  the  surface  of  the  earth  they  not  only  flow  to  the
regions  which  possess  a  weaker  charge,  but  at  once  become  polarized,
that  is  to  say,  the  current  goes  towards  the  terrestrial  poles,  and  in-
creases the  intensity  of  the  odic  phenomena  there.  The  want  of  uni-
formity in  the  condition  of  the  earth's  surface,  according  as  it  is  or  is
not  covered  with  clouds,  since  in  the  former  case  the  odic  radiations
are  absorbed  by  the  atmosphere,  while  in  the  latter  they  reach  the
solid  substance  of  the  globe, — moreover,  the  differences  of  position  of
the  sun  and  moon  in  relation  to  the  earth,  the  co-operation  or  antag-
onism of  these, — all  these  things  necessarily  cause  irregularities  in  the
appearance  of  the  northern  light,  as  they  do  in  the  weather  gene-
rally ;  and  this  explains  the  differences  between  the  intensity  of  the
odic  light  of  the  terrelle  and  that  of  the  terrestrial  poles,  and  to  a
certain  extent  shows  their  necessity.

604.  If  it  should  be  objected  that  there  is  no  magnet  passing
through  the  e.arth  as  through  my  terrelle,  I  think  I  can  give  this  a
sufficient  answer ;  for  it  does  not  set  aside  the  demonstrated  and  es-
tablished fact  that  the  earth  really  possesses  magnetic  poles,  whether
these  depend  on  the  surface  and  its  irradiation  by  the  sun,  as  the
modern  physicists  think  there  is  reason  to  assume,  or  are  derived  from
the  internal  conditions  of  the  entire  planet.  In  regard  to  the  latter
supposition,  however,  there  is  a  point  in  its  favor,  which,  so  far  as  I
know,  has  not  yet  been  taken  account  of  in  physics  :  I  shall  take  the
liberty  to  explain  it  here.  It  is  now  pretty  generally  agreed  that
meteorites  are  of  planetary  origin,  that  they  are  minute  stars,  which
have  originated  under  the  same  laws,  and  follow  their  paths  around
the  sun  in  the  same  way  as  the  larger  and  smaller  planets.  And  in
reality  the  difference  is  not  much  greater  between  the  vast  Jupiter
and  the  little  Vesta  or  Astraea,  which  are  scarcely  larger  than  the
Island  of  Ceylon,  than  between  an  asteroid  such  as  these  and  the
enormous  meteorites  lying  in  Senegal,  stated  to  form  small  mountains
of  iron.     And  from  these,  again,  through  those  of  Bahia,  Durango,

446  THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.

and  Zacatecas,  which  are  masses  of  iron  weighing  many  tons,  to  our
ordinary  meteorites  of  a  few  pounds,  there  is  every  step  of  gradation.
Thus,  from  Jupiter  down  to  the  smallest  meteorite,  we  have  an  unin-
terrupted series,  so  that  apparently  size  alone  affords  distinction  be-
tween a  planet  and  a  meteoric  stone.  If  this  be  admitted,  and,
indeed,  it  cannot  now  be  avoided,  the  structure  of  the  meteorite
places  in  our  hands  a  key  of  extreme  value,  opening  the  way  to  the
examination  and  study  of  the  probable  internal  condition  of  the  earth.
The  law  which  gave  the  rule  for  the  composition  of  the  meteorite,
gave  it.  consequently,  for  the  construction  of  our  globe.  Now,  me-
teorites are  composed  chiefly  either  of  metallic  masses,  mostly  iron
with  a  portion  of  nickel,  or  of  stony  masses,  almost  always  containing
a  great  intermixture  of  this  metallic  nickeliferous  iron.  This  is  uni-
versally known  ;  but  it  is  not  known — and  this  is  of  essential  im-
portance here — that  in  the  majority  of  meteoric  stones  the  abundant
proportion  of  iron  does  not  occur  in  irregular,  accidental,  and  isolated
fragments,  but  the  form  of  a  connected  cellular  network,  traversing
the  whole  mass.  This  may  be  seen  with  the  naked  eye  in  the  me-
teorites of  Krasnoyarsk,  of  Atacama,  in  the  original  mass  of  iron  at
Bittburg,  and  in  the  meteorites  from  unknown  localities,  resembling
these,  in  the  collection  at  Grotha,  &c.  And  in  such  also  as  are  more
minutely  intermixed,  like  those  from  Smolensk,  Seres,  Blansko,  Tabor,
Barbotan,  &c,  and  have  the  same  structure,  the  stony  portion  may
be  extracted,  leaving  a  connected  cellular  network  of  iron.  The  spe-
cific gravity  of  these  stones  is  from  three  to  four  and  five.  That  of
the  earth,  as  is  well  known,  is  about  4-7,  and  all  this  renders  it
probable  that  it  is  constructed  internally  like  a  meteorite,  of  a  con-
geries of  iron  cells,  that  its  entire  stony  mass  is  interpenetrated  by
cellular  metallic  iron,  exactly  as  in  the  majority  of  meteoric  stones.
And  in  this  iron  would  the  magnetism  of  the  earth  dwell.  The  ir-
regularity of  its  distribution,  as  seen  in  every  meteoric  stone,  and
therefore  to  be  assumed  in  the  earth,  renders  the  four-fold  polarity
of  the  terrestrial  globe  readily  comprehensible.

605.  This  view  of  the  constitution  of  our  planet,  of  which  geolo-
gists have  not  yet  made  any  use,  but  which,  as  is  seen,  rests  on  a
foundation  of  facts  in  natural  history,  is  not  contradictory  to  the  now
generally  adopted  hypothesis,  that  strata  of  molten  matter  in  igneous
fusion  may  still  exist  beneath  the  lowest  of  our  geological  formations.
That  such  strata  do  exist  is  as  certain  as  that  meteorites  arrive  at  the
surface  of  our  earth,  still  hot  and  coated  with  recently-molten  clay.
The  remarkable  meteorite  of  Clairborn,  Alabama,  was  enveloped  by  a
crust  of  slag  one-fifth  to  one-third  of  an  inch  thick,  when  I  received
it.     I  received  a  mass  of  meteoric  iron  from  Caryfort,  Decalb  County,

THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.  447

U.  S.,  with  a  crust  one-sixth  of  an  inch  thick.  I  possess  aerolites
from  Nanjemoy,  Maryland,  covered  in  places  with  a  porous  slag  one-
seventh  of  an  inch  thick.  But  there  is  a  wide  interval  between  such
a  coating,  and  a  melting  and  a  state  of  igneous  fusion  throughout
the  entire  mass.  The  earth  has  really  an  incandescent  or  still  fluid
coating  some  inches  thick,  analogous  to  the  slag  crust  of  the  meteor-
ites ;  the  abuudant  proofs  are  too  strong  and  too  consistent  to  admit
of  a  doubt  of  it ;  but  it  by  no  means  follows  from  this,  that  it  must
be  in  a  state  of  incandescent  fusion  throughout  its  whole  mass,  as  is
commonly  much  too  hastily  assumed.  It  is  beyond  all  comparison
more  probable  that  its  internal  structure  is  like  that  of  a  meteorite,
and,  indeed,  of  a  meteoric  stone  containing  iron,  perhaps  of  several
united  together,  since  we  see  new  ones  becoming  united  to  it  daily
before  our  eyes.

606.  Certain  physicists,  in  particular  Mr.  Faraday,  have  asserted
that  it  is  impossible  for  the  earth  to  be  magnetic  throughout  its
mass,  if  it  be  in  igneous  fusion  in  its  interior,  as  we  know  from  ex-
periment that  great  heat  is  incompatible  with  the  presence  of  mag-
netism  in  bodies.  This  objection  is  only  important  so  long  as  we
regard  the  whole  contents  of  the  planet  as  a  lava.  There  is  not  only
no  strict  reason  for  so  doing,  but  a  number  of  circumstances  are  di-
rectly opposed  to  it,  none  of  which  I  shall  bring  forward  here,  except
those  I  have  just  developed  from  the  analogy  with  meteors.  All
these  are  melted  merely  on  the  surface,  and  in  their  interior  consist
of  crystalline  structures  produced  by  a  force  which  can  be  proved  to
have  operated  wholly  and  exclusively  in  the  cold.  Meteorites  have
been  placed  in  circumstances  in  which  excessive  heat  has  acted  upon
them  externally,  melted  their  surface,  and  produced  lava  upon  it,  but
this  only  for  a  short  period,  sufficient  to  melt  down  but  a  very
limited  portion  of  the  surface.  The  earth  has  also  once  passed
through  such  a  period,  in  the  same  way,  only  a  crust  of  the  substance
composing  it  could  be  melted,  now  represented  by  that  incandescent
thud  stratum  beneath  our  cooled  surface,  by  which  geologists  satis-
factorily explain  our  volcanoes,  our  basalts,  trachytes,  porphyries,  and
the  heat  increasing  with  the  depth  in  every  shaft  and  boring  ;  the
hypothetical  basis  on  which  all  this  rests  having  received  general  re-
cognition. But  such  a  mere  crust  of  glowing  matter,  even  if  miles
thick,  cannot  annihilate  or  even  essentially  affect  the  operations  of
the  magnetism  of  the  enormous  cold,  iron-traversed,  globular  mass
more  than  8000  miles  thick.

These  considerations,  therefore,  go  to  prove  that  the  terrestrial
globe  is  traversed  by  a  magnet  just  in  the  way  I  have,  in  imitation,
placed  one  in  the  terrelle,  and  thereby  sought  to  bring  the  latter  into

448  THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.

condition,  which  should  to  a  certain  extent  resemble  those  of  the
earth.

607.  But  this  iron,  assumed,  as  it  must  be,  to  be  interwoven
throuo-h  the  globe,  is  also  crystallized  throughout.  When  meteoric
stones"  are  ground  and  polished,  and  then  very  slowly  corroded  by
diluted  nitric  acid,  crystalline  characters,  which  become  distinctly  visi-
ble under  the  microscope,  make  their  appearance  in  all  the  portions
of  iron,  however  small  they  may  be.  There  have  been  demonstrated
to  be  markings  identical  with  those  called  Widmanstetten's  figures,
on  masses  of  meteoric  iron,  and  they  are  nothing  else  than  crystalline
structures  of  the  metallic  constituents.  I  have  investigated  a  great
many  in  my  own  collection,  and  have  found  they  contained  metallic
iron,  everywhere  crystallized,  exactly  in  like  manner,  and  according
to  the  same  laws  and  figures,  as  in  the  large  masses  of  iron.  I  have
dug  out  of  the  meteoric  stones  of  Blansko  little  particles  of  iron,
which,  when  polished  and  corroded,  small  as  they  were,  exhibited
not  only  planes  of  cleavage,  but  also  pyrites  enclosed  in  the  iron,  ex-
actly like  the  large  masses  of  meteoric  iron.  The  masses  of  meteoric
metal,  therefore,  have  magnetic  and  odic  polarity  from  two  causes  :
the  one  that  they  partially  consist  of  a  mass  of  iron  which  is  continu-
ous throughout,  although  cellular ;  the  other,  that  this  metallic  mass
is  crystallized,  perhaps  composed  of  one  single  vast  crystal,  irregu-
larly formed,  certainly,  on  the  surface,  but  cohering  intimately  ac-
cording to  the  laws  of  crystallization.  But  we  know,  from  §  55  of
my  second  treatise,  that  all  crystals  unceasingly  emit  concentrated
odic  light  from  their  poles.  The  contained  iron,  therefore,  and  crys-
tallization, act  in  conjunction  to  produce  magnetic  odic  poles  upon
the  terrestrial  globe,  and  they  afford  the  grounds  which  render  it
probable,  in  my  eyes,  that  the  magnetism  and  Od  of  the  earth  are  not
simply  external  and  due  to  the  sun's  rays,  but  are  in  great  part,  if  not
chiefly,  to  be  ascribed  to  internal  causes  ;  in  following  out  which,  the
otherwise  singular  fact  that  the  astronomical  and  magnetic  poles  of
the  earth  do  not  coincide,— that  we  have,  not  two,  but  four,  magnetic
terrestrial  poles,  &c.,— loses  its  strangeness,  and:  becomes  readily  ex-
plicable. Thus  the  polar  light  of  the  terrestrial  globe,  like  the  odic
luminous  phenomena  of  my  terrelle,  may,  on  magnetic  and  odic
grounds,  be  confidently  attributed  for  the  most  part  to  internal  ac-
tion. We  may  regard  both  as  diametrically  traversed  by  actively
magnetic  and  odic  axes.  The  analogy  between  the  entire  planet  and
the^miniature  artificial  imitation  of  it,  is,  therefore,  quite  complete  on
this  side  of  the  question.

608.  An  old  observation  made  in  Sweden  by  Wilke  may  also  de-
serve to  be  recalled  to  recollection,— that   the  appearance  and  the

THE  NORTHERN  LIGHT.  449

movements  of  the  northern  lights  are  always  preceded  by  disturbances
of  the  magnetic  needle*  This,  as  is  seen,  agrees  most  exactly  with
the  odic  phenomena :  the  latter  always  occur  later  and  more  tardily
than  the  magnetic  and  electrical  movements  complicated  with  them,
an  observable  pause  always  intervening  before  the  commencement  of
the  odic  effects.  Thus  the  same  things  which  I  have  made  out  as
above  described,  in  the  investigations  in  my  dark  chamber,  were  ob-
served by  others  many  years  ago  in  the  open  sky.

609.  Finally,  I  have  to  refer  to  Wargentin's  observation  that  the
northern  lights  weaken  the  magnetic  needle.  This  is  now  explained
without  difficulty.  The  northern  light  is  an  odic  magnetic  emana-
tion, material  or  immaterial,  whichever  we  please  to  assume.  When
it  issues  from  the  north  pole  it  is  of  positive  magnetic  nature.  But
the  northward  pole  of  the  needle  is  negative.  When  +M  passes
over  the  needle  from  north  to  south,  as  the  northern  light  does,  it
amounts  to  the  same  thing  as  if  the  southward  pole  of  a  very  weak
magnetic  bar  were  passing  uninterruptedly  over  the  needle  from
north  to  south,  for  a  length  of  time  equal  to  the  duration  of  the
northern  light.  The  effect  of  this  must  be  like  that  of  a  weak  ordi-
nary rubbing;  and  every  one  knows  that  a  needle  loses  strength,  or,
as  Wargentin  expresses  it,  becomes  dulled,  when  so  treated,  if  rubbed
in  a  direction  contrary  to  its  polarity.  The  northern  light  makes,
over  the  needle,  a  weak  but  not  the  less  real  reversed  pass,  which,
from  its  nature,  tends  to  carry  the  south  polarity  of  the  north  point
of  the  needle  to  its  south  end, — that  is,  to  reverse  it;  and,  since  it
does  not  possess  intensity  sufficient  for  this,  it  merely  weakens  the
needle,  thus  dulls  it,  and  so,  as  Wargentin  adds,  renders  it  less  sen-
sitive to  subsequent  northern  lights.

G10.  Thus  everything,  without  exception,  that  has  been  made  out,
in  the  endeavor  to  extend  our  knowledge  of  Od,  has  contributed  to
increase  the  harmony  with  which  all  the  facts  agree  to  mark  the
northern  light  as  an  enormous  manifestation  of  magnetic  odic  fame,
odic  vapor,  and  odic  light ;  a  miniature  representation  of  which  was
afforded  by  the  terrelle.

*  Geliler's  physisch- Wörterbuch  (Physiological  Dictionary),  i.  161.

INDEX.

Acid,  tartaric,  experiment  with,  134.

sulphuric,  165,  138,  155.
Active  bodies,  54.
Air,  rarefaction  of  the,  381-2.
Aerolites,  596.
Amanuensis,  141.
Animal  kingdom,  199.

organs,  especially  the  human  hands,  333,  356.
note  on,  by  Dr.  Ashburner,  333 — 356.
Arsenic,  155.
Ashburner's  (Dr.)  note  on  crystallic  force,  72.

secular  force  of  crystals,  80.
sensitive,  110.

poisonous  influence  of  graveyards,  144.
animal  organs,  especially  the  human  hands,  334.
luminous  phenomena  of  the  poles,  20.
magnetic  light,  37.
cataleptic  unconsciousness,  49.
theory  of  sleep,  50.
crystal  and  magnet,  51.
odized  water,  387.
iris  or  prismatic,  391-2.
the  od  positive,  207.
observation  on  la  baguette  divinatoire,  or  divining  rod,  81,  91.
case  of  a  somnambulist,  31.
experiment  by  will,  38.
experiments  on  luminosity,  24.
with  crystals,  43.
a  magnet,  44.
Atzmannsdorfer  (Miss),  effect  of  the  magnet  on,  100.

luminous  phenomena  on,  114,  160.
Aurora  borealis,  the,  20.

Baguette  divinatoire,  81.

Baquet,  power  of  the,  139.

Baumgartner's  test  with  magnet,  44.

Bicarbonate  of  soda,  experiments  with,  134.

Billing's  amanuensis,  141.

Biod,  578.

Biot,  researches  on  terrestrial  magnetism,  63.

Bleton's  divining  rod,  86 — 87.

Bodies,  inactive,  list  of,  53.

active,  list  of,  54.
Borax,  experiments  with,  136.

INDEX.  451

Caffeine,  166.

Cataleptic,  attack  of,  Miss  Nowotny,  22.

Dr.  Ashbumer's  note  on,  unconsciousness,  49.
Chemical  force,  133,  141.

action,  19*7.
Cold,  the  term,  218.

Coldstream,  Dr.  on  the  naked-eyed  medusae,  336.
Colors  of  odic  light,  387.

light  also  exhibits,  365.
Concentration  of  the  odic  light,  582.
Cool,  the  term,  212.

Copper  elements,  experiment  with,  146,  168.
sulphate  of,  168.

wire,  experiments  made  with,  384.
Coulomb,  researches  on  terrestrial  magnetism,  63.
Crosse  on  light,  338.
Crvstallic  bodies,  54.
force,  72.

comparison  of,  with  the  magnet,  104.
electric  affinity  of  the,  77.
Crystals,  43.

that  one  pole  of,  gave  a  cold  and  the  other  a  warm  pass,  180.
Dr.  Ashbumer's  experience  with,  43.

note  on,  55.
of  selenite,  184.
force  of  a  polar  nature,  61,  64.
Crystal,  polar  point  of  a,  62.

Dr.  Ashbumer's  note  on,  65.
electricity,  76.
rock,  180.

in  general,  like  magnets,  emit  a  fine  flaming  light  from  their  poles,  79.
effect  of,  on  animal  nerves,  81.
peculiar  force  of,  developed,  80.
most  active  at  its  opposite  extremities,  82.
emits  light,  83.

action  of,  agrees  with  the  rays  of  the  sun,  121.
on  sensitive  persons,  115,  165.

Daguerreotype,  experiment  with  a,  35.
Diagram  of  odic  colors  or  lisrht,  328.
Diamagnetism,  233,  244.
Digestion,  139.
Divining  rod,  85 — 91.
Dualism  in  the  phenomena,  179.
its  nature,  181.

Electrical  machine,  148.
Electricity,  145—153,  331.

distinctions  from,  235-6.
Electro-dynamic  apparatus,  experiment  with  an,  30.

magnetism,  327.
Endlicher  on  the  magnet,  105,  368,  395.
Eyes,  the,  212.

452  INDEX.

Faraday,  Mr.  596.

Fingers  act  on  odic  flames  like  crystals  and  magnets,  356.
Fire  acts  Od-negatively  on  the  sensitively  in  all  cases,  193.
Flame,  positive  and  negative,  41.

mechanically,  41.

magnetic,  42.

light  from  their  poles,  emit  a,  79.

apparent  temperature  of  the,  192.

list  of  cold  and  warm  Od,  193.

blue,  northward,  3 IT.

red,  southward,  31*7.
Flowers,  196—197.
Forbes  on  the  medusae,  336.
Friction,  effect  of,  129.

Gas,  oxygen,  159,  160.

German  silver  conductor,  126,  167.

Glass  tubes,  experiment  with  two,  130.

of  water,  experiment  with  a,  1 35.
Gold  paper,  166.

leaf,  167.
Graveyards,  141 — 144.
Gum,  powdered,  167.

Hands,  action  of  the,  on  sensitive  patients,  111,165,  169,  170,  183,  202,  203,

210,  333,  340.
Hauy's  researches  on  terrestrial  magnetism,  63.
Head,  the,  208,  210.
Heat,  all  positive  bodies  give  out,  190.

distinction  from,  233,  357.

luminous  phenomena  produced  by,  129.

the  magnetic  light  emitted  no,  36.
Herschel,  Sir  W.,  power  of  telescopes  to  penetrate  into  space,  viii.

Ice,  experiment  with  a  piece  of,  129.

Inactive  bodies,  53.

Iris  or  prismatic,  390,  393,  397.

Iron,  pure,  action  on  sensitive  patients,  116.

wire,  experience  with  an,  128,  137.

rods,  163,  332.

exhibit  odic  flames,  332.

globe,  379.

crystallized  throughout,  448.

Kiss,  the  import  of  a,  200.
Königsberg,   native  silver  from,  54.

Leaf,  198.

Liebig  on  digestion,  139,  140.

respiration,  20.
Light,  the  magnetic,  20.

the,  99.

effect  of  sulphur  on  the,  157.

INDEX.  453

Light,  note  on,  by  Mr.  Crosse,  338.
also  exhibits  colors,
diagram  of  odic,  399 — 416.
northern,  the,  442.
List  of  simple  substances  and  preparations,  according  to  their  difference  of  cold
and  warmth,  188-9.
substances  of  warm,  cold  Od-flames,  193.
witnesses  to  my  experiments,  228 — 231.
Luminosity,  23.

Ashburner's  experiments  on,  24.
of  Miss  Nowotny,  22.
Sturmann,  26.
Maix,  27.
Reichel,  28.
Atzmannsdorfer,  33.
of  crystals,  poles,  44,  170.
Luminous  phenomena  at  the  poles  and  sides  of  strong  magnets,  20.
on  Miss  Reichel,  114.
produced  by  heat,  129.
over  graves,  141 — 144.
on  the  magnet,  the  odic,  244.

Magnet,  comparison  of  the  crystallic  forces  with,  104.

action  of  the,  agrees  with  those  of  the  rays  of  the  sun,  124.
luminous  phenomena  at  the  poles  and  sides  of  strong,  20.
experiment  on  Miss  Sturmann  with  a,  26.
M.  Maix,  with  a,  27.
B.  Reichel  with  a,  27.
Davy,  Sir  II.,  on  the  influence  of  the,  on  the  electrical  current,  39.
strength  of  a,  41.
and  crystals,  43.
Baumgartner's  test  on,  47.
effect  of  the,  on  Miss  Sturmann,  98.

the  Misses  Maix,  Reichel,  and  Atzmannsdorfer,  99, 100, 162.
sulphur  on  the,  157.
odic  light  in  modified  external  conditions  of  the,  379.
Magnetic  light,  the,  emitted  no  heat,  36,  37.
flames,  42.
rod,  181-3.
needle,  experience  with,  95.

disturbance  of  the,  378.
tub,  139.
Magnetism,  distinctions  from,  338.
Magnets,  the  odic  luminous  phenomena  on  the,  244 — 264.

in  general,  historical  establishment  of  the  fact  of  odic  light  on,  244 — 263.
forms  of  the  luminous  emanations  of  the,  270.
odic  incandescence  of  the  steel,  270.
flame  on  steel,  293 — 363.
Maix,  Miss,  experiment  on,  with  a  magnet,  27.
effect  of  the  magnet  on,  99.
sulphur  on,  157.
Matters,  solid  or  fluid,  without  exception,  produce  sensations  of  coolness  and
tepid  heat,  154-6.

454  INDEX.

Medusas,  336.

Men,  living,  affect  sensitive,  116.
Meteorite  of  Clairborn,  446.
Moon,  shades  of  the,  100.

rays  of  the,  effect  of  the,  117.

light,  effect  of,  132.

the,  241.
Mouth,  the,  200.

Names  of  persons,  list  of,  who  have  co-operated  in  the  experiments,  229.

Nebulae,  odic,  364.

Needle,  disturbance  of  the  magnetic,  448.

Negative  pole,  experiment  with  the,  59.

Nerves,  action  of  the  fingers  on  the,  105 — 109.

Nervous  patient,  effect  of  the  fingers  on,  105 — 109.

Northern  fight,  the,  529.

Nowotny,  Miss,  effect  of  oxygen  gas  on,  159.

cataleptic  attacks  of,  22.

experience  on,  with  the  magnetic  needle,  95.

Od,  odic  reflection  on,  176.

agreement  with  magnetism,  182,  185.
list  of  substances  of  cold  and  warm  Od-fiames,  193.
produced  by  heat,  195.
positive,  the,  207.
note  on,  207.

remarks  on  the  word,  232.
contrast  to  magnetism,  856.
Odic  luminous  phenomena  on  the  magnet,  the,  244.
light,  245.
flame,  293 — 402.

incandescence  on  the  steel  magnet,  270,  292.
flame  on  steel  magnet,  293 — 317.
incandescence  of  the  rubber,  318.
flame  of  the  rubber,  319.
incandescence  of  the  rubber  magnet,  320,  321.
threads,  streaks,  and  nebulae,  364.
flame  from  iron,  361.
smoke,  367,  375.

is  thrown  out  by  magnets,  370.
relation  between  odic  flame  and,  373.
sparks,  376.
fight  in  modified  external  conditions  of  the  magnet,  378.

colors  of,  387.
color,  variableness  of,  397.

diagram  of,  399 — 418.
light,  in  the  more  restricted  seüse  of  the  word,  435.
concentration  of  the,  437.
Odized  water,  387.

Pfeffel's  occurrence,  141.

Photosphere,  431.

Physical  and  physiological  laws  of  the  organic  force,  93.

INDEX.  455

Plants,  197.

Poisonous  influence  of  graveyards,  141 — 145.

Polar  point  of  a  crystal,  62.

wire,  62.
Polarization,  149.

chemical,  195-96.
Pole,  the,  41.
Poles  and  sides  of  strong  magnets,  luminous  phenomena  at  the,  43.

positive  or  negative,  experience  on,  59.
Potassium,  167.
Preface  by  the  Editor,  iv.
Prismatic,  390.

note  by  Dr.  Ashburner  on,  391-92.

Reichel,  Miss,  effect  of  the  magnet  on,  99,  163.

luminous  phenomena  on,  78,  114,  129,  162,  170.

experiment  with  a  brass  wire  on,  129.

view  of  a  cemetery,  143.

effects  of  the  stars  and  sun  on,  173.
Pespiration,  140.
Rubber,  the,  318.

Salt,  common,  experiment  with,  135.
Selenite,  180.
Sensitive,  105—110.

affected  by  living  men,  116.
Sensitives,  healthy,  246.
sickly,  *2  60.
diseased,  265.
Silver  from  Königsberg,  54.

experiment  with  German,  126,  167.
Sleep,  theory  of,  50.

Smith,  Dr.  Pye,  Scripture  and  some  parts  of  geological  science,  xv.
Soda,  carbonate  of,  experiment  with,  134.
Solar  spectrum,  effect  of  the,  124.
Solid  and  fluid  matters,  without  exception,  produce  sensations  of  coolness  and

tepid  heat,  153—155.
Somnambulism,  Dr.  Ashburner's  case  of,  31.
Stars,  effect  of  the,  173.
Steel  magnet,  odic  incandescence  on  the,  270.

flame  on,  293.
Stomach,  the,  213.
Streaks,  odic,  364.
Sturmann,  Miss,  experiment  on,  with  a  magnet,  26.

effect  of  the  magnet  on,  99.
Substances,  list  of  simple,  and  preparations,  according  to  their  difference  of

cold  and  warmth,  188-89,  193.
Sugar,  experiment  with,  135.
Sulphur,  157,  159-160,  166,  168.
Sun,  rays  of  the,  effect  of  the,  117.

action  of  the,  agrees  with  those  of  crystals  and  magnet,  124.

the,  205.

effect  of  the,  173.

/ '

456  INDEX.

Telescopes  to  penetrate  into  space,  Sir  W.  Herschel's,  power  of,  viii.

Tepid,  the  term,  218.

Terrelle,  444.

Terrestrial  magnetism,  researches  of  Hauy,  Biot,  and  Coulomb  on,  63.

effect  of,  100.

influence  on  sensitive  bodies  of  the,  102.

sts  id  no  relation  to  crystallic  force,  76.

influence  of,  on  odic  flame,  329.
Thouvenel,  baguette  divinatoire,  85.
Threads,  odic,  364.
Tin  electrophorus  plate,  151.
Tongue,  the,  200.
Turnip,  19Y.

Unconsciousness,  Dr.  Ashburner's  note  on  cataleptic,  49.

Vapor,  luminous,  430.

odic,  449.
Voltaic  pile,  138.

battery,  194.

Warm,  the  term,  218.

what  this  expression  signifies,  179.
Water,  experiment  with  magnetized,  135-36,  382,  386.
Will,  Dr.  Ashburner  on,  37.
Wire,  experiment  with  an  iron,  128-29.
Witnesses,  list  of,  to  my  experiments,  229 — 231.
World,  the  material,  in  general,  153.

Zinc,  experiment  with,  146 — 148.

Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process.
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide
Treatment  Date:  Nov.  2004

PreservationTechnologies

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive
Cranberry  Township.  PA  16066
(724)779-2111

LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS

0  013  521  907  1
