AN INQUIRY INTO THE HUMAN MIND, ON THE PRINCIPLES OF COMMON SENSE
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/cu31924102763426), the 1769 third edition (London: T. Cadell; Edinburgh: A. Kincaid and J. Bell).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

I N Q^U I R y\

INTO THE

HUMAN MIND,

On the Principles of

COMMON SENSE.

By THOMAS REID, D. D;

Profeffor of Moral Philofophy in the Univerfity
of Glasgow.


The infpiration of the Almighty gi-veth them under/landing,

Job«


The THIRD EDITION Correfted.


LONDON:

Printed for T. Cadell, (Succeflbr to A. Millar} in the

Strand, and T. Longman, in Pater-Nofter Row, London ;

and A. Kincaid and J. Bell, Edinburgh.


MDCCLXIX.


T O
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE

JAMES Earl of FINDL ATER
and SEAFIELD,

Chancellor of the Univerfity of
OLD ABERDEEN.

,. My LoRi),

fTp hough I apprehend that there are
-*■ things new, and of fome import-
ance, in the following inquiry* it is
not without timidity that I have con-
fented to the publication of it. The
fubjeet has been canvafied by men of
very great penetration and genius : for
who does not acknowledge Des Cartes,
Malebranche, Locke, Berkeley, and
Hume, to be fuch? A view of the hu-
man underftanding fo different from
that which they have exhibited* will,
no doubt, be condemned by many
a 2 without


fv DEDICATION.

without examination, as proceeding
from temerity and vanity.

But I hope the candid and difcern-
ing Few, who are capable of attend-
ing to the operations of their own
minds, will weigh deliberately what
is here advanced, before they pafs fen-
tence upon it. To fuch I appeal, as
the only competent judges. If theydif-
approve, I am probably in the wrong,
and fhall be ready to change my opi-
nion upon conviction. If they approve,
the Many will at lafl yield to their au-
thority, as they always do.

However contrary my notions are
to thofe of the writers I have mention-
ed, their fpeculations have been of
great ufe to me, and feem even to
point out the road which I have taken j
and your Lordfhip knows, that the me-
rit of ufeful difcoveries is fometimes
not more juftly due to thofe that have
hit upon them, than to others, who


DEDICATION. v

have ripened them, and brought them
to the birth.

I acknowledge, my Lord, that I
never thought of calling in queftion
the principles commonly received with
regard to the human underftanding,
until the Treatife of human nature was
publifhed, in the year 1 739. The inge-
nious author of that treatife, upon the
principles of Locke, who was no fceptic,
hath built a fyftem of fcepticifm, which
leaves no ground to believe any one
thing rather than its contrary. His
reafoning appeared to me to be juft:
there was therefore a neceffity to call
in queftion the principles upon which
it was founded, or to admit the con-
clufion.

But can any ingenious mind admit
this fceptical fyftem without reluct-
ance ? I truly could not, my Lord : for
I am perfuaded,., that abfolute fcepti-
cifm is not more deftructive of the
a 3 faith


vi DEDICATION.

faith of a Chriftian, than of the fci-
ence of a philofopher, and of the pru-
dence of a man of common under-
ftanding. I am perfuaded, that the
unjuft live by faith as well as the jujl ;
that, if all belief could be laid alide,
piety, patriotifm, friendfhip, paren-
tal affection, and private virtue,
would appear as ridiculous as knight-
errantry ; and that the purfuits of
pleafure, of ambition, and of avarice,
mufl: be grounded upon belief, as well
as thofe.that are honourable and vir-
tuous.

The day-labourer toils at his work,
in the belief that he mall receive his
wages at night; and if he had not
this belief, he would 'not toil. We
may venture to fay, that even the au-
thor of this fceptical fyftem, wrote it
in the belief that it fhould be read and
regarded. I hope he wrote it in the
belief alfo, that it would be ufeful to
mankind : and perhaps it may prove

fo


DEDICATION. vii

fb at laft. For I conceive the fceptical
writers to be a fet of men, whofe bu-
finefs it is, to pick holes in the fabric
of knowledge wherever it is weak and
faulty ; and when thefe places are
properly repaired, the whole building
becomes more firm and folid than it
was formerly.

Tor my own fatisf action, I entered
Into a ferious examination of the prin-
ciples upon which this fceptical fyf-
tem is built ; and was not a little fur-
prifed to find, that it leans with its
whole weight upon a hypothefis,
which is ancient indeed, and hath
been. very generally received by phi-
lofophers, but of which I could find
no folid proof. The hypothefis I mean
is, That nothing is perceived but what
is in the mind which perceives it:
That we do not really perceive things
that are external, but only certain
images and pictures of them imprint-
a 4 - ed


viii DEDICATION.


«►


ed upon the mind, which are called

imprejjions and ideas.

If this be true; fuppofing certain
impreflions and ideas to exift in my
mind, I cannot, from their exiftence,
infer the exiftence of any thing elfe ;
my impreflions and ideas are the only
exiftence s of which I can have any
knowledge or conception: and they
are fuch fleeting and transitory beings,
that they can have no exiftence at all,
any longer than I am confcious of
them. So that, upon this hypothefis,
the whole univerfe about me, bodies
and fpirits, fun, moon, ftars, and
earth, friends and relations, all things
without exception, which I imagined
to have a permanent exiftence,
whether I thought of them or not,
vanifh at once ;

And like the bafelefs jabric of a vi/tQti,
Leave not a tra5l hehind %

X


DEDICATION. ix

I thought it unreafonable, my
Lord, upon the authority of philofo-
phers, to admit a hypothecs, which,
in my opinion, overturns all philoso-
phy, . all religion and, virtue, and all
common fenfe: and finding that all
the fyftems concerning the human
understanding which I was acquaint-
ed with, were built upon this hypo-
thefis, I refolved to inquire into this
fubjedt. anew, without regard- to any
hypothefis.

What I now humbly prefent to
your Lordfhip, is the fruit of this in-
quiry, fo far only as it regards the five
fenfes. In which I claim no other me-
rit, than that of having given great
attention to the operations of my own
mind, and of having expreffed, with
all the perfpicuity I was able, what I
conceive, every man who gives the
fame attention, will feel and perceive.
The productions of imagination, re-
quire a genius which foars above the

common


x DEDICATION.

common rank j but the treafures of
knowledge are commonly buried
'deep, and may be reached by thofe
drudges who can dig with labour and
patience, tho' they have not wings to
fly. The experiments that were to be
made in this inveftigation fuited me,
as they required no other expence, but
that of time and attention, which I
could bellow. The leifure of an aca-
demical life, difengaged from the
purfuits of interefl and ambition ; the

duty of my profeffion, which obliged
me to give prelections on thefe fubjects
to the youth ; and an early inclination"
to fpeculations of this kind, have en-
abled me, as I flatter myfelf, to give
a more minute attention to the fub-
jecT: of this inquiry, than has been
given before.

My thoughts upon this fubjedl were,
a good many years ago, put together
in another form, for the ufe of my
pupils ; and afterwards were fubmitted

to


DEDICATION. xi

to the judgment of a private philofo-
phical fociety, of which I have the
honour to be a member. A great part
of this inquiry was honoured even by
your Lordfliip's perufal. And the en-
couragement which you, my Lord,
and others, whofe friendfhip is my
boaft, and whofe judgment I reve-
rence, were pleafed to give me, coun-
terbalanced my timidity and diffi-
dence, and determined me to offer it
to the public.

If it appears to your Lordfhip to ju-
itify the common fenfe and reafon of
mankind, againft the fceptical fubtil-
ties which, in this age, have endea-
voured to put them out of counte-
nance ; if it appears to throw, any new
light upon one of the noblefl parts of
the divine workmanfhip ; your Lord-
fliip's refpect for the arts and fciences,
and your attention to every thing
which tends to the improvement of
them, as well as to every thing elfe

that


xii D..E D I C A T I O N.

that contributes to the felicity of your
c mutry, leave aie no room to doubt
of your favourable acceptance of this
efTav, as the fruit of my induftry in a
pr oreffion wherein I was accountable
to your Lordlhip; and as a teftimony
of the gr.-at efteem and refpecl: where-
with I have the honour to be,

My Lord,

Your Lordship's

mod obliged, and

moft devoted fervant,


THO. REID.


CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTION.

Sett. Page

1. The importance of the fubjeft, and the
means of profecuting it,. i

2. The .impediments to .our knowledge of the

mind, 4

3. The prefent Jlate of this part of philofo-

phy. Of Des Cartes, Malebranche, and
Locke, 10

4. Apology for thofe philofophers, - 14

5. Of Bifhop Berkeley ; the Treatife of human
nature ; and .of fcepticifm, - - 16

6. Of the Treatife of human nature, - 20

7. T^tf j/y/«» of all thefe authors is the fame,

and leads to fcepticifm, - - 22

8. We ought not to dtfpair of a better, - 23

CHAP. II.

Of SMELLING.

Sed.

1 . The order of proceeding. Of- the medium

and organ of fmell, - - 26

2. Thefenfationconjideredabflraclly, - 28

3. Senfation and remembrance, natural princi-

ples of belief - - -30

4. Judgment and belief- in fame cafes precede

Jimple apprehenjion, - - 34

6 5. Two


xiv CONTENTS.

Soft. Page

5. Two theories of the nature of belief refuted.

Conclufions from what hath been f aid, 35

6. Apology for metaphyjical abfurdities. Senfa-

tion without a fentient, a confequence of
the theory of ideas. Conferences of this
firange opinion, - - 39

7. The conception and belief of a fentient being

or mind, is fuggejled by our confiitution.
The notion of relations not always got by
comparing the related ideas, - 47

8. There is a quality or virtue in bodies, which

we call their fmell. How this is connecled
in the imagination with the fenfation, 5 1

g. That there is a principle in human nature,
from which the notion of this, as well as
of all other natural virtues or caufes, is de-
rived, - - 54

10. Whether in fenfation the mind is aElive or
fajjive? - - - 6»

CHAP. Ill,
Of TASTING, - z 6$

CHAP. IV.
Of HEARING.

Sefo

1 . Variety of founds. Their place and diftance

learned by cuftom, without reafoning, 65?

2. Of natural language, - - 72

3 CHAP.


CONTENTS. xv

CHAP. V.

Of T O U C H.

Seft. Page

i. Of heat and cold, - ; - 78

2. Of hardnefs and foftnefs, » - 81

3. Of natural figns, - - 87

4. Of hardnefs, and other primary qualities, 92

5. Of extenfion, - - - 94

6. Of extenfion, - - - 99

7. Of the exiftence of a material world, 102

8. Of the Jyftems of philofophers concerning the

fenfes, z - - 113

CHAP. VI:
Of SEEING.

Sea.

1. The excellence and dignity of this fa-

culty, - - - - 120

2. Sight difcovers almoft nothing which the

blind may not comprehend. The reafon

of this, . - - 123

3. Of the vifible appearances of objecls, 130

4. That colour is a quality of bodies, not a

fenfation of the mind, - - 135

5. An inference from the preceding, - 139

6. That none of our fenfations are refem-

hlances of any of the qualities of bodies, 1 45

7. Of vifible figure and extenfion, - 153

8. Some queries concerning vifible figure an-

fwered, - - - 159

9. Of the geometry of vifibks t - 168

10. Of


xvi Contents.

Se£t. Page

10. Of the parallel motion of the eyes, 1 85

11. Of our feeing objects eretl by inverted

images, - - » 190

iz. The fame fubjeSl continued, 199

13. Of feeing- objeSis fingle with two eyes, 222
H4. Of the laws of vifion in brute animals^ 233
15 Squinting confidered hypothetical^, 237

16. Fails relating to fquinting, 253

17. Of 4 he effeil-of cuftom in feeing objeSfs
Jingle, - 258

18. Of Dr Porterfield's account of Jingle

■timd double <vifim, - - 268

19,- Of Dr. Briggs's theory, and of Sir Ifaac

Newton's conjetJure on this fubjetl, 273

10. Of perception in general, - 288

2 1 . Of the prccefs of nature in perception, 301

22. Of the figns by which we learn to per-

ceive diftance from the eye, 309

23. Of the figns ujed in other acquired per-

ceptions, - - 326

24. Of the analogy between perception, and

the credit we give to human teftimony t 330


CHAP. VII.

CONCLUSION.

Containing, Reflections upon the opinions
of Philosophers on this fubjedt* - 355


INQUIRY'

INTO THE

HUMAN'MIND.

CHAP. I.

INTRODUCTION.

SECT. I.

The importance of the fubjeffj and the means of
■profecuting it.

TH E fabric of the human mind is curi-
ous and wonderful, as well as that of
the human body. ' .The faculties of the
One are with no lefs Wifdom adapted to their fe-
veral ends, than the organs of the other. Nay,
it is reafonable to think, that as the mind is a
nobler work, and of a higher order than the
body, eveji more of the wifdom and fkill of
the divine architect hath been employed in its
ftruclure. It is therefore a fubjec\ highly

A worthy


2 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. I.
worthy of inquiry on its own account, but ftill
more worthy on account of the extehfive influ-
ence which the knowledge of it hath over every
Other branch of fcience.

In the arts and fciences which have leaft con-
nexion with the mind, its faculties are the en-
gines which we muft employ j and the better we
underftand their nature and ufe, their defects and
diforders, the more fkilfully we mail apply them,
and with the greater fuccefs. But in the nobleft
arts, the mind is alfo the fubjett upon which we
operate. The painter, the poet, the a&o'r, the
orator, the moralift, and the ftatefman, attempt
to operate upon the mind in different ways, and
for different ends ; and they fucceed, according
as they touch properly the firings of the human
frame. Nor can their feveral arts ever ftand on
a folid foundation, or rife to the dignity of fci-
ence, until they are built on the principles of the
human eonflitution.

Wife men now agree, or ought to agree in
this, that there is but one way to the knowledge
of nature's works 5 the way of obfervatiOn and
experiment. By our eonftitution, we have a
ftrong propensity to trace particular fafts and ob-
fervations to general rules, and to apply fuch ge-
neral rules to account for other effedls, or to dr-
re£t us in the production of them. This proce-
dure of the underftandingjs familiar to every hu-
man creature in the common affairs of life, and
it is the only one by which any real di&overy
in philofbphy can be made.

The


Seft. i. INTRODUCTION. $

The man who firft difcovered that cold free-
zes water, and that heat turns it into vapour*
proceeded on the fame general principles, and in
the fame method, by which Newton difcovered
the law of gravitation, and the properties of light*
His reguld • philpfopbdndi are maxims of common,
fenfe, and are prattifed every day in common
life; and he who philofophjzes by other rules,
either concerning the material fyftem, of con-
cerning the mind, miftakes his aim.

Conjectures and theories are the creatures of
men, and will always be found very unlike the
creatures of God. If we would know the works
of God, we muft confult themfelves with atten-
tion and humility, without daring to add any
thing of ours to what they declare. A juft in-
terpretation of nature is the Only found and or-
thodox philofophy : Whatever we add of out
own, is apocryphalj and of no authority.

All our curious theories of the formation of
the earth, of the generation of animals, of the
origin of natural and moral evil, fo far as they go
beyond a juft induction from fads, are vanity
and folly, no lefs than the vortices of Des Cartes*
or the Archseus of Paracelfus. Perhaps the phi-
lofophy of the mind hath been no lefs adultera-
ted by theories, than that of the material fyfterri*
The theory of ideas is indeed very ancient, and
hath been very univerfally received j but as nei-»
ther of thefe titles can give it authenticity, they
ought not to fcreen it from a free and candid
examination -, efpecially in this age, when it hath
A a pro*


4 OftheHUM AN MIND. Chap. L
produced a fyftem of fcepticifm, that feems to
triumph over all fcience, and even over the dic-
tates of common fenfe.

All that we- know of the body, is owing to
anatomical difledlionand obfervation, and it mult
be by an anatomy of the mind that we can dis-
cover its powers and principles.

SECT.. II.

'the impediments to our knowledge of the mind.

T> UT it muft be acknowledged, that, this
kind of anatomy is much more difficult
than the other ; and therefore it needs not feem
ftrange, that mankind have made lefs progrefs in
it. To attend accurately to the operations of
our minds, and make them an object of thought,
is no eafy matter even to the contemplative, and
to the bulk of mankind is next to impoffible.

An anatomift who h3th happy opportunities,
may have accefs to examine with his own eyes,
and with equal accuracy, bodies of all different
ages, fexes, and conditions ; fa that what is de-r
fedlive, obfcure, or preternatural in one, may be
difcerned clearly, and in its moft perfedl ftate in
another. But the anatomift of the mind cannot
have the fame advantage. It is his own mind
only that he can examine, with any degree of
accuracy and diftin&nefs. This is the only fub-
jecl: he can look into. He may, from outward
figns, collecT: the operations of other minds ; but
2 thefe


Seft. 2. INTRODUCTION. 5

thefe figns are for the moft part ambiguous, and
muft be interpreted by what he perceives within
himfelf.

So that if a philofopher could delineate to us,
diftinftly and methodically, all the operations of
the thinking principle within him, which no man
was ever able to do, this would be only the ana-
tomy of one particular fubjecl:; which would be
both deficient and erroneous, if applied to human
nature in general. For a little- reflection may
fatisfy us, that the difference of minds is greater
than that of any other beings, which we confider
as of the fame fpecies.

Of the various powers and. faculties we pof-
fefs, there are fome which nature feems both to -
have planted and reared, fo as to have left no-
thing to human induftry. Such are the powers
which we have in common with the brutes, and
which are neceflary to the prefervation of the in-
dividual, or the continuance of the kind. There
are other powers, of which nature hath only
planted the feeds in our minds, but hath left the
rearing of them to human culture. It is by the
proper culture of thefe that we are capable of all
thofe improvements in intellectuals, in tafte, and
in morals, which exalt and dignify human na-
ture -, while, on the other hand, the neglect or
perverfion of them makes its degeneracy and
corruption.

The two-legged animal that eats of nature's

dainties what his tafte or appetite craves, and fa-

tisfies his thirft at the cryftal fountain, who pror

A 3 pagates


6 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap, I,

pagates his kind as occafion and, lqft prompt, re*
pels injuries, and takes alternate labour and re-
pofe, is, like a tree in the foreft, purely of na^
ture's growth. But this fame favage hath with^
in him the feeds of the logician, the man of tafte
and breeding, the orator, the ftatefman, the man
of virtue, and the faint, ; which feeds, though
planted in his mind by nature, yet, through want
of culture and exercife, muft lie for ever buried,
and be hardly perceivable by himfelf or by
others,

The loweft degree of focial life will bring to
Jight fome of thofe principles which lay hid in
the favage ftate ; and according to his training,
9nd company, and manner of life, fome of them,
either by their native vigour, or by the force of
culture, will thrive and grow up to great perfect
tion, pthers will be ftrangely perverted from
their natural form, and others checked, or per-
haps quite eradicated. ■$£ „

This makes human nature fo various and mul-r
tiform in the individuals that partakea)f it, that,
in point of morals, and intellectual endowments,
it fills up all that gap which we conceive to be
between brutes and devils belqw, and the eelef-
tial orders above ; and fuch a prodigious diver^
fity of minds muft make it extremely difficult to
djfcover the common principles of the fpecies.

The language of philofqphers, with regard to
the original faculties of the mind, is fo adapted
to the prevailing^ fyftem, that k cannot fit any
Other $ Jjk? a. coat that fits the. maji for whom it

was


Scft. a. INTRODUCTION. 7

was made, and fhows Him to advantage, which
yet will fit very aukward upon one of a different
make, although perhaps as handfome and as well
proportioned. It is hardly poflible to make any
innovation in our philofophy concerning the mind
and its operations, without ufing new words and
phrafes, or giving a different meaning to thofe
that are received ; a liberty which, even when
neceffary, creates prejudice and mifconftru&ion,
and which muft wait the fancldon of time to au-
thorife- it. For innovations in, language, like
thofe in religion and 'government, are always
fufpe&ed and diffiked by the many, till ufe hath
made them familiar, and prefcription hath given
them a title.

If the original perceptions and notions of the
mind were to make their appearance fingle and
unmixed, as we fifft received them from the hand
of nature, one accuftomed to reflection would
have lefs difficulty in tracing them ; but before
we are capable of reflection, they are fo mixed,
compounded, and decompounded, by habits, af-
fociations, and abftraclions, that it is hard to
know what they were originally. The mind
may in this refpeft be compared to an apothecary
or a chymift, whofe materials indeed are furnifli-
ed by nature ; but for the purpofes of his art,
he mixes, compounds, difiblves, evaporates, and
fublimes them, till they put on a quite different
appearance i fo that it is very difficult to know
what they were at firft, and much more to bring
them back to their original and natural form,
A 4 And


8 Of -the H U M A N M I N D. ' Chap. I,

And this work of the mind is not carried on by
deliberate acts of mature reafon, which we might
recoiled, but bymeansof inftincts, habits, affocia-
tions, andother principles, which operate before we
come to the ufe of reafon •, fo that it is extremely
difficult for the mind to return upon its own foot-
fteps, and trace back thofe operations which have
employed it fince it firft began to think and to aft.
. Could we obtain a diftinct and full hiftory of
all that hath paffed in the mind of a child, from
the beginning of life and fenfation, till it grows
up to the ufe of reafori'; how its infant faculties
began to work,: and-hew they brought forth and
ripened all. the various notions, opinions* and fen-
timents, which we find in ourfelves' when we
come to be capable of reflection \ this would be a
treafure of natural hiftory, which would probably
give more light. into- the human faculties, than
all the fyftems of philolbphers about them fince
the beginning of the world. But it is in vain
to wifh for what nature has not put within the
reach of our power. Reflection, the only inftru-
ment by -which we can difcern the powers of
the mind,; comes too late to obferve the progrefs
of nature, in raifing them from their infancy to

perfection.

It mufL therefore require great caution, and
.greats application of mind, for a man that is
grown up in all the prejudices of education, fa-
ihion, and philofophy, to unravel his notions and
ppinions, till he finds out the fimple and original
principles of his conftitution, of which no ac r

count


Seft. 2. INTRODUCTION. 9

count can be given but the will of our Maker.
This may be truly called an analyfis of the hu^
man faculties ; and till this is performed, it is in
vain we expeel: any juft jyftem of the mind -, that
is, an enumeration of the original powers and
laws of our conftitution, and an explication from
them of the various pb'asnomena of human na-
ture.

Suceefs, in an inquiry of this kind, it is not in
human power to' command ; but perhaps' it is
poffible, by caution and humility, to avoid error
and delufion. The labyrinth may be too intri-
cate, and the , thread too fine, to be traced thro'
all its windings ; but if we ftop where we can
trace it no farther', and fecUre. the ground we
have gained, there is no harm done; a quicker
eye may in time trace it farther.

It is genius, and not the want of it, that adul-
terates philofophy, and fills it with error and
falfe theory."' A creative imagination difdains
the mean "offices of digging for a foundation, of
removing rubbifh, and carrying materials : lea-
ving thefe feryile employments to the drudges, in
fcience, it 1 plans a defign, and raifes a fabric. In-
vention fupplies materials- where they are want-
ing, and fancy adds colouring, and every befit-
ting ornament. The work pleafes the eye, and
wants nothing but folid'ity'artd a good founda-
tion. It feems even to vye with the works of
nature, till fome fucceeding architect blows it
into rubbifh, and builds as goodly a fabric of
his own in its place. Happily for the prefent

age,


IO OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. L
age, the caftle-builders employ themfelves more
in romance than in philofophy. That is un-
doubtedly their province, and in thofe regions
the offspring of fancy is legitimate, but in phU
lofophy it is all fpurjoys.

SECT. Ill,

*f. he prefent ft ale of this part of philofophy. Of
Des Cartes, Malefranche, and Lpcke,

r T i H A T our philofophy concerning the mind
and its faculties, is but in a very low ftate,
may be reafonably conjectured, even by thofe
who never have narrowly examined it. Are
there any principles with regard to the mind,
fettled with that perfpicuity. and evidence, which
attends the principles 'of mechanics, aftronomy,
and optics ? Thefe are really fciences, built up-
on laws of nature which univerfally obtain,
"What is difcovered in them, is no longer matter
of difpute : future ages may add to it, but till
the CQurfe of nature be changed, what is already
eftablifhed can never be overturned. But when
we turn our attention inward, and confider the
phenomena of human thoughts, opinions, and
perceptions, and endeavour to trace them to the
general laws and the firft principles- of our con-
stitution, we are immediately involved in darl$-
nefs and perplexity. And if common fenfe, or the
principles of education, happen not to be flub-
born, it is odds but we end in abfolute fcepticifm,

Des


Beft. S , INTRODUCTION. u

Des Cartes finding nothing eftablifhed in this
part of philofophy, in order to lay the founda-
tion of it deep, refolved not to believe his own
exiftence till he fhould be able to give a good
reafon for it. He was, perhaps, the firft that
took up fuch a reiblution : but if he could indeed
have effected his purpofe, and really become dif-
fident of his exiftence, his cafe would have been
deplorable, and without any remedy from reafon,
or philofophy, A man that difbelieves his own
exiftence, is furely as unfit to be reafoned with,
as a man that believes he is made of glafs. There
may be diforders in the human frame that may
produce fuch extravagancies, but they will never
be cured by reafon ing. Des Cartes indeed would
make us believe, that he got out of this delirium
by this logical argument, Cegito, ergo /urn. But
it is evident he was in his fenfes all the time, and
neVer ferioufly doubted of his exiftence. For he
takes it for granted in this argument, and proves
nothing at all. I am thinking, fays he, therefore
I am : and is it not as good reafoning to fay, I
am deeping, therefore I am ? or, I am doing no-
thing, therefore 1 am ? If a body moves, it muft
exift, no doubt ; but if it is at reft, % it muft exift
likeways.

Perhaps Des Cartes meant not to afTume his
own exiftence in this enthymeme, but the exi-
ftence of thought ; and to infer from that the
exiftence of a mind, or fubjeft of thought. But
why did he not prove the exiftence of his
thought ? Confcioufnefs, \ t m? y b e faid, vouches

that.


12 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. I.
that. But who is voucher for confcioufnefs ?
Can any man prove that his confcioufnefs may not
deceive him ? No man can : nor can we give a
better reafon for trufting to it, than that every
man, while his mind is found, is determined,
by the conftitution of his nature, to give impli-
cit belief to it, and to laugh at, or pity the man
who doubts its teftimony. And is not every
man, in his wits, as much determined to take his-
exiftence upon truft as his confcioufnefs ?

The other proportion affumed in' this argu-
ment, That thought cannot be without a mind or
fubjecl, is liable to the fame objection : not that
it wants evidence; but that its evidence is no
clearer, nor more immediate, than that of the
propofition to be proved by it. And taking all
thefe propoficions together, — I think, — I am
confcious,' — Every thing that thinks, exifts, —
I exift, — would not every fober man form the
fame opinion of the man who ferioufly doubted
any one of them ? And if he was his frierld, would
he not hope for his cure from phyfic and good
regimen, rather than from metaphyfic and logic ?

But fuppofing it proved, that my thought and
my confcioufnefs muft have a fubjecl, and confe-
quently that I exift, how do I know that all that
train and ^ucceflion of thoughts which I remem-
ber, belong to one fubjecl, and that the I of this
moment, is the very individual I of yefterday,
and of times paft ?

Des Cartes did not think proper to ftart this
doubt : but Locke has done it ; and, in order

to


Sea. 3. INTRODUCTION. 13

to refolve it, gravely determines, that perfqnal
identity confifts in confcioufnefs ; that is, if you
are confcious. that you did fuch a thing a twelve-
month ago, this confcioufnefs makes you to be
the very perfon that did it. Now, confcioufnefs
of what is paft, can fignify nothing elfe but the
remembrance that I did it. So that Locke's
principle rnuft be, That identity confifts in re-
membrance ; and confequently a man muft lofe
his perfonal. identity with regard to every thing
he forgets.

Nor are thefe the'only instances whereby our
philofophy concerning the mind appears to be
very fruitful in creating doubts, but very un-
happy in refolving them.

Des Cartes, Malebranche, and Locke, have all
employed their genius and (kill, to prove the
exiftence of a material world ; and with very
bad fuccefs. Poor untaught mortals believe un-
doubtedly, that there is a fun, moon, and ftars ;
an earth, which we inhabit ; country, friends,
and relations, which we enjoy ; land, houfes, and
moveables, which we pofiefs. But philofophers,
pitying the^ credulity of the vulgar, refolve to
have no faith but what is founded upon reafon.
They apply to philofophy to furnifh them .with
reafons for the belief of thofe things which all
mankind have believed, without being able to
give any reafon for it. And fureiy.one would
expeft, that, in matters of fuch importance, the
proof would not be difficult : but it is the molt
difficult thing in the world. For thefe three

great


*4 Ofthe HUMAN MlND. Chap. I
great frien, with the beft good will, #have not
been able$ from all the treafures of philofophy,
to draw one argument, that is fit to convince a
man that can reafon* of the exiftence of any one
thing without him. Admired Philofophy (
daughter of light ! parent of wifdom and know-
ledge ! if thou art fhe ! furely thou haft not yet
arifen upon the human mind, nor blefled us with
more of thy rays* than are fufficient to fhed a
darknefs vifible upon the human faculties, and to
difturb that repofe and fecurity which happief
mortals enjoy, who never approached thine al-
tar, nor felt thine influence ! But if indeed thou
haft not power to difpel thofe clouds and phan->
toms which thou haft difcovered or created*
withdraw this penurious arid malignant ray { I
defpife Philofophy, and fenounce its guidance;
let my foul dwell with Common Senfe.

SECT. IV.

Apology for thofe philosopher U

t? U T inftead of defpifing the dawn of right*
we ought rather to hope for its increafe i
Inftead of blaming the philofophefs I have men-
tioned, for the defedts and blemifhes of their
fyfterrij we ought rather to honour their me-
mories, as the firft difcoverefs of a region in phi-
lofophy formerly unknown ; and however lame
and imperfect the fyftem may be, they have
opened the way to future difcoveries, and are

juftly


&& 4 . INTRO DtJCTIOK. i$

juftly intitled to a great mare in the merit of
them. They have removed an infinite deal of
duft and rubbifli, collected in the ages of fcho-
laftic fophiftry, which had obftructed the way.
They have put us in the right road, that of ex-
perience and accurate reflection. They have
taught us to avoid the fnares of ambiguous and
ill-defined words, and have fpoken and thought
upon this fubject with a diftinctnefs and perfpi*
cuity formerly unknown. They have made
many openings that may lead to the difcovery
of truths which they did not reach, or to the de-
tection of errors in which they were involun-
tarily intangled.

It may be obferved, that the defe&s and ble-
milhes in the received philofophy concerning the
mind, which have moll expofed it to the con-
tempt and ridicule of fenfible men, have chiefly
been owing to this : That the votaries of this
Philofophy, from a natural prejudice in her fa-
vour, have endeavoured to extend her jurifdic-
tion beyond its juft limits, and to call to her bar
the dictates of Common Senfe. But thefe de-
cline this jurifdictibn ; they difdain the trial of
reafoning, and difown its authority; they nei-
ther claim its aid, nor dread its attacks.

In this unequal conteft betwixt Common
Senfe and Philofophy, the latter will always
come off both with dilhonour and lofs ; nor cart
me ever thrive till this rivalfhip is dropt, thefe
incroachmertts given up, and a cordial friendftiip
reftored : for, in reality, Common Senfe holds
f nothing


i6 Of the HI/MAN MIND. Chap. L
nothing of Philofophy, nor needs her aid. But,
on the other hand, Philosophy (if I may be per-
mitted to change the metaphor) has no other
root but the principles of Common Senfe; it
grows out of them, and draws its nourimment
from them : fevered from this root, its honours
wither, its fap is dried up, it dies and rots.

The philofophers of the laft age, whom I have
mentioned, did not attend to the preferving t-hi®
union and fubordination fo carefully as the hoi-
nour and intereft of philofophy required : but
thofe of the'prefent have waged open war with
Common Senfe, and hope to make a complete
conqueft of it by the fubtilties of Philofophy s
an attempt no lefs audacious and vain, than that
of the giants to dethrone almighty Jove.

S E C T. V.

Of Bijhop Berkeley -, the "Treatife of human nature ;
and of fcepticifm.

*TP H E prefent age, I apprehend, has not
produced two more acute or more pra&i-
fed in this part of philofophy, than the Bifhop
of Cloyne, and the author of the Treatife of hu-
man nature. The firft was no friend to fcepti-
ciim, but had that warm concern for religious
and moral principles which became his order:
yet the refult of his inquiry was, a ferious con-
vicYion, that there is no fuch thing as a material
world ; nothing in nature but fpirits and ideas ;

and


Seflr.5. INTRODUCTION. jy

and that the belief of material fubftances, and of
abftraft ideas, are the chief caufes of all our er-
rors- in philofophy, and of all infidelity and here-
fy, in religion. His arguments are founded upon
the principles which were formerly laid down by
Des Cartes, Malebranche, and Locke, and which
have been very generally received.

And the opinion of the ableft judges feems to
be, that they neither have been, nor can be con-
futed ; and that he hath proved by unanfwerable
arguments what no man in his fenfes can believe.

The fecond proceeds upon the fame principles,
but carries them to their full length; and as the
Bilhop undid the whole material world, this au-
thor, upon the fame grounds, undoes the world
of fpirits, and leaves nothing in nature but ideas
and impreffions, without any fubject on which
they may be imprefied.

It feems to be a peculiar ftrain of humour in
this author, to fet out in his introduction, by
promifing, with a grave face, no lefs than a com-
plete fyftem of the fciences, upon a foundation
entirely new, to wit, that of human nature;
when the intention of the whole work is to fhew,
that there is neither human nature^nor fcience in
the world. It may perhaps be unreafonable t,o
complain of this conduct in an author, who nei-
ther believes his own exiftence, nor that of his
reader; and therefore could not mean to difap-
point him, or to laugh at his credulity. Yet I
cannot imagine, that the author of the Treatife
of human nature is fo fceptical as to plead -this
B apology.


18 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap.!.

apology. He believed, againft his principles, that
he ihould be read, and that he mould retain his
perfonal identity, till he reaped the honour and re-
putation jufllyduetohis metaphyCica.1 acumen. In-
deed he ingenuoufly acknowledges, that it was only
in folitude and retirement that he could yield any
aflfent to his own philofophy •, fociety, like day-
light, difpelledthedarknefsandfogs of fcepticifm,
and made him yield to the dominion of Common
Senfe. Nor did I ever hear him charged with
doing any thing, even in folitude, that argued
fuch a degree of fcepticifm as his principles main-
tain. Surely if his friends apprehended this, they
would have the charity never to leave him alone.

Pyrrho the Elean, the father of this philofo-
phy, feems to have carried it to greater perfec-
tion than any of his fuccefibrs : for if we may be-
lieve Antigonus the Caryftian, quoted by Dio-
genes Laertius, his life correfponded to his doc-
trine. And therefore, if a cart run againft him, or
a dog attacked him, or if he came upon a'precf-
pice, he would not ftir a foot to avoid the dan-
ger, giving no credit to his fenfes. But his atten-
dants, who, happily for him, were not fo great
fceptics, took care to keep him out of harm's
way ; fo that he lived till he was ninety years of
age. Nor is it to be doubted, but this author's
friends would have been equally careful to keep
him from harm, if ever his principles had taken
too ftrong a hold of him.

It is probable the Treatife of human nature was
not written in company; yet it cbritaihs'mani-

feft


Sect. 5 . iNf RODtJtTlON. t 9

Fed indications, that the author every now and
then relapfed into the faith of the vulgar, and
could hardly, for half a dozen pages, keep up the
fceptical character.

In like manner, the great Pyrrho himfelf for-
got his principles on fome occafions -, and is faid
once to have been in fuch a paflion with his cook,
who probably had not roafted his dinner to hfs
mind, that with thefpit in his hand, and the meat
Upon it; he purfued him even into the market-
place.

It is a bold philofophy that rejects; without ce-
remonyj principles which irrefiftibly govern the
belief and the conduct of all mankind in the
common concerns of life ; and to which the phi-
lofopher himfelf mult yield, after he imagines he
hath confuted them. Such principles are older;
and of more authority, than Philofophy: (he refts
Upon them as her bafis, not they upon her. If fhe
could overturn them, (he muft be buried in their
ruins ; but all the engines of philofophical fubcil-
' ty are too weak for this purpofe ; and the at-
tempt is no lefs ridiculous, than if a mechanic
fhould contrive an axis in peritrochib to remove
the earth out of its place ; or if a mathematician
fhould pretend to demonftfate, that things equal
to the fame thing are hot equal to one another.
Zeno endeavoured to demonftrate the impof-
fibility of motion -, Hobbes, that there was no
difference between right and wrong ; and this
author, that no credit is to be given to our fen-
fes, to our memory, or even to demonstration.
B 2 Such


20 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap, I.
Such philofophy is juftly ridiculous, even to thofe
who cannot detect the fallacy of it. It can have
no other tendency, than to ftiew the acutenefs of
the fophift, at the expence of difgracing reafon
and human nature, and making mankind Yahoos.

SECT. VI.

Of the Treatife of human nature.

"J~HEItE are other prejudices againft this
fyftem of human nature, which, even up-
on a general view, may make one diffident of it.

Des Cartes, Hobbes, and this author, have
each of them given us a fyftem of human nature j
an undertaking too vaft for .any one man, how
great foever his genius and abilities may be.
There muft furely be reafon to apprehend, that
many parts of human nature never came under
their obfervation •, and that others have been
ftretchedand diftorted, to fill up blanks, andcom-
plete the fyftem. Chriftopher Columbus, or Se-
baftian Cabot, might almoft as reafonably have
undertaken to give us a complete mapof America.

There is a certain character and ftyle in na-
ture's works, which is never attained in the molt
perfedl imitation of them. This feems to be
wanting in the fyftems of human nature I have
mentioned, and particularly inthelaft. One may
fee a puppet make variety of motions and aefti-
culations, which ftrike much at firft view *? but
when it is accurately obierved, and taken to

pieces,


Seft.6. INTRODUCTION. 21
pieces, our admiration ceafes ; we comprehend
the whole art of the maker. How unlike is it
to that which it repre fents ! what a poor piece
of work compared with the body of a man, whofe
ftrufture the more we know, the more won-
ders we difcover in it, and the more fenfible we
are of our ignorance ! Is the mechanifm of the
mind fo eafily comprehended, when that of the
body is fo difficult ? Yet, by this fyftem, three
laws of affociation, joined to a few original feel-
ings, explain the whole mechanifm of fenfe, ima-.
gination, memory, belief, and of all the actions
and pafiions of the mind. Is this the man that
Nature. made ? I furpecT: it is not fo eafy to look
behind the fcenes in Nature's work. This is a
puppet furely, contrived by too bold an appren-
tice of Nature, to mimic her work. It fliews to-
lerably by candle light, but brought into clear
day, and taken to pieces, it will appear to be a
man made with mortar and a trowel. The more
we know of other parts of nature, the more we
like and approve them. The little I know of the
planetary fyftem ; of the earth which we inha-
bit; of minerals, vegetables, and animals; of my
own body, and of the laws which obtain in thefe
parts of nature, opens to my mind grand and beau-
tiful fcenes, and contributes equally to my hap- •
pinefs and power. But when I look within, and
confider the mind itfelf, which makes me capa-
ble of all thefe profpects and enjoyments ; if it is
indeed what the Treatife of human nature makes
it, I find I have been only in an incha'nted caftle,
B 3 impofed


22 Of the HUM AN MIND. Chap. I,
jmpofed upon by fpeftres and apparitions. I blufb,
inwardly to think how I have been deluded ; I
am afnamed of my frame, and can hardly for-
bear expoftulating with my deftiny : Is this thy
paftime, O Nature, to put fuch tricks upon a fil-
ly creature, and then to take off the mafic, and
fhew him how he hath been befooled ? If this is
the philofophy of human nature, my foul enter
thou not into her fecrets. It is furely the forbidden,
tree of knowledge; I no fooner tafte of it, than
I perceive rnyfelf naked, and ftript of all things,
yea even of my very felf. 1 fee rnyfelf, and the
whole frame of nature, {brink into fleeting ideas,
which, like Epicurus's atqms, dance about in,
emptinefs.

S E C T. VII.

The fyjlem of all tbefe authors is tbffame, and leads
to fcepticifm.

T)UT what if thefe profound difquifitions into
the firft principles of human nature, do natu-
rally and neceffarily plunge a man into this abyfs
of fcepticifm ? May we not reafonably judge fa
from what hath happened ? Des Cartes no foon-
er began to dig in this mine, than fcepticifm was
ready to break in upon him. He did what he
could to (hut it out. Malebranche and Locke,
who dug deeper, found the difficulty of keeping
out this enemy ftill to increafe •, but they la-
boured honeftly in the defign. Then Berkeley,

v/ho


.Seft. 7. INTRODUCTION. 23

who carried on the work, defpairing of fecuring
all, bethought himfelf of an expedient : By gi-
ving up the material world, which he thought
might be fpared without lofs, and even with ad-
vantage, he hoped by an impregnable partition
to fecure the world of fpirits. But, alas ! the
Treatife of human nature wantonly fapped the
foundation of this partition, and drowned all in
one univerfal deluge.

Thefe fa&s, which are undeniable, do indeed
give reafon to apprehend, that Des Cartes's fy-
ftem of the human understanding, which I fliall
beg leave to call the ideal fyft em, and which, with
fome improvements made by later writers, is now
generally received, hath fome original defect;
that this fcepticifm is inlaid in it, and reared
along with it; and, therefore, that we mull: lay it
open to the foundation, and examine the materi-
als, before we can expedt to raife any folid and ufe-
ful fabric of knowledge on this fubjed,

SECT. VIII. ,

We ought not to defpair of a better.

Y> U T is this to be defpaired of, becaufe Des
Cartes and his followers have failed ? by no
means. This pufillanimity would be injurious to
ourfelves,- and injurious to truth. Ufeful difco-
veries are fometimes indeed the effecT: of iuperior
genius, but more frequently they are the birth of
time and of accidents. A traveller of good judg-

B 4 nunc


24 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. I.

ment may miftake his way, and be unawares led
into a wrong track; and while the road is fair
before him, he may go on without fufpicion and
be followed by others ; but when it ends in a
coal-pit, it requires no great judgment to know
that he hath gone wrong, nor perhaps to find out
what mifled him.

In the mean time, the unprofperous ftate of this
part of philofophy hath produced an effect, fome-
what difcouraging indeed to any attempt of this
nature, but an effect which might be expected,
and which time only and better fuccefs can reme-
dy. Senfible men, who never will be fceptics in
matters of common life, are* apt to treat with fo-
vereign contempt every thing that hath been
faid, or is to be faid, upon this fubject. It is me-
taphyfic, fay they : Who minds it ? Let fchola-
ftic fophifters intangle themfelves in their own
cobwebs ; I am refolved to take my own exift-
ence, and the exiftence of other things, upon
trnft •, and to believe that fnow is cold, and ho-
ney fweet, whatever they may fay to the contra-
ry. He muft either be a fool, or want to make
a fool of me, that would reafon me out of my rea-
fon and fenfes.

I confefs I know not what a fceptic can anfwer
to this, nor by what good argument he can plead
even for a hearing ; for either his reafoning is fo-
phiftry, and fo deferves contempt; or there is no
truth in human faculties, and then why mould

we reafon ?

,. ,• .„: If


Seft.8. INTRODUCTION. a$
If therefore a man find himfelf intangled in
thefe metaphyfical toils, and can find no other
way to efcape, let him bravely cut the knot which
he cannot loofe, curfe metaphyfic, and diffuade
every man from meddling with it. For if I have
been led into bogs and quagmires by following
an ignis fqtuus, what can I do better than to
warn others to beware of it ? If Philofpphy con-
tradicts herfelf, befools her votaries, and deprives
them of every object worthy to be purfued or
enjoyed, let her be fent back to the infernal re-
gions from which Ihe mull have had her original.
But is it abfolutely certain that this fair lady
is of the party ? Is it not poifible fhe may have
been mifreprefented ? Have not men of genius in-
former ages often made their own dreams to pafs
for her oracles ? Ought lhe then to be condemn-
ed without any farther hearing ? This would be
unreafonable. I have found her in "all "other mat-
ters an agreeable companion, a faithful counfel-
lor, a friend to Common Senfe, and to the hap-
pinefs of mankind. This juftly intitles her to
my correfpondence arid confidence, till I find
pfallible proofs of her infidelity.


CHAP.


#6

CHAP. II,
Of SMELLING.

SECT. I.

The order of proceeding. 'Of the medium and,
organ of fmell,

T T is fo difficult to unravel the operations of
the human understanding, and to reduce
them to their firft principles, that we cannot
expect to fucceed in the attempt, but by begin-
ning with the ' fimpleft, and proceeding by very
cautious fteps to the more complex. The five
external fenfes may, for this reafon, claim to be
firft confidered in an analyfis of the human facul-
ties. And the fame reafon ought to determine us
to make a choice even among the fenfes, and to
give the precedence, not to the nobleft, or moft
ufeful, but to the fimpleft, and that whofe objects
are leaft in danger of being miftaken for other
things.

In this view, an analyfis of our fenfations may
be carried on, perhaps with moft eafe and diftinct-
nefs, by taking them in this order : Smelling,
Tafting, Hearing, Touch, and, laftof all, Seeing.
Natural philofophy informs us, that all animal
and vegetable bodies, and probably all or moft
other bodies, while expofed to the air, are conti-
nually fending forth effluvia of vaft fubtilty, not
6 only


Sedti. Of SMELLING. %y

only in their ftate of life and growth, but in the
ftates of fermentation and putrefaction. Thefe
volatile particles do probably repel each other,
and fo fcatter themfelves in the air, until they
meet with other bodies to which they have fome
chymical affinity, and with which they unite, and
form new concretes. All the fmell of plants, and
of other bodies, is caufed by thefe volatile parts,
" and is fmelled wherever they are fcattered in the
air : And the acutenefs of fmell in fome animals,
ihews us, that thefe effluvia fpread far, and mufj;
be inconceivably fubtile.

Whether, as fome chymifts conceive, every
fpecjes of bodies hath afpiritus reffor, a kind of
foul, which caufes the fmell, and all the fpecific
virtues of that body, and which, being extreme-
ly volatile, flies about in the air in queft of a'pro-
per receptacle, I do not inquire. This, like moft
other theories, is perhaps rather the product of
imagination than of juft induction. But that all
bodies arefmelled by means of effluvia which they
emit, and which are drawn into the noftrils
fllong with the air, there is no reafon to doubt.
So that there is manifeft appearance of defign in
placing the organ of fmell in the infide of that
panal, through which the air is continually pafs-
ing in inipiration and expiration.

Anatomy informs us, that the membrana pitui-
taria, and'th'e olfactory nerves, which are diftri-
buted %o the villous parts of this membrane, are
the organs deftined by the wifdom of nature to
f;hj,s fenfe ; fo that when a body emits no efflu-
via,


aS Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. II.

via, or when they do not enter into the nofe, or
■when the pituitary membrane or olfactory nerves
are rendered unfit to perform their office, it can-
not be fmelled.

Yet, notwithftanding this, it is evident, that
neither the organ of fmell, nor the medium, nor
any motions we can conceive excited in the mem-
brane above mentioned, or in the nerve or ani-
mal fpirits, do in the leaft refemble the fenfation
of fmelling} nor could that fenfation of itfelf
ever have led us to think of nerves, animal fpi-
rits, or effluvia.

SECT. II.

The fenfation confldered abftraBly,

TT A V I N G premifed thefe things, wiph
regard to the medium and organ of
this fenfe, let us now attend carefully to what
the mind is-confcious of when we fmell a rofe or
a lily ; and fxnce our language affords no other
name for this fenfation, we fhall call \t a fmell or
odour, carefully excluding from the meaning of
thofe names every thing but the fenfation itfelf,
at leaft till we have examined it.

Suppofe a perfon who never had this fenfe be-
fore, to receive it all at once, and to fmell a
rofe; can he perceive any fimilitude or agree-
ment between the fmell and the rofe ? or indeed
between it and any other objeft whatfoever ?
Certainly he cannot. He finds himfelf affe&ed


Sea. 2. Of SMELLING. 29

in a new way, he knows not why or from what
caufe. Like a man that feels fome pain or plea-
fure formerly unknown to him, he is confcious
that he is not the caufe of it himfelf ; but can-
not, from the nature of the thing, determine
whether it is caufed by body or fpirit, by fome*
thing near, or by fomething at a diftance. It
has no fimilitude to any thing elfe, fo as to ad-
mit of a comparifon ; and therefore he can con-
clude nothing from it, unlefs perhaps that there
muft be fome unknown caufe of it.

It is evidently ridiculous, to afcribe to it
figure, colour, extenfion, or any other quality of
bodies. He cannot give it a place, any more
than he, can give a place to melancholy or joy :
nor can he conceive it to have any exiftence, but
when it is fmelled. So that it appears to be*'. a
fimple and original affe&ion or feeling of the
mind, altogether inexplicable and unaccountable.
It is indeed impoflible that it can be in any body :
It is a fenfation, and a fenfation can only be in a
fentient thing.

The various odours have each their different
degrees of ftrength or weaknefs. Moft of them
are agreeable or difagreeable ; and frequently
thofe that are agreeable when weak, are difagree-
able when ftronger. When we compare diffe-
rent fmells together, we can perceive very few
refemblances or contrarieties, or indeed relations
of any kind between them. They are all fo fimple
in' themfelves, and fo different from each other,
that it is hardly poflible to divide them into gene-
8 ra %


3 o Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. ft.
ra, and /pedes.. ' Moft of the names we give
them are particular ; as the fmell of a rofe, of a
jejfamine, and the like. Yet there are fome ge-
neral names ; as fweet, Jlinkifig, mufly, putrid^
cadaverous, aromatic. Some of them feem to re-
frefh and animate the mind, others to deaden
and deprefs it.

SECT. III.

Senfatioti and rememhrance, natural principles of
belief.

C O far we have confidered this fenfation ab-
ftraclly. Let us next compare it with other
things to which it bears fome relation. And
firft I mall compare this fenfation with the re-
membrance^ and the imagination of it.

I can think of the fmell of a rofe when I
do not fmell it •, and it is poffible that when I
think of it, there is neither rofe nor fmell any
where exifting. But when I fmell it, I am ne-
ceflarily determined to believe that" the fenfa-*
fation really exifts. This is common to all fenfa-
tions, that as they cannot exift but in being per-
ceived, fo they cannot be perceived but they
muft exift. I tould as eafily doubt of my own
exiftence, as of the exiftence of my fenfationsi
Even thofe profound philofophdrs who have en-
deavoured to difprove their own exiftence, have
yet left their fenfations to ftand upon their own

bottom,


Se£t. 3. Of SMELLING. 3*

bottom, ftript of a fubjeft, rather than call in
queftion the reality of their exiftence.

Here then a fenfation, a fmell for inftance,
may be prefented to the mind three different
ways : it may be fmelled, it may be remember-
ed, it may be, imagined or thought of. In the
firfl: cafe, it is nece'fTarily accompanied with a
belief of its prefent exiftence -, in the fecond,
it is neceffarily accompanied with a belief of its
paft exiftence ; and in the laft, it is not accom-
panied with belief at all, but is what the logi-
cians call a Jimph apprehenjion:

"Why fenfation fhould compel our belief of
the prefent exiftence of the thing, memory a
belief of its paft exiftence, and imagination no
belief at all, I believe no philofopher can give
a fhadow of reafon, but that fuch is the nature of
thefe operations : They are all fimple and origi-
nal, and therefore inexplicable acts of the
mind.

Suppofe that once, and only once, I fmelled
a tuberofe in a certain room where it grew in
a pot, and gave a very grateful perfume. Next
day I relate what I faw and fmelled. When I
attend as carefully as I can to what paffes in my
mind in this cafe, it appears evident, that the
very thing I faw yefterday, and the fragrance I
fmelled, are now the immediate objects of my
mind when I remember it. Further, I can ima-
gine this pot and flower tranfported to the room
where I now fit, and yielding the fame perfume.
Here likewife it appears, that the individual thing

which


$2 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. If;
which I faw and fmelled, is the objecl: of my ima-
gination.

Philofophers indeed tell me, that the imme-
diate object of my memory and imagination in
this cafe, is not thepaftfenfation, but an ideaof it,
an image, pharitafm, or fpecies of the odour
I fmelled : that this idea now exifts in my mind*
or in my fenforium •, and the mind contemplating
this prefentidea, finds it a reprefentation of what
is paft, or. of what may exift ; and accordingly
calls it memory, or imagination. This is the
dodtrine of the ideal philofophy ; which we fhall
not now examine, that we may not interrupt the
thread of the prefent investigation. Upon the
ftridteft attention, memory appears to me to
have things that are paft, and not prefent ideasj
for its object. We fhall afterwards examine this
fyftem of ideas, and endeavour to make it ap-
pear, that no folid proof has ever been advanced
of the existence of ideas ; that they are a mere
fiction and hypothefis, contrived to folve the
phaenomena of the human understanding ; that
they do not at all anfwer this end ; and that this
hypothefis of ideas or images of things in the
mind, or in the fenforium, is the parent of thofe
many paradoxes fo fhocking to common fenfe,
and of that fcepticifm, which difgrace our phi-
lofophy of the, mind, and have brought upon it
the ridicule and contempt of fenfible men.

In the mean time, I beg leave to think with
the vulgar, that when I remember the fmell of
the tuberofe, that very fenfation which I had

yefterday,


Sect. 3. Of SMELLING. 33

yefterday, and which has now no more any ex-
iftence, is the immediate object of my memory »
and when I imagine it pfefent, the fenfation it-
felf, and not any idea of it, is the object of my
imagination. But though the object of my fen-
fation, memory, and imagination, be in this cafe
the fame, yet thefe acts or operations of the
mind are as different, and as eafily diftinguifti-
able, as fmell, taftej and found. I am confcious
of a difference in kind between fenfation and me-
mory, and between both and imagination. I
find this alfoj that the fenfation compels my be-
lief of the prefent exiftence of the fmell, and
memory my belief of its pad exiftence. There
is a fmell, is the immediate teftimony of fenfe ;
there Was a fmell, is the immediate teftimony of
memory. If you afk me, why I believe that the
fmell exifts ? I can give no other reafon, nor
fhall ever be able to give any other, than that I
fmell it. If you afk- why I believe that it ex-
ifted yefterday ? I can give no other reafon but
that I remember it.

Senfation and memory therefore are fimple,
Original, and perfectly diftirtct operations of the
mind, and both of them are original principles
of belief. Imagination is diftinct from both,
but is no principle of belief. Senfation implies
the prefent exiftence of its object ; memory its
paft exiftence ; but imagination views its object
naked, and without any belief of its exiftence or
non-exiftence, . and is therefore what the fchools
cv\\ fimple appreh.enfion.

C SECT.


34 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap, II.

SECT. IV.

Judgment and belief in fome cafes precede fimple
apprehenfion.

"OUT here again the ideal fyftem comes in our
way : it teaches us, that the firft operation
of the mind about its ideas, is fimple apprehen-
fion ; that is, the bare conception of a thing
without any belief about it ; and that after we
have got fimple apprehenfions, by comparing
them together, we perceive agreements or difa-
greements between them ; and that this percep-
tion of the agreement or difagreement of ideas,
is all that we call belief, judgment, or know-
ledge. Now, this appears to me to be all fic-
tion, without any foundation in nature : for it
is acknowledged by all, that fenfation muft go
before memory and imagination ; and hence it
neceffarily follows, that apprehenfion accompa-
nied with belief and knowledge, mull go before
fimple apprehenfion, at leaft in the matters we
are now fpeaking of. So that here, inftead of
faying, that the belief or knowledge is got by
putting together and comparing the fimple ap-
prehenfions, we ought rather to fay, that the
fimple apprehenfion is performed by refolving
and analysing a natural and original judgment.
And it is with the operations of the mind, in
this cafe, as with natural bodies, which are in-
deed compounded of fimple principles or ele-
ments.


Seft. 4. Of SMELLING. 33

ments. Nature does not exhibit thefe eleriients
feparate, to be compounded by us ; fhe exhibits
them mixed and compounded in concrete bodies,
and it is only by art and chymical analyfis that
they can be feparated.

SECT. V.

Two theories of the nature of belief refuted. Con*
clujiom from what hath been faid.

DUT what is this belief or knowledge which
accompanies fenfation aud memory ? Every
man knows what it is, but no man can de-
fine it. Does any man pretend to define fenfa-
tion, or to define confcioufneis ? It is happy in*
deed that no man does. And if no philofopher
had endeavoured to define and explain belief,
fome paradoxes in philofophy, more incredible
than ever were brought forth by the moft abjecT:
fuperftition, or the moft frantic enthufiafm, had
never feen the light. Of this kind furely is
that modern difcovery of the ideal philofophy,
that fenfation, memory, belief, and imagina-
tion, when they have the fame object, are only
different degrees of ftrength and vivacity in the
idea. Suppofe the idea to be that of a future
ftate after death ; one man believes it firmly 5
this means no more than that he hath a ftrong
and lively idea of it : Another neither believes
nor difbelieves ; that is,* he has a weak and faint
idea. Suppofe now a third perfon believes firm-*
C 2 ly


3 6 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. II.
ly that there is no fuch thing ; I am at a lofs
to know whether his idea be faint or lively : If
it is faint, then there may be a firm belief where
the idea is faint ; if the idea is lively, then the be-
lief of a future ftate and the belief of no future
ftate muft be one and the fame. The fame ar-
guments that are ufed to prove that belief implies
only a ftronger idea of the object than fimple ap-
prehenfion, might as well be ufed to prove that
love implies only a ftronger idea of the object
than indifference. And then what fhall we fay
of hatred, which muft upon this hypothefis be
a degree of love, or a degree of indifference ?
If it fhould be faid, that in love there is fome-
thing: more than an idea, to wit, an affection of


o


the mind ; may it not be faid with equal reafon,
that in belief there is fomething more than an
idea, to wit, an affent or perfuafion of the mind ?
But perhaps it may be thought as ridiculous to
argue againft this ftrange opinion, as to maintain
it. Indeed, if a man fhould maintain, that a
circle, a fquare, and a triangle, differ only in
magnitude, and not in figure, I believe he would
find nobody difpofed either to believe him or to
argue againft him ; and yet I do not think it lefs
(hocking to common fenfe, to maintain, that
fenfation, memory, and imagination, differ Only
in degree, and not in kind. I know it is faid,
that in a delirium, or in dreaming, men are apt
to miftake one for the other. But does it fol-
low from this, that men' who are neither dream-
ing, nor in a delirium, cannot diftinguifh them ?

But


Sea. 5. Of SMELLING. 37

But how does a man know, that he is not in a
delirium ? I cannot tell : neither can I tell how
a man knows that he exifts : But if any man fe-
rioufly doubts whether he is in a delirium, I
think it highly probable that he is, and that it
is time to feek for a cure, which I am perfuad-
ed he will not find in the whole fyftem of logic.

I mentioned before Locke's notion of belief
or knowledge : he holds that it eonfifts in a per-
ception of the agreement or difagreement of
ideas ; and this he values himfelf upon as a very
important difcovery.

We fhall have occafion afterwards to examine
more particularly this grand principle of Locke's
.philofophy, and to Ihew that it is one of the
main pillars of modern fcepticifm, although he
had no intention to make that ufe of it. At
prefent let us only confider how it agrees with
the inftances of belief now under confideration ;
and whether it gives any light to them. I be-
lieve that the fenfation I have, exifts ; and that
the fenfation I remember, does not now exift,
but did exift yefterday. Here, according to
Locke's fyftem, I compare the idea of a fenfation
with the ideas of paft and prefent exiftence : at
one time I perceive that this idea agrees with
that of prefent exiftence, butdifagrees with that of
paft exiftence ; but at another time it agrees with
the ideaof paft exiftence, and difagtiees with that of
prefent exiftence. Truly thefe ideas feem to be
yery capricious in their agreements and difagree-
ments. Befides, 1 cannot for my heart con-
C 3 ceiye


g« Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. II,
ceive what is meant by either. I fay a fenfation
exifts, and I think I understand clearly what I
mean. But you want to make the thing clearer,
and for that end tell me, that there is an agree-
ment between the idea of that fenfation and
the idea of exiftence. To fpeak freely, this
conveys to me no light, but darknefs ; I can
conceive no otherwife of it, than as an odd and
obfcure circumlocution. I conclude, then, that
the belief which accompanies fenfation and me-
mory, is a fimple aft of the mind, which can?-
not be defined. It is in this refpefl: like feeing
and hearing, which can never be fo defined as
to be underftood by thofe who have not thefe fa-
culties : and to fuch as have them, no definition
can make thefe operations more clear than they
are already. In like manner, every man that
has any belief, and he muft be a curiofity that
has none, knows perfectly what belief is, but
can never define or explain it. I conclude alfo,
that fenfation, memory, and imagination, even
where they have the fame object, are operations
pf a quite different nature, and perfectly diftin-
guifhable by thofe who are found and fober. A
.man that is in danger of confounding them, is
indeed to be pitted -, but whatever relief he may
find from another airth, he can find none from lo-
gic or metaphyfic. I conclude further, that it
js no lefs a part of the human conftitution, to
believe the prefent exiftence of our fenfations,
and to believe the paft exiftence of what we re-
rnerriber ? fhan it is to believe that twice two

ipak,s


Sett. 5. Of S M E L L I N G. 39

make four. The evidence of fenfe, the evi-
dence of memory, and the evidence of
the neceffary relations of things, are all di-
ftincl: and original kinds of evidence, equal-
ly grounded on Our conltitution : none of them
depends upon, or can be refolved into another.
To reafon againft any of thefe kinds of evidence,
is abfurd ; nay to reafon for them, is abfuid.
They are firft principles ; and fuch fall not with-
in the province of Reafon, but of Common
Senfe.

SECT. VI.

Apology for metaphyseal abfurdities. Senfation
without a fentient, a canfequence of the theory
of ideas. Conferences of this Jlrange opi-
nion.

Tjr A VI NG confidered the relation which the
fenfation of fmelling bears to the remem-
brance and imagination of it, I proceed to con-
fider, what relation it bears to a mind, or fen-
tient principle. It is certain, no man can con-
ceive or believe fmelling to exift of itfelf, with-
out a mind, or fomething that has the power of
fmelling, of which it is called a fenfation, an
operation, or feeling. Yet if any man fhould
demand a proof, that fenfation cannot be with-
out a mind or fentient being, I conf'efs that I
can give none ; and that to pretend to prove it,
feems to me almoft as abfurd as to deny it.

This
C 4


40 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. II.

This might have been faid without any apo-
logy before the Treatife of human nature appear-
ed in the world. For till that time no man, as
far as I know, ever thought either of calling
in queftion that principle, or of giving a
reafon for his belief of it. Whether think-
ing beings were of an ethereal or igneous nature,
whether material or immaterial, was varioufly
difputed ; but that thinking is an operation of
fome kind of being or other, was always taken
for granted, as a principle that could not pof-
fibly admit of doubt.

However, fince the author above mentioned,
who is undoubtedly one ofthe m oft acute meta-
phyficians that this or any age hath produced,
hath treated it as a vulgar prejudice, and maintain-
ed, that the mind is only a fucceffion of ideas
and impreffions without any fubjecT: ; his opini-
on, however contrary to the common apprehen-
sions of mankind, deferves refpect. I beg there-
fore, once for all, that no offence may be taken
at charging this or other metaphyfical notions
with abfurdity, or with being contrary to the
common fenfe of mankind. No difparagement
is meant to the underftandings ofthe authors or
maintainers of fuch opinions. Indeed, they com-
monly proceed not from defect of understanding,
but from an excefs of refinement : the reafoning
that leads to them, often gives new light to the
fubjecT, and fliews real genius and deep penetra-
tion in the author ; and the premifes do more

than attone for the conclufion,

.: v ,.. .... ■. • |f


Seft. 6. Of SMELLING, 41

If there are certain principles, as I think there
are, which the conftitution of our nature leads
,us to believe, and which we are under a necef-
lity to take for granted }n the common concerns
of life, without being able to give a reafon for
jhem ; thefe are what we call the principles of
common fenfe ; and what is manifestly contrary
to them, is what we call abfurd.

Indeed, if it is true, and to be received as a prin-
ciple of philofophy, That fenfation and thought
may be without a thinking being ; it muft be
acknowledged to be the moft wonderful difcove^
ry that this or any other age hath produced. The
received doctrine of ideas is the principle from
which it is deduced, and of which indeed it feems
to be a juft and natural confequence. And it is
probable, that it would not have been fo late a
difcovery, but that it is fo fhocking and repug-
nant to the common apprehenlions of mankind,
that it required an uncommon degree of philofo-
phical intrepidity to ufher it into the world. ' It
is a fundamental principle of the ideal fyftem,
That every object of thought muft be an impref-
fion, or an idea, that is, a faint copy of fome
preceding impreffion. This is a principle fo
commonly received, that the author above men-
tioned, although his whole fyftem is built upon
it, never offers the leaft proof of it. It is upon
this principle, as a fixed point, that he erects
his metaphyfical engines, to overturn heaven and
earth, body and fpirit. And indeed, in my ap-
prehenfion, it is altogether fufficient for the pur-
' 5 k pofe.


4 z Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. II.
pofe. For if impreffions and ideas are the on-
ly objects of thought, then heaven and earth,
and body and fpirit, and every thing you pleafe,
muft fignify only impreffions and ideas, or they
muft be words without any meaning. It feems,
therefore, that this notion, however orange, is
clofely connected with the received doctrine of
ideas, and we muft either admit the conGlufion,"
or call in queftion the premifes.

Ideas feem to have fomething in their nature
unfriendly to other exiftences. They were firft
introduced into philofophy, in the humble cha-
raft^r of images or reprefentatives of things ; and
in this character they feemed not only to be in-
offenfive, but to ferve admirably well for ex-
plaining the operations of the human understand-
ing. But fince men began to reafon clearly and
diftinctly about them, they have by degrees fup-
planted their conftituents, and undermined the
exiftence of every thing but themfelves. Firft,
they difcarded all fecondary qualities of bodies ;
and it was found out by their means, that fire is
not hot, nor fnow cold, nor honey fweet ; and,
in a word, that heat and cold, found, colour,
tafte, and ftnell, are nothing but ideas or impref-
fions, Bilhop Berkeley advanced them a ftep
higher, and found out, by juft reafoning, from
thefame principles, thatextenfion, folidity, fpace,
figure, and body, are ideas, and that there is no-
thing in nature but ideas and fpirits. But the
triumph of ideas was completed by the Treatife
of human nature, which difcards fpirits alfo, and

leaves


Sett. 6. Of S M E L L I N G. 43

leaves ideas and impreffions as the fole exiftences
in the univerfe. What if at laft, having nothing
elfe to contend with, they mould fall foul of
one another, and leave no exiftence in nature at
all? This would furely bring philofophy into
danger •, for what fhould we have left to talk or
to difpute about ?

However, hitherto thefe philofophers acknow-
ledge the exiftence of impreffions and ideas -, they
acknowledge certain laws of attraction, or rules
of precedence, according to which ideas and im-
preffions range themfelves in various forms, and
fucceed one another: but that they fhould be-
long to a mind, as its proper goods and chattels,
this they have found to be a vulgar error. Thefe
ideas are as free and independent as the birds of
the air, or as Epicurus's atoms when they purfuqd
their journey in the vaft inane. Shall we con-
ceive them like the films of things in the Epicu-
rean fyftem ?

Vrincipio hoc dicp, rerum firmdacra vagarj,
MultH modis multis, in cuntlas undique parieif
Tenuia, qu^e facile inter fe junguntur in auris,
Qfrvia cum yeniunt. Lucr.

Or do they rather refemble Ariftotle's intelligi-
ble fpecies after they are fhot-forth from the, ob-
ject, and before they have yet (truck upon the
paffive intellect ? But why fhould we feek to com-
pare them with any thing, fince there is nothing
>n nature but themfelves ? They make the whole

furniturg


44 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. II.
furniture of the univerfe ; ftarting into exiftence,
or out of it, without any caufe ; combining in-
to parcels, which the vulgar call minds ; and fuc-
ceeding one another by fixed laws, without time,
place, or author of thofe laws.

Yet, after all, thefe felf-exiftent and indepen-
dent ideas look pitifully naked and deftitute,
when left thus alone in the univerfe, and feefn,
upon the whole, to be in a worfe condition than
they were before. Des Cartes, Malebranche,
and Locke, as they made much ufe of ideas,
treated them handfomely, and provided them in
decent accommodation; lodging them either in the
pineal gland, or in the pure intellect, or even in
the divine mind. They moreover clothed them
with a commiffion, and made them reprefenta-
tives of things, which gave them fome dignity
and character. But the Treat ife of human nature,
though no lefs indebted to them, feems to have
made but a bad return, by bellowing upon them
this independent exiftence-, fince thereby they
are turned out of houfe and home, and fet adrift
in the world, without friend or connexion, with-
out a rag to cover their nakednefs ; and who
knows but the whole fyftem of ideas may perifh
by the indifcreet zeal of their friends to exalt
them ?

However this may be, it is certainly a moft
amazing difcovery, that thought and ideas may
be without any thinking being. A difcovery big
with confequences which cannot eafily be traced
by thofe deluded mortals who think and reafon in

the


Seft. 6. OfSMELLING. 45

the common track, We were always apt to ima-
gine, that thought fuppofed a thinker, and love a
lover, and treafon a traitor : but this, it feems,
was all a miftake ; and it is found out, that there
.may be treafon without a traitor, and love with-
out a lover, laws without a legifiator, and punifh-
ment without a fufferer, fucceflion without time,
and motion without any thing moved, or fpace
in which it may move : or if, in thefe cafes, ideas
are the lover, the fufferer, the traitor, it were
to be wifhed - that the author of this difcovery
had farther condefcended to acquaint us, whe-
ther ideas can converfe together, and be under
obligations of duty or gratitude to each other ;
whether they can make promifes and enter into
leagues and covenants, and fulfil or break them,
and be punifhed for the breach ? If one fetof ideas
makes a covenant, another brezks it, and a third
is punilhed for it, there is reafon to think that
juftice is no natural virtue in this fyftem.

It feemed very natural to think, that the Trea-
tife of human nature required an author, and a
very ingenious one too; but now we learn, that
it is only a fet of ideas which came together,
and arranged themfelves by certain aflbciations
and attractions.

After all, this curious fyftem appears not to
be fitted to the prefent ftate of human nature.
How far it may fuit forrie choice fpirits, w,ho are
refined from the dregs of common fenfe, I can-
not fay. It is acknowledged, I think, that even
thefe can enter into this fyftem only in their moft

Ipeculative


46 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. If,

fpeculative hours, when they foarfo high in pur-
fuit of thofe felf-exiftent ideas, as to lofe fight of
all other things. But when they condefcend to
mingle again with the human race, and to con-
verfe with a friend, a companion, or a fellow ci-
tizen, the ideal fyflem vanifhes ; common fenfe,
like an irrefiftible torrent, carries them along 5
and, in fpite of all their reafoning arid philofophy*
they believe their own exiftence, and the exifi>
ehce of other things.

Indeed, it is happy they do fo ; for if they*
ihould carry their clofet belief into the world,
the reft of mankind would confider them as dif-
eafed, and fend them to an infirmary. Therefore,
as Plato required certain previous qualifications
of thofe who entered his fchool, I think it would
be prudent for the doctors of this ideal philofo-
>phy to do the faitse, and to refufe admittance to
every man who is fo weak, as to imagine that he
ought to have the fame belief in folitude and in
company., or that his principles ought to have
any influence upon his practice : for this philofo-
phy is like a hobby-horfe, which a man in bad
health may ride in his clofet, without hurting his
reputation; but if he fhould take him abroad
with him to church, or to the exchange, or to
the play-houfe, his heir would immediately call a
jury, andfeize his eftate.


SECT.


Se&7< Of SMELLING. 47

SECT. VII.

The conception and belief of a fentient being or
mind, is fuggefted by our conftitution. The no-
tion of relations not always got by comparing the
related ideas.

T EAVlNG this philofbphy therefore to
thofe who have occafion for it, and can ufe
it difcreetly as a chamber-exercife, we may ftill
inquire, how the reft of mankind, and even the
adepts themfelves, except in fome folitary mo-
ments, have got fo ftrong and irrefiflible a belief,
that thought muft have a fubjecl:, and be the act
of fome thinking being : how every man believes
himfelf to be fomething diftinct from his ideas
and impreffions ; fomething which continues the
fame identical felf when all his ideas and im-
preflions are changed. It is impofiible to trace
the origin of this opinion in hiftory : for all lan-
guages have it interwoven in their original con-
ftruction. All nations have always believed it.
The conftitution of all laws and governments, as
well as the common tranfa&ions of life, fuppofe
it.

It is no lefs impoffible for any man to recol-
lect when Jie himfelf came by this notion : for,
as far back as we can remember, we were alrea-
dy in poffeffion of it, and as fuliy perfuaded of
our own exiftence, and the exiftence of other
things, as that one and one make two. It feems,

therefore,


4 8 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. II.
therefore, that this opinion preceded all reafon-
ing, and experience, and inftruction ; and this is
the more probable, becaufe we could not get it
by any of thefe means. It appears then to be an
undeniable fact, that from-thought or fenfation,-
all mankind, conftantly and invariably, from the
firft dawning of reflection, do infer a power or
faculty of thinking, and a permanent being or
mind to which that faculty belongs ; and that we'
as invariably afcribe all the various kinds of fen-
fation and thought we are confcious of, to one
individual mind or felf.

But by what rules of logic we make thefe in-
ferences, it is impofiible to mow ; nay, it is im-
pofiible to fhow how our fenfations and thoughts
can give us the very notion and .conception ei-
ther of a mind or of a faculty. The faculty of
fmelling is fomething very different from the ac-
tual fenfation of fmelling ; for the faculty may
remain when we have no fenfation. And the
mind is no lefs different from the faculty ; for it
continues the fame individual being when that fa-
culty is loft. Yet this fenfation fuggefts to us
both a faculty and a mind ; and not only fuggefts
the notion of them, but creates a belief of their
exiftence -, although it is impofiible to difcover,
by reafon, any tie or connection between one
and the other.

What fhall we fay then ? Either thofe infe-
rences which we draw from our fenfations, name-
ly, the exiftence of a mind, and of powers or fa-
culties belonging to it, are prejudices of philofb-

phy


Se&. 7. Of S M £ L L I N G. 49

phy or education, mere fidtionsof the mind, which
a wife man fhould throw off as he does the belief
of fairies , or they are judgments of nature, judg-
ments not got by comparing ideas, and percei-
ving agreements and difagreements, butimmedi- 1
ately infpired by our constitution.

If this laft is the Cafe, as 1 apprehend it is, it
will be impofiible to .fhake offthofeopinions, and
we muft yield to them at laft, though we strug-
gle hard to get rid of them. And if we could,
by a determined obftinacy, fhake off the princi-
ples of our nature, this is not to adt the philofo-
pher, but the fool or the madman. It is incum-
bent upon thofe who think that thefe are not na-
tural principles, to fhow, in the firft place, how
we can otherwife get the notion of a mind and
its faculties ; and then to fhow, how we come to
deceive ourfelves into the opinion that fenfation
Cannot be without a fentient being.

It is the received doctrine of philofophers, that
our notions of relations can only be got by com-
paring the related ideas : but, in the prefent cafe,
there feems to be an inftance to the contrary. It
is not by having firft: the notions of mind and
fenfation, and then comparing them together,
that we perceive the one to have the relation of
a fubject or fubftratum, and the other that of aa
act or operation : on the contrary, one of the
related things, to wit, fenfation, fuggefts to us
both the correlate and the relation.

I beg leave to make ufe of the word fuggefli-

on, becaufe I know not one more proper, to ex-

D prefa


5 o OftheHUMAN MIND. Ch^ II.
prefs a power of the mind, which feems entirely
to have efcaped the notice of philofophers, and
to which we owe many of our fimpje notions
which are neither impreffions nor ideas, as well as
many original principles of belief. I /hall endea-
vour to illuftrate, by an example, what I under-
ftand by this word. We all know, that a certain
kind of found fqggefts immediately to the mind,
a coach paffing in the ftreet •, and not only pro-
duces the imagination, butthe belief, thata coach
is paffing. Yet there is here no comparing of
ideas, no perception of agreements or difagree-
ments, to produce this belief; nor is there the
leaft fimilitude between the found we hear, and
the coach we imagine and believe to be paffing.
It is true that this fuggeftion is not natural and
original ; it is the refult of experience and ha-
bit. But I think it appears, from, what hath been
faid, that there are naturaj fuggeftions ; particu-
larly, that fenfation fuggefts the notion of prefent
exiftence, and the belief that what we perceive,
or feel, does now exift ; that memory fuggefts
the notion of pad exiftence, and the belief that
what we remember did exift in time paft ; and
that our fenfations and thoughts do alfo fuggeft
the notion of a mind, and the belief of its exift-
ence, and of its relation to our thoughts. By a
like natural principle it is, that a beginning of
exiftence, or any change in nature, fuggefts to
us the notion of a caufe, and compels our belief
of its exiftence. And in like manner, as fhall be
{hewn when we come to theefenfe of touch, cer-
tain


Sed. 7. Of S M E L L I N G. £1

tain fenfations of touch, by the conftitution of oup
nature, fuggeft to usextenfion, folidity, and mo*-
tion, which are nowife like to fenfations, although
they have been hitherto confounded with them.

SECT. VIII.

There is a quality or virtue in bodies, which we call
their fmell. How this is come fled in the imagi-
nation with the fenfation.

Wf E have confidered fmell as fignifying a fen-
fation, feeling, or irnpreffion upon the
mind ; and in this fenfe, it can only be in a mind,
or fentient being : but it is evident, that man-

[ kind give the name of fmell much more fre-
quently to fomething which they conceive to be
external, and to be a quality of body : they un-
derftand fomething by it which does not at all
infer a mind; and have not the leaft difficulty in
conceiving the air perfumed witharomaticodours
in the defarts of Arabia, or in fome uninhabited
ifland, where the human foot never trod. Every
fenfible day-labourer hath as clear a notion of
this, and as full a conviction of the poffibility of
it, as he hath of his own exiftence ; and can no
more doubt of the one than of the other.

j Suppofe that fuch a man meets with a modern
philofopher, and wants to be informed, what
fmell in plants is. The philofopher tells him,
that there is no fmell in plants, nor in any thing,
but in the mind ; that it is impofiible there can '
D i be


5 2 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. II.

be fmell but in a mind ; and that all this hath
been demonftrated by modern philofophy. The
plain man will, no doubt, be apt to think him
merry : but if he finds that he is ferious, his next
conclufion will be, that he is mad ; or that phi-
lofophy, like magic, puts men into a new world,
and gives them different faculties from common
men. And thus philofophy and common fenfe
are fet at variance. But who is to blame for it ?
In my opinion the philofopher is to blame. For
if he means by fmell, what the reft of mankind
moft commonly mean, he is certainly mad. Bat
if he puts a different meaning upon the word,
without oblerving it himlelf, or giving warning
to others ; he abufes language, and difgraces phi-
lofophy, without doing any fervice to truth : as
if a man fhould exchange the meaning of the
words daughter and cow, and then endeavour to
prove to his plain neighbour, that his cow is his
daughter, and his daughter his cow.

I believe there is not much more wifdom irt
many of thofe paradoxes of the ideal philofophy,
which to plain fenfible men appear to be palpa-
ble abfurdities, but with the adepts pafs for. pro-
found difcoveries. I refolve, for my own part,
always to pay a great regard to the dictates' of
common fenfe, and not to depart from them
without abfolute neceffity : and therefore I am
apt to think, that there is really fometfring in the
rofe or lily, which is by the vulgar called fmell,
and which continues to exift when it is not
fmelled,: and fhall proceed to inquire what this


13


Seft. 8; OfSMELLING. 53

is ; how we come by the notion of it; and what
relation this quality or virtue of fmell hath to the
fenfation, which we have been obliged to call by
the fame name, for want of another.

Let us therefore fuppofe, as before, a perfon
beginning to exercife the fenfe of fmelling : a
little experience will difcover to him, that the
nofe is the organ of this fenfe, and that the air,
or fomething in the air, is a medium of it. And
finding by farther experience, that when a rofe
is near, he has a certain fenfation ; when it is re-
moved, the -fenfation is gone; he finds a connec-
tion in nature betwixt the rofe and this fenfation.
The rofe is confidered as a caufe, occafion, or an-
tecedent, of the fenfation ; the fenfation as an ef-
fect or confequent of the prefence of the rofe :
they are afibciated in the mind, and conftantly
found conjoined in the imagination.

But here it deferves our notice, that altho'
the fenfation may feem more clofely related to
the mind its fubjeft, or to the nofe its organ ;
yet neither of thefe connexions operate fo pow-
erfully upon the imagination, as its connexion
with the rofe its concomitant. The reafon of this
feems to be, that its connexion with the mind
is more general, and noway diftinguifheth it from
other fmells, or even from taftes, founds, and
other kinds of fcnfations. The relation it hath
to the organ, is likewife general, and doth not
diftinguifh it from other fmells > but the con-
nection it hath with the rofe is fpecial, and con-
ftant; by which means theyibecome almoft in-
D^ 'fcparable


54 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. II.
feparable in the imagination, in like manner as
thunder and lightning, freezing and cold.

SECT. IX.

tfbat there is a principle in human nature, front
which the notion of this, as well as all dtber
natural virtues or caufes, is derived.


I


N order to illuftrate further how we come to
conceive a quality or virtue in the rofe which
we call fmell, and what -this fmell is, it is pro-
per to obferve, that the mind begins very early
to thirft after principles, which may direct it in
the exertion of its powers. The fmell of a
rofe is a certain affection or feeling of the mind ;
and as it is not conftant, but comes and goes, we
want to know when and where we may expect
it, and are uneafy till we find fomething, which
being prefent, brings this feeling along with it,
and being removed, removes it. This, when
found, we call the caufe of it ; not in a ftrict and
philofpphical fenfe : as if xhe feeling were really
effected or produced by that caufe, but in a po-
pular fenfe : for the mind is fatisfied, if there is
a conftant conjunction between them ; and fuch
caufes are in reality nothing elfe but laws of na-
ture. Having found the fmell thus conftantly
conjoined with the rofe, the mind is at reft, with-
out inquiring whether this conjunction is owing
to a real efficiency or not ; that being a philofo^
phical inquiry, which does not concern human


.»«*•


Sect. 9. Of SMELLING. 55

life. But every difcovery of fuch a coriftant
conjunction is of real importance in life, and
makes a llrong impreffion upon the mind.

So ardently do we defire to find every thing
that happens within our obfervation, thus con-
nected with fomething elfe, as its caufe orocca-
fion, that we are apt to fancy connections upon
the flighteft grounds : and this weaknefs is mofl
remarkable in the ignorant, who know leaft of
the real connections eftabliflied in nature. A
man meets with an unlucky accident on a certain
day of the year; and knowing no other caufe
of his misfortune, he is apt to conceive fome-
thing unlucky in that day of the calendar; and
if he finds the fame connection hold a fecond
time-, is ftrongly confirmed 1 in his fuperftition.
I remember, many years ago, a white ox was
brought into this country, of fo enormous a fize,
that people eame many miles to fee him. There
happened, feme months after, an uncommon fa*
tality among women in child-bearing. Two
fuch uncommon events following one another^
gave a fufpicion of their connection, and occa-
fioned a common opinion among the country-
people, that the white ox was the caufe of this
fatality.

However filly and ridiculous this opinion was,
it fprung from the fame root in human nature, on
which all natural philofophy grows ; namely, an
eager defire to find out connections in things,
and a natural, original, and unaccountable pro-
penfity to believe, that the connections which
D 4 we


$6 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. II.
we have obferved in time paft, will continue in
time to come. Omens, portents, good and bad
luck, palmiftry, aftrology, all the numerous arts
of divination, and of interpreting dreams, falfe
hypothefes and fyftems, and true principles in
the philofophy of nature, are all built upon the
fame foundation in the human conftitution -, and
are diftinguifhed only according as we conclude
rafhjy from too few inftances, or cautiouflyfrom
3 fufficient induction.

As it is experience only that difcovers thefe
connections between natural caufes and their ef-
fects ; without inquiring further, we attribute to
the caufe fome vague and indiftinct notion of
powerorvirtueto produce the effect. Andinmany
cafes, the purpofes of life do not make it neceflary
to give diftinct names to the caufe and the effect.
Whence ithappens, that beingclofely connected in
the imagination, altho' very unlike to each other,
one name ferves for both ; and, in common dif-
courfe, is moft frequently applied to that which,
of the two, is moft the objedr. of our attention.
This occaGons an ambiguity in many words,
which having the fame caufes in all languages, is
common to all, and is apt to be overlooked even
by philofophers. Some inftances will ferve both
to illuftrate and confirm what we have faid.

Magnetifm fignifies both the tendency of the
iron towards the magnet, and the power of the
magnet to produce that tendency : and if it was
alked, whether' it is a quality of the iron or of
the magnet ? one would perhaps be puzzled at

firfti


Sea. 9. Of SMELLING. 57

firftj but a little attention would difcover, that
we conceive a power or virtue in the magnet as
the caufe, and a motion in the iron as the effe<5t ;
and altho' thefe are things quite unlike, they are
ib united in the imagination, that we give the
common name of magnetifm to both. The fame
thing may be faid of gravitation^ which fome-
times fignifies the tendency of bodies towards the
earth, fbmetimes the attractive power of the
earth, which we conceive as the caufe of that
tendency. We may obferve the fame ambiguity
in fome of t Sir lfaac Newton's definitions; and
that even in words of his own making. In three
of his definitions, he explains very diftinctly
what he underftands by the abfolute quantity,
what by the accelerativc quantity, and what by
the motive quantity, of a centripetal force. In
the firft of thefe three definitions, centripetal
force is put for the caufe, which we conceive to
be fome power or virtue in the centre or central
body : in the two laft, the fame word is put for
the effect of this caufe, in producing velocity, or
in producing motion towards that centre.

Heat fignifies a fenfation, and cold a contrary
one. But heat likewife fignifies a quality or ftate
of bodies, which hath no contrary, but different
degrees. When a man feels the fame water hot
to one hand, and cold to the other, this gives
him occafion to diftinguifh between the feeling,
and the heat of the body •, and altho' he knows
that the fentations are contrary, he does not ima-
gincthat the body can have contrary qualities

at


58 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. If.

at the fame time. And when he finds a different
tafte in the fame body in ficknefs and in health,
he is eafily convinced, that the quality in the bo-
dy called tafte is the fame as before, altho' the
fenfations he has from it are perhaps oppofite.

The vulgar are commonly charged by philofo-
phers, with the abfurdity of imagining the fmell
in the rofe to be fomething like to the fenfation
of fmelling: but I think, unjuftly; for they nei-
ther give the fame epithets to both, nor do they
reafon in the fame manner from them. What is
fmell in the rofe ? It is a quality or virtue of the
rofe, or of fomething proceeding from it, which
we perceive by the fenfe of fmelling ; and this is
all we know of the matter. But what is fmel-
ling ? It is an aft of the mind, but is never ima-
gined to be a quality of the mind. Again, the.
fenfation of fmelling is conceived to infer ne-
ceffarily a mind or fentient being -, but fmell in
the rofe infers no fuch thing. We fay, This bo-
dy fmells fweet, that ftinks ; but we do not fay,
This mind fmells fweet, and that ftinks. There-
fore fmell in the rofe, and the fenfation which it
caufes, are not conceived, even by the vulgar,
to be things of the fame kind, altho' they have
the fame name.

From what hath been faid, we may learn,
that the fmell of a rofe fignifies two things. Firft,
A fenfation, which can have no exiftence but
when it is perceived, and can only be in a fen-
tient being or mind. Secondly, It fignifies fome
power, quality, or virtue, in the rofe, or in efflu-
via


St&.f. Of SMELLING. 59

via proceeding from it, which hath a permanent
exiftence, independent of the mind, and which
by the conftitution of nature, produce? the fen-
fation in us. By the original conftitution of our
nature, we are both led to believe, that there is
a permanent caufeof the fenfation, and prompt-
ed to feek after it; and experience determines
us to place it in the rofe. The names of all
fmells, taftes, founds, as well as heat and cold,
have a like ambiguity in all languages : but it de-
fences our attention, that thefe names are but
rarely, in common language, ufed to fignify the
fenfations; for the moft, part, they fignify the ex-
ternal qualities which are indicated by the fen-
fations. The caufe of which phenomenon I
take to be this. Our fenfations have very dif-
ferent degrees of ftrength. Some of them are
fo quick and lively, as to give us a great deal
either of pleafure or of uneafinefs : When this
is the cafe, we are compelled to attend to the
fenfation kfelf, and to make it an object of thought
and difcourfe ; we give it a name, which fignifies
nothing but the fenfation ; and in this cafe we
readily acknowledge, that the thing meant by
that name is in the mind only, and not in any
thing external* Such are the various kinds of
pain, ficknefs, and the fenfations of hunger and
other appetites. But where the fenfation is not
fo intefefting as to require to be made an object
of thought, our conftitution leads us to confider
it as a fign of fomething external, which hath a
conftanc conjunction with it; and having found

what


6o Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. II.
what it indicates, we give a name to that : the
fenfation, having no proper name, falls in as an
accefibry to the thing fignified by ir, and is con-
founded under the fame name. So that the name
may indeed be applied to the fenfition, but mod
properly and commonly is applied to the thing in-
dicated by that fenfation. The fenfations of fmell
tafte, found, and colour, are of infinitely more
importance as figns or indications, than they are
upon their own account; like the words of a
language, wherein we do not attend to the found,
but to the fenfe.

SECT. X.

Whether in fenfation the mind is aSlive or
faffive ?

*T< HERE is one inquiry remains, Whether
in fmelling, and in other fenfations, the
mind is acYive or pafiive ? This poffibly may
feem to be a queftion about words, or at leaft of
very fmall importance -, however, if it leads us
to attend more accurately to the operations of
our minds, than we are accuftomed to do, it is
upon that very account not altogether unprofit-
able. 1 think the opinion of modern philofo-
phers is, that in fenfation the mind is-altogether
paffive. And this undoubtedly is fo far true,
that we cannof raife any fenfation in our minds
by willing jt ; and, on the other hand, it feems
hardly poffible to avoid having the fenfation when

the


Sett. 10. Of SMELLING. 61

the object is prefented. Yet it feems like wife to
be true, that in proportion as the attention is more
or lefs turned to a fenfation, or diverted from it,
that fenfation is more or lefs perceived and re-
membered. Every one knows, that very in-
tenfe pain may be diverted by a furprife, or by
any thing that entirely occupies the mind. When
we are engaged in earneft converfation, the clock
may ftrike by us without being heard; at l'eaft
we remember not the next moment that we did
hear it. The noife and tumult of a great tra-
ding city, is not heard by them who have lived
in it all their days ; but it ftuns thofe ftrangers
who, have lived in the peaceful retirement of the
country. Whether therefore there can be any
fenfation where the mind is purely paffive, I will
not fay •, but I think we are confcious of having
given fome.attention to every fenfation which we
remember, though ever fo recent.

No doubt, where the impulfe is ftrongand un-
common, it is as difficult to withhold attention,
as it is to forbear crying out in racking pain, or
ftarting in a fudden fright : but how far both
might be attained by ftrong refolution and prac-
tice, is not eafy to determine. So that, al-
though the Peripatetics had no good reafon to
fuppofe an active and a paffive intellect, fince at-'
tention may be well enough accounted an act of
the will ; yet I think they came nearer to the
truth, in holding the mind to be in fenfation
partly paffive and partly active, than the moderns,
in affirming it to be purely paffive. Senfation,

imagination,


62 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. II.

imagination, memory, and judgment, have, by
the vulgar, in all ages, been confidered as afts of
the mind. The manner in which they are ex-
prefled in all languages, fhews this. When the
mind is much employed in them, we fay it is
very active ; whereas, if they were impreflions
only, as the ideal philofophy would lead us to
conceive, we ought in fuch a cafe rather to fay,
that the mind is very paflive: for I fuppofe no
man would attribute great activity to the paper
I write upon, becaufe it receives variety of cha-
racters.

The relation which the fenfation of fmell bears
to the memory and imagination of it, and to a
mind or fubject, is common to all our fenfations,
and indeed to all the operations of the mind :
the relation it bears to the will, is common to
it with all the powers of underftanding : and
the relation it bears to that quality or virtue of
bodies which it indicates, is common to it with
the fenfations of tafte, hearing, colour, heat,
and cold : fo that what hath been faid of this
fenfe, may eafily be applied to feveral of our fen-
fes, and to other operations of the mind ; and
this, I hope, will apologize for our infifting fo
long upon it.


CHAP.


i 63 •]

CHAP. III.

Of TASTING.

AG R E A T part of what hath been faid of
the fehfe of fmelling, is fo eafily applied
to thofe of tailing and hearing, that we fhall
leave the application entirely to the reader's judg-
ment, and fave ourfelves the trouble of a tedious
repetition.

It is probable that every thing that affedts the
tafte, is in fome degree foluble in the faliva. It
is not conceivable how any thing mould enter
readily, and of its own accord, as it were, into
the pores of the tongue, palate, and fauces, un-
lefs it had Fome chymical affinity to that liquor
with which thefe pores are always replete. It is
therefore an admirable contrivance of nature, that
the organs of tafte mould always be moift with a
liquor which is fo univerfal a menftruum, and
which deferves to be examined more than it hath
been hitherto,, both in that capacity, and as a
medical unguent. Nature teaches dogs, and
other animals, to ufe it in this laft way ; and its
fubferviency both to tafte and digeftion, Ihews
its efficacy in the former.

It is with manifeft defign and propriety, that

the organ of this fenfe guards the entrance of the

alimentary canal, as that of fmell, the entrance

of the canal for refpiration. And frpm thefe or-

7 gans


64 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. If.
gans being placed in fuch manner, that every
thing that enters into the ftomach muft undergo
the fcrutiny of both fenfes, it is plain, that they
were intended by nature to diftinguifh wholefome
food from that which is noxious. The brutes
have no other means of chufing their food ; nor
would mankind, in the favage ftate. And it is
very probable, that the fmell and tafte, no way
vitiated by luxury or bad habits, would rarely,
if ever, lead us to a wrong choice of food among
the productions of nature-, akho' the artificial
compofnionsof a refined and luxurious cookery, or
of chymiftry and pharmacy, may often impofe
upon both, and produce things agreeable to the
tafte and fmell, which are noxious to health. And
it is probable, that both fmell and tafte are vitia-
ted, and rendered lefs fit to perform their natural
offices, by the unnatural kind of life men com-
monly lead in fociety.

Thefe fenfes are likewife of great ufe to di-
ftinguilh bodies that cannot be diftinguiftied by
our other fenfes, and to difcern the changes
which the fame body undergoes, which in many
cafes are fooner perceived by tafte and fmell than
by any other means. How many things are there
in the market, the eating-houfe, and the tavern,
as well as in the apothecary and chymift's (hops,
which are known to be what they are given out
to be, and are perceived to be good or bad in
their kind, only by tafte or fmell ? And how far
our judgment of things, by means of our fenfes,
might be improved by accurate attention to the

fmall


Of TASTING. 65

fmall differences oftafte and fmell, and other fen-
fible qualities, is not eafy to determine; Sir
Ifaac Newton, by a noble effort of his great geni-
us, attempted, from the colour of opaque bodies,
to difcover the magnitude of the minute pellucid
parts, of which they are compounded : and who
knows what new lights natural philofophy may
yet receive from other fecondary qualities duly
examined ?

Some taftes and fmells Simulate the nerves*
and raife the fpirits : but fuch an artificial eleva-
tion of the fpirits is, by the laws of nature, fol-
lowed by a depreffion, which can only be relie-
ved by time, or by the repeated ufe of the like
Jlimulus. By the ufe of fuch things we create
an appetite for them, which very much refem-
bles, and hath all the force of a natural one. It
is in this manner that men acquire an appetite
forfnuff, tobacco, ftrong liquors, laudanum, and
the like.

Nature indeed feems ftudioufly to have fefc
bounds to the pleafures and pains we have by
thefe two fenfes, and to have confined them with-
in very narrow limits, that we might not place
any part of our happinefs in them ; there being
hardly any fmell or tafte fo d'fagreeable that ufe
will not make it tolerable, and at laft perhaps
agreeable, nor any lb agreeable as not to lofe its
relifh by conftant ufe. Neither is there any
pleafore or pain of thefe fenfes which is not in-
troduced, or followed, by fome degree of irs
contrary, which nearly balances it. So that
E we


66 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. HI.

we may here apply the beautiful allegory of the
divine Socrates •, That altho' plead; re and pain
are contrary in their nature, and their faces look
different ways, yet Jupiter hath tied them {o to-
gether, that he that lays hold of the one, draws
the other along with it.

As there is a great variety of fmells, feeming-
ly fimple and uncompounded, not only altoge-
ther unlike, but fome of them contrary to
others -, and as the fame thing may be faid of
taftes •, it would feem that one tafte is not lefs
different from another than it is from a fmell :
and therefore it may be a queftion, how all
fmells come to be confidered as one genus, and
all taftes as another ? What is the generical di-
ftinclion ? Is it only that the nofe is the organ
of the one and the palate of the other ? or r
abftra&ing from the organ, is there not in the
fenfations themfeives fomething common to
fmells, and fomething elfe common to taftes,
whereby the one is diftinguifhed from the other ?
It feems moft probable that the latter is the cafe;
and that under the appearance of the greateft
fimplicity, there is ftill in thefe fenfations fome-
thing of compofition.

If one confiders the matter abftractly, it
would feem, that a number of fenfations, or in-
deed of any other individual things, which are
perfect ly fimple and uncompounded, are incapa-
ble of being reduced into genera and /pedes ; bc-
caufe individuals which belong to a fpecies, muft
have fomething peculiar to each, by which thev

3^2


Of TASTING. 67

are diftinguifhed, and fomething common to the
whole fpecies. And the fame may be faid of
fpecies which belong to one genus. And whe-
ther this does not imply fome kind of compofi-
tion, we fhall leave to metaphyficians to deter-
mine. „

The fenfations both of fmell and tafte do un-
doubtedly admit of an immenfe variety of modi-
fications, which no language can exprefs. If a
man was tdexamine five hundred different wines,
he would hardly find two of them that had pre-
cifely the fame tafte : the fame thing holds in
cheefe, and in many other things. Yet of , five
hundred different taftes in cheefe or wine, we
can hardly defcribe twenty, fo as to give a dif-
tindt notion of them to one who had not tafted
them.

Dr. Nehemiah Grew, a moft judicious and la-
borious naturalift, in a difcourfe read before the
Royal Society, anno 1675, hath endeavoured to
fhow, that there are at leaft fixteen different fim-
ple taftes,, which he enumerates. How many
compounded ones may be made out of all the va-
rious combinations of two, three, four, or more
of thefe fimple ones, they who are acquainted with
the theory of combinations will eafily perceive.
All thefe have various degrees of intenfcnefs and
weaknefs. Many of them have other varieties :
in fome the tafte is more quickly perceived upon
the application of the fapid body, in others more
flowly ; in fome the fenfation is more permanent,
in others more transient ; in fome it feems to un-
E 2 dukte,


68 OftheHUMANMIND.Chap.il.
dulate, or return after certain intervals, in others
it is conftant : the various parts of the organ, as
the lips, the tip of the tongue, the root of the
tongue, the fauces, the uvula, and the throat,
are fome of them chiefly affected by one fapid bo-
dy, and others by another. All thefe, and other
varieties of taftes, that accurate writer illuftrates
by a number of examples. Nor is it to be doubt-
ed, but fmells, if examined with the fame ac-
curacy, would appear to have as great variety.


CHAP.


[ €9 J.
CHAP. IV.

Of HEARING.

SECT. I.

Variety of founds. Their place and dijlance learn-
ed by cujlom, without reafoning.

SOUNDS have probably no lefs variety
of modifications, than either taftes or
odours. For, firft, founds differ in tone.
The ear is capable of perceiving fpur or five hun-
dred variations of tone in found, and probably as
many different degrees of ftrength ; by combi-
ning thefe, we have above twenty thoufand fim-
ple founds that differ either in tone or ftrength
fuppofing every tone to be perfect. But it is
to be oblerved, that to make a perfect tone, a
great many undulations of elaftic air are re-
quired, which muft all be of equal duration and
extent, and follow one another with perfect re-
gularity ; and each undulation muft be made up
of the advance and recoil of innumerable parti-
cles of elaftic air, whofe motions are all uniform
in direction, force, and time. Hence we may
eafily conceive a prodigious variety in the fame
tone, arifing from irregularities of it, occafioned
by the conftitution, figure, fituation, or manner
oi ftriking the fonorous body : from the confti-
tutiqn of the elaftic medium, or its being difturb-
L % ed


70 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. IV.
ed by other motions •, and from the conftitution
of the ear itfclf, upon which the imprefilon is
made.

A flute, a violin, a hautboy, and a French
horn, may all found the fame tone, and be eafily
diftinguiihable. Nay, if twenty human voices
found the fame note, and with equal ftrength,
there will ft ill be fome difference. The fame
voice, while it retains its proper diftinflions, may
yet be varied many ways, by ficknefs or health,
youth or age, leannefs or fatnefs, good or bad
humour, The fame words fpoken by foreigners
and natives, nay, by perfons of different provin-
ces of the fame nation, , may be diftinguifhed.
Such an immenfe variety of fenfatio'ns of fmell,
tafte,, and found, furely was not given us in vain.
They are figns, by which we know and diftin-
guifh things without us -, and it was fit that the
variety of the figns mould, in fome degree cor-
refpond with the variety of the things fignified
by them.

it feems to be by cuftom, that we learn to dif-
tinguim both the place of things, and their na-
ture, by means of their found. That fuch a
noife is in the ftreet, fuch another in the room
above me - ? that this is a knock at my door, that
a perfon walking up ftairs, is probably learnt by
experience. I remember, that once lying a-bed,
and having been put into a fright, I heard my own
heart beat •, but I took it to be one knocking at
the door, and arofe and opened the door oftener
than once, before I difcovered that the found was

in


Seft. i. Of HEARING. ;i

in my own breaft. It is probable, that previ-
ous to all experience, we fhould as little know,
whether a found came from the right or. left,
from above or below, from a great or a fmall di-
ftance, as we fhould know whether it was the
found of a drum, or a bell, or a cart. Nature
is frugal in her operations, and will not be at the
expence of a particular inftincT:, to give us that
knowledge which experience will foon produce,
by means of a general principle of human na-
ture.

For a little experience, by the conftitution of
human nature, tiestogether, not only in our ima-
gination, but in our belief, thofe things which
were in their nature unconnected. When I hear
a certain found, I conclude immediately, without
reafonihg, that a coach paries by. There are
no premifes from which this conclufion isinferred
by any rules of logic. It is" the effect of a prin-
ciple of our nature, common to us with the

brutes.

Akho' it is by hearing, that we are . capable

of the perceptions of harmony and melody, and
of all the charms of mufic j yet it would feem,
that thefe require a higher faculty, which we
call a mufical ear. This feems to be in very dif-
ferent degrees, in thofe who have the bare facul-
ty of hearing equally perfect: ; and therefore
ought not to ht claffed with the external fenfes,
but in a higher order. ,

E 4 SECT.


72 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. IV.

SECT. II,

Of natural language.

N E of the nobleft purpofes of found un-
doubtedly is language-, without which man-
kind would hardly be able to attain any degree
of improvement above the brutes. Language
is commonly confidered as purely an invention of
men, who by nature are no lei's mute than the
brutes, but having a fuperior degree of invention
and reafon, have been able to contrive artificial
figns of their thoughts and purpofes, and to efta-
blifh them by common conient. But the origin
of language deferves to be more carefully inqui-
red into, not only as this inquiry may be of im-
portance for the improvement of language, but
as it is related to the prefent fubjecr, and tends
to lay open lome of the firft principles of human
nature. I mail therefore offer fome thoughts
upon this fubject.

By language I underftand all thofe figns which
mankind ufe in order to communicate to others
their thoughts and intentions, their purpofes and
defires. And fiich figns may be conceived to be
of two kinds : Firft, kich as? have no meaning,
but what is affixed to them by compacl or agree-
ment among thofe wi;o ufe them -, theie are arti-
ficial figns : Secondly, fuch as, previous to all
compadt or agreement, have a meaning which
every man underftands by the principles of his

nature.


Sed. 2. Of HEARING. 73

nature. Language, fo far as it confifts of arti-
ficial figns, may be called artificial; fo far as it
confifts of natural figns, I call it natural.

Having premifed thefe definitions, I think it
is demonstrable, that if mankind had not a natu-
ral language, they could never have invented an
artificial one by their reafon and ingenuity. For
all artificial language fuppofes fome compact or
agreement to affix a certain meaning to certain
figns; therefore there muft be compacts or agree-
ments before the ufe of artificial figns ; but there
can be no compact or agreement without figns,
nor without language ; and therefore there muft
be a natural language before any artificial lan-
guage can be invented : Which was to be demon-
strated.

Had language in general been a human inven-
tion, as much as writing or printing, we ftiould
find whole nations as mute as the brutes. Indeed
even the brutes have fome natural figns by which
they exprefs their own thoughts, affectiom,
and defires, and underftand thofe of others. A
chick, as foon as hatched, underftands the dif-
ferent founds whereby its dam calls it to food,
or gives the alarm of danger. A dog or a horfe
underftands, by nature, when the human voice
careffes, and when it threatens him. But brutes,
as far as we know, have no notion of conn acts
or covenants, or of moral obligation to perform
them. If nature had given them thefe notions,
fhe would probably have given them natural
figns to expreis them. And where nature has

denied


74 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. IV.
denied thefe notions, it is as impoffible to acquire
them by art, as it is for a blind man to acquire
the notion of colours. Some brutes are feniible
of honour or difgrace ; they have refentment
and gratitude; but none of them, as far as we
know, can make a promife, or plight their faith,
having; no fuch notions from their conftitution.
And if mankind had not thefe notions by nature,
and natural figns to exprefs them by, with all
their* wit and ingenuity they could never have
invented language.

The elements of this natural language of man-
kind, or the figns that are naturally exprefiive
of our thoughts, may, I think, be reduced to
thefe three kinds ; modulations of the voice,
geftures, and features. By means of thefe,' two
favages who have no common artificial language,
can converfe together; can communicate tK j .ir
thoughts in fome tolerable manner ; can afk and
refufe-, affirm and deny, threaten and fupplicate ;
can traffic, enter into covenants, and plight their
faith. This might be confirmed by historical
facl:s of undoubted credit, if it were neceffary.

Mankind having thus a common language by
nature, tho' a fcanty one, adapted only to the
neceffities of nature, there is no great ingenuity
required in improving it by the addition of arti-
ficial figns, to fupply the deficiency of the natu-
ral. Thefe artificial figns muft multiply with
the arts of life, and the improvements of know-
ledge. The articulations of the voice, feem to
be, of all figns, the moil proper for artificial

language ;


Sect, a. Of H E A R I N G. 75

language; and as mankind have univerfally
ufed them for that purpofe, we may rea-
fonably judge that nature intended them for it.
But nature probably does not intend that we
Ihould lay afide the ufe of the natural figns ; it is
enough that we fupply their defects by artificial
ones. A man thatrides always in a chariot, by
degrees lofes the ufe of his leg's ; and one who
ufes arcificial figns only^ lofes both the knowledge
and ufe of the natural. Dumb people retain
much more of the natural language than others,
becaufe neceffity obliges them to ufe it. And
for the fame reafon, favages have much more of
it than civilized nations. It is by natural figns
chiefly that we give force and energy to lan-
guage ; and the lefs language has of them, it is
the lefs expreffive and perfuafive. Thus, writing
is lefs expreffive than reading, and reading lefs
expreffive than fpeaking without book ; fpeaking
without the proper and natural modulations,
force, and variations of the voice, is a frigid
and dead language, compared with that which
. is attended with them ; it is ftill more expreffive
when we add the language of the eyes and fea-
tures; and is then only in its perfect and natural
ftate, and attended with its proper energy, when
(to all thefe we fuperadd the force of action,

Where fpeech is natural, it will be an exer-
cifc, not of the voice and lungs only, but of all
the mufcles of the body; like that of dumb
people and favages, whofe language, as it has

more


7 6 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. IV.
more of nature, is more expreffive, and is more
eafily learned.

Is it not pity that the refinements of a civi-
lized life, inftead of fupplying the defects of na-
tural language, fliould root it out, and plant in
its ftead dull and lifejefs articulations of unmean-
ing' founds, or the fcrawling of infignificant cha-
racters ? The perfection o' language is common-
; ly thought to be, to exprefs human thoughts and
fentiments diftin&ly by thefe dull figns •, but if
this is the perfection of artificial language, it is
furely the corruption of the natural.

Artificial figns fignify, but they do not ex-
prefs •, they fpeak to the underftanding, as alge-
braical characters may do, but the paffions, the
affections, and the will, hear them not : diefe
continue dormant and inactive, till we fpeak to
them in the language of nature, to which they
are all attention and obedience.

It were eafy to fbow, that the fine arts of the
mufician, the painter, the actor, and the orator,
fo far as they are expreffive ; aitho' the know-
ledge of them requires in us a delicate tafte, a
nice judgment, and much ftudy and practice;
yet they are nothing elfe but the language of
nature, which we brought into the world with
us, but have unlearned by difufe, and fo find the
greateft difficulty in recovering it.

Abolifh the ufe of articulate founds and wri-
ting among mankind for a century, and every
' man would be a painter, an actor, and an orator.
We mean not to affirm that fuch an expedient is

practicable ;


Seft. 2. Of HEARING. 77

practicable ; or, if it were, that the advantage
would counterbalance thelofs ; 'but that, as men
are led by nature and neceffity to converfe to-
gether, they wi\l ufe every mean in their power
to make themfelves underftood ; and whe/e they
cannot do this by artificial figns, they will do it,
as far as poffible, by natural ones : and he that
underftands perfectly the ufe of natural figns,
muft be the beft judge in all the exprefiive atts.


CHAP.


G H A P. V.

Of TOUCH.

S E C T. I.

Of heat and cold.

TH E fenfes which we have hitherto con-
fidered, are very fimple and uniform,
each of them exhibiting only one kind of fenfa-
tion, and thereby indicating only one quality of
bodies. By the ear we perceive founds, and no-
thing elfe •, by the palate, taftes ; and by the
nofe, odours : Thefe qualities are all likewife of
one order, being all fecondary qualities : Where-
as by touch we perceive not one quality only,
but many, and thofe of. very different kinds.
The chief of them are heat and cold, hardnefs
and foftnefs, roughnefs and fmoothnefs, figure,
folidity, motion, and extenfion. "We mall con-
fider thefe in order.

As to heat and cold, it will eafily be allowed
that they are fecondary qualities, of the fame or-
der with fmell, tafte, and found. And, there-
fore, what hath been already faid of fmeil, is
eafily applicable to them ; that is, that the words
heat and cold have each of them two fignifica-
tions ; they fometimes fignify certain feniations
of the mind, which can have no exiftence when
they are not felt, nor can exift any where but

in


Sea. i. Of TOUCH. 79

in a mind or fentient being ; but more frequent-
ly they fignify a quality in bodies, which, by
the laws of nature, occafions the fenfations of
heat and cold in us : A quality which, tho' con-
nected by cuftom fo clofely with the fenfation,
that we cannot without difficulty feparate them •,
yet hath not the leaft refemblance to it, and
may continue to exift when there is no fenfation
at all.

The fenfations of heat and cold are perfe&ly
known; for they neither are, nor can be, any
thing elfe than what we feel them to be ; but
the qualities in bodies which we call heat and cold,
are unknown. They are only conceived by us,
as unknown caufes or occafions of the fenfations
to which we give the fame names. But though
common fenfe fays nothing of .the nature of thefe
qualities, it plainly dictates the exiftence of them ;
and to deny tharthere can be heat and cold when
they are not felt, is an abfurdity too grofs to
merit confutation. For what could be more ab-
furd, than to fay, that the thermometer cannot
rife or fall unlefs fome perfon be prefent, or that
the coafl: of Guinea would be as cold as Nova
Zembla, if it had no inhabitants ?

It is the bufinefs of philofophers to investigate,
by proper experiments and induction, what heat
and cold are in bodies. And whether they make
best a particular element diffufed through nature,
and accumulated in the heated body, or whether
they make it a certain vibration of the parts of
the heated body j whether they determine that
2 heat


80 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. V.
heat and cold are contrary qualities, as the fen-
fations undoubtedly are contrary, or that heat
only is a quality, and cold its privation ; thefe
queftions are within the province of philofophy ;
for common fenfe fays nothing on the one fide or
the other.

But whatever be the nature of that quality in
bodies which we call heat, we certainly know
this, that it cannot in the leaft refemble the fen-
fation of heat. It is no lefs abfurd to fuppofe a
likenefs between the fenfation and the quality,
than it would be to fuppofe, that the pain of the
gout refembles a fquare or a triangle. The
fimpleft man that hath common fenfe, does not
imagine the fenfation of heat, or any thing that
refembles that fenfation, to be in the fire. He on-
ly imagines, that there is fomething in the fire,
which makes him and other fentient beings feel
heat. Yet as the name of heat, in common lan-
guage, more frequently and more properly fig-
nifies this unknown fomething in the fire, than
the fenfation occafioned by it, he juftly laughs at
the philofopher, who denies that there is any
heat in the fire, and thinks that he fpeaks con-
trary to common fenfe.


SECT.


Seft. 2. Of TOUCH. Si

S EC T. II.

Of hardnefs and foft nefs.

T ET us next confider hardnefs and-foftnefs $
by which words we always underftandireal
properties or qualities of bodies, of which we
have a diftindt conception.

When the parts of a body adhere fo firmly
that it cannot eafily be made to change its figure,
we call it hard; when its parts are eafily difpla-
ced, we call it foft. This is the notion which all
mankind have of hardnefs and foftnefs : they are
neither fenfations, nor like any fenfation ; they
were real qualities before they were perceived by
touch, .and continue to be fo when they are not
perceived : for if any man will affirm, that dia-
monds were not hard "till they were handled, who
would reafon with him ?

There is, no doubt, a fenfation by which we
perceive a body to be hard or foft. This fenfa-
tion of hardnefs may eafily be had, by prefiing
one's hand againft the table, and attending to
the feeling that enfues, fetting afide, as much as
poffible, all thought of the table and its qualities,
or of any external thing. But it is one thing to
have the fenfation, and another to attend to it,
and make it a diftindt object of reflection. The
firft is very eafy ? the laft, in molt cafes, ex-
tremely difficult.

F We


82 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. V.

We are fo accuftomed to ufe the fenfaticn as
a fign, and to pafs immediately to the hardnefs
fignified, that, as far as appears, it was never
made an obje£t of thought, either by the vulgar
or by philofophers ; nor has it a name in any
language. There is no fenfation more diftinft, or
more frequent ; yet it is never attended to, but
paffes through the mind inftantaneoufly, and ferves
only to introduce that quality in bodies, which,
by a law of our conftitution, it fuggefts.

There are indeed fome cafes, wherein it is no
difficult matter to attend to the fenfation occafi-
oned by the hardnefs of a body ; for inftance,
when it is fo violent as to occafion considerable
pain : then nature calls upon us to attend to it,
and then we acknowledge, that it is a mere fen-
fation, and can only be in a fentient being. If a
man runs his head with violence againft a pillar,
I appeal to him, whether the pain he feels refem-
bles the hardnefs of the ftone ; or if he can con-
ceive any thing like what he feels, to be in an
inanimate piece of matter.

The attention of the mind is here entirely
turned towards the painful feeling ; and, tofpeak
in the common language of mankind, he feels no-
thing in the ftone, but feels a violent pain in his
head. It is quite otherwife when he leans his
head gently againft the pillar ; for then he will
tell you that he feels nothing in his head, but
feels hardnefs in the ftone. Hath he not a fen-
fation in this cafe as well as in the other ? Un-
doubtedly he hath : but it is a fenfation which

nature


Sect. «. Of T O U C M. 83

nature intended only as a fign of fomethirig in
the ftone; and, accordingly, he inftantly fixes
his attention upon the thing fignified ; and can-
not, without great difficulty, attend fo much to
the fenfation, as to be perfuaded that there is
any fuch thing, diftinft from the hardnefs it fig-
nifies.

But however difficult it may be to attend to
this fugitive fenfation, to ftop its rapid progrefs,
and to disjoin it from the external quality of
hardnefs, in whofe fhadow it is apt immediately
to hide itfelf ; this is what a philofopher by pains
and practice muft attain, otherwife it will be im-
poffible for him to reafon juftly upon this fub-
ject, or even to underftand what is here advanced.
For the laft appeal, in fubjefts of this nature,
muft be to what a man feels and perceives in his
own mind.

It is indeed flrange, that a fenfation which we
have every time we feel a body hard, and which,
confequently, we can command as often, and con-
tinue as long as we pleafe, a fenfation as diftinct
and determinate as any other, (hould yet be fo
much unknown, as never to have been made an
object of thought and refleftion, nor to have
been honoured with a name in any language ;
that philofophers, as well as the vulgar, fhould
have entirely overlooked it, or confounded it
with that quality of bodies which we call hard-
nefs, to which it hath not the leaft fimilitude.
May we not hence conclude, That the know-
ledge of the human faculties is but in its infan-
F 2 cy?


84 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap.V.
cy ? That we have not yet learned to attend to
thofe operations of the mind, of which we are
confcious every hour of our lives ? That there
are habits of inattention acquired very early,
which are as hard to be overcome as other ha-
bits ? For I think it is probable, that the novel-
ty of this fenfation will procure fome attention to
it in children at firft-, but being in nowife inte-
refting in itfelf, as foon as it becomes familiar, i£
is overlooked, and the attention turned folely to
that which it fignifies. Thus, when one is learn-
ing a language, he attends to the founds ; but
when he is mafter of ir, he attends only to the
fenfe of what he would exprefs. If this is the
cafe, we muft become as little children again, if
we will be philofophers :' we muft overcome this
habit of inattention which has been gathering
ftrength ever fince we began to think -, a habit,
the ufcfulnefs of which, in common life, atones
for the difficulty it creates to the philofopher in
difcovering the firft principles of the human mind.
The firm cohefion of the parts of a body, is
no more like that fenfation by which I perceive
it to be hard, than the vibration of a fonorous
body is like the found I hear : nor can I poffibly
perceive, by my reafon, any connexion between
the one and the other. No man can give a rea-
fon, why the vibration of a body might not have
given the fenfation of fmelling, and the effluvia
of bodies affected our hearing, if it had fo plealed
, our Maker. In like manner, no man can give a
reafon, why the fenfations of fmell, or tafte, or

found,


Sed. 2. Of TOUCH. 8 5

found, might not have indicated hardnefs, as well
as that fenfaiion, which, by our constitution, does
indicate it. Indeed no man can conceive any fen-
fation to refemble any known quality of bodies.
Nor can any man mow, by any good argument,
that all our fenfations might not have been as
they are, though no body, nor quality of body,
had ever exifted.

Here then is a phenomenon of human nature,
which comes to be relblved. Hardnefs of bodies
is a thing that we conceive as diftinclly, and be-
lieve as firmly, as any thing in nature. We have
no way of coming at this conception and belief,
but by means of a certain fenfation of touch, to
which hardnefs hath not the leaft fimilitude ; nor
can we, by any rules of reafoning, infer the one
from the other. The queftion is, How we come
by this conception and belief ?

Firft, as to the conception : Shall we call it
an idea of fenfation, or of refledion ? The laft
will not be affirmed ; and as little can the firft,
unlefs we will call, that an idea of fenfation, which
hath no refemblance to any fenfation. So that
the origin of this idea of hardnefs, one of the
raoft common and moft diftindT: we have, is not
to be found in all our fyftems of the mind : not
even in thofe which have fo copioufly endea-
voured to deduce all our notions from fenfation
and reflection.

But, fecondly, fuppofing we have got the con-
ception of hardnefs, how come we by the belief
of it? Is it felf-evident, from comparing the
F 3 ideas,


Z6 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. V.
ideas, that fuch a fenfation could not be felt, un-
lefs fuch a quality of bodies exifted ? No. Can
it be proved by probable or certain arguments ?
No, it cannot, Have we got this belief then by
tradition, by education, or by experience ? No,
it is not got in any of thefe ways. Shall we then
throw off this belief, as having no foundation in
reafon ? Alas ! it is not in our power •, it tri-
umphs over reafon, and laughs at all the argu-
ments of a philofopher. Even the author of the
Treatife of human nature^ though he faw no rea-
fon for this belief, but many againft it, could
hardly conquer it in his fpeculative and folitary
moments ; at other times he fairly yielded to ir,
and confeffes that he found himfelf under a ne-
ceffity to do fo.

What lhall we fay then of this conception,
and this belief, which are fo unaccountable and
untraceable ? I fee nothing left, but to conclude,
that, by an original principle of our conftitution,
a certain fenfation of touch both fuggefts to the
mind the conception of hardnefs, and creates the
belief of it : or, in other words, that this fenfa-
tion is a natural fign of hardnefs. And this J
jhall endeavour more fully to explain,


SECT.


Seft. 3. OfTOUCH. 87

SECT. III.

Of natural Jigns.

A S in artificial figns there is often neither fi-
militude between the fign and thing fig-
nified, nor any connection that arifes neceffarily"
from the nature of the things ; fo it is alfo in na-
tural figns. The word gold has no fimilitude to
the fubftance fignified by it •, nor is it in its own
nature more fit to fignify this than any other
fubftance : yet, by habit and cuftom, it fuggefts
this and no other. In like manner, a fenfation of
touch fuggefts hardnefs, although it hath neicher
fimilitude to hardnefs, nor, as far as we can per-
ceive, any necefiary connection with it. The
difference betwixt thefe two figns lies only in
this, that, in the firft, the fuggeftion is, the ef-
fect of habit and cuftom ; in the fecond, it is
not the effect of habit, but of the original con-
ftitution of our minds.

It appears evident from what hath been faid
on the fubject of language, That there are natu-
ral figns, as well as artificial j and particularly,
That the thoughts, purpofes, and difpofitions of
the mind, have their natural figns in the features
of the face, the modulation of the voice, and the
motion and attitude of the body : That without
a natural knowledge of the connexion between
thefe figns, and the things fignified by them, lan-
guage could never have been invented, and efta-
F 4 blifhed


8Z Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. V.

blifhed among men : and, That the fine arts are
all founded upon this connexion, which we may
call the natural language of mankind. It is now
proper to obferve, that there are different orders
of natural figns, and to point out the different
claffes into which they may be diftinguifhed, that
we may more diftin£tly conceive the relation be-
tween our fenfations and the things they fuggeft,
and what we mean by calling fenfations figns of
external things.

The firft clafs of natural figns comprehends,
thofe whofe connection with the thing fignified is
eflablifhed by nature, but difcovered only by ex-
perience. The whole of genuine philofophy con^
fifls in difcovering fuch connections, and redu-
cing them to general rules. The great Lord Ve-
rulam had a perfect comprehenfion of this, when
he called it an interpretation of nature. No man
ever more distinctly underftood, or happily ex-
prefled the nature and foundation of th&philofo-
phic art. What is all we know of mechanics,
aftronomy, and optics, but connections eflablifh-
ed by nature, and difcovered by experience or ob-
fervation, and confequences deduced from them ?
All the knowledge we have in agriculture, gar-
dening, chymiftry, and medicine, is built upon the
fame foundation. And if ever our philofophy
concerning the human mind is carried fo far as to,
deferve the name of fcience, which ought never
to be defpaired of, it muft be by obferving facts,
reducing them to general rules, and drawing juft
conclufions from them. What we commonly call

natural


Sect. 3. OfTOUC H. 89

natural caufes might, with more propriety, be
called natural Jigns, and what we call effefls, the
things fignified. The caufes have no proper
efficiency or cafuality, as far as we know -, and
all we can certainly affirm, is, that nature hath
eftabliihed a conftant conjunction between them"
and the things called their effects ; and hath gi-<
ven to mankind a difpofition to obferve thofe
connections, to,confide in their continuance, and
to make ufe of them for the improvement of our
knowledge, and increafe of our power.

A fecond clafs is that wherein the connection
between the fign and thing fignified, is not only
eftabliflhed by nature, but difcovered to us by a
natural principle, without reafoning or experi-
ence. Of this kind are the natural figns of hu-
man thoughts, purpofes, and defires, which have
been already mentioned as the natural language
of mankind. An infant may be put into a fright
by an angry countenance, and foothed again by
fmiles and blandifhments. A child that has a
good mufical ear, may be put to fleep or to
dance, may be made merry or forrowful, by
the modulation of mufical founds. The prin-
ciples of all the fine arts, and of what we call a
fine tafte, may be refolved into connections of
this kind. A fine tafte may be improved by
reafoning and experience ; but if the firft princi-~
pies of it weve not planted in our minds by na-
ture, it could- never be acquired. Nay, we have
already made it appear, that a great part of this
knowledge, which we have by nature, is loft by

the


9 o OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. V.

the difufe of natural figns, and the fubftitution
of artificial in their place.

A third clafs of natural figns comprehends
thofe which, tho' we never before had any no-
tion or conception of the things fignified, do
fuggeft it, or conjure It up, as it were, by a
natural kind of magic, and at once give us a
conception, and create a belief of it. I ftiewed
formerly, that our fenfations fuggeft to us a
fentient being or mind to which they belong : a
being which. hath a permanent exiftence, altho*
the fenfations are tranfient and of fhort duration :
a being which is ftill the fame, while its fenfati-
ons and other operations are varied ten thou-
sand ways : a being which hath the fame relati-
on to all that infinite variety of thoughts, pur-
pofes, actions, affections, enjoyments, and fuf-
ferings, which we are confcious of, or can re-
member. The conception of a mind is neither
an idea of fenfation nor of reflection ; for it is
neither like any of our fenfations, nor like any
thing we are confcious of. The firft conception
of it, as well as the belief of it, and of the com-
mon relation it bears to all that we are confcious
of, or remember, is fuggefted to every thinking
being, we don't know how.

The notion of hardnefs in bodies, as well as
the belief of it, are got in a fimilar manner •, be-
ing by an original principle of our nature, annex-
ed to that fenfation which we have when we
feel a hard body. And fo naturally and necef-
farily does the fenfation convey the notion and

belief


Seft. 3. Of T O U C H. gi

belief of hardnefs, that hitherto they have been
confounded by the moft acute inquirers into the
principles of human nature, altho' they appear,
upon accurate refkaion, not only to be different
things, but as unlike as pain is to the point of a
fword.

It may be obferved, that as the firft clafs of
natural figns I have mentioned, is the founda-
tion of true philofophy, and the fecond, the
foundation of the fine arts, or of tafte ; fo the
laft is the foundation of common fenfe ; a part
of human nature which hath never been ex-
plained.

I take it for granted, that the notion of hard-
nefs, and the belief of it, is firft got by means
of that particular fenfation, which, as far back
as we can remember, does invariably fuggeft it;
and that if we had never had fuch a feeling, we
mould never have had any notion of hardnefs. I
think it is evident, that we cannot, by reafon-
ing from our fenfations, colleft the exiftence of
bodies at all, far lefs any of their qualities. This
hath been proved by unanfwerable arguments by
the Bifhop of Cloyne, and by the author of the
Treatife of human nature. It appears, as evident,
that this conneaion between our fenfations and
the conception and belief of external exiftences
cannot be produced by habit, experience, edu-
cation or any principle of human nature that
hath been admitted by philofophers. At the
fame time it is a faa, that fuch fenfations are
invariably conneaed with the conception and be-
lief


92 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. V.
lief of external exiftences. Hence, by all rules
of juft reafoning, we muft conclude, that this
connection is the effect of our constitution, and
ought to be considered as an original principle
of human nature, till we find fome more gene-
ral principle into which it may be refolved.

SECT. IV.

Of hardnefs, and other primary qualities.

Tp Urther I obferve, that hardnefs is a qua-
lity, of which we have as clear and diftinct
a conception as of any thing whatfoever. The
cohefion of the parts of a body with more or lefs
force, is perfectly underfjtood, . tho' its caufe is
not : we know what it is, as well as how it a"f-
fefts the touch. It is therefore a quality of a
quite different order from thofe fecondary quali-
ties we have already taken notice of, whereof
we know no more naturally, than that they are
adapted to raife certain fenfations in us. If hard-
nefs were a quality of the fame kind, it would
be a proper inquiry for philofophers, What hard-
nefs in bodies is ? and we fhould have had vari-
ous hypothefes about it, as well as about colour
,and heat. But it is evident that any fuch hypo-
thefis would be ridiculous. If any man fhould -
fay, that hardnefs in bodies is a certain vibra-
tion of their parts, or that it is a certain effluvia
emitted by them which effect our touch in the
manner we feel ; fuch hypothefes would fhock

common


Sedt. 4: OfTOUC H. 93

common fenfe ; becaufe we all know, that if
the parts of a body' adhere ftrongly, it is hard,
altho' it mould neither emit effluvia, nor vibrate.
Yet at the fame time, no man can fay, but that
effluvia, or the vibration of the parts of a body,
might have arFeiSted our touch, in the fame man-
ner that hardnefs now does, if had fo pleated
the author of our nature ; and if either of thefe
hypothefes is applied to explain a fecondary qua-
lity, fuch as fmell, or tafte, or found, or colour,
or heat, . there appears • no manifeft abfurdity in
the fuppofition.

The diftinftipn betwixt primary .and fecondary
qualities hath had feveral revolutions. Demo*
critus and Epicurus, and their followers, main-
tained it. Ariftotle and the Peripatetics abolifh-
ed it. Des Cartes, Malebranche, and Locke,
revived it, and were thought to have put it in
a very clear light. But Biihop Berkeley again
difcarded this diftin&ion, by fuch proofs as muft
be convincing to thofe that hold the received
dodtrine of ideas. Yet, after all, there appears
to be a real foundation- for it in the principles of
our nature.

What hath been faid of hardnefs, is fo eafily
applicable, not only to its oppofite, foftnefs, but
likewife to roughnefs and fmoothnefs, to figure
and motion, that we may be excufedfrom mak-
ing the application, which would only be a re-
petition of what hath been faid. All thefe, by
means of certain correfponding fenfations of"
touch, are prefented to the mind as real exter-
nal


94 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. V.
nal qualities ; the conception and the belief of
them are invariably connected with the corre-
fponding fenfations, by an original principle of
human nature. Their fenfations have no name
in any language ; they have not only been over-
looked by the vulgar, but by philofophers ; or if
they have been at all taken notice of, they have
been confounded with the external qualities
which they fuggeft.

SECT. V.

Ofextenjion.

T T is further to be obferved, that hardnefs and
foftnefs, roughnefs and fmoothnefs, figure and
motion, do all fuppofe extenfion, and cannot be
conceived without it ; yet I think it muft, on
the other hand, be allowed, that if we had
never felt any thing hard or foft, rough or
fmooth, figured or moved, we mould never
have had a conception of extenfion : fo that as
there is good ground to believe, that the notion
of extenfion could not be prior to that of other
primary qualities ; fo it is certain that it could
not be pofterior to the notion of any of them,
being neceflarily implied in them all.

Extenfion, therefore, feems to be a quality
fuggefted to us, by the very fame fenfations
which fuggeft the other qualities above mention-
ed. , "When I grafp a ball in my hand, I per-
ceive it at once hard, figured, and extended.

The


Seft. 5. Of T O U C H. 95

The feeling is very fimple, and hath not the leaft
refemblance to any quality of body. Yet it
fuggefts to us three primary qualities perfectly
diftinct from one another, as well as from the
fenfation which indicates them. When I move
my hand along the table, the feeling is fo fim-
ple, that I find it difficult to diftinguifh it into
things of different natures ; yet it immediately
fuggefts hardnefs, ftnoothnefs, extenfion, and mo-
tion, things of very different natures, and all of
them as diftinctly underftood as the feeling which
fuggefts them.

We are commonly told by philofophers, that
we get the idea of extenfion by feeling along the
extremities of a body, as if there was no man-
ner of difficulty in the matter. I have fought,
with great pains, I confefs, to find out how this
idea can be got by feeling, but I have fought in
vain. Yet it is one of the cleareft and moft
diftindr. notions we have j nor is there any thing
whatfoever, about which the human underftand-
ing can carry on fo many long and demonftra-
tive trains of reafoning.

The notion of extenfion is fo familiar to us
from infancy, and fo constantly obtruded by
every thing we fee and feel, that we are apt to
think it obvious how it comes into the mind ;
but upon a narrower examination we fhall find
it utterly inexplicable. It is true we have feel-
ings of touch, which every moment prefent ex-
tention to the mind •, but how they come to do
fo, is the queftion ; for jhofe feelings do no more

refemble


g6 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. V.
referable extenfion, than they refemble jufticeor
courage : nor can the exiftence of extended
things be inferred from thofe feelings by any
rules of reafoning : fo that the feelings we have
by touch, can neither explain how . we get the
notion, nor how we come by the belief of ex-
tended things.

What hath impofed upon philofophers in this
matter, is, that the feelings of touch, which fug-
ged primary qualities, have no names, nor are
they ever reflected Upon. They pafs through
the mind inftantaneoufly, arid ferve only to in-
troduce the notion and belief of external things,
which by our conftitution are con nefted with them.
They are natural figns, and the mind immediately
pafles to the thing fignified, without making the
kaft reflection upon the fign, or obferving that
there was any fuch thing. Hence it hath always
been taken for granted, thatthe ideas of extenfion,
figure, and motion, are ideas of fenfation, which
enter into the mind by the fenfe of touch, in the
fame manner as the fenfatioris of found and fmell
do by the ear and nofe.' The fenfations of touch
are fo connected, by our conftitution, with the
notions of extenfion, figure, and motion, that phi-
lofophers have miftaken the one for the other,
and never have been able to difcern that they
were not only diftincl things, but altogether un-
like. However, if we will reafon diftinctly up-
on this fubjeft, we ought to give names to thofe
feelings of touch ; we muft accuftom ourfelves
3 * to


Se«5t. 5 . Or TOUCH. 97

to attend to them, and to refledl upon them,
that we may be able to disjoin them from, and
to compare them with, the qualities fignified or
fuggefted by them.

The habit of doing this is not to be attained
without pains and practice ; and till a man hath
acquired this habit, it will be impoffible for him
to think diftin&ly, or to judge right, upon this
fubject.

Let a man prefs his hand againft the table :
he feels it hard. But what is the meaning of
this ? the meaning undoubtedly is, that he hath
a certain feeling of touch, from which he con-^
eludes, without any reafoning, or comparing
ideas, that there is fomething external really ex^
ifting, whofe parts flick fo firmly together, that
they cannot be difplaced without confiderable
force. ,

There is here a feeling, and a conclufion drawn
from it, or fome way fuggefted by it. In order
to compare thefe, we muft view them feparately,
and then confider by what tie they are connected,
and wherein they refemble one another. The
hardnefs of the table is the conclufion, the feeling
is the medium by which we are led to that con-
clufion. Let a man attend diftin&ly to this me-
dium, and to the conclufion, and he will perceive
them to be as unlike as any two things in nature,
The one is a fenfation of the mind, which can
have no exiftence but in a fentient being ; nor
can it exift one moment longer than it is felt ;
the other is. in the table, and we conclude with-
G ' owl


98 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. V,
out any difficulty, that it was in the table before
it was felt, and continues after the feeling is
over. The one implies no kind of e^tenfion,
nor parts, nor cohefion ; the other implies all
thefe. Eoth indeed admit of degrees, and the
feeling, beyond a certain degree, is a fpecies of
pain; but adamantine hardnefs does not imply
the leaft pain.

And as the feeling hath no fimilitude to hard-
nefs, fo neither can our reafon perceive the leaft
tie or connection between them ; nor will the
logician ever be able to (how a reafon why we
ftiould conclude hardnefs from this feeling, rather
than foftnefs, or any other quality whatfoever.
But in reality all mankind are led by their eon-
ftitution to conclude hardnefs from this feeling.

The fenfation of heat, and the fenfation we
have by preffinga hard body, are equally feelings :
nor can we by reafoningdraw any conclufion from
the one, but what may be drawn from the other:
but, by our conftitution, we conclude from the
firft an obfcure or occult quality, of which we
have only this relative conception, that it is
fomething adapted to raife in us the fenfation of
heat; from theiecond, we conclude a quality of
which we have a clear and diftincl: conception,
to wit, the hardnefs of the body. ,

SECT.


Sed. 6. Of TOUCH. 99

SECT. VI.

Of extenfion.

HT O put this matter in another light, it may
be proper to try, whether from fenfation
alone we can colled any notion of extenfion, fi-
gure, motion, and fpace. I take it for granted,
that a blind manjiath the fame notions of exten-
fion, figure, and motion, as a man that fees $
that Dr. Saunderfon had the fame notion of a cone*
a cylinder, and a fphere, and of the motions and
diftances of the heavenly bodies, as Sir Ifaac
Newton.

As fight therefore is not neceffary for our ac-
quiring thofe notions, we (hall leave it out alto-
gether in ourinquiry into the firfl; origin of them ;
and (hall fuppofe a blind man, by fome flrange
diftemper, to have loft all the experience and ha-
bits and notions he had got by touch ; not to
have the leaft conception of the exiftence, figure,
dimenfions, or extenfion, either of his own body,
or of any other ; but to have all his knowledge
of external things to acquire anew, by means of
fenfation, and the. power of reafon, which we
fuppofe to remain entire.

"We fhall; firfty fuppofe his body fixed immove-
ably in one place, and that he can only have
the feelings of touch, by the application of other
bodies to it. Suppofe him firft to be pricked
with a pin ; this will, no doubt, give a fmart
G 2 fenfation s


ioo OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. V.
fenfation : he feels pain •, but what can he infer
from it ? Nothing furely with regard to the exift-
ence or figure of a pin. He can infer nothing
from this fpecies of pain, which he may not as
well infer from the gout or fciatica. Common
fenfe may lead him to think that this pain has a
caufe ; but whether this caufe is body or fpirit,
extended or unextended, figured or not figured,
he cannot pofiibly, from any principle's he is fup^
pofed to have, form the leaft conjecture. Ha-
ving had formerly no notion of body or of exten-
fion, the prick of a pin can give him none,

Suppofe, next, a body not pointed, but blunt,
is applied to his body with a force gradually in-
creafed until it bruifes him. What has he got
by thisi but another fenfation, or train of fenfa,-
tions, from which he is able to conclude as little
as from the former ? A fchirrous tumour in any
inward part of the body, by prefilng upon the
adjacent parts, may give the fame kind of fenfa-
tion as the preffure of an external body, without,
conveying any notion but thai: of pain, which
furely hath no refemblance to extenfion.

Suppofe, thirdly, that the body applied to him
touches a larger or a lefier part of his body.
Can this give him any notion of its extenfion or
dimenfions ? To me it feems impofiible that it
fhould, unlefs he had fome previous notion of the
dimenfions and figure of his own body, to ferve
him as a meafure. When my two hands touch
the extremities of a body ; if I know them to be
a foot afunder, I eafily called that the body is a

% foot


Se&. 6. Of TOUCH. lot

foot long ; and if I know them to be five feet
afunder, that it is five feet long : but if I know
not what the diftance of my hands is, I cannot
know the length of the objedT: they grafp ; and
if I have no previous notion of hands at all, or
of diftance between them, I can never get that
notion by their being touched.

Suppofe, again, that a body is drawn along
his hands or face, while they are at reft : Can
this give him any notion of fpace or motion ? It
no doubt gives a new feeling; but how it
mould convey a notion of fpace or motion, to
one who had none before, I cannot conceive.
The blood moves along the arteries and veins,
and this motion, when violent, is felt : but I
imagine no man, by this feeling, could get the
conception of fpace or motion, if he had it not
before. Such a motion may give a certain fuc-
ceffion of feelings, as the cholic may do ; but
no feelings, nor any combination of feelings, can
ever refemble fpace or motion*

Let us next fuppofe, that he makes fome in-
ftindive effort to move his head cr his hand ; but
that no motion follows, either on account of ex-
ternal refiftance, ar of palfy. Can this effort
convey the notion of fpace and motion to one
who never had it before ? Surely it cannot.

Laft of all, let us fuppofe, that he moves a limb
by inftin£r, without having had any previous no-
tion of fpace or motion. He has here anew fenfa-
tion, which accompanies the flexure of joints,, and
thefwellingofmufcles. But how this fenfation can
convey into his mind the idea of fpace and motion, is
G 3 l ftill


102 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. V,
{till altogether my fterious and unintelligible. The
motion's of the heart and lungs are all performed
by the contraction of mufcles, yet give no con-
ception of fpace or motion. An embryo in the
womb has many fuch motions, and probably the
feelings that accompany them, without any idea
pf fpace or motion.

Upon the whole, it appears, that our philofo-
phers have impofed upon themfelves, and upon us,
in pretending to deduce from fenfation the firfb
origin of our notions of external exiftences, of
fpace, motion, andextenfion, and all the primary
qualities of body, that is, the qualities whereof
we have the moft clear and diftinct conception.
Thefe qualities do not at all tally with any fy-
fiem of the human faculties that hath been ad-
vanced. They have no refemblance to any fen-
fation, or to any operation of our minds ; and
therefore they cannot be ideas either of fenfation,
, or of reflection. The very conception of them
is irreconcileable to the principles of allourphi-
lofophic fyftems of the underftanding. The be-,
lief of them is no lefs fo.

SECT. VII.

Of the exiftence of a material world.

T T is beyond our power to fay, when or in
what order we came by our notions of thefe
qualities. When we trace the operations of our
minds as far back as memory and reflection can
carry us,,* we find them already in poffeffion of

our


Seft. 7. Of T O U C H. 103

our imagination and belief, and quite familiar to
the mind : but how they came firft into its ac-
quaintance, or what has given them fo ftrong a
hold of our belief, and what regard they deferve,
are no doubt very important queftions in the
philofophy of human nature.

Shall we, with the Bifhop of Cloyne, ferve
them with a <j$uo warranto, and have them tried
at the bar of philofophy, upon the ftatute of the
ideal fyftem ? Indeed, in this trial they feem to
have come off very pitifully. For altho' they
had very able counfel, learned in the law, viz.
Des Cartes, Malebranche, and Locke, who faid
every thing they could for their clients •, the Bi-
fhop of Cloyne, believing them to be aiders and
abetters of herefy and fchifm, profecuted them
with great vigour, fully anfwered all that had been
pleaded in their defence, and filenced their ableft
advocates, who feem for. half a century paft to
decline the argument, and to truft to the favour
of the jury rather than to the ftrength of their
pleadings.

Thus, the wifdom of philofophy is fet in oppo-
fition to the common fenje of mankind. The
firft pretends to demonftrate a priori, that there
can be no fuch thing as a material world ; that
fun, moon, ftars, and earth, vegetable and ani-
mal bodies, are, and can be nothing elfe, but fen-
fations in the mind, or images of thofe fenfations
in the memory and imagination ; that, like pain
and joy, they can have no existence when they
are not thought of. The la'ft can conceive no
G 4 otherwife


*©4 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. V.
otherwife of this opinion, than as a kind of me-
taphyfical lunacy ; and concludes, that too much
learning is apt to rr.ake men mad ; and that the
man who ferioufly entertains this belief, tho' in
other refpe&s he may be a very good man, as a
man may be who believes that he is made of
glafs •, yet furely he hath a foft place in hisunder-
ftanding, arid hath been hurt by much thinking*

This oppofition betwixt philofophy and com-
mon fenfe, is apt to have a very unhappy influ-
ence upon the philofopher himfelf. He fees hu-
man nature in an odd, unamiable, and mortifying
light. He confiders himfelf, and the reft of his
fpecies, as born under a neceffity of believing ten
thoufand abfurdities and contradictions, and en-
dowed with fuch a pittance of reafon, as is juft
fufficient to make this unhappy difcovery : and
this is all the fruit of his profound fpeculations.
Such notions of human nature. tend to flacken
every nerve of the foul, to put every noble pur-
pofe and fentiment out of countenance, and fpread
a melancholy gloom over the whole face of
things. /

If this is wifdom, let me be deluded with the vul-
gar. I find fomething within methat recoils againft
It, and infpires more reverent fentiments of the
human kind, and of the universal adminiftration.
Common fenfe and reafon have both one author ;
that Almighty author, in all whofe other works
we obferve a confiftency, uniformity, and beauty,
which charm and delight the underftanding : there
muft therefore be fome order and confiftency in the

human


Sea. 7. Gf TOUCH. 105

human faculties, as well as in other parts of his
workmanfhip. A man that thinks reverently of
his own kind, and efteems true wifdom and phi-
lofophy, will not be fond, nay, will be very fuf-
picious, of fuch ftrange and paradoxical opi-
nions. If they are falfe, they difgrace philofophy;
and if they are true, they degrade the human fpe-
cies,. and make us juftly afliamed of our frame.

To what purpofe is it for philofophy to decide
againft common fenfe in this or any other matter?
The belief of a material world is older, and of more
authority, than any principlesof philofophy. Itde-
clines the tribunal of reafon, and laughs at all the
artillery of the logician. It retains its fovereign
authority in fpite of all the edicts of philofophy,
and reafon itfelf muft floop to its orders. Even
thofe philofophers who have difowned the autho-
rity of our notions of an external material world,
confefs, that they find themfelves under a necef-
fity of fubmitting to their power.

Methinks, therefore, it were better to make
a virtue of neceffity ; and, fince we cannot get
rid of the vulgar notion and belief of an external
world, to reconcile our reafon to it as well as we
can : for if Reafon mould ftomach and fret ever
fo much at this yoke, fhe cannot throw it off; if
fhe will not be the fervant of Common Senfe,
fhe muft be her flave.

In order therefore to reconcile reafon to com-
mon fenfe in this matter, I beg leave to offer to
the confederation of philofophers thefe two ob-
servations. Firft, That in all this debate about

the


ioo" Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. V.
the exiftence of a material world, it hath been
taken for granted on both fides, that this fame
material world, if any fuch there be, muffc
be the exprefs image of our fenfations ; that we
can have no conception of any material thing
which is not like fome fenfation in our minds ;
and particularly, that the fenfations of touch
are images of extenfion, hardnefs, figure, and
motion. Every argument brought againft the
exiftence of a material world, either by the Bi-
fhop of Cloyne, or by the author of the Treatife
of human nature, fuppofeth this. If this is true,
their arguments are conclufive and unanfwerable:
but, on the other hand, if it is not true, there is
no fhadow of argument left. Have thofe philo-
sophers then given any folid proof of this hypo-
thefis, upon which the whole weight of fo ftrange
a fyftem refts ? No. They have not fo much as
attempted to do it. But, becaufe antient and
modern philofophers have agreed in this opinion,
they have taken it for granted. But let us, as
becomes philofophers, lay afide authority ; we
need not furely confult Ariftotle or Locke, to
know whether pain be like the point of a fword.
I have as clear a conception of extenfion, hard*
nefs, and motion, as I have of the point of a fword}
and, with fome pains and pra&ice, I can form as
clear a notion of the other fenfations of touch, as
1 have of pain. When I do fo, and compare them
together., it appears to me clear as day-light, that
the former are not of kin to the latter, nor re=
femble them in any one feature. They are as

-f unlike.


Seft. 7. Of T O U C H. 107

unlike, yea as certainly and manifeftly unlike,
as pain is to the point of afword. It may be true,
that thofe fenfations firft introduced the material
world to our acquaintance ; it may be true, that it
feldom or never appears without' their company;
but, for all that, they are as unlike as the paffion
of anger is to thofe features of the countenance
which attend it.

So that, in the fentence thofe philofophers
have pafled againft the material world, there is
an error per/on*. Their proof touches not mat-
ter, or any of its qualities •, but ftrikes direaiy
againft an idol of their own imagination, a ma-
terial world made of ideas and fenfations, which
never had nor can have an exiftence.

Secondly, The very exiftence of our concept
tions of extenfion, figure, and motion, fince they
are neither ideas of fenfation nor refkaion, over-
turns the whole ideal fyftem, by which the
material world hath been tried and condemned :
fo that there hath been likewife in this fentence
an error juris.

It is a very fine and a juft obfervation of
Locke, That as no human art can create a fingle
particle of matter, and the whole extent of our
power over the material world, confifts in com-
pounding, combining, and disjoining the matter
made to our hands ; fo in the world of thought,
the materials are all made by nature, and can
only be varioufly combined and disjoined by us.
So that it is impoMible for reafon or prejudice,
true or falfe philofophy, to produce one fimple

notion


io8 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. V.
notion or conception, which is not the work of
nature, and the refult of our conftitution. The
conception of extenfion, motion, and the other
attributes of matter, cannot be the effect of
error or prejudice-, it muft be the work of na-
ture. And the power or faculty, by which we
acquire thofe conceptions, muft be fomething
different from any power of the human mind
that hath been explained, fince it is neither fen-
fation nor reflection.

This I would therefore humbly propofe as an
experimentum cruets, by which the ideal fyftem
muft ftand or fall ; and it brings the matter to
a fhort iffue : Extenfion, figure, motion, may,
any one, or all of them, be taken for the fub-
jecT: of this experiment. Either they are ideas
of fenfation, or they are not. If any one of
them can be fhown to be an idea of fenfation, or
to have the leaft refemblance to any fenfation, I
lay my hand upon my mouth, and give up all
pretence to reconcile reafon to common fenfe in
this matter, and muft fuffer the ideal fcepticifm
to triumph. But if, on the other hand, they
are not ideas of fenfation, nor like to any fenfa-
tion, then the ideal fyftem is a rope of fand, and
all the laboured arguments of the fceptical philo-
fophy againft a material world, and againft the
existence of every thing but impreffions and
ideas, proceed upon a falfe hypothefis.

If our philofophy concerning the mind be fo
lame with regard to the origin of our, notions of
the cleareft, moft fimple, and mod familiar ob-
jects


Se£t. 7. Of TOUCH. 10$

jefts of thought, and the powers from which
they are derived, can we expedt that it fhould
be more perfedl in the account it gives of the
origin of our opinions and belief? We have ken
already fome inftances of its imperfe&ion in
this refpecl: : and perhaps that fame nature which
hath given us the power to conceive things al-
together unlike to any of our fenfations, or to
any operation of our minds, hath likewife pro-
vided for our belief of them, by fome part of
our conftitution hitherto not explained,

Bifhop Berkeley hath proved, beyond the
poflibility of reply, that we cannot by reafonino-
infer the exiftence of matter from our fenfations:
and the author of the Treatife of human nature
hath proved no lefs clearly, that we cannot by
reafoning infer the exiftence of our own or other
minds from our fenfations. But are we to ad-
mit nothing but what can, be proved by reafon-
ing ? Then we muft be fceptics indeed, and be-
lieve nothing at all. The author of the Treatife
of human nature appears to me to be but a half
fceptic. He hath not followed his principles fo
far as they lead him : but after having, with un-
paralleled intrepidity and Tuccefs, combated vul-
gar prejudices ; when he had but one blow to
flrike, his courage fails him, he fairly lays down
his arms, and yields himfelf a captive to the moft
common of all vulgar prejudices, I mean the be-
lief of the exiftence of his own imprefiions and
ideas.

I beg


iio Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. V,
I beg therefore to have the honour of mak-
ing an addition to the fceptical fyftem, without
which I conceive it cannot hang together. I
affirm, that the belief of the exiftence of impref-
lions and ideas, is as little fupported by reafonj
as that of the exiftence of minds and bodies.
No man ever did, or could offer any reafon for
this belief. Des Cartes took it for granted*
that he .thought, and had fenfations and ideas;
fo have all his followers done. Even the hero
of fcepticifm hath yielded this point, I crave
leave to fay* weakly and imprudently. I fay
fo, becaufe I am perfuaded that there is no prin-
ciple of his philofophy that obliged him to make
this conceffion. And what is there in impref-
fions and ideas fo formidable, that this all-con-
quering philofophy, after triumphing over every
other exiftence, mould pay homage to them ?
Befides, the conceffion is dangerous : for belief
is of fuch a nature, that if you leave any root,
It will fpread ; and you may more eafily pull it
up altogether, than fay, Hitherto (halt thou go,
and no further •, the exiftence of impreffions and
ideas I give up to thee ; but fee thou pretend to
nothing more. A thorough and confiltent fcep-
tic will never, therefore, yield this point ; and
while he holds it, you can never oblige him to
yield any thing elfe.

To fuch a fceptic I have nothing to fay ; but
of the femi-fceptics, I fhould beg to know, why
they believe the exiftence of their impreffions
and ideas. The true reafon I take to be, be-
caufe


Seel. 7. Of TOUCH. rii

caufe they cannot help it; and the fame realofl
will lead them to believe many other things.
All reafoning muft be from firft principles ;
. . and for firft principles no other reafon can be
given but this, that, by the conftitution of our
nature, we are under a neceflity of aflenting to
them. Such principles are parts of our confti-
tuiion, no lefs than the power of thinking: rea-
fon can neither make nor deftroy them ; nor
can it do any thing without them : it is like a
telefcope, which may help a man to fee farther,
who hath eyes; but without eyes, a telefcope
fhews nothing at all. A mathematician cannot
prove the truth of his axioms, nor can he prove
any thing, unlefs he takes them for granted. We
cannot prove the exiftence of our minds, nor
even of our thoughts and fenfations. A hifto-
rian, or a witnefs, can prove nothing, unlefs it is
taken for granted, that the memory and fenfes
may be trufted. A natural philofopher can prove
nothing, unlefs it is taken for granted, that the
courfe of nature is fteady and uniform.

How or when I got fuch firft principles, upon
which I build all my reafoning, I know not; for
I had them before! can remember: but I am
fure they are parts of my conftitution, and that
I cannot throw them off. That our thoughts
and fenfations muft have a fubjecl, which we
call ourfelf, is not therefore an opinion got by
reafoning, but a natural principle. That our
fenfations of touch indicate fomething external,
extended, figured, hard or foft, is not a de-
duction


ii2 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap.V.

duftion of reafon, but a natural principle. The
belief of it, and the very conception of it, are
equally parts of our conftitution. If we are de-
ceived in it, we are deceived by him that made
us, and there is no remedy.

1 do not mean to affirm, that the fenfations
of touch do from the very firft fuggeft the fame
notions of body and its qualities, which they do
when we are grown up. Perhaps Nature is
frugal in this, as in her other operations. The
paflion of love, with all its concomitant fenti-
ments and defires, is naturally fuggefted by the
perception of beauty in the other fex. Yet the
fame perception does not fuggeft the tender paf-
fion, till a certain period of life. A blow given
to an infant, raifes grief and lamentation ; but
when he grows up, it as naturally ftirs refent--
ment, and prompts him to refiftance. Perhaps
a child in the womb, or for fome fhort period of
its existence, is merely a fentient being: the
faculties, by which it perceives an external
world, by which it reflects on its own thoughts,
and exiftence, and relation to other things, as
well as its reafoning and moral faculties, unfold
themfelves by degrees ; fo that it is infpired with
the various principles of common fenfe, as with
the paffions of love and refentment, when it has
occafion for them.


SECT.


Sea. 8. Of TOUCH.


i»3


SECT. VIII.

Of the fyftems of philofophers concerning thefenfes.

ALL the fyftems of philofophers about our
fenfes and their objects have fplit upon this
rock, of not diftinguifhing properly fenfations,
which can have no exiflence but when they are
felt, from the things fuggefted by them. Ari-
ftotle, with as diftinguifhing a head as ever ap-
plied to philofophicaldifquifidons, confounds thele
two ; and makes every fenfation to be the fcrm 4
without the matter, of the thing perceived by it.
As the impreffion of a feal upon wax has the form
of the feal, but nothing of the matter of it ; (o
he conceived our fenfations to be impreffions up-
on the mind, which bear the image, likenefs, or
form of the external thing perceived, without
the matter of it. Colour, found, and fmell, as
well as extenfion, figure, and hardnefs, are, ac-
cording to him, various forms of matter : our
fenfations are the fame forms imprinted on the
mind, and perceived in its own intellect. It is
evident from this, that Ariftotle made no diftinc-
tion between primary and fecondary qualities of
bodies, although that diftinction was made by
Democritus, Epicurus, and others of the ancients.
Des Cartes, Malebranche, and Locke, revived
the diftinction between primary and fecondary
qualities. But they made the fecondary qualities
mere fenfations, and the primary ones refemblan-

H ces


ii4 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. V.

ces of our fenfations. They maintained, that co-
lour, found, and heat, are not any thing in bo-
dies, but fenfations of the mind : At the fame
time, they acknowledged fome particular texture
or modification of the "body, to be the caufe or
occafion of thofe fenfations ; but to this modifi-
cation they gave no name. Whereas, by the vul-
gar, the names of colour, heat, and found, are
but rarely applied to the fenfations, and moft
commonly to thofe unknown caufes of them } as-
hath been already explained. The conftitution of
,our nature leads us rather to attend to the things
fignified by the fenfation, than to the fenfation it-
felf, and to give a name to the former rather than
to the latter. Thus we fee, that with regard to
fecondary qualities, thefe philoibphers thought
with the vulgar, and With common fenfe. Their
paradoxes were only an abufe of words. For when
they maintain, as an important modern difcovery,
that there is no heat in the fire, they meah no
more, than that the fire does not feel heat, which
every one knew before.

With regard to primary qualities, thefe philo-
fophers erred more grofsly : They indeed belie-
ved the exiftence of thofe qualities ; but they
did not at all attend to the fenfations that fug-
geft them, which having no names, have been as
little considered as if they had no exiftence.
They were aware, that figure, extenfion, and-
jiardnefs, are perceived by means of fenfations of
touch ; whence they ralhly concluded, that thefe

J fenfations


Seft. 8. Of TOUCH. n 5

fenfations muft be images and refemblances of
figure, extenfion, and hardnefs.

The received hypothefis of ideas naturally led
them to this conclufion ; and indeed cannot con-
fift with any other ; for, according to that hy-
pothefis, external things muft be perceived by-
means of images of them in the mind ; and what
can thofe images of external things in the mind
be, but the fenfations by which we perceive them ?.

This however was to draw a conclufion from
a hypothefis againft fact. We need not have re-
courfe to any hypothefis to know what our fen-
fations are, or what they are like. By a proper
degree of reflection and attention we may un-
derftand them 'perfectly, and be as certain that
they are not like any quality of body, as we can
be, that the toothach is not like a triangle. How
a fenfation mould inftantly make us conceive and
believe the exiftence of an external thing altoge-
ther unlike to it, I do not pretend to know ; and
when I fay that the one fuggefts the other, I
mean not to explain the manner of their connec-
tion, but to exprefs a fact, which every one may
be confcious of; namely, that, by a law of our
nature, fuch a conception and belief conftantly
and immediately follow the fenfation.

Biftiop Berkeley gave new light to this fub-
je£t, by Ihowing, that the qualities of an inani-
mate thing, fuch as matter is conceived to be,
cannot referable any fenfation ; that it is impof-
fible to conceive any thing like the fenfations
of pur minds, but the fenfations of other minds.
H 2 Every


n6 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap,V.
Every one that attends properly to his fenfatioriS'
fnuft afient to this ; yet. it had efcaped all the
philofophers that came before Berkeley ; it had
efcaped even the ingenious Locke, who had fo
much praclifed reflection' on the operations of his
own mind. So difficult it is to attend properly
even to our own feelings. They are fo accuftom-
ed to pafs through the mind unobferved^ and irr-
ftantly to make way for that which nature in-
tended them to fignify, that it is extremely diffi-
cult to ftop, and furvey them ; and when we-
think we have acquired this power,, perhaps the
mind ftill fluctuates between the fenfation and its-
afibciated quality, fo that they mix together, and
prefent fomething to the imagination that is com-
pounded of both. Thus in a globe or cylinder,,
whofe oppofite fides are quite unlike in colour, if
you turn it (lowly, the colours are perfedly di-
ftinguifhable, and their diffimilitude is manifeft ;
but if it is turned fafl, they lofe their distinction,
and feem to be of one and the fame colour.

No fuccefilon can be more quick, than that of
tangible qualities to the fenfations with which
nature has aflbciated them : But when one has
once acquired the art of making them feparate
and diftinct objects of thought, he will then clear-
ly perceive, that the maxim of Bifhop Berkeley
above mentioned, is felf-evident ; and that the
features of the face are not more unlike to a paf-
fion of the mind which they indicate, than the
fenfations of touch are to the primary qualities of
body.

But


Se<3. 8. Of TOUCH. u 7

But let us obferve what ufe the Bilhop makes
•of this important difcovery : Why, he concludes,
that we can have no conception of an inanimate
fubftance, fuch as matter is conceived to be, or
©f any of its qualities ; and that there is the
ftrongeft ground to believe that there is no ex-
iftence in nature but minds, fenfations, and ideas :
If there is any other kind of exi'ftences, it muft
be what we neither have nor can have any con-
ception of. But how does this follow ? Why
thus : We can have no conception of any thing
but what refembles fome fenfation or idea in our
minds ; but the fenfations and ideas in our minds
can refemble nothing but the fenfations and ideas
in other minds ; therefore, the conclufion is evi-
dent. This argument, we fee, leans upon two
propofitions. The laft of them the ingenious au-
thor hath indeed made evident to all that under-
ftand his reafoning, and can attend to their own
fenfations : but the firft propofition he never at-
tempts to prove ; it is taken from the doctrine of
ideas, which hath been fo univerfally received by
philofophers, that it was thought to need no
proof.

We may here again obferve, that this acute
writer argues from a hypothefis againft faft, and
againft the common fenfe of mankind. That we
can have no conception of any thing, unlefs there
is fome impreffion, fenfation, or idea, in our minds
which refembles it, is indeed an opinion which
hath been very generally received among philo-
fophers j but it is neither felf-evident, nor hath

H 3 it


n8 Of the HUM AM MIND. Chap.V.

it been clearly proved -, and therefore it had been
more reafonable to call in queftion this doctrine
of philofophers, than to difcard the material
world, and by that means expofe philofophy to
the ridicule of all men, who will not offer up
common fenfe as a facrifice to metaphyfics.

We ought, however, to do this juftice both to
the Bifhop of Cloyne and to the author of the
Treatife of human nature, to acknowledge, that
their conclufions are juftly drawn from the doc-
trine of ideas, which has been fo univerfally re-
ceived. On the other hand, from the character of
Bifhop Berkeley, and of his predeceffors Des Car-
tes, Locke, and Malebranche, we may venture
to fay, that if they had feen all the confequences
of this doctrine, as clearly as the author before
mentioned did, they would have fufpected it ve-
hemently, and examined it more carefully than
they appear to have done.

The theory of ideas, like the Trojan horfe,
had a fpecious appearance both of innocence and
beauty •, but if thofe philofophers had known that
it carried in its belly death and destruction to all
fcience and common fenfe, they would not have>
broken down their walls to give it admittance.

That we have clear and diftindt conceptions of
extenfion, figure, motion, and other attributes of
body, which are neither fenfations, nor like any
fenfation, is a fact of which we may be as certain,
as that we have fenfations. And that all mankind
have a fixed belief of an external material world,
a belief which is neither got by reafoning nor

.education,


Seft. 8. Of TOUCH. 119

education, and a belief which we cannot Ihake off,
even when we feem to have ftrong arguments
againft it, and no fhadow of argument for it, is
likewife a fact, for which we have all the evidence
that the nature of the thing admits. Thefe facts
are phsenomena of human ..nature, from which
we may juftly argue againft any hypothefis, how-
ever generally received. But to argue from a
hypothefis againft facts, is contrary to the rules
of true philolbphy.


H 4 CHAP.


C I20 ]

CHAP. VI.

Of SEEING.

SECT. I.

The excellence and dignity of this faculty.

THE advances made in the knowledge of
optics in the laft age, and in the prefent,
and chiefly the difcoveries of Sir Ifaac Newton,
do honour, not to philofophy only, but to hu-
man nature. Such difcoveries ought for ever to
put to fhame the ignoble attempts of our modern
fceptics to depreciate the human understanding,
and to difpirit men in the fearch of truth, by
reprefenting the human faculties as fit for no-
thing, but to lead us into abfurdities and contra-
dictions.

Of the faculties called the five fenfes, fight is
without doubt the nobleft. The rays of light,
which minifter to this fenfe, and of which, with-
out it, we could never have had the leaft con-
ception, are the moft wonderful and aftonifhing
part of the inanimate creation. We muft be fa-
tisfied of this, if we confider their extreme mi-
nutenefs, their inconceivable velocity, the regular
variety of colours which they exhibit, the inva-
riable laws according to which they are acted up-
on by other bodies, in their reflexions, inflexi-
ons,


Seft. i. Of SEEING. i 2t

ons, and refradbions, without the leaft change of
their original properties, and the facility with
which they pervade bodies of great denfity, and
oftheclofelt texture, without refiftance, without
crowding or difturbing one another, without gi-
ving the leaft fenfible impulfe to the lighteft bo-
dies.

The ftrutture of the eye, and of aH its appur-
tenances, the admirable contrivances, of nature for
performing all its various external and internal
motions, and the variety in the eyes of different
animals, fuited to their feveral natures and ways
of life, clearly demonftrate this organ to be a
mafterpiece of Nature's work. And he muft be
very ignorant of what hath been difcovered
about it, or have a very ftrange caft of underftand-
ing, who can ferioufly doubt, whether or not
the rays of light and the eye were made for one
another, with confummate wifdom, and perfect
fkill in optics.

If we lhall fuppofe an order of beings, en-
dued with every human faculty but that of fight,
how incredible would it appear to fuch beings, ac-
cuftomed only to the flow informations of touch,
that, by the addition of an organ^ confifting of a
ball and focket of an inch diameter, they might
be enabled in an inftant of time, without chan-
ging their place, to perceive the difpofition of a
whole army, or the order of a battle, the figure
of a magnificent palace, or all the variety'of a
landfeape ? If a man were by feeling to find out
the figure of the peak of TenerifFe, or even of

St.


U2 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. YI.
St. Peter's church at Rome, it would be the work
of a lifetime.

It would appear ftill more incredible to fuch
beings as we have fuppofed, if they were inform-
ed of the difcoveries which may be made by this
little organ in things far beyond the reach of any
other fenfe : That by means of it we can find
our way in the pathlefs ocean ; that we can tra-
verfe the globe of the earth, determine its figure
and dimenfions, and delineate every region of it :
Yea, that we can meafure the planetary orbs, and
make difcoveries in the fphere of the fixed ftars.

Would it not appear ftill more aftonifhing to
4uch beings, if they {hould be farther informed,
That, by means of this fame organ, we can per-
ceive the tempers and difpofitions, the paffions
and affeolions of our fellow-creatures, even when
they want moft to conceal them ? That when
.the tongue is taught moft artfully to lie and dif-
fembie, the hypocrify fhould appear in the coun-
tenance to a difcernkig eye ? And that by this
organ, we can often perceive what is ftraight and
•what is crooked in the mind as well as in the
•body ? How many myfterious things mufta blind
man believe, if he will give credit to the rela-
tions of thofe that fee ? Surelv he needs as ftrona
a faith as is required of a good Chriftian.

It is not therefore without reafon, that the fa-
culty of feeing is looked upon, not only as more
noble than the other fenfes, but as having fome-
thing in it of a nature fuperior to fenfation. The
evidence of reafon is called feeing not feeling,

fondling*


Sea. i. Of SEEING. 123

fuelling, or tafting. Yea, we are wont to exprefs
the manner of the divine knowledge by feeing,
as that kin4 of knowledge which is moft perfect
in us.

SECT. II.

Sight difcovers almoft nothing iiohich the blind may
not comprehend. The reafon of this.

"VTOtwithstanding what hath been, faid of
the dignity and fuperior nature of this
faculty, it is worthy of our obfervation, that
there is very little of the knowledge acquired
by fight, that may not be communicated to a
man born blind. One who never faw the light,
may be learned , and knowing in every fcience,
even in optics ; and may make difcoveries in
every branch Of philofophy. He may underftand
as much as another man, not only of the order,
diftances, and motions of the heavenly bodies ;
but of the nature of light, and of the laws of
the reflexion and refraction of its rays. He may
underftand diftindlly, how thofe laws produce
the phasnomena of the rain-bow, the prifm, the
camera obfcura, and the magic lanthorn, and all
the powers of the microfcope and telefcope.
This is a fact fufRciently attefted by experience.
In order to perceive the reafon of it, we mu(b
diftinguifh the appearance than objects make to
the eye, from the things fuggefted by that ap-
pearance : and again, in the vifible appearance

of


ii4 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VI.
ef objects, we muft diftinguifh the appearance
of colour from the appearance of extenfion
figure, and motion. Firft, then, as to the vi-
sible appearance of the figure, and motion, and
extenfion of bodies, I conceive that a man born
blind may have a diftinct notion, if not of the
very things, at leaft of fomething extremely-
like to them. May not a blind man be made
to conceive, that a body moving directly from
the eye, or directly towards it, may appear to
be at reft ? and that the fame motion may ap-
pear quicker or flower, according as it is nearer
to the eye or farther off, more direct or more
oblique ? May he not be made to conceive, that
a plain furface, in a certain pofition, may appear
as a ftraight line, and vary its vifible figure, as
its pofition, or the pofition of the eye, is varied ?
That a circle feen obliquely will appear an ellipfe;
and a fquare, a rhombus, or an oblong rectangle ?
Dr. Saunderfon understood the projection of the
fphere, and the common rules of perfpective ;
and if he did, he mufl have underftood all that
I have mentioned. If there were any doubt of
Dr. Saunderfon's underftanding thefe things, I
could mention my having heard him fay in con-
verfarion, that he found great difficulty in under-
ftanding Dr. Halley's demonftration of that pro-
pofition, That the angles made by the circles
of the fphere, are equal to the angles made by
their reprefentatives in the ftereographic pro-
jection : but, faid he, when I laid afide that de-
monftration, and confidered the propofition in

my


Sea. 2. Of S E E I N G. 125

my own way, I faw clearly that it muft be
true. Another gentleman, of undoubted credk
and judgment in thefe matters, who had part in
this converfation, remembers it diftinctly.

As to the appearance of colour, a blind man
muft be more at a lofs ; becaufe he hath ho per-
ception that refembles it. Yet he may, by a
kind of analogy, in part fupply this defect. To
thefe who fee, a fcarlet colour fignifies an un-
known quality in bodies,, that makes to the eye
an appearance, which they are well acquainted
with, and 'have often obferved : to a blind man,
it fignifies an unknown quality that makes to
the eye an appearance; which he is unacquaint-
ed with. But he can conceive the eye to be
varioufly affected by different colours, as the
nofe is by different fmelis, or the ear by dif-
ferent founds. Thus he can conceive fcarlet to
differ from blue,, as the found of a trumpet does
from that of a drum ; or as the frnell of an orange
differs from that of an apple. It is impoffible to
know whether a fcarlet colour has the fame ap-
pearance, to me which it hath to another man ;
and if the appearances of it to different perfons
differed as much as colour does from found, they
might never be able to difcover this difference.
Hence it appears obvious, that a blind man
might talk long about colours diftincfly and per-
tinently : and if you were to examine him in
the dark about the nature, compofition, and.
beauty of them, he might be able to anfwer, fo
as not to betray his defect.

We


i 2 6 Of the HUM AN MIND. Chap. VI.

"We have ften how far a blind man may go in
the knowledge of the appearances which things
make to the eye. As to the thing3 which are fug-
gefted by them, or inferred from them ; altho*
he could never difcover them of himfelf, yet he
may understand them perfectly by the informa-
tion of others. And every thing of this kind
that enters into our minds by the eye, may en-
ter into his by the ear. Thus, for inftance, he
could never, if left to the direction of his own
faculties, have dreamed of any fuch thing as
light ; but he can be informed of every thing
we know about it. He can conceive, as di-
ftin&ly as we, the minutenefs and velocity of
its rays, their various degrees of refrangibility
and reflexibility, and all the magical powers and
virtues of that wonderful element. He could
never of himfelf have found out, that there are
fuch bodies as the fun, moon, and ftars ; but he
may be informed of all the noble difcoveries of
aftronomers about their motions, and the laws
of nature by which they are regulated. Thus
it appears, that there is very little knowledge
got by the eye, which may not be communicat-
ed by language to thofe who have no eyes.

If we fhould fuppofe, that it were as uncom-
mon for men to fee, as it is to be born blind ;
would not the few who had this rare gift, ap-
pear as prophets and infpired teachers to the
many ? We conceive, infpiration to give a man
no new faculty, but to communicate to him in
a new way, and by extraordinary means, what

the


Scft. 2. Of S E E I N G. iiy

the faculties common to mankind can apprehend,
and what he can communicate to others by or-
dinary means. On the fuppofition we have
made, fight would appear to the blind very fi-
milar to this, for the few who had this' gift,
could communicate the knowledge acquired by
it to thofe who had it not. They could not in-
deed convey to the blind any diftinct notion of
the manner in which they acquired this know-
ledge. A ball and focket would feem, to a-
blind man, in this cafe^ as improper an inftru-
ment for acquiring fuch a variety and extent of
knowledge, as a dream or a vifion. The man-
ner in which a man who fees, difcerns fo many
things by means of the eye, is as unintelligible
to the blind, as the manner in which a man may
be infpired with knowledge by the Almighty,
- is to us. Ought the blind man therefore, with-
out examination, to treat all pretences to the
gift of Feeing as impofture ? Might he not, if he
were candid and tradable, find reafonable evi-
dence of the reality of this gift in others, and
draw great advantages from it to himfelf ?

The diftindion we have made between the
vifible appearances of the obje&s of fight, and
things fuggefted by them, is- necefiary to give
us a juft notion of the intention of nature in
giving us eyes. If we attend duly to the ope-
ration of our mind in the ufe of this faculty, we
fhall perceive, that, the vifible appearance of
objects is hardly ever regarded by us. It is not
at all made an objecY of thought or refle&ion,

but


i 2 8 Ofthe HUM AN MIND. Chap. VI,
but ferves only as a fign to introduce to the mind
fomething elfe, which may be diftindtly concei-
ved by thofe who never faw.

Thus the vifible appearance of things- in my
room varies almoft every hour* according as the
day is clear or cloudy, as the fun is in the eaft s
or fouth, or weft, and as my eye is in one pare
of the room or in another : but I never think
of thefe variations, otherwife than as figns of
morning, noon, or night, of a clear or cloudy
fky. A book or a chair has a different appear-
ance to the eye, in every different diftance and
pofition ; yet we conceive it to be ftill the
fame •, and, overlooking the appearance, we im-
mediately conceive the real figure, diftance, and
pofition of the body, of which its vifible or per-
fpe&ive appearance is, a fign and indication.

"When I fee a man at the diftance of ten
yards, and afterwards fee him at the, diftance
of a hundred yards, his vifible appearance in its
length, breadth, and all its linear proportions,
is ten times lefs in the laft cafe than it is in the
firft : yet I do not conceive him one inch dimi-
nifhed by this diminution of his vifible figure.
Nay, 1 do not in the leaft attend to this diminu-
tion, even when I draw from it the conclufion
of his being at a greater diftance'. For fuch is
the fubtiky of the mind's operation in this cafe,
that we draw the conclufion, without perceiving
that ever the premifes entered into the mind.
A thoufand fuch inftances might be produced,
in order to fhew that the vifible appearances of
i objects


Seft.2. Of SEEING. - 129

objects are intended by nature only as figns or
indications ; and that the mind paflfes inftantly
to the things fignified, without making the leaft
reflection upon the fign, or even perceiving that
there is any fuch thing. It is in a way fomewhat
fimilar, that the founds of a language, after it
is become familiar, are overlooked, and we at-
tend only to the things fignified by them.

It is therefore a juft and important obferva-
tion of the Bifhop of Cloyne, That the vifible
appearance of objects is a kind of language ufed
by nature, to inform us of their diftance, magni-
tude, and figure. And this obfervation hath
been very happily applied by that ingenious wri-
ter, to the folution of fome phenomena in optics,
which had before perplexed the greateft matters
in that fcience. The fame obfervation is further
improved by the judicious Dr. Smith", in his Op-
tics, for explaining the apparent figure of the hea-
vens, and the apparent diftances and magnitudes!
of objects feen with glaffes, or by the naked eye.

Avoiding as much as poffible the repetition of
what hath been faid by thefe excellent writers,
we fhall avail ourfelves of the diftindtion between
the figns that nature ufeth in this vifual language,
and the things fignified by them ; and in what
remains to be faid of fight, fhall firft make fome
obfervations upon the figns.


SECT.


i 3 o Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

SECT. III.

Of the vifible appearances of objefls.

J N this fedYion we muft fpeak of things which
are never made the object of reflexion,
tho' almoft every moment prefented to the mind.
Nature intended them only for figns ; and in the
whole courfe of life they are put to no other ufe.
The mind has acquired a confirmed and invete-
rate habit of inattention to them •, for they no
fooner appear, than quick as lightning the thing
fignified fucceeds, and ingrofles all our regard.
They have no name in language ; and altho' we
are confcious of them when they pafs through the
mind, yet their paflage is fo quick, and fo fami-
liar, that it is abfolutely unheeded ; nor do they
leave any footfteps of themfelves either in the
memory or imagination. That this is the cafe
with regard to the fenfations of touch, hath been
fhown in the lafl: chapter ; and it holds no lefs
with regard to the vifible appearances of objects.
I cannot therefore entertain the hope of being
intelligible to thofe readers who have nor, by
pains and practice, acquired the habit of diftin-
guifhing the appearance of objects to the eye,
from the judgment which we form by fight of
their colour, diftance, magnitude, and figure.
The only profeflion in life" wherein it is necefia-
ry to make this diftinclion, is that of painting.
Thepainter hath occafion for an abftraction, with

regard


Seft. 3 . Of SEEING. i 5 t

regard to vifible objects, fomewhat fimilar to that
which we here require : and this indeed is the
moft difficult part of his art. For it is evident,
that if he could fix in his imagination the vifible
appearance ofobjecls, without confounding it with
the things fignified by that appearance, it would
be as eafy for him to paint from the life, and *x>
give every figure its proper fhading and relief,
and its perfpeclive proportions, as it is to paint
from a copy. Perfpeclive, lhading, giving re-
lief, and colouring, are nothing elfe but copying
the appearance which things make to the eye.
We may therefore borrow fome light on the fub-
jecT: of vifible appearance from this art.

Let one look upon any familiar object, fuch
as a book, at different diftanoes and in different
pofitions : is he not able to affirm, upon the
teftimony of his fight, that it is the fame book,
the fame object , whether feen at the diftance of
one foot or of ten, whether in one pofition or
another -, that the colour is the fame, the dimen-
fions the fame, and the figure the fame, as far as
the eye can judge ? This furely muft be acknow-
ledged. The fame individual objecl: is prefented
to the mind, only placed at different diftances,
and in different pofitions. Let me aflc, in the
next place, Whether this object has the fame ap-
pearance to the eye in thefe different diftaiices f
Infallibly it hath not. For,

Firft, However certain our judgment may be

that the colour is the fame, it is as certain that

it hath not the fame appearance at different

I 2 diftances.


132 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

diftarices. There is a certain degradation of the
colour, and a certain confufion and indiftindtnefs
of the minute parts, which is the natural confe-
quence of the removal of the object to a greater
diftance. Thofethat are not painters, or critics
in painting, overlook this ; and cannot eafily be
perfuaded, that the colour of the fame object
hath a different appearance at the diftance of one
foot and often, in the made and in the light.
But the mailers in painting know how, by the de-
gradation of the colour, and the confufion of the
minute parts, figures, which are upon the fame
canvas, and at the fame diftance from the eye,
may be made to reprefent objects which are at the
moft unequal diftances. They know how to
make the objects appear to be of the fame colour,
by making their pictures really of different co-
lours according to their diftances or fhades.

Secondly, Every one who is acquainted with
the rules of perfpedtive, knows that the appear-
ance of the figure of the book muft vary in eve-
ry different pofition : yet if you afk" a man
that has no notion of perfpedtive, whether the
figure of it does not appear to his eye to be the
fame in all its different pofitions ? he can with a
good confcience affirm, that it does. He hath
learned to make allowance for the variety of
vifible figure arifing from the difference of pofi-
tion, and to draw the proper conclufions from it.
But he draws thefe conclufions fo readily and
habitually, as to lofe fight of the premifes :
and therefore where he hath made the fame

conclufion.


Seel. 3. Of SEEING. i 33

conclufion, he conceives the vifible appearance
mult have been the fame.

Thirdly, Let us conlider the apparent magni-
tude or dimenfions of the book. Whether I
view it at the diftance of one foot or of ten feet,
it feems to be about feven inches long, five
broad, and one thick. I can judge of thefe di-
menfions very nearly by the eye, and I judge
them to be the fame at both diftances. But yet
it is certain, that at the diftance of one foot its
vifible length and breadth is about ten times as
great as at the diftance of ten feet ; and confe-
quently its furface is about a hundred times as
great. This great change of apparent magni-
tude is altogether overlooked, and every man is
apt to imagine, that it appears to the eye of the
fame fize at both diftances. Further, when I
look at the book, it feems plainly to have three
dimenfions, of length, breadth, and thicknefs :
but it is certain that the vifible appearance hath
no more than two, and can be exactly reprefent-
ed upon a canvas which hath only length and
breadth. 1

In the laft place, Does not every man, by
fight perceive the diftance of the book from his
eye ? Can he not affirm with certainty, that in
one cafe it is not above one foot diftant, that in
another it is ten ? Neverthelefs it appears certain,
that diftance from the eye, is no immediate ob-
ject of fight. There are certain things in the
vifible appearance which are figns of diftance
from the eye, and from which, as we Ihall after-
I 3 wards


r 3 4 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VI.
wards (how, we learn by experience to judge of
that diftance within certain limits ; but it feems
beyond doubt, that a man born blind, and fud-
denly made to fee, could form no judgment
at firft of the diftance of the objects which he
faw. The young man couched by Chefelden,
thought, at firft, that every thing he faw touch-
ed his eye, and learned only by experience to
judge of the diftance of vifible objects.

I have entered into this long detail, in order
to (hew, that the vifible appearance of an object
is extremely different from the notion of it which
experience teaches us to form by fight ; and to
enable the reader to attend to the vifible appear-
ance of colour, figure, and extenfion, in vifi-
ble things, which is no common object of
thought, but muft be carefully attended to by
thofe who would enter into the philofophy of
this fenfe, or would comprehend what fhall be
faid upon it. To a man newly made to fee, the
vifible appearance of objects would be, the fame
as to us ; but he would fee nothing at all of their
real dimenfions, as we do. He could form no
conje<5lure, by means of his fight only, how '
many inches orfeet they were in length, foreadth,
or. thick nefs. He could perceive little or no-
thing of their real figure.; nor could he difcern,
that this was a cube, that a fphere ; that this
Was a cone, and that a cylinder. - His eye
could not inform him, that this object was near,
and that more remote. The habit of a man or
of a woman, which appeared to us of one uni-
form


Seel. 3. Of SEEING. i 35

form colour, varioufly folded and fhaded, would
prefent to his eye neither fold nor fhade, but
variety of colour. In a word, his eyes, tho'
ever fo perfect, would at firft give him almoft
no information of things without him. They
would indeedprefent the fame appearances to him
as they do to us, and fpeak the fame language ;
but to him it is an unknown language ; and
therefore he would attend only to the figns,
without knowing the fignification of them :
whereas to us it is a language perfectly familiar j
and therefore we take no notice of the figns, but
attend only to the thing fignified by them.

SECT. IV.

'That colour is a quality of bodies, not a fenfation
of the mind.

TJ Y colour, all men, who have not been tutor-
ed by modern philofophy, underftand, not
a fenfation of the mind, which can have no ex-
iftence when it is not perceived, but a quality
or modification of bodies, which continues to-
be the fame, whether it is f en or not. The
fcarlet-rofe, which is before me, is ftill a fcarlet-
rofe when I fhut my eyes, and was fo at mid-
night when no eye faw it. The colour re-
mains when the appearance ceafes : it remains
the fame when the "appearance changes. For
when I view this fcarlet-rofe through a pair of
green fpeftacles, the appearance is changed, but
I 4 I do


136 Of the H UMA NMIND. Chap. VI.
I do not conceive the colour of the rofe changed.
To a perfon in the jaundice, it has ftill another
appearance ; but he is eafily convinced, that the
change is in his eye, and not in the colour of
the object. Every different degree of light
makes it have a different appearance, and total
darknefs takes away all appearance, but makes
not the leaft change in the colour of the body.
We may, by a variety of optical experiments,
change the appearance of figure and magnitude
in a body, as well as that of colour •, we may
make one body appear to be ten. But all men
believe, that as a multiplying glafs does not
really produce ten guineas out of one, nor a mi-
crofcope turn a guinea into a ten pound piece ;
fo neither does a coloured glafs change the real
colour of the object feen thro' it, when it chan-
ges the appearance of that colour.

The common language of mankind mows evi-
dently, that we ought to diftinguifh between the
colour of a body, which is conceived to be a fix-
ed and permanent quality in the body, and the
appearance of that colour to the eye, which may
be varied a thoufand ways, by a variation of the
light, of the medium, or of the eye itfelf. The
permanent colour of the body is the caufe, which,
by the mediation of various kinds or degrees of
light, and of various tranfparent bodies interpo-
fed, produces all this variety of appearances.
"When a coloured body is prefented, there is a
certain apparition to the eye, or to the mind,
which we have called the appearance of colour.

' Mr.


Seft. 4 . Of SEEING. 137

Mr. Locke calls it an idea ; and indeed it may be
called fo with the greateft propriety. This idea
can have no exiftence but when it is perceived.
It is a kind of thought, and can only be the aft
of a percipient or thinking being. By the con-
ftitutionof our nature, we are led to conceive
this idea as a fign of fomething external, and are
impatient till we learn its meaning. A thoufand
experiments for this purpofe are made every day
by children, even before they come to the ufe of
reafon. They look at things, they handle them,
they put them in various pofitions, at different
diftances, and in different lights. The ideas of
fight, by thefe means, come to be aflbciated with,
and readily to fuggeft, things external, and alto-
gether unlike them. In particular, that idea which
we have called the appearance of colour, fuggefts
the conception and belief of fome unknown qua-
lity in the body, which occafions the idea ; and
it is to this quality, and not to the idea, that we
give the name of colour; The various colours,
although in their nature equally unknown, are
eafily diftinguifhed when we think or fpeak of
them, by being aflbciated with the ideas which
they excite. In like manner, gravity, magnetifm,
and eleftricity, although all unknown qualities,
are diftinguifhed by their different effects. As
we grow up, the mind acquires a habit of pafling
fo rapidly from the ideas of fight to the external
things fuggefted by them, that the ideas are not
in the leaft attended to, nor have they names gi-
ven them in common language.

When


i 3 8 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VI.

When we think or fpeak of any particular co-
lour, however fimple the notipn may feem to be,
which is prefented to -the imagination, it is really
in fome fort compounded. It involves an un-
known caufe, and a known effect. The name of
colour belongs indeed to the caufe only, and not
to the effect. But as the caufe is unknown, we
can form no diftinct conception of it, but by its
relation to the known effect. And therefore both
go together in the imagination, and are fo clofely
united, that they are miftaken for one fimple
object of thought. When I would conceive thofe
colours of bodies which we call fcarlet and blue ;
if 'I conceived them only as unknown qualities,
I could perceive no diftinction between the one
and the other. I muft therefore, for the fake of
diftinetion, join to each of them in my imagi-
nation fome effect or fome relation that is pecu-
liar. And the moil obvious diftincTion is, the ap-
pearance which one and the other makes to the
eye. Hence the appearance is, in the imagina-
tion, fo clofely united with the quality called a
fearkt-colour, that they are apt to be miftaken
for one and the fame thing, altho' they are in
reality fo different and fo unlike, that one is ah
idea in the mind, the other is a quality of body.

I conclude then, that colour is not a fenfation,
but a fecondary quality of bodies, in the fenfe
we have already explained ; that it is a certain
power or virrue in bodies, that in fair day-light
exhibits to the eye an appearance, which is very
familiar to us, although it hath no name. Co-
lour


Seft. 4- Of SEEING. 139

lour differs from other fecond,ary qualities in this,
that whereas the name of the quality is fome-
times given to the fenfation which indicates it*
and is occafioned by it, we never, as far as I can
judge, give the name of colour to the fenfation,
but to the quality only. Perhaps the reafon of
this may be, that the appearances of the fame co-
lour are fo various and changeable, according to
the different modifications of the light, of the
medium, and of the eye, that language could not
afford names for them. And indeed they are fo
little intereftirig, that they are never attended to,
but ferve only as figns to introduce the things
fignified by them. Nor ought it to appear incre-
dible, that appearances fo frequent and fo familiar
fhould have no names, nor be made objects of
thought ■, fince we have before fhown, that this
is true of many fenfations of touch, which are no
lefs frequent, nor lefs familiar.

SECT. V.

An inference from the ■preceding:

Tp R O M what hath been faid about colour, we
may infer two things. The firft is, that one
of the moft remarkable paradoxes of modern phi-
lofophy, which hath been univerfally efteemed as
a great difcovery, is, in reality, when examined
to the bottom, nothing elfe but an abufe of
words. The paradox I mean is, That colour is,
not a qualijy of bodies, but only an idea in the

mind.


140 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VI.'
mind. We have fhown, that the word colour, as
ufed by the vulgar, cannot fignify an idea in the
mind, but a permanent quality of body. We have
ihown, that there is really a permanent quality of
body, to which the common ufe of this word ex-
actly agrees. Can any ftronger proof be defired,
that this quality is that to which the vulgar give
the name of colour? If it fhould be faid, that this
quality, to which we give the name of colour, is
unknown to the vulgar, and therefore can have
no name among them ; I anfwer, it is indeed
known only by its effe&s ; that is, by its exci-
tino- a certain idea in us : but are there not num-
berlefs qualities of bodies which are known only
by their effects, to which, notwithftanding, we
find it neceffary to give names ? Medicine alone
might furnifh us with a hundred inftances of this
kind. Do not the words afiringent, narcotic,
epifpaftic, cauflic, and innumerable others, fignify
qualities of bodies which are known only by their
effects upon animal bodies ? Why then mould not
the vulgar give a name to a quality, whofe ef-
fects are every moment perceived by their eyes ?
We have all the reafon therefore that the nature
of the thing admits, to think that the vulgar ap-
ply the name of colour to that quality of bodies
which excites in us what the philofophers call the
idea of colour. And that there is fuch a quality
in bodies, all philofophers allow, who allow that
there is any fuch thing as body. Philofophers
have thought fit to leave that quality of bodies
which the vulgar call colour, without a name,

and


Sett. 5. Of S E E I N G. * 4 i

and to give the name, of colour to the idea or ap-
pearance, to which, as we have fhown, the vul-
gar give no name, becaufe they never make it an
objec"b of thought or reflection. Hence it appears,
that when philofophers affirm that colour is not
in bodies, but in the mind -, and the vulgar af-
firm, that colour is not in the mind, but is a qua-
lity of bodies ; there is no difference between
them about things, but only about the meaning
of a word.

The vulgar have undoubted right to give
names to things which they are daily converfant
about; and philofophers feem juftly chargeable
with an abufe of language, when they change the
meaning of a common word, without giving
warning.

If it is a good rule, to think with philofophers,
and fpeak with the vulgar, it muft be right to
fpeak with the vulgar when we think with them,
and not to (hock them by philofophical paradoxes,
which, when put into common language, exprefs
only the common fenfe of mankind.

If you alk a man that is no philofopher, what
colour is ? or, what makes one body appear white,
another fcarlet ? He cannot tell. He leaves that
inquiry to philofophers, and can embrace any hy-
pothefis about it, except that of our modern phi-
lofophers, who affirm, that colour is not in body,
but only in the mind.

Nothing, appears more fhocking to his appre-

.henfion, than that vifible objects lhould have no

colour, and that colour fhould be in that which

7 he


i 4 2 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
he conceives to be invjlible. Yet this ftrange pa-
radox is not only univerfally received, but confi-
. dered as one of the nobleft difcoveries of modern
philofophy. The ingenious Addifon, in the Spec-
tator, N°4i:$. fpeaks thus of it. " I have here
" fuppofed that my reader is acquainted with
" that great modern difcovery, which is at pre-
" fent univerfally acknowledged by all the in-
*' quirers into natural philofophy, namely, that
" light and colours, as apprehended by the ima-
" gination, are only ideas in the mind, and not
" qualities that have any exiftence in matter.
" As this is a truth which has been proved in-
" conteftably by many modern philofophers, and
" is indeed one of the fineft fpeculations in that
" fcience, if the Englifh reader would fee the no-
" tion explained at large, he may find it in the
" eighth chapter of the fecond book of Locke's
" EJfay on human underftanding."

Mr. Locke and Mr. Addifon are writers who
have deferved fo well of mankind, that one muft
feel fome uneafinefs in differing from them, and
would wifh to afcribe all the merit that is due to
a difcovery upon which they put fo high a va-
lue. And indeed it is juft to acknowledge, that
Locke, and other modern philofophers, on the
fubject of fecondary qualities, have the merit of
diftinguifhing more accurately than thofe that
went before them, between the fenfation in the
mind, and that conftitution or quality of bodies
which gives occafion to the fenfation. They
have (hown clearly, that thtfe two things are

not


Sea. 5. Of SEEING. 143

flot only diftinet, but altogether unlike: that
there is no fimilitude between the effluvia of an
odorous body, and the fenfation of frneil, or be-
tween the vibrations of a founding body ? and the
(enfation of found : that there can be no refem-
blance between the feeling of heat, and the con-
ftitution of the heated body which occafions it ;
or between the appearance which a coloured body
makes to the eye, and the texture of the body
which caufes that appearance.

Nor was the merit fmall of diftinguifhing
thefe things accurately •, becaufe, however dif-
ferent and unlike in their nature, they have been
always fo affociated in the imagination, as to
coalefce, as it were into one two-faced form,
Which, from its amphibious nature, could not
juftly be appropriated either to body or mind ;
and until it was properly diftinguifhed into its
different conftituent parts, it was impoflible to
aflign to either their jult mares in it. None of
the ancient philolbphers had made this diftinc-
tion. The followers of Democritus and Epi-
curus conceived the forms of heat, and found,
and colour, to be in the mind only, but that
our fenfes fallaciouQy reprefented them as beinc
in bodies. The Peripatetics imagined, that
thofe forms are really in bodies ; and that the
images of them are conveyed to the mind by our
fenfes.

The one fyftem made the fenfes naturally fal-
lacious and deceitful; the other made the qua-
lities of body to referable the fenfations of the

mind.


144 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI,
mind. Nor was it poffible to find a third, with-
out making the diftindtion we have mentioned ;
by which indeed the errors of both thefe ancient
fyftems are avoided, and we are not left under
the hard neceffity of believing, either, on the
one hand, that our fenfations are like to the
qualities of body, or, on the other, that God
hath given us one faculty to deceive us, and an-
other to detect the cheat.

We defire therefore, with pleafure, 1 to do
juftice to the doctrine of Locke, and other
modern philofophers, with regard to colour,
and other fecondary qualities, and to afcribe to
it its due merit, while we beg leave to cenfure
the language in which they have exprefled their
doctrine. When they had explained and efta-
blifhed the diftinction between the appearance
which colour makes to the eye, and the modifica-
tion of the coloured body, which, by the laws of
Nature, caufes that appearance ; the queftion
was* Whether to give the name of colour to the
caufe, or to the effect ? By giving it, as they
have done, to tlje effect, they fet philofophy
apparently in oppofition to common fenfe, and
expofe it to the ridicule of the vulgar. But had
they given the name of colour to the caufe, as
they ought to have done, they muff then have
affirmed, with the vulgar, that colour is a qua-
lity of bodies ; and that there is neither colour
nor any thing like it in the mind. Their lan-
guage, as well as their fentiments, would have
been perfectly agreeable to the common appre-

henfions


Sefl:. 5. Of S E E I N G. 145

henfions of mankind, and true philofophy would
have joined hands with Common Senfe. As
Locke was no enemy to common fenfe, it may-
be prefumed that, in this inftance, as in fome
others, he was feduced by fome received hypo-
thecs : and that this was actually the cafe, will
appear in the following feftion.

SECT. VI.

That none of our fenfations are refemblances of any
of the qualities of bodies.

A Second inference is. That altho' colour
is really a quality of body, yet it is not re-
prefented to the mind by an idea or fenfation
that refembles it} on the contrary, it is fug-
gefted by an idea which does not in the leaft
refemble it. And this inference is applicable,
not to colour only, but to all the qualities of
body which we have examined.

It deferves to be remarked, that in the ana-
lyfis we have hitherto given of the operations of
the five fenfes, and of the qualities of bodies
difcovered by them, no inftance hath occurred,
either of any fenfation which refembles any qua-
lity of body, or of any quality of body whofe
image or refemblance is conveyed to the mind
by means of the fenfes.

There is no phenomenon in nature more un-
accountable, than the intercourfe that is carriecl
on between the mind and the external world :
K there


146 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
there is no phenomenon which philofophical fpi-
rits have fhown greater avidity to pry into, and to
refblve, It is agreed by all, that this intercourfe
is carried on by means of the fenfes : and this
fatisfies the vulgar curiofity, but not the philofo-
phic. Philofophers muft have fome fyftem,
fome hypothefis, that Ihews the manner in which
our fenfes make us acquainted with external
things. All the fertility of human invention
feems to have produced only one hypothefis
for this purpofe; which therefore hath been
uniyerfally received ; and that is, that the mind,
like a mirror, receives the images of things
from without, by means of the fenfes ; fo that
their ufe muft be to convey thefe images into
the mind.

Whether to thefe images of external things
in the mind we give the name of fenfible forms,
or fenfible fpecies, with the Peripatetics, or the
name of ideas of fenfatiori, with Locke ; or whe-
ther, with later philofophers, wediftinguifby^a-
fations, which are immediately conveyed by the
fenfes, from ideas of fenfation, which are faint
copies of our fenfations retained in the memory
and imagination ; thefe are only differences about
words. The hypothefis I have mentioned is
common to all thefe different fyftems.

The neceffary and allowed confequence of
this hypothefis is, That no material things nor
any quality of material things, can be conceiv-
ed by us, or made an object of thought, until
its image is conveyed to the mind by means
6 of


SZ&. 6. Of S E E 1 U G< i 47

of the ferifes. We fhall examine this hypothefis
particularly afterwards, and at this time only
obferve, that in confequence of it, one would na-
turally expect, that to every quality and attri-
bute of body we know or can conceive, there
lhould be a fenfation correfponding, which is
the image and refemblance of that quality ; and
that the fenfations which have no fimilitude or
refemblance to body, or to any of its qualities,
lhould give us no conception of a material world*,
or of any thing belonging to it. Thefe things
might be expected as the natural confequences of
the hypothefis we have mentioned.

Now, we have confidered, in this and the
preceding chapters, extenfion, figure, folidify*
motion, hardnefs, rough nefs, as well as colour,
heat, and cold, found, tafte, and fmell. We
have endeavdurect to fhew, that our nature and
conftitution lead us to conceive thefe as qualities
of body, as all mankind have always conceived
them to be. We have likewife examined, with
great attention, the various fenfations we have
by means of the five fenfes, and are hot able to
find among them all one fingle. image of body,
or of any of its qualities. From whence then
come thofe images of body and of its qualities
into the mind? Let philofophers refolve this
queftion. All I can fay is, that they come not
by the fenfes. I' am fure, that, by proper at-
tention and care, I may know my fenfations,
and be able to, affirm with' certainty'what they
refemble, and what they do not refemble. I
K 2 have.


i 4 8 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap.VL
have examined them one by one, and compared
them with matter and its qualities; and I cannot
find one of them that confefles a refembling

feature.

A truth fo evident as this, That our fenfa-
tions are not images of matter, or of any of its
qualities, ought not to yield to a hypothefis
fuch as that above mentioned, however ancient,
or however univerfally received by philofophers ;,
nor can there be any amicable union between,
the two. This will appear by fome reflexions,
upon the fpirit of the ancient and modern philo-
fophy concerning fenfation.

During the reign of the Peripatetic philofo-
phy, our fenfations were not minutely or accis-
rately examined. The attention of philofophers,
as well as of the vulgar, was turned to the things
fignified by them : therefore, in conlequence of
the common hypothefis, it was taken for granted,
that all the fenfations . we have from external"
things, are the forms or images of thefe external
things. And thus the truth we have mentioned
yielded entirely to the hypothefis, and was alto-
gether fupprefied by it.

Des Cartes gave a noble example of turning
our attention inward, and fcrutinizing our fen-
fations ; and this example hath been very wor-
thily followed by modern philofophers, particu-
larly by Malebranch.e, Locke, Berkeley, and
Hume. The effect of this fcrutiny hath been,
a gradual difcovery of the truth above mention-
ed, to wit, the diffimilitude between the fen-

' fations


Seft. 6. Of SEEING. 149

fations of pur minds and the qualities or attri-
butes of an infentient, inert fubftance, fuch as
we conceive matter to be. But this valuable and
ufeful difcovery, in its different ftages, hath ftill
been unhappily united to the ancient hypothe-
fis : and from this inauipicious match of opinions,
fo Unfriendly and difcordant in their natures,
have arifen thofe monfters of paradox and fcep-
ticifm with which the modern philofophy is too
juft'ly chargeable.

Locke faw clearly, and proved inconteftably,
th3t the fenfations we have by tafte, fmell, and
hearing, as well as the fenfations of colour, heat,
and cold, are not refemblances of any thing in
bodies ; and in this he agrees with Des Cartes
and Malebranche. Joining this opinion with
the hypothefis, it follows necefiarily, that three
fenfes of the 'five are cut off from giving us any
intelligence of the material world, as being alto-
gether inept for that office. Smell, and tafte,
and found, as well as colour and heat, can have
no more relation to body, than anger or grati-
tude ; nor ought the former to be called qualities
of body, whether "primary or fecondary, any
more than the latter. For it was natural and
obvious to argue thus from that hypothefis : If
heat, and colour, and found, are real qualities of
body, the fenfations by which we perceive them,
mutt be refemblances of thofe qualities; but
thefe fenfations are not refemblances j therefore
thofe are not real qualities of body.

K 3 We


i S o Of the HUMAN MIND, Chap. VI,

We fee then, that Locke, having found that
the ideas of fecondary qualities are no refembjan^
ces, was compelled, by a hypothecs common to
all philofophers, to deny that they are real qua-
lities of body. It is more difficult to afilgn a
reafon, why, after this, he mould call them fecon-
dary qualities ; for this. name, if I miftake not,
was of his invention. Surely he did not mean
that they were fecondary qualities of the mind ;
and I do not fee with what propriety, or even by
what tolerable licence, he could call them fecon-
dary qualities of body, after finding that they
were no qualities of body at all. In this., he
feems to have facrificed to Common Senfe, and
to have been led by her authority even in oppo-
fition to his hypothefis. The fame fovereign
miftrefs of our opinions that led this phjlofopher
to call thofe things fecondary qualities of body,
which, according.to his principles and reafonings,
were no qualities of body at all, hath led, not
the vulgar of all ages only, but philofophers al-
fo, and even the difciples of Locke, to believe
them to be real qualifies of body : fhe hath led
them to inveftigafe, by experiments, the nature
pf colour, and "found, and hear, in bodies.
Nor hath this inveftigation been fruitlefs, as it
muft ruve been, if there had been no fuch thing
in bodies : on the contrary, it hath produced ve-
ry noble and ufeful difcoveries, which make a
vecy considerable part of natural philofophy. If
then natural philofophy be not a dream, there is
fornething in bodies, which we call colour, and


Sed. 6. Of SEEING. i 5 i

heat, and found. And if this be fo, the hypo-
thefis from which the contrary is concluded, muft
be falfe : for the argument, leading to a falfe
conclulion, recoils againft the hypothefis from
which it was drawn, and thus directs its force
backward. If the qualities of body were
known to us only by fenfations that refemble
them, then colour, and found, and heat, could be
no qualities of body; but thefe are real qualities
of body; and- therefore the qualities of body
are not known only by means of fenfations that
refemble them.

But to proceed : What Locke had proved
with regard to the fenfations we have by fmell,
tafte, and hearing, Bifhop Berkeley proved no lefs
unanfwerably with regard to all our other fenfa^-
tions ; to wit, that none of them can in the
leaft refemble the qualities of a lifelefs and infen-
tient being, fuch as matter is conceived to be.
Mr. Hume hath confirmed this by his authority
and reafoning. This opinion furely looks with
a very malign afpecT: upon the old hypothefis ;
yet that hypothefis hath frill been retained, and
conjoined with it. And what a brood of mo'n-
fters ha'h this produced !

The firft-born of this union, and perhaps the
moft harmlefs, was, That the fecondary quali-
ties of body were mere fenfations of the mind.
To pafs by Malebranche's notion of feeing all
things in the ideas of the divine mind, as a fo-
reigner never naturalized in this ifland ; the
next was Berkeley's fyftem, That extenfion,
K 4 and


i 5 2 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
and figure, and hardnefs, and motion ; that land,
and fea, and houfes, and our own bodies, as
well as thofe of our wives, and children, and
friends, are nothing but ideas in the mind ; and
that there is nothing exifting in nature, but
minds and ideas.

The progeny that followed, is ftill more
frightful ; fo that it is furprifing, that one could
befonnd who had the courage to act the midwife,
to rear it up, and to ulher it into the world.
No caufes nor 'effects ; no fubftances, material
orfpiritual; no evidence even in mathematical
dernonftration ; no liberty nor active power ;
nothing exifting in nature, but impreffions and
ideas following each other, without time, place,
or fubject. Surely no age ever produced fuch a
fyftem of opinions, juftly deduced with great
acutenefs, perfpicuity, and eleganc'e, from a
principle univerfally received. The hypothefis
we have mentioned, is the father of them all.
The diffimilitude of our fenfations and feelings
to external things, is the innocent mother of
moft of them.

As it happens fometimes in an arithmetical
operation, that two errors balance one another,
fo that the conclufion is little or nothing affect-
ed by them •, but when one of them is corrected,
and the other left, we are led farther from the
truth, than by both together : fo it feems to
have happened in the Peripatetic philofophy of
fcnfation, compared with the modern. The
Peripatetics adopted two errors j but the laft fer-

ved


Seft. 6. Of seeing: i 55

ved as a corrective to the firft, and rendered it
mild and gentle ; fa that their fyftem had no
tendency to fcepticifm. The moderns have re-
tained the firft of thofe errors, but have gradual-
ly detected and corre&ed the laft. The confe-
quence hath been, that the light we have ftruck
out hath created darknefs, and fcepticifm hath
advanced hand in hand with knowledge, fpread-
ing its melancholy gloom, firft over the material
world, and at laft over the whole face of na-
ture. Such a phenomenon as this, is apt to
ftagger even the lovers of light and knowledge,
while its caufe is latent; but when that is detect-
ed, it may give hopes, that this darknefs fhall
not be everlafting, but that it fhall be fucceeded
by a more permanent light.

SECT. VII.

Of vijibk figure and extenjion.

A Lthough there is no refemblance, nor, as
far as we know, any neceffary connection,
between that quality in a body which we call
its colour, and the appearance which that colour
makes to the eye ; it is quite otherwife with re-
gard to its figure and magnitude. There is cer-
tainly a refemblance, and a neceffary connection,
between the vifible figure and magnitude of a
body, and its real figure and magnitude ; no man
can give a reafon why a fcarlet colour affects the
eye in the manner it does ; no man can be fure,

that


154 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
that it affects his eye in the fame manner as it
affects the eye of another, and that it has the
fame appearance to him, as it has to another
man ; but we can affign a reafon why a circle
placed obliquely to the eye, fhould appear in the
form of an ellipfe. The vifible figure, magni-
tude, and pofition, may, by mathematical rea-
foning, be deduced from the real ; and it may be
demonftrated, that every eye that fees diftindtly
and perfectly, muft, in the fame fituation, fee
it under this form, and no other. Nay, we may
venture to affirm, that a man born blind, if he
were , inftrudted in mathematics, would be able
to determine the vifible figure of a body, when
its real figure, diftance, and pofition, are given.
Dr. Saunderfon understood the projection of the
fphere, and perfpedtive. Now I require no
more knowledge in a blind man, in order to his
being able to determine the Vifible figure of bo-
dies, than that he can project the outline of a
given body, upon the furface of a hollow fphere,
whofe centre is in the eye. This projection is
the vifible figure he wants ; for it is the fame
figure with that which is projected upon the tu-<
pea retina in vifion,

A blind man can conceive lines drawn from
every point of the object to the centre of the
eye, making angles. He can conceive, that
the length of the object will appear greater or
lefs, in proportion to the angle which it fub-
tends at the eye •, and that, in like manner, the
breadth, and in general the diftance of any one

pojnt


Seft. 7. Of S E E I N G. 155

point of the object from any other point, will ap-
pear greater or lefs, in proportion to the angles
which thofe diftances fubtend. He can eafily be
made to conceive, that the vifible appearance has
no thicknefs, 'any more than a projection of the
fphere, or a perfpedtive draught. He may be
informed, that the eye, until it is aided by ex-
perience, does not reprefent one object as nearer
or more remote than another. Indeed he would
probably conjecture this of himfelf, and be apt
to think that the rays of light muft make the
fame impreffion upon the eye, whether they
come from a greater or a lefs diftance.

Thefe are all the principles which we fuppofe
our blind mathematician to have ; and thefe he
may certainly acquire by information and reflec-
tion. It is no lefs certain, that from thefe prin-
ciples, having given the real figure and magni-
tude of a body, and its pofition and diftance with
regard to the eye, he can find out its vifible fi-
gure and magnitude. He can demonftrate in ge-
neral, from thefe principles, that the vifible fi-
gure of all bodies will be the fame with that of
their projection upon the furface of a hollow
fphere, when the eye is placed in the centre.
And he can demonftrate, that their vifible magr
nitude will be greater or lefs, according as their-
projection occupies a greater or lefs part of the
furface of this fphere.

To fetthis matter in another light, let us dif-
tinguifh betwixt the pofition of objectij with re-?
gard to the eye, and their d$am;e from it. Ob-
jects,


i S 6 Of the HU M A N M I N D. Chap. VI.
je£ts that lie in the fame right line drawn from
the centre of the eye, have the fame pofition,
however different their diftances from the eye
may be : but objects which lie in different right
lines drawn from the eye's centre, have a differ-
ent pofition -, and this difference of pofition is
greater or lefs in proportion to the angle made
at the eye by the right lines mentioned. Ha-
ving thus defined what we mean by the pofition
of objects with regard to the eye, it is evidenr,
that as the real figure of a body confifts in the
fituation of its feveral parts with regard to one
another, fo its vifible figure confifts in the pofition
of its feveral parts with regard to the eye; and
as he that hath a diftinct conception of the fitu-
ation of the parts of the body with regard to one
another, mult have a diftincl conception of its
real figure; fo he that conceives diftinclly the
pofition of its feveral parts with regard to the
eye, muft have a diftincl conception of its vifible
figure. Now, there is nothing furely to hinder
a blind man from conceiving the pofition of the
feveral parts of a body with regard to the eye,
any more than from conceiving their fituation
with regard to one another ; and therefore I con-
clude, that a blind man may attain a diftincl
conception of the vifible figure of bodies.

Altho' we think the arguments that have been
offered are fufficient to prove, that a blind man
may conceive the vifible extenfion and figure of
bodies ; yet, in order to remove fome prejudices
againft this truth, it will be of ufe to compare

the


SeA. 7. Of SEEING. 157

the notion which a blind mathematician might
form to himfelf of viable figure, with that which
is prefented to the eye in vifion, and to obferve
wherein they differ.

Firft, Vifible figure is never prefented to the
eye but in conjunction with colour : and akho*
there be no connexion between them from the
nature of the things, yet having fo invariably kept
company together, we are hardly able to disjoin
them even in our imagination. What mightily
increafes this difficulty is, that we have never
been accuftomed to make vifible figure an object
of thought. It is only ufed as a fign, and ha-
ving ferved this purpofe, pafies away, without
leaving a trace behind. The drawer or defigner,
whofe bufinefs it is to hunt this fugitive form,
and to take a copy of it, finds How difficult his
talk is, after many years labour and practice
Happy ] if at laft he can acquire the art of ar-
refting it in his imagination, until he can deline-
ate it. For then it is evident, that he muft be
able to draw as accurately from the life as from
a copy. But how few of the profefled matters
of defigning are ever able to arrive at this de-
gree of perfeel ion ? it is no wonder, then, that
we fhould find fo great difficulty in conceiving
this form apart from its conftant aflociate, when
it is fo difficult to conceive it at all. But our
blind man's notion of vifible figure will not be
affociated with colour, of which he hath no
conception ; but it will perhaps be aflbciated with
hardnefs or fmoothnefs, with which he is ac-
quainted


i 5 8 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
quainted by touch. Thefe different afibciations
are apt to impofe upon us, and to make things
feem different, which in reality are the fame.

Secondly, The blind man forms the notion of
vifible figure to himfelf, by thought, and by ma-
thematical reafoning from principles ; whereas
the man that fees, has it prefented to his eye at
once, without any labour, without any reafoning,
by a kind of infpiration. A man may form to
himfelf the notion of a parabola, or a cycloid,
from the mathematical definition of thofe figures,
altho' he had never feen them drawn or deline-
ated. Another, who knows nothing of the ma-
thematical definition of the figures, may fee them
delineated on paper, or feel them cut out in wood.
Each may have a diftinct conception of the fi-
gures, one by mathematical reafoning, the other
by fenfe. Now, the blind man forms his notion
of vifible figure in the fame manner as the firft
of thefe formed his notion of a parabola or a cy-
cloid, which he never faw.

Thirdly, Vifible figure leads the man that fees,
direftly to the conception of the real figure, of
which it is a fign. But the blind man's thoughts
move in a contrary direction. For he rnufr. firft
know the real figure, diftance, and fituation, of
the body, and from thence he flowly traces out
thevifible figure by mathematical reafoning. Nof
does his nature lead him to conceive this vifible
figure as a fign ; it is a creature of his own rea-
fon and imagination.

SECT,


Sea. 8. Of SEEING.


'59


SECT. VIII.

Some queries concerning vifible figure anfwered.

T T may be afked, What kind of thing is this
: vifible figure ? Is it a fenfation, or an idea ?
If it is an idea, from what fenfation is it copied ?
Thefe questions may feem trivial or impertinent
to one who does not know, that there is a tribu-
nal of inquifition ere&ed by certain modern phi-
lofophers, before which every thing in nature
muft anfwer. The articles of inquifition are few
indeed, but very dreadful in their confequences.
They are only thefe : Is the prifoner an imprei-
fion, or an idea ? If an idea, from what impref-
fion copied ? Now, if it appears that the prifoner
is neither an impreflion, nor an idea copied from
p>me impreflion, immediately, without being al-
lowed to offer any thing, in arreft of judgment,
he is fentenced to pafs out of exigence,, and to
be, in all time to come, an. empty unmeaning
found, or the ghoft of a departed entity.

Before this dreadful tribunal, caufe and effeft,.
time and plaee, matter and fpirit, have been tried
andcaft : how.thenfhall'fuch.a poor flimfy form
as vifible figure ftand before it? It muft even
plead guilty, and confefs that it is neither an irn-
preflion,. nor an idea. For, alas ! it is notorious,
that it is extended in length and breadth ; it may
be long or fhort, broad or narrow, triangular,
quadrangular, or circular: and therefore unlefs

ideas


i6o Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VL
ideas and imprefiions are extended and figured,
it cannot belong to that category.

If it fhould ftill be afked. To what category of
beings does vifible figure then belong ? I can on-
ly, in anfwer, give fome tokens, by which thofe
who are better acquainted with the categories,
may chance to find its place. It is, as we have
{aid, the pofition of the feveral parts of a figu-
red body with regard to the eye. The differ-
ent pofitions of the feveral parts of the body
with regard to the eye, when put together, make
a real figure, which is truly extended in length
and breadth, and which reprefents a figure that
is extended in length, breadth, and thicknefs.
In like manner, a projection of the fphere is a
real figure, and hath length and breadth, but re-
prefents the fphere, which hath three dimensions.
A projection of the fphere, or a perfpective view
of a palace, is a reprefentative in the very fame
fenfe as vifible figure is, and wherever they
have their lodgings in the categories, this will be
found to dwell next door to them.

It may-farther be afked, Whether there be
any fenfation proper to vifible figure, by which
it is fuggefted in vifion ? Or by what means it is 7
prefented to the mind ? This is a queftion of
fome importance, in order to our having a dif-
tinct notion of the faculty of feeing : and to give!
all the light to it we can, it is necefiary to com-
pare this fenfe with other fenfes, and to make
fome fuppo/itions, by which we may be enabled
3 to


Sect. 8, Of S E E I N Q. 161

to diftinguifti things that are apt to be confound*
ed, although they are .totally different;

There are three of our fenfes which give us
intelligence of things at a diftanGB^fmell, hear-
ing, and fight. In fmelling, and in hearing, we
have a fenfation or imprefijon upon the mind*
Which, by our cpnftitdtion, we conceive to be a
fign of fomething external : but the pofition of
this external thing, with regard to the organ of
fenfe, is not presented to the mind along with
the fenfation* When I hear the found of a coach,
I could not, previous to experience, determine
whether the founding body was above or below^
to the right hand or to the left. So that the fcnr
fetion fuggefts to me fbme external object as the
taufe or occafion of it; but jt fuggefts not the 1
pofuipn of thjat object, whether h lies in this di-
rection or in that. The fame thing may be faid
With regard to fmelling,* But the cafe is quite
different with regard to feeing. When' I fee art
objectj the appearance which the colour of it
makes, may be called the fenfaUm, which fug-
gefts to me fome external thing as its caufe ; bu£
it fuggefts likewife the individual dire&ion and
pofition of this eaufe with regard to the eye. I
know it is precifely in fuch a direction, and in no
Other. At thq fame time I am not confcious of
any thing that can be called Jenfatiom, but the
feufatipn of colour. The pofition of the coloured
thing is no fenfation, but.it is by the laws of my
constitution prefented to the mind along with
the colour, without any additional fenfation.

L LetT


i6i OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap.Vf.

Let us fuppofe, that the eye werefo conftitu-
ted, that' the rays coming from any one point ofi
the object, were not, as they are in our eyes, col-
lected in one "point of the retinn, but difFufecf
over the whole : It is evident to thofe who un-
derftand the ftrudture of the eye, that fuch an
eye as we have fuppofed, would Ihew the colour
of a body as our eyes do, but that it would nei-
ther fhew figure nor pofition. The operation of
fuch an eye would be precifely fimilar tp that of
hearing and fmell; it would give no perception
of figure or extenfion, but merely of colour. Nor
is the fuppofitiorc we have made altogether ima-
ginary: for it is nearly the cafe of moft people
who have cataracts, whofe cryftalline, as Mr.
Chefeldenobferves, does not altogether exclude
the rays of light, but diffufes them over the retina,
fo that fuch perfons fee things as one does thro"
a glafs of broken gelly : they perceive the colour, .
but nothing of the figure or magnitude of ob-
jects.

Again, if we mould fuppofe, that fmell and
found were conveyed in right lines from the ol>
jects, and that every fenfation of hearing and
fmell fuggefted the precift direction or pofition
of its object •, in this cafe the operations of hear"
ing and fmelling would be fimilar to that of fee-
ing : we fhould fmell and hear the figure of ob-
jects, in the fame fenfe as now we fee it; and
every fmell and found would be aflbciated with
fome figure in the imagination, as colour is in
our prefen: ftate.

We


Sect. 8. Of.SEEING. 163

We have reafon to believe, that the rays of
light make feme impreffion upon the retina ; but
we are not confcious of this impreffion ; nor have
anatomifts or philofophers been able to difcover
the nature and effects of it ; whether it produ-
ces a vibration in the nerve, or the motion of
fome fubtile fluid contained in the nerve, or
fomething different from either, to which we
xannot give a name. Whatever it is, we (hall j
call it the material impreffion <, remembring care-
fully, that it is not an impreffion upon the mind §
but upbn the body ; and that it is no feiifation,
nor can refemble fenfation, any more than figure
or, motion can refemble thought. Now, this
material impreffion, made upon a particular point
of the retina, by the laws of our conftitution,
fuggefts two things to the mind, namely, the co-
lour, and the pofition of fome external object.
No man can give a reafon, why the fame material
imprefiion might not, have fuggefted found, or
fmell, or either of thefe, along with the pofition
of the object. That it fhould fuggeft colour
and pofitionj and nothing elfe, we can refolve only
into our conftitution, or the will of our Maker.
And fince there is no neceifary connection be-
tween thefe two things fuggefted by this mate*
rial impreffion, it might, if it had fo pleafed our
Creator, have fuggefted one of them without the
other. Let us fuppbfe, therefore, fince it plain-
ly appears to be poffible, that our eyes had been
fo framed, as to fuggeft to us the pofition of the
object, without fuggefting, colour, or any other
L 2 quality .


i6 4 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap.Vfl
quality : What is the confequence of this fup-
pofition ? It is evidently this*, that the perfon en-
dued with fuch an eye, would perceive the vifible
figure of bodies, without having any fenfation or
impreffion made upon his mind. The figure he
perceives is altogether external ; and therefore
cannot be called an impreffion upon the mind y
without the groffeft abufe of language. If it
mould be faid, that it is-impoffible to perceive a
figure, unlefs there be fome impreffion of it upon
the mind ; I beg leave not to admit the impof-
fibiiity of this without fome proof: and I can?
find none. Neither can I conceive what- is
meant by an impreffion of figure upon the mind,
I can conceive an impreffion of figure upon wax,,
or upon' any body that is fit to receive it ; but
an impreffion of it upon the mind, is to me quite
unintelligible - y and altho' I form the moil dif-
tinct conception of the figure, I cannot, upon'
the ilricteft examination, find any impreffion of
it upon my mind.

If we fuppofe, laft of all; that the eye fiath?
the power reftored of perceiving colour,; I ap-
prehend that it will be allowed,, that now it per-
ceives figure in- the very fame manner as before y
with this difference only, that- colour' is always
joined with it.

In anfwer therefore to the queftion propofed,,
there feems„to be no fenfation that is appropriated:'
to vifible figure, or whofe office it is to fuggefe
it. It feems to be fuggefted immediately bf
the material impreffion upon the organ, of which

we


$edV8. Of SEE'INsG. 165

f/e are not confcious : and why may not a ma-
terial impreffion upon the .rjetina fuggeft vifible
figure, as well as the material impreffion made
«pon the hand, when we grafp a ball, fuggefts
real figure ? In the one cafe, one and the fame
material impreffion, fuggefts both colour and vi-
fible figure ; and in the other cafe, one and the
fame material impreffion fuggefts hardnefs., heat,
-or cold, and real figure, all at the fame time.
• We fhall conclude this fe&ion with another
.queftion upon this fubjecl. Since the vifible fi-
gure of bodies is a real and external object to the
<eye, as their tangible figure is to the touch; it
may be aflced, Whence arifes the difficulty of at-
tending to the firft, and the facility of attending
to the laft ? It is certain that the firft is more fre-
quently prefented to the eye, than the laft is to
the touch : the firft is as. diftinct and determi-
aiate an object as the laft, and feems in its own
mature as proper for (peculation. Yet fo little
ihath it been attended to, that it never had ^
.name in any language, until Bifhop Berkeley
gave it that which we .have ufed after his exam-
ple, to diftinguifh itfrom the figure whichisthe
objecl: of touch.

The difficulty of attending to the vifible fi-
gure of bodies, and making it an object of
thought, appears fo fimilar to that which we find
dn attending to our fenfations, .that both have
:probably like caufes. Nature intended the yi-
iible figure as a fign of the tangible figure and
iituation of bodies, and hath taught us by a kind
L 3 ~ of


1 66 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
of inftinct to put it always to this ufe. Hence
it happens, that the mind pafles over it with a
rapid motion, to attend to the things fignified by
it. It is as unnatural to the mind to flop at the
vifible figure, and attend to it, as it is to a fphe-
rical body to Hop upon an inclined plane^ There
is an inward principle, which conftantly carries
it forward, and which cannot be overcome but
by a contrary force.

There are other external things which nature
intended for figns •, and we find this common to
them' all, that the mind is difpofed to overlook
them, and to attend only to the things fignified
by them. Thus there arc certain modifications
of the human face, which are natural figns of the
prefent difpofition of the mind. Every man
underftands the meaning of thefe figns, but not
one of a hundred ever attended to the figns them-
felves, or knows any thing about them. Hence
you may find many an excellent practical phyfiog-
nomift, who knows nothing of the proportions
of a face, nor can delineate or defcribe the ex-
preffion of any one paffion.

An excellent painter or ftatuary can tell, not
only what are the proportions of a good face,
but what changes every paffion makes in it.
This, however, is one of the chief myfteries of
his art, to the acquifition of which, infinite la-
bour and attention, as well as a happy genius,
are required. But when .he puts his art in
practice, and happily expreffes a paffion by its
proper figns., every one underftands the meaning

of


■3c&..8. Of SEEING. 167

of thefe figns, without art, and without re-
flection.

What has been faid of painting, might eafily
he applied to .all the fine arts,. The difficulty in
them all confiils in knowing and attending to
thofe natural figns, whereof every man under-
stands the meaning.

We pafs from the fign to the thing fignified,
with eafe, and by natural impulfe.; but to go
backward from,the thing fignified ,to the fign, is
a work of labour and difficulty. Viable figure,
therefore, being intended by nature to be a fign,
we pafs on immediately to the thing fignified,
and cannot eafily return to give any attention to
ihe fign.

Nothing thews' more clearly our indifpofifion
to attend to vifible figure and vifible extenfion
than this, that altho' mathematical reafoning is
no lefs applicable to them, than to tangible
■figure and extenfion, yet they have entirely
eicaped the notice of mathematicians. While
that figure and that extenfion which are objects
"of touch, have been tortured ten thoufand ways
for twenty centuries, and a very noble fyftern
of fcience has been drawn out of them ; not a
fingle proposition do we find with regard to the
figure and extenfion which are the immediate ob-
jects of fight ! ,

When the geometrician draws a diagram with

the mod perfect accuracy; when he keeps his

eye fixed upon it, while he goes through a long

procefs of reafoning* and demonftrates the rela-

L 4 tions


i68 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI,

tions of the feveral parts of his figure; he does
not confider, that the vifibJe figure preferred to
his eye, is only the reprefentative of a tangible
figure, upon which all his attention is. fixed; he
does not confider that thefe two figures have
really different properties ; and that what he de-;
jnonftrates tq be true of the one, is not true of
the other,

This perhaps will feem fo great a paradox,
even to mathematicians, as to require demo^
{Iration before it can be believed. Nor is the de-
rnonftration at all difficult, if the reader will have
patience to enter but a little into the mathema-*
peal confideration of vifible figure^ which wq
{hall call the geometry of vifibles,

SECT. IX.

Of the geometry of vifihhs.

!f N this geometry, the definitions of a poin£ ;

of a line, whether ftraight or curve; of an
angle, whether acute, or right, or obtufe ; and
t)f a circle, are the fame as in common geome-
try. The mathematical reader will eafily enter
into the whole myftery of this geometry, if he
attends duly to thefe few evident principles.

I. Suppofing the eye placed in the centre
of a fphere, every great circle of the fphere will
have the fame appearance to the eye as if it was
£ ftraight line. For the curvature of the circle
being turned directly toward the eye, is not

perceived


Se&.g. Of SEEING, ify

perceived by it. And for the fame reafon, any
Jine which is drawn in the plane of a great
Circle of the fphere, whether it be in reality
ftraight or curve, will appear ftraight to th«
eye.

2. Every" vifible right line will appear to
coincide with fome great circle of the fphere j
and the circumference of that great circle, even
when it is produced until it returns into itfelf,
will appear to be a continuation of the fame vifi-
ble right line, all the parts of it being vifibly in
directum. For the eye, perceiving only the
pofition of .objects with regard to itfelf, and not
their diftance, will fee thofe points in the fame
vifible place which have the fame pofition with
regard to the eye, how different foever their
diftahces from it may be. Now, fince a plane
palling through the eye and a given vifible
right line, will be the plane of fome great circle
of the fphere, every point of the vifible right
line will have the fame pofition as fome point df
the great circle -, therefore they will both have
the fame vifible place, and coincide to the eye ;
and the whole circumference of the great circle
continued even until it returns into itfelf, wilj
appear to be a continuation of the fame vifibl©
right line.

Hence it follows.

3, That every vifible right line, when i%
48 continued in $re£ium i as far as it may be
continvied, will be reprefented. by a great circle

of


iyo Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VL

of a fphere, in whofe centre the eye is placed.
It follow^,

4 . That the vifible angle comprehended un-
der two vifible right lines, is equal to the
Ipherical angle comprehended under the two
great -circles which are the reprefentatives of
thefe vifible lines. For fince tKe vifible lines
appear to qoincide with the great circles, the
vifible angle., comprehended under the former,
muft be equal to the vifible angle comprehend-
ed under the latter. But the vifible angle com-
prehended under the two great circles, when
fcen from the centre, is of the fame magnitude
.with the fpherical angle which they really com-
prehend, as mathematicians know ; therefore the
vifible angle made by any two vifible lines, is
equal to the fpherical angle made by the. two
great circles of the fphere which are their repre-t
fentatives.

5. Hence it is evident, that every vifible
right-lined triangle, will coincide in all it's
parts with fome fpherical triangle. The fides
of the one will appear equal to the fides of the
other, and the angles of the one to the angles
of the other, each to each ; and therefore the
whole of the one triangle will appear equal to
the whole of the other. In a word, to the
eye they will be one and the fame, and have
the fame mathematical properties. The pro-
perties therefore of vifible right-lined triangles,
are not the fame with the properties of plain

triangles,


Seft.V Of SEEING. 17I

triangles, but are the fame with thofe of fphe-
rical triangles.

6. Every leffer circle of the fphere, will ap-
pear a circle to the eye, placed, as we have fup-
pofed all along, in the centre of the fphere.
And, on the other hand, every vifible circle
will appear to coincide with fome leffer circle of
the fphere.

7. Moreover, the, whole furface of the fphere
will reprefent the whole of vifible fpace : for, 1
fince every vifible point coincides with fome
point of the furface of the fphere, and has the
fame vifible place, it follows, that all the parts
of the fpherical furface taken together, will re-
prefent all poffible vifible places, that is, the
whole of vifible fpace. And from this it fol-
lows,- in "the laft place,

8. That every vifible figure will he repre-
fented by that part of the furface of the fphere,
on which it might be projected, the eye being
jn the centre. And every fuch vifible figure
will bear the fame ratio to the whole of vifible
fpace, as the part of the fpherical furface which
r^prefents it, bears to the whole fpherical fur-
face.

The mathematical reader, I hope, will enter
into thefe principles with perfect facility, and
will as eafily perceive, that the following pro-
pofitions with regard to vifible figure and fpace,
which we offer only as a fpecimen, may be ma-
thematically demonflrated from them, and are
|iot lefs true nor lefs evident than the pro-

pofitions


tyz Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

pofitions of Euclid, with regard to tangible
figures.

Prop. i. Every right line being produced,
will at laft return into itfelf.

2. A right line returning into itfelf, is the
longeft pofiible right line ; and all other right
lines bear a finite ratio to it.

3. A right line returning into itfelf, divides
tiie whole of vifible fpace into two equal parts,
which will both be comprehended under this
sight line.

4. The whole of vifible fpace bears a finite
rat ia to any part of it.

5. Any two right lines being produced, will
meet in two points, and mutually bifect each
Other.

6. If two lines be parallel, that is, every
where equally diftant from each other, they can-
not both be ftraight.

7. Any right line being given, a point may
be found, which is at the fame distance from all
f he points of the given right line.

8. A circle may be parallel to a right line,
that is, may be equally diftant from it in all its
parts.

9. Right-lined triangles that are fimilar, are
alfo equal.

10. Of every right-lined triangle, the three
angles taken together, are greater than two right

angles.

1 1 . The angles of a right-lined triangle, may

all be right angles, or all obtufe angles.

12. Unequal


Scfl. 9- Of SEEING. x?$

12. Unequal circles are not as the fquares of
their diameters, nor are their circumferences ift
the ratio of their diameters.

This fmall fpecimen of the geometry of vift-
bles, is intended to lead the reader to a clear and
diftinft conception of the figure and extenfion
which is prefented to the mind by vifion ; and
to demonftrate the truth of what we have affirm-
ed abovCj namely, That thofe figures and that
extenfion which are the immediate objefb of
fight, are not the figures and the extenfion about
which common geometry is employed ; that th&
geometrician, while he looks at his diagram,, and
demonftrates a propofition-, hath a figure prefent-
ed to his eye, which is only a fign and repre&it-
tative of a tangible figure ; that he gives- not the
leaft attention to the firft, but attends only to the
iaft i and that thefe two. figures have different
properties, fo that what he demonftrates' of the
one, is not true of the other.

It deferves, however, to be remarked, that as
a fmall part of a fpherical furface differs not fen-
fibly from a plain furface ; fo a fmall part of vt-
fible extenfion differs very little from that exten-
fion in length and breadth, which is the objeel: of
touch. And k is likewife to be obferved, that
*he human eye is fo formed, that an object which;
is feen diftincHy and at one view, can occupy
buc a fmall part of vifible fpace : for we never
fee diftin&ly what is at a eonfiderable diftance
from the axis of the eye •, and therefore when
we would fee a large object at one view, the eye
3 muft


'j 74 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap.VL
tnuft be at fo great a diftanee, that the objecT;
occupies but a fmall part of vifible fpace. From
thefe two obfervations, it follows, that plain fi^
gures which are feen at one view, when their
planes are not oblique, but direct to the eye, dif-*
fer little from the vifible figures which they pre-
sent to the eye- The feveral lines in the tangible
figure have very nearly the fame proportion to
each other as in the vifible ; and the angles of
the one are very nearly, altho' not ftrictly and
mathematically, equal to thofe of the other. Al-
tho' therefore we have found many inftances of
natural figns which have no fimilitude to the
things fignified, this is not the cafe with regard
to vifible figure. It hath in all cafes fuch a fimi-
litude to the thing fignified by it, as a plan or
profile hath to that which it reprefents ; and in
fome cafes the fign and^thing fignified, have to all
fenfe the fame figure and the fame proportions.
If we could find a being endued with fight only,
without any other external fenfe, and capable of
reflecting and reafoning upon what he fees, th&
notions and philofophical {peculations of fuch a
being, might afiift us in the difficult tafk of drf-
tinguifhing the perceptions which we have pure-
ly by fight, from thofe which derive their origin
from other fenfes. Let us fuppofe fuch a being,,
' and conceive, as well as we can, what notion he
would have of vifible objects, and what concju-
fions he would deduce from them. We mult not
conceive him difpofed by his conftitution, as we
are, to confider the vifible appearance as a fign

of


Se&. o. Of SEEING. 175

of fomething elfe : it is no fign to him,^ becaufis
there is nothing fignified by it ; and therefore we
tnuft fuppofe him as much difpofed to attend to
the vifible figure and extenfion of bodies, as we
are difpofed to attend to their tangible figure and
extenfion.

- If various figures were prefented to his fenfe,
he might without doubt, as they grow familiar,
compare them together, and perceive wherein
they agree, and wherein they differ. He might
perceive vifible objedls to have length and breadth,
but could have no notion of a third dimenfion,
any more than we can have of a fourth. All vi-
fible objects would appear to be terminated by
lines, ftraight or curve ; and objefts terminated
by the fame vifible lines, would occupy the fame
place, and fill the fame part of vifible fpace. It
would not be poffible for him to conceive one
object to be behind another, or one to be near-
er, another, more diftant.

To us, who conceive three dimenfions, aline
may be conceived ftraight ; or it may be con-
ceived incurvated in one dimenfion, and ftraight
in another ; or, laftly, it may be incurvated in
two dimenfions. Suppofe a line to be drawn up-
wards and downwards, its length makes one di-
menfion, which we fhall call upwards and down-
wards ; and there are two dimenfions remaining,
according to 'which it may be ftraight or curve.
It may be bent to the right or to the left; and
if it has no bending either to right or left, it
.is ftraight in this dimenfion. But fuppofing it

ftraight


1 7 6 O," the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VL
ftraight in this dimenfion of right and left, there
is ftill another dimenfion remaining, in which it
may be curve ; for it may be bent backwards of
forwards. When we conceive a tangible ftraightj
line, we exclude curvature in either of thefe two
dimenfions : and as what is conceived to be ex-
cluded, muft be conceived, as well as what is con-
ceived to be included, it follows, that all the three
dimenfions enter into our conception of a ftraight
line. Its length is one dimenfion^ its ftraight-
nefs in two other dimenfions is included, or cur-
vature in thefe two dimenfions excluded, in the
conception of it.

The being we have fuppofed, having no con-
ception of more than two dimenfions, of which
the length of a line is one, cannot poffibly con-
ceive it either ftraight or curve in more than one
dimenfion : fo that in his conception of a right
line, curvature to the right hand or left is ex-
cluded ; but curvature backwards or forwards
cannot be excluded, becaufe he neither hath, nor
can have any conception of fuch curvature. Hence
we fee the reafon that a line, which is ftraight to
the eye, may return into itfelf : for its being
ftraight to the eye, implies only ftraightnefs in
one dimenfion ; and a line which is ftraight in
one dimenfion, may notwithftanding be curve in
another dimenfion, and fo may return into itfelf*

To us, who- conceive three dimenfions, a fur-
face is that which hath length and breadth, ex-
cluding thicknefs : and ailurface may be either
plain in this third dimenfion, or it may be in-
cur vated :


Seft.g. Of SEEING. 177

curvated : fo that the notion of a third dimen-
sion enters into our conception of a furface; for it
is only by means of this third dimenfion that we
can diftihguifli furfaces into plain and curve fur-
faces j and neither one nor the other can be con- ,
ceived without conceiving a third dimeniion.

The being we have fuppofed having no con-
ception of a third dimenfion, his vifible figures
have length and breadth indeed ; but thicknefs
is neither included nor excluded; being a thing
of which he has no conception. And therefore vi-
fible figures, altho' they have length and breadth,
as furfaces have, yet they are neither plain fur-
faces, nor curve furfaces. For a curve furface
implies curvature in a third dimenfion, and a plain
furface implies the want of curvature in a third
dimenfion ; and fuch a being can conceive nei-
ther of thefe, becaufe he has no conception of a
third dimenfion. Moreover, altho* he hath a dif-,
tirift conception of the inclination of two lines
which make an angle, yet he can neither con-
ceive a plain angle nor a fpherical angle. Even
, his notion' of a point is fomewhat lefs determined
than ours. In the notion of a point we exclude
length, breadth, and thicknefs •, he excludes
length and breadth, but cannot either exclude or
include thicknefs, becaufe he hath no conception,
of it.

Having thus fettled the notions which fuch a
, being as we have fuppofed might form of ma-
thematical points, lines, angles, and figures, it is
eafy to fee, that by comparing thefe together,
M and


1 78 Of the H O M A N M I N D. Chap. .Vi-
and reaforiing about them, he might difcover
their relations, and form geometrical conclufiona
built uponfelf-evident principles. He might like-
wife, without doubt, have the fame notions of
numbers as we have, and form a fyftem of arith-
metic. It is not material to fay in what order
he might proceed in fuch difcoveries, or how
much time and pains he might employ about
them ; but what fuch a being, by reafon and in-
genuity, without any materials of fenfation but
thofe of fight only, might difcover.

As it is more difficult to attend to a detail of
poffibilities,. than of fafts even of flender authori-
ty, I fliall beg leave to give an extract from the
travels of Johannes Rudblphus Anepigraphus, a
Roficrucian philofopher, who having, by deep
ftudy of the occult fciences, acquired the art of
tranfporting himfelf to various fublunary regions,
and of converfmg with various orders of intelli-
gences, in the courfe of his adventures, became
acquainted with an order of beings exacBy fuch
as I have fuppofed.

How they communicate their fentiments ta
one another, and by what means he became ac-
quainted with their language, and was initiated
into their philofophy, as well as of many other
particulars, which might have gratified the curio-
fity of his readers, and perhaps added credibility
to his relation, he hath not thought fit to inform
us ; thefe being matters proper for adepts only
to know.

His


Sea. £» t)f SEEING. i 79

His account of their philofophy is as follows*
" The Idomenians," faith he, " are many of
cc them very ingenious* and much given to con-
** templation. In arithmetic, geometry, meta-
" .phyfics, and phyfics, they have moft elaborate
" fyftems, In the two latter indeed they have
" had many difputes carried on with great fub-
" tilty, and are divided into various feels ; yet in
" the two former there hath been no lefs una-
" nimity than among the human fpecies. Their
*' principles relating to numbers and arithmetic*
" making allowance for their notation, differ in
*' nothing from, ours : but their geometry differs
" very cOnfiderably."

As our author's account of the geometry of the
Idomenians agrees in every thing with the geo-
metry of vifibles, of Which we have already gi*
ven a fpecimen, we mail pafs over it. He goes on
thus : " Colour, exterifion, and figure, are con-
" ceived to be the effential properties of body.
" A very 'con fiderable feet maintains, that colour
" is the effence of body. If there had been no
" colour, fay they, there had been no perception
" or fenfation. Colour is all that we perceive,
" or can conceive, that is peculiar to body ; ex*
" tenfion and figure being modes common to
" body and to empty fpace. And if We fhould
" fuppofe a body to be annihilated, 'colour is the
" only thing in it that can be annihilated ■, for
" its place, and confequently the figure and ex-
" tenfion of that place, mud remain, and cannon
«' be imagined not to exift. Thefe philofophers
M 2 " hold


180 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap.VL
" hold fpace to be the place of all bodies, im-
" moveable and indeftru&ible, without figure,
" and fimilar in all its parts, incapable of increafe
" or diminution, yet not unmeafureable : for
" every the leaft part of fpace bears a finite ratio
w to the whole. So that with them the whole
" extent of fpace is the common and natural
" meafure of every thing that hath length and
" breadth, and the magnitude of every body and
" of every figure is exprefied by its being fuch a
* c part of the univerfe. In like manner, the com-
" mon and natural meafure of length, is an in-
" finite right line, which, as hath been before
" obferved, returns into itfelf, and hath no 11-
" mits, but bears a finite ratio to every other
" line.

" As to their natural philofophy, it is now
" acknowledged by the wifeft of them to have
«' been for many ages in a very low ftate. The
" philofophers obferving, that one body can dif-
" fer from another only in colour, figure, or
" magnitude, it was taken for granted, that all
" their particular qualities mult arife from the
*' various combinations of thefe their efiential at-
" tributes. And therefore it was looked upon as
" the end of natural philofophy, to fhew how
" the various combinations of thefe three quali-
" ties in different bodies produced all the phse-
«* nomena of nature. It were endlefs to enume-
" rate the various fyftems that were invented
" with this view, and the difputes that were car-
*' ried on for ages ; the followers of every fy-
t !' ftem


Seft. 9. Of SEEING. 181

*' Item expofing the weak fides of other fyftems,
" and palliating thofe of their own, wich great
" art.

" At laft, fome free and facetious fpirits, wea-
" ried with eternal difputation, and the labour
" of patching and propping weak fyftems, be-
" gan to complain of the fubtilty of nature ; of
" the infinite changes that bodies undergo in fi-
" gure, colour, and magnitude; and of the diffi-
" culty of accounting for thefe appearances, ma-
" king this a pretence for giving up all inquiries
*' into the caufes of things, as vain and fruitlefs.

" Thefe wits had ample matter of mirth and
** ridicule in the fyftems of philofophers, aj»d
" finding it an eafier tafk to pull down than to
*' build or fupport, and that every feet furnifhed
w them with arms and auxiliaries to deltroy an-
" other, they began to fpread mightily, ano went
** on with great fuccefs. Thus philofophy gave
u way to fcepticifm and irony, and thofe fyftems
" which had been the work of ages, and the ad-
" miration of the learned, became thejeftof the
M vulgar : for even the vulgar readily took part
" in the triumph over a kind of learning which
" they had long fufpected, becaufe it produced
" nothing but wrangling and altercation. The *
" wits having now acquired great reputation,
** and being flufhed with fuccefs, began to think
" their triumph incomplete, until every pretence
*•' to knowledge was overturned ; and according-
*' ly began their attacks upon arithmetic, geo-
?' metry, and even upon the common notions of
M 3 ** untaught


i82 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI,

" untaught Idomenians. So dijfHcult it hath al-
" ways been (fays our author) for gteap con-
*' querors to know where to flop.

" In the mean time, natural pbilofophy be-*
" gan to rife from its afhes, under the direction
" of a perfon of great genius, who is looked
" upon as having had fomething in him above
«* Idomenian nature, He obferved, that the Xdo-
*' menian faculties were certainly intended for
" contemplation, and that the works of nature
*' were a nobler fubje6t to exercife them upon,
" than the follies of fyftems, or the errors of the
" learned ; and being fenfible of the difficulty
*' of finding out the caufes of natural things, he
*' propofed, by accurate obfervation of the pha^
«' nomena of nature, to find out the rules ac-
*' cording' to which they happen, without in-
" quiring into the caufes of thofe rules. In this
*' he made confiderable progrefs himfelf, and
*' planned out much work for his followers, who
" call themfelves induftive philofopbers. The
" fceptics look with envy upon this riling feci,
" as eclipfing their reputation, and threatning to
" limit their empire •, but they are at a lofs on
? ' what hand to attack it.. The vulgar begin to
*' reverence it, as producing ufeful difcoveries.

" It is to be obferved, that every Idomenian
" firmly believes, that two or more bodies may
*^ exift in the fame place. For this they have
" the teftjmony of fenfe, and they can no more
" doubt of it, than they can doubt whether
** they have any perception at all. They often,


Sect. 9; Of SEEING. ,« 3

*' fee two bodies meet, and coincide in the
" fame place, and feparate again, without ha-
* c ving undergone any change in their fenfible
*' qualities by this penetration. When two
" bodies meet, and occupy the fame place, com-
" monly one only appears in that place, and
*' the other difappears. That which continues
'* to appear is faid to overcome, the other to be
" overcome."

To this quality of bodies they gave a name,
which pur author tells us hath no word anfwer-
ing to it in any human language. And there-
fore, after making a long apology, which I
omit, he begs leave to call it the over-coming qua-
lity of bodies. He allures us, that " the ipe-
*' culations which had been raifed about this
*' fingle quality of bodies, and the hypothefes
" contrived to account for it, were fufficient to
* c fill many volumes. Nor have there been
" fewer hypothefes invented by their philofo-
" phers, to account for the changes of magni-
*' tude and figure ; which, in moft bodies that
" move, they perceive to be in a continual
*' fluctuation. The founder of the inductive
* c feet, believing it to be above the reach of
** Idomentan faculties, to difcover the real caufes
" of thefe phenomena, applied himfelf to find
" from obfervation, by what laws they are
*' connected together ; and difcovered many
" mathematical ratios and relations concerning
"the motions, magnitudes, figures, and over-
*' coming quality of bodies, which conftaflc
M 4 ** experience


j 84 Of the HUM AN" MIND. Chap. VI.
" experience confirms. But the oppofers of
" this feci: chufe rather to content themfelves
" with ftigned caufes of thefe phenomena, than
*' to acknowledge the real laws whereby they
** are governed, which humble their pride, by
" being confefiedly unaccountable."

Thus far Johannes Rudolphus Anepigraphus,
"Whether this Anepigraphus be the fame who is
recorded among the Greek alchemiftical writers
not yet publiflied, by Borrichius, Fabricius, and
others, I do not pretend to determine. The
identity of their name, and the fimilitude of
their ftudies, although no flight arguments, yet
are not abfolutely conclusive. Nor will I take
upon me to judge of the narrative of this learn-
ed traveller by the external marks of his credi-
bility -, I fhall confine myfelf to thofe which the
critics call internal. It would even be of fmall
importance to enquire, whether the Idomenians
have a real, or only an ideal exiftence-, fince
this is difputed among the learned with regard
to things with which we are more nearly con-
nected. The important queftion is, Whether
the account above given, is a juft account of
their geometry and philofophy ? We have all
the faculties which they have, with the addition
of others which they have not : we may there-
fore form fome judgment of their philofophy
and geometry, by fepararing from all others,,
the perceptions we have by fight, and reafon-
ing upon them. As far as I am able to judge
in this way after a careful examination, their

geometry


Sea. 9. Of S E E I N G. 185

geometry muft be fuch as Anepigraphus hath
defcribed. Nor does his account of their phi-
lofophy appear to contain any evident marks of
impofture •, altho' here, no doubt, proper al-
lowance is to be made for liberties which tra-
vellers take, as well as for involuntary mjftakes
which they are apt to fall into.

SECT. X.

Of the parallel motion of the eyes.

TT Aving explained, as diftin&ly as we can,
vifible figure, and (hewn its connection
with the things fignified by it, it will be proper
next to confider fome phenomena of the eyes,
and of vifion, which have commonly been re-
ferred to cuftom, to anatomical or to mechani-
cal caufes ; but which, as I conceive, muft be re-
folved into original powers and principles of the
human mind -, and therefore belong properly to
the fubject of this inquiry.

The firft is, the parallel motion of the eyes ;
by which, when one eye is turned to the right
or to the left, upwards or downwards, or ftraight
forwards, the other always goes along with it
in the fame direction. We fee plainly, when
both eyes are open, that they are always turn-
ed the fame way, as if both were acted upon by
the fame motive force : and if one eye is fhur,
and the hand laid upon it, while the other turns
yarious ways, we feci the eye that is fhut turn

at


|86 Of the H U M A N MI N D. Chap. VI.
at the fame time, and that whether we will or
riot. What makes this phenomenon furprifing
is, that it is acknowledged by all anatomifts,
that the mufcles which move the two eyes, and
the nerves which ferve thefe mufcles, are entire-
ly diftincl and unconnected. It would be thought
very furprifing and unaccountable to fee a man,
■who, from his birth, never moved one arm,
without moving the other precisely in the fame
manner, fo as to keep them always parallel:
yet it would not be more difficult to find the
phy.fical caufe of fuch motion of the arms, than
it is to find the caufe of the parallel motion of
.the eyes, which is perfectly fimilar.

The only caufe that hath been affigned of this
parallel motion of the eyes, is cuftom. We find
by experience, it is faid when we begin to
look at obje&s, that in order to have diftinct
virion, it is neceffary to turn both eyes the
fame way •, therefore we foon acquire the habit
of doing it conftantly, and by degrees ioofe the
power of doing otherwife.

This account of the matter feems to b.e in-
fufficient -, becaufe habits are not got at once s
it takes time to acquire and to confirm them ;
and if this motion of the eyes were got by habit,
we mould fee children, when they are born,
turn their eyes different ways, and move one
without the other, as they .do their hands or
Jegs. I know fome have affirmed' that they
are apt to do fo. But I have never found it true
fjrom my own obfervation, altho' J have taken

pains


Seft. 10. Of S E E I N G. 137

pains to make obfervations of this kind, and
have had good opportunities. I have likewife
confulted experienced midwives, mothers and
nurfes, and found them agree, that they had
never obferved diftortions of this kind in the
eyes of children, but when they had reafon
to fufpedt convulfions, or ibme preternatural
caufe.

It feems therefore to be extremely probable,
that, previous to cuftom, there is fornething
jn the conftitution, fome natural inftinct, which
directs us to move both eyes always the fame
way.

We know not how the mind acts upon the
body, nor by what power the mufcks are con-
tracted and relaxed : but we fee that in fome of
the voluntary, as well as in fome of the invo-
luntar.y motions, this power is fo directed, that
many mufcles which have no material tie or
connection, act in concert, each of them being
taught to play its part in exact time and meafure,
£Jor doth a company of expert players in a
theatrical performance, or of excellent mufieians
in a concert, or of good dancers in a country-
dance, with more regularity and order, confpire
and contribute their feveral. parts, to produce
one uniform effect, than a number of mufcles
do, in many of the animal functions, and in
many voluntary actions. Yet welee fuch ac^
tions no lefs fkilfully and regularly performed
jn children, and in thofe who know not that

§ they


..j«8 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
they have fuch mufcles, than in the moft fkilful
anatomift and phyfiologift.

Who taught all the mufcles that are concern-
ed in fucking, in fwallowing our food, in breath-
ing, and in the feveral natural expulfions, to act
their part in fuch regular order and exact
meawre ? It was not cuftom furely. It was
that fame powerful and wife Being who made
the fabric of the human body, and fixed the
laws by which the mind operates upon every
part of it, fo that they may anfwer the purpofes
intended by them. And when we fee, in fo
many other inftances, a fyftemof unconnected
mufcles confpiring fo wonderfully in their feveral
functions, without the aid of habit, it needs
not be thought ftrange, that the mufcles of the
eyes ihould, without this aid, confpire to give
that direction to the eyes, without whichr they
eould not anfwer their end.

We fee a like confpiring adlion in the mufcks
which contract the pupils of the two eyes ; and
in thofe mufcles, whatever they be, by which
the conformation of the eyes is varied according
to the diftance of objects.

It ought however to be obferved, that altho*
it appears to be by natural inftinct that both eyes
are always turned the fame way, there is, ftill
fome latitude left for cuftom.

What we have faid of the parallel motion of
the eyes is not to be underftood fo ftriftly, as
jf nature directed us to keep their axes always
precifely and mathematically parallel to each

other,


$eft. 10. Of SEEING. 189

other. Indeed, although they are always nearly
parallel, they hardly ever are exaftly fo. When
we look at an object, the axes of the eyes meec
in that object ; and therefore make an angle,
which is always fmall, but will be greater or
lefs, according as the object is nearer or more
remote. Nature hath very wifely left us the
power of varying the parallelifm of our eyes a
little, fo that we can direct them to the fame
point, whether remote or near. This, no doubt,
is learned by cuftom ; and accordingly we fee,
that it is a^ long time before children get this
habit in perfection. .

This power of varying the parallelifm of the
eyes is naturally no more than is fufficient for
the purpofe intended by it, but by much practice
and (training, it may be increafed. Accord-
ingly we fee, that fome have acquired the
power of diftorting their eyes into unnatural
directions, as others have acquired the power of
diftorting their bodies into unnatural poftures.

Thofe who have loft the fight of an eye,
commonly lofe what they had got by cuftom,
in the direction of their eyes, but retain what
they had by nature •, that is, altho' their eyes
turn and move always together ; yet, when they
look upon an objedt, the blind eye will often,
have a very fmall deviation from it ; which is
not perceived by a (light observer, but may be
difcerned by one accuftomed to make exact ob-
fervations in thefe matters.

S?CT.


i 9 o Of the H U M A N Mt N D. Chap, tl

SECT. XI.

Of our feeing objetls ereB by inverted images.

A NOTHER phenomenon which hdth per-
■"" plexed philofophers, is, our feeing objects
erect, when it is well known that their images
or picture's upon the tunica retina of the eye are
inverted.

The fagacious Kepler firft made the noble dis-
covery, That diftindt but inverted, pictures of
vifible objects, are formed upon the retina by the
rays of light coming from the object. The fame
great philOfopher demonftrated from the prin-
ciples of optics, how thefe pictures are formed,
to wit, That the rays coming from any one
point of the object, and falling upon the vari-
ous parts of the pupil, are, by the cornea and
chryftalline, refracted fo as to meet again in one
point of the retina, and there paint the colour of
that point of the object from which they come.
As the rays from different points of the object
crofs each other before they come to the retina,
the picture they form muft be inverted ; the up-
per part of, the object being painted upon the
lower part of the retina, the right fide of the ob-
ject upon the left of the retina, and fo of the
other parts.

This philofopher thought that we fee objects
erect by means of thefe inverted pictures, for
this reafon, That as the rays from different points

of


Sect, ii. Of S£ El N G. tgi

of the object crofs each Other, before they fall
upon the rttind, we conclude that the impulfe
which we feel Upbn the lower part of the retina,
comes from above ; and that the impulfe which
we feel upon the higher part, conies from below.
Des Cartes afterwards gave the farrie folution
of this phenomenon, and illuftrated it by thfe
judgment which we form of the pdfitidh of ob-
jects which we feel with our arms crofled, or
with two flicks that crofs each other.

But we cannot acquiefce in this folutiori.
Firft, Becaufe it fuppofes our feeing things erect,
to be a deduction of reafon, drawn from certain
premifes : whereas it feems to be an immediate
perception. And, fecondly, Becaufe the pre-
mifes from which all mankind are fuppofed to
draw this conclusion, never entered into the minds
of the far greater part, but are abfolutely un-
known to them. We have no feeling or per-
ception of the pictures upon the retina, and as
little furely of the pofition of them. In order
to fee objects erect, according to the principles
of Kepler or Des Cartes, we muft previbufly
know, that the rays of light come from the ob-
ject to the eye in ftraight lines ; we muft know,
that the- rays from different points of the object
crofs one another, before they form the pictures
upon the . retina ; and laftly we muft know that
thefe pictures are really inverted. Now, althu'
all thefe things "are true, and known to philofo-
phers, yet they are abfolutely unknown to the
far greateft part of mankind : nor is it poflible

that


i 9 2 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
that they who are abfolutely ignorant of them,
fliould reafon from them, and build conclufions
upon them. Since therefore vifible objects ap-
pear erect to the ignorant as well as to the learn-
ed, this cannot be a conclufion drawn from pre-
mifes which never entered into the minds ofthe
ianorant. We have indeed had occafion to bb-
ferve many inftances of conclufions drawn, either
by means of original principles, or by habit,
from premifes which pafs through the mind very
quickly, and which are never made the objects
of refle&ion ; but furely no man wilL conceive it.
pofiible to draw conclufions from premifes which
never entered into the mind at all.

Bifliop Berkeley having juftly rejected this fo-
lution gives one founded upon his own princi-
ples •, wherein he is followed by the judicious
Dr. Smith in his Optics j and this we fhall next
explain and examine.

That ingenious writer conceives the ideas of
fight to be altogether unlike thofe of touch.
And fince the notions we have of an object by
thefe different fenfes have no fimilitude, we can
learn only by experience how one fenfe will be
affected, by what, in a certain manner, affects
the other. Figure, pofition, and even number,
in tangible objects, are ideas of touch ; and al-
tho' there is no fimilitude between thefe and the
ideas of fight, yet we learn by experience, th-it
a triangle affects the fuht in fuch a manner, and
that a fquare affects it in fuch another manner :
hence we judge that which affects it in the firfl

manner,


Sect, ii. Of SEEING. 193

manner, to be a triangle, and that which affe&s
it in the fecond, to be a fquare. In the fame
way, finding from experience, that an object
in an erect pofition, affects the eye in one
manner, and the fame object in an inverted po-
fition, affects it in another, we learn to judge,
by the manner in which the eye is affected, whe-
ther the object is erect or inverted. In a word,
vifible ideas, according to this author, are figns
of the tangible ; and the mind pafleth from the
fign to the thing fignified, not by means of any
fimilitude between the one and the other, nor by
any natural principle ; but by having found them
conftantly conjoined in experience, as the founds
of a language are with the things they fignify.
So that if the images upon the retina had been
always erect, they would have fhewn the objects
erect, in the manner as they do now that they
are inverted : nay, if the vifible idea which we
now have from an inverted object, had been affo-
ciated from the beginning with the erect pofi-
tion of that object, it would have fignified an
erect pofition, as readily as it now fignifies an in-
verted one. And if the vifible appearance of
two {hillings had been found connected from the
beginning with the tangible idea of one {hilling,
that appearance would as naturally and readily
have fignified the unity of the object, as now it
fignifies its duplicity.

This opinion is undoubtedly very ingenious ;

and, if it is juft, ferves to refolve, not only the

phenomenon now under confederation, but like-

N wjfe


194 Of the HUMAN MIND. £hap. Vt
likewtfe that which we fhall next ebnfider, ouf
feeing objects fingle with two eyes.

It is evident, that in this folu^ion it is fuppo-
fed, that we do not originally, and previous to-
acquired habits, fee things either erect or invert-
ed, of one figure or another, fingle or double,
but learn from experience to judge of their tan-
gible pofition, figure, and number, by certain vi-
fibte figns.

Indeed it muft be acknowledged to be ex-
tremely difficult to diftinguifh the immediate and
natural objects of fight, from the conclufions
which we have been accuftomed from infancy to
draw from them. Bifhop Berkeley was the
firft that attempted to diftinguifh the one from
the other, and to trace out the boundary that
divides them. And, if in doing fo, he hath,
gone a little to the right hand or to the left,
this might be expected in a fubject altogether
new, and of, the greateft fubtilty. .The nature-
of vifion hath received great light from this dif-
tin&ion ; and manyphsnomena in optics, which
before appeared altogether unaccountable, have
been clearly and diftinctly refolved by it. . It is-
natural, and almoft unavoidable, to one who hath
made an important difcovery in philofophy, to
carry it a little beyond its fphere, and to ap-
ply it to the refolution of phenomena which
do not fall within its province. Even the great
Newton, when he had difcovered the univerfal
law of gravitation, and obferved how many of
the phenomena of nature depend upon this, and

other


Sect, ii. Of SEEING. * 195

other laws of attraction and repulfion, could not
help expreffing his conjecture,, that all the phe-
nomena of the material world depend upon at-
tracting and repelling forces in the particles of
matter. And I fufpect that the ingenious Bifhop
of Cloyne, having found fo many phaenomena
of virion reducible to the conftant afibciation of
the ideas of fight and touch, carried this princi-
ple a little beyond its juft limits.

In order to judge as well as we can, whether
it is fo, let us fuppofe fuch a blind man as Dr. '
Saunderfon, having ail the knowledge and abili-
ties which a blind man may have, fuddenly made
to fee perfectly. Let us fuppofe him kept from
all opportunities of afibciating his ideas of fight
with thofe of touch, until the former become a
little familiar ; and the firft furprife, occafioned
by objects fo new, being abated, he has time to
canvafs them, and to compare them, in his mind,
with the notions which he formerly had by
touch; and in particular to compare, in his mind,
that vifible extenfion which his eyes prefent, with
the extenfion in length and breadth with which
he was before acquainted.

We have endeavoured to prove, that a blind
man may form a notion of the vifible extenfion
and figure of bodies, from the relation which it
bears to their tangible extenfion and figure.
Much more, when this vifible extenfion and fi-
gure are prefented to his eye, will he be able to
compare them with tangible extenfion and figure,
and to perceive, that the one has length and
N 2 breadth


196 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
breadth as well as the otfter; that the one may
be bounded by lines, either ftraight or curve, as
well as the other. And therefore, he will per-
ceive, that there may be vifible, as well as tangi-
ble circles, triangles, quadrilateral and multila-
teral figures. And altho' the vifible figure is
coloured, and the tangible is not, they may, not-
withftanding, have the fame figure ; as two ob-
jects of touch may have the fame figure, altho*
one is hot and the other cold.

We have demonftrated, that the properties of
vifible figures differ from thofe of the plain fi-
gures which they reprefent : but it was obferved
at the fame time, that when the objecT: is fo fmall
as to be feen diftinctly at one view, and is pla-
ced directly before the eye, the difference between
the vifible and the tangible figure is too fmall
to be perceived by the fenfes. Thus, it is true,
that of every vifible triangle, the three angles are
greater than two right angles ; whereas in a plain
triangle, the three angles are equal to two right
angles : but when the vifible triangle is fmall,
its three angles will be fo nearly equal to two
right angles, that the fenfe cannot difcern the dif-
ference. In like manner, the circumferences of
unequal vifible circles are not, but thofe of plain
circles are, in the ratio of their diameters ; yet
in fmall vifible circles, the circumferences are ve-
ry nearly in the ratio of their diameters; and
the diameter bears the fame ratio to the circum-
ference, as in a plain circle, very nearly.

Hence


Se£t. ii. Of SEEING. 197

Hence it appears, that fmall vifible figures
(and fuch only can be feen diftinclly at one view)
have not only a refemblance to the plain tangible
figures which have the fame name, but are to all
fenfe the fame. So that if Dr. Saunderfon had
been made to fee, and had attentively viewed
the figures of the firft book of Euclid, he might,
by thought and confideration, without touching
them, have found out that they were the very
figures he was before fo well acquainted with by
touch.

When plain figures are feen obliquely, their
vifible figure differs more from the tangible ; and
the reprefentation which is made to the eye, of
folid figures, is ftill more imperfeft ; becaufe vi-
fible extenfion hath not three, but two dimen-
sions only. Yet as it cannot be faid that an exact
picture of a man hath no refemblance of the man,
or that a perfpective view of a houfe hath no re-
femblance of the houfe ; fo it cannot be faid,
with any propriety, that the vifible figure of a
man, or of a houfe, hath no refemblance of the
objects which they reprefent.

Bifhop Berkeley therefore proceeds upon a ca-
pital miftake, in fuppofing that there is no refem-
blance betwixt the extenfion, figure, and pofition
which we fee, and that which we perceive by
touch.

We may further obferve, that Bifhop Berke-
ley's fyftem, with regard to material things, mufl
have made him fee this queftion, of the erect ap-
pearance of objects, in a very different light from
N 3 that


198 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
that in which it appears to thofe who do not
adopt his fyftem.

In his theory of vifion, he feems indeed to al-
low, that there is an external material world :
but he believed that this external world is tangi-
ble only, and not viable; and that the vifible
world, the proper object of fight, is not external,
but in the mind. If this is fuppofed, he that
affirms that he fees things erect and not inverted,
affirms that there is a top and a bottom, a right
and a left in the mind. Now, I confefs I am not
f® well acquainted with the topography of the
mind, as to be able to affix a meaning to thefe
words when applied to it.,

We ihall therefore allow, that if vifible objects
were not external, but exifled only in the mind,
they could have no figure, or pofition, or ex-
tenfion •, and that it would be abfurd to affirm,
that they are feen either erect or inverted •, or
that there is any refemblance between them and
the objects of touch. But when we propofe the
queftion, Why obje&s are feen erect and not in-
verted ? we take it for granted, that we are not
in Bifliop Berkeley's ideal world, but in that
world which men, who yield to the dictates of
common fenfe, believe themfelves to inhabit.
We take it for granted, that the objects both of
fight and of touch, are external, and have a cer-
tain figure, and a certain polition with regard to
one another, and with regard to our bodies, whe-
ther we perceive it or not.

When


Sect, i r. , Of S E E I N G. 199

"When I hold my .walking-cane upright in my
hand, and look at it, I take it for granted, that
I fee and handle the fame individual object. When
I fay that I feel it erect, my meaning is, that I
feel the head directed from the horizon, and the
point directed towards it : and when I fay that
I fee it erect, I mean that I fee it with the head
directed from the horizon, and the point towards
it. I conceive the horizon as a fixed object both
of fight and touch, with relation to which, ob-
jects are faid to be high or low, erect or invert-
ed : and when the queftion is afked, Why I fee
the object erect, and not inverted ? it is the
fame as if you mould afk, Why I fee it in that
pofition which it realiy hath ? or, Why the eye
fliows the real pofition of objects, and doth not
ihow them in an inverted pofition, as they are
feen by a common aftronomical telefcope, or as
their pictures are feen upon the retina of an eye
when it is diffected ?

S E C T. XII.

_ The, fame fubjeSl continued.

TT is ifnpoffible to give a fatisfactory anfwer to
this queftion, otherwife than by pointing out

the laws of nature which take place in vifion ;

for by thefe the phenomena of vifion muft be

regulated. ,

Therefore I anfwer, Firft, That, by a law of

nature the rays of light proceed from every point
N 4 of


200 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
of the object to the pupil of the eye in ftraight
lines. Secondly, That, by the laws of nature, the
rays coming from any one point of the object to
the various parts of the pupil, are fo refradled,
as to meet again in one point of the retina; and
the rays from different points of the object, firft
croffiog each other, and then proceeding to as
many different points of the retina % form an in-
verted picture of the object.

So, far the principles of optics carry us; and
experience further aflbres us, that if there is no
fuch picture upon the retina, there is no vifion ;
and that fuch as the picture on the retina is, fuch
is the appearance of the object, in colour and fi-
gure, diftindtnefs or indiftinctnefs, brightnefs or
faintnefs.

It is evident, therefore, that the pictures upon
the retina are, by the laws of nature, a mean of
vifion; but in what way they accomplifh their
end, we are totally ignorant. Philofophers con-
ceive, that the impreifion made on the retina by
the rays of light, is communicated to the optic
nerve, and by the optic nerve conveyed to fome
part of the brain, by them called the fenforium ;
and that the impreffion thus conveyed to the fen-
fcrium is immediately perceived by the mind,
which is fuppofed to refide there. But we know
nothing of the feat of the foul: and we are fo
far from perceiving immediately what is tranfr
a,£ted in the brain, that of all parts of the hu-
man body we know leaft about it. It is indeed
very probable, that the, optic nerve is an inftru-

ment


Seft. re. Of S E E IN G. aoi

ment of vifion no lefs neceffary than the retina j
and that fome impreffion is made -upon it, by
means of the pictures on the retina. But of what
kind this impreffion is, we know nothing;

There is not the leaft probability, that there
is any picture or image of the object either in the
optic nerve or brain. The pictures on the retina
are formed by the rays of light; and whether
we fuppofe, with fome, that their impulfe upon
the retina caufes fome vibration of the fibres of
the optic nerve j or, with others, that it gives
motion to fome fubtile fluid contained in the
nerve; neither that vibration, nor this motion,
can refemble the vifible object which is prefent-
ed to the mind. Nor is there any probability;
that the mind perceives the pictures upon the
retina. Thefe pictures are no more objects of our
perception, than the brain is,' or the optic nerve.
No man ever faw the pictures in his own eye;
nor indeed the pictures in the eye of another, un-
til it was taken out of the head, and duly pre-
pared.

It is very ftrange, that philofophers, of all
ages, fhould have agreed in this notion, That the
images of external objects are conveyed by the
organs of fenfe to the brain, and are there per-
ceived by the mind. Nothing can be more un>
philofophical. For, firft, This notion hath no
foundation in fact and obfervation. Of all the
organs of fenfe, the eye only, as far as we can
difcover, forms any kind of image of its object j
and the images formed by the eye are not in the

brain,


202 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VI.
brain, but only in the bottom of the eye •, nor
are they at all perceived or felt by the mind.
Secondly, It is as difficult to conceive how the
mind perceives images in the brain, as, how it
perceives things more diftant. If any man will
fhew how the mind may perceive images in the
brain, I will undertake to (hew how it may per-
ceive the moft diftant objects : for if we give
eyes to the mind, to perceive what is tranfadled
at home in its dark chamber, why may we not
make thefe eyes a little longer-lighted ? and then
we (hall have no occafion for that unphilofophi-
cal fi&ion of images in the brain. In a word, the
manner and mechanifm of the mind's perception
is quite beyond our comprehenfion : and this
way of explaining it by images in the brain,
feems to be founded upon very grofs notions of
the mind and its operations ; as if the fuppofed
images in the brain, by a kind of contacf r form-
ed limilar impreffioris or images of objefts upon
the mind, of which impreffions it is fuppofed to
be confcious.

We have endeavoured to fhew, throughout
the courfe of this inquiry, that the impreffions
made upon the mind by means of the five fenfes,
have not the leaft refemblance to the objefts of
fenfe : and therefore, as we fee no fhadow of
evidence, that there are any fuch images in the
brain, fo we fee no purpofe, in philofophy, that
the fuppofition of them can anfwer. Since the
picture upon the retina therefore is neither itfelf
feen by _the mind, nor produces any impreffion

upon


Seft. 12. Of SEEING. 203

upon the brain or fenforium, which is feen by
the mind, nor makes any impreffion upon the
mind that refembles the object, it may ftill be
afked, How this picture upon the retina caufes
vifion ?

Before we anfwer this queftion, it is proper
to obferve, that in the operations of the mind,
as well as in thofe of bodies, we muft often be
fatisfied with knowing, that certain things are
connected, and invariably follow one another,
without being able to difcover the chain that
goes between them. It is to fuch connections
that we give the name of laws of nature; and
when we fay that one thing produces another
by a law of nature, this fignifies no more, but
that one thing, which we call in popular lan-
guage the caufe, is constantly and invariably fol-
lowed by another, which we call the effebl ; and
that we know not how they are connected.
Thus, we fee it is a fa£t, that bodies gravitate
towards bodies •, and that this gravitation- is re-
gulated by certain mathematical proportions,
according to the diftances of the bodies from
each other, and their quantities of matter. Be-
ing unable to difcover the caufe of this gravita-
tion, and prefuming that it is the immediate
operation, either of the Author of nature, or of
fome fubordinate caufe, which we have not
hitherto been able to reach, we call it a law of
nature. '■ If any philofopher mould hereafter be
fo happy as to difcover the caufe of gravitation,
t<hjs can only be done by difcovering fome more

general


2 o4 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VI.
general law of nature, of which the gravitation
of bodies is a neceffary confequence. In every
chain of natural caufes, the higheft link is a
primary law of nature •, and the higheft link
which we can trace, by juft induction, is either
this primary law of nature, or a neceffary con-
fequence of it. To trace out the laws of nature,
by induction, from the phaenomena of nature, is
all that true philofophy aims at, and all that it
can ever reach.

There are laws of nature by which the ope-
rations of the mind are regulated ; there are
aifo laws of nature that govern the material
fyftem : and as the latter are the ultimate con-
dufions which the human faculties can reach in
the pffilofophy of bodies, fo the former are the
ultimate conclufions we can reach in the philo-
fophy of minds.

To return, therefore, to the queftion above
ptopofed, we may fee, from what hath been
juft now obferved, that it amounts to this, By
what law of nature is a picture upon the retina y
the mean or occafion of my feeing an external
object of the fame figure and colour, in a con-
trary petition, and in a certain direction from
the eye ?

It will, without doubt, be allowed, that I
fee: the whole object in the fame manner and by
the fame law by which I fee any one point of it.
Now, I know it to be a fact, that, in direct
vifion, I fee every point of the object in the
direction of the right line that pafieth from the

centre


Sect. 12. Of SEEING. -105

centre of the eye to that point of the objectj
and I know likewhe, from optics, that the ray
of light that comes to the centre of my eye,
paffes on to the retina in the fame direction.
Hence it appears to be a fact, that every point
of the object is feen in the direction of a right
line pafllng from the picture of that point on the
retina through the centre of the eye. As this
is a fact that holds univerfally and invariably, it
muft either be a law of nature, or the neceflary
confequence of fome more general law of nature.
And according to thejuft rules of philofophizing,
we may hold it for a law of nature, until fome
more general law be difcovered, whereof it is
a neceflary confequence, which I fufpect can
never be done.

Thus we fee, that the phaenomena of vifion
lead us by the hand to a Jaw of nature, or
a law of our conftitution, of which law our
feeing objects erect by inverted images, is a
neceflary confequence. For it neceflarjly fol-
lows, from the law we have mentioned, that
the object whbfe picture is loweft on the retina,
muft be feen in the higheft direction from the
eye; and that the object whofe picture; is on
the right of the retina, muft be feen on the
left-, fo that if the pictures hacl been erect in
the, retina, we fhould have fee^n the object in-
serted. My chief intention in handling this
queftion, was to point put this law of nature ;
which as it is a part of the conftitution of the
human mind, belongs properly to the fubject of

this


io6 Of the H U M A N M 1 N D. Chap, VI.
this inquiry. For this reafon I (hall make fome
farther remarks upon it, after doing juftice to
the ingenious Dr. Porterfield, who, long ago in
the ' Medical Effays, or more lately in his
Treatife of the Eye, pointed out, as a primary
law of our nature, That a vifible object appears
in the- direftion.of a right line perpendicular to
the retina at that point where its image is paint-
ed. If lines drawn from the centre of the eye
to all parts of the retina be perpendicular to it,
as they muft be very nearly, this coincides with
the law we have mentioned, and is the fame in
other words. In order, therefore, that we may
have a more diftin<5t notion of this law of our
conftitution, we may obferve,

i. That we can give no reafon why the
retina is, of all parts of the body, the only one
on which pictures made by the rays of light
caufe vifion •, and therefore we muft refolve this
folely into a law of our conftitution. We may
form fuch pictures by means of optical glafies,
upon the hand, or upon any other' part of the
body; but they are not felt, nor do they pro-
duce any thing like vifion. A picture upon the
retina is as little felt as one- upon the hand ; bur
it produces vifion •, for no other reafon that we
know, but becaufe it is deftined by the wifdom
of nature to this pnrpofe. The vibrations of
the air ftrike upon the eye, the palate, and the
olfactory membrane, with the fame force as upon
the membrani tympani of the ear : The impref-
fion they make upon the laft, produces the fen-

fation


Scft. 12. Of S E E I N G. 207

fatipn of found ; but their impreffion upon any
of the former, produces no fenfation at all. This
may be extended to all the fenfes, whereof each
hath its peculiar laws, according to which, the
impreffions made upon the organ of that fenfe,
produce fenfations or perceptions in the mind,
that cannot be produced by impreffions made
upon any other organ.

2. We may obferve, that the laws of per-
ception, by the different fenfes, are very dif-
ferent, not only in refpeet of the nature of the
objeds perceived by them, but likewife in re-
fpecVof the notices they give us of the diftance
and fituation of the object. In all of them the
object is conceived to be external, and to have
real exiftence, independent of our perception :
but in one, the diftance, figure, and fituation of
the object, are all prefented to the mind ; ia
another, the figure and fituation, but not the
diftance ; and in others, neither figure, fituation,
nor difbtnce. In vain do we attempt to account
for thefe varieties in the manner of perception
by the different fenfes^ from principles of ana-
tomy or natural phllofophy. They muft at laft
be refolved into the will of our Maker, who in-
tended that our powers of perception fhould have
certain limits, and adapted the organs of percep-
tion, and the laws of nature by which they ope-
rate, to his wife purpofes.

When we hear an unufual found, the fenfa*

tion indeed is in the mind, but we know that

there is fomething external that produced this

1 found.


2o8 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. VI*
found. At the fame time our hearing does not
inform us, whether the founding body is near
or at a diftance, in this direction or that ; and
therefore we look round to difcover it.

If any new phasnomenon appears in the hea-
vens, we fee exactly its colour, its apparent
place, magnitude, and figure, but we fee not its
diftance. It may be in the atmofphere, it may
be among the planets, of it may be in the fphere
of the fixed ftars, for any thing the eye can de-
termine.

The teftimony of the fenfe of touch reaches
only to objects that are contiguous to the or-
gan, but with regard to them, is more precife
and determinate. When we feel a body with
our hand, we know the figure, diftance, and
pofition of it, as well as whether it is rough or
fmooth, hard or foft, hot or cold.

The fenfations of touch, of feeing, and hear-
ing, are all in the mind, and can have no exift-
ence but when they are perceived. How do
they all conftantly and invariably fuggeft the
conception and belief of external objects, which
exift whether they are perceived or not ? No
philofopher can give any other anfwer to this,
but that fuch is the conftitution of our nature.
How do we know, that the object of touch is
at the fingers end, and no where elfe ? That the
object of fight is in fuch a direction from the
eye, and in no other, but may be at any di-
ftance ? and that the object of hearing may be
at any diftance, and in any dire&ion ? Not by

cuftom


Se<5t. 12. Of S E E I N G. 209

cuftom furely; not by reafoning, or comparing
ideas, but by the conftitution of our nature.
How do we perceive vifible objects in the di-
rection of right lines perpendicular to that part
of the 'retina on which the rays ftrike, while
we do not perceive the objects of hearing in
lines perpendicular to the membrana tympanic
upon which the vibrations of the air ftrike ? Be-
caufe fuch are the laws of our nature. How
do we know the parts of our bodies affected by
particular pains ? Not by experience or by rea-
foning, but by the conftitution of nature. The
fenfation of pain is, no doubt, in the mind, and
cannot be faid to have any relation, from its own
nature, to any part of the body ^ but this fenfa-
tion,. by.our conftitution, gives a perception of
fome particular part of the body, whbfe diforder
caufes the uneafy. fenfation. If it were not fo,
a man who never before felt either the gout or
the- toothach, when he is firltifeized with .the ,
gout in his toe,, might m'jftake it for the tooth-
ache ' . . „-',", ",_;.;

Every fenfe therefore rhath its peculiar laws -
and limits, by the -conftitution of oar nature;
and one of the laws of fight is, That .we always
fee an object in the direction of a right line.pak. ,;
fing from its image on the retina- through the -
centre of the eye. c -.

3. Perhaps fome readers will imaginei that

it is. eafier, "and will anfwer the purpofeas well,

to conceive a law: of nature, by which, we fhall

always fee objects in the place in which* they are,

O and


aio Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
and in their true pofition, without having re-
courfe to images on the retina, or to the optical
centre of the eye.

To this I anfwer, That nothing can be a law of
nature which is contrary to fact. The laws of
nature are the m oft general facts we; can difcover
in the operations of nature. Like other facts, they
are not to be hit upon by a happy conjecture, but
juftly deduced from obfervation : Like other ge-
neral facts, they are not to be drawn from a few
particulars, but from a copious, patient, and
cautious induction. That we fee things always
in their true place and pofition, is not fa«5b ; and
therefore it can be no law of nature. In a plain
mirror, I fee myfelf, and other things, in places
very different from thofe they really occupy.
And fo it happens in every inftance, v wherein
the rays coming from the object are either re-
flected or refracted before falling upon the eye.
Thofe who know any thing of optics, know
that, in all fuch cafes, the object is feen in the
direction of a line paffyig from the centre of the
eye, to the point where the rays were laft re-
flected or refracted ; and that upon this all the
powers of the telefcope and microfcope depend.

Shall we fay then, that it is a law of nature,
that the object is feen in the direction which the
rays have when they fall on the eye, or rather
in the direction contrary to that of the rays
■when they fall upon the eye ? No. This is not
true, and therefore it is no law of nature. For
the rays, from any one point of the object, come

to


Se£hi2. t)£ SEEING. dii

to all parts of the pupil ; and therefore muft have
different directions k but we fee the object only
ihonedf thefedireftionsi to wit, in the direction
of the rays that come to the centre of the eye.
And this holds true, even when the rays that
fhould pafs through the centre are ftopt, and the
object is feen by rays that pafs at a diftance front
the centre.

Perhaps it may ftill be imagined, that alcho*
we are not made fb as to fee objects always in
their true place, nor fo as to fee them precifely
in the direction of the rays when they falPupon
the cornea •, yet we may be fo made, as to fee
the object in the direction Which the rays have
when they fall upon the retina,, after they have
undergone all their refractions in the eye, that
is, in the direction in which the rays pafs from
the cryftalline to the retina. But neither is this
true ; and confequently it is ho law of our con-
stitution. In order to fee that it is not true, we
muft conceive all the rays that pafs from the
cryftalline to one point of the retina, as forming
a fmall cone, whofe bafe is upon the back of the
cryftalline, and whofe vertex is a point of the
retina. It is eVident that the rays which form
the picture in this point, have various directions^
even after they pafs the Cryftalline ; yet the ob-
ject is feen only in one of thefe directions, to wit$,
in the direction of the rays that come from the
centre of the eye. Nor is this owing to any
particular virtue in the central rays, or in the
centre itfelf j for the central rays may be ftopt.
O 2 When


2i2 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
When they are ftopt, the image will be formed
upon the fame point of the retina as before, by
rays that are not central, nor have the fame
direction which the central rays had : and in
this cafe the object is feen in the fame direction
as before, altho' there are now no rays coming
in that direction.

From this indu&ion we conclude, That our
feeing an objecl: in tliat particular direction in
which we do fee it, is not owing to any law of
nature by which we are made to fee it in the
direction of the rays, either before their refrac-
tions in the eye, or after, but to a law of our
nature, by which we fee the object in the direc-
tion of the right line that pafleth from the pic-
ture of the object upon the retina to the centre
of the eye.

The facts upon which I ground this induction,
are taken from fome curious experiments of
Scheiner, in his Fundament. Optic, quoted by Dr.
Porterfield, and confirmed by his experience. I
have alfo repeated thefe experiments, and found
them to anfwer. As they are eafily made, and
tend to illuftrate and confirm the law of nature I
have mentioned, I (hall recite them as briefly and
diftinctly as I can.

Experiment I. Let a very fmall object, fuch
as the head of a pin, well illuminated, be fix-
ed at fuch a diftance from the eye, as to be be-
yond the neareft limit and within the fartheft
limit of diftinct vifion. For a young eye, not
rcear-fighted, the object may be placed at the

diftance


"Seft. 12. Gf SEEING. 213

diftance of eighteen inches. Let the eye be
kept fteadily in one place, and take a diftindt
view of the object. We know from the princi-
ples of optics, that the rays from any one point
of this object, whether they pafs thro' the cen*.
tre of the eye, or at any diftance from the centre
which the breadth of the pupil will permit, do
all unite again in one point of the retina. We
know alfo, that thefe rays have different direc-
tions, both before they fall upon the eye, and af»
ter they pafs through the cryftalline.

Now we can fee the object by any one fmall
parcel of thefe rays, excluding the reft,, by look-
ing thro' a fmall pin-hole in a card. Moving
this pin-hole over the various parts of the pupil,
we can fee the object, firft by the rays that pafs
above the centre of the eye, then by the central
rays, then by the rays that pafs below the centre,
and in like manner by the rays that pafs on the
right and left of the centre. Thus, we view
this object, fucceffively, by rays that are
central, and by rays that are not central ; by
rays that have different directions, and are vari-
ouQy inclined to each other, both when they
fall upon the cornea^ and when they fall upon
the retina ; but always, by rays which fall upon
the fame point of the retina. And what is the
event ? It is this, that the object is feen in the
fame individual direction, whether feen by all
thefe rays together, or by any one parcel of
them.

O 3 Experiment


*i 4 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Cha^. VI,
Experiment 2. Let the object above mentis
oned be now placed within, the neareft limit of
diftinct vifion, that is, for an eye that is not
near-fighted, at the diftance of four or five inches.
We know, that in this cafe, the rays coming
from one point of the object, do not meet in
one point of the retina, but fpread over a fmall
circular fpot of it •, the central rays occupying
the centre of this circle, the rays that pafs above
the centre occupying the upper part of the cir-
cular fpot, and fo of the reft. And we know
that the object is in. this cafe feen confufed, eve-
ry point of it being feen, not in one, but in va-
rious directions. To remedy this confufion, we
look at the object thro' the pin-hole, and while
we move the pin-hole over the various parts of
the pupil, the object, does not keep its place,
but leems to move in a cpntrary dire£tion.

It is here to be obferved, that when the
pin-hole is' carried upwards over the pupil, the
picture of the object is carried upwards upon the
retina, and the object at the fame time feems to
move downwards, fo as to be always in the right
line paffing from the picture thrp' the centre of
the eye. It is likewife to be obferved, that the
rays which form the upper and the lower pic-
tures upon the retina, do not crofs each other as,
in ordinary vifion ; yet ftill the higher pifture
fliews the object lower, and the lower picture
ihews the object higher, in the fame manner as
when the rays crofs each other. "Whence we
rnaj cbferve, by the way, that this phaenome-

non,


Sc&. i a. Of SEEING. 215

non of our feeing objects in a pofuion contrary
to that of their pictures upon the retina, does
not depend upon the croffing of the rays, as
Ifepler and Des Cartes conceived.

Experiment 3. Other things remaining as in
the laft experiment, make three pin-holes in a
ftraight line, fo near, that the rays coming from
the object thro' all the holes, may enter the pu-
pil at the fame time^ In this cafe we have a ve-
ry curious phaenomenon ; for the object is feen
triple with one eye. And if you make more
holes within the breadth of the £>upil, you will
fee as many objects as there are holes. How-
ever, we (hall fuppofe them only three ; one on
the right, one in the middle, and one on the left;
in which cafe you fee three objects ftanding in a
line from right to left.

It is here to be obferved, that there are three
pictures on the retina ; that on the left being
formed by the rays which pafs on the left of the
eye's centre ; the middle pifture being formed
by the central rays, and the right-hand picture by
the rays which pafs on the right of the eye's cen-
tre. It is farther to be obferved, that the abject
which appears on the right, is not that which is
feen thro' the hole on the right, but that which
is feen thro' the hole on the left ; and in like
manner, the left-hand object is feen thro' the
hole on the right, as is eafily proved by cover-
ing the holes fucceflively. So that, whatever is
the direction of the rays which form the right-
h$nd and left hand pictures, ftill the right-hand
O 4 picture


216 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
picture fhows a left-hand object, and the left-
hand picture fhows a right-hand object.

Experiment 4. It is eafy to fee how the two
laft experiments may be varied, by placing the
object beyond the fartheft limit of diftinct vi-
fion. In order to make this experiment, I look-
ed at a candle at the diftance of ten feet, and put
the eye of my fpectacles behind the card, that
the rays from the fame point ofthe object might
meet, and crofs each other, before they reached
the retina. In this cafe ? as in the former, the
candje was feen triple through the three pin-:
holes ; buc the candle on the right, was feen
thro' the hole on the right ; and, on the contra-
ry, the left-hand candle was feen trjro' the hole
on the left. In this experiment it is evident
from the principles of optics, that the rays forr
rning the feveral pictures on the retina, crofs each
other a little before they reach the retina ; and
therefore the left-hand picture is formed by the
rays which pafs thro' the hole on the right: fo that
the pofition of the pictures is contrary to that of
the holes by which they are formed ; and there-
fore is alfo contrary to that of their objects, as
we have found it to be in the former expert?
ments.

Thefe experiments exhibit feyeral uncommon
phenomena, that regard the apparent place, and
the direction of vifible objects from the eye;
phenomena that feem to be moft contrary to the •
common rules of yifion. \Yher} we look at the

fame


Sett. 12. Of SEEING. 217

fame time through three holes that are in a right
line, and at certain diftances from each other,
we expeft, that the objects feen through them
fhould really be, and fhould appear to be, at a dis-
tance from each other : Yet, by the firft expe-
riment, we may, through three fuch holes, fee
the fame object, and the fame point of that ob-
ject ; and through all the three it appears in the
fame individual place and direction.

When the rays of light come from the ob-
ject in right lines to the eye, without any re-
flexion, inflexion, or refraction^ we expect, that
the object fhould appear in its real and proper di-
rection from the eye -, and fo it, commonly does :
But in thefecond, third, and fourth experiments,
we fee the object in a direction which is not its
true and real direction from the eye, altho' the
rays come from the object to the eye, without
any inflexion, reflexion, or refraction.

"When both the object and the eye are fixed
without the leaft motion, and the medium un-
changed, we expeCt, that the object fhould ap-
pear to reft, and keep the fame place : Yet in
the fecond and fourth experiments, when both
the eye and the object are at reft, and the me-
dium unchanged, we make the object appear to
move upwards or downwards, or in any direction
we pleafe.

When we look at the fame time, and with
the fame eye, through holes that ftand in a line
from right to left, we expect, that the object feen
through the left-hand hple fhould appear on the


2i8 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
k r c, and the object feen through the right-hand
hole, fhould appear on the right: Yet in the
third experiment, we find the direft contrary.
Altho* many instances occur in feeing the fame
^ tjfd du^i-'e with two eyes, we always expect,
t; vi.; it fhould appear fingle when feen only by
oiiv eye : Yet in the fecond and fourth experi-
ments, we have inftances wherein the fame ob-
ject may appear double, triple, or quadruple to
one eye, without the help of a polyhedron or
multiplying glafs.

All thefe "extraordinary phenomena, regarding
the direction of vifible objects from the eye, as
well as thofe that are common and ordinary, lead
us to that law of nature which I have mentioned,
and are the neceflary confequences of it. And,
as there is no probability that we fhall ever be
able to give a reafon why pictures upon the retina
make us fee external objects, any more than pic-
tures upon the hand or upon the cheek ; or, that
we fhall ever be able to give a reafon, why we
fee the object in the direction of a line pafling
from its picture through the centre, of the eye,
rather than in any other direction ; I am there-
fore apt to look upon this law as a primary law
of our conftitution.

To prevent being mifunderftood, I beg the
reader to obferve, that I do not mean to affirm,
that the picture upon the retina will make us fee
an object in the direction mentioned, or in any
direction, unlefs the optic nerve, and the other
more immediate inftruments of vifion, be found,

and


Seft. 12. Of SEEING. 219

and perform their funf^oxu We know not well
what is the office of the optic nerve, nor in what
manner if performs that office ; but that it hath
fome part in the faculty of feeing, feems to be
certain j becaufe in an amaurofu, which is be-
lieved to be a diforder of the optic nerve, the
pictures on the retina are clear and diftindt, and
yet there is no vifion.

We know (till lefs of the ufe and function of
the choroid membrane; but it feems likewle" to
be neceflary to vifion : for it is well known, that
pictures upon that part of the retina where it is
not covered by the choroid, I mean at the en-
trance of the optic nerve, produce no vifion, any
more than a picture upon the hand. We ac-
knowledge, therefore, that the retina is not the
laft and moft immediate inftrument of the mind
in vifion. There-are other material organs, whofe
operation is neceflary to feeing, even after the
piiflures upon the retina are formed. If ever we
pome to know the ftrufture and ufe of the cho-
roid membrane, the optic nerve, and the brain, and
what impreffions are made upon them by means
of the pictures on the retina, fome more links of
the chain may be brought within our view, and a
more general law of vifion difcovered : but while
we know fo little of the nature and office of thefe
more immediate inftruments of vifion, it feems to
be impoffible to trace its laws beyond the pictures
upon the retina.

Neither do I pretend to fay, that. there may

not be difeafes of the eye, or accidents, which

7 may


220 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

mayoccafionour feeingobjects in a direction fome-
what different from that mentioned above. I
fhall beg leave to mention one inftance of this
kind that concerns myfelf.

In May 1761, being occupied in making an
exact meridian, in order to obferve the tranfit of
Venus, I rafhly directed to the fun, by my right,
eye, the crofs hairs of a fmall telefcope. I had
often done the like in my younger days with im-
punity •, but I fuffered by it at laft, which I men-
tion as a warning to others.

I foon obferved a remarkable dimnefs in that
eye ; and for many weeks, when I was in the
dark, or fhut my eyes, there appeared before the
right eye a lucid fpot, which trembled much like
the image of the fun feen by reflection from wa-
ter. This appearance grew fainter, and lefs fre-
quent by degrees ; fo that now there are feldom
any remains of it. But fome other very fenfible
effects of this hurt ftill remain. For, firft, The
fight of the right eye continues to be more dim
than that of the left. Secondly, The nearefl: limit
of diftinct virion is more remote in the right eye
than in the other ; altho', before the time men-
tioned, they were equal in both thefe refpects, as
I had found by many trials. But, thirdly, what
I chiefly intended to mention is, That a ftraight
line, in fome circumftances, appears to the right
eye to have a curvature in it. Thus, when I
look upon a mufic-book, and, ftiuttjng my left
eye, direct the right to a point of the middle
line of the five which, compofe.#ie ftaff pf mufic ;

the


Sect. 12. Of S E E I N G. 221

the middle line appears dim indeed, at the point
to which the eye is directed, but ftraight; at
the fame time the two lines above it, and the
two below it, appear to be bent outwards, and
to be more diftant from each other, and from
the middle line, than at other parts of the ftaff,
to which the eye is not directed. Fourthly,
Altho' I have repeated this experiment times in-
numerable, within thefe fixteen months, I do not
find that cuftom and experience takes away this
appearance of curvature in ftraight lines. Laft-
ly, This appearance of curvature is perceptible
when I look with the right eye only, but not
when I look with both eyes ; yet I fee better
with both eyes together, than even with the left
eye alone.

I have related this fact minutely as it is, with-
out regard to any hypothefis; becaufe I think
fuch uncommon fads deferve to be recorded. I
fhall leave it to others to conjecture the caufe of
this appearance. To me it feems moil probable,
that a fmall part of the retina towards the centre is
fhrunk, and that thereby the contiguous parts are
drawn nearer to the centre, and to one another,
than they were before; and that objects whofe
images fall on thefe parts, appear at that diftance
from each other which correfponds, not to the
interval of the parts in their prefent preternatu-
ral contraction, but to their interval in their na-
tural and found flate.

SECT.


222 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VL

SECT. XIII.

Of feeing objeSts fingle with two eyes.

A Nother phenomenon of vifion which de-
ferves attention, is our feeing objects fingle
with two eyes. There are two pictures of the
object, one on each retina ; and each picture by
itfelf makes us fee an object in a certain direc-
tion from the eye : yet both together common-
ly make us fee only one object. All the accounts
or folutions of this phenomenon given by anato*
mifts and philofophers, feem to be unfatisfactory.
I (hall pafs over the opinions of Galen, of Gaf-
fendus, of Baptifta Porta, and of Rohault. The
reader may fee thefe examined and refuted by
Dr. Porterfield. I fhall examine Dr. Porterfield's
own opinion, Bifhop Berkeley's, and fome others.
But it will be neceffary firft to afcertain the facts ;
for if we miftake the phenomena of fingle and
double vifion, it is ten to one but this miftake
will lead us wrong in affigning the caufes. This
likewife we ought carefully to attend to, which is
acknowledged in theory by all who have any true
judgment or juft tafte in inquiries of this nature,
but is very often overlooked in practice, name-
ly, That in the folution of natural phenomena,
all the iength that the human faculties can carry
us, is only this, that from particular phenomena,
we may, by induction, trace out general pheno-
mena, of which all the particular ones are necef-

fary


Sea. 13. Of SEEING. 223

fary confequences. And when we have arrived
at the moft general phenomena we can reach,
there we muft flop. If it is alked, Why fuch a
body gravitates towards the earth ? all the an-
fwer that can be given is, Becaufe all bodies gra-
vitate towards the earth. This is refolving a par-
ticular phenomenon into a general one. If it
fhould again be alked, Why do all bodies gravi-
tate towards the earth ? we can give no other
folation of this phenomenon, but that all bodies
whatfoever gravitate towards each other. This
is refolving a general phenomenon into a more
general one. If it fhould be alked, Why all bo-
dies gravitate to one another ? we cannot tell ;
but if we could tell, it could only be by refol-
ving this univerfal gravitation of bodies into fome
ether phenomenon ftill more general, and of
which the gravitation of all bodies is a particular
inftance. The moft general phenomena we can
reach, are what we call laws of nature. So that
the laws of nature are nothing elfe but the moft
general facts relating to the operations of nature,
which include a great many particular facts un-
der them. And if in any cafe we fhould give-
the name of a law of nature to a general pheno-
menon, which human induftry fhall afterwards
trace to one more general, there is no great
harm done. The moft general afiumes the name
of a law of nature, when it is difcovered; and
the lefs general is contained and comprehended in
k. Having premifed thefe things, we proceed to
conflder the phenomena of fingie and double vi-

fion,


224 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
fion, in order to difcover fome general principle
to which, they all lead, and of which they are the
neceffary confequences. If we can difcover any
fuch general principle, it muft either be a law of
nature, or the neceffary confequence of fome law
of nature ; and its authority will be equal, whe-
ther it is the firft or the laftl

i. We find, that when the eyes are found
and perfect, and the axes of both directed to one
point, an object placed in that point is leen An-
gle : and here we obferve, that in this cafe the
two pictures which fhow the object fingle, are in
the centres of the retina. When two pictures of
a fmall object are formed upon points of the re-
tina, if they fhow the object fingle, we fhall, for
the fake of perfpicuity, call fuch two points of the
retina, correfponding points; and where the ob-
ject is feen double, we fhall call the points of the
retina on which the pictures are formed, points
that do not correspond. Now, in this firft phasno-
menon it is evident, that the two centres of the
retina are correfponding points.

2. Suppofing the fame things as in the laft
phenomenon, other objects at the fame diftance
from the eyes as that to which their axes are di-
rected, do alfo appear fingle. Thus, if I direct
my eyes to a candle placed at the diftance of ten
feet ; and, while I look at this candle, another
ftands at the fame diftance from my eyes, within
the field of vifion ; I can, while I look at the
firft candle, attend to the appearance which the
fecond makes to the eye; and I find that in this

cafe
6


Sed, 13. Of SEEING. 225

cafe it always appears fingle. It is here to be ob-
ferved, that the pictures of the fecond candle do
not fall upon the centres of the retina, but they
both fall upon the fame fide of the centres, that
is, both to the right, or both to the left, and
both are at the fame diftance from the centres.
This might eafily be demonflrated from the prin-
ciples of optics. Hence it appears, that in this fe-
cond phenomenon of fingle virion, the corre-
fponding points are pointsof the tvroretina, which
are fimilarly fituate with refpect to the two
centres, being both upon the fame fide of the
centre, and at the fame diftance from it. It ap-
pears likewife from this phenomenon, that every
point in one retina correfponds with that which
is fimilarly fituate in the other.

3. Suppofing ftill the fame things, objects
which are much nearer to the eyes, or much
more diftant from them, than that to which the
two eyes are directed, appear double. Thus, if
the candle is placed at the diftance of ten feet,
and I hold my finger at arms-length between my
eyes and the candle; when I look at the candle,
I fee my finger double •, and when I look at my
finger, I fee the candle double : And the fame
thing happens with regard to all other objects at
like diftances which fall within the fphere of vs-
fion. In this phenomenon it is evident to thofe
who understand the principles of optics, that the
pictures of the objects which are feen double, do
not fall upon points of the retina which are fimi-
larly fituate, but that the pictures of the objects
P ken


226 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VI.
feen fingle do fall upon points fimilarly fuuate.
"Whence we infer, that as the points of the two
retina, which are fimilarly fituate with regard to
the centres, do correfpond, fo thofe which are
diffimilarly fituate do not correfpond.

4. It is to be obfcrved, that altho', in fuch
cafes as are mentioned in the laft phenomenon,
we have been accuftomed from infancy to fee ob-
jects double which we know to be fingle ; yet
cuftom, and experience of the unity of the ob-
ject, never take away this appearance of dupli-
city.

5. It may however be remarked, that the cu-
• ftom of attending to vifible appearances has a

con (iderable effect, and makes the phsenomenon
of double vifion to be more or lefs obferved and
remembered. Thus you may find a man that can
fay with a good confcience, that he never faw
thingsdouble all his life; yet this very man, put
in the fituation above mentioned, with his finger
between him and the candle, and defired to at-
tend to the appearance of the object which he
does not look at, will, upon the firft trial, fee
the candle double, when he looks at his finger;
and his finger double, when he looks at the can-
dle. Does he now fee otherwife than he faw
before? No, furely; but he now attends to
what he never attended to before. The fame
double appearance of an object hath been a thou-
sand times prefented to his eye before now ; but
fie "did not attend to it; and fo it is as little an

object


Seft. 13. Of S E E 1 N C. ay

Object of his reflection and memory, as if it had
never happened.

When we look at an object, the circumja-
cent objects may be feen at the fame time, al*
tho' more obfcurely and indiftinctly : for the eye 1
hath a considerable field of vifion, which intakes
in at once. But we attend only to the object we
look at. The other objects which fall within the
field of vifion, are not attended to ; and there-
fore are as if they were not feen. If any of them
draws our attention, it naturally draws the eyes
at the fame time : for in the common courfe of
life, the eyes always follow the attention : or if
at any time, in a reverie, they are feparated from
it, we hardly at that time fee what is directly be-
fore us. Hence we may fee the reafon, why the
man we are fpeaking of, thinks that he never be-
fore faw an object double. When he looks at
any object, he fees it fingle, and takes no notice
of other vifible objects at that time, whether they
appear fingle or double. If any of them draws
his attention, it draws his eyes at the fame time 4
and as foon as the eyes are turned towards it, it
appears fingle. But in order to fee things double,
at leaft in order to have any reflexion or remem-*
brance that he did fo, it is necefiary that he
Ihould look at one object, and at the fame time
attend to the faint appearance of other objects'
which are within the field of vifion. This is a
practice which perhaps he never ufed, nor at->
tempted ; and therefore he does not recollect
that ever he faw an object double. B-ut when he
P 2 is


228 Of the HUM AN MIND. Chap. VI.
is put upon giving this attention, he immediately
fees objects double in the fame manner, and with
the very fame circumftancts, as they who have
been accuftomed, for the greateft part of their
lives, to give this attention.

There are many phsenomena of a fimilar na-
ture, which ihew, that the mind may not at-
tend to, and thereby, in fome fort, not per-
ceive object.-, that ftrike the fenfes. I had pc-
cafion to mention fevera-1 instances of this in the
fecond chapter •, and I have been allured, by
perfons of the beft flcill in mufic, that in hearing
a tune upon the harpflchprd, when they give
attention to the treble, they do, not hear the
bafs •, and when they attend to the bafs, they
do not perceive the air of the treble. Some
perfons are fo near- fighted, that, in reading,
they hold the book to one eye, while the other
is directed to other objects. Such perfons ac-
quire the habit of attending in this cafe to the
objects of one eye, while they give no attention
to thofe of the other.

6. It is obfervable, that in all cafes wherein
we fee an object double, the two appearances
have a certain pofition with regard to one ano-
ther, and a certain apparent or angular diftance.
This apparent diftance is greater or lefs in diffe-
rent circumftances ; but in the fame circum-
ftances, it is always the fame, not only to the
fame, but to different perfons.

Thus, in the experiment above mentioned, if
twenty different perfons, who fee perfectly with

both


Setit. 13. Of SEEING. 229

both eyes, fhall ptece their fin'ger and the candle
at the d'i#a'nces above expre'ffed, and hold their ,
heads upright ;• looking at the finger, they will
fee two cages', one on the right, another on
the left. That whiefo is feen on the right, is
feen by the right eye, and that which is feen on
the left, by the left eye ; and they will fee
them at t:he fame apparent diftance from each
other. If again they look at the candle, they
wiM fee two fingers, one on the right, and the
other on the left; and all will ; fee them at the
fame apparent diftance ; the finger towards the
left being feen by the right eye, and the other
by the left. If the head is hid' horizontally to
onefide, other circurhrtances remaining' the fame,
One appearance of the objeil: feen double, will
be direttly above the other. In a word, vary
thecircumftarices as-you'-ple-.fe, and the appear-
ances' are varied to- all the fpedtatbris in one and'
the fame manner.

7. Having' made many experiments in order
to afcertain the apparent diftance of the two-
appearances of an Object feen double, I have
found that' in all<cafes this apparent diftance is
proportioned to the diftance between the point
of the retina, where the picture is made in one
eye, and the point which is fituated fimilarly to
that on which the picture is made on .the other
eye. So that as the apparent diftance of two
objects feen with one eye, is proportioned to
the arch of the retina, which lies between their
piiftures ; in like manner, when an object is
P 3 feen


2 3 o Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

feen double with the two eyes, the apparent
diftance of the two appearances is proportioned
to the arch of either retina, which lies between
the picture in that retina, and the point corre-
sponding to that of the picture in the other
retina.

8. As in certain circumftances we invariably
fee one obje<St appear double, fo in others we
as invariably fee two objects unite into one ;
and, in appearance, lofe their duplicity. This
is evident in the appearance of the binocular
telefcope. And the fame thing happens when
any [two fimilar tubes are applied to the two
eyes in a parallel direction ; for in this cafe we
fee only one tube. And if two {hillings are
placed at the extremities of the two tubes, one
exactly in the axis of one eye, and the other in
the axis of the other eye, we {hall fee but one
fhilling. If two pieces of coin, or other bodies,
of different colour, and of different figure, be
properly placed in the two axes of the eyes, and
at the extremities of the tubes, we (hall fee
both the bodies in one and the fame place, each
as it were fpread over the other, without hiding
it ; and the cqlour will be that which is com-
pounded of the two colours,.

9. From thefe phenomena, and from all _the
trials I have been able to make, it appears evi-
dently, that in perfect human eyes, the centres
of the two retina correfpond and harmonize with
one another ; and that every other point in one
retina, doth correfpond and harmonize with the

point,


Scd. 13. Of SEEING. 231

point which is fimilarly fituate in the other; in
fuch manner, that pictures falling on the cor-
refpondihg points of the two retina, fhew only
one object, even when there are really two :
and pictures falling upon points of the retina
which do not correfpond, fhew us two vifible
appearances, altho' there be but one object. So
that pictures, upon correfponding points of the
two retina, prefent the fame appearance to the
mind as if they had both fallen upon the fame
point of one retina ; and pictures upon points of
the two retina, which do not correfpond, prefent
to the mind the fame apparent diftance and po-
fition of two objects, as if one of thofe pictures
was carried to the point correfpodning to it in
the other retina. This relation and fympathy
between correfponding points of the two retina,
I do not advance as a hypothefis, but as a gene-
ral fact or phenomenon of vifion. All the.phs-
nomena before mentioned, of fingle or double
vifion, lead to it, and are neceflary confequences
of it. It holds true invariably in all perfect hu-
man eyes, as far as I am able to collect from
innumerable trials of various kinds made upon
my own eyes, and many made by others at my
deQre. Moll of the hypothefes that have been
contrived to refolve the phenomena of fingle and
double vifion, fuppofe this general fact, while
their authors were not aware of it. Sir Ifaac
Newton, who was too judicious a philofopher,
and too accurate an obferver, to have offered
$ven a conjecture which did not tally with the
P 4 facts


232 Of the HUMAN MIND, Ch.ip.VJ.

fa us that had fallen under his obfervation, pro-
pofes a query with refpect to the caufe of it,
Optics, quer. 15. The judicious Dr. Smith, in
his Optics, lib. i. § 137. hath confirmed, the
truth of this general phenomenon from his own
experience, not only as to the apparent unity of
objects whofe pictures fall upon the correspond-
ing points of the retina^ but alfo as to the ap-
parent diftance of the two appearances of the
fame object' when feea double.

This general phsenomenon appears therefore
to be founded upon a very full induction, which
is all the evidence we can have for a fact of this
nature. Before we make an end of this fubject,
it will be proper to inquire, firft, Whether thofe
animals whofe eyes have an adverfe pofition in
their heads, and look contrary ways, have fuch
correfponding points in their retina? Secondly,
\Vhat,is the pofition of the correfponding points
in imperfect human eyes, I mean in thofe that
fquint ? And, in the laft place, Whether this
harmony of the correfponding points in the re-
tina, be natural and original, or the effect of
cufiom ? And if it is original, Whether it can
be accounted for by any of the. laws of nature
already discovered ? or whether it is itfelf to be
looked upon as a law of nature, and a part of
the human constitution ?


SECT.


Sea. 14. Of SEEING. ag 3

SECT. XIV.

Of the laws, of vifion in hrute animals.

T T is the intention of nature, in giving eyes.,
to animals, that they may perceive the fituar
tion of vifible objects, or the direction in which,
they are placed : it is, probable, therefore, that,,
in ordinary cafes, every animal, whether it has
many eyes or few, whether of one ftructure or
of another, fees objects fingle, and in their true,
and proper direction. And fince there is a pro-
digious variety in the ftructure, the motions,
and the number of eyes in different animate and
infects, it is probable that the laws by which vi-
fion is regulated, are not the fame in all, but
various, adapted to the eyes which nature hath
given them.

Mankind naturally turn their eyes always the
fame way, fo that the axes of the two eyes meet
in one point. They naturally attend to, or
look at that object only which is placed in the
point where the axes meet. And whether the
object be more or lefs diftant, the configuration
of the eye is adapted to the diftance of the ob-
ject, fo as to form a diftinct picture of it.

When we ufe our eyes in this natural way,
the two pictures of the object we look at, are
formed upon the centres of the two retina ; and
fhe two pictures of any contiguous object are
formed upon the points of the retina which are

fiinilarly


2 3 + Of the HUM AN MIND. Chap. VI.
fimilarly fituate with regard to the centres.
Therefore, in order to our feeing objeils fingle,
and in their proper direction, with two eyes, it
is fufficient that we be fo conftituted, that ob-
jects whofe pictures are formed upon the centres
of the two retina, or upon points fimilarly fituate
with regard to thefe centres, (hall be feen in
the fame vifible place. And this is the confti-
tution which nature hath actually given to hu-
man eyes.

When we diftort our eyes from their parallel
direction, which is an unnatural motion, but
may be learned by practice ; or when we direct
the axes of the two eyes to one point, and at
the fame time direct our attention to fome vifible
object much nearer or much more diftant than
that point, which is alio unnatural, yet may be
learned •, in thefe cafes, and in thefe only, we
fee one object double, or two objects confound-
ed in one. In thefe cafes, the two pictures of
the fame object are formed upon points of the
retina which are not fimilarly fituate, and fo the
object is feen double ; or the two pictures of
different objects are formed upon points of the
retina which are fimilarly fituate, and fo the two
objects are feen confounded in one place.

Thus it appears, that the laws of vifion in
the human conftitution are wifely adapted to the
natural ufe of human eyes, but not to that ufe
of them which is unnatural. We fee objects
truly when we ufe our eyes in the natural way;
but have falfe appearances prefented to us when

we


sea. 7. of seeing; 235

we ufe them in a way that is unnatural. We
may reafonably think, that the cafe is the fame
with other animals. But is it not unreafonable
to think, that thofe animals which naturally turn
one eye towards one object, and another eye
towards another object, muft thereby have fuch
falfe appearances prefented to them, as we have
when we do fo againft nature ?

Many animals have their eyes by nature pla-
ced adverfe and immoveable, the axes of the two
eyes being always directed to oppofite points.
Do objects painted on the centres of the two
retina appears to fuch animals as they do to hu-
man eyes, in one and the fame vifible place ? I
think it is highly probable that they do not ;
and that they appear, as they really are, in op-
pofite places.

If we judge from analogy in this cafe, it will
lead us to think that there is a certain corre-
fpondence between points of the two retina in
fuch animals, but of a different kind from that
which we have found in human eyes. The
centre of one retina will correfpond with the
centre of the other, in fuch manner, that the
objects whofe pictures are formed upon thefe
correfponding points, fhall appear not to be in
the fame place, as in human eyes, but in oppo-
fite places. And in the fame manner will the
fuperior part of one retina correfpond with the
inferior part of the other, and the anterior part
of one with the pofterior part of the other.

.„ Some


£' 3 6 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

Some! animals, by nature^ tuarn their eyeswith
equal' facility, either the fame way, or different
ways, as we tarn our hands and armsi Have
fuch animals correfpond'ing points in their retime,
and points which do n©t correfpond, as the
human kind has ? I think it is probable that they
have not •, becauie fuch a constitution in them
could ferve no other purpofe but to exhibit falfe
appearances.

If we judge from analogy, it wills lead' us to
thittk, that as fuch animals move their eyes in a
manner Similar to that in which wemove our arms,
they have an immediate and: natural perception
of the direction they give to-their eyes, as'-we have'
of the direction we give tooaf arms; and perceive'
the-ff.uaiion of vifible objedte-by. their eyes-, in a-'
manner fimilar to that in which we perceive the'
fituacionof tangible objects- with-our- hands-.

-We- can-not teach brute animals to* ufe their-
eyes in any other way than in that which na-
ture hath taught them ; nor can- we teach them-
to communicate to us the appearances which vi-
fible objects-make to them, either in ordinary or
in extraordinary cafes,. We have noE therefore'
the fame means; of difcovering the laws of virion
in them-, as in our own- kind, bur muft fatisfy
ourfelves with probable conjectures': and what
we have faid: upon this fubjeci:, is chiefly intend-
ed to (hew, that animals ta^jjich nature hath
given eyes differing in their number, in their po-
fition, and in their, natural motions, may very
probably be fubjesfted. to different laws of virion,

adapted


Sect, 14. Of S E E I N G. . 237

adapted to the peculiarities of their organs of
vifion.

SECT. XV.

Squinting conjidered hypothetically.

"VUL^Hetber there be correfponding points
in the retina, of thofe who have an invo-
luntary fquint? and if there are, whether they
be fituate in the fame manner as in thofe who
have no fquint ? are not queftions of mere curi-
ofity. They are of real importance to the phy-
fician who attempts the cure of a fquint, and to
the patient who fubmits to the cure. After fo
much hath been faid of the Jlrabifmus t or
fquint, both by medical and by optical writers,
one might exoedl to find abundance of facts for
determining thefe queftions. Yet I confefs I
have been difappointed in this expectation, after
taking fome pains both to make obfervations,
and 1 to collect thofe which have been made by
others.

Nor will this appear very ftrange, if we con-
fider that to make the obfervations which are
neceffary for determining thefe queftions, know-
ledge of the principles, of optics, and of the laws
of vifion, muft concur with opportunities rare-
ly to be met with.

Of thofe who fquint, the far greater part have
no diftinct vifion with one eye. When this is
the cafe, it is impoflible, and indeed of no im-
portance,.


238 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
portance, to determine the fituation of the cor-
refponding points. When both eyes are good,
they commonly differ fo much in their direction,
that the fame objecl cannot be feen by both at
the fame time ; and in this cafe it will be very
difficult to determine the fituation of the corre-
fponding points ; for fuch perfons will probably
attend only to the objecls of one eye, and the
objecls of the other will be as little regarded as
if they were not feen.

We have before obferved, that when we look
at a near object, and attend to it, we do not
perceive the double appearances of more diftant
objefts, even when they are in the fame direc-
tion, and are prefented to the eye at the fame
time. It is probable that a fquinting perfon,
when he attends to the objecls of one eye, will,
in like manner, have his attention totally divert-
ed from the obje&s, of the other : and that he
will perceive them as little as we perceive the
double appearances of objecls when we ufe our
eyes in the natural way. Such a perfon, there-
fore, unltrfs he is fo much a philofopher as to
have acquired the habit of attending very accu-
rately to the vifible appearances of objecls, and
even of objecls which he does not look at, will
not be able to give any light to the queftions
now under confideration.

Ic is very probable that hares, rabbits, birds,
and fifties, whofe eyes are fixed in an adverfe po-
fition, have the natural faculty of attending at
the fame time to vifible objecls placed in differ-


Sea. 15. Of S E E I N ; G. 239

enr, and even in contrary directions ;- becaufe»
without this faculty, they could not have thofe
advantages from the contrary; direction of their
eyes, which nature feems to have intended. But
it is not probable that thofe wh'o'fquint have any
fuch natural faculty ; becaufe we find no fuch
faculty in the reft of the fpecies. We naturally
attend to objects placed in the point where the
axes of the two eyes meet, and to them only.
To give attention to an object in a different di-
rection is unnatural, and not to be learned with-
out pains and practice.

A very convincing proof of this may be drawn
from a fact now well known to philofophers :
when one eye is fhut, there is a certain fpace with-
in the field of vifion, where we can fee nothing at
all ; the fpace which is directly oppofed to that
part of the bottom of the eye where the optic
nerve enters. This defect of fight, in one part of
the eye, is common to all human eyes, and hath
been fo from the beginning of the world •, yet it
was never known, until the fagacity of the Ab-
be Mariotte difcovered it in the laft century.
And now when it is known, it cannot be per-
ceived, but by means of fome particular expe-
riments, which require care and attention to make
them fucceed.

What is the reafon that fo remarkable a de-
fect of fight, common to all mankind, was fo
long unknown, and is now perceived with fo
much difficulty ? It is furely this, That the de-
fect is at fome diftance from the axis of the eye,

and


240 Of the HU M A N M I N D. Chap. VL
and corifequently in a pare of the field of virion
to vyhich we never attend natur My, and to
which we cannot attend at all, without the aid
of fome particular circumftances.

From what we have faid, it appears, that, to
determine the -fituation of the correfponding
points in the eyes of thofe that fquint, is impof-
fible, if they do not. fee diftinctly with both eyes ;
and that it will be very difficult-, unlefs the two
eyes differ fo little in their direction, that the
fame objedt may be feen with both at the fame
time. Such patients I apprehend are rare •, at
leaft there are very few of them with whom I
have had the fortune to meet : and therefore,
for the affiftance of thofe who may have happier
opportunities, and inclination to make the pro-
per ufe of them, we ihall confider the cafe of
fquinting hypothetically, pointing out the pro-
per articles of inquiry, the obfervations that are
wanted, and the conclusions that may be drawn
from them.

i. It ought to be inquired, "Whether the
fquinting perlbn fees equally well with both eyes ?
and, if there be a clefecl in one, the nature and
degree of that defect Ought to be remarked. The
experiments by which this may be done, are fo
obvious, that I need not mention them. But I
would advife the obferver to make the proper
experiments, and not to rely upon the tefti-
mony of the patient ; becaufe I have found
many inftances, both of perfons that fquinted,
and others, who were found, upon trial, to
have a great defect in the fight of one eye,

altho*


Sett. 15. Of SEEING. 241

alr.ho' they were never aware of it before.
In all the following articles, it is fuppofed that
the patient fees with both eyes fo well, as to be
able to read with either, when the other is co-
vered.

2. It ought to be inquired, Whether, when
one eye is covered, the other is turned directly
to the object ? This ought to be tried in both
eyes fucceffively. By this obfervation, as a touch-
ftone, we may try the hypothefis concerning
fquinting, invented by M. de la Hire, and adopt-
ed by Boerhaave, and many others of the medi-
cal faculty.

The hypothefis is, That in one eye of a fquint-
ing perfon, the greateft fenfibility and the moft
diftinct vifion is not, as in other men, in' the
centre of the retina, but upon one fide of the
centre ; and that he turns the axis of this eye
afide from the object, in order that the picture of
the object may fall upon the moft fenfible part
of the retina, and thereby give the moft diftinct
vifion. If this is the caufe of fquinting, the
fquinting eye- will be turned afide from the ob-
ject, when the other eye is covered, as well as
when it is not.

A trial fo eafy to be made, never was made
for more than forty years ; but the hypothefis
was very generally received. So prone are men
to invent hypothefes, and fo backward to exa-
mine them by facts. At laft.Dr. Jurin having
made the trial, found that- perfons who fquint,
turn the axis of the fquinting tye directly to the

Q^ object,


242 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap., JJ r
object, when the other eye is covered. This fact
is confirmed by Dr. Porterfieldi and I have found
it verified in all the inftances that have fallen un-
der my obfervation.

3. It ought to be inquired, Whether the axes
of the two eyes follow one another, lb as to have
always the fame inclination, or make the fame
angle, when the perfon looks to the right or to
the left, upward or downward, or ftraight for-
ward. By this obfervation we may judge, whe-
ther a fquint is owing to any defect in the muf-
cles which move the eye, as fome havefuppofed.
In the following articles we fuppofe that^the in-
clination of the axes of the eyes is found -to be
always the fame.

4. It ought to be inquired, Whether the per-
fon that fquints fees an object fingle or double ?

If he fees the object double; and if the two
appearances have an angular diftance equal to the
angle which the axes of h'is eyes make with each
other, it may be concluded that he hath corre-
fponding points in the retina of his eyes,, and that ■
they have the fame fituation as. in thofe who
have no fquint.. If the two appearances fhould
have an angular diftance which is always the fame,
but manifeftly greater or lefs than the angle con-
tained under the optic axes, this would indicate
correfponding points, in the retina, whofe fitua-
tion is not the fame as in thole who have no
fquint ; but it is difficult to judge' accurately of
the angle which the optic axes make.

A


Sect. 15. Of SEEING. 243

A fquint too fmall to be perceived, may oc-
Gafion double vifion of objects : for if we fpeak
ftrictly, every perfon fquints more or lefs, whofe
optic axes do not meet exactly in the object
which he looks at. Thus, if a man can only bring
the axes of *his eyes to be parallel, but cannot
make them converge in the leaft,' he muft have
a fmall fquint in looking at near objects, and will
fee them double, while he fees very diftant ob-
jects fingle. Again, if the optic axes always con-
verge, fo as to meet eight or ten feet before the
face at fartheft, fuch a perfon will fee near ob-
jects fingle ; but when he looks at very diftant
objects, he will fquint a little, and fee them dou-
ble.

An inftance of this kind is related by Aguilo-
nius in his Optics ; who fays, that, he had fee'h a
young man to whom near objects appeared fingle,
but diftant objects appeared double.

Dr. Briggs, in his Nova vifionis theoria, ha-
ving collected from authors feveral inftances of
double vifiori, quotes this from Aguilonius, as the
rnoft wonderful and unaccountable of all, in fo
much that he fu (beets fome impofition on the
part of the young man : but to thofe who under-
stand the laws by which fingle and double vifion
are regulated, it appears to be the natural effect
of a very fmall fquint.

Double vifion may always be owing to a fmall
fquint, when the two appearances are feen at a
fmall angular diftance, altho 5 no fquint was ob-
ferved : and I do hot remember any inftances of

(^ 2 double


244 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap.Vfc
double vifion recorded by authors, wherein any
account is given of the angular diftance of the
appearances.

In almoft all the inftances of double vifion,
there is reafon to fufpect a fquint or diftortion of
the eyes, from the concomitant circumftances,
which we find to be one or other of the follow-
ing, the approach of death, or of a deliquium, ex-
ceffive drinking, or other intemperance, violent
headach, bliftering the head, fmoaking tobacco,
blows or wounds in the head. In all thefe cafes,,
it is reafonable to fufpect a diftortion of the eyes,,
either from fpafm, or paralyfis in the mufcles that
move them. But altho' it be probable that there
is always a fquint greater or lefs where there is.
double vifion ; yet it is certain that there is not
double vifion always where there is a fquint. I
know no inftance of double vifion that continued
for life, or even for a great number of years. We
fhall therefore fuppofe, in the following articles,,
that the fquinting perfon fees objects fingle.

5. The next inquiry then ought to be, Whe-
ther the object is feen with both eyes at the fame
time, or only with the eye whofe axis is directed
to it ? It hath been taken for granted, by the
writers upon the Jlrabifmus, before Dr. Jurin,
that thofe who fquint, commonly fee objects
fingle with both eyes at the fame time ; but I
know not one fact advanced by any writer which,
proves it. Dr. Jurin is of a contrary opinion; and
as it is of confequence, fo it is very eafy, to de-
termine this point in particular inftances, by this

obvious


Sect. 15. Of S E E I N G. 245

obvious experiment. While the perfon that fquints
looks fteadily at an object, let the obfervef care-
fully remark the direction of both his eyes, and
obferve their motions ; and let an opaque body
be interpofed between the object and the two
«yes fucceffively. If the patient, notwithstanding
this interpofition, and without changing the di-
rection of his eyes, continues to fee the object
all the time, it may be concluded that he faw it
with both eyes at once. But if the interpofition
of the body between one eye and the object,
makes it difappear, then we may be certain, that
it was feen by that eye only. In the two follow-
ing articles, we (hall fuppofe the firft to happen,
according to the common hypothefis.

6. Upon this fuppofition, it ought to be in-
quired, Whether the patient fees an object dou-
ble in thofe circumftances wherein it appears dou-
ble to them who have no fquint ? Let him, for
inftance, place a candle at the diftance of ten
feet ; and holding his finger at arm's length be-
tween him and the candle, let him obferve, when
he looks at the candle, whether he fees his finger
with both eyes, and whether he fees it fingle or
double; and when he looks at his finger, let him
obferve whether he fees the candle with both
eyes, and whether fingle or double.

-By this obfervation, it may be determined,
whether to this patient, the phenomena of dou-
ble as well as of fingle vifion are the fame as to
them who have no fquint. If they are not the
fame; if he fees objects fingle with two eyes,

0^3 not


246 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

not only in the cafes wherein they appear fingle,
but in thofe alfo wherein they appear double to
other men ; the conclufion to be drawn from this
fuppofition is, that his fingle vifion does not arife
from ccrrefponding points in the retina of his
eyes-, and that the laws of vifion are not the
fame in him as in the reft of mankind.

7. If, on the other hand, he fees objects dou-
ble in thofe cafes wherein they appear double to
others, the conclufion muft be, that he hath corr
refponding points in the retina of his eyes, but
unnaturally fituate ; and their fituation may be
thus determined.

When he looks at an object, having the axis
of one eye directed to it, and the axis of the
other turned afide from it ; let us fuppofe a right
line to pafs from the objeft through the centre
of the diverging eye. We fhall, for the fake of
perfpicuity, call this right line the natural axis of
the eye: and it. will make an angle with the real
axis, greater or lefs, according as his fquint is
greater or lefs. We fhall alfo call that point of
the retina in which the natural axis cuts it, the
natural centre of the retina ; which will be more
or lefs diftant from the real, centre, according as
the fquint is greater or lefs.

Having premifed thefe definitions, it will be
evident to thofe who underftand the principles of
optics, that in this perfon the natural centre of
one retina correfponds with the real centre of
the other, in the very fame manner as the two
real centres correfpond in perfect eyes ; and that

the


Seft. 15. Of SEEING. 247

the ..points fimilarly fituate with regard to the*
real centre in one retina, and the natural centre
in the other, do likewife correfpond, in the very
fame manner as the points fimilarly fituate with
regard to the two real centres correfpond in per-
fect eyes.

If it is true, as has been commonly affirmed,
that one who fquints fees an object with both
eyes at the fame time, and yet fees it fingle, the
fquint will moft probably be fuch as we have de-
fcribed in this article. And we may further con-
clude, that if a perfon affe&ed with fuch a fquint s
as we have fuppoied, could be brought to the ha-
bit of looking ftraight^ his fight would thereby
be greatly hurt. For he would then fee every
thing double which he faw with both eyes at the
fame time, and diftant objects would appear to
be confounded together. His eyes are made for
fquinting,as much as .thofe of other men are made
for looking ftraight ; and his fight would be no
lefs injured by looking ftraight, than that of an-
other man by fquinting. He can never fee per-
fectly when he does not fquint, unlefs the corre-
fppnding points of his eyes mould by cuftom ■
change their place ; but how fmall the probabi-
lity of this is, will appear in the i7thfection.

Thofe of the medical faculty who^ attempt the .
cure of a fquint, would do well to confider whe-
ther it is attended with fuch fymptoms as are •
above defcribed. If it is,, the cure would be worfe
than the malady : for every one will readily ac-
knowledge, that it is better to put up with the
Q^4 deformity


243 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
deformity of a fquint, than to purchafe the cure
by the lofs of perfect: and diftinct vifion.

8. We fhall now return to Dr. Jurin's hypo-
thefis, and fuppofe, that our patient, when he
faw objects fingle notwithstanding his fquint, was
found, upon trial, to have feen them only with
one eye.

We would advife fuch a patient, to endeavour,
by repeated efforts, to leffen his fquint, and to
bring the axes of his eyes nearer to a parallel di-
rection. We have naturally the power of ma-
king fmall variations in the inclination of the op-
tic axes ; and this power may be greatly increa-
fed by exercife.

In the ordinary and natural ufe of our eyes,
we can direct: their axes to a fixed ftar ; in this
cafe they muft be parallel : we can direct them
alfo to an object fix inches diftant from the eye ;
and in this cafe the axes muft make an angle of
fifteen or twenty degrees. We fee young peo-
ple in their frolics learn to fquint, making their
eyes either converge or diverge, when they will,
to a very confiderable degree. Why fhould it be
more difficult for a fquinting perfon to learn to
look Straight when he pleafes ? If once, by an
effort of his will, he can but leffen his fquint, fre-
quent practice will make it eafy to leffen it, and
will daily increafe his power. So that if he be-
gins this practice in youth, and perfeveres in it,
he may probably, after fome time, learn to direct
both his eyes to one object. '

When


Seft. 15. Of SEEING. 249

When he hath acquired' this power, it will
be no difficult matter to determine, by proper
obfervations, whether the centres of -the retina;,
and other points fimilarly fituate with regard to
the centres, correfpond, as in other men.'
: 9. Let us now fuppofe that he finds, this to
be the cafe; and that he fees an object fingle
with both eyes,' when the axes of both are di-
rected to it. It will then concern him to ac-
quire the habit of looking ftraight, as he hath
got the power, becaufe he will thereby not only
remove a deformity, but improve his fight : and
I conceive this habit, like all others, may be
got by frequent exereife. He may practife be-
fore a mirror when alone, and in company he
ought to have thofe about him, who will obferve
and admonifh him when he fqiiints.

fo. What is fuppofed in the 9th article is
not merely imaginary-; it is really the cafe of
ibme fquinting perfons, as will appear in the
next fection. Therefore it ought further to be
inquired, How it comes to pafs, that fdeh a per-
fon fees an object which he looks at, only with
one eye, when both are open ? In order to an-
fwer this queftion, it may be obferved, firft,
Whether, when he looks at an object, the di-
verging eye is not drawn fo clofe to the nofe,
that it can have no diftindr. images ? Or, fecond-
ly, Whether the pupil of the diverging eye is
not covered wholly, or in part, by the upper
eye- lid ? Dr. Jurin obferved ■ inftances of thefe
cafes in perfons that fquinted, and affigns them

as


250 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
as caufes of their feeing 1 the object only with
one eye. Thirdly, it may be obferved, Whether
the diverging eye is not fo directed, that the
picture of the object falls upon that part of the
retina where the optic nerve enters, and where
there is no vifion ? This will probably happen
in a fquint wherein the axes of the eyes con-
verge fo as to meet about fix inches before the
nofe.

ii. In the laft place, it ought to be inqui-
red, Whether fuch a perfon hath any diftinct vi-
fion at all with the diverging eye, at the time
he is looking at an object with the other ?

It may feem very improbable, that he fhould
be able to read with the diverging eye when the
other is covered, and yet, when both are open,,
have no diftinct vifion with it at all. But this
perhaps will not appear fo improbable, if the
following confiderations are duly attended to.

Let us fuppofe that one who faw perfectly,
gets, by a blow on the head, or fome other ac-
cident, a permanent and involuntary fquint.
According to the laws of vifion, he will fee
objects double, and will fee diftant objects con-
founded together : but fuch vifion being very
difagreeable, as well as inconvenient, he will do
every thing in his power to remedy it. For al-
leviating fuch diftrelTes, nature often teaches
men wonderful expedients, which the fagacity
of a philofopher would be unable to difcover.
Every accidental motion, every direction or
conformation of his eyes, which lefiehs the

evil,


Sect. 15. Of SEEING. 251

evil, will be agreeable ; it will be repeated, un-
til it be learned to perfection, and become ha-
bitual, even without thought or defign. I\ow,
in this cafe, what difturbs the fight of one eye,
is the fight of the other ; and all the difagreeabie
appearances in vifion would ceafe, if the light
of one eye was extinct : The fight of one eye
will become more diftinct and more agreeable,
in the fame proportion as that of the other be-
comes faint and indiftinct. It may therefore
be expected, that every habit will, by degrees,
be acquired, which tends to deftroy diftinct
vifion in one eye, while it is preferved in the
•other. Thefe habits will be greatly facilitated,
if one eye was at fi'rft better than the other;
for in that cafe the belt eye will always be di-
rected to the object which he intends to look
at, and every habit will be acquired which tends
to hinder his feeing it at all, or feeing it diftindt-
ly by the other at the fame time.

I fhall mention one or two habits that may
probably be' acquired in fuch a cafe; perhaps
there are others which we cannot fo eafily con-
jecture. Firft, By a fmall increafe or diminu-
tion of his fquint, he may bring it to correfpond
with one or other of the cafes mentioned in the
laft article. Secondly, The diverging eye may
be brought to fuch a conformation as to be ex-
tremely fhort-fighted, and confequently to have
no diftincSt vifion of objedts at a diftance. I
Jcnew this to be the cafe of one perfon that
fquinted; but cannot fay whether the Ihort-
fighted-


252 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

iightednefs of the diverging eye was original, or
acquired by habit.

We fee, therefore, that one who fquints, and
originally faw objects double by reafon of that
fquint, may acquire fuch habits, that when he
looks at an object, he fhall fee it only with one
eye : nay, he may acquire fuch habits, that
■when he looks at an object with his beft eye, he
fhall have no diftinct vifion with the other at all.
"Whether this is really the cafe, being unable to
determine in the inftances that have fallen under
my obfervauon, I fhall leave to future inquiry.

I have endeavoured, in the foregoing articles,
to delineate fuch a procefs as is proper in ob-
ferving the phenomena of fquinting. I know
well by experience, that this procefs appears
more eafy in theory, than it will be found to
be in practice ; and that in order to carry it on
•with fuccefs, fome qualifications of mind are
neceffary in the patient, which are not always
to be met with. But if thofe who have pro-
per opportunities, and inclination, to obferve
fuch phenomena, attend duly to this procefs,
they may be able to furnifh facts lefs vague and
uninftructive than thofe we meet with, even in
authors of reputation. By fuch facts, vain theo-
ries may be exploded, and our knowledge of the
laws of nature which regard the nobleft of our
fenfes, enlarged.


S EC T.


Seft. 16. Of S E E I N G. 253

SECT. XVI.

Fafis relating to fquinting:

<
TLIAving confidered the phenomena of fquint-
ing hypothetically, and their connection
with correfponding points in the retina ; I (hall
now mention the facts I have had occafion to ob-'
ferve myfelf, or have met with in authors, that
can give any light to this fubject.

Having examined above twenty peffons that
fquinted, I found in all of them a defect in the
fight of one eye. Four only had fo much of
diftinct virion in the weak eye, as to be able to
read with it, when the other was covered. The
reft faw nothing at all diftinctly with one eye.

Dr. Porterfield fays, that this is generally the
cafe of people that fquint : and I fufpect it is fo
more generally than is commonly imagined. Dr.
Jurin, in a very judicious diflertation upon fquint-
ing, printed in Dr. Smith's Optics, obferves, that
thofe who fquint, and fee with both eyes, ne-
ver fee the. fame object with both at the fame
time; that when one eye is directed ftraight
forward to an object, the other is drawn fo
clofe to the nofe, that the object cannot at all
be feen by it, the images being too oblique and
too indiftinct to affect the eye. In fome fquint-
ing perfons, he obferved the diverging eye drawn
under the upper eye-lid while the other was
directed to the object. From thefe obfervations
5 he


4 54 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
he concludes, that " the eye is thus diftorted,
" not for the fake of feeing better with it, but
" rather to avoid feeing at all with it as much
" as poflible." From all the obfervations he
had made, he was fatisfied that there is nothing
peculiar in the ftructure of a fquinting eye ;
that the fault is only in its wrong direction •, and
that this wrong direction is got by habit. There-
fore he propofes that method of cure which we
have defcribed in the 8th and 9th articles of the
laft fection. He tells us, that he had attempted
a cure after this method, upon a young Gen-
tleman, with promifing hopes of fuccefs ; but
was interrupted by his falling ill of the fmall-pox,
of which he died.

It were to be wifhed that Dr. Jurin had ac-
quainted us, whether he ever brought the young
man to direct the axes of both eyes to the fame
object, and whether, in that cafe, .he faw the
object fingle, and faw it with both eyes ; and
that he had likevvife acquinted us, whether he
faw objects double when his fquint was diminilh-
ed. But as to thefe facts he is filent.

I wifhed long for an opportunity of trying
Dr. Jurin's method of curing a fquint, without
finding one ; having always, upon examination,
difcovered fo great a defect in the fight of one
eye of the patient as difcouraged the attempt.

But I have lately found three young Gentle-
men, with whom I am hopeful this method
may have fuccefs, if they have patience and
perfeverance in ufing it. Two of them are

brothers,


Seft. 16. Of S E E I N G. 255

brothers T and, before I had accefs to examine
them, had been practifing this method by the
direction of their tutor, with fuch fuccefs, that
the elder looks ftraight when he is upon his
guard : the younger can direct both his eyes to
one object; but they foon return to their ufual
fquint.

A third young Gentleman, who had never
heard of this method before, by a few days
practice, was able to direct both his eyes to
one object, bur could not keep them long in
that direction. All the three agree in this,
that when both eyes are directed to one object,
they fee it and the adjacent objects fingle; but
when they fquint, they fee objects fometimes
fingle and fometimes double. I obferved of all
the three, that when they fquinted moft, that
is, in the way they had been accuftomed to,
the axes of their eyes converged fo as to meet
five or fix inches before the nofe. It is pro-
bable that in this cafe the picture of the object
in the diverging eye, mull fall upon that part
of the retina where the optic nerve enters ; and
therefore the object could not be {een by that
eye.

All the three have fome defect in the fight
of one eye, which none of them knew until I
put them upon making trials ; and when they
fquint, the beft eye is always directed to the
object, and the weak eye is that which di-
verges from it. But when the beft eye is co-
. vered, the weak eye is turned directly to the
1 object.


2 5 6 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
object. Whether this defect of fight in one
eye, be the effect of its having been long dif-
ufed, as. it muft have been when they fquinted ;
or whether fome original defect in one eye
might be the occafion of their fquinting, time
may difcover. The two brothers have found
the fight of the weak eye improved by ufing to
read with it while the other is covered. The
elder can read an ordinary print with the weak
eye ; the other, as well as the third Gentleman,
can only read a large print with the weak eye.
I have met with one other perfon only who
fquinted, and yet could read a large print with
the weak eye. He is a young man, whofe eyes
are both tender and weak-fighted, but the left
much weaker than the right. When he looks
at any object, he always directs the right eye
to it, and then the left is turned towards the
nofe fo much, that it is impoflible for him to fee
the fame object with both eyes at the fame time.
When the right eye is covered, he turns the
left directly to the object ; but he fees it indi-
ftinctly, and as if it had a mift about it.

I made feveral experiments, fome of them in
the company and with the afiiftance of an in-
genious phyfician, in order to difcover, whether
objects that were in the axes of the two eyes,
were feen in one place confounded together, as
in thofe" who have no involuntary fquint. The
object placed in the axis of the weak eye was
a lighted candle, at the diftance of eight or ten
feet. Before the other eye we placed a -printed

book,


Seft. 16. Of SEEING. 257

book, at fuch a diftance as that he could read
upon it. He faid, that while he read upon the
book, he faw the candle but very faintly. And
from what we could learn, thefe two objects
did not appear in one place, but had all that an-
gular diftance in appearance which they had in
reality.

If this was really the cafe, the conclufion to
be drawn from it is, that the correfponding
points in his eyes are not fituate in the fame
manner as in other men j and that if he could
be brought to direct both eyes to one object, he
Would fee it double. But confidering that the
young man had never been accuftomed to ob-
servations of this kind, and that the fight of
one eye was fo imperfect, I do not pretend to
draw this conclufion with certainty from this
fingle inftance.

All that can be inferred from thefe facts is,
that of four perfons who fquint, three appear
to have nothing preternatural in the ftructure of
their eyes. The centres of their retina, and
the points fimilarly fituate with regard to the
centres, do certainly correfpond in the fame
manner as in other men. So that if they can
be brought to the habit of directing their eyes
.right to an object, they will not only remove a
deformity, but improve their fight. With re-
gard to the fourth, the cafe is dubious, with
ibme probability of a deviation from the ufual
courfe of nature in the fituation of the corre-
fponding points of his eyes.

R SECT.


258 Of the HUMAN MIND. Gh.ap.VL

SECT. XVII.

Of the effeS of etiftofyi' in feeing objsfls fingle:

T T appears from the phenomena of fiogle and
double vifion, recited in Sect. 13. that our
feeing an object fmgle with two eyes, depends
upon thefe two things. Firft, Upon that mu-
tual correfpondenee of certain. points of the re-
titta which we have often defcribed. Secondly,
"Upon the two eyes being directed to the object
fo accurately, that the two images of it fall upon*
correfponding . points. Thefe, ■ two t things- mud
concur in order to our feeing an object * •fingle
• with two eyes ; and as far as they depend upon
cuftom, fo far only can fingle vifion depend upon
cuftom.

With- regard to the fecondy that is, the ac-
curate diredion of both, eyes to the object, 1 1
think it muft be acknowledged that this is only
learned by cuftom. Nature hath wifely or-
dained the eyes to move in fuch manner, that
their axes fhall always be nearly parallel ; but
hath left it in our power to vary their inclina-
tion a little, according to the diftance Of the
object we look at. Without this power, ob-
jects would appear fingle at one particular di-
ftance only; and, at diftances mu'chlefs, or much
greater, would always appear double. The
wifdom of nature is confpicuous in giving us this
power, and no lefs confpicuous in making the
extent of it exactly adequate to the end.

3 The


■Sect. i 7 . b£ SEEING'. ly

The parallelifm of the eyes, in general, is
therefore the work of nature; but that preciife
and accurate direction, which muft be varied ac-
cording to the diftance of the object, is the ef-

.fect of cuftom; The power which nature hath

j left us of varying the inclination of the optic
axes a little* is turned into a habit of giving
them always that inclination which is adapted to

..the diftance of the object.

( But it may be aiked, What gives rife to this

. habit ? The only anfwer that can be given to

.this queftipn is, that it is found necefiary to
perfect and diftinct vifion. A man who, hath
loft the fight of one eye, very often lofes the
habit of directing it exactly to the object he
looks at, becaufe that habit is no longer of ufe
to him. And if he Ihould recover the fight of
his eye, he would recover this habit, by finding
it ufefuh ,No part of the human constitution is
more admirable than that whereby we acquire
habits which are found ufeful, without any def
fign or intention. Children muft fee imper-
fectly at firft ; but, by ufing their eyes, they
learn to ufe them in the beft manner, and ac-
quire,, without intending it, the habits necef-
fary for that pufpofe. Every man becomes moft
expert in that kind of vifion which is moft ufe-
ful to him in his particular profeflion and manner
of life* A miniature painter, or an engraver*

^ fees very near obje&s better than afailor; but

the failor fees very diftant objects much better

than they, A perfon that is fhort-fighted, irt

R ?. looking


i6o Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

looking at diftant objects, gets the habit of con-
tracting the aperture of his eyes, by-almoft
clofing his eye-lids. Why ? For no other rea-
fon, but becaufe this makes him fee the object
more diftinct. In like manner, the reafon why
every man acquires the habit of directing both
eyes accurately to the object, muft be, becaufe
thereby he fees it more perfectly and diftinctly.

It remains to be confidered, whether that cor-
refpondence between certain points of the retina,
which is likewife neceffary to fingle vifion, Jbe
the effect of cuftom, or an original property of
human eyes.

A ftrong argument for its being an original
property, may be drawn from the habit juft
now mentioned of directing the eyes accurately
to an object. This habit is got by our finding
it neceffary to perfect and diftinct vifion. But
why is it neceffary ? For no other reafon but
this, becaufe thereby the two images of the ob-
ject falling upon correfponding points, the eyes
afiift each other in vifion, and the objecT: is feen
better by both together, than it could be by
one ; but when the eyes are not accurately di-
rected, the two images of an object fall upon
points that do not correfpond, whereby the fight
of one eye difturbs the fight of the other, and
the object is feen more indiftinctly with both
eyes than it would be with one. Whence it is
reafonable to conclude, that this correfpondence
of certain points of the retina, is prior to the

habits


Seft. 17- Of SEEING. 261

habits we acquire in vifion, and confequently is
natural and original. We have all acquired the
habit of directing our eyes always in a particu-
lar manner, which caufes fingle vifion. Now,
if nature hath ordained that we fhould have fingle
vifion only, when our eyes are thus directed,
there is an obvious reafon why all mankind
fhould agree in the habit of directing them in
this manner. But if fingle vifion is the effect
of cuftom, any other habit of directing the eyes
would have anfwered the purpofe ; and no ac-
count can be given why this particular habit
ftiould be fo univerfal ; and it muft appear very
ftrange, that no one inftance hath been found of,
a perfon who had acquired the habit of feeing
objects fingle with both eyes, while they were
directed'in any other manner.

The judicious Dr. Smith, in his excellent
fyftem of optics, maintains the contrary opinion,
and offers fome reafonings and facts in proof of
it. He agrees with Bifhop Berkeley in attribu-
ting it entirely to cuftom, that we fee objects
fingle with two eyes, as well as that we fee ob-
jects erect by inverted images. Having confi-
dered Bifhop Berkeley's reafonings in the nth
fection, we fhall now beg leave to make fome re-
marks on what Dr. Smith hath faid upon this
fubject, with the refpedt due to an author to whom
the world owes, not only many valuable difco-
veries of his own, but thofe.of the boghtefl:
mathematical genius of this age, which, with
R 3 great


262 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

great labour, he generbufly redeemed from o'bli-.
vion,

He obferves, that the qiieftion, "Why we fee
objects fingle with two eyes ? is of the fame fort
with this, Why we hear founds fingle with two
ears ? and that the fame anfwer muft ferve both.
The inference intended to be drawn from this ob-
fervation is, that as the fecond of thefe pheno-
mena is the effect of cuftom, fo likewife is the
firft.

Now I humbly conceive that the queftions are
not fo much of the fame fort, that the fame an-
fwer muft ferve for both; and moreover, that
our hearing fingle with two, ears, is not the ef-
fect of cuftom.

Two or more vifible objects s altho' perfectly
fimilar, and feen at the very fame time, may be
diftinguifhed by their vifible places •, but two
founds perfectly fimilar, and heard at the fame
time, cannot be diftinguifhed ; for from the na-
ture of found, the fenfations theyoccafion muftco-
alefce into one, and lofe all diftinfHon. If there-
fore it is afked, Why we hear founds fingle with
two ears ? I anfwer, Not from cuftom ; but be-
caufe two founds which are perfectly like and
fynchronous, have nothing by which they can be
diftinsiuifhed. But will this anfwer fit the other
queftion ? I think not.

The object makes an appearance to each eye,
as the found makes an impreffion upon each ear;
fo far the two fenfes agree. But the vifible ap-
pearances may be diftinguifhed by place, when

perfectly


Sect. 17. Of SEEING. 263.

perfectly like in other refpects; the founds can-
not be thus diftinguiftied •, and herein the two
fjenfes differ. Indeed, if the two appearances
have the fame vifibie place, they are, in that
cafe, as incapable of diftin&ion as the founds
were, and we fee the object fingle. But when
they have not the farhe viuble place, they are
perfectly diftinguifhable, and we fee the object
double. We fee the object fingle only, when
the eyes are dire&ed in one particular manner -,
while there are many other ways of directing
them within the fphere of our power, by which
we fee the object double.

Dr. Smith juftly attributes to cuftom that
well-known fallacy in feeling, whereby a button
prefied with two oppofite fides of two con-
tiguous fingers laid acrofs, is felt double. I
agree with him, that the caufe of this appearance
is, that thofe oppofite fides of the fingers have
never been ufed to feel the fame object, but two
different objects, at the fame time. And I beg
leave to add, that as cuftom produces this phe-
nomenon, fo a contrary cuftom deftroys it : for
if a man frequently accuftoms himfelf to feel the
button with his fingers acrofs, it will at laft be
felt fingle ; as I have found by experience.

It may be taken for a general rule, That
things which are produced by cuftom, may be un-
done or changed by difufe, or by a contrary
cuftom. On the other hand, it is a ftrong ar-
gument, that an effect is not owing to cuftom,
but to the conftitution of nature, when a con-
R 4 ' trary


264 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
trary cuftom, long continued, is found neither
to change nor weaken it. I take this to be the
beft rule by which we can determine the queftion
prefently under confideration. I (hall therefore
mention two facts brought by Dr. Smith, to prove
that the correfponding points of the retina have
been changed by cuftom -, and then I mail mention
fome facts tending to prove, that there are cor-
refponding points of the retina of the eyes origi-
nally, andthatcuftomproduces no change in them.

" One fact is related upon the authority of
*' Martin Folkes, Efq; who was informed by
" Dr. Hepburn of Lynn, that the Reverend
" Mr. Fofter of Clinchwharton, in that neigh-
" bourhood, having been blind for fome years of
" a gutta ferena, was reftored to fight by faliva-
" tion : and that upon his firft beginning to fee,
*' all objects appeared to him double ; but after-
" wards the two appearances approaching by
" degrees, he came at laft to fee fingle, and as
tt diftinctly as he did before he was blind."

Upon this cafe I obferve, firft, That it does
not prove any change of the correfponding points
of the eyes, unlefs we fuppofe, what is not affirm-
ed, that Mr. Fofter directed his eyes to the ob-
ject at firft, when he faw double, with the fame
accuracy, and in the fame manner, that he did
afterwards when he faw fingle. 2dly, If we
fhould fuppofe this, no account can be given,
why at firft the two appearances mould be feen
at one certain angular diftance rather than ano-
ther; or why this angular diftance fhould gra-
dually


Sea. if. Of SEEING. 265

dually decreafe, until at laft the appearances
coincided. How could this effect be produced
by cuftom ? But, thirdly, Every circumftance of
this cafe may be accounted for on the fuppofiti-
on that Mr. Fofter had correfponding points in
the retina of his eyes from the time he began to
fee, and that cuftom made no change with re-
gard to them. We need only further fuppofej
what is common in fuch cafes, that by fome
years blindnefs he had loft the habit of directing
his eyes accurately to an object, and that he gra-
dually recovered this habit when he came to iee.

The fecond fact mentioned by Dr. Smith, is
taken from Mr. Chefelden's anatomy; * and is
this. " A gentleman who, from a blow on the
«' head, had one eye diftorted, found every
** object appear double ; but by degrees the moft
*' familiar ones became fingle ; and in time all
«' objects became fo, without any amendment
** of the diftortion."

I obferve here, that it is not faid that the
two appearances gradually approached, and at
laft united, without any amendment of the
diftortion. This would indeed have been a de-
cifive proof of a change in the correfponding
points of the retina ; and yet of fuch a change
as could not be accounted for from cuftom. But
this is not faid ; and if it had been obferved, a
circumftance fo remarkable would have been
mentioned by Mr. Chefelden, as it was in the
other cafe by Dr. Hepburn. We may therefore
take it for granted, that one of the appearances

vanifhed


*6& OftheH-UMrAN MWD. Chap. VI.
vanished by degrees,, without approaching to, the
other* And thisr I. conceive might happen fe-
deral ways. Firft, The fight of the diftorted
eye might gradually decay, by. the hurt : fo the
appearances prefented by that eye would gra-
dually vanim. Secondly, A fmall and unper-
ceived change in the manner of directing the
cyesy might oceafion his- not feeing the object
with the diftorted eye, as appears from Sect. 15.
Art. 10. Thirdly, By acquiring the habit of
directing, one and the fame eye always to the ob-
ject, the faint and oblique appearance, prefented
by the other eye, might be fo little attended to
when it became familiar, as not to-be perceived..
One of thefe caufes, or more of them concur-
ring,- might produce the effect mentioned-, with-
out any change of the correfponding points of
the eyes.

For thefe reafons, the facts mentioned by Dr.
Smith, altho* curious, feem not to be decisive.

The following facts ought to be put in the
oppofite fcale. Firft, In the famous cafe of the
young gentleman couched by Mr, Chefelden after
having had cataracts on both eyes until he was
thirteen years of age, it appears, that he faw
objects fingle from the time he began to fee with
both eyes. Mr. Chefelden's words are, " And
*' now being lately couched of his other eye, he
** fays, that objects at firft appeared large to
" this eye, but not fo large as they did at firft
" to the other ; and looking upon the fame ob-
11 jeer, with both eyes, he thought it looked

«' abouis


a*a. 17. Of SEEING. %4f

u about twice as large as with the firft couched
" eye only, But riot 1 double, that we cah any?
« w'ays difcdve'r."

Secdridly, The 1 three young gentlemen men-
tioned in the lalt feciion, who. had fquinted, as
far as I know, ffbrn infancy ; as foon as they*
learned to direct both eyes to an object, faw it
fingle. In thefe four cafes, it appears evident,*
that the centres of the retina correfponded origi-
nally, and before cuftom could produce any fuch
effect: for Mr. Ch£felderi' s yourig.gentleman had
never been accuftomed to fee at all before he
was couched ; arid the other three had neveV
been accuftomed to direct the axes of both eyes
to the object.

Thirdly, From the facts recited in Sect. 13}.
it appears, That from the time we are capable
of obierving the phenomena of fingle arid double
vifion, cuftom makes no change in thetn.

I have amufed myfelf with fuch obfervations
for more than thirty years ; and in every cafe
wherein I faw the object double at firft, I fee it
fo to this day, notwithftanding the conftant' ex-
perience of its being fingle, In other cafes where
I know there are two objects, there appears only
pne, after thoufarids of experiments.

Let a man look at a familiar object thrQUgfi" a
polyhedron or rriultiplyirig-glafs every hour of
his life, the number of vifibleappearances will be
the fame at laft as at firft : nor does any number
of experiments, or length of time, make the leaft
Change.

Effects


*68 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

Effects produced by habit, muft vary accord-
ing as the acts by which the habit is acquired are
more or lefs frequent ; but the phenomena of
jingle and double vifion are fo invariable and
uniform in all men, are fo exactly regulated by
mathematical rules, that I think, we have good
reafon to conclude, that they are not the effect
of cuftom, but of fixed and immutable laws of
nature.

SECT. XVIII.

Of Dr. Porterjiel&s account of Jmgle and double
vifion.

TJIshop Berkeley and Dr. Smith feem to attri-
bute too much to cuftom in vifion, Dr. Por-
terfield too little.

This ingenious writer thinks, that, by an ori-
ginal law of our nature, antecedent to cuftom and
experience, we perceive vifible objects in their
true place, not only as to their direction, but
likewife as to their diftance from the eye : and
therefore he accounts for our feeing objects An-
gle, with two eyes, in this manner. Having the
faculty of perceiving the object with each eye in
its true place, we muft perceive it with both
eyes in the fame place •, and confequently muft
perceive it fingle.

He is aware, that this principle, altho' it ac-
counts for our feeing objects fingle with two eyes,
yet docs not at all account for our feeing objects

double :


Sea. 18. Of SEEING. 2%

double : and whereas other writers on this fub-
ject take it to be a fufficient caufe for double vi-
fion that we have two eyes, and only find it dif-,
ficuk to affign a caufe for fingle vifion •, on the
contrary, Dr. Porterfield's principle throws all
the difficulty on the other fide.

Therefore, in order to account for the phse-"
nomena of double vifion, he advances another
principle, without fignifying whether he con-
ceives it to be an original law of our nature, or
the effect of cuftom. It is, That our natural per-
ception of the diftance of objects from the eye,
is not extended to all the objects that fall within
the field of vifion, but limited to that which we
directly look at ; and that the circumjacent ob-
jects, whatever be their real diftance, are fcen at
the fame diftance with the object we look at; as
if they were all in the furface of a fphere where-
of the eye is the centre.

Thus, fingle vifion is accounted for by our fee-
ing the true diftance of an object which we look
at ; and double vifion, by a falfe appearance of
diftance in objects which we do not directly look
at.

We agree with this learned and ingenious au-
thor, that it is by a natural and original princi-
ple that we fee vifible objects in a certain direc-
tion from the eye, and honour him as the author
, of this difcovery : but we cannot afient to either
of thofe principles by which he explains fingle
and double vifion, for the following reafons.

f 1. Our


&jo OfthcHUiM-ANfMIND. Chap ■ VI.
i. 'Our having a natural and original percep-
tion of the diftance of objects, from the. eye, . ap-
pears contrary to a well-attefted : fact : for the

'young gentleman couched -by , Mr. Chefelden,

'imagined at firft, that whatever-he; faw„ touched
his eye, as what he felt, touched his: hand.

2. The perception we have .of the diftance of
objects from the eye, whether.it be from. nature
or cuftom, is -not fo accurate. and determinate as
is neceffaryto produce fingle vifion. A miflake
of the twentieth, or. thirtieth part of the diftance

. of a fmall object,- fuch as a pin, ought, according
to Dr. Porterfield's hypothefis, to make it appear
double. Very few can judge of the diftance of a
vifible object .with fuch accuracy. . Yet we never

j; find double vifion- produced by miftaking the di-

"ftance of the object. 'There are many cafes in vi-
fion, even .with the naked eye, wherein we mif-
take the diftance of an objeft by one half or
-more : ^why-do we fee fuehobjects fingle ? When

•'I move my fpectacles, from. my eyes toward; a
-fmall object, two or three feet diftant, the ob-
ject Teems to- approach,., fo as to be feen at laft at
about half its real diftance ; but it is feen fingle
at that apparent diftance, as well as when we fee
it with the naked eye at its real diftance. And
when we look at an object with a binocular re-

■ lefcope, properly fitted to the eyes, we fee it fin-
gle, while it appears fifteen or twenty times near-
er than it is. There are then- few cafes wherein
the diftance of an object from the eye is feen fa
accurately as is necefiary for fingle vifion, upon

this


5e&.ji8. Of SEE'IN^G. -2.7*1

this hypothecs : This feeps ro * be a cowcUafive
ar.CTumanttagairrfl'thejaccouritgivfrKSfiififlgie.vi-
fion. 'We find iikw/bk, -that fatfe judgments or
''fallacious appearances of the diftanee-4>f an ob-
;je£t, do not proekie© 'double vifion. This feems
•to beta> conclu-five 'alignment 'againit the account

• given- of x3©#ble vifion.

3. The perception -we'-have- of 5 the 1 linear di-

• fiance of -objects, 'feems to- be -wholly the effect
- of experience. This : I think' hath been proved
l byi BimoptJBeFkekyand,by Dr. Smith ; ami when

■we come to point out she-rneans ©f judging of
^d-iftance <byiiight, dt -will appear that they are all
: furoifhed! by experience.

•4. ' Supposing- that fey a law of our nature, the
^Iftance of- objects' from- the eye were perceived
■ motbaccurately, a& well-as their direotion, it will
-not- follow 'that we muft fee the object- Tingle.
Let us eonfldermvhat? means fuch a law of nature
•would furnnlifor refblving the queftion, Whe-
ther the objects of the two eyes are in one and
the' fame place, and confeqnently are not two,
but one?

Suppofe then two right lines, one drawn from
the centre of one eye to--its -object, the other
drawn, in like-manner, from the centre of the
other eye to its object. This law of nature gives
us the direction or pofitionof each of : thefe right
lines, and 1 the length of each ;- and -this is all thai;
it gives. Thefe are geometrical data, and we
may learn from geometry what is determined by
their means. Is it then determined by thefe data,

Whether


2 7 2 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap* VI.

Whether 'the two right lines terminate in one
and the fame point, or not ? No truly. In order
to determine this, we muft have three other da-
ta. We muft know whether the two right lines
are in one plane: we muft know what angle
they make ; and we muft know the diftance be-
tween the centres of the eyes. And when thefe
things are known, we muft apply the rules of
trigonometry, before we can refolve the que-
ftion, Whether the objects of the two eyes are
in one and the fame place v and confequently
whether they are two or one ?

5. That falfe appearance of diftance into
•which double vifion is refolved, cannot be the
effect of cuftom ; for conftant experience con-
tradicts it : Neither hath it the features of a law
of nature; becaufe it does not anfwerany good
purpofe, nor indeed any purpofe at all but to de-
ceive us. But why mould we feek for argu-
ments, in a queftion concerning what appears
to us, or does not appear ? The queftion is, At
what diftance do the objefts now in my eye
appear ? Do they all appear at one diftance, as
if placed in the concave furface of a fphere, the
eye being in the centre ? Every man furely may
know this with certainty ; and, if he will but
give attention to the teftimony of his eyes, needs
not afk a philofopher, how vifible objects ap~
pear to him. Now, it is very true, that if I
look up to a ftar in the heavens, the other ftars
that appear at the fame time, da appear in this
manner: Yet this phenomenon does not favour

Dr.


Sect. 18. Of S E E I N G. 273

Dr. Porterfield's hypothefis ; for the ftars and
heavenly bodies, do not appear at their true di-
ftances when we look directly to them, any more
than when they are feeri obliquely : and if this
phenomenon be an argument for Dr. Porter-
field's fecond principle, itmuft deftroy the firft.

The true caufe of this phsenomenon will be
given afterwards; therefore fetting it afide for
the prefent, let us put another cafe. I fit in
my room, and direct my eyes to the door, which
appears- to be about fixteen feet diftant: at the
fame time I fee many other objects faintly and
obliquely -, the floor, floor-cloth, the table which
I write upon, papers, ftandifh, candle, i£c.
Now, do all thefe obje&s appear at the fame
diftance'of fixteen feet ? Upon the clofeft atten-
tion, I find they do not.

SECT. XIX.

Of Dr. Briggs's theory, and Sir Ifaac Newton's
conjecture on this JiibjeM.

T Am afraid the reader, as well as the writer,
is already tired of the fubject of fingle and
double vifion. The multitude of theories ad-
vanced by authors of great name, and the mul-
titude of facts, obferved without fufficient fluU
in optics, or related without attention' to the.
moft material and decifive circumftances, have
equally contributed to perplex it.

S in


274 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

In order to bring it to fome ifiue, I have, in
the 13th fedtion, given a more full and regular
deduction than had been given heretofore, of
the phenomena of fingle and double vifion, in
thofe whofe fight- is perfect; and have traced
them up to one general principle, which appears
to be a law of vifion in human eyes that are per-
fect and in their natural ftate.

In the 14th fedtion I have made rt appear,
that this law of vifion, altho' excellently adapt-
ed to the fabric of human eyes, cannot anfwer
the purpofes of vifion in fome other animals ;
and therefore, very probably, is not common to
all animals. The purpofe of the 15th and 16th
fections is, to inquire, whether there be any
deviation from this law of vifion in thofe who
fquint ? a queftion which is of real importance
in the medical art, as well as in the philofophy
of vifion ; but which, after all that hath been
obferved and written on the fubject, feems not
to be ripe for a determination, for want of pro-
per obfervations. Thofe who have had fkitt
to make proper obfervations, have wanted op-
portunities ; and thofe who have had opportu-
nities, have wanted fkill or attention. I have
therefore thought it worth while to give a diP-
tin£t account of the obfervations necefiary for
the determination of this queftion, and what
conclufions may be drawn from the facts ob-
ferved. I have likewife collected, and fet in
one view, the moft conclufive facts that have

occurred


Seft. i 9 . Of S E E I N G. 275

occurred in authors, or have fallen under my
own obfervation.

It muft be confefied that thefe facts, when
applied to the queftion in hand, make a very-
poor figure •, and the Gentlemen of the medical
faculty are called upon, for the honour of their
profeflion, and for the benefit of mankind, to
add to them.

All the medical, and all the optical writers,
upon the ftrabifmus, that I have met with, ex-
cept Dr. Jurin, either affirm, or take it for
granted, that fquinting perfons fee the object
with both eyes, and yet fee it fingle. Dr. Jurin
affirms, that fquinting perfons never fee the ob-
ject with both eyes ; and that if they did, they
would fee it double. If the common opinion be
true, the cure of a fquint would be as pernici-
ous to the fight of the patient, as the caufing of
a permanent fquint would be to one who na-
turally had no fquint : and therefore no phyfi-
ci.an ought to attempt fuch a cure ; no patient
ought to fubmit to it.' But if Dr. Jurin's opi-
nion be true, mod: young people that fquint
may cure themfelves, by taking fome pains ;
and may not .only remove the deformity, but
at the fame time improve their. fight. If the
common opinion be true, the centres and other
points of the two retina in fquinting perfons do
not correfpond as in other men, 'and nature in
them deviates from her common rule. But if
Dr. Jurin's opinion be true, there is reafon to
think, that the fame general law of vifion which.

S 2 we


276 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
we have found in perfect human eyes, extends
alfo to thofe which fquint.

It is impofiible to determine, by reafoning,
which of thefe opinions is true •, or whether
one may not be found true in fome patients,
and the other in others. Here, experience and
obfervation are our only guides ; and a deduc-
tion of inftances is the only rational argument.
It might therefore have been expected, that
the patrons of the contrary opinions Ihould have
given inftances, in fupport of them, that are clear
and indifputable : but I have not found one fuch
inftance on either fide of the queftion, in all
the authors I have met with. I have given
three inftances from my own obfervation, in
confirmation of Dr. Jurin's opinion, which ad-
mit of no doubt ; and one which leans rather
to the other opinion, but is dubious. And
here I muft leave the matter to fucther obferva-
tion.

In the 17th fection, I have endeavoured to
fhew,- that the correfpondence and fympathy of
certain points of the„two retina, into which we
have refolved all the phasnomena of fingle and
double vifion, is not, as Dr. Smith conceived,
the effect of cuftom, nor can be changed by
cuftpm, but is a natural and original property
of human eyes : and in the laft fection, that it
is not owing to an original and natural percep-
tion, of the true diftance of objects from the
eye, as Dr. 'Porterfield imagined, lifter this
recapitulation^ which is intended to relieve the
. 2 attention


Seft. 19. Of SEEING. 277

attention of the reader, fhall we enter into more
theories upon this fubject ?

That of Dr. Briggs, firft publifhed in Englifh,
in the Philofophical Tranfactions, afterwards in
Latin, under the title of Neva vifwnis theoria,
with a prefatory epiftle of Sir Ifaac Newton to
the author, amounts to this, That the fibres of
the optic nerves pafiingfrom correfponding points
of the retina to the tbalami nervorum opticorum,
having the fame length, the fame tenfion, and
a fimilar fatuation, will have the fame tone ; and
therefore their vibrations, excited by the impref-
fion of the rays of light, will be like uniibns in
mufic, and will prefent one and the fame image
to the mind : but the fibres paffing from parts
of the retina which do not carrefpond, having
different tenfions and tones, will have difcordant
vibrations'; and therefore prefent different images
to the mind.

I fhall not enter upon a particular examina-
tion of this theory. It is enough to obferve in
general, that it is a fyftem of conjectures con-
cerning things of which we are entirely igno-
rant; and that all fuch theories in philofophy
deferve rather to be laughed at, than to be fe-
rioufly refuted.

From the firft dawn of philofophy to this
day, it hath been believed that the optic nerves
are intended to carry the images of vifible ob-
jects from the bottom of the eye to the mind ;
and that the nerves belonging to the organs of
the other fenfes have a like office. But how

S3 d0


278 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
do we know this ? We conjecture it : and ta-
king this conjecture for a truth, we confider how
the nerves may belt anfwer this purpofe. The
fyftem of the nerves, for many ages, was taken
to be a hydraulic engine, confifting of a bundle
of pipes which carry to and fro a liquor called
animal /pit its. About the time of Dr. Briggs,
it was thought rather to be a ftringed inftrument,
compofed of vibrating chords, each of which
had its proper tenfion and tone. But fome,
with as great probability, conceived it to be a
wind inftrument, which played its part by the
vibrations of an elaftic aether in the nervous
fibrils.

Thefe, I think, are all the engines into which
the nervous fyftem hath been moulded by phi-
lofophers, for conveying the images of fenfible
things from the organ to the fenforium. And
for all that we know of the matter, every man
may freely chufe which he thinks fitteft for the
purpofe ; for, from fact and experiment, no one
of them can claim preference to another. In-
deed, they all feem fo unhandy engines for car-
rying images, that a man would be tempted to
invent a new one.

Since, therefore, a blind man may guefs as
well in the dark as one that fees, I beg leave to
offer another conjecture touching the nervous
fyftem, which I hope will anfwer the purpofe
as well as thofe we have mentioned, and which
recommends itfelf by its fimplicity. Why may
not the optic nerves, for inftance, be made up

of


Seel. 19. Of S E E I N G. 279

of empty tubes, opening their mouths wide
enough to receive the rays of light which form
the image upon the retina, and gently conveying
them fafe, and in their proper order, to the
very feat of the foul, until they flafli in her
face. It is eafy for an ingenious philofopher to
fit the caliber of thefe empty tubes to the dia-
meter of the particles of light, fo as they (hall
receive no groffer kind of matter. And if thefe
rays mould be in danger of miftaking their way,
an expedient may alfo be found to prevent
this. For it requires no more than to beftow
upon the tubes of the nervous fyftem a pe-
riftaltic motion, like that of the alimentary
tube.

It is a peculiar advantage of this hypothefis,
that, altho' all philofophers believe that the
{pedes or images of things are conveyed by the
nerves to the foul, yet none of their hypothefes
fliew how this may be done. For how can the
images of found, tafte, fmell, colour, figure, and
all fenfible qualities, be made out of the vibra-
tions of mufical chords, or the undulations of -
animal fpirits, or of asther ? We ought not to
fuppofe means inadequate to the end. Is it not
as philofophical, and more intelligible, to con-
ceive, that as the ftomach receives its food^ fo
the foul receives her images by a kind of ner-
vous deglutition ? I might add, that we need
only continue this periftaltic motion of the ner-
vous tubes from the fenforium to the extremities

S 4 of.


a$o OFthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

of the nerves that ferve the mufcles, in order to
account for mufcular motion.

Thus nature will be confonant to herfelf; and
as fenfation will be the conveyance of the ideal
aliment to the mind, fo mufcular motion will
be the expulfion of the recrementitious part of
it. For who can deny, that the images of
things cenveyed by fenfation, may, after dug
ccncoflion, become fit to be thrown off by
mufcular mot : on ? I only give hints of thefe
things to the ingenious, hoping that in time
th:s hypothefis may be wroughtAlp into a fyftem
as truly philofophical, as that of animal {pints,
or the vibration of nervous fibres.

To be ferious : In the operations of nature, I
hold the theories of a philofopher, which are
nnfupported by fact, in the fame eftimation with
the dreams of a man aileep, or ihe ravings of a
madman. We laugh at the Indian philofopher,
who, to account for the fupport of the earth,
con rived the hypothefis of a huge elephant, and
to fupport the elephant, a huge tortoife. If we
will candidly confefs the truth, we know as
little of the operation of the nerves, as he did
of the manner in which the earth is fupported ;
and our hypothefes about animal fpirits, op
about the tenfion and vibrations of the nerves,
are as like to be true, as his about the fupport
of the earth. His elephant was a hypothefis,
and our hypothecs are elephants. Every theory
in philoiophy, which is built on pure conjecture,
is an elephant ; and every theory that is fupport-

c4


Se&. 19. Of S E E IN G. 281

ed partly by faft, and partly by conjecture, is
like Nebuchadnezzar's image, whofe feet were
partly of iron, and partly of clay.

The great Newton firft gave an example to
philofophers, which always ought to be, but:'
rarely hath been followed, by diftinguifhing his
conjectures from his conclufions, and putting the
former by themfelves, in the modeft form of
queries. This is fair and legal; but all other'
philosophical traffick in conje&ure, ought to be
held contraband and illicit. Indeed his conjec-
tures have commonly more foundation in faft %
and more verifimilttude, than the dogmatical
theories of moft other philofophers ; and there-
fore we ought not to omit that which he hath
offered concerning the caufe of our feeing ob-
jects fingle with two eyes, in the 15th query an-
nexed to his Optics.

" Are not the fpecies of objects feen.with
" both eyes, united where the optic nerves
" meet before they come into the . brain, the
*' fibres on the right fide of both nerves uniting
•** there, and after union going thence into the
" brain in the nerve" 'which is on. the right fide.
" of the head, and the fibres on the left fide
** of both nerves unking in the fame place, and
" after union going into the brain in the nerve
." which is on the left fide of the head, and
" thefe two neryes meeting in the brain in fuch
;*' a manner that their fibres make but one en-
.** tire fpecies or pi&ure, half of "which on the
.*.* fight fide of the fenfprium comes from the

« right


a«2 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

" right fide of both eyes through the right fide
" of both optic nerves, to the place where the
" nerves meet, and from thence on the right
" fide of the head into the brain, and the other
" half on the left fide of the fenforium comes,
*' in like manner, from the left fide of both
" eyes ? For the optic nerves of fuch animals
" as look the fame way with both eyes (as men,
«' dogs, fheep, oxen, &c.) meet before they
" come into the brain ; but the optic nerves
" of fuch animals as do not look the fame way
" with both eyes, (as of fifties and of the cha-
" meleon) do not meet, if I am rightly in-
" formed."

I beg leave to diftinguilh this query into two,
which are of very different natures ; one being
purely anatomical, the other relating to the car-
rying fpecies or pictures of vifible objects to the
fenforium.

The firfb queftion is, Whether the fibres com-
ing from correfponding points of the two retina,
do not unite at the place where the optic nerves
meet, and continue united from thence to the
brain ; fo that the right optic nerve, after the
meeting of the two nerves, is compofed of the
fibres coming from the right fide of both re-
tina, and the left, of the fibres coming from the
left fide of both retina t

This is undoubtedly a curious and rational
queftion; becaufe, if we could find ground from
anatomy to anfwer it in the affirmative, it would
lead us a ftep forward in difcovering the caufe of

the


Seft. ig: Of SEEIN G. 283

the correfpondence and fympathy which there is
between certain points of the two retina. For
akho' we know not what is the p%rtipular func-
tion of the optic nerves, yet it is probable that
fome impreffion made upon them, and commu-
nicated along their fibres, ' is neceflary to virion :
And whatever be the nature of this impreffion, if
two fibres are united into one, an impreffion made
upon one of them, or upon both, may probably
produce the fame effect. Anatomifts think it a fuf-
ficient account of a fympathy between two parts
of the body, when they are ferved by branches
of the fame nerve : we Ihould therefore look up-
on it as an important difcovery in anatomy, if it ,
were found that the fame nerve fent branches to
the correfponding points of the retina.

But bath any fuch difcovery been made ? No*
not fo much as in one fubjeft, as far as I can
learn. But in feveral fubjefts, the contrary feems
to have been difcovered. Dr. Porterfield hath
given us two cafes at length from Vefalius, and
one from Csefalpinus, wherein the optic nerves,
after touching one another as ufual, appeared to
be refleded back to the fame fide whence they
came, without any mixture of their fibres. Each
of thefe perfons had loft an eye fometime before
his death, and the optic nerve belonging to that
eye was fhrunk, fo that it could be diftinguifned
from the other at the place where they met. An-
other cafe which the fame author gives from
Vefalius, is ftill more, remarkable ; for in it the
optic nerves did not touch at all ; and yet, upon

inquiry,


284 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

inquiry, thefe who were raoft familiar with the
perfon in his lifetime, declared that he never com-
plained of any defect of fight, or of his feeing
objects double. Diemerbrocck tells us, that
Aquapendens and Valverda likeways affirm, that
they have met with fubjects wherein the optic
nerves did not touch.,

As thefe obfervations were made before Sir
Ifaac Newton put this query, it is uncertain whe-
ther he was ignorant of them, or whether he
fufpected fome inaccuracy in them, and defired
that the matter might be more carefully examin-
ed. But from the following paflage of the moft
accurate Window, it does not appear, that later
obfervations have been more favourable to his
conjecture. " The union of thefe [optic] nerves,
*' by the fmall curvatures of their cornua, is ve-
" ry difficult to be unfolded in human bodies.
♦' This union is commonly found to be very
*' clofe, but in fome fubjects it feems to be no
" more than a ftrong gdhefion, in others to be
" partly made by an interferon or croffing of
" fibres. They have been found quite feparate;
" and in other fubjects, one of them has been
" found to be very much altered both in fize
" and colour through its whole paflage, the
f other remaining in its natural ftate."

When'we confider this conjecture of Sir Ifaac
Newton by itfelf, it appears more ingenious, and
to have more verifimilitude, than any thing that
has been offered upon the fubject j and we ad-
mire, the caution and modeity of the author, in

pro*


Sett. 19. Of SEEING. 285

propofing it only as a fubject of inquiry : but
when we compare it with the obferyations of
anatomifts which contradict it, we are naturally-
led to this reflection, That if we truft to the
conjectures of men of the greateft genius in the
operations of nature, we have only the chance
of going wrong in an ingenious manner.

The fecond part of the query is, Whether the
two fpecies of obje&s from the two eyes are not,
at the place where the optic nerves meet, united
into one fpecies or picture,, half of which is car-
ried thence to the fenforium in the right optic
nerve, and the other half in the left ? and whe-
ther thefe two halves are not fo put together
again at the fenforium, as to make one fpecies or
picture ?

Here it feems natural to, put the previous
queftion, What reafon have we to believe, that
pictures of objects are at all carried to the fenfo-
rium, either by the optic nerves, or by any
other nerves ? Is it not poflible, that this great
philofopher, as well as many of a lower form,
having been led into this opinion at firft by edu-
cation, may have continued in it, becaufe he ne-
ver thought of calling it in queftion ? I confefs
this was my own cafe for a considerable part of
my life. But fince I was led by accident to think
ferioufly what reafon I had to believe it, I could
find none at all. It feems to be a mere hypothe-
cs, as much as the Indian philofopher's elephant.
I am not confcious of any pictures of external ob-
jects in my fenforium, any more than in my

ftomath :


z86 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

ftomach : the things which I perceive by my
fenfes, appear to be external, and not in any part
of the brain ; and my fenfations, properly fo
called, have norefemblance of external objects.

The conclufion. from all that hath been faid,
in no lefs than feven feflions, upon our feeing
objects fingle with two eyes, is this, That, by
an original property of human eyes, objects
painted upon the centres of the two retina, or
upon points fimilarly fituate with regard to the
centres, appear in the fame vifible place ; that
the moft plaufible attempts to account for this
property of the eyes, have been unfuccefsful j
and therefore, that it muft be either a primary
law of our conflitution, or the confequence of
fbme more general law which is not yet difco-
vered.

We have now finifhed what we intended to
fay, both of the vifible appearances of things to
the eye, and of the laws of our conflitution by
■which thofe appearances are exhibited. But it
was obferved, in the beginning of this chapter,
that the vifible appearances of objedls ferve only
as figns of their diftance, magnitude, figure, and
other tangible qualities. The vifible appearance
is that which is prefented to the mind by nature,
according to thofe laws of our conflitution which
have been explained. But the thing fignified by
that appearance, is that which is prefented to the
mind by cuftom.

When one fpeaks to us in a language that is
familiar, we hear certain founds, and this is all

the


Sea. 19. Of SEEING. 287

the effecl: that his difcpurfe has upon us by na-
ture : but by cuftom we underftand the mean-
ing of thefe founds ; and therefore we fix our
attention, not upon the founds, but upon the
things fignified by them. In like manner, we fee
only the vifible appearance of objects, by nature;
but we learn by cuftom to interpret thefe appear-
ances, and to underftand their meaning. And
when this vifual language is learned, and becomes
familiar, we attend only to the things fignified ;
and cannot, without great difficulty, attend to the
figns by which they are prefe*nted. The mind
pafles from one to the other fo rapidly, and fo
familiarly, that no trace of the fign is left in the
memory, and we feem immediately, and without
the intefvention of any fign, to perceive the
thing fignified.

When I look at the apple-tree which ftands
before my window, I perceive, at the firft glance,
its diftance and magnitude, the roughnefs of its
trunk, the difpofition of its branches, the figure
of its leaves and fruit. I feem to perceive all
thefe things immediately. The vifible appearance
which prefented them all to the mind, has en-
tirely efcaped me ; I cannot, without great diffi-
culty, and painful abftradion, attend to it, even
when it ftands before me. Yet it is certain that
this vifible appearance only, is prefented to my
eye by nature, and that I learned by cuftom to
collect allthe reft from it. If I had never feen
before now, I fhould not perceive either the di-
ftance or tangible figure of the tree, and it would
4 fcave


288 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

have required the practice of leeing for many
months, to change that original perception Avhich.
nature gave me by my eyes, into that which I
now have by cuftom.

The objects which we fee naturally and origi-
nally, as hath been before obferved, have length
and breadth, but no thicknefs, nor diftance from
the eye. Cuftom, by a kind of legerdemain,
withdraws gradually thefe original and proper
objects of fight, and fubftitutes in their place ob-
jects of touch, which have* length, breadth, and
thicknefs, and a determinate diftance from the
eye, By what means this change is brought
about, and what principles of the human mind
concur in it, we are next to inquire.

SECT. XX.

Of perception in general.

CEnsation, and the perception of external
objects by the fenfes, tho' very different in
their nature, have commonly been confidered as
one and the fame thing. The purpofes of com-
mon life do not make it necefiary to diftinguifh
them, and the received opinions of philofophers
tend rather to confound them : but, without at-
tending carefully to this diftin&ion, it is impof-
fible to have any juft conception ofthe operations
of our fenfes. The moft fimple operations ofthe
mind, admit not of a logical definition : all we
can do is to defcribe them, fo as to lead thofe
who are confcious of them in themfelves, to at-
tend


Seft. 20; Of S E E I N G. 289

tend to them, and reflect upon them : and it is
often very difficult to defcribe them fo as to an-
fwer this intention.

The fame mode of expreffion is ufed to de-
note fenfation and perception ; and therefore we
are apt to look upon them as things of the fame
nature. Thus, I feel a pain ; 1 fee a tree : the
firft denoteth a fenfation, the laft a perception.
Thegrammaticalanalyfis of bothexpreffionsis the
fame : for both confift of an adtive verb and an
object. But, if we attend to the things fignified
by thefe expreffions, we mail find, that in the firft,
the diftindtion between the aft and the objedr. is
not real but grammatical; in the fecond, the
diftindtion is not only grammatical but real.

The form of the expreffion, I feel pain, might
feem to imply, that the feeling is fomething dif-
tindt from the pain felt ; yet, in reality, there
is no diftindtion. As thinking a thought is an ex-
preffion which could fignify no more than think-
ing, to feeling a pain fignifies no more than being
pained. What we have faid of pain is applicable
to every other mere fenfation. It is difficult to
give inftances, very few of our fenfations having
names ; and where they have, the name being
common to the fenfation, and to fomething elfe
which is affociated with it. But when we attend
to the fenfation by itfelf, and feparate it from
other things which are conjoined with it in the
imagination, it appears to be fomething which
can have no exiftence but in a fentient mind, no
T diftindtion


290 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap.VL

diftindtion from the aft of the mind by which ie
is felt.

Perception, as we here underftand it, hath al-
ways an object diftincl: from the act by which it
is perceived ; an object which may exift whether
it be perceived or not. I perceive a tree that
grows before my window ; there is here an ob-
ject which is perceived, and an a£t of the mind
by which it is perceived ; and thefe two are not
only diftinguifhable, but they are extremely un-
like in their natures. The object is made up of a
trunk, branches, and leaves ; but the a£t of the
mind by which it is perceived, hath neither trunk,
branches* nor leaves. I am confcious of this act
of my mind, and I can refleft upon it ; but it is
too ample to admit of an analyfis, and I cannot
find proper words to defcribe it. I find nothing
that refembles k fo much as the remembrance of
the tree, or the imagination of it. Yet both thefe
differ effentially from perception; they differ
likewife one from another. It is in vain that a
philofopher affures me, that the imagination of
the tree, the remembrance of it, and the percep-
tion of it, are all one, and differ only in degree
of vivacity. I know the contrary ; for I am as
well acquainted with all the three, as I am with
the apartments of my own houfe. I know this al-
fo, that the perception of an objedt implies both
a conception of its form, and a belief of its pre-
fent exiftence. I know moreover, that this belief
is not the effect of argumentation and reafoningi.
it is the immediate effect of my constitution.

I am


Seel:. 20. Of SEEING. 29 1

I am aware, that this belief which I have in
perception, ftands expofed to the ftrongeft bat-
teries of fcepticifm. But they make no great im-
preflion upon it. The fceptic afks me, Why do
you believe the exiftence of the external objedt
which you perceive ? This belief, Sir, is none of
my manufacture-, it came from the mint of nature;
it bears her image and fuperfcription ; and, if it
is not right, the fault is not mine : I even took
itupontruft, and without fufpicion. Reafon, fays
the fceptiCj is the only judge of truth, and you
ought to throw off every opinion and every be-
lief that is not grounded on reafon. "Why, Sir,
ftiould I believe the faculty of reafon more than
t'hat of perception ; they came both out of the
fame fhop, and were made by the fame artift ;
and if he puts one piece of falfe ware into my
hands, what mould hinder him from putting an*
other ?

Perhaps the fceptic will agree to diftruft rea-
. fon, rather than give any credit to perception.
For, fays he, fince, by your own conceffion, the
object which you perceive, and that act of your
mind, by which you perceive it, are quite differ-
ent things, the one may exift without the other ;
and as the object may exift without being per-
ceived, fo the perception may exift without an
objedt. There is nothing fo fhameful in a philo-
sopher as to be deceived and deluded ; and there-
fore you ought to refojve firmly to with- hold
aflenr, and to throw off this belief of external ob-
jects, which may be all delufion. For my part,
T 2 I wiU


2:92 OftHeHUMAK MTND. Chap.Vl.
I will never attempt to throw it off; and altho'
the fober part of mankind will not be very-
anxious to know my reafons, yet if they can be
of ufe to any fceptic, they are thefe.

Firft, Becaufe it is not in my power : why
then mould I make a vain attempt ? It would be
agreeable to fly to the moon, and to make a
vifit to Jupiter and Saturn ; but when- I know
that nature has bound me down by the law of
gravitation to this planet which I inhabit, I reft
contented, and quietly fuffer myfelf to be carried
along in its orbit. My belief is carried along by
perception, as irrefiftibly as my body by the
earth. And the greateft fceptic will find him-
felf to be in the fame condition. He may ftrug-
gle hard to difbelieve the informations of his fen-
fes, as a man does to fwim againft a torrent; but
ah ! it is in vain. It is in vain that he (trains
every nerve, and wreftles with nature, and with
every object that ftrikes upon his fenfes. For
after all, when his ftrength is fpent in the fruit-
lefs attempt, he will be carried down the torrent
with the common herd of believers.

Secondly, I think it would not be prudent to
throw off this belief, if it were in my power. If
Nature intended to deceive me, and impofe upon
me by falfe appearances, and I, by my great
cunning and profound logic, have difcovered the
Lmpoiture •, prudence would didtate to me in this
cafe, even to put up this indignity done me, as.
quietly as I could, and not to call her an impo-
stor- to her face, left fhe ,I*iould be even with me

i»


Seft. ao. Of SEEING. 293

in another way. For what do I gain by refent-
ing this injury? You ought at leaft not to believe
what fhe fays. This indeed feems reafonable, if
fhe intends to impofe upon me. But what is the
confequence ? I refolve not to believe my fenfes.
I break my nofe againft a poll that comes in my
way ; I ftep into a dirty kennel ; and, after
twenty fuch wife and rational a&ions, I am
taken up and clapt into a mad-houfe. Now, I
confefs I would rather make one of the credu-
lous fools whom Nature impofes upon, than of
thofe wife and rational philofophers who refolve
to with-hold aflent at all this expence. If a
man pretends to be a fceptic with regard to the
informations of fenfe, and yet prudently keeps
out of harm's way as other men do, he muft ex-
cufe my fufpicion, that he either acts the hypo-
crite, or impofes upon himfelf. For if the
fcale of his belief were fo evenly pOifed, as to
lean no more to one fide than to the contrary,
it is impofiible that his actions could be directed
by any rules of common prudence.

Thirdly, Although the two reafons already
mentioned are perhaps two more than enough,
I (hall offer a third. I gave implicit belief to
the informations of Nature by my fenfes, for a
ronfiderable part of my life, before I had learned
fo much logic as to be able to ftart a doubt con-
cerning them. And now, when I reflect upon
what "is paft, I do not find that 1 have been im-
pofed upofi by this belief. I find, that without
jt I muft have perifhed by a thoufand accidents.
Tj I find,


2 9 4- Oftfie HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI,
I find, that without it I fhould have been no
wifer now than when 1 was born. I fhould not
even have been able to acquire that logic which
fuggefts thefe fceptfcal doubts with regard to my
fenfes. Therefore, I confider this inftinftive
belief as one of the bed gifts of Nature. I
thank the Author of my being who bellowed it,
upon me, before the eyes of my reafon were
opened, and ftill beftows it upon me to be my
guide, where reafon leaves me in the dark. And
now I yield to the direction of my fenfes, not
from inftincl only, but from confidence and
trufr. in a faithful and beneficent monitor, ground-
ed upon the experience of his paternal care and,
goodnefs.

In all this, I deal with the Author of my be-
ing, no otherways than I thought it reafonable to
deal with my parents and tutors. I believed by
jnftindr. whatever they told me, long before I
had the idea of a lie, or thought of the pofiibi-
lity of their deceiving me. Afterwards, upon
reflection, I found they had acled like fair and
hbneft people who wifhed me well. I found,
that if I had pot believed what they told me,
before I could give a reafon pf my belief, I had
to this day been little better than a changeling.
And although this natural credulity hath fome-
times occasioned my being impofed upon by de-
ceivers, yet jt hath been of infinite advantage
to me upon the whole; therefore I confider it
as another good gift of Nature. And I con-
tinue to give that credit frorn reflection, to

thafs


Se&. 20. Of S E E I N G. 295

thofe of whofe integrity and veracity I have had
experience, which before I gave from inftincl.

There is a much greater fimilitude than is com-
monly imagined, between the teftimony of na-
ture given by our fenfes, and the teftimony of
men given by language. The credit we give to
both is at firft the effect of inftinfl only. When
we grow up, and begin to reafon about them,
the credit given to human teftimony, is reftrain-
ed, and weakened, by the experience we have
of deceit. But the credit given to the 'teftimo-
ny of our fenfes, is eftablilhed and confirmed by
the uniformity and conftancy of the laws of na-
ture.

Our perceptions are of two kinds : fome are
natural and original, others acquired, and thefruit
of experience. When I perceive that this is the
tafte of cyder, that of brandy ; that this is the
fmell of an apple, that of an orange ; that this
, is the noife of thunder, that the ringing of bells ;
this the found of a coach palling, that the voice
of fuch a friend ; thefe perceptions, and others
of the fame kind, are not original, they are ac-
quired. But the perception which I have by
touch of the hardnefs and foftnefs of bodies, of
their extenfion, figure, and motion, is not ac-
quired, it is original.

, In all our fenfes, the acquired perceptions are
many more than the original, efpecially in fight.
By this fenfe we perceive originally the vifible
figure and colour of bodies only, and their vifi-
ble place ; but we learn to perceive by the eye,
T 4 almolt


2 9 6 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
almoft every thing which we can perceive by
touch. The original perceptions of this fenfe,
ferve only as figns to introduce the acquired.

The figns by which objefts are prefented to
us in perception, are the language of nature to
rrian ; and as, in many refpedts, it hath great
affinity with the language of man to man ; fo
particularly in this, that both are partly na-
tural and original, partly acquired by cuftom.
Our original or natural perceptions are analogous
to the natural language of man to man, of which
we took notice in the 4th chapter-, and our ac-
quired perceptions are analogous to artificial lan-
guage, which, in our mother-tongue, is got very
much in the fame manner with our acquired per-
ceptions, as we fhall afterwards more fully explain.

Not only men, but children, idiots, and
brutes, acquire by habit many perceptions which
they had not originally. Almoft every employ-
ment in life, hath perceptions of this kind that
are peculiar to it. The fhepherd knows every
fheep of his flock, as we do our acquaintance,
and can pick them out of another flock one by
one, The butcher knows by light the weight
and quality of his beeves and fheep before they
are killed. , The farmer perceives by his eye,
very nearly, the quantity of hay in a rick, or
of corn in a heap. The failor fees the burthen,
the built, and the diftance of a fhip at fea,
while fhe is a great way off. Every man ac-
cuftomed to writing, diftinguifhes his acquaint-
ance by their hand-writing, as he does by their

faces.


Seft. 20. Of SEEING.. 297

faces. And the painter diftinguifhes in the
works of his art, the ftyle of all the great ma-
ilers. In a word, acquired perception is very
different in different perfons, according to the
diverfity of objects about which they are em-
ployed, and the application they bellow in ob-
ferving them.

Perception ought not.only to be diftinguifhed
from fenfation, but likewife from that knowledge
of the objects of fenfe which is got by reafoning.
There is no reafoning in perception, as hath been
obferved. The belief which is implied in it, is
the effect of inftinct. But there are many things,,
with regard to fenfible objects, which we can in-
fer from what we perceive ; and fuch conclufions
of reafon ought to be diftinguifhed from what is
merely perceived. "When I look at the moon,
I perceive her to be fometimes circular, fome-
times horned, and fometimes gibbous. This is
fimple perception, and is the fame in the philo-
sopher, and in the clown : but from thefe various
appearances of her enlightened part, I infer that
£he is really of a fpherical figure. This con-
clufion is not obtained by fimple perception, but
by reafoning. Simple perception has the fame
relation to the conclufions of reafon drawn from
our perceptions, as the axioms in mathematics
have to the propofitions. I cannot demonftrate,
that two quantities which are equal to the fame
quantity, are equal to each other ; neither can I
demonftrate, that the tree which I perceive,
psifts. But, by the conftitution of my nature,
t my


2 9 8 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chag.VI.
my belief is irrefiftibly carried along by my ap-
prehension of the axiom ; and by the conftku-
tion of my nature, my belief is no lefs irrefiftibly
carried along by my perception of the tree. All
reafoning is from principles. The firft principles
of mathematical reafoning are mathematical axi-
oms and definitions ; and the firft principles ofall
our reafoning about existences, are our percep-
tions. The firft principles of every kind of reafon-
ing are given us by nature, and are of equal au-
thority with the faculty of reafon itfelf, which is
alfo the gift of nature. The conclufions of rea-
fon are all built upon firft principles, and can
have no other foundation. Moft juftly, there-
fore, do fuch principles difdain to be tried by
reafon, and laugh at all the artillery of the logi-
cian, when it is directed againft them.

When a long train of reafoning is necesTary
in demonstrating a mathematical propofition, it
is eafily distinguished from an axiom, and they
feem to be things of a very different nature.
But there are fome propositions which lie fo
near to axioms, that it is difficult to fay,
whether they ought to be held as axioms, or
demonstrated as propositions. The fame thing
holds with regard to perception, and the con-
clufions drawn from it. Some of thefe con-
clufions follow our perceptions fo eafily, and
are -fo immediately connected with them, that
it is difficult to fix the' limit which divides the
pne from the other.

Perception


Seft. 20. Of S E E I N G. 299

Perception, whether original or acquired,
implies no exercife of reafon ; and is common
to men, children, idiots, and brutes. The
more obvious conclufions drawn from our per-
ceptions, by reafon, make what we call com-
mon underfianding ; by which men conduct thenih?'
felves in the common affairs of life, and by
which they are diftinguifhed from idiots. The
more remote conclufions which are drawn from
our perceptions, by reafon, make what we com-
monly call fcience in the various parts of na-
ture, whether in agriculture, medicine, me-
chanics, or in any part of natural philofophy.
When I fee a garden in good order, containing
a great variety of things of the beft kinds, and
in the moft flourifhing condition, I immediate-
ly conclude from thefe figns, the fkill and in-
duftry of the gardener. A farmer, when he
rifes in the morning, and perceives that the
neighbouring brook overflows his field, con-
cludes that a great deal of rain hath fallen in
the night. Perceiving his fence broken, and
his corn trodden down, he concludes that fome
of his own or his neighbours cattle have broke
loofe. Perceiving that his ftable-door is broke
open, and fome of his horfes gone, he con-
cludes that a thief has carried them off. He
traces the prints 'jof his horfes feet in the foft
ground, and by them difcovers which road the
thief hath taken. Thefe are inftances of com-
mon underftanding, which dwells fo near to
perception, tha,t it js difficult to trace the line

which


goo OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. VL
which divides the one from the other. In like
manner, the fcience of nature dwells fo near
to common underftanding, that we cannot dif-
cern where the latter ends and the former be-
gins. I perceive that bodies lighter than water
fwim in water, and that thofe which are hea-
vier link. Hence I conclude, that if a body
remains wherever it is put under water, whether
at the top or bottom, it is precifely of the fame
weight with water'. If it will reft only when
part of it is above water, it is lighter than
water. And the greater the part above water
is, compared with the whole, the lighter is the
body. If it had no gravity at all, it would
make no imprefiion upon the water, but (land
wholly above it. Thus, every man, by com-
mon underftanding, has a rule by which he
judges of the fpecific gravity of bodies which
fwim in water : anJd a ftep or two more, leads
him into the fcience of hydroftatics.

All that we know of nature, or of exiftences,
may be compared to a tree, which hath its root,
trunk, and branches. In this tree of know-
ledge, perception is the root, common under-
ftanding is the trunk, and the fciences are the
branches.


SECT.


Seft.ai. Of SEEDING. 30 J

SECT. XXI.

Of the proeefs of nature in perception.

A Ltho' there is no reafoning in perception,
yet there are certain means and inftru-
ments, which, by the appointment of nature,
muft intervene between the object and our per-
ception of it •, and, by thefe, our perceptions are
limited and regulated. Firft, if the object is
not in contact with the organ of fenfe, there
muft be fbme medium which paffes between
them. Thus, in vifion, the rays of light ; in
hearing, the vibrations of elaftic air ; in fmel-
ling, the effluvia of the body fmell'd, muft pafs
from the object to the • organ ; otherwife we
have no perception. Secondly, There muft be
fome action or impreflion uspn the organ of
fenfe, either by the immediate application of
the object, or by the medium that goes between
them. Thirdly, The nerves which go from
the brain to the organ, muft receive fome im-
preflion by means of that which was made upon
the organ ; and, probably, by means of the
nerves, fome impreflion muft be made upon the
brain. Fourthly, The impreflion made upon
the organ, nerves, and brain, is~followed by a
fenfation. And, laft of all, This fenfation is
followed by the perception of the object.

Thus our perception of objects is the refult
of a train of operations ; fome of which affect

the


$oi Of the HUMAN MlftD. CHap.VL
the body only, others affect the mind. We
know very little of the nature of fome of thefe
operations ; we know not at all how they are
connected together, of in what wa'y they cori-
tribute to that perception which is the refult of
the whole : but, by the laws of our conftitu-
fion* we perceive objects in this, and in no other
way.

There may be other beings, who can per-
ceive external objects without rays of light, of
vibrations of air, or effluvia of bodies, without
impreffions on bodily organs, or even without
fenfations : but we are fo framed by the Author
of nature, that even when we are furrounded
by external objects, we may perceive none of
them. Our faculcy of perceiving an object lies
dormant, until it is roufed and ftimulated by a
certain correfponding fenfation. Nor is this
fenfatton always at hand to perform its office j
for it enters into the mind only in confequence
of a certain correfponding impreflion made on
the organ of fenfe by the object.

Let us trace this correfpondence of impref-
fions, fenfations, and perceptions, as far as we
can -, beginning with that which is firft in order,
the impreffion made upon the bodily organ.
Bur, alas ! we know not of what nature thefe
impreffions are, far lefs how they excite fenfa-
tions in the mind.

We know that one body may act upon ana-
ther by preffure, by percuffion, by attraction,
by repulfion, and probably in many other ways

which-


Seft. 21. Of SEEING. 303

which we neither know, nor have names to ex-
prefs. But in which of thefe ways objects*
when perceived by us, act upon the organs of
fenfe, thefe organs upon the nerves, and the
nerves upon the Brain, we know not. Can any
man tell me how, in vifion, the rays of light
aft upon the retina, how the retina acts upon
the optic nerve, and how the optic nerve acts
upon the brain ? No man can. When I feel
the pain of the gout in my toe, I know that
there is fome unufual imprefiion made upon that
part of my body. But of what kind is it ?
Are the fmall veflels diftended with fome redun-
dant elaftic, or unelaftic fluid ? Are the fibres
unufually ftretehed ? Are they torn afunder by
force, or gnawed and corroded by fome acrid hu-
mour 2 I can anfwer none of thefe queftions.
AU that I feel is pain, which is not an impref-
iion upon the body, but upon the mind ; and all
that I perceive by this fenfation is, that fome dif-
temper in my toe occafions this pain. But as
I know not the natural temper and texture of
my toe when it is at eafe, I know as little what
change or diforder of its parts occafions this un-
eafy fenfation. In like manner, in every other
fenfation there is, without doubt, fome im-
prefiion made upon the organ of fenfe ; but an
imprefiion of which we know not the nature.
It is two fubtile to be difcovered by our fenfes,
and we may make a thoufand conjectures with-
out coming near the truth. If we underftood
the ftru&ure of our organs of fenfe fo minutely,

as


3 64 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chip. Vt.

as to difcover what effects are produced upon
them by external objects, this knowledge would
contribute nothing to our perception of the ob-
ject •, for they perceive as diftin&ly who know
leaft about the manner of perception, as the
greateft adepts. It is neceffary that the impref-
fion be made upon our organs, but not that it
be known. Nature carries on this p,art of the
procefs of perception, without our confciouf-
nefs or concurrence.

But we cannot be unconfcions of the next
ftep in this procefs, the fenfation of the mind,
which always immediately follows the impref-
fion made upon the body. It is effential to a
fenfation to be felt, and it can be nothing more
than we feel it to be. If we can only acquire
the habit of attending to our fenfations, we may
know them perfectly. But how are the fenfa-
tions of the mind produced by impreffions upon
the body ?; Of this we. are abfolut'ely ignorant,
having no meaiis'-of .knowing how the body'acts
upon the mind, or the mind jupon the body.
When we confider the nature, arid attributes of
both, they feem to 'be fo different, and fo un-
like, that we can find no handle by which the
one may lay hold of the other. There is a
deep and a dark gulf between them, which our
understanding cannot pafs ; and the manner of
their correfpondence and intercourfe is abfolute-
ly unknown.

Experience teaches us, that certain impreffions
upon the body are conftantly followed by cer-
tain


Sect. 2i. 6f SEEING. 305

tain fenfations of the mind; and that, on the
other hand, certain determinations of the mind
are conftantly followed by certain motions in the
body : but we fee not the chain that ties thefe
things together. Who knows but their connec-
tion may be arbitrary, and owing to the will of
our Maker ? Perhaps the fame fenfations might
have been connected with other imprefllons, or
other bodily organs. Perhaps we might have been
fo made, as to tafte with our fingers, 'to fmell
with our ears, and to hear by the nofe. Perhaps
we might have been fo made, as to have all the
fenfations and perceptions which we have, with-
out any impreffion made upon our bodily organs
at all.

However thefe things may be* if Nature had
given us nothing more than imprefllons made
upon the body, and fenfations in our minds cor-
refponding to them, we mould in that cafe have
been merely fentient, but not percipient beings.
We fhtfuld never have been able to form a con--
ception of any external object, far lefs a belief of
its exiftence. Our fenfations have no refemblance
to external objects ; nor can we difcover, by our
reafon, any neceflary connection between the ex-
iftence of the former, and that of the latter.

We might perhaps have been made of fuch a
conftitution, as to have our prefent perceptions
connected with other fenfations. We might per*
haps have had the perception of external objects,
without either imprefllons upon the organs of
fenfe, or fenfations. Or laftly, The perceptions

U we


3 o6 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VI:

we have, might have been immediately connect-
ed with the impreflions upon our organs, without
any intervention of fenfations. This laft feems
really to be the cafe in one inftance, to wit, in
our perception of the vifible figure of bodies, as
was obferved in the 8th fection of this chapter.

The procefs of Nature in perception by the
fenfes, may therefore be conceived as a kind of
drama, wherein fome things are performed be-
hind the fcenes, others are reprefented to the
mind in different fcenfes, one fucceeding another.
The imprefiion made by the object upon the or-
gan, either by immediate contact, or by fome in-
tervening medium, as well as the imprefiion made
upon the nerves and brain, is performed behind
the fcenes, and the mind fees nothing of it. But
every fuch imprefiion, by the laws of the drama,
is followed by a fenfation, which is the firft fcene
exhibited to the mind ; and this fcene is quickly
fucceeded by another, which is the perception of,
the object.

In this drama, Nature is the actor, we are the
fpectators. We know nothing of the machinery
by means of which every different imprefiion
upon the organ, nerves, and brain, exhibits its,
correfponding fenfation ; or of the machinery by
means of which each fenfation exhibits its corre-
fponding perception. We are infpired with the
fenfation, and we are infpired with the corre-
fponding perception, by means unknown. And
becaufe the mind pafies immediately from the
fenfation to that conception and belief of the ob-
ject


Sect. 21. Of SEEING. 307

ject which we have in perception, in the fame
manner as it paffes from figns to the things figni-
fied by them, we have therefore called our fen-
fations Jigns of external objects ; finding no word
more proper to exprefs the function which nature
hath affigned them in perception, and the relation
"which they bear to their correfponding objects.

There is no neceffity of a refemblance between
the fign and the thing fignified: and indeed no
fenfation can refemble any external object. But
there are two things neceffary to our knowing
things by means of figns. Firft, That a real con-
nection between the fign and thing fignified be
eftablifhed, either by the courfe of nature, or by
the will and appointment of men. When they
are connected by the courfe of nature, it is a na-
tural fign i when by human appointment, it is an
artificial fign. Thus, fmoke is a natural fign of
fire j certain features are natural figns of anger :
but our words, whether expreffed by articulate
founds or by writing, are artificial figns of our
thoughts and purpofes.

Another requifite to our knowing things by
figns is, that the appearance of the fign to the
mind, be followed by the conception and belief
of the thing fignified. Without this the fign is
not underftood or interpreted ; and therefore is
no fign to us, however fit in its own nature for
that purpofe. „

Now, there arethree ways in which the mind

paffes from the appearance of a natural fign to the

U 2 con-


3 o8 Of theHUMAN MIND. Chap.VI.
conception and belief of the thing fignified j by
original principles of our conftitution, by cuftom,
and by reafoning.

Our original perceptions are got in the firft of
thefe ways, our acquired perceptions in the fe-
cond, and all that reafon difcovers of the courfe
of nature, in the third. In the firft of thefe ways,
nature, by means of the fenfations of touch, in-
forms us of the hardnefs and foftnefs of bodies ;
of their extenfion, figure, and motion •, and of
that fpace in' which they move and are placed, as
hath been already explained in the fifth chapter
of this inquiry. And in the fecond of thefe ways
fhe informs us, by means of our eyes, of almoft
all the fame things which originally we could
perceive only by touch.

In order, therefore, to understand more par-
ticularly how we learn to perceive fo many things
by the eye, which originally could be perceived
only by touch, it will be proper, firft, To point
out the figns by which thofe things are exhibited
to the eye, and their connection with the things
fignified by them j and, fecondly, To confider
how the experience of this connection produces
that habit by which the mind, without any rea-
foning or reflexion, pafies from the fign to the
conception and belief of the thing fignified.

Of all the acquired perceptions which we have
by fight, the moft remarkable is the perception
of the diftance of objects from the eye ; we fhall
therefore particularly confider the figns by which

this


Seel:. 22. Of S E E I N G. 309

this perception is exhibited, and only make fome
general remarks with regard to the figns which
are ufed in other acquired perceptions.

SECT. XXII.

Of the figns by which we learn to perceive diftance
from the eye.

TT was before obferved in general, That the '

original perceptions of fight are figns which
ferve to introduce thofe that are acquired : but
this is not to be underftood as if no other figns
were employed for that purpofe. There are fe-
veral motions of the eyes, which, in order to di-
ftindt vifion, muft be varied, according as the ob-
ject is more or lefs diftant ; and fuch motions be-
ing by habit connected with the correfponding
diftancesof the objecl:, become figns of thofe di-
ftances. Thefe motions were at firft voluntary
and unconfined ; but as the intention of nature
was, to produce perfect and diftinc~t vifion by
their means, we foon learn by experience to re-
gulate them according to that intention only,
without the leaft reflexion.

A fhip requires a different trim for every vari-
ation of the direction and ftrength of the wind :
and, if we may be allowed to borrow that word,
the eyes require a different trim for every de-
gree of light, and for every variation of the di-
ftance of the object, while it is within certain
limits. The eyes are trimmed for a particular
object, by contracting certain mufcles, and re-
U 3 laxing


3 io. Of the H U M A N M 1 N D. Chap. VI.
laxing others ; as the (hip is trimmed for a parti-
cular wind by drawing certain ropes., and flack-
ening others. The failor learns the trim of his
Ihip, as we learn the trim of our eyes, by expe-
rience. A fhip, akho' the nobleft machine that
human art can boaft, is far inferior to the eye in
this refpe£t, that it requires art and ingenuity to
navigate her ; and a failor muft know what ropes
he muft pull, and what he muft flacken, to fit
her to a particular wind : but with fuch fuperior
wifdom is the fabric of the eye, and the princi-
ples of its motion contrived, that it requires no
art nor ingenuity to fee by it. Even that part
of vifion which it got by experience, is attained
by idiots. We need not know what mufcles
we are to contract, and what we are to relax, in
order to fit the eye to a particular diftance of the
object.

But akho' we are not confcious of the motions
we pei form, in. order to fit the eyes to the di-
ftance of the object, we are confcious of the ef-
fort employed in producing thefe motions ; and
probably have fome fenfation which accompanies
them, to which we give as little attention as to
other fenfations. And thus, an effort confciouf-
ly exerted, or a fenfation confequent upon that
effort, comes to be conjoined with the diftance
of the object which gave occafion to it, and by
this conjunction becomes a fign of that diftance.
Some inftances of this will appear in confidering
the means or figns by which we learn to fee the
diftance of objects from the eye. In the enu-
meration


Sett. 22. Of SEEING. 311

meratidn of thefe, we agree with Dr. Porterfkld,
notwithftanding that diftance from the eye, in
his opinion, is perceived originally, but ih our
opinion, by experience only.

In general, when a near object affects the eye
in one manner, and the fame object, placed at
a greater diftance, affects it in a different man-
ner ; thefe various affections of the eye become
figns of the correfponding diftances. The means
of perceiving diftance by the eye, will therefore
be explained, by (hewing in what various ways
objects affecl the" eye differently, according to
their proximity or diftance.

1. It is well known, that to fee objects dif-
tinctly at various diftances, the form of the eye
muft undergo fome change. And Nature hath
given us the power of adapting it to near objects,
by the contraction of certain mufcles, and to di-
ftant objects by the contraction of other mufcles.
As to the manner in which this is done, and the
mufcular parts employed, anatomifts do not alto-
gether agree. The ingenious Dr. Jurin, in his
excellent effay on diftinct and indiftinct vifion,
feems to have given the moft probable account
of this matter ; and to him I refer the reader.

But whatever be the manner in which this
•change of the form of the eye is effected, it is
certain that young people have commonly the
power of adapting their eyes to all diftances
of the object, from fix or feven inches, to fifteen
or fixteen feet ; fo as to have perfect and diftinct
vifion at any diftance within thefe limits. From
U 4 this


3 iz OftheHtJMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

this it follows, that the effort we confcioufly
employ to adapt the eye to any particular di.
ftance of objects within thefe limits, will be
connected and aflbciated with that diftahce, and
will Jjecome a fign of it. When the object is re-
moved beyond the fartheft limit of diftinct vifion,
it will be feen indiftinctly ; but more or lefs fo,
according as its diftance is greater or lefs : fo that
the degrees of indiftinctnefs of the object may
become the figns of diftances considerably be-
yond the fartheft limit of diftinct vifion.

If we had no other mean but this, of perceiv-
ing diftance of vifible obje&s, the moft diftant
•would not appear to be above twenty or thirty
feet from the eye, and the tops of houfes and
trees would feem to touch the clouds j for in
that cafe the figns of all greater diftances being
the fame, they have the fame fignifkation, and
give the fame perception of diftance.

But it is of more importance to obferve, that
becaufe the neareft limit of diftinct vifion in the
time of youth, when we learn to perceive di-
ftance by the eye, is about fix or feven inches,
no object feen diftinctly, ever appears to be
nearer than fix or feven inches from the. eye.
We can, by art, make a fmall object appear di-
ftinct, when it is in reality not above half an
inch from the eye; either by ufing a fingle mir
crcfcope, or by looking through a fmall pin-hole
jn a card. * When, by either of thefe means, ao
object is made to appear diftinct, however fmall
jt§ diftance is in reality, it feems to he removed

at


Sea. 22: Of SEEING. 313

at leaft to the diftance of fix or feven inches,
that is, within the limits of diftinct vifion.

This obfervation is the more important, be-
caufe it affords the only reafon we can give why
an object is magnified either by a fingle micro-
fcope, or by being feen through a pin-hole ; and
the only mean by which we can afcertain the
degree in which the object will be magnified by
either. Thus, if the object is really half an inch
diftant from the eye, and appears to be feven
inches diftant, its diameter will feem to be en-
larged in the fame proportion as its diftance, that
is fourteen times.

2. In order to direct both eyes to an object,
the optic axes muft have a greater or lefs inclU
nation, according as the object is nearer or more
diftant. And altho' we are not confcious of this
inclination, yet we are confcious of the effort
employed in it. By this mean we perceive fmall
djftances more accurately than we could do by
the conformation of the eye only. And there-
fore we find, that thofe who have loft the fight
of one eye, are apt, even within arm's-length,
to make miftakes in the diftance of objects,
which are eafily avoided by thofe who fee with
both eyes. Such miftakes are often difcovered
in fnuffing a candle, in threading a needle, or in
filling a tea-cup.

"When a pitture is feen with both eyes, and at no
great diftance, the reprefentation appears not fo
natural as when it is feen only with one. The in-
dention of painting being to deceive the eye, and

to


3I4 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VI.
to make things appear at different diftances which
in reality are upon the fame piece of canvas,
this deception is not fo eafily put upon both
eyes as upon one ; becaufe we perceive the di-
ftance of vifible objects more exactly and deter-
minately with two eyes than with one. If the
fljading and relief be executed in the beft manner,
the picture may have almoft the fame appearance
to <Mie eye as the objects themfelves would have,
but it cannot have the fame appearance to both.
This is not the fault of the artift, but an una-
voidable imperfection in the art. And it is ow-
ing to what we juft now obferved, that the per-
ception we have of the diftance of objects by one
eye is more uncertain, and more liable to decep-
tion, than that which we have by both*

The great impediment, and I think the only
invincible impediment, to that agreeable decep-
tion of the eye which the painter aims at, is the
perception which we have of the diftance of
vifible objects from the eye, partly by means
of the conformation of the eye, but chiefly by
means of the inclination of the optic axes. If
this perception could be removed, I fee no rea-
fon why a picture might not be made fo perfect
as to deceive the eye in reality, and to be
triiftaken for the original object. Therefore,
in order to judge of the merit of a picture,' we
Ought, as much as pofllble, to exclude thefe two
means of perceiving the diftance of the feveral
parts of it.

In


Sea. 22. Of SEEING. 315

In order to remove this perception of diftance,
the connoiffeurs in painting ufe a method which
is very proper. They look at the picture with
one eye, through a tube which, excludes the view
of all other objects. By this method, the prin-
cipal mean whereby we perceive the diftance of
the object, to wit, the inclination of the optic
axes, is entirely excluded. I would humbly
propofe, as an improvement of this method of
viewing pictures, that the aperture of the tube
next to the eye fhould be very fmall. If it is as
fmall as a pin-hole, fo much the better, pro-
viding there be light enough to fee the picture
dearly. The reafon of this propofal is, that
when we look at an object through a fmall aper-
ture, it will be feen diftinctly whether the con-
formation of the eye be adapted to its diftance
or not, and we have no mean left to judge of
the diftance, but the light and colouring, which
are in the painter's power. If, therefore, the
artift performs his part properly, the picture
will by this method affect the eye in the fame
manner that the object reprefented would do j
which is the perfection of this art.

Altho' this fecond mean of perceiving the
diftance of vifible objects be more determinate
and exact than the firft, yet it hath its limits,
beyond which it can be of no ufe. For when
the optic axes directed to an object are fo near-
ly parallel, that in directing them to an object
yet more diftant, we are not confcious of any
new effort, nor have any different fenfation ;

there


3 i6 OfthcHUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
there our perception of diftance flops ; and as
all more diftant objects affect the eye in the fame
manner, we perceive them to be at the fame
diftance. This is the reafon why the fun,
moon, planets, and fixed ftars, when feen not
iiear the horizon, appear to be, all at the fame
diftance, as if they touched the concave furface
of a great fphere. The furface of this celeftial
fphere is at that diftance beyond which all ob-
jects affect the eye in the fame manner. Why
this celeftial vault appears more diftant towards
the horizon, than towards the zenith, will after-
wards appear.

3. The colours of objects, according as they
are more diftant, become more faint and languid,
and are tinged more with the azure of the in-
tervening atmofphere : to this we may add, that
their minute parts become more indiftinct, and
their outline lefs accurately defined. It is by
thefe means chiefly, that painters can reprefent
objects at very different diftances, upon, the
fame canvas. And the diminution of the mag-
nitude of an object, would not have the effect
of making it appear to be at a great diftance
without this degradation of colour, andindif-
tinctnefs of the outline, and of the minute
parts. If a'painter fhould make a human figure
ten times lefs than other human figures that are
in the fame piece, having the colours as bright,
and the outline and minute parts as accurately
defined, it would not have the appearance of a

man


Seft. 22. Of SEEING. 317

man at a great diftance, but of a pigmy or Lilli-
putian.

When an objeft hath a known variety of
colours, its diftance is more clearly indicated
by the gradual dilution of the colours into one
another, than when it is of one uniform colour.
In the fteeple which ftands before me at a fmall
diftance, the joinings of the ftones are clearly
perceptible ; the gray colour of the ftone and
the white cement are diftinctly limited : when
I fee it at a greater diftance, the joinings of the
ftones are lefs diftinct, and the colours of the
ftone and of the cement begin to dilute into one
another : at a diftance ftill greater, the joinings
difappear altogether, and the variety of colour
vanifhes.

In an apple-tree which ftands at the diftance
of about twelve feet, covered with flowers, I
can perceive the figure and the colour of the
leaves and petals ; pieces of branches, fome
larger, others fmaller, peeping through the in-
tervals of the leaves, fome of them enlightened
by the fun 's rays, others fhaded; and fome
openings of the fky'are perceived through the
whole. When I gradually remove from this
tree, the appearance, even as to colour, changes
every minute. Pirft, the fmaller parts, then
the larger, are gradually confounded and mix-
ed. The colours of leaves, petals, branches,
and fky, are gradually diluted into each other,
and the colour of the whole becomes more and
more uniform. This change of appearance, cor-

refponding


3 i8 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

refponding to the feveral diftances, marks the
diftance more exactly than if the whole object
had been of one colour .

Dr. Smith, in his Optics, gives us a very
curious obfervation made by Bifhop Berkeley, in
his travels through Italy and Sicily. He ob-
ferved, That in ^thofe countries, cities and
palaces feen at a great diftance, appeared nearer
to him by feveral miles than they really were :
and he very judieiouGy imputed it to this caufe,
That the purity of the Italian and Sicilian air,
gave to very diftant objects, that degree of
brightness and diftindtnefs, which, in the grofler
air of his own country, was to be feen only in
thofe that are near. The purity of the Italian
air hath been affigned as the reafon why the Ita-
lian painters commonly give a more lively colour
to the fky, than the Flemifh. Ought they not,
for the fame 'reafon, to give lefs degradation of
the colours, and lefs indiftindtnefs of the mi-
nute parts, in the reprefentation of very diftant
objedts ?

It is very certain, that as in air uncommonly
pure, we are apt to think vifible objedls nearer,
and lefs than they redly are ; fo, in air uncom-
monly foggy, we are apt to think them more
diftant and larger than the truth. Walking by
the fea-fide in a thick fog, I fee an objedt which
feems to me to be a man on horfeback, and at
the diftance of about half a mile. My compa-
nion, who has better eyes, or is -more accuftom-
ed to fee fuch objedls in fuch circumftances,

aflures


Se& 22; Of SEEING. 319

aflures me, that it is a fea-gull, and not a man
on horfeback* Upon a fecond view, I imme-
diately affent to his opinion j and now it appears
to me to be a fea-gull, and at the diftance only
of feventy or eighty yards. The miftake made
on this occafion, and the correction of it, are
both fo fudden, that we are at a lofs whether to
call them by the name of judgment, or by that of
fimfle perception.

It is not worth while to difpute about names ;
but it is evident, that my belief, both firft and
laft, was produced rather by figns than by argu-
ments ; and that the mind proceeded to the con-
clufion in both cafes by habit, and not by ratio-
cination. And the procefs of the mind feems
to have been this. Firft, Not knowing, or
not minding, the effect of a foggy air on the
vifible appearance of objects, the object feems
to me to have that degradation of colour, and
that indiftinctnefe of the outline, which objects
have at the diftance of half a mile ; therefore^
from the vifible appearance as a fign, I imme-
diately proceed to the belief that the object is
half a mile diftant. Then, this diftance, to-
gether with the Vifible magnitude, fignify to me
the real magnitude, which, fuppofing the di-
ftance to be half a mile, muft be equal to that
of a man on horfeback v and the figure, con-
fidering the indiftinctnefs of the Outline, agrees
with that of a man on horfeback. Thus the
deception is brought about. But when I am
affured that it is a fea-gull, the real magnitude

5 of


3 2© Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap.VL
of a fea-gull, together with the vifible magni-
tude presented to the eye, immediately fuggeft
the diftance, which in .this cafe cannot be above
feventy or eighty yards : the indiftindtnefs of
the figure likewife fuggefts the fogginefs of the
air as its caufe : and now the whole chain of
figns, and things fignified, feems ftronger and
better connefted than it was before; the half
mile vanifhes to eighty yards ; the man on horfe-
back dwindles to a fea-gull j I get a new percep-
tion, and wonder how I got the former, or what
is become of it ; for it is now fo entirely gone,
that I cannot recover it.

It ought to be obferved, that in order to
produce fuch deceptions from the clearnefs or
fogginefs of the air, it mult be uncommonly
clear, or uncommonly foggy : for we learn from
experience, to make allowance for that variety
of conftitutions of the air which we have been
accuftomed to obferve, and of which we are
aware. Bifhop Berkeley therefore* committed
a miftake, when he attributed the large ap-
pearance of the horizontal moon to the faintnefs
of her light, occafioned by its palling through a
larger tract of atmofphere : for we are fo much
accuftomed to fee the moon in all degrees of
faintnefs and brightnefs, from the greateft to
the leaft, that we learn to make allowance for
it ; and do not imagine her magnitude increafed
by the faintnefs of her appearance. Befides,
it is certain that the horizontal moon feen
through a tube which cuts off the view of the

inter-


Sect. iz. 6f SEEING. .321

interjacent ground, and of all terreftrial objects^
lofes all that unufual appearance of magnitude.

4. We frequently perceive the diftance of
objects, by means of intervening or contiguous
objects, whofe diftance or magnitude is other-
wife known. When I perceive certain fields
or trails of ground to lie between me and an
object, it is evident that thefe may become figns
of its diftance. Arid altho' we have no parti-
cular information of the dimenfions of fuch fields
or tracts, yet their fimilitude to others which
we know, fuggefts their dimenfions.

We are fo much accuftomed to meafure With
our eye the ground which we travel, and to com-
pare the judgments of diftances formed by fight,
with our experience or information, that we learn
by degrees, in this way, to form a more accu-
rate judgment of the diftance Of terreftrial ob-
jects, than we could do by any of the means be-
fore mentioned. An object placed upon the top
Of a high building, appears much lefs than wheri
placed upon the ground at the fame diftance.
When it ftands upon the ground, the intervening
tract of ground ferves as a fign of its diftance ;
and the diftance, together with the vifible mag-
nitude^ ferves as a fign of its real magnitude. But
when the object is placed on high, this fign of its
diftance is taken away : the remaining figns lead
us to place it at a lefs diftance ; and this lefs di-<
fiance, together with the vifible magnitude, be-
comes a* fign of a lefs real magnitude.

5£ TheS'


322 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
The two firft means we have mentioned,
would never of themfelves make a vifible ob-
ject appear above a hundred and fifty, or two
hundred feet, diftant ; becaufe, beyond that
there is no fenfible, change, either of the confor-
mation of the eyes, or of the inclination of their
axes. The third mean, is but a vague and un-
determinate fign, when applied to diftances
above two or three hundred feet, unlefs we know
the real colour and figure of the object ; and the
fifth mean, to be afterwards mentioned, can only
be applied to objects which are familiar, or whofe
real magnitude is known. Hence it follows, that
when unknown objects, upon, or near the fur-
face of the earth, are perceived to be at the di-
ftance of fome miles, it is always by this fourth
mean that we are led to that conclufion.

Dr. Smith hath obferved, very juftly, that the
known diftance of the . terreftrial objefls which
terminate our view, makes that part of the fity
which is towards the horizon, appear more diftant
than that which is towards the zenith. Hence it
comes to.pafs, that the apparent figure of the fky
is not that of a hemifphere, but rather a lefs feg-
ment of a fphere. And hence likewife it comes
to pafs, that the diameter of the fun or moon, or
the diftance between two fixed ftars, feen con-
tiguous to a hill, or to any diftant terreftrial ob-
ject, appears much greater than when no fuch ob-
ject ftrikes the eye at the, fame time.

Thefe obfervations have been fufficiently ex-
plained and confirmed by Dr. Smith- I beg leave

to


Sett. 22, Of SEEING. 333

£0 add, that when the vifible horizon is termi-
nated by very diftant objects* the celeftial vault
feems to be enlarged in all its dimensions. When
j. view it from a confined ftreet or lane, it bears
fame proportion to the buildings that furround
me : but when I view it from a large plain, ter-
minated on all hands by hills which rife one
above another, to the diftance of twenty miles
from the eye, methinks I fee a new heaven,
whofe magnificence declares the greatnefs of its
Author* and puts every human edifice out of
countenance ; for now the lofty fpires and the
gorgeous palaces (brink into nothing before it,
and bear no more proportion to the celeftial
dome, than their makers bear to its Maker.

5. There remains another mean by which we
perceive the diftarice of vifible objects, aijd that
is, the diminution of their 1 vifible or appparent
magnitude. By experience I know what figure a
man, or any other known abject, makes to my
eye, at the diftance of ten feet : I perceive the
gradual and proportional diminution of this vifi-
ble figure, at the diftance of twenty, forty, a hun*
dred feet, and at greater diftances, until it vanilh
altogether. Hence a certain vifible magnitude of
a known object, becomes the figrt of a certain de*
terminate diftance, and carries along with it the
conception and belief of that diftance.

In this procefs of the mind, the fign is not a
fenfation ; it is an original perception. We per-
ceive the vifible figure and vifible magnitude of
the object, by the original powers of vifion , but
X 2 the


j«4 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap.Vf.
the vifible figure is ufed only as a fign of the real
figure, and the vifible magnitude is ufed only as
a fign either of the diftance, or of the real mag-
nitude, of the object ; and therefore thefe origi-
nal perceptions, like other mere figns, pafs thro*
the mind without any attention or reflexion.

This laft mean of perceiving the diftance of
known objects, fcrves to explain fome very re-
markable phenomena in optics, which would
otherwife appear very my Ilerious. When we view
objects of known dimenfions thro' optical glafies,
there is no other mean left of determining their
diftance, but this. fifth. Hence it follows, that
known objects feen thro' glaffes, mull feem to be
brought nearer, in proportion to the magnifying
power of the glafs, or to be removed to a great-
er diftance, in proportion to the diminifhing
power of the glafs.

If a man who had never before feen objects thro?'
a telefcope, were told, that the telefcope, which he
is about to ufe, magnifies the diameter of the ob-
ject ten times-, when he looks thro' this telefcope
at a man fix feet high, what would he expect to
fee ? Surely he would very naturally expect to
fee a giant fixty feet high. But he fees no fuch
thing. The man appears no more than fix feet
high, and confequently no bigger than he really
is ; but he appears ten times nearer than he is.
The telefcope indeed magnifies the image of this
man upon the retina ten times in diameter, and
muft therefore magnify his vifible figure in the
fame proportion ; and as we have been accuftom-
7 ed


Sett. 22. Of SEEING. 3 z 5

<ed to fee him of this vifible magnitude when he
was ten times nearer than he is prefently, and in
mo other cafe ; this vifible magnitude* therefore,
fuggeftsthe conception and belief of that diftance
of the object with which it hath been always
•connected. We have been accuftomed to con^-
ceive this amplification of the vifible figure of a
known object, only as the effect or fign of its be^
ing brought nearer : and we have annexed a cer-
tain determinate diftance to every degree of vi-
fible magnitude of the object ; and therefore, any
particular degree of vifible -magnitude, whether
feen by. the naked eye or by glaffes, brings along
with it the conception and belief of the diftance
which correfpondsto it. This is the reafon why
a telefcope feems not to magnify known obje&s,
but to bring them nearer to the eye.

When we look thro' a pin-hole, or a fingle
microfcope, at an object which is half an inch
from the eye, the picture of the object upon the
retina is notenlarged, but only rendered diftinct ;
neither is the vifible figure enlarged: yet the ob*-
ject appears to the eye twelve or fourteen times
more diftant, and as many times larger in diame-
ter, than it really is. Such a telefcope as we have
mentioned, amplifies the image on the retina,
and the vifible figure of the object, ten times in
diameter, and yet makes it feem no bigger, but
•only ten times nearer. Thefe appearances had
been long obferved by the writers on optics %
they tortured their invention to find the caufes of
jhem from optical principles \ but in vain : they
X j muft


3 s6 Of the H U M A N M 1 N D. Chap. VI.

muft be refolved into habits of perception, which
are acquired by cuftom, but are apt to be mif-
taken for original perceptions. The Bifhop of
Cloyne firft furnifhed the world with the proper
key for opening up thefe myfterious appear-
ances •, but he made considerable miftakes in the
application of it. Dr. Smith, in his elaborate and
judicious treatife of Optics, hath applied it to the
apparent diftance of objects feen with glafles, and
to the apparent figure of the heavens, with fuch
happy fuccefs, that there can be no more doubt
about the caufes of thefe phenomena,

SECT. XXIII.

Of the figns ujed in other acquired ■perceptions.

Hp H E diftance of objetts from the eye, is
the moft important lefion in vifion. Many
others are eafily learned in confequence of it.
The diftance of the object, joined with its v'v
fible magnitude, is a fign of its real magnitude :
and the diftance of the feveral parts of an ob-
ject, joined with its vifible figure^ becomes a
fign of its real figure. Thus when I look at a
globe which ftands before me ; by the original
powers of fight I perceive only fomething of a
circular form, varioufly coloured. The vifible
figure hath no diftance from the eye, no con-
vexity, nor hath it three dimenfions ; even its
length and breadth are incapable of being mea-
fijred by inches, feet, qr other linear meafures.

But


Sect. 23. Of SEEING. 327

But when I have learned to perceive the di-
ftance of every part of this object from the eye,
this perception gives it convexity, and a fpheri-
cal figure ; and adds a third dimenfion to that
which had but two before. The diflance of
the whole object makes me likewife perceive
the real magnitude; for being accuftomed to
obferve how an inch or a foot of length affects
the eye at that diftance, I plainly perceive by
my eye the linear dimenfions of the globe, and
qan affirm with certainty that its diameter is
about one foot and three inches.

It was fhewn in the feventh fection of this
chapter, that the vifible figure of a body may,
by mathematical reafoning, be inferred from its
real figure, diftance, and pofition, with regard
to the eye : in like manner, we may, by mathe-
matical reafoning, from the vifible figure, to-
gether with the diftance of the feveral parts of it
from the eye, infer the" real figure and pofition.
But this laft inference is not commonly made by
mathematical reafoning, nor indeed by reafoning
of any kind, but by cuftom.

The original appearance which the colour of
an object makes to the eye, is a fenfation for
which we have no name, becaufe it is ufed merely
as a fign, and is never made an object of atten-
tion in common life : but this appearance, ac-
cording to the different circumftances, fignifiea
various things. If a piece of cloth, of one uni-
form colour, is laid fo that part of it is in the
fun, and part in the fhade ; the appearance of
X 4 colour.


S 28 Of the HUM AN MIND. Chap. VI.
colour, in thefe different parts, is very different :
yet we perceive the colour to be the fame •, we
interpret the variety of appearance as a fign of
light and fhade, and not as a fign of real diffe-
rence in colour. But if the eye could be fo far
deceived, as not to perceive the difference of
light in the two parts of the cloth, we fhould,
in that cafe, interpret the variety of appearance
to fignify a variety of colour in the parts of the
cloth.

Again, if we fuppofe a piece of cloth placed
as before, but having the fhaded part fo much
brighter in the colour, that it gives the fame
appearance to the eye as the more enlightened
part \ the famenefs of appearance will here be
interpreted to fignify a variety of colour, be-
caufe we (hall make allowance for the effect of
light and fhade.

When the real colour of an object is known,
the appearance of it indicates, in fome circum-
ftances the degree of light or fhade ; in others^
the colour of the circumambient bodies, whofe
rays are reflected by it ; and in other circum-
ftances it indicates the diftance or proximity, of
the object, as was obferved in the laft fection ;
and by means of thefe, many other things are
fuggefted to the mind. Thus, an unufual ap-
pearance in the colour of familiar objects, may
be the diagnoftic of a difeafe in the fpectatqr.
The appearance cf things in my room, may in-
dicate funfhine or cloudy weather, the earth co-

veied


Sea. 23; Of SEEIN 6: 329

vered with fnow, or blackened with rain. Ic
hath been obferved, that the colour of the fky,
in a piece of painting, may indicate the country
©f the painter, becaufe the Italian fky is really
pf a different colour from the Flemifh.

It was already obferved, that the original and
acquired perceptions which we have by our fen-
fes, are the language of nature to man, which,
in many refpe&s, hath a great affinity to human
languages. The inftances which we have given
of acquired perceptions, fuggeft this affinity,
that as, in human languages, ambiguities are often
found, fo this language of nature in our acquired
perceptions is not exempted from them. We
have feen, in vifion particularly, that the fame
appearance to the eye, may, in different circum-
ftances, indicate different things. Therefore,
when the circumftances are unknown upon which
the interpretation of the figns depends, their
meaning mull be ambiguous ; and when «the
circumftances are miftaken, the meaning of the
figns muft alfb, be miftaken.

This is the cafe in all the phenomena which
we call fallacies of the fenfes; and particular-
ly, in thofe which are called fallacies in vifion.
The appearance of things to the eye, always cor-
refponds to the fixed laws of nature ; therefore,
if we fpeak properly, there is no fallacy in the
fenfes. Nature always fpeaketh the fame lan-
guage, and ufeth the fame figns in the fame cir-
cumftances : but we fometimes miftake the
meaning of the figns, either through ignorance

of


33© Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

of the laws of nature, or through ignorance of
the circumftances which attend the figns.

To a man unacquainted with the principles
of optics, almoft every experiment that is made
with the prifm, with the magic lanthorn, with
the telefcope, with the microfcope, feems to
produce fome fallacy in vifion. Even the ap-
pearance of a common mirror, to- one altoge-
ther unacquainted with the effects of it, would
feem moft remarkably fallacious. For how can
a man be more impofed upon, than in feeing
that before him which is really behind him ?
How can he be more impofed upon, than in be-
ing made to fee himfelf feveral yards removed
from himfelf? Yet children, even before they
can fpeak their mother-tongue, learn not to be
deceived by thefe appearances. Thefe, as well
as all the other furprifing appearances produced
by optical glafles, are a part of the vifual lan-
guage ; and, to thofe who underftand the laws
of nature concerning light and colours, are in
no wife fallacious, but have a diftincl: and true
meaning.

SECT. XXIV.

Of the analogy between perception and the credit
we give to human tejtimpny.

'Tp H E obje&s of human knowledge are innu-
merable, but the channels by which it is
conveyed to the mind are few. Among thefe,

the


5eft. 24. Of SEEING. 331

the perception of external things by our fenfes,
and the informations which we receive upon
human teftimony, are not the leaft confiderable :
and fo remarkable is the analogy between thefe
two, and the analogy between the principles of
the mind which are fubfervient to the one and
thofe which are fubfervient to the other, that
without further apology, we (hall confider them
. together.

In the teftimony of nature given by the
fenfes, as well as in human teftimony given by
language, things are fignified to us by figns:
and in one as well as the other, the mind,
either by original principles, or by c-uftom,
paffes from the fign to the conception and be-
lief of the things fignified.

We have diftinguimed our perceptions into
original and acquired; and language, into na-
tural and artificial. Between acquired percep-
tion, and artificial language, there is a great
analogy ; but ftill a greater between original
perception and natural language.

The figns in original perception are fenfa-
tions, of which nature hath given us a great
variety, fuited to the variety of the things
fignified by them. Nature hath eftablifhed a
real connection between the figns and the things
fignified; and nature hath alfo taught us the
interpretation of the figns ; fo that, previous to
experience, the fign fuggefts the thing fignified,
j»nd creates the belief of it.

The


33 2 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

The figns in natural language are features of
the face, geftures of the body, and modulations
of the voice ; the variety of which is fuited to
the Variety of the things fignified by them. Na-
ture hath eftablifhed a real connection between
thefe figns, and the thoughts and difpofitions
of the mind which are fignified by them ; and
nature hath taught us the interpretation of thefe
figns •, fo that, previous to experience, the figns
fuggeft the thing fignified, and creates the belief
of it.

A man in cpmpany, without doing good or
evil, without uttering an articulate found, may
behaVe himfelf gracefully, civilly, politely ; or,
on the contrary, meanly, rudely, and imperti-
nently. We fee the" difpofitions of his mind,
by their natural figns in his countenance and
behaviour, in the fame manner as we perceive
the figure and other qualities of bodies by the
fenfations which nature hath connected with
them.

The figns in the natural language of the hu-
man countenance and behaviour, as well as the
figns in our original perceptions, have the fame
fignification in all climates and in all nations ;
and the fkill of interpreting them is not acqui,
red, but innate.

In acquired perception, the figns are either
fenfations, or things which we perceive by
means of fenfations. The connection between
the fign, and the thing fignified, is eflablifhed
by nature : and we difcover. this connexion by

experience ;


Sea. 24.'- Of SEEING. 333

experience; but not without the aid of our
original perceptions, or of thofe which we have
already acquired. After this connection is dis-
covered, the fign, in like manner as in original
perception, always fuggefts the things Signified,
and creates the belief of it.

In artificial language, the figns are articulate
founds, whofe connection with the things figni-
fied by them is eflablifhed by the will of men :
and in learning our mother-tongue, we difcover
this connection by experience ; but not without
the aid of natural language, or of what we had
before attained of artificial language. And after
this connection is difcovered, the fign, as in na-
tural language, always fuggefts the thing figni-
fied, and creates the belie# of it.

Our original perceptions are few, compared
with the acquired ; but without the former, we
could not poffibly attain the latter. In like man-
ner, natural language is fcanty, compared with
artificial ; but without the former, we could not
poffibly attain the latter.

Our original perceptions, as well as the na-
tural language of human features and geftures,
muft be refolved into particular principles of the
human conftitution. Thus, it is by one parti-
cular principle of our conftitution, that certain
features exprefs anger; and by another parti-
cular principle, that certain features exprefs
benevolence. It is in like manner, by one par-
ticular principle of our conftitution, that a cer-
tain fenfauon fignifies hardncfs -in the body

which


S3 4 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VL
■which I handle ; and it is by another particular
principle, that a certain fenfation fignifies rfiotion
in that body.

But our acquired perceptions, and the infof*
mation we receive by means of artificial lan-
guage, mud be refolved into general principles
of the human conftitution. When a painter
perceives, that this picture is the work of Ra-
phael, that the work of Titian ; a jeweller* that
this is a true diamond, that a counterfeit ; a
failor, that this is a fhip of fivd hundred ton*
that of four hundred : thefe different acquired
perceptions are produced by the fame general
principles of the human mind, which have a dif*
ferent operation in the fame perfon according as
they are variously applied, and in different per-
fons according to the diverfity of their educa-
tion and manner of life. In like manner, when
certain articulate founds convey to my mind the
knowledge of the battle of Pharfalia, and others*
the knowledge of the battle of Poltowa; when
a Frenchman and an Englifhman receive the
fame information by different articulate founds;
the figns. ufed in thefe different cafes, produce
the knowledge and belief of the things, fignifled,
by means of the fame general principles of the
human conftitution.

Now, if we compare the general principles
of our conftitution, which fit us for receiving
information from our fellow- creatures by lan-
guage, with the general principles which fit us
for acquiring the perception of things- by our

fenfes,


Seft. 24. Of SEEING. ^5

fenfes, we lhall find them to be very fimilar in
their nature and manner of operation.

When we begin to learn our mother-tongue, .
we perceive by the help of natural language,
that they who fpeak to us, ufe certain founds to
exprefs certain things: we imitate the fame
founds when we would exprefs the fame things,
and find that we are underftood.

But here a difficulty occurs which merits our
attention, becaufe the folution of it leads to
fome original principles of the human mind, •
which are of great importance, and of very ex-
tenfive influence. We know by experience,
that men have ufed fuch words to exprefs fuch
things. But all experience is of the paft, and
can, of itfelf, give no notion or belief of what
is future. How come we then to believe, and to
rely upon it with affurance, that men who have
it in their power to do otherwife, will continue
to ufe the fame words when they think the fame
things ? Whence comes this knowledge and be-
lief, this forefight we ought rather to call it,
of the future and voluntary actions of our fel-
low-creatures ? Have they promifed that they
will never impofe upon us by equivocation or
falfehood ? No, they have not. And if they
had, this would not folve the difficulty : for
fuch promife muft be expreffed by words, or by
other figns ; and before we can rely upon it, we
muft be afiured that they put the ufual mean-
ing upon the figns which exprefs that promife.
No man of common fenfe ever thought of ta-
king


2 j6 Of the H UM A N MIND. Chap. VI.

king a man's own word for his honefty ; and it is
evident that we take his veracity for granted,
when we lay any ftrefs upon his word or pro-
mife. I might add, that this reliance upon the
declarations and teftimony of men, is found in
children long before they know what a pro-
mife is.

There is therefore in the human mind art
early anticipation, neither derived from expe-
rience, nor from reafon, nor from any compact
or promife, that our fellow-creatures will ufe
the fame figns in language, when they have the
fame fentiments.

This is, in reality, a kind of preference of
human acf ions ; and it feems to me to be an
original principle of .-the human conftitution,
without which we fhould be incapable of lan-
guage, and confequently incapable of inftrudtion.

The wife and beneficent Author of nature*
who intended that we mould be focial creatures,
and that we fhould receive the greateft andmoft
important part of our knowledge by the infor-
mation of others, hath, for thefe pufpofes, im-
planted in our natures two principles that tally
with each other.

The firfl of thefe principles is, a propenfity to 1
fpeak truth, and to ufe the figns of language, fo
as to convey our real fentiments. This principle
has a powerful operation, even in the greatefl
liars ; for where they lie once, they fpeak truth
a hundred times. Truth is always uppermoft,'
and is the natural iffue of the mind.- It requires

no- 1


Seft. 24. Of S E E I N G. 337

no art or training, no Inducement or temptation,
but only that we yield to a natural impulfe. Ly-
ing, on the contrary, is doing violence to our na-
ture j and is never pra&ifed, even by the worft
men, without fome temptation. Speaking truth
is like ufing our natural food, which we would
do from appetite, altho' it anfwered no end; but
lying is like taking phyfic, which is naufeous to
the tafte, and which no man takes but for fome
end which he cannot otherwife attain.

If it mould be objected, That men may be in-
fluenced by moral or political confiderations to
fpeak truth, and therefore, that their doing fo,
is no proof of fuch an original principle as we
have mentioned ; I anfwer, firft, That moral or
political confiderations can have no influence,
until we arrive at years of understanding and
reflexion ; and it is certain from experience,
that children keep to truth invariably, before
they are capable of being influenced by fuch con-
fiderations. Secondly, When we are influenced
by moral or political confiderations, we muft be
confcious of that influence, and capable of per-
ceiving it upon reflexion. Now, when I reflect
upon my aclions moft attentively, I am not con-
fcious that in fpeaking truth, I am influenced on
ordinary occafions by any motive moral or poli-
tical. I find, that truth is always at the door of
my lips, and goes forth fpontanecufiy, if not held
back. It requires neither good nor bad intention
to bring it forth, but only that I be artlefs an$
Undefigning. There may indeed be temptations
Y to


$38 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

to falfehood, which would be too ftrong for the
natural principle of veracity, unaided by princi-
ples of honour or virtue •, but where there is no
fuch temptation, we fpeak truth by inftinct ; and
this inftinct is the principle I have been explain-
ing.

By this inftinct, a real connection is formed
between our words and our thoughts, and there-
by the former become fit to be figns of the lat-
ter, which they could not otherwife be. And al-
tho' this connection is broken in every inftance
of lying and equivocation, yet thefe inftances be-
ing comparatively few, the authority of human
teftimony is only weakened by them, but not
deftroyed.

Another original principle implanted in us by
the Supreme Being, is a difpofition to confide in
the veracity of others, and to believe what they
tell us. This is the counter-part to the former »
and as that may be called the principle of veraci-
ty, we fhall, for want of a more proper name, call;
this the principle of credulity-. It is unlimited in
children, until they meet with inftances of deceit
arid falfehood : and it retains a very considerable
degree of ftrength through life.

If nature had left the mind of the fpeaker in
aauilibrio, without any inclination to the fide of
truth more than to that of falfehood ; children
would lie as often as they fpeak truth, until rea-
fon was fp far ripened, as to fuggeft the impru-
dence of lying, or confcience, as to fuggeft its-
immorality. And if nature had kft the mind

of


Sett. 24. Of S E E I N G. 339

of the hearer in aquilibrio, without any inclina-
tion to the fide of belief more than to that of
difbelief, we mould take no man's word until we
had pofitive evidence that he fpoke truth. His
.teftimony would, in this cafe, have no more au-
thority than his dreams ; which may be true or
falfe, but no man is difpofed to believe them, on
this account, that they were dreamed. It is evi-
dent, that, in the matter of teftimony, the balance
of human judgment is by nature inclined to the
fideof belief; and turns to that fideof itfelf, when
there is nothing put into the oppofite fcale. If
it was not fo, no propofition that is uttered in
difcourfe would be believed, until it was exami-
ned and tried by reafon ; and moft men would be
unable to find reafons for believingthethoufandth
part of what is told them. Such diftruft and in-
credulity would deprive us of the greateft bene-
fits of fociety, and place us in a worfe condition
than that of favages.

Children, on this fuppofition, would be abfb-
lutely incredulous •, and therefore abfolutely in-
capable of inftrudtion : thofe who had little
knowledge of human life, and of the manners
and characters of men, would be in the next de-
gree incredulous : and the moft credulous men
would be thofe of greateft experience, and of the
deepeft penetration ; becaufe, in many cafes, they
would be able to find good reafons for believing
teftimony, which the weak and the ignorant
could not difcover.

Y 2 In


34Q Of the H OMAN MIND. Chap. Vf,

In a word, if credulity were the effect of rea-
soning and experience, it muft grow up and ga-
ther ftrength, in the fame proportion as reafon
and experience do. But if it is the gift of nature,
it will be ftrongeft in childhood, and limited and
reftrained by experience ; and the moft fuperfi-
cial view of human life fhows, that the laft is
really the cafe, and not the firft.

It is the intention of nature, that We fhould be
carried in arms before we are able to walk upon
our legs; and it is likewife the intention of na-
ture, that our belief fhould be guided by the au-
thority and reafon of others, before it can be
guided by our own reafon. The weaknefs of the
infant, and the natural affection of the mother,
plainly indicate the former ; and the natural cre-
dulity of youth, and authority of age, as plainly
indicate the latter. The infant, by proper nur-
fing and care, acquires ftrength to walk without
fupport. Reafon hath likewife her infancy, when
fhe muft be carried in arms : then fhe leans en-
tirely upon authority, by natural inftinct, as if
fiie was confcious of her own weaknefs ; and
without this fupport, fhe becomes vertiginous.
When brought to maturity by properculture, fhe
begins to feel her own ftrength, and leans lefs
upon the reafon of others ; fhe learns to fufpe&
teftimony in fome cafes, and to difbelieve it in
others •, and fets bounds to that authority to
which fhe was at firft entirety fubject. But ftill,
tathe end of life, fhe finds a neceflity of borrow-
ing light from teftimony, where fhe has none

within


Sea. 24. Of S E E I N G. 34 i

within herfelf, and of learning in fome degree
upon the reafon of others, where fhe is confcious
of her own imbecillity.

And as in many inftances, Reafon, even in her
maturity, borrows aid from teftimony -, fo in
others fhe mutually gives aid to it, and ftrength-
ens its authority. For as we find good reafon to
reject teftimony in fome cafes, fo in others we
find good reafon to rely upon it with perfect fe-
curity, in our moft important concerns^ The
character, the number, and the difintereftednefs
ofwitneffes, the impoflibility of collufion, and
the incredibility of theirconcurring in their tefti-
1 mony without collufion, may give an irrefiftible
ftrength to teftimony, compared to which its
native and intrinfic authority is very inconfider-
able.

Having now conftdered .the general principles
of the human mind which fit us for receiving
information from our fellow-creatures-, by the
means of language ; let us next confider the ge-
neral principles which fit us for receiving the in-
formation of nature by our acquired perceptions.

Jt is undeniable, and indc£d is acknowledged
by all, that when we have found two things to
have been conftantly conjoined in the courfe of
nature, the appearance of one of them is immedi-
ately followed by the conception and belief of
the other. The former becomes a natural fign of
the latter-, and the knowledge of their conftanc
conjunction in tims paft, whether got by expe-
dience or otherwife, is fufficient to make us rely
Y 3 with


342 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
with afTurance upon the continuance of that con-
junction.

This procefs of the human mind is fo familiar,
that we never think of inquiring into the princi-
ples upon which it is founded. We are apt to
conceive it as a felf-evident truth, that what is
to come muft be fimilar to what is paft. Thus
if a certain degree of cold freezes water to-day,
and has been known to do fo in all time paft,
we have no doubt but the fame degree of- cold
will freeze water to-morrow, or a year hence.
That this is a truth which all men believe as foon
as they underftand it, 1 readily admit ; but the
queftion is, Whence does its evidence arife ? Not
from comparing the ideas, furely. For when I
compare the idea of cold with that of water hard-
ened into a tranfparent folid body, I can perceive
no connection between them : no man can (how
the one to be the neceflary effect of the other :
no man can give a fhadow of reafon why nature
hath conjoined them. But do we not learn their
conjunction from experience ? True j experience
informs us that they have been conjoined in time
paft : but no man ever had any experience of
what is future : and this is the very queftion to
be refolved, How we come to believe that the/«-
ture will be like the paft ? .Hath the Author of
nature promifed this ? Or were we admitted to
his council, when he eftablifhed the prefent laws
of nature, and determined the time of their con-
tinuance ? No, furely. Indeed, if we believe that
there is a wife and good Author of nature, we
4 may


5e&. 24. Of S E E I N G. 343

may fee a good reafon, why he mould continue
the fame laws of nature, and the fame connec-
tions of things, for a long time : becaufe, if he
did otherwife, we could learn nothing from what
is paft, and all our experience would be of no ufe
to us. But tho' this confideration, when we come
to the ufe of reafon, may confirm our belief of
the continuance of the prefent courfe of nature,
it is certain that it did not give rife to this be-
lief; for children and idiots have this belief as
foon as they know that fire will burn them. It
muft therefore be the effect of inftinft, not of
reafon.

The wife Author of our nature intended, that
a great and necefiary part of our knowledge
mould be derived from experience, before we
are capable of reafoning, and he hath provided
means perfedlly adequate to this intention. For,
firft, He governs nature by fixed laws, fo that
we find innumerable connections of things which
continue from age to age. Without this liabi-
lity of the courfe of nature, there could be no
experience ; or, it would be a falfe guide, and
lead us into error and mifchief. If there were
not a principle of veracity in the human mind,
mens words would not befigns of their thoughts :
and if there were no regularity in the courfe of
nature, rfo one thing could be a natural fign of
another. Secondly, he hath implanted in human
minds an original principle by which we believe
and expect the continuance of the courfe of na-
ture, and the continuance of thofe connections
Y 4 which


344 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VI.
which we have obferved in time paft. It is by
this general principle of our nature, that when
two things have been found connected in time
paft, the appearance of the one produces the be-
lief of the other.

I think the ingenious author of the Treatife
ef human nature firft obferved, That our belief
of the continuance of the laws of nature cannot
be founded either upon knowledge or probabi-
lity : but, far from conceiving it to be an origi-
nal principle of the mind, he endeavours to ac-
count for it from his favourite hypothefis, That
belief is nothing but a certain degree, of vivacity
in the idea of the thing believed. I made a re-
mark upon this curious hypothefis in the fecond
chapter, and ftiall now make another.

The belief which we have in perception, is a
belief of the prefent exiftence of the objeftj
that which we have in memory, is a belief of
its paft exiftence,; the belief of which we are
now fpeaking, is a belief of its future exiftence,
and in imagination there is no belief at all. Now,
I would gladly know of this author, how one de-
gree of vivacity fixes the exiftence of the objecT:
to the prefent moment ; another carries it back
to time paft ; a third, taking a contrary direction,
carries it into futurity ; and a fourth carries it
out of exiftence altogether." Suppofe, for in-
ftance, that I fee the fun rifing out of the fea ; I
remember to have feen him rife yefterday ; I be-
lieve he will rife to-morrow near the fame place ;
I can likewife imagine him rifing in that place^

with'*


Se&. 24. Of SEEING. 345

without any belief at all. Now, according to this
fceptical hypothefis, this perception, this memory,
this foreknowledge, and this imagination, are all
the fame idea, diverfifiedonly by different degrees
of vivacity. The perception of the fun rifing, is
the mod lively idea j the memory of his rifing
yefterday, is the fame idea a little more faint;
the belief of his rifing to-morrow, is the fame
idea yet fainter •, and the imagination of his ri-
fing, isftill the fame idea, but fainteftof all. One
is apt to think, that this idea might gradually
pafs thro' all poflible degrees of vivacity, without
ftirring out of its place. But if we think fo, we
deceive ourfelves ; for no fooner does it begin to
grow languid, than it moves backward into time
paft. Suppofing this to be granted, we expect at
leaft that as it moves backward by the decay of
its vivacity, the more that vivacity decays, it
will go back the farther, until it remove quite
out of fight. But here we are deceived again ;
for there is a certain period of this declining vi-
vacity, when, as if it had met an elaftic obftacle
, in its motion backward, it fuddenly rebounds
from the paft to the future, without taking the
prefent in its way. And now having got into
the regions of futurity, we are apt to think,
that it has room enough to fpend all its remain-
ing vigour : but ftill we are deceived ; for, by
another fprightly bound, it mounts up into the
a/iry region of imagination. So that ideas, in
the gradual declenfion of their vivacity, feem

to


34 6 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.
to imitate the inflexion of verbs in grammar.
They begin with the prefent, and proceed in or-
der to the preterite, the future, and the indefi-
nite. This article of the fceptical creed is in-
deed fo full of myftery, on whatever fide we
view it, that they who hold that creed, are very
injurioufly charged with incredulity : for to me
it appears to require as much faith as that of St.
Athanafius.

However, we agree with the author of the
Vreatife of human nature in this, That our belief
of the continuance of nature's laws is not deri-
ved from reafon. It is an inftinftive prefcience
of the operations of nature, very like to that pre-
fcience of human actions which makes us rely
upon the teftimony of our fellow-creatures ; and
as, without the latter, we mould be incapable of
receiving information from men by language ;
fo, without the former, we mould be incapable of
receiving the information of nature by means of
experience.

All our knowledge of nature, beyond our
original perceptions, is got by experience, and
confifts in the interpretation of natural figns.
The conftancy of nature's laws, connects the
fign with the thing fignified, and, by the natu-
ral principle juft now explained, we rely upon
the continuance of the connexions which expe-
rience hath difcovered ; and thus the appearance
of the fign, is followed by the belief of the
thing fignified.

Upon


Seft. 24. Of S E E IN G. 547

Upon this principle of our conftitution, not
only acquired perception, but all indu&ive rea-
foning, and all our reafoning from analogy, is
grounded : and therefore, for want of another
name, we fhall beg leave to call it the induftive
principle. It is from the force of this principle,
that we immediately affent to that axiom upon
which all our knowledge of nature is built, That
effects of the fame kind mult have the fame
caufe. For effefts and caufes, in the operations
of nature, mean nothing but figns, and the
things fignified by them. We perceive no pro-
per caufality or efficiency in any natural eaufe ;
but only a connection eftablifhed by the courfe
of nature between it and what is called its effecl:.
Antecedently to all reafoning, we have, by our
conftitution, an anticipation, that there is a
fixed and fteady courfe of nature ; and we have
an eager defire to difcover this courfe of nature.
"We attend to every conjunction of things which
prefents itfelf, and expect the continuance of
that conjunction. And when fuch a conjunction
lias been often obferved, we conceive the things
to be naturally conne&ed, and the appearance
of One, without any reafoning or reflexion, car-
ries along with it the belief of the other.

If any reader fhould imagine that the induc-
tive principle may be refolved into what philo-
fophers ufually call the affociation of ideas, let
him obferve, that, by this principle, natural figns
are not affociated with the idea only, but with
the belief of the things fignified. Now, this

can


348 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

can with no propriety be called an aflbciation
of ideas, unlefs ideas and belief be one and the
fame thing. A child has found the prick of a
pin conjoined with pain ; hence he believes, and
knows, that thefe things are naturally connected -,
he knows that the one will always follow the
other. If any man will call this only an aflbcia-
tion of ideas, I difpute not about words, but I
think he fpeaks very improperly. For if we ex-
prefs it in plain Englilh, it is a prefcience, that
things which he hath found conjoined in time
paft, will be conjoined in time to come. And
this prefcience is not the effect of reafoning, but
of an original principle of human nature, which
I have called the induSive principle. '

This principle, like that of credulity, is un-
limited in infancy, and gradually reftrained and
regulated as we grow up. It leads us often into
miftaker, but is of infinite advantage upon the
v;hole. By it the child once burnt fhuns the
fire; by it, he likewife runs away from the
furgeon by whom he was inoculated. It is bet-
ter that he mould do the laft, than that he mould
not do the firft.

But the miftakes we are led into by thefe
two natural principles, are of a different kind. ,
Men fometimes lead us into miftakes, when we
perfectly underftand their language, by fpeaking
lies. But .Nature never miQeads us in this way;
her language is always true ; and it is only by
Kiifinterpreting it that we fall into error. There
KUift be many accidental conjunctions of things,

as


Scft. 24. Of S E £ I N G. 349

as well as natural conne&ions ; and the former
are apt to be miftaken for the latter. Thus,
in the inftance above mentioned, the child con-
nected the pain of inoculation with the furgeon ;
whereas it was really connected with the incifion
only. Philofophers, and men of fcience, are
not exempted from fuch miftakes-, indeed all
falfe reafoning in philofophy is owing to them :
it is drawn from experience and analogy, as
well as juft reafoning, otherwife it could have
no verifimilitude : but the one is an unfkilful
and rafh, the other, a juft and legitimate in-
terpretation of natural figns. If a child, or a
man of common understanding, were put to in-
terpret a book of fcience, wrote in his mother-
tongue, how many blunders and miftakes would
he be apt to fall into ? Yet he knows as much of
this language as is neceffary for his manner of
life.

The language of nature is the univerfal ftudy;
and the ftudents are of different clafTes. Brutes,
idiots, and children, employ themfelves in this
ftudy, and owe to it all their acquired percep-
tions. Men of common understanding make a
greater progrefs, and learn, by a fmall degree
of refle&ion, many things of which children are


ignorant.


Philofophers fill up the higheft form in this
fchool, and are critics in the language of na-
ture. All thefe different clafles have one teacher,
Experience, enlightened- by the indudive prin-
ciple. Take- away the light of this inductive

principle,


35 o Ofth&HUMAN MIND. Chap. VI.

principle, and Experience is as blind as a mole :
Ihe may indeed feel what is prefent, and whafc
immediately touches her; but fhe fees nothing
that is either before or behind, upon the right
hand or upon the left, future or paft.

The rules of indudtive reafoning, or of a juffc
interpretation of nature, as well as the fallacies
by which we are apt to mifinterpret her lan-
guage, have been, with wonderful fagacity, de-
lineated by the great genius of Lord Bacon : fo
that his Novum organum may juftly be called a
grammar of the language of nature. It adds
greatly to the merit of this work, and atones
for its defects, that, at the time it was written,
the world had not feen any tolerable model of
inductive reafoning from which the rules of it
might be copied. The arts of poetry and elo-
quence were grown up to perfection when Ari-
ftotle defcribed them ; but the art of interpret-
ing nature was yet in embryo when Bacon de-
lineated its manly features and proportions. Ari-
ftotle drew his rules, from the beft models of
thofe arts that have yet appeared ; but the beft
models of inductive reafoning that have yet ap-
peared, which I take to be the third book of
the Principia and the Optics of Newton, were
drawn from Bacon's rules. The purpofe of all
thofe rules, is to teach us to diftinguiih feeming
or apparent connections of' things in the courfe
of nature, from fuch as are real.

They that are unfkilful in inductive reafon---
ing, are moje apt to fail into error in their

reafomngs


Se6t. 24. Of S E E I N G. 351

reafonings from the phaenomena of nature, than
in their acquired perceptions -, becaufe we often
reafon from a few inftances, and thereby are
apt to miftake accidental conjunctions of things
for natural connexions : but that habit of paf-
fing, without reafoning, from the fign to the
thing fignified, which conftitutes acquired per-
ception, mul be learned by many inftances or
experiments ; and the number of experiments
ferves to disjoin thofe things which have been
accidentally conjoined, as well as to confirm our
belief of natural connections.

From the time that children begin to ufe
their hands, natufe directs them to handle every
thing over and over, to look at it while they
handle it, and to put it in various positions*
and at various diftances from the eye. We
are apt to excufe this as a childifh diverfion r
becaufe they muft be doing fomething, and have
not reafon to entertain themfeives in a more
manly way. But if we think more juftly, we
fhall find, that they are engaged in the moft
ferious and important ftudy ; and if they had
all the reafon of a philofopher, they could not
be more properly employed. For it is this
childifh employment that enables them to make
the proper ufe of their eyes. They are there-
by every day acquiring habits of perception,
which are of greater importance than any thing
we can teach them. The original perceptions
which Nature gave them are few, and infufB-
cient for the purpofea of life j, and therefore fhe

made


352 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap.V?.
made then* capable of acquiring many more per-
ceptions by habit. And to complete her work,
fhe hath given them an unwearied afiiduiry in
applying to the exercifes by which thofe percep-
tions are acquired.

This is the education which Nature gives
to her children. And fince we have fallen upon
this fubjefr, we may add, that another part of
Nature's education is, That, by the courfe of
things, children mud often exert all their muf-
cular force, and employ all their ingenuity, in
qrder to gratify their curiofity, and fatisfy their
little appetites. What they defire is only to be
obtained at the expence of labour and patience,
and many difappointments. By the exercife of
body and mind necelTary for fatisfying their de-
fires, they acquire agility, ftrength, and dex-
terity in their motions, as well as health and
vigour to their conftitutions ; they learn pa-
tience and perfeverance ; they learn to bear
pain without dejection, and difappointment with-
out defpondence. The education of Nature
is moft perfect in favages, who have no other
tutor: and we fee, that, in the quicknefs of all
their fenfes, in the agility of their motions, in
the hardinefs of their conftitutions, and in the
ftrength of their minds to bear hunger, thirft, .
pain, and difappointment, they commonly far
exceed the civilized. A moft ingenious writer,
on this account, feems to prefer the favage life
to that of fociety. But the education of Nature
could never of itfelf produce a Rouffeau. It is

the


Seft. 24. Of SEEING. 353

the intention of nature, that human education
Ihould be joined to her inftitution, in order to
form the man. And me hath fitted us for hu-
man education, by the natural principles of imi-
tation and credulity, which difcover themfelves
almoft in infancy, as well aS by others which are
of later growth.

When the education which we receive from
men, does not give fcope to the education of
Nature, it is wrong directed ; it tends to hurt
our faculties of perception, and to enervate both
the body and mind. Nature hath her way of
fearing men, as fhe hath of curing their dif-
eafes. The art of medicine is to follow Nature*
to imitate and to affift her in the cure of difea-
fes; and the art of education is to follow Na-
ture, to affiit and to imitate her in her way of
rearing men. The ancient Baleares followed
Nature in the manner of teaching their children
to be good archers, when they hang their din-
ner aloft by a thread, and left the younkers to
bring it down by their fkiil in archery.

The education of Nature, without any more
human care than is necefiary to preferve life,
makes a perfect favage* Human education, join-
ed to that of Nature, may make a good citizen*
a fkilful artifan, or a well-bred man. But Rea-
,fon and Reflection muft fuperadd their tutory,
in order to produce a 'Roufleauy a Bacon, or a
Newton. '

Notwithftanding the innumerable errors com-
mitted in human education, there is hardly any

Z education


3 54 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VI.
education fo bad, as to be worfe than none. And
I apprehend, that if even Roufleau were to
chufe whether to educate a fon among the
French, the Italians, the Chinefe, or among the
Efkimaux, he would not give the preference to
the laft.

When reafon is properly employed, {he will
confirm the documents of Nature, which are
always true and wholefome ; fhe will diftingurlh,
in the documents of human education, the good
from the bad, rejecting the laft with modefty,
and adhering to the firft with reverence.

Moil men continue all their days to be juft
what Nature and human education made them.
Their manners, their opinions, their virtues,
and their vices, are all got by habit, imitation,
and inftruftion ; and Reafon has little or no fhare
in forming them.


t 355 j
CHAP. VIL

CONCLUSION.

Containing Reflections- upon the opinions
of philofophers on ,this fubjeit.

TH E R E are two ways in which men may-
form their notions and opinions concern-
ing the mind, and concerning its powers and
operations. The firft is the only way that leads
to truth ; but it is narrow and rugged, and few
have entered upon it. The fecond is broad and
fmooth, and hath been much beaten, not only
by the vulgar, but even by philofophers : it is
fufficient for common life, and is well adapted
to the purpofes of the poet and orator •„ but, in
philofophical difquifitions concerning the mind^
it leads to error and delufion.

We may call the firft of thefe ways* the way
of 'reflexion. When the operations of the mind
are exerted;, we are confcious of them •, and it
is in our power to attend to them, and tO reflect
upon them, until they become familiar objects
of thought. This is the only way in which we
Can form jufb and accurate notions of thofe ope-
rations. But this . attention and reflection is ib
difficult to man, furrounded on all hands by ex-
Z 2 < ternai


35 6 Of the H U M A N M IN" D. Chap. VII.

ternal objects which conftantly folicit his atten-
tion, that it has been very little practifed, even
by philofophers. In the courfe of this inquiry,
we have had many occafions to fhow, how little
attention hath been given to the moft familiar
operations of the fenfes.

The fecond, and the moft common way, in
which men form their opinions concerning the
mind and its operations, we may call the way of
analogy. There is nothing in the courfe of na-
ture lb fingular, but we can find fome refem-
blance, or at leaft fome analogy, between it and
other things with which we are acquainted. The
mind naturally delights in' hunting after fuch
analogies, and attends to them with pleafure.
From them, poetry and wit derive a great pare
of their charms ; and eloquence, not a little of
its perfuafive force.

Befides the pleafure we receive from analogies,
they are of very confiderable ufe, both to facili-
tate the conception of things, when they are not
eafily apprehended without fuch a handle, and to
lead us to probable conjectures about their nature
and qualities, when we want the means of more
direct and immediate knowledge. When I con-
fider that the planet Jupiter, in like manner as the
earth, rolls round his own axis, and revolves
round the fun, and that he is enlightened by fe-
veral fecondary planets, as the earth is enlight-
ened. by the moon ; I am apt to conjecture from
analogy, that as the earth by thefe means is fit-
ted


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 357

ted to be the habitation of various orders of ani-
mals, fo the planet Jupiter is, by the like means,
fitted for the fame purpofe : and having no ar-
gument more direct and conclufive to determine
me in this point, I yield, to this analogical rea-
foning, a degree of affent proportioned to its
ftrength. When I obferve, that the potatoe-plant
yery much refembles thefolanum in its flower and
fructification, and am informed, that the laft is
poifonous, I am apt from analogy to have fome
fufpicion of the former : but in this cafe, I have
accefs to more direct and certain evidence ; and
therefore ought not to truft to analogy, which
would lead me' into an error.

Arguments from analogy aw always at hand,
and grow up fpohtaneoufly in a fruitful imagina-
tion, while arguments that are more direct, and
more conclufive,, often -require painful attention
and application : and therefore mankind in gene-
ral have been very much difpofed to truft to the
former. If one attentively examines the fyftems
of the ancient philofophers, either concerning the
material world, or concerning the mind, he will
find them to be built folely upon the foundation
of analogy. Lord Bacon firft delineated the
ftrict and fevere method of induction ; fince his
time it has been applied with very happy fuccefs
in fome parts of natural philofophy ; and hardly
in any thing elfe. But there is no fubject in
which mankind are fo much difpofed to tijift to
the analogical way of thinking and reafoning, as
in what concerns the mind and its operations ;
Z 3 becaufe,


35 8 OftheHUMAN MIND. Chap. VII,

becaufe, to form clear and diftinct notions of
thofe operations in the direft and proper way^
and to reafon about them, requires a habit of at-
tentive reflexion, of which few are capable, and
which, even by thofe few, cannot be attained
without much pains and labour.

Every man is apt to form his notions of things
difficult to be apprehended, or lefs familiar, from
their analogy to things which are more familiar.
Thus, if a man bred to the feafaring life, and ac-
cuftomed to think and talk only of matters relat-
ing to navigation, enters into difcourfe upon any
Other fubjedt ; it is well known, that the lan-
guage and the notions proper to his own profef-
fion are infufed into every fubjecl, and all thing?
are meafured by the rules of navigation : and if
he mould take it into his head to philofophize
concerning the faculties of the mind, it cannot
be doubted, but he would draw his notions from
the fabric of his (hip, and would find in the mind,
fails, mafts, rudder, and compafs.
■ Senfible objects of one kind or other, do no
lefs occupy and ingrofs the reft of mankind, than
things relating to navigation, the feafaring man.
For a confiderable part of life, we can think of
nothing but the objedts of fenfe ; and to attend
to objefts of another nature, fo as to form clear
and diftindl notions of them, is no eafy matter,
even after we come to years of reflexion. The
condition of mankind, therefore, affords good
reafon to apprehend, that their language, and
their common notions, concerning the mind and

its


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 359

its operations, will be analogical, and derived
from the objetts of fenfe; and that thefe analo-
gies will be apt to impofe upon philofophers, as
well as upon the vulgar, and to lead them to ma-
terialize the mind and its faculties : and experi-
ence abundantly confirms the truth of this.

How generally men of all nations, and in all
ages of the world, have conceived the foul, or
thinking principle in man, to be fome lubtile
matter, like breath or wind, the names given t o
it almoft in all languages fufficiently teftify. We
have words which are proper, and not analogical,
to exprefs the various ways in which we perceive
external objedts by the fenfes ; fuch as feeling,
fight, tafie : but .we are often obliged to ufe thefe
words analog'cally, to exprefs other powers of
the mind which are of a very different nature.
And the powers which imply fome degree of re-
flexion, have generally no names but fuch as are
analogical. The objects of thought are faid to
be in the mind, to be apprehended, comprehended,
conceived, imagined, retained, weighed, ruminated.'

It does not appear that the notions of the an-
cient philofophers, with regard to the nature of
the foul, were much more refined than thofe of
the vulgar, or that they were formed in any
other way. We fhalldhtingiufh the philofophy
that regards our fubjecc into the old and the new.
The old reached down to Oes Cartes, who gave
it a fatal blow, of which it has been gradually
expiring ever fince, and is now almoft eve net.
Des Cartes is the father of the new philofcphy


■ $ 6o Of the HTJ M A N M I N D. Chap. VII,
that relai.es to this fubjecl: ; but it hath been gra-
dually improving fince his time, upon the princi-
ples laid down by him. The old philofophy feems
to have been purely analogical : the new is more
derived from reflexion, but ftill with a very con-
fiderable mixture of the old analogical notions.

Becaufe the objects of fenfe conliit oimattw
and form, the ancient philofophers conceived
every thing, to belong to one of thefe, or to be
made up of both. Some therefore thought, that
trie foul is a particular kind of fubtile matter, fe-
parable: from our grofs bodies ; others thought
that.it is only a particular form of the body, and
infeparable from it. For there feem to have been
fome" among the ancients, as well as among the
moderns, who conceived that a certain ftructure,
• or organization of the body, is all that is necefla-
' r'y to render it fen':ble and intelligent. The dif-
ferent powers of the mind were, accordingly, by
the laft feet of philofophers, conceived to belong
to different parts of the body, as the heart, the
Brain, the liver, the ftomach, the blood.

They who thought that the foul is a fubtile
matter feparable from the body, difputed to which
cf the four elements it belongs, whether to earth,
water, air, or fire. Of the three laft, each had
its particular advocates. But fome were of
opinion, that it partakes of all the elements ;
that it muft have fomething in its cornpofition
fjmilar to every thing w.e perceive; and that we
perceive earth by the earthly part; water, by the
watery part; and fire, by the fiery part of the

foul,


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 361

foul. Some, philofophersj not fatisfied with de-»
termining of what kind of matter the foul is
made, inquired likewife into its figure, which
they determined to be fpherical, that it might be
the more fit for motion. The moft fpiritual and
fublime notion concerning the nature of the foul,
to be met with among the ancient philofophers,
I conceive to be that of the Platonifts, who held
that it is made of that celeftial and incorruptible
matter of which the fixed ftars were made, and
therefore has a natural tendency to rejoin its pro-
per element. I am at a lofs to fay, in which of
thefe clafles of philofophers Ariftotle ought to
be placed. He defines the foul to be, The firft
I HTiteXtHz of a natural body which has potential life.
I beg to be excufed from tranflating the Greek
word, becaufe I know not the meaning of it.

The notions of the ancient philofophers with
regard to ehe operations of the mind, particu-
larly with regard to perception and ideas, feem
likewife to have been formed by the lame kind
of analogy.

Plato, of the writers that are extant, firft in-
troduced the word idea into phik>fophy ; but his
doctrine upon this fubjecl: had fomewhat peculiar.
He agreed with the reft of the ancient philofo-
phers in this, that all things confift of matter and
form i and that the matter of which all things,
were made a exifted from eternity, without form ;
but he likewife believed, that there are eternal
forms of all pofiible things which exift, without
matter j and to thefe eternal and immaterial forms

he


3 62 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VII.

he gave the name of ideas ; maintaining, that
they are the only object of true knowledge. It
is of no great moment to us, whether he bor-
rowed thefe notions from Parmenides, or whe^-
ther they were the iflbe of his own creative
imagination. The later Platonifts feem to have
improved upon them, in conceiving thofe ideas,
or eternal forms of things, to exift, not of them-
selves, but in the divine mind, and to be the
models and patterns according to which all things
were made :

'Then IrSd tF Eternal One, then, deep retired
In his unfathom'd ejfenee, view'd at large
The uncreated images of things.

To thefe Platonic notions, that of Malebranche
is very nearly allied. This author feems, more
than any other, to have been aware of the dif-
ficulties attending the common hypothefis con-
cerning ideas, to wit, That ideas of all objects of
thought are in the human mind ; and therefore*
in order to avoid thofe difficulties, makes the
ideas which are the immediate obje&s of human
thought, to be the ideas of things in the Divine
Mind ; who being intimately prefent to every
human mind, may difcover his ideas to it, as far
as pleafeth him.

The Platonifts and Malebranche excepted, all
other philofophers, as far as I know, have con-
ceived that there are ideas or images of every ob-
ject of thought in the human mind, or at lead: in

fomq


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 363

fome part of the brain, where the mind is fup-
pofed to have its refidence.

Ariftotle had no good •affection to the word
idea, and feldom or never ufes it but in refuting
Plato's notions about ideas. He thought that
matter may exift without form ; but that forms
pannot exift without matter. But at the fame
time he taught, That there can be no fenfation,
no imagination, nor intellection, without forms,
phantafms, or fpecies in the mind; and that
things fenfible are perceived by fenfible fpecies,
and things intelligible, by intelligible fpecies.
His followers taught more explicitly, that thofe
fenfible and intelligible fpecies are fent forth by
the objects, and make their impreffions upon the
paffive intellect -, and that the active intellect
perceives them in the paffive intellect. And this
feems to have been the common opinion while
{he Peripatetic philofophy retained its authority.
The Epicurean doctrine, as explained by Lu-
cretius, though widely different from the Peripa-
tetic in many things, is almoft the fame in this.
He affirms, that flender films or ghofts (tenuia
rerum Jimulacra) are ftill going off from all
things, and flying about •, and that thefe being
extremely fubtile, eafily penetrate our grofs bo-
dies, and ftriking upon the mind, caufe thought
and imagination.

After the Peripatetic fyftem had reigned
above a thoufand years in the fchools of Europe,
ajmoft without a rival, it funk before that of

Des


364 Of the HUM AN MIND. Chap. VII.
Pes Cartes ; the perfpicuity of whofe writings
and notions, contracted with the obfcurity of
Ariftotle and his commentators, created a ftrong
prejudice in favour of this new philofophy. The
characleriftic of Plato's genius was fublimuy,
that of Ariftotle's, fubtilty ; but Des Cartes
far excelled both in perfpicuity, and bequeathed
this fpirit to his fucceflbrs. The fyftem which
is now generally received, with regard to the
mind and its operations, derives not only its
fpirit from Des Cartes, but its fundamental prin-
ciples ; and after all the improvements made by
Malebranche, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume, may
ftill be caMcdjbe Cartejzan Jyjlem : we lhall there-
fore make fome remarks upon its fpirit and ten-
dency in general, and upon its do&rine concern*
jng ideas in particular.

i. It may be obferved, That the method
which Des Cartes purfued, naturally led him to
attend more to the operations of the mind by ac-
curate reflexion, and to truft lefs to analogical
reafoningupon this fubjecl, than any philofopher
had done before him. Intending to build a fyf-
tem upon a new foundation, he began with a
refolution to admit nothing but what was abfo-
lutely certain and evident. He fuppofed that
his fenfes, iiis memory, his reafon, and every
Other faculty to which we truft in common life,
might be fallacious ; and refolved to difbelieve
every thing, until he was compelled by irre-
fiftjble evidence to yield, afient.

In


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 3 € 5

In this method of proceeding, what appeared
to him, firft of all, certain and evident, was,
That he thought, that he doubted, that he de-
liberated. In a word, the operations of his
own mind, of which he was confeious, muft be
real, and no delufion ; and though all his other
faculties mould deceive him, his confeioufnefs
could not. This therefore he looked upon as
the firft of all truths. This was the firft firm
ground upon which he fet his foot, after being
tolled in the ocean of fcepticifm ; and he re-
folved to build all knowledge upon it, without
feeking after any more firft principles.

As every other truth, therefore, and parti-
cularly the exiftence of the objects of fenfe,
was to be deduced by a train of ftridf. argumen-
tation from what he knew by confeioufnefs, he
was naturally led to give attention to the ope-
rations of which he was confeious, without
borrowing his notions of them from external
things.

It was not in the way of analogy, but of
attentive reflection, that he was led to obferve,
That thought, volition, remembrance, and the
other attributes of the mind, are altogether
unlike to extenfion, to figure, and to all the
attributes of body; that we have no reafon,
therefore, to conceive thinking fubftances to
have any refemblance to extended fubftances -,
and that, as the attributes of the thinking fub-
ftance are things of which we are confeious, we
may have a more certain and immediate know-
ledge


3 €6 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap.' Vl!»

Jedge of them by reflection, than we can hav6
of external objects by our fenfes.

Thefe obfervations, as far as I know, were
firft made by Des Cartes ; and they are of more
importance, and throw more light upon the fub-
ject, than all that had been faid upon it before;
They ought to make us diffident and jealous of
every notion concerning the mind and its opera-
tions, which is drawn from fenfible objefts, in
the way of analogy, and to make us rely only
upon accurate reflection, as the fource of all
real knowledge upon this fubjedt.

, 2. I obferve, That as the Peripatetic fyftem
has a tendency to materialize the mind, and its
operations ; fo the Cartefian has a tendency to
fpiritualize body, and its qualities. One error,
common to both fyftems, leads to the firft of
thefe extremes in the way of analogy, and to the
laft, in the way of reflection. The error I
mean is, That we can know nothing about body*
or its qualities, but as far as we have fenfations
which refemble thofe qualities. Both fyftems
agreed in this : but according to their different
methods of reafoning, they drew very different
conclusions from it ; the Peripatetic drawing
his notions of fenfation from the qualities of
body ; the Cartefian, on the contrary, drawing
his notions of the qualities of body from his fen-
fations.

The Peripatetic, taking it for granted that
bodies and their qualities do really exift, and are'
fuch as we commonly take them to be, inferred

from


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 367

from them the nature of his fenfations, and
reafoned in this manner: Our fenfations are the
impreffions which fenfible objects make upon the
mind, and may be compared to the impreffion
of a feal upon wax ; the impreffion is the image
or form of the feal, without the matter of it :
in like manner, every fenfation is the image or
form of fome fenfible quality of the object. This
is the reafoning of Ariftotle, and it has an evi-
dent tendency to materialize the mind, and its
fenfations.

The Cartefian, on the contrary, thinks, that
the exiftence of body, or of any of its qualities,
is not to be taken as a firft principle ; and that
we ought to admit nothing concerning it, but
what, by juft reafoning, can be deduced from
our fenfations •, and he knows, that by reflection
we can form clear and diftinct notions of our
fenfations, without borrowing our notions of
them by analogy from the objects of fenfe. The
Cartefians, therefore, beginning to give atten-
tion to their fenfations, firft difcovered that the
fenfations correfponding to fecondary qualities,
cannot refemble any quality of body. Hence
Des Cartes and Locke inferred, that found, tafte,
fmell, colour, heat, and cold, which the vulgar
took to be qualities of body, we're not qualities
of body, but mere fenfations of the mind. After-
wards the ingenious Berkeley, confidering more
attentively the nature of fenfation in>generaL
difcovered, and demonftrated, that no fenfation
whatever could poffibly refemble any quality of

an


B 6l OftheHtFMAN MIND. Ckp.VlL

an infentient being, fuch as body is fuppofed to
be; and hence he inferred, very juftly, that
there is the fame reafon to hold exterifion, figure,
and all the primary qualities^ to be mere fenfa-
.tions, as there is to hold the fecondary qualities
to be mere fenfations. Thus, by juft reafoning
upon the Cartefian principles, matter was flript
of all its qualities ; the new fyftem, by a kind of
metaphyfical fublimttion, converted all the qua-
lities of matter into fenfations, and fpiritualized
body, as the old had materialized fpirit.

The way to avoid both thefe extremes, is*
to admit the exiftence of what we fee and feel
as a firft principle, as well as the exiftence of
things whereof we are confcious •, and to take
our notions of the qualities of body, from the
teftimony of our fenfes, with the Peripatetics j
and our notions of our fenfations, from the tefti-
mony of confcioufnefs, with the Cartefians.

3. I obferve, That the modern fcepticifm is
the natural iflue of the new fyftem ; and that,
although it did not bring forth this monfter until
the year 1739, it may be faid to have carried it
in its womb from the beginning.

The old fyftem admitted all the principles of
common fenfe as firft principles, without requi-
ring any proof of them ; and therefore, though
its reafoning was commonly vague, analogical,
and dark, yet it was built upon a broad founda-
tion, and had no tendency to fcepticifm. ' We
do not find that any Peripatetic thought it in-
cumbent upon him to prove the exiftence of a

material


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 3 6 9

material world ; but every writer upon the Car-
tefian fyftem attempted this, until Berkeley
clearly demonftrated the futility of their argu-
ments ; and thence concluded, that there was no
fuch thing as a material world; and that the
belief of it ought to be rejected as a vulgar
error.

The new fyftem admits only one of the prin-
ciples of common fenfe as a firft principle; and
pretends, by ftricT: argumentation, to deduce all
the reft from it. That our thoughts, our fenfa-
tions, and every thing of which we are confcious,
hath a real exiftence, is admitted in this fyftem
as a firft principle ; but every thing elfe muft be
made evident by the light of reafon. Reafon
muft rear the whole fabric of knowledge upon
this fingle principle of confcioufnefs.

There is a difpofition in human nature to re-
duce things to as few prinqiples as poffible ; and
this, without doubt,' adds to the beauty of a
fyftem, if the principles are able to fupport what
refts upon them. The mathematicians glory,
very juftly, in having raifed fo noble and mag-
nificent a fyftem of fcience, upon the foundation
of a few axioms and definitions. This love of
fzmplicity, and of reducing things to few prin-
ciples, hath produced many a falfe fyftem ; But
there never was any fyftem in which it appears
fo remarkably as that of Des Cartes. His whole
fyftem concerning matter and fpirit is built upon
one axiom, exprefied in one word cogito. Upon
the foundation of confcious thought, with ideas
A a for


370 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VII.
for his materials, he builds his fyftem of the hu-
man underftanding, and attempts to account for
all its phenomena : And having, as he imagined,
from his confcioufnefs, proved the exiftence of
matter; upon the exifcence of matter, and of a
certain quantity of motion originally imprefied
upon ir, he builds his fyftem of the material
world, and attempts to account for all its phe-
nomena.

Thefe principles, with regard to the material
fyftem, have been found inefficient; and it has
been made evident, that beTides matter and mo-
tion, we mull admit gravitation, cohefion, cor-
pufcular attraction, magnetifm, and other cen^
tripetal and centrifugal forces, by whkh the
particles of matter attract and repel each other.
Newton, having difcovered this, and demon-
ftrated, that thefe principles cannot be refolved
into matter and motion, was led by analogy,
and the love of fimplicity, to conjecture, but
with a mo.iefty and caution peculiar to him,
that all the phenomena of the material world
depended upon attracting and repelling forces in
the particles of matter. But we may now ven-
ture to fay, that this conjecture fell ftiort of the
mark. For, even in the unorganized kingdom,
the powers by which falts, cryftals, fpars,. and
many other bodies, concrete into regular forms,
can never be accounted for by attracting and
repelling forces in the particles of matter. And
in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, there are
ftrong indications of powers of a different nature
8 from


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 371

from all the powers of unorganized bodies. We
fee then, that altho' in the ftru&ure of the ma-
terial world there is, without doubt, all the
beautiful fimplicity confiftent with the purpofes
for which it was made, it is not lb fimple as the
great Des Cartes determined it to be : nay, it
is not fo fimple as the greater Newton modeftly
conjectured it to be. Both were mifled by ana-
logy, and the love of fimplicity. One had been
much converfant about extenfion, figure, and
motion ; the other had enlarged his views to
attracting and repelling forces ; and both formed
their notions of the unknown parts of nature,
from thofe with which they were acquainted, as
the ftiepherd Tityrus formed his notion of the
city of Rome from his country village :

Urbem quant dicunt Romam, Melibcee, putavi
Stultus ego, huic nofira fimilem, quo fape folemus
Paftores avium teneros depellere fcetus.
Sic canibus catulos fimiles, fie matribus h^edos
Noram : fie parvis componere magna folebam.

This is a juft piflure of the analogical way of
thinking.

But to come to the fyftem of Des Cartes, con-
cerning the human underftanding ; it was built,
as we have obferved, upon confeioufnefs as its
fole foundation, arid with ideas as its materials ;
and all his followers have bu.lt upon the fame
foundation and wi,th the fame materials. They
acknowledge that nature hath given us various
A a 2 k fimple


372 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VII.
fimple ideas j Thefe are analogous to the matter
of Des Cartes's phyfical fyftem. They acknow-
ledge likewife a natural power by which ideas are
compounded, disjoined, affociated, compared :
This is analogous to the original quantity of mo-
tion in Des Cartes's phyfical fyftem. From,
thefe principles they attempt to explain the phse-
nomena of the human understanding, juft as in
the phyfical fyftem the phasnomena of nature
were to be explained by matter and motion. It
muft indeed be acknowledged, that there is great
fimplicity in this fyftem as well as in the other.
There is fuch a fimilitude between the two, as
may be expected between children of the fame
father : but as the one has been found to be the
child of Des Cartes, and not of nature, there is
ground to think that the other is fo likewife.

That the natural iffue of this fyftem is fcep-
ticifm with regard to every thing except the ex-
iftence of our ideas, and of their necefiary rela-
tions which appear upon comparing them, is evi-
dent: for ideas being the only objects of thought,
and having no exiftence but when we are con-
fcious of them, it neceflarily follows, that there
is no object of our thought which can have a
continued and permanent exiftence. Body and
fpirit, caufe and effect, time and fpace, to which
we were wont to afcribe an exiftence indepen-
dent of our thought, are all turned out of exift-
ence by this fhort dilemma : Either thefe things
are ideas of ienfation or reflexion, or they are
not: if they are ideas of fenfation or reflexion,
5 they


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 373

they can have no exiftence but when we are con-
scious of them, if they are not ideas of fenfation
or reflection,, they are words without any mean-
ing.

Neither Des Cartes nor Locke perceived
this confequence of their fyftem concerning
ideas. Bifhop Berkeley was the firft who difco-
vered it. And what followed upon this difco-
very ? Why, with regard to the material world,
and with regard to fpace and time, he admits
the confequence, That thefe things are mere
ideas, and have no exiftence but in our minds :
but with regard to the exiftence of fpirits or
minds, he does not admit the confequence ; and
if he had admitted it, he muft have been an ab-
lolute fceptic. But how does he evade this con-
fequence with regard to the exiftence of fpirits ?
The expedient which the good Bifhop ufes on
this occafion is very remarkable, and fhows his
great averfion to fcepticifm. He maintains, that
we have no ideas of fpirits ; and that we can
think, and fpeak, and reafon about them, and
about their attributes, without having any ideas
of them. If this is fo, my Lord, what, fhould
hinder us from thinking. and reafoning about
bodies, and their qualities, without having ideas
of them ? The Bifhop either did not think of
this queftion, or did not think fit to give any
anfwer to it. However, we may obferve, that
in order to avoid fcepticifm, he fairly ftarts out
of the Cartefian fyftem, without giving any
reafon why he did fo in this inftance, and in no
A a 3 other.


374 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. VII,
other. This indeed is the only inftance of a
deviation from Cartefian principles which I have
met with in the fucceffors of Des Cartes -, and
it feems to have been only a fudden ftart, occa-
fioned by the terror of fcepticifm ; for in all other
things Berkeley's fyftem is founded upon Carte-:
fian principles.

Thus we fee, that Des Cartes and Locke
take the road that leads to fcepticifm, without
knowing-the end of it -, but they flop fhort for
want oflight to carry them farther. Berkeley,
frighted at the appearance of the dreadful abyfs,
flans afide, and avoids it. But the author of
the I'reatife of human nature, more daring and in-
trepid, without turning afide to the right hand
or to the left, like Virgil's Alefto, fhqor.s direclly
into the sulf:


t^


Hie fpscus horrendum, et fievi fpiracula Ditis
Mcnftrantur : ruptoque ingens Acheronte vorago
Peftiferas aperit fauces.

4. We may obferve, That the account given
by the new fyftem, of that furniture of the
human underftanding which is the gift of na-
ture, and not the acquiCtion .of our own rea T
foaing faculty, is extremely lame and imper-
ftft.

The natural furniture of the human under-
ftanding is of two kinds ; Firft, The notions or
fimple apprehenfions which we have of things :
and Secondly, The judgments or the belief which

we


C^ap. VII. CONCLUSION. 375

we have concerning them. As to our notions,
the new fyftem reduces them to two claflcs ;
ideas of fenfation, and ideas of reflection; the firft
are conceived to be copies of our fenfations, re-
tained in the memory or imagination ; the fecond,
to be copies of the operations of our minds where-
of we are confeious, in like manner retained in
the memory or imagination : and we are taught,
that thefe two comprehend all the materials
about which the human underftanding is, or can
be employed. As to our judgment of things,
or the belief which we" have concerning them,
the new fyftem allows no part of it to be the
gift of nature, but holds it to be the acquili-
tion of reafon, and to be got by comparing our
ideas, and perceiving their agreements or difu-
greements. Now I take this account, both of
our notions, and of our judgments or belief, to
be extremely imperfect ; and I fhall briefly point
out fome of its capital defects.

The divifion of our notions into ideas of fen-
fation, and ideas of reflexion, is contrary to all
rules of logic ; becaufe the fecond member of
the divifion includes the firit. For, can we
form clear and j aft notions of our fenfations
any other way than by reflexion? Surely we
cannot. Senfation is an operation of the mind
of which we are confeious ; and we get the
notion of fen Cation, by reflecting upon that
which we are confeious of. In like manner,
doubting and believing are operations of the
mind wnereof we are confeious j and we get
A a 4 the


376 Of the H U M A N M I N D. Chap. VII.

the notion of them by reflecting upon what we
are confcious of. The ideas of fenfation, there-
fore, are ideas of reflexion, as much as the ideas
of doubting, or believing, or any other ideas
whatfoever.

But to pafs over the inaccuracy of this divi-
fion, it is extremely incomplete. For, fince fen-
fation is an operation of the mind, as well as all
the other things of which we form our notions
by reflexion ; when it is aflerted, that all our no-
tions are either ideas of fenfation, or ideas of re-
flexion, the plain Englifh of this is, That man-
kind neither do, nor can think of any thing but
of the operations of their own minds. Nothing
can be more contrary to truth, or more contrary
to the experience of mankind. I know that
Locke, while he maintained this doftrine, be-
lieved the notions which we have of body and of
its qualities, and the notions which we have of
motion and of fpace, to be ideas of fenfation. But
why did he believe this ? Becaufe he believed
thole notions to be nothing elfe but images of
our fenfations. If therefore the notions of body
and its qualities, of motion and fpace, be not
images of our fenfations, will it not follow, that
thofe notions are not ideas of fenfation ? Moft
certainly.

There is no doctrine in the new fyftem which
more directly leads to fcepticifm than this. And
the author of the Treatife of human nature knew
very well how to ufe it for that purpofe : for, if
you maintain that there is any fuch exiflence as

body


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 377

body or fpirit, time or place, caufe or effecT:, he
immediately catches you between the horns of
this dilemma ; your notions of thefe exiftences
are either ideas of fenfation, or ideas of reflexion;
if of fenfation, from what fenfation are they co-
pied ? if of reflexion, from what operation of the
mind are they copied?

It is indeed to be wifhed, that thofe who have
written much about fenfation, and about the
other operations of the mind, had likewife thought
and reflected much, and with great care, upon
thofe operations : but is it not very ftrange,
that they will not allow it to be poffible for man-
kind to think of any thing elfe ?

The account which this fyftem gives of our
judgment and belief concerning things, is as far
from the truth as the account it gives of our no-
tions or fimple apprehenfions. It reprefents our
fenfes as having no other office, but that of fur-
nifhing the mind with notions or fimple appre-
henfions of things ; and makes our judgment and
belief concerning thofe things to be acquired by
comparing our notions together, and perceiving
their agreements or difagreements.

We have fhown, on the contrary, that every
operation of the fenfes, in its very nature, implies
judgment or belief, as well as fimple apprehen-
fion. Thus, when I feel the pain of the gout in
my toe, I have not only a notion of pain, but a
belief of its exiftence, and a belief of fomedifor-
der in my toe which occafions it ; and this be-
lief is not produced by comparing ideas, and per-
ceiving


378 Of the HUMAN'MIND.' Chap. VII.
ceiving their agreements and difagreements •, it
is included in the very nature of the fenfation.
When I perceive a tree before me, my faculty of
feeing gives me not only a notion or fimple ap-
prehenfion of the tree, but a belief of its exift-
cnce, and of its figure, diftance, and magnitude j
and this judgment or belief is not got by compa-
ring ideas, it is included in the very nature of the
perception. We have taken notice of feveral
original principles of belief in the courfe of this in-
quiry ; and when other faculties of the mind are
examined, we mail find more, which have not
occurred in the examination of the five fenfes.

Such original and natural judgments are there-
fore a part of that furniture which nature hath
given to the human underftanding. They are
the in fpi ration of the Almighty, no lefs than our
notions or fimple apprehenfions. They ferve to
direct us in the common affairs of life, where our
reafoning. faculty would leave us in the dark.
They are a part of our conftitution, and all the
d'ifcoveries ofpurreafon are grounded upon them.
They make up what is called the tommati fenfe of
mankind; and what is manifeftly contrary to any
of thofe firft principles, is what we call abfurd.
The ftrength of them is good fenfi, which is.
often found in thofe who are not acute in reafon-
ing. A remarkable deviation from them, arifing
from a diforder in the conftitution, is what we
C&W lunacy, as when a man believes that he is
made of glafs. When a man fuffers himfelf to be
reafoned out of the principles of common fenfe,

by


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 379

by metaphylkal arguments, we may call this me-
taphyseal lunacy ; which differs from the other
fpecies of the diftemper in this, that it is not
continued, |but intermittent : it is apt to ferae the
patient in folitary and fpeculative moments -, but
when he enters into fociety, Common Senfe re-
covers her authority. A clear explication and
enumeration of the principles of common fenfe, is
one of the chief defiderata in logic. We have
only confidered fuch of them as occurred in the
examination of the five fenfes.

5. The laft obferyation that I fhall make up-
on the new fyftem is, That, altho' it profefies
to fet out in the way of reflexion, and not of
analogy, it hath retained fome of the old analogi-
cal notions concerning the operarions of the mind;
particularly, That things which do not now ex-
ift in the mind itfelf, can only be perceived, re-
membred, or imagined, by means of ideas or
images of them in the mind, which are the im-
mediate objects of perception, remembrance, and
imagination. This doctrine appears evidently to
be borrowed from the old fyftem ; which taught,
that external things make imprefiions upon the
mind, like the imprefiions of a feal upon wax ;
that it is by means of thofe imprefiions that we
perceive, remember, or imagine them ; and that
thofe imprefiions mull refemble the things from
which they are taken. When we form our no-
tions of the operations of the mind by analogy,
this way of conceiving them feems to be very
natural, and orfers itfelf to our thoughts : for as

every


380 Of the HUMAN MIND. Chap. VII.
every thing which is felt mud make fome im-
preffion upon the body, we are apt to think, that
every thing which is underftood mult make fome
impreflion upon the mind.

From fuch analogical reafoning, this opinion
of the exiftence of ideas or images of things in
the mind, feems to have taken its rife, and to
have been fo univerfally received among philofo-
phers. It was obferved already, that Berkeley, in
one inftance, apoftatizes from this principle of
the new fyftem, by affirming, that we have no
ideas of fpirits, and that we can think of them
immediately, without ideas. But I know not
whether in this he has had any followers. There
is fome difference likewife among modern philo-
fophers, with regard to the ideas or images by
which we perceive, remember, or imagine fenfi-
ble things. For, tho 5 all agree in the exiftence of
fuch images, they differ about their place ; fome
placing them in a particular part of the brain,
where the foul is thought to have her refidence,
and others placing them in the mind itfelf. Des
Cartes held the firft of thefe opinions ; to which
Newton feems likewife to haye inclined ; for he
propofes this query in his Optics : " Annon fen-
" forium animalium eft locus cui fubftantia fen-
" tiens adeft, et in quern fenfibiles rerum fpecies
" per nervos et cerebrum deferuntur, ut ibi
" prsefentes a prsefente fentiri poflint ?" But
Locke feems to place the ideas of fenfible things
in the mind : and that Berkeley, and the au-
thor of the Treatife cf human nature, were of

the


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 381

the fame opinion, is evident. The laft makes
a very curious application of this do&rine, by
endeavouring to prove from it, That the mind
either is no fubftance, or that it is an extended
and divifible fubftance ; becaufe the ideas of ex-
tension cannot be in a fubjeft which is indivifible
and unextended.

I confefs I think his reafoning in this, as in
moil cafes, is clear and ftrong. For whether
the idea of extenfion be only another name for
extenfion itfelf, as Berkeley and this author af-
fert ; or whether the idea of extenfion be an
image and refemblance of extenfion, as Locke
conceived ; I appeal to any man of common
fenfe, whether extenfion, or any image of ex-
tenfion, can be in an unextended and indivifible
fubjeft. But while I agree with him in his rea-
foning, I would make a different application of
it. He takes it for granted, that there are ideas
of extenfion in the mind ; and thence infers,
that if it is at all a fubftance, it muft be an ex-
tended and divifible fubftance. On the con-
trary, I take it for granted, upon the teftimony
of common fenfe, that my mind is a fubftance,
that is, a permanent fubjedt of thought ; and my
reafon convinces me, that it is an unextended
and indivifible fubftance ; and hence I infer,
that there cannot be in it any thing that re-
fembles extenfion. If this reafoning had oc-
curred to Berkeley, it would probably have led
him to acknowledge, that we may think and
reafon concerning bodies, without having ideas

of


382 Ofthe HUMAN MIND. Chap. ViL

of them in the mind, as well as concerning fpi-
nts.

I intended to have examined more pa: iciv
larly and fully this dodtrine of the exiftenee of
ideas or images of things in the mind-, and
likewife another doctrine, which is founded up-
on it, to wit, That judgment or belief is no-
thing but a perception of the agreement or dif-
agreement of our ideas : but having already
fhewn, through the courfe of this inquiry, that
the operations of the mind which we have exa-
mined, give no countenance to either of thefe
doctrines, and in many things contradict them,
I have thought it proper to drop this part of my
defign. It may be executed with more advan-
tage, if it is at all necefiary, after inquiring in-
to fome other powers of the human underftand-


ing.


Although we have examined only the five
fenfes, and the principles of the human mind
which are employed about them, or fuch as have
fallen in our way in the courfe of this examina-
tion -, we (hall leave the further profecution of
this inquiry to future deliberation. The powers
of memory, of imagination, of tafte, of rea-'
foning, of moral perception, the will, the paf-
fions, the affedions, and all the active powers
of the foul, prefent a vaft and boundlcfs field of
philofophical difquifition, which the author of
this inquiry is far from thinking himfelf able to
furvey with accuracy. Many authors of in-
genuity, ancient and modern, have made ex-

curfions


Chap. VII. CONCLUSION. 383

curfions into this vaft territory, and have com-
municated ufeful obfcrvations : but there is rea-
fon to believe, that thofe who have pretended.
to give us a map of the whole, have fatisfied
themfelves with a very inaccurate and incom-
plete furvey. If Galileo had attempted a com-
plete fyftem of natural pbilolbphy, he had, pro-
bably, done little fervice to mankind : but by
confining himfelf to what was within his com-
prehenfion, he laid the foundation of a fyftem
of knowledge, which rifes by degrees, and dees
honour to the human underftanding. Newton,
building upon this foundation, and m like man-
ner, confining his inquiries to the law of gravi-
tation and the properties of light, performed
wonders. If he had attempted a great deal
rnore, he had done a great deal lefs, and per-
haps nothing at all. Ambitious of following
fuch great examples, with unequal fteps, alas I
and unequal force, we have attempted an in-
quiry only into one little corner of the human
mind ; that corner which feems to be mod: esc-
pofed to vulgar obfervation, and to be moil eafily
comprehended ; and yet, if we have delineated
it juftly, it muft be acknowledged, that the
accounts heretofore given of it,, were very lame,
and wide of the truth.


THEE N D.
