ESSAYS ON THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS OF MAN
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/reidsessaysonint00reid): from Reid's collected writings, edited with notes by Sir William Hamilton (Edinburgh: Maclachlan and Stewart; London: Longmans, 1853).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

REID'S  ESSAYS


INTELLECTUAL  POWERS  OF  MAN.


FROM


HIS  COLLECTED  WRITINGS


«OT9«flM


SIR  WILLIAM  HAMILTON,  BART.

AND WITH THE FOOT NOTES


THE EDITOR.


EDINBURGH:

MACLACHLAN AND STEWART.

LONDON: LONGMANS AND COMPANY.

MDCCCLIII.


\


<&


/  s~*7


CONTENTS.  $>?>


ESSAYS  ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS  OF  MAN.


Dedication, ......  215

Preface, ......  216

ESSAY  I. — Preliminary.  .

Chapter I.  Explication  of  Words, .• ."" ' . .  219

II.  Principles  taken  for  granted, . . .  230

III.  Of  Hypotheses, ' . ' . . .  234

IV.  Of  Analogy, ... .  236
V.  Of  the  proper  means  of  Knowing  the  operations  of  the  Mind,  238

VI.  Of  the  difficulty  of  Attending  to  the  operations  of  our  own  Minds, 240

V "II.  Division  of  the  powers  of  the  Mind, . . .  242

VIII.  Of  Social  [and  Solitary]  operations  of  Mind. .  244


ESSAY  II. — Of  the  Powers  we  have  by  means  of  our  External  Senses.

Chapter I.  Of  the  Organs  of  Sense,  ....  245

II.  Of  the  Impressions  on  the  Organs,  Nerves,  and  Brain,  247

III.  Hypothesis  concerning  the  Nerves  and  Brain,  .  248

IV.  False  Conclusions  drawn  from  the  impressions  before  mentioned,  253

V.  Of  Perception,  .  .  .  .258

VI.  What  it  is  to  Account  for  a  Phenomenon  in  Nature,  260

VII.  Sentiments of  Philosophers  about  the Perceptions  of  External

objects  ;  and  first,  of  the  theory  of  Father  Malebranche  262
VIII.  Of  the  Common  Theory  of  Perception  ; and  of  the  sentiments  of

the  Peripatetics,  and  of  Des  Cartes,  .  .  267

IX.  The  sentiments  of  Mr  Locke,  .  .  .  275

X. The  sentiments  of  Bishop  Berkeley, .  .  .  280

XI.  Bishop  Berkeley's  sentiments  of  the  nature  of  Ideas,  287

XII. The  sentiments  of  Mr  Hume,  .  .  .  292

XIII.  The  sentiments  of  Anthony  Arnauld,  .  .  295

XIV.  Reflections  on  the  Common  Theory  of  Ideas, . .  298
XV.  Account  of  the  system  of  Leibnitz, " . ' .  306

XVI.  Of  Sensation, . . . . ■ .  310
XVII.  Of  the  Objects  of  Perception  ;  and  first,  of  Primary  and  Second-
ary Qualities, ....  313
XVIII.  Of  other  objects  of  Perception, . . .  319
XIX.  Of  Matter  and  of  Space, ....  322
XX.  Of  the  Evidence  of  Sense,  and  of  Belief  in  general, .  326*
XXI.  Of  the  Improvement  of  the  Senses, . . .  330
XXII.  Of  the  Fallacy  of  the  Senses, ...  334


VI  CONTENTS.

Page
ESSAY  III.— Op  Memory.

Chapter I. Things  obvious  and  certain  with  regard  to  Memory,  .  339

II.  Memory  an  original  faculty,  .  .  .  340

III.  OfJ>uration, .....  342

IV.  Of  Identity, .....  344
V.  Mr  Locke's  account  of  the  Origin  of  our  Ideas,  and  particularly

of  the  idea  of  Duration,  ....  346

VI.  Mr  Locke's  account  of  our  Personal  Identity,  .  350

VII. Theories  concerning  Memory,  ,  .  .  353


ESSAY  IV Of  Conception.

Chapter I.  Of  Conception,  or  Simple  Apprehension  in  general,  . 360

II. Theories  concerning  Conception, .  . 368

III.  Mistakes  concerning  Conception, *. .  . 375

IV.  Of  the  Train  of  Thought  in  the  mind, .  . 379


ESSAY  V.— Of  Abstraction.

Chapter I.  Of  General  Words,  ....  389

II.  Of  General  Conceptions,  .  .  .  391

III.  Of  general  conceptions  formed  by  Analysing  objects,  .  394

IV.  Of  general  conceptions  formed  by  Combination,  .  398
V. Observations  concerning  the  Names  given  to  our  general  notions, 403

VI. Opinion  of  philosophers  about  Universals,  .  .  405


ESSAY  VI.— Of  Judgment.

Chapter I. Of  Judgment  in  general, ....  413

•II. Of  Common  Sense, ....  421

III.  Sentiments  of  philosophers  concerning  Judgment, .  426

IV.  Of  First  Principles  in  general, • • .  434
V. The  first  principles  of  Contingent  Truths. [  On  Consciousness, ~\ 441

VI.  First  principles  of  Necessary  Truths, . .  452

VII. Opinions,  ancient  and  modern,  about  First  Principles, .  462

VIII. Of  Prejudices,  the  causes  of  error, . .  468


ESSAY  VII.— Of  Reasoning.

Chapter I. Of  Reasoning  in  general,  and  of  Demonstration,  •  475

II. Whether  Morality  be  capable  of  demonstration,  .  478

■wJJI. Of  Probable  Reasoning, ....  481

IV. Of  Mr  Hume's  Scepticism  with  regard  to  Reason, .  484


ESSAY  VIII.— Of  Taste.

Chapter I. Of  Taste  in  general, ....  490

II.  Of  the  Objects  of  taste,  and  first  of  Novelty, .  493

[II. Of  Grandeur, ....  494

IV. Of  Beauty, .....  498


ESSAYS

ON  THK

INTELLECTUAL  POWERS  OF  MAN,

By  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.,  F.R.S.E.,

PROFESSOR  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  GLASGOW,
"  Who  bath  put  wisdom  in  the  inward  part*  ?*— Job.


fcf"  This  impression  of  the  "  Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers,"  is  made  from  the
only  authentic  edition — that  of  1785,  in  4to.  For  the  convenience  of  reference  the  pages
of  that  edition  are  distinguished  in  the  present ;  and  by  these  pages  I  shall  always,  in
the  notes,  prospectively,  quote.  They  will  be  found  marked  both  in  the  text  and  on  the
lower  margin — H.


DEDICATION


MR  DUGALD STEWART,

LATELY  PROFESSOR  OF  MATHEMATICS,  NOW PROFESSOR  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY,

AND

DR  JAMES GREGORY,

PROFESSOR  OF  THE  THEORY  OF  PHYSIC  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH.*


My.  Dear  Friends, — I  know  not  to
whom  I  can  address  these  Essays  with
more  propriety  than  to  you ;  not  only  on
account  of  a  friendship  begun  in  early  life
on  your  part,  though  in  old  age  on  mine,
and  in  one  of  you  I  may  say  hereditary  ;
nor  yet  on  account  of  that  correspondence
in  our  literary  pursuits  and  amusements,
which  has  always  given  me  so  great  plea-
sure ;  but  because,  if  these  Essays  have
any  merit,  you  have  a  considerable  share
in  it,  having  not  only  encouraged  me  to  hope
that  [iv.]  they  may  be  useful,  but  favoured
me  with  your  observations  on  every  part  of
them,  both  before  they  were  sent  to  the
press,  and  while  they  were  under  it.

I  have  availed  myself  of  your  observa-
tions, so  as  to  correct  many  faults  that
might  otherwise  have  escaped  me ;  and  I
have  a  very  grateful  sense  of  your  friend-
ship, in  giving  this  aid  to  one  who  stood
much  in  need  of  it ;  having  no  shame,  but
much  pleasure,  in  being  instructed  by  those
who  formerly  were  my  pupils,  as  one  of  you
was.

It  would  be  ingratitude  to  a  man  whose
memory  I  most  highly  respect,  not  to  men-
tion my  obligations  to  the  late  Lord  Karnes,
for  the  concern  he  was  pleased  to  take  in
this  "Work.  Having  seen  a  small  part  of
it,  he  urged  me  to  carry  it  on ;  took  acount
of  my  progress  from  time  to  time  ;  revised
it  more  than  once,  as  far  as  it  was  carried,
before  his  death  ;  and  gave  me  his  observa-
tions on  it,  both  with  respect  to  the  matter
and  the  expression. On  some  points  we

•  See  above,  in  "  Correspondence,"  p.  65,  a.— H.
[iii.-vi.l


differed  in  opinion,  and  debated  them
keenly,  both  in  conversation  and  by  many
letters,  without  any  abatement  of  his  affec-
tion, or  of  his  zeal  for  the  work's  being
carried  on  and  published  :  for  he  had  too
much  liberality  of  mind  not  to  allow  to  [v.]
others  the  same  liberty  in  judging  which  he
claimed  to  himself.

It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  that  worthy
man  was  more  eminent  in  active  life  or
in  speculation.  Very  rare,  surely,  have
been  the  instances  where  the  talents  for
both  were  united  in  so  eminent  a  degree.

His  genius  and  industry,  in  many  differ-
ent branches  of  literature,  will,  by  his
works,  be  known  to  posterity  :  his  private
virtues  and  public  spirit,  his  assiduity,
through  a  long  and  laborious  life,  in  many
honourable  public  offices  with  which  he  was
entrusted,  and  his  zeal  to  encourage  and
promote  everything  that  tended  to  the
improvement  of  his  country  in  laws,  litera-
ture, commerce,  manufactures,  and  agricul-
ture, are  best  known  to  his  friends  and
contemporaries.

The  favourable  opinion  which  he,  and
you  my  friends,  were  pleased  to  express
of  this  work,  has  been  my  chief  encourage-
ment to  lay  it  before  the  public  ;  and  per-
haps, without  that  encouragement,  it  had
never  seen  the  light :  for  I  have  always
found,  that,  without  social  intercourse,  even
a  favourite  speculation  languishes;  and
that  we  cannot  help  thinking  the  better  of  our
own  opinions  [vi.]  when  they  are  approved
by  those  whom  we  esteem  good  judges.

You  know  that  the  substance  of  these
Essays  was  delivered  annually,  for  more


21(5


PREFACE.


than  twenty  years,  in  Lectures  to  a  large
body  of  the  more  advanced  students  in  this
University,  and  for  several  years  before,  in
another  University.  Those  who  heard  me
with  attention,  of  whom  I  presume  there
are  some  hundreds  alive,  will  recognise  the
doctrine  which  they  heard,  some  of  them
thirty  years  ago,  delivered  to  them  more
diffusely,  and  with  the  repetitions  and  illus-
trations proper  for  such  audiences.

I  am  afraid,  indeed,  that  the  more  intel-
ligent reader,  who  is  conversant  in  such
abstract  subjects,  may  think  that  there  are
repetitions  still  left,  which  might  be  spared.
Such,  I  hope,  will  consider,  that  what  to


one  reader  is  a  superfluous  repetition,  to
the  greater  part,  less  conversant  in  such
subjects,  may  be  very  useful.  If  this  apo-
logy be  deemed  insufficient,  and  be  thought
to  be  the  dictate  of  laziness,  I  claim  some
indulgence  even  for  that  laziness,  at  my
period  of  life,  [vii  ]

You  who  are  in  the  prime  of  life,  with
the  vigour  which  it  inspires,  will,  I  hope,
make  more  happy  advances  in  this  or  in  any
other  branch  of  science  to  which  your  talents
may  be  applied.

Tho.  Reid.
Glasgow  College,  June  I,  1785.


PREFACE.


Human  knowledge  may  be  reduced  to
two  general  heads,  according  as  it  relates
to  body  or  to  mind  ;  to  things  material  or
to  things  intellectual.*

The  whole  system  of  bodies  in  the  uni-
verse, of  which  we  know  but  a  very  small
part,  may  be  called  the  Material  World  ;
the  whole  system  of  minds,  from  the  infinite
Creator  to  the  meanest  creature  endowed
with  thought,  may  be  called  the  Intellectual
World.  These  are  the  two  great  kingdoms
of  nature-|*  that  fall  within  our  notice ;
and  about  the  one,  or  the  other,  or  things
pertaining  to  them,  every  art,  every  science,
and  every  human  thought  is  employed  ;  nor
can  the  boldest  flight  of  imagination  carry
us  beyond  their  limits.

Many  things  there  are,  indeed,  regarding
the  nature  and  the  structure  both  of  body
and  of  mind,  which  our  faculties  cannot
reach ;  many  difficulties  which  the  ablest
philosopher  cannot  resolve : but  of  other


*  See  Stewan  's  "  Life  and  Writings  of  Reid,"
supra,  p.  14  ;  and  his  "  Elements,"  vol.  I.,  introduc-
tion ;  Jouffroy,  in  the  preface  to  his  "  Oeuvres  de
Reid,"  t.  i.,  pp.  23-53.  This  important  Preface  will
soon  be  made  generally  accessibleto  the  British  pub-
lic by  a  highly  competent  translator. —  H.

t  The  term  Natwe  is  used  sometimes  in  a  wider,
sometimes  in  a  narrower  extension.  When  employed
in  its  most  extensive  meaning,  it  embraces  the  two
worlds  of  mind  and  matter.  When  employed  in  its
more  restricted  signification,  it  is  a  synonyme  for  the
latter  only,  and  is  then  used  in  contradistinction  to
the  former.  In  the  Greek  philosophy,  the  word
Quo-i;  was  general  in  its  meaning ;  and  the  great
branch  of  philosophy  styled  "  physical  or  physiolo-
gical," included  under  it  not  only  the  sciences  of
matter,  but  also  th<  se  of  mind.  With  us,  the  term
Nature  is  mo  e  vaguely  extensive  than  the  terms,
physics,  ;  h  si  a!,  physiology,  physiological,  or  even
tnan  the  adjective  natural ;  whereas,  in  the  philo-
sophy of  Germany,  Natur,  and  its  correlatives,
whether  of  Greek  or  Latin  derivation,  are,  in  general,
exprcssive-of  the  woild  of  matter  in  contrast  to  the
world  ol-  intelligence. —  H.


[vii -2]


natures,  if  any  other  there  be,  we  have  no
knowledge,  no  conception  at  all.

That  everything  that  exists  must  be  either
corporeal  or  incorporeal  is  evident.  But
it  is  not  so  evident  that  every  thing  [2]  that
exists  must  either  be  corporeal  or  endowed
with  thought.  Whether  there  be  in  the
universe  beings  which  are  neither  extended,
solid,  and  inert,  like  body,  nor  active  and
intelligent,  like  mind,  seems  to  be  beyond
the  reach  of  our  knowledge.  There  appears
to  be  a  vast  interval  between  body  and
mind ;  and  whether  there  be  any  interme-
diate nature  that  connects  them  together,
we  know  not.

We  have  no  reason  to  ascribe  intelli-
gence, or  even  sensation,  to  plants ;  yet
there  appears  in  them  an  active  force  and
energy,  which  cannot  be  the  result  of  any
arrangement  or  combination  of  inert  matter.
The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  those  powers
by  which  animals  are  nourished  and  grow,
by  which  matter  gravitates,  by  which  mag-
netical  and  electrical  bodies  attract  and
repel  each  other,  and  by  which  the  parts  of
solid  bodies  cohere.

Some  have  conjectured  that  the  pheno-
mena of  the  material  world  which  require
active  force,  are  produced  by  the  continual
operation  of  intelligent  beings  :  others  have
conjectured  that  there  may  be  in  the  uni-
verse, beings  that  are  active,  without  in-
telligence, which,  as  a  kind  of  incorporeal
machinery,  contrived  by  the  supreme  wis-
dom, perform  their  destined  task  without
any  knowledge  or  intention.*  But,  laying
aside  conjecture,  and  all  pretences  to  deter-
mine in  things  beyond  our  reach,  we  must

* Like  the  tripods  of  Vulcan—

"O^jat  it  ituToptxroi  Btioi  hvrxictr'  ikyuutt-— H.


PREFACE.


217


rest  in  this,  that  body  and  mind  are  the
01  ih  kinds  of  being  of  which  we  can  have
any  knowledge,  or  can  form  any  concep-
tion. If  there  are  other  kinds,  they  are
not  discoverable  by  the  faculties  which  God
hath  given  us ;  and,  with  regard  to  us,  are
as  if  they  were  not.  [3]

As,  therefore,  all  our  knowledge  is  con-
fined to  body  and  mind,  or  things  belonging
to  them,  there  are  two  great  branches  of
philosophy,  one  relating  to  body,  the  other
to  mind.  The  properties  of  body,  and  the
laws  that  obtain  in  the  material  system,  are
the  objects  of  natural  philosophy,  as  that
word  is  now  used-  The  branch  which
treats  of  the  nature  and  operations  of  minds
has,  by  some,  been  called  Pneumatology.*
And  to  the  oneor  the  otherof  these  branches,
the  principles  of  all  the  sciences  belong.

What  variety  there  may  be  of  minds  or
thinking  beings,  throughout  this  vast  uni-
verse, we  cannot  pretend  to  say.  We  dwell
in  a  little  corner  of  God's  dominion,  dis-
joined from  the  rest  of  it.  The  globe  which
we  inhabit  is  but  one  of  seven  planets  that
encircle  our  sun.  What  various  orders  of
beings  may  inhabit  the  other  six,  their
secondaries,  and  the  comets  belonging  to
our  system,  and  how  many  other  suns  may
be  encircled  with  like  systems,  are  things
altogether  hid  from  us.  Although  human
reason  and  industry  have  discovered,  with
great  accuracy,  the  order  and  distances  of
the  planets,  and  the  laws  of  their  motion,
we  have  no  means  of  corresponding  with
them.  That  they  may  be  the  habitation  of
animated  beings,  is  very  probable ;  but  of
the  nature  or  powers  of  their  inhabitants,
we  are  perfectly  ignorant.  Every  man  is
conscious  of  a  thinking  principle,  or  mind,
in  himself ;  and  we  have  sufficient  evidence
of  a  like  principle  in  other  men.  The
actions  of  brute  animals  shew  that  they
have  some  thinking  principle,  though  of  a
nature  far  inferior  to  the  human  mind.  And
everything  about  us  may  convince  us  of  the
existence  of  a  supreme  mind,  the  Maker  and
Governor  of  the  universe.  These  are  all
the  minds  of  which  reason  can  give  us  any
certain  knowledge.  [4]

The  mind  of  man  is  the  noblest  work  of
God  which  reason  discovers  to  us,  and,
therefore,  on  account  of  its  dignity,  deserves
our  study,  "t*  It  must,  indeed,  be  acknow-
ledged, that,  although  it  is  of  all  objects  the
nearest  to  us,  and  seems  the  most  within
our  reach,  it  is  very  difficult  to  attend  to
its  operations  so  as  to  form  a  distinct  notion


•  Now  properly  superseded  by  the  term  Psychol-
ogy ;  to  which  no  competent  objection  can  be  made,
and  which  affords  us — what  the  various  clumsy  peri,
phrases  in  ue  do  not — a  convenient  adjective,  psycho-
logical.—H.

t  "  On  earth,"  says  a  forgotten  philosopher,
"  there  is  nothing  great  but  Man  ;  in  man  there  is
nothing  great  but  Mind."— H.


[3—5]


of  them ;  and  on  that  account  there  is  no
branch  of  knowledge  in  which  the  ingenious
and  speculative  have  fallen  into  so  great
errors,  and  even  absurdities.  These  errors
and  absurdities  have  given  rise  to  a  general
prejudice  against  all  inquiries  of  this  nature.
Because  ingenious  men  have,  for  many
ages,  given  different  and  contradictory
accounts  of  the  powers  of  the  mind,  it  is
concluded  that  all  speculations  concerning
them  are  chimerical  and  visionary.

But  whatever  effect  this  prejudice  may
have  with  superficial  thinkers,  the  judicious
will  not  be  apt  to  be  carried  away  with  it.
About  two  hundred  years  ago,  the  opinions
of  men  in  natural  philosophy  were  as  various
and  as  contradictory  as  they  are  now  con-
cerning the  powers  of  the  mind.  Galileo,
Torricelli,  Kepler,  Bacon,  and  Newton,
had  the  same  discouragement  in  their
attempts  to  throw  light  upon  the  material
system,  as  we  have  with  regard  to  the  in-
tellectual. If  they  had  been  deterred  by
such  prejudices,  we  should  never  have
reaped  the  benefit  of  their  discoveries,
which  do  honour  to  human  nature,  and  will
make  their  names  immortal.  The  motto
which  Lord  Bacon  prefixed  to  some  of  his
writings  was  worthy  of  his  genius,  Inveniam
viam  aut  faciam.*

There  is  a  natural  order  in  the  progress
of  the  sciences,  and  good  reasons  may  be
assigned  why  the  philosophy  of  body  should
[5]  be  elder  sisler  to  that  of  mind,  and  of  a
quicker  growth  ;  but  the  last  hath  the  prin-
ciple of  life  no  less  than  the  first,  and  will
grow  up,  though  slowly,  to  maturity.  The
remains  of  ancient  philosophy  upon  this
subject,  are  venerable  ruins,  carrying  the
marks  of  genius  and  industry,  sufficient  to
inflame,  but  not  to  satisfy  our  curiosity.  In
later  ages,  Des  Cartes  was  the  first  that
pointed  out  the  road  we  ought  to  take  in
those  dark  regions.  Malebranche,  Arnauld,
Locke,  Berkeley,  Buffier,  Hutcheson,
Butler,  Hume,  Price,  Lord  Karnes,  have
laboured  to  make  discoveries — nor  have  they
laboured  in  vain;  for,  however  different
and  contrary  their  conclusions  are,  how-
ever sceptical  some  of  them,  they  have  all
given  new  light,  and  cleared  the  way  to  those
who  shall  come  after  them.

We  ought  never  to  despair  of  human
genius,  but  rather  to  hope  that,  in  time,
it  may  produce  a  system  of  the  powers  and
operations  of  the  human  mind,  no  less  cer-
tain than  those  of  optics  or  astronomy.

This  is  the  more  devoutly  to  be  wished,
that  a  distinct  knowledge  of  the  powers  of
the  mind  would  undoubtedly  give  great  light
to  many  other  branches  of  science.  Mr
Hume  hath  justly  observed,  that  "  all  the


•  See  Mr  Stewart's  "  Philosophical  Essays,"  Pre-
liminary  Disseitation,  ch.  ii


218


PREFACE.


sciences  have  a  relation  to  human  nature  ;
and,  however  wide  any  of  them  may  seem
to  run  from  it,  they  still  return  hack  hy  one
passage  or  another.  This  is  the  centre  and
capital  of  the  sciences,*  which,  being  once
masters  of,  we  may  easily  extend  our  con-
quests everywhere."

The  faculties  of  our  minds  are  the  tools
and  engines  we  must  use  in  every  disquisi-
tion ;  and  the  better  we  understand  their  [6]
nature  and  force,  the  more  successfully  we
shall  he  able  to  apply  them.  Mr  Locke
gives  this  account  of  the  occasion  of  his
entering  upon  his  essay  concerning  human
understanding  : — "  Five  or  six  friends,"
says  he,  "  meeting  at  my  chamber,  and  dis-
coursing on  a  subject  very  remote  from
this,  found  themselves  quickly  at  a  stand
by  the  difficulties  that  rose  on  every  side.
After  we  had  for  a  while  puzzled  ourselves,
without  coming  any  nearer  to  a  resolution
of  those  doubts  that  perplexed  us,  it  came
into  my  thoughts  that  we  took  a  wrong
course  ;  and  that,  before  we  set  ourselves
upon  inquiries  of  that  nature,  it  was  neces-
sary to  examine  our  own  abilities,  and  see
what  objects  our  understandings  were  fitted
or  not  fitted  to  deal  with.  This  I  proposed
to  the  company,  who  all  readily  assented ;
and  thereupon  it  was  agreed  that  this  should
be  our  first  enquiry.''  If  this  be  commonly
the  cause  of  perplexity  in  those  disquisi-
tions which  have  least  relation  to  the  mind,
it  must  be  so  much  more  in  those  that  have
an  immediate  connection  with  it.

The  sciences  may  be  distinguished  into
two  classes,  according  as  they  pertain  to  the
material  or  to  the  intellectual  world.  The
various  parts  of  natural  philosophy,  the
mechanical  arts,  chemistry,  medicine,  and
agriculture,  belong  to  the  first ;  but,  to  the
last,  belong  grammar,  logic,  rhetoric,  na-


*  Hume  probably  had  the  siying  of  Poljrbius  in
his  eye,  who  calls  History  the  mother  city  (/j^rtirt'
Xis  )  of  Philosophy.— H.


tural  theology,  morals,  jurisprudence,  law.
politics,  and  the  fine  arts.  The  know-
ledge of  the  human  mind  is  the  root  from
which  these  grow,  and  draw  their  nourish-
ment.* Whether,  therefore,  we  consider
the  dignity  of  this  subject,  or  its  subser-
viency to  science  in  general,  and  to  the
noblest  branches  of  science  in  particular,  it
highly  deserves  to  be  cultivated.  [7]

A  very  elegant  writer,  on  the  sublime  and
beautiful ,-f-  concludes  his  account  of  the
passions  thus  : — "  The  variety  of  the  pas-
sions is  great,  and  worthy,  in  every  branch
of  that  variety,  of  the  most  diligent  inves-
tigation. The  more  accurately  we  search
into  the  human  mind,  the  stronger  traces
we  everywhere  find  of  His  wisdom  who  made
it.  If  a  discourse  on  the  use  of  the  parts  of
the  body  may  be  considered  as  a  hymn  to
the  Creator,  X  the  use  of  the  passions,
which  are  the  organs  of  the  mind,  cannot
be  barren  of  praise  to  Him,  nor  unproductive
to  ourselves  of  that  noble  and  uncommon
union  of  science  and  admiration,  which  a
contemplation  of  the  works  of  infinite  Wis-
dom alone  can  afford  to  a  rational  mind ;
whilst  referring  to  Him  whatever  we  find  of
right,  or  good,  or  fair,  in  ourselves,  dis-
covering His  strength  and  wisdom  even  in  our
own  weakness  and  imperfection,  honouring
them  where  we  discover  them  clearly,  and
adoring  their  profundity  where  we  are  lost
in  our  search,  we  may  be  inquisitive  with-
out impertinence,  and  elevated  without
pride ;  we  may  be  admitted,  if  I  may  dare
to  say  so,  into  the  counsels  of  the  Almighty,
by  a  consideration  of  his  works.  This  ele-
vation of  the  mind  ought  to  be  the  principal
end  of  all  our  studies,  which,  if  they  do  not
in  some  measure  effect,  they  are  of  very
little  service  to  us."

*  It  is  justly  observed  by  M.  Jouffroy,  that  the
division  here  enounced  is  not  in  principle  identical
with  that  previrusly  propounded. — H.

f  Burke.— H.

J  Galen  is  referred  to  — H.


i.r]


ESSAYS

ON  THB

INTELLECTUAL  POWERS  OF  MAN.


ESSAY I.

PRELIMINARY


CHAPTER  I.

EXPLICATION  OP  WORDS.

There  is  no  greater  impediment  to  the
advancement  of  knowledge  than  the  ambi-
guity of  words.  To  this  chiefly  it  is  owing
that  we  find  sects  and  parties  in  most
branches  of  science ;  and  disputes  which
are  carried  on  from  age  f o  age,  without  being
brought  to  an  issue.

Sophistry  has  been  more  effectually  ex-
cluded from  mathematics  and  natural
philosophy  than  from  other  sciences.  In
mathematics  it  had  no  place  from  the  begin-
ning ;  mathematicians  having  had  the  wis-
dom to  define  accurately  the  terms  they  use,
and  to  lay  down,  as  axioms,  the  first  prin-
ciples on  which  their  reasoning  is  grounded.
Accordingly,  we  find  no  parties  among  ma-
thematicians, and  hardly  any  disputes.*  [10]

In  natural  philosophy,  there  was  no  less
sophistry,  no  less  dispute  and  uncertainty,
than  in  other  sciences,  until,  about  a  cen-
tury and  a  half  ago,  this  science  began  to  be
built  upon  the  foundation  of  clear  defini-
tions and  self-evident  axioms.  Since  that
time,  the  science,  as  if  watered  with  the
dew  of  Heaven,  hath  grown  apace ;  dis-
putes have  ceased,  truth  hath  prevailed,
and  the  science  hath  received  greater  in-
crease in  two  centuries  than  in  two  thous-
and years  before.

It  were  to  be  wished  that  this  method,
which  hath  been  so  successful  in  those
branches  of  science,  were  attempted  in
others  ;  for  definitions  and  axioms  are  the
foundations  of  all  science.  But  that  defini-
tions may  not  be  sought  where  no  defini-
tion can  be  given,  nor  logical  definitions  be
attempted  where  the  subject  does  not  admit
of  them,  it  may  be  proper  to  lay  down  some
general  principles  concerning  definition,  for


*  It  was  not  the  superior  wisdom  of  mathema-
ticians, but  the  simple  and  palpable  character  of  their
object-matter,  which  determined  the  difference.— H.


[9-11]


the  sake  of  those  who  are  less  conversant
in  this  branch  of  logic.

When  one  undertakes  to  explain  any  art
or  science,  he  will  have  occasion  to  use
many  words  that  are  common  to  all  who
use  the  same  language,  and  some  that  are
peculiar  to  that  art  or  science.  Words  of
the  last  kind  are  called  terms  of  the  art,  and
ought  to  be  distinctly  explained,  that  their
meaning  may  be  understood.

A  definition*  is  nothing  else  but  an  ex-
plication of  the  meaning  of  a  word,  by  words
whose  meaning  is  already  known.  Hence
it  is  evident  that  every  word  cannot  be
defined ;  for  the  definition  must  consist  of
words ;  and  there  could  be  no  definition,  if
there  were  not  words  previously  understood
without  definition.  Common  words,  there-
fore, ought  to  be  used  in  their  common
acceptation  ;  and,  when  they  have  different
acceptations  in  common  language,  these,
when  it  is  necessary,  ought  to  be  distin-
guished. But  they  require  no  definition.
It  is  sufficient  to  define  words  that  are  un-
common, or  that  are  used  in  an  uncommon
meaning.

It  may  farther  be  observed,  that  there
are  many  words,  which,  though  they  may
need  explication,  cannot  be  logically  defined.
A  [  1 1  ]  logical  definition — that  is,  a  strict  and
proper  definition — must  express  the  kind
[genus]  of  the  thing  defined,  and  the  spe-
cific difference  by  which  the  species  defined
is  distinguished  from  every  other  species
belonging  to  that  kind.  It  is  natural  to  the
mind  of  man  to  class  things  under  various
kinds,  and  again  to  subdivide  every  kind
into  its  various  species.  A  species  may
often  be  subdivided  into  subordinate  species,
and  then  it  is  considered  as  a  kind.

From  what  has  been  said  of  logical  defi-
nition, it  is  evident,  that  no  word  can  be
logically  defined  which  does  not  denote  a


*  In  what  follows,  there  is  a  confusion  of  defini-
tions verbal  and  real,  which  should  have  been  care-
fully distinguished. — H.


220


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


£eS8AY  I.


species  ;  because  such  things  only  can  have
a  specific  difference  ;  and  a  specific  differ-
ence is  essential  to  a  logical  definition.
On  this  account  there  can  be  no  logical
definition  of  individual  things,  such  as
London  or  Paris.  Individuals  are  distin-
guished either  by  proper  names,  or  by  acci-
dental circumstances  of  time  or  place  ;  but
they  have  no  specific  difference  ;  and,  there-
fore, though  they  may  be  known  by  pro-
per names,  or  may  be  described  by  circum-
stances or  relations,  they  cannot  be  defined.  *
It  is  no  less  evident  that  the  most  general
words  cannot  be  logically  defined,  because
there  is  not  a  more  general  term,  of  which
they  are  a  species.

Nay,  we  cannot  define  every  species  of
things,  because  it  happens  sometimes  that
we  have  not  words  to  express  the  specific
difference.  Thus,  a  scarlet  colour  is,  no
doubt,  a  species  of  colour ;  but  how  shall
we  express  the  specific  difference  by  which
scarlet  is  distinguished  from  green  or  blue  ?
The  difference  of  them  is  immediately  per-
ceived by  the  eye  ;  but  we  have  not  words
to  express  it.  These  things  we  are  taught
by  logic.

Without  having  recourse  to  the  prin-
ciples of  logic,  we  may  easily  be  satisfied
that  words  cannot  be  defined,  which  signify
things  perfectly  simple,  and  void  of  all  com-
position. This  observation,  I  think,  was
first  made  by  Des  Cartes,  and  afterwards
more  fully  illustrated  by  Locke,  -j-  And,
however  obvious  it  appears  to  be,  many  in-
stances may  be  given  of  great  philosophers
who  have  perplexed  [12]  and  darkened  the
subjects  they  have  treated,  by  not  knowing,
or  not  attending  to  it.

When  men  attempt  to  define  things  which
cannot  be  defined,  their  definitions  will
always  be  either  obscure  or  false.  It  was
one  of  the  capital  defects  of  Aristotle's  phi-
losophy, that  he  pretended  to  define  the
simplest  things,  which  neither  can  be,  nor
need  to  be  defined — such  as  time  and  mo-
tivn.% Among modern philosophers, I


*  It  is  well  said  by  the  old  logicians,  Omnis  in-
tuitiva  notitia  est  definition — that  is,  a  view  of  the
thinj.  itself  is  its  best  definition.  \\\i  *his  is  true,
both  of  the  objects  of  sense,  and  of  the  objects  of  self-
consciousness. — H.

t  This  is  incorrect.  Des  Cartes  has  little,  and
Locke  no  title  to  praise  for  this  observation.  It  had
been  made  by  Aristotle,  and  alter  him  by  many
others;  while,  subsequent  to  Des  Cartes,  and  pre-
viovs  to  Locke,  Pascal  and  the  Poit- Royal  Logicians,
to  say  nothing  of  a  paper  of  Leibnitz,  in  1684,  had  re-
duced it  to  a  matter  of  commonplace.  In  this  instance,
Locke  can,  indeed,  be  proved  a  borrower.  Mr  Stewart
("  Philosophical  Essays,"  Note  A)  is  wrong  in  think-
ing that,  after  Des  Cartes,  Lord  Stair  is  the  earliest
philosopher  by  whom  this  logical  principle  was
enounced  ;  for  Stair,  as  a  writer,  is  subsequent  to
the  authors  adduced. — H.

%  There  is  not  a  little,  however,  to  be  said  in  vin-
dication of  Aristotle's  definitions.  Leibnitz  is  not
the  only  modern  philosopher  who  has  applauded  that
of  Motion,  which  requires,  however,  some  ilh  s-
tration  of  the  special  significance  of  its  terms — H.

ri2,  is]


know  none  that  has  abused  definition  so
much  as  Carolus  [Christianus]  Wolfius,  the
famous  German  philosopher,  who,  in  a
work  on  the  human  mind,  called  a  Psycho-
logia  Empirica,"  consisting  of  many  hun-
dred propositions,  fortified  by  demon-
strations, with  a  proportional  accompani-
ment of  definitions,  corollaries,  and  scholia,
has  given  so  many  definitions  of  things
which  cannot  be  defined,  and  so  many  de-
monstrations of  things  self-evident,  that
the  greatest  part  of  the  work  consists  of
tautology,  and  ringing  changes  upon
words.*

There  is  no  subject  in  which  there  is
more  frequent  occasion  to  use  words  tha;
cannot  be  logically  defined,  than  in  treating
of  the  powers  and  operations  of  the  mind.
The  simplest  operations  of  our  minds  must
all  be  expressed  by  words  of  this  kind.  No
man  can  explain,  by  a  logical  definition,
what  it  is  to  think,  to  apprehend,  to  believe,
to  will,  to  desire.  Every  man  who  under-
stands the  language,  has  some  notion  of  the
meaning  of  those  words ;  and  every  man
who  is  capable  of  reflection  may,  by  attend-
ing to  the  operations  of  his  own  mind,
which  are  signified  by  them,  form  a  clear
and  distinct  notion  of  them  ;  but  they  can-
not be  logically  defined.

Since,  therefore,  it  is  often  impossible  to
define  words  which  we  must  use  on  this
subject,  we  must  as  much  as  possible  use
common  words,  in  their  common  accepta-
tion, pointing  out  their  various  senses  where
they  are  ambiguous  ;  and,  when  we  are
obliged  to  use  words  less  common,  we  must
endeavour  to  explain  them  [13]  as  well  as
we  can,  without  affecting  to  give  logical  de-
finitions, when  the  nature  of  the  thing  does
not  allow  it.

The  following  observations  on  the  mean-
ing of  certain  words  are  intended  to  supply,
as  far  as  we  can,  the  want  of  definitions,  by
preventing  ambiguity  or  obscurity  in  the
use  of  them.

1.  By  the  mind  of  a  man,  we  understand
that  in  him  which  thinks,  remembers,  rea-
sons, wills.-)-  The  essence  both  of  body  and
of  mind  is  unknown  to  us.  We  know  cer-
tain properties  of  the  first,  and  certain  oper-
ations of  the  last,  and  by  these  only  we  can
define  or  describe  them.  We  define  body
to  be  that  which  is  extended,  solid,  move-
able, divisible.  In  like  manner,  we  define
mind  to  be  that  which  thinks.  We  are  con-
cious  that  we  think,  and  that  we  have  a
variety  of  thoughts  of  different  kinds — such
as  seeing,  hearing,  remembering,  delibe-
rating, resolving,  loving,  hating,  and  many


*  This  judgment  is  not  false ;  but  it  is  exaggerated
— H.

t  This  corresponds  to  Aristotle's  second  definition
of  the  soul,  or  that  a  posteriori.  Vide  supra,  p.  203
a,  note  « — H.


CHAP.  I.]


EXPLICATION  OF  WORDS.


221


other  kinds  of  thought — all  which  we  are
taught  by  nature  to  attribute  to  one  internal
principle ;  and  this  principle  of  thought  we
call  the  mind  or  soul  of  a  man.

2.  By  the  operations*  of  the  mind,  we  un-
derstand every  mode  of  thinking  of  which
we  are  conscious.

It  deserves  our  notice,  that  the  various
modes  of  thinking  have  always,  and  in  all
languages,  as  far  as  we  know,  been  called
by  the  name  of  operations  of  the  mind,  or
by  names  of  the  same  import.  To  body
we  ascribe  various  properties,  but  not  oper-
ations, properly  so  called :  it  is  extended,
divisible,  moveable,  inert ;  it  continues  in
any  state  in  which  it  is  put ;  every  change
of  its  state  is  the  effect  of  some  force  im-
pressed upon  it,  and  is  exactly  proportional
to  the  force  impressed,  and  in  the  precise
direction  of  that  force.  These  are  the  ge-
neral properties  of  matter,  and  these  are
not  operations ;  on  the  contrary,  they  all
imply  its  being  a  dead,  inactive  thing,
which  moves  only  as  it  is  moved,  and  acts
only  by  being  acted  upon.-t*  [14]

But  the  mind  is,  from  its  very  nature,  a
living  and  active  being.  Everything  we
know  of  it  implies  life  and  active  energy ;
and  the  reason  why  all  its  modes  of  thinking
are  called  its  operations,  is,  that  in  all,  or  in
most  of  them,  it  is  not  merely  passive,  as
body  is,  but  is  really  and  properly  active.

In  all  ages,  and  in  all  languages,  ancient
and  modern,  the  various  modes  of  thinking
have  been  expressed  by  words  of  active
signification,  such  as  seeing,  hearing,  reason-
ing, willing,  and  the  like.  It  seems,  there-
fore, to  be  the  natural  judgment  of  man-
kind, that  the  mind  is  active  in  its  various
ways  of  thinking  :  and,  for  this  reason,  they
are  called  its  operations,  and  are  expressed
by  active  verbs.

It  may  be  made  a  question,  What  regard
is  to  be  paid  to  this  natural  judgment  ?
May  it  not  be  a  vulgar  error  ?  Philosophers
who  think  so  have,  no  doubt,  a  right  to  be
heard.  But,  until  it  is  proved  that  the
mind  is  not  active  in  thinking,  but  merely
passive,  the  common  language  with  regard
to  its  operations  ought  to  be  used,  and  ought
not  to  give  place  to  a  phraseology  invented
by  philosophers,  which  implies  its  being
merely  passive.

3.  The  words  power  and  faculty,  which
are  often  used  in  speaking  of  the  mind,
need  little  explication.  Every  operation
supposes  a  power  in  the  being  that  oper-
rates ;  for  to  suppose  anything  to  operate,
which  has  no  power  to  operate,  is  mani-
festly absurd. But,  on  the  other  hand,

*  Operation,  Act,  Energy,  are  nearly  convertible
terms  ;  and  are  opposed  to  Faculty,  (of  which  anon,)
as  the  actual  to  the  potential  —  H.

f  "  Materiae  datum  est  cogi,  sed  cogere  Memi."
Maniuus.— H.
[14.  15]


there  is  no  absurdity  in  supposing  a  being
to  have  power  to  operate,  when  it  does  not
operate.  Thus  I  may  have  power  to  walk,
when  I  sit ;  or  to  speak,  when  I  am  silent.
Every  operation,  therefore,  implies  power ;
but  the  power  does  not  imply  the  operation.

The  faculties  of  the  mind,  and  its  powers,
are  often  used  as  synonymous  expressions.
But,  as  most  synonymes  have  some  minute
distinction  that  deserves  notice,  I  apprehend
that  the  word  faculty  [15]  is  most  properly
applied  to  those  powers  of  the  mind  which
are  original  and  natural,  and  which  make  a
part  of  the  constitution  of  the  mind.  There
are  other  powers,  which  are  acquired  by
use,  exercise,  or  study,  which  are  not  called
faculties,  but  habits.  There  must  be  some-
thing in  the  constitution  of  the  mind  neces-
sary to  our  being  able  to  acquire  habits —
and  this  is  commonly  called  capacity.*

4.  We  frequently  meet  with  a  distinction
in  writers  upon  this  subject,  between  things
in  the  mind,  and  things  external  to  the  mind.
The  powers,  faculties,  and  operations  of  the
mind,  are  things  in  the  mind.  Everything
is  said  to  be  in  the  mind,  of  which  the  mind
is  the  subject.  It  is  self-evident  that  there
are  some  things  which  cannot  exist  without
a  subject  to  which  they  belong,  and  of  which
they  are  attributes.  Thus,  colour  must  be
in  something  coloured  ;  figure  in  something
figured ;  thought  can  only  be  in  something
that  thinks  ;  wisdom  and  virtue  cannot  exist
but  in  some  being  that  is  wise  and  virtuous.
When,  therefore,  we  speak  of  things  in  the
mind,  we  understand  by  this,  things  of  which
the  mind  is  the  subject.  Excepting  the
mind  itself,  and  things  in  the  mind,  all  other
things  are  said  to  be  external.  It  ought
therefore  to  be  remembered,  that  this  dis-
tinction between  things  in  the  mind  and
things  external,  is  not  meant  to  signify  the
place  of  the  things  we  speak  of,  but  their
subject.  •{*

There  is  a  figurative  sense  in  which  things
are  said  to  be  in  the  mind,  which  it  is  suf-
ficient barely  to  mention.  We  say  such  a
thing  was  not  in  my  mind ;  meaning  no  more
than  that  I  had  not  the  least  thought  of  it.
By  a  figure,  we  put  thething  for  the  thought


*  These  terms  properly  stand  in  the  following  re-
lations : — Powers  are  active  and  passive,  natural
and  acquired.  Powers,  natural  ar  d  active„are  railed
Faculties :  Powers,  natural  and  passive,  Capacities
or  Receptivities  :  Powers  acquired  are  Habits,  and
habit  is  used  both  in  an  active  and  in  a  passive^ense;
the  Power,  again,  of  acquiring  a  habit,  is  called  a
Disposition.— On  the  meaning  of  the  term  Power,  see
further,  under  the  first  Essay  on  the  Active  Powers,
chap,  iii.,  p  23— H

•f-  Subject  and  Object  are  correlative  terms.  The
former  is  properly  id  in  quo :  the  latter,  id  circa
quod.  Hence,  in  psychological  language,  the  subject,
absolutely,  is  the  mind  that  knows  or  thinks—*  e.,
the  mind  considered  as  the -subject  r.f  knowledge  or
thought ;  the  object,  that  which  is  known,  orthought
abo'.it.  The  adjectives  subjective  and  objective  are  I
convenient,  if  not  indispensable,  expressions. —  H.


*!


AC


222


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


Qessay  I.


of  it.  In  this  sense  external  things  are  in
the  mind  as  often  as  they  are  the  objects  of
our  thought.

5.  Thinking  is  a  very  general  word,  which
includes  all  the  operations  of  our  minds,  and
is  so  well  understood  as  to  need  no  defi-
nition." [16]

To  perceive,  to  remember,  to  he  conscious,
.and  to  conceive  or  imagine,  are  words  com-
mon to  philosophers  and  to  the  vulgar.
They  signify  different  operations  of  the
mind,  which  are  distinguished  in  all  lan-
guages, and  by  all  men  that  think.  I  shall
endeavour  to  use  them  in  their  most  com-
mon and  proper  acceptation,  and  I  think
they  are  hardly  capable  of  strict  definition.
But,  as  some  philosophers,  in  treating  of  the
mind,  have  taken  the  liberty  to  use  them
very  improperly,  so  as  to  corrupt  the  Eng-
lish language,  and  to  confound  things
which  the  common  understanding  of  man-
kind hath  always  led  them  to  distinguish,
I  shall  make  some  observations  on  the  mean-
ing of  them,  that  may  prevent  ambiguity
or  confusion  in  the  use  of  them.

6.  First,  We  are  never  said  to  perceive
things,  of  the  existence  of  which  we  have
not  a  full  conviction.  I  may  conceive  or
imagine  a  mountain  of  gold,  or  a  winged
horse  ;  but  no  man  says  that  he  perceives
such  a  creature  of  imagination.  Thus  per-
ception  is  distinguished  from  conception  or
imagination.  Secondly,  Perception  is  ap-
plied only  to  external  objects,  not  to  those
that  are  in  the  mind  itself.  When  I  am
pained,  I  do  not  say  that  I  perceive  pain,
but  that  I  feel  it,  or  that  I  am  conscious  of
it.  Thus,  perception  is  distinguished  from
consciousness.  Thirdly,  The  immediate
object  of  perception  must  be  something  pre-
sent, and  not  what  is  past.  We  may  re-
member what  is  past,  but  do  not  perceive
it.  I  may  say,  I  perceive  such  a  person
has  had  the  small-pox  ;  but  this  phrase  is
figurative,  although  the  figure  is  so  familiar
that  it  is  not  observed.  The  meaning  of  it
is,  that  I  perceive  the  pits  in  his  face,  which
are  certain  signs  of  his  having  had  the  small
pox.  We  say  we  perceive  the  thing  signi-
fied, when  we  only  perceive  the  sign.  But
when  the  word  perception  is  used  properly,
and  without  any  figure,  it  is  never  applied
to  things  past.  And  thus  it  is  distinguished
from  remembrance.

In  a  word,  perception  is  most  properly
applied  to  the  evidence  which  we  have  of
external  objects  by  our  senses.  But,  as
this  is  a  [17]  very  clear  and  cogent  kind  of
evidence,  the  word  is  often  applied  by  ana-
logy to  the  evidence  of  reason  or  of  testi-


•  Thought  and  thinking  are  used  in  a  more,  and  in
a  less,  restricted  signification.  In  the  former  mean,
ing  they  are  limited  to  the  discursive  energies  alone ;
in  the  latter,  they  are  co-extensive  with  conscious,
ness.— H.


ri6-18"l


mony,  when  it  is  clear  and  cogent.  The
perception  of  external  objects  by  our  senses,
is  an  operation  of  the  mind  of  a  peculiar
nature,  and  ought  to  have  a  name  appro-
priated to  it.  It  has  so  in  all  languages.
And,  in  English,  I  know  no  word  more
proper  to  express  this  act  of  the  mind  than
perception.  Seeing,  hearing,  smelling,
tasting,  and  touching  or  feeling,  are  words
that  express  the  operations  proper  to  each
sense;  perceiving  expresses  that  which  is
common  to  them  all.

The  observations  made  on  this  word
would  have  been  unnecessary,  if  it  had  not
been  so  much  abused  in  philosophical
writings  upon  the  mind  ;  for,  in  other  writ-
ings, it  bas  no  obscurity.  Although  this
abuse  is  not  chargeable  on  Mr  Hume  only,
yet  I  think  he  has  carried  it  to  the  highest
pitch.  The  first  sentence  of  his  "  Treatise
of  Human  Nature"  runs  thus  : — "  All  the
perceptions  of  the  human  mind  resolve
themselves  into  two  distinct  heads,  which
I  shall  call  impressions  and  ideas."  He
adds,  a  little  after,  that,  under  the  name
of  impressions,  he  comprehends  all  our
sensations,  passions,  and  emotions.  Here
we  learn  that  our  passions  and  emotions
are  perceptions.  I  believe,  no  English
writer  before  him  ever  gave  the  name  of  a
perception  to  any  passion  or  emotion.
When  a  man  is  angry,  we  must  say  that  he
has  the  perception  of  anger.  When  he  is
in  love,  that  he  has  the  perception  of  love.
He  speaks  often  of  the  perceptions  of  me-
mory, and  of  the  perceptions  of  imagina-
tion; and  he  might  as  well  speak  of  the
hearing  of  sight,  or  of  the  smelling  of  touch  ;
for,  surely,  hearing  is  not  more  different
from  sight,  or  smelling  from  touch,  than
perceiving  is  from  remembering  or  imagin-
ing.*

7.  Consciousness  is  a  word  used  by
philosophers,  to  signify  that  immediate
knowledge  which  we  have  of  our  present
thoughts  and  purposes,  and,  in  general,  of
all  the  present  operations  of  our  minds.
Whence  we  may  observe,  that  conscious-
ness is  only  of  things  present.  To  apply
consciousness  to  things  past,  which  some-
times [18]  is  done  in  popular  discourse,  is  to
confound  consciousness  with  memory  ;  and
all  such  confusion  of  words  ought  to  be
avoided  in  philosophical  discourse.  It  is
likewise  to  be  observed,  that  consciousness


•  In  the  Cartesian  and  Lockian  philosophies,  the
term  Perception  was  used  almost  convertibly  with
Consciousness :  whatever  we  could  be  said  to  be
conscious  of,  that  we  could  be  said  to  perceive.  And
there  is  nothing  in  the  etymology  of  the  word,  or  in
its  use  by  ancient  writers,  that  renders  this  unexclu.
sive  application  of  it  abusive.  In  the  Leibnitzian
philosophy,  perception  and  apperception  were  dis-
tinguished in  a  peculiar  manner — of  which  again.
Reid  is  right  in  his  own  restriction  of  the  term;  liut
he  is  not  warranted  in  blaming  Hume  for  having  used
it  in  the  wider  signification  ot  his  predecessors — H.


EXPLICATION  OF  WORDS.


223


is  only  of  things  in  the  mind,  and  not  of
external  things.  It  is  improper  to  say,  I
am  conscious  of  the  table  which  is  before
me.  I  perceive  it,  I  see  it ;  but  do  not  say
I  am  conscious  of  it.  As  that  consciousness
by  which  we  have  a  knowledge  of  the  opera-
tions of  our  own  minds,  is  a  different  power
from  that  by  which  we  perceive  external
objects,  and  as  these  different  powers  have
different  names  in  our  language,  and,  I
believe,  in  all  languages,  a  philosopher
ought  carefully  to  preserve  this  distinction,
and  never  to  confound  things  so  different  in
their  nature.*

8.  Conceiving,  imagining,  and  appre-
hending, are  commonly  used  as  synony-
mous in  our  language,  and  signify  the  same
thing  which  the  logicians  call  simple  appre-
hension. This  is  an  operation  of  the  mind
different  from  all  those  we  have  mentioned.
Whatever  we  perceive,  whatever  we  re-
member, whatever  we  are  conscious  of,  we
have  a  full  persuasion  or  conviction  of  its
existence.  But  we  may  conceive  or  imagine
what  has  no  existence,  and  what  we  firmly
believe  to  have  no  existence.  What  never
had  an  existence  cannot  be  remembered ;
what  has  no  existence  at  present  cannot
be  the  object  of  perception  or  of  conscious-
ness ;  but  what  never  had,  nor  has  any
existence,  may  be  conceived.  Every  man
knows  that  if  is  as  easy  to  conceive  a  winged
horse,  or  a  centaur,  as  it  is  to  conceive  a  horse
or  a  man.  Let  it  be  observed,  therefore,  that
to  conceive,  to  imagine,  to  apprehend,  when
taken  in  the  proper  sense,  signify  an  act  of
the  mind  which  implies  no  belief  or  judg-
ment at  all.+  It  is  an  act  of  the  mind  by
which  nothing  is  affirmed  or  denied,  and
which,  therefore,  can  neither  be  true  nor
false.

But  there  is  another  and  a  very  different
meaning  of  those  words,  so  common  and  so
well  authorized  in  language  that  it  cannot
easily  be  avoided ;  and  on  that  account
we  ought  to  be  the  more  on  our  guard,  that
we  be  not  misled  by  the  ambiguity.  Po-
ateness  and  [19]  good-breeding  lead  men,  on
most  occasions,  to  express  their  opinions
with  modesty,  especially  when  they  differ
from  others  whom  they  ought  to  respect.
Therefore,  when  we  would  express  our
opinion  modestly,  instead  of  saying,  "  This
is  my  opinion,"  or,  "  This  is  my  judgment,"
which  has  the  air  of  dogmaticalness,  we  say,
"  I  conceive  it  to  be  thus — I  imagine,  or  ap-
prehend it  to  be  thus  ;"  which  is  understood
as  a  modest  declaration  of  our  judgment.
In  like  manner,  when  anything  is  said  which
we  take  to  be  impossible,  we  say,  "We  can-

*  Reid's  degradation  of  Consciousness  into  a
special  faculty,  (in  which  he  seems  to  follow  Hut-
cheson,  in  opposition  to  other  philosophers,)  is,  in
every  point  of  view,  obnoxious  to  every  possible  ob-
jection. See  note  H. — H

t  Except  of  its  own  ideal  reality. — H.

f  19,201


not  conceive  it ;"  meaning  that  we  cannot
believe  it.

Thus  we  see  that  the  words  conceive,
imagine,  apprehend,  have  two  meanings,
and  are  used  to  express  two  operations  of
the  mind,  which  ought  never  to  be  con-
founded. Sometimes  they  express  simple
apprehension,  which  implies  no  judgment
at  all ;  sometimes  they  express  judgment  or
opinion.  This  ambiguity  ought  to  be  at-
tended to,  that  we  may  not  impose  upon
ourselves  or  others  in  the  use  of  them.  The
ambiguity  is  indeed  remedied,  in  a  great
measure,  by  their  construction.  When
they  are  used  to  express  simple  apprehen*
sion,  they  are  followed  by  a  noun  in  the
accusative  case,  which  signifies  the  object
conceived  ;  but,  when  they  are  used  to  ex-
press opinion  or  judgment,  they  are  com-
monly followed  by  a  verb,  in  the  infinitive
mood.  "  I  conceive  an  Egyptian  pyramid."
This  implies  no  judgment.  "  I  conceive
the  Egyptian  pyramids  to  be  the  most  an-
cient monuments  of  human  art."  This
implies  judgment.  When  the  words  are
used  in  the  last  sense,  the  thing  conceived
must  be  a  proposition,  because  judgment
cannot  be  expressed  but  by  a  proposition.
When  they  are  used  in  the  first  sense,  the
thing  conceived  may  be  no  proposition,  but
a  simple  term  only — as  a  pyramid,  an  obe-
lisk. Yet  it  may  be  observed,  that  even  a
proposition  may  be  simply  apprehended,
without  forming  any  judgment  of  its  truth
or  falsehood  :  for  it  is  one  thing  to  conceive
the  meaning  of  a  proposition  ;  it  is  another
thing  to  judge  it  to  be  true  or  false. [20]

Although  the  distinction  between  simple
apprehension,  and  every  degree  of  assent  or
judgment,  be  perfectly  evident  to  every  man
who  reflects  attentively  on  what  passes  in
his  own  mind—  although  it  is  very  neces-
sary, in  treating  of  the  powers  of  the  mind,
to  attend  carefully  to  this  distinction — yet,
in  the  affairs  of  common  life,  it  is  seldom
neoessary  to  observe  it  accurately.  On
this  account  we  shall  find,  in  all  common
languages,  the  words  which  express  one  oi
those  operations  frequently  applied  to  the
other.  To  think,  to  suppose,  to  imagine,
to  conceive,  to  apprehend,  are  the  words  we
use  to  express  simple  apprehension ;  but
they  are  all  frequently  used  to  express
judgment.  Their  ambiguity  seldom  occa-
sions any  inconvenience  in  the  common
affairs  of  life,  for  which  language  is  framed.
But  it  has  perplexed  philosophers,  in  treat-
ing of  the  operations  of  the  mind,  and  will
always  perplex  them,  if  they  do  not  attend
accurately  to  the  different  meanings  which
are  put  upon  those  words  on  different  oc-
casions.

9.  Most  of  the  operations  of  the  mind,
from  their  very  nature,  must  have  objects
to  which  they  are  directed,  and  about  which


224


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  I.


they  are  employed.  He  that  perceives,
must  perceive  something ;  and  that  which
he  perceives  is  called  the  object  of  his  per-
ception. To  perceive,  without  having  any
object  of  perception,  is  impossible.  The
miud  that  perceives,  the  object  perceived,
und  the  operation  of  perceiving  that  object,
are  distinct  things,  and  are  distinguished  in
the  structure  of  all  languages.  In  this
sentence,  "  I  see,  or  perceive  the  moon,"
/  is  the  person  or  mind,  the  active  verb
see  denotes  the  operation  of  that  mind,  and
the  moon  denotes  the  object.  What  we
have  said  of  perceiving,  is  equally  applicable
to  most  operations  of  the  mind.  Such  opera-
tions are,  in  all  languages,  expressed  by
active  transitive  verbs ;  and  we  know  that,
in  all  languages,  such  verbs  require  a  thing
or  person,  which  is  the  agent,  and  a  noun
following  in  an  oblique  case,  which  is  the
object.  Whence  it  is  evident,  that  all
mankind,  both  those  who  have  contrived
language,  and  those  who  use  it  with  under-
standing, have  distinguished  these  three
things  as  different — to  wit,  the  operations  of
the  mind,  which  [21]  are  expressed  by  active
verbs ;  the  mind  itself,  which  is  the  nomin-
ative to  those  verbs ;  and  the  object,  which
is,  in  the  oblique  case,  governed  by  them.

It  would  have  been  unnecessary  to  ex-
plain so  obvious  a  distinction,  if  some  sys-
tems of  philosophy  had  not  confounded  it.
Mr  Hume's  system,  in  particular,  confounds
all  distinction  between  the  operations  of  the
mind  and  their  objects.  When  he  speaks
of  the  ideas  of  memory,  the  ideas  of  imagin-
ation, and  the  ideas  of  sense,  it  is  often  im-
possible, from  the  tenor  of  his  discourse,  to
know  whether,  by  those  ideas,  he  means
the  operations  of  the  mind,  or  the  objects
about  which  they  are  employed.  And,
indeed,  according  to  his  system,  there  is
no  distinction  between  the  one  and  the
other.

A  philosopher  is,  no  doubt,  entitled  to
examine  even  those  distinctions  that  are  to
be  found  in  the  structure  of  all  languages  ;
and,  if  he  is  able  to  shew  that  there  is  no
foundation  for  them  in  the  nature  of  the
things  distinguished — if  he  can  point  out
some  prejudice  common  to  mankind  which
has  led  them  to  distinguish  things  that  are
not  really  different — in  that  case,  such  a
distinction  may  be  imputed  to  a  vulgar
error,  which  ought  to  be  corrected  in  philo-
sophy. But  when,  in  his  first  setting  out,
he  takes  it  for  granted,  without  proof,  that
distinctions  found  in  the  structure  of  all
languages,  have  no  foundation  in  nature,
this,  surely,  is  too  fastidious  a  way  of
treating  the  common  sense  of  mankind.
When  we  come  to  be  instructed  by  philo-
sophers, we  must  bring  the  old  light  of
common  sense  along  with  us,  and  by  it
judge  of  the  new  light  which  the  philo-
[21 23]


sopher  communicates  to  us.  But  when  we
are  required  to  put  out  the  old  light  alto-
gether, that  we  may  follow  the  new,  we
have  reason  to  be  on  our  guard.  There
may  be  distinctions  that  have  a  real  foun-
dation, and  which  may  be  necessary  in
philosophy,  which  are  not  made  in  common
language,  because  not  necessary  in  the  com-
mon business  of  life.  But  I  believe  [22]  no
instance  will  be  found  of  a  distinction  made
in  all  languages,  which  has  not  a  just  found-
ation in  nature.

10.  The  word  idea*  occurs  so  frequently
in  modern  philosophical  writings  upon  the
mind,  and  is  so  ambiguous  in  its  meaning,
that  it  is"necessary  to  make  some  observa-
tions upon  it.  There  are  chiefly  two  mean-
ings of  this  word  in  modern  authors — a
popular  and  a  philosophical.

First,  In  popular  language,  idea  signi-
fies the  same  thing  as  conception,  appre-
hension, notion.  To  have  an  idea  of  any-
thing, is  to  conceive  it.  To  have  a  distinct
idea,  is  to  conceive  it  distinctly.  To  have
no  idea  of  it,  is  not  to  conceive  it  at  all.
It  was  before  observed,  that  conceiving  or
apprehending  has  always  been  considered
by  all  men  as  an  act  or  operation  of  the
mind,  and,  on  that  account,  has  been  ex-
pressed in  all  languages  by  an  active  verb.
When,  therefore,  we  use  the  phrase  of
having  ideas,  in  .the  popular  sense,  we
ought  to  attend  to  this,  that  it  signifies
precisely  the  same  thing  which  we  com-
monly express  by  the  active  verbs,  conceiv-
ing or  apprehending.

When  the  word  idea  is  taken  in  this  po-
pular sense,  no  man  can  possibly  doubt
whether  he  has  ideas.  For  he  that  doubts
must  think,  and  to  think  is  to  have  ideas.

Sometimes,  in  popular  language,  a  man's
ideas  signify  his  opinions.  The  ideas  of
Aristotle,  or  of  Epicurus,  signify  the
opinions  of  these  philosophers.  What  was
formerly  said  of  the  words  imagine,  conceive,
apprehend,  that  they  are  sometimes  used
to  express  judgment,  is  no  less  true  of  the
word  idea.  This  signification  of  the  word
seems  indeed  more  common  in  the  French
language  than  in  English.  But  it  is  found
in  this  sense  in  good  English  authors,  and
even  in  Mr  Locke.  Thus  we  see,  that
having  ideas,  taken  in  the  popular  sense,
has  precisely  the  same  meaning  with  conceiv-
ing, imagining,  apprehending,  and  has  like-
wise [23]  the  same  ambiguity.  It  may,  there-
fore, be  doubted,  whether  the  introduction  of
this  word  into  popular  discourse,  to  signify  the
operation  of  conceiving  or  apprehending,
was  at  all  necessary.  For,  first,  We  have,
as  has  been  shewn,  several  words  which  are
either  originally  English,  or  have  been  long
naturalized,  that  express  the  same  thing  ;


•  On  the  history  of  the  term  Idea, see  NorefJ.


CHAP.  I.]


EXPLICATION  OF  WORDS.


225


why,  therefore,  should  we  adopt  a  Greek
word,  in  place  of  these,  any  more  than  a
French  or  a  German  word  ?  Besides,  the
words  of  our  own  lauguage  are  less  ambi-
guous. For  the  word  idea  has,  for  many
ages,  been  used  by  philosophers  as  a  term
of  art ;  and  in  the  different  systems  of  phi-
losophers means  very  different  things.

Secondly,  According  to  the  philosophi-
cal meaning  of  the  word  idea,  it  does  not
signify  that  act  of  the  mind  which  we  call
thought  or  conception,  but  some  object  of
thought.  Ideas,  according  to  Mr  Locke,
(whose  very  frequent  use  of  this  word  has
probably  been  the  occasion  of  its  being
adopted  into  common  language,)  "  are
nothing  but  the  immediate  objects  of  the
mind  in  thinking."  But  of  those  objects  of
thought  called  ideas,  different  sects  of  phi-
losophers have  given  a  very  different  ac-
count. Bruckerus,  a  learned  German,  wrote
a  whole  book,  giving  the  history  of  ideas.

The  most  ancient  system  we  have  con-
cerning ideas,  is  that  which  is  explained  in
several  dialogues  of  Plato,  and  which  many
ancient,  as  Avell  as  modern  writers,  have
ascribed  to  Plato,  as  the  inventor.  But  it  is
certain  that  Plato  had  his  doctrine  upon
this  subject,  as  well  as  the  name  idea,  from
the  school  of  Pythagoras.  We  have  still
extant,  a  tract  of  Timaeus,  the  Locrian,  a
Pythagorean  philosopher,  concerning  the
soul  of  the  world,  in  which  we  find  the  sub-
stance of  Plato's  doctrine  concerning  ideas.*
They  were  held  to  be  eternal,  uncreated,
and  immutable  forms,  or  models,  according
to  which  the  Deity  made  every  species  of
things  that  exists,  of  an  eternal  matter.
Those  philosophers  held,  that  there  are
three  first  principles  of  all  things  :  First,
An  eternal  matter,  of  which  all  things  were
made ;  Secondly,  Eternal  and  immaterial
forms,  or  ideas,  according  to  which  they  were
made;  and,  [24]  Thirdly,  An  efficient  cause,
the  Deity  who  made  them.-j-  The  mind  of
man,  in  order  to  its  being  fitted  for  the  con-
templation of  these  eternal  ideas,  must  un-
dergo a  certain  purification,  and  be  weaned
from  sensible  things.  The  eternal  ideas  are
the  only  object  of  science;  because  the  ob-
jects of  sense,  being  in  a  perpetual  flux,  there
can  be  no  real  knowledge  with  regard  to  them.

The  philosophers  of  the  Alexandrian
school,  commonly  called  the  latter  Plalo-
nisls,  made  some  change  upon  the  system  of
the  ancient  Platonists  with  respect  to  the
eternal  ideas.  They  held  them  not  to  be  a
principle  distinct  from  the  Deity,  but  to  be
the  conceptions  of  things  in  the  divine  un-

The  whole  series  of  Pythagorean  treatises  and
I  fragments  in  the  Doric  dialect,  ill  which  the  doc-
itrines  and  phraseology  of  Plato-and  Aristotle  are  so
i marvellously  anticipated,  are  now  proved  to  be  com.
paratively  recent  forgeries.  Of  these,  the  treatise
under  the  name  of  Timaeus,  is  one. — H.

t  See  above,  p.  204,  a,  note  * — H.
|;[24,  25]


derstanding  ;  the  natures  and  essences  of  all
things  being  perfectly  known  to  him  from
eternity.

It  ought  to  be  observed  that  the  Pythago-
reans, and  the  Platonists,  whether  elder  or
latter,  made  the  eternal'ideas  to  be  objects
of  science  only,  and  of  abstract  contempla-
tion, not  the  objects  of  sense.*  And  in
this,  the  ancient  system  of  eternal  ideas
differs  from  the  modern  one  of  Father  Ma-
lebranche.  He  held,  in  common  with  other
modern  philosophers,  that  no  external
thing  is  perceived  by  us  immediately,  but
only  by  ideas.  But  he  thought  that  the
ideas,  by  which  we  perceive  an  external
world,  are  the  ideas  of  the  Deity  himself,
in  whose  mind  the  ideas  of  all  things,  past,
present,  and  future,  must  have  been  from
eternity;  for  the  Deity  being  intimately
present  to  our  minds  at  all  times,  may  dis-
cover to  us  as  much  of  his  ideas  as  he  sees
proper,  according  to  certain  established
laws  of  nature  ;  and  in  his  ideas,  as  in  a
mirror,  we  perceive  whatever  we  do  per-
ceive of  the  external  world.

Thus  we  have  three  systems,  which  main-
tain that  the  ideas  which  ai*e  the  imme-
diate objects  of  human  knowledge,  are
eternal  and  immutable,  and  existed  before
the  things  which  they  represent.  There
are  other  systems,  according  to  which  the
ideas  which  are  the  immediate  objects  of
all  our  thoughts,  are  posterior  to  the  things
which  they  represent,  and  derived  from
them,  We  shall  [25]  give  some  account  of
these  ;  but,  as  they  have  gradually  sprung
out  of  the  ancient  Peripatetic  system,  it  is
necessary  to  begin  with  some  account  of  it.

Aristotle  taught  that  all  the  objects  of
our  thought  enter  at  first  by  the  senses ;
and,  since  the  sense  cannot  receive  external
material  objects  themselves,  it  receives  their
species — that  is,  their  images  or  forms,
without  the  matter ;  as  wax  receives  the  form
of  the  seal  without  any  of  the  matter  of  it.
These  images  or  forms,  impressed  upon  the
senses,  are  called  sensible  species,  and  are
the  objects  only  of  the  sensitive  part  of  the
mind ;  but,  by  various  internal  powers,  they
are  retained,  refined,  and  spiritualized,  so  as
to  become  objects  of  memory  and  imagina-
tion, and,  at  last,  of  pure  intellection.
When  they  are  objects  of  memory  and  of
imagination,  they  get  the  name-of  phantasms.
When,  by  farther  refinement,  and  being
stripped  of  their  particularities,  they  become
objects  of  science,  they  are  called  intelli-
gible  species : so that every immediate

*  Reid,  in  common  with  our  philosophers  in  general,
had  no  knowledge  of  the  Platonic  theory  of  sensible
perceiilion;  and  yet  the  gnostic  forms,  the  cognitive
reasons  of  the  Platonists,  held  a  far  more  proximate
relation  to  ideas  in  the  modern  acceptation,  than  the
Platon  c  ideas  themselves.  These,  in  fact,  as  to  all
that  relates  to  the  c'octrine  of  perception  and  ima-
gination, may  be  thrown  wholly  out  of  account.  See
below,  under  p.  Ufi.— H.

Q


226


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  I.


object,  whether  of  sense,  of  memory,  of
imagination,  or  of  reasoning,  must  he  some
phantasm  or  species  in  the  mind  itself.*

The  followers  of  Aristotle,  especially  the
schoolmen,  made  great  additions  to  this
theory,  which  the  author  himself  mentions
very  briefly,  and  with  an  appearance  of
reserve.  They  entered  into  large  disquisi-
tions with  regard  to  the  sensible  species :
what  kind  of  things  they  are  ;  how  they
are  sent  forth  by  the  object,  and  enter  by
the  organs  of  the  senses ;  how  they  are
preserved  and  refined  by  various  agents,
called  internal  senses,  concerning  the  num-
ber and  offices  of  which  they  had  many
controversies.  But  we  shall  not  enter  into
a  detail  of  these  matters.

The  reason  of  giving  this  brief  account  of
the  theory  of  the  Peripatetics,  with  regard  to
the  immediate  objects  of  our  thoughts,  is,
because  the  doctrine  of  modern  philoso-
phers concerning  ideas  is  built  upon  it.  Mr
Locke,  who  uses  this  word  so  very  fre-
quently, tells  us,  that  he  means  the  same  thing
by  it  as  is  commonly  [26]  meant  by  species
or  phantasm.  Gassendi,  from  whom  Locke
borrowed  more  than  from  any  other  author,
says  the  same.  The  words  species  and
phantasm,  are  terms  of  art  in  the  Peripa-
tetic system,  and  the  meaning  of  them  is  to
be  learned  from  it.-f-

The  theory  of  Democritus  and  Epicurus,
on  this  subject,  was  not  very  unlike  to  that
of  the  Peripatetics.  They  held  that  all
bodies  continually  send  forth  slender  films
or  spectres  from  their  surface,  of  such
extreme  subtilty  that  they  easily  penetrate
our  gross  bodies,  or  enter  by  the  organs  of
sense,  and  stamp  their  image  upon  the
mind.  The  sensible  species  of  Aristotle
were  mere  forms  without  matter.  The
spectres  of  Epicurus  were  composed  of  a
very  subtile  matter.

Modern  philosophers,  as  well  as  the  Peri-
patetics and  Epicureans  of  old,  have  con-
ceived that  external  objects  cannot  be  the
immediate  objects  of  our  thought ;  that
there  must  be  some  image  of  them  in  the
mind  itself,  in  which,  as  in  a  mirror,  they
are  seen.  And  the  name  idea,  in  the  philo-
sophical sense  of  it,  is  given  to  those  inter-
nal and  immediate  objects  of  our  thoughts.
The  external  thing  is  the  remote  or  mediate
object ;  but  the  idea,  or  image  of  that  object
in  the  mind,  is  the  immediate  object,  without

*  This  is  a  tolerable  account  of  the  doctrine
vulgarly  attributed  to  Aristotle.— H.

*  If  by  this  it  be  meant  that  the  terms  of  species
and  phantasm,  as  occasionally  employed  by  Gassendi
and  Locke,  are  used  by  them  in  the  common  mean-
ing attache  I  to  them  in  the  Schools,  Reid  is  wrong.
Gassendi,  no  more  than  Des  Cartes,  In  adopting
these  terms  of  the  I'eripatetics,  adopted  them  in
their  Peripatetic  signification.  Both  these  philoso-
phers are  explicit  ;n  declaring  the  contrary  ;  and
what  these  terms  as  employed  by  them  denote,  they
have  clearly  stated. Locke  is  less  precise.  —  H.


which  we  could  have  no  perception,  no  re-
membrance, no  conception  of  the  mediate
object.*

When,  therefore,  in  common  language,
we  speak  of  having  an  idea  of  anything,  we
mean  no  more  by  that  expression,  but
thinking  of  it.  The  vulgar  allow  that  this
expression  implies  a  mind  that  thinks,  an
act  of  that  mind  which  we  call  thinking,
and  an  object  about  which  we  think.  But,
besides  these  three,  the  philosopher  con-
ceives that  there  is  a  fourth — to  wit,  the
idea,  which  is  the  immediate  object.  The
idea  is  in  the  mind  itself,  and  can  have  no
existence  but  in  a  mind  that  thinks  ;  but  the
remote  or  mediate  object  may  be  something
external,  as  the  sun  or  moon ;  it  may  be
something  past  or  future ;  it  may  be  some-
thing which  never  existed.  [27]  This  is
the  philosophical  meaning  of  the  word  idea  ;
and  we  may  observe  that  this  meaning  of
that  word  is  built  upon  a  philosophical
opinion :  for,  if  philosophers  had  not  be-
lieved that  there  are  such  immediate  objects
of  all  our  thoughts  in  the  mind,  they  would
never  have  used  the  word  idea  to  express
them.

I  shall  only  add,  on  this  article,  that,  al-
though I  may  have  occasion  to  use  the  word
idea  in  this  philosophical  sense  in  explaining
the  opinions  of  others,  I  shall  have  no  occa-
sion to  use  it  in  expressing  my  own,  because
I  believe  ideas,  taken  in  this  sense,  to  be
a  mere  fiction  of  philosophers.  And,  in  the
popular  meaning  of  the  word,  there  is  the
less  occasion  to  use  it,  because  the  English
words  thought,  notion,  apprehension,  answer
the  purpose  as  well  as  the  Greek  word
idea;  with  this  advantage,  that  they  are
less  ambiguous.  There  is,  indeed,  a  mean-
ing of  the  word  idea,  which  I  think  most
agreeable  to  its  use  in  ancient  philosophy,
and  which  I  would  willingly  adopt,  if  use,
the  arbiter  of  language,  did  permit.  But
this  will  come  to  be  explained  afterwards.

11.  The  word  impression  is  used  by  Mr
Hume,  in  speaking  of  the  operations  of  the
mind,  almost  as  often  as  the  word  idea  is
by  Mr  Locke.  "What  the  latter  calls  ideas,
the  former  divides  into  two  classes  ;  one  of
which  he  calls  impressions,  the  other  ideas.
I  shall  make  some  observations  upon  Mr
Hume's  explication  of  that  word,  and  then
consider  the  proper  meaning  of  it  in  the
English  language.

"  We  may  divide,"  (says  Mr  Hume,
K  Essays,"  vol.  II.,  p.  18,-f)  "  all  the  percep-
tions of  the  human  mind  into  two  classes
or  species,  which  are  distinguished  by  their

*  On  Reid's  ambiguous  employment  of  the  ex.
pressions  mediate  and  immediate  ohject,  see  No'e
B  ■  and,  on  Ms  confusion  of  the  two  hypotheses  of
representation,  Note  C  — H.

t  "  Enquiry  concerning  Human  Understanding, *"
$  2.  The  quotation  has  been  filled  up  by  the  origi-
nal.—  H.

[26,  2?1


CHAP. I.]


EXPLICATION  OF  WORDS.


22'


differeut  degrees  of  force  and  vivacity.  The
less  lively  and  forcible  are  commonly  deno-
minated thoughts  or  ideas.  The  other
species  want  a  name  in  our  language,  and
in  most  others  ;  [I  suppose  because  it  was
not  requisite  for  any  but  philosophical  pur-
poses to  rank  them  under  a  general  term
or  appellation.]  Let  us,  therefore,  use  a
little  freedom,  and  call  them  impressions  ;
[employing  that  word  in  a  sense  somewhat
different  from  the  usual.]  By  the  term
impression,  then,  I  mean  all  our  more  lively
perceptions,  when  we  hear,  or  see,  or  feel,
or  love,  or  hate,  or  desire,  or  will.  [And
impressions  are  distinguished  from]  ideas
[which]  are  the  [28]  less  lively  perceptions,
of  which  we  are  conscious,  when  we  reflect  on
any  of  those  sensations  or  movements  above
mentioned."

This  is  the  explication  Mr  Hume  hath
given  in  his  "  Essays"  of  the  term  impres-
sions, when  applied  to  the  mind:  and  his
explication  of  it,  in  his  "  Treatise  of  Human
Nature,"  is  to  the  same  purpose.  [Vol.  I.
p.  11.]

Disputes  about  words  belong  rather  to
grammarians  than  to  philosophers ;  but
philosophers  ought  not  to  escape  censure
when  they  corrupt  a  language,  by  using
words  in  a  way  which  the  purity  of  the  lan-
guage will  not  admit.  I  find  fault  with  Mr
Hume's  phraseology  in  the  words  I  have
quoted —

First,  Because  he  gives  the  name  of  per-
ceptions to  every  operation  of  the  mind.
Love  is  a  perception,  hatred  a  perception  ;
desire  is  a  perception,  will  is  a  perception ;
and,  by  the  same  rule,  a  doubt,  a  question,
a  command,  is  a  perception.  This  is  an
intolerable  abuse  of  language,  which  no  phi-
losopher has  authority  to  introduce.*

Secondly,  When  Mr  Hume  says,  that  we
may  divide  all  the  perceptions  of  the  human
mind  into  two  classes  or  species,  which  are
distinguished  ly  their  degrees  of  force  and
vivacity,  the  manner  of  expression  is  loose
and  unphilosophical.  To  differ  in  species
is  one  thing;  to  differ  in  degree  is  an-
other. Things  which  differ  in  degree  only
must  be  of  the  same  species.  It  is  a
maxim  of  common  sense,  admitted  by  all
men,  that  greater  and  less  do  not  make
a  change  of  species.-]-  The  same  man
may  differ  in  the  degree  of  his  force  and
vivacity,  in  the  morning  and  at  night,  in
health  and  in  sickness  ;  but  this  is  so  far
from  making  him  a  different  species,  that
it  does  not  so  much  as  make  him  a  dif-
ferent individual.  To  say,  therefore,  that
two  different  classes,  or  species  of  percep-

*  Hume  did  not  introduce  it  The  teim  Percep-
tion was  so  used  by  Des  Can  es  and  many  others ;  and,
asdesires,  feelings,  &c.  exist  only  as  known,  so  are  they
all,  in  a  certain  sense, cognitions  (perceptions.)— H.

t  "  Rlagis  et  minus  non  variant  speciem."—  H.
[2$,  29]


tions,  are  distinguished  by  the  degrees  of
their  force  and  vivacity,  is  to  confound  a
difference  of  degree  with  a  difference  of
species,  which  every  man  of  understanding
knows  how  to  distinguish.* [29]

Thirdly,  We  may  observe,  that  this
author,  having  given  the  general  name  of
perception  to  all  the  operations  of  the
mind,-j-  and  distinguished  them  into  two
classes  or  species,  which  differ  only  in  de-
gree of  force  and  vivacity,  tells  us/that  he
gives  the  name  of  impressions  to  all  our
more  lively  perceptions— to  wit,  when  Ave
hear,  or  see,  or  feel,  or  love,  or  hate,  or
desire,  or  will.  There  is  great  confusion
in  this  account  of  the  meaning  of  the  word
impression.  When  I  see,  this  is  an  im-
piessun.  But  why  has  not  the  author
told  us  whether  he  gives  the  name  of  im-
pression to  the  object  seen,  or  to  that  act  of
my  mind  by  which  I  see  it  ?  When  I  see
the  full  moon,  the  full  moon  is  one  thing,
my  perceiving  it  is  another  thing.  Which
of  these  two  things  does  he  call  an  impres-
sion ?  We  are  left  to  guess  this  ;  nor  does
all  that  this  author  writes  about  impressions
clear  this  point.  Everything  he  says  tends
to  darken  it,  and  to  lead  us  to  think  that  the
full  moon  which  I  see,  and  my  seeing  it,  are
not  two  things,  but  one  and  the  same  thing.J
The  same  observation  may  be  applied  to
every  other  instance  the  author  gives  to
illustrate  the  meaning  of  the  word  impres-
sion. "  When  we  hear,  when  we  feel,
when  we  love,  when  Ave  hate,  Avhen  Ave  de-
sire, when  we  will."  In  all  these  acts  of
the  mind  there  must  be  an  object,  which  is
heard,  or  felt,  or  loved,  or  hated,  or  desired,
or  Avilled.  Thus,  for  instance,  I  love  my
country.  This,  says  Mr  Hume,  is  an  im-
pression. But  Avhat  is  the  impression  f  Is  it
my  country,  or  is  it  the  affection  I  bear  to  it  ?
I  ask  the  philosopher  this  question  ;  but  I
find  no  ansAver  to  it. And  when  I  read  all


*  This  objection  reaches  far  more  extensively  than
to  Hume  ;  in  fact,  to  all  who  do  not  allow  an  imme-
diate knowledge  or  consciousness  of  the  t.on-ego  in
perception.  Where  are  the  philosophers  who  lo? —
Aristotle  and  Hobbes  call  imagination  a  dying  sense;
and  Des  Cartes  is  equally  explicit. —  H.

t  As  others  previously  had  done.— H.

%  This  objection  is  easily  answered.  The  thing,
(Hume  would  say,)  as  unknown,  as  unperceived,  as
beyond  the  sphere  of  my  consciousness,  is  to  me  as
zero;  to  that,  therefore,  I  could  not  refer,  Asper-
ceived,  as  known,  it  mu>t  be  within  the  sphere  oj  my
consciousness  ;  but,  as  philosophers  concur  in  main-
taining that  1  can  only  be  conscious  of  my  mind  and
its  contents,  the  object,  as  perceived,  mu*t  be  either
a  mode  of,  or  something  contained  within  my  mind,
and  to  that  internal  object,  as  perceived,  1  give  the
name  of  impression. — Nor  can  the  act  of  perception
(he  would  add)  be  really  distinguished  from  the  ob-
ject perceived.  Both  are  only  relatives,  mutually
constituent  of  the  same  indivisible  relation  of  know-
ledge ;  and  to  that  relation  and  these  relatives- 1  give
the  name  of  impression,  precisely  as,  in  different
points  cf  view,  the  term  perception  is  applied  to  the
mind  perceiving,  to  the  object  perceived,  and.  to  the
act  of  which  these  are  the  ii. separable  constituents.
— T  his  likewise  has  reference  to  what  follows.— H.


228


ON- THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  I-


that  he  has  written  on  this  subject,  I  find
this  word  impression  sometimes  used  to  sig-
nify an  operation  of  the  mind,  sometimes
the  object  of  the  operation ;  but,  for  the
most  part,  it  is  a  vague  and  indetermined
word  that  signifies  both.

I  know  not  whether  it  may  be  considered
as  an  apology  for  such  abuse  of  words,  in  an
author  who  understood  the  language  so  well,
and  used  it  with  so  great  propriety  in  writ-
ing on  other  subjects,  [30]  that  Mr  Hume's
system,  with  regard  to  the  mind,  required  a
language  of  a  different  structure  from  the
common  :  or,  if  expressed  in  plain  English,
would  have  been  too  shocking  to  the  com-
mon sense  of  mankind.  To  give  an  instance
or  two  of  this.  If  a  man  receives  a  present
on  which  he  puts  a  high  value,  if  he  see
and  handle  it,  and  put  it  in  his  pocket,  this,
says  Mr  Hume,  is  an  impression.  If  the
man  only  dream  that  he  received  such  a
present,  this  is  an  idea.  Wherein  lies  the
difference  between  this  impression  and  this
idea — between  the  dream  and  the  reality  ?
They  are  different  classes  or  species,  says
Mr  Hume  :  so  far  all  men  will  agree  with
him.  But  he  adds,  that  they  are  distinguished
only  by  different  degrees  of  force  and  viva-
city. Here  he  insinuates  a  tenet  of  his
own,  in  contradiction  to  the  commonsense
of  mankind.  Common  sense  convinces  every
man,  that  a  lively  dream  is  no  nearer  to  a
reality  than  a  faint  one ;  and  that,  if  a  man
should  dream  that  he  had  all  the  wealth  of
Croesus,  it  would  not  put  one  farthing  in
his  pocket.  It  is  impossible  to  fabricate  ar-
guments against  such  undeniable  principles,
without  confounding  the  meaning  of  words.

In  like  manner,  if  a  man  would  persuade
me  that  the  moon  which  I  see,  and  my  see-
ing it,  are  not  two  things,  but  one  and  the
same  thing,  he  will  answer  his  purpose  less
by  arguing  this  point  in  plain  English,  than
by  confounding  the  two  under  one  name —
such  as  that  of  an  impression.  For  such  is
the  power  of  words,  that,  if  we  can  be
brought  to  the  habit  of  calling  two  things
that  are  connected  by  the  same  name,  we  are
the  more  easily  led  to  believe  them  to  be
one  and  the  same  thing.

Let  us  next  consider  the  proper  meaning
of  the  word  impression*  in  English,  that  we
may  see  how  far  it  is  fit  to  express  either
the  operations  of  the  mind  or  their  objects.

When  a  figure  is  stamped  upon  a  body  by
pressure,  that  figure  is  called  an  impression,
as  the  impression  of  a  seal  on  wax,  of  [31]
printing-types,  or  of  a  copperplate  on  paper-
This  seems  now  to  be  the  literal  sense  of
the  word ;  the  effect  borrowing  its  name
from  the  cause.  But,  by  metaphor  or  ana-
logy, like  most  other  words,  its  meaning  is
extended,  so  as  to  signify  any  change  pro-

*•  See  below,  under' p.  338.— H.


duced  in  a  body  by  the  operation  of  some
external  cause.  A  blow  of  the  hand  makes
no  impression  on  a  stone  wall ;  but  a  bat-
tery of  cannon  may.  The  moon  raises  a
tide  in  the  ocean,  but  makes  no  impression
on  rivers  and  lakes.

When  we  speak  of  making  an  impression
on  the  mind,  the  word  is  carried  still  farther
from  its  literal  meaning ;  use,  however,
which  is  the  arbiter  of  language,  authorizes
this  application  of  it — as  when  we  say  that
admonition  and  reproof  make  little  impres-
sion on  those  who  are  confirmed  in  bad
habits.  The  same  discourse  delivered  in
one  way  makes  a  strong  impression  on  the
hearers ;  delivered  in  another  way,  it  makes
no  impression  at  all.

It  may  be  observed  that,  in  such  ex-
amples, an  impression  made  on  the  mind
always  implies  some  change  of  purpose  or
will ;  some  new  habit  produced,  or  some
former  habit  weakened ;  some  passion  raised
or  allayed.  When  such  changes  are  pro-
duced by  persuasion,  example,  or  any  ex-
ternal cause,  we  say  that  such  causes  make
an  impression  upon  the  mind ;  but,  when
things  are  seen,  or  heard,  or  apprehended,
without  producing  any  passion  or  emotion,
we  say  that  they  make  no  impression.

In  the  most  extensive  sense,  an  impres-
sion is  a  change  produced  in  some  passive
subject  by  the  operation  of  an  external
cause.  If  we  suppose  an  active  being  to
produce  any  change  in  itself  by  its  own
active  power,  this  is  never  called  an  im-
pression. It  is  the  act  or  operation  of
the  being  itself,  not  an  impression  upon  it.
From  this  it  appears,  that  to  give  the  name
of  an  impression  to  any  effect  produced  in
the  mind,  is  to  suppose  that  the  mind  does
not  act  at  all  in  the  production  of  that  effect.
If  seeing,  hearing,  desiring,  willing,  be
operations  of  the  mind,  they  cannot  be  im-
pressions. If  [32]  they  be  impressions,  they
cannot  be  operations  of  the  mind.  In  the
structure  of  all  languages,  they  are  con-
sidered as  acts  or  operations  of  the  mind  it-
self, and  the  names  given  them  imply  this.
To  call  them  impressions,  therefore,  is  to
trespass  against  the  structure,  not  of  a  par-
ticular language  only, but  of  all  languages.*

If  the  word  impression  be  an  improper
word  to  signify  the  operations  of  the  mind,
it  is  at  least  as  improper  to  signify  their
objects  ;  for  would  any  man  be  thought  to
speak  with  propriety,  who  should  say  that
the  sun  is  an  impression,  that  the  earth  and
the  sea  are  impressions  ?

It  is  commonly  believed,  and  taken  for
granted,  that  every  language,  if  it  be  suffi-
ciently copious  in  words,  is  equally  fit  to
express  all  opinions,  whether  they  be  true


h  I-


But  see  Scaligcr,  "  De  Subtilitate,"  Exerc.  295,


[30-32]


I.]


EXPLICATION  OF  WORDS.


229


or  false.  I  apprehend,  however,  that  there
is  an  exception  to  this  general  rule,  which
deserves  our  notice.  There  are  certain
common  opinions  of  mankind,  upon  which
the  structure  and  grammar  of  all  languages
are  founded.  While  these  opinions  are
common  to  all  men,  there  will  be  a  great
similarity  in  all  languages  that  are  to  be
found  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  Such  a
similarity  there  really  is  ;  for  we  find  in  all
languages  the  same  parts  of  speech,  the
distinction  of  nouns  and  verbs,  the  distinc-
tion of  nouns  into  adjective  and  substan-
tive, of  verbs  into  active  and  passive.  In
verbs  we  find  like  tenses,  moods,  persons,
and  numbers.  There  are  general  rules  of
grammar,  the  same  in  all  languages.  This
similarity  of  structure  in  all  languages,
shews  an  uniformity  among  men  in  those
opinions  upon  which  the  structure  of  lan-
guage is  founded.

If,  for  instance,  we  should  suppose  that
there  was  a  nation  who  believed  that  the
things  which  we  call  attributes  might  exist
without  a  subject,  there  would  be  in  their
language  no  distinction  between  adjectives
and  substantives,  nor  would  it  be  a  rule
with  them  that  an  adjective  has  no  mean-
ing, unless  when  joined  to  a  substantive.
If  there  was  any  nation  who  did  not  dis-
tinguish between  [33]  acting  and  being  acted
upon,  there  would  in  their  language  be  no
distinction  between  active  and  passive
verbs ;  nor  would  it  be  a  rule  that  the
active  verb  must  have  an  agent  in  the
nominative  case,  but  that,  in  the  passive
verb,  the  agent  must  be  in  an  oblique  case.

The  structure  of  all  languages  is  grounded
upon  common  notions,  which  Mr  Hume's
philosophy  opposes,  and  endeavours  to
overturn.  This,  no  doubt,  led  him  to  warp
the  common  language  into  a  conformity  with
his  principles  ;  but  we  ought  not  to  imitate
him  in  this,  until  we  are  satisfied  that  his
principles  are  built  on  a  solid  foundation.

12.  Sensation  is  a  name  given  by  philo-
sophers to  an  act  of  mind,  which  may  be
distinguished  from  all  others  by  this,  that
it  hath  no  object  distinct  from  the  act  itself.*
Pain  of  every  kind  is  an  uneasy  sensation.
When  I  am  pained,  I  cannot  say  that  the
pain  I  feel  is  one  thing,  and  that  my  feeling
it  is  another  thing.  They  are  one  and  the
same  thing,  and  cannot  be  disjoined,  even
in  imagination.  Pain,  when  it  is  not  felt,
has  no  existence.  It  can  be  neither  greater
nor  less  in  degree  or  duration,  nor  anything
else  in  kind  than  it  is  felt  to  be.  It  cannot
exist  by  itself,  nor  in  any  subject  but  in  a
sentient  being. No  quality  of  an  inanimate

*  But  sensation,  in  the  language  of  philosophers,
has  been  generallv  employed  to  denote  the  whole  pro-
cess of  sensitive.cognition,  including  both  perception
iroper  and  sensation  proper.  On  this  distinction,
see  below,  Essay  II.,  ch.  xvi.,  and  Note  D.*—  H.
[33,  34.]


insentient  being  can  have  the  least  resem-
blance to  it.

What  we  have  said  of  pain  may  be
applied  to  every  other  sensation.  Some  of
them  are  agreeable,  others  uneasy,  in
various  degrees.  These  being  objects  of
desire  or  aversion,  have  some  attention
given  to  them ;  but  many  are  indifferent,
and  so  little  attended  to  that  they  have  no
name  in  any  language.

Most  operations  of  the  mind  that  have
names  in  common  language,  are  complex
in  their  nature,  and  made  up  of  various
ingredients,  or  more  simple  acts  ;  which,
though  conjoined  in  our  constitution,  must
be  disjoined  by  abstraction,  in  order  to  our
having  a  distinct  and  scientific  notion  of  the
complex  operation.  [34]  In  such  operations,
sensation,  for  the  most  part,  makes  an  in-
gredient. Those  who  do  not  attend  to  the
complex  nature  of  such  operations,  are  apt
to  resolve  them  into  some  one  of  the  simple
acts  of  which  they  are  compounded,  over-
looking the  others.  And  from  this  cause
many  disputes  have  been  raised,  and  many
errors  have  been  occasioned  with  regard  to
the  nature  of  such  operations.

The  perception  of  external  objects'  is
accompanied  with  some  sensation  corre-
sponding to  the  object  perceived,  and  such
sensations  have,  in  many  cases,  in  all  lan-
guages, the  same  name  with  the  external
object  which  they  always  accompany.  The
difficulty  of  disjoining,  by  abstraction,  things
thus  constantly  conjoined  in  the  course  of
nature,  and  things  which  have  one  and  the
same  name  in  all  languages,  has  likewise
been  frequently  an  occasion  of  errors  in  the
philosophy  of  the  mind.  To  avoid  such
errors,  nothing  is  of  more  importance  than
to  have  a  distinct  notion  of  that  simple
act  of  the  mind  which  we  call  sensation,  and
which  we  have  endeavoured  to  describe.
By  this  means,  we  shall  find  it  more  easy  to
distinguish  it  from  every  external  object  that
it  accompanies,  and  from  every  other  act  of
the  mind  that  may  be  conjoined  with  it.
For  this  purpose,  it  is  likewise  of  import-
ance that  the  name  of  sensation  should,  in
philosophical  writings,  be  appropriated  to
signify  this  simple  act  of  the  mind,  without
including  anything  more  in  its  signification,
or  being  applied  to  other  purposes.

I  shall  add  an  observation  concerning  the
word  fpelinp.  This  word  has  two  meanings.
First,  it  signifies  the  perceptions  we  have  of
external  objects,  by  the  sense  of  touch.
When  we  speak  of  feeling  a  body  to  be  hard
or  soft,  rough  or  smooth,  hot  or  cold,  to
feel  these  things  is  to  perceive  them  by
touch.  They  are  external  things,  and  that
act  of  the  mind  by  which  we  feel  them  is
easily  distinguished  from  the  objects  felt.
Secondly,  the  word  feeling  is  used  to  signify
the  same  thing  as  sensation,  which  we  have


230


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  1.


just  now  explained ;  and,  in  this  sense,  it
has  no  object ;  the  feeling  and  the  thing
felt  are  one  and  the  same. [35  J

Perhaps  betwixt  feeling,  taken  in  this
last  sense,  and  sensation,  there  may  be  this
small  difference,  that  sensation  is  most  com-
monly used  to  signify  those  feelings  which
we  have  by  our  external  senses  and  bodily
appetites,  and  all  our  bodily  pains  and
pleasures.  But  there  are  feelings  of  a
nobler  nature  accompanying  our  affections,
our  moral  judgments,  and  our  determina-
tions in  matters  of  taste,  to  which  the  word
sensation  is  less  properly  applied.

I  have  premised  these  observations  on
the  meaning  of  certain  words  that  frequently
occur  in  treating  of  this  subject,  lor  two
reasons  :  First,  That  I  may  be  the  better
understood  when  I  use  them;  and,  Secondly,
That  those  who  would  make  any  progress
in  this  branch  of  science,  may  accustom
themselves  to  attend  very  carefully  to  the
meaning  of  words  that  are  used  hi  it.  They
may  be  assured  of  this,  that  the  ambiguity
of  words,  and  the  vague  and  improper  appli-
cation of  them,  have  thrown  more  darkness
upon  this  subject  than  the  subtilty  and
intricaey  of  things.

When  we  use  common  words,  we  ought
to  use  them  in  the  sense  in  which  they  are
most  commonly  used  by  the  best  and  purest
writers  in  the  language  ;  and,  when  we  have
occasion  to  enlarge  or  restrict  the  meaning
of  a  common  word,  or  give  it  more  precision
than  it  has  in  common  language,  the  reader
ought  to  have  warning  of  this,  otherwise  we
shall  impose  upon  ourselves  and  upon  him.

A  very  respectable  writer  has  given  a
good  example  of  this  kind,  by  explaining,
in  an  Appendix  to  his  :'  Elements  of  Criti-
cism," the  terms  he  has  occasion  to  use.
In  that  Appendix,  most  of  the  words  are
explained  on  which  I  have  been  making
observations ;  and  the  explication  I  have
given,  I  think,  agrees,  for  the  most  part,
with  his.

Other  words  that  need  explication,  shall
be  explaiued  as  they  occur. [36]


CHAPTER  II.

PRINCIPLES  TAKEN  FOR  GRANTED.

As  there  are  words  common  to  philosophers
and  to  the  vulgar,  which  need  no  explica-
tion, so  there  are  principles  common  to  both,
which  need  no  proof,  and  which  do  not
admit  of  direct  proof.

One  who  applies  to  any  branch  of  science,
must  be  come  to  years  of  understanding,
and,  consequently,  must  have  exercised  his
reason,  and  the  other  powers  of  his  mind,
in  various  ways.  He  must  have  formed
various  opinions  and  principles,  by  which  he


conducts  himself  in  the  affairs  of  life.  Of
those  principles,  some  are  common  to  ail
men,  being  evident  in  themselves,  and  so
necessary  in  the  conduct  of  life  that  a  man
cannot  live  and  act  according  to  the  rules
of  common  prudence  without  them.

All  men  that  have  common  understand-
ing, agree  in  such  principles  ;  and  consider
a  man  as  lunatic  or  destitute  of  common
sense,  who  denies  or  calls  them  in  question.
Thus,  if  any  man  were  found  of  so  strange
a  turn  as  not  to  believe  his  own  eyes,  to
put  no  trust  in  his  senses,  nor  have  the
least  regard  to  their  testimony,  would  any
man  think  it  worth  while  to  reason  gravely
with  such  a  person,  and,  by  argument,  to
convince  him  of  his  error  ?  Surely  no  wise
man  would.  For,  before  men  can  reason
together,  they  must  agree  in  first  principles ;
and  it  is  impossible  to  reason  with  a  man
who  has  no  principles  in  common  with  you.

There  are,  therefore,  common  principles,
which  are  the  foundation  of  all  reasoning
and  of  all  science.  Such  common  principles
seldom  admit  of  direct  proof,  nor  do  they
need  it.  Men  need  not  to  be  taught  them  ;
for  they  are  such  as  all  men  of  [37]  com-
mon understanding  know;  or  such,  at  least,
as  they  give  a  ready  assent  to,  as  soon  as
they  are  proposed  and  understood.

Such  principles,  when  we  have  occasion
to  use  them  in  science,  are  called  axiotns.
And,  although  it  be  not  absolutely  neces-
sary, yet  it  may  be  of  great  use,  to  point
cut  the  principles  or  axioms  on  which  a
science  is  grounded.

Thus,  mathematicians,  before  they  prove
any  of  the  propositions  of  mathematics,  lay
down  certain  axioms,  or  common  princi-
ples, upon  which  they  build  their  reason-
ings. And  although  those  axioms  be  truths
which  every  man  knew  before — such  as,
That  the  whole  is  greater  than  a  part,  That
equal  quantities  added  to  equal  quantities
make  equal  sums ;  yet,  when  we  see  no-
thing assumed  in  the  proof  of  mathematical
propositions,  but  such  self-evident  axioms,
the  propositions  appear  more  certain,  and
leave  no  room  for  doubt  or  dispute.

In  all  other  sciences,  as  well  as  in  mathe-
matics, it  will  be  found  that  there  are  a
few  common  principles,  upon  which  all  the
reasonings  in  that  science  are  grounded,
and  into  which  they  may  be  resolved.  If
these  were  pointed  out  and  considered,  we
should  be  bet  ter  able  to  j  udge  what  stress  may
be  laid  upon  the  conclusions  in  that  science.
If  the  principles  be  certain,  the  conclusions
justly  drawn  from  them  must  be  certain.
If  the  principles  be  only  probable,  the  con-
clusions can  only  be  probable.  If  the  prin-
ciples be  false,  dubious,  or  obscure,  the
superstructure  that  is  built  upon  them
must  partake  of  the  weakness  of  the  found-
ation.

[33-37]


CHAP.  II.  ]


PRINCIPLES  TAKEN  FOR  GRANTED.


231


Sir  Isaac  Newton,  the  greatest  of  na-
tural philosophers,  has  given  an  example
well  worthy  of  imitation,  by  laying  down
the  common  principles  or  axioms,  on  which
the  reasonings  in  natural  philosophy  are
built.  Before  this  was  done,  the  reason-
ings of  philosophers  in  that  science  were
as  vague  and  uncertain  as  they  are  in
most  others.  Nothing  was  fixed  ;  all  was
dispute  and  controversy;  [38]  but,  by
this  happy  expedient,  a  solid  foundation
is  laid  in  that  science,  and  a  noble  super-
structure is  raised  upon  it,  about  which
there  is  now  no  more  dispute  or  con-
troversy among  men  of  knowledge,  than
there  is  about  the  conclusions  of  mathe-
matics.

It  may,  however  be  observed,  that  the
first  principles  of  natural  philosophy  are  of
a  quite  different  nature  from  mathematical
axioms :  they  have  not  the  same  kind  of
evidence,  nor  are  they  necessary  truths,  as
mathematical  axioms  are.  They  are  such  as
these  :  That  similar  effects  proceed  from  the
same  or  similar  causes  ;  That  we  ought  to
admit  of  no  other  causes  of  natural  effects,
but  such  as  are  true,  and  sufficient  to  ac-
count for  the  effects.  These  are  principles
which,  though  tbey  ha  ve  not  the  same  kind  of
evidence  that  mathematical  axioms  have  ;
yet  have  such  evidence  that  every  man  of
common  understanding  readily  assents  to
them,  and  finds  it  absolutely  necessary  to
conduct  his  actions  and  opinions  by  them,
in  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life.

Though  it  has  not  been  usual,  yet  I  con-
ceive it  may  be  useful,  to  point  out  some  of
those  things  which  I  shall  take  for  granted,
as  first  principles,  in  treating  of  the  mind
and  its  faculties.  There  is  the  more  oc-
casion for  this  ;  because  very  ingenious
men,  such  as  Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,
Arnauld,  Locke,  and  many  others,  have
lost  much  labour,  by  not  distinguishing
things  which  require  proof,  from  things
which,  though  they  may  admit  of  illustra-
tration,  yet,  being  self-evident,  do  not  admit
of  proof.  When  men  attempt  to  deduce
such  self-evident  principles  from  others
more  evident,  they  always  fall  into  incon-
clusive reasoning  :  and  the  consequence  of
this  has  been,  that  others,  such  as  Berkeley
and  Hume,  finding  the  arguments  brought
to  prove  such  first  principles  to  be  weak
and  inconclusive,  have  been  tempted  first
to  doubt  of  them,  and  afterwards  to  deny
them.

It  is  so  irksome  to  reason  with  those  who
deny  first  principles,  that  wise  men  com-
monly decline  it.  Yet  it  is  not  impossible,
that  [39]  what  is  only  a  vulgar  prejudice
may  be  mistaken  for  a  first  principle.  Nor
is  it  impossible  that  what  is  really  a  first
principle  may,  by  the  enchantment  of  words,
have  such  a  mist  thrown  about  it,  as  to
T38-401


hide  its  evidence,  and  to  make  a  man  of
candour  doubt  of  it.  Such  cases  happen
more  frequently,  perhaps,  in  this  science
than  in  any  other ;  but  they  are  not  alto-
gether without  remedy.  There  are  ways
by  which  the  evidence  of  first  principles
may  be  made  more  apparent  when  they  are
brought  into  dispute ;  but  they  require  to
be  handled  in  a  way  peculiar  to  themselves.
Their  evidence  is  not  demonstrative,  but
intuitive.  They  require  not  proof,  but  to
be  placed  in  a  proper  point  of  view.  This
will  be  shewn  more  fully  in  its  proper  place,
and  applied  to  those  very  principles  which
we  now  assume.  In  the  meantime,  when
they  are  proposed  as  first  principles,  the
reader  is  put  on  his  guard,  and  warned  to
consider  whether  they  have  a  just  claim  to
that  character.

1.  First,  then,  I  shall  take  it  for  granted,
that  I  think,  that  I  remember,  that  I  rea-
son, and,  in  general,  that  I  really  perform
all  those  operations  of  mind  of  which  I  am
conscious.

The  operations  of  our  minds  are  attended
with  consciousness  ;  and  this  consciousness
is  the  evidence,  the  only  evidence,  which
we  have  or  can  have  of  their  existence.  If
a  man  should  take  it  into  his  head  to  think
or  to  say  that  his  consciousness  may  de-
ceive him,  and  to  require  proof  that  it  can-
not, I  know  of  no  proof  that  can  be  given
him  ;  he  must  be  left  to  himself,  as  a  man
that  denies  first  principles,  without  which
there  can  be  no  reasoning.  Every  man
finds  himself  under  a  necessity  of  believing
what  consciousness  testifies,  and  everything
that  hath  this  testimony  is  to  be  taken  as  a
first  principle.*

2.  As  by  consciousness  we  know  cer-
tainly the  existence  of  our  present  thoughts
and  passions ;  so  we  know  the  past  by  re-
membrance. +  And,  when  they  are  re-
cent, and  the  remembrance  of  them  fresh,
[40]  the  knowledge  of  them,  from  such
distinct  remembrance,  is,  in  its  certainty
and  evidence,  next  to  that  of  conscious-
ness.

3.  But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  we  are
conscious  of  many  things  to  which  we  give
little  or  no  attention.  We  can  hardly  at-
tend to  several  things  at  the  same  time ;
and  our  attention^  is  commonly  employed
about  that  which  is  the  object  of  our
thought,  and  rarely  about  the  thought  it-
self. Thus, when a man  is  angry,  his


•  To  doubt  that  we  are  conscious  of  this  or  that,
is  impossible.  For  the  doubt  must  at  least  postulate
itself;  but  the  doubt  is  only  a  datum  of  conscious-
ness ;  therefore,  in  postulating  its  own  reality,  it  ad.
mits  the  truth  of  consciousness,  and  consequently
annihilates  itself.  See  below,  p.  579.  On  Con-
sciousness, in  the  history  of  psychology,  see  Note  IJ.
—  H.

+  Remembrance  cannot  be  taken  out  of  Con-
sciousness. See  Note  H.—  VI


232


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[_ESSAY


attention  is  turned  to  the  injury  done  him,
or  the  injurious  person;  and  he  gives  very
little  attention  to  the  passion  of  anger,  al-
though he  is  conscious  of  it.  It  is  in  our
power,  however,  when  we  come  to  the
years  of  understanding,  to  give  attention  to
our  own  thoughts  and  passions,  and  the  va-
rious operations  of  our  minds.  And,  when
we  make  these  the  objects  of  our  atten-
tion, either  while  they  are  present  or
when  they  are  recent  and  fresh  in  our  me-
mory, this  act  of  the  mind  is  called  reflec-
tion.

We  take  it  for  granted,  therefore,  that,
by  attentive  reflection,  a  man  may  have  a
clear  and  certain  knowledge  of  the  opera-
tions of  his  own  mind ;  a  knowledge  no  less
clear  and  certain  than  that  which  he  has
of  an  external  object  when  it  is  set  before
his  eyes.

This  reflection  is  a  kind  of  intuition,  it
gives  a  like  conviction  with  regard  to  in-
ternal objects,  or  things  in  the  mind,  as
the  faculty  of  seeing  gives  with  regard  to
objects  of  sight.  A  man  must,  therefore,
be  convinced  beyond  possibility  of  doubt,
of  everything  with  regard  to  the  opera-
tions of  his  own  mind,  which  he  clearly
and  distinctly  discerns  by  attentive  reflec-
tion.*

4.  I  take  it  for  granted  that  all  the
thoughts  I  am  conscious  of,  or  remember,
are  the  thoughts  of  one  and  the  same
thinking  principle,  which  I  call  myself,  or
my  mind.  Every  man  has  an  immediate
and  irresistible  conviction,  not  only  of  his
present  existence,  but  of  his  continued
existence  and  identity,  as  far  back  as  he
can  remember.  If  any  man  should  think
fit  to  demand  [41]  a  proof  that  the  thoughts
he  is  successively  conscious  of,  belong  to
one  and  the  same  thinking  principle— if
he  should  demand  a  proof  that  he  is  the
same  person  to-day  as  he  was  yesterday,  or
a  year  ago — I  know  no  proof  that  can  be
given  him :  he  must  be  left  to  himself,
either  as  a  man  that  is  lunatic,  or  as  one
who  denies  first  principles,  and  is  not  to  be
reasoned  with.

Every  man  of  a  sound  mind,  finds  him-
self under  a  necessity  of  believing  his  own
identity,  and  continued  existence.  The
conviction  of  this  is  immediate  and  irresist-
able ;  and,  if  he  should  lose  this  conviction,
it  would  be  a  certain  proof  of  insanity,
which  is  not  to  be  remedied  by  reasoning.

5.  I  take  it  for  granted,  that  there  are
some  things  which  cannot  exist  by  them-
selves, but  must  be  in  something  else  to
which  they  belong,  as  qualities,  or  attributes.

Thus,  motion  cannot  exist,  but  in  some-

*  See  infra,  pp.  60, 105, 581 ,  where  a  similar,  and
pp.  324,  516,  where  a  different  extension  is  given  to
Reflection.  On  Attention  and  Reflection,  in  the
history  of  psychology,  see  Note I.— H.


thing  that  is  moved.  And  to  suppose  that
there  can  be  motion  while  everything  is  at
rest,  is  a  gross  and  palpable  absurdity.  In
like  manner,  hardness  and  softness,  sweet-
ness and  bitterness,  are  things  which  cannot
exist  by  themselves ;  they  are  qualities  of
something  which  is  hard  or  soft,  sweet  or
bitter.  That  thing,  whatever  it  be,  of
which  they  are  qualities,  is  called  their  sub-
ject; and  such  qualities  necessarily  suppose
a  subject.

Things  which  may  exist  by  themselves,
and  do  not  necessarily  suppose  the  exist-
ence of  anything  else,  are  called  substances  ;
and,  with  relation  to  the  qualities  or  attri-
butes that  belong  to  them,  they  are  called
the  subjects  of  such  qualities  or  attributes.

All  the  things  which  we  immediately  per-
ceive by  our  senses,  and  all  the  things  we
are  conscious  of,  are  things  which  must  be
in  something  else,  as  their  subject.  Thus,
by  my  senses,  I  perceive  figure,  colour,
hardness,  softness,  motion,  resistance,  and
such  [42]  like  things.  But  these  are  qualities,
and  must  necessarily  be  in  something  that
is  figured,  coloured,  hard  or  soft,  that
moves,  or  resists.  It  is  not  to  these  qua-
lities, but  to  that  which  is  the  subject  of
them,  that  we  give  the  name  of  body.  If
any  man  should  think  fit  to  deny  that  these
things  are  qualities,  or  that  they  require  any
subject,  I  leave  him  to  enjoy  his  opinion  as
a  man  who  denies  first  principles,  and  is
not  fit  to  be  reasoned  with.  If  he  has
common  understanding,  he  will  find  that  he
cannot  converse  half  an  hour  without  say-
ing things  which  imply  the  contrary  of  what
he  professes  to  believe.

In  like  manner,  the  things  I  am  conscious
of,  such  as  thought,  reasoning,  desire,  ne-
cessarily suppose  something  that  thinks,
that  reasons,  that  desires.  We  do  not  give
the  name  of  mind  to  thought,  reason,  or
desire  ;  but  to  that  being  which  thinks,
which  reasons,  and  which  desires.

That  every  act  or  operation,  therefore,
supposes  an  agent,  that  every  quality  sup-
poses a  subject,  are  things  which  I  do  not
attempt  to  prove,  but  take  for  granted.
Every  man  of  common  understanding  dis-
cerns this  immediately,  and  cannot  enter-
tain the  least  doubt  of  it.  In  all  languages,
we  find  certain  words  which,  by  gramma-
rians, are  called  adjectives.  Such  words
denote  attributes,  and  every  adjective  must
have  a  substantive  to  winch  it  belongs —
that  is,  every  attribute  must  have  a  subject.
In  all  languages,  we  find  active  verbs  which
denote  some  action  or  operation  ;  and  it
is  a  fundamental  rule  in  the  grammar  of  all
languages,  that  such  a  verb  supposes  a  per-
son— that  is,  in  other  words,  that  every
action  must  have  an  agent.  We  take  it,
therefore,  as  a  first  principle,  that  goodness,
wisdom,  and  virtue,  can  only  be  in  some

[41,  42]


CHAP.  I!.]


PRINCIPLES  TAKEN  FOR  GRANTED.


233


being  that  is  good,  wise,  and  virtuous  ;
that  thinking  supposes  a  being  that  thinks ;
and  that  every  operation  we  are  conscious
of  supposes  an  agent  that  operates,  which
we  call  mind.

6.  I  take  it  for  granted,  that,  in  most
operations  of  the  mind,  there  [4-3]  must  be  an
object  distinct  from  the  operation  itself.  I
cannot  see,  without  seeing  something.  To
see  without  having  any  object  of  sight  is
absurd.  I  cannot  remember,  without  re-
membering something.  The  thing  remem-
bered is  past,  while  the  remembrance  of  it
is  present ;  and,  therefore,  the  operation
and  the  object  of  it  must  be  distinct  things.
The  operations  of  our  mind  are  denoted,  in
all  languages,  by  active  transitive  verbs,
which,  from  their  construction  in  grammar,
require  not  only  a  person  or  agent,  but
likewise  an  object  of  the  operation.  Thus,
the  verb  know,  denotes  an  operation  of
mind.  From  the  general  structure  of  lan-
guage, this  verb  requires  a  person — I  know,
you  know,  or  he  knows  ;  but  it  requires  no
less  a  noun  in  the  accusative  case,  denoting
the  thing  known ;  for  he  that  knows  must
know  something ;  and,  to  know,  without
having  any  object  of  knowledge,  is  an  ab-
surdity too  gross  to  admit  of  reasoning.*

7.  We  ought  likewise  to  take  for  granted,
as  first  principles,  things  wherein  we  find
an  universal  agreement,  among  the  learned
and  unlearned,  in  the  different  nations  and
ages  of  the  world,  -f  A  consent  of  ages  and
nations,  of  the  learned  and  vulgar,  ought,
at  least,  to  have  great  authority,  unless  we
can  shew  some  prejudice  as  universal  as
that  consent  is,  which  might  be  the  cause
of  it.  Truth  is  one,  but  error  is  infinite.
There  are  many  truths  so  obvious  to
the  human  faculties,  that  it  may  be  ex-
pected that  men  should  universally  agree  in
them.  And  this  is  actually  found  to  be
the  case  with  regard  to  many  truths,  against
which  we  find  no  dissent,  unless  perhaps
that  of  a  few  sceptical  philosophers,  who
may  justly  be  suspected,  in  such  cases,  to
differ  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  through
pride,  obstinacy,  or  some  favourite  passion.
Where  there  is  such  universal  consent
in  things  not  deep  nor  intricate,  but  which
lie,  as  it  were,  on  the  surface,  there  is  the
greatest  presumption  that  can  be,  that  it  is
the  natural  result  of  the  human  faculties ;
and  it  must  have  great  authority  with  every
sober  [44]  mind  that  loves  truth.  Major
enim  pars  eo  fere  deferri  solet  quo  a  natura
deducitur.—Cic.  de  Off.  I.  41.

Perhaps  it  may  be  thought  that  it  is
impossible  to  collect  the  opinions  of  all  men
upon  any  point  whatsoever ;  and,  there-
fore, that  this  maxim  can  be  of  no  use.
But  there  are  many  cases  wherein  it  is


* See  Note  B.
T43-451


t  See  Soto  A.— H.


otherwise.  Who  can  doubt,  for  instance,
whether  mankind  have,  in  all  ages,  believed
the  existence  of  a  material  world,  and  that
those  things  which  they  see  and  handle  are
real,  and  not  mere  illusions  and  appari-
tions ?  Who  can  doubt  whether  mankind
have  universally  believed  that  everything
that  begins  to  exist,  and  every  change  that
happens  in  nature,  must  have  a  cause  ?
Who  can  doubt  whether  mankind  have
been  universally  persuaded  that  there  is  a
right  and  a  wrong  in  human  conduct  ? —
some  things  which,  in  certain  circumstan-
ces, they  ought  to  do,  and  other  things
which  they  ought  not  to  do  ?  The  univers-
ality of  these  opinions,  and  of  many  such
that  might  be  named,  is  sufficiently  evi-
dent, from  the  whole  tenor  of  men's  con-
duct, as  far  as  our  acquaintance  reaches,
and  from  the  records  of  history,  in  all
ages  and  nations,  that  are  transmitted  to
us.

There  are  other  opinions  that  appear  to
be  universal,  from  what  is  common  in  the
structure  of  all  languages,  ancient  and  mo-
dern, polished  and  barbarous.  Language  is
the  express  image  and  picture  of  human
thoughts ;  and,  from  the  picture,  we  mayoften
draw  very  certain  conclusions  with  regard
to  the  original.  We  find  in  all  languages  the
same  parts  of  speech — nouns  substantive
and  adjective,  verbs  active  and  passive,
varied  according  to  the  tenses  of  past,  pre-
sent, and  future  ;  we  find  adverbs,  preposi-
tions, and  conjunctions.  There  are  general
rules  of  syntax  common  to  all  languages.
This  uniformity  in  the  structure  of  lan-
guage shews  a  certain  degree  of  uniformity
in  those  notions  upon  which  the  structure  of
language  is  grounded.

We  find,  in  the  structure  of  all  lan-
guages, the  distinction  of  [45]  acting  and
being  acted  upon,  the  distinction  of  action
and  agent,  of  quality  and  subject,  and  many
others  of  the  like  kind  ;  which  shews  that
these  distinctions  are  founded  In  the  uni-
versal sense  of  mankind.  We  shall  have
frequent  occasion  to  argue  from  the  sense
of  mankind  expressed  in  the  structure  of
language ;  and  therefore  it  was  proper
here  to  take  notice  of  the  force  of  argu-
ments drawn  from  this  topic.

8.  I  need  hardly  say  that  I  shall  also
take  for  granted  such  facts  as  are  attested
to  the  conviction  of  all  sober  and  reasonable
men,  either  by  our  senses,  by  memory,  or
by  human  testimony.  Although  some  wri-
ters on  this  subject  have  disputed  the
authority  of  the  senses,  of  memory,  and  of
every  human  faculty,  yet  we  find  that  such
persons,  in  the  conduct  of  life,  in  pursuing
their  ends,  or  in  avoiding  dangers,  pay  the
same  regard  to  the  authority  of  their  senses
and  other  faculties,  as  the  rest  of  mankind.
By  this  they  give  us  just  ground  to  doubt  of


234


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  I.


their  candour  in  their  professions  of  scep-
ticism.

This,  indeed,  has  always  heen  the  fate  of
the  few  that  have  professed  scepticism,  that,
when  they  have  done  what  they  can  to
discredit  their  senses,  they  find  themselves,
after  all,  under  a  necessity  of  trusting  to
them.  Mr  Hume  has  been  so  candid  as  to
acknowledge  this  ;  and  it  is  no  less  true  of
those  who  have  not  shewn  the  same  can-
dour ;  for  I  never  heard  that  any  sceptic
run  his  head  against  a  post,  or  stepped  into
a  kennel,  because  he  did  not  believe  his
eyes.

Upon  the  whole,  I  acknowledge  that  we
ought  to  be  cautious  that  we  do  not  adopt
opinions  as  first  principles  which  are  not
entitled  to  that  character.  But  there  is
surely  the  least  danger  of  men's  being  im-
posed upon  in  this  way,  when  such  prin-
ciples openly  lay  claim  to  the  character,  and
are  thereby  fairly  exposed  to  the  examina-
tion of  those  who  may  dispute  their  au-
thority. We  do  not  pretend  that  those
things  that  are  laid  down  as  first  principles
may  not  be  examined,  and  that  we  ought
not  to  [4G]  have  our  ears  open  to  what
may  be  pleaded  against  their  being  admit-
ted as  such.  Let  us  deal  with  them  as  an
upright  judge  does  with  a  witness  who  has
a  fair  character.  He  pays  a  regard  to  the
testimony  of  such  a  witness  while  his  cha-
racter is  unimpeached  ;  but,  if  it  can  be
shewn  that  he  is  suborned,  or  that  he  is
influenced  by  malice  or  partial  favour,  his
testimony  loses  all  its  credit,  and  is  justly
rejected.


CHAPTER  III.

OF  HYPOTHESES.

Everv  branch  of  human  knowledge  hath
its  proper  principles,  its  proper  foundation
and  method  of  reasoning ;  and,  if  we  en-
deavour to  build  it  upon  any  other  found-
ation, it  will  never  stand  firm  and  stable.
Thus,  the  historian  builds  upon  testimony,
and  rarely  indulges  conjecture ;  the  anti-
quarian mixes  conjecture  with  testimony,
and  the  former  often  makes  the  larger
ingredient ;  the  mathematician  pays  not  the
least  regard  either  to  testimony  or  conjec-
ture, but  deduces  everything,  by  demon-
strative reasoning,  from  his  definitions  and
axioms.  Indeed,  whatever  is  built  upon
conjecture,  is  improperly  called  science ;
for  conjecture  may  beget  opinion,  but  can-
not produce  knowledge.  Natural  philoso-
phy must  be  built  upon  the  phenomena  of
the  material  system,  discovered  by  observ-
ation and  experiment.

When  men  first  began  to  philosophize —
that  is,  to  carry  their  thoughts  beyond  the


objects  of  sense,  and  to  inquire  into  the
causes  of  things,  and  the  secret  operations
of  nature — it  was  very  natural  for  them  to
indulge  conjecture ;  nor  was  it  to  be  ex-
pected that,  in  many  ages,  they  should  dis-
cover the  proper  and  scientific  way  of  pro-
ceeding in  philosophical  disquisitions.  Ac-
cordingly, we  find  that  the  most  ancient
systems  in  every  branch  of  philosophy  were
nothing  but  the  conjectures  of  men  famous
for  their  wisdom,  whose  fame  gave  author-
ity to  their  opinions.  Thus,  in  early  ages,
[47]  wise  men  conjectured  that  this  earth
is  a  vast  plain,  surrounded  on  all  hands
by  a  boundless  ocean  ;  that,  from  this  ocean,
the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  emerge  at  their
rising,  and  plunge  into  it  again  at  their
setting.

With  regard  to  the  mind,  men  in  their
rudest  state  are  apt  to  conjecture  that  the
principle  of  life  in  a  man  is  his  breath  ;  be-
cause the  most  obvious  distinction  between
a  living  and  a  dead  man  is,  that  the  one
breathes,  and  the  other  does  not.  To  this
it  is  owing  that,  in  ancient  languages,  the
word  which  denotes  the  soul,  is  that  which
properly  signifies  breath  or  air.

As  men  advance  in  knowledge,  their  first
conjectures  appear  silly  and  childish,  and
give  place  to  others,  which  tally  better  with
later  observations  and  discoveries.  Thus
one  system  of  philosophy  succeeds  another,
without  any  claim  to  superior  merit,  but
this — that  it  is  a  more  ingenious  system  of
conjectures,  and  accounts  better  for  com-
mon appearances.

To  omit  many  ancient  systems  of  this
kind,  Des  Cartes,  about  the  middle  of  the
last  century,  dissatisfied  with  the  materia
prima,  the  substantial  forms,  and  the  occult
qualities  of  the  Peripatetics,  conjectured
boldly,  that  the  heavenly  bodies  of  our  sys-
tem are  carried  round  by  a  vortex  or  whirl-
pool of  subtile  matter,  just  as  straws  and
chaff  are  carried  round  in  a  tub  of  water.
He  conjectured,  that  the  soul  is  seated  in  a
small  gland  in  the  brain,  called  the  pineal
gland  ;  that  there,  as  in  her  chamber  of
presence,  she  receives  intelligence  of  every-
thing that  affects  the  senses,  by  means  of  a
subtile  fluid  contained  in  the  nerves,  called
the  animal  spirits  ;  and  that  she  dispatches
these  animal  spirits,  as  her  messengers,  to
put  in  motion  the  several  muscles  of  the
body,  as  there  is  occasion.  • By  such  con-

*  It  is  not,  however,  to  be  supposed  that  Des  Cartes
allowed  the  soul  to  be  seated  by  loral  presence  in  any
part  of  the  tody  ;  for  the  smallest  point  of  body  is
still  extended,  and  mind  is  absolutely  simple  and  in-
capable of  occnpying-place.  The  pineal  gland,  in  the
Cartesian  drctrine,  is  only  analogically  called  the  seat
of  the  soul,  inasmuch  as  this  is  viewed  as  the  cen.
tral  point  of  the  corporeal  organism;  but  while
through  this  point  the  mind  and  body  are  mutually
connected,  that  connection  is  not  ore  of  a  mere
physical  dependence,  as  they  do  not  operate  on  each
bv  direct  and  natural  causation.— H.

[46,  1-7]


CHAP.  III.]


OF  HYPOTHESES.


235


jectures  as  these,  Des  Cartes  could  account
for  every  phsenomenon  in  nature,  in  such  a
plausible  manner  as  gave  satisfaction  to  a
great  part  of  the  learned  world  for  more
than  half  a  century. [48]

Such  conjectures  in  philosophical  matters
have  commonly  got  the  name  of  hypotheses,
or  theories.*  And  the  invention  of  a  hypo-
thesis, founded  on  some  slight  probabilities,
which  accounts  for  many  appearances  of
nature,  has  been  considered  as  the  highest
attainment  of  a  philosopher.  If  the  hypo-
thesis hangs  well  together,  is  embellished
by  a  lively  imagination,  and  serves  to  ac-
count for  common  appearances,  it  is  con-
sidered by  many  as  having  all  the  qualities
that  should  recommend  it  to  our  belief,
and  all  that  ought  to  be  required  in  a  philo-
sophical system.

There  is  such  proneness  in  men  of  genius
to  invent  hypotheses,  and  in  others  to
acquiesce  in  them,  as  the  utmost  which  the
human  faculties  can  attain  in  philosophy,
that  it  is  of  the  last  consequence  to  the  pro-
gress of  real  knowledge,  that  men  should
have  a  clear  and  distinct  understanding  of
the  nature  of  hypotheses  in  philosophy,  and
of  the  regard  that  is  due  to  them.

Although  some  conjectures  may  have  a
considerable  degree  of  probability,  yet  it  is
evidently  in  the  nature  of  conjecture  to  be
uncertain.  In  every  case  the  assent  ought
to  be  proportioned  to  the  evidence  ;  for  to
believe  firmly  what  has  but  a  small  degree
of  probability,  is  a  manifest  abuse  of  our
understanding.  Now,  though  we  may,  in
many  cases,  form  very  probable  conjectures
concerning  the  works  of  men,  every  conjec-
ture we  can  form  with  regard  to  the  works
of  God  has  as  little  probability  as  the  con-
jectures of  a  child  with  regard  to  the  works
of  a  man.

The  wisdom  of  God  exceeds  that  of  the
wisest  man,  more  than  his  wisdom  exceeds
that  of  a  child.  If  a  child  were  to  conjec-
ture how  an  army  is  to  be  formed  in  the
day  of  battle — how  a  city  is  to  be  fortified,
or  a  state  governed — what  chance  has  he
to  guess  right  ?  As  little  chance  has  the
wisest  man  when  he  pretends  to  conjecture
how  the  planets  move  in  their  courses,  how
the  sea  ebbs  and  flows,  and  how  our  minds
act  upon  our  bodies. [49]

If  a  thousand  of  the  greatest  wits  that
ever  the  world  produced  were,  without  any
previous  knowledge  in  anatomy,  to  sit  down
and  contrive  how,  and  by  what  internal
organs,  the  various  functions  of  the  human
body  are  carried  on,  how  the  blood  is  made
to  circulate  and  the  limbs  to  move,  they
would  not,  in  a  thousand  years,  hit  upon  any-
thing like  the  truth.

Of  all  the  discoveries that have  been

* See  above,  note  *,  p.  97,  b— H.
[48-50]


!  made  concerning  the  inward  structure  of
the  human  body,  never  one  was  made  by
conjecture.  Accurate  observations  of  ana-
tomists have  brought  to  light  innumerable
artifices  of  Nature  in  the  contrivance  of  this
machine  of  the  human  body,  which  we  can-
not but  admire  as  excellently  adapted  to
their  several  purposes.  But  the  most  saga-
cious physiologist  never  dreamed  of  them
till  they  were  discovered.  On  the  other
hand,  innumerable  conjectures,  formed  in
different  ages,  with  regard  to  the  structure
of  the  body,  have  been  confuted  by  obser-
vation, and  none  ever  confirmed.

What  we  have  said  of  the  internal  struc-
ture of  the  human  body,  may  be  said,  with
justice,  of  every  other  part  of  the  works  of
God,  wherein  any  real  discovery  has  been
made.  Such  discoveries  have  always  been
made  by  patient  observation,  by  accurate
experiments,  or  by  conclusions  drawn  by
strict  reasoning  from  observations  and  ex-
periments ;  and  such  discoveries  have  always
tended  to  refute,  but  not  to  confirm,  the
theories  and  hypotheses  which  ingenious
men  have  invented.

As  this  is  a  fact  confirmed  by  the  history
of  philosophy  in  all  past  ages,  it  ought  to
have  taught  men,  long  ago,  to  treat  with
just  contempt  hypotheses  in  every  branch
of  philosophy,  and  to  despair  of  ever  ad-
vancing real  knowledge  in  that  way.  The
Indian  philosopher,  being  at  a  loss  to  know
how  the  earth  was  supported,  invented  the
hypothesis  of  a  huge  elephant ;  and  this
elephant  he  supposed  to  stand  upon  the
back  of  a  huge  tortoise.  This  hypothesis,
however  ridiculous  it  appears  to  us,  might
seem  very  reasonable  [50]  toother  Indians,
who  knew  no  more  than  the  inventor  of  it ;
and  the  same  will  be  the  fate  of  all  hypo-
theses invented  by  men  to  account  for  the
works  of  God.  They  may  have  a  decent
and  plausible  appearance  to  those  who  are
not  more  knowing  than  the  inventor  ;  but,
when  men  come  to  be  more  enlightened,
they  will  always  appear  ridiculous  and
childish.

This  has  been  the  case  with  regard  to
hypotheses  that  have  been  revered  by  the
most  enlightened  part  of  mankind  for  hun-
dreds of  years  ;  and  it  will  always  be  the
case  to  the  end  of  the  world.  For,  until
the  wisdom  of  men  bear  some  proportion  to
the  wisdom  of  God,  their  attempts  to  find
out  the  structure  of  his  works,  by  the  force
of  their  wit  and  genius,  will  be  vain.

The  finest  productions  of  human  art  are
immensely  short  of  the  meanest  works  of
Nature.  The  nicest  artist  cannot  make  a
feather  or  the  leaf  of  a  tree.  Human
workmanship  will  never  bear  a  comparison
with  divine.  Conjectures  and  hypotheses
are  the  invention  and  the  workmanship  of
men,  and  must  bear  proportion  to  the  capa-


236


OX  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  I.


city  and  skill  of  the  inventor ;  .and,  there-
fore, will  always  be  very  unlike  to  the
works  of  God,  which  it  is  the  business  of
philosophy  to  discover.

The  world  has  been  so  long  befooled  by
hypotheses  in  all  parts  of  philosophy,  that
it  is  of  the  utmost  consequence  to  every
man  who  would  make  any  progress  in  real
knowledge,  to  treat  them  with  just  con-
tempt, as  the  reveries  of  vain  and  fanciful
men,whose  pride  makes  them  conceive  them-
selves able  to  unfold  the  mysteries  of  nature
by  the  force  of  their  genius.  A  learned  man,
in  an  epistle  to  Des  Cartes,  has  the  follow-
ing observation,  which  very  much  deserved
the  attention  of  that  philosopher,  and  of  all
that  come  after  him  : — "  When  men,  sit-
ting in  their  closet,  and  consulting  only
their  books,  attempt  disquisitions  into  nature,
they  may,  indeed,  tell  how  they  would  have
made  the  world,  if  God  had  given  them  that
in  commission ;  that  is,  they  may  describe
[51]  chimeras,  which  correspond  with  the
imbecility  of  their  own  minds,  no  less  than
the  admirable  beauty  of  the  universe  cor-
responds with  the  infinite  perfection  of  its
Creator ;  but  without  an  understanding
truly  divine,  they  can  never  form  such  an
idea  to  themselves  as  the  Deity  had  in
creating  things."

Let  us,  therefore,  lay  down  this  as  a
fundamental  principle  in  our  inquiries  into
the  structure  of  the  mind  and  its  opera-
tions— that  no  regard  is  due  to  the  conjec-
tures or  hypotheses  of  philosophers,  how-
ever ancient,  however  generally  received.
Let  us  accustom  ourselves  to  try  every
opinion  by  the  touchstone  of  fact  and  ex-
perience. What  can  fairly  be  deduced
from  facts  duly  observed  or  sufficiently  at-
tested, is  genuine  and  pure  ;  it  is  the  voice
of  God,  and  no  fiction  of  human  imagina-
tion.

The  first  rule  of  philosophising  laid  down
by  the  great  Newton,  is  this  : — Causas  re-
rum  naturalium,  non  phircs  admitti  debere,
quam  qua  et  vera  sint,  et  earum  phceno
menis  explicandis  svfficiant.  "  No  more
causes,  nor  any  other  causes  of  natural
effects,  ought  to  be  admitted,  but  such  as
are  both  true,  and  are  sufficient  for  ex-
plaining their  appearances."  This  is  a  golden
rule  ;  it  is  the  true  and  proper  test,  by
which  what  is  sound  and  solid  in  philoso-
phy may  be  distinguished  from  what  is  hol-
low and  vain.*

If  a  philosopher,  therefore,  pretends  to
shew  us  the  cause  of  any  natural  effect,
whether  relating  to  matter  or  to  mind,  let
us  first  consider  whether  there  is  sufficient


•  For  this  rule  we  are  not  indebted  to  Newton.
It  is  only  the  old  law  of  parcimony,  and  that  ambigu-
ous'y  expressed.  For,  in  their  plain  meaning,  the
words  "  et  vcrce  sint"  are  redundant ;  or  what  follows  is
redundant,  and  the  whole  rule  a  barren  truism. — H.


evidence  that  the  cause  he  assigns  does
really  exist.  If  there  is  not,  reject  it  with
disdain,  as  a  fiction  which  ought  to  have  no
place  in  genuine  philosophy.  If  the  cause
assigned  really  exists,  consider,  in  the  next
place,  whether  the  effect  it  is  brought  to
explain  necessarily  follows  from  it.  Un-
less it  has  these  two  conditions,  it  is  good
for  nothing.

When  Newton  had  shewn  the  admirable
effects  of  gravitation  in  our  planetary  sys-
tem, he  must  have  felt  a  strong  desire  to
know  [52]  its  cause.  He  could  have  in-
vented a  hypothesis  for  this  purpose,  as
many  had  done  before  him.  But  his  phi-
losophy was  of  another  complexion.  Let
us  hear  what  he  says  :  Rationem  harttm
gravitatis  proprietatum  ex  phanomenis  mm
potui  deiucere,  et  hypotheses  non  Jingo.
Qulcquid  enim  ex -phanomenis  non  deduci-
tur  hypothesis  vocanda  est.  Et  hypotheses,
seu  metaphydca,  aeu  physica,  sen  qualila-
tum  occullarum,  seu  mechunica,  in  philoso-
phia  experimeniali  locum  non  habent.


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  ANALOGY.

It  is  natural  to  men  to  judge  of  things
less  known,  by  some  similitude  they  ob-
serve, or  think  they  observe,  between  them
and  things  more  familiar  or  better  known.
In  many  cases,  we  have  no  better  way  of
judging.  And,  where  the  things  compared
have  really  a  great  similitude  in  their  na-
ture, when  there  is  reason  to  think  that  they
are  subject  to  the  same  laws,  there  may  be
a  considerable  degree  of  probability  in  con-
clusions drawn  from  analogy.

Thus,  we  may  observe  a  very  great  si-
militude between  this  earth  which  we  in-
habit, and  the  other  planets,  Saturn,  Ju-
piter, Mars,  Venus,  and  Mercury.  They
all  revolve  round  the  sun,  as  the  earth
does,  although  at  different  distances  and
in  different  periods.  They  borrow  all  their
light  from  the  sun,  as  the  earth  does.
Several  of  them  are  known  to  revolve  round
their  axis  like  the  earth,  and,  by  that
means,  must  have  a  like  succession  of  day
and  night.  Some  of  them  have  moons,
that  serve  to  give  them  light  in  the  absence
of  the  sun,  as  our  moon  does  to  us.  They
are  all,  in  their  motions,  subject  to  the
same  law  of  gravitation,  as  the  earth  is.
From  all  this  similitude,  it  is  not  unrea-
sonable to  think,  that  those  planets  may,
like  our  earth,  be  the  habitation  of  va-
rious [53]  orders  of  living  creatures.  There
is  some  probability  in  this  conclusion  from
analogy.

In  medicine,  physicians  must,  for  the
most  part,  be  directed  in  their  prescriptions

[51-53]


IV.]


OF  ANALOGY.


237


by  analogy.  The  constitution  of  one  human
body  is  so  like  to  that  of  another  that  it  is
reasonable  to  think  that  what  is  the  cause
of  health  or  sickness  to  one,  may  have  the
same  effect  upon  another.  And  this  ge-
nerally is  found  true,  though  not  without
some  exceptions.

In  politics  we  reason,  for  the  most  part,
from  analogy.  The  constitution  of  human
nature  is  so  similar  in  different  societies  or
commonwealths,  that  the  causes  of  peace
and  war,  of  tranquillity  and  sedition,  of
riches  and  poverty,  of  improvement  and
degeneracy,  are  much  the  same  in  all.

Analogical  reasoning,  therefore,  is  not,
in  all  cases,  to  be  rejected.  It  may  afford
a  greater  or  a  less  degree  of  probability,
according  as  the  things  compared  are  more
or  less  similar  in  their  nature.  But  it
ought  to  be  observed,  that,  as  this  kind  of
reasoning  can  afford  only  probable  evidence
at  best ;  so,  unless  great  caution  be  used,
we  are  apt  to  be  led  into  error  by  it.  For
men  are  naturally  disposed  to  conceive  a
greater  similitude  in  things  than  there
really  is.

To  give  an  instance  of  this  :  Anatomists,
in  ancient  ages,  seldom  dissected  human
bodies  ;  but  very  often  the  bodies  of  those
quadrupeds  whose  internal  structure  was
thought  to  approach  nearest  to  that  of  the
human  body.  Modern  anatomists  have
discovered  many  mistakes  the  ancients
were  led  into,  by  their  conceiving  a  greater
similitude  between  the  structure  of  men
and  of  some  beasts  than  there  is  in  reality.
By  this,  and  many  other  instances  that
might  be  given,  it  appears  that  conclusions
built  on  analogy  stand  on  a  slippery  founda-
tion ;  and  that  we  ought  never  to  rest  upon
evidence  of  this  kind,  when  we  can  have
more  direct  evidence. [54]

I  know  no  author  who  has  made  a  more
just  and  a  more  happy  use  of  this  mode  of
reasoning  than  Bishop  Butler,  in  his  "Ana-
logy of  Religion,  Natural  and  Revealed,  to
the  Constitution  and  Course  of  Nature."
In  that  excellent  work  the  author  does  not
ground  any  of  the  truths  of  religion  upon
analogy,  as  their  proper  evidence.  He
only  makes  use  of  analogy  to  answer  objec-
tions against  them.  When  objections  are
made  against  the  truths  of  religion,  which
may  be  made  with  equal  strength  against
what  we  know  to  be  true  in  the  course
of  nature,  such  objections  can  have  no
weight.

Analogical  reasoning,  therefore,  may  be
of  excellent  use  in  answering  objections
against  truths  which  have  other  evidence.
It  may  likewise  give  a  greater  or  a  less
degree  of  probability  in  cases  where  we  can
find  no  other  evidence.  But  all  arguments,
drawn  from  analogy,  are  still  the  weaker,
the  greater  disparity  there  is  between  the
T54.  55]


things  compared ;  and,  therefore,  must  be
weakest  of  all  when  we  compare  body  with
mind,  because  there  are  no  two  things  in
nature  more  unlike.

There  is  no  subject  in  which  men  have
always  been  so  prone  to  form  their  notions
by  analogies  of  this  kind,  as  in  what  re-
lates to  the  mind.  We  form  an  early  ac-
quaintance with  material  things  by  means
of  our  senses,  and  are  bred  up  in  a  con-
stant familiarity  with  them.  Hence  we
are  apt  to  measure  all  things  by  them  ;  and
to  ascribe  to  things  most  remote  from  mat-
ter, the  qualities  that  belong  to  material
things.  It  is  for  this  reason,  that  man-
kind have,  in  all  ages,  been  so  prone  to
conceive  the  mind  itself  to  be  some  sub-
tile kind  of  matter :  that  they  have  been
disposed  to  ascribe  human  figure  and  hu-
man organs,  not  only  to  angels,  but  even
to  the  Deity.  Though  we  are  conscious  of
the  operations  of  our  own  minds  when  they
are  exerted,  and  are  capable  of  attending
to  them,  so  as  to  form  a  distinct  notion  of
them,  this  is  so  difficult  a  work  to  men
whose  attention  is  constantly  solicited  by
external  objects,  that  we  give  them  names
from  things  that  are  familiar,  and  which
[55]  are  conceived  to  have  some  similitude
to  them  ;  and  the  notions  we  form  of  them
are  no  less  analogical  than  the  names  we
give  them.  Almost  all  the  words  by  which
we  express  the  operations  of  the  mind,  are
borrowed  from  material  objects.  To  un-
derstand, to  conceive,  to  imagine,  to  com-
prehend, to  deliberate,  to  infer,  and  many
others,  are  words  of  this  kind  ;  so  that  the
very  language  of  mankind,  with  regard  to
the  operations  of  our  minds,  is  analogical.
Because  bodies  are  affected  only  by  con-
tact and  pressure,  we  are  apt  to  conceive
that  what  is  an  immediate  object  of  thought,
and  affects  the  mind,  must  be  in  contact
with  it,  and  make  some  impression  upon
it.  When  we  imagine  anything,  the  very
word  leads  us  to  think  that  there  must  be
some  image  in  the  mind  of  the  thing  con-
ceived. It  is  evident  that  these  notions
are  drawn  from  some  similitude  conceived
between  body  and  mind,  and  between  the
properties  of  body  and  the  operations  of
mind-
To  illustrate  more  fully  that  analogical
reasoning  from  a  supposed  similitude  of
mind  to  body,  which  I  conceive  to  be  the
most  fruitful  source  of  error  with  regard  to
the  operations  of  our  minds,  I  shall  give  an
instance  of  it.

When  a  man  is  urged  by  contrary  motives
— those  on  one  hand  inciting  him  to  do  some
action,  those  on  the  other  to  forbear  it — he
deliberates  about  it,  and  at  last  resolves  to
do  it,  or  not  to  do  it.  The  contrary  motives
are  here  compared  to  the  weights  in  the
opposite  scales  of  a  balance  ;  and  there  i3


238


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  I.


not,  perhaps,  any  instance  that  can  be
named  of  a  more  striking  analogy  between
body  and  mind.  Hence  the  phrases  of
weighing  motives,  of  deliberating  upon
actions,  are  commoir  to  all  languages.

From  this analogy,  some philosophers
draw  very  important  conclusions. They
say,  that,  as  the  balance  cannot  incline  to
one  side  more  than the  other  when the
opposite  weights  are  equal,  so  a  man  can-
not possibly  determine  himself  if  the  motives
on  both  hands  are  equal ;  and,  as  the  bal-
ance must  necessarily  turn  to  that  side  [56]
which  has  most  weight,  so  the  man  must
necessarily be determined to that  hand
where the  motive is strongest. And  on
this  foundation some of  the schoolmen*
maintained that, if a hungry  ass were
placed  between  two  bundles  of  hay  equally
inviting,  the  beast  must  stand  still  and  starve
to  death,  being  unable  to  turn  to  either,
because  there  are  equal  motives  to  both.
This  is  an  instance  of  that  analogical  rea-
soning which  I  conceive  ought  never  to  be
trusted  ;  for  the  analogy  between  a  balance
and  a  man  deliberating,  though  one  of  the
strongest  that  can  be  found  between  matter
and  mind,  is  too  weak  to  support  any  argu-
ment. A  piece  of  dead  inactive  matter,
and  an  active  intelligent  being,  are  things
very  unlike ;  and,  because  the  one  would
remain  at  rest  in  a  certain  case,  it  does  not
follow  that  the  other  would  be  inactive  in  a
case  somewhat  similar. The  argument  is
no  better  than  this — That,  because  a  dead
animal  moves  only  as  it  is  pushed,  and,  if
pushed  with  equal  force  in  contrary  direc-
tions, must  remain  at  rest ;  therefore,  the
same  thing  must  happen  to  a  living  animal ;
for,  surely,  th-e  similitude  between  a  dead
animal  and  a living,  is  as  great  as  that
between  a  balance  and  a  man.

The  conclusion  I  would  draw  from  all
that  has  been  said  on  analogy,  is,  that,  in
our  inquiries  concerning  the  mind  and  its
operations,  we  ought  never  to  trust  to  rea-
sonings drawn  from  some  supposed  simili-
tude of  body  to  mind  ;  and  that  we  ought
to  be  very  much  upon  our  guard  that  we
be  not  imposed  upon  by  those  analogical
terms  and  phrases,  by  which  the  operations
of  the  mind  are  expressed  in  all  languages.
[57]


*  Ttiis  illustration  is  specially  associated  with
Joannes  Buridanus,  a  celebrated  Nominalist,  of  the
14th  century,  andone-of  the  acutest  reasoners  on  the
great  question  of  moral  liberty.  The  supposition
of  the  ass,  &c,  is  not,  however,  as  I  have  ascertained,
to  he  found  in  his  writings.  Perhaps  it  was  orally
advanced  in  disputation,  or  in  lecturing,  as  an  ex-
ample in  illustration  of  h;s  Determinism  ;  perhaps  it
was  employed  by  his  opponents  as  an  instance  to
reduce  that  doctrine  to  absurdity.  With  this  latter
view,  a  similar  refutation  of  the  principles  of  our
modern  Fatalists  was,  as  we  have s  en,  ingeniously
essayed  by  Reid's  friend  and  kinsman,  Dr  James
Gregory.— H.


CHAPTER  V.

OF THE PROPER MEANS OF KNOWING THE
OPERATIONS  OF  THE  MIND.

Since  we  ought  to  pay  no  regard  to  hypo-
theses, and  to  be  very  suspicious  of  analo-
gical reasoning,  it  may  be  asked,  From  what
source  must  the  knowledge  of  the  mind
and  its  faculties  be  drawn  ?

I  answer,  the  chief  and  proper  source  of
this  branch  of  knowledge  is  accurate  reflec-
tion upon  the  operations  of  our  own  minds.
Of  this  source  we  shall  speak  more  fully,
after  making  some  remarks  upon  two  others
that  may  be  subservient  to  it.  The  first  of
them  is  attention  to  the  structure  of  lan-
guage.

The  language  of  mankind  is  expressive  of
their  thoughts,  and  of  the  various  opera-
tions of  their  minds.  The  various  opera-
tions of  the  understanding,  will,  and  pas-
sions, which  are  common  to  mankind,  have
various  forms  of  speech  corresponding  to
them  in  all  languages,  which  are  the  signs
of  them,  and  by  which  they  are  expressed  :
And  a  due  attention  to  the  signs  may,  in
many  cases,  give  considerable  light  to  the
things  signified  by  them.

There  are  in  all  languages  modes  of
speech,  by  which  men  signify  their  judg-
ment, or  give  their  testimony ;  by  which
they  accept  or  refuse  ;  by  which  they  ask
information  or  advice  ;  by  which  they  com-
mand, or  threaten,  or  supplicate  ;  by  which
they  plight  their  faith  in  promises  or  con-
tracts. If  such  operations  were  not  com-
mon to  mankind,  we  should  not  find  in  all
languages  forms  of  speech,  by  which  they
are  expressed.

All  languages,  indeed,  have  their  imper-
fections— they  can  never  be  adequate  to  all
the  varieties  of  human  thought ;  and  there-
fore things  may  be  really  distinct  in  their
nature,  and  capable  of  being  distinguished
by  the  human  mind,  which  are  not  distin-
guished [58]  in  common  language.  "We  can
only  expect,  in  the  structure  of  languages,
those  distinctions  which  all  mankind  in  the
common  business  of  life  have  occasion  to
make.

There  may  be  peculiarities  in  a  particular
language,  of  the  causes  of  which  we  are
ignorant,  and  from  which,  therefore,  we  can
draw  no  conclusion.  But  whatever  we  find
common  to  all  languages,  must  have  a  com-
mon cause ;  must  be  owing  to  some  com-
mon notion  or  sentiment  of  the  human
mind.

We  gave  some  examples  of  this  before,
and  shall  here  add  another.  All  languages
have  a  plural  number  in  many  of  their
nouns ;  from  which  wa  may  infer  that  all
men  have  notions,  not  of  individual  things

[56-5*1


CHAP.  V.]


OPERATIONS  OF  THE  MIND.


239


only,  but  of  attributes,  or  things  which  are
common  to  many  individuals  ;  for  no  indi-
vidual can  have  a  plural  number.

Another  source  of  information  in  this
subject,  is  a  due  attention  to  the  course  of
human  actions  and  conduct.  The  actions
of  men  are  effects ;  their  sentiments,  their
passions,  and  their  affections,  are  the  causes
of  those  effects  ;  and  we  may,  in  many  cases,
form  a  judgment  of  the  cause  from  the
effect.

The  behaviour  of  parents  towards  their
children  gives  sufficient  evidence  even  to
those  who  never  had  children,  that  the
parental  affection  is  common  to  mankind.
It  is  easy  to  see,  from  the  general  conduct
of  men,  what  are  the  natural  objects  of  their
esteem,  their  admiration,  their  love,  their
approbation,  their  resentment,  and  of  all
their  other  original  dispositions.  It  is
obvious,  from  the  conduct  of  men  in  all
ages,  that  man  is  by  his  nature  a  social
animal;  that  he  delights  to  associate  with
his  species  ;  to  converse,  and  to  exchange
good  offices  with  them.

Not  only  the  actions,  but  even  the  opi-
nions of  men  may  sometimes  give  light
into  the  frame  of  the  human  mind.  The
opinions  of  men  may  be  considered  as  the
effects  of  their  intellectual  powers,  [59]  as
their  actions  are  the  effects  of  their  active
principles.  Even  the  prejudices  and  errors
of  mankind,  when  they  are  general,  must
have  some  cause  no  less  general ;  the  dis-
covery of  which  will  throw  some  light  upon
the  frame  of  the  human  understanding.

I  conceive  this  to  be  the  principal  use  of
the  history  of  philosophy.  When  we  trace
the  history  of  the  various  philosophical  opin-
ions that  have  sprung  up  among  thinking
men,  we  are  led  into  a  labyrinth  of  fanciful
opinions,  contradictions,  and  absurdities,
intermixed  with  some  truths  ;  yet  we  may
sometimes  find  a  clue  to  lead  us  through  the
several  windings  of  this  labyrinth.  We  may
find  that  point  of  view  which  presented
things  to  the  author  of  the  system,  in  the
li^ht  in  which  they  appeared  to  him.  This
will  often  give  a  consistency  to  things  seem-
ingly contradictory,  and  some  degree  of
probability  to  those  that  appeared  most
fanciful.  *

The  history  of  philosophy,  considered  as
a  map  of  the  intellectual  operations  of  men
of  genius,  must  always  be  entertaining,  and
may  sometimes  give  us  views  of  the  human
understanding,  which  could  not  easily  be  had
any  other  way.

I  return  to  what  I  mentioned  as  the  main
source  of  information  on  this  subject — at-
tentive reflection  upon  the  operations  of  our
own  minds.


» "  Ivory  error,"  says Bossuet,
abused."—  H.


[69-61]


All  the  notions  we  have  of  mind  and  of
its  operations,  are,  by  Mr  Locke,  called
ideas  of  reflection.*  A  man  may  have  as
distinct  notions  of  remembrance,  of  judg-
ment, of  will,  of  desire,  as  he  has  of  any
object  whatever.  Such  notions,  as  Mr
Locke  justly  observes,  are  got  by  the  power
of  reflection.  But  what  is  this  power  of
reflection  ?  "  It  is,"  says  the  same  author,
"  that  power  by  which  the  mind  turns  its
view  inward,  and  observes  its  own  actions
and  operations."  He  observes  elsewhere,
"  That  the  understanding,  like  the  eye,
whilst  it  makes  us  see  and  perceive  all  [60]
other  things,  takes  no  notice  of  itself;  and
that  it  requires  art  and  pains  to  set  it  at  a
distance,  and  make  it  its  own  object."
Cicero  hath  expressed  this  sentiment  most
beautifully. Tusc.  I.  28.

This  power  of  the  understanding  to  make
its  own  operations  its  object,  to  attend  to
them,  and  examine  them  on  all  sides,  is  the
power  of  reflection,  by  which  alone  we  can
have  any  distinct  notion  of  the  powers  of  our
own  or  of  other  minds.

This  reflection  ought  to  be  distinguished
from  consciousness,  with  which  it  is  too
often  confounded;  even  by  Mr  Locke.  All
men  are  conscious  of  the  operations  of  their
own  minds,  at  all  times,  while  they  are
awake  ;  but  there  are  few  who  reflect  upon
them,  or  make  them  objects  of  thought.

From  infancy,  till  we  come  to  the  years
of  understanding,  we  are  employed  solely
about  external  objects.  And,  although  the
mind  is  conscious  of  its  operations,  it  does
not  attend  to  them  ;  its  attention  is  turned
solely  to  the  external  objects,  about  which
those  operations  are  employed.  Thus,  when
a  man  is  angry,  he  is  conscious  of  his  pas-
sion ;  but  his  attention  is  turned  to  the
person  who  offended  him,  and  the  circum-
stances of  the  offence,  while  the  passion  of
anger  is  not  in  the  least  the  object  of  his
attention.

I  conceive  this  is  sufficient  to  shew  the
difference  between  consciousness  of  the
operations  of  our  minds,  and  reflection  upon
them ;  and  to  shew  that  we  may  have  the
former  without  any  degree  of  the  latter.
The  difference  between  consciousness  and
reflection,  is  like  to  the  difference  between
a  superficial  view  of  an  object  which  pre-
sents itself  to  the  eye  while  we  are  engaged
about  something  else,  and  that  attentive
examination  which  we  give  to  an  object
when  we  are  wholly  employed  in  surveying
it.  Attention  is  a  voluntary  act ;  it  re-
quires an  active  exertion  to  begin  and  to
continue  it,  and  it  may  be  continued  as
long  as  we  will ;  but  consciousness  [61]  is

*  Locke  is  not  (as  Reid  seems  tn  think,  and  as  Mi
Stewart  expressly  says)  the  first  who  introduced  Re.
(lection  either  as  a  ps>  etiological  term,  or  apsycholo-
gical  principle. See  Note I. — H.


240


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  i.


involuntary  and  of  no  continuance,  changing
with  every  thought.

The  power  of  reflection  upon  the  oper-
ations of  their  own  minds,  does  not  appear
at  all  in  children.  Men  must  be  come  to
some  ripeness  of  understanding  before  they
are  capable  of  it.  Of  all  the  powers  of  the
human  mind,  it  seems  to  be  the  last  that
unfolds  itself.  Most  men  seem  incapable  of
acquiring  it  in  any  considerable  degree.
Like  all  our  other  powers,  it  is  greatly  im-
proved by  exercise  ;  and  until  a  man  has
got  the  habit  of  attending  to  the  operations
of  his  own  mind,  he  can  never  have  clear
and  distinct  notions  of  them,  nor  form  any
steady  judgment  concerning  them.  His
opinions  must  be  borrowed  from  others,  his
notions  confused  and  indistinct,  and  he  may
easily  be  led  to  swallow  very  gross  absurd-
ities. To  acquire  this  habit,  is  a  work  of
time  and  labour,  even  in  those  who  begin  it
early,  and  whose  natural  talents  are  toler-
ably fitted  for  it ;  but  the  difficulty  will  be
daily  diminishing,  and  the  advantage  of  it
is  great.  They  will,  thereby,  be  enabled  to
think  with  precision  and  accuracy  on  every
subject,  especially  on  those  subjects  that
are  more  abstract.  They  will  be  able  to
judge  for  themselves  in  many  important
points,  wherein  others  must  blindly  follow  a
leader.


CHAPTER  VI.

OP THE  DIFFICULTY  OF ATTENDING TO THE
OPERATIONS  OF  OUR  OWN  MINDS.

The  difficulty  of  attending  to  our  mental
operations,  ought  to  be  well  understood,  and
justly  estimated,  by  those  who  would  make
any  progress  in  this  science ;  that  they  may
neither,  on  the  one  hand,  expect  success
without  pains  and  application  of  thought ;
nor,  on  the  other,  be  discouraged,  by  con-
ceiving that  the  obstacles  that  lie  in  the  way
are  insuperable,  and  that  there  is  no  cer-
tainty to  be  attained  in  it.  I  shall,  there-
fore, endeavour  to  point  [62]  out  the  causes
of  this  difficulty,  and  the  effects  that  have
arisen  from  it,  that  we  may  be  able  to  form
a  true  judgment  of  both.

1.  The  number  and  quick  succession  of
the  operations  of  the  mind,  make  it  difficult
to  give  due  attention  to  them.  It  is  well
known  that,  if  a  great  number  of  obj.cts  be
presented  in  quick  succession,  even  to  the
eye,  they  are  confounded  in  the  memory
and  imagination.  We  retain  a  confused
notion  of  the  whole,  and  a  more  confused
one  of  the  several  parts,  especially  if  they
are  objects  to  which  we  have  never  before
given  particular  attention.  No  succession
can  be  more  quick  than  that  of  thought.
The  mind  is  busy  while  we  are  awake,  con-


tinually passing  from  one  thought  and  one
operation  to  another.  The  scene  is  con-
stantly shifting.  Every  man  will  be  sen-
sible of  this,  who  tries  but  for  one  minute
to  keep  the  same  thought  in  his  imagination,
without  addition  or  variation.  He  will  find
it  impossible  to  keep  the  scene  of  his  imagin-
ation fixed.  Other  objects  will  intrude,
without  being  called,  and  all  he  can  do  is  to
reject  these  intruders  as  quickly  as  possible,
and  return  to  his  principal  object.

2.  In  this  exercise,  we  go  contrary  to
habits  which  have  been  early  acquired,  and
confirmed  by  long  unvaried  practice.  From
infancy,  we  are  accustomed  to  attend  to
objects  of  sense,  and  to  them  only ;  and,
when  sensible  objects  have  got  such  strong
hold  of  the  attention  by  confirmed  habit,  it
is  not  easy  to  dispossess  them.  When  we
grow  up,  a  variety  of  external  objects
solicits  our  attention,  excites  our  curiosity,
engages  our  affections,  or  touches  our  pas-
sions ;  and  the  constant  round  of  employ-
ment, about  external  objects,  draws  off  the
mind  from  attending  to  itself;  so  that
nothing  is  more  just  than  the  observation
of  Mr  Locke,  before  mentioned,  "  That  the
understanding,  like  the  eye,  while  it  sur-
veys all  the  objects  around  it,  commonly
takes  no  notice  of  itself."

3.  The  operations  of  the  mind,  from  their
very  nature,  lead  the  mind  to  give  its  atten-
tion to  some  other  object.  Our  sensations,
[63]  as  will  be  shewn  afterwards,  are  natu-
ral signs,  and  turn  our  attention  to  the  things
signified  by  them  ;  so  much  that  most  of
them,  and  those  the  most  frequent  and
familiar,  have  no  name  in  any  language.  In
perception,  memory,  judgment,  imagination,
and  reasoning,  there  is  an  object  distinct
from  the  operation  itself ;  and,  while  we  are
led  by  a  strong  impulse  to  attend  to  the
object,  the  operation  escapes  our  notice.
Our  passions,  affections,  and  all  our  active
powers,  have,  in  like  manner,  their  objects
which  engross  our  attention,  and  divert  it
from  the  passion  itself.

4.  To  this  we  may  add  a  just  observation
made  by  Mr  Hume,  That,  when  the  mind
is  agitated  by  any  passion,  as  soon  as  we
turn  our  attention  from  the  object  to  the
passion  itself,  the  passion  subsides  or  van-
ishes, and,  by  that  means,  escapes  our
inquiry.  This,  indeed,  is  common  to  almost
every  operation  of  the  mind.  When  it  is
exerted,  we  are  conscious  of  it ;  but  then
we  do  not  attend  to  the  operation,  but  to
its  object.  When  the  mind  is  drawn  off
from  the  object  to  attend  to  its  own  opera-
tion, that  operation  ceases,  and  escapes  our
notice.

5.  As  it  is  not  sufficient  to  the  discovery
of  mathematical  truths,  that  a  man  be  able
to  attend  to  mathematical  figures,  as  it  is
necessary  that  he  should  have  the  ability  to

[62,  63]


CHAP.  VI.]


OPERATIONS  OF  THE  MIND.


241


distinguish  accurately  things  that  differ,
and  to  discern  clearly  the  various  relations
of  the  quantities  he  compares — an  ability
which,  though  much  greater  in  those  who
have  the  force  of  genius  than  in  others,
yet,  even  in  them,  requires  exercise  and
habit  to  bring  it  to  maturity — so,  in  order
to  discover  the  truth  in  what  relates  to  the
operations  of  the  mind,  it  is  not  enough  that
a  man  be  able  to  give  attention  to  them  :
he  must  have  the  ability  to  distinguish  ac-
curately their  minute  differences  ;  to  resolve
and  analyse  complex  operations  into  their
simple  ingredients ;  to  unfold  the  ambiguity
of  words,  which  in  this  science  is  greater
than  in  any  other,  and  to  give  them  the  same
accuracy  and  precision  that  mathematical
terms  have  ;  for,  indeed,  the  same  precision
in  the  use  of  words,  the  same  cool  attention
to  [64]  the  minute  differences  of  things,
the  same  talent  for  abstraction  and  analys-
ing, which  fit  a  man  for  the  study  of  math-
ematics, are  no  less  necessary  in  this.  But
there  is  thi&great  difference  between  the  two
sciences — that  the  objects  of  mathematics
being  things  external  to  the  mind,  it  is
much  more  easy  to  attend  to  them,  and  fix
them  steadily  in  the  imagination.

The  difficulty  attending  our  inquiries
into  the  powers  of  the  mind,  serves  to
account  for  some  events  respecting  this
branch  of  philosophy,  which  deserve  to  be
mentioned.

While  most  branches  of  science  have,
either  in  ancient  or  in  modern  times,  been
highly  cultivated,  and  brought  to  a  con-
siderable degree  of  perfection,  this  remains,
to  this  day,  in  a  very  low  state,  and,  as  it
were,  in  its  infancy.

Every  science  invented  by  men  must
have  its  beginning  and  its  progress  ;  and,
from  various  causes,  it  may  happen  that
one  science  shall  be  brought  to  a  great
degree  of  maturity,  while  another  is  yet  in
its  infancy.  The  maturity  of  a  science  may
be  judged  of  by  this — When  it  contains  a
system  of  principles,  and  conclusions  drawn
from  them,  which  are  so  firmly  established
that,  among  thinking  and  intelligent  men,
there  remains  no  doubt  or  dispute  about
them ;  so  that  those  who  come  after  may
raise  the  superstructure  higher,  but  shall
never  be  able  to  overturn  what  is  already
built,  in  order  to  begin  on  a  new  founda-
tion.

Geometry  seems  to  have  been  in  its  in-
fancy about  the  time  of  Thales  and  Pytha-
goras ;  because  many  of  the  elementary
propositions,  on  which  the  whole  science  is
built,  are  ascribed  to  them  as  the  inventors.
Euclid's  'l  Elements,"  which  were  written
some  ages  after  Pythagoras,  exhibit  a  sys-
tem of  geometry  which  deserves  the  name
of  a  science ;  and,  though  great  additions
have  been  made  by  Apollonius,  Archi-
T64-66]


medes,  Pappus,  and  others  among  the  an-
cients, and  still  greater  by  the  moderns  ;
yet  what  [65]  was  laid  down  in  Euclid's
"  Elements"  was  never  set  aside.  It  re-
mains as  the  firm  foundation  of  all  future
superstructures  in  that  science.

Natural  philosophy  remained  in  its  in-
fant state  near  two  thousand  years  after
geometry  had  attained  to  its  manly  form  :
for  natural  philosophy  seems  not  to  have
been  built  on  a  stable  foundation,  nor  carried
to  any  degree  of  maturity,  till  the  last  cen-
tury. The  system  of  Des  Cartes,  which  was
all  hypothesis,  prevailed  in  the  most  enlight-
ened part  of  Europe  till  towards  the  end  of
last  century.  Sir  Isaac  Newton  has  the
merit  of  giving  the  form  of  a  science  to  this
branch  of  philosophy  ;  and  it  need  not  ap-
pear surprising,  if  the  philosophy  of  the
human  mind  should  be  a  century  or  two
later  in  being  brought  to  maturity.

It  has  received  great  accessions  from  the
labours  of  several  modern  authors ;  and
perhaps  wants  little  more  to  entitle  it  to  the
name  of  a  science,  but  to  be  purged  of  cer-
tain hypotheses,  which  have  imposed  on
some  of  the  most  acute  writers  on  this  sub-
ject, and  led  them  into  downright  scepticism.

What  the  ancients  have  delivered  to  us
concerning  the  mind  and  its  operations,  is
almost  entirely  drawn,  not  from  accurate
reflection,  but  from  some  conceived  analogy
between  body  and  mind-  And,  although
the  modern  authors  I  formerly  named  have
given  more  attention  to  the  operations  of
their  own  minds,  and  by  that  means  have
made  important  discoveries,  yet,  by  re-
taining some  of  the  ancient  analogical  no-
tions, their  discoveries  have  been  less  use-
ful than  they  might  have  been,  and  have
led  to  scepticism.

It  may  happen  in  science,  as  in  building,
that  an  error  in  the  foundation  shall  weaken
the  whole ;  and  the  farther  the  building  is
carried  on,  this  weakness  shall  become  the
more  apparent  and  the  more  threatening.
Something  of  this  kind  seems  to  have  hap-
pened in  our  systems  concerning  the  mind.
The  accession  they  [66]  have  received  by
modern  discoveries,  though  very  important  in
itself,  has  thrown  darkness  and  obscurity
upon  the  whole,  and  has  led  men  rather  to
scepticism  than  to  knowledge.  This  must
be  owing  to  some  fundamental  errors  that
have  not  been  observed  ;  and  when  these
are  corrected,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  im-
provements that  have  been  made  will  have
their  due  effect.

The  last  effect  I  observe  of  the  difficulty
of  inquiries  into  the  powers  of  the  mind,  is,
that  there  is  no  other  part  of  human  know-
ledge in  which  ingenious  authors  have  been
so  apt  to  run  into  strange  paradoxes,  and
even  into  gross  absurdities.

When  we  find  philosophers  maintaining

K


242


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


£essay


that  there  is  no  heat  in  the  fire,  nor  colour
in  the  rainbow  ;*  when  we  find  the  gravest
philosophers,  from  Des  Cartes  down  to
Bishop  Berkeley,  mustering  up  arguments
to  prove  the  existence  of  a  material  world,
and  unable  to  find  any  that  will  bear  ex-
amination ;  when  we  find  Bishop  Berkeley
and  Mr  Hume,  the  acutest  metaphysicians
uf  the  age,  maintaining  that  there  is  no  such
thing  as  matter  in  the  universe — that  sun,
moon,  and  stars,  the  earth  which  we  inhabit,
our  own  bodies,  and  those  of  our  friends,  are
only  ideas  in  our  minds,  and  have  no  exist-
ence but  in  thought ;  when  we  find  the
last  maintaining  that  there  is  neither  body
nor  mind — nothing  in  nature  but  ideas  and
impressions,  without  any  substance  on  which
they  are  impressed — that  there  is  no  cer-
tainty, nor  indeed  probability,  even  in  ma-
thematical axioms  :  I  say,  when  we  consider
such  extravagancies  of  many  of  the  most
acute  writers  on  this  subject,  we  may  be  apt
to  think  the  whole  to  be  only  a  dream  of
fanciful  men,  who  have  entangled  them-
selves in  cobwebs  spun  out  of  their  own
brain.  But  we  ought  to  consider  that  the
more  closely  and  ingeniously  men  reason
from  false  principles,  the  more  absurdities
they  will  be  led  into  ;  and  when  such  absur-
dities help  to  bring  to  light  the  false  prin-
ciples from  which  they  are  drawn,  they  may
be  the  more  easily  forgiven. [67]

CHAPTER  VII.

DIVISION  OF  THE  POWERS  OF  THE  MIND.

The  powers  of  the  mind  are  so  many,  so
various,  and  so  connected  and  complicated
in  most  of  its  operations,  that  there  never
has  been  any  division  of  them  proposed
which  is  not  liable  to  considerable  objec-
tions. We  shall,  therefore,  take  that  gene-
ral division  which  is  the  most  common,  into
the  powers  of  understanding  and  those  of
wil/.-f  Under  the  will  we  comprehend  our
active  powers,  and  all  that  lead  to  action,
or  influence  the  mind  to  act — such  as  appe-
tites, passions,  affections.  The  understand-
ing comprehends  our  contemplative  powers  ;
by  which  wre  perceive  objects  ;  by  which
we  conceive  or  remember  them ;  by  which
we  analyse  or  compound  them ;  and  by  which
we  judge  and  reason  concerning  them.


*  A  merely  verbal  dispute.  See  before,  p.  2i'5,  b,
note.— H.

T  It  would  be  out  of  place  to  enter  on  the  exten.
give  field  of  history  and  discussion  relative  to  the
distribution  of  our  mental  powers.  It  is  sufficient
to  say,  that  the  vulgar  division  of  the  faculties,
adopted  by  Reid,  into  those  of  the  Understanding
and  those  of  the  Will,  is  to  be  traced  to  the  classifi-
cation, taken  in  the  Aristotelic  school,  of  the  powers
into  gnostic,  or  cognitive,  and  orectic,  or  appetent.
On  this  the  reader  may  consult  the  admirablenntro-
duction  of  Philoponus— or  rather  of  Ammonius  Her.
mise— to  the  books  of  Aristotle  upon  the  Soul.— H.


Although  this  general  division  may  be  of
use  in  order  to  our  proceeding  more  metho-
dically in  our  subject,  we  are  not  to  under-
stand it  as  if,  in  those  operations  which  are
ascribed  to  the  understanding,  there  were
no  exertion  of  will  or  activity,  or  as  if  the
understanding  wTere  not  employed  in  the
operations  ascribed  to  the  will ;  for  I  con-
ceive there  is  no  operation  of  the  under-
standing wherein  the  mind  is  not  active  in
some  degree.  We  have  some  command
over  our  thoughts,  and  can  attend  to  this
or  to  that,  of  many  objects  which  present
themselves  to  our  senses,  to  our  memory,
or  to  our  imagination.  We  can  survey  an
pbject  on  this  side  or  that,  superficially  or
accurately,  for  a  longer  or  a  shorter  time  ;
so  that  our  contemplative  powers  are  under
the  guidance  and  direction  of  the  active  ;
and  the  former  never  pursue  their  object
without  being  led  and  directed,  urged  or
restrained  by  the  latter  :  and  because  the
understanding  is  always  more  or  less  di-
rected by  the  will,  mankind  have  ascribed
some  degree  of  activity  to  [68]  the  mind  in
its  intellectual  operations,  as  well  as  in  those
which  belong  to  the  will,  and  have  ex-
pressed them  by  active  verbs,  such  as  see-
ing, hearing,  judging,  reasoning,  and  the
like.

And  as  the  mind  exerts  some  degree  of
activity  even  in  the  operations  of  under-
standing, so  it  is  certain  that  there  can  be
no  act  of  will  which  is  not  accompanied
with  some  act  of  understanding.  The  will
must  have  an  object,  and  that  object  must
be  apprehended  or  conceived  in  the  under-
standing. It  is,  therefore,  to  be  remem-
bered, that,  in  most,  if  not  all  operations  of
the  mind,  both  faculties  concur ;  and  we
range  the  operation  under  that  faculty  which
hath  the  largest  share  in  it.  •

The  intellectual  powers  are  commonly
divided  into  simple  apprehension,  judgment,
and  reasoning. -f  As  this  division  has  in
its  favour  the  authority  of  antiquity,  and  of
a  very  general  reception,  it  would  be  im-
proper to  set  it  aside  without  giving  any
reason  :  I  shall,  therefore,  explain  it  briefly,
and  give  the  reasons  why  I  choose  to  follow
another.


«  It  should  be  always  remembered  that  the  various
mental  energies  are  all  only  possible  in  and  through
each  other;  and  that  our  psychological  analyses  do  not
suppose  any  real  distinction  of  the  operations  which
we  discriminate  by  different  names.  Thought  and
volition  can  no  more  be  exerted  apart,  than  the  sides
and  angles  of  a  square  can  exist  separately  from  each
other.— H.

+  This,  is  a  singular  misapprehension.  The  divi.
sion  in  question,  I  make  bold  to  sav,  ntver  was
proposed  by  any  philosopher  as  a  psychological  dis.
tribution  of  the  cognitive  faculties  in  general :  on
the  contrary,  it  is  only  a  logical  distribution  of.that
section  of  the  cognitive  faculties  which  we. denomi-
nate discursive,  as  those  alone  which  are  proximately
concerned  in  the  process  of  reasoning — or  thought,  in
its  strictest  signification.— H.


[87,  68]


chap,  vii.] DIVISION  OF  THE  POWERS  OF  THE  iMIND.


243


It  may  be  observed  that,  without  appre-
hension of  the  objects  concerning  which
we  judge,  there  can  be  no  judgment;  as
little  can  there  be  reasoning  without  both
apprehension  and  judgment :  these  three
operations,  therefore,  are  not  independent
of  each  other.  The1  second  includes  the
first,  and  the  third  includes  both  the  first
and  second ;  but  the  first  may  be  exer-
cised without  either  of  the  other  two.*  It
is  on  that  account  called  simple  apprehen-
sion ,•  that  is,  apprehension  unaccompanied
with  any  judgment  about  the  object  appre-
hended. This  simple  apprehension  of  an
object  is,  in  common  language,  called  having
a  notion,  or  having  a  conception  of  the  ob-
ject, and  by  late  authors  is  called  having
an  idea  of  it.  In  speaking,  it  is  expressed
by  a  word,  or  by  a  part  of  a  proposition,
without  that  composition  and  structure
which  makes  a  complete  sentence;  as  a
man,  a  man  of  fortune;  Such  words,  taken
by  themselves,  signify  simple  apprehen-
sions. They  neither  affirm  nor  [69]  deny;
they  imply  no  judgment  or  opinion  of  the
thing  signified  by  them ;  and,  therefore,
cannot  be  said  to  be  either  true  or  false.

The  second  operation  in  this  division  is
judgment  ;  in  which,  say  the  philosophers,
there  must  be  two  objects  of  thought  com-
pared, and  some  agreement  or  disagree-
ment, or,  in  general,  some  relation  discerned
between  them  ;  in  consequence  of  which,
there  is  an  opinion  or  belief  of  that  relation
which  we  discern.  This  operation  is  ex-
pressed in  speech  by  a  proposition,  in  which
some  relation  between  the  things  compared
is  affirmed  or  denied  :  as  when  we  say,  All
men  are  fallible.

Truth  and  falsehood  are  qualities  which
belong  to  judgment  only ;  or  to  proposi-
tions by  which  judgment  is  expressed.
Every  judgment,  every  opinion,  and  every
proposition,  is  either  true  or  false.  But
words  which  neither  affirm  nor  deny  any-
thing, can  have  neither  of  those  qualities  ;
and  the  same  may  be  said  of  simple  appre-
hensions, which  are  signified  by  such  words.

The  third  operation  is  reasoning ;  in
which,  from  two  or  more  judgments,  we
draw  a  conclusion.

This  division  of  our  intellectual  powers
corresponds  perfectly  with  the  account  com-
monly given  by  philosophers,  of  the  suc-
cessive steps  by  which  the  mind  proceeds
in  the  acquisition  of  its  knowledge  ;  which
are  these  three :  First,  By  the  senses,  or
by  other  means,  it  is  furnished  with  various

•  This  is, not  correct.  Apprehension  is  a-  impos.
sible  without  judgment,  as  judgment  is  impossible
without  apprehension.  The  apprehension  of  a  thing
or  notion,  is  only  realized  in  the  mental  affirmation
that  the  concept  ideally  exists,  and  this  affirmation  is
a  judgment.  In  fact,  all  consciousness  supposes  a
judgment,  as  all  consciousness  supposes  a  discrimina-
tion.—H.

[69-71]


simple  apprehensions,  notions,  or  ideas.
These  are  the  materials  which  nature  gives
it  to  work  upon  ;  and  from  the  simple  ideas
it  is  furnished  with  by  nature,  it  forms
various  others  more  complex.  Secondly,
By  comparing  its  ideas,  and  by  perceiving
their  agreements  and  disagreements,  it
forms  its  judgments.  And,  Lastly,  From
two  or  more  judgments,  it  deduces  con-
clusions of  reasoning.

Now,  if  all  our  knowledge  is  got  by  a
procedure  of  this  kind,  [70]  certainly  the
threefold  division  of  the  powers  of  under-
standing, into  simple  apprehension,  judg-
ment, and  reasoning,  is  the  most  natural
and  the  most  proper  that  can  be  devised.
This  theory  and  that  division  are  so  closely
connected  that  it  is  difficult  to  judge  which
of  them  has  given  rise  to  the  other  ;  and
they  must  stand  or  fall  together.  But,  if
all  our  knowledge  is  not  got  by  a  process
of  this  kind — if  there  are  other  avenues
of  knowledge  besides  the  comparing  our
ideas,  and  perceiving  their  agreements  and
disagreements — it  is  probable  that  there  may
be  operations  of  the  understanding  which
cannot  be  properly  reduced  under  any  of
the  three  that  have  been  explained.

Let  us  consider  some  of  the  most  familiar
operations  of  our  minds,  and  see  to  which
of  the  three  they  belong.  I  begin  with
consciousness.  I  know  that  I  think,  and
this  of  all  knowledge  is  the  most  certain.
Is  that  operation  of  my  mind  which  gives
me  this  certain  knowledge,  to  be  called
simple  apprehension  ?  No,  surely.  Simple
apprehension  neither  affirms  nor  denies.
It  will  not  be  said  that  it  is  by  reason-
ing that  I  know  that  I  think.  It  re-
mains, therefore,  that  it  must  be  by  judg-
ment— that  is,  according  to  the  account
given  of  judgment,  by  comparing  two  ideas,
and  perceiving  the  agreement  between
them.  But  what  are  the  ideas  compared  ?
They  must  be  the  idea  of  myself,  and  the
idea  of  thought,  for  they  are  the  terms  of
the  proposition  I  think.  According  to  this
account,  then,  first,  I  have  the  idea  of  my-
self and  the  idea  of  thought ;  then,  by  com-
paring these  two  ideas,  I  perceive  that  I
think.

Let  any  man  who  is  capable  of  reflection
judge  for  himself,  whether  it  is  by  an  opera-
tion of  this  land  that  he  comes  to  be  con-
vinced that  he  thinks  ?  To  me  it  appears
evident,  that  the  conviction  I  have  that  I
think,  is  not  got  in  this  way  ;  and,  therefore,
I  conclude,  either  that  consciousness  is  not
judgment,  or  that  judgment  is  not  rightly
defined  to  be  the  perception  of  some  agree-
ment oi  disagreement  between  two  ideas.

The perception of an object by  my

senses  is another  operation of [71] the

understanding. 1  would  know  whether  it

be  simple  apprehension, or  judgment,  or

it  2


244


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


reasoning.  It  is  not  simple  apprehension,
because  I  am  persuaded  of  the  existence  of
the  object  as  much  as  I  could  be  by  demon-
stration. It  is  not  judgment,  if  by  judg-
ment be  meant  the  comparing  ideas,  and
perceiving  their  agreements  or  disagree-
ments. It  is  not  reasoning,  because  those
who  cannot  reason  can  perceive.

I  find  the  same  difficulty  in  classing  me-
mory under  any  of  the  operations  men-
tioned.

There  is  not  a  more  fruitful  source  of
error  in  this  branch  of  philosophy,  than
divisions  of  things  which  are  taken  to  be
complete  when  they  are  not  really  so.  To
make  a  perfect  division  of  any  class  of
things,  a  man  ought  to  have  the  whole
under  his  view  at  once.  But  the  greatest
capacity  very  often  is  not  sufficient  for
this.  Something  is  left  out  which  did  not
come  under  the  philosopher's  view  when
he  made  his  division  :  and  to  suit  this  to
the  division,  it  must  be  made  what  nature
never  made  it.  This  has  been  so  common
a  fault  of  philosophers,  that  one  who  would
avoid  error  ought  to  be  suspicious  of  divi-
sions, though  long  received,  and  of  great
authority,  especially  when  they  are  grounded
on  a  theory  that  may  be  called  in  question.
In  a  subject  imperfectly  known,  we  ought
not  to  pretend  to  perfect  divisions,  but  to
leave  room  for  such  additions  or  alterations
as  a  more  perfect  view  of  the  subject  may
afterwards  suggest.

I  shall  not,  therefore,  attempt  a  com-
plete enumeration  of  the  powers  of  the  hu-
man understanding.  I  shall  only  mention
those  which  I  propose  to  explain ;  and  they
are  the  following : —

1st,  The  powers  we  have  by  means  of
our  external  senses.  2dly,  Memory.  3dly,
Conception.  4thly,  The  powers  of  resolv-
ing and  analysing  complex  objects,  and
compounding  those  that  are  more  simple.
bthly,  Judging.  6lhly,  Reasoning.  Jthly,
Taste.  8thly,  Moral  Perception  ;*  and,  last
of  all,  Consciousness.  + [72]


CHAPTER  VIII.

. OF  SOCIAL  OPERATIONS  OF  MIND.

There  is  another  division  of  the  powers
of  the  mind,  which,  though  it  has  been,
ought  not  to  be  overlooked  by  writers  on
this  subject,  because  it  has  a  real  founda-
tion in  nature.  Some  operations  of  our
minds,  from  their  very  nature,  are  social,
others  are  solitary.


•  Moral  Perception  is  treated  under  the  Active
Powers,  in  Essay  V.  — H.

t  Consciousness  obtains  only  an  incidental  consi-
deration, under  Judgment,  in  the  Fifth  Chapter  of
the  Sixth  Essay.— H.


By  the  first,  I  understand  such  operations
as  necessarily  suppose  an  intercourse  with
some  other  intelligent  being.  A  man  may
understand  and  will ;  he  may  apprehend,
and  judge,  and  reason,  though  he  should
know  of  no  intelligent  being  in  the  universe
besides  himself.  But,  when  he  asks  inform-
ation, or  receives  it ;  when  he  bears  tes-
timony, or  receives  the  testimony  of  an-
other ;  when  he  asks  a  favour,  or  accepts
one  ;  when  he  gives  a  command  to  his  ser-
vant, or  receives  one  from  a  superior  ;  when
he  plights  his  faith  in  a  promise  or  con-
tract— these  are  acts  of  social  intercourse
between  intelligent  beings,  and  can  have  no
place  in  solitude.  They  suppose  under-
standing and  will ;  but  they  suppose  some-
thing more,  which  is  neither  understanding
nor  will ;  that  is,  society  with  other  intelli--
gent  beings.  They  may  be  called  intellec-
tual, because  they  can  only  be  in  intellectual
beings ;  but  they  are  neither  simple  appre-
hension, nor  judgment,  nor  reasoning,  nor  are
they  any  combination  of  these  operations.

To  ask  a  question,  is  as  simple  an  opera-
tion as  to  judge  or  to  reason ;  yet  it  is
neither  judgment  nor  reasoning,  nor  simple
apprehension,  nor  is  it  any  composition  of
these.  Testimony  is  neither  simple  appre-
hension, nor  judgment,  nor  reasoning.  The
same  may  be  said  of  a  promise,  or  of  a  con-
tract. These  acts  of  mind  are  perfectly
understood  by  every  man  of  common  under-
standing ;  but,  when  philosophers  attempt
to  bring  them  within  the  pale  of  their  divi-
sions, by  analysing  them,  they  find  inex-
plicable mysteries,  [73]  and  even  contradic-
tions, in  them.  One  may  see  an  instance
of  this,  of  many  that  might  be  mentioned,
in  Mr  Hume's  "  Enquiry  concerning  the
Principles  of  Morals,"  §  3,  part  2,  note,
near  the  end.

The  attempts  of  philosophers  to  reduce
the  social  operations  under  the  common
philosophical  divisions,  resemble  very  much
the  attempts  of  some  philosophers  to  re-
duce all  our  social  affections  to  certain
modifications  of  self-love.  The  Author  of
our  being  intended  us  to  be  social  beings,
and  has,  for  that  end,  given  us  social  intel-
lectual powers,  as  well  as  social  affections.*
Both  are  original  parts  of  our  constitution,
and  the  exertions  of  both  no  less  natural
than  the  exertions  of  those  powers  that  are
solitary  and  selfish.

Our  social  intellectual  operations,  as  well
as  our  social  affections,  appear  very  early
in  life,  before  we  are  capable  of  reasoning ;
yet  both  suppose  a  conviction  of  the  exist-
ence of  other  intelligent  beings.  When  a
child  asks  a  question  of  his  nurse,  this  act

•  "  Man,"  says  Aristotle,  "  is,  by  nature,  more
political  than  any  bee  or  ant."  And,  in  another
work,  '*  Man  is  the  sweetest  thing  to  man" — uvB^u-
tiai  r,$is'ov  ecvQ^anro;  —  H.

{  72,  73]


chap,  viii.]  OF  SOCIAL  OPERATIONS  OF  MIND.


245


of  his  mind  supposes  not  only  a  desire  to
know  what  he  asks ;  it  supposes,  likewise,
a  conviction  that  the  nurse  is  an  intelligent
being,  to  whom  he  can  communicate  his
thoughts,  and  who  can  communicate  her
thoughts  to  him.  How  he  came  by  this
conviction  so  early,  is  a  question  of  some
importance  in  the  knowledge  of  the  human
mind,  and,  therefore,  worthy  of  the  con-
sideration of  philosophers.  But  they  seem
to  have  giv^en  no  attention,  either  to  this
early  conviction,  or  to  those  operations  of
mind  which  suppose  it.  Of  this  we  shall
have  occasion  to  treat  afterwards.

All  languages  are  fitted  to  express  the
social  as  well  as  the  solitary  operations  of
the  mind.  It  may  indeed  be  affirmed,  that,
to  express  the  former,  is  the  primary  and
direct  intention  of  language.  A  man  who
had  no  intercourse  with  any  other  intelli-
gent being,  would  never  think  of  language.
He  would  be  as  mute  as  the  beasts  of  the
field ;  even  more  so,  because  they  have
some  degree  of  social  intercourse  with  one
another,  and  some  of  them  [74]  with  man.
When  language  is  once  learned,  it  may  be
useful  even  in  our  solitary  meditations ;  and
by  clothing  our  thoughts  with  words,  we
may  have  a  firmer  hold  of  them.  But
this  was  not  its  first  intention  ;  and  the
structure  of  every  language  shews  that  it  is
not  intended  solely  for  this  purpose.

In  every  language,  a  question,  a  com-
mand, a  promise,  which  are  social  acts,  can
be  expressed  as  easily  and  as  properly  as
judgment,  which  is  a  solitary  act.  The  ex-
pression of  the  last  has  been  honoured  with
a  particular  name  ;  it  is  called  a  proposition  ;
it  has  been  an  object  of  great  attention  to  i


philosophers ;  it  has  been  analysed  into  its
very  elements  of  subject  predicate,  and  co-
pula. All  the  various  modifications  of  these,
and  of  propositions  which  are  compounded  of
them,  have  been  anxiously  examined  in
many  voluminous  tracts.  The  expression
of  a  question,  of  a  command,  or  of  a  pro-
mise, is  as  capable  of  being  analysed  as  a
proposition  is ;  but  we  do  not  find  that  this
has  been  attempted ;  we  have  not  so  much
as  given  them  a  name  different  from  the
operations  which  they  express.

Why  have  speculative  men  laboured  so
anxiously  to  analyse  our  solitary  operations,
and  given  so  little  attention  to  the  social  ?
I  know  no  other  reason  but  this,  that,  in
the  divisions  that  have  been  made  of  the
mind's  operations,  the  social  have  been
omitted,  and  thereby  thrown  behind  the
curtain.

In  all  languages,  the  second  person  of
verbs,  the  pronoun  of  the  second  person,  and
the  vocative  case  in  nouns,  are  appropriated
to  the  expression  of  social  operations  of  mind,
and  could  never  have  had  place  in  language
but  for  this  purpose  :  nor  is  it  a  good
argument  against  this  observation,  that,  by
a  rhetorical  figure,  we  sometimes  address
persons  that  are  absent,  or  even  inanimated
beings,  in  the  second  person.  For  it  ought
to  be  remembered,  that  all  figurative  ways
of  using  words  or  phrases  suppose  a  natural
and  literal  meaning  of  them.* [75]


*  What,  throughout  this  chapter,  is  implied,  ought
to  have  been  explicitly  stated — that  language  19  natu.
ral  to  man  ;  and  consequently  the  faculty  of  tipeech
ought  to  have  been  enumerated  among  the  mental
powers. — H.


ESSAY II.


OF  THE  POWERS  WE  HAVE  BY  MEANS  OF  OUR
EXTERNAL  SENSES.


CHAPTER  I.

OP  THE  ORGANS  OF  SENSE.

Of  all  the  operations  of  our  minds,  the
perception  of  external  objects  is  the  most
familiar.  The  senses  come  to  maturity
even  in  infancy,  when  other  powers  have
not  yet  sprung  up.  They  are  common  to
us  with  brute  animals,  and  furnish  us  with
the  objects  about  which  our  other  powers
are  the  most  frequently  employed.  We
find  it  easy  to  attend  to  their  operations ;
and,  because  they  are  familiar,  the  names
which  properly  belong  to  them  are  applied
[74,  75]


to  other  powers  which  are  thought  to  re-
semble them.  For  these  reasons,  they  claim
to  be  first  considered.

The  perception  of  external  objects  is  one
main  link  of  that  mysterious  chain  which
connects  the  material  world  with  the  intel-
lectual. We  shall  find  many  things  in  this
operation  unaccountable ;  sufficient  to  con-
vince us  that  we  know  but  little  of  our  own
frame  ;  and  that  a  perfect  comprehension
of  our  mental  powers,  and  of  the  manner  of
their  operation,  is  beyond  the  reach  of  our
understanding.

In  perception,  there  are  impressions  upon
the  organs  of  sense,  the  nerves,  and  brain,


246


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[jiSSAY  II,


which,  by  the  laws  of  our  nature,  are  fol-
lowed by  certain  operations  of  mind.  These
two  things  are  apt  to  be  confounded ;  but
ought  most  carefully  to  be  distinguished.
Some  philosophers,  without  good  reason,
have  concluded,  that  the  [76]  impressions
made  on  the  body  are  the  proper  efficient
cause  of  perception.  Others,  with  as  little
reason,  have  concluded  that  impressions  are
made  on  the  mind  similar  to  those  made  on
the  body.  From  these  mistakes  many  others
have  arisen.  The  wrong  notions  men  have
rashly  taken  up  with  regard  to  the  senses,
have  led  to  wrong  notions  with  regard  to
other  powers  which  are  conceived  to  resemble
them.  Many  important  powers  of  mind
have,  especially  of  late,  been  called  internal
senses,  from  a  supposed  resemblance  to  the
external — such  as,  the  sense  of  beauty,  the
sense  of  harmony,  the  moral  sense.*  And
it  is  to  be  apprehended  that  errors,  with
regard  to  the  external,  have,  from  analogy,
led  to  similar  errors  with  regard  to  the
internal ;  it  is,  therefore,  of  some  conse-
quence, even  with  regard  to  other  branches
of  our  subject,  to  have  just  notions  concern-
ing the  external  senses.

In  order  to  this,  we  shall  begin  with  some
observations  on  the  organs  of  sense,  and  on
the  impressions  which  in  perception  are
made  upon  them,  and  upon  the  nerves  and
brain.

We  perceive  no  external  object  but  by
means  of  certain  bodily  organs  which  God
has  given  us  for  that  purpose.  The  Su-
preme Being  who  made  us,  and  placed  us
in  this  world,  hath  given  us  such  powers  of
mind  as  he  saw  to  be  suited  to  our  state
and  rank  in  his  creation.  He  has  given  us
the  power  of  perceiving  many  objects  around
us — the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  the  earth  and
sea,  and  a  variety  of  animals,  vegetables,
and  inanimate  bodies.  But  our  power  of
perceiving  these  objects  is  limited  in  various
ways,  and  particularly  in  this — that,  with-
out the  organs  of  the  several  senses,  we
perceive  no  external  object.  We  cannot
see  without  eyes,  nor  hear  without  ears ;  it
is  not  only  necessary  that  we  should  have
these  organs,  but  that  they  should  be  in  a
sound  and  natural  state.  There  are  many
disorders  of  the  eye  that  cause  total  blind-
ness ;  others  that  impair  the  powers  of  vi-
sion, without  destroying  it  altogether  :  and
the  same  may  be  said  of  the  organs  of  all
the  other  senses. [77]

All  this  is  so  well  known  from  experience,
that  it  needs  no  proof ;  but  it  ought  to  be
observed,  that  we  know  it  from  experience
only.  We  can  give  no  reason  for  it,  but
that  such  is  the  will  of  our  Maker.  No
man  can  shew  it  to  be  impossible  to  the
Supreme  Being  to  have  given  us  the  power  of

*  He  refers  to  Hutcheson.— H.


perceiving  external  objects  without  such  or-
gans.* We  have  reason  tobelieve  that,  when
we  put  off  these  bodies  and  all  the  organs
belonging  to  them,  our  perceptive  powers
shall  rather  be  improved  than  destroyed  or
impaired.  We  have  reason  to  believe  that
the  Supreme  Being  perceives  everything  in
a  much  more  perfect  manner  than  we  do,
without  bodily  organs.  We  have  reason  to
believe  that  there  are  other  created  beings
endowed  with  powers  of  perception  more
perfect  and  more  extensive  than  ours,  with-
out any  such  organs  as  we  find  necessary.

We  ought  not,  therefore,  to  conclude,
that  such  bodily  organs  are,  in  their  own
nature,  necessary  to  perception  ;  but  rather
that,  by  the  will  of  God,  our  power  of  per-
ceiving external  objects  is  limited  and  cir-
cumscribed by  our  organs  of  sense ;  so  that
we  perceive  objects  in  a  certain  manner,
and  in  certain  circumstances,  and  in  no
other,  -f

If  a  man  was  shut  up  in  a  dark  room,  so
that  he  could  see  nothing  but  through  one
small  hole  in  the  shutter  of  a  window,
would  he  conclude  that  the  hole  was  the
cause  of  his  seeing,  and  that  it  is  impos-
sible to  see  any  other  way  ?  Perhaps,  if  he
had  never  in  his  life  seen  but  in  this  way,
he  might  be  apt  to  think  so ;  but  the  con-
clusion is  rash  and  groundless.  He  sees,
because  God  has  given  him  the  power  of
seeing ;  and  he  sees  only  through  this  small
hole,  because  his  power  of  seeing  is  circum-
scribed by  impediments  on  all  other  hands.

Another  necessary  caution  in  this  matter
is,  that  we  ought  not  to  confound  the  or-
gans of  perception  with  the  being  that  per-
ceives. Perception  must  be  the  act  of  some
being  that  perceives.  The  eye  [78]  is  not
that  which  sees ;  it  is  only  the  organ  by  which
we  see.J  The  ear  is  not  that  which  hears,
but  the  organ  by  which  we  hear ;  and  so  of
the  rest.§

A  man  cannot  see  the  satellites  of  Jupiter
but  by  a  telescope.  Does  he  conclude  from
this,  that  it  is  the  telescope  that  sees  those
stars  ?  By  no  means — such  a  conclusion
would  be  absurd. It  is  no  less  absurd  to

*  However  astonishing,  it  is  now  proved  beyond
all  rational  doubt,  that,  in  certain  abnormal  stales
of  the  nervous  organism,  perceptions  are  possible,
through  other  than  the  ordinary  channels  of  the
senses. — H

t  The  doctrine  of  Plato  and  of  many  other  phi.
losophers.  Reid  ought,  however,  to  have  said,
limited  to,  instead  of  "  by  our  organs  of  sense  :''  for,
if  the  body  be  viewed  as  the  prison  of  the  soul,  the
senses  must  be  viewed  at  least  as  partial  outlets. —
H.

t  Aletp9ciX/jtMii,ou»  o$3*.\fx.o~;.  says  Plato,  followed
by  a  host  of  philosophers,  comparing  the  senses  to
windows  of  the  mind. — H.

§  "  '1  he  mind  Fees,"  says  Epicharmus — "  the  mind
hears,  all  else  is  deaf  and  blind" — a  saying  alluded  to
as  proverbial  b"  Aristotle,  in  a  passage  to  the  same
effect,  which  cannot  adequately  be  translated  :—
\.4i(ic-8i7<r&  a'i'ffSvtrij  diuvoia-f,  z&Oacxie  ocyairSrirer
T.iisv  lxu>  «*■«■'{  ti^trrai  to,  N  S  r  o«a,  zet)  tSf
it  »  eC  it-  This  has  escaped  the  commentators, — H.
Seep.  878, n.  f76~78]


chap,  ii.] OF  IMPRESSIONS  ON  THE  ORGANS,  &c.


247


conclude  that  it  is  the  eye  that  sees,  or
the  ear  that  hears.  The  telescope  is  an
artificial  organ  of  sight,  but  it  sees  not.
The  eye  is  a  natural  organ  of  sight,  by
which  we  see  ;  but  the  natural  organ  sees
as  little  as  the  artificial.

The  eye  is  a  machine  most  admirably
contrived  for  refracting  the  rays  of  light,
and  forming  a  distinct  picture  of  objects
upon  the  retina ;  but  it  sees  neither  the
object  nor  the  picture.  It  can  form  the
picture  after  it  is  taken  out  of  the  head ;
but  no  vision  ensues.  Even  when  it  is  in
its  proper  place,  and  perfectly  sound,  it  is
well  known  that  an  obstruction  in  the  optic
nerve  takes  away  vision,  though  the  eye
has  performed  all  that  belongs  to  ifc,

If  anything  more  were  necessary  to  be
said  on  a  point  so  evident,  we  might  ob-
serve that,  if  the  faculty  of  seeing  were  in
the  eye,  that  of  hearing  in  the  ear,  and  so
of  the  other  senses,  the  necessary  conse-
quence of  this  would  be,  that  the  thinking
principle,  which  I  call  myself,  is  not  one,
but  many.  But  this  is  contrary  to  the  ir-
resistible conviction  of  every  man.  When
I  say  I  see,  I  hear,  I  feel,  I  remember,
this  implies  that  it  is  one  and  the  same  self
that  performs  all  these  operations ;  and,  as
it  would  be  absurd  to  say  that  my  memory,
another  man's  imagination,  and  a  third
man's  reason,  may  make  one  individual
intelligent  being,  it  would  be  equally  ab-
surd to  say  that  one  piece  of  matter  see-
ing, another  hearing,  and  a  third  feeling,
may  make  one  and  the  same  percipient
being.

These  sentiments  are  not  new ;  they  have
occurred  to  thinking  men  from  early  ages.
Cicero,  in  his  "  Tusculan  Questions,"  Book
I.,  chap.  20,  has  expressed  them  very  dis-
tinctly. Those  who  choose  may  consult  the
passage.* [79]


CHAPTER  II.

CF  THE  IMPRESSIONS  ON  THE  ORGANS,  NERVES,
AND  BRAINS.

A  second  law  of  our  nature  regarding
perception  is,  that  we  perceive  no  object,
unless  some  impression  is  made  upon  the
organ  of  sense,  either  by  the  immediate
application  of  the  object,  or  by  some  medium
which  passes  between  the  object  and  the
organ.

In  two  of  our  senses — to  wit,  touch  and
taste — there  must  be  an  immediate  applica-
tion of  the  object  to  the  organ.  In  the
other  three,  the  object  is  perceived  at  a  dis-
tance, but  still  by  means  of  a  medium,  by


* Cicero  says  nothing  on  this  head  that  had  not
been  said  before  him  by  the  Greek  philosophers.— H.


which  some  impression  is  made  upon  the
organ.*

The  effluvia  of  bodies  drawn  into  the
nostrils  with  the  breath,  are  the  medium  of
smell ;  the  undulations  of  the  air  are  the*
medium  of  hearing  ;  and  the  rays  of  ligb.
passing  from  visible  objects  to  the  eye,  ar
the  medium  of  sight.  We  see  no  object
unless  rays  of  light  come  from  it  to  the  eye.
We  hear  not  the  sound  of  any  body,  unless
the  vibrations  of  some  elastic  medium,  oc-
casioned by  the  tremulous  motion  of  the
sounding  body,  reach  our  ear.  We  per-
ceive no  smell,  unless  the  effluvia  of  the
smelling  body  enter  into  the  nostrils.  We
perceive  no  taste,  unless  the  sapid  body  be
applied  to  the  tongue,  or  some  part  of  the
organ  of  taste.  Nor  do  we  perceive  any
tangible  quality  of  a  body,  unless  it  touch
the  hands,  or  some  part  c»  our  bodies.

These  are  facts  known  from  experience
to  hold  universally  and  invariably,  both  in
men  and  brutes.  By  this  law  of  our  na-
ture, our  powers  of  perceiving  external  ob-
jects, are  farther  limited  and  circumscribed.
Nor  can  we  give  any  other  reason  for  this,
than  [80]  that  it  is  the  will  of  our  Maker,  who
knows  best  what  powers,  and  what  degrees
of  them,  are  suited  to  our  state.  We  were
once  in  a  state,  I  mean  in  the  womb,  wherein
our  powers  of  perception  were  more  limited
than  in -the  present,  and,  in  a  future  state,
they  may  be  more  enlarged.

It  is  likewise  a  law  of  our  nature,  that,
in  order  to  our  perceiving  objects,  the  im-
pressions made  upon  the  organs  of  sense
must  be  communicated  to  the  nerves,  and
by  them  to  the  brain.  This  is  perfectly
known  to  those  who  know  anything  of  ana-
tomy.

The  nerves  are  fine  cords,'  which  pass
from  the  brain,  or  from  the  spinal  marrow,
which  is  a  production  of  the  brain,  to  all
parts  of  the  body,  dividing  into  smaller
branches  as  they  proceed,  until  at  last  they
escape  our  eyesight :  and  it  is  found  by
experience,  that  all  the  voluntary  and  in-
voluntary motions  of  the  body  are  performed
by  their  means.  When  the  nerves  that
serve  any  limb,  are  cut,  or  tied  hard,  we
have  then  no  more  power  to  move  that  limb
than  if  it  was  no  part  of  the  body.

As  there  are  nerves  that  serve  the  mus-
cular motions,  so  there  are  others  that  serve
the  several  senses  ;  and  as  without  the  for-
mer we  cannot  move  a  limb,  so  without  the
latter  we  can  have  no  perception.

*  This  distinction  of  a  mediate  and  immediate  ob-
ject, or  of  an  object  and  a  medium,  in  perception,  is
inaccurate,  and  a  source  of  sad  confusion.  We  per-
ceive, and  can  perceive,  nothing  but  what  is  in  rela-
tion  to  the  organ,  and  nothing  is  in  relation  to  the
organ  that  is  not  present  to  it.  All  thesenses  are,  in
fact,  modifications  of  touch,  as  Democritus  of  old
taught.  We  reach  the  distant  reality,  not  by  sense,
not  by  perception,  but  by  inference.  Reid,  how.
ever,  in  this  only  follows  his  predecessora — H.


[79,  80]


248


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


This  train  of  machinery  the  wisdom  of
God  has  made  necessary  to  our  perceiving
objects.  Various  parts  of  the  body  concur
to  it,  and  each  has  its  own  function.  First,
The  object,  either  immediately,  or  by  some
medium,  must  make  an  impression  on  the
organ.  The  organ  serves  only  as  a  medium
by  which  an  impression  is  made  on  the
nerve  ;  and  the  nerve  serves  as  a  medium
to  make  an  impression  upon  the  brain.
Here  the  material  part  ends ;  at  least  we
can  trace  it  no  farther ;  the  rest  is  all  in-
tellectual.*

The  proof  of  these  impressions  upon  the
nerves  and  brain  in  [81]  perception  is  this,
that,  from  many  observations  and  experi-
ments, it  is  found  that,  when  the  organ  of
any  sense  is  perfectly  sound,  and  has  the
impression  made  upon  it  by  the  object  ever
so  strongly,  yet,  if  the  nerve  which  serves
that  organ  be  cut  or  tied  hard,  there  is  no
perception  ;  and  it  is  well  known  that  dis-
orders in  the  brain  deprive  us  of  the  power
of  perception  when  both  the  organ  and  its
nerve  are  sound.

There  is,  therefore,  sufficient  reason  to
conclude  that,  in  perception,  the  object  pro-
duces some  change  in  the  organ  ;  that  the
organ  produces  some  change  upon  the
nerve ;  and  that  the  nerve  produces  some
change  in  the  brain.  And  we  give  the
name  of  an  impression  to  those  changes,
because  we  have  not  a  name  more  proper  to
express,  in  a  general  manner,  any  change
produced  in  a  body,  by  an  external  cause,
without  specifying  the  nature  of  that
change.  Whether  it  be  pressure,  or  at-
traction, or  repulsion,  or  vibration,  or  some-
thing unknown,  for  which  we  have  no
name,  still  it  may  be  called  an  impression.
But,  with  regard  to  the  particular  kind  of
this  Ghange  or  impression,  philosophers
have  never  been  able  to  discover  anything
at  all.

But,  whatever  be  the  nature  of  those  im-
pressions upon  the  organs,  nerves,  and
brain,  we  perceive  nothing  without  them.
Experience  informs  that  it  is  so  ;  but  we
cannot  give  a  reason  why  it  is  so.  In  the
constitution  of  man,  perception,  by  fixed
laws  of  nature,  is  connected  with  those  im-
pressions ;  but  we  can  discover  no  neces-
sary connection.  The  Supreme  Being  has
seen  fit  to  limit  our  power  of  perception ;  so
that  we  perceive  not  without  such  impres-
sions; and  this  is  all  we  know  of  the
matter.

This,  however,  we  have  reason  to  con-

*  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  whole  organism
of  the  sense,  from  periphery  to  centre,  must  co-operate
simultaneously  in  perception ;  but  there  is  no  rea-
son to  place  the  mind  at  the  central  extremity  alone,
and  to  hold  that  not  only  a  certain  series  of  organic
changes,  but  a  sensation,  must  precede  the  mental
cognition.  This  is  mere  hypothesis,  and  opposed  to
the  testimony  of  consciousness. — K.


elude  in  general — that,  as  the  impressions  on
the  organs,  nerves,  and  brain,  correspond
exactly  to  the  nature  aDd  conditions  of  the
objects  by  which  they  are  made,  so  our
perceptions  and  sensations  correspond  to
those  impressions,  and  vary  in  kind,  and  in
degree,  as  they  vary.  [82]  Without  thisexact
correspondence,  the  information  we  receive
by  our  senses  would  not  only  be  imperfect,
as  it  undoubtedly  is,  but  would  be  fallacious,
which  we  have  no  reason  to  think  it  is.


CHAPTER  III.

HYPOTHESES  CONCERNING THE NERVES  AND
BRAIN.

We  are  informed  by  anatomists,  that,  al-
though the  two  coats  which  inclose  a  nerve,
and  which  it  derives  from  the  coats  of  the
brain,  are  tough  and  elastic,  yet  the  nerve
itself  has  a  very  small  degree  of  consistence,
being  almost  like  marrow.  It  has,  how-
ever, a  fibrous  texture,  and  may  be  divided
and  subdivided,  till  its  fibres  escape  our
senses  ;  and,  as  we  know  so  very  little  about
the  texture  of  the  nerves,  there  is  great
room  left  for  those  who  choose  to  indulge
themselves  in  conjecture.

The  ancients  conjectured  that  the  ner-
vous fibres  are  fine  tubes,  filled  with  a  very
subtile  spirit,  or  vapour,  which  they  called
animal  spirits  ;  that  the  brain  is  a  gland,
by  which  the  animal  spirits  are  secreted
from  the  finer  part  of  the  blood,  and  their
continual  waste  repaired  ;  and  that  it  is  by
these  animal  spirits  that  the  nerves  perform
their  functions.  Des  Cartes  has  shewn
how,  by  these  animal  spirits,  going  and  re-
turning in  the  nerves,  muscular  motion,
perception,  memory,  and  imagination,  are
effected.  All  this  he  has  described  as  dis-
tinctly as  if  he  had  been  an  eye-witness  of
all  those  operations.  But  it  happens  that
the  tubular  structure  of  the  nerves  was
never  perceived  by  the  human  eye,  nor
shewn  by  the  nicest  injections  ;  and  all  that
has  been  said  about  animal  spirits,  through
more  than  fifteen  centuries,  is  mere  con-
jecture.

Dr  Briggs,  who  was  Sir  Isaac  Newton's
master  in  anatomy,  was  the  first,  as  far  as
I  know,  who  advanced  a  new  system
concerning  [83]  the  nerves.*  He  conceived
them to be  solid  filaments  of  prodigious


*  Briggs  was  not  the  first.  The  Jesuit,  Hoti~.
ratus  Fabry,  had  before  him  denied  the  old  hypothe-
sis of  spirits  ;  and  the  new  hypothesis  of  cerebral
fibres,  and  fibrils,  by  which  he  explains  the  phasno-
raena  of  sense,  imagination  and  memory,  is  not  only
the  first,  but  perhaps  the  most  ingenious  of  the  class
that  has  been  proposed.  Yet  the  very  name  of  Fabry
is  wholly  unnoticed  by  those  historians  of  philosophy
who  do  not  deem  it  sui.erflucus  to  dwell  on  the  tire,
some  reveries  of  Briggs,  Hartlev,  ;md  Bonnet. — H.

[81.83]


chap,  in.]  HYPOTHESES  CONCERNING  THE  NERVES,  &i


249


tenuity ;  and  this  opinion,  as  it  accords  bet-
ter with  observation,  seems  to  have  been
more  generally  received  since  his  time.  As
to  the  manner  of  performing  their  office,
Dr  Briggs  thought  that,  like  musical  cords,
they  have  vibrations  differing  according  to
their  length  and  tension.  They  seem,  how-
ever, very  unfit  for  this  purpose,  on  account
of  their  want  of  tenacity,  their  moisture,
and  being  through  their  whole  length  in
contact  with  moist  substances  ;  so  that,  al-
though Dr  Briggs  wrote  a  book  upon  this
system,  called  Nova  Visionis  Theoria,  it
seems  not  to  have  been  much  followed.

Sir  Isaac  Newton,  in  all  his  philosophical
writings,  took  great  care  to  distinguish  his
doctrines,  which  he  pretended  to  prove  by
just  induction,  from  his  conjectures,  which
were  to  stand  or  fall  according  as  future
experiments  and  observations  should  esta-
blish or  refute  them.  His  conjectures  he
has  put  in  the  form  of  queries,  that  they
might  not  be  received  as  truths,  but  be
inquired  into,  and  determined  according  to
the  evidence  to  be  found  for  or  against
them.  Those  who  mistake  his  queries  for
a  part  of  his  doctrine,  do  him  great  injus-
tice, and  degrade  him  to  the  rank  of  the
common  herd  of  philosophers,  who  have  in
all  ages  adulterated  philosophy,  by  mixing
conjecture  with  truth,  and  their  own  fancies
with  the  oracles  of  Nature.  Among  other
queries,  this  truly  great  philosopher  pro-
posed this,  Whether  there  may  not  be  an
elastic  medium,  or  aether,  immensely  more
rare  than  air,  which  pervades  all  bodies,
and  which  is  the  cause  of  gravitation  ;  of
the  refraction  and  reflection  of  the  rays  of
light ;  of  the  transmission  of  heat,  through
spaces  void  of  air ;  and  of  many  other  phe-
nomena ?  In  the  23d  query  subjoined  to  his
"  Optics,"  he  puts  this  question  with  regard
to  the  impressions  made  on  the  nerves  and
brain  in  perception,  Whether  vision  is
effected  chiefly  by  the  vibrations  of  this
medium,  excited  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye
by  the  rays  of  light,  and  propagated  along
the  solid,  pellucid,  and  uniform  capillaments
of  the  optic  nerve  ?  And  whether  hearing
is  effected  [84]  by  the  vibrations  of  this  or
some  other  medium,  excited  by  the  tremor
of  the  air  in  the  auditory  nerves,  and  pro-
pagated along  the  solid,  pellucid,  and  uni-
form capillaments  of  those  nerves  ?  And
so  with  regard  to  the  other  senses.

What  Newton  only  proposed  as  a  matter
to  be  inquired  into,  Dr  Hartley  conceived
to  have  such  evidence,  that,  in  his  "  Ob-
servations on  Man,"  he  has  deduced,  in  a
mathematical  form,  a  very  ample  system
concerning  the  faculties  of  the  mind,  from
the  doctrine  of  vibrations,  joined  with  that
of  association.

His  notion  of  the  vibrations  excited  in
the  nerves,  is  expressed  in  Propositions  4
[84,  85]


and  5  of  the  first  part  of  his  "  Observa-
tions on  Man."  "  Prop.  4.  External  objects
impressed  on  the  senses  occasion,  first  in
the  nerves  on  which  they  are  impressed,
and  then  in  the  brain,  vibrations  of  the
small,  and,  as  one  may  say,  infinitesimal
medullary  particles.  Prop.  5.  The  vibra-
tions mentioned  in  the  last  proposition  are
excited,  propagated,  and  kept  up,  partly  by
the  aether — that  is,  by  a  very  subtile  elastic
fluid  ;  partly  by  the  uniformity,  continuity,
softness,  and  active  powers  of  the  medullary
substance  of  the  brain,  spinal  marrow,  and
nerves."

The  modesty  and  diffidence  with  which
Dr  Hartley  offers  his  system  to  the  world —
by  desiring  his  reader  "  to  expect  nothing
but  hints  and  conjectures  in  difficult  and
obscure  matters,  and  a  short  detail  of  the
principal  reasons  and  evidences  in  those
that  are  clear  ;  by  acknowledging,  that  he
shall  not  be  able  to  execute,  with  any  ac-
curacy, the  proper  method  of  philosophising,
recommended  and  followed  by  Sir  Isaac
Newton  ;  and  that  he  will  attempt  a  sketch
only  for  the  benefit  of  future  enquirers"—
seem  to  forbid  any  criticism  upon  it.  One
cannot,  without  reluctance,  criticise  what  is
proposed  in  such  a  manner,  and  with  so
good  intention  ;  yet,  as  the  tendency  of  this
system  of  vibrations  is  to  make  all  the  oper-
ations of  the  mind  mere  mechanism,  depend-
ent [85]  on  the  laws  of  matter  and  motion,
and,  as  it  has  been  held  forth  by  its  vota-
ries, as  in  a  manner  demonstrated,  I  shall
make  some  remarks  on  that  part  of  the  sys-
tem which  relates  to  the  impressions  made
on  the  nerves  and  brain  in  perception.

It  may  be  observed,  in  general,  that  Dr
Hartley's  work  consists  of  a  chain  of  pro-
positions, with  their  proofs  and  corollaries,
digested  in  good  order,  and  in  a  scientific
form.  A  great  part  of  them,  however,  are,
as  he  candidly  acknowledges,  conjectures
and  hints  only  ;  yet  these  are  mixed  with
the  propositions  legitimately  proved,  with-
out any  distinction.  Corollaries  are  drawn
from  them,  and  other  propositions  grounded
upon  them,  which,  all  taken  together,  make
up  a  system.  A  system  of  this  kind  re-
sembles a  chain,  of  which  some  links  are
abundantly  strong,  others  very  weak.  The
strength  of  the  chain  is  determined  by  that
of  the  weakest  links ;  for,  if  they  give  way,
the  whole  falls  to  pieces,  and  the  weight
supported  by  it  falls  to  the  ground.

Philosophy  has  been,  in  all  ages,  adul-
terated by  hypotheses ;  that  is,  by  systems
built  partly  on  facts,  and  much  upon  con-
jecture. It  is  pity  that  a  man  of  Dr  Hart-
ley's knowledge  and  candour  should  have
followed  the  multitude  in  this  fallacious
tract,  after  expressing  his  approbation  of
the  proper  method  of  philosophising,  pointed
out  by  Bacon  and  Newton. The  last  con-


250


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


£essay  u,


sidered  it  as  a  reproach  when  his  system
was  called  his  hypothesis ;  and  says,  with
disdain  of  such  imputation,  Hypotheses  non
Jingo.  And  it  is  very  strange  that  Dr
Hartley  should  not  only  follow  such  a  me-
thod of  philosophising  himself,  but  that  he
should  direct  others  in  their  inquiries  to
follow  it.  So  he  does  in  Proposition  87,
Part  I.,  where  he  deduces  rules  for  the
ascertainment  of  truth,  from  the  rule  of
false,  in  arithmetic,  and  from  the  art  of
decyphering ;  and  in  other  places.

As  to  the  vibrations  and  vibratiuncles,
whether  of  an  elastic  aether,  or  of  the  in-
finitesimal particles  of  the  brain  and  nerves,
there  [86]  may  be  such  things  for  what  we
know ;  and  men  may  rationally  inquire
whether  they  can  find  any  evidence  of  their
existence ;  but,  while  we  have  no  proof  of
their  existence,  to  apply  them  to  the  solu-
tion of  phaenomena,  and  to  build  a  system
upon  them,  is  what  I  conceive  we  call  build-
ing a  castle  in  the  air.

When  men  pretend  to  account  for  any
of  the  operations  of  Nature,  the  causes
assigned  by  them  ought,  as  Sir  Isaac  New-
ton has  taught  us,  to  have  two  conditions,
otherwise  they  are  good  for  nothing.  First,
They  ought  to  be  true,  to  have  a  real  exist-
ence, and  not  to  be  barely  conjectured  to
exist,  without  proof.  Secondly,  They  ought
to  be  sufficient  to  produce  the  effect.

As  to  the  existence  of  vibratory  motions
in  the  medullary  substance  of  the  nerves
and  brain,  the  evidence  produced  is  this  :
First,  It  is  observed  that  the  sensations  of
seeing  and  hearing,  and  some  sensations  of
touch,  have  some  short  duration  and  con-
tinuance. Secondly,  Though  there  be  no
direct  evidence  that  the  sensations  of  taste
and  smell,  and  the  greater  part  of  these  of
touch,  have  the  like  continuance,  yet,  says
the  author,  analogy  would  incline  one  to
believe  that  they  must  resemble  the  sensa-
tions of  sight  and  hearing  in  this  particular.
Thirdly,  The  continuance  of  all  our  sensa-
tions being  thus  established,  it  follows,  that
external  objects  impress  vibratory  motions
on  the  medullary  substance  of  the  nerves
and  brain ;  because  no  motion,  besides  a
vibratory  one,  can  reside  in  any  part  for  a
moment  of  time.

This  is  the  chain  of  proof,  in  which  the
first  link  is  strong,  being  confirmed  by  ex-
perience ;  the  second  is  very  weak  ;  and  the
third  still  weaker.  For  other  kinds  of  mo-
tion, besides  that  of  vibration,  may  have
some  continuance — such  as  rotation,  bending
or  unbending  of  a  spring,  and  perhaps  others
which  we  are  unacquainted  with ;  nor  do
we  know  whether  it  is  motion  that  is  pro-
duced in  the  nerves — it  may  be  pressure,
attraction,  repulsion,  or  something  we  do
not  know.  This,  indeed,  is  the  common
refuge  of  all  hypotheses,  [87]  that  we  know


no  other  way  in  which  the  phsenomena  may
be  produced,  and,  therefore,  they  must  be
produced  in  this  way.  There  is,  therefore,
no  proof  of  vibrations  in  the  infinitesimal
particles  of  the  brain  and  nerves.

It  may  be  thought  that  the  existence  of
an  elastic  vibrating  aether  stands  on  a  firmer
foundation,  having  the  authority  of  Sir
Isaac  Newton.  But  it  ought  to  be  observed
that,  although  this  great  man  had  formed
conjectures  about  this  aether  near  fifty
years  before  he  died,  and  had  it  in  his  eye
during  that  long  space  as  a  subject  of  in-
quiry, yet  it  does  not  appear  that  he  ever
found  any  convincing  proof  of  its  existence,
but  considered  it  to  the  last  as  a  question
whether  there  be  such  an  aether  or  not.
In  the  premonition  to  the  reader,  prefixed
to  the  second  edition  of  his  "  Optics,"
anno  1717>  he  expresses  himself  thus  with
regard  to  it : — "  Lest  any  one  should  think
that  I  place  gravity  among  the  essential
properties  of  bodies,  I  have  subjoined  one
question  concerning  its  cause  ;  a  question,
I  say,  for  I  do  not  hold  it  as  a  thing  estab-
lished." If,  therefore,  we  regard  the
authority  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  we  ought
to  hold  the  existence  of  such  an  aether  as  a
matter  not  established  by  proof,  but  to  be
examined  into  by  experiments  ;  and  I  have
never  heard  that,  since  his  time,  any  new
evidence  has  been  found  of  its  existence.

"  But,"  says  Dr  Hartley,  "  supposing
the  existence  of  the  aether,  and  of  its  pro-
perties, to  be  destitute  of  all  direct  evidence,
still,  if  it  serves  to  account  for  a  great
variety  of  phaenomena,  it  will  have  an  in-
direct evidence  in  its  favour  by  this  means."
There  never  was  an  hypothesis  invented  by
an  ingenious  man  which  has  not  this  evi-
dence in  its  favour.  The  vortices  of  Des
Cartes,  the  sylphs  and  gnomes  of  Mr  Pope,
serve  to  account  for  a  great  variety  of
phaenomena.

When  a  man  has,  with  labour  and  in-
genuity, wrought  up  an  hypothesis  into  a
system,  he  contracts  a  fondness  for  it,
which  is  apt  [88]  to  warp  the  best  judgment.
This,  I  humbly  think,  appears  remarkably
in  Dr  Hartley.  In  his  preface,  he  declares
his  approbation  of  the  method  of  philoso-
phising recommended  and  followed  by  Sir
Isaac  Newton  ;  but,  having  first  deviated
from  this  method  in  his  practice,  he  is
brought  at  last  to  justify  this  deviation  in
theory,  and  to  bring  arguments  in  defence
of  a  method  diametrically  opposite  to  it.
"  We  admit,"  says  he,  "  the  key  of  a  cypher
to  be  a  true  one  when  it  explains  the  cypher
completely."  I  answer,  To  find  the  key
requires  an  understanding  equal  or  supe-
rior to  that  which  made  the  cypher.  This
instance,  therefore,  will  then  be"*in  point,
when  he  who  attempts  to  decypher  the
works  of  Nature  by  an  hypothesis,  has  an

[86-88]


chap,  in.] HYPOTHESES  CONCERNING  THE  NERVES,  &c. 251


understanding  equal  or  superior  to  that
which  made  them.  The  votaries  of  hypo-
theses have  often  been  challenged  to  shew
one  useful  discovery  in  the  works  of  Nature
that  was  ever  made  in  that  way.  If  in-
stances of  this  kind  could  be  produced,  we
ought  to  conclude  that  Lord  Bacon  and
Sir  Isaac  Newton  have  done  great  disser-
vice to  philosophy  by  what  they  have  said
against  hypotheses.  But,  if  no  such  in-
stance can  be  produced,  we  must  conclude,
with  those  great  men,  that  every  system
which  pretends  to  account  for  the  phseno-
mena  of  Nature  by  hypotheses  or  conjecture,
is  spurious  and  illegitimate,  and  serves  only
to  flatter  the  pride  of  man  with  a  vain  con-
ceit of  knowledge  which  he  has  not  attained.

The  author  tells  us,  "that  any  hypo-
thesis that  has  so  much  plausibility  as  to
explain  a  considerable  number  of  facts,  helps
us  to  digest  these  facts  in  proper  order,  to
bring  new  ones  to  light,  and  to  make  eoc-
perimenta  cruris  for  the  sake  of  future
inquirers."

Let  hypotheses  be  put  to  any  of  these
uses  as  far  as  they  can  serve.  Let  them
suggest  experiments,  or  direct  our  inquiries ;
but  let  just  induction  alone  govern  our
belief.

"  The  rule  of  false  affords  an  obvious  and
strong  instance  of  the  possibilityof  being  led,
with  precision  and  certainty,  to  a  [89]  true
conclusion  from  a  false  position.  And  it  is
of  the  very  essence  of  algebra  to  proceed  in
the  way  of  supposition."

This  is  true  ;  but,  when  brought  to  jus-
tify the  accounting  for  natural  phsenomena
by  hypotheses,  is  foreign  to  the  purpose.
When  an  unknown  number,  or  any  un-
known quantity,  is  sought,  which  must  have
certain  conditions,  it  may  be  found  in  a
scientific  manner  by  the  rule  of  false,  or
by  an  algebraical  analysis ;  and,  when
found,  may  be  synthetically  demonstrated
to  be  the  number  or  the  quantity  sought,
by  its  answering  all  the  conditions  required.
But  it  is  one  thing  to  find  a  quantity  which
shall  have  certain  conditions  ;  it  is  a  very
different  thing  to  find  out  the  laws  by  which
it  pleases  God  to  govern  the  world  and
produce  the  phsenomena  which  fall  under
our  observation.  And  we  can  then  only
allow  some  weight  to  this  argument  in  favour
of  hypotheses,  when  it  can  be  shewn  that
the  cause  of  any  one  pheenomenon  in  nature
has  been,  or  can  be  found,  as  an  unknown
quantity  is,  by  the  rule  of  false,  or  by  alge-
braical analysis.  This,  I  apprehend,  will
never  be,  till  the  sera  arrives,  which  Dr
Hartley  seems  to  foretell,  "  AVhen  future
generations  shall  put  all  kinds  of  evidences
and  enquiries  into  mathematical  forms ;
and,  as  it  were,  reduce  Aristotle's  ten  Ca-
tegories, and  Bishop  Wilkin's  forty  Summa
Genera  to  the  head  of  quantity  alone,  so  as
[89,  90]


to  make  mathematics  and  logic,  natural
history  and  civil  history,  natural  philoso-
phy and  philosophy  of  all  other  kinds,
coincide  omni  ex  parte."

Since  Sir  Isaac  Newton  laid  down  the
rules  of  philosophising  in  our  inquiries  into
the  works  of  Nature,  many  philosophers
have  deviated  from  them  in  practice ;  per-
haps few  have  paid  that  regard  to  them
which  they  deserve.  But  they  have  met
with  very  general  approbation,  as  being
founded  in  reason,  and  pointing  out  the
only  path  to  the  knowledge  of  Nature's
works.  Dr  Hartley  is  the  only  author  I
have  met  with  who  reasons  against  them,
and  has  taken  pains  to  find  out  arguments
in  defence  of  the  exploded  method  of  hy-
pothesis. [90]

Another  condition  which  Sir  Isaac  New-
ton requires  in  the  causes  of  natural  things
assigned  by  philosophers,  is,  that  they  be
sufficient  to  account  for  the  phsenomena.
Vibrations,  and  vibratiuncles  of  the  me-
dullary substance  of  the  nerves  and  brain,
are  assigned  by  Dr  Hartley  to  account  for
all  our  sensations  and  ideas,  and,  in  a  word,
for  all  the  operations  of  our  minds.  Let
us  consider  very  briefly  how  far  they  are
sufficient  for  that  purpose.

It  would  be  injustice  to  this  author  to
conceive  him  a  materialist.  He  proposes
his  sentiments  with  great  candour,  and  they
ought  not  to  be  carried  beyond  what  his
words  express.  He  thinks  it  a  consequence
of  his  theory,  that  matter,  if  it  can  be
endued  with  the  most  simple  kinds  of  sens-
ation, might  arrive  at  all  that  intelligence
of  which  the  human  mind  is  possessed.
He  thinks  that  his  theory  overturns  all
the  arguments  that  are  usually  brought  for
the  immateriality  of  the  soul,  from  the
subtilty  of  the  internal  senses,  and  of  the
rational  faculty  ;  but  he  does  not  take  upon
him  to  determine  whether  matter  can  be
endued  with  sensation  or  no.  He  even
acknowledges  that  matter  and  motion,
however  subtilly  divided  and  reasoned  upon,
yield  nothing  more  than  matter  and  motion
still ;  and  therefore  he  would  not  be  any
way  interpreted  so  as  to  oppose  the  imma-
teriality of  the  soul.

It  would,  therefore,  be  unreasonable  to
require  that  his  theory  of  vibrations  should,
in  the  proper  sense,  account  for  our  sensa-
tions. It  would,  indeed,  be  ridiculous  in
any  man  to  pretend  that  thought  of  any  kind
must  necessarily  result  from  motion,  or
that  vibrations  in  the  nerves  must  neces-
sarily produce  thought,  any  more  than  the
vibrations  of  a  pendulum.  Dr  Hartley
disclaims  this  way  of  thinking,  and  there-
fore it  ought  not  to  be  imputed  to  him.
All  that  he  pretends  is,  that,  in  the  human
constitution,  there  is  a  certain  connection
between  vibrations  in  the  medullary  sub-


252


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


Qe<?say  II.


stance  of  the  nerves  and  brain,  and  tho
thoughts  of  the  mind  ;  so  that  the  last  de-
pend entirely  upon  the  first,  and  every  kind
of  thought  [91]  in  the  mind  arises  in  conse-
quence of  a  corresponding  vibration,  or
vibratiuncle  in  the  nerves  and  brain.  Our
sensations  arise  from  vibrations,  and  our
ideas  from  vibratiuncles,  or  miniature  vibra-
tions ;  and  he  comprehends,  under  these
two  words  of  sensations  and  ideas,  all  the
operations  of  the  mind.

But  how  can  we  expect  any  proof  of  the
connection  between  vibrations  and  thought,
when  the  existence  of  such  vibrations  was
never  proved  ?  The  proof  of  their  connec-
tion cannot  be  stronger  than  the  proof  of
their  existence  ;  for,  as  the  author  acknow-
ledges that  we  cannot  infer  the  existence
of  the  thoughts  from  the  existence  of  the
vibrations,  it  is  no  less  evident  that  we  can-
not infer  the  existence  of  vibrations  from
the  existence  of  our  thoughts.  The  exist-
ence of  both  must  be  known  before  we  can
know  their  connection.  As  to  the  exist-
ence of  our  thoughts,  we  have  the  evidence
of  consciousness,  a  kind  of  evidence  that
never  was  called  in  question.  But  as  to
the  existence  of  vibrations  in  the  medullary
substance  of  the  nerves  and  brain,  no  proof
has  yet  been  brought.

All,  therefore,  we  have  to  expect  from
this  hypothesis,  is,  that  in  vibrations,  con-
sidered abstractly,  there  should  be  a  variety
in  kind  and  degree,  which  tallies  so  exactly
with  the  varieties  of  the  thoughts  they  are  to
account  for,  as  may  lead  us  to  suspect  some
connection  between  the  one  and  the  other.
If  the  divisions  and  subdivisions  of  thought
be  found  to  run  parallel  with  the  divisions
and  subdivisions  of  vibrations,  this  would
give  that  kind  of  plausibility  to  the  hypo-
thesis of  their  connection,  which  we  com-
monly expect  even  in  a  mere  hypothesis  ;
but  we  do  not  find  even  this.

For,  to  omit  all  those  thoughts  and  oper-
ations which  the  author  comprehends  under
the  name  of  ideas,  and  which  he  thinks  are
connected  with  vibratiuncles  ;  to  omit  the
perception  of  external  objects,  which  he
comprehends  under  the  name  of  sensations  ;
to  omit  the  sensations,  properly  so  called,
which  accompany  our  passions  [92]  and
affections,  and  to  confine  ourselves  to  the
sensations  which  we  have  by  means  of  our
external  senses,  we  can  perceive  no  corre-
spondence between  the  variety  we  find  in
their  kinds  and  degrees,  and  that  which  may
be  supposed  in  vibrations.

We  have  five  senses,  whose  sensations
differ  totally  in  kind.  By  each  of  these,
excepting  perhaps  that  of  hearing,  we  have
a  variety  of  sensations,  which  differ  specific-
ally, and  not  in  degree  only.  How  many
tastes  and  smells  are  there  which  are  spe-
fically  different,  each  of  them  capable  of  all


degrees  of  strength  and  weakness  ?  Heat
and  cold,  roughness  and  smoothness,  hard-
ness and  softness,  pain  and  pleasure,  are
sensations  of  touch  that  differ  in  kind,  and
each  has  an  endless  variety  of  degrees.
Sounds  have  the  qualities  of  acute  and
grave,  loud  and  low,  with  all  different  de-
grees of  each.  The  varieties  of  colour  are
many  more  than  we  have  names  to  express.
How  shall  we  find  varieties  in  vibrations
corresponding  to  all  this  variety  of  sensa-
tions which  we  have  by  our  five  senses
only?

I  know  two  qualities  of  vibrations  in  an
uniform  elastic  medium,  and  I  know  no
more.  They  may  be  quick  or  slow  in  vari-
ous degrees,  and  they  may  be  strong  or
weak  in  various  degrees  ;  but  I  cannot  find
any  division  of  our  sensations  that  will  make
them  tally  with  those  divisions  of  vibra-
tions. If  we  had  no  other  sensations  but
those  of  hearing,  the  theory  would  answer
well ;  for  sounds  are  either  acute  or  grave,
which  may  answer  to  quick  or  slow  vibra-
tions ;  or  they  are  loud  or  low,  which  an-
swer to  strong  or  weak  vibrations.  But
then  we  have  no  variety  of  vibrations  cor-
responding to  the  immense  variety  of  sens-
ations which  we  have  by  sight,  smell,  taste,
and  touch.

Dr  Hartley  has  endeavoured  to  find  out
other  two  qualities  of  vibrations ;  to  wit,
that  they  may  primarily  affect  one  part  of
the  brain  or  another,  and  that  they  may
vary  in  their  direction  according  as  they
enter  by  different  external  nerves  ;  but  these
[93]  seem  to  be  added  to  make  a  number ;
for,  as  far  as  we  know,  vibrations  in  an
uniform  elastic  substance  spread  over  the
whole,  and  in  all  directions.  However,
that  we  may  be  liberal,  we  shall  grant  him
four  different  kinds  of  vibrations,  each  of
them  having  as  many  degrees  as  he  pleases.
Can  he,  or  any  man,  reduce  all  our  sensa-
tions to  four  kinds  ?  We  have  five  senses,
and  by  each  of  them  a  variety  of  sensations,
more  than  sufficient  to  exhaust  all  the
varieties  we  are  able  to  conceive  in  vibra-
tions.

Dr  Hartley,  indeed,  was  sensible  of  the
difficulty  of  finding  vibrations  to  suit  all  the
variety  of  our  sensations.  His  extensive
knowledge  of  physiology  and  pathology
could  yield  him  but  a  feeble  aid  ;  and,  there-
fore, he  is  often  reduced  to  the  necessity  of
heaping  supposition  upon  supposition,  con-
jecture upon  conjecture,  to  give  some  credi-
bility to  his  hypothesis  ;  and,  in  seeking  out
vibrations  which  may  correspond  with  the
sensations  of  one  sense,  he  seems  to  forget
that  those  must  be  omitted  which  have  been
appropriated  to  another.

Philosophers  have  accounted  in  some  de-
gree for  our  various  sensations  of  sound  by
the  vibrations  of  elastic  air ;  but  it  is  to  be

[91-93


CHAP. IV.]


FALSE  CONCLUSIONS,  &c.


253


observed,  first,  That  we  know  that  such  vi-
brations do  really  exist ;  and,  secondly,  That
they  tally  exactly  with  the  most  remarkable
phenomena  of  sound.  We  cannot,  indeed,
shew  how  any  vibration  should  produce  the
sensation  of  sound.  This  must  be  resolved
into  the  will  of  God,  or  into  some  cause
altogether  unknown.  But  we  know  that,
as  the  vibration  is  strong  or  weak,  the
sound  is  loud  or  low  ;  we  know  that,  as  the
vibration  is  quick  or  slow,  the  sound  is
acute  or  grave.  We  can  point  out  that
relation  of  synchronous  vibrations  which
produces  harmony  or  discord,  and  that
relation  of  successive  vibrations  which  pro-
duces melody ;  and  all  this  is  not  conjec-
tured, but  proved  by  a  sufficient  induction.
This  account  of  sounds,  therefore,  is  philo-
sophical :  although,  perhaps,  there  may  be
many  things  relating  to  sound  that  we  can-
not account  for,  and  of  which  the  causes
remain  latent.  The  connections  described
[94]  in  this  branch  of  philosophy  are  the
work  of  God,  and  not  the  fancy  of  men.

If  anything  similar  to  this  could  be  shewn
in  accounting  for  all  our  sensations  by
vibrations  in  the  medullary  substance  of  the
nerves  and  brain,  it  would  deserve  a  place
in  sound  philosophy ;  but,  when  we  are  told
of  vibrations  in  a  substance  which  no  man
could  ever  prove  to  have  vibrations,  or  to
be  capable  of  them ;  when  such  imaginary
vibrations  are  brought  to  account  for  all  our
sensations,  though  we  can  perceive  no  cor-
respondence in  their  variety  of  kind  and
degree  to  the  variety  of  sensations — the  con-
nections described  in  such  a  system  are  the
creatures  of  human  imagination,  not  the
work  of  God.

The  rays  of  light  make  an  impression
upon  the  optic  nerves  ;  but  they  make  none
upon  the  auditory  or  olfactory.  The  vibra-
tions of  the  air  make  an  impression  upon
the  auditory  nerves ;  but  none  upon  the
optic  or  the  olfactory.  The  effluvia  of
bodies  make  an  impression  upon  the  olfac-
tory nerves ;  but  make  none  upon  the  optic
or  auditory.  No  man  has  been  able  to  give
a  shadow  of  reason  for  this.  While  this  is
the  case,  is  it  not  better  to  confess  our
ignorance  of  the  nature  of  those  impressions
made  upon  the  nerves  and  brain  in  percep-
tion, than  to  flatter  our  pride  with  the  con-
ceit of  knowledge  which  we  have  not,  and
to  adulterate  philosophy  with  the  spurious
brood  of  hypotheses  ?*


*  Reid  appears  to  have  been  unacquainted  with
the  works  and  theory  of  Bonnet. — With  our  author's
strictures  on  the  physiological  hypotheses,  the  reader
may  compare  those  of  Tetens,  in  his  "  Versuche."
and  of  Srewa.tin  his  "  Philosophical  Essays."— H.


[«»*,  95]


CHAPTER  IV.

FALSE CONCLUSIONS DRAWN FROM THE
IMPRESSIONS  BEFORE  MENTIONED.

Some  philosophers  among  the  ancients,
as  well  as  among  the  moderns,  imagined
that  man  is  nothing  but  a  piece  of  matter,
so  curiously  organized  that  the  impressions
of  external  objects  produce  in  it  sensation,
perception,  remembrance,  and  all  the  other
operations  [95]  we  are  conscious  of.  *  This
foolish  opinion  could  only  take  its  rise  from
observing  the  constant  connection  which
the  Author  of  Nature  hath  established  be-
tween certain  impressions  made  upon  our
senses  and  our  perception  of  the  objects  by
which  the  impression  is  made  ;  from  which
they  weakly  inferred  that  those  impressions
were  the  proper  efficient  causes  of  the  cor-
responding perception.

But  no  reasoning  is  more  fallacious  than
this — that,  because  two  things  are  always
conjoined,  therefore  one  must  be  the  cause
of  the  other.  Day  and  night  have  been
joined  in  a  constant  succession  since  the
beginning  of  the  world;  but  who  is  so  foolish
as  to  conclude  from  this  that  day  is  the
cause  of  night,  or  night  the  cause  of  the
following  day  ?  There  is  indeed  nothing
more  ridiculous  than  to  imagine  that  any
motion  or  modification  of  matter  should  pro-
duce thought.

If  one  should  tell  of  a  telescope  so  exactly
made  as  to  have  the  power  of  seeing  ;  of  a~
whispering  gallery  that  had  the  power  of
hearing ;  of  a  cabinet  so  nicely  framed  as  to
have  the  power  of  memory ;  or  of  a  machine
so  delicate  as  to  feel  pain  when  it  was
touched— such  absurdities  are  so  shocking  to
common  sense  that  they  would  not  find  belief
even  among  savages ;  yet  it  is  the  same
absurdity  to  think  that  the  impressions  of
external  objects  upon  the  machine  of  our
bodies  can  be  the  real  efficient  cause  of
thought  and  perception.

Passing  this,  therefore,  as  a  notion  too
absurd  to  admit  of  reasoning,  another  con-
clusion very  generally  made  by  philoso-
phers is,  that,  in  perception,  an  impression
is  made  upon  the  mind  as  well  as  upon  the
organ,  nerves,  and  brain.  Aristotle,  as
was  before  observed,  thought  that  the  form
or  image  of  the  object  perceived,  enters  by


* The  Stoics  are  reprehended  for  such  a  docl  rine
by  Boethius: —

*'  Quondam  porticus  attulit

Obscuros  nimium  sencs,

Qui  sensus  et  imagines

E  corporibus  extimis

Credant  mentibus  imprimi,

Ut  quondam  celeri  stylo

Mos  est  squore  pagina?

Quae  nullas  habeat  notaK,

Pie-ssas  flgere  literas."  Ac
The  tabula  rasa  remounts,  however,  to  Aristotle
—indeed  to  Plato— as  an  illustration. —  H.


254


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[ESSAY  II.


the  organ  of  sense,  and  strikes  upon  the
mind.*  Mr  Hume  gives  the  name  of  im-
pressions to  all  our  perceptions,  to  all  our
sensations,  and  even  to  the  objects  which
we  perceive.  Mr  Locke  affirms  very  posi-
tively, that  the  ideas  of  external  objects  are
produced  [96]  in  our  minds  by  impulse,
"  that  being  the  only  way  we  can  conceive
bodies  to  operate  in."  It  ought,  however,  to
be  observed,  in  justice  to  Mr  Locke,  that  he
retracted  this  notion  in  his  first  letter  to  the
Bishop  of  Worcester,  and  promised,  in  the
next  edition  of  his  Essay,  to  have  that  pas-
sage rectified  ;  but,  either  from  forgetful-
ness  in  the  author,  or  negligence  in  the
printer,  the  passage  remains  in  all  the  sub-
sequent editions  1  have  seen.

There  is  no  prejudice  more  natural  to
man  than  to  conceive  of  the  mind  as  hav-
ing some  similitude  to  body  in  its  opera-
tions. Hence  men  have  been  prone  to
imagine  that,  as  bodies  are  put  in  motion
by  some  impulse  or  impression  made  upon
them  by  contiguous  bodies,  so  the  mind  is
made  to  think  and  to  perceive  by  some  im-
pression made  upon  it,  or  some  impulse
given  to  it  by  contiguous  objects.  If  we
have  such  a  notion  of  the  mind  as  Homer
had  of  his  gods — who  might  be  bruised  or
wounded  with  swords  and  spears— we  may
then  understand  what  is  meant  by  impres-
sions made  upon  it  by  a  body ;  but,  if  we
conceive  the  mind  to  be  immaterial — of
which  I  think  we  have  very  strong  proofs —
we  shall  find  it  difficult  to  affix  a  meaning
to  impressions  made  upon  it.

There  is  a  figurative  meaning  of  impres-
sions on  the  mind  which  is  well  authorized,
and  of  which  we  took  notice  in  the  observa-
tions made  on  that  word  ;  but  this  meaning
applies  only  to  objects  that  are  interesting.
To  say  that  an  object  which  I  see  with  per-
fect indifference  makes  an  impression  upon
my  mind,  is  not,  as  I  apprehend,  good
English.  If  philosophers  mean  no  more
but  that  I  see  the  object,  why  should  they
invent  an  improper  phrase  to  express  what
every  man  knows  how  to  express  in  plain
English  ?

But  it  is  evident,  from  the  manner  in
which  this  phrase  is  used  by  modern  philo-
sophers, that  they  mean,  not  barely  to  ex-
press by  it  my  perceiving  an  object,  but  to
explain  the  manner  of  perception.  They
think  that  the  object  perceived  acts  upon
the  mind  in  some  way  similar  to  that  in
which  one  body  acts  upon  another,  by
making  [97]  an  impression  upon  it.  The
impression  upon  the  mind  is  conceived  to
be  something  Avherein  the  mind  is  alto-
gether passive,  and  has  some  effect  pro-

*  A  mere  metaphor  in  Aristotle.  (See  Notes  K.
and  M.)  At  any  rate,  the  impr  ssion  was  supposed
to  be  made  on  the  animated  sensory,  am  not  on  the
intellect— H.


duced  in  it  by  the  object.  But  this  is  a
hypothesis  which  contradicts  the  common
sense  of  mankind,  and  which  ought  not  to
be  admitted  without  proof.

When  I  look  upon  the  wall  of  my  room,
the  wall  does  not  act  at  all,  nor  is  capable
of  acting  ;  the  perceiving  it  is  an  act  or
operation  in  me.  That  this  is  the  common
apprehension  of  mankind  with  regard  to
perception,  is  evident  from  the  manner  of
expressing  it  in  all  languages.

The  vulgar  give  themselves  no  trouble
how  they  perceive  objects — they  express
what  they  are  conscious  of,  and  they  express
it  with  propriety  ;  but  philosophers  have  an
avidity  to  know  how  we  perceive  objects ;
and,  conceiving  some  similitude  between  a
body  that  is  put  in  motion,  and  a  mind  that
is  made  to  perceive,  they  are  led  to  think
that,  as  the  body  must  receive  some  impulse
to  make  it  move,  so  the  mind  must  receive
some  impulse  or  impression  to  make  it  per-
ceive. This  analogy  seems  to  be  confirmed,
by  observing  that  we  perceive  objects  only
when  they  make  some  impression  upon  the
organs  of  sense,  and  upon  the  nerves  and
brain ;  but  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that
such  is  the  nature  of  body  that  it  cannot
change  its  state,  but  by  some  force  impressed
upon  it.  This  is  not  the  nature  of  mind.
All  that  we  know  about  it  shews  it  to  be  in
its  nature  living  and  active,  and  to  have
the  power  of  perception  in  its  constitution,
but  still  within  those  limits  to  which  it  is
confined  by  the  laws  of  Nature.

It  appears,  therefore,  that  this  phrase  of
the  mind's  having  impressions  made  upon
it  by  corporeal  objects  in  perception,  is
either  a  phrase  without  any  distinct  mean-
ing, and  contrary  to  the  propriety  of  the
English  language,  or  it  is  grounded  upon
an  hypothesis  which  is  destitute  of  proof.
On  that  account,  though  we  grant  that  in
perception  there  is  an  impression  made
upon  the  organ  of  [98]  sense,  and  upon  the
nerves  and  brain,  we  do  not  admit  that
the  object  makes  any  impression  upon  the
mind.

There  is  another  conclusion  drawn  from
the  impressions  made  upon  the  brain  in
perception,  which  I  conceive  to  have  no
solid  foundation,  though  it  has  been  adopted
very  generally  by  philosophers.  It  is,  that,
by  the  impressions  made  on  the  brain,
images  are  formed  of  the  object  perceived  ;
and  that  the  mind,  being  seated  in  the  brain
as  its  chamber  of  presence,  immediately
perceives  those  images  only,  and  has  no
perception  of  the  external  object  but  by
them.  This  notion  of  our  perceiving  ex-
ternal objects,  not  immediately,  but  in  cer-
tain images  or  species  of  them  conveyed  by
the  senses,  seems  to  be  the  most  ancient
philosophical  hypothesis  we  have  on  the
subject of  perception, and  to have  with

[96-98]


CHAP.  IV.]


FALSE  CONCLUSIONS,  &c.


255


small  variations  retaiued  its  authority  to
this  day.

Aristotle,  as  was  before  observed,  main-
tained, that  the  species,  images,  or  forms
of  external  objects,  coming  from  the  object,
are  impressed  on  the  mind.  The  followers
of  Democritus  and  Epicurus  held  the  same
thing,  with  regard  to  slender  films  of  sub-
tile matter  coming  from  the  object,  that
Aristotle  did  with  regard  to  his  immaterial
species  or  forms.

Aristotle  thought  every  object  of  human
understanding  enters  at  first  by  the  senses  ;*
and  that  the  notions  got  by  them  are  by
the  powers  of  the  mind  refined  and  spirit-
ualized, so  as  at  last  to  become  objects  of
the  most  sublime  and  abstracted  sciences.
Plato,  on  the  other  hand,  had  a  very  mean
opinion  of  all  the  knowledge  we  get  by  the
senses.  He  thought  it  did  not  deserve  the
name  of  knowledge,  and  could  not  be  the
foundation  of  science  ;  because  the  objects
of  sense  are  individuals  only,  and  are  in  a
constant  fluctuation.  All  science,  according
to  him,  must  be  employed  about  those
eternal  and  immutable  ideas  which  existed
before  the  objects  of  sense,  and  are  not  liable
to  any  change.  In  this  there  was  an  essen-
tial difference  between  the  systems  of  these
two  philosophers.  [99]  The  notion  of  eter-
nal and  immutable  ideas,  which  Plato  bor-
rowed from  the  Pythagorean  school,  was
totally  rejected  by  Aristotle,  who  held  it  as
a  maxim,  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  intel-
lect, which  was  not  at  first  in  the  senses.

But,  notwithstanding  this  great  difference
in  those  two  ancient  systems,  they  might
both  agree  as  to  the  manner  in  which  we
perceive  objects  by  our  senses  :  and  that
they  did  so,  I  think,  is  probable  ;  because
Aristotle,  as  far  as  I  know,  neither  takes
notice  of  any  difference  between  himself
and  his  master  upon  this  point,  nor  lays
claim  to  his  theory  of  the  manner  of  our
perceiving  objects  as  his  own  invention.
It  is  still  more  probable,  from  the  hints
which  Plato  gives  in  the  seventh  book  of  his
Republic,  concerning  the  manner  in  which
we  perceive  the  objects  of  sense ;  which  he
compares  to  persons  in  a  deep  and  dark  cave,
who  see  not  external  objects  themselves  but
only  their  shadows,  by  alight  let  into  the
cave  through  a  small  opening,  -f

It  seems,  therefore,  probable  that  the  Py-
thagoreans and  Platonists  agreed  with  the
Peripatetics  in  this  general  theory  of  per-
ception— to  wit,  that  the  objects  of  sense

*  This  is  a  very  doubtful  point,  and  has  accord-
ingly divided  his  followers.  Texts  can  be  quoted  to
prove,  on  tre  one  side,  that  Aristotle  derived  all  our
notions,  a  pos'e>iori,  from  the  experience  of  sense;
and,  on  the  other,  that  he  viewed  sense  only  as  afford-
ing  to  intellect  the  condition  requisite  for  it  to  be.
come  actually  conscious  of  the  native  and  necessary
notions  it,  a  priori,  virtually  possessed. — H.

+  Reid  wholly  mistakes  the  meaning  of  Plato's
simile  of  the  cave. See  below,  under  p.  1 16. — H.
199,  100]


are  perceived  only  by  certain  images,  or
shadows  of  them,  let  into  the  mind,  as  into
a  camera  obscura.*

The  notions  of  the  ancients  were  very
various  with  regard  to  the  seat  of  the  soul
Since  it  has  been  discovered,  by  the  im-
provements in  anatomy,  that  the  nerves
are  the  instruments  of  perception,  and  of
the  sensations  accompanying  it,  and  that
the  nerves  ultimately  terminate  in  the
brain,-]-  it  has  been  the  general  opinion  of
philosophers  that  the  brain  is  the  seat  of
the  soul ;  and  that  she  perceives  the  images
that  are  brought  there,  and  external  things,
only  by  means  of  them.

Des  Cartes,  observing  that  the  pineal
gland  is  the  only  part  of  the  brain  that  is
single,  all  the  other  parts  being  double,^:
and  thinking  that  the  soul  must  have  one
seat,  was  determined  by  this  [100]  to  make
that  gland  the  soul's  habitation,  to  which,
by  means  of  the  animal  spirits,  intelligence
is  brought  of  all  objects  that  affecD  the
senses.  §

Others  have  not  thought  proper  to  con-
fine the  habitation  of  the  soul  to  the  pineal
gland,  but  to  the  brain  in  general,  or  to
some  part  of  it,  which  they  call  the  sen-
sor turn.  Even  the  great  Newton  favoured
this  opinion,  though  he  proposes  it  only  as
a  query,  with  that  modesty  which  dis-
tinguished him  no  less  than  his  great  genius.
"  Is  not,"  says  he,  "the  sensorium  of  animals
the  place  where  the  sentient  substance  is
present,  and  to  which  the  sensible  species  of
things  are  brought  through  the  nerves  and
brain,  that  there  they  may  be  perceived  by
the  mind  present  in  that  place  ?  And  is
there  not  an  incorporeal,  living,  intelligent,
and  omnipresent  Being,  who,  in  infinite
space,  as  if  it  were  in  his  sensorium,  inti-
mately perceives  things  themselves,  and
comprehends  them  perfectly,  as  being  pre-
sent to  them ;  of  which  things,  that  prin-
ciple in  us,  which  perceives  and  thinks,
discerns  only,  in  its  little  sensorium,  the
images  brought  to  it  through  the  organs  of
the  senses  ?"||

His  great  friend  Dr  Samuel  Clarke
adopted  the  same  sentiment  with  more  con-
fidence. In  his  papers  to  Leibnitz,  we
find  the  following  passages :  "  Without
being  present  to  the  images  of  the  things
percehied,  it  (the  soul)  could  not  possibly
perceive  them.  A  living  substanee  can
only  there  perceive  where  it  is  present,
either  to  the  things  themselves,  (as  the
omnipresent  God  is  to  the  whole  universe,)

* An  error. See  below,  under  p.  1 16.— H.

+  That  is,  since  the  time  of  Erasistratus  and  Galen.
— H.

X  Which  is  not  the  case.  The  Hypophysis,  the
Vermiform  process,  &c,  are  not  less  single  than  the
Conafium. — H.

$  See  above,  p.  2:34,  b,  note  *.— H.

||  Before  Reid,  these  crude  conjectures  of  Newton
were  justly  censured  by  Genovesi,  and  others — .H.


256


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay


or  to  the  images  of  things,  (as  the  soul  of
man  is  in  its  proper  sensory.)  Nothing
can  any  more  act,  or  be  acted  upon,  where
it  is  not  present,  than  it  can  be  where  it  is
not.  We  are  sure  the  soul  cannot  perceive
what  it  is  not  present  to,  because  nothing
can  act,  or  be  acted  upon,  where  it  is  not."

Mr  Locke  expresses  himself  so  upon
this  point,  that,  for  the  [101]  most  part,
one  would  imagine  that  he  thought  that
the  ideas,  or  images  of  things,  which  he  be-
lieved to  be  the  immediate  objects  of  per-
ception, are  impressions  upon  the  mind  it-
self; yet,  in  some  passages,  he  rather
places  them  in  the  brain,  and  makes  them
to  be  perceived  by  the  mind  there  present.
"  There  are  some  ideas,"  says  he,  "  which
have  admittance  only  through  one  sense ;
and,  if  the  organs  or  the  nerves,  which  are
the  conduits  to  convey  them  from  without
to  their  audience  in  the  brain,  the  mind's
presence  room,  if  I  may  so  call  it,  are  so
disordered  as  not  to  perform  their  function,
they  have  no  postern  to  be  admitted  by.

"  There  seems  to  be  a  constant  decay  of
all  our  ideas,  even  of  those  that  are  struck
deepest.  The  pictures  drawn  in  our  minds
are  laid  in  fading  colours.  Whether  the
temper  of  the  brain  makes  this  difference,
that  in  some  it  retains  the  characters  drawn
on  it  like  marble,  in  others  like  freestone,
and  in  others  little  better  than  sand,  I  shall
not  enquire."*

From  these  passages  of  Mr  Locke,  and
others  of  a  like  nature,  it  is  plain  that  he
thought  that  there  are  images  of  external
objects  conveyed  to  the  brain.  But  whether
he  thought  with  Des  Cartesi"  and  Newton,
that  the  images  in  the  brain  are  perceived
by  the  mind  there  present,  or  that  they  are
imprinted  on  the  mind  itself,  is  not  so  evi-
dent.

Now,  with  regard  to  this  hypothesis,
there  are  three  things  that  deserve  to  be
considered,  because  the  hypothesis  leans
upon  them  ;  and,  if  any  one  of  them  fail,  it
must  fall  to  the  ground.  The  first  is,  That
the  soul  has  its  seat,  or,  as  Mr  Locke  calls
it,  its  presence  room  in  the  brain.  The
second,  That  there  are  images  formed  in
the  brain  of  all  the  objects  of  sense.  The
third,  That  the  mind  or  soul  perceives  these
images  in  the  brain ;  and  that  it  perceives
not  external  objects  immediately,  b*t  only
perceives  them  by  means  of  those  images.
L102]

As  to  the  first  point — that  the  soul  has  its


•  No  great  stress  should  be  laid  on  such  figurative
passages  as  indications  of  the  real  opinion  of  Locke,
which,  on  this  point,  it  is  not  easy  to  discover.  See
Note  O— -H.

t  Des  Cartes  is  perhaps  an  erratum  for  Dr  Clarke.
If  not,  the  opinion  of  Des  Cartes  is  misrepresented  j
for  he  denied  to  the  mind  a!l  consciousness  or  imme-
diate knowledge  of  matter  and  its  modifications.
But  of  this  again. See  Note  N H.


seat  hi  the  brain — this,  surely,  is  not  so  well
established  as  that  we  can  safely  build
other  principles  upon  it.  There  have  been
various  opinions  and  much  disputation  about
the  place  of  spirits :  whether  they  have  a
place  ?  and,  if  they  have,  how  they  occupy
that  place  ?  After  men  had  fought  in  the
dark  about  those  points  for  ages,  the  wiser
part  seem  to  have  left  off  disputing  about
them,  as  matters  beyond  the  reach  of  the
human  faculties.

As  to  the  second  point — that  images  of  all
the  objects  of  sense  are  formed  in  the  brain —
we  may  venture  to  affirm  that  there  is  no
proof  nor  probability  of  this,  with  regard  to
any  of  the  objects  of  sense  ;  and  that,  with
regard  to  the  greater  part  of  them,  it  is
words  without  any  meaning.*

We  have  not  the  least  evidence  that  the
image  of  any  external  object  is  formed  in
the  brain.  The  brain  has  been  dissected
times  innumerable  by  the  nicest  ana-
tomists ;  every  part  of  it  examined  by  the
naked  eye,  and  with  the  help  of  microscopes ;
but  no  vestige  of  an  image  of  any  external
object  was  ever  found.  The  brain  seems
to  be  the  most  improper  substance  that  can
be  imagined  for  receiving  or  retaining  images,
being  a  soft,  moist,  medullary  substance.

But  how  are  these  images  formed  ?  or
whence  do  they  come  ?  Says  Mr  Locke,  the
organs  of  sense  and  nerves  convey  them  from
without.  This  is  just  the  Aristotelian
hypothesis  of  sensible  species,  which  modern
philosophers  have  been  at  great  pains  to
refute,  and  which  must  be  acknowledged  to
be  one  of  the  most  unintelligible  parts  of
the  Peripatetic  system.  Those  who  con-
sider species  of  colour,  figure,  sound,  and
smell,  coming  from  the  object,  and  entering
by  the  organs  of  sense,  as  a  part  of  the
scholastic  jargon  long  ago  discarded  from
sound  philosophy,  ought. to  have  discarded
images  in  the  brain  along  with  them.
There  never  was  a  shadow  of  argument
brought  by  any  author,  to  shew  that  an
[103]  image  of  any  external  object  ever
entered  by  any  of  the  organs  of  sense.

That  external  objects  make  some  impres-
sion on  the  organs  of  sense,  and  by  them  on
the  nerves  and  brain,  is  granted  ;  but  that
those  impressions  resemble  the  objects
they  are  made  by,  so  as  that  they  may  be
called  images  of  the  objects,  is  most  impro-
bable. Every  hypothesis  that  has  been
contrived,  shews  that  there  can  be  no  such
resemblance ;  for  neither  the  motions  of
animal  spirits,  nor  the  vibrations  of  elastic
chords,  or  of  elastic  aether,  or  of  the  infinites-


*  It  "would  he  rash  to  assume  that,  because  a  phi-
losopher uses  the  term  image,  ox  impression,  ox  idea,
and  places  what  it  denotes  in  the  brain,  that  he
therefore  means  that  the  mind  was  cognizant  of  such
corporeal  affection,  as  of  its  object,  either  in  percep-
tion  or  imagination. See  ><ote  K. — H.

[101-103]


IV.]


FALSE  CONCLUSIONS,  &c.


257


imal  particles  of  the  nerves,  can  be  sup-
posed to  resemble  the  objects  by  which
they  are  excited.

We  know  that,  in  vision,  an  image  of  the
visible  object  is  formed  in  the  bottom  of  the
eye  by  the  rays  of  light.  But  we  know,
also,  that  this  image  cannot  be  conveyed  to
the  brain,  because  the  optic  nerve,  and  all
the  parts  that  surround  it,  are  opaque  and
impervious  to  the  rays  of  light ;  and  there
is  no  other  organ  of  sense  in  which  any
image  of  the  object  is  formed.

It  is  farther  to  be  observed,  that,  with
regard  to  some  objects  of  sense,  we  may
understand  what  is  meant  by  an  image  of
them  imprinted  on  the  brain ;  but,  with
regard  to  most  objects  of  sense,  the  phrase
is  absolutely  unintelligible,  and  conveys  no
meaning  at  all.  As  to  objects  of  sight,  I
understand  what  is  meant  by  an  image  of
their  figure  in  the  brain.  But  how  shall  we
conceive  an  image  of  their  colour  where  there
is  absolute  darkness  ?  And  as  to  all  other
objects  of  sense,  except  figure  and  colour,
I  am  unable  to  conceive  what  is  meant  by  an
image  of  them.  Let  any  man  say  what  he
means  by  an  image  of  heat  and  cold,  an  image
of  hardness  or  softness,  an  image  of  sound,
or  smell,  or  taste.  The  word  image,  when
applied  to  these  objects  of  sense,  has  abso-
lutely no  meaning.  Upon  what  a  weak
foundation,  then,  does  this  hypothesis  stand,
when  it  supposes  that  images  of  all  the
objects  of  sense  are  imprinted  on  the  brain,
being  conveyed  thither  by  the  conduits  of  the
organs  and  nerves  !* [104]

The  third  point  in  this  hypothesis  is,
That  the  mind  perceives  the  images  in  the
brain,  and  external  objects  only  by  means
of  them.  This  is  as  improbable  as  that
there  are  such  images  to  be  perceived.  If
our  powers  of  perception  be  not  altogether
fallacious,  the  objects  we  perceive  are  not
in  our  brain,  but  without  us.-|-  We  are  so
far  from  perceiving  images  in  the  brain,
that  we  do  not  perceive  our  brain  at  all ;
nor  would  any  man  ever  have  known  that
he  had  a  brain,  if  anatomy  had  not  dis-
covered, by  dissection,  that  the  brain  is  a
constituent  part  of  the  human  body.

To  sum  up  what  has  been  said  with  re-
gard to  the  organs  of  perception,  and  the
impressions  made  upon  our  nerves  and
brain.  It  is  a  law  of  our  nature,  estab-
lished by  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Being,
that  we  perceive  no  external  object  but  by


*  These  objections  to  the  hypothesis  in  question,
have  been  frequently  urged  both  in  ancient  and  in
modern  times. See  Note  K. —  H.

t  If  this  de  taken  literally  and  by  itself,  then,  ac-
cording to  Reid,  perception  is  not  an  immanent  "og-
nition;  extension  and  figure  are,  in  that,  act,  not
merely  suggest- -d  conceptions;  and,  as  we  are  perci-
pient «f  the  non-ego,  and,  conscious  of  the  perception,
we  are  therefore  conscious  of  the  non-ego.  But  see
Note  C—  H.
[104; 105]


means  of  the  organs  given  us  for  that  pur-
pose. But  these  organs  do  not  perceive.
The  eye  is  the  organ  of  sight,  but  it  sees
not.  A  telescope  is  an  artificial  organ  of
sight.  The  eye  is  a  natural  organ  of  sight,
but  it  sees  as  little  as  the  telescope.  We
know  how  the  eye  forms  a  picture  of  the
visible  object  upon  the  retina  ;  but  how  this
picture  makes  us  see  the  object  we  know
not ;  and  if  experience  had  not  informed  us
that  such  a  picture  is  necessary  to  vision,
we  should  never  have  known  it.  We  can
give  no  reason  why  the  picture  on  the  re-
tina should  be  followed  by  vision,  while  a
like  picture  on  any  other  part  of  the  body
produces  nothing  like  vision.

It  is  likewise  a  law  of  our  nature,  that  we
perceive  not  external  objects,  unless  certain
impressions  be  made  by  the  object  upon  the
organ,  and  by  means  of  the  organ  upon  the
nerves  and  brain.  But  of  the  nature  of
those  impressions  we  are  perfectly  ignorant ;
and  though  they  are  conjoined  with  percep-
tion by  the  will  of  our  Maker,  yet  it  does
not  appear  that  they  have  any  necessary  con-
nection with  it  in  their  own  nature,  far  less
that  they  can  be  the  proper  efficient  cause
of  it.  [105]  We  perceive,  because  God  has
given  us  the  power  of  perceiving,  and  not
because  we  have  impressions  from  objects.
We  perceive  nothing  without  those  impres-
sions, because  our  Maker  has  limited  and
circumscribed  our  powers  of  perception,  by
such  laws  of  Nature  as  to  his  wisdom  seemed
meet,  and  such  as  suited  our  rank  in  his
creation.  *


*  The  doctrine  of  Reid  and  Stewart,  in  regard  to
our  perception  of  external  things,  bears  a  close  ana-
logy to  the  Cartesian  scheme  of  divine  assistance,  or
of  occasional  causes.  It  seems,  however,  to  coincide
most  completely  with  the  opinion  of  Ruardus  Andala,
a  Dutch  Cartesian,  who  attempted  to  reconcile  the
theory  of  assistance  with  that  of  physical  influence.
"Statuo,"hesays.  "nosclarissimametdistinctissimam
hujus  opeialionis  et  unionis  posse  habere  idecm,  si
modo,  quod  omnino  facere  oportet,  ad  Deum,  cans,
sam  ejus  primam  et  liberam  ascendamus,  et  ab  ejus
beneplacito  admirandum  hunc  effectum  derivemus,
Nos  possumus  huic  vel  illi  motui  e.  gr.  carapanas,
sic  et  hedera?  suspense.  Uteris  scriptis,  verbis  quibus-
cunque  pronunciatis,  aliisque  signis,  varias  ideas
alligare,  ita,  ut  per  visum,  vel  auditum  in  menteex.
citentur  varias  ideas,  perceptiones  et  sensationes  .•
tnnon  hincclare  et  facile  intellioimus,  Deum  crea-
torem  m  ntis  et  corporis  potuisse  inistituere  et  orr.i-
are,  ut  per  vaios  in  corpore  motus  varias  in  mente
excitei. tur  ideae  et  perceptiones ;  et  vicissim,  ut  per
varias  mentis  volitiones,  varii  in  corpore  excitentur
ct  producantur  nu  tus  ?  Huic  et  pro  varia  alter,
utrius  partis  dispositione  altera  pars  variis  moriis
affici  potest.  Hoc  autem  a  Deo  ita  ordinatum  et
erfectum  esse,  a  posteriori,  ccntinua,  certissima  et
clarissima  experientia  docet  Testes  irrefragabiles
omnique  exceptione  majores  reciproci  hujus  com-
mercii,  operationis  meniis  in  corpus,  et  corporis  in
mentem,  nee  non  communionis  status,  sunt  senstis
omnes  turn  extemi,  turn  interni ;  ut  et  omnes  et
singula?  et  continue  actiones  mentis  in  corp-  s,  de
quibus  modo  fuit  actum.  Si  quis  vero  a  proprieta-
tibus  mentis  ad  proprietates  corporis  progredi  velif,
aut  exrarttaxzdiversissiBaarum  harum  substar.tiarum
dedu<  ere  motum  in  corpore,  &  perceptiones  in  n  ente,
aut  hos  effectus  ut  necessano  connexos  spectare  ;
na:  is  frustra  erit,  nihil  intelhget,  perveisissimephi.


258


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


|_ESSAY  II.


CHAPTER  V.


OF  PERCEPTION.


In  speaking  of  the  impressions  made  on
our  organs  in  perception,  we  build  upon
facts  borrowed  from  anatomy  and  physio-
logy, for  which  we  have  the  testimony  of
our  senses.  But,  being  now  to  speak  of
perception  itself,  which  is  solely  an  act  of
the  mind,  we  must  appeal  to  another
authority.  The  operations  of  our  minds
are  known,  not  by  sense,  but  by  conscious-
ness, the  authority  of  which  is  as  certain
and  as  irresistible  as  that  of  sense.

In  order,  however,  to  our  having  a  distinct
notion  of  any  of  the  operations  of  our  own
minds,  it  is  not  enough  that  we  be  conscious
of  them ;  for  all  men  have  this  consciousness.
It  is  farther  necessary  that  we  attend  to  them
while  they  are  exerted,  and  reflect  upon  them
with  care,  while  they  are  recent  and  fresh
in  our  memory.  It  is  necessary  that,  by
employing  ourselves  frequently  in  this  way,
we  get  the  habit  of  this  attention  and  reflec-
tion ;  and,  therefore,  for  the  proof  of  facts
which  I  shall  have  occasion  to  mention  upon
this  subject,  I  can  only  appeal  to  the  reader's
own  thoughts,  whether  such  facts  are  not
agreeable  to  what  he  is  conscious  of  in  his
own  mind. [106]

If,  therefore,  we  attend  to  that  act  of
our  mind  which  we  call  the  perception  of  an
external  object  of  sense,  we  shall  find  in  it
these  three  things: — First,  Some  con-
ception or  notion  of  the  object  perceived ;
Secondly,  A  strong  and  irresistible  convic-
tion and  belief  of  its  present  existence  ;  and,
Thirdly,  That  this  conviction  and  belief  are
immediate,  and  not  the  effect  of  reasoning.  *

First,  It  is  impossible  to  perceive  an
object  without  having  some  notion  or  con-
ception of  that  which  we  perceive.  We
may,  indeed,  conceive  an  object  which  we
do  not  perceive ;  but,  when  we  perceive  the
object,  we  must  have  some  conception  of  it
at  the  same  time  ;  and  we  have  commonly
a  more  clear  and  steady  notion  of  the  object
while  we  perceive  it,  than  we  have  from
memory  or  imagination  when  it  is  not  per-
ceived. Yet,  even  in  perception,  the  notion
which  our  senses  give  of  the  object  may  be
more  or  less  clear,  more  or  less  distinct,  in
all  possible  degrees.

Thus  we  see  more  distinctly  an  object  at
a  small  than  at  a  great  distance.  An  object
at  a  great  distance  is  seen  more  distinctly  in


losophabitur  nullamque  hujus  rei  ideam  habere  po-
tent. Si  vero  ad  Deum  i  reatorem  adscendamus,
eumque  vere  agnoscamus,  nihil  hie  erit  obscuri,
hwnc  effectum  clari^sirae  intelligemus,  et  quidem  per
caussam  ejus  primam  ;  qua?  perfectissima  demum
est  scientia  " — H.

*  See  above,  p.  183,  a,  note «  :  p.  128,  b,  note  *  ;
and  Note  C— H.


a  clear  than  in  a  foggy  day.  An  object
seen  indistinctly  with  the  naked  eye,  on
account  of  its  smallness,  may  be  seen  dis-
tinctly with  a  microscope.  The  objects  in
this  room  will  be  seen  by  a  person  in  the
room  less  and  less  distinctly  as  the  light  of
the  day  fails;  they  pass  through  all  the
various  degrees  of  distinctness  according  to
the  degrees  of  the  light,  and,  at  last,  in
total  darkness  they  are  not  seen  at  all.
What  has  been  said  of  the  objects  of  sight
is  so  easily  applied  to  the  objects  of  the
other  senses,  that  the  application  may  be
left  to  the  reader.

In  a  matter  so  obvious  to  every  person
capable  of  reflection,  it  is  necessary  &nly
farther  to  observe,  that  the  notion  which
we  get  of  an  object,  merely  by  our  external
sense,  ought  not  to  be  confounded  with  that
more  scientific  notion  which  a  man,  come  to
the  years  of  understanding,  may  have  of  the
same  object,  by  attending  to  its  various
attributes,  or  to  its  various  parts,  and  their
relation  to  each  other,  and  to  the  whole.
[107]  Thus,  the  notion  which  a  child  has  of
a  jack  for  roasting  meat,  will  be  acknowledged
to  be  very  different  from  that  of  a  man  who
understands  its  construction,  and  perceives
the  relation  of  the  parts  to  one  another,  and
to  the  whole.  The  child  sees  the  jack  and
every  part  of  it  as  well  as  the  man.  The
child,  therefore,  has  all  the  notion  of  it
which  sight  gives  ;  whatever  there  is  more
in  the  notion  which  the  man  forms  of  it,
must  be  derived  from  other  powers  of  the
mind,  which  may  afterwards  be  explained.
This  observation  is  made  here  only  that  we
may  not  confound  the  operations  of  differ-
ent powers  of  the  mind,  which  by  being
always  conjoined  after  we  grow  up  to  under-
standing, are  apt  to  pass  for  one  and  the  same.

Secondly,  In  perception  we  not  only  have
a  notion  more  or  less  distinct  of  the  object
perceived,  but  also  an  irresistible  conviction
and  belief  of  its  existence.  This  is  always
the  case  when  we  are  certain  that  we  per-
ceive it.  There  may  be  a  perception  so
faint  and  indistinct  as  to  leave  us  in  doubt
whether  we  perceive  the  object  or  not.
Thus,  when  a  star  begins  to  twinkle  as  the
light  of  the  sun  withdraws,  one  may,  for  a
short  time,  think  he  sees  it  without  being
certain,  until  the  perception  acquire  some
strength  and  steadiness.  When  a  ship  just
begins  to  appear  in  the  utmost  verge  of  the
horizon,  we  may  at  first  be  dubious  whether
we  perceive  it  or  not ;  but  when  the  percep-
tion is  in  any  degree  clear  and  steady,  there
remains  no  doubt  of  its  reality  ;  and  when
the  reality  of  the  perception  is  ascertained,
the  existence  of  the  object  perceived  can  no
longer  be  doubted.*


•  In  this  paragraph  there  is  a  confusion  of  that
which  is  pe  ccived  and  that  which  is  inferred  from
the  perception. — H.

fl06,  1071


en  AT v.]


OF  PERCEPTION.


259


By  the  laws  of  all  nations,  in  the  most
solemn  judicial  trials,  wherein  men's  for-
tunes and  lives  are  at  stake,  the  sentence
passes  according  to  the  testimony  of  eye  or
ear  witnesses  of  good  credit.  An  upright
judge  will  give  a  fair  hearing  to  every  objec-
tion that  can  be  made  to  the  integrity  of  a
witness,  and  allow  it  to  be  possible  that  he
may  be  corrupted ;  but  no  judge  will  ever
suppose  that  witnesses  maybe  imposed  upon
by  trusting  to  their  eyes  and  ears.  And  if
a  sceptical  counsel  should  plead  against  the
testimony  of  the  witnesses,  that  they  had
no  other  evidence  for  what  they  [108]  de-
clared but  the  testimony  of  their  eyes  and
ears,  and  that  we  ought  not  to  put  so  much
faith  in  our  senses  as  to  deprive  men  of  life
or  fortune  upon  their  testimony,  surely  no
upright  judge  would  admit  a  plea  of  this
kind.  I  believe  no  counsel,  however  scep-
tical, ever  dared  to  offer  such  an  argument ;
and,  if  it  was  offered,  it  would  be  rejected
with  disdain.

Can  any  stronger  proof  be  given  that  it
is  the  universal  judgment  of  mankind  that
the  evidence  of  sense  is  a  kind  of  evidence
which  we  may  securely  rest  upon  in  the
most  momentous  concerns  of  mankind ;
that  it  is  a  kind  of  evidence  against  which
we  ought  not  to  admit  any  reasoning  ;  and,
therefore,  that  to  reason  either  for  or  against
it  is  an  insult  to  common  sense  ?

The  whole  conduct  of  mankind  in  the
daily  occurrences  of  life,  as  well  as  the  so-
lemn procedure  of  judicatories  in  the  trial
of  causes  civil  and  criminal,  demonstrates
this.  I  know  only  of  two  exceptions  that
may  be  offered  against  this  being  the  uni-
versal belief  of  mankind.

The  first  exception  is  that  of  some  luna-
tics who  have  been  persuaded  of  things  that
seem  to  contradict  the  clear  testimony  of
their  senses-  It  is  said  there  have  been
lunatics  and  hypochondriacal  persons,  who
seriously  believed  themselves  to  be  made  of
glass ;  and,  in  consequence  of  this,  lived  in
continual  terror  of  having  their  brittle  frame
shivered  into  pieces.

All  I  have  to  say  to  this  is,  that  our
minds,  in  our  present  state,  are,  as  well  as
our  bodies,  liable  to  strange  disorders  ;  and,
as  we  do  not  judge  of  the  natural  constitu-
tion of  the  body  from  the  disorders  or  dis-
eases to  which  it  is  subject  from  accidents,
so  neither  ought  we  to  judge  of  the  natural
powers  of  the  mind  from  its  disorders,  but
from  its  sound  state.  It  is  natural  to  man,
and  common  to  the  species,  to  have  two
hands  and  two  feet ;  yet  I  have  seen  a  man,
and  a  very  ingenious  one,  who  was  born
without  either  hands  or  feet.  [109  J  It  is
natural  to  man  to  have  faculties  superior  to
those  of  brutes  ;  yet  we  see  some  indivi-
duals whose  faculties  are  not  equal  to  those
of  many  brutes  ;  and  the  wisest  man  may,
[108-110]


by  various  accidents,  be  reduced  to  this
state.  General  rules  that  regard  those
whose  intellects  are  sound  are  not  over-
thrown by  instances  of  men  whose  intellects
are  hurt  by  any  constitutional  or  accidental
disorder.

The  other  exception  that  may  be  made
to  the  principle  we  have  laid  down  is  that
of  some  philosophers  who  have  maintained
that  the  testimony  of  sense  is  fallacious,
and  therefore  ought  never  to  be  trusted.
Perhaps  it  might  be  a  sufficient  answer  to
this  to  say,  that  there  is  nothing  so  absurd
which  some  philosophers  have  not  main-
tained.* It  is  one  thing  to  profess  a  doc-
trine of  this  kind,  another  seriously  to  be-
lieve it,  and  to  be  governed  by  it  in  the
conduct  of  fife.  It  is  evident  that  a  man
who  did  not  believe  his  senses  could  not
keep  out  of  harm's  way  an  hour  of  his  life  ;
yet,  in  all  the  history  of  philosophy,  we
never  read  of  any  sceptic  that  ever  stepped
into  fire  or  water  because  he  did  not  believe
his  senses,  or  that  shewed  in  the  conduct  of
life  less  trust  in  his  senses  than  other  men
have.-)-  This  gives  us  just  ground  to  appre-
hend that  philosophy  was  never  able  to
conquer  that  natural  belief  which  men  have
in  their  senses ;  and  that  all  their  subtile
reasonings  against  this  belief  were  never
able  to  persuade  themselves.

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  clear  and
distinct  testimony  of  our  senses  carries
irresistible  conviction  along  with  it  to  every
man  in  his  right  judgment.

I  observed,  Tlnrdly,  That  this  conviction
is  not  only  irresistible,  but  it  is  immediate ;
that  is,  it  is  not  by  a  train  of  reasoning
and  argumentation  that  we  come  to  be
convinced  of  the  existence  of  what  we
perceive ;  we  ask  no  argument  for  the
existence  of  the  object,  but  that  we  per-
ceive it ;  perception  commands  our  belief
upon  its  own  authority,  and  disdains  to
rest  its  authority  upon  any  reasoning  what-
soever. % [no]

The  conviction  of  a  truth  may  be  irre-
sistible, and  yet  not  immediate.  Thus,  my
conviction  that  the  three  angles  of  every
plain  triangle  are  equal  to  two  right  angles,
is  irresistible,  but  it  is  not  immediate  ;  I
am  convinced  of  it  by  demonstrative  rea-
soning. There  are  other  truths  in  mathe-
matics of  which  we  have  not  only  an  irre-
sistible but  an  immediate  conviction.  Such
are  the  axioms.  Our  belief  of  the  axioms
m  mathematics  is  not  grounded  upon  argu-


* A  saying  of  Varro. — H.

t  All  this  we  read,  however,  in  Laertius,  of  Pyrrho ;
and  on  the  authority  of  Antigonus  Carystius,  the
great  sceptic's  contemporary.  Whether  we  are  to
believe  the  narrative  is  another  question.—  H.

X  If  Keid  holds  that  in  perception  we  have  only  a
conception  of  the  Non-Eno  in  the  Ego,  this  belief  is
either  not  the  reflex  of  a  cognition,  but- a  blind  faith,
or  it  is  mediate,  as  held  by  Stewart. — Phi  os.  Ess.  ii
c  2.-H.

82


260


OX  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  n.


raent — arguments  are  grounded  upon  them ;
but  their  evidence  is  discerned  immediately
by  the  human  understanding.

It  is,  no  doubt,  one  thing  to  have  an
immediate  conviction  of  a  self-evident
axiom  ;  it  is  another  thing  to  have  an  im-
mediate conviction  of  the  existence  of  what
we  see ;  but  the  conviction  is  equally  imme-
diate and  equally  irresistible  in  both  cases.
No  man  thinks  of  seeking  a  reason  to  believe
what  he  sees  ;  and,  before  we  are  capable  of
reasoning,  we  put  no  less  confidence  in  our
senses  than  after.  The  rudest  savage  is  as
fully  convinced  of  what  he  sees,  and  hears,
and  feels,  as  the  most  expert  logician.  The
constitution  of  our  understanding  deter-
mines us  to  hold  the  truth  of  a  mathematical
axiom  as  a  first  principle,  from  which  other
truths  may  be  deduced,  but  it  is  deduced
from  none ;  and  the  constitution  of  our
power  of  perception  determines  us  to  hold
the  existence  of  what  we  distinctly  perceive
as  a  fir st. principle,  from  which  other  truths
may  be  deduced  ;  but  it  is  deduced  from
none.  What  has  been  said  of  the  irresis-
tible and  immediate  belief  of  the  existence
of  objects  distinctly  perceived,  I  mean  only
to  affirm  with  regard  to  persons  so  far  ad-
vanced in  understanding  as  to  distinguish
objects  of  mere  imagination  from  things
which  have  a  real  existence.  Every  man
knows  that  he  may  have  a  notion  of  Don
Quixote,  or  of  Garagantua,  Avithout  any
belief  that  such  persons  ever  existed  ;  and
that  of  Julius  Caesar  and  Oliver  Crom-
well, he  has  not  only  a  notion,  but  a  belief
that  they  did  really  exist.  [Ill]  But
whether  children,  from  the  time  that  they
begin  to  use  their  senses,  make  a  distinction
between  things  which  are  only  conceived  or
imagined,  and  things  which  really  exist,
may  be  doubted.  Until  we  are  able  to
make  this  distinction,  we  cannot  properly
be  said  to  believe  or  to  disbelieve  the
existence  of  anything.  The  belief  of  the
existence  of  anything  seems  to  suppose  a
notion  of  existence — a  notion  too  abstract,
perhaps,  to  enter  into  the  mind  of  an  in-
fant. I  speak  of  the  power  of  perception
in  those  that  are  adult  and  of  a  sound
mind,  who  believe  that  there  are  some
things  which  do  really  exist ;  and  that  there
are  many  things  conceived  by  themselves,
and  by  others,  which  have  no  existence.
That  such  persons  do  invariably  ascribe
existence  to  everything  which  they  distinctly
perceive,  without  seeking  reasons  or  argu-
ments for  doing  so,  is  perfectly  evident  from
the  whole  tenor  of  human  life.

The  account  I  have  given  of  our  percep-
tion of  external  objects,  is  intended  as  a
faithful  delineation  of  what  every  man,  come
to  years  of  understanding,  and  capable  of
giving  attention  to  what  passes  in  his  own
mind,  may  feel  in  himself. In  what  man-


ner the  notion  of  external  objects,  and  the
immediate  belief  of  their  existence,  is  pro-
duced by  means  of  our  senses,  I  am  not
able  to  shew,  and  I  do  not  pretend  to  shew.
If  the  power  of  perceiving  external  objects
in  certain  circumstances,  be  a  part  of  the
original  constitution  of  the  human  mind,
all  attempts  to  account  for  it  will  be  vain.
No  other  account  can  be  given  of  the  con-
stitution of  things,  but  the  will  of  Him  that
made  them.  As  we  can  give  no  reason  why
matter  is  extended  and  inert,  why  the  mind
thinks  and  is  conscious  of  its  thoughts,  but
the  will  of  Him  who  made  both  ;  so  I  sus-
pect we  can  give  no  other  reason  why,  hi
certain  circumstances,  we  perceive  external
objects,  and  in  others  do  not.*

The  Supreme  Being  intended  that  we
should  have  such  knowledge  of  the  material
objects  that  surround  us,  as  is  necessary  in
order  to  our  supplying  the  wants  of  nature,
and  avoiding  the  dangers  to  which  we  are
constantly  exposed ;  and  he  has  admirably
fitted  our  powers  of  perception  to  this
purpose.  [  1 12]  If  the  intelligence  we  have
of  external  objects  were  to  be  got  by
reasoning  only,  the  greatest  part  of  men
would  be  destitute  of  it ;  for  the  greatest
part  of  men  hardly  ever  learn  to  reason  ;
and  in  infancy  and  childhood  no  man  can
Reason :  Therefore,  as  this  intelligence  of
the  objects  that  surround  us,  and  from
which  we  may  receive  so  much  benefit  or
harm,  is  equally  necessary  to  children  and
to  men,  to  the  ignorant  and  to  the  learned,
God  in  his  wisdom  conveys  it  to  us  in  a
way  that  puts  all  upon  a  level.  The  inform-
ation of  the  senses  is  as  perfect,  and  gives
as  full  conviction  to  the  most  ignorant  as  to
the  most  learned.


CHAPTER  VI.

WHAT  IT  IS  TO  ACCOUNT  FOR  A  PHENOMENON
IN  NATURE.

An  object  placed  at  a  proper  distance,
and  in  a  good  light,  while  the  eyes  are  shut,
is  not  perceived  at  all ;  but  no  sooner  do
we  open  our  eyes  upon  it  than  we  have,  as
it  were  by  inspiration,  a  certain  knowledge
of  its  existence,  of  its  colour,  figure,  and
distance.  This  is  a  fact  which  every  one
knows.  The  vulgar  are  satisfied  with  know-.
ing  the  fact,  and  give  themselves  no  trouble
about  the  cause  of  it :  but  a  philosopher  is
impatient  to  know  how  this  event  is  pro-
duced, to  account  for  it,  or  assign  its  cause.

This  avidity  to  know  the  causes  of  things
is  the  parent  of  all  philosophy,  true  and
false.  Men  of  speculation  place  a  great
part  of  their  happiness  in  such  knowledge.

* See  above,  p.  128,  b,  note  *,  and  p.  130,  b,  note  * :
a> Vote  A.-H.


[Ill,  112]


CliAP.  VI. "J


ACCOUNT  OF  A  PHENOMENON.


261


Felix  qui  poiuit  rerttm  cognoscere  causas,
has  always  been  a  sentiment  of  human
nature.  But,  as  in  the  pursuit  of  other
kinds  of  happiness  men  often  mistake  the
road,  so  in  none  have  they  more  frequently
done  it  than  in  the  philosophical  pursuit  of
the  causes  of  things. [113]

It  is  a  dictate  of  common  sense,  that  the
causes  we  assign  of  appearances  ought  to
be  real,  and  not  fictions  of  human  imagina-
tion. It  is  likewise  self-evident,  that  such
causes  ought  to  be  adequate  to  the  effects
that  are  conceived  to  be  produced  by  them.

That  those  who  are  less  accustomed  to
inquiries  into  the  causes  of  natural  appear-
ances, may  the  better  understand  what  it
is  to  shew  the  cause  of  such  appearances,
or  to  account  for  them,  I  shall  borrow  a
plain  instance  of  a  phsenomenon  or  appear-
ance, of  which  a  full  and  satisfactory  ac-
count has  been  given.  The  phsenomenon
is  this  :  That  a  stone,  or  any  heavy  body,
falling  from  a  height,  continually  increases
its  velocity  as  it  descends  ;  so  that,  if  it
acquire  a  certain  velocity  in  one  second  of
time,  it  will  have  twice  that  Arelocity  at  the
end  of  two  seconds,  thrice  at  the  end  of
three  seconds,  and  so  on  in  proportion  to
the  time.  This  accelerated  velocity  in  a
stone  falling  must  have  been  observed  from
the  beginning  of  the  world  ;  but  the  first
person,  as  far  as  we  know,  who  accounted
for  it  in  a  proper  and  philosophical  manner,
was  the  famous  Galileo,  after  innumer-
able false  and  fictitious  accounts  had  been
given  of  it.

He  observed,  that  bodies  once  put  in
motion  continue  that  motion  with  the  same
velocity,  and  in  the  same  direction,  until
they  be  stopped  or  retarded,  or  have  the
direction  of  their  motion  altered,  by  some
force  impressed  upon  them.  This  property
of  bodies  is  called  their  inertia,  or  inac-
tivity; for  it  implies  no  more  than  that
bodies  cannot  of  themselves  change  their
state  from  rest  to  motion,  or  from  motion
to  rest.  He  observed  also,  that  gravity  acts
constantly  and  equally  upon  a  body,  and
therefore  will  give  equal  degrees  of  velocity
to  a  body  in  equal  times.  From  these
principles,  which  are  known  from  experi-
ence to  be  fixed  laws  of  nature,  Galileo
shewed  that  heavy  bodies  must  descend
with  a  velocity  uniformly  accelerated,  as
by  experience  they  are  found  to  do.  [114]
For  if  the  body  by  its  gravitation  ac-
quire a  certain  velocity  at  the  end  of  one
second,  it  would,  though  its  gravitation
should  cease  that  moment,  continue  to  go  on
with  that  velocity  ;  but  its  gravitation  con-
tinues, and  will  in  another  second  give  it  an
additional  velocity,  equal  to  that  which  it  gave
in  the  first ;  so  that  the  whole  velocity  at
the  end  of  two  seconds,  will  be  twice  as  great
as  at  the  end  of  one.  In  like  manner,  this
fl 13-1 15"1


velocity  being  continued  through  the  third
second,  and  having  the  same  addition  by
gravitation  as  in  any  of  the  preceding,  the
whole  velocity  at  the  end  of  the  third  second
will  be  thrice  as  great  as  at  the  end  of  the
first,  and  so  on  continually.

We  may  here  observe,  that  the  causes
assigned  of  this  phsenomenon  are  two :  First,
That  bodies  once  put  in  motion  retain  their
velocity  and  their  direction,  until  it  is  changed
by  some  force  impressed  upon  them.  Se-
condly, That  the  weight  or  gravitation  of  a
body  is  always  the  same.  These  are  laws
of  Nature,  confirmed  by  universal  experi-
ence, and  therefore  are  not  feigned  but  true
causes.  Then,  they  are  precisely  adequate
to  the  effect  ascribed  to  them ;  they  must
necessarily  produce  that  very  motion  in
descending  bodies  which  we  find  to  take
place ;  and  neither  more  nor  less.  The
account,  therefore,  given  of  this  phsenom-
non,  is  just  and  philosophical ;  no  other
will  ever  be  required  or  admitted  by  those
who  understand  this.

It  ought  likewise  to  be  observed,  that
the  causes  assigned  of  this  phsenomenon,
are  things  of  which  we  can  assign  no  cause.
Why  bodies  once  put  in  motion  continue  to
move — why  bodies  constantly  gravitate  to-
wards the  earth  with  the  same  force — no
man  has  been  able  to  shew  :  these  are  facts
confirmed  by  universal  experience,  and
they  must  no  doubt  have  a  cause  ;  but  their
cause  is  unknown,  and  we  call  them  laws
of  Nature,  because  we  know  no  cause  of
them,  but  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Being.

But  may  we  not  attempt  to  find  the  cause
of  gravitation,  and  of  other  phsenomena,
which  we  call  laws  of  Nature  ?  No  doubt
we  may.  [115]  We  know  notthe  limit  which
has  been  set  to  human  knowledge,  and  our
knowledge  of  the  works  of  God  can  never
be  carried  too  far.  But,  supposing  gravita-
tion to  be  accounted  for,  by  an  sethereal
elastic  medium,  for  instance,  this  can  only  be
done,  first,  by  proving  the  existence  and  the
elasticity  of  this  medium ;  and,  secondly,
by  shewing  that  this  medium  must  neces-
sarily produce  that  gravitation  which  bodies
are  known  to  have.  Until  this  be  done,
gravitation  is  not  accounted  for,  nor  is
its  cause  known ;  and  when  this  is  done,
the  elasticity  of  this  medium  will  be  consi-
dered as  a  law  of  nature  whose  cause  is
unknown.  The  chain  of  natural  causes  has,
not  unfitly,  been  compared  to  a  chain  hang-
ing down  from  heaven  :  a  link  that  is  dis-
covered supports  the  links  below  it,  but  it
must  itself  be  supported ;  and  that  which
supports  it  must  be  supported,  until  we
come  to  the  first  link,  which  is  supported
by  the  throne  of  the  Almighty.  Every  na-
tural cause  must  have  a  cause,  until  we
ascend  to  the  first  cause,  which  is  uncaused,
and  operates  not  by  necessity  but  by  wilt


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


By  what  has  been  said  in  this  chapter,
those  who  are  but  little  acquainted  with
philosophical  inquiries,  may  see  what  is
meant  by  accounting  for  a  phaenomenon,
or  shewing  its  cause,  which  ought  to  be  well
understood,  in  order  to  judge  of  the  theories
by  which  philosophers  have  attempted  to
account  for  our  perception  of  external  ob-
jects by  the  senses.


CHAPTER  VII.

SENTIMENTS*  OP  PHILOSOPHERS  ABOUT  THE
PERCEPTION  OP  EXTERNAL  OBJECTS  ;  AND,
FIRST,  OF  THE  THEORY  OF  FATHER  MALE-
BRANCHE.-j*

How  the  correspondence  is  carried  on
between  the  thinking  principle  within  us,  and
the  material  world  without  us,  has  always
been  found  a  very  difficult  problem  to  those
philosophers  who  think  themselves  obliged
to  account  for  every  phsenomenon  in  nature.
[116]  Many  philosophers,  ancient  and
modern,  have  employed  their  invention  to
discover  how  we  are  made  to  perceive  ex-
ternal objects  by  our  senses ;  and  there
appears  to  be  a  very  great  uniformity  in
their  sentiments  in  the  main,  notwithstand-
ing their  variations  in  particular  points.

Plato  illustrates  our  manner  of  perceiving
the  objects  of  sense,  in  this  manner.  He
supposes  a  dark  subterraneous  cave,  in
which  men  He  bound  in  such  a  manner
that  they  can  direct  their  eyes  only  to  one
part  of  the  cave :  far  behind,  there  is  a
light,  some  rays  of  which  come  over  a  wall
to  that  part  of  the  cave  which  is  before  the
eyes  of  our  prisoners.  A  number  of  per-
sons, variously  employed,  pass  between
them  and  the  light,  whose  shadows  are  seen
by  the  prisoners,  but  not  the  persons  them-
selves.

In  this  manner,  that  philosopher  con-
ceived that,  by  our  senses,  we  perceive  the
shadows  of  things  only,  and  not  things
themselves.  He  seems  to  have  borrowed
his  notions  on  this  subject,  from  the  Pytha-
goreans, and  they  very  probably  from  Py-
thagoras himself.  If  we  make  allowance
for  Plato's  allegorical  genius,  his  sentiments
on  this  subject,  correspond  very  well  with

*  Sentiment,  as  here  and  elsewhere  employed  by
Reid,  in  the  meaning  of  opinion,  {sententia,)  is  not
to  be  imitated.  There  are,  undoubtedly,  precedents
to  be  found  for  sucli  usage  in  English  writers  ;  and,  in
the  French  and  Italian  languages,  this  is  one  of  the
ordinary  signfications  of  the  word. —  H.

t  It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  by  what  principle  the
order  of  the  history  of  opinions  touching  Perception,
contained  in  the  nine  following  chapters,  is  deter,
mined.  It  is  not  chronological,  and  it  is  not  systematic.
Of  these  theories,  there  is  a  very  able  survey,  by  M.
Rover  Collard,  among  the  fragments  of  his  lectures,
in  the  third  volume  of  Jouffroy's  "  Oeuvres  rie  Reid."
That  distinguished  philosopher  has,  however,  placed
too  great  a  reliance  upon  the  accuracy  of  Reid.— H.


those  of  his  scholar,  Aristotle,  and  of  the
Peripatetics.  The  shadows  of  Plato  may
very  well  represent  the  species  and  phan-
tasms of  the  Peripatetic  school,  and  the
ideas  and  impressions  of  modern  philo-
sophers.*

*  This  interpretation  of  the  meaning  of  Plato's
comparison  of  the  cave  exhibits  a  curious  mistake,
in  which  Keid  is  followed  by  Mr  Stewart  and  many
others,  and  which,  it  is  remarkable,  has  never  yet
been  detected.  In  the  similitude  >n  question,  (which
will  be  found  in  the  seventh  book  of  the  Republic,)
Plato  is  supposed  to  intend  an  illustration  of  the
mode  in  which  the  shadows  or  vicarious  images  of
external  things  are  admitted  into  the  mind — to
typify,  in  short,  an  hypothesis  of  sensitive  perceptien.
On  this  supposition,  the  identity  of  the  Platonic,
Pythagorean,  and  Peripatetic  theories  of  this  pro-
cess is  inferred.  Nothing  can,  however,  be  more
groundless  than  the  supposition  ;  nothing  more  erro.
neous  than  the  inference.  By  his  cave,  images,  and
shadows,  Plato  meant  simply  to  illustrate  the  grand
principle  of  his  philosophy — that  the  Sensible  or  Ec-
typal  world,  (phaenomenal,  transitory,  -yiyvi/xivov,  ov
xoci  fiw  eV,)  stands  to  the  Noetic  or  Archetypal,  (sub-
stantial, permanent,  S»ro>s  ov,)  in  the  same  relation
of  comparative  unreality,  in  which  the  shadows  of  the
images  of  sensible  existences  themselves,  stand  to  the
things  of  which  they  are  the  dim  and  distant  adum-
brations. In  the  language  of  an  illustrious  poet —
"  An  nescis,  quaecunque  heic  sunt,  qua?  hac  nocte

teguntur,
Omnia  res  prorsus  veras  non  esse,  sed  umbras,
Aut  specula,  unde  ad  nos  aliena  elucet  imago  ?
Terra  quidem,  et  maria  alta,  atque  his  circumfluus

aer,
Etquas  consistunt  ex  iis,  haec  omnia  tenueis
Sunt  umbrae,  humanos  qua?  tanquam  somnia  qua-

dam
Pertingunt  animos,  fallaci  et  imagine  ludunt,
Nunquam  eadem,  fluxu  semper  variata  perenni.
Sol  autem,  Lunzeque  globus,  fulgentiaque  astra
Caetera,  sint  quamvis  meliori  praedita  vita,
Et  donata  sevo  immortali,  heec  ipsa  tamen  sunt
iEterni  specula,  in  quae  animus,  qui  est  inde  profec-

tus,
Inspiciens,  patria?  quodam  quasi  tactus  amore,
Ardescit. Verum  quoniam  heic  non  perstat  et  ultra
Nescio  quid  sequitur  secum,  tacitusque  requirit,
Nosse  licet  circum  hsec  ipsum  consistere  verum,
Non  finem  :  sed  enim  esse  aliud  quid,  cujus  imago
Splendet  in  iis,  quod  per  se  ipsum  est,  et  principium

esse
Omnibus  Eeternum,  ante  omnem  numerumque  diem-

que;
In  quo  alium  Solem  atque  aliara  splendescere  Lu-

nam
Adspicias,  aliosque  orbes,  alia  astra  manere,
Terramque,  fiuviosque  alios,  atque  aera,  et  ignem,
Et  nemora,  atque  aliis  evrare  animalia  silvis.'*

And  as  the  comparison  is  misunderstood,  so  no-
thing can  be  conceived  more  adverse  to  the  doctrine
of  Plato  than  the  theory  it  is  supposed  to  elucidate.
Plotinus,  indeed,  formally  refutes,  as  contrary  to  the
Platonic,  the  very  hypothesis  thus  attributed  to  his
master.  (Enn.  IV,  1.  vi.,  cc.  1,  3.)  The  doctrineof
the  Platonists  on  this  point  has  been  almost  wholly
neglected;  and  the  author  among  them  whose  work
contains  its  most  articulate  developement  has  been
so  completely  overlooked,  both  by  scholars  and  phi-
losophers, that  hi;  work  is  of  the  rarest,  while  even
his  name  is  mentioned  in  no  history  of  philosophy.
It  is  here  sufficient  to  state,  that  the  e'i2a?.a.,  the
kiyoi  -yvus-txo),  the  forms  representative  of  external
things,  and  corresponding  to  the  species  sensiles  ex.
pressce  of  the  schoolmen,  were  not  held  by  the  Plato-
nists to  be  derived  from  without.  Prior  to  the  act  of
perception,  they  have  a  latent  but  real  existence  in
the  soul;  and,  by  the  impassive  energy  of  the  mind
itself,  are  elicited  into  consciousness,  on  occasion  of  the
impression  (xivri(ris,nti,8o;,".tA$a.irts)  made  on  the  exter-
nal organ,  and  of  the  vital, form  (tartxov  tTSs?),  in  con-
sequence thereof,  sublimated  in  the  animal  life.  The
verses  of  Boethius,  which  have  been  so  frequently
mi  understood,  contain  an  accurate  statement  of  the
Platonic  theory  of  perception. After  refuting  the

M161


:i.]


SENTIMENTS  ABOUT  PERCEPTION.


263


Two  thousand  years  after  Plato,  Mr
Locke,  who  studied  the  operations  of  the
human  mind  so  much,  and  with  so  great
success,  represents  our  manner  of  perceiving
external  objects,  by  a  similitude  very  much
resembling  that  of  the  cave.  "  Methinks,"
says  he,  "the  understanding  is  not  much
unlike  a  closet  wholly  shut  from  light,  with
only  some  little  opening  left,  to  let  in  exter-
nal visible  resemblances  or  ideas  of  things
without.  Would  the  pictures  coming  into
such  a  dark  room  but  stay  there,  and  lie  so
orderly  as  to  be  found  upon  occasion,  it
would  very  much  resemble  the  under-
standing of  a  man,  in  reference  to  all  objects
of  sight,  and  the  ideas  of  them. " [117]

Plato's  subterranean  cave,  and  Mr  Locke's
dark  closet,  may  be  applied  with  ease  to  all
the  systems  of  perception  that  have  been
invented :  for  they  all  suppose  that  we
perceive  not  external  objects  immediately,
and  that  the  immediate  objects  of  percep-
tion are  only  certain  shadows  of  the  ex-
ternal objects.  Those  shadows  or  images,
which  we  immediately  perceive,  were  by
the  ancients  called  species,  forms,  phan-
tasms. Since  the  time  of  Des  Cartes,  they
have  commonly  been  called  ideas,  and  by
Mr  Hume,  impressions.  But  all  philoso-
phers, from  Plato  to  Mr  Hume,  agree  in
this,  That  we  do  not  perceive  external  ob-
jects immediately,  and  that  the  immediate
object  of  perception  must  be  some  image
present  to  the  mind.* So  far  there  ap-


Stoical  doctrine  of  the  passivity  of  mind  in  this  pro-
cess,  he  proceeds  : —

"  Mens  est  efficiens  magis

Longe  causa  potentior,

Quam  qua?  materia?  modo

lmpressas  patitur  notas.

Prcecedit  tamen  excitans

Ac  vires  animi  movens

Vivo  in  corpore  passio,

Cum  vel  lux  oculos  ferit,

Vel  vox  auribus  instrepit:

Turn  mentis  vigor  exoitus

Quas  intus  species  tenet,

Ad  motus  similes  vocans,

Notis  applicat  exteris,

Introrsumque  reconditis

fi'ormis  miscet  imagines."
I  cannot  now  do  more  than  indicate  the  contrast
of  this  doctrine  to  the  Peripatetic  (I  do  not  say  Aris-
totelian) theory,  and  its  approximation  to  the  Carte,
iian  and  Leibnitzian  hypoiheses;  which,  however,
both  attempt  to  explain,  what  the  Platonic  did  not—
how  the  mind,  ex  hypothesi,  above  all  physical  in.
licence,  is  determined,  on  the  presence  of  the  un-
known reality  within  the  sphere  of  sense,  to  call  into
consciousness  the  representation  through  which  that
reality  is  made  known  to  us.  I  may  add,  that  not
merely  the  Platonists,  but  some  of  the  older  Peripa-
tetics held  that  the  soul  virtually  contained  within  it-
self representative  forms,  which  were  only  excited
by  the  external  reality;  as  Theophrastus  and  The-
mi.itius,  to  say  nothing  of  the  Hatonizing  Porphyry,
Simplicius  and  Ammonius  Hermia?  ;  and  the  same
opinion,  adopted  probably  from  the  latter,  by  his
pupil,  the  Arabian  Adelandus,  subsequently  he.
came  even  the  common  doctrine  of  the  Mooiish
Aristotelians.

I  shall  afterwards  have  occasion  to  notice  that
Bacon  has  also  wrested  Plato's  similitude  of  the  cave
from  its  genuine  signification  — H.

*  This  is  not  correct.  There  were  philosophers
[117,  118]


pears  an  unanimity,  rarely  to  be  found  among
philosophers  on  such  abstruse  points.*

If  it  should  be  asked,  Whether,  accord-
ing to  the  opinion  of  philosophers,  we  per-
ceive the  images  or  ideas  only,  and  infer  the
existence  and  qualities  of  the  external  ob-
ject from  what  we  perceive  in  the  image ;
or,  whether  we  really  perceive  the  external
object  as  well  as  its  image  ? — the  answer
to  this  question  is  not  quite  obvious,  -f

On  the  one  hand,  philosophers,  if  we  ex-
cept Berkeley  and  Hume,  believe  the  ex-
istence of  external  objects  of  sense,  and  call
them  objects  of  perception,  though  not  im-
mediate objects.  But  what  they  mean  by
a  mediate  object  of  perception  I  do  not  find
clearly  explained  :  whether  they  suit  their
language  to  popular  opinion,  and  mean  that
we  perceive  external  objects  in  that  figura-
tive sense  in  which  we  say  that  we  perceive
an  absent  friend  when  we  look  on  his  pic-
ture ;  or  whether  they  mean  that,  really,
and  without  a  figure,  we  perceive  both  the
external  object  and  its  idea  in  the  mind.
If  the  last  be  their  meaning,  it  would  follow
that,  in  every  instance  of  perception,  there
is  a  double  object  perceived:  [118]  that
I  perceive,  for  instance,  one  sun  in  the
heavens,  and  another  in  my  own  mind.$
But  I  do  not  find  that  they  affirm  this  ;
and,  as  it  contradicts  the  experience  of  all
mankind,  I  will  not  impute  it  to  them.

It  seems,  therefore,  that  their  opinion  is,
That  we  do  not  really  perceive  the  external
object,  but  the  internal  only ;  and  that,  when
they  speak  of  perceiving  external  objects,
they  mean  it  only  in  a  popular  or  in  a  figur-
ative sense,  as  above  explained.  Several
reasons  lead  me  to  think  this  to  be  the
opinion  of  philosophers,  beside  what  is
mentioned  above.  First,  If  we  do  really
perceive  the  external  object  itself,  there
seems  to  be  no  necessity,  no  use,  for  an
image  of  it.  Secondly,  Since  the  time  of
Des  Cartes,  philosophers  have  very  gene-
rally thought  that  the  existence  of  external
objects  of  sense  requires  proof,  andean  only
be  proved  from  the  existence  of  their  ideas.
Thirdly,  The  way  in  which  philosophers
speak  of  ideas,  seems  to  imply  that  they
are  the  only  objects  of  perception.

who  held  a  purer  and  preciser  doctrine  of  immediate
perception  than  Reid  himself  contemplated. — H.

*  Reid  him>elf,  like  the  philos'-phers  in  general,
really  holds,  that  we  do  not  perceive  external  things
immediately,  if  he  does  not  allow  us  a  consciousness
of  the  non-ego.  It  matters  n<t  whether  the  external
reality  be  represented  in  a  tertium  quid,  or  in  a  mo-
dification of  the  mind  itself;  in  either  case,  it  is  not
known  in  itself,  but  in  something  numerically  dif-
ferent.—H.

t  Notl  ing  can  be  clearer  than  would  be  this  answer.
— In  perception,  the  external  reality,  (the  mediate
object,)  is  only  known  to  us  in  and  through  the  im-
mediate object,  i.  c,  the  representation  of  which  we
are  conscious,  ss  exi  ting,  and  beyond  the  sphere  of
consciousness,  the  external  reality  i-  unknown.  -H.

X  "  Et  solem  geminum  et  dupHces  se  ostendere
Thebas!"—  H.


264


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


Having  endeavoured  to  explain  what  is
common  to  philosophers  in  accounting  for
our  perception  of  external  objects,  we  shall
give  some  detail  of  their  differences.

The  ideas  by  which  we  perceive  external
objects,  are  said  by  some  to  be  the  ideas  of
the  Deity ;  but  it  has  been  more  generally
thought,  that  every  man's  ideas  are  proper
to  himself,  and  are  either  in  his  mind,  or
in  his  sensorium,  where  the  mind  is  imme-
diately present.  The  first  is  the  theory  of
Malebranche  ;  the  second  we  shall  call  the
common  theory.

With  regard  to  that  of  Malebranche,  it
seems  to  have  some  affinity  with  the  Pla-
tonic notion  of  ideas,*  but  is  not  the  same.
Plato  believed  that  there  are  three  eternal
first  principles,  from  which  all  things  have
their  origin — matter,  ideas,  and  an  efficient
cause.  Matter  is  that  of  which  all  things
are  made,  which,  by  all  the  ancient  philo-
sophers, was  conceived  to  be  eternal.  [119]
Ideas  are  forms  without  matter  of  every
kind  of  things  which  can  exist ;  which  forms
were  also  conceived  by  Plato  to  be  eternal
and  immutable,  and  to  be  the  models  or
patterns  by  which  the  efficient  cause — that
is,  the  Deity — formed  every  part  of  this
universe.  These  ideas  were  conceived  to
be  the  sole  objects  of  science,  and  indeed
of  all  true  knowledge.  While  we  are  im-
prisoned in  the  body,  we  are  prone  to  give
attention  to  the  objects  of  sense  only  ;  but
these  being  individual  things,  and  in  a  con-
stant fluctuation,  being  indeed  shadows
rather  than  realities,  cannot  be  the  object
of  real  knowledge.  All  science  is  employed
not  about  individual  things,  but  about
tilings  universal  and  abstract  from  matter.
Truth  is  eternal  and  immutable,  and  there-
fore must  have  for  its  object  eternal  and
immutable  ideas ;  these  we  are  capable  of
contemplating  in  some  degree  even  in  our
present  state,  but  not  without  a  certain
purification  of  mind,  and  abstraction  from
the  objects  of  sense.  Such,  as  far  as  I  am
able  to  comprehend,  were  the  sublime
notions  of  Plato,  and  probably  of  Pytha-
goras.

The  philosophers  of  the  Alexandrian
school,  commonly  called  the  latter  Plato-
nists,  seem  to  have  adopted  the  same  sys-
tem ;  but  with  this  difference,  that  they
made  the  eternal  ideas  not  to  be  a  principle
distinct  from  the  Deity,  but  to  be  in  the
divine  intellect,  as  the  objects  of  those  con-
ceptions which  the  divine  mind  must,  from
all  eternity,  have  had,  not  only  of  every-


*  The  Platonic  theory  of  Ideas  has  nothing  to  do
with  a  doctrine  of  sensitive  perception  ;  and  its  intro-
duction into  the  question  is  only  pregnant  with  con-
fusion  ;  while,  in  regard  to  sensitive  perceptions  the
peculiar  hypothesis  of  Malebranche,  is  in  fact  not  only
not  similar  to,  but  much  farther  removed  from,  the
Platonic  than  the  common  Cartesian  theory,  and
the  Leibnitzian  — -H.


thing  which  he  has  made,  but  of  every  pos-
sible existence,  and  of  all  the  relations  of
things.*  By  a  proper  purification  and
abstraction  from  the  objects  of  sense,  we
may  be  in  some  measure  united  to  the
Deity,  and,  in  the  eternal  light,  be  enabled
to  discern  the  most  sublime  intellectual
truths.

These  Platonic  notions,  grafted  upon
Christianity,  probably  gave  rise  to  the
sect  called  Mystics,  which,  though  in  its
spirit  and  principles  extremely  opposite  to
the  Peripatetic,  yet  was  never  extinguished,
but  subsists  to  this  day. [120]

Many  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Christian
church  have  a  tincture  of  the  tenets  of  the
Alexandrian  school ;  among  others,  St
Augustine.  But  it  does  not  appear,  as  far
as  I  know,  that  either  Plato,  or  the  latter
Platonists,  or  St  Augustine,  or  the  Mystics,
thought  that  we  perceive  the  objects  of
sense  in  the  divine  ideas.  They  had  too
mean  a  notion  of  our  perception  of  sensible
objects  to  ascribe  to  it  so  high  an  origin.
This  theory,  therefore,  of  our  perceiving
the  objects  of  sense  in  the  ideas  of  the
Deity,  I  take  to  be  the  invention  of  Father
Malebranche  himself.  He,  indeed,  brings
many  passages  of  St  Augustine  to  counte-
nance it,  and  seems  very  desirous  to  have
that  Father  of  his  party.  But  in  those
passages,  though  the  Father  speaks  in  a
very  high  strain  of  God's  being  the  light  of
our  minds,  of  our  being  illuminated  imme-
diately by  the  eternal  light,  and  uses  other
similar  expressions ;  yet  he  seems  to  apply
those  expressions  only  to  our  illumination
in  moral  and  divine  things,  and  not  to  the
perception  of  objects  by  the  senses.  Mr
Bayle  imagines  that  some  traces  of  this
opinion  of  Malebranche  are  to  be  found  in
Amelius  the  Platonist,  and  even  in  Demo-
critus;  but  his  authorities  seem  to  be
strained.-J-

Malebranche,  with  a  very  penetrating
genius,  entered  into  a  more  minute  examin-
ation of  the  powers  of  the  human  mind,
than  any  one  before  him.  He  had  the  advan-
tage of  the  discoveries  made  by  Des  Cartes,
whom  he  followed  without  slavish  attach-
ment.

He  lays  it  down  as  a  principle  admitted
by  all  philosophers,  and  which  could  not
be  called  in  question,  that  we  do  not  per-
ceive external  objects  immediately,  but  by
means  of  images  or  ideas  of  them  present
to  the  mind. "  I  suppose,"  says  he,  "  that


*  And  this,  though  Aristotle  asserts  the  contrary,
was  perhaps  also  the  doctrine  of  Plato.— H.

f  The  theory  of  Malebranche  has  been  vainly
sought  for  in  the  Bible,  the  Platonists,  and  the  Fathers.
It  is,  in  fact,  more  clearly  enounced  in  Homer  than
in  any  of  these  graver  sources.

1'oTcs  ykj  moos  h?iv  i-Tiz9oviojv  otyB^raiv,^
OTov  i<r'  hyL&Z  kyy^i  Ta.TV,e  octdfiuv  te  6i£v  Tc.
But  for  anticipations,  see  Note  P — H.


[119. 120]


chap,  vii.] SENTIMENTS  ABOUT  EXTERNAL  OBJECTS.


265


every  one  will  grant  that  we  perceive  not
the  objects  that  are  without  us  immediately,
and  of  themselves.*  We  see  the  sun,  the
stars,  and  an  infinity  of  objects  without  us  ;
and  it  is  not  at  all  likely  that  the  soul  sal-
lies out  of  the  body,  and,  as  it  were,  takes  a
walk  through  the  heavens,  to  contemplate
all  those  objects.  [121]  She  sees  them  not,
therefore,  by  themselves ;  and  the  imme-
diate object  of  the  mind,  when  it  sees  the
sun,  for  example,  is  not  the  sun,  but  some-
thing which  is  intimately  united  to  the
soul ;  and  it  is  that  which  I  call  an  idea.
So  that  by  the  word  idea,  I  understand
nothing  else  here  but  that  which  is  the  im-
mediate object,  or  nearest  xo  the  mind,
when  we  perceive-]-  any  object.^  It  ought
to  be  carefully  observed,  that,  in  order  to
the  mind's  perceiving  any  object,  it  is  abso-
lutely necessary  that  the  idea  of  that  ob-
ject be  actually  present  to  it. Of  this  it

is  not  possible  to  doubt

The  things  which  the  soul  perceives  are  of
two  kinds.  They  are  either  in  the  soul,  or
they  are  without  the  soul.  Those  that  are
in  the  soul  are  its  own  thoughts — that  is  to
say,  all  its  different  modifications.  [For
by  these  words — thought,  manner  of  think-
ing, or  modification  of  the  soul,  I  under-
stand in  general  whatever  cannot  be  in  the
niind  without  the  mind  perceiving  it,  as  its
proper  sensations,  its  imaginations,  its  pure
intellections,  or  simply  its  conceptions,  its
passions  even,  and  its  natural  inclina-
tions. ]§  The  soul  has  no  need  of  ideas  for
perceiving  these  things.  ||  But  with  regard
to  things  without  the  soul,  we  cannot  per-
ceive them  but  by  means  of  ideas.  "5f

Having  laid  this  foundation,  as  a  prin-
ciple common  to  all  philosophers,  and  which
admits  of  no  doubt,  he  proceeds  to  enume-
rate all  the  possible  ways  by  which  the  ideas
of  sensible  objects  may  be  presented  to  the
mind  :  Either,  first,  they  come  from  the
bodies  which  we  perceive ;  *  *  or,  secondly,  the
soul  has  the  power  of  producing  them  in  it-
self;-]--]- or,  thirdly,  they  are  produced  by  the

•  Rather  in  or  by  themselves  {par  eux  mimes.)
— H.

+  That  is,  in  the  language  of  philosophers  before
Reid,  "  where  we  have  the  apprehensive  cognition
or  consciousness  of  any  object."— H.

%  In  this  definition,  all  philosophers  concur.  Des
Cartes,  Locke,  Sec  ,  give  it  in  almost  the  same  terms.

—  H.

§  I  have  inserted  this  sentence,  omitted  by  Reid,
from  the  original,  in  order  to  shew  in  how  exten-
sive a  meaning  the  term  thought  was  used  in  the
Cartesian  school. See  Cartesii  Princ-,  P.  I.,  $  9. — H.

||  Hence  the  distinction  precisely  taken  by  Male-
branche  of  Idea  (idee)  and  Feeling,  (sentiment,)  cor.
responding  in  principle  to  our  Perception  of  the
primary,  and  our  Sensation  of  the  secondary  qualities.

—  H.

IT  Be  la  Recherche  dela  Verili.  Liv.  III.,  Partie
ii.,ch.  1.— H.

*• The  common  Peripatetic  doctrine,  &c  — H.

-ff  Malebranche  refers,  I  presume,  to  the  opinions
of  certain  Cartesians. See  Gassendi  0{era,  iii.  p  321.

[121,  122]


Deity,  either  in  our  creation,  or  occasionally,
as  there  is  use  for  them  ;*  or,  fourthly,  the
soul  has  in  itself  virtually  and  eminently,  as
the  schools  speak,  all  the  perfections  which
it  perceives  in  bodies  ;-f-  or,  fifthly,  the  soul
is  united  wTith  a  Being  possessed  of  all  per-
fection, who  has  in  himself  the  ideas  of  all
created  things.

This  he  takes  to  be  a  complete  enumera-
tions of  all  the  possible  ways  in  which  the
ideas  of  external  objects  may  be  presented
to  our  minds.  He  employs  a  whole  chapter
upon  each ;  refuting  the  four  first,  and  con-
firming the  last  by  various  arguments.
The  Deity,  being  always  present  to  our
minds  in  a  more  intimate  manner  than  any
other  being,  may,  upon  occasion  of  the  im-
pressions made  on  our  bodies,  discover  to  us,
as  far  as  he  thinks  proper,  and  according
to  fixed  laws,  his  own  ideas  of  the  object ;
and  thus  we  see  all  things  in  God,  or  in  the
divine  ideas.lj: [122]

However  visionary  this  system  may  ap-
pear on  a  superficial  view,  yet,  when  we
consider  that  he  agreed  with  the  whole  tribe
of  philosophers  in  conceiving  ideas  to  be  the
immediate  objects  of  perception,  and  that
he  found  insuperable  difficulties,  and  even
absurdities,  in  every  other  hypothesis  con-
cerning them,  it  will  not  appear  so  wonder-
ful that  a  man  of  very  great  genius  should
fall  into  this  ;  and,  probably,  it  pleased
so  devout  a  man  the  more,  that  it  sets,  in
the  most  striking  light,  our  dependence  upon
God,  and  his  continual  presence  with  us.

He  distinguished,  more  accurately  than
any  philosopher  had  done  before,  the  objects
which  we  perceive  from  the  sensations  in
our  own  minds,  which,  by  the  laws  of
Nature,  always  accompany  the  perception
of  the  object.  As  in  many  things,  so  par-
ticularly in  this,  he  has  great  merit.  For
this,  I  apprehend,  is  a  key  that  opens  the
way  to  a  right  understanding,  both  of  our
external  senses  and  of  other  powers  of  the
mind.  The  vulgar  confound  sensation  with
other  powers  of  the  mind,  and  with  their
objects,  because  the  purposes  of  life  do  not
make  a  distinction  necessary.  The  con-
founding of  these  in  common  language,  has
led  philosophers,  in  one  period,  to  make
those  things  external  which  really  are  sens-
ations in  our  own  minds  ;  and,  in  another
period,  running,  as  is  usual,  into  the  con-

*  Opiniots  analogous  to  the  second  or  third,  were
held  by  the  Platonists,  by  some  of  the  Greek,  and
by  many  of  the  Arabian  Aristotelians.  See  i  bove,  p.
262,  note *.— H.

f  Something  similar  to  this  is  hazarded  by  Des
Cartes  in  his  Third  "  Meditation,"  which  it  is  likely
that  Malebranche  had  in  his  eye. — H.

%  It  should  have  been  noticed  that  the  Malebranch-
ian  philosophy  is  fundamentally  Cartesian,  and  that,
after  De  la  Forge  and  Geulinx,  the  doctrine  of
Divine  Assistance,  implicitly  maintained  by  Des
Cartes,  was  most  ably  developed  by  Malebranche,  to
whom  it  owes,  ndeed,  a  principal  share  of  its  ceU
brity.—  H.


266


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II


trary  extreme,  to  make  everything  almost
to  be  a  sensation  or  feeling  in  our  minds.

It  is  obvious  that  the  system  of  Male-
branche  leaves  no  evidence  of  the  existence
of  a  material  world,  from  what  we  perceive
by  our  senses ;  for  the  divine  ideas,  which
are  the  objects  immediately  perceived,  were
the  same  before  the  world  was  created.
Malebranche  was  too  acute  not  to  discern
this  consequence  of  his  system,  and  too  can-
did not  to  acknowledge  it.  [123]  He  fairly
owns  it,  and  endeavours  to  make  advantage
of  it,  resting  the  complete  evidence  we  have
of  the  existence  of  matter  upon  the  author-
ity of  revelation.  He  shews  that  the  argu-
ments brought  by  Des  Cartes  to  prove  the
existence  of  a  material  world,  though  as
good  as  any  that  reason  could  furnish,  are
not  perfectly  conclusive ;  and,  though  he
acknowledges  with  Des  Cartes  that  we  feel
a  strong  propensity  to  believe  the  existence
of  a  material  world,  yet  he  thinks  this  is
not  sufficient ;  and  that  to  yield  to  such
propensities  without  evidence,  is  to  expose
ourselves  to  perpetual  delusion.  He  thinks,
therefore,  that  the  only  convincing  evidence
we  have  of  the  existence  of  a  material  world
is,  that  we  are  assured  by  revelation  that
God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,
and  that  the  Word  was  made  flesh.  He  is
sensible  of  the  ridicule  to  which  so  strange
an  opinion  may  expose  him  among  those
who  are  guided  by  prejudice  ;  but,  for  the
sake  of  truth,  he  is  willing  to  bear  it.  But
no  author,  not  even  Bishop  Berkeley,  hath
shewn  more  clearly,  that,  either  upon  his
own  system,  or  upon  the  common  principles
of  philosophers  with  regard  to  ideas,  we
have  no  evidence  left,  either  from  reason
or  from  our  senses,  of  the  existence  of  a
material  world.  It  is  no  more  than  justice
to  Father  Malebranche,  to  acknowledge  that
Bishop  Berkeley's  arguments  are  to  be
found  in  him  in  their  whole  force.

Mr  Norris,  an  English  divine,  espoused
the  system  of  Malebranche,  in  his  "  Essay
towards  the  Theory  of  the  Ideal  or  Intel-
lectual World,"  published  in  two  volumes
8°,  anno  1701.  This  author  has  made  a
feeble  effort  to  supply  a  defect  which  is  to
be  found  not  in  Malebranche  only,  but  in
almost  all  the  authors  who  have  treated  of
ideas — I  mean,  to  prove  their  existence.*
He  has  employed  a  whole  chapter  to  prove
that  material  things  cannot  be  an  immediate
object  of  perception.  His  arguments  are
these  :  Is/,  They  are  without  the  mind,  and,
therefore  there  can  be  no  union  between  the
object  and  the  perception.  2dly,  They  are
disproportioned  to  the  mind,  and  removed

-  This  is  incorrect.  In  almost  every  system  of
the  Aristoteiico-scholastic  philosophy,  the  attempt  is
made  to  prove  the  existence  of  Species  ;  nor  is  Reid's
asseition  true  even  of  ideas  in  the  Cartesian  philoso-
phy. In  fact,  Morris's  arguments  are  all  old  and
commonplace. — H.


from  it  by  the  whole  diameter  of  being.
3dlyy  Because,  if  material  objects  were
immediate  objects  of  perception,  there  could
be  no  physical  science;  things  necessary
and  immutable  being  the  only  objects  of
science.  [124]  Athly,  If  material  things  were
perceived  by  themselves,  they  would  be  a
true  light  to  our  minds,  as  being  the  intel-
ligible form  of  our  understandings,  and  con-
sequently perfective  of  them,  and,  indeed,
superior  to  them.

Malebranche's  system  was  adopted  by
many  devout  people  in  France  of  both
sexes ;  but  it  seems  to  have  had  no  great
currency  in  other  countries.  Mr  Locke
wrote  a  small  tract  against  it,  which  is
found  among  his  posthumous  works  :*  but,
whether  it  was  written  in  haste,  or  after
the  vigour  of  his  understanding  was  im-
paired by  age,  there  is  less  of  strength  and
solidity  in  it  than  in  most  of  his  writings.
The  most  formidable  antagonist  Male-
branche met  with  was  in  his  own  country —
Antony  Arnauld,  doctor  of  the  Sorbonne,
and  one  of  the  acutest  writers  the  Jansenists
have  to  boast  of,  though  that  sect  has  pro-
duced many.  Malebranche  was  a  Jesuit,
and  the  antipathy  between  the  Jesuits  and
Jansenists  left  him  no  room  to  expect
quarter  from  his  learned  antagonist.-]-  Those
who  choose  to  see  this  system  attacked  on
the  one  hand,  and  defended  on  the  other,
with  subtilty  of  argument  and  elegance  of
expression.^:  and  on  the  part  of  Arnauld
with  much  wit  and  humour,  may  find  satis-
faction by  reading  Malebranche's  "  Enquiry
after  Truth ;''  Arnauld's  book  "  Of  True  and
False  Ideas ;"  Malebranche's  "  Defence ;"
and  some  subsequent  replies  and  defences.
In  controversies  of  this  kind,  the  assailant
commonly  has  the  advantage,  if  they  are
not  unequally  matched  ;  for  it  is  easier  to
overturn  all  the  theories  of  philosophers
upon  this  subject,  than  to  defend  any  one
of  them.  Mr  Bayle  makes  a  very  just  re-
mark upon  this  controversy — that  the  argu-
ments of  Mr  Arnauld  against  the  system  of
Malebranche,  were  often  unanswerable,  but


*  In  answer  to  Locke's  "  Examination  of  P.  Male-
branche's Opinion,"  Leibnitz  wrote  "  Remarks,"
which  are  to  be  found  among  his  posthumous  works,
published  by  Raspe. —  H.

t  Malebranche  was  not  a  Jesuit,  but  a  Priest  of  the
Oratory;  and  so  little  was  he  either  a  favourer  or
favourite  of  the  Jesuits,  that,  by  the  Pere  de  Valois,
he  was  accused  of  heresy,  by  the  Pere  Hardouin,  of
Atheism.  The  endeavours  of  the  Jesuits  in  France  to
prohibit  the  introduction  of  every  form  of  the  Carte-
sian doctrine  into  the  public  seminaries  of  education,
are  well  known.  Malebranche  and  Arnauld  were
therefore  not  opposed  as  Jesuit  and  Jansenist,  and  it
should  likewise  be  remembered  that  they  were  both
Cartesians. — H.

X  Independently  of  his  principal  hypothesis  alto-
gether, t  lie  works  of  Malebranche  deserve  the  most
attentive  study,  both  on  account  of  the  nuny  ad-
mirable thoughts  and  observations  with  which  they
abound,  and  because  they  are  among  the  few  con-
summate models  of  philos  phical  eloquence  — H.


fl23,  124]


chap,  viii.] OF  THE  THEORY  OF  PERCEPTION,  &c.

they  were  capable  of  being  retorted  against
his  own  system  ;  and  his  ingenious  antag-
onist knew  well  how  to  use  this  defence.  L 1 25  ]


267


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF  THE  COMMON  THEORY  OF  PERCEPTION,
AND  OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  THE  PERIPA-
TETICS, AND  OF  DES  CARTES.

This  theory,  in  general,  is,  that  we  per-
ceive external  objects  only  by  certain  images
which  are  in  our  minds,  or  in  the  sensorium
to  which  the  rnind  is  immediately  present.
Philosophers  in  different  ages  have  differed
both  in  the  names  they  have  given  to  those
images,  and  in  their  notions  concerning
them.  It  would  be  a  laborious  task  to
enumerate  all  their  variations,  and  per-
haps would  not  requite  the  labour.  I  shall
only  give  a  sketch  of  the  principal  dif-
ferences with  regard  to  their  names  and
their  nature.

By  Aristotle  and  the  Peripatetics,  the
images  presented  to  our  senses  were  called
sensible  species  or  forms  ;  those  presented
to  the  memory  or  imagination  were  called
phantasms  ,•  and  those  presented  to  the
intellect  were  called  intelligible  species ;
and  they  thought  that  there  can  be  no
perception,  no  imagination,  no  intellection,
without  species  or  phantasms,*  What  the
ancient  philosophers  called  species,  sensible
and  intelligible,  and  phantasms,  in  later
times,  and  especially  since  the  time  of  Des
Cartes,  came  to  be  called  by  the  common
name  of  ideas.f  The  Cartesians  divided
our  ideas  into  three  classes — those  of  sensa-
tion, of  imagination,  and  of  pure  intellection.
Of  the  objects  of  sensation  and  imagination,
they  thought  the  images  are  in  the  brain ;  %
but  of  objects  that  are  incorporeal  the
images  are  in  the  understanding  or  pure
intellect.

Mr  Locke,  taking  the  word  idea  in  the
same  sense  as  Des  Cartes  had  done  before
him,  to  signify  whatever  is  meant  by  phan-
tasm, notion,  or  species,  divides  ideas  into
those  of  sensation,  and  those  of  reflection  ;
meaning  by  the  first,  the  ideas  of  all  corpo-
real objects,  whether  perceived,  remem-
bered, or  imagined;  by  the  second,  the
ideas  of  the  powers  arid  operations  of  our
minds.  [126]  What  Mr  Locke  calls  ideas,
Mr  Hume  divides  into  two  distinct  kinds,
impressions  and  ideas.  The  difference  be-
twixt these,  he  says,  consists  in  the  degrees
of  force  and  liveliness  with  which  they  strike
upon  the  mind.  Under  impressions  he  com-
prehends all  our  sensations,  passions,  and

* See  Note  M.— H.

t  Not  merely  especially,  but  rnly  since  the  time  of
Des  Cartes, isee  Note  G.-  H.

X  Incorrect. Sec  Note  N. — H.
[125,  126]


emotions,  as  they  make  their  first  appear-
ance in  the  soul.  By  ideas,  he  means  the
faint  images  of  these  in  thinking  and  rea-
soning.

Dr  Hartley  gives  the  same  meaning  to
ideas  as  Mr  Hume  does,  and  what  Mr
Hume  calls  impressions  he  calls  sensations  ;
conceiving  our  sensations  to  be  occasioned
by  vibrations  of  the  infinitesimal  particles
of  the  brain,  and  ideas  by  miniature  vibra-
tions or  vibratiuncles.  Such  differences
we  find  among  philosophers,  with  regard  to
the  name  of  those  internal  images  of  objects
of  sense  which  they  hold  to  be  the  imme-
diate objects  of  perception.*

We  shall  next  give  a  short  detail  of  the
sentiments  of  the  Peripatetics  and  Carte-
sians, of  Locke,  Berkeley,  and  Hume,  con-
cerning them.

Aristotle  seems  to  have  thought  that  the
soul  consists  of  two  parts,  or  rather  that
we  have  two  souls — the  animal  and  the  ra-
tional ;  or,  as  he  calls  them,  the  soul  and
the  intellect.-]-  To  the  first,  belong  the
senses,  memory,  and  imagination  ;  to  the
last,  judgment,  opinion,  belief,  and  reason-
ing. The  first  we  have  in  common  with
brute  animals  ;  the  last  is  peculiar  to  man.
The  animal  soul  he  held  to  be  a  certain
form  of  the  body,  which  is  inseparable  from
it,  and  perishes  at  death-  To  this  soul  the
senses  belong  ;  and  he  defines  a  sense  to  be
that  which  is  capable  of  receiving  the  sensi-
ble forms  or  species  of  objects,  without  any
of  the  matter  of  them  ;  as  wax  receives  the
form  of  the  seal  without  any  of  the  matter
of  it. The  forms  of  sound,  of  colour,  of


*  Reid,  1  may  observe  in  general,  does  not  dis-
tinguishes it  especially  behoved  him  to  do,  between
what  were  held  by  philosophers  to  be  the  proximate
causes  of  our  mental  representations,  and  these
representations  themselves  as'the  objects  of  cognition
— i.  e ,  between  what  are  known  in  the  schools  as
the  species  impresses,  and  the  species  expressa*.  The
former,  to  which  the  name  of  species,  image,  idea,
was  often  given,  in  common  with  the  latter,  was  held
on  all  hands  to  be  unknown  to  consciousness,  and
generally  supposed  to  be  merely  certain  occu  It  motions
in  the  organism.  The  latter,  the  result  determined
by  the  former,  is  the  mental  representation,  and
the  immediate  or  proper  object  in  perception.  Great
confusion,  to  those  who  do  not  bear  this  distinction  in
mind,  is,  however,  the  consequence  of  the  verbal
ambiguity;  and  Reid's  misrepresentations  of  the
doctrine  of  the  philosophers  ig,  in  a  great  measure,  to
be  traced  to  this  source. — H.

+  This  not  correct.  Instead  of  two,  the  animal  and
rational,  Aristotle  gave  to  the  soul  three  generic
functions,  the  vegetable,  the  animal  or  sensual,  and
the  rational;  but  whether  he  supposes  these  to
constitute  three  concentric  potences,  three  separate
parts,  or  thr.ee  distinct  souls,  has  divided  his  disciples.
He  also  defines  the  soul  in  general,  and  not,  as  Reid
supposes,  the  mere' animal  soul,'  to  be  the  form  or
tvTiXsxiiot  of  the  body. — {Be  Animal,  ii.  c.  1.)  In-
tellect (vSs)  he  however  thought  was  inorganic;  but
there  is  some  ground  for  believing  that  he  did  not
view  this  as  personal,  but  harboured  an  opinion
which,  under  various  modifications,  many  of  his  fol
lowers  also  held,  that  the  active  intellect  was  com-
mon to  all  men,  immortal  and  divine.  Km?  yo>.o  ^a,s
irivret  to  iv  ifjbiv  0w<W  Xoyou  5'  «.£%*i  ov  Xoyo;  kXkcc  rt
x-gimov-  vi  ovv  kv  xgurrov  xa.1  &ris~'7ifMiS  imoi,  T\r,t
8i6;i  —  II.


268


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


Qessay  II.


taste,  and  of  other  sensible  qualities,  are,
in  manner,  received  by  the  senses.  * [127]

It  seems  to  be  a  necessary  consequence
of  Aristotle's  doctrine,  that  bodies  are  con-
stantly sending  forth,  in  all  directions,  as
many  different  kinds  of  forms  without
matter  as  they  have  different  sensible  qua-
lities ;  for  the  forms  of  colour  must  enter
by  the  eye,  the  forms  of  sound  by  the  ear,
and  so  of  the  other  senses.  This,  accord-
ingly, was  maintained  by  the  followers  of
Aristotle,  though  not,  as  far  as  I  know,
expressly  mentioned  by  himself,  f  They
disputed  concerning  the  nature  of  those
forms  of  species,  whether  they  were  real
beings  or  nonentities  ;$  and  some  held
them  to  be  of  an  intermediate  nature  be-
tween the  two.  The  whole  doctrine  of  the
Peripatetics  and  schoolmen  concerning
forms,  substantial  and  accidental,  and  con-
cerning the  transmission  of  sensible  species
from  objects  of  sense  to  the  mind,  if  it  be
at  all  intelligible,  is  so  far  above  my  com-
prehension that  I  should  perhaps  do  it  in-
justice, by  entering  into  it  more  minutely.
Malebranche,  in  his  "  Recherche  de  la
Verite,"  has  employed  a  chapter  to  shew
that  material  objects  do  not  send  forth
sensible  species  of  their  several  sensible
qualities.

The  great  revolution  which  Des  Cartes
produced  in  philosophy,  was  the  effect  of  a
superiority  of  genius,  aided  by  the  circum-
stances of  the  times.  Men  had,  for  more
than  a  thousand  years,  looked  up  to  Ari-
stotle as  an  oracle  in  philosophy.  His
authority  was  the  test  of  truth.  The  small
remains  of  the  Platonic  system  were  con-
fined to  a  few  mystics,  whose  principles  and
manner  of  life  drew  little  attention.  The
feeble  attempts  of  Ramus,  and  of  some
others,  to  make  improvements  in  the  sys-
tem, had  little  effect.  The  Peripatetic
doctrines  were  so  interwoven  with  the  whole
system  of  scholastic  theology,  that  to  dissent
from  Aristotle  was  to  alarm  the  Church.
The  most  useful  and  intelligible  parts,
even  of  Aristotle's  writings,  were  neglected,
and  philosophy  was  become  an  art  of  speak-
ing learnedly,  and  disputing  subtilely,  with-
out producing  any  invention  of  use  in  human
life.  It  was  fruitful  of  words,  but  barren
of  works,  and  admirably  contrived  for
drawing  a  veil  over  human  ignorance,  and


* See  Note  M.— H.

t  Nor  is  there  valid  ground  for  supposing  that  such
an  opinion  was  even  implicitly  held  t;y  the  Stagirite.
It  was  also  explicitly  repudiated  by  many  of  his  fol.
lowers. See  Note  M.— H.

t  The  question  in  the  schools,  between  ihose  who
admitted  species,  was  not,  whether  species,  in  gene-
ral, were  real  beings  or  nonentiti--s  (which  would
have  been,  did  they  exist  or  not,)  but  whether  sen-
si  le  species  were  material,  immaterial,  or  of  a
nature  between  body  and  spirit — a  problem,  it  must
b  •  allowed,  sufficiently  futile,  but  not,  like  the  other,
self-contraclictow.—  h.


putting  a  stop  to  the  progress  of  knowledge,
by  filling  men  with  a  conceit  that  they
knew  everything.  [128]  It  was  very  fruitful
also  in  controversies ;  but,  for  the  most  part,
they  were  controversies  about  words,  or
about  things  of  no  moment,  or  things  above
the  reach  of  the  human  faculties.  And  the
issue  of  them  was  what  might  be  expected —
that  the  contending  parties  fought,  without
gaining  or  losing  an  inch  of  ground,  till  they
were  weary  of  the  dispute,  or  their  atten-
tion was  called  off  to  some  other  subject.*

Such  was  the  philosophy  of  the  schools  of
Europe,  during  many  ages  of  darkness  and
barbarism  that  succeeded  the  decline  of  the
Roman  empire ;  so  that  there  was  great
need  of  a  reformation  in  philosophy  as  well
as  in  religion.  The  light  began  to  dawn  at
last ;  a  spirit  of  inquiry  sprang  up,  and
men  got  the  courage  to  doubt  of  the  dogmas
of  Aristotle,  as  well  as  of  the  decrees  of
Popes.  The  most  important  step  in  the
reformation  of  religion,  was  to  destroy
the  claim  of  infallibility,  which  hindered
men  from  using  their  judgment  in  matters
of  religion  ;  and  the  most  important  step  in
the  reformation  of  philosophy,  was  to  destroy
the  authority  of  which  Aristotle  had  so  long
had  peaceable  possession.  The  last  had
been  attempted  by  Lord  Bacon  and  others,
with  no  less  zeal  than  the  first  by  Luther
and  Calvin.

Des  Cartes  knew  well  the  defects  of  the
prevailing  system,  which  had  begun  to  lose
its  authority.  His  genius  enabled  him,  and
his  spirit  prompted  him,  to  attempt  a  new
one.  He  had  applied  much  to  the  mathe-
matical sciences,  and  had  made  considerable
improvement  in  them.  He  wished  to  in-
troduce that  perspicuity  and  evidence  into
other  branches  of  philosophy  which  he
found  iii  them.

Being  sensible  how  apt  we  are  to  be  led
astray  by  prejudices  of  education,  he  thought
the  only  way  to  avoid  error  was  to  resolve
to  doubt  of  everything,  and  hold  everything
to  be  uncertain,  even  those  things  which
he  had  been  taught  to  hold  as  most  certain,
until  he  had  such  clear  and  cogent  evidence
as  compelled  his  assent. [129]

In  this  state  of  universal  doubt,  that
which  first  appeared  to  him  to  be  clear  and
certain,  was  his  own  existence.  Of  this  he
was  certain,  because  he  was  conscious  that  he
thought,  that  he  reasoned,  and  that  he
doubted.  He  used  this  argument,  there-
fore, to  prove  his  own  existence,  Cojjito,
ergo  sum.  This  he  conceived  to  be  the  first
of  all  truths,  the  foundation-stone  upon
which  the  whole  fabric  of  human  knowledge


*  This  is  the  vulgar  opinion  in  regard  to  the
scholastic  philosophy.  The  few  are,  however,  now
aware  that  the  human  mind,  though  partially,  vns
never  more  powerfully  developed  than  during  the
middle  ages.—  H.

["127-129]


chap,  viii.]  OF  THE  THEORY  OF  PERCEPTION,  &c.


269


is  built,  and  on  which  it  must  rest.*  And,
as  Archimedes  thought  that,  if  he  had  one
fixed  point  to  rest  his  engines  upon,  he
could  move  the  earth ;  so  Des  Cartes,
charmed  with  the  discovery  of  one  certain
principle,  by  which  he  emerged  from  the
state  of  universal  doubt,  believed  that  this
principle  alone  would  be  a  sufficient  found-
ation on  which  he  might  build  the  whole
system  of  science.  He  seems,  therefore,  to
have  taken  no  great  trouble  to  examine
whether  there  might  not  be  other  first  prin-
ciples, which,  on  account  of  their  own  light
and  evidence,  ought  to  be  admitted  by
every  man  of  sound  judgment,  -f-  The  love
of  simplicity  so  natural  to  the  mind  of  man,
led  him  to  apply  the  whole  force  of  his  mind
to  raise  the  fabric  of  knowledge  upon  this
one  principle,  rather  than  seek  a  broader
foundation.

Accordingly,  he  does  not  admit  the  evi-
dence of  sense  to  be  a  first  principle,  as  he
does  that  of  consciousness.  The  argu-
ments of  the  ancient  sceptics  here  occurred
to  him,  that  our  senses  often  deceive  us,
and  therefore  ought  never  to  be  trusted  on
their  own  authority  :  that,  in  sleep,  we  often
seem  to  see  and  hear  things  which  we  are
convinced  to  have  had  no  existence.  But
that  which  chiefly  led  Des  Cartes  to  think
that  he  ought  not  to  trust  to  his  senses,
without  proof  of  their  veracity,  was,  that  he
took  it  for  granted,  as  all  philosophers  had
done  before  him,  that  he  did  not  perceive
external  objects  themselves,  but  certain
images  of  them  in  his  own  mind,  called
ideas.  He  was  certain,  by  consciousness,
that  he  had  the  ideas  of  sun  and  moon,
earth  and  sea  ;  but  how  could  he  be  assured
that  there  really  existed  external  objects
like  to  these  ideas  ?% [130]

Hitherto  he  was  uncertain  of  everything
but  of  his  own  existence,  and  the  existence
of  the  operations  and  ideas  of  his  own  mind.
Some  of  his  disciples,,  it  is  said,  remained  at
this  stage  of  his  system,  and  got  the  name
of  Egoists.  §  They  could  not  find  evidence
in  the  subsequent  stages  of  his  progress.
But  Des  Cartes  resolved  not  to  stop  here  ;
he  endeavoured  to  prove,  by  a  new  argu-
ment, drawn  from  his  idea  of  a  Deity,  the
existence  of  an  infinitely  perfect  Being,  who
made  him  and  all  his  faculties.  From  the
perfection  of  this  Being,  he  inferred  that  he
could  be  no  deceiver ;  and  therefore  con-
cluded that  his  senses,  and  the  other  facul-
ties he  found  in  himself,  are  not  fallacious,


•  On  the  Cartesian  doubt,  see  Note  R. — H.

t  This  cannot  justly  be  affirmed  of  Des  Cartes.
— H

X  On  this  point  it  is  probable  that  Des  Cartes  and
Reid  are  at  one. See  Notes  C  and  N — H.

§  I  am  doubtful  about  the  existence  of  this  sup-
posed sect  of  Egcsts.  The  Chevalier  Ramsay,
above  a  centurv  ago,  incidentally  speaks  of  this  doc.
trine  as  an  offshoot  of  Spinozism,  and  under  the
[130,  131J


but  may  be  trusted,  when  a  proper  use  is
made  of  them.

The  system  of  Des  Cartes  is,  with  great
perspicuity  and  acuteness,  explained  by
himself  in  his  writings,  which  ought  to  be
consulted  by  those  who  would  understand  it.
The  merit  of  Des  Cartes  cannot  be  easily
conceived  by  those  who  have  not  some
notion  of  the  Peripatetic  system,  in  which
he  was  educated.  To  throw  off  the  preju-
dices of  education,  and  to  create  a  system  of
nature,  totally  different  from  that  which
had  subdued  the  understanding  of  mankind,
and  kept  it  in  subjection  for  so  many  cen-
turies, required  an  uncommon  force  of  mind.
The  world  which  Des  Cartes  exhibits  to
our  view,  is  not  only  in  its  structure  very
different  from  that  of  the  Peripatetics,  but
is,  as  we  may  say,  composed  of  different
materials.

In  the  old  system,  everything  was,  by  a
kind  of  metaphysical  sublimation,  resolved
into  principles  so  mysterious  that  it  may  be
a  question  whether  they  were  words  with-
out meaning,  or  were  notions  too  refined  for
tiuman  understanding.

All  that  we  observe  in  nature  is,  accord-
ing to  Aristotle,  a  constant  succession  of
the  operations  of  generation  and  corruption.
[131  ]  The  principles  of  generation  are  mat-
ter and  form.  The  principle  of  corruption  is
privation.  All  natural  things  are  produced
or  generated  by  the  union  of  matter  and
form  ;  matter  being,  as  it  were,  the  mother,
and  form  the  father.  As  to  matter,  or  the
first  matter,  as  it  is  called,  it  is  neither
substance  uor  accident ;  it  has  no  quality
or  property ;  it  is  nothing  actually,  but
everything  potentially.  It  has  so  strong
an  appetite  for  form,  that  it  is  no  sooner
divested  of  one  form  than  it  is  clothed  with
another,  and  is  equally  susceptibie  of  all
forms  successively.  It  has  no  nature,  but
only  the  capacity  of  having  any  one.

This  is  the  account  which  the  Peripate-
tics give  of  the  first  matter.  The  other
principle  of  generation  is  form,  act,  perfec-
tion ;  for  these  three  words  signify  the  same
thing.  But  we  must  not  conceive  form  to
consist  in  the  figure,  size,  arrangement,  or
motion  of  the  parts  of  matter.  These,  in-
deed, are  accidental  forms,  by  which  things


name  of  Egomisme.  But  Father  Buffier,  about  the
same  time,  and,  be  it  noted,  in  a  work  published  some
ten  years  before  Hume's  "  Treatise  of  Human  Na-
tute,"  talks  of  it,  on  hearsay,  as  the  speculation  ot  a
Scotch  philosopher: — "  Unecrivain  I.cossoisapublie,
ciit  on,  un  ouvragepour  prouverqu'il  n'avoit  aucune
evidence  de  l'existence  d'aucun  etre  quedelui;  et
encore  de  lui,  en  tant  qu'  esprit;  n'aiant  aucune  de-
monstration  veritable  de  l'existence  d'aucun  corps."
—EUmens  de  Metuphysique,  j  61.  Now,  we  know
that  there  is  no  sucn  work.  I  am  aware,  however,
that  there  is  some  discussion  on  this  point'in  the
"  Memoirs  tie  Trevoux,"  anno  1713,  p.  922  ;  to  which
however,  I  must  refer  the  reader,  as  I  have  notthat
journal  at  hand.— But  more  of  this  below,  undef
p  187.— H.


270


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essa  y


artificial  are  formed  :  but  every  production
of  Nature  has  a  substantial  form,*  which,
joined  to  matter,  makes  it  to  be  what  it  is.
The  substantial  form  is  a  kind  of  informing
soul,  which  gives  the  thing  its  specific  na-
ture, and  all  its  qualities,  powers,  and
activity.  Thus  the  substantial  form  of
heavy  bodies,  is  that  which  makes  them
descend  ;  of  light  bodies,  that  which  makes
them  ascend.  The  substantial  form  of
gold,  is  that  which  gives  it  its  ductility,  its
fusibility,  its  weight,  its  colour,  and  all  its
qualities ;  and  the  same  is  to  be  understood  of
every  natural  production.  A  change  in  the
accidental  form  of  any  body,  is  alteration
only  ;  but  a  change  in  the  substantial  form
is  generation  and  corruption  :  it  is  corrup-
tion with  respect  to  the  substantial  form,  of
which  the  body  is  deprived ;  it  is  genera-
tion with  respect  to  the  substantial  form
that  succeeds.  Thus,  when  a  horse  dies
and  turns  to  dust,  the  philosophical  account
of  the  phenomenon  is  this  : — A  certain  por-
tion of  the  materia  prima,  which  was  joined
to  the  substantial  form  of  a  horse,  is  de-
prived of  it  by  privation,  and  in  the  same
instant  is  invested  with  the  substantial  form
of  earth.  [132]  As  every  substance  must
have  a  substantial  form,  there  are  some  of
those  forms  inanimate,  some  vegetative,
some  animal,  and  some  rational.  The  three
former  kinds  can  only  subsist  in  matter  ;
but  the  last,  according  to  the  schoolmen,  is
immediately  created  by  God,  and  infused
into  the  body,  making  one  substance  with
it,  while  they  are  united ;  yet  capable  of
being  disjoined  from  the  body,  and  of  sub-
sisting by  itself.

Such  are  the  principles  of  natural  things  in
the  Peripatetic  system.  It  retains  so  much
of  the  ancient  Pythagorean  doctrine,  that
we  cannot  ascribe  the  invention  of  it  solely
to  Aristotle,  although  he,  no  doubt,  made
considerable  alterations  in  it.  The  first
matter  was  probably  the  same  in  both  sys-
tems, and  was  in  both  held  to  be  eternal.
They  differed  more  about  form.  The  Py-
thagoreans and  Platonists  held  forms  or
ideas,  as  they  called  them,  to  be  eternal,
immutable,  and  self-existent.  Aristotle
maintained  that  they  were  not  eternal,  nor
self-existent.  On  the  other  hand,  he  did
not  allow  them  to  be  produced,  but  educed
from  matter ;  yet  he  held  them  not  to  be
actually  in  the  matter  from  which  they  are
educed,  but  potentially  only.  But  these
two  systems  differed  less  from  one  another,
than  that  of  Des  Cartes  did  from  both.

In  the  world  of  Des  Cartes  we  meet  with
two  kinds  of  beings  only — to  wit,  body  and
mind  ;  the  first  the  object  of  our  senses,

*  It  is  not,  however,  to  be  supposed  that  the
scholastic  doctrine  of  Substanti.il  Forms  receives  any
countenance  from  the  authority  of  Aristotle,  if  we
lav  aside  his  language  touching  the  soul — H.


the  other  of  consciousness  ;  both  of  them
things  of  which  we  have  a  distinct  appre-
hension, if  the  human  mind  be  capable  of
distinct  apprehension  at  all.  To  the  first,
no  qualities  are  ascribed  but  extension,
figure,  and  motion  ;  to  the  last,  nothing  but
thought,  and  its  various  modifications,  of
which  we  are  conscious."  He  could  ob-
serve no  common  attribute,  no  resembling
feature,  in  the  attributes  of  body  and  mind,
and  therefore  concluded  them  to  be  distinct
substances,  and  totally  of  a  different  nature ;
and  that  body,  from  its  very  nature,  is  in-
animate aud  inert,  incapable  of  any  kind  of
thought  or  sensation,  or  of  producing  any
change  or  alteration  in  itself. [133]

Des  Cartes  must  be  allowed  the  honour
of  being  the  first  who  drew  a  distinct  line
between  the  material  and  intellectual  world,
which,  in  all  the  old  systems,  were  so
blended  together  that  it  was  impossible  to
say  where  the  one  ends  and  the  other  be-
gins, -f-  How  much  this  distinction  hath
contributed  to  the  improvements  of  modern
times,  in  the  philosophy  both  of  body  and
of  mind,  is  not  easy  to  say.

One  obvious  consequence  of  this  distinc-
tion was,  that  accurate  reflection  on  the
operations  of  our  own  mind  is  the  only  way
to  make  any  progress  in  the  knowledge  of
it.  Malebranche,  Locke,  Berkeley,  and
Hume,  were  taught  this  lesson  by  Des
Cartes  ;  and  to  it  we  owe  their  most  va-
luable discoveries  in  this  branch  of  philo-
sophy. The  analogical  way  of  reasoning
concerning  the  powers  of  the  mind  from  the
properties  of  body,  which  is  the  source  of
almost  all  the  errors  on  this  subject,  and
which  is  so  natural  to  the  bulk  of  mankind,
was  as  contrary  to  the  principles  of  Des
Cartes,  as  it  was  agreeable  to  the  princi-
ples of  the  old  philosophy.  We  may  there-
fore truly  say,  that,  in  that  part  of  philoso-
phy which  relates  to  the  mind,  Des  Cartes
laid  the  foundation,  and  put  us  into  that
tract  which  all  wise  men  now  acknowledge
to  be  the  only  one  in  which  we  can  expect
success.

With  regard  to  physics,  or  the  philosophy
of  body,  if  Des  Cartes  had  not  the  merit  of
leading  men  into  the  right  tract,  we  must
allow  him  that  of  bringing  them  out  of  a
wrong  one.  The  Peripatetics,  by  assigning
to  every  species  of  body  a  particular  sub-
stantial form,  which  produces,  in  an  un-
known manner,  all  the  effects  we  observe
in  it,  put  a  stop  to  all  improvement  in  this
branch  of  philosophy.  Gravity  and  levity,
fluidity  and  hardness,  heat  and  cold,  were
qualities  arising  from  the  substantial  form
of  the  bodies  to  which  they  belonged. Gen-


* In  the  Cartesian  language,  the  term  thought  in.
eluded  all  of  which  we  are  conscious — H.

+  This  assertion  is  true  in  general ;  but  some in.
dividual  exceptions  might  betaken. — H.

f  132,  133]


chap,  vm.] OF  THE  THEORY  OF  PERCEPTION,  &c.


271


eration  and  corruption,  substantial  forms
and  occult  qualities,  were  always  at  hand,
to  resolve  every  phenomenon.  This  phi-
losophy, therefore,  instead  of  accounting
for  any  of  the  phenomena  of  Nature,  con-
trived only  to  give  learned  names  to  their
unknown  causes,  and  fed  men  with  the  husks
of  barbarous  terms,  instead  of  the  fruit  of
real  knowledge. [  1 34  ]

By  the  spreading  of  the  Cartesian  system,
materia  prima,  substantial  forms,  and  oc-
cult qualities,  with  all  the  jargon  of  the
Aristotelian  physics,  fell  into  utter  disgrace,
and  were  never  mentioned  by  the  followers
of  the  new  system,  but  as  a  subject  of  ridi-
cule. Men  became  sensible  that  their  un-
derstanding had  been  hoodwinked  by  those
hard  terms.  They  were  now  accustomed
to  explain  the  phsenomena  of  nature,  by
the  figure,  size,  and  motion  of  the  particles
of  matter,  things  perfectly  level  to  human
understanding,  and  could  relish  nothing  in
philosophy  that  was  dark  and  unintelligible.
Aristotle,  after  a  reign  of  more  than  a
thousand  years,  was  now  exposed  as  an
object  of  derision  even  to  the  vulgar,  arrayed
in  the  mock  majesty  of  his  substantial  forms
and  occult  qualities.  The  ladies  became
fond  of  a  philosophy  which  was  easily  learned,
and  required  no  words  too  harsh  for  their
delicate  organs.  Queens  and  princesses,
the  most  distinguished  personages  of  the
age,  courted  the  conversation  of  Des  Cartes,
and  became  adepts  in  his  philosophy.  Wit-
ness Christina,  Queen  of  Sweden,  and
Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Frederick,  King  of
Bohemia,  the  mother  of  our  Royal  Family.
The  last,  though  very  young  when  Des
Cartes  wrote  his  "  Principia,"  he  declares
to  be  the  only  person  he  knew,  who  per-
fectly understood  not  only  all  his  philoso-
phical writings,  but  the  most  abstruse  of
his  mathematical  works.

That  men  should  rush  with  violence  from
one  extreme,  without  going  more  or  less
into  the  contrary  extreme,  is  not  to  be  ex-
pected from  the  weakness  of  human  nature.
Des  Cartes  and  his  followers  were  not  ex-
empted from  this  weakness ;  they  thought
that  extension,  figure,  and  motion,  were
sufficient  to  resolve  all  the  phsenomena  of
the  material  system.  To  admit  other  qua-
lities, whose  cause  is  unknown,  was  to
return  to  Egypt,  from  which  they  had  been
so  happily  delivered. [135]

When  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  doctrine  of
gravitation  was  published,  the  great  objec-
tion to  it,  which  hindered  its  general  recep-
tion in  Europe  for  half  a  century,  was,  that
gravitation  seemed  to  be  an  occult  quality,
as  it  could  not  be  accounted  for  by  exten-
sion, figure,  and  motion,  the  known  attri-
butes of  body.  They  who  defended  him
found  it  difficult  to  answer  this  objection  to
the  satisfaction  of  those  who  had  been
[134-1361


initiated  in  the  principles  of  the  Cartesian
system.  But,  by  degrees,  men  came  to
be  sensible  that,  in  revolting  from  Ari-
stotle, the  Cartesians  had  gone  into  the  oppo-
site extreme  ;  experience  convinced  them
that  there  are  qualities  in  the  material
world,  whose  existence  is  certain  though
their  cause  be  occult.  To  acknowledge  this,
is  only  a  candid  confession  of  human  ignor-
ance, than  which  there  is  nothing  more  be-
coming a  philosopher.

As  all  that  we  can  know  of  the  mind  must
be  derived  from  a  careful  observation  of  its
operations  in  ourselves  ;  so  all  that  we  can
know  of  the  material  system  must  be  derived
from  what  can  be  discovered  by  our  senses.
Des  Cartes  was  not  ignorant  of  this ;  nor
was  his  system  so  unfriendly  to  observation
and  experiment  as  the  old  system  was.*
He  made  many  experiments,  and  called
earnestly  upon  all  lovers  of  truth  to  aid  him
in  this  way ;  but,  believing  that  all  the
phsenomena  of  the  material  world  are  the
result  of  extension,  figure,  and  motion,  and
that  the  Deity  always  combines  these,  so  as
to  produce  the  phsenomena  in  the  simplest
manner  possible,  he  thought  that,  from  a
few  experiments,  he  might  be  able  to  dis-
cover the  simplest  way  in  which  the  obvious
phsenomena  of  nature  can  be  produced  by
matter  and  motion  only  ;  and  that  this  must
be  the  way  in  which  they  are  actually  pro-
duced. H  is  conj  ectures  were  ingenious,  upon
the  principles  he  had  adopted  ;  but  they  are
found  to  be  so  far  from  the  truth,  that  they
ought  for  ever  to  discourage  philosophers
from  trusting  to  conjecture  in  the  operations
of  nature. [136]

The  vortices  or  whirlpools  of  subtile
matter  by  which  Des  Cartes  endeavoured
to  account  for  the  phsenomena  of  the  ma-
terial world,  are  now  found  to  be  fictions,
no  less  than  the  sensible  species  of  Ari-
stotle.-J-

It  was  reserved  for  Sir  Isaac  Newton  to
point  out  clearly  the  road  to  the  knowledge
of  nature's  works.  Taught  by  Lord  Bacon
to  despise  hypotheses  as  the  fictions  of  hu-
man fancy,  he  laid  it  down  as  a  rule  of
philosophising,  that  no  causes  of  natural
things  ought  to  be  assigned  but  such  as  can
be  proved  to  have  a  real  existence.  He
saw  that  all  the  length  men  can  go  in  ac-
counting for  phsenomena,  is  to  discover  the
laws  of  nature  according  to  which  they  are
produced ;  and,  therefore,  that  the  true
method  of  philosophising  is  this  :  From
real  facts,  ascertained  by  observation  and
experiment,  to  collect  by  just  induction  the


*  That  is,  the  Aristotelic.  But  Aristotle  himself
was  as  declared  an  advocate  of  experiment  as  any
philosopher ;  and  it  is  not  to  be  imputed  to  him  that
his  authority  had  subsequently  the  effect  of  imped-
ing, by  being  held  to  supersede,  observation — H.

-f-  Read  "the  sensible  species  of  the  schoolmen."
See  Kote  M.— H.


272


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


f  ESSAY II.


laws  of  Nature,  and  to  apply  the  laws  so
discovered,  to  account  for  the  phsenomena
of  Nature.

Thus,  the  natural  philosopher  has  the
rules  of  his  art  fixed  with  no  less  precision
than  the  mathematician,  and  may  be  no  less
certain  when  he  keeps  within  them,  and
when  he  deviates  from  them.  And,  though
the  evidence  of  a  law  of  nature  from  induc-
tion is  not  demonstrative,  it  is  the  only  kind
of  evidence  on  which  all  the  most  import-
ant affairs  of  human  life  must  rest.

Pursuing  this  road  without  deviation,
Newton  discovered  the  laws  of  our  planet-
ary system,  and  of  the  rays  of  light ;  and
gave  the  first  and  the  noblest  examples  of
that  chaste  induction  which  Lord  Bacon
could  only  delineate  in  theory.

How  strange  is  it  that  the  human  mind
should  have  wandered  for  so  many  ages,
without  falling  into  this  tract !  How  much
more  strange,  that,  after  it  has  been  clearly
discovered,  and  a  happy  progress  made  in  it,
many  choose  rather  to  wander  in  the  fairy
regions  of  hypothesis  ! [137]

To  return  to  Des  Cartes's  notions  of  the
manner  of  our  perceiving  external  objects,
from  which  a  concern  to  do  justice  to  the
merit  of  that  great  reformer  in  philosophy
has  led  me  to  digress,  he  took  it  for  granted,
as  the  old  philosophers  had  done,  that  what
we  immediately  perceive  must  be  either  in
the  mind  itself,  or  in  the  brain,  to  which
the  mind  is  immediately  present.  The  im-
pressions made  upon  our  organs,  nerves,
and  brain  could  be  nothing,  according  to
his  philosophy,  but  various  modifications  of
extension,  figure,  and  motion.  There  could
be  nothing  in  the  brain  like  sound  or  colour,
taste  or  smell,  heat  or  cold  ;  these  are  sens-
ations in  the  mind,  which,  by  the  laws  of
the  union  of  soul  and  body,  are  raised  on
occasion  of  certain  traces  in  the  brain  ;  and
although  he  gives  the  name  of  ideas  to  those
traces  in  the  brain,  he  does  not  think  it
necessary  that  they  should  be  perfectly
like  to  the  things  which  they  represent,
any  more  than  that  words  or  signs  should
resemble  the  things  they  signify.  But,
says  he,  that  we  may  follow  tne  received
opinion  as  far  as  is  possible,  we  may  allow
a  slight  resemblance.  Thus  we  know  that
a  print  in  a  book  may  represent  houses,
temples,  and  groves ;  and  so  far  is  it  from
being  necessary  that  the  print  should  be
perfectly  like  the  thing  it  represents,  that
its  perfection  often  requires  the  contrary :
for  a  circle  must  often  be  represented  by  an
ellipse,  a  square  by  a  rhombus,  and  so  of
other  things.*


*  But  be  it  observed  that  Des  Cartes  did  not  allow,
far  less  hold,  that  the  mind  had  any  cognizance  of
these  organic  motions — of  these  material  ideas  They
were  merely  the  antecedents,  established  by  the  law  of
union,  of  the  mental  idea  ;  which  mental  idea  was  no-


The  perceptions  of  sense,  he  thought,  are
to  be  referred  solely  to  the  union  of  soul
and  body.  They  commonly  exhibit  to  ua
only  what  may  hurt  or  profit  our  bodies  ;
and  rarely,  and  by  accident  only,  exhibit
things  as  they  are  in  themselves.  It  is  by
observing  this,  that  we  must  learn  to  throw
off  the  prejudices  of  sense,  and  to  attend
with  our  intellect  to  the  ideas  which  are  by
nature  implanted  in.it.  By  this  means  we
shall  understand  that  the  nature  of  matter
does  not  consist  in  those  things  that  affect
our  senses,  such  as  colour,  or  smell,  or  taste ;
but  only  in  this,  that  it  is  something  ex-
tended in  length,  breadth,  and  depth.  [138]

The  writings  of  Des  Cartes  have,  in  ge-
neral, a  remarkable  degree  of  perspicuity  ;
and  he  undoubtedly  intended  that,  in  this
particular,  his  philosophy  should  be  a  per-
fect contrast  to  that  of  Aristotle ;  yet,  in
what  he  has  said,  in  different  parts  of  his
writings,  of  our  perceptions  of  external
objects,  there  seems  to  be  some  obscurity,
and  even  inconsistency ;  whether  owing  to
his  having  had  different  opinions  on  the  sub-
ject at  different  times,  or  to  the  difficulty  he
found  in  it,  I  will  not  pretend  to  say.

There  are  two  points,  in  particular,
wherein  I  cannot  reconcile  him  to  himself  ;
the  first,  regarding  the  place  of  the  ideas
or  images  of  external  objects,  which  are  the
immediate  objects  of  perception  ;  the  second.
with  regard  to  the  veracity  of  our  external
senses.

As  to  the  first,  he  sometimes  places  the
ideas  of  material  objects  in  the  brain,  not
only  when  they  are  perceived,  but  when
they  are  remembered  or  imagined;  and
this  has  always  been  held  to  be  the  Car-
tesian doctrine;*  yet  he  sometimes  says,
that  we  are  not  to  conceive  the  images  or
traces  in  the  brain  to  be  perceived,  as  if
there  were  eyes  in  the  brain  ;  these  traces
are  only  occasions  on  which,  by  the  laws  of
the  union  of  soul  and  body,  ideas  are  ex-
cited in  the  mind  ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  not
necessary  that  there  should  be  an  exact
resemblance  between  the  traces  and  the
things  represented  by  them,  any  more  than
that  words  or  signs  should  be  exactly  like
the  things  signified  by  them.-f-

These  two  opinions,  I  think,  cannot  be
reconciled.  For,  if  the  images  or  traces  in
the  brain  are  perceived,*  they  must  be  the


thing  more  than  a  modification  of  the  mind  itself.—
H,

*  But  not  in  Reid's  exclusive  sense  of  the  word
Idea.— H.

t  The  non-negation,  in  this  instance,  of  all  re-
semblance between  the  material  Ideas,  or  organic
motions  in  the  brain,  and  the  external  reality,  is  one
of  the  occasional  instances  of  Des  Cartes's  reticence  of
his  subordinate  doctrines,  in  order  to  avoid  all  useless
tilting  against  prevalent  opinions.  Another  is  his
sometimes  giving  to  these  motions  the  name  of  Spe.
cies. — H.

£  Which,  in  Des  Cartes'  doctrine,  they  are  not. — H.


[137,  138]


chap,  viii.] OF  THE  THEORY  OF  PERCEPTION,  &c.


2/3


objects  of  perception,  and  not  the  occasions
of  it  only.  On  the  other  hand,  if  they  are
only  the  occasions  of  our  pei*ceiving,  they
are  not  perceived  at  all.  Des  Cartes  seems
to  have  hesitated  between  the  two  opinions,
or  to  have  passed  from  the  one  to  the
other.*  Mr  Locke  seems,  in  like  manner,
to  have  wavered  between  the  two ;  some-
times representing  the  ideas  of  material
things  as  being  in  the  brain,  but  more  fre-
quently as  in  the  mind  itself. -J-  [139]
Neither  Des  Cartes  nor  Mr  Locke  could,
consistently  with  themselves,  attribute  any
other  qualities  to  images  in  the  brain  but
extension,  figure,  and  motion  ;  for  as  to
those  qualities  which  Mr  Locke  distin-
guished by  the  name  of  secondary  qualities,
both  philosophers  believed  them  not  to  be-
long to  body  at  all,J  and,  therefore,  could
not  ascribe  them  to  images  in  the  brain.  §

Sir  Isaac  Newton  and  Dr  Samuel  Clarke
uniformly  speak  of  the  species  or  images  of
material  things  as  being  in  that  part  of  the
brain  called  the  sensorium,  and  perceived
by  the  mind  there  present ;  but  the  former
speaks  of  this  point  only  incidentally,  and
with  his  usual  modesty,  in  the  form  of  a
query.  ||  Malebranche  is  perfectly  clear  and
unambiguous  in  this  matter.  According  to
his  system,  the  images  or  traces  in  the
brain  are  not  perceived  at  all — they  are
only  occasions  upon  which,  by  the  laws  of
Nature,  certain  sensations  are  felt  by  us,
and  certain  of  the  divine  ideas  discovered  to
our  minds.

The  second  point  on  which  Des  Cartes
seems  to  waver,  is  with  regard  to  the  credit
that  is  due  to  the  testimony  of  our  senses.

Sometimes,  from  the  perfection  of  the
Deity,  and  his  being  no  deceiver,  he  infers
that  our  senses  and  our  other  faculties  can-
not be  fallacious ;  and  since  we  seem  clearly
to  perceive  that  the  idea  of  matter  comes
to  us  from  things  external,  which  it  per-
fectly resembles,  therefore  we  must  con-
clude that  there  really  exists  something
extended  in  length,  breadth,  and  depth,
having  all  the  properties  which  we  clearly
perceive  to  belong  to  an  extended  thing.

At  other  times,  we  find  Des  Cartes  and
his  followers  making  frequent  complaints,


•  Des  Cartes  had  only  one  opinion  on  the  point.
The  difficulty  which  perplexes  Reid  arose  from  his
want  of  a  systematic  comprehension  of  the  Cartesian
philosophy,  and  his  being  unaware  that,  by  Ideas,
Des  Cartes  designated  two  very  different  things — viz. ,
the  proximate  bodily  antecedent,  and  the  mental
consequent— H.

+  Locke's  opinion,  if  he  had  a  precise  one  on  the
matter,  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain.  See  Note  O. —
H.

t  See  above,  p.  205,  note  *  —  H.

§  Yet  Locke  expressly  denies  them  to  be  modifica-
tions of  mind. See  Note  O.— H.

||  Reid  is  correct  in  all  he  here  says  of  Newton  and
Clarke;  it  is indeed  virtually admitted  by  Clarke
himself,  in  his  controversy  wi  h  Leibnitz. Compare
Le;bnitii  Opera,  II.,  p.  161,  and  p.  182.— H.
fl-39,  UO]


as  all  the  ancient  philosophers  did,  of  the
fallacies  of  sense.  He  warns  us  to  throw
off  its  prejudices,  and  to  attend  only  with
our  intellect,  to  the  ideas  implanted  there.
By  this  means  we  may  perceive,  that  the
nature  of  matter  does  not  consist  in  hard-
ness, colour,  weight,  or  any  of  those  things
that  affect  our  senses,  but  in  this  only,  that
it  is  something  extended  in  length,  breadth,
and  depth.  [140]  The  senses,  he  says,
are  only  relative  to  our  present  state  ;  they
exhibit  things  only  as  they  tend  to  profit
or  to  hurt  us,  and  rarely,  and  by  accident
only,  as  they  are  in  themselves.  *

It  was  probably  owing  to  an  aversion  to
admit  anything  into  philosophy,  of  which
we  have  not  a  clear  and  distinct  concep-
tion, that  Des  Cartes  was  led  to  deny  that
there  is  any  substance  of  matter  distinct  from
those  qualities  of  it  which  we  perceive. -f-
We  say  that  matter  is  something  extended,
figured,  moveable.  Extension,  figure,  mo-
bility, therefore,  are  not  matter,  but  quali-
ties, belonging  to  this  something,  which
we  call  matter.  Des  Cartes  could  not
relish  this  obscure  something,  which  is  sup-
posed to  be  the  subject  or  substratum  of
those  qualities  ;  and,  therefore,  maintained
that  extension  is  the  very  essence  of  mat-
ter. But,  as  we  must  ascribe  extension  to
space  as  well  as  to  matter,  he  found  him-
self under  a  necessity  of  holding  that  space
and  matter  are  the  same  thing,  and  differ
only  in  our  way  of  conceiving  them  ;  so
that,  wherever  there  is  space  there  is  mat-
ter, and  no  void  left  in  the  universe.  The
necessary  consequence  of  this  is,  that  the
material  world  has  no  bounds  nor  limits.
He  did  not,  however,  choose  to  call  it  in-
finite, but  indefinite.

It  was  probably  owing  to  the  same  cause
that  Des  Cartes  made  the  essence  of  the
soul  to  consist  in  thought.  He  would  not
allow  it  to  be  an  unknown  something  that
has  the  power  of  thinking  ;  it  cannot,  there-
fore, be  without  thought ;  and,  as  he  con-
ceived that  there  can  be  no  thought  with-
out ideas,  the  soul  must  have  had  ideas  in
its  first  formation,  which,  of  consequence,
are  innate.  J

The  sentiments  of  those  who  came  after
Des  Cartes,  with  regard  to  the  nature  of
body  and  mind,  have  been  various.  Many
have  maintained  that  body  is  only  a  collec-
tion  of qualities to which we give one


*  But  see  "  Principia,"  \  66,  sqq  — H.

t  See  Stewart's  "  Elements,"  1.,  Note  A ;  Royer
Collard's  Fragment,  VIIL— H.

%  The  doctrine  of  Des  Cartes,  in  relation  to  Innate
Ideas,  has  been  very  generally  misunderstood  ;  and
by  no  one  more  than  by  Locke.  What  it  really
amounted  to,  is  clearly  stated  in  his  strictures  on
the  Program  of  Regius.  Justice  has  latterly  been
donehim,  among  others,  by  Mr  .Stewart,  in  his  "  Dis.
sertation,"  and  by  M.  Laromiguiere,  in  his  "  Cours."
See  also  the  old  controversy  of  De  Vries  with  Rbell
on  i  his  point — H.

T


274


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay II.


name ;  and  that  the  notion  of  a  subject  of
inhesion,  to  which  those  qualities  belong,
is  only  a  fiction  of  the  mind.*  [141]
Some  have  even  maintained  that  the  soul
is  only  a  succession  of  related  ideas,  with-
out any  subject  of  inhesion. -f-  It  appears,
by  what  has  been  said,  how  far  these  no-
tions are  allied  to  the  Cartesian  system.

The  triumph  of  the  Cartesian  system
over  that  of  Aristotle,  is  one  of  the  most
remarkable  revolutions  in  the  history  of  phi-
losophy, and  has  led  me  to  dwell  longer
upon  it  than  the  present  subject  perhaps
required.  The  authority  of  Aristotle  was
now  no  more.  That  reverence  for  hard
words  and  dark  notions,  by  which  men's
understanding  had  been  strangled  in  early
years,  was  turned  into  contempt,  and  every-
thing euspected  which  was  not  clearly  and
distinctly  understood.  This  is  the  spirit  of
the  Cartesian  philosophy,  and  is  a  more
important  acquisition  to  mankind  than  any
of  its  particular  tenets ;  and  for  exerting
this  spirit  so  zealously,  and  spreading  it  so
successfully,  Des  Cartes  deserves  immortal
honour.

It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  Des
Cartes  rejected  a  part  only  of  the  ancient
theory,  concerning  the  perception  of  ex-
ternal objects  by  the  senses,  and  that  he
adopted  the  other  part.  That  theory  may
be  divided  into  two  parts  :  The  first,  that
images,  species,  orforms  of  external  objects,
come  from  the  object,  and  enter  by  the
avenues  of  the  senses  to  the  mind;  the
second  part  is,  That  the  external  object
itself  is  not  perceived,  but  only  the  species
or  image  of  it  in  the  mind.  The  first  part
Des  Cartes  and  his  followers  rejected,  and
refuted  by  solid  arguments  ;  but  the  second
part,  neither  he  nor  his  followers  have
thought  of  calling  in  question  ;  being  per-
suaded that  it  is  only  a  representative
image  in  the  mind  of  the  external  object
that  we  perceive,  and  not  the  object  itself.
And  this  image,  which  the  Peripatetics
called  a  species,  he  calls  an  idea,  changing
the  name  only,  while  he  admits  the  thing.  %
[142]

It  seems  strange  that  the  great  pains
which  this  philosopher  took  to  throw  off  the
prejudices  of  education,  to  dismiss  all  his
former  opinions,  and  to  assent  to  nothing,
till  he  found  evidence  that  compelled  his
assent,  should  not  have  led  him  to  doubt  of
this  opinion  of  the  ancient  philosophy.  It
is  evidently  a  philosophical  opinion ;  for  the
vulgar  undoubtedly  believe  that  it  is  the

*  As  Locke,  (but  he  is  not  consistent,)  Law,
Green,  Watts,  and  others.  See  Cousin,  "  Cours  de
Philosophie,"  lome  II.,  Lecon  xviii. — H.

t  Hume— H.

t  Des  Cartes  and  Reid  coincide  in  doctrine,  if
Reid  holds  that  we  know  the  extended  and  exter.
nal  object  only,  by  a  conception  or  subjective  modifi-
tion  of  the  percipient  mind.  See  Notes  N  and  C— H.


external  object  which  we  immediately  per-
ceive, and  not  a  representative  image  of  it
only.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  they  look
upon  it  as  perfect  lunacy  to  call  in  question
the  existence  of  external  objects.*

It  seems  to  be  admitted  as  a  first  prin-
ciple, by  the  learned  and  the  unlearned,  that
what  is  really  perceived  must  exist,  and  that
to  perceive  what  does  not  exist  is  impossible.
So  far  the  unlearned  man  and  the  philoso-
pher agree.  The  unlearned  man  says — I
perceive  the  external  object,  and  I  perceive
it  to  exist.  Nothing  can  be  more  absurd
than  to  doubt  of  it.  The  Peripatetic  says —
What  I  perceive  is  the  very  identical  form
of  the  object,  which  came  immediately  from
the  object,  and  makes  an  impression  upon
my  mind,  as  a  seal  does  upon  wax ;  and,
therefore,  I  can  have  no  doubt  of  the  ex-
istence of  an  object  whose  form  I  perceive. -f-
But  what  says  the  Cartesian  ?  I  perceive
not,  says  he,  the  external  object  itself.  So
far  he  agrees  with  the  Peripatetic,  and  diners
from  the  unlearned  man.  But  I  perceive
an  image,  or  form,  or  idea,  in  my  own
mind,  or  hi  my  brain.  I  am  certain  of  the
existence  of  the  idea,  because  I  imme-
diately perceive  it.-f-  But  how  this  idea  is
formed,  or  what  it  represents,  is  not  self-
evident  ;  and  therefore  I  must  find  argu-
ments by  which,  from  the  existence  of  the
idea  which  I  perceive,  I  can  infer  the  ex-
istence of  an  external  object  which  it  re-
presents.

As  I  take  this  to  be  a  just  view  of  the
principles  of  the  unlearned  man,  of  the  Peri-
patetic, and  of  the  Cartesian,  so  I  think
they  all  reason  consequentially  from  their
several  principles  :  that  the  Cartesian  has
strong  grounds  to  doubt  of  the  existence  of
external  objects  ;  the  Peripatetic  very  little
ground  of  doubt ;  and  the  unlearned  [143]
man  none  at  all :  and  that  the  difference  of
their  situation  arises  from  this— that  the  un-
learned man  has  no  hypothesis  ;  the  Peri-
patetic leans  upon  an  hypothesis ;  and  the
Cartesian  upon  one  half  of  that  hypothesis.

Des  Cartes,  according  to  the  spirit  of  his
own  philosophy,  ought  to  have  doubted  of
both  parts  of  the  Peripatetic  hypothesis,  or  to
have  given  his  reasons  why  he  adopted  one
part,  as  well  as  why  he  rejected  the  other


*  This  is  one  of  the  passages  which  favour  the
opinion  that  Reid  did  suppose  the  non-ego  to  be
known  in  itself  as  existing,  and  not  only  in  and
through  the  ego ;  for  mankind  in  general  believe
that  the  extended  reality,  as  perceived,  is  something
more  than  a  mere  internal  representation  by  the
mind,  suggested  in  consequence  of  the  impression
made  by  an  unknown  something  on  the  sense.  See
Note  C— H.

f  The  Peripatetic  and  the  Cartesian  held  that  the
species  or  idea  was  an  object  of  consciousness.  If-
Reid  understood  the  language  he  uses,  he  must  hold
that  the  external  and  extended  reality  is  an  object  of
consciousness.  But  this  does  not  quadrate  with  his
doctrine,  that  we  only  know  extension  and  figure  by
a  suggested  conception  in  the  mind.  See  Note  C. —  H.
[141-113]


chap,  ix.] OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  MR  LOCKE.


275


part ;  especially,  since  the  unlearned,  who
have  the  faculty  of  perceiving  objects  by
their  senses  in  no  less  perfection  than
philosophers,  and  should,  therefore,  know,
as  well  as  they,  what  it  is  they  perceive,
have  been  unanimous  in  this,  that  the
objects  they  perceive  are  not  ideas  in  their
own  minds,  but  things  external.  It  might
have  been  expected  that  a  philosopher  who
was  so  cautious  as  not  to  take  his  own  ex-
istence for  granted  without  proof,  would  not
have  taken  it  for  granted  without  proof,
that  everything  he  perceived  was  only  ideas
in  his  own  mind.

But,  if  Des  Cartes  made  a  rash  step  in
this,  as  I  apprehend  he  did,  he  ought  not
to  bear  the  blame  alone.  His  successors
have  still  continued  in  the  same  track,  and,
after  his  example,  have  adopted  one  part  of
the  ancient  theory — to  wit,  that  the  objects
we  immediately  perceive  are  ideas  only.  All
their  svstems  are  built  on  this  foundation.


CHAPTER  IX.

OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  MR  LOCKE.

The  reputation  which  Locke's  "Essay  on
Human  Understanding"  had  at  home  from
the  beginning,  and  which  it  has  gradually
acquired  abroad,  is  a  sufficient  testimony  of
its  merit.  [144]  There  is,  perhaps,  no
book  of  the  metaphysical  kind  that  has  been
so  generally  read  by  those  who  understand
the  language,  or  that  is  more  adapted  to
teach  men  to  think  with  precision,*  and  to
inspire  them  with  that  candour  and  love  of
truth  which  is  the  genuine  spirit  of  philo-
sophy. He  gave,  I  believe,  the  first  ex-
ample in  the  English  language  of  writing
on  such  abstract  subjects,  with  a  remarkable
degree  of  simplicity  and  perspicuity ;  and
in  this  he  has  been  happilv  imitated  by
others  that  came  after  him.  No  author
hath  more  successfully  pointed  out  the
danger  of  ambiguous  words,  and  the  im-
portance of  having  distinct  and  determin-
ate notions  in  judging  and  reasoning.  His
observations  on  the  various  powers  of  the
human  understanding,  on  the  use  and  abuse
of  words,  and  on  the  extent  and  limits  of
human  knowledge,  are  drawn  from  atten-
tive reflection  on  the  operations  of  his  own
mind,  the  true  source  of  all  real  knowledge
on  these  subjects ;  and  shew  an  uncommon
degree  of  penetration  and  judgment.  But
he  needs  no  panegyric  of  mine,  and  I  men-
tion these  things,  only  that,  when  I  have
occasion  to  differ  from  him,  I  may  not  be
thought  insensible  of  the  merit  of  an  author
whom  I  highly  respect,  and  to  whom  I  owe


*  To  praise Locke  for precision,  is  rather too
much. — H.
[144,  145]


my  first  lights  in  those  studies,  as  well  as
my  attachment  to  them.

He  sets  out  in  his  essay  with  a  full  con-
viction, common  to  him  with  other  philo-
sophers, that  ideas  in  the  mind  are  the
objects  of  all  our  thoughts  in  every  opera-
tion of  the  understanding.  This  leads  him
to  use  the  word  idea*  so  very  frequently,
beyond  what  was  usual  in  the  English
language,  that  he  thought  it  necessary,  in
his  introduction,  to  make  this  apology : —
"  It  being  that  term,''  says  he,  "which,  I
I  think,  serves  best  to  stand  for  whatsoever
is  the  object  of  understanding  when  a  man
thinks,  I  have  used  it  to  express  whatever
is  meant  by  phantasm,  notion,  species,  or
whatever  it  is  which  the  mind  can  be  em-
ployed about  in  thinking  ;  and  I  could  not
avoid  frequently  using  it.  I  presume  it
will  be  granted  me,  that  there  are  such
ideas  in  men's  minds  ;  every  man  is  con-
scious of  them  in  himself,  and  men's  words
and  actions  will  satisfy  him  that  they  are  in
others." [145]

Speaking  of  the  reality  of  cur  knowledge,
he  says,  "  It  is  evident  the  mind  knows  not
things  immediately,  but  only  by  the  inter-
vention of  the  ideas  it  has  of  them.  Our
knowledge,  therefore,  is  real,  only  so  far  as
there  is  a  conformity  between  our  ideas  and
the  reality  of  things.  But  what  shall  be
here  the  criterion  ?  How  shall  the  mind,
when  it  perceives  nothing  but  its  own  ideas,
know  that  they  agree  with  things  them-
selves ?  This,  though  it  seems  not  to  want
difficulty,  yet,  I  think,  there  be  two  sorts
of  ideas  that  we  may  be  assured  agree  with
things."

We  see  that  Mr  Locke  was  aware,  no
less  than  Des  Cartes,  that  the  doctrine  o<
ideas  made  it  necessary,  and  at  the  samf
time  difficult,  to  prove  the  existence  of  9
material  world  without  us ;  because  th«
mind,  according  to  that  doctrine,  perceives
nothing  but  a  world  of  ideas  in  itself.  Not
only  Des  Cartes,  but  Malebranche,  Arnauld.,
and  Norris,  had  perceived  this  difficulty,
and  attempted  to  remove  it  with  little  suc-
cess. Mr  Locke  attempts  the  same  thing  ;
but  his  arguments  are  feeble.  He  even
seems  to  be  conscious  of  this ;  for  he  con-
cludes his  reasoning  with  this  observation
— "  That  we  have  evidence  sufficient  to
direct  us  in  attaining  the  good  and  avoiding
the  evil,  caused  by  external  objects,  and
that  this  is  the  important  concern  we  have
in  being  made  acquainted  with  them."  This,
indeed,  is  saying  no  more  than  will  be
granted  by  those  who  deny  the  existence  of
a  material  world.

As  there  is  no  material  difference  between


*  Locke  may  be  said  to  have  first  naturalized  *he
viQrA  in  English  philosophical  language,  in  its  Cane-
sian  extension.— H.

T  2


276


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


Locke  and  Des  Cartes  with  regard  to  the
perception  of  objects  by  the  senses,  there
is  the  less  occasion,  in  this  place,  to  take
notice  of  all  their  differences  in  other  points.
They  differed  about  the  origin  of  our  ideas.
Des  Cartes  thought  some  of  them  were
innate ;  the  other  maintained  that  there
are  no  innate  ideas,  and  that  they  are  all
derived  from  two  sources — to  wit,  sensation
and  reflection  ;  meaning,  by  sensation,  the
operations  of  our  exteriial  senses  ;  and,  by
reflection,  that  attention  which  we  are
capable  of  giving  to  the  operations  of  our
own  minds. [146]

They  differed  with  regard  to  the  essence
both  of  matter  and  of  mind  :  the  British
philosopher  holding  that  the  real  essence  of
both  is  beyond  the  reach  of  human  know-
ledge  ;  the  other  conceiving  that  the  very
essence  of  mind  consists  in  thought,  and
that  of  matter  in  extension,  by  which  he
made  matter  and  space  not  to  differin  reality,
and  no  part  of  space  to  be  void  of  matter.

Mr  Locke  explained,  more  distinctly  than
had  been  done  before,  the  operations  of  the
mind  in  classing  the  various  objects  of
thought,  and  reducing  them  to  genera  and
species.  He  was  the  first,  I  think,  who
distinguished  in  substances  what  he  calls
the  nominal  essence — which  is  only  the
notion  we  form  of  a  genus  or  species,  and
which  we  express  by  a  definition — from  the
real  essence  or  internal  constitution  of  the
thing,  which  makes  it  to  be  what  it  is.*
Without  this  distinction,  the  subtile  dis-
putes which  tortured  the  schoolmen  for  so
many  ages,  in  the  controversy  between  the
nominalists  and  realists,  could  never  be
brought  to  an  issue.  He  shews  distinctly
how  we  form  abstract  and  general  notions,
and  the  use  and  necessity  of  them  in  rea-
soning. And  as  (according  to  the  received
principles  of  philosophers)  every  notion  of
our  mind  must  have  for  its  object  an  idea
in  the  mind  itself, -|-  he  thinks  that  we  form
abstract  ideas  by  leaving  out  of  the  idea  of
an  individual  everything  wherein  it  differs
from  other  individuals  of  the  same  species
or  genus ;  and  that  this  power  of  forming
abstract  ideas,  is  that  which  chiefly  dis-
tinguishes us  from  brute  animals,  in  whom
he  could  see  no  evidence  of  any  abstract
ideas.

Since  the  time  of  Des  Cartes,  philoso-
phers have  differed  much  with  regard  to  the
share  they  ascribe  to  the  mind  itself,  in  the
fabrication  of  those  representative  beings
called  ideas,  and  the  manner  in  which  this
work  is  carried  on.


*  Locke  has  no  originality  in  this  respect. — H.

■}  Notion  is  here  used  for  the  apprehension  of  the
idea,  or  representative  reality,  which  Reid  supposed
that  all  philosophers  viewed  as  something  more  than
the  mere  act  of  knowledge,  considered  in  relation  to
what  was,  through  it,  known  or  represented.— H.


Of  the  authors  I  have  met  with,  Dr
Robert  Hook  is  the  most  explicit.  He  was
one  of  the  most  ingenious  and  active  mem-
bers of  the  Royal  Society  of  London  at  its
first  institution  ;  and  frequently  read  lec-
tures to  the  Society,  which  were  published
among  his  posthumous  works.  [  147]  In  his
"  Lectures  upon  Light,"  §  7,  he  makes
ideas  to  be  material  substances  ;  and  thinks
that  the  brain  is  furnished  with  a  proper
kind  of  matter  for  fabricating  the  ideas  of
each  sense.  The  ideas  of  sight,  he  thinks,
are  formed  of  a  kind  of  matter  resembling
the  Bononian  stone,  or  some  kind  of  phos-
phorus ;  that  the  ideas  of  sound  are  formed
of  some  matter  resembling  the  chords  or
glasses  which  take  a  sound  from  the  vibra-
tions of  the  air ;  and  so  of  the  rest.

The  soul,  he  thinks,  may  fabricate  some
hundreds  of  those  ideas  in  a  day ;  and  that,
as  they  are  formed,  they  are  pushed  farther
off  from  the  centre  of  the  brain  where  the
soul  resides.  By  this  means  they  make  a  con-
tinued chain  of  ideas,  coyled  up  in  the  brain  ;
the  first  end  of  which  is  farthest  removed
from  the  centre  or  seat  of  the  soul,  and  the
other  end  is  always  at  the  centre,  being  the
last  idea  formed,  which  is  always  present
the  moment  when  considered ;  and,  there-
fore, according  as  there  is  a  greater  number
of  ideas  between  the  present  sensation  or
thought  in  the  centre  and  any  other,  the
soul  is  apprehensive  of  a  larger  portion  of
time  interposed.

Mr  Locke  has  not  entered  into  so  minute
a  detail  of  this  manufacture  of  ideas  ;  but  he
ascribes  to  the  mind  a  very  considerable
hand  in  forming  its  own  ideas.  With  re-
gard to  our  sensations,  the  mind  is  passive,
"  they  being  produced  in  us,  only  by  dif-
ferent degrees  and  modes  of  motion  in  our
animal  spirits,  variously  agitated  by  ex-
ternal objects."  These,  however,  cease  to
be  as  soon  as  they  cease  to  be  perceived ;
but,  by  the  faculties  of  memory  and  imagin-
ation, "  the  mind  has  an  ability,  when  it
wills,  to  revive  them  again,  and,  as  it  were,
to  paint  them  anew  upon  itself,  though
some  with  more,  some  with  less  difficulty.'*

As  to  the  ideas  of  reflection,  he  ascribes
them  to  no  other  cause  but  to  that  attention
which  the  mind  is  capable  of  giving  to  its
own  operations.  These,  therefore,  are
formed  by  the  mind  itself.  [148]  Heascribes
likewise  to  the  mind  the  power  of  com-
pounding its  simple  ideas  into  complex  ones
of  various  forms;  of  repeating  them,  and
adding  the  repetitions  together  ;  of  dividing
and  classing  them  ;  of  comparing  them,
and,  from  that  comparison,  of  forming  the
ideas  of  their  relation  ;  nay,  of  forming  a
general  idea  of  a  species  or  genus,  by  taking
from  the  idea  of  an  individual  everything
by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  other  in-
dividuals of  the  kind,  till  at  last  it  becomes
[146-148]


chap.  ix.J  OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  MR  LOCKE.


277


a  i  abstract  general  idea,  common  to  all  the
iu  iividuals  of  the  kind.

These,  I  think,  are  the  powers  which  Mr
Locke  ascribes  to  the  mind  itself  in  the
fabrication  of  its  ideas.  Bishop  Berkeley,
as  we  shall  see  afterwards,  abridged  them
considerably,  and  Mr  Hume  much  more.

The  ideas  we  have  of  the  various  quali-
ties of  bodies  are  not  all,  as  Mr  Locke
thinks,  of  the  same  kind.  Some  of  them
are  images  or  resemblances  of  what  is  really
iu  the  body ;  others  are  not.  There  are
certain  qualities  inseparable  from  matter ;
such  as  extension,  solidity,  figure,  mobility.
O  ur  ideas  of  these  are  real  resemblances  of
the  qualities  in  the  body  ;  and  these  he
calls  primary  qualities-  But  colour,  sound,
taste,  smell,  heat,  and  cold,  he  calls  second-
ary qualities,  and  thinks  that  they  are
only  powers  in  bodies  of  producing  cer-
tain sensations  in  us ;  which  sensations
have  nothing  resembling  them,  though  they
are  commonly  thought  to  be  exact  resem-
blances of  something  in  the  body.  "  Thus,"
says  he,  "  the  idea  of  heat  or  light,  which
we  receive,  by  our  eye  or  touch,  from  the
sun,  are  commonly  thought  real  qualities
existing  in  the  sun,  and  something  more
than  mere  powers  in  it."

The  names  of  primary  and  secondary
qualities  were,  I  believe,  first  used  by  Mr
Locke  ;  but  the  distinction  which  they  ex-
press, was  well  understood  by  Des  Cartes,
and  is  explained  by  him  in  his  "  Principia,"
Part  I.,  §  C9,  70,  7L [149]

Although  no  author  has  more  merit  than
Mr  Locke,  in  pointing  out  the  ambiguity  of
words,  and  resolving,  by  that  means,  many
knotty  questions,  which  had  tortured  the
wits  of  the  schoolmen,  yet,  I  apprehend,
he  has  been  sonetimes  misled  by  the  ambi-
guity of  the  word  idea,  which  he  uses  so
often  almost  in  every  page  of  his  essay.

In  the  explication  given  of  this  word,  we
took  notice  of  two  meanings  given  to  it — a
popular  and  a  philosophical.  In  the  popu-
lar meaning,  to  have  an  idea  of  anything,
signifies  nothing  more  than  to  think  of  it.

Although  the  operations  of  the  mind  are
most  properly  and  naturally,  and  indeed
most  commonly  in  all  vulgar  languages,  ex-
pressed by  active  verbs,  there  is  another
way  of  expressing  them,  less  common,  but
equally  well  understood.  To  think  of  a
thing,  and  to  have  a  thought  of  it ;  to  be-
lieve a  thing,  and  to  have  a  belief  of  it ;  to
see  a  thing,  and  have  a  sight  of  it ;  to  con-
ceive a  thing,  and  to  have  a  conception,
notion,  or  idea  of  it — are  phrases  perfectly
synonymous.  In  these  phrases,  the  thought
means  nothing  but  the  act  of  thinking ;  the
belief,  the  act  of  believing ;  and  the  con-
ception, notion,  or  idea,  the  act  of  conceiv-
ing. To  have  a  clear  and  distinct  idea  is,
in  this  sense,  nothing  else  but  to  conceive
r14-9,  150]


the  thing  clearly  and  distinctly.  When  the
word  idea  is  taken  in  this  popular  sense,
there  can  be  no  doubt  of  our  having  ideas  in
our  minds.  To  think  without  ideas  would
be  to  think  without  thought,  which  is  a
manifest  contradiction.*

But  there  is  another  meaning  of  the  word
idea  peculiar  to  philosophers,  and  grounded
upon  a  philosophical  theory,  which  the  vul-
gar never  think  of.  Philosophers,  ancient
and  modern,  have  maintained  that  the
operations  of  the  mind,  like  the  tools  of  an
artificer,  can  only  be  employed  upon  objects
that  are  present  in  the  mind,  or  in  the
brain,  where  the  mind  is  supposed  to  reside.
[150]  Therefore,  objects  that  are  distant  in
time  or  place  must  have  a  representative  hi
the  mind,  or  in  the  brain — some  image  or
picture  of  them,  which  is  the  object  that  the
mind  contemplates.  This  representative
image  was,  in  the  old  philosophy,  called  a
species  or  phantasm.  Since  the  time  of
Des  Cartes,  it  has  more  commonly  been
called  an  idea ;  and  every  thought  is  con-
ceived to  have  an  idea  of  its  object.  As
this  has  been  a  common  opinion  among
philosophers,  as  far  back  as  we  can  trace  phi-
losophy, it  is  the  less  to  be  wondered  at  that
they  should  be  apt  to  confound  the  opera-
tion of  the  mind  in  thinldng  with  the  idea
or  object  of  thought,  which  is  supposed  to
be  its  inseparable  concomitant.*

If  we  pay  any  regard  to  the  common
sense  of  mankind,  thought  and  the  object
of  thought  are  different  things,  and  ought
to  be  distinguished.  It  is  true,  thought
cannot  be  without  an  object — for  every
man  who  thinks  must  think  of  something  ;
but  the  object  he  thinks  of  is  one  thing,  his
thought  of  that  object  is  another  thing.
They  are  distinguished  in  all  languages,  even
by  the  vulgar ;  and  many  things  may  be
affirmed  of  thought — that  is,  of  the  opera-
tion of  the  mind  in  thinking — which  cannot,
without  error,  and  even  absurdity,  be  af-
firmed of  the  object  of  that  operation.*

From  this,  I  think,  it  is  evident  that,  if
the  word  idea,  in  a  work  where  it  occurs  in
every  paragraph,  is  used  without  any  inti-
mation of  the  ambiguity  of  the  word,  some-
times to  signify  thought,  or  the  operation
of  the  mind  in  thinking,  sometimes  to  sig-
nify those  internal  objects  of  thought  which
philosophers  suppose,  this  must  occasion
confusion  in  the  thoughts  both  of  the  au-
thor and  of  the  readers.  I  take  this  to  be
the  greatest  blemish  in  the  "  Essay  on  Hu-
man Understanding."  I  apprehend  this  is
the  true  source  of  several  paradoxical  opin-
ions in  that  excellent  work,  which  I  shall
have  occasion  to  take  notice  of.

Here  it  is  very  natural  to  a?k,  Whether
it  was  Mr  Locke's  opinion,  that  ideas  are

» See  Note  C— H.


278


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


the  only  objects  of  thought  ?  or,  Whether
it  is  not  possible  for  men  to  think  of  things
which  are  not  ideas  in  the  mind  ?* [151]

To  this  question  it  is  not  easy  to  give  a
direct  answer.  On  the  one  hand,  he  says
often,  in  distinct  and  studied  expressions,
that  the  term  idea  stands  for  whatever  is
the  object  of  the  understanding  when  a  man
thinks,  or  whatever  it  is  which  the  mind
can  be  employed  about  in  thinking :  that
the  mind  perceives  nothing  but  its  own
ideas :  that  all  knowledge  consists  in  the
perception  of  the  agreement  or  disagree-
ment of  our  ideas :  that  we  can  have  no
knowledge  farther  than  we  have  ideas.
These,  and  many  other  expressions  of  the
like  import,  evidently  imply  that  every
object  of  thought  must  be  an  idea,  and  can
be  nothing  else.

On  the  other  hand,  I  am  persuaded  that
Mr  Locke  would  have  acknowledged  that
we  may  think  of  Alexander  the  Great,  or
of  the  planet  Jupiter,  and  of  numberless
things  which  he  would  have  owned  are  not
ideas  in  the  mind,  but  objects  which  exist
independent  of  the  mind  that  thinks  of
them.-f-

How  shall  we  reconcile  the  two  parts  of
this  apparent  contradiction  ?  All  I  am  able
to  say,  upon  Mr  Locke's  principles,  to  recon-
cile them,  is  this,  That  we  cannot  think  of
Alexander,  or  of  the  planet  Jupiter,  unless
we  have  in  our  minds  an  idea — that  is,  an
image  or  picture  of  those  objects.  The
idea  of  Alexander  is  an  image,  or  picture,
or  representation  of  that  hero  in  my  mind ;


*  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  Keid  means,  by
Ideas,  representative  entities  different  from  the  cog.
nitive  modifications  of  the  mind  itself  — H.

t  On  the  confusion  of  this  and  the  four  subsequent
paragraphs,  see  Note  C.— Whatever  is  the  immediate
object  of  thought,  of  that  we  are  necessarily  conscious.
But  of  Alexander,  for  example,  as  existing,  we  are
necessatily  not  conscious.  Alexander,  as  existing,
cannot,  therefore,  possibly  be  an  immediate  object  of
thought;  consequently,  if  we  can  be  said  to  think  of
Alexander  at  all,  we  can  only  be  said  to  think  of  him
mediately,  in  and  through  a  representation  of  which
we  are  conscious  ;  and  that  representation  is  the  im.
mediate  object  of  thought.  It  makes  no  difference
whether  this  immediate  object  be  viewed  as  a  tertium
quid,  distinct  from  the  existing  reality  and  from  the
conscious  mind;  or  whether  as  a  mere  modality  of
the  conscious  mind  itself— as  tne  mere  act  of  thought
considered  in  its  relation  to  something  beyond  the
sphere  of  consciousness.  In  neither  case,  can  we  be
6aid  (be  it  in  the  imagination  of  a  possible  or  the
recollection  of  a  past  existence)  to  know  a  thing  as
existing— that  is,  immediately  ;  and,  therefore,  if  in
these  operations  we  be  said  to  know  aught  out  the
mind  at  all,  we  can  only  be  said  to  know  it  me-
diately—in other  words,  as  a  mediate  object.  The
whole  perplexity  arises  from  the  ambiguity  of  the
term  object,  that  term  being  used  both  for  the  exter-
nal reality  of  which  we  are  here  not  conscious,  and
cannot  therefore  know  in  itself,  and  for  the  mental
representation  which  we  know  in  itself,  but  which  is
known  only  as  relative  to  the  other.  Reid  chooses  to
abolish  the  former  signification,  on  the  supposition
that  it  only  applies  to  a  representative  entity  differ-
ent from  the  act  of  thought.  In  this  supposition,
however,  he  is  wrong ;  nor  does  he  obtain  an  imme-
diate knowledge,  even  in  perception,  by  merely  deny-
thecrudc  hypothesis  of  representation  —H.


and  this  idea  is  the  immediate  object  of  my
thought  when  I  think  of  Alexander.  That
this  was  Locke's  opinion,  and  that  it  has
been  generally  the  opinion  of  philosophers,
there  can  be  no  doubt.

But,  instead  of  giving  light  to  the  ques-
tion proposed,  it  seems  to  involve  it  in
greater  darkness.

When  I  think  of  Alexander,  I  am  told
there  is  an  image  or  idea  of  Alexander  in
my  mind,  which  is  the  immediate  object  of
this  thought.  The  necessary  consequence
of  this  seems  to  be,  that  there  are  two  ob-
jects of  this  thought — the  idea,  which  is  in
the  mind,  and  the  person  represented  by  that
idea  ;  the  first,  the  immediate  object  of  the
thought,  the  last,  the  object  of  the  same
thought,  but  not  the  immediate  object.
[152]  This  is  a  hard  saying;  for  it  makes
every  thought  of  things  external  to  have  a
double  object.  Every  man  is  conscious  of
his  thoughts,  and  yet,  upon  attentive  reflec-
tion, he  perceives  no  such  duplicity  in  the
object  he  thinks  about.  Sometimes  men
see  objects  double,  but  they  always  know
when  they  do  so :  and  I  know  of  no  philo-
sopher who  has  expressly  owned  this  dupli-
city in  the  object  of  thought,  though  it  fol-
lows necessarily  from  maintaining  that,  in
the  same  thought,  there  is  one  object  that
is  immediate  and  in  the  mind  itself,  and
another  object  which  is  not  immediate,  and
which  is  not  in  the  mind.*

Besides  this,  it  seems  very  hard,  or  rather
impossible,  to  understand  what  is  meant  by
an  object  of  thought  that  is  not  an  imme-
diate object  of  thought.  A  body  in  motion
may  move  another  that  was  at  rest,  by  the
medium  of  a  third  body  that  is  interposed.
This  is  easily  understood  ;  but  we  are  unable
to  conceive  any  medium  interposed  between
a  mind  and  the  thought  of  that  mind ;  and,
to  think  of  any  object  by  a  medium,  seems
to  be  words  without  any  meaning.  There
is  a  sense  in  which  a  thing  may  be  said  to
be  perceived  by  a  medium.  Thus  any  kind
of  sign  may  be  said  to  be  the  medium  by
which  I  perceive  or  understand  the  thing
signified.  The  sign  by  custom,  or  compact,
or  perhaps  by  nature,  introduces  the  thought
of  the  thing  signified.  But  here  the  thing
signified,  when  it  is  introduced  to  the
thought,  is  an  object  of  thought  no  less
immediate  than  the  sign  was  before.  And
there  are  here  two  objects  of  thought,  one
succeeding  another,  which  we  have  shewn
is  not  the  case  with  respect  to  an  idea,  and
the  object  it  represents.

»  That  is,  if  by  object  was  meant  the  same  thing,
when  the  term  is  applied  to  the  external  reality,
and  to  its  mental  representation.  Even  under  the
Scholastic  theory  of  repeesentation,  it  was  generally
maintained  that  thespecies  itself  is  not  an  object  of
perception,  but  the  external  reality  through  it ;  a
mode  of  speaking  justly  reprehended  by  the  acuter
schoolmen.  But  in  this  respect  Reid  is  equally  to
blame. See  Note  C— H.

("151 1*2]


chap,  ix.] OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  MR  LOCKE.


279


I  apprehend,  therefore,  that,  if  philoso-
phers will  maintain  that  ideas  in  tlie  mind
are  the  only  immediate  objects  of  thought,
they  will  be  forced  to  grant  that  they  are  the
sole  objects  of  thought,  and  that  it  is  im-
possible for  men  to  think  of  anything  else.
[  1 53]  Yet,  surely,  Mr  Locke  believed  that
we  can  think  of  many  things  that  are  not
ideas  in  the  mind  ;  but  he  seems  not  to  have
perceived,  that  the  maintaining  that  ideas
in  the  mind  are  the  only  immediate  objects
of  thought,  must  necessarily  draw  this  con-
sequence along  with  it.

The  consequence,  however,  was  seen  by
Bishop  Berkeley  and  Mr  Hume,  who  rather
chose  to  admit  the  consequence  than  to  give
up  the  principle  from  which  it  follows.

Perhaps  it  was  unfortunate  for  Mr  Locke
that  he  used  the  word  idea  so  very  fre-
quently as  to  make  it  very  difficult  to  give
the  attention  necessary  to  put  it  always  to
the  same  meaning.  And  it  appears  evident
that,  in  many  places,  he  means  nothing
more  by  it  but  the  notion  or  conception  we
have  of  any  object  of  thought ;  that  is,  the
act  of  the  mind  in  conceiving  it,  and  not  the
object  conceived.*

In  explaining  this  word,  he  says  that  he
uses  it  for  whatever  is  meant  by  phantasm,
notion,  species.  Here  are  three  synonymes
to  the  word  idea.  The  first  and  last  are
very  proper  to  express  the  philosophical
meaning  of  the  word,  being  terms  of  art  in
the  Peripatetic  philosophy,  and  signifying
images  of  external  things  in  the  mind,
which,  according  to  that  philosophy,  are
objects  of  thought.  But  the  word  notion  is
a  word  in  common  language,  whose  meaning
agrees  exactly  with  the  popular  meaning  of


*  When  we  contemplate  a  triangle,  we  may  consider
it  either  as  a  complement  of  three  sides  or  of  three
angles  ;  not  that  the  three  sides  and  the  three  angles
are  possible  except  through  each  other,  but  because
we  may  in  thought  view  the  figure— qua  triangle,
in  reality  one  and  indivisible— in  different  relations.
In  like  manner,  we  may  consider  a  representative  act
of  knowledge  in  two  relations—  1°,  as  an  actrepresen-
tative  of  something,  and,  2°  as  an  act  cognitive  of
that  representation,  although,  in  truth,  these  are  both
only  one  indivisible  energy— the  representation  only
existing  as  known,  the  cognition  being  only  possible  in
a  representation.  Thus,  e.  g.,  in  the  imagination  of
a  Centaur — the  Centaur  represented  is  the  Centaur
known,  the  Centaur  known  is  the  Centaur  repre-
een'ed.  It  is  one  act  under  two  relations— a  relation
to  the  subject  knowing — a  relation  to  the  object  re-
presented. But  to  a  cognitive  act  considered  in  these
several  relations  we  may  give  either  different  names,
or  we  may  confound  ttlem  under  one,  or  we  may  do
both  ;  and  this  is  actually  done  ;  some  words  express-
ing only  one  relation,  others  both  or  either,  and
others  properly  the  one  but  abusively  also  the  other,
'thus  Idea  properly  denotes  an  act  of  thought  con-
sidered in  relation  to  an  external  something  beyond
the  sphere  of  consciousness— a  representation;  but
some  philosophers,  as  Locke,  abuse  it  to  comprehend
the  thought  also,  viewed  as  cognitive  of  this  represen-
tation. Again,  perception,  notion,  conception,  &c.
{concept  is,  unfortunately,  obsolete)  comprehend
both,  or  may  be  used  to  denote  either  of  the  rela-
tions; and  it  is  only  by  the  context  that  we  can  ever
vaguely  discover  in  which  application  they  are  in-
tended. This  is  unfoitunate;  but  so  it  is.— H.


[153-155]


the  word  idea,  but  not  with  the  philosophi-
cal.

When  these  two  different  meanings  o/
the  word  idea  are  confounded  in  a  studied
explication  of  it,  there  is  little  reason  to
expect  that  they  should  be  carefully  dis-
tinguished in  the  frequent  use  of  it.  There
are  many  passages  in  the  Essay  in  which,
to  make  them  intelligible,  the  word  idea
must  be  taken  in  one  of  those  senses,  and
many  others  in  which  it  must  be  taken  in
the  other.  It  seems  probable  that  the
author,  not  attending  to  this  ambiguity  of
the  word,  used  it  in  the  one  sense  or  the
other,  as  the  subject-matter  required  ;  and
the  far  greater  part  of  his  readers  have  done
the  same. [154]

There  is  a  third  sense,  in  which  he  uses
the  word  not  unfrequently,  to  signify  objects
of  thought  that  are  not  in  tlie  mind,  but
external.  Of  this  he  seems  to  be  sensible,
and  somewhere  makes  an  apology  for  it.
When  he  affirms,  as  he  does  in  innumerable
places,  that  all  human  knowledge  consists
in  the  perception  of  the  agreement  or  dis-
agreement of  our  ideas,  it  is  impossible  to
put  a  meaning  upon  this,  consistent  with
his  principles,  unless  he  means  by  ideae
every  object  of  human  thought,  whether
mediate  or  immediate  ;  everything,  in  a
word,  that  can  be  signified  by  the  subject,
or  predicate  of  a  proposition.

Thus,  we  see  that  the  word  idea  has  three
different  meanings  in  the  essay;  and  the
author  seems  to  have  used  it  sometimes  in  one,
sometimes  in  another,  without  being  aware
of  any  change  in  the  meaning.  The  reader
slides  easily  into  the  same  fallacy,  that
meaning  occurring  most  readily  to  his  mind
which  gives  the  best  sense  to  what  he  reads.
I  have  met  with  persons  professing  no  slight
acquaintance  with  the  "  Essay  on  Human
Understanding,''  who  maintained  that  the
word  idea,  wherever,  it  occurs,  means
nothing  more  than  thought  ;  and  that,
where  he  speaks  of  ideas  as  images  in  the
mind,  and  as  objects  of  thought,  he  is  not
to  be  understood  as  speaking  properly,  but
figuratively  or  analogically.  And,  indeed,
I  apprehend  that  it  would  be  no  small
advantage  to  many  passages  in  the  book,
if  they  could  admit  of  this  interpretation.

It  is  not  the  fault  of  this  philosopher
alone  to  have  given  too  little  attention  to
the  distinction  between  the  operations  of
the  mind  and  the  objects  of  those  opera-
tions. Although  this  distinction  be  familiar
to  the  vulgar,  and  found  in  the  structure  of
all  languages,  philosophers,  when  they  speak
of  ideas,  often  confound  [155]  the  two  to-
gether ;  and  their  theory  concerning  ideas
has  led  them  to  do  so ;  for  ideas,  being
supposed  to  be  a  shadowy  kind  of  beings,
intermediate  between  the  thought  and  the
object  of  thought,  sometimes  seem  to  coa>


280


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II


lesce  with  the  thought,  sometimes  with  the
object  of  thought,  and  sometimes  to  have  a
distinct  existence  of  their  own.

The  same  philosophical  theory  of  ideas
has  led  philosophers  to  confound  the  differ-
ent operations  of  the  understanding,  and
to  call  them  all  by  the  name  of  perception.*
Mr  Locke,  though  not  free  from  this  fault,
is  not  so  often  chargeable  with  it  as  some
who  came  after  him.  The  vulgar  give  the
name  of  perception  to  that  immediate  know-
ledge of  external  objects  which  we  have  by
our  external  senses.  +  This  is  its  proper
meaning  in  our  language,  though  sometimes
it  may  be  applied  to  other  things  metaphori-
cally or  analogically.  J  When  I  think  of
anything  that  does  not  exist,  as  of  the
republic  of  Oceana,  I  do  not  perceive  it — I
only  conceive  or  imagine  it.§  When  I
think  of  what  happened  to  me  yesterday,  I
do  not  perceive  but  remember  it.  ||  When
I  am  pained  with  the  gout,  it  is  not  proper
to  say  I  perceive  the  pain  ;  I  feel  it,  or  am
conscious  of  it :  it  is  not  an  object  of  per-
ception, but  of  sensation  and  of  conscious-
ness.^" So  far,  the  vulgar  distinguish  very
properly  the  different  operations  of  the
mind,  and  never  confound  the  names  of
things  so  different  in  their  nature.  But
the  theory  of  ideas  leads  philosophers  to
conceive  all  those  operations  to  be  of  one
nature,  and  to  give  them  one  name.  They
are  all,  according  to  that  theory,  the  per-
ception of  ideas  in  the  mind.  Perceiving,
remembering,  imagining,  being  conscious,
are  all  perceiving  ideas  in  the  mind,  and
are  called  perceptions.  Hence  it  is  that
philosophers  speak  of  the  perceptions  of
memory,  and  the  perceptions  of  imagina-


•  No  mere  than  by  calling  them  all  by  the  name
of  Cognitioi  s,  or  Acts  of  Consciouness.  There  was
no  reason,  either  from  etymology  or  usage,  why  per-
ception should  not  signify  the  energy  of  immediately
apprehending,  in  general;  and  until  Reid  limited  the
word  to  our  apprehension  of  an  external  world,  it
was,  in  fact,  employed  by  philosophers,  as  tanta-
mount to  an  act  of  consciousness.  We  were  in  need
of  a  word  to  express  our  sensitive  cognitions  as  dis-
tinct from  our  sensitive  feelings,  (for  the  term  sens-
ation involved  both,)  and,  therefore,  Reid's  restric-
tion, though  contrary  to  all  precedent,  may  be  ad-
mitted ;  but  his  criticism  of  i.ther  philosophers  for
their  employment  of  the  term,  in  a  wider  meaning,
is  wholly  groundless. —  H.

t  But  not  exclusively.— -H.

%  This  is  not  correct  — H.

\  And  why  ?  Simply  because  we  do  not,  by  such
an  act,  know,  or  apprehend  such  an  object  to  exist ;
we  merely  represent  it.  But  perception  was  only
used  for  such  an  apprehension.  We  could  say,  how-
ever, that  we  peiceived  (as  we  could  say  that  we  were
conscious  of)  the  republic  of  Cceana,  as  imagined
by  us,  after  Harrington. — H.

i|  And  (his,  for  the  same  reason.  What  is  remem-
bered is  not  and  can  not  be  immediately  known  ;
nought  but  the  present  mental  representation  is  so
known  ;  and  this  we  could  properly  say  that  we
perceived. — H.

If  Because  the  feeling  of  pain,  though  only  possible
through  consciousness,  is  not  an  act  of  knowledge.
But  it  could  be  properly  said,  /  perceive  a  feeling  of
pain.  At  any  rate,  theexpression  1 perceive  a  pain,
is  *s  correct  as  J  am  conscious  of  a  jain.—  H.


tion.  They  make  sensation  to  be  a  percep-
tion ;  and  everything  we  perceive  by  our
senses  to  be  an  idea  of  sensation.  Some-
times they  say  that  they  are  conscious  of
the  ideas  in  their  own  minds,  sometimes
that  they  perceive  them.* [156]

However  improbable  it  may  appear  that
philosophers  who  have  taken  pains  to  study
the  operations  of  their  own  minds,  should
express  them  less  properly  and  less  dis-
tinctly than  the  vulgar,  it  seems  really  to  be
the  case ;  and  the  only  account  that  can  be
given  of  this  strange  phenomenon,  I  take
to  be  this :  that  the  vulgar  seek  no  theory
to  account  for  the  operations  of  their  minds  ;
they  know  that  they  see,  and  hear,  and  re-
member, and  imagine ;  and  those  who  think
distinctly  will  express  these  operations  dis-
tinctly, as  their  consciousness  represents
them  to  the  mind  ;  but  philosophers  think
they  ought  to  know  not  only  that  there  are
such  operations,  but  how  they  are  per-
formed ;  how  they  see,  and  hear,  and  re-
member, and  imagine ;  and,  having  invented
a  theory  to  explain  these  operations,  by
ideas  or  images  in  the  mind,  they  suit  their
expressions  to  their  theory  ;  and,  as  a  false
comment  throws  a  cloud  upon  the  text,  so
a  false  theory  darkens  the  phenomena
which  it  attempts  to  explain.

We  shall  examine  this  theory  afterwards.
Here  I  would  only  observe  that,  if  it  is  not
true,  it  may  be  expected  that  it  should  lead
ingenious  men  who  adopt  it  to  confound  the
operations  of  the  mind  with  their  objects,
and  with  one  another,  even  where  the  com-
mon language  of  the  unlearned  clearly  dis-
tinguishes them.  One  that  trusts  to  a  false
guide  is  in  greater  danger  of  being  led
astray,  than  he  who  trusts  his  own  eyes,
though  he  should  be  but  indifferently  ac-
quainted with  the  road.


CHAPTER  X.

OF THE  SENTIMENTS OF BISHOP  EERKELEY.

George  Berkeley,  afterwards  Bishop
of  Cloyne,  published  his  "  New  Theory  of
Vision,"  in  1709;  his  "Treatise  concern-
ing the  Principles  of  Human  Knowledge,"  in
1710 ;  and  his  "Dialogues  between  Hylas
and  Philonous,"  in  1713  ;  being  then  a  Fel-
low of  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  [157]  He  is
acknowledged  universally  to  have  great
merit,  as  an  excellent  writer,  and  a  very
acute  and  clear  reasoner  on  the  most  ab-
stract subjects,  not  to  speak  of  his  virtues
as  a  man,  which  were  very  conspicuous  :
yet  the  doctrine  chiefly  held  forth  in  the
treatises  above  mentioned,  especially  in  the

*  The  connection  of  the  wider  signification  of  the
term  perception,  with  the  more  complex  theory  of
representation,  has  no  foundation — H.

ri56,  157"!


chap,  x.]  OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF BISHOP  BERKELEY.


281


two  last,  has  generally  been  thought  so  very
absurd,  that  few  can  be  brought  to  think
that  he  either  believed  it  himself,  or  that
he  seriously  meant  to  persuade  others  of  its
truth.

He  maintains,  and  thinks  he  has  demon-
strated, by  a  variety  of  arguments,  ground-
ed on  principles  of  philosophy  universally
received,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as
matter  in  the  universe  ;  that  sun  and  moon,
earth  and  sea,  our  own  bodies,  and  those  of
our  friends,  are  nothing  but  ideas  in  the
minds  of  those  who  think  of  them,  and  that
they  have  no  existence  when  they  are  not
the  objects  of  thought ;  that  all  that  is  in
the  universe  may  be  reduced  to  two  cate-
gories— to  wit,  minds,  and  ideas  in  the
mind.

But,  however  absurd  this  doctrine  might
appear  to  the  unlearned,  who  consider  the
existence  of  the  objects  of  sense  as  the
most  evident  of  all  truths,  and  what  no  man
in  his  senses  can  doubt,  the  philosophers
who  had  been  accustomed  to  consider  ideas
as  the  immediate  objects  of  all  thought,  had
no  title  to  view  this  doctrine  of  Berkeley  in
so  unfavourable  a  light.

They  were  taught  by  Des  Cartes,  and  by
all  that  came  after  him,  that  the  existence
of  the  objects  of  sense  is  not  self-evident,
but  requires  to  be  proved  by  arguments  ;
and,  although  Des  Cartes,  and  many  others,
had  laboured  to  find  arguments  for  this
purpose,  there  did  not  appear  to  be  that
force  and  clearness  in  them  which  might
have  been  expected  in  a  matter  of  such  im-
portance. Mr  Norris  had  declared  that,
after  all  the  arguments  that  had  been
offered,  the  existence  of  an  external  world
is  only  probable,  but  by  no  means  certain.
[158]  Malebranche  thought  it  rested  upon  the
authority  of  revelation,  and  that  the  argu-
ments drawn  from  reason  were  not  perfectly
conclusive.  Others  thought  that  the  argu-
ment from  revelation  was  a  mere  sophism,
because  revelation  comes  to  us  by  our
senses,  and  must  rest  upon  their  authority.

Thus  we  see  that  the  new  philosophy
had  been  making  gradual  approaches  towards
Berkeley's  opinion ;  and;  whatever  others
might  do,  the  philosophers  had  no  title  to
look  upon  it  as  absurd,  or  unworthy  of  a
fair  examination.  Several  authors  attempt-
ed to  answer  his  arguments,  but  with  little
success,  and  others  acknowledged  that  they
could  neither  answer  them  nor  assent  to
them.  It  is  probable  the  Bishop  made  but
few  converts  to  his  doctrine  ;  but  it  is  cer-
tain he  made  some  ;  and  that  he  himself
continued,  to  the  end  of  his  life,  firmly  per-
suaded, not  only  of  its  truth,*  but  of  its


•  Berkeley's  confidence  in  his  idealism  was,  how.
ever,  nothing  to  Fichte's.  This  philosopher,  in  one
of  his  controversial  treatises,  imprecates  everlasting
damnation  on  himself  not  only  should  he  retract,  but
fl58.  159"!


great  importance  for  the  improvement  of
human  knowledge,  and  especially  for  the
defence  of  religion.  Dial.  Pref.  "  If  the
principles  which  I  here  endeavour  to  pro-
pagate, are  admitted  for  true,  the  conse-
quences which  I  think  evidently  flow  from
thence  are,  that  atheism  and  scepticism
will  be  utterly  destroyed,  many  intricate
points  made  plain,  great  difficulties  solved,
several  useless  parts  of  science  retrenched,
speculation  referred  to  practice,  and  men
reduced  from  paradoxes  to  common  sense."

In  the  "  Theory  of  Vision,"  he  goes  no
farther  than  to  assert  that  the  objects  of
sight  are  nothing  but  ideas  in  the  mind,
granting,  or  at  least  not  denying,  that  there
is  a  tangible  world,  which  is  really  external,
and  which  exists  whether  we  perceive  it  or
not.  Whether  thereason  of  this  was, that  his
system  had  not,  at  that  time,  wholly  opened
to  his  own  mind,  or  whether  he  thought  it
prudent  to  let  it  enter  into  the  minds  of  his
readers  by  degrees,  I  cannot  say.  I  think
he  insinuates  the  last  as  the  reason,  in  the
"  Principles  of  Human  Knowledge."  [  159]

The  "  Theory  of  Vision,"  however,  taken
by  itself,  and  without  relation  to  the  main
branch  of  his  system,  contains  very  important
discoveries,  and  marks  of  great  genius.  He
distinguishes  more  accurately  than  any  that
went  before  him,  between  the  immediate
objects  of  sight,  and  those  of  the  other
senses  which  are  early  associated  with  them.
He  shews  that  distance,  of  itself  and  imme-
diately, is  not  seen  ;  but  that  we  learn  to
judge  of  it  by  certain  sensations  and  per-
ceptions which  are  connected  with  it.  This
is  a  very  important  observation ;  and,  I
believe,  was  first  made  by  this  author.*
It  gives  much  new  light  to  the  operations
of  our  senses,  and  serves  to  account  for
many  phsenomena  in  optics,  of  which  the
greatest  adepts  in  that  science  had  always
either  given  a  false  account,  or  acknow-
ledged that  they  could  give  none  at  all.

We  may  observe,  by  the  way,  that  the
ingenious  author  seems  not  to  have  attended
to  a  distinction  by  which  his  general  asser-
tion ought  to  have  been  limited.  It  is  true
that  the  distance  of  an  object  from  the  eye  is
not  immediately  seen  ;  but  there  is  a  certain
kind  of  distance  of  one  object  from  another
which  we  see  immediately.  The  author
acknowledges  that  there  is  a  visible  exten-
sion, and  visible  figures,  which  are  proper
objects  of  sight ;  there  must  therefore  be  a
visible  distance.  Astronomers  call  it  an-
gular distance  ;  and,  although  they  measure


should  he  even  waver  in  regard  to  any  one  principle
of  his  doctrine;  a  doctrine,  the  speculative  result  of
which  left  him,  as  he  confesses,  without  even  a  cer.
tainty  of  his  own  existence.  (See  above,  p.  129,
note  *.)  It  is  Varro  who  speaks  of  the  credula
philosopho^um  natio  :  but  this  is. to  be  credulous
even  in  incredulity. — H.

*  This  last  statement  is  inaccurate.—  H.


182


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


it  by  the  angle,  which  is  made  by  two  lines
drawn  from  the  eye  to  the  two  distant  ob-
jects, yet  it  is  immediately  perceived  by
sight,  even  by  those  who  never  thought  of
that  nngle.

He  led  the  way  in  shewing  how  we  learn
to  perceive  the  distance  of  an  object  from
the  eye,  though  this  speculation  was  carried
farther  by  others  who  came  after  him.  He
made  the  distinction  between  that  extension
and  figure  which  we  perceive  by  sight  only,
and  that  which  we  perceive  by  touch ;  call-
ing the  first,  visible,  the  last,  tangible  ex-
tension and  figure.  He  shewed,  likewise,
that  tangible  extension,  and  not  visible,  is
the  object  of  geometry,  although  mathema-
ticians commonly  use  visible  diagrams  in
their  demonstrations.* [160]

The  notion  of  extension  and  figure  which
we  get  from  sight  only,  and  that  which  we
get  from  touch,  have  been  so  constantly
conjoined  from  our  infancy  in  all  the  judg-
ments we  form  of  the  objects  of  sense,
that  it  required  great  abilities  to  distin-
guish them  accurately,  and  to  assign  to
each  sense  what  truly  belongs  to  it ;  "  so
difficult  a  thing  it  is,"  as  Berkeley  justly
observes,  "  to  dissolve  an  union  so  early
begun,  and  confirmed  by  so  long  a  habit."
This  point  he  has  laboured,  through  the
whole  of  the  essay  on  vision,  with  that
uncommon  penetration  and  judgment  which
he  possessed,  and  with  as  great  success  as
could  be  expected  in  a  first  attempt  upon
so  abstruse  a  subject.

He  concludes  this  essay,  by  shewing,  in
no  less  than  seven  sections,  the  notions
which  an  intelligent  being,  endowed  with
sight,  without  the  sense  of  touch,  might
form  of  the  objects  of  sense.  This  specu-
lation, to  shallow  thinkers,  may  appear  to
be  egregious  trifling.  -|-  To  Bishop  Ber-
keley it  appeared  in  another  light,  and  will
do  so  to  those  who  are  capable  of  entering
into  it,  and  who  know  the  importance  of  it,
in  solving  many  of  the  phenomena  of  vision.
He  seems,  indeed,  to  have  exerted  more
force  of  genius  in  this  than  in  the  main
branch  of  his  system.

In  the  new  philosophy,  the  pillars  by
which  the  existence  of  a  material  world  was
supported,  were  so  feeble  that  it  did  not
re  i  aire  the  force  of  a  Samson  to  brinsr  them


*  Properly  «pe.ik  ng,  it  is  neither  tangible  nor
visible  extension  which  is  the  object  of  geometry,
but  intelligible,  pure,  or  a  priori  extension. — H.

+  This,  I  have  no  doubt,  is  in  allusion  to  Priestley.
That  writer  had,  not  very  courteously,  said,  in  his
««  Examination  of  Reid's  Inquiry"  ««  I  do  not  re-
member to  have  seen  a  more  egregious  piece  of  so-
lemn trifling  than  the  chapter  which  our  author  calls
the  '  Geometry  of  Visible*,'  and  his  account  of  the
•  Idomenians,'  as  he  terms  tlr  se  imaginary  beings  who
nad  no  ideas  of  substance  but  from  sight.  "—In  a  note
upon  that  chapter  of  ««  The  Inquiry,"  I  stated  that
the  thought  of  a  Geometry  of  Visihles  was  original  to
Berkeley,  and  I  had  then  no  recollection  of  Reid's
acknowledgment  in  the  present  paragraph.  — H.


down ;  and  in  this  we  have  not  so  much
reason  to  admire  the  strength  of  Berkeley's
genius,  as  his  boldness  in  publishing  to  the
world  an  opinion  which  the  unlearned  would
be  apt  to  interpret  as  the  sign  of  a  crazy
intellect.  A  man  who  was  firmly  persuaded
of  the  doctrine  universally  received  by  phi-
losophers concerning  ideas,  if  he  could  but
take  courage  to  call  in  question  the  exist-
ence of  a  material  world,  would  easily  find
unanswerable  arguments  in  that  doctrine.
[161]  "  Some  truths  there  are,"  says  Berke-
ley, "  so  near  and  obvious  to  the  mind,  that
a  man  need  only  open  his  eyes  to  see  them.
Such,"  he  adds,  "I  take  this  important  one
to  be,  that  all  the  choir  of  heaven,  and  fur-
niture of  the  earth— in  a  word,  all  those
bodies  which  compose  the  mighty  frame
of  the  world — have  not  any  subsistence
without  a  mind." Princ.  §  6.

The  principle  from  which  this  important
conclusion  is  obviously  deduced,  is  laid  down
in  the  first  sentence  of  his  principles  of
knowledge,  as  evident ;  and,  indeed,  it  has
always  been  acknowledged  by  philosophers.
"  It  is  evident,"  says  he,  "  to  any  one  who
takes  a  survey  of  the  objects  of  human
knowledge,  that  they  are  either  ideas  ac-
tually imprinted  on  the  senses,  or  else  such
as  are  perceived,  by  attending  to  the  pas-
sions and  operations  of  the  mind  ;  or,  lastly,
ideas  formed  by  help  of  memory  and  imagin-
ation, either  compounding,  dividing,  or
barely  representing  those  originally  per-
ceived in  the  foresaid  ways."

This  is  the  foundation  on  which  the  whole
system  rests.  If  this  be  true,  then,  indeed,
the  existence  of  a  material  world  must  be
a  dream  that  has  imposed  upon  all  mankind
from  the  beginning  of  the  world.

The  foundation  on  which  such  a  fabric
rests  ought  to  be  very  solid  and  well  esta-
blished ;  yet  Berkeley  says  nothing  more  for
it  than  that  it  is  evident.  If  he  means  that
it  is  self-evident,  this  indeed  might  be  a
good  reason  for  not  offering  any  direct  argu-
ment in  proof  of  it.  But  I  apprehend  this
cannot  justly  be  said.  Self-evident  propo-
sitions are  those  which  appear  evident  to
every  man  of  sound  understanding  who  ap-
prehends the  meaning  of  them  distinctly,
and  attends  to  them  without  prejudice.  Can
this  be  said  of  this  proposition,  That  all  the
objects  of  our  knowledge  are  ideas  in  our
own  minds  ?* I  believe  that,  to  anv  man


*  To  the  Idealist,  it  is  of  perfect  indifference  whether
this  proposition,  in  Reid's  sense  of  the  expression
Ideas,  be  admitted,  or  whether  it  be  held  that  we  are
conscious  of  nothing  but  of  the  modifications  of  our
own  minds.  For,  on  the  supposition  that  we  can
know  the  non-ego  only  in  and  through  the  ego,  it
follows,  (since  we  can  know  nothing  immediately  of
which  we  are  not  conscious,  and  it  being  allowed
that  we  are  conscious  only  of  mind,)  that  it  is  con.
tradicfory  to  suppose  aught,  as  known,  {i.e.,  any  ob-
ject of  knowledge.)  to  be  known  otherwise  than  as  it
phenomenon  ct  mind.— H.

[160/  16T]


:hap.  x.J  OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  BISHOP  BERKELEY


283


uninstracted  in  philosophy,  this  proposition
will  appear  very  improbable,  if  not  absurd.
[162]  However  scanty  his  knowledge  may
be,  he  considers  the  sun  and  moon,  the  earth
and  sea,  as  objects  of  it;  and  it  will  be  difficult
to  persuade  him  that  those  objects  of  his
knowledge  are  ideas  in  his  own  mind,  and
have  no  existence  when  he  does  not  think
of  them.  If  I  may  presume  to  speak  my
own  sentiments,  I  once  believed  this  doc-
trine of  ideas  so  firmly  as  to  embrace  the
whole  of  Berkeley's  system  in  consequence
of  it ;  till,  finding  other  consequences  to
follow  from  it,  which  gave  me  more  unea-
siness than  the  want  of  a  material  world,
it  came  into  my  mind,  more  than  forty
years  ago,  to  put  the  question,  What  evi-
dence have  I  for  this  doctrine,  that  all  the
objects  of  my  knowledge  are  ideas  in  my
own  mind  ?  From  that  time  to  the  pre-
sent I  have  been  candidly  and  impartially,
as  I  think,  seeking  for  the  evidence  of  this
principle,  but  can  find  none,  excepting  the
authority  of  philosophers.

We  shall  have  occasion  to  examine  its
evidence  afterwards.  I  would  at  present
only  observe,  that  all  the  arguments  brought
by  Berkeley  against  the  existence  of  a  ma-
terial world  are  grounded  upon  it ;  and  that
he  has  not  attempted  to  give  any  evidence
for  it,  but  takes  it  for  granted,  as  other
philosophers  had  done  before  him.

But,  supposing  this  principle  to  be  true,
Berkeley's  system  is  impregnable.  No
demonstration  can  be  more  evident  than
his  reasoning  from  it.  Whatever  is  per-
ceived is  an  idea,  and  an  idea  can  only
exist  in  a  mind.  It  has  no  existence  when
it  is  not  perceived  ;  nor  can  there  be  any-
thing like  an  idea,  but  an  idea.

So  sensible  he  was  that  it  required  no
laborious  reasoning  to  deduce  his  system
from  the  principle  laid  down,  that  he  was
afraid  of  being  thought  needlessly  prolix  in
handling  the  subject,  and  makes  an  apology
for  it.  Princ.  §  22.  "  To  what  purpose
is  it,"  says  he,  "  to  dilate  upon  that  which
may  be  demonstrated,  with  the  utmost  evi-
dence, in  a  line  or  two,  to  any  one  who  is
capable  of  the  least  reflection?"  [163]  But,
though  his  demonstration  might  have  been
comprehended  in  a  line  or  two,  he  very  pru-
dently thought  that  an  opinion  which  the
world  would  be  apt  to  look  upon  as  a  mon-
ster of  absurdity,  would  not  be  able  to  make
its  way  at  once,  even  by  the  force  of  a  naked
demonstration.  He  observes,  justly,  Dial.
2,  "  That,  though  a  demonstration  be  never
so  well  grounded  and  fairly  proposed,  yet
if  there  is,  withal,  a  strain  of  prejudice,  or
a  wrong  bias  on  the  understanding,  can  it
be  expected  to  perceive  clearly,  and  adhere
firmly  to  the  truth  ?  No  ;  there  is  need  of
time  and  pains ;  the  attention  must  be
awakened  and  detained,  by  a  frequent  re-


petition of  the  same  thing,  placed  often  in
the  same,  often  in  different  lights."

It  was,  therefore,  necessary  to  dwell
upon  it,  and  turn  it  on  all  sides,  till  it  became
familiar ;  to  consider  all  its  consequences,
and  to  obviate  every  prejudice  and  pre-
possession that  might  hinder  its  admittance.
It  was  even  a  matter  of  some  difficulty  to
fit  it  to  common  language,  so  far  as  to
enable  men  to  speak  and  reason  about  it
intelligibly.  Those  who  have  entered  se-
riously into  Berkeley's  system,  have  found,
after  all  the  assistance  which  his  writings
give,  that  time  and  practice  are  necessary
to  acquire  the  habit  of  speaking  and  think-
ing distinctly  upon  it.

Berkeley  foresaw  the  opposition  that
would  be  made  to  his  system,  from  two
different  quarters :  first,  from  the  philos-
ophers ;  and,  secondly,  from  the  vulgar,
who  are  led  by  the  plain  dictates  of  nature.
The  first  he  had  the  courage  to  oppose
openly  and  avowedly ;  the  second,  he
dreaded  much  more,  and,  therefore,  takes
a  great  deal  of  pains,  and,  I  think,  uses
some  art,  to  court  into  his  party.  This
is  particularly  observable  in  his  "  Dia-
logues." He  sets  out  with  a  declaration,
Dial.  1,  "  That,  of  late,  he  had  quitted
several  of  the  sublime  notions  he  had  got
in  the  schools  of  the  philosophers,  for  vul-
gar opinions,"  and  assures  Hylas,  his  fel-
low-dialogist,  "  That,  since  this  revolt  from
metaphysical  notions  to  the  plain  dictates
of  nature  and  common  sense,  he  found  his
understanding  strangely  enlightened ;  so
that  he  could  now  easily  comprehend  a  great
many  things,  which  before  were  all  mys-
tery and  riddle."  [164]  Pref.  to  Dial.  "  If
his  principles  are  admitted  for  true,  men
will  be  reduced  from  paradoxes  to  common
sense."  At  the  same  time,  he  acknowledges,
"  That  they  carry  with  them  a  great  opposi-
tion to  the  prejudices  of  philosophers,  which
have  so  far  prevailed  against  the  common
sense  and  natural  notions  of  mankind."

When  Hylas  objects  to  him,  Dial.  3,
"  You  can  never  persuade  me,  Philonous,
that  the  denying  of  matter  or  corporeal
substance  is  not  repugnant  to  the  universal
sense  of  mankind" — he  answers,  "  I  wish
both  our  opinions  were  fairly  stated,  and
submitted  to  the  judgment  of  men  who  had
plain  common  sense,  without  the  prejudices
of  a  learned  education.  Let  me  be  repre-
sented as  one  who  trusts  his  senses,  who
thinks  he  knows  the  things  he  sees  and
feels,  and  entertains  no  doubt  of  their  ex-
istence— If  by  material  substance  is  meant
only  sensible  body,  that  which  is  seen  and
felt,  (and  the  unphilosophical  part  of  the
world,  I  dare  say,  mean  no  more,)  then  I
am  more  certain  of  matter's  existence  than
you  or  any  other  philosopher  pretend  to  be.
If there be  anything which makes  the


284


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


generality  of  mankind  averse  from  the
notions  I  espouse,  it  is  a  misapprehension
that  I  deny  the  reality  of  sensible  things :
but,  as  it  is  you  who  are  guilty  of  that,  and
not  I,  it  follows,  that,  in  truth,  their  aversion
is  against  your  notions,  and  not  mine.  I
am  content  to  appeal  to  the  common  sense
of  the  world  for  the  truth  of  my  notion.  I
am  of  a  vulgar  east,  simple  enough  to
believe  my  senses,  and  to  leave  things  as  I
find  them.  I  cannot,  for  my  life,  help
thinking  that  snow  is  white  and  fire  hot."

When  Hylas  is  at  last  entirely  converted,
he  observes  to  Philonous,  "  After  all,  the
controversy  about  matter,  in  the  strict
acceptation  of  it,  lies  altogether  between
you  and  the  philosophers,  whose  principles,
I  acknowledge,  are  not  near  so  natural,  or
so  agreeable  to  the  common  sense  of  man-
kind, and  Holy  Scripture,  as  yours."  [165]
Philonous  observes,  in  the  end,  "  That  he
does  not  pretend  to  be  a  setter  up  of  new
notions ;  his  endeavours  tend  only  to  unite,
and  to  place  in  a  clearer  light,  that  truth
which  was  before  shared  between  the  vul-
gar and  the  philosophers  ;  the  former  being
of  opinion,  that  those  things  they  im-
mediately perceive  are  the  real  things ;  and
the  latter,  that  the  things  immediately
perceived,  are  ideas  which  exist  only  in  the
mind  ;  which  two  things  put  together  do,
in  effect,  constitute  the  substance  of  what
lie  advances."  And  he  concludes  by  ob-
serving, "That  those  principles  which  at
first  view  lead  to  scepticism,  pursued  to  a
certain  point,  bring  men  back  to  common
sense."

These  passages  shew  sufficiently  the
author's  concern  to  reconcile  his  system  to
the  plain  dictates  of  nature  and  common
sense,  while  he  expresses  no  concern  to
reconcile  it  to  the  received  doctrines  of
philosophers.  He  is  fond  to  take  part  with
the  vulgar  against  the  philosophers,  and  to
vindicate  common  sense  against  their  inno-
vations. What  pity  is  it  that  he  did  not
carry  this  suspicion  of  the  doctrine  of  philo-
sophers so  far  as  to  doubt  of  that  philoso-
phical tenet  on  which  his  whole  system  is
built — to  wit,  that  the  things  immediately
perceived  by  the  senses  are  ideas  which
exist  only  in  the  mind  !

After  all,  it  seems  no  easy  matter  to  make
the  vulgar  opinion  and  that  of  Berkeley  to
meet.  And,  to  accomplish  this,  he  seems
to  me  to  draw  each  out  of  its  line  towards
the  other,  not  without  some  straining.

The  vulgar  opinion  he  reduces  to  this,
that  the  very  things  which  we  perceive  by
our  senses  do  really  exist.  This  he  grants  ;*
for  these  things,  says  he,  are  ideas  in  our
minds, or  complexions  of  ideas,  to  which

* This  is  one  of  the  passages  that  may  be  brought
prove  that  Reid  did  allow  to  the  ego  an  imnv.'diate
aid  real  knowledge  of  the  non-ego. — H.


we  give  one  name,  and  consider  as  one
thing  ;  these  are  the  immediate  objects  of
sense,  and  these  do  really  exist.  As  to  the
notion  that  those  things  have  an  absolute
external  existence,  independent  of  being
perceived  by  any  mind,  he  thinks  [166]  that
this  is  no  notion  of  the  vulgar,  but  a  refine-
ment of  philosophers  ;  and  that  the  notion  of
material  substance,  as  &  substratum,  or  sup-
port of  that  collection  of  sensible  qualities
to  which  we  give  the  name  of  an  apple  or  a
melon,  is  likewise  an  invention  of  philoso-
phers, and  is  not  found  with  the  vulgar  till
they  are  instructed  by  philosophers.  The
substance  not  being  an  object  of  sense,  the
vulgar  never  think  of  it ;  or,  if  they  are
taught  the  use  of  the  word,  they  mean  no
more  by  it  but  that  collection  of  sensible
qualities  which  they,  from  finding  them  con-
joined in  nature,  have  been  accustomed  to
call  by  cue  name,  and  to  consider  as  one
thing.

Thus  he  draws  the  vulgar  opinion  near
to  his  own  ;  and,  that  he  may  meet  it  half
way,  he  acknowledges  that  material  things
have  a  real  existence  out  of  the  mind  of
this  or  that  person  ;  but  the  question,  says
he,  between  the  materialist  and  me,  is,
Whether  they  have  an  absolute  existence
distinct  from  their  being  perceived  by  God,
and  exterior  to  all  minds  ?  This,  indeed,
lie  says,  some  heathens  and  philosophers
have  affirmed  ;  but  whoever  entertains  no-
tions of  the  Deity,  suitable  to  the  Holy
Scripture,  will  be  of  another  opinion.

But  here  an  objection  occurs,  which  it
required  all  his  ingenuity  to  answer.  It  is
this  :  The  ideas  in  my  mind  cannot  be  the
same  with  the  ideas  of  any  other  mind ;
therefore,  if  the  objects  I  perceive  be  only
ideas,  it  is  impossible  that  the  objects  I  per-
ceive can  exist  anywhere,  when  I  do  not
perceive  them  ;  and  it  is  impossible  that
two  or  more  minds  can  perceive  the  same
object.

To  this  Berkeley  answers,  that  this  ob-
jection presses  no  less  the  opinion  of  the
materialist  philosopher  than  his.  But  the
difficulty  is  to  make  his  opinion  coincide
with  the  notions  of  the  vulgar,  who  are
firmly  persuaded  that  the  very  identical
objects  which  they  perceive,  continue  to
exist  when  they  do  not  perceive  them  ;  and
who  are  no  less  firmly  persuaded  that,  when
ten  men  look  at  the  sun  or  the  moon,  they
all  see  the  same  individual  object.* [167]

To  reconcile  this  repugnancy,  he  observes,
Dial.  3 — "  That,  if  the  term  same  be  taken
in  the  vulgar  acceptation,  it  is  certain  (and
not  at  all  repugnant  to  the  principles  he
maintains)  that  different  persons  may  per-
ceive the  same  thing ;  or  the  same  thing  or
idea  exist  in  different  minds. Words  are


• See  the  last  note.— H.


[165-167]


chap,  x.]  OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  BISHOP  BERKELEY.


285


of  arbitrary  imposition  ;  and,  since  men  are
used  to  apply  the  word  same,  where  no  dis-
tinction or  variety  is  perceived,  and  he  does
not  pretend  to  alter  their  perceptions,  it
follows  that,  as  men  have  said  before,
several  saw  the  same  thing,  so  they  may,
upon  like  occasions,  still  continue  to  use  the
same  phrase,  without  any  deviation,  either
from  propriety  of  language,  or  the  truth  of
things ;  but,  if  the  term  same  be  used  in  the
acceptation  of  philosophers,  who  pretend  to
an  abstracted  notion  of  identity,  then,
according  to  their  sundry  definitions  of  this
term,  (for  it  is  not  yet  agreed  wherein  that
philosophic  identity  consists,)  it  may  or
may  not  be  possible  for  divers  persons  to
perceive  the  same  thing ;  but  whether  phi-
losophers shall  think  fit  to  call  a  thing  the
same  or  no  is,  I  conceive,  of  small  import-
ance. Men  may  dispute  about  identity  and
diversity,  without  any  real  difference  in
their  thoughts  and  opinions,  abstracted  from
names."

Upon  the  whole,  I  apprehend  that  Berk-
eley has  carried  this  attempt  to  reconcile
his  system  to  the  vulgar  opinion  farther
than  reason  supports  him  ;  and  he  was  no
doubt  tempted  to  do  so,  from  a  just  appre-
hension that,  in  a  controversy  of  this  kind,
the  common  sense  of  mankind  is  the  most
formidable  antagonist.

Berkeley  has  employed  much  pains  and
ingenuity  to  shew  that  his  system,  if  re-
ceived and  believed,  would  not  be  attended
with  those  bad  consequences  in  the  conduct
of  life,  which  superficial  thinkers  may  be  apt
to  impute  to  it.  His  system  dees  not  take
away  or  make  any  alteration  upon  our  plea-
sures or  our  pains  :  our  sensations,  whether
agreeable  or  disagreable,  are  the, same  upon
his  system  as  upon  any  other.  These  are  real
things,  and  the  only  things  that  interest  us.
[  168]  They  are  produced  in  us  according  to
certain  laws  of  nature,  by  which  our  con-
duct will  be  directed  in  attaining  the  one,
and  avoiding  the  other  ;  and  it  is  of  no
moment  to  us,  whether  they  are  produced
immediately  by  the  operation  of  some  power-
ful intelligent  being  upon  our  minds ;  or
by  the  mediation  of  some  inanimate  being
which  we  call  matter.

The  evidence  of  an  all-governing  mind,
so  far  from  being  weakened,  seems  to  appear
even  in  a  more  striking  light  upon  his
hypothesis,  than  upon  the  common  one.
The  powers  which  inanimate  matter  is.  sup-
posed to  -possess,  have  always  been  the
stronghold  of  atheists,  to  which  they  had
recourse  in  defence  of  their  system.  This
fortress  of  atheism  must  be  most  effectually
overturned,  if  there  is  no  such  thing  as
matter  in  the  universe.  In  all  this  the
Bishop  reasons  justly  and  acutely.  But
there  is  one  uncomfortable  consequence  of
his  system,  which  he  seems  not  to  have  at-
["168,  169]


tended  to,  and  from  which  it  will  be  found
difficult,  if  at  all  possible,  to  guard  it.

The  consequence  I  mean  is  this — that,
although  it  leaves  us  sufficient  evidence  of  a
supreme  intelligent  mind,  it  seems  to  take
away  all  the  evidence  we  have  of  other
intelligent  beings  like  ourselves.  What  I
call  a  father,  a  brother,  or  a  friend,  is  only
a  parcel  of  ideas  in  my  own  mind ;  and,  being
ideas  in  my  mind,  they  cannot  possibly  have
that  relation  to  another  mind  which  they  have
to  mine,  any  more  than  the  pain  felt  by  me
can  be  the  individual  pain  felt  by  another.  I
can  find  no  principle  in  Berkeley's  system,
which  affords  me  even  probable  ground  to
conclude  that  there  are  other  intelligent
beings,  like  myself,  in  the  relations  of  father,
brother,  friend,  or  fellow-citizen.  I  am  left
alone,  as  the  only  creature  of  God  in  the
universe,  in  that  forlorn  state  of  egoism
into  which  it  is  said  some  of  the  disciples  of
Des  Cartes  were  brought  by  his  philo-
sophy.* [169]

Of  all  the  opinions  that  have  ever  been
advanced  by  philosophers,  this  of  Bishop
Berkeley,  that  there  is  no  material  world,
seems  the  strangest,  and  the  most  apt  to
bring  philosophy  into  ridicule  with  plain
men  who  are  guided  by  the  dictates  of  nature
and  common  sense.  And,  it  will  not,  I  ap-
prehend, be  improper  to  trace  this  progeny
of  the  doctrine  of  ideas  from  its  origin,  and
to  observe  its  gradual  progress,  till  it  acquired
such  strength  that  a  pious  and  learned
bishop  had  the  boldness  to  usher  it  into  the
world,  as  demonstrable  from  the  principles
of  philosophy  universally  received,  and  as
an  admirable  expedient  for  the  advance-
ment of  knowledge  and  for  the  defence  of
religion.

During  the  reign  of  the  Peripatetic  phi-
losophy, men  were  little  disposed  to  doubt,
and  much  to  dogmatize.  The  existence  of
the  objects  of  sense  was  held  as  a  first  prin-
ciple ;  and  the  received  doctrine  was,  that
the  sensible  species  or  idea  is  the  very  form
of  the  external  object,  just  separated  from
the  matter  of  it,  and  sent  into  the  mind  that
perceives  it ;  so  that  we  find  no  appearance
of  scepticism  about  the  existence  of  mat-
ter under  that  philosophy. -f-

Des  Cartes  taught  men  to  doubt  even  of
those  things  that  had  been  taken  for  first
principles. He  rejected  X  the  doctrine  of


*  In  which  the  scul,  like  the  unhappy  Dido—
^—  "  semperque  relinqui
Sola  sibi,  semper  longam  incomitata  videtur
Ire  viam." — H.
f  Thi^  is  not  the  case. It  could  easily  be  shewn
that,  in  the  schools  of  the  middle  ages,  the  arguments
in  favour  of  Idealism  were  fully  understood  ; and
they  would  certainly  have  obtained  numerous  parti-
sans, had  it  not  been  seen  that  such  a  philosophical
opinion  involved  a  theological  heresy  touching  the
eucharist This  was  even  recognised  by  St  Augus-
tine— H
J  Alter  many  of  the  Peripatetics  themselves — H.


28(5


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


JJESSAY  il.


species  or  ideas  coming  from  objects ;  but
still  maintained  that  what  we  immediately
perceive,  is  not  the  external  object,  but  an
idea  or  image  of  it  in  our  mind.  This  led
some  of  his  disciples  into  Egoism,  and  to  dis-
believe the  existence  of  every  creature  in  the
universe  but  themselves  and  their  own  ideas.  *

But  Des  Cartes  himself — either  from
dread  of  the  censure  of  the  church,  which
he  took  great  care  not  to  provoke;  or  to  shun
the  ridicule  of  the  world,  which  might  have
crushed  his  system  at  once,  as  it  did  that  of
the  Egoists  ;*  or,  perhaps,  from  inward
conviction — was  resolved  to  support  the  ex-
istence of  matter.  To  do  this  consistently
with  his  principles,  he  found  himself  obliged
to  have  recourse  to  arguments  that  are  far-
fetched, and  not  very  cogent.  Sometimes
he  argues  that  our  senses  are  given  us  by
God,  who  is  no  deceiver ;  and,  therefore,
we  ought  to  believe  their  testimony.  [170]
But  this  argument  is  weak  ;  because,  accord-
ing to  his  principles,  our  senses  testify  no
more  but  that  we  have  certain  ideas  :  and,
if  we  draw  conclusions  from  this  testimony,
which  the  premises  will  not  support,  we
deceive  ourselves.  To  give  more  force  to
this  weak  argument,  he  sometimes  adds,
that  we  have  by  nature  a  strong  propensity
to  believe  that  there  is  an  external  world
corresponding  to  our  ideas.  +

Malebranche  thought  that  this  strong
propensity  is  not  a  sufficient  reason  for  be-
lieving the  existence  of  matter ;  and  that  it
is  to  be  received  as  an  article  of  faith,  not
certainly  discoverable  by  reason.  He  is
aware  that  faith  comes  by  hearing ;  and  that
it  may  be  said  that  prophets,  apostles,  and
miracles  are  only  ideas  in  our  minds.  But
to  this  he  answers,  that,  though  these  things
are  only  ideas,  yet  faith  turns  them  into
realities  ;  and  this  answer,  he  hopes,  will
satisfy  those  who  are  not  too  morose.

It  may  perhaps  seem  strange  that  Locke,
who  wrote  so  much  about  ideas,  should  not
see  those  consequences  which  Berkeley
thought  so  obviously  deducible  from  that
doctrine.  Mr  Locke  surely  was  not  willing
that  the  doctrine  of  ideas  should  be  thought
to  be  loaded  with  such  consequences.  He
acknowledges  that  the  existence  of  a  mate-
rial world  is  not  to  be  received  as  a  first
principle — nor  is  it  demonstrable;  but  he
offers  the  best  arguments  for  it  he  can ;  and
supplies  the  weakness  of  his  arguments  by
this  observation — that  we  have  such  evi-


*  See  above,  p.  269,  note
187.- H.


and  below,  under  p.


t  We  are  only  by  nature  led  to  believe  in  the  exist-
ence of  an  outer  world,  because  we  are  by  nature  led
to  believe  that  we  have  an  immediate  knowledge  of
it  as  existing.  Now,  Des  Cartes  and  the  philosophers
in  general  (is  Reid  an  exception?)  hold  that  we  are
deluded  in  the  latter  belief;  and  yet  they  argue,  on
the  authority  of  the  former,  that  an  external  world
exists. — H.


dence  as  is  sufficient  to  direct  us  in  pur-
suing the  good  and  avoiding  the  ill  we  may
receive  from  external  things,  beyond  which
we  have  no  concern.

There  is,  indeed,  a  single  passage  in
Locke's  essay,  which  may  lead  one  to  con-
jecture that  he  had  a  glimpse  of  that  sys-
tem which  Berkeley  afterwards  advanced,
but  thought  proper  to  suppress  it  within  his
own  breast.  [171]  The  passage  is  in  Book
4,  c.  10,  where,  having  proved  the  existence
of  an  eternal  intelligent  mind,  he  comes
to  answer  those  who  conceive  that  matter
also  must  be  eternal,  because  we  cannot
conceive  how  it  could  be  made  out  of
nothing ;  and  having  observed  that  the
creation  of  mind  requires  no  less  power  than
the  creation  of  matter,  he  adds  what  fol-
lows : — "  Nay,  possibly,  if  we  could  eman-
cipate ourselves  from  vulgar  notions,  and
raise  our  thoughts,  as  far  as  they  would
reach,  to  a  closer  contemplation  of  things,
we  might  be  able  to  aim  at  some  dim  and
seeming  conception,  how  matter  might  at
first  be  made  and  begin  to  exist,  by  the
power  of  that  eternal  first  Being ;  but  to
give  beginning  and  being  to  a  spirit,  would
be  found  a  more  inconceivable  effect  of  om-
nipotent power.  But  this  being  what  would
perhaps  lead  us  too  far  from  the  notions  on
which  the  philosophy  now  in  the  world  is
built,  it  would  not  be  pardonable  to  deviate
so  far  from  them,  or  to  inquire,  so  far  as
grammar  itself  would  authorize,  if  the  com-
mon settled  opinion  opposes  it ;  especially
in  this  place,  where  the  received  doctrine
serves  well  enough  to  our  present  purpose.*

It  appears  from  this  passage — First,  That
Mr  Locke  had  some  system  in  his  mind,
perhaps  not  fully  digested,  to  which  we
might  be  led,  by  raising  our  thoughts  to  a
closer  contemplation  of  things,  and.  emanci-
pating them  from  vulgar  notions  ;  Secondly,
That  this  system  would  lead  so  far  from  the
notions  on  which  the  philosophy  now  in  the
world  is  built,  that  he  thought  proper  to
keep  it  within  his  own  breast ;  Thirdly,
That  it  might  be  doubted  whether  this  sys-
tem differed  so  far  from  the  common  settled
opinion  in  reality,  as  it  seemed  to  do  in
words  ;  Fourthly,  By  this  system,  we  might
possibly  be  enabled  to  aim  at  some  dim  and
seeming  conception  how  matter  might  at
first  be  made  and  begin  to  exist ;  but  it
would  give  no  aid  in  conceiving  how  a
spirit  might  be  made.  These  are  the  cha-
racteristics of  that  system  which  Mr  Locke
had  in  his  mind,  and  thought  it  prudent  to
suppress.  May  they  not  lead  to  a  probable
conjecture,  that  it  was  the  same,  or  some-
thing similar  to  that  of  Bishop  Berkeley  ?

*  Mr  Stewart  plausibly  supposes  that  this  passage
contains  rather  an  anticipation  of  Boscovich's  Theory
of-  Matter,  than  of  Berkeley's  Theory  of  Idealism.
Philosophical  Essays,  p.  64.  But  see  note  F. — H.

[170,  171]


chap.  x.J  OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  BISHOP  BERKELEY.


287


According  to  Berkeley's  system,  God's  creat-
ing the  material  world  at  such  a  time,  means
no  more  but  that  he  decreed  from  that  time,
to  produce  ideas  in  the  minds  of  finite  spirits,
in  that  order  and  according  to  those  rules
which  we  call  the  laws  of  Nature.  [172]
This,  indeed,  removes  all  difficulty,  in  con-
ceiving how  matter  was  created ;  and
Berkeley  does  not  fail  to  take  notice  of  the
advantage  of  his  system  on  that  account.
But  his  system  gives  no  aid  in  conceiving
how  a  spirit  may  be  made.  It  appears,
therefore,  that  every  particular  Mr  Locke
has  hinted,  with  regard  to  that  system  which
he  had  in  his  mind,  but  thought  it  prudent
to  suppress,  tallies  exactly  with  the  system
of  Berkeley.  If  we  add  to  this,  that
Berkeley's  system  follows  from  Mr  Locke's,
by  very  obvious  consequence,  it  seems  rea-
sonable to  conjecture,  from  the  passage  now
quoted,  that  he  was  not  unaware  of  that
consequence,  but  left  it  to  those  who  should
come  after  him  to  carry  his  principles  their
full  length,  when  they  should  by  time  be
better  established,  and  able  to  bear  the  shock
of  their  opposition  to  vulgar  notions.  Mr
Norris,  in  his  "  Essay  towards  the  Theory
of  the  Ideal  or  Intelligible  World,"  pub-
lished in  1701,  observes,  that  the  material
world  is  not  an  object  of  sense ;  because
sensation  is  within  us,  and  has  no  object.
Its  existence,  therefore,  he  says,  is  a  collec-
tion of  reason,  and  not  -a  very  evident  one.

From  this  detail  we  may  learn  that  the
doctrine  of  ideas,  as  it  was  new-modelled
byT)es  Cartes,  looked  with  an  unfriendly
aspect  upon  the  material  world ;  and,  al-
though philosophers  were  very  unwilling  to
give  up  either,  they  found  it  a  very  difficult
task  to  reconcile  them  to  each  other.  In
this  state  of  things,  Berkeley,  I  think,  is
reputed  the  first  who  had  the  daring  reso-
lution to  give  up  the  material  world  alto-
gether, as  a  sacrifice  to  the  received  phi-
losophy of  ideas.

But  we  ought  not,  in  this  historical  sketch,
to  omit  an  author  of  far  inferior  name,
Arthur  Collier,  Rector  of  Langford  Magna,
near  Sarum.  He  published  a  book  in  1713,
which  he  calls  "  Clavis  Universalis  ;  or,  a
New  Inquiry  after  Truth  ;  being  a  demon-
stration of  the  non-existence  or  impossibility
of  an  external  world."  His  arguments  are  the
same  in  substance  with  Berkeley's ;  and  he
appears  to  understand  the  whole  strength  of
his  cause.  [173]  Though  he  is  not  deficient
in  metaphysical  acuteness,  his  style  is  dis-
agreeable, being  full  of  conceits,  of  new-
coined  words,  scholastic  terms,  and  per-
plexed sentences.  He  appears  to  be  well
acquainted  with  Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,
and  Norris,  as  well  as  with  Aristotle  and
the  schoolmen.  But,  what  is  very  strange,
it  does  not  appear  that  he  had  ever  heard
of  Locke's  Essay,  which  had  been  pub-
[172-174]


lished  twenty-four  years,  or  of  Berkeley's
"  Principles  of  Knowledge,"  which  had
been  published  three  years.

He  says  he  had  been  ten  years  firmly
convinced  of  the  non-existence  of  an  ex-
ternal world,  before  he  ventured  to  publish
his  book.  He  is  far  from  thinking,  as  Ber-
keley does,  that  the  vulgar  are  of  his  opi-
nion. If  his  book  should  make  any  con-
verts to  his  system,  (of  which  he  expresses
little  hope,  though  he  has  supported  it  by
nine  demonstrations,)  he  takes  pains  to
shew  that  his  disciples,  notwithstanding
their  opinion,  may,  with  the  unenlightened,
speak  of  material  things  in  the  common
style.  He  himself  had  scruples  of  con-
science about  this  for  some  time  ;  and,  if
he  had  not  got  over  them,  he  must  have
shut  his  lips  for  ever ;  but  he  considered
that  God  himself  has  used  this  style  in
speaking  to  men  in  the  Holy  Scripture,  and
has  thereby  sanctified  it  to  all  the  faithful ;
and  that  to  the  pure  all  things  are  pure.
He  thinks  his  opinion  may  be  of  great
use,  especially  in  religion ;  and  applies  it,
in  particular,  to  put  an  end  to  the  con-
troversy about  Christ's  presence  in  the
sacrament.

I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  give  this
short  account  of  Collier's  book,  because  I
believe  it  is  rare,  and  little  known.  I  have
only  seen  one  copy  of  it,  which  is  in  the
University  library  of  Glasgow.  • [174]


CHAPTER  XI

bishop  Berkeley's  sentiments  of  the
nature  of  ideas.

I  pass  over  the  sentiments  of  Bishop
Berkeley,  with  respect  to  abstract  ideas,
and  with  respect  to  space  and  time,  as
things  which  may  more  properly  be  consi-
dered in  another  place.  But  I  must  take
notice  of  one  part  of  his  system,  wherein  he

*  This  work,  though  of  extreme  rarity,  and  long
absolutely  unknown  to  the  philosophers  or  this  coun-
try, hart  excited,  from  the  first,  the  attention  of  the
German  metaphysicians.  A  long  analysis  of  it  was
given  in  the  "  Acta  Eruditorum ;"  it  is  found  quoted
by  Bilfinger,  and  other  Lebnitzians;  and  was  sub-
sequently  translated  into  German,  with  controver-
sial notes  by  Professor  Eschenbach  of  Rostock, in  his
"  Collection  of  the  principal  writers  who  deny  the
Reality  of  their  own  Body  and  of  the  whole  Corporeal
World,"  1756.  The  late  learned  Dr  Parr  had  long
the  intention  of  publishing  the  work  oi  Collier  along
with  some  other  rare  metaphysical  treatses.  He  did
not,  however,  accomplish  his  purpose;  which  in.
volved,  likewu-e,  an  introductory  disquisition  by  him-
self ;  but  a  complete  impression  ot  the  "  Clavis  Univer-
salis" and  four  other  tracts,  was  found,  after  his
death  ;  and  this  having  been  purchased  by  Mr  Lum-
ley,  has,  by  him,  been  recently  published,  under  the
title—"  Metaphysical  Tracts,  by  English  Philoso-
phers of  the  Eighteenth  Century,"  &c.  London:
1837.  A  very  small  edition  of  the  "  Clavis"  had  been
printed  in  Edinburgh,  by  private  subscription,  in  th«
previous  year.  A  Life  of  Collier  has  likewise  re-
cently appeared.— H.


288


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


seems  to  have  deviated  from  the  common
opinion  about  ideas.

Though  he  sets  out  in  his  principles  of
knowledge,  by  telling  us  that  it  is  evident
the  objects  of  human  knowledge  are  ideas,
and  builds  his  whole  system  upon  this  prin-
ciple ;  yet,  in  the  progress  of  it,  he  finds
that  there  are  certain  objects  of  human
knowledge  that  are  not  ideas,  but  things
which  have  a  permanent  existence.  The
objects  of  knowledge,  of  which  we  have  no
ideas,  are  our  own  minds,  and  their  various
operations,  other  finite  minds,  and  the
Supreme  Mind.  The  reason  why  there
can  be  no  ideas  of  spirits  and  their  opera-
tions, the  author  informs  us  is  this,  That
ideas  are  passive,  inert,  unthinking  beings  ;*
they  cannot,  therefore,  be  the  image  or
likeness  of  things  that  have  thought,  and
will,  and  active  power  ;  we  have  notions  of
minds,  and  of  their  operations,  but  not
ideas.  We  know  what  we  mean  by  think-
ing, willing,  and  perceiving  ;  we  can  rea-
son about  beings  endowed  with  those
powers,  but  we  have  no  ideas  of  them.  A
spirit  or  miud  is  the  only  substance  or
support  wherein  the  unthinking  beings  or
ideas  can  exist ;  but  that  this  substance
which  supports  or  perceives  ideas,  should
itself  be  an  idea,  or  like  an  idea,  is  evidently
absurd.

He  observes,  farther,  Princip.  sect.  142,
that  "  all  relations,  including  an  act  of  the
mind,  we  cannot  properly  be  said  to  have
an  idea,  but  rather  a  notion  of  the  relations
or  habitudes  between  things.  [175]  But
if,  in  the  modern  way,  the  word  idea  is
extended  to  spirits,  and  relations,  and  acts,
this  is,  after  all,  an  affair  of  verbal  con-
cern ;  yet  it  conduces  to  clearness  and  pro-
priety, that  we  distinguish  things  very  dif-
ferent by  different  names."

This  is  an  important  part  of  Berkeley's
system,  and  deserves  attention.  We  are
led  by  it  to  divide  the  objects  of  human
knowledge  into  two  kinds.  The  first  is  ideas,
which  we  have  by  our  five  senses  ;  they
have  no  existence  when  they  are  not  per-
ceived, and  exist  only  in  the  minds  of  those
who  perceive  them.  The  second  kind  of
objects  comprehends  spirits,  their  acts,  and
the  relations  and  habitudes  of  things.  Of
these  we  have  notions,  but  no  ideas.  No
idea  can  represent  them,  or  have  any  simi-
litude to  them  :  yet  we  understand  what
they  mean,  and  we  can  speak  with  under-
standing, and  reason  about  them,  without
ideas.

This  account  of  ideas  is  very  different
from  that  which  Locke  has  given.  In  his
system,  we  have  no  knowledge  where  we
have  no  ideas. Every  thought  must  have


•  Berkeley  is  one  of  the  philosophers  who  rea'ly
held  the  doctrine  of  ideas,  erroneously,  by  Reid,  at-
tributed to  all— H.


an  idea  for  its  immediate  object.  In  Ber-
keley's, the  most  important  objects  are
known  without  ideas.  In  Locke's  system,
there  are  two  sources  of  our  ideas,  sensa-
tion and  reflection.  In  Berkeley's,  sensa-
tion is  the  only  source,  because  of  the  objects
of  reflection  there  can  be  no  ideas.  We
know  them  without  ideas.  Locke  divides
our  ideas  into  those  of  substances,  modes,
and  relations.  In  Berkeley's  system,  there
are  no  ideas  of  substances,  or  of  relations  ;
but  notions  only.  And  even  in  the  class  of
modes,  the  operations  of  our  own  minds
are  things  of  which  we  have  distinct  notions ;
but  no  ideas.

We  ought  to  do  the  j  ustice  to  Malebranche
to  acknowledge  that,  in  this  point,  as  well
as  in  many  others,  his  system  comes  nearer
to  Berkeley's  than  the  latter  seems  willing
to  own.  That  author  tells  us  that  there
are  four  different  ways  in  which  we  come
to  the  knowledge  of  things.  To  know  things
by  their  ideas,  is  only  one  of  the  four.  [176]
He  affirms  that  we  have  no  idea  of  our
own  mind,  or  any  of  its  modifications  :  that
we  know  these  things  by  consciousness,
without  ideas.  Whether  these  two  acute
philosophers  foresaw  the  consequences  that
may  be  drawn  from  the  system  of  ideas,
taken  in  its  full  extent,  and  which  were  after-
wards drawn  by  Mr  Hume,  I  cannot  pre-
tend to  say.  If  they  did,  their  regard  to
religion  was  too  great  to  permit  them  to  ad-
mit those  consequences,  or  the  principles
with  which  they  were  necessarily  connected.

However  this  may  be,  if  there  be  so  many
things  that  may  be  apprehended  and  known
without  ideas,  this  very  naturally  suggests
a  scruple  with  regard  to  those  that  are  left :
for  it  may  be  said,  If  we  can  apprehend
and  reason  about  the  world  of  spirits,  with-
out ideas,  Is  it  not  possible  that  we  may
apprehend  and  reason  about  a  material
world,  without  ideas  ?  If  consciousness
and  reflection  furnish  us  with  notions  of
spirits  and  of  their  attributes,  without  ideas,
may  not  our  senses  furnish  us  with  notions
of  bodies  and  their  attributes,  without  ideas  ?

Berkeley  foresaw  this  objection  to  his
system,  and  puts  it  in  the  mouth  of  Hylas,
in  the  following  words  : — Dial.  3,  Hylas.
"  If  you  can  conceive  the  mind  of  God,
without  having  an  idea  of  it,  why  may  not
I  be  allowed  to  conceive  the  existence  of
matter,  notwithstanding  that  I  have  no  idea
of  it  ?"  The  answer  of  Philonous  is —
"  You  neither  perceive  matter  objectively,
as  you  do  an  inactive  being  or  idea,  nor
know  it,  as  you  do  yourself,  by  a  reflex  act,
neither  do  you  immediately  apprehend  it  by
similitude  of  the  one  or  the  other,  nor  yet
collect  it  by  reasoning  from  that  which  you
know  immediately ;  all  which  makes  the
case  of  matter  widely  different  from  that  of
the  Deity."

T175,  1?6"|


chap,  xi.]  BISHOP  BERKELEY'S  SENTIMENTS  OF  IDEAS.


289


Though  Hylas  declares  himself  satisfied
with  this  answer,  I  confess  I  am  not  :  be-
cause, if  I  may  trust  the  faculties  that  God
has  given  me,  I  do  perceive  matter  objec-
tively— that  is,  something  which  is  extended
and  solid,  which  may  be  measured  and
weighed,  is  the  immediate  object  of  my  touch
and  sight.*  [177]  And  this  object  I  take  to
be  matter,  and  not  an  idea.  And,  though  I
have  been  taught  by  philosophers,  that  what
I  immediately  touch  is  an  idea,  and  not
matter ;  yet  I  have  never  been  able  to  dis-
cover this  by  the  most  accurate  attention
to  my  own  perceptions.

It  were  to  be  wished  that  this  ingenious
author  had  explained  what  he  means  by
ideas,  as  distinguished  from  notions.  The
word  notion,  being  a  word  in  common  lan-
guage, is  well  understood.  All  men  mean
by  it,  the  conception,  the  apprehension,  or
thought  which  we  have  of  any  object  of
thought.  A  notion,  therefore,  is  an  act
of  the  mind  conceiving  or  thinking  of  some
object.  The  object  of  thought  may  be
either  something  that  is  in  the  mind,  or
something  that  is  not  in  the  mind.  It  may
be  something  that  has  no  existence,  or
something  that  did,  or  does,  or  shall  exist.
But  the  notion  which  I  have  of  that  ob-
ject, i3  an  act  of  my  mind  which  really
exists  while  I  think  of  the  object ;  but  has
no  existence  when  I  do  not  think  of  it.
The  word  idea,  in  popular  language,  has
precisely  the  same  meaning  as  the  word
notion.  But  philosophers  have  another
meaning  to  the  word  idea  ;  and  what  that
meaning  is,  I  think,  is  very  difficult  to  say.

The  whole  of  Bishop  Berkeley's  system
depends  upon  the  distinction  between  no-
tions and  ideas ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  worth
while  to  find,  if  we  are  able,  what  those
things  are  which  he  calls  ideas,  as  distin-
guished from  notions.

For  this  purpose,  we  may  observe,  that
he  takes  notice  of  two  kinds  of  ideas — the
ideas  of  sense,  and  the  ideas  of  imagina-
tion. "  The  ideas  imprinted  on  the  senses
by  the  Author  of  Nature,''  he  says,  "  are
called  real  things ;  and  those  excited  in  the
imagination,  being  less  regular,  vivid,  and
constant,  are  more  properly  termed  ideas,
or  images  of  things,  which  they  copy  and
represent.  [178]  B  ut  then  our  sensations,
be  they  never  so  vivid  and  distinct,  are
nevertheless  ideas  ;  that  is,  they  exist  in
the  mind,  or  are  perceived  by  it  as  truly
as  the  ideas  of  its  own  framing.  The  ideas
of  sense  are  allowed  to  have  more  reality
in  them — that  is,  to  be  more  strong,  or-
derly, and  coherent — than  the  creatures  of


*  Doe*  Reidmean  to  surrender  his  doctrine,  hat
perception  i<  a  conception  —that  exf <  nsion  and  figure
are  not  known  by  sense,  hut  are  notions  suggested  on
the  occasion  of  sensation  ?  If  he  does  not,  his  Ian.
guage  in  the  text  is  inaccurate. — H.
[ 177-179]


the  mind.  They  are  also  less  dependent
on  the  spirit,  or  thinking  substance  which
perceives  them,  in  that  they  are  excited  by
the  will  of  another  and  more  powerful
spirit ;  yet  still  they  are  ideas ;  and  cer-
tainly no  idea,  whether  faint  or  strong,  can
exist,  otherwise  than  in  a  mind  perceiving
it." Principles,  §  33.

From  this  passage  we  see  that,  by  the
ideas  of  sense,  the  author  means  sensa-
tions ;*  and  this,  indeed,  is  evident  from
many  other  passages,  of  which  I  shall  men-
tion a  few Principles,  §  5. "  Light  and

colours,  heat  and  cold,  extension  and  figure —
in  a  word,  the  things  we  see  and  feel — what
are  they  but  so  many  sensations,  notions,
ideas,  or  impressions  on  the  sense  ? — and  is
it  possible  to  separate,  even  in  thought,
any  of  these  from  perception  ?  For  my
part,  I  might  as  easily  divide  a  thing  from
itself."  §  18.  "As  for  our  senses,  by
them  we  have  the  knowledge  only  of  our
sensations,  ideas,  or  those  things  that  are
immediately  perceived  by  sense,  call  them
what  you  will ; — but  they  do  not  inform  us
that  things  exist  without  the  mind,  or  un-
perceived,  like  to  those  which  are  per-
ceived." §  25.  "  All  our  ideas,  sensa-
tions, or  the  things  which  we  perceive,  by
whatever  names  they  may  be  distinguished,
are  visibly  inactive ;  there  is  nothing  of
power  or  agency  included  in  them."

This,  therefore,  appears  certain — that,
by  the  ideas  of  sense,  the  author  meant  the
sensations  we  have  by  means  of  our  senses.
I  have  endeavoured  to  explain  the  meaning
of  the  word  sensation,  Essay  I.,  chap.  1,
[p.  229,]  and  refer  to  the  explication  there
given  of  it,  which  appears  to  me  to  be  per-
fectly agreeable  to  the  sense  in  which  Bishop
Berkeley  uses  it.*

As  there  can  be  no  notion  or  thought
but  in  a  thinking  being ;  so  there  can  be
no  sensation  but  in  a  sentient  being.  [  1 79]
It  is  the  act  or  feeling  of  a  sentient  being  ;
its  very  essence  consists  in  its  being  felt.
Nothing  can  resemble  a  sensation,  but  a
similar  sensation  in  the  same  or  in  some
other  mind.  To  think  that  any  quality  in
a  thing  that  is  inanimate  can  resemble  a
sensation,  is  a  great  absurdity.  In  all  this,
I  cannot  but  agree  perfectly  with  Bishop
Berkeley  ;  and  I  think  his  notions  of  sensa-


*  How  it  ran  bei  asserted,  that  by  ideas  of  sense
Berkeley  meant  only  what  Reiri  did  by  sensations,
I  cannot  comprehend.  That  the  former  used  ideas
of  sense  and  sensations  as  convertible  expressions,  is
true.  But  then  Berkeley's  sensation  was  equivalent
to  Reid's  sensation  plus  his perception.  This  is  mani-
fest even  by  the  passages  adduced  in  the  text.  In
that  from  §  v.  .of  the  "  Principles,''  Berkeley  ex.
pressly  calls  extension  and  figure,  sensations.  But
it  is  a  fundamental  principle  of  Reid's  philosophy,
not  only  that  neither  extension  nor  figure,  but  that
none  of  the  primary  qualities,  are  sensations.  To
make  a  single  quotation— "'Yhv primary  qualities,"
he  says,  '*  are.  neither  sensations,  nor  are  they  the
resemblances  of  sensations." — Infra,  p.  238. — H.

U


290


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


tion  much  more  distinct  and  accurate  than
Locke's,  who  thought  that  the  primary
qualities  of  body  are  resemblances  of  our
sensations,*  but  that  the  secondary  are  not.

That  we  have  many  sensations  by  means
of  our  external  senses,  there  can  be  no
doubt ;  and,  if  he  is  pleased  to  call  those
ideas,  there  ought  to  be  no  dispute  about
the  meaning  of  a  word.  But,  says  Bishop
Berkeley,  by  our  senses,  we  have  the  know-
ledge, only  of  our  sensations  or  ideas,  call
them  which  you  will.  I  allow  him  to  call
them  which  he  will ;  but  I  would  have  the
word  orcein  this  sentence  to  be  well  weighed,
because  a  great  deal  depends  upon  it.

For,  if  it  be  true  that,  by  our  senses,  we
have  the  knowledge  of  our  sensations  only,
then  his  system  must  be  admitted,  and  the
existence  of  a  material  world  must  be  given
up  as  a  dream.  No  demonstration  can  be
more  invincible  than  this.  If  we  have  any
knowledge  of  a  material  world,  it  must  be
by  the  senses  :  but,  by  the  senses,  we  have
no  knowledge  but  of  our  sensations  only  ;
and  our  sensations  have  no  resemblance  of
anything  that  can  be  in  a  material  world,  f
The  only  proposition  in  this  demonstration
which  admits  of  doubt  is,  that,  by  our  senses,
we  have  the  knowledge  of  our  sensations
only,  and  of  nothing  else.  If  there  are  ob-
jects of  the  senses  which  are  not  sensations,
his  arguments  do  not  touch  them :  they  may
be  things  which  do  not  exist  in  the  mind,  as
all  sensations  do ;  they  may  be  things  of  which,
by  our  senses,  we  have  notions,  though  no
ideas ;  just  as,  by  consciousness  and  reflection,
we  have  notions  of  spirits  and  of  their  oper-
ations, without  ideas  or  sensations.^ [180]

Shall  we  say,  then,  that,  by  our  senses,
we  have  the  knowledge  of  our  sensations
only  ;  and  that  they  give  us  no  notion  of
anything  but  of  our  sensations  ?  Perhaps
this  has  been  the  doctrine  of  philosophers,
and  not  of  Bishop  Berkeley  alone,  otherwise
he  would  have  supported  it  by  arguments.
Mr  Locke  calls  all  the  notions  we  have  by
our  senses,  ideas  of  sensation  ;  and  in  this
has  been  very  generally  followed.  Hence
it  seems  a  very  natural  inference,  that  ideas

*  Here  again  we  have  a  criticism  which  proceeds
on.  the  erroneous  implication,  that  Locke  meant  by
sensation  what  ,:eid  himself  did.  If  for  sensation
we  substitute  perception,  (and  by  sensation  Locke
denoted  both  sensation  proper  and  perception  proper,)
there  remains  nothing  to  censure ;  for  Reid  main-
tains that  "  our  senses  give  us  a  direct  and  a  distinct
notion  of  the  primary  qualities,  and  inform  us  what
they  are  in  themselves  "  (infra,  p.  237  ;)  which  is  only
Locke's  meaning  in  other  words.  1  he  same  observa-
tion applies  to  many  of  the  following  passages  — H.
t  See  the  last  note.— H.

t  But,  unless  that,  be  admitted,  which  the  natural
conviction  of  mankind  certifies,  that  we  have  an
immediate  perception— a  consciousness— ot  external
and  extended  existences,  it  makes  no  difference,  in
regaid  to  the  conclusion  of  the  Idealist,  whether
it  hat  we  are  conscious  of  in  perception  be  supposed
an  entity  in  the  mind,  (an  idea  in  Reids  meaning,)
or  a  modification  of  the  mind,  (a  notion  or  concep-
tion.) See  above,  p.  128,  no.es *. —  H.


of  sensation  are  sensations.  But  philoso-
phers may  err  :  let  us  hear  the  dictates  of
common  sense  upon  this  point.

Suppose  I  am  pricked  with  a  pin,  I  ask,
Is  the  pain  1  feel,  a  sensation  ?  Undoubtedly
it  is.  There  can  be  nothing  that  resembles
pain  in  any  inanimate  being.  But  I  ask
again,  Is  the  pin  a  sensation  ?  To  this
question  I  find  myself  under  a  necessity  of
answering,  that  the  pin  is  not  a  sensation,
nor  can  have  the  least  resemblance  to  any
sensation.  The  pin  has  length  and  thick-
ness, and  figure  and  weight.  A  sensation
can  have  none  of  those  qualities.  I  am  not
more  certain  that  the  pain  I  feel  is  a  sensa-
tion, than  that  the  pin  is  not  a  sensation ;
yet  the  pin  is  an  object  of  sense  ;  and  I  am
as  certain  that  I  perceive  its  figure  and
hardness  by  my  senses,  as  that  I  feel  pain
when  pricked  by  it.*

Having  said  so  much  of  the  ideas  of  sense
in  Berkeley's  system,  we  are  next  to  con-
sider the  account  he  gives  of  the  ideas  of
imagination.  Of  these  he  says,  Principles,
§  28 — "  I  find  I  can  excite  ideas  in  my
mind  at  pleasure,  and  vary  and  shift  the
scene  as  oft  as  I  think  fit,  It  is  no  more
than  willing ;  and  straightway  this  or  that  idea
arises  in  my  fancy  ;  and  by  the  same  power
it  is  obliterated,  and  makes  way  for  another.
This  making  and  unmaking  of  ideas,  doth
very  properly  denominate  the  mind  active.
Thus  much  is  certain,  and  grounded  on
experience.  Our  sensations,"  he  says,  "  are
called  real  things  ;  the  ideas  of  imagination
are  more  properly  termed  ideas,  or  images
of  things  ;''-f-  that  is,  as  I  apprehend,  they
are  the  images  of  our  sensations.  [181]
It  might  surely  be  expected  that  we  should
be  well  acquainted  with  the  ideas  of  imagin-
ation, as  they  are  of  our  making  ;  yet,  after
all  the  Bishop  has  said  about  them,  I  am
at  a  loss  to  know  what  they  are.

I  would  observe,  in  the  first  place,  with
regard  to  these  ideas  of  imagination — that
they  are  not  sensations  ;  for  surely  sensation
is  the  work  of  the  senses,  and  not  of  imagin-
ation ;  and,  though  pain  be  a  sensation,  the
thought  of  pain,  when  I  am  not  pained,  is
no  sensation.

I  observe,  in  the  second  place — that  I  can
find  no  distinction  between  ideas  of  imagin-
ation and  notions,  which  the  author  says
are  not  ideas. I  can  easily  distinguish  be-

«  This  illustration  is  taken  from  Des  Cartes.  In
this  paragraph,  the  term  sensation  is  again  not  used
in  the<extension  given  to  it  by  the  philosophers  in
question  — H.

t  Berkeley's  real  words  are — "  1  he  ideas  imprint,
ed.on  the  Senses  by  the  Author  of  Nature  are  called
real  things,  and  those  excited  in  the  Imagination
being  less  regular,  vivid  and  constant,  are  more  pro-
perly termed  ideas-or  images  of  things,  which  thty
copy  and  represent.  But  then  our  Sensations,  be  they
never  so  vivid  and.  dist  net,  are  nevertheless  ideas —
that  is,  they  exis  in  the  mind,  or  are  perceived  by
it,  as  truly  as  the  ideas  of  its  own  framing.''  Sect,
xxxiii.— H.

f ISO,  lfl]


chap.  xi.  I  BISHOP  BERKELEY'S  SENTIMENTS  OF  IDEAS.


291


tween  a  notion  and  a  sensation.  It  is  one
thing  to  say,  I  have  the  sensation  of  pain.
It  is  another  thing  to  say,  I  have  a  notion  of
pain.  The  last  expression  signifies  no  more
than  that  I  understand  what  is  meant  by  the
word  pain.  The  first  signifies  that  I  really
feel  pain.  But  I  can  find  no  distinction
between  the  notion  of  pain  and  the  imagin-
ation of  it,  or  indeed  between  the  notion
of  anything  else,  and  the  imagination  of  it.
I  can,  therefore,  give  no  account  of  the
distinction  which  Berkeley  makes  between
ideas  of  imagination  and  notions,  which,  he
says,  are  not  ideas.  They  seem  to  me  per-
fectly to  coincide.*

He  seems,  indeed,  to  say,  that  the  ideas
of  imagination  differ  not  in  land  from  those
of  the  senses,  but  only  in  the  degree  of  their
regularity,  vivacity,  and  constancy.  "  They
are,"  says  he,  "  less  regular,  vivid,  and  con-
stant." This  doctrine  was  afterwards  greed-
ily embraced  by  Mr  Hume,  and  makes  a
main  pillar  of  his  system  ;  but  it  cannot  be
reconciled  to  common  sense,  to  which  Bishop
Berkeley  professes  a  great  regard.  For,
according  to  this  doctrine,  if  we  compare  the
state  of  a  man  racked  with  the  gout,  with
his  state  when,  being  at  perfect  ease,  he
relates  what  he  has  suffered,  the  difference
of  these  two  states  is  only  this — that,  in  the
last,  the  pain  is  less  regular,  vivid,  and  con-
stant, than  in  the  first.  [182]  We  cannot
possibly  assent  to  this.  Every  man  knows
that  he  can  relate  the  pain  he  suffered,  not
only  without  pain,  but  with  pleasure  ;  and
that  to  suffer  pain,  and  to  think  of  it,  are
things  which  totally  differ  in  kind,  and  not
in  degree  only.-j-

We  see,  therefore,  upon  the  whole,  that,
according  to  this  system,  of  the  most  im-
portant objects  of  knowledge — that  is,  of

*  Yet  the  distinction  of  ideas,  strictly  so  called,  and
notions,  is  one  of  the  most  common  and  important  in
the  philosophy  of  mind.  •  Nor  do  we  owe  it,  as  has  been
asserted,  to  Berkeley.  It  was  virtually  taken  by  Des
Cartes  and  the  Cartesians,  in  their  discrimination  of
ideas  of  imagination  and  ide  s*of  intelligence;  it  was
in  terms  vindicated  against  Locke,  by  t-erjeant,  Stil-
Ungfleet,^Norris,  Z.  Mayne,  Bishop  Brown,  and
others;  Bonnet  signalized  it;  and,  under  the  con.
trast  of  Anschauungen  -and  Begriffe,  it  has  long  been
an»  established  and  classical  discrimination  with  the
philosophers  of  Germany.  Nay,  Keid  himself  sug-
gests it  in  the  distinction  he  requires  between  ima-
gination and  conception,  a'distinction  which  he  unfor-
tunately did  not.  carry  out,  and  which  Mr  Stewart
still  more  unhappily  again  perverted.  See  below,  p.
371.  The  terms  notion-and  conception,  (or  more  cor-
rectly- concept  in  this*  sense, )  should-  be  reserved
taexpress  what  we  comprehend  but  cannot  picture
in  imagination,  such  as-  a  relation,  a  general  term,
&o.  The  word"  idea,  as- one  prostituted  to  all  mean-
ings, it  were  perhaps  better  altogether  to  discard.
As  for  the  representations  of '.imagination'  or  phan-
tasy, I  would  employ  the  terms  image  or  phantasm,  it
being  distinctly  understood> that  these  terms  are  ap-
plied to  denote  the  re-presentations,  not  of  our  visible
perceptions  merely,  as  the  terms  taken  literally  would
indicate,  but  of  our  sensible  perceptions  in  general. —
H.

■}  There  is  here  a  confusion  between  pain  considered
as  a  feeling,  and  as  the  cognition  of  a  feeling,  to
which  the  philosophers  would  object  — H.
[182,  183]


spirits,  of  their  operations,  and  of  the  rela-
tions of  things — we  have  no  ideas  at  all  ;*
we  have  notions  of  them,  but  not  ideas  ;  the
ideas  we  have  are  those  of  sense,  and  those
of  imagination.  The  first  are  the  sensa-
tions we  have  by  means  of  our  senses,  whose
existence  no  man  can  deny,  because  he  is
conscious  of  them  ;  and  whose  nature  hath
been  explained  by  this  author  with  great
accuracy.  As  to  the  ideas  of  imagination,
he  hath  left  us  much  in  the  dark.  He  makes
them  images  of  our  sensations ;  though,
according  to  his  own  doctrine,  nothing  can
resemble  a  sensation  but  a  sensation. -f-  He
seems  to  think  that  they  differ  from  sensa-
tions only  in  the  degree  of  their  regularity,
vivacity,  and  constancy.  But  this  cannot
be  reconciled  to  the  experience  of  mankind;
and,  besides  this  mark,  which  cannot  be
admitted,  he  hath  given  us  no  other  mark
by  which  they  may  be  distinguished  from
notions.  Nay,  it  may  be  observed,  that  the
very  reason  he  gives  why  we  can  have  no
ideas  of  the  acts  of  the  mind  about  its  ideas,
nor  of  the  relations  of  things,  is  applicable
to  what  he  calls  ideas  of  imagination.
Principles,  §  142.  "  We  may  not,  I  think,
strictly  be  said  to  have  an  idea  of  an  active
being,  or  of  an  action,  although  Ave  may  be
said  to  have  a  notion  of  them.  I  have  some
knowledge  or  notion  of  my  mind,  and  its
acts  about  ideas,  in  as  much  as  I  know  or
understand  what  is  meant  by  these  words.
[I  will  not  say  that  the  terns  Idea  and
Notion  may  not  be  usee  convertibly,  if  the
world  will  have  it  so.  But  yet  it  conduces  to
clearness  and  propriety  that  we  distinguish
things  very  different  by  different  names.]
It  is  also  to  be  remarked,  that  all  relations
including  an  act  of  the  mind,  we  cannot  so
properly  be  said  to  have  an  idea,  but  rather
a  notion  of  the  relations  and  habitudes  be-
tween things. "  From  this  it  follows,  that  our
imaginations  are  not  properly  ideas,  but  no-
tions, because  they  include  an  actof  the  mind.
[  1 83  ]  For  he  tells  us,  in  a  passage  already
quoted,  that  they  are  creatures  of  the  mind,
of  its  own  framing,  and  that  it  makes  and
unmakes  them  as  it  thinks  fit,  and  from  this
is  properly  denominated  active.  If  it  be  a
good  reason  why  we  have  not  ideas,  but
notions  only  of  relations,  because  they  in-
clude an  act  of  the  mind,  the  same  reason
must  lead  us  to  conclude,  that  our  imagina-
tions are  notions  and  not  ideas,  since  they
are  made  and  unmade  by  the  mind  as  it
thinks  fit :  and,  from  this,  it  is  properly  de-
nominated active.  £

t  *  That  is,  no  images  of  them  in  the  phantasy  Reid
h'imself  would  not  say  that  such  could  be  imagined. —
H.

t  Berkeley  does  not  say  so  in  the  meaning  sup-
posed.—  H.

t  Imagination  is  an  ambiguous  word ;  it  means
either  the  act  of  imagining,  or  the  product— i.  e  ,  the
image  imagined.  Of  the  mimer,  Beikeley  held,  we
can  form  a  notion,  but  not  an  idea,  in  the  sense  ht

U  2


292


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


f essay  ir.


When  so  much  has  been  written,  and  so
many  disputes  raised  about  ideas,  it  were
desirable  that  we  knew  what  they  are,  and
to  what  category  or  class  of  beings  they  be-
long. In  this  we  might  expect  satisfaction
in  the  writings  of  Bishop  Berkeley,  if  any-
where, considering  his  known  accuracy  and
precision  in  the  use  of  words ;  and  it  is  for
this  reason  that  I  have  taken  so  much  pains
to  find  out  what  he  took  them  to  be.

After  ali,  if  I  understand  what  he  calls  the
ideas  of  sense,  they  are  the  seusations  which
we  have  by  means  of  our  five  senses ;  but
they  are,  he  says,  less  properly  termed  ideas.

I  understand,  likewise,  what  he  calls
notions  ;  but  they,  says  he,  are  very  differ-
ent from  ideas,  though,  in  the  modern,  way,
often  called  by  that  name.

The  ideas  of  imagination  remain,  which
are  most  properly  termed  ideas,  as  he  says  ;
and,  with  regard  to  these,  I  am  still  very
much  in  the  dark.  When  I  imagine  a  lion
or  an  elephant,  the  lion  or  elephant  is  the
object  imagined.  The  act  of  the  mind,  in
conceiving  that  object,  is  the  notion,  the
conception,  or  imagination  of  the  object.  If
besides  the  object,  and  the  act  of  the  mind
about  it,  there  be  something  called  the  idea
of  the  object,  I  know  not  what  it  is.*

If  we  consult  other  authors  who  have
treated  of  ideas,  we  shall  find  as  little  satis-
faction with  regard  to  the  meaning  of  this
philosophical  term.  [184]  The  vulgar
have  adopted  it ;  but  they  only  mean  by
it  the  notion  or  conception  we  have  of  any
object,  especially  our  more  abstract  or  gen-
eral notions.  When  it  is  thus  put  to  sig-
nify the  operation  of  the  mind  about  objects,
whether  in  conceiving,  remembering,  or
perceiving,  it  is  well  understood.  But  phi-
losophers will  have  ideas  to  be  the  objects
of  the  mind's  operations,  and  not  the  oper-
ations themselves.  There  is,  indeed,  great
variety  of  objects  of  thought.  We  can
think  of  minds,  and  of  their  operations  ;  of
bodies,  and  of  their  qualities  and  relations.
If  ideas  are  not  comprehended  under  any  of
these  classes,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  comprehend
what  they  are.

In  ancient  philosophy,  ideas  were  said  to
be  immaterial  forms,  which,  according  to
one  system,  existed  from  all  eternity ;  and,
according  to  another,  are  sent  forth  from
the  objects  whose  form  they  are.+  In  mo-
dern philosophy,  they  are  things  in  the
mind,  which  are  the  immediate  objects  of
all  our  thoughts,  and  which  have  no  exist-
ence when  we  do  not  think  of  them.  They
are  called  the  images,  the  resemblances,  the


u>es  the  term ;  whereas,  of  the  latter,  we  can  form
an  idea  by  merely  repeating  the  imaginatory  act. —
H.

•  On  Reid's  misconception  on  this  point,  see  Note
B. — H.

t  Nothing  by  the  name  of  idea  was  sent  off  from
objects  in  the  ancient  philosophy.— ti.


representatives  of  external  objects  of  sense ;
yet  they  have  neither  colour,  nor  smell,  nor
figure,  nor  motion,  nor  any  sensible  quality.
I  revere  the  authority  of  philosophers,  espe-
cially where  they  are  so  unanimous ;  but
until  I  can  comprehend  what  they  mean  by
ideas,  I  must  think  and  speak  with  the  vulgar.

In  sensation,  properly  so  called,  I  can
distinguish  two  things — the  mind,  or  sen-
tient being,  and  the  sensation.  Whether
the  last  is  to  be  called  a  feeling  or  an  oper-
ation, I  dispute  not ;  but  it  has  no  object
distinct  from  the  sensation  itself.  If  in
sensation  there  be  a  thir<
idea,  I  know  not  what  it

In  perception,  in  remembrance,  and  in
conception,  or  imagination,  I  distinguish
three  things — the  mind  that  operates,  the
operation  of  the  mind,  and  the  object  of  that
operation.*  [185]  That  the  object  per-
ceived is  one  thing,  and  the  perception  of
that  object  another,  I  am  as  certain  as  I
can  be  of  anything.  The  same  may  be
said  of  conception,  of  remembrance,  of  love
and  hatred,  of  desire  and  aversion.  In  all
these,  the  act  of  the  mind  about  its  object  is
one  thing,  the  object  is  another  thing.
There  must  be  an  object,  real  or  imaginary,
distinct  from  the  operation  of  the  mind
about  it-f-  Now,  if  in  these  operations  the
idea  be  a  fourth  thing  different  from  the
three  I  have  mentioned,  I  know  not  what  it
is,  nor  have  been  able  to  learn  from  all  that
has  been  written  about  ideas.  And  if  the
doctrine  of  philosophers  about  ideas  con-
founds any  two  of  these  things  which  I  have
mentioned  as  distinct— if,  for  example,  it
confounds  the  object  perceived  with  the
perception  of  that  object,  and  represents
them  as  one  and  the  same  thing— such  doc-
trine is  altogether  repugnant  to  all  that  I  am
able  to  discover  of  the  operations  of  my  own
mind ;  and  it  is  repugnant  to  the  common
sense  of  mankind,  expressed  in  the  struc-
ture of  all  languages.


CHAPTER XII.

OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  MR  HUME.

Two  volumes  of  the  "  Treatise  of  Human
Nature"  were  published  in  17^9,  and  the
third  in  1740.  The  doctrine  contained  in
this  Treatise  was  published  anew  in  a  more
popular  form  in  Mr  Hume's  "  Philosophical
Essays,"  of  which  there  have  been  various
editions. What  other  authors,  from  the


«  See  Note  B.— H.

+  If  there  be  an  imaginary  object  distinct  from  the
act  of  imagination,  where  does  it  exist  ?  It  cannot
be  external  to  the  mind — for,  ex  hypothesi,  it  is  ima-
ginary; and,  if  in  the  mind  itself,  distinct  from  the  act
of  imagination— why.  what  is  this  but  the  very  crudest
doctrine  of  species?  For  Reid's  puzzle,  see  Note  B.
— H.

[184,  185]


chap,  xii.] OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  MR  HUME.


293


time  of  Des  Cartes,  had  called  idea.*,  this
author  distinguishes  into  two  kinds — to  wit,
impressions  &nd  ideas;  comprehending  under
the  first,  all  our  sensations,  passions,  and
emotions ;  and  under  the  last,  the  faint
images  of  these,  when  we  remember  or
imagine  them. [18G]

He  sets  out  with  this,  as  a  principle  that
needed  no  proof,  and  of  which  therefore  he
offers  none — that  all  the  perceptions  of  the
human  mind  resolve  themselves  into  these
two  kinds,  impressions  and  ideas.

As  this  proposition  is  the  foundation  upon
which  the  whole  of  Mr  Hume's  system
rests,  and  from  which  it  is  raised  with  great
acuteness  indeed,  and  ingenuity,  it  were  to
be  wished  that  he  had  told  us  upon  what
authority  this  fundamental  proposition  rests.
But  we  are  left  to  guess,  whether  it  is  held
forth  as  a  first  principle,  which  has  its
evidence  in  itself;  or  whether  it  is  to  be
received  upon  the  authority  of  philosophers.

Mr  Locke  had  taught  us,  that  all  the
immediate  objects  of  human  knowledge  are
ideas  in  the  mind.  Bishop  Berkeley,  pro-
ceeding upon  this  foundation,  demonstrated,
very  easily,  that  there  is  no  material  world.
And  he  thought  that,  for  the  purposes
both  of  philosophy  and  religion,  we  should
find  no  loss,  but  great  benefit,  in  the  want
of  it.  But  the  Bishop,  as  became  his  order,
was  unwilling  to  give  up  the  world  of  spirits.
He  saw  very  well,  that  ideas  are  as  unfit  to
represent  spirits  as  they  are  to  represent
bodies.  Perhaps  he  saw  that,  if  w  e  per-
ceive only  the  ideas  of  spirits,  we  shall  find
the  same  difficulty  in  inferring  their  real
existence  from  the  existence  of  their  ideas,  as
we  find  in  inferring  the  existence  of  matter
from  the  idea  of  it ;  and,  therefore,  while  he
gives  up  the  material  world  in  favour  of  the
system  of  ideas,  he  gives  up  one-half  of  that
system  in  favour  of  the  world  of  spirits ;  and
maintains  that  we  can,  without  ideas,  think,
and  speak,  and  reason,  intelligibly  about
spirits,  and  what  belongs  to  them.

Mr  Hume  shews  no  such  partiality  in
favour  of  the  world  of  spirits.  He  adopts
the  theory  of  ideas  in  its  full  extent ;  and,
in  consequence,  shews  that  there  is  neither
matter  nor  mind  in  the  universe  ;  nothing
but  impressions  and  ideas.  What  we  call
a  body,  is  only  a  bundle  of  sensations ;  and
what  we  call  the  mind  is  only  a  bundle  of
thoughts,  passions,  and  emotions,  without
any  subject. [187  J

Some  ages  hence,  it  will  perhaps  be
looked  upon  ss  a  curious  anecdote,  that
two  philosophers  of  the  eighteenth  century,
of  very  distinguished  rank,  were  led,  by  a
philosophical  hypothesis,  one,  to  disbelieve
the  existence  of  matter,  and  the  other,  to
disbelieve  the  existence  both  of  matter  and
of  mind.  Such  an  anecdote  may  not  be
uninstructive,  if  it  prove  a  warning  to
[18«_188J


philosophers  to  beware  of  hypotheses,  espe-
cially when  they  lead  to  conclusions  which
contradict  the  principles  upon  which  all  men
of  common  sense  must  act  in  common  life.

The  Egoists,*  whom  we  mentioned  be-
fore, were  left  far  behind  by  Mr  Hume  ;
for  they  believed  their  own  existence,  and
perhaps  also  the  existence  of  a  Deity.  But
Mr  Hume's  system  does  not  even  leave  him
a  self  to  claim  the  property  of  his  impres-
sions and  ideas.

A  system  of  consequences,  however  ab-
surd, acutely  and  justly  drawn  from  a  few
principles,  in  very  abstract  matters,  is  of
real  utility  in  science,  and  may  be  made
subservient  to  real  knowledge.  This  merit
Mr  Hume's  metaphysical  writings  have  in
a  great  degree.

We  had  occasion  before  to  observe,  that,
since  the  time  of  Des  Cartes,  philosophers,
in  t:  eating  of  the  powers  of  the  mind,  have,
in  many  instances,  confounded  things  which
the  common  sense  of  mankind  has  always
led  them  to  distinguish,  and  which  have
different  names  in  all  languages.  Thus,  in
the  perception  of  an  external  object,  all
languages  distinguish  three  things—  the
mind  that  perceives,  the  operation  of  that
mind,  which  is  called  perception,  and  the
object  perceived. -f-  Nothing  appears  more
evident  to  a  mind  untutored  by  philosophy,
than  that  these  three  are  distinct  things,
which,  though  related,  ought  never  to  be
confounded.  [188]  The  structure  of  all
languages  supposes  this  distinction,  and  is
built  upon  it.  Philosophers  have  intro-
duced a  fourth  thing  in  this  process,  which
they  call  the  idea  of  the  object,  which  is
supposed  to  be  an  image,  or  representative
of  the  object,  and  is  said  to  be  the  imme-
diate object.  The  vulgar  know  nothing
about  this  idea ;  it  is  a  creature  of  philo-
sophy,introduced  to  account  for  and  explain
the  manner  of  our  perceiving  external  objects.


*  In  supplement  to  no'e  §  at  p  269,  supra,  in  re-
gard  to  the  pretended  sect  of  Egoists,  there  is  to  be
ad  led  the  following  notices,  which  I  did  not  recol-
lect till  after  that  note  was  s«n  :  —

Wolf,  {Psychologia  Rafionalis,  §  SS,)  after  dividing
Idealists  into  Egoists  and  Pluralists,  says,  inter  alia,  of
the  former  : — "  Fuit  paucis  alhinc  annis  assecla
quidam  Malebranchii,  Parisiis.  qui  Egoi>mum  pro-
fessus  est  (quod  mirum  mihi  videtur)  asseclas  et  ipso
nactus  est."  In  his  Vermienftige  Gedankenvon  Gott,
&c,  c.  J,  ^  2,  he  also  mentions  this  allerseltsamste
Secte  There  is  also  an  oration  by  Christopher
Matthaeus  Pfaff,  the  Chancellor  of  Tuebingen—
"  Be  Egoismo,nova  philosophica  Jiaeresi,"  in  i72v—
which  I  have  not  seen — i  hus,  what  I  formerly  ha.
zarded,  is  still  farther  confirmed.  All  is  vague  and
contradictory  hearsay  in  regard  to  the  Eg<>i.-ts.  The
French  place  them  in  Scotland  ;  the  Scotch  in  Hol-
land ;  the  Germans  in  France ;  and  they  are  variously
stated  as  the  immedia  e  disciples  of  Des  Cartes,
Malebranche,  Spinoza.  There  is  certainly  no  reason
why  an  Egoistical  IdealiMB  should  not  have  been
explicitly  promulgated  before  Fichte,  (whose  doctrine,
however,  is  not  the  same;)  but  I  have,  as  yet,  seen
no  satisfactory  grounds  on  which  it  can  be  shewn
that  this  had  actua.ly  been  done — H.
t  See  Notes  B  and  C— H.


294


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


It  is  pleasant  to  observe  that,  while  philo-
sophers, for  more  than  a  century,  have  been
labouring,  by  means  of  ideas,  to  explain
perception  and  the  other  operations  of  the
mind,  those  ideas  have  by  degrees  usurped
the  place  of  perception,  object,  and  even  of
the  mind  itself,  and  have  supplanted  those
very  things  they  were  brought  to  explain.
Des  Cartes  reduced  all  the  operations  of  the
understanding  to  perception  ;  and  what  can
be  more  natural  to  those  who  believe  that
they  are  only  different  modes  of  perceiving
ideas  in  our  own  minds  ?  Locke  confounds
ideas  sometimes  with  the  perception  of  an
external  object,  sometimes  with  the  external
object  itself.  In  Berkeley's  system,  the  idea
is  the  only  object,  and  yet  is  often  con-
founded with  the  perception  of  it.  But,  in
Hume's,  the  idea  or  the  impression,  which
is  only  a  more  lively  idea,  is  mind,  percep-
tion, and  object,  all  in  one  :  so  that,  by  the
term  perception,  in  Mr  Hume's  system,  we
must  understand  the  mind  itself,  all  its
operations,  both  of  understanding  and  will,
and  all  the  objects  of  these  operations.  Per-
ception taken  in  this  sense  he  divides  into
our  more  lively  perceptions,  which  he  calls
impressions,*  and  the  less  lively,  which  he
calls  ideas.  To  prevent  repetition,  I  must
here  refer  the  reader  to  some  remarks  made
upon  this  division,  Essay  I.  chap.  1,  in  the
explication  there  given  of  the  words,  per-
ceive, object,  impression,  [pp.  222,  223,226.]

Philosophers  hare  differed  very  much
with  regard  to  the  origin  of  our  ideas,  or
the  sources  whence  they  are  derived.  The
Peripatetics  held  that  all  knowledge  is  de-
rived originally  from  the  senses  ;-f  and  this
ancient  doctrine  seems  to  be  revived  by
some  late  French  philosophers,  and  by  Dr
Hartley  and  Dr  Priestley  among  the  Brit-
ish. [189]  Des  Cartes  maintained,  that
many  of  our  ideas  are  innate.  Locke  op-
posed the  doctrine  of  innate  ideas  with
much  zeal,  and  employs  the  whole  first
book  of  his  Essay  against  it.  But  he  ad-
mits two  different  sources  of  ideas  .  the
operations  of  our  external  senses,  which  he
calls  sensation,  by  which  we  get  all  our
ideas  of  body,  and  its  attributes ;  and  re-
flection upon  the  operations  of  our  minds,  by
which  we  get  the  ideas  of  everything  be-

■  Mr  Stewart  {Elan.  III.  Addenda  to  vol  I.  p.
43)  seems  to  think  that  the  word  impression  was
first  introduced  as  a.  technical  term,  into  the  philo-
sophy of  mind,  by  Hume.  This  is  not  altogether
correct.  For,  besides  the  instances  which  Mr  Stewart
himself  adduces,  of  the  illustration  attempted,  of  the
phenomena  of  memory  from  the  analogy  of  an  im-
press and  3  t;  ace,  words  corresponding  to  impression
were  amoiig  the  ancients  familiarly  applied  to  thepro-
cessescf  external  perception,  imagination,  &c.,in  the
Atomistic,  the  Platonic,  the  Aristotelian,  and  the
Stoical  philosophies ;  while,  amongmodern  psycholo-
gists, (as  D<  s  Cartes  and  Oasserdi,;  the  term  was  like-
wise in  common  use — H.

T  This  is  an  incorrect,  at  least  a  too  unqualified,
statement.— H.


longing  to  the  mind.  The  main  design  of
the  second  book  of  Locke's  "  Essay,"  is  to
shew,  that  all  our  simple  ideas,  without
exception,  are  derived  from  the  one  or  the
other,  or  both  of  these  sources.  In  doing
this,  the  author  h  led  into  some  paradoxes,
although,  in  general,  he  is  not  fond  of  para-
doxes :  And  had  he  foreseen  all  the  con-
sequences that  may  be  drawn  from  his  ac-
count of  the  origin  of  our  ideas,  he  would
probably  have  examined  it  more  carefully.*

Mr  Hume  adopts  Locke's  account  of  the
origin  of  our  ideas  ;  and  from  that  principle
infers,  that  we  have  no  idea  of  substance,
corporeal  or  spiritual,  no  idea  of  power,  no
other  idea  of  a  cause,  but  that  it  is  something
antecedent,  and  constantly  conjoined  to  that
which  we  call  its  effect ;  and,  in  a  word,
that  we  can  have  no  idea  of  anything  but
our  sensations,  and  the  operations  of  mind
we  are  conscious  of.

This  author  leaves  no  power  to  the  mind
in  framing  its  ideas  and  impressions  ;  and,
no  wonder,  since  he  holds  that  we  have  no
idea  of  power  ;  and  the  mind  is  nothing  but
that  succession  of  impressions  and  ideas  of
which  we  are  intimately  conscious.

He  thinks,  therefore,  that  our  impressions
arise  from  unknown  causes,  and  that  the
impressions  are  the  causes  of  their  corre-
sponding ideas.  By  this  he  means  no  more
but  that  they  always  go  before  the  ideas ;
for  this  is  all  that  is  necessary  to  constitute
the  relation  of  cause  and  effect. [190]

As  to  the  order  and  succession  of  our
ideas,  he  holds  it  to  be  determined  by  three
laws  of  attraction  or  association,  which  he
takes  to  be  original  properties  of  the  ideas,
by  which  they  attract,  as  it  were,  or  asso-
ciate themselves  with  other  ideas  which
either  resemble  them,  or  which  have  been
contiguous  to  them  in  time  and  place,  or  to
which  they  have  the  relations  of  cause  and
effect.

We  may  here  observe,  by  the  way,  that
the  last  of  these  three  laws  seems  to  be  in-
cluded in  the  second,  since  causation,  ac-
cording to  him,  implies  no  more  than  con-
tiguity in  time  and  place. -f-


*  At  any  rate,  according  to  i  ocke,  all  our  know-
ledge is  a  derivation  from  experience. —  H.

t  Mr  Hume  says—"  I  do  not  find  that  any  philo.
sopher  has  attempted  to  enumerate  or  class  all  the
principles  of  Association  ;  a  subject,  however,  that
seems  to  me  very  woithy  of  curiosity.  To  me  there
appears  to  be  only  three  principles  of  connection
among  ideas:  Resemblance — Contiguity  in  time  or
place — Cause  and  Effect." — Essays,  vol.  ii.,  p.  2\  —
Aristoile,  and,  after  him,  many  other  philosophers,
had,  however,  done  this,  and  with  even  greater  success
than  Hume  himself.  Aristotle's  reduction  is  to  the
four  following  heads  .- — Proximity  in  time— Conti-
guity in  place — Resemblance — Contrast.  This  is
more  correct  than  Hume's;  for  Hume's  second  head
ought  tc  be  divided  into  two  ;  while  our  connecting
any  particular  events  in  the  relation  of  cause  and
effect,  is  itself  the  result  of  their  oi  served  proximity
in  time  and  contiguity  in  place ;  nay,  to  custom  and
this  empirical  connection  (as  observed  by  Heid)  does


[189,  190]


chap,  xiii.]  OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  ANTHONY  ARNAULD. 295


It  is  not  my  design  at  present  to  shew
how  Mr  Hume,  upon  the  principles  he  has
borrowed  from  Locke  and  Berkeley,  has,
with  great  acuteness,  reared  a  system  of
absolute  scepticism,  which  leaves  no  rational
ground  to  believe  any  one  proposition,
rather  than  its  contrary  :  my  intention  in
this  pi  ice  being  only  to  give  a  detail  of  the
sentiments  of  philosophers  concerning  ideas
since  they  became  an  object  of  speculation,
and  concerning  the  manner  of  our  perceiv-
ing external  objects  by  their  means.


CHAPTER  XIII.


OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  ANTHONY  ARNAULD.

In  this  sketch  of  the  opinions  of  philoso-
phers concerning  ideas,  we  must  not  omit
Anthony  Arnauld,  doctor  of  the  Sorbonne,
who,  in  the  year  1683,  published  his  book
"  Of  True  and  False  Ideas,"  in  opposition
to  the  system  of  Malebranche  before  men-
tioned. It  is  only  about  ten  years  since  I
could  find  this  book,  and  I  believe  it  is
rare." [191]

Though  Arnauld  wrote  before  Locke,
Berkeley,  and  Hume,  I  have  reserved  to
the  last  place  some  account  of  his  senti-
ments, because  it  seems  difficult  to  deter-
mine whether  he  adopted  the  common  theory
of  ideas,  or  whether  he  is  singular  in  reject-
ing it  altogether  as  a  fiction  of  philoso-
phers.

The  controversy  between  Malebranche
and  Arnauld  necessarily  led  them  to  con-
sider what  kind  of  things  ideas  are— a  point
upon  which  other  philosophers  had  very
generally  been  silent.  Both  of  them  pro-
fessed the  doctrine  universally  received :
that  we  perceive  not  material  things  imme-
diately— that  it  is  their  ideas  that  are  the
immediate  objects  of  our  thought— and  that
it  is  in  the  idea  of  everything  that  we  per-
ceive its  properties.

It  is  necessary  to  premise  that  both
these  authors  use  the  word  perception,  as
Des  Cartes  had  done  before  them,  to  sig-
nify every  operation  of  the  understand-
ing.-]- "  To  think,  to  know,  to  perceive,  are
the  same  thing,"  says  Mr  Arnauld,  chap.
v.  def.  2.  It  is  likewise  to  be  observed,
that  the  various  operations  of  the  mind  are
by  both  called  modifications  of  the  mind.
Perhaps  they  were  led  into  this  phrase  by
the  Cartesian  doctrine,  that  the  essence  of
the  mind  consists  in  thinking,  as  that  of
body  consists  in  extension. I  apprehend,

Hume  himself  endeavour  to  reduce  the  principle  of
Causality  altogether— H.  See  Notes  D*  andD***.
*  The  treatises  of  Arnauld  in  his  controversy  with
Malebranche,  are  to  be  found  in  the  thirty. eiahth
volume  of  his  collected  works  in  4to. — H.

t  Every  apprehensive,  or  strictly  cognitive  opera-
tion of  the  understanding.  —  H.

[191 ,  192]


therefore,  that,  when  they  make  sensation,
perception,  memory,  and  imagination,  to
be  various  modifications  of  the  mind,  they
mean  no  more  but  that  these  are  things
which  can  only  exist  in  the  mind  as  their
subject.  We  express  the  same  thing,  by
calling  them  various  modes  of  thinking,  or
various  operations  of  the  mind.*

The  things  which  the  mind  perceives,
says  Malebranche,  are  of  two  kinds.  They
are  either  in  the  mind  itself,  or  they  are
external  to  it.  The  things  in  the  mind,
are  all  its  different  modifications,  its  sensa-
tions, its  imaginations,  its  pure  intellec-
tions, its  passions  and  affections.  These
are  immediately  perceived  ;  we  are  con-
scious of  them,  and  have  no  need  of  ideas
to  represent  them  to  us. [192]

Things  external  to  the  mind,  are  either
corporeal  or  spiritual.  With  regard  to  the
last,  he  thinks  it  possible  that,  in  another
state,  spirits  may  be  an  immediate  object
of  our  understandings,  and  so  be  perceived
without  ideas  ;  that  there  may  be  such  an
union  of  spirits  as  that  they  may  imme-
diately perceive  each  other,  and  communi-
cate their  thoughts  mutually,  without  signs
and  without  ideas.

But,  leaving  this  as  a  problematical  point,
he  holds  it  to  be  undeniable,  that  material
things  cannot  be  perceived  immediately,
but  only  by  the  mediation  of  ideas.  He
thought  it  likewise  undeniable,  that  the  idea
must  be  immediately  present  to  the  mind,
that  it  must  touch  the  soul  as  it  were,  and
modify  its  perception  of  the  obj<  ct.

From  these  principles  we  must  neces-
sarily conclude,  either  that  the  idea  is
some  modification  of  the  human  mind,  or
that  it  must  be  an  idea  in  the  Divine
Mind,  which  is  always  intimately  present
with  our  minds.  The  matter  being  brought
to  this  alternative,  Malebranche  considers
first  all  the  possible  ways  such  a  modifica-
tion may  be  produced  in  our  mind  as  that
we  call  an  idea  of  a  material  object,  taking
it  for  granted  always,  that  it  must  be  an
object  perceived,  and  something  different
from  the  act  of  the  mind  in  perceiving  it.
He  finds  insuperable  objections  against
every  hypothesis  of  such  ideas  being  pro-
duced in  our  minds;  and  therefore  con-
cludes, that  the  immediate  objects  of  per-
ception are  the  ideas  of  the  Divine  Mind.

Against  this  system  Arnauld  wrote  his
book  "  Of  True  and  False  Ideas."  He
does  not  object  to  the  alternative  men-
tioned by  Malebranche  ;  but  he  maintains,
that  ideas  are  modifications  of  our  minds.
And,  finding  no  other  modification  of  the


*  Modes,  ox  modifications  of  mind,  in  the  Cartesian
school,  mean  merely  what  some  recent  philosophers
express  by  states  of  mind  and  include  .both  ihe
active  and  passive  ph&nomeua  of  the  conscious  sub-
ject. The  terms  were  used  by  Des  Cartes  as  well  =»s
by  his  disciples. —  H.


296


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


human  mind  which  can  be  called  the  idea
of  an  external  object,  he  says  it  is  only
another  word  for  perception.  Chap,  v.,  def.
3.  [193]  "  I  take  the  idea  of  an  object,
and  the  perception  of  an  object,  to  be  the
same  thing.  I  do  not  say  whether  there
may  be  other  things  to  which  the  name  of
idea  may  be  given.  But  it  is  certain  that
there  are  ideas  taken  in  this  sense,  and  that
these  ideas  are  either  attributes  or  modifi-
cations of  our  minds."*

This,  I  think,  indeed,  was  to  attack  the
system  of  Malebranche  upon  its  weak  side,
and  where,  at  the  same  time,  an  attack  was
least  expected.  Phdosophers  had  been  so
unanimous  in  maintaining  that  we  do  not
perceive  external  objects  immediately, f
but  by  certain  representative  images  of
them  called  ideus,%  that  Malebranche
might  well  think  his  system  secure  upon
that  quarter,  and  that  the- only  question  to
be  determined  was,  in  what  subject  those
ideas  are  placed,  whether  in  the  human  or
in  the  divine  mind  ?

But,  says  Mr  Arnauld,  those  ideas  are
mere  chimeras — fictions  of  philosophers  ;
there  are  no  such  beings  in  nature ;  and,
therefore,  it  is  to  no  purpose  to  inquire
whether  they  are  in  the  divine  or  in  the  hu-
man mind.  The  only  true  and  real  ideas
are  our  perceptions,  which§  are  acknow-
ledged by  all  philosophers,  and  by  Male-
branche himself,  to  be  acts  or  modifications
of  our  own  minds.  He  does  not  say  that
the  fictitious  ideas  were  a  fiction  of  Male-
branche- He  acknowledges  that  they  had
been  very  generally  maintained  by  the
scholastic  philosophers,  j|  and  points  out,
very  judiciously,  the  prejudices  that  had
led  them  into  the  belief  of  such  ideas.

Of all the powers of  our mind, the

•  Arnauld  did  not  allow  that  perceptions  and
ideas  are  really  or  numerically  distinguished — i  e.,  as
one  thing  from  another  thing ;  not  even  that  tney
are  modally  distinguished— i.  e,  as  a  thing  from  its
mode.  He  maintained  that  they  are  really  identical,
and  only  rationally  discriminated  as  viewed  in  dif-
ferent relations ;  the  indivisib  e  mental  modification
being  called  a  perception,  by  reference  to  the  mind  or
thinking  subject— an  idea,  by  reference  to  the  mediate
object  or  thing  thought.  Arnauld  everywhere  avows
that  he  denies  ideas  only  as  existences  distinct  Iroin
the  act  itself  of  perception. — bee  Oeuvres.  t.  xxxvni.
pp.  187,  198,  199,  339.— H.

f  Arnauld  does  not  assert  against  Malebranche
"  that-we  perceive  external  objects  immediately"— that
is,  in  themselves,  and  as  existing.  He  was  too  accu.
rate  for  this.  By  an  immediate  cognition,  Reid
means  merely  the  negation  of  the  intermediation  of
any  third  thing  between  the  reality  perceived  and
the  percipient  mind.— H.

t  Idea  was  not  the  word  by  which  representative
images,  distinct  from  the  percipient  act,  had  been
commonly  called  ;  nor  were  philosophers  at  all  unani-
mous in  the  admission  of  such  vicarious  objects. —
See  Notes  G,  L,  M,  N,  O,  &c— H.

$  That  is,  Perceptions,  (the  cognitive  acts,)  but  not
hlcas,  (tbe  immediate  objects  of  those  acts.)  The  latter
were  not  acknowledged  by  Malebranche  and  all  phi-
losophers to  be  mere  acts  or  modifications  of  our  own
minds. — H.

||  But  by  a  different  name H.


external  senses  are  thought  to  be  the
best  understood,  and  their  objects  are  the
most  familiar.  Hence  we  measure  other
powers  by  them,  and  transfer  to  other
powers  the  language  which  properly  be-
longs to  them.  The  objects  of  sense  must
be  present  to  the  sense,  or  within  its
sphere,  in  order  to  their  being  perceived.
Hence,  by  analogy,  we  are  led  to  say  of
everything  when  we  think  of  it,  that  it  is
present  to  the  mind,  or  in  the  mind.  [194]
But  this  presence  is  metaphorical,  or  ana-
logical only ;  and  Arnauld  calls  it  objec-
tive presence,  to  distinguish  it  from  that
local  presence  which  is  required  in  objects
that  are  perceived  by  sense.  But  both
being  called  bv  the  same  name,  they  are
confounded  together,  and  those  things  that
be'.ong  only  to  real  or  local  presence,  are
attributed  to  the  metaphorical.

We  are  likewise  accustomed  to  see  objects
by  their  images  in  a  mirror,  or  in  water ;
and  hence  are  led,  by  analogy,  to  think  that
objects  may  be  presented  to  the  memory  or
imagination  in  some  similar  manner,  by
images,  which] philosopher  have  called  ideas.

By  such  prejudices  and  analogies,  Arnauld
conceives,  men  have  been  led  to  believe  that
the  objects  of  memory  and  imagination
must  be  presented  to  the  mind  by  images
or  ideas  ;  and  the  philosophers  have  been
more  carried  away  by  these  prejudices  than
even  the  vulgar,  because  the  use  made  of
this  theory  was  to  explain  and  account  for
the  various  operations  of  the  mind — a  matter
in  which  the  vulgar  take  no  concern.

He  thinks,  however,  that  Des  Cartes  had
got  the  better  of  these  prejudices,  and  that
he  uses  the  word  idea  as  signifying  the  same
thing  with  perception,*  and  is,  therefore,
surprised  that  a  disciple  of  Des  Cartes,  and
one  who  was  so  great  an  admirer  of  him  as
Malebranche  was,  should  be  carrh  d  away
by  them.  It  is  strange,  indeed,  that  the
two  most  eminent  disciples  of  Des  Cartes
and  his  contemporaries  should  differ  eo
essentially  with  regard  to  his  doctrine  con-
cerning ideas,  -f-

I  shall  not  attempt  to  give  the  reader  an
account  of  the  continuation  of  this  contro-
versy between  those  two  acute  philosophers,
in  the  subsequent  defences  and  replies  ;  be-
cause I  have  not  access  to  see  them.  After
much  reasoning,  and  some  animosity,  each


*  I  am  convinced  that  in  this  interpretation  of  Des
Cartes'  doctrine,  Arnauld  is  right ;  for  Des  Cartes
defines  mental  ideas — those,  to  wit,  of  which  we  are
conscious — to  he  "  Coyitationcs  prout  sunt  tanquam
imagines — that  is,  tnoughts  considered  in  their  repre-
sentative capacity ;  nor  is  there  any  passage  to  be  found
in  the  writings  ot  this  philosopher,  which,  if  properly
understood,  warrants  the  conclusion,  that,  by  ideas  in
the  mind,  he  meant  aught  distinct  from  the  cognitive
act.  The  double  use  of  the  term  idea  by  Des  Cartes
has,  however,  led  Reid  and  others  into  a  miscon.
ception  on  this  point. See  Note  N. — H.

t  Reid's  own  doctrine  is  far  more  ambiguous. — H.

[193,  1.94]


hap.  xiii.]  OF  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  ANTHONY  ARNAULD. 297


continued  in  his  own  opinion,  and  left  his
antagonist  where  he  found  him.  [195]
Malebran  die's  opinion  of  our  seeing  all
things  in  God,  soon  died  away  of  itself ;  and
Arnauld's  notion  of  ideas  seems  to  have
been  less  regarded  than  it  deserved,  by  the
philosophers  that  came  after  him  ;*  per-
haps for  this  reason,  among  others,  that  it
seemed  to  be,  in  some  sort,  given  up  by
himself,  in  his  attempting  to  reconcile  it  to
the  common  doctrine  concerning  ideas.

From  the  account  I  have  given,  one
would  be  apt  to  conclude  that  Arnauld
totally  denied  the  existence  of  ideas,  in  the
philosophical  sense  of  that  word,  and  that
he  adopted  the  notion  of  the  vulgar,  who
acknowledge  no  object  of  perception  but  the
external  object.  But  he  seems  very  un-
willing to  deviate  so  far  from  the  common
track,  and,  what  he  had  given  up  with  one
hand,  he  takes  back  with  the  other.

For,  first.  Having  defined  ideas  to  be  the
same  thing  with  perceptions,  he  adds  this
qualification  to  his  definition  : — "  I  do  not
here  consider  whether  there  are  other  things
that  may  be  called  ideas  ;  but  it  is  certain
there  are  ideas  taken  in  this  sense.*}"  I
believe,  indeed,  there  is  no  philosopher  who
does  not,  on  some  occasions,  use  the  word
idea  in  this  popular  sense.


*  The  opinion  of  Arnauld  in  regard  to  the  nature
of  ideas  was  by  no  means  overlooked  by  subsequent
philosophers.  It  is  found  fully  detailed  in  almost
every  systematic  course  or  compend  of  philosoj>hy,
which  appeared  for  a  long  time  after  its  first  promul.
gation,  and  in  many. of  these  it  is  the  doctrine. re-
commended  as  the  true.  Arnauld's  was  indeed  the
opinion  which  latterly  prevailed  in  the  Cartesian
school.  From  this  it  passed  into  other  schools.  Leib-
nitz, like  Arnauld,  regarded  Ideas,  Notions,  Repre-
sentations, as  mere  modifications  of  the  mind,  (what
Ly  his  disciples,  were  called  material  ideas,  like  the
cerebral  ideas  of  Des  Cartes,  are  out  ofthe  quest  ion,)
and  no  cruder  opinion  than  this  has  ever  subse-
quently found  a  footing  in  any  of  the  German
systems,

"  I  don't  know,"  says  Mr  Stewart,  "  of  any  author
who,  prior  to  Dr  Keicl,  has  expressed  himself  on  this
subject  with  so  much  justness  and  precision  as  Father
Burner,  in  the  following  passage  of  his  Treatise  on
•  First  Truths  :*—

"  '  If  we  confine  ourselves  to  what  is  intelligible  in
our  observations  on  ideas,  we  will  say,  they  are  nn.
thing»but  mere  modifications  of  the  mind  as  a  think,
ing  heing.  They  are  called  ideas  with  regard  to  the
object  represented ;  and  perceptions  with  regard  to
the  faculty  representing.  It  is  manifest  that  our
ideas,  considered  in  this  sense,  ate  not  more  distin-
guished than  motion  is  from  a  body  moved.' — (P.
311, English  Translation.)" — i 1<  m.  iii.  Add.  to  vol.  i.
p.  10

In  this  passage,  Burner  only  repeats  thedectrine  of
Arnauld,  in  Arnauld's  own  words.

Dr  Thomas  Brown,  on  the  other  hand,  has  en-
deavoured to  shew  that  ths  doctrine,  (which  he
identifies  with  Reid's,)  had  been  long  the  catholic
opinion  ;  and  that  Keid,  in  his  attack  on  the  Ide.d
system,  only  refuted  what  had  been  already  ahn<  st
universally  exploded.  In  this  attempt  he  is,  how-
ever, singularly  unfortunate;  for,  with  the  excep-
tion of  Crousaz,  all  the  examples  he- adduces  to
evince  the  prevalence  of  Arnauld's  doctrine  are  only
so  many  mistakes,  so  many  instances,  in  fact,  which
might  be  alleged  in  confirmation  of  the  very  opposite
conclusion. See  Edinburgh  Review,  vol.  Iii.,  p.  181-

iy6.-H.

f  See  following  note— H.
[195,  19(3]


Secondly,  He  supports  this  popular  sense
of  the  word  by  the  authority  of  Des  Cartes,
who,  in  his  demonstration  of  the  existence
of  God,  from  the  idea  of  him  in  our  minds,
defines  an  idea  thus  : — "  By  the  word  idea,
I  understand  that  form  of  any  thought,  by
the  immediate  perception  of  which  I  am
conscious  of  that  thought ;  so  that  I  can  ex-
press nothing  by  words,  with  understanding,
without  being  certain  that  there  is  in  my  mind
the  idea  of  that  which  is  expressed  by  the
words."  This  definition  seems,  indeed,  to
be  of  the  same  import  with  that  which  is
given  by  Arnauld.  But  Des  Cartes  adds
a  qualification  to  it,  which  Arnauld,  in
quoting  it,  omits  ;  and  which  shews  that
Des  Cartes  meant  to  limit  his  definition  to
the  idea  then  treated  of — that  is,  to  the  idea
of  the  Deity  ;  and  that  there  are  other  ideas
to  which  this  definition  does  not  apply.  [  1 96]
For  he  adds : — "  And  thus  I  give  the  name
of  idea,  not  solely  to  the  images  painted  in
the  phantasy ;  nay,  in  this  place,  I  do  not
at  all  give  the  name  of  ideas  to  those
images,  in  so  far  as  they  are  painted  in  the
corporeal  phantasy  that  is  in  some  part  of
the  brain,  but  only  in  so  far  as  they  inform
the  mind,  turning  its  attention  to  that  part
of  the  brain."*

Thirdly,  Arnauld  has  employed  the  whole
of  his  sixth  chapter,  to  shew  that  these  ways
of  speaking,  common  among  philosophers —
to  wit,  that  we  perceive  not  things  imme-
diately ;  that  it  is  their  ideas  that  are  the
immediate  objects  of  our  thoughts;  that  it  is
in  the  idea  of  everything  thats.we  perceive  i  s
properties — are  not  to  be  rejected,  but  are
true  when  rightly  understood.  He  labours
to  reconcile  these  expressions  to  his  own
definition  of  ideas,  by  observing,  that  every
perception  and  every  thought  is  necessarily
conscious  of  itself,  and  reflects  upon  itself ;
and  that,  by  this  consciousness  and  reflec-
tion, it  is  its  own  immediate  object.  Whence
he  infers,  that  the  idea — that  is,  the  percep-
tion— is  the  immediate  object  of  perception.

This  looks  like  a  weak  attempt  to  recon-
cile two  inconsistent  doctrines  by  one  who
wishes  to  hold  both.*f-  It  is  true,  that  con-
sciousness always  goes  along  with  percep-
tion; but  they  are  different  operations  of
the  mind,  and  they  have  their  different
objects.  Consciousness  is  not  perception,
nor  is  the  object  of  consciousness  the  object
of  percel  tion.  J The  same  may  be  sa  d  of

*  Des  Cartes  here  refers  to  the  other  meaning  which
he  gives  to  the  term  idea — that  is,  to  denote  the
material  motion,  the  organic  affection  of  the  biain,
of  which  the  mind  is  not  conscious.  On  Reid's  mis-
apprehension of  the  Cartesian  doctrine  touching  this
matter,  see  Note  N  —  H

-f  Arnauld's  attempt  is  ne  ther  weak  nor  inconsist.
ent.  He  had,  in  tact,  a  clearer  view  of  the  condi-
tions of  the  problem  than  Reid  himself,  who  has,  in
fact,  confound;,  d  two  opposite  doctrines.  See  Note  C.
—  H.

%  On  Reid's  error  in  reducing  consciousness  to  a
fpecial  faculty,  see  Note  H H.


293


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[_ESSAY II.


every  operation  of  mind  that  has  an  object.
Thus,  injury  is  the  object  of  resentment.
When  I  resent  an  injury,  I  am  conscious
of  my  resentment — that  is,  my  resentment
is  the  immediate  and  the  only  object  of  my
consciousness ;  but  it  would  be  absurd  to
infer  from  this,  that  my  resentment  is  the
immediate  object  of  my  resentment.  [  1 97  ]
Upon  the  whole,  if  Arnauld — in  conse-
quence of  his  doctrine,  that  ideas,  taken
for  representative  images  of  external  ob-
jects, are  a  mere  fiction  of  the  philosophers
— had  rejected  boldly  the  doctrine  of  Des
Cartes,  as  well  as  of  the  other  philosophers,
concerning  those  fictitious  beings,  and  all
the  ways  of  speaking  that  imply  their  ex-
istence, I  should  have  thought  him  more
consistent  with  himself,  and  his  doctrine
concerning  ideas  more  rational  and  more
intelligible  than  that  of  any  other  author  of
my  acquaintance  who  has  treated  of  the
subject.*


CHAPTER  XIV.

REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  COMMON  THEORY  OF
IDEAS.

After  so  long  a  detail  of  the  sentiments
of  philosophers,  ancient  and  modern,  con-
cerning ideas,  it  may  seem  presumptuous
to  call  in  question  their  existence.  But  no
philosophical  opinion,  however  ancient,
however  generally  received,  ought  to  rest
upon  authority.  There  is  no  presumption
in  requiring  evidence  for  it,  or  in  regulat-
ing our  belief  by  the  evidence  we  can  find.

To  prevent  mistakes,  the  reader  must
again  be  reminded,  that  if  by  ideas  are
meant  only  the  acts  or  operations  of  our
minds  in  perceiving,  remembering,  or  ima-
gining objects,  I  am  far  from  calling  in
question  the  existence  of  those  acts  ;  we
are  conscious  of  them  every  day  and  every
hour  of  life ;  and  I  believe  no  man  of  a
sound  mind  ever  doubted  of  the  real  exist-
ence of  the  operations  of  mind,  of  which  he
is  conscious.  Nor  is  it  to  be  doubted  that,
by  the  faculties  which  God  has  given  us,
we  can  conceive  things  that  are  absent,  as
well  as  perceive  those  that  are  within  the
reach  of  our  senses  ;  and  that  such  concep-
tions may  be  more  or  less distinct, and


*  Reid  s  discontent  with  Arnauld  <s  opinion — an
opinio.i  which  is  stated  with  great  perspicuity  by  its
author— may  be  used  as  an  argum  nt  to  shew  that  his
own  doctrine  is,  however  ambiguous,  that  of  intui-
tive or  immediate  perception.  (See  NoteC.)  Arnauld's
theory  is  identical  with  the  finer  form* of  representa-
tive or  mediate  perception,  and  the  difficulties  of  that
doctrine  were  not  overlooked  by  his  great  antagonist.
Arnauld  well  objected  that,  when  we  see  a  horse,  ac-
cording to  Malebranche,  what  we  see  is  in  reality
God,  himself;  but  Malebranche  well  rejoined,  that,
when  we  see  a  horse,  according  to  Arnauld,  what  we
-see  is,  in  reality,  only  a  modification  of  ourselves.— H.


more  or  less  lively  and  strong.  We  have
reason  to  ascribe  to  the  all-knowing  and
all-perfect  Being  distinct  conceptions  of  all
things  existent  and  possible,  and  of  all  their
relations ;  and  if  these  conceptions  are  called
his  eternal  ideas,  there  ought  to  be  no  dis-
pute among  philosophers  about  a  word.
[198]  The  ideas,  of  whose  existence  I
require  the  proof,  are  not  the  operations  of
any  mind,  but  supposed  objects  of  those
operations.  They  are  not  perception,  re-
membrance, or  conception,  but  things  that
are  said  to  be  perceived,  or  remembered,  or
imagined.

Nor  do  I  dispute  the  existence  of  what
the  vulgar  call  the  objects  of  perception.
These,  by  all  who  acknowledge  their  exist-
ence, are  called  real  things,  not  ideas.  But
philosophers  maintain  that,  besides  these,
there  are  immediate  objects  of  perception
in  the  mind  itself :  that,  for  instance,  we
do  not  see  the  sun  immediately,  but  an
idea ;  or,  as  Mr  Hume  calls  it,  an  impres-
sion in  our  own  minds.  This  idea  is  said
to  be  the  image,  the  resemblance,  the  re-
presentative of  the  «sun,  if  there  be  a  sun.
It  is  from  the  existence  of  the  idea  that  we
must  infer  the  existence  of  the  sun.  But
the  idea,  being  immediately  perceived,  there
can  be  no  doubt,  as  philosophers  think,  of
its  existence.

In  like  manner,  when  I  remember,  or
when  I  imagine  anything,  all  men  acknow-
ledge that  there  must  be  something  that  is
remembered,  or  that  is  imagined ;  that  is,
some  object  of  those  operations.  The
object  remembered  must  be  something  that
did  exist  in  time  past :  the  object  imagined
may  be  something  that  never  existed.*
But,  say  the  philosophers,  besides  these
objects  which  all  men  acknowledge,  there
is  a  more  immediate  object  which  really
exists  in  the  mind  at  the  same  time  we
remember  or  imagine.  This  object  is  an
idea  or  image  of  the  thing  remembered  or
imagined.

The  Jirst  reflection  I  would  make  on  this
philosophical  opinion  is,  that  it  is  directly
contrary  to  the  universal  sense  of  men  who
have  not  been  instructed  in  philosophy.
When  we  see  the  sun  or  moon,  we  have  no
doubt  that  the  very  objects  which  we  im-
mediately see  are  very  far  distant  from  us,
and  from  one  another.  We  have  not  the
least  doubt  that  this  is  the  sun  and  moon
which  God  created  some  thousands  of  years
ago,  and  which  have  continued  to  perform
their  revolutions  in  the  heavens  ever  since.
[199]  But  how  are  we  astonished  when
the  philosopher  informs  us  that  we  are  mis-
taken in  all  this ;  that  the  sun  and  moon
which  we  see  are  not,  as  we  imagine,  many
miles  distant  from  us,  and  from  each  other,


«  See  Note  B—  H


[197-199]


chap,  xiv.]  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  IDEAS.


299


but  that  they  are  in  our  own  mind ;  that
they  had  no  existence  before  we  saw  them,
and  will  have  none  when  we  cease  to  per-
ceive and  to  think  of  them ;  because  the
objects  we  perceive  are  only  ideas  in  our
own  minds,  which  can  have  no  existence  a
moment  longer  than  we  think  of  them  !*

If  a  plain  man,  uninstructed  in  philoso-
phy, has  faith  to  receive  these  mysteries,
how  great  must  be  his  astonishment  !  He
is  brought  into  a  new  world,  where  every-
thing he  sees,  tastes,  or  touches,  is  an  idea
— a  fleeting  kind  of  being  which  he  can  con-
jure into  existence,  or  can  annihilate  in  the
twinkling  of  an  eye.

After  his  mind  is  somewhat  composed,  it
will  be  natural  for  him  to  ask  his  philoso-
phical instructor,  Pray,  sir,  are  there  then
no  substantial  and  permanent  beings  called
the  sun  and  moon,  which  continue  to  exist
whether  we  think  of  them  or  not  ?

Here  the  philosophers  differ.  Mr  Locke,
and  those  that  were  before  him,  will  answer
to  this  question,  that  it  is  very  true  there
are  substantial  and  permanent  beings  called
the  sun  and  moon  ;  but  they  never  appear
to  us  in  their  own  person,  but  by  their  re-
presentatives, the  ideas  in  our  own  minds,
and  we  know  nothing  of  them  but  what  we
can  gather  from  those  ideas.

Bishop  Berkeley  and  Mr  Hume  would
give  a  different  answer  to  the  question  pro-
posed. They  would  assure  the  querist  that
it  is  a  vulgar  error,  a  mere  prejudice  of  the
ignorant  and  unlearned,  to  think  that  there
are  any  permanent  and  substantial  beings
called  the  sun  and  moon  ;  that  the  heavenly
bodies,  our  own  bodies,  and  all  bodies  what-
soever, are  nothing  but  ideas  in  our  minds ;
and  that  there  can  be  nothing  like  the  ideas
of  one  mind,  but  the  ideas  of  another  mind.
[200]  There  is  nothing  in  nature  but
minds  and  ideas,  says  the  Bishop; — nay,
says  Mr  Hume,  there  is  nothing  in  nature
but  ideas  only  ;  for  what  we  call  a  mind  is
nothing  but  a  train  of  ideas  connected  by
certain  relations  between  themselves.

In  this  representation  of  the  theory  of
ideas,  there  is  nothing  exaggerated  or  mis-
represented^ far  as  I  am  able  to  judge  ;
and  surely  nothing  farther  is  necessary  to
shew  that,  to  the  uninstructed  in  philoso-
phy, it  must  appear  extravagant  and  vision-
ary, and  most  contrary  to  the  dictates  of
common  understanding.

There  is  the  less  need  of  any  farther
proof  of  this,  that  it  is  very  amply  acknow-


*  Whether  Reid  himself  do  not  virtually  hold  this
last  opinion,  see  Note  C.  At  any  rate,  it 'is  very  in-
correct to  say  ihat  the sim,  moon,  &c,  are,  or  can  be.
perceived. by  us  as  existent,  aid  in  their  real  dis-
tance in  the  heavens  ;  all  that  we  can  be  cognisant
of  (supposing  that  we  are  immediately  percipient  of
the  non-ego)  is  i  he  rays  of  .light  emanating  from  them,
ahd  in.  contact  and  relation  with  our  organ  of  sight.
—  H.

[200,201]


ledged  by  Mr  Hume  in  his  Essay  on  the
Academical  or  Sceptical  Philosophy.  "  It
seems  evident,"  says  he,  "  that  men  are  car-
ried, by  a  natural  instinct  or  prepossession,
to  repose  faith  in  their  senses ;  and  that,
without  any  reasoning,  or  even  almost  be-
fore the  use  of  reason,  we  always  suppose  an
external  universe,  which  depends  not  on
our  perception,  but  would  exist  though  we
and  every  sensible  creature  were  absent  or
annihilated.  Even  the  animal  creation  are
governed  by  a  like  opinion,  and  preserve  this
belief  of  external  objects  in  all  their  thoughts,
designs,  and  actions.''

"  It  seems  also  evident  that,  whenlmen
follow  this  blind  and  powerful  instinct  of
nature,  they  always  suppose  the  very  im-
ages presented  by  the  senses  to  be  the  ex-
ternal objects,  and  never  entertain  any
suspicion  that  the  one  are  nothing  but  re-
presentations of  the  other.  This  very  table
which  we  see  white,  and  feel  hard,  is  be-
lieved to  exist  independent  of  our  percep-
tion, and  to  be  something  external  to  the
mind  which  perceives  it ;  our  presence  be-
stows not  being  upon  it ;  our  absence  anni-
hilates it  not :  it  preserves  its  existence
uniform  and  entire,  independent  of  the  situ-
ation of  intelligent  beings  who  perceive  or
contemplate  it. [201]

"  But  this  universal  and  primary  notion
of  all  men  is  soon  destroyed  by  the  slightest
philosophy,  which  teaches  us  that  nothing
can  ever  be  present  to  the  mind,  but  an
image  or  perception ;  and  that  the  senses
are  only  the  inlets  through  which  these
images  are  received,  without  being  ever
able  to  produce  any  immediate  intercourse
between  the  mind  and  the  object."

It  is  therefore  acknowledged  by  this  phi-
losopher, to  be  a  natural  instinct  or  pre-
possession, an  universal  and  primary  opinion
of  all  men,  a  primary  instinct  of  nature,  that
the  objects  which  we  immediately  perceive
by  our  senses,  are  not  images  in  our  minds,
but  external  objects,  and  that  their  exist-
ence is  independent  of  us  and  our  percep-
tion.

In  this  acknowledgment,  Mr  Hume  in-
deed seems  to  me  more  generous,  and  even
more  ingenuous  than  Bishop  Berkeley,  who
would  persuade  us  that  his  opinion  does
not  oppose  the  vulgar  opinion,  but  only  that
of  the  philosophers  ;  and  that  the  external
existence  of  a  material  world  is  a  philoso-
phical hypothesis,  and  not  the  natural  dic-
tate of  our  perceptive  powers.  The  Bishop
shews  a  timidity  of  engaging  such  an  adver-
sary, as  a  primary  and  universal  opinion  of
all  men.  He  is  rather  fond  to  court  its  pa-
tronage. But  the  philosopher  intrepidly  gives
a  defiance  to  this /antagonist,  and  seems  to
glory  in  a  conflict  that  was  worthy  of  his  arm.
Optat  aprum  aut  fulvnm  descendere  monte
leonem. After  all,  I  suspect  that  a  philo-


300


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  PO\¥ERS.


[essay  II.


sopher  who  wages  war  with  this  adversary,
will  find  himself  in  the  same  condition  as  a
mathematician  who  should  undertake  to
demonstrate  that  there  is  no  truth  in  the
axioms  of  mathematics.

A  seco/W  reflection  upon  this  subject  is —
that  the  authors  who  have  treated  of  ideas,
have  generally  taken  their  existence  for
granted,  as  a  thing  that  could  not  be  called
in  question  ;  and  such  arguments  as  they
have  mentioned  incidentally,  in  order  to
prove  it,  seem  too  weak  to  support  the  con-
clusion. [202]

Mr  Locke,  in  the  introduction  to  his
Essay,  tells  us,  that  he  uses  the  word  idea
to  signify  whatever  is  the  immediate  object
of  thought ;  and  then  adds,  "  I  presume  it
will  be  easily  granted  me  that  there  are
such  ideas  in  men's  minds ;  every  one  is
conscious  of  them  in  himself;  and  men's
words  and  actions  will  satisfy  him  that  they
are  in  others."  I  am  indeed  conscious  of
perceiving,  remembering,  imagining;  but
that  the  objects  of  these  operations  are
images  in  my  mind,  I  am  not  conscious.
I  am  satisfied,  by  men's  words  and  actions,
that  they  often  perceive  the  same  objects
which  I  perceive,  which  could  not  be,  if
those  objects  were  ideas  in  their  own  minds.

Mr  Norris  is  the  only  author  I  have  met
with,  who  professedly  puts  the  question,
Whether  material  things  can  be  perceived
by  us  immediately  ?  He  has  offered  four
arguments  to  shew  that  they  cannot.  First,
"  Material  objects  are  without  the  mind,
and  therefore  there  can  be  no  union  between
the  object  and  the  percipient."  Answer,
This  argument  is  lame,  until  it  is  shewn  to
be  necessary  that  in  perception  there  should
be  a  union  between  the  object  and  the  per-
cipient. Second,  "  Material  objects  are
disproportioned  to  the  mind,  and  removed
from  it  by  the  whole  diameter  of  Being."
This  argument  I  cannot  answer,  because  I
do  not  understand  it.* Third,  "  Because,

*This  confession  would,  of  itself,  prove  how  super,
ficially  Reid  was  versed  in  the  literature  of  philo-
sophy. N orris's. second  argument  is  only  the  state-
ment of  a  principle  generally  assumed  by  philosophers
— that  the  relation  of  knowledge  infers  a  correspond-
ence of  nature  between  the  subject  knowing,  and  the
object  known,  (his  principle  has,  perhaps,  exerted
a  more  extensive  influence  on  speculation  than  any
other ;  and  yet  it  has  not  been  proved,  and  is  incapable
of  proof— nay,  is  contradicted  by  the  evidence  of
consciousness" itself.  To  trace  the  influence  of  this
assumption  would  be,  in  fact,  in  a  certain  sort,-  to
write  the  history  of  philosophy  ;  for,  though  this  in-
fluence has  never  yet  been  historically  devel  ped,  it
would  be  easy  to  shew  that  the  belief,  explicit
or  implicit,  that  what  knows  and  what  is  imme-
diately known  must  be  of  an  analogous  nature,  lies
at  the  root  of  almost  every  theory  of  cognition,  from
the  very  earliest  to  the  very  latest  speculations.  In
the  more  ancient  philosophy  of  Greece,  three  philo-
sophers (Anaxagoras,  Heraciitus,  and  Alcmaenn)  are
found,  who  professed  the  opposite  doctrine— that  the
condition  of  knowledge  lies  in  the  contrariety,  in  the
natural  antithesis,  of  subject  and  object.  Aristotle,
likewise,  in  his  treatise  On  the  Soul,  expressly  con-
demns the  prevalent  opinion,  that  the  similar  is  only


if  material  objects  were  immediate  objects
of  perception,  there  could  be  no  physical
science— things  necessary  and  immuable
being  the  only  object  of  science."  Answer,
Although  things  necessary  and  immutable
be  not  the  immediate  objects  of  perception,
they  may  be  immediate  objects  of  other
powers  of  the  mind.  Fourth,  "  If  material
things  were  perceived  by  themselves,  they
would  be  a  true  light  to  our  minds,  as  being
the  intelligible  form  of  our  understandings,
and  consequently  perfective  of  them,  and
indeed  superior  to  them."  If  I  comprehend
anything  of  this  mysterious  argument,  it
follows  from  it,  that  the  Deity  perceives
nothing  at  all,  because  nothing  can  be  supe-
rior to  his  understanding,  or  perfective  of
it. [203]

There  is  an  argument  which  is  hinted
at  by  Malebranche,  and  by  several  other
authors,  which  deserves  to  be  more  seriously
considered.  As  I  find  it  most  clearly  ex-
pressed and  most  fully  urged  by  Dr  Samuel
Clarke,  I  shall  give  it  in  his  words,  in  his
second  reply  to  Leibnitz,  §  4.  "  The  soul,
without  being  present  to  the  images  of  the
things  perceived,  could  not  possibly  perceive
them.  A.  living  substance  can  only  there
perceive,  where  it  is  present,  either  to  the


cognisable  by  the  similar ;  but,  in  his  Nicomachian
Ethics,  he  reverts  t<>  the  doctrine  which,  in  the  for-
mer work,  he  had  rejected.  With  these  exceptions,
no  principle,  since  the  time  of  Empedocles,  by  whom
it  seems  first  to  have  been  explicitly  announced,  has
been  more  universally  received,  than  this— that  the
relation  of  knowledge  infers  an  analog//  of  existence.
This  analogy  may  be  of  two  degrees.  What  knoivs,
and  tchat  is  knov:n,  may  be  either  similar  or  the
same;  and,  i  the  principle  itself  be  admitted,  the
latter  alternative  is  the  more  philosophical.  Without
entering  on  details,  I  may  here  notice  some  of  the
more  remarkable  results  of  this  principle,  in  both  its
degrees.  The  general  principle,  not,  indeed,  exclu.
sively,  but  mainly,  determined  the  admission  of  a
representative  perception,  by  disallowing  the  possibil-
ity of  any  consciousness,  or  immediate  knowledge  of
matter,  by  a  nature  so  different  from  it  as  mind  ;
and,  in  its  two  degrees,  it  determined  thevarions  hy-
potheses, by  which  it  was  attempted  to  explain  the
possibility  of  a  representative  or  mediate  perception
of  the  external  world.  To  this  principle,  in  its
lower  potence— that  what  knows  must  be  similar  in
nature  to  what  is  immediately  known— we  owe  the
intentional  species  of  the  Aristotelians,  and  the  ideas
of  Malebrauche  and  Berkeley.  From  this  principle,
in  its  higher  potence — that  what  knows  must  be
identical  in  nature  with  what  is  immediately  known
— there  flow  the  gnostic  reasons  of  the  Platonists,  the
pre-existing  forms  or  species  of  Tbeophrastus  and  The.
mistius,  of  Adelandus  and  Avicenna,  the  (mental)
ideas  of  Des  Cartes  and  Arnauld,  the  representations,
sensual  ideas,  <yc.  of  Leibnitz  and  V\  olf,  the  phceno-
mena  of  Kant,  the  states  of  Brown,  and  (shall  we
say  ?;  the  vacillating  doctrine  of  perception  held  by
Heid  himself.  Mediately,  this  principle  was  the
origin  of  many  other  famous  theories :— of  the  hier-
archical gradation  ol  souls  or  faculties  of  the  Aristo-
telians ;  of  the  vehicular  media  of  the  t'iatonists;
of  the  hypotheses  of  a  common  intellect  of  Alex-
ander, Themistius,  A'erroes,  Cajetanus,  and  Zabar.
ella  ;  ofthe  vision  in  the  deity  of  Malebranche:  and  of
the  (_  artesian  and  Leibnitzian  doctrines  of  assistance
and  pre-established  harmony.  Finally,  to  this  prin-
ciple is  to  be  ascribed  the  refusal  of  the  evidence  o.  con-
sciousness to  the  primary  fact,  the  duality  of  its  per-
ception ;  and  the  unitarian  schemes  of  Absolute  Iden-
tity, Materialism,  and  Idealism,  are  the  results  — H.


[202,  203]


chap,  xiv.]  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  IDEAS.


301


things  themselves,  (as  the  omnipresent  God
is  to  the  whole  universe,)  or  to  the  images
of  things,  as  the  soul  is  in  its  proper  senso-
rium."

Sir  Isaac  Newton  expresses  the  same
sentiment,  but  with  his  usual  reserve,  in  a
query  only.

The  ingenious  Dr  Porterfield,  in  his  Essay
concerning  the  motions  of  our  eyes,  adopts
this  opinion  with  more  confidence.  His
words  are  :  "  How  body  acts  upon  mind,
or  mind  upon  body,  I  know  not ;  but  this  I
am  very  certain  of,  that  nothing  can  act,  or
be  acted  upon,  where  it  is  not ;  and  there-
fore our  mind  can  never  perceive  anything
but  its  own  proper  modifications,  and  the
various  states  of  the  sensorium,  to  which  it
is  present :  so  that  it  is  not  the  external
sun  and  moon  which  are  in  the  heavens,
which  our  mind  perceives,  but  only  their
image  or  representation  impressed  upon  the
sensorium.  How  the  soul  of  a  seeing  man
sees  these  images,  or  how  it  receives  those
ideas,  from  such  agitations  in  the  sensorium,
I  know  not ;  but  I  am  sure  it  can  never
perceive  the  external  bodies  themselves,  to
which  it  is  not  present."

These,  indeed,  are  great  authorities  :  but,
in  matters  of  philosophy,  we  must  not  be
guided  by  authority,  but  by  reason.  Dr
Clarke,  in  the  place  cited,  mentions  slightly,
as  the  reason  of  his  opinion,  that  "  nothing
can  any  more  act,  or  be  acted  upon  when
it  is  not  present,  than  it  can  be  where  it  is
not."  [204]  And  again,  in  his  third
reply  to  Leibnitz,  §  1 1  — "  We  are  sure  the
soul  cannot  perceive  what  it  is  not  present
to,  because  nothing  can  act,  or  be  acted
upon,  where  it  is  not."  The  same  reason
we  see  is  urged  by  Dr  Porterfield.

That  nothing  can  act  immediately  where
it  is  not,  I  think  must  be  admitted :  for  I
agree  with  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  that  power
without  substance  is  inconceivable.  It  is  a
consequence  of  this,  that  nothing  can  be
acted  upon  immediately  where  the  agent  is
not  present :  let  this,  therefore  be  granted.
To  make  the  reasoning  conclusive,  it  is
farther  necessary,  that,  when  we  perceive
objects,  either  they  act  upon  us,  or  we  act
upon  them.  This  does  not  appear  self-evi-
dent, nor  have  I  ever  met  with  any  proof
of  it.  I  shall  briefly  offer  the  reasons  why  I
think  it  ought  not  to  be  admitted.

When  we  say  that  one  being  acts  upon
another,  we  mean  that  some  power  or  force
is  exerted  by  the  agent,  which  produces,  or
has  a  tendency  to  produce,  a  change  in  the
thing  acted  upon.  If  this  be  the  meaning
of  the  phrase,  as  I  conceive  it  is,  there
appears  no  reason  for  asserting  that,  in
perception,  either  the  object  acts  upon  the
mind,  or  the  mind  upon  the  object.

An  object,  in  being  perceived,  does  not
act  at  all.  I  perceive  the  walls  of  the  room
[20  i,  205]


where  I  sit ;  but  they  are  perfectly  inactive,
and  therefore  act  not  upon  the  mind.  To
be  perceived,  is  what  logicians  call  an  ex-
ternal denomination,  which  implies  neither
action  nor  quality  in  the  object  perceived.*
Nor  could  men  ever  have  gone  into  this
notion,  that  perception  is  owing  to  some
action  of  the  object  upon  the  mind,  were
it  not  that  we  are  so  prone  to  form  our
notions  of  the  mind  from  some  similitude
we  conceive  between  it  and  body.  Thought
in  the  mind  is  conceived  to  have  some
analogy  to  motion  in  a  body  :  and,  as  a  body
is  put  in  motion,  by  being  acted  upon  by
some  other  body  ;  so  we  are  apt  to  think  the
mind  is  made  to  perceive,  by  some  impulse
it  receives  from  the  object.  But  reasonings,
drawn  from  such  analogies,  ought  never  to
be  trusted.  [205]  They  are,  indeed,  the
cause.-of  most  of  our  errors  with  regard  to
the  mind.  And  we  might  as  well  conclude,
that  minds  may  be  measured  by  feet  and
inches,  or  weighed  by  ounces  and  drachms,
because  bodies  have  those  properties. -f-

I  see  as  little  reason,  in  the  second  place,
to  believe  that  in  perception  the  mind  acts
upon  the  object.  To  perceive  an  object  is
one  thing,  to  act  upon  it  is  another ;  nor  is
the  last  at  all  included  in  the  first.  To  say
that  I  act  upon  the  wall  by  looking  at  it,  is
an  abuse  of  language,  and  has  no  meaning.
Logicians  distinguish  two  kinds  of  opera-
tions of  mind :  the  first'  kind  produces  no
effect  without  the  mind ;  the  last  does.
The  first  they  call  immanent  acts,  the  se-
cond transitive.  All  intellectual  operations
belong  to  the  first  class  ;  they  produce  no
effect  upon  any  external  object.  But,  with-
out having  recourse  to  logical  distinctions,
every  man  of  common  sense  knows,  that  to


*  This  passage,  among  others  that  follow,  afford
the  foundation  of  an  argument,  to  prove  that  Reid
is  not  original  in  his  doctrine  of  Perception ;  but
that  it  was  borrowed  from  the  speculations  of  cert  iin
older  philosophers,  of  which  he  was  aware.  See
Note  S.— H.

f  This  reasoning,  which  is  not  original  to  Reld,
(see  Note  S,)  is  not  clearly  or  precisely  expressed.
In  asserting  that  "  an  object,  in  being  perceived,  does
not  act  at  all,"  our  author  cannot  mean  that,  it  does
not  act  upon  the  organ  of  sense ;  for  this  would  not
only  be  absurd  in  itself,  but  in  contradiction  to  his
own  doctrine—"  it  being,"  he  says,  "  a  law  of  our
nature  that  we  perceive  not  external  objects  un.
less  certain  impressions  be  made  on  the  nerves  and
brain."  The  assertion — "  I  perceive  the  walls  of  the
room  where  1  sit, -but  they  are  perfectly  inactive,
and,  therelore,  act  not  on  the  mind,"  is  equally  in-
correct in  statement.  Tlie  walls  of  the-.room,  strictly
so  called,  assuredly  do  not  act  on  the  mind' or  on  the
eye;  but  the  walls  of  the  room,  in  this  sens  ,  are,  in
fact,  no  object  of  (visual)  perception,  at  all.  What
we  see  in  this  instance,  and  what  we  loosely  call  the
walls  of  the  room,  is  only  the  light  reflected-  from
their  surface  in  its  relation  to  the  organ  of  sight — i  e.,
colour;  but  it  cannot  be  affirmed  that  the  rays  of
light  do  not  act  on  and  affect  the  retina,  optic  nerve,
and  brain.  What  Aristotle  distinguished  as  the
concommitants  of  sensation — as  extension,  motion,
position,  &c. — are,  indeed,  perceived  without  any
relative  passion" of  thje  sense.  Bu>,  whatever  may
be  Reid's  meaning,  it  is,  at  best,  vague  and  inexpli-
cit—H.


302


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


think  of  an  object,  and  to  act  upon  it,  are
very  different  things.

As  we  have,  therefore,  no  evidence  that,
in  perception,  the  mind  acts  upon  the  object,
or  the  object  upon  the  mind,  but  strong  rea-
sons to  the  contrary,  Dr  Clarke's  argument
against  our  perceiving  external  objects  im-
mediately falls  to  the  ground.

This  notion,  that,  in  perception,  the  object
must  be  contiguous  to  the  percipient,  seems,
with  many  other  prejudices,  to  be  borrowed
from  analogy.  In  all  the  external  senses,
there  must,  as  has  been  before  observed,  be
some  impression  made  upon  the  organ  of
sense  by  the  object,  or  by  something  coming
from  the  object.  An  impression  supposes
contiguity.  Hence  we  are  led  by  analogy
to  conceive  something  similar  in  the  opera-
tions of  the  mind.  Many  philosophers  re-
solve almost  every  operation  of  mind  into
impressions  and  feelings,  words  manifestly
borrowed  from  the  sense  of  touch.  And  it
is  very  natural  to  conceive  contiguity  neces-
sary between  that  which  makes  the  impres-
sion, and  that  which  receives  it ;  between
that  which  feels,  and  that  which  is  felt.  [206]
And  though  no  philosopher  will  now  pre-
tend to  justify  such  analogical  reasoning  as
this,  yet  it  has  a  powerful  influence  upon
the  judgment,  while  we  contemplate  the
operations  of  our  minds,  only  as  they  ap-
pear through  the  deceitful  medium  of  such
analogical  notions  and  expressions.  *

When  we  lay  aside  those  analogies,  and
reflect  attentively  upon  our  perception  of
the  objects  of  sense,  we  must  acknowledge
that,  though  we  are  conscious  of  perceiving
objects,  we  are  altogether  ignorant  how  it
is  brought  about ;  and  know  as  little  how
we  perceive  objects  as  how  we  were  made.
And,  if  we  should  admit  an  image  in  the
mind,  or  contiguous  to  it,  we  know  as
little  how  perception  may  be  produced  by
this  image  as  by  the  most  distant  object.
Why,  therefore,  should  we  be  led,  by  a
theory  which  is  neither  grounded  on  evi-
dence, nor,  if  admitted,  can  explain  any  one
phenomenon  of  perception,  to  reject  the
natural  and  immediate  dictates  of  those
perceptive  powers,  to  which,  in  the  conduct
of  life,  we  find  a  necessity  of  yielding  im-
plicit submission  ?

There  remains  only  one  other  argument
that  I  have  been  able  to  find  urged  against
our  perceiving  external  objects  immediately.
It  is  proposed  by  Mr  Hume,  who,  in  the
essay  already  quoted,  after  acknowledging
that  it  is  an  universal  and  primary  opi-
nion of  all  men,  that  we  perceive  external

*  It  is  self-evident  that,  if  a  thing  is  to  be  an  ob-
ject immediately  known,  it  must  be  known  as  it
exists.  Now,  a  body  must  exist  in  some  definite
part  of  space — in  a  certain  place;  it  cannot,  there-
fore, be  immediately  known  as  existing,  except  it  be
known  in  its  place.  But  this  supposes  the  mind  to
be  immediately  present  to  it  in  space.— H.


objects  immediately,  subjoins  what  fol-
lows : —

"  But  this  universal  and  primary  opinion
of  all  men  is  soon  destroyed  by  the  slightest
philosophy,  which  teaches  us  that  nothing
can  ever  be  present  to  the  mind  but  an
image  or  perception  ;  and  that  the  senses
are  only  the  inlets  through  which  these
images  are  received,  without  being  ever
able  to  produce  any  immediate  intercourse
between  the  mind  and  the  object.  The
table,  which  we  see,  seems  to  diminish  as
we  remove  farther  from  it :  but  the  real
table,  which  exists  independent  of  us,  suf-
fers no  alteration.  ['207]  It  was,  therefore,
nothing  but  its  image  which  was  present  to
the  mind.  These  are  the  obvious  dictates  of
reason ;  and  no  man  who  reflects  ever  doubted
that  the  existences  which  we  consider,  when
we  say  this  huvse,  and  that  tree,  are  nothing
but  perceptions  in  the  mind,  and  fleeting
copies  and  representations  of  other  exist-
ences, which  remain  uniform  and  independ-
ent. So  far,  then,  we  are  necessitated,  by
reasoning,  to  depart  from  the  primary  in-
stincts of  nature,  and  to  embrace  a  new
system  with  regard  to  the  evidence  of  our
senses."

We  have  here  a  remarkable  conflict  be-
tween two  contradictory  opinions,  wherein
all  mankind  are  engaged.  On  the  one  side
stand  all  the  vulgar,  who  are  unpractised  in
philosophical  reseaches,  and  guided  by  the
uncorrupted  primary  instincts  of  nature.
On  the  other  side  stand  all  the  philoso-
phers, ancient  and  modern  ;  every  man,
without  exception,  who  reflects.  In  this
division,  to  my  great  humiliation,  I  find
myself  classed  with  the  vulgar.

The  passage  now  quoted  is  all  I  have
found  in  Mr  Hume's  writings  upon  this
point :  and,  indeed,  there  is  more  reason-
ing in  it  than  I  have  found  in  any  other
author  ;  I  shall,  therefore,  examine  it  min-
utely.

First,  He  tells  us,  that  "  this  universal
and  primary  opinion  of  all  men  is  soon
destroyed  by  the  slightest  philosophy,  which
teaches  us  that  nothing  can  ever  be  pre-
sent to  the  mind  but  an  image  or  percep-
tion."

The  phrase  of  being  present  to  the  mind
has  some  obscurity ;  but  I  conceive  he
means  being  an  immediate  object  of  thought ;
an  immediate  object,  for  instance,  of  per-
ception, of  memory,  or  of  imagination.  If
this  be  the  meaning,  (and  it  is  the  only
pertinent  one  I  can  think  of,)  there  is  no
more  in  this  passage  but  an  assertion  of  the
proposition  to  be  proved,  and  an  assertion
that  philosophy  teaches  it.  If  this  be  so,
I  beg  leave  to  dissent  from  philosophy  till
she  gives  me  reason  for  what  she  teaches.
[208]  For,  though  common  sense  and  my
external  senses  demand  my  assent  to  their
[-206-208]


chap,  xiv.] REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  IDEAS.


303


dictates  upon  their  own  authority,  yet  phi-
losophy is  not  entitled  to  this  privilege.
But,  that  I  may  not  dissent  from  so  grave
a  personage  without  giving  a  reason,  I  give
this  as  the  reason  of  my  dissent : — 1  see
the  sun  when  he  shines  ;  I  remember  the
battle  of  Culloden  ;*  and  neither  of  these
objects  is  an  image  or  perception.

He  tells  us,  in  the  next  place,  "  That  the
senses  are  only  the  inlets  through  which
these  images  are  received."

I  know  that  Aristotle  and  the  schoolmen
taught  that  images  or  species  flow  from  ob-
jects, and  are  let  in  by  the  senses,  and  strike
upon  the  mind ;  but  this  has  been  so  effectu-
ally refuted  by  Des  Cartes,  by  Malebranche,
and  many  others,  that  nobody  now  pretends
to  defend  it.  Reasonable  men  consider  it
as  one  of  the  most  unintelligible  and  un-
meaning parts  of  the  ancient  system.  To
what  cause  is  it  owing  that  modern  philo-
sophers are  so  prone  to  fall  back  into  this
hypothesis,  as  if  they  really  believed  it  ?
For,  of  this  proneness  I  could  give  many
instances  besides  this  of  Mr  Hume  ;  and  I
take  the  cause  to  be,  that  images  in  the
mind,  and  images  let  in  by  the  senses,  are
so  nearly  allied,  and  so  strictly  connected,
that  they  must  stand  or  fall  together.  The
old  system  consistently  maintained  both  :
but  the  new  system  has  rejected  the  doc-
trine of  images  let  in  by  the  senses,  hold-
ing, nevertheless,  that  there  are  images  in
the  mind  ;  and,  having  made  this  unnatural
divorce  of  two  doctrines  which  ought  not
to  be  put  asunder,  that  which  they  have
retained  often  leads  them  back  involun-
tarily to  that  which  they  have rejected.

Mr  Hume  surely  did  not  seriously  be-
lieve that  an  image  of  sound  is  let  in  by  the
ear,  an  image  of  smell  by  the  nose,  an
image  of  hardness  and  softness,  of  solidity
and  resistance,  by  the  touch.  For,  besides
the  absurdity  of  the  thing,  which  has  often
been  shewn,  Mr  Hume,  and  all  modern
philosophers,  maintain  that  the  images  which
are  the  immediate  objects  of  perception
have  no  existence  when  they  are  not  per-
ceived ;  whereas,  if  they  were  let  in  by  the
senses,  they  must  be,  before  they  are  per-
ceived, and  have  a  separate  existence.  [209]
He  tell  us,  farther,  that  philosophy  teaches
that  the  senses  are  unable  to  produce  any
immediate  intercourse  between  the  mind
and  the  object.  Here,  I  still  require  the
reasons  that  philosophy  gives  for  this  ;  for,
to  my  apprehension,  I  immediately  per-
ceive external  objects,  and  this,  I  conceive
is  the  immediate  intercourse  here  meant.
Hitherto  I  see  nothing  that  can  be  called


*  The  sun  can  be  no  immediate  object  of  conscious-
)  ess  in  perception,  but  only  certain  rays  in  connec-
tion with  the  eye.  The  battle  of  Culloden  can  be  no
immediate  object  of  consciousness  in  recollection,  but
only  a  certain  representation  by  the  mind  itself.— H.


an  argument.  Perhaps  it  was  intended
only  for  illustration.  The  argument,  the
only  argument,  follows  : —

The  table  which  we  see,  seems  to  dimin-
ish as  we  remove  farther  from  it ;  but  the
real  table,  which  exists  independent  of  us
suffers  no  alteration.  It  was,  therefore,
nothing  but  its  image  which  was  presented
to  the  mind.  These  are  the  obvious  dic-
tates of  reason.

To  judge  of  the  strength  of  this  argu-
ment, it  is  necessary  to  attend  to  a  distinc-
tion which  is  familiar  to  those  who  are  con-
versant in  the  mathematical  sciences — I
mean  the  distinction  between  real  and  ap-
parent magnitude.  The  real  magnitude  of
a  line  is  measured  by  some  known  measure
of  length — as  inches,  feet,  or  miles  :  the
real  magnitude  of  a  surface  or  solid,  by
known  measures  of  surface  or  of  capacity.
This  magnitude  is  an  object  of  touch  only,
and  not  of  sight ;  nor  could  we  even  have
had  any  conception  of  it,  without  the  sense
of  touch ;  and  Bishop  Berkeley,  on  that
account,  calls  it  tangible  magnitude  *

Apparent  magnitude  is  measured  by  the
angle  which  an  object  subtends  at  the  eye.
Supposing  two  right  lines  drawn  from  the
eye  to  the  extremities  of  the  object  making
an  angle,  of  which  the  object  is  the  sub-
tense, the  apparent  magnitude  is  measured
by  this  angle.  [210]  This  apparent  mag-
nitude is  an  object  of  sight,  and  not  of
touch.  Bishop  Berkeley  calls  it  visible
magnitude.

If  it  is  asked  what  is  the  apparent  mag-
nitude of  the  sun's  diameter,  the  answer
is,  that  it  is  about  thirty-one  minutes  of  a
degree.  But,  if  it  is  asked  what  is  the
real  magnitude  of  the  sun's  diameter,  the
answer  must  be,  so  many  thousand  miles,
or  so  many  diameters  of  the  earth.  From
which  it  is  evident  that  real  magnitude,  and
apparent  magnitude,  are  things  of  a  different
nature,  though  the  name  of  magnitude  is
given  to  both.  The  first  has  three  dimen-
sions, the  last  only  two ;  the  first  is  mea-
sured by  a  line,  the  last  by  an  angle.

From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident
that  the  real  magnitude  of  a  body  must
continue  unchanged,  while  the  body  is
unchanged.  This  we  grant.  But  is  it
likewise  evident,  that  the  apparent  mag-

*  The  doctrine  of  Reid — that  real  magnitude  or
extension  .is  the  object  of  touch,  and  of  touch  alone—
is  altogether  untenable.  For,  in  the  first  place,  mag-
nitude appears  greater  or  less  in  proportion  to  the
different  size  of  the  tactile  organ  in  different  subjects  ;
thus,  an  apple  is  larger  to  the  hand  of  a  child  than  to
the  hand  of  an  adult.  Touch,  therefore,  can,  at  best,
afford  a  knowledge  of  the  relation  of  magnitudes,  in
proportion  to  the  organ  of  this  or  that  individual.
Kut,  in  the  second  place,  even  in  the  same  individual,
the  same  object  appears  greater  or  less,  according  as
it  is  w.uched  by  one  part  of  the  body  or  by  another.
On  this  subject,  see  Weber's  "  Annotationes  de
Pulsu,  Resorptione,  Auditu  et  Tactu ;"  J.eipsic,
18W.-H.


[209,  210]


304


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II


nitude  must  continue  the  same  while  the
body  is  unchanged  ?  So  far  otherwise,
that  every  man  who  knows  anything  of
mathematics  can  easily  demonstrate,  that
the  same  individual  object,  remaining  in
the  same  place,  and  unchanged,  must  neces-
sarily vary  in  its  apparent  magnitude,  ac-
cording as  the  point  from  which  it  is  seen
is  more  or  less  distant ;  and  that  its  appa-
rent length  or  breadth  will  be  nearly  in  a
reciprocal  proportion  to  the  distance  of  the
spectator.  This  is  as  certain  as  the  princi-
ples of  geometry.*

We  must  likewise  attend  to  this — that,
though  the  real  magnitude  of  a  body  is  not
originally  an  object  of  sight,  but  of  touch,
yet  we  learn  by  experience  to  judge  of  the
real  magnitude  in  many  cases  by  sight.
We  learn  by  experience  to  judge  of  the
distance  of  a  body  from  the  eye  within  cer-
tain limits  ;  and,  from  its  distance  and  ap-
parent magnitude  taken  together,  we  learn
to  judge  of  its  real  magnitude. [211]

And  this  kind  of  judgment,  by  being
repeated  every  hour  and  almost  every
minute  of  our  lives,  becomes,  when  we  are
grown  up,  so  ready  and  so  habitual,  that  it
very  much  resembles  the  original  perceptions
of  our  senses,  and  may  not  improperly  be
called  acquired, pei  ception.

Whether  we  call  it  judgment  or  acquired
perception  is  a  verbal  difference.  But  it  is
evident  that,  by  means  of  it,  we  often  dis-
cover by  one  sense  things  which  are  pro-
perly and  naturally  the  objects  of  another.
Thus  I  can  say,  without  impropriety,  I  hear
a  drum,  I  hear  a  great  bell,  or  I  hear  a
small  bell;  though  it  is  certain  that  the
figure  or  size  of  the  sounding  body  is  not
originally  an  object  of  hearing,  'in  like
manner,  we  learn  by  experience  how  a
body  of  such  a  real  magnitude  and  at  such
a  distance  appears  to  the  eve.  But  neither
its  real  magnitude,  nor  its  distance  from
the  eye,  are  properly  objects  of  sight,  any
more  than  the  form  of  a  drum  or  the  size
of  a  bell,  are  properly  objects  of  hearing.

If  these  things  be  considered,  it  will  ap-
pear that  Mr  Hume's  argument  hath  no
force  to  support  his  conclusion — nay,  that  it
leads  to  a  contrary  conclusion.  The  argu-
ment is  this :  the  table  we  see  seems  to  di-
minish as  we  remove  farther  from  it ;  that
is,  its  apparent  magnitude  is  diminished;
but  the  real  table  suffers  no  alteration — to
wit,  in  its  real  magnitude ;  therefore,  it  is


*  The  whole  confusion  and  difficulty  in  this  mar.
ter  arises  from  not  determining  what  is  the  true  object
in  visual  .perception.  This  is  not  any  distant  thing,
but  merely  the  rays  of  light  in  immediate  relation  to
the  organ.  We  therefore,  see  a  different  object  at
every  movement,  by  which  a  different  complement
of  rays  is  reflected  to  the  eye.  The  things  from  which
these  rays  are  reflected  are  not,  in  truth,  perceived  at
all ;  and  to  conceive  tjiem  as  objects  of  perceptiou  is
therefore  erroneous,  and  productive  of  error. — H.


not  the  real  table  we  see.  I  admit  both  the
premises  in  this  syllogism,  but  I  deny  the
conclusion.  The  syllogism  has  what  the
logicians  call  two  middle  terms :  apparent
magnitude  is  the  middle  term  in  the  first
premise ;  real  magnitude  in  the  second.
Therefore,  according  to  the  rules  of  logic,
the  conclusion  is  not  justly  drawn  from  the
premises ;  but,  laying  aside  the  rules  of
logic,  let  us  examine  it  by  the  light  of  com-
mon sense.

Let  us  suppose,  for  a  moment,  that  it  is
the  real  table  we.  see  :  Must  not  this  real
table  seem  to  diminish  as  we  remove  farther
from  it  ?  It  is  demonstrable  that  it  must.
How  then  can  this  apparent  diminution  be  an
argument  that  it  is  not  the  real  table  ?  [212]
When  that  which  must  happen  to  the  real
table,  as  we  remove  farther  from  it,  does
actually  happen  to  the  table  we  see,  it  is  ab-
surd to  conclude  from  this,  that  it  is  not  the
real  table  we  see.*  It  is  evident,  therefore,
that  this  ingenious  author  has  imposed  upon
himself  by  confounding  real  magnitude  with
apparent  magnitude,  and  that  his  argument
is  a  mere  sophism.

I  observed  that  Mr  Hume's  argument
not  only  has  no  strength  to  support  his  con-
clusion, but  that  it  leads  to  the  contrary  con-
clusion— to  wit,  that  it  is  the  real  table  we
see  ;*  for  this  plain  reason,  that  the  table
we  see  has  precisely  that  apparent  magni-
tude which  it  is  demonstrable  the  real  table
must  have  when  placed  at  that  distance.

This  argument  is  made  much  stronger  by
considering  that  the  real  table  may  be  placed
successively  at  a  thousand  different  dis-
tances, and,  in  every  distance,  in  a  thousand
different  positions ;  and  it  can  be  deter-
mined demonstratively,  by  the  rules  of
geometry  and  perspective,  what  must  be  its
apparent  magnitude  and  apparent  figure,  in
each  of  those  distances  and  positions.  Let
the  table  be  placed  successively  in  as  many
of  those  different  distances  and  different  po-
sitions as  you  will,  or  in  them  all ;  open
your  eyes  and  you  shall  see  a  table  pre-
cisely of  that  apparent  magnitude,  and  that
apparent  figure,  which  the  real  table  must
have  in  that  distance  and  in  that  position.
Is  not  this  a  strong  argument  that  it  is  the
real  table  you  see  ?*

In  a  word,  the  appearance  of  a  visible
object  is  infinitely  diversified,  according  to
its  distance  and  position.  The  visible  ap-
pearances are  innumerable,  when  we  con-
fine ourselves  to  one  object,  and  they  are
multiplied  according  to  the  variety  of  ob-
jects- Those  appearances  have  been  mat-
ter of  speculation  to  ingenious  men,  at  least
since  the  time  of  Euclid.  They  have  ac-
counted for  all  this  variety,  on  the  suppo-
sition that  the  objects  we  see  are  external,


See  last  note.— H.


[211,  212]


chap,  xiv.]  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  IDEAS.


305


and  not  in  the  mind  itself.  [213]  The  rules
they  have  demonstrated  about  the  various
projections  of  the  sphere,  about  the  appear-
ances of  the  planets  in  their  progressions,
stations,  and  retrogradations,  and  all  the
rules  of  perspective,  are  built  on  the  suppo-
sition that  the  objects  of  sight  are  external.
They  can  each  of  them  be  tried  in  thousands
of  instances.  In  many  arts  and  professions,
innumerable  trials  are  daily  made ;  nor
were  they  ever  found  to  fail  in  a  single  in-
stance. Shall  we  say  that  a  false  supposi-
tion, invented  by  the  rude  vulgar,  has  been
so  lucky  in  solving  an  infinite  number  of
phaenomena  of  nature  ?  This,  surely,  would
be  a  greater  prodigy  than  philosophy  ever
exhibited  :  add  to  this,  that,  upon  the  con-
trary hypothesis — to  wit,  that  the  objects  of
sight  are  internal — no  account  can  be  given
of  any  one  of  those  appearances,  nor  any
physical  cause  assigned  why  a  visible  object
should,  in  any  one  case,  have  one  apparent
figure  and  magnitude  rather  than  another.

Thus,  I  have  considered  every  argument
I  have  found  advanced  to  prove  the  exist-
ence of  ideas,  or  images  of  external  things,
in  the  mind ;  and,  if  no  better  arguments  can
be  found,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  the
whole  history  of  philosophy  has  never  fur-
nished an  instance  of  an  opinion  so  unani-
mously entertained  by  philosophers  upon  so
slight  grounds.

A  third  reflection  I  would  make  upon
this  subject  is,  that  philosophers,  notwith-
standing their  unanimity  as  to  the  existence
of  ideas,*  hardly  agree  in  any  one  thing
else  concerning  them.  If  ideas  be  not  a
mere  fiction,  they  must  be,  of  all  objects  of
human  knowledge,  the  things  we  have  best
access  to  know,  and  to  be  acquainted  with  ;
yef  there  is  nothing  about  which  men  differ
so  much.

Some  have  held  them  to  be  self-existent,
others  to  be  in  the  Divine  mind,  others  in
our  own  minds,  and  others  in  the  brain  or
sensorium.  I  considered  the  hypothesis  of
images  in  the  brain,  in  the  fourth  chapter
of  this  essay.  As  to  images  in  the  mind,  if
anything  more  is  meant  by  the  image  of  an
object  in  the  mind  than  the  thought  of  that
object,  I  know  not  what  it  means.  [214]
The  distinct  conception  of  an  object  may,
in  a  metaphorical  or  analogical  sense,  be
called  an  image  of  it  in  the  mind.  But  this
image  is  only  the  conception  of  the  object,
and  not  the  object  conceived.  It  is  an  act
of  the  mind,  and  not  the  object  of  that  act.-f-

Some  philosophers  will  have  our  ideas,  or
a  part  of  them,  to  be  innate  ;  others  will
have  them  all  to  be  adventitious  :  some  de-
rive them  from  the  senses  alone  ;  others
from  sensation  and  reflection  :  some  think


» This  unanimity  did,  not  exist.— H.
t  See  Notes  B  and  C — H.
'213-215]


they  are  fabricated  by  the  mind  itself;
others  that  they  are  produced  by  externa
objects ;  others  that  they  are  the  immediate
operation  of  the  Deity;  others  say,  that
impressions  are  the  causes  of  ideas,  and
that  the  causes  of  impressions  are  unknown  :
some  think  that  we  have  ideas  only  of  ma-
terial objects,  but  none  of  minds,  of  their
operations,  or  of  the  relations  of  things ;
others  will  have  the  immediate  object  of
every  thought  to  be  "an  idea  :  some  think
we  have  abstract  ideas,  and  that  by  this
chiefly  we  are  distinguished  from  the  brutes  ;
others  maintain  an  abstract  idea  to  be  an
absurdity,  and  that  there  can  be  no  such
thing :  with  some  they  are«the  immediate  ob-
jects of  thought,  with  others  the  only  objects.

A  fourth  reflection  is,  that  ideas  do  not
make  any  of  the  operations  of  the  mind  to
be  better  understood,  although  it  was  pro-
bably with  that  view  that  they  have  been
first  invented,  and  afterwards  so  generally
received.

We  are  at  a  loss  to  know  how  we  per-
ceive distant  objects ;  how  we  remember
things  past ;  how  we  imagine  things  that
have  no  existence.  Ideas  in  the  mind  seem
to  account  for  all  these  operations  :  they  are
all  by  the  means  of  ideas  reduced  to  one
operation — to  a  kind  of  feeling,  or  imme-
diate perception  of  things  present  and  in
contact  with  the  percipient ;  and  feeling  is
an  operation  so  familiar  that  we  think  it
needs  no  explication,  but  may  serve  to  ex-
plain other  operations. [215]

But  this  feeling,  or  immediate  percep-
tion, is  as  difficult  to  be  comprehended  as
the  things  which  we  pretend  to  explain  by
it.  Two  things  may  be  in  contact  without
any  feeling  or  perception ;  there  must
therefore  be  in  the  percipient  a  power  to
feel  or  to  perceive.  How  this  power  is  pro-
duced, and  how  it  operates,  is  quite  beyond
the  reach  of  our  knowledge.  As  little  can
we  know  whether  this  power  must  be  limited
to  things  present,  and  in  contact  with  us.
Nor  can  any  man  pretend  to  prove  that  the
Being  who  gave  us  the  power  to«  perceive
things  present,  may  not  give  us  the  power
to  perceive  things  that  are  distant,*  to  re-
member things  past,  and  to  conceive  things
that  never  existed.

Some  philosophers  have  endeavoured  to
make  all  our  senses  to  be  only  different
modifications  of  touch  ;-}-  a  theory  which
serves  only  to  confound  things  that  are  dif-
ferent, and  to  perplex  and  darken  things
that  are  clear.  The  theory  of  ideas  resembles
this,  by  reducing  all  the  operations  of  the


*  An  immediate  perception  of  things  distant,  is  a
contradiction  in  terms. — H.

t  It  an  immediate  perception  be  supposed,  it  can
only  be  rationally  supposed  of  objects  as  in  contact
with  the  organs  of  sense.  But,  in  this  case,  all  the
senses  would,  as  Democritus  held,  be,  in  a  certain
sort,  only  modifications  of  touch.— H.

X


306


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  it.


human  understanding  to  the  perception  of
ideas  in  our  own  minds.  This  power  of
perceiving  ideas  is  as  inexplicable  as  any  of
the  powers  explained  by  it  :  and  the  con-
tiguity of  the  object  contributes  nothing  at
all  to  make  it  better  understood ;  because
there  appears  no  connection  between  con-
tiguity and  perception,  but  what  is  grounded
on  prejudices  drawn  from  some  imagined
similitude  between  mind  and  body,  and
from  the  supposition  that,  in  perception,
the  object  acts  upon  the  mind,  or  the  mind
upon  the  object.  We  have  seen  how  this
theory  has  led  philosophers  to  confound
those  operations  of  mind,  which  experience
teaches  all  men  to  be  different,  and  teaches
them  to  distinguish  in  common  language  ;
and  that  it  has  led  them  to  invent  a  lan-
guage inconsistent  with  the  principles  upon
which  all  language  is  grounded.

The  last  reflection  I  shall  make  upon  this
theory,  is — that  the  natural  and  necessary
consequences  of  it  furnish  a  just  prejudice
against  it  to  every  man  who  pays  a  due  re-
gard to  the  common  sense  of  mankind.  [216]

Not  to  mention  that  it  led  the  Pytha-
goreans and  Plato  to  imagine  that  we  see
only  the  shadows  of  external  things,  and
not  the  things  themselves,*  and  that  it  gave
rise  to  the  Peripatetic  doctrine  of  sensible
species,  one  of  the  greatest  absurdities  of
that  ancient  system,  let  us  only  consider  the
fruits  it  has  produced  since  it  was  new-
modelled  by  Des  Cartes.  That  great  re-
former in  philosophy  saw  the  absurdity  of
the  doctrine  of  ideas  coming  from  external
objects,  and  refuted  it  effectually,  after  it
had  been  received  by  philosophers  forHhou-
sands  of  years ;  but  he  still  retained  ideas
in  the  brain  and  in  the  mind.-j-  Upon  this
foundation  all  our  modern  systems  of  the
powers  of  the  mind  are  built.  And  the  tot-
tering state  of  those  fabrics,  though  built
by  skilful  hands,  may  give  a  strong  suspicion
of  the  unsoundness  of  the  foundation.

It  was  this  theory  of  ideas  that  led  Des
Cartes,  and  those  that  followed  him,  to  think
it  necessary  to  prove,  by  philosophical  argu-
ments, the  existence  of  material  objects.
And  who  does  not  see  that  philosophy  must
make  a  very  ridiculous  figure  in  the  eyes  of
sensible  men,  while  it  is  employed  in  muster-
ing up  metaphysical  arguments,  to  prove
that  there  is  a  sun  and  a  moon,  an  earth  and
a  sea  ?  Yet  we  find  these  truly  great  men,
Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,  Arnauld,  and
Locke,  seriously  employing  themselves  in
this  argument.  %

Surely  their  principles  led  them  to  think


*  See  above,  p.  262  col.  b,  note  *— .H

t  See  Note  N.—H.

%  If  Reid  do  not  allow  that  we  are  i  mmediately
cognitive  or  conscious  of  the  non-ego,  his  own  doc
trine  of  perception  differs  not  from  that  of  other
philosophers  in  the  necessity  for  this  proof — H,


that  all  men,  from  the  beginning  of  the
world,  believed  the  existence  of  these  things
upon  insufficient  grounds,  and  to  think  that
they  would  be  able  to  place  upon  a  more
rational  foundation  this  universal  belief  of
mankind.  But  the  misfortune  is,  that  all
the  laboured  arguments  they  have  advanced,
to  prove  the  existence  of  those  things  we
see  and  feel,  are  mere  sophisms  :  Not  one
of  them  will  bear  examination.

I  might  mention  several  paradoxes,  which
Mr  Locke,  though  by  no  means  fond  of  para-
doxes, was  led  into  by  this  theory  of  ideas.
[217]  Such  as,  that  the  secondary  qualities
of  body  are  no  qualities  of  body  at  all,  but
sensations  of  the  mind  :  That  the  primary
qualities  of  body  are  resemblances  of  our
sensations  :  That  we  have  no  notion  of  dur-
ation, but  from  the  succession  of  ideas  in
our  minds  :  That  personal  identity  consists
in  consciousness  ;  so  that  the  same  indivi-
dual thinking  being  may  make  two  or  three
different  persons,  and  several  different  think-
ing beings  make  one  person  :  That  judg-
ment is  nothing  but  a  perception  oi  the
agreement  or  disagreement  of  our  ideas.
Most  of  these  paradoxes  I  shall  have  oc-
casion to  examine.

However,  all  these  consequences  of  the
doctrine  of  ideas  were  tolerable,  compared
with  those  which  came  afterwards  to  be  dis-
covered by  Berkeley  and  Hume : — That
there  is  no  material  world  :  No  abstract
ideas  or  notions  :  That  the  mind  is  only  a
train  of  related  impressions  and  ideas,  with-
out any  subject  on  which  they  may  be  im-
pressed: That  there  is  neither  space  nor
time,  body  nor  mind,  but  impressions  and
ideas  only  :  And,  to  sum  up  all,  That  there
is  no  probability,  even  in  demonstration  it-
self, nor  any  one  proposition  more  probable
than  its  contrary.

These  are  the  noble  fruits  which  have
grown  upon  this  theory  of  ideas,  since  it
began  to  be  cultivated  by  skilful  hands.  It
is  no  wonder  that  sensible  men  should  be
disgusted  at  philosophy,  when  such  wild
and  shocking  paradoxes  pass  under  its  name.
However,  as  these  paradoxes  have,  with
great  acuteness  and  ingenuity,  been  deduced
by  just  reasoning  from  the  theory  of  ideas,
they  must  at  last  bring  this  advantage,  that
positions  so  shocking  to  the  common  sense
of  mankind,  and  so  contrary  to  the  decisions
of  all  our  intellectual  powers,  will  open  men's
eyes,  and  break  the  force  of  the  prejudice
which  hath  held  them  entangled  in  that
theory. [218]

CHAPTER  XV.

ACCOUNT  OF  THE  SYSTEM  OF  LEIBNITZ.

There  is  yet  another  system  concerning

perception,  of  which  I  shall  give  some  ac-

[216-218]


chap,  xv.] ACCOUNT  OF  THE  SYSTEM  OF  LEIBNITZ.


307


count,  because  of  the  fame  of  its  author.  It
is  the  invention  of  the  famous  German  phi-
losopher Leibnitz,  who,  while  he  lived,  held
the  .first  rank  among  the  Germans  in  all
parts  of  philosophy,  as  well  as  in  mathe-
matics, in  jurisprudence,  in  the  knowledge
of  antiquities,  and  in  every  branch  both  of
science  and  of  literature.  He  was  highly
respected  by  emperors,  and  by  many  kings
and  princes,  who  bestowed  upon  him  singu-
lar marks  of  their  esteem.  He  was  a  par-
ticular favourite  of  our  Queen  Caroline,
consort  of  George  II.,  with  whom  he  con-
tinued his  correspondence  by  letters,  after
she  came  to  the  crown  of  Britain,  till  his
death.

The  famous  controversy  between  him  and
the  British  mathematicians,  whether  he  or
Sir  Isaac  Newton  was  the  inventor  of  that
noble  improvement  in  mathematics,  called
by  Newton,  the  method  of  fluxions,  and  by
Leibnitz  the  differential  method,  engaged
the  attention  of  the  mathematicians  in
Europe  for  several  years.  He  had  likewise
a  controversy  with  the  learned  and  judicious
Dr  Samuel  Clarke,  about  several  points  of
the  Newtonian  philosophy  which  he  dis-
approved. The  papers  which  gave  occasion
to-  this  controversy,  with  all  the  replies  and
rejoinders,  had  the  honour  to  be  transmitted
from  the  one  party  to  the  other,  through
the  hands  of  Queen  Caroline,  and  were
afterwards  published.

His  authority,  in  all  matters  of  philoso-
phy, is  still  so  great  in  most  parts  of  Ger-
many, that  they  are  considered  as  bold
spirits,  and  a  kind  of  heretics,  who  dissent
from  him  in  anything.  [219]  Carolus-
Wolfius,  the  most  voluminous  writer  in
philosophy  of  this  age,  is  considered  as  the
great  interpreter  and  advocate  of  the  Leib-
nitzian  system,  and  reveres  as  an  oracle
whatever  has  dropped  from  the  pen  of
Leibnitz.  This  author  proposed  two  great
works  upon  the  mind.  The  first,  which  I
have  seen,  he  published  with  the  title  of
"  Psychologia  Empirica,  seu  Experiment-
alis."-f-  The  other  was  to  have  the  title  of
"  Psychologia  Rationalis  ;"  and  to  it  he
refers  for  his  explication  of  the  theory  of
Leibnitz  with  regard  to  the  mind.  But
whether  it  was  published  I  have  not  learn-
ed.*

I  must,  therefore,  take  the  short  account
I  am  to  give  of  this  system  from  the  writ-
ings of  Leibnitz  himself,  without  the  light
which  his  interpreter  Wolfius  may  have
thrown  upon  it.  i

Leibnitz  conceived  the  whole  universe,


*  His  name  was  Christian. — H.

+  This  title  is  incorrect.  It  is  "Psychologia  Em-
pirica methodo  scientifica  pertractata,"  &c  The
work  appeared  in  1732.— H.

t  It  waspiblished-in  1734.  Such  careless  ignorance
of  the  most  distinguished  works  on.  the  subject  of  an
author's  speculations,  is  peculiarly  British. — H.
[219,220]


bodies  as  well  as  minds,  to  be  made  up
of  monads — that  is,  simple  substances,  each
of  which  is,  by  the  Creator,  in  the  begin-
ning of  its  existence,  endowed  with  certain
active  and  perceptive  powers.  A  monad,
therefore,  is  an  active  substance,  simple,
without  parts  or  figure,  which  has  within
itself  the  power  to  produce  all  the  changes
it  undergoes  from  the  beginning  of  its  ex-
istence to  eternity.  The  changes  which
the  monad  undergoes,  of  what  kind  soever,
though  they  may  seem  to  us  the  effect  of
causes  operating  from  without,  yet  they
are  only  the  gradual  and  successive  evolu-
tions of  its  own  internal  powers,  which
would  have  produced  all  the  same  changes
and  motions,  although  there  had  been  no
other  being  in  the  universe.

Every  human  soul  is  a  monad  joined  to
an  organized  body,  which  organized  body
consists  of  an  infinite  number  of  monads,
each  having  some  degree  of  active  and  of
perceptive  power  in  itself.  But  the  whole
machine  of  the  body  has  a  relation  to  that
monad  which  we  call  the  soul,  which  is,  as
it  were,  the  centre  of  the  whole. [220]

As  the  universe  is  completely  filled  with
monads,  without  any  chasm  or  void,  and
thereby  every  body  acts  upon  every  other
body,  according  to  its  vicinity  or  distance,
and  is  mutually  reacted  upon  by  every  other
body,  it  follows,  says  Leibnitz,  that  every
monad  is  a  kind  of  living  mirror,  which  re-
flects the  whole  universe,  according  to  its
point  of  view,  and  represents  the  whole
more  or  less  distinctly.

I  cannot  undertake  to  reconcile  this  part
of  the  system  with  what  was  before  men-
tioned— to  wit,  that  every  change  in  a
monad  is  the  evolution  of  its  own  original
powers,  and  would  have  happened  though
no  other  substance  had  been  created.  But,
to  proceed.

There  are  different  orders  of  monads,
some  higher  and  others  lower.  The  higher
orders  he  calls  dominant ;  such  is  the  hu-
man soul.  The  monads  that  compose  the
organized  bodies  of  men,  animals,  and  plants,
are  of  a  lower  order,  and  subservient  to  the
dominant  monads.  But  every  monad,  of
whatever  order,  is  a  complete  substance  in
itself — indivisible,  having  no  parts  ;  inde-
structible, because,  having  no  parts,  it  can-
not perish  by  any  kind  of  decomposition ;
it  can  only  perish  by  annihilation,  and  we
have  no  reason  to  believe  that  God  will  ever
annihilate  any  of  the  beings  which  he  has
made.

The  monads  of  a  lower  order  may,  by  a
regular  evolution  of  their  powers,  rise  to  a
higher  order.  They  may  successively  be
joined  to  organized  bodies,  of  various  forms
and  different  degrees  of  perception  ;  but
they  never  die,  nor  cease  to  be  in  some  de-
gree active  and  percipient.

x2


303


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


£essay  (I.


This  philosopher  makes  a  distinction  be-
tween perception  and  what  he  calls  apper-
ception. The  first  is  common  to  all  monads,
the  last  proper  to  the  higher  orders,  among
which  are  human  souls. [221]

By  apperception  he  understands  that  de-
gree of  perception  which  reflects,  as  it  were,
upon  itself;  by  which  we  are  conscious  of
our  own  existence,  and  conscious  of  our
perceptions ;  by  which  we  can  reflect  upon
the  operations  of  our  own  minds,  and  can
comprehend  abstract  truths.  The  mind,  in
many  operations,  he  thinks,  particularly  in
sleep,  and  in  many  actions  common  to  us
with  the  brutes,  has  not  this  apperception,
although  it  is  still  filled  with  a  multitude  of
obscure  and  indistinct  perceptions,  of  which
we  are  not  conscious.

He  conceives  that  our  bodies  and  minds
are  united  in  such  a  manner  that  neither
has  any  physical  influence  upon  the  other.
Each  performs  all  its  operations  by  its  own
internal  springs  and  powers  ;  yet  the  oper-
ations of  one  correspond  exactly  with  those
of  the  other,  by  a  pre-established  harmony  ;
just  as  one  clock  may  be  so  adjusted  as  to
keep  time  with  another,  although  each  has
its  own  moving  power,  and  neither  receives
any  part  of  its  motion  from  the  other.

So  that,  according  to  this  system,  all  our
perceptions  of  external  objects  would  be  the
same,  though  external  things  had  never
existed  ;  our  perception  of  them  would  con-
tinue, although,  by  the  power  of  God,  they
should  this  moment  be  annihilated.  We
do  not  perceive  external  things  because  they
exist,  but  because  the  soul  was  originally  so
constituted  as  to  produce  in  itself  all  its
successive  changes,  and  all  its  successive
perceptions,  independently  of  the  external
objects.

Every  perception  or  apperception,  every
operation,  in  a  word,  of  the  soul,  is  a  neces-
sary consequence  of  the  state  of  it  imme-
diately preceding  that  operation ;  and  this
state  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  the
state  preceding  it ;  and  so  backwards,  until
you  come  to  its  first  formation  and  consti-
tution, which  produces,  successively  and
by  necessary  consequence,  all  its  succes-
sive states  to  the  end  of  its  existence ;
[222]  so  that,  in  this  respect,  the  soul,  and
every  monad,  may  be  compared  to  a  watch
wound  up,  which,  having  the  spring  of  its
motion  in  itself,  by  the  gradual  evolution  of
its  own  spring,  produces  all  the  successive
motions  we  observe  in  it.

In  this  account  of  Leibnitz's  system  con-
cerning monads  and  the  pre-established
harmony,  I  have  kept,  as  nearly  as  I  could,
to  his  own  expressions,  in  his  "  New  System
of  the  Nature  and  Communication  of  Sub-
stances, and  of  the  Union  of  Soul  and
Body ;"  and  in  the  several  illustrations  of
that  new  system  which  he  afterwards  pub-


lished ;  and  in  his  "  Principles  of  Nature
and  Grace  founded  in  Reason."  I  shall
now  make  a  few  remarks  upon  this  system.

1.  To  pass  over  the  irresistible  necessity
of  all  human  actions,  which  makes  a  part  of
this  system,  that  will  be  considered  in  an-
other place,  1  observe,  first,  that  the  dis-
tinction made  between  perception  and  ap-
perception is  obscure  and  unphilosophical.
As  far  as  we  can  discover,  every  operation
of  our  mind  is  attended  with  consciousness,
and  particularly  that  which  we  call  the  per-
ception of  external  objects  ;  and  to  speak  of
a  perception  of  which  we  are  not  conscious,
is  to  speak  without  any  meaning.

As  consciousness  is  the  only  power  by
which  we  discern  the  operations  of  our  own
minds,  or  can  form  any  notion  of  them,  an
operation  of  mind  of  which  we  are  not  con-
scious, is,  we  know  not  what ;  and  to  call
such  an  operation  by  the  name  of  perception,
is  an  abuse  of  language.  No  man  can  per-
ceive an  object  without  being  conscious  that
he  perceives  it.  No  man  can  think  without
being  conscious  that  he  thinks.  What  men
are  not  conscious  of,  cannot  therefore,  with-
out impropriety,  be  called  either  perception
or  thought  of  any  kind.  And,  if  we  will
suppose  operations  of  mind  of  which  we  are
not  conscious,  and  give  a  name  to  such
creatures  of  our  imagination,  that  name
must  signify  what  we  know  nothing  about.*
[223]

2.  To  suppose  bodies  organized  or  un-
organized, to  be  made  up  of  indivisible
monads  which  have  no  parts,  is  contrary  to
all  that  we  know  of  body.  It  is  essential
to  a  body  to  have  parts  ;  and  every  part  of
a  body  is  a  body,  and  has  parts  also.  No
number  of  parts,  without  extension  or  figure,
not  even  an  infinite  number,  if  we  may  use '
that  expression,  can,  by  being  put  together,
make  a  whole  that  has  extension  and  figure,
which  all  bodies  have.

3.  It  is  contrary  to  all  that  we  know  of
bodies,  to  ascribe  to  the  monads,  of  which
they  are  supposed  to  be  compounded,  per-
ception and  active  force.  If  a  philosopher
thinks  proper  to  say,  that  a  clod  of  earth
both  perceives  and  has  active  force,  let  him
bring  his  proofs.  But  he  ought  not  to
expect  that  men  who  have  understanding
will  so  far  give  it  up  as  to  receive  without
proof  whatever  his  imagination  may  sug-
gest.

4.  This  system  overturns  all  authority  of
our  senses,  and  leaves  not  the  least  ground
to  believe  the  existence  of  the  objects  of

*  The  .language  in  which  Leibnitz  expresses  his
doctrine  of  latent  modifications  of  mind,  which,
though  out  of  consciousness,  manifest  their  existence
in  their  effects,  is  objectionable;  the  doctrine  itself  is
not  only  true  but  of  the  very  highest  importance  in
psychology,  although  it  has  never  yet  been  appreci-
ated or  even,understood  by  any  writer  on  philosophy
in  this  island. — H.

[221-223]


ohap.  xv.] ACCOUNT  OF  THE  SYSTEM  OF  LEIBNITZ.


209


sense,  or  the  existence  of  anything  which
depends  upon  the  authority  of  our  senses  ;
for  our  perception  of  objects,  according  to
this  system,  has  no  dependence  upon  any-
thing external,  and  would  be  the  same  as  it
is,  supposing  external  objects  had  never
existed,  or  that  they  were  from  this  moment
annihilated.

It  is  remarkable  that  Leibnitz's  system,
that  of  Malebranche,  and  the  common  sys-
tem of  ideas  or  images  of  external  objects
in  the  mind,  do  all  agree  in  overturning  all
the  authority  of  our  senses  ;  and  this  one
thing,  as  long  as  men  retain  their  senses,
will  always  make  all  these  systems  trulv
ridiculous.

5.  The  last  observation  I  shall  make
upon  this  system,  which,  indeed,  is  equally
applicable  to  all  the  systems  of  Perception
1  have  mentioned,  is,  that  it  is  all  hypo-
thesis, made  up  of  conjectures  and  suppo-
sitions, without  proof.  The  Peripatetics
supposed  sensible  species  to  be  sent  forth
by  the  objects  of  sense.  The  moderns  sup-
pose ideas  in  the  brain.or  in  the  mind.  [224]
Malebranche  supposed  that  we  perceive
the  ideas  of  the  Divine  mind.  Leibnitz
supposed  monads  and  a  pre-established  har-
mony; and  these  monads  being  creatures
of  his  own  making,  he  is  at  liberty  to  give
them  what  properties  and  powers  his  fancy
may  suggest.  In  like  manner,  the  Indian
philosopher  supposed  that  the  earth  is  sup-
ported by  a  huge  elephant,  and  that  the
elephant  stands  on  the  back  of  a  huge  tor-
toise. *

Such  suppositions,  while  there  is  no  proof
of  them  offered,  are  nothing  but  the  fictions
of  human  fancy  ;  and  we  ought  no  more
to  believe  them,  than  we  believe  Homer's
fictions  of  Apollo's  silver  bow,  or  Minerva's
shield,  or  Venus's  girdle.  Such  fictions  in
poetry  are  agreeable  to  the  rules  of  art :
they  are  intended  to  please,  not  to  convince.
But  the  philosophers  would  ha/e  us  to
believe  their  fictions,  though  tfie  ?  scoxrnt
they  give  of  the  phenomena  of  nat  ire  has
commonly  no  more  probability  .nan  the
account  that  Homer  gives  of  the  plague  in
the  Grecian  camp,  from  Apollo  taking  his
station  on  a  neighbouring  mountain,  and
from  his  silver  bow  letting  fly  his  swift
arrows  into  the  camp.

Men  then  only  begin  to  have  a  true  taste
in  philosophy,  when  they  have  learned  to
hold  hypotheses  in  just  contempt ;  and  to
consider  them  as  the  reveries  of  speculative
men,  which  will  never  have  any  similitude
to  the  works  of  God.

*  It  is  a  disputed  point  whether  Leibnitz  were
serious  in  his  nionadology  and  pre  established  har-
mony.— H.

[224-226J


The  Supreme  Being  has  given  us  some
intelligence  of  his  works,  by  what  our  senses
inform  us  of  external  things,  and  by  what
our  consciousness  and  reflection  inform  us
concerning  the  operations  of  our  own  minds.
Whatever  can  be  inferred  from  these  com-
mon informations,  by  just  and  sound  reason-
ing, is  true  and  legitimate  philosophy  :  but
wl/at  we  add  to  this  from  conjecture  is  all
s/ urious  and  illegitimate. [225]

After  this  long  account  of  the  theories
idvanced  by  philosophers,  to  account  for
our  perception  of  external  objects,  I  hope
it  will  appear,  that  neither  Aristotle's  theory
of  sensible  species,  nor  Malebranche's  of
our  seeing  things  in  God,  nor  the  common
theory  of  our  perceiving  ideas  in  our  own
minds,  nor  Leibnitz's  theory  of  monads
and  a  pre-established  harmony,  give  any
satisfying  account  of  this  power  of  the  mind,
or  make  it  more  intelligible  than  it  is
without  their  aid.  They  are  conjectures,
and,  if  they  were  true,  would  solve  no  diffi-
culty, but  raise  many  new  ones.  It  is,
therefore,  more  agreeable  to  good  sense
and  to  sound  philosophy,  to  rest  satisfied
with  what  our  consciousness  and  attentive
reflection  discover  to  us>  of  the  nature  of
perception,  than,  by  inventing  hypotheses,
to  attempt  to  explain  things  which  are
above  the  reach  of  human  understanding.
I  believe  no  man  is  able  to  explain  how  we
perceive  external  objects,  any  more  than
how  we  are  conscious  of  those  that  are
internal.  Perception,  consciousness,  me-
mory, and  imagination,  are  all  original  and
simple  powers  of  the  mind,  and  parts  of  its
constitution.  For  this  reason,  though  I
have  endeavoured  to  shew  that  the  theories
of  philosophers  on  this  subject  are  ill
grounded  and  insufficient,  I  do  not  attempt
to  substitute  any  other  theory  in  their
place.

Every  man  feels  that  perception  gives
him  an  invincible  belief  of  the  existence  of
that  which  he  perceives ;  and  that  this
belief  is  not  the  effect  of  reasoning,  but
the  immediate  consequence  of  perception.*
When  philosophers  have  wearied  them-
selves and  their  readers  with  their  specula-
tions upon  this  subject,  they  can  neither
strengthen  this  belief,  nor  weaken  it  ;  nor
can  they  shew  how  it  is  produced.  It  puts
the  philosopher  and  the  peasant  upon  a
level ;  and  neither  of  them  .can  give  any
other  reason  for  believing  his  senses,  than
that  he  finds  it  impossible  for  him  to  do
otherwise. [226]


*  In  an  immediate  perception  of  external  things,
the  belief  of  their  existence  would  not  be  a  conse-
quence of  the  perception,  but  be  involved  in  the  per.
ception  itself.— H.


310


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


CHAPTEK  XVI.


OF  SENSATION.


Having  finished  what  I  intend,  with
regard  to  that  act  of  mind  which  we  call
the  perception  of  an  external  object,  I
proceed  to  consider  another,  which,  by  our
constitution,  is  conjoined  with  perception,
and  not  with  perception  only,  but  with
many  other  acts  of  our  minds ;  and  that  is
sensation.  To  prevent  repetition,  I  must
refer  the  reader  to  the  explication  of  this
word  given  in  Essay  I.,  chap.  i.

Almost  all  our  perceptions  have  corre-
sponding sensations  which  constantly  ac-
company them,  and,  on  that  account,  are
very  apt  to  be  confounded  with  them.
Neither  ought  we  to  expect  that  the  sens-
ation, and  its  corresponding  perception,
should  be  distinguished  in  common  lan-
guage, because  the  purposes  of  common
life  do  not  require  it.  Language  is  made
to  serve  the  purposes  of  ordinary  conversa-
tion ;  and  we  have  no  reason  to  expect  that
it  should  make  distinctions  that  are  not  of
common  use.  Hence  it  happens,  that  a
quality  perceived,  and  the  sensation .  cor-
responding to  that  perception,  often  go  under
the  same  name.

This  makes  the  names  of  most  of  our
sensations  ambiguous,  and  this  ambiguity
hath  very  much  perplexed  philosophers.  It
will  be  necessary  to  give  some  instances,  to
illustrate  the  distinction  between  our  sens-
ations and  the  objects  of  perception.

When  I  smell  a  rose,  there  is  in  this
operation  both  sensation  and  perception.
The  agreeable  odour  I  feel,  considered  by
itself,  without  relation  to  any  external  ob-
ject, is  merely  a  sensation.  [227]  It  affects
the  mind  in  a  certain  way ;  and  this  affection
of  the  mind  may  be  conceived,  without  a
thought  of  the  rose,  or  any  other  object.
This  sensation  can  be  nothing  else  than  it
is  felt  to  be.  Its  very  essence  consists  in
being  felt ;  and,  when  it  is  not  felt,  it  is  not.
There  is  no  difference  between  the  sensa-
tion and  the  feeling  of  it — they  are  one  and
the  same  thing.  It  is  for  this  reason  that
we  before  observed  that,  in  sensation,  there
is  no  object  distinct  from  that  act  of  the
mind  by  which  it  is  felt — and  this  holds
true  with  regard  to  all  sensations.

Let  us  next  attend  to  the  perception
which  we  have  in  smelling  a  rose.  Percep-
tion has  always  an  external  object ;  and  the
object  of  my  perception,  in  this  case,  is  that
quality  in  the  rose  which  I  discern  by  the
sense  of  smell.  Observing  that  the  agree-
able sensation  is  raised  when  the  rose  is
near,  and  ceases  when  it  is  removed,  I  am
led,  by  my  nature,  to  conclude  some  quality
to  be  in  the  rose,  which  is  the  cause  of  this


sensation.  This  quality  in  the  rose  is  the
object  perceived  ;  and  that  act  of  my  mind
by  which  I  have  the  conviction  and  belief
of  this  quality,  is  what  in  this  case  I  call
perception.*

But  it  is  here  to  be  observed,  that  the
sensation  I  feel,  and  the  quality  in  the  rose
which  I  perceive,  are  both  called  by  the
same  name.  The  smell  of  a  rose  is  the
name  given  to  both  :  so  that  this  name  hath
two  meanings  ;  and  the  distinguishing  its
different  meanings  removes  all  perplexity,
and  enables  us  to  give  clear  and  distinct
answers  to  questions  about  which  philoso-
phers have  held  much  dispute,  -f-

Thus,  if  it  is  asked,  whether  the  smell
be  in  the  rose,  or  in  the  mind  that  feels  it,
the  answer  is  obvious  :  That  there  are  two
different  things  signified  by  the  smell  of  a
rose  ;  one  of  which  is  in  the  mind,  and  can
be  in  nothing  but  in  a  sentient  being ;  the
other  is  truly  and  properly  in  the  rose.  The
sensation  which  I  feel  is  in  my  mind.  The
mind  is  the  sentient  being  ;  and,  as  the  rose
is  insentient,  there  can  be  no  sensation,  nor
anything  resembling  sensation  in  it.  [228]
But  this  sensation  in  my  mind  is  occasioned
by  a  certain  quality  in  the  rose,  which  is
called  by  the  same  name  with  the  sensation,
not  on  account  of  any  similitude,  but  be-
cause of  their  constant  concomitancy.

All  the  names  we  have  for  smells,  tastes,
sounds,  and  for  the  various  degrees  of  heat
and  cold,  have  a  like  ambiguity ;  and  what
has  been  said  of  the  smell  of  a  rose  may  be
applied  to  them.  They  signify  both  a  sens-
ation, and  a  quality  perceived  by  means  of
that  sensation.  The  first  is  the  sign,  the
last  the  thing  signified.  As  both  are  con-
joined by  nature,  and  as  the  purposes  of
common  life  do  not  require  them  to  be  dis-
joined in  our  thoughts,  they  are  both  ex-
pressed by  the  same  name :  and  this  am-
biguity is  to  be  found  in  all  languages,  be-
cause the  reason  of  it  extends  to  all.

The  same  ambiguity  is  found  in  the
names  of  such  diseases  as  are  indicated  by
a  particular  painful  sensation  :  such  as  the
toothache,  the  headache. The  toothache

*  This  paragraph  appears  to  be  an  explicit  disa-
vowal of  the  doctrine  of  an  intuitive  or  immediate
perception.  If,  from  a  certain  sensible  feeling,  or
sensation,  (which  is  itself  cognitive  of  no  object,)  1  am
only  determined  by  my  nature  to  conclude  that  there
is  some  external  quality  which  is  the  cause  of  this
sensation,  and  if  this  quality,  thus  only  known  as  an
inference  from  its  effect,  be  the  object  perceived;  then
is  perception  not  an  act  immediately  cognitive  of
any  existing  object,  and  the  object  pprceived  is,  in
fact,  except  as  an  imaginary  something,  unknown.
— H.

+  In  reference  to  this  and  the  following  paragraphs,
I  may  observe  that  the  distinction  of  subjective  and
objective  qualities  here  vaguely  attempted,  had  been
already  precisely  accomplished  by  Aristotle,  in  his
discrimination  of  <ra.By)Tix,a.)  xoioTv,Tif  fqualitatespati.
biles,)  and  jra&i  (passioncs).  In  regard  to  the  Car.
tesian  distinction,  which  is  equally  precise,  but  of
which  likewise  Peid  is  unaware,  see  above,  p.  205,
col.  b,  note*.— H

[2-27,  2281


CHAP. XVI. J


OF  SENSATION.


311


signifies  a  painful  sensation,  which  can  only
be  in  a  sentient  being  ;  but  it  signifies  also
a  disorder  in  the  body,  which  has  no  simili-
tude to  a  sensation,  but  is  naturally  con-
nected with  it.

Pressing  my  hand  with  force  against  the
table,  I  feel  pain,  and  I  feel  the  table  to  be
hard.  The  pain  is  a  sensation  of  the  mind,
and  there  is  nothing  that  resembles  it  in
the  table.  The  hardness  is  in  the  table,
nor  is  there  anything  resembling  it  in  the
mind.  Feeling  is  applied  to  both  ;  but  in
a  different  sense ;  being  a  word  commomto
the  act  of  sensation,  and  to  that  of  perceiv-
ing by  the  sense  of  touch.

I  touch  the  table  gently  with  my  hand,
and  I  feel  it  to  be  smooth,  hard,  and  cold.
These  are  qualities  of  the  table  perceived  by
touch  ;  but  I  perceive  them  by  means  of  a
sensation  which  indicates  them.  This  sens-
ation not  being  painful,  I  commonly  give  no
attention  to  it.  [229]  It  carries  my  thought
immediately  to  the  thing  signified  by  it,  and
is  itself  forgot,  as  if  it  had  never  been.  But,
by  repeating  it,  and  turning  my  attention
to  it,  and  abstracting  my  thought  from  the
thing  signified  by  it,  I  find  it  to  be  merely
a  sensation,  and  that  it  has  no  similitude  to
the  hardness,  smoothness,  or  coldness  of
the  table,  which  are  signified  by  it.

It  is  indeed  difficult,  at  first,  to  disjoin
things  in  our  attention  which  have  always
been  conjoined,  and  to  make  that  an  object
of  reflection  which  never  was  so  before  ;
but  some  pains  and  practice  will  overcome
this  difficulty  in  those  who  .have  got  the
habit  of  reflecting  on  the  operations  of  their
own  minds.

Although  the  present  subject  leads  us
only  to  consider  the  sensations  which  we
have  by  means  of  our  external  senses,  yet
it  will  serve  to  illustrate  what  has  been  said,
and,  I  apprehend,  is  of  importance  in  itself,
to  observe,  that  many  operations  of  mind,
to  which  we  give  one  name,  and  which  we
always  consider  as  one  thing,  are  complex
in  their  nature,  and  made  up  of  several
more  simple  ingredients ;  and  of  these  ingre-
dients sensation  very  often  makes  one.  Of
this  we  shall  give  some  instances-

The  appetite  of  hunger  includes  an  un-
easy sensation,  and  a  desire  of  food.  Sens-
ation and  desire  are  different  acts  of  mind.
The  last,  from  its  nature,  must  have  an
object ;  the  first  has  no  object.  These  two
ingredients  may  always  be  separated  in
thought — perhaps  they  sometimes  are,  in
reality  ;  but  hunger  includes  both.

Benevolence  towards  our  fellow-creatures
includes  an  agreeable  feeling;  but  it  includes
also  a  desire  of  the  happiness  of  others.
The  ancients  commonly  called  it  desire.
Many  moderns  chuse  rather  to  call  it  a  feel-
ing. Both  are  right :  and  they  only  err  who
exclude  either  of  the  ingredients.  [230]
r229-2.31~l


Whether  these  two  ingredients  are  neces-
sarily connected,  is,  perhaps,  difficult  for  us
to  determine,  there  being  many  necessary
connections  which  we  do  not  perceive  to  be
necessary ;  but  we  can  disjoin  them  in
thought.  They  are  different  acts  of  the
mind.

An  uneasy  feeling,  and  a  desire,  are,  in
like  manner,  the  ingredients  of  malevolent
affections ;  such  as  malice,  envy,  revenge.
The  passion  of  fear  includes  an  uneasy
sensation  or  feeling,  and  an  opinion  of
danger  ;  and  hope  is  made  up  of  the  con-
trary ingredients.  When  we  hear  of  a
heroic  action,  the  sentiment  which  it  raises
in  our  mind,  is  made  up  of  various  ingre-
dients. There  is  in  it  an  agreeable  feeling,
a  benevolent  affection  to  the  person,  and  a
judgment  or  opinion  of  his  merit.

If  we  thus  analyse  the  various  operations
of  our  minds,  we  shall  find  that  many  of
them  which  we  consider  as  perfectly  simple,
because  we  have  been  accustomed  to  call
them  by  one  name,  are  compounded  of  more
simple  ingredients  ;  and  that  sensation,  or
feeling,  which  is  only  a  more  refined  kind
of  sensation,  makes  one  ingredient,  Dot
only  in  the  perception  of  external  objects,
but  in  most  operations  of  the  mind.

A  small  degree  of  reflection  may  satisfy
us  that  the  number  and  variety  of  our  sens-
ations and  feelings  is  prodigious;  for,  to
omit  all  those  which  accompany  our  appe-
tites, passions,  and  affections,  our  moral
sentiments  and  sentiments  of  taste,  even
our  external  senses,  furnish  a  great  variety
of  sensations,  differing  in  kind,  and  almost
in  every  kind  an  endless  variety  of  degrees.
Every  variety  we  discern,  with  regard  to
taste,  smell,  sound,  colour,  heat,  and  cold,
and  in  the  tangible  qualities  of  bodies,  is
indicated  by  a  sensation  corresponding  to
it.

The  most  general  and  the  most  import-
ant division  of  our  sensations  and  feelings,
is  into  the  agreeable,  the  disagreeable,  and
the  indifferent:  Everything  we  call  plea-
sure, happiness,  or  enjoyment,  on  the  one
hand;  and,  on  the  other,  everything  we
call  misery,  pain,  or  uneasiness,  is  sensa-
tion or  feeling  ;  for  no  man  can  for  the  pre-
sent be  more  happy  or  more  miserable  than
he  feels  himself  to  be.  [231]  He  cannot
be  deceived  with  regard  to  the  enjoyment
or  suffering  of  the  present  moment.

But  I  apprehend  that,  besides  the  sens-
ations that  are  either  agreeable  or  disagree-
able, th«:re  is  still  a  greater  number  that
are  indifferent.  *  To  these  we  give  so  little
attention,  that  they  have  no  name,  and  are
immediately  forgot,  as  if  tney  had  never
been  ;  and  it  requires  attention  to  the  ope-


* This  is  a  point  in  dispute  among  philosophers.
-H.


312


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


rations  of  our  minds  to  be  convinced  of  their
existence.

For  this  end  we  may  observe,  that,  to  a
good  ear,  every  human  voice  is  distinguish-
able from  all  others.  Some  voices  are  plea-
sant, some  disagreeable  ;  but  the  far  greater
part  can  neither  be  said  to  be  one  nor  the
other.  The  same  thing  may  be  said  of
other  sounds,  and  no  less  of  tastes,  smells,
and  colours  ;  and,  if  we  consider  that  our
senses  are  in  continual  exercise  while  we  are
awake,  that  some  sensation  attends  every
object  they  present  to  us,  and  that  familiar
objects  seldom  raise  any  emotion,  pleasant
or  painful,  we  shall  see  reason,  besides  the
agreeable  and  disagreeable,  to  admit  a  third
class  of  sensations  that  may  be  called  in-
different.

The  sensations  that  are  indifferent,  are
far  from  being  useless.  They  serve  as
signs  to  distinguish  things  that  differ ;  and
the  information  we  have  concerning  things
external,  comes  by  their  means.  Thus,  if
a  man  had  no  ear  to  receive  pleasure  from
the  harmony  or  melody  of  sounds,  he  would
still  find  the  sense  of  hearing  of  great
utility.  Though  sounds  give  him  neithei
pleasure  nor  pain  of  themselves,  they  would
give  him  much  useful  information  ;  and  the
like  may  be  said  of  the  sensations  we  have
by  all  the  other  senses. [232]

As  to  the  sensations  and  feelings  that  are
agreeable  or  disagreeable,  they  differ  much
not  only  in  degree,  but  in  kind  and  in  dig-
nity. Some  belong  to  the  animal  part  of
our  nature,  and  are  common  to  us  with  the
brutes  ;  others  belong  to  the  rational  and
moral  part.  The  first  are  more  properly
called  sensations  ;  the  last,  feelings.  The
French  word  sentiment  is  common  to  both.  *

The  intention  of  nature  in  them  is  for  the
most  part  obvious,  and  well  deserving  our
notice.  It  has  been  beautifully  illustrated
by  a  very  elegant  French  writer,*  in  his
"  Theorie  des  Sentiments  Aqreables"

The  Author  of  Nature,  in  the  distribution
of  agreeable  and  painful  feelings,  hath
wisely  and  benevolently  consulted  the  good
of  the  human  species,  and  hath  even  shewn
us,  by  the  same  means,  what  tenor  of  con-
duct we  ought  to  hold.  For,  first,  The
painful  sensations  of  the  animal  kind  are
admonitions  to  avoid  what  would  hurt  us  ;
and  the  agreeable  sensations  of  this  kind
invite  us  to  those  actions  that  are  necessary
to  the  preservation  of  the  individual  or  of
the  kind.  Secondly,  By  the  same  means,
nature  invites  us  to  moderate  bodily  exer-
cise, and  admonishes  us  to  avoid  idleness
and  inactivity  on  the  one  hand,  and  exces-
sive labour and fati/nie on the other.


»  Some French  philosophers,  since Keid, have
attempted  the  distinction  of  sentiment  and  sensation.

t  Levesque  de  PouMy H.


Thirdly,  The  moderate  exercise  of  all  oub
rational  powers  gives  pleasure.  Fourthly,
Every  species  of  beauty  is  beheld  with
pleasure,  and  every  species  of  deformity
with  disgust ;  and  we  shall  find  all  that  we
call  beautiful,  to  be  something  estimable  or
useful  in  itself,  or  a  sign  of  something  that
is  estimable  or  useful.  Fifthly,  The  bene-
volent affections  are  all  accompanied  with
an  agreeable  feeling,  the  malevolent  with
the  contrary.  And,  sixthly,  The  highest,
the  noblest,  and  most  durable  pleasure  is
that  of  doing  well,  and  acting  the  part  that
becomes  us  ;  and  the  most  bitter  and  pain-
ful sentiment,  the  anguish  and  remorse  of
a  guilty  conscience.  These  observations,
with  regard  to  the  economy  of  nature  in
the  distribution  of  our  painful  and  agree-
able sensations  and  feelings,  are  illustrated
by  the  author  last  mentioned,  so  elegantly
and  judiciously,  that  I  shall  not  attempt  to
say  anything  upon  them  after  him. [233]

I  shall  conclude  this  chapter  by  observ-
ing that,  as  the  confounding  our  sensations
with  that  perception  of  external  objects
which  is  constantly  conjoined  with  them,
has  been  the  occasion  of  most  of  the  errors
and  false  theories  of  philosophers  with  re-
gard to  the  senses ;  so  the  distinguishing
these  operations  seems  to  me  to  be  the  key
that  leads  to  a  right  understanding  of  both.

Sensation,  taken  by  itself,  implies  neither
the  conception  nor  belief  of  any  external
object.  It  supposes  a  sentient  being,  and
a  certain  manner  in  which  that  being  is
affected ;  but  it  supposes  no  more.  Per-
ception implies  an  immediate  conviction
and  belief  of  something  external — some-
thing different  both  from  the  mind  that
perceives,  and  from  the  act  of  perception.
Things  so  different  in  their  nature  ought
to  be  distinguished ;  but,  by  our  constitu-
tion, they  are  always  united.  Every  dif-
ferent perception  is  conjoined  with  a  sensa-
tion that  is  proper  to  it.  The  one  is  the
sign,  the  other  the  thing  signified.  They
coalesce  in  our  imagination.  They  are  sig-
nified by  one  name,  and  are  considered  as
one  simple  operation.  The  purposes  of  life
do  not  require  them  to  be  distinguished.

It  is  the  philosopher  alone  who  has  occa-
sion to  distinguish  them,  when  he  would
analyse  the  operation  compounded  of  them.
But  he  has  no  suspicion  that  there  is  any
composition  in  it ;  and  to  discover  this  re-
quires a  degree  of  reflection  which  has  been
too  little  practised  even  by  philosophers.

In  the  old  philosophy,  sensation  and  per-
ception were  perfectly  confounded.  The
sensible  species  coming  from  the  object,  and
impressed  upon  the  mind,  was  the  whole ;
and  you  might  call  it  sensation  or  percep-
tion as  you  pleased*


♦  This  is  not  correct ;  for,  in  the  distinction  of  Hie


f232,  233]


chap,  xvii.] OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION.


313


Des  Cartes  and  Locke,  attending  more
to  the  operations  of  their  own  minds,  say,
that  the  sensations  by  which  we  have  notice
of  secondary  qualities  have  no  resemblance
to  anything  that  pertains  to  body ;  but  they
did  not  see  that  this  might,  with  equal  justice,
be  applied  to  the  primary  qualities.  [234]
Mr  Locke  maintains,  that  the  sensations  we
have  from  primary  qualities  are  resem-
blances of  those  qualities.  This  shews  how
grossly  the  most  ingenious  men  may  err
with  regard  to  the  operations  of  their  minds.
It  must,  indeed,  be  acknowledged,  that  it  is
much  easier  to  have  a  distinct  notion  of  the
sensations  that  belong  to  secondary  than
of  those  that  belong  to  the  primary  quali-
ties.* The  reason  of  this  will  appear  in
the  next  chapter.

But,  had  Mr  Locke  attended  with  suffi-
cient accuracy  to  the  sensations-!-  which  he
was  every  day  and  every  hour  receiving
from  primary  qualities,  he  would  have  seen
that  they  can  as  little  resemble  any  quality
of  an  inanimated  being  as  pain  can  resemble
a  cube  or  a  circle.

What  had  escaped  this  ingenious  philo-
sopher, was  clearly  discerned  by  Bishop
Berkeley.  He  had  a  just  notion  of  sensa-
tions, and  saw  that  it  was  impossible  that
anything  in  an  insentient  being  could  re-
semble them  ;  a  thing  so  evident  in  itself,
that  it  seems  wonderful  that  it  should  have
been  so  long  unknown.

But  let  us  attend  to  the  consequence  of
this  discovery-  Philosophers,  as  well  as  the
vulgar,  had  been  accustomed  to  comprehend
both  sensation  and  perception  under  one
name,  and  to  consider  them  as  one  uncom-
pounded  operation.  Philosophers,  even
more  than  the  vulgar,  gave  the  name  of
sensation  to  the  whole  operation  of  the
senses ;  and  all  the  notions  we  have  of  ma-
terial things  were  called  ideas  of  sensation.
This  led  Bishop  Berkeley  to  take  one  in-
gredient of  a  complex  operation  for  the
whole ;  and,  having  clearly  discovered  the
nature  of  sensation,  taking  it  for  granted
that  all  that  the  senses  present  to  the  mind
is  sensation,  which  can  have  no  resemblance
to  anything  material,  he  concluded  that
there  is  no  material  world. [235]

If  the  senses  furnished  us  with  no  mate-
rials of  thought  but  sensations,  his  conclu-
sion must  be  just ;  for  no  sensation  can  give
us  the  conception  of  material  things,  far  less


species  impressa  and  species  expressa,  the  distinc-
tion of  sensation  and  perception  could  be  perceived  ;
but,  in  point  of  fact,  many  even  of  the  Aristotelians,
who  admitted  species  at  all,  allowed  them  only  in  one
or  two  of  the  senses. See  Notes  D  * and  M  — H.

*  The  reader  will  observe  that  Reid  says,  "  dis-
tinct notion  of  the  sensations  that  belong  to  the  se-
condary qualities,"  and  not  distinct  notion  of  the
secondary  qualities  themselves. — H.

|  Here  again  the  reader  will  observe  that  the  term
is  sensations,  and  not  notions,  of  the  primary  quali-
ties.—H.


[234-236]


any  argument  to  prove  their  existence.  But,
if  it  is  true  that  by  our  senses  we  have  not
only  a  variety  of  sensations,  but  likewise  a
conception  and  an  immediate  natural  con-
viction of  external  objects,  he  reasons  from
a  false  supposition,  and  his  arguments  fall
to  the  ground.*


CHAPTER  XVII.

OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION  ; AND,  FIRST,
OF  PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  QUALITIES.

The  objects  of  perception  are  the  various
qualities  of  bodies.  Intending  to  treat  of
these  only  in  general,  and  chiefly  with  a  view
to  explain  the  notions  which  our  senses
give  us  of  them,  I  begin  with  the  distinction
between  primary  and  secondary  qualities.
These  were  distinguished  very  early.  The
Peripatetic  system  confounded  them,  and
left  no  difference.  The  distinction  was  again
revived  by  Des  Cartes  and  Locke,  and  a
second  time  abolished  by  Berkeley  and
Hume.  If  the  real  foundation  of  this  dis-
tinction can  be  pointed  out,  it  will  enable  us
to  account  for  the  various  revolutions  in  the
sentiments  of  philosophers  concerning  it.

Every  one  knows  that  extension,  divisi-
bility, figure,  motion,  solidity,  hardness,
softness,  and  fluidity,  were  by  Mr  Locke
called  primary  qualities  of  body  ;  and  that
sound,  colour,  taste,  smell,  and  heat  or  cold,
were  called  secondary  qualities.  Is  there  a
just  foundation  for  this  distinction  ?  Is
there  anything  common  to  the  primary
which  belongs  not  to  the  secondary  ?  And
what  is  it  ?

I  answer,  That  there  appears  to  me  to  be
a  real  foundation  for  the  distinction  ;  and  it
is  this — that  our  senses  give  us  a  direct  and
a  distinct  notion  of  the  primary  qualities,
and  inform  us  what  they  are  in  themselves,  -f-
But  of  the  secondary  qualities,  our  senses
give  us  only  a  relative  and  obscure  notion.
[236]  They  inform  us  only,  that  they  are
qualities  that  affect  us  in  a  certain  manner
— that  is,  produce  in  us  a  certain  sensation  ;
but  as  to  what  they  are  in  themselves,  our
senses  leave  us  in  the  dark.t


*  On  this  whole  distinction,  see  Note  D.  *  . —  H.

t  By  the  expression,  '*  what  they  are  in  themselves,"
in  reference  to  the  primary  qualities,  and  of  "  rela-
tive notion,"  in  reference  to  the  secondary,  Reid
cannot  mean  that  the  former  are  known  to  us  ato-
lutely  and  in  themselves — that  is,  out  of  relation  to  our
cognitive  faculties ;  for  he  elsewhere  admits  that  all
our  knowledge  is  relative.  Farther,  if  "  our  senses
give  us  a  direct  and  distinct  notion  of  the  primary
qualities,  and  inform  \  s  what  they  are  in  themselves,"
these  qualities,  as  known,  must  resemble,  or  be  iden-
tical with,  these  qualities  as  existing. — H.

t  The  distinctions  of  perception  and  sensation,  and
of  primary  and  secondary  qualities,  may  be  reduced
to  one  higher  priuc  pie.  Knowledge  is  partly  object'
ive,  partly  subjective ;  both  these  elements  are  essen-
tial to  every  cognition,  but  in  every  cognition  they
are  always  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  each  other. Nov/


314


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay


Every  man  capable  of  reflection  may
easily  satisfy  himself  that  he  has  a  perfectly
clear  and  distinct  notion  of  extension,  divisi-
bility, figure,  and  motion.  The  solidity  of
a  body  means  no  more  but  that  it  excludes
other  bodies  from  occupying  the  same  place
at  the  same  time  Hardness,  softness,  and
fluidity  are  different  degrees  of  cohesion  in
the  parts  of  a  body.  It  is  fluid  when  it  has
no  sensible  cohesion ;  soft,  when  the  cohe-
sion is  weak  ;  and  hard,  when  it  is  strong.
Of  the  cause  of  this  cohesion  we  are  ignor-
ant, but  the  thing  itself  we  understand  per-
fectly, being  immediately  informed  of  it  by
the  sense  of  touch.  It  is  evident,  therefore,
that  of  the  primary  qualities  we  have  a  clear
and  distinct  notion ;  we  know  what  they
are,  though  we  may  be  ignorant  of  their
causes.

I  observed,  farther,  that  the  notion  we
have  of  primary  qualities  is  direct,  and  not
relative  only.  A  relative  notion  of  a  thing,
is,  strictly  speaking,  no  notion  of  the  thing
at  all,  but  only  of  some  •  relation  which  it
bears  to  something  else.

Thus,  gravity  sometimes  signifies  the  tend-
ency of  bodies  towards  the  earth  ;  some-
times it  signifies  the  cause  of  that  tendency.
When  it  means  the  first,  I  have  a  direct
and  distinct  notion  of  gravity ;  I  see  it,  and
feel  it,  and  know  perfectly  what  it  is  ;  but
this  tendency  must  have  a  cause.  We  give
the  same  name  to  the  cause ;  and  that  cause
has  been  an  object  of  thought  and  of  specu-
lation. Now,  what  notion  have  we  of  this
cause  when  we  think  and  reason  about  it  ?
It  is  evident  we  think  of  it  as  an  unknown
cause,  of  a  known  effect.  This  is  a  relative
notion  ;  and  it  must  be  obscure,  because  it
gives  us  no  conception  of  what  the  thing  is,
but  of  what  relation  it  bears  to  something
else.  Every  relation  which  a  thing  un-
known bears  to  something  that  is  known,
may  give  a  relative  notion  of  it ;  and  there
are  many  objects  of  thought  and  of  dis-
course of  which  our  faculties  can  give  no
better  than  a  relative  notion. [237]

Having  premised  these  things  to  explain
what  is  meant  by  a  relative  notion,  it  is  evi-
dent that  our  notion  of  primary  qualities  is
not  of  this  kind ;  we  know  what  they  are,
and  not  barely  what  relation  they  bear  to
something  else.

It  is  otherwise  with  secondary  qualities.
If  you  ask  me,  what  is  that  quality  or  mo-
dification in  a  rose  which  I  call  its  smell,  I
am  at  a  loss  to  answer  directly.  Upon  re-
flection, I  find,  that  I  have  a  distinct  notion
of  the  sensation  which  it  produces  in  my
mind.  But  there  can  be  nothing  like  to
this  sensation  in  the  rose,  because  it  is  in-


in  perception  and  theprimary  qualities,  the  objective
element  preponderates,  whereas  the  subjective  ele-
ment preponderates  in  sensation  and  the  secondary
Qualities. See  Notes  D  and  D  *  .— H.


sentient.  The  quality  in  the  rose  is  some-
thing which  occasions  the  sensation  in  me  ;
but  what  that  something  is,  I  know  not.
My  senses  give  me  no  information  upon
this  point.  The  only  notion,  therefore,  my
senses  give  is  this — that  smell  in  the  rose  is
an  unknown  quality  or  modification,  which
is  the  cause  or  occasion  of  a  sensation  which
I  know  well.  The  relation  which  this  un-
known quality  bears  to  the  sensation  with
which  nature  hath  connected  it,,isall  I  learn
from  the  sense  of  smelling ;  but  this  is
evidently  a  relative  notion.  The  same  rea-
soning will  apply  to  every  secondary  quality.

Thus,  I  think  it  appears  that  there  is  a
real  foundation  for  the  distinction  of  pri-
mary from  secondary  qualities ;  and  that
they  are  distinguished  by  this — that  of  the
primary  we  have  by  our  senses  a  direct  and
distinct  notion  ;  but  of  the  secondary  only
a  relative  notion,  which  must,  because  it  is
only  relative,  be  obscure  ;  they  are  con-
ceived only  as  the  unknown  causes  or  occa-
sions of  certain  sensations  with  which  we
are  well  acquainted.

The  account  I  have  given  of  this  distinc-
tion is  founded  upon  no  hypothesis.  [238]
Whether  our  notions  of  primary  qualities
are  direct  and  distinct,  those  of  the  se-
condary relative  and  obscure,  is  a  matter
of  fact,  of  which  every  man  may  have  cer-
tain knowledge  by  attentive  reflection  upon
them.  To  this  reflection  I  appeal,  as  the
proper  test  of  what  has  been  advanced,  and
proceed  to  make  some  reflections  on  this
subject.

1.  The  primary  qualities  are  neither  sens-
ations, nor  are  they  resemblances  of  sens-
ations. This  appears  to  me  self-evident.
I  have  a  clear  and  distinct  notion  of  each  of
the  primary  qualities.  I  have  a  clear  and
distinct  notion  of  sensation.  I  can  com-
pare the  one  with  the  other ;  and,  when  I
do  so,  I  am  not  able  to  discern  a  resembling
feature.  Sensation  is  the  act  or  the  feeling
(I  dispute  not  which)  of  a  sentient  being.
Figure,  divisibility,  solidity,  are  neither
acts  nor  feelings.  Sensation  supposes  a
sentient  being  as  its  subject ;  for  a  sensa-
tion that  is  not  felt  by  some  sentient  being,
is  an  absurdity.  Figure  and  divisibility
supposes  a  subject  that  is  figured  and  divi-
sible, but  not  a  subject  that  is  sentient.

2.  We  have  no  reason  to  think  that  any
of  the  secondary  qualities  resemble  any  sens-
ation. The  absurdity  of  this  notion  has
been  clearly  shewn  by  Des  Cartes,  Locke,
and  many  modern  philosophers.  It  was  a
tenet  of  the  ancient  philosophy,  and  is  still
by  many  imputed  to  the  vulgar,  but  only  as
a  vulgar  error.  It  is  too  evident  to  need
proof,  that  the  vibrations  of  a  sounding
body  do  not  resemble  the  sensation  of  sound,
nor  the  effluvia  of  an  odorous  body  the  sens-
ation of  smell.

[  237,  2381


chap,  xvii.]  OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION.


315


3.  The  distinctness  of  our  notions  of  pri-
mary qualities  prevents  all  questions  and
disputes  about  their  nature.  There  are  no
different  opinions  about  the  nature  of  ex-
tension, figure,  or  motion,  or  the  nature  of
any  primary  quality.  Their  nature  is  man-
ifest to  our  senses,  and  cannot  be  unknown
to  any  man,  or  mistaken  by  him,  though
their  causes  may  admit  of  dispute. [239]

The  primary  qualities  are  the  object  of
the  mathematical  sciences;  and  the  dis-
tinctness of  our  notions  of  them  enables
us  to  reason  demonstratively  about  them  to
a  great  extent.  Their  various  modifications
are  precisely  defined  in  the  imagination,  and
thereby  capable  of  being  compared,  and  their
relations  determined  with  precision  and  cer-
tainty.

It  is  not  so  with  secondary  qualities.
Their  nature  not  being  manifest  to  the  sense,
maybe  a  subject  of  dispute.  Our  feeling
informs  us  that  the  fire  is  hot ;  but  it  does
not  inform  us  what  that  heat  of  the  fire  is.
But  does  it  not  appear  a  contradiction,  to
say  we  know  that  the  fire  is  hot,  but  we
know  not  what  that  heat  is  ?  I  answer,
there  is  the  same  appearance  of  contradic-
tion in  many  things  that  must  be  granted.
We  know  that  wine  has  an  inebriating  qua-
lity ;  but  we  know  not  what  that  quality  is.
It  is  true,  indeed,  that,  if  we  had  not  some
notion  of  what  is  meant  by  the  heat  of  fire,
and  by  an  inebriating  quality,  we  could
affirm  nothing  of  either  with  understand-
ing. We  have  a  notion  of  both  ;  but  it -is
only  a  relative  notion.  We  know  that  they
are  the  causes  of  certain  known  effects.

4.  The  nature  of  secondary  qualities  is  a
proper  subject  of  philosophical  disquisition  ;
and  in  this  philosophy  has  made  some  pro-
gress. It  has  been  discovered,  that  the
sensation  of  smell  is  occasioned  by  the
effluvia  of  bodies  ;  that  of  sound  by  their
vibration.  The  disposition  of  bodies  to  re-
flect a  particular  kind  of  light,  occasions  the
sensation  of  colour.  Very  curious  dis-
coveries have  been  made  of  the  nature  of
heat,  and  an  ample  field  of  discovery  in
these  subjects  remains.

5.  We  may  see  why  the  sensations  be-
longing to  secondary  qualities  are  an  object
of  our  attention,  while  those  which  belong
to  the  primary  are  not.

The  first  are  not  only  signs  of  the  ob-
ject perceived,  but  they  bear  a  capital  part
in  the  notion  we  form  of  it.  [240]  We
conceive  it  only  as  that  which  occasions  such
a  sensation,  and  therefore  cannot  reflect
upon  it  without  thinking  of  the  sensation
which  it  occasions :  we  have  no  other  mark
whereby  to  distinguish  it.  The  thought  of
a  secondary  quality,  therefore,  always  car-
ries us  back  to  the  sensation  which  it  pro-
duces. We  give  the  same  name  to  both,
and  are  apt  to  confound  them  together.
H239-2411


But,  having  a  clear  and  distinct  conception
of  primary  qualities,  we  have  no  need,  when
we  think  of  them,  to  recall  their  sensations.
When  a  primary  quality  is  perceived,  the
sensation  immediately  leads  our  thought  to
the  quality  signified  by  it,  and  is  itself  for-
got. We  have  no  occasion  afterwards  to
reflect  upon  it ;  and  so  we  come  to  be  as
little  acquainted  with  it  as  if  we  had  never
felt  it.  This  is  the  case  with  the  sensations
of  all  primary  qualities,  when  they  are  not
so  painful  or  pleasant  as  to  draw  our  atten-
tion.

When  a  man  moves  his  hand  rudely
against  a  pointed  hard  body,  he  feels  pain,
and  may  easily  be  persuaded  that  this  pain
is  a  sensation,  and  that  there  is  nothing
resembling  it  in  the  hard  body ;  at  the  same
time,  he  perceives  the  body  to  be  hard  and
pointed,  and  he  knows  that  these  qualities
belong  to  the  body  only.  In  this  case,  it  is
easy  to  distinguish  what  he  feels  from  what
he  perceives.

Let  him  again  touch  the  pointed  body
gently,  so  as  to  give  him  no  pain  ;  and  now
you  can  hardly  persuade  him  that  he  feels
anything  but  the  figure  and  hardness  of  the
body  :  so  difficult  it  is  to  attend  to  the  sens-
ations belonging  to  primary  qualities,  when
they  are  neither  pleasant  nor  painful.  They
carry  the  thought  to  the  external  object,
and  immediately  disappear  and  are  forgot.
Nature  intended  them  only  as  signs ;  and
when  they  have  served  that  purpose  they
vanish.

We  are  now  to  consider  the  opinions
both  of  the  vulgar  and  of  philosophers  upon
this  subject.  [241]  As  to  the  former,  it
is  not  to  be  expected  that  they  should  make
distinctions  which  have  no  connection  with
the  common  affairs  of  life ;  they  do  not,
therefore,  distinguish  the  primary  from  the
secondary  qualities,  but  speak  of  both  as
being  equally  qualities  of  the  external  ob-
ject. Of  the  primary  qualities  they  have  a
distinct  notion,  as  they  are  immediately  and
distinctly,  perceived  by  the  senses ;  of  the
secondary,  their  notions,  as  I  apprehend,
are  confused  and  indistinct,  rather  than
erroneous.  A  secondary  quality  is  the
unknown  cause  or  occasion  of  a  well-known
effect ;  and  the  same  name  is  common  to
the  cause  and  the  effect.  Now,  to  dis-
tinguish clearly  the  different  ingredients  of  a
complex  notion,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the
different  meanings  of  an  ambiguous  word,
is  the  work  of  a  philosopher ;  and  is  not
to  be  expected  of  the  vulgar,  when  their
occasionsido  not  require  it.

I  grant,  therefore,  that  the  notion  which
the  vulgar  have  of  secondary  qualities,  is
indistinct  and  inaccurate.  But  there  seems
to  be  a  contradiction  between  the  vulgar
and  the  philosopher  upon  this  subject,  and
each  charges  the  other  with  a  gross ab-


316


ON  THE INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


L  ESSAY II.


surdity.  The  vulgar  say,  that  fire  is  hot,
and  snow  cold,  and  sugar  sweet ;  and  that
to  deny  this  is  a  gross  absurdity,  and  con-
tradicts the  testimony  of  our  senses.  The
philosopher  says,  that  heat,  and  cold,  and
sweetness,  are  nothing  but  sensations  in
our  minds ;  and  it  is  absurd  to  conceive
that  these  sensations  are  in  the  fire,  or  in
the  snow,  or  in  the  sugar.

I  believe  this  contradiction,  between  the
vulgar  and  the  philosopher,  is  more  apparent
than  real ;  and  that  it  is  owing  to  an  abuse
of  language  on  the  part  of  the  philosopher,
and  to  indistinct  notions  on  the  part  of  the
vulgar.  The  philosopher  says,  there  is  no
heat  in  the  fire,  meaning  that  the  fire  has
not  the  sensation  of  heat.  His  meaning  is
just ;  and  the  vulgar  will  agree  with  him,
as  soon  as  they  understand  his  meaning :
But  his  language  is  improper ;  for  there  is
really  a  quality  in  the  fire,  of  which  the
proper  name  is  heat ;  and  the  name  of  heat
is  given  to  this  quality,  both  by  philosophers
and  by  the  vulgar,  much  more  frequently  than
to  the  sensation  of  heat.  [242]  This  speech
of  the  philosopher,  therefore,  is  meant  by
him  in  one  sense ;  it  is  taken  by  the  vulgar
in  another  sense.  In  the  sense  in  which
they  take  it,  it  is  indeed  absurd,  and  so
they  hold  it  to  be.  In  the  sense  in  which
he  means  it,  it  is  true  ;  and  the  vulgar,  as
soon  as  they  are  made  to  understand  that
sense,  will  acknowledge  it  to  be  true.  They
know,  as  well  as  the  philosopher,  that  the
fire  does  not  feel  heat :  and  this  is  all  that
he  means  by  saying  there  is  no  heat  in  the
fire.*

In  the  opinions  of  philosophers  about
primary  andgsecondary  qualities,  there  have
been,  as  was  before  observed,  several  revo-
lutions. -J-  They  were  distinguished,  long  be-
fore the  days  of  Aristotle,  by  the  sect  called
Atomists  :  among  whom  Democritus  made
a  capital  figure.  In  those  times,  the  name
of  quality  was  applied  only  to  those  we  call
secondary  qualities ;  the  primary,  being  con-
sidered as  essential  to  matter,  were  not
called  qualities.  %  That  the  atoms,  which
they  held  to  be  the  first  principles  of  things,
were  extended,  solid,  figured,  and  movable,
there  was  no  doubt ;  but  the  question  was,
whether  they  had  smell,  taste,  and  colour  ?
or,  as  it  was  commonly  expressed,  whether
they  had  qualities  ?  The  Atomists  main-
tained, that  they  had  not ;  that  the  quali-
ties were  not  in  bodies,  but  were  something
resulting  from  the  operation  of  bodies  upon
our  senses.  §


*  All  this  ambiguity  was  understood  and  articu.
•ately  explained  by  former  philos  >phers.  See  above,
notes  at  pp  205  and  310,  and  No  e  D.— H.

+  See  Note  D — H.

%  The  Atomists  derived  the  qualitative  attributes
of.things  from  the  quantitative  —  H.

\  Still  Democritus  suppose  i  certain  real  or  ob-
jective causes  f  >r  the  subjsct  ve  differences  of  our


It  would  seem  that,  when  men  began  to
speculate  upon  this  subject,  the  primary
qualities  appeared  so  clear  and  manifest
that  they  could  entertain  no  doubt  of  their
existence  wherever  matter  existed  ;  but  the
secondary  so  obscure  that  they  were  at  a
loss  where  to  place  them.  They  used  this
comparison  :  as  fire,  which  is  neither  in  the
flint  nor  in  the  steel,  is  produced  by  their
collision,  so  those  qualities,  though  not  in
bodies,  are  produced  by  their  impulse  upon
our  senses. [243]

This  doctrine  was  opposed  by  Aristotle.  *
He  believed  taste  and  colour  to  be  substan-
tial forms  of  bodies,  and  that  their  species,
as  well  as  those  of  figure  and  motion,  are
received  by  the  senses,  -f-

In  believing  that  what  we  commonly
call  taste  and  colour,  is  something  really
inherent  in  body,  and  does  not  depend  upon
its  being  tasted  and  seen,  he  followed  nature.
But,  in  believing  that  our  sensations  of
taste  and  colour  are  the  forms  or  species  of
those  qualities  received  by  the  senses,  he
followed  his  own  theory,  which  was  an  ab-
surd fiction.-}-  Des  Cartes  not  only  shewed
the  absurdity  of  sensible  species  received  by
the  senses,  but  gave  a  more  just  and  more
intelligible  account  of  secondary  qualities
than  had  been  given  before.  Mr  Locke
followed  him,  and  bestowed  much  pains
upon  this  subject.  He  was  the  first,  I
think,  that  gave  them  the  name  of  secondary
qualities,^  which  has  been  very  gsnerally
adopted.  He  distinguished  the  sensation
from  the  quality  in  the  body,  which  is  the
cause  or  occasion  of  that  sensation,  and
shewed  that  there  neither  is  nor  can  be  any
similitude  between  them.§

By  this  account,  the  senses  are  acquitted
of  putting  any  fallacy  upon  us;  the  sensation
is  real,  and  no  fallacy  ;  the  quality  in  the
body,  which  is  the  cause  or  occasion  of  this
sensation,  is  likewise  real,  though  the  nature
of  it  is  not  manifest  to  our  senses.  If  we
impose  upon  ourselves,  by  confounding  the
j-ensation  with  the  quality  that  occasions
it,  this  is  owing  to  rash  judgment  or  weak
understanding,  but  not  to  any  false  testi-
mony of  our  senses.

This  account  of  secondary  qualities  I  take

sensations  Thus,  in  the  different  forms,  positions,
and  relations  of  atoms,  he  sought  the  ground  of
difference  of  tastes,  colours,  heat  and  cold,  &c.  See
Theophrastus  De  Sensu,  §  65  —Aristotle  De  Anima,
iii.  2.— Galen  De  Elementis—S\m^\\c\\xs  in  Phys.
Auscult.  libros,  f.  119,  b.— H.

*  Aristotle  admitted  that  the  doctrine  in  question
was  true,  of  colour,  taste,  &c,  as  »<*•»•'  tvte/yuctv,  but
not  true  of  them  as  *«t«  $uva/u.iv.  See  be  Anima
iii.2 —  H.

t This  is  not  really  Aristotle's  doctrine.—  H.

t  Locke  only  gave  a  new  meaning  to  old  terms.
The  first  and  second  or  the  primary  and  secondary
qualities  of  Aristotle,  denoted  a  distinction  similar
to,  but  not  identical  with,  that  in  question— H.

§  He  distinguished  nothing  which  had  not  been
more  precisely  discriminated  by  Aristotle  and  the
Cartesians. — H.

[242,  243]


chap,  xvn.] OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION.


317


to  be  very  just ;  and  if  Mr  Locke  had
stopped  here,  he  would  have  left  the  matter
very  clear.  But  he  thought  it  necessary  to
introduce  the  theory  of  ideas,  to  explain  the
distinction  between  primary  and  secondary
qualities,  and  by  that  means,  as  I  think,
perplexed  and  darkened  it.

When  philosophers  speak  about  ideas,  we
are  often  at  a  loss  to  know  what  they  mean
by  them,  and  may  be  apt  to  suspect  that
they  are  mere  fictions,  that  have  no  exist-
ence. [244]  They  have  told  us,  that,  by  the
ideas  which  we  have  immediately  from  our
senses,  they  mean  our  sensations.*  These,
indeed,  are  real  things,  and  not  fictions.
We  may,  by  accurate  attention  to  them,
know  perfectly  their  nature  ;  and,  if  philo-
sophers would  keep  by  this  meaning  of  the
word  idea,  when  applied  to  the  objects  of
sense,  they  would  at  least  be  more  intelli-
gible. Let  us  hear  how  Mr  Locke  explains
the  nature  of  those  ideas,  when  applied  to
primary  and  secondary  qualities,  Book  2,
chap  8,  §  7j  tenth  edition.  "  To  discover
the  nature  of  our  ideas  the  better,  and  to
discourse  of  them  intelligibly,  it  will  be  con-
venient to  distinguish  them,  as  they  are
ideas,  or  perceptions  in  our  minds,  and  as
they  are  modifications  of  matter  in  the  bodies
that  cause  such  perceptions  in  us,  that  so
we  may  not  think  (as  perhaps  usually  is
done)  that  they  are  exactly  the  images  and
resemblances  of  something  inherent  in  the
subject ;  most  of  those  of  sensation  being,
in  the  mind,  no  more  the  likeness  of  some-
thing existing  without  us,  than  the  names
that  stand  for  them  are  the  likeness  of  our
ideas,  which  yet,  upon  hearing,  they  are  apt
to  excite  in  us."

This  way  of  distinguishing  a  thing,  first,
as  what  it  is ;  and,  secondly,  as  what  it  is
not,  is,  I  apprehend,  a  very  extraordinary
way  of  discovering  its  nature.-f-  And  if  ideas
are  ideas  or  perceptions  in  our  minds,  and,
at  the  same  time,  the  modifications  of  mat-
ter in  the  bodies  that  cause  such  percep-
tions in  us,  it  will  be  no  easy  matter  to
discourse  of  them  intelligibly.

The  discovery  of  the  nature  of  ideas  is
carried  on  in  the  next  section,  in  a  manner
no  less  extraordinary.  "  Whatsoever  the
mind  perceives  in  itself,  or  is  the  immediate
object  of  perception,  thought,  or  under-
standing, that  I  call  idea  ;  and  the  power
to  produce  any  idea  in  our  mind,  I  call
quality  of  the  subject  wherein  that  power
is.  Thus,  a  snowball  having  the  power  to
produce  in  us  the  ideas  of  white,  cold,  and
round — the  powers  to  produce  those  ideas


•  The  Cartesians,  particularly  Malebranche,  dis-
tinguished the  Idea  and  the  Feeling  (sentiment,  se7isa-
tio.)  Of  the  primary  qualities  in  their  doctrine  we
have  Ideas ;  of  the  secondary,  only  Feelings.— H.

t  This  and  some  of  the  following  strictures  on
Locke  are*rather  hypercritical— H.
[244-246]


in  us,  as  they  are  in  the  snowball,  I  call
qualities  ;  and,  as  they  are  sensations,  or
perceptions  in  our  understandings,  I  call
them  ideas ;  which  ideas,  if  I  speak  of
them  sometimes  as  in  the  things  themselves,
I  would  be  understood  to  mean  those  quali-
ties in  the  objects  which  produce  them  in
us." [245]

These  are  the  distinctions  which  Mr
Locke  thought  convenient,  in  order  to  dis-
cover the  nature  of  our  ideas  of  the  quali-
ties of  matter  the  better,  and  to  discourse
of  them  intelligibly.  I  believe  it  will  be
difficult  to  find  two  other  paragraphs  in  the
essay  so  unintelligible.  Whether  this  is  to  be
imputed  to  the  intractable  nature  of  ideas,
or  to  an  oscitancy  of  the  author,  with  which
he  is  very  rarely  chargeable,  I  leave  the
reader  to  judge.  There  are,  indeed,  seve-
ral other  passages  in  the  same  chapter,  in
which  a  like  obscurity  appears  ;  but  I  do
not  chuse  to  dwell  upon  them.  The  con-
clusion drawn  by  him  from  the  whole  is,
that  primary  and  secondary  qualities  are
distinguished  by  this,  that  the  ideas  of  the
former  are  resemblances  or  copies  of  them,
but  the  ideas  of  the  other  are  not  resem-
blances of  them.  Upon  this  doctrine,  I  beg
leave  to  make  two  observations.

First,  Taking  it  for  granted  that,  by  the
ideas  of  primary  and  secondary  qualities,
he  means  the  sensations'  they  excite  in  us,
I  observe  that  it  appears  strange,  that  a^
sensation  should  be  the  idea  of  a  quality  in
body,  to  which  it  is  acknowledged  to  bear
no  resemblance.  If  the  sensation  of  sound
be  the  idea  of  that  vibration  of  the  sound-
ing body  which  occasions  it,  a  surfeit  may,
for  the  same  reason,  be  the  idea  of  a  feast.

A  second  observation  is,  that,  when  Mr
Locke  affirms,  that  the  ideas  of  primary
qualities — that  is,  the  sensations*  they  raise
in  us — are  resemblances  of  those  qualities,
he  seems  neither  to  have  given  due  atten-
tion to  those  sensations,  nor  to  the  nature
of  sensation  in  general. [246]

Let  a  man  press  his  hand  against  a  hard
body,  and  let  him  attend  to  the  sensation
he  feels,  excluding  from  his  thought  every
thing  external,  even  the  body  that  is  the
cause  of  his  feeling.  This  abstraction,  in-
deed, is  difficult,  and  seems  to  have  been
little,  if  at  all  practised.  But  it  is  not  im-
possible, and  it  is  evidently  the  only  way  to
understand  the  nature  of  the  sensation.  A
due  attention  to  this  sensation  will  satisfy


*  Here,  as  formerly,  (vide  supra,  notes  at  pp.  208,
290,  &c.,)  Reid  will  insist  on  giving  a  more  limited
meaning  to  the  term  Sensation  than  Locke  did,  and
on  criticising  him  by  that  imposed  meaning.  The
Sensation  of  Locke  was  equivalent  to  the  Sensation
and  Perception  of  Reid.  It  is  to  be  observed  that
Locke  did  not,  like  the  Cartesians,  distinguish  the
Idea  (corresponding  to  Reid's  Perception)  from  the
Feeling  (sentiment,  sen6::tio)  corresponding  to  Reid'i
Sensation. — H.


318


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II


him  that  it  is  no  more  like  hardness  in  a
body  than  the  sensation  of  sound  is  like
vibration  in  the  sounding  body.

I  know  of  no  ideas  but  my  conceptions ;
and  my  idea  of  hardness  in  a  body,  is  the
conception  of  such  a  cohesion  of  its  parts
as  requires  great  force  to  displace  them.  I
have  both  the  conception  and  belief  of  this
quality  in  the  body,  at  the  same  time  that
I  have  the  sensation  of  pain,  by  pressing
my  hand  against  it.  The  sensation  and
perception  are  closely  conjoined  by  my
constitution ;  but  I  am  sure  they  have  no
similitude  ;  I  know  no  reason  why  the  one
should  be  called  the  idea  of  the  other,  which
does  not  lead  us  to  call  every  natural  effect
the  idea  of  its  cause.

Neither  did  Mr  Locke  give  due  attention
to  the  nature  of  sensation  in  general,  when
he  affirmed  that  the  ideas  of  primary  qua-
lities— that  is,  the  sensations*  excited
by  them— are  resemblances  of  those  quali-
ties.

That  there  can  be  nothing  like  sensation
in  an  insentient  being,  or  like  thought  in
an  unthinking  being,  is  self-evident,  and
has  been  shewn,  to  the  conviction  of  all
men  that  think,  by  Bishop  Berkeley ;  yet
this  was  unknown  to  Mr  Locke.  It  is  an
humbling  consideration,  that,  in  subjects  of
this  kind,  self-evident  truths  may  be  hid
from  the  eyes  of  the  most  ingenious  men.
But  we  have,  withal,  this  consolation,  that,
when  once  discovered,  they  shine  by  their
own  light :  and  that  light  can  no  more  be
put  out. [247]

Upon  the  whole,  Mr  Locke,  in  making
secondary  qualities  to  be  powers  in  bodies
to  excite  certain  sensations  in  us,  has  given
a  just  and  distinct  analysis  of  what  our
senses  discover  concerning  them ;  but,  in
applying  the  theory  of  ideas  to  them  and
to  the  primary  qualities,  he  has  been  led  to
say  things  that  darken  the  subject,  and  that
will  not  bear  examination.  -|-

Bishop  Berkeley  having  adopted  the  sen-
timents common  to  philosophers,  concern-
ing the  ideas  we  have  by  our  senses — to  wit,
that  they  are  all  sensations — saw  more  clearly
the  necessary  consequence  of  this  doctrine ;
which  is,  that  there  is  no  material  world —
bo  qualities  primary  or  secondary  —  and,
consequently,  no  foundation  for  any  dis-
tinction between  them.:}:  He  exposed  the
absurdity  of  a resemblance  between  our


*  No ;  not  Sensations  in  Reid's  meaning ;  but  Per-
cepts—the immediate  objects  we  are  conscious  of  in
the  cognitions  of  sense. — H.

1  The  Cartesians  did  not  apply  the  term  ideas  to
our  sensations  of  the  secondary  qualities. — H.

%  See  above,  p.  142,  note  *.  The  mere  distinction
of  primary  and  secondary  qualities,  of  perception  and
sensation,  is  of  no  importance  against  Idealism,  if  the
primary  qualities  as  immediately  percewed.  (i  e.  as
known  to  consciousness,)  be  only  conceptions,  no-
tions, or  modifications  of  mind  itselt.  See  following
Note— H.


sensations  and  any  quality,  primary  or
secondary,  of  a  substance  that  is  supposed
to  be  insentient.  Indeed,  if  it  is  granted
that  the  senses  have  no  other  office  but  to
furnish  us  with  sensations,  it  will  be  found
impossible  to  make  any  distinction  between
primary  and  secondary  qualities,  or  even  to
maintain  the  existence  of  a  material  world.

From  the  account  I  have  given  of  the
various  revolutions  in  the  opinions  of  philo-
sophers about  primary  and  secondary  qua-
lities, I  think  it  appears  that  all  the  dark-
ness and  intricacy  that  thinking  men  have
found  in  this  subject,  and  the  errors  they
have  fallen  into,  have  been  owing  to  the
difficulty  of  distinguishing  clearly  sensa-
tion from  perception — what  we  feel  from
what  we  perceive.

The  external  senses  have  a  double  pro-
vince— to  make  us  feel,  and  to  make  us
perceive.  They  furnish  us  with  a  variety
of  sensations,  some  pleasant,  others  painful,
and  others  indifferent ;  at  the  same  time,
they  give  us  a  conception  and  an  invincible
belief  of  the  existence  of  external  objects.
This  conception  of  external  objects  is  the
work  of  nature.  The  belief  of  their  exist-
ence, which  our  senses  give,  is  the  work  of
nature ;  so  likewise  is  the  sensation  that
accompanies  it.  This  conception  and  be-
lief which  nature  produces  by  means  of  the
senses,  we  call  perception.*  [248]  The
feeling  which  goes  along  with  the  percep-
tion, we  call  sensation.  The  perception  and
its  corresponding  sensation  are  produced  at
the  same  time.  In  our  experience  we  never
find  them  disjoined.  Hence,  we  are  led  to
consider  them  as  one  thing,  to  give  them
one  name,  and  to  confound  their  different
attributes.  It  becomes  very  difficult  to
separate  them  in  thought,  to  attend  to  each
by  itself,  and  to  attribute  nothing  to  it
which  belongs  to  the  other.

To  do  this,  requires  a  degree  of  attention
to  what  passes  in  our  own  minds,  and  a
talent  of  distinguishing  things  that  differ,
which  is  not  to  be  expected  in  the  vulgar,
and  is  even  rarely  found  in  philosophers ;
so  that  the  progress  made  in  a  just  analysis
of  the  operations  of  our  senses  has  been
very  slow.  The  hypothesis  of  ideas,  so
generally  adopted,  hath,  as  I  apprehend,
greatly  retarded  this  progress,  and  we  might
hope  for  a  quicker  advance,  if  philosophers
could  so  far  humble  themselves  as  to  be-
lieve that,  in  every  branch  of  the  philosophy
of  nature,  the  productions  of  human  fancy
and  conjecture  will  be  found  to  be  dross ;
and  that  the  only  pure  metal  that  will  en.
dure  the  test,  is  what  is  discovered  by
patient  observation  and  chaste  induction.


*  If  the  conception,  like  the  belief,  be  subjective
in  perception,  we  have  no  refuge. from  Idealism  in
this  doctrine.  See  above,  the  notes  at  pp.  128-130,
183,  &c,  and  NoteC— H.

[247,  248]


chap,  xviii.] OF  OTHER  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION.


319


CHAPTER  XVIII.

OF  OTHER  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION.

Besides  primary  and  secondary  qualities
of  bodies,  there  are  many  other  immediate
objects  of  perception.  Without  pretending
to  a  complete  enumeration,  I  think  they
mostly  fall  under  one  or  other  of  the  follow-
ing, classes.  1st,  Certain  states  or  condi-
tions of  our  own  bodies.  2d,  Mechanical
powers  or  forces.  3d,  Chemical  powers.
4th,  Medical  powers  of  virtues.  5th,  Vege-
table and  animal  powers. [249]

That  we  perceive  certain  disorders  in  our
own  bodies  by  means  of  uneasy  sensations,
which  nature  hath  conjoined  with  them,  will
not  be  disputed.  Of  this  kind  are  toothache,
headache,  gout,  and  every  distemper  and
hurt  which  we  feel.  The  notions  which
our  sense  gives  of  these,  have  a  strong
analogy  to  our  notions  of  secondary  qualities.
Both  are  similarly  compounded,  and  may
be  similarly  resolved,  and  they  give  light  to
each  other.

In  the  toothache,  for  instance,  there  is,
first,,  a  painful  feeling ;  and,  secondly,  a
conception  and  belief  of  some  disorder  in
the  tooth,  which  is  believed  to  be  the  cause
of  the  uneasy  feeling.*  The  first  of  these
is  a  sensation,  the  second  is  perception  ;
for  it  includes  a  conception  and  belief  of  an
external  object.  But  these  two  things,
though  of  different  natures,  are  so  con-
stantly conjoined  in  our  experience  and  in
our  imagination,  that  we  consider  them  as
one.  We  give  the  same  name  to  both  ;  for
the  toothache  is  the  proper  name  of  the
pain  we  feel ;  and  it  is  the  proper  name  of
the  disorder  in  the  tooth  which  causes  that
pain.  If  it  should  be  made  a  question
whether  the  toothache  be  in  the  mind  that
feels  it,  or  in  the  tooth  that  is  affected,
much  might  be  said  on  both  sides,  while  it
is  not  observed  that  the  word  has  two  mean-
ings, -f*  But  a  little  reflection  satisfies  us,
that  the  pain  is  in  the  mind,  and  the  dis-
order in  the  tooth.  If  some  philosopher
should  pretend  to  have  made  the  discovery
that  the  toothache,  the  gout,  the  headache,
are  only  sensations  in  the  mind,  and  that
it  is  a  vulgar  error  to  conceive  that  they
are  distempers  of  the  body,  he  might  defend
his  system  in  the  same  manner  as  those
who  affirm  that  there  is  no  sound,  nor
colour,  nor  taste  in  bodies,  defend  that  para-
dox. But both  these  systems,  like  most


*  There  is  no  such  perception,  properly  so  called.
The  cognition  is  merely  an  inference  from  the
feeling;  and  it  subject,  at  least,  only  some  hypothe-
tical representation  of  a  really  ignotum  quid.  Here
the  subjective  element  preponderates  so  greatly  as
almost  to  extinguish  the  objective — H.

+  This  is  not  correct.  See  above,  p.  205,  col.  b
note  *,  and  Note  D.—H.


[249,  250]


paradoxes,  will  be  found  to  be  only  an  abuse
of  words.

We  say  that  we  feci  the  toothache,  not
that  we  perceive  it.  On  the  other  hand,  we
say  that  we  perceive  the  colour  of  a  body,
not  that  we  feel  it.  Can  any  reason  be  given
for  this  difference  of  phraseology  ?  [250]
In  answer  to  this  question,  I  apprehend
that,  both  when  we  feel  the  toothache  and
when  we  see  a  coloured  body,  there  is  sensa-
tion and  perception  conjoined.  But,  in  the
toothache,  the  sensation  being  very  painful,
engrosses  the  attention  ;  and  therefore  we
speak  of  it  as  if  it  were  felt  only,  and  not
perceived  :  whereas,  in  seeing  a  coloured
body,  the  sensation  is  indifferent,  and  draws
no  attention.  The  quality  in  the  body,
which  we  call  its  colour,  is  the  only  object
of  attention  ;  and  therefore  we  speak  of  it
as  if  it  were  perceived  and  not  felt.  Though
all  philosophers  agree  that,  in  seeing  colour
there  is  sensation,  it  is  not  easy  to  persuade
the  vulgar  that,  in  seeing  a  coloured  body,
when  the  light  is  not  too  strong  nor  the
eye  inflamed,  they  have  any  sensation  or
feeling  at  all.

There  are  some  sensations,  which,  though
they  are  very  often  felt,  are  never  attended
to,  nor  reflected  upon.  We  have  no  con-
ception of  them  ;  and,  therefore,  in  language
there  is  neither  any  name  for  them,  nor
any  form  of  speech  that  supposes  their
existence.  Such  are  the  sensations  of  colour,
and  of  all  primary  qualities  ;  and,  therefore,
those  qualities  are  said  to  be  perceived,  but
not  to  be  felt.  Taste  and  smell,  and  heat
and  cold,  have  sensations  that  are  often
agreeable  or  disagreeable,  in  such  a  degree
as  to  draw  our  attention  ;  and  they  are
sometimes  said  to  be  felt,  and  sometimes  to
be  perceived.  When  disorders  of  the  body
occasion  very  acute  pain,  the  uneasy  sensa-
ation  engrosses  the  attention,  and  they  are
said  to  be  felt,  not  to  be  perceived.*

There  is  another  question  relating  to
phraseology,  which  this  subject  suggests.
A  man  says,  he  feels  pain  in  such  a  parti,
cular  part  of  his  body ;  in  his  toe  for  in-
stance. Now,  reason  assures  us  that  pain
being  a  sensation,  can  only  be  in  the  sen-
tient being,  as  its  subject- — that  is,  in  the
mind.  And,  though  philosophers  have  dis-
puted much  about  the  place  of  the  mind ;
yet  none  of  them  ever  placed  it  in  the  toe.-f-

*  As  already  repeatedly  observed,  the  objective
element  (perception)  and  the  subjective  element
(feeling,  sensation)  are  always  in  the  inverse  ratio
of  each  other.  This  is  a  law  of  which  Reid  and  the
philosophers  were  not  aware. — H.

t  Not  in  the  toe-exclusively.  But,  both  in  ancient
and  modern  times,  the  opinion  has  been  held  that
the  mind  has  as  much  a  local  presence  in  the  toe  as  in
the  head,  the  doctrine,  indeed,  -longgenerally  main-
tained was,  that,  in  relation  to  the  body,  thesoulis  all
in  the  whole,  and  all  in  every  part.  On  the  question  of
the  seat  of  the  soul,  which  has  been  marvellously
perplexed,  I  cannot  enter.  I  shall  only  say,  in  gene-
ral, that  the  first  condition  of  the  possibility  of  an


320


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[ESSAY  12


What  shall  we  say  then  in  this  case  ?  Do
our  senses  really  deceive  us,  and  make  us
believe  a  thing  which  our  reason  determines
to  be  impossible?  [251]  I  answer,  first,
That,  when  a  man  says  he  has  pain  in  his  toe,
he  is  perfectly  understood,  both  by  himself
and  those  who  hear  him.  This  is  all  that
he  intends.  He  really  feels  what  he  and
all  men  call  a  pain  in  the  toe ;  and  there  is
no  deception  in  the  matter.  Whether,
therefore,  there  be  any  impropriety  in  the
phrase  or  not,  is  of  no  consequence  in  com-
mon life.  It  answers  all  the  ends  of  speech,
both  to  the  speaker  and  the  hearers.

In  all  languages  there  are  phrases  which
have  a  distinct  meaning;  while,  at  the
same  time,  there  may  be  something  in  the
structure  of  them  that  disagrees  with  the
analogy  of  grammar  or  with  the  principles
of  philosophy.  And  the  reason  is,  because
language  is  not  made  either  by  gramma-
rians or  philosophers.  Thus,  we  speak  of
feeling  pain,  as  if  pain  was  something  dis-
tinct from  the  feeling  of  it.  We  speak  of
pain  coming  and  going,  and  removing  from
one  place  to  another.  Such  phrases  are
meant  by  those  who  use  them  in  a  sense
that  is  neither  obscure  nor  false.  But  the
philosopher  puts  them  into  his  alembic,
reduces  them  to  their  first  principles,  draws
out  of  them  a  sense  that  was  never  meant,
and  so  imagines  that  he  has  discovered  an
error  of  the  vulgar.

I  observe,  secondly,  That,  when  we  con-
sider the  sensation  of  pain  by  itself,  with-
out any  respect  to  its  cause,  we  cannot  say
with  propriety,  that  the  toe  is  either  the
place  or  the  subject  of  it.  But  it  ought  to
be  remembered,  that,  when  we  speak  of  pain
in  the  toe,  the  sensation  is  combined  in  our
thought,  with  the  cause  of  it,  which  really  is
in  the  toe.  The  cause  and  the  eifect  are
combined  in  one  complex  notion,  and  the
same  name  serves  for  both.  It  is  the  busi-
ness of  the  philosopher  to  analyse  this  com-
plex notion,  and  to  give  different  names  to
its  different  ingredients.  He  gives  the
name  of  pain  to  the  sensation  only,  and  the
name  of  disorder  to  the  unknown  cause  of
it.  Then  it  is  evident  that  the  disorder
only  is  in  the  toe,  and  that  it  would  be  an
error  to  think  that  the  pain  is  in  it.*  But
we  ought  not  to  ascribe  this  error  to  the
vulgar,  who  never  made  the  distinction,  and
who,  under  the  name  of  pain,  comprehend
both  the  sensation  and  its  cause.  -|* [252]


immediate,  intuitive,  or  real  perception  of  external
things,  which  our  consciousness  assures  that  we  pos-
sess, is  the  immediate  connection  of  the  cognitive
principle  with  every  part  of  the  corporeal  organism. —

*  Only  if  the  toe  be  considered  as  a  mere  material
mass,  and  apart  from  an  animating  principle.— H.

t  That  the  pain  is  where  it  is  felt  is,  however,  the
doctrine  of  common  sense.  We  only  feel  in  as  much
as  we  have  a  body  and  a  soul ;  we  only  feel  pain  in
the  toe  in  as  much  as  we  have  such  a  member,  and  in


Cases  sometimes  happen,  which  give
occasion  even  to  the  vulgar  to  distinguish
the  painful  sensation  from  the  disorder
which  is  the  cause  of  it.  A  man  who  has  had
his  leg  cut  off,  many  years  after  feels  pain
in  a  toe  of  that  leg.  The  toe  has  now  no
existence ;  and  he  perceives  easily,  that  the
toe  can  neither  be  the  place  nor  the  subject
of  the  pain  which  he  feels  ;  yet  it  is  the
same  feeling  he  used  to  have  from  a  hurt
in  the  toe  ;  and,  if  he  did  not  know  that  his
leg  was  cut  off,  it  would  give  him  the  same
immediate  conviction  of  some  hurt  or  dis-
order in  the  toe.*

The  same  phenomenon  may  lead  the
philosopher,  in  all  cases,  to  distinguish  sens-
ation from  perception.  We  say,  that  the
man  had  a  deceitful  feeling,  when  he  felt  a
pain  in  his  toe  after  the  leg  was  cut  off;
and  we  have  a  true  meaning  in  saying  so.
But,  if  we  will  speak  accurately,  our  sensa-
tions cannot  be  deceitful ;  they  must  be
what  we  feel  them  to  be,  and  can  be  no-
thing else.  Where,  then,  lies  the  deeeit  ?  I
answer,  it  lies  not  in  the  sensation,  which
is  real,  but  in  the  seeming  perception  he
had  of  a  disorder  in  his  toe.  This  percep-
tion, which  Nature  had  conjoined  with  the
sensation,  was,  in  this  instance,  fallacious.

The  same  reasoning  may  be  applied  to
every  phenomenon  that  can,  with  propriety,
be  called  a  deception  of  sense.  As  when
one  who  has  the  jaundice  sees  a  body
yellow,  which  is  really  white  ;-f-  or  when  a
man  sees  an  object  double,  because  his
eyes  are  not  both  directed  to  it :  in  these,
and  other  like  cases,  the  sensations  we  have
are  real,  and  the  deception  is  only  in  the
perception  which  nature  has  annexed  to
them.

Nature  has  connected  our  perception  of
external  objects  with  certain  sensations.
If  the  sensation  is  produced,  the  corre-
sponding perception  follows  even  when  there
is  no  object,  and  in  that  case  is  apt  to
deceive  us.  [253]  In  like  manner,  nature
has  connected  our  sensations  with  certain
impressions  that  are  made  upon  the  nerves
and  brain  ;  and,  when  the  impression  is
made,  from  whatever  cause,  the  corre-
sponding sensation  and  perception  imme-
diately follow.  Thus,  in  the  man  who  feels
pain  in  his  toe  after  the  leg  is  cut  off,  the
nerve  that  went  to  the  toe,  part  of  which  was
cut  off  with  the  leg,  had  the  same  impres-
sion made  upon  the  remaining  part,  which,
in  the  natural  state  of  his  body,  was  caused


as  much  as  the  mind,  or  sentient  principle,  pervades
it.  We  just  as  much  feel  in  the  toe  as  we  think  in
in  the  head.  If  (but  only  if)  the  latter  be  a  vitium
subreptionit,  as  Kant  thinks,  so  is  the  former.— H.

*  This  illustration  is  Des  Cartes'.  If  correct,  it
only  shews  that  the  connection  of  mind  with  organ-
ization extends  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference
of  the  nervous  system,  and  is  not  limited  to  any
part.— H.

1  The  man  does  not  see  the  white  body  at  all.—  H.


[251-253]


chap,  xvm.] OF  OTHER  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION.


321


by  a  hurt  in  the  toe  :  and  immediately  this
impression  is  followed  by  the  sensation  and
perception  which  nature  connected  with  it.*

In  like  manner,  if  the  same  impressions
which  are  made  at  present  upon  my  optic
nerves  by  the  objects  before  me,  could  be
made  in  the  dark,  I  apprehend  that  I
should  have  the  same  sensations  and  see
the  same  objects  which  I  now  see.  The  im-
pressions and  sensations  would  in  such  a  case
be  real,  and  the  perception  only  fallacious.*

Let  us  next  consider  the  notions  which
our  senses  give  us  of  those  attributes  of
bodies  called  powers.  This  is  the  more
necessary,  because  power  seems  to  imply
some  activity ;  yet  we  consider  body  as  a
dead  inactive  thing,  which  does  not  act,  but
may  be  acted  upon.

Of  the  mechanical  powers  ascribed  to
bodies,  that  which  is  called  their  vis  insita
or  inertia,  may  first  be  considered.  By
this  is  meant,  no  more  than  that  bodies
never  change  their  state  of  themselves,
either  from  rest  to  motion,  or  from  motion
to  rest,  or  from  one  degree  of  velocity  or
one  direction  to  another.  In  order  to
produce  any  such  change,  there  must  be
some  force  impressed  upon  them  ;  and  the
eha'ige  produced  is  precisely  proportioned
to  the  force  impressed,  and  in  the  direction
of  that  force.

That  all  bodies  have  this  property,  is  a
matter  of  fact,  which  we  learn  from  daily
observation,  as  well  as  from  the  most  accu-
rate experiments..  [254]  Now,  it  seems
plain,  that  this  does  not  imply  any  activity
in  body,  but  rather  the  contrary.  A  power
in  body  to  change  its  state,  would  much
rather  imply  activity  than  its  continuing  in
the  same  state :  so  that,  although  this
property  of  bodies  is  called  their  vis  insita,
or  vis  imrlice,  it  implies  no  proper  activity.

If  we  consider,  next,  the  power  of  gravity,
it  is  a  fact  that  all  the  bodies  of  our  pla-
netary system  gravitate  towards  each  other.
This  has  been  fully  proved  by  the  great
Newton.  But  this  gravitation  is  not  con-
ceived by  that  philosopher  to  be  a  power
inherent  in  bodies,  which  they  exert  of
themselves,  but  a  force  impressed  upon
them,  to  which  they  must  necessarily  yield.
Whether  this  force  be  impressed  by  some
subtile  aether,  or  whether  it  be  impressed  by
the  power  of  the  Supreme  Being,  or  of  some
subordinate  spiritual  being,  we  do  not  know ;
but  all  sound  natural  philosophy,  particu-
larly that  of  Newton,  supposes  it  to  be  an
impressed  force,  and  not  inherent  in  bodies,  -f

So  that,  when  bodies  gravitate,  they  do


*  This  is  a  doctrine  which  cannot  be  reconciled
with  that  of  an  intuitive  or  objective  perception.
AW  here  is  subjective. —  H.

f  That  all  activity  supposes  an  immaterial  or  spi-
ritual agent,  is  an  ancient  doctrine. It  is,  however,
only  an  hypothesis. — H.
[ aS4-«5tf]


not  properly  act,  but  are  acted  upon :  they
only  yield  to  an  impression  that  is  made
upon  them.  It  is  common  in  language  to
express,  by  active  verbs,  many  changes  in
things  wherein  they  are  merely  passive  :
and  this  way  of  speaking  is  used  chiefly
when  the  cause  of  the  change  is  not  obvious
to  sense.  Thus  we  say  that  a  ship  sails,
when  every  man  of  common  sense  knows
that  she  has  no  inherent  power  of  motion
and  is  only  driven  by  wind  and  tide.  In
like  manner,  when  we  say  that  the  planets
gravitate  towards  the  sun,  we  mean  no  more
but  that,  by  some  unknown  power,  they  are
drawn  or  impelled  in  that  direction.

What  has  been  said  of  the  power  of  Gra-
vitation may  be  applied  to  other  mechanical
powers,  such  as  cohesion,  magnetism,  elec-
tricity ;  and  no  less  to  chemical  and  medical
powers.  By  all  these,  certain  effects  are
produced,  upon  the  application  of  one  body
to  another.  [255]  Our  senses  discover  the
effect ;  but  the  power  is  latent.  We  know
there  must  be  a  cause  of  the  effect,  and  we
form  a  relative  notion  of  it  from  its  effect ;  and
very  often  the  same  name  is  used  to  signify
the  unknown  cause,  and  the  known  effect.

We  ascribe  to  vegetables  the  powers  of
drawing  nourishment,  growing  and  multi-
plying their  kind.  Here  likewise  the  effect
is  manifest,  but  the  cause  is  latent  to  sense.
These  powers,  therefore,  as  well  as  all  the
other  powers  we  ascribe  to  bodies,  are  un-
known causes  of  certain  known  effects.  It
is  the  business  of  philosophy  to  investigate
the  nature  of  those  powers  as  far  as  we  are
able  ;  but  our  senses  leave  us  in  the  dark.

We  may  observe  a  great  similarity  in  the
notions  which  our  senses  give  us  of  second-
ary qualities,  of  the  disorders  we  feel  in  our
own  bodies,  and  of  the  various  powers  of
bodies  which  we  have  enumerated.  They
are  all  obscure  and  relative  notions,  being
a  conception  of  some  unknown  cause  of  a
known  effect.  Their  names  are,  for  the
most  part,  common  to  the  effect  and  to
its  cause  ;  and  they  are  a  proper  subject
of  philosophical  disquisition.  They  might,
therefore,  I  think,  not  improperly  be  called
occult  qualities.

This  name,  indeed,  is  fallen  into  disgrace
since  the  time  of  Des  Cartes.  It  is  said  to
have  been  used  by  the  Peripatetics  to  cloak
their  ignorance,  and  to  stop  all  inquiry  into
the  nature  of  those  qualities  called  occult.
Be  it  so.  Let  those  answer  for  this  abuse
of  the  word  who  were  guilty  of  it.  To  call  a
thing  occult,  if  we  attend  to  the  meaning
of  the  word,  is  rather  modestly  to  confess
ignorance,  than  to  cloak  it.  It  is  to  point
it  out  as  a  proper  subject  for  the  investiga-
tion of  philosophers,  whose  proper  business
it  is  to  better  the  condition  of  humanity,  by
discovering  what  was  before  hid  from  human
knowledge. [256]


322


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


Were  I  therefore  to  make  a  division  of
the  qualities  of  bodies  as  they  appear  to  our
senses,  I  would  divide  them  first  into  those
that  are  manifest  and  those  that  are  occult.
The  manifest  qualities  are  those  which  Mr
Locke  calls  primary  ,•  such  as  Extension,
Figure,  Divisibility,  Motion,  Hardness,
Softness,  Fluidity.  The  nature  of  these  is
manifest  even  to  sense  :  and  the  business  of
the  philosopher  with  regard  to  them,  is  not
to  find  out  their  nature,  which  is  well  known,
but  to  discover  the  effects  produced  by  their
various  combinations  ;  and,  with  regard  to
those  of  them  which  are  not  essential  to
matter,  to  discover  their  causes  as  far  as
he  is  able.

The  second  class  consists  of  occult  quali-
ties, which  may  be  subdivided  into  various
kinds  :  as,  first,  the  secondary  qualities  ;
secondly,  the  disorders  we  feel  in  our  own
bodies ;  and,  thirdly,  all  the  qualities  which
we  call  powers  of  bodies,  whether  mechani-
cal, chemical,  medical,  animal, or  vegetable;
or  if  there  be  any  other  powers  not  compre-
hended under  these  heads.  Of  all  these  the
existence  is  manifest  to  sense,  but  the  nature
is  occult ;  and  here  the  philosopher  has  an
ample  field.

What  is  necessary  for  the  conduct  of  our
animal  life,  the  bountiful  Author  of  Nature
hath  made  manifest  to  all  men.  But  there
are  many  other  choice  secrets  of  Nature,
the  discovery  of  which  enlarges  the  power
and  exalts  the  state  of  man.  These  are  left
to  be  discovered  by  the  proper  use  of  our
rational  powers.  They  are  hid,  not  that
they  may  be  always  concealed  from  human
knowledge,  but  that  we  may  be  excited  to
search  for  them.  This  is  the  proper  busi-
ness of  a  philosopher,  and  it  is  the  glory  of
a  man,  and  the  best  reward  of  his  labour,
to  discover  what  Nature  has  thus  con-
cealed. [257]


CHAPTER  XIX.

OF  MATTER  AND  OF  SPACE.

The  objects  of  sense  we  have  hitherto
considered  are  qualities.  But  qualities  must
have  a  subject.  We  give  the  names  of
matter,  material  substance,  and  bod;:,  to  the
subject  of  sensible  qualities  ;  and  it  may  be
asked  what  this  mat  er  is.

I  perceive  in  a  billiard  ball,  figure,  colour,
and  motion  ;  but  the  ball  is  not  figure,  nor
is  it  colour,  nor  motion,  nor  all  these  taken
together ;  it  is  something  that  has  figure,
and  colour,  and  motion.  This  is  a  dictate
of  nature,  and  the  belief  of  all  mankind.

As  to  the  nature  of  this  something,  I  am
afraid  we  can  give  little  account  of  it,  but
that  it  has  the  qualities  which  our  senses
discover.


But  how  do  we  know  that  they  are  qua-
lities, and  cannot  exist  without  a  subject  ?
I  confess  I  cannot  explain  how  we  know
that  they  cannot  exist  without  a  subject,
any  more  than  I  can  explain  how  we  know
that  they  exist.  We  have  the  information
of  nature  for  their  existence  ;  and  I  think
we  have  the  information  of  nature  that  they
are  qualities.

The  belief  that  figure,  motion,  and  colour
are  qualities,  and  require  a  subject,  must
either  be  a  judgment  of  nature,  or  it  must
be  discovered  by  reason,  or  it  must  be  a
prejudice  that  has  no  just  foundation.  There
are  philosophers  who  maintain  that  it  is  a
mere  prejudice  ;  that  a  body  is  nothing  but
a  collection  of  what  we  call  sensible  quali-
ties ;  and  that  they  neither  have  nor  need
any  subject.  This  is  the  opinion  of  Bishop
Berkeley  and  Mr  Hume;  and  they  were
led  to  it  by  finding  that  they  had  not  in
their  minds  any  idea  of  substance.  [258]
It  could  neither  be  an  idea  of  sensation  nor
of  reflection.

But  to  me  nothing  seems  more  absurd
than  that  there  should  be  extension  without
anything  extended,  or  motion  without  any-
thing moved  ;  yet  I  cannot  give  reasons  for
my  opinion,  because  it  seems  to  me  self-
evident,  and  an  immediate  dictate  of  my
nature.

And  that  it  is  the  belief  of  all  mankind,
appears  in  the  structure  of  all  languages ;
in  which  we  find  adjective  nouns  used  to
express  sensible  qualities.  It  is  well  known
that  every  adjective  in  language  must  belong
to  some  substantive  expressed  or  under-
stood— that  is,  every  quality  must  belong
to  some  subject.

Sensible  qualities  make  so  great  a  part  of
the  furniture  of  our  minds,  their  kinds  are
so  many,  and  their  number  so  great,  that,
if  prejudice,  and  not  nature,  teach  us  to
ascribe  them  all  to  a  subject,  it  must  have
a  great  work  to  perform,  which  cannot  be
accomplished  in  a  short  time,  nor  carried
on  to  the  same  pitch  in  every  individual.
We  should  find  not  individuals  only,  but
nations  and  ages,  differing  from  each  other
in  the  progress  which  this  prejudice  had
made  in  their  sentiments  ;  but  we  find  no
such  difference  among  men.  What  one  man
accounts  a  quality,  all  men  do,  and  ever  did.

It  seems,  therefore,  to  be  a  judgment  of
nature,  that  the  things  immediately  per-
ceived are  qualities,  which  must  belong  to
a  subject ;  and  all  the  information  that  our
senses  give  us  about  this  subject,  is,  that
it  is  that  to  which  such  qualities  belong.
From  this  it  is  evident,  that  our  notion  of
body  or  matter,  as  distinguished  from  its
qualities,  is  a  relative  notion;*  and  I  am


*  That  is— our  notion  of  absolute  body  is  relative.
This  is  incorrectly  expressed. We  can  know,  we  can

[257,  258]


P.  XIX.  ]


OF  MATTER  AND  OF  SPACE.


323


afraid  it  must  always  be  obscure  until  men
have  other  faculties. [259]

The  philosopher,  in  this,  seems  to  have
no  advantage  above  the  vulgar ;  for,  as
they  perceive  colour,  and  figure,  and  motion
by  their  senses  as  well  he  does,  and  both
are  equally  certain  that  there  is  a  subject
of  those  qualities,  so  the  notions  which
both  have  of  this  subject  are  equally  ob-
scure. When  the  philosopher  calls  it  a
substratum,  and  a  subject  of  inhesion,  those
learned  words  convey  no  meaning  but  what
every  man  understands  and  expresses,  by
saying,  in  common  language,  that  it  is  a
thing  extended,  and  solid,  and  movable.

The  relation  which  sensible  qualities  bear
to  their  subject — that  is,  to  body — is  not,
however,  so  dark  but  that  it  is  easily  dis-
tinguished from  all  other  relations.  Every
man  can  distinguish  it  from  the  relation
of  an  effect  to  its  cause ;  of  a  mean  to  its
end  ;  or  of  a  sign  to  the  thing  signified  by
it.

I  think  it  requires  some  ripeness  of  un-
derstanding to  distinguish  the  qualities  of  a
body  from  the  body.  Perhaps  this  dis-
tinction is  not  made  by  brutes,  nor  by  in-
fants ;  and  if  any  one  thinks  that  this  dis-
tinction is  not  made  by  our  senses,  but  by
some  other  power  of  the  mind,  I  will  not
dispute  this  point,  provided  it  be  granted
that  men,  when  their  faculties  are  ripe,
have  a  natural  conviction  that  sensible  qua-
lities cannot  exist  by  themselves  without
some  subject  to  which  they  belong.

I  think,  indeed,  that  some  of  the  determ-
inations we  form  concerning  matter  can-
not be  deduced  solely  from  the  testimony
of  sense,  but  must  be  referred  to  some  other
source.

There  seems  to  be  nothing  more  evident
than  that  all  bodies  must  consist  of  parts ;
and  that  every  part  of  a  body  is  a  body,  and
a  distinct  being,  which  may  exist  without  the
other  parts  ;  and  yet  I  apprehend  this  con-
clusion is  not  deduced  solely  from  the  testi-
mony of  sense :  for,  besides  that  it  is  a
necessary  truth,  and,  therefore,  no  object
of  sense,*  there  is  a  limit  beyond  which  we


conceive,  only  what  is  relative.  Our  knowledge  of
qualities  or  jihcenomena  is  necessarily  relative  ;  for
these  exist  only  as  they  exist  in  relation  to  our  facul-
ties. The  knowledge,  or  even  the  conception,  of  a
substance  in  itself,  and  apart  from  any  qualities  in
relation  to,  and  therefore  cognisable  or  conceivable
by,  our  minds,  involves  a  contradiction.  Of  such  we
can  form  only  a  negative  notion  ;  that  is,  we  can
merely  conceive  it  as  inconceivable.  But  to  call  this  ne-
gative notion  a  relative  notion,  is  wrong  ;  1°,  because
all  our  (positive)  notions  are  relative ;  and  '<s°,  because
this  is  itself  a  negative  notion — i.  e.,  no  notion  at  all —
simply  because  there  is  no  relation.  The  same  im-
proper application  of  the  term  relative  was  also  made
by  Reid  when  speaking  of  the  secondary  qualities. — H,
*  It  is  creditable  to  Reid  that  he  perceived  that
the  quality  of  necessity  is  the  criterion  which  distin-
guishes native  from  adventitious  notions  cr  judg-
ments. He  did  not,  however,  always  make  the  proper
use  of  it.  Leibnitz  has  the  honour  of  first  explicitly
enouncing  this  criterion,  and  Kant  of  first  fully  ap-
[259-261]


cannot  perceive  any  division  of  a  body.
The  parts  become  too  small  to  be  perceived
by  our  senses ;  but  we  cannot  believe  that
it  becomes  then  incapable  of  being  farther
divided,  or  that  such  division  would  make
it  not  to  be  a  body. [260]

We  carry  on  the  division  and  subdivision
in  our  thought  far  beyond  the  reach  of  our
senses,  and  we  can  find  no  end  to  it :  nay,
I  think  we  plainly  discern  that  there  can
be  no  limit  beyond  which  the  division  can-
not be  carried.

For,  if  there  be  any  limit  to  this  division,
one  of  two  things  must  necessarily  happen  :
either  we  have  come  by  division  to  a  body
which  is  extended,  but  has  no  parts,  and  is
absolutely  indivisible  ;  or  this  body  is  divi-
sible, but,  as  soon  as  it  is  divided,  it  becomes
no  body.  Both  these  positions  seem  to  me
absurd,  and  one  or  the  other  is  the  neces-
sary consequence  of  supposing  a  limit  to  the
divisibility  of  matter.

On  the  other  hand,  if  it  is  admitted  that
the  divisibility  of  matter  has  no  limit,  it
will  follow  that  no  body  can  be  called  one
individual  substance.  You  may  as  well
call  it  two,  or  twenty,  or  two  hundred.  For,
when  it  is  divided  into  parts,  every  part  is
a  being  or  substance  distinct  from  all  the
other  parts,  and  was  so  even  before  the  di-
vision. Any  one  part  may  continue  to
exist,  though  all  the  other  parts  were  an-
nihilated.

There  is,  indeed,  a  principle  long  re-
ceived as  an  axiom  in  metaphysics,  which
I  cannot  reconcile  to  the  divisibility  of  mat-
ter ;  it  is,  that  every  being  is  one,  omne  ens
est  iinum.  By  which,  I  suppose,  is  meant,
that  everything  that  exists  must  either  be
one  indivisible  being,  or  composed  of  a  de-
terminate number  of  indivisible  beings.
Thus,  an  army  may  be  divided  into  regi-
ments, a  regiment  into  companies,  and  a
company  into  men.  But  here  the  division
has  its  limit ;  for  you  cannot  divide  a  man
without  destroying  him,  because  he  is  an
individual;  and  everything,  according  to
this  axiom,  must  be  an  individual,  or  made
up  of  individuals. [261]

That  this  axiom  will  hold  with  regard  to
an  army,  and  with  regard  to  many  other
things,  must  be  granted  ;  but  I  require  the
evidence  of  its  being  applicable  to  all  beings
whatsoever.

Leibnitz,  conceiving  that  all  beings  must
have  this  metaphysical  unity,  was  by  this
led  to  maintain  that  matter,  and,  indeed,
the  whole  universe,  is  made  up  of  monads —
that  is,  simple  and  indivisible  substances.

Perhaps,  the  same  apprehension  might
lead  Boscovich  into  his  hypothesis,  which
seems  much  more  ingenious — to  wit,  that

plying  it  to  the  phenomena.  In  none  has  Kant  been
more  successful  than  in  this  under  consideration.—
H.

y  2


324


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


matter  is  composed  of  a  definite  number  of
mathematical  points,  endowed  with  certain
powers  of  attraction  and  repulsion.

The  divisibility  of  matter  without  any
limit,  seems  to  me  more  tenable  than  either
of  these  hypotheses ;  nor  do  I  lay  much
stress  upon  the  metaphysical  axiom,  con-
sidering its  origin.  Metaphysicians  thought
proper  to  make  the  attributes  common  to
all  beings  the  subject  of  a  science.  It
must  be  a  matter  of  some  difficulty  to  find
out  such  attributes  ;  and,  after  racking
their  invention,  they  have  specified  three —
to  wit,  Unity,  Verity,  and  Goodness  ;  and
these,  I  suppose,  have  been  invented  to
make  a  number,  rather  than  from  any  clear
evidence  of  their  being  universal.

There  are  other  determinations  concern-
ing matter,  which,  I  think,  are  not  solely
founded  upon  the  testimony  of  sense  :  such
as,  that  it  is  impossible  that  two  bodies
should  occupy  the  same  place  at  the  same
time  ;  or  that  the  same  body  should  be  in
different  places  at  the  same  time  ;  or  that
a  body  can  be  moved  from  one  place  to
another,  without  passing  through  the  inter-
mediate places,  either  in  a  straight  course,
or  by  some  circuit.  These  appear  to  be
necessary  truths,  and  therefore  cannot  be
conclusions  of  our  senses ;  for  our  senses
testify  only  what  is,  and  not  what  must  ne-
cessarily be.* [262]

We  are  next  to  consider  our  notion  of
Space.  It  may  be  observed  that,  although
space  be  not  perceived  by  any  of  our  senses
when  all  matter  is  removed,  yet,  when  we
perceive  any  of  the  primary  qualities,  space
presents  itself  as  a  necessary  concomitant  ;-f-
for  there  can  neither  be  extension  nor  mo-
tion, nor  figure  nor  division,  nor  cohesion
of  parts,  without  space.

There  are  only  two  of  our  senses  by  which
the  notion  of  space  enters  into  the  mind —
to  wit,  touch  and  sight.  If  we  suppose  a
man  to  have  neither  of  these  senses,  I  do
not  see  how  he  could  ever  have  any  concep-
tion of  space.:):  Supposing  him  to  have
both,  until  he  sees  or  feels  other  objects,
he  can  have  no  notion  of  space.  It  has
neither  colour  nor  figure  to  make  it  an
object  of  sight :  it  has  no  tangible  quality
to  make  it  an  object  of  touch.  But  other
objects  of  sight  and  touch  carry  the  notion
of  space  along  with  them  ;  and  not  the
notion  only,  but  the  belief  of  it ;  for  a  body
could  not  exist  if  there  was  no  space  to  con-
tain it.  It  could  not  move  if  there  was
no  space.  Its  situation,  its  distance,  and
every  relation  it  has  to  other  bodies,  suppose
space.

But,  though  the  notion  of  space  seems

*  See  last  note.— H.
t  See  above,  p.  12+,  note  +.— H.
X Vide  supra,  p. 123,  col.  b,  notes  *,  t  :  and  p.
126,  col  b,  note* H,


not  to  enter,  at  first,  into  the  mind,  until  it
is  introduced  by  the  proper  objects  of  sense,
yet,  being  once  introduced,  it  remains  in
our  conception  and  belief,  though  the  objects
which  introduced  it  be  removed.  We  see
no  absurdity  in  supposing  a  body  to  be  an-
nihilated ;  but  the  space  that  contained  it
remains ;  and,  to  suppose  that  annihilated,
seems  to  be  absurd.  It  is  so  much  allied
to  nothing  or  emptiness,  that  it  seems  in-
capable of  annihilation  or  of  creation.*

Space  not  only  retains  a  firm  hold  of  our
belief,  even  when  we  suppose  all  the  objects
that  introduced  it  to  be  annihilated,  but  it
swells  to  immensity.  We  can  set  no  limits
to  it,  either  of  extent  or  of  duration.  Hence
we  call  it  immense,  eternal,  immovable,
and  indestructible.  But  it  is  only  an  im-
mense, eternal,  immovable,  and  indestruc-
tible void  or  emptiness.  Perhaps  we  may
apply  to  it  what  the  Peripatetics  said  of
their  first  matter,  that,  whatever  it  is,  it  is
potentially  only,  not  actually. [2G3]

When  we  consider  parts  of  space  that
have  measure  and  figure,  there  is  nothing
we  understand  better,  nothing  about  which
we  can  reason  so  clearly,  and  to  so  great
extent.  Extension  and  figure  are  circum-
scribed parts  of  space,  and  are  the  object  of
geometry,  a  science  in  which  human  reason
has  the  most  ample  field,  and  can  go  deeper,
and  with  more  certainty,  than  in  any  other.
But,  when  we  attempt  to  comprehend  the
whole  of  space,  and  to  trace  it  to  its  origin,
we  lose  ourselves  in  the  search.  The  pro-
found speculations  of  ingenious  men  upon
this  subject  differ  so  widely  as  may  lead
us  to  suspect  that  the  line  of  human  under-
standing is  too  short  to  reach  the  bottom
of  it.

Bishop  Berkeley,  I  think,  was  the  first
who  observed  that  the  extension,  figure,  and
space,  of  which  we  speak  in  common  lan-
guage, and  of  which  geometry  treats,  are
originally  perceived  by  the  sense  of  touch
only ;  but  that  there  is  a  notion  of  exten-
sion, figure,  and  space,  which  may  be  got
by  sight,  without  any  aid  from  touch.  To
distinguish  these,  he  calls  the  first  tangible
extension,  tangible  figure,  and  tangible
space. The  last  he  calls  visible.

As  I  think  this  distinction  very  import-
ant in  the  philosophy  of  our  senses,  I  shall
adopt  the  names  used  by  the  inventor  to
express  it  ;  remembering  what  has  been
already  observed — that  space,  whether  tan-
gible or  visible,  is  not  so  properly  an  object
of  sense,  as  a  necessary  concomitant  of  the
objects  both  of  sight  and  touch. -f-


*  His  doctrine  of  space  is  an  example  of  Reid's
imperfect  application  of  the  criterion  of  necessity.
Seep.  123,  note  f-  If  seemingly  required  but  little  to
rise  to  Kant's  view  of  the  conception  of  space,  as  an
a  priori  or  native  form  of  thought.— H.

t  See  above,  p.  124,  note  f. — H.

[262,  263]


XIX.]


OF  MATTER  AND  OF  SPACE.


25


The  reader  may  likewise  be  pleased  to
attend  to  this,  that,  when  I  use  the  names  of
tangible  and  visible  space,  I  do  not  mean  to
adopt  Bishop  Berkeley's  opinion,  so  far  as
to  think  that  they  are  really  different  things,
and  altogether  unlike.  I  take  them  to  be
different  conceptions  of  the  same  thing ;
the  one  very  partial,  and  the  other  more
complete  ;  but  both  distinct  and  just,  as  far
as  they  reach. [2C4]

Thus,  when  I  see  a  spire  at  a  very  great
distance,  it  seems  like  the  point  of  a  bodkin  ;
there  appears  no  vane  at  the  top,  no  angles.
But,  when  I  view  the  same  object  at  a  small
distance,  I  see  a  huge  pyramid  of  several
angles,  with  a  vane  on  the  top.  Neither
of  these  apj  e.irances  is  fallacious.  Each  of
them  is  what  it  ought  to  be,  and  what  it
must  be,  from  such  an  object  seen  at  such
different  distances.  These  different  appear-
ances of  the  same  object  may  serve  to  illus-
trate the  different  conceptions  of  space,
according  as  they  are  drawn  from  the  in-
formation of  sight  alone,  or  as  they  are
drawn  from  the  additional  information  of
touch.

Our  sight  alone,  unaided  by  touch,  gives
a  very  partial  notion  of  space,  but  yet  a
distiuct  one.  When  it  is  considered  accord-
ing to  this  partial  notion,  I  call  it  visible
space.  The  sense  of  touch  gives  a  much
more  complete  notion  of  space  ;  and,  when
it  is  considered  according  to  this  notion,  I
call  it  tangible  space.  Perhaps  there  may
be  intelligent  beings  of  a  higher  order,  whose
conceptions  of  space  are  much  more  com-
plete than  those  we  have  from  both  senses.
Another  sense  added  to  those  of  sight  and
touch,  might,  for  what  I  know,  give  us  con-
ceptions of  space  as  different  from  those  we
can  now  attain  as  tangible  space  is  from
visible,  and  might  resolve  many  knotty
points  concerning  it,  which,  from  the  imper-
fection of  our  faculties,  we  cannot,  by  any
labour,  untie.

Berkeley  acknowledges  that  there  is  an
exact  correspondence  between  the  visible
figure  and  magnitude  of  objects,  and  the
tangible;  and  that  every  modification  of
the  one  has  a  modification  of  the  other  cor-
responding. He  acknowledges,  likewise,
that  Nature  has  established  such  a  con-
nection between  the  visible  figure  and  mag-
nitude of  an  object,  and  the  tangible,  that
we  learn  by  experience  to  know  the  tan-
gible figure  and  magnitude  from  the  visible.
And,  having  been  accustomed  to  do  so  from
infancy,  we  get  the  habit  of  doing  it  with
such  facility  and  quickness  that  we  think
we  see  the  tangible  figure,  magnitude,  and
distance  of  bodies,  when,  in  reality,  we  only
collect  those  tangible  qualities  from  the
corresponding  visible  qualities,  which  are
natural  signs  of  them. [265]

The  correspondence  and  connection  which
[L2iH-266]


Berkeley  shews  to  be  between  the  visible
figure  and  magnitude  of  objects,  and  their
tangible  figure  and  magnitude,  is  in  some
respects  very  similar  to  that  which  we  have
observed  between  our  sensations  and  the
primary  qualities  with  which  they  are  con-
nected. No  sooner  is  the  sensation  felt,
than  immediately  we  have  the  conception
and  belief  of  the  corresponding  quality.
We  give  no  attention  to  the  sensation ;  it
has  not  a  name ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  per-
suade us  that  there  was  any  such  thing.

In  like  manner,  no  sooner  is  the  visible
figure  and  magnitude  of  an  object  seen,  than
immediately  we  have  the  conception  and
belief  of  the  corresponding  tangible  figure
and  magnitude.  We  give  no  attention  to
the  visible  figure  and  magnitude.  It  is
immediately  forgot,  as  if  it  had  never  been
perceived  ;  and  it  has  no  name  in  common
language  ;  and,  indeed,  until  Berkeley
pointed  it  out  as  a  subject  of  speculation,
and  gave  it  a  name,  it  had  none  among
philosophers,  excepting  in  one  instance,
relating  to  the  heavenly  bodies,  which  are
beyond  the  reach  of  touch.  With  regard
to  them,  what  Berkeley  calls  visible  magni-
tude was,  by  astronomers,  cased  apparent
magnitude.

There  is  surely  an  apparent  magnitude,
and  an  apparent  figure  of  terrestrial  objects,
as  well  as  of  celestial ;  and  this  is  what
Berkeley  calls  their  visible  figure  and  mag-
nitude. But  this  was  never  made  an  object
of  thought  among  philosophers,  until  that
author  gave  it  a  name,  and  observed  the
correspondence  and  connection  between  it
and  tangible  magnitude  and  figure,  and  how
the  mind  gets  the  habit  of  passing  so  in-
stantaneously from  the  visible  figure  as  a
sign  to  the  tangible  figure  as  the  thing
signified  by  it,  that  the  first  is-  perfectly
forgot  as  if  it  had  never  been  perceived.
[26o]

Visible  figure,  extension,  and  space,  may
be  made  a  subject  of  mathematical  specula-
tion as  well  as  the  tangible.  In  the  visible,
we  find  two  dimensions  only ;  in  the  tan-
gible, three.  In  the  one,  magnitude  is  mea-
sured by  angles  ;  in  the  other,  by  lines.
Every  part  of  visible  space  bears  some  pro-
portion to  the  whole ;  but  tangible  space
being  immense,  any  part  of  it  bears  no  pro-
portion to  the  whole.

Such  differences  in  their  properties  led
Bishop  Berkeley  to  think  that  visible  and
tangible  magnitude  and  figure  are  things
totally  different  and  dissimilar,  and  cannot
both  belong  to  the  same  object.

And  upon  this  dissimilitude  is  grounded
one  of  the  strongest  arguments  by  which  his
system  is  supported.  For  it  may  be  said,
if  there  be  external  objects  which  have  a
real  extension  and  figure,  it  must  be  either
tangible  extension  and  figure,  or  visible,  or


326


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[_ESSJ


both.  *  The  last  appears  absurd ;  nor  was
it  ever  maintained  by  any  man,  that  the
same  object  has  two  kinds  of  extension  and
figure  totally  dissimilar.  There  is  then  only
one  of  the  two  really  in  the  object ;  and  the
other  must  be  ideal.  But  no  reason  can  be
assigned  why  the  perceptions  of  one  sense
should  be  real,  while  those  of  another  are
only  ideal ;  and  he  who  is  persuaded  that
the  objects  of  sight  are  ideas  only,  has
equal  reason  to  believe  so  of  the  objects  of
touch.

This  argument,  however,  loses  all  its
force,  if  it  be  true,  as  was  formerly  hinted,
that  visible  figure  and  extension  are  only  a
partial  conception,  and  the  tangible  figure
and  extension  a  more  complete  conception
of  that  f'gure  and  extension  which  is  really
in  the  object. -f [267]

It  has  been  proved  very  fully  by  Bishop
Berkeley,  that  sight  alone,  without  any  aid
from  the  informations  of  touch,  gives  us  no
perception,  nor  even  conception  of  the  dis-
tance of  any  object  from  the  eye.  But  he
was  not  aware  that  this  very  principle  over-
turns the  argument  for  his  system,  taken
from  the  difference  between  visible  and
tangible  extension  and  figure.  For,  sup-
posing external  objects  to  exist,  and  to  have
that  tangible  extension  and  figure  which  we
perceive,  it  follows  demonstrably,  from  the
principle  now  mentioned,  that  their  visible
extension  and  figure  must  be  just  what  we
see  it  to  be.

The  rules  of  perspective,  and  of  the  pro-
jection of  the  sphere,  which  is  a  branch  of
perspective,  are  demonstrable.  They  sup-
pose the  existence  of  external  objects,  which
have  a  tangible  extension  and  figure  ;  and,
upon  that  supposition,  they  demonstrate
what  must  be  the  visibleextension  and  figure
of  such  objects,  when  placed  in  such  a  posi-
tion and  at  such  a  distance.

Hence,  it  is  evident  that  the  visible  figure
and  extension  of  objects  is  so  far  from  being
incompatible  with  the  tangible,  that  the  first
is  a  necessary  consequence  from  the  last  in
beings  that  see  as  we  do.  The  correspond-
ence between  them  is  not  arbitrary,  like  that
between  words  and  the  thing  they  signify,  as
Berkeley  thought ;  but  it  results  necessarily
from  the  nature  of  the  two  senses  ;  and  this
correspondence  being  always  found  in  ex-
perience to  be  exactly  what  the  rules  of  per-
spective shew  that  it  ought  to  be  if  the  senses
give  true  information,  is  an  argument  of  the
truth  of  both.


*  Or  neither.  And  this  omitted  supposition  is  the
true.  For  neither  sight  nor  touch  give  us  full  and
accurate  information  in  regard  to  the  real  extension
and  figure  of  objects.  See  above  p.  lib",  notes  *j
and  p.  303,  col.  V>,  note  *.— H.

f  If  tangible  figure  and  extension  be  only  "  a  more
complete  conception,"  &c,  it  cannot  be  a  cognition
of  real  figure  and  extension.— II.


CHAPTER  XX.

OF  THE  EVIDENCE OF  SENSE, AND  OF  BELIEP
IN  GENERAL.

The  intention  of  nature  in  the  powers
which  we  call  the  external  senses,  is  evident.
They  are  intended  to  give  us  that  informa-
tion of  external  objects  which  the  Supreme
Being  saw  to  be  proper  for  us  in  our  pre-
sent state;  and  they  give  to  all  mankind
the  information  necessary  for  life,  without
reasoning,  without  any  art  or  investigation
on  our  part. [268]

The  most  uninstructed  peasant  has  as
distinct  a  conception  and  as  firm  a  belief
of  the  immediate  objects  of  his  senses,  as
the  greatest  philosopher  ;  and  with  this  he
rests  satisfied,  giving  himself  no  concern
how  he  came  by  this  conception  and  belief.
But  the  philosopher  is  impatient  to  know
how  his  conception  of  external  objects,  and
his  belief  of  their  existence,  is  produced.
This,  I  am  afraid,  is  hid  in  impenetrable
darkness.  But  where  there  is  no  know-
ledge, there  is  the  more  room  for  conjecture,
and  of  this,  philosophers  have  always  been
very  liberal.

The  dark  cave  and  shadows  of  Plato,*  the
species  of  Aristotle,-)*  the  films  of  Epicurus,
and  the  ideas  and  impressions  of  modern
phdosophers.*  are  the  productions  of  human
fancy,  successively  invented  to  satisfy  the
eager  desire  of  knowing  how  we  perceive
external  objects  ;  but  they  are  all  deficient
in  the  two  essential  characters  of  a  true  and
philosophical  account  of  the  pboenomenon  :
for  we  neither  have  any  evidence  of  their
existence,  nor,  if  they  did  exist,  can  it  be
shewn  how  they  would  produce  perception.

It  was  before  observed,  that  there  are
two  ingredients  in  this  operation  of  percep-
tion :  fix  st,  the  conception  or  notion  of  the
object ;  and,  secondly,  the  belief  of  its  pre-
sent existence. Both  are  unaccountable.

That  we  can  assign  no  adequate  cause  of
our  first  conceptions  of  things,  I  think,  is
now  acknowledged  by  the  most  enlightened
philosophers.  We  know  that  such  is  our
constitution,  that  in  certain  circumstances
we  have  certain  conceptions  ;  but  how  they
are  produced  we  know  no  more  than  how
we  ourselves  were  produced. [269]

When  we  have  got  the  conception  of  ex«
ternal  objects  by  our  senses,  we  can  ana-
lyse them  in  our  thought  into  their  sim-
ple ingredients ;  and  we  can  compound
those  ingredients  into  various  new  forms,
which  the  senses  never  presented. But  it  is


*  ?ee  p.  262,  col.  b,  note  *.— H.

\  See  Note  M.— H.

±  By  ideas,  as  repeatedly  noticed,  Reid  under
stands  always  certain  representative  entities  distinct
from  the  knowing  mind.

[267-2691


XX.]


OF  THE  EVIDENCE  OF  SENSE,  &c.


327


beyond  the  power  of  human  imagination  to
form  any  conception,  whose  simple  ingre-
dients have  not  been  furnished  by  nature  in  a
manner  unaccountable  to  our  understanding.

We  have  an  immediate  conception  of  the
operations  of  our  own  minds,  joined  with  a
a  belief  of  their  existence  ;  and  this  we  call
consciousness.  *  But  this  is  only  giving  a
name  to  this  source  of  our  knowledge.  It
is  not  a  discovery  of  its  cause.  In  like  man-
ner, we  have,  by  our  external  senses,  a
conception  of  external  objects,  joined  with  a
belief  of  their  existence ;  and  this  we  call
perception.  But  this  is  only  giving  a  name
to  another  source  of  our  knowledge,  without
discovering  its  cause.

We  know  that,  when  certain  impressions
are  made  upon  our  organs,  nerves,  and
brain,  certain  corresponding  sensations  are
felt,  and  certain  objects  are  both  conceived
and  believed  to  exist.  But  in  this  train
of  operations  nature  works  in  the  dark.
We  can  neither  discover  the  cause  of  any
one  of  them,  nor  any  necessary  connection
of  one  with  another  ;  and,  whether  they
are  connected  by  any  necessary  tie,  or  only
conjoined  in  our  constitution  by  the  will  of
heaven,  we  know  not.-)-

That  any  kind  of  impression  upon  a  body
should  be  the  efficient  cause  of  sensation,  ap-
pears very  absurd.  Nor  can  we  perceive
any  necessary  connection  between  sensation
and  the  conception  and  belief  of  an  external
object.  For  anything  we  can  discover,  we
might  have  been  so  framed  as  to  have  all
the  sensations  we  now  have  by  our  senses,
without  any  impressions  upon  our  organs,
and  without  any  conception  of  any  external
object.  For  anything  we  know,  we  might
have  been  so  made  as  to  perceive  external
objects,  without  any  impressions  on  bodily
organs,  and  without  any  of  those  sensa-
tions which  invariably  accompany  percep-
tion in  our  present  frame. [270]

If  our  conception  of  external  objects  be
unaccountable,  the  conviction  and  belief  of
their  existence,  which  we  get  by  our  senses,
is  no  less  so.±


*  Here  consciousness  is  made  to  consist  in  concep-
tion. l?ut,  as  Reid  could  hardly  mean  that  con-
sciousness conceives  {i.e.,  represents)  the  operations
about  which  it  is  conversant,  and  is  not  intuitively
cognisant  of  them,  it  would  seem  that  he  occasionally
employs  conception  for  knowledge.  This  is  of  im-
portance in  explaining  favourably  Reid's  use  of  the
word  Conception  in  relation  to  Perception.  But  then,
how  vague  and  vacillating  is  his  language! — H.

t  See  p.  257,  col.  b,  note  *.— H.

±  If  an  immediate  knowledge  of  external  things—
that  is,  a  consciousness  of  the  qualities  of  the  non-
ego — be  admitted,  the  Lelief  of  their  existence  follows
of  course.  On  this  supposition,  therefore,  such  a
belief  would  not  be  unaccountable  ;  for  it  would  be
accounted  for  by  the  fact  of  the  knowledge  in  which
it  would  necessarily  be  contained.  Our  belief,  in  this
case,  of  the  existence  of  external  objects,  would  not
be  more  inexplicable  than  our  belief  that  2  J- 2  =  4.
In  both  cases  it  would  be  sufficient  to  say,  we  believe
because  tve  know;  for  belief  is  only  unaccountable
when  it  is  not  the  consequent  or  concomitant  of
[270,271]


Belief,  assent,  conviction,  are  words
which  I  do  not  think  admit  of  logical  defin-
ition, because  the  operation  of  mind  sig-
nified by  them  is  perfectly  simple,  and  of
its  own  kind.  Nor  do  they  need  to  be  de-
fined, because  they  are  common  words,  and
well  understood.

Belief  must  have  an  object.  For  he
that  believes  must  believe  something ;  and
that  which  he  believes,  is  called  the  object
of  his  belief.  Of  this  object  of  his  belief,
he  must  have  some  conception,  clear  or  ob-
scure ;  for,  although  there  may  be  the  most
clear  and  distinct  conception  of  an  object
without  any  belief  of  its  existence,  there
can  be  no  belief  without  conception.*

Belief  is  always  expressed  in  language  by
a  proposition,  wherein  something  is  affirmed
or  denied.  This  is  the  form  of  speech
which  in  all  languages  is  appropriated  to
that  purpose,  and  without  belief  there  could
be  neither  affirmation  nor  denial,  nor  should
we  have  any  form  of  words  to  express
either.  Belief  admits  of  all  degrees,  from
the  slightest  suspicion  to  the  fullest  assur-
ance. These  things  are  so  evident  to
every  man  that  reflects,  that  it  would  be
abusing  the  reader's  patience  to  dwell  upon
them.

I  proceed  to  observe  that  there  are  many
operations  of  mind  in  which,  when  we
analyse  them  as  far  as  we  are  able,  we  find
belief  to  be  an  essential  ingredient.  A  man
cannot  be  conscious  of  his  own  thoughts,
without  believing  that  he  thinks.  He  can-
not perceive  an  object  of  sense,  without  be-
lieving that  it  exists.-]-  He  cannot  distinctly
remember  a  past  event,  without  believing
that  it  did  exist.  Belief  therefore  is  an
ingredient  in  consciousness,  in  perception,
and  in  remembrance. [271]

Not  only  in  most  of  our  intellectual  oper-
ations, but  in  many  of  the  active  princi-
ples of  the  human  mind,  belief  enters  as  an
ingredient.  Joy  and  sorrow,  hope  and
fear,  imply  a  belief  of  good  or  ill,  either  pre-
sent or  in  expectation.  Esteem,  gratitude,
pity,  and  resentment,  imply  a  belief  of  cer-
tain qualities  in  their  objects.  In  every
action  that  is  done  for  an  end,  there  must
be  a  belief  of  its  tendency  to  that  end.  So
large  a  share  has  belief  in  our  intellectual


knowledge.  By  this,  however,  I  do  not,  of  course,
mean  to  say  that  knowledge  is  not  in  itself  marvel-
lous and  unaccountable.  This  statement  of  Keid
again  favours  the  opinion  that  his  doctrine  of  percep-
tion is  not  really  immediate.— H.

*  Is  conception  here  equivalent  to  knowledge  or  to
thouaht?—  H.

t  Mr  Stewart  (Elem.  I.,  ch.iii.,  p.  146,  and  Essays,
II.,  ch.  ii.,  p.  79,  sq.)  proposes  a  supplement  to  this
doctrine  of  Keid,  in  order  to  explain  why  we  believe
in  the  existence  of  the  qualities  of  external  objects
when  they  are  not  the  objects  of  our  perception.
This  belief  he  holds  to  be  the  result  of  experience,  in
combination  with  an  original  principle  ot  our  consti-
tution, whereby  we  ate  determined  to  believe  in  the
permanence  of  the  laws  of  nature.—  H


328


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  II.


operations,  in  our  active  principles,  and  in
our  actions  themselves,  that,  as  faith  in
things  divine  is  represented  as  the  main
spring  in  the  life  of  a  Christian,  so  belief  in
general  is  the  main  spring  in  the  life  of  aman.

That  men  often  believe  what  there  is  no
just  ground  to  believe,  and  thereby  are  led
into  hurtful  errors,  is  too  evident  to  be
denied.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  that  there
are  just  grounds  of  belief  can  as  little  be
doubted  by  any  man  who  is  not  a  perfect
sceptic.

We  give  the  name  of  evidence  to  what-
ever is  a  ground  of  belief.  To  believe  with-
out evidence  is  a  weakness  which  every
man  is  concerned  to  avoid,  and  which  every
man  wishes  to  avoid.  Nor  is  it  in  a  man's
power  to  believe  anything  longer  than  he
thinks  he  has  evidence.

What  this  evidence  is,  is  more  easily  felt
than  described.  Those  who  never  reflected
upon  its  nature,  feel  its  influence  in  govern-
ing their  belief.  It  is  the  business  of  the
logician  to  explain  its  nature,  and  to  dis-
tinguish its  various  kinds  and  degrees  ;  but
every  man  of  understanding  can  judge  of  it,
and  commonly  judges  right,  when  the  evi-
dence is  fairly  laid  before  him,  and  his
mind  is  free  from  prejudice.  A  man  who
knows  nothing  of  the  theory  of  vision  may
have  a  good  eye;  and  a  man  who  never
speculated  about  evidence  in  the  abstract
may  have  a  good  judgment. [272]

The  common  occasions  of  life  lead  us  to
distinguish  evidence  into  different  kinds,  to
which  we  give  names  that  are  well  under-
stood ;  such  as  the  evidence  of  sense,  the
evidence  of  memory,  the  evidence  of  con-
sciousness, the  evidence  of  testimony,  the
evidence  of  axioms,  the  evidence  of  reason-
ing. All  men  of  common  understanding
agree  that  each  of  these  kinds  of  evidence
may  afford  just  ground  of  belief,  and  they
agree  very  generally  in  the  circumstances
that  strengthen  or  weaken  them.

Philosophers  have  endeavoured,  by  ana-
lysing the  different  sorts  of  evidence,  to
find  out  some  common  nature  wherein  they
all  agree,  and  thereby  to  reduce  them  all
to  one.  This  was  the  aim  of  the  school-
men in  their  intricate  disputes  about  the
criterion  of  truth.  Des  Cartes  placed  this
criterion  of  truth  in  clear  and  distinct  per-
ception, and  laid  it  down  as  a  maxim,  that
whatever  we  clearly  and  distinctly  perceive
to  be  true,  is  true ;  but  it  is  difficult  to
know  what  he  understands  by  clear  and
distinct  perception  in  this  maxim.  Mr
Locke  placed  it  in  a  perception  of  the  agree-
ment or  disagreement  of  our  ideas,  which
perception  is  immediate  in  intuitive  know-
ledge, and  by  the  intervention  of  other  ideas
in  reasoning.

I  confess  that,  although  I  have,  as  I
think, a distinct notion of  the different


kinds  of  evidence  above-mentioned,  and,
perhaps,  of  some  others,  which  it  is  unne-
cessary here  to  enumerate,  yet  I  am  not
able  to  find  any  common  nature  to  which
they  may  all  be  reduced.  They  seem  to
me  to  agree  only  in  this,  that  they  are  all
fitted  by  Nature  to  produce  belief  in  the
human  mind,  some  of  them  in  the  highest
degree,  which  we  call  certainty,  others  in
various  degrees  according  to  circumstances.

I  shall  take  it  for  granted  that  the  evi-
dence of  sense,  when  the  proper  circum-
stances concur,  is  good  evidence,  and  a  just
ground  of  belief.  My  intention  in  this
place  is  only  to  compare  it  with  the  other
kinds  that  have  been  mentioned,  that  we
may  judge  whether  it  be  reducible  to  any  of
them,  or  of  a  nature  peculiar  to  itself.  [273]

First.,  It  seems  to  be  quite  different  from
the  evidence  of  reasoning.  All  good  evi-
dence is  commonly  called  reasonable  evi-
dence, and  very  justly,  because  it  ought  to
govern  our  belief  as  reasonable  creatures.
And,  according  to  this  meaning,  I  think  the
evidence  of  sense  no  less  reasonable  than
that  of  demonstration.*  If  Nature  give
us  information  of  things  that  concern  us,
by  other  means  than  by  reasoning,  reason
itself  will  direct  us  to  receive  that  inform-
ation with  thankfulness,  and  to  make  the
best  use  of  it.

But,  when  we  speak  of  the  evidence  of
reasoning  as  a  particular  kind  of  evidence,
it  means  the  evidence  of  propositions  that
are  inferred  by  reasoning,  from  propositions
already  known  and  believed.  Thus,  the
evidence  of  the  fifth  proposition  of  the
first  book  of  Euclid's  Elements  consists  in
this,  That  it  is  shewn  to  be  the  necessary
consequence  of  the  axioms,  and  of  the  pre-
ceding propositions.  In  all  reasoning,  there
must  be  one  or  more  premises,  and  a  con-
clusion drawn  from  them.  And  the  pre-
mises are  called  the  reason  why  we  must
believe  the  conclusion  which  we  see  to  fol-
low from  them.

That  the  evidence  of  sense  is  of  a  differ-
ent kind,  needs  little  proof.  No  man  seeks
a  reason  for  believing  what  he  sees  or  feels  ;
and,  if  he  did,  it  would  be  difficult  to  find
one.  But,  though  he  can  give  no  reason
for  believing  his  senses,  his  belief  remains
as  firm  as  if  it  were  grounded  on  demon-
stration.

Many  eminent  philosophers,  thinking  it
unreasonable  to  believe  when  they  could  not
shew  a  reason,  have  laboured  to  furnish  us
with  reasons  for  believing  our  senses  ;  but
their  reasons  are  very  insufficient,  and
will  not  bear  examination. Other  philoso-

*  7jv;tiiv  Xoyov  kqivTizs  rr,y  et'io-Bytriv,  ccpptusict  ris  tfi
Sictvoioif- — A?"  tOtle.  YleQ/rixiiv  ob  5£~  xotvTa.  ton  Zicc
tmv  Xoycav,  ccXKoc  toWclxis  f&c&Wov  toi;  tpxivof&svoi;.—
Id.  Trf  at)ertir,tru  uciXXoy  *?  tu  Xoyu  sr*5"£UrE0»*  xa.)  te7;
Xoyois  sk»  oueXeycCfAtvet  itismCun  rot;'  tpatvouivoif.—
Id. 'H  a.'ic-0y,7ic  inrKUn  E£t/ 5yv«ii/v. — Id H.

[_272,  273 J


XX.]]


OF  THE  EVIDENCE  OF  SKNSE,  &c.


329


pliers  have  shewn  very  clearly  the  fallacy
of  these  reasons,  and  have,  as  they  imagine,
discovered  invincible  reasons  against  this  be-
lief ;  but  they  have  never  been  able  either
to  shake  it  in  themselves,  or  to  convince
others.  [274]  The  statesman  continues  to
plod,  the  soldier  to  fight,  and  the  merchant
to  export  and  import,  without  being  in  the
least  moved  by  the  demonstrations  that
have  been  offered  of  the  non-existence  of
those  things  about  which  they  are  so  seri-
ously employed.  And  a  man  may  as  soon,
by  reasoning,  pull  the  moon  out  of  her  orbit,
as  destroy  the  belief  of  the  objects  of  sense.
Shall  we  say,  then,  that  the  evidence
of  sense  is  the  same  with  that  of  axioms,
or  self-evident  truths  ?  I  answer,  First,
That,  all  modern  philosophers  seem  to  agree
that  the  existence  of  the  objects  of  sense
is  not  self-evident,  because  some  of  them
have  endeavoured  to  prove  it  by  subtle  rea-
soning, others  to  refute  it.  Neither  of
these  can  consider  it  as  self-evident.

Secondly,  I  would  observe  that  the  word
axiom  is  taken  by  philosophers  in  such  a
sense  as  that  the  existence  of  the  objects
of  sense  cannot,  with  propriety,  be  called
an  axiom.  They  give  the  name  of  axiom
only  to  self-evident  truths,  that  are  neces-
sary, and  are  not  limited  to  time  and  place,
but  must  be  true  at  all  times  and  in  all
places.  The  truths  attested  by  our  senses
are  not  of  this  kind  ;  they  are  contingent,
and  limited  to  time  and  place.

Thus,  that  one  is  the  half  of  two,  is  an
axiom.  It  is  equally  true  at  all  times  and
in  all  places.  We  perceive,  by  attending
to  the  proposition  itself,  that  it  cannot  but
be  true  ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  called  an  eter-
nal, necessary,  and  immutable  truth.  That
there  is  at  present  a  chair  on  my  right  hand,
and  another  on  my  left,  is  a  truth  attested
by  my  senses  ;  but  it  is  not  necessary,  nor
eternal,  nor  immutable.  It  may  not  be
true  next  minute  ;  and,  therefore,  to  call  it
an  axiom  would,  I  apprehend,  be  to  deviate
from  the  common  use  of  the  word.  [275]
Thirdly,  If  the  word  axiom  be  put  to
signify  every  truth  which  is  known  imme-
diately, without  being  deduced  from  any
antecedent  truth,  then  the  existence  of  the
objects  of  sense  may  be  called  an  axiom  ;
for  my  senses  give  me  as  immediate  con-
viction of  what  they  testify,  as  my  under-
standing gives  of  what  is  commonly  called
an  axiom.

There  is,  no  doubt,  an  analogy  between
the  evidence  of  sense  and  the  evidence  of
testimony.  Hence,  we  find,  in  all  lan-
guages, the  analogical  expressions  of  the
testimony  of  sense,  of  giving  credit  to  our
senses,  and  the  like.  But  there  is  a  real
difference  between  the  two,  as  well  as  a
similitude.  In  believing  upon  testimony,
ue  rely  upon  the  authority  of  a  person  who
['27  4-276]


testifies  ;  but  we  have  no  such  authority  for
believing  our  senses.

Shall  we  say,  then,  that  this  belief  is  the
inspiration  of  the  Almighty  ?  I  think  this
may  be  said  in  a  good  sense  ;  for  I  take  it
to  be  the  immediate  effect  of  our  constitu-
tion, which  is  the  work  of  the  Almighty.
But,  if  inspiration  be  understood  to  imply
a  persuasion  of  its  coming  from  God,  our
belief  of  the  objects  of  sense  is  not  inspira-
tion ;  for  a  man  would  believe  his  senses
though  he  had  no  notion  of  a  Deity.  He
who  is  persuaded  that  he  is  the  workman-
ship of  God,  and  that  it  is  a  part  of  his
constitution  to  believe  his  senses,  may
think  that  a  good  reason  to  confirm  his
belief.  But  he  had  the  belief  before  he  could
give  this  or  any  other  reason  for  it.

If  we  compare  the  evidence  of  sense  with
that  of  memory,  we  find  a  great  resem-
blance, but  still  some  difference.  I  remem-
ber distinctly  to  have  dined  yesterday  with
such  a  company.  What  is  the  meaning  of
this  ?  It  is,  that  I  have  a  distinct  con-
ception and  firm  belief  of  this  past  event ;
not  by  reasoning,  not  by  testimony,  but
immediately  from  my  constitution.  And  I
give  the  name  of  memory  to  that  part  of
my  constitution  by  which  I  have  this  kind
of  conviction  of  past  events. [276]

I  see  a  chair  on  my  right  hand.  What
is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  It  is,  that  I  have,
by  my  constitution,  a  distinct  conception
and  firm  belief  of  the  present  existence  of
the  chair  in  such  a  place  and  in  such  a
position  ;  and  I  give  the  name  of  seeing  to
that  part  of  my  constitution  by  which  I
have  this  immediate  conviction.  The  two
operations  a.uree  in  the  immediate  convic-
tion which  they  give.  They  agree  in  this
also,  that  the  things  believed  are  not
necessary,  but  contingent,  and  limited  to
time  and  place.  But  they  differ  in  two
respects  : — First,  That  memory  has  some-
thing for  its  object  that  did  exist  in  time
past ;  but  the  object  of  sight,  and  of  all  the
senses,  must  be  something  which  exists  at
present ; — and,  Secondly,  That  I  see  by  my
eyes,  and  only  when  they  are  directed  to
the  object,  and  when  it  is  illuminated.  But
my  memory  is  not  limited  by  any  bodily
organ  that  I  know,  nor  by  light  and  dark-
ness, though  it  has  its  limitations  of  another
kind.*

These  differences  are  obvious  to  all  men,
and  very  reasonably  lead  them  to  consider
seeing  and  remembering  as  operations  spe-
cifically different.  But  the  nature  of  the
evidence  they  give,  has  a  great  resemblance.

*  There  is  a  more  important  difference  than  these
omitted.  In  memory,  we  cannot  possibly  be  con-
scious or  immediately  cognisant  of  any  object  beyond
the  modifications  of  "the  ego  itself.  In  perception,  (if
an  immediate  perception  be  allowed,)  we  must  be
conscious,  or  immediately  cognisant,  of  scm°  pheno-
menon of  the  non-ego. —  H.


330


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  n.


A  like  difference  and  a  like  resemblance
there  is  between  the  evidence  of  sense  and
that  of  consciousness,  which  I  leave  the
reader  to  trace.

As  to  the  opinion  that  evidence  consists
in  a  perception  of  the  agreement  or  dis-
agreement of  ideas,  we  may  have  occasion
to  consider  it  more  particularly  in  another
place.  Here  I  only  observe,  that,  when
taken  in  the  most  favourable  sense,  it  may
be  applied  with  propriety  to  the  evidence  of
reasoning,  and  to  the  evidence  of  some
axioms.  But  I  cannot  see  how,  in  any
sense,  it  can  be  applied  to  the  evidence  of
consciousness,  to  the  evidence  of  memory,
or  to  that  of  the  senses.

When  I  compare  the  different  kinds  of
evidence  above-mentioned,  I  confess,  after
all,  that  the  evidence  of  reasoning,  and  that
of  some  necessary  and  self-evident  truths,
seems  to  be  the  least  mysterious  and  the
most  perfectly  comprehended ;  and  there-
fore I  do  not  think  it  strange  that  philoso-
phers should  have  endeavoured  to  reduce  all
kinds  of  evidence  to  these. [277]

When  I  see  a  proposition  to  be  self-evi-
dent and  necessary,  and  that  the  subject  is
plainly  included  in  the  predicate,  there  seems
to  be  nothing  more  that  I  can  desire  in  order
to  understand  why  I  believe  it.  And  when
I  see  a  consequence  that  necessarily  follows
from  one  or  more  self-evident  propositions,  I
want  nothing  more  with  regard  to  my  belief
of  that  consequence.  The  light  of  truth  so
fills  my  mind  in  these  cases,  that  I  can
neither  conceive  nor  desire  anything  more
satisfying.

On  the  other  hand,  when  I  remember  dis-
tinctly a  past  event,  or  see  an  object  before
my  eyes,  this  commands  my  belief  no  less
than  an  axiom.  But  when,  as  a  philosopher,
I  reflect  upon  this  belief,  and  want  to  trace  it
to  its  origin,  I  am  not  able  to  resolve  it  into
necessary  and  self-evident  axioms,  or  con-
clusions that  are  necessarily  consequent
upon  them.  I  seem  to  want  that  evidence
which  I  can  best  comprehend,  and  which
gives  perfect  satisfaction  to  an  inquisitive
mind  ;  yet  it  is  ridiculous  to  doubt ;  and  I
find  it  is  not  in  my  power.  An  attempt  to
throw  off  this  belief  is  like  an  attempt  to  fly,
equally  ridiculous  and  impracticable.

To  a  philosopher,  who  has  been  accus-
tomed to  think  that  the  treasure  of  his  know-
ledge is  the  acquisition  of  that  reasoning
power  of  which  he  boasts,  it  is  no  doubt
humiliating  to  find  that  his  reason  can  lay  no
claim  to  the  greater  part  of  it.

By  his  reason,  he  can  discover  certain
abstract  and  necessary  relations  of  things  ;
but  his  knowledge  of  what  really  exists,  or
did  exist,  comes  by  another  channel,  which
is  open  to  those  who  cannot  reason.  He  is
led  to  it  in  the  dark,  and  knows  not  how  he
came  by  it. [278]


It  is  no  wonder  that  the  pride  of  philo-
sophy should  lead  some  to  invent  vain
theories  in  order  to  account  for  this  know-
ledge ;  and  others,  who  see  this  to  be  im-
practicable, to  spurn  at  a  knowledge  they
cannot  account  for,  and  vainly  attempt  to
throw  it  off  as  a  reproach  to  their  under-
standing. But  the  wise  and  the  humble
will  receive  it  as  the  gift  of  Heaven,  and
endeavour  to  make  the  best  use  of  it.


CHAPTER  XXI.

OF  THE  IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  SENSES.

Our  senses  may  be  considered  in  two
views :  first,  As  they  afford  us  agreeable
sensations,  or  subject  us  to  such  as  are  dis-
agreeable ;  and,  secondly,  As  they  give  us
information  of  things  that  concern  us.

In  the  first  view,  they  neither  require  nor
admit  of  improvement.  Both  the  painful
and  the  agreeable  sensations  of  our  external
senses  are  given  by  nature  for  certain  ends  ;
and  they  are  given  in  that  degree  which  is
the  most  proper  for  their  end.  By  dimin-
ishing or  increasing  them,  we  should  not
mend,  but  mar  the  work  of  Nature.

Bodily  pains  are  indications  of  some  dis-
order or  hurt  of  the  body,  and  admonitions
to  use  the  best  means  in  our  power  to  pre-
vent or  remove  their  causes.  As  far  as  this
can  be  done  by  temperance,  exercise,  regi-
men, or  the  skill  of  the  physician,  every  man
hath  sufficient  inducement  to  do  it.

When  pain  cannot  be  prevented  or  re-
moved, it  is  greatly  alleviated  by  patience
and  fortitude  of  mind.  While  the  mind  is
superior  to  pain,  the  man  is  not  unhappy,
though  he  may  be  exercised.  It  leaves  no
sting  behind  it,  but  rather  matter  of  triumph
and  agreeable  reflection,  when  borne  pro-
perly, and  in  a  good  cause.  [279]  The
Canadians  have  taught  us  that  even  savages
may  acquire  a  superiority  to  the  most  ex-
cruciating pains ;  and,  in  every  region  of
the  earth,  instances  will  be  found,  where  a
sense  of  duty,  of  honour,  or  even  of  worldly
interest,  have  triumphed  over  it.

It  is  evident  that  nature  intended  for  man,
in  his  present  state,  a  life  of  labour  and
toil,  wherein  he  may  be  occasionally  exposed
to  pain  and  danger  ;  and  the  happiest  man
is  not  he  who  has  felt  least  of  those  evils,
but  he  whose  mind  is  fitted  to  bear  them  by
real  magnanimity.

Our  active  and  perceptive  powers  are
improved  and  perfected  by  use  and  exercise.
This  is  the  constitution  of  nature.  But,
with  regard  to  the  agreeable  and  disagree-
able sensations  we  have  by  our  senses,  the
very  contrary  is  an  established  constitution
of  nature — the  frequent  repetition  of  them
weakens  their  force.  Sensations  at  first  very
[277-279]


chap,  xxi.] OF  THE  IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  SENSES.


331


disagreeable,  by  use  become  tolerable,  and
at  last  perfectly  indifferent.  And  those  that
are  at  first  very  agreeable,  by  frequent  re-
petition become  insipid,  and  at  last,  per-
haps, give  disgust.  Nature  has  set  limits
to  the  pleasures  of  sense,  which  we  cannot
pass  ;  and  all  studied  gratifications  of  them,
as  it  is  mean  and  unworthy  of  a  man,  so  it
is  foolish  and  fruitless.

The  man  who,  in  eating  and  drinking,
and  in  other  gratifications  of  sense,  obeys
the  calls  of  Nature,  without  affecting  deli-
cacies and  refinements,  has  all  the  enjoy-
ment that  the  senses  can  afford.  If  one
could,  by  a  soft  and  luxurious  life,  acquire
a  more  delicate  sensibility  to  pleasure,  it
must  be  at  the  expense  of  a  like  sensibility
to  pain,  from  which  he  can  never  promise
exemption,  and  at  the  expense  of  cherishing
many  diseases  which  produce  pain.

The  improvement  of  our  external  senses,
as  they  are  the  means  of  giving  us  informa-
tion, is  a  subject  more  worthy  of  our  atten-
tion ;  for,  although  they  are  not  the  noblest
and  most  exalted  powers  of  our  nature,  yet
they  are  not  the  least  useful.  [280]  All
that  we  know,  or  can  know,  of  the  material
world,  must  be  grounded  upon  their  inform-
ation ;  and  the  philosopher,  as  well  as  the
day-labourer,  must  be  indebted  to  them  for
the  largest  part  of  his  knowledge.

Some  of  our  perceptions  by  the  senses
may  be  called  original,  because  they  require
no  previous  experience  or  learning ;  but
the  far  greatest  part  is  acquired,  and  the
fruit  of  experience.

Three  of  our  senses — to  wit,  smell,  taste,
and  hearing — originally  give  us  only  certain
sensations,  and  a  conviction  that  these  sensa-
tions are  occasioned  by  some  external  object.
We  give  a  name  to  that  quality  of  the  ob-
ject by  which  it  is  fitted  to  produce  such  a
sensation,  and  connect  that  quality  with  the
object,  and  with  its  other  qualities.

Thus  we  learn,  that  a  certain  sensation
of  smell  is  produced  by  a  rose ;  and  that
quality  in  the  rose,  by  which  it  is  fitted  to
produce  this  sensation,  we  call  the  smell  of
the  rose.  Here  it  is  evident  that  the  sensa-
tion is  original.  The  perception  that  the
rose  has  that  quality  which  we  call  its
smell,  is  acquired.  In  like  manner,  we
learn  all  those  qualities  in  bodies  which  we
call  their  smell,  their  taste,  their  sound.
These  are  all  secondary  qualities,  and  we
give  the  same  name  to  them  which  we  give
to  the  sensations  they  produce;  not  from
any  similitude  between  the  sensation  and
the  quality  of  the  same  name,  but  because
the  quality  is  signified  to  us  by  the  sensation
as  its  sign,  and  because  our  senses  give  us
no  other  knowledge  of  the  quality  but  that
it  is  fit  to  produce  such  a  sensation.

By  the  other  two  senses,  we  have  much
more  ample  information.  By  sight,  we
T2S0-282]


learn  to  distinguish  objects  by  their  colour,
in  the  same  manner  as  by  their  sound,
taste,  and  smell.  By  this  sense,  we  perceive
visible  objects  to  have  extension  in  two
dimensions,  to  have  visible  figure  and
magnitude,  and  a  certain  angular  distance
from  one  another.  These,  I  conceive,  are
the  original  perceptions  of  sight.* [281]

By  touch,  we  not  only  perceive  the  tem-
perature of  bodies  as  to  heat  and  cold,-J-
which  are  secondary  qualities,  but  we  per-
ceive originally  their  three  dimensions,  their
tangible  figure  and  magnitude,  their  linear
distance  from  one  another,  their  hardness,
softness,  or  fluidity.  These  qualities  we
originally  perceive  by  touch  only  ;  but,  by
experience,  we  learn  to  perceive  all  or  most
of  them  by  sight.

We  learn  to  perceive,  by  one  sense,  what
originally  could  have  been  perceived  only
by  another,  by  finding  a  connection  between
the  objects  of  the  different  senses.  Hence
the  original  perceptions,  or  the  sensations
of  one  sense  become  signs  of  whatever  has
always  been  found  connected  with  them ;
and  from  the  sign,  the  mind  passes  imme-
diately to  the  conception  and  belief  of  the
thing  signified.  And,  although  the  connec-
tion in  the  mind  between  the  sign  and  the
thing  signified  by  it,  be  the  effect  of  custom,
this  custom  becomes  a  second  nature,  and
it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  it  from  the  ori-
ginal power  of  perception.

Thus,  if  a  sphere  of  one  uniform  colour
be  set  before  me,  I  perceive  evidently  by  my
eye  its  spherical  figure  and  its  three  dimen-
sions. All  the  world  will  acknowledge
that,  by  sight  only,  without  touching  it,  I
may  be  certain  that  it  is  a  sphere  ;  yet  it
is  no  less  certain  that,  by  the  original  power
of  sight,  I  could  not  perceive  it  to  be  a
sphere,  and  to  have  three  dimensions.  The
eye  originally  could  only  perceive  two  di-
mensions, and  a  gradual  variation  of  colour
on  the  different  sides  of  the  object.

It  is  experience  that  teaches  me  that  the
variation  of  colour  is  an  effect  of  spherical
convexity,  and  of  the  distribution  of  light
and  shade.  But  so  rapid  is  the  progress  of
the  thought,  from  the  effect  to  the  cause,
that  we  attend  only  to  the  last,  and  can
hardly  be  persuaded  that  we  do  not  imme-
diately see  the  three  dimensions  of  the
sphere. [282]

Nay,  it  may  be  observed,  that,  in  this
case,  the  acquired  perception  in  a  manner
effaces  the  original  one ;  for  the  sphere  is
seen  to  be  of  one  uniform  colour,  though
originally  there  would  have  appeared  a
gradual  variation  of  colour. But  that  ap-


*  See  above,  p.  123,  col.  b,  note  f,  and  p.  1S5,  col.  a,
note  *.

•}  Whether  heat,  cold,  &c,  be  objects  of  touch  or
of  a  different  sense,  it  is  not  here  the  place  to  inquire.
-H.


332


ON. THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[ESSAY II.


parent  variation  we  learn  to  interpret  as
the  effect  of  light  and  shade  falling  upon  a
sphere  of  one  uniform  colour.

A  sphere  may  be  painted  upon  a  plane,
so  exactly,  as  to  be  taken  for  a  real  sphere
when  the  eye  is  at  a  proper  distance  and
in  the  proper  point  of  view.  We  say  in
this  case,  that  the  eye  is  deceived,  that  the
appearance  is  fallacious.  But  there  is  no
fallacy  in  the  original  perception,  but  only
in  that  which  is  acquired  by  custom.  The
variation  of  colour,  exhibited  to  the  eye  by
the  painter's  art,  is  the  same  which  nature
exhibits  by  the  different  degrees  of  light
falling  upon  the  convex  surface  of  a  sphere.

In  perception,  whether  original  or  ac-
quired, there  is  something  which  may  be
called  the  sign,  and  something  which  is
signified  to  us,  or  brought  to  our  knowledge
by  that  sign.

In  original  perception,  the  signs  are  the
various  sensations  which  are  produced  by
the  impressions  made  upon  our  organs.  The
things  signified,  are  the  objects  perceived
in  consequence  of  those  sensations,  by  the
original  constitution  of  our  nature.

Thus,  when  I  grasp  an  ivory  ball  in  my
hand,  I  have  a  certain  sensation  of  touch.
Although  this  sensation  be  in  the  mind  and
have  no  similitude  to  anything  material,
yet,  by  the  laws  of  my  constitution,  it  is
immediately  followed  by  the  conception
and  belief,  that  there  is  in  my  hand  a  hard
smooth  body  of  a  spherical  figure,  and  about
an  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter.  This  belief
is  grounded  neither  upon  reasoning,  nor
upon  experience  ;  it  is  the  immediate  effect
of  my  constitution,  and  this  I  call  original
perception.* [283]

In  acquired  perception,  the  sign  may  be
either  a  sensation,  or  something  originally
perceived.  The  thing  signified,  is  something
which,  by  experience,  has  been  found  con-
nected with  that  sign.

Thus,  when  the  ivory  ball  is  placed  be-
fore my  eye,  I  perceive  by  sight  what  I
before  perceived  by  touch,  that  the  ball  is
smooth,  spherical,  of  such  a  diameter,  and
at  such  a  distance  from  the  eye ;  and  to
this  is  added  the  perception  of  its  colour.
All  these  things  I  perceive  by  sight,  dis-
tinctly and  with  certainty.  Yet  it  is  cer-
tain from  principles  of  philosophy,  that,  if  I
had  not  been  accustomed  to  compare  the
informations  of  sight  with  those  of  touch,
I  should  not  have  perceived  these  things
by  sight.  I  should  have  perceived  a  circu-
lar object,  having  its  colour  gradually  more
faint  towards  the  shaded  side.  But  I  should
not  have  perceived  it  to  have  three  dimen-
sions, to  be  spherical,  to  be  of  such  a  linear
magnitude,  and  at  such  a  distance  from  the
eye. That  these  last  mentioned  are  not

*  See  above,  p.  ll\,  et-alibi.—H.


original  perceptions  of  sight,  but  acquired
by  experience,  is  sufficiently  evident  from
the  principles  of  optics,  and  from  the  art  of
painters,  in  painting  objects  of  three  dimen-
sions, upon  a  plane  which  has  only  two.
And  it  has  been  put  beyond  all  doubt,  by
observations  recorded  of  several  persons,
who  having,  by  cataracts  in  their  eyes,
been  deprived  of  sight  from  their  infancy,
have  been  couched  and  made  to  see,  after
they  came  to  years  of  understanding.  *

Those  who  have  had  their  eyesight  from
infancy,  acquire  such  perceptions  so  early
that  they  cannot  recollect  the  time  when
they  had  them  not,  and  therefore  make  no
distinction  between  them  and  their  original
perceptions  ;  nor  can  they  be  easily  per-
suaded that  there  is  any  just  foundation
for  such  a  distinction.  [284]  In  all  lan-
guages men  speak  with  equal  assurance  of
their  seeing  objects  to  be  spherical  or  cubi-
cal, as  of  their  feeling  them  to  be  so  ;  nor
do  they  ever  dream  that  these  perceptions
of  sight  were  not  as  early  and  original  as
the  perceptions  they  have  of  the  same  ob-
jects by  touch.

This  power  which  we  acquire  of  perceiv-
ing things  by  our  senses,  which  originally
we  should  not  have  perceived,  is  not  the
effect  of  any  reasoning  on  our  part :  it  is
the  result  of  our  constitution,  and  of  the
situations  in  which  we  happen  to  be  placed.

We  are  so  made  that,  when  two  things
are  found  to  be  conjoined  in  certain  circum-
stances, we  are  prone  to  believe  that  they
are  connected  by  nature,  and  will  always  be
found  together  in  like  circumstances.  The
belief  which  we  are  led  into  in  such  cases  is
not  the  effect  of  reasoning,  nor  does  it  arise
from  intuitive  evidence  in  the  thing  believed ;
it  is,  as  I  apprehend,  the  immediate  effect  of
our  constitution.  Accordingly,  it  is  strongest
in  infancy,  before  our  reasoning  power
appears — before  we  are  capable  of  draw-
ing a  conclusion  from  premises.  A  child
who  has  once  burnt  his  finger  in  a  candle,
from  that  single  instance  connects  the  pain
of  burning  with  putting  his  finger  in  the
caudle,  and  believes  that  these  two  things
must  go  together.  It  is  obvious  that  this
part  of  our  constitution  is  of  very  great  use
before  we  come  to  the  use  of  reason,  and
guards'us  from  a  thousand  mischiefs,  which,
without  it,  we  would  rush  into  ;  it  may
sometimes  lead  us  into  error,  but  the  good
effects  of  it  far  overbalance  the  ill.

It  is,  no  doubt,  the  perfection  of  a  rational
being  to  have  no  belief  but  what  is  grounded
on  intuitive  evidence,  or  on  just  reasoning  :
but  man,  I  apprehend,  is  not  such  a  being ;
nor  is  it  the  intention  of  nature  that  he
should  be  such  a  being,  in  every  period  of
his existence. We  come  into the  world

*  See  above,  p.  136,  note  t,  and  p.  182,  note  *.— H.
[283,  281]


chap,  xxi.] OF  THE  IMPROVEMENT  OF THE  SENSES.


333


without  the  exercise  of  reason  ;  we  are
merely  animal  before  we  are  rational  crea-
tures ;  and  it  is  necessary  for  our  preserva-
tion, that  we  should  believe  many  things  be-
fore we  can  reason.  How  then  is  our  belief
to  be  regulated  before  we  have  reason  to
regulate  it  ?  ['285]  Has  nature  left  it  to  be
regulated  by  chance  ?  By  no  means.  It  is
regulated  by  certain  principles,  which  are
parts  of  our  constitution ;  whether  they
ought  to  be  called  animal  principles,  or  in-
stinctive principles,  or  what  name  we  give
to  them,  is  of  small  moment ;  but  they  are
certainly  different  from  the  faculty  of  rea-
son :  they  do  the  office  of  reason  while  it  is
in  its  infancy,  and  must,  as  it  were,  be  car-
ried in  a  nurse's  arms,  and  they  are  leading-
strings  to  it  in  its  gradual  progress.

From  what  has  been  said,  I  think  it  ap-
pears that  our  original  powers  of  perceiving
objects  by  our  senses  receive  great  improve-
ment by  use  and  habit ;  and  without  this
improvement,  would  be  altogether  insuf-
ficient for  the  purposes  of  life.  The  daily
occurrences  of  life  not  only  add  to  our  stock
of  knowledge,  but  give  additional  percep-
tive powers  to  our  senses ;  and  time  gives
us  the  use  of  our  eyes  and  ears,  as  well  as
of  our  hands  and  legs.

This  is  the  greatest  and  most  important
improvement  of  our  external  senses.  It  is
to  be  found  in  all  men  come  to  years  of  un-
derstanding, but  it  is  various  in  different
persons  according  to  their  different  occupa-
tions, and  the  different  circumstances  in
which  they  are  placed.  Every  aitist  re-
quires an  eye  as  well  as  a  hand  in  his  own
profession  ;  his  eye  becomes  skilled  in  per-
ceiving, no  less  than  his  hand  in  executing,
what  belongs  to  his  employment.

Besides  this  improvement  of  our  senses,
which  nature  produces  without  our  inten-
tion, there  are  various  ways  in  which  they
may  be  improved,  or  their  defects  re-
medied by  art.  As,  firsl ',  by  a  due  care  of
the  organs  of  sense,  that  they  be  in  a  sound
and  natural  state.  This  belongs  to  the  de-
partment of  the  medical  faculty.

Secondly,  By  accurate  attention  to  the
objects  of  sense.  The  effects  of  such  atten-
tion in  improving  our  senses,  appear  in  every
art.  The  artist,  by  giving  more  attention
to  certain  objects  than  others  do,  by  that
means  perceives  many  things  in  those  ob-
jects which  others  do  not.  [286]  Those
who  happen  to  be  deprived  of  one  sense,
frequently  supply  that  defect  in  a  great  de-
gree, by  giving  more  accurate  attention  to
the  objects  of  the  senses  they  have.  The
blind  have  often  been  known  to  acquire  un-
common acuteness  in  distinguishing  things
by  feeling  and  hearing  ;  and  the  deaf  are
uncommonly  quick  in  reading  men's  thoughts
in  their  countenance.

A  third  way  in  which  our  senses  admit  of
[285-287]


improvement,  is,  by  additional  organs,  or  in-
struments contrived  by  art.  By  the  inven-
tion of  optical  glasses,  and  the  gradual  im-
provement of  them,  the  natural  power  of
vision  is  wonderfully  improved,  and  a  vast
addition  made  to  the  stock  of  knowledge
which  we  acquire  by  the  eye.  By  speaking-
trumpets  and  •  ear-trumpets  some  improve-
ment has  been  made  in  the  sense  of  hearing.
Whether  by  similar  inventions  the  other
senses  may  be  improved,  seems  uncertain.

A  fourth  method  by  which  the  informa-
tion got  by  our  senses  may  be  improved,  is,
by  discovering  the  connection  which  nature
hath  established  between  the  sensible  quali-
ties of  objects,  and  their  more  latent  qualities.

By  the  sensible  qualities  of  bodies,  I  un-
derstand those  that  are  perceived  immedi-
ately by  the  senses,  such  as  their  colour,
figure,  feeling,  sound,  taste,  smell.  The
various  modifications  and  various  combin-
ations of  these,  are  innumerable ;  so  that
there  are  hardly  two  individual  bodies  in
Nature  that  may  not  be  distinguished  by
their  sensible  qualities.

The  latent  qualities  are  such  as  are  not
immediately  discovered  by  our  senses  ;  but
discovered  sometimes  by  accident,  some-
times by  experiment  or  observation.  The
most  important  part  of  our  knowledge  of
bodies  is  the  knowledge  of  the  latent  qua-
lities of  the  several  species,  by  which  they
are  adapted  to  certain  purposes,  either  for
food,  or  medicine,  or  agriculture,  or  for  the
materials  or  utensils  of  some  art  or  manu-
facture. [287]

I  am  taught  that  certain  species  of  bodies
have  certain  latent  qualities ;  but  how  shall
I  know  that  this  individual  is  of  such  a
species  ?  This  must  be  known  by  the  sen-
sible qualities  which  characterise  the  species.
I  must  know  that  this  is  bread,  and  that
wine,  before  I  eat  the  one  or  drink  the
other.  I  must  know  that  this  is  rhubarb,
and  that  opium,  before  I  use  the  one  or  the
other  for  medicine.

It  is  one  branch  of  human  knowledge  to
know  the  names  of  the  various-  species  of
natural  and  artificial  bodies,  and  to  know
the  sensible  qualities  by  which  they  are
ascertained  to  be  of  such  a  species,  and  by
which  they  are  distinguished  from  one  an-
other. It  is  another  branch  of  knowledge
to  know  the  latent  qualities  of  the  several
species,  and  the  uses  to  which  they  are
subservient.

The  man  who  possesses  both  these
branches  is  informed,  by  his  senses,  of  in-
numerable things  of  real  moment  which  are
hid  from  those  who  possess  only  one,  or
neither.  This  is  an  improvement  in  the
information  got  by  our  senses,  which  must
keep  pace  with  the  improvements  made  in
natural  history,  in  natural  philosophy,  and
in  the  arts.


334


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


j^ESSAY  n.


It  would  be  an  improvement  still  higher
if  we  were  able  to  discover  any  connection
between  the  sensible  qualities  of  bodies  and
their  latent  qualities,  without  knowing  the
species,  or  whai  may  have  been  discovered
with  regard  to  it.

Some  philosophers,  of  the  first  rate,  have
made  attempts  towards  this  noble  improve-
ment, not  without  promising  hopes  of  suc-
cess. Thus,  the  celebrated  Linnaeus  has
attempted  to  point  out  certain  sensible  qua-
lities by  which  a  plant  may  very  probably
be  concluded  to  be  poisonous  without  know-
ing its  name  or  species.  He  has  given  se-
veral other  instances,  wherein  certain  medi-
cal and  economical  virtues  of  plants  are
indicated  by  their  external  appearances.
Sir  Isaac  Newton  hath  attempted  to  shew
that,  from  the  colours  of  bodies,  we  may
form  a  probable  conjecture  of  the  size  of
their  constituent  parts,  bv  which  the  rays
of  light  are  reflected. [288]

No  man  can  pretend  to  set  limits  to  the
discoveries  that  may  be  made  by  human
genius  and  industry,  of  such  connections
between  the  latent  and  the  sensible  quali-
ties of  bodies.  A  wide  field  here  opens  to
our  view,  whose  boundaries  no  man  can
ascertain,  of  improvements  that  may  here-
after be  made  in  the  information  conveyed
to  us  by  our  senses.


CHAPTER  XXII.

OF  THE  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES.

Complaints  of  the  fallacy  of  the  senses
have  been  very  common  in  ancient  and  in
modern  times,  especially  among  the  philo-
sophers. And,  if  we  should  take  for  granted
all  that  they  have  said  on  this  subject,  the
natural  conclusion  from  it  might  seem  to
be,  that  the  senses  are  given  to  us  by  some
malignant  demon  on  purpose  to  delude  us,
rather  than  that  they  are  formed  by  the
wise  and  beneficent  Author  of  Nature,  to
give  us  true  information  of  things  necessary
to  our  preservation  and  happiness.

The  whole  sect  of  atomists  among  the
ancients,  led  by  Democritus,  and  afterwards
by  Epicurus,  maintained  that  all  the  quali-
ties of  bodies  which  the  moderns  call  se-
condary qualities — to  wit,  smell,  taste,  sound,
colour,  heat,  and  cold — are  mere  illusions  of
sense,  and  have  no  real  existence.*  Plato
maintained  that  we  can  attain  no  real  know-
ledge of  material  things ;  and  that  eternal
and  immutable  ideas  are  the  only  objects  of
real  knowledge.  The  academics  and  scep-
tics anxiously  sought  for  arguments  to
prove  the  fallaciousness  of  our  senses,  in
order  to  support  their  favourite  doctrine,


*  Not  correctly  stated. See  above,  p.  'A\6,  note  ).
The  Epicureans  denied  the  fallacy  of  Sense.— H.


that  even  in  things  that  seem  most  evident,
we  ought  to  withhold  assent. [289  J

Among  the  Peripatetics  we  find  frequent
complaints  that  the  senses  often  deceive  us,
and  that  their  testimony  is  to  be  suspected,
when  it  is  not  confirmed  by  reason,  by  which
the  errors  of  sense  may  be  corrected.  This
complaint  they  supported  by  many  com-
monplace instances :  such  as,  the  crooked
appearance  of  an  oar  in  water ;  objects  being
magnified,  and  their  distance  mistaken,  in
a  fog ;  the  sun  and  moon  appearing  about
a  foot  or  two  in  diameter,  while  they  are
really  thousands  of  miles  ;  a  square  tower
being  taken  at  a  distance  to  be  round.  These,
and  many  similar  appearances,  they  thought
to  be  sufficiently  accounted  for  from  the
fallacy  of  the  senses  :  and  thus  the  fallacy
of  the  senses  was  used  as  a  decent  cover  to
conceal  their  ignorance  of  the  real  causes  of
such  phaenomena,  and  served  the  same  pur-
pose as  their  occult  qualities  and  substantial
forms.  *

Des  Cartes  and  his  followers  joined  in
the  same  complaint.  Antony  le  Grand,  a
philosopher  of  that  sect,  in  the  first  chapter
of  his  Logic,  expresses  the  sentiments  of
the  sect  as  follows :  "  Since  all  our  senses  are
fallacious,  and  we  are  frequently  deceived
by  them,  common  reason  advises  that  we
should  not  put  too  much  trust- in  them,  nay,
that  we  should  suspect  falsehood  in  every-
thing they  represent ;  for  it  is  imprudence
and  temerity  to  trust  to  those  who  have  but
oncedeceived  us ;  and,if  they  err  at  any  time,
they  may  be  believed  always  to  err.  They
are  given  by  nature  for  this  purpose  only
to  warn  us  of  what  is  useful  and  what  is
hurtful  to  us.  The  order  of  Nature  is  per-
verted when  we  put  them  to  any  other
use,  and  apply  them  for  the  knowledge  of
truth."

When  we  consider  that  the  active  part
of 'mankind,  in  all  ages  from  the  beginning
of  the  world,  have  rested  their  most  import-
ant concerns  upon  the  testimony  of  sense,
it  will  be  very  difficult  to  reconcile  their
conduct  with  the  speculative  opinion  so
generally  entertained  of  the  fallaciousness
of  the  senses.  [290]  And  it  seems  to  be
a  very  unfavourable  account  of  the  work-
manship of  the  Supreme  Being,  to  think
that  he  has  given  us  one  faculty  to  deceive
us — to  wit,  our  senses ;  and  another  faculty
— to  wit,  our  reason — to  detect  the  fallacy.

It  deserves,  therefore,  to  be  considered,
whether  the  fallaciousness  of  our  senses  be
not  a  common  error,  which  men  have  been
led  into,  from  a  desire  to  conceal  their  igno-
rance, or  to  apologize  for  their  mistakes.

There  are  two  powers  which  we  owe  to

*  A  very  inaccurate  representation  of  the  Peripa-
tetic doctrine  touching  this  matter.  In  fact,  the  Ari-
stotelian doctrine,  and  that  of  Reid  himself,  are
almost  the  same. — H.

[288-290]


chap,  xxn.] OF  THE  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES.


335


our  external  senses— sensation,  and  the  per-
ception of  external  objects.

It  is  impossible  that  there  can  be  any
fallacy  in  sensation  :  for  we  are  conscious  of
all  our  sensations,  and  they  can  neither  be
any  other  in  their  nature,  nor  greater  or
less  in  their  degree  than  we  feel  them.  It
is  impossible  that  a  man  should  be  in  pain,
when  he  does  not  feel  pain  ;  and  when  he
feels  pain,  it  is  impossible  that  his  pain
should  not  be  real,  and  in  its  degree  what
it  is  felt  to  be ;  and  the  same  thing  may  be
said  of  every  sensation  whatsoever.  An
agreeable  or  an  uneasy  sensation  may  be
forgot  when  it  is  past,  but  when  it  is  pre-
sent, it  can  be  nothing  but  what  we  feel.

If,  therefore,  there  be  any  fallacy  in  our
senses,  it  must  be  in  the  perception  of  ex-
ternal objects,  winch  we  shall  next  con-
sider.

And  here  I  grant  that  we  can  conceive
powers  of  perceiving  external  objects  more
perfect  than  ours,  which,  possibly,  beings  of  a
higher  order  may  enjoy.  We  can  perceive
external  objects  only  by  means  of  bodily  or-
gans ;  and  these  are  liable  to  various  dis-
orders, which  sometimes  affect  our  powers
of  perception.  The  nerves  and  brain,  which
are  interior  organs  of  perception,  are  like-
wise liable  to  disorders,  as  every  part  of  the
human  frame  is. [291]

The  imagination,  the  memory,  the  judging
and  reasoning  powers,  are  all  liable  to  be
hurt,  or  even  destroyed,  by  disorders  of  the
oody,  as  well  as  our  powers  of  perception  ;
but  we  do  not  on  this  account  call  them
fallacious.

Our  senses,  our  memory,  and  our  reason,
are  all  limited  and  imperfect — this  is  the
lot  of  humanity  :  but  they  are  such  as  the
Author  of  our  being  saw  to  be  best  fitted
for  us  in  our  present  state.  Superior  natures
may  have  intellectual  powers  which  we  have
not,  or  such  as  we  have,  in  a  more  perfect
degree,  and  less  liable  to  accidental  disor-
ders ;  but  we  have  no  reason  to  think  that
God  has  given  fallacious  powers  to  any  of
his  creatures :  this  would  be  to  think  dis-
honourably of  our  Maker,  and  would  lay  a
foundation  for  universal  scepticism.

The  appearances  commonly  imputed  to
the  fallacy  of  the  senses  are  many  and  of
different  kinds;  but  I  think  they  may  be
reduced  to  the  four  following  classes.

First,  Many  things  called  deceptions  of
the  senses  are-only  conclusions  rashly  drawn
from  the  testimony  of  the  senses.  In  these
cr.ses  the  testimony  of  the  senses  is  true,
but  we  rashly  draw  a  conclusion  from  it,
which  does  not  necessarily  follow.  We  are
disposed  to  impute  our  errors  rather  to  false
information  than  to  inconclusive  reasoning,
and  to  biame  our  senses  for  the  wrong  con-
clusions we  draw  from  their  testimony.

Thus,  when  a  man  has  taken  a  counter-
[291-293]


feit  guinea  for  a  true  one,  he  says  his  senses
deceived  him ;  but  he  lays  the  blame  where
it  ought  not  to  be  laid  :  for  we  may  ask  him,
Did  your  senses  give  a  false  testimony  of
the  colour,  or  of  the  figure,  or  of  the  im-
pression ?  No.  But  this  is  all  that  tbey
testified,  and  this  they  testified  truly  :  From
these  premises  you  concluded  that  it  was  a
true  guinea,  but  this  conclusion  does  not
follow  ;  you  erred,  therefore,  not  by  relying
upon  the  testimony  of  sense,  but  by  judging
rashly  from  its  testimony.  [292]  Not  only
are  your  senses  innocent  of  this  error,  but
it  is  only  by  their  information  that  it  can  be
discovered.  If  you  consult  them  properly,
they  will  inform  you  that  what  you  took  for
a  guinea  is  base  metal,  or  is  deficient  in
weight,  and  this  can  only  be  known  by  the
testimony  of  sense.

I  remember  to  have  met  with  a  man  who
thought  the  argument  used  by  Protestants
against  the  Popish  doctrine  of  transubstan-
tiation,  from  the  testimony  of  our  senses,
inconclusive ;  because,  said  he,  instances
may  be  given  where  several  of  our  sensesmay
deceive  usi  How  do  we  know  then  that
there  may  not  be  cases  wherein  they  all
deceive  us,  and  no  sense  is  left  to  detect  the
fallacy  ?  I  begged  of  him  to  know  an  in-
stance wherein  several  of  our  senses  deceive
us.  I  take,  said  he,  a  piece  of  soft  turf ;  I
cut  it  into  the  shape  of  an  apple ;  with  the
essence  of  apples,  I  give  it  the  smell  of  an
apple  ;  and  with  paint,  I  can  give  it  the  skin
and  colour  of  an  apple.  Here  then  is  a  body,
which,  if  you  judge  by  your  eye,  by  your
touch,  or  by  your  smell,  is  an  apple.

To  this  I  would  answer,  that  no  one  of
our  senses  deceives  us  in  this  case.  My
sight  and  touch  testify  that  it  has  the  shape
aLd  colour  of  an  apple  :  this  is  trie.  The
sense  of  smelling  testifies  that  it  has  the
smell  of  an  apple  :  this  is  likewise  true,  and
is  no  deception.  Where  then  lies  the  de-
ception ?  It  is  evident  it  lies  in  this — that
because  this  body  has  some  qualities  belong-
ing tovm  apple  I  conclude  that  it  is  an  apple.
This  is  a  fallacy,  not  of  the  senses,  but  of
inconclusive  "reasoning.

Many  false  judgments  that  are  accounted
deceptions  of  sense,  arise  from  our  mistaking
relative  motion  for  real  or  absolute  motion.
These  can.be  no  deceptions  of  sense,  because
by  our  senses  we  perceive  only  the  relative
motions  of  bodies ;  and  it  is  by  reasoning
that  we  infer  the  real  from  the  relative  which
we  perceive.  A  little  reflection  may  satisfy
us  of  this. [293]

It  was  before  observed,  that  we  perceive
extension  to  be  one  sensible  quality  of
bodies,  and  thence  are  necessarily  led  to
conceive  space,  though  space  be  of  itself
no  object  of  sense.  When  a  body  is  re-
moved out  of  its  place,  the  space  which  it
filled  remains  empty  till  it  is  filled  by  some


330


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[»


other  body,  and  would  remain  if  it  should
never  be  filled.  Before  any  body  existed,  the
space  which  bodies  now  occupy  was  empty
spaee,  capable  of  receiving  bodies  ;  for  no
body  can  exist  where  there  is  no  space  to
contain  it.  There  is  space  therefore  where-
ever  bodies  exist,  or  can  exist.

Hence  it  is  evident  that  space  can  have
no  limits.  It  is  no  less  evident  that  it  is
immovable.  Bodies  placed  in  it  are  mov-
able, but  the  place  where  they  were  cannot
be  moved  ;  and  we  can  as  easily  conceive  a
thing  to  be  moved  from  itself,  as  one  part
of  space  brought  nearer  to  or  removed
farther  from  another.

The  space,  therefore,  which  is  unlimited
and  immovable,  is  called  by  philosophers
absolute  space.  Absolute  or  real  motion  is
a  change  of  place  in  absolute  space.

Our  senses  do  not  testify  the  absolute
motion  or  absolute  rest  of  any  body.  When
one  body  removes  from  anothei*,  this  may
be  discerned  by  the  senses ;  but  whether
any  body  keeps  the  same  part  of  absolute
space,  we  do  not  perceive  by  our  senses.
When  one  body  seems  to  remove  from  an-
other, we  can  infer  with  certainty  that  there
is  absolute  motion,  but  whether  in  the  one
or  the  other,  or  partly  in  both,  is  not  dis-
cerned by  sense.

Of  all  the  prejudices  which  philosophy
contradicts,  I  believe  there  is  none  so  general
as  that  the  earth  keeps  its  place  unmoved.
This  opinion  seems  to  be  universal,  till  it
is  corrected  by  instruction  or  by  philoso-
phical speculation.  Those  who  have  any
tincture  of  education  are  not  now  in  danger
of  being  held  by  it,  but  they  find  at  first  a
reluctance  to  believe  that  there  are  anti-
podes ;  that  the  earth  is  spherical,  and  turns
round  its  axis  every  day,  and  round  the  sun
every  year  :  they  can  recollect  the  time
when  reason  struggled  with  prejudice  upon
these  points,  and  prevailed  at  length,  but
not  without  some  effort. [294]

The  cause  of  a  prejudice  so  very  general
is  not  unworthy  of  investigation.  But  that
is  not  our  present  business.  It  is  sufficient
to  observe,  that  it  cannot  justly  be  called  a
fallacy  of  sense  ;  because  our  senses  testify
only  the  change  of  situation  of  one  body  in
relation  to  other  bodies,  and  not  its  change
of  situation  in  absolute  space.  It  is  only
the  relative  motion  of  bodies  that  we  per-
eeive,  and  that  we  perceive  truly.  It  is
the  province  of  reason  and  philosophy,  from
the  relative  motions  which  we  perceive,  to
collect  the  real  and  absolute  motions  which
produce  them.

All  motion  must  be  estimated  from  some
point  or  place  which  is  supposed  to  be  at
rest.  We  perceive  not  the  points  of  abso-
lute space,  from  which  real  and  absolute
motion  must  be  reckoned  .  And  there  are
obvious  reasons  that  lead  mankind  in  the


state  of  ignorance,  to  make  the  earth  the
fixed  place  from  which  they  may  estimate
the  various  motions  they  perceive.  The
custom  of  doing  this  from  infancy,  and  of
using  constantly  a  language  which  supposes
the  earth  to  be  at  rest,  may  perhaps  be  the
cause  of  the  general  prejudice  in  favour  of
this  opinion.

Thus  it  appears  that,  if  we  distinguish
accurately  between  what  our  senses  really
and  naturally  testify,  and  the  conclusions
which  we  draw  from  their  testimony  by
reasoning,  we  shall  find  many  of  the  errors,
called  fallacies  of  the  senses,  to  be  no  fal-
lacy of  the  senses,  but  rash  judgments,
which  are  not  to  be  imputed  to  our  senses.

Secondly,  Another  class  of  errors  imputed
to  the  fallacy  of  the  senses,  are  those  which
we  are  liable  to  in  our  acquired  perceptions.
Acquired  perception  is  not  properly  the
testimony  of  those  senses  which  God  hath
given  us,  but  a  conclusion  drawn  from  what
the  senses  testify.  [295]  In  our  past  ex-
perience, we  have  found  certain  things  con-
joined with  what  our  senses  testify.  We
are  led  by  our  constitution  to  expect  this
conjunction  in  time  to  come  ;  and  when
we  have  often  found  it  in  our  experience  to
happen,  we  acquire  a  firm  belief  that  the
things  which  we  have  found  thus  conjoined,
are  connected  in  nature,  and  that  one  is  a
sign  of  the  other.  The  appearance  of  the
sign  immediately  produces  the  belief  of  its
usual  attendant,  and  we  think  we  perceive
the  one  as  well  as  the  other.

That  such  conclusions  are  formed  even
in  infancy,  no  man  can  doubt :  nor  is  it  less
certain  that  they  are  confounded  with  the
natural  and  immediate  perceptions  of  sense,
and  in  all  languages  are  called  by  the  same
name.  We  are  therefore  authorized  by
language  to  call  them  perception,  and  must
often  do  so,  or  speak  unintelligibly.  But
philosophy  teaches  us,  in  this,  as  in  many
other  instances,  to  distinguish  things  which
the  vulgar  confound.  I  have  therefore
given  the  name  of  acquired  perception  to
such  conclusions,  to  distinguish  them  from
what  is  naturally,  originally,  and  imme-
diately testified  by  our  senses.  Whether
this  acquired  perception  is  to  be  resol  ved
into  some  process  of  reasoning,  of  which
we  have  lost  the  remembrance,  as  some
philosophers  think,  or  whether  it  results
from  some  part  of  our  constitution  distinct
from  reason,  as  I  rather  believe,  does  not
concern  the  present  subject.  If  the  first
of  these  opinions  be  true,  the  errors  of  ac-
quired perception  will  fall  under  the  first
class  before  mentioned.  If  not,  it  makes
a  distinct  class  by  itself.  But  whether  the
one  or  the  other  be  true,  it  must  be
observed  that  the  errors  of  acquired  per-
ception are  not  properly  fallacies  of  our
senses.

[294.  2951


chap,  xxii.]  OF  THE  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES.


337


Thus,  when  a  globe  is  set  before  me,  I
perceive  by  my  eyes  that  it  has  three  di-
mensions and  a  spherical  figure.  To  say
that  this  is  not  perception,  would  be  to
reject  the  authority  of  custom  in  the  use  of
words,  which  no  wise  man  will  do  :  but
that  it  is  not  the  testimony  of  my  sense  of
seeing,  every  philosopher  knows.  I  see
only  a  circular  form,  having  the  light  and
colour  distributed  in  a  certain  way  over  it.
[296]  But,  being  accustomed  to  observe
this  distribution  of  light  and  colour  only  in
a  spherical  body,  I  immediately,  from  what
I  see,  believe  the  object  to  be  spherical,  and
say  that  I  see  or  perceive  it  to  be  spherical.
When  a  ^painter,  by  an  exact  imitation  of
that  distribution  of  light  and  colour  which
I  have  been  accustomed  to  see  only  in  a
real  sphere,  deceives  me,  so  as  to  make  me
take  that  to  be  a  real  sphere  which  is  only  a
painted  one,  the  testimony  of  my  eye  is  true
— the  colour  and  visible  figure  of  the  object
is  truly  what  I  see  it  to  be  :  the  error  lies
in  the  conclusion  drawn  from  what  I  see —
to  wit,  that  the  object  has  three  dimensions
and  a  spherical  figure.  The  conclusion  is
false  in  this  case ;  but,  whatever  be  the
origin  of  this  conclusion,  it  is  not  properly
the  testimony  of  sense.

To  this  class  we  must  refer  the  judg-
ments we  are  apt  to  form  of  the  distance
and  magnitude  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and
of  terrestrial  objects  seen  on  high.  The
mistakes  we  make  of  the  magnitude  and
distance  of  objects  seen  through  optical
glasses,  or  through  an  atmosphere  uncom-
monly clear  or  uncommonly  foggy,  belong
likewise  to  this  class.

The  errors  we  are  led  into  in  acquired
perception  are  very  rarely  hurtful  to  us  in
the  conduct  of  life  ;  they  are  gradually  cor-
rected by  a  more  enlarged  experience,  and
a  more  perfect  knowledge  of  the  laws  of
Nature  :  and  the  general  laws  of  our  con-
stitution, by  which  we  are  sometimes  led
into  them,  are  of  the  greatest  utility.

We  come  into  the  world  ignorant  of
everything,  and  by  our  ignorance  exposed
to  many  dangers  and  to  many  mistakes.  The
regular  train  of  causes  and  effects,  which
divine  wisdom  has  established,  and  which
directs  every  step  of  our  conduct  in  advanced
life,  is  unknown,  until  it  is  gradually  dis-
covered by  experience. [297]

We  must  learn  much  from  experience
before  we  can  reason,  and  therefore  must  be
liable  to  many  errors.  Indeed,  I  apprehend,
that,  in  the  first  part  of  life,  reason  would  do
us  much  more  hurt  than  good  Were  we
sensible  of  our  condition  in  that  period,  and
capable  of  reflecting  upon  it,  we  snould  be
like  a  man  in  the  dark,  surrounded  with
dangers,  where  every  step  he  takes  may  be
into  a  pit.  Reason  would  direct  him  to  sit
down,  and  wait  till  he  could  see  about  him.
("2.96-298]


In  like  manner,  if  we  suppose  an  infant
endowed  with  reason,  it  would  direct  him
to  do  nothing,  till  he  knew  what  could  be
done  with  safety.  This  he  can  only  know
by  experiment,  and  experiments  are  danger-
ous. Reason  directs,  that  experiments  that
are  full  of  danger  should  not  be  made  with-
out a  very  urgent  cause.  It  would  there-
fore make  the  infant  unhappy,  and  hinder
his  improvement  by  experience.

Nature  has  followed  another  plan.  The
child,  unapprehensive  of  danger,  is  led  by
instinct  to  exert  all  his  active  powers,  to
try  everything  without  the  cautious  admo-
nitions of  reason,  and  to  believe  everything
that  is  told  him.  Sometimes  he  suffers  by
his  rashness  what  reason  would  have  pre-
vented :  but  his  suffering  proves  a  salutary
discipline,  and  makes  him  for  the  future
avoid  the  cause  of  it.  Sometimes  he  is
imposed  upon  by  his  credulity ;  but  it  is  of
infinite  benefit  to  him  upon  the  whole.  His
activity  and  credulity  are  more  useful  qua-
lities and  better  instructors  than  reason
would  be  ;  they  teach  him  more  in  a  day
than  reason  would  do  in  a  year ;  they  furnish
a  stock  of  materials  for  reason  to  work  upon ;
they  make  him  easy  and  happy  in  a  period
of  his  existence  when  reason  could  only
serve  to  suggest  a  thousand  tormenting
anxieties  and  fears  :  and  he  acts  agreeably
to  the  constitution  and  intention  of  nature
even  when  he  does  and  believes  what  reason
would  not  justify.  So  that  the  wisdom  and
goodness  of  the  Author  of  nature  is  no  less
conspicuous  in  withholding  the  exercise  of
our  reason  in  this  period,  than  in  bestowing
it  when  we  are  ripe  for  it. [298]

A  third  class  of  errors,  ascribed  to  the
fallacy  of  the  senses,  proceeds  from  igno-
rance of  the  laws  of  nature.

The  laws  of  nature  (I  mean  not  moral
but  physical  laws)  are  learned,  either  from
our  own  experience,  or  the  experience  of
others,  who  have  had  occasion  to  observe
the  course  of  nature.

Ignorance  of  those  laws,  or  inattention
to  them,  is  apt  to  occasion  false  judgments
with  regard  to  the  objects  of  sense,  especial-
ly those  of  hearing  and  of  sight ;  which
false  judgments  are  often,  without  good
reason,  called  fallacies  of  sense.

Sounds  affect  the  ear  differently,  accord-
ing as  the  sounding  body  is  before  or  behind
us,  on  the  right  hand  or  on  the  left,  near  or
at  a  great  distance.  We  learn,  by  the
manner  in  which  the  sound  affects  the  ear,
on  what  hand  we  are  to  look  for  the  sound-
ing body  ;  and  inmost  cases  we  judge  right.
But  we  are  sometimes  deceived  by  echoes,
or  by  whispering  galleries,  or  speaking
trumpets,  which  return  the  sound,  or  alter
its  direction,  or  convey  it  to  a  distance  with-
out diminution.

The  deception  is  still  greater,  because


338


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


(_ESSAY  II.


more  uncommon,  which  is  said  to  be  pro-
duced by  Gastriloquists — that  is,  persons
who  have  acquired  the  art  of  modifying
their  voice,  so  that  it  shall  affect  the  ear  of  the
hearers,  as  if  it  came  from  another  person,
or  from  the  clouds,  or  from  under  the  earth-

I  never  had  the  fortune  to  be  acquainted
with  any  of  these  artists,  and  therefore  can-
not say  to  what  degree  of  perfection  the  art
may  have  been  carried.

I  apprehend  it  to  be  only  such  an  im-
perfect imitation  as  may  deceive  those  who
are  inattentive,  or  under  a  panic.  For,  if
it  could  be  carried  to  perfection,  a  Gastrho-
quist  would  be  as  dangerous  a  man  in  so-
ciety as  was  the  shepherd  Gyges,*  who,  by
turning  a  ring  upon  his  finger,  could  make
himself  invisible,  and,  by  that  means,  from
being  the  king's  shepherd,  became  King  of
Lydia. [299]

If  the  Gastriloquists  have  all  been  too
good  men  to  use  their  talent  to  the  detri-
ment of  others,  it  might  at  least  be  expected
that  some  of  them  should  apply  it  to  their
own  advantage.  If  it  could  be  brought  to
any  considerable  degree  of  perfection,  it
seems  to  be  as  proper  an  engine  for  draw-
ing money  by  the  exhibition  of  it,  as  leger-
demain or  rope-dancing.  But  I  have  never
heard  of  any  exhibition  of  this  kind,  and
therefore  am  apt  to  think  that  it  is  too
coarse  an  imitation  to  bear  exhibition,  even
to  the  vulgar.

Some  are  said  to  have  the  art  of  imitat-
ing the  voice  of  another  so  exactly  that  in
the  dark  they  might  be  taken  for  the  person
whose  voice  they  imitate.  I  am  apt  to
think  that  this  art  also,  in  the  relations
made  of  it,  is  magnified  beyond  the  truth,  as
wonderful  relations  are  apt  to  be,  and  that
an  attentive  ear  would  be  able  to  distinguish
the  copy  from  the  original.

It  is  indeed  a  wonderful  instance  of  the
accuracy  as  well  as  of  the  truth  of  our  senses,
in  things  that  are  of  real  use  in  life,  that  we
are  able  to  distinguish  all  our  acquaintance
ty  their  countenance,  by  their  voice,  and
by  their  handwriting,  when,  at  the  same
time,  we  are  often  unable  to  say  by  what
minute  difference  the  distinction  is  made  ;
and  that  we  are  so  very  rarely  deceived  in
matters  of  this  .kind,  when  we  give  proper
attention  to  the  informations  of  sense.

However,  if  any  case  should  happen,  in
which  sounds  produced  by  different  causes
are  not  distinguishable  by  the  ear,  this  may
prove  that  our  senses  are  imperfect,  but  not
that  they  are  fallacious.  The  ear  may  not
be  able  to  draw  the  just  conclusion,  but  it
is  only  our  ignorance  of  the  laws  of  sound
that  leads  us  to  a  wrong  conclusion. [300]

Deceptions  of  sight,  arising  from  igno-

*  See  Cicero,  De  Officiis.  The  story  told  by  Hero-
dotus is  different— H.


ranee  of  the  laws  of  nature,  are  more  numer-
ous and  more  remarkable  than  those  of
hearing.

The  rays  of  light,  which  are  the  means
of  seeing,  pass  in  right  lines  from  the  object
to  the  eye,  when  they  meet  with  no  obstruc-
tion ;  and  we  are  by  nature  led  to  conceive
the  visible  object  to  be  in  the  direction  of
the  rays  that  come  to  the  eye.  But  the
rays  may  be  reflected,  refracted,  or  inflected
in  their  passage  from  the  object  to  the  eye,
according  to  certain  fixed  laws  of  nature,
by  which  means  their  direction  may  be
changed,  and  consequently  the  apparent
place,  figure,  or  magnitude  of  the  object.

Thus,  a  child  seeing  himself  in  a  mirror,
thinks  he  sees  another  child  behind  the
mirror,  that  imitates  all  his  motions.  But
even  a  child  soon  gets  the  better  of  this  de-
ception, and  knows  that  he  sees  himself  only.

All  the  deceptions  made  by  telescopes,
microscopes,  camera  obscuras,  magic  lan-
thorns,  are  of  the  same  kind,  though  not  so
familiar  to  the  vulgar.  The  ignorant  may
be  deceived  by  them  ;  but  to  those  who  are
acquainted  with  the  principles  of  optics,
they  give  just  and  true  information  ;  and  the
laws  of  nature  by  which  they  are  produced,
are  of  infinite  benefit  to  mankind.

There  remains  another  class  of  errors,
commonly  called  deceptions  of  sense,  and
the  only  one,  as  I  apprehend,  to  which  that
name  can  be  given  with  propriety  :  I  mean
such  as  proceed  from  some  disorder  or  pre-
ternatural state,  either  of  the  external  organ
or  of  the  nerves  and  brain,  which  are  in-
ternal organs  of  perception.

In  a  delirium  or  in  madness,  perception,
memory,  imagination,  and  our  reasoning
powers,  are  strangely  disordered  and  con-
founded. There  are  likewise  disorders  which
affect  some  of  our  senses,  while  others  are
sound.  Thus,  a  man  may  feel  pain  in  his
toes  after  the  leg  is  cut  off.  He  may  feel  a
little  ball  double  by  crossing  his  fingers.  [30 1  ]
He  may  see  an  object  double,  by  not  direct-
both  eyes  properly  to  it.  By  pressing  the
ball  of  his  eye,  he  may  see  colours  that  ara
not  real.  By  the  jaundice  in  his  eyes,  he
may  mistake  colours.  These  are  more
properly  deceptions  of  sense  than  any  of  the
classes  before  mentioned.

We  must  acknowledge  it  to  be  the  lot  of
human  nature,  that  all  the  human  faculties
are  liable,  by  accidental  causes,  to  be  hurt
and  unfitted  for  their  natural  functions,
either  wholly  or  in  part :  but  as  this  imper-
fection is  common  to  them  all,  it  gives  no
just  ground  for  accounting  any  of  them
fallacious.

Upon  the  whole,  it  seems  to  have  been  a
common  error  of  philosophers  to  account
the  senses  fallacious.  And  to  this  error
they  have  added  another — that  one  use  of
reason  is  to  detect  the  fallacies  of  sense.

[299-301]


chap,  xxii.] OF  THE  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES.


339


It  appears,  I  think,  from  what  has  heen
said,  that  there  is  no  more  reason  to  account
our  senses  fallacious,  than  our  reason,  our
memory,  or  any  other  faculty  of  judging
which  nature  hath  given  us.  They  are  all
limited  and  imperfect ;  but  wisely  suited  to
the  present  condition  of  man.  We  are
liable  to  error  and  wrong  judgment  in  the
use  of  them  all ;  but  as  little  in  the  inform-
ations of  sense  as  in  the  deductions  of
reasoning.  And  the  errors  we  fall  into  with
regard  to  objects  of  sense  are  not  corrected
by  reason,  but  by  more  accurate  attention
to  the  informations  we  may  receive  by  our
senses  themselves.

Perhaps  the  pride  of  philosophers  may
have  given  occasion  to  this  error.  Reason
is  the  faculty  wherein  they  assume  a  supe-
riority to  the  unlearned.  The  informations
of  sense  are  common  to  the  philosopher  and
to  the  most  illiterate  :  they  put  all  men
upon  a  level ;  and  therefore  are  apt  to  be
undervalued.  We  must,  however,  be  be-
holden to  the  informations  of  sense  for  the
greatest  and  most  interesting  part  of  our


knowledge.  [302]  The  wisdom  of  nature
has  made  the  most  useful  things  most  com-
mon, and  they  ought  not  to  be  despised  on
that  account.  Nature  likewise  forces  our
belief  in  those  informations,  and  all  the
attempts  of  philosophy  to  weaken  it  are
fruitless  and  vain.

I  add  only  one  observation  to  what  has
been  said  upon  this  subject.  It  is,  that  there
seems  to  be  a  contradiction  between  what
philosophers  teach  concerning  ideas,  and
their  doctrine  of  the  fallaciousness  of  the
senses.  We  are  taught  that  the  office  of
the  senses  is  only  to  give  us  the  ideas  of
external  objects.  If  this  be  so,  there  can
be  no  fallacy  in  the  senses.  Ideas  can
neither  be  true  nor  false.  If  the  senses
testify  nothing,  they  cannot  give  false  testi-
mony. If  they  are  not  judging  faculties,  no
judgment  can  be  imputed  to  them,  whether
false  or  true.  There  is,  therefore,  a  contra-
diction between  the  common  doctrine  con-
cerning ideas  and  that  of  the  fallaciousness
of  the  senses.  Both  may  be  false,  as  I  believe
they  are,  but  both  cannot  be  true. [303]


ESSAY  III
OF  MEMORY.


CHAPTER  I.

THINGS  OBVIOUS  AND  CERTAIN  WITH  REGARD
TO  MEMORY.

In  the  gradual  progress  of  man,  from
infancy  to  maturity,  there  is  a  certain  order
in  which  his  faculties  are  unfolded,  and  this
seems  to  be  the  best  order  we  can  follow  in
treating  of  them.

The  external  senses  appear  first ;  me-
mory soon  follows — which  we  are  now  to
consider.

It  is  by  memory  that  we  have  an  imme-
diate knowledge  of  things  past.*  The
senses  give  us  information  of  things  only  as
they  exist  in  the  present  moment ;  and  this
information,  if  it  were  not  preserved  by
memory,  would  vanish  instantly,  and  leave
us  as  ignorant  as  if  it  had  never  been.

Memory  must  have  an  object.  Every
man  who  remembers  must  remember  some-


*  An  immediate  knowledge of'apast  thing  is  a  con-
tradiction. For  we  can  only  know  a  thing  imme-
diately, if  we  know  it  in  itself,  or  as  existing  ;  but
what  is  past  cannot  be  known  in  itself,  for  it  is  non-
existent.—-H.


thing,  and  that  which  he  remembers  is
called  the  object  of  his  remembrance.  In
this,  memory  agrees  with  perception,  but
differs  from  sensation,  which  has  no  object
but  the  feeling  itself.* [304]

Every  man  can  distinguish  the  thing  re-
membered from  the  remembrance  of  it.
We  may  remember  anything  which  we  have
seen,  or  heard,  or  known,  or  done,  or  suf-
fered ;  but  the  remembrance  of  it  is  a  par-
ticular act  of  the  mind  which  now  exists,
and  of  which  we  are  conscious.  To  con-
found these  two  is  an  absurdity,  which  a
thinking  man  could  not  be  led  into,  but  by
some  false  hypothesis  which  hinders  him
from  reflecting  upon  the  thing  which  he
would  explain  by  it.

In  memory  we  do  not  find  such  a  train
of  operations  connected  by  our  constitution
as  in  perception.  When  we  perceive  an
object  by  our  senses,  there  is,  first,  some
impression  made  by  the  object  upon  the
organ  of  sense,  either  immediately,  or  by
means  of  some  medium. By  this,  an  im-


[302-304]


*  But  have  we  only  such  a  mediate  knowledge  of
the  real  object  in  perception,  as  we  have  of  the  real
object  in  memory  ? On  Reid's  error,  touching  the
object  of  memory,  see,  in  general,  Note  B. — H.
z  2


340


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  IH*


pression  is  made  upon  the  nerves  and  brain,
in  consequence  of  which  we  feel  some  sensa-
tion ;  and  that  sensation  is  attended  by  that
conception  and  belief  of  the  external  object
which  we  call  perception.  These  opera-
tions are  so  connected  in  our  constitution,
that  it  is  difficult  to  disjoin  them  in  our  con-
ceptions, and  to  attend  to  each  without  con-
founding it  with  the  others.  But,  in  the
operations  of  memory,  we  are  free  from  this
embarrassment ;  they  are  easily  distin-
guished from  all  other  acts  of  the  mind,  and
the  names  which  denote  them  are  free  from
all  ambiguity.

The  object  of  memory,  or  thing  remem-
bered, must  be  something  that  is  past ;  as
the  object  of  perception  and  of  conscious-
ness must  be  something  which  is  present.
What  now  is,  cannot  be  an  object  of
memory ;  neither  can  that  which  is  past
and  gone  be  an  object  of  perception  or  of
consciousness.

Memory  is  always  accompanied  with  the
belief  of  that  which  we  remember,  as  per-
ception is  accompanied  with  the  belief  of
that  which  we  perceive,  and  consciousness
with  the  belief  of  that  whereof  we  are  con-
scious. Perhaps  in  infancy,  or  in  a  disorder
of  mind,  things  remembered  may  be  con-
founded with  those  which  are  merely  ima-
gined ;  but  in  mature  years,  and  in  a  sound
state  of  mind,  every  man  feels  that  he  must
believe  what  he  distinctly  remembers,
though  he  can  give  no  other  reason  of  his
belief,  but  that  he  remembers  the  thing  dis-
tinctly ;  whereas,  Avhen  he  merely  imagines
a  thing  ever  so  distinctly,  he  has  no  belief
of  it  upon  that  account.  [305]

This  belief,  which  we  have  from  distinct
memory,  we  account  real  knowledge,  no
less  certain  than  if  it  was  grounded  on  de-
monstration ;  no  man  in  his  wits  calls  it  in
question,  or  will  hear  any  argument  against
it.*  The  testimony  of  witnesses  in  causes
of  life  and  death  depends  upon  it,  and  all
the  knowledge  of  mankind  of  past  events  is
built  on  this  foundation.

There  are  cases  in  which  a  man's  me-
mory is  less  distinct  and  determinate,  and
where  he  is  ready  to  allow  that  it  may  have
failed  him  ;  but  this  does  not  in  the  least
weaken  its  credit,  when  it  is  perfectly  dis-
tinct.

Memory  implies  a  conception  and  belief
of  past  duration  ;  for  it  is  impossible  that  a
man  should  remember  a  thing  distinctly,
without  believing  some  interval  of  duration,
more  or  less,  to  have  passed  between  the
time  it  happened,  and  the  presentmoment ;
and  I  think  it  is  impossible  to  shew  how
we  could  acquire  a  notion  of  duration  if  we
had  no  memory.  Things  remembered
must be things formerly perceived or

*  But  see  beW,  p.  36?.— H.


known.  I  remember  the  transit  of  Venus
over  the  sun  in  the  year  1769.  I.  must
therefore  have  perceived  it  at  the  time  it
happened,  otherwise  I  could  not  now  re-
member it.  Our  first  acquaintance  with
any  object  of  thought  cannot  be  by  remem-
brance. Memory  can  only  produce. a  con-
tinuance or  renewal  of  a  former  acquaint-
ance with  the  thing  remembered.

The  remembrance  of  a  past  event  is  ne-
cessarily accompanied  with  the  conviction
of  our  own  existence  at  the  time  the  event
happened.  I  cannot  remember  a  thing
that  happened  a  year  ago,  without  a  con-
viction as  strong  as  memory  can  give,  that
I,  the  same  identical  person  who  now  re-
member that  event,  did  then  exist. [306]

What  I  have  hitherto  said  concerning
memory,  I  consider  as  principles  which  ap-
pear obvious  and  certain  to  every  man  who
will  take  the  pains  to  reflect  upon  the  oper-
ations of  his  own  mind.  They  are  facts  of
which  every  man  must  judge  by  what  he
feels  ;  and  they  admit  of  no  other  proof
but  an  appeal  to  every  man's  own  reflec-
tion. I  shall  therefore  take  them  for
granted  in  what  follows,  and  shall,  first,
draw  some  conclusions  from  them,  and
then  examine  the  theories  of  philoso-
phers concerning  memory,  and  concerning
duration,  and  our  personal  identity,  of
which  we  acquire  the  knowledge  by  me-
mory.


CHAPTER  II.

MEMORY  AN  ORIGINAL  FACULTY.

First,  I  think  it  appears,  that  memory
is  an  original  faculty,  given  us  by  the
Author  of  our  being,  of  which  we  can  give
no  account,  but  that  we  are  so  made.

The  knowledge  which  I  have  of  things
past,  by  my  memory,  seems  to  me  as  unac-
countable as  an  immediate  knowledge
would  be  of  things  to  come  ;  *  and  I  can
give  no  reason  why  I  should  have  the  one
and  not  the  other,  but  that  such  is  the  wiil
of  my  Maker.  I  find  in  my  mind  a  distinct
conception,  and  a  firm  belief  of  a  series  of
past  events;  but  how  this  is  produced  I
know  not.  I  call  it  memory,  but  this  is
only  giving  a  name  to  it — it  is  not  an  ac-
count of  its  cause.  I  believe  most  firmly,
what  I  distinctly  remember  ;  but I can

*  An  immediate  knowledge  of  firings  to  come,  is
equally  a  contradiction  as  an  immediate  knowledge  of
tilings  past.  See  the  first  note  of  last  page.  But  if,
as  Reid  himself  allows,  memory  depend  upo:i  cer-
tain enduring  affections  of  the  brain,  determined  by
past  cognition,  it  seems  a  strange  assertion,  on  this
as  on  other  accounts,  that  the  possibility  of  a  know-
ledge of  the  future  is  not  more  inconceivable  than
of  a  knowledge  of  the  past.  Maupertuis,  howrver,
has  advanced  a  similar  doctrine;  and  some,  also,  of
the  advocates  of  animal  magnetism. —  H.


[305, 306]


II.]


MEMORY  AN  ORIGINAL  FACULTY.


341


give  no  reason  of  this  belief.  It  is  the  in-
spiration of  the  Almighty  that  gives  me
this  understanding.* [307]

When  I  believe  the  truth  of  a  mathema-
tical axiom,  or  of  a  mathematical  proposi-
tion, I  see  that  it  must  be  so  :  every  man
who  has  the  same  conception  of  it  sees  the
same.  There  is  a  necessary  and  an  evident
connection  between  the  subject  and  the  pre-
dicate of  the  proposition ;  and  I  have  all
the  evidence  to  support  my  belief  which  I
can  possibly  conceive. •.

When  I  believe  that  I  washed  my  hands
and  face  this  morning,  there  appears  no  ne-
cessity in  the  truth  of  this  proposition.  It
might  be,  or  it  might  not  be.  A  man  may
distinctly  conceive  it  without  believing  it  at
all.  How  then  do  I  come  to  believe  it  ?  I
remember  it  distinctly.  This  is  all  I  can
say.  This  remembrance  is  an  act  of  my
mind.  Is  it  impossible  that  this  act  should
be,  if  the  event  had  not  happened  ?  I  con-
fess I  do  not  see  any  necessary  connection
between  the  one  and  the  other.  If  any  man
can  shew  such  a  necessary  connection,  then
I  think  that  belief  which  we  have  of  what
we  remember  will  be  fairly  accounted  for ;
but,  if  this  cannot  be  done,  that  belief  is  un-
accountable, and  we  can  say  no  more  but
that  it  is  the  result  of  our  constitution.

Perhaps  it  may  be  said,  that  the  ex-
perience we  have  had  of  the  fidelity  of  me-
mory is  a  good  reason  for  relying  upon  its
testimony.  I  deny  not  that  this  may  be  a
reason  to  those  who  have  had  this  expe-
rience, and  who  reflect  upon  it. .  But  1  be-
lieve there  are  few  who  ever  thought  of  this
reason,  or  who  found  any  need  of  it.  It
must  be  some  very  rare  occasion  that  leads
a  man  to  have  recourse  to  it ;  and  in  those
who  have  done  so, 'the  testimony  of  memory
was  believed  before  the  experience  of  its
fidelity,  and  that  belief  could  not  be  caused
by  the  experience  which  came  after  it.

We  know  some  abstract  truths,  by  com-
paring the  terms  of  the  proposition  which
expresses  them,  and  perceiving  some  ne-
cessary relation  or  agreement  between  them.
It  is  thus  I  know  that  two  and  three  make
five ;  that  the  diameters  of  a  circle  are  all
equal.  [308]  Mr  Locke  having  discovered
this  source  of  knowledge,  too  rashly  con-
cluded that  all  human  knowledge  might  be
derived  from  it ;  and  in  this  he  has  been
followed  very  generally — by  Mr  Hume  in
particular.

But  I  apprehend  that  our  knowledge  of
the  existence  of  things  contingent  can  never
be  traced  to  this  source.  I  know  that  such
a  thing  exists,  or  did  exist.  This  know-
ledge cannot  be  derived  from  the  perception
of  a  necessary  agreement  between  existence


*  "  The  inspiration  of  the- Almigl.tv  giveth
u  nderstandtng."—  Job. —  H.

r307-309l


and  the  thing  that  exists,  because  there  is
no  such  necessary  agreement ;  and  there-
fore no  such  agreement  can  be  perceived
either  immediately  or  by  a  chain  of  reason-
ing. The  thing  does  not  exist  necessarily,
but  by  the  will  and  power  of  him  that  made
it ;  and  there  is  no  contradiction  follows  from
supposing  it  not  to  exist.

Whence  I  think  it  follows,  that  our  know-
ledge of  the  existence  of  our  own  thoughts,
of  the  existence  of  all  the  material  objects
about  us,  and  of  all  past  contingencies,
must  be  derived,  not  from  a  perception  of
necessary  relations  or  agreements,  but  from
some  other  source.

Our  Maker  has  provided  other  means  for
giving  us  the  knowledge  of  these  things —
mean's  which  perfectly  answer  their  end,
and  produce  the  effect  intended  by  them.
But  in  what  manner  they  do  this,  is,  I  fear,
beyond  our  skill  to  explain.  We  know  our
own  thoughts,  and  the  operations  of  our
minds,  by  a  power  which  we  call  conscious-
ness :  but  this  is  only  giving  a  name  to  this
part  of  our  frame.  It  does  not  explain  its
fabric,  nor  how  it  produces  in  us  an  irre-
sistible conviction  of  its  informations.  We
perceive  material  objects  and  their  sensible
qualities  by  our  senses  ;  but  how  they  give
us  this  information,  and  how  they  produce
our  belief  in  it,  we  know  not.  We  know
many  past  events  by  memory  ;  but  how  it
gives  this  information,  I  believe,  is  inex-
plicable.

It  is  well  known  what  subtile  disputes
were  held  through  all  the  scholastic  ages,
and  are  still  carried  on  about  the  prescience
of  the  Deity.  [309]  Aristotle  had  taught
that  there  can  be  no  certain  foreknowledge
of  things  contingent ;  and  in  this  he  has
been  very  generally  followed,  upon  no  other
grounds,  as  I  apprehend,  but  that  we  can-
not conceive  how  such  things  should  be
foreknown,  and  therefore  conclude  it  to  be
impossible.  Hence  has  arisen  an  opposi-
tion and  supposed  inconsistency  between
divine  prescience  and  human  liberty.  Some
have  given  up  the  first  in  favour  of  the  last,
and  others  have  given  up  the  last  in  order
to  support  the  first.

It  is  remarkable  that  these  disputants
have  never  apprehended  that  there  is  any
difficulty  in  reconciling  with  liberty  the
knowledge  of  what  is  past,  but  only  of  what
is  future.  It  is  prescience  only,  and  not
memory,  that  is  supposed  to  be  hostile  to
liberty,  and  hardly  reconcileable  to  it.

Yet  I  believe  the  difficulty  is  perfectly
equal  in  the  one  case  and  in  the  other.  I
admit,  that  we  cannot  account  for  prescience
of  the  actions  of  a  free  agent.  But  I  main-
tain that  we  can  as  little  account  for  me-
mory of  the  past  actions  of  a  free  agent,
If  any  man  thinks  he  can  prove  that  the
actions  of  a  free  agent  cannot  be  foreknown.


342


ON  THE INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[[essay  III.


he  will  find  the  same  arguments  of  equal
force  to  prove  that  the  past  actions  of  a  free
agent  cannot  he  remembered.*  It  is  true,
that  what  is  past  did  certainly  exist.  It  is
no  less  true  that  what  is  future  will  cer-
tainly exist.  I  know  no  reasoning  from  the
constitution  of  the  agent,  or  from  his  cir-
cumstances, that  has  not  equal  strength,
whether  it  be  applied  to  his  past  or  to  his
future  actions.  The  past  was,  but  now  is
not.  The  future  will  be,  but  now  is  not.
The  present  is  equally  connected  or  un-
connected with  both.

The  only  reason  why  men  have  appre-
hended so  great  disparity  in  cases  so  per-
fectly like,  I  take  to  be  this,  That  the  faculty
of  memory  in  ourselves  convinces  us  from
fact,  that  it  is  not  impossible  that  an  in-
telligent being,  even  a  finite  being,  should
have  certain  knowledge  of  past  actions  of
free  agents,  without  tracing  them  from  any-
thing necessarily  connected  with  them.
[310]  But  having  no  prescience  in  our-
selves corresponding  to  our  memory  of  what
is  past,  we  find  great  difficulty  in  admitting
it  to  be  possible  even  in  the  Supreme
Being.

A  faculty  which  we  possess  in  some  de-
gree, we  easily  admit  that  the  Supreme
Being  may  possess  in  a  more  perfect  degree ;
but  a  faculty  which  has  nothing  corre-
sponding to  it  in  our  constitution,  we  will
hardly  allow  to  be  possible.  We  are  so
constituted  as  to  have  an  intuitive  know-
ledge of  many  things  past ;  but  we  have  no
intuitive  knowledge  of  the  future. -f-  We
might  perhaps  have  been  so  constituted  as
to  have  an  intuitive  knowledge  of  the  future ;
but  not  of  the  past ;  nor  would  this  consti-
tution have  been  more  unaccountable  than
the  present,  though  it  might  be  much  more
inconvenient.  Had  this  been  our  consti-
tution, we  should  have  found  no  difficulty
in  admitting  that  the  Deity  may  know  all
things  future,  but  very  much  in  admitting
his  knowledge  of  things  that  are  past.

Our  original  faculties  are  all  unaccount-
able. Of  these  memory  is  one.  He  only
who  madethem,  comprehends  fully  howthey
are  made,  and  how  they  produce  in  us  not
only  a  conception,  but  a  firm  belief  and
assurance  of  things  which  it  concerns  us  to
know.


*  This  is  a  marvellous  doctrine.  The  difficulty  in
the  two  cases  is  not  the  same  The  past,  as  past,
whether  it  has  been  the  action  of  a  free  agent  or  not,
is  now  necessary ,-  and,  though  we  mny  be  unable  to
undcrsta  d  how  it  can  be  remembered,  the  supposi-
tion of-its  r  nieml>rance  involves  no  conrad;ction.
On  the  contrary,  the  future  action  of  a  free  agent  is
ex  hypothesi  not  a  necessary  event,  i  ut  an  event
cannot  be  now  certair.ly  foreseen,  excep  it  is  now
ce  tainly  to  be  j  and  to  say  that  what  is  certainly  to  be
i>  not  necessarily  to  be,  s  ems  a  contradiction.—  H.

t  If  by  intuitive  be -meant  immediate,  such  a  know-
ledge is  impossi  le-in  either  cise;  for  we  can  know
neither  the  past  nor  the  future- in  themselves,  but
only  in  the  present— that  i-,  mediately.—  H.


CHAPTER  III.


OF  DURATION.


From  the  principles  laid  down  in  the
first  chapter  of  this  Essay,  I  think  it  appears
that  odr  notion  of  duration,  as  well  as  our
belief  of  it,  is  got  by  the  faculty  of  memory.  *
It  is  essential  to  everything  remembered
that  it  be  something  which  is  past ;  and  we
cannot  conceive  a  thing  to  be  past,  without
conceiving  some  duration,  more  or  less,  be-
tween it  and  the  present.  [311]  As  soon
therefore  as  we  remember  anything,  we
must  have  both  a  notion  and  a  'belief  of
duration.  It  is  necessarily  suggested  by
every  operation  of  our  memory  ;  and  to  that
faculty  it  ought  to  -be  ascribed.  This  is,
therefore,  a  proper  place  to  consider  what
is  known  concerning  it.

Duration,  Extension,  and  Number,  are
the  measures  of  all  things  subject  to  men-
suration. When  we  apply  them  to  finite
things  which  are  measured  by  them,  they
seem  of  all  things  to  be  the  most  distinctly
conceived  and  most  within  the  reach  of
human  understanding.

Extension  having  three  dimensions,  has
an  endless  variety  of  modifications,  capable
of  being  accurately  defined  ;  and  their
various  relations  furnish  the  human  mind
with  its  most  ample  field  of  demonstrative
reasoning.  Duration  having  only  one  di-
mension, has  fewer  modifications  ;  but  these
are  clearly  understood — and  their  relations
admit  of  measure,  proportion,  and  demon-
strative reason  in£.

Number  is  called  discrete  quantity,  be-
cause it  is  compounded  of  units,  which  are
all  equal  and  similar,  and  it  can  only  be
divided  into  units.  This  is  true,  in  some
sense,  even  of  fractions  of  unity,  to  which
we  now  commonly  give  the  name  of  num-
ber. For,  in  every  fractional  number,  the
unit  is  supposed  to  be  subdivided  into  a
certain  number  of  equal  parts,  which  are
the  units  of  that  denomination,  and  the
fractions  of  that  denomination  are  only  di-
visible into  units  of  the  same  denomination.
Duration  and  extension  are  not  discrete,
but  continued  quantity.  They  consist  of
parts  perfectly  similar,  but  divisible  without
end.

In  order  to  aid  our  conception  of  the  mag-
nitude and  proportions  of  the  various  inter-
vals of  duration,  we  find  it  necessary  to  give
a  name  to  some  known  portion  of  it,  such
as  an  hour,  a  day,  a  year.  These  we  con-
sider as  units,  and,  by  the  number  of  them
contained  in  a  larger  interval,  we  form  a
distinct  conception  of  its  magnitude.  [312]
A  similar  expedient  we  find  necessary  to  give

*  Reid  <hus  apparently>makes  Time  an  empirical
cr  generalized  notion. — H.

[310-312]


CHAP.  III.]


OF  DURATION.


343


us  a  distinct  conception  of  the  magnitudes
and  proportions  of  things  extended.  Thus,
number  is  found  necessary,  as  a  common
measure  of  extension  and  duration.  But
this  perhaps  is  owing  to  the  weakness  of  our
understanding.  It  has  even  been  disco-
vered, by  the  sagacity  of  mathematicians,
that  this  expedient  does  not  in  all  cases
answer  its  intention.  For  there  are  pro-
portions of  continued  quantity,  which  can-
not be  perfectly  expressed  by  numbers ;
such  as  that  between  the  diagonal  and  side
of  a  square,  and  many  others.

The  parts  of  duration  have  to  other  parts
of  it  the  relations  of  prior  and  posterior,
and  to  the  present  they  have  the  relations
of  past  and  future.  The  notion  of  past  is
immediately  suggested  by  memory,  as  has
been  before  observed.  And  when  we  have
got  the  notions  of  present  and  past,  and  of
prior  and  posterior,  we  can  from  these
frame  a  notion  of  the  future  ;  for  the  future
is  that  which  is  posterior  to  the  present.
Nearness  and  distance  are  relations  equally
applicable  to  time  and  to  place.  Distance  in
time,  and  distance  in  place,  are  things  so
different  in  their  nature  and  so  like  in  their
relation,  that  it  is  difficult  to  determine
whether  the  name  of  distance  is  applied  to
both  in  the  same,  or  an  anological  sense.

The  extension  of  bodies  which  we  per-
ceive by  our  senses,  leads  us  necessarily  to
the  conception  and  belief  of  a  space  which
remains  immoveable  when  the  body  is  re-
moved. And  the  duration  of  events  which
we  remember  leads  us  necessarily  to  the
conception  and  belief  of  a  duration  which
would  have  gone  on  uniformly  though  the
event  had  never  happened.  •

Without  space  there  can  be  nothing  that
is  extended.  And  without  time  there
can  be  nothing  that  hath  duration.  This  I
think  undeniable  ;  and  yet  we  find  that  ex-
tension and  duration  are  not  more  clear  and
intelligible  than  space  and  time  are  dark  and
difficult  objects  of  contemplation. [313]

As  there  must  be  space  wherever  any-
thing extended  does  or  can  exist,  and  time


*  If  Space  and  Time  be  necessary  .yeneralizations
from  experience,  this  is  contrary  to  Keid's  own  doc-
trine, that  experience  can  give  us  no  necessary  know,
ledge.  If,  again,  they  be  necessary- and  original
notions,  the  account  of  their  origin  here  given,  is  in-
correct. It-should  have  been  said  that  experience  is
not  the  source  of  their  existence,  but  only  the  occa-
sion of  their  manifestation.  On  this  subject,  see,
mstar  omnium,  Cousin  on  Locke,  in  his  ••  Cours
de  Philosophic,"  (t.  ii.,  Lecons  17  and.  18.)  This
admirable  work  has  been  well  transla'ed  into  Eng-
lish, by  an  American,  philosopher,  Mr  Henry;  but
the  eloquei  ce  and  precision  of  the  author  can  only
be  properly  appreciaed  by  those  who  study  the  work
in  the  original  language.  The  reader  may,  however,
consult  likewise  Stewart's  "  Philosophical  Essays."
(Essay  ii.,'chap.  -2,)  ,and  Hoyer  Collard's  "  Frag-
ments," (ix.  and  x.)  These  auihors,  from  their  mce
limited  acquaintance  with  the  speculations  of  the  Ger-
man philosophers,  are,  however,  less  on  a  level  with
the  problem. —  H.

[313,  314]


when  there  is  or  can  be  anything  that  has
duration,  we  can  set  no  bounds  to  either,
even  in  our  imagination.  They  defy  all
limitation.  The  one  swells  in  our  concep-
tion to  immensity,  the  other  to  eternity.

An  eternity  past  is  an  object  which  we
cannot  comprehend ;  but  a  beginning  of
time,  unless  we  take  it  in  a  figurative  sense,
is  a  contradiction.  By  a  common  figure  of
speech,  we  give  the  name  of  time  to  those
motions  and  revolutions  by  which  we  mea-
sure it,  such  as  days  and  years.  We  can
conceive  a  beginning  of  these  sensible  mea-
sures of  time,  and  say  that  there  was  a  time
when  they  wrere  not,  a  time  undistinguished
by  any  motion  or  change  ;  but  to  say  that
there  was  a  time  before  all  time,  is  a  con-
tradiction.

All  limited  duration  is  comprehended  in
time,  and  all  limited  extension  in  space.
These,  in  their  capacious  womb,  contain  all
finite  existences,  but  are  contained  by  none.
Created  things  have  their  particular  place
in  space,  and  their  particular  place  in  time  ;
but  time  is  everywhere,  and  space  at  alltimes.
They  embrace  each  the  other,  and  have  that
mysterious  union  which  the  schoolmen  con-
ceived between  soul  and  body.  The  whole
of  each  is  in  every  part  of  the  other.

We  are  at  a  loss  to  what  category  or  class
of  things  we  ought  to  refer  them.  They
are  not  beings,  but  rather  the  receptacles
of  every  created  being,  without  which  it
could  not  have  had  the  possibility  of  exist-
ence. Philosophers  have  endeavoured  to
reduce  all  the  objects  of  human  thought  to
these  three  classes,  of  substances,  modes,
and  relations.  To  which  of  them  shall  we
refer  time,  space,  and  number,  the  most
common  objects  of  thought  ? [314]

Sir  Isaac  Newton  thought  that  the  Deity,
by  existing  everywhere  and  at  all  times,
constitutes  time  and  space,  immensity  and
eternity.  This  probably  suggested  to  his
great  friend,  Dr  Clarke,  what  he  calls  the
argument  a  priori  for  the  existence  of  an
immense  and  eternal  Being.  Space  and
time,  he  thought,  are  only  abstract  or  par-
tial conceptions  of  an  immensity  and  eter-
nity which  forces  itself  upon  our  belief.
And  as  immensity  and  eternity  are  not
substances,  they  must  be  the  attributes  of  a
Being  who  is  necessarily  immense  and
eternal.  These  are  the  speculations  of  men
of  superior  genius.  But  whether  thev  be
as  solid  as  they  are  sublime,  or  whether
they  be  the  wanderings  of  imagination  in  a
region  beyond  the  limits  of  human  under-
standing, I  am  unable  to  determine.

The  schoolmen  made  eternity  to  be  a
nunc  stajis — that  is,  a  moment  of  time  that
stands  still.  This  was  to  put  a  spoke  into
the  wheel  of  time,  and  might  give  satisfac-
tion to  those  who  are  to  be  satisfied  by
words without meaning. But I can as


344


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[EssAy  in


easily  believe  a  circle  to  be  a  square  as
time  to  stand  still.

Such  paradoxes  and  riddles,  if  I  may  so
call  them,  men  are  involuntarily  led  into
when  they  reason  about  time  and  space,
and  attempt  to  comprehend  their  nature.
They  are  probably  things  of  which  the  hu-
man faculties  give  an  imperfect  and  inade-
quate conception.  Hence  difficulties  arise
which  we  in  vain  attempt  to  overcome,  and
doubts  which  we  are  unable  to  resolve.
Perhaps  some  faculty  which  we  possess  not,
is  necessary  to  remove  the  darkness  which
hangs  over  them,  and  makes  us  so  apt  to
bewilder  ourselves  when  we  reason  about
them. [315]


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  IDENTITY.

The  conviction  which  every  man  has  of
his  Identity,  as  far  back  as  his  memory
reaches,  needs  no  aid  of  philosophy  to
strengthen  it;  and  no  philosophy  can  weaken
it,  without  first  producing  some  degree  of
insanity.

The  philosopher,  however,  may  very
properly  consider  this  conviction  as  a  phe-
nomenon of  human  nature  worthy  of  his
attention.  If  he  can  discover  its  cause,  an
addition  is  made  to  his  stock  of  knowledge.
If  not,  it  must  be  held  as  a  part  of  our  ori-
ginal constitution,  or  an  effect  of  that  con-
stitution produced  in  a  manner  unknown
to  us.

We  may  observe,  first  of  all,  that  this  con-
viction is  indispensably  necessary  to  all  ex-
ercise of  reason.  The  operations  of  reason,
whether  in  action  or  in  speculation,  are
made  up  of  successive  parts.  The  antece-
dent are  the  foundation  of  the  consequent,
and,  without  the  conviction  that  the  ante-
cedent have  been  seen  or  done  by  me,  I
could  have  no  reason  to  proceed  to  the  con-
sequent, in  any  speculation,  or  in  any
active  project  whatever.

There  can  be  no  memory  of  what  is  past
without  the  conviction  that  we  existed  at
the  time  remembered.  There  may  be  good
arguments  to  convince  me  that  I  existed
before  the  earliest  thing  I  can  remember ;
but  to  suppose  that  my  memory  reaches  a
moment  farther  back  than  my  belief  and
conviction  of  my  existence,  is  a  contradic-
tion.

The  moment  a  man  loses  this  conviction,
as  if  he  had  drunk  the  water  of  Lethe,  past
things  are  done  away ;  and,  in  his  own
belief,  he  then  begins  to  exist.  [316]
Whatever  was  thought,  or  said,  or  done,
or  suffered  before  that  period,  may  belong
to  some^  other  person ;  but  he  can  never
impute  it  to  himself,  or  take  any  subse-


quent step  that  supposes  it  to  be  his  do-
ing.

From  this  it  is  evident  that  we  must
have  the  conviction  of  our  own  continued
existence  and  identity,  as  soon  as  we  are
capable  of  thinking  or  doing  anything,  on
account  of  what  we  have  thought,  or  done,
or  suffered  before ;  that  is,  as  soon  as  we
are  reasonable  creatures.

That  we  may  form  as  distinct  a  notion  as
we  are  able  of  this  phenomenon  of  the  human
mind,  it  is  proper  to  consider  what  is  meant
by  identity  in  general,  what  by  our  own
personal  identity,  and  how  we  are  led  into
that  invincible  belief  and  conviction  which
every  man  has  of  his  own  personal  identity,
as  far  as  his  memory  reaches.

Identity  in  general,  I  take  to  be  a  rela-
tion between  a  thing  which  is  known  to
exist  at  one  time,  and  a  thing  which  is
known  to  have  existed  at  another  time.*
If  you  ask  whether  they  are  one  and  the
same,  or  two  different  things,  every  man  of
common  sense  understands  the  meaning  of
your  question  perfectly.  Whence  we  may
infer  with  certainty,  that  every  man  of
common  sense  has  a  clear  and  distinct  no-
tion of  identity.

If  you  ask  a  definition  of  identity,  I  con-
fess I  can  give  none ;  it  is  too  simple  a  no-
tion to  admit  of  logical  definition.  I  can
say  it  is  a  relation  ;  but  I  cannot  find  words
to  express  the  specific  difference  between
this  and  other  relations,  though  I  am  in  no
danger  of  confounding  it  with  any  other.
I  can  say  that  diversity  is  a  contrary  rela-
tion, and  that  similitude  and  dissimilitude
are  another  couple  of  contrary  relations,
which  every  man  easily  distinguishes  in  his
conception  from  identity  and  diversity.
[317]

I  see  evidently  that  identity  supposes
an  uninterrupted  continuance  of  existence.
That  which  hath  ceased  to  exist,  cannot  be
the  same  with  that  which  afterwards  begins
to  exist ;  for  this  would  be  to  suppose  a
being  to  exist  after  it  ceased  to  exist,  and
to  have  had  existence  before  it  was  produced,
which  are  manifest  contradictions.  Con-
tinued uninterrupted  existence  is  therefore
necessarily  implied  in  identity.

Hence  we  may  infer  that  identity  cannot,
in  its  proper  sense,  be  applied  to  our  pains,
our  pleasures,  our  thoughts,  or  any  opera-
tion of  our  minds.  The  pain  felt  this  day
is  not  the  same  individual  pain  which  I  felt
yesterday,  though  they  may  be  similar  in
kind  and  degree,  and  have  the  same  cause.
The  same  may  be  said  of  every  feeling  and
of  every  operation  of  mind  : they  are  all


*  Identity  is  a  relation  between  our  cognitions  of
a  thing,  and  not  letween^.things  themselves.  It
would,  therefore,  have  been  better  in  this  sentence  to
have  said,  "  a  relations Letween  a  thing  as  known  to
exist  at  one  time,  and  a  thing  as  knoun  to  exist  at
another  time." — H.

[315-317]


IV.]


OF  IDENTITY.


345


successive  in  their  nature,  like  time  itself,
no  two  moments  of  which  can  be  the  same
moment.  ■

It  is  otherwise  with  the  parts  of  absolute
space.  They  always  are,  and  were,  and
will  be  the  same.  So  far,  I  think,  we  pro-
ceed upon  clear  ground  in  fixing  the  notion
of  identity  in  general.

It  is,  perhaps,  more  difficult  to  ascertain
with  precision  the  meaning  of  Personality;
but  it  is  not  necessary  in  the  present  sub-
ject :  it  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to
observe,  that  all  mankind  place  their  per-
sonality in  something  that  cannot  be  divided,
or  consist  of  parts.  A  part  of  a  person  is
a  manifest  absurdity.

When  a  man  loses  his  estate,  his  health,
his  strength,  he  is  still  the  same  person,
and  has  lost  nothing  of  his  personality.  If
he  has  a  leg  or  an  arm  cut  off,  he  is  the
same  person  he  was  before.  The  amputated
member  is  no  part  of  his  person,  otherwise
it  would  have  a  right  to  a  part  of  his
estate,  and  be  liable  for  a  part  of  his  en-
gagements ;  it  would  be  entitled  to  a  share  of
his  merit  and  demerit — which  is  manifestly
absurd.  A  person  is  something  indivisible,
and  is  what  Leibnitz  calls  a  monad. [318]

My  personal  identity,  therefore,  implies
the  continued  existence  of  that  indivisible
thing  which  I  call  myself.  Whatever  this
self  may  be,  it  is  something  which  thinks,
and  deliberates,  and  resolves,  and  acts,  and
suffers.  I  am  not  thought,  I  am  not  action,
I  am  not  feeling ;  I  am  something  that
thinks,  and  acts,  and  suffers.  My  thoughts,
and  actions,  and  feelings,  change  every
moment — they  have  no  continued,  but  a
successive  existence  ;  but  that  self  or  /,  to
which  they  belong,  is  permanent,  and  has  the
same  relation  to  all  the  succeeding  thoughts,
actions,  and  feelings,  which  I  call  mine.

Such  are  the  notions  that  I  have  of  my
personal  identity.  But  perhaps  it  may  be
said,  this  may  all  be  fancy  without  reality.
How  do  you  know  ?— what  evidence  have
you,  that  there  is  such  a  permanent  self
which  has  a  claim  to  all  the  thoughts,
actions,  and  feelings,  which  you  call  yours  ?

To  this  I  answer,  that  the  proper  evi-
dence I  have  of  all  this  is  remembrance.  I
remember  that,  twenty  years  ago,  I  conversed
with  such  a  person  ;  I  remember  several
things  that  passed  in  that  conversation;
my  memory  testifies  not  only  that  this  was
done,  but  that  it  was  done  by  me  who  now
remember  it.  If  it  was  done  by  me,  I  must
have  existed  at  that  time,  and  continued  to
exist  from  that  time  to  the  present :  if  the
identical  person  whom  I  call  myself,  had
not  a  part  in  that  conversation,  my  memory
is  fallacious — it  gives  a  distinct  and  positive
testimony  of  what  is  not  true.  Every  man
in  his  senses  believes  what  he  distinctly
remembers,  and  everything  he  remembers
[318-320]


convinces  him  that  he  existed  at  the  time
remembered.

Although  memory  gives  the  most  irre-
sistible evidence  of  my  being  the  identical
person  that  did  such  a  thing,  at  such  a  time,
I  may  have  other  good  evidence  of  things
which  befel  me,  and  which  I  do  not  remem-
ber :  I  know  who  bare  me  and  suckled  me,
but  I  do  not  remember  these  events. [319]

It  may  here  be  observed,  (though  the
observation  would  have  been  unnecessary  if
some  great  philosophers  had  not  contra-
dicted it,)  that  it  is  not  my  remembering
any  action  of  mine  that  makes  me  to  be
the  person  who  did  it.  This  remembrance
makes  me  to  know  assuredly  that  I  did  it ;
but  I  might  have  done  it  though  I  did  not
remember  it.  That  relation  to  me,  which
is  expressed  by  saying  that  I  did  it,  would
be  the  same  though  I  had  not  the  least  re-
membrance of  it.  To  say  that  my  remem-
bering that  I  did  such  a  thing,  or,  as  some
choose  to  express  it,  my  being  conscious
that  I  did  it,  makes  me  to  have  done  it,
appears  to  me  as  great  an  absurdity  as  it
would  be  to  say,  that  my  belief  that  the
world  was  created  made  it  to  be  created.

When  we  pass  judgment  on  the  identity
of  other  persons  besides  ourselves,  we  pro-
ceed upon  other  grounds,  and  determine
from  a  variety  of  circumstances,  which
sometimes  produce  the  firmest  assurance,
and  sometimes  leave  room  for  doubt.  The
identity  of  persons  has  often  furnished  mat-
ter of  serious  litigation  before  tribunals  of
justice.  But  no  man  of  a  sound  mind  ever
doubted  of  his  own  identity,  as  far  as  he
distinctly  remembered.

The  identity  of  a  person  is  a  perfect
identity  ;  wherever  it  is  real,  it  admits  of  no
degrees  ;  and  it  is  impossible  that  a  person
should  be  in  part  the  same,  and  in  part
different ;  because  a  person  is  a  monad,  and
is  not  divisible  into  parts.  The  evidence  of
identity  in  other  persons  besides  ourselves
does  indeed  admit  of  all  degrees,  from  what
we  account  certainty  to  the  least  degree  of
probability.  But  still  it  is  true  that  the'
same  person  is  perfectly  the  same,  and  can-
not be  so  in  part,  or  in  some  degree  only.

For  this  cause,  I  have  first  considered
personal  identity,  as  that  which  is  perfect
in  its  kind,  and  the  natural  measure  of  that
which  is  imperfect, [320]

We  probably  at  first  derive  our  notion  of
identity  from  that  natural  conviction  which
every  man  has  from  the  dawn  of  reason  of
his  own  identity  and  continued  existence.
The  operations  of  our  minds  are  all  succes-
sive, and  have  no  continued  existence.  But
the  thinking  being  has  a  continued  exist-
ence ;  and  we  have  an  invincible  belief  that
it  remains  the  same  when  all  its  thoughts
and  operations  change.

Our  judgments  of  the  identity  of  objects


646


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  III.


of  sense  seem  to  be  formed  much  upon  the
same  grounds  as  our  judgments  of  the
identity  of  other  persons  besides  ourselves.
Wherever  we  observe  great  similarity,
we  are  apt  to  presume  identity,  if  no  reason
appears  to  the  contrary.  Two  objects  ever
so  like,  when  they  are  perceived  at  the  same
time,  cannot  be  the  same ;  but,  if  they  are
presented  to  our  senses  at  different  times,
we  are  apt  to  think  them  the  same,  merely
from  their  similarity.

Whether  this  be  a  natural  prejudice,  or
from  whatever  cause  it  proceeds,  it  cer-
tainly appears  in  children  from  infancy ;
and,  when  we  grow  up,  it  is  confirmed  in
most  instances  by  experience  ;  for  we  rarely
find  two  individuals  of  the  same  species  that
are  not  distinguishable  by  obvious  differ-
ences.

A  man  challenges  a  thief  whom  he  finds
in  possession  of  his  horse  or  his  watch,  only
on  similarity.  When  the  watchmaker
swears  that  he  sold  this  watch  to  such  a
person,  his  testimony  is  grounded  on  simi-
larity. The  testimony  of  witnesses  to  the
identity  of  a  person  is  commonly  grounded
on  no  other  evidence.

Thus  it  appears  that  the  evidence  we
have  of  our  own  identity,  as  far  back  as  we
remember,  is  totally  of  a  different  kind  from
the  evidence  we  have  of  the  identity  of  other
persons,  or  of  objects  of  sense.  The  first
is  grounded  on  memory,  and  gives  un-
doubted certainty.  The  last  is  grounded  on
similarity,  and  on  other  circumstances,
which  in  many  cases  are  not  so  decisive  as
to  leave  no  room  for  doubt. [321]

It  may  likewise  be  observed,  that  the
identity  of  objects  of  sense  is  never  perfect.
All  bodies,  as  they  consist  of  innumerable
parts  that  may  be  disjoined  from  them  by
a  great  variety  of  causes,  are  subject  to
continual  changes  of  their  substance,  in-
creasing, diminishing,  changing  insensibly.
When  such  alterations  are  gradual,  because
language  could  not  afford  a  different  name
for  every  different  state  of  such  a  change-
able being,  it  retains  the  same  name,  and
is  considered  as  the  same  thing.  Thus
we  say  of  an  old  regiment  that  it  did  such  a
thing  a  century  ago,  though  there  now  is  not
a  man  alive  who  then  belonged  to  it.  We  say
a  tree  is  the  same  in  the  seed-bed  and  in  the
forest.  A  ship  of  war,  which  has  successively
changed  her  anchors,  her  tackle,  her  sails,
her  masts,  her  planks,  and  her  timbers,  while
she  keeps  the  same  name,  is  the  same.

The  identity,  therefore,  which  we  ascribe
to  bodies,  whether  natural  or  artificial,  is
not  perfect  identity ;  it  is  rather  some-
thing which,  for  the  conveniency  of  speech,
we  call  identity.  It  admits  of  a  great
change  of  the  subject,  providing  the  change
be  gradual,  sometimes  even  of  a  total
change. And  the  changes  which  in  com-


mon language  are  made  consistent  with
identity,  differ  from  those  that  are  thought
to  destroy  it,  not  in  kind,  but  in  number
and  degree.  It  has  no  fixed  nature  wheu
applied  to  bodies  ;  and  questions  about  the
identity  of  a  body  are  very  often  questions
about  words.  But  identity,  when  applied
to  persons,  has  no  ambiguity,  and  admits
not  of  degrees,  or  of  more  and  less.  It  is
the  foundation  of  all  rights  and  obligations,
and  of  all  accountableness  ;  and  the  notion
of  it  is  fixed  and  precise. [322]


CHAPTER  V.

mr  locke's  account  of  the  origin  op  our
ideas,  and  particularly  of  the  idea
of  duration.

It  was  a  very  laudable  attempt  of  Mr
Locke  "  to  inquire  into  the  original  of  those
ideas,  notions,  or  whatever  you  please  to
call  them,  which  a  man  observes,  and  is
conscious  to  himself  he  has  in  his  mind,
and  the  ways  whereby  the  understanding
comes  to  be  furnished  with  them.'*  No
man  was  better  qualified  for  this  investi-
gation ;  and  I  believe  no  man  ever  en-
gaged in  it  with  a  more  sincere  love  of
truth.

His  success,  though  great,  would,  I  ap-
prehend, have  been  greater,  if  he  had  not
too  early  formed  a  system  or  hypothesis
upon  this  subject,  without  all  the  caution
and  patient  induction,  which  is  necessary
in  drawing  general  conclusions  from  facts.

The  sum  of  his  doctrine  I  take  to  be
this — "  That  all  our  ideas  or  notions  may
be  reduced  to  two  classes,  the  simple  and
the  complex :  That  the  simple  are  purely
the  work  of  Nature,  the  understanding
being  merely  passive  in  receiving  them  :
That  they  are  all  suggested  by  two  powers
of  the  mind — to  wit,  Sensation  and  Reflec-
tion ;*  and  that  they  are  the  materials  of
all  our  knowledge.  That  the  other  class  of
complex  ideas  are  formed  by  the  under-
standing itself,  which,  being  once  stored
with  simple  ideas  of  sensation  and  reflec-
tion, has  the  power  to  repeat,  to  compare,
and  to  combine  them,  even  to  an  almost
infinite  variety,  and  so  can  make  at  pleasure
new  complex  ideas  :  but  that  is  not  in  the
power  of  the  most  exalted  wit,  or  enlarged

*  That  "Locke  did  not  (as  even  Mr  Stewart  sup-
poses) introduce  Reflection,  either  name  or  thing,
into  the  philosophy  of  mind,  see  Note  I.  Nor
was  he  even  the  first  explicitly  to  enunciate  Sense
and  Reflection  as  the  two  sources  of  our  knowledge;
for  I  can  shew  that  this  had  been  done  in  a  far  more
philosophical  manner  by  some  of  the  schoolmen ;
Reflection  with  them  not  being  merely,  as  with
Locke,  a  source  of  adventitious,  empirical,  or  a  pos-
teriori knowledge,  but  the  mean  by  which  we  dis-
close also  the  native,  pure,  or  a  priori  cognitions
which  the  intellect  itself  contains. — H.


f32l,  322"]


chap,  v.]  LOCKE'S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  IDEA  OF  DURATION. 347


understanding,  by  any  quickness  or  variety
of  thought,  to  invent  or  frame  one  new
simple  iuea  in  the  mind,  not  taken  in  by
the  two  ways  before-mentioned.  [323]  That,
as  our  power  over  the  material  world  reaches
only  to  the  compounding,  dividing,  and
putting  together,  in  various  forms,  the
matter  which  God  has  made,  but  reaches
not  to  the  production  or  annihilation  of  a
single  atom ;  so  we  may  compound,  com-
pare, and  abstract  the  original  and  simple
ideas  which  Nature  has  given  us ;  but  are
unable  to  fashion  in  our  understanding  any
simple  idea,  not  received  in  by  our  senses
from  external  objects,  or  by  reflection  from
the  operations  of  our  own  mind  about  them."

This  account  of  the  origin  of  all  our  ideas
is  adopted  by  Bishop  Berkeley  and  Mr
Hume;  but  some  very  ingenious  philoso-
phers, who  have  a  high  esteem  of  Locke's
Essay,  are  dissatisfied  with  it.

Dr  Hutcheson  of  Glasgow,  in  his  "  In-
quiry into  the  Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Virtue,"
lias  endeavoured  to  shew  that  these  are
original  and  simple  ideas,  furnished  by
original  powers,  which  he  calls  the  sense  of
beauty  and  the  moral  sense.

Dr  Price,  in  his  "  Review  of  the  Principal
Questions  and  Difficulties  in  Morals,"  has
observed,  very  justly,  that,  if  we  take  the
words  sensation  and  reflection,  as  Mr  Locke
has  defined  them  in  the  beginning  of  his
excellent  Essay,  it  will  be  impossible  to
derive  some  of  the  most  important  of  our
ideas  from  them ;  and  that,  by  the  under-
standing— that,  is  by  our  judging  and  reason-
ing power — we  are  furnished  with  many
simple  and  original  notions.

Mr  Locke  says  that,  by  reflection,  he
would  be  understood  to  mean  "  the  notice
which  the  mind  takes  of  its  own  operations,
and  the  manner  of  them. "  This,  I  think,  we
commonly  call  consciousness;  from  which,
indeed,  we  derive  all  the  notions  we  have
of  the  operations  of  our  own  minds  ;  and  he
often  speaks  of  the  operations  of  our  own
minds,  as  the  only  objects  of  reflection.

When  reflection  is  taken  in  this  confined
sense,  to  say  that  all  our  ideas  are  ideas
either  of  sensation  or  reflection,  is  to  say
that  everything  we  can  conceive  is  either
some  object  of  sense  or  some  operation  of
our  own  minds,  which  is  far  from  being
true. [324]

But  the  word  reflection  is  commonly  used
in  a  much  more  extensive  sense ;  it  is  ap-
plied to  many  operations  of  the  mind,  with
more  propriety  than  to  that  of  conscious-
ness. We  reflect,  when  we  remember,  or
call  to  mind  what  is  past,  and  survey  it
with  attention.  We  reflect,  when  we  define,
when  we  distinguish,  when  we  judge,  when
we  reason,  whether  about  things  material
or  intellectual.

When  reflection  is  taken  in  this  sense,
[ 323-325]


which  is  more  common,  and  therefore  more
proper*  than  the  sense  which  Mr  Locke
has  put  upon  it,  it  may  be  justly  said  to  be
the  only  source  of  all  our  distinct  and  ac-
curate notions  of  things.  For,  although  our
first  notions  of  material  things  are  got  by
the  external  senses,  and  our  first  notions  of
the  operations  of  our  own  minds  by  con-
sciousness, these  first  notions  are  neither
simple  nor  clear.  Our  senses  and  our  con-
sciousness are  continually  shifting  from  one
object  to  another  ;  their  operations  are  tran-
sient and  momentary,  and  leave  no  distinct
notion  of  their  objects,  until  they  are  re-
called by  memory,  examined  with  attention,
and  compared  with  other  things.

This  reflection  is  not  one  power  of  the
mind ;  it  comprehends  many ;  such  as  re-
collection, attention,  distinguishing,  com-
paring, judging.  By  these  powers  our  minds
are  furnished  not  only  with  many  simple
and  original  notions,  but  with  all  our  notions,
which  are  accurate  and  well  defined,  and
which  alone  are  the  proper  materials  of
reasoning.  Many  of  these  are  neither  no-
tions of  the  objects  of  sense,  nor  of  the
operations  of  our  own  minds,  .and  therefore
neither  ideas  of  sensation,  nor  of  reflection,
in  the  sense  that  Mr  Locke  gives  to  reflec-
tion. But,  if  any  one  chooses  to  call  them
ideas  of  reflection,  taking  the  word  in  the
more  common  and  proper  sense,  I  have  no
objection. [325]

Mr  Locke  seems  to  me  to  have  used  the
word  reflection  sometimes  in  that  limited
sense  which  he  has  given  to  it  in  the  defi-
nition before  mentioned,  and  sometimes  to
have  fallen  unawares  into  the  common  sense
of  the  word  ;  and  by  this  ambiguity  his  ac-
count of  the  origin  of  our  ideas  is  darkened
and  perplexed.

Having  premised  these  things  in  general
of  Mr  Locke's  theory  of  the  origin  of  our
ideas  or  notions,  I  proceed  to  some  observ-
ations on  his  account  of  the  idea  of  dura-
tion.

"  Reflection,"  he  says,  "  upon  the  train  of
ideas,  which  appear  one  after  another  in  our
minds,  is  that  which  furnishes  us  with  the
idea  of  succession ;  and  the  distance  between
any  two  parts  of  that  succession,  is  that  we
call  duration."

If  it  be  meant  that  the  idea  of  succession
is  prior  to  that  of  duration,  either  in  time
or  in  the  order  of  nature,  this,  I  think,  is
impossible,  because  succession,  as  Dr  Price
justly  observes,  presupposes  duration,  and
can  in  no  sense  be  prior  to  it ;  and  there-


*  This  is  not  correct;  and  the  employment  of
Reflection  in  another  meaning  than  that  of  irirpotpii
Tpo;  iaorto — the  reflex  knowledge  or  consciousness
which  the  mind  has  of  its  own  affections— is  wholly  a
secondary  and  less  proper  signification.  See  Note  I.
I  may  again  notice,  that  Reid  vacillates  in  the  mean-
ing he  gives  to  the  term  Reflection.  Compare  above,
p.  '232,  note  *,  and  below,  under  p.  516.— H.


34»


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  III


fore  it  would  be  more  proper  to  derive  the
idea  of  succession  from  that  of  duration.

But  how  do  we  get  the  idea  of  succession  ?
[t  is,  says  he,  by  reflecting  uponthe  train
of  ideas  which  appear  one  after  another  in
our  minds.

Reflecting  upon  the  train  of  ideas  can  be
nothing  butrememberingit,  and  giving  atten-
tion to  what  our  memory  testifies  concern-
ing it ;  for,  if  we  did  not  remember  it,  we
could  not  bave  a  thought  about  it.  So  that
it  is  evident  that  this  reflection  includes
remembrance,  without  which  there  could  be
no  reflection  on  what  is  past,  and  conse-
quently no  idea  of  succession. [326]

It  may  here  be  observed,  that,  if  we  speak
strictly  and  philosophically,  no  kind  of  suc-
cession can  bean  object  either  of  the  senses
or  of  consciousness ;  because  the  operations
of  both  are  confined  to  the  present  point  of
time,  and  there  can  be  no  succession  in  a
point  of  time  ;  and  on  that  account  the  mo-
tion of  a  body,  which  is  a  successive  change
of  place,  could  not  be  observed  by  the  senses
alone  without  the  aid  of  memory.

As  this  observation  seems'  to  contradict
the  common  sense  and  common  language  of
mankind,  when  they  affirm  that  they  see  a
ody  move,  and  hold  motion  to  be  an. object
of  the  senses,  it  is  proper  to  take  notice,  that
this  contradiction  between  the  philosopher
and  the  vulgar  is  apparent  only,  and  not
real.  It  arises  from  this,  that  philosophers
and  the  vulgar  differ  in  the  meaning  they
put  upon  what  is  called  the  present  time,
and  are  thereby  led  to  make  a  different  limit
between  sense  and  memory.

Philosophers  give  the  name  of  the  pre-
sent to  that  indivisible  point  of  time,  which
divides  the  future  from  the  past :  but  the
vulgar  find  it  more  convenient  in  the  affairs
of  life,  to  give  the  name  of  present  to  a  por-
tion of  time,  which  extends  more  or  less,
according  to  circumstances,  into  the  past  or
the  future.  Hence  we  say,  the  present
hour,  the  present  year,  the  present  century,
though  one  point  only  of  these  periods  can
be  present  in  the  philosophical  sense.

It  has  been  observed  by  grammarians,
that  the  present  tense  in  verbs  is  not  con-
fined to  an  indivisible  point  of  time,  but  is
so  far  extended  as  to  have  a  beginning,  a
middle,  and  an  end ;  and  that,  in  the  most
copious  and  accurate  languages,  these  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  present  are  distinguished
by  different  forms  of  the  verb.

As  the  purposes  of  conversation  make  it
convenient  to  extend  what  is  called  the  pre-
sent, the  same  reason  leads  men  to  extend
the  province  of  sense,  and  to  carry  its  limit
as  far  back  as  they  carry  the  present.  Thus
a  man  may  say,  I  saw  such  a  person  just
now  :  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  find  fault
with  this  way  of  speaking,  because  it  is
authorized  bv  custom,  and  has  a  distinct


meaning.  [327]  But,  if  we  speak  philoso-
phically, the  senses  do  not  testify  what  we
saw,  but  only  what  we  see  ;  what  I  saw
last  moment  I  consider  as  the  testimony  of
sense,  though  it  is  now  only  the  testimony
of  memory.

There  is  no  necessity  in  common  life  of
dividing  accurately  the  provinces  of  sense
and  of  memory ;  and,  therefore  ,we  assign  to
sense,  not  an  indivisible  point  of  time,  but
that  small  portion  of  time  which  we  call  the
present,  which  has  a  beginning,  a  middle,
and  an  end.

Hence,  it  is  easy  to  see  that,  though,  in
common  language,  we  speak  with  perfect
propriety  and  truth,  when  we  say  that  we
see  a  body  move,  and  that  motion  is  an  ob-
ject of  sense,  yet  when,  as  philosophers,  we
distinguish  accurately  the  province  of  sense
from  that  of  memory,  we  can  no  more  see
what  is  past,  though  but  a  moment  ago,
than  we  can  remember  what  is  present ;  so
that,  speaking  philosophically,  it  is  only  by
the  aid  of  memory  that  we  discern  motion,
or  any  succession  whatsoever.  We  see  the
present  place  of  the  body  ;  we  remember
the  successive  advance  it  made  to  that
place  :  the  first  can  then  only  give  us  a
conception  of  motion  when  joined  to  the  last.

Having  considered  the  account  given  by
Mr  Locke,  of  the  idea  of  succession,  we
shall  next  consider  how,  from  the  idea  of
succession,  he  derives  the  idea  of  duration.

"  The  distance,"  he  says,  "  between  any
parts  of  that  succession,  or  between, the
appearance  of  any  two  ideas  in  our  minds,
is  that  we  call  duration."

To  conceive  this  the  more  distinctly,  let
us  call  the  distance  between  an  idea  and
that  which  immediately  succeeds  it,  one  ele-
ment of  duration  ;  the  distance  between  an
idea,  and  the  second  that  succeeds  it,  two
elements,  and  so  on  :  if  ten  such  elements
make  duration,  then  one  must  make  dura-
tion, otherwise  duration  must  be  made  up  of
parts  that  have  no  duration,  which  is  im-
possible. [328]

For,  suppose  a  succession  of  as  many
ideas  as  you  please,  if  none  of  these  ideas
have  duration,  nor  any  interval  of  duration
be  between  one  and  another,  then  it  is
perfectly  evident  there  can  be  no  interval
of  duration  between  the  first  and  the  last,
how  great  soever  their  number  be.  I  con-
clude, therefore,  that  there  must  be  dura-
tion iu  every  single  interval  or  element  of
which  the  whole  duration  is  made  up.
Nothing  indeed,  is  more  certain,  than  that
every  elementary  part  of  duration  must
have  duration,  as  every  elementary  part  of
extension  must  have  extension.

Now,  it  must  be  observed  that,  in  these

elements  of  duration,  or  single  intervals  of

successive  ideas,  there  is  no  succession  of

ideas  ;  yet  we  must  conceive  them  to  have

[326-32S]


chap,  v.]  LOCKE'S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  IDEA  OF  DURATION. 349


duration ;  whence  we  may  conclude  with
certainty,  that  there  is  a  conception  of  du-
ration, where  there  is  no  succession  of  ideas
in  the  mind.

We  may  measure  duration  by  the  suc-
cession of  thoughts  in  the  mind,  as  we  mea-
sure length  by  inches  or  feet ;  but  the  notion
or  idea  of  duration  must  be  antecedent  to
the  mensuration  of  it,  as  the  notion  of
length  is  antecedent  to  its  being  measured.

Mr  Locke  draws  some  conclusions  from
his  account  of  the  idea  of  duration,  which
may  serve  as  a  touchstone  to  discover  how
far  it  is  genuine.  One  is,  that,  if  it  were
possible  for  a  waking  man  to  keep  only  one
idea  in  his  mind  without  variation,  or  the
succession  of  others,  he  would  have  no  per-
ception of  duration  at  all ;  and  the  moment
he  began  to  have  this  idea,  would  seem  to
have  no  distance  from  the  moment  he
ceased  to  have  it.

Now,  that  one  idea  should  seem  to  have
no  duration,  and  that  a  multiplication  of  that  j
no  duration  should  seem  to  have  duration,
appears  to  me  as  impossible  as  that  the
multiplication  of  nothing  should  produce
something. [329]

Another  conclusion  which  the  author
draws  from  this  theory  is,  that  the  same
period  of  duration  appears  long  to  us  when
the  succession  of  ideas  in  our  mind  is  quick,
and  short  when  the  succession  is  slow.

There  can  be  no  doubt  but  the  same
length  of  duration  appears  in  some  circum-
stances much  longer  than  in  others  ;  the
time  appears  long  when  a  man  is  impatient
under  any  pain  or  distress,  or  when  he  is
eager  in  the  expectation  of  some  happiness.
On  the  other  hand,  when  he  is  pleased  and
happy  in  agreeable  conversation,  or  delighted
with  a  variety  of  agreeable  objects  that
strike  his  senses  or  his  imagination,  time
flies  away,  and  appears  short.

According  to  Mr  Locke's  theory,  in  the
first  of  these  cases,  the  succession  of  ideas
is  very  quick,  and  in  the  last  very  slow.  I
am  rather  inclined  to  think  that  the  very
contrary  is  the  truth.  When  a  man  is  racked
with  pain,  or  with  expectation,  he  can
hardly  think  of  anything  but  his  distress  ;
and  the  more  his  mind  is  occupied  by  that
sole  object,  the  longer  the  time  appears.
On  the  other  hand,  when  he  is  entertained
with  cheerful  music,  with  lively  conversa-
tion, and  brisk  sallies  of  wit,  there  seems
to  be  the  quickest  succession  of  ideas,  but
the  time  appears  shortest.

I  have  heard  a  military  officer,  a  man  of
candour  and  observation,  say,  that  the  time
he  was  engaged  in  hot  action  always,  ap-
peared to  him  much  shorter  than  it  really
was.  Yet  I  think  it  cannot  be  supposed
that  the  succession  of  ideas  was  then  slower
than  usual.  *


*  In  travelling,  the  time^seems  verv  short,  while
329,  330]


If  the  idea  of  duration  were  got  merely
by  the  succession  of  ideas  in  our  minds,
that  succession  must,  to  ourselves,  appear
equally  quick  at  all  times,  because  the  only
measure  of  duration  is  the  number  of  suc-
ceeding ideas  ;  but  I  believe  every  man
capable  of  reflection  will  be  sensible,  that
at  one  time  his  thoughts  come  slowly  and
heavily,  and  at  another  time  have  a  much
quicker  and  livelier  motion. [330]

I  know  of  no  ideas  or  notions  that  have
a  better  claim  to  be  accounted  simple  and
original  than  those  of  Space  and  Time.  It
is  essential  both  to  space  and  time  to  be
made  up  of  parts  ;  but  every  part  is  similar
to  the  whole,  and  of  the  same  nature.  Dif-
ferent parts  of  space,  as  it  has  three  dimen-
sions, may  differ  both  in  figure  and  in  mag-
nitude ;  but  time  having  only  one  dimen-
sion, its  parts  can  differ  only  in  magnitude  ;
and,  as  it  is  one  of  the  simplest  objects  of
thought,  the  conception  of  it  must  be  purely
the  effect  of  our  constitution,  and  given  us
by  some  original  power  of  the  mind.

The  sense  of  seeing,  by  itself,  gives  us
the  conception  and  belief  of  only  two  dimen-
sions of  extension,  but  the  sense  of  touch
discovers  three  ;  and  reason,  from  the  con-
templation of  finite  extended  things,  leads
us  necessarily  to  the  belief  of  an  immensity
that  contains  them.*  In  like  manner,  me-
mory gives  us  the  conception  and  belief  of
finite  intervals  of  duration.  From  the  con-
templation of  these,  reason  leads  us  neces-
sarily to  the  belief  of  an  eternity,  which
comprehends  all  things  that  have  a  begin-
ning and  end.*  Our  conceptions,  both  of
space  and  time,  are  probably  partial  and
inadequate,-]'-  and,  therefore,  we  are  apt  to
lose  ourselves,  and  to  be  embarrassed  in
our  reasonings  about  them.

Our  understanding  is  no  less  puzzled
when  we  consider  the  minutest  parts  of
time  and  space  than  when  Ave  consider  the
whole.  We  are  forced  to  acknowledge
that  in  their  nature  they  are  divisible  with-
out end  or  limit ;  but  there  are  limits  be-
yond which  our  faculties  can  divide  neither
the  one  nor  the  other.

It  may  be  determined  by  experiment,
what  is  the  least  angle  under  which  an
object  may  be  discerned  by  the  eye,  and
what  is  the  least  interval  of  duration  that
may  be  discerned  by  the  ear.  I  believe
these  may  be  different  in  different  persons  :
But  surely  there  is  a  limit  which  no
man  can  exceed :  and  what  our  faculties
can  no  longer  divide  is  still  divisible  in  it-


passing;  very  long  n  retrospect.  The  cause  is  ob-
vious.— H.

*  See  above,  p.  343,  rote  *.—  H.

+  They  are  not  probably  but  necessarily  partial
and  inadequate.  For  we  are  unable  positively  to
conceive  Time  or  Space,  either  as  infinite,  (i.  e.,
without  limits,)  or  a?  not  infinite  (/.  e.,  as  limited.*
—  H.


350


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  III.


self,  and,  by  beings  of  superior  perfection,
may  be  divided  into  thousands  of  parts.
[331]

I  have  reason  to  believe,  that  a  good  eye
in  the  prime  of  life  may  see  an  object  under
an  angle  not  exceeding  half  a  minute  of  a
degree,  and  I  believe  there  are  some  human
eyes  still  more  perfect.  But  even  this  de-
gree of  perfection  will  appear  great,  if  we
consider  how  small  a  part  of  the  retina  of
the  eye  it  must  be  which  subtends  an  angle
of  half  a  minute.

Supposing  the  distance  between  the  centre
of  the  eye  and  the  retina  to  be  six  or  seven
tenths  of  an  inch,  the  subtense  of  an  angle
of  half  a  minute  to  that  radius,  or  the
breadth  of  the  image  of  an  object  seen  under
that  angle,  will  not  be  above  the  ten  thou-
sandth part  of  an  inch.  This  shews  such
a  wonderful  degree  of  accuracy  in  the  re-
fracting power  of  a  good  eye,  that  a  pencil
of  rays  corning  from  one  point  of  the  object
shall  meet  in  one  point  of  the  retina,  so  as
not  to  deviate  from  that  point  the  ten
thousandth  part  of  an  inch.  It  shews,
likewise,  that  such  a  motion  of  an  object  as
makes  its  image  on  the  retina  to  move  the
ten  thousandth  part  of,an  inch,  is  discern-
ible by  the  mind.

In  order  to  judge  to  what  degree  of  ac-
curacy we  can  measure  short  intervals  of
time,  it  may  be  observed  that  one  who  has
given  attention  to  the  motion  of  a  Second
pendulum,  will  be  able  to  beat  seconds  for
a  minute  with  a  very  small  error.  When
he  continues  this  exercise  long,  as  for  five
or  ten  minutes,  he  is  apt  to  err,  more  even
than  in  proportion  to  the  time— for  this
reason,  as  I  apprehend,  that  it  is  difficult  to
attend  long  to  the  moments  as  they  pass,
without  wandering  after  some  other  object
of  thought.

I  have  found,  by  some  experiments,  that
a  man  may  beat  seconds  for  one  minute,
without  erring  above  one  second  in  the
whole  sixty ;  and  I  doubt  not  but  by  long
practice  he  might  do  it  still  more  accurately.
From  this  I  think  it  follows,  that  the  six-
tieth part  of  a  second  of  time  is  discernible
bv  the  human  mind. [332]


CHAPTER  VI.

OF  MR  LOCKE'S  -ACCOUNT  OF  OUR  PERSONAL
IDENTITY.

In  a  long  chapter  upon  Identity  and
Diversity,  Mr  Locke  has  made  many  in-
genious and  just  observations,  and  some
which  I  think  cannot  be  defended.  I  shall
only  take  notice  of  the  account  he  gives  of
our  own  Personal  Identity.  His  doctrine
upon  this  subject  has  been  censured  by
Bishop  Butler,  in  a  short  essay  subjoined  to


his  "  Analogy,"  with  whose  sentiments  I
perfectly  agree.

Identity,  as  was  observed.  Chap.  IV.  of
this  Essay,  supposes  the  continued  existence
of  the  being  of  which  it  is  affirmed,  and
therefore  can  be  applied  only  to  things  which
have  a  continued  existence.  While  any
being  continues  to  exist,  it  is  the  same  being :
but  two  beings  which  have  a  different  be-
ginning or  a  different  ending  of  their  exist-
ence, cannot  possibly  be  the  same.  To  this
I  think  Mr  Locke  agrees.

He  observes,  very  justly,  that  to  know
what  is  meant  by  the  same  person,  we  must
consider  what  the  word  person  stands  for  ;
and  he  defines  a  person  to  be  an  intelligent
being,  endowed  with  reason  and  with  con-
sciousness, which  last  he  thinks  inseparable
from  thought.

From  this  definition  of  a  person,  it  must
necessarily  follow,  that,  while  the  intelligent
being  continues  to  exist  and  to  be  intelli-
gent, it  must  be  the  same  person.  To  say
that  the  intelligent  being  is  the  person,  and
yet  that  the  person  ceases  to  exist,  while
the  intelligent  being  continues,  or  that  the
person  continues  while  the  intelligent  being
ceases  to  exist,  is  to  my  apprehension  a
manifest  contradiction. [333 J

One  would  think  that  the  definition  of  a
person  should  perfectly  ascertain  the  nature
of  personal  identity,  or  wherein  it  consists,
though  it  might  still  be  a  question  how  we
come  to  know  and  be  assured  of  our  per-
sonal identity.

Mr  Locke  tells  us,  however,  "  that  per-
sonal identity — that  is,  the  sameness  of  a
rational  being — consists  in  consciousness
alone,  and,  as  far  as  this  consciousness  can
be  extended  backwards  to  any  past  action
or  thought,  so  far  reaches  the  identity  of
that  person.  So  that,  whatever  hath  the
consciousness  of  present  and  past  actions,
is  the  same  person  to  whom  they  belong."*

*  See  Essay,  (Book  ii.  c^.  27,  ?.  9.)  The  passage
given  as  a  quotation  in  the  .text,  is  the  sum  of
Locke's  doctrine,  but  not  exactly  in  his  words.  Long
before  Butler,  to  whom  the  merit  is  usually  ascribed,
L  cke's  doctrine  of  Personal  Identity  had  been
attaskeo.  and  refuted.  This  was  done  eren  by  his
earliest  critic,  John  Sergeant,  whose  words,  as  he
is.an  author  wholly  unknown  to  all  historians  of  phi.
losophy,  and  his  works  of  the  rarest,  I  shall  quote.
He  thus  argues  : — "  The  former  distinction  forelaid,
he  ( Locke)  proceeds  to  make  personal  identity  in  man
to  consist  in  the  consciousness  that  we  are  the  same
thinking  thing  in  different  times  and^places.  He
proves  it,  because  consciousness  is  inseparable  from
thinking,  and,  as  it  seems  to  him,  essential  to  it.
Perhaps  he  may  have  had  second  thoughts,  since  he
writ  his  19th  Chapter,  where,  ^  4,  he  thought  it
probable  that  Thinking  is  but  the  action,  and  not  the
essence  of  the  soul.  His  reason  here  is — '  Because
'tis  impossible  for  any  to  perceive,  without  perceiving
that  he  does  perceive,'  which  I  have  shewn  above  to
be  so  far  lrom  impossible,  that  the  contrary  is  such.
But,  to  speak  to  the  point ;  Consciousness  of  any
action  or  other  accident  we  have  now,  or  have  had,
is  nothing  but  our  knowledge  that  it  belonged  to  us ;
and,  since  we  both  •  gree  that  we  lave  no  .innate
knowledges,  it  follows,  that  all,  both  actual  and  ha!>i-
tual  knowledges,  which  we  have,  are  acquired  orac-

r 331-3331


chap,  vi.]  LOCKE'S  ACCOUNT  OF  OUR  PERSONAL  IDENTITY.  351


This  doctrine  hath  some  strange  conse-
quences, which  the  author  was  aware  of,
Such  as,  that,  if  the  same  consciousness  can
be  transferred  from  one  intelligent  being  to
another,  which  he  thinks  we  cannot  shew
to  be  impossible,  then  two  or  twenty  intel-
ligent beings  may  be  the  same  person.  And
if  the  intelligent  being  may  lose  the  con-
sciousness of  the  actions  done  by  him,  which
surely  is  possible,  then  he  is  not  the  person
that  did  those  actions  ;  so  that  one  intelli-
gent being  may  be  two  or  twenty  different
persons,  if  he  shall  so  often  lose  the  con-
sciousness of  his  former' actions.

There  is  another  consequence  of  this
doctrine,  which  follows  no  less  necessarily,
though  Mr  Locke  probably  did  not  see  it.
It  is,  that  a  man  may  be,  and  at  the  same
time  not  be,  the  person  that  did  a  particular
action.

Suppose  a  brave  officer  to  have  been
flogged  when  a  boy  at  school,  for  robbing
an  orchard,  to  have  taken  a  standard  from
the  enemy  in  his  first  campaign,  and  to  have
been  made  a  general  in  advanced  life  :  Sup-
pose also,  which  must  be  admitted  to  be
possible,  that,  when  he  took  the  standard,


cidental  to  the  subject  or  knower.  Wherefore^the
man,  or  that  thing,  which:  is  to  be  the  knower,  must
have  had  individuality,  or  personality,  from  other
principles,  antecedently  to-  this  knowledge,  called
consciousness :  and,  consequently,  he  will  retain  his
identity,  or  continue  the  same  man,  or  (which  •  is
equivalent)  the  same  person,  as  long  as  he  has  those
individuating  principles.  What  those  principles  are
which  constitute  this  man;  or  this  knowing  indivi.
duum,  I  have  shewn  above,  \\  6,  7.  It  being  then
most  evident,  that  a  man  must  be  the  same,  ere  he  can
know  or  be  conscious  that  he  is  the  same,  all  his
laborious  descants  and  extravagant  consequences
which  are  built  upon  this  supposition,  that  conscious-
ness individuates  the  person,  can  need  no  farther
refutation."

The  same  objection  was  also  made  by  Leibnitz  in
his  strictures  on  Locke's  Essay.  Inter  alia,  he  says —
"  Pour  ce  qui  est  du  soi  il  sera  bon  de  le  distinguer
de  Vapparence  du  soi  et  de  la  consciosite.  Le  soi  fait
l'identite  reelle  et  physique,  et  l'apparence  du  soi,
accompagnee  de  laverite,  y  joint  l'identite  personelle.
Ainsi  ne  voulant  point  dire,  que  l'identite  personelle
ne  s'etend  pas  plus  loin  que  le  souvenir,  je  dirois  encore
moms  que  le  soi  ou  l'identite  physique  en  depend.
L'identite  reele  et  personelle seprouve  le  plus  certain-
ment  qu'il  se.peut  en  matiere  de  fait,  par  la  reflexion
presente  et  immediate ;  elle  se  prouve  suffisament  pour
1'ordinaire  par  notre  souvenir  d'intervalle  ou  par  le
temeignage  conspirant  des  autres.  Mais  si  Dieu
changeoit  extraordinairment  l'identite  reele,  la  per-
sonelle  demeuroit,  pourvu  que  l'homme  conservat
les  apparences  d'identite,  tant  les  internes,  (e'est-^a
dire  de  la  conscience,)  que  lesexternes,  comme  celles
qui  consistent  dans  ce  qui  paroit  aux  autres.  Ainsi
la  conscience  n'est  pas  le  seul  moyennle  oonstituer
l'identite  personelle,  et  le  rapport  d'autrui  ou  meme
d'autres  marques ypeuvent  supplier.  Mais  il  y  a  dela
difliculte,  s'il  se  trouve  contradiction  entreces  diver-
ses-apparei  ces.  La  conscience  se  peut  taire  cqmme
dans  l'oubli ;  mais-si  elle  disoit  bien  clairment  des
choses,  qui  fussent  contrairesaux  autres  apparences,
on  seroit  embarasse"  dans  la  decision  et  comme  sus-
pends quelques  fois  entre  deux  possibilites,  cellede
1'erreur  du  noire  souvenir  et  celle  de  quelque  decep-
tion dans  les  apparences  externes."

For  the  best  criticism  of  Locke's  doctrine  of  Perso-
nal Identity,  I  may,  however,  reler  the  reader  to  M.
Cousin's  "  Cours  de  Philosophic"  t.  ii„  Leeon  xviii.,
p.  U  0-198— H.

[331,  335]


he  was  conscious  of  his  having  been  flogged
at  school,  and  that  when  made  a  general  he
was  conscious  of  his  taking  the  standard,
but  had  absolutely  lost  the  consciousness  of
his  flogging. [334]

These  things  being  supposed,  it  follows,
from  Mr  Locke's  doctrine,  that  he  who  was
flogged  at  school  is  the  same  person  who
took  the  standard,  and  that  he  who  took  the
standard  is  the  same  person  who  was  made
a  general.  Whence  it  follows,  if  there  be
any  truth  in  logic,  that  the  general  is  the
same  person  with  him  who  was  flogged
at  school.  But  the  general's  consciousness
does  not  reach  so  far  back  as  his  flogging —
therefore,  according  to  Mr  Locke's  doctrine,
he  is  not  the  person  who  was  flogged.
Therefore,  the  general  is,  and  at  the  same
time  is  not  the  same  person  with  him  who
was  flogged  at  school.*

Leaving  the  consequences  of  this  doctrine
to  those  who  have  leisure  to  trace  them,  we
may  observe,  with  regard  to  the  doctrine
itself—

First,  That  Mr  Locke  attributes  to  con-
sciousness the  conviction  we  have  of  our
past  actions,  as  if  a  man  may  now  be  con-
scious of  what  he  did  twenty  years  ago.
It  is  impossible  to  understand  the  meaning
of  this,  unless  by  consciousness  be  meant
memory,  the  only  faculty  by  which  we  have  an
immediate  knowledge  of  our  past  actions. -f*

Sometimes,  in  popular  discourse,  a  man
says  he  is  conscious  that  he  did  such  a
thing,  meaning  that  he  distinctly  remembers
that  he  did  it.  It  is  unnecessary,  in  com-
mon discourse,  to  fix  accurately  the  limits
between  consciousness  and  memory.  This
was  formerly  shewn  to  be  the  case  with  re-
gard to  sense  and  memory  :  and,  therefore,
distinct  remembrance  is  sometimes  called
sense,  sometimes  consciousness,  without
any  inconvenience.

But  this  ought  to  be  avoided  in  philoso-
phy, otherwise  we  confound  the  different
powers  of  the  mind,  and  ascribe  to  one  what
really  belongs  to  another.  If  a  man  can  be
conscious  of  what  he  did  twenty  years  or
twenty  minutes  ago,  there  is  no  use  for
memory,  nor  ought  we  to  allow  that  there
is  any  such  faculty.  [335]  The  faculties  of
consciousness  and  memory  are  chiefly  dis-
tinguished by  this,  that  the  first  is  an  im-
mediate knowledge  of  the  present,  the  second
an  immediate  knowledge  of  the  past.  %

When,  therefore,  Mr  Locke's  notion  of


*  Compare  Buffier's  "  Traite des  premieres  Veritez,"
(Remarques  sur  Locke,  §  5f  b,)  who  makes*a  similar
criticism. — JH.

.  t  Locke,  it.  will  be  remembered,  does  not,  like
Reid,  view  con-ciousi  ess  as  a  co-ordinate  faculty  with
memory  ;  but  under  consciousness  he  properly  com-
prehends the  various  faculties  as  so -many  special
modifications. — H.

%  As  already  frequently .  stated,  an  immediate
knowledge  of  the  past  isicontradictory.  This-  ob-
servation Icannot  again  repeat. See  Note  B. — H.


352


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[_essay  III.


personal  identity  is  properly  expressed,  it  is
that  personal  identity  consists  in  distinct
remembrance ;  for,  even  in  the  popular
sense,  to  say  that  I  am  conscious  of  a  past
action,  means  nothing  else  than  that  I  dis-
tinctly remember  that  I  did  it.

Secondly,  It  may  be  observed,  that,  in
this  doctrine,  not  only  is  consciousness  con-
founded with  memory,  but,  which  is  still
more  strange,  personal  identity  is  confounded
with  the  evidence  which  we  have  of  our
personal  identity.

It  is  very  true  that  my  remembrance
that  I  did  such  a  thing  is  the  evidence  I
have  that  I  am  the  identical  person  who  did
it.  And  this,  I  am  apt  to  think,  Mr  Locke
meant.  But,  to  say  that  my  remembrance
that  I  did  such  a  thing,  or  my  conscious-
ness, makes  me  the  person  who  did  it,  is,  in
my  apprehension,  an  absurdity  too  gross  to
be  entertained  by  any  man  who  attends  to
the  meaning  of  it ;  for  it  is  to  attribute  to
memory  or  consciousness,  a  strange  magi-
cal power  of  producing  its  object,  though
that  object  must  have  existed  before  the
memory  or  consciousness  which  produced  it.

Consciousness  is  the  testimony  of  one
faculty ;  memory  is  the  testimony  of  another
faculty.  And,  to  say  that  the  testimony  is
the  cause  of  the  thing  testified,  this  surely
is  absurd,  if  anything  be,  and  could  not
have  been  said  by  Mr  Locke,  if  he  had  not
confounded  the  testimony  with  the  thing
testified.

When  a  horse  that  was  stolen  is  found
and  claimed  by  the  owner,  the  only  evidence
he  can  have,  or  that  a  judge  or  witnesses
can  have  that  this  is  the  very  identical  horse
which  was  his  property,  is  similitude.  [336]
But  would  it  not  be  ridiculous  from  this  to
infer  that  the  identity  of  a  horse  consists  in
similitude  only  ?  The  only  evidence  I  have
that  I  am  the  identical  person  who  did  such
actions  is,  that  I  remember  distinctly  I  did
them ;  or,  as  Mr  Locke  expresses  it,  I  am
conscious  I  did  them.  To  infer  from  this,
that  personal  identity  consists  in  conscious-
ness, is  an  argument  which,  if  it  had  any
force,  would  prove  the  identity  of  a  stolen
horse  to  consist  solely  in  similitude.

Thirdly,  Is  it  not  strange  that  the  same-
ness or  identity  of  a  person  should  consist
in  a  thing  which  is  continually  changing,
and  is  not  any  two  minutes  the  same  ?

Our  consciousness,  our  memory,  and
every  operation  of  the  mind,  are  still  flow-
ing, like  the  water  of  a  river,  or  like  time
itself.  The  consciousness  I  have  this
moment  can  no  more  be  the  same  conscious-
ness I  had  last  moment,  than  this  moment
can  be  the  last  moment.  Identity  can  only
be  affirmed  of  things  which  have  a  continued
existence.  Consciousness,  and  every  kind
of  thought,  is  transient  and  momentary,  and
has  no  continued existence ; and,  there-


fore, if  personal  identity  consisted  in  con-
sciousness, it  would  certainly  follow  that  no
man  is  the  same  person  any  two  moments
of  his  life  ;  and,  as  the  right  and  justice  of
reward  and  punishment  is  founded  on  per-
sonal identity,  no  man  could  be  responsible
for  his  actions.

But,  though  I  take  this  to  be  the  una-
voidable consequence  of  Mr  Locke's  doc-
trine concerning  personal  identity,  and
though  some  persons  may  have  liked  the
doctrine  the  better  on  this  account,  I  am
far  from  imputing  anything  of  this  kind  to
Mr  Locke.  He  was  too  good  a  man  not  to
have  rejected  with  abhorrence  a  doctrine
which  he  believed  to  draw  this  consequence
after  it. [337]

Fourthly,  There  are  many  expressions
used  by  Mr  Locke,  in  speaking  of  personal
identity,  which,  to  me,  are  altogether  unin-
telligible, unless  we  suppose  that  he  con-
founded that  sameness  or  identity  which  we
ascribe  to  an  individual,  with  the  identity
which,  in  common  discourse,  is  often  ascribed
to  many  individuals  of  the  same  species.

When  we  say  that  pain  and  pleasure,
consciousness  and  memory,  are  the  same  in
all  men,  this  sameness  can  only  mean  simi-
larity, or  sameness  of  kind  ;  but,  that  the
pain  of  one  man  can  be  the  same  individual
pain  with  that  of  another  man,  is  no  less
impossible  than  that  one  man  should  be
another  man ;  the  pain  felt  by  me  yester-
day can  no  more  be  the  pain  I  feel  to-day,
than  yesterday  can  be  this  day;  and  the
same  thing  may  be  said  of  every  passion
and  of  every  operation  of  the  mind.  The
same  kind  or  species  of  operation  may  be
in  different  men,  or  in  the  same  man  at
different  times ;  but  it  is  impossible  that  the
same  individual  operation  should  be  in  dif-
ferent men,  or  in  the  same  man  at  different
times.

When  Mr  Locke,  therefore,  speaks  of  "the
same  consciousness  being  continued  through
a  succession  of  different  substances  ;"  when
he  speaks  of  "  repeating  the  idea  of  a  past
action,  with  the  same  consciousness  we  had
of  it  at  the  first,"  and  of  "  the  same  con-
sciousness extending  to  actions  past  and  to
come" — these  expressions  are  to  me  unin-
telligible, unless  he  means  not  the  same  in-
dividual consciousness,  but  a  consciousness
that  is  similar,  or  of  the  same  kind.

If  our  personal  identity  consists  in  con-
sciousness, as  this  consciousness  cannot  be
the  same  individually  any  two  moments,
but  only  of  the  same  kind,  it  would  follow
that  we  are  jnot  for  any  two  moments  the
same  individual  persons,  but  the  same  kind
of  persons.

As  our  consciousness  sometimes  ceases

to  exist,  as  in  sound  sleep,  our  personal

identity  must cease  with  it. Mr  Locke

allows,  that  the  same  thing  cannot  have

[336,  337]


CHAP.  VII.]


THEORIES  CONCERNING  MEMORY.


353


two  beginnings  of  existence ;  so  that  our
identity  would  be  irrecoverably  gone  every
time  we  cease  to  think,  if  it  was  but  for  a
a  moment.* [338]


CHAPTER  VII.

THEORIES  CONCERNING  MEMORY.

The  common  theory  of  ideas — that  is,
of  images  in  the  brain  or  in  the  mind,  of
all  the  objects  of  thought — has  been  very
generally  applied  to  account  for  the  facul-
ties of  memory  and  imagination,  as  well  as
that  of  perception  by  the  senses.

The  sentiments  of  the  Peripatetics  are
expressed  by  Alexander  Aphrodisiensis,
one  of  the  earliest  Greek  commentators  on
Aristotle,  in  these  words,  as  they  are  trans-
lated by  Mr  Harris  in  his  "  Hermes :" —
"  Now,  what  Phancy  or  Imagination  is,  we
may  explain  as  follows  : — We  may  conceive
to  be  formed  within  us,  from  the  operations  of
our  senses  about  sensible  objects,  some  Im-
pression, as  it  were,  or  Picture,  in  our  origi-
nal Sensorium,  being  a  relict  of  that  motion
caused  within  us  by  the  external  object ;  a
relict  which,  when  the  external  object  is
no  longer  present,  remains,  and  is  still
preserved,  being,  as it were,  its Image,


*  It  is  here  proper  to  insert  Keid's  remarks  on
Personal  Identity,  as  published  by  Lord  Kames,  in
his  "  Essays  on  the  Principles  of  Morality  and  Natural
Religion,"  (third  edition,  p.  204.)  These,  perhaps,
might  have  more  appropriately  found  their  place  in
the  Correspondence  of  our  Author.

"  To  return  to  our  subject,"  says  his  Lordship,
"  Mr  Locke,  writing  on  personal  identity,  has  fallen
6hort  of  his  usual  accuracy.  He  inadvertently  jumbles
together  the  identity  that  is  nature's  work,  with
our  knowledge  of  it.  Nay,  he  expresses  himself  some-
times as  if  identity  had  no  other  foundation  than
that  knowledge.  1  am  favoured  by  l)r  Reid  with  the
following  thoughts  on  personal  identity  : —

"'  All  men  agree  that  personality  is  indivisible  ;  a
part  of  a  person  is  an  absurdity.  A  man  who  loses
his  estate,  his  health,  an  arm,  or  a  leg,  continues  stiil
to  be  the  same  person.  My  personal  identity,  therefore,
is  the  continued  existence  of  that  indivisible  thing
which  I  call  myself.  lam  not  thought;  1  am  not
action  ;  I  am  not  feeling;  but  I  think,  and  act,  and
feel.  Thoughts,  actions,  feelings,  change  every
moment;  but  self,  to  which  they  belong,  is  perman-
ent. If  it  be  asked  how  I  know  that  it  is  permanent,
the  answer  is,  that  !  know  it  from  memory.  Every-
thing I  remember  to  have  seen,  or  heard,  or  done,  or
suffered,  convinces  me  that  I  existed  at  the  time
remembered.  But,  though  it  is  from  memory  that  I
have  the  knowledge  of  my  personal  identity,  yet  per.
sonal  identity  must  exist'in  nature,  independent  of
memory  ;  otherwise,  I  should  only  be  the  same  per-
son as  far  as  my  memory  serves  me  ;  and  what  would
become  of  my  existence  during  the  intervals  wherein
my  memory  has  failed  me  ?  My  rememberance  of  any
ol  my  actions  does  not  make  me  to  be  the  person  who
did  the  action,  but  only  makes  me  know  that  I  was
the  person  who  did  it.  And  yet  it  w^s  Mr  Locke's
opinion,  that  my  remembrance  of  an  action  is  what
makes  me  to  be  the  person  who  did  it ;  a  pregnant
instance  that  even  men  of  the  greatest  genius  may
sometimes  fall  into  an  absurdity.  Is  it  not  an  obvious
corollary,  from  Mr  Locke's  opinion,  that  he  never
was  born  ?  He  could  not  remember  his  birth  ;  and,
therefore,  was  not  the  person  born  at  such  a  place
and  at  such  a  time.' "—  H.
T338,  339]


and  which,  by  being  thus  preserved,  be-
comes the  cause  of  our  having  Memory.
Now,  such  a  sort  of  relict,  and,  as  it  were,
impression,  they  call  Phancy  or  Imagina-
tion.""

Another  passage  from  Alcinous  Of  the
Doctrines  of  Plato,  chap.  4,  shews  the  agree-
ment of  the  ancient  Platonists  and  Peripa-
tetics in  this  theory  : — "  When  the  form  or
type  of  things  is  imprinted  on  the  mind  by
the  organs  of  the  senses,  and  so  imprinted
as  not  to  be  deleted  by  time,  but  preserved
firm  and  lasting,  its  preservation  is  called
Memory."* [339]

Upon  this  principle,  Aristotle  imputes  the
shortness  of  memory  in  children  to  this
cause — that  their  brain  is  too  moist  and  soft
to  retain  impressions  made  upon  it:  and
the  defect  of  memory  in  old  men  he  imputes,
on  the  contrary,  to  the  hardness  and  rigidity
of  the  brain,  which  hinders  its  receiving
any  durable  impression,  -f-

This  ancient  theory  of  the  cause  of
memory  is  defective  in  two  respects  :  First,
If  the  cause  assigned  did  really  exist,  it  by
no  means  accounts  for  the  phsenomenon  ;
and,  secondly,  There  is  no  evidence,  nor
even  probability,  that  that  cause  exists.

It  is  probable  that  in  perception  some
impression  is  made  upon  the  brain  as  well
as  upon  the  organ  and  nerves,  because  all
the  nerves  terminate  iu  the  brain,  and  be-
cause disorders  and  hurts  of  the  brain  are
found  to  affect  our  powers  of  perception
when  the  external  organ  and  nerve  are
found ;  but  we  are  totally  ignorant  of  the
nature  of  this  impression  upon  the  brain  :
it  can  have  no  resemblance  to  the  object
perceived,  nor  does  it  in  any  degree  ac-
count for  that  sensation  and  perception
which  are  consequent  upon  it.  These  things
have  been  argued  in  the  second  Essay,  and
shall  now  be  taken  for  granted,  to  prevent
repetition.

If  the  impression  upon  the  brain  be  insuf-
ficient to  account  for  the  perception  of  ob-
jects that  are  present,  it  can  as  little  account
for  the  memory  of  those  that  are  past.

So  that,  if  it  were  certain  that  the  im-
pressions made  on  the  brain  in  perception
remain  as  long  as  there  is  any  memory  of
the  object,  all  that  could  be  inferred  from
this,  is,  that,  by  the  laws  of  Nature,  there
is  a  connection  established  between  that  im-
pression, and  the  rememberance  of  that
object. But  how  the  impression  contributes


*  The  inference  founded  on  these  passages,  is  alto,
gether  erroneous. See  Note  K.—  H.

f  In  this  whole  statement  Reid  is  wrong.  Tn  the
first  place,  Aristotle  did  not  impute  the  defect  of
memory  in  children  and  old  persons  to  any  const  tu-
tion  of  the  Brain  ;  for,  in  his  doctrine,  the  Heart,
and  not  the  Brain,  is  the  primary  sensorium  in  which
the  impression  is  made.  In  the  second  place,  the
term  impression  (tuxos),  is  used  by  Aristotle  in  an
analogical,  not  in  a  literal  signification,  See  Note  K.
— H.

<2  A


354


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  III.


to  this  remembrance,  we  should  be  quite
ignorant ;  it  being  impossible  to  discover
hew  thought  of  any  kind  should  be  pro-
duced, by  an  impression  on  the  brain,  or
upon  any  part  of  the  body. [340]

To  say  that  this  impression  is  memory,  is
absurd,  if  understood  literally.  If  it  is  only
meant  that  it  is  the  cause  of  memory,  it
ought  to  be  shewn  how  it  produces  this
effect,  otherwise  memory  remains  as  unac-
countable as  before.

If  a  philosopher  should  undertake  to  ac-
count for  the  force  of  gunpowder  in  the
discharge  of  a  musket,  and  then  tell  us
gravely  that  the  cause  of  this  phenomenon
is  the  drawing  of  the  trigger,  we  should  not
be  much  wiser  by  this  account.  As  little
are  we  instructed  in  the  cause  of  memory,
by  being  told  that  it  is  caused  by  a  certain
impression  on  the  brain.  For,  supposing
that  impression  on  the  brain  were  as  neces-
sary to  memory  as  the  drawing  of  the  trigger
is  to  the  discharge  of  the  musket,  we  are
still  as  ignorant  as  we  were  how  memory  is
produced ;  so  that,  if  the  cause  of  memory,
assigned  by  this  theory,  did  really  exist,  it
does  not  in  any  degree  account  for  memory.

Another  defect  in  this  theory  is,  that
there  is  no  evidence  nor  probability  that
the  cause  assigned  does  exist ;  that  is,  that
the  impression  made  upon  the  brain  in  per-
ception remains  after  the  object  is  removed.

That  impression,  whatever  be  its  nature,
is  caused  by  the  impression  made  by  the
object  upon  the  organ  of  sense,  and  upon
the  nerve.  Philosophers  suppose,  without
any  evidence,  that,  when  the  object  is  re-
moved, and  the  impression  upon  the  organ
and  nerve  ceases,  the  impression  upon  the
brain  continues,  and  is  permanent ;  that  is,
that,  when  the  cause  is  removed,  the  effect
continues.  The  brain  surely  does  not  ap-
pear more  fitted  to  retain  an  impression
than  the  organ  and  nerve.

But,  granting  that  the  impression  upon
the  brain  continues  after  its  cause  is  re-
moved, its  effects  ought  to  continue  while
it  continues ;  that  is,  the  sensation  and
perception  should  be  as  permanent  as  the
impression  upon  the  brain,  which  is  sup-
posed to  be  their  cause.  But  here  again
the  philosopher  makes  a  second  supposition,
with  as  little  evidence,  but  of  a  contrary
nature — to  wit,  that,  while  the  cause  re-
mains, the  effect  ceases.  [341]
■  If  this  should  be  granted  also,  a  third
must  be  made — That  the  same  cause  which
at  first  produced  sensation  and  perception,
does  afterwards  produce  memory — an  opera-
tion essentially  different,  both  from  sensa-
tion and  perception.

A  fourth  supposition  must  be  made —
That  this  cause,  though  it  be  permanent,
does  not  produce  its  effect  at  all  times  ;  it
must  be  like  an  inscription  which  is  some-


times covered  with  rubbish,  and  on  other
occasions  made  legible ;  for  the  memory  of
things  is  often  interrupted  for  a  long  time,
and  circumstances  bring  to  our  recollection
what  had  been  long  forgot.  After  all,  many
things  are  remembered  which  were  never
perceived  by  the  senses,  being  no  objects  of
sense,  and  therefore  which  could  make  no
impression  upon  the  brain  by  means  of  the
senses.

Thus,  when  philosophers  have  piled  one
supposition  upon  another,  as  the  giants  piled
the  mountains  in  order  to  scale  the  heavens,
all  is  to  no  purpose — memory  remains  unac-
countable ;  and  we  know  as  little  how  we
remember  things  past,  as  how  we  are  con-
scious of  the  present.

But  here  it  is  proper  to  observe,  that,
although  impressions  upon  the  brain  give
no  aid  in  accounting  for  memory,  yet  it  is
very  probable  that,  in  the  human  frame,
memory  is  dependent  on  some  proper  state
or  temperament  of  the  brain.*

Although  the  furniture  of  our  memory
bears  no  resemblance  to  any  temperament
of  brain  whatsoever,  as  indeed  it  is  impos-
sible it  should,  yet  nature  may  have  sub-
jected us  to  this  law,  that  a  certain  consti-
tution or  state  of  the  brain  is  necessary  to
memory.  That  this  is  really  the  case,
many  well-known  facts  lead  us  to  con-
clude. [342]

It  is  possible  that,  by  accurate  observa-
tion, the  proper  means  may  be  discovered
of  preserving  that  temperament  of  the  brain
which  is  favourable  to  memory,  and  of
remedying  the  disorders  of  that  tempera-
ment. This  would  be  a  very  noble  im-
provement of  the  medical  art.  But,  if  it
should  ever  be  attained,  it  would  give  no
aid  to  understand  how  one  state  of  the  brain
assists  memory,  and  another  hurts  it.

I  know  certainly,  that  the  impression
made  upon  my  hand  by  the  prick  of  a  pin
occasions  acute  pain.  But  can  any  philo-
sopher shew  how  this  cause  produces  the
effect  ?  The  nature  of  the  impression  is
here  perfectly  known ;  but  it  gives  no  help
to  understand  how  that  impression  affects
the  mind  ;  and,  if  we  knew  as  distinctly  that
state  of  the  brain  which  causes  memory,
we  should  still  be  as  ignorant  as  before  how
that  state  contributes  to  memory.  We
might  have  been  so  constituted,  for  anything
that  I  know,  that  the  prick  of  a  pin  in  the
hand,  instead  of  causing  pain,  should  cause
remembrance  ;  nor  would  that  constitution
be  more  unaccountable  than  the  present.

The  body  and  mind  operate  on  each  other,


*  Nothing  more  was  meant  by  the  philosopher  in
question,  than  that  memory  is,  as  Reid  himself  ad.
mits,  dependent  on  a  certain  state  ot  the  brain,  and
on  some  unknown  effect  determined  in  it,  to  which
they  gave  the  metaphorical  name — impression,  trace,
type,  &C.—H.


[340-342]


CHAP.  VII.]


THEORIES  CONCERNING  MEMORY.


355


according  to  fixed  iaws  of  nature  ;  and  it  is
the  business  of  a  philosopher  to  discover
those  laws  by  observation  and  experiment :
but,  when  he  has  discovered  them,  he  must
rest  in  them  as  facts  whose  cause  is  in-
scrutable to  the  human  understanding.

Mr  Locke,  and  those  who  have  followed
him,  speak  with  more  reserve  than  the
ancients,*  and  only  incidentally,  of  impres-
sions on  the  brain  as  the  cause  of  memory,
and  impute  it  rather  to  our  retaining  in  our
minds  the  ideas  got  either  by  sensation  or
reflection.

This,  Mr  Locke  says,  may  be  done  two
ways — "  First,  By  keeping  the  idea  for  some
time  actually  in  view,  which  is  called  con-
templation ;  Secondly,  By  the  power  to  re-
vive again  in  our  minds  those  ideas  which,
after  imprinting,  have  disappeared,  or  have
been,  as  it  were,  laid  out  of  sight ;  and  this
is  memory,  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  store-
house of  our  ideas." [343]

To  explain  this-  more  distinctly,  he  imme-
diately adds  the  following  observation : —
"  But  our  ideas  being  nothing  but  actual
perceptions  in  the  mind,  which  cease  to  be
anything  when  there  is  no  perception  of
them,  this  laying  up  of  our  ideas  in  the
repository  of  the  memory  signifies  no  more
but  this,  that  the  mind  has  a  power,  in
many  cases,  to  revive  perceptions  which  it
once  had,  with  this  additional  perception
annexed  to  them,  that  it  has  had  them
before ;  and  in  this  sense  it  is,  that  our  ideas
are  said  to  be  in  our  memories,  when  indeed
they  are  actually  nowhere ;  but  only  there
is  an  ability  in  the  mind,  when  it  will,  to
revive  them  again,  and,  as  it  were,  paint
them  anew  upon  itself,  though  some  with
more,  some  with  less  difficulty,  some  more
lively,  and  others  more  obscurely."

In  this  account  of  memory,  the  repeated
use  of  the  phrase,  as  it  were,  leads  one  to
judge  that  it  is  partly  figurative  ;  we  must
therefore  endeavour  to  distinguish  the  figu-
rative part  from  the  philosophical.  The
first,  being  addressed  to  the  imagination,
exhibits  a  picture  of  memory,  which,  to
have  its  effect,  must  be  viewed  at  a  proper
distance  and  from  a  particular  point  of
view.  The  second,  being  addressed  to  the
understanding,  ought  to  bear  a  near  inspec-
tion and  a  critical  examination.

The  analogy  between  memory  and  a  re-
pository, and  between  remembering  and
retaining,  is  obvious,  and  is  to  be  found  in
all  languages,  it  being  very  natural  to  ex-
press the  operations  of  the  mind  by  images
taken  from  things  material.  But,  in  phi-
losophy we  ought  to  draw  aside  the  veil  of
imagery,  and  to  view  them  naked.

When,  therefore,  memory  is  said  to  be  a
repository  or  storehouse  of  ideas,  where  they

I*  This  is  .hardly  correct See  Note  K.— H.
[343-345]


are  laid  up  when  not  perceived,  and  again
brought  forth  as  there  is  occasion,  I  take
this  to  be  popular  and  rhetorical.  [344]
For  the  author  tells  us,  that  when  they  are
not  perceived,  they  are  nothing,  and  no-
where, and  therefore  can  neither  be  laid  up
in  a  repository,  nor  drawn  out  of  it.

But  we  are  told,  "  That  this  laying  up  of
our  ideas  in  the  repository  of  the  memory
signifies  no  more  than  this,  that  the  mind
has  a  power  to  revive  perceptions,  which  it
once  had,  with  this  additional  perception
annexed  to  them,  that  it  has  had  them
before."  This,  I  think,  must  be  understood
literally  and  philosophically.

But  it  seems  to  me  as  difficult  to  revivf
things  that  have  ceased  to  be  anything,  as
to  lay  them  up  in  a  repository,  or  to  bring
them  out  of  it.  When  a  thing  is  once
annihilated,  the  same  thing  cannot  be  again
produced,  though  another  thing  similar  to
it  may.  Mr  Locke,  in  another  place,
acknowledges  that  the  same  thing  cannot
have  two  beginnings  of  existence  ;  and  that
things  that  have  different  beginnings  are
not  the  same,  but  diverse.  From  this  it
follows,  that  an  ability  to  revive  our  ideas
or  perceptions,  after  they  have  ceased  to  be,
can  signify  no  more  hut  an  ability  to  create
new  ideas  or  perceptions  similar  to  those  we
had  before.

They  are  said  "  to  be  revived,  with  this
additional  perception,  that  we  have  had  them
before."  This  surely  would  be  a  fallacious
perception,  since  they  could  not  have  two
beginnings  of  existence  :  nor  could  we  be-
lieve them  to  have  two  beginnings  of  exist-
ence. We  can  only  believe  that  we  had
formerly  ideas  or  perceptions  very  like  to
them,  though  not  identically  the  same.  But
whether  we  perceive  them  to  be  the  same,
or  only  like  to  those  we  had  before,  this
perception,  one  would  think,  supposes  a
remembrance  of  those  we  had  before,  other-
wise the  similitude  or  identity  could  not  be
perceived.

Another  phrase  is  used  to  explain  this
reviving  of  our  perceptions — "  The  mind,
as  it  were,  paints  them  anew  upon  itself.'-
[345]  There  may  be  something  figurative
in  this  ;  but,  making  due  allowance  for  that,
it  must  imply  that  the  -mind,  which  paints
the  things  that  have  ceased  to  exist,  must
have  the  memory  of  what  they  were,  since
every  painter  must  have  a  copy  either  before
his  eye,  or  in  his  imagination  and  memory.

These  remarks  upon  Mr  Locke's  account
of  memory  are  intended  to  shew  that  his
system  of  ideas  gives  no  light  to  this  faculty,
but  rather  tends  to  darken  it ;  as  little  does
it  make  us  understand  how  we  remember,
and  by  that  means  have  the  certain  know-
ledge of  things  past.

Every  man  knows  what  memory  is,  and
has  a  distinct  notion  of  it.  But  when  Mr
2  a  2


356


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay 111.


Locke  speaks  of  a  power  to  revive  in  the
mind  those  ideas  which,  after  imprinting,
have  disappeared,  or  have  been,  as  it  were,
laid  out  of  sight,  one  would  hardly  know
this  to  be  memory,  if  he  had  not  told  us.
There  are  other  things  which  it  seems  to
resemble  at  least  as  much.  I  see  before
me  the  picture  of  a  friend.  I  shut  my  eyes,
or  turn  them  another  way,  and  the  picture
disappears,  or  is,  as  it  were,  laid  out  of  sight.
I  have  a  power  to  turn  my  eyes  again  to-
wards the  picture,  and  immediately  the  per-
ception is  revived.  But  is  this  memory  ?
No  surely ;  yet  it  answers  the  definition  as
well  as  memory  itself  can  do. "

We  may  observe,  that  the  word  percep-
tion is  used  by  Mr  Locke  in  too  indefinite
a  way,  as  well  as  the  word  idea.

Perception,  in  the  chapter  upon  that  sub-
ject, is  said  to  be  the  first  faculty  of  the
mind  exercised  about  our  ideas.  Here  we
are  told  that  ideas  are  nothing  but  percep-
tions. Yet,  I  apprehend,  it  would  sound
oddly  to  say,  that  perception  is  the  first
faculty  of  the  mind  exercised  about  percep-
tion ;  and  still  more  strangely  to  say,  that
ideas  are  the  first  faculty  of  the  mind  ex-
ercised about  our  ideas.  But  why  should
not  ideas  be  a  faculty  as  well  as  perception,
if  both  are  the  same  ?f [346]

Memory  is  said  to  be  a  power  to  revive
our  perceptions.  Will  it  not  follow  from
this,  that  everything  that  can  be  remem-
bered is  a  perception  ?  If  this  be  so,  it  will
be  difficult  to  find  anything  in  nature  but
perceptions.  $

Our  ideas,  we  are  told,  are  nothing  but
actual  perceptions ;  but,  in  many  places  of
the  Essay,  ideas  are  said  to  be  the  objects
of  perception,  and  that  the  mind,  in  all  its
thoughts  and  reasonings,  has  no  other  im-
mediate object  which  it  does  or  can  con-
template but  its  own  ideas.  Does  it  not
appear  from.this,  either  that  Mr  Locke  neld
the  operations  of  the  mind  to  be  the  same
thing  with  the  objects  of  those  operations, §
or  that  he  used  the  word  idea  sometimes  in
one  sense  and  sometimes  in  another,  with-
out any  intimation,  and  probably  without
any  apprehension  of  its  ambiguity  ?  It  is
au  article  of  Mr  Hume's  philosophy,  that
there  is  no  distinction  between  the  opera-
tions of  the  mind  and  their  objects. §  But
I  see  no  reason  to  impute  this  opinion  to
Mr  Locke. I  rather  think  that,  notwith-

*  To  some  of  the  preceding*  strictures  on  Locke's
account  of  memory,  excuses  might  competently  be
pleaded. —  H.

t  This  cntirurn  only  shews  the  propriety  of  the
distinction  of  perception  and  percept.  Locke  and
other-philosophers  use  the  word  perception,  l3,  for
the  act  or  faculty  of  perceiving;  v°,  for  that  which  is
perceived— the  idea  in  their  doctrine ;  and  3°,  for
either  or  both  indifferentlv.—  H.

4:  See  above  p.  222,  b,  note  *  ;  p.  280,  a.  note*.— H.
^.  The  term  object  being  then  used  lor  the  imme-
diate object— viz.,  that  of  which  we  are  conscious.
—  H


standing  his  "great  judgment  and  candour,
his  understanding  was  entangled  by  the
ambiguity  of  the  word  idea,  and  that  most
of  the  imperfections  of  his  Essay  are  owing
to  that  cause.

Mr  Hume  saw  farther  into  the  conse-
quences of  the  common  system  concerning
ideas  than  any  author  bad  done  before  him.
He  saw  the  absurdity  of  making  every  object
of  thought  double,  and  splitting  it  into  a
remote  object,  which  has  a  separate  and
permanent  existence,  and  an  immediate
object,  called  an  idea  or  impression,  which
is  an  image  of  the  former,  and  has  no  ex-
istence, but  when  we  are  conscious  of  it.
According  to  this  system,  we  have  no  in-
tercourse with  the  external  world,  but  by
means  of  the  internal  world  of  ideas,  which
represents  the  other  to  the  mind.

He  saw  it  was  necessary  to  reject  one
of  these  worlds  as  a  fiction,  and  the  question
was,  Which  should  be  rejected  ? — whether
all  mankind,  learned  and  unlearned,  had
feigned  the  existence  of  the  external  world
without  good  reason  ;  or  whether  philoso-
phers had  feigned  the  internal  world  of  ideas,
in  order  to  account  for  the  intercourse  of
the  mind  with  the  external  ?  [347]  Mr
Hume  adopted  the  first  of  these  opinions,
and  employed  his  reason  and  eloquence  in
support  of  it.

Bishop  Berkeley  had  gone  so  far  in  the
same  track  as  to  reject  the  material  world
as  fictitious ;  but  it  was  left  to  Mr  Hume
to  complete  the  system.

According  to  his  system,  therefore,  im-
pressions and  ideas  in  his  own  mind  are
the  only  things  a  man  can  know  or  can
conceive.  Nor  are  these  ideas  representa-
tives, as  they  were  in  the  old  system.
There  is  nothing  else  in  nature,  or,  at  least,
within  the  reach  of  our  faculties,  to  be  re-
presented. What  the  vulgar  call  the  per-
ception of  an  external  object,  is  nothing  but
a  strong  impression  upon  the  mind.  What
we  call  the  remembrance  of  a  past  event,
is  nothing  but  a  present  impression  or  idea,
weaker  than  the  former.  And  what  we  call
imagination,  is  still  a  present  idea,  but
weaker  than  that  of  memory.

That  I  may  not  do  him  injustice,  these
are  his  words  in  his  "  Treatise  of  Human
Nature,"  [vol.  I.]  page  193.

"  We  find  by  experience  that,  when  any
impression  has  been  present  with  the  mind,
it  again  makes  its  appearance  there  as  an
idea  ;  and  this  it  may  do  after  two  different
ways,  either  when  in  its  new  appearance  it
retains  a  considerable  degree  of  its  first
vivacity  and  is  somewhat  intermediate  be-
twixt an  impression  and  an.idea,  or  when  it
entirely  loses  that  vivacity,  and  is  a  perfect
idea.  The  faculty  by  which  we  repeat  our
impressions  in  the  first  manner,  is  called
the  memory,  and  the  other  the  imagination."
[346,  347]


CHAP.  VII.


THEORIES  CONCERNING  MEMORY.


357


Upon  this  account  of  memory  and  imagi-
nation, I  shall  make  some  remarks.  [348]
First,  I  wish  to  know  what  we  are  here
to  understand  by  experience  ?  It  is  said,
we  find  all  this  by  experience  ;  and  I  con-
ceive nothing  can  be  meant  by  this  expe-
rience but  memory — not  that  memory
which  our  author  defines,  but  memory  in
the  common  acceptation  of  the  word.  Ac-
cording to  vulgar  apprehension,  memory  is
an  immediate  knowledge  of  something  past.
Our  author  does  not  admit  that  there  is
any  such  knowledge  in  the  human  mind.
He  maintains  that  memory  is  nothing  but
a  present  idea  or  impression.  But,  in  de-
fining what  he  takes  memory  to  be,  he  takes
for  granted  that  kind  of  memory  which  he
rejects.  For,  can  we  find  by  experience,
that  an  impression,  after  its  first  appearance
to  the  mind,  makes  a  second  and  a  third,  with
different  degrees  of  strength  and  vivacity,
if  we  have  not  so  distinct  a  remembrance  of
its  first  appearance  as  enables  us  to  know
it  upon  its  second  and  third,  notwithstand-
ing that,  in  the  interval,  it  has  undergone
a  very  considerable  change  ?*

All  experience  supposes  memory;  and
there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  experience,
without  trusting  to  our  own  memory,  or
that  of  others.  So  that  it  appears,  from
Mr  Hume's  account  of  this  matter,  that  he
found  himself  to  have  that  kind  of  memory
which  he  acknowledges  and  defines,  by  ex-
ercising that  kind  which  he  rejects.

Se-ondl'/,  What  is  it  we  find  by  expe-
rience or  memory  ?  It  is,  "  That,  when  an
impression  has  been  present  with  the  mind,
it  again  makes  its  appearance  there  as  an
idea,  and  that  after  two  different  ways."

If  experience  informs  us  of  this,  it  cer-
tainly deceives  us  ;  for  the  thing  is  impos-
sible, and  the  author  shews  it  to  be  so.
Impressions  and  ideas  are  fleeting,  perish-
able things,  which  have  no  existence  but
when  we  are  conscious  of  them.  If  an  im-
pression could  make  a  second  and  a  third
appearance  to  the  mind,  it  must  have  a
continued  existence  during  the  interval  of
these  appearances,  which  Mr  Hume  ac-
knowledges to  be  a  gross  absurdity.  [349]
It  seems,  then,  that  we  find,  by  experience,
a  thing  which  is  impossible.  We  are  im-
posed upon  by  our  experience,  and  made  to
believe  contradictions.

Perhaps  it  may  be  said,  that  these  dif-
ferent appearances  of  the  impression  are  not
to  be  understood  literally,  but  figuratively ;
that  the  impression  is  personified,  and  made
to  appear  at  different  times  and  in  different
habits,  when  no  more  is  meant  but  that  an
impression  appears  at  one  time ;  afterwards
a  thing  of  a  middle  nature,  between  an  im-
pression and  an  idea,  which  we  call  memory ;


[318-350]


*  S^e  NoteB.— H.


and,  last  of  all,  a  perfect  idea,  which  we  call
imagination :  that  this  figurative  meaning
agrees  best  with  the  last  sentence  of  the
period,  where  we  are  told  that  memory  and
imagination  are  faculties,  whereby  we  repeat
our  impresions  in  a  more  or  less  lively
manner.  To  repeat  an  impression  is  a  figur-
ative way  of  speaking,  which  signifies  making
a  new  impression  similar  to  the  former.

If,  to  avoid  the  absurdity  implied  in  the
literal  meaning,  we  understand  the  philo-
sopher in  this  figurative  one,  then  his  defini-
tions of  memory  and  imagination,  when
stripped  of  the  figurative  dress,  will  amount
to  this,  That  memory  is  the  faculty  of
making  a  weak  impression,  and  imagination
the  faculty  of  making  an  impression  still
weaker,  after  a  corresponding  strong  one.
These  definitions  of  memory  and  imagina-
tion labour  under  two  defects  :  First,  That
they  convey  no  notion  of  the  thing  defined  ;
and,  Secondly,  That  they  may  be  applied  to
things  of  a  quite  different  nature  from  those
that  are  defined.

When  we  are  said  to  have  a  faculty  of
making  a  weak  impression  after  a  corre-
sponding strong  one,  it  would  not  be  easy
to  conjecture  that  this  faculty  is  memory.
Suppose  a  man  strikes  his  head  smartly
against  the  wall,  this  is  an  impression ;
now,  he  has  a  faculty  by  which  he  can
repeat  this  impression  with  less  force,  so
as  not  to  hurt  him  :  this,  by  Mr  Hume's
account,  must  be  memory.  [350]  He
has  a  faculty  by  which  he  can  just  touch
the  wall  with  his  head,  so  that  the  impres-
sion entirely  loses  its  vivacity.  This  surely
must  be  imagination ;  at  least,  it  comes  as
near  to  the  definition  given  of  it  by  Mr
Hume  as  anything  I  can  conceive.

Thirdly,  We  may  observe,  that,  when  we
are  told  that  we  have  a  faculty  of  repeating
our  impressions  in  a  more  or  less  lively
manner,  this  implies  that  we  are  the  effi-
cient causes  of  our  ideas  of  memory  and
imagination ;  but  this  contradicts  what  the
author  says  a  little  before,  where  he  proves,
by  what  he  calls  a  convincing  argument,
that  impressions  are  the  cause  of  their  cor-
responding ideas.  The  argument  that  proves
this  had  need,  indeed,  to  be  very  con-
vincing ;  whether  we  make  the  idea  to  be
a  second  appearance  of  the  impression,  or  a
new  impression  similar  to  the  former.

If  the  first  be  true,  then  the  impression
is  the  cause  of  itself.  If  the  second  then
the  impression,  after  it  is  gone  and  has  no
existence,  produces  the  idea.  Such  are  the
mysteries  of  Mr  Hume's  philosophy.

It  may  be  observed,  that  the  common
system,  that  ideas  are  the  only  immediate
objects  of  thought,  leads  to  scepticism  with
regard  to  memory,  as  well  as  with  regard  to
the  objects  of  sense,  whether  those  ideas
are  placed  in  the  mind  or  in  the  brain.


358


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  III.


Ideas  are  said  to  be  tilings  internal  and
present,  which  have  no  existence  but  during
the  moment  they  are  in  the  mind.  The
objects  of  sense  are  things  external,  which
ha^e  a  continued  existence.  When  it  is
maintained  that  all  that  we  immediately
perceive  is  only  ideas  or  phantasms,  how
can  we,  from  the  existence  of  those  phan-
tasms, conclude  the  existence  of  an  external
world  corresponding  to  them  ?

This  difficult  question  seems  not  to  have
occurred  to  the  Peripatetics.*  Des  Cartes
saw  the  difficulty,  and  endeavoured  to  find
out  arguments  by  which,  from  the  existence
of  our  phantasms  or  ideas,  we  might  infer
the  existence  of  external  objects.  [351]  The
same  course  was  followed  by  Malebranche,
Arnauld,  and  Locke;  but  Berkeley  and
Hume  easily  refuted  all  their  arguments,
and  demonstrated  that  there  is  no  strength
in  them.

The  same  difficulty  with  regard  to  mem-
ory naturally  arises  from  the  system  of
ideas  ;  and  the  only  reason  why  it  was  not
observed  by  philosophers,  is,  because  they
give  less  attention  to  the  memory  than  to
the  senses  ;  for,  since  ideas  are  things  pre-
sent, how  can  we,  from  our  having  a  certain
idea  piesently  in  our  mind,  conclude  that  an
event  really  happened  ten  or  twenty  years
ago,  corresponding  to  it  ?

There  is  the  same  need  of  arguments  to
prove,  that  the  ideas  of  memory  are  pictures
of  things  that  really  did  happen,  as  that  the
ideas  of  sense  are  pictures  of  external  objects
which  now  exist.  In  both  cases,  it  will  be
impossible  to  find  any  argument  that  has
real  weight.  So  that  this  hypothesis  leads
us  to  absolute  scepticism,  with  regard  to
those  things  which  we  most  distinctly  re-
member, no  less  than  with  regard  to  the
external  objects  of  sense.

It  does  not  appear  to  have  occurred  either
to  Locke  or  to  Berkeley,  that  their  system
has  the  same  tendency  to  overturn  the  tes-
timony of  memory  as  the  testimony  of  the
senses.

Mr  Hume  saw  farther  than  both,  and
found  this  consequence  of  the  system  of
ideas  perfectly  corresponding  to  his  aim  of
establishing  universal  scepticism.  Hissys-
stem  is  therefore  more  consistent  than
theirs,  and  the  conclusions  agree  better  with
the  premises.

But,  if  we  should  grant  to  Mr  Hume  that
our  ideas  of  memory  afford  no  just  ground
to  believe  the  past  existence  of  things  which
we  remember,  it  may  still  be  asked,  How  it

*  This  is  not  correct.  See  above,  p.  2R5,  note  \.
To  that  note  I  may  add,  that  no  orthodox  Catholic
could  be  an  Idealist.  It  was  only  the  doctrine  of
transsubstantiation  that  prevented  Malebranche  from
pre-occupying  the  theory  of  Berkeley  and  Collier,
wh'ch  was  in  fact  his  own,  with  the  transcendent
reality  of  a  material  world  left  out,  as  a  Protectant
hors  d'amvre.  This,  it  is  curious,  has  never  been
observed. See  Note  P. — H.


comes  to  pass  that  perception  and  memory
are  accompanied  with  belief,  while  bare  ima-
gination is  not  ?  Though  this  belief  can-
not be  justified  upon  his  system,  it  ought  to
be  accounted  for  as  a  phsenomenon  of  hu-
man nature. [352]

This  he  has  done,  by  giving  us  a  new
theory  of  belief  in  general ;  a  theory  which
suits  very  well  with  that  of  ideas,  and  seems
to  be  a  natural  consequence  of  it,  and  which,
at  the  same  time,  reconciles  all  the  belief
that  we  find  in  human  nature  to  perfect
scepticism.

What,  then,  is  this  belief?  It  must
either  be  an  idea,  or  some  modification  of
an  idea  ;  we  conceive  many  things  which  we
do  not  believe.  The  idea  of  an  object  is
the  same  whether  we  believe  it  to  exist,  or
barely  conceive  it.  The  belief  adds  no  new
idea  to  the  conception  ;  it  is,  therefore,  no-
thing but  a  modification  of  the  idea  of  the
thing  believed,  or  a  different  manner  of
conceiving  it. Hear  himself : —

"  All  the  perceptions  of  the  mind  are  of
two  kinds,  impressions  and  ideas,  which
differ  from  each  other  only  in  their  different
degrees  of  force  and  vivacity.  Our  ideas
are  copied  from  our  impressions,  and  repre-
sent them  in  all  their  parts.  When  you
would  vary  the  idea  of  a  particular  object,
you  can  only  increase  or  diminish  its  force
and  vivacity.  If  you  make  any  other  change
upon  it,  it  represents  a  different  object  or
impression.  The  case  is  the  same  as  in
colours.  A  particular  shade  of  any  colour
may  acquire  a  new  degree  of  liveliness  or
brightness,  without  any  other  variation  ;
but,  when  you  produce  any  other  variation,
it  is  no  longer  the  same  shade  or  colour.  So
that,  as  belief  does  nothing  but  vary  the
manner  in  which  we  conceive  any  object,  it
can  only  bestow  en  our  ideas  an  additional
force  and  vivacity.  An  opinion,  therefore,
or  belief,  may  be  most  accurately  defined  a
lively  idea,  related  to  or  associated  with  a
present  impression.''

This  theory  of  belief  is  very  fruitful  of
consequences,  which  Mr  Hume  traces  with
his  usual  acuteness,  and  brings  into  the
service  of  his  system.  [353]  A  great  part
of  his  system,  indeed,  is  built  upon  it ;  and
it  is  of  itself  sufficient  to  prove  what  he
calls  his  hypothesis,  "  that  belief  is  more
properly  an  act  of  the  sensitive  than  of
the  cogitative  part  of  our  natures."

It  is  very  difficult  to  examine  this  ac-
count of  belief  with  the  same  gravity  with
which  it  is  proposed.  It  puts  one  in
mind  of  the  ingenious  account  given  by
Martinus  Scriblerus  of  the  power  of  syllo-
gism, by  making  the  maj  >>•  the  male,  and
the  minor  the  female,  which,  being  coupled
by  the  middle  term,  generate  the  conclusion.
There  is  surely  no  science  in  which  men  of
great  parts  and  ingenuity  have  fallen  into
[~3.5 1-3.53]


chap,  vii.]  THEORIES  CONCERNING  MEMORY.


359


such  gross  absurdities  as  in  treating  of  the
powers  of  the  mind.  I  cannot  help  think-
ing that  never  anything  more  absurd  was
gravely  maintained  by  any  philosopher,
than  this  account  of  the  nature  of  belief,
and  of  the  distinction  of  perception,  memory,
and  imagination.

The  belief  of  a  proposition  is  an  opera-
tion of  mind  of  which  every  man  is  con-
scious, and  what  it  is  he  understands  per-
fectly, though,  on  account  of  its  simplicity,
he  cannot  give  a  logical  definition  of  it.  If
he  compares  it  with  strength  or  vivacity  of
his  ideas,  or  with  any  modification  of  ideas,
they  are  so  far  from  appearing  to  be  one
and  the  same,  that  they  have  not  the  least
similitude.

That  a  strong  belief  and  a  weak  belief
differ  only  in  degree,  I  can  easily  compre-
hend ;  but  that  belief  and  no  belief  should
differ  only  in  degree,  no  man  can  believe
who  understands  what  he  speaks.  For  this
is,  in  reality,  to  say  that  something  and
nothing  differ  only  in  degree ;  or,  that
nothing  is  a  degree  of  something.

Every  proposition  that  may  be  the  ob-
ject of  belief,  has  a  contrary  proposition
that  may  be  the  object  of  a  contrary  belief.
The  ideas  of  both,  according  to  Mr  Hume,
are  the  same,  and  differ  only  in  degrees  of
vivacity — that  is,  contraries  differ  only  in
degree ;  and  so  pleasure  may  be  a  degree
of  pain,  and  hatred  a  degree  of  love.  [354]
But  it  is  to  no  purpose  to  trace  the  absurd-
ities that  follow  from  this  doctrine,  for  none
of  them  can  be  more  absurd  than  the  doc-
trine itself.

Every  man  knows  perfectly  what  it  is  to
see  an  object  with  his  eyes,  what  it  is  to
remember  a  past  event,  and  what  it  is  to
conceive  a  thing  which  has  no  existence.
That  these  are  quite  different  operations  of
his  mind,  he  is  as  certain  as  that  sound
differs  from  colour,  and  both  from  taste  ;
and  I  can  as  easily  believe  that  sound,  and
colour,  and  taste  differ  only  in  degree,  as
that  seeing,  and  remembering,  and  imagin-
ing, differ  only  in  degree.

Mr  Hume,  in  the  third  volume  of  his
"  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"  is  sensible
that  his  theory  of  belief  is  liable  to  strong
objections,  and  seems,  in  some  measure,  to
retract  it ;  but  in  what  measure,  it  is  not
easy  to  say.  He  seems  still  to  think  that
belief  is  only  a  modification  of  the  idea ;
but  that  vivacity  is  not  a  proper  term  to
express  that  modification.  Instead  of  it,
he  uses  some  analogical  phrases,  to  explain
that  modification,  such  as  "  apprehending
the  idea  more  strongly,  or  taking  faster
hold  of  it."

There  is  nothing  more  meritorious  in  a
philosopher  than  to  retract  an  error  upon
conviction  ;  but,  in  this  instance,  I  hum-
bly apprehend  Mr  Hume  claims  that  merit
1354-3.561


upon  too  slight  a  ground.  For  I  cannot
perceive  that  the  apprehending  an  idea
more  strongly,  or  taking  faster  hold  of  it,
expresses  any  other  modification  of  the  idea
than  what  was  before  expressed  by  its
strength  and  vivacity,  or  even  that  it  ex-
presses the  same  modification  more  pro-
perly. Whatever  modification  of  the  idea
he  makes  belief  to  be,  whether  its  vivacity,
or  some  other  without  a  name,  to  make
perception,  memory,  and  imagination  to  be
the  different  degrees  of  that  modification,
is  chargeable  with  the  absurdities  we  have
mentioned.

Before  we  leave  this  subject  of  memory,
it  is  proper  to  take  notice  of  a  distinction
which  Aristotle  makes  between  memory
and  reminiscence,  because  the  distinction
has  a  real  foundation  in  nature,  though  in
our  language,  I  think,  we  do  not  distinguish
them  by  different  names. [355]

Memory  is  a  kind  of  habit  which  is  not
always  in  exercise  with  regard  to  things  we
remember,  but  is  ready  to  suggest  them
when  there  is  occasion.  The  most  perfect
degree  of  this  habit  is,  when  the  thing  pre-
sents itself  to  our  remembrance  spontane-
ously, and  without  labour,  as  often  as  there
is  occasion.  A  second  degree  is,  when  the
thing  is  forgot  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time,
even  when  there  is  occasion  to  remember
it ;  yet,  at  last,  some  incident  brings  it  to
mind  without  any  search.  A  third  degree
is,  when  we  cast  about  and  search  for  what
we  would  remember,  and  so  at  last  find  it
out.  It  is  this  last,  I  think,  which  Ari-
stotle calls  reminiscence,  as  distinguished
from  memory.

Reminiscence,  therefore,  includes  a  will
to  recollect  something  past,  and  a  search  for
it.  But  here  a  difficulty  occurs.  It  may
be  said,  that  what  we  will  to  remember  we
must  conceive,  as  there  can  be  no  will  with-
out a  conception  of  the  thing  willed.  A
will  to  remember  a  thing,  therefore,  seems
to  imply  that  we  remember  it  already,  and
have  no  occasion  to  search  for  it.  But  this
difficulty  is  easily  removed.  When  we  will
to  remember  a  thing,  we  must  remember
something  relating  to  it,  which  gives  us  a
relative  conception  of  it ;  but  we  may,  at
the  same  time,  have  no  conception  what  the
thing  is,  but  only  what  relation  it  bears  to
something  else.  Thus,  I  remember  that  a
friend  charged  me  with  a  commission  to  be
executed  at  such  a  place  ;  but  I  have  forgot
what  the  commission  was.  By  applying
my  thought  to  what  I  remember  concerning
it,  that  it  was  given  by  such  a  person,  upon
such  an  occasion,  in  consequence  of  such  a
conversation,  I  am  led,  in  a  train  of  thought,
to  the  very  thing  I  had  forgot,  and  recol-
lect distinctly  what  the  commission  was.
[356]

Aristotle  says,  that  brutes  have  not  re-


360


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  it-


miniscence  ;*  and  this  I  think  is  probable ;
but,  says  he,  they  have  memory.  It  cannot,
indeed,  be  doubted  but  they  have  something
very  like  to  it,  and,  in  some  instances,  in  a
very  great  degree.  A  dog  knows  his  master
after  long  absence.  A.  horse  will  trace  back
a  road  he  has  once  gone,  as  accurately  as  a
man  ;  and  this  is  the  more  strange,  that  the
train  of  thought  which  he  had  in  going  must
be  reversed  in  his  return.  It  is  very  like
to  some  prodigious  memories  we  read  of,
where  a  person,  upon  hearing  an  hundred
names  or  unconnected  words  pronounced,
can  begin  at  the  last,  and  go  backwards  to


the  first,  without  losing  or  misplacing  one.
Brutes  certainly  may  learn  much  from  ex-
perience, which  seems  to  imply  memory.

Yet,  I  see  no  reason  to  think  that  brutes
measure  time  as  men  do,  by  days,  months,
or  years  ;  or  that  they  have  any  distinct
knowledge  of  the  interval  between  things
which  they  remember,  or  of  their  distance
from  the  present  moment  If  we  could  not
record  transactions  according  to  their  dates,
human  memory  would  be  something  very
different  from  what  it  is,  and,  perhaps,  re-
semble more  the  memory  of  brutes. [357]


ESSAY IV.


OF  CONCEPTION.


CHAPTER  I.

OF  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION  IN
GENERAL.

Conceiving,  imagining,^  apprehending,  un-
derstanding, having  a  notion  of  a  thing,  are
common  words,  used  to  express  that  opera-
tion of  the  understanding  which  the  logi-
cians call  simple  apprehension.  The  having
an  idea  of  a  thing,  is,  in  common  language,
used  in  the  same  sense,  chiefly,  I  think,
since  Mr  Locke's  time.  X

Logicians  define  Simple  Apprehension  to
be  the  bare  conception  of  a  thing  without
any  judgment  or  belief  about  it.  If  this
were  intended  for  a  strictly  logical  definition,
it  might  be  a  just  objection  to  it,  that  con-
ception and  apprehension  are  only  synony-
mous words  ;  and  that  we  may  as  well
define  conception  by  apprehension,  as  appre-
hension by  conception  ;  but  it  ought  to  be


*  This  is  a  question  which  may  be  differently  an.
swered,  according  as  we  attribute  a  diflerent  meaning
to  the  terms  employed H.

t  Imagining  should  not  be  confounded  with  Con-
ceiving, &c. ;  though  some  philosophers,  as  Ga-sendi,
have  not  attended  to  the  distinction.  The  words
Conception,  Concept,  Notion,  should  be  limited  to  the
thought  of  what  cannot  be  represented  in  the  imagin-
ation, as,  the  thought  .sugges'ed  by  a  general  term.
The  Leibnitzians  call  this  symbolical  in  contrast' to
intuitive  knowledge.  This  is  the  sense  -m  which
conceptio-and  conceptits  have  been  usually  and  cor-
rectly employed.  Mr  Siewarf,  on  the  other  hand,
arbitrarily  limiis  Conception  to  the  reproduction,  in
imagination,  of  an  object  of  sense  as  actually  per-
ceived.  See  Elements,  vol.  I.,  ch.  iii.  I  cannot
enter  on  a  general  criticism  of  Reid's  nomenclature,
though  I  may  say  something  more  of  this  in  the
sequel. See  below,  under  pp.  371, 482.— H.

t  In  this  country  should  be  added.  Locke  only
introduced  into  English  philosophy  the  teim  idea  in
its  Cartesian  universality.  Prior  to  him,  the  word
was  only  used  with  us  in  its  Platonic  signification.
Before  Des  Cartes.  David  Buchanan,  a  Scotch  philo-
sopher, who  sojourned  in  France,  had,  however,  em-
ployed Idea  in  an  equal  latitude. See  Note  G—  H.


remembered  that  the  most  simple  operations
of  the  mind  cannot  be  logically  defined.  To
have  a  distinct  notion  of  them,  we  must
attend  to  them  as  we  feel  them  in  our  own
minds.  He  that  would  have  a  distinct
notion  of  a  scarlet  colour,  will  never  attain
it  by  a  definition ;  he  must  set  it  before  his
eye,  attend  to  it,  compare  it  with  the  colours
that  come  nearest  to  it,  and  observe  the
specific  difference,  which  he  will  in  vain
attempt  to  define.* [358]

Every  man  is  conscious  that  he  can  con-
ceive a  thousand  things,  of  which  he  believes
nothing  at  all — as  a  horse  with  wings,  a
mountain  of  gold  ;  but,  although  concep-
tion may  be  without  any  degree  of  belief,
even  the  smallest  belief  cannot  be  without
conception.  He  that  believes  must  have
some  conception  of  what  he  believes.

Without  attempting  a  definition  of  this
operation  of  the  mind,  I  shall  endeavour  to
explain  some  of  its  properties  ;  consider  the
theories  about  it ;  and  take  notice  of  some
mistakes  of  philosophers  concerning  it.

1.  It  may  be  observed  that  conception
enters  as  an  ingredient  in  every  operation
of  the  mind.  Our  senses  cannot  give  us  the
belief  of  any  object,  without  giving  some
conception  of  it  at  the  same  time.  No  man
can  either  remember  or  reason  about  things
of  which  he  hath  no  conception.  When
we  will  to  exert  any  of  our  active  powers,
there  must  be  some  conception  of  what  we
will  to  do.  There  can  be  no  desire  nor
aversion,  love  nor  hatred,  without  some  con-
ception of  the  object.  We  cannot  feel  pain
without  conceiving  it,  though  we  can  con-
ceive it  without  feeling  it.  These  things
are  self-evident.

In  every  operation  of  the  mind,  there-


*  We  do  not  define  the  specific  difference,  but  we
define  bv  it.— K.


[357,  358]


chap,  i.] OF  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION  IN  GENERAL.


3(H


fore,  in  everything  we  call  thought,  there
must  be  conception.  When  we  analyse  the
various  operations  either  of  the  understand-
ing or  of  the  will,  we  shall  always  find  this
at  the  bottom,  like  the  caput  mortuum  of
the  chemists,  or  the  materia  prima  of  the
Peripatetics  ;  but,  though  there  is  no  opera-
tion of  miud  without  conception,  yet  it  may
be  found  naked,  detached  from  all  others,
and  then  it  is  called  simple  apprehension,  or
the  bare  conception  of  a  thing.

As  all  the  operations  of  our  mind  are  ex-
pressed by  language,  every  one  knows  that
it  is  one  thing  to  understand  what  is  said,
to  conceive  or  apprehend  its  meaning,
whether  it  be  a  word,  a  sentence,  or  a  dis-
course ;  it  is  another  thing  to  judge  of  it,
to  assent  or  dissent,  to  be  persuaded  or
moved.  The  first  is  simple  apprehension,
and  may  be  without  the  last ;  but  the  last
cannot  be  without  the  first.  ^  [359]

2.  In  bare  conception  there  can  neither
be  truth  nor  falsehood,  because  it  neither
affirms  nor  denies.  Every  judgment,  and
every  proposition  by  which  judgment  is
expressed,  must  be  true  or  false ;  and  the
qualities  of  true  and  false,  in  their  proper
sense,  can  belong  to  nothing  but  to  judg-
ments, or  to  propositions  which  express
judgment.  In  the  bare  conception  of  a
thing  there  is  no  judgment,  opinion,  or  be-
lief included,  and  therefore  it  cannot  be
either  true  or  false.

But  it  may  be  said,  Is  there  anything
more  certain  than  that  men  may  have  true
or  false  conceptions,  true  or  false  appre-
hensions, of  things  ?  I  answer,  that  such
ways  of  speaking  are  indeed  so  common,
and  so  well  authorized  by  custom,  the  arbiter
of  language,  that  it  would  be  presumption
to  censure  them.  It  is  hardly  possible  to
avoid  using  them.  But  we  ought  to  be
upon  our  guard  that  we  be  not  misled  by
them,  to  confound  things  which,  though
often  expressed  by  the  same  words,  are
really  different.  We  must  therefore  re-
member what  was  before  observed,  Essay  I.
chap.  I — that  all  the  words  by  which  we
signify  the  bare  conception  of  a  thing,  are
likewise  used  to  signify  our  opinions,  when
we  wish  to  express  them  with  modesty  and
diffidence.  And  we  shall  always  find,  that,
when  we  speak  of  true  or  false  conceptions,
we  mean  true  or  false  opinions.  An  opinion,
though  ever  so  wavering,  or  ever  so  mo-
destly expressed,  must  be  either  true  or
false  ;  but  a  bare  conception,  which  ex-
presses no  opinion  or  judgment,  can  be
neither.

If  we  analyse  those  speeches  in  which
men  attribute  truth  or  falsehood  to  our
conceptions  of  things,  we  shall  find  in  every
case,  that  there  is  some  opinion  or  judgment
implied  in  what  they  call  conception.  [360]
A  child  conceives  the  moon  to  be  flat,  and  a
[359-361]


foot  or  two  broad — that  is,  this  is  his  opinion :
and,  when  we  say  it  is  a  false  notion  or  a
false  conception,  we  mean  that  it  is  a  false
opinion.  He  conceives  the  city  of  London
to  be  like  his  country  village — that  is,  he
believes  it  to  be  so,  till  he  is  better  instructed.
He  conceives  a  lion  to  have  horns  ;  that  is,
he  believes  that  the  animal  which  men  call
a  lion,  has  horns.  Such  opinions  language
authorizes  us  to  call  conceptions  ;  and  they
may  be  true  or  false.  But  bare  conception,
or  what  the  logicians  call  simple  apprehen-
sion, implies  no  opinion,  however  slight,
and  therefore  can  neither  be  true  nor  false.

What  Mr  Locke  says  of  ideas  (by  which
word  he  very  often  means  nothing  but  con-
ceptions) is  very  just,  when  the  word  idea
is  so  understood.  Book  II.,  chap,  xxxii.,  §  1.
"  Though  truth  and  falsehood  belong  in
propriety  of  speech  only  to  propositions,  yet
ideas  are  often  termed  true  or  false  (as
what  words  are  there  that  are  not  used  with
great  latitude,  and  with  some  deviation
from  their  strict  and  proper  signification  ?)
though  I  think  that  when  ideas  themselves
are  termed  true  or  false,  there  is  still  some
secret  or  tacit  proposition,  which  is  the
foundation  of  that  denomination  :  as  we  shall
see,  if  we  examine  the  particular  occasions
wherein  they  come  to  be  called  true  or  false ;
in  all  which  we  shall  find  some  kind  of
affirmation  or  negation,  which  is  the  reason
of  that  denomination  ;  for  our  ideas,  being
nothing  but  bare  appearances,  or  perceptions
in  our  minds,  cannot  properly  and  simply
in  themselves  be  said  to  be  true  or  false,  no
more  than  a  simple  name  of  anything  can
be  said  to  be  true  or  false."

It  may  be  here  observed,  by  the  way,  that,
in  this  passage,  as  in  many  others,  Mr
Locke  uses  the  word  perception,  as  well  as
the  word  idea,  to  signify  what  I  call  con-
ception, or  simple  apprehension.  And  in
his  chapter  upon  perception,  Book  II.,  chap,
ix.,  he  uses  it  in  the  same  sense.  Percep-
tion, he  says,  "as  it  is  the  first  faculty  of
the  mind,  exercised  about  our  ideas,  so  it
is  the  first  and  simplest  idea  we  have  from
reflection,  and  is  by  some  called  thinking
in  general.  [361]  It  seems  to  be  that
which  puts  the  distinction  betwixt  the  ani-
mal kingdom  and  the  inferior  parts  of  nature.
It  is  the  first  operation  of  all  our  faculties,
and  the  inlet  of  all  knowledge  into  our
minds."

Mr  Locke  has  followed  the  example  given
by  Des  Cartes,  Gassendi,  and  other  Carte-
sians,* in  giving  the  name  of  perception  to
the  bare  conception  of  things  :  and  he  has
been  followed  in  this  by  Bishop  Berkeley,


*  GassendiWas  not  a  Cartesian,  but  an  Anti-Car
tesian,  though  he  adopted  several  points  in  his  phi-
losoDhy  from  Des  Cartes — for  example,  the  employ-
ment of  the  term  Idea  not  in  its  Platonic  limitation.


362


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


Qessay  IV.


Mr  Hume,  and  many  late  philosopher?,
when  they  treat  of  ideas.  They  have  pro-
bably been  led  into  this  impropriety,  by  the
common  doctrine  concerning-  ideas,  which
teaches  us,  that  conception,  perception  by
the  senses,  and  memory,  are  only  different
ways  of  perceiving  ideas  in  our  own  minds.  *
If  that  theory  be  well  founded,  it  will  in-
deed be  very  difficult  to  find  any  specific
distinction  between  conception;and  percep-
tion, -f-  But  there  is  reason  to  distrust  any
philosophical  theory  when  it  leads  men  to
corrupt  language,  and  to  confound,  under
one  name,  operations  of  the  mind  which
common  sense  and  common  language  teach
them  to  distinguish.

I  grant  that  there  are  some  states  of  the
mind,  wherein  a  man  may  confound  his
conceptions  with  what  he  perceives  or  re-
members, and  mistake  the  one  for  the  other ;
as  in  the  delirium  of  a  fever,  in  some  cases
of  lunacy  and  of  madness,  in  dreaming,  and
perhaps  in  some  momentary  transports  of
devotion,  or  of  other  strong  emotions,  which
cloud  his  intellectual  faculties,  and,  for  a
time,  carry  a  man  out  of  himself,  as  we
usually  express  it.

Even  in  a  sober  and  sound  state  of  mind,
the  memory  of  a  thing  may  be  so  very  weak
that  we  may  be  in  doubt  whether  we  only
dreamed  or  imagined  it.

It  may  be  doubted  whether  children,
when  their  imagination  first  begins  to  work,
can  distinguish  what  they  barely  conceive
from  what  they  remember.  [362]  I  have
been  told,  by  a  man "  of  knowledge  and  ob-
servation, that  one  of  his  sons,  when  he
began  to  speak,  very  often  told  lies  with
great  assurance,  without  any  intention,  as
far  as  appeared,  or  any  consciousness  of
guilt.  From  which  the  father  concluded,
that  it  is  natural  to  some  children  to  lie.
I  am  rather  inclined  to  think  that  the  child
had  no  intention  to  deceive,  but  mistook  the
rovings  of  his  own  fancy^for  things  which
he  remembered.  £  This,  however,  I  take
to  be  very  uncommon,  after  children  can
communicate  their  sentiments  by  language,
though  perhaps  not  so  in  a  more  early
period.

Granting  all  this,  if  any  man  will  affirm
that  they  whose  intellectual  faculties  are
sound,  and  sober,  and  ripe,  cannot  with
certainty  distinguish  what  they  perceive  or
remember,  from  what  they  barely  conceive,
when  those  operations  have  any  degree  of
strength  and  distinctness,  he  may  enjoy  his

*  But  see  above,  p.  280,  a,  note  *  ct  -alibi.—  H.

\  Yet  Re  id  himself  defines  Perception,  a  Concep-
tion (Imagination)  accompanied  with  a  belief  in  the
existence  of  its -object ;  and  Mr  Stewart  reduces  the
specific  difference,  at  best  only  a  concomitant,  to  an
accidental  circumstance,  in  holding  that  our  im-
aginations are  themselves  conjoined  with  a  tempo,
rary  bplief  in  their  objective  reality. — H.
X  But  compeue  alxve,  y.  340,  col.  a.— H.


opinion  ;  I  know  not  how  to  reason  with
him.  Why  should  philosophers  confound
those  operations  in  treating  of  ideas,  when
they  would  be  ashamed  to  do  it  on  other
occasions?  To  distinguish  the  various
powers  of  our  minds,  a  certain  degree  of
understanding  is  necessary.  And  if"  some,
through  a  defect  of  understanding,  natural
or  accidental,  or  from  unripeness  of  under-
standing, may  be  apt  to  confound  different
powers,  will  it  follow  that  others  cannot
clearly  distinguish  them  ?

To  return  from  this  digression —  into  which
the  abuse  ofthe  word  perception,  by  philo-
sophers, has  led  me — it  appears  evident  that
the  bare  conception  of  an  object,  which
includes  no  opinion  or  judgment,  can  neither
be  true  nor  false.  Those  qualities,  in  their
proper  sense,  are  altogether  inapplicable  to
this  operation  of  the  mind.

3.  Of  all  the  analogies  between  the  opera-
tions of  body  and  those  of  the  mind,  there
is  none  so  strong  and  so  obvious  to  all  man-
kind as  that  which  there  is  between  paint-
ing, or  other  plastic  arts,  and  the  power  of
conceiving  objects  in  the  mind.  Hence,  in
all  languages,  the  words  by  which  this  power
of  the  mind  and  its  various  modifications
are  expressed,  are  analogical,  and  borrowed
from  those  arts.  [363]  We  consider  this
power  of  the  mind  as  a  plastic  power,  by
which  we  form  to  ourselves  images  of  the
objects  of  thought.

In  vain  should  we  attempt  to  avoid  this
analogical  language,  for  we  have  no  other
language  upon  the  subject ;  yet  it  is  danger-
ous, and  apt  to  mislead.  All  analogical  and
figurative  words  have  a  double  meaning  ;
and,  if  we  are  not  very  much  upon  our
guard,  we  slide  insensibly  from  the  bor-
rowed and  figurative  meaning  into  the  pri-
mitive. We  are  prone  to  carry  the  parallel
between  the  things  compared  farther  than  it
will  hold,  and  thus  very  naturally  to  fall
into  error.

To  avoid  this  as  far  as  possible  in  the  pre-
sent subject,  it  is  proper  to  attend  to  the
dissimilitude  between  conceiving  a  thing  in
the  mind,  and  painting  it  to  the  eye,  as  well
as  to  their  similitude.  The  similitude  strikes
and  gives  pleasure.  The  dissimilitude  we
are  less  disposed  to  observe  ;  but  the  philo-
sopher ought  to  attend  to  it,  and  to  carry  it
always  in  mind,  in  his  reasonings  on  this
subject,  as  a  monitor,  to  warn  him  against
the  errors  into  which  the  analogical  lan-
guage is  apt  to  draw  him.

When  a  man  paints,  there  is  some  work
done,  which  remains  when  his  hand  is  taken
off,  and  continues  to  exist  though  he  should
think  no  more  of  it.  Every  stroke  of  his
pencil  produces  an  effect,  and  this  effect  is
different  from  his  action  in  making  it ;  for
it  remains  and  continues  to  exist  when  the
action  ceases.  The  action  of  painting  is
[  362,  633~}


•1


OF  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION  IN  GENERAL.


363


one  thing ;  the  picture  produced  is  another
thing.  The  first  is  the  cause,  the  second  is
the  effect.

Let  us  next  consider  what  is  done  when
he  only  conceives  this  picture.  He  must
have  conceived  it  before  he  painted  it  ;  for
this  is  a  maxim  universally  admitted,  that
every  work  of  art  must  first  be  conceived  in
the  mind  of  the  operator.  What  is  this
conception  ?  It  is  an  act  of  the  mind,  a  kind
of  thought.  This  cannot  be  denied.  [364]
But  does  it  produce  any  effect  besides  the
act  itself  ?  Surely  common  sense  answers
this  question  in  the  negative ;  for  every
Dne  knows  that  it  is  one  thing  to  conceive,
another  thing  to  bring  forth  into  effect.  It
is  one  thing  to  project,  another  to  execute.
A  man  may  think  for  a  long  time  what  he
is  to  do>  and  after  all  do  nothing.  Con-
ceiving, as  well  as  projecting  or  resolving,
are  what  the  schoolmen  called  immanent  acts
of  the  mind,  which  produce  nothing  beyond
themselves.  But  painting  is  a  transitive
act,  which  produces  an  effect  distinct  from
the  operation,  and  this  effect  is  the  picture.
Let  this,  therefore,  be  always  remembered,
that  what  is  commonly  called  the  image  of
a  thing  in  the  mind,  is  no  more  than  the
act  or  operation  of  the  mind  in  conceiving
it.

That  this  is  the  common  sense  of  men
who  are  untutored  by  philosophy,  appears
from  their  language.  If  one  ignorant  of  the
language  should  ask,  What  is  meant  by
conceiving  a  thing  ?  we  should  very  natur-
ally answer,  that  it  is  having  an  image  of
it  in  the  mind — and  perhaps  we  could  not
explain  the  word  better.  This  shews  that
conception,  and  the  image  of  a  thing  in  the
mind,  are  synonymous  expressions.  The
image  in  the  mind,  therefore,  is  not  the
object  of  conception,  nor  is  it  any  effect
produced  by  conception  as  a  cause.  It  is
conception  itself.  That  very  mode  of  think-
ing which  we  call  conception,  is  by  another
name  called  an  image  in  the  mind.*

Nothing  more  readily  gives  the  concep-
tion of  a  thing  than  the  seeing  an  image  of
it.  Hence,  by  a  figure  common  in  language,
conception  is  called  an  image  of  the  thing
conceived.  But  to  shew  that  it  is  not  a
real  but  a  metaphorical  image,  it  is  called
an  image  in  the  mind.  We  know  nothing
that  is  properly  in  the  mind  but  thought ;
and,  when  anything  else  is  said  to  be  in  the
mind,  the  expression  must  be  figurative,
and  signify  some  kind  of  thought.  [365]
I  know  that  philosophers  very  unani-
mously maintain,  that  in  conception  there


*  We  ought,  however,  to  distinguish  Imagination
and  Image,  Conception  and  Concept.  Imagination
and  Conception  ought  to  be  employed  in  speaking  of
the  mental  modification,  one' and  indivisible,  con.
sidered  as  an  act ;  Image  and  Concept,  in  speaking
of  it,  considered  as  a  product  or  immediate  object.—

f364.-366l


is  a  real  image  in  the  mind,  which  is  the
immediate  object  of  conception,  and  distinct
from  the  act  of  conceiving  it.  I  beg  the
reader's  indulgence  to  defer  what  may  be
said  for  or  against  this  philosophical  opinion
to  the  next  chapter ;  intending  in  this  only
to  explain  what  appears  to  me  to  belong  to
this  operation  of  mind,  without  considering
the  theories  about  it.  I  think  it  appears,
from  what  has  been  said,  that  the  common
language  of  those  who  have  not  imbibed  any
philosophical  opinion  upon  this  subject,
authorizes  us  to  understand  the  conception
of  a  thing,  and  an  image  of  it  in  the  mind,
not  as  two  different  things,  but  as  two  dif-
ferent expressions,  to  signify  one  and  the
same  thing  ;  and  I  wish  to  use  common
words  in  their  common  acceptation.

4.  Taking  along  with  us  what  is  said  in
the  last  article,  to  guard  us  against  the  se-
duction of  the  analogical  language  used  on
this  subject,  we  may  observe  a  very  strong
analogy,  not  only  between  conceiving  and
painting  in  general,  but  between  the  dif-
ferent kinds  of  our  conception?,  and  the
different  works  of  the  painter.  He  either
makes  fancy  pictures,  or  he  copies  from  the
painting  of  others,  or  he  paints  from  the
life  ;  that  is,  from  real  objects  of  art  or
nature  which  he  has  seen.  I  think  our
conceptions  admit  of  a  division  very  similar.

First,  There  are  conceptions  which  may
be  called  fancy  pictures.  They  are  com-
monly called  creatures  of  fancy,  or  of  im-
agination. They  are  not  the  copies  of  any
original  that  exists,  but  are  originals  them-
selves. Such  was  the  conception  which
Swift  formed  of  the  island  of  Laputa,  and
of  the  country  of  the  Lilliputians  ;  Cer-
vantes of  Don  Quixote  and.  his  Squire ;
Harrington  of  the  Government  of  Oceana  ;
and  Sir  Thomas  More  of  that  of  Utopia.
We  can  give  names  to  such  creatures  of
imagination,  conceive  them  distinctly,  and
reason  consequentially  concerning  them,
though  they  never  had  an  existence.  They
were  conceived  by  their  creators,  and  may
be  conceived  by  others,  but  they  never
existed.  We  do  not  ascribe  the  qualities
of  true  or  false  to  them,  because  they  are
not  accompanied  with  any  belief,  nor  do  they
imply  any  affirmation  or  negation. [366]

Setting  aside  those  creatures  of  imagina-
tion, there  are  other  conceptions,  which
may  be  called  copies,  because  they  have  an
original  or  archetype  to  which  they  refer,
and  with  which  they  are  believed  to  agree  ;
and  we  call  them  true  or  false  conceptions,
according  as  they  agree  or  disagree  with
the  standard  to  which  they  are  referred.
These  are  of  two  kinds,  which  have  different
standards  or  originals.

The  first  kind  is  analogous  to  pictures
taken  from  the  life.  We  have  conceptions
of  individual  things  that  really  exist,  such


3fJ4


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[_ES.?AY  JV


as  the  city  of  London,  or  the  government
of  Venice.  Here  the  things  conceived  are
the  originals  ;  and  our  conceptions  are  called
true  when  they  agree  with  the  thing  con-
ceived. Thus,  my  conception  of  the  city  of
London  is  true,  when  I  conceive  it  to  be
what  it  really  is.

Individual  things  which  really  exist,
being  the  creatures  of  God,  (though  some
of  them  may  receive  their  outward  form
from  man,)  he  only  who  made  them  knows
their  whole  nature  ;  we  know  them  but  in
part,  and  therefore  our  conceptions  of  them
must  in  all  cases  be  imperfect  and  inade-
quate ;  yet  they  may  be  true  and  just,  as
far  as  they  reach.

The  second  kind  is  analogous  to  the  copies
which  the  painter  makes  from  pictures  done
before.  Such  I  think  are  the  conceptions
we  have  of  what  the  ancients  called  univer-
sal ;  that  is,  of  things  which  belong  or  may
belong  to  many  individuals.  These  are
kinds  and  species  of  things  ;  such  as  man
or  elephant,  which  are  species  of  substances ;
wisdom  or  courage,  which  are  species  of
qualities  ;  equality  or  similitude,  which  are
species  of  relations.*  It  may  be  asked —
From  what  original  are  these  conceptions
formed  ?  And  when  are  they  said  to  be
true  or  false  ? [367]

It  appears  to  me,  that  the  original  from
which  they  are  copied — that  is,  the  thing
conceived — is  the  conception  or  meaning
which  other  men,  who  understand  the
language,  affix  to  the  same  words.

Things  are  parcelled  into  kinds  and  sorts,
not  by  nature,  but  by  men.  The  individual
things  we  are  connected  with,  are  so  many,
that  to  give  a  proper  name  to  every  indi-
vidual would  be  impossible.  We  could
never  attain  the  knowledge  of  them  that  is
necessary,  nor  converse  and  reason  about
them,  without  sorting  them  according  to
their  different  attributes.  Those  that  agree
in  certain  attributes  are  thrown  into  one
parcel,  and  have  a  general  name  given
them,  which  belongs  equally  to  every  indi-
vidual in  that  parcel.  This  common  name
must  therefore  signify  those  attributes
which  have  been  observed  to  be  common
to  every  individual  in  that  parcel,  and  no-
thing else.

That  such  general  words  may  answer
their  intention,  all  that  is  necessary  is,  that
those  who  use  them  should  affix  the  same
meaning  or  notion— that  is,  the  same  con-
ception to  them.  The  common  meaning  is
the  standard  by  which  such  conceptions  are
formed,  and they  are  said  to  be  true  or


*  Of  all  su:h  we  can  have  no  adequate  imagination.
A  universal,  when  represented  in  imagination,  is  no
longer  adequate,  no  longer  a  universal.  We.  cannot
have  an  image  of  Horse,  but  only  of  some  individual
of  that  species  We  may,  however,  have  a  notion  or
conception  of  it. See  below,  p.  48  >.—H.


false  according  as  they  agree  or  disagree
with  it.  Thus,  my  conception  of  felony  is
true  and  just,  when  it  agrees  with  the
meaning  of  that  word  in  the  laws  relating
to  it,  and  in  authors  who  understand  the
law.  The  meaning  of  the  word  is  the
thing  conceived  ;  and  that  meaning  is  the
conception  affixed  to  it  by  those  who  best
understand  the  language.

An  individual  is  expressed  in  language
either  by  a  proper  name,  or  by  a  general
word  joined  to  such  circumstances  as  dis-
tinguish that  individual  from  all  others  ;  if
it  is  unknown,  it  may,  when  an  object  of
sense,  and  within  reach,  be  pointed  out  to
the  senses  ;  when  beyond  the  reach  of  the
senses,  it  may  be  ascertained  by  a  descrip-
tion, which,  though  very  imperfect,  may  be
true,  and  sufficient  to  distinguish  it  from
every  other  individual.  Hence  it  is,  that,
in  speaking  of  individuals,  we  are  very  little
iu  danger  of  mistaking  the  object,  or  tak-
ing one  individual  for  another. [368]

Yet,  as  was  before  observed,  our  concep-
tion of  them  is  always  inadequate  and  lame.
They  are  the  creatures  of  God,  and  there
are  many  things  belonging  to  them  which
we  know  not,  and  which  cannot  be  deduced
by  reasoning  from  what  we  know.  They
have  a  real  essence,  or  constitution  of
nature,  from  which  all  their  qualities  flow  ;
but  this  essence  our  faculties  do  not  com-
prehend. They  are  therefore  incapable  of
definition ;  for  a  definition  ought  to  com-
prehend the  whole  nature  or  essence  of  the
thing  denned.

Thus,  Westminster  Bridge  is  an  indi-
vidual object;  though  I  had  never  seen
or  heard  of  it  before,  if  I  am  only  made
to  conceive  that  it  is  a  bridge  from  West-
minster over  the  Thames,  this  concep-
tion, however  imperfect,  is  true,  and  is
sufficient  to  make  me  distinguish  it,  when
it  is  mentioned,  from  every  other  object
that  exists.  The  architect  may  have  an
adequate  conception  of  its  structure,  which
is  the  work  of  man  ;  but  of  the  materials,
which  are  the  work  of  God,  no  man  has  an
adequate  conception ;  and,  therefore,  though
the  object  may  be  described,  it  cannot  bo
denned.

Universals  are  always  expressed  by  gene-
ral words ;  and  all  the  words  of  language,
excepting  proper  names,  are  general  words  ;
they  are  the  signs  of  general  concep-
tions, or  of  some  circumstance  relating
to  them.  These  general  conceptions  are
formed  for  the  purpose  of  language  and
reasoning ;  and  the  object  from  which  they
are  taken,  and  to  which  they  are  intended
to  agree,  is  the  conception  which  other  men
join  to  the  same  words ;  they  may,  there-
fore, be  adequate,  and  perfectly  agree  with
the  thing  conceived.  This  implies  no  more
than  that  men  who  speak  the  same  language
[367,  368J


chap,  i.] OF  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION  IN  GENERAL.


365


may  perfectly agree in the meaning of
many  general  words.

Thus  mathematicians  have  conceived
what  they  call  a  plane  triangle.  They
have  defined  it  accurately ;  and,  when  I
conceive  it  to  be  a  plane  surface,  bounded
by  three  right  lines,  I  have  both  a  true  and
an  adequate  conception  of  it.  [369]  There
is  nothing  belonging  to  a  plane  triangle
which  is  not  comprehended  in  this  conception
of  it,  or  deducible  from  it  by  just  reasoning.
This  definition  expresses  the  whole  essence
of  the  thing  defined,  as  every  just  definition
ought  to  do  ;  but  this  essence  is  only  what
Mr  Locke  very  properly  calls  a  nominal
essence ;  it  is  a  general  conception  formed
by  the  mind,  and  joined  to  a  general  word
as  its  sign.

If  all  the  general  words  of  a  language  had
a  precise  meaning,  and  were  perfectly  un-
derstood, as  mathematical  terms  are,  all
verbal  disputes  would  be  at  an  end,  and
men  would  never  seem  to  differ  in  opinion,
but  when  they  differ  in  reality ;  but  this  is
far  from  being  the  case.  The  meaning  of
most  general  words  is  not  learned,  like  that
of  mathematical  terms,  by  an  accurate
definition,  but  by  the  experience  we  happen
to  have,  by  hearing  them  used  in  conversa-
tion. From  such  experience,  we  collect
their  meaning  by  a  kind  of  induction  ;  and,
as  this  induction  is,  for  the  most  part,  lame
and  imperfect,  it  happens  that  different  per-
sons join  different  conceptions  to  the  same
general  word ;  and,  though  we  intend  to
give  them  the  meaning  which  use,  the
arbiter  of  language,  has  put  upon  them,
this  is  difficult  to  find,  and  apt  to  be  mis-
taken, even  by  the  candid  and  attentive.
Hence,  in  innumerable  disputes,  men  do  not
really  differ  in  their  judgments,  but  in  the
way  of  expressing  them.

Our  conceptions,  therefore,  appear  to  be
of  'hree  kinds.  They  are  either  the  concep-
tions of  individual  things,  the  creatures  of
God ;  or  they  are  conceptions  of  the  mean-
ing of  general  words  ;  or  they  are  the  crea-
tures of  our  own  imagination  :  and  these
different  kinds  have  different  properties,
which  we  have  endeavoured  to  describe.

5 .  O  ur  conception  of  things  may  be  strong
and  lively,  or  it  may  be  faint  and  languid  in
all  degrees.  These  are  qualities  which  pro-
perly belong  to  our  conceptions,  though  we
have  no  names  for  them  but  such  as  are
analogical.  •  Every  man  is  conscious  of  such
a  difference  in  his  conceptions,  and  finds  his
lively  conceptions  most  agreeable,  when  the
object  is  not  of  such  a  nature  as  to  give
pain. 1370]

Those  who  have  lively  conceptions,  com-
monly express  them  in  a  lively  manner —
that  is,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  raise  lively
conceptions  and  emotions  in  others  Such
persons  are  the  most  agreeable  companions
[369-371 J


in  conversation,  and  the  most  acceptable  in
their  writings.

The  liveliness  of  our  conceptions  proceeds
from  different  causes-  Some  objects,  from
their  own  nature,  or  from  accidental  asso-
ciations, are  apt  to  raise  strong  emotions  in
the  mind.  Joy  and  hope,  ambition,  zeal,
and  resentment,  tend  to  enliven  our  con-
ceptions ;  disappointment,  disgrace,  grief,
and  envy,  tend  rather  to  flatten  them.  Men
of  keen  passions  are  commonly  lively  and
agreeable  in  conversation  ;  and  dispassion-
ate men  often  make  dull  companions.  There
is  in  some  men  a  natural  strengthaand  vigour
of  mind  which  gives  strength  to  their  con-
ceptions on  all  subjects,  and  in  all  the  occa-
sional variations  of  temper.

It  seems  easier  to  form  a  lively  concep-
tion of  objects  that  are  familiar,  than  of
those  that  are  not ;  our  conceptions  of  visible
objects  are  commonly  the  most  lively,  when
other  circumstances  are  equal.  Hence,
poets  not  only  delight  in  the  description  of
visible  objects,  but  find  means,  by  meta-
phor, analogy,  and  allusion,  to  clothe  every
object  they  describe  with  visible  qualities.
The  lively  conception  of  these  makes  the
object  appeal',  as  it  were,  before  our  eyes.
Lord  Kames,  in  his  Elements  of  Criticism,
has  shewn  of  what  importance  it  is  in
works  of  taste,  to  give  to  objects  described,
what  he  calls  ideal  presence.*  To  produce
this  in  the  mind,  is,  indeed,  the  capital  aim
of  poetical  and  rhetorical  description.  It
carries  the  man,  as  it  were,  out  of  himself,
and  makes  him  a  spectator  of  the  scene
described.  This  ideal  presence  seems  to  me,
to  be  nothing  else  but  a  lively  conception  of
the  appearance  which  the  object  would  make
if  really  present  to  the  eye. [371]

Abstract  and  general  conceptions  are
never  lively,  though  they  may  be  distinct ;
and,  therefore,  however  necessary  in  philo-
sophy, seldom  enter  into  poetical  descrip-
tion without  being  particularised  or  clothed
in  some  visible  dress,  -f-

It  may  be  observed,  however,  that  our
conceptions  of  visible  objects  become  more
lively  by  giving  them  motion,  and  more
still  by  giving  them  life  and  intellectual
qualities.  Hence,  in  poetry,  the  whole  crea-
tion is  animated,  and  endowed  with  sense
and  reflection.

Imagination,  when  it  is  distinguished
from  conception,  seems  to  me  to  signify
one  species  of  conception  —to  wit,  the  COn-


EIlaXoTOhct,  Visiones,  of  the  ancient  Rhetoricians.—
H.

t  They  thus  cease  to  be  aught  abstract  and  general,
and  become  merely  individual  representations.  In
precise  language,  they  are  no  longer  i>ovnu.otrx,  but
<p«vTa<r,u,<KT<*  ;  no  \onger  Begriffe,  but  Anschauungen  ;
no  longer  notions  or  concepts,  but  images.  The worl
"  particularised"  ought  to  have  been  individualised


366


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  IV.


ception  of  visible  objects.*  Thus,  in  a
mathematical  proposition,  I  imagine  the
figure,  and  I  conceive  the  demonstration  ;
it  would  not,  I  think,  be  improper  to  say,
I  conceive  both ;  but  it  would  not  be  so
proper  to  say, I  imagine  the  demonstration.

6-  Our  conceptions  of  things  maybe  clear,
distinct,  and  steady ;  or  they  may  be  ob-
scure, indistinct,  and  wavering.  The  live-
liness of  our  conceptions  gives  pleasure,
but  it  is  their  distinctness  and  steadiness
that  enables  us  to  judge  right,  and  to
express  our  sentiments  with  perspicuity.

If  we  inquire  into  the  cause,  why,  among
persons  speaking  or  writing  on  the  same
subject,  we  find  in  one  so  much  darkness,
in  another  so  much  perspicuity,  I  believe
the  chief  cause  will  be  found  to  be,  that
one  had  a  distinct  and  steady  concep-
tion of  what  he  said  and  wrote,  and  the
other  had  not.  Men  generally  find  means
to  express  distinctly  what  they  have  con-
ceived distinctly.  Horace  observes,  that
proper  words  spontaneously  follow  distinct
conceptions — "  Verbaque  provisam  rem.  non
invito,  sequuntur."  But  it  is  impossible
that  a  man  should  distinctly  express  what
he  has  not  distinctly  conceived. [372]

We  are  commonly  taught  that  perspicuity
depends  upon  a  proper  choice  of  words,  a
proper  structure  of  sentences,  and  a  proper
order  in  the  whole  composition.  All  this
is  very  true  ;  but  it  supposes  distinctness  in
our  conceptions,  without  which  there  can
be  neither  propriety  in  our  words,  nor  in
the  structure  of  our  sentences,  nor  in  our
method.

Nay,  1  apprehend  that  indistinct  con-
ceptions of  things  are,  for  the  most  part,
the  cause,  not  only  of  obscurity  in  writing
and  speaking,  but  of  error  in  judging.

Must  not  they  who  conceive  things  in  the
same  manner  form  the  same  judgment  of
their  agreements  and  disagreements  ?  Is
it  possible  for  two  persons  to  differ  with
regard  to  the  conclusion  of  a  syllogism  who
have  the  same  conception  of  the  premises  ?

Some  persons  find  it  difficult  to  enter
into  a  mathematical  demonstration.  I  be-
lieve we  shall  always  find  the  reason  to  be,
that  they  do  not  distinctly  apprehend  it.
A  man  cannot  be  convinced  by  what  he
does  not  understand.  On  the  other  hand,
I  think  a  man  cannot  understand  a  de-
monstration without  seeing  the  force  of  it.
I  speak  of  such  demonstrations  as  those
of  Euclid,  where  every  step  is  set  down,  and
nothing  left  to  be  supplied  by  the  reader.

*  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Reid  did  not  more  fully
develope  the  distinction  of  Imagination  and  Concep-
tion, on  which  he  here  and  elsewhere  inadequately
touches.  Imagination  is  not,  though  in  conformity
to  the  etymology  of  the  term,  to  be  limited  to  the
representation  of  visible  objects.  See  below,  under
p.  482.  Neither  ought  the  term  conceive  to  be  used
in  the  extensive  sense  of  understand. — H.


Sometimes  one  who  has  got  through  the
first  four  books  of  Euclid's  "  Elements,"
and  sees  the  force  of  the  demonstrations,
finds  difficulty  in  the  fifth.  What  is  the
reason  of  this  ?  You  may  find,  by  a  little
conversation  with  him,  that  he  has  not  a
clear  and  steady  conception  of  ratios,  and
of  the  terms  relating  to  them.  When  the
terms  used  in  the  fifth  book  have  become
familiar,  and  readily  excite  in  his  mind  a
clear  and  steady  conception  of  their  mean-
ing, you  may  venture  to  affirm  that  he  will
be  able  to  understand  the  demonstrations
of  that  book,  and  to  see  the  force  of  them.
[373]

If  this  be  really  the  case,  as  it  seems  to
be,  it  leads  us  to  think  that  men  are  very
much  upon  a  level  with  regard  to  mere
judgment,  when  we  take  that  faculty  apart
from  the  apprehension  or  conception  of  the
things  about  which  we  judge;  so  that  a
sound  judgment  seems  to  be  the  inseparable
companion  of  a  clear  and  steady  apprehen-
sion. And  we  ought  not  to  consider  these
two  as  talents,  of  which  the  one  may  fall  to
the  lot  of  one  man,  and  the  other  to  the  lot
of  another,  but  as  talents  which  always  go
together.

It  may,  however,  be  observed,  that  some
of  our  conceptions  may  be  more  subservient
to  reasoning  than  others  which  are  equally
clear  and  distinct.  It  was  before  observed,
that  some  of  our  conceptions  are  of  indi-
vidual things,  others  of  things  general  and
abstract.  It  may  happen  that  a  man  who
has  very  clear  conceptions  of  things  in-
dividually, is  not  so  happy  in  those  of
things  general  and  abstract.  And  this  I
take  to  be  the  reason  why  we  find  men
who  have  good  judgment  in  matters  of
common  life,  and  perhaps  good  talents  for
poetical  or  rhetorical  composition,  who  find
it  very  difficult  to  enter  into  abstract  reas-
oning.

That  I  may  not  appear  singular  in  put-
ting men  so  much  upon  a  level  in  point  of
mere  judgment,  I  beg  leave  to  support  this
opinion  by  the  authority  of  two  very  think
ing  men,  Des  Cartes  and  Cicero.  The
former,  in  his  dissertation  on  Method,  ex-
presses himself  to  this  purpose : — "  Nothing
is  so  equally  distributed  among  men  as
judgment.  •  Wherefore,  it  seems  reasonable
to  believe,  that  the  power  of  distinguishing
what  is  true  from  what  is  false,  (which  we
properly  call  judgment  or  right  reason,)  is
by  nature  equal  in  all  men  ;  and  therefore
that  the  diversity  of  our  opinions  does  not
arise  from  one  person  being  endowed  with
a  greater  power  of  reason  than  another,  but
only  from  this,  that  we  do  not  lead our


*  *'  Judgment,"  bona  mens,  in  the  authentic
Latin  translation.  I  cannot,  at  the  moment,  lay
hands  on  my  copy  of  the  French  original ;  but,  if  I
recollect  aright,  it  is  there  le  bon  sens. — H.

[372,373]


chap,  i.] OF  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION  IN  GENERAL.


3(J7


thought  in  the  same  track,  nor  attend  to
the  same  things."

Cicero,  in  his  third  book  "  De  Oratore,"
makes  this  observation — "  It  is  wonderful
when  the  learned  and  unlearned  differ  so
much  in  art,  how  little  they  differ  in  judg-
ment. For  art  being  derived  from  Nature,
is  good  for  nothing,  unless  it  move  and
delight  Nature." [374]

From  what  has  been  said  in  this  article,
it  follows,  that  it  is  so  far  in  our  power  to
write  and  speak  perspicuously,  and  to  reason
justly,  as  it  is  in  our  power  to  form  clear
and  distinct  conceptions  of  the  subject  on
which  we  speak  or  reason.  And,  though
Nature  hath  put  a  wide  difference  between
one  man  and  another  in  this  respect,  yet
that  it  is  in  a  very  considerable  degree  in
our  power  to  have  clear  and  distinct  appre-
hensions of  things  about  which  we  think
and  reason,  cannot  be  doubted.

7.  It  has  been  observed  by  many  authors,
that,  when  we  barely  conceive  any  object,
the  ingredients  of  that  conception  must
either  be  things  with  which  we  were  before
acquainted  by  some  other  original  power  of
the  mind,  or  they  must  be  parts  or  attri-
butes of  such  things.  Thus,  a  man  cannot
conceive  colours  if  he  never  saw,  nor  sounds
if  he  never  heard.  If  a  man  had  not  a  con-
science, he  could  not  conceive  what  is  meant
by  moral  obligation,  or  by  right  and  wrong
in  conduct.

Fancy  may  combine  things  that  never
were  combined  in  reality.  It  may  enlarge
or  diminish,  multiply  or  divide,  compound
and  fashion  the  objects  which  nature  pre-
sents ;  but  it  cannot,  by  the  utmost  effort
of  that  creative  power  which  we  ascribe  to
it,  bring  any  one  simple  ingredient  into  its
productions  which  Nature  has  not  framed
and  brought  to  our  knowledge  by  some
other  faculty.

This  Mr  Locke  has  expressed  as  beauti-
fully as  justly.  The  dominion  of  man,  in
this  little  world  of  his  own  understanding,
is  much  the  same  as  in  the  great  world  of
visible  things  ;  wherein  his  power,  however
managed  by  art  and  skill,  reaches  no  farther
than  to  compound  and  divide  the  materials
that  are  made  to  his  hand,  but  can  do  no-
thing towards  making  the  least  particle  of
matter,  or  destroying  one  atom  that  is
already  in  being.  [375]  The  same  inability
will  every  one  find  in  himself,  to  fashion  in  his
understanding  any  simple  idea  not  received
by  the  powers  which  God  has  given  him.

I  think  all  philosophers  agree  in  this  senti-
ment. Mr  Hume,  indeed,  after  acknow-
ledging the  truth  of  the  principle  in  general,
mentions  what  he  thinks  a  single  exception
to  it — That  a  man,  who  had  seen  all  the
shades  of  a  particular  colour  except  one,
might  frame  in  his  mind  a  conception  of
that  shade  which  he  never  saw.  I  think
[374-376]


this  is  not  an  exception  ;  because  a  parti-
cular shade  of  a  colour  differs  not  specifically,
but  only  in  degree,  from  other  shades  of  the
same  colour.

It  is  proper  to  observe,  that  our  most
simple  conceptions  are  not  those  which
nature  immediately  presents  to  us.  When
we  come  to  years  of  understanding,  we  have
the  power  of  analysing  the  objects  of  nature,
of  distinguishing  their  several  attributes
and  relations,  of  conceiving  them  one  by
one,  and  of  giving  a  name  to  each,  whose
meaning  extends  only  to  that  single  attri-
bute or  relation  :  and  thus  our  most  simple
conceptions  are  not  those  of  any  object  in
nature,  but  of  some  single  attribute  or  rela-
tion of  such  objects.

Thus,  nature  presents  to  our  senses
bodies  that  are  extended  in  three  dimensions,
and  solid.  By  analysing  the  notion  we  have
of  body  from  our  senses,  we  form  to  our-
selves the  conceptions  of  extension,  solidity,
space,  a  point,  a  line,  a  surface — all  which
are  more  simple  conceptions  than  that  of  a
body.  But  they  are  the  elements,  as  it
were,  of  which  our  conception  of  a  body  is
made  up,  and  into  which  it  may  be  analysed.
This  power  of  analysing  objects  we  propose
to  consider  particularly  in  another  place.
It  is  only  mentioned  here,  that  what  is  said
in  this  article  may  not  be  understood  so  as
to  be  inconsistent  with  it. [376]

8.  Though  our  conceptions  must  be  con-
fined to  the  ingredients  mentioned  in  the
last  article,  we  are  unconfined  with  regard
to  the  arrangement  of  those  ingredients.
Here  we  may  pick  and  choose,  and  form
an  endless  variety  of  combinations  and  com-
positions, which  we  call  creatures  of  the
imagination.  These  may  be  clearly  con-
ceived, though  they  never  existed :  and,
indeed,  everything  that  is  made,  must  have
been  conceived  before  it  was  made.  Every
work  of  human  art,  and  every  plan  of  con-
duct, whether  in  public  or  in  private  life,
must  have  been  conceived  before  it  was
brought  to  execution.  And  we  cannot  avoid
thinking,  that  the  Almighty,  before  he
created  the  universe  by  his  power,  had  a
distinct  conception  of  the  whole  and  of  every
part,  and  saw  it  to  be  good,  and  agreeable
to  his  intention.

It  is  the  business  of  man,  as  a  rational
creature,  to  employ  this  unlimited  power  of
conception,  for  planning  his  conduct  and
enlarging  his  knowledge.  It  seems  to  be
peculiar  to  beings  endowed  with  reason  to
act  by  a  preconceived  plan.  Brute  animals
seem  either  to  want  this  power,  or  to  have
it  in  a  very  low  degree.  They  are  moved
by  instinct,  habit,  appetite,  or  natural  affec-
tion, according  as  these  principles  are  stirred
by  the  present  occasion.  But  I  see  no
reason  to  think  that  they  can  propose  to
themselves  a  connected  plan  of  life,  or  form


368


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  IV.


general  rules  of  conduct  Indeed,  we  see
that  many  of  the  human  species,  to  whom
God  has  given  this  power,  make  little  use
of  it.  They  act  without  a  plan,  as  the  pas-
sion or  appetite  which  is  strongest  at  the
time  leads  them.

9.  The  last  property  I  shall  mention  of
this  faculty,  is  that  which  essentially  dis-
tinguishes it  from  every  other  power  of  the
mind ;  and  it  is,  that  it  is  not  employed
solely  about  things  which  have  existence.
I  can  conceive  a  winged  horse  or  a  centaur,
as  easily  and  as  distinctly  as  I  can  conceive
a  man  whom  I  have  seen.  Nor  does  this
distinct  conception  incline  my  judgment  in
the  least  to  the  belief  that  a  winged  horse
or  a  centaur  ever  existed. [377]

It  is  not  so  with  the  other  operations  of
our  minds.  They  are  employed  about  real
existences,  and  carry  with  them  the  belief
of  their  objects.  When  I  feel  pain,  I  am
compelled  to  believe  that  the  pain  that  I
feel  has  a  real  existence.  When  I  perceive
any  external  object,  my  belief  of  the  real
existence  of  the  object  is  irresistible.  When
I  distinctly  remember  any  event,  though
that  event  may  not  now  exist,  I  can  have
no  doubt  but  it  did  exist.  That  conscious-
ness which  we  have  of  the  operations  of
our  own  minds,  implies  a  belief  of  the  real
existence  of  those  operations.

Thus  we  see,  that  the  powers  of  sensa-
tion, of  perception,  of  memory,  and  of  con-
sciousness, are  all  employed  solely  about
objects  that  do  exist,  or  have  existed.  But
conception  is  often  employed  about  objects
that  neither  do,  nor  did,  nor  will  exist.  This
is  the  very  nature  of  this  faculty,  that  its
object,  though  distinctly  conceived,  may
have  no  existence.  Such  an  object  we  call
a  creature  of  imagination ;  but  this  creature
never  was  created.

That  we  may  not  impose  upon  ourselves
in  this  matter,  we  must  distinguish  between
that  act  or  operation  of  the  mind,  which  we
call  conceiving  an  object,  and  the  object
which  we  conceive.  When  we  conceive
anything,  there  is  a  real  act  or  operation  of
the  mind.  Of  this  we  are  conscious,  and
can  have  no  doubt  of  its  existence.  But
every  such  act  must  have  an  object  ;*  for  he
that  conceives  must  conceive  something.
Suppose  he  conceives  a  centaur,  he  may
have  a  distinct  conception  of  this  object,
though  no  centaur  ever  existed.

I  am  afraid  that,  to  those  who  are  unac-
quainted with  the  doctrine  of  philosophers
upon  this  subject,  I  shall  appear  in  a  very
ridiculous  light,  for  insisting  upon  a  point
so  very  evident  as  that  men  may  barely
conceive  things  that  never  existed.  They
will  hardly  believe  that  any  man  in  his  wits
ever  doubted  of  it. Indeed, I  know  no

*  See  below,  p.  390,  and  Note  E.— H.


truth  more  evident  to  the  common  sense  and
to  the  experience  of  mankind.  But,  if  the
authority  of  philosophy,  ancient  and  modern,
opposes  it,  as  I  think  it  does,  I  wish  not
to  treat  that  authority  so  fastidiously  as  not
to  attend  patiently  to  what  may  be  said  in
support  of  it. [378]


CHAPTER II.

THEORIES  CONCERNING  CONCEPTION.

The  theory  of  ideas  has  been-  applied  to
the  conception  of  objects,  as  well  as  to  per-
ception and  memory.  Perhaps  it  will  be
irksome  to  the  reader,  as  it  is  to  the  writer,
to  return  to  that  subject,  after  so  much  has
been  said  upon  it ;  but  its  application  to  the
conception  of  objects,  which  could  not  pro-
perly have  been  introduced  before,  gives  a
more  comprehensive  view  of  it,  and  of  the
prejudices  which  have  led  philosophers  so
unanimously  into  it.

There  are  two  prejudices  which  seem  to
me  to  have  given  rise  to  the  theory  of  ideas
in  all  the  various  forms  in  which  it  has  ap-
peared in  the  course  of  above  two  thousand
years  ;  and,  though  they  have  no  support
from  the  natural  dictates  of  our  faculties,
or  from  attentive  reflection  upon  their  oper-
ations, they  are  prejudices  which  those  who
speculate  upon  this  subject  are  very  apt  to
be  led  into  by  analogy.

The  first  is — That,  in  all  the  operations  of
the  understanding,  there  must  be  some  im-
mediate intercourse  between  the  mind  and
its  object,  so  that  the  one  may  act  upon  the
other.  The  second,  That,  in  all  the  opera-
tions of  understanding,  there  must  be  an
object  of  thought,  which  really  exists  while
we  think  of  it ;  or,  as  some  philosophers
have  expressed  it,  that  which  is  not  cannot
be  intelligible.

Had  philosophers  perceived  that  these  are
prejudices  grounded  only  upon  analogical
reasoning,  we  had  never  heard  of  ideas  in
the  philosophical  sense  of  that  word. [379]

The  first  of  these  principles  has  led  philo-
sophers to  think  that,  as  the  external
objects  of  sense  are  too  remote  to  act  upon
the  mind  immediately,  there  must  be  some
image  or  shadow  of  them  that  is  present  to
the  mind,  and  is  the  immediate  object  of
perception.  That  there  is  such  an  imme-
diate object  of  perception,  distinct  from
the  external  object,  has  been  very  unani-
mously held  by  philosophers,  though  they
have  differed much  about the  name,  the


*  The  reader  will  bear  in  mind  what  has  been
already  said  of  the  limi'ed  meaning  attached  by
Reid  to  the  term  Idea,  viz.,  something  in,  or  present
to  the  mind,  but  not  a  mere  modification  of  the
mind — and  his  error  in  supposing  that  all  philosophers
admitted  this  crude  hypothesis.  See  Notes  B,  C,  Lt
M,  N,  O,  P,  &c— H.


[377-379"]


chap,  ii.] THEORIES  CONCERNING  CONCEPTION.


309


nature,  and  the  origin  of  those  immediate
objects.

We  have  considered  what  has  been  said  in
the  support  of  this  principle,  Essay  II.  chap.
14,  to  which  the  reader  is  referred,  to
prevent  repetition.

I  shall  only  add  to  what  is  there  said,
That  there  appears  no  shadow  of  reason
why  the  mind  must  have  an  object  imme-
diately present  to  it  in  its  intellectual  oper-
ations, any  more  than  in  its  affections  and
passions.  Philosophers  have  not  said  that
ideas  are  the  immediate  objects  of  love  or
resentment,  of  esteem  or  disapprobation.
It  is,  I  think,  acknowledged,  that  persons
and  not  ideas,  are  the  immediate  objects  of
those  affections  ;  persons,  who  are  as  far
from  being  immediately  present  to  the  mind
as  other  external  objects,  and,  sometimes,
persons  who  have  now  no  existence,  in  this
world  at  least,  and  who  can  neither  act
upon  the  mind,  nor  be  acted  upon  by  it.

The  second  principle,  which  I  conceive
to  be  likewise  a  prejudice  of  philosophers,
grounded  upon  analogy,  is  now  to  be
considered.

It  contradicts  directly  what  was  laid  down
in  the  last  article  of  the  preceding  chapter
— to  wit,  that  we  may  have  a  distinct  con-
ception of  things  which  never  existed.  This
is  undoubtedly  the  common  belief  of  those
who  have  not  been  instructed  in  philosophy  ;
and  they  will  think  it  as  ridiculous  to  defend
it  by  reasoning,  as  to  oppose  it. [380]

The  philosopher  says,  Though  there
may  be  a  remote  object  which  does  not  ex-
ist, there  mast  be  an  immediate  object
which  really  exists  ;  for  that  which  is  not,
cannot  be  an  object  of  thought.  The  idea
must  be  perceived  by  the  mind,  and,  if  it
does  not  exist  there,  there  can  be  no  per-
ception of  it,  no  operation  of  the  mind
about  it.-

This  principle  deserves  the  more  to  be
examined,  because  the  other  before  men-
tioned depends  upon  it ;  for,  although  the
last  may  be  true,  even  if  the  first  was  false,
yet,  if  the  last  be  not  true,  neither  can  the
first.  If  we  can  conceive  objects  which
have  no  existence,  it  follows  that  there  may
be  objects  of  thought  which  neither  act  upon
the  mind,  nor  are  acted  upon  by  it ;  because
that  which  has  no  existence  can  neither  act
nor  be  acted  upon.

It  is  by  these  principles  that  philosophers
have  been  led  to  think  that,  in  every  act  of
memory  and  of  conception,  as  well  as  of
perception,  there  are  two  objects — the
one,  the  immediate  object,  the  idea,  the
species,  the  form  ;  the  other,  the  mediate
or  external  object. The  vulgar  know  onlj


*  In  relation  to  this  and  what  follows,  see  above,
p.  292,  b,  note  t ;  p.  278,  a,  note  f  j  and  Note  B.


H.

[380,3811


of  one  object,  which,  in  perception,  is  some-
thing external  that  exists ;  in  memory,
something  that  did  exist ;  and,  in  concep-
tion, may  be  something  that  never  existed.*
But  the  immediate  object  of  the  philo-
sophers, the  idea,  is  said  to  exist,  and  to  be
perceived  in  all  these  operations.

These  principles  have  not  only  led  philo-
sophers to  split  objects  into  two,  where
others  can  find  but  one,  but  likewise  have
led  them  to  reduce  the  three  operations  now
mentioned  to  one,  making  memory  and  con-
ception, as  well  as  perception,  to  be  the  per-
ception of  ideas.  But  nothing  appears  more
evident  to  the  vulgar,  than  that  what  is
only  remembered,  or  only  conceived,  is  not
perceived  ;  and,  to  speak  of  the  perceptions
of  memory,  appears  to  them  as  absurd  as
to  speak  of  the  hearing  of  sight. [381]

In  a  word,  these  two  principles  carry  us
into  the  whole  philosophical  theory  of  ideas,
and  furnish  every  argument  that  ever  was
used  for  their  existence.  If  they  are  true,
that  system  must  be  admitted  with  all  its
consequences.  If  they  are  only  prejudices,
grounded  upon  analogical  reasoning,  the
whole  system  must  fall  to  the  ground  with
them.

It  is,  therefore,  of  importance  to  trace
those  principles,  as  far  as  we  are  able,  to
their  origin,  and  to  see,  rf  possible,  whether
they  have  any  just  foundation  in  reason,  or
whether  they  are  rash  conclusions,  drawn
from  a  supposed  analogy  between  matter
and  mind.

The  unlearned,  who  are  guided  by  the
dictates  of  nature,  and  express  what  they
are  conscious  of  concerning  the  operations
of  their  own  mind,  believe  that  the  object
which  they  distinctly  perceive  certainly
exists  ;  that  the  object  which  they  distinctly
remember  certainly  did  exist,  but  now  may
not ;  but  as  to  things  that  are  barely  con-
ceived, they  know  that  they  can  conceive  a
thousand  things  that  never  existed,  and  that
the  bare  conception  of  a  thing  does  not  so
much  as  afford  a  presumption  of  its  exist-
ence. They  give  themselves  no  trouble  to
know  how  these  operations  are  performed,  or
to  account  for  them  from  general  principles.

But  philosophers,  who  wish  to  discover
the  causes  of  things,  and  to  account  for
these  operations  of  mind,  observing  that  in
other  operations  there  must  be  not  only  an
agent,  but  something  to  act  upon,  have
been  led  by  analogy  to  conclude  that  it
must  be  so  in  the  operations  of  the  mind.

The  relation  between  the  mind  and  its
conceptions  bears  a  very  strong  and  obvious
analogy  to  the  relation  between  a  man  and
his  work.  Every  scheme  he  forms,  every
discovery  he  makes  by  his  reasoning  powers,
is  very  properly  called  the  work  of  his  mind.
These  works  of  the  mind  are  sometimes
*  See  references  in  preceding  note.— H.
SB


370


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  IV.


great  and  important  works,  and  draw  the
attention  and  admiration  of  men. [382]

It  is  the  province  of  the  philosopher  to
consider  how  such  works  of  the  mind  are
produced,  and  of  what  materials  they  are
composed.  He  calls  the  materials  ideas.
There  must  therefore  be  ideas,  which  the
mind  can  arrange  and  form. into  a  regular
structure.  Everything  that  is  produced,
must  be  produced  of  something ;  and  from
nothing,  nothing  can  be  produced.

Some  such  reasoning  as  this  seems  to  me
to  have  given  the  first  rise  to  the  philoso-
phical notions  of  ideas.  Those  notions  were
formed  into  a  system  by  the  Pythagoreans,
two  thousand  years  ago ;  and  this  system
was  adopted  by  Plato,  and  embellished  with
all  the  powers  of  a  fine  and  lofty  imagina-
tion. I  shall,  in  compliance  with  custom,
call  it  the  Platonic  system  of  ideas,  though
in  reality  it  was  the  invention  of  the  Pytha-
gorean school.*

The  most  arduous  question  which  em-
ployed the  wits  of  men  in  the  infancy  of
the  Grecian  philosophy  was— What  was  the
origin  of  the  world  ? — from  what  principles
and  causes  did  it  proceed  ?  To  this  ques-
tion very  different  answers  were  given  in
the  different  schools.  Most  of  them  appear
to  us  very  ridiculous.  The  Pythagoreans,
however,  judged,  very  rationally,  from  the
order  and  beauty  of  the  universe,  that  it
must  be  the  workmanship  of  an  eternal,  in-
telligent, and  good  being  :  and  therefore
they  concluded  the  Deity  to  be  one  first
principle  or  cause  of  the  universe.

But  they  conceived  there  must  be  more.
The  universe  must  be  made  of  something.
Every  workman  must  have  materials  to
work  upon.  That  the  world  should  be  made
out  of  nothing  seemed  to  them  absurd,  be-
cause everything  that  is  made  must  be  made
of  something.

Nullam  rem  e  nihilo  gigni  divinitus  unquam.— Lucr.
De  nibilo  nihil,  in  nihilum  nil  posse  reverti. — Pens.

This  maxim  never  was  brought  into  doubt :
even  in  Cicero's  time  it  continued  to  be
held  by  all  philosophers.  [383]  What
natural  philosopher  (says  that  author  in  his
second  book  of  Divination)  ever  asserted
that  anything  could  take  its  rise  from
nothing,  or  be  reduced  to  nothing  ?  Be-
cause men  must  have  materials  to  work
upon,  they  concluded  it  must  be  so  with
the  Deity.  This  was  reasoning  from  analogy.
From  this  it  followed,  that  an  eternal
uncreated  matter  was  another  first  prin-
ciple of  the  universe.  But  this  matter  they
believed  had  no  form  nor  quality. It  was


*  Ideas  in  the  Platonic,  and  Ideas  in  the  modern
signification,  hold,  as  I  hare  already  shewn,  little
or  no  analogy  to  each  other.  See  above,  p.  204,  a,
notes  +  ±  j  p.  225,  b,  note  *  j  p.  262,  b.  note  *.— H.


the  same  with  the  materia  prima  or  first
matter  of  Aristotle,  who  borrowed  this  part
of  his  philosophy  from  his  predecessors.

To  us  it  seems  more  rational  to  think
that  the  Deity  created  matter  with  its  qua-
lities, than  that  the  matter  of  the  universe
should  be  eternal  and  self-existent.  But
so  strong  was  the  prejudice  of  the  ancient
philosophers  against  what  we  call  creation,
that  they  rather  chose  to  have  recourse  to
this  eternal  and  unintelligible  matter,  that
the  Deity  might  have  materials  to  work
upon.

The  same  analogy  which  led  them  to
think  that  there  must  be  an  eternal  matter  of
which  the  world  was  made,  led  them  also
to  conclude  that  there  must  be  an  eternal
pattern  or  model  according  to  which  it  was
made.  Works  of  design  and  art  must  be
distinctly  conceived  before  they  are  made.
The  Deity,  as  an  intelligent  Being,  about
to  execute  a  work  of  perfect  beauty  and
regularity,  must  have  had  a  distinct  con-
ception of  his  work  before  it  was  made.
This  appears  very  rational.

But  this  conception,  being  the  work  of
the  Divine  intellect,  something  must  have
existed  as  its  object.  This  could  only  be
ideas,  which  are  the  proper  and  immediate
object  of  intellect. [384]

From  this  investigation  of  the  principles
or  causes  of  the  universe,  those  philoso-
phers concluded  them  to  be  three  in  number
— to  wit,  an  eternal  matter  as  the  material
cause,  eternal  ideas  as  the  model  or  exem-
plary cause,  and  an  eternal  intelligent  mind
as  the  efficient  cause.

As  to  the  nature  of  those  eternal  ideas,
the  philosophers  of  that  sect  ascribed  to
them  the  most  magnificent  attributes.
They  were  immutable  and  uncreated  ;*  the
object  of  the  Divine  intellect  before  the
world  was  made  ;  and  the  only  object  of
intellect  and  of  science  to  all  intelligent
beings.  As  far  as  intellect  is  superior  to
sense,  so  far  are  ideas  superior  to  all  the
objects  of  sense.  The  objects  of  sense
being  in  a  constant  flux,  cannot  properly
be  said  to  exist.  Ideas  are  the  things
which  have  a  real  and  permanent  exist-
ence. They  are  as  various  as  the  species  of
things,  there  being  one  idea  of  every  spe-
cies, but  none  of  individuals.  The  idea  is
the  essence  of  the  species,  and  existed  be-
fore any  of  the  species  was  made.  It  is
entire  in  every  individual  of  the  species,
without  being  either  divided  or  multiplied.

In  our  present  state,  we  have  but  an
imperfect  conception  of  the  eternal  ideas  ;
but  it  is  the  highest  felicity  and  perfection
of  men  to  be  able  to  contemplate  them-

*  Whether,  in  the  Platonic  system,  Ideas  are,  or
are  not,  independent  of  the  Deity,  I  have  already
stated,  is,  and  always  has  been,  a  vexata  qucestio.—
H.

[382-38 1]


chap,  ii.j THEORIES  CONCERNING  CONCEPTION.


371


While  we  are  in  this  prison  of  the  body,
sense,  as  a  dead  weight,  bears  us  down
from  the  contemplation  of  the  intellectual
objects ;  and  it  is  only  by  a  due  purifica-
tion of  the  soul,  and  abstraction  from  sense,
that  the  intellectual  eye  is  opened,  and  that
we  are  enabled  to  mount  upon  the  wings  of
intellect  to  the  celestial  world  of  ideas.

Such  was  the  most  ancient  system  con-
cerning ideas,  of  which  we  have  any  account.
And,  however  different  from  the  modern,
it  appears  to  be  built  upon  the  prejudices
we  have  mentioned — to  wit,  that  in  every
operation  there  must  be  something  to  work
upon ;  and  that  even  in  conception  there
must  be  an  object  which  really  exists.
[385J

For,  if  those  ancient  philosophers  had
thought  it  possible  that  the  Deity  could
operate  without  materials  in  the  formation
of  the  world,  and  that  he  could  conceive
the  plan  of  it  without  a  model,  they  could
have  seen  no  reason  to  make  matter  and
ideas  eternal  and  necessarily  existent  prin-
ciples, as  well  as  the  Deity  himself.

Whether  they  believed  that  the  ideas
were  not  only  eternal,  but  eternally,  and
without  a  cause,  arranged  in  that  Leautiful
and  perfect  order  which  they  ascribe  to  this
intelligible  world  of  ideas,  I  cannot  say ;
but  this  seems  to  be  a  necessary  conse-
quence of  the  system  :  for,  if  the  Deity
could  not  conceive  the  plan  of  the  world
which  he  made,  without  a  model  which
really  existed,  that  model  could  not  be  his
work,  nor  contrived  by  his  wisdom  ;  for,  if
he  made  it,  he  must  have  conceived  it
before  it  was  made  ;  it  must  therefore  have
existed  in  all  its  beauty  and  order  inde-
pendent of  the  Deity ;  and  this  I  think
they  acknowledged,  by  making  the  model
and  the  matter  of  this  world,  first  princi-
ples, no  less  than  the  Deity.

If  the  Platonic  system  be  thus  understood,
(and  I  do  not  see  how  it  can  hang  together
otherwise,)  it  leads  to  two  consequences
that  are  unfavourable  to  it.

First,  Nothing  is  left  to  the  Maker  of
this  world  but  the  skill  to  work  after  a
model.  The  model  had  all  the  perfection
and  beauty  that  appears  in  the  copy,  and
the  Deity  had  only  to  copy  after  a  pattern
that  existed  independent  of  him.  Indeed,
the  copy,  if  we  believe  those  philosophers,
falls  very  far  short  of  the  original ;  but  this
they  seem  to  have  ascribed  to  the  refracto-
riness of  matter  of  which  it  was  made.

Secondly,  If  the  world  of  ideas,  without
being  the  work  of  a  perfectly  wise  and  good
intelligent  being,  could  have  so  much  beauty
and  perfection,  how  can  we  infer  from  the
beauty  and  order  of  this  world,  which  is
but  an  imperfect  copy  of  the  other,  that  it
must  have  been  made  by  a  perfectly  wise
and  good  being  ?  {386]  The  force  of  this
[385-387 ]


reasoning,  from  the  beauty  and  order  of  the
universe,  to  its  being  the  work  of  a  wise
being,  which  appears  invincible  to  every
candid  mind,  and  appeared  so  to  those
ancient  philosophers,  is  entirely  destroyed
by  the  supposition  of  the  existence  of  a
world  of  ideas,  of  greater  perfection  and
beauty,  which  never  was  made.  Or,  if  the
reasoning  be  good,  it  will  apply  to  the  world
of  ideas,  which  must,  of  consequence,  have
been  made  by  a  wise  and  good  intelligent
being,  and  must  have  been  conceived  before
it  was  made.

It  may  farther  be  observed,  that  all  that
is  mysterious  and  unintelligible  in  the  Pla-
tonic ideas,  arises  from  attributing  existence
to  them.  Take  away  this  one  attribute,  all
the  rest,  however  pompously  expressed,
are  easily  admitted  and  understood.

What  is  a  Platonic  idea  ?  It  is  the
essence  of  a  species.  It  is  the  exemplar,  the
model,  according  to  which  all  the  individuals
of  that  species  are  made.  It  is  entire  in
every  individual  of  the  species,  without  be-
ing multiplied  or  divided.  It  was  an  object
of  the  divine  intellect  from  eternity,  and  is  an
object  of  contemplation  and  of  science  to
every  intelligent  being.  It  is  eternal,  im-
mutable, and  uncreated ;  and,  to  crown  all,
it  not  only  exists,  but  has  a  more  real  and
permanent  existence  than  anything  that
ever  God  made.

Take  this  description  a1  together,  and  it
would  require  an  CEdipus  to  unriddle  it.
But  take  away  the  last  part  of  it,  and  no-
thing is  more  easy.  It  is  easy  to  find  five
hundred  things  which  answer  to  every
article  in  the  description  except  the  last.

Take,  for  an  instance,  the  nature  of  a
circle,  as  it  is  defined  by  Euclid — an  object
which  every  intelligent  being  may  conceive
distinctly,  though  no  circle  had  ever  existed ;
it  is  the  exemplar,  the  model,  according  to
which  all  the  individual  figures  of  that
species  that  ever  existed  were  made ;  for
they  are  all  made  according  to  the  nature  of  a
circle.  [387]  It  is  entire  in  every  individual
of  the  species,  without  being  multiplied  or
divided.  For  every  circle  is  an  entire
circle  ;  and  all  circles,  in  as  far  as  they  are
circles,  have  one  and  the  same  nature.  It
was  an  object  of  the  divine  intellect  from
all  eternity,  and  may  be  an  object  of  con-
templation and  of  science  to  every  intelli-
gent being.  It  is  the  essence  of  a  species,
and,  like  all  other  essences,  it  is  eternal,
immutable,  and  uncreated.  This  means
no  more  but  that  a  circle  always  was  a
circle,  and  can  never  be  anything  but  a
circle.  It  is  the  necessity  of  the  thing,
and  not  any  act  of  creating  power,  that
makes  a  circle  to  be  a  circle.

The  nature  of  every  species,  whether  of
substance,  of  quality,  or  of  relation,  and  in
general  everything  which  the  ancients  called

2b  a


372


ON  THE INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  IV.


an  universal,  answers  to  the  description  of
a  Platonic  idea,  if  in  that  description  you
leave  out  the  attribute  of  existence.

If  we  believe  that  no  species  of  things
could  be  conceived  by  the  Almighty  with-
out a  model  that  really  existed,  we  must  go
back  to  the  Platonic  system,  however  mys-
terious. But,  if  it  be  true  that  the  Deity
could  have  a  distinct  conception  of  things
which  did  not  exist,  and  that  other  intelligent
beings  may  conceive  objects  which  do  not
exist,  the  system  has  no  better  foundation
than  this  prejudice,  that  the  operations  of
mind  must  be  like  those  of  the  body.

Aristotle  rejected  the  ideas  of  his  master
Plato  as  visionary;  but  he  retained  the
prejudices  that  gave  rise  to  them,  and  there-
fore substituted  something  in  their  place,
but  under  a  different  name,*  and  of  a  dif-
ferent origin.

He  called  the  objects  of  intellect,  intelli-
gible species ;  those  of  the  memory  and
imagination,  phantasms ;  and  those  of  the
senses,  sensible  species.  This  change  of  the
name*  was  indeed  very  small ;  for  the  Greek
word  of  Aristotle  [eT^o?]  which  we  translate
species  or  form,  is  so  near  to  the  Greek
word  idea,  both  in  its  sound  and  significa-
tion, that,  from  their  etymology,  it  would
not  be  easy  to  give  them  different  meanings.
[388]  Both  are  derivedfrom  the  Greek  word
which  signifies  to  see,  and  both  may  signify  a
vision  or  appearance  to  the  eye.  Cicero,  who
understood  Greek  well,  often  translates  the
Greek  word  idea  by  the  Latin  word  visio.
But  both  words  being  used  as  terms  of  art —
one  in  the  Platonic  system,  the  other  in  the
Peripatetic — the  Latin  writers  generally
borrowed  the  Greek  word  idea  to  express  the
Platonic  notion,  and  translated  Aristotle's
word,  by  the  words  species  or  forma  ;  and  in
this  they  have  been  followed  in  the  modern
languages.  *

Those  forms  or  species  were  called  intelli-
gible, to  distinguish  them  from  sensible
species,  which  Aristotle  held  to  be  the  imme-
diate objects  of  sense.

He  thought  that  the  sensible  species  come
from  the  external  object,  and  denned  a  sense
to  be  that  which  has  the  capacity  to  receive
the  form  of  sensible  things  without  the  mat-
ter ;  as  wax  receives  the  form  of  a  seal  with-
out any  of  the  matter  of  it  In  like  manner,
he  thought  that  the  intellect  receives  the
forms  of  things  intelligible ;  and  he  callsit
the  place  of  forms.


*  Reid  seems  not  aware  that  Plato,  and  Aristotle
in  relation  to  Plato,  employed  the  terms  iTbo;  and
\~hitA  almost  as  convertible.  In  fact,  the  latter  usually
combats  the  ideal  theory  of  the  former  by  the  name
oiuhos — e.  g.,  ret,  t'i'hi)  j;*i{:'va,  rieiTio-fJ.ot.ra.  y«£  \s~i.
M.  Cousin,  in  a  learned  and  ingenious  paper  of  his
"  Nouveaux  Fragments,"  has  endeavoured  to  shew
that  ^lato  did  not  apply  the  two  terms  indifferently;
end  the  same  has  been  attempted  by  Richter.  But
60  many  exceptions  must  be  admitted,  that,  appa-
rently, no  determinate  rule  can  be  established.—  H.


I  take  it  to  have  been  the  opinion  of  Aris-
totle, that  the  intelligible  forms  in  the  hu-
man intellect  are  derived  from  the  sensible
by  abstraction,  and  other  operations  of  the
mind  itself.  As  to  the  intelligible  forms  in
the  divine  intellect,  they  must  have  had
another  origin  ;  but  I  do  not  remember  that
he  gives  any  opinion  about  them.  He  cer-
tainly maintained,  however,  that  there  is  no
intellection  without  intelligible  species  ;*
no  memory  or  imagination  without  phan-
tasms ;  no  perception  without  sensible
species.  Treating  of  memory,  he  proposes  ,
a  difficulty,  and  endeavours  to  resolve  it  —
how  a  phantasm,  that  is  a  present  object  in
the  mind,  should  represent  a  thing  that  is
past. [389]

Thus,  I  think,  it  appears  that  the  Per-
ipatetic system  of  species  and  phantasms,
as  well  as  the  Platonic  system  of  ideas,  is
grounded  upon  this  principle,  that  in  every
kind  of  thought  there  must  be  some  object
that  really  exists ;  in  every  operation  of  the
mind,  something  to  work  upon.  "Whether
this  immediate  object  be  called  an  idea  with
Plato,-f*  or  a  phantasm  or  species  with  Aris-
totle— whether  it  be  eternal  and  uncreated,
or  produced  by  the  impressions  of  external
objects — is  of  no  consequence  in  the  pre-
sent argument.  In  both  systems,  it  was
thought  impossible  that  the  Deity  could
make  the  world  without  matter  to  wrork
upon ;  in  both,  it  was  thought  impossible
that  an  intelligent  Being  could  conceive
anything  that  did  not  exist,  but  by  means
of  a  model  that  really  existed.

The  philosophers  of  the  Alexandrian
school,  commonly  called  the  latter  Plato-
nists,  conceived  the  eternal  ideas  of  things
to  be  in  the  Divine  intellect,  and  thereby
avoided  the  absurdity  of  making  them  a
principle  distinct  from  and  independent  of
the  Deity ;  but  still  they  held  them  to  exist
really  in  the  Divine  mind  as  the  objects  of
conception,  and  as  the  patterns  and  arche-
types of  things  that  are  made.

Modern  philosophers,  still  persuaded  that
of  every  thought  there  must  be  an  imme-
diate object  that  really  exists,  have  not
deemed  it  necessary  to  distinguish  by  dif-
ferent names  the  immediate  objects  of  in-
tellect, of  imagination,  and  of  the  senses,
but  have  given  the  common  name  of  idea
to  them  all.

Whether  these  ideas  be  in  the  sensorium,
or  in  the  mind,  or  partly  in  the  one  and
partly  in  the  other;  whether  they  exist
when  they  are  not  perceived,  or  only  when

*  There  is  ,even  less  reason  to  attribute  such  a
theory  to  Aristotle  in  relation  to  the  intellect  than
in  relation  to  sense  and  imagination.  See  even  his
oldest  commentator,  the  Aphrodisian,  TLiefWvxvs  *
f.  139,  a.  In  fact,  the  greater  number  of  those  Peri-
patetics  who  admitted  species  in  this  crude  form  for
the  latter,  rejected  them  for  the  former. — H.

t  See  above,  p.  26?,  b,  note  *. — H.

[388,  3391


chap,  ii.] THEORIES  CONCERNING  CONCEPTION.


373


they  are  perceived ;  whether  they  are  the
workmanship  of  the  Deity  or  of  the  mind
itself,  or  of  external  natural  causes — with
regard  to  these  points,  different  authors
seem  to  have  different  opinions,  and  the
same  author  sometimes  to  waver  or  be
diffident ;  but  as  to  their  existence,  there
seems  to  be  great  unanimity.* [390]

So  much  is  this  opinion  fixed  in  the
minds  of  philosophers,  that  I  doubt  not  but
it  will  appear  to  most  a  very  strange  para-
dox, or  rather  a  contradiction,  that  men
should  think  without  ideas.

That  it  has  the  appearance  of  a  contra-
diction, I  confess.  But  this  appearance
arises  from  the  ambiguity  of  the  word  idea.
If  the  idea  of  a  thing  means  only  the  thought
of  it,  or  the  operation  of  the  mind  in  think-
ing about  it,  which  is  the  most  common
meaning  of  the  word,  to  think  without  ideas,
is  to  think  without  thought,  which  is  un-
doubtedly a  contradiction.

But  an  idea,  according  to  the  definition
given  of  it  by  philosophers,  is  not  thought,
but  an  object  of  thought,  which  really  exists
and  is  perceived.  Now,  whether  is  it  a
contradictiou  to  say,  that  a  man  may  think
of  an  object  that  does  not  exist  ?

I  acknowledge  that  a  man  cannot  per-
ceive an  object  that  does  not  exist ;  nor  can
he  remember  an  object  that  did  not  exist ;
but  there  appears  to  me  no  contradiction  in
his  conceiving  an  object  that  neither  does
nor  ever  did  exist.

Let  us  take  an  example.  I  conceive  a
centaur.  This  conception  is  an  operation
of  the  mind,  of  which  I  am  conscious,  and
to  which  I  can  attend.  The  sole  object  of  it
is  a  centaur,  an  animal  which,  I  believe,
never  existed.  I  can  see  no  contradiction
in  this.-j-

The  philosopher  says,  I  cannot  conceive
a  centaur  without  having  an  idea  of  it  in
my  mind.  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand
what  he  means.  He  surely  does  not  mean
that  I  cannot  conceive  it  without  conceiving
it.  This  would  make  me  no  wiser.  What
then  is  this  idea  ?  Is  it  an  animal,  half
horse  and  half  man  ?  No.  Then  I  am
certain  it  is  not  the  thing  I  conceive.  Per-
haps he  will  say,  that  the  idea  is  an  image
of  the  animal,  and  is  the  immediate  object
of  my  conception,  and  that  the  animal  is
the  mediate  or  remote  object.^ [391]

To  this  I  answer — Fir.^t,  I  am  certain
there  are  not  two  objects  of  this  conception,
but  one  only  ;  and  that  one  is  as  immediate
an  object  of  my  conception  as  any  can  be.

Secondly ',  This  one  object  which  I  con-
ceive, is  not  the  image  of  an  animal — it  is


*  This,  as  already  once  and  again  stated,  is  not
correct. — H.

t  See  above,  p.  29?,  b,  note  \,  and  Note  B.— H.

£  On  this,  and  the  subsequent  reasoning  in  the
present  chapter,  see  Note  13.—  H.


I  390-392]


an  animal.  I  know  what  it  is  to  conceive
an  image  of  an  animal,  and  what  it  is  to
conceive  an  animal ;  and  I  can  distinguish
the  one  of  these  from  the  other  without
any  danger  of  mistake.  The  thing  I  con-
ceive is  a  body  of  a  certain  figure  and
colour,  having  life  and  spontaneous  motion.
The  philosopher  says,  that  the  idea  is  an
image  of  the  animal ;  but  that  it  has  neither
body,  nor  colour,  nor  life,  nor  spontaneous
motion. This  I  am  not  able  to  comprehend.

Thirdly,  I  wish  to  know  how  this  idea
comes  to  be  an  object  of  my  thought,  when
I  cannot  even  conceive  what  it  means;
and,  if  I  did  conceive  it,  this  would  be  no
evidence  of  its  existence,  any  more  than
my  conception  of  a  centaur  is  of  its  exist-
ence. Philosophers  sometimes  say  that  we
perceive  ideas,  sometimes  that  we  are  con-
scious of  them.  I  can  have  no  doubt  of
the  existence  of  anything  which  I  either
perceive  or  of  which  I  am  conscious  ;•  but
I  cannot  find  that  I  either  perceive  ideas
or  am  conscious  of  them.

Perception  and  consciousness  are  very
different  operations,  and  it  is  strange  that
philosophers  have  never  determined  by
which  of  them  ideas  are  discerned. -f-  This
is  as  if  a  man  should  positively  affirm  that
he  perceived  an  object ;  but  whether  by  his
eyes,  or  his  ears,  or  his  touch,  he  could  not
say.

But  may  not  a  man  who  conceives  a
centaur  say,  that  he  has  a  distinct  image  of
it  in  his  mind  ?  I  think  he  may.  And  if  he
means  by  this  way  of  speaking  what  the
vulgar  mean,  who  never  heard  of  the  phi-
losophical theory  of  ideas,  I  find  no  fault
with  it.  [392]  By  a  distinct  image  in  the
mind,  the  vulgar  mean  a  distinct  concep-
tion ;  and  it  is  natural  to  call  it  so,  on
account  of  the  analogy  between  an  image  of
a  thing  and  the  conception  of  it.  On  ac-
count of  this  analogy,  obvious  to  all  man-
kind, this  operation  is  called  imagination,
and  an  image  in  the  mind  is  only  a  peri-
phrasis for  imagination.  But  to  infer  from
this  that  there  is  really  an  image  in  the
mind,  distinct  from  the  operation  of  con-
ceiving the  object,  is  to  be  misled  by  an
analogical  expression  ;  as  if,  from  the
phrases  of  deliberating  and  balancing  things
in  the  mind,  we  should  infer  that  there  is
really  a  balance  existing  in  the  mind  for
weighing  motives  and  arguments.

The  analogical  words  and  phrases  used
in  all  languages  to  express  conception,  do,
no  doubt,  facilitate  their  being  taken  in  a
literal  sense. But,  if  we  only  attend  care-

*  This  is  not  the  case,  unless  it  be  admitted  that
we  are  conscious  of  what  we  perceive — in  oiher  words,
immediately  cognitive  of  the  non-ego. — H.

\  But  the  philosophers  did  not,  like  Reid,  make
Consciousness  one  special  faculty,  and  Perception
another  ;  nor  did  they  and  Reid.mean  by  Terception
the  same  thing.— H.


374


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


Lessay  IV.


fully  to  what  we  are  conscious  of  in  this
operation,  we  shall  find  no  more  reason  to
think  that  images  do  really  exist  in  our
minds,  than  that  balances  and  other  me-
chanical engines  do.

We  know  of  nothing  that  is  in  the  mind
but  by  consciousness,  and  we  are  conscious
of  nothing  but  various  modes  of  thinking  ;
such  as  understanding,  willing,  affection,
passion,  doing,  suffering.  If  philosophers
choose  to  give  the  name  of  an  idea  to  any
mode  of  thinking  of  which  we  are  conscious,
I  have  no  objection  to  the  name,  but  that
it  introduces  a  foreign  word  into  our  lan-
guage without  necessity,  and  a  word  that  is
very  ambiguous,  and  apt  to  mislead.  But,
if  they  give  that  name  to  images  in  the
mind,  which  are  not  thought,  but  only
objects  of  thought,  I  can  see  no  reason  to
think  that  there  are  such  things  in  nature.
If  they  be,  their  existence  and  their  nature
must  be  more  evident  than  anything  else,
because  we  know  nothing  but  by  their
means.  I  may  add,  that,  if  they  be,  we
can  know  nothing  besides  them.  For,  from
the  existence  of  images,  we  can  never,  by
any  just  reasoning,  infer  the  existence  of
anything  else,  unless  perhaps  the  existence
of  an  intelligent  Author  of  them.  In  this,
Bishop  Berkeley  reasoned  right. [393]

In  every  work  of  design,  the  work  must
be  conceived  before  it  is  executed — that  is,
before  it  exists.  If  a  model,  consisting  of
ideas,  must  exist  in  the  mind,  as  the  ob-
ject of  this  conception,  that  model  is  a  work
of  design  no  less  than  the  other,  of  which
it  is  the  model ;  and  therefore,  as  a  work  of
design,  it  must  have  been  conceived  before
it  existed.  In  every  work  of  design,  there-
fore, the  conception  must  go  before  the
existence.  This  argument  we  applied  be-
fore to  the  Platonic  system  of  eternal  and
immutable  ideas,  and  it  may  be  applied  with
equal  force  to  all  the  systems  of  ideas.

If  now  it  should  be  asked,  What  is  the
idea  of  a  circle  ?  I  answer,  It  is  the  con-
ception of  a  circle.  What  is  the  immediate
object  of  this  conception  ?  The  immediate
and  the  only  object  of  it  is  a  circle.  But
where  is  this  circle  ?  It  is  nowhere.  If
it  was  an  individual,  and  had  a  real  ex-
istence, it  must  have  a  place  ;  but,  being  an
universal,  it  has  no  existence,  and  therefore
no  place.  Is  it  not  in  the  mind  of  him  that
conceives  it  ?  The  conception  of  it  is  in
the  mind,  being  an  act  of  the  mind  ;  and  in
common  language,  a  thing  being  in  the
mind,  is  a  figurative  expression,  signify-
ing that  the  thing  is  conceived  or  remem-
bered.

It  may  be  asked,  Whether  this  concep-
tion is  an  image  or  resemblance  of  a  circle  ?
I  answer,  I  have  already  accounted  for  its
being,  in  a  figurative  sense,  called  the  image
of  a  circle  in  the  mind. If  the  question  is


meant  in  the  literal  sense,  we  must  observe,
that  the  word  conception  has  two  meanings.
Properly  it  signifies  that  operation  of  the
mind  which  we  have  been  endeavouring  to
explain;  but  sometimes  it  is  put  for  the
object  of  conception,  or  thing  conceived.

Now,  if  the  question  be  understood  in  the
last  of  these  senses,  the  object  of  this  con-
ception is  not  an  image  or  resemblance  of
a  circle ;  for  it  is  a  circle,  and  nothing  can
be  an  image  of  itself. [394]

If  the  question  be  —  Whether  the  opera-
tion of  mind  in  conceiving  a  circle  be  an
image  or  resemblance  of  a  circle  ?  I  think
it  is  not ;  and  that  no  two  things  can  be
more  perfectly  unlike,  than  a  species  of
thought  and  a  species  of  figure.  Nor  is  it
more  strange  that  conception  should  have
no  resemblance  to  the  object  conceived,
than  that  desire  should  have  no  resem-
blance to  the  object  desired,  or  resentment
to  the  object  of  resentment.

I  can  likewise  conceive  an  individual
object  that  really  exists,  such  as  St  Paul's
Church  in  London.  I  have  an  idea  of  it ;
that  is,  I  conceive  it.  The  immediate
object  of  this  conception  is  four  hundred
miles  distant ;  and  I  have  no  reason  to  think
that  it  acts  upon  me,  or  that  I  act  upon  it ;
but  I  can  think  of  it  notwithstanding.  I
can  think  of  the  first  year  or  the  last  year
of  the  Julian  period.

If,  after  all,  it  should  be  thought  that
images  in  the  mind  serve  to  account  for  this
faculty  of  conceiving  things  most  distant  in
time  and  place,  and  even  things  which  do
not  exist,  which  otherwise  would  be  alto-
gether inconceivable ;  to  this  I  answer,
that  accounts  of  tilings,  grounded  upon
conjecture,  have  been  the  bane  of  true
philosophy  in  all  ages.  Experience  may
satisfy  us  that  it  is  an  hundred  times  more
probable  that  they  are  false  than  that  they
are  true.

This  account  of  the  faculty  of  conception,
by  images  in  the  mind  or  in  the  brain,
will  deserve  the  regard  of  those  who  have
a  true  taste  in  philosophy,  when  it  is  proved
by  solid  arguments — First,  That  there  are
images  in  the- mind,  or  in  the  brain,  of  the
things  we  conceive.  Secondly,  That  there
is  a  faculty  in  the  mind  of  perceiving  such
images.  Thirdly,  That  the  perception  of
such  images  produces  the  conception  of
things  most  distant,  and  even  of  things  that
have  no  existence.  And,  fourthly,  That
the  perception  of  individual  images  in  the
mind,  or  in  the  brain,  gives  us  the  concep-
tion of  universals,  which  are  the  attributes
of  many  individuals.  [395]  Until  this  is
done,  the  theory  of  images  existing  in  the
mind  or  in  the  brain,  ought  to  be  placed  in
the  same  category  with  the  sensible  species,
materia  prima  of  Aristotle,  and  the  vortices
of  Des  Cartes.

[393-3951


cuap.  in.] MISTAKES  CONCERNING  CONCEPTION.


3Jb


CHAPTER  III.

MISTAKES  CONCERNING  CONCEPTION.

1.  Writers  on  logic,  after  the  example
of  Aristotle,  divide  the  operations  of  the
understanding  into  three  :  Simple  Appre-
hension, (which  is  another  word  for  Con-
ception,) Judgment,  and  Reasoning.  They
teach  us,  that  reasoning  is  expressed  hy  a
syllogism,  judgment  by  a  proposition,  and
simple  apprehension  by  a  term  only — that
is,  by  one  or  more  words  which  do  not
make  a  full  proposition,  but  only  the  sub-
ject or  predicate  of  a  proposition.  If,  by
this  they  mean,  as  I  think  they  do,  that  a
proposition,  or  even  a  syllogism,  may  not
be  simply  apprehended,-  I  believe  this  is  a
mistake.

In  all  judgment  and  in  all  reasoning,
conception  is  included.  We  can  neither
judge  of  a  proposition,  nor  reason  about  it,
unless  we  conceive  or  apprehend  it.  We
may  distinctly  conceive  a  proposition,  with-
out judging  of  it  at  all.  We  may  have  no
evidence  on  one  side  or  the  other  ;  we  may
have  no  concern  whether  it  be  true  or  false.
In  these  cases  we  commonly  form  no  judg-
ment about  it,  though  we  perfectly  under-
stand its  meaning,  -f-

A  man  may  discourse,  or  plead,  or  write,
for  other  ends  than  to  find  the  truth.  His
learning,  and  wit,  and  invention  may  be
employed,  while  his  judgment  is  not  at  all,
or  very  little.  When  it  is  not  truth,  but
some  other  end  he  pursues,  judgment  would
be  an  impediment,  unless  for  discovering
the  means  of  attaining  his  end  ;  and,  there-
fore, it  is  laid  aside,  or  employed  solely  for
that  purpose. [396]

The  business  of  an  orator  is  said  to  be,
to  find  out  what  is  fit  to  persuade.  This  a
man  may  do  with  much  ingenuity,  who
never  took  the  trouble  to  examine  whether
it  ought  to  persuade  or  not.  Let  it  not  be
thought,  therefore,  that  a  man  judges  of
the  truth  of  every  proposition  he  utters,  or
hears  uttered.  In  our  commerce  with  the
world,  judgment  is  not  the  talent  that  bears
the  greatest  price  ;  and,  therefore,  those  who
are  not  sincere  lovers  of  truth,  lay  up  this
talent  where  it  rusts  and  corrupts,  while
they  carry  others  to  market,  for  which
there  is  greater  demand.

2.  The  division  commonly  made  by  logi-

*  Does  Reid  .here  mean,  by  apprehending  simply,
apprehending  in  one  simple  and  indivisible  act  ?— H.

t  There  is  no  conception  poss;ble  without  a  judg-
ment affirming  its  (ideal)  existence.  There  is  no
consciousness,  in  fact,  possible  without  judgment.
See  above,  p.  243,  a,  note  *.  It  is  to  be  observed,
that  Reid  uses  conception  in  the  course  Of  this  chap-
ter as  convertible  with  understanding  or  comprehen-
sion ;  and,  therefore,  as  we  shall  see,  in  a  vaguer  or
rrr  re  extensive  meaning  than  the  philosophers  whose
opinion  he  controverts.— H.

[.?»'!,  397]


cians,  of  simple  apprehension,  into  Sensation,
Imagination,  and  Pure  Intellection,  seems
to  me  very  improper  in  several  respects.

First,  Under  the  word  sensation,  they
include  not  only  what  is  properly  so  called,
but  the  perception  of  external  objects  by
the  senses.  These  are  very  different  opera-
tions of  the  mind ;  and,  although  they  are
commonly  conjoined  by  nature,  ought  to  be
carefully  distinguished  by  philosophers.

Secondly,  Neither  sensation  nor  the  percep-
tion of  external  objects,  is  simple  apprehen-
sion. Both  include  j  udgment  and  belief,  which
are  excluded  from  simple  apprehension.*

Thirdly,  They  distinguish  imagination
from  pure  intellection  by  this,  that,  iu
imagination,  the  image  is  in  the  brain  ;-f-  in
pure  intellection,  it  is  in  the  intellect.  This
is  to  ground  a  distinction  upon  an  hypo-
thesis. We  have  no  evidence  that  there
are  images  either  in  the  brain  or  in  the  in-
tellect. [397]

I  take  imagination,  in  its  most  proper
sense,  to  signify  a  lively  conception  of
objects  of  sight. %  This  is  a  talent  of  im-
portance to  poets  and  orators,  and  deserves
a  proper  name,  on  account  of  its  connection
with  those  arts.  According  to  this  strict
meaning  of  the  word,  imagination  is  dis-
tinguished from  conception  as  a  part  from
the  whole.  We  conceive  the  objects  of  the
other  senses,  but  it  is  not  so  proper  to  say
that  we  imagine  them.  We  conceive  judg-
ment, reasoning,  propositions,  and  argu-
ments ;  but  it  is  rather  improper  to  say
that  we  imagine  these  things.

This  distinction  between  imagination  and
conception,  may  be  illustrated  by  an  ex-
ample, which  Des  Cartes  uses  to  illus-
trate the  distinction  betAveen  imagination
and  pure  intellection.  We  can  imagine  a
triangle  or  a  square  so  clearly  as  to
distinguish  them  from  every  other  figure.
But  we  cannot  imagine  a  figure  of  a  thou-
sand equal  sides  and  angles  so  clearly.  The
best  eye,  by  looking  at  it,  could  not  distin-
guish it  from  every  figure  of  more  or  fewer
sides.  And  that  conception  of  its  appear-
ance to  the  eye,  which  we  properly  call  im-
agination, cannot  be  more  distinct  than  the
appearance  itself;  yet  we  can  conceive  a
figure  of  a  thousand  sides,  and  even  can
demonstrate  the  properties  which  distinguish
it  from  all  figures  of  more  or  fewer  sides.
It  is  not  by  the  eye,  but  by  a  superior  fa-
culty, that  we  form  the  notion  of  a  great


*  See  the  last  note.—  H."

t  But  not  the  image,  of  which  the  mind  :s  con-
scious. By  image  or  idea  in  the  brain,  species  im-
presses,, Sfc,  was  meant  only  the  unknown  corporeal
antecedent  of-  the  known  mental  consequent,  -the
image  or  idea  in  the  mind,  the  species  expressa,  fyc.
Reid  here  refers  principally  to  the  Cartesian  doctrine.
—  H.

X  See  above,  p.  3f>G,  a,  note  *  :  and,  below,  unde.
p.  48.-.-  H.


3?6


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[[essay  IV.


number,  such  as  a  thousand.  And  a  distinct
notion  of  this  number  of  sides  not  being  to
be  got  by  the  eye,  it  is  not  imagined,  but
it  is  distinctly  conceived,  and  easily  distin-
guished from  every  other  number.  *

3.  Simple  apprehension  is  commonly  re-
presented as  the  first  operation  of  the
understanding ;  and  judgment,  as  being  a
composition  or  combination  of  simple  appre-
hensions.

This  mistake  has  probably  arisen  from  the
taking  sensation,  and  the  perception  of
objects  by  the  senses,  to  be  nothing  but
simple  apprehension.  They  are,  very  pro-
bably, the  first  operations  of  the  mind  ;  but
they  are  not  simple  apprehensions.  *f-  [398]

It  is  generally  allowed,  that  we  cannot
conceive  sounds  if  we  have  never  heard,
nor  colours  if  we  have  never  seen ;  and  the
same  thing  may  be  said  of  the  objects  of
the  other  senses.  In  like  manner,  we  must
have  judged  or  reasoned  before  we  have
the  conception  or  simple  apprehension  of
judgment  and  of  reasoning.

Simple  apprehension,  therefore,  though
it  be  the  simplest,  is  not  the  first  operation
of  the  understanding  ;  and,  instead  of  say-
ing that  the  more  complex  operations  of
the  mind  are  formed  by  compounding  sim-
ple apprehensions,  we  ought  rather  to  say,
that  simple  apprehensions  are  got  by  ana-
lysing more  complex  operations.

A  similar  mistake,  which  is  carried
through  the  whole  of  Mr  Locke's  Essay,
may  be  here  mentioned.  It  is,  that  our
simplest  ideas  or  conceptions  are  got  im-
mediately by  the  senses,  or  by  conscious-
ness, and  the  complex  afterwards  formed
by  compounding  them.  I  apprehend  it  is
far  otherwise.

Nature  presents  no  object  to  the  senses,
or  to  consciousness,  that  is  not  complex.
Thus,  by  our  senses  we  perceive  bodies  of
various  kinds ;  but  every  body*  is  a  com-
plex object ;  it  has  length,  breadth,  and
thickness;  it  has  figure,  and  colour,  and
various  other  sensible  qualities,  which  are
blended  together  in  the  same  subject ;  and
I  apprehend  that  brute  animals,  who  have
the  same  senses  that  we  have,  cannot  sepa-
rate the  different  qualities  belonging  to  the
same  subject,  and  have  only  a  complex
and  confused  notion  of  the  whole.  Such
also  would  be  our  notions  of  the  objects  of
sense,  if  we  had  not  superior  powers  of
understanding,  by  which  we  can  analyse
the  complex  object,  abstract  every  parti-
cular attribute  from  the  rest,  and  form  a
distinct  conception  of  it.

So  that  it  is  not  by  the  senses  imme-

*  See  above,  p.  366,  a,  note  *.— H.

t  They  are  not  simple  apprehensions,  in  one  sense
—that  is,  the  objects  are  not  incoraposite.  Hut  this
vas  not  the  meaning  in  which  the  expression  was  used
by  the  Logicians.— H.


diately,  but  rather  by  the  powers  of  ana-
lysing and  abstraction,  that  we  get  the  most
simple  and  the  most  distinct  notions  even
of  the  objects  of  sense.  This  will  be  more
fully  explained  in  another  place. [399]

4-  There  remains  another  mistake  con-
cerning conception,  which  deserves  to  be
noticed.  It  is — That  our  conception  of
things  is  a  test  of  their  possibility,  so  that,
what  we  can  distinctly  conceive,  we  may
conclude  to  be  possible  ;  and  of  what  is  im-
possible, we  can  have  no  conception.

This  opinion  has  been  held  by  philoso-
phers for  more  than  an  hundred  years,
without  contradiction  or  dissent,  as  far  as  I
know ;  and,  if  it  be  an  error,  it  may  be  of
some  use  to  inquire  into  its  origin,  and  the
causes  that  it  has  been  so  generally  re-
ceived as  a  maxim  whose  truth  could  not
be  brought  into  doubt.

One  of  the  fruitless  questions  agitated
among  the  scholastic  philosophers  in  the
dark  ages'  was — What  is  the  criterion  of
truth  ?  as  if  men  could  have  any  other  way
to  distinguish  truth  from  error,  but  by  the
right  use  of  that  power  of  judging  which
God  has  given  them.

Des  Cartes  endeavoured  to  put  an  end  to
this  controversy,  by  making  it  a  fundamen-
tal principle  in  his  system,  that  whatever
we  clearly  and  distinctly  perceive,  is  true."}*

To  understand  this  principle  of  Des
Cartes,  it  must  be  observed,  that  he  gave
the  name  of  perception  to  every  power  of
the  human  understanding  ;  and  in  explain-
ing this  very  maxim,  he  tells  us  that  sense,
imagination,  and  pure  intellection,  are  only
different  modes  of  perceiving,  and,  so  the
maxim  was  understood  by  all  his  followers.  £

The  learned  Dr  Cudworth  seems  also  to
have  adopted  this  principle  : — "  The  cri-
terion of  true  knowledge,  says  he,  is  only
to  be  looked  for  in  our  knowledge  and  con-
ceptions themselves :  for  the  entity  of  all
theoretical  truth  is  nothing  else  but  clear
intelligibility,  and  whatever  is  clearly  con-
ceived is  an  entity  and  a  truth  ;  but  that
which  is  false,  divine  power  itself  cannot
make  it  to  be  clearly  and  distinctly  under-
stood. [400]  A  falsehood  can  never  be
clearly  conceived  or  apprehended  to  be
true." — "  Eternal  and  Immutable  Mora-
lity," p.  172,  &c.

This  Cartesian  maxim  seems  to  me  to
have  led  the  way  to  that  now  under  con-
sideration, which  seems  to  have  been  adopted
as  the  proper  correction  of  the  former.
When  the  authority  of  Des  Cartes  declined,
men  began  to  see  i  that  we  may  clearly  and
distinctly  conceive  what  is  not  true,  but


*  This  was  more  a  question  with  the  Greek  philo.
sophers  than  witn  the  schoolmen.— H.

t  In  this  he  proposed  nothing  new.  -H.

±  That  is,  in  Des  Cartes'  signification  of  the  word,

different  modes  of  'jeing  conscioKS. See  above. —  H.

[398-100]


cuai».  in.]  MISTAKES  CONCERNING  CONCEPTION.


377


thought,  that  our  conception,  though  not  in
all  cases  a  test  of  truth,  might  be  a  test  of
possibility.*

This  indeed  seems  to  be  a  necessary  con-
sequence of  the  received  doctrine  of  ideas  ;
it  being  evident  that  there  can  be  no  dis-
tinct image,  either  in  the  mind  or  anywhere
else,  of  that  which  is  impossible.  -|-  The
ambiguity  of  the  word  conceive,  which  we
observed,  Essay  I.  chap.  1,  and  the  com-
mon phraseology  of  saying  we  cannot  con-
ceive such  a  thing,  when  we  would  signify
that  we  think  it  impossible,  might  likewise
contribute  to  the  reception  of  this  doctrine.

But,  whatever  was  the  origin  of  this
opinion,  it  seems  to  prevail  universally,
and  to  be  received  as  a  maxim.

"  The  bare  having  an  idea  of  the  propo-
sition proves  the  thing  not  to  be  impossible  ;
for  of  an  impossible  proposition  there  can
be  no  idea." — Dr  Samuel  Clarke.

"  Of  that  which  neither  does  nor  can
exist  we  can  have  no  idea." — Lord  Boling-
broke.

"  The  measure  of  impossibility  to  us  is
inconceivableness,  that  of  which  we  can
have  no  idea,  but  that  reflecting  upon  it,  it
appears  to  be  nothing,  we  pronounce  to  be
impossible." — Abernethy. [401]

"  In  every  idea  is  implied  the  possibility
of  the  existence  of  its  object,  nothing  being
clearer  than  that  there  can  be  no  idea  of
an  impossibility,  or  conception  of  what  can-
not exist." — Dr  Price.

"  Impossible  est  cujus  nullani  notionem
formare  possumus ;  possibile  e  contra,  cui
aliqua  respondet  notio." — Wolfii  Ontolo-

"  It  is  an  established  maxim  in  metaphy-
sics, that  whatever  the  mind  conceives,  in-
cludes the  idea  of  possible  existence,  or,  in
other  words,  that  nothing  we  imagine  is
absolutely  impossible." — D.  Hume.

It  were  easy  to  muster  up  many  other
respectable  authorities  for  this  maxim,  and
I  have  never  found  one  that  called  it  in
question.

If  the  maxim  be  true  in  the  extent  which

*  That  is,  of  logical  possibility — the  absence  of  con-
tradiction.— H.

*  This  is  rather  a  strained  inference. — H.

?  These  are  not  exactly  Wolf's  expressions.  See
"  Ontolopia,"  §  §  102,  103;  "  Philosophia  Rationalis"
\  §  522,  528.  The  same  doctrine  is  held  by  Tschirn.
hansen  and  others.  In  so  far,  however,  as  it  is  said
that  inconceivability  is  the  criterion  of  impossibility,
it  is- manifestly  erroneous.  Of  many  contradictories,
we  are  able  to  conceive  neither;  but,  by  the  law  of
thought,  called  that  of  Excluded  Middle,  one  of  two
contradictories  must  be  admitted— must  be  true.
For  example,  we  can  neither  conceive,  on  the  one
hand,  an  ultimate  minimum  of  space  or  of  time;  nor
can  we,  on  the  other,  conceive  their  infinite  divisibi-
lity. In  like  manner,  we  cannot  conceive  the  abso-
lute commencement  of  time,  or  the  utmost  limit  of
space,  And  are  yet  equally  unable  to  conceive  them
without  any  commencement  or  limit.  The  absurdity
that  would  result  from  the  assertion,  that  all  that  is
inconceivable  is  impossible,  is  thus  obvious ;  and  so

far  Reid's  criticism  is  jusi,  though  not  new H.

[10  i,  1-02]


the  famous  Wolfius  has  given  it  in  the  pas-
sage above  quoted,  we  shall  have  a  short
road  to  the  determination  of  every  question
about  the  possibility  or  impossibility  of
things.  We  need  only  look  into  our  own
breast,  and  that,  like  the  Urim  and
Thummim,  will  give  an  infallible  answer.
If  we  can  conceive  the  thing,  it  is  possible  ;
if  not,  it  is  impossible.  And,  surely,  every
man  may  know  whether  he  can  conceive
what  is  affirmed  or  not.

Other  philosophers  have  been,  satisfied
with  one  half  of  the  maxim  of  Wolfius.
They  say,  that  whatever  we  can  conceive  is
possible  ;  but  they  do  not  say  that  whatever
we  cannot  conceive  is  impossible.

I  cannot  help  thinking  even  this  to  be  a
mistake,  which  philosophers  have  been  un-
warily led  into,  from  the  causes  before  men-
tioned. My  reasons  are  these  : — [402]

1.  Whatever  is  said  to  be  possible  or  ira-r
possible,  is  expressed  by  a  proposition.
Now,  what  is  it  to  conceive  a  proposition  ?
I  think  it  is  no  more  than  to  understand
distinctly  its  meaning.* I  know  no  more


*  In  this  sense  of  the  word  Conception,  I  make
bold  to  say  that  there  is  no  philosopher  who  ever
held  an  opinion  different  from  that  of  our  author.
The  whole  dispute  arises  from  Reid  giving  a  wider
signification  to  this  term  than  that  which  it  has
generally  received.  In  his  view,  it  has  two  mean-
ings ;  in  that  of  the  philosophers  whom  he  attacks,
it  has  only  one.  To  illustrate  this,  take  the  proposi-
tion— a  circle  is  square.  Here  we  easily  understand
the  meaning  of  the  affirmation,  because  what  is  neces-
sary to  an  act  of  judgment  is  merely  that  the  subject
and  predicate  should  be  brought  into  a  unity  of  rela-
tion. A  judgment  is  therefore  possible,  even  where
the  two  terms  are  contradictory.  But  the  philosophers
never  expressed,  by  the  term  conception,  this  under,
standing  of  the  purport  of  a  proposition.  What  they
meant  by  conception  was  not  the  unity  of  relation,
but  the  unity  of  representation ;  and  this  unity  of
representation  they  made  the  criterion  of  logical  pos-
sibility. To  take  the  example  already  given  :  they
did  not  say  a  circle  may  possibly  be  square,  because
we  can  understand  the  meaning  of  the  proposition,
a  circle  is  square ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  they  said  it
is  impossible  that  a  circle  can  be  square,  and  the  pro-
position affirming  this  is  necessarily  false,  because  we
cannot,  in  consciousness,  bring  to  a  unity  of  repre-
sentation the  repugnant  notions,  circle  and  square-
that  is,  conceive-  the  notion  of  square  circle.  Reid's
mistake  in  this  matter  is  so  palpable  that  it  is  not
more  surprising  that  he  should  have  committed  it,
than  that  so  many  should  not  only  have  followed  him
in  the  opinion,  but  even  have  lauded  it  as  the  refuta-
tion of  an  important  error.  To  shew  how  com-
pletely Reid  mistook  the  philosophers,  it  will  be  suf-
ficient to  quote  a  passage  from  Wolf's  vernacular
Logic,  which  I  take  from  the  English  translation,
(one,  by  the  by,  of  the  few  tolerable  versions  we  have
of  German  philosophical  works,)  published  in  1770: —

"  It  is  carefully  to  be  observed,  that  we  have  not
always  the  notion  of  the  thing  present  to  us,  or  in
view,  when  we  speak  or  think  of  it ;  but  are  satisfied
when  we  imagine  we  sufficiently  understand  what  we
speak,  if  we  think  we  recollect  that  we  have  had,  at
another  time,  the  notion  which  is  to  be  joined  tothis
or  the  other  word;' and  thus  we  represent  to  our-
selves, as  at  a  distance  only,  or  obscurely,  the  thing
denoted  by  the  term.

<f  Hence,  it  usually  happens  that,  when  we  combine
words  together,  to  each  of  which,  apart,  a  meaning
or  notion  answers,  we  imagine  we  understand  what
we.utter,  though  that  which  isdenoted  by  such  com-
bined words  be  impossible,  and  consequently  can
have  no  meaning. For  that  which  is  impossible  is


378


OxN  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  J  v.


that  can  be  meant  by  simple  apprehension
or  conception,  when  applied  to  a  proposi-
tion. The  axiom,  therefore,  amounts  to
this  : — Every  proposition,  of  which  you  un-
derstand the  meaning  distinctly,  is  possible.
I  am  persuaded  that  I  understand  as  dis-
tinctly the  meaning  of  this  proposition,  Any
two  sides  of  a  triangle  are  together  equal
to  (he  third,  as  of  this — Any  two  sides  of  a
triangle  are  together  greater  than.  1 he  third  ;
yet  the  first  of  these  is  impossible.

Perhaps  it  will  be  said,  that,  though  you
understand  the  meaning  of  the  impossible
proposition,  you  cannot  suppose  or  conceive
it  to  be  true.

Here  we  are  to  examine  the  meaning  of
the  phrases  of  supposing  and  conceiving  a
proposition  to  be  true.  I  can  certainly  sup-
pose it  to  be  true,  because  I  can  draw  con-
sequences from  it  which  I  find  to  be  impos-
sible, as  well  as  the  proposition  itself.

If,  by  conceiving  it  to  be  true,  be  meant
giving  some  degree  of  assent  to  it,  how-
ever small,  this,  I  confess,  I  cannot  do.
But  will  it  be  said  that  every  proposition  to
which  I  can  give  any  degree  of  assent,  is
possible  ?  This  contradicts  experience,  and,
therefore,  the  maxim  cannot  be  true  in
this  sense.

Sometimes,  when  we  say  that  we  cannot
conceive  a  thing  to  be  true,  we  mean  by  that
expression,  that  we  judge  it  to  be  impossible.
In  this  sense  I  cannot,  indeed,  conceive
it  to  be  true,  that  two  sides  of  a  triangle
are  equal  to  the  third,  I  judge  it  to  be
impossible.  If,  then,  we  understand,  in
this  sense,  that  maxim,  that  nothing  we  can
conceive  is  impossible,  the  meaning  will
be,  that  nothing  is  impossible  which  we
judge  to  be  possible.  But  does  it  not  often
happen,  that  what  one  man  judges  to  be
possible,  another  man  judges  to  be  impos-
sible ?  The  maxim,  therefore,  is  not  true
in  this  sense. [403]

I  am  not  able  to  find  any  other  meaning
of  conceiving  a  proposition,  or  of  conceiving
it  to  be  true,  besides  these  I  have  men-
tioned. I  know  nothing  that  can  be  meant
by  having  the  idea  of  a  proposition,  but


nothing  at  all,  and  of  nothing  there  can  be  no  idea.
For  instance,  we  have  a  notion  of  gold,  as  also  of
iron.  But  it  is  impossible  that  iron  can  at  the  same
time  1  e  gold,  consequently,  neither  can  we  have  any
notion  of  iron-gold  ;  and  yet  we  understand  what
people  mean  when  they  mention  iron-gold.

"  In  the  instance  alleged,  it  certainly  strikes  every
one,  at  first,  that  the  expression  iron-gold  is  an  empty
sound ;  but  yet  there  are  a  thousand  instances  in  which
it  does  not  so  easily  strike.  For  example,  when  I
say  a  rectilineal  two-lined  figure,  a  figure  contained
under  two  right  lines,  I  am  equally  well  understood
as  when  I  say,  a  right-lined  triangle,  a  figure  c  n-
tainedum<er  three  right  lines.  And  it  should  seem
we  had  a  distinct  notion  of  both  figures.  However,
as  we  shew  in  Geometry  that  two  right  lines  can
never  contain  space,  it  is  also  impossible  to  form  a
notion  of  a  rectilineal  two-lined  figure;  and  conse-
quently that  expression  is  an  empty  sound." — P.  55.


either  the  understanding  its  meruimg,  or
the  judging  of  its  truth.  I  can  understand
a  proposition  that  is  false  or  impossible,  as
well  as  one  that  is  true  or  possible  ;  and  I
find  that  men  have  contradictory  judgments
about  what  is  possible  or  impossible,  as  well
as  about  other  things.  In  what  sense  then
can  it  be  said,  that  the  having  an  idea  of  a
proposition  gives  certain  evidence  that  it  is
possible  ?

If  it  be  said,  that  the  idea  of  a  proposition
is  an  image  of  it  in  the  mind,  I  think  indeed
there  cannot  be  a  distinct  image,  either  in
the  mind  or  elsewhere,  of  that  which  is
impossible ;  but  what  is  meant  by  the  image
of  a  proposition  I  am  not  able  to  compre-
hend, and  I  shall  be  glad  to  be  informed.

2.  Every  proposition  that  is  necessarily
true  stands  opposed  to  a  contradictory  pro-
position that  is  impossible ;  and  he  that
conceives  one  conceives  both.  Thus  a  man
who  believes  that  two  and  three  necessarily
make  five,  must  believe  it  to  be  impossible
that  two  and  three  should  not  make  five.
He  conceives  both  propositions  when  he
believes  one.  Every  proposition  carries  its
contradictory  in  its  bosom,  and  both  are
conceived  at  the  same  time.  "  It  is  con-
fessed," says  Mr  Hume,  "  that,  in  all  cases
where  we  dissent  from  any  person,  we  con-
ceive both  sides  of  the  question ;  but  we
can  believe  only  one."  From  this,  it  cer-
tainly follows,  that,  when  we  dissent  from
any  person  about  a  necessary  proposition,
we  conceive  one  that  is  imposible  ;  yet  I
know  no  philosopher  who  has  made  so
much  use  of  the  maxim,  that  whatever  we
conceive  is  possible,  as  Mr  Hume.  A  great
part  of  his  peculiar  tenets  is  built  upon  it ;
and,  if  it  is  true,  they  must  be  true.  But
he  did  not  perceive  that,  in  the  passage
now  quoted,  the  truth  of  which  is  evident,
he  contradicts  it  himself. [404]

3.  Mathematicians  have,  in  many  cases,
proved  some  things  to  be  possible,  and
others  to  be  impossible,  which,  without
demonstration,  would  not  have  been  be-
lieved. Yet  I  have  never  found  that  any
mathematician  has  attempted  to  prove  a
thing  to  be  possible,  because  it  can  be  con-
ceived ;  or  impossible,  because  it  cannot  be
conceived.*  Why  is  not  this  maxim  applied
to  determine  whether  it  is  possible  to  square
the  circle  ?  a  point  about  which  very  emi-
nent mathematicians  have  differed.  It  is
easy  to  conceive  that,  in  the  infinite  series
of  numbers,  and  intermediate  fractions,
some  one  number,  integral  or  fractional,
may  bear  the  same  ratio  to  another,  as  the
side  of  a  square  bears  to  its  diagonal  ;-f-  yet,

*  All  geometry  is,  in  fact,  founded  on  our  intui-
tions of  space— that  is,  in  comm<  n  language,  on  our
conceptions  of  space  and  its  relations. —  H.

t  We  are  able  to  conceive  nothing  infinite;  and  we
mav  suppose,  but  we  cannot  conceive,  represent,  or
itnaffine,  the  possibility  in  question. — H.

[403,  10 i  ;


ciiAP.iv.] OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  THOUGHT  IN  THE  MIND. 379


however  conceivable  this  may  be,  it  may  be
demonstrated  to  be  impossible.

4.  Mathematicians  often  require  us  to
conceive  things  that  are  impossible,  in  order
to  prove  them  to  be  so.  This  is  the  case  in
all  their  demonstrations  ad  absurdum.
Conceive,  says  Euclid,  a  right  line  drawn
from  one  point  of  the  circumference  of  a
circle  to  another,  to  fall  without  the  circle  :*
I  conceive  this — I  reason  from  it,  until  I
come  to  a  consequence  that  is  manifestly
absurd ;  and  from  thence  conclude  that  the
thing  which  I  conceived  is  impossible.

Having  said  so  much  to  shew  that  our
power  of  conceiving  a  proposition  is  no
criterion  of  its  possibility  or  impossibility,  I
shall  add  a  few  observations  on  the  extent
of  our  knowledge  of  this  kind.

1.  There  are  many  propositions  which,
by  the  faculties  God  has  given  us,  we  judge
to  be  necessary,  as  well  as  true.  All
mathematical  propositions  are  of  this  kind,
and  many  others.  The  contradictories  of
such  propositions  must  be  impossible.  Our
knowledge,  therefore,  of  what  is  impossible,
must,  at  least,  be  as  extensive  as  our  know-
ledge of  necessary  truth.

2.  By  our  senses,  by  memory,  by  testi-
mony, and  by  other  means,  we  know  many
things  to  be  true  which  do  not  appear  to  be
necessary.  But  whatever  is  true  is  pos-
sible. Our  knowledge,  therefore,  of  what  is
possible  must,  at  least,  extend  as  far  as  our
knowledge  of  truth. [405]

3.  If  a  man  pretends  to  determine  the
possibility  or  impossibility  of  things  beyond
these  limits,  let  him  bring  proof.  I  do  not
say  that  no  such  proof  can  be  brought.  It
has  been  brought  in  many  cases,  particu-
larly in  mathematics.  But  I  say  that  his
being  able  to  conceive  a  thing,  is  no  proof
that  it  is  possible.-]*  Mathematics  afford
many  instances  of  impossibilities  in  the
nature  of  things,  which  no  man  would  have
believed  if  they  had  not  been  strictly  de-
monstrated. Perhaps,  if  we  were  able  to
reason  demonstratively  in  other  subjects,  to
as  great  extent  as  in  mathematics,  we  might
find  many  things  to  be  impossible,  which
we  conclude  without  hesitation,  to  be  pos-
sible.

It  is  possible,  you  say,  that  God  might
have  made  an  universe  of  sensible  and  ra-
tional creatures,  into  which  neither  natural
nor  moral  evil  should  ever  enter.  It  may
be  so,  for  what  I  know.  But  how  do  you
know  that  it  is  possible  ?  That  you  can
conceive  it,  I  grant ;  but  this  is  no  proof.


*  Euclid  does  not  require  us  to  conceive  or  imagine
any  such  impossibility.  The  proposition  to  which
Reid  must  refer,  is  the  second  of  the  third  Book  of
the  Elements. — H.

t  Not,  certainly,  that  it  is  really  possible,  but  that
»t  is  problematically  possible — i.  e.,  involves  no  con-
tradiction— violates  no  law  of  thought. This  latter
is  that  possibility  alone  in  question.— H.
[405,  406]


I  cannot  admit,  as  an  argument,  or  even  as
a  pressing  difficulty,  what  is  grounded  on
the  supposition  that  such  a  thing  is  possible,
when  there  is  no  good  evidence  that  it  is
possible,  and,  for  anything  we  know,  it  may,
in  the  nature  of  things,  be  impossible.


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  THOUGHT  IN  THE  MIND.

Every  man  is  conscious  of  a  succession
of  thoughts  which  pass  in  his  mind  while  he
is  awake,  even  when  they  are  not  excited
by  external  objects. [406]

The  mind,  on  this  account,  may  be  com-
pared to  liquor  in  the  state  of  fermentation.
When  it  is  not  in  this  state,  being  once  at
rest,  it  remains  at  rest,  until  it  is  moved  by
some  external  impulse.  But,  in  the  state
of  fermentation,  it  has  some  cause  of  motion
in  itself,  which,  even  when  there  is  no  im-
pulse from  without,  suffers  it  not  to  be  at
rest  a  moment,  but  produces  a  constant
motion  and  ebullition,  while  it  continues  to
ferment.

There  is  surely  no  similitude  between
motion  and  thought ;  but  there  is  an  analogy,
so  obvious  to  all  men,  that  the  same  words
are  often  applied  to  both  ;  and  many  modi-
fications of  thought  have  no  name  but  such
as  is  borrowed  from  the  modifications  of
motion.  Many  thoughts  are  excited  by  the
senses.  The  causes  or  occasions  of  these
may  be  considered  as  external.  But,  when
such  external  causes  do  not  operate  upon
us,  we  continue  to  think  from  some  internal
cause.  From  the  constitution  of  the  mind
itself  there  is  a  constant  ebullition  of  thought,
a  constant  intestine  motion  ;  not  only  of
thoughts  barely  speculative,  but  of  senti-
ments, passions,  and  affections,  which  attend
them.

This  continued  succession  of  thought  has,
by  modern  philosophers,  been  called  the
imagination.  *  I  think  it  was  formerly  called
the  fancy,  or  the  phantasy.-f  If  the  old
name  be  laid  aside,  it  were  to  be  wished
that  it  had  got  a  name  less  ambiguous  than
that  of  imagination,  a  name  which  had  two
or  three  meanings  besides.

It  is  often  called  the  train  of  ideas.  This
may  lead  one  to  think  that  it  is  a  train  of
bare  conceptions  ;  but  this  would  surely  be
a  mistake.  It  is  made  up  of  many  other
operations  of  mind,  as  well  as  of  concep-
tions, or  ideas.

*  By  some  only,  and  that  improperly. — H.

t  The  Latin  Imagvnatfa,  with  its  modifications  in
the  vulgar  languages,  was  employed  both  in  ancient
and  modern  times  to  express  what  the  Greeks  deno-
minated <bu.\Tu.<r'ict..  Phantasy,  of  which  Phansy  or
Fancy  is  a  corruption,  and  now  employed  in  a  mure
limited  sense,  was  a  common  name  for  Imagination
with  the  old  English  writers. —  H.


380


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS


[essay  Hit


Memory,  judgment,  reasoning,  passions,
affections,  and  purposes — in  a  word,  every
operation  of  the  mind,  excepting  those  of
sense — is  exerted  occasionally  in  this  train
of  thought,  and  has  its  share  as  an  ingre-
dient ;  so  that  we  must  take  the  word  idea
in  a  very  extensive  sense,  if  we  make  the
train  of  our  thoughts  to  be  only  a  train  of
ideas. [407]

To  pass  from  the  name,  and  consider  the
thing,  we  may  observe,  that  the  trains  of
thought  in  the  mind  are  of  two  kinds  :  they
are  either  such  as  flow  spontaneously,  like
water  from  a  fountain,  without  any  exer-
tion of  a  governing  principle  to  arrange
them  ;  or  they  are  regulated  and  directed
by  an  active  effort  of  the  mind,  with  some
view  and  intention.

Before  we  consider  these  in  their  order,
it  is  proper  to  premise  that  these  two  kinds,
however  distinct  in  their  nature,  are  for
the  most  part  mixed,  in  persons  awake  and
come  to  years  of  understanding.

On  the  one  hand,  we  are  rarely  so  vacant
of  all  project  and  design,  as  to  let  our
thoughts  take  their  own  course,  without
the  least  check  or  direction.  Or  if,  at  any
time,  we  should  be  in  this  state,  some  object
will  present  itself,  which  is  too  interesting
not  to  engage  the  attention  and  rouse  the
active  or  contemplative  powers  that  were
at  rest.

On  the  other  hand,  when  a  man  is  giving
the  most  intense  application  to  any  specula-
tion, or  to  any  scheme  of  conduct,  when  he
wills  to  exclude  every  thought  that  is  fo-
reign to  his  present  purpose,  such  thoughts
will  often  impertinently  intrude  upon  him,
in  spite  of  his  endeavours  to  the  contrary,
and  occupy,  by  a  kind  of  violence,  some
part  of  the  time  destined  to  another  pur-
pose. One  man  may  have  the  command
of  his  thoughts  more  than  another  man,
and  the  same  man  more  at  one  time  than
at  another.  But,  I  apprehend,  in  the  best
trained  mind,  the  thoughts  will  sometimes
be  restive,  sometimes  capricious  and  self-
willed,  when  we  wish  to  have  them  most
under  command. [408]

It  has  been  observed  very  justly,  that
we  must  not  ascribe  to  the  mind  the  power
of  calling  up  any  thought  at  pleasure,  be-
cause such  a  call  or  volition  supposes  that
thought  to  be  already  in  the  mind;  for,
otherwise,  how  should  it  be  the  object  of
volition  ?  As  this  must  be  granted  on  the
one  hand,  so  it  is  no  less  certain,  on  the
other,  that  a  man  has  a  considerable  power
in  regulating  and  disposing  his  own  thoughts.
Of  this  every  man  is  conscious,  and  I  can
no  more  doubt  of  it  than  I  can  doubt  whether
I  think  at  all.

We  seem  to  treat  the  thoughts  that  pre-
sent themselves  to  the  fancy  in  crowds,  as
a  great  man  treats  those  that  attend  his


levee.  They  are  all  ambitious  of  his  at-
tention :  he  goes  round  the  circle,  bestow-
ing a  bow  upon  one,  a  smile  upon  another ;
asks  a  short  question  of  a  third  ;  while  a
fourth  is  honoured  with  a  particular  con-
ference ;  and  the  greater  part  have  no  par-
ticular mark  of  attention,  but  go  as  they
came.  It  is  true,  he  can  give  no  mark  of
his  attention  to  those  who  were  not  there,
but  he  has  a  sufficient  number  for  making
a  choice  and  distinction.

In  like  manner,  a  number  of  thoughts
present  themselves  to  the  fancy  spontane-
ously ;  but,  if  we  pay  no  attention  to  them,
nor  hold  any  conference  with  them,  they
pass  with  the  crowd,  and  are  immediately
forgot,  as-  if  they  had  never  appeared.  But
those  to  which  we  think  proper  to  pay  at-
tention, may  be  stopped,  examined,  and
arranged,  for  any  particular  purpose  we
have  in  view.

It  may  likewise  be  observed,  that  a  train
of  thought,  which  was  at  first  composed  by
application  and  judgment,  when  it  has
been  often  repeated,  and  becomes  familiar,
will  present  itself  spontaneously.  Thus,
when  a  man  has  composed  an  air  hi  music,
so  as  to  please  his  own  ear,  after  he  has
played  or  sung  it  often,  the  notes  will
arrange  themselves  in  just  order,  and  it
requires  no  effort  to  regulate  their  succes-
sion. [409]

Thus  we  see  that  the  fancy  is  made  up
of  trains  of  thinking — some  of  which  are
spontaneous,  others  studied  and  regulated,
and  the  greater  part  are  mixed  of  both
kinds,  and  take  their  denomination  from  that
which  is  most  prevalent ;  and  that  a  train
of  thought  which  at  first  was  studied  and
composed,  may,  by  habit,  present  itself
spontaneously.  Having  premised  these
things,  let  us  return  to  those  trains  of
thought  which  are  spontaneous,  which  must
be  first  in  the  order  of  nature.

When  the  work  of  the  day  is  over,  and  a
man  lies  down  to  relax  his  body  and  mind,
he  cannot  cease  from  thinking,  though  he
desires  it.  Something  occurs  to  his  fancy  ;
that  is  followed  by  another  thing  ;  and  so  his
thoughts  are  carried  on  from  one  object  to
another,  until  sleep  does  the  scene.

In  this  operation*  of  the  mind,  it  is  not
faculty  only  that  is  employed;  there  are
many  that  join  together  in  its  production.
Sometimes  the  transactions  of  the  day  are
brought  upon  the  stage,  and  acted  over
again,  as  it  were,  upon  this  theatre  of  the
imagination.  In  this  case,  memory  surely
acts  the  most  considerable  part,  since  the
scenes  exhibited  are  not  fictions,  but  realities,
which  we  remember  ;  yet,  in  this  case,  the


*  The  word  process  might  be  here  preferable.
Operation  would  -denote  that  the  mind  is  active  in
associating  the  train  of  thought.—  H.

[407-409]


chap,  iv.]  OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  THOUGHT  IN  THE  MIND.


381


memory  does  not  act  alone,  other  powers  are
employed,  and  attend  upon  their  proper
objects.  The  transactions  remembered  will
be  more  or  less  interesting  ;  and  we  cannot
then  review  our  own  conduct,  nor  that  of
others,  without  passing  some  judgment  upon
it.  This  we  approve,  that  we  disapprove.
This  elevates,  that  humbles  and  depresses
us.  Persons  that  are  not  absolutely  indif-
ferent to  us,  can  hardly  appear,  even  to  the
imagination,  without  some  friendly  or  un-
friendly emotion.  We  judge  and  reason
about  things  as  well  as  persons  in  such
reveries.  We  remember  what  a  man  said
and  did ;  from  this  we  pass  to  his  designs
and  to  his  general  character,  and  frame
some  hypothesis  to  make  the  whole  con-
sistent. Such  trains  of  thought  we  may
call  historical. [410]

There  are  others  which  we  may  call  ro-
mantic, in  which  the  plot  is  formed  by  the
creative  power  of  fancy,  without  any  regard
to  what  did  or  will  happen.  In  these  also,
the  powers  of  judgment,  taste,  moral  senti-
ment, as  well  as  the  passions  and  affections,
come  in  and  take  a  share  in  the  execu-
tion.

In  these  scenes,  the  man  himself  com-
monly acts  a  very  distinguished  part,  and
seldom  does  anything  which  he  cannot  ap-
prove. Here  the  miser  will  be  generous,
the  coward  brave,  and  the  knave  honest.
Mr  Addison,  in  the  '•  Spectator,"  calls  this
play  of  the  fancy,  castle-building.

The  young  politician,  who  has  turned  his
thoughts  to  the  affairs  of  government,  be-
comes, in  his  imagination,  a  minister  of
state.  He  examines  every  spring  and  wheel
of  the  machine  of  government  with  the
nicest  eye  and  the  most  exact  judgment.
He  finds  a  proper  remedy  for  every  disorder
of  the  commonwealth,  quickens  trade  and
manufactures  by  salutary  laws,  encourages
arts  and  sciences,  and  makes  the  nation
happy  at  home  and  respected  abroad.  He
feels  the  reward  of  his  good  administration,
in  that  self-approbation  which  attends  it,
.and  is  happy  in  acquiring,  by  his  wise  and
patriotic  conduct,  the  blessings  of  the  present
age,  and  the  praises  of  those  that  are  to
come.

It  is  probable  that,  upon  the  stage  of
imagination,  more  great  exploits  have  been
performed  in  every  age  than  have  been
upon  the  stage  of  life  from  the  beginning  of
the  world.  An  innate  desire  of  self-appro-
bation is  undoubtedly  a  part  of  the  human
constitution.  It  is  a  powerful  spur  to
worthy  conduct,  and  is  intended  as  such  by
the  Author  of  our  being.  A  man  cannot
be  easy  or  happy,  unless  this  desire  be  in
some  measure  gratified.  While  he  con-
ceives himself  worthless  and  base,  he  can
relish  no  enjoyment.  The  humiliating,
mortifying  sentiment  must  be  removed,  and
[410-412]


this  natural  desire  of  self-approbation  will
either  produce  a  noble  effort  to  acquire  real
worth,  which  is  its  proper  direction,  or  it
will  lead  into  some  of  those  arts  of  self-
deceit,  which  create  a  false  opinion  of
worth. [411]

A  castle-builder,  in  the  fictitious  scenes
of  his  fancy,  will  figure,  not  according  to  his
real  character,  but  according  to  the  highest
opinion  he  has  been  able  to  form  of  himself,
and  perhaps  far  beyond  that  opinion.  For,
in  those  imaginary  conflicts,  the  passions
easily  yield  to  reason,  and  a  man  exerts  the
noblest  efforts  of  virtue  and  magnanimity;
with  the  same  ease  as,  in  his  dreams,  he
flies  through  the  air  or  plunges  to  the  bot-
tom of  the  ocean.

The  romantic  scenes  of  fancy  are  most
commonly  the  occupation  of  young  minds,
not  yet  so  deeply  engaged  in  life  as  to  have
their  thoughts  taken  up  by  its  real  cares
and  business.

Those  active  powers  of  the  mind,  which
are  most  luxuriant  by  constitution,  or  have
been  most  cherished  by  education,  im-
patient to  exert  themselves,  hurry  the
thought  into  scenes  that  give  them  play ;
and  the  boy  commences  in  imagination,
according  to  the  bent  of  his  mind,  a  general
or  a  statesman,  a  poet  or  an  orator.

When  the  fair  ones  become  castle-build-
ers, they  use  different  materials  ;  and,  while
the  young  soldier  is  carried  into  the  field  of
Mars,  where  he  pierces  the  thickest  squad-
rons of  the  enemy,  despising  death  in  all
its  forms,  the  gay  and  lovely  nymph,  whose
heart  has  never  felt  the  tender  passion,  is
transported  into  a  brilliant  assembly,  where
she  draws  the  attention  of  every  eye,  and
makes  an  impression  on  the  noblest  heart.

But  no  sooner  has  Cupid's  arrow  found
its  way  into  her  own  heart,  than  the  whole
scenery  of  her  imagination  is  changed.
Balls  and  assemblies  have  now  no  charms.
Woods  and  groves,  the  flowery  bank  and
the  crystal  fountain,  are  the  scenes  she
frequents  in  imagination.  She  becomes  an
Arcadian  shepherdess,  feeding  her  flock
beside  that  of  her  Strephon,  and  wants  no
more  to  complete  her  happiness. [412]

In  a  few  years  the  lovesick  maid  is
transformed  into  the  solicitous  mother.  Her
smiling  offspring  play  around  her.  She
views  them  with  a  parent's  eye.  Her  ima-
gination immediately  raises  them  to  man-
hood, and  brings  them  forth  upon  the  stage
of  life.  One  son  makes  a  figure  in  the
army,  another  shines  at  the  bar ;  her
daughters  are  happily  disposed  of  in  mar-
riage, and  bring  new  alliances  to  the  family.
Her  children's  children  rise  up  before  her,
and  venerate  her  grey  hairs.

Thus  the  spontaneous  sallies  of  fancy  are
as  various  as  the  cares  and  fears,  the  de-
sires and  hopes,  of  man.


382


OX  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay


Quicquid  ap.nnt  homines,  votum,  timor,  ira,  voluptas,
Gaudia,  discursus :

These  fill  up  the  scenes  of  fancy,  as  well
as  the  page  of  the  satirist.  Whatever
possesses  the  heart  makes  occasional  ex-
cursions into  the  imagination,  and  acts  such
scenes  upon  that  theatre  as  are  agreeable
to  the  prevailing  passion.  The  man  of
traffic,  who  has  committed  a  rich  cargo  to
the  inconstant  ocean,  follows  it  in  his
thought,  and,  according  as  his  hopes  or  his
fears  prevail,  he  is  haunted  with  storms,
and  rocks,  and  shipwreck ;  or  he  makes  a
happy  and  a  lucrative  voyage,  and,  before
his  vessel  has  lost  sight  of  land,  he  has  dis-
posed of  the  profit  which  she  is  to  bring  at
her  return.

The  poet  is  carried  into  the  Elysian  fields,
where  he  converses  with  the  ghosts  of
Homer  and  Orpheus.  The  philosopher  makes
a  tour  through  the  planetary  system,  or
goes  down  to  the  centre  of  the  earth,  and
examines  its  various  strata.  In  the  devout
man  likewise,  the  great  objects  that  possess
his  heart  often  play  in  his  imagination :
sometimes  he  is  transported  to  the  regions
of  the  blessed,  from  whence  he  looks  down
with  pity  upon  the  folly  and  the  pageantry
of  human  life;  or  he  prostrates  himself
before  the  throne  of  the  Most  High  with
devout  veneration ;  or  he  converses  with
celestial  spirits  about  the  natural  and  moral
kingdom  of  God,  which  he  now  sees  only
by  a  faint  light,  but  hopes  hereafter  to  view
with  a  steadier  and  brighter  ray. [413]

In  persons  come  to  maturity,  there  is,
even  in  these  spontaneous  sallies  of  fancy,
some  arrangement  of  thought ;  and  I  con-
ceive that  it  will  be  readily  allowed,  that 'in
those  who  have  the  greatest  stock  of  know-
ledge, and  the  best  natural  parts,  even  the
spontaneous  movements  of  fancy  will  be
the  most  regular  and  connected.  They
have  an  order,  connection,  and  unity,  by
which  they  are  no  less  distinguished  from
the  dreams  of  one  asleep,  or  the  ravings  of
one  delirious  on  the  one  hand,  than  from
the  finished  productions  of  art  on  the  other.

How  is  this  regular  arrangement  brought
about  ?  It  has  all  the  marks  of  judgment
and  reason,  yet  it  seems  to  go  before  judg-
ment, and  to  spring  forth  spontaneously.

Shall  we  believe  with  Leibnitz,  that  the
mind  was  originally  formed  like  a  watch
wound  up ;  and  that  all  its  thoughts,  pur-
poses, passions,  and  actions,  are  effected
by  the  gradual  evolution  of  the  original
spring  of  the  machine,  and  succeed  each
other  in  order,  as  necessarily  as  the  motions
and  pulsations  of  a  watch  ?

If  a  child  of  three  or  four  years  were  put
to  account  for  the  phenomena  of  a  watch,
he  would  conceive  that  there  is  a  little  man
within  the  watch,  or  some  other  little  animal,
that  beats continually,  and  produces  the


motion.  Whether  the  hypothesis  of  this
young  philosopher,  in  turning  the  watch-
spring  into  a  man,  or  that  of  the  German
philosopher,  in  turning  a  man  into  a  watch-
spring,  be  the  most  rational,  seems  hard  to
determine.*

To  account  for  the  regularity  of  our  first
thoughts,  from  motions  of  animal  spirits,
vibrations  of  nerves,  attractions  of  ideas,  or
from  any  other  unthinking  cause,  whether
mechanical  or  contingent,  seems  equally
irrational. [4 14  J

If  we  be  not  able  to  distinguish  the
strongest  marks  of  thought  and  design  from
the  effects  of  mechanism  or  contingency,  the
consequence  will  be  very  melancholy ;  foi
it  must  necessarily  follow,  that  we  have  no.,
evidence  of  thought  in  any  of  our  fellow
men — nay,  that  we  have  no  evidence  of
thought  or  design  in  the  structure  and  go-
vernment of  the  universe.  If  a  good  period
or  sentence  was  ever  produced  without
having  had  any  judgment  previously  em-
ployed about  it,  why  not  an  Iliad  or  JEneid  ?
They  differ  only  in  less  and  more  ;  and  we
should  do  injustice  to  the  philosopher  of
Laputa,  in  laughing  at  his  project  of  making
poems  by  the  turning  of  a  wheel,  if  a  con-
currence of  unthinking  causes  may  produce
a  rational  train  of  thought.

It  is,  therefore,  in  itself  highly  probable
to  say  no  more,  that  whatsoever  is  regular
and  rational  in  a  train  of  thought,  which
presents  itself  spontaneously  to  a  man's
fancy,  without  any'study,  is  a  copy  of  what
had  been  before  composed  by  his  own  ra-
tional powers,  or  those  of  some  other  person.

We  certainly  judge  so  in  similar  cases.
Thus,  in  a  book  I  find  a  train  of  thinking,
which  has  the  marks  of  knowledge  and
judgment.  I  ask  how  it  was  produced  ?  It
is  printed  in  a  book.  This  does  not  satisfy
me,  because  the  book  has  no  knowledge  nor
reason.  I  am  told  that  a  printer  printed
it,  and  a  compositor  set  the  types.  Neither
does  this  satisfy  me.  These  causes,  per-
haps, knew  very  little  of  the  subject.  There
must  be  a  prior  cause  of  the  composition.
It  was  printed  from  a  manuscript.  True.
But  the  manuscript  is  as  ignorant  as  the
printed  book.  The  manuscript  was  written
or  dictated  by  a  man  of  knowledge  and
judgment.  This,  and  this  only,  will  satisfy
a  man  of  common  understanding ;  and  it
appears  to  him  extremely  ridiculous  to  be-
lieve that  such  a  train  of  thinking  could
originally  be  produced  by  any  cause  that
neither  reasons  nor  thinks. [415]

Whether  such  a  train  of  thinking  be
printed  in  a  book,  or  printed,  so  to  speak,
in  his  mind,  and  issue  spontaneously  from
his  fancy,  it  must  have  been  composed  with


*  The  theory  of  our  mental  associations  owes  much
to  the  philosophers  of  the  Leibnitzian  school.— H.


[413-415]


chap,  iv.]  OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  THOUGHT  IN  THE  MIND.


383


judgment  by  himself,  or  by  some  other
rational  being.

This,  I  think,  will  be  confirmed  by  tracing
the  progress  of  the  human  fancy  as  far
back  as  we  are  able.

We  have  not  the  means  of  knowing  how
the  fancy  is  employed  in  infants.  Their
time  is  divided  between  the  employment  of
their  senses  and  sound  sleep  :  so  that  there
is  little  time  left  for  imagination,  and  the
materials  it  has  to  work  upon  are  probably
very  scanty.  A  few  days  after  they  are
born,  sometimes  a  few  hours,  we  see  them
smile  in  their  sleep.  But  what  they  smile
at  is  not  easy  to  guess  ;  for  they  do  not
smile  at  anything  they  see,  when  awake,
for  some  months  after  they  are  born.  It
is  likewise  common  to  see  them  move  their
lips  in  sleep,  as  if  they  were  sucking.

These  things  seem  to  discover  some
working  of  the  imagination ;  but  there  is
no  reason  to  think  that  there  is  any  regular
train  of  thought  in  the  mind  of  infants.

By  a  regular  train  of  thought,  I  mean
that  which  has  a  beginning,  a  middle,  and
an  end,  an  arrangement  of  its  parts,  ac-
cording to  some  rule,  or  with  some  inten-
tion. Thus,  the  conception  of  a  design,
and  of  the  means  of  executing  it ;  the  con-
ception of  a  whole,  and  the  number  and
order  of  the  parts.  These  are  instances  of
the  most  simple  trains  of  thought  that  can
be  called  regular.

Man  has  undoubtedly  a  power  (whether
we  call  it  taste  or  judgment  is  not  of  any
consequence  in  the  present  argument)
whereby  he  distinguishes  between  a  com-
position and  a  heap  of  materials  ;  between
a  house,  for  instance,  and  a  heap  of  stones  ;
between  a  sentence  and  a  heap  of  words  ;
between  a  picture  and  a  heap  of  colours.
[41 6  J  It  does  not  appear  to  me  that  chil-
dren have  any  regular  trains  of  thought
until  this  power  begins  to  operate.  Those
who  are  born  such  idiots  as  never  to  shew
any  signs  of  this  power,  shew  as  little  any
signs  of  regularity  of  thought.  It  seems,
therefore,  that  this  power  is  connected  with
all  regular  trains  of  thought,  and  may  be
the  cause  of  them.

Such  trains  of  thought  discover  them-
selves iu  children  about  two  years  of  age.
They  can  then  give  attention  to  the  opera-
tions of  older  children  in  making  their
little  houses,  and  ships,  and  other  such
things,  hi  imitation  of  the  works  of  men.
They  are  then  capable  of  understanding  a
little  of  language,  which  shews  both  a
regular  train  of  thinking,  and  some  degree
of  abstraction.  I  think  we  may  perceive  a
distinction  between  the  faculties  of  children
of  two  or  three  years  of  age,  and  those  of
the  most  sagacious  brutes.  They  can  then
perceive  design  and  regularity  in  the  works
of  others,  especially  of  older  children ;  their
["416,  417]


little  minds  are  fired  with  the  discovery ;
they  are  eager  to  imitate  it,  and  never  at
rest  till  they  can  exhibit  something  of  the
same  kind.

When  a  child  first  learns  by  imitation
to  do  something  that  requires  design,  how
does  he  exult !  Pythagoras  was  not  more
happy  in  the  discovery  of  his  famous  theo-
rem. He  seems  then  first  to  reflect  upon
himself,  and  to  swell  with  self-esteem.  His
eyes  sparkle.  He  is  impatient  to  shew  his
performance  to  all  about  him,  and  thinks
himself  entitled  to  their  applause.  He  is
applauded  by  all,  and  feels  the  same  emo-
tion from  this  applause,  as  a  Roman  Con-
sul did  from  a  triumph.  He  has  now  a
consciousness  of  some  worth  in  himself.  He
assumes  a  superiority  over  those  who  are
not  so  wise,  and  pays  respect  to  those  who
are  wiser  than  himself.  He  attempts
something  else,  and  is  every  day  reaping
new  laurels.

As  children  grow  up,  they  are  delighted
with  tales,  with  childish  games,  with  designs
and  stratagems.  Everything  of  this  kind
stores  the  fancy  with  a  new  regular  train  of
thought,  which  becomes  familiar  by  repeti-
tion, so  that  one  part  draws  the  whole  after
it  in  the  imagination. [417]

The  imagination  of  a  child,  like  the  hand
of  a  painter,  is  long  employed  in  copying
the  works  of  others,  before  it  attempts  any
invention  of  its  own.

The  power  of  invention  is  not  yet  brought
forth  ;  but  it  is  coming  forward,  and,  like
the  bud  of  a  tree,  is  ready  to  burst  its
integuments,  when  some  accident  aids  its
eruption.

There  is  no  power  of  the  understanding
that  gives  so  much  pleasure  to  the  owner,
as  that  of  invention,  whether  it  be  employed
in  mechanics,  in  science,  in  the  conduct  of
life,  in  poetry,  in  wit,  or  in  the  fine  arts.
One  who  is  conscious  of  it,  acquires  thereby
a  worth  and  importance  in  his  own  eye
which  he  had  not  before.  He  looks  upon
himself  as  one  who  formerly  lived  upon  the
bounty  and  gratuity  of  others,  but  who  has
now  acquired  some  property  of  his  own.
When  this  power  begins  to  be  felt  in  the
young  mind,  it  has  the  grace  of  novelty
added  to  its  other  charms,  and,  like  the
youngest  child  of  the  family,  is  caressed
beyond  all  the  rest.

We  may  be  sure,  .herefore,  that,  as  soon
as  children  are  conscious  of  this  power,
they  will  exercise  it  in  such  ways  as  are
suited  to  their  age,  and  to  the  objects  they
are  employed  about.  This  gives  rise  to
innumerable  new  associations,  and  regular
trains  of  thought,  which  make  the  deeper
impression  upon  the  mind,  as  they  are  its
exclusive  property.

I  am  aware  that  the  power  of  invention
is  distributed  among  men  more  unequally


384


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.  [essay  iv.


than  almost  any  other.  When  it  is  able  to
produce  anything  that  is  interesting  to  man-
kind we  call  it  genius  ;  a  talent  which  is  the
lot  of  very  few.  But  there  is,  perhaps,  a
lower  kind  or  lower  degree  of  invention  that
is  more  common.  However  this  may  be,  it
must  be  allowed  that  the  power  of  invention
in  those  who  have  it,  will  produce  many
new  regular  trains  of  thought ;  and  these
being  expressed  in  works  of  art,  in  writing,
or  in  discourse,  will  be  copied  by  others.
[418]

Thus,  I  conceive  the  minds  of  children,
as  soon  as  they  have  judgment  to  distin-
guish what  is  regular,  orderly,  and  connected,
from  a  mere  medley  of  thought,  are  fur-
nished with  regular  trains  of  thinking  by
these  means.

First  and  chiefly,  by  copying  what  they
see  in  the  works  and  in  the  discourse  of
others.  Man  is  the  most  imitative  of  all
animals  ;  he  not  only  imitates  with  inten-
tion, and  purposely,  what  he  thinks  has  any
grace  or  beauty,  but  even  without  intention,
he  is  led,  by  a  kind  of  instinct,  which  it  is
difficult  to  resist,  into  the  modes  of  speaking,
thinking,  and  acting,  which  he  has  been  ac-
customed to  see  in  his  early  years.  The
more  children  see  of  what  is  regular  and
beautiful  in  what  is  presented  to  them,  the
more  they  are  led  to  observe  and  to  imitate
it.

This  is  the  chief  part  of  their  stock,  and
descends  to  them  by  a  kind  of  tradition
from  those  who  came  before  them ;  and  we
shall  find  that  the  fancy  of  most  men  is
furnished  from  those  they  have  conversed
with,  as  well  as  their  religion,  language,
and  manners.

Secondly,  By  the  additions  or  innovations
that  are  properly  their  own,  these  will  be
greater  or  less,  in  proportion  to  their  study
and  invention  ;  but  in  the  bulk  of  mankind
are  not  very  considerable.

Every  profession  and  every  rank  in  life,
has  a  manner  of  thinking,  and  turn  of  fancy
that  is  proper  to  it ;  by  which  it  is  character-
ised in  comedies  and  works  of  humour.
The  bulk  of  men  of  the  same  nation,  of  the
same  rank,  and  of  the  same  occupation,  are
cast  as,  it  were,  in  the  same  mould.  This
mould  itself  changes  gradually,  but  slowly,
by  new  inventions,  by  intercourse  with
strangers,  or  by  other  accidents.* [419]

The  condition  of  man  requires  a  longer
infancy  and  youth  than  that  of  other  ani-
mals ;  for  this  reason,  among  others,  that
almost  every  station  in  civil  society  requires
a  multitude  of  regular  trains  of  thought,  to


««  *  Non  ad  rationem  sed  ad  similitudinem  compo-

nimur,"  says  Seneca ;  and  Schiller —

•«  Man— he  is  aye  an  imitative  creature,
And  he  who  is  the  foremost  leads  the  flock."

There  would  be  no  end  of  quotations  to  the  same

eftect.— H.


be  not  only  acquired,  but  to  be  made  so
familiar  by  frequent  repetition,  as  to  pre-
sent themselves  spontaneously  when  there
is  occasion  for  them.

The  imagination  even  of  men  of  good
parts  never  serves  them  readily  but  in
things  wherein  it  has  been  much  exercised.
A  minister  of  state  holds  a  conference  with
a  foreign  ambassador  with  no  greater  emo-
tion than  a  professor  in  a  college  prelects  to
his  audience.  The  imagination  of  each
presents  to  him  what  the  occasion  requires
to  be  said,  and  how.  Let  them  change
places,  and  both  would  find  themselves  at  a
loss.

The  habits  which  the  human  mind  is
capable  of  acquiring  by  exercise  are  won-
derful in  many  instances ;  in  none  more
wonderful  than  in  that  versatility  of  imagin-
ation which  a  well-bred  man  acquires  by
being  much  exercised  in  the  various  scenes
of  life.  In  the  morning  he  visits  a  friend
in  affliction.  Here  his  imagination  brings
forth  from  its  store  every  topic  of  consola-
tion ;  everything  that  is  agreeable  to  the
laws  of  friendship  and  sympathy,  and  no-
thing that  is  not  so.  From  thence  he  drives
to  the  minister's  levee,  where  imagination
readily  suggests  what  is  proper  to  be  said
or  replied  to  every  man,  and  in  what  man-
ner, according  to  the  degree  of  acquaint-
ance or  familiarity,  of  rank  or  dependence,
of  opposition  or  concurrence  of  interests,  of
confidence  or  distrust,  that  is  between  them.
Nor  does  all  this  employment  hinder  him
from  carrying  on  some  design  with  much
artifice,  and  endeavouring  to  penetrate  into
the  views  of  others  through  the  closest  dis-
guises. From  the  levee  he  goes  to  the
Housf  of  Commons,  and  speaks  upon  the
affairs  of  the  nation  ;  from  thence  to  a  ball
or  assembly,  and  entertains  the  ladies.  His
imagination  puts  on  the  friend,  the  courtier,
the  patriot,  the  fine  gentleman,  with  more
ease  than  we  put  off  one  suit  and  put  on
another. [420]

This  is  the  effect  of  training  and  exer-
cise. For  a  man  of  equal  parts  and  know-
ledge, but  unaccustomed  to  those  scenes  of
public  life,  is  quite  disconcerted  when  first
brought  into  them.  His  thoughts  are  put
to  flight,  and  he  cannot  rally  them.

There  are  feats  of  imagination  to  be
learned  by  application  and  practice,  as  won-
derful as  the  feats  of  balancers  and  rope-
dancers,  and  often  as  useless.

When  a  man  can  make  a  hundred  verses
standing  on  one  foot,  or  play  three  or  four
games  at  chess  at  the  same  time  without
seeing  the  board,  it  is  probable  he  hath
spent  his  life  in  acquiring  such  a  feat.  How-
ever, such  unusual  pheenomena  shew  what
habits  of  imagination  may  be  acquired.

When  such  habits  are  acquired  and  per-
fected, they  are  exercised  without  any  labo-
[418-420]


criAP.  iv.]  OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  THOUGHT  IN  THE  MIND.


385


rious  effort ;  like  the  habit  of  playing  upon
an  instrument  of  music  There  are  innu-
merable motions  of  the  fingers  upon  the
stops  or  keys,  which  must  be  directed  in
one  particular  train  or  succession.  There
is  only  one  arrangement  of  those  motions
that  is  right,  while  there  are  ten  thousand
that  are  wrong,  and  would  spoil  the  music
The  musician  thinks  not  in  the  least  of  the
arrangement  of  those  motions  ;  he  has  a  dis-
tinct idea  of  the  tune,  and  wills  to  play  it.
The  motions  of  the  fingers  arrange  them-
selves so  as  to  answer  his  intention.

In  like  manner,  when  a  man  speaks  upon  a
subject  with  which  he  is  acquainted,  there  is
a  certain  arrangement  of  his  thoughts  and
words  necessary  to  make  his  discourse  sen-
sible, pertinent,  and  grammatical.  In  every
sentence  there  are  more  rules  of  grammar,
logic,  and  rhetoric,  that  may  be  transgressed,
than  there  are  words  and  letters.  He
speaks  without  thinking  of  any  of  those
rules,  and  yet  observes  them  all,  as  if  they
were  all  in  his  eye. [421]

This  is  a  habit  so  similar  to  that  of  a
player  on  an  instrument,  that  I  think  both
must  be  got  in  the  same  way — that  is,  by
much  practice,  and  the  power  of  habit.

When  a  man  speaks  well  and  methodi-
cally upon  a  subject  without  study  and  with
perfect  ease,  I  believe  we  may  take  it  for
granted  that  his  thoughts  run  in  a  beaten
track.  There  is  a  mould  in  his  mind —
which  has  been  formed  by  much  practice,  or
by  study — for  this  very  subject,  or  for  some
other  so  similar  and  analogous  that  his
discourse  falls  into  this  mould  with  ease,
and  takes  its  form  from  it.

Hitherto  we  have  considered  the  opera-
tions of  fancy  that  are  either  spontaneous,
or,  at  least,  require  no  laborious  effort  to
guide  and  direct  them,  and  have  endeav-
oured to  account  for  that  degree  of  regu-
larity and  arrangement  which  is  found  even
in  them.  The  natural  powers  of  judgment
And  invention,  the  pleasure  that  always
attends  the  exercise  of  those  powers,  the
means  we  have  of  improving  them  by  imi-
tation of  others,  and  the  effect  of  practice
and  habits,  seem  to  me  sufficiently  to
account  for  this  phaenomenon,  without  sup-
posing any  unaccountable  attractions  of  ideas
by  which  they  arrange  themselves.

But  we  are  able  to  direct  our  thoughts  in
a  certain  course,  so  as  to  perform  a  destined
task.

Every  work  of  art  has  its  model  framed
in  the  imagination.  Here  the  "  Iliad"  of
Homer,  the  "  Republic"  of  Plato,  the
"  Principia"  of  Newton,  were  fabricated.
Shall  we  believe  that  those  works  took  the
form  in  which  they  now  appear  of  them-
selves ? — that  the  sentiments,  the  manners,
and  the  passions  arranged  themselves  at
once  in  the  mind  of  Homer,  so  as  to  form
[421-423]


the  "  Iliad  ?"  Was  there  no  more  effort
in  the  composition  than  there  is  in  telling  a
well-known  tale,  or  singing  a  favourite
song  P This  cannot  be  believed. [422]

Granting  that  some  happy  thought  first
suggested  the  design  of  singing  the  wrath  of
Achilles,  yet,  surely,  it  was  a  matter  of
judgment  and  choice  where  the  narration
should  begin  and  where  it  should  end.

Granting  that  the  fertility  of  the  poet's
imagination  suggested  a  variety  of  rich  ma-
terials, was  not  judgment  necessary  to  select
what  was  proper,  to  reject  what  was  im-
proper, to  arrange  the  materials  into  a  just
composition,  and  to  adapt  them  to  each
other,  and  to  the  design  of  the  whole  ?

No  man  can  believe  that  Homer's  ideas,
merely  by  certain  sympathies  and  antipa-
thies, by  certain  attractions  and  repulsions
inherent  in  their  natures,  arranged  them-
selves according  to  the  most  perfect  rules  of
epic  poetry;  and  Newton's,  according  to
the  rules  of  mathematical  composition.

I  should  sooner  believe  that  the  poet,
after  he  invoked  his  muse,  did  nothing  at
all  but  listen  to  the  song  of  the  goddess.
Poets,  indeed,  and  other  artists,  must  make
their  works  appear  natural ;  but  nature  is
the  perfection  of  art,  and  there  can  be  no
just  imitation  of  nature  without  art.  When
the  building  is  finished,  the  rubbish,  the
scaffolds,  the  tools  and  engines  are  carried
out  of  sight ;  but  we  know  it  could  not  have
been  reared  without  them.

The  train  of  thinking,  therefore,  is  capable
of  being  guided  and  directed,  much  in  the
same  manner  as  the  horse  we  ride.  The
horse  has  his  strength,  his  agility,  and  his
mettle  in  himself ;  he  has  been  taught  cer-
tain movements,  and  many  useful  habits,
that  make  him  more  subservient  to  our
purposes  and  obedient  to  our  will ;  but  to
accomplish  a  journey,  he  must  be  directed
by  the  rider.

In  like  manner,  fancy  has  its  original
powers,  which  are  very  different  in  different
persons  ;  it  has  likewise  more  regular  mo-
tions, to  which  it  has  been  trained  by  along
course  of  discipline  and  exercise,  and  by
which  it  may,  extempore,  and  without  much
effort,  produce  things  that  have  a  consid-
erable degree  of  beauty,  regularity,  and
design. [423]

But  the  most  perfect  works  of  design  are
never  extemporary.  Our  first  thoughts  are
reviewed  ;  we  place  them  at  a  proper  dis
tance ;  examine  eveiy  part,  and  take  a
complex  view  of  the  whole.  By  our  criti-
cal faculties,  we  perceive  this  part  to  be
redundant,  that  deficient ;  here  is  a  want
of  nerves,  there  a  want  of  delicacy  ;  this  is
obscure,  that  too  diffuse.  Things  are  mar-
shalled anew,  according  to  a  second  and
more  deliberate  judgment ;  what  was  defi-
cient, is  supplied  ;  what  was  dislocated,  is
2  u


386


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  IV,


put  in  joint ;  redundances  are  lopped  off,
and  the  whole  polished.

Though  poets,  of  all  artists,  make  the
highest  claim  to  inspiration ;  yet,  if  we  be-
lieve Horace,  a  competent  judge,  no  pro-
duction in  that  art  can  have  merit  which
has  not  cost  such  labour  as  this  in  the
birth.

"  VosO!
Pompilius  sanguis,  carmen  reprehendite  quod  non
Multa  dies,  et  mult  a  litura  coercuit,  atque
Perfectum  decies  non  castigavit  ad  unguem."

The  conclusion  I  would  draw  from  all
that  has  been  said  upon  this  subject  is,
That  everything  that  is  regular  in  that
train  of  thought  which  we  call  fancy  or
imagination,  from  the  little  designs  and
reveries  of  children  to  the  grandest  pro-
ductions of  human  genius,  was  originally
the  offspring  of  judgment  or  taste,  applied
with  some  effort  greater  or  less.  What
one  person  composed  with  art  and  judg-
ment, is  imitated  by  another  with  great
ease;  What  a  man  himself  at  first  com-
posed with  pains,  becomes  by  habit  so
familiar  as  to  offer  itself  spontaneously  to
his  fancy  afterwards.  But  nothing  that  is
regular  was  ever  at  first  conceived  without
design,  attention,  and  care. [424]

I  shall  now  make  a  few  reflections  upon  a
theory  which  has  been  applied  to  account
for  this  successive  train  of  thought  in  the
mind.  It  was  hinted  by  Mr  Hobbes,  but
has  drawn  more  attention  since  it  was  dis-
tinctly explained  by  Mr  Hume.

That  author*  thinks  that  the  train  of
thought  in  the  mind  is  owing  to  a  kind  of
attraction  which  ideas  have  for  other  ideas
that  bear  certain  relations  to  them.  He
thinks  the  complex  ideas — which  are  the
common  subjects  of  our  thoughts  and  rea-
soning— are  owing  to  the  same  cause.  The
relations  which  produce  this  attraction  of
ideas,  he  thinks,  are  these  three  only — to
wit,  causation,  contiguity  in  time  or  place,
and  similitude.  He  asserts  that  these  are
the  only  general  principles  that  unite  ideas.
And  having,  in  another  place,  occasion  to
take  notice  of  contrariety  as  a  principle  of
connection  among  ideas,  in  order  to  recon-
cile this  to  his  system,  he  tells  us  gravely,
that  contrariety  may  perhaps  be  considered
as  a  mixture  of  causation  and  resemblance.
That  ideas  which  have  any  of  these  three
relations  do  mutually  attract  each  other,  so
that  one  of  them  being  presented  to  the
fancy,  the  other  is  drawn  along  with  it —
this  he  seems  to  think  an  original  property
of  the  mind,  or  rather  of  the  ideas,  and
therefore  inexplicable. -f-


*  He  should  have  said  this  author,  for  Hume  is
referred  to H.

t  See  above,  p.  294,  b,  note  f.  The  history  of  the
doctrine  of  Association  has  never  yet  been  at  all
adequately  developed. Some  of  the  most  remark.


First,  I  observe,  with  regard  to  this
theory,  that,  although  it  is  true  that  the
thought  of  any  object  is  apt  to  lead  us  to
the  thought  of  its  cause  or  effect,  of  things
contiguous  to  it  in  time  or  place,  or  of
things  resembling  it,  yet  this  enumeration
of  the  relations  of  things  which  are  apt  to
lead  us  from  one  object  to  another,  is  very
inaccurate.

The  enumeration  is  too  large  upon  his
own  principles  ;  but  it  is  by  far  too  scanty  in
reality.  Causation,  according  to  his  philo-
sophy, implies  nothing  more  than  a  con-
stant conjunction  observed  between  the
cause  and  the  effect,  and,  therefore,  conti-
guity must  include  causation,  and  his  three
principles  of  attraction  are  reduced  to  two.
[425]

But  when  we  take  all  the  three,  the  enu-
meration is,  in  reality,  very  incomplete.
Every  relation  of  things  has  a  tendency,
more  or  less,  to  lead  the  thought,  in  a
thinking  mind,  from  one  to  the  other ;  and
not  only  every  relation,  but  every  kind  of
contrariety  and  opposition.  What  Mr
Hume  says— that  contrariety  may  perhaps
be  considered  as  a  mixture  "  of  causation
and  resemblance" — I  can  as  little  compro-
hend  as  if  he  had  said  that  figure  may  per-
haps be  considered  as  a  mixture  of  colour
and  sound.

Our  thoughts  pass  easily  from  the  end
to  the  means  ;  from  any  truth  to  the  evi-
dence on  which  it  is  founded,  the  conse-
quences that  may  be  drawn  from  it,  or  the
use  that  may  be  made  of  it.  From  a  part
we  are  easily  led  to  think  of  the  whole,  from
a  subject  to  its  qualities,  or  from  things
related  to  the  relation.  Such  transitions  in
thinking  must  have  been  made  thousands
of  times  by  every  man  who  thinks  and
reasons,  and  thereby  become,  as  it  were,
beaten  tracks  for  the  imagination.

Not  only  the  relations  of  objects  to  each
other  influence  our  train  of  thinking,  but
the  relation  they  bear  to  the  present  tem-
per and  disposition  of  the  mind  ;  their  re-
lation to  the  habits  we  have  acquired,
whether  moral  or  intellectual ;  to  the  com-
pany we  have  kept,  and  to  the  business  in
which  we  have  been  chiefly  employed.  The
same  event  will  suggest  very  different  re-
flections to  different  persons,  and  to  the
same  person  at  different  times,  according
as  he  is  in  good  or  bad  humour,  as  he  is
lively  or  dull,  angry  or  pleased,  melancholy
or  cheerful.

Lord  Kames,  in  his  "  Elements  of  Criti-
cism," and  Dr  Gerard,  in  his  "  Essay  on
Genius,"  have  given  a  much  fuller  and
juster  enumeration  of  the  causes  that  in-
fluence our  train  of  thinking,  and  I  have


able  speculations  on  this  matter  are  wholly  unknown.
Of  these  I  can,  at  present,  say  nothing.— H. See


Notes  D  *  *,  D


[424,  425]


chap,  iv.]  OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  THOUGHT  IN  THE  MIND.


387


nothing  to  add  to  what  they  have  said  on
this  subject.

Secondly,  Let  us  consider  how  far  this
attraction  of  ideas  must  be  resolved  into
original  qualities  of  human  nature. [426]

I  believe  the  original  principles  of  the
mind,  of  which  we  can  give  no  account  but
that  such  is  our  constitution,  are  more  in
number  than  is  commonly  thought.  But
we  ought  not  to  multiply  them  without
necessity.

That  trains  of  thinking,  which,  by  fre-
quent repetition,  have  become  familiar,
should  spontaneously  offer  themselves  to
our  fancy,  seems  to  require  no  other  origi-
nal quality  but  the  power  of  habit.  *

In  all  rational  thinking,  and  in  all  rational
discourse,  whether  serious  or  facetious,  the
thought  must  have  some  relation  to  what
went  before.  Every  man,  therefore,  from
the  dawn  of  reason,  must  have  been  accus-
tomed to  a  train  of  related  objects.  These
please  the  understanding,  and,  by  custom,
become  like  beaten  tracks  which  invite  the
traveller.

As  far  as  it  is  in  our  power  to  give  a
direction  to  our  thoughts,  which  it  is  un-
doubtedly in  a  great  degree,  they  will  be
directed  by  the  active  principles  common
to  men — by  our  appetites,  our  passions,  our
affections,  our  reason,  and  conscience.  And
that  the  trains  of  thinking  in  our  minds  are
chiefly  governed  by  these,  according  as  one
or  another  prevails  at  the  time,  every  man
will  find  in  his  experience.

If  the  mind  is  at  any  time  vacant  from
every  passion  and  desire,  there  are  still
some  objects  that  are  more  acceptable  to
us  than  others.  The  facetious  man  is
pleased  with  surprising  similitudes  or  con-
trasts ;  the  philosopher  with  the  relations
of  things  that  are  subservient  to  reasoning ;
the  merchant  with  what  tends  to  profit;
and  the  politician  with  what  may  mend  the
state.

A  good  writer  of  comedy  or  romance  can
feign  a  train  of  thinking  for  any  of  the  per-
sons of  his  fable,  which  appears  very  natu-
ral, and  is  approved  by  the  best  judges.
Now,  what  is  it  that  entitles  such  a  fiction
to  approbation  ?  Is  it  that  the  author  has
given  a  nice  attention  to  the  relations  of
causation,  contiguity,  and  similitude  in  the
ideas?  [427]  This  surely  is  the  least
part  of  its  merit.  But  the  chief  part  con-
sists in  this,  that  it  corresponds  perfectly
with  the  general  character,  the  rank,  the
habits,  the  present  situation  and  passions  of
the  person.  If  this  be  a  just  way  of  judging
in  criticism,  it  follows  necessarily,  that  the
circumstances  last  mentioned  have  the  chief
influence  in  suggesting  our  trains  of  thought.

*  We  can  as  well  explain  Habit  by  Association,
as  Association  by  Habit— H.
["426-428]


It  cannot  be  denied,  that  the  state  of  the
body  has  an  influence  upon  our  imagination,
according  as  a  man  is  sober  or  drunk,  as
he  is  fatigued  or  refreshed.  Crudities  and
indigestion  are  said  to  give  uneasy  dreams,
and  have  probably  a  like  effect  upon  the
waking  thoughts.  Opium  gives  to  some
persons  pleasing  dreams  and  pleasing  im-
aginations when  awake,  and  to  others  such
as  are  horrible  and  distressing.

These  influences  of  the  body  upon  the
mind  can  only  be  known  by  experience,  and
I  believe  we  can  give  no  account  of  them.

Nor  can  we,  perhaps,  give  any  reason  whj.
we  must  think  without  ceasing  while  we  are
awake.  I  believe  we  are  likewise  origi-
nally disposed,  in  imagination,  to  pass  from
any  one  object  of  thought  to  others  that  are
contiguous  to  it  in  time  or  place.  This,  I
think,  may  be  observed  in  brutes  and  in
idiots,  as  well  as  in  children,  before  any
habit  can  be  acquired  that  might  account
for  it.  The  sight  of  an  object  is  apt  to
suggest  to  the  imagination  what  has  been
seen  or  felt  in  conjunction  with  it,  even
when  the  memory  of  that  conjunction  is
gone.

Such  conjunctions  of  things  influence  not
only  the  imagination,  but  the  belief  and  the
passions,  especially  in  children  and  in
brutes  ;  and  perhaps  all  that  we  call  memory
in  brutes  is  something  of  this  kind.

They  expect  events  in  the  same  order  and
succession  in  which  they  happened  before  ;
and  by  this  expectation,  their  actions  and
passions,  as  well  as  their  thoughts,  are  re-
gulated. [428]  A  horse  takes  fright  at
the  place  where  some  object  frighted  him
before.  "We  are  apt  to  conclude  from  this
that  he  remembers  the  former  accident.
But  perhaps  there  is  only  an  association
formed  in  his  mind  between  the  place  and
the  passion  of  fear,  without  any  distinct
remembrance.

Mr  Locke  has  given  us  a  very  good
chapter  upon  the  association  of  ideas  ;  and
by  the  examples  he  has  given  to  illustrate
this  doctrine,  I  think  it  appears  that  very
strong  associations  may  be  formed  at  once —
not  of  ideas  to  ideas  only,  but  of  ideas  to
passions  and  emotions  ;  and  that  strong  as-
sociations are  never  formed  at  once,  but
when  accompanied  by  some  strong  passion
or  emotion.  I  believe  this  must  be  resolved
into  the  constitution  of  our  nature.

Mr  Hume's  opinion — that  the  complex
ideas,  which  are  the  common  objects  of
discourse  and  reasoning,  are  formed  by  those
original  attractions  of  ideas  to  which  he
ascribes  the  train  of  thoughts  in  the  mind —
will  come  under  consideration  in  another
place.

To  put  an  end  to  our  remarks  upon  this
theory  of  Mr  Hume,  I  think  he  has  real
merit  in  bringing  this  curious  subject  under
2  c2


388


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  IV.


the  view  of  philosophers,  and  carrying  it  a
certain  length.  But  I  see  nothing  in  this
theory  that  should  hinder  us  to  conclude,
that  everything  in  the  trains  of  our  thought,
which  bears  the  marks  of  judgment  and
reason,  has  been  the  product  of  judgment
and  reason  previously  exercised,  either  by
the.  person  himself,  at  that  or  some  former
time,  or  by  some  other  person.  The  at-
traction of  ideas  will  be  the  same  in  a  man's
second  thoughts  upon  any  subject  as  in  his
first.  Or,  if  some  change  in  his  circum-
stances, or  in  the  objects  about  him,  should
make  any  change  in  the  attractions  of  his
ideas,  it  is  an  equal  chance  whether  the
second  be  better  than  the  first,  or  whether
they  be  worse.  But  it  is  certain  that
every  man  of  judgment  and  taste  will,  upon
a  review,  correct  that  train  of  thought  which
first  presented  itself.  If  the  attractions  of
ideas  are  the  sole  causes  of  the  regular
arrangement  of  thought  in  the  fancy,  there
is  no  use  for  judgment  or  taste  in  any  com-
position, nor  indeed  any  room  for  their
operation. [429  J

There  are  other  reflections,  of  a  more
practical  nature  and  of  higher  importance,
to  which  this  subject  leads.

I  believe  it  will  be  allowed  by  every  man,
that  our  happiness  or  misery  in  life,  that
our  improvement  in  any  art  or  science  which
we  profess,  and  that  our  improvement  in
real  virtue  and  goodness,  depend  in  a  very
great  degree  on  the  train  of  thinking  that
occupies  the  mind  both  in  our  vacant  and
in  our  more  serious  hours.  As  far,  there-
fore, as  the  direction  of  our  thoughts  is  in
our  power,  (and  that  it  is  so  in  a  great
measure,  cannot  be  doubted)  it  is  of  the  last
importance  to  give  them  that  direction  which
is  most  subservient  to  those  valuable  pur-


What  employment  can  he  have  worthy
of  a  man,  whose  imagination  is  occupied
only  about  things  low  and  base,  and  grovels
in  a  narrow  field  of  mean,  unanimating,  and
uninteresting  objects,  insensible  to  those
finer  and  more  delicate  sentiments,  and
blind  to  those  more  enlarged  and  nobler
views  which  elevate  the  soul,  and  make  it
conscious  of  its  dignity.

How  different  from  him  whose  imagina-
tion, like  an  eagle  in  her  flight,  takes  a  wide
prospect,  and  observes  whatever  it  presents,
that  is  new  or  beautiful,  grand  or  important ;
whose  rapid  wing  varies  the  scene  every
moment,  carrying  him  sometimes  through
the  fairy  regions  of  wit  and  fancy,  some-


times through  the  more  regular  and  sober
walks  of  science  and  philosophy  !

The  various  objects  which  he  surveys,
according  to  their  different  degrees  of  beauty
and  dignity,  raise  in  him  the  lively  and
agreeable  emotions  of  taste.  Illustrious
human  characters,  as  they  pass  in  review,
clothed  with  their  moral  qualities,  touch  his
heart  still  more  deeply.  They  not  only
awaken  the  sense  of  beauty,  but  excite  the
sentiment  of  approbation,  and  kindle  the
glow  of  virtue.

While  he  views  what  is  truly  great  and
glorious  in  human  conduct,  his  soul  catches
the  divine  flame,  and  burns  with  desire  to
emulate  what  it  admires. [430]

The  human  imagination  is  an  ample
theatre,  upon  which  everything  in  human
life,  good  or  bad,  great  or  mean,  laudable
or  base,  is  acted.

In  children,  and  in  some  frivolous  minds,
it  is  a  mere  toy-shop.  And  in  some,  who
exercise  their  memory  without  their  judg-
ment, its  furniture  is  made  up  of  old  scraps
of  knowledge,  that  are  thread -bare  and
worn  out.

In  some,  this  theatre  is  often  occupied  by
ghastly  superstition,  with  all  her  train  of
Gorgons,  and  Hydras,  and  Chimccras  dire.
Sometimes  it  is  haunted  with  all  the  infernal
demons,  and  made  the  forge  of  plots,  and
rapine,  and  murder.  Here  everything  that
is  black  and  detestable  is  first  contrived,  and
a  thousand  wicked  designs  conceived  that
are  never  executed.  Here,  too,  the  furies
act  their  part,  taking  a  severe  though  secret
vengeance  upon  the  self-condemned  criminal.

How  happy  is  that  mind  in  which  the  light
of  real  knowledge  dispels  the  phantoms  of
superstition  ;  in  which  the  belief  and  rever-
ence of  a  perfect  all-governing  mind  casts
out  all  fear  but  the  fear  of  acting  wrong ;
in  which  serenity  and  cheerfulness,  inno-
cence, humanity,  and  candour,  guard  the  im-
agination against  the  entrance  of  every  un-
hallowed intruder,  and  invite  more.amiable
and  worthier  guests  to  dwell  !

There  shall  the  Muses,  the  Graces,  and
the  Virtues  fix  their  abode  ;  for  everything
that  is  great  and  tvorthy  in  human  conduct
must  have  been  conceived  in  the  imagina-
tion before  it  was  brought  into  act.  And
many  great  and  good  designs  have  been
formed  there,  which,  for  want  of  power  and
opportunity,  have  proved  abortive.

The  man  whose  imagination  is  occupied
by  these  guests,  must  be  wise ;  he  must  be
good  ;  and  he  must  be  happy. [431]

[429-431]


CHAP.  I.]


OF  GENERAL  WORDS.


389


ESSAY  V.

OF  ABSTRACTION.


CHAPTER  I.


OF  GENERAL  WORDS.


The  words  we  use  in  language  are  either
general  words  or  proper  names.  Proper
names  are  intended  to  signify  one  individual
only.  Such  are  the  names  of  men,  king-
doms, provinces,  cities,  rivers,  and  of  every
other  creature  of  God,  or  work  of  man,
which  we  choose  to  distinguish  from  all
others  of  the  kind,  by  a  name  appropriated
to  it.  All  the  other  words  of  language  are
general  words,  not  appropriated  to  signify
any  one  individual  thing,  but  equally  related
to  many.

Under  general  words,  therefore,  I  com-
prehend not  only  those  which  logicians  call
general  terms — that  is,  such  general  words
as  may  make  the  subject  or  the  predicate
of  a  proposition,  but  likewise  their  auxiliaries
or  accessories,  as  the  learned  Mr  Harris
calls  them  ;  such  as  prepositions,  conjunc-
tions, articles,  which  are* all  general  words,
though  they  cannot  properly  be  called  gene-
ral terms.

In  every  language,  rude  or  polished,
general  words  make  the  greatest  part,  and
proper  names  the  least.  Grammarians
have  reduced  all  words  to  eight  or  nine
classes,  which  are  called  parts  of  speech.
Of  these  there  is  only  one — to  wit,  that  of
nouns — wherein  proper  names  are  found.
[432]  All  pronouns,  verbs,  participles,  ad-
verbs,articles, prepositions,  conjunctions,  and
interjections,  are  general  words.  Of  nouns,
all  adjectives  are  general  words,  and  the
greater  part  of  substantives.  Every  sub-
stantive that  has  a  plural  number,  is  a  gene-
ral word ;  for  no  proper  name  can  have  a
plural  number,  because  it  signifies  only  one
individual.  In  all  the  fifteen  books  of
Euclid's  Elements,  there  is  not  one  word
that  is  not  general ;  and  the  same  may  be
said  of  many  large  volumes.

At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  acknowledged,
that  all  the  objects  we  perceive  are  individ-
uals. Every  object  of  sense,  of  memory,
or  of  consciousness,  is  an  individual  object.
All  the  good  things  we  enjoy  or  desire,  and
all  the  evils  we  feel  or  fear,  must  come  from
individuals  ;  and  I  think  we  may  venture  to
say,  that  every  creature  which  God  has  made,
in  the  heavens  above,  or  in  the  earth  be-
[432,  433]


neath,  or  in  the  waters  under  the  earth,  is
an  individual.*

How  comes  it  to  pass,  then,  that,  in  all
languages,  general  words  make  the  greatest
part  of  the  language,  and  proper  names  but
a  very  small  and  inconsiderable  part  of  it.

This  seemingly  strange  phaenomenon  may,
I  think,  be  easily  accounted  for  by  the  fol-
lowing observations  : —

First,  Though  there  be  a  few  individuals
that  are  obvious  to  the  notice  of  all  men,
and,  therefore,  have  proper  names  in  all
languages — such  as  the  sun  and  moon,  the
earth  and  sea — yet  the  greatest  part  of  the
things  to  which  we  think  fit  to  give  proper
names,  are  .local ;  known  perhaps  to  a  vil-
lage or  to  a  neighbourhood,  but  unknown  to
the  greater  part  of  those  who  speak  the
same  language,  and  to  all  the  rest  of  man-
kind. The  names  of  such  things  being  con-
fined to  a  corner,  and  having  no  names
answering  to  them  in  other  languages,  are
not  accounted  a  part  of  the  language,  any
more  than  the  customs  of  a  particular  ham-
let are  accounted  part  of  the  law  of  the
nation. [433]

For  this  reason,  there  are  but  few  proper
names  that  belong  to  a  language.  It  is
next  to  be  considered  why  there  must  be
many  general  words  in  every  language.

Secondly,  It  may  be  observed,  that  every
individual  object  that  falls  within  our  view
has  various  attributes  ;  and  it  is  by  them
that  it  becomes  useful  or  hurtful  to  us.
We  know  not  the  essence  of  any  individual
object ;  all  the  knowledge  we  can  attain  of
it,  is  the  knowledge  of  its  attributes — its
quantity,  its  various  qualities,  its  various
relations  to  other  things,  its  place,  its
situation,  and  motions.  It  is  by  such  attri-
butes of  things  only  that  we  can  communi-
cate our  knowledge  of  them  to  others.  By
their  attributes,  our  hopes  or  fears  for  them
are  regulated ;  and  it  is  only  by  attention
to  their  attributes  that  we  can  make  them
subservient  to  our  ends  ;  and  therefore  we
give  names  to  such  attributes.

Now,  all  attributes  must,  from  their
nature,  be  expressed  by  general  words,  and
are  so  expressed  in  all  languages.  In  the
ancient  philosophy,  attributes  in  general
were  called  by  two  names  which  express


*  This  Boethius.has  well  expressed  :-
est,  eo  quod  est,  singulare  est."— -ti.


Omne  quod


390


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  V


their  nature.  They  were  called  universals,
because  they  might  belong  equally  to  many
individuals,  and  are  not  confined  to  one.
They  were  also  called  predicables,  because
whatever  is  predicated,  that  is,  affirmed  or
denied  of  one  subject,  may  be  of  more,  and
therefore  is  an  universal,  and  expressed  by
a  general  word.  A  predicable  therefore
signifies  the  same  thing  as  an  attribute,  with
this  difference  only,  that  the  first  is  Latin,
the  last  English.*  The  attributes  we  find
either  in  the  creatures  of  God  or  in  the
works  of  men,  are  common  to  many  indi-
duals.  We  either  find  it  to  be  so,  or  pre-
sume it  may  be  so,  and  give  them  the  same
name  in  every  subject  to  which  they  belong.

There  are  not  only  attributes  belonging
to  individual  subjects,  but  there  are  likewise
attributes  of  attributes,  which  may  be  called
secondary  attributes.  Most  attributes  are
capable  of  different  degrees  and  different
modifications,  which  must  be  expressed  by
general  words. [434]

Thus  it  is  an  attribute  of  many  bodies  to
De  moved ;  but  motion  may  be  in  an  endless
variety  of  directions.  It  may  be  quick  or
slow,  rectilineal  or  curvilineal ;  it  may  be
equable,  or  accelerated,  or  retarded.

As  all  attributes,  therefore,  whether  pri-
mary or  secondary,  are  expressed  by  general
words,  it  follows  that,  in  every  proposition
we  express  in  language,  what  is  affirmed  or
denied  of  the  subject  of  the  proposition  must
be  expressed  by  general  words :  and  that
the  subject  of  the  proposition  may  often  be
a  general  word,  will  appear  from  the  next
observation.

Thirdly,  The  same  faculties  by  which  we
distinguish  the  different  attributes  belong-
ing to  the  same  subject,  and  give  names
to  them,  enable  us  likewise  to  observe,
that  many  subjects  agree  in  certain  attri-
butes while  they  differ  in  others.  By  this
means  we  are  enabled  to  reduce  individuals
which  are  infinite,  to  a  limited  number  of
classes,  which  are  called  kinds  and  sorts ;
and,  in  the  scholastic  language,  genera  and
species.

Observing  many  individuals  to  agree  in
certain  attributes,  we  refer  them  all  to  one
class,  and  give  a  name  to  the  class.  This
name  comprehends  in  its  signification  not
one  attribute  only,  but  all  the  attributes
which  distinguish  that  class;  and  by  affirm-
ing this  name  of  any  individual,  we  affirm
it  to  have  all  the  attributes  which  charac-
terise the  class  :  thus  men,  dogs,  horses,
elephants,  are  so  many  different  classes  of
animals.  In  like  manner  we  marshal  other
substances,  vegetable  and  inanimate,  into


*  They  are  both  Latin,  or  both  English.  The  only
difference  is,  that  the  one  i9  of  technical,  the  other
of  popular  application,  and  that  the  former  expresses
as  potential  what  the  latter  does  as  actual.— H.


Nor  is  it  only  substances  that  we  thus
form  into  classes.  We  do  the  same  with
regard  to  qualities,  relations,  actions,  affec-
tions, passions,  and  all  other  things.

When  a  class  is  very  large,  it  is  divided
into  subordinate  classes  in  the  same  man-
ner. [435]  The  higher  class  is  called  a
genus  or  kind :  the  lower  a  species  or  sort
of  the  higher.  Sometimes  a  species  is  still
subdivided  into  subordinate  species ;  and
this  subdivision  is  carried  on  as  far  as  is
found  convenient  for  the  purpose  of  language,
or  for  the  improvement  of  knowledge.

In  this  distribution  of  things  into  genera
and  species,  it  is  evident  that  the  name  of
the  species  comprehends  more  attributes
than  the  name  of  the  genus.  The  species
comprehends  all  that  is  in  the  genus,  and
those  attributes  likewise  which  distinguish
that  species  from  others  belonging  to  the
same  genus  ;  and  the  more  subdivisions  we
make,  the  names  of  the  lower  become  still
the  more  comprehensive  in  their  significa-
tion, but  the  less  extensive  in  their  appli-
cation to  individuals.

Hence  it  is  an  axiom  in  logic — that  the
more  extensive  any  general  term  is,  it  is  the
less  comprehensive  ;  and,  on  the  contrary,
the  more  comprehensive,  the  less  extensive.
Thus,  in  the  following  series  of  subordinate
general  terms — Animal — Man  —  French-
man— Parisian,  every  subsequent  term  com-
prehends in  its  signification  all  that  is  in
the  preceding,  and  something  more ;  and
every  antecedent  term  extends  to  more
individuals  than  the  subsequent.

Such  divisions  and  subdivisions  of  things
into  genera  and  spec'es  with  general  names,
are  not  confined  to  the  learned  and  polished
languages  ;  they  are  found  in  those  of  the
rudest  tribes  of  mankind.  From  which  we
learn,  that  the  invention  and  the  use  of
general  words,  both  to  signify  the  attributes
of  things,  and  to  signify  the  genera  and
species  of  things,  is  not  a  subtile  invention
of  philosophers,  but  an  operation  which  all
men  perform  by  the  light  of  common  sense.
Philosophers  may  speculate  about  this  ope-
ration, and  reduce  it  to  canons  and  aphor-
isms ;  but  men  of  common  understanding,
without  knowing  anything  of  the  philosophy
of  it,  can  put  it  in  practice,  in  like  manner
as  they  can.  see  objects,  and  make  good  use
of  their  eyes,  although  they  know  nothing
of  the  structure  of  the  eye,  or  of  the  theory
of  vision. [436]

Every  genus,  and  every  species  of  things,
may  be  either  the  subject  or  the  predicate
of  a  proposition — nay,  of  innumerable  pro-
positions ;  for  every  attribute  common  to
the  genus  or  species  may  be  affirmed  of  it ;
and  the  genus  may  be  affirmed  of  every
species,  and  both  genus  and  species  of  every
individual  to  which  it  extends.

Thus,  of  man  it  may  be  affirmed,  that  he
[4-34-436]


II.]


OF  GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS.


391


is  an  animal  made  up  of  body  and  mind ;
that  he  is  of  few  days,  and  full  of  trouble ;
that  he  is  capable  of  various  improvements
in  arts,  in  knowledge,  and  in  virtue.  In  a
word,  everything  common  to  the  species
may  be  affirmed  of  man ;  and  of  all  such
propositions,  which  are  innumerable,  man
is  the  subject.

Again,  of  every  nation  and  tribe,  and  of
every  individual  of  the  human  race  that  is,
or  was,  or  shall  be,  it  may  be  affirmed  that
they  are  men.  In  all  such  propositions,
which  are  innumerable,  man  is  the  predi-
cate of  the  proposition.

We  observed  above  an  extension  and  a
comprehension  in  general  terms ;  and  that,
in  any  subdivision  of  things,  the  name  of
the  lowest  species  is  most  comprehensive,
and  that  of  the  highest  genus  most  exten-
sive. I  would  now  observe,  that,  by  means
of  such  general  terms,  there  is  also  an  ex-
tension and  comprehension  of  propositions,
which  is  one  of  the  noblest  powers  of  lan-
guage, and  fits  it  for  expressing,  with  great
ease  and  expedition,  the  highest  attainments
in  knowledge,  of  which  the  human  under-
standing is  capable.

When  the  predicate  is  a  genus  or  a  species,
the  proposition  is  more  or  less  comprehen-
sive, according  as  the  predicate  is.  Thus,
when  I  say  that  this  seal  is  gold,  by  this
single  proposition  I  affirm  of  it  all  the  pro-
perties which  that  metal  is  known  to  have.
When  I  say  of  any  man  that  he  is  a
mathematician,  this  appellation  compre-
hends all  the  attributes  that  belong  to
him  as  an  animal,  as  a  man,  and  as  one
who  has  studied  mathematics.  When  I
say  that  the  orbit  of  the  planet  Mercury
is  an  ellipsis,  I  thereby  affirm  of  that
orbit  all  the  properties  which  Apollonius
and  other  geometricians  have  discovered,
or  may  discover,  of  that  species  of  figure.
[437]

Again,  when  the  subject  of  a  proposition
is  a  genus  or  a  species,  the  proposition  is
more  or  less  extensive,  according  as  the
subject  is.  Thus,  when  I  am  taught  that
the  three  angles  of  a  plane  triangle  are
equal  to  two  right  angles,  this  properly  ex-
tends to  every  species  of  plane  triangle,  and
to  every  individual  plane  triangle  that  did,
or  does,  or  can  exist.

It  is  by  means  of  such  extensive  and
comprehensive  propositions,  that  human
knowledge  is  condensed,  as  it  were,  into  a
size  adapted  to  the  capacity  of  the  human
mind,  with  great  addition  to  its  beauty,
and  without  any  diminution  of  its  distinct-
ness and  perspicuity.

General  propositions  in  science  may  be
compared  to  the  seed  of  a  plant,  which,
according  to  some  philosophers,  has  not
only  the  whole  future  plant  inclosed  within
it,  but  the  seeds  of  that  plant,  and  the  plants
[437-439]


that  shall  spring  from  them  through  all
future  generations.

But  the  similitude  falls  short  in  this  re-
spect, that  time  and  accidents,  not  in  our
power,  must  concur  to  disclose  the  contents
of  the  seed,  and  bring  them  into  our  view  ;
whereas  the  contents  of  a  general  proposi-
tion may  be  brought  forth,  ripened,  and
exposed  to  view  at  our  pleasure,  and  in  an
instant.

Thus  the  wisdom  of  ages,  and  the  most
sublime  theorems  of  science,  may  be  laid
up,  like  an  Iliad  in  a  nut-shell,  and  trans-
mitted to  future  generations.  And  this
noble  purpose  of  language  can  only  be  ac-
complished by  means  of  general  words
annexed  to  the  divisions  and  subdivisions  of
things. [438]

What  has  been  said  in  this  chapter,  I
think,  is  sufficient  to  shew  that  there  can  be
no  language,  not  so  much  as  a  single  pro-
position, without  general  words  ;  that  they
must  make  the  greatest  part  of  every  lan-
guage ;  and  that  it  is  by  them  only  that
language  is  fitted  to  express,  with  wonder-
ful ease  and  expedition,  all  the  treasures
of  human  wisdom  and  knowledge.


CHAPTER  II.

OF  GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS.

As  general  words  are  so  necessary  in
language,  it  is  natural  to  conclude  that  there
must  be  general  conceptions,  of  which  they
are  the  signs.

Words  are  empty  sounds  when  they  do
not  signify  the  thoughts  of  the  speaker ;
and  it  is  only  from  their  signification  that
they  are  denominated  gen(  \d.  Every  word
that  is  spoken,  considered  merely  as  a  sound,
is  an  individual  sound.  And  it  can  only  be
called  a  general  word,  because  that  which  it
signifies  is  general.  Now,  that  which  it
signifies,  is  conceived  by  the  mind  both  of
the  speaker  and  hearer,  if  the  word  have  a
distinct  meaning,  and  be  distinctly  under-
stood. It  is,  therefore,  impossible  that
words  can  have  a  general  signification,  un-
less there  be  conceptions  in  the  mind  of
the  speaker  and  of  the  hearer,  of  things
that  are  general.  It  is  to  such  that  I  give
the  name  of  general  conceptions ;  and  it
ought  to  be  observed,  that  they  take  this
denomination,  not  from  the  act  of  the  mind
in  conceiving,  which  is  an  individual  act,
but  from  the  object  or  thing  conceived,
which  is  general.

We  are,  therefore,  here  to  consider
whether  we  have  such  general  conceptions,
and  how  they  are  formed. [439]

To  begin  with  the  conceptions  expressed
by  general  terms— that  is,  by  such  general
words  as  may  be  the  subject  or  the  predi-


392


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay


cate  of  a  proposition.  They  are  either
attributes  of  things,  or  they  are  genera  or
species  of  things.

It  is  evident,  with  respect  to  all  the  indi-
viduals we  are  acquainted  with  that  we  have
a  more  clear  and  distinct  conception  of  their
attributes  than  of  the  subject  to  which  those
attributes  belong.

Take,  for  instance,  any  individual  body
we  have  access  to  know — what  conception  do
we  form  of  it  ?  Every  man  may  know  this
from  his  consciousness.  He  will  find  that
he  conceives  it  as  a  thing  that  has  length,
breadth,  and  thickness,  such  a  figure  and
such  a  colour ;  that  it  is  hard,  or  soft,  or
fluid ;  that  it  has  such  qualities,  and  is  fit
for  such  purposes.  If  it  is  a  vegetable,  he
may  know  where  it  grew,  what  is  the  form
of  its  leaves,  and  flower,  and  seed.  If  an
animal,  what  are  its  natural  instincts,  its
manner  of  life,  and  of  rearing  its  young.
Of  these  attributes,  belonging  to  this  indi-
vidual and  numberless  others,  he  may
surely  have  a  distinct  conception ;  and  he
will  find  words  in  language  by  which  he  can
clearly  and  distinctly  express  each  of  them.

If  we  consider,  in  like  manner,  the  con-
ception we  form  of  any  individual  person  of
our  acquaintance,  we  shall  find  it  to  be  made
up  of  various  attributes,  which  we  ascribe  to
him  ;  such  as,  that  he  is  the  son  of  such  a
man,  the  brother  of  such  another  ;  that  he
has  such  an  employment  or  office ;  has  such
a  fortune  ;  that  he  is  tall  or  short,  well  or
ill  made,  comely  or  ill  favoured,  young  or
old,  married  or  unmarried  ;  to  this  we  may
add  his  temper,  his  character,  his  abilities,
and  perhaps  some  anecdotes  of  his  history.

Such  is  the  conception  we  form  of  indi-
vidual persons  of  our  acquaintance.  By
such  attributes  we  describe  them  to  those
who  know  them  not ;  and  by  such  attri-
butes historians  give  us  a  conception  of  the
personages  of  former  times.  Nor  is  it  pos-
sible to  do  it  in  any  other  way. [440]

All  the  distinct  knowledge  we  have  or
can  attain  of  any  individual  is  the  know-
ledge of  its  attributes;  for  we  know  not
the  essence  of  any  individual.  This  seems
to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  the  human  facul-
ties.

Now,  every  attribute  is  what  the  ancients
called  an  universal.  It  is,  or  may  be,  com-
mon to  various  individuals.  There  is  no
attribute  belonging  to  any  creature  of  God
which  may  not  belong  to  others ;  and,  on
this  account,  attributes,  in  all  languages,  are
expressed  by  general  words.

It  appears,  likewise,  from  every  man's
experience,  that  he  may  have  as  clear  and
distinct  a  conception  of  such  attributes  as
we  have  named,  and  of  innumerable  others,
as  he  can  have  of  any  individual  to  which
they  belong.

Indeed,  the  attributes  of  individuals  is  all


that  we  distinctly  conceive  about  them.  It
is  true,  we  conceive  a  subject  to  which  the
attributes  belong ;  but  of  this  subject,  when
its  attributes  are  set  aside,  we  have  but  an
obscure  and  relative*  conception,  whether  it
be  body  or  mind.

This  was  before  observed  with  regard  to
bodies,  Essay  II.  chap.  19,  [p.  322]  to
which  we  refer ;  and  it  is  no  less  evident
with  regard  to  minds.  What  is  it  we  call  a
mind  ?  It  is  a  "thinking,  intelligent,  active
being.  Granting  that  thinking,  intelli-
gence, and  activity,  are  attributes  of  mind,
I  want  to  know  what  the  thing  or  being  is
to  whieh  these  attributes  belong  ?  To  this
question  I  can  find  no  satisfying  answer.
The  attributes  of  mind,  and  particularly  its
operations,  we  know  clearly ;  but  of  the
thing  itself  we  have  only  an  obscure  no-
tion. [441]

Nature  teaches  us  that  thinking  and
reasoning  are  attributes,  which  cannot  exist
without  a  subject ;  but  of  that  subject  I  be-
lieve the  best  notion  we  can  form  implies
little  more  than  that  it  is  the  subject  of  such
attributes.

Whether  other  created  beings  may  have
the  knowledge  of  the  real  essence  of  created
things,  so  as  to  be  able  to  deduce  their  at-
tributes from  their  essence  and  constitution,
or  whether  this  be  the  prerogative  of  him
who  made  them,  we  cannot  tell ;  but  it  is
a  knowledge  which  seems  to  be  quite  be-
yond the  reach  of  the  human  faculties.

We  know  the  essence  of  a  triangle,  and
from  that  essence  can  deduce  its  properties.
It  is  an  universal,  and  might  have  been
conceived  by  the  human  mind  though  no
individual  triangle  had  ever  existed.  It  has
only  what  Mr  Locke  calls  a  nominal  essence,
which  is  expressed  in  its  definition.  But
everything  that  exists  has  a  real  essence,
which  is  above  our  comprehension  ;  and,
therefore,  we  cannot  deduce  its  properties
or  attributes  from  its  nature,  as  we  do  in
the  triangle.  We  must  take  a  contrary
road  in  the  knowledge  of  God's  works,  and
satisfy  ourselves  with  their  attributes  as
facts,  and  with  the  general  conviction  that
there  is  a  subject  to  which  those  attributes
belong.

Enough,  I  think,  has  been  said,  to  shew,
not  only  that  we  may  have  clear  and  dis-
tinct conceptions  of  attributes,  but  that
they  are  the  only  things,  with  regard  to
individuals,  of  which  we  have  a  clear  and
distinct  conception.

The  other  class  of  general  terms  are  those
that  signify  the  genera  and  species  into
which  we  divide  and  subdivide  things.  And,
if  we  be  able  to  form  distinct  conceptions  of
attributes,  it  cannot  surely  be  denied  that
we  may  have  distinct  conceptions  of  genera


*  Sec  above,  p.  322,  note.— H.

[140,  441]


II.]


OF  GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS.


393


and  species ;  because  they  are  only  collec-
tions of  attributes  which  we  conceive  to
exist  in  a  subject,  and  to  which  we  give  a
general  name.  [442]  If  the  attributes
comprehended  under  that  general  name  be
distinctly  conceived,  the  thing  meant  by  the
name  must  be  distinctly  conceived.  And
the  name  may  justly  be  attributed  to  every
individual  which  has  those  attributes.

Thus,  I  conceive  distinctly  what  it  is  to
have  wings,  to  be  covered  with  feathers,  to
lay  eggs.  Suppose  then  that  we  give  the
name  of  bird  to  every  animal  that  has  these
three  attributes.  Here  undoubtedly  my
conception  of  a  bird  is  as  distinct  as  my
notion  of  the  attributes  which  are  common
to  this  species  :  and,  if  this  be  admitted  to
be  the  definition  of  a  bird,  there  is  nothing
I  conceive  more  distinctly.  If  I  had  never
seen  a  bird,  and  can  but  be  made  to  under-
stand the  definition,  I  can  easily  apply  it  to
every  individual  of  the  species,  without
danger  of  mistake.

When  things  are  divided  and  subdivided
by  men  of  science,  and  names  given  to  the
genera  and  species,  those  names  are  defined.
Thus,  the  genera  and  species  of  plants,  and
of  other  natural  bodies,  are  accurately  de-
fined by  the  writers  in  the  various  branches
of  natural  history;  so  that,  to  all  future
generations,  the  definition  will  convey  a  dis-
tinct notion  of  the  genus  or  species  defined.

There  are,  without  doubt,  many  words
signifying  genera  and  species  of  things,
which  have  a  meaning  somewhat  vague  and
indistinct ;  so  that  those  who  speak  the
same  language  do  not  always  use  them  in
the  same  sense.  But,  if  we  attend  to  the
cause  of  this  indistinctness,  we  shall  find
that  it  is  not  owing  to  their  being  general
terms,  but  to  this,  that  there  is  no  defini-
tion of  them  that  has  authority.  Their
meaning,  therefore,  has  not  been  learned
by  a  definition,  but  by  a  kind  of  induction,
by  observing  to  what  individuals  they  are
applied  by  those  who  understand  the  lan-
guage. We  learn  by  habit  to  use  them  as
we  see  others  do,  even  when  we  have  not  a
precise  meaning  annexed  to  them.  A-man
may  know  that  to  certain  individuals  they
may  be  applied  with  propriety  ;  but  whether
they  can  be  applied  to  certain  other  indivi-
duals, he  may  be  uncertain,  either  from
want  of  good  authorities,  or  from  having
contrary  authorities,  which  leave  him  in
doubt. [443]

Thus,  a  man  may  know  that,  when  he
applies  the  name  of  beast  to  a  lion  or  a
tiger,  and  the  name  of  bird  to  an  eagle  or
a  turkey,  he  speaks  properly.  But  whether
a  bat  be  a  bird  or  a  beast,  he  may  be  uncer-
tain. If  there  was  any  accurate  definition
of  a  beast  and  of  a  bird,  that  was  of  suffi-
cient authority,  he  could  be  at  no  loss.

It  is  said  to  have  been  sometimes  a  mat-
[412-444]


ter  of  dispute,  with  regard  to  a  monstrous
birth  of  a  woman,  whether  it  was  a  man  or
not.  Although  this  be,  in  reality,  a  ques-
tion about  the  meaning  of  a  word,  it  may
be  of  importance,  on  account  of  the  privi-
leges which  laws  have  annexed  to  the  human
character.  To  make  such  laws  perfectly
precise,  the  definition  of  a  man  would,  be
necessary,  which  I  believe  legislators  have
seldom  or  never  thought  fit  to  give.  It  is,
indeed,  very  difficult  to  fix  a  definition  of
so  common  a  word ;  and  the  cases  wherein
it  would  be  of  any  use  so  rarely  occur,  that
perhaps  it  may  be  better,  when  they  do
occur,  to  leave  them  to  the  determination
of  a  judge  or  of  a  jury,  than  to  give  a  defi-
nition, which  might  be  attended  with  un-
foreseen consequences.

A  genus  or  species,  being  a  collection  of
attributes  conceived  to  exist  in  one  subject,
a  definition  is  the  only  way  to  prevent  any
addition  or  diminution  of  its  ingredients  in
the  conception  of  different  persons  ;  and
when  there  is  no  definition  that  can  be
appealed  to  as  a  standard,  the  name  will
hardly  retain  the  most  perfect  precision  in
its  signification.

From  what  has  been  said,  I  conceive  it
is  evident  that  the  words  which  signify
genera  and  species  of  things  have  often  as
precise  and  definite  a  signification  as  any
words  whatsoever  ;  and  that,  when  it  is
otherwise,  their  want  of  precision  is  not
owing  to  their  being  general  words,  but  to
other  causes. [444]

Having  shewn  that  we  may  have  a  per-
fectly clear  and  distinct  conception  of  the
meaning  of  general  terms,  we  may,  I  think,
take  it  for  granted,  that  the  same  may  be
said  of  other  general  words,  such  as  prepo-
sitions, conjunctions,  articles.  My  design
at  present  being  only  to  shew  that  we  have
general  conceptions  no  less  clear  and  dis-
tinct than  those  of  individuals,  it  is  sufficient
for  this  purpose,  if  this  appears  with  regard
to  the  conceptions  expressed  by  general
terms.  To  conceive  the  meaning  of  a
general  word,  and  to  conceive  that  which  it
signifies,  is  the  same  thing.  We  conceive
distinctly  the  meaning  of  general  terms,
therefore  we  conceive  distinctly  that  which
they  signify.  But  such  terms  do  not  sig-
nify any  individual,  but  what  is  common  to
many  individuals ;  therefore,  we  have  a
distinct  conception  of  things  common  to
many  individuals — that  is,  we  have  distinct
general  conceptions.

We  must  here  beware  of  the  ambiguity
of  the  word  conception,  which  sometimes
signifies  the  act  of  the  mind  in  conceiving,
sometimes  the  thing  conceived,  which  is  the
object  of  that  act.* If  the  word  be  taken


*'This  iast  should  be  called  Concept,  which  was  a
term  in  use  with  the  old  English  philosophers.—  H.


394


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  v.


in  the  first  sense,  I  acknowledge  that  every
act  of  the  mind  is  an  individual  act ;  the
universality,  therefore,  is  not  in  the  act  of
the  mind,  but  in  the  object  or  thing  con-
ceived. The  thing  conceived  is  an  attri-
bute common  to  many  subjects,  or  it  is  a
genus  or  species  common  to  many  indivi-
duals.

Suppose  I  conceive  a  triangle — that  is,  a
plain  figure,  terminated  by  three  right
lines.  He  that  understands  this  definition
distinctly,  has  a  distinct  conception  of  a
triangle.  But  a  triangle  is  not  an  indivi-
dual ;  it  is  a  species.  The  act  of  my  under-
standing in  conceiving  it  is  an  individual
act,  and  has  a  real  existence  ;  but  the  thing
conceived  is  general,  and  cannot  exist  with-
out other  attributes,  which  are  not  included
in  the  definition. [445]

Every  triangle  that  really  exists  must
have  a  certain  length  of  sides  and  measure
of  angles ;  it  must  have  place  and  time.
But  the  definition  of  a  triangle  includes
neither  existence  nor  any  of  those  attri-
butes ;  and,  therefore,  they  are  not  included
in  the  conception  of  a  triangle,  which  can-
not be  accurate  if  it  comprehend  more  than
the  definition.

Thus,  I  think,  it  appears  to  be  evident,
that  we  have  general  conceptions  that  are
clear  and  distinct,  both  of  attributes  of
things,  and  of  genera  and  species  of  things.


CHAPTER  III.

OF  GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS  FORMED  BY
ANALYSING  OBJECTS.

We  are  next  to  consider  the  operations
of  the  understanding,  by  which  we  are
enabled  to  form  general  conceptions.

These  appear  to  me  to  be  three  : — First,
The  resolving  or  analysing  a  subject  into
its  known  attributes,  and  giving  a  name  to
each  attribute,  which  name  shall  signify
that  attribute,  and  nothing  more.

Secondly,  The  observing  one  or  more
such  attributes  to  be  common  to  many  sub-
jects. The  first  is  by  philosophers  called
abstraction ;  the  second  may  be  called
generalising ;  but  both  are  commonly  in-
cluded under  the  name  of  abstraction.

It  is  difficult  to  say  which  of  them  goes
first,  or  whether  they  are  not  so  closely
connected  that  neither  can  claim  the  prece-
dence. For,  on  the  one  hand,  to  perceive  an
agreement  between  two  or  more  objects  in
the  same  attribute,  seems  to  require  no-
thing more  than  to  compare  them  together.
[446]  A  savage,  upon  seeing  snow  and
chalk,  would  find  no  difficulty  in  perceiv-
ing that  they  have  the  same  colour.  Yet,
on  the  other  hand,  it  seems  impossible  that
he  should  observe  this  agreement  without


abstraction — that  is,  distinguishing  in  his
conception  the  colour,  wherein  those  two
objects  agree,  from  the  other  qualities
wherein  they  disagree.

It  seems,  therefore,  that  we  cannot
generalise  without  some  degree  of  abstrac-
tion ;  but  I  apprehend  we  may  abstract
without  generalising.  For  what  hinders
me  from  attending  to  the  whiteness  of  the
paper  before  me,  without  applying  that
colour  to  any  other  object.  The  whiteness
of  this  individual  object  is  an  abstract  con-
ception, but  not  a  general  one,  while  applied
to  one  individual  only.  These  two  opera-
tions, however,  are  subservient  to  each
other ;  for  the  more  attributes  we  observe
and  distinguish  in  any  one  individual,  the
more  agreements  we  shall  discover  between
it  and  other  individuals.

A  third  operation  of  the  understanding,
by  which  we  form  abstract  conceptions,  is
the  combining  into  one  whole  a  certain
number  of  those  attributes  of  which  we
have  formed  abstract  notions,  and  giving  a
name  to  that  combination.  It  is  thus  we
form  abstract  notions  of  the  genera  and
species  of  things.  These  three  operations
we  shall  consider  in  order.

With  regard  to  abstraction,  strictly  so
called,  I  can  perceive  nothing  in  it  that  is
difficult  either  to  be  understood  or  practised.
What  can  be  more  easy  than  to  distinguish
the  different  attributes  which  we  know  to
belong  to  a  subject  ?  In  a  man,  for  in-
stance, to  distinguish  his  size,  his  com-
plexion, his  age,  his  fortune,  his  birth,  his
profession,  and  twenty  other  things  that
belong  to  him.  To  think  and  speak  of
these  things  with  understanding,  is  surely
within  the  reach  of  every  man  endowed
with  the  human  faculties. [447]

There  may  be  distinctions  that  require
nice  discernment,  or  an  acquaintance  with
the  subject  that  is  not  common.  Thus,  a
critic  in  painting  may  discern  the  style  of
Raphael  or  Titian,  when  another  man
could  not.  A  lawyer  may  be  acquainted
with  many  distinctions  in  crimes,  and  con-
tracts, and  actions,  which  never  occurred
to  a  man  who  has  not  studied  law.  One
man  may  excel  another  in  the  talent  of  dis-
tinguishing, as  he  may  in  memory  or  in
reasoning ;  but  there  is  a  certain  degree  of
this  talent,  without  which  a  man  would
have  no  title  to  be  considered  as  a  reason-
able creature.

It  ought  likewise  to  be  observed,  that
attributes  may,  with  perfect  ease,  be  dis-
tinguished and  disjoined  in  our  conception,
which  cannot  be  actually  separated  in  the
subject.  Thus,  in  a  body,  I  can  distinguish
its  solidity  from  its  extension,  and  its  weight
from  both.  In  extension  I  can  distinguish
length,  breadth,  and  thickness  ;  yet  none  of
these  can  be  separated  from  the  body,  or
[445-447]


chap,  in.]  CONCEPTIONS  FORMED  BY  ANALYSING  OBJECTS.  395


from  one  another.  There  may  be  attri-
butes belonging  to  a  subject,  and  inseparable
from  it,  of  which  we  have  no  knowledge,
and  consequently  no  conception  ;  but  this
does  not  hinder  our  conceiving  distinctly
those  of  its  attributes  which  we  know.

Thus,  all  the  properties  of  a  circle  are
inseparable  from  the  nature  of  a  circle,
and  may  be  demonstrated  from  its  defini-
tion ;  yet  a  man  may  have  a  perfectly
distinct  notion  of  a  circle,  who  knows  very
few  of  those  properties  of  it  which  mathe-
maticians have  demonstrated  ;  and  a  circle
probably  has  many  properties  which  no
mathematician  ever  dreamed  of.

It  is  therefore  certain  that  attributes,
which  in  their  nature  are  absolutely  inse-
parable from  their  subject  and  from  one
another,  may  be  disjoined  in  our  conception ;
one  cannot  exist  without  the  other,  but  one
can  be  conceived  without  the  other.

Having  considered  abstraction,  strictly
so  called,  let  us  next  consider  the  operation
of  generalising,  which  is  nothing  but  the
observing  one  or  more  attributes  to  be
common  to  many  subjects. [448]

If  any  man  can  doubt  whether  there  be
attributes  that  are  really  common  to  many
individuals,  let  him  consider  whether  there
be  not  many  men  that  are  above  six  feet
high,  and  many  below  it;  whether  there
be  not  many  men  that  are  rich,  and  many
more  that  are  poor  ;  whether  there  be  not
many  that  were  born  in  Britain,  and  many
that  were  born  in  France.  To  multiply
instances  of  this  kind,  would  be  to  affront  the
reader's  understanding.  It  is  certain,  there-
fore, that  there  are  innumerable  attributes
that  are  really  common  to  many  individuals  ;
and  if  this  be  what  the  schoolmen  called
universale  a  parte  rei,  we  may  affirm  with
certainty  that  there  are  such  universals.

There  are  some  attributes  expressed  by
general  words,  of  which  this  may  seem  more
doubtful.  Such  are  the  qualities  which  are
inherent  in  their  several  subjects.  It  may
be  said  that  every  subject  hath  its  own
qualities,  and  that  which  is  the  quality  of
one  subject  cannot  be  the  quality  of  another
subject.  Thus  the  whiteness  of  the  sheet
of  paper  upon  which  I  write,  cannot  be  the
whiteness  of  another  sheet,  though  both  are
called  white.  The  weight  of  one  guinea  is
not  the  weight  of  another  guinea,  though
both  are  said  to  have  the  same  weight.

To  this  I  answer,  that  the  whiteness  of
this  sheet  is  one  thing,  whiteness  is  another ;
the  conceptions  signified  by  these  two  forms
of  speech  are  as  different  as  the  expressions.
The  first  signifies  an  individual  quality
really  existing,  and  is  not  a  general  con-
ception, though  it  be  an  abstract  one  :  the
second  signifies  a  general  conception,  which
implies  no  existence,  but  may  be  predicated
of  everything  that  is  white,  and  in  the
[MP-4>,n]


same  sense.  On  this  account,  if  one  should
say  that  the  whiteness  of  this  sheet  is  the
whiteness  of  another  sheet,  every  man  per-
ceives this  to  be  absurd  ;  but  when  he  says
both  sheets  are  white,  this  is  true  and  per-
fectly understood.  The  conception  of  white-
ness implies  no  existence  ;  it  would  remain
the  same  though  everything  in  the  universe
that  is  white  were  annihilated. [449]

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  general
names  of  qualities,  as  well  as  of  other  at-
tributes, are  applicable  to  many  individuals
in  the  same  sense,  which  cannot  be  if  there
be  not  general  conceptions  signified  by  such
names.

If  it  should  be  asked,  how  early,  or  at
what  period  of  life  men  begin  to  form  general
conceptions  ?  I  answer,  As  soon  as  a  child
can  say,  with  understanding,  that  he  has
two  brothers  or  two  sisters — as  soon  as  he
can  use  the  plural  number — he  must  have
general  conceptions  ;  for  no  individual  can
have  a  plural  number.

As  there  are  not  two  individuals  in  nature
that  agree  in  everything,  so  there  are  very
few  that  do  not  agree  in  some  things.  We
take  pleasure  from  very  early  years  in  ob-
serving such  agreements.  One  great  branch
of  what  we  call  wit,  which,  when  innocent,
gives  pleasure  to  every  good-natured  man,
consists  in  discovering  unexpected  agree-
ments in  things.  The  author  of  Hudibras
could  discern  a  property  common  to  the
morning  and  a  boiled  lobster — that  both
turn  from  black  to  red.  Swift  could  see
something  common  to  wit  and  an  old  cheese,
Such  unexpected  agreements  may  shew  wit ;
but  there  are  innumerable  agreements  of
things  which  cannot  escape  the  notice  of
the  lowest  understanding ;  such  as  agree-
ments in  colour,  magnitude,  figure,  features,
time,  place,  age,  and  so  forth.  These  agree-
ments are  the  foundation  of  so  many  com-
mon attributes,  which  are  found  in  the
rudest  languages.

The  ancient  philosophers  called  these
universals,  or  predicables,  and  endeavoured
to  reduce  them  to  five  classes — to  wit,
Genus,  Species,  Specific  Difference,  Pro-
perties, and  Accidents.  Perhaps  there  may
be  more  classes  of  universals  or  attributes —
for  enumerations,  so  very  general,  are  s sel-
dom complete  :  but  every  attribute,  common
to  several  individuals,  may  be  expressed  by
a  general  term,  which  is  the  sign  of  a
general  conception. [450]

How  prone  men  are  to  form  general  con-
ceptions we  may  see  from  the  use  of  meta-
phor, and  of  the  other  figures  of  speech
grounded  on  similitude.  Similitude  is  no-
thing else  than  an  agreement  of  the  objects
compared  in  one  or  more  attributes  ,  and
if  there  be  no  attribute  common  to  both,
there  can  be  no  similitude.

The  similitudes  and  analogies  between


396


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


Q  ESSAY  V.


the  various  objects  that  nature  presents  to
us,  are  infinite  and  inexhaustible.  They
not  only  please,  when  displayed  by  the  poet
or  wit  in  works  of  taste,  but  they  are  highly
useful  in  the  ordinary  communication  of  our
thoughts  and  sentiments  by  language.  In
the  rude  languages  of  barbarous  nations,
similitudes  and  analogies  supply  the  want  of
proper  words  to  express  men's  sentiments,
so  much  that  in  such  languages  there  is
hardly  a  sentence  without  a  metaphor ;  and,
if  we  examine  the  most  copious  and  polished
languages,  we  shall*  find  that  a  great  pro-
portion of  the  words  and  phrases  which  are
accounted  the  most  proper,  may  be  said  to
be  the  progeny  of  metaphor.

As  foreigners,  who  settle  in  a  nation  as
their  home,  come  at  last  to  be  incorporated
and  lose  the  denomination  of  foreigners,  so
words  and  phrases,  at  first  borrowed  and
figurative,  by  long  use  become  denizens  in
the  language,  and  lose  the  denomination  of
figures  of  speech.  When  we  speak  of  the
extent  of  knowledge,  the  steadiness  of  virtue,
the  tenderness  of  affection,  the  perspicuity
of  expression,  no  man  conceives  these  to  be
metaphorical  expressions ;  they  are  as  pro-
per as  any  in  the  language  :  yet  it  appears
upon  the  very  face  of  them,  that  they
must  have  been  metaphorical  in  those  who
vised  them  first ;  and  that  it  is  by  use  and
prescription  that  they  have  lost  the  deno-
mination of  figurative,  and  acquired  a  right
to  be  considered  as  proper  words.  This
observation  will  be  found  to  extend  to  a
great  part,  perhaps  the  greatest  part  of  the
words  of  the  most  perfect  languages.  Some-
times the  name  of  an  individual  is  given  to
a  general  conception,  and  thereby  the  in-
dividual in  a  manner  generalised  ;  as  when
the  Jew  Shy  lock,  in  Shakespeare,  says —
"  A  Daniel  come  to  judgment ;  yea,  a
Daniel !"  In  this  speech,  "  a  Daniel"  is
an  attribute,  or  an  universal.  The  character
of  Daniel,  as  a  man  of  singular  wisdom,
is  abstracted  from  his  person,  and  considered
as  capable  of  being  attributed  to  other  per-
sons. [451]

Upon  the  whole,  these  two  operations  of
abstracting  and  generalising  appear  com-
mon to  all  men  that  have  understanding.
The  practice  of  them  is,  and  must  be,  fami-
liar to  every  man  that  uses  language  ;  but
it  is  one  thing  to  practise  them,  and  another
to  explain  how  they  are  performed  ;  as  it  is
one  thing  to  see,  another  to  explain  how  we
see.  The  first  is  the  province  of  all  men,
and  is  the  natural  and  easy  operation  of  the
faculties  which  God  hath  given  us.  The
second  is  the  province  of  philosophers,  and,
though  a  matter  of  no  great  difficulty  in  it-
self, has  been  much  perplexed  by  the  ambi-
guity of  words,  and  still  more  by  the
hypotheses  of  philosophers.

Thus, when I  consider  a  billiard  ball,


its  colour  is  one  attribute,  which  I  signify
by  calling  it  white  ;  its  figure  is  another,
which  is  signified  by  calling  it  spherical ,
the  firm  cohesion  of  its  parts  is  signified  by
calling  it  hard ;  its  recoiling,  when  it  strikes
a  hard  body,  is  signified  by  its  being  called
elastic ;  its  origin,  as  being  part  of  the  tooth
of  an  elephant,  is  signified  by  calling  it
ivory ;  and  its  use  by  calling  it  a  billiard  ball.

The  words  by  which  each  of  those  attri-
butes is  signified,  have  one  distinct  meaning,
and  in  this  meaning  are  applicable  to  many
individuals.  They  signify  not  any  indivi-
dual thing,  but  attributes  common  to  many
individuals  ;  nor  is  it  beyond  the  capacity
of  a  child  to  understand  them  perfectly,  and
to  apply  them  properly  to  every  individual
in  which  they  are  found.

As  it  is  by  analysing  a  complex  object
into  its  several  attributes  that  we  acquire
our  simplest  abstract  conceptions,  it  may  be
proper  to  compare  this  analysis  with  that
which  a  chemist  makes  of  a  compounded
body  into  the  ingredients  which  enter  into
its  composition  ;  for,  although  there  be  such
an  analogy  between  these  two  operations,
that  we  give  to  both  the  name  of  analysis
or  resolution,  there  is,  at  the  same  time,  so
great  a  dissimilitude  in  some  respects,  that
we  may  be  led  into  error,  by  applying  to  one
what  belongs  to  the  other. [452]

It  is  obvious  that  the  chemical  analysis
is  an  operation  of  the  hand  upon  matter,
by  various  material  instruments.  The  an-
alysis we  are  now  explaining,  is  purely  an
operation  of  the  understanding,  which  re-
quires no  material  instrument,  nor  produces
any  change  upon  any  external  thing ;  we
shall,  therefore,  call  it  the  intellectual  or
mental  analysis.

In  the  chemical  analysis,  the  compound
body  itself  is  the  subject  analysed.  A  sub-
ject so  imperfectly  known  that  it  may  be
compounded  of  various  ingredients,  when
to  our  senses  it  appears  perfectly  simple  ;*
and  even  when  we  are  able  to  analyse  it
into  the  different  ingredients  of  which  it  is
composed,  we  know  not  how  or  why  the
combination  of  those  ingredients  produces
such  a  body.

Thus,  pure  sea-salt  is  a  body,  to  appear-
ance as  simple  as  any  in  nature.  Every  the
least  particle  of  it,  discernible  by  our  senses,
is  perfectly  similar  to  every  other  particle  in
all  its  qualities.  The  nicest  taste,  the  quick-
est eye,  can  discern  no  mark  of  its  being
made  up  of  different  ingredients;  yet,  by
the  chemical  art,  it  can  be  analysed  into  an
acid  and  an  alkali,  and  can  be  again  pro-
duced by  the  combination  of  those  two  in-
gredients. But  how  this  combination  pro-
duces sea-salt,  no  man  has  been  able  to  dis-
cover. The  ingredients  are  both  as  unlike

*  Something  seems  wanting  in  this  clause.— H.

[451 **2]


chap,  in.]  CONCEPTIONS  FORMED  BY  ANALYSING  OBJECTS 397


the  compound  as  any  bodies  we  know.  No
man  could  have  guessed,  before  the  thing
was  known,  that  sea-salt  is  compounded  of
those  two  ingredients  ;  no  man  could  have
guessed  that  the  union  of  those  two  ingre-
dients should  produce  such  a  compound  as
sea-salt.  Such,  in  many  cases,  are  the
phsenomena  of  the  chemical  analysis  of  a
compound  body. [453]

If  we  consider  the  intellectual  analysis  of
an  object,  it  is  evident  that  nothing  of  this
kind  can  happen ;  because  the  thing  ana-
lysed is  not  an  external  object  imperfectly
known ;  it  is  a  conception  of  the  mind  it-
self. And,  to  suppose  that  there  can  be
anything  in  a  conception  that  is  not  con-
ceived, is  a  contradiction.

The  reason  of  observing  this  difference
between  those  two  kinds  of  analysis  is,  that
some  philosophers,  in  order  to  support  their
systems,  have  maintained  that  a  complex
idea  may  have  the  appearance  of  the  most
perfect  simplicity,  and  retain  no  similitude
of  any  of  the  simple  ideas  of  which  it  is
compounded ;  just  as  a  white  colour  may
appear  perfectly  simple,  and  retain  no
similitude  to  any  of  the  seven  primary
colours  of  which  it  is  compounded ;  or  as  a
chemical  composition  may  appear  perfectly
simple,  and  retain  no  similitude  to  any  of
the  ingredients.

From  which  those  philosophers  have  drawn
this  important  conclusion,  that  a  cluster  of
the  ideas  of  sense,  properly  combined,  may
make  the  idea  of  a  mind  ;  and  that  all  the
ideas  which  Mr  Locke  calls  ideas  of  re-
flection, are  only  compositions  of  the  ideas
which  we  have  by  our  five  senses.  From
this  the  transition  is  easy,  that,  if  a  proper
composition  of  the  ideas  of  matter  may
make  the  idea  of  a  mind,  then  a  proper
composition  of  matter  itself  may  make  a
mind,  and  that  man  is  only  a  piece  of
matter  curiously  formed.

In  this  curious  system,  the  whole  fabric
rests  upon  this  foundation,  that  a  complex
idea,  which  is  made  up  of  various  simple
ideas,  may  appear  to  be  perfectly  simple,
and  to  have  no  marks  of  composition,  be-
cause a  compound  body  may  appear  to  our
senses  to  be  perfectly  simple.

Upon  this  fundamental  proposition  of
this  system  I  beg  leave  to  make  two  re-
marks. [454]

1.  Supposing  it  to  be  true,  it  affirms  only
what  may  be.  We  are,  indeed,  in  most
cases  very  imperfect  judges  of  what  may
be.  But  this  we  know,  that,  were  we  ever
so  certain  that  a  thing  may  be,  this  is  no
good  reason  for  believing  that  it  really  is.
A  may -be  is  a  mere  hypothesis,  which  may
furnish  matter  of  investigation,  but  is  not
entitled  to  the  least  degree  of  belief.  The
transition  from  what  may  be  to  what  really
is,  is  familiar  and  easy  to  those  who  have  a
[453-455]


predilection  for  a  hypothesis  ;  but  to  a  man
who  seeks  truth  without  prejudice  or  pre-
possession, it  is  a  very  wide  and  difficult
step,  and  he  will  never  pass  from  the  one
to  the  other,  without  evidence  not  only  that
the  thing  may  be,  but  that  it  really  is.

2.  As  far  as  I  am  able  to  judge,  this,
which  it  is  said  may  be,  cannot  be.  That
a  complex  idea  should  be  made  up  of  simple
ideas  ;  so  that  to  a  ripe  understanding  re-
flecting upon  that  idea,  there  should  be  no
appearance  of  composition,  nothing  similar
to  the  simple  ideas  of  which  it  is  com-
pounded, seems  to  me  to  involve  a  contra-
diction. The  idea  is  a  conception  of  the
mind.  If  anything  more  than  this  is  meant
by  the  idea,  I  know  not  what  it  is  ;  and  I
wish  both  to  know  what  it  is,  and  to  have
proof  of  its  existence.  Now,  that  there
should  be  anything  in  the  conception  of  an
object  which  is  not  conceived,  appears  to
me  as  manifest  a  contradiction  as  that
there  should  be  an  existence  which  does
not  exist,  or  that  a  thing  should  be  con-
ceived and  not  conceived  at  the  same  time.

But,  say  these  philosophers,  a  white
colour  is  produced  by  the  composition  of
the  primary  colours,  and  yet  has  no  resem-
blance to  any  of  them.  I  grant  it.  But
what  can  be  inferred  from  this  with  regard
to  the  composition  of  ideas  ?  To  bring  this
argument  home  to  the  point,  they  must
say,  that  because  a  white  colour  is  com-
pounded of  the  primary  colours,  therefore
the  idea  of  a  white  colour  is  compounded  of
the  ideas  of  the  primary  colours.  This
reasoning,  if  it  was  admitted,  would  lead
to  innumerable  absurdities.  An  opaque
fluid  may  be  compounded  of  two  or  more
pellucid  fluids.  Hence,  we  might  infer,
with  equal  force,  that  the  idea  of  an  opaque
fluid  may  be  compounded  of  the  idea  of  two
or  more  pellucid  fluids. [455]

Nature's  way  of  compounding  bodies,
and  our  way  of  compounding  ideas,  are  so
different  in  many  respects,  that  we  cannot
reason  from  the  one  to  the  other,  unless  it
can  be  found  that  ideas  are  combined  by
fermentations  and  elective  attractions,  and
may  be  analysed  in  a  furnace  by  the  force
of  fire  and  of  menstruums.  Until  this  dis-
covery be  made,  we  must  hold  those  to  be
simple  ideas,  which,  upon  the  most  atten-
tive reflection,  have  no  appearance  of  com-
position ;  and  those  only  to  be  the  ingre-
dients of  complex  ideas,  which,  by  attentive
reflection,  can  be  perceived  to  be  contained
in  them.

If  the  idea  of  mind  and  its  operations,
may  be  compounded  of  the  ideas  of  matter
and  its  qualities,  why  may  not  the  idea  of
matter  be  compounded  of  the  ideas  of
mind  ?  There  is  the  same  evidence  for  the
last  may-be  as  for  the  first.  And  why  may
not  the  idea  of  sound  be  compounded  of  the


398


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  v.


ideas  of  colour ;  or  the  idea  of  colour  of
those  of  sound  ?  Why  may  not  the  idea  of
wisdom  be  compounded  of  ideas  of  folly  ;
or  the  idea  of  truth  of  ideas  of  absurdity  ?
But  we  leave  these  mysterious  may-bes  to
them  that  have  faith  to  receive  them.


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  GENERAL CONCEPTIONS FORMED  BV  COM-
BINATION.

As,  by  an  intellectual  analysis  of  objects,
we  form  general  conceptions  of  single  attri-
butes, (which,  of  all  conceptions  that  enter
into  the  human  mind,  are  the  most  simple,)
so,  by  combining  several  of  these  into  one
parcel,  and  giving  a  name  to  that  combina-
tion, we  form  general  conceptions  that  may
be  very  complex,  and,  at  the  same  time,
very  distinct. [456]

Thus,  one  who,  by  analysing  extended
objects,  has  got  the  simple  notions  of  a
point,  a  line,  straight  or  curve,  an  angle,  a
surface,  a  solid,  can  easily  conceive  a  plain
surface,  terminated  by  four  equal  straight
lines,  meeting  in  four  points  at  right  angles.
To  this  species  of  figure  he  gives  the  name
of  a  square.  In  like  manner,  he  can  con-
ceive a  solid  terminated  by  six  equal  squares,
and  give  it  the  name  of  a  cube.  A  square,
a  cube,  and  every  name  of  mathematical
figure,  is  a  general  term,  expressing  a  com-
plex general  conception,  made  by  a  certain
combination  of  the  simple  elements  into
which  we  analyse  extended  bodies.

Every  mathematical  figure  is  accurately
defined,  by  enumerating  the  simple  ele-
ments of  which  it  is  formed,  and  the  man-
ner of  their  combination.  The  definition
contains  the  whole  essence  of  it.  And
every  property  that  belongs  to  it  may  be
deduced  by  demonstrative  reasoning  from
its  definition.  It  is  not  a  thing  that
exists,  for  then  it  would  be  an  individual ;
but  it  is  a  thing  that  is  conceived  without
regard  to  existence.

A  farm,  a  manor,  a  parish,  a  county,  a
kingdom,  are  complex  general  conceptions,
formed  by  various  combinations  and  modi-
fications of  inhabited  territory,  under  cer-
tain forms  of  government.

Different  combinations  of  military  men
form  the  notions  of  a  company,  a  regiment,
an  army.

The  several  crimes  which  are  the  objects
of  criminal  law,  such  as  theft,  murder,
robbery,  piracy,  what  are  they  but  certain
combinations  of  human  actions  and  inten-
tions, which  are  accurately  defined  in
criminal  law,  and  which  it  is  found  con-
venient to  comprehend  under  one  name,
and  consider  as  one  thing  ?

When  we  observe  that  nature,  in  her


animal,  vegetable,  and  inanimate  produc-
tions, has  formed  many  individuals  that
agree  in  many  of  their  qualities  and  attri-
butes, we  are  led  by  natural  instinct  to
expect  their  agreement  in  other  qualities,
which  we  have  not  had  occasion  to  perceive.
[457]  Thus,  a  child  who  has  once  burnt
his  finger,  by  putting  it  in  the  flame  of  one
candle,  expects  the  same  event  if  he  puts  it
in  the  flame  of  another  candle,  or  in  any
flame,  and  is  thereby  led  to  think  that  the
quality  of  burning  belongs  to  all  flame.
This  instinctive  induction  is  not  justified
by  the  rules  of  logic,  and  it  sometimes  leads
men  into  harmless  mistakes,  which  expe-
rience may  afterwards  correct ;  but  it  pre-
serves us  from  destruction  in  innumerable
dangers  to  which  we  are  exposed.

The  reason  of  taking  notice  of  this  prin-
ciple in  human  nature  in  this  place  is,  that
the  distribution  of  the  productions  of  na-
ture into  genera  and  species  becomes,  on
account  of  this  principle,  more  generally
useful.

The  physician  expects  that  the  rhubarb
which  has  never  yet  been  tried  will  have
like  medical  virtues  with  that  which  he  has
prescribed  on  former  occasions.  Two  par-
cels of  rhubarb  agree  in  certain  sensible
qualities,  from  which  agreement  they  are
both  called  by  the  same  general  name
rhubarb.  Therefore  it  is  expected  that
they  will  agree  in  their  medical  virtues.
And,  as  experience  has  discovered  certain
virtues  in  one  parcel,  or  in  many  parcels,
we  presume,  without  experience,  that  the
same  virtues  belong  to  all  parcels  of  rhubarb
that  shall  be  used.

If  a  traveller  meets  a  horse,  an  ox,  or  a
sheep,  which  he  never  saw  before,  he  is
under  no  apprehension,  believing  these  ani-
mals to  be  of  a  species  that  is  tame  and  in-
offensive. But  he  dreads  a  lion  or  a  tiger,
because  they  are  of  a  fierce  and  ravenous
species.

We  are  capable  of  receiving  innumerable
advantages,  and  are  exposed  to  innumer-
able dangers,  from  the  various  productions
of  nature,  animal,  vegetable,  and  inanimate.
The  life  of  man,  if  an  hundred  times  longer
than  it  is,  would  be  insufficient  to  learn
from  experience  the  useful  and  hurtful  qua-
lities of  every  individual  production  of  na-
ture taken  singly. [458]

The  Author  of  Nature  hath  made  pro-
vision for  our  attaining  that  knowledge  of
his  works  which  is  necessary  for  our  subsist-
ence and  preservation,  partly  by  the  consti-
tution of  the  productions  of  nature,  and  partly
by  the  constitution  of  the  human  mind.

For,  first,  In  the  productions  of  nature,
great  numbers  of  individuals  are  made  so
like  to  one  another,  both  in  their  obvious
and  in  their  more  occult  qualities,  that  we
are  not  only  enabled,  but  invited,  as  it  were,
[456-458/


chap,  iv.] CONCEPTIONS  FORMED  BY  COMBINATION.


399


to  reduce  them  into  classes,  and  to  give  a
general  name  to  a  class ;  a  name  which  is
common  to  every  individual  of  the  class,
because  it  comprehends  in  its  signification
those  qualities  or  attributes  only  that  are
common  to  all  the  individuals  of  that  class.

Secondly,  The  human  mind  is  so  framed,
that,  from  the  agreement  of  individuals  in
the  more  obvious  qualities  by  which  we
reduce  them  into  one  class,  we  are  naturally
led  to  expect  that  they  will  be  found  to
agree  in  their  more  latent  qualities — and  in
this  we  are  seldom  disappointed.

We  have,  therefore,  a  strong  and  rational
inducement,  both  to  distribute  natural  sub-
stances into  classes,  genera  and  species,
under  general  names,  and  to  do  this  with  all
the  accuracy  and  distinctness  we  are  able.
For  the  more  accurate  our  divisions  are
made,  and  the  more  distinctly  the  several
species  are  denned,  the  more  securely  we
may  rely  that  the  qualities  we  find  in  one  or
in  a  few  individuals  will  be  found  in  all  of
the  same  species.

Every  species  of  natural  substances  which
has  a  name  in  language,  is  an  attribute  of
many  individuals,  and  is  itself  a  combination
of  more  simple  attributes,  which  we  observe
to  be  common  to  those  individuals. [459]

We  shall  find  a  great  part  of  the  words
of  every  language — nay,  I  apprehend,  the
far  greater  part — to  signify  combinations  of
more  simple  general  conceptions,  which
men  have  found  proper  to  be  bound  up,  as
it  were,  in  one  parcel,  by  being  designed  by
one  name.

Some  general  conceptions  there  are,  which
may  more  properly  be  called  compositions
or  works  than  mere  combinations.  Thus,
one  may  conceive  a  machine  which  never
existed.  He  may  conceive  an  air  in  music,
a  poem,  a  plan  of  architecture,  a  plan  of
government,  a  plan  of  conduct  in  public  or
in  private  life,  a  sentence,  a  discourse,  a
treatise.  Such  compositions  are  things
conceived  in  the  mind  of  the  author,  not
individuals  that  really  exist ;  and  the  same
general  conception  which  the  author  had,
may  be  communicated  to  others  by  language.

Thus,  the  "  Oceana"  of  Harrington  was
conceived  in  the  mind  of  its  author.  The
materials  of  which  it  is  composed  are  things
conceived,  not  things  that  existed.  His
senate,  his  popular  assembly,  his  magis-
trates, his  elections,  are  all  conceptions  of
his  mind,  and  the  whole  is  one  complex
conception.  And  the  same  may  be  said  of
every  work  of  the  human  understanding.

Very  different  from  these  are  the  works
of  God,  which  we  behold.  They  are  works
of  creative  power,  not  of  understanding
only.  They  have  a  real  existence.  Our
best  conceptions  of  them  are  partial  and
imperfect.  But  of  the  works  of  the -human
understanding  our  conception  may  be  per-
[459-461]


feet  and  complete.  They  are  nothing  but
what  the  author  conceived,  and  what  he  can
express  by  language,  so  as  to  convey  his
conception  perfectly  to  men  like  himself.

Although  such  works  are  indeed  complex
general  conceptions,  they  do  not  so  properly
belong  to  our  present  subject.  They  are
more  the  objects  of  judgment  and  of  taste,
than  of  bare  conception  or  simple  appre-
hension. [460]

To  return,  therefore,  to  those  complex
conceptions  which  are  formed  merely  by
combining  those  that  are  more  simple.
Nature  has  given  us  the  power  of  combin-
ing such  simple  attributes,  and  such  a  num-
ber of  them  as  we  find  proper ;  and  of
giving  one  name  to  that  combination,  and
considering  it  as  one  object  of  thought.

The  simple  attributes  of  things,  which
fall  under  our  observation,  are  not  so  nume-
rous but  that  they  may  all  have  names  in  a
copious  language.  But  to  give  names  to
all  the  combinations  that  can  be  made  of
two,  three,  or  more  of  them,  would  be  im-
possible. The  most  copious  languages  have
names  but  for  a  very  small  part.

It  may  likewise  be  observed,  that  the
combinations  that  have  names  are  nearly,
though  not  perfectly,  the  same  in  the  dif-
ferent languages  of  civilized  nations  that
have  intercourse  with  one  another.  Hence
it  is,  that  the  Lexicographer,  for  the  most
part,  can  give  words  in  one  language  answer-
ing perfectly,  or  very  nearly,  to  those  of
another ;  and  what  is  written  in  a  simple
style  in  one  language,  can  be  translated  al-
most word  for  word  into  another.  •

From  these  observations  we  may  con-
clude that  there  are  either  certain  common
principles  of  human  nature,  or  certain  com-
mon occurrences  of  human  life,  which  dis-
pose men,  out  of  an  infinite  number  that
might  be  formed,  to  form  certain  combina-
tions rather  than  others.

Mr  Hume,  in  order  to  account  for  this
phenomenon,  has  recourse  to  what  he  calls
the  associating  qualities  of  ideas  ;  to  wit,
causation,  contiguity  in  time  and  place,  and
similitude.  He  conceives — "That  one  of
the  most  remarkable  effects  of  those  associa-
ting qualities,  is  the  complex  ideas  which
are  the  common  subjects  of  our  thoughts.
That  this  also  is  the  cause  why  languages
so  nearly  correspond  to  one  another;  Nature
in  a  manner  pointing  out  to  every  one  those
ideas  which  are  most  proper  to  be  united
into  a  complex  one." [461]

I  agree  with  this  ingenious  author,  that
Nature  in  a  manner  points  out  those  simple
ideas  which  are  most  proper  to  be  united
into  a  complex  one  :  but  Nature  does  this,
not  solely  or  chiefly  by  the  relations  between
the  simple  ideas  of  contiguity,  causation,

*  This  is  only  strictly  true  of  the  words  relative  to
objects  of  sense.— H.


400


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay


causation,  and  resemblance  ;  but  rather  by
the  fitness  of  the  combinations  we  make,  to
aid  our  own  conceptions,  and  to  convey
them  to  others  by  language  easily  and
agreeably.

The  end  and  use  of  language,  without
regard  to  the  associating  qualities  of  ideas,
WW*  lead  men  that  have  common  under-
standing to  form  such  complex  notions  as
are  proper  for  expressing  their  wants,  their
thoughts,  and  their  desires  :  and  in  every
language  we  shall  find  these  to  be  the  com-
plex notions  that  have  names.

In  the  rudest  state  of  society,  men  must
have  occasion  to  form  the  general  notions  of
man,  woman,  father,  mother,  son,  daughter,
sister,  brother,  neighbour,  friend,  enemy,
and  many  others,  to  express  the  common
relations  of  one  person  to  another.

If  they  are  employed  in  hunting,  they
must  have  general  terms  to  express  the
various  implements  and  operations  of  the
chase.  Their  houses  and  clothing,  however
simple,  will  furnish  another  set  of  general
terms,  to  express  the  materials,  the  work-
manship, and  the  excellencies  and  defects
of  those  fabrics.  If  they  sail  upon  rivers
or  upon  the  sea,  this  will  give  occasion  to  a
great  number  of  general  terms,  which  other-
wise would  never  have  occurred  to  their
thoughts.

The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  agricul-
ture, of  pasturage,  of  every  art  they  prac-
tise, and  of  every  branch  of  knowledge  they
attain.  The  necessity  of  general  terms  for
communicating  our  sentiments  is  obvious  ;
and  the  invention  of  them,  as  far  as  we  find
them  necessary,  requires  no  other  talent
but  that  degree  of  understanding  which  is
common  to  men. [462]

The  notions  of  debtor  and  creditor,  of
profit  and  loss,  of  account,  balance,  stock
on  hand,  and  many  others,  are  owing  to
commerce.  The  notions  of  latitude,  longi-
tude, course,  distance,  run,  and  those  of
ships,  and  of  their  various  parts,  furniture,
and  operations,  are  owing  to  navigation.
The  anatomist  must  have  names  for  the
various  similar  and  dissimilar  parts  of  the
human  body,  and  words  to  express  their
figure,  position,  structure,  and  use.  The
physician  must  have  names  for  the  various
diseases  of  the  body,  their  causes,  symp-
toms, and  means  of  cure.

The  like  may  be  said  of  the  grammarian,
the  logician,  the  critic,  the  rhetorician,  the
moralist,  the  naturalist,  the  mechanic,  and
every  man  that  professes  any  art  or  science.

When  any  discovery  is  made  in  art  or  in
nature,  which  requires  new  combinations  and
new  words  to  express  it  properly,  the  in-
'  vention  of  these  is  easy  to  those  who  have
a  distinct  notion  of  the  thing  to  be  expressed ;
and  such  words  will  readily  be  adopted,  and
receive  the  public  sanction.


If,  on  the  other  hand,  any  man  of  emi-
nence, through  vanity  or  want  of  judgment,
should  invent  new  words,  to  express  com-
binations that  have  neither  beauty  nor
utility,  or  which  may  as  well  be  expressed
in  the  current  language,  his  authority  may
give  them  currency  for  a  time  with  servile
imitators  or  blind  admirers  ;  but  the  judi-
cious will  laugh  at  them,  and  they  will  soon
lose  their  credit.  So  true  was  the  observa-
tion made  by  Fomponius  Marcellus,  an
ancient  grammarian,  to  Tiberius  Caesar  : —
"  You,  Ccesar,  have  power  to  make  a  man
a  denizen  of  Rome,  but  not  to  make  a  word
a  denizen  of  the  Roman  language."*

Among  nations  that  are  civilized,  and
have  intercourse  with  one  another,  the  most
necessary  and  useful  arts  will  be  common  ;
the  important  parts  of  human  knowledge
will  be  common ;  their  several  languages
will  be  fitted  to  it,  and  consequently  to  one
another. [463]

New  inventions  of  general  use  give  an
easy  birth  to  new  complex  notions  and  new
names,  which  spread  as  far  as  the  inven-
tion does.  How  many  new  complex  notions
have  been  formed,  and  names  for  them
invented  in  the  languages  of  Europe,  by  the
modern  inventions  of  printing,  of  gun-
powder, of  the  mariner's  compass,  of  opti-
cal glasses  ?  The  simple  ideas  combined
in  those  complex  notions,  and  the  associat-
ing qualities  of  those  ideas,  are  very  an-
cient ;  but  they  never  produced  those  com-
plex notions  until  there  was  use  for  them.

What  is  peculiar  to  a  nation  in  its  cus-
toms, manners,  or  laws,  will  give  occasion
to  complex  notions  and  words  peculiar  to
the  language  of  that  nation.  Hence  it  is
easy  to  see  why  an  impeachment,  and  an
attainder,  in  the  English  language,  and
ostracism  in  the  Greek  language,  have  not
names  answering  to  them  in  other  lan-
guages.

I  apprehend,  therefore,  that  it  is  utility,
and  not  the  associating  qualities  of  the  ideas,
that  has  led  men  to  form  only  certain  com-
binations, and  to  give  names  to  them  in
language,  while  they  neglect  an  intnite
number  that  might  be  formed.

The  common  occurrences  of  life,  in  the
intercourse  of  men,  and  in  their  occupa-
tions, give  occasion  to  many  complex  no-
tions. We  see  an  individual  occurrence,
which  draws  our  attention  more  or  less,
and  may  be  a  subject  of  conversation.
Other  occurrences,  similar  to  this  in  many
respects,  have  been  observed,  or  may  be
expected.  It  is  convenient  that  we  should
be  able  to  speak  of  what  is  common  to
them  all,  leaving  out  the  unimportant  cir-


',*  «'Tu,  Cffisar,  civitatem  .dare  potes  horainibus,
verbis  non  potes."  See  Suetonius  Be  IUust-Gram-
nuxtyC.  82.— H.

[462,  463]


chap,  iv.] CONCEPTIONS  FORMED  BY  COMBINATION,


401


cumstances  of  time,  place,  and  persons.
This  we  can  do  with  great  ease,  by  giving
a  name  to  what  is  common  to  all  those
individual  occurrences.  Such  a  name  is  a
great  aid  to  language,  because  it  compre-
hends, in  one  word,  a  great  number  of
simple  notions,  which  it  would  be  very
tedious  to  express  in  detail. {464]

Thus,  men  have  formed  the  complex
notions  of  eating,  drinking,  sleeping,  walk-
ing, riding,  running,  buying,  selling,  plough-
ing, sowing,  a  dance,  a  feast,  war,  a  battle,
victory,  triumph ;  and  others,  without
number.

Such  things  must  frequently  be  the  sub-
ject of  conversation ;  and,  if  we  had  not  a
more  compendious  way  of  expressing  them
than  by  a  detail  of  all  the  simple  notions
they  comprehend,  we  should  lose  the  benefit
of  speech.

The  different  talents,  dispositions,  and
habits  of  men  in  society,  being  interesting
to  those  who  have  to  do  with  them,  will  in
every  language  have  general  names — such
as  wise,  foolish,  knowing,  ignorant,  plain,
cunning.  In  every  operative  art,  the  tools,
instruments,  materials,  the  work  produced,
and  the  various  excellencies  and  defects  of
these,  must  have  general  names.

The  various  relations  of  persons,  and  of
things  which  cannot  escape  the  observation
of  men  in  society,  lead  us  to  many  complex
general  notions ;  such  as  father,  brother,
friend,  enemy,  master,  servant,  property,
theft,  rebellion.

The  terms  of  art  in  the  sciences  make
another  class  of  general  names  of  complex
notions  ;  as  in  mathematics,  axiom,  defini-
tion, problem,  theorem,  demonstration.

I  do  not  attempt  a  complete  enumeration
even  of  the  classes  of  complex  general  con-
ceptions. Those  I  have  named  as  a  speci-
men, I  think,  are  mostly  comprehended
under  what  Mr  Locke  calls  mixed  modes
and  relations;  which,  he  justly  observes,
have  names  given  them  in  language,  in
preference  to  innumerable  others  that  might
be  formed ;  for  this  reason  only,  that  they
are  useful  for  the  purpose  of  communicat-
ing our  thoughts  by  language. [465]

In  all  the  languages  of  mankind,  not  only
the  writings  and  discourses  of  the  learned,
but  the  conversation  of  the  vulgar,  is  almost
entirely  made  up  of  general  words,  which
are  the  signs  of  general  conceptions,  either
simple  or  complex.  And  in  every  language,
we  find  the  terms  signifying  complex  no-
tions to  be  such,  and  only  such,  as  the  use
of  language  requires.

There  remains  a  very  large  class  of  com-
plex general  terms,  on  which  I  shall  make
some  observations ;  I  mean  those  by  which
we  name  the  species,  genera,  and  tribes  of
natural  substances.

It  is  utility,  indeed,  that  leads  us  to  give
[464-406]  '


general  names  to  the  various  species  of  na-
tural substances ;  but,  in  combining  the
attributes  which  are  included  under  the
specific  name,  we  are  more  aided  and  di-
rected by  nature  than  in  forming  other  com-
binations of  mixed  modes  and  relations.  In
the  last,  the  ingredients  are  brought  to-
gether in  the  occurrences  of  life,  or  in  the
actions  or  thoughts  of  men.  But,  in  the
first,  the  ingredients  are  united  by  nature  in
many  individual  substances  which  God  has
made.  We  form  a  general  notion  of  those
attributes  wherein  many  individuals  agree.
We  give  a  specific  name  to  this  combina-
tion, which  name  is  common  to  all  sub-
stances having  those  attributes,  which
either  do  or  may  exist.  The  specific  name
comprehends  neither  more  nor  fewer  attri-
butes than  we  find  proper  to  put  into  its
definition.  It  comprehends  not  time,  nor
place,  nor  even  existence,  although  there
can  be  no  individual  without  these.

This  work  of  the  understanding  is  abso-
lutely necessary  for  speaking  intelligibly  of
the  productions  of  nature,  and  for  reaping
the  benefits  we  receive,  and  avoiding  the
dangers  we  are  exposed  to  from  them.  The
individuals  are  so  many,  that  to  give  a
proper  name  to  each  would  be  beyond  the
power  of  language.  If  a  good  or  bad  qua-
lity was  observed  in  an  individual,  of  how
small  use  would  this  be,  if  there  was  not  a
species  in  which  the  same  quality  might  be
expected ! [466]

Without  some  general  knowledge  of  the
qualities  of  natural  substances,  human  life
could  not  be  preserved.  And  there  can  be
no  general  knowledge  of  this  kind  without
reducing  them  to  species  under  specific
names.  For  this  reason,  among  the  rudest
nations,  we  find  names  for  fire,  water,  earth,
air,  mountains,  fountains,  rivers  •  for  the
kinds  of  vegetables  they  use  ;  of  animals
they  hunt  or  tame,  or  that  are  found  useful
or  hurtful.

Each  of  those  names  signifies  in  general
a  substance  having  a  certain  combination  of
attributes.  The  name,  therefore,  must  be
common  to  all  substances  in  which  those
attributes  are  found.

Such  general  names  of  substances  being
found  in  all  vulgar  languages,  before  philo-
sophers began  to  make  accurate  divisions
and  less  obvious  distinctions,  it  is  not  to  be
expected  that  their  meaning  should  be  more
precise  than  is  necessary  for  the  common
purposes  of  life.

As  the  knowledge  of  nature  advances,
more  species  of  natural  substances  are
observed,  and  their  useful  qualities  dis-
covered. In  order  that  this  important  part
of  human  knowledge  may  be  communicated,
and  handed  down  to  future  generations,  it
is  not  sufficient  that  the  species  have  names.
Such  is  the  fluctuating  state  of  language,
2  D


402


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  V


that  a  general  name  will  not  always  retain
the  same  precise  signification,  unless  it  have
a  definition  in  wluch  men  are  disposed  to
acquiesce-

There  was  undoubtedly  a  great  fund  of
natural  knowledge  among  the  Greeks  and
Romans  in  the  time  of  Pliny.  There  is  a
great  fund  in  his  Natural  History ;  but
much  of  it  is  lost  to  us — for  this  reason
among  others,  that  we  know  not  what
species  of  substance  he  means  by  such  a
name.

Nothing  could  have  prevented  this  loss
but  an  accurate  definition  of  the  name,  by
which  the  species  might  have  been  distin-
guished from  all  others  as  long  as  that  name
and  its  definition  remained. [467]

To  prevent  such  loss  in  future  times,
modern  philosophers  have  very  laudably
attempted  to  give  names  and  accurate  defin-
itions of  all  the  known  species  of  sub-
stances wherewith  the  bountiful  Creator
hath  enriched  our  globe.

This  is  necessary,  in  order  to  form  a
copious  and  distinct  language  concerning
them,  and,  consequently,  to  facilitate  our
knowledge  of  them,  and  to  convey  it  to
future  generations.

Every  species  that  is  known  to  exist
ought  to  have  a  name  ;  and  that  name
ought  to  be  defined  by  such  attributes  as
serve  best  to  distinguish  the  species  from
all  others.

Nature  invites  to  this  work,  by  having
formed  things  so  as  to  make  it  both  easy
and  important.

For,  first,  We  perceive  numbers  of  indi-
vidual substances  so  like  in  their  obvious
qualities,  that  the  most  unimproved  tribes
of  men  consider  them  as  of  one  species,  and
give  them  one  common  name.

Secondly,  The  more  latent  qualities  of
substances  are  generally  the  same  in  all
the  individuals  of  a  species  ;  so  that  what,
by  observation  or  experiment,  is  found  in
a  few  individuals  of  a  species,  is  presumed
and  commonly  found  to  belong  to  the
whole.  By  this  we  are  enabled,  from  par-
ticular facts,  to  draw  general  conclusions.
This  kind  of  induction  is,  indeed,  the  mas-
ter-key to  the  knowledge  of  Nature,  without
which  we  could  form  no  general  conclu-
sions in  that  branch  of  philosophy.

And,  thirdly,  By  the  very  constitution
of  our  nature,  we  are  led,  without  reason-
ing, to  ascribe  to  the  whole  species  what
we  have  found  to  belong  to  the  individuals.
It  is  thus  we  come  to  know  that  fire  burns
and  water  drowns  ;  that  bodies  gravitate
and  bread  nourishes. [468]

The  species  of  two  of  the  kingdoms  of
Nature— to  wit,  the  animal  and  the  vege-
table— seem  to  be  fixed  by  Nature,  by  the
power  they  have  of  producing  their  like.
And,  in  these,  men,  in  all  ages  and  nations,


have  accounted  the  parent  and  the  progeny
of  the  same  species.  The  differences  among
Naturalists,  with  regard  to  the  species  of
these  two  kingdoms,  are  very  inconsider-
able, and  may  be  occasioned  by  the  changes
produced  by  soil,  climate,  and  culture,  and
sometimes  by  monstrous  productions,  which
are  comparatively  rare.

In  the  inanimate  kingdom  we  have  not
the  same  means  of  dividing  thingo  into
species,  and,  therefore,  the  limits  of  species
seem  to  be  more  arbitrary.  But,  from  the
progress  already  made,  there  is  ground  to
hope  that,  even  in  this  kingdom,  as  the
knowledge  of  it  advances,  the  various
species  may  be  so  well  distinguished  and
defined  as  to  answer  every  valuable  pur-
pose.

When  the  species  are  so  numerous  as  to
burden  the  memory,  it  is  greatly  assisted
by  distributing  them  into  genera,  the  genera
into  tribes,  the  tribes  into  orders,  and  the
orders  into  classes.

Such  a  regular  distribution  of  natural
substances,  by  divisions  and  subdivisions,
has  got  the  name  of  a  system.

It  is  not  a  system  of  truths,  but  a  system
of  general  terms,  with  their  definitions ;
and  it  is  not  only  a  great  help  to  memory,
but  facilitates  very  much  the  definition  of
the  terms.  For  the  definition  of  the  genus
is  common  to  all  the  species  of  that  genus,
and  so  is  understood  in  the  definition  of
each  species,  without  the  trouble  of  repeti-
tion. In  like  manner,  the  definition  of  a
tribe  is  understood  in  the  definition  of  every
genus,  and  every  species  of  that  tribe ;  and
the  same  may  be  said  of  every  superior
division. [469]

The  effect  of  such  a  systematical  distri-
bution of  the  productions  of  Nature  is  seen
in  our  systems  of  zoology,  botany,  and  min-
eralogy ;  in  which  a  species  is  commonly
defined  accurately  in  a  line  or  two,  which,
without  the  systematical  arrangement,  could
hardly  be  defined  in  a  page.

With  regard  to  the  utility  of  systems  of
this  kind,  men  have  gone  into  contrary  ex-
tremes ;  some  have  treated  them  with  con-
tempt, as  a  mere  dictionary  of  words ;
others,  perhaps,  rest  in  such  systems  as  all
that  is  worth  knowing  in  the  works  of
Nature.

On  the  one  hand,  it  is  not  the  intention
of  such  systems  to  communicate  all  that  is
known  of  the  natural  productions  which
they  describe.  The  properties  most  fit  for
defining  and  distinguishing  the  several
species,  are  not  always  those  that  are  most
useful  to  be  known.  To  discover  and  to
communicate  the  uses  of  natural  substances
in  life  and  in  the  arts,  is,  no  doubt,  that
part  of  the  business  of  a  naturalist  which  is
the  most  important ;  and  the  systematical
arrangement  of  them  is  chiefly  to  be  valued
[467-469]


chap. v.] OF  NAMES  GIVEN  TO  GENERAL  NOTIONS.


403


for  its  subserviency  to  this  end. This  every
judicious  naturalist  will  grant.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  labour  is  not
to  be  despised,  by  which  the  road  to  an  use-
ful and  important  branch  of  knowledge  is
made  easy  in  all  time  to  come;  especially
when  this  labour  requires  both  extensive
knowledge  and  great  abilities.

The  talent  of  arranging  properly  and
defining  accurately,  is  so  rare,  and  at  the
same  time  so  useful,  that  it  may  very  justly
be  considered  as  a  proof  of  real  genius,  and
as  entitled  to  a  high  degree  of  praise.  There
is  an  intrinsic  beauty  in  arrangement,  which
captivates  the  mind,  and  gives  pleasure,
even  abstracting  from  its  utility  ;  as  in  most
other  things,  so  in  this  particularly,  Nature
has  joined  beauty  with  utility.  The  arrange-
ment of  an  army  in  the  day  of  battle  is  a
grand  spectacle.  The  same  men  crowded
in  a  fair,  have  no  such  effect.  It  is  not
more  strange,  therefore,  that  some  men
spend  their  days  in  studying  systems  of
Nature,  than  that  other  men  employ  their
lives  in  the  study  of  languages.  The  most
important  end  of  those  systems,  surely",  is
to  form  a  copious  and  an  unambiguous  lan-
guage concerning  the  productions  of  Nature,
by  which  every  useful  discovery  concerning
them  may  be  communicated  to  the  present,
and  transmitted  to  all  future  generations,
without  danger  of  mistake. [470]

General  terms,  especially  such  as  are
complex  in  their  signification,  will  never
keep  one  precise  meaning,  without  accurate
definition  ;  and  accurate  definitions  of  such
terms  can  in  no  way  be  formed  so  easily  and
advantageously  as  by  reducing  the  things
they  signify  into  a  regular  system.

Very  eminent  men  in  the  medical  profes-
sion, in  order  to  remove  all  ambiguity  in
the  names  of  diseases,  and  to  advance  the
healing  art,  have,  of  late,  attempted  to  re-
duce into  a  systematical  order  the  diseases
of  the  human  body,  and  to  give  distinct
names  and  accurate  definitions  of  the  seve-
ral species,  penera,  orders,  and  classes,  into
which  they  distribute  them ;  and  I  appre-
hend that,  in  every  art  and  science,  where
the  terms  of  the  art  have  any  ambiguity
that  obstructs  its  progress,  this  method  will
be  found  the  easiest  and  most  successful  for
the  remedy  of  that  evil.

It  were  eveu  to  be  wished  that  the  gene-
ral terms  which  we  find  in  common  lan-
guage, as  well  as  those  of  the  arts  and
sciences,  could  be  reduced  to  a  systematica!
arrangement,  and  defined  so  as  that  they
might  be  free  from  ambiguity  ;  but,  per-
haps, the  obstacles  to  this  are  insurmount-
able. I  know  no  man  who  has  attempted  it
but  Bishop  Wilkins  in  his  Essay  towards  a
real  character  and  a  philosophical  language.  •

*  In  this  attempt  Wilkins  was  preceded  by  our
[470-472]


The  attempt  was  grand,  and  worthy  of  a
man  of  genius.

The  formation  of  such  systems,  therefore,
of  the  various  productions  of  Nature,  in-
stead of  being  despised,  ought  to  be  ranked
among  the  valuable  improvements  of  modern
ages,  and  to  be  the  more  esteemed  that  its
utility  reaches  to  the  most  distant  future
times,  and,  like  the  invention  of  writing,
serves  to  embalm  a  most  important  branch
of  human  knowledge,  and  to  preserve  it  from
being  corrupted  or  lost. [471]


CHAPTER  V.

OBSERVATIONS  CONCERNING  THE  NAMES  GIVEN
TO  OUR  GENERAL  NOTIONS.

Having  now  explained,  as  well  as  I  am
able,  those  operations  of  the  mind  by  which
we  analyse  the  objects  which  nature  pre-
sents to  our  observation,  into  their  simple
attributes,  giving  a  general  name  to  each,  and
by  which  we  combine  any  number  of  such
attributes  into  one  whole,  and  give  a  general
name  to  that  combination,  I  shall  offer  some
observations  relating  to  our  general  notions,
whether  simple  or  complex.

I  apprehend  that  the  names  given  to
them  by  modern  philosophers,  have  contri-
buted to  darken  our  speculations  about  them,
and  to  render  them  difficult  and  abstruse.

We  call  them  general  notions,  concep-
tions, ideas.  The  words  notion  and  con-
ception, in  their  proper  and  most  common
sense,  signify  the  act  or  operation  of  the
mind  in  conceiving  an  object.  In  a  figura-
tive sense,  they  are  sometimes  put  for  the
object  conceived.  And  I  think  they  are
rarely,  if  ever,  used  in  this  figurative  sense,
except  when  we  speak  of  what  we  call
general  notions  or  general  conceptions.  The
word  idea,  as  it  is  used  in  modern  times,
has  the  same  ambiguity.

Now,  it  is  only  in  the  last  of  these  senses,
and  not  in  the  first,  that  we  can  be  said  to
have  general  notions  or  conceptions.  The
generality  is  in  the  object  conceived,  and
not  in  the  act  of  the  mind  by  which  it  is
conceived.  Every  act  of  the  mind  is  an  in-
dividual act,  which  does  or  did  exist.  [472]
But  we  have  power  to  conceive  things  which
neither  do  nor  ever  did  exist.  We  have
power  to  conceive  attributes  without  regard
to  their  existence.  The  conception  of  such
an  attribute  is  a  real  and  individual  act  of
the  mind ;  but  the  attribute  conceived  is
common  to  many  individuals  that  do  or  may
exist.  We  are  too  apt  to  confound  an  ob-
ject of  conception  with  the  conception  of

countryman  Dalgarno  ;  and  from  Dalgarno  it  is
highly  probable  that  Wilkins  borrowed  the  idea.
But  even  Dalgarno  was  not  the  first  who  conceived
the  project.—  H.

2  D  2


404


ON  THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS.


[essay  v.


that  object.  But  the  danger  of  doing  this
must  be  much  greater  when  the  object  of
conception  is  called  a  conception.

The  Peripatetics  gave  to  such  objects  of
conception  the  names  of  universals,  and  of
predicables.  Those  names  had  no  ambi-
guity, and  I  think  were  much  more  fit  to
express  what  was  meant  by  them  than  the
names  we  use.

It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  have  so  often
used  the  word  attribute,  which  has  the  same
meaning  with  predicable.  And,  for  the  same
reason,  I  have  thought  it  necessary  repeat-
edly to  warn  the  reader,  that  when,  in  com-
pliance with  custom,  I  speak  of  general
notions  or  general  conceptions,  I  always
mean  things  conceived,  and  not  the  act  of
the  mind  in  conceiving  them.

The  Pythagoreans  and  Platonists  gave
the  name  of  ideas  to  such  general  objects  of
conception,  and  to  nothing  else.  As  we
borrowed  the  word  idea  from  them,  so  that
it  is  now  familiar  in  all  the  languages  of
Europe,  I  think  it  would  have  been  happy
if  we  had  also  borrowed  their  meaning,  and
had  used  it  only  to  signify  what  they  meant
by  it.  I  apprehend  we  want  an  unambigu-
ous word  to  distinguish  things  barely  con-
ceived from  things  that  exist.  If  the  word
idea  was  used  for  this  purpose  only,  it  would
be  restored  to  its  original  meaning,  and
supply  that  want.

We  may  surely  agree  with  the  Platonists
in  the  meaning  of  the  word  idea,  without
adopting  their  theory  concerning  ideas.  We
need  not  believe,  with  them,  that  ideas  are
eternal  and  self-existent,  and  that  they
have  a  more  real  existence  than  the  things
we  see  and  feel. [473]

They  were  led  to  give  existence  to  ideas,
from  the  common  prejudice  that  everything
which  is  an  object  of  conception  must
really  exist ;  and,  having  once  given  exist-
ence to  ideas,  the  rest  of  their  mysterious
system  about  ideas  followed  of  course  ;  for
things  merely  conceived  have  neither  be-
ginning nor  end,  time  nor  place  ;  they  are
subject  to  no  change  ;  they  are  the  patterns
and  exemplars  according  to  which  the
Deity  made  everything  that  he  made ;  for
the  work  must  be  conceived  by  the  artificer
before  it  is  made.

These  are  undeniable  attributes  of  the
ideas  of  Plato  ;  and,  if  we  add  to  them  that
of  real  existence,  we  have  the  whole  myste-
rious system  of  Platonic  ideas.  Take  away
the  attribute  of  existence,  and  suppose
them  not  to  be  things  that  exist,  but
things  that  are  barely  conceived,  and  all
the  mystery  is  removed ;  all  that  remains
is  level  to  the  human  understanding.

The  word  essence  came  to  be  much  used
among  the  schoolmen,  and  what  the  Pla-
tonists called  the  idea  of  a  species,  they
called  its  essence. The  word  essentia  is


said  to  have  been  made  by  Cicero  ;  but
even  his  authority  could  not  give  it  cur-
rency, until  long  after  his  time.  It  came
at  last  to  be  used,  and  the  schoolmen  fell
into  much  the  same  opinions  concerning
essences,  as  the  Platonists  held  concerning
ideas.  The  essences  of  things  were  held  to
be  uncreated,  eternal,  and  immutable.

Mr  Locke  distinguishes  two  kinds  of
essence,  the  real  and  the  nominal.  By  the
real  essence,  he  means  the  constitution  of
an  individual,  which  makes  it  to  be  what  it
is.  This  essence  must  begin  and  end  with
the  individual  to  which  it  belongs.  It  is
not,  therefore,  a  Platonic  idea.  But  what
Mr  Locke  calls  the  nominal  essence,  is  the
constitution  of  a  species,  or  that  which
makes  an  individual  to  be  of  such  a  species ;
and  this  is  nothing  but  that  combination  of
attributes  which  is  signified  by  the  name  of
the  species,  and  which  we  conceive  without
regard  to  existence. [474]

The  essence  of  a  species,  therefore,  is
what  the  Platonists  called  the  idea  of  the
species.

If  the  word  idea  be  restricted  to  the
meaning  which  it  bore  among  the  Plato-
nists and  Pythagoreans,  many  things  which
Mr  Locke  has  said  with  regard  to  ideas
will  be  just  and  true,  and  others  will  not.

It  will  be  true  that  most  words  (in-
deed all  general  words)  are  the  signs  of
ideas ;  but  proper  names  are  not :  they
signify  individual  things,  and  not  ideas.  It
will  be  true  not  only  that  there  are  general
and  abstract  ideas,  but  that  all  ideas  are
general  and  abstract.  It  will  be  so  far
from  the  truth,  that  all  our  simple  ideas
are  got  immediately,  either  from  sensation
or  from  consciousness,  that  no  simple
idea  is  got  by  either,  without  the  co-opera-
tion of  other  powers.  The  objects  of  sense,
of  memory,  and  of  consciousness,  are  not
ideas  but  individuals  ;  they  must  be  anal-
ysed by  the  understanding  into  their  simple
ingredients,  before  we  can  have  simple
ideas ;  and  those  simple  ideas  must  be
again  combined  by  the  understanding,  in
distinct  parcels,  with  names  annexed,  in
order  to  give  us  complex  ideas.  It  will  be
probable  not  only  that  brutes  have  no  ab-
stract ideas,  but  that  they  have  no  ideas  at  all.

I  shall  only  add  that  the  learned  author
of  the  origin  and  progress  of  language,  and,
perhaps,  his  learned  friend,  Mr  Harris,  are
the  only  modern  authors  I  have  met  with
who  restrict  the  word  idea  to  this  meaning.
Their  acquaintance  with  ancient  philosophy
led  them  to  this.  What  pity  is  it  that  a
word  which,  in  ancient  philosophy,  had  a
distinct  meaning,  and  which,  if  kept  to
that  meaning,  would  have  been  a  real  ac-
quisition to  our  language,  should  be  used
by  the  moderns  in  so  vague  and  ambiguous
a  manner,  that  it  is  more  apt  to  perplex
[473,  474]


CHAP.  VI.]


OPINIONS  ABOUT  UNIVERSALS.


405


and  darken  our  speculations,  than  to  convey
useful  knowledge  !

From  all  that  has  been  said  about  ab-
stract and  general  conceptions,  I  think  we
may  draw  the  following  conclusions  con-
cerning them. [475]

First,  That  it  is  by  abstraction  that  the
mind  is  furnished  with  all  its  most  simple
and  most  distinct  notions.  The  simplest
objects  of  sense  appear  both  complex  and
indistinct,  until  by  abstraction  they  are
analysed  into  their  more  simple  elements ;
and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  objects  of
memory  and  of  consciousness.

Secondly,  Our  most  distinct  complex
notions  are  those  that  are  formed  by  com-
pounding the  simple  notions  got  by  abstrac-
tion.

Thirdly,  Without  the  powers  of  abstract-
ing and  generalising,  it  would  be  impossible
to  reduce  things  into  any  order  and  method,
by  dividing  them  into  genera  and  species.

Fourthly,  Without  those  powers  there
could  be  no  definition  ;  for  definition  can
only  be  applied  to  universals,  and  no  indi-
vidual can  be  defined.

Fifthly,  Without  abstract  and  general
notions  there  can  neither  be  reasoning  nor
language.

Sixthly,  As  brute  animals  shew  no  signs
of  being  able  to  distinguish  the  various
attributes  of  the  same  subject;  of  being
able  to  class  things  into  genera  and  species ;
to  define,  to  reason,  or  to  communicate
their  thoughts  by  artificial  signs,  as  men
do — I  must  think,  with  Mr  Locke,  that  they
have  not  the  powers  of  abstracting  and
generalising,  and  that,  in  this  particular,
nature  has  made  a  specific  difference  be-
tween them  and  the  human  species.


CHAPTER  VI.

OPINIONS OF PHILOSOPHERS ABOUT
UNIVERSALS.

In  the  ancient  philosophy,  the  doctrine  of
universals — that  is,  of  things  which  we  ex-
press by  general  terms — makes  a  great  figure.
The  ideas  of  the  Pythagoreans  and  Pla-
tonists,  of  which  so  much  has  been  already
said,  were  universals.  [476]  All  science  is
employed  about  universals  as  its  object.  It
was  thought  that  there  can  be  no  s-cience,
unless  its  object  be  something  real  and
immutable  ;  and  therefore  those  who  paid
homage  to  truth  and  science,  maintained
that  ideas  or  universals  have  a  real  and
immutable  existence.

The  sceptics,  on  the  contrary,  (for  there
were  sceptical  philosophers  in  those  early
days,)  maintained  that  all  things  are  mu-
table and  in  a  perpetual  fluctuation ;  and,
from  this  principle,  inferred  that  there  is
[475-177]


no  science,  no  truth ;  that  all  is  uncertain
opinion.

Plato,  and  his  masters  of  the  Pythagorean
school,  yielded  this  with  regard  to  objects
of  sense,  and  acknowledged  that  there  could
be  no  science  or  certain  knowledge  con-
cerning them.  But  they  held  that  there
are  objects  of  intellect  of  a  superior  order
and  nature,  which  are  permanent  and  im-
mutable. These  are  ideas,  or  universal
natures,  of  which  the  objects  of  sense  are
only  the  images  and  shadows.

To  these  ideas  they  ascribed,  as  I  have
already  observed,  the  most  magnificent
attributes.  Of  man,  of  a  rose,  of  a  circle,
and  of  every  species  of  things,  they  believed
that  there  is  one  idea  or  form,  which  ex-
isted from  eternity,  before  any  individual  of
the  species  was  formed  ;  that  this  idea  is
the  exemplar  or  pattern,  according  to  which
the  Deity  formed  the  individuals  of  the
species  ;  that  every  individual  of  the  species
participates  of  this  idea,  which  constitutes
its  essence ;  and  that  this  idea  is  likewise
an  object  of  the  human  intellect,  when,  by
due  abstraction,  we  discern  it  to  be  one  in
all  the  individuals  of  the  species.

Thus  the  idea  of  every  species,  though
one  and  immutable,  might  be  considered  in
three  different  views  or  respects  :  first,  As
having  an  eternal  existence  before  there
was  any  individual  of  the  species ;  secondly,
As  existing  in  every  individual  of  that  spe-
cies, without  division  or  multiplication,  and
making  the  essence  of  the  species  ;  and,
thirdly,  As  an  object  of  intellect  and  of  science
in  man. [477]

Such  I  take  to  be  the  doctrine  of  Plato,
as  far  as  I  am  able  to  comprehend  it.  His
disciple  Aristotle  rejected  the  first  of  these
views  of  ideas  as  visionary,  but  differed
little  from  his  master  with  regard  to  the
two  last.  He  did  not  admit  the  existence
of  universal  natures  antecedent  to  the  ex-
istence of  individuals  :  but  he  held  that
every  individual  consists  of  matter  and
form ;  that  the  form  (which  I  take  to  be
what  Plato  calls  the  idea)  is  common  to  all
the  individuals  of  the  species ;  and  that  the
human  intellect  is  fitted  to  receive  the  forms
of  things  as  objects  of  contemplation.  Such
profound  speculations  about  the  nature  of
universals,  we  find  even  in  the  first  ages  of
philosophy.*  I  wish  I  could  make  them
more  intelligible  to  myself  and  to  the  reader.

The  division  of  universals  into  five
classes — to  wit,  genus,  species,  specific
difference,  properties,  and  accidents — is
likewise  very  ancient,  and  I  conceive  was
borrowed  by  the  Peripatetics  from  the
Pythagorean  school. +

*  Different  philosophers  have  maintained  that'
Aristotle  was  a  Realist,  a  Conceptualist,  and  a  No-
minalist, in  the  strictest  sense. — H.

+  This  proceeds  on  the  supposition  that  the  sup.
I  osititious  Pythagorean  treatises  are  genuine.— H.


406


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay


Porphyry  has  given  us  a  very  distinct
treatise  upon  these,  as  an  introduction  to
Aristotle's  categories.  But  he  has  omitted
the  intricate  metaphysical  questions  that
were  agitated  about  their  nature  :  such  as,
whether  genera  and  species  do  really  exist
in  nature,  or  whether  they  are  only  con-
ceptions of  the  human  mind.  If  they  exist
in  nature,  whether  they  are  corporeal  or
incorporeal ;  and  whether  they  are  inherent
in  the  objects  of  sense,  or  disjoined  from
them.  These  questions,  he  tells  us,  for
brevity's  sake,  he  omits,  because  they  are
very  profound,  and  require  accurate  discus-
sion. It  is  probable  that  these  questions
exercised  the  wits  of  the  philosophers  till
about  the  twelfth  century. [478]

About  that  time,  Roscelinus  or  Rusce-
linus,  the  master  of  the  famous  Abelard,
introduced  a  new  doetrine — that  there  is
nothing  universal  but  words  or  names.
For  this,  and  other  heresies,  he  was  much
persecuted.  However,  by  his  eloquence
and  abilities,  and  those  of  his  disciple  Abe-
lard, the  doctrine  spread,  and  those  who
followed  it  were  called  Nominalists.*  His
antagonists,  who  held  that  there  are  things
that  are  really  universal,  were  called  Realists.
The  scholastic  philosophers,  from  the  be-
ginning of  the  twelfth  century,  were  divided
into  these  two  sects.  Some  few  took  a
middle  road  between  the  contending  parties-
That  universality  which  the  Realists  held
to  be  in  things  themselves,  Nominalists  in
names  only,  they  held  to  be  neither  in  things
nor  in  names  only,  but  in  our  conceptions.
On  this  account  they  were  called  Concep-
tualists  :  but,  being  exposed  to  the  batteries
of  both  the  opposite  parties,  they  made  no
great  figure,  -f

When  the  sect  of  Nominalists  was  like
to  expire,  it  received  new  life  and  spirit
from  Occam,  the  disciple  of  Scotus,  in  the
fourteenth  century.  Then  the  dispute  about
universals,  a  parte  rei,  was  revived  with
the  greatest  animosity  in  the  schools  of
Britain,  France,  and  Germany,  and  carried
on,  not  by  arguments  only,  but  by  bitter
reproaches,  blows,  and  bloody  affrays,  until
the  doctrines  of  Luther  and  the  other  Re-
formers turned  the  attention  of  the  learned
world  to  more  important  subjects.

After  the  revival  of  learning,  Mr  Hobbes
adopted  the  opinion  of  the  Nominalists. £

*  Abelard  was  not  a  Nominalist  like  Roscelinus ;
but  held  a  doctrine,  intermediate  between  absolute
Nominalism  and  Healism,  corresponding  to  the
opinion  since  called  Conceptualism.  A  flood  of  light
has  been  thrown  upon  Abclard's  doctrines,  by  M.
Cousin's  introduction  to  his  recent  publication  of
the  unedited  works  of  that  illustrious  thinker. —
H.

t  The  later  Nominalists,  of  the  school  of  Occam,
were  really  Conceptualists  in  our  sense  of  the  term.
—  H.

t  Hobbes  is  justly  said  by  Leibnitz  to  have  been
*ps>'s  A'ominalibus  nominalior.  Tltcy  were  really
Conceptualists.— H.


*  Human  Nature,"  chap  5,  §  6—"  It  is
plain,  therefore,"  says  he,  "that  there  is  no-
thing universal  but  names."  And  in  his
"  Leviathan,"  part  i  chap  4,  "  There  being
nothing  universal  but  names,  proper  names
bring  to  mind  one  thing  only  ;  universals
recall  any  one  of  many."

Mr  Locke,  according  to  the  division  be-
fore mentioned,  I  think,  may  be  accounted
a  Conceptualist.  He  does  not  maintain
that  there  are  things  that  are  universal ;
but  that  we  have  general  or  universal  ideas
which  we  form  by  abstraction  ;  and  this
power  of  forming  abstract  and  general  ideas,
he  conceives  to  be  that  which  makes  the
chief  distinction  in  point  of  understanding,
between  men  and  brutes. [479]

Mr  Locke's  doctrine  about  abstraction
has  been  combated  by  two  very  powerful
antagonists,  Bishop  Berkeley  and  Mr  Hume,
who  have  taken  up  the  opinion  of  the  Nom-
inalists. The  former  thinks,  "  That  the
opinion  that  the  mind  hath  a  power  of  form-
ing abstract  ideas  or  notions  of  things,  has
had  a  chief  part  in  rendering  speculation
intricate  and  perplexed,  and  has  occasioned
innumerable  errors  and  difficulties  in  almost
all  parts  of  knowledge."  That  "  abstract
ideas  are  like  a  fine  and  subtile  net,  which
has  miserably  perplexed  and  entangled  the
minds  of  men,  with  this  peculiar  circum-
stance, that  by  how  much  the  finer  and
more  curious  was  the  wit  of  any  man,  by
so  much  the  deeper  was  he  like  to  be  en-
snared, and  faster  held  therein."  That,
"  among  all  the  false  principles  that  have
obtained  in  the  world,  there  is  none  hath  a
more  wide  influence  over  the  thoughts  of
speculative  men,  than  this  of  abstract  gene-
ral ideas."

The  good  bishop,  therefore,  in  twenty-
four  pages  of  the  introduction  to  his  "  Prin-
ciples of  Human  Knowledge,"  encounters
this  principle  with  a  zeal  proportioned  to
his  apprehension  of  its  malignant  and  ex-
tensive influence.

That  the  zeal  of  the  sceptical  philosopher
against  abstract  ideas  was  almost  equal  to
that  of  the  bishop,  appears  from  his  words,
"  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"  Book  I.
part  i.  §  7  : — "  A  very  material  question
has  been  started  concerning  abstract  or
general  ideas — whether  they  be  general  or
particular,  in  the  mind's  conception  of  them.
A  great  philosopher"  (he  means  Dr  Berke-
ley) "  has  disputed  the  received  opinion  in
this  particular,  and  has  asserted  that  all
general  ideas  are  nothing  but  particular  ones
annexed  to  a  certain  term,  which  gives  them
a  more  extensive  signification,  and  makes
them  recall,  upon  occasion,  other  individuals
which  are  similar  to  them.  As  I  look  upon
this  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  and  most
valuable  discoveries  that  have  been  made
of  late  years  in  the  republic  of  letters,  I
[478.  ¥19]


CHAP.  VI.]


OPINIONS  ABOUT  UNIVERSALE


407


shall  here  endeavour  to  confirm  it  by  some
arguments,  which,  I  hope,  will  put  it  beyond
all  doubt  and  controversy." [480]

I  shall  make  an  end  of  this  subject,  with
some  reflections  on  what  has  been  said  upon
it  by  these  two  eminent  philosophers.

1.  First,  I  apprehend  that  we  cannot,
with  propriety,  be  said  to  have  abstract  and
general  ideas,  either  in  the  popular  or  in  the
philosophical  sense  of  that  word.  In  the
popular  sense,  an  idea  is  a  thought ;  it  is
the  act  of  the  mind  in  thinking,  or  in  con-
ceiving any  object.  This  act  of  the  mind
is  always  an  individual  act,  and,  therefore,
there  can  be  no  general  idea  in  this  sense.
In  the  philosophical  sense,  an  idea  is  an
image  in  the  mind,  or  in  the  brain,  which,
in  Mr  Locke's  system,  is  the  immediate  ob-
ject of  thought ;  in  the  system  of  Berkeley
and  Hume,  the  only  object  of  thought.  I
believe  there  are  no  ideas  of  this  kind,  and,
therefore,  no  abstract  general  ideas.  In-
deed, if  there  were  really  such  images  in
the  mind  or  in  the  brain,  they  could  not
be  general,  because  everything  that  really
exists  is  an  individual.  Universals  are
neither  acts  of  the  mind,  nor  images  in  the
mind.

As,  therefore,  there  are  no  general  ideas
in  either  of  the  senses  in  which  the  word
idea  is  used  by  the  moderns,  Berkeley  and
Hume  have,  in  this  question,  an  advantage
over -Mr  Locke ;  and  their  arguments  against
him  are  good  ad  hominem.  They  saw
farther  than  he  did  into  the  just  conse-
quences of  the  hypothesis  concerning  ideas,
which  was  common  to  them  and  to  him ;
and  they  reasoned  justly  from  this  hypo-
thesis when  they  concluded  from  it,  that
there  is  neither  a  material  world,  nor  any
such  power  in  the  human  mind  as  that  of
abstraction. [481]

A  triangle,  in  general,  or  any  other  uni-
versal, might  be  called  an  idea  by  a  Plato-
nist ;  but,  in  the  style  of  modern  philo-
sophy, it  is  not  an  idea,  nor  do  we  ever
ascribe  to  ideas  the  properties  of  triangles.
It  is  never  said  of  any  idea,  that  it  has
three  sides  and  three  angles.  We  do  not
speak  of  equilateral,  isosceles,  or  scalene
ideas,  nor  of  right-angled,  acute-angled,  or
obtuse-angled  ideas.  And,  if  these  attri-
butes do  not  belong  to  ideas,  it  follows,
necessarily,  that  a  triangle  is  not  an  idea.
The  same  reasoning  may  be  applied  to
every  other  universal.

Ideas  are  said  to  have  a  real  existence  in
the  mind,  at  least  while  we  think  of  them  ;
but  universals  have  no  real  existence.
When  we  ascribe  existence  to  them,  it  is
not  an  existence  in  time  or  place,  but  exist-
ence in  some  individual  subject ;  and  this
existence  means  no  more  but  that  they  are
truly  attributes  of  such  a  subject.  Their
existence  is  nothing  but  predicability,  or  the
[430-432]


capacity  of  being  attributed  to  a  subject.
The  name  of  predicables,  which  was  given
them  in  ancient  philosophy,  is  that  which
most  properly  expresses  their  nature.

2.  I  think  it  must  be  granted,  in  the
second  place,  that  universals  cannot  be  the
objects  of  imagination,  when  we  take  that
word  in  its  strict  and  proper  sense.  "  I
find,"  says  Berkeley,  "  I  have  a  faculty  of
imagining  or  representing  to  myself  the
ideas  of  those  particular  things  I  have  per-
ceived, and  of  variously  compounding  and
dividing  them.  I  can  imagine  a  man  with
two  heads,  or  the  upper  parts  of  a  man
joined  to  the  body  of  a  horse.  I  can  imagine
the  hand,  the  eye,  the  nose,  each  by  itself,
abstracted  or  separated  from  the  rest  of  the
body.  But  then,  whatever  hand  or  eye  I
imagine,  it  must  have  some  particular  shape
or  colour.  Likewise,  the  idea  of  a  man  that
I  frame  to  myself  must  be  either  of  a  white,
or  a  black,  or  a  tawny ;  a  straight  or  a
crooked  ;  a  tall,  or  a  low,  or  a  middle-sized
man."

I  believe  every  man  will  find  in  himself
what  this  ingenious  author  found — that  he
cannot  imagine  a  man  without  colour,  or
stature,  or  shape. [482]

Imagination,  as  we  before  observed,  pro-
perly signifies  a  conception  of  the  appear-
ance an  object  would  make  to  the  eye  if
actually  seen.*  An  universal  is  not  an
object  of  any  external  sense,  and  therefore
cannot  be  imagined ;  but  it  may  be  dis-
tinctly conceived.  When  Mr  Pope  says,
"  The  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man,"  I
conceive  his  meaning  distinctly,  though  I
neither  imagine  a  black  or  a  white,  a
crooked  or  a  straight  man.  The  distinction
between  conception  and  imagination  is  real,
though  it  be  too  often  overlooked,  and  the
words  taken  to  be  synonimous.  I  can  con-
ceive a  thing  that  is  impossible,-]-  but  I
cannot  distinctly  imagine  a  thing  that  is
impossible.  I  can  conceive  a  proposition  or
a  demonstration,  but  I  cannot  imagine
either.  I  can  conceive  understanding  and
will,  virtue  and  vice,  and  other  attributes  of
mind,  but  I  cannot  imagine  them.  In  like
manner,  I  can  distinctly  conceive  uni-
versals, but  I  cannot  imagine  them.  J

As  to  the  manner  how  we  conceive  uni-
versals, I  confess  my  ignorance.  I  know
not  how  I  hear,  or  see,  or  remember,  and
as  little  do  I  know  how  I  conceive  things
that  have  no  existence. In  all  our  original

*  See  above,  p.  366,  a,  note.— H.

t  See  above,  p.  377,  b,  note. — H.

X  Imagination  and  Conception  are  distinguished,
but  the  latter  ought  not  to  be  used  in  the  vague  and
extensive  signification  of  Reid.  The  discrimination
in  question  is  best  made  in  the  German  language  of
philosophy,  where  the  terms  Begriffe  (Conceptions)
are  strongly  contrasted  with  Anschauungen  (Intui-
tions), Bilden  (Images),  &c.  See  above,  p. 360,  a,  note
t ;  p.  365,  b,  note  -f.  The  reader  may  compare
Stewart's  "  Elements,"  I.  p.  196.— H.


403


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  y.


faculties,  the  fabric  and  manner  of  operation
is,  I  apprehend,  beyond  our  comprehension,
and  perhaps  is  perfectly  understood  by  him
only  who  made  them.

But  we  ought  not  to  deny  a  fact  of  which
we  are  conscious,  though  we  know  not  how
it  is  brought  about.  And  I  think  we  may
be  certain  that  universals  are  not  conceived
by  means  of  images  of  them  in  our  minds,
because  there  can  be  no  image  of  an  uni-
versal.

3.  It  seems  to  me,  that  on  this  question
Mr  Locke  and  his  two  antagonists  have
divided  the  truth  between  them.  He  saw
very  clearly,  that  the  power  of  forming  ab-
stract and  general  conceptions  is  one  of  the
most  distinguishing  powers  of  the  human
mind,  and  puts  a  specific  difference  between
man  and  the  brute  creation.  But  he  did
not  see  that  this  power  is  perfectly  irrecon-
cileable  to  his  doctrine  concerning  ideas.
[483]

His  opponents  saw  this  inconsistency  ;
but,  instead  of  rejecting  the  hypothesis  of
ideas,  they  explain  away  the  power  of  ab-
straction, and  leave  no  specific  distinction
between  the  human  understanding  and  that
of  brutes.

4.  Berkeley,*  in  his  reasoning  against
abstract  general  ideas,  seems  unwillingly
or  unwarily  to  grant  all  that  is  necessary
to  support  abstract  and  general  concep-
tions.

*'  A  man,"  he  says,  "  may  consider  a
figure  merely  as  triangular,  without  attend-
ing to  the  particular  qualities  of  the  angles,
or  relations  of  the  sides-  So  far  he  may
abstract.  But  this  will  never  prove  that
he  can  frame  an  abstract  general  inconsist-
ent idea  of  a  triangle."

If  a  man  may  consider  a  figure  merely
as  triangular,  he  must  have  some  concep-
tion of  this  object  of  his  consideration  ;  for
no  man  can  consider  a  thing  which  he  does
not  conceive.  He  has  a  conception,  there-
fore, of  a  triangular  figure,  merely  as  such.
I  know  no  more  that  is  meant  by  an  abstract
general  conception  of  a  triangle.

He  that  considers  a  figure  merely  as  tri-
angular, must  understand  what  is  meant  by
the  word  triangular.  If,  to  the  conception
he  joins  to  this  word,  he  adds  any  particu-
lar quality  of  angles  or  relation  of  sides,  he
misunderstands  it,  and  does  not  consider
the  figure  merely  as  triangular.  Whence,
I  think,  it  is  evident,  that  he  who  considers
a  figure  merely  as  triangular  must  have  the
conception  of  a  triangle,  abstracting  from
any  quality  of  angles  or  relation  of  sides.

The  Bishop,  in  like  manner,  grants,
"  That  we  may  consider  Peter  so  far  forth
as  man,  or  so  far  forth  as  animal,  without


*  On Reid's  criticUm  of  Berkelev,  <-ee  Stewart,
[Elpnents,  II.  i>.  lit),  >q.)— H.


framing  the  forementioned  abstract  idea,  in
as  much  as  all  that  is  perceived  is  not
considered."  It  may  here  be  observed,
that  he  who  considers  Peter  so  far  forth  as
man,  or  so  far  forth  as  animal,  must  con-
ceive the  meaning  of  those  abstract  general
words  man  and  animal,  and  he  who  con-
ceives the  meaning  of  them  has  an  abstract
general  conception. [484]

From  these  concessions,  one  would  be
apt  to  conclude  that  the  Bishop  thinks  that
we  can  abstract,  but  that  we  cannot  frame
abstract  ideas  ;  and  in  this  I  should  agree
with  him.  But  I  cannot  reconcile  his  con-
cessions with  the  general  principle  he  lays
down  before.  " To  be  plain,"  says  he,  ''I
deny  that  I  can  abstract  one  from  another,
or  conceive  separately  those  qualities  which
it  is  impossible  should  exist  so  separated."
This  appears  to  me  inconsistent  with  the
concessions  above  mentioned,  and  incon-
sistent with  experience.

If  we  can  consider  a  figure  merely  as
triangular,  without  attending  to  the  parti-
cular quality  of  the  angles  or  relation  of  the
sides,  this,  I  think,  is  conceiving  separately
things  which  cannot  exist  so  separated ;
for  surely  a  triangle  cannot  exist  without
a  particular  quality  of  angles  and  relation
of  sides.  And  it  is  well  known,  from  ex-
perience, that  a  man  may  have  a  distinct
conception  of  a  triangle,  without  having
any  conception  or  knowledge  of  many  of
the  properties  without  which  a  triangle
cannot  exist.

Let  us  next  consider-the  Bishop's  notion
of  generalising.*  He  does  not  absolutely
deny  that  there  are  general  ideas,  but  only
that  there  are  abstract  general  ideas.  "An
idea,"  he  says,  "  which,  considered  in  it-
self, is  particular,  becomes  general,  by  be-
ing made  to  represent  or  stand  for  all  other
particular  ideas  of  the  same  sort.  To  make
this  plain  by  an  example  :  Suppose  a  geo-
metrician is  demonstrating  the  method  of
cutting  a  line  in  two  equal  parts.  He
draws,  for  instance,  a  black  line,  of  an  inch
in  length.  This,  which  is  in  itself  a  parti-
cular line,  is,  nevertheless,  with  regard  to
its  signification,  general ;  since,  as  it  is
there  used,  it  represents  all  particular  lines
whatsoever ;  so  that  what  is  demonstrated
of  it,  is  demonstrated  of  all  lines,  or,  in
other  words,  of  a  line  in  general.  And  as
that  particular  line  becomes  general  by  be-
ing made  a  sign,  so  the  name  line,  which,
taken  absolutely,  is  particular,  by  being  a
sign,  is  made  general." [485]

Here  I  observe,  that  when  a  particular
idea,  is  made  a  sign  to  represent  and  stand
for  all  of  a  sort,  this  supposes  a  distinction
of  things  into  sorts  or  species.  To  be  of  a
sort  implies  having  those  attributes  which

*  See  Stewart,  {FAanatis,  II  p.  125.)— H.

[183-485]


CHAP.  VI.]


OPINIONS  ABOUT  UNIVERSALS.


409


characterise  the  sort,  and  are  common  to
all  the  individuals  that  belong  to  it.  There
cannot,  therefore,  be  a  sort  without  general
attributes,  nor  can  there  be  any  conception
of  a  sort  without  a  conception  of  those
general  attributes  which  distinguish  it.  The
conception  of  a  sort,  therefore,  is  an  ab-
stract general  conception.

The  particular  idea  cannot  surely  be  made
a  sign  of  a  thing  of  which  we  have  no  con-
ception. I  do  not  say  that  you  must  have
an  idea  of  the  sort,  but  surely  you  ought
to  understand  or  conceive  what  it  means,
when  you  make  a  particular  idea  a  repre-
sentative of  it ;  otherwise  your  particular
idea  represents,  you  know  not  what.

When  I  demonstrate  any  general  pro-
perty of  a  triangle,  such  as,  that  the  three
angles  are  equal  to  two  right  angles,  I  must
understand  or  conceive  distinctly  what  is
common  to  all  triangles.  I  must  distinguish
the  common  attributes  of  all  triangles  from
those  wherein  particular  triangles  may  differ.
And,  if  I  conceive  distinctly  what  is  common
to  all  triangles,  without  confounding  it  with
what  is  not  so,  this  is  to  form  a  general  con-
ception of  a  triangle.  And  without  this,  it
is  impossible  to  know  that  the  demonstra-
tion extends  to  all  triangles.

The  Bishop  takes  particular  notice  of  this
argument,  and  makes  this  answer  to  it : —
"'  Though  the  idea  I  have  in  view,  whilst
I  make  the  demonstration,  be,  for  instance,
that  of  an  isosceles  rectangular  triangle,
whose  sides  are  of  a  determinate  length,  I
may  nevertheless  be  certain  that  it  extends
to  all  other  rectilinear  triangles,  of  what
sort  or  bigness  soever;  and  that  because
neither  the  right  angle,  nor  the  equality  or
determinate  length  of  the  sides,  are  at  all
concerned  in  the  demonstration." [486]

But,  if  he  do  not,  in  the  idea  he  has  in
view,  clearly  distinguish  what  is  common
to  all  triangles  from  what  is  not,  it  would
be  impossible  to  discern  whether  something
that  is  not  common  be  concerned  in  the
demonstration  or  not.  In  order,  therefore,
to  perceive  that  the  demonstration  extends
to  all  triangles,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a
distinct  conception  of  what  is  common  to
all  triangles,  excluding  from  that  concep-
tion all  that  is  not  common.  And  this  is
all  I  understand  by  an  abstract  general
conception  of  a  triangle.

Berkeley  catches  an  advantage  to  his  side
of  the  question,  from  what  Mr  Locke  ex-
presses (too  strongly  indeed)  of  the  difficulty
of  framing  abstract  general  ideas,  and  the
pains  and  skill  necessary  for  that  purpose.
From  which  the  Bishop  infers,  that  a  thing
so  difficult  cannot  be  necessary  for  com-
munication by  language,  which  is  so  easy
and  familiar  to  all  sorts  of  men.

There  may  be  some  abstract  and  general
conceptions  that  are  difficult,  or  even  be-
[48G-4.8S-]


yond  the  reach  of  persons  of  weak  under-
standing ;  but  there  are  innumerable  which
are  not  beyond  the  reach  of  children.  It
is  impossible  to  learn  language  without
acquiring  general  conceptions ;  for  there
cannot  be  a  single  sentence  without  them.
I  believe  the  forming  these,  and  being  able
to  articulate  the  sounds  of  language,  make
up  the  whole  difficulty  that  children  find  in
learning  language  at  first.

But  this  difficulty,  we  see,  they  are  able
to  overcome  so  early  as  not  to  remember
the  pains  it  cost  them.  They  have  the
strongest  inducement  to  exert  all  their
labour  and  skill,  in  order  to  understand
and  to  be  understood ;  and  they  no  doubt
do  so. [437]

The  labour  of  forming  abstract  notions,  is
the  labour  of  learning  to  speak,  and  to
understand  what  is  spoken.  As  the  words
of  every  language,  excepting  a  few  proper
names,  are  general  words,  the  minds  of
children  are  furnished  with  general  con-
ceptions, in  proportion  as  they  learn  the
meaning  of  general  words.  I  believe  most
men  have  hardly  any  general  notions  but
those  which  are  expressed  by  the  general
words  they  hear  and  use  in  conversation.
The  meaning  of  some  of  these  is  learned
by  a  definition,  which  at  once  conveys  a
distinct  and  accurate  general  conception.
The  meaning  of  other  general  words  we
collect,  by  a  kind  of  induction,  from  the
way  in  which  we  see  them  used  on  various
occasions  by  those  who  understand  the
language.  Of  these  our  conception  is  often
less  distinct,  and  in  different  persons  is
perhaps  not  perfectly  the  same.

"  Is  it  not  a  hard  thing,"  says  the  Bishop,
"  that  a  couple  of  children  cannot  prate  to-
gether of  their  sugar-plumbs  and  rattles,
and  the  rest  of  their  little  trinkets,  till  they
have  first  tacked  together  numberless  in-
consistencies, and  so  formed  in  their  minds
abstract  general  ideas,  and  annexed  them
to  every  common  name  they  make  use  of  ?"

However  hard  a  thing  it  may  be,  it  is  an
evident  truth,  that  a  couple  of  children,
even  about  their  sugar- plumbs  and  their
rattles,  cannot  prate  so  as  to  understand
and  be  understood,  until  they  have  learned
to  conceive  the  meaning  of  many  general
words — and  this,  I  think,  is  to  have  general
conceptions.

5.  Having  considered  the  sentiments  of
Bishop  Berkeley  on  this  subject,  let  us
next  attend  to  those  of  Mr  Hume,  as  they
are  expressed  Part  I.  §  7>  "  Treatise  of
Human  Nature."  He  agrees  perfectly
with  the  Bishop,  "  That  all  general  ideas
are  nothing  but  particular  ones  annexed  to
a  certain  term,  which  gives  them  a  more
extensive  signification,  and  makes  them
recall,  upon  occasion,  other  individuals  which
are  similar  to  them. [488] A  particular


410


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  v.


idea  becomes  general,  by  being  annexed  to
a  general  term ;  that  is,  to  a  term,  which,
from  a  customary  conjunction,  has  a  rela-
tion to  many  other  particular  ideas,  and
readily  recalls  them  in  the  imagination.
Abstract  ideas  are  therefore  in  themselves
individual,  however  they  may  become  general
in  their  representation.  The  image  in  the
mind  is  only  that  of  a  particular  object,
though  the  application  of  it  in  our  reason-
ing be  the  same  as  if  it  was  universal."

Although  Mr  Hume  looks  upon  this  to
be  one  of  the  greatest  and  most  valuable
discoveries  that  has  been  made  of  late  years
in  the  republic  of  letters,  it  appears  to  be
no  other  than  the  opinion  of  the  nominal-
ists, about  which  so  much  dispute  was
held,  from  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth
century  down  to  the  Reformation,  and
which  was  afterwards  supported  by  Mr
Hobbes.  I  shall  briefly  consider  the  argu-
ments by  which  Mr  Hume  hopes  to  have
put  it  beyond  all  doubt  and  controversy.

First,  He  endeavours  to  prove,  by  three
arguments,  that  it  is  utterly  impossible  to
conceive  any  quantity  or  quality,  without
forming  a  precise  notion  of  its  degrees;

This  is  indeed  a  great  undertaking  ;  but,
if  he  could  prove  it,  it  is  not  sufficient  for
his  purpose — for  two  reasons.

First,  Because  there  are  many  attributes
of  things,  besides  quantity  and  quality ;  and
it  is  incumbent  upon  him  to  prove  that  it
is  impossible  to  conceive  any  attribute,
without  forming  a  precise  notion  of  its
degree.  Each  of  the  ten  categories  of
Aristotle  is  a  genus,  and  may  be  an  attri-
bute. And,  if  he  should  prove  of  two  of
them — to  wit,  quantity  and  quality — that
there  can  be  no  general  conception  of  them  ;
there  remain  eight  behind,  of  which  this
must  be  proved. [489  J

The  other  reason  is,  because,  though  it
were  impossible  to  conceive  any  quantity
or  quality,  without  forming  a  precise  notion
of  its  degree,  it  does  not  follow  that  it  is
impossible  to  have  a  general  conception
even  of  quantity  and  quality.  The  con-
ception of  a  pound  troy  is  the  conception
of  a  quantity,  and  of  the  precise  degree  of
that  quantity  ;  but  it  is  an  abstract  general
conception  notwithstanding,  because  it  may
be  the  attribute  of  many  individual  bodies,
and  of  many  kinds  of  bodies.  He  ought,
therefore,  to  have  proved  that  we  cannot
conceive  quantity  or  quality,  or  any  other
attribute,  without  joining  it  inseparably  to
some  individual  subject.

This  remains  to  be  proved,  which  will  be
found  no  easy  matter.  For  instance,  I
conceive  what  is  meant  by  a  Japanese  as
distinctly  as  what  is  meant  by  an  English-
man or  a  Frenchman.  It  is  true,  a  Japan-
ese is  neither  quantity  nor  quality,  but  it
is  an  attribute  common  to  every  individual


of  a  populous  nation.  I  never  saw  an  in-
dividual of  that  nation  ;  and,  if  I  can  trust
my  consciousness,  the  general  term  does
not  lead  me  to  imagine  one  individual  of
the  sort  as  a  representative  of  all  others.

Though  Mr  Hume,  therefore,  undertakes
much,  yet,  if  he  could  prove  all  he  under-
takes to  prove,  it  would  by  no  means  be
sufficient  to  shew  that  we  have  no  abstract
general  conceptions.

Passing  this,  let  us  attend  to  his  argu-
ments for  proving  this  extraordinary  posi-
tion, that  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  any
quantity  or  quality,  without  forming  a  pre-
cise notion  of  its  degree.

The  first  argument  is,  that  it  is  impossi-
ble to  distinguish  things  that  are  not  ac-
tually separable.  "  The  precise  length  of
a  line  is  not  different  or  distinguishable
from  the  line." [490]

I  have  before  endeavoured  to  shew,  that
things  inseparable  in  their  nature  may  be
distinguished  in  our  conception.  And  we
need  go  no  farther  to  be  convinced  of  this,
than  the  instance  here  brought  to  prove
the  contrary.  The  precise  length  of  a  line,
he  says,  is  not  distinguishable  from  the
line.  When  I  say,  This  is  a  line,  I  say  and
mean  one  thing.  When  I  say,  It  is  a  line
of  three  inches,  I  say  and  mean  another
thing.  If  this  be  not  to  distinguish  the
precise  length  of  the  line  from  the  line,  I
know  not  what  it  is  to  distinguish.

Second  argument — "  Every  object  of
sense — that  is,  every  impression — is  an  in-
dividual, having  its  determinate  degrees  of
quantity  and  quality.  But  whatever  is
true  of  the  impression  is  true  of  the  idea,
as  they  differ  in  nothing  but  their  strength
and  vivacity."

The  conclusion  in  this  argument  is,  in-
deed, justly  drawn  from  the  premises.  If
it  be  true  that  ideas  differ  in  nothing  from
objects  of  sense,  but  in  strength  and  viva-
city, as  it  must  be  granted  that  all  the  ob-
jects of  sense  are  individuals,  it  will  cer-
tainly follow  that  all  ideas  are  individuals.
Granting,  therefore,  the  justness  of  this
conclusion,  I  beg  leave  to  draw  two  other
conclusions  from  the  same  premises,  which
will  follow  no  less  necessarily.

First,  If  ideas  differ  from  the  objects  of
sense  only  in  strength  and  vivacity,  it  will
follow,  that  the  idea  of  a  lion  is  a  lion  of
less  strength  and  vivacity.  And  hence  may
arise  a  very  important  question,  Whether
the  idea  of  a  lion  may  not  tear  in  pieces,
and  devour  the  ideas  of  sheep,  oxen,  and
horses,  and  even  of  men,  women,  and
children  ?

Secondly,  If  ideas  differ  only  in  strength
and  vivacity  from  the  objects  of  sense,  it
will  follow  that  objects  merely  conceived,
are  not  ideas ;  for  such  objects  differ  from
the  objects  of  sense  in  respects  of  a  very
[489,  490]


VI.]


OPINIONS  ABOUT  UNIVERSALS.


411


different  nature  from  strength  and  vivacity.
[491]  Every  object  of  sense  must  have  a
real  existence,  and  time  and  place.  But
things  merely  conceived  may  neither  have
existence,  nor  time  nor  place  ;  and,  there-
fore, though  there  should  be  no  abstract
ideas,  it  does  not  follow  that  things  abstract
aud  general  may  not  be  conceived.

The  third  argument  is  this : — "  It  is  a
principle  generally  received  in  philosophy,
that  everything  in  nature  is  individual ;  and
that  it  is  utterly  absurd  to  suppose  a  tri-
angle really  existent  which  has  no  precise
proportion  of  sides  and  angles.  If  this,
therefore,  be  absurd  in  fact  and  reality,  it
must  be  absurd  in  idea,  since  nothing  of
which  we  can  form  a  clear  and  distinct
idea  is  absurd  or  impossible."

I  acknowledge  it  to  be  impossible  that  a
triangle  should  really  exist  which  has  no
precise  proportion  of  sides  and  angles  ;  and
impossible  that  any  being  should  exist
which  is  not  an  individual  being ;  for,  I
think,  a  being  and  an  individual  being
mean  the  same  thing :  but  that  there  can
be  no  attributes  common  to  many  indivi-
duals I  do  not  acknowledge.  Thus,  to
many  figures  that  really  exist  it  may  be
common  that  they  are  triangles  ;  and  to
many  bodies  that  exist  it  may  be  common
that  they  are  fluid.  Triangle  and  fluid  are
not  beings,  they  are  attributes  of  beings.

As  to  the  principle  here  assumed,  that
nothing  of  which  we  can  form  a  clear  and
distinct  idea  is  absurd  or  impossible,  I  refer
to  what  was  said  upon  it,  chap.  3,  Essay
IV.  It  is  evident  that,  in  every  mathema-
tical demonstration,  ad  absurdum,  of  which
kind  almost  one-half  of  mathematics  con-
sists, we  are  required  to  suppose,  and,  con-
sequently, to  conceive,  a  thing  that  is  im-
possible. From  that  supposition  we  reason,
until  we  come  to  a  conclusion  that  is  not
only  impossible  but  absurd.  From  this  we
infer  that  the  proposition  supposed  at  first
is  impossible,  and,  therefore,  that  its  con-
tradictory is  true. [492]

As  this  is  the  nature  of  all  demonstra-
tions, ad  absurdum,  it  is  evident,  (I  do  not
say  that  we  can  have  a  clear  and  distiuct
idea,)  but  that  we  can  clearly  and  distinctly
conceive  things  impossible.

The  rest  of  Mr  Hume's  discourse  upon
this  subject  is  employed  in  explaining  how
an  individual  idea,  annexed  to  a  general
term,  may  serve  all  the  purposes  in  reason-
ing which  have  been  ascribed  to  abstract
general  ideas.

"  When  we  have  found  a  resemblance
among  several  objects  that  often  occur  to
us,  we  apply  the  same  name  to  all  of  them,
whatever  differences  we  may  observe  in  the
degrees  of  their  quantity  and  quality,  and
whatever  other  differences  may  appear
among  them.  After  we  have  acquired  a
[491-493]


custom  of  this  kind,  the  hearing  of  that
name  revives  the  idea  of  one  of  these  ob-
jects, and  makes  the  imagination  conceive
it,  with  all  its  circumstances  and  propor-
tions." But,  along  with  this  idea,  there  is
a  readiness  to  survey  any  other  of  the  indi-
viduals to  which  the  name  belongs,  and  to
observe  that  no  conclusion  be  formed  con-
trary to  any  of  them.  If  any  such  conclu-
sion is  formed,  those  individual  ideas  which
contradict  it  immediately  crowd  in  upon  us,
and  make  us  perceive  the  falsehood  of  the
proposition.  If  the  mind  suggests  not  al-
ways these  ideas  upon  occasion,  it  proceeds
from  some  imperfection  in  its  faculties  ;
and  such  a  one  as  is  often  the  source  of
false  reasoning  and  sophistry.

This  is,  in  substance,  the  way  in  which
he  accounts  for  what  he  calls  "  the  fore-
going paradox,  that  some  ideas  are  parti-
cular in  their  nature,  but  general  in  their
representation."  Upon  this  account  I  shall
make  some  remarks. [493]

1.  He  allows  that  we  find  a  resemblance
among  several  objects,  and  such  a  resem-
blance as  leads  us  to  apply  the  same  name
to  all  of  them.  This  concession  is  suffi-
cient to  shew  that  we  have  general  concep-
tions. There  can  be  no  resemblance  in
objects  that  have  no  common  attribute ;
and,  if  there  be  attributes  belonging  in  com-
mon to  several  objects,  and  in  man  a  fa-
culty to  observe  and  conceive  these,  and  to
give  names  to  them,  this  is  to  have  general
conceptions.

I  believe,  indeed,  we  may  have  an  indis-
tinct perception  of  resemblance  without
knowing  wherein  it  lies.  Thus,  I  may  see
a  resemblance  between  one  face  and  an-
other, when  I  cannot  distinctly  say  in  what
feature  they  resemble ;  but,  by  analysing
the  two  faces,  and  comparing  feature  with
feature,  I  may  form  a  distinct  notion  of
that  which  is  common  to  both.  A  painter,
being  accustomed  to  an  analysis  of  this  kind,
would  have  formed  a  distinct  notion  of  this
resemblance  at  first  sight ;  to  another  man
it  may  require  some  attention.

There  is,  therefore,  an  indistinct  notion
of  resemblance  when  we  compare  the  objects
only  in  gross  :  and  this  I  believe  brute  ani-
mals may  have.  There  is  also  a  distinct
notion  of  resemblance  when  we  analyse  the
objects  into  their  different  attributes,  and
perceive  them  to  agree  in  some  while  they
differ  in  others.  It  is  in  this  case  only  that
we  give  a  name  to  the  attributes  wherein
they  agree,  which  must  be  a  common  name,
because  the  thing  signified  by  it  is  common.
Thus,  when  I  compare  cubes  of  different
matter,  I  perceive  them  to  have  this  attri-
bute in  common,  that  they  are  compre-
hended under  six  equal  squares,  and  this
attribute  only  is  signified  by  applying  the
name  of  cube  to  them  all. When  I  com-


412


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  v.


pare  clean  linen  with  snow,  I  perceive  them
to  agree  in  colour ;  and  when  I  apply  the
name  of  white  to  both,  this  name  signifies
neither  snow  nor  clean  linen,  but  the  attri-
bute which  is  common  to  both.

2.  The  author  says,  that  when  we  have
found  a  resemblance  among  several  objects,
we  apply  the  same  name  to  all  of  them.
[494]

It  must  here  be  observed,  that  there  are
two  kinds  of  names  which  the  author  seems
to  confound,  though  they  are  very  different
in  nature,  and  in  the  power  they  have  in
language.  There  are  proper  names,  and
there  are  common  names  or  appellatives.
The  first  are  the  names  of  individuals.  The
same  proper  name  is  never  applied  to
several  individuals  on  account  of  their  simi-
litude, because  the  very  intention  of  a  pro-
per name  is  to  distinguish  one  individual
from  all  others  ;  and  hence  it  is  a  maxim
in  grammar  that  proper  names  have  no
plural  number.  A  proper  name  signifies
nothing  but  the  individual  whose  name  it
is ;  and,  when  we  apply  it  to  the  individual,
we  neither  affirm  nor  deny  anything  con-
cerning him.

A  common  name  or  appellative  is  not  the
name  of  any  individual,  but  a  general  term,
signifying  something  that  is  or  may  be
common  to  several  individuals.  Common
names,  therefore,  signify  common  attri-
butes. Thus,  when  I  apply  the  name  of
son  or  brother  to  several  persons,  this  sig-
nifies  and  affirms  that  this  attribute  is
common  to  all  of  them.

From  this,  it  is  evident  that  the  apply-
ing the  same  name  to  several  individuals
on  account  of  their  resemblance,  can,  in
consistence  with  grammar  and  common
sense,  mean  nothing  else  than  the  express-
ing, by  a  general  term,  something  that  is
common  to  those  individuals,  and  which,
therefore,  may  be  truly  affirmed  of  them  all.

3.  The  author  says,  "  It  is  certain  that
we  form  the  idea  of  individuals  whenever
we  use  any  general  term.  The  word  raises
up  an  individual  idea,  and  makes  the  ima-
gination conceive  it,  with  all  its  particular
circumstances  and  proportions."

This  fact  he  takes  a  great  deal  of  pains  to
account  for,  from  the  effect  of  custom.
[495]

But  the  fact  should  be  ascertained  before
we  take  pains  to  account  for  it.  I  can  see
no  reason  to  believe  the  fact ;  and  I  think
a  farmer  can  talk  of  his  sheep  and  his  black
cattle,  without  conceiving,  in  his  imagina-
tion, one  individual,  with  all  its  circum-
stances and  proportions.  If  this  be  true,
the  whole  of  his  theory  of  general  ideas  falls


to  the  ground.  To  me  it  appears,  that
when  a  general  term  is  well  understood,  it  is
only  by  accident  if  it  suggest  some  indi-
vidual of  the  kind ;  but  this  effect  is  by  no
means  constant.

I  understand  perfectly  what  mathemati-
cians call  a  line  of  the  fifth  order ;  yet  I
never  conceived  in  my  imagination  anyone
of  the  kind  hi  all  its  circumstances  and  pro-
portions. Sir  Isaac  Newton  first  formed  a
distinct  general  conception  of  lines  of  the
third  order ;  and  afterwards,  by  great  labour
and  deep  penetration,  found  out  and  de-
scribed the  particular  species  comprehended
under  that  general  term.  According  to  Mr
Hume's  theory,  he  must  first  have  been
acquainted  with  the  particulars,  and  then
have  learned  by  custom  to  apply  one
general  name  to  all  of  them.

The  author  observes,  "  That  the  idea  of
an  equilateral  triangle  of  an  inch  perpen-
dicular, may  serve  us  in  talking  of  a  figure,
a  rectilinear  figure,  a  regular  figure,  a  tri-
angle, and  an  equilateral  triangle."

I  answer,  the  man  that  uses  these  general
terms  either  understands  their  meaning,
or  he  does  not.  If  he  does  not  understand
their  meaning,  all  his  talk  about  them  will
be  found  only  without  sense,  and  the  par-
ticular idea  mentioned  cannot  enable  him
to  speak  of  them  with  understanding.  If
he  understands  the  meaning  of  the  general
terms,  he  will  find  no  use  for  the  particular
idea.

4.  He  tells  us  gravely,  "  That  in  a  globe
of  white  marble  the  figure  and  the  colour
are  undistinguishable,  and  are  in  effect  the
same."  [496]  How  foolish  have  mankind
been  to  give  different  names,  in  all  ages
andinall  languages,  to  things  undistinguish-
able, and  in  effect  the  same  ?  Henceforth,
in  all  books  of  science  and  of  entertainment,
we  may  substitute  figure  for  colour,  and
colour  for  figure.  By  this  we  shall  make
numberless  curious  discoveries,  without
danger  of  error. * [497]


*  The  whole  controversy  of  Nominalism  and  Con-
ceptualisra  is  founded  on  the  ambiguity  of  the  terms
employed.  The  opposite  partus  are  substantially  at
one.  Had  our  British  philosophers  been  aware  of
the  Leibnitzian  distinction  of  Intuitive  and  Symboli-
cal knowledge ;  and  had  we,  like  the  Germans,
different  terms,  like  Begriff  w&Anschauung,  to  de-
note different  kinds  of  thought,  there  would  have
been  as  little  difference  of  opinion  in  regard  to  the
nature  of  general  notions  in  this  country  as  in  the
Empire.  V\  ith  us,  Idea,  Notion,  Concqction,  Ike.
are  confounded,  or  applied  by  different  philosophers
in  different  senses.  1  must  put  the  reader  on  his
guard  against  Dr  Thomas  Brown's  speculations  on
this  subject.  His  own  doctrine  of  universals,  in  so
far  as  it  is  peculiar,  is  self-c  .ntradictory  j  and  nothing
can  be  more  erroneous  than  his  statement  of  the  doc-
trine held  by  others,  especially  by  tfce  Nominalists.

[494-497]


niAP.  i."]


OF  JUDGMENT  IN  GENERAL.


413


ESSAY  VI.
OF  JUDGMENT


CHAPTER  I.

OF  JUDGMENT  IN  GENERAL.

Judging  is  an  operation  of  the  mind  so
familiar  to  every  man  who  hath  understand-
ing, and  its  name  is  so  common  and  so  well
understood,  that  it  needs  no  definition.

As  it  is  impossible  by  a  definition  to  give
a  notion  of  colour  to  a  man  who  never  saw
colours  ;  so  it  is  impossible  by  any  defini-
tion to  give  a  distinct  notion  of  judgment  to
a  man  who  has  not  often  judged,  and  who
is  not  capable  of  reflecting  attentively  upon
this  act  of  his  mind.  The  best  use  of  a  de-
finition is  to  prompt  him  to  that  reflection  ;
and  without  it  the  best  definition  will  be  apt
to  mislead  him.

The  definition  commonly  given  of  judg-
ment, by  the  more  ancient  writers  in  logic,
was,  that  it  is  an  act  of  the  mind,  where!  y
ono  thing  is  affirmed  or  denied  of  another.
I  believe  this  is  as  good  a  definition  of  it  as
can  be  given.  Why  I  prefer  it  to  some
later  definitions,  will  afterwards  appear.
"Without  pretending  to  give  any  other.  I
shall  make  two  remarks  upon  it,  and  then
offer  some  general  observations  on  this
subject. [498]

1.  It  is  true  that  it  is  by  affirmation  or
denial  that  we  express  our  judgments ;  but
there  may  be  judgment  which  is  not  ex-
pressed. It  is  a  solitary  act  of  the  mind,
and  the  expression  of  it  by  affirmation  or
denial  is  not  at  all  essential  to  it.  It  may
be  tacit,  and  not  expressed.  Nay,  it  is
well  known  that  men  may  judge  contrary
to  what  they  affirm  or  deny ;  the  definition
therefore  must  be  understood  of  mental  af-
firmation or  denial,  which  indeed  is  only
another  name  for  judgment.

2.  Affirmation  and  denial  is  very  often
the  expression  of  testimony,  which  is  a  dif-
ferent act  of  the  mind,  and  ought  to  be
distinguished  from  judgment.

A  judge  asks  of  a  witness  what  he  knows
of  such  a  matter  to  which  he  was  an  eye
or  ear-witness.  He  answers,  by  affirming
or  denying  something  But  his  answer
does  not  express  his  judgment;  it  is  his
testimony.  Again,  I  ask  a  man  his  opinion
in  a  matter  of  science  or  of  criticism.  His
answer  is  not  testimony ;  it  is  the  expres-
sion of  his  judgment.

Testimony  is  a  social  act,  and  it  is  essen
[498,  499]


tial  to  it  to  be  expressed  by  words  or  signs.
A  tacit  testimony  is  a  contradiction  :  but
there  is  no  contradiction  in  a  tacit  judgment ;
it  is  complete  without  being  expressed.

In  testimony  a  man  pledges  his  veracity
for  what  he  affirms  ;  so  that  a  false  testi-
mony is  a  lie :  but  a  wrong  judgment  is  not
a  lie ;  it  is  only  an  error.

I  believe,  in  all  languages,  testimony  and
judgment  are  expressed  by  the  same  form
of  speech.  A  proposition  affirmative  or
negative,  with  a  verb  in  what  is  called  the
indicative  mood,  expresses  both.  To  dis-
tinguish them  by  the  form  of  speech,  it
would  be  necessary  that  verbs  should  have
two  indicative  moods,  one  for  testimony,
and  another  to  express  judgment.  [499]
I  know  not  that  this  is  found  in  any  lan-
guage. And  the  reason  is — not  surely  that
the  vulgar  cannot  distinguish  the  two,  for
every  man  knows  the  difference  between  a
lie  and  an  error  of  judgment — but  that,  from
the  matter  and  circumstances,  we  can  easily
see  whether  a  man  intends  to  give  his  tes-
timony, or  barely  to  express  his  judgment.

Although  men  must  have  judged  in  many
cases  before  tribunals  of  justice  were
erected,  yet  it  is  very  probable  that  there
were  tribunals  before  men  began  to  specu-
late about  judgment,  and  that  the  word  may
be  borrowed  from  the  practice  of  tribunals.
As  a  judge,  after  taking  the  proper  evidence,
passes  sentence  in  a  cause,  and  that  sent-
ence is  called  his  judgment,  so  the  mind,
with  regard  to  whatever  is  true  or  false,
passes  sentence,  or  determines  according  to
the  evidence  that  appears.  Some  kinds  of
evidence  leave  no  room  for  doubt.  Sent-
ence is  passed  immediately,  without  seek-
ing or  hearing  any  contrary  evidence,
because  the  thing  is  certain  and  notorious.
In  other  cases,  there  is  room  for  weighing
evidence  on  both  sides,  before  sentence  is
passed.  The  analogy  between  a  tribunal
of  justice,  and  this  inward  tribunal  of  the
mind,  is  too  obvious  to  escape  the  notice  of
any  man  who  ever  appeared  before  a  judge.
And  it  is  probable  that  the  word  judgment,
as  well  as'many  other  words  we  use  in  speak-
ing of  this  operation  of  mind,  are  grounded
on  this  analogy.

Having  premised  these  things,  that  it
may  be  clearly  understood  what  I  mean  by
judgment,  I  proceed  to  make  some  general
observations  concerning  it.


14


OX  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[ess.ay VI.


First,  Judgment  is  an  act  of  the  mind,
specifically  different  from  simple  apprehen-
sion, or  the  bare  conception  of  a  thing.*
It  would  be  unnecessary  to  observe  this,  if
some  philosophers  had  not  been  led  by  their
theories  to  a  contrary  opinion. [500]

Although  there  can  be  no  judgment  with-
out a  conception  of  the  things  about  which
we  judge,  yet  conception  may  be  without  any
judgment. -f*  Judgment  can  be  expressed
by  a  proposition  only,  and  a  proposition  is
a  complete  sentence ;  but  simple  apprehen-
sion may  be  expressed  by  a  word  or  words,
which  make  no  complete  sentence.  When
simple  apprehension  is  employed  about  a
proposition,  every  man  knows  that  it  is  one
thing  to  apprehend  a  proposition — that  is,
to  conceive  what  it  means — but  it  is  quite
another  thing  to  judge  it  to  be  true  or  false.

It  is  self-evident  that  every  judgment
must  be  either  true  or  false  \  but  simple
apprehension,  or  conception,  can  neither  be
true  nor  false,  as  was  shewn  before.

One  judgment  may  be  contradictor}'  to
another  ;  and  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  to
have  two  judgments  at  the  same  time,  which
he  perceives  to  be  contradictory.  But  con-
tradictory propositions  may  be  conceived^
at  the  same  time  without  any  difficulty.
That  the  sun  is  greater  than  the  earth,  and
that  the  sun  is  not  greater  than  the  earth,
are  contradictory  propositions.  He  that
apprehends  the  meaning  of  one,  apprehends
the  meaning  of  both.  But  it  is  impossible
for  him  to  judge  both  to  be  true  at  the  same
time.  He  knows  that,  if  the  one  is  true,
the  other  must  be  false.  For  these  reasons,
I  hold  it  to  be  certain  that  judgment  and
simple  apprehension  are  acts  of  the  mind
specifically  different*

Secondly,  There  are  notions  or  ideas  that
ought  to  be  referred  to  the  faculty  of  judg-
ment as  their  source  ;  because,  if  we  had
not  that  faculty,  they  could  not  enter  into
our  minds;  and  to  those  that  have  that
faculty,  and  are  capable  of  reflecting  upon
its  operations,  they  are  obvious  and  familiar.

Among  these  we  may  reckon  the  notion
of  judgment  itself ;  the  notions  of  a  propos-
ition— of  its  subject,  predicate,  and  copula ;
of  affirmation  and  negation,  of  true  and
false  ;  of  knowledge,  belief,  disbelief,  opi-
nion, assent,  evidence.  From  no  source
could  we  acquire  these  notions,  but  from
reflecting  upon  our  judgments.  Relations
of  things  make  one  great  class  of  our  notions
or  ideas ;  and  we  cannot  have  the  idea  of
any  relation  without  some  exercise  of  judg-
ment, as  will  appear  afterwards.  [501]
Thirdly, In  persons  come to years  of

*  Which,  however,  implies  a  judgment  affirming
its  subjective  reality— an  existential  judgment.— H.

t  See  last  note,  and  above,  p.  *43,  a,  note  *.  and  p.
37  5,  a,  notet— H.  • «

+  See  above,  p.  377,  b,  note.— H


understanding,  judgment  necessarily  accom-
panies all  sensation,  perception  by  the
senses,  consciousness,  and  memory,  but  not
conception.*

I  restrict  this  to  persons  come  to  the  years
of  understanding,  because  it  may  be  a  ques-
tion, whether  infants,  in  the  first  period  of
life,  have  any  judgment  or  belief  at  all.*
The  same  question  may  be  put  with  regard
to  brutes  and  some  idiots.  This  question
is  foreign  to  the  present  subject ;  and  I  say
nothing  here  about  it,  but  speak  only  of
persons  who  have  the  exercise  of  judg-
ment.

In  them  it  is  evident  that  a  man  who
feels  pain,  judges  and  believes  that  he  is
really  pained.  The  man  who  perceives  an
object,  believes  that  it  exists,  and  is  what
he  distinctly  perceives  it  to  be  ;  nor  is  it  in
his  power  to  avoid  such  judgment.  And
the  like  may  be  said  of  memory,  and  of
consciousness.  Whether  judgment  ought
to  be  called  a  necessary  concomitant  of
these  operations,  or  rather  a  part  or  in-
gredient of  them,  I  do  not  dispute  ;  but  it
is  certain  that  all  of  them  are  accompanied
with  a  determination  that  something  is
true  or  false,  and  a  consequent  belief.  If
this  determination  be  not  judgment,  it  is
an  operation  that  has  got  no  name ;  for  it
is  not  simple  apprehension,  neither  is  it
reasoning ;  it  is  a  mental  affirmation  or
negation  ;  it  may  be  expressed  by  a  propo-
sition affirmative  or  negative,  and  it  is
accompanied  with  the  firmest  belief.  These
are  the  characteristics  of  judgment ;  and  I
must  call  it  judgment,  till  I  can  find  another
name  to  it.

The  judgments  we  form  are  either  of
things  necessary,  or  of  things  contingent.
That  three  times  three  is  nine,  that  the
whole  is  greater  than  a  part,  are  judg-
ments about  things  necessary.  [502]  Our
assent  to  such  necessary  propositions  is  not
grounded  upon  any  operation  of  sense,  of
memory,  or  of  consciousness,  nor  does  it
require  their  concurrence  ;  it  is  unaccom-
panied by  any  other  operation  but  that  of
conception,  which  must  accompany  all  judg-
ment ;  we  may  therefore  call  this  judgment
of  things  necessary  pure  judgment.  Our
judgment  of  things  contingent  must  always
rest  upon  some  other  operation  of  the  mind,
such  as  sense,  or  memory,  or  consciousness,
or  credit  in  testimony,  which  is  itself
grounded  upon  sense.

That  I  now  write  upon  a  table  covered
with  green  cloth,  is  a  contingent  event,
which  I  judge  to  be  most  undoubtedly  true.
My  judgment  is  grounded  upon  my  percep-
tion, and  is  a  necessary  concomitant  or  in-
gredient of  my  perception. That  I  dined


*  In  so  far  as  there  can  be  Consciousness,  there
must  be  Judgment— H.

[500-502  1


I.]


OF  JUDGMENT  IN  GENERAL.


415


with  such  a  company  yesterday,  I  judge  to
be  true,  because  I  remember  it ;  and  my
judgment  necessarily  goes  along  with  this
remembrance,  or  makes  a  part  of  it.

There  are  many  forms  of  speech  in  com-
mon language  which  shew  that  the  senses,
memory  and  consciousness,  are  considered
as  judging  faculties.  We  say  that  a  man
judges  of  colours  by  his  eye,  of  sounds  by
his  ear.  We  speak  of  the  evidence  of  sense,
the  evidence  of  memory,  the  evidence  of
consciousness.  Evidence  is  the  ground  of
judgment ;  and  when  we  see  evidence,  it  is
impossible  not  to  judge.

When  we  speak  of  seeing  or  remember-
ing anything,  we,  indeed,  hardly  ever  add
that  we  judge  it  to  be  true.  But  the  rea-
son of  this  appears  to  be,  that  such  an
addition  would  be  mere  superfluity  of
speech,  because  every  one  knows  that
what  I  see  or  remember,  I  must  judge  to
be  true,  and  cannot  do  otherwise.

And,  for  the  same  reason,  in  speaking  of
anything  that  is  self-evident  or  strictly  de-
monstrated, we  do  not  say  that  we  judge
it  to  be  true.  This  would  be  superfluity
of  speech,  because  every  man  knows  th^.t  we
must  judge  that  to  be  true  which  we  hold
self-evident  or  demonstrated. [503]

When  you  say  you  saw  such  a  thing,  or
that  you  distinctly  remember  it,  or  when
you  say  of  any  proposition  that  it  is  self-
evident,  or  strictly  demonstrated,  it  would
be  ridiculous  after  this  to  ask  whether  you
judge  it  to  be  true  ;  nor  would  it  be  less
ridiculous  in  you  to  inform  us  that  you  do.
It  would  be  a  superfluity  of  speech  of  the
same  kind  as  if,  not  content  with  saying
that  you  saw  such  an  object,  you  should
add  that  you  saw  it  with  your  eyes.

There  is,  therefore,  good  reason  why,  in
speaking  or  writing,  judgment  should  not
be  expressly  mentioned,  when  all  men  know
it  to  be  necessarily  implied  ;  that  is,  when
there  can  be  no  doubt.  In  such  cases,  we
barely  mention  the  evidence.  But  when
the  evidence  mentioned  leaves  room  for
doubt,  then,  without  any  superfluity  or  tau-
tology, we  say  we  judge  the  thing  to  be  so,
because  this  is  not  implied  in  what  was  said
before.  A  woman  with  child  never  says,
that,  going  such  a  journey,  she  carried  her
child  along  with  her.  We  know  that,  while
it  is  in  her  womb,  she  must  carry  it  along
with  her.  There  are  some  operations  of
mind  that  may  be  said  to  carry  judgment
in  their  womb,  and  can  no  more  leave  it
behind  them  than  the  pregnant  woman  can
leave  her  child.  Therefore,  in  speaking  of
such  operations,  it  is  not  expressed.

Perhaps  this  manner  of  speaking  may
have  led  philosophers  into  the  opinion  that,
in  perception  by  the  senses,  in  memory,
and  in  consciousness,  there  is  no  judgment
at  all.  Because  it  is  not  mentioned  in
[503-505]


speaking  of  these  faculties,  they  conclude
that  it  does  not  accompany  them  ;  that  they
are  only  different  modes  of  simple  appre-
hension, or  of  acquiring  ideas ;  and  that  it
is  no  part  of  their  office  to  judge. [504]

I  apprehend  the  same  cause  has  led  Mr
Locke  into  a  notion  of  judgment  which  I
take  to  be  peculiar  to  him.  He  thinks  that
the  mind  has  two  faculties  conversant  about
truth  and  falsehood.  Fhst,  knowledge;
and,  secondly,  judgment.  In  the  first,  the
perception  of  the  agreement  or  disagree-
ment of  the  ideas  is  certain.  In  the  second,
it  is  not  certain,  but  probable  only.

According  to  this  notion  of  judgment,  it
is  not  by  judgment  that  I  perceive  that  two
and  three  make  five  ;  it  is  by  the  faculty  of
knowledge.  I  apprehend  there  can  be  no
kaowledge  without  judgment,  though  there
may  be  judgment  without  that  certainty
which  we  commonly  call  knowledge.

Mr  Locke,  in  another  place  of  his  Essay,
tells  us,  "  That  the  notice  we  have  by  our
senses  of  the  existence  of  things  without  us,
though  not  altogether  so  certain  as  our  in-
tuitive knowledge,  or  the  deductions  of  our
reason  about  abstract  ideas,  yet  is  an  as-
surance that  deserves  the  name  of  know-
ledge." I  think,  by  this  account  of  it,  and
by  his  definitions  before  given  of  knowledge
and  judgment,  it  deserves  as  well  the  name
of  judgment.

That  I  may  avoid  disputes  about  the
meaning  of  words,  I  wish  the  reader  to  un-
derstand, that  I  give  the  name  of  judgment
to  every  determination  of  the  mind  con-
cerning what  is  true  or  what  is  false.  This,
I  think,  is  what  logicians,  from  the  days  of
Aristotle,  have  called  judgment.  Whether
it  be  called  one  faculty,  as  I  think  it  has
always  been,  or  whether  a  philosopher
chooses  to  split  it  into  two,  seems  not  very
material.  And,  if  it  be  granted  that,  by  our
senses,  our  memory,  and  consciousness,  we
not  only  have  ideas  or  simple  apprehen-
sions, but  form  determinations  concerning
what  is  true  and  what  is  false — whether
these  determinations  ought  to  be  called
knowledge  or  judgment,  is  of  small  moment.
[505]

The  judgments  grounded  upon  the  evi-
dence of  sense,  of  memory,  and  of  conscious-
ness, put  all  men  upon  a  level.  The  phi-
losopher, with  regard  to  these,  has  no  pre-
rogative above  the  illiterate,  or  even  above
the  savage.

Their  reliance  upon  the  testimony  of
these  faculties  is  as  firm  and  as  well
grounded  as  his.  His  superiority  is  in
judgments  of  another  kind — in  judgments
about  things  abstract  and  necessary.  And
he  is  unwilling  to  give  the  name  of  judg-
ment to  that  wherein  the  most  ignorant
and  unimproved  of  the  species  are  his
equals.


416


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  vt„


But  philosophers  have  never  been  able
to  give  any  definition  of  judgment  which
does  not  apply  to  the  determinations  of
our  senses,  our  memory,  and  conscious-
ness, nor  any  definition  of  simple  appre-
hension which  can  comprehend  those  deter-
minations.

Our  judgments  of  this  kind  are  purely
the  gift  of  Nature,  nor  do  they  admit  of
improvement  by  culture.  The  memory  of
one  man  may  be  more  tenacious  than  that
of  another ;  but  both  rely  with  equal  assur-
ance upon  what  they  distinctly  remember.
One  man's  sight  may  be  more  acute,  or  his
feeling  more  delicate,  than  that  of  another;
but  both  give  equal  credit  to  the  distinct
testimony  of  their  sight  and  touch.

And,  as  we  have  this  belief  by  the  con-
stitution of  our  nature,  without  any  effort
of  our  own,  so  no  effort  of  ours  can  over-
turn it.

The  sceptic  may  perhaps  persuade  him-
self, in  general,  that  he  has  no .  ground  to
believe  his  senses  or  his  memory :  but,  in
particular  cases  that  are  interesting,  his
disbelief  vanishes,  and  he  finds  himself
under  a  necessity  of  believing  both. [506]

These  judgments  may,  in  the  strictest
sense,  be  called  judgments  of  nature.  Na-
ture has  subjected  us  to  them,  whether  we
will  or  not.  They  are  neither  got,  nor  can
they  be  lost  by  any  use  or  abuse  of  our
faculties ;  and  it  is  evidently  necessary  for
our  preservation  that  it  should  be  so.  For,
if  belief  in  our  senses  and  in  our  memory
were  to  be  learned  by  culture,  the  race  of
men  would  perish  before  they  learned  this
lesson.  It  is  necessary  to  all  men  for  their
being  and  preservation,  and  therefore  is
unconditionally  given  to  all  men  by  the
Author  of  Nature.

I  acknowledge  that,  if  we  were  to  rest
in  those  judgments  of  Nature  of  which  we
now  speak,  without  building  others  upon
them,  they  would  not  entitle  us  to  the  deno-
mination of  reasonable  beings.  But  yet
they  ought  not  to  be  despised,  for  they  are
the  foundation  upon  which  the  grand  super-
structure of  human  knowledge  must  be
raised.  And,  as  in  other  superstructures
the  foundation  is  commonly  overlooked,  so
it  has  been  in  this.  The  more  sublime
attainments  of  the  human  mind  have  at-
tracted the  attention  of  philosophers,  while
they  have  bestowed  but  a  careless  glance
upon  the  humble  foundation  on  which  the
whole  fabric  rests.

A  fourth  observation  is,  that  some  exer-
cise of  judgment  is  necessary  in  the  forma-
tion of  all  abstract  and  general  conceptions,
whether  more  simple  or  more  complex ;  in
dividing,  in  defining,  and,  in  general,  in
forming  all  clear  and  distinct  conceptions
of  things,  which  are  the  only  fit  materials
of  reasoning.


These  operations  are  allied  to  each  other,
and  therefore  I  bring  them  under  one  ob-
servation. They  are  more  allied  to  cur
rational  nature  than  those  mentioned  in  the
last  observation,  and  therefore  are  consi-
dered by  themselves.

That  I  may  not  be  mistaken,  it  may  be
observed  that  I  do  not  say  that  abstract
notions,  or  other  accurate  notions  of  things,
after  they  have  been  formed,  cannot  be
barely  conceived  without  any  exercise  of
judgment  about  them.  I  doubt  not  that
they  may  :  but  what  I  say  is,  that,  in  their
formation  in  the  mind  at  first,  there  must
be  some  exercise  of  judgment. [507]

It  is  impossible  to  distinguish  the  different
attributes  belonging  to  the  same  subject,
without  judging  that  they  are  really  different
and  distinguishable,  and  that  they  have  that
relation  to  the  subject  which  logicians  ex-
press, by  saying  that  they  may  be  predicated
of  it.  We  cannot  generalise,  without  judg-
ing that  the  same  attribute  does  or  may  be-
long to  many  individuals.  It  has  been
shewn  that  our  simplest  general  notions
are  formed  by  these  two  operations  of  dis-
tinguishing and  generalising  ;  judgment
therefore  is  exercised  in  forming  the  simplest
general  notions.

In  those  that  are  more  complex,  and
which  have  been  shewn  to  be  formed  by
combining  the  more  simple,  there  is  another
act  of  the  judgment  required ;  for  such
combinations  are  not  made  at  random,  but
for  an  end ;  and  judgment  is  employed  in
fitting  them  to  that  end.  We  form  complex
general  notions  for  conveniency  of  arrang-
ing our  thoughts  in  discourse  and  reasoning ;
and,  therefore,  of  an  infinite  number  of  com-
binations that  might  be  formed,  we  choose
only  those  that  are  useful  and  necessary.

That  judgment  must  be  employed  in
dividing  as  well  as  in  distinguishing,  ap-
pears evident.  It  is  one  thing  to  divide  a
subject  properly,  another  to  cut  it  in  pieces.
Hocnon  est  divider e,  sed  fr  anger  e  rem,  said
Cicero,  when  he  censured  an  improper
division  of  Epicurus.  Reason  has  discovered
rules  of  division,  which  have  been  known
to  logicians  more  than  two  thousand  years.

There  are  rules  likewise  of  definition  of
no  less  antiquity  and  authority.  A  man
may  no  doubt  divide  or  define  properly  with-
out attending  to  the  rules,  or  even  without
knowing  them.  But  this  can  only  be  when
he  has  judgment  to  perceive  that  to  be  right
in  a  particular  case,  which  the  rule  de-
termines to  be  right  in  all  cases.

I  add  in  general,  that,  without  some  de-
gree of  judgment,  we  can  form  no  accurate
aud  distinct  notions  of  things  ;  so  that  one
province  of  judgment  is,  to  aid  us  in  form-
ing clear  and  distinct  conceptions  of  things,
which  are  the  only  fit  materials  for  reason-
ing. [508]

[506-508]


CHAP,


«•]


OF  JUDGMENT  IN  GENERAL.


417


This  will  probably  appear  to  be  a  paradox
to  philosophers,  who  have  always  considered
the  formation  of  ideas  of  every  kind  as  be-
longing to  simple  apprehension ;  and  that
the  sole  province  of  judgment  is  to  put  them
together  in  affirmative  or  negative  proposi-
tions ;  and  therefore  it  requires  some  con-
firmation.

Fin-t,  I  think  it  necessarily  follows,  from
what  has  been  already  said  in  this  observa-
tion. For  if,  without  some  degree  of  judg-
ment, a  man  can  neither  distinguish,  nor
divide,  nor  define,  nor  form  any  general
notion,  simple  or  eomplex,  he  surely,  with-
out some  degree  of  judgment,  cannot  have
in  his  mind  the  materials  necessary  to
reasoning.

There  cannot  be  any  proposition  in  lan-
guage which  does  not  involve  some  general
conception.  The  proposition,  that  I  exist,
which  Des  Cartes  thought  the  first  of  all
truths,  and  the  foundation  of  all  knowledge,
cannot  be  conceived  without  the  conception
of  existence,  one  of  the  most  abstract  general
conceptions  A  man  cannot  believe  his  own
existence,  or  the  existence  of  anything  he
sees  or  remembers,  until  he  has  so  much
judgment  as  to  distinguish  things  that  really
exist  from  things  which  are  only  conceived.
He  sees  a  man  six  feet  high  ;  he  conceives
a  man  sixty  feet  high  :  he  judges  the  first
object  to  exist,  because  he  sees  it ;  the
second  he  does  not  judge  to  exist,  because
he  only  conceives  it.  Now,  I  would  ask,
Whether  he  can  attribute  existence  to  the
first  object,  and  not  to  the  second,  without
knowing  what  existence  means  ?  It  is  im-
possible.

How  early  the  notion  of  existence  enters
into  the  mind,  I  cannot  determine ;  but  it
must  certainly  be  in  the  mind  as  soon  as
we  ean  affirm  of  anything,  with  understand-
ing, that  it  exists. [509]

In  every  other  proposition,  the  predicate,
at  least,  must  be  a  general  notion — a  pre-
dicable  and  an  universal  being  one  and  the
same.  Besides  this,  every  proposition  either
affirms  or  denies.  And  no  man  can  have
a  distinct  conception  of  a  proposition,  who
does  not  understand  distinctly  the  meaning
of  affirming  or  denying.  But  these  are  very
general  conceptions,  and,  as  was  before
observed,  are  derived  from  judgment,  as
their  source  and  origin.

I  am  sensible  that  a  strong  objection  may
be  made  to  this  reasoning,  and  that  it  may
seem  to  lead  to  an  absurdity  or  a  contra-
diction. It  may  be  said,  that  every  judg-
ment is  a  mental  affirmation  or  negation.
If,  therefore,  some  previous  exercise  of
judgment  be  necessary  to  understand  what
is  meant  by  affirmation  or  negation,  the
exercise  of  judgment  must  go  before  any
judgment  which  is  absurd.

In  like  manner,  every  judgment  may  be
[509,510]


expressed  by  a  proposition,  and  a  proposi-
tion must  be  conceived  before  we  can  judge
of  it.  If,  therefore,  we  cannot  conceive  the
meaning  of  a  proposition  without  a  previous
exercise  of  judgment,  it  follows  that  judg-
ment must  be  previous  to  the  conception  of
any  proposition,  and  at  the  same  time  that
the  conception  of  a  proposition  must  be  pre-
vious to  all  judgment,  which  is  a  contra-
diction.

The  reader  may  please  to  observe,  that
I  have  limited  what  I  have  said  to  distinct
conception,  and  some  degree  of  judgment ;
and  it  is  by  this  means  I  hope  to  avoid  this
labyrinth  of  absurdity  and  contradiction.
The  faculties  of  conception  and  judgment
have  an  infancy  and  a  maturity  as  man  has.
What  I  have  said  is  limited  to  their  mature
state.  I  believe  in  their  infant  state  they
are  very  weak  and  indistinct ;  and  that,  by
imperceptible  degrees,  they  grow  to  ma-
turity, each  giving  aid  to  the  other,  and
receiving  aid  from  it.  But  which  of  them
first  began  this  friendly  intercourse,  is  be-
yond my  ability  to  determine.  It  is  like
the  question  concerning  the  bird  and  the
egg. [510]

In  the  present  state  of  things,  it  is  true
that  every  bird  comes  from  an  egg,  and
every  egg  from  a  bird  ;  and  each  may  be
said  to  be  previous  to  the  other.  But,  if
we  go  back  to  the  origin  of  things,  there
must  have  been  some  bird  that  did  not
come  from  any  egg,  or  some  egg  that  did
not  come  from  any  bird.

In  like  manner,  in  the  mature  state  of
man,  distinct  conception  of  a  proposition
supposes  some  previous  exercise  of  judg-
ment, and  distinct  judgment  supposes  dis-
tinct conception.  Each  may  truly  be  said
to  come  from  the  other,  as  the  bird  from
the  egg,  and  the  egg  from  the  bird.  But,
if  we  trace  back  this  succession  to  its  origin
— that  is,  to  the  first  proposition  that  was
ever  conceived  by  the  man,  and  the  first
judgment  he  ever  formed — I  determine  no-
thing about  them,  nor  do  I  know  in  what
order,  or  how,  they  were  produced,  any
more  than  how  the  bones  grow  in  the
womb  of  her  that  is  with  child.

The  first  exercise  of  these  faculties  of
conception  and  judgment  is  hid,  like  the
sources  of  the  Nile,  in  an  unknown  region.

The  necessity  of  some  degree  of  judg-
ment to  clear  and  distinct  conceptions  of
things,  may,  I  think,  be  illustrated  by  this
similitude.

An  artist,  suppose  a  carpenter,  cannot
work  in  his  art  without  tools,  and  these
tools  must  be  made  by  art.  The  exercise
of  the  art,  therefore,  is  necessary  to  make
the  tools,  and  the  tools  are  necessary  to  the
exercise  of  the  art.  There  is  the  same
appearance  of  contradiction,  as  in  what  I
have  advanced  concerning  the  necessity  of
2  E


418


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


some  degree  of  judgment,  in  order  to  form
clear  and  distinct  conceptions  of  things.
These  are  the  tools  we  must  use  in  judging
and  in  reasoning,  and  without  them  must
make  very  bungling  work ;  yet  these  tools
cannot  be  made  without  some  exercise  of
judgment [511]

The  necessity  of  some  degree  of  judg-
ment in  forming  accurate  and  distinct  no-
tions of  things  will  farther  appear,  if  we
consider  attentively  what  notions  we  can
form,  without  any  aid  of  judgment,  of  the
objects  of  sense,  of  the  operations  of  our
own  minds,  or  of  the  relations  of  things.

To  begin  with  the  objects  of  sense.  It
is  acknowledged,  on  all  hands,  that  the  first
notions  we  have  of  sensible  objects  are  got
by  the  external  senses  only,  and  probably
before  judgment  is  brought  forth ;  but  these
first  notions  are  neither  simple,  nor  are
they  accurate  and  distinct :  they  are  gross
and  indistinct,  and,  like  the  chaos,  a  rudis
indigestaque  moles.  Before  we  can  have
any  distinct  notion  of  this  mass,  it  must  be
analysed ;  the  heterogeneous  parts  must  be
separated  in  our  conception,  and  the  simple
elements,  which  before  lay  hid  in  the  com-
mon mass,  must  first  be  distinguished,  and
then  put  together  into  one  whole.

In  this  way  it  is  that  we  form  distinct
notions  even  of  the  objects  of  sense ;  but
this  process  of  analysis  and  composition,  by
habit,  becomes  so  easy,  and  is  performed
so  readily,  that  we  are  apt  to  overlook  it,
and  to  impute  the  distinct  notion  we  have
formed  of  the  object  to  the  senses  alone  ;
and  this  we  are  the  more  prone  to  do
because,  when  once  we  have  distinguished
the  sensible  qualities  of  the  object  from
one  another,  the  sense  gives  testimony  to
each  of  them.

You  perceive,  for  instance,  an  object
white,  round,  and  a  foot  in  diameter.  I
grant  that  you  perceive  all  these  attributes
of  the  object  by  sense ;  but,  if  you  had  not
been  able  to  distinguish  the  colour  from
the  figure,  and  both  from  the  magnitude,
your  senses  would  only  have  given  you  one
complex  and  confused  notion  of  all  these
mingled  together.

A  man  who  is  able  to  say  with  under-
standing, or  to  determine  in  his  own  mind,
that  this  object  is  white,  must  have  distin-
guished whiteness  from  other  attributes.
If  he  has  not  made  this  distinction,  he  does
not  understand  what  he  says. [512]

Suppose  a  cube  of  brass  to  be  presented
at  the  same  time  to  a  child  of  a  year  old
and  to  a  man.  The  regularity  of  the  figure
will  attract  the  attention  of  both.  Both
have  the  senses  of  sight  and  of  touch  in
equal  perfection ;  and,  therefore,  if  any-
thing be  discovered  in  this  object  by  the
man,  which  cannot  be  discovered  by  the
child,  it  must  be  owing,  not  to  the  senses,


but  to  some  other  faculty  which  the  child
has  not  yet  attained.

First,  then,  the  man  can  easily  distin-
guish the  body  from  the  surface  which
terminates  it ;  this  the  child  cannot  do.
Secondly,  The  man  can  perceive  that  this
surface  is  made  up  of  six  planes  of  the  same
figure  and  magnitude  ;  the  child  cannot
discover  this.  Thirdly,  The  man  perceives
that  each  of  these  planes  has  four  equal
sides  and  four  equal  angles ;  and  that  the
opposite  sides  of  each  plane  and  the  oppo-
site planes  are  parallel.

It  will  surely  be  allowed,  that  a  man  of
ordinary  judgment  may  observe  all  this  in
a  cube  which  he  makes  an  object  of  con-
templation, and  takes  time  to  consider ;
that  he  may  give  the  name  of  a  square  to
a  plane  terminated  by  four  equal  sides  and
four  equal  angles ;  and  the  name  of  a  cube
to  a  solid  terminated  by  six  equal  squares  •.
all  this  is  nothing  else  but  analysing  the
figure  of  the  object  presented  to  his  senses
into  its  simplest  elements,  and  again  com-
pounding it  of  those  elements.

By  this  analysis  and  composition  two
effects  are  produced.  First,  From  the  one
complex  object  which  his  senses  presented,
though  one  of  the  most  simple  the  senses
can  present,  he  educes  many  simple  and
distinct  notions  of  right  lines,  angles,  plain
surface,  solid,  equality,  parallelism ;  notions
which  the  child  has  not  yet  faculties  to
attain.  Secondly,  When  he  considers  the
cube  as  compounded  of  these  elements,  put
together  in  a  certain  order,  he  has  then,
and  not  before,  a  distinct  and  scientific
notion  of  a  cube.  The  child  neither  con-
ceives those  elements,  nor  in  what  order
they  must  be  put  together  in  order  to  make
a  cube  ;  and,  therefore,  has  no  accurate
notion  of  a  cube  which  can  make  it  a  sub-
ject of  reasoning. [513]

Whence  I  think  we  may  conclude,  that
the  notion  which  we  have  from  the  senses
alone,  even  of  the  simplest  objects  of  sense,
is  indistinct  and  incapable  of  being  either
described  or  reasoned  upon,  until  it  is  ana-
lysed into  its  simple  elements,  and  con-
sidered as  compounded  of  those  elements.

If  we  should  apply  this  reasoning  to  more
complex  objects  of  sense,  the  conclusion
would  be  still  more  evident.  A  dog  may  be
taught  to  turn  a  jack,  but  he  can  never  be
taught  to  have  a  distinct  notion  of  a  jack.
He  sees  every  part  as  well  as  a  man  ;  but
the  relation  of  the  parts  to  one  another
and  to  the  whole,  he  has  not  judgment  to
comprehend.

A  distinct  notion  of  an  object,  even  of
sense,  is  never  got  in  an  instant ;  but  the
sense  performs  its  office  in  an  instant.  Time
is  not  required  to  see  it  better,  but  to  analyse
it,  to  distinguish  the  different  parts,  and  their
relation  to  one  another  and  to  the  whole.
[511-513]


CHAP.  I.]


OF  JUDGMENT  IN  GENERAL.


419


Hence  it  is  that,  when  any  vehement
passion  or  emotion  hinders  the  cool  applica-
tion of  judgment,  we  get  no  distinct  notion
of  an  object,  even  though  the  sense  be  long
directed  to  it.  A  man  who  is  put  into  a
panic,  by  thinking  he  sees  a  ghost,  may
stare  at  it  long  without  having  any  distinct
notion  of  it ;  it  is  his  understanding,  and
not  his  sense,  that  is  disturbed  by  his  horror.
If  he  can  lay  that  aside,  judgment  immedi-
ately enters  upon  its  office,  and  examines
the  length  and  breadth,  the  colour,  and
figure,  and  distance  of  the  object.  Of  these,
while  his  panic  lasted,  he  had  no  distinct
notion,  though  his  eyes  were  open  all  the
time.

When  the  eye  of  sense  is  open,  but  that
of  judgment  shut  by  a  panic,  or  any  violent
emotion  that  engrosses  the  mind,  we  see
things  confusedly,  and  probably  much  in  the
same  manner  that  brutes  and  perfect  idiots
do,  and  infants  before  the  use  of  judgment.
[514]

There  are,  therefore,  notions  of  the  objects
of  sense  which  are  gross  and  indistinct,  and
there  are  others  that  are  distinct  and  scienti-
fic. The  former  may  be  got  from  the  senses
alone,  but  the  latter  cannot  be  obtained  with-
out some  degree  of  judgment.

The  clear  and  accurate  notions  which
geometry  presents  to  us  of  a  point,  a  right
line,  an  angle,  a  square,  a  circle,  of  ratios
direct  and  inverse,  and  others  of  that  kind,
can  find  no  admittance  into  a  mind  that  has
not  some  degree  of  judgment.  They  are
not  properly  ideas  of  the  senses,  nor  are
they  got  by  compounding  ideas  of  the
senses,  but  by  analysing  the  ideas  or  no-
tions we  get  by  the  senses  into  their  simplest
elements,  and  again  combining  these  ele-
ments into  various  accurate  and  elegant
forms,  which  the  senses  never  did  nor  can
exhibit.

Had  Mr  Hume  attended  duly  to  this,  it
ought  to  have  prevented  a  very  bold  attempt,
which  he  has  prosecuted  through  fourteen
pages  of  his  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"
to  prove  that  geometry  is  founded  upon  ideas
that  are  not  exact,  and  axioms  that  are  not
precisely  true.

A  mathematician  might  be  tempted  to
think  that  the  man  who  seriously  under-
takes this  has  no  great  acquaintance  with
geometry ;  but  I  apprehend  it  is  to  be  im-
puted to  another  cause,  to  a  zeal  for  his  own
system.  We  see  that  even  men  of  genius
may  be  drawn  into  strange  paradoxes,  by
an  attachment  to  a  favourite  idol  of  the
understanding,  when  it  demands  so  costly  a
sacrifice.

We  Protestants  think  that  the  devotees
of  the  Roman  Church  pay  no  small  tribute
to  her  authority  when  they  renounce  their
five  senses  in  obedience  to  her  decrees.  Mr
Hume's  devotion  to  his  system  carries  him
1 514-516"]


even  to  trample  upon  mathematical  demon-
stration. [515]

The  fundamental  articles  of  his  system
are,  that  all  the  perceptions  of  the  human
mind  are  either  impressions  or  ideas,  and
that  ideas  are  only  faint  copies  of  impres-
sions. The  idea  of  a  right  line,  therefore,  is
only  a  faint  copy  of  some  line  that  has  been
seen,  or  felt  by  touch ;  and  the  faint  copy
cannot  be  more  perfect  than  the  original.
Now  of  such  right  lines,  it  is  evident  that
the  axioms  of  geometry  are  not  precisely
true  ;  for  two  lines  that  are  straight  to  our
sight  or  touch  may  include  a  space,  or  they
may  meet  in  more  points  than  one.  If,
therefore,  we  cannot  form  any  notion  of  a
straight  line  more  accurate  than  that  which
we  have  from  the  senses  of  sight  and  touch,
geometry  has  no  solid  foundation.  If,  on
the  other  hand,  the  geometrical  axioms  are
precisely  true,  the  idea  of  a  right  line  is  not
copied  from  any  impression  of  sight  or  touch,
but  must  have  a  different  origin  and  a  more
perfect  standard.

As  the  geometrician,  by  reflecting  only
upon  the  extension  and  figure  of  matter,
forms  a  set  of  notions  more  accurate  and
scientific  than  any  which  the  senses  exhi-
bit, so  the  natural  philosopher,  reflecting
upon  other  attributes  of  matter,  forms
another  set,  such  as  those  of  density,  quan-
tity of  matter,  velocity,  momentum,  fluidity,
elasticity,  centres  of  gravity,  and  of  oscilla-
tion. These  notions  are  accurate  and
scientific  ;  but  they  cannot  enter  into  a
mind  that  has  not  some  degree  of  judg-
ment, nor  can  we  make  them  intelligible  to
children,  until  they  have  some  ripeness  of
understanding.

In  navigation,  the  notions  of  latitude,
longitude,  course,  leeway,  cannot  be  made
intelligible  to  children ;  and  so  it  is  with
regard  to  the  terms  of  every  science,  and
of  every  art  about  which  we  can  reason.
They  have  had  their  five  senses  as  perfect
as  men  for  years  before  they  are  capable
of  distinguishing,  comparing,  and  perceiv-
ing the  relations  of  things,  so  as  to  be  able
to  form  such  notions.  They  acquire  the
intellectual  powers  by  a  slow  progress,  and
by  imperceptible  degrees  ;  and  by  means
of  them,  learn  to  form  distinct  and  accurate
notions  of  things,  which  the  senses  could
never  have  imparted. [516]

Having  said  so  much  of  the  notions  we
get  from  the  senses  alone  of  the  objects  of
sense,  let  us  next  consider  what  notions  we
can  have  from  consciousness  alone  of  the
operations  of  our  minds.

Mr  Locke  very  properly  calls  conscious-
ness an  internal  sense.  It  gives  the  like
immediate  knowledge  of  things  in  the  mind —
that  is,  of  our  own  thoughts  and  feelings —
as  the  senses  give  us  of  things  external.
There  is  this  difference,  however,  that  an
2  K  2


420


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


external  object  may  be  at  rest,  and  the
sense  may  be  employed  about  it  for  some
time.  But  the  objects  of  consciousness
are  never  at  rest :  the  stream  of  thought
flows  like  a  river,  without  stopping  a  mo-
ment ;  the  whole  train  of  thought  passes  in
succession  under  the  eye  of  consciousness,
which  is  always  employed  about  the  present.
But  is  it  consciousness  that  analyses  com-
plex operations,  distinguishes  their  different
ingredients,  and  combines  them  in  distinct
parcels  under  general  names  ?  This  surely
is  not  the  work  of  consciousness,  nor  can  it
be  performed  without  reflection,*  recollect-
ing and  judging  of  what  we  were  conscious
of,  and  distinctly  remember.  This  reflec-
tion does  not  appear  in  children.  Of  all
the  powers  of  the  mind,  it  seems  to  be  of
the  latest  growth,  whereas  consciousness  is
coeval  with  the  earliest. *t*

Consciousness,  being  a  kind  of  internal
sense,  can  no  more  give  us  distinct  and
accurate  notions  of  the  operations  of  our
minds,  than  the  external  senses  can  give
of  external  objects.  Reflection  upon  the
operations  of  our  minds  is  the  same  kind  of
operation  with  that  by  which  we  form  dis-
tinct notions  of  external  objects.  They
differ  not  in  their  nature,  but  in  this  only,
that  one  is  employed  about  external,  and
the  other  about  internal  objects ;  and  both
may,  with  equal  propriety,  be  called  reflec-
tion. [517]

Mr  Locke  has  restricted  the  word  reflec-


*  See  above,  p.  2  J2,  a,  note  *.— H.

t  See  above,  p.  239,  b.— As  a  corollary  of  this  truth,
Mr  Stewart  makes  the  following  observations,  in
which  he  is  supported  by  every  competent  authority
in  education.  The  two  northern  universities  have
long  withdrawn  themselves  from  the  reproach  of
placing  Physics  last  in  their  curriculum  of  arts.  In
that  of  Edinburgh,  no  order  is  prescrnVd;  but  in  St
Andrew's  and  Glasgow,  the  class  of  Physics  still  stands
after  those  of  Mental  Philosophy.  This  absurdity  is,
it  is  to  be  observed,  altogether  of  a  modern  intro-
duction For,  when  our  Scottish  universities  were
founded,  and  long  after,  the  philosophy  of  mind  was
taught  by  the  Professor  of  Physics.  "  I  apprehend,"
says  Mr  Stewart,  "that  the  study  of  the  mind  should
form  the  last  branch  of  the  education  of  youth  ;  an
order  which  nature  herself  seems  to  point  out,  by
what  I  have  already  remarked  with  respect  to  the
developement  of  our  faculties.  After  the  under,
standing  is  well  stored  with  particular  facts,  and
has  been  conversant  with  particular  scientific  pur.
suits,  it  will  be  enabled  to  speculate  concerning  its
own  powers  with  additional  advai  tage,  and  will  run
no  hazard  in  indulging  too  far  in  such  inquiries.
Nothing  can  be  more  absurd,  on  this  as  well  as  on
many  other  accounts,  than  the  common  practice
which  is  followed  in  our  universities,  [in  some  only,]
of  beginning  a  course  of  philosophical  education  with
the  study  of  Logic.  If  this  order  were  completely  re-
versed ;  and  if  the  study  of  Logic  were  delayed  till
after  the  mind  of  "he  student  was  well  stored  with
particular  facts  in  Physics,  in  Chemistry,  in  Natural
and  Civil  History,  his  attention  might  be  led  with
the  most  important  advantage,  and  without  any  dan-
ger to  his  po'-ver  of  observation,  to  an  examination
of  his  own  faculties,  which,  besides  opening  to  him
a  new  and  pleasing  field  of  speculation,  would  enable
him  to  form  an  estimate  of  his  own  powers,  of  the
acquisitions  he  has  made,  of  the  habits  he  has  formed,
and  of  the  farther  improvements  of  which  his  mind
is  susceptible."— H.


tion  to  that  which  is  employed  about  the
operations  of  our  minds,  without  any
authority,  as  I  think,  from  custom,  the
arbiter  of  language.  For,  surely,  I  may
reflect  upon  what  I  have  seen  or  heard,  as
well  as  upon  what  I  have  thought.*  The
word,  in  its  proper  and  common  meaning,
is  equally  applicable  to  objects  of  sense,
and  to  objects  of  consciousness. -|-  He  has
likewise  confounded  reflection  with  con-
sciousness, and  seems  not  to  have  been
aware  that  they  are  different  powers,  and
appear  at  very  different  periods  of  life  %

If  that  eminent  philosopher  had  been
aware  of  these  mistakes  about  the  meaning
of  the  word  reflection,  he  would,  I  think,
have  seen  that,  as  it  is  by  reflection  upon
the  operations  of  our  own  minds  that  we
can  form  any  distinct  and  accurate  notions
of  them,  and  not  by  consciousness  without
reflection,  so  it  is  by  reflection  upon  the
objects  of  sense,  and  not  by  the  senses
without  reflection,  that  we  can  form  dis-
tinct notions  of  them.  Reflection  upon  any-
thing, whether  external  or  internal,  makes
it  an  object  of  our  intellectual  powers,  by
which  we  survey  it  on  all  sides,  and  form
such  judgments  about  it  as  appear  to  be
just  and  true.

I  proposed,  in  the  third  place,  to  consi-
der our  notions  of  the  relations  of  things  :
and  here  I  think,  that,  without  judg-
ment, we  cannot  have  any  notion  of  rela-
tions.

There  are  two  ways  in  which  we  get  the
notion  of  relations.  The  first  is,  by  com-
paring the  related  objects,  when  we  have
before  had  the  conception  of  both.  By  this
comparison,  we  perceive  the  relation,  either
immediately,  or  by  a  process  of  reasoning.
That  my  foot  is  longer  than  my  finger,  1
perceive  immediately ;  and  that  three  is
the  half  of  six.  This  immediate  perception
is  immediate  and  intuitive  judgment.  That
the  angles  at  the  base  of  an  isosceles  triangle
are  equal,  I  perceive  by  a  process  of  reason-
ing, in  which  it  will  be  acknowledged  there
is  judgment.

Another  way  in  which  we  get  the  notion
of  relations  (which  seems  not  to  have  occur-
red to  Mr  Locke)  is,  when,  by  attention  to
one  of  the  related  objects,  we  perceive  or
judge  that  it  must,  from  its  nature,  have  a
certain  relation  to  something  else,  which
before,  perhaps,  we  never  thought  of;  and
thus  our  attention  to  one  of  the  related  ob-


*  See  note  before,  last,  arid  note  at  p.  347,  b.— H.

t  Mr  Stewart  makes  a  curious  mistarement  of  the
meaning  attached  by  Reid  to  the  word  Reflection,  if
this  passage  and  others  are  taken  into  account. — See
Elements*  I.  p.  106,  note  f-— H.

%  Consciousness  and  Reflection  cannot  be  analysed
into  different  powers.  Reflection  is  only,  in  Locke's
meaning  of  the  word,  (and  this  is  the  more  correct,)
Consciousness,  concentrated  by  an  act  of  Will  on  the
phEenomena  of  mind— i.  e.,  internal  Attention  ;  in
Reid's,  what  is  it  but  Attention  in  general  ?— H.

[517]


■]


OF  COMMON  SENSE.


42J


jects  produces  the  notion  of  a  correlate,  and
of  a  certain  relation  between  them. [518]

Thus,  when  I  attend  to  colour,  figure,
weight,  I  cannot  help  judging  these  to  be
qualities  which  cannot  exist  without  a  sub-
ject ;  that  is,  something  which  is  coloured,
figured,  heavy.  If  I  had  not  perceived  such
things  to  be  qualities,  I  should  never  have
had  any  notion  of  their  subject,  or  of  their
relation  to  it.

By  attending  to  the  operations  of  think-
ing, memory,  reasoning,  we  perceive  or
judge  that  there  must  be  something  which
thinks,  remembers,  and  reasons,  which  we
call  the  mind.  When  we  attend  to  any
change  that  happens  in  Nature,  judgment
informs  us  that  there  must  be  a  cause  of
this  change,  which  had  power  to  produce
it ;  and  thus  we  get  the  notions  of  cause
and  effect,  and  of  the  relation  between
them.  When  we  attend  to  body,  we  per-
ceive that  it  cannot  exist  without  space ;
hence  we  get  the  notion  of  space,  (which  is
neither  an  object  of  sense  nor  of  conscious-
ness,) and  of  the  relation  which  bodies
have  to  a  certain  portion  of  unlimited  space,
as  their  place.

I  apprehend,  therefore,  that  all  our  no-
tions of  relations  may  more  properly  be
ascribed  to  judgment  as  their  source  and
origin,  than  to  any  other  power  of  the
mind.  We  must  first  perceive  relations
by  our  judgment,  before  we  can  conceive
them  without  judging  of  them  ;  as  we  must
first  perceive  colours  by  sight,  before  we
can  conceive  them  without  seeing  them.  I
think  Mr  Locke,  when  he  comes  to  speak
of  the  ideas  of  relations,  does  not  say  that
they  are  ideas  of  sensation  or  reflection,
but  only  that  they  terminate  in,  and  are
concerned  about,  ideas  of  sensation  or  re-
flection. [519]

The  notions  of  unity  and  number  are  so
abstract,  that  it  is  impossible  they  should
enter  into  the  mind  until  it  has  some  degree
of  judgment.  We  see  with  what  difficulty,
and  how  slowly,  children  learn  to  use,  with
understanding,  the  names  even  of  small
numbers,  and  how  they  exult  in  this  acqui-
sition when  they  have  attained  it.  Every
number  is  conceived  by  the  relation  which
it  bears  to  unity,  or  to  known  combinations
of  units ;  and  upon  that  account,  as  well
as  on  account  of  its  abstract  nature,  all
distinct  notions  of  it  require  some  degree
of  judgment-

In  its  proper  place,  I  shall  have  occasion
to  shew  that  judgment  is  an  ingredient  in
all  determinations  of  taste,  in  all  moral
determinations,  and  in  many  of  our  pas-
sions and  affections.  So  that  this  opera-
tion, after  we  come  to  have  any  exercise  of
judgment,  mixes  with  most  of  the  operations
of  our  minds,  and,  in  analysing  them,  cannot
be  overlooked  without  confusion  and  error.
[518-520]


CHAPTER  II.


OF  COMMON  SENSE.*


The  word  sense,  in  common  language,
seems  to  have  a  different  meaning  from  that
which  it  has  in  the  writings  of  philosophers  ;
and  those  different  meanings  are  apt  to  be
confounded,  and  to  occasion  embarrassment
|  and  error.

Not  to  go  back  to  ancient  philosophy  upon
this  point,  modern  philosophers  consider
sense  as  a  power  that  has  nothing  to  do  with
j  udgment.  Sense  they  consider  as  the  power
by  which  we  receive  certain  ideas  of  im-
pressions from  objects  ;  and  judgment  as
the  power  by  which  we  eompare  those
ideas,  and  perceive  their  necessary  agree-
ments and  disagreements. [  520  ]

The  external  senses  give  us  the  idea  of
colour,  figure,  sound,  and  other  qualities  of
body,  primary  or  secondary.  Mr  Locke
gave  the  name  of  an  internal  sense  to  con-
sciousness, because  by  it  we  have  the  ideas
of  thought,  memory,  reasoning,  and  other
operations  of  our  own  minds.  Dr  Hutche-
son  of  Glasgow,  conceiving  that  we  have
simple  and  original  ideas  which  cannot  be
imputed  either  to  the  external  senses  or  to
consciousness,  introduced  other  internal
senses ;  such  as  the  sense  of  harmony,  the
sense  of  beauty,  and  the  moral  sense.
Ancient  philosophers  also  spake  of  internal
senses,  of  which  memory  was  accounted  one.

But  all  these  senses,  whether  external  or
internal,  have  been  represented  by  philo-
sophers as  the  means  of  furnishing  our
minds  with  ideas,  without  including  any
kind  of  judgment.  Dr  Hutcheson  defines
a  sense  to  be  a  determination  of  the  mind
to  receive  any  idea  from  the  presence  of  an
object  independent  on  our  will.

"  By  this  term  (sense)  philosophers,  in
general,  have  denominated  those  faculties
in  consequence  of  which  we  are  liable  to
feelings  relative  to  ourselves  only,  and  from
which  they  have  not  pretended  to  draw  any
conclusions  concerning  the  nature  of  things ;
whereas  truth  is  not  relative,  but  absolute
and  real — (Dr  Priestlv's  "  Examination  of
Dr  Reid,"&c,  p.  123".)

On  the  contrary,  in  common  language,
sense  always  implies  judgment.  A  man  of
sense  is  a  man  of  judgment.  Good  sense
is  good  judgment.  Nonsense  is  what  is
evidently  contrary  to  right  judgment.  Com-
mon sense  is  that  degree  of  judgment  which
is  common  to  men  with  whom  we  «an  con-
verse and  transact  business.

Seeing  and  hearing,  by  philosophers,  are
called  senses, because  we  have ideas  by


*  On  Common  Sense,  name  and  thine,  see  Note  A.
— H.


422


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


them  ;  by  the  vulgar  they  are  called  senses,
because  we  judge  by  them.  We  judge  of
colours  by  the  eye ;  of  sounds  by  the  ear ;
of  beauty  and  deformity  by  taste  ;  of  right
and  wrong  in  conduct,  by  our  moral  sense
or  conscience. [521]

Sometimes  philosophers,  who  represent
it  as  the  sole  province  of  sense  to  furnish
us  with  ideas,  fall  unawares  into  the  popu-
lar opinion  that  they  are  judging  faculties.
Thus  Locke,  Book  IV.  chap.  2  :— "  And  of
this,  (that  the  quality  or  accident  of  colour
doth  really  exist,  and  hath  a  being  without
me,)  the  greatest  assurance  I  can  possibly
have,  and  to  which  my  faculties  can  attain,
is  the  testimony  of  my  eyes,  which  are  the
proper  and  sole  judges  of  this  thing."

This  popular  meaning  of  the  word  sense
is  not  peculiar  to  the  English  language.
The  corresponding  words  in  Greek,  Latin,
and,  I  believe,  in  all  the  European  languages,
have  the  same  latitude.  The  Latin  words
sentire,  sententia,  sensa*  sensus,  from  the
last  of  which  the  English  word  sense  is
borrowed,  express  judgment  or  opinion,  and
are  applied  indifferently  to  objects  of  exter-
nal sense,  of  taste,  of  morals,  and  of  the
understanding.

I  cannot  pretend  to  assign  the  reason  why
a  word,  which  is  no  term  of  art,  which  is
familiar  in  common  conversation,  should
have  so  different  a  meaning  in  philosophical
writings.  I  shall  only  observe,  that  the
philosophical  meaning  corresponds  perfectly
with  the  account  which  Mr  Locke  and  other
modern  philosophers  give  of  judgment.  For,
if  the  sole  province  of  the  senses,  external
and  internal,  be  to  furnish  the  mind  with
the  ideas  about  which  we  judge  and  reason,
it  seems  to  be  a  natural  consequence,  that
the  sole  province  of  judgment  should  be  to
compare  those  ideas,  and  to  perceive  their
necessary  relations.

These  two  opinions  seem  to  be  so  con-
nected, that  one  may  have  been  the  cause
of  the  other.  I  apprehend,  however,  that,
if  both  be  true,  there  is  no  room  left  for  any
knowledge  or  judgment,  either  of  the  real
existence  of  contingent  things,  or  of  their
contingent  relations.

To  return  to  the  popular  meaning  of  the
word  sense.  I  believe  it  would  be  much
more  difficult  to  find  good  authors  who  never
use  it  in  that  meaning,  than  to  find  such
as  do. [522]

We  may  take  Mr  Pope  as  good  authority
for  the  meaning  of  an  English  word.  He
uses  it  often,  and,  in  his  "  Epistle  to  the
Earl  of  Burlington,"  has  made  a  little  de-
scant upon  it.


*  What  does  sensa  mean  ?  Is  it  an  erratum,  or
does  he  refer  to  sensa,  once  only,  I  believe,  employed
by  Cicero,  and  interpreted  by  Nonius  Marcellus,  as
'«  quae  sentiuntur  ?"— H.


,c  Oft  have  you  "hinted  to  your  brother  Peer,
A  certain  truth,  which  many  buy  too  dear:
Something  there  is  more  needful  than  expense,
And  something  previous  ev'n  to  taste— 'tis  sense.
Good  sense,  w.uch  only  is  the  gift-of  heaven,
And,  though  no  science,  fairly  worth  the  seven  ;
A  light  which  in  yourself  you  must  perceive,
Jones  and  Le  Notre  have  it  not  to  give."

This  inward  light  or  sense  is  given  by
heaven  to  different  persons  in  different  de-
grees. There  is  a  certain  degree  of  it  which
is  necessary  to  our  being  subjects  of  law  and
government,  capable  of  managing  our  own
affairs,  and  answerable  for  our  conduct
towards  others  :  this  is  called  common
sense,  because  it  is  common  to  all  men  with
whom  we  can  transact  business,  or  call  to
account  for  their  conduct.

The  laws  of  all  civilised  nations  distin-
guish those  who  have  this  gift  of  heaven,
from  those  who  have  it  not.  The  last  may
have  rights  which  ought  not  to  be  violated,
but,  having  no  understanding  in  themselves
to  direct  their  actions,  the  laws  appoint  them
to  be  guided  by  the  understanding  of  others.
It  is  easily  discerned  by  its  effects  in  men's
actions,  in  their  speeches,  and  even  in  their
looks ;  and  when  it  is  made  a  question
whether  a  man  has  this  natural  gift  or  not,
a  judge  or  a  jury,  upon  a  short  conversation
with  him,  can,  for  the  most  part,  determine
the  question  with  great  assurance.

The  same  degree  of  understanding  which
makes  a  man  capable  of  acting  with  com-
mon prudence  in  the  conduct  of  life,  makes
him  capable  of  discovering  what  is  true  and
what  is  false  in  matters  that  are  self-evident,
and  which  he  distinctly  apprehends. [523]

All  knowledge,  and  all  science,  must  be
built  upon  principles  that  are  self-evident ;
and  of  such  principles  every  man  who  has
common  sense  is  a  competent  judge,  when
he  conceives  them  distinctly.  Hence  it  is,
that  disputes  very  often  terminate  in  an
appeal  to  common  sense.

While  the  parties  agree  in  the  first  prin-
ciples on  which  their  arguments  are  ground-
ed, there  is  room  for  reasoning  ;  but  when
one  denies  what  to  the  other  appears  too
evident  to  need  or  to  admit  of  proof,  rea-
soning seems  to  be  at  an  end ;  an  appeal  is
made  to  common  sense,  and  each  party  is
left  to  enjoy  his  own  opinion.

There  seems  to  be  no  remedy  for  this,
nor  any  way  left  to  discuss  such  appeals,
unless  the  decisions  of  common  sense  can
be  brought  into  a  code  in  which  all  reason-
able men  shall  acquiesce.  This,  indeed,  if
it  be  possible,  would  be  very  desirable,  and
would  supply  a  desideratum  in  logic ;  and
why  should  it  be  thought  impossible  that
reasonable  men  should  agree  in  things  that
are  self-evident  ?

All  that  is  intended  in  this  chapter  is  to

explain  the  meaning  of  common  sense,  that

it  may  not  be  treated,  as  it  has  been  by

some,  as  a  new  principle,  or  as  a  word  with-

[521-523]


CHAP.  II. J


OF  COMMON  SENSE.


423


out  any  meaning.  I  have  endeavoured  to
shew  that  sense,  in  its  most  common,  and
therefore  its  most  proper  meaning,  signifies
judgment,  though  philosophers  often  use  it
in  another  meaning.  From  this  it  is  natural
to  think  that  common  sense  should  mean
common  judgment ;  and  so  it  really  does.

What  the  precise  limits  are  which  divide
common  judgment  from  what  is  beyond  it
on  the  one  hand,  and  from  what  falls  short
of  it  on  the  other,  may  be  difficult  to  de-
termine ;  and  men  may  agree  in  the  mean-
ing of  the  word  who  have  different  opinions
about  those  limits,  or  who  even  never
thought  of  fixing  them.  This  is  as  intel-
ligible as,  that  all  Englishmen  should  mean
the  same  thing  by  the  county  of  York,
though  perhaps  not  a  hundredth  part  of
them  can  point  out  its  precise  limits. [524]

Indeed,  it  seems  to  me,  that  common
sense  is  as  unambiguous  a  word  and  as  well
understood  as  the  county  of  York.  We
find  it  in  innumerable  places  in  good  writers ;
we  hear  it  on  innumerable  occasions  in  con-
versation ;  and,  as  far  as  I  am  able  to  judge,
always  in  the  same  meaning.  And  this  is
probably  the  reason  why  it  is  so  seldom
defined  or  explained.

Dr  Johnson,  in  the  authorities  he  gives,
to  shew  that  the  word  sense  signifies  under-
standing, soundness  of  faculties,  strength  of
natural  reason,  quotes  Dr  Bentley  for  what
may  be  called  a  definition  of  common  sense,
though  probably  not  intended  for  that  pur-
pose, but  mentioned  accidentally  :  "  God
hath  endowed  mankind  with  power  and
abilities,  which  we  call  natural,  light  and
reason,  and  common  sense."

It  is  true  that  common  sense  is  a  popular
and  not  a  scholastic  word ;  and  by  most  of
those  who  have  treated  systematically  of
the  powers  of  the  understanding,  it  is  only
occasionally  mentioned,  as  it  is  by  other
writers.  But  I  recollect  two  philosophical
writers,  who  are  exceptions  to  this  remark.
One  is  Buffier,  who  treated  largely  of  com-
mon sense,  as  a  principle  of  knowledge,
above  fifty  years  ago.  The  other  is  Bishop
Berkeley,  who,  I  think,  has  laid  as  much
stress  upon  common  sense,  in  opposition  to
the  doctrines  of  philosophers,  as  any  philo-
sopher that  has  come  after  him.  If  the
reader  chooses  to  look  back  to  Essay  II.
chap.  10,  he  will  be  satisfied  of  this,  from
the  quotations  there  made  for  another  pur-
pose, which  it  is  unnecessary  here  to  repeat.

Men  rarely  ask  what  common  sense  is ;
because  every  man  believes  himself  pos-
sessed of  it,  and  would  take  it  for  an  imput-
ation upon  his  understanding  to  be  thought
unacquainted  with  it.  Yet  I  remember
two  very  eminent  authors  who  have  put
this  question  ;  and  it  is  not  improper  to  hear
their  sentiments  upon  a  subject  so  frequently
mentioned,  and  so  rarely  canvassed.  [525]
f524-526]


It  is  well  known  that  Lord  Shaftesbury
gave  to  one  of  his  Treatises  the  title  of
"  Sensus  Communis;  an  Essay  on  the
Freedom  of  Wit  and  Humour,  in  a  Letter
to  a  Friend  ;"  in  which  he  puts  his  friend  in
mind  of  a  free  conversation  with  some  of
their  friends  on  the  subjects  of  morality
and  religion.  Amidst  the  different  opinions
started  and  maintained  with  great  life  and
ingenuity,  one  or  other  would,  every  now  and
then,  take  the  liberty  to  appeal  to  common
sense.  Every  one  allowed  the  appeal ;  no
one  would  offer  to  call  the  authority  of  the
court  in  question,  till  a  gentleman  whose
good  understanding  was  never  yet  brought
in  doubt,  desired  the  company,  very  gravely,
that  they  would  tell  him  what  common
sense  was.

"  If,"  said  he,  "■  by  the  word  sense,  we
were  to  understand  opinion  and  judgment,
and  by  the  word  common,  the  generality  or
any  considerable  part  of  mankind,  it  would
be  hard  to  discover  where  the  subject  of
common  sense  could  lie ;  for  that  which
was  according  to  the  sense  of  one  part  of
mankind,  was  against  the  sense  of  another.
And  if  the  majority  were  to  determine  com-
mon sense,  it  would  change  as  often  as
men  changed.  That  in  religion,  common
sense  was  as  hard  to  determine  as  catholic
or  orthodox.  What  to  one  was  absurdity^
to  another  was  demonstration.

"  In  policy,  if  plain  British  or  Dutch
sense  were  right,  Turkish  and  French  must
certainly  be  wrong.  And  as  mere  non-
sense as  passive  obedience  seemed,  we
found  it  to  be  the  common  sense  of  a  great
party  amongst  ourselves,  a  greater  party
in  Europe,  and  perhaps  the  greatest  part
of  all  the  world  besides.  As  for  morals,
the  difference  was  still  wider  ;  for  even  the
philosophers  could  never  agree  in  one  and
the  same  system.  And  some  even  of  our
most  admired  modern  philosophers  had
fairly  told  us  that  virtue  and  vice  had  no
other  law  or  measure  than  mere  fashion  and
vogue." [526]

This  is  the  substance  of  the  gentleman's
speech,  which,  I  apprehend,  explains  the
meaning  of  the  word  perfectly,  and  contains
all  that  has  been  said  or  can  be  said  against
the  authority  of  common  sense,  and  the
propriety  of  appeals  to  it.

As  there  is  no  mention  of  any  answer
immediately  made  to  this  speech,  we  might
be  apt  to  conclude  that  the  noble  author
adopted  the  sentiments  of  the  intelligent
gentleman  whose  speech  he  recites.  But
the  contrary  is  manifest,  from  the  title  of
Sensus  Communis  given  to  his  Essay,  from
his  frequent  use  of  the  word,  and  from  the
whole  tenor  of  the  Essay.

The  author  appears  to  have  a  double  in-
tention in  that  Essay,  corresponding  to  the
double  title  prefixed  to  it. One  intention


424:


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


is,  to  justify  the  use  of  wit,  humour,  and
ridicule,  in  discussing  among  friends  the
gravest  subjects.  "  I  can  very  well  sup-
pose," says  he,  "  men  may  be  frighted
out  of  their  wits ;  but  I  have  no  apprehen-
sion they  should  be  laughed  out  of  them.
I  can  hardly  imagine  that,  in  a  pleasant
way,  they  should  ever  be  talked  out  of  their
love  for  society,  or  reasoned  out  of  humanity
and  common  sense."

The  other  intention,  signified  by  the  title
Sensus  Communis,  is  carried  on  hand  in
hand  with  the  first,  and  is  to  shew  that
common  sense  is  not  so  vague  and  uncertain
a  thing  as  it  is  represented  to  be  in  the
sceptical  speech  before  recited.  "  I  will
try,"  says  he,  "  what  certain  knowledge  or
assurance  of  things  may  be  recovered  in
that  very  way,  (to  wit,  of  humour,)  by
which  all  certainty,  you  thought,  was  lost,
and  an  endless  scepticism  introduced."  [527]

He  gives  some  criticisms  upon  the  word
sensus  communis  in  Juvenal,  Horace,  and
Seneca ;  and,  after  shewing,  in  a  facetious
way  throughout  the  treatise,  that  the  fun-
damental principles  of  morals,  of  politics,  of
criticism,  and  of  every  branch  of  knowledge,
are  the  dictates  of  common  sense,  he  sums
up  the  whole  in  these  words  : — "  That  some
moral  and  philosophical  truths  there  are
so  evident  in  themselves  that  it  would  be
easier  to  imagine  half  mankind  run  mad,
and  joined  precisely  in  the  same  species  of
folly,  than  to  admit  anything  as  truth
which  should  be  advanced  against  such
natural  knowledge,  fundamental  reason,
and  common  sense. "  And,  on  taking  leave,
he  adds  : — "  And  now,  my  friend,  should
you  find  I  had  moralised  in  any  tolerable
manner,  according  to  common  sense,  and
without  canting,  I  should  be  satisfied  with
my  performance."

Another  eminent  writer  who  has  put  the
question  what  common  sense  is,  is  Fenelon,
the  famous  Archbishop  of  Cambray.

That  ingenious  and  pious  author,  having
had  an  early  prepossession  in  favour  of  the
Cartesian  philosophy,  made  an  attempt  to
establish,  on  a  sure  foundation,  the  meta-
physical arguments  which  Des  Cartes  had
invented  to  prove  the  being  of  the  Deity.
For  this  purpose,  he  begins  with  the  Carte-
sian doubt.  He  proceeds  to  find  out  the
truth  of  his  own  existence,  and  then  to  ex-
amine wherein  the  evidence  and  certainty
of  this  and  other  such  primary  truths  con-
sisted. This,  according  to  Cartesian  prin-
ciples, he  places  in  the  clearness  and  dis-
tinctness of  the  ideas.  On  the  contrary,
he  places  the  absurdity  of  the  contrary  pro-
positions, in  their  being  repugnant  to  his
clear  and  distinct'ideas.

To  illustrate  this,  he  gives  various  ex-
amples of  questions  manifestly  absurd  and
ridiculous, which every man  of  common


understanding  would,  at  first  sight,  perceive
to  be  so  ;  and  then  goes  on  to  this  purpose.

"  What  is  it  that  makes  these  questions
ridiculous  ?  Wherein  does  this  ridicule
precisely  consist  ?  It  will,  perhaps,  be
replied,  that  it  consists  in  this,  that  they
shock  common  sense.  But  what  is  this
same  common  sense  ?  It  is  not  the  first
notions  that  all  men  have  equally  of  the
same  things.  [528]  This  common  sense,
which  is  always  and  in  all  places  the  same  ;
which  prevents  inquiry ;  which  makes  in-
quiry in  some  cases  ridiculous  ;  which,  in-
stead of  inquiring,  makes  a  man  laugh
whether  he  will  or  not ;  which  puts  it  out
of  a  man's  power  to  doubt :  this  sense,
which  only  waits  to  be  consulted — which
shews  itself  at  the  first  glance,  and  imme-
diately discovers  the  evidence  or  the  absurd-
ity of  a  question — is  not  this  the  same  that
I  call  my  ideas  ?

"  Behold,  then,  those  ideas  or  general
notions,  which  it  is  not  in  my  power  either
to  contradict  or  examine,  and  by  which  I
examine  and  decide  in  every  case,  insomuch
that  I  laugh  instead  of  answering,  as  often
as  anything  is  proposed  to  me,  which  is  evi-
dently contrary  to  what  these  immutable
ideas  represent."

I  shall  only  observe  upon  this  passage,
that  the  interpretation  it  gives  of  Des
Cartes'  criterion  of  truth,  whether  just  or
not,  is  the  most  intelligible  and  the  most
favourable  I  have  met  with.

I  beg  leave  to  mention  one  passage  from
Cicero,  and  to  add  two  or  three  from  late
writers,  which  shew  that  this  word  is  not
become  obsolete,  nor  has  changed  its
meaning.

"De  Oratore,"  lib.  3 — "Omnes  enim
tacito  quodam  sensu,  sine  ulla  arte  aut
ratione,  in  artibus  ac  rationibus,  recta  ac
prava  dijudicant.  Idque  cum  faciant  in
picturis,  et  in  signis,  et  in  aliis  operibus,  ad
quorum  intelligentiam  a  natura  minus  hab-
ent  instrumenti,  turn  multo  ostendunt  magis
in  verborum,  numerorum,  vocumque  judi-
cio ;  quod  ea  sint  in  communibus  infixa
sensibus ;  neque  earum  rerum  quemquam
funditus  natura  voluit  expert  em."

"  Hume's  "  Essays  and  Treatises,"  vol.

I.  p.  5 "But  a  philosopher  who  proposes

only  to  represent  the  common  sense  of
mankind  in  more  beautiful  and  more  engag-
ing colours,  if  by  accident  he  commits  a
mistake,  goes  no  farther,  but,  renewing  his
appeal  to  common  sense,  and  the  natural
sentiments  of  the  mind,  returns  into  the
right  path,  and  secures  himself  from  any
dangerous  illusion." [529]

Hume's  "  Enquiry  concerning  the  Prin-
ciples of  Morals,"  p.  2 "  Those  who  have

refused  the  reality  of  moral  distinctions  may
be  ranked  among  the  disingenuous  dis-
putants. The  only  way  of  converting  an
[527-529]


CHAP.  JI.J


OF  COMMON  SENSE.


425


antagonist  of  this  kind  is  to  leave  him  to
himself :  for,  finding  that  nobody  keeps  up
the  controversy  with  him,  it  is  probable  he
will  at  last,  of  himself,  from  mere  weariness,
come  over  to  the  side  of  common  sense  and
reason."

Priestley's  "  Institutes,"  Preliminary
Essay,  vol.  i.  p.  27 — "  Because  common
sense  is  a  sufficient  guard  against  many
errors  in  religion,  it  seems  to  have  been
taken  for  granted  that  that  common  sense
is  a  sufficient  instructor  also,  whereas  in
fact,  without  positive  instruction,  men  would
naturally  have  been  mere  savages  with
respect  to  religion  ;  as,  without  similar  in-
struction, they  would  be  savages  with  re-
spect to  the  arts  of  life  and  the  sciences.
Common  sense  can  only  be  compared  to  a
judge;  but  what  can  a  judge  do  without
evidence  and  proper  materials  from  which
to  form  a  judgment  ?"

Priestley's  ''  Examination  of  Dr  Reid,"
&c.  page  127. — "  But  should  we,  out  of
complaisance,  admit  that  what  has  hitherto
been  called  judgment  may  be  called  sense,
it  is  making  too  free  with  the  established
signification  of  words  to  call  it  common
sense,  which,  in  common  acceptation,  has
long  been  appropriated  to  a  very  different
thing — viz.,  to  that  capacity  for  judging  of
common  things  that  persons  of  middling
capacities  are  capable  of."  Page  129. — "  I
should,  therefore,  expect  that,  if  a  man  was
so  totally  deprived  of  common  sense  as  not
to  be  able  to  distinguish  truth  from  false-
hood in  one  case,  he  would  be  equally  in-
capable of  distinguishing  it  in  another."
[530]

From  this  cloud  of  testimonies,  to  which
hundreds  might  be  added,  I  apprehend,
that  whatever  censure  is  thrown  upon  those
who  have  spoke  of  common  sense  as  a  prin-
ciple of  knowledge,  or  who  have  appealed  to
it  in  matters  that  are  self-evident,  will  fall
light,  when  there  are  so  many  to  share  in
it.  Indeed,  the  authority  of  this  tribunal
is  too  sacred  and  venerable,  and  has  pre-
scription too  long  in  its  favour  to  be  now
tvi.-ely  called  in  question.  Those  who  are
disposed  to  do  so,  may  remember  the  shrewd
saying  of  Mr  Hobbes — "  When  reason  is
against  a  man,  a  man  will  be  against  rea-
son." This  is  equally  applicable  to  com-
mon sense.

From  the  account  I  nave  given  of  the
meaning  of  this  term,  it  is  easy  to  judge
both  of  the  proper  use  and  of  the  abuse
of  it.

It  is  absurd  to  conceive  that  there  can  be
any  opposition  between  reason  and  com-
mon sense.*  It  is  indeed  the  first-born  of
fc Reason  ;  and,  as  they  are  commonly  joined

*  See  above,  p.  loo,  b,  note  t  j  and  Mr  Stewart's
"  Elements,"  II.  p.  92.— H.
[530,  531]


together  in  speech  and  in  writing,  they  are
inseparable  in  their  nature.

We  ascribe  to  reason  two  offices,  or  two
degrees.  The  first  is  to  judge  of  things
self-evident ;  the  second  to  draw  conclusions
that  are  not  self-evident  from  those  that
are.  The  first  of  these  is  the  province,  and
the  sole  province,  of  common  sense ;  and,
therefore,  it  coincides  with  reason  in  its
whole  extent,  and  is  only  another  name  for
one  branch  or  one  degree  of  reason.  Per-
haps it  may  be  said,  Why  then  should  you
give  it  a  particular  name,  since  it  is  acknow-
ledged to  be  only  a  degree  of  reason  ?  It
would  be  a  sufficient  answer  to  this,  Why
do  you  abolish  a  name  which  is  to  be  found
in  the  language  of  all  civilized  nations,  and
has  acquired  a  right  by  prescription  ?  Such
an  attempt  is  equally  foolish  and  ineffectual.
Every  wise  man  will  be  apt  to  think  that
a  name  which  is  found  in  all  languages  as
far  back  as  we  can  trace  them,  is  not  with-
out some  use. [531]

But  there  is  an  obvious  reason  why  this
degree  of  reason  should  have  a  name  ap-
propriated to  it ;  and  that  is,  that,  in  the
greatest  part  of  mankind,  no  other  degree  of
reason  is  to  be  found.  It  is  this  degree
that  entitles  them  to  the  denomination  of
reasonable  creatures.  It  is  this  degree  of
reason,  and  this  only,  that  makes  a  man
capable  of  managing  his  own  affairs,  and
answerable  for  his  conduct  towards  others.
There  is  therefore  the  best  reason  why  it
should  have  a  name  appropriated  to  it.

These  two  degrees  of  reason  differ  in
other  respects,  which  would  be  sufficient  to
entitle  them  to  distinct  names.

The  first  is  purely  the  gift  of  Heaven.
And  where  Heaven  has  not  given  it,  no
education  can  supply  the  want.  The  se-
cond is  learned  by  practice  and  rules,  when
the  first  is  not  wanting.  A  man  who  has
common  sense  may  be  taught  to  reason.
But,  if  he  has  not  that  gift,  no  teaching  will
make  him  able  either  to  judge  of  first  prin-
ciples or  to  reason  from  them.

I  have  only  this  farther  to  observe,  that
the  province  of  common  sense  is  more  ex-
tensive in  refutation  than  in  confirmation.
A  conclusion  drawn  by  a  train  of  just  rea-
soning from  true  principles  cannot  possibly
contradict  any  decision  of  common  sense,
because  truth  will  always  be  consistent
with  itself.  Neither  can  such  a  conclu-
sion receive  any  confirmation  from  com-
mon sense,  because  it  is  not  within  its  juris-
diction.

But  it  is  possible  that,  by  setting  out
from  false  principles,  or  by  an  error  in
reasoning,  a  man  may  be  led  to  a  conclu-
sion that  contradicts  the  decisions  of  com-
mon sense.  In  this  case,  the  conclusion
is  within  the  jurisdiction  of  common  sense,
though the reasoning on which it was


426


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


grounded  be  not ;  and  a  man  of  common
sense  may  fairly  reject  the  conclusion  with-
out being  able  to  shew  the  error  of  the  rea-
soning that  led  to  it- [532]

Thus,  if  a  mathematician,  by  a  process
of  intricate  demonstration,  in  which  some
false  step  was  made,  should  be  brought  to
this  conclusion,  that  two  quantities,  which
are  both  equal  to  a  third,  are  not  equal  to
each  other,  a  man  of  common  sense,  with-
out pretending  to  be  a  judge  of  the  demon-
stration, is  well  entitled  to  reject  the  con-
clusion, and  to  pronounce  it  absurd.


CHAPTER  III.

SENTIMENTS  OF  PHILOSOPHERS  CONCERNING
JUDGMENT.

A  difference  about  the  meaning  of  a
word  ought  not  to  occasion  disputes  among
philosophers  ;  but  it  is  often  very  proper  to
take  notice  of  such  differences,  in  order  to
prevent  verbal  disputes.  There  are,  in-
deed, no  words  in  language  more  liable  to
ambiguity  than  those  by  which  we  express
the  operations  of  the  mind ;  and  the  most
candid  and  judicious  may  sometimes  be  led
into  different  opinions  about  their  precise
meaning.

I  hinted  before  what  I  take  to  be  a  pecu-
liarity in  Mr  Locke  with  regard  to  the
•meaning  of  the  word  judgment,  and  men-
tioned what,  I  apprehend,  may  have  led
him  into  it.  But  let  us  hear  himself,  Essay,
book  iv.  chap.  14  : — "  The  faculty  which
God  has  given  to  man  to  supply  the  want
of  clear  and  certain  knowledge,  where  that
cannot  be  had,  is  judgment ;  whereby  the
mind  takes  its  ideas  to  agree  or  disagree  ;
or,  which  is  the  same,  any  proposition  to
be  true  or  false,  without  perceiving  a  de-
monstrative evidence  in  the  proofs.  Thus
the  mind  has  two  faculties  conversant  about
truth  and  falsehood.  First,  Knowledge,
whereby  it  certainly  perceives,  and  is  un-
doubtedly satisfied  of,  the  agreement  or
disagreement  of  any  ideas.  Secondly,
Judgment,  which  is  the  putting  ideas  to-
gether, or  separating  them  from  one  an-
other in  the  mind,  when  their  certain  agree-
ment or  disagreement  is  not  perceived,  but
presumed  to  be  so" [533]

Knowledge,  I  think,  sometimes  signifies
things  known ;  sometimes  that  act  of  the
mind  by  which  we  know  them.  And  in  like
manner  opinion  sometimes  signifies  things
believed ;  sometimes  the  act  of  the  mind
by  which  we  believe  them.  But  judgment
is  the  faculty  which  is  exercised  in  both
these  acts  of  the  mind.  In  knowledge,  we
judge  without  doubting ;  in  opinion,  with
some  mixture  of  doubt.  But  I  know  no
authority,  besides  that  of  Mr  Locke,  for


calling  knowledge  a  faculty,  any  more  than
for  calling  opinion  a  faculty.

Neither  do  I  think  that  knowledge  is
confined  within  the  narrow  limits  which
Mr  Locke  assigns  to  it;  because  the  far
greatest  part  of  what  all  men  call  human
knowledge,  is  in  things  which  neither  ad-
mit of  intuitive  nor  of  demonstrative  proof.

I  have  all  along  used  the  word  judgment
in  a  more  extended  sense  than  Mr  Locke
does  in  the  passage  above-mentioned.  I
understand  by  it  that  operation  of  mind  by
which  we  determine,  concerning  anything
that  may  be  expressed  by  a  proposition,
whether  it  be  true  or  false.  Every  propo-
sition is  either  true  or  false ;  so  is  every
judgment.  A  proposition  may  be  simply
conceived  without  judging  of  it.  But  when
there  is  not  only  a  conception  of  the  pro-
position, but  a  mental  affirmation  or  nega-
tion, an  assent  or  dissent  of  the  understand-
ing, whether  weak  or  strong,  that  is  judg-
ment.

I  think  that,  since  the  days  of  Aristotle,
logicians  have  taken  the  word  in  that  sense,
and  other  writers,  for  the  most  part,
though  there  are  other  meanings,  which
there  is  no  danger  of  confounding  with  this.
[534]

We  may  take  the  authority  of  Dr  Isaac
Watts,  as  a  logician,  as  a  man  who  under-
stood English,  and  who  had  a  just  esteem
of  Mr  Locke's  Essay.  Logic.  Introd.  page
5 — "  Judgment  is  that  operation  of  the
mind,  wherein  we  join  two  or  more  ideas
together  by  one  affirmation  or  negation;
that  is,  we  either  affirm  or  deny  this  to  be
that.  So:  this  tree  is  high  ;  that  horse  is  not
swift  ;  the  mind  of  man  is  a  thinking  being;
mere  matter  has  no  thought  belonging  to  it;
God  is  just;  good  men  are  of  ten  miserable  in
this  world  ;  a  righteous  governor  will  make
a  difference  betwixt  the  evil  and  the  good;
which  sentences  are  the  effect  of  judgment,
and  are  called  propositions."  And,  Part  II.
chap.  ii.  §  9 — "  The  evidence  of  sense  is,
when  we  frame  a  proposition  according  to
the  dictate  of  any  of  our  senses.  So  we
judge  that  grass  is  green  ;  that  a  trumpet
gives  a  pleasant  sound;  that  fire  burns  wood;
water  is  soft  ;  and  iron  hard.'"

In  this  meaning,  judgment  extends  to
every  kind  of  evidence,  probable  or  certain
and  to  every  degree  of  assent  or  dissent.
It  extends  to  all  knowledge  as  well  as  to  all
opinion ;  with  this  difference  only,  that  in
knowledge  it  is  more  firm  and  steady,  like
a  house  founded  upon  a  rock.  In  opinion
it  stands  upon  a  weaker  foundation,  and  is
more  liable  to  be  shaken  and  overturned.

These  differences  about  the  meaning  of
words  are  not  mentioned  as  if  truth  was  on
one  side  and  error  on  the  other,  but  as  an
apology  for  deviating,  in  this  instance,  from
the  phraseology  of  Mr  Locke,  which  is,  for
[532-534]


chap,  in.] SENTIMENTS  CONCERNING  JUDGMENT.


427


the  most  part,  accurate  and  distinct ;  and
because  attention  to  the  different  meanings
that  are  put  upon  words  by  different  authors,
is  the  best  way  to  prevent  our  mistaking
verbal  differences  for  real  differences  of
opinion.

The  common  theory  concerning  ideas
naturally  leads  to  .a  theory  concerning
judgment,  which  may  be  a  proper  test  of  its
truth ;  for,  as  they  are  necessarily  con-
nected, they  must  stand  or  fall  together.
Their  connection  is  thus  expressed  by  Mr
Locke,  Book  IV.  chap.  1  — "  Since  the
mind,  in  all  its  thoughts  and  reasonings,
hath  no  other  immediate  object  but  its  own
ideas,  which  it  alone  does  or  can  con-
template, it  is  evident  that  our  knowledge  is
only  conversant  about  them.  Knowledge
then  seems  to  me  to  be  nothing  but  the
perception  of  the  connection  and  agreement,
or  disagreement  and  repugnancy,  of  any  of
our  ideas. In  this  alone  it  consists." [535]

There  can  only  be  one  objection  to  the
justice  of  this  inference ;  and  that  is,  that
the  antecedent  proposition  from  which  it  is
inferred  seems  to  have  some  ambiguity ;
for,  in  the  first  clause  of  that  proposition,
the  mind  is  said  to  have  no  other  immediate
object  but  its  own  ideas ;  in  the  second,
that  it  has  no  other  object  at  all ;  that  it
does  or  can  contemplate  ideas  alone.*

If  the  word  immediate  in  the  first  clause
be  a  mere  expletive,  and  be  not  intended  to
limit  the  generality  of  the  proposition,  then
the  two  clauses  will  be  perfectly  consistent,
the  second  being  only  a  repetition  or  expli-
cation of  the  first ;  and  the  inference  that
our  knowledge  is  only  conversant  about
ideas  will  be  perfectly  just  and  logical.

But,  if  the  word  immediate  in  the  first
clause  be  intended  to  limit  the  general  pro-
position, and  to  imply  that  the  mind  has
other  objects  besides  its  own  ideas,  though
no  other  immediate  objects,  then  it  will  not
be  true  that  it  does  or  can  contemplate  ideas
alone ;  nor  will  the  inference  be  justly
drawn  that  our  knowledge  is  only  conversant
about  ideas.

Mr  Locke  must  either  have  meant  his
antecedent  proposition,  without  any  limita-
tion by  the  word  immediate,  or  he  must
have  meant  to  limit  it  by  that  word,  and  to
signify  that  there  are  objects  of  the  mind
which  are  not  ideas.

The  first  of  these  suppositions  appears  to
me  most  probable,  for  several  reasons.
[536]

First,  Because,  when  he  purposely  de-
fines the  word  idea,  in  the  introduction  to
the  Essay,  he  says  it  is  whatsoever  is  the

*  In  reference  to  the  polemic  that  follows,  see,  for
a  solution,  what  has  been  said  above  in  regard  to  the
ambiguity  of  the  term  object,  and  Note  B.  In  regard
to  the  doctrine  of  Ideas,  as  held  by  the  philosophers,
see  above,  and  Note  C,  &c— H.
[535-537]


object  of  the  understanding  when  a  man
thinks,  or  whatever  the  mind  can  be  em-
ployed about  in  thinking.  Here  there  is  no
room  left  for  objects  of  the  mind  that  are
not  ideas.  The  same  definition  is  often
repeated  throughout  the  Essay.  Some-
times, indeed,  the  word  immediate  is  added,
as  in  the  passage  now  under  consideration  ;
but  there  is  no  intimation  made  that  it  ought
to  be  understood  when  it  is  not  expressed.
Now,  if  it  had  really  been  his  opinion  that
there  are  objects  of  thought  which  are  not
ideas,  this  definition,  which  is  the  ground-
work of  the  whole  Essay,  would  have  been
very  improper,  and  apt  to  mislead  his
reader.

Secondly,  He  has  never  attempted  to
shew  how  there  can  be  objects  of  thought
which  are  not  immediate  objects ;  and,
indeed,  this  seems  impossible.  For,  what-
ever the  object  be,  the  man  either  thinks  of
it,  or  he  does  not.  There  is  no  medium
between  these.  If  he  thinks  of  it,  it  is  an
immediate  object  of  thought  while  he  thinks
of  it.  If  he  does  not  think  of  it,  it  is  no
object  of  thought  at  all.  Every  object  of
thought,  therefore,  is  an  immediate  object
of  thought,  and  the  word  immediate,  joined
to  objects  of  thought,  seems  to  be  a  mere
expletive.

Thirdly,  Though  Malebranche  and  Bishop
Berkeley  believed  that  we  have  no  ideas  of
minds,  or  of  the  operations  of  minds,  and
that  we  may  think  and  reason  about  them
without  ideas,  this  was  not  the  opinion  of
Mr  Locke.  He  thought  that  there  are
ideas  of  minds,  and  of  their  operations,  as
well  as  of  the  objects  of  sense ;  that  the
mind  perceives  nothing  but  its  own  ideas,
and  that  all  words  are  the  signs  of  ideas.

A  fourth  reason  is,  That  to  suppose  that
he  intended  to  limit  the  antecedent  proposi-
tion by  the  word  immediate,  is  to  impute  to
him  a  blunder  in  reasoning,  which  I  do  not
think  Mr  Locke  could  have  committed;
for  what  can  be  a  more  glaring  paralogism
than  to  infer  that,  since  ideas  are  partly,
though  not  solely,  the  objects  of  thought,  it
is  evident  that  all  our  knowledge  is  only
conversant  about  them.  If,  on  the  con-
trary, he  meant  that  ideas  are  the  only  ob-
jects of  thought,  then  the  conclusion  drawn
is  perfectly  just  and  obvious  ;  and  he  might
very  well  say,  that,  since  it  is  ideas  only  that
the  mind  -does  or  can  contemplate,  it  is  evi-
dent that  our  knowledge  is  only  conversant
about  them. [537]

As  to  the  conclusion  itself,  I  have  only
to  observe,  that,  though  he  extends  it  only  to
what  he  calls  knowledge,  and  not  to  what
he  calls  judgment,  there  is  the  same  reason
for  extending  it  to  both.

It  is  true  of  judgment,  as  well  as  of
knowledge,  that  it  can  only  be  conversant
about  objects  of  the  mind,  or  about  things


428


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


ESSAY VI.


which  the  mind  can  contemplate.  Judg-
ment, as  well  as  knowledge,  supposes  the
conception  of  the  object  about  which  we
judge  ;  and  to  judge  of  objects  that  never
were  nor  can  be  objects  of  the  mind,  is  evi-
dently impossible.

This,  therefore,  we  may  take  for  granted,
that,  if  knowledge  be  conversant  about  ideas
only,  because  there  is  no  other  object  of  the
mind,  it  must  be  no  less  certain  that  judg-
ment is  conversant  about  ideas  only,  for
the  same  reason.

Mr  Locke  adds,  as  the  result  of  his  rea-
soning, "  Knowledge,  then,  seems  to  me  to
be  nothing  but  the  perception  of  the  con-
nection and  agreement,  or  disagreement
and  repugnancy,  of  any  of  our  ideas.  In
this  alone  it  consists."

This  is  a  very  important  point,  not  only
on  its  own  account,  but  on  account  of  its
necessary  connection  with  his  system  con-
cerning ideas,  which  is  such  as  that  both
must  stand  or  fall  together ;  for,  if  there  is
any  part  of  human  knowledge  which  does
not  consist  in  the  perception  of  the  agree-
ment or  disagreement  of  ideas,  it  must  fol-
low that  there  are  objects  of  thought  and
of  contemplation  which  are  not  ideas.
[538]

This  point,  therefore,  deserves  to  be  care-
fully examined.  With  this  view,  let  us
first  attend  to  its  meaning,  which,  I  think,
can  hardly  be  mistaken,  though  it  may
need  some  explication.

Every  point  of  knowledge,  and  every
judgment,  is  expressed  by  a  proposition,
wherein  something  is  affirmed  or  denied  of
the  subject  of  the  proposition.

By  perceiving  the  connection  or  agree-
ment of  two  ideas,  I  conceive,  is  meant  per-
ceiving the  truth  of  an  affirmative  proposi-
tion, of  which  the  subject  and  predicate  are
ideas.  In  like  manner,  by  perceiving  the
disagreement  and  repugnancy  of  any  two
ideas,  I  conceive  is  meant  perceiving  the
truth  of  a  negative  proposition,  of  which
both  subject  and  predicate  are  ideas.  This
I  take  to  be  the  only  meaning  the  words
can  bear,  and  it  is  confirmed  by  what  Mr
Locke  says  in  a  passage  already  quoted  in
this  chapter,  that  "  the  mind,  taking  its
ideas  to  agree  or  disagree,  is  the  same  as
taking  any  proposition  to  be  true  or  false."
Therefore,  if  the  definition  of  knowledge
given  by  Mr  Locke  be  a  just  one,  the  sub-
ject, as  well  as  the  predicate  of  every  pro-
position, by  which  any  point  of  knowledge
is  expressed,  must  be  an  idea,  and  can  be
nothing  else  ;  and  the  same  must  hold  of
every  proposition  by  which  judgment  is
expressed,  as  has  been  shewn  above.

Having  ascertained  the  meaning  of  this
definition  of  human  knowledge,  we  are
next  to  consider  how  far  it  is  just.

First,  I  would  observe  that,  if  the  word


idea  be  taken  in  the  meaning  which  it  had
at  first  among  the  Pythagoreans  and  Pla-
tonists,  and  if  by  knowledge  be  meant  only
abstract  and  general  knowledge,  (which  I
believe  Mr  Locke  had  chiefly  in  his  view,)
I  think  the  proposition  is  true,  that  such
knowledge  consists  solely  in  perceiving  the
truth  of  propositions  whose  subject  and
predicate  are  ideas. [539]

By  ideas  here  I  mean  things  conceived
abstractly,  without  regard  to  their  existence.
We  commonly  call  them  abstract  notions,
abstract  conceptions,  abstract  ideas — the
Feripatetics  called  them  universals  ;  and
the  Platonists,  who  knew  no  other  ideas,
called  them  ideas  without  addition.

Such  ideas  are  both  subject  and  predicate
in  every  proposition  which  expresses  ab-
stract knowledge.

The  whole  body  of  pure  mathematics  is
an  abstract  science  ;  and  in  every  mathe-
matical proposition,  both  subject  and  pre-
dicate are  ideas,  in  the  sense  above  explained.
Thus,  when  I  say  the  side  of  a  square  is  not
commensurable  to  its  diagonal — in  this
proposition  the  side  and  the  diagonal  of  a
square  are  the  subjects,  (for,  being  a  rela-
tive proposition,  it  must  have  two  subjects.)
A  square,  its  side,  and  its  diagonal,  are
ideas,  or  universals ;  they  are  not  indivi-
duals, but  things  predicable  of  many  indi-
viduals. Existence  is  not  included  in  their
definition,  nor  in  the  conception  we  form  of
them.  The  predicate  of  the  proposition  is
commensurable,  which  must  be  an  univer-
sal, as  the  predicate  of  every  proposition  is
so.  In  other  branches  of  knowledge,  many
abstract  truths  may  be  found,  but,  for  the
most  part,  mixed  with  others  that  are  not
abstract.

I  add,  that  I  apprehend  that  what  is  strictly
called  demonstrative  evidence,  is  to  be  found
in  abstract  knowledge  only.  This  was  the
opinion  of  Aristotle,  of  Plato,  and,  I  think,
of  all  the  ancient  philosophers  ;  and  I  be-
lieve in  this  they  judged  right.  It  is  true,
we  often  meet  with  demonstration  in  astro-
mony,  in  mechanics,  and  in  other  branches
of  natural  philosophy  ;  but,  I  believe,  we
shall  always  find  that  such  demonstrations
are  grounded  upon  principles  of  supposi-
tions, which  have  neither  intuitive  nor
demonstrative  evidence. [540]

Thus,  when  we  demonstrate  that  the
path  of  a  projectile  in  vacuo  is  a  parabola,
we  suppose  that  it  is  acted  upon  with  the
same  force  and  in  the  same  direction
through  its  whole  path  by  gravity.  This  is
not  intuitively  known,  nor  is  it  demon-
strable ;  and,  in  the  demonstration,  we  rea-
son from  the  laws  of  motion,  which  are
principles  not  capable  of  demonstration,
but  grounded  on  a  different  kind  of  evidence.

Ideas,  in  the  sense  above  explained,  are

creatures  of  the  mind  ;  they  are  fabricated

[538-540]


HI.]


SENTIMENTS  CONCERNING  JUDGMENT.


429


by  its  rational  powers  ;  we  know  their
nature  and  their  essence — for  they  are
nothing  more  than  they  are  conceived  to
be ; — and,  because  they  are  perfectly  known,
we  can  reason  about  them  with  the  highest
degree  of  evidence.

And,  as  they  are  not  things  that  exist,
but  things  conceived,  they  neither  have
place  nor  time,  nor  are  they  liable  to
change.

When  we  say  that  they  are  in  the  mind,
this  can  mean  no  more  but  that  they  are
conceived  by  the  mind,  or  that  they  are
objects  of  thought.  The  act  of  conceiving
them  is,  no  doubt,  in  the  mind ;  the  things
conceived  have  no  place,  because  they  have
not  existence.  Thus,  a  circle,  considered
abstractly,  is  said  figuratively  to  be  in  the
mind  of  him  that  conceives  it ;  but  in  no
other  sense  than  the  city  of  London  or  the
kingdom  of  France  is  said  to  be  in  his
mind  when  he  thinks  of  those  objects.

Place  and  time  belong  to  finite  things  that
exist,  but  not  to  things  that  are  barely  con-
ceived. They  may  be  objects  of  concep-
tion to  intelligent  beings  in  every  place  and
at  all  times.  Hence  the  Pythagoreans  and
Platonists  were  led  to  think  that  they  are
eternal  and  omnipresent.  If  they  had  ex-
istence, they  must  be  so  ;  for  they  have  no
relation  to  any  one  place  or  time,  which
they  have  not  to  every  place  and  to  every
time.

The  natural  prejudice  of  mankind,  that
what  we  conceive  must  have  existence,  led
those  ancient  philosophers  to  attribute  ex-
istence to  ideas  ;  and  by  this  they  were  led
into  all  the  extravagant  and  mysterious
parts  of  their  system.  When  it  is  purged
of  these,  I  apprehend  it  to  be  the  only  in-
telligible and  rational  system  concerning
ideas. [541]

I  agree  with  them,  therefore,  that  ideas
are  immutably  the  same  in  all  times  and
places  ;  for  this  means  no  more  but  that  a
circle  is  always  a  circle,  and  a  square  always
a  square.

I  agree  with  them  that  ideas  are  the  pat-
terns or  exemplars  by  which  everything
was  made  that  had  a  beginning :  for  an
intelligent  artificer  must  conceive  his  work
before  it  is  made  ;  he  makes  it  according  to
that  conception  ;  and  the  thing  conceived,
before  it  exists,  can  only  be  an  idea.

I  agree  with  them  that  every  species  of
things,  considered  abstractly,  is  an  idea;
and  that  the  idea  of  the  species  is  in  every
individual  of  the  species,  without  division
or  multiplication.  This,  indeed,  is  expressed
somewhat  mysteriously,  according  to  the
manner  of  the  sect ;  but  it  may  easily  be
explained.

Every  idea  is  an  attribute ;  and  it  is  a
common  way  of  speaking  to  say,  that  the
attribute  is  in  every  subject  of  which  it  may
[541-54.3]


truly  be  affirmed.  Thus,  to  he  above  fifty
years  of  age  is  an  attribute  or  idea.  This
attribute  may  be  in,  or  affirmed  of,  fifty
different  individuals,  and  be  the  same  in
all,  without  division  or  multiplication.

I  think  that  not  only  every  species,  but
every  genus,  higher  or  lower,  and  every
attribute  considered  abstractly,  is  an  idea.
These  are  things  conceived  without  regard  to
existence  ;  they  are  universals,  and,  there-
fore, ideas,  according  to  the  ancient  mean-
ing of  that  word. [542]

It  is  true  that,  after  the  Platonists  en-
tered into  disputes  with  the  Peripatetics,  in
order  to  defend  the  existence  of  eternal
ideas,  they  found  it  prudent  to  contract  the
line  of  defence,  and  maintained  only  that
there  is  an  idea  of  every  species  of  natural
things,  but  not  of  the  genera,  nor  of  things
artificial.  They  were  unwilling  to  multiply
beings  beyond  what  was  necessary ;  but
in  this,  I  think,  they  departed  from  the
genuine  principles  of  their  system.

The  definition  of  a  species  is  nothing
but  the  definition  of  the  genus,  with  the
addition  of  a  specific  difference  ;  and  the
division  of  things  into  species  is  the  work
of  the  mind,  as  well  as  their  division  into
genera  and  classes.  A  species,  a  genus,  an
order,  a  class,  is  only  a  combination  of  at-
tributes made  by  the  mind,  and  called  by
one  name.  There  is,  therefore,  the  same
reason  for  giving  the  name  of  idea  to  every
attribute,  and  to  every  species  and  genus,
whether  higher  or  lower  :  these  are  only
more  complex  attributes,  or  combinations
of  the  more  simple.  And,  though  it  might
be  improper,  without  necessity,  to  multiply
beings  which  they  believed  to  have  a  real
existence,  yet,  had  they  seen  that  ideas
are  not  things  that  exist,  but  things  that
are  conceived,  they  would  have  appre-
hended no  danger  nor  expense  from  thei*
number.

Simple  attributes,  species  and  genera,
lower  or  higher,  are  all  things  conceived
without  regard  to  existence  ;  they  are  uni-
versals ;  they  are  expressed  by  general
words  ;  and  have  an  equal  title  to  be  called
by  the  name  of  ideas.

I  likewise  agree  with  those  ancient  phi-
losophers that  ideas  are  the  object,  and  the
sole  object,  of  science,  strictly  so  called—
that  is,  of  demonstrative  reasoning.

And,  as  ideas  are  immutable,  so  their
agreements  and  disagreements,  and  all  their
relations  and  attributes,  are  immutable.
All  mathematical  truths  are  immutably
true.  Like  the  ideas  about  which  they  are
conversant,  they  have  no  relation  to  time
or  place,  no  dependence  upon  existence  or
change.  That  the  angles  of  a  plane  tri-
angle are  equal  to  two  right  angles  always
was,  and  always  will  be,  true,  though  no
triangle  had  ever  existed. [543]


430


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS


[essay  VI.


The  same  may  be  said  of  all  abstract
truths  :  on  that  account  they  have  often
been  called  eternal  truths  ;  and,  for  the
same  reason,  the  Pythagoreans  ascribed
eternity  to  the  ideas  about  which  they  are
conversant.  They  may  very  properly  be
called  necessary  truths ;  because  it  is  im-
possible they  should  not  be  true  at  all  times
and  in  all  places.

Such  is  the  nature  of  all  truth  that  can
be  discovered,  by  perceiving  the  agreements
and  disagreements  of  ideas,  when  we  take
that  word  in  its  primitive  sense.  And  that
Mr  Locke,  in  his  definition  of  knowledge,
had  chiefly  in  his  view  abstract  truths,  we
may  be  led  to  think  from  the  examples  he
gives  to  illustrate  it.

But  there  is  another  great  class  of  truths,
which  are  not  abstract  and  necessary,  and,
therefore,  cannot  be  perceived  in  the  agree-
ments and  disagreements  of  ideas.  These
are  all  the  truths  we  know  concerning  the
real  existence  of  things — the  truth  of  our
own  existence— of  the  existence  of  other
things,  inanimate,  animal,  and  rational,  and
of  their  various  attributes  and  relations.

These  truths  may  be  called  contingent
truths.  I  except  only  the  existence  and
attributes  of  the  Supreme  Being,  which  is
the  only  necessary  truth  I  know  regarding
existence.

All  other  beings  that  exist  depend  for
their  existence,  and  all  that  belongs  to  it,
upon  the  will  and  power  of  the  first  cause  ;
therefore,  neither  their  existence,  nor  their
nature,  nor  anything  that  befalls  them,  is
necessary,  but  contingent.

But,  although  the  existence  of  the  Deity
be  necessary,  I  apprehend  we  can  only  de-
duce it  from  contingent  truths.  The  only
arguments  for  the  existence  of  a  Deity
which  I  am  able  to  comprehend,  are  ground-
ed upon  the  knowledge  of  my  own  existence,
and  the  existence  of  other  finite  beings.
But  these  are  contingent  truths. [544]

I  believe,  therefore,  that  by  perceiving
agreements  and  disagreements  of  ideas,  no
contingent  truth  whatsoever  can  be  known,
nor  the  real  existence  of  anything,  not  even
our  own  existence,  nor  the  existence  of  a
Deity,  which  is  a  necessary  truth.  Thus  I
have  endeavoured  to  shew  what  knowledge
may,  and  what  cannot  be  attained,  by  per-
ceiving the  agreements  and  disagreements
of  ideas,  when  we  take  that  word  in  its
primitive  sense.

We  are,  in  the  next  place,  to  consider,
whether  knowledge  consists  in  perceiving  the
agreement  or  disagreement  of  ideas,  taking
ideas  in  any  of  the  senses  in  which  the  word
is  used  by  Mr  Locke  and  other  modern
philosophers.

1.  Very  often  the  word  idea  is  used  so,
that  to  have  the  idea  of  anything  is  a  peri-
phrasis for  conceiving  it. In  this  sense,  an


idea  is  not  an  object  of  thought,  it  is  thought
itself.  It  is  the  act  of  the  mind  by  which
we  conceive  any  object.  And  it  is  evident
that  this  could  not  be  the  meaning  which
Mr  Locke  had  in  view  in  his  definition  of
knowledge.

2.  A  second  meaning  of  the  word  idea  is
that  which  Mr  Locke  gives  in  the  intro-
duction to  his  Essay,  when  he  is  making  an
apology  for  the  frequent  use  of  it : — "  It  be-
ing that  term,  I  think,  which  serves  best  to
stand  for  whatsoever  is  the  object  of  the
understanding  when  a  man  thinks,  or  what-
ever it  is  which  a  man  can  be  employed
about  in  thinking."

By  this  definition,  indeed,  everything  that
can  be  the  object  of  thought  is  an  idea.
The  objects  of  our  thoughts  may,  I  think,
be  reduced  to  two  classes.

The  first  class  comprehends  all  those
objects  which  we  not  only  can  think  of,  but
which  we  believe  to  have  a  real  existence :
such  as  the  Creator  of  all  things,  and  all
his  creatures  that  fall  within  our  notice.
[545]  I  oan  think  of  the  sun  and  moon,
the  earth  and  sea,  and  of  the  various  animal,
vegetable,  and  inanimate  productions  with
which  it  hath  pleased  the  bountiful  Creator
to  enrich  our  globe.  I  can  think  of  myself,
of  my  friends  and  acquaintance.  I  think
of  the  author  of  the  Essay  with  high  esteem.
These,  and  such  as  these,  are  objects  of  the
understanding  which  we  believe  to  have  real
existence.

A  second  class  of  objects  of  the  under-
standing which  a  man  may  be  employed
about  in  thinking,  are  things  which  we  either
believe  never  to  have  existed,  or  which  we
think  of  without  regard  to  their  existence.

Thus,  I  can  think  of  Don  Quixote,  of
the  Island  of  Laputa,  of  Oceana,  and  of
Utopia,  which  I  believe  never  to  have  ex-
isted. Every  attribute,  every  species,  and
every  genus  of  things,  considered  abstractly,
without  any  regard  to  their  existence  or
non-existence,  may  be  an  object  of  the
understanding.

To  this  second  class  of  objects  of  the
understanding,  the  name  of  idea  does  very
properly  belong,  according  to  the  primitive
sense  of  the  word,  and  I  have  already  con-
sidered what  knowledge  does  and  what
does  not  consist  in  perceiving  the  agree-
ments and  disagreements  of  such  ideas.

But,  if  we  take  the  word  idea  in  so  ex-
tensive a  sense  as  to  comprehend,  not  only
the  second,  but  also  the  first  class  of  objects
of  the  understanding,  it  will  undoubtedly
be  true  that  all  knowledge  consists  in  per-
ceiving the  agreements  and  disagreement
of  ideas  :  for  it  is  impossible  that  there  can
be  any  knowledge,  any  judgment,  any
opinion,  true  or  false,  which  is  not  employed
about  the  objects  of  the  understanding.
But  whatsoever  is  an  object  of  the  under-
f544,  545]


chap,  in.] SENTIMENTS  CONCERNING  JUDGMENT.


431


standing  is  an  idea,  according  to  this  second
meaning  of  the  word.

Yet  I  am  persuaded  that  Mr  Locke,  in
his  definition  of  knowledge,  did  not  mean
that  the  word  idea  should  extend  to  all  those
things  which  we  commonly  consider  as  ob-
jects of  the  understanding. [546]

Though  Bishop  Berkeley  believed  that
eun,  moon,  and  stars,  and  all  material  things,
are  ideas,  and  nothing  but  ideas,  Mr  Locke
nowhere  professes  this  opinion.  He  be-
lieved that  we  have  ideas  of  bodies,  but  not
that  bodies  are  ideas.  In  like  manner,  he
believed  that  we  have  ideas  of  minds,  but
not  that  minds  are  ideas.  When  he  in-
quired so  carefully  into  the  origin  of  all  our
ideas,  he  did  not  surely  mean  to  find  the
origin  of  whatsoever  may  be  the  object  of
the  understanding,  nor  to  resolve  the  origin
of  everything  that  may  be  an  object  of
understanding  into  sensation  and  reflec-
tion.

3.  Setting  aside,  therefore,  the  two  mean-
ings of  the  word  idea,  before  mentioned,  as
meanings  which  Mr  Locke  could  not  have
in  his  view  in  the  definition  he  gives  of
knowledge,  the  only  meaning  that  could  be
intended  in  this  place  is  that  which  I  before
called  the  philosophical  meaning  of  the
word  idea,  which  hath  a  reference  to  the
theory  commonly  received  about  the  manner
in  which  the  mind  perceives  external  objects,
and  in  which  it  remembers  and  conceives
objects  that  are  not  present  to  it.  It  is  a  very
ancient  opinion,  and  has  been  very  generally
received  among  philosophers,  that  we  can-
not perceive  or  think  of  such  objects  im-
mediately, but  by  the  medium  of  certain
images  or  representatives  of  them  really
existing  in  the  mind  at  the  time.

To  those  images  the  ancients  gave  the
name  of  species  and  phantasms.  Modern
philosophers  have  given  them  the  name  of
ideas.  "  'Tis  evident,"  says  Mr  Locke,
book  iv.,  chap.  4,  "themindknows  not  things
immediately,  but  only  by  the  intervention
of  the  ideas  it  has  of  them."  And  in  the
same  paragraph  he  puts  this  question :
"  How  shall  the  mind,  when  it  perceives
nothing  but  its  own  ideas,  know  that  they
agree  with  things  themselves  ?" [547]

This  theory  I  have  already  considered,
in  treating  of  perception,  of  memory,  and
of  conception.  The  reader  will  there  find
the  reasons  that  lead  me  to  think  that  it
has  no  solid  foundation  in  reason,  or  in
attentive  reflection  upon  those  operations
of  our  minds  ;  that  it  contradicts  the  im-
mediate dictates  of  our  natural  faculties,
which  are  of  higher  authority  than  any
theory  ;  that  it  has  taken  its  rise  from  the
same  prejudices  which  led  all  the  ancient
philosophers  to  think  that  the  Deity  could
not  make  this  world  without  some  eternal
matter  to  work  upon,  and  which  led  the
[546-548]


Pythagoreans  and  Platonists  to  think  that
he  could  not  conceive  the  plan  of  the  world
he  was  to  make  without  eternal  ideas  really
existing  as  patterns  to  work  by  ;  and  that
this  theory,  when  its  necessary  consequences
are  fairly  pursued,  leads  to  absolute  scep-
ticism, though  those  consequences  were  not
seen  by  most  of  the  philosophers  who  have
adopted  it.

I  have  no  intention  to  repeat  what  nas
before  been  said  upon  those  points ;  but
only,  taking  ideas  in  this  sense,  to  make
some  observations  upon  the  definition  which
Mr  Locke  gives  of  knowledge.

First,  If  all  knowledge  consists  in  per-
ceiving the  agreements  and  disagreements
of  ideas — that  is,  of  representative  images  of
things  existing  in  the  mind — it  obviously
follows  that,  if  there  be  no  such  ideas,  there
can  be  no  knowledge.  So  that,  if  there
should  be  found  good  reason  for  giving  up
this  philosophical  hypothesis,  all  knowledge
must  go  along  with  it.

I  hope,  however,  it  is  not  so  :  and  that,
though  this  hypothesis,  like  many  others,
should  totter  and  fall  to  the  ground,  know-
ledge will  continue  to  stand  firm  upon  a
more  permanent  basis. [548]

The  cycles  and  epicycles  of  the  ancient
astronomers  were  for  a  thousand  years
thought  absolutely  necessary  to  explain
the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  Yet
now,  when  all  men  believe  them  to  have
been  mere  fictions,  astronomy  has  not  fallen
with  them,  but  stands  upon  a  more  rational
foundation  than  before.  Ideas,  or  images
of  things  existing  in  the  mind,  have,  for  a
longer  time,  been  thought  necessary  for
explaining  the  operations  of  the  understand-
ing. If  they  should  likewise  at  last  be
found  to  be  fictions,  human  knowledge  and
judgment  would  suffer  nothing  by  being
disengaged  from  an  unwieldy  hypothesis.
Mr  Locke  surely  did  not  look  upon  the  ex-
istence of  ideas  as  a  philosophical  hypo-
thesis. He  thought  that  we  are  conscious
of  their  existence,  otherwise  he  would  not
have  made  the  existence  of  all  our  know-
ledge to  depend  upon  the  existence  of  ideas.

Secondly,  Supposing  this  hypothesis  to
be  true,  I  agree  with  Mr  Locke  that  it  is
an  evident  and  necessary  consequence  that
our  knowledge  can  be  conversant  about
ideas  only,  and  must  consist  in  perceiving
their  attributes  and  relations.  For  nothing
can  be  more  evident  than  this,  that  all
knowledge,  and  all  judgment  and  opinion,
must  be  about  things  which  are  or  may  be
immediate  objects  of  our  thought.  What
cannot  be  the  object  of  thought,  or  the
object  of  the  mind  in  thinking,  cannot  be
the  object  of  knowledge  or  of  opinion.

Everything  we  can  know  of  any  object,
must  be  either  some  attribute  of  the  object,
or  some  relation  it  bears  to  some  other


432


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


object  or  objects.  By  the  agreements  and
disagreements  of  objects,  I  apprehend  Mr
Locke  intended  to  express  both  their  attri-
butes and  their  relations.  If  ideas  then  be
the  only  objects  of  thought,  the  consequence
is  necessary,  that  they  must  be  the  only
objects  of  knowledge,  and  all  knowledge
must  consist  in  perceiving  their  agreements
and  disagreements — that  is,  their  attributes
and  relations.

The  use  I  would  make  of  this  conse-
quence, is  to  shew  that  the  hypothesis  must
be  false,  from  which  it  necessarily  follows.
For  if  we  have  any  knowledge  of  things
that  are  not  ideas,  it  will  follow  no  less
evidently,  that  ideas  are  not  the  only  objects
of  our  thoughts. [549]

Mr  Locke  has  pointed  out  the  extent  and
limits  of  human  knowledge,  in  his  fourth
book,  with  more  accuracy  and  judgment
than  any  philosopher  had  done  before ;  but
he  has  not  confined  it  to  the  agreements
and  disagreements  of  ideas.  And  I  cannot
help  thinking  that  a  great  part  of  that  book
is  an  evident  refutation  of  the  principles
laid  down  in  the  beginning  of  it.

Mr  Locke  did  not  believe  that  he  himself
was  an  idea  ;  that  his  friends  and  acquaint-
ance were  ideas ;  that  the  Supreme  Being,
to  speak  with  reverence,  is  an  idea ;  or
that  the  sun  and  moon,  the  earth  and  the
sea,  and  other  external  objects  of  sense,  are
ideas.  He  believed  that  he  had  some  cer-
tain knowledge  of  all  those  objects.  His
knowledge,  therefore,  did  not  consist  solely
in  perceiving  the  agreements  and  disagree-
ments of  his  ideas  ;  for,  surely,  to  perceive
the  existence,  the  attributes,  and  relations
of  things,  which  are  not  ideas,  is  not  to  per-
ceive the  agreements  and  disagreements  of
ideas.  And,  if  things  which  are  not  ideas  be
objects  of  knowledge,  they  must  be  objects  of
thought.  On  the  contrary,  if  ideas  be  the
only  objects  of  thought,  there  can  be  no
knowledge,  either  of  our  own  existence,  or
of  the  existence  of  external  objects,  or  of
the  existence  of  a  Deity.

This  consequence,  as  far  as  concerns  the
existence  of  external  objects  of  sense,  was
afterwards  deduced  from  the  theory  of  ideas
by  Bishop  Berkeley  with  the  clearest  evi-
dence ;  and  that  author  chose  rather  to
adopt  the  consequence  than  to  reject  the
theory  on  which  it  was  grounded.  But,
with  regard  to  the  existence  of  our  own
minds,  of  other  minds,  and  of  a  Supreme
Mind,  the  Bishop,  that  he  might  avoid  the
consequence,  rejected  a  part  of  the  theory,
and  maintained  that  we  can  think  of  minds,
of  their  attributes  and  relations,  without
ideas. [550  J

Mr  Hume  saw  very  clearly  the  conse-
quences of  this  theory,  and  adopted  them
in  his  speculative  moments ;  but  candidly
acknowledges  that,  in  the  common busi-


ness of  life,  he  found  himself  under  a  neces-
sity of  believing  with  the  vulgar.  His
"  Treatise  of  Human  Nature"  is  the  only
system  to  which  the  theory  of  ideas  leads ;
and,  in  my  apprehension,  is,  in  all  its  parts,
the  necessary  consequence  of  that  theory.

Mr  Locke,  however,  did  not  see  all  the
consequences  of  that  theory  ;  he  adopted  it
without  doubt  or  examination,  carried  along
by  the  stream  of  philosophers  that  wrent
before  him  ;  and  his  judgment  and  good
sense  have  led  him  to  say  many  things,  and
to  believe  many  things,  that  cannot  be  re-
conciled to  it.

He  not  only  believed  his  own  existence,
the  existence  of  external  things,  and  the
existence  of  a  Deity ;  but  he  has  shewn
very  justly  how  we  come  by  the  knowledge
of  these  existences.

It  might  here  be  expected  that  he  should
have  pointed  out  the  agreements  and  dis-
agreements of  ideas  from  which  these  exist-
ences are  deduced  ;  but  this  is  impossible,
and  he  has  not  even  attempted  it.

Our  own  existence,  he  observes,  we  know
intuitively;  but  this  intuition  is  not  a  percep-
tion of  the  agreement  or  disagreement  of
ideas ;  for  the  subject  of  the  proposition,  /
exist,  is  not  an  idea,  but  a  person.

The  knowledge  of  external  objects  of
sense,  he  observes,  we  can  have  only  by  sensa-
tion. This  sensation  he  afterwards  expresses
more  clearly  by  the  testimony  of  our  senses,
which  are  the  proper  and  sole  judges  of  this
thing;  whose  testimony  is  the  greatest  assur-
ance we  can  possibly  have,  and  to  which
our  faculties  can  attain.  This  is  perfectly
agreeable  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind,
and  is  perfectly  understood  by  those  who
never  heard  of  the  theory  of  ideas.  Our
senses  testify  immediately  the  existence,
and  many  of  the  attributes  and  relations  of
external  material  beings  ;  and,  by  our  con-
stitution, we  rely  with  assurance  upon  their
testimony,  without  seeking  a  reason  for
doing  so.  This  assurance,  Mr  Locke  ac-
knowledges, deserves  the  name  of  know-
ledge. But  those  external  things  are  not
ideas,  nor  are  their  attributes  and  relations
the  agreements  and  disagreements  of  ideas,
but  the  agreements  and  disagreements  of
things  which  are  not  ideas. [551]

To  reconcile  this  to  the  theory  of  ideas,
Mr  Locke  says,  That  it  is  the  actual  receiv-
ing of  ideas  from  without  that  gives  us  notice
of  the  existence  of  those  external  things.

This,  if  understood  literally,  would  lead
us  back  to  the  doctrine  of  Aristotle,  that
our  ideas  or  species  come  from  without
from  the  external  objects,  and  are  the  image
or  form  of  those  objects.  But  Mr  Locke,
I  believe,  meant  no  more  by  it,  but  that
our  ideas  of  sense  must  have  a  cause,  and
that  we  are  not  the  cause  of  them  our-


[549-551]


chap,  in.] SENTIMENTS  CONCERNING  JUDGMENT.


433


Bishop  Berkeley  acknowledges  all  this,
and  shews  very  clearly  that  it  does  not
afford  the  least  shadow  of  reason  for  the
belief  of  any  material  object — nay,  that
there  can  be  nothing  external  that  has  any
resemblance  to  our  ideas  but  the  ideas  of
other  minds.

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  agree-
ments and  disagreements  of  ideas  can  give
us  no  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  any
material  thing.  If  any  knowledge  can  be
attained  of  things  which  are  not  ideas,  that
knowledge  is  a  perception  of  agreements
and:  disagreements  ;  not  of  ideas,  but  of
things  that  are  not  ideas.

As  to  the  existence  of  a  deity,  though
Mr  Locke  was  aware  that  Des  Cartes,  and
many  after  him,  had  attempted  to  prove  it
merely  from  the  agreements  and  disagree-
ments of  ideas  ;  yet  "  he  thought  it  an
ill  way  of  establishing  that  truth,  and  si-
lencing Atheists,  to  lay  the  whole  stress  of  so
important  a  point  upon  that  sole  founda-
tion." And,  therefore,  he  proves  this
point,  with  great  sti-ength  and  solidity,  from
our  own  existence,  and  the  existence  of  the
sensible  parts  of  the  universe.  [552]  By
memory,  Mr  Locke  says,  we  have  the
knowledge  of  the  past  existence  of  several
things.  But  all  conception  of  past  exist-
ence, as  well  as  of  external  existence,  is
irreconcileable  to  the  theory  of  ideas  ;  be-
cause it  supposes  that  there  may  be  imme-
diate objects  of  thought,  which  are  not  ideas
presently  existing  in  the  mind.

I  conclude,  therefore,  that,  if  we  have
any  knowledge  of  our  own  existence,  or  of
the  existence  of  what  we  see  about  us,  or  of
the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being,  or  if
we  have  any  knowledge  of  things  past  by
memory,  that  knowledge  cannot  consist  in
perceiving  the  agreements  and  disagree-
ments of  ideas.

This  conclusion,  indeed,  is  evident  of
itself.  For,  if  knowledge  consists  solely  in
the  perception  of  the  agreement  or  disagree-
ment of  ideas,  there  can  be  no  knowledge  of
any  proposition,  which  does  not  express
some  agreement  or  disagreement  of  ideas ;
consequently,  there  can  be  no  knowledge  of
any  proposition,  which  expresses  either  the
existence,  or  the  attributes  or  relations  of
things,  which  are  not  ideas.  If,  therefore,
the  theory  of  ideas  be  true,  there  can  be  no
knowledge  of  anything  but  of  ideas.  And,
on  the  other  hand,  if  we  have  any  know-
ledge of  anything  besides  ideas,  that  theory
must  be  false.

There  can  be  no  knowledge,  no  judgment
or  opinion  about  things  which  are  not  im-
mediate objects  of  thought.  This  I  take  to
be  self-evident.  If,  therefore,  ideas  be  the
only  immediate  objects  of  thought,  they
must  be  the  only  things  in  nature  of  which
we  can  have  any  knowledge,  and  about
[552-55i~]


which we can have any judgment or
opinion.

This  necessary  consequence  of  the  com-
mon doctrine  of  ideas  Mr  Hume  saw,  and
has  made  evident  in  his  "  Treatise  of
Human  Nature  ;"  but  the  use  he  made  of
it  was  not  to  overturn  the  theory  with  which
it  is  necessarily  connected,  but  to  overturn
all  knowledge,  and  to  leave  no  ground  to
believe  anything  whatsoever.  If  Mr  Locke
had  seen  this  consequence,  there  is  reason
to  think  that  he  would  have  made  another
use  of  it. [553]

That  a  man  of  Mr  Locke's  judgment  and
penetration  did  not  perceive  a  consequence
so  evident,  seems  indeed  very  strange  ;  and
I  know  no  other  account  that  can  be  given  of
it  but  this — that  the  ambiguity  of  the  word
idea  has  misled  him  in  this,  as  in  several
other  instances.  Having  at  first  defined
ideas  to  be  whatsoever  is  the  object  of  the
understanding  when  we  think,  he  takes  it
very  often  in  that  unlimited  sense  ;  and  so
everything  that  can  be  an  object  of  thought
is  an  idea.  At  other  times,  he  uses  the
word  to  signify  certain  representative  images
of  things  in  the  mind,  which  philosophers
have  supposed  to  be  immediate  objects  of
thought.  At  other  times,  things  conceived
abstractly,  without  regard  to  their  exist-
ence, are  called  ideas.  Philosophy  is  much
indebted  to  Mr  Locke  for  his  observations
on  the  abuse  of  words.  It  is  pity  he  did
not  apply  these  observations  to  the  word
idea,  the  ambiguity  and  abuse  of  which  has
very  much  hurt  his  excellent  Essay.

There  are  some  other  opinions  of  philo-
sophers concerning  judgment,  of  which  I
think  it  unnecessary  to  say  much.

Mr  Hume  sometimes  adopts  Mr  Locke's
opinion,  that  it  is  the  perception  of  the
agreement  or  disagreement  of  our  ideas ;
sometimes  he  maintains  that  judgment  and
reasoning  resolve  themselves  into  concep-
tion, and  are  nothing  but  particular  ways
of  conceiving  objects  ;  and  he  says,  that  an
opinion  or  belief  may  most  accurately  be
defined,  a  lively  idea  related  to  or  associated
wish  a  present  impression. — Treatise  of  Hu--
man  Nature,  vol.  I.  page  172.

I  have  endeavoured  before,  in  the  first
chapter  of  this  Essay,  to  shew  that  judgment
is  an  operation  of  mind  specifically  distinct
from  the  bare  conception  of  an  obj  ect.  I  have
also  considered  his  notion  of  belief,  in  treating
of  the  theories  concerning  memory. [554]

Dr  Hartley  says — "  That  assent  and  dis-
sent must  come  under  the  notion  of  ideas,
being  only  those  very  complex  internal
feelings  which  adhere  by  association  to  such
clusters  of  words  as  are  called  propositions
in  general,  or  affirmations  and  negations  in
particular."

This,  if  1  understand  its  meaning,  agrees
with  the  opinion  of  Mr  Hume,  above  meu-
2f


434


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


tioned,  and  has  therefore  been  before  con-
sidered.

Dr  Priestly  has  given  another  definition
of  judgment: — "It  is  nothing  more  than
the  perception  of  the  universal  concurrence,
or  the  perfect  coincidence  of  two  ideas ;  or
the  want  of  that  concurrence  or  coinci-
dence." This,  I  think,  coincides  with  Mr
Locke's  definition,  and  therefore  has  been
already  considered.

There  are  many  particulars  which  deserve
to  be  known,  and  which  might  very  properly
be  considered  in  this  Essay  on  judgment  ;
concerning  the  various  kinds  of  propositions
by  which  our  judgments  are  expressed ;
their  subjects  and  predicates ;  their  con-
versions and  oppositions  :  but  as  these  are
to  be  found  in  every  system  of  logic,  from
Aristotle  down  to  the  present  age,  I  think
it  unnecessary  to  swell  this  Essay  with  the
repetition  of  what  has  been  said  so  often.
The  remarks  which  have  occurred  to  me
upon  what  is  commonly  said  on  these  points,
as  well  as  upon  the  art  of  syllogism ;  the
utility  of  the  school  logic,  and  the  improve-
ments that  may  be  made  in  it,  may  be  found
in  a  "  Short  Account  of  Aristotle's  Logic,
with  Remarks,"  which  Lord  Kames  has
honoured  with  a  place  in  his  "  Sketches  of
the  History  of  Man." [555]


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  IN  GENERAL.

One  of  the  most  important  distinctions  of
our  judgments  is,  that  some  of  them  are
intuitive,  others  grounded  on  argument.

It  is  not  in  our  power  to  judge  as  we
will.  The  judgment  is  carried  along  neces-
sarily by  the  evidence,  real  or  seeming,
which  appears  to  us  at  the  time.  But,  in
propositions  that  are  submitted  to  our
judgment,  there  is  this  great  difference —
some  are  of  such  a  nature  that  a  man  of
ripe  understanding  may  apprehend  them
distinctly,  and  perfectly  understand  their
meaning,  without  finding  himself  under  any
necessity  of  believing  them  to  be  true  or
false,  probable  or  improbable.  The  judg-
ment remains  in  suspense,  until  it  is  in-
clined to  one  side  or  another  by  reasons  or
arguments.

But  there  are  other  propositions  which
are  no  sooner  understood  than  they  are  be-
lieved. The  judgment  follows  the  appre-
hension of  them  necessarily,  and  both  are
equally  the  work  of  nature,  and  the  result
of  our  original  powers.  There  is  no  search-
ing for  evidence,  no  weighing  of  arguments ;
the  proposition  is  not  deduced  or  inferred
from  another  ;  it  has  the  light  of  truth  in
itself,  and  has  no  occasion  to  borrow  it
from  another.


Propositions  of  the  last  kind,  when  they
are  used  in  matters  of  science,  have  com-
monly been  called  axioms  ;  and  on  what-
ever occasion  they  are  used,  are  called  first
principles,  principles  of  common  sense,  com-
mon notions,  self-evident  truths.  Cicero
calls  them  natures  judicia,  judicia  communi-
bus  hominum  sensibus  xnfixa.  Lord  Shaftes-
bury expresses  them  by  the  words,  natural
knowledge,  fundamental  reason,  and  common
sense. [556]

What  has  been  said,  I  think,  is  Sufficient
to  distinguish  first  principles,  or  intuitive
judgments,  from  those  which  may  be  as-
cribed to  the  power  of  reasoning  ;  nor  is  it
a  just  objection  against  this  distinction,  that
there  may  be  some  judgments  concerning
which  we  may  be  dubious  to  which  class
they  ought  to  be  referred.  There  is  a  real
distinction  between  persons  within  the
house,  and  those  that  are  without ;  yet  it
may  be  dubious  to  which  the  man  belongs
that  stands  upon  the  threshold.

The  power  of  reasoning — that  is,  of  draw-
ing a  conclusion  from  a  chain  of  premises —
may  with  some  propriety  be  called  an  art.
"  All  reasoning,"  says  Mr  Locke,  "  is
search  and  casting  about,  and  requires
pains  and  application."  It  resembles  the
power  of  walking,  which  is  acquired  by  use
and  exercise.  Nature  prompts  to  it,  and
has  given  the  power  of  acquiring  it ;  but
must  be  aided  by  frequent  exercise  before
we  are  able  to  walk.  After  repeated  efforts,
much  stumbling,  and  many  falls,  we  learn
to  walk  ;  and  it  is  in  a  similar  manner  that
we  learn  to  reason.

But  the  power  of  judging  in  self-evident
propositions,  which  are  clearly  understood,
may  be  compared  to  the  power  of  swallow-
ing our  food.  It  is  purely  natural,  and  there-
fore common  to  the  learned  and  the  un-
learned, to  the  trained  and  the  untrained.
It  requires  ripeness  of  understanding,  and
freedom  from  prejudice,  but  nothing  else.

I  take  it  for  granted  that  there  are  self-
evident  principles.  Nobody,  I  think,  de-
nies it.  And  if  any  man  were  so  sceptical
as  to  deny  that  there  is  any  proposition
that  is  self-evident,  I  see  not  how  it  would
be  possible  to  convince  him  by  reasoning.

But  yet  there  seems  to  be  great  difference
of  opinions  among  philosophers  about  first
principles.  What  one  takes  to  be  self-evi-
dent, another  labours  to  prove  by  argu-
ments, and  a  third  denies  altogether.  [557]

Thus,  before  the  time  of  Des  Cartes,  it
was  taken  for  a  first  principle,  that  there  is
a  sun  and  a  moon,  an  earth  and  sea,  which
really  exist,  whether  we  think  of  them  or
not.  Des  Cartes  thought  that  the  exist-
ence of  those,  things  ought  to  be  proved  by
argument  ;  and  in  this  he  has  been  follow-
ed by  Malebranche,  Arnauld,  and  Locke.
They  have  all  laboured  to  prove,  by  very
[555-5571


CHAP.  IV.]


OF  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  IN  GENERAL.


435


weak  reasoning,  the  existence  of  external
objects  of  sense;  and  Berkeley  and  Hume,
sensible  of  the  weakness  of  their  arguments,
have  been  led  to  deny  their  existence  alto-
gether.

The  ancient  philosophers  granted,  that
all  knowledge  must  be  grounded  on  first
principles,  and  that  there  is  no  reasoning
w.thout  them.  The  Peripatetic  philosophy
was  redundant  rather  than  deficient  in  fist
principles.  Perhaps  the  abuse  of  them  in
that  ancient  system  may  have  brought
them  into  discredit  in  modern  times  ;  for,
as  the  best  things  may  be  abused,  so  that
abuse  is  apt  to  give  a  disgust  to  the  thing
itself ;  and  as  one  extreme  often  leads  into
the  opposite,  this  seems  to  have  been  the
case  in  the  respect  paid  to  first  principles
in  ancient  and  modern  times.

Des  Cartes  thought  one  principle,  express-
ed in  one  word,  coyito,  a  sufficient  foundation
for  his  whole  system,  and  asked  no  more.

Mr  Locke  seems  to  think  first  principles
of  very  small  use.  Knowledge  consisting,
according  to  him,  in  the  perception  of  the
agreement  or  disagreement  of  our  ideas  ;
when  we  have  clear  ideas,  and  are  able  to
compare  them  together,  we  may  always  fa-
bricate first  principles  as  often  as  we  have
occasion  for  them.  Such  differences  we  find
among  philosophers  about  first  principles.

It  is  likewise  a  question  of  some  moment,
whether  the  differences  among  men  about
first  principles  can  be  brought  to  any  issue  ?
When  in  disputes  one  man  maintains  that
to  be  a  first  principle  which  another  denies,
commonly  both  parties  appeal  to  common
sense,  and  so  the  matter  rests.  Now,  is
there  no  way  of  discussing  this  appeal  ?  Is
there  no  mark  or  criterion,  whereby  first
principles  that  are  truly  such,  may  be  dis-
tinguished from  those  that  assume  the  cha-
racter without  a  just  title  ?  I  shall  humbly
offer  in  the  following  propositions  what
appears  to  me  to  be  agreeable  to  truth  in
these  matters,  always  ready  to  change  my
opinion  upon  conviction. [558]

1.  First,  I  hold  it  to  be  certain,  and  even
demonstrable,  that  all  knowledge  got  by
reasoning  must  be  built  upon  first  princi-
ples.*

This  is  as  certain  as  that  every  house
must  have  a  foundation.  The  power  of
reasoning,  in  this  respect,  resembles  the
mechanical  powers  or  engines ;  it  must
have  a  fixed  point  to  rest  upon,  otherwise
it  spends  its  force  in  the  air,  and  produces
no  effect.

When  we  examine,  in  the  way  of  ana-
lysis, the  evidence  of  any  proposition,  either
we  find  it  self-evident,  or  it  rests  upon  one
or  more  propositions  that  support  it.  The
same  thing  may  be  said  of  the  propositions


*  So  Aristotle,  pluries.—H.
[558,  559]


that  support  it,  and  of  those  that  support
them,  as  far  back  as  we  can  go.  But  we
cannot  go  back  in  this  track  to  infinity.
Where  then  must  this  analysis  stop  ?  It
is  evident  that  it  must  stop  only  when  we
come  to  propositions  which  support  all  that
are  built  upon  them,  but  are  themselves
supported  by  none — that  is,  to  self-evident
propositions.

Let  us  again  consider  a  synthetical  proof  of
any  kind,  where  we  begin  with  the  premises,
and  pursue  a  train  of  consequences,  until  we
come  to  the  last  conclusion  or  thing  to  be
proved.  Here  we  must  begin,  either  with
self-evident  propositions  or  with  such  as  have
been  already  proved.  When  the  last  is  the
case,  the  proof  of  the  propositions,  thus  as-
sumed, is  a  part  of  our  proof;  and  the
proof  is  deficient  without  it.  Suppose  then
the  deficiency  supplied,  and  the  proof  com-
pleted, is  it  not  evident  that  it  must  set  out
with  self-evident  propositions,  and  that  the
whole  evidence  must  rest  upon  them  ?  So
that  it  appears  to  be  demonstrable  that,
without  first  principles,  analytical  reasoning
could  have  no  end,  and  synthetical  reason-
ing could  have  no  beginning ;  and  that
every  conclusion  got  by  reasoning  must
rest  with  its  whole  weight  upon  first  princi-
ples, as  the  building  does  upon  its  founda-
tion. [559]

2.  A  second  proposition  is,  That  some
first  principles  yield  conclusions  that  are
certain,  others  such  as  are  probable,  in  va-
rious degrees,  from  the  highest  probability
to  the  lowest.

In  just  reasoning,  the  strength  or  weak-
ness of  the  conclusion  will  always  corre-
spond to  that  of  the  principles  on  which  it  is
grounded.

In  a  matter  of  testimony,  it  is  self-evi-
dent that  the  testimony  of  two  is  better
than  that  of  one,  supposing  them  equal  in
character,  and  in  their  means  of  knowledge ;
yet  the  simple  testimony  may  be  true,  and
that  which  is  preferred  to  it  may  be  false.

When  an  experiment  has  succeeded  in
several  trials,  and  the  circumstances  have
been  marked  with  care,  there  is  a  self-evi-
dent probability  of  its  succeeding  in  a  new
trial ;  but  there  is  no  certainty.  The  pro-
bability, in  some  cases,  is  much  greater
than  in  others ;  because,  in  some  cases,  it
is  much  easier  to  observe  all  the  circum-
stances that  may  have  influence  upon  the
event  than  in  others.  And  it  is  possible
that,  after  many  experiments  made  with
care,  our  expectation  may  be  frustrated  in
a  succeeding  one,  by  the  variation  of  some
circumstance  that  has  not,  or  perhaps
could  not  be  observed.

Sir  Isaac  Newton  has  laid  it  down  as  a

first  principle  in  natural  philosophy,  that  a

property  which  has  been  found  in  all  bodies

upon  which  we  have  had  access  to  make

2f2


436


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


("essay  vt.


experiments,  and  which  has  always  been
found  in  its  quantity  to  be  in  exact  propor-
to  the  quantity  of  matter  in  every  body,  is
to  be  held  as  an  universal  property  of  mat-
ter. [560]

This  principle,  as  far  as  I  know,  has
never  been  called  in  question.  The  evi-
dence we  have,  that  all  matter  is  divisible,
movable,  solid,  and  inert,  is  resolvable
into  this  principle  ;  and,  if  it  be  not  true,
we  cannot  have  any  rational  conviction  that
all  matter  has  those  properties.  From  the
same  principle  that  great  man  has  shewn
that  we  have  reason  to  conclude  that  all
bodies  gravitate  towards  each  other.

This  principle,  however,  has  not  that
kind  of  evidence  which  mathematical  axioms
have.  It  is  not  a  necessary  truth,  whose
contrary  is  impossible  ;  nor  did  Sir  Isaac
ever  conceive  it  to  be  such.  And,  if  it
should  ever  be  found,  by  just  experiments,
that  there  is  any  part  in  the  composition  of
some  bodies  which  has  not  gravity,  the
fact,  if  duly  ascertained,  must  be  admitted
as  an  exception  to  the  general  law  of  gra-
vitation.

In  games  of  chance,  it  is  a  first  principle
that  every  side  of  a  die  has  an  equal  chance
to  be  turned  up ;  and  that,  in  a  lottery,
every  ticket  has  an  equal  chance  of  being
drawn  out.  From  such  first  principles  as
these,  which  are  the  best  we  can  have  in
such  matters,  we  may  deduce,  by  demon-
strative reasoning,  the  precise  degree  of
probability  of  every  event  in  such  games.

But  the  principles  of  all  this  accurate
and  profound  reasoning  can  never  yield  a
certain  conclusion,  it  being  impossible  to
supply  a  defect  in  the  first  principles  by  any
accuracy  in  the  reasoning  that  is  grounded
upon  them.  As  water,  by  its  gravity,  can
rise  no  higher  in  its  course  than  the  foun-
tain, however  artfully  it  be  conducted ;  so
no  conclusion  of  reasoning  can  have  a
greater  degree  of  evidence  than  the  first
principles  from  which  it  is  drawn.

From  these  instances,  it  is  evident  that,
as  there  are  some  first  principles  that  yield
conclusions  of  absolute  certainty,  so  there
are  others  that  can  only  yield  probable  con-
clusions ;  and  that  the  lowest  degree  of
probability  must  be  grounded  on  first  prin-
ciples as  well  as  absolute  certainty.*
[561]

3.  A  third  proposition  is,  That  it  would
contribute  greatly  to  the  stability  of  human
knowledge,  and  consequently  to  the  im-
provement of  it,  if  the  first  principles  upon
which  the  various  parts  of  it  are  grounded
were  pointed  out  and  ascertained.

We  have  ground  to  think  so,  both  from
facts,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  thing.

There  are  two  branches  of  human  know-

. *  Compare  Stewart's  "Elements,"  ii.  p.  38.— H.


ledge  in  which  this  method  has  been  followed
— to  wit,  mathematics  and  natural  philoso-
phy ;  in  mathematics,  as  far  back  as  we  have
books.  It  is  in  this  science  only,  that,  for
more  than  two  thousand  years  since  it  be-
gan to  be  cultivated,  we  find  no  sects,  no
contrary  systems,  and  hardly  any  disputes  ;
or,  if  there  have  been  disputes,  they  have
ended  as  soon  as  the  animosity  of  par-
ties subsided,  and  have  never  been  again
revived.  The  science,  once  firmly  esta-
blished upon  the  foundation  of  a  few  axioms
and  definitions,  as  upon  a  rock,  has  grown
from  age  so  age,  so  as  to  become  the  loftiest
and  the  most  solid  fabric  that  human  rea-
son can  boast.*

Natural  philosophy,  till  less  than  two
hundred  years  ago,  remained  in  the  same
fluctuating  state  with  the  other  sciences.
Every  new  system  pulled  up  the  old  by
the  roots.  The  system-builders,  indeed,
were  always  willing  to  accept  of  the  aid
of  first  principles,  when  they  were  of  their
side  ;  but,  finding  them  insufficient  to  sup-
port the  fabric  which  their  imagination  had
raised,  they  were  only  brought  in  as  auxi-
liaries, and  so  intermixed  with  conjectures,
and  with  lame  inductions,  that  their  sys-
tems were  like  Nebuchadnezzar's  image,
whose  feet  were  partly  of  iron  and  partly
of  clay.

Lord  Bacon  first  delineated  the  only  so-
lid foundation  on  which  natural  philoso-
phy can  be  built ;  and  Sir  Isaac  Newton
reduced  the  principles  laid  down  by  Bacon
into  three  or  four  axioms,  which  he  calls
regulcB  philosophandi.  From  these,  toge-
ther with  the  phenomena  observed  by  the
senses,  which  he  likewise  lays  down  as
first  principles,  he  deduces,  by  strict  rea-
soning, the  propositions  contained  in  the
third  book  of  his  "Principia,"  and  in  his
"  Optics  ;"  and  by  this  means  has  raised  a
fabric  in  those  two  branches  of  natural
philosophy,  which  is  not  liable  to  be  shaken
by  doubtful  disputation,  but  stands  im-
movable upon  the  basis  of  self-evident
principles. [562]

This  fabric  has  been  carried  on  by  the
accession  of  new  discoveries ;  but  is  no
more  subject  to  revolutions.

The  disputes  about  materia  prima,  sub-
stantial forms,  Nature's  abhorring  a  va-
cuum, and  bodies  having  no  gravitation
in  their  proper  place,  are  now  no  more.
The  builders  in  this  work  are  not  put  to  the
necessity  of  holding  a  weapon  in  one  hand
while  they  build  with  the  other  ;  their
whole  employment  is  to  carry  on  the  work.

Yet  it  seems  to  be  very  probable,  that,  if
natural  philosophy  had  not  been  reared  upon
this  solid  foundation  of  self-evident  princi-
ples, it  would  have  been  to  this  day  a  field


*  See  Stewart's  «'  Elements,"  ii.  p.  43— H.

[560,  562]


chap,  iv.]  OF  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  IN  GENERAL.


437


of  battle,  wherein  every  inch  of  ground
would  have  been  disputed,  and  nothing  fixed
and  determined.

I  acknowledge  that  mathematics  and  na-
tural philosophy,  especially  the  former,
have  this  advantage  of  most  other  sciences,
that  it  is  less  difficult  to  form  distinct  and
determinate  conceptions  of  the  objects
about  which  they  are  employed  ;  but,  as
this  difficulty  is  not  insuperable,  it  affords
a  good  reason,  indeed,  why  other  sciences
should  have  a  longer  infancy  ;  but  no  rea-
son at  all  why  they  may  not  at  last  arrive
at  maturity,  by  the  same  steps  as  those  of
quicker  growth.

The  facts  I  have  mentioned  may  there-
fore lead  us  to  conclude,  that,  if  in  other
branches  of  philosophy  the  first  principles
were  laid  down,  as  has  been  done  in  ma-
thematics and  natural  philosophy,  and  the
subsequent  conclusions  grounded  upon  them,
this  would  make  it  much  more  easy  to  dis-
tinguish what  is  solid  and  well  supported
from  the  vain  fictions  of  human  fancy.  [563]

But,  laying  aside  facts,  the  nature  of  the
thing  leads  to  the  same  conclusion.

For,  wfien  any  system  is  grounded  upon
first  principles,  and  deduced  regularly  from
them,  we  have  a  thread  to  lead  us  through
the  labyrinth.  The  j  udgment  has  a  distinct
and  determinate  object.  The  heterogeneous
parts  being  separated,  can  be  examined  each
by  itself.

The  whole  system  is  reduced  to  axioms,
definitions,  and  deductions.  These  are  ma-
terials of  very  different  nature,  and  to  be
measured  by  a  very  different  standard  ;  and
it  is  much  more  easy  to  judge  of  each,  taken
by  itself,  than  to  judge  of  a  mass  wherein
they  are  kneaded  together  without  distinc-
tion. Let  us  consider  how  we  judge  of  each
of  them.

First,  As  to  definitions,  the  matter  is  very
easy.  They  relate  only  to  words,  and  differ-
ences about  them  may  produce  different
ways  of  speaking,  but  can  never  produce
different  ways  of  thinking,  while  every  man
keeps  to  his  own  definitions.

But,  as  there  is  not  a  more  plentiful  source
of  fallacies  in  reasoning  than  men's  using
the  same  word  sometimes  in  one  sense  and
at  other  times  in  another,  the  best  means
of  preventing  such  fallacies,  or  of  detecting
them  when  they  are  committed,  is  defi-
nitions of  words  as  accurate  as  can  be
given.

Secondly,  As  to  deductions  drawn  from
principles  granted  on  both  sides,  I  do  not
see  how  they  can  long  be  a  matter  of  dis-
pute among  men  who  are  not  blinded  by
prejudice  or  partiality ;  for  the  rules  of
reasoning  by  which  inferences  may  be  drawn
from  premises  have  been  for  two  thousand
years  fixed  with  great  unanimity.  No  man
pretends  to  dispute  the  rules  of  reasoning
[563-5G5]


laid  down  by  Aristotle  and  repeated  by
every  writer  in  dialectics. [564]

And  we  may  observe  by  the  way,  that
the  reason  why  logicians  have  been  so  una-
nimous in  determining  the  rules  of  reason-
ing, from  Aristotle  down  to  this  day,  seems
to  be,  that  they  were  by  that  great  genius
raised,  in  a  scientific  manner,  from  a  few
definitions  and  axioms.  It  may  farther  be
observed,  that,  when  men  differ  about  a
deduction,  whether  it  follows  from  certain
premises,  this  I  think  is  always  owing  to
their  differing  about  some  first  principle.
I  shall  explain  this  by  an  example.

Suppose  that,  from  a  thing  having  begun
to  exist,  one  man  infers  that  it  must  have
had  a  cause  ;  another  man  does  not  admit
the  inference.  Here  it  is  evident,  that  the
first  takes  it  for  a  self-evident  principle,  that
everything  which  begins  to  exist  must  have
a  cause.  The  other  does  not  allow  this  to
be  self-evident.  Let  them  settle  this  point,
and  the  dispute  will  be  at  an  end.

Thus,  I  think,  it  appears,  that,  in  matters
of  science,  if  the  terms  be  properly  explained,
the  first  principles  upon  which  the  reason-
ing is  grounded  be  laid  down  and  exposed
to  examination,  and  the  conclusions  re-
gularly deduced  from  them,  it  might  be
expected  that  men  of  candour  and  capacity,
who  love  truth,  and  have  patience  to  ex-
amine things  coolly,  might  come  to  unani-
mity with  regard  to  the  force  of  the  deduc-
tions, and  that  their  differences  might  be
reduced  to  those  they  may  have  about  first
principles.

4.  A  fourth  proposition  is,  That  Nature
hath  not  left  us  destitute  of  means  whereby
the  candid  and  honest  part  of  mankind  may
be  brought  to  unanimity  when  they  happen
to  differ  about  first  principles. [565]

When  men  differ  about  things  that  are
taken  to  be  first  principles  or  self-evident
truths,  reasoning  seems  to  be  at  an  end.
Each  party  appeals  to  common  sense.  When
one  man's  common  sense  gives  one  deter-
mination, another  man's  a  contrary  deter-
mination, there  seems  to  be  no  remedy  but
to  leave  every  man  to  enjoy  his  own  opinion.
This  is  a  common  observation,  and,  I  be-
lieve, a  just  one,  if  it  be  rightly  understood.

It  is  in  vain  to  reason  with  a  man  who
denies  the  first  principles  on  which  the  rea-
soning is  grounded.  Thus,  it  would  be  in
vain  to  attempt  the  proof  of  a  proposition
in  Euclid  to  a  man  who  denies  the  axioms.
Indeed,  we  ought  never  to  reason  with  men
who  deny  first  principles  from  obstinacy
and  unwillingness  to  yield  to  reason.

But  is  it  not  possible,  that  men  who  really
love  truth,  and  are  open  to  conviction,  may
differ  about  first  principles  ?

I  think  it  is  possible,  and  that  it  cannot,
without  great  want  of  charity,  be  denied  to
be  possible-


438


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[ES9AY  VI.


When  this  happens,  every  man  who  be-
lieves that  there  is  a  real  distinction  between
truth  and  error,  and  that  the  faculties  which
God  has  given  us  are  not  in  their  nature
fallacious,  must  be  convinced  that  there  is
a  defect  or  a  perversion  of  judgment  on
the  one  side  or  the  other.

A  man  of  candour  and  humility  will,  in
such  a  case,  very  naturally  suspect  his  own
judgment,  so  far  as  to  be  desirous  to  enter
into  a  serious  examination,  even  of  what
he  has  long  held  as  a  first  principle.  He
will  think  it  not  impossible,  that,  although
his  heart  be  upright,  his  judgment  may  have
been  perverted,  by  education,  by  authority,
by  party  zeal,  or  by  some  other  of  the  com-
mon causes  of  error,  from  the  influence  of
which  neither  parts  nor  integrity  exempt
the  human  understanding. [566]

In  such  a  state  of  mind,  so  amiable,  and
so  becoming  every  good  man,  has  Nature
left  him  destitute  of  any  rational  means  by
which  he  may  be  enabled,  either  to  correct
his  judgment  if  it  be  wrong,  or  to  confirm
it  if  it  be  right  ?

I  hope  it  is  not  so.  I  hope  that,  by  the
means  which  nature  has  furnished,  con-
troversies about  first  principles  may  be
brought  to  an  issue,  and  that  the  real  lovers
of  truth  may  come  to  unanimity  with  regard
to  them.

It  is  true  that,  in  other  controversies,
the  process  by  which  the  truth  of  a  propo-
sition is  discovered,  or  its  falsehood  detected,
is,  by  shewing  its  necessary  connection  with
first  principles,  or  its  repugnancy  to  them
It  is  true,  likewise,  that,  when  the  contro-
versy is,  whether  a  preposition  be  itself  a
first  principle,  this  process  cannot  be  ap-
plied. The  truth,  therefore,  in  controversies
of  this  kind,  labours  under  a  peculiar  dis-
advantage. But  it  has  advantantages  of
another  kind  to  compensate  this.

1.  For,  in  the  first  place,  in  such  con-
troversies, every  man  is  a  competent  judge;
and  therefore  it  is  difficult  to  impose  upon
mankind.

To  judge  of  first  principles,  requires  no
more  than  a  sound  mind  free  from  preju-
dice, and  a  distinct  conception  of  the  question.
The  learned  and  the  unlearned,  the  phi-
losopher and  the  day-labourer,  are  upon  a
level,  and  will  pass  the  same  judgment,
when  they  are  not  misled  by  some  bias,  or
taught  to  renounce  their  understanding
from  some  mistaken  religious  principle.

In  matters  beyond  the  reach  of  common
understanding,  the  many  are  led  by  the
few,  and  willingly  yield  to  their  authority.
But,  in  matters  of  common  sense,  the  few
must  yield  to  the  many,  when  local  and
temporary  prejudices  are  removed.  No
man  is  now  moved  by  the  subtle  arguments
of  Zeno  against  motion,  though,  perhaps,  he
knows  not  how  to  answer  them. [567]


The  ancient  sceptical  system  furnishes  a
remarkable  instance  of  this  truth.  That
system,  of  which  Pyrrho*was  reputed  the
father,  was  carried  down,  through  a  succes-
sion of  ages,  by  very  able  and  acute  philo-
sophers, who  taught  men  to  believe  nothing
at  all,  and  esteemed  it  the  highest  pitch  of
human  wisdom  to  withhold  assent  from
every  proposition  whatsoever.  It  was  sup-
ported with  very  great  subtilty  and  learning,
as  we  see  from  the  writings  of  Sextus  Eiu-
piricus,  the  only  author  of  that  sect  whose
writings  have  come  down  to  our  age.  The
assault  of  the  sceptics  against  all  science
seems  to  have  been  managed  with  more  art
and  address  than  the  defence  of  the  dog-
matists.

Yet,  as  this  system  was  an  insult  upon  the
common  sense  of  mankind,  it  died  away  of
itself;  and  it  would  be  in  vain  to  attempt
to  revive  it.  The  modern  scepticism  is  very
different  from  the  ancient,  otherwise  it  would
not  have  been  allowed  a  hearing ;  and,  when
it  has  lost  the  grace  of  novelty,  it  will  die
away  also,  though  it  should  never  be  refuted.

The  modern  scepticism,  I  mean  that  of
Mr  Hume,  is  built  upon  principles  which
were  very  generally  maintained  by  philo-
sophers, though  they  did  not  see  that  they
led  to  scepticism.  Mr  Hume,  by  tracing,
with  great  acuteness  and.  ingenuity,  the  con-
sequences of  principles  commonly  received,
has  shewn  that  they  overturn  all  knowledge,
and  at  last  overturn  themselves,  and  leave
the  mind  in  perfect  suspense.

2.  Secondly,  We  may  observe  that  opin-
ions which  contradict  first  principles,  are
distinguished,  from  other  errors,  by  this  : —
That  they  are  not  only  false  but  absurd ;
and,  to  discountenance  absurdity,  Nature
hath  given  us  a  particular  emotion — to  wit,
that  of  ridicule — which  seems  intended  for
this  very  purpose  of  putting  out  of  counte-
nance what  is  absurd,  either  in  opinion  or
practice. [568]

This  weapon,  when  properly  applied,  cuts
with  as  keen  an  edge  as  argument.  Nature
hath  furnished  us  with  the  first  to  expose
absurdity  ;  as  with  the  last  to  refute  error.
Both  are  well  fitted  for  their  several  offices,
and  are  equally  friendly  to  truth  when  pro-
perly used.

Both  may  be  abused  to  serve  the  cause
of  error  ;  but  the  same  degree  of  judgment
which  serves  to  detect  the  abuse  of  argu-
ment in  false  reasoning,  serves  to  detect  the
abuse  of  ridicule  when  it  is  wrong  directed.

Some  have,  from  nature,  a  happier  talent
for  ridicule  than  others  ;  and  the  same
thing  holds  with  regard  to  the  talent  of
reasoning.  Indeed,  I  conceive  there  is
hardly  any  absurdity,  which,  when  touched
with  the  pencil  of  a  Lucian,  a  Swift,  or  a
Voltaire,  would  not  be  put  out  of  counte-
nance, when  there  is  not  some  religious
[566-568]


CHAP.  IV.]


OF  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  IN  GENERAL.


439


panic,  or  very  powerful  prejudice,  to  blind
the  understanding.

But  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  the
emotion  of  ridicule,  even  when  most  natu-
ral, may  be  stifled  by  an  emotion  of  a  con-
trary nature,  and  cannot  operate  till  that
is  removed.

Thus,  if  the  notion  of  sanctity  is  annexed
to  an  object,  it  is  no  longer  a  laughable
matter ;  and  this  visor  must  be  pulled  off
before  it  appears  ridiculous.  Hence  we
see,  that  notions  which  appear  most  ridicu-
lous to  all  who  consider  them  coolly  and  in-
differently, have  no  such  appearance  to
those  who  never  thought  of  them  but  under
the  impression  of  religious  awe  and  dread.

Even  where  religion  is  not  concerned,
the  novelty  of  an  opinion  to  those  who  are
too  fond  of  novelties  ;  the  gravity  and
solemnity  with  which  it  is  introduced  ;  the
opinion  we  have  entertained  of  the  author ;
its  apparent  connection  with  principles
already  embraced,  or  subserviency  to  in-
terests which  we  have  at  heart ;  and,  above
all,  its  being  fixed  in  our  minds  at  that  time
of  life  when  we  receive  implicitly  what  we
are  taught — may  cover  its  absurdity,  and
fascinate  the  understanding  for  a  time.
[5G9]

But,  if  ever  we  are  able  to  view  it  naked,
and  stripped  of  those  adventitious  circum-
stances from  which  it  borrowed  its  import-
ance and  authority,  the  natural  emotion  of
ridicule  will  exert  its  force.  An  absurdity
can  be  entertained  by  men  of  sense  no  longer
than  it  wears  a  mask.  When  any  man  is
found  who  has  the  skill  or  the  boldness  to
pull  off  the  mask,  it  can  no  longer  bear  the
light ;  it  slinks  into  dark  corners  for  a  while,
and  then  is  no  more  heard  of,  but  as  an  ob-
ject of  ridicule.

Thus  I  conceive,  that  first  principles,
which  are  really  the  dictates  of  common
sense,  and  directly  opposed  to  absurdities
in  opinion,  will  always,  from  the  constitu-
tion of  human  nature,  support  themselves,
and  gain  rather  than  lose  ground  among
mankind.

3.  Thirdly,  It  may  be  observed,  that,  al-
though it  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  first
principles  to  admit  of  direct  or  apodictical
proof ;  yet  there  are  certain  ways  of  reason-
ing even  about  them,  by  which  those  that
are  just  and  solid  may  be  confirmed,  and
those  that  are  false  may  be  detected.  It
may  here  be  proper  to  mention  some  of  the
topics  from  which  we  may  reason  in  matters
of  this  kind.

First,  It  is  a  good  argument  ad  hominem,
if  it  can  be  shewn  that  a  first  principle
which  a  man  rejects,  stands  upon  the  same
footing  with  others  which  he  admits  :  for,
when  this  is  the  case,  he  must  be  guilty  of
an  inconsistency  who  holds  the  one  and
rejects  the  other.
[569-571]


Thus  the  faculties  of  consciousness,  of
memory,  of  external  sense,  and  of  reason,
are  all  equally  the  gifts  of  nature.  No  good
reason  can  be  assigned  for  receiving  the
testimony  of  one  of  them,  which  is  not  of
equal  force  with  regard  to  the  others.  The
greatest  sceptics  admit  the  testimony  of
consciousness,  and  allow  that  what  it  testi-
fies is  to  be  held  as  a  first  principle.  If,
therefore,  they  reject  the  immediate  testi-
mony  of  sense  or  of  memory,  they  are
guilty  of  an  inconsistency. [570]

Secondly,  A  first  principle  may  admit  of
a  proof  ad  absurdume

In  this  kind  of  proof,  which  is  very  com-
mon in  mathematics,  we  suppose  the  con-
tradictory proposition  to  be  true.  We  trace
the  consequences  of  that  supposition  in  a
train  of  reasoning  ;  and,  if  we  find  any  of
its  necessary  consequences  to  be  manifestly
absurd,  we  conclude  the  supposition  from
which  it  followed  to  be  false  ;  and,  there*
fore  its  contradictory  to  be  true.

There  is  hardly  any  proposition,  especially
of  those  that  may  claim  the  character  of
first  principles,  that  stands  alone  and  un-
connected. It  draws  many  others  along
with  it  in  a  chain  that  cannot  be  broken.
He  that  takes  it  up  must  bear  the  burden
of  all  its  consequences  ;  and,  if  that  is  too
heavy  for  him  to  bear,  he  must  not  pretend
to  take  it  up.

Thirdly,  I  conceive  that  the  consent  of
ages  and  nations,  of  the  learned  and  un-
learned, ought  to  have  great  authority  with
regard  to  first  principles,  where  every  man
is  a  competent  judge.

Our  ordinary  conduct  in  life  is  built  upon
first  principles,  as  well  as  our  speculations
in  philosophy  ;  and  every  motive  to  action
supposes  some  belief.  When  we  find  a
general  agreement  among  men,  in  principles
that  concern  human  life,  this  must  have
great  authority  with  every  sober  mind  that
loves  truth.

It  is  pleasant  to  observe  the  fruitless
pains  which  Bishop  Berkeley  takes  to  shew
that  his  system  of  the  non-existence  of  a
material  world  did  not  contradict  the  senti-
ments of  the  vulgar,  but  those  only  of  the
philosophers.

With  good  reason  he  dreaded  more  to
oppose  the  authority  of  vulgar  opinion  in  a
matter  of  this  kind,  than  all  the  schools  of
philosophers. [571]

Here,  perhaps,  it  will  be  said.  What  has
authority  to  do  in  matters  of  opinion  ?  Is
truth  to  be  determined  by  most  votes  ?  Or
is  authority  to  be  again  raised  out  of  its
grave  to  tyrannise  over  mankind  ?

I  am  aware  that,  in  this  age,  an  advo-
cate for  authority  has  a  very  unfavourable
plea  ;  but  I  wish  to  give  no  more  to  author-
ity than  is  its  due.

Most  justly  do  we  honour  the  nan"


140


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay


those  benefactors  to  mankind  who  have  con-
tributed more  or  less  to  break  the  yoke  of
that  authority  which  deprives  men  of  the
natural,  the  unalienable  right  of  judging
for  themselves;  but,  while  we  indulge  a
just  animosity  against  this  authority,  and
against  all  who  would  subject  us  to  its
tyranny,  let  us  remember  how  common  the
folly  is,  of  going  from  one  faulty  extreme
into  the  opposite.

Authority,  though  a  very  tyrannical  mis-
tress to  private  judgment,  may  yet,  on  some
occasions,  be  a  useful  handmaid.  This  is
all  she  is  entitled  to,  and  this  is  all  I  plead
in  her  behalf.

The  justice  of  this  plea  will  appear  by
putting  a  case  in  a  science,  in  which,  of  all
sciences,  authority  is  acknowledged  to  have
least  weight.

Suppose  a  mathematician  has  made  a
discovery  in  that  science  which  he  thinks
important ;  that  he  has  put  his  demonstra-
tion in  just  order  ;  and,  after  examining  it
with  an  attentive  eye,  has  found  no  flaw  in
it,  I  would  ask,  Will  there  not  be  still  in
his  breast  some  diffidence,  some  jealousy,
lest  the  ardour  of  invention  may  have  made
him  overlook  some  false  step  ?  This  must
be  granted. [572]

He  commits  his  demonstration  to  the  ex-
amination of  a  mathematical  friend,  whom
he  esteems  a  competent  judge,  and  waits
with  impatience  the  issue  of  his  judgment.
Here  I  would  ask  again,  Whether  the  verdict
of  his  friend,  according  as  it  is  favourable
or  unfavourable,  will  not  greatly  increase  or
diminish  his  confidence  in  his  own  judgment?
Most  certainly  it  will,  and  it  ought.

If  the  judgment  of  his  friend  agree  with
his  own,  especially  if  it  be  confirmed  by  two
or  three  able  judges,  he  rests  secure  of  his
discovery  without  farther  examination ;  but,
if  it  be  unfavourable,  he  is  brought  back
into  a  kind  of  suspense,  until  the  part  that
is  suspected  undergoes  a  new  and  a  more
rigorous  examination.

I  hope  what  is  supposed  in  this  case  is
agreeable  to  nature,  and  to  the.  experience
of  candid  and  modest  men  on  such  occa-
sions ;  yet  here  we  see  a  man's  judgment,
even  in  a  mathematical  demonstration,  con-
scious of  some  feebleness  in  itself,  seeking
the  aid  of  authority  to  support  it,  greatly
strengthened  by  that  authority,  and  hardly
able  to  stand  erect  against  it,  without  some
new  aid.

Society  in  judgment,  of  those  who  are
esteemed  fair  and  competent  judges,  has
effects  very  similar  to  those  of  civil  society  :
it  gives  strength  and  courage  to  every  indi-
vidual ;  it  removes  that  timidity  which  is
as  naturally  the  companion  of  solitary  judg-
ement, as  of  a  solitary  man  in  the  state  of
63$ure.

£$£us  judge  for  ourselves,  therefore ;  but


let  us  not  disdain  to  take  that  aid  from  the
authority  of  other  competent  judges,  which
a  mathematician  thinks  it  necessary  to  take
in  that  science  which,  of  all  sciences,  has
least  to  do  with  authority.

In  a  matter  of  common  sense,  every  man
is  no  less  a  competent  judge  than  a  mathe-
matician is  in  a  mathematical  demonstra-
tion ;  and  there  must  be  a  great  presump-
tion that  the  judgment  of  mankind,  in  such
a  matter,  is  the  natural  issue  of  those  facul-
ties which  God  hath  given  them.  Such  a
judgment  can  be  erroneous  only  when  there
is  some  cause  of  the  error,  as  general  as  the
error  is.  When  this  can  be  shewn  to  be  the
case,  I  acknowledge  it  ought  to  have  its  due
weight.  But,  to  suppose  a  general  devia-
tion from  truth  among  mankind  in  things
self-evident,  of  which  no  cause  can  be
assigned,  is  highly  unreasonable. [573]

Perhaps  it  may  be  thought  impossible
to  collect  the  general  opinion  of  men  upon
any  point  whatsoever ;  and,  therefore,  that
this  authority  can  serve  us  in  no  stead  in
examining  first  principles.  But  I  appre-
hend that,  in  many  cases,  this  is  neither
impossible  nor  difficult.

Who  can  doubt  whether  men  have  uni-
versally believed  the  existence  of  a  mate-
rial world  ?  Who  can  doubt  whether  men
have  universally  believed  that  every  change
that  happens  in  nature  must  have  a  cause  ?
Who  can  doubt  whether  men  have  uni-
versally believed,  that  there  is  a  right  and
a  wrong  in  human  conduct ;  some  things
that  merit  blame,  and  others  that  are  en-
titled to  approbation  ?

The  upiversality  of  these  opinions,  and
of  many  such  that  might  be  named,  is  suf-
ficiently evident,  from  the  whole  tenor  of
human  conduct,  as  far  as  our  acquaintance
reaches,  and  from  the  history  of  all  ages
and  nations  of  which  we  have  any  records.

There  are  other  opinions  that  appear  to
be  universal,  from  what  is  common  in  the
structure  of  all  languages.

Language  is  the  express  image  and  pic-
ture of  human  thoughts ;  and  from  the
picture  we  may  draw  some  certain  conclu-
sions concerning  the  original.

We  find  in  all  languages  the  same  parts
of  speech  ;  we  find  nouns,  substantive  and
adjective;  verbs,  active  and  passive,  in
their  various  tenses,  numbers,  and  moods.
Some  rules  of  syntax  are  the  same  in  all
languages.

Now,  what  is  common  in  the  structure
of  languages,  indicates  an  uniformity  of
opinion  in  those  things  upon  which  that
structure  is  grounded. [574]

The  distinction  between  substances,  and
the  qualities  belonging  to  them  ;  between
thought  and  the  being  that  thinks  ;  be-
tween thought  and  the  objects  of  thought ;
is  to  be  found  in  the  structure  of  all  lan-
[572-571]


chap,  v.] FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  CONTINGENT  TRUTHS.


441


guages.  And,  therefore,  systems  of  philo-
sophy, which  abolish  those  distinctions,  wage
war  with  the  common  sense  of  mankind.

We  are  apt  to  imagine  that  those  who
formed  languages  were  no  metaphysicians  ;
but  the  first  principles  of  all  sciences  are
the  dictates  of  common  sense,  and  lie  open
to  all  men ;  and  every  man  who  has  con-
sidered the  structure  of  language  in  a  phi-
losophical light,  will  find  infallible  proofs  that
those  who  have  framed  it,  and  those  who
use  it  with  understanding  have  the  power
of  making  accurate  distinctions,  and  of  form-
ing general  conceptions,  as  well  as  philoso-
phers. Nature  has  given  those  powers  to
all  men,  and  they  can  use  them  when  occa-
sions require  it,  but  they  leave  it  to  the
philosophers  to  give  names  to  them,  and  to
descant  upon  their  nature.  In  like  manner,
nature  has  given  eyes  to  all  men,  and  they
can  make  good  use  of  them ;  but  the  struc-
ture of  the  eye,  and  the  theory  of  vision,  is
the  business  of  philosophers.

Fourthly^  Opinions  that  appear  so  early
in  the  minds  of  men  that  they  cannot  be
the  effect  of  education  or  of  false  reason-
ing, have  a  good  claim  to  be  considered  as
first  principles.  Thus,  the  belief  we  have,
that  the  persons  about  us  are  living  and  in-
telligent beings,  is  a  belief  for  which,  per-
haps, we  can  give  some  reason,  when  we
are.  able  to  reason ;  but  we  had  this  belief
before  we  could  reason,  and  before  we  could
learn  it  by  instruction.  It  seems,  there-
fore, to  be  an  immediate  effect  of  our  con-
stitution.

The  last  topic  I  shall  mention  is,  when
an  opinion  is  so  necessary  in  the  conduct  of
life,  that,  without  the  belief  of  it,  a  man
must  be  led  into  a  thousand  absurdities  in
practice,  such  an  opinion,  when  we  can
give  no  other  reason  for  it,  may  safely  be
taken  for  a  first  principle. [575]

Thus  I  have  endeavoured  to  shew,  that,
although  first  principles  are  not  capable  of
direct  proof,  yet  differences,  that  may  hap-
pen with  regard  to  them  among  men  of
candour,  are  not  without  remedy;  that
Nature  has  not  left  us  destitute  of  means
by  which  we  may  discover  errors  of  this
kind ;  and  that  there  are  ways  of  reason-
ing, with  regard  to  first  principles,  by  which
those  that  are  truly  such  may  be  distin-
guished from  vulgar  errors  or  prejudices.


CHAPTER  V.

THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF CONTINGENT
TRUTHS.

"  Surely,"  says  Bishop  Berkeley,  "  it  is
a  work  well  deserving  our  pains  to  make
a  strict  inquiry  concerning  the  first  princi-
ples of  knowledge ;  to  sift  and  examine
[575,  576]


them  on  all  sides."  What  was  said  in  the
last  chapter  is  intended  both  to  shew  the
importance  of  this  inquiry,  and  to  make  it
more  easy.

But,  in  order  that  such  an  inquiry  may  ba
actually  made,  it  is  necessary  that  the  first
principles  of  knowledge  be  distinguished
from  other  truths,  and  presented  to  view,
that  they  may  be  sifted  and  examined  on
all  sides.  In  order  to  this  end,  I  shall
attempt  a  detail  of  those  I  take  to  be  such,
and  of  the  reasons  why  I  think  them  entitled
to  that  character. [576]

If  the  enumeration  should  appear  to  some
redundant,  to  others  deficient,  and  to  others
both— if  things  which  I  conceive  to  be  first
principles,  should  to  others  appear  to  be
vulgar  errors,  or  to  be  truths  which  derive
their  evidence  from  other  truths,  and  there-
fore not  first  principles  -  in  these  things
every  man  must  judge  for  himself.  I  shall
rejoice  to  see  an  enumeration  more  perfect
in  any  or  in  all  of  those  respects  ;  being
persuaded  that  the  agreement  of  men  of
judgment  and  candour  in  first  principles
would  be  of  no  less  consequence  to  the  ad-
vancement of  knowledge  in  general,  than
the  agreement  of  mathematicians  in  the
axioms  of  geometry  has  been  to  the  ad-
vancement of  that  science.

The  truths  that  fall  within  the  compass
of  human  knowledge,  whether  they  be  self-
evident,  or  deduced  from  those  that  are
self-evident,  may  be  reduced  to  two  classes.
They  are  either  necessary  and  immutable
truths,  whose  contrary  is  impossible;  or
they  are  contingent  and  mutable,  depend-
ing upon  some  effect  of  will  and  power,
which  had  a  beginning,  and  may  have  an
end.

That  a  cone  is  the  third  part  of  a  cylin-
der of  the  same  base  and  the  same  altitude,
is  a  necessary  truth.  It  depends  not  upon
the  will  and  power  of  any  being.  It  is  im-
mutably true,  and  the  contrary  impossible.
That  the  sun  is  the  centre  about  which  the
earth,  and  the  other  planets  of  our  system,
perform  their  revolutions,  is  a  truth  ;  but
it  is  nut  a  necessary  truth.  It  depends
upon  the  power  and  will  of  that  Being  who
made  the  sun  and  all  the  planets,  and  who
gave  them  those  motions  that  seemed  best
to  him.

If  all  truths  were  necessary  truths,  there
would  be  no  occasion  for  different  tenses  in
the  verbs  by  which  they  are  expressed.
What  is  true  in  the  present  time,  would  be
true  in  the  past  and  future;  and  there
would  be  no  change  or  variation  of  anything
in  nature.

We  use  the  present  tense  in  expressing
necessary  truths; but  it  is  only  because
there  is  no  flexion  of  the  verb  which  in
ejhides  all  times. When  I  say  that  t^
is  the  half  of  six,  I  use  the  preser'


442


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


only ;  but  I  mean  to  express  not  only  what
now  is,  but  what  always  was,  and  always  will
be  ;  and  so  every  proposition  is  to  be  under-
stood by  which  we  mean  to  express  a  neces-
sary truth.  Contingent  truths  are  of  an-
other nature.  As  they  are  mutable,  they
may  be  true  at  one  time,  and  not  at  an-
other ;  and,  therefore,  the  expression  of
them  must  include  some  point  or  period  of
time. [577]

If  language  had  been  a  contrivance  of
philosophers,  they  would  probably  have
given  some  flexion  to  the  indicative  mood
of  verbs,  which  extended  to  all  times  past,
present,  and  future  ;  for  such  a  flexion  only
would  be  fit  to  express  necessary  proposi-
tions, which  have  no  relation  to  time.  But
there  is  no  language,  as  far  as  I  know,  in
which  such  a  flexion  of  verbs  is  to  be  found.
Because  the  thoughts  and  discourse  of  men
are  seldom  employed  about  necessary  truths,
but  commonly  about  such  as  are  contin-
gent, languages  are  fitted  to  express  the
last  rather  than  the  first.

The  distinction  commonly  made  between
abstract  truths,  and  those  that  express  mat-
ters of  fact,  or  real  existences,  coincides  in
a  great  measure,  but  not  altogether,  with
that  between  necessary  and  contingent
truths.  The  necessary  truths  that  fall
within  our  knowledge  are,  for  the  most  part,
abstract  truths.  We  must  except  the  ex-
istence and  nature  of  the  Supreme  Being,
which  is  necessary.  Other  existences  are
the  effects  of  will  and  power.  They  had  a
beginning,  and  are  mutable.  Their  nature
is  such  as  the  Supreme  Being  was  pleased
to  give  them.  Their  attributes  and  rela-
tions must  depend  upon  the  nature  God  has
given  them,  the  powers  with  which  he  has
endowed  them,  and  the  situation  in  which
he  hath  placed  them.

The  conclusions  deduced  by  reasoning
from  first  principles,  will  commonly  be  ne-
cessary or  contingent,  according  as  the
principles  are  from  which  they  are  drawn.
On  the  one  hand,  I  take  it  to  be  certain,
that  whatever  can,  by  just  reasoning,  be
inferred  from  a  principle  that  is  necessary,
must  be  a  necessary  truth,  and  that  no
contingent  truth  can  be  inferred  from  prin-
ciples that  are  necessary.  • [578]

Thus,  as  the  axioms  in  mathematics  are
all  necessary  truths,  so  are  all  the  conclu-
sions drawn  from  C;em  ;  that  is,  the  whole
body  of  that  science.  But  from  no  mathe-
matical truth  can  we  deduce  the  existence
of  anything ;  not  even  of  the  objects  of  the
science.

On  the  other  hand,  I  apprehend  there
are  very  few  cases  in  which  we  can,  from
principles  that  are  contingent,  deduce  truths
that  are  necessary. I  can  only  recollect

*  See  Stewart's  '*  Elements,"  ii.  p.  33.


One  instance  of  this  kind — namely — that,
from  the  existence  of  things  contingent  and
mutable,  we  can  infer  the  existence  of  an
immutable  and  eternal  cause  of  them.

As  the  minds  of  men  are  occupied  much
more  about  truths  that  are  contingent  than
about  those  that  are  necessary,  I  shall  first
endeavour  to  point  out  the  principles  of  the
former  kind.

1.  First,  then,  I  hold,  as  a  first  principle,
the  existence  of  everything  of  which  I  am
conscious.

Consciousness  is  an  operation  of  the
understanding  of  its  own  kind,  and  cannot
be  logically  defined.  The  objects  of  it  are
our  present  pains,  our  pleasures,  our  hopes,
our  fears,  our  desires,  our  doubts,  our
thoughts  of  every  kind  ;  in  a  word,  all  the
passions,  and  all  the  actions  and  operations
of  our  own  minds,  while  they  are  present.
We  may  remember  them  when  they  are
past ;  but  we  are  conscious  of  them  only
while  they  are  present.

When  a  man  is  conscious  of  pain,  he  is
certain  of  its  existence ;  when  he  is  con-
scious that  he  doubts  or  believes,  he  is
certain  of  the  existence  of  those  operations.

But  the  irresistible  conviction  he  has  of
the  reality  of  those  operations  is  not  the
effect  of  reasoning ;  it  is  immediate  and
intuitive.  The  existence  therefore  of  those
passions  and  operations  of  our  minds,  of
which  we  are  conscious,  is  a  first  principle,
which  nature  requires  us  to  believe  upon
her  authority. [579]

If  I  am  asked  to  prove  that  I  cannot  be
deceived  by  consciousness — to  prove  that  it
is  not  a  fallacious  sense — I  can  find  nc  proof.
I  cannot  find  any  antecedent  truth  from
which  it  is  deduced,  or  upon  which  its  evi-
dence depends.  It  seems  to  disdain  any
such  derived  authority,  and  to  claim  my
assent  in  its  own  right.

If  any  man  could  be  found  so  frantic  as
to  deny  that  he  thinks,  while  he  is  conscious
of  it,  I  may  wonder,  I  may  laugh,  or  I  may
pity  him,  but  I  cannot  reason  the  matter
with  him.  We  have  no  common  principles
from  which  we  may  reason,  and  therefore
can  never  join  issue  in  an  argument.

This,  I  think,  is  the  only  principle  of
common  sense  that  has  never  directly  been
called  in  question.  *  It  seems  to  be  so  firmly
rooted  in  the  minds  of  men,  as  to  retain  its
authority  with  the  greatest  sceptics.  Mr
Hume,  after  annihilating  body  and  mind,
time  and  space,  action  and  causation,  and
even  his  own  mind,  acknowledges  the  reality
of  the  thoughts,  sensations,  and  passions  of
which  he  is  conscious.


*  It  could  not  possibly  be  called  in  question.  For,
in  doubting  the  fact  of  his  consciousness,  the  sceptic
must  at  leas'  affirm  the  fact  of  his  doubt ;  but  to
affirm  a  doubt  is  to  affirm  the  consciousness  of  it ;
the  doubt  would,  therefore,  be  self-contradictory—
i.  e.,  annihilate  itself. — H.

[577-579]


chap.  v.J  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  CONTINGENT  TRUTHS.


443


No  philosopher  has  attempted,  by  any
Hypothesis,  to  account  for  this  consciousness
of  our  own  thoughts,  and  the  certain  know-
ledge of  their  real  existence  which  accom-
panies it.  By  this  they  seem  to  acknow-
ledge that  this  at  least  is  an  original  power
of  the  mind  ^  a  power  by  which  we  not  only
have  ideas,  but  original  judgments,  and  the
knowledge  of  real  existence.

I  cannot  reconcile  this  immediate  know-
ledge of  the  operations  of  our  own  minds
with  Mr  Locke's  theory,  that  all  know-
ledge consists  in  perceiving  the  agreement
and  disagreement  of  ideas.  What  are  the
ideas,  from  whose  comparison  the  knowledge
of  our  own  thoughts  results  ?  Or  what  are
the  agreements  or  disagreements  which  con-
vince a  man  that  he  is  in  pain  when  he
feels  it  ? [580]

Neither  can  I  reconcile  it  with  Mr  Hume's
theory,  that  to  believe  the  existence  of  any-
thing, is  nothing  else  than  to  have  a  strong
and  lively  conception  of  it ;  or,  at  most,
that  belief  is  only  some  modification  of  the
idea  which  is  the  object  of  belief.  For,  not
to  mention  that  propositions,  not  ideas,  are
the  object  of  belief,  in  all  that  variety  of
thoughts  and  passions  of  which  we  are  con-
scious we  believe  the  existence  of  the  weak
as  well  as  of  the  strong,  the  faint  as  well  as
the  lively.  No  modification  of  the  opera-
tions of  our  minds  disposes  us  to  the  least
doubt  of  their  real  existence.

As,  therefore,  the  real  existence  of  our
thoughts,  and  of  all  the  operations  and  feel-
ings of  our  own  minds,  is  believed  by  all
men — as  we  find  ourselves  incapable  of
doubting  it,  and  as  incapable  of  offering  any
proof  of  it — it  may  justly  be  considered  as  a
first  principle,  or  dictate  of  common  sense.

But,  although  this  principle  rests  upon
no  other,  a  very  considerable  and  import-
ant branch  of  human  knowledge  rests  upon
it.

For  from  this  source  of  consciousness  is
derived  all  that  we  know,  and  indeed  all
that  we  can  know,  of  the  structure  and  of
the  powers  of  our  own  minds  ;  from  which
we  may  conclude,  that  there  is  no  branch
of  knowledge  that  stands  upon  a  firmer
foundation  ;  for  surely  no  kind  of  evidence
can  go  beyond  that  of  consciousness.

How  does  it  come  to  pass,  then,  that  in
this  branch  of  knowledge  there  are  so  many
and  so  contrary  systems  ?  so  many  subtile
controversies  that  are  never  brought  to  an
issue  ?  and  so  little  fixed  and  determined  ?
Is  it  possible  that  philosophers  should  differ
most  where  they  have  the  surest  means  of
agreement — where  everything  is  built  upon
a  species  of  evidence  which  all  men  ac-
quiesce in,  and  hold  to  be  the  most  certain  ?
[581]

This  strange  phsenomenon  may,  I  think,
be  accounted  for,  if  we  distinguish  between
[580-582]


consciousness  and  reflection,  which  are  often
improperly  confounded  *

The  first  is  common  to  all  men  at  all
times  ;  but  is  insufficient  of  itself  to  give  us
clear  and  distinct  notions  of  the  opera-
tions of  which  we  are  conscious,  and  of
their  mutual  relations  and  minute  distinc-
tions. The  second — to  wit,  attentive  reflec-
tion upon  those  operations,  making  them
objects  of  thought,  surveying  them  atten-
tively, and  examining  them  on  all  sides — is
so  far  from  being  common  to  all  men,  that  it
is  the  lot  of  very  few.  The  greatest  part
of  men,  either  through  want  of  capacity,  or
from  other  causes,  never  reflect  attentively
upon  the  operations  of  their  own  minds.
The  habit  of  this  reflection,  even  in  those
whom  nature  has  fitted  for  it,  is  not  to  be  at-
tained without  much  pains  and  practice.

We  can  know  nothing  of  the  immediate
objects  of  sight,  but  by  the  testimony  of  our
eyes ;  and  I  apprehend  that,  if  mankind
had  found  as  great  difficulty  in  giving  at-
tention to  the  objects  of  sight,  as  they  find
in  attentive  reflection  upon  the  operations
of  their  own  minds,  our  knowledge  of  the
first  might  have  been  in  as  backward  a  state
as  our  knowledge  of  the  last.

But  this  darkness  will  not  last  for  ever.
Light  will  arise  upon  this  benighted  part  of
the  intellectual  globe.  When  any  man  is
so  happy  as  to  delineate  the  powers  of  the
human  mind  as  they  really  are  in  nature,
men  that  are  free  from  prejudice,  and  cap-
able of  reflection,  will  recognise  their  own
features  in  the  picture  ;  and  then  the  wonder
will  be,  how  things  so  obvious  could  be  so
long  wrapped  up  in  mystery  and  darkness  ;
how  men  could  be  carried  away  by  false
theories  and  conjectures,  when  the  truth
was  to  be  found  in  their  own  breasts  if  they
had  but  attended  to  it.

2.  Another  first  principle,  I  think,  is,
That  the  thoughts  of  which  I  am  cnnsci>vs,
are  the thoughts of  a  being  which  I  call

MYSELF,  my  MIND,  mi/  PERSON. [582]

The  thoughts  and  feelings  of  which  we  are
conscious  are  continually  changing,  and  the
thought  of  this  moment  is  not  the  thought
of  the  last ;  but  something  which  I  call  my-
self, remains  under  this  change  of  thought.
This  self  has  the  same  relation  to  all  the
successive  thoughts  I  am  conscious  of — they
are  all  my  thoughts ;  and  every  thought
which  is  not  my  thought,  must  be  the
thought  of  some  other  person.

If  any  man  asks  a  proof  of  this,  I  confess
I  can  give  none ;  there  is  an  evidence  in  the
proposition  itself  which  I  am  unable  to  re-
sist. Shall  I  think  that  thought  can  stand
by  itself  without  a  thinking  being  ?  or  that
ideas  can  feel  pleasure  or  pain  ?  My  nature
dictates  to  me  that  it  is  impossible.


*  Compare  above,  pp.


b,258,a  —  H.


444


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI,


And  that  nature  has  dictated  the  same  to
all  men,  appears  from  the  structure  of  all
languages  :  for  in  all  languages  men  have
expressed  thinking,  reasoning,  willing,  lov-
ing, hating,  by  personal  verbs,  which,  from
their  nature,  require  a  person  who  thinks,
reasons,  wills,  loves,  or  hates.  From  which
it  appears,  that  men  have  been  taught  by
nature  to  believe  that  thought  requires  a
thinker,  reason  a  reasoner,  and  love  a  lover.

Here  we  must  leave  Mr  Hume,  who  con-
ceives it  to  be  a  vulgar  error,  that,  besides
the  thoughts  we  are  conscious  of,  there  is  a
mind  which  is  the  subject  of  those  thoughts.
If  the  mind  be  anything  else  than  impres-
sions and  ideas,  it  must  be  a  word  without
a  meaning.  The  mind,  therefore,  accord-
ing to  this  philosopher,  is  a  word  which
signifies  a  bundle  of  perceptions  ;  or,  when
he  defines  it  more  accurately — "  It  is  that
succession  of  related  ideas  and  impressions,
of  which  we  have  an  intimate  memory  and
consciousness."

I  am,  therefore,  that  succession  of  related
ideas  and  impressions  of  which  I  have  the
intimate  memory  and  consciousness.

But  who  is  the  /  that  has  this  memory
and  consciousness  of  a  succession  of  ideas
and  impressions  ?  Why,  it  is  nothing  but
that  succession  itself. [583]

Hence,  I  learn,  that  this  succession  of
ideas  and  impressions  intimately  remembers,
and  is  conscious  of  itself.  I  would  wish  to
be  farther  instructed,  whether  the  impres-
sions remember  and  are  conscious  of  the
ideas,  or  the  ideas  remember  and  are  con-
scious of  the  impressions,  or  if  both  remem-
ber and  are  conscious  of  both  ?  and  whether
the  ideas  remember  those  that  come  after
them,  as  well  as  those  that  were  before  them  ?
These  are  questions  naturally  arising  from
this  system,  that  have  not  yet  been  explained.

This,  however,  is  clear,  that  this  succes-
sion of  ideas  and  impressions,  not  only  re-
members and  is  conscious,  but  that  it  judges,
reasons,  affirms,  denies — nay,  that  it  eats
and  drinks,  and  is  sometimes  merry  and
sometimes  sad.

If  these  things  can  be  ascribed  to  a  suc-
cession of  ideas  and  impressions,  in* a  con-
sistency with  common  sense,  I  should  be
very  glad  to  know  what  is  nonsense.

The  scholastic  philosophers  have  been
wittily  ridiculed,  by  representing  them  as
disputing  upon  ihis  question — Numchimcera
bombinans  in  vacuo  possit  comedere  secun-
das  intentiones  ?  and  I  believe  the  wit  of
man  cannot  invent  a  more  ridiculous  ques-
tion. But,  if  Mr  Hume's  philosophy  be
admitted,  this  question  deserves  to  be
treated  more  gravely :  for  if,  as  we  learn
from  this  philosophy,  a  succession  of  ideas
and  impressions  may  eat,  and  drink,  and
be  merry,  I  see  no  good  reason  why  a
chimera,-  which,  if  not  the  same  is  of  kin  to


an  idea,  may  not  chew  the  cud  upon  that
kind  of  food  which  the  schoolmen  call  second
intentions.*

3.  Another  first  principle  I  take  to  be —
That- those  things  did  really/happen  which  I
distinct  if  rememher. [584]

This  has  one  of  the  surest  marks  of  a  first
principle  ;  for  no  man  ever  pretended  to
prove  it,  and  yet  no  man  in  his  wits  calls  it
in  question  :  the  testimony  of  memory,  like
that  of  consciousness,  is  immediate  ;  it
claims  our  assent  upon  its  own  authority,  -f-

Suppose  that  a  learned  counsel,  in  defence
of  a  client  against  the  concurring  testimony
of  witnesses  of  credit,  should  insist  upon  a
new  topic  to  invalidate  the  testimony.
"  Admitting,"  says  he,  "  the  integrity  of
the  witnesses,  and  that  they  distinctly  re-
member what  they  have  given  in  evidence-
it  does  not  follow  that  the  prisoner  is  guilty.
It  has  never  been  proved  that  the  most
distinct  memory  may  not  be  fallacious.
Shew  me  any  necessary  connection  between
that  act  of  the  mind  which  we  call  memory,
and  the  past  existence  of  the  event  remem-
bered. No  man  has  ever  offered  a  shadow
of  argument  to  prove  such  a  connection ;
yet  this  is  one  link  of  the  chain  of  proof
against  the  prisoner  ;  and,  if  it  have  no
strength,  the  whole  proof  falls  to  the  ground :
until  this,  therefore,  be  made  evident — until
it  can  be  proved  that  we  may  safely  rest
upon  the  testimony  of  memory  for  the  truth
of  past  events — no  judge  or  jury  can  justly
take  away  the  life  of  a  citizen  upon  so
doubtful  a  point."

I  believe  we  may  take  it  for  granted,  that
this  argument  from  a  learned  counsel  would
have  no  other  effect  upon  the  judge  or  jury,
than  to  convince  them  that  he  was  dis-
ordered in  his  judgment.  Counsel  is  allowed
to  plead  everything  for  a  client  that  is  fit  to
persuade  or  to  move  ;  yet  I  believe  no
counsel  ever  had  the  boldness  to  plead  this
topic.  And  for  what  reason  ?  For  no  other
reason,  surely,  but  because  it  is  absurd.
Now,  what  is  absurd  at  the  bar,  is  so  in  the
philosopher's  chair.  What  would  be  ridi-
culous, if  delivered  to  a  jury  of  honest  sen-
sible citizens,  is  no  less  so  when  delivered
gravely  in  a  philosophical  dissertation.

Mr  Hume  has  not,  as  far  as  I  remember,
directly  called  in  question  the  testimony  of

*  All  this  criticism  of  Hume  proceeds  upon  the
erroneous  hypothesis  that  he  was  a  Dogmatist.  He
was  a  Sceptic— that  is,  he  accepted  the  principles  as-
sertedfby  the  prevalent  Dogmatism ;  and  only  shewed
that  such  and  such  coi. elusions  were,  on  these  prin-
ciples, inevitable.  The  absurdity  was  not  Hume's,  but
Locke's.  This  is  the  kind  of  criticism,  however,
with  which  Hume  is  generally  assailed. —  H.

f  The  datum  of  Memory  does  not  stand  upon^the
same  ground  as  the.datum  of  simple  Consciousness.
In  so  far  as  memory-  is  consciousness,  it  cannot  he
denied  We  cannot,  without  contradiction,  deny  the
fact  of  memory  as  a  present  consciousness;  but  we
may,  without  contradiction,  suppose  that  the  past
given  therein,  is  only  an  illusion  of  the  present.— H.
f  583,  584]


cnAP.  v.]  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  CONTINGENT  TRUTHS.  445


memory  ;  but  he  has  laid  down  the  premises
by  which  its  authority  is  overturned,  leav-
ing it  to  his  reader  to  draw  the  conclu-
sion. [585]

He  labours  to  shew  that  the  belief  or
assent  which  always  attends  the  memory
and  senses  is  nothing  but  the  vivacity  of
those  perceptions  which  they  present.  He
shews  very  clearly,  that  this  vivacity  gives
no  ground  to  believe  the  existence  of  ex-
ternal objects.  And  it  is  obvious  that  it
can  give  as  little  giound  to  believe  the  past
existence  of  the  objects  of  memory.

Indeed  the  theory  concerning  ideas,  so
generally  received  by  philosophers,  destroys
all  the  authority  of  memory,  as  well  as  the
authority  of  the  senses.  Des  Cartes,  Ma-
lebranche,  and  Locke,  were  aware  that  this
theory  made  it  necessary  for  th  m  to  find
out  arguments  to  prove  the  existence  of  ex-
ternal objects,  which  the  vulgar  believe
upon  the  bare  authority  of  their  senses ;
but  those  philosophers  were  not  aware  that
this  theory  made  it  equally  necessary  for
them  to  find  arguments  to  prove  the  exist-
ence of  things  past,  which  Ave  remember,
and  to  support  the  authority  of  memory.

All  the  arguments  they  advanced  to  sup-
port the  authority  of  our  senses,  were  easily
refuted  by  Bishop  Berkeley  and  Mr  Hume,
being  indeed" very  weak  and  inconclusive.
And  it  would  have  been  as.eusy  to  answer
every  argument  they  could  have  brought,
consistent  with  their  theory,  to  support  the
authority  of  memory.

For,  according  to  that  theory,  the  im-
mediate object  of  memory,  as  well  as  of
every  other  operation  of  the  understanding,
is  an  idea  present  in  the  mind.  And,  from
the  present  existence  of  this  idea  of  me-
mory I  am  left  to  infer,  by  reasoning,  that,
six  months  or  six  years  ago,  there  did  ex-
ist an  object  similar  to, this  idea. [586]

But  what  is  there  in  the  idea  that  can
lead  me  to  this  conclusion  ?  What  mark
does  it  bear  of  the  date  of  its  archetype  ?
Or  what  evidence  have  I  that  it  had  an
archetype,  and  that  it  is  not  the  first  of  its
kind?

Perhaps  it  will  be  said,  that  this  idea  or
image  in  the  mind  must  have  had  a  cause."
I  admit  that,  if  there  is  such  an  image  in
the  mind,  it  must  have  had  a  cause,  and  a
cause  able  to  produce  the  effect  ;•  but  what
can  we  infer  from  its  having  a  cause  ?  Does
it  follow  that  the  effect  is  a  type,  an  image,
a  copy  of  its  cause  ?  Then  it  will  follow,
that  a  picture  is  an  image  of  the  painter,
and  a  coach  of  the  coachmaker.

A  past  event  may  be  known  by  reasoning ;
but  that  is  not  remembering  it.  When  I
remember  a  thing  distinctly,  I  disdain
equally  to  hear  reasons  for  it  or  against  it.
And  so I  think  does  every  man  in  his


£585-58?  ]


4.  Another  first  principle  is,  Our  own  per-
sonal identity  and  continued  existence,  as
far  back  as  we  remember  anything  distinctly.

This  we  know  immediately,  and  not
by  reasoning.  It  seems,  indeed,  to  be  a
part  of  the  testimony  of  memory.  Every-
thing we  remember  has  such  a  relation  to
ourselves  as  to  imply  necessarily  our  ex-
istence at  the  time  remembered.  And
there  cannot  be  a  more  palpable  absurdity
than  that  a  man  should  remember  what
happened  before  he  existed.  He  must
therefore  have  existed  as  far  back  as  he  re-
members anything  distinctly,  if  his  memory
be  not  fallacious.  This  principle,  there-
fore, is  so  connected  with  the  last  mention-
ed, that  it  may  be  doubtful  whether  both
ought  not  to  be  included  in  one.  Let
every  one  judge  of  this  as  he<sees  reason.
The  proper  notion  of  identity,  and  the  sen-
timents of  Mr  Locke  on  this  subject,  have
been  considered  before,  under  the  head  of
Memory. [587]

5.  Another  first  principle  is,  That  those
things  do  really  exist  which  we  distinctly
perceive  by  our  senses,  and  are  what  we
perceive  them  to  be.

It  is  too  evident  to  need  proof,  that  all
men  are  by  nature  led  to  give  implicit  faith
to  the  distinct  testimony  of  their  senses,
long  before  they  are  capable  of  any  bias
from  prejudices  of  education  or  of  philo-
sophy.

How  came  we  at  first  to  know  that  there
are  certain  beings  about  us  whom  we  call
father,  and  mother,  and  sisters,  and  bro-
thers, and  nurse  ?  Was  it  not  by  the
testimony  of  our  senses  ?  How  did  these
persons  convey  to  us  any  information  or
instruction  ?  Was  it  not  by  means  of  our
senses  ?

It  is  evident  we  can  have  no  communi-
cation, no  correspondence  or  society  with
any  created  being,  but  by  means  of  our
senses.  And,  until  we  rely  upon  their  testi-
mony, we  must  consider  ourselves  as  being
alone  in  the  universe,  without  any  fellow-
creature,  living  or  inanimate,  and  be  left  to
converse  with  our  own  thoughts.

Bishop  Berkeley  surely  did  not  duly  con-
sider that  it  is  by  means  of  the  material
world  that  we  have  any  correspondence
with  thinking  beings,  or  any  knowledge  of
their  existence  ;  and  that,  by  depriving  us
of  the  material  world,  he  deprived  us,  at
the  same  time,  of  family,  friends,  country,
and  every  human  creature  ;  of  every  object
of  affection,  esteem,  or  concern,  except  our-
selves.

The  good  Bishop  surely  never  intended
this.  He  was  too  warm  a  friend,  too  zeal-
ous a  patriot,  and  too  good  a  Christian,  to
be  capable  of  such  a  thought.  He  was  not
aware  of  the  consequences  of  his  system,
and  therefore  they  ought  not  to  be  imputed


448


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


to  him  ;  but  we  must  impute  them  to  the
system  itself.  It  stifles  every  generous  and
social  principle. [588]

When  I  consider  myself  as  speaking  to
men  who  hear  me,  and  can  judge  of  what
I  say,  I  feel  that  respect  which  is  due  to
such  an  audience.  I  feel  an  enjoyment  in
a  reciprocal  communication  of  sentiments
with  candid  and  ingenious  friends  ;  and  my
soul  blesses  the  Author  of  my  being,  who
has  made  me  capable  of  this  manly  and
rational  entertainment.

But  the  Bishop  shews  me,  that  this  is
all  a  dream ;  that  I  see  not  a  human  face  ;
that  all  the  objects  I  see,  and  hear,  and
handle,  are  only  the  ideas  of  my  own  mind ;
ideas  are  my  only  companions.  Cold  com-
pany, indeed !  Every  social  affection  freezes
at  the  thought !

But,  my  Lord  Bishop,  are  there  no  minds
left  in  the  universe  but  my  own  ?

Yes,  indeed;  it  is  only  the  material
world  that  is  annihilated ;  everything  else
remains  as  it  was.

This  seems  to  promise  some  comfort  in
my  forlorn  solitude.  But  do  I  see  those
minds  ?  No.  Do  I  see  their  ideas  ?  No.
Nor  do  they  see  me  or  my  ideas.  They
are,  then,  no  more  to  me  than  the  inhabit-
ants of  Solomon's  isles,  or  of  the  moon  ;
and  my  melancholy  solitude  returns.  Every
social  tie  is  broken,  and  every  social  affec-
tion is  stifled.

This  dismal  system,  which,  if  it  could  be
believed,  would  deprive  men  of  every  social
comfort,  a  very  good  Bishop,  by  strict  and
accurate  reasoning,  deduced  from  the  prin-
ciples commonly  received  by  philosophers
concerning  ideas.  The  fault  is  not  in  the
reasoning,  but  in  the  principles  from  which
it  is  drawn.

All  the  arguments  urged  by  Berkeley  and
Hume,  against  the  existence  of  a  material
world,  are  grounded  upon  this  principle —
that  we  do  not  perceive  external  objects
themselves,  but  certain  images  or  ideas  in
our  own  minds.*  But  this  is  no  dictate  of
common  sense,  but  directly  contrary  to  the
sense  of  all  who  have  not  been  taught  it  by
philosophy. [589]

We  have  before  examined  the  reasons
given  by  philosophers  to  prove  that  ideas,
and  not  external  objects,  are  the  immediate
objects  of  perception,  and  the  instances
given  to  prove  the  senses  fallacious.  With-
out repeating  what  has  before  been  said
upon  those  points,  we  shall  only  here  ob-
serve, that,  if  external  objects  be  perceived
immediately,  we  have  the  same  reason  to


*  Idealism,  as-  already  noticed,  rests  equally  well,
if  not  better,  on  the  hypothesis  that  what  we  perceive
(or  are  conscious  of  in  perception)  is  only  a  modifica-
tion of  mind,  as  on  the  hypothesis  that,  in  perception,
we  are  conscious  of  a  representative  entity  distinct
from  mind  as  from  the  external  reality. —  H.


believe  their  existence  as  philosophers  have
to  believe  the  existence  of  ideas,  while  they
hold  them  to  be  the  immediate  objects  of
perception.*

6.  Another  first  principle,  I  think,  is,
That  we  have  some  degree  of  power  over
our  actions,  and  the  determinations  of  our
will.

All  power  must  be  derived  from  the
fountain  of  power,  and  of  every  good  gift.
Upon  His  good  pleasure  its  continuance  de-
pends, and  it  is  always  subject  to  his  con-
trol.

Beings  to  whom  God  has  given  any  de-
gree of  power,  and  understanding  to  direct
them  to  the  proper  use  of  it,  must  be  ac-
countable to  their  Maker.  But  those  who
are  intrusted  with  no  power  can  have  no
account  to  make  ;  for  all  good  conduct  con-
sists in  the  right  use  of  power ;  all  bad
conduct  in  the  abuse  of  it.

To  call  to  account  a  being  who  never  was
intrusted  with  any  degree  of  power,  is  an
absurdity  no  less  than  it  would  be  to  call
to  account  an  inanimate  being.  We  are
sure,  therefore,  if  we  have  any  account  to
make  to  the  Author  of  our  being,  that  we
must  have  some  degree  of  power,  which,
as  far  as  it  is  properly  used,  entitles  us  to
his  approbation  ;  and,  when  abused,  renders
us  obnoxious  to  his  displeasure. [590]

It  is  not  easy  to  say  in  what  way  we  first
get  the  notion  or  idea  of  power.  It  is
neither  an  object  of  sense  nor  of  conscious-
ness. We  see  events,  one  succeeding  an-
other ;  but  we  see  not  the  power  by  which
they  are  produced.  We  are  conscious  of
the  operations  of  our  minds  ;  but  power  is
not  an  operation  of  mind.  If  we  had  no
notions  but  such  as  are  furnished  by  the
external  senses,  and  by  consciousness,  it
seems  to  be  impossible  that  we  should  ever
have  any  conception  of  power.  Accord-
ingly, Mr  Hume,  who  has  reasoned  the
most  accurately  upon  this  hypothesis,  denies
that  we  have  any  idea  of  power,  and  clearly
refutes  the  account  given  by  Mr  Locke  of
the  origin  of  this  idea.

But  it  is  in  vain  to  reason  from  a  hypo-
thesis against  a  fact,  the  truth  of  which
every  man  may  see  by  attending  to  his  own
thoughts.  It  is  evident  that  all  men,  very
early  in  life,  not  only  have  an  idea  of  power,
but  a  conviction  that  they  have  some  de-
gree of  it  in  themselves  ;  for  this  conviction
is  necessarily  implied  in  many  operations
of  mind,  which  are  familiar  to  every  man,
and  without  which  no  man  can  act  the  part
of  a  reasonable  being.

First,  It  is  implied  in  every  act  of  voli-
tion. "  Volition,  it  is  plain,"  says  Mr
Locke,  "  is  an  act  of  the  mind,  knowingly


*  Philosophers  admitted  that  we  are  conscious  of

these ;  does  Reid  admit  this  of  external  objects  ? — H.

[588-590]


chap,  v.]  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  CONTINGENT  TRUTHS.  447


exerting  that  dominion  which  it  takes  itself
to  have  over  any  part  of  the  man,  by  em-
ploying it  in,  or  withholding  it  from  any
particular  action."  Every  volition,  there-
fore, implies  a  conviction  of  power  to  do  the
action  willed.  A  man  may  desire  to  make
a  visit  to  the  moon,  or  to  the  planet  Jupi-
ter ;  but  nothing  but  insanity  could  make
him  will  to  do  so.  And,  if  even  insanity
produced  this  effect,  it  must  be  by  making
him  think  it  to  be  in  his  power.

Secondly,  This-  conviction  is  implied  in
all  deliberation  ;  for  no  man  in  his  wits  de-
liberates whether  he  shall  do  what  he  be-
lieves not  to  be  in  his  power.  Thirdly,
The  same  conviction  is  implied  in  every
resolution  or  purpose  formed  in  consequence
of  deliberation.  A  man  may  as  well  form
a  resolution  to  pull  the  moon  out  of  her
sphere,  as  to  do  the  most  insignificant  action
which  he  believes  not  to  be  in  his  power.
The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  every  pro-
mise or  contract  wherein  a  man  plights  his
faith ;  for  he  is  not  an  honest  man  who
promises  what  he  does  not  believe  he  has
power  to  perform. [591]

As  these  operations  imply  a  belief  of
some  degree  of  power  in  ourselves  ;  so  there
are  others  equally  common  and  familiar,
which  imply  a  like  belief  with  regard  to
others.

When  we  impute  to  a  man  any  action  or
omission,  as  a  ground  of  approbation  or  of
blame,  we  must  believe  he  had  power  to  do
otherwise.  The  same  is  implied  in  all
advice,  exhortation,  command,  and  rebuke,
and  in  every  case  in  which  we  rely  upon  his
fidelity  in  performing  any  engagement  or
executing  any  trust.

It  is  not  more  evident  that  mankind  have
a  conviction  of  the  existence  of  a  material
world,  than  that  they  have  the  conviction
of  some  degree  of  power  in  themselves  and
in  others  ;  every  one  over  his  own  actions,
and  the  determinations  of  his  will — a  con-
viction so  early,  so  general,  and  so  inter-
woven with  the  whole  of  human  conduct,
that  it  must  be  the  natural  effect  of  our
constitution,  and  intended  by  the  Author  of
our  being  to  guide  our  actions.

It  resembles  our  conviction  of  the  ex-
istence of  a  material  world  in  this  respect
also,  that  even  those  who  reject  it  in  specu-
lation, find  themselves  under  a  necessity  of
being  governed  by  it  in  their  practice  ;  and
thus  it  will  always  happen  when  philosophy
contradicts  first  principles,

7.  Another  first  principle  is — That  the
natural  faculties,  by  which  we  distinauish
truth  from  error,  are  not  fallacious.  If  any
man  should  demand  a  proof  of  this,  it  is
impossible  to  satisfy  him.  For,  suppose  it
should  be  mathematically  demonstrated,
this  would  signify  nothing  in  this  case ;
because,  to  judge  of  a  demonstration,  a  man
[591-593]


must  trust  his  faculties,  and  take  for  granted
the  very  thing  in  question. [592]

If  a  man's  honesty  were  calle;!  in  ques-
tion, it  would  be  ridiculous  to  refer  it  to  the
man's  own  word,  whether  he  be  honest  or
not.  The  same  absurdity  there  is  in  at-
tempting to  prove,  by  any  kind  of  reasoning,
probable  or  demonstrative,  that  our  reason
is  not  fallacious,  since  the  very  point  in
question  is,  whether  reasoning  may  be
trusted.

If  a  sceptic  should  build  his  scepticism
upon  this  foundation,  that  all  our  reasoning
and  judging  powers  are  fallacious  in  their
nature,  or  should  resolve  at  least  to  with-
hold assent  until  it  be  proved  that  they  are
not,  it  would  be  impossible  by  argument
to  beat  him  out  of  this  stronghold  ;  and  he
must  even  be  left  to  enjoy  his  scepticism.

Des  Cartes  certainly  made  a  false  step  in
this  matter,  for  having  suggested  this  doubt
among  others — that  whatever  evidence  he
might  have  from  his  consciousness,  his
senses,  his  memory,  or  his  reason,  yet
possibly  some  malignant  being  had  given
him  those  faculties  on  purpose  to  impose
upon  him  ;  and,  therefore,  that  they  are  not
to  be  trusted  without  a  proper  voucher.
To  remove  this  doubt,  he  endeavours  to
prove  the  being  of  a  Deity  who  is  no  de-
ceiver; whence  he  concludes,  that  the  facul-
ties he  had  given  him  are  true  and  worthy
to  be  trusted.

It  is  strange  that  so  acute  a  reasoner  did
not  perceive  that  in  this  reasoning  there  is
evidently  a  begging  of  the  question.

For,  if  our  faculties  be  fallacious,  why
may  they  not  deceive  us  in  this  reasoning  as
well  as  in  others  ?  And,  if  they  are  not  to
be  trusted  in  this  instance  without  a  voucher,
why  not  in  others  ? [593]

Every  kind  of  reasoning  for  the  veracity
of  our  faculties,  amounts  to  no  more  than
taking  their  own  testimony  for  their  vera-
city ;  and  this  we  must  do  implicitly,  until
God  give  us  new  faculties  to  sit  in  judg-
ment upon  the  old  ;  and  the  reason  why
Des  Cartes  satisfied  himself  with  so  weak
an  argument  for  the  truth  of  his  faculties,
most  probably  was,  that  he  never  seriously
doubted  of  it.

If  any  truth  can  be  said  to  be  prior  to  all
others  in  the  order  of  nature,  this  seems
to  have  the  best  claim-;  because,  in  every
instance  of  assent,  whether  upon  intuitive,
demonstrative,  or  probable  evidence,  the
truth  of  our  faculties  is  taken  for  granted,
and  is,  as  it  were,  one  of  the  premises  on
which  our  assent  is  grounded.  *

How  then  come  we  to  be  assured  of  this


*  There  is  a  presumption  in  favour  of  the  veracity
of  the  primary  data' of  consciousness.  This  can  only
be  rebutted  by  shewing  tha~  these  facts  are  contradic-
tory. Scepticism  attempts  t&shew  this  on  the  prin-
ciples which  Dogmatism  postulates.— H.


448


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


fundamental  truth  on  which  all  others  rest  ?
Perhaps  evidence,  as  in  many  other  respects
it  resembles  light,  so  in  this  also — that,  as
light,  which  is  the  discoverer  of  all  visible
objects,  discovers  itself  at  the  same  time,
so  evidence,  which  is  the  voucher  for  all
truth,  vouches  for  itself  at  the  same  time.

This,  however,  is  certain,  that  such  is
the  constitution  of  the  human  mind,  that
evidence  discerned  by  us,  forces  a  corre-
sponding degree  of  assent.  And  a  man
who  perfectly  understood  a  just  syllogism,
without  believing  that  the  conclusion  follows
from  the  premises,  would  be  a  greater  mon-
ster than  a  man  born  without  hands  or
feet.

We  are  born  under  a  necessity  of  trust-
ing to  our  reasoning  and  judging  powers ;
and  a  real  belief  of  their  being  fallacious
cannot  be  maintained  for  any  considerable
time  by  the  greatest  sceptic,  because  it  is
doing  violence  to  our  constitution.  It  is
like  a  man's  walking  upon  his  hands,  a  feat
which  some  men  upon  occasion  can  exhibit ;
but  no  man  ever  made  a  long  journey  in
this  manner.  Cease  to  admire  bis  dexte-
rity, and  he  will,  like  other  men,  betake
himself  to  his  legs. [594  ]

We  may  here  take  notice  of  a  property
of  the  principle  under  consideration,  that
seems  to  be  common  to  it  with  many  other
first  principles,  and  which  can  hardly  be
found  in  any  principle  that  is  built  solely
upon  reasoning  ;  and  that  is,  that  in  most
men  it  produces  its  effect  without  ever  being
attended  to,  or  made  an  object  of  thought.
No  man  ever  thinks  of  this  principle,  unless
when  he  considers  the  grounds  of  scepticism ;
yet  it  invariably  governs  his  opinions.
When  a  man  in  the  common  course  of
life  gives  credit  to  the  testimony  of  his
senses,  his  memory,  or  his  reason,  he  does
not  put  the  question  to  himself,  whether
these  faculties  may  deceive  him  ;  yet  the
trust  he  reposes  in  them  supposes  an  inward
conviction,  that,  in  that  instance  at  least,
they  do  not  deceive  him.

It  is  another  property  of  this  and  of  many
first  principles,  that  they  force  assent  in  par-
ticular instances,  more  powerfully  than
when  they  are  turned  into  a  general  propo-
sition. Many  sceptics  have  denied  every
general  principle  of  science,  excepting  per-
haps the  existence  of  our  present  thoughts  ;
yet  these  men  reason,  and  refute,  and  prove,
they  assent  and  dissent  in  particular  cases.
They  use  reasoning  to  overturn  all  reason-
ing, and  judge  that  they  ought  to  have  no
judgment,  and  see  clearly  that  they  are
bhnd.  Many  have  in  general  maintained
that  the  senses  are  fallacious,  yet  there
never  was  found  a  man  so  sceptical  as  not
to  trust  his  senses  in  particular  instances
when  his  safety  required  it ;  and  it  may  be
observed  of  those  who  have  professed  scep-


ticism, that  their  scepticism  lies  in  generals,
while  in  particulars  they  are  no  less  dog-
matical than  others.

8.  Another  first  principle  relating  to  ex-
istence, is,  That  there  is.life  and  intelligence
in  our  ./ elk w -men  with  whom  we  converse.

As  soon  as  children  are  capable  of  askiug
a  question,  or  of  answering  a  question,  as
soon  as  they  shew  the  signs  of  love,  of  re-
sentment, or  of  any  other  affection,  they
must  be  convinced  that  those  with  whom
they  have  this  intercourse  are  intelligent
beings. [595]

It  is  evident  they  are  capable  of  such  in-
tercourse long  before  they  can  reason.
Every  one  knows  that  there  is  a  social  in-
tercourse between  the  nurse  and  the  child
before  it  is  a  year  old.  It  can,  at  that  age,
understand  many  things  that  are  said  to  it.

It  can  by  signs  ask  and  refuse,  threaten
and  supplicate.  It  clings  to  its  nurse  in
danger,  enters  into  her  grief  and  joy,  is  hap-
py in  her  soothing  and  caresses,  and  un-
happy in  her  displeasure.  That  these
things  cannot  be  without  a  conviction  in
the  child  that  the  nurse  is  an  intelligent
being,  I  think  must  be  granted.

Now,  I  would  ask  how  a  child  of  a  year
old  comes  by  this  conviction  ?  Not  by  rea-
soning surely,  for  children  do  not  reason  at
that  age.  Nor  is  it  by  external  senses,  for
life  and  intelligence  are  not  objects  of  the
external  senses.

By  what  means,  or  upon  what  occasions,
Nature  first  gives  this  information  to  the
infant  mind,  is  not  easy  to  determine.  We
are  not  capable  of  reflecting  upon  our  own
thoughts  at  that  period  of  life  ;  and  before
we  attain  this  capacity,  we  have  quite  for-
got how  or  on  what  occasion  we  first  had
this  belief ;  we  perceive  it  in  those  who  are
born  blind,  and  in  others  who  are  born
deaf;  and  therefore  Nature  has  not  con-
nected it  solely  either  with  any  object  of
sight,  or  with  any  object  of  hearing.  When
we  grow  up  to  the  years  of  reason  and  re-
flection, this  belief  remains.  No  man  thinks
of  asking  himself  what  reason  he  has  to  be-
lieve that  his  neighbour  is  a  living  creature.
He  would  be  not  a  little  surprised  if  another
person  should  ask  him  so  absurd  a  ques-
tion ;  and  perhaps  could  not  give  any  rea-
son which  would  not  equally  prove  a  watch
or  a  puppet  to  be  a  living  creature.

But,  though  you  should  satisfy  him  of  the
weakness  of  the  reasons  he  gives  for  his  be-
lief, you  cannot  make  him  in  the  least
doubtful.  This  belief  stands  upon  another
foundation  than  that  of  reasoning;  and
therefore,  whether  a  man  can  give  good
reasons  for  it  or  not,  it  is  not  in  his  power
to  shake  it  off. [596]

Setting  aside  this  natural  conviction,  I

believe the  best  reason  we  can give,  to

prove  that  other  men  are  living  and  intelli-

[594-596]


chap,  v.] FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  CONTINGENT  TRUTHS. 449


gent,  is,  that  their  words  and  actions  indi-
cate like  powers  of  understanding  as  we
are  conscious  of  in  ourselves-  The  very
same  argument  applied  to  the  works  of  na-
ture, leads  us  to  conclude  that  there  is  an
intelligent  Author  of  nature,  and  appears
equally  strong  and  obvious  in  the  last  case
as  in  the  first ;  so  that  it  may  be  doubted
whether  men,  by  the  mere  exercise  of  rea-
soning, might  not  as  soon  discover  the  ex-
istence of  a  Deity,  as  that  other  men  have
life  and  intelligence.

The  knowledge  of  the  last  is  absolutely
necessary  to  our  receiving  any  improve-
ment by  means  of  instruction  and  example  ;
and,  without  these  means  of  improvement,
there  is  no  ground  to  think  that  we  should
ever  be  able  to  acquire  the  use  of  our  rea-
soning powers.  This  knowledge,  therefore,
must  be  antecedent  to  reasoning,  and  there-
fore must  be  a  first  principle.

It  cannot  be  said  that  the  judgments  we
form  concerning  life  and  intelligence  in
other  beings  are  at  first  free  from  error.
But  the  errors  of  children  in  this  matter
lie  on  the  safe  side  ;  they  are  prone  to  at-
tribute intelligence  to  things  inanimate.
These  errors  are  of  small  consequence,  and
are  gradually  corrected  by  experience  and
ripe  judgment.  But  the  belief  of  life  and
intelligence  in  other  men,  is  absolutely  ne-
cessary for  us  before  we  are  capable  of
reasoning ;  and  therefore  the  Author  of
our  being  hath  given  us  this  belief  antece-
dently to  all  reasoning.

9.  Another  first  principle  I  take  to  be,
That  certain  features  of  the  countenance,
sounds  of  the  voice,  and  gestures  of  the  body,
indicate  certain  thoughts  and  dispositions  of
mind. [597]

That  many  operations  of  the  mind  have
their  natural  signs  in  the  countenance,  voice,
and  gesture,  I  suppose  every  man  will  ad-
mit. Omnis  enim  mo! us  animi,  says  Cicero,
suum  quemdam  habet  a  natura  vultum,  et
v.ocem  et  gestum.  The  only  question  is,
whether  we  understand  the  signification  of
those  signs,  by  the  constitution  of  our  na-
ture, by  a  kind  of  natural  perception  simi-
lar to  the  perceptions  of  sense ;  or  whether
we  gradually  learn  the  signification  of  such
signs  from  experience,  as  we  learn  that
smoke  is  a  sign  of  fire,  or  that  the  freezing
of  water  is  a  sign  of  cold  ?  I  take  the  first
to  be  the  truth.

It  seems  to  me  incredible,  that  the  no-
tions men  have  of  the  expression  of  features,
voice,  and  gesture,  are  entirely  the  fruit  of
experience.  Children,  almost  as  soon  as  born,
may  be  frighted,  and  thrown  into  fits  by  a
threatening  or  angry  tone  of  voice.  I  knew
a  man  who  could  make  an  infant  cry,  by
whistling  a  melancholy  tune  in  the  same
or  in  the  next  room  ;  and  again,  by  alter-
ing his  key,  and  the  strain  of  his  music,
[597,  598]


could  make  the  child  leap  and  dance  for

joy.

It  is  not  by  experience  surely  that  we
learn  the  expression  of  music ;  for  its  opera-
tion is  commonly  strongest  the  first  time  we
hear  it:  One  air  expresses  mirth  and  festi-
vity— so  that,  when  we  hear  it,  it  is  with
difficulty  we  can  forbear  to  dance ;  another
is  sorrowful  and  solemn.  One  inspires  with
tenderness  and  love ;  another  with  rage  and
fury.

"  Hear  how  Timotheus  varied  lays  surprise,
And  bid  alternate  passions  fall  and  rise ;
While  at  each  change,  the  son  of  Lvbian  Jove
Now  burns  with  glory,  and  then  melts  with  love.
Now  his  fierce  eyes  with  sparkling  fury  glow,
Now  sighs  steal. out,  and  tears  begin  to  flow.
Persians  and  Greeks,  like  turns  of  Nature,  found,
A  iid  the  world's  victor  stood  subdu'd  by  sound."

It  is  not  necessary  that  a  man  have  studied
either  music  or  the  passions,  in  order  to  his
feeling  these  effects.  The  most  ignorant
and  unimproved,  to  whom  Nature  has  given
a  good  ear,  feel  them  as  strongly  as  the
most  knowing. [598]

The  countenance  and  gesture  have  an
expression  no  less  strong  and  natural  than
the  voice.  The  first  time  one  sees  a  stern
and  fierce  look,  a  contracted  brow,  and  a
menacing  posture,  he  concludes  that  the
person  is  inflamed  with  anger.  Shall  we
say,  that,  previous  to  experience,  the  most
hostile  countenance  has  as  agreeable  an
appearance  as  the  most  gentle  and  benign  ?
This  surely  would  contradict  all  experience ;
for  we  know  that  an  angry  countenance
will  fright  a  child  in  the  cradle.  Who  has
not  observed  that  children,  very  early,  are
able  to  distinguish  what  is  said  to  them  in
jest  from  what  is  said  in  earnest,  by  the
tone  of  the  voice,  and  the  features  of  the
face  ?  They  judge  by  these  natural  signs,
even  when  they  seem  to  contradict  the  arti-
ficial.

If  it  were  by  experience  that  we  learn
the  meaning  of  features,  and  sound,  and
gesture,  it  might  be  expected  that  we  should
recollect  the  time  when  we  first  learned
those  lessons,  or,  at  least,  some  of  such  a
multitude.

Those  who  give  attention  to  the  opera-
tions of  children,  can  easily  discover  the
time  when  they  have  their  earliest  notices
from  experience — such  as  that  flame  will
burn,  or  that  knives  v/ill  cut.  But  no
man  is  able  to  recollect  in  himself,  or  to
observe  in  others,  the  time  when  the  expres-
sion of  the  face,  voice,  and  gesture,  were
learned.

Nay,  I  apprehend  that  it  is  impossible
that  this  should  be  learned  from  experi-
ence.

When  we  see  the  sign,  and  see  the  thing
signified  always  conjoined with it,  expe-
rience may  be  the  instructor,  and  teach  us
how  that  sign  is  to  be  interpreted. But
2  G


450


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


how  shall  experience  instruct  us  when  we
see  the  sign  only,  when  the  thing  signified
is  invisible  ?  Now,  this  is  the  case  here  :
the  thoughts  and  passions  of  the  mind,  as
well  as  the  mind  itself,  are  invisible,  and
therefore  their  connection  with  any  sensible
sign  cannot  be  first  discovered  by  expe-
perience ;  there  must  be  some  earlier  source
of  this  knowledge. [599]

Nature  seems  to  have  given  to  men  a
faculty  or  sense,  by  which  this  connection
is  perceived.  And  the  operation  of  this
sense  is  very  analogous  to  that  of  the  ex-
ternal senses.

When  I  grasp  an  ivory  ball  in  my  hand,
I  feel  a  certain  sensation  of  touch.  In  the
sensation  there  is  nothing  external,  nothing
corporeal.  The  sensation  is  neither  round
nor  hard;  it  is  an  act  of  feeling  of  the
mind,  from  which  I  cannot,  by  reasoning,
infer  the  existence  of  any  body.  But,  by
the  constitution  of  my  nature,  the  sensation
carries  along  with  it  the  conception  and  be-
lief of  a  round  hard  body  really  existing  in
my  hand.

In  like  manner,  when  I  see  the  features
of  an  expressive  face,  I  see  only  figure  and
colour  variously  modified.  But,  by  the
constitution  of  my  nature,  the  visible  ob-
ject brings  along  with  it  the  conception
and  belief  of  a  certain  passion  or  sentiment
in  the  mind  of  the  person.

In  the  former  case,  a  sensation  of  touch
is  the  sign,  and  the  hardness  and  roundness
of  the  body  I  grasp  is  signified  by  that  sen-
sation. In  the  latter  case,  the  features  of
the  person  is  the  sign,  and  the  passion  or
sentiment  is  signified  by  it.

The  power  of  natural  signs,  to  signify
the  sentiments  and  passions  of  the  mind,  is
seen  in  the  signs  of  dumb  persons,  who  can
make  themselves  to  be  understood  in  a  con-
siderable degree,  even  by  those  who  are
wholly  inexperienced  in  that  language.

It  is  seen  in  the  traffic  which  has  been  fre-
quently carried  on  between  people  that  have
no  common  acquired  language.  They  can
buy  and  sell,  and  ask  and  refuse,  and  shew  a
friendly  or  hostile  disposition  by  natural
signs. [600]

It  was  seen  still  more  in  the  actors
among  the  ancients  who  performed  the
gesticulation  upon  the  stage,  while  others
recited  the  words.  To  such  a  pitch  was
this  art  carried,  that  we  are  told  Cicero
and  Roscius  used  to  contend  whether  the
orator  could  express  anything  by  words,
which  the  actor  could  not  express  in  dumb
show  by  gesticulation ;  and  whether  the
same  sentence  or  thought  could  not  be  act-
ed in  all  the  variety  of  ways  in  which  the
orator  could  express  it  in  words.

But  the  most  surprising  exhibition  of
this  kind,  was  that  of  the  pantomimes
among  the  Romans,  who  acted  plays,  or


I  scenes  of  plays,  without  any  recitation,  and
!  yet  could  be  perfectly  understood.

And  here  it  deserves  our  notice,  that,  al-
though it  required  much  study  and  practice
in  the  pantomimes  to  excel  in  their  art,
yet  it  required  neither  study  nor  practice  in
the  spectators  to  understand  them.  It  was
a  natural  language,  and  therefore  under-
stood by  all  men,  whether  Romans,  Greeks,
or  barbarians,  by  the  learned  and  the  un-
learned.

Lucian  relates,  that  a  king,  whose  domi-
nions bordered  upon  the  Euxine  Sea,  hap-
pening to  be  at  Rome  in  the  reign  of  Nero,
and  having  seen  a  pantomime  act,  begged
him  of  Nero,  that  he  might  use  him  in  his
intercourse  with  all  the  nations  in  his
neighbourhood ;  for,  said  he,  I  am  obliged
to  employ  I  don't  know  how  many  inter-
preters, in  order  to  keep  a  correspondence
with  neighbours  who  speak  many  languages,
and  do  not  understand  mine ;  but  this  fel-
low will  make  them  all  understand  him.

For  these  reasons,  I  conceive,  it  must  be
granted,  not  only  that  there  is  a  connection
established  by  Nature  between  certain  signs
in  the  countenance,  voice,  and  gesture,  and
the  thoughts  and  passions  of  the  mind  ;  but
also,  that,  by  our  constitution,  we  under-
stand the  meaning  of  those  signs,  and  from
the  sign  conclude  the  existence  of  the  thing
signified. [601]

10.  Another  first  principle  appears  to
me  to  be — That  there  is  a  certain  regard
due  to  human  testimony  in  matters  of  fact,
and  even  to  human  authority  in  matters  of
opinion.

Before  we  are  capable  of  reasoning  about
testimony  or  authority,  there  are  many
things  which  it  concerns  us  to  know,  for
which  we  can  have  no  other  evidence.  The
wise  Author  of  nature  hath  planted  in  the
human  mind  a  propensity  to  rely  upon  this
evidence  before  we  can  give  a  reason  for
doing  so.  This,  indeed,  puts  our  judgment
almost  entirely  in  the  power  of  those  who
are  about  us  in  the  first  period  of  life  ;  but
this  is  necessary  both  to  our  preservation
and  to  our  improvement.  If  children  were
so  framed  as  to  pay  no  regard  to  testimony
or  to  authority,  they  must,  in  the  literal
sense,  perish  for  lack  of  knowledge.  It  is
not  more  necessary  that  they  should  be  fed
before  they  can  feed  themselves,  than  that
they  should  be  instructed  in  many  things
before  they  can  discover  them  by  their  own
judgment.

But,  when  our  faculties  ripen,  we  find
reason  to  check  that  propensity  to  yield  to
testimony  and  to  authority,  which  was  so
necessary  and  so  natural  in  the  first  period
of  life.  We  learn  to  reason  about  the  re-
gard due  to  them,  and  see  it  to  be  a  childish
weakness  to  lay  more  stress  upon  them  than
than  reason  justifies.  Yet,  I  believe,  to
[599-601]


chap,  v.] FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  CONTINGENT  TRUTHS. 451


the  end  of  life,  most  men  are  more  apt  to  go
into  this  extreme  than  into  the  contrary ;
and  the  natural  propensity  still  retains  some
force.

The  natural  principles,  by  which  our
judgments  and  opinions  are  regulated  before
we  come  to  the  use  of  reason,  seem  to  be  no
less  necessary  to  such  a  being  as  man,  than
those  natural  instincts  which  the  Author  of
nature  hath  given  us  to  regulate  our  actions
during  that  period. [602]

11.  There  are  many  events  depending
upon  the  will  of  man,  in  which  there  is  a
self-evident  probability,  greater  or  less,  ac-
cording to  circumstances.

There  may  be  in  some  individuals  such  a
degree  of  frenzy  and  madness,  that  no
man  can  say  what  they  may  or  may  not  do.
Such  persons  we  find  it  necessary  to  put
under  restraint,  that  as  far  as  possible  they
may  be  kept  from  doing  harm  to  themselves
or  to  others.  They  are  not  considered  as
reasonable  creatures,  or  members  of  society.
But,  as  to  men  who  have  a  sound  mind,  we
depend  upon  a  certain  degree  of  regularity
in  their  conduct ;  and  could  put  a  thousand
different  cases,  wherein  we  could  venture,
ten  to  one,  that  they  will  act  in  such  a  way,
and  not  in  the  contrary.

If  we  had  no  confidence  in  our  fellow-men
that  they  will  act  such  a  part  in  such  cir-
cumstances, it  would  be  impossible  to  live
in  society  with  them.  For  that  which
makes  men  capable  of  living  in  society,  and
uniting  in  a  political  body  under  government,
is,  that  their  actions  will  always  be  regu-
lated, in  a  great  measure,  by  the  common
principles  of  human  nature.

It  may  always  be  expected  that  they
will  regard  their  own  interest  and  reputa-
tion, and  that  of  their  families  and  friends  ;
that  they  will  repel  injuries,  and  have  some
sense  of  good  offices;  and  that  they  will
have  some  regard  to  truth  and  justice,  so
far  at  least  as  not  to  swerve  from  them
without  temptation.

It  is  upon  such  principles  as  these,  that
all  political  reasoning  is  grounded.  Such
reasoning  is  never  demonstrative ;  but  it
may  have  a  very  great  degree  of  probability,
especially  when  applied  to  great  bodies  of
men. [603]

12.  The  last  principle  of  contingent  truths
I  mention  is,  That,  in  the  phenomena  of
nature,  what  is  to  be,  will  probably  be  like
to  what  has  been  in  similar  circumstances.*

We  must  have  this  conviction  as  soon  as
we  are  capable  of  learning  anything  from
experience  ;  for  all  experience  is  grounded
upon  a  belief  that  the  future  will  be  like
the  past.  Take  away  this  principle,  and
the  experience  of  an  hundred  years  makes


*  Compare  above,  "  Inquiry,"  c.  vi.  §  24.  8tewart's
"  Elements",  i.  p.  205.  "  Philosophical  Essays,"
p.  74,  sq.— H.


[602-604]


us  no  wiser  with  regard  to  what  is  to
come.

This  is  one  of  those  principles  which,
when  we  grow  up  and  observe  the  course  of
nature,  we  can  confirm  by  reasoning.  We
perceive  that  Nature  is  governed  by  fixed
laws,  and  that,  if  it  were  not  so,  there  could
be  no  such  thing  as  prudence  in  human
conduct ;  there  would  be  no  fitness  in  any
means  to  promote  an  end ;  and  what,  on
one  occasion,  promoted  it,  might  as  pro-
bably, on  another  occasion,  obstruct  it.

But  the  principle  is  necessary  for  us  be-
fore we  are  able  to  discover  it  by  reasoning,
and  therefore  is  made  a  part  of  our  consti-
tution, and  produces  its  effects  before  the
use  of  reason.

This  principle  remains  in  all  its  force
when  we  come  to  the  use  of  reason  ;  but
we  learn  to  be  more  cautious  in  the  appli-
cation of  it.  We  observe  more  carefully
the  circumstances  on  which  the  past  event
depended,  and  learn  to  distinguish  them
from  those  which  were  accidentally  con-
joined with  it.

In  order  to  this,  a  number  of  experi-
ments, varied  in  their  circumstances,  is
often  necessary.  Sometimes  a  single  ex-
periment is  thought  sufficient  to  establish  a
general  conclusion.  Thus,  when  it  was
once  found,  that,  in  a  certain  degree  of  cold,
quicksilver  became  a  hard  and  malleable
metal,  there  was  good  reason  to  think  that
the  same  degree  of  cold  will  always  produce
this  effect  to  the  end  of  the  world. [604]

I  need  hardly  mention,  that  the  whole
fabric  of  natural  philosophy  is  built  upon
this  principle,  and,  if  it  be  taken  away,
must  tumble  down  to  the  foundation.

Therefore  the  great  Newton  lays  it  down
as  an  axiom,  or  as  one  of  his  laws  of  philo-
sophising, in  these  words,  Effectuum  natur-
alium  ejusdem  generis  easdem  esse  causas.
This  is  what  every  man  assents  to,  as  soon
as  he  understands  it,  and  no  man  asks  a
reason  for  it.  It  has,  therefore,  the  most
genuine  marks  of  a  first  principle.

It  is  very  remarkable,  that,  although  all
our  expectation  of  what  is  to  happen  in  the
course  of  nature  is  derived  from  the  belief
of  this  principle,  yet  no  man  thinks  of  ask-
ing what  is  the  ground  of  this  belief.

Mr  Hume,  I  think,  was  the  first*  who
put  this  question;  and  he  has  shewn  clearly
and  invincibly,  that  it  is  neither  grounded
upon  reasoning,  nor  has  that  kind  of  intui-
tive evidence  which  mathematical  axioms
have. It  is  not  a  necessary  truth.

He  has  endeavoured  to  account  for  it
upon  his  own  principles.  It  is  not  my
business,  at  present,  to  examine  the  account
he  has  given  of  this  universal  belief  of  man-

*  Hume  was  not  the.  first:  but  on  the  various
opinions  touching  the  ground  of  this  expectancy,  I
cannot  touch.— H.

2  G  2


>N  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


kind ;  because,  whether  his  account  of  it  be
just  or  not,  (and  I  think  it  is  not,)  yet,  as
this  belief  is  universal  among  mankind,  and
is  not  grounded  upon  any  antecedent  rea-
soning, but  upon  the  constitution  of  the
mind  itself,  it  must  be  acknowledged  to  be
a  first  principle,  in  the  sense  in  which  I
use  that  word.

I  do  not  at  all  affirm,  that  those  I  have
mentioned  are  all  the  first  principles  from
which  we  may  reason  concerning  contingent
truths.  Such  enumerations,  even  when
made  after  much  reflection,  are  seldom  per-
fect. [605]


CHAPTER  VI.

FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OP  NECESSARY  TRUTHS.

About  most  of  the  first  principles  of  ne-
cessary truths  there  has  been  no  dispute,
and  therefore  it  is  the  less  necessary  to
dwell  upon  them.  It  will  be  sufficient  to
divide  them  into  different  classes  ;  to  men-
tion some,  by  way  of  specimen,  in  each
class  ;  and  to  make  some  remarks  on  those
of  which  the  truth  has  been  called  in  ques-
tion.

They  may,  I  think,  most  properly  be
divided  according  to  the  sciences  to  which
they  belong.

1.  There  are  some  first  principles  that
may  be  called  grammatical .  such  as,  That
every  adjective  in  a  sentence  must  belong  to
some  substantive  expressed  or  understood  ;
That  every  complete  sentence  must  have  a
verb.

Those  who  have  attended  to  the  struc-
ture of  language,  and  formed  distinct  no-
tions of  the  nature  and  use  of  the  various
parts  of  speech,  perceive,  without  reasoning,
that  these,  and  many  other  such  principles,
are  necessarily  true.

2.  There  are  logical  axioms  :  such  as,
That  any  contexture  of  words  which  does  not
make  a  proposition,  is  neither  true  nor  false  ;
That' every  proposition is  either true or

false  ;  That  no  proposition  can  be  both  true
and  false  at  the  same  time  ;  That  reasoning
in  a  circle  proves  nothing  ;  That  whatever
may  be  truly  affirmed  of  a  genus,  may  be
truly  affirmed  of  all  the  species,  and  all  the
individuals  belonging  to  that  genus. [606]

3.  Every  one  knows  there  axe  mathematical
axioms.*  Mathematicians  have,  from  the
days  of  Euclid,  very  wisely  laid  down  the
axioms  or  first  principles  on  which  they
reason.  And  the  effect  which  this  appears
to  have  had  upon  the  stability  and  happy
progress  of  this  science,  gives  no  small  en-
couragement to  attempt  to  lay  the  founda-
tion of  other  sciences  in  a  similar  manner,
as  far  as  we  are  able.


*  See  Stewart's  "  Elements,"  ii.  p.  3S,  sq.— H.


Mr  Hume  hath  discovered,  as  he  appre-
hends, a  weak  side,  even  in  mathematical
axioms  ;•  and  thinks  that  it  is  not  strictly
true,  for  instance,  that  two  right  lines  can
cut  one  another  in  one  point  only.

The  principle  he  reasons  from  is,  That
every  simple  idea  is  a  copy  of  a  preceding
impression ;  and  therefore  in  its  precision
and  accuracy,  can  never  go  beyond  its  ori-
ginal. From  which  he  reasons  in  this  man-
ner :  No  man  ever  saw  or  felt  a  line  so
straight  that  it  might  not  cut  another,
equally  straight,  in  two  or  more  points.
Therefore,  there  can  be  no  idea  of  such  a
line.

The  ideas  that  are  most  essential  to  geo-
metry— such  as  those  of  equality,  of  a
straight  line,  and  of  a  square  surface,  are  far,
he  says,  from  being  distinct  and  deter-
minate; and  the  definitions  destroy  the
pretended  demonstrations.  Thus,  mathe-
matical demonstration  is  found  to  be  a  rope
of  sand.

I  agree  with  this  acute  author,  that,  if
we  could  form  no  notion  of  points,  lines,  and
surfaces,  more  accurate  than  those  we  see
and  handle,  there  could  be  no  mathematical
demonstration. "

But  every  man  that  has  understanding,
by  analysing,  by  abstracting,  and  compound-
ing the  rude  materials  exhibited  by  his
senses,  can  fabricate,  in  his  own  mind,
those  elegant  and  accurate  forms  of  mathe-
matical lines,  surfaces,  and  solids. [607]

If  a  man  finds  himself  incapable  of  form-
ing a  precise  and  determinate  notion  of  the
figure  which  mathematicians  call  a  cube,
he  not  only  is  no  mathematician,  but  is  in-
capable of  being  one.  But,  if  he  has  a  pre-
cise and  determinate  notion  of  that  figure,
he  must  perceive  that  it  is  terminated  by  six
mathematical  surfaces,  perfectly  square  and
perfectly  equal.  He  must  perceive  that
these  surfaces  are  terminated  by  twelve
mathematical  lines,  perfectly  straight  and
perfectly  equal,  and  that  those  lines  are  ter-
minated by  eight  mathematical  points.

When  a  man  is  conscious  of  having  these
conceptions  distinct  and  determinate,  as
every  mathematician  is,  it  is  in  vain  to  bring
metaphysical  arguments  to  convince  him
that  they  are  not  distinct.  You  may  as  well
bring  arguments  to  convince  a  man  racked
with  pain  that  he  feels  no  pain.

Every  theory  that  is  inconsistent  with  our
having  accurate  notions  of  mathematical
lines,  surfaces,  and  solids,  must  be  false.
Therefore  it  follows,  that  they  are  not  copies
of  our  impressions.

The  Medicean  Venus  is  not  a  copy  of  the
block  of  marble  from  which  it  was  made.
It  is  true,  that  the  elegant  statue  was
formed  out  of  the  rude  block,  and  that,  too,
by  a  manual  operation,  which,  in  a  literal
sense,  we  may  call  abstraction.  Mathe-
T605-607]


chap,  vi.] FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  NECESSARY  TRUTHS.


453


matical  notions  are  formed  in  the  under-
standing by  an  abstraction  of  another  kind,
out  of  the  rude  perceptions  of  our  senses.

As  the  truths  of  natural  philosophy  are
not  necessary  truths,  but  contingent,  de-
pending upon  the  will  of  the  Maker  of  the
world,  the  principles  from  which  they  are
deduced  must  be  of  the  same  nature,  and,
therefore,  belong  not  to  this  class. [608]

4.  I  think  there  are  axioms,  even  in
matters  of  taste.  Notwithstanding  the
variety  found  among  men,  in  taste,  there
are,  I  apprehend,  some  common  principles,
even  in  matters  of  this  kind.  I  never  heard
of  any  man  who  thought  it  a  beauty  in  a
human  face  to  want  a  nose,  or  an  eye,  or  to
have  the  mouth  on  one  side.  How  many
ages  have  passed  since  the  days  of  Homer  !
Yet,  in  this  long  tract  of  ages,  there  never
was  found  a  man  who  took  Thersites  for  a
beauty.

The  fine  arts  are  very  properly  called  the
arts  of  taste,  because  the  principles  of  both
are  the  same ;  and,  in  the  fine  arts,  we  find
no  less  agreement  among  those  who  practise
them  than  among  other  artists.

No  work  of  taste  can  be  either  relished
or  understood  by  those  who  do  not  agree
with  the  author  in  the  principles  of  taste.

Homer  and  Virgil,  and  Shakspeare  and
Milton,  had  the  same  taste ;  and  all  men
who  have  been  acquainted  with  their  writ-
ings, and  agree  in  the  admiration  of  them,
must  have  the  same  taste.

The  fundamental  rules  of  poetry  and
music,  and  painting,  and  dramatic  action  and
eloquence,  have  been  always  the  same,  and
will  be  so  to  the  end  of  the  world.

The  variety  we  find  among  men  in  matters
of  taste,  is  easily  accounted  for,  consistently
with  what  we  have  advanced.

There  is  a  taste  that  is  acquired,  and  a
taste  that  is  natural.  This  holds  with  re-
spect both  to  the  external  sense  of  taste  and
the  internal.  Habit  and  fashion  have  a
powerful  influence  upon  both.

Of  tastes  that  are  natural,  there  are  some
that  may  be  called  rational,  others  that  are
merely  animal.

Children  are  delighted  with  brilliant  and
gaudy  colours,  with  romping  and  noisy
mirth,  with  feats  of  agility,  strength,  or
cunning  ;  and  savages  have  much  the  same
tas+e  as  children. [609]

But  there  are  tastes  that  are  more  intel-
lectual. It  is  the  dictate  of  our  rational  na-
ture, that  love  and  admiration  are  misplaced
when  there  is  no  intrinsic  worth  in  the  object.

In  those  operations  of  taste  which  are  ra-
tional, we  judge  of  the  real  worth  and  ex-
cellence of  the  object,  and  our  love  or
admiration  is  guided  by  that  judgment.  In
such  operations  there  is  judgment  as  well
as  feeling,  and  the  feeling  depends  upon
the  judgment  we  form  ot  the  object.
[608-610]


I  do  not  maintain  that  taste,  so  far  as  it
is  acquired,  or  so  far  as  it  is  merely  animal,
can  be  reduced  to  principles.  But,  as  far
as  it  is  founded  on  judgment,  it  certainly  may.

The  virtues,  the  graces,  the  muses,  have
a  beauty  that  is  intrinsic.  It  lies  not  in
the  feelings  of  the  spectator,  but  in  the
real  excellence  of  the  object.  If  we  do  not
perceive  their  beauty,  it  is  owing  to  the  de-
fect or  to  the  perversion  of  our  faculties.

And,  as  there  is  an  original  beauty  in  cer-
tain moral  and  intellectual  qualities,  so
there  is  a  borrowed  and  derived  beauty
in  the  natural  signs  and  expressions  of
such  qualities.

The  features  of  the  human  face,  the  mo-
dulations of  the  voice,  and  the  proportions,
attitudes,  and  gesture  of  the  body,  are  all
natural  expressions  of  good  or  bad  quali-
ties of  the  person,  and  derive  a  beauty  or
a  deformity  from  the  qualities  which  they
express.

Works  of  art  express  some  quality  of
the  artist,  and  often  derive  an  additional
beauty  from  their  utility  or  fitness  for  their
end.

Of  such  things  there  are  some  that
ought  to  please,  and  others  that  ought  to
displease.  If  they  do  not,  it  is  owing  to
some  defect  in  the  spectator.  But  what
has  real  excellence  will  always  please
those  who  have  a  correct  judgment  and  a
sound  heart. [610]

The  sum  of  what  has  been  said  upon
this  subject  is,  that,  setting  aside  the
tastes  which  men  acquire  by  habit  and
fashion,  there  is  a  natural  taste,  which  is
partly  animal,  and  partly  rational.  With
regard  to  the  first,  all  we  can  say  is,
that  the  Author  of  nature,  for  wise  rea-
sons, has  formed  us  so  as  to  receive  plea-
sure from  the  contemplation  of  certain
objects,  and  disgust  from  others,  before
we  are  capable  of  perceiving  any  real  ex-
cellence in  one  or  defect  in  the  other.
But  that  taste  which  we  may  call  ration-
al, is  that  part  of  our  constitution  by
which  we  are  made  to  receive  pleasure
from  the  contemplation  of  what  we  con-
ceive to  be  excellent  in  its  kind,  the  plea-
sure being  annexed  to  this  judgment,  and
regulated  by  it.  This  taste  may  be  true
or  false,  according  as  it  is  founded  on  a
true  or  false  judgment.  And,  if  it  may  be
true  or  false,  it  must  have  first  principles.

5.  There  are  also  first  principles  in  mo-
rals.

That  an  unjust  action  has  more  demerit
than  an  ungenerous  one  :  That  a  generous
action  has  more  merit  than  a  merely  just
one  :  That  no  man  ought  to  be  blamed  for
what  it  was  not  in  his  power  to  hinder  :  That
we  ought  not  to  do  to  others  what  we  would
think  unjust  or  unfair  to  be  done  to  us  in
like  circumstances.  These  are  moral  axioms,


454


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


and  many  others  might  be  named  which  ap-
pear to  me  to  have  no  less  evidence  than
those  of  .mathematics.

Some  perhaps  may  think  that  our  de-
terminations, either  in  matters  of  taste  or
in  morals,  ought  not  to  be  accounted  ne-
cessary truths  :  That  they  are  grounded
upon  the  constitution  of  that  faculty  which
we  call  taste,  and  of  that  which  we  call
the  moral  sense  or  conscience ;  which  fa-
culties might  have  been  so  constituted  as
to  have  given  determinations  different,  or
even  contrary  to  those  they  now  give  :
That,  as  there  is  nothing  sweet  or  bitter
in  itself,  but  according  as  it  agrees  or  dis-
agrees with  the  external  sense  called  taste  ;
so  there  is  nothing  beautiful  or  ugly  in  it-
self, but  according  as  it  agrees  or  dis-
agrees with  the  internal  sense,  which  we
also  call  taste ;  and  nothing  morally  good
or  ill  in  itself,  but  according  as  it  agrees
or  disagrees  with  our  moral  sense. [611]

This  indeed  is  a  system,  with  regard  to
morals  and  taste,  which  hath  been  supported
in  modern  times  by  great  authorities.  And
if  this  system  be  true,  the  consequence
must  be,  that  there  can  be  no  principles,
either  of  taste  or  of  morals,  that  are  neces-
sary truths.  For,  according  to  this  system,
all  our  determinations,  both  with  regard  to
matters  of  taste,  and  with  regard  to  morals,
are  reduced  to  matters  of  fact — I  mean  to
such  as  these,  that  by  our  constitution  we
have  on  such  occasions  certain  agreeable
feelings,  and  on  other  occasions  certain  dis-
agreeable feelings.

But  I  cannot  help  being  of  a  contrary
opinion,  being  persuaded  that  a  man  who
determined  that  polite  behaviour  has  great
deformity,  and  that  there  is  great  beauty
in  rudeness  and  ill-breeding,  would  judge
wrong,  whatever  his  feelings  were.

In  like  manner,  I  cannot  help  thinking
that  a  man  who  determined  that  there  is
more  moral  worth  in  cruelty,  perfidy,  and
injustice,  than  in  generosity,  justice,  pru-
dence, and  temperance,  would  judge  wrong,
whatever  his  constitution  was.

And,  if  it  be  true  that  there  is  judgment
in  our  determinations  of  taste  and  of  morals,
it  must  be  granted  that  what  is  true  or
false  in  morals,  or  in  matters  of  taste,  is
necessarily  so.  For  this  reason,  I  have
ranked  the  first  principles  of  morals  and  of
taste  under  the  class  of  necessary  truths.

6.  The  last  class  of  first  principles  I  shall
mention,  we  may  call  metaphysical.

I  shall  particularly  consider  three  of  these,
because  they  have  been  called  in  question
by  Mr  Hume. [612]

The  first  is,  That  the  qualities  which  we
perceive  by  our  senses  must  have  a  subject,
which  we  call  body,  and  that  the  thoughts
we  are  conscious  of  must  have  a  subject,
which  we  call  mind.


It  is  not  more  evident  that  two  and  two
make  four,  than  it  is  that  figure  cannot
exist,  unless  there  be  something  that  is
figured,  nor  motion  without  something  that
is  moved.  I  not  only  perceive  figure  and
motion,  but  I  perceive  them  to  be  qualities.
They  have  a  necessary  relation  to  some-
thing in  which  they  exist  as  their  subject.
The  difficulty  which  some  philosophers  have
found  in  admitting  this,  is  entirely  owing  to
the  theory  of  ideas.  A  subject  of  the  sen-
sible qualities  which  we  perceive  by  our
senses,  is  not  an  idea  either  of  sensation  or
of  consciousness ;  therefore  say  they,  we
have  no  such  idea.  Or,  in  the  style  of  Mr
Hume,  from  what  impression  is  the  idea  of
substance  derived  ?  It  is  not  a  copy  of  any
impression ;  therefore  there  is  no  such  idea.

The  distinction  between  sensible  quali-
ties, and  the  substance  to  which  they  belong,
and  between  thought  and  the  mind  that
thinks,  is  not  the  invention  of  philosophers ;
it  is  found  in  the  structure  of  all  languages,
and  therefore  must  be  common  to  all  men
who  speak  with  understanding.  And  I
believe  no  man,  however  sceptical  he  may
be  in  speculation,  can  talk  on  the  common
affairs  of  life  for  half  an  hour,  without  say-
ing things  that  imply  his  belief  of  the  reality
of  these  distinctions.

Mr  Locke  acknowledges,  "  That  we  can-
not conceive  how  simple  ideas  of  sensible
qualities  should  subsist  alone ;  and  there-
fore we  suppose  them  to  exist  in,  and  to  be
supported  by,  some  common  subject."  In
his  Essay,  indeed,  some  of  his  expressions
seem  to  leave  it  dubious  whether  this  belief,
that  sensible  qualities  must  have  a  subject,
be  a  true  judgment  or  a  vulgar  prejudice.
[613]  But  in  his  first  letter  to  the  Bishop
of  Worcester,  he  removes  this  doubt,  and
quotes  many  passages  of  his  Essay,  to  shew
that  he  neither  denied  nor  doubted  of  the
existence  of  substances,  both  thinking  and
material ;  and  that  he  believed  their  ex-
istence on  the  same  ground  the  Bishop
did — to  wit,  "  on  the  repugnancy  to  our
conceptions,  that  modes  and  accidents  should
subsist  by  themselves."  He  offers  no  proof
of  this  repugnancy  ;  nor,  I  think,  can  any
proof  of  it  be  given,  because  it  is  a  first
principle.

It  were  to  be  wished  that  Mr  Locke,  who
inquired  so  accurately  and  so  laudably  into
the  origin,  certainty,  and  extent  of  human
knowledge,  had  turned  his  attention  more
particularly  to  the  origin  of  these  two
opinions  which  he  firmly  believed  ;  to  wit,
that  sensible  qualities  must  have  a  subject
which  we  call  body,  and  that  thought  must
have  a  subject  which  we  call  mind.  A  due
attention  to  these  two  opinions  which  go-
vern the  belief  of  all  men,  even  of  sceptics
in  the  practice  of  life,  would  probably  have
led  him  to  perceive,  that  sensation  and
f611-6l3]


chap,  vi.] FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  NECESSARY  TRUTHS.


455


consciousness  are  not  the  only  sources  of
human  knowledge ;  and  that  there  are  prin-
ciples of  belief  in  human  nature,  of  which
we  can  give  no  other  account  but  that  they
necessarily  result  from  the  constitution  of
our  faculties  ;  and  that,  if  it  were  in  our
power  to  throw  off  their  influence  upon  our
practice  and  conduct,  we  could  neither
speak  nor  act  like  reasonable  men.

We  cannot  give  a  reason  why  we  believe
even  our  sensations  to  be  real  and  not  fal-
lacious ;  why  we  believe  what  we  are  con-
scious of ;  why  we  trust  any  of  our  natural
faculties.  We  say,  it  must  be  so,  it  cannot
be  otherwise.  This  expresses  only  a  strong
belief,  which  is  indeed  the  voice  of  nature,
and  which  therefore  in  vain  we  attempt  to
resist.  But  if,  in  spite  of  nature,  we  resolve
to  go  deeper,  and  not  to  trust  our  faculties,
without  a  reason  to  shew  that  they  cannot
be  fallacious,  I  am  afraid,  that,  seeking  to
become  wise,  and  to  be  as  gods,  we  shall
become  foolish,  and,  being  unsatisfied  with
the  lot  of  humanity,  we  shall  throw  off  com-
mon sense.

The  second  metaphysical  principle  I  men-
tion is — That  ivhatever  begins  to  exist,  must
have  a  cause  which  produced  it.* [614]

Philosophy  is  indebted  to  Mr  Hume  in
this  respect  among  others,  that,  by  calling
in  question  many  of  the  first  principles  of
human  knowledge,  he  hath  put  speculative
men  upon  inquii'ing  more  carefully  than  was
done  before  into  the  nature  of  the  evidence
upon  which  they  rest.  Truth  can  never
suffer  by  a  fair  inquiry ;  it  can  bear  to  be
seen  naked  and  in  the  fullest  light ;  and  the
strictest  examination  will  always  turn  out
in  the  issue  to  its  advantage.  I  believe  Mr
Hume  was  the  first  who  ever  called  in
question  whether  things  that  begin  to  exist
must  have  a  cause.

With  regard  to  this  point,  we  must  hold
one  of  these  three  things,  either  that  it  is
an  opinion  for  which  we  have  no  evidence,
and  which  men  have  foolishly  taken  up
without  ground ;  or,  secondly^  That  it  is
capable  of  direct  proof  by  argument ;  or,
thirdly,  That  it  is  self-evident,  and  needs  no
proof,  but  ought  to  be  received  as  an  axiom,
which  cannot,  by  reasonable  men,  be  called
in  question.

The  first  of  these  suppositions  would  put
an  end  to  all  philosophy,  to  all  religion,  to
all  reasoning  that  would  carry  us  beyond
the  objects  of  sense,  and  to  all  prudence  in
the  conduct  of  life.

As  to  the  second  supposition,  that  this
principle  may  be  proved  by  direct  reason-
ing, I  am  afraid  we  shall  find  the  proof
extremely  difficult,  if  not  altogether  im-
possible.

I  know  only  of  three  or  four  arguments

*  See  below,  "  Essays  on  the  Active  Powers,"  p.  30,
rq.— H.

[614-616]


that  have  been  urged  by  philosophers,  in  the
way  of  abstract  reasoning,  to  prove  that
things  which  begin  to  exist  must  have  a  cause.

One  is  offered  by  Mr  Hobbes,  another
by  Dr  Samuel  Clarke,  another  by  Mr  Locke.
Mr  Hume,  in  his  "  Treatise  of  Human
Nature,"  has  examined  them  all  ;*  and,  in
my  opinion,  has  shewn  that  they  take  for
granted  the  thing  to  be  proved  ;  a  kind  of
false  reasoning,  which  men  are  very  apt  to
fall  into  when  they  attempt  to  prove  what
is  self-evident. [615]

It  has  been  thought,  that,  although  thia
principle  does  not  admit  of  proof  from
abstract  reasoning,  it  may  be  proved  from
experience,  and  may  be  justly  drawn  by
induction,  from  instances  that  fall  within
our  observation.

I  conceive  this  method  of  proof  will  leave
us  in  great  uncertainty,  for  these  three
reasons  :

1st,  Because  the  proposition  to  be  proved
is  not  a  contingent  but  a  necessary  proposi-
tion. It  is  not  that  things  which  begin  to
exist  commonly  have  a  cause,  or  even  that
they  always  in  fact  have  a  cause ;  but  that
they  must  have  a  cause,  and  cannot  begin
to  exist  without  a  cause.

Propositions  of  this  kind,  from  their
nature,  are  incapable  of  proof  by  induction.
Experience  informs  us  only  of  what  is  or
has  been,  not  of  what  must  be  ;  and  the
conclusion  must  be  of  the  same  nature  with
the  premises. -f-

For  this  reason,  no  mathematical  propo-
sition can  be  proved  by  induction.  Though
it  should  be  found  by  experience  in  a  thou-
sand cases,  that  the  area  of  a  plane  triangle
is  equal  to  the  rectangle  under  the  altitude
and  half  the  base,  this  would  not  prove  that
it  must  be  so  in  all  cases,  and  cannot  be
otherwise ;  which  is  what  the  mathematician
affirms.  £

In  like  manner,  though  we  had  the  most
ample  experimental  proof  that  things  which
have  begun  to  exist  had  a  cause,  this  would
not  prove  that  they  must  have  a  cause.
Experience  may  shew  us  what  is  the  esta-
blished course  of  nature,  but  can  never  shew
what  connections  of  things  are  in  their
nature  necessary.

Idly,  General  maxims,  grounded  on  ex-
perience, have  only  a  degree  of  probability
proportioned  to  the  extent  of  our  experience,
and  ought  always  to  be  understood  so  as  to
leave  room  for  exceptions,  if  future  expe-
rience shall  discover  any  such. [616]

The  law  of  gravitation  has  as  full  a  proof
from  experience  and  induction  as  any  prin-
ciple can  be  supposed  to  have.  Yet,  if  any
philosopher  should,  by  clear experiment,

*  Vol.  j.  p.  144-146.— H.

t  See  below,  p.  627  ;  and  "  Active  Powers,"  p.  31,
and  alove,  p.  323,  a,  note  *.— H.
i  So  Aristotle.— H.


456


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.  [essay  vi.


shew  that  there  is  a  kind  of  matter  in  some
bodies  which  does  not  gravitate,  the  law
of  gravitation  ought  to  be  limited  by  that
exception.

Now,  it  is  evident  that  men  have  never
considered  the  principle  of  the  necessity  of
causes,  as  a  truth  of  this  kind  which  may
admit  of  limitation  or  exception  ;  and  there-
fore it  has  not  been  received  upon  this  kind
of  evidence.

3dly,  I  do  not  see  that  experience  could
satisfy  us  that  every  change  in  nature  act-
ually has  a  cause.

In  the  far  greatest  part  of  the  changes  in
nature  that  fall  within  our  observation,  the
causes  are  unknown  ;  and,  therefore,  from
experience,  we  cannot  know  whether  they
have  causes  or  not.

Causation  is  not  an  object  of  sense.  The
enly  experience  we  can  have  of  it,  is  in  the
consciousness  we  have  of  exerting  some
power  in  ordering  our  thoughts  and  actions.
But  this  experience  is  surely  too  narrow  a
foundation  for  a  general  conclusion,  that
all  things  that  have  had  or  shall  have  a  be-
ginning, must  have  a  cause.

For  these  reasons,  this  principle  cannot
be  drawn  from  experiance,  any  more  than
from  abstract  reasoning.

The  third  supposition  is — That  it  is  to  be
admitted  as  a  first  or  self-evident  principle.
Two  reasons  may  be  urged  for  this.

1.  The  universal  consent  of  mankind,  not
of  philosophers  only,  but  of  the  rude  and  un-
learned vulgar.

Mr  Hume,  as  far  as  I  know,  was  the  first
that  ever  expressed  any  doubt  of  this  prin-
ciple.* And  when  we  consider  that  he  has  re-
jected every  principle  of  human  knowledge,
excepting  that  of  consciousness,  and  has  not
even  spared  the  axioms  of  mathematics,
his  authority  is  of  small  weight. [617]

Indeed,  with  regard  to  first  principles,
there  is  no  reason  why  the  opinion  of  a
philosopher  should  have  more  authority
than  that  of  another  man  of  common  sense,
who  has  been  accustomed  to  judge  in  such
cases.  The  illiterate  vulgar  are  competent
judges  ;  and  the  philosopher  has  no  preroga-
tive in  matters  of  this  kind  ;  but  he  is  more
liable  than  they  to  be  misled  by  a  favourite
system,  especially  if  it  is  his  own.

Setting  aside  the  authority  of  Mr  Hume,
what  has  philosophy  been  employed  in
since  men  first  began  to  philosophise,  but
in  the  investigation  of  the  causes  of  things  ?
This  it  has  always  professed,  when  we  trace
it  to  its  cradle.  It  never  entered  into  any
man's  thought,  before  the  philosopher  we
have  mentioned,  to  put  the  previous  ques-
tion, whether  things  have  a  cause  or  not  ?
Had  it  been  thought  possible  that  they
might  not,  it  may  be  presumed  that,  in  the

*  Hume  was  not  the  first.— H.


variety  of  absurd  and  contradictory  causes
assigned,  some  one  would  have  had  recourse
to  this  hypothesis.

They  could  conceive  the  world  to  arise
from  an  egg,  from  a  struggle  between  love
and  strife,  between  moisture  and  drought,
between  heat  and  cold  ;  but  they  never  sup-
posed that  it  had  no  cause.  We  know  not
any  atheistic  sect  that  ever  had  recourse
to  this  topic,  though  by  it,  they  might  have
evaded  every  argument  that  could  be
brought  against  them,  and  answered  all
objections  to  their  system.

But  rather  than  adopt  such  an  absurdity,
they  contrived  some  imaginary  cause — such
as  chance,  a  concourse  of  atoms,  or  neces-
sity— as  the  cause  of  the  universe. [618]

The  accounts  which  philosophers  have
given  of  particular  pheenomena,  as  well  as
of  the  universe  in  general,  proceed  upon
the  same  principle.  That  every  phaeno-
menon  must  have  a  cause,  was  always  taken
for  granted.  Nil  turpius  physico,  says
Cicero,  quam  fieri  sine  causa  quicquam
dicere.  Though  an  Academic,  he  was  dog-
matical in  this.  And  Plato,  the  father  of
the Academy, was no less so. "  Dem

ya.g  ottviiotrov  xai'S  otWiou  yititriv  i%uv  :  it  IS  impos-
sible that  anything  should  have  its  origin
without  a  cause." — Tim^us.

I  believe  Mr  Hume  was  the  first  who
ever  held  the  contrary.*  This,  indeed,  he
avows,  and  assumes  the  honour  of  the  dis-
covery. "  It  is,"  says  he,  "  a  maxim  in
philosophy,  that  whatever  begins  to  exist,
must  have  a  cause  of  existence.  This  is
commonly  taken  for  granted  in  all  reason-
ings, without  any  proof  given  or  demanded.
It  is  supposed  to  be  founded  on  intuition,
and  to  be  one  of  those  maxims  which,
though  they  may  be  denied  with  the  lips,
it  is  impossible  for  men  in  their  hearts
really  to  doubt  of.  But,  if  we  examine
this  maxim  by  the  idea  of  knowledge  above
explained,  we  shall  discover  in  it  no  mark
of  such  intuitive  certainty."  The  meaning
of  this  seems  to  be,  that  it  did  not  suit  with
his  theory  of  intuitive  certainty,  and,  there-
fore, he  excludes  it  from  that  privilege.

The  vulgar  adhere  to  this  maxim  as
firmly  and  universally  as  the  philosophers.
Their  superstitions  have  the  same  origin-
as  the  systems  of  philosophers — to  wit,  a
desire  to  know  the  causes  of  things.  Felix
qui  potuit  rerum  cognoscere  causas,  is  the
universal  sense  of  men  ;  but  to  say  that
anything  can  happen  without  a  cause,  shocks
the  common  sense  of  a  savage.

This  universal  belief  of  mankind  is  easily
accounted  for,  if  we  allow  that  the  neces-
sity of  a  cause  of  every  event  is  obvious  to
the  rational  powers  of  a  man.  But  it  is
impossible  to  account  for  it  otherwise. It


*  See  last  note.— H.


[617,  G18]


ohap  vi.] FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  NECESSARY  TRUTHS.


457


cannot  be  ascribed  to  education,  to  systems
of  philosophy,  or  to  priestcraft.  One
would  think  that  a  philosopher  who  takes
it  to  be  a  general  delusion  or  prejudice,
would  endeavour  to  shew  from  what  causes
in  human  nature  such  a  general  error  may
take  its  rise.  But  I  forget  that  Mr  Hume
might  answer  upon  his  own  principles,  that
since  things  may  happen  without  a  cause —
this  error  and  delusion  of  men  may  be  uni-
versal without  any  cause. [619]

2.  A  second  reason  why  I  conceive  this
to  be  a  first  principle,  is,  That  mankind  not
only  assent  to  it  in  speculation,  but  that  the
practice  of  life  is  grounded  upon  it  in  the
most  important  matters,  even  in  cases  where
experience  leaves  us  doubtful ;  and  it  is
impossible  to  act  with  common  prudence  if
we  set  it  aside.

In  great  families,  there  are  so  many  bad
things  done  by  a  certain  personage,  called
Nobody,  that  it  is  proverbial  that  there  is
a  Nobody  about  every  house  who  does  a
great  deal  of  mischief  ;  and  even  where
there  is  the  exactest  inspection  and  govern-
ment, many  events  will  happen  of  which  no
other  author  can  be  found  ;  so  that,  if  we
trust  merely  to  experience  in  this  matter,  No-
body will  be  found  to  be  a  very  active  person,
and  to  have  no  inconsiderable  share  in  the
management  of  affairs.  But  whatever  coun-
tenance this  system  may  have  from  experi-
ence, it  is  too  shocking  to  common  sense  to
impose  upon  the  most  ignorant.  A  child
knows  that,  when  his  top,  or  any  of  his  play-
things, are  taken  away,  it  must  be  done  by
somebody.  Perhaps  it  would  not  be  diffi-
cult to  persuade  him  that  it  was  done  by
some  invisible  being,  but  that.it  should  be
done  by  nobody  he  cannot  believe.

Suppose  a  man's  house  to  be  broke  open,
his  money  and  jewels  taken  away.  Such
things  have  happened  times  innumerable
without  any  apparent  cause  ;  and  were  he
only  to  reason  from  experience  in  such  a
case,  how  must  he  behave  ?  He  must  put
in  one  scale  the  instances  wherein  a  cause
was  found  of  such  an  event,  and  in  the  other
scale  the  instances  where  no  cause  was
found,  and  the  preponderant  scale  must
determine  whether  it  be  most  probable  that
there  was  a  cause  of  this  event,  or  that
there  was  none.  Would  any  man  of  com-
mon understanding  have  recourse  to  such
an  expedient  todirect  his  judgment? [620]

Suppose  a  man  to  be  found  dead  on  the
highway,  his  skull  fractured,  his  body
pierced  with  deadly  wounds,  his  watch  and
money  carried  off.  The  coroner's  jury  sits
upon  the  body ;  and  the  question  is  put,
What  was  the  cause  of  this  man's  death  ? —
was  it  accident,  or  felo  de  se,  or  murder  by
persons  unknown  ?  Let  us  suppose  an
adept  in  Mr  Hume's  philosophy  to  make
one  of  the  jury,  and  that  he  insists  upon  the
[619-621]


previous  question,  whether  there  was  any
cause  of  the  event,  and  whether  it  happened
without  a  cause.

Surely,  upon  Mr  Hume's  principles,  a
great  deal  might  be  said  upon  this  point ;
and,  if  the  matter  is  to  be  determined  by
past  experience,  it  is  dubious  on  which  side
the  weight  of  argument  might  stand.  But
we  may  venture  to  say,  that,  if  Mr  Hume
had  been  of  such  a  jury,  he  would  have  laid
aside  his  philosophical  principles,  and  acted
according  to  the  dictates  of  common  pru-
dence.

Many  passages  might  be  produced,  even
in  Mr  Hume's  philosophical  writings,  in
which  he,  unawares,  betrays  the  same  in-
ward conviction  of  the  necessity  of  causes
which  is  common  to  other  men.  I  shall
mention  only  one,  in  the  "  Treatise  of  Hu-
man Nature,"  and  in  that  part  of  it  where
he  combats  this  very  principle  : — "  As  to
those  impressions,"  says  he,  "  which  arise
from  the  senses,  their  ultimate  cause  is,  in
my  opinion,  perfectly  inexplicable  by  hu-
man reason  ;  and  it  will  always  be  impos-
sible to  decide  with  certainty  whether  they
arise  immediately  from  the  object,  or  are
produced  by  the  creative  power  of  the  mind,
or  are  derived  from  the  Author  of  our
being."

Among  these  alternatives,  he  never
thought  of  their  not  arising  from  any
cause.* [621]

The  arguments  which  Mr  Hume  offers  to
prove  that  this  is  not  a  self-evident  prin-
ciple, are  three.  First,  That  all  certainty
arises  from  a  comparison  of  ideas,  and  a
discovery  of  their  unalterable  relations,
none  of  which  relations  imply  this  proposi-
tion, That  whatever  has  a  beginning  must
have  a  cause  of  existence.  This  theory  of
certainty  has  been  examined  before.

The  second  argument  is,  That  whatever
we  can  conceive  is  possible.  This  has  like-
wise been  examined.

The  thirda.rgiwient  is,  That  what  we  call
a  cause,  is  only  something  antecedent  to,
and  always  conjoined  with,  the  effect.  This
is  also  one  of  Mr  Hume's  peculiar  doctrines,
which  we  may  have  occasion  to  consider
afterwards.  It  is  sufficient  here  to  observe,
that  we  may  learn  from  it  that  night  is  the
cause  of  day,  and  day  the  cause  of  night :
for  no  two  things  have  more  constantly
followed  each  other  since  the  beginning  of
the  world.

The  [third  and]  lad  metaphysical  prin-
ciple I  mention,  which  is  opposed  by  the
same  author,  is,  That  design  and  intelli-
gence in  the  cause  may  be  inferred,  with
certainty,  from  marks  or  signs  of  it  in  the
effect.


*  See  above,  p.  444,  note  *.  It  is  the  triumph  of
scepticism  to  shew  that  speculation  and  practice  are
irreconcilable. — H.


458


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


Intelligence,  design,  and  skill,  are  not
objects  of  the  external  senses,  nor  can  we
be  conscious  of  them  in  any  person  but  our-
selves. Even  in  ourselves,  we  cannot,  with
propriety,  be  said  to  be  corscious  of  the
natural  or  acquired  talents  we  possess.  We
are  conscious  only  of  the  operations  of  mind
in  which  they  are  exerted.  Indeed,  a  man
comes  to  know  his  own  mental  abilities,
just  as  he  knows  another  man's,  by  the
effects  they  produce,  when  there  is  occasion
to  put  them  to  exercise.

A  man's  wisdom  is  known  to  us  only  by
the  signs  of  it  in  his  conduct ;  his  eloquence
by  the  signs  of  it  in  his  speech.  In  the  same
manner,  we  judge  of  his  virtue,  of  his  forti-
tude, and  of  all  his  talents  and  virtues.  [622]

Yet  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  we  judge  of
men's  talents  with  as  little  doubt  or  hesita-
tion as  we  judge  of  the  immediate  objects
of  sense.

One  person,  we  are  sure,  is  a  perfect
idiot ;  another,  who  feigns  idiocy  to  screen
himself  from  punishment,  is  found,  upon
trial,  to  have  the  understanding  of  a  man,
and  to  be  accountable  for  his  conduct.  We
perceive  one  man  to  be  open,  another  cun-
ning; one  to  be  ignorant,  another  very
knowing  ;  one  to  be  slow  of  understanding,
another  quick.  Every  man  forms  such
judgments  of  those  he  converses  with ;  and
the  common  affairs  of  life  depend  upon  such
judgments.  We  can  as  little  avoid  them  as
we  can  avoid  seeing  what  is  before  our  eyes.

From  this  it  appears,  that  it  is  no  less  a
part  of  the  human  constitution,  to  judge  of
men's  characters,  and  of  their  intellectual
powers,  from  the  signs  of  them  in  their
actions  and  discourse,  than  to  judge  of  cor-
poreal objects  by  our  senses  ;  that  such
judgments  are  common  to  the  whole  human
race  that  are  endowed  with  understanding ;
and  that  they  are  absolutely  necessary  in
the  conduct  of  life.

Now,  every  judgment  of  this  kind  we
form,  is  only  a  particular  application  of  the
general  principle,  that  intelligence,  wisdom,
and  other  mental  qualities  in  the  cause,
may  be  inferred  from  their  marks  or  signs
in  the  effect.

The  actions  and  discourses  of  men  are
effects,  of  which  the  actors  and  speakers
are  the  causes.  The  effects  are  perceived
by  our  senses ;  but  the  causes  are  behind
the  scene.  We  only  conclude  their  exist-
ence and  their  degrees  from  our  observa-
tion of  the  effects.

From  wise  conduct,  we  infer  wisdom  in
the  cause ;  from  brave  actions,  we  infer
courage  ;  and  so  in  other  cases. [623]

This  inference  is  made  with  perfect  secu-
rity by  all  men.  We  cannot  avoid  it ;  it
is  necessary  in  the  ordinary  conduct  of
life  ;  it  has  therefore  the  strongest  marks  of
being  a  first  principle.


Perhaps  some  may  think  that  this  prin-
ciple may  be  learned  either  by  reasoning  or
by  experience,  and  therefore  that  there  is
no  ground  to  think  it  a  first  principle.

If  it  can  be  shewn  to  be  got  by  reasoning,
by  all,  or  the  greater  part  of  those  who  are
governed  by  it,  I  shall  very  readily  ac-
knowledge that  it  ought  not  to  be  esteemed
a  first  principle.  But  I  apprehend  the  con-
trary appears  from  very  convincing  argu-
ments.

First,  The  principle  is  too  universal  to
be  the  effect  of  reasoning.  It  is  common
to  philosophers  and  to  the  vulgar ;  to  the
learned  and  to  the  most  illiterate ;  to  the
civilized  and  to  the  savage.  And  of  those
who  are  governed  by  it,  not  one  in  ten
thousand  can  give  a  reason  for  it.

Secondly,  We  find  philosophers,  ancient
and  modern,  who  can  reason  excellently  in
subjects  that  admit  of  reasoning,  when  they
have  occasion  to  defend  this  principle,  not
offering  reasons  for  it,  or  any  medium  of
proof,  but  appealing  to  the  common  sense
of  mankind ;  mentioning  particular  instan-
ces, to  make  the  absurdity  of  the  contrary
opinion  more  apparent,  and  sometimes
using  the  weapons  of  wit  and  ridicule,  which
are  very  proper  weapons  for  refuting  ab-
surdities, but  altogether  improper  in  points
that  are  to  be  determined  by  reasoning.

To  confirm  this  observation,  I  shall  quote
two  authors,  an  ancient  and  a  modern,  who
have  more  expressly  undertaken  the  defence
of  this  principle  than  any  others  I  remem-
ber to  have  met  with,  and  whose  good
sense  and  ability  to  reason,  where  reasoning
is  proper,  will  not  be  doubted. [624]

The  first  is  Cicero,  whose  words,  {lib.  1.
cap.  13.  De  Divinalione,)  may  be  thus
translated.

"  Can  anything  done  by  chance  have  all
the  marks  of  design  ?  Four  dice  may  by
chance  turn  up  four  aces ;  but  do  you  think
that  four  hundred  dice,  thrown  by  chance,
will  turn  up  four  hundred  aces  ?  Colours
thrown  upon  canvas  without  design  may
have  some  similitude  to  a  human  face  ;  but
do  you  think  they  might  make  as  beautiful
a  picture  as  that  of  the  Coan  Venus  ?  A
hog  turning  up  the  ground  with  his  nose
may  make  something  of  the  form  of  the  let-
ter A  ;  but  do  you  think  that  a  hog  might
describe  on  the  ground  the  Andromache  of
Ennius  ?  Carneades  imagined  that,  in  the
stone  quarries  at  Chios,  he  found,  in  a  stone
that  was  split,  a  representation  of  the  head
of  a  little  Pan,  or  sylvan  deity.  I  believe  he
might  find  a  figure  not  unlike ;  but  surely  not
such  a  one  as  you  would  say  had  been  formed
by  an  excellent  sculptor  like  Scopas.  For
so,  verily,  the  case  is,  that  chance  never
perfectly  imitates  design." Thus  Cicero.*

*  See  also  Cicero  "  Dc  Natura  Dcorum" *L  ii.  c.
[622-624]


chap.  vi.J FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  NECESSARY  TRUTHS.


459


Now,  in  all  this  discourse,  I  see  very
good  sense,  and  what  is  apt  to  convince
every  unprejudiced  mind  ;  but  I  see  not  in
the  whole  a  single  step  of  reasoning.  It  is
barely  an  appeal  to  every  man's  common
sense.

*  Let  us  next  see  how  the  same  point  is
handled  by  the  excellent  Archbishop  Tillot-
son. (1st  Sermon,  vol.  i.)

"For  I  appeal  to  any  man  of  reason,
whether  anything  can  be  more  unreasonable
than  obstinately  to  impute  an  effect  to  chance
which  carries  in  the  face  of  it  all  the  argu-
ments and  characters  of  design  ?  Was  ever
any  considerable  work,  in  which  there  was
required  a  great  variety  of  parts,  and  an
orderly  and  regular  adjustment  of  these
parts,  done  by  chance  ?  Will  chance  fit
means  to  ends,  and  that  in  ten  thousand
instances,  and  not  fail  in  any  one  ?  [625]
How  often  might  a  man,  after  he  had  j  umbled
a  set  of  letters  in  a  bag,  fling  them  out  upon
the  ground  before  they  would  fall  into  an
exact  poem,  yea,  or  so  much  as  make  a
good  discourse  in  prose  ?  And  may  not  a
little  book  be  as  easily  made  as  this  great
volume  of  the  world  ?  How  long  might  a
man  sprinkle  colours  upon  canvass  with  a
careless  hand,  before  they  would  make  the
exact  picture  of  a  man  ?  And  is  a  man
easier  made  by  chance  than  his  picture  ?
How  long  might  twenty  thousand  blind  men,
which  should  be  sent  out  from  the  remote
parts  of  England,  wander  up  and  down  be-
fore they  would  all  meet  upon  Salisbury
plains,  andfall  into  rank  and  file  in  the  exact
order  of  an  army  ?  And  yet  this  is  much
more  easy  to  be  imagined  than  how  the
innumerable  blind  parts  of  matter  should
rendezvous  themselves  into  a  word.  A  man
that  sees  Henry  VI I. 's  chapel  at  West-
minster might,  with  as  good  reason,  main-
tain, (yea,  and  much  better,  considering  the
vast  difference  between  that  little  structure
and  the  huge  fabric  of  the  world,)  that  it
was  never  contrived  or  built  by  any  man,
but  that  the  stones  did  by  chance  grow  into
those  curious  figures  into  which  we  see  them
to  have  been  cut  and  graven ;  and  that,  upon
a  time,  (as  tales  usually  begin,)  the  mate-
rials of  that  building — the  stone,  mortar,
timber,  iron,  lead,  and  glass — happily  met
together,  and  very  fortunately  ranged  them-
selves into  that  delicate  order  in  which  we
see  them  now,  so  close  compacted  that  it
must  be  a  very  great  chance  that  parts  them
again.  What  would  the  world  think  of  a
man  that  should  advance  such  an  opinion
as  this,  and  write  a  book  for  it  ?  If  they
would  do  him  right,  they  ought  to  look  upon
him  as  mad.  But  yet  he  might  maintain
this  opinion  with  a  little  more  reason  than
any  man  can  have  to  say  that  the  world  was
made  by  chance,  or  that  the  first  men  grew
out  of  the  earth,  as  plants  do  now  ;  for,  can
[625-627]


anything  be  more  ridiculous  and  against  all
reason,  than  to  ascribe  the  production  of
men  to  the  first  fruitfulness  of  the  earth,
without  so  much  as  one  instance  or  experi-
ment in  any  age  or  history  to  countenance
so  monstrous  a  supposition  ?  The  thing  is
at  first  sight  so  gross  and  palpable,  that  no
discourse  about  it  can  make  it  more  appa-
rent. A.nd  yet  these  shameful  beggars  of
principles,  who  give  this  precarious  account
of  the  original  of  things,  assume  to  them-
selves to  be  the  men  of  reason,  the  great
wits  of  the  world,  the  only  cautious  and  wary
persons,  who  hate  to  be  imposed  upon,  that
must  have  convincing  evidence  for  every-
thing, and  can  admit  nothing  without  a  clear
demonstration  for  it. [626]

In  this  passage,  the  excellent  author  takes
what  I  conceive  to  be  the  proper  method  of
refuting  an  absurdity,  by  exposing  it  in  dif-
ferent lights,  in  which  every  man  of  common
understanding  conceives  it  to  be  ridiculous.
And,  although  there  is  much  good  sense,  as
well  as  wit,  in  the  passage  I  have  quoted,  I
cannot  find  one  medium  of  proof  in  the
whole.

I  have  met  with  one  or  two  respectable
authors  who  draw  an  ax*gument  from  the
doctrine  of  chances,  to  shew  how  impro-
bable it  is  that  a  regular  arrangement  of
parts  should  be  the  effect  of  chance,  or  that
it  should  not  be  the  effect  of  design.

I  do  not  object  to  this  reasoning ;  but  I
would  observe  that  the  doctrine  of  chances
is  a  branch  of  mathematics  little  more  than
an  hundred  years  old.  But  the  conclusion
drawn  from  it  has  been  held  by  all  men  from
the  beginning  of  the  world.  It  cannot,
therefore,  be  thought  that  men  have  been
led  to  this  conclusion  by  that  reasoning.
Indeed,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  first
principle  upon  which  all  the  mathematical
reasoning  about  chances  is  grounded,  is
more  self-evident  than  this  conclusion  drawn
from  it,  or  whether  it  is  not  a  particular
instance  of  that  general  conclusion.

We  are  next  to  consider  whether  we  may
not  learn  this  truth  from  experience,  That
effects  which  have  all  the  marks  and  tokens
of  design,  must  proceed  from  a  designing
cause. [627]

I  apprehend  that  we  cannot  learn  this
truth  from  experience  for  two  reasons.

First,  Because  it  is  a  necessary  truth,
not  a  contingent  one.  It  agrees  with  the
experience  of  mankind  since  the  beginning
of  the  world,  that  the  area  of  a  triangle  is
equal  to  half  the  rectangle  under  its  base
and  perpendicular.  It  agrees  no  less  with
experience,  that  the  sun  rises  in  the  east
and  sets  in  the  west.  So  far  as  experience
goes,  these  truths  are  upon  an  equal  footing.
But  every  man  perceives  this  distinction
between  them — that  the  first  is  a  necessary
truth,  and  that  it  is  impossible  it  should  not


460


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


be  true ;  but  the  last  is  not  necessary,  but
contingent,  depending  upon  the  will  of  Him
who  made  the  world.  As  we  cannot  learn
from  experience  that  twice  three  must  ne-
cessarily make  six,  so  neither  can  we  learn
from  experience  that  certain  effects  must
proceed  from  a  designing  and  intelligent
cause.  Experience  informs  us  only  of  what
has  been,  but  never  of  what  must  be.*

Secondly,  It  may  be  observed,  that  ex-
perience can  shew  a  connection  between  a
sign  and  the  thing  signified  by  it,  in  those
cases  only  where  both  the  sign  and  thing
signified  are  perceived  and  have  always
been  perceived  in  conjunction.  But,  if  there
be  any  case  where  the  sign  only  is  per-
ceived, experience  can  never  shew  its  con-
nection with  the  thing  signified.  Thus,  for
example,  thought  is  a  sign  of  a  thinking
principle  or  mind.  But  how  do  we  know
that  thought  cannot  be  without  a  mind  ?  If
any  man  should  say  that  he  knows  this  by
experience,  he  deceives  himself.  It  is  im-
possible he  can  have  any  experience  of  this  ;
because,  though  we  have  an  immediate
knowledge  of  the  existence  of  thought  in
ourselves  by  consciousness,  yet  we  have  no
immediate  knowledge  of  a  mind.  The  mind
is  not  an  immediate  object  either  of  sense
or  of  consciousness.  We  may,  therefore,
justly  conclude,  that  the  necessary  con-
nection between  thought  and  a  mind,  or
thinking  being,  is  not  learned  from  expe-
rience. [628]

The  same  reasoning  may  be  applied  to
the  connection  between  a  work  excellently
fitted  for  some  purpose,  and  design  in  the
author  or  cause  of  that  work.  One  of  these
— to  wit,  the  work — may  be  an  immediate
object  of  perception.  But  the  design  and
purpose  of  the  author  cannot  be  an  imme-
diate object  of  perception ;  and,  therefore,
experience  can  never  inform  us  of  any  con-
nection between  the  one  and  the  other,  far
less  of  a  necessary  connection.

Thus,  I  think,  it  appears,  that  the  prin-
ciple we  have  been  considering — to  wit,
that  from  certain  signs  or  indications  in  the
effect,  we  may  infer  that  there  must  have
been  intelligence,  wisdom,  or  other  intel-
lectual or  moral  qualities  in  the  cause,  is  a
principle  which  we  get,  neither  by  reason-
ing nor  by  experience  ;  and,  therefore,  if  it
be  a  true  principle,  it  must  be  a  first  prin-
ciple. There  is  in  the  human  understand-
ing a  light,  by  which  we  see  immediately
the  evidence  of  it,  when  there  is  occasion
to  apply  it.

Of  how  great  importance  this  principle
is  in  common  life,  we  have  already  observed.
And  I  need  hardly  mention  its  importance
in  natural  theology.

The  clear  marks  and  signatures  of  wis-

*  See  abovep.  t515;  and  "  Active  Powero,"p.  31.— H.


dom,  power,  and  goodness,  in  the  consti-
tution and  government  of  the  world,  is,  of
all  arguments  that  have  been  advanced  for
the  being  and  providence  of  the  Deity,  that
which  in  all  ages  has  made  the  strongest
impression  upon  candid  and  thinking  minds  ;
an  argument,  which  has  this  peculiar  ad-
vantage, that  it  gathers  strength  as  human
knowledge  advances,  and  is  more  convincing
at  present  than  it  was  some  centuries  ago.

King  Alphonsus  might  say,  that  he  could
contrive  a  better  planetary  system  than  that
which  astronomers  held  in  his  day.*  That
system  was  not  the  work  of  God,  but  the
fiction  of  men. [629]

But  since  the  true  system  of  the  sun,
moon,  and  planets,  has  been  discovered,  no
man,  however  atheistically  disposed,  has
pretended  to  shew  how  a  better  could  be
contrived.

When  we  attend  to  the  marks  of  good
contrivance  which  appear  in  the  works  of
God,  every  discovery  we  make  in  the  con-
stitution of  the  material  or  intellectual
system  becomes  a  hymn  of  praise  to  the
great  Creator  and  Governor  of  the  world.
And  a  man  who  is  possessed  of  the  genuine
spirit  of  philosophy  will  think  it  impiety  to
contaminate  the  divine  workmanship,  by
mixing  it  with  those  fictions  of  human  fancy,
called  theories  and  hypotheses,  which  will
always  bear  the  signatures  of  human  folly,
no  less  than  the  other  does  of  divine  wis-
dom.

I  know  of  no  person  who  ever  called  in
question  the  principle  now  under  our  consi-
deration, when  it  is  applied  to  the  actions
and  discourses  of  men.  For  this  would  be  to
deny  that  we  have  any  means  of  discerning
a  wise  man  from  an  idiot,  or  a  man  that  is
illiterate  in  the  highest  degree  from  a  man
of  knowledge  and  learning,  which  no  man
has  the  effrontery  to  deny.

But,  in  all  ages,  those  who  have  been
unfriendly  to  the  principles  of  religion,  have
made  attempts  to  weaken  the  force  of  the
argument  for  the  existence  and  perfec-
tions of  the  Deity,  which  is  founded  on  this
principle.  That  argument  has  got  the  name
of  the  argument  from  final  causes  ;  and  as
the  meaning  of  this  name  is  well  understood,
we  shall  use  it.

The  argument  from  final  causes,  when  re-
duced to  a  syllogism,  has  these  two  premises :
— First,  That  design  and  intelligence  in  the
cause,  may,  with  certainty,  be  inferred  from
marks  or  signs  of  it  in  the  effect.  This  is
the  principle  we  have  been  considering,  and


*  Alphonso  X.  of  Castile.  He  flourished  in  the
thirteenth  century— a  great  mathematician  and  as-
tronomer. To  him  we  owe  the  Alphonsine  Tables.
His  saying  was  not  so  pious  and  philosophical  as  Reid
states ;  but  that,  "  Had  he  been  present  with  God
at  the  creation,  he  could  have  supplied  some  useful
hmrs  towards  the  better  ordering  of  the  universe."


U.


[628,  629]


chap,  vi.] FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  NECESSARY  TRUTHS.


451


we  may  call  it  the  maj  w  proposition  of  the
argument.  The  seeing  which  we  call  the
minor  proposition,  is,  That  there  are  in  fact
the  clearest  marks  of  design  and  wisdom  in
ihe  works  of  nature  ;  and  the  conclusion  is,
That  the  works  of  nature  are  the  effects
of  a  wise  and  intelligent  Cause.  One  must
either  assent  to  the  conclusion,  or  deny  one
or  other  of  the  premises. [630]

Those  among  the  ancients  who  denied  a
God  or  a  Providence,  seem  to  me  to  have
yielded  the  major  proposition,  and  to  have
denied  the  minor  ;  conceiving  that  there
are  not  in  the  constitution  of  things  such
marks  of  wise  contrivance  as  are  sufficient
to  put  the  conclusion  beyond  doubt.  This,
I  think,  we  may  learn,  from  the  reasoning
of  Cotta  the  academic,  in  the  third  book  of
Cicero,  of  the  Nature  of  the  Gods.

The  gradual  advancement  made  in  the
knowledge  of  nature,  hath  put  this  opinion
quite  out  of  countenance.

When  the  structure  of  the  human  body
was  much  less  known  than  it  is  now,  the
famous  Galen  saw  such  evident  marks  of
wise  contrivance  in  it,  that,  though  he  had
been  educated  an  Epicurean,  he  renounced
that  system,  and  wrote  his  book  of  the  use
of  the  parts  of  the  human  body,  on  purpose
to  convince  others  of  what  appeared  so  clear
"to  himself,  that  it  was  impossible  that  such
admirable  contrivance  should  be  the  effect
of  chance.

Those,  therefore,  of  later  times,  who  are
dissatisfied  with  this  argument  from  final
causes,  have  quitted  the  stronghold  of  the
ancient  atheists,  which  had  become  un-
tenable, and  have  chosen  rather  to  make  a
defence  against  the  major  proposition.

Des  Cartes  seems  to  have  led  the  way  in
this,  though  he  was  no  atheist.  But,  having
invented  some  new  arguments  for  the  being
of  God,  he  was,  perhaps,  led  to  disparage
those  that  had  been  used  before,  that  he
might  bring  more  credit  to  his  own.  Or
perhaps  he  was  offended  with  the  Peripa-
tetics, because  they  often  mixed  final  causes
with  physical,  in  order  to  account  for  the
phsenomena  of  nature. [631  ]

He  maintained,  therefore,  that  physical
causes  only  should  be  assigned  for  phaeno-
mena  ;  that  the  philosopher  has  nothing  to
do  with  final  causes ;  and  that  it  is  pre-
sumption in  us  to  pretend  to  determine  for
what  end  any  work  of  nature  is  framed.
Some  of  those  who  were  great  admirers  of
Des  Cartes,  and  folio  wed  him  in  many
points,  differed  from  him  in  this,  particu-
larly Dr  Henry  More  and  the  pious  Arch-
bishop Fenelon  :  but  others,  after  the  ex-
ample of  Des  Cartes,  have  shewn  a  contempt
of  all  reasoning  from  final  causes.  Among
these,  I  think,  we  may  reckon  Maupertuis
and  Buffon.  But  the  most  direct  attack
has  been  made  upon  this  principle  by  Mr
[630-632]


Hume,  who  puts  an  argument  in  the  mouth
of  an  Epicurean,  on  which  he  seems  to  lay
great  stress.

The  argument  is,  That  the  universe  is  a
singular  effect,  and,  therefore,  we  can  draw
no  conclusion  from  it,  whether  it  may  have
been  made  by  wisdom  or  not.  *

If  I  understand  the  force  of  this  argu-
ment, it  amounts  to  this,  That,  if  we  had
been  accustomed  to  see  worlds  produced,
some  by  wisdom  and  others  without  it,  and
had  observed  that  such  a  world  as  this
which  we  inhabit  was  always  the  effect  of
wisdom,  we  might  then,  from  past  experi-
ence, conclude  that  this  world  was  made
by  wisdom;  but,  having  no  such  experi-
ence, we  have  no  means  of  forming  any
conclusion  about  it.

That  this  is  the  strength  of  the  argument
appears,  because,  if  the  marks  of  wisdom
seen  in  one  world  be  no  evidence  of  wisdom,
the  like  marks  seen  in  ten  thousand  will
give  as  little  evidence,  unless,  in  time  past,
we  perceived  wisdom  itself  conjoined  with
the  tokens  of  it ;  and,  from  their  perceived
conjunction  in  time  past,  conclude  that,  al-
though, in  the  present  world,  we  see  only
one  of  the  two,  the  other  must  accompany
it. [632]

W  hence  it  appears  that  this  reasoning  of
Mr  Hume  is  built  on  the  supposition  that
our  inferring  design  from  the  strongest
marks  of  it,  is  entirely  owing  to  our  past
experience  of  having  always  found  these
two  things  conjoined.  But  I  hope  I  have
made  it  evident  that  this  is  not  the  case.
And,  indeed,  it  is  evident  that,  according
to  this  reasoning,  we  can  have  no  evidence
of  mind  or  design  in  any  of  our  fellow-
men.

How  do  I  know  that  any  man  of  my  ac-
quaintance has  understanding  ?  I  never
saw  his  understanding.  I  see  only  cer-
tain effects,  which  my  judgment  leads
me  to  conclude  to  be  marks  and  tokens
of  it.

But,  says  the  sceptical  philosopher,  you
can  conclude  nothing  from  these  tOKens;  un-
less past  experience  has  informed  you  that
such  tokens  are  always  joined  with  under-
standing. Alas  !  sir,  it  is  impossible  I  can
ever  have  this  experience.  The  understand-
ing of  another  man  is  no  immediate  object
of  sight,  or  of  any  other  faculty  which  God
hath  given  me ;  and  unless  I  can  conclude
its  existence  from  tokens  that  are  visible,  I
have  no  evidence  that  there  is  understand-
ing in  any  man.

It  seems,  then,  that  the  man  who  main-
tains that  there  is  no  force  in  the  argument
from  final  causes,  must,  if  he  will  be  con-
sistent, see  no  evidence  of  the  existence  of
any  intelligent  being  but  himself.

*  See  Stewart's  "  Elements,"  ii.  p.  579.— H.


462


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay VI.


CHAPTER  VII.

OPINIONS,  ANCIENT  AND  MODERN,  ABOUT
FIRST  PRINCIPLES.

I  know  no  writer  who  has  treated  ex-
pressly of  first  principles  before  Aristotle  ;
but  it  is  probable  that,  in  the  ancient  Py-
thagorean school,  from  which  both  Plato
and  Aristotle  borrowed  much,  this  subject
had  not  been  left  untouched. [633]

Before  the  time  of  Aristotle,  considerable
progress  had  been  made  in  the  mathema-
tical sciences,  particularly  in  geometry.

The  discovery  of  the  forty-seventh  pro-
position of  the  first  book  of  Euclid,  and  of
the  five  regular  solids,  is,  by  antiquity,
ascribed  to  Pythagoras  himself;  and  it  is
impossible  he  could  have  made  those  dis-
coveries without  knowing  many  other  pro-
positions in  mathematics.  Aristotle  men-
tions the  incommensurability  of  the  diagonal
of  a  square  to  its  side,  and  gives  a  hint  of
the  manner  in  which  it  was  demonstrated.
We  find  likewise  some  of  the  axioms  of
geometry  mentioned  by  Aristotle  as  axioms,
and  as  indemonstrable  principles  of  mathe-
matical reasoning.

It  is  probable,  therefore,  that,  before  the
time  of  Aristotle,  there  were  elementary
treatises  of  geometry,  which  are  now  lost ;
and  that  in  them  the  axioms  were  distin-
guished from  the  propositions  which  require
I  roof.

To  suppose  that  so  perfect  a  system  as
that  of  Euclid's  "  Elements"  was  produced
by  one  man,  without  any  preceding  model
or  materials,  would  be  to  suppose  Euclid
more  than  a  man.  We  ascribe  to  him  as
much  as  the  weakness  of  human  under-
standing will  permit,  if  we  suppose  that  the
inventions  in  geometry,  which  had  been
made  in  a  tract  of  preceding  ages,  were  by
him  not  only  carried  much  farther,  but
digested  into  so  admirable  a  6ystem  that
his  work  obscured  all  that  went  before  it,
and  made  them  be  forgot  and  lost.

Perhaps,  in  like  manner,  the  writings  of
Aristotle  with  regard  to  first  principles,  and
with  regard  to  many  other  abstract  subjects,
may  have  occasioned  the  loss  of  what  had
been  written  upon  those  subjects  by  more
ancient  philosophers. [634]

Whatever  may  be  in  this,  in  his  second
book  upon  demonstration,  he  has  treated
very  fully  of  first  principles  ;  and,  though  he
has  not  attempted  any  enumeration  of  them,
he  shews  very  clearly  that  all  demonstra-
tion must  be  built  upon  truths  which  are
evident  of  themselves,  but  cannot  be  de-
monstrated. His  whole  doctrine  of  syllo-
gisms is  grounded  upon  a  few  axioms,  from
which  he  endeavours  to  demonstrate  the
rules  of  syllogism  in  a  mathematical  way  ;


|  and  in  his  topics  he  points  out  many  of  the
first  principles  of  probable  reasoning.

As  long  as  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle
prevailed,  it  was  held  as  a  fixed  point,  that
all  proof  must  be  drawn  from  principles
already  known  and  granted.

We  must  observe,  however,  that,  in  that
philosophy,  many  things  were  assumed  as
first  principles,  which  have  no  just  claim
to  that  character  :  such  as,  that  the  earth
is  at  rest ;  that  nature  abhors  a  vacuum  ;
that  there  is  no  change  in  the  heavens  above
the  sphere  of  the  moon ;  that  the  heavenly
bodies  move  in  circles,  that  being  the  most
perfect  figure ;  that  bodies  do  not  gravitate
in  their  proper  place  ;  and  many  others.

The  Peripatetic  philosophy,  therefore,
instead  of  being  deficient  in  first  principles,
was  redundant ;  instead  of  rejecting  those
that  are  truly  such,  it  adopted,  as  first
principles,  many  vulgar  prejudices  and  rash
judgments  :  and  this  seems  in  general  to
have  been  the  spirit  of  ancient  philosophy.  *

It  is  true,  there  were  among  the  ancients
sceptical  philosophers,  who  professed  to  have
no  principles,  and  held  it  to  be  the  greatest
virtue  in  a  philosopher  to  withhold  assent,
and  keep  his  judgment  in  a  perfect  equil  -
brium  between  contradictory  opinions.  But,
though  this  sect  was  defended  by  some  per-
sons of  great  erudition  and  acuteness,  it  died
of  itself,  and  the  dogmatic  philosophy  of
Aristotle  obtained  a  complete  triumph  over
it. [635]

What  Mr  Hume  says  of  those  who  are
sceptical  with  regard  to  moral  distinctions
seems  to  have  had  its  accomplishment  in
the  ancient  sect  of  Sceptics.  "  The  only
way,"  says  he,  "  of  converting  antagonists
of  this  kind  is  to  leave  them  to  themselves  ;
for,  finding  that  nobody  keeps  up  the  con-
troversy with  them,  it  is  probable  they  will
at  last  of  themselves,  from  mere  weariness,
come  over  to  the  side  of  common  sense  and
reason."

Setting  aside  this  small  sect  of  the  Scep-
tics, which  was  extinct  many  ages  before  the
authority  of  Aristotle  declined,  I  know  of
no  opposition  made  to  first  principles  among
the  ancients.  The  disposition  was,  as  has
been  observed,  not  to  oppose,  but  to  mul-
tiply them  beyond  measure.

Men  have  always  been  prone,  when  they
leave  one  extreme,  to  run  into  the  opposite  ;
and  this  spirit,  in  the  ancient  philosophy,  to
multiply  first  principles  beyond  reason,  was
a  strong  presage  that,  when  the  authority
of  the  Peripatetic  system  was  at  an>  end,


*  The  Peripatetic  philosophy  did  not  assume  any
such  principles  as  original  and  self-evident ;  but  pro-
fessed to  establish  them  all  upon  induction  and  gene-
ralization. In  practice  its  induction  of  instances
might  be  imperfect,  and  its  generalization  from  par-
ticulars rash  :  but  in  theory,  at  least,  it  was  correct,
— H.


[633-6351


chap,  vir.] OPINIONS  ABOUT  FIRST  PRINCIPLES.


463


the  next  reigning  system  would  diminish
their  number  beyond  reason.

This,  accordingly,  happened  in  that  great
revolution  of  the  philosophical  republic
brought  about  by  Des  Cartes.  That  truly
great  reformer  in  philosophy,  cautious  to
a*void  the  snare  in  which  Aristotle  was
taken,  of  admitting  things  as  first  principles
too  rashly,  resolved  to  doubt  of  everything,
and  to  withhold  his  assent,  until  it  was  forced
by  the  clearest  evidence.*

Thus  Des  Cartes  brought  himself  into
that  very  state  of  suspense  which  the  an-
cient Sceptics  recommended  as  the  highest
perfection  of  a  wise  man,  and  the  only  road
to  tranquillity  of  mind.  But  he  did  not
remain  long  in  this  state  ;  his  doubt  did
not  arise  from  despair  of  finding  the  truth,
but  from  caution,  that  he  might  not  be  im-
posed upon,  and  embrace  a  cloud  instead  of
a  goddess. [636]

His  very  doubting  convinced  him  of  his
own  existence  ;  for  that  which  does  not  exist
can  neither  doubt,  nor  believe,  nor  reason.
Thus  he  emerged  from  universal  scepti-
cism by  this  short  enthymeme,  Cogito,  ergo
sum.

This  enthymeme  consists  of  an  antece-
dent proposition,  I  think,  and  a  conclusion
drawn  from  it,  therefore  I  exist.

If  it  should  be  asked  how  Des  Cartes
came  to  be  certain  of  the  antecedent  proposi-
tion, it  is  evident  that  for  this  he  trusted  to
the  testimony  of  consciousness.  He  was  con-
scious that  he  thought,  and  needed  no  other
argument.

So  that  the  first  principle  which  he  adopts
in  this  famous  enthymeme  is  this,  That  those
doubts,  and  thoughts,  and  reasonings,  of
which  he  was  conscious,  did  certainly  exist,
and  that  his  consciousness  put  their  exist-
ence beyond  all  doubt.

It  might  have  been  objected  to  this  first
principle  of  Des  Cartes,  How  do  you  know
that  your  consciousness  cannot  deceive  you  ?
You  have  supposed  that  all  you  see,  and
hear,  and  handle,  may  be  an  illusion.  Why,
therefore,  should  the  power  of  conscious-
ness have  this  prerogative,  to  be  believed
implicitly,  when  all  our  other  powers  are
supposed  fallacious  ?

To  this  objection  I  know  no  other  answer
that  can  be  made  but  that  we  find  it  im-
possible to  doubt  of  things  of  Avhich  we  are
conscious.  The  constitution  of  our  nature
forces  this  belief  upon  us  irresistibly.

This  is  true,  and  is  sufficient  to  justify
Des  Cartes  in  assuming,  as  a  first  principle,
the  existence  of  thought,  of  which  he  was
conscious. [637]

He  ought,  however,  to  have  gone  farther
in  this  track,  and  to  have  considered  whe-
ther there  may  not  be  other  first  principles


*  On  the  Cartesian  doubt,  see  Note  R.— H.
f636-638]


which  ought  to  be  adopted  for  the  same
reason.  But  he  did  not  see  this  to  be  ne-
cessary, conceiving  that,  upon  this  on3  first
principle,  he  could  support  the  whole  fabric
of  human  knowledge.

To  proceed  to  the  conclusion  of  Des
Cartes's  enthymeme.  From  the  existence
of  his  thought  he  infers  his  own  existence.
Here  he  assumes  another  first  principle,
not  a  contingent,  but  a  necessary  one ;  to
wit,  that,  where  there  is  thought,  there
must  be  a  thinking  being  or  mind.

Having  thus  established  his  own  exist-
ence, he  proceeds  to  prove  the  existence  of
a  supreme  and  infinitely  perfect  Being;
and,  from  the  perfection  of  the  Deity,  he
infers  that  his  senses,  his  memory,  and  the
other  faculties  which  God  had  given  him,
are  not  fallacious.

Whereas  other  men,  from  the  beginning
of  the  world,  had  taken  for  granted,  as  a  first
principle,  the  truth  and  reality  of  what  they
perceive  by  their  senses,  and  from  thence
inferred  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Author
and  Maker  of  the  world,  Des  Cartes  took
a  contrary  course,  conceiving  that  the  tes-
timony of  our  senses,  and  of  all  our  facul-
ties, excepting  that  of  consciousness,  ought
not  to  be  taken  for  granted,  but  to  be
proved  by  argument.

Perhaps  some  may  think  that  Des  Car-
tes meant  only  to  admit  no  other  first  prin-
ciple of  contingent  truths  besides  that  of
consciousness  ;  but  that  he  allowed  the  axi-
oms of  mathematics,  and  of  other  necessary
truths,  to  be  received  without  proof. [638]

But  I  apprehend  this  was  not  his  inten-
tion ;  for  the  truth  of  mathematical  axioms
must  depend  upon  the  truth  of  the  faculty
by  which  we  judge  of  them.  If  the  faculty
be  fallacious,  we  may  be  deceived  by  tri,  st-
ing to  it.  Therefore,  as  he  supposes  that
all  our  faculties,  excepting  consciousness,
may  be  fallacious,  and  attempts  to  prove
by  argument  that  they  are  not,  it  follows
that,  according  to  his  principles,  even  ma-
thematical axioms  require  proof.  Neither
did  he  allow  that  there  are  any  necessary
truths,  but  maintained,  that  the  truths
which  are  commonly  so  called,  depend  up-
on the  will  of  God.  And  we  find  his  fol-
lowers, who  may  be  supposed  to  under-
stand his  principles,  agree  in  maintaining,
that  the  knowledge  of  our  own  existence  is
the  first  and  fundamental  principle  from
which  all  knowledge  must  be  deduced  by
one  who  proceeds  regularly  in  philosophy.

There  is,  no  doubt,  a  beauty  in  raising  a
large  fabric  of  knowledge  upon  a  few  first
principles.  The  stately  fabric  of  mathema-
tical knowledge,  raised  upon  the  foundation
of  a  few  axioms  and  definitions,  charms
every  beholder.  Des  Cartes,  who  was  well
acquainted  with  this  beauty  in  the  mathe-
matical sciences,  seems  to  have  been  am  •


464


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


bitious  to  give  the  same  beautiful  simplicity
to  his  system  of  philosophy ;  and  therefore
sought  only  one  first  principle  as  the  founda-
tion of  all  our  knowledge,  at  least  of  con-
tingent truths.

And  so  far  has  his  authority  prevailed,
that  those  who  came  after  him  have
almost  universally  followed  him  in  this
track.  This,  therefore,  may  be  considered
as  the  spirit  of  modern  philosophy,  to  allow
of  no  first  principles  of  contingent  truths
but  this  one,  that  the  thoughts  and  opera-
tions of  our  own  minds,  of  which  we  are
conscious,  are  self-evidently  real  and  true  ;
but  that  everything  else  that  is  contingent
is  to  be  proved  by  argument.

The  existence  of  a  material  world,  and
of  what  we  perceive  by  our  senses,  is  not
self-evident,  according  to  this  philosophy.
Des  Cartes  founded  it  upon  this  argument,
that  God,  who  hath  given  us  our  senses,
and  all  our  faculties,  is  no  deceiver,  and
therefore  they  are  not  fallacious. [639]

I  endeavoured  to  shew  that,  if  it  be  not
admitted  as  a  first  principle,  that  our  facul-
ties are  not  fallacious,  nothing  else  can  be
admitted ;  and  that  it  is  impossible  to  prove
this  by  argument,  unless  God  should  give  us
new  faculties  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  the  old.

Father  Malebranche  agreed  with  Des
Cartes,  that  the  existence  of  a  material
world  requires  proof ;  but,  being  dissatisfied
with  Des  Cartes's  argument  from  the  per-
fection of  the  Deity,  thought  that  the  only
solid  proof  is  from  divine  revelation.

Arnauld,  who  was  engaged  in  controversy
with  Malebranche,  approves  of  his  anta-
gonist in  offering  an  argument  to  prove  the
existence  of  the  material  world,  but  objects
to  the  solidity  of  his  argument,  and  offers
other  arguments  of  his  own.

Mr  Norris,  a  great  admirer  of  Des  Cartes
and  of  Malebranche,  seems  to  have  thought
all  the  arguments  offered  by  them  and  by
Arnauld  to  be  weak,  and  confesses  that  we
have,  at  best,  only  probable  evidence  of  the
existence  of  the  material  world.

Mr  Locke  acknowledges  that  the  evidence
we  have  of  this  point  is  neither  intuitive
nor  demonstrative  ;  yet  he  thinks  it  may
be  called  knowledge,  and  distinguishes  it
by  the  name  of  sensitive  knowledge ;  and,
as  the  ground  of  this  sensitive  knowledge,
he  offers  some  weak  arguments,  which  would
rather  tempt  one  to  doubt  than  to  believe.

At  last,  Bishop  Berkeley  and  Arthur
Collier,  without  any  knowledge  of  each
other,  as  far  as  appears  by  their  writings,
undertook  to  prove,  that  there  neither  is
nor  can  be  a  material  world.  The  excel-
lent style  and  elegant  composition  of  the
former  have  made  his  writings  to  be  known
and  read,  and  this  system  to  be  attributed
to  him  only,  as  if  Collier  had  never  ex-
isted. [6401


Both,  indeed,  owe  so  much  to  Male-
branche, that,  if  we  take  out  of  his  system
the  peculiarities  of  our  seeing  all  things  in
God,  and  our  learning  the  existence  of  an
external  world  from  divine  revelation,  what
remains  is  just  the  system  of  Bishop  Berke-
ley. I  make  this  observation,  by  the  way,
in  justice  to  a  foreign  author,  to  whom
British  authors  seem  not  to  have  allowed
all  that  is  due.*

Mr  Hume  hath  adopted  Bishop  Berke-
ley's arguments  against  the  existence  of
matter,  and  thinks  them  unanswerable.

We  may  observe,  that  this  great  meta-
physician, though  in  general  he  declares  in
favour  of  universal  scepticism,  and  there-
fore may  seem  to  have  no  first  principles  at
all,  yet,  with  Des  Cartes,  he  always  acknow-
ledges the  reality  of  those  thoughts  and
operations  of  mind  of  which  we  are  con-
scious.-}- So  that  he  yields  the  antecedent
of  Des  Cartes's  enthymeme  cogito,  but
denies  the  conclusion  ergo  sum,  the  mind
being,  according  to  him,  nothing  but  that
train  of  impressions  and  ideas  of  which  we
are  conscious.

Thus,  we  see  that  the  modern  philosophy,
of  which  Des  Cartes  may  justly  be  ac-
counted the  founder,  being  built  upon  the
ruins  of  the  Peripatetic,  has  a  spirit  quite
opposite,  and  runs  into  a  contrary  extreme.
The  Peripatetic  not  only  adopted  as  first
principles  those  which  mankind  have  always
rested  upon  in  their  most  important  trans-
actions, but,  along  with  them,  many  vulgar
prejudices  ;  so  that  this  system  was  founded
upon  a  wide  bottom,  but  in  many  parts
unsound.  The  modern  system  has  nar-
rowed the  foundation  so  much,  that  every
superstructure  raised  upon  it  appears  top-
heavy.

From  the  single  principle  of  the  exist-
ence of  our  own  thoughts,  very  little,  if  any
thing,  can  be  deduced  by  just  reasoning,
especially  if  we  suppose  that  all  our  other
faculties  may  be  fallacious.

Accordingly,  we  find  that  Mr  Hume  was
not  the  first  that  was  led  into  scepticism  by
the  want  of  first  principles.  For,  soon  after
Des  Cartes,  there  arose  a  sect  in  France
called  Egoists,  who  maintained  that  we
have  no  evidence  jof  the  existence  of  any-
thing but  ourselves.  % [641]

Whether  these  egoists,  like  Mr  Hume,


*  If  I  recollect  aright,  (I  write  this  note  at  a  di>s-
tance  from  books,)  Locke  explicitly  anticipates  the
Berkeleian  idealism  in  his  "Examination  of  Father
Malebranche's  Opinion."  This  was  also  done  Dy
Bayle.  In  fact,  Malebranche,  and  many  others  be-
fore him,  would  inevitably  have  become  Idealists,
had  they  not  been  Catholics.  But  an  Idealist,  as  I
have  already  observed,  no  consistent  Catholic  could
be.  See  above,  p.  2S5,  note  t>  and  p.  35S,  note  *.
— H.

f  See  above,  p.  442,  b,  not^. — H.

%  See  above  p.  269,  a,  note  \  ;  and  p.  293,  b,  note
*.— H.


[639-641]


chap,  vii.] OPINIONS  ABOUT  FIRST  PRINCIPLES.


465


believed  themselves  to  be  nothing  but  a  train
of  ideas  and  impressions,  or  to  have  a  more
permanent  existence,  I  have  not  learned,
having  never  seen  any  of  their  writings  ;  nor
do  I  know  whether  any  of  this  sect  did  write
in  support  of  their  principles.  One  would
think  they  who  did  not  believe  that  there
was  any  person  to  read,  could  have  little
inducement  to  write,  unless  they  were
prompted  by  that  inward  monitor  which
Persius  makes  to  be  the  source  of  genius
and  the  teacher  of  arts.  There  can  be  no
doubt,  however,  of  the  existence  of  such  a
sect,  as  they  are  mentioned  by  many
authors,  and  refuted  by  some,  particularly
by  Buffier,  in  his  treatise  of  first  principles.

Those  Egoists  and  Mr  Hume  seem  to
me  to  have  reasoned  more  consequentially
from  Des  Cartes'  principle  than  he  did  him-
self ;  and,  indeed,  I  cannot  help  thinking,
that  all  who  have  followed  Des  Cartes'
method,  of  requiring  proof  by  argument  of
everything  except  the  existence  of  their
own  thoughts,  have  escaped  the  abyss  of
scepticism  by  the  help  of  weak  reasoning
and  strong  faith  more  than  by  any  other
means.  And  they  seem  to  me  to  act  more
consistently,  who,  having  rejected  the  first
principles  on  which  belief  must  be  grounded,
have  no  belief,  than  they,  who,  like  the
others,  rejecting  first  principles,  must  yet
have  a  system  of  belief,  without  any  solid
foundation  on  which  it  may  stand.

The  philosophers  I  have  hitherto  men-
tioned, after  the  time  of  Des  Cartes,  have
all  followed  his  method,  in  resting  upon  the
truth  of  their  own  thoughts  as  a  first
principle,  but  requiring  arguments  for  the
proof  of  every  other  truth  of  a  contingent
nature;  but  none  of  them,  excepting  Mr
Locke,  has  expressly  treated  of  first  princi-
ples, or  given  any  opinion  of  their  utility  or
inutility.  We  only  collect  their  opinion
from  their  following  Des  Cartes  in  requir-
ing proof,  or  pretending  to  offer  proof  of
the  existence  of  a  material  world,  which
surely  ought  to  be  received  as  a  first  princi-
ple, if  anything  be,  beyond  what  we  are
conscious  of. [642]

I  proceed,  therefore,  to  consider  what
Mr  Locke  has  said  on  the  subject  of  first
principles  or  maxims.

I  have  not  the  least  doubt  of  this  author's
candour  in  what  he  somewhere  says,  that
his  essay  was  mostly  spun  out  of  his  own
thoughts.  Yet,  it  is  certain,  that,  in  many
of  the  notions  which  we  are  wont  to  ascribe
to  him,  others  were  before  him,  particularly
pes  Cartes,  Gassendi,  and  Hobbes.  Nor
is  it  at  all  to  be  thought  strange,  that  inge-
nious men,  when  they  are  got  into  the
same  track,  should  hit  upon  the  same
things.

But,  in  the  definition  which  he  gives  of
knowledge  in  general,  and  in  his  notions
[642,  643]


concerning  axioms  or  first  principles,  1
know  none  that  went  before  him,  though
he  has  been  very  generally  followed  in  both.

His  definition  of  knowledge,  that  it  con-
sists si  lely  in  the  perception  of  the  agree-
ment or  disagreement  of  our  ideas,  has  been
already  considered.  But  supposing  it  to  be
just,  still  it  would  be  true,  that  some  agree-
ments and  disagreements  of  ideas  must  be
immediately  perceived ;  and  such  agree-
ments or  disagreements,  when  they  are
expressed  by  affirmative  or  negative  propo-
sitions, are  first  principles,  because  their
truth  is  immediately  discerned  as  soon  as
they  are  understood.

This,  I  think,  is  granted  by  Mr  Locke,
book  4,  chap.  2.  "  There  is  a  part  of  our
knowledge,"  says  he,  "  which  we  may  call
intuitive.  In  this  the  mind  is  at  no  pains
of  proving  or  examining,  but  perceives  the
truth  as  the  eye  does  light,  only  by  being
directed  toward  it.  And  this  kind  of  know-
ledge is  the  clearest  and  most  certain  that
human  frailty  is  capable  of.  This  part  of
knowledge  is  irresistible,  and,  like  bright
sunshine,  forces  itself  immediately  to  be
perceived,  as  soon  as  ever  the  mind  turns
its  view  that  way." [643]

He  farther  observes — "  That  this  intui-
tive knowledge  is  necessary  to  connect  all
the  steps  of  a  demonstration."*

From  this,  I  think,  it  necessarily  follows,
that,  in  every  branch  of  knowledge,  we
must  make  use  of  truths  that  are  intuitively
known,  in  order  to  deduce  from  them  such
as  require  proof.

But  I  cannot  reconcile  this  with  what  he
says,  §  8,  of  the  same  chapter : — "  The
necessity  of  this  intuitive  knowledge  in  every
step  of  scientifical  or  demonstrative  reason-
ing gave  occasion,  I  imagine,  to  that  mis-
taken axiom,  that  all  reasoning  was^.v  pne-
ccguitis  et  prceconcessis,  which,  how  far  it  is
mistaken,  I  shall  have  occasion  to  shew
more  at  large,  when  I  come  to  consider
propositions,  and  particularly  those  proposi-
tions which  are  called  maxims,  and  to  shew
that  it  is  by  a  mistake  that  they  are  sup-
posed to  be  the  foundation  of  all  our  know-
ledge and  reasonings."

1  have  carefully  considered  the  chapter
on  maxims,  which  Mr  Locke  here  refers  to  ;
and,  though  one  would  expect,  from  the
quotation  last  made,  that  it  should  run  con-
trary to  what  I  have  before  delivered  con-
cerning first  principles,  I  find  only  two  or
three  sentences  in  it,  and  those  chiefly  inci-
dental, to  which  I  do  not  assent ;  and  I  am
always  happy  in  agreeing  with  a  philoso-
pher whom  I  so  highly  respect.

He  endeavours  to  shew  that  axioms  or
intuitive  truths  are  not  innate. -J*


*  See  Stewart's  "  Elements,"  ii.  p.  49.— H.
t He  does  more. He  attempts  to  shew  that  they
are  all  generalizations  from  experience ;  whereas  ex-
2  n


466


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


To  this  I  agree.  I  maintain  only,  that
when  the  understanding  is  ripe,  and  when
we  distinctly  apprehend  such  truths,  we
immediately  assent  to  them. [644]

He  observes,  that  self-evidence  is  not
peculiar  to  those  propositions  which  pass
under  the  name  of  axioms,  and  have  the
dignity  of  axioms  ascribed  to  them.  '

I  grant  that  there  are  innumerable  self-
evident  propositions,  which  have  neither
dignity  nor  utility,  and,  therefore,  deserve
not  the  name  of  axioms,  as  that  name  is
commonly  understood  to  imply  not  only
self-evidence,  but  some  degree  of  dignity  or
utility.  That  a  man  is  a  man,  and  that  a
man  is  not  a  horse,  are  self-evident  propo-
sitions ;  but  they  are,  as  Mr  Locke  very
justly  calls  them,  trifling  propositions.  Til-
lotson  very  wittily  says  of  such  propositions,
that  they  are  so  surfeited  with  truth,  that
they  are  good  for  nothing  ;  and  as  they  de-
serve not  the  name  of  axioms,  so  neither
do  they  deserve  the  name  of  knowledge.

He  observes,  that  such  trifling  self-evi-
dent propositions  as  we  have  named  are  not
derived  from  axioms,  and  therefore  that  all
our  knowledge  is  not  derived  from  axioms.

I  grant  that  they  are  not  derived  from
axioms,  because  they  are  themselves  self-
evident.  But  it  is  an  abuse  of  words  to  call
them  knowledge,  as  it  is,  to  call  them
axioms  ;  for  no  man  can  be  said  to  be  the
wiser  or  more  knowing  for  having  millions  of
them  in  store.

He  observes,  that  the  particular  propo-
sitions contained  under  a  general  axiom  are
no  less  self-evident  than  the  general  axiom,
and  that  they  are  sooner  known  and  under-
stood. Thus,  it  is  as  evident  that  my  hand
is  less  than  my  body,  as  that  a  part  is  less
than  the  whole ;  and  I  know  the  truth  of
the  particular  proposition  sooner  than  that
of  the  general.

This  is  true.  A  man  cannot  perceive  the
truth  of  a  general  axiom,  such  as,  that  a
part  is  less  than  the  whole,  until  he  has  the
general  notions  of  a  part  and  a  whole  formed
in  his  mind  ;  and,  before  he  has  these
general  notions,  he  may  perceive  that  his
hand  is  less  than  his  body. [645]

A  great  part  of  this  chapter  on  maxims
is  levelled  against  a  notion,  which,  it  seems,
some  have  entertained,  that  all  our  know-
ledge is  derived  from  these  two  maxims —
to  wit,  whatever  is,  is  ;  and  it  is  impossible
for  the  same  thing  to  be,  and  not  to  be.  *

This  I  take  to  be  a  ridiculous  notion,
justly  deserving  the  treatment  which  Mr


perience  on'y  affords  the  occasions  on  which  the
native  (not  innate)  or  a  priori  cognitions,  virtually
possessed  by  the  mind,  actually  manifest  their  exist,
ence.— H.

*  These  are  called,  the  principle  of  Identity,  and  the
principle  of  Contradiction,  or.  more  properly,  Non.
contradiction.— H.


Locke  has  given  it,  if  it  at  all  merited  his
notice.  These  are  identical  propositions ;
they  are  trifling,  and  surfeited  with  truth.
No  knowledge  can  be  derived  from  them.

Having  mentioned  how  far  I  agree  with
Mr  Locke  concerning  maxims  or  first  prin-
ciples, I  shall  next  take  notice  of  two  or
three  things,  wherein  I  cannot  agree  with
him.

In  the  seventh  section  of  this  chapter,  he
says,  That,  concerning  the  real  existence  of
all  other  beings,  besides  ourselves  and  a
first  cause,  there  are  no  maxims.

I  have  endeavoured  to  shew  that  there
are  maxims,  or  first  principles,  with  regard
to  other  existences.  Mr  Locke  acknowledges
that  we  have  a  knowledge  of  such  existences,
which,  he  savs,  is  neither  intuitive  nor  de-
monstrative, and  which,  therefore,  he  calls
sensitive  knowledge.  It  is  demonstrable,
and  was  long  ago  demonstrated  by  Aristotle,
that  every  proposition  to  which  we  give  a
rational  assent,  must  either  have  its  evi-
dence in  itself,  or  derive  it  from  some  ante-
cedent proposition.  And  the  same  thing
may  be  said  of  the  antecedent  proposition.
As,  therefore,  we  cannot  go  back  to  ante-
cedent propositions  without  end,  the  evi-
dence must  at  last  rest  upon  propositions,
one  or  more,  which  have  their  evidence  in
themselves — that  is,  upon  first  principles.

As  to  the  evidence  of  our  own  existence,
and  of  the  existence  of  a  first  cause,  Mr
Locke  does  not  say  whether  it  rests  upon
first  principles  or  not.  But  it  is  manifest,
from  what  he  has  said  upon  both,  that  it
does. [646]

With  regard  to  our  own  existence,  says
he,  we  perceive  it  so  plainly  and  so  cer-
tainly that  it  neither  needs  nor  is  capable
of  any  proof.  This  is  as  much  as  to  say
that  our  own  existence  is  a  first  principle  ;
for  it  is  applying  to  this  truth  the  very
definition  of  a  first  principle.

He  adds,  that,  if  I  doubt,  that  very  doubt
makes  me  perceive  my  own  existence,  and
will  not  suffer  me  to  doubt  of  that.  If  I
feel  pain,  I  have  as  certain  perception  of
my  existence  as  of  the  pain  I  feel.

Here  we  have  two  first  principles  plainly
implied — First,  That  my  feeling  pain,  or
being  conscious  of  pain,  is  a  certain  evidence
of  the  real  existence  of  that  pain ;  and,
secondly,  That  pain  cannot  exist  without  a
mind  or  being  that  is  pained.  That  these
are  first  principles,  and  incapable  of  proof,
Mr  Locke  acknowledges.  And  it  is  certain,
that,  if  they  are  not  true,  we  can  have  no
evidence  of  our  own  existence  ;  for,  if  we
may  feel  pain  when  no  pain  really  exists,  or
if  pain  may  exist  without  any  being  that  is
pained,  then  it  is  certain  that  our  feeling
pain  can  give  us  no  evidence  of  our  ex-
istence.

Thus,  it  appears  that  the  evidence  of  our
[644-646]


chap,  vii.] OPINIONS  ABOUT  FIRST  PRINCIPLES.


467


own  existence,  according  to  the  view  that
Mr  Locke  gives  of  it,  is  grounded  upon  two
of  those  first  principles  which  we  had  occa-
sion to  mention.

If  we  consider  the  argument  he  has  given
for  the  existence  of  a  first  intelligent  cause,
it  is  no  less  evident  that  it  is  grounded  upon
other  two  of  them.  The  first,  That  what
begins  to  exist  must  have  a  cause  of  its  ex-
istence ;  and  the  second,  That  an  unintelli-
gent and  unthinking  being  cannot  be  the
cause  of  beings  that  are  thinking  and  in-
telligent. Upon  these  two  principles,  he
argues,  very  convincingly,  for  the  existence
of  a  first  intelligent  cause  of  things.  And,
if  these  principles  are  not  true,  we  can  have
no  proof  of  the  existence  of  a  first  cause,
either  from  our  own  existence,  or  from  the
existence  of  other  things  that  fall  within  our
view. [647]

Another  thing  advanced  by  Mr  Locke
upon  this  subject  is,  that  no  science  is  or
hath  been  built  upon  maxims.

Surely  Mr  Locke  was  not  ignorant  of
geometry,  which  hath  been  built  upon
maxims  prefixed  to  the  elements,  as  far  back
as  we  are  able  to  trace  it.-  But,  though
they  had  not  been  prefixed,  which  was  a
matter  of  utility  rather  than  necessity,  yet
it  must  be  granted  that  every  demonstra-
tion in  geometry  is  grounded  either  upon
propositions  formerly  demonstrated,  or  upon
self-evident  principles.

Mr  Locke  farther  says,  that  maxims  are
not  of  use  to  help  men  forward  in  the  ad-
vancement of  the  sciences,  or  new  dis-
coveries of  yet  unknown  truths  ;  that  New-
ton,  in  the  discoveries  he  has  made  in  his
never- enough-to-be-admired  book,  has  not
been  assisted  by  the  general  maxims — what-
ever is,  is  ;  or,  the  whole  is  greater  than  a
part ; or  the  like.

I  answer,  the  first  of  these  is,  as  was  be-
fore observed,  an  identical  trifling  proposi-
tion, of  no  use  in  mathematics,  or  in  any
other  science.  The  second  is  often  used  by
Newton,  and  by  all  mathematicians,  and
many  demonstrations  rest  upon  it.  In
general,  Newton,  as  well  as  all  other  mathe-
maticians, grounds  his  demonstrations  of
mathematical  propositions  upon  the  axioms
laid  down  by  Euclid,  or  upon  propositions
which  have  been  before  demonstrated  by
help  of  those  axioms. [643]

But  it  deserves  to  be  particularly  observed,
that  Newton,  intending,  in  the  third  book  of
his  "  Principia,"  to  give  a  more  scientific
form  to  the  physical  part  of  astronomy,
which  he  had  at  first  composed  in  a  popular
form,  thought  proper  to  follow  the  example
of  Euclid,  and  to  lay  down  first,  in  what  he


*  Compare  Stewart's  "  Elements,"  ii.  pp.  38,  43,
196.  On  this  subject,  "satius  est  silerequam  parum
dicere."— H.


£647-649]


calls  "  Rcgulce  Philosnphandi"  and  in  his
"  Phenomena"  the  first  principles  which  he
assumes  in  his  reasoning.

Nothing,  therefore,  could  have  been  more
unluckily  adduced  by  Mr  Locke  to  support
his  aversion  to  first  principles,  than  the  ex-
ample of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  who,  by  laying
down  the  first  principles  upon  which  he  rea-
sons in  those  parts  of  natural  philosophy
which  he  cultivated,  has  given  a  stability  to
that  science  which  it  never  had  before,  and
which  it  will  retain  to  the  end  of  the  world.

I  am  now  to  give  some  account  of  a  philo-
sopher, who  wrote  expressly  on  the  subject
of  first  principles,  after  Mr  Locke.

Pere  Buffier,  a  French  Jesuit,  first  pub-
lished his  "  Traite  des  premiers  Veritez,  et
de  la  Source  de  nos  Jugements"  in  8vo,  if
I  mistake  not,  in  the  year  1724.  It  was
afterwards  published  in  folio,  as  a  part  of
his  "  Cours  des- Sciences." Paris,  1732.

He  defines  first  principles  to  be  proposi-
tions so  clear  that  they  can  neither  be
proved  nor  combated  by  those  that  are  more
clear.

The  first  source  of  first  principles  he  men-
tions, is,  that  intimate  conviction  which
every  man  has  of  his  own  existence,  and  of
what  passes  in  his  own  mind.  Some  philo-
sophers, he  observes,  admitted  these  as  first
principles,  who  were  unwilling  to  admit  any
others ;  and  he  shews  the  strange  conse-
quences that  follow  from  this  system.

A  second  source  of  first  principles  he
makes  to  be  common  sense  ;  which,  he  ob-
serves, philosophers  have  not  been  wont  to
consider.  He  defines  it  to  be  the  disposi-
tion which  Nature  has  planted  in  all  men,
or  the  far  greater  part,  which  leads  them,
when  they  come  to  the  use  of  reason,  to  form
a  common  and  uniform  judgment  upon
objects  which  are  not  objects  of  conscious-
ness, nor  are  founded  on  any  antecedent
judgment. [649]

He  mentions,  not  as  a  full  enumeration,
but  as  a  specimen,  the  following  principles
of  common  sense.

1.  That  there  are  other  beings  and  other
men  in  the  universe,  besides  myself.

2.  That  there  is  in  them  something  that
is  called  truth,  wisdom,  prudence ;  and  that
these  things  are  not  purely  arbitrary.

3.  That  there  is  something  in  me  which
I  call  intelligence,  and  something  which  is
not  that  intelligence,  which  I  call  my  body  ;
and  that  these  things  have  different  pro-
perties.

4.  That  all  men  are  not  in  a  conspiracy
to  deceive  me  and  impose  upon  my  cre-
dulity.

5.  That  what  has  not  intelligence  cannot
produce  the  effects  of  intelligence,  nor  can
pieces  of  matter  thrown  together  by  chance
form  any  regular  work,  such  as  a  clock  or
watch.

2  h2


468


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


He  explains  very  particularly  the  several
parts  of  his  definition  of  common  sense,
and  shews  how  the  dictates  of  common
sense  may  be  distinguished  from  common
prejudices ;  and  then  enters  into  a  particular
consideration  of  the  primary  truths  that
concern  being  in  general ;  the  truths  that
concern  thinking  beings ;  those  that  concern
body ;  and  those  on  which  the  various
branches  of  human  knowledge  are  grounded.

I  shall  not  enter  into  a  detail  of  his  sen-
timents on  these  subjects.  I  think  there  is
more  which  I  take  to  be  original  in  this
treatise  than  in  most  books  of  the  meta-
physical kind  I  have  met  with  ;  that  many
of  his  notions  are  solid;  and  that  others,
which  I  cannot  altogether  approve,  are
ingenious. [650]

The  other  writers  I  have  mentioned,
after  Des  Cartes,  may,  I  think,  'without
impropriety,  be  called  Cartesians.  For,
though  they  differ  from  Des  Cartes  in  some
things,  and  contradict  him  in  others,  yet
they  set*out  from  the  same  principles,  and
follow  the  same  method,  admitting  no  other
first  principle  with  regard  to  the  existence
of  things  but  their  own  existence,  and  the
existence  of  those  operations  of  mind  of
which  they  are  conscious,  and  requiring
that  the  existence  of  a  material  world,  and
the  existence  of  other  men  and  things,
should  be  proved  by  argument.

This  method  of  philosophising  is  common
to  Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,  Arnauld,
Locke,  Norris,  Collier,  Berkeley,  and  Hume ;
and,  as  it  was  introduced  by  Des  Cartes,  I
call  it  the  Cartesian  system,  and  those  who
follow  it  Cartesians,  not  intending  any  dis-
respect by  this  term,  but  to  signify  a  parti-
cular method  of  philosophising  common  to
them  all,  and  begun  by  Des  Cartes.

Some  of  these  have  gone  the  utmost
length  in  scepticism,  leaving  no  existence
in  nature  but  that  of  ideas  and  impressions.
Some  have  endeavoured  to  throw  off  the
belief  of  a  material  world  only,  and  to  leave
us  ideas  and  spirits.  All  of  them  have
fallen  into  very  gross  paradoxes,  which  can
never  sit  easy  upon  the  human  understand-
ing, and  which,  though  adopted  in  the
closet,  men  find  themselves  under  a  ne-
cessity of  throwing  off  and  disclaiming  when
they  enter  into  society.

Indeed,  in  my  judgment,  those  who  have
reasoned  most  acutely  and  consequentially
upon  this  system,  are  they  that  have  gone
deepest  into  scepticism.

Father  Buffier,  however,  is  no  Cartesian
in  this  sense.  He  seems  to  have  perceived
the  defects  of  the  Cartesian  system  while
it  was  in  the  meridian  of  its  glory,  and  to
have  been  aware  that  a  ridiculous  scepticism
is  the  natural  issue  of  it,  and  therefore
nobly  attempted  to  lay  a  broader  founda-
tion  for human  knowledge,  and  has  the


honour  of  being  the  first,  as  far  as  I  know,
after  Aristotle,  who  has  given  the  world  a
just  treatise  upon  first  principles. [651]

Some  late  writers,  particularly  Dr  Os-
wald, Dr  Beattie,  and  Dr  Campbell,  have
been  led  into  a  way  of  thiuking  somewhat
similar  to  that  of  Buffier  ;  the  two  former,
as  I  have  reason  to  believe,  without  any  in-
tercourse with  one  another,  or  any  know-
ledge of  what  Buffier  had  wrote  on  the  sub-
ject. Indeed,  a  man  who  thinks,  and  who
is  acquainted  with  the  philosophy  of  Mr
Hume,  will  very  naturally  be  led  to  appre-
hend, that,  to  support  the  fabric  of  human
knowledge,  some  other  principles  are  neces-
sary than  those  of  Des  Cartes  and  Mr
Locke.  Buffier  must  be  acknowledged  to
have  the  merit  of  having  discovered  this,
before  the  consequences  of  the  Cartesian
system  were  so  fully  displayed  as  they  have
been  by  Mr  Hume.  But  I  am  apt  to  think
that  the  man  who  does  not  see  this  now,
must  have  but  a  superficial  knowledge  of
these  subjects.*

The  three  writers  above  mentioned  have
ray  high  esteem  and  affection  as  men  ;  but
I  intend  to  say  nothing  of  them  as  writers
upon  this  subject,  that  I  may  not  incur  the
censure  of  partiality.  Two  of  them  have
been  joined  so  closely  with  me  in  the  anim-
adversions of  a  celebrated  writer, -f-  that
we  may  be  thought  too  near  of  kin  to  give
our  testimony  of  one  another.


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF  PREJUDICES,  THE  CAUSES  OF  ERROR.

Our  intellectual  powers  are  wisely  fitted
by  the  Author  of  our  nature  for  the  disco-
very of  truth,. as  far  as  suits  our  present
state.  Error  is  not  their  natural  issue,  any
more  than  disease  is  of  the  natural  structure
of  the  body.  Yet,  as  we  are  liable  to  vari-
ous diseases  of  body  from  accidental  causes,
external  and  internal ;  so  we  are,  from  like
causes,  liable  to  wrong  judgments. [652]

Medical  writers  have  endeavoured  to  enu-
merate the  diseases  of  the  body,  and  to  re-
duce them  to  a  system,  under  the  name  of
nosology  ;  and  it  were  to  be  wished  that  we
had  also  a  nosology  of  the  human  under-
standing.

When  we  know  a  disorder  of  the  body,
we  are  often  at  a  loss  to  find  the  proper
remedy  ;  but  in  most  cases  the  disorders  of
the  understanding  point  out  their  remedies
so  plainly,  that  he  who  knows  the  one  must
know  the  other.

Many  authors  have  furnished  useful  ma-
terials for  this  purpose,  and  some  have  en-
deavoured to  reduce  them  to  a  system. I


*  See  Note  A.— H.


t  Priestley.— H.
[650-852]


cuap.  viii.] OF  PIIEJUDICES,  THE  CAUSES  OF  ERROR.


469


like  best  the  general  division  given  of  thein
by  Lord  Bacon,  in  his  fifth  book  "  De  Aug-
tnevJis  Scientiarum"  and  more  fully  treated
in  his  "  Novum  Organutn."  He  divides
them  into  four  classes — idola  tribus,  idola
specus,  idola  fori,  and  idola  theatri.  The
names  are  perhaps  fanciful ;  but  I  think
the  division  judicious,  like  most  of  the  pro-
ductions of  that  wonderful  genius.  And  as
this  division  was  first  made  by  him,  he  may
be  indulged  the  privilege  of  giving  names
to  its  several  members.

I  propose  in  this  chapter  to  explain  the
several  members  of  this  division,  according
to  the  meaning  of  the  author,  and  to  give
instances  of  each,  without  confining  myself
to  those  which  Lord  Bacon  has  given,  and
without  pretending  to  a  complete  enumera-
tion.

To  every  bias  of  the  understanding,  by  which
a  man  may  be  misled  in  judging,  or  drawn
into  error,  Lord  Bacon  gives  the  name  of
an  idol.  The  understanding,  in  its  natural
and  best  state,  pays  its  homage  to  truth
only.  The  causes  of  error  are  considered
by  him  as  so  many  false  deities,  who  receive
the  homage  which  is  due  only  to  truth.
[653]

A.  The  first  class  are  the  idola  tribus.
The.-e  are  such  as  beset  the  whole  human
species  ,'  so  that  every  man  is  in  danger
from  them.  They  arise  from  principles  of
the  human  constitution,  which  are  highly
useful  and  necessary  in  our  present  state  ;
but,  by  their  excess  or  defect,  or  wrong
direction,  may  lead  us  into  error.

As  the  active  principles  of  the  human
frame  are  wisely  contrived  by  the  Author
of  our  being  for  the  direction  of  our  ac-
tions, and  yet,  without  proper  regulation
and  restraint,  are  apt  to  lead  us  wrong,  so
it  is  also  with  regard  to  those  parts  of  our
constitution  that  have  influence  upon  our
opinions.  Of  this  we  may  take  the  follow-
ing instances  : —

1.  First, — Men  are  prone  to  be  led  too
much  by  authority  in  their  opinions.

In  the  first  part  of  life,  we  have  no  other
guide  ;  and,  without  a  disposition  to  receive
implicitly  what  we  are  taught,  we  should
be  incapable  of  instruction,  and  incapable
of  improvement.

When  judgment  is  ripe,  there  are  many
things  in  which  we  are  incompetent  judges.
In  such  matters,  it  is  most  reasonable  to
rely  upon  the  judgment  of  those  whom  we
believe  to  be  competent  and  disinterested.
The  highest  court  of  judicature  in  the
nation  relies  upon  the  authority  of  lawyers
and  physicians  in  matters  belonging  to
their  respective  professions.

Even  in  matters  which  we  have  access
to  know,  authority  always  will  have,  and
ought  to  have,  more  or  less  weight,  in  pro-
portion to  the  evidence  on  which  our  own
[>  53-  65  5]


judgment  rests,  and  the  opinion  we  have  of
the  judgment  and  candour  of  those  who
differ  from  us,  or  agree  with  us  The
modest  man,  conscious  of  his  own  fal-
libility in  judging,  is  in  danger  of  giving
too  much  to  authority;  the  arrogant  of
giving  too  little. [654]

In  all  matters  belonging  to  our  cog-
nizance, every  man  must  be  determined  by
his  own  final  judgment,  otherwise  he  does
not  act  the  part  of  a  rational  being.
Authority  may  add  weight  to  one  scale ;
but  the  man  holds  the  balance,  and  judges
what  weight  he  ought  to  allow  to  authority.

If  a  man  should  even  claim  infallibility,
we  must  judge  of  his  title  to  that  preroga-
tive. If  a  man  pretend  to  be  an  ambassa-
dor from  heaven,  we  must  judge  of  his
credentials.  No  claim  can  _  deprive  us  of
this  right,  or  excuse  us  for  neglecting  to
exercise  it.

As,  therefore,  our  regard  to  authority
may  be  either  too  great  or  too  small,  the
bias  of  human  nature  seems  to  lean  to  the
first  of  these  extremes  ;  and  I  believe  it  is
good  for  men  in  general  that  it  should  do  so.

When  this  bias  concurs  with  an  in  differ.
ence  about  truth,  its  operation  will  be  the
more  powerful.

The  love  of  truth  is  natural  to  man,  and
strong  in  every  well-disposed  mind.  But
it  may  be  overborne  by  party  zeal,  by
vanity,  by  the  desire  of  victory,  or  even  by
laziness.  When  it  is  superior  to  these,  it
is  a  manly  virtue,  and  requires  the  exer-
cise of  industry,  fortitude,  self-denial,  can-
dour, and  openness  to  conviction.

As  there  are  persons  in  the  world  of  so
mean  and  abject  a  spirit  that  they  rather
choose  to  owe  their  subsistence  to  the
charity  of  others,  than  by  industry  to  ac-
quire some  property  of  their  own  ;  so  there
are  many  more  who  may  be  called  mere
beggars  with  regard  to  their  opinions.
Through  laziness  and  indifference  about
truth,  they  leave  to  others  the  drudgery  of
digging  for  this  commodity  ;  they  can  have
enough  at  second  hand  to  serve  their  occa-
sions. Their  concern  is  not  to  know  what
is  true,  but  what  is  said  and  thought  on
such  subjects ;  and  their  understanding,
like  their  clothes,  is  cut  according  to  the
fashion. [655]

This  distemper  of  the  understanding  has
taken  so  deep  root  in  a  great  part  of  man-
kind, that  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  they
use  their  own  judgment  in  things  that  do
not  concern  their  temporal  interest.  Nor  is
it  peculiar  to  the  ignorant ;  it  infects  all
ranks.  We  may  guess  their  opinions  when
we  know  where  they  were  born,  of  what
parents,  how  educated,  and  what  company
they  have  kept.  These  circumstances  de-
termine their  opinions  in  religion,  in  politics,
and  in  philosophy.


470


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


2.  A  second  general  prejudice  arises  from
a  disposition  to  measure  things  less  known
and  less  familiar,  by  those  that  are  better
known  and  more  familiar.

This  is  the  foundation  of  analogical  rea-
soning, to  which  we  have  a  great  proneness
by  nature,  and  to  it  indeed  we  owe  a  great
part  of  our  knowledge.  It  would  be  absurd
to  lay  aside  this  kind  of  reasoning  altogether,
and  it  is  difficult  to  judge  how  far  we  may
venture  upon  it.  The  bias  of  human  nature
is  to  judge  from  too  slight  analogies.

The  objects  of  sense  engross  our  thoughts
m  the  first  part  of  life,  and  are  most  fami-
liar through  the  whole  of  it.  Hence,  in  all
ages  men  have  been  prone  to  attribute  the
human  figure  and  human  passions  and  frail-
ties to  superior  intelligences,  and  even  to
the  Supreme  Being.

There  is  a  disposition  in  men  to  mate-
rialize everything,  if  I  may  be  allowed  the
expression  ;  that  is,  to  apply  the  notions  we
have  of  material  objects  to  things  of  another
nature.  Thought  is  considered  as  analogous
to  motion  in  a  body ;  and  as  bodies  are  put
in  motion  by  impulses,  and  by  impressions
made  upon  them  by  contiguous  objects,  we
are  apt  to  conclude  that  the  mind  is  made
to  think  by  impressions  made  upon  it,  and
that  there  must  be  some  kind  of  contiguity
between  it  and  the  objects  of  thought.
Hence  the  theories  of  ideas  and  impressions
have  so  generally  prevailed. [656]

Because  the  most  perfect  works  of  human
artists  are  made  after  a  model,  and  of  ma-
terials that  before  existed,  the  ancient  phi-
losophers universally  believed  that  the  world
was  made  of  a  pre-existent  uncreated  matter ;
and  many  of  them,  that  there  were  eternal
and  uncreated  models  of  every  species  of
things  which  God  made.

The  mistakes  in  common  life,  which  are
owing  to  this  prejudice,  are  innumerable,
and  cannot  escape  the  slightest  observation.
Men  judge  of  other  men  by  themselves,  or
by  the  small  circle  of  their  acquaintance.
The  selfish  man  thinks  all  pretences  to  be-
nevolence and  public  spirit  to  be  mere
hypocrisy  or  self-deceit.  The  generous  and
open-hearted  believe  fair  pretences  too
easily,  and  are  apt  to  think  men  better  than
they  really  are.  The  abandoned  and  pro-
fligate can  hardly  be  persuaded  that  there
is  any  such  thing  as  real  virtue  in  the  world.
The  rustic  forms  his  notions  of  the  man-
ners and  characters  of  men  from  those  of
his  country  village,  and  is  easily  duped  when
he  comes  into  a  great  city.

It  is  commonly  taken  for  granted,  that
this  narrow  way  of  judging  of  men  is  to  be
cured  only  by  an  extensive  intercourse  with
men  of  different  ranks,  professions,  and
nations  ;  and  that  the  man  whose  acquaint-
ance has  been  confined  within  a  narrow
^ircle,  must  have  many  prejudices  and  nar-


row notions,  which  a  more  extensive  inter-
course would  have,  cured.

3.  Men  are  often  led  into  error  by  the
love  of  simplicity,  which  disposes  us  to  re-
duce things  to  few  principles,  and  to  con-
ceive a  greater  simplicity  in  nature  than
there  really  is.* [ 657 ]

To  love  simplicity,  and  to  be  pleased  with
it  wherever  we  find  it,  is  no  imperfection,
but  the  contrary.  It  is  the  result  of  good
taste.  "We  cannot  but  be  pleased  to  ob-
serve, that  all  the  changes  of  motion  pro-
duced by  the  collision  of  bodies,  hard,  soft,
or  elastic,  are  reducible  to  three  simple
laws  of  motion,  which  the  industry  of  phi-
losophers has  discovered.

When  we  consider  what  a  prodigious
variety  of  effects  depend  upon  the  law  of
gravitation ;  how  many  phenomena  in  the
earth,  sea,  and  air,  which,  in  all  preceding
ages,  had  tortured  the  wits  of  philosophers,
and  occasioned  a  thousand  vain  theories,
are  shewn  to  be  the  necessary  consequences
of  this  one  law  ;  how  the  whole  system  of
sun,  moon,  planets,  primary  and  secondary,
and  comets,  are  kept  in  order  by  it,  and
their  seeming  irregularities  accounted  for
and  reduced  to  accurate  measure — the  sim-
plicity of  the  cause,  and  the  beauty  and
variety  of  the  effects,  must  give  pleasure  to
every  contemplative  mind.  By  this  noble
discovery,  we  are  taken,  as  it  were,  behind
the  scene  in  this  great  drama  of  nature,
and  made  to  behold  some  part  of  the  art  of
the  divine  Author  of  this  system,  which,
before  this  discovery,  eye  had  not  seen,  nor
ear  heard,  nor  had  it  entered  into  the  heart
of  man  to  conceive.

There  is,  without  doubt,  in  every  work
of  nature,  all  the  beautiful  simplicity  that  is
consistent  with  the  end  for  which  it  was
made.  But,  if  we  hope  to  discover  how
nature  brings  about  its  ends,  merely  from
this  principle,  that  it  operates  in  the  simplest
and  best  way,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and
forget  that  the  wisdom  of  nature  is  more
above  the  wisdom  of  man,  than  man's  wis-
dom is  above  that  of  a  child.

If  a  child  should  sit  down  to  contrive  how
a  city  is  to  be  fortified,  or  an  army  arranged
in  the  day  of  battle,  he  would,  no  doubt,
conjecture  what,  to  his  understanding,  ap-
peared the  simplest  and  best  way.  But
could  he  ever  hit  upon  the  true  way  ?  No
surely.  When  he  learns  from  fact  how
these  effects  are  produced,  he  will  then  see
how  foolish  his  childish  conjectures  were.
[658]

We  may  learn  something  of  the  way  in
which  nature  operates  from  fact  and  ob-
servation ;  but,  if  we  conclude  that  it  ope-
rates in  such  a  manner,  only  because  to  our


*  See  "  Inquiry,"  ch.  vii.  \  3,  above,  p.  206,  sqq
—  H.


[656-658]


chap,  viii.] OF  PREJUDICES,  THE  CAUSES  OF  ERROR.


471


understanding  that  appears  to  be  the  best
and  simplest  manner,  we  shall  always  go
wrong.

It  was  believed,  for  many  ages,  that  all
the  variety  of  concrete  bodies  we  find  on
this  globe  is  reducible  to  four  elements,  of
which  they  are  compounded,  and  into  which
they  may  be  resolved.  It  was  the  simpli-
city of  this  theory,  and  not  any  evidence
from  fact,  that  made  it  to  be  so  generally
received  ;  for  the  more  it  is  examined,  we
find  the  less  ground  to  believe  it.

The  Pythagoreans  and  Platonists  were
carried  farther  by  the  same  love  of  sim-
plicity. Pythagoras,  by  his  skill  in  mathe-
matics, discovered,  that  there  can  be .  no
more  than  five  regular  solid  figures,  ter-
minated by  plain  surfaces,  which  are  all
similar  and  equal;  to  wit,  the  tetrahedron,
the  cube,  the  octahedron,  the  dodecahedron,
and  the  eicosihedron.  As  nature  works  in
the  most  simple  and  regular  way,  he  thought
that  all  the  elementary  bodies  must  have
one  or  other  of  those  regular  figures  ;  and
that  the  discovery  of  the  properties  and
relations  of  the  regular  solids  would  be  a
key  to  open  the  mysteries  of  nature.

This  notion  of  the  Pythagoreans  and
Platonists  has  undoubtedly  great  beauty
and  simplicity.  Accordingly  it  prevailed,
at  least,  to  the  time  of  Euclid.  He  was
a  Platonic  philosopher,  and  is  said  to  have
wrote  all  the  books  of  his  "  Elements"  in
order  to  discover  the  properties  and  rela-
tions of  the  five  regular  solids.  This  ancient
tradition  of  the  intention  of  Euclid  in  writing
his  "  Elements,"  is  countenanced  by  the
work  itself.  For  the  last  books  of  the
"  Elements"  treat  of  the  regular  solids,  and
all  the  preceding  are  subservient  to  the
last. [659]

So  that  this  most  ancient  mathematical
work,  which,  for  its  admirable  composition,
has  served  as  a  model  to  all  succeeding
writers  in  mathematics,  seems,  like  the  two
first  books  of  Newton's  "Principia,"  to
have  been  intended  by  its  author  to  exhibit
the  mathematical  principles  of  natural  phi-
sophy.

It  was  long  believed,  that  all  the  qualities
of  bodies,*  and  all  their  medical  virtues,
were  reducible  to  four — moisture  and  dry-
ness, heat  and  cold;  and  that  there  are
only  four  temperaments  of  the  human  body —
the  sanguine,  the  melancholy,  the  bilious,
and  the  phlegmatic.  The  chemical  system,
of  reducing  all  bodies  to  salt,  sulphur,  and
mercury,  was  of  the  same  kind.  For  how
many  ages  did  men  believe,  that  the  division
of  all  the  objects  of  thought  into  ten  cate-
gories, and  of  all  that  can  be  affirmed  or
denied  of  anything,  into  five  universals  or
predicables,  were  perfect  enumerations  ?

"~*  Only  the  qualitatcs  primes  of  the  Peripatetics.—

H.

[65f),  66o]


The  evidence  from  reason  that  could  be
produced  for  those  systems  was  next  to  no-
thing, and  bore  no  proportion  to  the  ground
they  gained  in  the  belief  of  men ;  but  they
were  simple  and  regular,  and  reduced  things
to  a  few  principles ;  and  this  supplied  their
want  of  evidence.

Of  all  the  systems  we  know,  that  of  Des
Cartes  was  most  remarkable  for  its  sim-
plicity.* Upon  one  proposition,  /  I '.ink,
he  builds  the  whole  fabric  of  human  know-
ledge. And  from  mere  matter,  with  a
certain  quantity  of  motion  given  it  at  first,
he  accounts  for  all  the  phaenomena  of  the
material  world.

The  physical  part  of  this  system  was
mere  hypothesis.  It  had  nothing  to  re-
commend it  but  its  simplicity  ;  yet  it  had
force  enough  to  overturn  the  system  of
Aristotle,  after  that  system  had  prevailed
for  more  than  a  thousand  years.

The  principle  of  gravitation,  and  other
attracting  and  repelling  forces,  after  Sir
Isaac  Newton  had  given  the  strongest  evi-
dence of  their  real  existence  in  nature,  were
rejected  by  the  greatest  part  of  Europe  for
half  a  century,  because  they  could  not  be
accounted  for  by  matter  and  motion.  So
much  were  men  enamoured  with  the  sim-
plicity of  the  Cartesian  system. [660]

Nay,  I  apprehend,  it  was  this  love  of
simplicity,  more  than  real  evidence,  that  led
Newton  himself  to  say,  in  the  preface  to  his
"  Principia,"  speaking  of  the  phaenomena
of  the  material  world — "  Nam  multa  me
movent  ut  nonnihil  suspicer,  ea  omnia  ex
viribus  quibusdam  pendere  posse,  quibus
corporum  particular,  per  causas  nondum
cognitas,  vel  in  se  mutuo  impelluntur,  et
secundum  figuras  regulares  cohaerent,  vel
ab  invicem  fugantur  et  recedunt."  For
certainly  we  have  no  evidence  from  fact,
that  all  the  phaenomena  of  the  material
world  are  produced  by  attracting  or  repell-
ing forces.

With  his  usual  modesty,  he  proposes  it
only  as  a  slight  suspicion  ;  and  the  ground
of  this  suspicion  could  only  be,  that  he  saw-
that  many  of  the  phaenomena  of  nature  de-
pended upon  causes  of  this  kind  ;  and  there-
fore was  disposed,  from  the  simplicity  of
nature,  to  think  that  all  do.

When  a  real  cause  is  discovered,  the
same  love  of  simplicity  leads  men  to  attri-
bute effects  to  it  which  are  beyond  its  pro-
vince.

A  medicine  that  is  found  to  be  of  great
use  in  one  distemper,  commonly  has  its
virtues  multiplied,  till  it  becomes  a  panacea.
Those  who  have  lived  long,  can  recollect
many  instances  of  this.  In  other  branches
of  knowledge,  the  same  thing  often  happens.
When  the  attention  of  men  is  turned  to  any

*  See  above,  p.  206,  b,  note  f.—  H.


472


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


particular  cause,  by  discovering  it  to  have
remarkable  effects,  they  are  in  great  danger
of  extending  its  influence,  upon  slight  evi-
dence, to  things  with  which  it  has  no  con-
nection. Such  prejudices  arise  from  the
natural  desire  of  simplifying  natural  causes,
and  of  accounting  for  many  phsenomena
from  the  same  principle. [661]

4.  One  of  the  most  copious  sources  of
error  in  philosophy  is  the  misapplication  of
our  noblest  intellectual  power  to  purposes  for
which  it  is  incompetent.

Of  all  the  intellectual  powers  of  man,
that  of  invention  bears  the  highest  price.
It  resembles  most  the  power  of  creation,
and  is  honoured  with  that  name.

We  admire  the  man  who  shews  a  supe-
riority in  the  talent  of  finding  the  means  of
accomplishing  an  end  ;  who  can,  by  a  happy
combination,  produce  an  effect,  or  make  a
discovery  beyond  the  reach  of  other  men  ;
who  can  draw  important  conclusions  from
circumstances  that  commonly  pass  unob-
served ;  who  judges  with  the  greatest  saga-
city of  the  designs  of  other  men,  and  the
consequences  of  his  own  actions.  To  this
superiority  of  understanding  we  give  the
name  of  genius,  and  look  up  with  admira-
tion to  everything  that  bears  the  marks  of  it.

Yet  this  power,  so  highly  valuable  in  it-
self, and  so  useful  in  the  conduct  of  life,
may  be  misapplied ;  and  men  of  genius,  in
all  ages,  have  been  prone  to  apply  it  to  pur-
poses for  which  it  is  altogether  incompe-
tent.

The  works  of  men  and  the  works  of
Nature  are  not  of  the  same  order.  The
force  of  genius  may  enable  a  man  perfectly
to  comprehend  the  former,  and  see  them  to
the  bottom.  What  is  contrived  and  exe-
cuted by  one  man  may  be  perfectly  under-
stood by  another  man.  With  great  proba-
bility, he  may  from  a  part  conjecture  the
whole,  or  from  the  effects  may  conjecture
the  causes ;  because  they  are  effects  of  a
wisdom  not  superior  to  his  own. [662]

But  the  works  of  Nature  are  contrived
and  executed  by  a  wisdom  and  power  in-
finitely superior  to  that  of  man  ;  and  when
men  attempt,  by  the  force  of  genius,  to  dis-
cover the  causes  of  the  phsenomena  of  Na-
ture, they  have  only  the  chance  of  going
wrong  more  ingeniously.  Their  conjectures
may  appear  very  probable  to  beings  no
wiser  than  themselves ;  but  they  have  no
chance  to  hit  the  truth.  They  are  like  the
conjectures  of  a  child  how  a  ship  of  war  is
built,  and  how  it  is  managed  at  sea.

Let  the  man  of  genius  try  to  make  an
animal,  even  the  meanest ;  to  make  a  plant,
or  even  a  single  leaf  of  a  plant,  or  a  feather
of  a  bird  ;  he  will  find  that  all  his  wisdom
and  sagacity  can  bear  no  comparison  with
the  wisdom  of  Nature,  nor  his  power  with
the  power  of  Nature.


The  experience  of  all  ages  shews  how
prone  ingenious  men  have  been  to  invent
hypotheses  to  explain  the  phsenomena  of
Nature ;  how  fond,  by  a  kind  of  anticipa-
tion, to  discover  her  secrets.  Instead  of  a
slow  and  gradual  ascent  in  the  scale  of  na-
tural causes,  by  a  just  and  copious  induc-
tion, they  would  shorten  the  work,  and,  by
a  flight  of  genius,  get  to  the  top  at  once.
This  gratifies  the  pride  of  human  under-
standing ;  but  it  is  an  attempt  beyond  our
force,  like  that  of  Phaeton  to  guide  the
chariot  of  the  sun.

When  a  man  has  laid  out  all  his  inge-
nuity in  fabricating  a  system,  he  views  it
with  the  eye  of  a  parent ;  he  strains  phse-
nomena to  make  them  tally  with  it,  and
make  it  look  like  the  work  of  Nature.

The  slow  and  patient  method  of  induc-
tion, the  only  way  to  attain  any  knowledge
of  Nature's  work,  was  little  understood
untd  it  was  delineated  by  Lord  Bacon,  and
has  been  little  followed  since.  It  humbles
the  pride  of  man,  and  puts  him  constantly  in
mind  that  his  most  ingenious  conjectures
with  regard  to  the  works  of  God  are  pitiful
and  childish. [663]

There  is  no  room  here  for  the  favourite
talent  of  invention.  In  the  humble  method
of  information,  from  the  great  volume  of
Nature  Ave  must  receive  all  our  knowledge
of  Nature.  Whatever  is  beyond  a  just  in-
terpretation of  that  volume  is  the  work  of
man  ;  and  the  work  of  God  ought  not  to  be
contaminated  by  any  mixture  with  it.

To  a  man  of  genius,  self-denial  is  a  diffi-
cult lesson  in  philosophy  as  well  as  in  reli-
gion. To  bring  his  fine  imaginations  and
most  ingenious  conjectures  to  the  fiery  trial
of  experiment  and  induction,  by  which  the
greater  part,  if  not  the  whole,  will'  be
found  to  be  dross,  is  a  humiliating  task.
This  is  to  condemn  him  to  dig  in  a  mine,
when  he  would  fly  -with  the  wings  of  an
eagle.

In  all  the  fine  arts,  whose  end  is  to
please,  genius  is  deservedly  supreme.  In
the  conduct  of  human  affairs,  it  often  does
wonders  ;  but  in  all  inquiries  into  the  con-
stitution of  Nature,  it  must  act  a  subor-
dinate part,  ill-suited  to  the  superiority  it
boasts.  It  may  combine,  but  it  must  not
fabricate.  It  may  collect  evidence,  but
must  not  supply  the  want  of  it  by  conjec-
ture. It  may  display  its  powers  by  putting
Nature  to  the  question  in  well-contrived
experiments,  but  it  must  add  nothing  to  her
answers.

5.  In  avoiding  one  extreme,  men  are  very
apt  to  rush  into  the  opposite.

Thus,  in  rude  ages,  men,  unaccustomed
to  search  for  natural  causes,  ascribe  every
uncommon  appearance  to  the  immediate
interposition  of  invisible  beings  ;  but  when
philosophv  has  discovered  natural  causes  of
[661-OGS]


chap viii.] OF  PREJUDICES,  THE  CAUSES  OF  ERROR.


473


many  events,  which,  in  the  days  of  ignor-
ance, were  ascribed  to  the  immediate  opera-
tion of  gods  or  daemons,  they  are  apt  to
think  that  all  the  phenomena  of  Nature
may  be  accounted  for  in  the  same  way.  and
that  there  is  no  need  of  an  invisible  Maker
and  Governor  of  the  world. [664]

Rude  men  are,  at  first,  disposed  to  ascribe
intelligence  and  active  power  to  everything
they  see  move  or  undergo  any  change.
"  Savages,"  says  the  Abbe  Raynal,  "  where-
ever  they  see  motion  which  they  cannot
account  for,  there  they  suppose  a  soul."
When  they  come  to  be  convinced  of  the
folly  of  this  extreme,  they  are  apt  to  run
into  the  opposite,  and  to  think  that  every
thing  moves  only  as  it  is  moved,  and  acts
as  it  is  acted  upon.

Thus,  from  the  extreme  of  superstition,
the  transition  is  easy  to  that  of  atheism  ;
and  from  the  extreme  of  ascribing  activity
to  every  part  of  Nature,  to  that  of  exclud-
ing it  altogether,  and  making  even  the  deter-
minations of  intelligent  beings,  the  links  of
one  fatal  chain,  or  the  wheels  of  one  great
machine.

The  abuse  of  occult  qualities  in  the  Peri-
patetic philosophy  led  Des  Cartes  and  his
followers  to  reject  all  occult  qualities,  to
pretend  to  explain  all  the  phenomena  of
Nature  by  mere  matter  and  motion,  and
even  to  fix  disgrace  upon  the  name  of  occult
quality.

6.  Men's  judgments  are  often  perverted
oy  their  affections  and  passions.  This  is
so  commonly  observed,  and  so  universally
acknowledged,  that  it  needs  no  proof  nor
illustration.

B.  The  second  class  of  idols  in  Lord
Bacon's  division  are  the  idola  specus.

These  are  p.ejudices  which  have  their
origin,  not  from  the  constitution  of  human
nature,  but  from  some  thing  peculiar  to  the
individual.

As  in  a  cave  objects  vary  in  their  appear-
ance according  to  the  form  of  the  cave  and
the  manner  in  which  it  receives  the  light.
Lord  Bacon  conceives  the  mind  of  every
man  to  resemble  a  cave,  which  has  its  par-
ticular form,  and  its  particular  manner  of
being  enlightened  ;  and,  from  these  circum-
stances, often  gives  false  colours  and  a  delu-
sive appearance  to  objects  seen  in  it.  *  [665]

For  this'reason  he  gives  the  name  oi  idola
specus  to  those  prejudices  which  arise  from
the  particular  way  in  which  a  man  has  been
trained,,  from  his  being  addicted  to  some
particular  profession,  or  from  something
particular  in  the  turn  of  his  mind.

A  man  whose  thoughts  have  been  con-


*  If  Bacon  took-  his  similcof  the  cave.from  Plato,
lie  has  perverted  it  Irom  its  proper  meaning;  for,  in
the  Platon:c  signification,  the-  idola  specus  should
denote  the  prejudices. of  the  species,  and  not  of  the
individual — that  is,  expre-s  what  Bacon  denominates
by  idola  trilnts.—  H .


[661-666]


fined  to  a  certain  track  by  his  profession  or
manner  of  life,  is  very  apt  to  judge  wrong
when  he  ventures  out  of  that  track.  He  is
apt  to  draw  everything  within  the  sphere  of
his  profession,  and  to  judge  by  its  maxims
of  things  that  have  no  relation  to  it.

The  mere  mathematician  is  apt  to  apply
measure  and  calculation  to  things  which  do
not  admit  of  it.  Direct  and  inverse  ratios
have  been  applied  by  an  ingenious  author  to
measure  human  affections,  and  the  moral
worth  of  actions.  An  eminent  mathemati-
cian* attempted  to  ascertain  by  calculation
the  ratio  in  which  the  evidence  of  facts
must  decrease  in  the  course-  of  time,  and
fixed  the  period  when  the  evidence  of  the
facts  on  which  Christianity  is  founded  shall
become  evanescent,  and  when  in  conse-
quence no  faith  shall  be  found  on  the  earth.
1  have  seen  a  philosophical  dissertation,
published  by  a  very  good  mathematician,
wherein,  in  opposition  to  the  ancient  divi-
sion of  things  into  ten  categories,  he  main-
tains that  there  arc  no  more,  and  can  be  no
more  than  two  categories,  to  wit,  data  and
qacesita.-f

The  ancient  chemists  were  wont  to  ex-
plain all  the  mysteries  of  Nature,  and  even
of  religion,  by  salt,  sulphur,  and  mercury.

Mr  Locke,  I  think,  mentions  an  eminent
musician,  who  believed  that  God  created
the  world  in  six  days,  and  rested  the  se-
venth, because  there  are  but  seven  notes  in
music.  I  knew  one  of  that  profession,  who
thought  that  there  could  be  only  three  parts
in  harmony — to  wit,  bass,  tenor,  and  treble
— because  there  are  but  three  persons  in  the
Trinity. [666]

The  learned  and  ingenious  Dr  Henry
More  having  very  elaborately  and  methodi-
cally compiled  his  "  Enchirid'mm  Metaphy-
sician," and  "  Enchiridium  Eihicum"
found  all  the  divisions  and  subdivisions  of
both  to  be  allegorically  taught  in  the  first
chapter  of  Genesis.  Thus  even  very  inge-
nious men  are  apt  to  make  a  ridiculous
figure,  by  drawing  into  the  track  in  which
their  thoughts  have  long  run,  things  alto-
gether foreign  to  it.  J

Different  persons,  either  from  temper  or
from  education,  have  different  tendencies  of
understanding,  which,  by  their  excess,  are
unfavourable  to  sound  judgment.

Some  have  an  undue  admiration  of  anti-
quity, and  contempt  of  whatever  is  modern ;
others  go  as  far  into  the  contrary  extreme.
It  may  be  judged,  that  the  former. are  per-

*  Craig.— H.

t  Reid  refers  to  his  uncle,  James  Gregory,  Profes-
sor of  Mathematics  in  St  Andrew's  and  Edinburgh.
See  above,  p.  6S,  b. .  — H.
%  "  Musicians  think  our  souls  are  harmonies  ;
Physicians  held  that  they  complexions  he
Epicures  make  them  swarms  of  atomies,
Which  do  by  chance  into  the  body  flee.
Sir  John  Davies,  in  the  first  and  second  lints,  al
ludes  to  Aristoxcnus  and  Cialen.—  H.


474


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VI.


sons  who  value  themselves  upon  their  ac-
quaintance with  ancient  authors,  and  the
latter  such  as  have  little  knowledge  of  this
kind.

Some  are  afraid  to  venture  a  step  out  of  the
beaten  track,  and  think  it  safest  to  go  with
the  multitude  ;  others  are  fond  of  singulari-
ties, and  of  everything  that  has  the  air  of
paradox.

Some  are  desultory  and  changeable  in
their  opinions ;  others  unduly  tenacious.
Most  men  have  a  predilection  for  the  tenets
of  their  sect  or  party,  and  still  more  for
their  own  inventions.

C.  The  idolafori  are  the  fallacies  arising
from  the  imperfections  and  the  abuse  of  lan-
guage, which  is  an  instrument  of  thought
as  well  as  of  the  communication  of  our
thoughts. [667]

Whether  it  be  the  effect  of  constitution
or  of  habit,  I  will  not  take  upon  me  to  de-
termine ;  but,  .from  one  or  both  of  these
causes,  it  happens  that  no  man  can  pursue
a  train  of  thought  or  reasoning  without  the
use  of  language.  Words  are  the  signs  of
our  thoughts ;  and  the  sign  is  so  associated
with  the  thing  signified,  that  the  last  can
hardly  present  itself  to  the  imagination,
without  drawing  the  other  along  with  it.

A  man  who  would  compose  in  any  lan-
guage must  think  in  that  language.  If  he
thinks  in  one  language  what  he  would  ex-
press in  another,  he  thereby  doubles  his
labour ;  and,  after  all,  his  expressions  will
have  more  the  air  of  a  translation  than  of
an  original.

This  shews  that  our  thoughts  take  their
colour  in  some  degree  from  the  language
we  use ;  and  that,  although  language  ought
always  to  be  subservient  to  thought,  yet
thought  must  be,  at  some  times  and  in  some
degree,  subservient  to  language.

As  a  servant  that  is  extremely  useful  and
necessary  to  his  master,  by  degrees  acquires
an  authority  over  him,  so  that  the  master
must  often  yield  to  the  servant,  such  is  the
case  with  regard  to  language.  Its  inten-
tion is  to  be  a  servant  to  the  understanding ;
but  it  is  so  useful  and  so  necessary  that  we
cannot  avoid  being  sometimes  led  by  it  when
it  ought  to  follow.  We  cannot  shake  off
this  impediment — we  must  drag  it  along
with  us ;  and,  therefore,  must  direct  our
course,  and  regulate  our  pace,  as  it  permits.

Language  must  have  many  imperfections
when  applied  to  philosophy,  because  it  was
not  made  for  that  use.  In  the  early  periods
of  society,  rude  and  ignorant  men  use  cer-
tain forms  of  speech,  to  express  their  wants,
their  desires,  and  their  transactions  with
one  another.  Their  language  can  reach  no
farther  than  their  speculations  and  notions ;
and,  if  their  notions  be  vague  and  ill-defined,
the  words  by  which  they  express  them  must
be  so  likewise.


It  was  a  grand  and  noble  project  of
Bishop  Wilkins*  to  invent  a  philosophical
language,  which  should  be  free  from  the
imperfections  of  vulgar  languages.  Whether
this  attempt  will  ever  succeed,  so  far  as  to
be  generally  useful,  I  shall  not  pretend  to
determine.  The  great  pains  taken  by  that
excellent  man  in  this  design  have  hitherto
produced  no  effect.  Very  few  have  ever
entered  minutely  into  his  views  ;  far  less
have  his  philosophical  language  and  his  real
character  been  brought  into  use. [668]

He  founds  his  philosophical  language  and
real  character  upon  a  systematical  division
and  subdivision  of  all  the  things  which  may
be  expressed  by  language ;  and,  instead  of
the  ancient  division  into  ten  categories,  has
made  forty  categories,  or  summa  genera.
But  whether  this  division,  though  made  by
a  very  comprehensive  mind,  will  always  suit
the  various  systems  that  may  be  introduced,
and  all  the  real  improvements  that  may  be
made  in  human  knowledge,  may  be  doubted.
The  difficulty  is  still  greater  in  the  sub-
divisions ;  so  that  it  is  to  be  feared  that
this  noble  attempt  of  a  great  genius  will
prove  abortive,  until  philosophers  have  the
same  opinions  and  the  same  systems  in  the
various  branches  of  human  knowledge.

There  is  more  reason  to  hope  that  the
languages  used  by  philosophers  may  be
gradually  improved  in  copiousness  and  in
distinctness ;  and  that  improvements  in
knowledge  and  in  language  may  go  hand  in
hand  and  facilitate  each  other.  But  I  fear
the  imperfections  of  language  can  never  be
perfectly  remedied  while  our  knowledge  *.is
imperfect.

However  this  may  be,  it  is  evident  that
the  imperfections  of  language,  and  much
more  the  abuse  of  it,  are  the  occasion  of
many  errors  ;  and  that  in  many  disputes
which  have  engaged  learned  men,  the  differ-
ence has  been  partly,  and  in  some  wholly,
about  the  meaning  of  words,

Mr  Locke  found  it  necessary  to  employ  a
fourth  part  of  his  "  Essay  on  Human  Un-
derstanding" about  words,  their  various
kinds,  their  imperfection  and  abuse,  and
the  remedies  of  both  ;  and  has  made  many
observations  upon  these  subjects  well  worthy
of  attentive  perusal. [669]

D.  The  fourth  class  of  prejudices  are  the
idola  theatri,  by  which  are  meant  prejudices
arising  from  the  systems  or  sects  in  which
we  have  been  trained,  or  which  we  have
adopted.

A  false  system  once  fixed  in  the  mind,
becomes,  as  it  were,  the  medium  through
which  we  see  objects  :  they  receive  a  tinc-
ture from  it,  and  appear  of  another  colour
than  when  seen  by  a  pure  light.

Upon  the  same  subject,  a  Platonist,  a


*  See  above,  p.  403,  note.— H.

[667-669


chap. viii.] OF  PREJUDICES,  THE  CAUSES  OF  ERROR.


475


Peripatetic,  and  an  Epicurean,  will  think
differently,  not  only  in  matters  connected
with  his  peculiar  tenets,  but  even  in  things
remote  from  them.

A  judicious  history  of  the  different  sects
of  philosophers,  and  the  different  methods  of
philosophising,  which  have  obtained  among
mankind,  would  be  of  no  small  use  to  direct
men  in  the  search  of  truth.  In  such  a
history,  what  would  be  of  the  greatest  mo-
ment is  not  so  much  a  minute  detail  of  the
dogmata  of  each  sect,  as  a  just  delineation
of  the  spirit  of  the  sect,  and  of  that  point
of  view  in  which  things  appeared  to  its
founder.  This  was  perfectly  understood,
and,  as  far  as  concerns  the  theories  of  mo-
rals, is  executed  with  great  judgment  and
candour  by  Dr  Smith  in  his  theory  of  moral
sentiments.

As  there  are  certaiD  temperaments  of  the
body  that  dispose  a  man  more  to  one  class
of  diseases  than  to another,  and,  on  the


other  hand,  diseases  of  that  kind,  when  they
happen  by  accident,  are  apt  to  induce  the
temperament  that  is  suited  to  them — there
is  something  analogous  to  this  in  the  dis-
eases of  the  understanding. [670]

A  certain  complexion  of  understanding
may  dispose  a  man  to  one  system  of  opinions
more  than  to  another ;  and,  on  the  other
hand,  a  system  of  opinions,  fixed  in  the  mind
by  education  or  otherwise,  gives  that  com-
plexion to  the  understanding  which  is  suited
to  them.

It  were  to  be  wished,  that  the  different
systems  that  have  prevailed  could  be  classed
according  to  their  spirit,  as  well  as  named
from  their  founders.  Lord  Bacon  has  dis-
tinguished false  philosophy  into  the  sophis-
tical, the  empirical,  and  the  superstitious,
and  has  made  judicious  observations  upon
each  of  these  kinds.  But  I  apprehend  this  sub-
ject  deserves  to  be  treated  more  fully  by  such
a  hand,  if  such  a  hand  can  be  found. [671  ]


ESSAY  VII


OF  REASONING.


CHAPTER  I.

OF  REASONING  IN'  GENERAL,  AND  OF
DEMONSTRATION.

The  power  of  reasoning  is  very  nearly
allied  to  that  of  judging ;  and  it  is  of  little
consequence  in  the  common  affairs  of  life
to  distinguish  them  nicely.  On  this  account,
the  same  name  is  often  given  to  both.  We
include  both  under  the  name  of  reason.*
The  assent  we  give  to  a  proposition  is  called
judgment,  whether  the  proposition  be  self-
evident,  or  derive  its  evidence  by  reasoning
from  other  propositions.

Yet  there  is  a  distinction  between  rea-
soning and  judging.  Reasoning  is  the  pro-
cess by  which  we  pass  from  one  judgment
to  another,  which  is  the  consequence  of  it.
Accordingly  our  judgments  are  distinguished
into  intuitive,  which  are  not  grounded  upon
any  preceding  judgment,  and  discursive,
which  are  deduced  from  some  preceding
judgment  by  reasoning.

In  all  reasoning,  therefore,  there  must  be
a  proposition  inferred,  and  one  or  more  from
which  it  is  inferred.  And  this  power  of
inferring,  or  drawing  a  conclusion,  is  only
another  name  for  reasoning ;  the  proposi-
tion inferred  being  called  the  conclusion,


*  See  Stewart's
[670-672]


Elements,"  ii.  p.  12.'— H.


and  the  proposition  or  propositions  from
which  it  is  inferred,  the  premises. [672]

Reasoning  may  consist  of  many  steps  ;
the  first  conclusion  being  a  premise  to  a
second,  that  to  a  third,  and  so  on,  till  we.
come  to  the  last  conclusion.  A  process
consisting  of  many  steps  of  this  kind,  is  so
easily  distinguished  from  judgment,  that  it
is  never  called  by  that  name.  But  when
there  is  only  a  single  step  to  the  conclusion,
the  distinction  is  less  obvious,  and  the  pro-
cess is  sometimes  called  judgment,  some-
times reasoning.

It  is  not  strange  that,  in  common  dis-
course, judgment  and  reasoning  should  not
be  very  nicely  distinguished,  since  they  are
in  some  cases  confounded  even  by  logicians.
We  are  taught  in  logic,  that  judgment  is
expressed  by  one  proposition,  but  that  rea-
soning requires  two  or  three.  But  so
various  are  the  modes  of  speech,  that  what
in  one  mode  is  expressed  by  two  or  three
propositions,  may,  in  another  mode,  be  ex-
pressed by  one.  Thus  I  may  say,  God  is
pood  ;  therefore  good  men  shall  be  happy.
This  is  reasoning,  of  that  kind  which  logi-
cians  call  an  enthymeme,  consisting  of  an
antecedent  proposition,  and  a  conclusion
drawn  from  it.* But  this  reasoning  may

*  Theenthymeuieisamere  abbreviation  of  expres-
sion;  in  the  mental  process  there  is  no  ellipsis. By


476


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VII.


be  expressed  by  one  proposition,  thus : —
Because  God  is  good,  good  men  shall  be
happy.  This  is  what  they  call  a  causal
proposition,  and  therefore  expresses  judg-
ment ;  yet  the  enthyraeme,  which  is  reason-
ing, expresses  no  more.

Reasoning,  as  well  as  judgment,  must  be
true  or  false  :  both  are  grounded  upon  evi-
dence which  may  be  probable  or  demonstra-
tive, and  both  are  accompanied  with  assent
or  belief. [673]

The  power  of  reasoning  is  justly  accounted
one  of  the  prerogatives  of  human  nature  ;
because  by  it  many  important  truths  have
been  and  may  be  discovered,  which  with-
out it  would  be  beyond  our  reach ;  yet  it
seems  to  be  only  a  kind  of  crutch  to  a
limited  understanding.  We  can  conceive
an  understanding,  superior  to  human,  to
which  that  truth  appears  intuitively,  which
we  can  only  discover  by  reasoning.  For
this  cause,  though  we  must  ascribe  judg-
ment to  the  Almighty,  we  do  not  ascribe
reasoning  to  him,  because  it  implies  some
defect  or  limitation  of  understanding.  Even
among  men,  to  use  reasoning  in  things  that
are  self-evident,  is  trifling  ;  like  a  man
going  upon  crutches  when  he  can  walk
upon  his  legs.

What  reasoning  is,  can  be  understood
only  by  a  man  who  has  reasoned,  and  who
is  capable  of  reflecting  upon  this  operation
of  his  own  mind-  We  can  define  it  only  by
synonymous  words  or  phrases,  such  as  in-
ferring, drawing  a  conclusion,  and  the  like.
The  very  notion  of  reasoning,  therefore,  can
enter  into  the  mind  by  no  other  channel
than  that  of  reflecting  upon  the  operation
of  reasoning  in  our  own  minds  ;  and  the
notions  of  premises  and  conclusion,  of  a
syllogism  and  all  its  constituent  parts,  of
an  enthymeme,  sorites,  demonstration,  pa-
ralogism, and  many  others,  have  the  same
origin.

It  is  nature,  undoubtedly,  that  gives  us
the  capacity  of  reasoning.  When  this  is
wanting,  no  art  nor  education  can  supply  it.
But  this  capacity  may  be  dormant  through
life,  like  the  seed  of  a  plant,  which,  for  want
of  heat  and  moisture,  never  vegetates-  This
is  probably  the  case  of  some  savages.

Although  the  capacity  be  purely  the  gift
of  nature,  and  probably  given  in  very  dif-
ferent degrees  to  different  persons  ;  yet  the
power  of  reasoning  seems  to  be  got  by  habit,
as  much  as  the  power  of  walking  or  running.
Its  first  exertions  we  are  not  able  to  recol-
lect in  ourselves,  or  clearly  to  discern  in
others.  They  are  very  feeble,  and  need  to
be  led  by  example,  and  supported  by  autho-
rity. By  degrees  it  acquires  strength,
chiefly  by  means  of  imitation  and  exer-
cise. [674]

enthymeme,  Aristotle  also  meant  something  very  dif-
ferent trom  what  is  vulgarly  supposed.— H.


The  exercise  of  reasoning  on  various  sub-
jects not  only  strengthens  the  faculty,  but
furnishes  the  mind  with  a  store  of  materials.
Every  train  of  reasoning,  which  is  familiar,
becomes  a  beaten  track  in  the  way  to  many
others.  It  removes  many  obstacles  which
lay  in  our  way,  and  smooths  many  roads
which  we  may  have  occasion  to  travel  in
future  disquisitions.

When  men  of  equal  natural  parts  apply
their  reasoning  power  to  any  subject,  the
man  who  has  reasoned  much  on  the  same
or  on  similar  subjects,  has  a  like  advantage
over  him  who  has  not,  as  the  mechanic
who  has  store  of  tools  for  his  work,  has  of
him  who  has  his  tools  to  make,  or  even  to
invent.

In  a  train  of  reasoning,  the  evidence  of
every  step,  where  nothing  is  left  to  be  sup-
plied by  the  reader  or  hearer,  must  be  im-
mediately discernible  to  every  man  of  ripe
understanding  who  has  a  distinct  compre-
hension of  the  premises  and  conclusion,  and
who  compares  them  together.  To  be  able
to  comprehend,  in  one  view,  a  combination
of  steps  of  this  kind,  is  more  difficult,  and
seems  to  require  a  superior  natural  ability.
In  all,  it  may~be  much  improved  by  habit.

But  the  highest  talent  in  reasoning  is  the
invention  of  proofs;  by  which,  truths  re-
mote from  the  premises  are  brought  to  light.
In  all  works  of  understanding,  invention
has  the  highest  praise  :  it  requires  an  ex-
tensive view  of  what  relates  to  the  subject,
and  a  quickness  in  discerning  those  affinities
and  relations  which  may  be  subservient  to
the  purpose.

In  all  invention  there  must  be  some  end
in  view :  and  sagacity  in  finding  out  the
road  that  leads  to  this  end,  is,  I  think,  what
we  call  invention.  In  this  chiefly,  as  I  ap-
prehend, and  in  clear  and  distinct  concep-
tions, consists  that  superiority  of  under-
standing which  we  call  genius. [675]

In  every  chain  of  reasoning,  the  evidence
of  the  last  conclusion  can  be  no  greater  than
that  of  the  weakest  link  of  the  chain,  what-
ever may  be  the  strength  of  the  rest.

The  most  remarkable  distinction  of  rea-
sonings is,  that  some  are  probable,  others
demonstrative.

In  every  step  of  demonstrative  reason-
ing, the  inference  is  necessary,  and  we  per-
ceive it  to  be  impossible  that  the  conclusion
should  not  follow  from  the  premises.  In
probable  reasoning,  the  connection  between
the  premises  and  the  conclusion  is  not  neces-
sary, nor  do  we  perceive  it  to  be  impossible
that  the  first  should  be  true  while  the  last
is  false.

Hence,  demonstrative  reasoning  has  no
degrees,  nor  can  one  demonstration  be
stronger  than  another,  though,  in  relation
to  our  faculties,  one  may  be  more  easily
comprehended  than  another.  Every  de-
[673-675]


chap,  i.] OF  REASONING,  AND  OF  DEMONSTRATION.


477


monstration  gives  equal  strength  to  the  con-
clusion, and' leaves  no  possibility  of  its  being
false.

It  was,  I  think,  the  opinion  of  all  the
ancients,  that  demonstrative  reasoning  can
be  applied  only  to  truths  that  are  necessary,
and  not  to  those  that  are  contingent.  In
this,  I  believe,  they  judged  right.  Of  all
created  things,  the  existence,  the  attributes,
and,  consequently,  the  relations  resulting
from  those  attributes,  are  contingent.  They
depend  upon  the  will  and  power  of  Him  who
made  them.  These  are  matters  of  fact,  and
admit  not  of  demonstration.

The  field  of  demonstrative  reasoning,
therefore,  is  the  various  relations  of  things
abstract,  that  is,  of  things  which  we  con-
ceive, without  regard  to  their  existence.
Of  these,  as  they  are  conceived  by  the  mind,
and  are  nothing  but  what  they  are  conceived
to  be,  we  may  have  a  clear  and  adequate
comprehension.  Their  relations  and  attri-
butes are  necessary  and  immutable.  They
are  the  things  to  which  the  Pythagoreans
and  Platonists  gave  the  name  of  ideas.  I
would  beg  leave  to  borrow  this  meaning  of
the  word  idra  from  those  ancient  philoso-
phers, and  then  I  must  agree  with  them,
that  ideas  are  the  only  objects  about  which
we  can  reason  demonstratively. [676]

There  are  many  even  of  our  ideas  about
which  we  can  carry  on  no  considerable  train
of  reasoning.  Though  they  be  ever  so  well
defined  and  perfectly  comprehended,  yet
their  agreements  and  disagreements  are  few,
and  these  are  discerned  at  once.  We  may
go  a  step  or  two  in  forming  a  conclusion
with  regard  to  such  objects,  but  can  go  no
farther.  There  are  others,  about  which  we
may,  by  a  long  train  of  demonstrative  rea-
soning, arrive  at  conclusions  very  remote
and  unexpected.

The  reasonings  I  have  met  with  that  can
be  called  strictly  demonstrative,  may,  I
think,  be  reduced  to  two  classes.  They  are
either  metaphysical,  or  they  are  mathe-
matical.

In  metaphysical  reasoning,  the  process  is
always  short.  The  conclusion  is  but  a  step
or  two,  seldom  more,  from  the  first  principle
or  axiom  on  which  it  is  grounded,  and  the
different  conclusions  depend  not  one  upon
another.

It  is  otherwise  in  mathematical  reason-
ing. Here  the  field  has  no  limits.  One
proposition  leads  on  to  another,  that  to  a
third,  and  so  on  without  end.

If  it  should  be  asked,  why  demonstrative
reasoning  has  so  wide  a  field  in  mathema-
tics, while,  in  other  abstract  subjects,  it  is
confined  within  very  narrow  limits,  I  con-
ceive this  is  chiefly  owing  to  the  nature  of
quantity,  the  object  of  mathematics.

Every  quantity,  as  it  has  magnitude,  and
is  divisible  into  parts  without  end,  so,  in
[676-678]


respect  of  its  magnitude,  it  has  a  certain
ratio  to  every  quantity  of  the  kind.  The
ratios  of  quantities  are  innumerable,  such
as,  a  half,  a  third,  a  tenth,  double,  triple.
[677]  All  the  powers  of  number  are  in-
sufficient to  express  the  variety  of  ratios.
For  there  are  innumerable  ratios  which
cannot  be  perfectly  expressed  by  numbers,
such  as,  the  ratio  of  the  side  to  the  diagonal
of  a  square,  or  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle
to  the  diameter.  Of  this  infinite  variety  of
ratios,  every  one  may  be  clearly  conceived
and  distinctly  expressed,  so  as  to  be  in  no
danger  of  being  mistaken  for  any  other.

Extended  quantities,  such  as  lines,  sur-
faces, solids,  besides  the  variety  of  relations
they  have  in  respect  of  magnitude,  have  no
less  variety  in  respect  of  figure  ;  and  every
mathematical  figure  may  be  accurately
defined,  so  as  to  distinguish  it  from  all
others.

There  is  nothing  of  this  kind  in  other
objects  of  abstract  reasoning.  Some  of
them  have  various  degrees  ;  but  these  are
not  capable  of  measure,  nor  can  be  said  to
have  an  assignable  ratio  to  others  of  the
kind.  They  are  either  simple,  or  com-
pounded of  a  few  indivisible  parts ;  and
therefore,  if  we  may  be  allowed  the  expres-
sion, can  touch  only  in  few  points.  But
mathematical  quantities  being  made  up  of
parts  without  number,  can  touch  in  innu-
merable points,  and  be  compared  in  innu-
merable different  ways.

There  have  been  attempts  made  to  mea-
sure the  merit  of  actions  by  the  ratios  of
the  affections  and  principles  of  action  from
which  they  proceed.  'This  may  perhaps,
in  the  way  of  analogy,  serve  to  illustrate
what  was  before  known  ;  but  I  do  not  think
any  truth  can  be  discovered  in  this  way.
There  are,  no  doubt,  degrees  of  benevolence,
self-love,  and  other  affections  ;  but,  when
we  apply  ratios  to  them,  I  apprehend  we
have  no  distinct  meaning.

Some  demonstrations  are  called  direct,
others  indirect.  The  first  kind  leads  directly
to  the  conclusion  to  be  proved.  Of  the
indirect,  some  are  called  demonstrations  ad
absurd 'um.  In  these,  the  proposition  con-
tradictory to  that  which  is  to  be  proved  is
demonstrated  to  be  false,  or  to  lead  to  an
absurdity ;  whence  it  follows,  that  its  con-
tradictory— that  is,  the  proposition  to  be
proved — is  true.  This  inference  is  grounded
upon  an  axiom  in  logic,  that  of  two  contra-
dictory propositions,  if  one  be  false,  the
other  must  be  true.* [678]

Another  kind  of  indirect  demonstration
proceeds  by  enumerating  all  the  supposi-
tions that  can  possibly  be  made  concerning
the proposition to be proved, and then


*  This  is  called  the  principle  of  Excluded  Middle—
riz.,  between  two  contradictories. — H


478


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[_ESSAY  VII.


demonstrating  that  all  of  them,  excepting
that  which  is  to  be  proved,  are  false ;  whence
it  follows,  that  the  excepted  supposition  is
true.  Thus,  one  line  is  proved  to  be  equal
to  another,  by  proving  first  that  it  cannot  be
greater,  and  then  that  it  cannot  be  less  :  for
it  must  be  either  greater,  or  less,  or  equal ;
and  two  of  these  suppositions  being  demon-
strated to  be  false,  the  third  must  be  true.

All  these  kinds  of  demonstration  are  used
in  mathematics,  and  perhaps  some  others.
They  have  all  equal  strength.  The  direct
demonstration  is  preferred  where  it  can  be
had,  for  this  reason  only,  as  I  apprehend,
because  it  is  the  shortest  road  to  the  con-
clusion. The  nature  of  the  evidence,  and
its  strength,  is  the  same  in  all :  ouly  we
are  conducted  to  it  by  different  roads.


CHAPTER  II.

WHETHER  MORALITY  BE  CAPABLE  OF
DEMONSTRATION.

What  has  been  said  of  demonstrative
reasoning,  may  help  us  to  judge  of  an  opi-
nion of  Mr  Locke,  advanced  in  several  places
of  his  Essay — to  wit,  "  That  morality  is
capable  of  demonstration  as  well  as  mathe-
matics."

In  book  III.,  chap.  11,  having  observed
that  mixed  modes,  especially  thcfee  belong-
ing to  morality,  being  such  combinations  of
ideas  as  the  mind  puts  together  of  its  own
choice,  the  signification  of  their  names
may  be  perfectly  and  exactly  defined,  he
adds— [679]

Sect.  16.  "  Upon  this  ground  it  is  that  I
am  bold  to  think  that  morality  is  capable  of
demonstration  as  well  as  mathematics ;  since
the  precise  real  essence  of  the  things  moral
words  stand  for  may  be  perfectly  known,
and  so  the  congruity  or  incongruity  of  the
things  themselves  be  certainly  discovered,
in  which  consists  perfect  knowledge.  Nor
let  any  one  object,  That  the  names  of  sub-
stances are  often  to  be  made  use  of  in  mo-
rality, as  well  as  those  of  modes,  from
which  will  arise  obscurity ;  for,  as  to  sub-
stances, when  concerned  in  moral  dis-
courses, their  divers  natures  are  not  so
much  inquired  into  as  supposed  :  v.  g.  When
we  say  that  man  is  subject  to  law,  we  mean
nothing  by  man  but  a  corporeal  rational
creature :  what  the  real  essence  or  other
qualities  of  that  creature  are,  in  this  case,
is  no  way  considered."

Again,  in  book  IV.,  ch.  in.,  §  18 : — "  The
idea  of  a  Supreme  Being,  whose  workman-
ship we  are,  and  the  idea  of  ourselves,  being
such  as  are  clear  in  us,  would,  I  suppose,
if  duly  considered  and  pursued,  afford  such
foundation  of  our  duty  and  rules  of  action
as  might  place  morality  among  the  sciences


capable  of  demonstration.  The  relation  of
other  modes  may  certainly  be  perceived,  as
well  as  those  of  number  and  extension  ;  and
I  cannot  see  why  they  should  not  be  cap-
able of  demonstration,  if  due  methods  were
thought  on  to  examine  or  pursue  their
agreement  or  disagreement."

He  afterwards  gives,  as  instances,  two
propositions,  as  moral  propositions  of  which
we  may  be  as  certain  as  of  any  in  mathe-
matics ;  and  considers  at  large  what  may
have  given  the  advantage  to  the  ideas  of
quantity,  and  made  them  be  thought  more
capable  of  certainty  and  demonstration.  [  680  ]

Again,  in  the  12th  chapter  of  the  same
book,  §  7,  8  : — "  This,  I  think,  I  may  say,
that,  if  other  ideas  that  are  the  real  as  we'll
as  nominal  essences  of  their  several  species
were  pursued  in  the  way  familiar  to  mathe-
maticians, they  would  carry  our  thoughts
farther,  and  with  greater  evidence  and
clearness,  than  possibly  we  are  apt  to  ima-
gine. This  gave  me  the  confidence  to
advance  that  conjecture  which  I  suggest,

chap  iii viz.,  That  morality  is  capable  of

demonstration  as  well  as  mathematics."

From  these  passages,  it  appears  that  this
opinion  was  not  a  transient  thought,  but
what  he  had  revolved  in  his  mind  on  dif-
ferent occasions.  He  offers  his  reasons  for
it,  illustrates  it  by  examples,  and  considers
at  length  the  causes  that  have  led  men  to
think  mathematics  more  capable  of  demon-
stration than  the  principles  of  morals.

Some  of  his  learned  correspondents,  par-
ticularly his  friend  Mr  Molyneux,  urged
and  importuned  him  to  compose  a  system
of  morals  according  to  the  idea  he  had  ad-
vanced in  his  Essay ;  and,  in  his  answer  to
these  solicitations,  he  only  pleads  other  oc-
cupations, without  suggesting  any  change  of
his  opinion,  or  any  great  difficulty  in  the
execution  of  what  was  desired.

The  reason  he  gives  for  this  opinion  is
ingenious  ;  and  his  regard  for  virtue,  the
highest  prerogative  of  the  human  species,
made  him  fond  of  an  opinion  which  seemed
to  be  favourable  to  virtue,  and  to  have  a
just  foundation  in  reason.

We  need  not,  however,  be  afraid  that  the
interest  of  virtue  may  suffer  by  a  free  and
candid  examination  of  this  question,  or  in-
deed of  any  question  whatever.  For  the
interests  of  truth  and  of  virtue  can  never
be  found  in  opposition.  Darkness  and  error
may  befriend  vice,  but  can  never  be  favour-
able to  virtue. [681]

Those  philosophers  who  think  that  our
determinations  in  morals  are  not  real  judg-
ments— that  right  and  wrong  in  human  con-
duct are  only  certain  feelings  or  sensations
in  the  person  who  contemplates  the  action
— must  reject  Mr  Locke's  opinion  without
examination.  For,  if  the  principles  of  mo-
rals be  not  a  matter  of  judgment,  but  of
[679-681]


chap,  ii.] WHETHER  MORALITY  BE  DEMONSTRABLE.


479


feeling  only,  there  can  be  no  demonstration
of  them  ;  nor  can  any  other  reason  be  given
for  them,  but  that  men  are  so  constituted
by  the  Author  of  their  being  as  to  contem-
plate with  pleasure  the  actions  we  call  vir-
tuous, and  with  disgust  those  we  call  vicious.

It  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  expected  that
the  philosophers  of  this  class  should  think
this  opinion  of  Mr  Locke  worthy  of  ex-
amination, since  it  is  founded  upon  what
they  think  a  false  hypothesis.  But  if  our
determinations  in  morality  be  real  judg-
ments, and,  like  all  other  judgments,  be
either  true  or  false,  it  is  not  unimportant
to  understand  upon  what  kind  of  evidence
those  judgments  rest.

The  argument  offered  by  Mr  Locke,
to  shew  that  morality  is  capable  of  demon-
stration, is,  "  That  the  precise  real  essence
of  the  things  moral  words  stand  for,  may  be
perfectly  known,  and  so  the  congruity  or
incongruity  of  the  things  themselves  be
perfectly  discovered,  in  -which  consists  per-
fect knowledge."

.  It  is  true,  that  the  field  of  demonstration
is  the  various  relations  of  things  conceived
abstractly,  of  which  we  may  have  perfect
and  adequate  conceptions.  And  Mr  Locke,
taking  all  the  things  which  moral  words
stand  for  to  be  of  this  kind,  concluded  that
morality  is  as  capable  of  demonstration  as
mathematics.

I  acknowledge  that  the  names  of  the
virtues  and  vices,  of  right  and  obligation,
of  liberty  and  property,  stand  for  things
abstract,  which  may  be  accurately  denned,
or,  at  least,  conceived  as  distinctly  and
adequatelyas  mathematical  quantities.  And
thence,  indeed,  it  follows,  that  their  mutual
relations  may  be  perceived  as  clearly  and
certainly  as  mathematical  truths. [682]

Of  this  Mr  Locke  gives  two  pertinent
examples.  The  first — "  Where  there  is  no
property,  there  is  no  injustice,  is,"  says  he,
"  a  proposition  as  certain  as  any  demon-
stration in  Euclid."

When  injustice  is  defined  to  be  a  viola-
tion of  property,  it  is  as  necessary  a  truth,
that  there  can  be  no  injustice  where  there
is  no  property,  as  that  you  cannot  take
from  a  man  that  which  he  has  not.

The  second  example  is,  "  That  no
government  allows  absolute  liberty."  This
is  a  truth  no  less  certain  and  necessary.

Such  abstract  truths  I  would  call  meta-
physical rather  than  moral.  We  give  the
name  of  mathematical  to  truths  that  ex-
press the  relations  of  quantities  considered
abstractly ;  all  other  abstract  truths  may
be  called  metaphysical.  But  if  those  men-
tioned by  Mr  Locke  are  to  be  called  moral
truths,  I  agree  with  him  that  there  are
many  such  that  are  necessarily  true,  and
that  have  all  the  evidence  that  mathemati-
cal truths  can  have.
f682,  683]


It  ought,  however,  to  be  remembered,
that,  as  was  before  observed,  the  relations
of  things  abstract,  perceivable  by  us,  ex-
cepting those  of  mathematical  quantities,
are  few,  and,  for  the  most  part,  immediately
discerned,  so  as  not  to  require  that  train
of  reasoning  which  we  call  demonstration.
Their  evidence  resembles  more  that  of
mathematical  axioms  than  mathematical
propositions.

This  appears  in  the  two  propositions
given  as  examples  by  Mr  Locke.  The  first
follows  immediately  from  the  definition  of
injustice  ;  the  second  from  the  definition  of
government.  Their  evidence  may  more
properly  be  called  intuitive  than  demon-
strative. And  this  I  apprehend  to  be  the
case,  or  nearly  the  case,  of  all  abstract
truths  that  are  not  mathematical,  for  the
reason  given  in  the  last  chapter. [683]

The  propositions  which  I  think  are  pro-
perly called  moral,  are  those  that  affirm
some  moral  obligation  to  be,  or  not  to  be
incumbent  on  one  or  more  individual  per-
sons. To  such  propositions,  Mr  Locke's
reasoning  does  not  apply,  because  the  sub-
jects of  the  proposition  are  not  things  whose
real  essence  may  be  perfectly  known.  They
are  the  creatures  of  God  ;  their  obligation
results  from  the  constitution  which  God
hath  given  them,  and  the  circumstances
in  which  he  hath  placed  them.  That  an
individual  hath  such  a  constitution,  and  is
placed  in  such  circumstances,  is  not  an
abstract  and  necessary,  but  a  contingent
truth.  It  is  a  matter  of  fact,  and,  there-
fore, not  capable  of  demonstrative  evidence,
which  belongs  only  to  necessary  truths.

The  evidence  which  every  man  hath  of
his  own  existence,  though  it  be  irresistible,
is  not  demonstrative.  And  the  same  thing
may  be  said  of  the  evidence  which  every
man  hath,  that  he  is  a  moral  agent,  and
under  certain  moral  obligations.  In  like
manner,  the  evidence  we  have  of  the  exist-
ence of  other  men,  is  not  demonstrative ;
nor  is  the  evidence  we  have  of  their  being
endowed  with  those  faculties  which  make
them  moral  and  accountable  agents.

If  man  had  not  the  faculty  given  him  by
God  of  perceiving  certain  things  in  conduct
to  be  right,  and  others  to  be  wrong,  and  of
perceiving  his  obligation  to  do  what  is  right,
and  not  to  do  what  is  wrong,  he  would  not
be  a  moral  and  accountable  being.

If  man  be  endowed  with  such  a  faculty,
there  must  be  some  things  which,  by  this
faculty,  are  immediately  discerned  to  be
right,  and  others  to  be  wrong  ;  and,  there-
fore, there  must  be  in  morals,  as  in  other
sciences,  first  principles  which  do  not  de-
rive their  evidence  from  any  antecedent
principles,  but  may  be  said  to  be  intuitively
discerned.

Moral  truths,  therefore,  may  be  divided


480


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VII.


into  two  classes — to  wit,  such  as  are  self-
evident  to  every  man  whose  understanding
and  moral  faculty  are  ripe,  and  such  as  are
deduced  by  reasoning  from  those  that  are
self-evident.  If  the  first  be  not  discerned
without  reasoning,  the  last  never  can  be  so
by  any  reasoning. [684]

If  any  man  could  say,  with  sincerity,  that
he  is  conscious  of  no  obligation  to  consult
his  own  present  and  future  happiness  ;  to
be  faithful  to  his  engagements  ;  to  obey  his
Maker ;  to  injure  no  man ;  I  know  not
what  reasoning,  either  probable  or  demon-
strative, I  could  use  to  convince  him  of  any
moral  duty.  As  you  cannot  reason  in
mathematics  with  a  man  who  denies  the
axioms,  as  little  can  you  reason  with  a  man
in  morals  who  denies  the  first  principles  of
morals.  The  man  who  does  not,  by  the  light
of  his  own  mind,  perceive  some  things  in
conduct  to  be  right,  and  others  to  be  wrong,
is  as  incapable  of  reasoning  about  morals
as  a  blind  man  is  about  colours.  Such  a
man,  if  any  such  man  ever  wa«,  would  be
no  moral  agent,  nor  capable  of  any  moral
obligation.

Some  first  principles  of  morals  must  be
immediately  discerned,  otherwise  we  have
no  foundation  on  which  others  can  rest,  or
from  which  we  can  reason.

Every  man  knows  certainly,  that,  what  he
approves  in  other  men,  he  ought  to  do  in
like  circumstances,  and  that  he  ought  not  to
do  what  he  condemns  in  other  men.  Every
man  knows  that  he  ought,  with  candour,  to
use  the  best  means  of  knowing  his  duty.
To  every  man  who  has  a  conscience,  these
things  are  self-evident.  They  are  imme-
diate dictates  of  our  moral  faculty,  which  is
a  part  of  the  human  constitution ;  and  every
man  condemns  himself,  whether  he  wrill  or
not,  when  he  knowingly  acts  contrary  to
them.  The  evidence  of  these  fundamental
principles  of  morals,  and  of  others  that
might  be  named,  appears,  therefore,  to  me
to  be  intuitive  rather  than  demonstrative.

The  man  who  acts  according  to  the  dic-
tates of  his  conscience,  and  takes  due  pains
to  be  rightly  informed  of  his  duty,  is  a  per-
fect man  with  regard  to  morals,  and  merits
no  blame,  whatever  may  be  the  imperfec-
tions or  errors  of  his  understanding.  He
who  knowingly  acts  contrary  to  them,  is
conscious  of  guilt,  and  self-condemned.
Every  particular  action  that  falls  evidently
within  the  fundamental  rules  of  morals,  is
evidently  his  duty ;  and  it  requires  no  rea-
soning to  convince  him  that  it  is  so. [685]

Thus,  I  think  it  appears,  that  every  man
of  common  understanding  knows  certainly,
and  without  reasoning,  the  ultimate  ends
he  ought  to  pursue,  and  that  reasoning  is
necessary  only  to  discover  the  most  proper
means  of  attaining  them  ;  and  in  this,  in-
deed, a  good  man  may  often  be  in  doubt.


Thus,  a  magistrate  knows  that  it  is  his
duty  to  promote  the  good  of  the  community
which  hath  intrusted  him  with  authority ;
and  to  offer  to  prove  this  to  him  by  reason-
ing, would  be  to  affront  him.  But  whether
such  a  scheme  of  conduct  in  his  office,  or
another,  may  best  serve  that  end,  he  may
in  many  cases  be  doubtful.  I  believe,  in
such  cases,  he  can  very  rarely  have  demon-
strative evidence.  His  conscience  deter-
mines the  end  he  ought  to  pursue,  and  he
has  intuitive  evidence  that  his  end  is  good  ;
but  prudence  must  determine  the  means
of  attaining  that  end  ;  and  prudence  can
very  rarely  use  demonstrative  reasoning,
but  must  rest  in  what  appears  most  proba-
ble.

I  apprehend,  that,  in  every  kind  of  duty
we  owe  to  God  or  man,  the  case  is  similar —
that  is,  that  the  obligation  of  the  most
general  rules  of  duty  is  self-evident ;  that
the  application  of  those  rules  to  particular
actions  is  often  no  less  evident ;  and  that,
when  it  is  not  evident,  but  requires  reason-
ing, that  reasoning  can  very  rarely  be  of
the  demonstrative,  but  must  be  of  the  pro-
bable kind.  Sometimes  it  depends  upon
the  temper,  and  talents,  and  circumstances
of  the  man  himself;  sometimes  upon  the
character  and  circumstances  of  others ;
sometimes  upon  both  ;  and  these  are  things
which  admit  not  of  demonstration. [686 J

Every  man  is  bound  to  employ  the  talents
which  God  hath  given  him  to  the  best  pur-
pose ;  but  if,  through  accidents  which  he
could  not  foresee,  or  ignorance  which  was
invincible,  they  be  less  usefully  employed
than  they  might  have  been,  this  will  not  be
imputed  to  him  by  his  righteous  Judge.

It  is  a  common  and  a  just  observation,
that  the  man  of  virtue  plays  a  surer  game
in  order  to  obtain  his  end  than  the  man  of
the  world.  It  is  not,  however,  because  he
reasons  better  concerning  the  means  of
attaining  his  end  ;  for  the  children  of  this
world  are  often  wiser  in  their  generation
than  the  children  of  light.  But  the  reason
of  the  observation  is,  that  involuntary
errors,  unforeseen  accidents,  and  invincible
ignorance,  which  affect  deeply  all  the  con-
cerns of  the  present  world,  have  no  effect
upon  virtue  or  its  reward.

In  the  common  occurrences  of  life,  a  man
of  integrity,  who  hath  exercised  his  moral
faculty  in  judging  what  is  right  and  what
is  wrong,  sees  his  duty  without  reasoning,
as  he  sees  the  highway.  The  cases  that
require  reasoning  are  few,  compared  with
those  that  require  none  ;  and  a  man  may
be_  very  honest  and  virtuous  who  cannot
reason,  and  who  knows  not  what  demon-
stration means.

The  power  of  reasoning,  in  those  that

have  it,  may  be  abused  in  morals,  as  in

other  matters. To  a  man  who  uses  it  with

[684-686]


CHAP.  III.]


OF  PROBABLE  REASONING.


481


an  upright  heart,  and  a  single  eye  to  find
what  is  his  duty,  it  will  be  of  great  use ;
but  when  it  is  used  to  justify  what  a  man
has  a  strong  inclination  to  do,  it  will  only
serve  to  deceive  himself  and  others.  When
a  man  can  reason,  his  passions  will  reason,
and  they  are  the  most  cunning  sophists  we
meet  with.

If  the  rules  of  virtue  were  left  to  be  dis-
covered by  demonstrative  reasoning,  or  by
reasoning  of  any  kind,  sad  would  be  the
condition  of  the  far  greater  part  of  men,
who  have  not  the  means  of  cultivating  the
power  of  reasoning.  As  virtue  is  the  busi-
ness of  all  men,  the  first  principles  of  it  are
written  in  their  hearts,  in  characters  so
legible  that  no  man  can  pretend  ignorance
of  them,  or  of  his  obligation  to  practise
them. [687]

Some  knowledge  of  duty  and  of  moral
obligation  is  necessary  to  all  men.  With-
out it  they  could  not  be  moral  and  account-
able creatures,  nor  capable  of  being  mem-
bers of  civil  society.  It  may,  therefore,
be  presumed  that  Nature  has  put  this
knowledge  within  the  reach  of  all  men.
Reasoning  and  demonstration  are  weapons
which  the  greatest  part  of  mankind  never
was  able  to  wield.  The  knowledge  that  is
necessary  to  all,  must  be  attainable  by  all.
We  see  it  is  so  in  what  pertains  to  the
natural  life  of  man.

Some  knowledge  of  things  that  are  useful
and  things  that  are  hurtful,  is  so  necessary
to  all  men,  that  without  it  the  species  would
soon  perish.  But  it  is  not  by  reasoning
that  this  knowledge  is  got,  far  less  by  de-
monstrative reasoning.  It  is  by  our  senses,
by  memory,  by  experience,  by  information  ;
means  of  knowledge  that  are  open  to  all
men,  and  put  the  learned  and  the  unlearned,
those  who  can  reason  and  those  who  can-
not, upon  a  level.

It  may,  therefore,  be  expected,  from  the
analogy  of  nature,  that  such  a  knowledge
of  morals  as  is  necessary  to  all  men  should
be  had  by  means  more  suited  to  the  abili-
ties of  all  men  than  demonstrative  reason-
ing is.

This,  I  apprehend,  is  in  fact  the  case.
When  men's  faculties  are  ripe,  the  first
principles  of  morals,  into  which  all  moral
reasoning  may  be  resolved,  are  perceived
intuitively,  and  in  a  manner  more  analogous
to  the  perceptions  of  sense  than  to  the  con-
clusions of  demonstrative  reasoning. [688]

Upon  the  whole,  I  agree  with  Mr  Locke,
that  propositions  expressing  the  congruities
and  incongruities  of  things  abstract,  which
moral  words  stand  for,  may  have  all  the
evidence  of  mathematical  truths.  But  this
is  not  peculiar  to  things  which  moral  words
stand  for.  It  is  common  to  abstract  pro-
positions of  every  kind.  For  instance,  you
cannot  take  from  a  man  what  he  has  not.
[697-689]


A  man  cannot  be  bound  and  perfectly  free
at  the  same  time.  I  think  no  man  will
call  these  moral  truths ;  but  they  are  neces-
sary truths,  and  as  evident  as  any  in  mathe-
matics. Indeed,  they  are  very  nearly  allied
to  the  two  which  Mr  Locke  gives  as  in-
stances of  moral  propositions  capable  of
demonstration.  Of  such  abstract  proposi-
tions, I  think  it  may  more  properly  be  said
that  they  have  the  evidence  of  mathemati-
cal axioms,  than  that  they  are  capable  of
demonstration.

There  are  propositions  of  another  kind,
which  alone  deserve  the  name  of  moral  pro-
positions. They  are  such  as  affirm  some-
thing to  be  the  duty  of  persons  that  really
exist.  These  are  not  abstract  propositions ;
and,  therefore,  Mr  Locke's  reasoning  does
not  apply  to  them.  The  truth  Of  all  such
propositions  depends  upon  the  constitution
and  circumstances  of  the  persons  to  whom
they  are  applied.

Of  such  propositions,  there  are  some  that
are  self-evident  to  every  man  that  has  a
conscience  ;  and  these  are  the  principles
from  which  all  moral  reasoning  must  be
drawn.  They  may  be  called  the  axioms  of
morals.  But  our  reasoning  from  these
axioms  to  any  duty  that  is  not  self-evident
can  very  rarely  be  demonstrative.  Nor  is  this
any  detriment  to  the  cause  of  virtue,  because
to  act  against  what  appears  most  probable
in  a  matter  of  duty,  is  as  real  a  trespass
against  the  first  principles  of  morality,  as
to  act  against  demonstration  ;  and,  because
he  who  has  but  one  talent  in  reasoning,  and
makes  the  proper  use  of  it,  shall  be  ac-
cepted, as  well  as  he  to  whom  God  has
given  ten. [689]


CHAPTER  III.

OF  PROBABLE  REASONING.

The  field  of  demonstration,  as  has  been
observed,  is  necessary  truth  :  the  field  of
probable  reasoning  is  contingent  truth — not
what  necessarily  must  be  at  all  times,  but
what  is,  or  was,  or  shall  be.

No  contingent  truth  is  capable  of  strict
demonstration ;  but  necessary  truths  may
sometimes  have  probable  evidence.

Dr  Wallis  discovered  many  important
mathematical  truths,  by  that  kind  of  induc-
tion which  draws  a  general  conclusion  from
particular  premises.  This  is  not  strict  de-
monstration, but,  in  some  cases,  gives  as
full  conviction  as  demonstration  itself ;  and
a  man  may  be  certain,  that  a  truth  is  de-
monstrable before  it  ever  has  been  demon-
strated. In  other  cases,  a  mathematical
proposition  may  have  such  probable  evi-
dence from  induction  or  analogy  as  en-
courages the  mathematician  to  investigate
21


482


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VII.


its  demonstration.  But  still  the  reasoning,
proper  to  mathematical  and  other  necessary
truths,  is  demonstration ;  and  that  which  is
proper  to  contingent  truths,  is  probable
reasoning.

These  two  kinds  of  reasoning  differ  in
other  respects.  In  demonstrative  reason-
ing, one  argument  is  as  good  as  a  thousand-
One  demonstration  may  be  more  elegant
than  another ;  it  may  be  more  easily  com-
prehended, or  it  may  be  more  subservient
to  some  purpose  beyond  the  present.  On
any  of  these  accounts  it  may  deserve  a
preference :  but  then  it  is  sufficient  by  it-
self ;  it  needs  no  aid  from  another ;  it  can
receive  none.  To  add  more  demonstrations
of  the  same  conclusion,  would  be  a  kind  of
tautology  in  reasoning ;  because  one  de-
monstration, clearly  comprehended,  gives
all  the  evidence  we  are  capable  of  receiv-
ing. [690]

The  strength  of  probable  reasoning,  for
the  most  part,  depends  not  upon  any  one
argument,  but  upon  many,  which  unite
their  force,  and  lead  to  the  same  conclusion.
Any  one  of  them  by  itself  would  be  insuf-
ficient to  convince  ;  but  the  whole  taken
together  may  have  a  force  that  is  irresistible,
so  that  to  desire  more  evidence  would  be
absurd.  Would  any  man  seek  new  argu-
ments to  prove  that  there  were  such  persons
as  King  Charles  I.  or  Oliver  Cromwell  ?

Such  evidence  may  be  compared  to  a  rope
made  up  of  many  slender  filaments  twisted
together.  The  rope  has  strength  more
than  sufficient  to  bear  the  stress  laid  upon
it,  though  no  one  of  the  filaments  of  which
it  is  composed  would  be  sufficient  for  that
purpose.

It  is  a  common  observation,  that  it  is
unreasonable  to  require  demonstration  for
things  which  do  not  admit  of  it.  It  is  no
less  unreasonable  to  require  reasoning  of
any  kind  for  things  which  are  known  with-
out reasoning.  All  reasoning  must  be
grounded  upon  truths  which  are  known
without  reasoning.  In  every  branch  of  real
knowledge  there  must  be  first  principles
whose  truth  is  known  intuitively,  without
reasoning,  either  probable  or  demonstrative.
They  are  not  grounded  on  reasoning,  but
all  reasoning  is  grounded  on  them.  It  has
been  shewn,  that  there  are  first  principles
of  necessary  truths,  and  first  principles  of
contingent  truths.  Demonstrative  reason-
ing is  grounded  upon  the  former,  and  pro-
bable reasoning  upon  the  latter.

That  we  may  not  be  embarrassed  by  the
ambiguity  of  words,  it  is  proper  to  observe,
that  there  is  a  popular  meaning  of  probable
evidence,  which  ought  not  to  be  confounded
with  the  philosophical  meaning,  above  ex-
plained. [691]

In  common  language,  probable  evidence
is  considered  as  an  inferior  degree  of  evi-


dence, and  is  opposed  to  certainty  :  so  that
what  is  certain  is  more  than  probable,  and
what  is  only  probable  is  not  certain.  Phi-
losophers consider  probable  evidence,  not
as  a  degree,  but  as  a  species  of  evidence,
which  is  opposed,  not  to  certainty,  but  to
another  species  of  evidence,  called  demon-
stration.

Demonstrative  evidence  has  no  degrees  ;
but  probable  evidence,  taken  in  the  philo-
sophical sense,  has  all  degrees,  from  the
very  least  to  the  greatest,  which  we  call
certainty.

That  there  is  such  a  city  as  Rome,  I  am
as  certain  as  of  any  proposition  in  Euclid ;
but  the  evidence  is  not  demonstrative,  but
of  that  kind  which  philosophers  call  pro-
bable. Yet,  in  common  language,  it  would
sound  oddly  to  say,  it  is  probable  there  is
such  a  city  as  Rome,  because  it  would
imply  some  degree  of  doubt  or  uncertainty.

Taking  probable  evidence,  therefore,  in
the  philosophical  sense,  as  it  is  opposed  to
demonstrative,  it  may  have  any  degrees  of
evidence,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest.

I  think,  in  most  cases,  we  measure  the
degrees  of  evidence  by  the  effect  they  have
upon  a  sound  understanding,  when  com-
prehended clearly  and  without  prejudice.
Every  degree  of  evidence  perceived  by  the
mind,  produces  a  proportioned  degree  of
assent  or  belief.  The  judgment  may  be  in
perfect  suspense  between  two  contradictory
opinions,  when  there  is  no  evidence  for
either,  or  equal  evidence  for  both.  The
least  preponderancy  on  one  side  inclines  the
judgment  in  proportion.  Belief  is  mixed
with  doubt,  more  or  less,  until  we  come
to  the  highest  degree  of  evidence,  when
all  doubt  vanishes,  and  the  belief  is  firm
and  immovable.  This  degree  of  evidence,
the  highest  the  human  faculties  can  attain,
we  call  certainty. [692]

Probable  evidence  not  only  differs  in  kind
from  demonstrative,  but  is  itself  of  different
kinds.  The  chief  of  these  I  shall  mention,
without  pretending  to  make  a  complete
enumeration.

The  first  kind  is  that  of  human  testimony,
upon  which  the  greatest  part  of  human
knowledge  is  built.

The  faith  of  history  depends  upon  it,  as
well  as  the  judgment  of  solemn  tribunals,
with  regard  to  men's  acquired  rights,  and
with  regard  to  their  guilt  or  innocence,
when  they  are  charged  with  crimes.  A
great  part  of  the  business  of  the  judge,  of
counsel  at  the  bar,  of  the  historian,  the
critic,  and  the  antiquarian,  is  to  canvass
and  weigh  this  kind  of  evidence ;  and  no
man  can  act  with  common  prudence  in  the
ordinary  occurrences  of  life,  who  has  not
some  competent  judgment  of  it.

The  belief  we  give  to  testimony,  in  many

cases,  is  not  solely  grounded  upon  the  vera-

[690-692]


CHAP,  in.]


OF  PROBABLE  REASONING.


483


city  of  the  testifier.  In  a  single  testimony,
we  consider  the  motives  a  man  might  have
to  falsify.  If  there  be  no  appearance  of
any  such  motive,  much  more  if  there  be
motives  on  the  other  side,  his  testimony  has
weight  independent  of  his  moral  character.
If  the  testimony  be  circumstantial,  we  con-
sider how  far  the  circumstances  agree  to-
gether, and  with  things  that  are  known.
It  is  so  very  difficult  to  fabricate  a  story
which  cannot  be  detected  by  a  judicious
examination  of  the  circumstances,  that  it
acquires  evidence  by  being  able  to  bear
such  a  trial.  There  is  an  art  in  detecting
false  evidence  in  judicial  proceedings,  well
known  to  able  judges  and  barristers ;  so
that  I  believe  few  false  witnesses  leave  the
bar  without  suspicion  of  their  guilt.

When  there  is  an  agreement  of  many
witnesses,  in  a  great  variety  of  circum-
stances, without  the  possibility  of  a  previous
concert,  the  evidence  may  be  equal  to  that
of  demonstration. [693]

A  second  kind  of  probable  evidence,  is
the  authority  of  those  who  are  good  judges
of  the  point  in  question.  The  supreme
court  of  judicature  of  the  British  nation,  is
often  determined  by  the  opinion  of  lawyers
in  a  point  of  law,  of  physicians  in  a  point  of
medicine,  and  of  other  artists,  in  what  re-
lates to  their  several  professions.  And,  in
the  common  affairs  of  life,  we  frequently
rely  upon  the  judgment  of  others,  in  points
of  which  we  are  not  proper  judges  our-
selves.

A  third  kind  of  probable  evidence,  is  that
by  which  we  recognise  the  identity  of  things
and  persons  of  our  acquaintance.  That  two
swords,  two  horses,  or  two  persons,  may  be
so  perfectly  alike  as  not  to  be  distinguish-
able by  those  to  whom  they  are  best  known,
cannot  be  shewn  to  be  impossible.  But  we
learn  either  from  nature,  orfrom  experience,
that  it  never  happens ;  or  so  very  rarely,
that  a  person  or  thing,  well  known  to  us,  is
immediately  recognised  without  any  doubt,
when  we  perceive  the  marks  or  signs  by
which  we  were  in  use  to  distinguish  it  from
all  other  individuals  of  the  kind.

This  evidence  we  rely  upon  in  the  most
important  affairs  of  life ;  and,  by  this  evi-
dence, the  identity,  both  of  things  and  of
persons,  is  determined  in  courts  of  judica-
ture.

A  fourth  kind  of  probable  evidence,  is
that  which  we  have  of  men's  future  actions
and  conduct,  from  the  general  principles  of
action  in  man,  or  from  our  knowledge  of  the
individuals.

Notwithstanding  the  folly  and  vice  that
are  to  be  found  among  men,  there  is  a  certain
degree  of  prudence  and  probity  which  we
rely  upon  in  every  man  that  is  not  insane.
If  it  were  not  so,  no  man  would  be  safe  in
the  company  of  another,  and  there  could  be
[693-695]


no  society  among  mankind.  If  men  were
as  much  disposed  to  hurt  as  to  do  good,  to
lie  as  to  speak  truth,  they  could  not  live  to-
gether ;  they  would  keep  at  as  great  dis-
tance from  one  another  as  possible,  and  the
race  would  soon  perish. [694]

We  expect  that  men  will  take  some  care
of  themselves,  of  their  family,  friends,  and
reputation  ;  that  they  will  not  injure  others
without  some  temptation  ;  that  they  will
have  some  gratitude  for  good  offices,  and
some  resentment  of  injuries.

Such  maxims  with  regard  to  human  con-
duct, are  the  foundation  of  all  political  rea-
soning, and  of  common  prudence  in  the  con-
duct of  life.  Hardly  can  a  man  form  any
project  in  public  or  in  private  life,  which
does  not  depend  upon  the  conduct  of  other
men,  as  well  as  his  own,  and  which  does  not
go  upon  the  supposition  that  men  will  act
such  a  part  in  such  circumstances.  This
evidence  may  be  probable  in  a  very  high
degree  ;  but  can  never  be  demonstrative.
The  best  concerted  project  may  fail,  and
wise  counsels  may  be  frustrated,  because
some  individual  acted  a  part  which  it  would
have  been  against  all  reason  to  expect.

Another  kind  of  probable  evidence,  the
counterpart  of  the  last,  is  that  by  which  we
collect  men's  characters  and  designs  from
their  actions,  speech,  and  other  external
signs.

We  see  not  men's  hearts,  nor  the  prin-
ciples by  which  they  are  actuated  ;  but
there  are  external  signs  of  their  principles
and  dispositions,  which,  though  not  certain,
may  sometimes  be  more  trusted  than  their
professions  ;  and  it  is  from  external  signs
that  we  must  draw  all  the  knowledge  we
can  attain  of  men's  characters.

The  next  kind  of  probable  evidence  I
mention,  is  that  which  mathematicians  call
the  probability  of  chances.

We  attribute  some  events  to  chance,  be
cause  we  know  only  the  remote  cause  which
must  produce  some  one  event  of  a  num-
ber ;  but  know  not  the  more  immediate
cause  which  determines  a  particular  event
of  that  number  in  preference  to  the  others.
[695]

I  think  all  the  chances  about  which  we  rea-
son in  mathematics  are  of  this  kind.  Thus,
in  throwing  a  just  die  upon  a  table,  we  say
it  is  an  equal  chance  which  of  the  six  sides
shall  be  turned  up ;  because  neither  the
person  who  throws,  nor  the  bystanders,
know  the  precise  measure  of  force  and  di-
rection necessary  to  turn  up  any  one  side
rather  than  another.  There  are  here,  there-
fore six  events,  one  of  which  must  happen  ;
and  as  all  are  supposed  to  have  equal  pro-
bability, the  probability  of  any  one  side
being  turned  up,  the  ace,  for  instance,  is  as
one  to  the  remaining  number,  five.

The  probability  of  turning  up  two  aces
2  I  2


484


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VII.


with  two  dice  is  as  one  to  thirty-five ;  because
here  there  are  thirty-six  events,  each  of
which  has  equal  probability.

Upon  such  principles  as  these,  the  doc-
trine of  chances  has  furnished  a  field  of  de-
monstrative reasoning  of  great  extent,  al-
though the  events  about  which  this  reason-
ing is  employed  be  not  necesssary,  but  con-
tingent, and  be  not  certain,  but  probable.-

This  may  seem  to  contradict  a  principle
before  advanced,  that  contingent  truths  are
not  capable  of  demonstration ;  but  it  does
not :  for,  in  the  mathematical  reasonings
about  chance,  the  conclusion  demonstrated,
is  not,  that  such  an  event  shall  happen,  but
that  the  probability  of  its  happening  bears
such  a  ratio  to  the  probability  of  its  failing  ;
and  this  conclusion  is  necessary  upon  the
suppositions  on  which  it  is  grounded.

The  last  kind  of  probable  evidence  I  shall
mention,  is  that  by  which  the  known  laws
of  Nature  have  been  discovered,  and  the
effects  which  have  been  produced  by  them
in  former  ages,  or  which  may  be  expected
in  time  to  come.

The  laws  of  Nature  are  the  rules  by  which
the  Supreme  Being  governs  the  world.  We
deduce  them  only  from  facts  that  fall  within
our  own  observation,  or  are  properly  attested
by  those  who  have  observed  them. [696]

The  knowledge  of  some  of  the  laws  of
nature  is  necessary  to  all  men  in  the  con-
duct of  life.  These  are  soon  discovered
even  by  savages.  They  know  that  fire
burns,  that  water  drowns,  that  bodies  gra-
vitate towards  the  earth.  They  know  that
day  and  night,  summer  and  winter,  regu-
larly succeed  each  other.  As  far  back  as
their  experience  and  information  reach,
they  know  that  these  have  happened  regu-
larly ;  and,  upon  this  ground,  they  are  led,
by  the  constitution  of  human  nature,  to  ex-
pect that  they  will  happen  in  time  to  come,
in  like  circumstances.

The  knowledge  which  the  philosopher
attains  of  the  laws  of  Nature  differs  from
that  of  the  vulgar,  not  in  the  first  principles
on  which  it  is  grounded,  but  in  its  extent
and  accuracy.  He  collects  with  care  the
phenomena  that  lead  to  the  same  conclu-
sion, and  compares  them  with  those  that
seem  to  contradict  or  to  limit  it.  He  ob-
serves the  circumstances  on  which  every
phenomenon  depends,  and  distinguishes
them  carefully  from  those  that  are  accident-
ally conjoined  with  it.  He  puts  natural
bodies  in  various  situations,  and  applies
them  to  one  another  in  various  ways,  on
purpose  to  observe  the  effect ;  and  thus  ac-
quires from  his  senses  a  more  extensive
knowledge  of  the  course  of  Nature  in  a  short
time,  than  could  be  collected  by  casual  ob-
servation in  many  ages.

But  what  is  the  result  of  his  laborious
researches  ? It  is,  that,  as  far  as  he  has


been  able  to  observe,  such  things  have
always  happened  in  such  circumstances,  and
such  bodies  have  always  been  found  to  have
such  properties.  These  are  matters  of  fact,
attested  by  sense,  memory,  and  testimony,
just  as  the  few  facts  which  the  vulgar  know
are  attested  to  them.

And  what  conclusions  does  the  philoso.
pher  draw  from  the  facts  he  has  collected  ?
They  are,  that  like  events  have  happened
in  former  times  in  like  circumstances,  and
will  happen  in  time  to  come  ;  and  these  con-
clusions are  built  on  the  very  same  ground
on  which  the  simple  rustic  concludes  that
the  sun  will  rise  to-morrow. [697]

Facts  reduced  to  general  rules,  and  the
consequences  of  those  general  rules,  are  all
that  we  really  know  of  the  material  world.
And  the  evidence  that  such  general  rules
have  no  exceptions,  as  well  as  the  evidence
that  they  will  be  the  same  in  time  to  come
as  they  have  been  in  time  past,  can  never
be  demonstrative.  It  is  only  that  species
of  evidence  which  philosophers  call  probable.
General  rules  may  have  exceptions  or  limit-
ations which  no  man  ever  had  occasion  to
observe.  The  laws  of  nature  may  be  changed
by  him  who  established  them.  But  we  are
led  by  our  constitution  to  rely  upon  their
continuance  with  as  little  doubt  as  if  it  was
demonstrable.

I  pretend  not  to  have  made  a  complete
enumeration  of  all  the  kinds  of  probable
evidence ;  but  those  I  have  mentioned  are
sufficient  to  shew,  that  the  far  greatest  part,
and  the  most  interesting  part  of  our  know-
ledge, must  rest  upon  evidence  of  this  kind ;
and  that  many  things  are  certain  for  which
we  have  only  that  kind  of  evidence  which
philosophers  call  probable.


CHAPTER  IV.

of  mr  hume's  scepticism  with  regard  to

REASON.

In  the  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"
book  I.  part  iv.  §  1,  the  author  undertakes
to  prove  two  points  : — First,  That  all  that
is  called  human  knowledge  (meaning  de-
monstrative knowledge)  is  only  probability ;
and,  secondly,  That  this  probability,  when
duly  examined,  evanishes  by  degrees,  and
leaves  at  last  no  evidence  at  all :  so  that,
in  the  issue,  there  is  no  ground  to  believe
anyone  proposition  rather  than  its  contrary ;
and  "  all  those  are  certainly  fools  who  reason
or  believe  anything." [698]

According  to  this  account,  reason,  that
boasted  prerogative  of  man,  and  the  light  of
his  mind,  is  an  ignis  fatuus,  which  misleads
the  wandering  traveller,  and  leaves  him  at
last  in  absolute  darkness.

How  "unhappy  is  the  condition  of  man,


[696-698]


chap,  iv.]  OF  MR  HUME'S  SCEPTICISM  ABOUT  REASON.


485


born  under  a  necessity  of  believing  contra-
dictions, and  of  trusting  to  a  guide  who  con-
fesses herself  to  be  a  false  one  !

It  is  some  comfort,  that  this  doctrine  can
never  be  seriously  adopted  by  any  man  iu
his  senses.  And  after  this  author  had
shewn  that  "  all  the  rules  of  logic  require  a
total  extinction  of  all  belief  and  evidence,"
he  himself,  and  all  men  that  are  not  insane,
must  have  believed  many  things,  and  yielded
assent  to  the  evidence  which  he  had  ex-
tinguished.

This,  indeed,  he  is  so  candid  as  to  acknow-
ledge. "  He  finds  himself  absolutely  and
necessarily  determined,  to  live  and  talk  and
act  like  other  people  in  the  common  affairs
of  life.  And  since  reason  is  incapable  of
dispelling  these  clouds,  most  fortunately  it
happens,  that  nature  herself  suffices  to  that
purpose,  and  cures  him  of  this  philosophical
melancholy  and  delirium." See  §  7-

This  was  surely  a  very  kind  and  friendly
interposition  of  nature  ;  for  the  effects  of
this  philosophical  delirium,  if  carried  into
life,  must  have  been  very  melancholy.

But  what  pity  is  it,  that  nature,  (what-
ever is  meant  by  that  personage,)  so  kind
in  curing  this  delirium,  should  be  so  cruel
as  to  cause  it.  Doth  the  same  fountain
send  forth  sweet  waters  and  bitter  ?  Is  it
not  more  probable,  that,  if  the  cure  was  the
work  of  nature,  the  disease  came  from
another  hand,  and  was  the  work  of  the
philosopher  ? [699]

To  pretend  to  prove  by  reasoning  that
there  is  no  force  in  reason,  does  indeed  look
like  a  philosophical  delirium.  It  is  like  a
man's  pretending  to  see  clearly,  that  he
himself  and  all  other  men  are  blind.

A  common  symptom  of  delirium  is,  to
think  that  all  other  men  are  fools  or  mad.
This  appears  to  have  been  the  case  of  our
author,  who  concluded,  "  That  all  those  are
certainly  fools  who  reason  or  believe  any-
thing."

Whatever  was  the  cause  of  this  delirium,
it  must  be  granted  that,  if  it  was  real  and
not  feigned,  it  was  not  to  be  cured  by  rea-
soning ;  for  what  can  be  more  absurd  than
to  attempt  to  convince  a  man  by  reasoning
who  disowns  the  authority  of  reason.  It
was,  therefore,  very  fortunate  that  Nature
found  other  means  of  curing  it.

It  may,  however,  not  be  improper  to
inquire,  whether,  as  the  author  thinks,  it.
was  produced  by  a  just  application  of  the
rules  of  logic,  or,  as  others  may  be  apt  to
think,  by  the  misapplication  and  abuse  of
them.

First,  Because  we  are  fallible,  the  author
infers  that  all  knowledge  degenerates  into
probability.

That  man,  and  probably  every  created
being,  is  fallible ;  and  that  a  fallible  being
cannot  have  that  perfect  comprehension
f699-701]


and  assurance  of  truth  which  an  infallible
being  has — I  think  ought  to  be  granted.  It
becomes  a  fallible  being  to  be  modest,  open
to  new. light,  and  sensible  that,  by  some
false  bias,  or  by  rash  judging,  he  may  be
misled.  If  this  be  called  a  degree  of  scep-
ticism, I  cannot  help  approving  of  it,  being
persuaded  that  the  man  who  makes  the  best
use  he  can  of  the  faculties  which  God  has
given  him,  without  thinking  them  more  per-
fect than  they  really  are,  may  have  all  the
belief  that  is  necessary  in  the  conduct  of
life,  and  all  that  is  necessary  to  his  accept-
ance with  his  Maker. [700]

It  is  granted,  then,  that  human  judg-
ments ought  always  to  be  formed  with  an
humble  sense  of  our  fallibility  in  judging.

This  is  all  that  can  be  inferred  by  the
rules  of  logic  from  our  being  fallible.  And
if  this  be  all  that  is  meant  by  our  know-
ledge degenerating  into  probability,  I  know
no  person  of  a  different  opinion.

But  it  may  be  observed,  that  the  author
here  uses  the  word  probability  in  a  sense
for  which  I  know  no  authority  but  his  own.
Philosophers  understand  probability  as  op-
posed to  demonstration ;  the  vulgar  as
opposed  to  certainty ;  but  this  author  un-
derstands it  as  opposed  to  infallibility,  which
no  man  claims.

One  who  believes  himself  to  be  fallible
may  still  hold  it  to  be  certain  that  two  and
two  make  four,  and  that  two  contradictory
propositions  cannot  both  be  true.  He  may
believe  some  things  to  be  probable  only,
and  other  things  to  be  demonstrable,  with-
out making  any  pretence  to  infallibility.

If  we  use  words  in  their  proper  meaning,
it  is  impossible  that  demonstration  should
degenerate  into  probability  from  the  imper-
fection of  our  faculties.  Our  judgment  can-
not change  the  nature  of  the  things  about
which  we  judge.  What  is  really  demon-
stration, will  still  be  so,  whatever  judgment
we  form  concerning  it-  It  may,  likewise,
be  observed,  that,  when  we  mistake  that  foi
demonstration  which  really  is  not,  the  con-
sequence of  this  mistake  is,  not  that  de-
monstration degenerates  into  probability,
but  that  what  we  took  to  be  demonstration
is  no  proof  at  all ;  for  one  false  step  in  .a
demonstration  destroys  the  whole,  but  can-
not turn  it  into  another  kind  of  proof.
[701]

Upon  the  whole,  then,  this  first  conclu-
sion of  our  author,  That  the  fallibility  of
human  judgment  turns  all  knowledge  into
probability,  if  understood  literally,  is  absurd ;
but,  if  it  be  only  a  figure  of  speech,  and
means  no  more  but  that,  in  all  our  judg-
ments, we  ought  to  be  sensible  of  our  falli-
bility, and  ought  to  hold  our  opinions  with
that  modesty  that  becomes  fallible  crea-
tures— which  I  take  to  be  what  the  author
meant — this,  I  think,  nobody  denies,  nor


486


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VII


was  it  necessary  to  enter  into  a  laborious
proof  of  it.

One  is  never  in  greater  danger  of  trans-
gressing against  the  rules  of  logic  than  in
attempting  to  prove  what  needs  no  proof.
Of  this  we  have  an  instance  in  this  very
case ;  for  the  author  begins  his  proof,  that
all  human  judgments  are  fallible,  with  af-
firming that  some  are  infallible.

"  In  all  demonstrative  sciences,"  says
he,  "  the  rules  are  certain  and  infallible ;
but  when  we  apply  them,  our  fallible  and
uncertain  faculties  are  very  apt  to  depart
from  them,  and  fall  into  error."

He  had  forgot,  surely,  that  the  rules  of
demonstrative  sciences  are  discovered  by
our  fallible  and  uncertain  faculties,  and
have  no  authority  but  that  of  human  judg-
ment. If  they  be  infallible,  some  human
judgments  are  infallible ;  and  there  are  many
in  various  branches  of  human  knowledge
which  have  as  good  a  claim  to  infallibility
as  the  rules  of  the  demonstrative  sciences.

We  have  reason  here  to  find  fault  with
our  author  for  not  being  sceptical  enough,
as  well  as  for  a  mistake  in  reasoning,  when
he  claims  infallibility  to  certain  decisions  of
the  human  faculties,  in  order  to  prove  that
all  their  decisions  are  fallible.

The  second  point  which  he  attempts  to
prove  is,  That  this  probability,  when  duly
examined,  suffers  a  continual  diminution,
and  at  last  a  total  extinction.

The  obvious  consequence  of  this  is,  that
no  fallible  being  can  have  good  reason  to
believe  anything  at  all ;  but  let  us  hear  the
proof. [702]

"  In  every  judgment,  we  ought  to  cor-
rect the  first  judgment  derived  from  the
nature  of  the  object,  by  another  judgment
derived  from  the  nature  of  the  understand-
ing. Beside  the  original  uncertainty  inher-
ent in  the  subject,  there  arises  another,
derived  from  the  weakness  of  the  faculty
which  judges.  Having  adjusted  these  two
uncertainties  together,  we  are  obliged,  by
our  reason,  to  add  a  new  uncertainty,  de-
rived from  the  possibility  of  error  in  the
estimation  we  make  of  the  truth  and  fidelity
of  our  faculties.  This  is  a  doubt  of  which,
if  we  would  closely  pursue  our  reasoning,
we  cannot  avoid  giving  a  decision-  But
this  decision,  though  it  should  be  favour-
able to  our  preceding  judgment,  being
founded  only  on  probability,  must  weaken
still  farther  our  first  evidence.  The  third
uncertainty  must,  in  like  manner  be  criti-
cised by  a  fourth,  and  so  on  without  end.

"  Now,  as  every  one  of  these  uncertainties
takes  away  a  part  of  the  original  evidence,
it  must  at  last  be  reduced  to  nothing.  Let
our  first  belief  be  ever  so  strong,  it  must  in-
fallibly perish,  by  passing  through  so  many
examinations,  each  of  which  carries  off
somewhat  of  its  force  and  vigour. No  finite


object  can  subsist  under  a  decrease  repeated
in  infinitum.

11  When  I  reflect  on  the  natural  fallibil-
ity of  my  judgment,  I  have  less  confidence
in  my  opinions  than  when  I  only  consider
the  objects  concerning  which  I  reason.  And
when  I  proceed  still  farther,  to  turn  the  scru-
tiny against  every  successive  estimation  I
make  of  my  faculties,  all  the  rules  of  logic
require  a  continual  diminution,  and  at  last
a  total  extinction  of  belief  and  evidence."

This  is  the  author's  Achillean  argument
against  the  evidence  of  reason,  from  which
he  concludes,  that  a  man  who  would  govern
his  belief  by  reason  must  believe  nothing  at
all,  and  that  belief  is  an  act,  not  of  the  co-
gitative, but  of  the  sensitive  part  of  our
nature. [703]

If  there  be  any  such  thing  as  motion,
(said  an  ancient  Sceptic,*)  the  swift-footed
Achilles  could  never  overtake  an  old  man
in  a  journey.  For,  suppose  the  old  man  to
set  out  a  thousand  paces  before  Achilles,
and  that,  while  Achilles  has  travelled  the
thousand  paces,  the  old  man  has  gone  five
hundred  ;  when  Achilles  has  gone  the  five
hundred,  the  old  man  has  gone  two  hun-
dred and  fifty ;  and  when  Achilles  has
gone  the  two  hundred  and  fifty,  the  old
man  is  still  one  hundred  and  twenty-five
before  him.  Repeat  these  estimations  in
infinitum,  and  you  will  still  find  the  old  man
foremost ;  therefore  Achilles  can  never
overtake  him ;  therefore  there  can  be  no
such  thing  as  motion.

The  reasoning  of  the  modern  Sceptic
against  reason  is  equally  ingenious,  and
equally  convincing.  Indeed,  they  have  a
great  similarity.

If  we  trace  the  journey  of  Achilles  two
thousand  paces,  we  shall  find  the  very
point  where  the  old  man  is  overtaken.  But
this  short  journey,  by  dividing  it  into  an
infinite  number  of  stages,  with  correspond-
ing estimations,  is  made  to  appear  infinite.
In  like  manner,  our  author,  subjecting
every  judgment  to  an  infinite  number  of
successive  probable  estimations,  reduces
the  evidence  to  nothing.

To  return  then  to  the  argument  of  the
modern  Sceptic.  I  examine  the  proof  of  a
theorem  of  Euclid.  It  appears  to  me  to  be
strict  demonstration.  But  I  may  have
overlooked  some  fallacy;  therefore  I  ex-
amine it  again  and  again,  but  can  find  no
flaw  in  it.  I  find  all  that  have  examined
it  agree  with  me.  I  have  now  that  evidence
of  the  truth  of  the  proposition  which  I  and
all  men  call  demonstration,  and  that  belief
of  it  which  we  call  certainty. [704]

Here  my  sceptical  friend  interposes,  and
assures  me,  that  the  rules  of  logic  reduce

*  Zeno  Eleates.  He  is  improperly  called,  simpti-
citer, Sceptic. — H.

[702- 70 1]


chap,  iv.]  OF  MR  HUME'S  SCEPTICISM  ABOUT  REASON.


487


this  demonstration  to  no  evidence  at  all.
I  am  willing  to  hear  what  step  in  it  he  thinks
fallacious,  and  why.  He  makes  no  objec-
tion to  any  part  of  the  demonstration,  but
pleads  my  fallibility  in  judging.  I  have
made  the  proper  allowance  for  this  already,
by  being  open  to  conviction.  But,  says  he,
there  are  two  uncertainties,  the  first  inherent
in  the  subject,  which  I  have  already  shewn
to  have  only  probable  evidence  ;  the  second
arising  from  the  weakness  of  the  faculty
that  j  udges.  I  answer,  it  is  the  weakness  of
the  faculty  only  that  reduces  this  demonstra-
tion to  what  you  call  probability.  You
must  not  therefore  make  it  a  second  uncer-
tainty; for  it  is  the  same  with  the  first.
To  take  credit  twice  in  an  account  for
the  same  article  is  not  agreeable  to  the
rules  of  logic.  Hitherto,  therefore,  there
is  but  one  uncertainty — to  wit,  my  fallibility
in  judging.

But,  says  my  friend,  you  are  obliged  by
reason  to  add  a  new  uncertainty,  derived
from  the  possibility  of  error  in  the  estima-
tion you  make  of  the  truth  and  fidelity  of
your  faculties. I  answer —

This  estimation  is  ambiguously  ex-
pressed ;  it  may  either  mean  an  estimation
of  my  liableness  to  err  by  the  misapplica-
tion and  abuse  of  my  faculties  ;  or  it  may
mean  an  estimation  of  my  liableness  to  err
by  conceiving  my  faculties  to  be  true  and
faithful,  while  they  may  be  false  and  falla-
cious in  themselves,  even  when  applied  in
the  best  manner.  I  shall  consider  this
estimation  in  each  of  these  senses.

If  the  first  be  the  estimation  meant,  it  is
true  that  reason  directs  us,  as  fallible  crea-
tures, to  carry  along  with  us,  in  all  our
judgments,  a  sense  of  our  fallibility.  It  is
true  also,  that  we  are  in  greater  danger  of
erring  in  some  cases,  and  less  in  others ;
and  that  this  danger  of  erring  may,  accord-
ing to  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  admit
of  an  estimation,  which  we  ought  likewise
to  carry  along  with  us  in  every  judgment
we  form. [705]

When  a  demonstration  is  short  and  plain ;
when  the  point  to  be  proved  does  not
touch  our  interest  or  our  passions ;  when
the  faculty  of  judging,  in  such  cases,  has
acquired  strength  by  much  exercise — there  is
less  danger  of  erring ;  when  the  contrary
circumstances  take  place,  there  is  more.

In  the  present  case,  every  circumstance
is  favourable  to  the  judgment  I  have  formed.
There  cannot  be  less  danger  of  erring  in
any  case,  excepting,  perhaps,  when  I  judge
of  a  self-evident  axiom.

The  Sceptic  farther  urges,  that  this  deci-
sion, though  favourable  to  my  first  judg-
ment, being  founded  only  on  probability,
must  still  weaken  the  evidence  of  that  judg-
ment-

Here  I  cannot  help  being  of  a  quite  con-
£705,  706"|


trary  opinion ;  nor  can  I  imagine  how  an
ingenious  author  could  impose  upon  himself
so  grossly ;  for  surely  he  did  not  intend  to
impose  upon  his  reader.

After  repeated  examination  of  a  propo-
sition of  Euclid,  I  judge  it  to  be  strictly
demonstrated ;  this  is  my  first  judgment.
But,  as  I  am  liable  to  err  from  various
causes,  I  consider  how  far  I  may  have  been
misled  by  any  of  these  causes  in  this  judg-
ment. My  decision  upon  this  second  point
is  favourable  to  my  first  judgment,  and
therefore,  as  I  apprehend,  must  strengthen
it.  To  say  that  this  decision,  because  it  is
only  probable,  must  weaken  the  first  evi-
dence, seems  to  me  contrary  to  all  rules  of
logic,  and  to  common  sense.

The  first  judgment  may  be  compared  to
the  testimony  of  a  credible  witness ;  the
second,  after  a'  scrutiny  into  the  character
of  the  witness,  wipes  off  every  objection
that  can  be  made  to  it,  and  therefore  surely
must  confirm  and  not  weaken  his  testi-
mony. [706]

But  let  us  suppose,  that,  in  another  case,
I  examine  my  first  judgment  upon  some
point,  and  find  that  it  was  attended  with
unfavourable  circumstances,  what,  in  rea-
son, and  according  to  the  rules  of  logic,
ought  to  be  the  effect  of  this  discovery  ?

The  effect  surely  will  be,  and  ought  to
be,  to  make  me  less  confident  in  my  first
judgment,  until  I  examine  the  point  anew
in  more  favourable  circumstances.  If  it
be  a  matter  of  importance,  I  return  to
weigh  the  evidence  of  my  first  judgment.
If  it  was  precipitate  before,  it  must  now  be
deliberate  in  every  point.  If,  at  first,  I
was  in  passion,  I  must  now  be  cool.  If  I
had  an  interest  in  the  decision,  I  must
place  the  interest  on  the  other  side.

It  is  evident  that  this  review  of  the  sub-
ject may  confirm  my  first  judgment,  not-
withstanding the  suspicious  circumstances
that  attended  it.  Though  the  judge  was
biassed  or  corrupted,  it  does  not  follow  that
the  sentence  was  unjust.  The  rectitude  of
the  decision  does  not  depend  upon  the  cha-
racter of  the  judge,  but  upon  the  nature  of
the  case.  From  that  only,  it  must  be  deter-
mined whether  the  decision  be  just.  The
circumstances  that  rendered  it  suspicious
are  mere  presumptions,  which  have  no  force
against  direct  evidence.

Thus,  I  have  considered  the  effect  of  this
estimation  of  our  liableness  to  err  in  our
first  judgment,  and  have  allowed  to  it  all
the  effect  that  reason  and  the  rules  of  logic
permit.  In  the  case  I  first  supposed,  and
in  every  case  where  we  can  discover  no
cause  of  error,  it  affords  a  presumption  in
favour  of  the  first  judgment.  In  other
cases,  it  may  afford  a  presumption  against
it.  But  the  rules  of  logic  require,  that  we
should  not  judge  by  presumptions,  where


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VII.


we  have  direct  evidence.  The  effect  of  an
unfavourable  presumption  should  only  be,
to  make  us  examine  the  evidence  with  the
greater  care. [707]

The  sceptic  urges,  in  the  last  place,  that
this  estimation  must  be  subjected  to  another
estimation,  that  to  another,  and  so  on,  in  in-
finitum ;  and  as  every  new  estimation  takes
away  from  the  evidence  of  the  first  judg-
ment, it  must  at  last  be  totally  annihilated.

I  answer,  first,  It  has  been  shewn  above,
that  the  first  estimation,  supposing  it  un-
favourable, can  only  afford  a  presumption
against  the  first  judgment ;  the  second,
upon  the  same  supposition,  will  be  only  the
presumption  of  a  presumption ;  and  the
third,  the  presumption  that  there  is  a  pre-
sumption of  a  presumption.  This  infinite
series  of  presumptions  resembles  an  infinite
series  of  quantities,  decreasing  in  geome-
trical proportion,  which  amounts  only  to  a
finite  sum.  The  infinite  series  of  stages  of
Achilles'sjourney  after  the  old  man,  amounts
only  to  two  thousand  paces ;  nor  can  this
infinite  series  of  presumptions  outweigh  one
solid  argument  in  favour  of  the  first  judg-
ment, supposing  them  all  to  be  unfavour-
able to  it.

Secondly,  I  have  shewn,  that  the  estima-
tion of  our  first  judgment  may  strengthen
it ;  and  the  same  thing  may  be  said  of  all  the
subsequent  estimations.  It  would,  there-
fore, be  as  reasonable  to  conclude,  that  the
first  judgment  will  be  brought  to  infallible
certainty  when  this  series  of  estimations  is
wholly  in  its  favour,  as  that  its  evidence
will  be  brought  to  nothing  by  such  a  series
supposed  to  be  wholly  unfavourable  to  it.
But,  in  reality,  one  serious  and  cool  re-
examination of  the  evidence  by  which  our
first  judgment  is  supported,  has,  and  in
reason  ought  to  have  more  force  to  strengthen
or  weaken  it,  than  an  infinite  series  of  such
estimations  as  our  author  requires.

Thirdly,  I  know  no  reason  nor  rule  in
logic,  that  requires  that  such  a  series  of
estimations  should  follow  every  particular
judgment. [708]

A  wise  man,  who  has  practised  reasoning,
knows  that  he  is  fallible,  and  carries  this
conviction  along  with  him  in  every  judg-
ment he  forms.  He  knows  likewise  that
he  is  more  liable  to  err  in  some  cases  than
in  others.  He  has  a  scale  in  his  mind,  by
which  he  estimates  his  liableness  to  err,  and
by  this  he  regulates  the  degree  of  his  assent
in  his  first  judgment  upon  any  point.

The  author's  reasoning  supposes,  that  a
man,  when  he  forms  his  first  judgment,
conceives  himself  to  be  infallible  ;  that  by  a
second  and  subsequent  judgment,  he  dis-
covers that  he  is  not  infallible  ;  and  that  by
a  third  judgment,  subsequent  to  the  second,
he  estimates  his  liableness  to  err  in  such  a
case  as  the  present.


If  the  man  proceed  in  this  order.  I  grant,
that  his  second  judgment  will,  with  good
reason,  bring  down  the  first  from  supposed
infallibility  to  fallibility ;  and  that  his  third
judgment  will,  in  some  degree,  either
strengthen  or  weaken  the  first,  as  it  is  cor-
rected by  the  second.

But  every  man  of  understanding  proceeds
in  a  contrary  order.  When  about  to  judge
in  any  particular  point,  he  knows  already
that  he  is  not  infallible.  He  knows  what
are  the  cases  in  which  he  is  most  or  least
liable  to  err.  The  conviction  of  these  things
is  always  present  to  his  mind,  and  influences
the  degree  of  his  assent  in  his  first  judg-
ment, as  far  as  to  him  appears  reasonable.

If  he  should  afterwards  find  reason  to
suspect  his  first  judgment,  and  desires  to
have  all  the  satisfaction  his  faculties  can
give,  reason  will  direct  him  not  to  form
such  a  series  of  estimations  upon  estima-
tions, as  this  author  requires,  but  to  examine
the  evidence  of  his  first  judgment  carefully
and  coolly ;  and  this  review  may  very  reason-
ably, according  to  its  result,  either  strengthen
or  weaken,  or  totally  overturn  his  first
judgment. [709]

This  infinite  series  of  estimations,  there-
fore, is  not  the  method  that  reason  directs,
in  order  to  form  our  judgment  in  any  case.
It  is  introduced  without  necessity,  without
any  use  but  to  puzzle  the  understanding,
and  to  make  us  think,  that  to  judge,  even
in  the  simplest  and  plainest  cases,  is  a  mat-
ter of  insurmountable  difficulty  and  endless
labour ;  just  as  the  ancient  Sceptic,  to  make
a  journey  of  two  thousand  paces  appear
endless,  divided  it  into  an  infinite  number
of  stages.

But  we  observed,  that  the  estimation
which  our  author  requires,  may  admit  of
another  meaning,  which,  indeed,  is  more
agreeable  to  the  expression,  but  inconsist-
ent with  what  he  advanced  before.

By  the  possibility  of  error  in  the  estima-
tion of  the  truth  and  fidelity  of  our  faculties,
may  be  meant,  that  we  may  err  by  esteem-
ing our  faculties  true  and  faithful,  while  they
may  be  false  and  fallacious,  even  when  used
according  to  the  rules  of  reason  and  logic.

If  this  be  meant,  I  answer,  first,  That
the  truth  and  fidelity  of  our  faculty  of  judg-
ing is,  and  must  be  taken  for  granted  in
every  judgment  and  in  every  estimation.

If  the  sceptic  can  seriously  doubt  of  the
truth  and  fidelity  of  his  faculty  of  judging
when  properly  used,  and  suspend  his  judg-
ment upon  that  point  till  he  finds  proof,  his
scepticism  admits  of  no  cure  by  reasoning,
and  he  must  even  continue  in  it  until  he
have  new  faculties  given  him,  which  shall
have  authority  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  the
old.  Nor  is  there  any  need  of  an  endless
succession  of  doubts  upon  this  subject ;  for
the  first  puts  an  end  to  all  judgment  and
[707~709"»


chap.  iv.J OF  MR  HUME'S  SCEPTICISM  ABOUT  REASON.


489


reasoning,  and  to  the  possibility  of  convic-
tion by  that  means.  The  sceptic  has  here
got  possession  of  a  stronghold,  which  is  im-
pregnable to  reasoning,  and  we  must  leave
him  in  possession  of  it  till  Nature,  by  other
means,  makes  him  give  it  up. [710]

Secondly,  I  observe,  that  this  ground  of
scepticism,  from  the  supposed  infidelity  of
our  faculties,  contradicts  what  the  author
before  advanced  in  this  very  argument — to
wit,  that  "  the  rules  of  the  demonstrative
sciences  are  certain  and  infallible,  and  that
truth  is  the  natural  effect  of  reason,  and
that  error  arises  from  the  irruption  of  other
causes."

But,  perhaps,  he  made  these  concessions
unwarily.  He  is,  therefore,  at  liberty  to
retract  them,  and  to  rest  his  scepticism  upon
this  sole  foundation,  That  no  reasoning  can
prove  the  truth  and  fidelity  of  our  faculties-
Here  he  stands  upon  firm  ground ;  for  it  is
evident  that  every  argument  offered  to
prove  the  truth  and  fidelity  of  our  faculties,
takes  for  granted  the  thing  in  question,  and
is,  therefore,  that  kind  of  sophism  which
logicians  call  petitio  principii.

All  we  would  ask  of  this  kind  of  sceptic
is,  that  he  would  be  uniform  and  consistent,
and  that  his  practice  in  life  do  not  belie  Ids
profession  of  scepticism,  with  regard  to  the
fidelity  of  his  faculties ;  for  the  want  of  faith,
as  well  as  faith  itself,  is  best  shewn  by
works.  If  a  sceptic  avoid  the  fire  as  much
as  those  who  believe  it  dangerous  to  go
into  it,  we  can  hardly  avoid  thinking  his
scepticism  to  be  feigned,  and  not  real.

Our  author,  indeed,  was  aware,  that
neither  his  scepticism  nor  that  of  any  other
person,  was  able  to  endure  this  trial,  and,
therefore,  enters  a  caveat  against  it.
"  Neither  I,"  savs  he,  "  nor  any  other  per-
son was  ever  sincerely  and  constantly  of
that  opinion.  Nature,  by  an  absolute  and
uncontrollable  necessity,  has  determined  us
to  judge,  as  well  as  to  breathe  and  feel.  My
intention,  therefore,"  says  he,  "  in  display-
ing so  carefully  the  arguments  of  that  fan-
tastic sect,  is  only  to  make  the  reader  sen-
sible of  the  truth  of  my  hypothesis,  that  all
our  reasonings  concerning  causes  and  effects,
are  derived  from  nothing  but  custom,  and
that  belief  is  more  properly  an  act  of  the
[710-713]


sensitive  than  of  the  cogitative  part  of  our
nature." [711]

We  have  before  considered  the  first  part
of  this  hypothesis,  Whether  our  reasoning
about  causes  be  derived  only  from  custom  ?

The  other  part  of  the  author's  hypothesis
here  mentioned  is  darkly  expressed,  though
the  expression  seems  to  be  studied,  as  it  is
put  in  Italics.  It  cannot,  surely,  mean
that  belief  is  not  an  act  of  thinking.  It  is
not,  therefore,  the  power  of  thinking  that
he  calls  the  cogitative  part  of  our  nature.
Neither  can  it  be  the  power  of  judging,  for
all  belief  implies  judgment ;  and  to  believe
a  proposition  means  the  same  thing  as  to
judge  it  to  be  true.  It  seems,  therefore,  to
be  the  power  of  reasoning  that  he  calls  the
cogitative  part  of  our  nature.

If  this  be  the  meaning,  I  agree  to  it  in
part.  The  belief  of  first  principles  is  not
an  act  of  the  reasoning  power  ;  for  all  rea-
soning must  be  grounded  upon  them.  We
judge  them  to  be  true,  and  believe  them
without  reasoning.  But  why  this  power  of
judging  of  first  principles  should  be  called
the  sensitive  part  of  our  nature,  I  do  not
understand.

As  our  belief  of  first  principles  is  an  act
of  pure  judgment  without  reasoning ;  so
our  belief  of  the  conclusions  drawn  by  rea-
soning from  first  principles,  may,  I  think,  be
called  an  act  of  the  reasoning  faculty.
[712]

Upon  the  whole,  I  see  only  two  conclu-
sions that  can  be  fairly  drawn  from  this
profound  and  intricate  reasoning  against
reason.  The  first  is,  That  we  are  fallible
in  all  our  judgments  and  in  all  our  reason-
ings. The  second.  That  the  truth  and
fidelity  of  our  faculties  can  never  be  proved
by  reasoning  ;  and,  therefore,  our  belief  of
it  cannot  be  founded  on  reasoning.  If  the
last  be  what  the  author  calls  his  hypothesis,
I  subscribe  to  it,  and  think  it  not  an  hypo-
thesis, but  a  manifest  truth ;  though  I  con-
ceive it  to  be  very  improperly  expressed,  by
saying  that  belief  is  more  properly  an  act
of  the  sensitive  than  of  the  cogitative  part
of  our  nature.* [713]

*  In  the  preceding  strictures,  the  Sceptic  »«again
too  often  assailed  as  a  Dogmatist.  See  above  p.  444
note  * H.


490


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.  [essay  viii.


ESSAY VIII,


OF  TASTE.


CHAPTER  I.

OP  TASTE  IN  GENERAL.

That  power  of  the  mind  by  which  we
are  capable  of  discerning  and  relishing  the
beauties  of  Nature,  and  whatever  is  excel-
lent in  the  fine  arts,  is  called  taste.

The  external  sense  of  taste,  by  which  we
distinguish  and  relish  the  various  kinds  of
food,  has  given  occasion  to  a  metaphorical
application  of  its  name  to  this  internal
power  of  the  mind,  by  which  we  perceive
what  is  beautiful  and  what  is  deformed  or
defective  in  the  various  objects  that  we
contemplate.

Like  the  taste  of  the  palate,  it  relishes
some  things,  is  disgusted  with  others  ;  with
regard  to  many,  is  indifferent  or  dubious  ;
and  is  considerably  influenced  by  habit,  by
associations,  and  by  opinion.  These  obvious
analogies  between  external  and  internal
taste,  have  led  men,  in  all  ages,  and  in
all  or  most  polished  languages,*  to  give  the
name  of  the  external  sense  to  this  power  of
discerning  what  is  beautiful  with  pleasure,
and  what  is  ugly  and  faulty  in  its  kind  with
disgust. [714]

In  treating  of  this  as  an  intellectual
power  of  the  mind,  I  intend  only  to  make
some  observations,  first  on  its  nature,  and
then  on  its  objects.

1 .  In  the  external  sense  of  taste,  we  are
led  by  reason  and  reflection  to  distinguish
between  the  agreeable  sensation  we  feel,  and
the  quality  in  the  object  which  occasions  it.
Both  have  the  same  name,  and  on  that  ac-
count are  apt  to  be  confounded  by  the  vulgar,
and  even  by  philosophers.  The  sensation
I  feel  when  I  taste  any  sapid  body  is  in  my
mind;  but  there  is  a  real  quality  in  the
body  which  is  the  cause  of  this  sensation.
These  two  things  have  the  same  name  in
language,  not  from  any  similitude  in  their
nature,  but  because  the  one  is  the  sign  of
the  other,  and  because  there  is  little  occa-
sion in  common  life  to  distinguish  them.

This  was  fully  explained  in  treating  of  the
secondary  qualities  of  bodies.  The  reason
of  taking  notice  of  it  now  is,  that  the  in-
ternal power  of  taste  bears  a  great  analogy
ra  this  respect  to  the  external.

When  a  beautiful  object  is  before  us,  we

*  1  his  is  hardly  correct.— H.


may  distiuguish  the  agreeable  emotion  it
produces  in  us,  from  the  quality  of  the  ob-
ject which  causes  that  emotion.  When  I
hear  an  air  in  music  that  pleases  me,  I  say,
it  is  fine,  it  is  excellent.  This  excellence  is
not  in  me;  it  is  in  the  music.  But  the
pleasure  it  gives  is  not  in  the  music  ;  it  is
in  me.  Perhaps  I  cannot  say  what  it  is  in
the  tune  that  pleases  my  ear,  as  I  cannot
say  what  it  is  in  a  sapid  body  that  pleases  my
palate  ;  but  there  is  a  quality  in  the  sapid
body  which  pleases  my  palate,  and  I  call  it
a  delicious  taste ;  and  there  is  a  quality  in
the  tune  that  pleases  my  taste,,  and  I  call  it
a  fine  or  an  excellent  air.

This  ought  the  rather  to  be  observed,
because  it  is  become  a  fashion  among  mo-
dern philosophers,  to  resolve  all  our  percep-
tions into  mere  feelings  or  sensations  in  the
person  that  perceives,  without  anything
corresponding  to  those  feelings  in  the  ex-
ternal object.  [715]  According  to  those
philosophers,  there  is  no  heat  in  the  fire,
no  taste  in  a  sapid  body  ;  the  taste  and  the
heat  being  only  in  the  person  that  feels
them.*  In  like  manner,  there  is  no  beauty
in  any  object  whatsoever  ;  it  is  only  a  sens-
ation or  feeling  in  the  person  that  per-
ceives it.

The  language  and  the  common  sense  of
mankind  contradict  this  theory.  Even  those
who  hold  it,  find  themselves  obliged  to  use
a  language  that  contradicts  it.  I  had  occa-
sion to  shew,  that  there  is  no  solid  founda-
tion for  it  when  applied  to  the  secondary
qualities  of  body  ;  and  the  same  arguments
shew  equally,  that  it  has  no  solid  foundation
when  applied  to  the  beauty  of  objects,  or  to
any  of  those  qualities  that  are  perceived  by
a  good  taste.

But,  though  some  of  the  qualities  that
please  a  good  taste  resemble  the  secondary
qualities  of  body,  and  therefore  may  be
called  occult  qualities,  as  we  only  feel  their
effect,  and  have  no  more  knowledge  of  the
cause,  but  that  it  is  something  which  is
adapted  by  nature  to  produce  that  effect —
this  is  not  always  the  case.

Our  judgment  of  beauty  is  in  many  cases
more  enlightened.  A  work  of  art  may
appear  beautiful  to  the  most  ignorant,  even
to  a  child.  It  pleases,  but  he  knows  not
___^ .

*  But  see,  above,  p.  205,  b,  note  *,  and  p.  310,  b,
note  f— H.

[714,  715]


OF  TASTE  IN  GENERAL.


491


why.  To  one  who  understands  it  perfectly,
and  perceives  how  every  part  is  fitted  with
exact  judgment  to  its  end,  the  beauty  is  not
mysterious  ;  it  is  perfectly  comprehended  ;
and  he  knows  wherein  it  consists,  as  well
as  how  it  affects  him.

2.  We  may  observe,  that,  though  all  the
tastes-  we  perceive  by  the  palate  are  either
agreeable  or  disagreeable,  or  indifferent ;
yet,  among  those  that  are  agreeable,  there
is  great  diversity,  not  in  degree  only,  but  in
kind.  And,  as  we  have  not  generical  names
for  all  the  different  kinds  of  taste,  we  dis-
tinguish them  by  the  bodies  in  which  they
are  found. [716]

In  like  manner,  all  the  objects  of  our
internal  taste  are  either  beautiful,  or  dis-
agreeable, or  indifferent ;  yet  of  beauty  there
is  a  great  diversity,  not  only  of  degree,  but
of  kind.  The  beauty  of  a  demonstration,
the  beauty  of  a  poem,  the  beauty  of  a  palace,
the  beauty  of  a  piece  of  music,  the  beauty
of  a  fine  woman,  and  many  more  that  might
be  named,  are  different  kinds  of  beauty  ;
and  we  have  no  names  to  distinguish  them
but  the  names  of  the  different  objects  to
which  they  belong.

As  there  is  such  diversity  in  the  kinds  of
beauty  as  well  as  in  the  degrees,  we  need
not  think  it  strange  that  philosophers  have
gone  into  different  systems  in  analysing  it,
and  enumerating  its  simple  ingredients.
They  have  made  many  just  observations  on
the  subject ;  but,  from  the  love  of  simplicity,
have  reduced  it  to  fewer  principles  than  the
nature  of  the  thing  will  permit,  having  had
in  their  eye  some  particular  kinds  of  beauty,
while  they  overlooked  others.

There  are  moral  beauties  as  well  as  na-
tural ;  beauties  in  the  objects  of  sense,  and
in  intellectual  objects  ;  in  the  works  of  men,
and  in  the  works  of  God ;  in  things  inani-
mate, in  brute  animals,  and  in  rational
beings ;  in  the  constitution  of  the  body  of
man,  and  in  the  constitution  of  his  mind.
There  is  no  real  excellence  which  has  not
its  beauty  to  a  discerning  eye,  when  placed
in  a  proper  point  of  view ;  and  it  is  as  diffi-
cult to  enumerate  the  ingredients  of  beauty
as  the  ingredients  of  real  excellence.

3.  The  taste  of  the  palate  may  be  accounted
most  just  and  perfect,  when  we  relish  the
things  that  are  fit  for  the  nourishment  of
the  body,  and  are  disgusted  with  things  of
a  contrary  nature.  The  manifest  intention
of  nature  in  giving  us  this  sense,  is,  that
we  may  discern  what  it  is  fit  for  us  to  eat
and  to  drink,  and  what  it  is  not.  Brute
animals  are  directed  in  the  choice  of  their
food  merely  by  their  taste.  [717]  Led  by
this  guide,  they  choose  the  food  that  nature
intended  for  them,  and  seldom  make  mis-
takes, unless  they  be  pinched  by  hunger,  or
deceived  by  artificial  compositions.  In  in-
fants likewise  the  taste  is  commonly  sound
[716-718J


and  uncorrupted,  and  of  the  simple  produc-
tions of  nature  they  relish  the  things  that
are  most  wholesome.

In  like  manner,  our  internal  taste  ought
to  be  accounted  most  just  and  perfect,  when
we  are  pleased  with  things  that  are  most
excellent  in  their  kind,  and  displeased  with
the  contrary.  The  intention  of  nature  is
no  less  evident  in  this  internal  taste  than
in  the  external.  Every  excellence  has  a
real  beauty  and  charm  that  makes  it  an
agreeable  object  to  those  who  have  the
faculty  of  discerning  its  beauty  ;  and  this
faculty  is  what  we  call  a  good  taste.

A  man  who,  by  any  disorder  in  his  mental
powers,  or  by  bad  habits,  has  contracted  a
relish  for  what  has  no  real  excellence,  or
what  is  deformed  and  defective,  has  a  de-
praved taste,  like  one  who  finds  a  more
agreeable  relish  in  ashes  or  cinders  than  in
the  most  wholesome  food.  As  we  must  ac-  '
knowledge  the  taste  of  the  palate  to  be  de-
praved in  this  case,  there  is  the  same  reason
to  think  the  taste  of  the  mind  depraved  in
the  other.

There  is  therefore  a  just  and  rational
taste,  and  there  is  a  depraved  and  corrupted
taste.  For  it  is  too  evident,  that,  by  bad
education,  bad  habits,  and  wrong  associa-
tions, men  may  acquire  a  relish  for  nasti-
ness,  for  rudeness,  and  ill-breeding,  and  for
many  other  deformities.  To  say  that  such
a  taste  is  not  vitiated,  is  no  less  absurd  than
to  say,  that  the  sickly  girl  who  delights  in
eating  charcoal  and  tobacco-pipes,  has  as
just  and  natural  a  taste  as  when  she  is  in
perfect  health.

4.  The  force  of  custom,  of  fancy,  and  of
casual  associations,  is  very  great  both  upon
the  external  and  internal  taste.  An  Eski-
maux  can  regale  himself  with  a  draught  of
whale-oil,  and  a  Canadian  can  feast  upon  a
dog.  A  Kamschatkadale  lives  upon  putrid
fish,  and  is  sometimes  reduced  to  eat  the
bark  of  trees.  The  taste  of  rum,  or  of  green
tea,  is  at  first  as  nauseous  as  that  of  ipeca-
cuan,  to  some  persons,  who  may  be  brought
by  use  to  relish  what  they  once  found  so
disagreeable. [718]

When  we  see  such  varieties  in  the  taste
of  the  palate  produced  by  custom  and  as-
sociations, and  some,  perhaps,  by  constitu-
tion, we  may  be  the  less  surprised  that  the
same  causes  should  produce  like  varieties
in  the  taste  of  beauty  ;  that  the  African
should  esteem  thick  lips  and  a  flat  nose  ;
that  other  nations  should  draw  out  their
ears,  till  they  hang  over  their  shoulders  ;
that  in  one  nation  ladies  should  paint  their
faces,  and  in  another  should  make  them
shine  with  grease.

5.  Those  who  conceive  that  there  is  no
standard  in  nature  by  which  taste  may  be
regulated,  and  that  the  common  proverb,
"  That  there  ought  to  be  no  dispute  about


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.  [essay  vm.


taste,"  is  to  be  taken  in  the  utmost  latitude,
go  upon  slender  and  insufficient  ground.
The  same  arguments  might  be  used  with
equal  force  against  any  standard  of  truth.

Whole  nations  by  the  force  of  prejudice
are  brought  to  believe  the  grossest  absurdi-
ties ;  and  why  should  it  be  thought  that  the
taste  is  less  capable  of  being  perverted  than
the  judgment  ?  It  must  indeed  be  acknow-
ledged, that  men  differ  more  in  the  faculty
of  taste  than  in  what  we  commonly  call
judgment ;  and  therefore  it  may  be  expected
that  they  should  be  more  liable  to  have  their
taste  corrupted  in  matters  of  beauty  and
deformity,  than  their  judgment  in  matters
of  truth  and  error.

If  we  make  due  allowance  for  this,  we
shall  see  that  it  is  as  easy  to  account  for
the  variety  of  tastes,  though  there  be  in
nature  a  standard  of  true  beauty,  and  con-
sequently of  good  taste,  as  it  is  to  account
for  the  variety  and  contrariety  of  opinions,
though  there  be  in  nature  a  standard  of
of  truth,  and,  consequently,  of  right  judg-
ment. [719]

6.  Nay,  if  we  speak  accurately  and
strictly,  we  shall  find  that,  in  every  opera-
tion of  taste,  there  is  judgment  implied.

When  a  man  pronounces  a  poem  or  a
palace  to  be  beautiful,  he  affirms  something
of  that  poem  or  that  palace  ;  and  every
affirmation  or  denial  expresses  judgment.
For  we  cannot  better  define  judgment,  than
by  saying  that  it  is  an  affirmation  or  denial
of  one  thing  concerning  another.  I  had
occasion  to  shew,  when  treating  of  judg-
ment, that  it  is  implied  in  every  perception
of  oar  external  senses.  There  is  an  imme-
diate conviction  and  belief  of  the  existence
of  the  quality  perceived,  whether  it  be
colour,  or  sound,  or  figure  ;  and  the  same
thing  holds  in  the  perception  of  beauty  or
deformity.

If  it  be  said  that  the  perception  of  beauty
is  merely  a  feeling  in  the  mind  that  per-
ceives, without  any  belief  of  excellence  in
the  object,  the  necessary  consequence  of
this  opinion  is,  that  when  I  say  Virgil's
"  Georgics"  is  a  beautiful  poem,  I  mean  not
to  say  anything  of  the  poem,  but  only  some-
thing concerning  myself  and  my  feelings.
Why  should  I  use  a  language  that  expresses
the  contrary  of  what  I  mean  ?

My  language,  according  to  the  necessary
rules  of  construction,  can  bear  no  other
meaning  but  this,  that  there  is  something
in  the  poem,  and  not  in  me,  which  I  call
beauty.  Even  those  who  hold  beauty  to
be  merely  a  feeling  in  the  person  that  per-
ceives it,  find  themselves  under  a  necessity
of  expressing  themselves  as  if  beauty  were
solely  a  quality  of  the  object,  and  not  of
the  percipient.


No  reason  can  be  given  why  all  man-
kind should  express  themselves  thus,  but  that
they  believe  what  they  say.  It  is  there-
fore contrary  to  the  universal  sense  of
mankind,  expressed  by  their  language,  that
beauty  is  not  really  in  the  object,  but  is
merely  a  feeling  in  the  person  who  is  said
to  perceive  it.  Philosophers  should  be  very
cautious  in  opposing  the  common  sense
of  mankind  ;  for,  when  they  do,  they  rarely
miss  going  wrong. [720]

Our  judgment  of  beauty  is  not  indeed  a
dry  and  unaffecting  judgment,  like  that-  of
a  mathematical  or  metaphysical  truth.  By
the  constitution  of  our  nature,  it  is  accom-
panied with  an  agreeble  feeling  or  emotion,
for  which  we  have  no  other  name  but  the
sense  of  beauty.  This  sense  of  beauty,  like
the  perceptions  of  our  other  senses,  implies
not  only  a  feeling,  but  an  opinion  of  some
quality  in  the  object  which  occasions  that
feeling.

In  objects  that  please  the  taste,  we  always
judge  that  there  is  some  real  excellence,
some  superiority  to  those  that  do  not
please.  In  some  cases,  that  superior  ex-
cellence is  distinctly  perceived,  and  can
be  pointed  out ;  in  other  cases,  we  have
only  a  general  notion  of  some  excellence
which  we  cannot  describe.  Beauties  of  the
former  kind  may  be  compared  to  the
primary  qualities  perceived  by  the  external
senses  ;  those  of  the  latter  kind,  to-  the
secondary.

7-  Beauty  or  deformity  in  an  object,  re-
sults from  its  nature  or  structure.  To  per-
ceive the  beauty,  therefore,  we  must  per-
ceive the  nature  or  structure  from  which  it
results.  In  this  the  internal  sense  differs
from  the  external.  Our  external  senses
may  discover  qualities  which  do  not  depend
upon  any  antecedent  perception.  Thus,  I
can  hear  the  sound  of  a  bell,  though  I  never
perceived  anything  else  belonging  to  it.
But  it  is  impossible  to  perceive  the  beauty
of  an  object  without  perceiving  the  object,
or,  at  least,  conceiving  it.  On  this  account,
Dr  Hutcheson  called  the  senses  of  beauty
and  harmony  reflex  or  secondary  senses ;
because  the  beauty  cannot  be  perceived
unless  the  object  be  perceived  by  some  other
power  of  the  mind.  Thus,  the  sense  of
harmony  and  melody  in  sounds  supposes
the  external  sense  of  hearing,  and  is  a  kind
of  secondary  to  it.  A  man  born  deaf  may
be  a  good  judge  of  beauties  of  another  kind,
but  can  have  no  notion  of  melody  or  har-
mony. The  like  may  be  said  of  beau-
ties in  colouring  and  in  figure,  which  can
never  be  perceived  without  the  senses  by
which  colour  and  figure  are  perceived.
[721]

[719-721J


".]


OF  NOVELTY.


493


CHAPTER  II.

OF  THE  OBJECTS  OP  TASTE  ; AND, FIRST, OF
NOVELTY.

A  philosophical  analysis  of  the  objects
of  taste  is  like  applying  the  anatomical  knife
to  a  fine  face.  The  design  of  the  philoso-
pher, as  well  as  of  the  anatomist,  is  not  to
gratify  taste,  but  to  improve  knowledge.
The  reader  ought  to  be  aware  of  this,  that
he  may  not  entertain  an  expectation  in
which  he  will  be  disappointed.

By  the  objects  of  taste,  I  mean  those
qualities  or  attributes  of  things  which  are,
by  Nature,  adapted  to  please  a  good  taste.
Mr  Addison,  and  Dr  Akenside  after  him,
have  reduced  them  to  three— to  wit,  novelty,
grandeur,  and  beauty.  This  division  is
sufficient  for  all  I  intend  to  say  upon  the
subject,  and  therefore  I  shall  adopt  it  —
observing  only,  that  beauty  is  often  taken
in  so  extensive  a  sense  as  to  comprehend
all  the  objects  of  taste  ;  yet  all  the  authors
I  have  met  with,  who  have  given  a  division
of  the  objects  of  taste,  make  beauty  one
species.

I  take  the  reason  of  this  to  be,  that  we
have  specific  names  for  some  of  the  quali-
ties that  please  the  taste,  but  not  for  all ;
and  therefore  all  those  fall  under  the  gene-
ral name  of  beauty,  for  which  there  is  no
specific  name  in  the  division.

There  are,  indeed,  so  many  species  of
beauty,  that  it  would  be  as  difficult  to  enu-
merate them  perfectly,  as  to  enumerate  all
the  tastes  we  perceive  by  the  palate.  Nor
does  there  appear  to  me  sufficient  reason
for  making,  as  some  very  ingenious  authors
have  done,  as  many  different  internal  senses
as  there  are  different  species  of  beauty  or
deformity. [722]

The  division  of  our  external  senses  is
taken  from  the  organs  of  perception,  and
not  from  the  qualities  perceived.  We  have
not  the  same  means  of  dividing  the  inter-
nal ;  because,  though  some  kinds  of  beauty
belong  only  to  objects  of  the  eye,  and  others
to  objects  of  the  ear,  there  are  many  which
we  cannot  refer  to  any  bodily  organ  ;  and
therefore  I  conceive  every  division  that  has
been  made  of  our  internal  senses  to  be  in
some  degree  arbitrary.  They  may  be  made
more  or  fewer,  according  as  we  have  dis-
tinct names  for  the  various  kinds  of  beauty
and  deformity ;  and  I  suspect  the  most
copious  languages  have  not  names  for  them
all.

Novelty  is  not  properly  a  quality  of  the
thing  to  which  we  attribute  it,  far  less  is
it  a  sensation  in  the  mind  to  which  it  is
new ;  it  is  a  relation  which  the  thing  has
to  the  knowledge  of  the  person.  What  is
new  to  one  man,  may  not  be  so  to  another ;
[722,  723]


what  is  new  this  moment,  may  be  familiar
to  the  same  person  some  time  hence.  When
an  object  is  first  brought  to  our  know-
ledge, it  is  new,  whether  it  be  agreeable
or  not.

It  is  evident,  therefore,  with  regard  to
novelty,  (whatever  may  be  said  of  other
objects  of  taste,)  that  it  is  not  merely  a
sensation  in  the  mind  of  him  to  whom  the
thing  is  new  ;  it  is  a  real  relation  which
the  thing  has  to  his  knowledge  at  that
time.

But  we  are  so  constituted,  that  what  is
new  to  us  commonly  gives  pleasure  upon
that  account,  if  it  be  not  in  itself  disagree-
able. It  rouses  our  attention,  and  occa-
sions an  agreeable  exertion  of  our  facul-
ties.

The  pleasure  we  receive  from  novelty  in
objects  has  so  great  influence  in  human
life,  that  it  well  deserves  the  attention  of
philosophers ;  and  several  ingenious  authors
— particularly  Dr  Gerard,  in  his  "  Essay  on
Taste" — have,  I  think,  successfully  account-
ed for  it,  from  the  principles  of  the  human
constitution. [723]

We  can  perhaps  conceive  a  being  so
made,  that  his  happiness  consists  in  a  con-
tinuance of  the  same  unvaried  sensations  or
feelings,  without  any  active  exertion  on  his
part.  Whether  this  be  possible  or  not,  it
is  evident  that  man  is  not  such  a  being ;
his  good  consists  in  the  vigorous  exertion
of  his  active  and  intellective  powers  upon
their  proper  objects  ;  he  is  made  for  action
and  progress,  and  cannot  be  happy  without
it ;  his  enjoyments  seem  to  be  given  by
Nature,  not  so  much  for  their  own  sake,  as
to  encourage  the  exercise  of  his  various
powers.  That  tranquillity  of  soul  in  which
some  place  human  happiness,  is  not  a  dead
rest,  but  a  regular  progressive  motion.

Such  is  the  constitution  of  man  by  the
appointment  of  Nature.  This  constitution
is  perhaps  a  part  of  the  imperfection  of  our
nature ;  but  it  is  wisely  adapted  to  our
state,  which  is  not  intended  to  be  stationary,
but  progressive.  The  eye  is  not  satiated
with  seeing,  nor  the  ear  with  hearing;
something  is  always  wanted.  Desire  and
hope  never  cease,  but  remain  to  spur  us  on
to  something  yet  to  be  acquired;  and,  if
they  could  cease,  human  happiness  must
end  with  them.  That  our  desire  and  hope
be  properly  directed,  is  our  part ;  that  they
can  never  be  extinguished,  is  the  work  of
Nature.

It  is  this  that  makes  human  life  so  busy
a  scene.  Man  must  be  doing  something,
good  or  bad,  trifling  or  important ;  and  he
must  vary  the  employment  of  his  facul-
ties, or  their  exercise  will  become  languid,
and  the  pleasure  that  attends  it  sicken  of
course.

The  notions  of  enjoyment,  and  of  activity,


494


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS. [essay  viii.


considered  abstractly,  are  no  doubt  very
different,  and  we  cannot  perceive  a  necessary
connection  between  them.  But,  in  our  con-
stitution, they  are  so  connected  by  the
wisdom  of  Nature,  that  they  must  go  hand
in  hand ;  and  the  first  must  be  led  and
supported  by  the  last. [724]

An  object  at  first,  perhaps,  gave  much
pleasure,  while  attention  was  directed  to  it
with  vigour.  But  attention  cannot  be  long
confined  to  one  unvaried  object,  nor  can  it
be  carried  round  in  the  same  narrow  circle.
Curiosity  is  a  capital  principle  in  the  human
constitution,  and  its  food  must  be  what  is
in  some  respect  new.  What  is  said  of  the
Athenians  may,  in  some  degree,  be  applied
to  all  mankind,  That  their  time  is  spent
in  hearing,  or  telling,  or  doing  some  new
thing.

Into  this  part  of  the  human  constitution,
I  think,  we  may  resolve  the  pleasure  we
have  from  novelty  in  objects.

Curiosity  is  commonly  strongest  in  child-
ren and  in  young  persons,  and  accordingly
novelty  pleases  them  most.  In  all  ages,  in
proportion  as  novelty  gratifies  curiosity,  and
occasions  a  vigorous  exertion  of  any  of  our
mental  powers  in  attending  to  the  new  ob-
ject, in  the  same  proportion  it  gives  plea-
sure. In  advanced  life,  the  indolent  and
inactive  have  the  strongest  passion  for  news,
as  a  relief  from  a  painful  vacuity  of  thought.

But  the  pleasure  derived  from  new  objects,
in  many  cases,  is  not  owing  solely  or  chiefly
to  their  being  new,  but  to  some  other  cir-
cumstance that  gives  them  value.  The  new
fashion  in  dress,  furniture,  equipage,  and
other  accommodations  of  life,  gives  plea-
sure, not  so  much,  as  I  apprehend,  because
it  is.  new,  as  because  it  is  a  sign  of  rank,
and  distinguishes  a  man  from  the  vulgar.

In  some  things  novelty  is  due,  and  the
want  of  it  a  real  imperfection.  Thus,  if  an
author  adds  to  the  number  of  books  with
which  the  public  is  already  overloaded,  we
expect  from  him  something  new ;  and,  if  he
says  nothing  but  what  has  been  said  before
in  as  agreeable  a  manner,  we  are  justly
disgusted. [725]

When  novelty  is  altogether  separated
from  the  conception  of  worth  and  utility,  it
makes  but  a  slight  impression  upon  a  truly
correct  taste.  Every  discovery  in  nature,
in  the  arts,  and  in  the  sciences,  has  a  real
value,  and  gives  a  rational  pleasure  to  a
good  taste.  But  things  that  have  nothing
to  recommend  them  but  novelty,  are  fit
only  to  entertain  children,  or  those  who  are
distressed  from  a  vacuity  of  thought.  This
quality  of  objects  may  therefore  be  com-
pared to  the  cypher  in  arithmetic,  which
adds  greatly  to  the  value  of  significant
figures ;  but,  when  put  by  itself,  signifies
nothing  at  all.


CHAPTER  III.


OF  GRANDEUR.


The  qualities  which  pk ase  the  taste  are
not  more  various  in  themselves  than  are
the  emotions  and  feelings  with  which  they
affect  our  minds.

Things  new  and  uncommon  affect  us  with
a  pleasing  surprise,  which  rouses  and  invi-
gorates our  attention  to  the  object.  But
this  emotion  soon  flags,  if  there  is  nothing
but  novelty  to  give  it  continuance,  and
leaves  no  effect  upon  the  mind.

The  emotion  raised  by  grand  objects  is
awful,  solemn,  and  serious.

Of  all  objects  of  contemplation,  the  Su-
preme Being,  is  the  most  grand.  His
eternity,  his  immensity,  his  irresistible  power,
his  infinite  knowledge  and  unerring  wisdom,
his  inflexible  justice  and  rectitude,  his  su-
preme government,  conducting  all  the
movements  of  this  vast  universe  to  the  no-
blest ends  and  in  the  wisest  manner — are
objects  which  fill  the  utmost  capacity  of  the
soul,  and  reach  far  beyond  its  comprehension.

The  emotion  which  this  grandest  of  all
objects  raises  in  the  human  mind,  is  what
we  call  devotion  ;  a  serious  recollected  tem-
per, which  inspires  magnanimity,  and  dis-
poses to  the  most  heroic  acts  of  virtue.  [726]

The  emotion  produced  by  other  objects
which  may  be  called  grand,  though  iu  an
inferior  degree,  is,  in  its  nature  and  in  its
effects,  similar  to  that  of  devotion.  It  dis-
poses to  seriousness,  elevates  the  mind
above  its  usual  state,  to  a  kind  of  enthusi-
asm, and  inspires  magnanimity,  and  a  con-
tempt of  what  is  mean.

Such,  I  conceive,  is  the  emotion  which
the  contemplation  of  grand  objects  raises  in
us.  We  are  next  to  consider  what  this
grandeur  in  objects  is.

To  me  it  seems  to  be  nothing  else  but
such  a  degree  of  excellence,  in  one  kind  or
another,  as  merits  our  admiration.

There  are  some  attributes  of  mind  which
have  a  real  and  intrinsic  excellence,  com-
pared with  their  contraries,  and  which,  in
every  degree,  are  the  natural  objects  of
esteem,  but,  in  an  uncommon  degree,  are  ob-
jects of  admiration.  We  put  a  value  upon
them  because  they  are  intrinsically  valuable
and  excellent.

The  spirit  of  modern  philosophy  would
indeed  lead  us  to  think,  that  the  worth  and
value  we  put  upon  things  is  only  a  sensation
in  our  minds,  and  not  anything  inherent  in
the  object ;  and  that  we  might  have  been  so
constituted  as  to  put  the  highest  value  upon
the  things  which  we  now  despise,  and  to
despise  the  qualities  which  we  now  highly
esteem.

[724-726 j


CHAP.  III. ]J


OF  GRANDEUR.


495


It  gives  me  pleasure  to  observe,  that  Dr
Price,  in  his  "  Review  of  the  Questions
concerning  Morals,"  strenuously  opposes
this  opinion,  as  well  as  that  which  resolves
moral  right  and  wrong  into  a  sensation  in
the  mind  of  the  spectator.  That  judicious
author  saw  the  consequences  which  these
opinions  draw  after  them,  and  has  traced
them  to  their  source — to  wit,  the  account
given  by  Mr  Locke,  and  adopted  by  the  gen-
erality of  modern  philosophers,  of  the  ori-
gin of  all  our  ideas,  which  account  he  shews
to  be  very  defective.  [727]

This  proneness  to  resolve  everything  into
feelings  and  sensations,  is  an  extreme  into
which  we  have  been  led  by  the  desire  of
avoiding  an  opposite  extreme,  as  common
in  the  ancient  philosophy.

At  first,  me  are  prone  by  nature  and  by
habit  to  give  all  their  attention  to  things
external.  Their  notions  of  the  mind,  and
its  operations,  are  formed  from  some  analogy
they  bear  to  objects  of  sense  ;  and  an  ex-
ternal existence  is  ascribed  to  things  which
are  only  conceptions  or  feelings  of  the
mind.

This  spirit  prevailed  much  in  the  philo-
sophy both  of  Plato  and  of  Aristotle,  and
produced  the  mysterious  notions  of  eternal
and  self-existent  ideas,  of  materia  prima,  of
substantial  forms,  and  others  of  the  like
nature.

From  the  time  of  Des  Cartes,  philosophy
took  a  contrary  turn.  That  great  man  dis-
covered, that  many  things  supposed  to  have
an  external  existence,  were  only  conceptions
or  feelings  of  the  mind.  This  track  has
been  pursued  by  his  successors  to  such  an
extreme  as  to  resolve  everything  into  sens-
ations, feelings,  and  ideas  in  the  mind,  and
to  leave  nothing  external  at  all.

The  Peripatetics  thought  that  heat  and
cold  which  we  feel  to  be  qualities  of  external
objects.  The  moderns  make  heat  and  cold
to  be  sensations  only,  and  allow  no  real
quality  of  body  to  be  called  by  that  name  :
and  the  same  judgment  they  have  formed
with  regard  to  all  secondary  qualities.

So  far  Des  Cartes  and  Mr  Locke  went.
Their  successors  being  put  into  this  track
of  converting  into  feelings  things  that  were
believed  to  have  an  external  existence,  found
that  extension,  solidity,  figure,  and  all  the
primary  qualities  of  body,  are  sensations  or
feelings  of  the  mind  ;  and  that  the  material
world  is  a  phsenomenon  only,  and  has  no
existence  but  in  our  mind. [728]

It  was  then  a  very  natural  progress  to  con-
ceive, that  beauty,  harmony,  and  grandeur,
the  objects  of  taste,  as  well  as  right  and
wrong,  the  objects  of  the  moral  faculty,  are
nothing  but  feelings  of  the  mind.

Those  who  are  acquainted  with  the
writings  of  modern  philosophers,  can  easily
trace  this  doctrine  of  feelings,  from  Des
[727-729]


Cartes  down  to  Mr  Hume,  who  put  the
finishing  stroke  to  it,  by  making  truth  and
error  to  be  feelings  of  the  mind,  and  belief
to  be  an  operation  of  the  sensitive  part  of
our  nature.

To  return  to  our  subject,  if  we  hearken
to  the  dictates  of  common  sense,  we  must  be
convinced  that  there  is  real  excellence  in
some  things,  whatever  our  feelings  or  our
constitution  be.

It  depends  no  doubt  upon  our  constitu-
tion, whether  we  do  or  do  not  perceive  ex-
cellence where  it  really  is  :  but  the  object
has  its  excellence  from  its  own  constitution,
and  not  from  ours.

The  common  judgment  of  mankind  in  this
matter  sufficiently  appears  in  the  language
of  all  nations,  which  uniformly  ascribes  ex-
cellence, grandeur,  and  beauty  to  the  object,
and  not  to  the  mind  that  perceives  it.  And
I  believe  in  this,  as  in  most  other  things,
we  shall  find  the  common  judgment  of  man-
kind and  true  philosophy  not  to  be  at  va-
riance.

Is  not  power  in  its  nature  more  excel-
lent than  weakness  ;  knowledge  than  igno-
rance ;  wisdom  than  folly  ;  fortitude  than
pusillanimity  ?

Is  there  no  intrinsic  excellence  in  self-
command,  in  generosity,  in  public  spirit  ?
Is  not  friendship  a  better  affection  of  mind
than  hatred,  a  noble  emulation  than  envy  ?
[729]

Let  us  suppose,  if  possible,  a  being  so
constituted  as  to  have  a  high  respect  for
ignorance,  weakness,  and  folly;  to  venerate
cowardice,  malice,  and  envy,  and  to  hold
the  contrary  qualities  in  contempt ;  to  have
an  esteem  for  lying  and  falsehood  ;  and  to
love  most  those  who  imposed  upon  him,
and  used  him  worst.  Could  we  believe
such  a  constitution  to  be  anything  else  than
madness  and  delirium  ?  It  is  impossible.
We  can  as  easily  conceive  a  constitution,
by  which  one  should  perceive  two  and  three
to  make  fifteen,  or  a  part  to  be  greater  than
the  whole.

Every  one  who  attends  to  the  operations
of  his  own  mind  will  find  it  to  be  certainly
true,  as  it  is  the  common  belief  of  mankind,
that  esteem  is  led  by  opinion,  and  that  every
person  draws  our  esteem,  as  far  only  as  he
appears  either  to  reason  or  fancy  to  be
amiable  and  worthy.

There  is  therefore  a  real  intrinsic  excel-
lence in  some  qualities  of  mind,  as  in  power,
knowledge,  wisdom,  virtue,  magnanimity.
These,  in  every  degree,  merit  esteem  ;  but
in  an  uncommon  degree  they  merit  admir-
ation ;  and  that  which  merits  admiration
we  call  grand.

In  the  contemplation  of  uncommon  ex-
cellence, the  mind  feels  a  noble  enthusiasm,
which  disposes  it  to  the  imitation  of  what  it
admires.


496


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  VIII.


When  we  contemplate  the  character  of
Cato — his  greatness  of  soul,  his  superiority
to  pleasure,  to  toil,  and  to  danger ;  his  ar-
dent zeal  for  the  liberty  of  his  country ;
when  we  see  him  standing  unmoved  in  mis-
fortunes, the  last  pillar  of  the  liberty  of
Rome,  and  falling  nobly  in  his  country's
ruin — who  would  not  wish  to  be  Cato  rather
than  Caesar  in  all  his  triumph  ? [730]

Such  a  spectacle  of  a  great  sOUl  strug-
gling with  misfortune,  Seneca  thought  not
unworthy  of  the  attention  of  Jupiter  him-
self, "Ecce  spectaculum  Deo  dignum,  ad
quod  respiciat  Jupiter  suo  operi  intentus,
vir  fortis  cum  mala  fortuna  compositus."

As  the  Deity  is,  of  all  objects  of  thought,
the  most  grand,  the  descriptions  given  in
holy  writ  of  his  attributes  and  works,  even
when  clothed  in  simple  expression,  are
acknowledged  to  be  sublime.  The  expres-
sion of  Moses,  "  And  God  said,  Let  there
be  light,  and  there  was  light,"*  has  not
escaped  the  notice  of  Longinus,  a  Heathen
critic,  as  an  example  of  the  sublime.

What  we  call  sublime  in  description,  or
in  speech  of  any  kind,  is  a  proper  expres-
sion of  the  admiration  and  enthusiasm  which
the  subject  produces  in  the  mind  of  the
speaker.  If  this  admiration  and  enthu-
siasm appears  to  be  just,  it  carries  the
nearer  along  with  it  involuntarily,  and  by
a  kind  of  violence  rather  than  by  cool  con-
viction :  for  no  passions  are  so  infectious  as
those  which  hold  of  enthusiasm.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  passion  of
the  speaker  appears  to  be  in  no  degree  jus-
tified by  the  subject  or  the  occasion,  it  pro-
duces in  the  judicious  hearer  no  other  emo-
tion but  ridicule  and  contempt.

The  true  sublime  cannot  be  produced
solely  by  art  in  the  composition ;  it  must
take  its  rise  from  grandeur  in  the  subject,
and  a  corresponding  emotion  raised  in  the
mind  of  the  speaker.  A  proper  exhibition
of  these,  though  it  should  be  artless,  is
irresistible,  like  fire  thrown  into  the  midst
of  combustible  matter. [731]

When  we  contemplate  the  earth,  the  sea,
the  planetary  system,  the  universe,  these
are  vast  objects;  it  requires  a  stretch  of
imagination  to  grasp  them  in  our  minds.
But  they  appear  truly  grand,  and  merit  the
highest  admiration,  when  we  consider  them
as  the  work  of  God,  who,  in  the  simple
style  of  scripture,  stretched  out  the  heavens,
and  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth  ;  or,  in
the  poetical  language  of  Milton —

"  In  his  hand
He  took  the  golden  compasses,  prepar'd
In  God's  eternal  store,  to  circumscribe
This  universe  and  all  created  thiugs.
One  foot  he  centr'd,  and  the  other  turn'd
Round  thro'  the  vast  profundity  obscure;


*  Better  translated—"  Be  there  light,  and  light
there  was  " — H.


And  said,  Thus  far  extend,  thus  far  thy  boundi,
This  be  thy  just  circumference,  O  world."

When  we  contemplate  the  world  of  Epi-
curus, and  conceive  the  universe  to  be  a
fortuitous  jumble  of  atoms,  there  is  nothing
grand  in  this  idea.  The  clashing  of  atoms
by  blind  chance  has  nothing  in  it  fit  to  raise
our  conceptions,  or  to  elevate  the  mind.
But  the  regular  structure  of  a  vast  system
of  beings,  produced  by  creating  power,  and
governed  by  the  best  laws  which  perfect
wisdom  and  goodness  could  contrive,  is  a
spectacle  which  elevates  the  understanding,
and  fills  the  soul  with  devout  admiration.

A  great  work  is  a  work  of  great  power,
great  wisdom,  and  great  goodness,  well  con-
trived for  some  important  end.  But  power,
wisdom,  and  goodness,  are  properly  the  at-
tributes of  mind  only.  They  are  ascribed  to
the  work  figuratively,  but  are  really  inherent
in  the  author :  and  by  the  same  figure,  the
grandeur  is  ascribed  to  the  work,  but  is
properly  inherent  in  the  mind  that  made  it.

Some  figures  of  speech  are  so  natural  and
so  common  in  all  languages,  that  we  are  led
to  think  them  literal  and  proper  expressions.
Thus  an  action  is  called  brave,  virtuous,
generous  ;  but  it  is  evident,  that  valour,
virtue,  generosity,  are  the  attributes  of  per-
sons only,  and  not  of  actions.  In  the  action
considered  abstractly,  there  is  neither  val-
our, nor  virtue,  nor  generosity.  The  same
action  done  from  a  different  motive  may
deserve  none  of  those  epithets.  [732]  The
change  in  this  case  is  not  in  the  action,  but
in  the  agent ;  yet,in  all  languages, generosity
and  other  moral  qualities  are  ascribed  to
actions.  By  a  figure,  we  assign  to  the  effect
a  quality  which  is  inherent  only  in  the
cause.

By  the  same  figure,  we  ascribe  to  a  work
that  grandeur  which  properly  is  inherent  in
the  mind  of  the  author.

When  we  consider  the  "  Iliad"  as  the
work  of  the  poet,  its  sublimity  was  really
in  the  mind  of  Homer.  He  conceived
great  characters,  great  actions,  and  great
events,  in  a  manner  suitable  to  their  nature,
and  with  those  emotions  which  they  are
naturally  fitted  to  produce  ;  and  he  conveys
his  conceptions  and  his  emotions  by  the
most  proper  signs.  The  grandeur  of  his
thoughts  is  reflected  to  our  eye  by  his  work,
and,  therefore,  it  is  justly  called  a  grand
work.

When  we  consider  the  things  presented
to  our  mind  in  the  "  Iliad"  without  regard
to  the  poet,  the  grandeur,  is  properly  in
Hector  and  Achilles,  and  the  other  great
personages,  human  and  divine,  brought
upon  the  stage.

Next  to  the  Deity  and  his  works,  we  ad-
mire great  talents  and  heroic  virtue  in  men,
whether  represented  in  history  or  in  fiction.
The  virtues  of  Cato,  Aristides,  Socrates,
[730-732]


.P. III.]


OF  GRANDEUR.


497


Marcus  Aurelius,  are  truly  grand.  Extra-
ordinary talents  and  genius,  whether  in
poets,  orators,  philosophers,  or  lawgivers,  are
objects  of  admiration,  and  therefore  grand.
We  find  writers  of  taste  seized  with  a  kind
of  enthusiasm  in  the  description  of  such
personages.

What  a  grand  idea  does  Virgil  give  of  the
power  of  eloquence,  when  he  compares  the
tempest  of  the  sea,  suddenly  calmed  by  the
command  of  Neptune,  to  a  furious  sedition
in  a  great  city,  quelled  at  once  by  a  man  of
authority  and  eloquence. [733]

"  Sic  ait,  ac  dicto  citius  tumida  aequora  placat :
Ac  veluti  magno  in  populo,  si  forte  coorta  est
Seditio,  saevitque  animis  ignobile  vulgus  ;
Jamque  faces  et  saxa  volant,  furor  arma  ministrat ;
Turn  pietate  gravem,  et  meritis,  si  forte  virum  quem
Conspexere,  silent,  arrectisque  auribus  adstant.
Ille  regit  dictis  animos,  et  pectora  mulcet.
Sic  cunctus  pelagi  cecidit  fragor."

The  wonderful  genius  of  Sir  Isaac  New-
ton, and  his  sagacity  in  discovering  the  laws
of  Nature,  is  admirably  expressed  in  that
short  but  sublime  epitaph  by  Pope  : —

"  Na'ure  and  Nature's  laws  lay  hid  in  night ;
God  said,  Let  Newton  be— and  all  was  light."

Hitherto  we  have  found  grandeur  only  in
qualities  of  mind  ;  but,  it  may  be  asked,  Is
there  no  real  grandeur  in  material  objects  ?

It  will,  perhaps,  appear  extravagant  to
deny  that  there  is ;  yet  it  deserves  to  be
considered,  whether  all  the  grandeur  we
ascribe  to  objects  of  sense  be  not  derived
from  something  intellectual,  of  which  they
are  the  effects  or  signs,  or  to  which  they  bear
some  relation  or  analogy.

Besides  the  relations  of  effect  and  cause,
of  sign  and  thing  signified,  there  are  innu-
merable similitudes  and  analogies  between
things  of  very  different  nature,  which  lead
us  to  connect  them  in  our  imagination,  and
to  ascribe  to  the  one  what  properly  belongs
to  the  other.

Every  metaphor  in  language  is  an  instance
of  this  ;  and  it  must  be  remembered,  that  a
very  great  part  of  language,  which  we  now
account  proper,  was  originally  metaphorical ;
for  the  metaphorical  meaning  becomes  the
proper,  as  soon  as  it  becomes  the  most
usual ;  much  more,  when  that  which  was  at
first  the  proper  meaning  falls  into  disuse.
[734]

The  poverty  of  language,  no  doubt,  con-
tributes in  part  to  the  use  of  metaphor;
and,  therefore,  we  find  the  most  barren  and
uncultivated  languages  the  most  metaphori-
cal. But  the  most  copious  language  may
be  called  barren,  compared  with  the  fertility
of  human  conceptions,  and  can  never,  with-
out the  use  of  figures,  keep  pace  with  the
variety  of  their  delicate  modifications.

But  another  cause  of  the  use  of  metaphor
is,  that  we  find  pleasure  in  discovering  rela-
tions, similitudes,  analogies,  and  even  con-
trasts, that  are  not  obvious  to  every  eye.
733-735]


All  figurative  speech  presents  something  of
this  kind ;  and  the  beauty  of  poetical  lan-
guage seems  to  be  derived  in  a  great  mea-
sure from  this  source.

Of  all  figurative  language,  that  is  the  most
common,  the  most  natural,  and  the  most
agreeable,  which  either  gives  a  body,  if  we
may  so  speak,  to  things  intellectual,  and
clothes  them  with  visible  qualities;  or  which,
on  the  other  hand,  gives  intellectual  qualities
to  the  objects  of  sense.

To  beings  of  more  exalted  faculties,  intel-
lectual objects  may,  perhaps,  appear  to  most
advantage  in  their  naked  simplicity.  But
we  can  hardly  conceive  them  but  by  means
of  some  analogy  they  bear  to  the  objects  of
sense.  The  names  we  give  them  are  almost
all  metaphorical  or  analogical.

Thus,  the  names  of  grand  and  sublime,  as
well  as  their  opposites,  mean  and  low,  are
evidently  borrowed  from  the  dimensions  of
body ;  yet,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  that
many  things  are  truly  grand  and  sublime,
to  which  we  cannot  ascribe  the  dimensions
of  height  and  extension.

Some  analogy  there  is,  without  doubt,  be-
tween greatness  of  dimension,  which  is  an
object  of  external  sense,  and  that  grandeur
which  is  an  object  of  taste.  On  account  of
this  analogy,  the  last  borrows  its  name  from
the  first ;  and,  the  name  being  common,
leads  us  to  conceive  that  there  is  something
common  in  the  nature  of  the  things. [735]

But  we  shall  find  many  qualities  of  mind,
denoted  by  names  taken  from  some  quality
of  body  to  which  they  have  some  analogy,
without  anything  common  in  their  nature.

Sweetness  and  austerity,  simplicity  and
duplicity,  rectitude  and  crookedness,  are
names  common  to  certain  qualities  of  mind,
and  to  qualities  of  body  to  which  they  have
some  analogy  ;  yet  he  would  err  greatly  who
ascribed  to  a  body  that  sweetness  or  that
simplicity  which  are  the  qualities  of  mind.
In  like  manner,  greatness  and  meanness
are  names  common  to  qualities  perceived
by  the  external  sense,  and  to  qualities
perceived  by  taste  ;  yet  he  may  be  in  an
error,  who  ascribes  to  the  objects  of  sense
that  greatness  or  that  meanness  which  is
only  an  object  of  taste.

As  intellectual  objects  are  made  more
level  to  our  apprehension  by  giving  them  a
visible  form ;  so  the  objects  of  sense  are
dignified  and  made  more  august,  by  ascrib-
ing to  them  intellectual  qualities  which  have
some  analogy  to  those  they  really  possess.
The  sea  rages,  the  sky  lowers,  the  meadows
smile,  the  rivulets  murmur,  the  breezes
whisper,  the  soil  is  grateful  or  ungrateful —
such  expressions  are  so  familiar  in  common
language,  that  they  are  scarcely  accounted
poetical  or  figurative ;  but  they  give  a  kind
of  dignity  to  inanimate  objects,  and  make
our  conception  of  them  more  agreeable.
2k


498


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.  [essay  mil


When  we  consider  matter  as  an  inert,
extended,  divisible,  and  movable  substance,
there  seems  to  be  nothing  in  these  qualities
which  we  can  call  grand ;  and  when  weascribe
grandeur  to  any  portion  of  matter,  however
modified,  may  it  not  borrow  this  quality
from  something  intellectual,  of  which  it  is
the  effect,  or  sign,  or  instrument,  or  to
which  it  bears  some  analogy  ?  or,  perhaps,
because  it  produces  in  the  mind  an  emotion
that  has  some  resemblance  to  that  admira-
tion which  truly  grand  objects  raise  ?  [736]

A  very  elegant  writer  on  the  sublime  and
beautiful,*  makes  everything  grand  or  sub-
lime that  is  terrible.  Might  he  not  be  led
to  this  by  the  similarity  between  dread  and
admiration  ?  Both  are  grave  and  solemn
passions ;  both  make  a  strong  impression
upon  the  mind ;  and  both  are  very  infec-
tious. But  they  differ  specifically,  in  this
respect,  that  admiration  supposes  some  un-
common excellence  in  its  object,  which
dread  does  not.  We  may  admire  what  we
see  no  reason  to  dread ;  and  we  may  dread
what  we  do  not  admire.  In  dread,  there  is
nothing  of  that  enthusiasm  which  naturally
accompanies  admiration,  and  is  a  chief  in-
gredient of  the  emotion  raised  by  what  is
truly  grand  or  sublime.

Upon  the  whole,  I  humbly  apprehend
that  true  grandeur  is  such  a  degree  of  ex-
cellence as  is  fit  to  raise  an  enthusiastical
admiration ;  that  this  grandeur  is  found,
originally  and  properly,  in  qualities  of  mind ;
that  it  is  discerned,  in  objects  of  sense,  only
by  reflection,  as  the  light  we  perceive  in  the
moon  and  planets  is  truly  the  light  of  the
sun  ;  and  that  those  who  look  for  grandeur
in  mere  matter,  seek  the  living  among  the
dead.

If  this  be  a  mistake,  it  ought,  at  least,  to
be  granted,  that  the  grandeur  which  we
perceive  in  qualities  of  mind,  ought  to  have
a  different  name  from  that  which  belongs
properly  to  the  objects  of  sense,  as  they  are
very  different  in  their  nature,  and  produce
very  different  emotions  in  the  mind  of  the
spectator. [737]


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  BEAUTY.

Beauty  is  found  in  things  so  various
and  so  very  different  in  nature,  that  it  is
difficult  to  say  wherein  it  consists,  or  what
there  can  be  common  to  all  the  objects  in
which  it  is,  found.

Of  the  objects  of  sense,  we  find  beauty  in
colour,  in  sound,  in  form,  in  motion.  There
are  beauties  of  speech,  and  beauties  of
thought ;  beauties  in  the  arts,  and  in  the

*  Burke.— H.


sciences ;  beauties  in  actions,  in  affections,
and  in  characters.

In  things  so  different  and  so  unlike  is
there  any  quality,  the  same  in  all,  which  we
may  call  by  the  name  of  beauty  ?  What
can  it  be  that  is  common  to  the  thought  of
a  mind  and  the  form  of  a  piece  of  matter,
to  an  abstract  theorem  and  a  stroke  of  wit  ?

I  am  indeed  unable  to  conceive  any  qua-
lity in  all  the  different  things  that  are  called
beautiful,  that  is  the  same  in  them  all.
There  seems  to  be  no  identity,  nor  even
similarity,  between  the  beauty  of  a  theorem
and  the  beauty  of  a  piece  of  music,  though
both  may  be  beautiful.  The  kinds  of  beauty
seem  to  be  as  various  as  the  objects  to  which
it  is  ascribed.

But  why  should  things  so  different  be
called  by  the  same  name  ?  This  cannot  be
without  a  reason.  If  there  be  nothing  com-
mon in  the  things  themselves,  they  must
have  some  common  relation  to  us,  or  to
something  else,  which  leads  us  to  give  them
the  same  name. [738]

All  the  objects  we  call  beautiful  agree  in
two  things,  which  seem  to  concur  in  our
sense  of  beauty.  First,  When  they  are
perceived,  or  even  imagined,  they  produce
a  certain  agreeable  emotion  or  feeling  in  the
mind ;  and,  secondly,  This  agreeable  emotion
is  accompanied  with  an  opinion  or  belief  of
their  having  some  perfection  or  excellence
belonging  to  them.

Whether  the  pleasure  we  feel  in  contem-
plating beautiful  objects  may  have  any  ne-
cessary connection  with  the  belief  of  their
excellence,  or  whether  that  pleasure  be  con-
joined with  this  belief,  by  the  good  pleasure
only  of  our  Maker,  I  will  not  determine.
The  reader  may  see  Dr  Price's  sentiments
upon  this  subject,  which  merit  considera-
tion, in  the  second  chapter  of  his  "  Review
of  the  Questions  concerning  Morals."

Though  we  may  be  able  to  conceive  these
two  ingredients  of  our  sense  of  beauty  dis-
joined, this  affords  no  evidence  that  they
have  no  necessary  connection.  It  has  in-
deed been  maintained,  that  whatever  we  can
conceive,  is  possible  :  but  I  endeavoured,
in  treating  of  conception,  to  shew,  that  this
opinion,  though  very  common,  is  a  mistake.
There  may  be,  and  probably  are,  man\
necessary  connections  of  things  in  nature,
which  we  are  too  dim-sighted  to  discover.

The  emotion  produced  by  beautiful  ob-
jects is  gay  and  pleasant.  It  sweetens  and
humanises  the  temper,  is  friendly  to  every
benevolent  affection,  and  tends  to  allay
sullen  and  angry  passions.  It  enlivens  the
mind,  and  disposes  it  to  other  agreeable
emotions,  such  as  those  of  love,  hope,  and
joy.  It  gives  a  value  to  the  object,  ab-
stracted from  its  utility.

In  things  that  may  be  possessed  as  pro-
perty, beauty  greatly  enhances  the  price.
,[736-738]


(HAP  IV.]


OF  BEAUTY.


499


A  beautiful  dog  or  horse,  a  beautiful  coach
or  house,  a  beautiful  picture  or  prospect,  is
valued  by  its  owner  and  by  others,  not  only
for  its  utility,  but  for  its  beauty. [739]

If  the  beautiful  object  be  a  person,  his
company  and  conversation  are,  on  that  ac-
count, the  more  agreeable,  and  we  are  dis-
posed to  love  and  esteem  him.  Even  in  a
perfect  stranger,  it  is  a  powerful  recom-
mendation, and  disposes  us  to  favour  and
think  well  of  him,  if  of  our  own  sex,  and
still  more  if  of  the  other.

"  There  is  nothing,"  says  Mr  Addison,
"  that  makes  its  way  more  directly  to  the  soul
than  beauty,  which  immediately  diffuses  a
secret  satisfaction  and  complacence  through
the  imagination,  and  gives  a  finishing  to
anything  that  is  great  and  uncommon.
The  very  first  discovery  of  it  strikes  the
mind  with  an  inward  joy,  and  spreads  a
cheerfulness  and  delight  through  all  its
faculties."

As  we  ascribe  beauty,  not  only  to  per-
sons, but  to  inanimate  things,  we  give  the
name  of  love  or  liking  to  the  emotion,  which
beauty,  in  both  these  kinds  of  objects,
produces.  It  is  evident,  however,  that
liking  to  a  person  is  a  very  different  affec-
tion of  mind  from  liking  to  an  inanimate
thing.  The  first  always  implies  benevo-
lence ;  but  what  is  inanimate  cannot  be  the
object  of  benevolence-  The  two  affections,
however  different,  have  a  resemblance  in
some  respects ;  and,  on  account  of  that
resemblance,  have  the  same  name.  And
perhaps  beauty,  in  these  two  different  kinds
of  objects,  though  it  has  one  name,  may  be
as  different  in  its  nature  as  the  emotions
which  it  produces  in  us.

Besides  the  agreeable  emotion  which
beautiful  objects  produce  in  the  mind  of
the  spectator,  they  produce  also  an  opinion
or  judgment  of  some  perfection  or  excel-
lence in  the  object.  This  I  take  to  be  a
second  ingredient  in  our  sense  of  beauty,
though  it  seems  not  to  be  admitted  by
modern  philosophers. [740]

The  ingenious  Dr  Hutcheson,  who  per-
ceived some  of  the  defects  of  Mr  Locke's
system,  and  made  very  important  improve-
ments upon  it,  seems  to  have  been  carried
away  by  it,  in  his  notion  of  beauty.  In
his  "  Inquiry  concerning  Beauty,"  §  1,
"Let  it  be  observed,"  says  he,  "that  in  the
following  papers,  the  word  beauty  is  taken
for  the  idea  raised  in  us,  and  the  sense  of
beauty  for  our  power  of  receiving  that  idea."
And  again — "  Only  let  it  be  observed,  that,
by  absolute  or  original  beauty,  is  not  under-
stood any  quality  supposed  to  be  in  the
object  which  should,  of  itself,  be  beautiful,
without  relation  to  any  mind  which  per-
ceives it :  for  beauty,  like  other  names  of
sensible  ideas,  properly  denotes  the  per-
ception of  some  mind  ;  so  cold,  hot,  sweet,
[739-741]


bitter,  denote  the  sensations  in  our  minds,
to  which,  perhaps,  there  is  no  resemblance
in  the  objects  which  excite  these  ideas  in
us  ;  however,  we  generally  imagine  other-
wise. Were  there  no  mind,  with  a  sense
of  beauty,  to  contemplate  objects,  I  see  not
how  they  could  be  called  beautiful."

There  is  no  doubt  an  analogy  between
the  external  senses  of  touch  and  taste,  and
the  internal  sense  of  beauty.  This  analogy
led  Dr  Hutcheson,  and  other  modern  phi-
losophers, to  apply  to  beauty  what  Des
Cartes  and  Locke  had  taught  concerning
the  secondary  qualities  perceived  by  the
external  senses.

Mr  Locke's  doctrine  concerning  the  se-
condary qualities  of  body,  is  not  so  much
an  error  in  judgment  as  an  abuse  of  words.
He  distinguished  very  properly  between
the  sensations  we  have  of  heat  and  cold,
and  that  quality  or  structure  in  the  body
which  is  adapted  by  Nature  to  produce
those  sensations  in  us.  He  observed  very
justly,  that  there  can  be  no  similitude  be-
tween one  of  these  and  the  other.  They
have  the  relation  of  an  effect  to  its  cause,
but  no  similitude.  This  was  a  very  just
and  proper  correction  of  the  doctrine  of  the
Peripatetics,  who  taught,  that  all  our  sens-
ations are  the  very  form  and  image  of  the
quality  in  the  object  by  which  they  are
produced. [741]

What  remained  to  be  determined  was,
whether  the  words,  heat  and  cold,  in  com-
mon language,  signify  the  sensations  we
feel,  or  the  qualities  of  the  object  which
are  the  cause  of  these  sensations.  Mr
Locke  made  heat  and  cold  to  signify  only
the  sensations  we  feel,  and  not  the  qualities
which  are  the  cause  of  them.  And  in  this,
I  apprehend,  lay  his  mistake.  For  it  is
evident,  from  the  use  of  language,  that  hot
and  cold,  sweet  and  bitter,  are  attributes  of
external  objects,  and  not  of  the  person  who
perceives  them.  Hence,  it  appears  a  mon-
strous paradox  to  say,  there  is  no  heat  in
the  fire,  no  sweetness  in  sugar ;  but,  when
explained  according  to  Mr  Locke's  meaning,
it  is  only,  like  most  other  paradoxes,  an
abuse  of  words.*

The  sense  of  beauty  may  be  analysed  in
a  manner  very  similar  to  the  sense  of  sweet-
ness. It  is  an  agreeable  feeling  or  emotion,
accompanied  with  an  opinion  or  judgment
of  some  excellence  in  the  object,  which  is
fitted  by  Nature  to  produce  that  feeling.

The  feeling  is,  no  doubt,  in  the  mind,
and  so  also  is  the  judgment  we  form  of  the
object :  but  this  judgment,  like  all  others,
must  be  true  or  false.  If  it  be  a  true  judg-
ment, there  is  some  real  excellence  in  the
object.  And  the  use  of  all  languages  shews
that  the  name  of  beauty  belongs  to  this  ex-

*  See  above,  p.  205,  b,  note  *.—  H.
2  K  2


500


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS


[essay  VIII.


eeilence  of  the  object,  and  not  to  the  feel-
ings of  the  spectator.

To  say  that  there  is,  in  reality,  no  beauty
in  those  objects  in  which  all  men  perceive
beauty,  is  to  attribute  to  man  fallacious
senses.  But  we  have  no  ground  to  think
so  disrespectfully  of  the  Author  of  our
being  ;  the  faculties  he  hath  given  us  are
not  fallacious  ;  nor  is  that  beauty  which
he  hath  so  liberally  diffused  over  all  the
works  of  his  hands,  a  mere  fancy  in  us,  but
a  real  excellence  in  his  works,  which  express
the  perfection  of  their  Divine  Author.

We  have  reason  to  believe,  not  only  that
the  beauties  we  see  in  nature  are  real,  and
not  fanciful,  but  that  there  are  thousands
which  our  faculties  are  too  dull  to  perceive.
We  see  many  beauties,  both  of  human  and
divine  art,  which  the  brute  animals  are  in-
capable of  perceiving  ;  and  superior  beings
may  excel  us  as  far  in  their  discernment  of
true  beauty  as  we  excel  the  brutes. [742]

The  man  who  is  skilled  in  painting  or
statuary  sees  more  of  the  beauty  of  a  fine
picture  or  statue  than  a  common  specta-
tor. The  same  thing  holds  in  all  the  fine
arts.  The  most  perfect  works  of  art  have
a  beauty  that  strikes  even  the  rude  and  ig-
norant ;  but  they  see  only  a  small  part  of
that  beauty  which  is  seen  in  such  works  by
those  who  understand  them  perfectly,  and
can  produce  them.

This  may  be  applied,  with  no  less  justice,
to  the  works  of  Nature.  They  have  a
beauty  that  strikes  even  the  ignorant  and
inattentive.  But  the  more  we  discover  of
their  structure,  of  their  mutual  relations,
and  of  the  laws  by  which  they  are  governed,
the  greater  beauty,  and  the  more  delightful
marks  of  art,  wisdom,  and  goodness,  we
discern.

Thus  the  expert  anatomist  sees  number-
less beautiful  contrivances  in  the  structure
of  the  human  body,  which  are  unknown  to
the  ignorant.

Although  the  vulgar  eye  sees  much  beauty
in  the  face  of  the  heavens,  and  in  the  various
motions  and  changes  of  the  heavenly  bodies,
the  expert  astronomer,  who  knows  their
order  and  distances,  their  periods,  the  orbits
they  describe  in  the  vast  regions  of  space,
and  the  simple  and  beautiful  laws  by  which
their  motions  are  governed,  and  all  the
appearances  of  their  stations,  progressions,
and  retrogradations,  their  eclipses,  occulta-
tions,  and  transits  are  produced — sees  a
beauty,  order,  and  harmony  reign  through
the  whole  planetary  system,  which  delights
the  mind.  The  eclipses  of  the  sun  and
moon,  and  the  blazing  tails  of  comets,
which  strike  terror  into  barbarous  nations,
furnish  the  most  pleasing  entertainment  to
his  eve,  and  a  feast  to  his  understanding.
[743]

In  every  part  of  Nature's  works,  there


are  numberless  beauties,  which,  on  account
of  our  ignorance,  we  are  unable  to  perceive.
Superior  beings  may  see  more  than  we  ;  but
He  only  who  made  them,  and,  upon  a  re-
view, pronounced  them  all  to  be  very  good,
can  see  all  their  beauty.

Our  determinations  with  regard  to  the
beauty  of  objects,  may,  I  think,  be  distin-
guished into  two  kinds ;  the  first  we  may
call  instinctive,  the  other  rational.

Some  objects  strike  us  at  once,  and  ap-
pear beautiful  at  first  sight,  without  any  re-
flection, without  our  being  able  to  say  why
we  call  them  beautiful,  or  being  able  to  spe-
cify any  perfection  which  justifies  our  judg-
ment. Something  of  this  kind  there  seems
to  be  in  brute  animals,  and  in  children
before  the  use  of  reason ;  nor  does  it  end
with  infancy,  but  continues  through  life.

In  the  plumage  of  birds  and  of  butterflies,
in  the  colours  and  form  of  flowers,  of  shells,
and  of  many  other  objects,  we  perceive  a
beauty  that  delights  ;  but  cannot  say  what
it  is  in  the  object  that  should  produce  that
emotion.

The  beauty  of  the  object  may  in  such
cases  be  called  an  occult  quality.  We  know
well  how  it  affects  our  senses  ;  but  what  it
is  in  itself  we  know  not.  But  this,  as  well
as  other  occult  qualities,  is  a  proper  subject
of  philosophical  disquisition  ;  and,  by  a  care-
ful examination  of  the  objects  to  which  Na-
ture hath  given  this  amiable  quality,  we
may  perhaps  discover  some  real  excellence
in  the  object,  or,  at  least,  some  valuable
purpose  that  is  served  by  the  effect  which
it  produces  upon  us.

This  instinctive  sense  of  beauty,  in  differ-
ent species  of  animals,  may  differ  as  much
as  the  external  sense  of  taste,  and  in  each
species  be  adapted  to  its  manner  of  life.  By
this  perhaps  the  various  tribes  are  led  to
associate  with  their  kind,  to  dwell  among
certain  objects  rather  than  others,  and  to
construct  their  habitation  in  a  particular
manner.  [744]

There  seem  likewise  to  be  varieties  in
the  sense  of  beauty  in  the  individuals  of  the
same  species,  by  which  they  are  directed  in
the  choice  of  a  mate,  and  in  the  love  and
care  of  their  offspring.

"We see," says Mr Addison, "that
every  different  species  of  sensible  creatures
has  its  different  notions  of  beauty,  and  that
each of  them  is  most affected  with the
beauties  of  its  own  kind. This  is  nowhere
more  remarkable  than  in  birds  of  the  same
shape  and  proportion,  where  we  often  see
the  mate  determined  in  his  courtship  by  the
single  grain  or  tincture  of  a  feather,  and
never  discovering  any  charms  but  in  the
colour  of  its  own  species."
««  Scit  thalamo  servare  fidcra,  sanctasque  veretur
Connubii  leges ;  non  ilium  in  pectore  candor
Sollicitat  niveus ; neque  pravum  accendit  amo-
rem

[742-744]


v.]


OF  BEAUTY.


501


Splendida  lanugo,  vel  honesta  in  vertice  crista ;
Purpureusve  nitor  pennarum  ;  ast  agmina  late
Fceminea  explorat  cautus,  maculasque  requirit
Cognatas,  paribusque  interlita  c  rpora  guttis  :
Ni  faceret, pictis  sylvam  circura  undique  mons-

tris
Confusam  aspiceres  vulgo,  partusque  biformes,
Et  genus  ambiguum,  et  veneris  monumenta ne-

fanda?.

"  Hinc  raerula  in  nigro  se  oblectat  nigra  marito;
Hinc  socium  lasciva  petit  philomela  canorum,
Agnoscitque  pare;  sonitus ;  hinc  noclua  tetrara
Canitiem  alarum,  etglaucos  miratur  ocellos.
Nempe  sibi  semper  constat,  crescitqu-  quotannis
Laacida  progenies.,  castos  contes.-a  parentes :
Vere  novo  exultat,  plumasque  decora  j:  vent us
Explicat  ad  solem,  patriisquecoloribus  ardet."

In  the  human  kind  there  are  varieties  in
the  taste  of  beauty,  of  which  we  can  no
more  assign  a  reason  than  of  the  variety  of
their  features,  though  it  is  easy  to  perceive
that  very  important  ends  are  answered  by
both.  These  varieties  are  most  observable
in  the  judgments  we  form  of  the  features  of
the  other  sex ;  and  in  this  the  intention  of
nature  is  most  apparent. [745]

As  far  as  our  determinations  of  the  com-
parative beauty  of  objects  are  instinctive,
they  are  no  subject  of  reasoning  or  of  criti-
cism ;  they  are  purely  the  gift  of  nature,
and  we  have  no  standard  by  which  they  may
be  measured.

But  there  are  judgments  of  beauty  that
may  be  called  rational,  being  grounded  on
some  agreeable  quality  of  the  object  which  is
distinctly  conceived,  and  may  be  specified.
This  distinction  between  a  rational  judg-
ment of  beauty  and  that  which  is  instinc-
tive, may  be  illustrated  by  an  instance.

In  a  heap  of  pebbles,  one  that  is  remark-
able for  brilliancy  of  colour  and  regularity
of  figure,  will  be  picked  out  of  the  heap  by  a
child.  He  perceives  a  beauty  in  it,  puts  a
value  upon  it,  and  is  fond  of  the  property  ol
it.  For  this  preference,  no  reason  can  be
given,  but  that  children  are,  by  their  con-
titution,  fond  of  brilliant  colours,  and  ot
regular  figures-

Suppose  again  that  an  expert  mechanic
views  a  well  constructed  machine.  He  sees
all  its  parts  to  be  made  of  the  fittest  mate-
rials, and  of  the  most  proper  form ;  no-
thing superfluous,  nothing  deficient ;  every
part  adapted  to  its  use,  and  the  whole  fitted
in  the  most  perfect  manner  to  the  end  for
which  it  is  intended.  He  pronounces  it  to
be  a  beautiful  machine.  He  views  it  with
the  same  agreeable  emotion  as  the  child
viewed  the  pebble  ;  but  he  can  give  a  reason
for  his  judgment,  and  point  out  the  particu-
lar perfections  of  the  object  on  which  it  is
grounded. [746]

Although  the  instinctive  and  the  rational
sense  of  beauty  may  be  perfectly  distin-
guished in  speculation,  yet,  in  passing  judg-
ment upon  particular  objects,  they  are  of  ,en
so  mixed  and  confounded,  that  it  is  difficult
to  assign  to  each  its  own  province.  Nay,  it
[745 747]


may  often  happen,  that  a  judgment  of  the
beauty  of  an  object,  which  was  at  first
merely  instinctive,  shall  afterwards  become
rational,  when  we  discover  some  latent  per-
fection of  which  that  beauty  in  the  object  is
a  sign.

As  the  sense  of  beauty  may  be  distin-
guished into  instinctive  and  rational ;  so  I
think  beauty  itself  may  be  distinguished  into
original  and  derived.

As  some  objects  shine  by  their  own  light,
and  many  more  by  light  that  is  borrowed
and  reflected  ;  so  I  conceive  the  lustre  of
beauty  in  some  objects  is  inherent  and
original,  and  in  many  others  is  borrowed
and  reflected.

There  is  nothing  more  common  in  the
sentiments  of  all  mankind,  and  in  the  lan-
guage of  all  nations,  than  what  may  be
called  a  communication  of  attributes  ;  that
is,  transferring  an  attribute,  from  the  sub-
ject to  which  it  properly  belongs,  to  some
related  or  resembling  subject.

The  various  objects  which  nature  pre-
sents to  our  view,  even  those  that  are  most
different  in  kind,  have  innumerable  simili-
tudes, relations,  and  analogies,  which  we
contemplate  with  pleasure,  and  which  lead
us  naturally  to  borrow  words  and  attributes
from  one  object  to  express  what  belongs  to
another.  The  greatest  part  of  every  lan-
guage under  heaven  is  made  up  of  words
borrowed  from  one  thing,  and  applied  to
something  supposed  to  have  some  relation
or  analogy  to  their  first  signification. [747]

The  attributes  of  body  we  ascribe  to  mind,
and  the  attributes  of  mind  to  material  ob-
jects. To  inanimate  things  we  ascribe  life,
and  even  intellectual  and  moral  qualities.
And,  although  the  qualities  that  are  thus
made  common  belong  to  one  of  the  subjects
in  the  proper  sense,  and  to  the  other  meta-
phorically, these  different  senses  are  often
so  mixed  in  our  imagination,  as  to  produce
the  same  sentiment  with  regard  to  both.

It  is  therefore  natural,  and  agreeable  to
the  strain  of  human  sentiments  and  of
human  language,  that  in  many  cases  the
beauty  which  originally  and  properly  is  in
the  thing  signified,  should  be  transferred
to  the  sign  ;  that  which  is  in  the  cause  to
the  effect ;  that  which  is  in  the  end  to  the
means ;  and  that  which  is  in  the  agent  to
the  instrument.

If  what  was  said  in  the  last  chapter  of
the  distinction  between  the  grandeur  which
we  ascribe  to  qualities  of  mind,  and  that
which  we  ascribe  to  material  objects,  be
well  founded,  this  distinction  of  the  beauty
of  objects  will  easily  be  admitted  as  per-
fectly analagous  to  it.  I  shall  therefore
only  illustrate  it  by  an  example.

There  is  nothing  in  the  exterior  of  a  man
more  lovely  and  more  attractive  than  per-
fect good  breeding. But  what  is  this  good


502


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS. [essay  vm


breeding  ?  It  consists  of  all  the  external
signs  of  due  respect  to  our  superiors,  con-
descension to  our  inferiors,  politeness  to  all
with  whom  we  converse  or  have  to  do,
joined  in  the  fair  sex  with  that  delicacy  of
outward  behaviour  which  becomes  them.
And  how  comes  it  to  have  such  charms  in
the  eyes  of  all  mankind;  for  this  reason
only,  as  I  apprehend,  that  it  is  a  natural
sign  of  that  temper,  and  those  affections
and  sentiments  with  regard  to  others,  and
with  regard  to  ourselves,  which  are  in
themselves  truly  amiable  and  beautiful.

This  is  the  original,  of  which  good  breed-
ing is  the  picture ;  and  it  is  the  beauty  of
the  original  that  is  reflected  to  our  sense
by  the  picture.  The  beauty  of  good  breed-
ing, therefore,  is  not  originally  in  the  ex-
ternal behaviour  in  which  it  consists,  but  is
derived  from  the  qualities  of  mind  which  it
expresses.  And  though  there  may  be  good
breeding  without  the  amiable  qualities  of
mind,  its  beauty  is  still  derived  from  what
it  naturally  expresses. [748] '

Having  explained  these  distinctions  of
our  sense  of  beauty  into  instinctive  and
rational,  and  of  beauty  itself  into  original
and  derived,  I  would  now  proceed  to  give
a  general  view  of  those  qualities  in  objects,
to  which  we  may  justly  and  rationally
ascribe  beauty,  whether  original  or  derived.
But  here  some  embarrassment  arises
from  the  vague  meaning  of  the  word  beauty,
which  I  had  occasion  before  to  observe.

Sometimes  it  is  extended,  so  as  to  include
everything  that  pleases  a  good  taste,  and
so  comprehends  grandeur  and  novelty,  as
well  as  what  in  a  more  restricted  sense  is
called  beauty.  At  other  times,  it  is  even
by  good  writers  confined  to  the  objects  of
sight,  when  they  are  either  seen,  or  remem-
bered, or  imagined.  Yet  it  is  admitted  by
all  men,  that  there  are  beauties  in  music  ;
that  there  is  beauty  as  well  as  sublimity  in
composition,  both  in  verse  and  in  prose ;
that  there  is  beauty  in  characters,  in  affec-
tions, and  in  actions.  These  are  not  ob-
jects of  sight ;  and  a  man  may  be  a  good
judge  of  beauty  of  various  kinds,  who  has
not  the  faculty  of  sight.

To  give  a  determinate  meaning  to  a  word
so  variously  extended  and  restricted,  I
know  no  better  way  than  what  is  suggested
by  the  common  division  of  the  objects  of
taste  into  novelty,  grandeur,  and  beauty.
Novelty,  it  is  plain,  is  no  quality  of  the
new  object,  but  merely  a  relation  which  it
has  to  the  knowledge  of  the  person  to  whom
it  is  new.  Therefore,  if  this  general  divi-
sion be  just,  every  quality  in  an  object  that
pleases  a  good  taste,  must,  in  one  degree
or  another,  have  either  grandeur  or  beauty.
It  may  still  be  difficult  to  fix  the  precise
limit  betwixt  grandeur  and  beauty  ;  but
they  must  together  comprehend  everything


fitted  by  its  nature  to  please  a  good  taste —
that  is,  every  real  perfection  and  excellence
in  the  objects  we  contemplate. [749]

In  a  poem,  in  a  picture,  in  a  piece  of
music,  it  is  real  excellence  that  pleases  a
good  taste.  In  a  person,  every  perfection
of  the  mind,  moral  or  intellectual,  and  every
perfection  of  the  body,  gives  pleasure  to  the
spectator,  as  well  as  to  the  owner,  when
there  is  no  envy  nor  malignity  to  destroy
that  pleasure.

It  is,  therefore,  in  the  scale  of  perfection
and  real  excellence  that  we  must  look  for
what  is  either  grand  or  beautiful  in  objects.
What  is  the  proper  object  of  admiration  is
grand,  and  what  is  the  proper  object  of  love
and  esteem  is  beautiful.

This,  I  think,  is  the  only  notion  of  beauty
that  corresponds  with  the  division  of  the
objects  of  taste  which  has  been  generally
received  by  philosophers.  And  this  con-
nection of  beauty  with  real  perfection,  was
a  capital  doctrine  of  the  Socratic  school.
It  is  often  ascribed  to  Socrates,  in  the  dia-
logues of  Plato  and  of  Xenophon.

We  may,  therefore,  take  a  view,  first,  of
those  qualities  of  mind  to  which  we  may
justly  and  rationally  ascribe  beauty,  and
then  of  the  beauty  we  perceive  in  the  objects
of  sense.  We  shall  find,  if  I  mistake  not,
that,  in  the  first,  original  beauty  is  to  be
found,  and  that  the  beauties  of  the  second
class  are  derived  from  some  relation  they
bear  to  mind,  as  the  signs  or  expressions
of  some  amiable  mental  quality,  or  as  the
effects  of  design,  art,  and  wise  contrivance.

As  grandeur  naturally  produces  admira-
tion, beauty  naturally  produces  love.  We
may,  therefore,  justly  ascribe  beauty  to  those
qualities  which  are  the  natural  objects  of
love  and  kind  affection.

Of  this  kind  chiefly  are  some  of  the  moral
virtues,  which,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  con-
stitute a  lovely  character.  Innocence,  gen-
tleness, condescension,  humanity,  natural
affection,  public  spirit,  and  the  whole  train
of  the  soft  and  gentle  virtues :  these  qualities
are  amiable  from  their  very  nature,  and  on
account  of  their  intrinsic  worth. [750]

There  are  other  virtues  that  raise  admira.
tion,  and  are,  therefore,  grand ;  such  as
magnanimity,  fortitude,  self-command,  su-
periority to  pain  and  labour,  superiority  to
pleasure,  and  to  the  smiles  of  Fortune  as
well  as  to  her  frowns.

These  awful  virtues  constitute  what  is
most  grand  in  the  human  character ;  the
gentle  virtues,  what  is  most  beautiful  and
lovely.  As  they  are  virtues,  they  draw  the
approbation  of  our  moral  faculty  ;  as  they
are  becoming  and  amiable,  they  affect  our
sense  of  beauty.

Next  to  the  amiable  moral  virtues,  there

are  many  intellectual  talents  which  have  an

intrinsic  value,  aud  draw  our  love  and  esteem

f  74-8-7  50]


IV.J


OF  BEAUTY.


503


to  those  who  possess  them.  Such  are,
knowledge,  good  sense,  wit,  humour,  cheer-
fulness, good  taste,  excellence  in  any  of  the
fine  arts,  in  eloquence,  in  dramatic  action ;
and,  we  may  add,  excellence  in  every  art  of
peace  or  war  that  is  useful  in  society.

There  are  likewise  talents  which  we  refer
to  the  body,  which  have  an  original  beauty
and  comeliness  ;  such  as  health,  strength,
and  agility,  the  usual  attendants  of  youth  ;
skill  in  bodily  exercises,  and  skill  in  the
mechanic  arts.  These  are  real  perfections
of  the  man,  as  they  increase  his  power,  and
render  the  body  a  fit  instrument  for  the
mind.

I  apprehend,  therefore,  that  it  is  in  the
moral  and  intellectual  perfections  of  mind,
and  in  its  active  powers,  that  beauty  origin-
ally dwells  ;  and  that  from  this  as  the  foun-
tain, all  the  beauty  which  we  perceive  in
the  visible  world  is  derived. [751]

This, I  think,  was  the  opinion  of  the
ancient  philosophers  before-named  ;  and  it
has  been  adopted  by  Lord  Shaftesbury  and
Dr  Akenside  among  the  moderns.
"  Mind,  mind  alone,  bear  witness,  earth  and  heav'n  !
The  living  fountains  in  itself  contains
Of  beauteous  and  sublime. Here  hand  in  hand
Si paramount  the  graces. Here  enthron'd,
Celestial  Venus,  with  divinest  airs,
Invites  the  soul  to  never-fading  joy." — Akenside.

But  neither  mind,  nor  any  of  its  qualities
or  powers,  is  an  immediate  object  of  per-
ception to  man.  We  are,  indeed,  imme-
diately conscious  of  the  operations  of  our
own  mind  ;  and  every  degree  of  perfection
in  them  gives  the  purest  pleasure,  with  a
proportional  degree  of  self-esteem,  so  flat-
tering to  self-love,  that  the  great  difficulty
is  to  keep  it  within  just  bounds,  so  that  we
may  not  think  of  ourselves  above  what  we
ought  to  think.

Other  minds  we  perceive  only  through
the  medium  of  material  objects,  on  which
their  signatures  are  impressed.  It  is
through  this  medium  that  we  perceive  life,
activity,  wisdom,  and  every  moral  and  in-
tellectual quality  in  other  beings.  The
signs  of  those  qualities  are  immediately
perceived  by  the  senses  ;  by  them  the  qua-
lities themselves  are  reflected  to  our  under-
standing ;  and  we  are  very  apt  to  attribute
to  the  sign  the  beauty  or  the  grandeur
which  is  properly  and  originally  in  the
things  signified.

The  invisible  Creator,  the  Fountain  of
all  perfection,  hath  stamped  upon  all  his
works  signatures  of  his  divine  wisdom,
power,  and  benignity,  which  are  visible  to
all  men.  The  works  of  men  in  science,  in
the  arts  of  taste,  and  in  the  mechanical
arts,  bear  the  signatures  of  those  qualities
of  mind  which  were  employed  in  their  pro-
duction. Their  external  behaviour  and
conduct  in  life  expresses  the  good  or  bad
qualities  of  their  mind.  [752]
[751-753]


In  every  species  of  animals,  we  perceive
by  visible  signs  their  instincts,  their  appe-
tites, their  affections,  their  sagacity.  Even
in  the  inanimate  world,  there  are  many
things  analogous  to  the  qualities  of  mind  ;
so  that  there  is  hardly  anything  belonging
to  mind  which  may  not  be  represented  by
images  taken  from  the  objects  of  sense ;
and,  on  the  other  hand,  every  object  of
sense  is  beautified,  by  borrowing  attire  from
the  attributes  of  mind.

Thus,  the  beauties  of  mind,  though  invi-
sible in  themselves,  are  perceived  in  the
objects  of  sense,  on  which  their  image  is
impressed.

If  we  consider,  on  the  other  hand,  the
qualities  in  sensible  objects  to  which  we
ascribe  beauty,  I  apprehend  we  shall  find
in  all  of  them  some  relation  to  mind,  and
the  greatest  in  those  that  are  most  beau-
tiful.

When  we  consider  inanimate  matter
abstractly,  as  a  substance  endowed  with
the  qualities  of  extension,  solidity,  divisi-
bility, and  mobility,  there  seems  to  be
nothing  in  these  qualities  that  affects  our
sense  of  beauty.  But  when  we  contem-
plate the  globe  which  we  inhabit,  as  fitted
by  its  form,  by  its  motions,  and  by  its  fur-
niture, for  the  habitation  and  support  of  an
infinity  of  various  orders  of  living  creatures,
from  the  lowest  reptile  up  to  man,  we  have
a  glorious  spectacle  indeed  !  with  which
the  grandest  and  the  most  beautiful  struc-
tures of  human  art  can  bear  no  compa-
rison.

The  only  perfection  of  dead  matter  is  its
being,  by  its  various  forms  and  qualities,
so  admirably  fitted  for  the  purposes  of  ani-
mal life,  and  chiefly  that  of  man.  It  fur-
nishes the  materials  of  every  art  that  tends
to  the  support  or  the  embellishment  of
human  life.  By  the  Supreme  Artist,  it  is
organized  in  the  various  tribes  of  the  veget-
able kingdom,  and  endowed  with  a  kind  of
life ;  a  work  which  human  art  cannot  imi-
tate, nor  human  understanding  compre-
hend. [753]

In  the  bodies  and  various  organs  of  the
animal  tribes,  there  is  a  composition  of
matter  still  more  wonderful  and  more  mys-
terious, though  we  see  it  to  be  admirably
adapted  to  the  purposes  and  manner  of  life
of  every  species.  But  in  every  form,  unor-
ganized, vegetable,  or  animal,  it  derives  its
beauty  from  the  purposes  to  which  it  is
subservient,  or  from  the  signs  of  wisdom
or  of  other  mental  qualities  which  it  ex-
hibits.

The  qualities  of  inanimate  matter,  in
which  we  perceive  beauty,  are — sound;
colour,  form,  and  motion  ;  the  first  an  ob-
ject of  hearing,  the  other  three  of  sight ;
which  we  may  consider  in  order.

In  a  single  note,  sounded  by  a  very  fine


501


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.  [essay  vm.


voice,  there  is  a  beauty  which  we  do  not
perceive  in  the  same  note,  sounded  by  a  bad
voice  or  an  imperfect  instrument.  I  need
not  attempt  to  enumerate  the  perfections
in  a  single  note,  which  give  beauty  to  it.
Some  of  them  have  names  in  the  science  of
music,  and  there  perhaps  are  others  which
have  no  names.  But  I  think  it  will  be
allowed,  that  every  quality  which  gives
beauty  to  a  single  note,  is  a  sign  of  some
perfection,  either  in  the  organ,  whether  it
be  the  human  voice  or  an  instrument,  or  in
the  execution.  The  beauty  of  the  sound
is  both  the  sign  and  the  effect  of  this  per-
fection ;  and  the  perfection  of  the  cause  is
the  only  reason  we  can  assign  for  the  beauty
of  the  effect.

In  a  composition  of  sounds,  or  a  piece  of
music,  the  beauty  is  either  in  the  harmony,
the  melody,  or  the  expression.  The  beauty
of  expression  must  be  derived,  either  from
the  beauty  of  the  thing  expressed,  or  from
the  art  and  skill  employed  in  expressing  it
properly.

In  harmony,  the  very  names  of  concord
and  discord  are  metaphorical,  and  suppose
some  analogy  between  the  relations  of  sound,
to  which  they  are  figuratively  applied,  and
the  relations  of  minds  and  affections,  which
they  originally  and  properly  signify. [754]

As  far  as  I  can  judge  by  my  ear,  when
two  or  more  persons,  of  a  good  voice  and
ear,  converse  together  in  amity  and  friend-
ship, the  tones  of  their  different  voices  are
concordant,  but  become  discordant  when
they  give  vent  to  angry  passions ;  so  that,
without  hearing  what  is  said,  one  may  know
by  the  tones  of  the  different  voices,  whether
they  quarrel  or  converse  amicably.  This,
indeed,  is  not  so  easily  perceived  in  those
who  have  been  taught,  by  good-breeding,
to  suppress  angry  tones  of  voiee,  even  when
they  are  angry,  as  in  the  lowest  rank,  who
express  their  angry  passions  without  any
restraint.

When  discord  arises  occasionally  in  con-
versation, but  soon  terminates  in  perfect
amity,  we  receive  more  pleasure  than  from
perfect  unanimity.  In  like  manner,  in  the
harmony  of  music,  discordant  sounds  are
occasionally  introduced,  but  it  is  always  in
o>  der  to  give  a  relish  to  the  most  perfect
concord  that  follows.

Whether  these  analogies,  between  the
harmony  of  a  piece  of  music,  and  harmony
in  the  intercourse  of  minds,  be  merely  fanci-
ful, or  have  any  real  foundation  in  fact,  I
submit  to  those  who  have  a  nicer  ear,  and
have  applied  it  to  observations  of  this  kind.
If  they  have  any  just  foundation,  as  they
seem  to  me  to  have,  they  serve  to  account
for  the  metaphorical  application  of  the
names  of  concord  and  discord  to  the  rela-
tions of  sounds  ;  to  account  for  the  pleasure
we  have  from  harmony  m  music;  and  to


shew,  that  the  beauty  of  harmony  is  derived
from  the  relation  it  has  to  agreeable  affec-
tions of  mind.

With  regard  to  melody.  J  leave  it  to  the
adepts  in  the  science  of  music,  to  determine
whether  music,  composed  according  to  the
established  rules  of  harmony  and  melody,
can  be  altogether  void  of  expression ;  and
whether  music  that  has  no  expression  can
have  any  beauty.  To  me  it  seems,  that
every  strain  in  melody  that  is  agreeable,  is
an  imitation  of  the  tones  of  the  human
voice  in  the  expression  of  some  sentiment
or  passion,  or  an  imitation  of  some  other  ob-
ject in  nature ;  and  that  music,  as  well  as
poetry,  is  an  imitative  art. [755]

The  sense  of  beauty  in  the  colours,  and
in  the  motions  of  inanimate  objects,  is,  I
believe,  in  some  cases  instinctive.  We  see
that  children  and  savages  are  pleased  with
brilliant  colours  and  sprightly  motions.  In
persons  of  an  improved  and  rational  taste,
there  are  many  sources  from  which  colours
and  motions  may  derive  their  beauty.  They,
as  well  as  the  forms  of  objects,  admit  of
regularity  and  variety.  The  motions  pro-
duced by  machinery,  indicate  the  perfection
or  imperfection  of  the  mechanism,  and  may
be  better  or  worse  adapted  to  their  end,  and
from  that  derive  their  beauty  or  deformity.

The  colours  of  natural  objects,  are  com-
monly signs  of  some  good  or  bad  quality  in
the  object ;  or  they  may  suggest  to  the
imagination  something  agreeable  or  dis-
agreeable.

In  dress  and  furniture,  fashion  has  a  con-
siderable influence  on  the  preference  we  give
to  one  colour  above  another.

A  number  of  clouds  of  different  and  ever-
changing  hue,  seen  on  the  ground  of  a  serene
azure  sky,  at  the  going  down  of  the  sun,
present  to  the  eye  of  every  man  a  glorious
spectacle.  It  is  hard  to  say,  whether  we
should  call  it  grand  or  beautiful.  It  is  both
in  a  high  degree.  Clouds  towering  above
clouds,  variously  tinged,  according  as  they
approach  nearer  to  the  direct  rays  of  the
sun,  enlarge  our  conceptions  of  the  regions
above  us.  They  give  us  a  view  of  the  fur-
niture of  those  regions,  which,  in  an  un-
clouded air,  seem  to  be  a  perfect  void ;  but
are  now  seen  to  contain  the  stores  of  wind
and  rain,  bound  up  for  the  present,  but  to
be  poured  down  upon  the  earth  in  due  sea-
son. Even  the  simple  rustic  does  not  look
upon  this  beautiful  sky,  merely  as  a  show
to  please  the  eye,  but  as  a  happy  omen  of
fine  weather  to  come.

The  proper  arrangement  of  colour,  and  of
light  and  shade,  is  one  of  the  chief  beauties
of  painting  ;  but  this  beauty  is  greatest,
when  that  arrangement  gives  the  most  dis-
tinct, the  most  natural,  and  the  most  agree-
able image  of  that  which  the  painter  intend-
ed to  represent. [756]

[754-756]


CHAP.  IV.]


OF  BEAUTY.


505


If  we  consider,  in  the  last  place,  the
beauty  of  form  or  figure  in  inanimate  ob-
jects, this,  according  to  Dr  Hutcheson,  re-
sults from  regularity,  mixed  with  variety.
Here,  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that  regu-
larity, in  all  cases,  expresses  design  and
art :  for  nothing  regular  was  ever  the  work
of  chance  ;  and  where  regularity  is  joined
with  variety,  it  expresses  design  more
strongly.  Besides,  it  has  been  justly  ob-
served, that  regular  figures  are  more  easily
and  more  perfectly  comprehended  by  the
mind  than  the  irregular,  of  which  we  can
never  form  an  adequate  conception.

Although  straight  lines  and  plain  surfaces
have  a  beauty  from  their  regularity,  they
admit  of  no  variety,  and,  therefore,  are
beauties  of  the  lowest  order.  Curve  lines
and  surfaces  admit  of  infinite  variety,  joined
with  every  degree  of  regularity ;  and,  there-
fore, in  many  cases,  excel  in  beauty  those
that  are  straight.

But  the  beauty  arising  from  regularity
and  variety,  must  always  yield  to  that  which
arises  from  the  fitness  of  the  form  for  the
end  intended.  In  everything  made  for  an
end,  the  form  must  be  adapted  to  that  end  ;
and  everything  in  the  form  that  suits  the
end,  is  a  beauty  ;  everything  that  unfits  it
for  its  end,  is  a  deformity.

The  forms  of  a  pillar,  of  a  sword,  and  of
a  balance  are  very  different.  Each  may
have  great  beauty  ;  but  that  beauty  is  de-
rived from  the  fitness  of  the  form  and  of
the  matter  for  the  purpose  intended.  [757]

Were  we  to  consider  the  form  of  the  earth
itself,  and  the  various  furniture  it  contains,
of  the  inanimate  kind  ;  its  distribution  into
land  and  sea,  mountains  and  valleys,  rivers
and  springs  of  water,  the  variety  of  soils
that  cover  its  surface,  and  of  mineral  and
metallic  substances  laid  up  within  it,  the  air
that  surrounds  it,  the  vicissitudes  of  day
and  night,  and  of  the  seasons ;  the  beauty
of  all  these,  which  indeed  is  superlative,
consists  in  this,  that  they  bear  the  most
lively  and  striking  impression  of  the  wisdom
and  goodness  of  their  Author,  in  contriving
them  so  admirably  for  the  use  of  man,  and
of  their  other  inhabitants.

The  beauties  of  the  vegetable  kingdom
are  far  superior  to  those  of  inanimate  mat-
ter, in  any  form  which  human  art  can  give
it.  Hence,  in  all  ages,  men  have  been  fond
to  adorn  their  persons  and  their  habitations
with  the  vegetable  productions  of  nature.

The  beauties  of  the  field,  of  the  forest,
and  of  the  flower-garden,  strike  a  child  long
before  he  can  reason.  He  is  delighted  with
what  he  sees ;  but  he  knows  not  why.  This
is  instinct,  but  it  is  not  confined  to  child-
hood ;  it  continues  through  all  the  stages  of
life.  It  leads  the  florist,  the  botanist,  the
philosopher,  to  examine  and  compare  the
objects  which  Nature,  by  this  powerful  in-
(_757,  758]


stinct,  recommends  to  his  attention.  By
degrees,  he  becomes  a  critic  in  beauties  of
this  kind,  and  can  give  a  reason  why  he
prefers  one  to  another.  In  every  species,
he  sees  the  greatest  beauty  in  the  plants  or
flowers  that  are  most  perfect  in  their  kind —
which  have  neither  suffered  from  unkindly
soil  nor  inclement  weather ;  which  have  not
been  robbed  of  their  nourishment  by  other
plants,  nor  hurt  by  any  accident.  When  he
examines  the  internal  structure  of  those
productions  of  Nature,  and  traces  them
from  their  embryo  state  in  the  seed  to  their
maturity,  he  sees  a  thousand  beautiful  con-
trivances of  Nature,  which  feast  his  under-
standing more  thau  their  external  form
delighted  his  eye.

Thus,  every  beauty  in  the  vegetable
creation,  of  which  he  has  formed  any  ra-
tional judgment,  expresses  some  perfection
in  the  object,  or  some  wise  contrivance  in
its  Author. [758]

In  the  animal  kingdom,  we  perceive  still
greater  beauties  than  in  the  vegetable-  Here
we  observe  life,  and  sense,  and  activity,
various  instincts  and  affections,  and,  in
many  cases,  great  sagacity.  These  are
attributes  of  mind,  and  have  an  original
beauty.

As  we  allow  to  brute  animals  a  thinking
principle  or  mind,  though  far  inferior  to
that  which  is  in  man  ;  and  as,  in  many  of
their  intellectual  and  active  powers,  they
very  much  resemble  the  human  species,
their  actions,  their  motions,  and  even  their
looks,  derive  a  beauty  from  the  powers  of
thought  which  they  express.

There  is  a  wonderful  variety  in  their
manner  of  life  ;  and  we  find  the  powers  they
possess,  their  outward  form,  and  their  in-
ward structure,  exactly  adapted  to  it.  In
every  species,  the  more  perfectly  any  indi-
vidual is  fitted  for  its  end  and  manner  of
life,  the  greater  is  its  beauty.

In  a  race-horse,  everything  that  expresses
agility,  ardour,  and  emulation,  gives  beauty
to  the  animal.  In  a  pointer,  acuteness  of
scent,  eagerness  on  the  game,  and  tractable-
ness,  are  the  beauties  of  the  species.  A
sheep  derives  its  beauty  from  the  fineness
and  quantity  of  its  fleece  ;  and  in  the  wild
animals,  every  beauty  is  a  sign  of  their
perfection  in  their  kind.

It  is  an  observation  of  the  celebrated
Linnaeus,  that,  in  the  vegetable  kingdom,
the  poisonous  plants  have  commonly  a  lurid
and  disagreeable  appearance  to  the  eye,  of
which  he  gives  many  instances.  I  appre-
hend the  observation  may  be  extended  to
the  animal  kingdom,  in  which  we  commonly
see  something  shocking  to  the  eye  in  the
noxious  and  poisonous  animals.

The  beauties  which  anatomists  and  phy-
siologists describe  in  the  internal  structure
of  the  various tribes  of  animals ;  in  th«


506


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay


organs  of  sense,  of  nutrition,  and  of  motion,
are  expressive  of  wise  design  and  contriv-
ance, in  fitting  them  for  the  various  kinds
of  life  for  which  they  are  intended. [759]

Thus,  I  think,  it  appears  that  the  beauty
which  we  perceive  in  the  inferior  animals,
is  expressive,  either  of  such  perfections  as
their  several  natures  may  receive,  or  ex-
pressive of  wise  design  in  Him  who  made
them,  and  that  their  beauty  is  derived  from
the  perfections  which  it  expresses.

But  of  all  the  objects  of  sense,  the  most
striking  and  attractive  beauty  is  perceived
in  the  human  species,  and  particularly  in
the  fair  sex.

Milton  represents  Satan  himself,  in  sur-
veying the  furniture  of  this  globe,  as  struck
with  the  beauty  of  the  first  happy  pair.

"  Two  of  far  nobler  shape,  erect  and  tall,
Godlike  erect!  with  native  honour  clad
In  naked  majesty,  seem'd  lords  of  all.
And  worthy  seem'd,  for  in  th  ir  looks  divine,
The  image  of  their  glorious  Maker,  shone
Truth,  wisdom,  sanctitude  severe  and  pure;
Severe,  but  in  true  filial  freedom  placM,
Whence  true  authority  in  man  ;  though  both
Not  equal,  as  their  sex  not  equal  seem'd,
For  contemplation  he,  and  valour  form'd,
For  softness  she,  and  sweet  attractive  grace."

In  this  well-known  passage  of  Milton,
we  see  that  this  great  poet  derives  the
beauty  of  the  first  pair  in  Paradise  from
those  expressions  of  moral  and  intellectual
qualities  which  appeared  in  their  outward
form  and  demeanour.

The  most  minute  and  systematical  ac-
count of  beauty  in  the  human  species,  and
particularly  in  the  fair  sex,  I  have  met
with,  is  in  "  Crito ;  or,  a  Dialogue  on
Beauty,"  said  to  be  written  by  the  author
of  "  Polymetis,"*  and  republished  by  Dods-
ley  in  his  collection  of  fugitive  pieces.
[760]

I  shall  borrow  from  that  author  some
observations,  which,  I  think,  tend  to  shew
that  the  beauty  of  the  human  body  is
derived  from  the  sigus  it  exhibits  of  some
perfection  of  the  mind  or  person.

All  that  can  be  called  beauty  in  the
human  species  may  be  reduced  to  these
four  heads :  colour,  form,  expression,  and
grace.  The  two  former  may  be  called  the
body,  the  two  latter  the  soul  of  beauty.

The  beauty  of  colour  is  not  owing  solely
to  the  natural  liveliness  of  flesh-colour  and
red,  nor  to  the  much  greater  charms  they
receive  from  being  properly  blended  toge-
ther ;  but  is  also  owing,  in  some  degree,  to
the  idea  they  carry  with  them  of  good
health,  without  which  all  beauty  grows
languid  and  less  engaging,  and  with  which
it  always  recovers  an  additional  strength
and  lustre.  This  is  supported  by  the  autho-
rity of  Cicero-  Venustas  .et  pulchritudo
corporis  secerni  non  potest  a  valetudine.

*  Spence,  under  the  name  of  Sir  Harry  leau-
mont  — H.


Here  I  observe,  that,  as  the  colour  of  the
body  is  very  different  in  different  climates,
every  nation  preferring  the  colour  of  its
climate,  and  as,  among  us,  one  man  prefers
a  fair  beauty,  another  a  brunette,  without
being  able  to  give  any  reason  for  this  pre-
ference ;  this  diversity  of  taste  has  no  stand-
ard in  the  common  principles  of  human
nature,  but  must  arise  from  something  that
is  different  in  different  nations,  and  -  in  dif-
ferent individuals  of  the  same  nation.

I  observed  before,  that  fashion,  habit,
associations,  and  perhaps  some  peculiarity
of  constitution,  may  have  great  influence
upon  this  internal  sense,  as  well  as  upon
the  external.  Setting  aside  the  judgments
arising  from  such  causes,  there  seems  to
remain  nothing  that,  according  to  the  com-
mon judgment  of  mankind,  can  be  called
beauty  in  the  colour  of  the  species,  but
what  expresses  perfect  health  and  liveli-
ness, and  in  the  fair  sex  softness  and  deli-
cacy ;  and  nothing  that  can  be  called  deform-
ity but  what  indicates  disease  and  decline.
And  if  this  be  so,  it  follows,  that  the  beauty
of  colour  is  derived  from  the  perfections
which  it  expresses.  This,  however,  of  all
the  ingredients  of  beauty,  is  the  least.  [761  ]

The  next  in  order  is  form,  or  proportion
of  parts.  The  most  beautiful  form,  as  the
author  thinks,  is  that  which  indicates  deli-
cacy and  softness  in  the  fair  sex,  and  in  the
male  either  strength  or  agility.  The  beau-
ty of  form,  therefore,  lies  all  in  expression.

The  third  ingredient,  which  has  more
power  than  either  colour  or  form,  he  calls
expression,  and  observes,  that  it  is  only  the
expression  of  the  tender  and  kind  passions
that  gives  beauty ;  that  all  the  cruel  and
unkind  ones  add  to  deformity  ;  and  that,  on
this  account,  good  nature  may  very  justly
be  said  to  be  the  best  feature,  even  in  the
finest  face.  Modesty,  sensibility,  and
sweetness,  blended  together,  so  as  either
to  enliven  or  to  correct  each  other,  give  al-
most as  much  attraction  as  the  passions  are
capable  of  adding  to  a  very  pretty  face.

It  is  owing,  says  the  author,  to  the  great
force  of  pleasingness  which  attends  all  the
kinder  passions,  that  lovers  not  only  seem,
but  really  are,  more  beautiful  to  each  other
than  they  are  to  the  rest  of  the  world  ;  be-
cause, when  they  are  together,  the  most  pleas-
ing passions  are  more  frequently  exerted  in
each  of  their  faces  than  they  are  in  either
before  the  rest  of  the  world.  There  is  then,
as  a  French  author  very  well  expresses  it,
a  soul  upon  their  countenances,  which  does
not  appear  when  they  are  absent  from  one
another,  or  even  in  company  that  lays  a  re-
straint upon  their  features.

There  is  a  great  difference  in  the  same

face,  according  as  the  person  is  in  a  better

or  a  worse  humour,  or  more  or  less  lively.

The  best  complexion,  the  finest  features,

[759-761]


IV.]


OF  BEAUTY.


507


and  the  exactest  shape,  without  anything
of  the  mind  expressed  in  the  face,  is  insipid
and  unmoving.  The  finest  eyes  in  the
world,  witli  an  excess  of  malice  or  rage  in
them,  will  grow  shocking.  The  passions
can  give  beauty  without  the  assistance  of
colour  or  form,  and  take  it  away  where
these  have  united  most  strongly  to  give  it ;
and  therefore  this  part  of  beauty  is  greatly
superior  to  the  other  two. [762]

The  last  and  noblest  part  of  beauty  is
grace,  which  the  author  thinks  undefin-
able.

Nothing  causes  love  so  generally  and  ir-
resistibly as  grace.  Therefore,  in  the  my-
thology of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  the
Graces  were  the  constant  attendants  of
Venus  the  goddess  of  love.  Grace  is  like
the  cestus  of  the  same  goddess,  which  was
supposed  to  comprehend  everything  that
was  winning  and  engaging,  and  to  create
love  by  a  secret  and  inexplicable  force,  like
that  of  some  magical  charm.

There  are  two  kinds  of  grace — the  majes-
tic and  the  familiar ;  the  first  more  com-
manding, the  last  more  delightful  and  en-
gaging. The  Grecian  painters  and  sculp-
tors used  to  express  the  former  most  strongly
in  the  looks  and  attitudes  of  their  Miner-
vas,  and  the  latter  in  those  of  Venus.  This
distinction  is  marked  in  the  description  of
the  personages  of  Virtue  and  Pleasure  in
the  ancient  fable  of  the  Choice  of  Hercules.
■•  Graceful,  bin  each  with  different  grace  they  move,
This  striking  sacred  awe,  that  softer  winning  lov:."

In  the  persons  of  Adam  and  Eve  in  Pa-
radise, Milton  has  made  the  same  distinc-
tion—

"  For  contemplation  he,  and  valour  formed,
For  softness  she,  and  sweet  attractive  grace."  [7631
Though  grace  be  so  difficult  to  be  defined,
there  are  two  things  that  hold  universally
with  relation  to  it.  First,  There  is  no
grace  without  motion ;  some  genteel  or
pleasing  motion,  either  of  the  whole  body
or  of  some  limb,  or  at  least  some  feature.
Hence,  in  the  face,  grace  appears  only  on
those  features  that  aremovaMe,  and  change
with  the  various  emotions  and  sentiments
of  the  mind,  such  as  the  eyes  and  eye-
brows, the  mouth  and  parts  adjacent.
When  Venus  appeared  to  her  son  ^Eneas
in  disguise,  and,  after  some  conversation
with  him,  retired,  it  was  by  the  grace  of
her  motion  in  retiring  that  he  discovered
her  be  to  truly  a  goddess.

"  Dixit,  et  avertens  rosea  cervice  refulsit,
Ambrosiasque  comae  divinum  vertice  odorem
Spiravere;  pedes  vestis  defluxit  ad  imos;
Et  vera  incessu  patuit  dea. Ille,  ubi  matrem
Agnovit,"  &c.

A  second  observation  is,  That  there  can
be  no  grace  with  impropriety,  or  that  no-
thing can  be  graceful  that  is  not  adapted  to
the  character  and  situation  of  the  person.

From  these  observations,  which  appear
[726-765.]


to  me  to  be  just,  we  may,  I  think,  conclude,
that  grace,  as  far  as -it  is  visible,  consists  of
those  motions,  either  of  the  whole  body,  or
of  a  part  or  feature,  which  express  the  most
perfect  propriety  of  conduct  and  sentiment
in  an  amiable  character.

Those  motions  must  be  different  in  dif-
ferent characters ;  they  must  vary  with
every  variation  of  emotion  and  sentiment ;
they  may  express  either  dignity  or  respect,
confidence  or  reserve,  love  or  just  resent-
ment, esteem  or  indignation,  zeal  or  indif-
ference. Every  passion,  sentiment,  or  emo-
tion, that  in  its  nature  and  degree  is  just
and  proper,  and  corresponds  perfectly  with
the  character  of  the  person,  and  with  the  oc-
casion, is  what  may  we  call  the  soul  of  grace.
The  body  or  visible  part  consists  of  those
emotions  and  features  which  give  the  true
and  unaffected  expression  of  this  soul.  [764]

Thus,  I  think,  all  the  ingredients  of
human  beauty,  as  they  are  enumerated  and
described  by  this  ingenious  author,  termi-
nate in  expression  :  they  either  express
some  perfection  of  the  body,  as  a  part  of  the
man,  and  an  instrument  of  the  mind,  or
some  amiable  quality  or  attribute  of  the
mind  itself.

It  cannot,  indeed,  be  denied,  that  the
expression  of  a  fine  countenance  may  be
unnaturally  disjoined  from  the  amiable  qua-
lities which  it  naturally  expresses :  but  we
presume  the  contrary  till  we  have  clear  evi-
dence ;  and  even  then  we  pay  homage  to
the  expression,  as  we  do  to  the  throne  when
it  happens  to  be  unworthily  filled.

Whether  what  I  have  offered  to  shew,
that  all  the  beauty  of  the  objects  of  sense
is  borrowed,  and  derived  from  the  beauties
of  mind  which  it  expresses  or  s  ggests  to
the  imagination,  be  well-founded  or  not,  I
hope  this  terrestrial  Venus  will  not  be
deemed  less  worthy  of  the  homage  which
has  always  been  paid  to  her,  by  being  con-
ceived more  nearly  allied  to  the  celestial
than  she  has  commonly  been  represented.

To  make  an  end  of  this  subject,  tas'e
seems  to  be  progressive  as  man  is.  Child-
ren, when  refreshed  by  sleep,  and  at  ease
from  pain  and  hunger,  are  disposed  to  at-
tend to  the  objects  about  them  ;  they  are
pleased  with  brilliant  colours,  gaudy  orna-
ments, regular  forms,  cheerful  counte-
nances, noisy  mirth  and  glee.  Such  is
the  taste  of  childhood,  which  we  must  con-
clude to  be  given  for  wise  purposes.  A
great  part  of  the  happiness  of  that  period
of  life  is  derived  from  it ;  and,  therefore,  it
ought  to  be  indulged.  It  leads  them  to
attend  to  objects  which  they  may  afterwards
find  worthy  of  their  attention.  It  puts  them
upon  exerting  their  infant  faculties  of  body
and  mind,  which,  by  such  exertions,  are
daily  strengthened  and  improved. [765]

As  they  advance  in  years  and  in  under-


508


ON  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.


[essay  viiiv


standing,  other  beauties  attract  their  atten-
tion, which,  by  their  novelty  or  superiority,
throw  a  shade  upon  those  they  formerly  ad-
mired. They  delight  in  feats  of  agility,
strength,  and  art ;  they  love  those  that  ex-
cel in  them,  and  strive  to  equal  them.  In
the  tales  and  fables  they  hear,  they  begin  to
discern  beauties  of  mind.  Some  characters
and  actions  appear  lovely,  others  give  dis-
gust. The  intellectual  and  moral  powers
begin  to  open,  and,  if  cherished  by  favour-
able circumstances,  advance  gradually  in
strength,  till  they  arrive  at  that  degree
of  perfection  to  which  human  nature,  in  its
present  state,  is  limited.

In  our  progress  from  infancy  to  maturity,
our  faculties  open  in  a  regular  order  ap-
pointed by  Nature ;  the  meanest  first,  those
of  more  dignity  in  succession,  unti!  the  mo-
ral and  rational  powers  finish  the  man.
Every  faculty  furnishes  new  notions,  brings
new  beauties  into  view,  and  enlarges  the
province  of  taste;  so  that  we  may  say,
there  is  a  taste  of  childhood,  a  taste  of
youth,  and  a  manly  taste.  Each  is  beau-
tiful in  its  season ;  but  not  so  much  so,
when  carried  beyond  its  season.  Not  that
the  man  ought  to  dislike  the  things  that
please  the  child  or  the  youth,  but  to  put
less  value  upon  them,  compared  with  other
beauties,  with  which  he  ought  to  be  ac-
quainted.

Our  moral  and  rational  powers  justly
claim  dominion  over  the  whole  man.  Even
taste  is  not  exempted  from  their  authority ;
it  must  be  subject  to  that  authority  in
every  case  wherein  we  pretend  to  reason  or
dispute  about  matters  of  taste ;  it  is  the  voice
of  reason  that  our  love  or  our  admiration


ought  to  be  proportioned  to  the  merit  of  the
object.  When  it  is  not  grounded  on  real
worth,  it  must  be  the  effect  of  constitution,
or  of  some  habit,  or  casual  association.  A
fond  mother  may  see  a  beauty  in  her  dar-
ling child,  or  a  fond  author  in  his  work,  to
which  the  rest  of  the  world  are  blind.  In
such  cases,  the  "affection  is  pre-engaged,
and,  as  it  were,  bribes  the  judgment,  to
make  the  object  worthy  of  that  affection.
For  the  mind  cannot  be  easy  in  putting  a
value  upon  an  object  beyond  what  it  con-
ceives to  be  due.  When  affection  is  not
carried  away  by  some  natural  or  acquired
bias,  it  naturally  is  and  ought  to  be  led  by
the  judgment. [766]


As,  in  the  division  which  I  have  followed
of  our  intellectual  powers,  I  mentioned
Moral  Perception  and  Consciousness,  the
reader  -may  expect  that  some  reason  should
be  given,  why  they  are  not  treated  of  in
this  place.

As  to  Consciousness,  what  I  think  neces-
sary to  be  said  upon  it  has  been  already
said,  Essay  vi.,  chap.  5.  As  to  the  faculty
of  moral  perception,  it  is  indeed  a  most  im-
portant part  of  human  understanding,  and
well  worthy  of  the  most  attentive  considera-
tion, since  without  it  we  could  have  no  con-
ception of  right  and  wrong,  of  duty  and
moral  obligation,  and  since  the  first  princi-
ples of  morals,  upon  which  all  moral  rea-
soning must  be  grounded,  are  its  immediate
dictates  ;  but,  as  it  is  an  active  as  well  as
an  intellectual  power,  and  has  an  immediate
relation  to  the  other  active  powers  of  the
mind,  I  apprehend  that  it  is  proper  to  defer
the  consideration  of  it  till  these  be  explained.

[766]
