ESSAYS ON THE ACTIVE POWERS OF THE HUMAN MIND
Public domain. Extracted from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/essaysonactivep00stewgoog): Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind; An Inquiry into the Human Mind; and An Essay on Quantity, with a memoir by Dugald Stewart, ed. Rev. G. N. Wright (London: Thomas Tegg, 1843). This file contains the Active Powers essays only (Essays I–V complete).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ESSAYS


OM


THE  ACTIVE  POWERS  OF  THE

HUMAN  MIND;

AN  INQUIRY  INTO  THE  HUMAN  MIND  ON  THE  t^RINCIPLES

OF  COMMON  SENSE;


AKD  AK


ESSAY  ON  QUANTITY.


BY


THOMAS  REID,  D.D. r.R.8.E.

PaOFSSSOa of moral philosophy in the TTKITERSITT op GLASGOW.

AKD

A  MEMOIR  OF  THE  AUTHOR,

BY  DUGALD  STEWART.


WITH  NOTES,  SECTIONAL  HEADS,  AND  A  SYNOPTICAL  TABLE

0¥  CONTENTS,

BT THE

REV.  G. N.  WRIGHT,  M.A.  &c.


LONDON;:
PRINTED FOR THOM^AS tEGG, '  CHEAPSIDE  ;

R.  GRIFFIN  AND  CO.,  GLASGOW; T.  MESSURIER,  DUBLIN;
J.  AND  S.  A.  TEOG,  SYDNEY  AND  HOBART  TOWN.

MDCCCXLIII.


THE  NEW  TORK ;

PUBLIC  LIBRARY


I


LLDBW ^QUNDATIONSj

—  'II  I I J


• k


<■  •  * .


• r


•  • » .

» • <  •  •• ,


EDITOR'S PREFACE.


Greater  typographical  accuracy  is  not  the  only  advantage  to
which  this  edition  of  the  author's  works  is  entitled;  it  possesses
the  still  further  recommendation  of  being  the  only  complete  and
perfect  collection  of  his  writings  yet  published.  In  the  first
volume  are  included,  "An  Account  of  Dr.  Reid's  Life  and
Writings,"  from  the  classic  pen  of  Dugald  Stewart;  "Essays
on  the  Active  Powers  of  the  Human  Mind ;"  "  An  Inquiry  into
the  Human  Mind,  on  the  Principles  of  Common  Sense ;"  and
"  An  Essay  on  Quantity :"  the  last  has  hitherto  only  appeared  in
the  "  Philosophical  Transactions."  The  second  volume  contains
the  author's  prceclarum  opus,  **  Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers
of  Man,"  together  with  his  "  View  "  or  «  Analysis  of  Aristotle's
Logic,"  first  published  in  the  works  of  Lord  Kames,  and  subse-
quently in  a  separate  volume.

In  the  preparation  of  these  Essays  for  the  press  and  the  pub-
lic, one  uniform  method  has  been  observed.  Where  it  had  not
been  previously  done  by  the  author,  the  chapters  are  divided,
with  scrupulous  attention  to  each  pause,  or  interruption  in  the
chain  of  reasoning,  into  sections ;  and  to  every  section,  whether
original  or  newly  separated,  headings  are  prefixed.  These
headings  present  a  condensed  view  of  the  contents,  argument,
or  arguments,  in  each  section ;  and,  as  far  as  it  could  be  done,
they  are  so  linked  together  in  meaning  as  to  afford  a  tolerably
full,  correct,  and  continuous  synopsis  of  the  author's  theory.
In  these  introductions,  perhaps,  consist  the  chief  merit  which  this


iv  editor's  preface.

edition  can  claim.  To  facilitate,  however,  the  interpretation  of
abstruse  passages,  brackets  are  employed,  italic  letters  frequently
used,  and  forcible  examples  marked  by  indices ;  besides  which
those  arguments  that  support  any  theory  or  fact,  and  which  are
scattered  over  many  pages  or  chapters,  or  even  Essays,  are
indicated  and  connected  by  the  numerals  of  some  one  particular
fount ;  and  attention  called  to  this  connexion  by  notes,  sometimes
containing  a  complete  recapitulation.

In  those  parts  of  the  author's  writings  that  are  of  a  mixed
character — moral  and  metaphysical — numerous  quotations  from
the  works  of  ancient  philosophers  occur  in  the  original  lan-
guages. All  such  extracts  have  been  translated,  not  literally,
but  appropriately ;  and  given,  not  in  substitution,  but  in  addi-
tion to  the  originals.

Hitherto  the  philosophical  labours  of  this  able  and  excellent
man,  the  bold  assailant  of  Locke,  lay,  like  the  Sibyl's  leaves,
where  the  vnnds  had  carried  them.  Henceforth,  it  is  hoped,
their  connexion,  an  end  so  valuable  in  such  serious  investiga-
tions, will  be  unequivocally  perceived;  and  some  of  the  diflScul-
ties  that  have  obstructed  the  study  of  pneumatology  thereby
alleviated,  if  not  entirely  removed.


G.  N.  W.


Coed  Celyn,  Llanrwst,  Denbighshire.
1843.


31
V

t

1


SYNOPTICAL  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


ESSAYS  ON  THE  ACTIVE  POWERS  OF  THE  MIND.


Life  of  Dr.  Reid


Introdaction


Page
1


. 77


ESSAY  I.


OF ACTIVE  POWER  IN  GENERAL,

CHAPTER  I.

OF  THE  NOTION  OF  ACTIVE  POWER 79

Sec  1.  An  explanation  of  the  mean-
ing of  **  active  power"  ne-
cessary .  .  . ib.

2.  The  Aristotelian  definition

of  motion  .  .  . ib.

3.  Of  our  conception  of  active

power .  .  .80

4.  Power  not  an  object  of  con-

sciousness .  .  . ib.

But  a  relative  conception . 81

6.  There are  some  things  of

which  we  can  have  both  a
direct  and  a  relative  con-
ception .  .  .82

7.  Our  conception  of  power  is

relative  to  its  exertions  or
effects .  .  .83

8.  Our  idea  of  power  .  . ib.


CHAPTER  II.

THE  SAME  SUBJECT

Sec.  1.  Distinction  of  "  action  and
passion "  coeval  with  the
origin  of  languages

2.  Objection .

6.  Active  verbs  appear  plainly
to  have  been  first  contrived
to  express  action .


85


ib.
ib.


88


CHAPTER  III.
OF  MB.  Locke's  account  of  our

IDEA  OF  POWER  .  . 91

2.  Objections  to  Mr.  Locke's
origin  of  our  idea  of  power ib.


CHAPTER  IV.
OF  MR.  Hume's  opinion  of  the

IDEA  OF  power

Sec  1.  Induction,  by  which  Mr.
Hume  attempts  to  explain
the  origin  of  our  simple
ideas,  imperfect
4.  Of  the  two  principles  which
Hume  opposes  to  Locke .

CHAPTER  V.
whether  beings  that  have  no

WILL nor understanding
MAY  HAVE  ACTIVE  POWER? .

Sec.  1.  The  question  perplexed  by
the ambiguity  of  certain
terms
4.  Volition necessary  to  the

operation  of  power
6.  Our conception of  active
power  relative


Page


93


ib.


96


97


ib.


99


101


CHAPTER  VL

OF  THE  EFFICIENT  CAUSES  OF  THE

PHENOMENA  OF  NATURE  . 103

Sec  1.  Of  powers  ascribed  to  matter ib.
CHAPTER  VIL

OF  THE  EXTENT  OF  HUMAN  POWER. 107

Sec.  I.  Power  an  attribute  of  ac-
countable beings .
8.  Human  power  entirely  de-
pendent upon  God  and  the
laws  of  nature .  .


ib.


113


ESSAY  II.

OF THE WILL.

CHAPTER  L

OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE

WILL .  .  .  , 114


VI


SYNOPTICAL TABLE


Page
Sec.  1.  Volition  and  will  different  .  114

2.  The  term  will,  how  used . ib.

3.  Its  definition  .  .  1 15
5.  Of  command,  will,  and  de-
sire . . .  117

CHAPTER  II.

OF  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  INCITE-
MENTS AND  MOTIVES  UPON  THE
WILL .  .  .  .119

Sec.  1.  Instinct .  .  . ib.

2.  Judgment  not  necessary  to

instinct .  .  . ib.

3.  The  exercise  of  judgment

distinct  from  the  impulse
of  appetite.  .  .121

4.  Taste  and  judgment  differ  .  122

5.  Of  passion  and  reason . ib.

CHAPTER  III.

OF OPERATIONS OF MIND WHICH

MAY  BE  CALLED  VOLUNTARY . 126

Sec.  1.  Of  attention, deliberation,

and  resolution .  . ib.

2.  Of  jgenius .  .  .127

3.  Deliberation  .  .129

6.  Resolution  .  .  .131

7.  The  virtue  and  affection  of

benevolence  different .  132


CHAPTER  IV.

COROLLARIES


135


Sec.  1.  Oftransient  and  momentary

acts  of  the  will .  . ib.


ESSAY  III.

OF  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  ACTION.

FART  I.

OF  THE  MECHANICAL  PRINCIPLES  OF
ACTION.

CHAPTER  I.

OF  THE PRINCIPLES OF  ACTION  IN

GENERAL  .  .  .138

Sec.  I.  Actions  of  men  classified . ib.

2.  Knowledge  of  the  principles

of  action  important  . ib.

3.  Difficulties  attending  an  in-

vestigation of  the  principles
of  human  actions  .  .139

4.  Third  cause  of  the  difficulty
of  tracing  the  principles  of


action  in  man

CHAPTER  II.

OF  INSTINCT

Sec.  1.  Of  instinct  in  man  .


140


142
ib.


Page
Sec.  2 .  Of  instinct  in  inferior  ani-
mals .  .  .  143
3.  Some  human  instincts  tran-
sitory, others  permanent  .  145

6.  Fourth  case in  which  in-

stinct, probably,  is  requisite  147

7.  Judgment  and  belief  influ-

enced, to  a  certain  extent,
by  instinct.  .  .148

CHAPTER  III.

OF  HABIT .... 151

Sec.  1.  Vulgar  definition  of  habit  . ib.
2.  The art  of  speaking,  the
strongest  illustration  of  the
force  of  habit .  .152

FART  II.

OF  ANIMAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  ACTION.

CHAPTER  I.

OF  APPETITES  .  .  .154

Sec.  1.  Definition  of  animal  princi-
ples of  action .  . ib.

6.  The  principle  of activity

belongs  to  every  period  of
life  ...  157

7.  The  government  of  appe-

tites gives  a  superiority  to
man  over  brute  animals .  159

CHAPTER  II.

OF  DESIRES .... 160

Sec.  1.  Distinction  between appe-
tites and  desires  twofold . ib.
2.  Of  esteem  and  contempt . ib.

5.  Such  natural  desires  not  sel-

fish principles .  .162'

6.  Our  desires  auxiliary  to  the

maintenance  of  morals . ib.
9.  Of  acquired  desires  .  165

CHAPTER  III.

OF  BENEVOLENT  AFFECTION  IN  GE-
NERAL '  .  .  . 166

Sec.  2.  Objects  of  our  desires  and

our  affections  different .  167

CHAPTER  IV.

OF  THE  PARTICULAR BENEVOLENT

AFFECTIONS .  .  .171

Sec.  1.  Of  natural  affection.  . ib.

2.  Duration  of  parental  affec-

tion limited  m  inferior  ani-
mals ;  not  so  in  the  human
species .  .  .172

3.  Parental  affection  the  effect

of  our  natural  constitution.  173

4.  Further uses of  parental

affection .  .  . ib.


OF CONTENTS.


Vll


Page
Sec  11.  Necessitjr  for submitting
public  spirit  to  the  control
of  reason  and  yirtue,  evi-
dent  .  .  .179

CHAPTER  V.

OF  MALEVOLENT  AFFECTION  . 182

Sec.  1.  Of  emulation  and resent-
ment .  .  . ib.

4.  Effects of emulation in

brute-animals .  .185

5.  Definition  of  resentment . ib.
7.  Children  and  rude  nations

generally  ascribe  life  and
mtelligence  to  inanimate
things .  .  .188

9.  Agreements  and  disagree-
ments between  deliberate
and  mere  animal  resent-
ment •  .  .  189

CHAPTER  VI.

OF  PASSION .  .  .  .190

Sec  1.  Passion,  Disposition,  Opin-
ion .  .  • ib.
2.  Definition  of  passion .  191

5.  Hume's  paradoxes  generally

reducible  to  abuses  of  words  193

6.  Common division of  the

passions .  .  . ib.

7.  Influence  of  passion  .  194

CHAPTER  VII.

OF  DISPOSITION .  .  . 198

Sec  3.  The  excellent  consequences

of  ^ood  humour .  .199

5.  Elation, magnanimity, a

sense  of  honour  and  pride 200

6.  Depression,  humility,  mean-
ness .  .  . ib.

CHAPTER  VIIL

OF  OPINION  .  .  . 202

Sec  1.  Influence  of  opinion  upon

our  animal  principles . ib.

4.  Analogy  between  the  disci-

pline of  body  and  mind .  203

5.  Man  actuated  by  no  sense

of  duty,  considered  .  204

FART III.

OF  THE  RATIONAL  PRINCIPLES OF
ACTION.

CHAPTER  I.

THERE  ARE  RATIONAL  PRINCIPLES

OF  ACTION  IN  MAN .  . 206

Sec.  2.  Hume's  error  as  to  one  of

the  chief  offices  of  reason  .  207


CHAPTER  IL

Page

OF  REGARD  TO  OUR  GOOD  ON  THE

WHOLE  .  .  .  208

Sec  1.  Chief  spring  of  our  early

actions .  .  ib.

2.  The  conception  of  what  is
good  or  iU  for  us  upon  the
whole,  the  offspring  of
reason .  .  .  209

4.  Office  of  practical  reason .211

CHAPTER  IIL

THE  TENDENCY  OF  THIS  PRINCIPLE 213

Sec  1.  Question  of  the  ancient  mo-
ralists, "  What  is  the  great-
est good  ?"  .  . ib.

2.  Fallacy  of  the Epicurean

doctrine .  .  . ib.

3.  Doctrine  of  the  Stoics  not

original .  .  .214

4.  Recapitulation  of  what  has

been  advanced  relative  to
the  rational  principles  of
action .  .  .  216

CHAPTER  IV.

DEFECTS  OF  THIS  PRINCIPLE  .217

Sec.  1.  The  rational  principle  of
action  not  the  only  regu-
lator of  human  conduct . ib.

CHAPTER  V.

OF  THE NOTION OF DUTY, RECTI-
TUDE, MORAL  OBLIGATION . 221

Sec  1.  A  sense  of  interest,  or  a
sense  of  duty,  or  both,  ne-
cessary to  the  social  state  . ib.

2.  Of  a  sense  of  duty  only . ib.

3.  The  notion  of  this  principle

invariable,  its  extent  not  so  223

4.  Reality  of  moral distinc-

tions .  .  . ib.

6.  Moral  obligation  a  relation 225

CHAPTER  VI.

OF  THE  SENSE  OF  DUTY .  .227

Sec  1.  The  moral  sense, — ^the  moral

faculty, — conscience  . ib.

2.  This  analogy  excusable . ib.

3.  Further  shown .  .  228

5.  Universality  of  first  princi-

ples .  .  .  230

6.  The  first  principles  of  morals

are  the  immediate  dictates
of  the  moral  faculty  .  230

7.  Recapitulation .  .231

CHAPTER  VII.

OF  MORAL  APPROBATION  AND  DIS-
APPROBATION .  .  .231


Vlll


SYNOPTICAL TABLE


Page

Sec.  1.  Of  affections  and  feelings
incladed  in  our  moral  judg-
ments .  .  .  231
• 3.  Moral  disapprobation  .  233

6.  Social  ties  auxiliary  to  vir-

tue, unfavourable  to  vice  .  235

7.  Consequences  of  remorse . ib.

8.  Operations of  the faculty

called  moral  sense .  .  236

CHAPTER  VIII.

OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING CON-
SCIENCE .  .  . 237

Sec.  1.  Our  judgment  of  moral  con-
duct advances  from  infancy
by  insensible  degrees . ib.
3.  Scepticism  twofold  .  .  238

8.  The  intention  or  end  of  our

active  powers  obvious .  241

9.  Office  of  conscience  .  242
10.  Stoical  perfection  ideal  .  243
12.  Extravagance  of  Mysticism ib.


ESSAY  IV.

■ ON THE LIBERTY OF MORAL
AGENTS.

CHAPTER  I.

THE NOTIONS  OF MORAL  LIBERTY

AND  NECESSITY  STATED  . 246

Sec.  1.  Moral  liberty  .  . ib.

2.  The  voluntary  actions  of
brutes,  determined  by  the
present  predominant  pas-
sion .  .  .  247

7.  Three  additional  meanings

of  the  word  liberty  .  249

CHAPTER  II.

OF  THE  WORDS  CAUSE  AND  EFFECT,

ACTION,  AND  ACTIVE  POWER  . 251

Sec.  1.  The  use  of  ambiguous  terms
has  impeded  our  reason-
ings about  moral  liberty . ib.
2.  Active  power  .  .  262

5.  Recapitulation .  .  254

CHAPTER  III.

CAUSES OF THE AMBIGUITY OP

THOSE  WORDS  .  .  . 255

Sec.  1.  Premature  conclusion  as  to

objects  indued  with  motion ib.

6.  A  chief  cause  of  the  imper-

fection of  language  .  257

8.  Absurd  theories  of  philoso-

phers to  explain  causation  259

9.  Not  mischievous .  . ib.


Page
Sec.  10.  Proof  of  a  Deity  on  these
. principles  presents  no  diffi-
culty .  . '.  260

CHAPTER  IV.

OF  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  MOTIVES . 261

Sec.  6.  Motives  of  the  same  kind

may  be  compared  .  .  264

8.  Animal  test  of  the  strength

of  motives.  .  .  265

9.  Rational  motives  defined .  266
10.  Rational  test  of  the  strength

of  motives  .  .  . ib.

14.  The  supposition  of  necessity
precludes  rewards  and  pun-
ishments —  liberty  gives
efficacy  to  both .  .  268

CHAPTER  V.

LIBERTY CONSISTENT WITH GO-
VERNMENT .  .  . 269

Sec.  1.  Mechanical  and  moral  go>

vemment  .  .  . ib.

7.  The  moral  government  of
God  consistent  with  liberty  273

CHAPTER  VI.

FIRST  ARGUMENT .  .  . 275

Sec.  3.  The  belief  of  acting  freely
is  coeval  with  our  reason,
universal,  and  necessary .  278
5.  Exceptions  .  .  .279

CHAPTER  VII.

SECOND  ARGUMENT  .  . 282

Sec.  1.  Certain  first  principles  uni-
versally conceded .  . ib.


CHAPTER  VIIL


THIRD  ARGUMENT


286

286

287

ib.


Sec.  2.  Argument  from  analogy

3.  Its  application

4.  Objection  and  answer

CHAPTER  IX.

OF  ARGUMENTS  FOR  NECESSITY . 289

Sec.  1.  Three  classes  of  arguments

against  human  liberty . ib.

2.  Boast  of  Leibnitz .  . ib.

3.  Identity  of  indiscemibles .  290

4.  Leibnitz*  proof  of  the  truth

of  his  principle  only  a  pe-
titio  principii .  . ib.

5.  Three  meanings  of  the  prin-

ciple of  "  a  sufficient  reason"
applied  to  the  determina-
tions of  the  will .  .291

6.  The  principle  further  ex-

amined .  .  . ib.


OF CONTENTS.


IX


Page
Sec.  9.  Four  consequences  of  this

definition  of  a  cause  .  294

CHAPTER  X.

THE  SAME  SUBJECT  .  .297

Sec.  2.  Third  class  of  arguments

against  human  liberty .  298

CHAPTER  XL

OP  THE  PERMISSION  OF  EVIL  . 303

Sec.  2.  Scientia  media .  . ib.

3.  Prescience  of  the  Deity  in-
disputable. .  .  304


ESSAY V.

OF  MORALS.

CHAPTER  I.

OF  THE  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  MO-
RALS .  .  .  ..312

Sec.  1.  First  principles .  . ib.

4.  Another  class  of  axioms  in

morals .  .  .  317

5.  Conclusion  .  .319

CHAPTER  II.

OF  SYSTEMS  OF  MORALS .  . 319

Sec.  1.  Instruction in  morals  ne-
cessary .  .  . ib
3.  Necessity  of  instruction  in
morals  shown  from  the  evi-
dence of  history . .321

6.  Morals  have  been  method-

ized in  different  ways .  322

CHAPTER  III.

OF  SYSTEMS  OF  NATURAL  JURIS-
PRUDENCE .  .  . 323

Sec.  1.  Jurisprudence and morals

closely  related .  . ib.

5.  True  origin  of  systems  of
natural  jurisprudence .  326

CHAPTER  IV.

WHETHER  AN  ACTION  DESERVING
MORAL  APPROBATION,  MUST  BE
DONE  WITH  THE  BELIEF  OF
ITS  BEING  MORALLY  GOOD . 329

Sec  9.  Conscience,  or  moral  sense 337


CHAPTER  V.

Page
WHETHER  JUSTICE  BE  A  NATURAL

OR  AN  ARTIFICIAL  VIRTUE . 338

Sec.  l.'Hume  consistent  as  a  writer

on  morals  .  .  . ib.

3.  Hume  agrees  with  the  Epi-

cureans in  one  respect .  339

4.  Disagrees  in  another  .  340

5.  Effect  of  this  doctrine  . ib.

6.  Natural  and  artificial  vir-

tues .  .  . ib.

8.  Esteem .  .  .341

9.  The  merit  of  justice,  accord-

ing to  Hume  .  .  342

17.  Six  branches  of  justice .  349
20.  Mr.  Hobbes'  system  .  350

26.  This  argument  would  prove
all  social  virtues  to  be  arti-
ficial, as  well  as  justice .  357

28.  Obvious defect in Mr.

Hume's  reasoning  as  to  the
standard  of  justice  gene-
rally .  .  .358

29.  Standard  of  justice  among

the  ancients  .  .  359

CHAPTER  VI.

OF  THE  NATURE  AND  OBLIGATION
OF  A  CONTRACT

Sec.  I.  Promise  and  contract  differ-
ent
2.  Definition  of  a  contract
5.  Contracts  and  promises  have
a  foundation  m  nature

7.  Natural tendency  of Mr.

Hume's  principles

8.  Mr.  Hume's  practice  proba-

bly contradicted  his  princi-
ples
10.  Origin  of  the  contradictions
in  Mr.  Hume's  arguments

CHAPTER  VII.

THAT MORAL APPROBATION IM-
PLIES  A REAL  JUDGMENT . 376

Sec.  4.  Of  feeling  and  judgment .  377
8.  Improper  use  of  words  has
impeded  the  study  of  moral
philosophy  .  .  384

10.  Impiety  of  the  assertion,  that
moral  judgment  is  merely
a  feeling .  .  .  392


361

ib.
362

367

370


371


374


SVNOPTICAL TABLE


AN  INQUIRY  INTO  THE  HUMAN  MIND  ON  THE
PRINCIPLES  OF  COMMON  SENSE.


Page
DEDICATION  TO  LORD  DE8KFOORD 395


CHAPTER  I.

INTBODUCTION  .  .  . 399

Sec.  1.  The  importance  of  the  sub-
ject, and  the  means  of  pro-
secuting it  .  . ib.

2.  The impediments to our

knowledge  of  the  mind .  400

3.  The  present  state  of  this

part  of  philosophy.  Of
£>es  Cartes,  Maiebranche,
and  Locke  .  .  403

4.  Apology  for  these  philoso-

phers .  .  .  405

5.  Of Bishop  Berkeley; the

"Treatise  of  Human  Na-
ture ;"  and  of  scepticism .  406

6.  Of  the  "  Treatise  of  Human

Nature" .  .  .408

7.  The  system  of  all  these  au-

thors is  the  same,  and  leads
to  scepticism  .  .  409

8.  We  ought  not  to  despair  of

a  better .  .  .  410


CHAPTER  IL


OF 8HELLINO


411


Sec  1.  The  order  of  proceeding.
Of  the  medium  and  organ
of  smell .  . , . ib.

2.  The sensation conddered

abstractly .  .  .  412

3.  Sensation and  its  remem-

brance natural  principles
of  belief .  .  .413

4.  Judgment  and  belief  in  some

cases  precede  simple  appre-
hension .  .  .415

5.  Two  theories  of  the  nature

of  belief  refuted.  Conclu-
sions from  what  hath  been
said  .  .  .  415

6.  Apolog^ormetaphjjTsical  ab-

surdities. Sensation  with-
out a  sentient,  a  conse-
quence of  the  theory  of
ideas.  Consequences  of
this  strange  opinion  .418

7.  The  conception  and  belief

of  a  sentient  being  or  mind,
is  saggested  by  our  consti-


Page
tution. The  notion  of  re-
lations not  always  got  by
comparing  the  related  ideas  422

8.  There  is  a  quality  or  virtue

in  bodies,  wJiich  we  call
their  smell.  How  this  is
connected  in  the  imagina-
tion with  the  sensation .  424

9.  That  there  is  a  principle  in

human  nature,  from  which
the  notion  of  this,  as  well
as  all  other  natural  virtues
or  causes,  is  derived  .  425

10.  Whether  in  sensations  the
mind  is  active  or  passive  .  428


CHAPTER  III.

OP TASTING


. 430


CHAPTER  IV.

OF HEARING  .  .  .  433

Sec.  1.  Variety  of  sounds. Their
place  and  distance  learned
by  custom,  without  reason-
ing .  .  . ib.
2.  Of  natural  language  .  434


CHAPTER  V.


OF  TOUCH


.  437


Sec.  I.  Of  heat  and  cold .  . ib.

2.  Of  hardness  and  softness .  438

3.  Of  natural  signs .  .441

4.  Of  hardness,  and  other  pri-

mary qualities .  .  444

5.  The  distinction  betwixt  pri-

mary and  secondary  quali-
ties hath  had  several  revo-
lutions .  .  . ib.

6.  Of  extension  .  .  445

7.  Of  extension  .  447

8.  Of  the  existence  of  a  mate-

rial world  .  .  .  449

9.  Of  the  systems  of  philoso-

phers concerning  the  senses  454

CHAPTER  VI.

OF SEEING .... 457

Sec.  1.  The  excellence  and  dignity

of  this  faculty .  . ib.

2.  Sight  discovers  almost  no-
thing which  the  blind  may
not  comprehend.  The  rea-
son of  this  .  .  459


OF CONTENTS.


XI


Page

Sec  3.  Of  the  visible  appearances

of  otjects .  .  .  462

,4.  That  colour  is  a  quality  of
bodies,  not  a  sensation  of
the  mind .  .  .  465

5.  First  inference  fh>m  the  pre-

ceding .  .  .  467

6.  Second. — That  none  of  our

sensations  are  resemblances
of  any  of  the  qualities  of
bodies .  .  .  470

7.  Of  visible  fig^ure  and  exten-

sion .  .  .  474

8.  Some  queries  concerning  vi-

sible figure  answered .  477

9.  Of  the  geometry  of  visibles 482

10.  Of  the  parallel  motion  of  the

eyes .  .  . .  490

11.  Of  our  seeing  objects  erect

by  inverted  images  .  492

12.  The  same  subject  continued  497

13.  Of  seeing  objects  single  with

two  eyes .  .  .  509

14.  Of  the  laws  of  vision  in

brute  animals .  .  514

1 5.  The  phenomena  of  squinting

considered  hypothetically 516


Page
Sec.  16.  Facts  relating  to  squinting  524

17.  Of  the  effect  of  custom  in

seeing  objects  single  .  526

18.  Of  Dr.  Porterfield's  account

of  single  and  double  vision  532

19.  Of  Dr.  Briggs's  theory,  and

Sir  Isaac  Newton's  conjec-
ture on  this  subject

20.  Of  perception  in  general .

21.  Of  the  process  of  nature  in

perception

22.  Of  the  signs  by  which  we

learn  to  perceive  distance
from  the  eye

23.  Of  the  signs  used  in  these

acquired  perceptions

24.  Of  the  analogy  between  per-

ception and  the  credit  we
give  to  human  testimony


534
542

548


552


561


563


CHAPTER  VII.


CONCLUSION


575


Sec.  1.  Containing  reflections  upon
the  opinions  of  philoso-
phers on  this  subject .  575


AN  ESSAY  ON  QUANTITY.


Page

Sec.  1.  What  quantity  is  . .591

2.  Of proper and  improper

quantity  . .  592

3.  CoroUaiy  1  . .  594

4.  Corollary  2  . ib.

5.  Corollary  3  .  595


Page
Sec.  6.  Of  the  Newtonian  measure

offeree .  .  .  596

7.  Of  the  Leibnitzian  measure

offeree .  .  .  597

8.  Reflections  on  this  contro-

versy .  .  .  598


ACCOUNT


OP


THE LIFE AND WRITINGS


OF


THOMAS  REID,  D.D.


SECTION  I.

FROM  DR.  REID'S  BIRTH  TILL  THE  DATE  OF  HIS  LATEST  PUBLICATION.

The  life  of  which  I  am  now  to  present  to  the  Royal  Society
a  short  account,  although  it  fixes  an  era  in  the  history  of  modem
philosophy,  was  uncommonly  barren  of  those  incidents  which
furnish  materials  for  biography ;  strenuously  devoted  to  truth,
to  virtue,  and  to  the  best  interests  of  mankind ;  but  spent  in  the
obscurity  of  a  learned  retirement,  remote  from  the  pursuits  of
ambition,  and  with  little  solicitude  about  literary  fame.  After
the  agitation,  however,  of  the  political  convulsions  which  Europe
has  witnessed  for  a  course  of  years,  the  simple  record  of  such  a
life  may  derive  an  interest  even  from  its  uniformity ;  and  when
contrasted  with  the  events  of  the  passing  scene,  may  lead  the
thoughts  to  some  views  of  human  nature,  on  which  it  is  not
imgratefiil  to  repose,

Thomas  Reid,  D.D,,  late  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in
the  University  of  Glasgow,  was  bom  on  the  26th  of  April,  1710,
at  Strachan  in  Kincardineshire,  a  country  parish  situated  about
twenty  miles  from  Aberdeen,  on  the  north  side  of  the  Grampian
Mountains.

His  father,  the  Reverend  Lewis  Reid,  was  minister  of  this
parish  for  fifty  years.  He  was  a  clergyman,  according  to  his
sra's  account  of  him,  respected  by  all  who  knew  him,  for  his

B '


2  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

piety,  prudence,  and  benevoleuce ;  inheriting  from  his  ancestors
(most  of  whom,  from  the  time  of  the  Protestant  establishment,
had  been  ministers  of  the  Church  of  Scotland)  that  purity  and
simplicity  of  manners  which  became  his  station ;  and  a  love  of
letters,  which,  without  attracting  the  notice  of  the  world,  amused
his  leisure,  and  dignified  his  retirement.

For  some  generations  before  his  time,  a  propensity  to  litera-
ture, and  to  the  learned  professions,— a  propensity  which,  when
it  has  once  become  characteristical  of  a  race,  is  peculiarly  apt  to
be  propagated  by  the  influence  of  early  associations  and  habits, —
may  be  traced  in  several  individuals  among  his  kindred.  One  of
his  ancestors,  James  Reid,  was  the  first  minister  of  Banchory-
Teman  after  the  Reformation ;  and  transmitted  to  four  sons  a
predilection  for  those  studious  habits  which  formed  his  own  hap-
piness. He  was  himself  a  younger  son  of  Mr.  Reid  of  Pitfoddels,
a  gentleman  of  a  very  ancient  and  respectable  family  in  the
county  of  Aberdeen.

James  Reid  was  succeeded  as  minister  of  Banchory  by  his  son
Robert.  Another  son,  Thomas,  rose  to  considerable  distinction
both  as  a  philosopher  and  a  poet;  and  seems  to  have  wanted
neither  ability  nor  inclination  to  turn  his  attainments  to  the  best
advantage.  After  travelling  over  Europe,  and  maintaining,  as
was  the  custom  of  his  age,  public  disputations  in  several  univer-
sities, he  collected  into  a  volume  the  theSes  and  dissertations
which  had  been  the  subjects  of  his  literary  contests ;  and  also
published  some  Latin  poems,  which  ipay  be  found  in  the  collec-
tion entitled  "  Deliciae  Poetarum  Scotorum."  On  his  return  to
his  native  country,  he  fixed  his  residence  in  London,  where  he
was  appointed  secretary  in  the  Grreek  and  Latin  tongues  to  King
James  the  First  of  England,  and  lived  in  habits  of  intimacy  with
some  of  the  most  distinguished  characters  of  that  period. — Little
more,  I  beliieve;  is  known  of  Thomas  Reid's  history,  excepting
that  he  bequeathed  to  the  Marischal  College  of  Aberdeen  a  curi-
ous collection  of  books  and  manuscripts,  with  a  fund  for  establish-
ing a  salary  to  a  librarian.

Alexander  Reid,  the  third  son,  was  physician  to  King  Charles
the  First,  and  published  several  books  on  surgery  and  medicine.
The  fortune  he  acquired  in  the  course  of  his  practice  was  con-
siderable, and  enabled  him  (beside  many  legacies  to  his  relations


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  3

and  friends)  to  leave  various  lasting  and  honourable  memorials^
both  of  his  benevolence,  and  of  his  attachment  to  letters.

A  fourth  son,  whose  name  was  Adam,  translated  into  English,
"  Buchanan's  History  of  Scotland."  Of  this  translation,  which
was  never  published,  there  is  a  manuscript  copy  in  the  possession
of  the  University  of  Glasgow.

A  grandson  of  Robert,  the  eldest  of  these  sons,  was  the  third
minister  of  Banchory  after  the  Reformation,  and  was  great-grand-
father of  Thomas  Reid,  the  subject  of  this  memoir.*

*  In  the  account  given  in  the  text,  of  Dr.  Reid's  ancestors,  I  have  followed
scrupulously  the  information  contained  in  his  own  memorandums.  I  have
some  suspicion,  however,  that  he  has  committed  a  mistake  with  respect  to  the
name  of  the  translator  of  Buchanan's  History ;  which  would  appear,  from  the
MS.  in  Glasgow  College,  to  have  been — ^not  Adam,  but  John.  At  the  same
time,  as  this  last  statement  rests  on  an  authority  altogether  \mknown,  (being
written  in  a  hand  dilQferent  from  the  rest  of  the  MS.,)  there  is  a  possibility  that
Dr.  Reid's  account  may  be  correct ;  and  therefore  I  have  thought  it  advisable,
in  a  matter  of  so  very  trifling  consequence,  to  adhere  to  it  in  preference  to  the
other.

The  following  particulars,  with  respect  to  Thomas  Reid  may,  perhaps,  be
acceptable  to  some  of  my  readers.  They  are  copied  from  Dempster,  a  con-
temporary writer;  whose  details  concerning  his  countrymen,  it  must,  however,
be  confessed,  are  not  always  to  be  implicitly  relied  on.

"  Thomas  Reidus  Aberdonensis,  pueritiae  mese  et  infantilis  otii  sub  Thoma
CargiUo  collega,  Lovanii  literas  in  schola  Lipsii  serid  didicit,  quas  magno
nomine  in  Germania  docuit,  cams  Principibus.  Londini  diu  in  comitatu
hnmanissimi  ac  darissimi  viri  Fulconis  Grevilli,  Regii  Consiliarii  Interioris  et
Anglise  Proquaestoris,  egit:  tum  ad  amicitiam  Regis,  eodem  Fulcone  deducente,
evectus,  inter  Palatines  admissus,  k  Uteris  Latinis  Regi  fuit.  Scripsit  multa,
ut  est  magn4  indole  et  vari4  eruditione,"  &c. — "  £x  aula  se,  nemine  conscio,
nuper  proripuit,  dum  illi  omnia  festinati  honoris  augmenta  singuli  ominaren-
tor,  nee  quid  deinde  egerit  aut  qu6  locorum  se  contulerit  quisquam  indicare
potuit.  Multi  suspicabantur,  taedio  aulse  affectum,  monasticae  quieti  seipsum
tradidisse,  sub  annum  1618.  Rumor  postea  fuit  in  aulam  rediisse,  et  meritissi-
mis  honoribus  redditum,  sed  nunquam  id  consequetur  quod  virtus  promeretur.'*
— HiiL  Ecclenaatica  GerUis  Scotorum,  lib.  xvi.  p.  576.

What  was  the  judgment  of  Thomas  Reid's  own  times  with  respect  to  his
genius,  and  what  their  hopes  of  his  posthumous  fame,  may  be  collected  from
an  elegy  on  his  death  by  his  learned  countryman  Robert  Aytoun.  Already,
before  the  lapse  of  two  hundred  years,  some  apology,  alas !  may  be  thought
necessary  for  an  attempt  to  rescue  his  name  from  total  obUvion.

Aytoun's  elegy  on  Reid  is  referred  to  in  terms  veiy  flattering  both  to  its
author  and  to  its  subject,  by  the  editor  of  the  Collection,  entitled,  ^'  Poetarum
Scotorum  Musse  Sacrae." "  In  obitum  Thomse  Rheidi  epicedium  extat  elegan-

b2


4  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

The  particulars  hitherto  mentioned,  are  stated  on  the  authority
of  some  short  memorandums  written  by  Dr.  Reid  a  few  weeks
before  his  death.  In  consequence  of  a  suggestion  of  his  friend
Dr.  Gregory,  he  had  resolved  to  amuse  himself  with  collecting
such  facts  as  his  papers  or  memory  could  supply,  with  respect  to
his  life,  and  the  progress  of  his. studies;  but,  unfortunately,
before  he  had  fairly  entered  on  the  subject,  his  design  was  inter-
rupted by  his  last  illness.  If  he  had  lived  to  complete  it,  I  might
have  entertained  hopes  of  presenting  to  the  public  some  details
with  respect  to  the  history  of  his  opinions  and  speculations  on
those  important  subjects  to  which  he  dedicated  his  talents ; — the
most  interesting  of  all  articles  in  the  biography  of  a  philosopher,
and  of  which,  it  is  to  be  lamented,  that  so  few  authentic  records
are  to  be  foimd  in  the  annals  of  letters.  All  the  information,
however,  which  I  have  derived  from  these  notes,  is  exhausted  in
the  foregoing  pages ;  and  I  must  content  myself,  in  the  continua-
tion of  my  narrative,  with  those  indirect  aids  which  tradition,  and
the  recollection  of  a  few  old  acquaintances,  afford;  added  to  what
I  myself  have  learned  from  Dr.  Reid's  conversation,  or  collected
from  a  careful  perusal  of  his  writings.

His  mother,  Margaret  Gregory,  was  a  daughter  of  David
Gregory,  Esq.,  of  Kinnairdie,  in  Banffsliire ;  elder  brother  of
James  Gregory,  the  inventor  of  the  reflecting  telescope,  and  the
antagonist  of  Huyghens.  She  was  one  of  twenty-nine  children ;
the  most  remarkable  of  whom  was  David  Gregory,  Savilian  Pro-
fessor of  Astronomy  at  Oxford,  and  an  intimate  friend  of  Sir
Isaac  Newton.  Two  of  her  younger  brothers  were  at  the  same
time  professors  of  mathematics ;  the  one  at  St.  Andrew's,  the

tissimnm  Robert!  Aytoni,  viri  Uteris  ac  dignitate  clarissimi,  in  Deliciis  Poeta-
rum  Scotorum,  ubi  et  ipsius  quoque  poSmata,  paucula  quidem  ilia,  sed  venusta,
sed  elegantia,  comparent'*

The  only  works  of  Alexander  Reid  of  which  I  have  heard,  are  "  Chimrgical
Lectures  on  Tumors  and  Ulcers,**  London,  1635  ;  and  a  "  Treatise  of  the  first
part  of  Chirurgerie,"  London,  1638.  He  appears  to  have  been  the  physician
and  friend  of  the  celebrated  mathematician  Thomas  Harriott,  of  whose  interest-
ing history  so  little  was  known,  till  the  recent  discovery  of  his  manuscripts,  by
Mr.  Zach,  of  Saxe-Gotha.

A  remarkable  instance  of  the  careless  or  capricious  orthography  formerly  so
common  in  writing  proper  names,  occurs  in  the  different  individuals  to  whom
this  note  refers.  Sometimes  the  family  name  is  written — Eeid;  on- other  oc-
casions, Riede,  Read,  Rhead  or  Rhaid,


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  5

other  at  Edinburgh ;  and  were  the  first  persons  who  taught  the
Newtonian  philosophy  in  our  northern  universities.  The  heredi-
tary worth  and  genius  which  have  so  long  distinguished,  and
which  still  distinguish,  the  descendants  of  this  memorable  family,
are  well  known  to  all  who  have  turned  their  attention  to  Scottish
biography ;  but  it  is  not  known  so  generally,  that  through  the
female  line,  the  same  characteristical  endowments  have  been
conspicuous  in  various  instances ;  and  that  to  the  other  monu-
ments which  illustrate  the  race  of  the  Gregories,  is  to  be  added
the  Philosophy  of  Reid.

With  respect  to  the  earlier  part  of  Dr.  Reid's  life,  aU  that  I
have  been  able  to  learn  amounts  to  this,  that  after  two  years
spent  at  the  parish  school  of  Kincardine,  he  was  sent  to  Aber-
deen, where  he  had  the  advantage  of  prosecuting  his  classical
studies  under  an  able  and  diligent  teacher ;  that,  about  the  age
of  twelve  or  thirteen,  he  was  entered  as  a  student  in  Marischal
College ;  and  that  his  master  in  philosophy,  for  three  years,  was
Dr.  George  Tumbull,  who  afterwards  attracted  some  degree  of
notice  as  an  author ;  particularly  by  a  book  entitled  **  Principles
of  Moral  Philosophy,"  and  by  a  voluminous  treatise  (long  ago
forgotten)  on  Ancient  Painting.*  The  sessions  of  the  College
were,  at  that  time,  very  short,  and  the  education  (according  to
Dr.Reid's  own  account)  slight  and  superficial.

It  does  not  appear  from  the  information  which  I  have  received,
that  he  gave  any  early  indications  of  future  eminence.  His
industry,  however,  and  modesty,  were  conspicuous  from  his
childhood;  and  it  was  foretold  of  him,  by  the  parish  school-

*  Dr.  TumbuU's  work  on  Moral  Philosophy  was  published  at  London  in
1740.  As  I  have  only  turned  over  a  few  pages,  I  cannot  say  any  thing  with
respect  to  its  merits.  The  mottos  on  the  title-page  are  curious,  when  considered
in  connexion  with  those  inquiries  which  his  pupil  afterwards  prosecuted  with  so
much  success;  and  may,  perhaps,  without  his  perceiving  it,  have  had  some
efiect  in  suggesting  to  him  that  plan  of  philosophizing  which  he  so  systemati-
cally and  so  happily  pursued.

"  If  Natural  Philosophy,  in  all  its  parts,  by  pursuing  this  method,  shall  at
length  be  perfected,  the  bounds  of  Moral  Philosophy  will  also  be  enlarged.'* —
Newton* 8  Optics,

"  Account  for  moral,  as  for  natural  things." — Pope,

For  the  opinion  of  a  very  competent  judge  with  respect  to  the  Treatise  on
Ancient  Painting,  vide  Hogarth's  print,  entitled,  "  Beer-lane.*'


6  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIPE  AND  WRITINGS

master  who  initiated  him  in  the  first  principles  of  learning,
"  That  he  would  turn  out  to  be  a  man  of  good  and  well  wearing
parts ;"  a  prediction  which  touched,  not  unhappily,  on  that  capa^
city  of  "  patient  thought"  which  so  peculiarly  characterised  his
philosophical  genius.

His  residence  at  the  university  was  prolonged  beyond  the
usual  term,  in  consequence  of  his  appointment  to  the  office  of
librarian,  which  had  been  endowed  by  one  of  his  ancestors  about
a  century  before.  The  situation  was  acceptable  to  him,  as  it
aflTorded  an  opportunity  of  indulging  his  passion  for  study,  and
united  the  charms  of  a  learned  society,  with  the  quiet  of  an
academical  retreat.

During  this  period,  he  formed  an  intimacy  with  John  Stewart,
afterwards  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  Marischal  College,  and
author  of  .a  commentary  on  Newton's  **  Quadrature  of  Curves."
His  predilection  for  mathematical  pursuits  was  confirmed  and
strengthened  by  this  connexion.  I  have  often  heard  him  mention
it  with  much  pleasure,  while  he  recollected  the  ardour  with
which  they  both  prosecuted  these  fascinating  studies,  and  the
lights  which  they  imparted  mutually  to  each  other,  in  their  first
perusal  of  the  "  Principia,"  at  a  time  when  a  knowledge  of  the
Newtonian  discoveries  was  only  to  be  acquired  in  the  writings  of
their  illustrious  author.

In  1736,  Dr.  Reid  resigned  his  office  of  librarian,  and  accom-
panied Mr.  Stewart  on  an  excursion  to  England.  They  visited,
together,  London,  Oxford,  and  Cambridge,  and  were  introduced
to  the  acquaintance  of  many  persons  of  the  first  literary  emi-
nence. His  relation  to  Dr.  David  Gregory  procured  him  a  ready
access  to  Martin  Folkes,  whose  house  concentrated  the  most
interesting  objects  which  the  metropolis  had  to  offer  to  his  curio-
sity. At  Cambridge  he  saw  Dr.  Bentley,  who  delighted  him
with  his  learning,  and  amused  him  with  his  vanity ;  and  enjoyed
repeatedly  the  conversation  of  the  blind  mathematician,  Saun-
derson;  a  phenomenon  in  the  history  of  the  hmnan  mind,  to
which  he  has  referred  more  than  once,  in  his  philosophical  specu-
lations.

With  the  learned  and  amiable  man  who  was  his  companion  in
this  journey,  he  maintained  an  uninterrupted  friendship  till  1766,
when  Mr.  Stewart  died  of  a  malignant  fever. His  death  was


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  f

accofinpanied  with  circumstances  deeply  afflicting  to  Dt.  Reid's
sensibility ;  the  same  disorder  proving  fatal  to  his  wife  and  daugh-
ter, both  of  whom  were  buried  with  him  in  one  grave.

In  1737,  Dr.  Reid  was  presented,  by  the  King's  College  of
Aberdeen,  to  the  living  of  New-Machar  in  the  same  county ;  but
the  circumstances  in  which  he  entered  on  his  preferment  were  far
from  auspicious.  The  intemperate  zeal  of  one  of  his  predeces-
sors, and  an  aversion  to  the  law  of  patronage,  had  so  inflamed
the  minds  of  his  parishioners  against  him,  that,  in  the  first  dis-
charge of  his  clerical  functions,  he  had  not  only  to  encounter  the
most  violent  opposition,  but  was  exposed  to  personal  danger.  His
unwearied  attention,  however,  to  the  duties  of  his  office ;  the
mildness  and  forbearance  of  his  temper,  and  the  active  spirit  of
his  humanity,  soon  overcame  all  these  prejudices ;  and,  not  many
years  afterwards,  when  he  was  called  to  a  different  situation,  the
same  persons  who  had  suffered  themselves  to  be  so  far  misled  as
to  take  a  share  in  the  outrages  against  him,  followed  him,  on  his
departure,  with  their  blessings  aad  tears.

Dr.  Reid's  popularity  at  New-Machar  (as  I  am  informed  by
the  respectable  clergyman*  who  now  holds  that  living)  increased
greatly  after  his  marriage,  in  1740,  with  Elizabeth,  daughter  of
his  uncle,  Dr.  George  Reid,  physician  in  London.  The  accom-
modating manners  of  this  excellent  woman,  and  her  good  offices
among  the  sick  and  necessitous,  are  still  remembered  with  grati-
tude ;  and  so  endeared  the  family  to  the  neighbourhood,  that  its
removal  was  regarded  as  a  general  misfortune.  The  simple  and
affecting  language  in  which  some  old  men  expressed  themselves
on  this  subject,  in  conversing  with  the  present  minister,  deserves
to  be  recorded.  "  We  fought  against  Dr.  Reid  when  he  came,
and  would  have  fought /or  him  when  he  went  away."

In  some  notes  relative  to  the  earlier  part  of  his  history,  which
have  been  kindly  communicated  to  me  by  the  Reverend  Mr.
Davidson,  minister  of  Rayne,  it  is  mentioned  as  a  proof  o^  his
uncommon  modesty  and  diffidence,  that  long  after  he  became
minister  of  New-Machar,  he  was  accustomed,  from  a  distrust  in
his  own  powers,  to  preach  the  sermons  of  Dr.  Tillotson  and  of
Dr.  Evans.  I  have  heard  also,  through  other  channels,  that  he
had  neglected  the  practice  of  composition  to  a  more  than  ordinary

•  The  Reverend  William  Stronach.


3  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

degree,  iu  the  earlier  part  of  his  studies.  The  fact  is  curious,
when  contrasted  with  that  ease,  perspicuity,  and  purity  of  style,
which  he  afterwards  attained.  From  some  information,  however,
which  has  been  lately  transmitted  to  me  by  one  of  his  nearest
relations,  I  have  reason  to  believe,  that  the  number  of  original
discourses  which  he  wrote,  while  a  country  clergyman,  was  not
inconsiderable.

The  satisfaction  of  his  own  mind  was  probably,  at  this  period,
a  more  powerful  incentive  to  his  philosophical  researches,  than
the  hope  of  being  able  to  instruct  the  world  as  an  author.  But,
whatever  his  views  were,  one  thing  is  certain,  that  during  his
residence  at  New-Machar,  the  greater  part  of  his  time  was  spent
in  the  most  intense  study ;  more  particularly  in  a  careful  examina-
tion of  the  laws  of  external  perception,  and  of  the  other  prin-
ples  which  form  the  groundwork  of  human  knowledge.  His
chief  relaxations  were  gardening  and  botany,  to  both  of  which
pursuits  he  retained  his  attachment  even  in  old  age.

A  paper  which  he  published  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions
of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  for  the  year  1748,  affords  some
light  with  respect  to  the  progress  of  his  speculations  about  this
period.  It  is  entitled,  "  An  Essay  on  Quantity,  occasioned  by
reading  a  Treatise,  in  which  Simple  and  Compound  Ratios  are
appKed  to  Virtue  and  Merit ;"  and  shows  plainly,  by  its  contents,
that,  although  he  had  not  yet  entirely  relinquished  the  favourite
researches  of  his  youth,  he  was  beginning  to  direct  his  thoughts
to  other  objects.

The  treatise  dlluded  to  in  the  title  of  this  paper,  was  manifestly
the  "  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  of  our  Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Virtue,"
by  Dr.  Hutcheson  of  Glasgow.  According  to  this  very  ingenious
writer,  the  moment  of  public  good  produced  by  an  individual,
depending  partly  on  his  benevolence,  and  partly  on  his  ability ,
the  relation  between  these  different  moral  ideas  may  be  expressed
in  tl^p  technical  form  of  algebraists,  by  sayiag,  that  the  first  is  in
the  compound  proportion  of  the  two  others.  Hence,  Dr.  Hutche-
son infers,  that  "  the  benevolence  of  an  agent  (which  in  this
system  is  synonymous  with  his  moral  merit)  is  proportional  to  a
fraction,  having  the  moment  of  good  for  the  numerator,  and  the
ability  of  the  agent  for  the  denominator."  Various  other  exam-
ples of  a  similar  nature  occur  in  the  same  work ;  and  are  stated


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  Q

with  a  gravity  not  altogether  worthy  of  the  author.  It  is  pro-
bable, that  they  were  intended  merely  as  illustrations  of  his
general  reasonings,  not  a^  media  of  investigation  for  the  discovery
of  new  conclusions ;  but  they  appeared  to  Dr.  Reid  to  be  an
innovation  which  it  was  of  importance  to  resist,  on  account  of
the  tendency  it  might  have  (by  confounding  the  evidence  of  dif-
ferent branches  of  science)  to  retard  the  progress  of  knowledge.
The  very  hiffh  reputation  which  Dr.  Hutcheson  then  possessed
in  the  ZiveLies^f  Scotland,  added  to  the  recent  attempts  of
Pitcaim  and  Cheyne  to  apply  mathematical  reasoning  to  medi-
cine, would  bestow,  it  is  likely,  an  interest  on  Dr.  Reid's  Essay
at  the  time  of  its  publication,  which  it  can  scarcely  be  expected
to  possess  at  present.  Many  of  the  observations,  however,  which
it  contams,  are  axiute  and  original;  and  all  of  them  are  expressed
with  that  clearness  and  precision,  so  conspicuous  in  his  subse-
quent  compositions.  The  circumstance  which  renders  a  subject
susceptible  of  mathematical  consideration,  is  accurately  stated ;
and  the  proper  province  of  that  science  defined  in  such  a  manner,
as  sufficiently  to  expose  the  absurdity  of  those  abuses  of  its
technical  phraseology  which  were  at  that  time  prevalent.  From
some  passages  in  it,  there  is,  I  think,  ground  for  concluding,  that
the  author's  reading  had  not  been  very  extensive  previous  to
this  period.  The  enumeration,  in  particular,  which  he  has  given
of  the  different  kinds  of  proper  quantity  ^  affords  a  proof,  that  he
was  not  acquainted  with  the  refined  yet  sound  disquisitions  con-
cerning the  nature  of  number  and  of  proportion,  which  had
appeared  almost  a  centuiy  before,  in  the  ^^  Mathematical  Lec-
tures" of  Dr.  Barrow ;  nor  with  the  remarks  on  the  same  subject
introduced  by  Dr.  Clarke  in  one  of  his  controversial  letters
addressed  to  Leibnitz.

Li  the  same  paper.  Dr.  Reid  takes  occasion  to  offer  some  re-
flections on  the  dispute  between  the  Newtonians  and  Leibnitzians
concerning  the  measure  of  forces.  The  fundamental  idea  on
which  these  reflections  proceed,  is  just  and  important;  and  it
leads  to  the  correction  of  an  error,  committed  very  generally  by
the  partizans  of  both  opinions;  that,  of  mistaking  a  question
concerning  the  comparative  advantages  of  two  definitions,  for  a
difference  of  statement  with  respect  to  a  physical  fact.  It  must,
I  think,  be  acknowledged,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  whole  merits


10  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  UFE  AND  WRITINGS

of  the  controversy  axe  not  here  exhausted ;  and  that  the  honour
of  placmg  this  very  subtle  and  abstruse  question  in  a  point  of
view  calculated  to  reconcile  completely  the  contending  parties^
was  reserved  for  M.  D'Alembert.  To  have  fallen  short  of  the
success  which  attended  the  inquiries  of  that  eminent  man,  on  a
subject  so  congenial  to  his  favourite  habits  of  study,  wiU  not
reflect  any  discredit  on  the  powers  of  Dr.  Reid's  mind,  in  the
judgment  of  those  who  are  at  all  acquainted  with  the  history  of
this  celebrated  discussion.

In  1752,  the  professors  of  King's  College  elected  Dr.  Reid
Professor  of  Philosophy,  in  testimony  of  the  high  opinion  they
had  formed  of  his  learning  and  abilities.  Of  the  particular  plan
which  he  followed  in  his  academical  lectures,  while  he  held  this
office,  I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  any  satisfactory  account ;
but  the  department  of  science  which  was  assigned  to  him  by  the
general  system  of  education  in  that  university,  was  abundantly
extensive ;  comprehending  mathematics  and  physics,  as  well  as
logic  and  ethics.  A  similar  system  was  pursued  formerly  in  the
other  universities  of  Scotland ;  the  same  professor  then  conduct-
ing his  pupils  through  all  those  branches  of  knowledge  which
are  now  appropriated  to  different  teachers.  And  where  he  hap-
pened fortunately  to  possess  those  various  accomplishments
which  distinguished  Dr.  Reid  in  so  remarkable  a  degree,  it  can-
not be  doubted  that  the  unity  and  comprehensiveness  of  method,
of  which  such  academical  courses  admitted,  must  necessarily
have  possessed  important  advantages  over  that  more  minute  sub-
division of  Kterary  labour  which  has  since  been  introduced.
But  as  public  establishments  ought  to  adapt  themselves  to  what
is  ordinary,  rather  than  to  what  is  possible,  it  is  not  surprising,
that  experience  should  have  gradually  suggested  an  arrangement
more  suitable  to  the  narrow  limits  which  commonly  circumscribe
human  genius.

Soon  after  Dr.  Reid's  removal  to  Aberdeen,  he  projected  (in
conjunction  vrith  his  friend  Dr.  John  Gregory)  a  literary  society,
which  subsisted  for  many  years,  and  which  seems  to  have  had
the  happiest  effects  in  awakening  and  directing  that  spirit  of
philosophical  research,  which  has  since  reflected  so  much  lustre
on  the  north  of  Scotland.  The  meetings  of  this  society  were
held  weekly ;  and  afforded  the  members  (beside  the  advantages


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  ]}

to  be  derived  from  a  mutual  communication  of  their  sentiments
on  the  common  objects  of  their  pursuit)  an  opportunity  of  sub-
jecting their  intended  pubKcations  to  the  test  of  friendly  criticism.
The  number  of  valuable  works  which  issued  nearly  about  the
same  time^  from  individuals  connected  with  this  institution,
more  particularly  the  writings  of  Reid,  Gregoiy,  Campbell,
Beattie,  and  Gerard,  furnish  the  best  panegyric  on  the  en-
lightened views  of  those  under  whose  direction  it  was  originally
formed.

Among  these  works,  the  most  original  and  profound  was,  un-
questionably, the  ^^  Inquiry  into  the  Human  Mind,"  published
by  Dr.  Reid  in  1764.  The  plan  appears  to  have  been  conceived,
and  the  subject  deeply  meditated,  by  the  author  long  before ;
but  it  is  doubtful  whether  his  modesty  would  have  ever  per-
mitted him  to  present  to  the  world  the  fruits  of  his  solitary
studies,  without  the  encouragement  which  he  received  from  the
general  acquiescence  of  his  associates,  in  the  most  important
conclusions  to  which  he  had  been  led.

From  a  passage  in  the  dedication,  it  would  seem  that  the
speculations  which  terminated  in  these  conclusions  had  com-
menced as  early  as  the  year  1739 ;  at  which  period  the  publica-
tion of  Mr.  Hume's  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature"  induced  him,
for  the  first  time,  as  he  himself  informs  us,  '^  to  call  in  question
the  principles  commonly  received  with  regard  to  the  human
understanding."  In  his  "Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers,"
he  acknowledges,  that,  in  his  youth  he  had,  without  examination,
admitted  the  established  opinions  on  which  Mr.  Hume's  system
of  scepticism  was  raised ;  and  that  it  was  the  consequences  which
these  opinions  seemed  to  involve,  which  roused  his  suspicions
concerning  their  truth.  "  K  I  may  presume,"  says  he,  "  to
speak  my  own  sentiments,  I  once  believed  the  doctrine  of  ideas
so  finnly,  as  to  embrace  the  whole  of  Berkeley's  system  along
with  it ;  till  finding  other  consequences  to  follow  from  it,  which
gave  me  more  uneasiness  than  the  want  of  a  material  world,  it
came  into  my  mind  more  than  forty  years  ago,  to  put  the  ques-
tion. What  evidence  have  I  for  this  doctrine,  that  all  the  objects
of  my  knowledge  are  ideas  in  my  own  mind  ?  From  that  time
to  the  present,  I  have  been  candidly  and  impartially,  as  I  think.


12  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

seeking  for  the  evidence  of  this  principle ;  but  can  find  none^
excepting  the  authority  of  philosophers."

In  following  the  train  of  Dr.  Reid's  researches,  this  last
extract  merits  attention,  as  it  contains  an  explicit  avowal,  on  his
own  part,  that,  at  one  period  of  his  life,  he  had  been  led,  by
Berkeley's  reasonings,  to  abandon  the  belief  of  the  existence  of
matter.  The  avowal  does  honour  to  his  candour,  and  the  fact
reflects  no  discredit  on  his  sagacity.  The  truth  is,  that  this
article  of  the  Berkleian  system,  however  contrary  to  the  conclu-
sions of  a  sounder  philosophy,  was  the  error  of  no  common  mind.
Considered  in  contrast  with  that  theory  of  materiaUsm  which
the  excellent  author  was  anxious  to  supplant,  it  possessed  im-
portant advantages,  not  only  in  its  tendency,  but  in  its  scientific
consistency ;  and  it  afforded  a  pioof,  wherever  it  met  with  a
favourable  reception,  of  an  imderstanding  superior  to  those
casual  associations,  which,  in  the  apprehensions  of  most  men,
blend  indissolubly  the  phenomena  of  thought  with  the  objects
of  external  perception.  It  is  recorded  as  a  saying  of  M.  Turgot,
(whose  philosophical  opinions  in  some  important  points  ap-
proached very  nearly  to  those  of  Dr.  Reid,*)  that  ^*  he  who  had
never  doubted  of  the  existence  of  matter,  might  be  assured  he
had  no  turn  for  metaphysical  disquisitions."

As  the  refutation  of  Mr.  Hume's  sceptical  theory  was  the
great  and  professed  object  of  Dr.  Reid's  "  Inquiry,"  he  was
anxious,  before  taking  the  field  as  a  controversial  writer,  to
guard  against  the  danger  of  misapprehending  or  misrepresenting
the  meaning  of  his  adversary,  by  submitting  his  reasonings  to
Mr.  Hume's  private  examination.  With  this  view,  he  availed
himself  of  the  good  offices  of  Dr.  Blair,  with  whom  both  he  and
Mr.  Hume  had  long  lived  in  habits  of  friendship.  The  com-
munications which  he  at  first  transmitted,  consisted  only  of
detached  parts  of  the  work  ;  and  appear  evidently,  from  a  cor-
respondence which  I  have  perused,  to  have  conveyed  a  very
imperfect  idea  of  his  general  system.  In  one  of  Mr.  Hume's
letters  to  Dr.  Blair,  he  betrays  some  want  of  his  usual  good
humour,  in  looking  forward  to  his  new  antagonist.  "  I  wish,"
says  he,  ^*  that  the  parsons  would  confine  themselves  to  their  old

*  See,  in  particular,  the  article  "Existence,"  in  the  EncyclopSdie,


OP  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  J3

occupation  of  worrying  one  another,  and  leave  philosophers  to
argue  with  temper,  moderation,  aad  good  manners."  After  Mr.
Hume,  however,  had  read  the  manuscript,  he  addressed  himself
directly  to  the  author,  in  terms  so  candid  and  liberal,  that  it
would  be  unjust  to  his  memory  to  withhold  from  the  public  so
pleasing  a  memorial  of  his  character.

"  By  Dr.  Blair's  means,  I  have  been  favoured  with  the  perusal
of  your  performance,  which  I  have  read  with  great  pleasure  and
attention.  It  is  certainly  very  rare,  that  a  piece  so  deeply
philosophical  is  wrote  with  so  much  spirit,  and  affords  so  much
entertamment  to  the  reader;  though  I  must  still  regret  the
disadvantages  under  which  I  read  it,  as  I  never  had  the  whole
performance  at  once  before  me,  and  could  not  be  able  fully  to
compare  one  part  with  another.  To  this  reason,  chiefly,  I
ascribe  some  obscurities,  which,  in  spite  of  your  short  analysis
or  abstract,  still  seem  to  hang  over  your  system.  For  I  must
do  you  the  justice  to  own,  that  when  I  enter  into  your  ideas,
no  man  appears  to  express  himself  with  greater  perspicuity  than
you  do;  a  talent  which,  above  all  others,  is  requisite  in  that
species  of  literature  which  you  have  cultivated.  There  are  some
objections  which  I  would  willingly  propose  to  the  chapter,  *  Of
Sight,'  did  I  not  suspect  that  they  proceed  from  my  not  suflB-
ciently  understanding  it ;  and  I  am  the  more  confirmed  in  this
suspicion,  as  Dr.  Blair  tells  me,  that  the  former  objections  I
made  had  been  derived  chiefly  from  that  cause.  I  shall  there-
fore forbear  till  the  whole  can  be  before  me,  and  shall  not  at
present  propose  any  farther  difficulties  to  your  reasonings.  I
shall  only  say,  that  if  you  have  been  able  to  clear  up  these
abstruse  and  important  subjects,  instead  of  being  mortified,  I
shall  be  so  vain  as  to  pretend  to  a  share  of  the  praise ;  and  shall
think,  that  my  errors,  by  having  at  least  some  coherence,  had  led
ytfU  to  make  a  more  strict  review  of  my  principles,  which  were
the  common  ones,  and  to  perceive  their  futility.

*'  As  I  was  desirous  to  be  of  some  use  to  you,  I  kept  a  watch-
ful eye  all  along  over  your  style;  but  it  is  really  so  correct,
and  so  good  English,  that  I  found  not  any  thing  worth  the
remarking.  There  is  only  one  passage  in  this  chapter,  where
you  make  use  of  the  phrase  hinder  to  do^  instead  of  hinder  from
doing,  which  is  the  English  one ;  but  I  could  not  find  the  pas-


14  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WKITINGS

sage  when  I  sought  for  it.  You  may  judge  how  unexception-
able the  whole  appeared  to  me,  when  I  could  remark  so  small  a
blemish.  I  beg  my  compliments  to  my  friendly  adversaries,  Dr.
Campbell  and  Dr.  Gerard ;  and  also  to  Dr.  Gregory,  whom  I
suspect  to  be  of  the  same  disposition,  though  he  has  not  openly
declared  himself  such.'* —

Of  the  particular  doctrines  contained  in  Dr.  Reid's  "  Inquiry,"
I  do  not  think  it  necessary  here  to  attempt  any  abstract ;  not
indeed  do  his  speculations  (conducted  as  they  were  in  strict
conformity  to  the  rules  of  inductive  philosophizing)  afford  a
subject  for  the  same  species  of  rapid  outline,  which  is  so  useful
in  facilitating  the  study  of  a  merely  hypothetical  theory.  Their
great  object  was  to  record  and  to  classify  the  phenomena  which
the  operations  of  the  human  mind  present  to  those  who  reflect
carefully  on  the  subjects  of  their  consciousness ;  and  of  such  a
history,  it  is  manifest,  that  no  abridgment  could  be  offered  with
advantage.  Some  reflections  on  the  peculiar  plan  adopted  by
the  author,  and  on  the  general  scope  of  his  researches  in  this
department  of  science,  will  afterwards  find  a  more  convenient
place,  when  T  shall  have  finished  my  account  of  his  subsequent
publications.

The  idea  of  prosecuting  the  study  of  the  human  mind,  on  a
plan  analogous  to  that  which  had  been  so  succe^vely  adopted
in  physics  by  the  followers  of  Lord  Bacon,  if  not  first  con-
ceived by  Dr.  Reid,  was  at  least  first  carried  successfully  into
execution  in  his  writings.  An  attempt  had  long  before  been
announced  by  Mr.  Hume,  in  the  title-page  of  his  "  Treatise  of
Human  Nature,"  to  introduce  the  experimental  method  of  rea-
soning into  moral  subjects ;  and  some  admirable  remarks  are  made
in  the  introduction  to  that  work,  on  the  errors  into  which  his
predecessors  had  been  betrayed  by  the  spirit  of  hypothesis ;  and
yet  it  is  now  very  generally  admitted,  that  the  whole  of  his  own
system  rests  on  a  principle  for  which  there  is  no  evidence  but
the  authority  of  philosophers ;  and  it  is  certain,  that  in  no  part
of  it  has  he  aimed  to  investigate  by  a  systematical  analysis,  those
general  principles  of  our  constitution  which  can  alone  afford  a
synthetical  explanation  of  its  complicated  phenomena.

I  have  often  been  disposed  to  think,  that  Mr.  Hume's  inatten-
tion to  those  ndes  of  philosophizing  which  it  was  his  professed,


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  J  5

intention  to  exemplify^  was  owing  in  part  to  some  indistinctness
in  his  notions  concerning  their  import.  It  does  not  appear,
that,  in  the  earKer  part  of  his  studies,  he  had  paid  much  atten-
tion to  the  models  of  investigation  exhibited  in  the  writings  of
Newton  and  of  his  successors;  and  that  he  was  by  no  means
aware  of  the  extraordinary  merits  of  Bacon  as  a  philosopher,
nor  of  the  influence  which  his  writings  have  had  on  the  subse-
quent progress  of  physical  discovery,  is  demonstrated  by  the
cold  and  qualified  encomium  which  is  bestowed  on  his  genius,
in  one  of  the  most  elaborate  passages  of  the  "  History  of
England."

In  these  respects.  Dr.  Reid  possessed  important  advantages ;
familiarized  from  his  early  years  to  those  experimental  inquiries
which,  in  the  course  of  the  two  last  centuries,  have  exalted
natural  philosophy  to  the  dignity  of  a  science ;  and  determined
strongly,  by  the  peculiar  bent  of  his  genius,  to  connect  every
step  in  the  progress  of  discovery  with  the  history  of  the  human
mind.  The  influence  of  the  general  views  opened  in  the  "  No-
vum Organon,"  may  be  traced  in  ahnost  every  page  of  his
writings ;  and  indeed,  the  circumstance  by  which  these  are  so
strongly  and  characteristically  distinguished,  is,,  that  they  exhibit
the  first  systematical  attempt  to  exemplify,  in  the  study  of  human
nature,  the  same  plan  of  investigation  which  conducted  Newton
to  the  properties  of  light,  and  to  the  law  of  gravitation.  It  is
from  a  steady  adherence  to  this  plan,  and  not  from  the  supe-
riority  of  his  inventive  powers,  that  he  claims  to  himself  any
merit  as  a  philosopher;  and  he  seems  even  willing  (with  a
modesty  approaching  to  a  fault)  to  abandon  the  praise  of  what  is
commonly  called  genim^  to  the  authors  of  the  systems  which  he
was  anxious  to  refute.  "  It  is  genius,"  he  observes  in  one  pas-
sage, "  and  not  the  want  of  it,4hat  adulterates  philosophy,  and
fills  it  with  error  and  false  theory.  A  creative  imagination
disdains  the  mean  offices  of  digging  for  a  foundation,  of  remov-
ing rubbish,  and  carrying  materials:  leaving  these  servile  em-
plojrments  to  the  drudges  of  science,  it  plans  a  design,  and  raises
a  fabric.  Invention  supplies  materials  where  they  are  wanting,
and  fancy  adds  colouring  and  every  befitting  ornament.  The
work  pleases  the  eye,  and  wants  nothing  but  solidity  and  a  good
foundation. It  seems  even  to  vie  with  the  works  of  nature,  till


(


26  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

some  succeeding  architect  blows  it  into  ruins,  and  builds  as
goodly  a  fabric  of  his  own  in  its  place.*'

Success  in  an  inquiry  of  this  kind,"  he  observes  farther,

it  is  not  in  human  power  to  command ;  but  perhaps  it  is  pos-
sible, by  caution  and  humility,  to  avoid  error  and  delusion.  The
labyrinth  may  be  too  intricate,  and  the  thread  too  fine,  to  be
traced  through  all  its  windings ;  but,  if  we  stop  where  we  can
tx^e  it  no  farther,  and  secure  the  ground  we  have  gained,  there
is  no  harm  done ;  a  quicker  eye  may  in  time  trace  it  farther."

The  unassuniirig  language  with  which  Dr.  Reid  endeavours
to  remove  the  prejudices  naturally  excited  by  a  new  attempt  to
philosophize  on  so  impromising,  and  hitherto  so  imgrateful  a
subject,  recalls  to  our  recollection  those  passages  in  which  Lord
Bacon — filled  as  his  own  imagination  was  vrith  the  future  gran-
deur of  the  fabric  foimded  by  his  hand — bespeaks  the  indulgence
of  his  readers,  for  an  enterprise  apparently  so  hopeless  and  pre-
sumptuous. The  apology  he  offers  for  himself,  when  compared
with  the  height  to  which  the  structure  of  physical  knowledge  has
since  attained,  may  perhaps  have  some  effect  in  attracting  a  more
general  attention  to  pursuits  still  more  immediately  interesting
to  mankind ;  and,  at  any  rate,  it  forms  the  best  comment  on  the
prophetic  suggestions  in  which  Dr.  Reid  occasionally  indulges
himself  concerning  the  future  progress  of  moral  speculation.

"  Si  homines  per  tanta  annorum  spatia  viam  veram  inveniendi
et  colendi  scientias  tenuissent,  nee  tamen  ulterius  progredi  potu-
issent,  audax  procul  dubio  et  temeraria  foret  opinio,  posse  rem
in  ulterius  provehi.  Quod  si  in  via  ipsa  erratum  sit,  atque  homi-
num  opera  in  iis  consumpta  in  quibus  minime  oportebat,  sequitur
ex  eo,  non  in  rebus  ipsis  diflBcultatem  oriri,  quae  potestatis  nos-
trae  non  sunt;  sed  in  intellectu  humano,  ejusque  usu  et  applica-
tione,  quae  res  remedium  et  medicinam  suscipit."  *  .  .  .  "  De
nobis  ipsis  silemus :  de  re  autem  quae  agitur,  petimus ;  ut  homi-
nes eam  non  opinionem,  sed  opus  esse  cogitent;  ac  pro  certo
habeant,  non  sectae  nos  alicujus,  aut  placiti,  sed  utilitatis  et
amplitudinis  humanae  fundamenta  moliri.  Praeterea,  ut  bene
sperent ;  neque  Instaurationem  nostram  ut  quiddam  infinitum  et
ultra  mortale  fingant,  et  animo  concipiant ;  quum  revera  sit
infiniti  erroris  finis  et  terminus  legitimus."f

*  Nov.  Org.  94.  f  Instaur.  Mag. — Praefat.


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  17

The  Impression  produced  on  the  minds  of  speculative  men  by
the  publication  of  Dr.  Reid's  "  Inquiry,"  was  fully  as  great  as
could  be  expected  from  the  nature  of  his  imdertaking.  It  was
a  work  neither  addressed  to  the  multitude,  nor  level  to  their
comprehension  ;  and  the  freedom  with  which  it  canvassed  opin-
ions sanctioned  by  the  highest  authorities,  was  ill  calculated  to
conciliate  the  favour  of  the  learned.  A  few,  however,  habituated,
like  the  author,  to  the  analytical  researches  of  the  Newtonian
school,  soon  perceived  the  extent  of  his  views,  and  recognised  in
his  pages  the  genuine  spirit  and  language  of  inductive  investiga-
tion. Among  the  members  of  this  university,  Mr.  Ferguson  was
the  first  to  applaud  Dr.  Reid's  success;  warmly  recommending
to  his  pupils  a  steady  prosecution  of  the  same  plan,  as  the  only
effectual  method  of  ascertaining  the  general  principles  of  the
human  frame ;  and  illustrating  happily,  by  his  own  profound  and
eloquent  disquisitions,  the  application  of  such  studies,  to  the
conduct  of  the  understanding,  and  to  the  great  concerns  of  life,
I  recollect,  too,  when  I  attended  (about  the  year  1771)  the  lec-
tures of  the  late  Mr.  Russell,  to  have  heard  high  encomiums  on
the  philosophy  of  Reid,  in  the  course  of  those  comprehensive
discussions  concerning  the  objects  and  the  rules  of  experimental
science,  with  which  he  so  agreeably  diversified  the  particular
doctrines  of  physics.  Nor  must  I  omit  this  opportunity  of  pay-
ing a  tribute  to  the  memory  of  my  old  friend,  Mr.  Stevenson,
then  professor  of  logic,  whose  candid  mind,  at  the  age  of
seventy,  gave  a  welcome  reception  to  a  system  subversive  of  the
theories  which  he  had  taught  for  forty  years ;  and  whose  zeal  for
the  advancement  of  knowledge  prompted  him,  when  his  career
was  ahnost  finished,  to  undertake  the  laborious  task  of  new-
modelling  that  useful  compilation  of  elementary  instruction,  to
which  a  singular  diffidence  of  his  own  powers  limited  his  literary
exertions.

It  is  with  no  common  feelings  of  respect  and  of  gratitude,
that  I  now  recall  the  names  of  those  to  whom  I  owe  my  first
attachment  to  these  studies,  and  the  happiness  of  a  liberal
occupation  superior  to  the  more  aspiring  aims  of  a  servile
ambition.

From  the  University  of  Glasgow,  Dr.  Reid's  "  Inquiry "  re-
ceived a  still  more  substantial  testimony  of  approbation;  the

c


18  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

author  having  been  invited,  in  1763,  by  that  learned  body,  to
the  professorship  of  moral  philosophy,  then  vacant  by  the  resig-
nation of  Mr.  Smith.  The  preferment  was  in  many  respects
advantageous ;  affording  an  income  considerably  greater  than  he
enjoyed  at  Aberdeen ;  and  enabling  him  to  concentrate  to  his
favourite  objects  that  attention  v^hich  had  been  hitherto  dis-
tracted by  the  miscellaneous  nature  of  his  academical  engage-
ments. It  was  not,  however,  without  reluctance,  that  he  con-
sented to  tear  himself  from  a  spot  where  he  had  so  long  been
fastening  his  roots  ;  and,  much  as  he  loved  the  society  in  which
he  passed  the  remainder  of  his  days,  I  am  doubtful  if,  in  his
mind,  it  compensated  the  sacrifice  of  earlier  habits  and  con-
nexions.

Abstracting  from  the  charm  of  local  attachment,  the  Univer-
sity of  Glasgow,  at  the  time  when  Dr.  Reid  was  adopted  as  one
of  its  members,  presented  strong  attractions  to  reconcile  him  to
his  change  of  situation.  Robert  Simson,  the  great  restorer  of
ancient  geometry,  was  still  alive  ;  and,  although  far  advanced  in
years,  preserved  unimpaired  his  ardour  in  study,  his  relish  for
social  relaxation,  and  his  amusing  singularities  of  himiour.  Dr.
Moor  combined  with  a  gaiety  and  a  levity  foreign  to  this  climate,
the  profound  attainments  of  a  scholar  and  of  a  mathematician.
In  Dr.  Black,  to  whose  fortunate  genius  a  new  world  of  science
had  just  opened,  Reid  acknowledged  an  instructor  and  a  guide  ;
and  met  a  simplicity  of  manners  congenial  to  His  own.  The
Wilsons  (both  father  and  son)  were  formed  to  attach  his  heart  by
the  similarity  of  their  scientific  pursuits,  and  an  entire  sympathy
with  his  views  and  sentiments.  Nor  was  he  less  delighted  with
the  good-humoured  opposition  which  his  opinions  never  failed  to
encounter  in  the  dcuteness  of  Millar, — then  in  the  vigour  of
youthful  genius,  and  warm  from  the  lessons  of  a  different  school.
Dr.  Leechman,  the  friend  and  biographer  of  Hutcheson,  was  the
oflicial  head  of  the  college ;  and  added  the  weight  of  a  venerable
name  to  the  reputation  of  a  community,  which  he  had  once
adorned  in  a  more  active  station.*

•  James  Moor,  LL.D.,  author  of  a  very  ingenious  fragment  on  Greek  gram-
mar, and  of  other  philological  essays.  He  was  also  distinguished  by  a  pro-
found acquaintance  with  ancient  geometry.  Dr.  Simson,  an  excellent  judge  of
his  merits  both  in  literature  and  science,  has  somewhere  honoured  him  with


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  ^9

Animated  by  the  zeal  of  such  associates,  and  by  the  busy
scenes  which  his  new  residence  presented  in  every  department  of
useful  industry,  Dr.  Reid  entered  on  his  functions  at  Glasgow,
with  an  ardour  not  common  at  the  period  of  life  which  he  had
now  attained.  His  researches  concerning  the  human  mind,  and
the  principles  of  morals,  which  had  occupied  but  an  inconsider-
able space  in  the  wide  circle  of  science,  allotted  to  him  by  his
former  office,  were  extended  and  methodized  in  a  course,  which
employed  five  hours  every  week,  during  six  months  of  the  year :
the  example  of  his  illustrious  predecessor,  and  the  prevailing
topics  of  conversation  around  him,  occasionally  turned  his  thoughts
to  commercial  politics,  and  produced  some  ingenious  essays  on
diflFerent  questions  connected  with  trade,  which  were  communi-
cated to  a  private  society  of  his  academical  friends :  his  early
passion  for  the  mathematical  sciences  was  revived  by  the  conver-
sation of  Simson,  Moor,  and  the  Wilsons;  and,  at  the  age  of
fifty-five,  he  attended  the  lectures  of  Black,  with  a  juvenile
curiosity  and  enthusiasm.

As  the  substance  of  Dr.  Reid's  lectures  at  Glasgow  (at  least  of
that  part  of  them  which  was  most  important  and  original)  has
been  since  given  to  the  public  in  a  more  improved  form,  it  is
unnecessary  for  me  to  enlarge  on  the  plan  which  he  followed  in
the  discharge  of  his  official  duties.  I  shall  therefore  only  observe,
that  beside  his  "  Speculations  on  the  Intellectual  and  Active
Powers  of  Man,"  and  a  **  System  of  Practical  Ethics,"  his  course
comprehended  some  general  views  with  respect  to  natural  juris-
prudence, and  the  fundamental  principles  of  politics.  A  few
lectures  on  rhetoric,  which  were  read,  at  a  separate  hour,  to  a
more  advanced  class  of  students,  formed  a  voluntary  addition  to
the  appropriate  functions  of  his  office,  to  which,  it  is  probable,
he  was  prompted,  rather  by  a  wish  to  supply  what  was  then  a
deficiency  in  the  established  course  of  education,  than  by  any
predilection  for  a  branch  of  study  so  foreign  to  his  ordinary
pursuits.

the  following  encomium : "  Tum  in  Mathesi,  tum  in  Grsecis  Uteris  multiim
et  feliciter  versatus."

Alexander  Wilson,  M.  D.,  and  Patrick  Wilson,  Esq. ;  well  known  over
Europe  by  their  "  Observations  on  the  Solar  Spots ;"  and  many  other  valuable
memoirs.

c2


•go  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

The  merits  of  Dr.  Reid,  as  a  public  teacher,  were  derived
chiefly  from  that  rich  fund  of  original  and  instructive  philosophy
vehich  is  to  be  found  in  his  writings ;  and  from  his  unwearied
assiduity  in  inculcating  principles  which  he  conceived  to  be  of
essential  importance  to  human  happiness.  In  his  elocution  and
mode  of  instruction,  there  was  nothing  peculiarly  attractive.  He
seldom,  if  ever,  indulged  himself  in  the  warmth  of  extempore
discourse ;  nor  was  his  manner  of  reading  calculated  to  increase
the  effect  of  what  he  had  committed  to  writing.  Such,  however,
was  the  simplicity  and  perspicuity  of  his  style  ;  such  the  gravity
and  authority  of  his  character ;  and  such  the  general  interest  of
his  young  hearers  in  the  doctrines  which  he  taught,  that  by  the
numerous  audiences  to  which  his  instructions  were  addressed,  he
was  heard  uniformly  with  the  most  silent  and  respectful  atten-
tion. On  this  subject,  I  speak  from  personal  knowledge ;  having
had  the  good  fortune,  during  a  considerable  part  of  the  winter
of  1772,  to  be  one  of  his  pupils.

It  does  not  appear  to  me,  from  what  I  am  now  able  to  recol-
lect of  the  order  which  he  observed  in  treating  the  different  parts
of  his  subject,  that  he  had  laid  much  stress  on  systematical
arrangement.  It  is  probable,  that  he  availed  himself  of  whatever
materials  his  private  inquiries  afforded,  for  his  academical  com-
positions ;  without  aiming  at  the  merit  of  combining  them  into
a  whole,  by  a  comprehensive  and  regular  design ; — an  under-
taking, to  which,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  the  established  forms  of
his  university,  consecrated  by  long  custom,  would  have  presented
some  obstacles.  One  thing  is  certain,  that  neither  he  nor  his
immediate  predecessor  ever  published  any  general  prospectus  of
their  respective  plans ;  nor  any  heads  or  outlines  to  assist  their
students  in  tracing  the  trains  of  thought  which  suggested  their
various  transitions.

The  interest,  however,  excited  by  such  details  as  these,  even
if  it  were  m  my  power  to  render  them  more  full  and  satisfactory,
must  necessarily  be  temporary  and  local ;  and  I  therefore  hasten
to  observations  of  a  more  general  nature,  on  the  distinguishing
characteristics  of  Dr.  Reid's  philosophical  genius,  and  on  the
spirit  and  scope  of  those  researches  which  he  has  bequeathed  to
posterity,  concerning  the  phenomena  and  laws  of  the  human
mind. In  mentioning  his  first  performance  on  this  subject,  I


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  gj

have  already  anticipated  a  few  remarks  which  are  equally  appli-
cable to  his  subsequent  publications;  but  the  hints  then  sug-
gested were  too  slight,  to  place  in  so  strong  a  light  as  I  could
wish,  the  peculiarities  of  that  mode  of  investigation,  which  it  was
tlie  great  object  of  his  writings  to  recommend  and  to  exemplify.
His  own  anxiet3?s  to  neglect  nothing  that  might  contribute  to  its
farther  illustration,  induced  him,  while  his  health  and  faculties
were  yet  entire,  to  withdraw  from  his  public  labours ;  and  to
devote  himself,  with  an  undivided  attention,  to  a  task  of  more
extensive  and  permanent  utility.  It  was  in  the  year  1781,  that
he  carried  this  design  into  execution,  at  a  period  of  life  (for  he
was  then  upwards  of  seventy)  when  the  infirmities  of  age  might
be  supposed  to  accoimt  sufficiently  for  his  retreat ;  but  when,  in
fact,  neither  the  vigour  of  his  mind  nor  of  his  body  seemed  to
have  suffered  any  injury  from  time.  The  works  which  he  pub-
lished not  many  years  afterwards,  afford  a  sufficient  proof  of  the
assiduity  with  which  he  had  availed  himself  of  his  literary  leisure ;
his  "Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man"  appearing  in
1785;  and  those  on  the  "  Active  Powers"  in  1788.

As  these  two  performances  are,  both  of  them,  parts  of  one
great  work,  to  which  his  "  Inquiry  into  the  Human  Mind"  may
be  regarded  as  the  introduction,  I  have  reserved  for  this  place
whatever  critical  reflections  I  have  to  offer  on  his  merits  as  an
author;  conceiving  that  they  would  be  more  likely  to  produce
their  intended  effect,  when  presented  at  once  in  a  connected
form,  than  if  interspersed,  according  to  a  chronological  order,
with  the  details  of  a  biographical  narrative.


SECTION  II.

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  SPIRIT  AND  SCOPE  OF  DR.  REID'S  PHILOSOPHY.

I  HAVE  already  observed,  that  the  distinguishing  feature  of
Dr.  Reid's  philosophy,  is  the  systematical  steadiness,  with  which
he  has  adhered  in  his  inquiries,  to  that  plan  of  investigation
which  is  delineated  in  the  "  Noviun  Organon,"  and  which  has
been  so  happily  exemplified  in  physics  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton  and
his  followers.  To  recommend  this  plan  as  the  only  effectual
method  of  enlarging  our  knowledge  of  nature,  was  the  favourite


22  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  tV'RlTINGS

aim  of  all  his  studies,  and  a  topic  on  which  he  thought  he  could
not  enlarge  too  much,  in  conversing  or  corresponding  with  )ns
younger  friends.  In  a  letter  to  Dr.  Gregory,  which  I  have
perused,  he  particularly  congratulates  him,  upon  his  acquaintance
with  Lord  Bacon's  works  ;  adding,  "  I  am  very  apt  to  measure  a
man's  understanding,  by  the  opinion  he  entertains  of  that  author."

It  were  perhaps  to  be  wished,  that  he  had  taken  a  little  more
pains  to  illustrate  the  fundamental  rules  of  that  logic,  the  value
of  which  he  estimated  so  highly ;  more  especially,  to  point  out
the  modifications  with  which  it  is  applicable  to  the  science  of
mind.  Many  important  hints,  indeed,  connected  with  this  sub-
ject, may  be  collected  from  different  parts  of  his  writings  ;  but  I
am  inclined  to  think,  that  a  more  ample  discussion  of  it  in  a  pre-
liminary dissertation,  might  have  thrown  light  on  the  scope  of
many  of  his  researches,  and  obviated  some  of  the  most  plausible
objections  which  have  been  stated  to  his  conclusions.

It  is  not,  however,  my  intention  at  present,  to  attempt  to  sup-
ply a  desideratum  of  so  great  a  magnitude ; — an  undertaking
which,  I  trust,  will  find  a  more  convenient  place,  in  the  farther
prosecution  of  those  speculations  with  respect  to  the  intellectual
powers  which  I  have  already  submitted  to  the  public.  The
detached  remarks  which  follow,  are  offered  merely  as  a  supple-
ment to  what  I  have  stated  concerning  the  nature  and  object  of
this  branch  of  study,  in  the  introduction  to  the  "  Philosophy  of
the  Human  Mind."

The  influence  of  Bacon's  genius  on  the  subsequent  progress
of  physical  discovery,  has  been  seldom  fairly  appreciated;  by
some  writers  almost  entirely  overlooked ;  and  by  others  consi-
dered as  the  sole  cause  of  the  reformation  in  science  which  has
since  taken  place.  Of  these  two  extremes,  the  latter  certainly
is  the  least  wide  of  the  truth ;  for,  in  the  whole  history  of  let-
ters, no  other  individual  can  be  mentioned  whose  exertions  have
had  so  indisputable  an  effect  in  forwarding  the  intellectual  pro-
gress of  mankind.  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  acknowledged,
that  before  the  era  when  Bacon  appeared,  various  philosophers
in  different  parts  of  Europe  had  struck  into  the  right  path ;  and
it  may  perhaps  be  doubted,  whether  any  one  important  rule  with
respect  to  the  true  method  of  investigation  be  contained  in  his
works,  of  which  no  hint  can  be  traced  in  those  of  his  predeces-


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  23

sors.  His  great  merit  lay  in  concentrating  their  feeble  and  scat-
tered lights ;  fixing  the  attention  of  philosophers  on  the  distin-
guishing characteristics  of  true  and  of  false  science,  by  a  felicity
of  illustration  peculiar  to  himself,  seconded  by  the  commanding
powers  of  a  bold  and  figurative  eloquence.  The  method  of  in-
vestigation which  he  recommended  had  been  previously  followed
in  every  instance  in  which  any  solid  discovery  had  been  made
with  respect  to  the  laws  of  nature ;  but  it  had  been  followed
accidentally,  and  without  any  regular,  preconceived  design  ;  and
it  wa^s  reserved  for  him  to  reduce  to  rule  and  method  what  others
had  effected,  either  fortuitously,  or  from  some  momentary  glimpse
of  the  truth.  It  is  justly  observed  by  Dr.  Reid,  that  "  the  man
who  first  discovered  that  cold  freezes  water,  and  that  heat  turns
it  into  vapour,  proceeded  on  the  same  general  principle  by  which
Newton  discovered  the  law  of  gravitation  and  the  properties  of
light.  His  *  Regulae  Philosophandi'  are  maxims  of  common
sense,  and  are  practised  every  day  in  common  life ;  and  he  who
philosophizes  by  other  rules,  either  concerning  the  material  sys-
tem or  concerning  the  mind,  mistakes  his  aim."

These  remarks  are  not  intended  to  detract  from  the  just  glory
of  Bacon ;  for  they  apply  to  all  those,  without  exception,  who
have  systematized  the  principles  of  any  of  the  arts.  Indeed,
they  apply  less  forcibly  to  him  than  to  any  other  philosopher
whose  studies  have  been  directed  to  objects  analogous  to  his;
inasmuch  as  we  know  of  no  art,  of  which  the  rules  have  been
reduced  successfully  into  a  didactic  form,  when  the  art  itself  was
as  much  in  infancy  as  experimental  philosophy  was  when  Bacon
wrote.  Nor  must  it  be  supposed  that  the  utility  was  small  of
thus  attempting  to  systematize  the  accidental  processes  of  unen-
lightened ingenuity,  and  to  give  to  the  noblest  exertions  of  hu-
man reason  the  same  advantages  of  scientific  method  which  have
contributed  so  much  to  ensure  the  success  of  genius  in  pursuits
of  inferior  importance.  The  very  philosophical  motto  which
Reynolds  has  so  happily  prefixed  to  his  "  Academical  Discourses,"
admits,  on  this  occasion,  of  a  still  more  appropriate  application :
"  Omnia  fere  quae  praeceptis  continentur  ab  ingeniosis  hominibus
fiunt ;  sed  casu  quodam  magis  quam  scientia.  Ideoque  doctrina
et  animadversio  adhibenda  est,  ut  ea  quae  interdum  sine  ratione
nobis  occurrunt,  semper  in  nostra  potestate  siuj ;  et  quoties  res


24  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

postulaverit,  a  nobis  ex  praBparato  adhibeantur." — Almost  all
things  set  forth  in  precepts  are  produced  by  men  of  high  intel-
lectual powers  ;  but  it  is  rather  by  chance  than  through  science.
Wherefore  learning  and  attention  should  be  applied  that  we  may
have  command  even  over  those  things  which  occur  sometimes  to
us  without  reasoning ;  so  that  we  may  be  prepared  to  make  use
of  them  when  necessary.

But  although  a  few  superior  minds  seem  to  have  been  in  some
measure  predisposed  for  that  revolution  in  science  which  Bacon
contributed  so  powerfully  to  accomplish,  the  case  was  very  dif-
ferent with  the  great  majority  of  those  who  were  then  most  dis-
tinguished for  learning  and  talents.  His  views  were  plainly  too
advanced  for  the  age  in  which  he  lived ;  and,  that  he  was  sen-
sible of  this  himself,  appears  from  those  remarkable  passages  in
which  he  styles  himself  ^^the  servant  of  posterity,"  and  **  be-
queaths his  fame  to  future  times."  Hobbes,  who  in  his  early
youth  had  enjoyed  his  friendship,  speaks,  a  considerable  time
after  Bacon's  death,  of  experimental  philosophy  in  terms  of  con-
tempt; influenced  probably,  not  a  little,  by  the  tendency  he
perceived  in  the  inductive  method  of  inquiry,  to  undermine  the
foundations  of  that  fabric  of  scepticism  which  it  was  the  great
object  of  his  labours  to  rear.  Nay, .  even  during  the  course  of
the  last  century,  it  has  been  less  from  Bacon's  own  speculations
than  from  the  examples  of  sound  investigation  exhibited  by  a
few  eminent  men,  who  professed  to  follow  him  as  their  guide,
that  the  practical  spirit  of  his  writings  has  been  caught  by  the
xnultitude  of  physical  experimentalists  over  Europe ;  truth  and
good  sense  descending  gradually,  in  this  as  in  other  instances,  by
the  force  of  imitation  and  of  early  habit,  from  the  higher  orders
of  intellect  to  the  lower.  In  some  parts  of  the  continent,  more
especially,  the  circulation  of  Bacon's  philosophical  works  has
been  surprisingly  slow.  It  is  doubtful  whether  Des  Cartes  him-
self ever  perused  them ;  and,  as  late  as  the  year  1759,  if  we  may
credit  Montucla,  they  were  very  little  known  in  France.  The
introductory  discourse  prefixed  by  D'Alembert  to  the  "  Ency-
clopedie,"  first  recommended  them  in  that  country  to  general
attention.

The  change  which  has  taken  place  during  the  two  last  centu-
ries in  the  plan  of  physical  research,  and  the  success  which  has


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  25

SO  remarkably  attended  it,  could  not  fail  to  suggest  an  idea,  that
sometliing  analogous  might  probably  be  accomplished  at  a  future
period,  with  respect  to  the  phenomena  of  the  intellectual  world.
And  accordingly,  various  hints  of  this  kind  may  be  traced  in
different  authors,  since  the  era  of  Newton's  discoveries.  A  me-
morable instance  occurs  in  the  prediction  with  which  that  great
man  concludes  his  "  Optics : " — "  That  if  natural  philosophy  in
all  its  parts,  By  pursuing  the  inductive  method,  shall  at  length  be
perfected,  the  bounds  of  moral  philosophy  will  also  be  enlarged."
Similar  remarks  may  be  found  in  other  publications ;  particularly
in  Mr.  Hume's  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"  where  the  subject
is  enlarged  on  with  much  ingenuity.  As  far,  however,  as  I  am
able  to  judge,  Dr.  Reid  was  the  first  who  conceived  justly  and
clearly  the  analogy  between  these  two  different  branches  of  hu-
man knowledge,  defining  with  precision  the  distinct  provinces  of
observation  and  of  reflection,  in  furnishing  the  data  of  all  our
reasonings  concerning  matter  and  mind ;  and  demonstrating  the
necessity  of  a  careful  separation  between  the  phenomena  which
they  respectively  exhibit,  while  we  adhere  to  the  same  mode  of
philosophizing  ID  investigating  the  laws  of  both.

That  so  many  philosophers  should  have  thus  missed  their  aim,
in  prosecuting  the  study  of  the  human  mind,  will  appear  the  less
surprising,  when  we  consider  in  how  many  difficulties,  peculiar
to  itself,  this  science  is  involved.  It  is  sufficient  at  present  to
mention  those  which  arise, — ^from  the  metaphorical  origin  of  all
the  words  which  express  the  intellectual  phenomena, — from  the
subtle  and  fiigitive  nature  of  the  objects  of  our  reasonings, — from
the  habits  of  inattention  we  acquire  in  early  life,  to  the  subjects
of  our  consciousness, — and  from  the  prejudices  which  early  im-
pressions and  associations  create  to  warp  our  opinions.  It  must
be  remembered,  too,  that  in  the  science  of  mind  (so  imperfectly
are  its  logical  rules  as  yet  understood)  we  have  not  the  same
checks  on  the  abuses  of  our  reasoning  powers,  which  serve  to
guard  us  against  error  in  our  other  researches.  In  physics,  a
speculative  mistake  is  abandoned  when  contradicted  by  facts  which
strike  the  senses.  In  mathematics,  an  absurd  or  inconsistent
conclusion  is  admitted  as  a  demonstrative  proof  of  a  faulty  hypo-
thesis. But,  in  those  inquiries  which  relate  to  the  principles  of
human  nature,  the  absurdities  and  inconsistencies  to  which  we
are  led  by  almost  all  the  systems  hitherto  proposed,  instead  of


gg  ACCOUNT OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

suggesting  corrections  and  improvements  on  these  systems,  have
too  frequently  had  the  effect  of  producing  scepticism  with  re-
spect to  all  of  them  alike.  How  melancholy  is  the  confession  of
Hume ! — "  The  intense  view  of  these  manifold  contradictions
and  imperfections  in  human  reason  has  so  wrought  upon  me  and
heated  my  brain,  that  I  am  ready  to  reject  all  belief  and  reason-
ing, and  can  look  upon  no  opinion  even  as  more  probable  or
likely  than  another."

Under  these  discouragements  to  this  branch  of  study,  it  affords
us  some  comfort  to  reflect  on  the  great  number  of  important
facts  with  f  espect  to  the  mind  which  are  scattered  in  the  writings
of  philosophers.  As  the  subject  of  our  inquiry  here  lies  within
our  own  breast,  a  considerable  mixture  of  truth  may  be  expected
even  in  those  systems  which  are  most  erroneous ;  not  only  be-
cause a  number  of  men  can  scarcely  be  long  imposed  on  by  an
hypothesis  which  is  perfectly  groimdless,  concerning  the  objects
of  their  own  consciousness ;  but  because  it  is  generally  by  an
alliance  with  truth  and  with  the  original  principles  of  human
nature,  that  prejudices  and  associations  produce  their  effects.
Perhaps  it  may  even  be  affirmed,  that  our  progress  in  this  re-
search depends  less  on  the  degree  of  our  industry  and  invention
than  on  our  sagacity  and  good  sense  in  separating  old  discoveries
from  the  errors  which  have  been  blended  with  them ;  and  on
that  candid  and  dispassionate  temper  that  may  prevent  us  from
being  led  astray  by  the  love  of  novelty,  or  the  affectation  of  sin-
gularity. In  this  respect,  the  science  of  mind  possesses  a  very
important  advantage  over  that  which  relates  to  the  laws  of  the
material  world.  The  former  has  been  cultivated  with  more  or
less  success  in  all  ages  and  countries :  the  facts  which  serve  as
the  basis  of  the  latter  have,  with  a  very  few  exceptions,  been
collected  during  the  course  of  the  two  last  centuries.  An  ob-
servation similar  to  this  is  applied  to  systems  of  ethics  by  Mr.
Smith,  in  his  account  of  the  theory  of  Mandeville  ;  and  the  illus-
tration he  gives  of  it  may  be  extended  with  equal  propriety  to
the  science  of  mind  in  general.  "  A  system  of  natural  philoso-
phy," he  remarks,  "  may  appear  very  plausible,  and  be,  for  a  long
time,  very  generally  received  in  the  world,  and  yet  have  no
foundation  in  nature,  nor  any  sort  of  resemblance  to  the  truth.
But  it  is  otherwise  with  systems  of  moral  philosophy.  When  a
traveller  gives  an  account  of  some  distant  country,  he  may  im-


OF  THOMAS  RfilD,  D.D.  g7

pose  upon  our  credulity  the  most  groundless  and  absurd  fictions
as  the  most  certain  matters  of  fact.  But  when  a  person  pretends
to  inform  us  of  what  passes  in  our  neighbourhood,  and  of  the
affairs  of  the  very  parish  we  live  in,  though  here  too,  if  we  are
so  careless  as  not  to  examine  things  with  our  own  eyes,  he  may
deceive  us  in  many  respects ;  yet  the  greatest  falsehoods  which
he  imposes  on  us  must  bear  some  resemblance  to  the  truth,  and
must  even  have  a  considerable  mixture  of  truth  in  them."

These  considerations  demonstrate  the  essential  importance,  in
this  branch  of  study,  of  forming,  at  the  commencement  of  our
inquiries,  just  notions  of  the  criteria  of  true  and  false  science,
and  of  the  rules  of  philosophical  investigation.  They  demon-
strate, at  the  same  time,  that  an  attention  to  the  rules  of  philo-
sophizing, as  they  are  exemplified  in  the  physical  researches  of
Newton  and  his  followers,  although  the  best  of  all  preparations
for  an  examination  of  the  mental  phenomena,  is  but  one  of  the
steps  necessary  to  ensure  our  success.  On  an  accurate  compari-
son of  the  two  subjects,  it  might  probably  appear,  that  after  this
preliminary  step  has  been  gained,  the  most  arduous  part  of  the
process  still  remains.  One  thing  is  certain,  that  it  is  not  from
any  defect  in  the  power  of  ratiocination  or  deduction,  that  our
speculative  errors  chiefly  arise, — a  fact  of  which  we  have  a
decisive  proof  in  the  facility  with  which  most  students  may  be
taught  the  mathematical  and  physical  sciences,  when  compared
with  the  difficulty  of  leading  their  minds  to  the  truth  on  ques-
tions of  morals  and  politics.

The  logical  rules  which  lay  the  foundation  of  sound  and  useful
conclusions  concerning  the  laws  of  this  internal  world,  although
not  altogether  overlooked  by  Lord  Bacon,  were  plainly  not  the
principal  object  of  his  work ;  and  what  he  has  written  on  the
subject,  consists  chiefly  of  detached  hints  dropt  casually  in  the
course  of  other  speculations.  A  comprehensive  view  of  the
sciences  and  arts  dependent  on  the  philosophy  of  the  human
mind,  exhibiting  the  relations  which  they  bear  to  each  other,  and
to  the  general  system  of  human  knowledge,  would  form  a  natural
and  useful  introduction  to  the  study  of  these  logical  principles ;
but  such  a  view  remains  still  a  desideratum,  after  all  the  advances
made  towards  it  by  Bacon  and  D'Alembert.  Indeed,  in  the  pre-
sent improved  state  of  things,  much  is  wanting  to  complete  and
perfect  that  more  simple  part  of  their  intellectual  map  which


28  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

relates  to  the  material  universe. — Of  the  inconsiderable  progress
hitherto  made  towards  a  just  delineation  of  the  method  to  be
pursued  in  studying  the  mental  phenomena,  no  other  evidence  is
necessary  than  this,  That  the  sources  of  error  and  false  judgment,
so  peculiarly  connected,  in  consequence  of  the  association  of
ideas,  with  studies  in  which  our  best  interests  axe  immediately
and  deeply  concerned,  have  never  yet  been  investigated  with
such  accuracy,  as  to  afford  effectual  aid  to  the  student,  in  his
attempts  to  counteract  their  influence.  One  of  these  sources
alone, — that  which  arises  from  the  imperfections  of  language, —
furnishes  an  exception  to  the  general  remark.  It  attracted,  for-
tunately, the  particular  notice  of  Locke,  whose  observations  with
respect  to  it,  compose,  perhaps,  the  most  valuable  part  of  his
philosophical  writings  ;  and,  since  the  time  of  Condillac,  the  sub-
ject has  been  still  more  deeply  analyzed  by  others.  Even  on
this  article,  much  yet  remains  to  be  done ;  but  enough  has  been
already  accomplished  to  justify  the  profound  aphorism  in  which
Bacon  pointed  it  out  to  the  attention  of  his  followers  : —
*'  Credunt  homines  rationem  suam  verbis  imperare ;  sed  fit  etiam
ut  verba  vim  suam  super  rationem  retorqueant."* — Men  suppose
that  their  reason  has  command  over  words.  Still  it  also  happens
that  words  exercise  reaction  on  reason. (Nov.  Organ,  lix.)

Into  these  logical  discussions  concerning  the  means  of  advanc-
ing the  philosophy  of  human  nature.  Dr.  Reid  has  seldom
entered  ;  and  still  more  rarely  has  he  indulged  himself  in  tracing
the  numerous  relations,  by  which  this  philosophy  is  connected
with  the  practical  business  of  life.  But  he  has  done  what  was
still  more  essential  at  the  time  he  wrote ;  he  has  exemplified,
with  the  happiest  success,  that  method  of  investigation  by  which
alone  any  solid  progress  can  be  made ;  directing  his  inquiries  to
a  subject  which  forms  a  necessary  groundwork  for  the  labours  of
his  successors, — an  analysis  of  the  various  powers  and  principles
belonging  to  our  constitution.  Of  the  importance  of  this  under-
taking, it  is  sufficient  to  observe,  that  it  stands  somewhat,
although  I  confess  not  altogether,  in  the  same  relation  to  the  dif-
ferent branches  of  intellectual  and  moral  science,  (such  as  gram-

*  Tliis  passage  of  Bacon  forms  the  motto  to  a  very  ingenious  and  philo-
sophicid  dissertation,  published  by  M.  Prevost  of  Geneva,)  entitled,  "  Des
Signes  envisages  relativement  k  leur  Influence  sur  la  Formation  des  Id6e8.'*
Paris,  an  8.


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  g9

mar,  rhetoric,  logic,  ethics,  natural  theology,  and  politics,)  in
which  the  anatomy  of  the  human  hody  stands  to  the  different
branches  of  physiology  and  pathology.  And  as  a  course  of  medical
education  naturally,  or  rather  necessarily,  hegins  with  a  general
survey  of  man's  animal  frame ;  so,  I  apprehend,  that  the  proper,
or  rather  the  essential  preparation  for  those  studies  which  regard
our  nobler  concerns,  is  an  examination  of  the  principles  which
belong  to  man  as  an  intelligent,  active,  social,  and  moral  being.
Nor  does  the  importance  of  such  an  analysis  rest  here ;  it  exerts
an  influence  over  all  those  sciences  and  arts  which  are  connected
with  the  material  world ;  and  the  philosophy  of  Bacon  itself,
while  it  points  out  the  road  to  physical  truth,  is  but  a  branch  of
the  philosophy  of  the  human  mind.

The  substance  of  these  remarks  is  admirably  expressed  iDy  Mr.
Hume  in  the  following  passage, — allowances  being  made  for  a
few  trifling  pecuUarities  of  expression,  borrowed  from  the  the-
ories which  were  prevalent  at  the  time  when  he  \yrote :  "  'Tis
evident,  that  all  the  sciences  have  a  relation,  greater  or  less,  to
human  nature,  and  that,  however  wide  any  of  them  may  seem  to
run  from  it,  they  still  return  back  by  one  passage  or  another.
Even  mathematics,  natural  philosophy,  and  natural  religion,  are
in  some  measure  dependent  on  the  science  of  man ;  since  they
lie  under  the  cognizance  of  men,  and  are  judged  of  by  their
powers  and  faculties.  It  is  impossible  to  tell  what  changes  and
improvements  we  might  make  in  these  sciences,  were  we  tho-
roughly acquainted  with  the  extent  and  force  of  human  under-
standing, and  could  explain  the  nature  of  the  ideas  we  employ,
and  of  the  operations  we  perform  in  our  reasonings.

**  If,  therefore,  the  sciences  of  mathematics,  natural  philoso-
phy, and  natural  religion,  have  such  a  dependence  on  the  know-
ledge of  man,  what  may  be  expected  in  the  other  sciences,  whose
connexion  with  human  nature  is  more  close  and  intimate  ?  The
sole  end  of  logic  is  to  explain  the  principles  and  operations  of
our  reasoning  faculty,  and  the  nature  of  our  ideas :  morals  and
criticism  regard  our  tastes  and  sentiments :  and  politics  consider
men  as  united  in  society,  and  dependent  on  each  other.  In
these  four  sciences  of  logic,  morals,  criticism,  and  politics,  is
comprehended  almost  every  thing  which  it  can  any  way  import
us  to  be  acquainted  with,  or  which  can  tend  either  to  the  improve-
ment or  ornament  of  the  human  mind.


gQ  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

"  Here,  then,  is  the  only  expedient  from  which  we  can  hope
for  success  in  our  philosophical  researches ;  to  leave  the  tedious,
lingering  method,  which  we  have  hitherto  followed ;  and,  instead
of  taking,  now  and  then,  a  castle  or  village  on  the  frontier,  to
march  up  directly  to  the  capital  or  centre  of  these  sciences,  to
human  nature  itself;  which  being  once  masters  of,  we  may
every  where  else  hope  for  an  easy  victory.  From  this  station,
we  may  extend  our  conquests  over  all  those  sciences  which  more
intimately  concern  human  Hfe,  and  may  afterwards  proceed  at
leisure  to  discover  more  fully  those  which  are  the  objects  of
pure  curiosity.  There  is  no  question  of  importance,  whose  deci-
sion is  not  comprised  in  the  science  of  man ;  and  there  is  none
which  can  be  decided  with  any  certainty,  before  we  become
acquainted  with  that  science."

To  prepare  the  way  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  design  so
forcibly  recommended  in  the  foregoing  quotation,  by  exempli-
fying, in  an  analysis  of  our  most  important  intellectual  and
active  principles,  the  only  method  of  carrying  it  successfully  into
execution,  was  the  great  object  of  Dr.  Reid,  in  all  his  various
philosophical  publications.  In  examining  these  principles,  he
had  chiefly  in  view  a  vindication  of  those  fundamental  laws  of
belief  which  form  the  groundwork  of  human  knowledge,  against
the  attacks  made  on  their  authority  in  some  modem  systems  of
scepticism ;  leaving  to  his  successors  the  more  agreeable  task  of
applying  the  philosophy  of  the  mind  to  its  practical  uses.  On
the  analysis  and  classification  of  our  powers,  which  he  has  pro-
posed, much  room  for  improvement  must  have  been  left  in  so
vast  an  undertaking  ;  but  imperfections  of  this  kind  do  not  neces-
sarily affect  the  justness  of  his  conclusions,  even  where  they
may  suggest  to  future  inquirers  the  advantages  of  a  simpler
arrangement,  and  a  more  definite  phraseology.  Nor  must  it  be
forgotten,  that,  in  consequence  of  the  plan  he  has  followed,  the
mistakes  which  may  be  detected  in  particular  parts  of  his  works,
imply  no  such  weakness  in  the  fabric  he  has  reared,  as  might
have  been  justly  apprehended,  had  he  presented  a  connected
system  founded  on  gratuitous  hypotheses,  or  on  arbitrary  defini-
tions. The  detections,  on  the  contrary,  of  his  occasional  errors,
may  be  expected,  from  the  invariable  consistency  and  harmony
of  truth,  to  throw  new  lights  on  those  parts  of  his  work,  where
his  inquiries  have  been  more  successful ;  as  the  correction  of  a


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  g|

particular  misstatement  in  an  authentic  history,  is  often  found,
by  completing  an  imperfect  link,  or  reconciling  a  seeming  con-
tradiction, to  dispel  the  doubts  which  himg  over  the  most  faith-
ful and  accurate  details  of  the  narrative.

In  Dr.  Reid's  first  performance,  he  confined  himself  entirely
to  the  five  senses,  and  the  principles  of  our  nature  necessarily
connected  with  them  ;  reserving  the  further  prosecution  of  the
subject  for  a  future  period.  At  that  time,  indeed,  he  seems  to
have  thought,  that  a  more  comprehensive  examination  of  the
mind  was  an  enterprise  too  great  for  one  individual.  "The
powers,"  he  observes,  *^  of  memory,  of  imagination,  of  taste,  of
reasoning,  of  moral  perception,  the  wUl,  the  passions,  the  affec-
tions, and  all  the  active  powers  of  the  soul,  present  a  boundless
field  of  philosophical  disquisition,  which  the  author  of  this
*  Inquiry'  is  far  from  thinking  himself  able  to  explore  with
accuracy.  Many  authors  of  ingenuity,  ancient  and  modern,
have  made  incursions  into  this  vast  territory,  and  have  communi-
cated useful  observations;  but  there  is  reason  to  believe,  that
those  who  have  pretended  to  give  us  a  map  of  the  whole,  have
satisfied  themselves  with  a  very  inaccurate  and  incomplete  sur-
vey. If  Galileo  had  attempted  a  complete  system  of  natural
philosophy,  he  had  probably  done  little  service  to  mankind ;
but,  by  confining  himself  to  what  was  within  his  comprehension,
he  laid  the  foundation  of  a  system  of  knowledge,  which  rises  by
degrees,  and  does  honour  to  the  human  understanding.  Newton,
building  upon  this  foundation,  and  in  like  manner,  confining  his
inquiries  to  the  law  of  gravitation,  and  the  properties  of  light,
performed  wonders.  If  he  had  attempted  a  great  deal  more,  he
had  done  a  great  deal  less,  and  perhaps  nothing  at  all.  Ambi-
tious of  following  such  great  examples,  with  imequal  steps,  alas !
and  unequal  force,  we  have  attempted  an  inquiry  into  one  little
comer  only,  of  the  human  mind ;  that  comer  which  seems  to  be
most  exposed  to  vulgar  observation,  and  to  be  most  easily  com-
prehended ;  and  yet,  if  we  have  delineated  it  justly,  it  must  be
acknowledged,  that  the  accoimts  heretofore  given  of  it  were  very
lame,  and  wide  of  the  truth."

From  these  observations,  when  compared  with  the  magnitude
of  the  work  which  the  author  lived  to  execute,  there  is  some
ground  for  supposing,  that,  in  the  progress  of  his  researches,  he


32  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

became  more  and  more  sensible  of  the  mutual  connexion  and
dependence  which  exist  among  the  conclusions  we  form  con-
cerning the  various  principles  of  human  nature ;  even  concern-
ing those  which  seem,  on  a  superficial  view,  to  have  the  most
remote  relation  to  each  other:  and  it  was  fortunate  for  the
world,  that,  in  this  respect,  he  was  induced  to  extend  his  views
so  far  beyond  the  limits  of  his  original  design.  His  examina-
tion, indeed,  of  the  powers  of  external  perception,  and  of  the
questions  immediately  connected  with  them,  bears  marks  of  a
still  more  minute  diligence  and  accuracy  than  appear  in  some  of
his  speculations  concerning  the  other  parts  of  our  frame ;  and
what  he  has  written  on  the  former  subject,  in  his.  "  Inquiry  into
the  Human  Mind,"  is  evidently  more  highly  finished  both  in
matter  and  form,  than  the  volumes  which  he  published  in  his
more  advanced  years.  The  value,  however,  of  these  is  inesti-
mable to  future  adventurers  in  the  same  arduous  undertaking ;
not  only,  in  consequence  of  the  aids  they  furnish  as  a  rough
draught  of  the  field  to  be  examined,  but,  by  the  example  they
exhibit  of  a  method  of  investigation  on  such  subjects,  hitherto
very  imperfectly  understood  by  philosophers.  It  is  by  the  ori-
ginality of  this  method,  so  systematically  pursued  in  all  his
researches,  still  more  than  by  the  importance  of  his  particoilar
conclusions,  that  he  stands  so  conspicuously  distinguished  among
those  who  have  hitherto  prosecuted  analytically  the  study  of  man.
I  have  heard*  it  sometimes  mentioned,  as  a  subject  of  regret,
that  the  writers  who  have  applied  themselves  to  this  branch  of
knowledge,  have,  in  general,  aimed  at  a  great  deal  more  than  it
was  possible  to  accomplish;  extending  their  researches  to  all
the  different  parts  of  our  constitution,  while  a  long  life  might
be  well  employed  in  examining  and  describing  the  phenomena
connected  with  any  one  particular  faculty.  Dr.  Reid,  in  a  pas-
sage already  quoted  from  his  "  Inquiry,"  might  have  been  sup-
posed to  give  some  countenance  to  this  opinion ;  if  his  own
subsequent  labours  did  not  so  strongly  sanction  the  practice  in
question.  The  truth,  I  apprehend,  is,  that  such  detached  re-
searches concerning  the  human  mind,  can  seldom  be  attempted
with  much  hope  of  success;  and  that  those  who  have  recom-
mended them,  have  not  attended  sufficiently  to  the  circumstances
which  so  remarkably  distinguish  this  study  from  that  which  has


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  33

for  its  object  the  philosophy  of  the  material  world.  A  few
remarks  in  illustration  of  this  proposition  seem  to  me  to  be
necessary,  in  order  to  justify  the  reasonableness  of  Dr.  Reid's
undertaking  ;  and  they  will  be  found  to  apply  with  still  greater
force,  to  the  labours  of  such  as  may  wish  to  avail  themselves  of
a  similar  analysis  in  explaining  the  varieties  of  human  genius
ana  character,  or  in  developing  the  latent  capacities  of  the
youthful  miud.

One  consideration  of  a  more  general  nature  is,  in  the  first
place,  worthy  of  notice;  that  in  the  infancy  of  every  science,
the  grand  and  fundamental  desideratum  is  a  bold  and  compre-
hensive outline : — somewhat  for  the  same  reason,  that,  in  the
cultivation  of  an  extensive  country,  forests  must  be  cleared,  and
wildernesses  reclaimed,  before  the  limits  of  private  property  are
fixed  with  accuracy ;  and  long  before  the  period,  when  the
divisions  and  subdivisions  of  separate  possessions  give  rise  to  the
details  of  a  curious  and  refined  husbandry.  The  speculations
of  Lord  Bacon  embraced  all  the  objects  of  human  knowledge.
Those  of  Newton  and  Boyle  were  confined  to  physics ;  but
included  an  astonishing  range  of  the  material  universe.  The
labours  of  their  successors,  in  our  own  times,  have  been  employed
with  no  less  zeal,  in  pursuing  those  more  particular,  but  equally
abstruse  investigations,  in  which  they  were  unable  to  engage,
for  want  of  a  suflicient  stock,  both  of  facts  and  of  general  prin-
ciples ;  and  which  did  not  perhaps  interest  their  curiosity  in  any
considerable  degree.

If  these  observations  are  allowed  to  hold  to  a  certain  extent
with  respect  to  all  the  sciences,  they  apply  in  a  more  peculiar
manner  to  the  subjects  treated  of  in  Dr.  Reid's  writings  ; — sub-
jects which  are  all  so  intimately  connected,  that  it  may  be  doubted,
if  it  be  possible  to  investigate  any  one  completely,  without. some
general  acquaintance,  at  least,  with  the  rest.  Even  the  theory
of  the  understanding  may  receive  important  lights  from  an
examination  of  the  active  and  the  moral  powers ;  the  state  of
which  in  the  mind  of  every  individual,  will  be  found  to  have  a
powerful  influence  on  his  intellectual  character : — while,  on  the
other  hand,  an  accurate  analysis  of  the  faculties  of  the  under-
standing, would  probably  go  far  to  obviate  the  sceptical  difficul-
ties which  have  been  started  concerning  the  origin  of  our  moral


34  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

ideas. It  appears  to  me,  therefore,  that,  whatever  be  the  depart-
ment of  mental  science  that  we  propose  more  particularly  to
cultivate,  it  is  necessary  to  begin  with  a  survey  of  human  nature
in  all  its  various  parts ;  studying  these  parts,  however, not  so
much  on  their  own  account,  as  with  a  reference  to  the  appUca-
tions  of  which  our  conclusions  are  susceptible  to  our  favourite
purpose. The  researches  of  Dr.  Reid,  when  considered  carefully
in  the  relation  which  they  bear  to  each  other,  afford  numberlesfif
illustrations  of  the  truth  of  this  remark. His  leading  design  was
evidently  to  overthrow  the  modern  system  of  scepticism ;  and  at
every  successive  step  of  his  progress,  new  and  unexpected  lights
break  in  on  his  fimdamental  principles.

It  is,  however,  chiefly  in  their  practical  application  to  the
conduct  of  the  understanding,  and  the  culture  of  the  heart,  that
such  partial  views  are  likely  to  be  dangerous ;  for  here,  they
tend  not  only  to  mislead  our  theoretical  conclusions,  but  to
counteract  our  improvement  and  happiness.  Of  this  I  am  so
fully  convinced,  that  the  most  faulty  theories  of  human  nature,
provided  only  they  embrace  the  whole  of  it,  appear  to  me  less
mischievous  in  their  probable  effects,  than  those  more  accurate
and  microscopical  researches  which  are  habitually  confined  to
one  particular  corner  of  our  constitution.  It  is  easy  to  conceive,
that  where  the  attention  is  wholly  engrossed  with  the  intellectual
powers,  the  moral  principles  will  be  in  danger  of  running  to
waste:  and  it  is  no  less  certain,  on  the  other  hand,  that,  by
confining  our  care  to  the  moral  constitution  alone,  we  may  suffer
the  understanding  to  remain  under  the  influence  of  unhappy
prejudices,  and  destitute  of  those  just  and  enlightened  views,
without  which  the  worthiest  dispositions  are  of  little  use,  either
to  ourselves  or  to  society.  An  exclusive  attention  to  any  one
of  the  subordinate  parts  of  our  frame, — to  the  culture  of  taste
(for  example)  or  of  the  argumentative  powers,  or  even  to  the
refinement  of  our  moral  sentiments  and  feelings, — must  be
attended  with  a  hazard  proportionally  greater.

**  In  forming  the  human  character,"  says  Bacon,  in  a  passage
which  Lord  Bolingbroke  has  pronounced  to  be  one  of  the  finest
and  deepest  in  his  writings,  "  we  must  not  proceed,  as  a  statuary
does  in  forming  a  statue,  who  works  sometimes  on  the  face,
sometimes  on  the  limbs,  sometimes  on  the  folds  of  the  drapery ;


.VI

tur


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  35

P^ but  we  must  proceed  (and  it  is  in  our  power  to  proceed)  as  nature
does  in  forming  a  flower,  or  any  other  of  her  productions  ; — she
throws  out  altogether,  and  at  once,  the  whole  system  of  being,
1 and  the  rudiments  of  all  the  parts. *  Rudimenta  partium  omnium
^T aimul  parit  et  producit.' "  *

J  Of  this  passage,  so  strongly  marked  with  Bacon's  capacious
I  intellect,  and  so  richly  adorned  with  his  "  philosophical  fancy,"
I  will  not  weaken  the  impression  by  any  comment ;  and,  indeed,
to  those  who  do  not  intuitively  perceive  its  evidence,  no  comment
would  be  useful.

In  what  I  have  hitherto  said  of  Dr.  Reid's  speculations,  I  have
conflhed  myself  to  such  general  views  of  the  scope  of  his  re-
searches, and  of  his  mode  of  philosophizing,  as  seemed  most
likely  to  facilitate  the  perusal  of  his  works  to  those  readers  who
have  not  been  much  conversant  with  these  abstract  disquisitions.
A  slight  review  of  some  of  the  more  important  and  fundamental
objections  which  have  been  proposed  to  his  doctrines,  may,  I
hope,  be  useful  as  a  farther  preparation  for  the  same  course  of
study.

Of  these  objections,  the  four  following  appear  to  me  to  be
chiefly  entitled  to  attention.

1.  That  he  has  assumed  gratuitously  in  all  his  reasonings,
that  theory  concerning  the  human  soul,  which  the  scheme  of
materialism  calls  in  question.

2.  That  his  views  tend  to  damp  the  ardour  of  philosophical
curiosity,  by  stating  as  ultimate  facts,  phenomena  which  may
be  resolved  into  principles  more  simple  and  general.

3.  That,  by  an  unnecessary  multiplication  of  original  or
instinctive  principles,  he  has  brought  the  science  of  mind  into
a  state  more  perplexed  and  unsatisfactory,  than  that  in  which  it
was  left  by  Locke  and  his  successors.

4.  That  his  philosophy,  by  sanctioning  an  appeal  from  the
decisions  of  the  learned  to  the  voice  of  the  multitude,  is  unfa-»
vourable  to  a  spirit  of  free  inquiry,  and  lends  additional  stability
to  popular  errors.

1.  With  respect  to  Dr.  Reid's  supposed  assumption  of  a

•  In  the  foregoing  paragraph,  I  have  borrowed  (with  a  very  trifling  altera-
tion) Lord  Bolingbroke's  words,  in  a  beautiful  paraphrase  on  Bacon's  remark.
—See  his  "  Idea  of  a  Patriot  King."

J>2


36  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

doubtful  hypothesis  concerning  the  nature  of  the  thinking  and
sentient  principle,  it  is  almost  sufficient  for  me  to  observe,  that
the  charge  is  directed  against  that  very  point  of  his  philosophy
in  which  it  is  most  completely  invulnerable.  The  circumstance
which  peculiarly  characterises  the  inductive  science  of  mind  is,
that  it  professes  to  abstain  from  all  speculations  concerning  its
nature  and  essence ;  confining  the  attention  entirely  to  pheno-
mena, for  which  we  have  the  evidence  of  consciousness,  and  to  the
laws  by  which  these  phenomena  are  regulated.  In  this  respect,
it  differs  equally,  in  its  scope,  from  the  pneumatological  discus-
sions of  the  schools  ;  and  from  the  no  less  visionary  theories,  so
loudly  vaunted  by  the  physiological  metaphysicians  of  ihore
modem  times.  Compared  with  the  first,  it  differs,  as  the  in-
quiries of  the  mechanical  philosophers  concerning  the  laws  of
moving  bodies,  differ  from  the  discussions  of  the  ancient  sophists
concerning  the  existence  and  the  nature  of  motion.  Compared
with  the  other,  the  difference  is  analogous  to  what  exists  between
the  conclusions  of  Newton  concerning  the  law  of  gravitation,
and  his  query  concerning  the  invisible  ether  of  which  he  sup-
posed it  might,  possibly,  be  the  effect.  The  facts  which  this
inductive  science  aims  at  ascertaining,  rest  on  their  own  proper
evidence ; — an  evidence  unconnected  with  all  these  hypotheses,
and  which  would  not,  in  the  smallest  degree,  be  affected,  although
the  truth  of  any  one  of  them  should  be  fully  established.  It  is
not,  therefore,  on  account  of  its  inconsistency  with  any  favourite
opinions  of  my  own,  that  I  would  oppose  the  disquisitions  either
of  scholastic  pneumatology,  or  of  physiological  metaphysics ;
but  because  I  consider  them  as  an  idle  waste  of  time  and  genius,
on  questions  where  our  conclusions  can  neither  be  verified  nor
overturned  by  an  appeal  to  experiment  or  observation.  Sir
Isaac  Newton's  query  concerning  the  cause  of  gravitation  was
certainly  not  inconsistent  with  his  own  discoveries  concerning  its
laws  ;  but  what  would  have  been  the  consequences  to  the  world,
if  he  had  indulged  himself  in  the  prosecution  of  hypothetical
theories  with  respect  to  the  former,  instead  of  directing  his
astonishing  powers  to  an  investigation  of  the  latter  ?

That  the  general  spirit  of  Dr.  Reid's  philosophy  is  hostile  to
the  conclusions  of  the  materialists,  is  indeed  a  fact :  not,  how-
ever, because  his  system  rests  on  the  contrary  hypothesis  as  a


OF  THOBIAS  REID,  D.D.  37

fundamental  principle,  but  because  his  inquiries  have  a  powerful
tendency  to  wean  the  understanding  gradually  from  those  obsti-
nate associations  and  prejudices,  to  which  the  common  mechani-
cal theories  of  mind  owe  all  their  plausibility.  It  is,  in  truth,
much  more  from  such  examples  of  soimd  research  concerning
the  laws  of  thought,  than  from  any  direct  metaphysical  refuta-
tion, that  a  change  is  to  be  expected  in  the  opinions  of  those
who  have  been  accustomed  to  confound  together  two  classes  of
phenomena,  so  completely  and  essentially  diflferent.  — But  this
view  of  the  subject  does  not  belong  to  the  present  argument.

It  has  been  recommended  of  late,  by  a  medical  author  of  great
reputation,  to  those  who  wish  to  study  the  human  mind,  to  begin
with  preparing  themselves  for  the  task  by  the  study  of  anatomy.
I  must  confess,  I  cannot  perceive  the  advantages  of  this  order
of  investigation ;  as  the  anatomy  of  the  body  does  not  seem  to
me  more  likely  to  throw  light  on  the  philosophy  of  the  mind,
than  an  analysis  of  the  mind  to  throw  light  on  the  physiology  of
the  body.  To  ascertain,  indeed,  the  general  laws  of  their  con-
nexion from  facts  established  by  observation  or  experiment,  is  a
reasonable  and  most  interesting  object  of  philosophical  curiosity ;
and  in  this  inquiry,  (which  was  long  ago  proposed  and  recom-
mended by  Lord  Bacon,)  a  knowledge  of  the  constitution  both
of  mind  and  body  is  indispensably  requisite  ;  but  even  here,  if
we  wish  to  proceed  on  firm  ground,  the  two  classes  of  facts  must
be  kept  completely  distinct ;  so  that  neither  of  them  may  be
warped  or  distorted,  in  consequence  of  theories  suggested  by
their  supposed  relations  or  analogies.*  Thus,  in  many  of  the
phenomena  connected  with  custom  and  habit,  there  is  ample
scope  for  investigating  general  laws,  both  with  respect  to  our
mental  and  our  corporeal  frame ;  but  what  light  do  we  derive
from  such  information  concerning  this  part  of  our  constitution
as  is  contained  in  the  following  sentence  of  Locke  ?  "  Habits
seem  to  be  but  trains  of  motion  in  the  animal  spirits,  which,
once  set  a-going,  continue  in  the  same  steps  they  had  been
used  to,  which  by  often  treading  are  worn  into  a  smooth  path."
In  like  manner,  the  laws  which  regulate  the  connexion  between
the  mind  and  our  external  organs,  in  the  case  of  perception,
have furnished  a  very  fertile  subject  of  examination  to  some

•  Elements  of  the  riiilosopby  of  the  Human  Mind,  pp.  11, 12,  2nd  edit.


38  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

of  the  best  of  our  modern  philosophers ;  but  how  impotent  does
the  genius  of  Newton  itself  appear^  when  it  attempts  to  shoot
the  gulf  which  separates  the  sensible  world,  and  the  sentient
principle  ?  "  Is  not  the  sensorium  of  animals,"  he  asks  in  one
of  his  queries,  "  the  place  where  the  sentient  substance  is  pre-
sent, and  to  which  the  sensible  species  of  things  are  brought
through  the  nerves  and  brain,  that  they  may  be  perceived  by  the
mind  present  in  that  place  ?"

It  ought  to  be  remembered  also,  that  this  inquiry,  with  respect
to  the  laws  regulating  the  connexion  between  our  bodily  organ-
ization, and  the  phenomena  subjected  to  our  own  consciousness,
is  but  one  particular  department  of  the  philosophy  of  the  mind ;
and  that  there  still  remains  a  wide  and  indeed  boundless  region,
where  all  our  data  must  be  obtained  from  our  own  mental  ope-
rations. In  examining,  for  instance,  the  powers  of  judgment
and  reasoning,  let  any  person  of  sound  understanding,  after
perusing  the  observations  of  Bacon  on  the  different  classes  of
our  prejudices,  or  those  of  Locke  on  the  abuse  of  words,  turn
his  attention  to  the  speculations  of  some  of  our  contemporary
theorists ;  and  he  will  at  once  perceive  the  distinction  between
the  two  modes  of  investigation  which  I  wish  at  present  to  con-
trast. *'  Reasoning,"  says  one  of  the  most  ingenious  and  original
of  these,  "  is  that  operation  of  the  sensorium,  by  which  we  excite
two  or  many  tribes  of  ideas  ;*'and  then  re-excite  the  ideas,  in
which  they  differ  or  correspond.  If  we  determine  this  difference,
it  is  called  Judgment ;  if  we  in  vain  endeavour  to  determine  it,
it  is  called  Doubting. — If  we  re-excite  the  ideas  in  which  they
differ,  it  is  called  Distinguishing ;  if  we  re-excite  those  in  which
they  correspond,  it  is  called  Comparing."* — In  what  acceptation
the  word  idea  is  to  be  understood  in  the  foregoing  passage,  may
be  learned  from  the  following  definition  of  the  same  author  : —
"  The  word  idea  has  various  meanings  in  the  writers  of  meta-
physics: it  is  here  used  simply  for  those  notions  of  external
things,  which  our  organs  of  sense  bring  us  acquainted  with
originally ;  and  is  defined,  a  contraction,  or  motion,  or  configu-
ration, of  the  fibres,  which  constitute  the  immediate  organ  of
sense."f  Mr.  Hume,  who  was  less  of  a  physiologist  than  Dr.
Darwin,  has  made  use  of  a  language  by  no  means  so  theoretical

•  Zoonomia,  vol.  i.  p.  181,  3rd  edit.  f  Ibid.  vol.  i.  pp.  11,  12.


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  39

and  arbitrary  ;  but  still  widely  removed  from  the  simplicity  and
precision  essentially  necessary  in  studies,  where  everything  de-
pends on  the  cautious  use  of  terms.  "Belief,"  according  to
him,  is  "  a  lively  idea  related  to  or  associated  with  a  present
impression ;  memory  is  the  faculty  by  which  we  repeat  our  im-
pressions, so  as  that  they  retain  a  considerable  degree  of  their
first  vivacity,  and  are  somewhat  intermediate  betwixt  an  idea
and  an  impression."

According  to  the  views  of  Dr.  Reid,  the  terms  which  express
the  simple  powers  of  the  mind,  are  considered  as  unsusceptible
of  definition  or  explanation ;  the  words,  feeling,  for  example,
knowledge,  will,  doubt,  belief,  being,  in  this  respect,  on  the
same  footing  with  the  wojrds,  green  or  scarlet,  sweet  or  bitter.
To  the  names  of  these  mental  operations,  all  men  annex  some
notions,  more  or  less  distinct ;  and  the  only  way  of  conveying
to  them  notions  more  correct,  is  by  teaching  them  to  exercise
their  own  powers  of  reflection.  The  definitions  quoted  from
Hume  and  Darwin,  even  if  they  were  more  unexceptionable  in
point  of  phraseology,  would,  for  these  reasons,  be  unphilosophi-
cal,  as  attempts  to  simplify  what  is  incapable  of  analysis ;  but,
as  they  are  actually  stated,  they  not  only  envelop  truth  in  mys-
tery, but  lay  a  foundation,  at  the  very  outset,  for  an  erroneous
theory.  It  is  worth  while  to  add,  that  of  the  two  theories  in
question,  that  of  Darwin,  how  inferior  soever,  in  the  estimation
of  competent  judges,  as  a  philosophical  work,  is  by  far  the  best
calculated  to  impose  on  a  very  wide  circle  of  readers,  by  the
mixture  it  exhibits  of  crude  and  visionary  metaphysics,  with
those  important  facts  and  conclusions  which  might  be  expected
from  the  talents  and  experience  of  such  a  writer,  in  the  present
advanced  state  of  medical  and  physiological  science.  The  ques-
tions which  have  been  hitherto  confined  to  a  few,  prepared  for
such  discussions  by  habits  of  philosophical  study,  are  thus  sub-
mitted to  the  consideration, — not  only  of  the  cultivated  and
enlightened  minds,  which  adorn  the  medical  profession, — but  of
the  half-informed  multitude  who  follow  the  medical  trade.  Nor
is  it  to  be  doubted,  that  many  of  these  will  give  the  author
credit  upon  subjects  of  which  they  feel  themselves  incompetent
to  judge,  for  the  same  ability  which  he  displays  within  their  own
professional  sphere. The  hypothetical  principles  assumed  by


40  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

Hume  are  intelligible  to  those  only  who  are  familiarized  to  the
language  of  the  schools  ;  and  his  ingenuity  and  elegance,  capti-
vating as  they  are  to  men  of  taste  and  refinement,  possess  slight
attractions  to  the  majority  of  such  as  are  most  likely  to  be  misled
by  his  conclusions.

Aftei  all,  I  do  not  apprehend  that  the  physiological  theories
concerning  the  mind,  which  have  made  so  much  noise  of  late,
will  produce  a  very  lasting  impression. The  splendour  of  Dr.
Darwin's  accomplishments  could  not  fail  to  bestow  a  temporary
importance  on  whatever  opinions  were  sanctioned  by  his  name ;
as  the  chemical  discoveries  which  have  immortalized  that  of
Priestley,  have,  for  a  while,  recalled  from  oblivion  the  reveries
of  Hartley. But,  abstracting  from  these  accidental  instances,  in
which  human  reason  seems  to  have  held  a  retrograde  course,
there  has  certainly  been,  since  the  time  of  Des  Cartes,  a  con-
tinual, and,  on  the  whole,  a  very  remarkable  approach  to  the  in-
ductive plan  of  studying  human  nature. We  may  trace  this  in
the  writings  even  of  those  who  profess  to  consider  thought  merely
as  an  agitation  of  the  brain;  in  the  writings  more  particularly  of
Hume  and  of  Helvetius ; both  of  whom,  although  they  may
have  occasionally  expressed  themselves  in  an  unguarded  manner
concerning  the  nature  of  mind,  have,  in  their  most  useful  and
practical  disquisitions,  been  prevented,  by  their  own  good  sense,
from  blending  any  theory  with  respect  to  the  causes  of  the  intel-
lectual phenomena  with  the  history  of  facts,  or  the  investigation
of  general  laws. The  authors  who  form  the  most  conspicuous
exceptions  to  this  gradual  progress,  consist  chiefly  of  men  whose
errors  may  be  easily  accounted  for,  by  the  prejudices  connected
with  their  circumscribed  habits  of  observation  and  inquiry ;  of
physiologists,  accustomed  to  attend  to  that  part  alone  of  the
human  frame  which  the  knife  of  the  anatomist  can  lay  open  ;  or
of  chemists,  who  enter  on  the  analysis  of  thought,  fresh  from  the
decompositions  of  the  laboratory ;  carrjdng  into  the  theory  of
mind  itself  (what  Bacon  expressively  calls)  "  the  smoke  and  tar-
nish of  the  furnace." Of  the  value  of  such  pursuits,  none  can
think  more  highly  than  myself ;  but  I  must  be  allowed  to  ob-
serve, that  the  most  distinguished  pre-eminence  in  them  does
not  necessarily  imply  a  capacity  of  collected  and  abstracted  re-
flection, or  an  understanding  superior  to  the  prejudices  of  early


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  41

association,  and  the  illusions  of  popular  language.  T  will  not
go  so  far  as  Cicero,  when  he  ascribes  to  those  who  possess  these
advantages  a  more  than  ordinary  vigour  of  intellect:  "Magni
est  ingenii  revocare  mentem  a  sensibus,  et  cogitationem  a  con-
suetudine  abducere."  "  It  is  characteristic  of  great  genius  to  be
able  to  call  away  the  mind  from  objects  of  sense,  and  abstract
the  thoughts  from  those  that  are  customary."  I  would  only
claim  for  them  the  merit  of  patient  and  cautious  research ;  and
would  exact  from  their  antagonists  the  same  qualifications.*

In  offering  these  remarks,  I  have  no  wish  to  exalt  any  one
branch  of  useful  knowledge  at  the  expense  of  another,  but  to
combat  prejudices  equally  fatal  to  the  progress  of  them  all.  With
the  same  view,  I  cannot  help  taking  notice  of  a  prevailing,  but
very  mistaken  idea,  that  the  formation  of  a  hypothetical  system
is  a  stronger  proof  of  inventive  genius  than  the  patient  investi-
gation of  nature,  in  the  way  of  induction.  To  form  a  system,
appears  to  the  young  and  inexperienced  understanding  a  species
of  creation ;  to  ascend  slowly  to  general  conclusions,  from  the
observation  and  comparison  of  particular  facts,  is  to  comment
servilely  on  the  works  of  another.

No  opinion  surely  can  be  more  groundless.  To  fix  on  a  few
principles,  or  even  on  a  single  principle  as  the  foundation  of  a
theory ;  and,  by  an  artful  statement  of  supposed  facts,  aided  by
a  dexterous  use  of  language,  to  give  a  plausible  explanation,  by
means  of  it,  of  an  immense  number  of  phenomena;  is  within
the  reach  of  most  men  whose  talents  have  been  a  little  exercised
among  the  subtleties  of  the  schools :  whereas,  to  follow  nature
through  all  her  varieties  with  a  quick  yet  an  exact  eye ;  to  re-

•  A  writer  of  great  talents  (after  having  reproached  Dr.  Reid  with  "  a  gross
ignorance,  disgraceful  to  the  university  of  which  he  was  a  member,")  boasts  of
the  trifling  expense  of  time  and  thought  which  it  had  cost  himself  to  overturn
his  philosophy.  "  Dr.  Oswald  is  pleased  to  pay  me  a  compliment  in  saying,
that  '  I  might  employ  myself  to  more  advantage  to  the  public,  by  pursuing
other  branches  of  science,  than  by  deciding  rashly  on  a  subject  which  he  sees  I
have  not  studied.'  In  return  to  this  compliment,  I  shall  not  affront  him  by
telling  him  how  very  little  of  my  time  this  business  has  hitherto  taken  up.
If  he  alludes  to  my  experiments,  I  can  assure  him  that  I  have  lost  no  time  at
all ;  for  having  been  intent  upon  such  as  require  the  use  of  a  burning  lens,  I
believe  I  have  not  lost  one  hour  of  sunshine  on  this  account.  And  the  public
may  perhaps  be  informed,  some  time  or  other,  of  what  I  have  been  doing  in
the  9un,  as  well  as  in  the  shade" — Examination  of  Reid's  Inquiry,  &c.
p.  357. See  also  pp.  101,  102,  of  the  same  work.


42  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

cord  faithfully  what  she  exhibits,  and  to  record  nothing  more ; —
to  trace,  amidst  the  diversity  of  her  operations,  the  simple  and
comprehensive  laws  by  which  they  are  regulated,  and  sometimes
to  guess  at  the  beneficent  purposes  to  which  they  are  subser-
vient,— may  be  safely  pronounced  to  be  the  highest  effort  of  a
created  intelligence.  And,  accordingly,  the  number  of  inge-
nious theorists  has,  in  every  age,  been  great ;  that  of  sound  phi-
losophers has  been  wonderfully  small,  or  rather,  they  are  only
beginning  now  to  have  a  glimpse  of  their  way,  in  consequence
of  the  combined  lights  furnished  by  their  predecessors.

Des  Cartes  aimed  at  a  complete  system  of  physics,  deduced  d
priori  from  the  abstract  suggestions  of  his  own  reason :  Newton
aspired  no  higher  than  at  a  faithful  "  interpretation  of  nature,"
in  a  few  of  the  more  general  laws  which  she  presents  to  our  no-
tice ;  and  yet  the  intellectual  power  displayed  in  the  voluminous
writings  of  the  former  vanishes  into  nothing,  when  compared
with  what  we  may  trace  in  a  single  page  of  the  latter.  On  this
occasion  a  remark  of  Lord  Bacon  appears  singularly  apposite ;
that  "  Alexander  and  Caesar,  though  they  acted  without  the  aid
of  magic  or  prodigy,  performed  exploits  that  are  truly  greater
than  what  fable  reports  of  King  Arthur  or  Amadis  de  Gaul."

I  shall  only  add  farther  on  this  head,  that  the  last  observation
holds  more  strictly  with  respect  to  the  philosophy  of  the  human
mind  than  any  other  branch  of  science  ;  for  there  is  no  subject
whatever  on  which  it  is  so  easy  to  form  theories  calculated  to
impose  on  the  multitude ;  and  none  where  the  discovery  of  truth
is  attended  with  so  many  difficulties.  One  great  cause  of  this
is,  the  analogical  or  theoretical  terms  employed  in  ordinary  lan-
guage to  express  every  thing  relating  either  to  our  intellectual
or  active  powers ;  in  .consequence  of  which,  specious  explana-
tions of  the  most  mysterious  phenomena  may  be  given  to  super-
ficial inquirers;  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  labour  of  just
investigation  is  increased  to  an  incalculable  degree.

2.  To  allege,  that  in  this  circumscription  of  the  field  of  our
inquiries  concerning  the  mind,  there  is  any  tendency  to  repress
a  reasonable  and  pliilosophical  curiosity,  is  a  charge  no  less  im-
founded  than  the  former;  inasmuch  as  every  physical  inquiry
concerning  the  material  world  is  circumscribed  by  limits  pre-
cisely analogous.  In  all  our  investigations,  whatever  their  sub-
ject may  be,  the  business  of  philosophy  is  confined  to  a  reference


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  4^

of  particular  facts  to  other  facts  more  general ;  and  our  most
successful  researches  must  at  length  terminate  in  some  law  of
nature,  of  which  no  explanation  can  be  given.  In  its  applica-
tion to  Dr.  Reid's  writings,  this  objection  has,  I  think,  been
more  pointedly  directed  against  his  reasonings  concerning  the
process  of  nature  in  perception ;  a  part  of  his  writings  which
(as  it  is  of  fundamental  importance  in  his  general  system)  he
has  laboured  with  peculiar  care.  The  result  is,  indeed,  by  no
means  flattering  to  the  pride  of  those  theorists  who  profess  to
explain  every  thing ;  for  it  amounts  to  an  acknowledgment,  that,
after  all  the  lights  which  anatomy  and  physiology  supply,  the
information  we  obtain,  by  means  of  our  senses,  concerning  the
existence  and  the  qualities  of  matter,  is  no  less  incomprehen-
sible to  our  faculties  than  it  appears  to  the  most  illiterate  pea-
sant ;  and  that  all  we  have  gained  is  a  more  precise  and  complete
acquaintance  with  some  particulars  in  our  animal  economy, —
highly  interesting  indeed  when  regarded  in  their  proper  light,
as  accessions  to  our  physical  knowledge,  but,  considered  in  con-
nexion with  the  philosophy  of  the  mind,  affording  only  a  more
accurate  statement  of  the  astonishing  phenomena  which  we  would
vainly  endeavour  to  explain.  This  language  has  been  charged,
but  most  unjustly  and  ignorantly,  with  mysticism  ;  for  the  same
charge  may  be  brought,  with  equal  fairness,  against  aU  the  most
important  discoveries  in  the  sciences.  It  was  in  truth  the  very
objection  urged  against  Newton,  when  his  adversaries  contended,
that  gravity  was  to  be  ranked  with  the  occult  qualities  of  the
schoolmen,  till  its  mechanical  cause  should  be  assigned ;  and  the
answer  given  to  this  objection  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  commen-
tator, Mr.  Maclaurin,  may  be  literally  applied,  in  the  instance
before  us,  to  the  inductive  philosophy  of  the  hmnan  mind.

"  The  opponents  of  Newton,  finding  nothing  to  object  to  his
observations  and  reasonings,  pretended  to  find  a  resemblance
between  his  doctrines  and  the  exploded  tenets  of  the  scholastic
philosophy.  They  triumphed  mightily  in  treating  gravity  as  an
occult  quality,  because  he  did  not  pretend  to  deduce  this  prin-
ciple fully  from  its  cause.  I  know  not  that  ever  it  was  made  an
objection  to  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  that  there  is  no  small
difliculty  in  accounting  for  it  mechanically.  They,  too,  who
first  extended  gravity  to  air,  vapour,  and  to  all  bodies  round  the


44  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

earth,  had  their  praise ;  though  the  cause  of  gravity  was  as  ob-
scure as  before  ;  or  rather  appeared  more  mysterious,  after  tbey
had  shown,  that  there  was  no  body  found  near  the  earth,  ex-
empt from  gravity,  that  might  be  supposed  to  be  its  cause.  Why
then  were  his  admirable  discoveries,  by  which  this  principle
was  extended  over  the  universe,  so  ill  relished  by  some  philoso-
phers ?  The  truth  is,  he  had,  with  great  evidence,  overtlirown
the  boasted  schemes  by  which  they  pretended  to  unravel  all  the
mysteries  of  nature ;  and  the  philosophy  he  introduced,  in  place
of  them,  canying  with  it  a  sincere  confession  of  our  being  far
from  a  complete  and  perfect  knowledge  of  it,  could  not  please
those  who  had  been  accustomed  to  imagine  themselves  possessed
of  the  eternal  reasons  and  primary  causes  of  all  things.

"  It  was,  however,  no  new  thing  that  this  philosophy  should
meet  with  opposition.  All  the  useful  discoveries  that  were  made
in  former  times,  and  particularly  in  the  seventeenth  century,  had
to  struggle  with  the  prejudices  of  those  who  had  accustomed
themselves,  not  so  much  as  to  think  but  in  a  certain  systematic
way ;  who  could  not  be  prevailed  on  to  abandon  their  favourite
schemes,  while  they  were  able  to  imagine  the  least  pretext  for
continuing  the  dispute.  Every  art  and  talent  was  displayed  to
support  their  falKng  cause  ;  no  aid  seemed  foreign  to  them  that
could  in  any  manner  annoy  their  adversary  ;  and  such  often  was
their  obstinacy,  that  truth  was  able  to  make  little  progress,  till
they  were  succeeded  by  younger  persons,  who  had  not  so  strongly
imbibed  their  prejudices."

These  excellent  observations  are  not  the  less  applicable  to  the
subject  now  under  consideration,  that  the  part  of  Dr.  Raid's
writings  which  suggested  the  quotation,  leads  only  to  the  correc-
tion of  an  inveterate  prejudice,  not  to  any  new  general  conclu-
sion. It  is  probable,  indeed,  (now  that  the  Ideal  Theory  has  in
a  great  measure  disappeared  from  our  late  metaphysical  systems,)
that  those  who  have  a  pleasure  in  detracting  from  the  merits  of
their  predecessors,  may  be  disposed  to  represent  it  as  an  idle
waste  of  labour  and  ingenuity  to  have  entered  into  a  serious
refutation  of  an  hypothesis  at  once  gratuitous  and  inconceivable.
A  different  judgment,  however,  will  be  formed  by  such  as  are
acquainted  with  the  extensive  influence  which,  from  the  earliest
accounts  of  science,  this  single  prejudice  has  had  in  vitiating


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  45

almost  every  branch  of  the  philosophy  of  the  mind ;  and  who,  at
the  same  time,  recollect  the  names  of  the  illustrious  men,  by
whom,  in  more  modern  times,  it  has  been  adopted  as  an  incon-
trovertible principle.  It  is  sufficient  for  me  to  mention  those  of
Berkeley,  Hume,  Locke,  Clarke,  and  Newton.  To  the  two  first
of  these,  it  has  served  as  the  basis  of  their  sceptical  conclusions,
which  seem  indeed  to  follow  from  it  as  necessary  consequences ;
while  the  others  repeatedly  refer  to  it  in  their  reasonings,  as  one
of  those  facts  concerning  the  mind,  of  which  it  would  be  equally
superfluous  to  attempt  a  proof  or  a  refutation.

I  have  enlarged  on  this  part  of  Dr.  Reid's  writings  the  more
fully  as  he  was  himself  disposed,  on  all  occasions,  to  rest  upon  it
his  chief  merit  as  an  author.  In  proof  of  this,  I  shall  transcribe
a  few  sentences  from  a  letter  of  his  to  Dr.  Gregory,  dated  ^th
August,  1790.

**  It  would  be  want  of  candour  not  to  own,  that  I  think  there
is  some  merit  in  what  you  are  pleased  to  call  my  philosaphy  ;  but
I  think  it  lies  chiefly  in  having  called  in  question  the  common
theory  of  idetis  or  images  of  things  in  the  mind  being  the  only
objects  of  thought ;  a  theory  founded  on  natural  prejudices,  and
so  universally  received  as  to  be  interwoven  with  the  structure  of
language.  Yet  were  I  to  give  you  a  detail  of  what  led  me  to
call  in  question  this  theory,  after  I  had  long  held  it  as  self-evi-
dent and  unquestionable,  you  would  think,  as  I  do,  that  there
was  much  of  chance  in  the  matter.  ITie  discovery  was  the  birth
of  time,  not  of  genius ;  and  Berkeley  and  Hume  did  more  to
bring  it  to  light  than  the  man  that  hit  upon  it.  I  think  there  is
hardly  any  thing  that  can  be  called  mine  in  the  philosophy  of
the  mind  which  does  not  follow  with  ease  from  the  detection  of
this  prejudice.

"  I  must,  therefore,  beg  of  you  most  earnestly,  to  make  no
contrast  in  my  favour  to  the  disparagement  of  my  predecessors  in
the  same  pursuit.  I  can  truly  say  of  them,  and  shall  always
avow,  what  you  are  pleased  to  say  of  me,  that  but  for  the  assist-
ance I  liave  received  from  their  writings,  I  never  could  have
wrote  or  thought  what  I  have  done."

3.  Somewhat  connected  with  the  last  objection  are  the  cen-
sures which  have  been  so  frequently  bestowed  on  Dr.  Reid  for
an  unnecessary  and  unsystematical  multiplication  of  original  or
instinctive  principles.


4g  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WHITINGS

In  reply  to  these  censures,  I  have  Kttle  to  add  to  what  I  have
remarked  on  the  same  topic,  in  the  "  Philosophy  of  the  Hiunan
Mind."  That  the  fault  which  is  thus  ascribed  to  Dr.  Reid  has
been  really  committed  by  some  ingenious  writers  in  this  part  of
the  island,  I  most  readily  allow ;  nor  will  I  take  upon  me  to
assert,  that  he  has  in  no  instance  fallen  into  it  himself.  Such
instances,  however,  will  be  found,  on  an  accurate  examination  of
his  works,  to  be  comparatively  few,  and  to  bear  a  very  trifling
proportion  to  those  in  which  he  has  most  successfully  and  deci-
sively displayed  his  acuteness  in  exposing  the  premature  and
flimsy  generalizations  of  his  predecessors.

A  certain  degree  of  leaning  to  that  extreme  to  which  Dr.  Reid
seems  to  have  inclined,  was,  at  the  time  when  he  wrote,  much
safer  than  the  opposite  bias.  From  the  earliest  ages,  the  sci-
ences in  general,  and  more  particularly  the  science  of  the  human
mind,  have  been  vitiated  by  an  undue  love  of  simplicity ;  and  in
the  course  of  the  last  century  this  disposition,  after  having  been
long  displayed  in  subtile  theories  concerning  the  active  powers,
or  the  principles  of  human  conduct,  ha^  been  directed  to  similar
refinements  with  respect  to  the  faculties  of  the  imderstanding,
and  the  truths  with  which  they  are  conversant.  Mr.  Hume
himself  has  coincided  so  far  with  the  Hartleian  school,  as  to
represent  the  "principle  of  imion  and  cohesion  among  our  simple
ideas  as  a  kind  of  attraction^  of  as  universal  application  in  the
mental  world  as  in  the  natural;"*  and  Dr.  Hartley,  with  a  still
more  sanguine  imagination,  looked  forward  to  an  era  "when
future  generations  shall  put  all  kinds  of  evidences  and  inquiries
into  mathematical  forms,  reducing  Aristotle's  ten  categories,  and
Bishop  Wilkins's  forty  summa  genera,  to  the  head  of  quantity
alone,  so  as  to  make  mathematics  and  logic,  natural  history  and
civil  history,  natural  philosophy  and  philosophy  of  all  other
kinds,  coincide  omni  exparte."f

It  is  needless  to  remark  the  obvious  tendency  of  such  prema-
ture generalizations  to  withdraw  the  attention  from  the  study  of
particular  phenomena ;  while  the  efiect  of  Reid's  mode  of  phi-
losophizing, even  in  those  instances  where  it  is  carried  to  an
excess,  is  to  detain  us,  in  this  preliminary  step,  a  little  longer

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  i.  p.  30.
f  Hartley  on  Man,  p.  207,  London,  1791.


OF  THOMAS  R£ID,  D.D.  47

than  is  absolutely  necessary.  The  truth  is,  that  when  the  phe-
nomena are  once  ascertained,  generalization  is  here  of  compara-
tively little  value,  and  a  task  of  far  less  difficulty  than  to  observe
facts  with  precision,  and  to  record  them  with  fairness.

In  no  part  of  Dr.  Reid's  writings,  I  am  inclined  to  think,
could  more  plausible  criticisms  be  made  on  this  ground,  than  in
his  classification  of  our  active  principles;  but  even  there,  the
facts  are  always  placed  fully  and  distinctly  before  the  reader.
That  several  of  the  benevolent  afiections  which  he  has  stated  as
ultimate  facts  in  our  constitution,  might  be  analyzed  into  the
same  general  principle  difierently  modified,  according  to  circum-
stances, there  can,  in  my  opinion,  be  little  doubt.  This,  how-
ever, (as  I  have  elsewhere  observed,*)  notwithstanding  the  stress
which  has  been  sometimes  laid  upon  it,  is  chiefly  a  question  of
arrangeihent.  Whether  we  suppose  these  afiections  to  be  all
ultimate  facts,  or  some  of  them  to  be  resolvable  into  other  facts
more  general ;  they  are  equally  to  be  regarded  as  constituent
parts  of  human  nature ;  and,  upon  either  supposition,  we  have
equal  reason  to  admire  the  wisdom  with  which  that  nature  is
adapted  to  the  situation  in  which  it  is  placed.  The  laws  which
regulate  the  acquired  perceptions  of  sight,  are  surely  as  much  a
part  of  our  frame  as  those  which  regulate  any  of  our  original
perceptions ;  and,  although  they  require,  for  their  development,
a  certain  degree  of  experience  and  observation  in  the  individual,
the  uniformity  of  the  result  shows,  that  there  is  nothing  arbi-
trary nor  accidental  in  their  origin.  In  this  point  of  view,  what
can  be  more  philosophical,  as  well  as  beautiful,  than  the  words
of  Mr.  Ferguson,  that  "  natural  afiection  springs  up  in  the  soul
of  the  mother,  as  the  milk  springs  in  her  breast,  to  furnish  nou-
rishment to  her  child !" — "  The  efiect  is  here  to  the  race,"  as  the
same  author  has  excellently  observed,  "  what  the  vital  motion
of  the  heart  is  to  the  individual ;  too  necessary  to  the  preserva-
tion of  nature's  works,  to  be  intrusted  to  the  precarious  will  or
intention  of  those  most  nearly  concemed."f

The  question,  indeed,  concerning  the  origin  of  our  different

♦  Outlines  of  Moral  Philosophy,  pp.  79,  80,  2nd  edit.  Edin.  1801.

t  Principles  of  Moral  and  Political  Science,  Part  i.  chap.  i.  sect.  3,  "  Of
the  principles  of  society  in  human  nature." — The  whole  discussion  unites,  in  a
singular  degree,  the  soundest  philosophy  with  the  most  eloquent  description.


48  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

affections,  leads  to  some  curiovis  analytical  disquisitions ;  but  is
of  very  subordinate  importance  to  those  inquiries  which  relate  to
their  laws,  and  uses,  and  mutual  references.  In  many  ethical
systems,  however,  it  seems  to  have  been  considered  as  the  most
interesting  subject  of  disquisition  which  this  wonderful  part  of
our  frame  presents.

In  Dr.  Reid's  "  Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man,"
and  in  his  "  Inquiry  into  the  Human  Mind,"  I  recollect  little
that  can  justly  incur  a  similiar  censure ;  notwithstanding  the  ridi-
cule which  Dr.  Priestley  has  attempted  to  throw  on  the  last  of
these  performances,  in  his  "  Table  of  Reid's  Instinctive  Princi-
ples."* To  examine  all  the  articles  enumerated  in  that  table,
would  require  a  greater  latitude  of  disquisition  than  the  limits
of  this  memoir  allow ;  and,  therefore,  I  shall  confine  my  observa-
tions to  a  few  instances,  where  the  precipitancy  of  the  general
criticism  seems  to  me  to  admit  of  little  dispute.  In  this  light  I
cannot  help  considering  it,  when  applied  to  those  dispositions  or
determinations  of  the  mind,  to  which  Dr.  Reid  has  given  the
names  of  the  "principle  of  credulity,"  and  the  "principle  of
veracity."  How  far  these  titles  are  happily  chosen,  is  a  question
of  little  moment ;  and  on  that  point  I  am  ready  to  make  every
concession.  I  contend  only  for  what  is  essentially  connected
with  the  objection  which  has  given  rise  to  these  remarks.

"  That  any  man,"  says  Dr.  Priestley,  "  should  imagine  that  a
peculiar  instinctive  principle  was  necessary  to  explain  our  giving
credit  to  the  relations  of  others,  appears  to  me,  who  have  been
used  to  see  things  in  a  different  light,  very  extraordinary  ;  and
yet  this  doctrine  is  advanced  by  Dr.  Reid,  and  adopted  by  Dr.
Beattie.  But  really,"  he  adds,  "  what  the  former  says  in  favour
of  it,  is  hardly  deserving  of  the  slightest  notice.f"

The  passage  quoted  by  Dr.  Priestley,  in  justification  of  this
very  peremptory  decision,  is  as  follows  :  "  If  credulity  were  the
effect  of  reasoning  and  experience,  it  must  grow  up  and  gather
strength  in  the  same  proportion  as  reason  and  experience  do.
But  if  it  is  the  gift  of  nature,  it  will  be  the  strongest  in  child-
hood, and  limited  and  restrained  by  experience ;  and  the  most
superficial  view  of  human  life  shows  that  this  last  is  the  case,
and  not  the  first."

*  Examination  of  Reid's  Inquiry,  &c.  London,  1774. ' -f  Ibid.  p.  82.


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  4Q

To  my  own  judgment,  this  argument  of  Dr.  Reid's,  when  con-
nected with  the  excellent  illustrations  which  accompany  it,  carries
complete  conviction ;  and  I  am  confirmed  in  my  opinion  by  find-
ing that  Mr.  Smith  (a  writer  inferior  to  none  in  acuteness,  and
strongly  disposed  by  the  peculiar  bent  of  his  genius,  to  simplify,
as  far  as  possible,  the  philosophy  of  human  nature,)  has,  in  the
latest  edition  of  his  "  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,"  acquiesced
in  this  very  conclusion  ;  urging  in  support  of  it  the  same  reason-
ing which  Dr.  Priestley  affects  to  estimate  so  lightly.  "  There
seems  to  be  in  young  children  an  instinctive  disposition  to  believe
whatever  they  are  told.  Nature  seems  to  have  judged  it  neces-
sary for  their  preservation  that  they  should,  for  some  time  at
least,  put  implicit  confidence  in  those  to  whom  the  care  of  their
childhood,  and  of  the  earliest  and  most  necessary  part  of  their
education,  is  intrusted.  Their  credulity,  accordingly,  is  exces*
sive,  and  it  requires  long  and  much  experience  of  the  falsehood
of  mankind  to  reduce  them  to  a  reasonable  degree  of  diffidence
and  distrust."* — That  Mr.  Smith's  opinion  also  coincided  with
Dr.  Reid's,  in  what  he  has  stated  concerning  the  "  principle  of
veracity,"  appears  evidently  from  the  remarks  which  immediately
follow  the  passage  just  quoted. — But  I  must  not  add  to  the  length
of  this  memoir  by  unnecessary  citations.

Another  instinctive  principle  mentioned  by  Reid  is,  "our
belief  of  the  continuance  of  the  present  course  of  nature." —
**  All  our  knowledge  of  nature,"  he  observes,  "beyond  our  ori-
ginal perceptions,  is  got  by  experience,  and  consists  in  the  inter-
pretation of  natural  signs.  The  appearance  of  the  sign  is  fol-
lowed by  the  belief  of  the  thing  signified.  Upon  this  principle
of  our  constitution,  not  only  acquired  perception,  but  also  in-
ductive reasoning,  and  all  reasoning  from  analogy,  is  grounded  ;
and,  therefore,  for  want  of  a  better  name,  we  shall  beg  leave  to
call  it  the  "  inductive  principle."  It  is  from  the  force  of  this  prin-
ciple that  we  immediately  assent  to  that  axiom,  upon  which  all
oiu"  knowledge  of  natiure  is  built,  that  effects  of  the  same  kind
must  have  the  same  cause.  Take  away  the  light  of  this  induc-
tive principle,  and  experience  is  as  blind  as  a  mole.  She  may,
indeed,  feel  what  is  present,  and  what  immediately  touches  her,

•  Smith's  "  Theory,"  last  edit.  Part  VII.  sect.  4.

E


50  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

but  she  sees  nothing  that  is  either  before  or  behind,  upon  the
right  hand  or  upon  the  left,  future  or  past."

On  this  doctrine,  likewise,  the  same  critic  has  expressed  him-
self with  much  severity ;  calling  it  "  a  mere  quibble ;"  and  add-
ing, "  Every  step  that  I  take  among  this  writer's  sophisms,  raises
my  astonishment  higher  than  before."  In  this,  however,  as  in
many  other  instances,  he  has  been  led  to  censure  Dr.  Raid,  not
because  he  was  able  to  see  farther  than  his  antagonist,  but  be-
cause he  did  not  see  quite  so  far.  Turgot,  in  an  article  inserted
in  the  French  "  Encyclopedie,"  and  Condorcet,  in  a  discourse  pre-
fixed to  one  of  his  mathematical  publications,*  have,  both  of
them,  stated  the  fact  with  a  true  philosophical  precision ;  and,
after  doing  so,  have  deduced  from  it  an  inference,  not  only  the
same  in  substance  with  that  of  Dr.  Reid,  but  almost  expressed
in  the  same  form  of  words.

In  these  references,  as  well  as  in  that  already  made  to  Mr.
Smith's  "  Theory,"  I  would  not  be  understood  to  lay  any  undue
stress  on  authority  in  a  philosophical  argument.  I  wish  only,
by  contrasting  the  modesty  and  caution  resulting  from  habits  of
profound  thought,  with  that  theoretical  intrepidity  which  a  blind-
ness to  insuperable  difficulties  has  a  tendency  to  inspire,  to  invite
those  whose  prejudices  against  this  part  of  Reid's  system  rest
chiefly  on  the  great  names  to  which  they  conceive  it  to  be  hos-
tile, to  re-examine  it  with  a  little  more  attention,  before  they
pronounce  finally  on  its  merits.

The  prejudices  which  are  apt  to  occur  against  a  mode  of  phi-
losophizing so  mortifying  to  scholastic  arrogance,  are  encouraged
greatly  by  that  natural  disposition  to  refer  particular  facts  to
general  laws,  which  is  the  foumdation  of  all  scientific  arrange-
ment ;  a  principle  of  the  utmost  importance  to  our  intellectual
constitution,  but  which  requires  the  guidance  of  a  sound  and
experienced  undeistanding  to  accomplish  the  purposes  for  which
it  was  destined.  They  are  encouraged,  also,  in  no  inconsiderable
degree,  by  the  acknowledged  success  of  mathematicians,  in
raising,  on  the  basis  of  a  few  simple  data,  the  most  magnificent,
and  at  the  same  time  the  most  solid  fabric  of  science,  of  which

*  Essai  8ur  T Application  de  TAnalyse  k  la  Probability  des  Decisions  rendues
a  la  Plurality  des  Voix.— Paris,  1785.


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  51

human  genius  can  boast.  The  absurd  references  which  logicians
are  accustomed  to  make  to  Euclid's  "  Elements  of  Geometry,"
as  a  model  which  cannot  be  too  studiously  copied,  both  in  phy-
sics and  in  morals,  have  contributed,  in  this  as  in  a  variety  of
other  instances,  to  mislead  philosophers  from  the  study  of  facts
into  the  false  refinements  of  hypothetical  theory.

On  these  misapplications  of  mathematical  method  to  sciences
which  rest  ultimately  on  experiment  and  observation,  I  shall
take  another  opportunity  of  ofiering  some  strictures.  At  pre-
sent, it  is  sufficient  to  remark  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  truths
about  which  pure  or  abstract  mathematics  are  conversant.  As
these  truths  have  all  a  necessary  connexion  with  each  other,  (all
of  them  resting  ultimately  on  those  definitions  or  hypotheses
which  are  the  principles  of  our  reasoning,)  the  beauty  of  the
science  cannot  fail  to  increase  in  proportion  to  the  simplicity  of
the  data,  compared^with  the  incalculable  variety  of  consequences
which  they  involve.  And  to  the  simplifications  and  generaliza-
tions of  theory  on  such  a  subject,  it  is  perhaps  impossible  to  con-
ceive any  limit.  How  difierent  is  the  case  in  those  inquiries
where  our  first  principles  are  not  definitions  hut  facts  ;  and  where
our  business  is  not  to  trace  necessary  connexions,  but  the  laws
which  regulate  the  established  order  of  the  universe !

In  various  attempts  which  have  been  lately  made,  more  espe-
cially on  the  Continent,  towards  a  systematical  exposition  of  the
elements  of  physics,  the  effects  of  the  mistake  I  am  now  cen-
suring are  extremely  remarkable.  The  happy  use  of  mathema-
tical principles  exhibited  in  the  writings  of  Newton  and  his
followers,  having  rendered  an  extensive  knowledge  of  them  an
indispensable  preparation  for  the  study  of  the  mechanical  philo-
sophy, the  early  habits  of  thought  acquired  in  the  former  pur-
suit are  naturally  transferred  to  the  latter.  Hence  the  illogical
and  obscure  manner  in  which  its  elementary  principles  have  fre-
quently been  stated ;  an  attempt  being  made  to  deduce  from  the
smallest  possible  number  of  data  the  whole  system  of  truths
which  it  comprehends.  The  analogy  existing  among  some  of
the  fundamental  laws  of  mechanics,  bestows,  in  the  opinion  of
the  multitude,  an  appearance  of  plausibility  on  such  attempts ;
and  their  obvious  tendency  is  to  withdraw  the  attention  from
that  unity  of  design  which  it  is  the  noblest  employment  of  phi-

E  2


52  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

losophy  to  illustrate,  by  disguising  it  under  the  semblance  of  an
eternal  and  necessary  order,  similar  to  what  the  mathematician
delights  to  trace  among  the  mutual  relations  of  quantities  and
figures.

These  slight  hints  may  serve  as  a  reply  in  part  to  what  Dr.
Priestley  has  suggested  with  respect  to  the  consequences  likely
to  follow,  if  the  spirit  of  Reid's  philosophy  should  be  introduced
into  physics.*  One  consequence  would  unquestionably  be,  a
careful  separation  between  the  principles  which  we  learn  from
experience  alone,  and  those  which  are  fairly  resolvable  by  mathe-
matical or  physical  reasoning,  into  other  facts  still  more  general ;
and,  of  course,  a  correction  of  that  false  logic,  which,  while  it
throws  an  air  of  mystery  over  the  plainest  and  most  imdeniable
facts,  levels  the  study  of  nature,  in  point  of  moral  interest,  with
the  investigations  of  the  geometer  or  of  the  algebraist.

It  must  not,  however,  be  supposed,  that,  in  the  present  state
of  natural  philosophy,  a  false  logic  threatens  the  same  danger-
ous efiects  as  in  the  philosophy  of  the  mind.  It  may  retard
somewhat  the  progress  of  the  student  at  his  first  outset ;  or  it
may  confound,  in  his  apprehensions,  the  harmony  of  systema-
tical order  with  the  consistency  and  mutual  dependency  essential
to  a  series  of  mathematical  theorems :  but  the  fundamental  truths
of  physics  are  now  too  well  established,  and  the  checks  which  it
furnishes  against  sophistry  are  too  numerous  and  palpable  to
admit  the  possibility  of  any  permanent  error  in  our  deductions.
In  the  philosophy  of  the  mind,  so  difficult  is  the  acquisition  of
those  habits  of  reflection  which  can  alone  lead  to  a  correct  know-
ledge of  the  intellectual  phenomena,  that  a  faulty  hypothesis,  if
skilfully  fortified  by  the  imposing,  though  illusory  strength  of
arbitrary  definitions  and  a  systematical  phraseology,  may  main-
tain its  ground  for  a  succession  of  ages.

It  vdU  not,  I  trust,  be  inferred  from  any  thing  I  have  here
advanced,  that  I  mean  to  ofier  an  apology  for  those  who,  either
in  physics  or  morals,  would  presumptuously  state  their  own
opinions  with  respect  to  the  laws  of  nature,  as  a  bar  against  fu-
ture attempts  to  simplify  and  generalize  them  still  farther.  To
assert,  that  none  of  the  mechanical  explanations  yet  given  of

•  Examination  of  Dr.  Reid's  Inquiry,  p.  110.


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  53

gravitation  are  satisfactory,  and  even  to  hint,  that  ingenuity
might  be  more  profitably  employed  than  in  the  search  of  such  a
theory,  is  somethiog  different  from  a  gratuitous  assumption  of
ultimate  facts  in  physics ;  nor  does  it  imply  an  obstinate  deter-
mination to  resist  legitimate  evidence,  should  some  fortimate
inquirer — contrary  to  what  seems  probable  at  present — succeed
where  the  genius  of  Newton  has  failed.  If  Dr.  Reid  has  gone
farther  than  this  in  his  conclusions  concerning  the  principles
which  he  calls  original  or  instinctive,  he  has  departed  from  that
guarded  language  in  which  Tie  commonly  expresses  himself;  for
all  that  it  was  of  importance  for  him  to  conclude  was,  that  the
theories  of  his  predecessors  were,  in  these  instances,  exception-
able ;  and  the  doubts  he  may  occasionally  insinuate,  concerning
the  success  of  future  adventurers,  so  far  from  betraying  any
overweening  confidence  in  his  own  understanding,  are  an  indi-
rect tribute  to  the  talents  of  those,  from  whose  failure  he  draws
an  argument  against  the  possibility  of  their  undertaking.

The  same  eagerness  to  simplify  and  to  generalize,  which  led
Priestley  to  complain  of  the  number  of  Beid's  instinctive  princi-
ples, has  carried  some  later  philosophers  a  step  farther.  Accord-
ing to  them,  the  very  word  instinct  is  imphilosophical ;  and  every
thing  either  in  man  or  brute  which  has  been  hitherto  referred
to  this  mysterious  source^  may  be  easily  accounted  for  by  expe-
rience or  imitation.  A  few  instances  in  which  this  doctrine
appears  to  have  been  successfully  verified,  have  been  deemed
sufiicient  to  establish  it  without  any  limitation.

In  a  very  original  work,  on  which  I  have  already  hazarded
some  criticisms,  much  ingenuity  has  been  employed  in  analysing
the  wonderful  efforts  which  the  human  infant  is  enabled  to  make
for  its  own  preservation  the  moment  after  its  introduction  to  the
light.  Thus,  it  is  observed,  that  the  foetus,  while  still  in  the
uterus,  learns  to  perform  the  operation  of  swallowing ;  and  also
learns  to  relieve  itself,  by  a  change  of  posture,  from  the  irksome-
ness  of  continued  rest:  and,' therefore,  (if  we  admit  these  pro-
positions,) we  must  conclude,  that  some  of  the  actions  which
infants  are  vulgarly  supposed  to  perform  in  consequence  of
instincts  coeval  with  birth,  are  only  a  continuation  of  actions  to
which  they  were  determined  at  an  earlier  period  of  their  being.
The  remark  is  ingenious,  and  it  may,  perhaps,  be  just ;  but  it


54  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  UFE  AND  WRITINGS

does  not  prove^  that  instinct  is  an  unphilosophical  term;  nor
does  it  render  the  operations  of  the  infant  less  mysterious  than
they  seem  to  be  on  the  common  supposition.  How  far  soever
the  analysis,  in  such  instances,  may  be  carried,  we  must  at  last
arrive  at  some  phenomenon  no  less  wonderful  than  that  we  mean
to  explain :  in  other  words,  we  must  still  admit,  as  an  ultimate
fact,  the  existence  of  an  original  determination  to  a  particular
mode  of  action  salutary  or  necessary  to  the  animal ;  and  all  we
have  accomplished  is  to  connect  the  origin  of  this  instinct  with
an  earlier  period  in  the  history  of  the'  human  mind.

The  same  author  has  attempted  to  accoimt,  in  a  manner
somewhat  similar,  for  the  different  degrees  in  which  the  young
of  different  animals  are  able,  at  the  moment  of  birth,  to  exert
their  bodily  powers.  Thus,  calves  and  chickens  are  able  to
walk  almost  immediately  ;  while  the  human  infant,  even  in  the
most  favourable  situations,  is  six  or  even  twelve  months  old
before  he  can  stand  alone.  For  this.  Dr.  Darwin  assigns  two
causes,  1,  That  the  young  of  some  animals  come  into  the
world  in  a  more  complete  state  than  that  of  others : — the  colt
and  lamb  (for  example)  enjoying,  in  this  respect,  a  striking
advantage  over  the  puppy  and  the  rabbit,  2.  That  the  mode
of  walking  of  some  animals  coincides  more  perfectly  than  that
of  others,  with  the  previous  motions  of  the  fcetus  in  utero.  The
struggles  of  all  animals,  he  observes,  in  the  womb,  must  resemble
their  maimer  of  swimming,  as  by  this  kind  of  motion  they  can
best  change  their  attitude  in  water.  But  the  swimming  of  the
calf  and  of  the  chicken  resembles  their  ordinary  movements  on
the  ground,  which  they  have  thus  learned  in  part  to  execute,
while  concealed  from  our  observation ;  whereas,  the  swimming
of  the  human  infant  differing  totally  from  his  manner  of  walk-
ing, he  has  no  opportunity  of  acquiring  the  last  of  these  arts  till
he  is  exposed  to  our  view, — The  theory  is  extremely  plausible,
and  does  honour  to  the  author's  sagacity ;  but  it  only  places  in  a
new  light  that  provident  care  which  Nature  has  taken  of  all  her
offspring  in  the  infancy  of  their  existence.

Another  instance  may  contribute  towards  a  more  ample  illus-
tration of  the  same  subject,  A  lamb,  not  many  minutes  after
it  is  dropped,  proceeds  to  search  for  its  nourishment  in  that  spot
where  alone  it  is  to  be  found ;  applying  both  its  limbs  and  its


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  55

eyes  to  their  respective  offices.  The  peasant  observes  the  fact,
and  gives  the  name  of  instinct,  or  some  corresponding  term,  to
the  unknown  principle  by  which  the  animal  is  guided.  On  a
more  accurate  examination  of  circumstances,  the  philosopher
finds  reason  to  conclude,  that  it  is  by  the  sense  of  smelling,  it  is
thus  directed  to  its  object.  In  proof  of  this,  among  other  curious
facts,  the  following  has  been  quoted.  "  On  dissecting,"  says
Gralen,  "  a  goat  great  with  young,  I  found  a  brisk  embryon,  and
having  detached  it  from  the  matrix,  and  snatching  it  away  before
it  saw  its  dam,  I  brought  it  into  a  room  where  there  were  many
vessels ;  some  filled  with  wine,  others  with  oil,  some  with  honey,
others  with  milk,  or  some  other  liquor ;  and  in  others  there  were
grains  and  fruits.  We  first  observed  the  young  animal  get  upon
its  feet  and  walk ;  then  it  shook  itself,  and  afterwards  scratched
its  side  with  one  of  its  feet :  then  we  saw  it  smelling  to  every
one  of  those  things  that  were  set  in  the  room ;  and  when  it  had
smelt  to  them  all,  it  drank  up  the  milk."*  Admitting  this  very
beautiful  story  to  be  true,  (and,  for  my  own  part,  I  am  far  from
being  disposed  to  question  its  probability,)  it  only  enables  us  to
state  the  fact  with  a  little  more  precision,  in  consequence  of  our
having  ascertained,  that  it  is  to  the  sense  of  smelling,  the  in-
stinctive determination  is  attached.  The  conclusion  of  the  pea-
sant is  not  here  at  variance  with  that  of  the  philosopher.  It
differs  only  in  this,  that  he  expresses  himself  in  those  general
terms  which  are  suited  to  his  ignorance  of  the  particular  process
by  which  Nature  in  this  case  accomplishes  her  end ;  and,  if  he
did  otherwise,  he  would  be  censurable  for  prejudging  a  question
of  which  he  is  incompetent  to  form  an  accurate  opinion.

The  application  of  these  illustrations  to  some  of  Dr.  Reid's
conclusions  concerning  the  instinctive  principles  of  the  human
mind,  is,  I  flatter  myself,  sufficiently  manifest.  They  relate,
indeed,  to  a  subject  which  differs,  in  various  respects,  from  that
which  has  fallen  under  his  more  particular  consideration ;  but
the  same  rules  of  philosophizing  will  be  found  to  apply  equally
to  both.

4.  The  criticisms  which  have  been  made  on  what  Dr.  Reid
has  written  concerning  the  intuitive  truths  which  he  distinguishes

♦  Darwin,  vol.  i.  pp.  195,  196.


56  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

by  the  title  of  "  Principles  of  Common  Sense,"  would  require  a
more  ample  discussion  than  I  can  now  bestow  on  them ; — not
that  the  importance  of  these  criticisms  (of  such  of  them,  at  least,
as  I  have  happened  to  meet  with)  demands  a  long  or  elaborate
refutation;  but  because  the  subject,  according  to  the  view  I
wish  to  take  of  it,  involves  some  other  questions  of  great  moment
and  difficulty,  relative  to  the  foundations  of  human  knowledge.
Dr.  Priestley,  the  most  formidable  of  Dr.  Reid's  antagonists,
has  granted  as  much  in  favour  of  this  doctrine  as  it  is  worth
while  to  contend  for,  on  the  present  occasion.  "  Had  these
writers,"  he  observes  with  respect  to  Dr.  Reid  and  his  followers,
"assumed,  as  the  elements  of  their  common  sense,  certain
truths  which  are  so  plain  that  no  man  could  doubt  of  them,
(without  entering  into  the  ground  of  our  assent  to  them,)  their
conduct  would  have  been  liable  to  very  little  objection.  All
that  could  have  been  said  would  have  been,  that,  without  any
necessity,  they  had  made  an  innovation  in  the  received  use  of  a
term.  For  no  person  ever  denied,  that  there  are  self-evident
truths,  and  that  these  must  be  assumed  as  the  foundation  of  all
our  reasoning.  I  never  met  with  any  person  who  did  not  ac-
knowledge this,  or  heard  of  any  argumentative  treatise  that  did
not  go  upon  the  supposition  of  it."*  After  such  an  acknow-
ledgment, it  is  impossible  to  forbear  asking  (with  Dr.  Campbell),
"  What  is  the  great  point  which  Dr.  Priestley  would  controvert  ?
Is  it,  whether  such  self-evident  truths  shall  be  denominated
principles  of  common  sense,  or  be  distinguished  by  some  other
appellation  ?"f

♦  Examination  of  Dr.  Reid's  Inquiry,  &c.  p.  119.

t  The  following  strictures  on  Dr.  Priestley's  "Examination,"  &c. are  copied
from  a  very  judicious  note  in  Dr.  Campbell's  "  Philosophy  of  Rhetoric,"
vol. i.  p.  111.

"  I  shall  only  subjoin  two  remarks  on  this  book.  The  first  is,  that  the  author,
through  tne  whole,  confounds  two  things  totally  distinct, — certain  associations
of  ideas,  and  certain  judgments  implying  belief,  which,  though  in  tomey  are
not  in  all  cases,  and  therefore  not  necessarily  connected  with  association.  And
if  so,  merely  to  account  for  the  association,  is  in  no  case  to  account  for  the
belief  with  which  it  is  attended.  Nay,  admitting  his  plea,  (p.  86,)  that  by
the  principle  of  association,  not  only  the  ideas,  but  the  concomitant  belief  may
be  accounted  for,  even  this  does  not  invalidate  the  doctrine  he  impugns.  For,
let  it  be  observed,  that  it  is  one  thing  to  assign  a  cause,  which,  from  the  me-


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  57

.  That  the  doctrine  in  question  has  been,  in  some  pubKcations,
presented  in  a  very  exceptionable  form,  I  most  readily  allow ;
nor  would  I  be  understood  to  subscribe  to  it  implicitly,  even  as
it  appears  in  the  works  of  Dr.  Reid,  It  is  but  an  act  of  justice
to  him,  however,  to  request,  that  his  opinions  may  be  judged  of
from  his  own  works  alone,  not  from  those  of  others  who  may
have  happened  to  coincide  with  him  in  certain  tenets,  or  in  cer-
tain modes  of  expression ;  and  that,  before  any  ridicule  be
attempted  on  his  conclusions  concerning  the  authority  of  com-
mon sense,  his  antagonists  would  take  the  trouble  to  examine  in
what  acceptation  he  has  employed  that  phrase.

The  truths  which  Dr.  Reid  seems,  in  most  instances,  disposed
to  refer  to  the  judgment  of  this  tribunal,  might,  in  my  opinion,
be  denominated  more  unexceptionably,  "  fundamental  laws  of
human  belief."  They  have  been  called  by  a  very  ingenious
foreigner,  (M.  Trembley  of  Geneva,)  but  certainly  with  a  singu-
lar infelicity  of  language,  Prejuges  Legitimes, — Of  this  kind  are
the  following  propositions :  "I  am  the  same  person  to-day  that

chanism  of  our  nature,  has  given  rise  to  a  particular  tenet  of  belief,  and  another
thing  to  produce  a  reason  by  which  the  understanding  has  been  convinced.
Now,  unless  this  be  done  as  to  the  principles  in  question,  they  must  be  consi-
dered as  primary  truths  in  respect  of  the  understanding,  which  never  deduced
them  from  other  truths,  and  which  is  under  a  necessity,  in  all  her  moral  rea-
sonings, of  founding  upon  them.  In  fact,  to  give  any  other  account  of  our
conviction  of  them,  is  to  confirm,  instead  of  confuting  the  doctrine,  that  in
all  argumentation  they  must  be  regarded  as  primary  truths,  or  truths  which
reason  never  inferred  through  any  medium,  from  other  truths  previously
perceived.  My  second  remark  is,  that  though  this  examiner  has,  from  Dr.
Reid,  given  us  a  catalogue  of  first  principles,  which  he  deems  unworthy  of
the  honourable  place  assigned  them,  he  has  no  where  thought  proper  to  give  us
a  list  of  those  self-evident  truths,  which,  by  his  own  account,  and  in  his  own
express  words,  'must  be  assumed  as  the  foundation  of  all  our  reasoning.'
How  much  light  might  have  been  thrown  upon  the  subject  by  the  contrast  I
Perhaps  we  should  have  been  enabled,  on  the  comparison,  to  discover  some
distinctive  characters  in  his  genuine  axioms,  which  would  have  preserved  us
from  the  danger  of  confounding  them  with  their  spurious  ones.  Nothing  is
more  evident  than  that,  in  whatever  regards  matter  of  fact,  the  mathematical
axioms  will  not  answer.  These  are  purely  fitted  for  evolving  tlie  abstract
relations  of  quantity.  This  he  in  effect  owns  himself  (p.  39.)  It  would  have
been  obliging,  then,  and  would  have  greatly  contributed  to  shorten  the  con-
troversy, if  he  had  given  us,  at  least,  a  specimen  of  those  self-evident  principles,
which,  in  his  estimation,  are  the  non  plus  ultra  of  moral  reasoning."


58  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

I  was  yesterday ;"  "  The  material  world  has  an  existence  inde-
pendent of  that  of  percipient  beings  ;"  "  There  are  other  intelli-
gent beings  in  the  universe  beside  myself;"  "  The  future  course
of  nature  will  resemble  the  past."  Such  truths  no  man  but  a
philosopher  ever  thinks  of  stating  to  himself  in  words ;  but  all
our  conduct  and  all  our  reasonings  proceed  on  the  supposition
that  they  are  admitted.  The  belief  of  them  is  essential  for  the
preservation  of  our  animal  existence :  and  it  is  accordingly
coeval  with  the  first  operations  of  the  intellect.

One  of  the  first  writers  who  introduced  the  phrase  common
sense  into  the  technical  or  appropriate  language  of  logic,  was
Father  Buffier,  in  a  book  entitled,  "  Traite  des  Premieres
Verites."  It  has  since  been  adopted  by  several  authors  of  note
in  this  country;  particularly  by  Dr.  Reid,  Dr.  Oswald,  and
Dr.  Beattie ;  by  all  of  whom,  however,  I  am  afraid,  it  must  be
confessed,  it  has  been  occasionally  employed  vrfthout  a  due
attention  to  precision.  The  last  of  these  writers  uses  it*  to
denote  that  power  by  which  the  mind  perceives  the  truth  of  any
intuitive  proposition  ;  whether  it  be  an  axiom  of  abstract  science ;
or  a  statement  of  some  fact  resting  on  the  immediate  information
of  consciousness  of  perception,  or  of  memory ;  or  one  of  those
fundamental  laws  of  belief  which  are  implied  in  the  application
of  our  faculties  to  the  ordinary  business  of  life.  The  same
extensive  use  of  the  word  may,  I  believe,  be  found  in  the  other
authors  just  mentioned.  But  no  authority  can  justify  such  a
laxity  in  the  employment  of  language  in  philosophical  discus-
sions ;  for,  if  mathematical  axioms  be  (as  they  are  manifestly
and  indisputably)  a  class  of  propositions  essentially  distinct  from
the  other  kinds  of  intuitive  truths  now  described,  why  refer
them  all  indiscriminately  to  the  same  principle  in  our  constitu-
tion ?  If  this  phrase,  therefore,  be  at  all  retained,  precision
requires,  that  it  should  be  employed  in  a  more  limited  accepta-
tion ;  and  accordingly,  in  the  works  imder  our  consideration,  it
is  appropriated  most  frequently,  though  by  no  means  uniformly,
to  that  class  of  intuitive  truths  which  I  have  already  called
**  fundamental  laws  of  belief."f When  thus  restricted,  it  con-

*  Essay  on  Truth,  second  edition,  p.  40,  et  seq. ;  also  p.  166,  et  seq.
f  This  seems  to  he  nearly  the  meaning  annexed  to  the  phrase,  hy  the  learned
and  acute  author  of  "  The  Philosophy  of  Rhetoric,"  vol.  i.  p.  109,  et  seq.


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  QQ

veys  a  notion,  unambiguous  at  least,  and  definite ;  and,  conse-
quently, the  question  about  its  propriety  or  impropriety  turns
entirely  on  the  coincidence  of  this  definition  with  the  meaning
of  the  word  as  employed  in  ordinary  discourse.  Whatever
objections,  therefore,  may  be  stated  to  the  expression  as  now
defined,  will  apply  to  it  with  additional  force,  when  used  with
the  latitude  which  has  been  already  censured.

I  have  said,  that  the  question  about  the  propriety  of  the
phrase  common  sense  as  employed  by  philosophers,  must  be
decided  by  an  appeal  to  general  practice :  for,  although  it  be
allowable  and  even  necessary  for  a  philosopher  to  limit  the
acceptation  of  words  which  are  employed  vaguely  in  common
discourse,  it  is  always  dangerous  to  give  to  a  word  a  scientific
meaning  essentially  distinct  from  that  in  which  it  is  usually
understood.  It  has,  at  least,  the  effect  of  misleading  those  who
do  not  enter  deeply  into  the  subject ;  and  of  giving  a  paradoxical
appearance  to  doctrines,  which,  if  expressed  in  more  unexcep-
tionable terms,  would  be  readily  admitted.

It  appears  to  me,  that  this  has  actually  happened  in  the  pre-
sent instance.  The  phrase  common  sense,  as  it  is  generally
understood,  is  nearly  synonymous  with  mother-wit ;  denoting
that  degree  of  sagacity  (depending  partly  on  original  capacity,
and  partly  on  personal  experience  and  observation,)  which  quali-
fies an  individual  for  those  simple  and  essential  occupations
which  all  men  are  called  on  to  exercise  habitually  by  their  com-
mon nature.  In  this  acceptation,  it  is  opposed  to  those  mental
acquirements  which  are  derived  from  a  regular  education,  and
from  the  study  of  books  ;  and  refers,  not  to  the  speculative  con-
victions of  the  understanding,  but  to  that  prudence  and  discre-
tion which  are  the  foundation  of  successful  conduct.  Such  is
the  idea  which  Pope  annexes  to  the  word,  when,  speaking  of
good  sense,  (which  means  only  a  more  than  ordinary  share  of

common  sense,)  he  calls  it

"  the  gift  of  Heaven,
And  though  no  science,  fairly  worth  the  seven.'*

To  speak,  accordingly,  of  appealing  from  the  conclusions  of
philosophy  to  conamon  sense,  had  the  appearance,  to  title-page
readers,  of  appealing  from  the  verdict  of  the  learned  to  the  voice
of  the  multitude  ;  or  of  attempting  to  silence  free  discussion,  by


60  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

a  reference  to  some  arbitrary  and  undefinable  standard,  distinct
from  any  of  the  intellectual  powers  hitherto  enumerated  'by
logicians.  Whatever  countenance  may  be  supposed  to  have  been
given  by  some  writers  to  such  an  interpretation  of  this  doctrine,
I  may  venture  to  assert  that  none  is  afforded  by  the  works  of
Dr,  Reid.  The  standard  to  which  he  appeals,  is  neither  the
creed  of  a  particular  sect,  nor  the  inward  light  of  enthusiastic
presumption;  but  that  constitution  of  human  nature  without
which  all  the  business  of  the  world  would  immediately  cease ; —
and  the  substance  of  his  argument  amounts  merely  to  this,  that
those  essential  laws  of  belief  to  which  sceptics  have  objected,
when  considered  in  connexion  with  our  scientific  reasonings,  are
implied  in  every  step  we  take  as  active  beings ;  and  if  called  in
question  by  any  man  in  his  practical  concerns,  wo\ild  expose  him
universally  to  the  charge  of  insanity.

In  stating  this  important  doctrine,  it  were  perhaps  to  be  wished,
that  the  subject  had  been  treated  with  somewhat  more  of  analy-
tical accuracy  ;  and  it  is  certainly  to  be  regretted,  that  a  phrase
should  have  been  employed,  so  well  calculated  by  its  ambiguity
to  furnish  a  convenient  handle  to  misrepresentations  :  but  in  the
judgment  of  those  who  have  perused  Dr.  Reid's  writings  with
an  intelligent  and  candid  attention,  these  misrepresentations  must
recoil  on  their  authors ;  while  they  who  are  really  interested  in
the  progress  of  useful  science,  will  be  disposed  rather  to  lend
their  aid  in  supplying  what  is  defective  in  his  viewi^,  than  to
reject  hastily  a  doctrine  which  aims,  by  the  development  of  some
logical  principles,  overlooked  in  the  absurd  systems  which  have
been  borrowed  from  the  schools,  to  vindicate  the  authority  of
truths  intimately  and  extensively  connected  with  human  happi-
ness.

In  the  prosecution  of  my  own  speculations  on  the  human
mind,  I  shall  have  occasion  to  explain  myself  fully  concerning
this  as  well  as  various  other  questions  connected  with  the  foun-
dations of  philosophical  evidence.  The  new  doctrines,  and  new
phraseology  on  that  subject,  which  have  lately  become  fashion-
able among  some  metaphysicians  in  Germany,  and  which,  in  my
opinion,  have  contributed  not  a  little  to  involve  it  in  additional
obscurity,  are  a  sufiicient  proof  that  this  essential  and  funda-
mental article  of  logic  is  not  as  yet  completely  exhausted.


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  Q{

■  In  order  to  bring  the  foregoing  remarks  within  some  compass^
I  have  found  it  necessary  to  confine  myself  to  such  objections  as
strik^e  at  the  root  of  Dr.  Reid's  philosophy,  without  touching  on
any  of  his  opinions  on  particular  topics,  however  important.  I
have  been  obliged  also  to  compress  what  I  have  stated  within
narrower  limits  than  were,  perhaps,  consistent  with  complete
perspicuity;  and  to  reject  many  illustrations  which  crowded
upon  me  at  almost  every  step  of  my  progress.

It  may  not,  perhaps,  be  su'perfluous  to  add,  that,  supposing
some  of  these  objections  to  possess  more  force  than  I  have  as-
cribed to  them  in  my  reply,  it  will  not  therefore  follow,  that
little  advantage  is  to  be  derived  from  a  careful  perusal  of  the
speculations  against  which  they  are  directed.  Even  they  who
dissent  the  most  widely  from  Dr.  Reid's  conclusions,  can  scarcely
fail  to  admit  that,  as  a  writer,  he  exhibits  a  striking  contrast  to
the  most  successful  of  his  predecessors,  in  a  logical  precision  and
simplicity  of  language ;  his  statement  of  facts  being  neither  vi-
tiated by  physiological  hypothesis,  nor  obscured  by  scholastic
mystery.  Whoever  has  reflected  on  the  infinite  importance,  in
such  inquiries,  of  a  skilful  use  of  words  as  the  essential  instru-
ment of  thought,  must  be  aware  of  the  influence  which  his  works
axe  likely  to  have  on  the  future  progress  of  science,  were  they  to
produce  no  other  effect  than  a  general  imitation  of  his  mode  of
reasoning,  and  of  his  guarded  phraseology.

It  is  not  indeed  every  reader  to  whom  these  inquiries  are  acces-
sible ;  for  habits  of  attention  in  general,  and  still  more  habits  of
attention  to  the  phenomena  of  thought,  require  early  and  careful
cultivation :  but  those  who  are  capable  of  the  exertion,  will  soon
recognise,  in  Dr,  Reid's  statements,  the  faithful  history  of  their
own  minds,  and  will  find  their  labours  amply  rewarded  by  that
satisfaction  which  always  accompanies  the  discovery  of  useful
truth.  They  may  expect,  also,  to  be  rewarded  by  some  intel-
lectual acquisitions  not  altogether  useless  in  their  other  studies.
An  author  well  qualified  to  judge,  from  his  own  experience,  of
whatever  conduces  to  invigorate  or  to  embellish  the  understand-
ing, has  beautifully  remarked,  that,  **  by  turning  the  soul  in-
ward on  itself,  its  forces  are  concentred,  and  are  fitted  for  stronger
and  bolder  flights  of  science ;  and  that,  in  such  pursuits,  whether
we  take,  or  whether  we  lose  the  game,  the  chase  is  certainly  of


g4  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

consideration  ;  problems  where  all  the  data  are  brought  at  once
under  the  eye,  and  where  a  connected  train  of  thinking  is  not
to  be  carried  on  from  day  to  day,  will  be  found,  (as  I  have  wit-
nessed with  pleasure,  in  several  instances,)  by  those  who  are  ca-
pable of  such  a  recreation,  a  valuable  addition  to  the  scanty
resources  of  a  life  protracted  beyond  the  ordinary  limit.

While  he  was  thus  enjoying  an  old  age,  happy  in  some  respects
beyond  the  usual  lot  of  humanity,  his  domestic  comfort  suffered
a  deep  and  incurable  wound  by  the  death  of  Mrs,  Reid.  He
had  had  the  misfortune,  too,  of  surviving,  for  many  years,  a  nu-
merous family  of  promising  children ;  four  of  whom  (two  sons
and  two  daughters)  died  after  they  attained  to  maturity.  One
daughter  only  was  left  to  him  when  he  lost  his  wife ;  and  of  her
affectionate  good  offices  he  could  not  always  avail  himself,  in
consequence  of  the  attentions  which  her  own  husband's  infirm-
ities required.  Of  this  lady,  who  is  still  alive,  (the  widow  of
Patrick  Carmichael,  M.D.,*)  I  shall  have  occasion  again  to  in-
troduce the  name,  before  I  conclude  this  narrative.

A  short  extract  from  a  letter  addressed  to  myself  by  Dr.  Reid,
not  many  weeks  after  his  wife's  death,  will,  I  am  persuaded,  be
acceptable  to  many,  as  an  interesting  relic  of  the  writer.

"  By  the  loss  of  my  bosom-friend,  with  whom  I  lived  fifty-
two  years,  I  am  brought  into  a  kind  of  new  world,  at  a  time  of
life  when  old  habits  are  not  easily  forgot,  or  new  ones  acquired.
But  every  world  is  God's  world,  and  I  am  thankful  for  the  com-
forts he  has  left  me.  Mrs.  Carmichael  has  now  the  care  of  two
old  deaf  men,  and  does  every  thing  in  her  power  to  please  them ;
and  both  are  very  sensible  of  her  goodness.  I  have  more  health
than  at  my  time  of  life  I  had  any  reason  to  expect.  I  walk
about;  entertain  myself  with  reading  what  I  soon  forget;  can
converse  with  one  person,  if  he  articulates  distinctly,  and  is  within
ten  inches  of  my  left  ear ;  go  to  church,  without  hearing  one
word  of  what  is  said.  You  know,  I  never  had  any  pretensions
to  vivacity,  but  I  am  still  free  from  languor  and  ennui.

♦  A  learned  and  worthy  physician,  who,  after  a  long  residence  in  Holland,
where  he  practised  medicine,  retired  to  Glasgow.  He  was  a  younger  son  of
Professor  Gerschom  Carmichael,  who  puhlished,  about  the  year  1720,  an  edi-
tion of  Puflfendorf,  **  De  Officio  Hominis  et  Civis,"  and  who  is  pronounced  by
Dr.  Hutcheson,  "  by  far  the  best  commentator  on  that  book,"


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  65

"  If  you  are  weary  of  tliis  detail,  impute  it  to  the  anxiety  you
express  to  know  the  state  of  my  health.  I  wish  you  may  have
no  more  uneasiness  at  my  age, — being  yours  most  affectionately."

About  four  years  after  this  event,  he  was  prevailed  on  by  his
friend  and  relation  Dr.  Gregory,  to  pass  a  few  weeks,  during  the
summer  of  1796,  at  Edinburgh.  He  was  accompanied  by  Mrs,
Carmichael,  who  lived  with  him  in  Dr.  Gregory's  house ;  a  situa-
tion which  imited,  under  the  same  roof,  every  advantage  of  medi-
cal care,  of  tender  attachment,  and  of  philosophical  intercourse.
As  Dr.  Gregory's  professional  engagements,  however,  necessarily
interfered  much  with  his  attentions  to  his  guest,  I  enjoyed  more
of  Dr.  Reid's  society  than  might  otherwise  have  fallen  to  my
share.  I  had  the  pleasure,  accordingly,  of  spending  some  hours
with  him  daily,  and  of  attending  him  in  his  walking  excursions,
which  frequently  extended  to  the  distance  of  three  or  four  miles.
His  faculties  (excepting  his  memory,  which  was  considerably
impaired,)  appeared  as  vigorous  as  ever ;  and,  although  his  deaf-
ness prevented  him  from  taking  any  share  in  general  conversa-
tion, he  was  still  able  to  enjoy  the  company  of  a  friend.  Mr.
Playfair  and  myself  were  both  witnesses  of  the  acuteness  which
he  displayed  on  one  occasion,  in  detecting  a  mistake,  by  no  means
obvious,  in  a  manuscript  of  his  kinsman  David  Gregory,  on  the
subject  of  "  Prime  and  Ultimate  Ratios."  Nor  had  his  temper
suffered  from  the  hand  of  time,  either  in  point  of  gentleness  or
of  gaiety.  "  Instead  of  repining  at  the  enjojrments  of  the  young,
he  delighted  in  promoting  them ;  and,  after  all  the  losses  he  had
sustained  in  his  own  family,  he  continued  to  treat  children  with
such  condescension  and  benignity,  that  some  very  young  ones
noticed  the  peculiar  kindness  of  his  eye."  *  In  apparent  sound-
ness and  activity  of  body,  he  resembled  more  a  man  of  sixty  than
of  eighty-seven.

He  returned  to  Glasgow  in  his  usual  health  and  spirits ;  and
continued,  for  some  weeks,  to  devote,  as  formerly,  a  regular  por-
tion of  his  time  to  the  exercise  both  of  body  and  of  mind.  It
appears,  from  a  letter  of  Dr.  Cleghorn's  to  Dr.  Gregory,  that  he

*  I  have  borrowed  this  sentence  from  a  just  and  elegant  character  of  Dr.
Reid,  which  appeared,  a  few  days  after  his  death,  in  one  of  the  Glasgow  jour-
nals. I  had  occasion  frequently  to  verify  the  truth  of  the  observation  during

his  last  visit  to  Edinburgh.

F


gg  ACCOUNT  OF THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

was  still  able  to  work  with  his  own  hands  in  his  garden ;  and  he
was  found  by  Dr.  Brown  occupied  in  the  solution  of  an  algebra-
ical problem  of  considerable  difficulty,  in  which,  after  the  labour
of  a  day  or  two,  he  at  last  succeeded.  It  was  in  the  course  of
the  same  short  interval  that  he  committed  to  writing  those  parti-
culars concerning  his  ancestors  which  I  have  already  mentioned.

His  active  and  useful  life  was  now,  however,  drawing  to  a
conclusion.  A  violent  disorder  attacked  him  about  the  end  of
September ;  but  does  not  seem  to  have  occasioned  much  alarm
to  those  about  him,  till  he  was  visited  by  Dr.  Cleghom,  who
soon  after  communicated  his  apprehensions  in  a  letter  to  Dr.
Gregory.  Among  other  symptoms,  he  mentioned  particularly,
"  that  alteration  of  voice  and  features,  which,  though  not  easily
described,  is  so  well  known  to  all  who  have  opportunities  of
seeing  life  close."  Dr.  Reid's  own  opinion  of  his  case  was  pro-
bably the  same  with  that  of  his  physician ;  as  he  expressed  to
him  on  his  first  visit,  his  hope  that  he  was  "  soon  to  get  his  dis-
mission." After  a  severe  struggle,  attended  with  repeated  strokes
of  palsy,  he  died  on  the  7th  of  October  following.  Dr.  Gregory
had  the  melancholy  satisfaction  of  visiting  his  venerable  friend
on  his  death -bed,  and  of  paying  him  this  unavailing  mark  of  at-
tachment, before  his  powers  of  recollection  were  entirely  gone.

The  only  surviving  descendant  of  Dr.  Reid  is  Mrs.  Carmi-
chael,  a  daughter  worthy  in  every  respect  of  such  a  father —
long  the  chief  comfort  and  support  of  his  old  age,  and  his  anx-
ious nurse  in  his  last  moments.*

*  Dr.  Reid*s  father,  the  Rev.  Lewis  Reid,  married,  for  his  second  wife,
Janet,  daughter  of  Mr.  Fraser,  of  Phopachy,  in  the  county  of  Inverness.  A
daughter  of  this  marriage  survived  Dr.  Reid ;  the  wife  of  the  Rev.  Alexander
Leslie,  and  the  mother  of  the  Rev.  James  Leslie,  ministers  of  Fordoun.  To  the
latter  of  these  gentlemen,  I  am  indebted  for  the  greater  part  of  the  information
I  have  been  able  to  collect  with  respect  to  Dr.  Reid,  previous  to  his  removal  to
Glasgow  J  Mr.  Leslie's  regard  for  the  memory  of  his  uncle  having  prompted
him,  not  only  to  transmit  to  me  such  particulars  as  had  fallen  under  his  own
knowledge,  but  some  valuable  letters  on  the  same  subject,  which  he  procured
from  his  relations  and  friends  in  the  North.

For  all  the  members  of  this  most  respectable  family,  Dr.  Reid  entertained
the  strongest  sentiments  of  affection  and  regard.  During  several  years  before
his  death,  a  daughter  of  Mrs.  Leslie's  was  a  constant  inmate  of  his  house,  and
added  much  to  the  happiness  of  his  small  domestic  circle.

Another  daughter  of  Mr.  Lewis  Reid  was  married  to  the  Rev.  John  Rose,


OP  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  ffj

In  point  of  bodily  constitution,  few  men  have  been  more  in-
debted to  nature  than  Dr.  Reid.  His  form  was  vigorous  and
athletic ;  and  his  muscular  force  (though  he  was  somewhat  under
the  middle  size)  uncommonly  great ;  advantages  to  which  his
habits  of  temperance  and  exercise,  and  the  unclouded  serenity
of  his  temper,  did  ample  justice.  His  countenance  was  strongly
expressive  of  deep  and  collected  thought ;  but  when  brightened
up  by  the  face  of  a  friend,  what  chiefly  caught  the  attention
was,  a  look  of  good-vrfU  and  of  kindness.  A  picture  of  him,
for  which  he  consented,  at  the  particular  request  of  Dr.  Gre-
gory, to  sit,  to  Mr.  Raebum,  during  his  last  visit  to  Edinburgh,
is  generally  and  justiy  ranked  among  the  happiest  performances
of  that  excellent  artist.  The  medallion  of  Tassie,  also,  for
which  he  sat  in  the  eighty-first  year  of  his  age,  presents  a  very
perfect  resemblance.

I  have  little  to  add  to  what  the  foregoing  pages  contain  with
respect  to  his  character.  Its  most  prominent  features  were, —
intrepid  and  inflexible  rectitude ; — a  pure  and  devoted  attach-
ment to  truth ; — and  an  entire  command  (acquired  by  the  un-
wearied exertions  of  a  long  Kfe)  over  all  his  passions.  Hence,
in  those  parts  of  his  writings  where  his  subject  forces  him  to
dispute  the  conclusions  of  others,  a  scrupulous  rejection  of  every
expression  calculated  to  irritate  those  whom  he  was  anxious  to
convince ;  and  a  spirit  of  liberality  and  good-humour  towards

minister  of  Udny.  She  died  in  1793.  In  this  connexion,  Dr.  Reid  was  no
less  fortunate  than  in  the  former ;  and  to  Mr.  Rose  I  am  indebted  for  favomv
of  the  same  kind  with  those  which  I  have  already  acknowledged  from  Mr.
Leslie.

The  widow  of  Mr.  Lewis  Reid  died  in  1798,  in  the  eighty-seventh  year  of
her  age,  having  survived  her  step-son,  Dr.  Reid,  more  than  a  year.

The  limits  within  which  I  was  obliged  to  confine  my  biographical  details,
prevented  me  from  availing  myself  of  many  interesting  circumstances  which
were  communicated  to  me  through  the  authentic  channels  which  I  have  now
mentioned.  But  I  cannot  omit  this  opportunity  of  returning  to  my  different
correspondents  my  warmest  acknowledgments  for  the  pleasure  and  instruction
which  I  received  from  their  letters.

Mr.  Jardine,  also,  the  learned  Professor  of  Logic  in  the  University  of  Glas-
gow, a  gentleman,  who,  for  many  years,  lived  in  habits  of  the  most  confiden-
tial intimacy  with  Dr.  Reid  and  his  family,  is  entitled  to  my  best  thanks  for  his
obliging  attention  to  various  queries,  which  I  took  the  liberty  to  propose  to  him,
concerning  the  history  of  our  common  friend.

f2


(38  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

his  opponents,  from  which  no  asperity  on  their  part  cotdd  pro-
voke him,  for  a  moment,  to  deviate.  The  progress  of  useful
knowledge,  more  especially  in  what  relates  to  human  nature  and
to  human  life,  he  believed  to  be  retarded  rather  than  advanced
by  the  intemperance  of  controversy;  and  to  be  secured  most
effectually  when  intrusted  to  the  slow  but  irresistible  influence
of  sober  reasoning.  That  the  argumentative  talents  of  the  dis-
putants might  be  improved  by  such  altercations,  he  was  willing
to  allow ;  but,  considered  in  their  connexion  with  the  great  ob-
jects which  all  classes  of  writers  profess  equally  to  have  in  view,
he  was  convinced  "  that  they  have  done  more  harm  to  the  prac-
tice, than  they  have  done  service  to  the  theory  of  morality."  *

In  private  life,  no  man  ever  maintained,  more  eminently  or
more  uniformly,  the  dignity  of  philosophy ;  combining  with  the
most  amiable  modesty  and  gentleness,  the  noblest  spirit  of  inde-
pendence. The  only  preferments  which  he  ever  enjoyed,  he
owed  to  the  unsolicited  favour  of  the  two  learned  bodies  who
successively  adopted  him  into  their  number ;  and  the  respectable
rank  which  he  supported  in  society  was  the  well-earned  reward
of  his  own  academical  labours.  The  studies  in  which  he  de-
lighted were  little  calculated  to  draw  on  him  the  patronage  of  the
great ;  and  he  was  unskilled  in  the  art  of  courting  advancement,
by  "  fashioning  his  doctrines  to  the  varying  hour."

As  a  philosopher,  his  genius  was  more  peculiarly  characterised
by  a  sound,  cautious,  distinguishing  judgment ;  by  a  singular
patience  and  perseverance  of  thought;  and  by  habits  of  the  most
fixed  and  concentrated  attention  to  his  own  mental  operations ;
endovnnents  which,  although  not  the  most  splendid  in  the  esti-
mation of  the  multitude,  would  seem  entitled,  from  the  history
of  science,  to  rank  among  the  rarest  gifts  of  the  mind.

With  these  habits  and  powers,  he  united  (what  does  not  always
accompany  them)  the  curiosity  of  a  naturalist,  and  the  eye  of  an
observer;  and,  accordingly,  his  information  about  every  thing
relating  to  physical  science  and  to  the  useful  arts,  was  extensive
and  accurate.  His  memory  for  historical  details  was  not  so  re-
markable ;  and  he  used  sometimes  to  regret  the  imperfect  degree
in  which  he  possessed  this  faculty. I  am  inclined,  however,  to

*  Preface  to  Pope's  "  Essay  on  Man."


OP  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  QQ

think,  that,  in  doing  so,  he  underrated  his  natural  advantages ;
estimating  the  strength  of  memory,  as  men  commonly  do,  rather
by  the  recollection  of  particular  facts,  than  by  the  possession  of
those  general  conclusions,  from  a  subserviency  to  which,  such
facts  derive  their  principal  value.

Towards  the  close  of  life,  indeed,  his  memory  was  much  less
vigorous  than  the  other  powers  of  his  intellect ;  in  none  of  which
could  I  ever  perceive  any  symptom  of  decline.  His  ardour  for
knowledge,  too,  remained  unextinguished  to  the  last ;  and,  when
cherished  by  the  society  of  the  young  and  inquisitive,  seemed
even  to  increase  with  his  years.  What  is  still  more  remarkable,
he  retained  in  extreme  old  age  all  the  sympathetic  tenderness,
and  all  the  moral  sensibility  of  youth ;  the  liveliness  of  his  emo-
tions, wherever  the  happiness  of  others  was  concerned,  forming
an  affecting  contrast  to  his  own  unconquerable  firmness  under
the  severest  trials.

Nor  was  the  sensibility  which  he  retained,  the  selfish  and  ste-
rile of&pring  of  taste  and  indolence.  It  was  alive  and  active,
wherever  he  could  command  the  means  of  relieving  the  distresses,
or  of  adding  to  the  comforts  of  others  ;  and  was  often  felt  in  its
effects  where  he  was  unseen  and  unknown.  Among  the  various
proofs  of  this  which  have  happened  to  fall  under  my  own  know-
ledge, I  cannot  help  mentioning  particularly  (upon  the  most  un-
questionable authority)  the  secrecy  with  which  he  conveyed  his
occasional  benefactions  to  his  former  parishioners  at  New-Machar,
long  after  his  establishment  at  Glasgow.  One  donation,  in  par-
ticular, during  the  scarcity  of  1782, — a  donation  which,  not-
withstanding all  his  precautions,  was  distinctly  traced  to  his
beneficence, — ^might  perhaps  have  been  thought  disproportionate
to  his  limited  income,  had  not  his  own  simple  and  moderate
habits  multiplied  the  resources  of  his  humanity.

His  opinions  on  the  most  important  subjects  are  to  be  found
in  his  works ;  and  that  spirit  of  piety  which  animated  every  part
of  his  conduct,  forms  the  best  comment  on  their  practical  ten-
dency. In  the  state  in  which  he  found  the  philosophical  world,
he  believed,  that  his  talents  could  not  be  so  usefully  employed,
as  in  combating  the  schemes  of  those  who  aimed  at  the  complete
subversion  of  reUgion,  both  natural  and  revealed  ;  convinced
with  Dr.  Clarke,  that  "  as  Christianity  presupposes  the  truth  of


70  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

natural  religion,  whatever  tends  to  discredit  the  latter,  must  have
a  proportionally  greater  effect  in  weakening  the  authority  of  the
former."*  In  his  views  of  both,  he  seems  to  have  coincided  nearly
with  Bishop  Butler,  an  author  whom  he  held  in  the  highest  esti-
mation, A  very  careful  abstract  of  the  treatise  entitled  "  Ana-
logy," drawn  up  by  Dr.  Reid,  many  years  ago,  for  his  own  use,
still  exists  among  his  manuscripts ;  and  the  short  '*  Dissertation
on  Virtue,"  which  Butler  has  annexed  to  that  work,  together
with  the  "  Discourses  on  Human  Nature,"  published  in  his  vo-
lume of  Sermons,  he  used  always  to  recommend  as  the  most
satisfactory  account  that  has  yet  appeared  on  the  fundamental
principles  of  morals ;  nor  could  he  conceal  his  regret,  that  the
profound  philosophy  which  these  discourses  contain,  should  of
late  have  been  so  generally  supplanted  in  England,  by  the  spe-
culations of  some  other  moralists,  who,  while  they  profess  to
idolize  the  memory  of  Locke,  "  approve  little  or  nothing  in  his
writings,  but  his  errors."!

Deeply  impressed,  however,  as  he  was  with  his  own  principles,
he  possessed  the  most  perfect  liberality  towards  all  whom  he  be-
lieved to  be  honestly  and  conscientiously  devoted  to  the  search
of  truth.  With  one  very  distinguished  character,  the  late  Lord
Kames,  he  lived  in  the  most  cordial  and  affectionate  friendship,
notwithstanding  the  avowed  opposition  of  their  sentiments  on
some  moral  questions,  to  which  he  attached  the  greatest  import-
ance. Both  of  them,  however,  were  the  friends  of  virtue  and  of
mankind ;  and  both  were  able  to  temper  the  warmth  of  free  dis-
cussion, with  the  forbearance  and  good-humour  founded  on  reci-
procal esteem.  No  two  men,  certainly,  ever  exhibited  a  more
striking  contrast  in  their  conversation,  or  in  their  constitutional
tempers :  the  one,  slow  and  cautious  in  his  decisions,  even  on
those  topics  which  he  had  most  diligently  studied ;  reserved  and
silent  in  promiscuous  society ;  and  retaining,  after  all  his  literary
eminence,  the  same  simple  and  unassuming  manners  which  he
brought  from  his  country  residence:  the  other,  lively,  rapid,

*  Collection  of  papers  which  passed  between  Leibnitz  and  Clarke. — See
Dr.  Clarke's  Dedication.

t  I  have  adopted  here  the  words  which  Dr.  Clarke  applied  to  some  of  Mr,
Locke*s  earlier  followers.  They  are  still  more  applicable  to  many  writers  of
the  present  times. — See  Garke's  first  Reply  to  Leibnitz.


OP  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  7]

and  commumcatiye ;  accustomed,  by  his  professional  pursuits,  to
wield  with  address  the  weapons  of  controversy,  and  not  averse  to
a  trial  of  his  powers  on  questions  the  most  foreign  to  his  ordi-
nary habits  of  inquiry.  But  these  characteristical  differences,
while  to  their  common  friends  they  lent  an  additional  charm  to
the  distinguishing  merits  of  each,  served  only  to  enliven  their
social  intercourse,  and  to  cement  their  mutual  attachment.

I  recollect  few,  if  any,  anecdotes  of  Dr.  Reid,  which  appear  to
me  calculated  to  throw  additional  light  on  his  character ;  and  I
suspect  strongly  that  many  of  those  which  are  to  be  met  with
in  biographical  publications  are  more  likely  to  mislead  than  to
inform.  A  trifling  incident,  it  is  true,  may  sometimes  paint  a
peculiar  feature  better  than  the  most  elaborate  description ;  but
a  selection  of  incidents  really  characteristical,  presupposes,  in  the
observer,  a  rare  capacity  to  discriminate  and  to  generalize  ;  and
where  this  capacity  is  wanting,  a  biographer,  with  the  most  scru-
pulous attention  to  the  veracity  of  his  details,  may  yet  convey  a
very  false  conception  of  the  individual  he  would  describe.  As,
in  the  present  instance,  my  subject  afforded  no  materials  for  such
a  choice,  I  have  attempted,  to  the  best  of  my  abilities,  (instead
of  retailing  detached  fragments  of  conversations,  or  recording
insulated  and  unmeaning  occurrences,)  to  communicate  to  others
the  general  impressions  which  Dr.  Reid's  character  has  left  on
my  own  mind.  In  this  attempt  I  am  far  from  being  confident
that  I  have  succeeded ;  but,  how  barren  soever  I  may  have  thus
rendered  my  pages  in  the  estimation  of  those  who  consider  bio-
graphy merely  in  the  light  of  an  amusing  tale,  I  have,  at  least,
the  satisfaction  to  think  that  my  picture,  though  faint  in  the
colouring,  does  not  present  a  distorted  resemblance  of  the  ori-
ginal.

The  confidential  correspondence  of  an  individual  with  his
friends,  affords  to  the  student  of  human  nature,  materials  of  far
greater  authenticity  and  importance ;  more  particularly  the  cor-
respondence of  a  man  like  Dr.  Reid,  who  will  not  be  suspected
by  those  who  knew  him  of  accommodating  his  letters  (as  has
been  alleged  of  Cicero)  to  the  humours  and  principles  of  those
whom  he  addressed.  I  am  far,  at  the  same  time,  from  thinking,
that  the  correspondence  of  Dr.  Reid  would  be  generally  interest-
ing ;  or  even  that  he  excelled  in  this  species  of  writing ;  but  few


72  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

men,  I  sincerely  believe,  who  have  written  so  much,  have  left
behind  them  such  unblemished  memorials  of  their  virtue.

At  present  I  shall  only  transcribe  two  letters,  which  I  select
from  a  considerable  number  now  l3ring  before  me,  as  they  seem
to  accord,  more  than  the  others,  with  the  general  design  of  this
memoir.  The  first  (which  is  dated  13  January,  1779;)  is  addressed
to  the  Reverend  William  Gregory,  (afterwards  Rector  of  St.
Andrew's,  Canterbury,)  then  an  imdergraduate  in  Balliol  College,
Oxford.  It  relates  to  a  remarkable  peculiarity  in  Dr.  Reid's
physical  temperament,  connected  with  the  subject  of  dreaming ;
and  is  farther  interesting  as  a  genuine  record  of  some  particulars
in  his  early  habits,  in  which  it  is  easy  to  perceive  the  openings
of  a  superior  mind.

"  The  fact  which  your  brother  the  Doctor  desires  to  be
informed  of,  was  as  you  mention  it.  As  far  as  I  remember  the
circumstances,  they  were  as  follow :

"  About  the  age  of  fourteen  I  was,  almost  every  night,  un-
happy in  my  sleep  from  frightful  dreams.  Sometimes  hanging
over  a  dreadful  precipice,  and  just  ready  to  drop  down ;  some-
times pursued  for  my  life,  and  stopped  by  a  wall,  or  by  a  sudden
loss  of  all  strength  ;  sometimes  ready  to  be  devoured  by  a  wild
beast.  How  long  I  was  plagued  with  such  dreams  I  do  not  now
recollect.  I  believe  it  was  for  a  year  or  two  at  least ;  and  I  think
they  had  quite  left  me  before  I  was  fifteen.  In  those  days  I  was
much  given  to  what  Mr.  Addison,  in  one  of  his  *  Spectators,'
calls  Castle-building,'  and  in  my  evening  solitary  walk,  which
was  generally  all  the  exercise  I  took,  my  thoughts  would  hurry
me  into  some  active  scene,  where  I  generally  acquitted  myself
much  to  my  own  satisfaction ;  and  in  these  scenes  of  imagination
I  performed  many  a  gallant  exploit.  At  the  same  time,  in  my
dreams  I  found  myself  the  most  arrant  coward  that  ever  was.
Not  only  my  courage,  but  my  strength,  failed  me  in  every  dan-
ger ;  and  I  often  rose  from  my  bed  in  the  morning,  in  such  a
panic,  that  it  took  some  time  to  get  the  better  of  it.  I  wished
very  much  to  get  free  of  these  uneasy  dreams,  which  not  only
made  me  unhappy  in  sleep,  but  often  left  a  disagreeable  impres-
sion in  my  mind  for  some  part  of  the  following  day.  I  thought
it  was  worth  trying  whether  it  was  possible  to  recollect  that  it
was  all  a  dream,  and  that  I  was  in  no  real  danger. I  often  went


OP  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  73

to  sleep  with  my  mind  as  strongly  impressed  as  I  could  with  this
thought,  that  I  never  in  my  lifetime  was  in  any  real  danger,  and
that  every  fright  I  had  was  a  dream.  After  many  fruitless  en-
deavours to  recollect  this  when  the  danger  appeared,  I  effected
it  at  last,  and  have  often,  when  I  was  sliding  over  a  precipice
into  the  abyss,  recollected  that  it  was  all  a  dream,  and  boldly
jumped  down.  The  effect  of  this  commonly  was,  that  I  imme-
diately awoke.  But  I  awoke  calm  and  intrepid,  which  I  thought
a  great  acquisition.  After  this,  my  dreams  were  never  very
mieasy ;  and  in  a  short  time  I  dreamed  not  at  all.

"  During  all  this  time  I  was  in  perfect  health ;  but  whether
my  ceasing  to  dream  was  the  effect  of  the  recollection  above  men-
tioned, or  of  any  change  in  the  habit  of  my  body,  which  is  usual
about  that  period  of  life,  I  cannot  tell.  I  think  it  may  more
probably  be  imputed  to  the  last.  However,  the  fact  was,  that
for  at  least  forty  years  after,  I  dreamed  none,  to  the  best  of  my
remembrance :  and  finding,  from  the  testimony  of  others,  that
this  is  somewhat  uncommon,  I  have  often,  as  soon  as  I  awoke,
endeavoured  to  recollect,  without  being  able  to  recollect,  any
thing  that  passed  in  my  sleep.  For  some  years  past  I  can  some-
times recollect  some  kind  of  dreaming  thoughts,  but  so  incohe-
rent that  I  can  make  nothing  of  them.

"  The  only  distinct  dream  I  ever  had  since  I  was  about  sixteen,
as  far  as  I  remember,  was  about  two  years  ago.  I  had  got  my
head  blistered  for  a  fall.  A  plaster  which  was  put  upon  it  after
the  blister,  pained  me  excessively  for  a  whole  night.  In  the
morning  I  slept  a  little,  and  dreamed  very  distinctly  that  I  had
fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  party  of  Indians,  and  was  scalped.

"  I  am  apt  to  think,  that  as  there  is  a  state  of  sleep,  and  a
state  wherein  we  are  awake,  so  there  is  an  intermediate  state,
which  partakes  of  the  other  two.  If  a  man  peremptorily  resolves
to  rise  at  an  early  hour  for  some  interesting  purpose,  he  wiU  of
himself  awake  at  that  hour.  A  sick-nurse  gets  the  habit  of
sleeping  in  such  a  manner  that  she  hears  the  least  whisper  of  the
sick  person,  and  yet  is  refreshed  by  this  kind  of  half  sleep.  The
same  is  the  case  of  a  nurse  who  sleeps  with  a  child  in  her  arms.
I  have  slept  on  horseback,  but  so  as  to  preserve  my  balance ;  and
if  the  horse  stumbled,  I  could  make  the  exertion  necessary  for
saving  me  from  a  fall,  as  if  I  was  awake.


74  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS

"  I  hope  the  sciences  at  your  good  university  axe  not  in  this
state.  Yet,  from  so  many  learned  men,  so  much  at  their  ease,
one  would  expect  something  more  than  we  hear  of."

For  the  other  letter,  I  am  indebted  to  one  of  Dr.  Reid's  most
intimate  friends,  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  in  the  year  1784,  on
occasion  of  the  melancholy  event  to  which  it  alludes.

"  I  sympathize  with  you  very  sincerely  in  the  loss  of  a  most
amiable  wife.  I  judge  of  your  feelings  by  the  impression  she
made  upon  my  own  heart,  on  a  very  short  acquaintance.  But
all  the  blessings  of  this  world  are  transient  and  uncertain ;  and
it  would  be  but  a  melancholy  scene  if  there  were  no  prospect  of
another.

*'  I  have  often  had  occasion  to  admire  the  resignation  and  for-
titude of  young  persons,  even  of  the  weaker  sex,  in  the  views  of
death,  when  their  imagination  is  filled  with  all  the  gay  prospects
which  the  world  presents  at  that  period.  I  have  been  witness  to
instances  of  this  kind,  which  I  thought  truly  heroic,  and  I  hear
Mrs.  Gregory  gave  a  remarkable  one.

"  To  see  the  soul  increase  in  vigour  and  wisdom,  and  in  every
amiable  quality,  when  health  and  strength  and  animal  spirits
decay ;  when  it  is  to  be  torn  by  violence  from  all  that  filled  the
imagination,  and  flattered  hope,  is  a  spectacle  truly  grand  and
instructive  to  the  surviving.  To  think  that  the  soul  perishes  in
that  fatal  moment,  when  it  is  purified  by  this  fiery  trial,  and
fitted  for  the  noblest  exertions  in  another  state,  is  an  opinion
which  I  cannot  help  looking  down  upon  with  contempt  and
disdain.

"  In  old  people  there  is  no  more  merit  in  leaving  this  world
with  perfect  acquiescence  than  in  rising  from  a  feast  after  one  is
full.  When  I  have  before  me  the  prospect  of  the  infirmities,  the
distresses,  and  the  peevishness  of  old  age,  and  when  I  have
already  received  more  than  my  share  of  the  good  things  of  this
life,  it  would  be  ridiculous  indeed  to  be  anxious  about  prolong-
ing it ;  but  when  I  was  four-and-twenty,  to  have  had  no  anxiety
for  its  continuance,  would,  I  think,  have  required  a  noble  effort.
Such  efforts,  in  those  that  are  called  to  make  them,  surely  shall
not  lose  their  reward."

•  *  *  «  •

I  HAVE  now  finished  all  that  the  limits  of  my  plan  permit  me


OF  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.  75

to  offer  here,  as  a  tribute  to  the  memory  of  this  excellent  person.
In  the  details  which  I  have  stated,  both  with  respect  to  his  pri-
vate life  and  his  scientific  pursuits,  I  have  dwelt  chiefly  on  such
circumstances  as  appeared  to  me  most  likely  to  interest  the
readers  of  his  works,  by  illustrating  his  character  as  a  man,  and
his  views  as  an  author.  Of  his  merits  as  an  instructor  of  youth,
I  have  said  but  little ;  partly  from  a  wish  to  avoid  unnecessary
diffuseness ;  but  chiefly  from  my  anxiety  to  enlarge  on  those
still  more  important  labours,  of  which  he  has  bequeathed  the
fruits  to  future  ages.  And  yet,  had  he  left  no  such  monument
to  perpetuate  his  name,  the  fidelity  and  zeal  with  wWch  he  dis-
charged,  during  so  long  a  period,  the  obscure  but  momentous
duties  of  his  official  station,  would,  in  the  judgment  of  the  wise
and  good,  have  ranked  him  in  the  first  order  of  useful  citizens. —
"  Nee  enim  is  solus  reipublicae  prodest,  qui  candidatos  extrahit,
et  tuetur  reos,  et  de  pace  belloque  censet ;  sed  qui  juventutem
exhortatur ;  qui,  in  tanta  bonorum  praeceptorum  inopia,  virtute
instruit  animos ;  qui,  ad  pecuniam  luxuriamque  cursu  ruentes
prensat  ac  retrahit,  et,  si  nihil  aliud,  certe  moratur :  in  privato,
publicum  negotiimi  agit,"  Seneca,  De  Tranquill.  An.  cap.  3. —
"  For  neither  is  he  alone  of  service  to  the  republic  who  induces
candidates  to  come  forward,  and  defends  the  accused,  and  gives
his  opinion  concerning  peace  and  war ;  but  he  who  admonishes
the  young ;  who  in  such  a  dearth  of  good  precepts  disciplines
their  minds  with  virtuous  precepts ;  who  checks  and  draws  back
those  eagerly  rushing  to  money  and  dissipation,  and  retards  them,
if  nothing  more ;  who  in  a  private  station  forwards  the  public
good."

In  concluding  this  memoir,  I  trust  I  shall  be  pardoned,  if,  for
once,  I  give  way  to  a  personal  feeling,  while  I  express  the  satis-
faction with  which  I  now  close  finally,  my  attempts  as  a  biogra-
pher. Those  which  I  have  already  made,  were  imposed  on  me
by  the  irresistible  calls  of  duty  and  attachment ;  and,  feeble  as
they  are,  when  compared  with  the  magnitude  of  subjects  so
splendid  and  so  various,  they  have  encroached  deeply  on  that
small  portion  of  literary  leisure  which  indispensable  engagements
allow  me  to  command.  I  cannot,  at  the  same  time,  be  insensi-
ble to  the  gratification  of  having  endeavoured  to  associate  in
some  degree,  my  name  with  three  of  the  greatest  which  have


76  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OP  THOMAS  REID,  D.D.

adorned  this  age  ; — Chappy,  if  without  deviating  intentionally
from  truth,  I  may  have  succeeded,  however  imperfectly,  in  my
wish,  to  gratify,  at  once,  the  curiosity  of  the  public,  and  to  soothe

the  recollections  of  surviving  friends. But  I,  too,  have  designs

and  enterprises  of  my  own ;  and  the  execution  of  these  (which
alas !  swell  in  magnitude,  as  the  time  for  their  accomplishment
hastens  to  a  period,)  claims  at  length,  an  undivided  attention.
Yet  I  should  not  look  back  on  the  past  with  regret,  if  I  could
indulge  the  hope,  that  the  facts  which  it  has  been  my  province
to  record, — by  displaying  those  fair  rewards  of  extensive  useful-
ness, and  of  permanent  fame^  which  talents  and  industry,  when
worthily  directed,  cannot  fail  to  secure, — may  contribute,  in  one
single  instance,  to  foster  the  proud  and  virtuous  independence
of  genius ;  or,  amidst  the  gloom  of  poverty  and  solitude,  to  gild
the  distant  prospect  of  the  unfriended  scholar,  whose  laurels  are
now  slowly  ripening  in  the  unnoticed  privacy  of  humble  life.


ESSAYS


ON  THE


ACTIVE  POWERS  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.


INTRODUCTION.

The  division  of  the  faculties  of  the  human  mind  into  Under-
standing  and  Will  is  very  ancient,  and  has  been  very  generally
adopted ;  the  fonner  comprehending  all  our  speculative,  the
latter  all  our  active  powers.

It  is  evidently  the  intention  of  our  Maker,  that  man  should
be  an  active  and  not  merely  a  speculative  being. For  this  pur-
pose, certain  active  powers  have  been  given  him,  limited  indeed^
in  many  respects,  but  suited  to  his  rank  and  place  in  the  crea-
tion.

Our  business  is  to  manage  these  powers,  by  proposing  to  our-
selves the  best  ends,  planning  the  most  proper  system  of  conduct
that  is  in  our  power,  and  executing  it  with  industry  and  zeal.
This  is  true  wisdom  ;  this  is  the  very  intention  of  our  being.

Every  thing  virtuous  and  praiseworthy  must  lie  in  the  right
use  of  our  power;  every  thing  vicious  and  blameable  in  the
abuse  of  it.  What  is  not  within  the  sphere  of  our  power  can-
not be  imputed  to  us  either  for  blame  or  praise.  These  are
self-evident  truths,  to  which  every  unprejudiced  mind  yields  an
immediate  and  invincible  assent.

Knowledge  derives  its  value  from  this,  that  it'  enlarges  our
power,  and  directs  us  in  the  application  of  it.  Eor  in  the  right
employment  of  our  active  power  consists  all  the  honour,  dignity,
and  worth  of  a  man,  and,  in  the  abuse  and  perversion  of  it,  aU
the  vice,  corruption,  and  depravity.

We  are  distinguished  from  the  brute  animals,  not  less  by  our
active  than  by  our  speculative  powers.


78  INTRODUCTION.

The  brutes  are  stimulated  to  various  actions  by  their  instmcta,
by  their  appetites,  by  their  passions.  But  they  seem  to  be
necessarily  determined  by  the  strongest  impulse,  without  any
capacity  of  self-government.  Therefore  we  do  not  blame  them
for  what  they  do ;  nor  have  we  any  reason  to  think  that  they
blame  themselves.  They  may  be  trained  up  by  discipline,  but
cannot  be  governed  by  law.  There  is  no  evidence  that  they
have  the  conception  of  a  law,  or  of  its  obligation.

Man  ±a  capable  of  acting  from  motives  of  a  higher  nature.  He
perceives  a  dignity  and  worth  in  one  course  of  conduct,  a  demerit
and  turpitude  in  another,  which  brutes  have  not  the  capacity  to
discern.

He  perceives  it  to  be  his  duty  to  act  the  worthy  and  the i  ^
honourable  part,  whether  his  appetites  and  passions  incite  him
to  it,  or  to  the  contrary. When  he  sacrifices  the  gratification  t)f
the  strongest  appetites  or  passions  to  duty,  this  is  so  far  firom
diminishing  the  merit  of  his  conduct,  that  it  greatly  increases  it,
and  affords  upon  reflection,  an  inward  satisfaction  and  triumph, Z
of  which  brute  animals  are  not  susceptible. When  he  acts  a  \j^
contrary  part,  he  has  a  consciousness  of  demerit,  to  which  they
are  no  less  strangers.

Since,  therefore,  the  active  powers  of  man  make  so  important
a  part  of  his  constitution,  and  distinguish  him  so  eminently  firom
his  fellow-animals,  they  deserve  no  less  to  be  the  subject  of  phi-
losophical disquisition  than  his  intellectual  powers.

A  just  knowledge  of  our  powers,  whether  intellectual  or  active,
is  so  far  of  real  importance  to  us,  as  it  aids  us  in  the  exercise  of
them.  And  every  man  must  acknowledge,  that  to  act  properly
is  much  more  valuable  than  to  think  justly  or  reason  acutely.


ifei
iEt


I


ESSAY  I.

OF  ACTIVE  POWER  IN  GENERAL.

CHAPTER  I.

OP  THE  NOTION  OP  ACTIVE  POWER.

I.  An  explanation  of  the  meaning  of  ^^  active  power*^  necet^
sary. — To  consider  gravely  what  is  meant  by  active  power,  may
seem  altogether  imnecessary,  and  to  be  mere  trifling.  It  is  not
a  term  of  art,  but  a  common  word  in  our  language,  used  every
day  in  discourse,  even  by  the  vulgar.  We  find  words  of  the
same  meaning  in  all  other  languages ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to
think  that  it  is  not  perfectly  understood  by  all  men  who  under-
stand the  English  language.

I  believe  all  this  is  true,  and  that  an  attempt  to  explam  a
word  so  well  understood,  and  to  show  that  it  has  a  meaning,
requires  an  apology.

[The  apology  is,  that  this  term,  so  well  understood  by  the  vul-
gar, ha^  been  darkened  by  philosophers,  who,  in  this,  as  in  many
other  instances,  have  found  great  difficulties  about  a  thing  which,
to  the  rest  of  mankind,  seems  perfectly  clear.]

This  has  been  the  more  easily  effected,  because  power  is  a
thing  so  much  of  its  ovm  kind,  and  so  simple  in  its  nature,  as
not  to  admit  of  a  logical  definition.

It  is  well  known,  that  there  are  many  things  perfectly  under-
stood, and  of  which  we  have  clear  and  distinct  conceptions,
which  cannot  be  logically  defined..  No  man  ever  attempted  to
define  magnitude  ;  yet  tnere  is  no  word  whose  meaning  is  more
distinctly  or  more  generally  understood.  We  cannot  give  a  logi-
cal definition  of  thought,  of  duration,  of  nimiber,  or  of  motion.

When  men  attempt  to  define  such  things,  they  give  no  light.
They  may  give  a  synonymous  word  or  phrase,  but  it  will  pro-
bably be  a  worse  for  a  better.  K  they  vrill  define,  the  definition
will  either  be  grounded  upon  a  hypothesis,  or  it  will  darken  the
subject  rather  than  throw  light  upon  it.

II.  The  Aristotelian  definition  of  motion,  that  it  is  "  actus
entis  in  potentia,  quatenus  in  pptentia,"  has  been  justly  censured
by  modem  philosophers ;  yet  I  think  it  is  matched  by  what  a


80  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  I.

celebrated  modem  philosopher  has  given  us,  as  the  most  accu-
rate definition  of  belief,  to  wit,  "  that  it  is  a  lively  idea  related
to  or  associated  with  a  present  impression."  (Treatise  of  Hu-
man Nature,  Vol.  I.  p.  17^.)  "Memory,"  according  to  the
same  philosopher,  "is  the  faculty  by  which  we  repeat  our  im-
pressions, so  as  that  they  retain  a  considerable  degree  of  their
first  vivacity,  and  are  somewhat  intermediate  betwixt  an  idea
and  an  impression."

Euclid,  if  his  editors  have  not  done  him  injustice,  has  at-
tempted to  define  a  right  line,  to  define  imity,  ratio,  and  num-
ber. But  these  definitions  are  good  for  nothing.  We  may,
indeed,  suspect  them  not  to  be  Euclid's,  because  they  are  never
once  quoted  in  the  "  Elements,"  and  are  of  no  use.

I  shall  not,  therefore,  attempt  to  define  active  power,  that  I
may  not  be  liable  to  the  same  censure  ;  but  shall  offer  some  ob-
servations that  may  lead  us  to  attend  to  the  conception  we  have
of  it  in  our  own  minds.

III.  Of  our  conception  of  active  power, — 1.  Power  is  not  an
object  of  any  of  our  external  senses,  nor  even  an  object  of  con^
sciousness.

That  it  is  not  seen,  nor  heard,  nor  touched,  nor  tasted,  nor
smelt,  needs  no  proof.  That  we  are  not  conscious  of  it,  in  the
proper  sense  of  that  word,  will  be  no  less  evident,  if  we  reflect,
that  consciousness  is  that  power  of  the  mind  by  which  it  has  an
immediate  knowledge  of  its  own  operations.  Power  is  not  an
operation  of  the  mind,  and  therefore  no  object  of  consciousness.
Indeed,  every  operation  of  the  mind  is  the  exertion  of  some
power  of  the  mind  ;  but  we  are  conscious  of  the  operation  only,
the  power  lies  behind  the  scene  ;  and  though  we  may  justly  infer
the  power  from  the  operation,  it  must  be  remembered,  that  in-
ferring is  not  the  province  of  consciousness,  but  of  reason.

I  acknowledge,  therefore,  that  our  having  any  conception  or
idea  of  power  is  repugnant  to  Mr.  Locke's  theory,  that  all  our
simple  ideas  are  got  either  by  the  external  senses,  or  by  con-
sciousness. Both  cannot  be  true.  Mr.  Hume  perceived  this
repugnancy,  and  consistently  maintained,  that  we  have  no  idea
of  power.  Mr.  Locke  did  not  perceive  it.  If  he  had,  it  might
have  led  him  to  suspect  his  theory ;  for  when  theory  is  repug-
nant to  fact,  it  is  easy  to  see  which  ought  to  yield.  I  am  con-
scious that  I  have  a  conception  or  idea  of  power,  but,  strictly
speaking,  I  am  not  conscious  that  I  have  power,

IV.  Power  not  an  object  of  consciousness. — I  shall  have  occa-
sion to  show,  that  we  have  very  early,  from  our  constitution,  a
conviction  or  belief  of  some  degree  of  active  power  in  ourselves.
This  belief,  however,  is  not  consciousness :  for  we  may  be  de-
ceived in  it ;  but  the  testimony  of  consciousness  can  never  de-
ceive. Thus,  a  man  who  is  struck  with  a  palsy  in  the  night,


OP  THE  NOTION  OP  ACTIVE  POWER.  gj

commonly  knows  not  that  he  has  lost  the  power  of  speech  till  he
attempts  to  speak ;  he  knows  not  whether  he  can  move  his  hands
and  arms  till  he  makes  the  trial ;  and  if,  without  making  trial,
he  consults  his  consciousness  ever  so  attentively,  it  will  give  him
no  information  whether  he  has  lost  these  powers,  or  still  retains
them.  -

From  this  we  must  conclude,  that  the  powers  we  have  are  not
an  object  of  consciatisness,  though  it  would  he  foolish  to  censure
this  way  of  speaking  in  popular  discourse,  which  requires  not
accurate  attention  to  the  different  provinces  of  our  various  facul-
ties. The  testimony  of  consciousness  is  always  unerring,  nor  was
it  ever  called  in  question  by  the  greatest  sceptics,  ancient  or
modem.

But  a  relative  conception. — [2,  A  second  observation  is,  that
as  there  are  some  things  of  which  we  have  a  direct,  and  others
of  which  we  have  only  a  relative  conception,  power  belongs  to
the  latter  class.]

As  this  distinction  is  overlooked  by  most  writers  in  logic,  I
shall  beg  leave  to  illustrate  it  a  little,  and  then  shall  apply  it  to
the  present  subject.

Of  some  things,  we  know  what  they  are  in  themselves ;  our
conception  of  such  things  I  call  direct.  Of  other  things,  we
know  not  what  they  are  in  themselves,  but  only  that  they  have
certain  properties  or  attributes,  or  certain  relations  to  other
things ;  of  these  our  conception  is  only  relative.

fBF  To  illustrate  this  by  some  examples :  in  the  university-
library,  I  call  for  the  book,  press  L,  shelf  10,  No.  10 ;  the  library-
keeper  must  have  such  a  conception  of  the  book  I  want,  as  to  be
able  to  distinguish  it  from  ten  thousand  that  are  under  his  care.
But  what  conception  does  he  form  of  it  from  my  words  ?  They
inform  him  neither  of  the  author,  nor  the  subject,  nor  the  lan-
guage, nor  the  size,  nor  the  binding,  but  only  of  its  mark  and
place.  His  conception  of  it  is  merely  relative  to  these  circum-
stances ;  yet  this  relative  notion  enables  him  to  distinguish  it
from  every  other  book  in  the  library.

There  are  other  relative  notions  that  are  not  taken  from  acci-
dental relations,  as  in  the  example  just  now  mentioned,  but  from
qualities  or  attributes  essential  to  the  thing.

IBF  Of  this  kind  are  our  notions  both  of  body  and  mind.
What  is  body  ?  It  is,  say  philosophers,  that  which  is  extended,
solid,  and  divisible.  Says  the  querist,  I  do  not  ask  what  the  pro-
perties of  body  are,  but  what  is  the  thing  itself?  let  me  first
know  directly  what  body  is,  and  then  consider  its  properties.
To  this  demand  I  am  afradd  the  querist  will  meet  with  no  satis-
factory answer ;  because  our  notion  of  body  is  not  direct,  but
relative  to  its  qualities.  We  know  that  it  is  something  extended,
solid,  and  divisible,  and  we  know  n6  more*

G


82  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  I.

fgg^  Again,  if  it  should  be  asked,  What  is  mind  ?  It  is  that
which  thinks »  I  ask  not  what  it  does,  or  what  its  operations  are,
but  what  it  is  ?  To  this  I  can  find  no  answer ;  our  notion  of
mind  being  not  direct,  but  relative  to  its  operations,  as  our  notion
of  body  is  relative  to  its  qualities.

B^  There  are  even  many  of  the  qualities  of  body,  of  which
we  have  only  a  relative  conception.  What  is  heat  in  a  body  ?
It  is  a  quality  which  affects  the  sense  of  touch  in  a  certain  way.
If  you  want  to  know,  not  how  it  affects  the  sense  of  touch,  but
what  it  is  in  itself ;  this  I  confess  I  know  not.  My  conception
of  it  is  not  direct,  but  relative  to  the  effect  it  has  upon  bodies.
The  notions  we  have  of  all  those  qualities  which  Mr.  Locke  calls
secondary,  and  of  those  he  calls  powers  of  bodies,  such  as  the
power  of  the  magnet  to  attract  iron,  or  of  fire  to  burn  wood,  are
relative.

V.  Having  given  examples  of  things  of  which  our  conception
is  only  relative,  it  may  be  proper  to  mention  some  of  which  it  is
direct.  Of  this  kind,  are  (1)  all  the  primary  qualities  of  body;
figure,  extension,  solidity,  hardness,  fluidity,  and  the  like.  Of
these  we  have  a  direct  and  immediate  knowledge  from  our  senses.
To  this  class  belong  also  (2)  all  the  operations  of  mind  of  which
we  are  conscious.  I  know  what  thought  is,  what  memory,  what
a  purpose,  what  a  promise.

VI.  There  are  some  things  of  which  we  can  have  both  a  direct
and  a  relative  conception.  I  can  directly  conceive  ten  thousand
men  or  ten  thousand  pounds,  because  both  are  objects  of  sense,
and  may  be  seen.  But  whether  I  see  such  an  object,  or  directly
conceive  it,  my  notion  of  it  is  indistinct ;  it  is  only  that  of  a
great  multitude  of  men,  or  of  a  great  heap  of  money ;  and  a
small  addition  or  diminution  makes  no  perceptible  change  in  the
notion  I  form  in  this  way.  igS^  But  I  can  form  a  relative  notion
of  the  same  number  of  men  or  of  pounds,  by  attending  to  the
relations  which  this  number  has  to  other  numbers,  greater  or
less.  Then  I  perceive  that  the  relative  notion  is  distinct  and
scientific.  For  the  addition  of  a  single  man,  or  a  single  pound,
or  even  of  a  penny,  is  easily  perceived.

I6F  In  like  manner,  I  can  form  a  direct  notion  of  a  polygon  of
a  thousand  equal  sides  and  equal  angles.  This  direct  notion
cannot  be  more  distinct,  when  conceived  in  the  mind,  than  that
which  I  get  by  sight,  when  the  object  is  before  me ;  and  I  find
it  so  indistinct,  that  it  has  the  same  appearance  to  my  eye,  or  to
my  direct  conception,  as  a  polygon  of  a  thousand  and  one,  or  of
nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  sides.  But  when  I  form  a  relative
conception  of  it,  by  attending  to  the  relation  it  bears  to  poly-
gons of  a  greater  or  less  number  of  sides,  my  notion  of  it  be-
comes distinct  and  scientific,  and  I  can  demonstrate  the  properties
by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  all  other  polygons. From


OF  THE  NOTION  OP  ACTIVE  POWER.  83

these  instances  it  appears,  that  our  relative  conceptions  of  things
are  not  always  less  distinct,  nor  less  fit  materials  for  accurate
reasoning,  than  those  that  are  direct ;  and  that  the  contrary  may
happen  in  a  remarkable  degree.

VII.  Our  conception  of  power  is  relative  to  its  exertions  or
effects, — Power  is  one  thing ;  its  exertion  is  another  thing.  It  is
true,  there  can  be  no  exertion  without  power ;  but  there  may  be
power  that  is  not  exerted.  Thus  a  man  may  have  power  to
speak  when  he  is  silent ;  he  may  have  power  to  rise  and  walk
when  he  sits  still.

But,  though  it  be  one  thing  to  speak,  and  another  to  have  the
power  of  speaking,  I  apprehend  we  conceive  of  the  power  as
something  which  has  a  certain  relation  to  the  effect.  And  of
every  power  we  form  our  notion  by  the  effect  which  it  is  able
to  produce.

3.  It  is  evident  that  power  is  a  quality,  and  cannot  exist  with-
out a  subject  to  which  it  belongs.

That  power  may  exist  without  any  being  or  subject  to  which
that  power  may  be  attributed,  is  an  absurdity,  shocking  to  every
man  of  common  understanding.

It  is  a  quality  which  may  be  varied,  not  only  in  degree,  but
also  in  kind  ;  and  we  distinguish  both  the  kinds  and  degrees  by
the  effects  which  they  are  able  to  produce.

Thus  a  power  to  fly,  and  a  power  to  reason,  are  different
kinds  of  power,  their  effects  being  different  in  kind.  But  a
power  to  carry  one  hundred  weight,  and  a  power  to  carry  two
hundred,  are  different  degrees  of  the  same  kind.

4.  We  cannot  conclude  the  want  of  power  from  its  not  being
exerted ;  nor  from  the  exertion  of  a  less  degree  of  power,  can
we  conclude  that  there  is  no  greater  degree  in  the  subject.  Thus,
though  a  man  on  a  particular  occasion  said  nothing,  we  cannot
conclude  from  that  circumstance,  that  he  had  not  the  power  of
speech ;  nor  from  a  man's  carrying  ten  pound  weight,  can  we
conclude  that  he  had  not  power  to  carry  twenty.

5.  There  are  some  qualities  that  have  a  contrary,  others  that
have  not ;  power  is  a  quality  of  the  latter  kind.

Vice  is  contrary  to  virtue,  misery  to  happiness,  hatred  to  love,
negation  to  affirmation ;  but  there  is  no  contrary  to  power.
Weakness  or  impotence  are  defects  or  privations  of  power,  but
not  contraries  to  it.

If  what  has  been  said  of  power  be  easily  understood,  and
readily  assented  to,  by  all  who  understand  our  language,  as  I
believe  it  is,  we  may  from  this  justly  conclude,  that  we  have  a
distinct  notion  of  power,  and  may  reason  about  it  with .  under-
standing, though  we  can  give  no  logical  definition  of  it.

VIII.  Our  idea  of  power. — If  power  were  a  thing  of  which
we  have  no  idea,  as  some  philosophers  have  taken  much  pains

G  ^


84  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  I.

to  prove,  that  is,  if  power  were  a  word  without  any  meaning,
we  could  neither  affirm  nor  deny  any  thing  concerning  it  witB
understanding.  We  should  have  equal  reason  to  say  that  it  is  a
substance,  as  that  it  is  a  quality  ;  that  it  does  not  admit  of  degrees,
as  that  it  does.  If  the  understanding  immediately  assents  to
one  of  these  assertions,  and  revolts  from  the  contrary,  we  may
conclude  with  certainty,  that  we  put  some  meaning  upon  the
word  power,  that  is,  that  we  have  some  idea  of  it.  And  it  is
chiefly  for  the  sake  of  this  conclusion,  that  1  have  enumerated
so  many  obvious  things  concerning  it.

IX.  The  term  active  power  is  used,  I  conceive,  to  distinguish
it  from  speculative  powers.  As  alllanguages  distinguish  action
from  speculation,  the  same  distinction  is  applied  to  the  powers
by  which  they  are  produced.  The  powers  of  seeing,  hearing,
remembering,  distinguishing,  judging,  reasoning,  are  speculative
powers  ;  the  power  of  executing  any  work  of  art  or  labour  is
active  power.

There  are  many  things  related  to  power,  in  such  a  manner,
that  we  can  have  no  notion  of  them  if  we  have  none  of  power.

The  exertion  of  active  power  we  call  action ;  and  as  every
action  produces  some  change,  so  every  change  must  be  caused
by  some  exertion,  or  by  the  cessation  of  some  exertion  of  power.
That  which  produces  a  change  by  the  exertion  of  its  power,  we
call  the  catise  of  that  change;  and  the  change  produced,  the
effect  of  that  cause.

When-  one  being,  by  its  active  power,  produces  any  change
upon  another,  the  last  is  said  to  be  passive,  or  to  be  acted  upon.
Thus  we  see,  that  action  and  passion,  cause  and  effect,  exertion
and  operation,  have  such  a  relation  to  active  power,  that  if  it  be
understood,  they  are  imderstood  of  consequence ;  but  if  power
be  a  word  without  any  meaning,  all  those  words  which  are  re-
lated to  it,  must  be  words  without  any  meaning.  They  are,
however,  common  words  in  our  language  ;  and  equivalent  words
have  always  been  common  in  all  languages.

It  would  be  very  strange  indeed,  if  mankind  had  always  used
these  words  so  familiarly,  without  perceiving  that  they  had  no
meaning;  and  that  this  discovery  should  have  been  first  made
by  a  philosopher  of  the  present  age.

With  equal  reason  it  might  be  maintained,  that  though  there
are  words  in  all  languages  to  express  sight,  and  words  to  signify
the  various  colours  which  are  objects  of  sight ;  yet  that  all  man-
kind, from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  had  been  blind,  and  never
had  an  idea  of  sight  or  of  colour.  But  there  are  no  absurdities
so  gross  as  those  which  philosophers  have  advanced  concerning
ideas.


85


CHAPTER  II.


THE  SAME  SUBJECT.


I.  Distinction  of  ^'  action  and  passion^*  coeval  with  the  origin
of  languages. — [There  are,  I  believe,  no  abstract  notions,  that
are  to  be  found  more  early,  or  more  universally,  in  the  minds
of  men,  than  those  of  acting,  and  being  acted  upon»'\  Every  child
that  understands  the  distinction  between  striking  and  being  struck,
must  have  the  conception  of  action  and  passion.

.  We  find,  accordingly,  that  there  is  no  language  so  imperfect,
but  that  it  has  active  and  passive  verbs,  and  participles  ;  the  one
signifying  some  kind  of  action ;  the  other,  the  being  acted  upon.
This  distinction  enters  into  the  original  contexture  of  all  Ian-'
guages.

Active  verbs  have  a  form  and  construction  proper  to  them-
selves ;  passive  verbs  a  different  form  and  a  different  construction.
In  all  languages,  the  nominative  to  an  active  verb  is  the  agent ;
the  thing  acted  upon  is  put  in  an  oblique  case.  In  passive  verbs,
the  thing  acted  upon  is  the  nominative,  and  the  agent,  if  ex-
pressed, must  be  in  an  oblique  case  ;  as  in  this  example  :  Raphael
drew  the  Cartoons;  the  Cartoons  were  drawn  by  Raphael.

Every  distinction  which  we  find  in  the  structure  of  all  lan-
guages, must  have  been  familiar  to  those  who  framed  the  lan-
guages at  first,  and  to  all  who  speak  them  with  understanding.

II.  Objection. — [It  may  be  objected  to  this  argument,  taken
from  the  structure  of  language,  m  the  use  of  active  and  passive
verbs,  (1)  that  active  verbs  are  not  always  used  to  denote  an
action ;  {2)  nor  is  the  nominative  before  an  active  verb  conceived
in  all  cases  to  be  an  agent,  in  the  strict  sense  of  that  word ;  (3)
that  there  are  many  passive  verbs  which  have  an  active  significa-
tion, and  active  verbs  which  have  a  passive.]  From  these  facts,
it  may  be  thought  a  just  conclusion,  that  in  contriving  the  differ-
ent forms  of  active  and  passive  verbs,  and  their  different  con-
struction, men  have  not  been  governed  by  a  regard  to  any  dis-
tinction between  action  and  passion,  but  by  chance,  or  some
accidental  cause.

III.  In  answer  to  this  objection,  the  fact  on  which  it  is  founded
must  be  admitted ;  but  I  think  the  conclusion  not  justly  drawn
from  it,  for  the  following  reasons  :

[1.  It  seems  contrary  to  reason,  to  attribute  to  chance  or
accident,  what  is  subject  to  rules,  even  though  there  may  be
exceptions  to  the  rule.]  The  exceptions  may,  in  such  a  case,  be
attributed  to  accident,  but  the  rule  cannot.  There  is  perhaps
hardly  anything  in  language  so  general,  as  not  to  admit  of  excep-


86  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  II.

tions.  It  cannot  be  denied  to  be  a  general  rule,  that  verbs  and
participles  have  an  active  and  a  passive  voice ;  and  as  this  is  a
general  rule,  not  in  one  language  only,  but  in  all  the  languages
wre  are  acquainted  with,  it  shows  evidently  that  men,  in  the
earliest  stages,  and  in  all  periods  of  society,  have  distinguished
action  from  passion.

[2,  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  forms  of  language  are  often
applied  to  purposes  different  from  those  for  which  they  were  ori-
ginally intended.  The  varieties  of  a  language,  even  the  most
perfect,  can  never  be  made  equal  to  all  the  variety  of  human
conceptions.]  The  forms  and  modifications  of  language  must  be
confined  within  certain  limits,  that  they  may  not  exceed  the
capacity  of  human  memory.  Therefore,  in  all  languages,  there,
must  be  a  kind  of  frugality  used,  to  make  one  form  of  expression
serve  many  different  purposes,  like  Sir  Hudibras'  dagger,  which,
though  made  to  stab  or  break  a  head,  was  put  to  many  other
uses.  Many  examples  might  be  produced  of  this  frugality  in
language.  Thus  the  Latins  and  Greeks  had  five  or  six  cases  of
nouns,  to  express  all  the  various  relations  that  one  thing  could
bear  to  another.  The  genitive  case  must  have  been  at  first
intended  to  express  some  one  capital  relation,  such  as  that  of
possession  or  of  property:  but  it  would  be  very  difficult  to
enumerate  all  the  relations  which,  in  the  progress  of  language,
it  was  used  to  express.  The  same  observation  may  be  applied
to  other  cases  of  nouns.

The  slightest  similitude  or  analogy  is  thought  sufficient  to
justify  the  extension  of  a  form  of  speech  beyond  its  proper
meaning,  whenever  the  language  does  not  afford  a  more  proper
form.  In  the  moods  of  verbs,  a  few  of  those  wjjich  occur  most
frequently  are  distinguished  by  different  forms,  and  these  are
made  to  supply  aU  the  forms  that  are  wanting.  The  same  obser-
vation may  be  applied  to  what  is  called  the  voices  of  verbs.  An
active  and  a  passive  are  the  capital  ones ;  some  languages  have
more,  but  no  language  so  many  as  to  answer  to  all  the  variations
of  human  thought.  We  cannot  always  coin  new  ones,  and
therefore  must  use  some  one  or  other  of  those  that  are  to  be
found  in  the  language,  though  at  first  intended  for  another  pur-
pose.

[3.  A  third  obseiTation  in  answer  to  the  objection  is,  That
we  can  point  out  a  cause  of  the  frequent  misapplication  of  active
verbs,  to  things  which  have  no  proper  activity  :]  a  cause  which
extends  to  the  greater  part  of  such  misapplications,  and  which
confirms  the  account  I  have  given  of  the  proper  intention  of
active  and  passive  verbs.

As  there  is  no  principle  that  appears  to  be  more  universally
acknowledged  by  mankind,  from  the  first  dawn  of  reason,  than,
that  every  change  we  observe  in  nature  must  have  a  cause ;  so


OF  THE  NOTION  OF  ACTIVE  POWER.  S7

this  is  no  sooner  perceived,  than  there  arises  in  the  human  mind
a  strong  desire  to  knov7  the  causes  of  those  changes  that  fall
vrithin  our  observation.  "  Felix  qui  potuit  rerum  cognoscere
causas,"  is  the  voice  of  nature  in  all  men.  Nor  is  there  any
thing  that  more  early  distinguishes  the  rational  from  the  brute
creation,  than  this  avidity  to  know  the  causes  of  things,  of  v^hich
I  see  no  sign  in  brute  animals.

IV.  It  must  surely  be  admitted,  that  in  those  periods  wherein
languages  are  formed,  men  are  but  poorly  furnished  for  carrying
on  this  investigation  with  success.  We  see,  that  the  experience
of  thousands  of  years  is  necessary  to  bring  men  into  the  right
track  in  this  investigation,  if  indeed  they  can  yet  be  said  to  be
brought  into  it.  What  innumerable  errors  rude  ages  must  fall
into,  vnth  regard  to  causes,  from  impatience  to  judge,  and
inability  to  judge  right,  we  may  conjecture  from  reason,  and
may  see  from  experience ;  from  which  I  think  it  is  evident,
that  supposing  active  verbs  to  have  been  originally  intended  to
express  what  is  properly  called  action,  and  their  nominatives  to
express  the  agent ;  yet,  in  the  rude  and  barbarous  state  wherein
languages  are  formed,  there  must  be  innumerable  misapplica-
tions of  such  verbs  and  nominatives,  and  many  things  spoken  of
as  active,  which  have  no  real  activity.

To  this  we  may  add,  [that  it  is  a  general  prejudice  of  our
early  years,  and  of  rude  nations,  when  we  perceive  any  thing  to
be  changed,  and  do  not  perceive  any  other  thing  which  we  can
believe  to  be  the  cause  of  that  change,  to  impute  it  to  the  thing
itself,  and  conceive  it  to  be  active  and  animated,  so  far  as  to  have
the  power  of  producing  that  change  in  itself.]  figp°  Hence  to  a
child,  or  to  a  savage,  all  nature  seems  to  be  animated ;  the  sea,
the  earth,  the  air,  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  rivers,  fountains,
and  groves,  are  conceived  to  be  active  and  animated  beings.  As
this  is  a  sentiment  natural  to  man  in  his  rude  state,  it  has,  on
that  account,  even  in  polished  nations,  the  verisimilitude  that  is
required  in  poetical  fiction  and  fable,  and  makes  personification
one  of  the  most  agreeable  figures  in  poetry  and  eloquence.

V.  The  origin  of  this  prejudice  probably  is,  that  we  judge  of
other  things  by  ourselves,  and  therefore  are  disposed  to  ascribe
to  them  that  bfe  and  activity  which  we  know  to  be  in  ourselves.

VST  A  little  girl  ascribes  to  her  doll  the  passions  and  senti-
ments she  feels  in  herself.  Even  brutes  seem  to  have  something
of  this  nature.  A  youlig  cat,  when  she  sees  any  brisk  motion  in
a  feather  or  a  straw,  is  prompted,  by  natural  instinct,  to  hunt  it
as  she  would  hunt  a  mouse.

Whatever  be  the  origin  of  this  prejudice  in  mankind,  it  has
a  powerful  influence  upon  language,  and  leads  men,  in  the
structure  of  language,  to  ascribe  action  to  many  things  that  are
merely  passive ;  because,  when  such  forms  of  speech  were  in-


gg  '  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  11.

vented,  those  things  were  really  believed  to  be  active.  Thus  we
say,  the  wind  blows,  the  sea  rages,  the  sun  rises  and  sets,  bodies
gravitate  and  move.

When  experience  discovers  that  these  things  are  altogether
inactive,  it  is  easy  to  correct  our  opinion  about  them ;  but  it  is
not  so  easy  to  alter  the  established  forms  of  language.  The  most
perfect  and  the  most  polished  languages  are  like  old  furniture,
which  is  never  perfectly  suited  to  the  present  taste,  but  retains
something  of  the  fashion  of  the  times  when  it  was  made.

^F  Thus,  though  all  men  of  knowledge  believe  that  the  suc-
cession of  day  and  night  is  owing  to  the  rotation  of  the  earth
round  its  axis,  and  not  to  any  diurnal  motion  of  the  heavens ;
yet  we  find  ourselves  under  a  necessity  of  speaking  in  the  old
style,  of  the  sun's  rising  and  going  down,  and  coming  to  the
meridian.  And  this  style  is  used,  not  only  in  conversing  with
the  vulgar,  but  when  men  of  knowledge  converse  with  one
another.  And  if  we  should  suppose  the  vulgar  to  be  at  last  so
far  enlightened,  as  to  have  the  same  belief  with  the  learned,  of
the  cause  of  day  and  night,  the  same  style  would  still  be  used.

From  this  instance  we  may  learn,  that  the  language  of  man-
kind may  furnish  good  evidence  of  opinions  which  have  been
early  and  universally  entertained,  and  that  the  forms  contrived
for  expressing  such  opinions  may  remain  in  use  after  the  opi-
nions which  gave  rise  to  them  have  been  greatly  changed.

VI.  Active  verbs  appear  plainly  to  have  been  first  contrived  to
express  action. — They  are  still  in  general  applied  to  this  pur-
pose. And  though  we  find  many  instances  of  the  application  of
active  verbs  to  things  which  we  now  believe  not  to  be  active,
this  ought  to  be  ascribed  to  men's  having  once  had  the  behef
that  those  things  are  active,  and  perhaps,  in  some  cases,  to  this,
that  forms  of  expression  are  commonly  extended,  in  course  of
time,  beyond  their  original  intention,  either  from  analogy,  or
because  more  proper  forms  for  the  purpose  are  not  found  in  the
language.

[  (1)  Even  the  misapplication  of  this  notion  of  action  and
active  power  shows  that  there  is  such  a  notion  in  the  human  mind,
and  shows  the  necessity  there  is  in  philosophy  of  distinguishing
the  proper  application  of  these  words,  from  the  vague  and  im-
proper application  of  them,  founded  on  common  language,  or  on
popular  prejudice.]

[  (2)  Another  argument  to  show  that  all  men  have  a  notion  or
idea  of  active  power  is,  that  there  are  many  operations  of  mind
common  to  all  men  who  have  reason,  and  necessary  in  the  ordi-
nary conduct  of  life,  which  imply  a  belief  of  active  power  in
ourselves  and  in  others.]

All  our  volitions  and  efforts  to  act,  all  our  deliberations,  our
purposes  and  promises,  imply  a  belief  of  active  power  in  our-


OF  THE  NOTION  OF  ACTIVE  POWER.  89

selves :  our  counsels,  exhortations,  and  commands,  imply  a  belief
of  active  power  in  those  to  whom  they  are  addressed.

er  If  a  man  should  make  an  effort  to  fly  to  the  moon ;  if  he
should  even  deliberate  about  it,  or  resolve  to  do  it,  we  should
conclude  him  to  be  lunatic ;  and  even  lunacy  would  not  account
for  his  conduct,  unless  it  made  him  believe  the  thing  to  be  in  his
power.

If  a  man  promises  to  pay  me  a  sum  of  money  to-morrow,
without  believing  that  it  will  then  be  in  his  power,  he  is  not  an
honest  man :  and,  if  I  did  not  believe  that  it  will  then  be  in  his
power,  I  should  have  no  dependence  on  his  promise.

All  our  power  is,  without  doubt,  derived  from  the  Author  of
our  being,  and,  as  he  gave  it  freely,  he  may  take  it  away  when
he  will.  No  man  can  be  certain  of  the  continuance  of  any  of
his  powers  of  body  or  mind  for  a  moment ;  and,  therefore,  in
every  promise  there  is  a  condition  understood,  to  wit,  if  we  live,
if  we  retain  that  health  of  body  and  soundness  of  mind  which  is
necessary  to  the  performance,  and  if  nothing  happen,  in  the  pro-
vidence of  God,  which  puts  it  out  of  our  power.  The  rudest
savages  are  taught  by  nature  to  admit  these  conditions  in  all
promises,  whether  they  be  expressed  or  not;  and  no  man  is
charged  with  breach  of  promise,  when  he  fails  through  the  fail-
ure of  these  conditions.

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that,  without  the  belief  of  some  active
power,  no  honest  man  would  make  a  promise,  no  wise  man  would
trust  to  a  promise  ;  and  it  is  no  less  evident,  that  the  belief  of
active  power,  in  ourselves,  or  in  others,  implies  an  idea  or  notion
of  active  power.

The  same  reasoning  may  be  applied  to  every  instance  wherein
we  give  counsel  to  others,  wherein  we  persuade  or  command.
As  long,  therefore,  as  mankind  are  beings  who  can  deliberate,
and  resolve,  and  wiU ;  as  long  as  they  can  give  counsel,  and  ex-
hort, and  command,  they  must  believe  the  existence  of  active
power  in  themselves,  and  in  others,  and  therefore  must  have  a
notion  or  idea  of  active  power.

VII.  [It  might  further  be  observed,  that  power  is  the  proper
and  immediate  object  of  ambition,  one  of  the  most  universal  pas-
sions of  the  human  mind,  and  that  which  makes  the  greatest
figure  in  the  history  of  all  ages.]  Whether  Mr.  Hume,  in  de-
fence of  his  system,  would  maintain  that  there  is  no  such  passion
in  mankind  as  ambition,  or  that  ambition  is  not  a  vehement
desire  of  power,  or  that  men  may  have  a  vehement  desire  of
power,  without  having  any  idea  of  power,  I  will  not  pretend  to
divine.

I  cannot  help  repeating  my  apology  for  insisting  so  long  in
the  refutation  of  so  great  an  absurdity.  It  is  a  capital  doctrine
in  a  late  celebrated  system  of  human  nature,  tliat  we  have  no


90  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  II.

idea  of  power,  not  even  in  the  Deity ;  that  we  are  not  able  to
discover  a  single  instance  of  it,  either  in  body  or  spirit,  either  in
superior  or  inferior  natures ;  and  that  we  deceive  ourselves  when
we  imagine  that  we  are  possessed  of  any  idea  of  this  kind.

To  support  this  important  doctrine,  and  the  out-works  that  are
raised  in  its  defence,  a  great  part  of  the  first  volume  of  the
"  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  "  is  employed.  That  system  abounds
with  conclusions  the  most  absurd  that  ever  were  advanced  by
any  philosopher,  deduced  with  great  acuteness  and  ingenuity
from  principles  commonly  received  by  philosophers.  To  reject
such  conclusions  as  unworthy  of  a  hearing,  would  be  disrespect-
ful to  the  ingenious  author ;  and  to  refute  them  is  difficult,  and
appears  ridiculous.

It  is  difficult,  because  we  can  hardly  find  principles  to  reason
from,  more  evident  than  those  we  wish  to  prove ;  and  it  appears
ridiculous,  because,  as  this  author  justly  observes,  next  to  the
ridicule  of  denying  an  evident  truth,  is  that  of  taking  much
pains  to  prove  it.

1^  Protestants  complain,  with  justice,  of  the  hardship  put
upon  them  by  Roman  Catholics,  in  requiring  them  to  prove  that
bread  and  wine  is  not  flesh  and  blood.  They  have,  however,
submitted  to  this  hardship  for  the  sake  of  truth.  I  think  it  is
no  less  hard  to  be  put  to  prove  that  men  have  an  idea  of  power.

[What  convinces  myself  that  I  have  an  idea  of  power  is,  that
I  am  conscious  that  I  know  what  I  mean  by  that  wordy  and,  while
I  have  this  consciousness ^  I  disdain  equally  to  hear  arguments  for
or  against  my  having  such  an  idea.]  But  if  we  would  convince
those  who,  being  led  away  by  prejudice,  or  by  authority,  deny
that  they  have  any  such  idea,  we  must  condescend  to  use  such
arguments  as  the  subject  will  affijrd,  and  such  as  we  should  use
with  a  man  who  should  deny  that  mankind  have  any  idea  of  mag-
nitude or  of  equality.

VIII.  The  arguments  I  have  adduced  are  taken  from  these
Jive  topics:  1.  That  there  are  many  things  that  we  can  affirm  or
deny  concerning  power,  with  understanding.  2.  That  there  are,
in  all  languages,  words  signifying,  not  only  power,  but  signifying
many  other  things  that  imply  power,  such  as  action  and  passion,
cause  and  effect,  energy,  operation,  and  others.  3.  That  in  the
structure  of  all  languages,  there  is  an  active  and  passive  form  in
verbs  and  participles,  and  a  different  construction  adapted  to
these  forms,  of  which  diversity  no  account  can  be  given,  but  that
it  has  been  intended  to  distinguish  action  from  passion.  4.  That
there  are  many  operations  of  the  human  mind  familiar  to  every
man  come  to  the  use  of  reason,  and  necessary  in  the  ordinary
conduct  of  life,  which  imply  a  conviction  of  some  degree  of
power  in  ourselves  and  in  others.  5.  That  the  desire  of  power
is  one  of  the  strongest  passions  of  human  nature.


CHAPTER  III.  V

OF  MR.  LOCKE'S  ACCOUNT  OF  OUR  IDEA  OF  POWER.  •

I.  This  author,  having  refuted  the  Cartesian  doctrine  of  in-
nate ideas,  took  up,  perhaps  too  rashly,  an  opinion  that  all  our
simple  ideas  are  got,  either  by  sensation  or  by  reflection ;  that
is,  by  our  external  senses,  or  by  consciousness  of  the  operations
of  our  own  minds.

Through  the  whole ^of  his  Essay,  he  shows  a  fatherly  aflection
to  this  opinion,  and  often  strains  very  hard  to  reduce  our  simple
ideas^to  one  of  those  sources,  or  both.  Of  this,  several  instances
might  be  given,  in  his  account  of  our  idea  of  substance,  of  dura-
tion, of  personal  identity.  Omitting  these,  as  foreign  to  the
present  subject,  I  shall  only  take  notice  of  the  account  he  gives
of  our  idea  of  power.

The  sum  of  it  is,  that  observing,  by  our  senses,  various
changes  in  objects,  we  collect  a  possibiUty  in  one  object  to  be
changed,  and  in  another  a  possibility  of  making  that  change,  and
so  come  by  that  idea  which  we  call  power.

Thus  we  say  the  fire  has  a  power  to  melt  gold,  and  gold  has
power  to  be  melted ;  the  first  he  calls  active,  the  second  passive
power.

He  thinks,  however,  that  we  have  the  most  distinct  notion  of
active  power,  by  attending  to  the  power  which  we  ourselves
exert,  in  giving  motion  to  our  bodies  when  at  rest,  or  in  directing
our  thoughts  to  this  or  the  other  object,  as  we  will.  And  this
way  of  forming  the  idea  of  power  he  attributes  to  reflection,  as
he  refers  the  former  to  sensation.*

II.  Objections  to  Mr.  Locke's  origin  of  our  idea  of  power. — On
this  account  of  the  origin  of  our  idea  of  power,  I  would  beg
leave  to  make  two  remarks,  with  the  respect  that  is  most  justly
due  to  so  great  a  philosopher,  and  so  good  a  man.

[1.  Whereas  he  distinguishes  power  into  active  and  passive,  I
conceive  passive  power  is  no  power  at  all.  He  means  by  it,  the
possibility  of  being  changed.  To  call  this  power,  seems  to  be  a
misapplication  of  the  word.  I  do  not  remember  to  have  met  with
the  phrase  passive  power  in  any  other  good  author.]  Mr.  Locke
seems  to  have  been  unlucky  in  inventing  it ;  and  it  deserves  not
to  be  retained  in  our  language.

Perhaps  he  was  unwarily  led  into  it,  as  an  opposite  to  active

*  *'  Observing  in  ourselves^  that  we  do  and  can  think ;  and  that  we  can  at
pleasure  move  several  parts  of  our  bodies  which  were  at  rest :  the  effects,  also,
that  natural  bodies  are  able  to  produce  in  one  another,  occurring  every  moment
to  our  senses,  we  both  these  ways  get  the  idea  of  power." — Essay,  Book  ii.
chap.  vil.  sect.  8.


92  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  III.

power.  But  I  conceive  we  call  certain  powers  active,  to  distin-
guish them  from  other  powers  that  are  called  speculative.  As
all  mankind  distinguish  action  from  speculation,  it  is  very  proper
to  distinguish  the  powers  by  which  those  different  operations  are
performed,  into  active  and  speculative.  Mr.  Locke,  indeed,
acknowledges  that  active  power  is  more  properly  called  power ;
but  I  see  no  propriety  at  all  in  passive  power ;  it  is  a  powerless
power,  and  a  contradiction  in  terms.

[2,  I  would  observe,  that  Mr.  Locke  seems  to  have  imposed
upon  himself,  in  attempting  to  reconcile  this  account  of  the  idea
of  power  to  his  favourite  doctrine,  that  all  our  simple  ideas  are
ideas  of  sensation,  or  of  reflection.]

There  are  two  steps,  according  to  his  account,  which  the  mind
takes  in  forming  this  idea  of  power ;  first,  it  observes  changes
in  thin^ ;  and,  secondly,  from  these  changes,  it  infers  a  cause  of
them,  and  a  power  to  produce  them.

If  both  these  steps  are  operations  of  the  external  senses,  or  of
consciousness,  then  the  idea  of  power  may  be  called  an  idea  of
sensation,  or  of  reflection.  But,  if  either  of  those  steps  requires
the  co-operation  of  other  powers  of  the  mind,  it  will  follow,  that
the  idea  of  power  cannot  be  got  by  sensation,  nor  by  reflection,
nor  by  both  together.  Let  us,  therefore,  consider  each  of  these
steps  by  itself.

First,  we  observe  various  changes  in  things.  And  Mr.  Locke
takes  it  for  granted,  that  changes  in  external  things  are  observed
by  our  senses,  and  that  changes  in  our  thoughts  are  observed  by
consciousness.

I  grant  that  it  may  be  said,  that  changes  in  things  are  observed
by  our  senses,  when  we  do  not  mean  to  exclude  every  other
faculty  from  a  share  in  this  operation.  And  it  vould  be  ridi-
culous to  censure  the  phrase,  when  it  is  so  used  in  popular  dis-
course. But  it  is  necessary  to  Mr.  Locke's  purpose,  that  changes
in  external  things  should  be  observed  by  the  senses  alone,  ex-
cluding every  other  faculty  ;  because  every  faculty  that  is  neces-
sary in  order  to  observe  the  change,  will  claim  a  share  in  the
origin  of  the  idea  of  power.

Now,  it  is  evident,  that  memory  is  no  less  necessary  than  the
senses,  in  order  to  our  observing  changes  in  external  things,  and
therefore  the  idea  of  power,  derived  from  the  changes  observed,
may  as  justly  be  ascribed  to  memory  as  to  the  senses.

Every  change  supposes  two  states  of  the  thing  changed.  Both
these  states  may  be  past ;  one  of  them  at  least  must  be  past ;
and  one  only  can  be  present.  By  our  senses  we  may  observe
the  present  state  of  the  thing  ;  but  memory  must  supply  us  with
the  past ;  and,  unless  we  remember  the  past  state,  we  can  per-
ceive no  change.

[The  same  observation  may  be  applied  to  consciousness. The


OF  MR.  HUME'S  OPINION  OF  THE  IDEA  OF  POWER.  93

truth,  therefore,  is,  that  hy  the  senses  alone ,  without  memory,  or
by  consciousness  alone,  without  memory,  no  change  can  be  ob^
served.']  Every  idea,  therefore,  that  is  derived  from  observing
changes  in  things,  must  have  its  origin,  partly  from  memory,  and
not  from  the  senses  alone,  nor  from  consciousness  alone,  nqr
from  both  together*

The  second  step  made  by  the  mind  in  forming  this  idea  of
power  is  this :  from  the  changes  observed,  we  collect  a  cause  of
those  changes,  and  a  power  to  produce  them.

Here  one  might  ask  Mr.  Locke,  whether  it  is  by  our  senses
that  we  draw  this  conclusion,  or  is  it  by  consciousness  ?  Is  rea-
soning the  province  of  the  senses,  or  is  it  the  province  of  con-
sciousness ?  If  the  senses  can  draw  one  conclusion  from  premises,
they  may  draw  five  hundred,  and  demonstrate  the  whole  Elements
of  Euclid.

Thus,  I  think,  it  appears,  that  [the  account  which  Mr.  Locke
himself  gives  of  the  origin  of  our  idea  of  power,  cannot  be  recon-
ciled to  his  favourite  doctrine,  that  all  our  simple  ideas  have
their  origin  from  sensation  or  reflection ;  and  that,  in  attempting
to  derive  the  idea  of  power  from  these  two  sources  only,  he  un-
awares brings  in  our  memory  and  our  reasoning  power  for  a  almre
in  its  origin.]


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  MR.  HUME'S  OPINION  OF  THE  IDEA  OF  POWER.

I.  Induction,  by  which  Mr.  Hume  attempts  to  explain  the  origin
of  our  simple  ideas,  imperfect. — This  very  ingenious  author  adopts
Ae  principle  of  Mr.  Locke  before  mentioned, — That  all  our
simple  ideas  are  derived  either  from  sensation  or  reflection.  This
he  seems  to  understand,  even  in  a  stricter  sense  than  Mr.  Locke
did ;  for  he  will  have  all  our  simple  ideas  to  be  copies  of  pre-
ceding impressions,  either  of  our  external  senses  or  of  conscious-
ness. **  After  the  most  accurate  examination,'*  says  he,  "  of
which  I  am  capable,  I  venture  to  affirm,  that  the  rule  here  holds
without  any  exception,  and  that  every  simple  idea  has  a  simple
impression  which  resembles  it,  and  every  simple  impression  a
correspondent  idea.  Every  one  may  satis^  himself  in  this  point,
by  running  over  as  many  as  he  pleases."

[I  observe  here,  by  the  way,  that  this  conclusion  is  formed  by
the  author  rashly  and  unphilosophically.  For  it  is  a  conclusion
that  admits  of  no  proof  but  by  induction ;  and  it  is  upon  this
ground  that  he  himself  founds  it.  The  induction  cannot  be  per-
feet  till  every  simple  idea  that  can  enter  into  the  human  mind  be
examined,  and  be  shown  to  be  copied  from  a  resembling  impres-
sion of  sense  or  of  consciousness.  J No  man  can  pretend  to  have


94  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  IV.

made  this  examination  of  all  our  simple  ideas  without  exception ;
and,  therefore,  no,  man  can,  consistently  with  the  rules  of  philo-
sophizing, assure  us,  that  this  conclusion  holds  without  any
exception.

The  author  professes,  in  his  title-page,  to  intK)duce  into  moral
subjects  the  experimental  method  of  reasoning.  This  was  a  very
laudable  attempt ;  but  he  ought  to  have  known,  that  it  is  a  rule
in  the  experimental  method  of  reasoning.  That  conclusions,
established  by  induction,  ought  never  to  exclude  exceptions,  if
any  such  should  afterwards  appear  from  observation  or  experi-
ment. Sir  Isaac  Newton,  speaking  of  such  conclusions,  says,
"  Et  si  quando  in  experiundo  postea  reperiatur  aliquid,  quod  a
parte  contraria  faciat ;  tum  demum,  non  sine  istis  exceptionibus
affirmetur  conclusio  opportebit."  "  And  if  at  any  time,  in  the
course  of  experimenting,  a  contrary  instance  occur,  then  the  con-
clusion must  necessarily  be  affirmed  subject  to  such  exception."
"  But,"  says  our  author,  "  I  will  venture  to  affirm,  that  the  mle
here  holds  without  any  exception."

Accordingly,  throughout  the  whole  treatise,  this  general  rule
is  considered  as  of  sufficient  authority,  in  itself,  to  exclude,  even
from  a  hearing,  every  thing  that  appears  to  be  an  exception  to
it.  This  is  contrary  to  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  experi-
mental method  of  reasoning,  and  therefore  may  be  called  rash
and  unphilosophical.

II.  [Having  thus  established  this  general  principle,  the  author
does  great  execution  by  it  among  our  ideas.  He  finds,  (1)  that
W9  have  no  idea  of  substance,  material  or  spiritual ;  {2)  that  body
and  mind  are  only  certain  trains  of  related  impressions  and  ideas ;
(3)  that  we  have  no  idea  of  space  or  duration ;  and  (4)  no  idea  of
power,  active  or  intellective.]

Mr.  Locke  used  his  principle  of  sensation  and  reflection  with
greater  moderation  and  mercy.  Being  unwilling  to  thrust  the
ideas  we  have  mentioned  into  the  limbo  of  non-existence,  he
stretches  sensation  and  reflection  to  the  very  utmost,  in  order  to
receive  these  ideas  within  the  pale ;  and  draws  them  into  it,  as
it  were,  by  violence.

But  this  author,  instead  of  showing  them  any  favour,  seems
fond  to  get  rid  of  them.

Of  the  ideas  mentioned,  it  is  only  that  of  power  that  concerns
our  present  subject.  And,  with  regard  to  this,  the  author
boldly  affirms,  "  That  we  never  have  any  idea  of  power  ;  that
we  deceive  ourselves  when  we  imagine  we  are  possessed  of  any
idea  of  this  kind."

He  begins  with  observing,  **  That  the  terms  efficacy ,  agency y
power y  force,  energy ,  are  all  nearly  synonymous ;  and  therefore
it  is  an  absurdity  to  employ  any  of  them  in  defining  the  rest*
By  this  observation,"  says  he,  "  we  reject  at  once  all  the  vulgar
deBnitions  which  philosophers  have  g\veiv  oi  power  aud  efficacy.^*


OF  MR.  HUME^  OPINION  OF  THE  IDEA  OF  POWER.  95

Surely  this  author  was  not  ignorant,  that  there  are  many
things  of  which  we  have  a  clear  and  distinct  conception,  which
are  so  simple  in  their  nature,  that  they  cannot  be  defined  any
other  way  than  by  synonymous  words.  It  is  true  that  this  is
not  a  logical  definition ;  but  that  there  is,  as  he  affirms,  an  ab-
surdity in  using  it,  when  ho  better  can  be  had,  I  cannot  per-
ceive.

He  might  here  have  applied  to  power  and  efficacy  what  he
says,  in  another  place,  of  pride  and  humility.  "  The  passions
of  pride  and  humility ^^^  he  says,  "  being  simple  and  uniform
impressions,  it  is  impossible  we  can  ever  give  a  just  definition
of  them.  As  the  words  are  of  general  use,  and  the  things  they
represent  the  most  common  of  any,  every  one,  of  himself,  will
be  able  to  form  a  just  notion  of  them  without  danger  of  mis-
take."

He  mentions  Mr.  Locke's  account  of  the  idea  of  power.  That,
observing  various  changes  in  things,  we  conclude  that  there
must  be  somewhere  a  power  capable  of  producing  them,  and
so  arrive  at  last,  by  th&  reasoning,  at  the  idea  of  power  and
efBcacy.

"  But,"  says  he,  "  to  be  satisfied  that  this  explication  is
more  popular  than  philosophical,  we  need  but  refiect  on  two
very  obvious  principles  :  firsts  That  reason  alone  can  never  give
rise  to  any  original  idea;  and,  secondly,  That  reason,  as  dis-
tinguished from  experience,  can  never  make  us  conclude  that  a
cause,  or  productive  quality,  is  absolutely  requisite  to  every
beginning  of  existence."*

III.  Before  we  consider  the  two  principles  which  our  author
opposes  to  the  popular  opinion  of  Mr.  Locke,  I  observe.

First,  That  there  are  some  popular  opinions,  which,  on  that
very  account,  deserve  more  regard  from  philosophers  than  this
author  is  willing  to  bestow.

That  things  cannot  begin  to  exist,  nor  undergo  any  change,
without  a  cause  that  hath  power  to  produce  that  change,  is  in-
deed so  popular  an  opinion,  that,  I  believe,  this  author  is  the
first  of  mankind  that  ever  called  it  in  question.  It  is  so  popu-
lar, that  there  is  not  a  man  of  common  prudence  who  does  not
act  from  this  opinion,  and  rely  upon  it  every  day  of  his  life.
And  any  man  who  should  conduct  nimself  by  the  contrary  opi-
nion, would  soon  be  confined  as  insane,  and  continue  in  that
state,  till  a  sufficient  cause  was  found  for  his  enlargement.

Such  a  popular  opinion  as  this  stands  upon  a  higher  autho-
rity than  that  of  philosophy,  and  philosophy  must  strike  sail  to
it,  if  she  would  not  render  herself  contemptible  to  every  man  of
common  understanding.

•  Vide  Essay  IV.,  chap.  ix.  sec.  9.


gg  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  IV.

For  though,  in  matters  of  deep  speculation,  the  multitude
must  be  guided  by  philosophers,  yet,  in  things  that  are  within
the  reach  of  every  man's  understanding,  and  upon  which  the
whole  conduct  of  human  life  turns,  the  philosopher  must  follow
the  multitude,  or  make  himself  perfectly  ridiculous.

Secondly  J  I  observe,  that  whether  this  popular  opinion  be  true
or  false,  it  follows  from  men's  having  this  opinion,  that  they
have  an  idea  of  power.  A  false  opinion  about  power,  no  less
than  a  true,  implies  an  idea  of  power ;  for  how  can  men  have
any  opinion,  true  or  false,  about  a  thing  of  which  they  have  no
idea?

IV.  Of  the  two  principles  which  Mr.  Hume  opposes  to  Mr.  Locke*
— [The  first  of  the  very  obvious  principles  which  the  author
opposes  to  Mr.  Locke's  account  of  the  idea  of  power,  is.  That
reason  alone  can  never  give  rise  to  any  original  idea."]

This  appears  to  me  so  far  from  being  a  very  obvious  prin-
ciple, that  the  contrary  is  very  obvious.

Is  it  not  our  reasoning  faculty  that  gives  rise  to  the  idea  of
reasoning  itself?  As  our  idea  of  sight  take's  its  rise  from  our
being  endowed  with  that  faculty,  so  does  our  idea  of  reasoning.
Do  not  the  ideas  of  demonstration,  of  probability,  our  ideas  of
a  syllogism,  of  major,  minor  and  conclusion,  of  an  enthymeme,
dilemma,  sorites,  and  all  the  various  modes  of  reasoning,  take
their  rise  from  the  faculty  of  reason  ?  Or  is  it  possible,  that  a
being,  not  endowed  with  the  faculty  of  reasoning,  should  have
these  ideas  ?  This  principle,  therefore,  is  so  fax  firom  being
obviously  true,  that  it  appears  to  be  obviously  false.

[The  second  obvious  principle  is.  That  reason^  as  distinguished
from  experience,  can  never  make  us  conclude,  that  a  cause,  or
productive  quality,  is  absolutely  requisite  to  every  beginning  of
existence.^

In  some  "  Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man,"  I  had
occasion  to  treat  of  this  principle.  That  every  change  in  nature
must  have  a  cause ;  and,  to  prevent  repetition,  I  beg  leave  to
refer  the  reader  to  what  is  said  upon  this  subject.  Essay  vi.
chap.  6.  I  endeavoured  to  show,  that  it  is  a  first  principle,
evident  to  all  men  come  to  years  of  understanding.  Besides  its
having  been  imiversally  received,  without  the  least  doubt,  from
the  beginning  of  the  world,  it  has  this  sure  mark  of  a  first  prin-
ciple, that  the  belief  of  it  is  absolutely  necessary  in  the  ordinary
afiairs  of  life,  and,  without  it,  no  man  could  act  with  common
prudence,  or  avoid  the  imputation  of  insanity.  Yet  a  philoso-
pher, who  acted  upon  the  firm  belief  of  it  every  day  of  his  life,
thinks  fit,  in  his  closet,  to  call  it  in  question.

[He  insinuates  here,  that  we  may  know  it  from  experience.
I  endeavoured  to  show,  that  we  do  not  learn  it  from  experience,
for  two  reasons.]


OP  BEINGS  THAT  HAVE  NO  UNDERSTANDING.  97

[First,  Because  it  is  a  necessary  truth,  and  has  always  been
received  as  a  necessary  truth.  Experience  gives  no  information
of  what  is  necessary,  or  of  what  must  be.]

We  may  know  from  experience,  what  is,  or  what  was,  and
from  that  may  probably  conclude  what  shall  be  in  like  circum-
stances ;  but  with  regard  to  what  must  necessarily  be,  experience
is  perfectly  silent.

rar  Thus  we  know,  by  unvaried  experience,  from  the  begin-
ning of  the  world,  that  the  sun  and  stars  rise  in  the  east  and  set
in  the  west.  But  no  man  believes  that  it  could  not  possibly
have  been  otherwise,  or  that  it  did  not  depend  upon  the  will
and  power  of  Him  who  made  the  world,  whether  the  earth
shoidd  revolve  to  the  east  or  to  the  west.

In  like  manner,  if  we  had  experience,  ever  so  constant,  that
every  change  in  nature  we  have  observed,  actually  had  a  cause,
this  might  afford  ground  to  believe,  that,  for  the  future,  it  shall
be  so  ;  but  no  ground  at  all  to  believe  that  it  must  be  so,  and
cannot  be  othervdse.

[/inother  reason  to  show  that  this  principle  is  not  learned  from
experience  is,  ITiat  experience  does  not  show  us  a  cause  of  one
in  a  hundred  of  those  changes  which  we  observe,  and  therefore
can  never  teach  us  that  there  must  be  a  cause  of  allJ]

Of  all  the  paradoxes  this  author  has  advanced,  there  is  not
one  more  shocking  to  the  human  understanding  than  this.  That
things  may  begin  to  exist  without  a  cause.  This  would  put  an
end  to  all  speculation,  as  well  as  to  all  the  business  of  life.  The
employment  of  speculative  men,  since  the  beginning  of  the
world,  has  been  to  investigate  the  causes  of  things.  What  pity
is  it,  they  never  thought  of  putting  the  previous  question,  Whe-
ther things  have  a  cause  or  not  ?  This  question  has  at  last  been
started ;  and  what  is  there  so  ridiculous  as  not  to  be  maintained
by  some  philosopher  ?

Enough  has  been  said  upon  it,  and  more,  I  think,  than  it
deserves.  But  being  about  to  treat  of  the  active  powers  of  the
human  mind,  I  thought  it  improper  to  take  no  notice  of  what
has  been  said  by  so  celebrated  a  philosopher,  to  show  that  there
is  not,  in  the  human  mind,  any  idea  of  power.


CHAPTER  V.

WHETHER  BEINGS  THAT HAVE  NO  WILL  NOR  UNDERSTANDING MAY  HAVE

ACTIVE  POWER  f

I.  The  question  perplexed  by  the  ambiguity  of  certain  term^. —
That  active  power  is  an  attribute,  which  cannot  exist  but  in
some  being  possessed  of  that  power,  and  the  subject  of  that

H


98  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  V.

attribute,  I  take  for  granted  as  a  self-evident  truth.  Whether
there  can  be  active  power  in  a  subject  which  has  no  thought,  no
understanding,  no  will,  is  not  so  evident.

[The  ambiguity  of  the  words  power,  cause,  agent,  and  of  all
the  words  related  to  these,  tends  to  perplex  this  question.]  The
weakness  of  human  understanding,  which  gives  us  only  an  indi-
rect and  relative  conception  of  power,  contributes  to  darken  our
reasoning,  and  should  make  us  cautious  and  modest  in  our  deter-
minations.

We  can  derive  little  light  in  this  matter  from  the  events  which
we  observe  in  the  course  of  nature.  We  perceive  changes  innu-
merable in  things  without  us.  We  know  that  those  changes
must  be  produced  by  the  active  power  of  some  agent ;  but  we
neither  perceive  the  agent  nor  the  power,  but  the  change  only.
Whether  the  things  be  active,  or  merely  passive,  is  not  easily
discovered.  And  though  it  may  be  an  object  of  curiosity  to  the
speculative  few,  it  does  not  greatly  concern  the  many.

To  know  the  event  and  the  circumstances  that  attended  it,  and
to  know  in  what  circumstances  like  events  may  be  expected,  may
be  of  consequence  in  the  conduct  of  life ;  but  to  know  the  real
efficient,  whether  it  be  matter  or  mind,  whether  of  a  superior  or
inferior  order,  concerns  us  little.

Thus  it  is  with  regard  to  all  the  effects  we  ascribe  to  nature.

II.  Nature  is  the  name  we  give  to  the  efficient  cause  of  innu-
merable effects  which  fall  daily  under  our  observation.  But  if
it  be  asked  what  nature  is  ? — whether  the  first  universal  cause,
or  a  subordinate  one,  whether  one  or  many,  whether  intelligent
or  unintelligent  ? — upon  these  points  we  find  various  conjectures
and  theories,  but  no  solid  ground  upon  which  we  can  rest ;  and
I  apprehend  the  wisest  men  are  they  who  are  sensible  that  they
know  nothing  of  the  matter.

From  the  course  of  events  in  the  natural  world,  we  have  suf-
ficient reason  to  conclude  the  existence  of  an  eternal  intelligent
First  Cause.  But  whether  he  acts  immediately  in  the  production
of  those  events,  or  by  subordinate  intelligent  agents,  or  by  instru-
ments that  are  unintelligent,  and  what  the  number,  the  nature,
and  the  different  offices  of  those  agents  or  instruments  may  be ;
these  I  apprehend  to  be  mysteries  placed  beyond  the  limits  of
human  knowledge.  We  see  an  established  order  in  the  succes-
sion of  natural  events,  but  we  see  not  the  bond  that  connects
them  together.

III.  [Since  we  derive  so  little  light,  with  regard  to  efficient
causes  and  their  active  power,  from  attention  to  the  natural
world,  let  us  next  attend  to  the  moral,  I  mean,  to  human  actions
and  conduct. 1

Mr.  Locke  observes  very  justly,  "  That,  from  the  observation
of  the  operation  of  bodies  by  our  senses,  we  have  but  a  very


OF  BEINGS  THAT  HAVE  NO UNDERSTANDING.  99

imperfect  obscure  idea  of  active  power,  since  they  afford  us  not
any  idea  in  themselves  of  the  power  to  begin  any  action,  either
of  motion  or  thought."  He  adds,  "  That  we  find  in  ourselves  a
power  to  begin  or  forbear,  continue  or  end  several  actions  of  our
minds  and  motions  of  our  bodies,  barely  by  a  thought  or  prefer-
ence of  the  mind,  ordering,  or,  as  it  were,  commanding  the  doing
or  not  doing  such  a  particular  action.  This  power  which  the
mind  has  thus  to  order  the  consideration  of  any  idea,  or  the  for-
bearing to  consider  it,  or  to  prefer  the  motion  of  any  part  of  the
body  to  its  rest,  and  vice  versa,  in  any  particular  instance,  is  that
which  we  call  the  will.  The  actual  exercise  of  that  power,  by
directing  any  particular  actibn,  or  its  forbearance,  is  that  which
we  call  volition  or  willing.''^

According  to  Mr.  Locke,  therefore,  the  only  clear  notion  or
idea  we  have  of  active  power,  is  taken  from  the  power  which  we
find  in  ourselves  to  give  certain  motions  to  our  bodies,  or  a  cer-
tain direction  to  our  thoughts  ;  and  this  power  in  ourselves  can
be  brought  into  action  only  by  willing  or  volition.

IV.  Volition  necessary  to  the  operation  of  power. — [From  this,
I  think,  it  follows,  that,  if  we  had  not  will,  and  that  degree  of
understanding  which  will  necessarily  implies,  we  could  exert  no
active  power,  and  consequently  could  have  none :  for  power  that
cannot  be  exerted  is  no  power.  It  foHows  also,  that  the  active
power,  of  which  only  we  can  have  any  distinct  conception,  can
be  only  in  beings  that  have  understanding  and  will.]

Power  to  produce  any  eflfect  implies  power  not  to  produce  it.
We  can  conceive  no  way  in  which  power  may  be  determined  to
one  of  these  rather  than  the  other,  in  a  being  that  has  no  will.

[Whatever  is  the  effect  of  active  power  must  be  something
that  is  contingent.  Contingent  existence  is  that  which  depended
upon  the  power  and  will  of  its  cause.  Opposed  to  this,  is  neces-
sary existence,  which  we  ascribe  to  the  Supreme  Being,  because
his  existence  is  not  owing  to  the  power  of  any  being.  The  same
distinction  there  is  between  contingent  and  necessary  truth.]

Igir  That  the  planets  of  our  system  go  round  the  sun  from
west  to  east,  is  a  contingent  truth ;  because  it  depended  upon  the
power  and  will  of  him  who  made  the  planetary  system,  and  gave
motion  to  it.  That  a  circle  and  a  right  line  can  cut  one  another
only  in  two  points,  is  a  truth  which  depends  upon  no  power  nor
will,  and  therefore  is  called  necessary  and  immutable.  Contin-
gency, therefore,  has  a  relation  to  active  power,  as  all  active
power  is  exerted  in  contingent  events ;  and  as  such  events  can
have  no  existence,  but  by  the  exertion  of  active  power.

0Sr  When  I  observe  a  plant  growing  from  its  seed  to  maturity,
I  know  that  there  must  be  a  cause  that  has  power  to  produce
this  eflfect.  But  I  see  neither  the  cause  nor  the  manner  of  its
operation.


100  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  V.

But  in  certain  motions  of  my  body  and  directions  of  my
thought,  I  know,  not  only  that  there  must  be  a  cause  that  has
power  to  produce  these  effects,  but  that  I  am  that  cause  ;  and  I
am  conscious  of  what  I  do  in  order  to  the  production  of  them.

From  the  consciousness  of  our  own  activity,  seems  to  be
derived,  not  only  the  clearest,  but  the  only  conception  we  can
form  of  activity,  or  the  exertion  of  active  power.

As  I  am  unable  to  form  a  notion  of  any  intellectual  power
different  in  kind  from  those  I  possess,  the  same  holds  with  respect
to  active  power.  If  all  men  had  been  blind,  we  should  have  had
no  conception  of  the  power  of  seeing,  nor  any  name  for  it  in
language.  If  man  had  not  the  powers  of  abstraction  and  rea-
soning, we  could  not  have  had  any  conception  of  these  operations.
In  like  manner,  if  he  had  not  some  degree  of  active  power,  and
if  he  were  not  conscious  of  the  exertion  of  it  in  his  voluntary
actions,  it  is  probable  he  could  have  no  conception  of  activity,  or
of  active  power.

A  train  of  events  following  one  another  ever  so  regularly,
could  never  lead  us  to  the  notion  of  a  cause,  if  we  had  not,  from
our  constitution,  a  conviction  of  the  necessity  of  a  cause  to  every
event.

And  of'  the  manner  in  which  a  cause  may  exert  its  active
power,  we  can  have  no  conception  but  from  consciousness  of  the
manner  in  which  our  own  active  power  is  exerted.

With  regard  to  the  operations  of  nature,  it  is  sufficient  for  us
to  know,  that,  whatever  the  agents  may  be,  whatever  the  manner
of  their  operation,  or  the  extent  of  their  power,  they  depend
upon  the  First  Cause,  and  are  under  his  control ;  and  this  indeed
is  all  that  we  know ;  beyond  this  we  axe  left  in  darkness.  But,
in  what  regards  human  actions,  we  have  a  more  inmiediate
concern.

It  is  of  the  highest  importance  to  us,  as  moral  and  accountable
creatures,  to  know  what  actions  are  in  our  own  power,  because
it  is  for  these  only  that  we  can  be  accountable  to  our  Maker,
or  to  our  fellow-men  in  society;  by  these  only  we  can  merit
praise  or  blame  ;  in  these  only  all  our  prudence,  wisdom  and  vir-
tue must  be  employed ;  and,  therefore,  with  regard  to  them,  the
wise  Author  of  nature  has  not  left  us  in  the  dark.

Every  man  is  led  by  nature  to  attribute  to  himself  the  free
determinations  of  his  own  will,  and  to  believe  those  events  to  be
in  his  power  which  depend  upon  his  wiU.  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  self-evident,  that  nothing  is  in  our  power  that  is  not  subject
to  our  will.

We  grow  from  childhood  to  manhood,  we  digest  our  food,  our
blood  circulates,  our  heart  and  arteries  beat,  we  are  sometimes
sick  and  sometimes  in  health ;  all  these  things  must  be  done  by
the  power  of  some  agent ;  but  they  are  not  done  by  our  power.


OP  BEINGS  THAT  HAVE  NO  UNDERSTANDING.  IQJ

How  do  we  know  this?  Because  they  are  not  subject  to  our
wilL  This  is  the  infallible  criterion  by  which  we  distinguish
what  is  our  doing  from  what  is  not ;  what  is  in  our  power  from
what  is  not.

l^Human  power,  therefore,  can  only  be  exerted  by  will,  and  we
are  unable  to  conceive  any  active  power  to  be  exerted  without
will.  Every  man  knows  infallibly  that  what  is  done  by  his  con^
sciotis  will  and  intention,  is  to  be  imputed  to  him  as  the  agent  or
cause  ;  and  that  whatever  is  done  without  his  will  and  intention,
cannot  be  imputed  to  him  with  truth.]

We  judge  of  the  actions  and  conduct  of  other  men  by  the
same  rule  as  we  judge  of  our  own.  In  morals,  it  is  self-evident
that  no  man  can  be  the  object  either  of  approbation  or  of  blame
for  what  he  did  not.  But  how  shall  we  know  whether  it  is  his
doing  or  not  ?  If  the  action  depended  upon  his  will,  and  if  he
intended  and  vdlled  it,  it  is  his  action  in  the  judgment  of  all
mankind.  But  if  it  was  done  without  his  knowledge,  or  with-
out his  will  and  intention,  it  is  as  certain  that  he  did  it  not,  and
that  it  ought  not  to  be  imputed  to  him  as  the  agent.

When  there  is  any  doubt  to  whom  a  particular  action  ought
to  be  imputed,  the  doubt  arises  only  from  our  ignorance  of  facts ;
when  the  facts  relating  to  it  are  known,  no  man  of  understand-
ing has  any  doubt  to  whom  the  action  ought  to  be  imputed.

V.  [The  general  rules  of  imputation  are  self-evident.  They
have  been  the  same  in  all  ages,  and  among  all  civilized  nations.]
No  man  blames  another  for  being  black  or  fair,  for  having  a  fever
or  the  falling  sickness ;  because  these  things  are  believed  not  to
be  in  his  power ;  and  they  are  believed  not  to  be  in  his  power,
because  they  depend  not  upon  his  vdll.  [We  can  never  conceive
that  a  man's  duty  goes  beyond  his  power,  or  that  his  power  goes
beyond  what  depends  upon  his  will.]

Reason  leads  us  to  ascribe  unhmited  power  to  the  Supreme
Being.  But  what  do  we  mean  by  unlimited  power  ?  It  is
power  to  do  whatsoever  he  wills.  To  suppose  him  to  do  what  he
does  not  will  to  do,  is  absurd.

VI.  Our  conception  of  active  power  relative. — [The  only  dis-
tinct conception  I  can  form  of  active  power  is,  that  it  is  an  attri-
bute in  a  being  by  which  he  can  do  certain  things  if  he  wills.
This,  after  all,  is  only  a  relative  conception.  It  is  relative  to  the
effect,  and  to  the  will  of  producing  it.]  Take  away  these,  and
the  conception  vanishes.  They  are  the  handles  by  which  the
mind  takes  hold  of  it.  When  they  are  taken  away,  our  hold  is
gone.  The  same  is  the  case  with  regard  to  other  relative  concep-
tions. Thus  velocity  is  a  real  state  of  a  body,  about  which  philo-
sophers reason  with  the  force  of  demonstration ;  but  our  concep-
tion of  it  is  relative  to  space  and  time.  What  is  velocity  in  a
body  ? It  is  a  state  in  which  it  passes  through  a  certain  space  in


102  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  V.

a  certain  time.  Space  and  time  are  very  different  from  velocity ;
but  we  cannot  conceive  it  but  by  its  relation  to  them.  The
ejffect  produced,  and  the  will  to  produce  it,  are  things  different
from  active  power,  but  we  can  have  no  conception  of  it,  but  by
its  relation  to  them.

Whether  the  conception  of  an  efficient  cause,  and  of  real
activity,  could  ever  have  entered  into  the  mind  of  man,  if  we  had
not  had  the  experience  of  activity  in  ourselves,  I  am  not  able  to
determine  with  certainty.  The  origin  of  many  of  our  concep-
tions, and  even  of  many  of  our  judgments,  is  not  so  easily  traced
as  philosophers  have  generally  conceived.  No  man  can  recollect
the  time  when  he  first  got  the  conception  of  an  eflicient  cause,
or  the  time  when  he  first  got  the  belief  that  an  eflicient  cause  is
necessary  to  every  change  in  nature.  The  conception  of  an
efficient  cause  may  very  probably  be  derived  from  the  experience
we  have  had  in  very  early  life  of  our  own  power  to  produce  cer-
tain effects.  But  the  belief,  that  no  event-  can  happen  without
an  efficient  cause,  cannot  be  derived  from  experience.  We  may
learn  from  experience  what  is,  or  what  was,  but  no  experience
can  teach  us  what  necessarily  must  be.

In  like  manner,  we  probably  derive  the  conception  of  pain
from  the  experience  we  have  had  of  it  in  ourselves ;  but  our
belief  that  pain  can  only  exist  in  a  being  that  hath  life,  cannot
be  got  by  experience,  because  it  is  a  necessary  truth ;  and  no
necessary  truth  can  have  its  attestation  from  experience.

If  it  be  so  that  the  conception  of  an  efficient  cause  enters  into
the  mind,  only  from  the  early  conviction  we  have  that  we  are
the  efficients  of  our  own  voluntary  actions,  (which  I  think  is
most  probable,)  the  notion  of  efficiency  will  be  reduced  to  this, —
That  it  is  a  relation  between  the  cause  and  the  effect,  similar  to
that  which  is  between  us  and  our  voluntary  actions.  This  is
surely  the  most  distinct  notion,  and,  I  think,  the  only  notion  we
can  form  of  real  efficiency.

Now  it  is  evident,  that,  to  constitute  the  relation  between  me
and  my  action,  my  conception  of  the  action,  and  will  to  do  it,  are
essential. For  what  I  never  conceived,  nor  willed,  I  never  did.

If  any  man,  therefore,  affirms,  that  a  being  may  be  the  efficient
cause  of  an  action,  and  have  power  to  produce  it,  which  that
being  can  neither  conceive  nor  will,  he  speaks  a  language  which
I  do  not  imderstand.  If  he  has  a  meaning,  his  notion  of  power
and  efficiency  must  be  essentially  different  from  mine ;  and,  until
he  conveys  his  notion  of  efficiency  to  my  understanding,  I  can  no
more  assent  to  his  opinion,  than  if  he  should  affirm,  that  a  being
without  life  may  feel  pain.

It  seems,  therefore,  to  me  most  probable,  that  such  beings
onljr  as  have  some  degree  of  understanding  and  will,  can  possess
active  power :  and  that  inanimate  beings  must  be  merely  passive,


■  OF  THE  PHENOMENA  OF  NATURE.  1()3

and  have  no  real  activity.  Nothing  we  perceive  without  us
affords  any  good  ground  for  ascribing  active  power  to  any  inani-
mate being  ;  and  every  thing  we  can  discover  in  our  own  consti-
tution, leads  us  to  think,  that  active  power  cannot  be  exerted
without  will  and  intelligence.


CHAPTER  VI.

OF THE EFFICIENT CAUSES OF THE PHENOMENA OF NATURE.

I.  Of  powers  ascribed  to  matter, — If  active  power,  in  its  pro-
per meaning,  requires  a  subject  endowed  with  will  and  intelli-
gence, what  shall  we  say  of  those  active  powers  which  philoso-
phers teach  us  to  ascribe  to  matter ;  the  powers  of  corpuscular
attraction,  magnetism,  electricity,  gravitation,  and  others  ?  Is
it  not  universally  allowed,  that  heavy  bodies  descend  to  the  earth
by  the  power  of  gravity ;  that,  by  the  same  power,  the  moon,
and  all  the  planets  and  comets,  are  retained  in  their  orbits  ?
Have  the  most  eminent  natural  philosophers  been  imposing
upon  us,  and  giving  us  words  instead  of  real  causes  ?

In  answer  to  this,  I  apprehend,  that  the  principles  of  natural
philosophy  have,  in  modem  times,  been  built  upon  a  foundation
that  cannot  be  shaken,  and  that  they  can  be  called  in  question
only  by  those  who  do  not  understand  the  evidence  on  which  they
stand.  [But  the  ambiguity  of  the  words  cause,  agency,  active
power,  and  the  other  words  related  to  these,  has  led  many  to  im-
derstand  them,  when  used  in  natural  philosophy,  in  a  wrong  sense,
and  in  a  sense  which  is  neither  necessary  for  establishing  the  true
principles  of  natural  philosophy,  nor  was  ever  meant  by  the  most
enlightened  in  that  science.]

To  be  convinced  of  this,  we  may  observe,  that  those  very
philosophers  who  attribute  to  matter  the  power  of  gravitation,
and  other  active  powers,  teach  us,  at  the  same  time,  that  mat-
ter is  a  substance  altogether  inert,  and  merely  passive;  that
gravitation,  and  the  other  attractive  or  repulsive  powers  which
they  ascribe  to  it,  are  not  inherent  in  its  nature,  but  impressed
upon  it  by  some  external  cause,  which  they  do  not  pretend  to
know,  or  to  explain.  Now,  when  we  find  wise  men  ascribing
action  and  active  power  to  a  substance  which  they  expressly
teach  us  to  consider  as  merely  passive,  and  acted  upon  by  some
unknown  cause,  we  must  conclude  that  the  action  and  active
power  ascribed  to  it  are  not  to  be  understood  strictly,  but  in
some  popular  sense.

II.  It  ought  likewise  to  be  observed,  that  although  philoso-
phers, for  the  sake  of  being  understood,  must  speak  the  lan-
guage of  the  vulgar,  as  when  they  say,  the  sun  rises  and  sets,


104  ESSAY I.  CHAP.  VI.

and  goes  through  all  the  signs  of  the  zodiac^  yet  they  often
think  dijSTerently  from  the  vulgar.  Let  us  hear  vrhat  the  great-
est of  natural  philosophers  says,  in  the  8th  definition  prefixed  to
his  "  Principia,"  '*  Voces  autem  attractionis,  impulsus,  vel  pro-
pensionis  cujuscunque  in  centrum,  indifferenter  et  pro  se  mutuo
promiscue  usurpo  ;  has  voces  non  physice  sed  mathematice  consi-
derando.  Unde  caveat  lector,  ne  per  hujus  modi  voces  cogitet  me
speciem  vel  modum  actionis,  causamve  aut  ration  em  physicam,
alicubi  definire ;  vel  centris  (quae  simt  puncta  mathematica)
vires  vere  et  physice  tribuere,  si  forte  centra  trahere,  aut  vires
centrorum  esse,  dixero."

"  But  I  use  the  w^ords  attraction,  impulse,  or  propensity  of
any  sort  towards  a  centre,  promiscuously  and  indifferently  one
for  another,  considering  those  forces  not  physically  but  ma-
thematically. Therefore  if  I  happen  to  speak  of  centres  as  at-
tracting, or  as  endued  with  attractive  powers,  let  the  reader
beware  lest  he  imagine,  that  I  anywhere  take  upon  me  to  define
the  kind,  or  the  manner  of  the  action ;  or  the  cause  or  physical
reason  thereof ;  or  that  I  attribute  forces  in  a  true  and  physical
sense,  to  certain  centres  which  are  only  mathematical  points."

[In  all  languages,  action  is  attributed  to  many  things  which
all  men  of  common  understanding  believe  to  be  merely  passive  ;
thus  we  say,  the  wind  blows,  the  rivers  flow,  the  sea  rages,  the
fire  burns,  bodies  move,  and  impel  other  bodies.]

Every  object  which  undergoes  any  change,  must  be  either
active  or  passive  in  that  change.  This  is  self-evident  to  all
men  from  the  first  dawn  of  reason ;  and  therefore  the  change
is  always  expressed  in  language,  either  by  an  active  or  a  passive
verb.  Nor  do  I  know  any  verb,  expressive  of  a  change,  which
does  not  imply  either  action  or  passion.  The  thing  either
changes,  or  it  is  changed.  [But  it  is  remarkable  in  language,
that  when  an  external  cause  of  the  change  is  not  obvious^  the
change  is  always  imputed  to  the  thing  changed^  as  if  it  were
animated,  and  had  active  power  to  produce  the  change  in  it-
self. So  we  say,  the  moon  changes,  the  sun  rises  and  goes  down.]

Thus  active  verbs  are  very  often  applied,  and  active  power
imputed  to  things,  which  a  little  advance  in  knowledge  and  expe-
rience teaches  us  to  be  merely  passive.  This  property,  common
to  all  languages,  I  endeavoured  to  accoimt  for  in  the  second
chapter  of  this  Essay,  to  which  the  reader  is  referred.

III.  A  like  irregularity  may  be  observed  in  the  use  of  the
word  signifying  cause^  in  all  languages,  and  of  the  words  re-
lated to  it.

Our  knowledge  of  causes  is  very  scanty  in  the  most  advanced
state  of  society,  much  more  is  it  so  in  that  early  period  in  which
language  is  formed.  A  strong  desire  to  know  the  causes  of
things,  is  common  to  aU  men  in  every  state  ;  but  the  experience


OF  THE  PHENOMENA  OF  NATURE.  105

of  all  ages  shows  that  this  keen  appetite,  rather  than  go  empty,
will  feed  upon  the  husks  of  real  knowledge  where  the  fruit
cannot  he  found.

While  we  are  very  much  in  the  dark  with  regard  to  the  Teal
agents  or  causes  which  produce  the  phenomena  of  Nature,  and
have,  at  the  same  time,  an  avidity  to  know  them,  ingenious
men  frame  conjectures,  which  those  of  weaker  understanding
take  for  truth.  The  fare  is  coarse,  hut  appetite  makes  it  go  down.

Thus,  in  a  very  ancient  system,  love  and  strife  were  made  the
causes  of  things.  Plato  made  the  causes  of  things  to  be  matter,
ideas,  and  an  efficient  architect.  Aristotle,  matter,  form,  and
privation.  Des  Cartes  thought  matter,  and  a  certain  quantity
of  motion  given  it  by  the  Ahnighty  at  first,  to  be  all  that  is  ne-
cessary to  make  the  material  world.  Leibnitz  conceived  the
whole  universe,  even  the  material  part  of  it,  to  be  made  up  of
monades,  each  of  which  is  active  and  intelligent,  and  produces
in  itself,  by  its  own  active  power,  all  the  changes  it  undergoes
from  the  beginning  of  its  existence  to  eternity.

In  common  language,  we  give  the  name  of  a  cause  to  a  rea-
son, a  motive,  an  end,  to  any  circumstance  wliich  is  connected
with  the  effect,  and  goes  before  it.

IV.  [Aristotle,  and  the  schoolmen  after  him,  distinguished
four  kinds  of  causes,  the  efficient,  the  material,  the  formal,  and
the  JinaLI  This,  like  many  of  Aristotle's  distinctions,  is  only
a  distinction  of  the  various  meanings  of  an  ambiguous  word ;
for  the  efficient,  the  matter,  the  form,  and  the  end,  have  no-
thing common  in  their  nature,  by  which  they  may  be  accounted
species  of  the  same  gentis  ;  but  the  Greek  word  which  we  trans-
late catise,  had  these  four  different  meanings  in  Aristotle's  days,
and  we  have  added  other  meanings.  We  do  not  indeed  call
the  matter  or  the  form  of  a  thing  its  cause ;  but  we  have  final
causes,  instrumental  causes,  occasional  causes,  and  I  know  not  how
many  others.

Thus  the  word  cause  has  been  so  hackneyed,  and  made  to
have  so  many  different  meanings  in  the  writings'  of  philoso-
phers, and  in  the  discourse  of  the  vulgar,  that  its  original  and
proper  meaning  is  lost  in  the  crowd.

With  regard  to  the  phenomena  of  nature,  the  important  end
of  knowing  their  causes,  besides  gratifying  our  curiosity,  is,
that  we  may  know  when  to  expect  them,  or  how  to  bring  them
about.  This  is  very  often  of  real  importance  in  life  ;  and  this
purpose  is  served,  by  knowing  what,  by  the  course  of  nature,
goes  before  them  and  is  connected  with  them ;  and  this,  there-
fore, we  call  the  cause  of  such  a  phenomenon.

ffif  If  a  magnet  be  brought  near  to  a  mariner's  compass,  the
needle,  which  was  before  at  rest,  immediately  begins  to  move,
and  bends  its  course  towards  the  magnet,  or  perhaps  the  con-


log  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  VI.

trary  way.  If  an  unlearned  sailor  is  asked  the  cause  of  this
motion  of  the  needle,  he  is  at  no  loss  for  an  answer.  He  tells
you  it  is  the  magnet ;  and  the  proof  is  clear ;  for,  remove  the
magnet,  and  the  ejffect  ceases ;  bring  it  near,  and  the  effect  is
again  produced.  It  is,  therefore,  evident  to  sense,  that  the  mag-
net is  the  cause  of  this  effect.

A  Cartesian  philosopher  enters  deeper  into  the  cause  of  this
phenomenon.  He  observes,  that  the  magnet  does  not  touch
the  needle,  and  therefore  can  give  it  no  impulse.  He  pities
the  ignorance  of  the  sailor.  The  effect  is  produced,  says  he,
by  magnetic  effluvia,  or  subtile  matter,  which  passes  from  the
magnet  to  the  needle,  and  forces  it  from  its  place.  He  can
even  show  you,  in  a  figure,  where  these  magnetic  effluvia  issue
from  the  magnet,  what  roimd  they  take,  and  what  way  they
return  home  again.  And  thus  he  thinks  he  comprehends  per-
fectly how,  and  by  what  cause,  the  motion  of  the  needle  is  pro-
duced.

A  Newtonian  philosopher  inquires  what  proof  can  be  offered
for  the  existence  of  magnetic  effluvia,  and  can  find  none :  he
therefore  holds  it  as  a  fiction,  a  hypothesis ;  and  he  has  learned
that  hypotheses  ought  to  have  no  place  in  the  philosophy  of
nature.  He  confesses  his  ignorance  of  the  real  cause  of  this
motion,  and  thinks  that  his  business,  as  a  philosopher,  is  only
to  find  from  experiment  the  laws  by  which  it  is  regulated  in  all
cases.

These  tliree  persons  differ  much  in  their  sentiments  with
regard  to  the  real  cause  of  this  phenomenon ;  and  the  man  who
knows  most  is  he  who  is  sensible  that  he  knows  nothing  of
the  matter.  Yet  all  the  three  speak  the  same  language,  and
acknowledge  that  the  cause  of  this  motion  is  the  attractive  or
repulsive  power  of  the  magnet.

V.  What  has  been  said  of  this,  may  be  applied  to  every  phe-
nomenon that  falls  within  the  compass  of  natural  philosophy.
We  deceive  ourselves,  if  we  conceive  that  we  can  point  out  the
real  efflcient  cause  of  any  one  of  them.

[The  grandest  discovery  ever  made  in  natural  philosophy,  was
that  of  the  laio  of  gravitation,  which  opens  such  a  view  of  our
planetary  system,  that  it  looks  like  something  divine.  But  the
author  of  diis  discovery  was  perfectly  aware  that  he  discovered
no  real  cause,  but  only  the  law  or  rule  according  to  which  the
unknown  cause  operates.]

Natural  philosophers,  who  think  accurately,  have  a  precise
meaning  to  the  terms  they  use  in  the  science ;  and  when  they
pretend  to  show  the  cause  of  any  phenomenon  of  nature,  they
mean  by  the  cause,  a  law  of  nature  of  which  that  phenomenon
is  a  necessary  consequence.

The  whole  object  of  natural  philosophy,  as  Newton  expressly


OF  THE  EXTENT  OF  HUMAN  POWER.  107

teaches,  is  reducible  to  these  two  heads :  first,  by  just  induc-
tion from  experiment  and  observation,  to  discover  the  laws  of
Nature,  and  then  to  apply  those  laws  to  the  solution  of  the
phenomena  of  Nature.  This  was  all  that  this  great  philosopher
attempted,  and  all  that  he  thought  attainable.  And  this  in-
deed he  attained  in  a  great  measure,  with  regard  to  the  motions
of  our  planetary  system, and  with  regard  to  the  rays  of  light.

But  supposing  that  all  the  phenomena  that  fall  within  the
reach  of  our  senses  were  accounted  for  from-  general  laws  of  na-
ture, justly  deduced  from  experience ;  that  is,  supposing  na-
tural philosophy  brought  to  its  utmost  perfection,  it  does  not
discover  the  efficient  cause  of  any  one  phenomenon  in  nature.

The  laws  of  nature  are  the  rules  according  to  which  the  effects
are  produced ;  but  there  must  be  a  cause  which  operates  according
to  these  rules.  The  rules  of  navigation  never  navigated  a  ship.
The  rules  of  architecture  never  built  a  house.

Natural  philosophers,  by  great  attention  to  the  course  of  na-
ture, have  discovered  many  of  her  laws,  and  have  very  happily
applied  them  to  account  for  many  phenomena ;  but  they  have
never  discovered  the  efficient  cause  of  any  one  phenomenon  ;
nor  do  those  who  have  distinct  notions  of  the  principles  of  the
science,  make  any  such  pretence.

Upon  the  theatre  of  nature  we  see  innumerable  effects,  which
require  an  agent,  endowed  with  active  power ;  but  the  agent  is
behind  the  scene.  [Whether  it  be  (1)  the  Supreme  Cause  alone,
or  (2)  a  subordinate  cause  or  causes,  and  (3)  if  subordinate
causes  be  employed  by  the  Almighty,  what  their  nature,  their
number,  and  their  different  offices  may  be,  are  things  hid,  for
wise  reasons  without  doubt,  from  the  human  eye.]

It  is  only  in  human  actions,  that  may  be  imputed  for  praise  or
blame,  that  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  know  who  is  the  agent ;  and
in  this,  nature  has  given  us  all  the  light  that  is  necessary  for  our
conduct.


CHAPTER  VII.


OF  THE  EXTENT  OF  HUMAN  POWER.


I.  Power  an  attribute  .of  accountable  beings. — Every  thing
laudable  and  praiseworthy  in  man,  must  consist  in  the  proper
exercise  of  that  power  which  is  given  him  by  his  Maker.  This
is  the  talent  which  he  is  required  to  occupy,  and  of  which  he
must  give  an  account  to  him  who  committed  it  to  his  trust.

[To  some  persons  more  power  is  given  than  to  others  ;  and  to
the  same  person  more  at  one  time  and  less  at  another. Its  exist-


108  ESSAY  I.  CHAP. VII.

ence,  its  extent,  and  its  continuance,  depend  solely  upon  the
pleasure  of  the  Almighty  ;  but  every  man  that  is  accountable
must  have  more  or  less  of  it.  For,  to  call  a  person  to  account,  to
approve  or  disapprove  of  his  conduct,  who  had  no  power  to  do
good  or  ill,  is  absurd.]  No  axiom  of  Euclid  appears  more  evi-
dent than  this.

As  power  is  a  valuable  gift,  to  under-rate  it  is  ingratitude  to
the  giver ;  to  over-rate  it,  begets  pride  and  presumption,  and
leads  to  unsuccessful  attempts.  It  is  therefore,  in  every  man,  a
point  of  wisdom  to  make  a  just  estimate  of  his  own  power.
"  Quid  ferre  recusent,  quid  valeant  humeri."

II.  [We  can  only  speak  of  the  power  of  man  in  general ;  and
as  our  notion  of  power  is  relative  to  its  effects,  we  can  estimate
its  extent  only  by  the  effects  which  it  is  able  to  produce.]

It  would  be  wrong  to  estimate  the  extent  of  human  power
by  the  effects  which"  it  has  actually  produced.  For  every  man
had  power  to  do  many  things  which  he  did  not,  and  not  to  do
many  things  which  he  did ;  otherwise  he  could  not  be  an  object
either  of  approbation  or  of  disapprobation,  to  any  rational  being.

The  effects  of  human  power  are  either  immedfiate,  or  they  are
more  remote.

The  immediate  effects,  I  think,  are  reducible  to  two  heads.
We  can  give  certain  motions  to  our  own  bodies ;  and  we  can
give  a  certain  direction  to  our  own  thoughts.

Whatever  we  can  do  beyond  this,  must  be  done  by  one  of
these  means,  or  both.

We  can  produce  no  motion  in  any  body  in  the  universe,  but
by  moving  first  our  own  body  as  an  instrument.  Nor  can  we
produce  thought  in  any  other  person,  but  by  thought  and  motion
in  ourselves.

Our  power  to  move  our  own  body  is  not  only  limited  in  its
extent,  but  in  its  nature  is  subject  to  mechanical  laws.  It  may
be  compared  to  a  spring  endowed  with  the  pewer  of  contracting
or  expanding  itself,  but  which  cannot  contract  without  drawing
equally  at  both  ends,  nor  expand  without  pushing  equally  at
both  ends ;  so  that  every  action  of  the  spring  is  always  accom-
panied with  an  equal  re-action  in  a  contrary  direction.

We  can  conceive  a  man  to  have  power  to  move  his  whole  body
in  any  direction,  without  the  aid  of  any  other  body,  or  a  power
to  move  one  part  of  his  body  without  the  aid  of  any  other  part.
But  philosophy  teaches  us  that  man  has  no  such  power.

If  he  carries  his  whole  body  in  any  direction  with  a  certain
quantity  of  motion,  this  he  can  do  only  by  pushing  the  earth,
or  some  other  body,  with  an  equal  quantity  of  motion  in  the
contrary  direction.  If  he  but  stretch  out  his  arm  in  one  direc-
tion, the  rest  of  his  body  is  pushed  with  an  equal  quantity  of
motion  in  the  contrary  direction.


OF  THE  EXTENT  OF  HUMAN POWER.  109

This  is  the  case  with  regard  to  all  animal  and  voluntary  mo-
tions, which  come  within  the  reach  of  our  senses.  They  are
performed  by  the  contraction  of  certain  muscles;  and  a  muscle,
when  it  is  contracted,  draws  equally  at  both  ends.  As  to  the
motions  antecedent  to  the  contraction  of  the  muscle,  and  conse-
quently upon  the  volition  of  the  animal,  we  know  nothing,  and
can  say  nothing  about  them.

We  know  not  even  how  those  immediate  effects  of  our  power
are  produced  by  our  willing  them.  We  perceive  not  any  neces-
sary connexion  between  the  volition  and  exertion  on  our  part,
and  the  motion  of  our  body  that  follows  them.

fSSF  Anatomists  inform  us,  that  every  voluntary  motion  of  the
body  is  performed  by  the  contraction  of  certain  muscles,  and  that
the  muscles  are  contracted  by  some  influence  derived  from  the
nerves.  But,  without  thinking  in  the  least  either  of  muscles  or
nerves,  we  will  only  the  external  effect,  and  the  internal  ma-
chinery, without  our  call,  immediately  produces  that  effect.

This  is  one  of  the  wonders  of  our  frame,  which  we  have  rea-
son to  admire ;  but  to  account  for  it  is  beyond  the  reach  of  our
understanding.

That  there  is  an  established  harmony  between  our  willing  cer-
tain motions  of  our  bodies,  and  the  operation  of  the  nerves  and
muscles  which  produces  those  motions,  is  a  fact  known  by  expe-
rience. This  volition  is  an  act  of  the  mind.  But  whether  this
act  of  the  mind  have  any  physical  effect  upon  the  nerves  and
muscles,  or  whether  it  be  only  an  occasion  of  their  being  acted
upon  by  some  other  efficient,  according  to  the  established  laws  of
nature,  is  hid  from  us.  So  dark  is  our  conception  of  our  own
power  when  we  trace  it  to  its  origin.

III.  [We  have  good  reason  to  believe,  that  matter  had  its
origin  from  mind,  as  well  as  all  its  motions ;  but  how,  or  in  what
manner,  it  is  moved  by  mind,  we  know  as  little  as  how  it  was
created.]

-  It  is  possible,  therefore,  for  any  thing  we  know,  that  what  we
call  the  immediate  effects  of  our  power,  may  not  be  so  in  the
strictest  sense.  Between  the  will  to  produce  the  effect,  and  the
production  of  it,  there  may  be  agents  or  instruments  of  which  we
are  ignorant.

This  may  leave  some  doubt,  whether  we  be,  in  the  strictest
sense,  the  efficient  cause  of  the  voluntary  motions  of  our  own
body.  But  it  can  produce  no  doubt  with  regard  to  the  moral
estimation  of  our  actions.

The  man  who  knows  that  such  an  event  depends  upon  his
will,  and  who  deliberately  wills  to  produce  it,  is,  in  the  strictest
moral  sense,  the  cause  of  the  event ;  and  it  is  justly  imputed  to
him,  whatever  physical  causes  may  have  concurred  in  its  pro-
duction.


]  IQ  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  VII.

jgg^  Thus,  he  who  maliciously  intends  to  shoot  his  neighbour
dead,  and  voluntarily  does  it,  is  undoubtedly  the  cause  of  his
death,  though  he  did  no  more  to  occasion  it  than  draw  the  trigger
of  the  gun.  He  neither  gave  to  the  ball  its  velocity,  nor  to  the
powder  its  expansive  force,  nor  to  the  flint  and  steel  the  power
to  strike  fire ;  but  he  knew  that  what  he  did  must  be  followed
by  the  man's  death,  and  did  it  with  that  intention ;  and  therefore
he  is  justly  chargeable  with  the  murder.

Philosophers  may  therefore  dispute  innocently,  whether  we  be
the  proper  efficient  causes  of  the  voluntary  motions  of  our  own
body ;  or  whether  we  be  only,  as  Malebranche  thinks,  the  occa-
sional causes. The  determination  of  this  question,  if  it  can  be-
determined,  can  have  no  ejffect  on  human  conduct.

IV.  The  other  branch  of  what  is  immediately  in  our  power,
is  to  give  a  certain  direction  to  our  own  thoughts.  This,  as  well
as  the  first  branch,  is  limited  in  various  ways.  It  is  greater  in
some  persons  than  in  others,  and  in  the  same  person  is  very  dif-
ferent, according  to  the  health  of  his  body,  and  the  state  of  his
mind.  [But  that  men,  when  free  from  disease  of  body  and  of
mind,  have  a  considerable  degree  of  power  of  this  kind,  and  that
it  may  be  greatly  increased  by  practice  and  habit,  is  sufficiently
evident  from  experience,  and  from  the  natural  conviction  of  all
mankind.]

[Were  we  to  examine  minutely  (1)  into  the  connexion  between
our  volitions,  and  the  direction  of  our  thoughts  which  obey  these
volitions ;  were  we  to  consider  (2)  how  we  are  able  to  give  atten-
tion to  an  object  for  a  certain  time,  and  turn  our  attention  to
another  when  we  choose,  we  might  perhaps  find  it  difficult  to
determine,  whether  the  mind  itself  be  the  sole  efficient  cause  of
the  voluntary  changes  in  the  direction  of  our  thoughts,  or  whe-
ther it  requires  the  aid  of  other  efficient  causes.]

I  see  no  good  reason  why  the  dispute  about  efficient  and  occa-
sional causes  may  not  be  applied  to  the  power  of  directing  our
thoughts,  as  well  as  to  the  power  of  moving  our  bodies.  In
both  cases,  I  apprehend,  the  dispute  is  endless,  and,  if  it  could  be
brought  to  an  issue,  would  be  fruitless.

Nothing  appears  more  evident  to  our  reason,  than  that  there
must  be  an  efficient  cause  of  every  change  that  happens  in  na-
ture. But  when  I  attempt  to  comprehend  the  maimer  in  which
an  efficient  cause  operates,  either  upon  body  or  upon  mind,  there
is  a  darkness  which  my  faculties  are  not  able  to  penetrate.

V.  [However  small  the  immediate  effects  of  human  power
seem  to  be,  its  more  remote  effects  are  very  considerable.]

B^  In  this  respect,  the  power  of  man  may  be  compared  to
the  Nile,  the  Ganges,  and  other  great  rivers,  which  make  a
figure  upon  the  globe  of  the  earth,  and,  traversing  vast  regions,
bring  sometimes  great  benefit,  at  other  times  great  mischief,  to


OF  THE  EXTENT  OF  HUMAN POWER.  ]  J  J

many  nations ;  yet,  when  we  trace  those  rivers  to  their  source,
we  find  them  to  rise  from  inconsiderable  fountains  and  rills.

jgSF  The  command  of  a  mighty  prince,  what  is  it  but  the  sound
of  his  breath,  modified  by  his  organs  of  speech  ?  But  it  may
have  great  consequences;  it  may  raise  armies,  equip  fleets,
and  spread  war  and  desolation  over  a  great  part  of  the  earth.

The  meanest  of  mankind  has  considerable  power  to  do  good,
and  more  to  hurt  himself  and  others.

From  this  I  think  we  may  conclude,  that  although  the  dege-
neracy of  mankind  be  great,  and  justly  to  be  lamented,  yet,  men
in  general  are  more  disposed  to  employ  their  power  in  doing
good,  than  in  doing  hurt  to  their  fellow-men.  The  last  is  much
more  in  their  power  than  the  first ;  and,  if  they  were  as  much
disposed  to  it,  human  society  could  not  subsist,  and  the  species
must  soon  perish  from  the  earth.

VI.  We  msLj  first  consider  the  effects  which  may  he  jiroduced
by  human  power  upon  the  material  system.

It  is  confined  indeed  to  the  planet  which  we  inhabit;  we
cannot  remove  to  another ;  nor  can  we  produce  any  change  in  the
annual  or  diurnal  motions  of  our  own.

But,  by  human  power,  great  changes  may  be  made  upon  the
face  of  the  earth ;  and  those  treasures  of  metals  and  minerals  that
are  stored  up  in  its  bowels,  may  be  discovered  and  brought  forth.

The  Supreme  Being  could,  no  doubt,  have  made  the  earth
to  supply  the  wants  of  man  without  any  cultivation  by  human
labour.  Many  inferior  animals,  who  neither  plant,  nor  sow,  nor
spin,  are  provided  for  by  the  bounty  of  Heaven.  But  this  is  not
the  case  with  man.

He  has  active  powers  and  ingenuity  given  him,  by  which  he
can  do  much  for  supplying  his  wants ;  and  his  labour  is  made
necessary  for  that  purpose.

His  wants  are  more  than  those  of  any  other  animal  that  in-
habits this  globe ;  and  his  resources  are  proportioned  to  them,
and  put  within  the  sphere  of  his  power.

Iggr  The  earth  is  left  by  nature  in  such  a  state  as  to  require
cultivation  for  the  accommodation  of  man.

It  is  capable  of  cultivation,  in  most  places,  to  such  a  degree,
that,  by  human  labour,  it  may  afford  subsistence  to  an  hundred
times  the  nmnber  of  men  it  could  in  its  natural  state.

Every  tribe  of  men,  in  every  climate,  must  labour  for  their
subsistence  and  accommodation ;  and  their  supply  is  more  or
less  comfortable,  in  proportion  to  the  labour  properly  employed
for  that  purpose.

It  is  evidently  the  intention  of  nature  that  man  should  be
laborious,  and  that  he  should  exert  his  powers  of  body  and  mind
for  his  ow:n  and  for  the  common  good.  And,  by  his  power  pro-
perly applied,  he  may  make  great  improvement  upon  the  fertility


\12  ESSAY  I.  CHAP.  VIC.

of  the  earth,  and  a  great  addition  to  his  own  accommodation  and
comfortable  state.

By  clearing,  tilling,  and  manuring  the  ground,  by  planting  and
sowing,  by  building  cities  and  harbours,  draining  marshes  and
lakes,  making  rivers  navigable,  and  joining  them  by  canals,  by
manufacturing  the  rude  materials  wnich  the  earth,  duly  culti-
vated, produces  in  abimdance,  by  the  mutual  exchange  of  com-
modities and  of  labour,  he  may  make  the  barren  wilderness  the
habitation  of  rich  and  populous  states.

If  we  compare  the  city  of  Venice,  the  province  of  Holland,
the  empire  of  China,  with  those  places  of  the  earth  which  never
felt  the  hand  of  industry,  we  may  form  some  conception  of  the
extent  of  human  power  upon  the  material  system,  in  changing
the  face  of  the  earth,  and  furnishing  the  accommodations  of
human  life.

VII.  But,  in  order  to  produce  those  happy  changes,  man  him^
self  must  be  improved.

[His  animal  faculties  are  sufficient  for  the  preservation  of  the
species ;  they  grow  up  of  themselves,  like  the  trees  of  the  forest,
which  require  only  the  force  of  nature  and  the  influences  of
heaven.

His  rational  and  moral  faculties,  like  the  earth  itself,  are
rude  and  barren  by  nature,  but  capable  of  a  high  degree  of
culture ;  and  this  culture  he  must  receive  from  parents,  from
instructors,  from  those  with  whom  he  lives  in  society,  joined
with  his  own  industry.]

If  we  consider  the  changes  that  may  be  produced  by  man
upon  his  own  mind,  and  upon  the  minds  of  others,  they  appear
to  be  great.

Upon  his  own  mind  he  may  make  great  improvement,  in  ac-
quiring the  treasures  of  useful  knowledge,  the  habits  of  skill  in
arts,  the  habits  of  wisdom,  prudence,  self-command,  and  every
other  virtue.  It  is  the  constitution  of  nature,  that  such  quali-
ties as  exalt  and  dignify  human  nature  are  to  be  acquired  by
proper  exertions ;  and,  by  a  contrary  conduct,  such  qualities  as
debase  it  below  the  condition  of  brutes.

Even  upon  the  minds  of  others,  great  ejffects  may  be  produced
by  means  vdthin  the  compass  of  human  power;  by  means  of
good  education,  of  proper  instruction,  of  persuasion,  of  good
example,  and  by  the  discipline  of  laws  and  government.

That  these  have  often  had  great  and  good  effects  on  the  civili-
zation and  improvement  of  individuals,  and  of  nations,  cannot  be
doubted.  But  what  happy  effects  they  might  have,  if  applied
universally  with  the  skill  and  address  that  is  within  the  reach  of
human  wisdom  and  power,  is  not  easily  conceived,  or  to  what
pitch  the  happiness  of  human  society,  and  the  improvement  of
the  species,  might  be  canned.


OP  THE  EXTENT  OF  HUMAN  POWER.  |13

•  What  a  noble,  what  a  divine  employment  of  human  power
is  here  assigned  us !  How  ought  it  to  rouse  the  ambition  of
parents,  of  instructors,  of  lawgivers,  of  magistrates,  of  every  man
in  his  station,  to  contribute  his  part  towards  the  accomplishment
of  so  glorious  an  end  !

VIII.  Human  power  entirely  dependent  upon  God  and  the
laws  of  nature, — [The  power  of  man  over  his  own  and  other
minds,  when  we  trace  it  to  its  origin,  is  involved  in  darkness,  no
less  than  his  power  to  move  his  own  and  other  bodies.]

How  far  we  are  properly  efficient  causes,  how  far  occasional
causes,  I  cannot  pretend  to  determine.

We  know  that  (1)  habit  produces  great  changes  in  the  mind ;
but  how  it  does  so,  we  know  not.  We  know  that  (2)  ex-
ample has  a  powerful,  and,  in  the  early  period  of  life,  almost  an
irresistible  effect;  but  we  know  not  how  it  produces  this  effect.

(3)  The  communication  of  thought,  sentiment,  and  passion,  from
one  mind  to  another,  has  something  in  it  as  mysterious  as  the
communication  of  motion  from  one  body  to  another.

We  perceive  one  event  to  follow  another,  according  to  estab-
lished laws  of  nature,  and  we  are  accustomed  to  call  the  first  the

(4)  cause  J  and  the  last  the  effect,  without  knowing  what  is  the
bond  that  unites  them.  In  order  to  produce  a  certain  event,  we
use  means  which,  by  laws  of  nature,  are  connected  with  that
event;  and  we  call  ourselves  the  cause  of  that  event,  though
other  efficient  causes  may  have  had  the  chief  hand  in  its  pro-
duction.

Upon  the  whole,  [human  power,  in  its  (1)  existence,  in  its  (2)
extent,  and  in  its  (3)  exertions,  is  entirely  dependent  upon  God,
and  upon  the  laws  of  nature  which  he  has  established.]  This
ought  to  banish  pride  and  arrogance  from  the  most  mighty  of
the  sons  of  men.  At  the  same  time,  that  degree  of  power  which
we  have  received  from  the  bounty  of  Heaven,  is  one  of  the  noblest
gifts  of  God  to  man ;  of  which  we  ought  not  to  be  insensible,
that  we  may  not  be  ungrateful,  and  that  we  may  be  excited  to
make  the  proper  use  of  it.

IX.  The  extent  of  human  power  is  perfectly  suited  to  the  state '
of  man,  as  a  state  of  improvement  and  discipline.  It  is  sufficient
to  animate  us  to  the  noblest  exertions.  By  the  proper  exercise
of  this  gift  of  God,  human  nature,  in  individuals  and  in  societies,
may  be  exalted  to  a  high  degree  of  dignity  and  felicity,  and  the
earth  become  a  paradise.  On  the  contrary,  its  perversion  and
abuse  is  the  cause  of  most  of  the  evils  that  afflict  human  life.


E  S  S  A  Y II.  i-


OF  THE  WILL.


CHAPTER  I.


OBSERVATIONS  CONCERNING  THE  WILL.


I.  Volition  and  will  different, — Every  man  is  conscious  of  a
power  to  determine,  in  things  which  he  conceives  to  depend  upon
his  determination.  To  this  power  we  give  the  name  of  will;
and,  as  it  is  usual,  in  the  operations  of  the  mind,  to  give  the
same  name  to  the  power  and  to  the  act  of  that  power,  the  term
will  is  often  put  to  signify  the  act  of  determining,  which  more
properly  is  called  volition.  \

l^Folitiony  therefore,  signifies  the  act  of  willing  and  determining ; ,
and  will  is  put  indifferently  to  signify  either  the  power  of  willing, '.
or  the  act.'\  \

But  the  term  will  has  very  often,  especially  in  the  writings  of
philosophers,  a  more  extensive  meaning,  which  we  must  care-
fully distinguish  from  that  which  we  have  now  given.

In  the  general  division  of  our  faculties  into  understanding  and
vnll,  our  passions,  appetites,  and  affections,  are  comprehended
under  the  will ;  and  so  it  is  made  to  signify,  not  only  our  deter-
mination to  act  or  not  to  act,  but  every  motive  and  incitement
to  action.

It  is  this,  probably,  that  has  led  some  philosophers  to  repre-
sent desire,  aversion,  hope,  fear,  joy,  sorrow,  all  our  appetites,
passions,  and  affections,  as  different  modifications  of  the  will,
which,  I  think,  tends  to  confound  things  which  are  very  different
in  their  nature.

The  advice  given  to  a  man,  and  his  determination  consequent
to  that  advice,  are  things  so  different  in  their  nature,  that  it
would  be  improper  to  call  them  modifications  of  one  and  the
same  thing.  In  like  manner,  the  motives  to  action,  and  the
determination  to  act  or  not  to  act,  are  things  that  have  no  com-
mon nature,  and  therefore  ought  not  to  be  confounded  under
one  name,  or  represented  as  different  modifications  of  the  same
thing.

II.  The  term  willy  how  used, — [For  this  reason,  in  speaking  of


I

i


OBSERVATIONS  CONCERNING  THE  WILL.  115

the  will  in  this  Essay,  I  do  not  comprehend  under  that  term  any
of  the  incitements  or  motives  which  may  have  an  influence  upon
our  determinations,  but  solely  the  determination  itself ^  and  the
power  to  determined]

•Mr.  Locke  has  considered  this  operation  of  the  mind  more
attentively,  and  distinguished  it  more  accurately,  than  some  very
ingenious  authors  who  wrote  after  him.

He  defines  volition*  to  be,  "  an  act  of  the  mind  knowingly
exerting  that  dominion  it  takes  itself  to  have  over  any  part  of
the  man,  by  employing  it  in,  or  withholding  it  from,  any  parti-
cular action."  f

III.  Its  definition, — [It  may  more  briefly  be  defined,  the  deter~
mination  of  the  mind  to  do  or  not  to  do  something  which  we  con-
ceive to  be  in  our  power,]

If  this  were  given  as  a  strictly  logical  definition,  it  would  be
liable  to  this  objection,  that  the  determination  of  the  mind  is
only  another  term  for  volition.  But  it  ought  to  be  observed,
that  the  most  simple  acts  of  the  mind  do  not  admit  of  a  logical
definition.  The  way  to  form  a  clear  notion  of  them  is,  to  reflect
attentively  upon  them  as  we  feel  them  in  ourselves.  Without
this  reflection,  no  definition  can  give  us  a  distinct  conception  of
them.

For  this  reason,  rather  than  sift  any  definition  of  the  will,  I
shall  make  some  observations  upon  it,  which  may  lead  us  to
reflect  upon  it,  and  to  distinguish  it  from  other  acts  of  mind,
which,  from  the  ambiguity  of  words,  are  apt  to  be  confounded
with  it.

[^First,  every  act  of  will  must  have  an  object.  He  that  wills,
must  will  something ;  and  that  which  he  wills  is  called  the  object
of  his  volition.  As  a  man  cannot  think  without  thinking  of
something,  nor  remember  without  remembering  something,  so
neither  can  he  will  without  willing  something.]  Every  act  of
will,  therefore,  must  have  an  object ;  and  the  person  who  wills
must  have  some  conception,  more  or  less  distinct,  of  what  he  y
wills.

By  this,  things  done  voluntarily  are  distinguished  from  things
done  merely  from  instinct,  or  merely  from  habit.

HT  A  healthy  child,  some  hours  after  its  birth,  feels  the
sensation  of  hunger,  and,  if  applied  to  the  breast,  sucks  and
swallows  its  food  very  perfectly.  We  have  no  reason  to  think,
that,  before  it  ever  sucked,  it  has  any  conception  of  that  complex
operation,  or  how  it  is  performed.  It  cannot,  therefore,  with
propriety,  be  said,  that  it  wills  to  suck.

•  "  The  actual  exercise  of  that  power,  by  directing  any  particular  action  or
its  forbearance,  is  that  which  we  call  volition^  or  willing,*' — Book  II.  chap.  xxi.
sect.  5.

f  Book  II.  chap.  xxi.  sect.  15.


116  ESSAY  II.  CHAP.  I.

Numberless  instances  might  be  given  of  things  done  by  ani-
mals without  any  previous  conception  of  what  they  are  to  do —
without  the  intention  of  doing  it.  They  act  by  some  inward
blind  impulse,  of  which  the  efficient  cause  is  hid  from  us ;  and
though  there  is  an  end  evidently  intended  by  the  action,  this
intention  is  not  in  the  animal,  but  in  its  Maker.

Other  things  are  done  by  habit,  which  cannot  properly  be
called  voluntary.  We  shut  our  eyes  several  times  every  minute
while  we  are  awake ;  no  man  is  conscious  of  willing  this  every
time  he  does  it.

[A  second  observation  is,  that  the  immediate  object  of  will
must  be  some  action  of  our  own.

By  this,  will  is  distinguished  from  two  acts  of  the  mind,  which
sometimes  take  its  name,  and  thereby  are  apt  to  be  confounded
with  it ;  these  are,  desire  and  command.']

IV.  The  distinction  between  will  and  desire  has  been  well
explained  by  Mr.  Locke ;  yet  many  later  vnriters  have  overlooked
it,  and  have  represented  desire  as  a  modification  of  will.

[Desire  and  will  agree  in  this,  that  both  must  have  an  object,
of  which  we  must  have  some  conception;  and  therefore  both
must  be  accompanied  with  some  degree  of  understanding.  But
they  differ  in  several  things.]

The  object  of  desire  may  be  any  thing  which  appetite,  pas-
sion, or  affection,  leads  us  to  pursue;  it  may  be  any  event
which  we  think  good  for  us,  or  for  ^those  to  whom  we  are  well
affected.  I  may  desire  meat,  or  drink,  or  ease  from  pain :
but  to  say  that  I  will  meat,  or  will  drink,  or  will  ease  from
pain,  is  not  English.  There  is,  therefore,  a  distinction  in  com-
mon language  between  desire  and  wiU.  And  the  distinction
is,  that  what  we  will  must  be  an  "action,  and  our  own  action ;
what  we  desire  may  not  be  our  own  action,  it  may  be  no  action
at  all.

A  man  desires  that  his  children  may  be  happy,  and  that  they
may  behave  well.  Their  being  happy  is  no  action  at  all ;  their
behaving  well  is  not  his  action,  but  theirs.

With  regard  to  our  own  actions,  we  may  desire  what  we  do
not  will,  and  will  what  we  do  not  desire ;  nay,  what  we  have  a
great  aversion  to.

A  man  a-thirst  has  a  strong  desire  to  drink,  but,  for  some
particular  reason,  he  determines  not  to  gratify  his  desire.  A
judge,  from  a  regard  to  justice,  and  to  the  duty  of  his  office,
dooms  a  criminal  to  die,  while,  from  humanity  or  particular  affec-
tion, he  desires  that  he  should  live.  A  man,  for  health,  may  take  a
nauseous  draught,  for  which  he  has  no  desire,  but  a  great  aver-
sion. [Desire,  therefore^  even  when  its  object  is  some  action  of  our
own,  is  only  an  incitement  to  will,  but  it  is  not  volition.']  The
determination  of  the  mind  may  be,  not  to  do  what  we  desire  to


OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE WILL.  117

do.  But  as  desire  is  often  accompanied  by  will,  we  are  apt  to
overlook  the  distinction  between  them.

V.  Of  command^  will,  and  desire. — [The  command  of  a  per-
son is  sometimes  called  his  will,  sometimes  his  desire  ;  but  when
these  words  are  used  properly,  they  signify  three  different  acts  of
the  mind.

The  immediate  object  of  will  is  some  action  of  our  own ;  the
object  of  a  command  is  some  action  of  another  person,  over
whom  we  claim  authority  ;  the  object  of  desire  may  be  no  action
at  all.]

In  giving  a  command,  all  these  acts  concur ;  and  as  they  go
together,  it  is  not  uncommon  in  language  to  give  to  one  the
name  which  properly  belongs  to  another.

A  command  being  a  voluntary  action,  there  must  be  a  will  to
give  the  command  :  some  desire  is  commonly  the  motive  to  that
act  of  will,  and  the  command  is  the  effect  of  it.

Perhaps  it  may  be  thought  that  a  command  is  only  a  desire
expressed  by  language,  that  the  thing  commanded  should  be
done.  But  it  is  not  so.  For  a  desire  may  be  expressed  by
language  when  there  is  no  command ;  and  there  may  possibly  be
a  command  without  any  desire  that  the  thing  commanded  should
be  done.  There  have  been  instances  of  tyrants  who  have  laid
grievous  commands  upon  their  subjects,  in  order  to  reap  the
penalty  of  their  disobedience,  or  to  furnish  a  pretence  for  their
punishment.

We  might  further  observe,  that  a  command  is  a  social  act  of
the  mind.  It  can  have  no  existence  but  by  a  communication  of
thought  to  some  intelligent  being ;  and  therefore  implies  a  be-
lief that  there  is  such  a  being,  and  that  we  can  communicate  our
thoughts  to  him.

Desire  and  will  are  solitary  acts,  which  do  not  imply  any
such  communication  or  belief.

The  immediate  object  of  volition,  therefore,  must  be  some
action,  and  our  own  action.

[A  third  observation  is.  That  the  object  of  our  volition  must
be  something  which  we  believe  to  be  in  our  power,  and  to  depend
upon  our  vdll.]

A  man  may  desire  to  make  a  visit  to  the  moon,  or  to  the
planet  Jupiter,  but  he  cannot  will  or  determine  to  do  it ;  be-
cause he  knows  it  is  not  in  his  power.  If  an  ins^e  person  should
make  an  attempt,  his  insanity  must  first  make  him  believe  it  to
be  in  his  power.

A  man  in  his  sleep  may  be  struck  with  a  palsy,  which  de-
prives him  of  the  power  of  speech ;  when  he  awakes,  he  attempts
to  speak,  not  knowing  that  he  has  lost  the  power.  But  when
he  knows  by  experience  that  the  power  is  gone,  he  ceases  to
make  the  effort.

The  same  man,  knowing  that  some  persons  have  recovered


113  ESSAY II.  CHAP.  I.

the  power  of  speech  after  they  had  lost  it  by  a  paralytic  stroke,
may  now  and  then  make  an  effort.  .  In  this  effort,  however,
there  is  not  properly  a  will  to  speak,  but  a  will  to  try  whether
he  can  speak  or  not.

In  like  manner,  a  man  may  exert  his  strength  to  raise  a  weight
which  is  too  heavy  for  him.  But  he  always  does  this,  either
from  the  belief  that  he  can  raise  the  weight,  or  for  a  trial  whe-
ther he  can  or  not.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  what  we  will
must  be  believed  to  be  in  our  power,  and  to  depend  upon  our
will.

[The  next  observation  is.  That  when  we  will  to  do  a  thing
immediately,  the  volition  is.  accompanied  with  an  effort  to  execute
that  which  we  will.]

If  a  man  wills  to  raise  a  great  weight  from  the  ground  by  the
strength  of  his  arm,  he  makes  an  effor-t  for  that  purpose  pro-
portioned to  the  weight  he  determines  to  raise.  A  great  weight
requires  a  great  effort ;  a  small  weight  a  less  effort.  We  say,
indeed,  that  to  raise  a  very  small  body  requires  no  effort  at  alL
But  this,  I  apprehend,  must  be  understood  either  as  a  figura-
tive way  of  speaking,  by  which  things  very  small  are  accounted
as  nothing ;  or  it  is  owing  to  our  giving  no  attention  to  very
small  efforts,  and  therefore  having  no  name  for  them.

Great  efforts,  whether  of  body  or  mind,  are  attended  with
difiiculty,  and,  when  long  continued,  produce  lassitude,  which
requires  that  they  should  be  intermitted.  This  leads  us  to  reflect
upon  them,  and  to  give  them  a  name.  The  name  effort  is  com-
monly appropriated  to  them ;  and  those  that  are  made  with  ease,
and  leave  no  sensible  effect,  pass  without  observation  and  with-
out a  name,  though  they  be  of  the  same  kind,  and  differ  only  in
degree  from  those  to  which  the  name  is  given.

This  effort  we  are  conscious  of,  if  we  will  but  give  attention
to  it ;  and  there  is  nothing  in  which  we  are  in  a  more  strict  sense
active.

[The  la^t  observation  is.  That  in  all  determinations  of  the
mind  that  are  of  any  importance,  there  must  he  something  in
the  preceding  state  of  the  mind  that  disposes  or  inclines  us  to  that
determination  J\

If  the  mind  were  always  in  a  state  of  perfect  indifference,
without  any  incitement,  motive,  or  reason,  to  act,  or  not  to  act,
to  act  one  way  rather  than  another,  our  active  power,  having  no
end  to  pursue,  no  rule  to  direct  its  exertions,  would  be  given  in
vain.  We  should  either  be  altogether  inactive,  and  never  vnll
to  do  any  thing,  or  our  volitions  would  be  perfectly  unmeaning
and  futile,  being  neither  wise  nor  foolish,  virtuous  nor  vicious.

We  have  reason,  therefore,  to  think,  that  to  every  being  to
M^hom  God  hath  given  any  degree  of  active  power,  he  hath  also
given  some  principles  of  action,  for  the  direction  of  that  power
to  the  end  for  which  it  was  intended.


INFLUENCE  OP  MOTIVES  UPON  THE  WILL.  J  19

It  is  evident  that,  in  the  constitution  of  man,  there  are  va-
rious principles  of  action  suited  to  our  state  and  situation.  A
particular  consideration  of  these  is  the.suhject  of  the  next  Essay ;
in  this  we  are  only  to  consider  them  in  general,  ynth  a  view  to
examine  the  relation  they  bear  to  volition,  and  how  it  is  influ-
enced by  them.


CHAPTER  II.

OP  THE  INFLUENCE  OF INCITEMENTS  AND  MOTIVES  UPON  THE  WILL.

I.  Instinct. — We  come  into  the  world  ignorant  of  every  thing,
yet  we  must  do  many  things  in  order  to  our  subsistence  and  well-
being.  A  new-born  child  may  be  carried  in  arms,  and  kept
warm  by  his  nurse,  but  he  must  suck  and  swallow  his  food  for
himself.  And  this  must  be  done  before  he  has  any  conception
of  sucking  or  swallowing,  or  of  the  manner  in  which  they  are
to  be  performed.  [He  is  led  by  nature  to  do  these  actions,  with-
out knowing  for  what  end,  or  what  he  is  about.  This  we  call
instinct.^

In  many  cases,  there  is  no  time  for  volimtary  determination.
The  motions  must  go  on  so  rapidly,  that  the  conception  and  vo-
lition of  every  movement  cannot  keep  pace  with  them.  In  some
cases  of  this  kind,'  instinct,  in  others  habit,  comes  in  to  our  aid.

ffiF  When  a  man  stumbles  and  loses  his  balance,  the  motion
necessary  to  prevent  his  fall  would  come  too  late,  if  it  were  the
consequence  of  thinking  what  is  fit  to  be  done,  and  making  a
voluntary  effort  for  that  purpose. He  does  this  instinctively.

When  a  man  beats  a  drum  or  plays  a  tune,  he  has  not  time  to
direct  every  particular  beat  or  stop  by  a  voluntary  determina-
tion ;  but  the  habit  which  may  be  acquired  by  exercise  answers
the  purpose  as  well.

[By  instinct,  therefore,  and  by  habit,  we  do  many  things  with-
out any  exercise  either  oi  judgment  or  wilL'[

In  other  actions,  the  will  is  exerted,  but  without  judgment.

Suppose  a  man  to  know  that,  in  order  to  live,  he  must  eat.
What  shall  he  eat?  How  much  ?  And  how  often  ?  His  rea-
son can  answer  none  of  these  questions  ;  and  therefore  can  give
no  direction  how  he  should  determine.  Here  again  nature,  as
an  indulgent  parent,  supplies  the  defects  of  his  reason ;  giving
him  appetite,  which  shows  him  when  he  is  to  eat,  how  often,  and
how  much ;  and  taste,  which  informs  him  what  he  is  and  what
he  is  not  to  eat.  And  by  these  principles  he  is  much  better  di-
rected than  he  could  be,  without  them,  by  all  the  knowledge  he
can  acquire.

II.  Judgment  not  necessary  to  instinct. — As  the  Author  of


1 20  ESSAY  IT.  CHAP.  II.

nature  has  given  us  some  principles  of  action  to  supply  the  de-
fects of  our  knowledge,  he  has  given  others  to  supply  the  defects
of  our  wisdom  and  virtue. .

The  natural  desires,  affections,  and  passions,  which  are  com-
mon to  the  wise  and  to  the  foolish,  to  the  virtuous  and  to  the
vicious,  and  even  to  the  more  sagacious  brutes,  serve  very  often
to  direct  the  course  of  human  actions.  By  these  principles,  men
may  perform  the  most  laborious  duties  of  life,  without  any
regard  to  duty ;  and  do  what  is  proper  to  be  done,  without
regard  to  propriety,  BSiT  like  a  vessel  that  is  carried  on  in  her
proper  course  by  a  prosperous  gale,  without  the  skill  or  judgment
of  those  that  are  aboard.

Appetite,  affection,  or  passion,  give  an  impulse  to  a  certain
action.  In  this  impulse  there  is  no  judgment  implied.  It  may
be  weak  or  strong ;  we  can  even  conceive  it  irresistible.  In  the
case  of  madness,  it  is  so.  Madmen  have  their  appetites  and  pas-
sions ;  but  they  want  the  power  of  self-government ;  and  there-
fore we  do  not  impute  their  actions  to  the  man,  but  to  the
disease.

In  actions  that  proceed  from  appetite  or  passion,  we  are  pas-
sive in  part,  and  only  in  part  active.  They  are  therefore  partly
imputed  to  the  passion ;  and  if  it  is  supposed  to  be  irresistible,
we  do  not  impute  them  to  the  man  at  all.

Even  an  American  savage  judges  in  this  manner :  when  in  a
fit  of  drunkenness,  he  kills  his  friend :  as  soon  as  he  comes  to
himself,  he  is  very  sorry  for  what  he  has  done ;  but  pleads,  that
drink,  and  not  he,  was  the  cause.

We  conceive  brute  animals  to  have  no  superior  principle  to
control  their  appetites  and  passions.  On  this  account,  their
actions  are  not  subject  to  law.  Men  are  in  a  like  state  in
infancy,  in  madness,  and  in  the  delirium  of  a  fever.  They  have
appetites  and  passions,  but  they  want  that  which  makes  them
moral  agents,  accountable  for  their  conduct,  and  objects  of  moral
approbation  or  of  blame.

In  some  cases,  a  stronger  impulse  of  appetite  or  passion  may
oppose  a  weaker.  Here  also  there  may  be  determination  and
action  without  judgment.

Suppose  a  soldier  ordered  to  mount  a  breach,  and  certain  of
present  death  if  he  retreats :  this  man  needs  not  courage  to  go  on ;
fear  is  sufficient.  The  certainty  of  present  death  if  he  retreats,
is  an  overbalance  to  the  probability  of  being  killed  if  he  goes  on.
The  man  is  pushed  by  contrary  forces,  and  it  requires  neither
judgment  nor  exertion  to  yield  to  the  strongest.

A  hungry  dog  acts  by  the  same  principle,  if  meat  is  set  before
him,  with  a  threatening  to  beat  him  if  he  touch  it.  Hunger
pushes  him  forward,  fear  pushes  him  back  with  more  force,  and
the  strongest  force  prevails.


INFLUENCE  OF  MOTIVES  UPON  THE  WILL.  JgJ

Thus  we  see,  that,  in  many  even  of  our  voluntary  actions,  we
may  act  from  the  impulse  of  appetite,  affection,  or  passion,  with-
out any  exercise  of  judgment,  and  much  in  the  same  maimer  as
brute  animals  seem  to  act.

III.  The  exercise  of  judgment  distinct  from  the  impulse  of  ap^
petite, — [Sometimes,  however,  there  is  a  calm  in  the  mind  from
the  gales  of  passion  or  appetite,  and  the  man  is  left  to  work  his
way,  in  the  voyage  of  fife,  without  those  impulses  which  they
give.]  Then  he  calmly  weighs  goods  and  evils,  which  are  at
too  great  a  distance  to  excite  any  passion.  He  judges  what  is
best  upon  the  whole,  without  feeling  any  bias  drawing  him  to
one  side.  He  judges  for  himself  as  he  would  do  for  another  in
his  situation ;  and  the  determination  is  wholly  imputable  to  the
man,  and  not  in  any  degree  to  his  passion.

Every  man  come  to  years  of  understanding,  who  has  given
any  attention  to  his  own  conduct,  and  to  that  of  others,  has,  in
his  mind,  a  scale  or  measure  of  goods  and  evils,  more  or  less
exact.  He  makes  an  estimate  of  the  value  of  health,  of  repu-
tation, of  riches,  of  pleasure,  of  virtue,  of  self-approbation,  and
of  the  approbation  of  his  Maker.  These  things,  and  their  con-
traries, have  a  comparative  importance  in  his  cool  and  deliberate
judgment.

[When  a  man  considers  whether  health  ought  to  be  preferred
to  bodily  strength,  fame  to  riches, — whether  a  good  conscience
and  the  approbation  of  his  Maker,  to  every  thing  that  can  come
in  competition  with  it, — this  appears  to  me  to  be  an  exercise  of
judgment y  and  not  any  impulse  of  passion  or  appetite  J]

Every  thing  worthy  of  pursuit  must  be  so,  either  intrinsically,
and  upon  its  own  account,  or  as  the  means  of  procuring  some-
thing that  is  intrinsically  valuable.  That  it  is  by  judgment  that
we  discern  the  fitness  of  means  for  attaining  an  end,  is  self-
evident  ;  and  in  this,  I  think,  all  philosophers  agree.  But  that
it  is  the  oflSce  of  judgment  to  appreciate  the  value  of  an  end,  or
the  preference  due  to  one  end  above  another,  is  not  granted  by
some  philosophers.

In  determining  what  is  good  or  ill,  and,  of  different  goods,
which  is  best,  they  think  we  must  be  guided,  not  by  judgment,
but  by  some  natural  or  acquired  taste,  which  makes  us  relish
one  thing  and  dislike  another.

Thus,  if  one  man  prefers  cheese  to  lobsters,  another  lobsters
to  cheese,  it  is  vain,  say  they,  to  apply  judgment  to  determine
which  is  right.  In  like  manner,  if  one  man  prefers  pleasure  to
virtue,  another  virtue  to  pleasure,  this  is  a  matter  of  taste,  judg-
ment has  nothing  to  do  in  it.  This  seems  to  be  the  opinion  of
some  philosophers.

I  cannot  help  being  of  a  contrary  opinion. I  think  we  may


122  ESSAY  II.  CHAP.  U.

form  a  judgment,  both  in  the  question  about  cheese  and  lobsters,
and  in  the  more  important  question  about  pleasure  and  virtue.

When  one  man  feels  a  more  agreeable  relish  in  cheese,  another
in  lobsters,  this,  I  grant,  requires  no  judgment ;  it  depends  only
upon  the  constitution  of  the  palate.  But,  if  we  would  deter-
mine which  of  the  two  has  the  best  taste,  I  think  the  question
must  be  determined  by  judgment ;  and  that,  with  a  small  share
of  this  faculty,  we  may  give  a  very  certain  determination,  to
wit,  that  the  two  tastes  are  equally  good,  and  that  both  of  the
persons  do  equally  well,  in  preferring  what  suits  their  palate  and
their  stomach.

Nay,  I  apprehend,  that  the  two  persons  who  differ  in  their
taste  will,  notwithstanding  that  difference,  agree  perfectly  in
their  judgment,  that  both  tastes  are  upon  a  footing  of  equality,
and  that  neither  has  a  just  claim  to  preference.

IV.  Taste  and  judgment  differ. — [Thus  it  appears,  that,  in
this  instance,  the  office  of  taste  is  very  different  from  that  of
judgment ;  and  that  men,  who  differ  most  in  taste,  may  agree
perfectly  in  their  judgment,  even  with  respect  to  the  tastes
wherein  they  differ.]

To  make  the  other  case  parallel  with  this,  it  must  be  supposed
that  the  man  of  pleasure  and  the  man  of  virtue  agree  in  their
judgment,  and  that  neither  sees  any  reason  to  prefer  the  one
course  of  life  to  the  other.

If  this  be  supposed,  I  shall  grant,  that  neither  of  these  per-
sons has  reason  to  condemn  the  other.  Each  chooses  according
to  his  taste,  in  matters  which  his  best  judgment  determines  to
be  perfectly  indifferent.

But  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  this  supposition  cannot  have
place  when  we  speak  of  men,  or  indeed  of  moral  agents.  The
man  who  is  incapable  of  perceiving  the  obligation  of  virtue,
when  he  uses  his  best  judgment,  is  a  man  in  name,  but  not  in
reality.  He  is  incapable  either  of  virtue  or  vice,  and  is  not  a
moral  agent.

Even  the  man  of  pleasure,  when  his  judgment  is  unbiassed,
sees,  that  there  are  certain  things  which  a  man  ought  not  to  do,
though  he  should  have  a  taste  for  them.  If  a  thief  breaks  into
his  house,  and  carries  off  his  goods,  he  is  perfectly  convinced  that
he  did  wrong,  and  deserves  punishment,  although  he  had  as
strong  a  relish  for  the  goods  as  he  himself  has  for  the  pleasures
he  pursues.

V.  Of  passion  and  reason, — [It  is  evident,  that  mankind,  in
all  ages,  have  conceived  two  parts  in  the  human  constitution  that
may  have  influence  upon  our  voluntary  actions.  These  we  call
by  the  general  names  of  passion  and  reason  ;  and  we  shall  find,
in  all  languages,  names  that  are  equivalent.]


INFLUENCE  OF  MOTIVES  UPON  THE  TIlTlLL.  Jgg

Under  tbe  former,  we  comprehend  various  principles  of  action,
similar  to  those  we  observe  in  brute  animals,  and  in  men  who
have  not  the  use  of  reason.  Appetites,  affections^  passions,  are
the  names  by  which  they  are  denominated ;  and  these  names  are
not  so  accurately  distinguished  in  common  language,  but  that
they  are  used  somewhat  promiscuously.  This,  however,  is  com-
mon to  them  all,  that  they  draw  a  man  toward  a  certain  object,
without  any  farther  view,  by  a  kind  of  violence ;  a  violence
which  indeed  may  be  resisted  if  the  man  is  master  of  himself,
but  cannot  be  resisted  without  a  struggle.

Cicero's  phrase  for  expressing  their  influence  is,  "  Hominem
hue  et  illuc  rapiunt.*'  Dr.  Hutcheson  uses  a  similar  phrase,
"  Quibus  agitatur  mens  et  bruto  quodam  impetu  fertur."  There
is  no  exercise  of  reason  or  judgment  necessary  in  order  to  feel
their  influence.

With  regard  to  this  part  (passion)  of  the  human  constitution,
I  see  no  difference  between  the  vulgar  and  philosophers.

As  to  the  other  part  of  our  constitution,  which  is  commonly
called  reason,  as  opposed  to  passion,  there  have  been  very  subtle
disputes  among  modem  philosophers,  whether  it  ought  to  be
called  reason,  or  be  not  rather  some  internal  sense  or  taste.

Whether  it  ought  to  be  called  reason,  or  by  what  other  name,
I  do  not  here  inquire,  but  what  kind  of  influence  it  has  upon
our  voluntary  actions.

As  to  this  ppint,  I  think,  all  men  must  allow  that  this  is  the
manly  part  of  our  constitution,  the  other  the  brute  part.  This
operates  in  a  calm  and  dispassionate  manner ;  a  manner  so  like
to  judgment  or  reason,  that  even  those  who  do  not  allow  it  to  be
called  by  that  name,  endeavour  to  account  for  its  having  always
had  the  name,  because,  in  the  maimer  of  its  operation,  it  has  a
similitude  to  reason.

As  the  simiUtude  between  this  principle  and  reason  ha^  led
mankind  to  give  it  that  name,  so  the  dissimilitude  between  it
and  passion  has  led  them  to  set- the  two  in  opposition.  They
have  considered  this  cool  principle  as  having  an  influence  upon
our  actions  so  different  from  passion,  that  what  a  man  does  coolly
and  deliberately,  without  passion,  is  imputed  solely  to  the  man,
whether  it  have  merit  or  demerit ;  whereas,  what  he  does  from
passion  is  imputed  in  part  to  the  passion.  If  the  passion  be
conceived  to  be  irresistible,  the  action  is  imputed  solely  to  it,
and  not  at  all  to  the  man.  If  he  had  power  to  resist,  and  ought
to  have  resisted,  we  blame  him  for  not  doing  his  duty;  but,
in  proportion  to  the  violence  of  the  passion,  the  fault  is  alle-
viated.

By  this  cool  principle,  we  judge  what  ends  are  most  worthy
to  be  pursued,  how  far  every  appetite  and  passion  may  be  in-
dulged, and  when  it  ought  to  be  resisted.


J  24  ESSAY  II.  CHAP.  II.

It  directs  us,  not  only  to  resist  the  impulse  of  passion  when  it
would  lead  us  wrong,  but  to  avoid  the  occasions  of  inflaming  it ;
l^rlike  Cyrus,  who  refused  to  see  the  beautiful  captive  prin-
cess. In  this  he  acted  the  part  both  of  a  wise  and  a  good  man ;
firm  in  the  love  of  virtue,  and,  at  the  same  time,  conscious  of
the  weakness  of  human  nature,  and  unwilling  to  put  it  to  too
severe  a  trial.  In  this  case,  the  youth  of  Cyrus,  the  incompar-
able beauty  of  his  captive,  and  every  circumstance  which  tended
to  inflame  his  desire,  exalts  the  merit  of  his  conduct  in  resist-
ing it.

It  is  in  such  actions  that  the  superiority  of  human  nature
appears,  and  the  specific  difference  between  it  and  that  of
brutes.  In  them  we  may  observe  one  passion  combating  an-
other, and  the  strongest  prevailing;  but  we  perceive  no  calm
principle  in  their  constitution,  that  is  superior  to  every  passion,
and  able  to  give  law  to  it.

VI.  The  difference  between  these  two  parts  of  our  constitu-
tion may  be  farther  illustrated  by  an  instance  or  two  wherein
passion  prevails.

^F  If  a  man,  upon  great  provocatiqp,  strike  another  when  he
ought  to  keep  the  peace,  he  blames  himself  for  what  he  did,  and
acknowledges  that  he  ought  not  to  have  yielded  to  his  passion.
Every  other  person  agrees  with  his  sober  judgment :  they  think  he
did  wrong  in  yielding  to  his  passion,  when  he  might  and  ought  to
have  resisted  its  impulse.  If  they  thought  it  impossible  to  bear
the  provocation,  they  would  not  blame  him  at  all ;  but  believing
that  it  was  in  his  power,  and  was  his  duty,  they  impute  to  him
some  degree  of  blame,  acknowledging,  at  the  same  time,  that  it
is  alleviated  in  proportion  to  the  provocation ;  so  that  the  tres-
pass is  imputed,  partly  to  the  man,  and  partly  to  the  passion.
But  if  a  man  deliberately  conceives  a  design  of  mischief  against
his  neighbour,  contrives  the  means,  and  executes  it,  the  action
admits  of  no  alleviation,  it  is  perfectly  voluntary,  and  he  bears
the  whole  guilt  of  the  evil  intended  and  done.

If  a  man,  by  the  agony  of  the  rack,  is  made  to  disclose  a
secret  of  importance,  with  which  he  is  intrusted,  we  pity  him
more  than  we  blame  him.  We  consider,  that  such  is  the  weak-
ness of  human  nature,  that  the  resolution,  even  of  a  good  man,
might  be  overcome  by  such  a  trial.  But  if  he  have  strength  of
mind,  which  even  the  agony  of  the  rack  could  not  subdue,  we
admire  his  fortitude  as  truly  heroical.

Thus,  I  think,  it  appears,  that  the  common  sense  of  men
(which,  in  matters  of  common  life,  ought  to  have  great  autho-
rity) has  led  them  to  distinguish  two  parts  in  the  human  con-
stitution, which  have  influence  upon  our  voluntary  determina-
tions. There  is  an  irrational  part,  common  to  us  with  brute
animals,  consisting of  appetites, affections,  and  passions ;  and


INFLUENCE  OF  MOTIVES  UPON  THE  WILL.  J  25

there  is  a  cool  and  rational  part.  The  first,  in  many  cases,  gives
a  strong  impulse,  but  without  judgment,  and  without  authority.
The  second  is  always  accompanied  with  authority.  All  wisdom
and  virtue  consist  in  following  its  dictates ;  all  vice  and  folly  in
disobeying  them.  We  may  resist  the  impulses  of  appetite  and
passion,  not  only  vdthout  regret,  but  with  self-applause  and
triumph ;  but  the  calls  of  reason  and  duty  can  never  be  resisted
without  remorse  and  self-condemnation.

VII.  [The  ancient  philosophers  agreed  with  the  vulgar,  in
making  this  distinction  of  the  principles  of  action.]  The  irra-
tional part  the  Greeks  called  op/xr; ;  Cicero  calls  it  appetitus,  tak-
ing that  word  in  an  extensive  sense,  so  as  to  include  every  pro-
pensity to  action  which  is  not  grounded  on  judgment.

The  other  principle  the  Greeks  called  vovs ;  Plato  calls  it  the
fiyrjfxovLKov,  or  leading  principle.  "  Duplex  enim  est  vis  animo-
rum  atque  naturaB,"  says  Cicero,  "  una  pars  in  appetitu  posita  est,
quae  est  op/xr;  Graece,  quae  hominem  hue  et  illuc  rapit ;  altera  in
ratione,  quae  docet,  et  explanat,  quid  faciendum  fugiendumve
sit ;  ita  fit  ut  ratio  praesit,  appetitus  obtemperet."

The  reason  of  explaining  this  distinction  here  is,  that  these
two  principles  influence  the  will  in  different  ways.  Their  influ-
ence differs,  not  in  degree  only,  but  in  kind.  This  difference
we  feel,  though  it  may  be  difficult  to  find  words  to  express  it.
We  may  perhaps  more  easily  form  a  notion  of  it  by  a  similitude.
It  is  one  thing  to  push  a  man  from  one  part  of  the  room  to
another :  it  is  a  thing  of  a  very  different  nature  to  use  arguments
to  persuade  him  to  leave  his  place,  and  go  to  another.  He  may
yield  to  the  force  which  pushes  him,  without  any  exercise  of  his
rational  faculties ;  nay,  he  must  yield  to  it,  if  he  do  not  oppose
an  equal  or  a  greater  force.  His  liberty  is  impaired  in  some
degree ;  and,  if  he  has  not  power  sufficient  to  oppose,  his  liberty
is  quite  taken  away,  and  the  motion  cannot  be  imputed  to  him
at  ^1.  The  influence  of  appetite  or  passion  seems  to  me  to  be
very  like  to  this.  K  the  passion  be  supposed  irresistible,  we
impute  the  action  to  it  solely,  and  not  to  the  man.  If  he  had
power  to  resist,  but  yields  after  a  struggle,  we  impute  the  action
partly  to  the  man  and  partly  to  the  passion.

If  we  attend  to  the  other  case,  when  the  man  is  only  urged
by  arguments  to  leave  his  place,  this  resembles  the  operation  of
the  cool  or  rational  principle.  It  is  evident  that,  whether  he
yields  to  the  arguments  or  not,  the  determination  is  wholly  his
own  act,  and  is  entirely  to  be  imputed  to  him.  Arguments,
whatever  be  the  degree  of  their  strength,  diminish  not  a  man's
liberty ;  they  may  produce  a  cool  conviction  of  what  we  ought  to
do,  and  they  can  do  no  more.  But  appetite  and  passion  give  an  im-
pulse to  act  and  impair  liberty,  in  proportion  to  their  strength.
With  most  men,  the  impulse  of  passion  is  more  effectual  than


12Q  ESSAY  II.  CHAP.  III.

bare  conviction  ;  and,  on  this  account,  orators,  who  would  per-
suade, find  it  necessary  to  address  the  passions,  as  well  as  to
convince  the  understanding;  and,  in  all  systems  of  rhetoric,
these  two  have  been  considered  as  difierent  intentions  of  the
orator,  and  to  be  accomplished  by  different  means.


CHAPTER  III.

OF  OPERATIONS  OF  MIND  WHICH  MAY  BE  CALLED  VOLUNTARY.

I.  Of  attention,  deliberation,  and  resolution, — The  faculties  of
understanding  and  will  are  easily  distinguished  in  thought,  but
very  rarely,  if  ever,  disjoined  in  operation.

In  most,  perhaps  in  all  the  operations  of  mind  for  which  we
have  names  in  language,  both  faculties  are  employed,  and  we
are  both  intellective  and  active.

Whether  it  be  possible  that  intelligence  may  exist  without
some  degree  of  activity,  or  impossible,  is  perhaps  beyond  the
reach  of  our  faculties  to  determine ;  but  I  apprehend  that,  in
fact,  they  are  always  conjoined  in  the  operations  of  our  minds.

It  is  probable,  I  thinK,  that  there  is  some  degree  of  activity
in  those  operations  which  we  refer  to  the  understanding ;  accord-
ingly, they  have  always,  and  in  all  languages,  been  expressed
by  active  verbs ;  as,  I  see,  I  hear,  I  remember,  I  apprehend,  I
judge,  I  reason.  And  it  is  certain  that  every  act  of  will  must
be  accompanied  by  some  operation  of  the  understanding ;  for  he
that  wills  must  apprehend  what  he  wills,  and  apprehension  be-
longs to  the  understanding.

The  operations  I  am  to  consider  in  this  chapter,  I  think,  have
commonly  been  referred  to  the  understanding ;  but  we  shall  find
that  the  will  has  so  great  a  share  in  them,  that  they  may,  with
propriety,  be  called  voluntary.  They  are  these  three, — atten^
tion,  deliberation,  and  fixed  purpose,  or  resolution,

[^Attention  may  be  given  to  any  object,  either  of  sense  or  of
intellect,  in  order  to  form  a  distinct  notion  of  it,  or  to  discover
its  nature,  its  attributes,  or  its  relations.  And  so  great  is  the
effect  of  attention,  that,  without  it,  it  is  impossible  to  acquire  or
retain  a  distinct  notion  of  any  object  of  thought.]

If  a  man  hear  a  discourse  without  attention,  what  does  he
carry  away  with  him  ?  If  he  see  St.  Peter's  or  the  Vatican
without  attention,  what  account  can  he  give  of  it  ?  While  two
persons  are  engaged  in  interesting  discourse,  the  clock  strikes
within  their  hearing,  to  which  they  give  no  attention :  what  is
the  consequence  ?  The  next  minute  they  know  not  whether  the
clock  struck  or  not.  Yet  their  ears  were  not  shut.  The  usual
impression  was  made  upon  the  organ  of  hearing,  and  upon  the


OF  VOLUNTARY  OPERATIONS.  127

auditory  nerve  arid  brain  ;  but  from  inattention  the  sound  either
was  not  perceived,  or  passed  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  without
leaving  the  least  vestige  in  the  memory,

A  man  sees  not  what  is  before  his  eyes  when  his  mind  is
occupied  about  another  object.  In  the  tumult  of  a  battle,  a
man  may  be  shot  through  the  body  without  knowing  anything
of  the  matter,  till  he  discover  it  by  the  loss  of  blood  or  of
strength.

The  most  acute  sensation  of  pain  may  be  deadened,  if  the  at-
tention can  be  vigorously  directed  to  another  object.  A  gen-
tleman of  my  acquaintance,  in  the  agony  of  a  fit  of  the  gout,
used  to  call  for  the  chess-board.  As  he  was  fond  of  that  game,
he  acknowledged  that,  as  the  game  advanced  and  drew  his  atten-
tion, the  sense  of  pain  abated,  and  the  time  seemed  much  shorter.

B^  Archimedes,  it  is  said,  being  intent  upon  a  mathematical
proposition,  when  Syracuse  was  taken  by  the  Romans,  knew  not
the  calamity  of  the  city,  tiU  a  Roman  soldier  broke  in  upon  his
retirement,  and  gave  him  a  deadly  wound ;  on  which  he  lamented
only  that  he  had  lost  a  fine  demonstration.

It  is  needless  to  multiply  instances  to  show,  that  when  one
faculty  of  the  mind  is  intensely  engaged  about  any  object,  the
other  faculties  are  laid,  as  it  were,  fast  asleep.

II.  Of  genius. — It  may  be  farther  observed,  that  [if  there  be
any  thing  that  can  be  called  genius,  in  matters  of  mere  judgment
and  reasoning,  it  seems  to  consist  chiefly  in  being  able  to  give
that  attention  to  the  subject  which  keeps  it  steady  in  the  mind,
till  we  can  survey  it  accurately  on  all  sides.]

There  is  a  talent  of  imagination,  which  bounds  from  earth  to
heaven,  and  from  heaven  to  earth,  in  a  moment.  This  may  be
favourable  to  wit  and  imagery  ;  but  the  powers  of  judging  and
reasoning  depend  chiefly  upon  keeping  the  mind  to  a  clear  and
steady  view  of  the  subject.

Sir  Isaac  Newton,  to  one  who  complimented  him  upon  the
force  of  genius,  which  had  made  such  improvements  in  mathe-
matics and  natural  philosophy,  is  said  to  have  made  this  reply,
which  was  both  modest  and  judicious,  that,  if  he  had  made  any
improvements  in  those  sciences,  it  was  owing  more  to  patient
attention  than  to  any  other  talent.

Whatever  be  the  effects  which  attention  may  produce,  (and
I  apprehend  they  are  far  beyond  what  is  commonly  believed,)  it
is  for  the  most  part  in  our  power.

Every  man  knows  that  he  can  turn  his  attention  to  this  sub-
ject or  to  that,  for  a  longer  or  a  shorter  time,  and  with  more  or
ess  intenseness,  as  he  pleases. It  is  a  voluntary  act,  and  depends
upon  his  will.

But  what  was  before  observed  of  the  will  in  general,  is  appli-
cable to  this  particular  exertion  of  it,  that  the  mind  is  rarely  in


t


life


J  28  ESSAY  II.  CHAP.  IIL

a  state  of  indifference,  left  to  turn  its  attention  to  the  object
which  to  reason  appears  most  deserving  of  it.  There  is,  for  the
most  part,  a  bias  to  some  particular  object  more  than  to  any
other ;  and  this  not  from  any  judgment  of  its  deserving  our  at-
tention more,  but  from  some  impulse  or  propensity,  grounded
on  nature  or  habit.

It  is  well  known,  that  things  new  and  uncommon,  things
grand,  and  things  that  are  beautiful,  draw  our  attention,  not  in
proportion  to  the  interest  we  have,  or  think  we  have  in  them,
but  in  a  much  greater  proportion.

Whatever  moves  our  passions  or  affections  draws  our  attention,
very  often,  more  than  we  wish.

You  desite  a  man  not  to  think  of  an  unfortunate  event  which
torments  him.  It  admits  of  no  remedy.  The  thought  of  it
answers  no  purpose  but  to  keep  the  wound  bleeding.  He  is
perfectly  convinced  of  aU  you  say.  He  knows  that  he  would
not  feel  the  affliction,  if  he  could  only  not  think  of  it ;  yet  he
hardly  thinks  df  any  thing  else.  Strange !  when  happiness  and
misery  stand  before  him,  and  depend  upon  his  choice,  he  chooses
misery,  and  rejects  happiness  with  his  eyes  open !

Yet  he  wishes  to  be  happy,  as  all  men  do.  How  shall  we  re-
concile this  contradiction  between  his  judgment  and  his  conduct  ?

The  accoimt  of  it  seems  to  me  to  be  this :  the  afflicting  event
draws  his  attention  so  strongly,  by  a  natural  and  blind  force,  that
he  either  hath  not  the  power,  or  hath  not  the  vigour  of  mind,
to  resist  its  impulse,  though  he  knows  that  to  yield  to  it  is
misery,  without  any  good  to  balance  it.

Acute  bodily  pain  draws  our  attention,  and  makes  it  very
difficult  to  attend  to  any  thing  else,  even  when  attention  to  the
pain  serves  no  other  purpose  but  to  aggravate  it  tenfold.

The  man  who  played  a  game  at  chess  in  the  agony  of  the
gout,  to  engage  his  attention  to  another  object,  acted  the  rea-
sonable part,  and  consulted  his  real  happiness  ;  but  it  required
a  great  effort  to  give  that  attention  to  his  game  which  was  ne-
cessary to  produce  the  effect  intended  by  it.

Even  when  there  is  no  particular  object  that  draws  away
our  attention,  there  is  a  desultoriness  of  thought  in  man,  and
in  some  more  than  in  others,  which  makes  it  very  difficult  to
give  that  fixed  attention  to  important  objects  which  reason  re-
quires.

It  appears,  I  think,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  the  atten-
tion we  give  to  objects  is  for  the  most  part  voluntary ;  that  a
great  part  of  wisdom  and  virtue  consists  in  giving  a  proper
direction  to  our  attention;  and  that  however  reasonable  this
appears  to  the  judgment  of  every  man,  yet,  in  some  cases,  it
requires  an  effort  of  self-command  no  less  than  the  most  heroic
virtues.


OF  VOLUNTARY  OPERATIONS.  129

III.  Deliberation. — [Another  operation  that  may  be  called
voluntary^  is  deliberation  about  what  we  are  to  do  or  to  for-
bear.]

Every  man  knows  that  it  is  in  his  power  to  deliberate  or
not  to  deliberate  about  any  part  of  his  conduct ;  to  deliberate
for  a  shorter,  or  a  longer  time,  more  carelessly,  or  more  seri-
ously ;  and  when  he  has  reason  to  suspect  that  his  affection  may
bias  his  judgment,  he  may  either  honestly  use  the  best  means
in  his  power  to  form  an  impartial  judgment,  or  he  may  yield
to  his  bias,  and  only  seek  arguments  to  justify  what  inclination
leads  him  to  do.  In  all  these  points,  he  determines,  he  wills,
the  right  or  the  vn'ong.

IV.  [The  general  rules  of  deliberation  are  perfectly  evident  to
reason  when  we  consider  them  abstractly.  They  are  axioms  in
morals.]

(1)  We  ought  not  to  deliberate  in  cases  that  are  perfectly  clear.
—  [No  man  deliberates  whether  he  ought  to  choose  happiness  or
misery.  No  honest  man  deliberates  whether  he  shall  steal  his
neighbour's  property.]  [  (2)  When  the  case  is  not  clear,  when  it
is  of  importance,  and  when  there  is  time  for  deliberation,  we
ought  to  deliberate  with  more  or  less  care,  in  proportion  to  the
importance  of  the  action.]  [  (3)  In  deliberation,  we  ought  to
weigh  things  in  an  even  balance,  and  to  allow  to  every  conside-
ration the  weight  which,  in  sober  judgment,  we  think  it  ought  to
have,  and  no  more.  This  is  to  deliberate  impartially.^  [  (4)  Our
deliberation  should  be  brought  to  an  issue  in  due  time,  so  that
we  may  not  lose  the  opportunity  of  acting  while  we  deliberate.]

The  axioms  of  Euclid  do  not  appear  to  me  to  have  a  greater
degree  of  self-evidence,  than  these  rules  of  deliberation.  And
as  far  as  a  man  acts  according  to  them,  his  heart  approves  of
him,  and  he  has  confidence  of  the  approbation  of  the  Searcher
of  hearts.

But  though  the  manner  in  which  we  ought  to  deliberate  be
evident  to  reason,  it  is  not  always  easy  to  follow  it.  Our  appe-
tites, our  affections,  and  passions,  oppose  all  deliberation,  but
that  which  is  employed  in  finding  the  means  of  their  gratifica-
tion. Avarice  may  lead  to  deliberate  upon  the  ways  of  making
money,  but  it  does  not  distinguish  between  the  honest  and  the
dishonest.

We  ought  surely  to  deliberate  how  far  every  appetite  and
passion  may  be  indulged,  and  what  limits  should  be  set  to  it.
But  our  appetites  and  passions  push  us  on  to  the  attainment  of
their  objects,  in  the  shortest  road,  and  wdthout  delay.

Thus  it  happens,  that,  if  we  yield  to  their  impulse,  we  shall
often  transgress  those  rules  of  deliberation  which  reason  ap-
proves. In  this  conflict  between  the  dictates  of  reason  and  the
blind  impulse  of  passion,  we  must  voluntarily  determine. When

K


J  30  ESSAY II.  CHAP.  III.

we  take  part  with  our  reason,  though  in  opposition  to  passion,
we  approve  of  our  own  conduct.

[What  we  call  a  fault  of  ignorance,  is  always  owing  to  the
want  of  due  deliberation.  When  we  do  not  take  due  pains  to  be
rightly  informed,  there  is  a  fault,  not  indeed  in  acting  according
to  the  light  we  have,  but  in  not  using  the  proper  means  to  get
light.  For  if  we  judge  wrong,  after  using  the  proper  means  of
information,  there  is  no  fault  in  acting  according  to  that  wrong
judgment ;  the  error  is  invincible.]

The  natural  consequence  of  deliberation  on  any  part  of  our
conduct,  is  a  determination  how  we  shall  act ;  and  if  it  is  not
brought  to  this  issue  it  is  lost  labour.

V.  [There  are  two  cases  in  which  a  determination  may  take
place ;  (1)  when  the  opportunity  of  putting  it  in  execution  is
present,  and  (2)  when  it  is  at  a  distance,"]

When  the  opportunity  is  present,  the  determination  to  act  is
immediately  followed  by  the  action.  Thus,  if  a  man  determine
to  rise  and  walk,  he  immediately  does  it,  unless  he  is  hindered
by  force,  or  has  lost  the  power  of  walking.  And  if  he  sit  still
when  he  has  power  to  walk,  we  conclude  infallibly  that  he  has
not  determined  or  willed  to  walk  immediately.

Our  determination  or  will  to  act  is  not  always  the  result  of
deliberation ;  it  may  be  the  effect  of  some  passion  or  appetite,
without  any  judgment  interposed.  And  when  judgment  is  inter-
posed, we  may*  determine  and  act  either  according  to  that  judg-
ment, or  contrary  to  it.

When  a  man  sits  down  hungry  to  dine,  he  eats  from  appetite,
very  often  without  exercising  his  judgment  at  all ;  nature  in-
vites, and  he  obeys  the  call,  as  the  ox,  or  the  horse,  or  as  an
infant  does.

When  we  converse  with  persons  whom  we  love  or  respect,  we
say  and  do  civil  things  merely  from  affection  or  from  respect.
They  flow  spontaneously  from  the  heart,  without  requiring  any
judgment.  In  such  cases,  we  act  as  brute-animals  do,  or  as  chil-
dren before  the  use  of  reason.  We  feel  an  impulse  in  our  na-
ture, and  we  yield  to  it.

When  a  man  eats  merely  from  appetite,  he  does  not  consider
the  pleasure  of  eating,  or  its  tendency  to  health.  These  consi-
derations are  not  in  his  thoughts.  But  we  can  suppose  a  man
who  eats  with  a  view  to  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  eating.  Such  a
man  reasons  and  judges.  He  will  take  care  to  use  the  proper
means  of  procuring  an  appetite.  He  will  be  a  critic  in  tastes,
and  make  nice  discriminations.  This  man  uses  his  rational  facul-
ties even  in  eating.  And  however  contemptible  this  application
of  them  may  be,  it  is  an  exercise  of  which,  I  apprehend,  brute-
animals  are  not  capable.

In  like  manner,  a  man  may  say  or  do  civil  things  to  another.


OF  VOLUNTARY OPERATIONS. .  131

not  from  affection,  but  in  order  to  serve  some  end  by  it,  or  be-
cause he  thinks  it  his  duty.

To  act  with  a  view  to  some  distant  interest,  or  to  act  from  a
sense  of  duty,  seems  to  be  proper  to  man  as  a  reasonable  being ;
but  to  act  merely  from  passion,  from  appetite,  or  from  affection,
is  common  to  him  with  the  brute-animals.  In  the  last  case  there
is  no  judgment  required,  but  in  the  first  there  is.

To  act  against  what  one  judges  to  be  for  his  real  good  upon
the  whole,  is  folly.  To  act  against  what  he  judges  to  be  his  duty,
is  immorality.  It  cannot  be  denied,  that  there  are  too  many
instances  of  both  in  human  life.  "  Video  meliora  proboque,
deteriora  sequor," — "  I  see  and  approve  of  better  things,  I  fol-
low worse," — is  neither  an  impossible  nor  an  unfrequent  case.

While  a  man  does  what  he  really  thinks  wisest  and  best  to  be
done,  the  more  his  appetites,  his  affections,  and  passions,  draw  him
the  contrary  way,  the  more  he  approves  of  his  own  conduct,  and
the  more  he  is  entitled  to  the  approbation  of  every  rational  being.

VI.  Resolution. — [The  third  operation  of  mind  I  mentioned,
which  may  be  called  voluntary,  is,  a  fixed  purpose,  or  resolution,
¥dth  regard  to  our  future  conduct.]

This  naturally  takes  place,  when  any  action,  or  course  of
action,  about  which  we  have  deliberated,  is  not  immediately  to
be  executed,  the  occasion  of  acting  being  at  some  distance.

[A  fixed  purpose  to  do,  some  time  hence,  something  which  we
believe  shall  then  be  in  our  power,  is  strictly  and  properly  a
determination  of  will,  no  less  than  a  determination  to  do  it
instantly.]  Every  definition  of  volition  agrees  to  it.  Whether
the  opportunity  of  doing  what  we  have  determined  to  do  be
present  or  at  some  distance,  is  an  accidental  circumstance  which
does  not  afiect  the  nature  of  the  determination,  and  no  good  rea-
son can  be  assigned  why  it  should  not  be  called  volition  in  the
one  case,  as  well  as  in  the  other.  A  purpose  or  resolution,  there-
fore, is  truly  and  properly  an  act  of  will.

Our  purposes  are  of  two  kinds.  We  may  call  the  one  parti-
cular,  the  other  general.  By  a  particular  purpose,  I  mean  that
which  has  for  its  object  an  individual  action,  limited  to  one  time
and  place ;  by  a  general  purpose,  that  of  a  course  or  train  of
action,  intended  for  some  general  end,  or  regulated  by  some
general  rule.

Thus,  I  may  purpose  to  go  to  London  next  winter. When
the  time  comes,  I  execute  my  purpose,  if  I  continue  of  the  same
mind  ;  and  the  purpose,  when  executed,  is  no  more. Thus  it  is  '
with  every  particular  purpose.

ji  general  purpose  may  continue  for  life ;  and,  after  many
particular  actions  have  been  done  in  consequence  of  it,  may
remain  and  regulate  future  actions.

Thus,  a  young  man  proposes  to  follow  the  profession  of  law,

K  2


/


132  ESSAY  11.  CHAP.  Ill

of  medicine,  or  of  theology.  This  general  purpose  directs  the
course  of  his  reading  and  study.  It  directs  him  in  the  choice  of
his  company  and  companions,  and  even  of  his  diversions.  It
determines  his  travels  and  the  place  of  his  abode.  It  has  influ-
ence upon  his  dress  and  manners,  and  a  considerable  effect  in
forming  his  character.

There  are  other  fixed  purposes  which  have  a  still  greater  effect
in  forming  the  character.  I  mean  such  as  regard  our  moral
conduct.

Suppose  a  man  to  have  exercised  his  intellectual  and  moral
faculties,  so  far  as  to  have  distinct  notions  of  justice  and  injus-
tice, and  of  the  consequences  of  both,  and,  after  due  delibera-
tion, to  have  formed  a  fixed  purpose  to  adhere  inflexibly  to
justice,  and  never  to  handle  the  wages  of  iniquity.

Is  not  this  the  man  whom  we  should  call  a  just  man  ?  We
consider  the  moral  virtues  as  inherent  in  the  mind  of  a  good  man,
even  when  there  is  no  opportunity  of  exercising  them.  And
what  is  it  in  the  mind  which  we  can  call  the  virtue  of  justice,
when  it  is  not  exercised  ?  It  can  be  nothing  but  a  fixed  purpose,
or  determination,  to  act  according  to  the  rules  of  justice,  when
there  is  opportunity.

The  Roman  law  defined  justice,  a  steady  and  perpetual  will
to  give  to  every  man  his  due.  When  the  opportunity  of  doing
justice  is  not  present,  this  can  mean  nothing  else  than  a  steady
purpose,  which  is  very  properly  called  will.  Such  a  purpose,  if
it  is  steady,  will  infallibly  produce  just  conduct ;  for  every  known
transgression  of  justice  demonstrates  a  change  of  purpose,  at  least
for  that  time.

What  has  been  said  of  justice,  may  be  so  easily  applied  to
every  other  moral  virtue,  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  give  instances.
They  are  all  fixed  purposes  of  acting  according  to  a  certain  rule.

VII.  The  virtue  and  affection  of  benevolence  different. — By
this,  the  virtues  may  be  easily  distinguished,  in  thought  at  least,
from  natural  affections  that  bear  the  same  name.  Thus,  bene-
volence is  a  capital  virtue,  which,  though  not  so  necessary  to  the
being  of  society,  is  entitled  to  a  higher  degree  pf  approbation
than  even  justice.  But  there  is  a  natural  affection  of  benevo-
lence^ common  to  good  and  bad  men,  to  the  virtuous  and  to  the
vicious. How  shall  these  be  distinguished  ?

In  practice,  indeed,  we  cannot  distinguish  them  in  other  men,
and  with  difficulty  in  ourselves ;  but  in  theory,  nothing  is  more
easy.  [The  virtue  of  benevolence  is  a  fixed  purpose  or  resolution
.to  do  good  when  we  have  opportunity,  from  a  conviction  that  it
is  right,  and  is  our  duty.  The  affection  of  benevolence  is  a  pro-
pensity to  do  good,  from  natural  constitution  or  habit,  without
regard  to  rectitude  or  duty.]

There  are  good  tempers  and  bad,  which  are  a  part  of  the  con-


AtM^


stitution  of  the  man,  and  are  really  involuntary,  though  they
often  lead  to  voluntary  actions.  A  good  natural  temper  is  not
virtue,  nor  is  a  bad  one  vice.  Hard  would  it  be  indeed  to  think,
that  a  man  should  be  born  under  a  decree  of  reprobation,  be-
cause he  has  the  misfortune  of  a  bad  natural  temper.

The  physiognomist  saw,  in  the  features  of  Socrates,  the  signa-
tures of  many  bad  dispositions,  which  that  good  man  acknow-
ledged he  felt  within  him ;  but  the  triumph  of  his  virtue  was  the
greater  in  having  conquered  them.

In  men  who  have  no  fixed  rules  of  conduct,  no  self-govern-
ment, the  natural  temper  is  variable  by  numberless  accidents.
The  man  who  is  full  of  affection  and  benevolence  this  hour,  when
a  cross  accident  happens  to  ruffle  him,  or  perhaps  when  an  east-
erly wind  blows,  feels  a  strange  revolution  in  his  temper.  The
kind  and  benevolent  affections  give  place  to  the  jealous  and  ma-
lignant, which  are  as  readily  indulged  in  their  turn,  and  for  the
same  reason,  because  he  feels  a  propensity  to  indulge  them.

We  may  observe,  that  men  who  have  exercised  their  rational
powers  are  generally  governed  in  their  opinions  by  fixed  prin-
ciples of  belief ;  and  men  who  have  made  the  greatest  advance  in
self-government  are  governed,  in  their  practice,  by  general  fixed
purposes.  Without  the  former,  there  would  be  no  steadiness  and
consistence  in  our  belief ;  nor  without  the  latter,  in  our  conduct.

When  a  man  is  come  to  years  of  understanding ;  from  his
education,  from  his  company,  or  from  his  study,  he  forms  to
himself  a  set  of  general  principles,  a  creed,  which  governs  his
judgment  in  particular  points  that  occur.

If  new  evidence  be  laid  before  him,  which  tends  to  overthrow
any  of  his  received  principles,  it  requires  in  him  a  great  degree
of  candour  and  love  of  truth  to  give  it  an  impartial  examination,
and  to  form  a  new  judgment.  Most  men,  when  they  are  fixed
in  their  principles,  upon  what  they  account  sufficient  evidence,
can  hardly  be  drawn  into  a  new  and  serious  examination  of  them.

They  get  a  habit  of  believing  them,  which  is  strengthened  by
repeated  acts,  and  remains  immoveable,  even  when  the  evidence
upon  which  their  belief  was  at  first  groimded  is  forgot.

It  is  this  that  makes  conversions,  either  from  religious  or  poli-
tical principles,  so  difficult.

A  mere  prejudice  of  education  sticks  fastj  as  a  proposition  of
Euclid  does  with  a  man  who  hath  long  ago  forgot  the  proof.
Both  indeed  are  upon  a  similar  footing.  We  rest  in  both,  be-
cause we  have  long  done  so,  and  think  we  received  them  at  first
upon  good  evidence,  though  that  evidence  be  quite  forgot.

When  we  know  a  man's  principles,  we  judge  by  them,  rather
than  by  the  degree  of  his  understanding,  now  he  will  determine
in  any  point  which  is  connected  with  them.

Thus,  [the  judgment  of  most  men  who  judge  for  themselves  is


136  ESSAY  11.  CHAP.  IV.

II.  [A  second  corollary  is,  That  nothing  in  a  man,  wherein
the  will  is  not  concerned,  can  justly  be  accounted  either  virtuous
or  immoral.]

That  no  blame  can  be  imputed  to  a  man  for  what  is  altogether
involuntary,  is  so  evident  in  itself,  that  no  arguments  can  make
it  more  evident.  The  practice  of  all  criminal  courts,  in  all
enlightened  nations,  is  founded  upon  it.

If  it  should  be  thought  an  objection  to  this  maxim,  that,  by
the  laws  of  all  nations,  children  often  suffer  for  the  crimes  of
parents,  in  which  they  had  no  hand,  the  answer  is  easy.

For,  first,  Such  is  the  connexion  between  parents  and  chil-
dren, that  the  punishment  of  a  parent  must  hurt  his  children
whether  the  law  will  or  not.  If  a  man  is  fined,  or  imprisoned ;
if  he  loses  life,  or  limb,  or  estate,  or  reputation,  by  the  hand  of
justice,  his  children  suffer  by  necessary  consequence.  Secondly,
When  laws  intend  to  appoint  any  punishment  of  innocent  chil-
dren for  the  father's  crime,  such  laws  are  either  unjust,  or  they
are  to  be  considered  as  acts  of  police,  and  not  of  jurisprudence,
and  are  intended  as  an  expedient  to  deter  parents  more  effectu-
ally from  the  commission  of  the  crime.  The  innocent  children,
in  this  case,  are  sacrified  to  the  public  good,  in  like  manner  as,
to  prevent  the  spreading  of  the  plague,  the  sound  are  shut  up
with  the  infected  in  a  house  or  ship  t^at  has  the  infection.

1^"  By  the  law  of  England,  if  a  man  is  killed  by  an  ox  goring
him,  or  a  cart  running  over  him,  though  there  be  no  fault  or
neglect  in  the  owner,  the  ox  or  the  cart  is  a  deodand,  and  is
confiscated  to  the  church.  The  legislature  surely  did  not  intend
to  punish  the  ox  as  a  criminal,  far  less  the  cart.  The  intention
evidently  was,  to  inspire  the  people  with  a  sacred  regard  to  the
life  of  man.

When  the  parliament  of  Paris,  with  a  similar  intention,
ordained  the  house  in  which  Ravilliac*  was  bom,  to  be  razed  to
the  ground,  and  never  to  be  rebuilt,  it  would  be  great  weakness
to  conclude,  that  that  wise  judicature  intended  to  punish  the
house.

If  any  judicature  should,  in  any  instance,  find  a  man  guilty,
and  an  object  of  punishment,  for  what  they  allowed  to  be  alto-
gether involuntary,  all  the  world  would  condemn  them  as  men
who  knew  nothing  of  the  first  and  most  fundamental  rules  of
justice.

I  have  endeavoured  to  show,  that,  in  our  attention  to  objects,
in  order  to  form  a  right  judgment  of  them ;  in  our  deliberation
about  particular  actions,  or  about  general  rules  of  conduct ;  in
our  purposes  and  resolutions,  as  well  as  in  the  execution  of
them,  the  will  has  a  principal  share.  If  any  man  could  be  found,
who,  in  the  whole  course  of  his  life,  had  given  due  attention  to

♦  The  assassin  of  Henri  Quatre.


things  that  concern  him,  had  deliberated  duly  and  impartially
about  his  conduct,  had  formed  his  resolutions,  and  executed
them  according  to  his  best  judgment  and  capacity,  surely  such
a  man  might  hold  up  his  face  before  God  and  man,  and  plead
iimocence.  He  must  be  acquitted  by  the  impartial  Judge,
^atever  his  natural  temper  was,  whatever  his  passions  and  ajffec-
tions,  as  far  as  they  were  involuntary.

III.  [A  third  corollary.  That  all  virtuous  Iiabits,  when  we
distinguish  them  from  virtuous  actions,  consist  in  fixed  purposes
of  acting  according  to  the  rules  of  virtue,  as  often  as  we  have
opportunity.].

We  can  conceive  in  a  man  a  greater  or  a  less  degree  of  steadi-
ngs to  his  purposes  or  resolutions ;  but  that  the  general  tenor
of  his  conduct  should  be  contrary  to  them,  is  impossible.

The  man  who  has  a  determined  resolution  to  do  his  duty  in
every  instance,  and  who  adheres  steadily  to  his  resolution,  is  a
perfect  man.  The  man  who  has  a  determined  purpose  of  carry-
^.  ing  on  a  course  of  action  which  he  knows  to  be  wrong,  is  a  hard-
ened offender.  Between  these  extremes  there  are  many  inter-
mediate degrees  of  virtue  and  vice.


ESSAY III.

OF  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  ACTION.
PART  I.

OF  THE  MECHANICAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  ACTION.


CHAPTER  I.

OF  THE PRINCIPLES  OF  ACTION  IN  GENERAL.

I.  Actions  of  men  classified. — In  the  strict  philosophical
sense,  nothing  can  be  called  the  action  of  a  man,  but  what  he
previously  conceived  and  willed  or  determined  to  do.  In  morals,
we  commonly  employ  the  word  in  this  sense,  and  never  impute
any  thing  to  a  man  as  his  doing,  in  which  his  will  was  not  inter-
posed. But  when  moral  imputation  is  not  concerned,  we  call
many  things  actions  of  the  man,  which  he  neither  previously  con-
ceived nor  willed.  [Hence  the  actions  of  men  have  been  distiii-
guished  into  three  classes,  the  voluntary ,  the  involuntary,  and
the  mixed.  By  the  last  are  meant  such  actions  as  are  under  the
command  of  the  will,  but  are  commonly  performed  without  any
interposition  of  will.]

We  cannot  avoid  using  the  word  action  in  this  popular  sense,
without  deviating  too  much  from  the  common  use  of  language  ;
and  it  is  in  this  sense  we  use  it  when  we  inquire  into  the  princi-
ples of  action  in  the  human  mind.

By  principles  of  action,  I  understand  every  thing  that  incites
us  to  act.

If  there  were  no  incitements  to  action,  active  power  :vould  be
given  us  in  vain. Having  no  motive  to  direct  our  active  exer-
tions, the  mind  would,  in  all  cases,  be  in  a  state  of  perfect  indif-
ference, to  do  this  or  that,  or  nothing  at  all. The  aiitive  power
would  either  not  be  exerted  at  all,  or  its  exertions  w^uld  be  per-
fectly unmeaning  and  frivolous,  neither  wise  nor  foolish,  neither
good  nor  bad. To  every  action  that  is  of  the  smallest  import-
ance, there  must  be  some  incitement,  some  motive  some  reason.
II.  Knowledge  of  the  principles  of  action  important. — It  is
therefore  a  most  important  part  of  the  philosophy  of  the  human
mind,  to  have  a  distinct  and  just  view  of  the  vaious  principles


OF  THE PRINCIPLES  OF  ACTION.  J  39

of  action  which  the  Author  of  our  being  hath  planted  in  our
nature,  to  arrange  them  properly,  and  to  assign  to  every  one  its
rank.

[By  this  it  is,  that  we  may  discover  the  end  of  our  being,  and
the  part  which  is  assigned  us  upon  the  theatre  of  life.]  In  this
part  of  the  human  constitution,  the  noblest  work  of  God  that
falls  within  our  notice,  we  may  discern  most  clearly  the  charac-
ter of  him  who  made  us,  and  how  he  would  have  us  to  employ
that  active  power  which  he  hath  given  us.

I  cannot  without  great  diffidence  enter  upon  this  subject,
observing  that  almost  every  author  of  reputation,  who  has  given
attention  to  it,  has  a  system  of  his  own  ;  and  that  no  man  has
been  so  happy  as  to  give  general  satisfaction  to  those  who  came
after  him.

There  is  a  branch  of  knowledge  much  valued,  and  very  justly,
which  we  call  knowledge  of  the  world,  knowledge  of  mankind,
kBowledge  of  human  nature :  this,  I  think,  consists  in  knowing
from  what  principles  men  generally  act ;  and  it  is  commonly  the
fruit  of  natural  sagacity  joined  v^ith  experience.

A  man  of  sagacity,  who  has  had  occasion  to  deal  in  interest-
ing matters,  with  a  great  variety  of  persons  of  different  age,  sex,
rank,  and  profession,  learns  to  judge  what  may  be  expected  from
men  in  given  circumstances  ;  and  how  they  may  be  most  effec-
tually induced  to  act  the  part  which  he  desires.  To  know  this
is  of  so  great  importance  to  men  in  active  life,  that  it  is  called
knowing  men,  and  knowing  human  nature.

This  knowledge  may  be  of  considerable  use  to  a  man  who
would  speculate  upon  the  subject  we  have  proposed,  but  is  not,
by  itself,  sufficient  for  that  purpose.

III.  Difficulties  attending  an  investigation  of  the  principles  of
human  actions. — The  man  of  the  world  conjectures,  perhaps  with
great  probability,  how  a  man  will  act  in  certain  given  circum-
stances ;  and  this  is  all  he  wants  to  know.  [To  enter  into  a
detail  of  the  various  principles  which  influence  the  actions  of
men,  to  give  them  distinct  names,  to  define  them,  and  to  ascer-
tain their  difierent  provinces,  is  the  business  of  a  philosopher,
and  not  of  a  man  of  the  world;  and,  indeed,  it  is  a  matter
attended  with  great  difficulty  from  various  causes.]

First,  On  account  of  the  great  number  of  active  principles  that
influence  the  actions  of  men.

Man  has,  not  without  reason,  been  called  an  epitome  of  the
universe.  His  body,  by  which  his  mind  is  greatly  affiscted,  being
a  part  of  the  material  system,  is  subject  to  all  the  laws  of  inani-
mate matter.  During  some  part  of  his  existence,  his  state  is
very  like  that  of  a  vegetable.  He  rises,  by  imperceptible
degrees,  to  the  animal,  and,  at  last,  to  the  rational  life,  and  has
the  principles  that  belong  to  all.


140  ESSAY  III.— PART  I.  CHAP.  I.

Another  cause  of  the  difficulty  of  tracing  the  various  principles
of  action  in  man,  is,  That  the  same  action,  nay,  the  same  course
and  train  of  action,  may  proceed  from  very  different  principles.

Men  who  are  fond  of  a  hypothesis,  commonly  seek  no  other
proof  of  its  truth,  but  that  it  serves  to  account  for  the  appearances
which  it  is  brought  to  explain. This  is  a  very  slippery  kind  of

f)roof  in  every  part  of  philosophy,  and  never  to  be  trusted ;  but
east  of  all,  when  the  appearances  to  be  accounted  for  are  human
actions.

Most  actions  proceed  from  a  variety  of  principles  concurring
in  their  direction ;  and  according  as  we  are  disposed  to  judge
favourably  or  unfavourably  of  the  person,  or  of  human  nature  in
general,  we  impute  them  wholly  to  the  best,  or  wholly  to  the
worst,  overlooking  others  which  had  no  small  share  in  them.

[The  principles  from  which  men  act  can  be  discovered  only  in
these  two  ways  ;  by  attention  to  the  conduct  of  other  men,  or  by
attention  to  our  own  conduct,  and  to  what  we  feel  in  ourselves.
There  is  much  uncertainty  in  the  former,  and  much  difficultjf  in
the  latter.]

Men  differ  much  in  their  characters ;  and  we  can  observe  the
conduct  of  a  few  only  of  the  species.  Men  differ  not  only  from
other  men,  but  from  themselves  at  different  times,  and  on  different
occasions  ;  according  as  they  are  in  the  company  of  their
superiors,  inferiors,  or  equals  ;  according  as  they  are  in  the  eye
of  strangers,  or  of  their  familiars  only,  or  in  the  view  of  no
human  eye  ;  according  as  they  are  in  good  or  bad  fortune,  or  in
good  or  bad  humour.  We  see  but  a  small  part  of  the  actions  of
our  most  familiar  acquaintance  ;  and  what  we  see  may  lead  us  to
a  probable  conjecture,  but  can  give  no  certain  knowledge  of  the
principles  from  which  they  act.

A  man  may,  no  doubt,  know  with  certainty  the  principles  from
which  he  himself  acts,  because  he  is  conscious  of  them.  But
this  knowledge  requires  an  attentive  reflection  upon  the  opera-
tions of  his  own  mind,  which  is  very  rarely  to  be  found.  It  is
perhaps  more  easy  to  find  a  man  who  has  formed  a  just  notion  of
the  character  of  man  in  general,  or  of  those  oi  his  familiar
acquaintance,  than  one  who  has  a  just  notion  of  his  own  cha-
racter.

Most  men,  through  pride  and  self-flattery,  are  apt  to  think
themselves  better  than  they  really  are  ;  and  some,  perhaps  from
melancholy,  or  from  false  principles  of  religion,  are  led  to  think
themselves  worse  than  they  really  are.

IV.  Third  came  of  the  difficulty,  of  tracing  the  principles  of
action  in  man. — It  requires,  therefore,  a  very  accurate  and
impartial  examination  of  a  man's  own  heart,  to  be  able  to  form
a  distinct  notion  of  the  various  principles  which  influence  his
conduct. [That  this  is  a  matter  of  great  difficulty,  we  may  judge


OP  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  ACTION.  14J

from  the  very  different  and  contradictory  systems  of  philosophers
upon  this  subject,  from  the  earliest  ages  to  this  day.]

During  the  age  of  Greek  philosophy,  the  Platonist,  the  Peri-
patetic, the  Stoic,  the  Epicurean,  had  each  his  own  system.  In
the  dark  ages,  the  Schoolmen  and  the  Mystics  had  systems  dia-
metrically opposite ;  and,  since  the  revival  of  learning,  no  con-
troversy hath  been  more  keenly  agitated,  especially  among  British
philosophers,  than  that  about  the  principles  of  action  in  the
human  constitution.

They  have  determined,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  learned,  the
forces  by  which  the  planets  and  comets  traverse  the  boundless
regions  of  space ;  but  have  not  been  able  to  determine,  with  any
degree  of  unanimity,  the  forces  which  every  man  is  conscious  of
in  himself,  and  by  which  his  conduct  is  directed.

[Some  admit  no  principle  but  self -love  ;  others  resolve  all  into
hve  of  the  pleasures  of  sense,  variously  modified  by  the  associa-
tion of  ideas ;  others  admit  disinterested  benevolence  along  with
self-love ;  others  reduce  all  to  reason  and  passion ;  others  to  pas-
sion alone  ;  nor  is  there  less  variety  about  the  number  and  distri-
bution of  the  passions.]

The  names  we  give  to  the  various  principles  of  action,  have  so
httle  precision,  even  in  the  best  and  purest  writers  in  every  lan-
guage, that,  on  this  account,  there  is  no  small  difiiculty  in  giving
them  names,  and  arranging  them  properly.

The  words,  appetite ,  passion,  affection,  interest,  reason,  cannot
be  said  to  have  one  definite  signification.  They  are  taken  some-
times in  a  larger,  and  sometime^  in  a  more  limited  sense.  The
same  principle  is  sometimes  called  by  one  of  those  names,  some-
times by  another ;  and  principles  of  a  very  different  nature  are
often  called  by  the  same  name.

To  remedy  this  confusion  of  names,  it  might  perhaps  seem
proper  to  invent  new  ones.  But  there  are  so  few  entitled  to  this
privilege,  that  I  shall  not  lay  claim  to  it ;  but  shall  endeavour  to
class  the  various  principles  of  human  action  as  distinctly  as  I  am
able,  and  to  point  out  their  specific  differences ;  giving  them  such
names  as  may  deviate  from  the  common  use  of  the  words  as
little  as  possible.

There  are  some  principles  of  action  which  require  no  atten-
tion, no  deliberation,  no  will.  These,  for  distinction's  sake,  we
shall  call  mechanicaL  Another  class  we  may  ceiW.  animal,  as  they
seem  common  to  man  with  other  animals.  A  third  class  we  may
call  rational,  being  proper  to  a  man  as  a  rational  creature.


142  ESSAY  III.— PART  I.  CHAP.  II.


CHAPTER  II.


OF  INSTINCT.


I.  Of  instinct  in  man. — The  mechanical  principles  of  action
may,  I  think,  be  reduced  to  two  species,  instincts  and  habits,

[By  instinct,  I  mean  a  natural  blind  impulse  to  certain  actions,
without  having  any  end  in  view,  without  deliberation,  and  very
often  without  any  conception  of  what  we  do.]

i^"  Thus  a  man  breathes  while  he  is  alive,  by  the  alternate
contraction  and  relaxation  of  certain  muscles,  by  which  the
chest,  and  of  consequence  the  lungs,  are  contracted  and  dilated.
There  is  no  reason  to  think  that  an  infant  new-born  knows  that
breathing  is  necessary  to  life  in  its  new  state,  that  he  knows  how
it  must  be  performed,  or  even  that  he  has  any  thought  or  concep-
tion of  that  operation  ;  yet  he  breathes  as  soon  as  he  is  bom,  with
perfect  regularity,  as  if  he  had  been  taught,  and  got  the  habit  by
long  practice.

By  the  same  kind  of  principle,  a  new-bom  child,  when  its
stomach  is  emptied,  and  nature  has  brought  milk  into  the
mother's  breast,  sucks  and  swallows  its  food  as  perfectly  as  if  it
knew  the  principles  of  that  operation,  and  had  got  the  habit  of
working  according  to  them.

Sucking  and  swallowing  are  very  complex  operations.  Ana-
tomists describe  about  thirty  pairs  of  muscles  that  must  be
employed  in  every  draught.  Of  those  muscles,  every  one  must
be  served  by  its  proper  nerve,  and  can  make  no  exertion  but  by
some  influence  communicated  by  the  nerve.  The  exertion  of  all
those  muscles  and  nerves  is  not  simultaneous.  They  must  suc-
ceed each  other  in  a  certain  order,  and  their  order  is  no  less
necessary  than  the  exertion  itself.

This  regular  train  of  operations  is  carried  on  according  to  the
nicest  rules  of  art,  by  the  infant,  who  has  neither  art,  nor  sci-
ence, nor  experience,  nor  habit.

That  the  infant  feels  the  uneasy  sensation  of  hunger,  I  admit ;
and  that  it  sucks  no  longer  than  till  this  sensation  be  removed.
But  who  informed  it  that  this  uneasy  sensation  might  be  re-
moved, or  by  what  means  ?  That  it  knows  nothing  of  this  is
evident ;  for  it  will  as  readily  suck  a  finger,  or  a  bit  of  stick,  as
the  nipple.

By  a  like  principle  it  is,  that  infants  cry  when  they  are  pained
or  hurt ;  that  they  are  afraid  when  left  alone,  especially  in  the
dark  ;  that  they  start  when  in  danger  of  falling  ;  that  they  are
terrified  by  an  angry  countenance,  or  an  angry  tone  of  voice  ;  and
are  soothed  and  comforted  by  a  placid  countenance,  and  by  soft
and  gentle  tones  of  voice.


OP  INSTINCT.  143

II.  Of  instinct  in  inferior  animals. — [In  the  animals  we  are
best  acquainted  with,  and  which  we  look  upon  as  the  more  per-
fect of  the  brute-creation,  we  see  much  the  same  instincts  as  in
the  human  kind,  or  very  similar  ones,  suited  to  the  particular
state  and  manner  of  life  of  the  animal.]

Besides  these,  there  are  in  brute-animals  instincts  peculiar  to
each  tribe,  by  which  they  are  fitted  for  defence,  for  ofience,  or
for  providing  for  themselves,  and  for  their  offspring.

It  is  not  more  certain,  that  nature  hath  furnished  various  ani-
mals with  various  weapons  of  offence  and  defence,  than  that  the
same  nature  hath  taught  them  how  to  use  them ; — the  bull  and
the  ram  to  butt,  the  horse  to  kick,  the  dog  to  bite,  the  lion  to
use  his  paws,  the  boar  his  tusks,  the  serpent  his  fangs,  and  the
bee  and  wasp  their  sting.

The  manufactures  of  animals,  if  we  may  call  them  by  that
name,  present  us  with  a  wonderful  variety  of  instincts,  belong-
ing to  particular  species,  whether  of  the  social  or  of  the  solitary
kind ; — the  nests  of  birds,  so  similar  in  their  situation  and  archi-
tecture in  the  same  kind,  so  various  in  different  kinds  ;  the
webs  of  spiders,  and  of  other  spinning  animals ;  the  ball  of  the
silk-worm  ;  the  nests  of  ants  and  other  mining  animals ;  the
combs  of  wasps,  hornets,  and  bees;  the  dams  and  houses  of
beavers.

The  instinct  of  animals  is  one  of  the  most  delightful  and
instructive  parts  of  a  most  pleasant  study,  that  of  natural  his-
tory, and  deserves  to  be  more  cultivated  than  it  has  yet  been.

Every  manufacturing  art  among  men  was  invented  by  some
man,  improved  by  others,  and  brought  to  perfection  by  time  and
experience.  Men  learn  to  work  in  it  by  long  practice,  which
produces  a  habit.  The  arts  of  men  vary  in  every  age,  and  in
every  nation,  and  are  found  only  in  those  who  have  been  taught
them.

The  manufactures  of  animals  differ  from  those  of  men  in  many
striking  particulars.

No  animal  of  the  species  can  claim  the  invention.  No  animal
ever  introduced  any  new  improvement,  or  any  variation  from
the  former  practice.  Every  one  of  the  species  has  equal  skill
from  the  beginning,  without  teaching,  without  experience  or
habit.  Every  one  has  its  art  by  a  kind  of  inspiration.  I  do  not
mean  that  it  is  inspired  with  the  principles  or  rules  of  the  art,
but  with  the  ability  and  inclination  of  working  in  it  to  perfection,
without  any  knowledge  of  its  principles,  rules,  or  end.

The  more  sagacious  animals  may  be  taught  to  do  many  things
which  they  do  not  by  instinct.  What  they  are  taught  to  do,
they  do  with  more  or  less  skill,  according  to  their  sagacity  and
their  training.  But,  in  their  own  arts,  they  need  no  teaching
nor  training,  nor  is  the  art  ever  improved  or  lost. Bees  gather


J^  ESSAY  III.—PART  I.  CHAP.  II.

their  honey  and  their  wax,  they  fabricate  their  combs  and  rear
their  young,  at  this  day,  neither  better  nor  worse  than  they  did
when  Virgil  so  Sweetly  sung  their  works.

The  work  of  every  animal  is  indeed  like  the  works  of  nature,
perfect  in  its  kind,  and  can  bear  the  most  critical  examination  of
the  mechanic  or  the  mathematician.  One  example  from  the  ani-
mal last  mentioned  may  serve  to  illustrate  this.

Bees,  it  is  well  known,  construct  their  combs  with  small  cells
on  both  sides,  fit  both  for  holding  their  store  of  honey,  and  for
rearing  their  young.  There  are  only 'three  possible  figures  of
the  cells,  which  can  make  them  all  equal  and  similar,  without
any  useless  interstices.  These  are  the  equilateral  triangle,  the
square,  and  the  regular  hexagon.

It  is  well  known  to  mathematicians,'  that  there  is  not  a  fourth
way  possible,  in  which  a  plane  may  be  cut  into  little  spaces  that
shall  be  equal,  similar,  and  regular,  without  leaving  any  interstices.
Of  the  three,  the  hexagon  is  the  most  proper,  both  for  conveni-
ency  and  strength.  Bees,  as  if  they  knew  this,  make  their  cells
regular  hexagons.

As  the  combs  have  cells  on  both  sides,  the  cells  may  either  be
exactly  opposite,  having  partition  against  partition,  or  the  bot-
tom of  a  cell  may  rest  upon  the  partitions  between  the  cells  on
the  other  side,  which  will  serve  as  a  buttress  to  strengthen  it.
The  last  way  is  best  for  strength ;  accordingly,  the  bottom  of
each  cell  rests  against  the  point  where  three  partitions  meet  on
the  other  side,  which  gives  it  all  the  strength  possible.

The  bottom  of  a  cell  may  either  be  one  plane  perpendicular
to  the  side-partitions,  or  it  may  be  composed  of  several  planes,
meeting  in  a  solid  angle  in  the  middle  point.  It  is  only  in  one
of  these  two  ways,  that  all  the  cells  can  be  similar  without  losing
room.  And,  for  the  same  intention,  the  planes  of  which  the
bottom  is  composed,  if  there  be  more  than  one,  must  be  three  in
number,  and  neither  more  nor  fewer.

It  has  been  demonstrated,  that,  by  making  the  bottoms  of  the
cells  to  consist  of  three  planes  meeting  in  a  point,  there  is  a
saving  of  material  and  labour  no  way  inconsiderable.  The  bees,
as  if  acquainted  with  these  principles  of  solid  geometry,  foUow
them  most  accurately ;  the  bottom  of  each  cell  being  composed
of  three  planes  which  make  obtuse  angles  v^ith  the  side-par-
titions, and  v^ith  one  another,  and  meet  in  a  point  in  the  middle
of  the  bottom ;  the  three  angles  of  this  bottom  being  supported
by  three  partitions  on  the  other  side  of  the  comb,  and  the  point
of  it  by  the  common  intersection  of  those  three  partitions.

One  instance  more  of  the  mathematical  skill  displayed  in  the
structure  of  a  honey-comb  deserves  to  be  mentioned.

It  is  a  curious  mathematical  problem,  at  what  precise  angle
the  three  planes  which  compose  the  bottom  of  a  cell  ought  to


OF  INSTINCT.  14,5

meet,  in  order  to  make  the  greatest  possible  saving,  or  the  least
expense  of  material  and  labour.

This  is  one  of  those  problems,  belonging  to  the  higher  parts
of  mathematics,  which  are  called  problems  of  maxima  and  minima.
It  has  been  resolved  by  some  mathematicians,  particularly  by
the  ingenious  Mr.  Maclarurin,  by  a  fluxionary  calculation,  which
is  to  be  found  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Lon-
don. He  has  determined  precisely  the  angle  required  ;  and  he
found,  by  the  most  exact  mensuration  the  subject  could  admit,
that  it  is  the  very  angle  in  which  the  three  planes  in  the  bottom
of  the  cell  of  a  honeycomb  do  actually  meet.

Shall  we  ask  here,  Who  taught  the  bee  the  properties  of  solids,
and  to  resolve  problems  of  maxima  and  minima  ?  If  a  honey-
comb were  a  work  of  human  art,  every  man  of  common  sense
would  conclude,  without  hesitation,  that  he  who  invented  the
construction  must  have  imderstood  the  principles  on  which  it  is
constructed.

We  need  not  say,  that  bees  know  none  of  these  things,  i^"  They
work  most  geometrically,  without  any  knowledge  of  geometry ;
somewhat  like  a  child,  who,  by  turning  the  hanfie  of  an  organ,
makes  good  music,  without  any  knowledge  of  music.

The  art  is  not  in  the  child,  but  in  him  who  made  the  organ.
In  like  manner,  when  a  bee  makes  its  combs  so  geometrically,
the  geometry  is  not  in  the  bee,  but  in  that  great  Geometrician
who  made  the  bee,  and  made  all  things  in  number,  weight,  and
measure.

III.  Some  human  instincts  transitory,  others  permanent, — To
return  to  instincts  in  man.  Those  are  most  remarkable  which
appear  in  infancy,  when  we  are  ignorant  of  every  thing  necessary
to  our  preservation,  and  therefore  must  perish,  if  we  had  not  an
invisible  Guide,  who  leads  us  blindfold  in  the  way  we  should
take,  if  we  had  eyes  to  see  it.

Besides  the  instincts  which  appear  only  in  infancy,  and  are
intended  to  supply  the  want  of  understanding  in  that  early
period,  there  are  many  which  continue  through  life,  and  which
supply  the  defects  of  our  intellectual  powers  in  every  period.
Of  these  we  may  observe  three  classes.

First,  There  are  many  things  necessary  to  be  done  for  our
preservation,  which,  even  when  we  will  to  do,  we  know  not  the
means  by  which  they  must  be  done,

A  man  knows  that  he  must  swallow  his  food  before  it  can
nourish  him.  But  this  action  requires  the  co-operation  of  many
nerves  and  muscles,  of  which  he  knows  nothing ;  and  if  it  were
to  be  directed  solely  by  his  understanding  and  will,  he  would
starve  before  he  learned  how  to  perform  it.

Here  instinct  comes  in  to  his  aid.  He  needs  do  no  more  than
will  to  swallow. All  the  requisite  motions  of  nerves  and  muscles

L


146  ESSAY  III.  CHAP.  II.

immediately  take  place  in  their  proper  order,  without  his  know-
ing or  willing  any  thing  about  them.

If  we  ask  here,  Whose  will  do  these  nerves  and  muscles  obey  ?
Not  his,  surely,  to  whom  they  belong.  He  knows  neither  their
names,  nor  nature,  nor  office  ;  he  never  thought  of  them.  They
are  moved  by  some  impulse,  of  which  the  cause  is  imknown,
without  any  thought,  will,  or  intention  on  his  part ;  that  is,  they
are  moved  instinctively.

This  is  the  case,  in  some  degree,  in  every  voluntaj^  motion
of  our  body.  Thus,  I  will  to  stretch  out  my  arm.  The  effect
immediately  follows.  But  we  know  that  the  arm  is  stretched
out  by  the  contraction  of  certain  muscles ;  and  that  the  muscles
are  contracted  by  the  influence  of  the  nerves.  I  know  nothing,
I  think  nothing,  either  of  nerves  or  muscles,  when  I  stretch  out
my  arm ;  yet  this  nervous  influence,  and  this  contraction  of  the
muscles,  uncalled  by  me,  immediately  produce  the  effect  which  I
willed.  This  is  as  if  a  weight  were  to  be  raised,  which  can  be
raised  only  by  a  complication  of  levers,  pullies,  and  other  me-
chanical powers,  that  are  behind  the  curtain,  and  altogether
unknown  to  me.  I  will  to  raise  the  weight ;  and  no  sooner  is
this  volition  exerted,  than  the  machinery  behind  the  curtain
falls  to  work,  and  raises  the  weight.

If  such  a  case  should  happen,  we  would  conclude  that  there  was
some  person  behind  the  curtain,  who  knew  my  will,  and  put  the
machine  in  motion  to  execute  it.

The  case  of  my  willing  to  stretch  out  my  arm,  or  to  swallow
my  food,  has  evidently  a  great  similarity  to  this.  But  who  it  is
that  stands  behind  the  curtain,  and  sets  the  internal  machinery
agoing,  is  hid  from  us:  so  strangely  and  wonderfully  are  we
made.  This,  however,  is  evident,  that  those  internal  motions
are  not  willed  nor  intended  by  us,  and  therefore  are  instinctive.

IV.  A  second  case  in  which  we  have  need  of  instinct,  even
in  advanced  life,  is,  when  the  action  must  be  so  frequently  re-
peated, that  to  intend  and  will  it  every  time  it  is  done,  would
occupy  too  much  of  our  thought^  and  leave  no  room  for  other
necessary  employments  of  the  mind.

We  must  breathe  often  every  minute,  whether  awake  or  asleep.
We  must  often  close  the  eyelids,  in  order  to  preserve  the  lustre
of  the  eye.  [If  these  things  required  particular  attention  and
volition  every  time  they  are  done,  they  would  occupy  all  om*
thought.  Nature,  there&re,  gives  an  impulse  to  do  them  as  often
as  is  necessary,  without  any  thought  at  all.  They  consume  no
time,  they  give  not  the  least  interruption  to  any  exercise  of  the
mind ;  because  they  are  done  by  instinct.]

V.  A  third  case,  in  which  we  need  the  aid  of  instinct,  is,
when  the  action  must  be  done  so  suddenly y  that  there  is  no
time  to  think  and  determine.  8P"  When  a  man  loses  his  balance,


OF  INSTINCT  147

either  on  foot  or  on  horseback,  he  makes  an  instantaneous  effort
to  recover  it  by  instinct.  The  effort  would  be  in  vain,  if  it
waited  the  determination  of  reason  and  will.

When  any  thing  threatens  our  eyes,  we  wink  hard,  by  instinct,
and  can  hardly  avoid  doing  so,  even  when  we  know  that  the
stroke  is  aimed  in  jest,  and  that  we  are  perfectly  safe  from  dan-
ger. I  have  seen  this  tried  upon  a  wager,  which  a  man  was  to
gain  if  he  could  keep  his  eyes  open,  while  another  aimed  a  stroke
at  them  in  jest.  The  difficulty  of  doing  this  shows  that  there
may  be  a  struggle  between  instinct  and  will ;  and  that  it  is  not
easy  to  resist  the  impulse  of  instinct,  even  by  a  strong  resolution
not  to  yield  to  it.

Thus  the  merciful  Author  of  our  nature  hath  adapted  our  in-
stincts to  the  defects  and  to  the  weakness  of  our  understanding.
In  infancy,  we  are  ignorant  of  every  thing ;  yet  many  things  must
be  done  by  us  for  our  preservation :  these  are  done  by  instinct.
When  we  grow  up,  there  are  many  motions  of  our  limbs  and
bodies  necessary,  which  can  be  performed  only  by  a  curious  and
complex  internal  machinery — a  machinery  of  which  the  bulk  of
manJdnd  are  totally  ignorant,  and  which  the  most  skilful  anatomist
knows  but  imperfectly.  All  this  machinery  is  set  agoing  by  in-
stinct. We  need  only  to  will  the  external  motion,  and  all  the
internal  motions  previously  necessary  to  the  effect  take  place  of
themselves,  without  our  will  or  command.

Some  actions  must  be  so  often  repeated,  through  the  whole
of  life,  that,  if  they  required  attention  and  will,  we  should  be
able  to  do  nothing  else :  these  go  on  regularly  by  instinct.

Our  preservation  from  danger  often  requires  such  sudden  ex-
ertions, that  there  is  no  time  to  think  and  to  determine:  ac-
cordingly we  make  such  exertions  by  instinct.

VI.  Fourth  case  in  which  instinct,  probably^  is  requisite. —
Another  thing  in  the  nature  of  man,  which  I  take  to  be  partly,
though  not  wholly,  instinctive,  is  his  proneness  to  imitation.

Aristotle  observed,  long  ago,  that  man  is  an  imitative  animal.
He  is  so  in  more  respects  then  one.  He  is  disposed  to  imitate
what  he  approves.  In  all  arts,  men  learn  more,  and  more
agreeably,  by  example  than  by  rules.  Imitation  by  the  chisel,
by  the  pencil,  by  description  prosaic  and  poetical,  and  by  action
and  gesture,  have  been  favourite  and  elegant  entertainments
of  the  whole  species.  In  all  these  cases,  however,  the  imita-
tion is  intended  and  willed,  and  therefore  cannot  be  said  to  be
instinctive.

But  I  apprehend  that  human  nature  disposes  us  to  the  imitation
of  those  among  whom  we  live,  when  we  neither  desire  nor  will  it.

1^"  Let  an  Englishman  of  middle  age  take  up  his  residence  in
Edinburgh  or  Glasgow ;  although  he  has  not  the  least  intention  to
use  the  Scots'  dialect,  but  a  firrii  re8olutio!\  to  preserve  his  own  pure

.- L  2


148  ESSAY  III.  CHAP.  II.

and  unmixed,  he  will  find  it  very  difficult  to  make  good  his
intention.  He  will,  in  a  course  of  years,  fall,  insensibly  and
without  intention,  into  the  tone  and  accent,  and  even  into  the
words  and  phrases,  of  those  he  converses  with ;  and  nothing  can
preserve  him  from  this  but  a  strong  disgust  to  every  Scotticism,
which  perhaps  may  overcome  the  natural  instinct.

It  is  commonly  thought  that  children  often  learn  to  stammer
by  imitation  ;  yet  I  believe  no  person  ever  desired  or  willed  to
learn  that  quality.

I  apprehend  that  instinctive  imitation  has  no  small  influence
in  forming  the  peculiarities  of  provincial  dialects ;  the  peculiari-
ties of  voice,  gesture,  and  manner,  which  we  see  in  some  fami-
lies ;  the  manners  peculiar  to  different  ranks,  and  different  pro-
fessions ;  and  perhaps  even  in  forming  national  characters,  and
the  human  character  in  general.

The  instances  that  history  furnishes  of  wild  men,  brought  up
from  early  years  without  the  society  of  any  of  their  own  species,
are  so  few,  that  we  cannot  build  conclusions  upon  them  with
great  certainty.  But  all  I  have  heard  of  agreed  in  this,  that
the  wild  man  gave  but  very  slender  indications  of  the  rational
faculties ;  and  with  regard  to  his  mind,  was  hardly  distinguish-
able from  the  more  sagacious  of  the  brutes.

There  is  a  considerable  part  of  the  lowest  rank  in  every
nation,  of  whom  it  cannot  be  said  that  any  pains  have  been
taken  by  themselves,  or  by  others,  to  cultivate  their  understand-
ing, or  to  form  their  manners ;  yet  we  see  an  immense  differ-
ence between  them  and  the  wild  man.

This  difference  is  wholly  the  effect  of  society ;  and  I  think  it
is  in  a  great  measure,  though  not  wholly,  the  effect  of  unde-
signed and  instinctive  imitation.

VII.  Judgment  and  belief  influenced^  to  a  certain  extent,  hy
instinct. — Perhaps,  [not  only  our  actions,  but  even  ova  judgment
and  belief,  are  in  some  cases  guided  by  instinct,  that  is,  by  a  na-
tural and  blind  impulse.]

When  we  consider  man  as  a  rational  creature,  it  may  seem
right  that  he  should  have  no  belief  but  what  is  grounded  upon
evidence,  probable  or  demonstrative ;  and  it  is,  I  think,  com-
monly taken  for  granted,  that  it  is  always  evidence,  real  or
apparent,  that  determines  our  belief.

If  this  be  so,  the  consequence  is,  that  in  no  case  can  there
be  any  belief  till  we  find  evidence,  or  at  least  what,  to  our  judg-
ment, appears  to  be  evidence.  I  suspect  it  is  not  so ;  but  that,
on  the  contrary,  before  we  grow  up  to  the  full  use  of  our
rational  faculties,  we  do  believe,  and  must  believe,  many  things
without  any  evidence  at  all.

The  faculties  which  we  have  in  common  with  brute  animals
are  of  earlier  growth  than  reason. We  are  irrational  animals


OF  INSTINCT.  24,9

for  a  considerable time before we can properly be called
rational.

The  operations  of  reason  spring  up  by  imperceptible  degrees  ;
nor  is  it  possible  for  us  to  trace  accurately  the  order  in  which
they  rise.  The  power  of  reflection,  by  which  only  we  could
trace  the  progress  of  our  growing  faculties,  comes  too  'late  to
answer  that  end.  Some  operations  of  brute  animals  look  so  like
reason,  that  they  are  not  easily  distinguished  from  it.  Whe-
ther brutes  have  any  thing  that  can  properly  be  called  belief,  I
cannot  say ;  but  their  actions  show  something  that  looks  very
like  it.

VII r.  If  there  be  any  instinctive  belief  in  man,  it  is  proba-
bly of  the  same  kind  with  that  which  we  ascribe  to  brutes,  and
may  be  specifically  different  from  that  rational  belief  which  is
grounded  on  evidence ;  but  that  there  is  something  in  man  which
we  call  belief,  which  is  not  grounded  on  evidence,  I  think,  must
be  granted.

We  need  to  be  informed  of  many  things  before  we  are  ca-
pable of  discerning  the  evidence  on  which  they  rest.  Were
our  belief  to  be  withheld  till  we  are  capable,  in  any  degree,
of  weighing  evidence,  we  should  lose  all  the  benefit  of  that
instruction  and  information,  without  which  we  could  never
attain  the  use  of  our  rational  faculties.

Man  would  never  acquire  the  use  of  reason  if  he  were  not
brought  up  in  the  society  of  reasonable  creatures.  The  benefit
he  receives  from  society  is  derived  partly  from  imitation  of  what
he  sees  others  do,  partly  from  the  instruction  and  information
they  communicate  to  him,  without  which  he  could  neither  be
preserved  from  destruction,  nor  acquire  the  use  of  his  rational
powers.

Children  have  a  thousand  things  to  learn,  and  they  learn
many  things  every  day ;  more  than  will  be  easily  believed  by  those
who  have  never  given  attention  to  their  progress.

**  Oportet  discentem  credere"  is  a  common  adage.  Children  have
every  thing  to  learn,  and  in  order  to  learn,  they  must  believe  their
instructors :  they  need  a  greater  stock  of  faith  from  infancy  to
twelve  or  fourteen  than  ever  after.  But  how  shall  they  get  this
stock,  so  necessary  to  them  ?  If  their  faith  depend  upon  evidence,
the  stock  of  evidence,^  real  or  apparent,  must  bear  proportion  to
their  faith.  But  such,  in  reality,  is  their  situation,  that  when  their
faith  must  be  greatest,  the  evidence  is  least.  They  believe  a  thou-
sand things  before  they  ever  spend  a  thought  upon  evidence.
Nature  supplies  the  want  of  evidence,  and  gives  the  man  instinct-
ive kind  of  faith  without  evidence.

\{\)They  believe  implicitly  whatever  they  are  told,  and  receive
with  assurance  the  testimony  of  every  one,  without  ever  thinking
of  a  reason  why  they  should  do  so.]


IgQ  ESSAY  III.  CHAP. II.

A  parent  or  a  master  might  command  them  to  believe,  but  in
vain,  for  belief  is  not  in  our  power ;  but  in  the  first  part  of  life  it  is
governed  by  mere  testimony  in  matters  of  fact,  and  by  mere  autho-
rity in  all  other  matters,  no  less  than  by  evidence  in  riper  years.
It  is  not  the  words  of  the  testifier,  but  his  belief,  that  pro-
duces this  belief  in  a  child ;  for  children  soon  learn  to  distinguish
what  is  said  in  jest,  from  what  is  said  in  good  earnest. Wliat
appears  to  them  to  be  said  in  jest,  produces  no  belief :  they  glory
in  showing  that  they  are  not  to  be  imposed  on. When  the  signs
of  belief  in  the  speaker  are  ambiguous,  it  is  pleasant  to  obser^'e
with  what  sagacity  they  pry  into  his  features,  to  discern  whe-
ther he  really  believes  what  he  says,  or  only  counterfeits  belief.
As  soon  as  this  point  is  determined,  their  belief  is  regulated  by
his. If  he  be  doubtful,  they  are  doubtful ;  if  he  be  assured,
they  are  also  assured.

It  is  well  known  what  a  deep  impression  religious  principles,
zealously  inculcated,  make  upon  the  minds  of  children.  The  ab-
surdities of  ghosts  and  hobgoblins,  early  impressed,  have  been
known  to  stick  so  fast,  even  in  enlightened  minds,  as  to  baflle
all  rational  conviction.

When  we  grow  up  to  the  use  of  reason,  testimony  attended
with  certain  circumstances,  or  even  authority,  may  afford  a  ra-
tional ground  of  belief ;  but  with  children,  without  any  regard
to  circumstances,  either  of  them  operates  like  demonstration.
And  as  they  seek  no  reason,  nor  can  give  any  reason,  for  this
regard  to  testimony  and  to  authority,  it  is  the  effect  of  a  natural
impulse,  and  may  be  called  instinct.

[  (2)  Another  instance  of  belief  which  appears  to  be  instinctive,
is  that  which  children  show  even  in  infancy,  that  an  event  which
they  have  observed  in  certain  circumstances,  will  happen  again  in
like  circumstances,']  A  child  of  half  a  year  old,  who  has  once
burned  his  finger  by  putting  it  in  the  candle,  will  not  put  it
there  again.  And  if  you  make  a  show  of  putting  it  in  the
candle  by  force,  you  see  the  most  manifest  signs  that  he  believes
he  shall  meet  with  the  same  calamity.

IX.  Mr.  Hume  hath  shown  very  clearly,  that  [this  belief  is
not  the  effect  either  of  reason  or  experience^  He  endeavours  to
account  for  it  by  the  association  of  ideas.  Though  I  am  not
satisfied  with  his  account  of  this  phenomenon,  I  fihall  not  now
examine  it;  because  it  is  suflScient  for  the  present  argument,
that  this  belief  is  not  groimded  on  evidence,  real  or  apparent,
which  I  think  he  clearly  proves.

A  person  who  has  lived  so  long  in  the  world,  as  to  observe
that  nature  is  governed  by  fixed  laws,  may  have  some  rational
ground  to  expect  similar  events  in  similar  circumstances ;  but
this  cannot  be  the  case  of  the  child.  His  belief,  therefore,  is  not
grounded  on  evidence. It  is  the  result  of  his  constitution.


OF  HABIT.  25J

Nor  is  it  the  less  so,  though  it  should  arise  from  the  associa-
tion of  ideas.  For  what  is  called  the  association  of  ideas  is  a  law
of  nature  in  our  constitution ;  which  produces  its  effects  without
any  operation  of  reason  on  our  part,  and  in  a  manner  of  which
we  are  entirely  ignorant.


CHAPTER  III.

OF  HABIT.

I.  Vulgar  definition  ofhabiL — Habit  differs  from  instinct,  not
in  its  nature,  but  in  its  origin ;  the  latter  being  natural,  the
former  acquired.  Both  operate  without  will  or  intention,  with-
out thought,  and  therefore  may  be  called  mechanical  principles.

[Habit  is  commonly  defined,  a  facility  of  doing  a  thing,  ac-
quired by  having  done  it  frequently.!^  This  definition  is  suffi-
cient for  habits  of  art:  but  the  habits  which  may,  with  pro-
priety, be  called  principles  of  action,  must  ^ve  more  than  a
facility,  thev  must  give  an  inclination  or  impulse  to  do  the  action ;
and  that,  m  many  cases,  habits  have  this  force,  cannot  be
doubted.

How  many  awkward  habits,  by  frequenting  improper  com-
pany, are  children  apt  to  learn,  in  their  address,  motion,  looks,
gesture,  and  pronunciation.  They  acquire  such  habits,  com-
monly, from  an  undesigned  and  instinctive  imitation,  before  they
can  judge  of  what  is  proper  and  becoming.

When  they  are  a  little  advanced  in  understanding,  they  may
easily  be  convinced  that  such  a  thing  is  unbecoming,  they  may
resolve  to  forbear  it ;  but  when  the  habit  is  formed,  such  a  ge-
neral resolution  is  not  of  itself  sufficient;  for  the  habit  will
operate  without  intention  ;  and  particular  attention  is  necessary,
on  every  occasion,  to  resist  its  impulse,  until  it  be  undone  by
the  habit  of  opposing  it.

It  is  owing  to  the  force  of  habits,  early  acquired  by  imitation,
that  a  man  who  has  grown  up  to  manhood  in  the  lowest  rank  of
life,  if  fortune  raise  him  to  a  higher  rank,  very  rarely  acquires
the  air  and  manners  of  a  gentleman.

When  to  that  instinctive  imitation,  which  I  spoke  of  before,
we  join  the  force  of  habit,  it  is  easy  to  see,  that  these  mechanical
principles  have  no  small  share  in  forming  the  manners  and  cha-
racter of  most  men.

The  difficulty  of  overcoming  vicious  habits  has,  in  all  ages,
been  a  common  topic  of  theologians  and  moralists ;  and  we  see
too  many  sad  examples  to  permit  us  to  doubt  of  it.

There  are  good  habits,  in  a  moral  sense,  as  well  as  bad ;  and
it  is  certain,  that  the  stated  and  regular  performance  of  what  we


152  ESSAY  III.  CHAP.  III.

approve,  not  only  make*  it  easy,  but  makes  us  uneasy  in  the
omission  of  it.  This  is  the  case,  even  when  the  action  derives
all  its  goodness  from  the  opinion  of  the  performer.  A  good
illiterate  Roman  Catholic  does  not  sleep  sound  if  he  goes  to
bed  without  telling  his  beads,  and  repeating  prayers  which  he
does  not  understand.

Aristotle  makes  wisdom,  prudence,  good  sense,  science,  and
art,  as  well  as  the  moral  virtues  and  vices,  to  be  habits.  If  he
meant  no  more,  by  giving  this  name  to  all  those  intellectual
and  moral  qualities,  than  that  they  are  all  strengthened  and  con-
tirmed  by  repeated  acts,  this  is  imdoubtedly  true.  I  take  the
word  in  a  less  extensive  sense,  when  I  consider  habits  as  princi-
ples of  action.  I  conceive  it  to  be  a  part  of  our  constitution,
•  that  what  we  have  been  accustomed  to  do,  we  acquire,  not  only
a  facility,  but  a  proneness  to  do  on  like  occasions ;  so  that  it
requires  a  particular  will  and  effort  to  forbear  it ;  but  to  do  it,
requires  very  often  no  will  at  all.  We  are  carried  by  habit  as
by  a  stream  in  swimming,  if  we  make  no  resistance.

II.  The  art  of  speaking,  the  strongest  illustration  of  the  force  of
habit, — [JEvery  art  furnishes  examples  both  of  the  power  of  habits
and  of  their  utility ;  no  one  more  than  the  most  common  of  all
arts,  the  art  of  speaking.]

Articulate  language  is  spoken,  not  by  nature,*  but  by  art.  It
is  no  easy  matter  to  children  to  learn  the  simple  sounds  of  lan-
guage ;  I  mean,  to  learn  to  pronounce  the  vowels  and  consonants.
It  would  be  much  more  difficult,  if  they  were  not  led  by  instinct
to  imitate  the  sounds  they  hear ;  for  the  difficulty  is  vastly
greater  of  teaching  the  deaf  to  pronounce  the  letters  and  words,
though  experience  shows  that  it  can  be  done.

What  is  it  that  makes  this  pronunciation  so  easy  at  last  which
was  so  difficult  at  first  ? It  is  habit.

But  from  what  cause  does  it  happen,  that  a  good  speaker  no
sooner  conceives  what  he  would  express,  than  the  letters,  sylla-
bles and  words  arrange  themselves  according  to  innumerable
rules  of  speech,  while  he  never  thinks  of  these  rules  ?  He  means
to  express  certain  sentiments.  In  order  to  do  this  properly,
a  selection  must  be  made  of  the  materials,  out  of  many  thou-
sands. He  makes  this  selection  without  any  expense  of  time
or  thought.  The  materials  selected  must  be  arranged  in  a
particular  order,  according  to  innumerable  rules  of  grammar,
logic,  and  rhetoric,  and  accompanied  with  a  particular  tone  and
emphasis.  He  does  all  this,  as  it  were,  by  inspiration,  without
thinking  of  any  of  these  rules,  and  without  breaking  one  of  them.

This  art,  if  it  were  not  more  common,  would  appear  more  won-
derful than  that  a  man  should  dance  blindfold  amidst  a  thou-
sand burning  ploughshares,  without  being  burnt;  yet  all  this
may  be  done  by  habit.


OP  HABIT.  153

It  appears  evident,  that  as,  without  instinct,  the  infant  could
not  Kve  to  become  a  man,  so,  without  habit,  man  would  remain
an  infant  through  life,  and  would  be  as  helpless,  as  unhandy,  as
speechless,  and  as  much  a  child  in  understanding  at  threescore  as
at  three.

[I  see  no  reason  to  think,  that  we  shall  ever  be  able  to  assign
the  physical  cause,  either  of  instinct  or  of  the  power  of  habitJ]

Both  seem  to  be  parts  of  our  original  constitution.  Their  end
and  use  is  evident ;  but  we  can  assign  no  cause  of  them,  but  the
will  of  Him  who  made  us.

III.  [With  regard  to  instinct,  which  is  a  natural  propensity,
this  will  perhaps  be  easily  granted ;  but  it  is  no  less  true  with
regard  to  that  power  and  inclination  which  we  acquire  by  habit.]

No  man  can  show  a  reason  why  our  doing  a  thing  frequently
should  produce  either  facility  or  inclination  to  do  it.

The  fact  is  so  notorious,  and  so  constantly  in  our  eye,  that  we
are  apt  to  think  no  reason  should  be  sought  for  it,  any  more  than
why  the  sun  shines.  But  there  must  be  a  cause  of  the  sun's
shining,  and  there  must  be  a  cause  of  the  power  of  habit.

We  see  nothing  analogous  to  it  in  inanimate  matter,  or  in
things  made  by  human  art.  A  clock  or  a  watch,  a  wagon  or  a
plough,  by  the  custom  of  going,  does  not  learn  to  go  better,  or
require  less  moving  force.  The  earth  does  not  increase  in  fer-
tility by  the  custom  of  bearing  crops.

fgg^  It  is  said,  that  trees  and  other  vegetables,  by  growing  long
in  an  unkindly  soil  or  climate,  sometimes  acquire  qualities  by
which  they  can  bear  its  inclemency  with  less  hurt.  This,  in  the
vegetable  kingdom,  has  some  resemblance  to  the  power  of  habit ;
but,  in  inanimate  matter,  I  know  nothing  that  resembles  it.

fg^  A  stone  loses  nothing  of  its  weight  by  being  long  sup-
ported, or  made  to  move  upward.  A  body,  by  being  tossed  about
ever  so  long,  or  ever  so  violently,  loses  nothing  of  its  inertia,
nor  acquires  the  least  disposition  to  change  its  state.


154  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  W


P  A  E  T II.

OF  ANIMAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  ACTION.

CHAPTER  L

OP  APPETITES.

I.  Definition  of  animal  principles  of  action, — Having  dis-
coursed of  the  mechanical  principles  of  action,  I  proceed  to
consider  those  I  called  animal.

They  are  [such  as  operate  upon  the  will  and  intention,  but  do
not  suppose  any  exercise  of  judgment  or  reason  ;  and  are  most  of
them  to  be  found  in  some  brute  animals,  as  well  as  in  man.]

In  this  class,  the  first  kind  I  shall  call  appetites,  taking  that
word  in  a  stricter  sense  than  it  is  sometimes  taken,  even  by  good
writers.

The  word  appetite  is  sometimes  limited,  so  as  to  signify  only
the  desire  of  food  when  we  hunger ;  sometimes  it  is  extended
so  as  to  signify  any  strong  desire,  whatever  be  its  object.  With-
out pretending  to  censure  any  use  of  the  word  which  custom  hath
authorized,  I  beg  leave  to  limit  it  to  a  particular  class  of  desires,
which  are  distinguished  from  all  others  by  the  following  marks.

First.  Every  appetite  is  accompanied  with  an  uneasy  sensation
proper  to  it,  which  is  strong  or  weak,  in  proportion  to  the  desire
we  have  of  the  object.  Secondly.  Appetites  are  not  constant,
but  periodical,  being  sated  by  their  objects  for  a  time,  and  re-
turning after  certain  periods.  Such  is  the  nature  of  those  princi-
ples of  action,  to  which  I  beg  leave,  in  this  essay,  to  appropriate
the  name  of  appetites.  Those  that  are  chiefly  observable  in  man,
as  well  as  in  most  other  animals,  are  hunger,  thirst,  and  lust.

[If  we  attend  to  the  appetite  of  hunger,  we  shall  find  in  it  two
ingredients,  an  uneasy  sensation,  and  a  desire  to  eat.]  The  de-
sire keeps  pace  with  the  sensation,  and  ceases  when  it  ceases.
When  a  man  is  sated  with  eating,  both  the  uneasy  sensation  and
the  desire  to  eat  cease  for  a  time,  and  return  after  a  certain
interval. So  it  is  with  other  appetites.

In  infants,  for  some  time  after  they  come  into  the  world,  the
uneasy  sensation  of  hunger  is  probably  the  whole.  We  cannot
suppose  in  them,  before  experience,  any  conception  of  eating,
nor,  consequently,  any  desire  of  it.  They  are  led  by  mere  in-
stinct to  suck  when  they  feel  the  sensation  of  hunger.  But
when  experience  has  connected,  in  their  imagination,  the  uneasy
sensation  with  the  means  of  removing  it,  the  desire  of  the  last
comes  to  be  so  associated  with  the  first,  that  they  remain  through
life  inseparable ;  and  we  give  the  name  of  hunger  to  the  principle
that  is  made  up  of  both.


OF  APPETITES.  155

That  the  appetite  of  hunger  includes  the  two  ingredients  I
have  mentioned,  will  not,  I  apprehend,  be  questioned.  I  take
notice  of  it  the  rather  because  we  may,  if  1  mistake  not,  find  a
similar  composition  in  other  principles  of  action.  They  are  made
up  of  different  ingredients,  and  may  be  analyzed  into  the  parts
that  enter  into  their  composition.

If  one  philosopher  should  maintain,  that  hunger  is  an  uneasy

sensation,  another,  that  it  is  a  desire  to  eat,  they  seem  to  differ

widely;  for  a  desire  and  a  sensation  are  very  different  things,

and  have  no  similitude. But  they  are  both  in  the  right;  for

hunger  includes  both  an  uneasy  sensation  and  a  desire  to  eat.

Although  there  has  been  no  such  dispute  among  philosophers
as  we  have  supposed  with  regard  to  hunger,  yet  there  have  been
similar  disputes  with  regard  to  other  principles  of  action  ;  and  it
deserves  to  be  considered  whether  they  may  not  be  terminated  in
a  similar  manner.

II.  \^The  ends  for  which  our  natural  appetites  are  given  are
too  evident  to  escape  the  observation  of  any  man  of  the  least
reflection.  Two  of  those  I  named  are  intended  for  the  pre-
servation of  the  individual,  and  the  third  for  the  continuance  of
the  species.^

The  reason  of  mankind  would  be  altogether  insufficient  for
these  ends,  without  the  direction  and  call  of  appetite.

Though  a  man  knew  that  his  life  must  be  supported  by  eating,
reason  could  not  direct  him  when  to  eat,  or  what ;  how  much,  or
how  often.  In  all  these  things,  appetite  is  a  much  better  guide
than  our  reason.  Were  reason  only  to  direct  us  in  this  matter,
its  calm  voice  would  often  be  drowned  in  th^  hurry  of  business,
or  the  charms  of  amusement.  But  the  voice  of  appetite  rises
gradually,  and,  at  last,  becomes  loud  enough  to  call  off  our  atten-
tion from  any  other  employment.

Every  man  must  be  convinced,  that,  without  our  appetites,
even  supposing  mankind  inspired  with  all  the  knowledge  requi-
site for  answering  their  ends,  the  race  of  men  must  have  perished
long  ago ;  but,  by  their  means,  the  race  is  continued  from  one
generation  to  another,  whether  men  be  savage  or  civilized,  know-
ing or  ignorant,  virtuous  or  vicious.

By  the  same  means,  every  tribe  of  brute-animals,  from  the
v^rhale  that  ranges  the  ocean  to  the  least  microscopic  insect,  has
been  continued  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  this  day ;  nor
has  good  evidence  been  found,  that  any  one  species  which  God
made  has  perished.*

Nature  has  given  to  every  animal,  not  only  an  appetite  for  its
food,  but  taste  and  smell,  by  which  it  distinguishes  the  food
proper  for  it.

It  is  pleasant  to  see  a  caterpillar,  which  nature  intended  to

♦  This  assertion  appears  to  be  contradicted  by  recent  geological  discoveries.


156  ESSAY  III— PART  II.  CHAP.  I.

Uve  upon  the  leaf  of  one  species  of  plant,  travel  over  a  hundred
leaves  of  other  kinds  without  tasting  one,  till  it  comes  to  that
which  is  its  natural  food,  which  it  immediately  falls  on,  and  de-
vours greedily.

Most  caterpillars  feed  only  upon  the  leaf  of  one  species  of
plant,  and  nature  suits  the  season  of  their  production  to  the  food
that  is  intended  to  nourish  them.  Many  insects  and  animals  have
a  greater  variety  of  food ;  but,  of  all  animals,  man  has  the  greatest
variety,  being  able  to  subsist  upon  almost  every  kind  of  vegetable
or  animal  food,  from  the  bark  of  trees  to  the  oil  of  whales.

I  believe  our  natural  appetites  may  be  made  more  violent  by
excessive  indulgence,  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  they  may  be
weakened  by  starving.  The  first  is  often  the  effect  of  a  perni-
cious luxury,  the  last  may  sometimes  be  the  effect  of  want,  some-
times of  superstition.  I  apprehend  that  nature  has  given  to  our
appetites  that  degree  of  strength  which  is  most  proper  for  us ;
and  that  whatever  alters  their  natural  tone,  either  in  excess  or
in  defect,  does  not  mend  the  work  of  nature,  but  may  mar  and
pervert  it.

A  man  may  eat  from  appetite  only.  So  the  brutes  commonly
do.  He  may  eat  to  please  his  taste,  when  he  has  no  call  of  appe-
tite. I  believe  a  brute  may  do  this  also.  He  may  eat  for  the
sake  of  health,  when  neither  appetite  nor  taste  invites.  This,  as
far  as  I  am  able  to  judge,  brutes  never  do.

From  so  many  different  principles,  and  from  many  more,  the
same  action  may  be  done ;  and  this  may  be  said  of  most  human
actions.  From  this,  it  appears,  that  very  different  and  contrary
theories  may  serve  to  account  for  the  actions  of  men.  The  causes
assigned  may  be  sufficient  to  produce  the  effect,  and  yet  not  be
the  true  causes.

To  act  merely  from  appetite  is  neither  good  nor  ill  in  a  moral
view.  It  is  neither  an  object  of  praise  nor  of  blame.  No  man
claims  any  praise  because  he  eats  when  he  is  hungry,  or  rests
when  he  is  weary.  On  the  other  hand,  he  is  no  object  of  blame,
if  he  obeys  the  call  of  appetite  when  there  is  no  reason  to  hinder
him. In  this,  he  acts  agreeably  to  his  nature.

III.  From  this  we  may  observe,  that  [the  definition  of  virtu-
ous actions,  given  by  the  ancient  Stoics,  and  adopted  by  some
modem  authors,  is  imperfect.  They  defined  virtuous  actions  to
be  such  as  are  according  to  natureJ]  What  is  done  according  to
the  animal  part  of  our  nature,  which  is  common  to  us  vdth  the
brute-animals,  is  in  itself  neither  virtuous  nor  vicious,  but  per-
fectly indifferent.  Then  only  it  becomes  vicious,  when  it  is  done
in  opposition  to  some  principle  of  superior  importance  and  autho-
rity. And  it  may  be  virtuous,  if  done  for  some  important  or
worthy  end.

Appetites,  considered  in  themselves,  are  neither  social  princi-


OF  APPETITES.  257

pies  of  action^  nor  selfish.  They  cannot  be  called  social,  because
they  imply  no  concern  for  the  good  of  others.  Nor  can  they
justly  be  called  selfish,  though  they  be  commonly  referred  to  that
class.  An  appetite  draws  us  to  a  certain  object,  without  regard
to  its  being  good  for  us,  or  ill.  There  is  no  self-love  implied  in
it  any  more  than  benevolence.  We  see,  that,  in  many  cases,
appetite  may  lead  a  man  to  what  he  knows  will  be  to  his  hurt.
To  call  this  acting  from  self-love,  is  to  pervert  the  meaning  of
words.  It  is  evident,  that,  in  every  case  of  this  kind,  self-love  is
sacrificed  to  appetite.

IV.  There  are  some  principles  of  the  human  frame  very  like
to  our  appetites,  though  they  do  not  commonly  get  that  name.

Men  are  made  for  labour,  either  of  body  or  mind.  Yet  exces-
sive labour  hurts  the  powers  of  both.  To  prevent  this  hurt,
nature  hath  given  to  men,  and  other  animals,  an  uneasy  sensa-
tion, which  always  attends  excessive  labour,  and  which  we  call
fatigue,  weariness,  lassitude.  This  uneasy  sensation  is  conjoined
with  the  desire  of  rest,  or  intermission  of  our  labour.  And  thus
nature  calls  us  to  rest  when  we  are  weary,  in  the  same  manner
as  to  eat  when  we  are  hungry.

In  both  cases,  there  is  a  desire  of  a  certain  object,  and  an  un-
easy sensation  accompanying  that  desire.  In  both  cases,  the
desire  is  satiated  by  its  object,  and  returns  after  certain  intervals.
In  this  only  they  difier,  that  in  the  appetites  first  mentioned,  the
uneasy  sensation  arises  at  intervals  without  action,  and  leads  to
a  certain  action :  in  weariness,  the  uneasy  sensation  arises  from
action  too  long  continued,  and  leads  to  rest.

But  nature  intended  that  we  should  be  active,  and  we  need
some  principle  to  incite  us  to  action,  when  we  happen  not  to  be
invited  by  any  appetite  or  passion.

For  this  end,  when  strength  and  spirits  are  recruited  by  rest,
nature  has  made  total  inaction  as  uneasy  as  excessive  labour.

We  may  call  this  the  principle  of  activity.  It  is  most  conspi-
cuous in  children,  who  cannot  be  supposed  to  know  how  useful
and  necessary  it  is  for  their  improvement  to  be  constantly  em-
ployed. Their  constant  activity  therefore  appears  not  to  proceed
from  their  having  some  end  constantly  in  view,  but  rather  from
this,  that  they  desire  to  be  always  doing  something,  and  feel  un-
easiness in  total  inaction.

y .  The  principle  of  activity  belongs  to  every  period  of  life. —
Nor  is  this  principle  confined  to  childhood ;  it  has  great  effects
in  advanced  life.

When  a  man  has  neither  hope,  nor  fear,  nor  desire,  nor  pro-
ject, nor  employment,  of  body  or  mind,  one  might  be  apt  to
think  him  the  happiest  mortal  upon  earth,  having  nothing  to
do  but  to  enjoy  himself:  but  we  find  him,  in  fact,  the  most
unhappy.

He  is  more  weary  of  inaction  than  ever  he  "was  of  eyjc^%^v^^


158  ESSAY  III.—PART  II.  CHAP. I.

labour.  He  is  weary  of  tlie  world,  and  of  his  own  existence ;
and  is  more  miserable  than  the  sailor  wrestling  with  a  storm,  or
the  soldier  mounting  a  breach.

This  dismal  state  is  commonly  the  lot  of  the  man  who  has
neither  exercise  of  body  nor  employment  of  mind,  i^gr  For  the
mind,  like  water,  corrupts  and  putrifies  by  stagnation,  but  by
running  purifies  and  refines.

Besides  the  appetites  which  nature  hath  given  us  for  useful
and  necessary  purposes,  we  may  create  appetites  which  nature
never  gave.

The  frequent  use  of  things  which  stimulate  the  nervous  sys-
tem produces  a  languor  when  their  eflfect  is  gone  off,  and  a
desire  to  repeat  them.  By  this  means  a  desire  of  a  certain  object
is  created,  accompanied  by  an  uneasy  sensation.  Both  are  re-
moved for  a  time  by  the  object  desired ;  but  they  return  after
a  certain  interval.  This  differs  from  natural  appetite,  only  in
being  acquired  by  custom.  Such  are  the  appetites  wluch  some
men  acquire  for  the  use  of  tobacco,  for  opiates,  and  for  intoxi-
cating liquors.

These  are  commonly  called  habits,  and  justly.  But  there  are
different  kinds  of  habits,  even  of  the  active  sort,  which  ought  to
be  distinguished.  Some  habits  produce  only  a  facility  of  doing
a  thing,  without  any  inclination  to  do  it.  All  arts  are  habits  of
this  kind ;  but  they  cannot  be  called  principles  of  action.  Other
habits  produce  a  proneness  to  do  an  action,  without  thought
or  intention.  These  we  considered  before  as  mechanical  principles
of  action.  There  are  other  habits  which  produce  a  desire  of  a
certain  object,  and  an  uneasy  sensation  till  it  is  obtained.  It  is
this  last  kind  only  that  I  call  acquired  appetites.

VI.  [As  it  is  best  to  preserve  our  natural  appetites  in  that
tone  and  degree  of  strength  which  nature  gives  them,  so  we
ought  to  beware  of  acquiring  appetites  which  nature  never  gave.
They  are  always  useless,  and  very  often  hurtful.]

Although,  as  was  before  observed,  there  be  neither  virtue  nor
vice  in  acting  from  appetite,  there  may  be  much  of  either  in  the
management  of  our  appetites.

When  appetite  is  opposed  by  some  principle  drawing  a  con-
trary way,  there  must  be  a  determination  of  the  will,  which  shall
prevail,  and  this  determination  may  be,  in  a  moral  sense,  right
or  wrong.

Appetite,  even  in  a  brute-animal,  may  be  restrained  by  a
stronger  principle  opposed  to  it.  A  dog,  when  he  is  hungry,  and
has  meat  set  before  him,  may  be  kept  from  touching  it  by  the
fear  of  immediate  punishment.  In  this  case,  his  fear  operates
more  strongly  than  his  desire.

Do  we  attribute  any  virtue  to  the  dog  on  this  account?  I
think  not.  Nor  should  we  ascribe  any  virtue  to  a  man  in  a  like
case. The  animal  is  carried  by  the  strongest  moving  force. This


OF  APPETITES.


159

requires  no  exertion,  no  self-government,  but  passively  to  yield

to  the  strongest  impulse.  This,  I  think,  brutes  always  do  ;  there-
fore we  attribute  to  them  neither  virtue  nor  vice.  We  consider
them  as  being  neither  objects  of  moral  approbation  nor  dis-
approbation.

VII.  The  government  of  appetites  gives  a  superiority  to  man
Qfoer  hrute  animals, —Qui  it  may  happen  that,  when  appetite
draws  one  way,  it  may  be  opposed,  not  by  any  appetite  or  pas-
sion, but  by  some  cool  principle  of  action,  which  has  authority
without  any  impulsive  force.  For  example,  by  some  interest,
which  is  too  distant  to  raise  any  passion  or  emotion,  or  by  some
consideration  of  decency  or  of  duty.

In  cases  of  this  kind,  the  man  is  convinced  that  he  ought  not
to  yield  to  appetite ;  yet  there  is  not  an  equal  or  a  greater  im-
pulse to  oppose  it.  There  axe  circumstances,  indeed,  that  con-
vince the  judgment ;  but  these  are  not  sufficient  to  determine
the  vrill  against  a  strong  appetite,  without  self-government.

[I  apprehend  that  brute  animals  have  no  power  of  self-go-
vernment* From  their  constitution,  they  must  be  led  by  the
appetite  or  passion  which  is  strongest  for  the  time.

On  this  accoimt,  they  have,  in  all  ages,  and  among  all  nations,
been  thought  incapable  of  being  governed  by  lawsy  though  some
of  them  may  be  subjects  of  discipline.^

The  same  would  be  the  condition  of  man,  if  he  had  no  power
to  restrain  appetite  but  by  a  stronger  contrary  appetite  or  pas-
sion. It  would  be  to  no  purpose  to  prescribe  laws  to  him  for
the  government  of  his  actions.  You  might  as  well  forbid  the
wind  to  blow,  as  forbid  him  to  follow  whatever  happens  to  give
the  strongest  present  impulse.

Every  one  knows,  that  when  appetite  draws  one  way,  duty,
decency,  or  even  interest,  may  draw  the  contrary  way  ;  and  that
appetite  may  give  a  stronger  impulse  than  any  one  of  these,  or
even  all  of  them  conjoined.  Yet  it  is  certain  that  in  every  case
of  this  kind,  appetite  ought  to  yield  to  any  of  these  principles
when  it  stands  opposed  to  them.  It  is  in  such  cases  that  self-
government  is  necessary.

The  man  who  suffers  himself  to  be  led  by  appetite  to  do  what
he  knows  he  ought  not  to  do,  has  an  immediate  and  natural
conviction  that  he  did  wrong,  and  might  have  done  otherwise  ;
and  therefore  he  condemns  himself,  and  confesses  that  he  yielded
to  an  appetite  which  ought  to  have  been  under  his  command.

[Thus  it  appears,  that  though  our  natural  appetites  have  in
themselves  neither  virtue  nor  vice ;  though  the  acting  merely
from  appetite,  when  there  is  no  principle  of  greater  authority  to
oppose  it,  be  a  matter  indifferent ;  yet  there  may  be  a  great  deal
of  virtue  or  of  vice  in  the  management  of  our  appetites  ;  and  that
the  power  of  self-government  is  necessary  for  their  regulation,]


160  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  II.


CHAPTER  II.


OF  DESIRES.


I.  Distinction  between  appetites  and  desires  twofold. — An-
other class  of  animal  principles  of  action  in  man,  I  shall,  for
want  of  a  better  specific  name,  call  desires,

[They  axe  distinguished  from  appetites  by  this :  That  (1)  there
is  not  an  uneasy  sensation  proper  to  each,  and  always  accompa-
nying it ;  and  that  {2)  they  are  not  periodical,  but  constant,  not
being  sated  with  their  objects  for  a  time,  as  appetites  axe.]

The  desires  I  have  in  view  are  chiefly  these  three :  the  de-
sire of  power,  the  desire  of  esteem,  and  the  desire  of  knowledge.

We  may,  I  think,  perceive  some  degree  of  these  principles
in  brute-animals  of  the  more  sagacious  kind ;  but  in  man  they
are  much  more  conspicuous,  and  have  a  larger  irohere.

In  a  herd  of  black  cattle  there  is  a  rank  and  subordination.
When  a  stranger  is  introduced  into  the  herd,  he  must  fight
every  one  till  his  rank  is  settled.  Then  he  yields  to  the  stronger
and  assumes  authority  over  the  weaker.  The  case  is  much  the
same  in  the  crew  of  a  ship  of  war.

As  soon  as  men  associate  together,  the  desire  of  superiority
discovers  itself.  In  barbarous  tribes,  as  well  as  among  the  gre-
garious kinds  of  animals,  rank  is  determined  by  strength,  cou-
rage, swiftness,  or  such  other  qualities.  Among  civiBzed  na-
tions, many  things  of  a  different  kind  give  power  and  rank —
places  in  government,  titles  of  honour,  riches,  wisdom,  elo-
quence, virtue,  and  even  the  reputation  of  these.  All  these  are
either  different  species  of  power,  or  means  of  acquiring  it ;  and
when  they  are  sought  for  that  end,  must  be  considered  as  in-
stances of  the  desire  of  power.

II.  Of  esteem  and  contempt. — The  desire  of  esteem  is  not  pe-
culiar to  man.  A  dog  exults  in  the  approbation  and  applause
of  his  master,  and  is  humbled  by  his  displeasure.  But  in  man
this  desire  is  much  more  conspicuous,  and  operates  in  a  thousand
different  ways.

[Hence  it  is  that  so  very  few  are  proof  against  flattery,  when
it  is  not  very  gross.  We  wish  to  be  well  in  the  opinion  of  others,
and  therefore  are  prone  to  interpret  in  our  own  favour  the  signs
of  their  good  opinion,  even  when  they  are  ambiguous.]

There  are  few  injuries  that  are  not  more  easy  to  be  borne  than
contempt.

We  cannot  always  avoid  seeing,  in  the  conduct  of  others,
things  that  move  contempt ;  but,  in  all  polite  circles,  the  signs
of  it  must  be  suppressec^  otherwise  men  could  not  converse  to-
gether. .


OF  DESIRES.  IQl

As  there  is  no  quality,  common  to  good  and  bad  men,  more
esteemed  than  courage,  nor  any  thing  in  a  man  more  the  object
of  contempt  than  cowardice;  hence  every  man  desires  to  be
thought  a  man  of  courage ;  and  the  reputation  of  cowardice  is
worse  than  death.  How  many  have  died  to  avoid  being  thought
cowards !  How  many,  for  the  same  reason,  have  done  what  made
them  unhappy  to  the  end  of  their  lives  !

I  believe  many  a  tragical  event,  if  traced  to  its  source  in  hu-
man nature,  might  be  referred  to  the  desire  of  esteem,  or  the
dread  of  contempt,

III.  In  brute  animals  there  is  so  little  that  can  be  called  know^
ledge,  that  the  desire  of  it  can  make  no  considerable  figure  in
them.  Yet  I  have  seen  a  cat,  when  brought  into  a  new  habita-
tion, examine  with  care  every  comer  of  it,  and  anxious  to  know
every  lurking  place,  and  the  avenues  to  it.  And  I  believe  the
same  thing  may  be  observed  in  many  other  species,  especially  in
those  that  are  liable  to  be  hunted  by  man,  or  by  other  animals.

But  the  desire  of  knowledge  in  the  human  species,  is  a  prin-
ciple that  cannot  escape  our  observation*

The  curiosity  of  children  is  the  principle  that  occupies  most
of  their  time  while  they  are  awake.  What  they  can  handle  they
examine  on  all  sides,  and  often  break  in  pieces,  in  order  to  dis-
cover what  is  within.

When  men  grow  up,  their  curiosity  does  not  cease,  but  is
employed  upon  other  objects.  Novelty  is  considered  as  one
great  source  of  the  pleasures  of  taste,  and  indeed  is  necessary,
in  one  degree  or  other,  to  give  a  relish  to  them  all.

When  we  speak  of  the  desire  of  knowledge  as  a  principle  of
action  in  man,  we  must  not  confine  it  to  the  pursuits  of  the
philosopher,  or  of  the  literary  man.  The  desire  of  knowledge
discovers  itself,  in  one  person,  by  an  avidity  to  know  the  scan-
dal of  the  village,  and  who  makes  love,  and  to  whom ;  in  an-
other, to  know  the  economy  of  the  next  family ;  in  another,  to
know  what  the  post  brings ;  and  in  another  to  trace  the  path  of
a  new  comet.

When  men  show  an  anxiety,  and  take  pains  to  know  what  is
of  no  moment,  and  can  be  of  no  use  to  themselves  or  to  others,
this  is  trifling,  and  vain  curiosity.  It  is  a  culpable  weakness
and  folly ;  but  still  it  is  the  wrong  direction  of  a  natural  prin-
ciple, and  shows  the  force  of  that  principle,  more  than  when  it
is  directed  to  matters  worthy  to  be  known.

IV.  I  think  it  unnecessary  to  use  arguments  to  show  that  [the
desires  oi  power,  of  esteem,  and  of  knowledge,  are  natural  prin-
ciples in  the  constitution  of  man.]  Those  who  are  not  con-
vinced of  this  by  reflecting  upon  their  own  feelings  and  senti-
ments, will  not  easily  be  convinced  by  arguments.

[Power,  esteem  and  knowledge,  are  so  useful  for  many  pur-

M


Igg  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  U.

poses,  that  it  is  easy  to  resolve  the  desire  of  them  into  other
principles.  Those  who  do  so  must  maintain  that  we  never  de-
sire these  objects  for  their  own  sakes,  but  as  means  only  of  pro-
curing pleasure,  or  something  which  is  a  natural  object  of  desire.
This,  indeed,  was  the  doctrine  of  Epicurus ;  and  it  had  its  vo-
taries in  modern  times.  But  it  has  been  observed  that  men
desire  posthumous  fame,  which  can  procure  no  pleasure.]  *

Epicurus  himself,  though  he  believed  that  he  should  have  no
existence  after  death,  was  so  desirous  to  be  remembered  with
esteem,  that,  by  his  last  will,  he  appointed  his  heirs  to  comme-
morate his  birth  annually,  and  to  give  a  monthly  feast  to  his  dis-
ciples, upon  the  twentieth  day  of  the  moon.  What  pleasure
could  this  give  to  Epicurus  when  he  had  no  existence  ?  On  this
account,  Cicero  justly  observes,  that  his  doctrine  was  refuted  by
his  own  practice.

Innumerable  instances  occur  in  life,  of  men  who  sacrifice  ease,
pleasure,  and  every  thing  else,  to  the  lust  of  power,  of  fame,  or
even  of  knowledge.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose,  that  men  should
sacrifice  the  end  to  what  they  desire  only  as  the  means  of  pro-
moting that  end.

V.  Such  natural  desires  not  selfish  principles. — [The  natural
desires  I  have  mentioned  are,  in  themselves,  neither  virtuous  nor
vicious.  They  are  parts  of  our  constitution,  and  ought  to  be
regulated  and  restrained,  when  they  stand  in  competition  with
more  important  principles.  But  to  eradicate  them,  if  it  were
possible  (and  I  believe  it  is  not),  would  only  be  like  cutting  off
a  leg  or  an  arm,  that  is,  making  ourselves  other  creatures  than
God  has  made  us.]

They  cannot,  with  propriety,  he  called  selfish  principles^  though
they  have  commonly  been  accounted  such.

When  power  is  desired  for  its  own  sake,  and  not  as  the  means
in  order  to  obtain  something  else,  this  desire  is  neither  selfish  nor
social.  When  a  man  desires  power  as  the  means  of  doing  good
to  others,  this  is  benevolence.  When  he  desires  it  only  as  the
means  of  promoting  his  own  good,  this  is  self-love.  But  when
he  desires  it  for  its  own  sake,  this  only  can  properly  be  called  the
desire  of  power ;  and  it  implies  neither  self  love  nor  benevolence.
The  same  thing  may  be  applied  to  the  desires  of  esteem  and  of
knowledge.

VI.  Our  desires  auxiliary  to.  the  maintenance  of  morals. —
The  wise  intention  of  nature  in  giving  us  these  desires,  is  no  less
evident  than  in  giving  our  natural  appetites.

[Without  the  natural  appetites,  reason,  as  was  before  ob-
served, would  be  insufficient, either  for the  preservation of
the  individual,  or  the  continuation  of  the  species ;  and  without
the  natural  desires  we  have  mentioned,  human  virtue  would
*  The  expectation  is  accompanied  by  present  pleasiure.


OF  DESIRES.  Ig3

be  insufficient  to  influence  mankind  to  a  tolerable  conduct  in
society!] -

To  these  natural  desires,  common  to  good  and  to  bad  men,  it
is  owing,  that  a  man,  who  has  little  or  no  regard  to  virtue,  may
notwithstanding  be  a  good  member  of  society.  It  is  true,  indeed,
that  perfect  virtue,  joined  with  perfect  knowledge,  would  make
both  our  appetites  and  desires  unnecessary  incumbrances  of  our
nature;  but  as  human  knowledge  and  human  virtue  are  both
very  imperfect,  these  appetites  and  desires  are  necessary  supple-
ments to  our  imperfections.

Society  among  men  could  not  subsist  without  a  certain  degree
of  that  regularity  of  conduct  which  virtue  prescribes.  To  this
regularity  of  conduct,  men  who  have  no  virtue  are  induced  by  a
regard  to  character,  sometimes  by  a  regard  to  interest.

[Even  in  those  who  are  not  destitute  of  virtue,  a  regard  to
character  is  often  an  useful  auxiliary  to  it,  when  both  principles
concur  in  their  direction.]

VII.  The  pursuits  of  power,  of  fame,  and  of  knowledge,  re-
quire self-command  no  less  than  virtue  does.  In  our  behaviour
towards  our  fellow-creatures,  they  generally  lead  to  that  very
conduct  which  virtue  requires.  I  say  generally,  for  this,  no
doubt,  admits  of  exceptions,  especially  in  the  case  of  ambition,
or  the  desire  of  power.

The  evils  which  ambition  has  produced  in  the  world  are  a
common  topic  of  declamation.  But  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that
where  it  has  led  to  one  action  hurtful  to  society,  it  has  led  to  ten
thousand  that  are  beneficial  to  it.  And  we  justly  look  upon  the
want  of  ambition  as  one  of  the  most  unfavourable  symptoms  in
a  man's  temper.

The  desires  of  esteem  and  of  knowledge  are  highly  useful  to
society,  as  well  as  the  desire  of  power,  and,  at  the  same  time,  are
less  dangerous  in  their  excesses.

Although  actions  proceeding  merely  from  the  love  of  power,
of  reputation,  or  of  knowledge,  cannot  be  accounted  virtuous,
or  be  entitled  to  moral  approbation ;  yet  we  allow  them  to  be
manly,  ingenuous,  and  suited  to  the  dignity  of  human  nature ;
and  therefore  they  are  entitled  to  a  degree  of  estimation,  supe-
rior to  those  which  proceed  from  mere  appetite.

Alexander  the  Great  deserved  that  epithet  in  the  early  part  of
his  life,  when  ease  and  pleasure,  and  every  appetite,  were  sacri-
ficed to  the  love  of  glory  and  power.  But  when  we  view  him
conquered  by  oriental  luxury,  and  using  his  power  to  gratify  his
passions  and  appetites,  he  sinks  in  our  esteem,  and  seems  to  for-
feit the  title  which  he  had  acquired.

Sardanapalus,  who  is  said  to  have  pursued  pleasure  as  eagerly
as  Alexander  pursued  glory,  never  obtained  from  mankind  the
appellation  of  the  Great.

M  2


164  ESSAY III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  II.

Appetite  is  the  principle  of  most  of  the  actions  of  brutes,  and
we  account  it  brutal  in  a  man  to  employ  himself  chiefly  in  the
gratification  of  his  appetites.  [The  desires  of  power,  of  esteem,
and  of  knowledge,  are  capital  parts  in  the  constitution  of  man ;
and  the  actions  proceeding  from  them,  though  not  properly  vir-
tuous, are  human  and  manly  ;  and  they  claim  a  just  superiority
over  those  that  proceed  from  appetite.]  This,  I  think,  is  the
universal  and  unbiassed  judgment  of  mankind.  Upon  what
ground  this  judgment  is  n)unded,  may  deserve  to  be  considered
in  its  proper  place.

VIII.  [The  desires  we  have  mentioned  are  not  only  (1)  highly
useful  in  society,  and  in  their  nature  (2)  more  noble  than  our
appetites,  they  are  likewise  (3)  the  most  proper  engines  that  can
be  used  in  the  education  and  discipline  of  men^

In  training  brute-animals  to  such  habits  as  they  are  capable  of,
the  fear  of  punishment  is  the  chief  instrument  to  be  used.  But
in  training  men  of  ingenuous  disposition,  ambition  to  excel,  and
the  love  of  esteem,  are  much  nobler  and  more  powerful  engines,
by  which  they  may  be  led  to  worthy  conduct,  and  trained  to
good  habits.

To  this  we  may  add,  that  the  desires  we  have  mentioned
are  very  friendly  to  real  virtue,  and  make  it  more  easy  to  be
acquired.

A  man  that  is  not  quite  abandoned  must  behave  so  in  society
as  to  preserve  some  degree  of  reputation.  This  every  man  de-
sires to  do,  and  the  greater  part  actually  do  it.  In  order  to  this,
he  must  acquire  the  habit  of  restraining  his  appetites  and  pas-
sions within  the  bounds  which  common  decency  requires,  and  so
as  to  make  himself  a  tolerable  member  of  society,  if  not  an  useful
and  agreeable  one.

It  cannot  be  doubted  that  many,  from  a  regard  to  character
and  to  the  opinion  of  others,  are  led  to  make  themselves  both
useful  and  agreeable  members  of  society,  in  whom  a  sense  of
duty  has  but  a  small  influence.

Thus  men,  living  in  society,  especially  in  polished  society,  are
tamed  and  civilized  by  the  principles  that  are  common  to  good
and  bad  men.  They  are  taught  to  bring  their  appetites  and
passions  under  due  restraint  before  the  eyes  of  men,  which  makes
it  more  easy  to  bring  them  under  the  rein  of  virtue.

igF  As  a  horse  that  is  broken  is  more  easily  managed  than  an
unbroken  colt,  so  the  man  who  has  undergone  the  discipline  of
society  is  more  tractable,  and  is  in  an  excellent  state  of  prepara-
tion for  the  discipline  of  virtue ;  and  that  self-command,  which
is  necessary  in  the  race  of  ambition  and  honour,  is  an  attainment
of  no  small  importance  in  the  course  of  virtue.

For  this  reason,  I  apprehend,  they  err  very  grossly  who  con-
ceive the  life  of  a  hermit  to  be  favourable  to  a  course  of  virtue.


OF DESIRES.  ]g5

The  hermit,  no  doubt,  is  free  from  some  temptations  to  vice,  but
he  is  deprived  of  many  strong  inducements  to  self-government,
as  well  as  of  every  opportunity  of  exercising  the  social  virtues.

[A  very  ingenious  author  has  resolved  our  moral  sentiments
respecting  the  virtues  of  self-government,  into  a  regard  to  the
opinion  (^men.  This  I  think  is  giving  a  great  deal  too  much  to
the  love  of  esteem,  and  putting  tlie  shadow  of  virtue  in  place  of
the  substance ;  but  that  a  regard  to  the  opinion  of  otliers  is,  in
most  instances  of  our  external  behaviour,  a  great  inducement  to
good  conduct,  cannot  be  doubted.  For,  whatever  men  may  prac-
tise themselves,  they  wiH  always  approve  of  that  in  others  which
they  think  right.]

IX.  Of  acquired  desires. — [It  was  before  observed,  that,  be-
sides the  appetites  which  nature  has  given  us,  we  may  acquire
appetites  which,  by  indulgence,  become  as  important  as  the  na-
tural. The  same  thing  may  be  applied  to  desiresj^

One  of  the  most  remarkable  acquired  desires  is  that  of  money,
which,  in  commercial  states,  will  be  found  in  most  men,  in  one
degree  or  other,  and,  in  some  men,  swallows  up  every  other
desire,  appetite  and  passion.

The  desire  of  money  can  then  only  be  accounted  a  principle
of  action,  when  it  is  desired  for  its  own  sake,  and  not  merely  as
the  means  of  procuring  something  else.^

It  seems  evident,  that  there  is  in  misers  such  a  desire  of  money ;
and,  I  suppose,  no  man  will  say  that  it  is  natural,  or  a  part  of
our  original  constitution. It  seems  to  be  the  effect  of  habit.

In  commercial  nations,  money  is  an  instrimient  by  which
almost  every  thing  may  be  procured  that  is  desired.  Being
useful  for  many  different  purposes  as  the  means,  some  men  lose
sight  of  the  end,  and  terminate  their  desire  upon  the  means.
[Money  is  also  a  species  of  power,  putting  a  man  in  condition  to
do  many  things  which  he  could  not  do  without  it ;  and  power  is
a  natural  object  of  desire,  even  when  it  is  not  exercised.]

In  like  manner,  a  man  may  acquire  the  desire  of  a  title  of
honour,  of  an  equipage,  of  an  estate.

Although  our  natural  desires  are  highly  beneficial  to  society,
and  even  aiding  to  virtue,  yet  acquired  desires  are  not  only  use-
less, but  hurtful  and  even  disgraceful.

[No  man  is  ashamed  to  own,  that  he  loves  power,  that  he  loves
esteem,  that  he  loves  knowledge,  for  their  own  sake.  There  may
be  an  excess  in  the  love  of  these  things,  which  is  a  blemish ;  but
there  is  a  degree  of  it,  which  is  natural,  and  is  no  blemish.]  To
love  money,  titles  or  equipage,  on  any  other  account  than  as
they  are  useful  or  ornamental,  is  allowed  by  all  to  be  weakness
and  folly.

The  natural  desires  I  have  been  considering,  though  they  can-
not be  called  social  principles  of  action  in  the  common  sense


IQg  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  Ill-

that  word,  since  it  is  not  their  object  to  procure  any  good  oT
benefit  to  others,  yet  they  have  such  a  relation  to  society,  as  to
show  most  evidently  the  intention  of  nature  to  be,  that  man
should  live  in  society.

The  desire  of  knowledge  is  not  more  natural  than  is  the  desire
of  communicating  our  knowledge.  Even  power  would  be  less
valued  if  there-  were  no  opportunity  of  showing  it  to  others.  It
derives  half  its  value  from  that  circumstance.  And  as  to  the
desire  of  esteem,  it  can  have  no  possible  gratification  but  in
society.

[These  parts  of  our  constitution,  therefore,  are  evidently  in-
tended for  social  life  ;  and  it  is  not  more  evident  that  birds  were
made  for  flying  and  fishes  for  swimming,  than  that  man,  endowed
with  a  natural  desire  of  power,  of  esteem,  and  of  knowledge,  is
made,  not  for  the  savage  and  solitary  state,  but  for  living  in
society.]


CHAPTER III.

OF BENEVOLENT AFFECTION IN GENERAL.

I.  We  have  seen  how,  by  instinct  and  habit,  a  kind  of  me-
chanical principle,  man,  without  any  expense  of  .thought,  with-
out deliberation  or  will,  is  led  to  many  actions  necessary  for
his  preservation  and  well-being,  which,  without  those  princi-
ples, all  his  skill  and  wisdom  would  not  have  been  able  to  ac-
complish.

It  may  perhaps  be  thought  that  his  deliberate  and  voluntary
actions  are  to  be  guided  by  his  reason.

[But  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that  he  is  a  volimtary  agent
long  before  he  has  the  use  of  reason.  Reason  and  virtue,  the
prerogatives  of  man,  are  of  the  latest  growth.]  They  come  to
maturity  by  slow  degrees,  and  are  too  weak,  in  the  greater  part
of  the  species,  to  secure  the  preservation  of  individuals  and  of
commimities,  and  to  produce  that  varied  scene  of  human  life,  in
which  they  are  to  be  exercised  and  improved.

Therefore  the  wise  Author  of  our  being  hath  implanted  in
human  nature  many  inferior  principles  of  action,  which,  with
little  or  no  aid  of  reason  or  virtue,  preserve  the  species,  and
produce  the  various  exertions,  and  the  various  changes  and  re-
volutions which  we  observe  upon  the  theatre  of  life.

In  this  busy  scene,  reason  and  virtue  have  access  to  act  their
parts,  and  do  often  produce  great  and  good  effects ;  but  whether
they  interpose  or  not,  there  are  actors  of  an  inferior  order  that
will  carry  on  the  play,  and  produce  a  variety  of  events,  good  or
bad.


OF  BENEVOLENT  AFFECTION  IN  GENERAL.  |67

Beason,  if  it  were  perfect,  would  lead  men  to  use  the  proper
means  of  preserving  their  own  lives,  and  continuing  their  kind.
But  the  Author  of  our  being  hath  not  thought  fit  to  leave  this
task  to  reason  alone,  otherwise  the  race  would  long  ago  have
been  extinct.  He  hath  given  us,  in  common  with  other  ani-
raak,  appetites,  by  which  those  important  purposes  are  secured,
whether  men  be  wise  or  foolish,  virtuous  or  vicious.

Reason,  if  it  were  perfect,  would  lead  men  neither  to  lose  the

benefit  of  their  active  powers  by  inactivity,  nor  to  overstrain

them  by  excessive  labour. But  nature  hath  given  a  powerful

assistant  to  reason,  by  making  inactivity  a  grievous  punishment  to

itself;  and  by  annexing  the  pain  of  lassitude  to  excessive  labour.

Reason,  if  it  were perfect,  would  lead  us  to  desire  power,

knowledge,  and  the  esteem  and  affection  of  our  fellow-men,  as

means  of  promoting  our  own  happiness,  and  of  being  useful  to

others. Here,  again.  Nature,  to  supply  the  defects  of  reason,

hath  given  us  a  strong  natural  desire  of  those  objects,  which  leads

us  to  pursue  them  without  regard  to  their  utility.

II.  Objects  of  our  desires  and  our  affections  different, — [These
principles  we  have  already  considered ;  and  we  may  observe,  that
all  of  them  have  things,  not  persons,  for  their  object.  They
neither  imply  any  good  nor  ill  affections  towards  any  other  per-
son, nor  even  towards  ourselves.  They  cannot,  therefore,  with
propriety,  be  called  either  selfish  or  sociaLI  But  there  are  various
principles  of  action  in  man,  which  have  persons  for  their  imme-
diate object,  and  imply,  in  their  very  nature,  our  being  well  or  ill
affected  to  some  person,  or  at  least  to  some  animated  being.

Such  principles  I  shall  call  by  the  general  name  of  affections^
whether  they  dispose  to  do  good  or  hurt  to  others.

Perhaps,  in  giving  them  this  general  name,  I  extend  the
meaning  of  the  word  affection  beyond  its  common  use  in  dis-
course. Indeed,  our  language  seems  in  this  to  have  departed
a  little  from  analogy :  for  we  use  the  verb  affect,  and  the  par-
ticiple affected,  in  an  indifferent  sense,  so  that  they  may  be
joined  either  with  good  or  ill.  A  man  may  be  said  to  be
ill  aflfected  towards  another  man,  or  well  affected.  But  the  word
affection,  which,  according  to  analogy,  ought  to  have  the  same
latitude  of  signification  with  that  from  which  it  is  derived,  and
therefore  ought  to  be  applicable  to  ill  affections  as  well  as  to
good,  seems,  by  custom,  to  be  limited  to  good  affections.
When  we  speak  of  having  affection  for  any  person,  it  is  always
understood  to  be  a  benevolent  affection.

Malevolent  principles,  such  as  anger,  resentment,  envy,  are
not  commonly  called  affections,  but  rather  passions.

I  take  the  reason  of  this  to  be,  that  the  malevolent  affections
are  almost  always  accompanied  with  that  perturbation  of  mind
which  we  properly  call  passion;  and  this  passion,  being  the
most  conspicuous  in^edient,  gives  its  name  \h  tXie  N^\\sAfc»


Igg  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHA  P.  lU

Even  love,  when  it  goes  beyond  a  certain  degree,  is  called  a
passion.  But  it  gets  not  that  name  when  it  is  so  moderate  as
not  to  discompose  a  man's  mind,  nor  deprive  him  in  any  mea-
sure of  the  government  of  himself.

As  we  give  the  name  of  passion,  even  to  benevolent  affection
when  it  is  so  vehement  as  to  discompose  the  mind,  so,  I  think,
without  trespassing  much  against  propriety  of  words,  we  may
give  the  name  of  affection  even  to  malevolent  principles,  when
unattended  with  that  disturbance  of  mind  which  commonly,
though  not  always,  goes  along  with  them,  and  which  has  made
them  get  the  name  of  ^mmow^.

The  principles  which  lead  us  immediately  to  desire  the  good
of  others,  and  those  that  lead  us  to  desire  their  hurt,  agree  in
this,  that  persons,  and  not  things,  are  their  immediate  object.
Both  imply  our  being  some  way  affected  towards  the  person.
They  ought  therefore  to  have  some  common  name  to  express
what  is  common  in  their  nature ;  and  I  know  no  name  more
proper  for  this  than  affection*

ni.  Taking  affection,  therefore,  in  this  extensive  sense,  our
affections  are  very  naturally  divided  into  benevolent  and  malevo^
lenty  according  as  they  imply  our  being  well  or  ill  affected  to-
wards their  object.

There  are  some  things  common  to  all  benevolent  affections,
others  wherein  they  differ.

They  differ  both  in  the  feeling,  or  sensation,  which  is  an  in-
gredient in  all  of  them,  and  in  the  objects  to  which  they  are
directed.

They  all  agree  in  two  things,  to  wit.  That  the  feeling  which
accompanies  them  is  agreeable ;  and  that  they  imply  a  desire  of
good  and  happiness  to  their  object.

The  affection  we  bear  to  a  parent,  to  a  child,  to  a  benefac-
tor, to  a  person  in  distress,  to  a  mistress,  differ  not  more  in
their  object  than  in  the  feelings  they  produce  in  the  mind.  We
have  not  names  to  express  the  differences  of  these  feelings,  but
every  man  is  conscious  of  a  difference.  Yet,  with  all  this  differ-
ence, they  agree  in  being  agreeable  feelings.

I  know  no  exception  to  this  rule,  if  we  distinguish,  as  we
ought,  the  feeling  which  naturally  and  necessarily  attends  the
kind  affection  from  those  which  accidentally,  in  certain  circimi-
stances,  it  may  produce.

The  parental  affection  is  an  agreeable  feeling ;  but  it  makes
the  misfortune  or  misbehaviour  of  a  child  give  a  deeper  wound
to  the  mind.  Pity  is  an  agreeable  feeling,  yet  distress,  which
we  are  not  able  to  relieve,  may  give  a  painful  sympathy.  Love
to  one  of  the  other  sex  is  an  agreeable  feeling ;  but  where  it
does  not  meet  with  a  proper  return,  it  may  give  the  most  pun-
gent distress.

The  joy  and  comfort  of  human  life  consists  in  the  reciprocal


OF  BENEVOLENT  AFFECTION  IN  GENERAL.  |g9

exercise  of  kind  affections,  and  without  them  life  would  be  un-
desirable.

It  has  been  observed  by  Lord  Shaftesbury,  and  l^y  many  other
judicious  moralists.  That  even  the  epicure  and  the  debauchee,
who  are  thought  to  place  all  their  happiness  in  the  gratifications
of  sense,  and  to  pursue  these  as  their  only  object,  can  find  no
relish  in  solitary  indulgences  of  this  kind,  but  in  those  only  that
are  mixed  with  social  intercourse,  and  a  reciprocal  exchange  of
kind  affections.

Cicero  has  observed,  that  the  word  convivium,  which  in  Latin
signifies  a  feast,  is  not  borrowed  from  eating  or  from  drinking,  but
from  that  social  intercourse  which,  being  the  chief  part  of  such
an  entertainment,  gives  the  name  to  the  whole.

Mutual  kind  affections  are  undoubtedly  the  balm  of  life,  and
of  all  the  enjoyments  common  to  good  and  bad  men,  are  the
chief.  If  a  man  had  no  person  whom  he  loved  or  esteemed,  no
person  who  loved  or  esteemed  him,  how  wretched  must  his  con-
dition be !  Surely  a  man  capable  of  reflection  would  choose  to
pass  out  of  existence,  rather  than  to  live  in  such  a  state.

It  has  been,  by  the  poets,  represented  as  the  state  of  some
bloody  and  barbarous  tyrants ;  but  poets  are  allowed  to  paint  a
little  beyond  the  life.  Atreus  is  represented  as  saying,  Oderint
dum  metuunt.  "I  care  not  for  their  hatred,  providing  they
dread  my  power."  I  believe  there  never  was  a  man  so  disposed
towards  all  mankind.  The  most  odious  tyrant  that  ever  was,
will  have  his  favourites,  whose  affection  he  endeavours  to  deserve
or  to  bribe,  and  to  whom  he  bears  some  good  will.

[We  may  therefore  lay  it  down  as  a  principle,  that  all  bene-
volent affections  are,  in  their  nature,  agreeable ;  and  that,  next
to  a  good  conscience,  t6  which  they  are  always  friendly,  and
never  can  be  adverse,  they  make  the  capital  part  of  human  hap-
pinessJ]

[IV.  Another  ingredient  essential  to  every  benevolent  affection,
and  from  which  it  takes  the  name,  is  a  desire  of  the  good  and
happiness  of  the  objectJ^

The  object  of  benevolent  affection,  therefore,  must  be  some
being  capable  of  happiness.  When  we  speak  of  affection  to  a
house,  or  to  any  inanimate  thing,  the  word  has  a  different  mean-
ing. For  that  which  has  no  capacity  of  enjoyment,  or  of  suf-
fering, may  be  an  object  of  liking  or  disgust,  but  cannot  possibly
be  an  object  either  of  benevolent  or  malevolent  affection.

A  thing  may  be  desired  either  on  its  own  account,  or  as  the
means  in  order  to  something  else.  That  only  can  properly  be
called  an  object  of  desire,  which  is  desired  upon  its  own  ac-
count ;  and  it  is  only  such  desires  that  I  call  principles  of  action.
When  any  thing  is  desired  as  the  means  only,  there  must  be  an
end  for  which  it  is  desired ;  and  the  desire  of  the  end  is,  in
this  case,  the  principle  of  action. The  means  are  desired  only


170  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  III.

as  they  tend  to  that  end ;  and  if  different,  or  even  contrary  means
tended  to  the  same  end,  they  would  be  equally  desired.

On  this  accoimt  I  consider  those  affections  only  as  benevolent,
where  the  good  of  the  object  is  desired  ultimately,  and  not  as
the  means  only,  in  order  to  something  else.

[To  say  that  we  desire  the  good  of  others,  only  in  order  to
procure  some  pleasure  or  good  to  ourselves,  is  to  say  that  there
is  no  benevolent  affection  in  human  nature.]

This,  indeed,  has  been  the  opinion  of  some  philosophers,  both
in  ancient  and  in  later  times.  I  intend  not  to  examine  this  opi-
nion in  this  place,  conceiving  it  proper  to  give  that  view  of  Uie
principles  of  action  in  man,  which  appears  to  me  to  be  just,
before  I  examine  the  systems  wherein  they  have  been  mistaken
or  misrepresented.

I  observe  only  at  present,  that  [it  appears  as  unreasonable  to
resolve  all  our  benevolent  affections  into  self-love,  as  it  would  be
to  resolve  hunger  and  thirst  into  self-love.]

These  appetites  are  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  the  indi-
vidual. Benevolent  affections  are  no  less  necessary  for  the  pre-
servation of  society  among  men,  without  which  man  would
become  an  easy  prey  to  the  beasts  of  the  field.

We  are  placed  in  this  world  by  the  Author  of  our  being,  sur-
rounded with  many  objects  that  are  necessary  or  useful  to  us,
and  with  many  that  may  hurt  us.  We  are  led,  not  by  reason
and  self-love  only,  but  by  many  instincts,  and  appetites,  and
natural  desires,  to  seek  the  former  and  to  avoid  the  latter.

But  of  all  the  things  of  this  world,  man  may  be  the  most
useful,  or  the  most  hurtful  to  man.  Every  man  is  in  the  power
of  every  man  with  whom  he  lives.  Every  man  has  power  to
do  much  good  to  his  fellow-men,  and  tb  do  more  hurt.

We  cannot  live  without  the  society  of  men ;  and  it  would  be
impossible  to  live  in  society,  if  men  were  not  disposed  to  do
much  of  that  good  to  men,  and  but  little  of  that  hurt,  which
it  is  in  their  power  to  do.

But  how  shall  this  end,  so  necessary  to  the  existence  of
human  society,  and  consequently  to  the  existence  of  the  human
species,  be  accompUshed  ?

[If  we  judge  from  analogy,  we  must  conclude,  that  in  this,
as  in  other  parts  of  our  conduct,  our  rational  principles  are
aided  by  principles  of  an  inferior  order,  similar  to  those  by
which  many  brute-animals  live  in  society  with  their  species;
and  that  bv  means  of  such  principles,  that  degree  of  regularity
is  observed,  which  we  find  in  all  societies  of  men,  whether  wise
or  foolish,  virtuous  or  vicious.]

The  benevolent  affections  planted  in  human  nature,  appear
therefore  no  less  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  the  human
species,  than  the  appetites  of  hunger  and  thirst.


I


171


CHAPTEK  IV.

OP  THE  PARTICULAR  BENEVOLENT  AFFECTIONS.

I.  Of  natural  affection. — Having  premised  these  things  in
general  concerning  benevolent  affections,  I  shall  now  attempt
some  enumeration  of  them.

1.  The  first  I  mention  is  that  of  parents  and  children,  and
other  near  relations.

This  we  commonly  call  natural  affection.  Every  language
has  a  name  for  it.  It  is  common  to  us  with  most  of  the  brute-
animals  ;  and  is  variously  modified  in  different  animals,  according
as  it  is  more  or  less  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  the  species.

Many  of  the  insect  tribe  need  no  other  care  of  parents,  than
that  the  eggs  be  laid  in  a  proper  place,  where  they  shall  have
neither  too  little  nor  too  much  heat,  and  where  the  animal,  as
soon  as  it  is  hatched,  shall  find  its  natural  food.  This  care  the
parent  takes,  and  no  more.

In  other  tribes,  the  young  must  be  lodged  in  some  secret
place,  where  they  cannot  be  easily  discovered  by  their  enemies.
They  must  be  cherished  by  the  warmth  of  the  parent's  body.
They  must  be  suckled,  and  fed  at  first  with  tender  food ;  at-
tended in  their  excursions,  and  guarded  from  danger,  till  they
have  learned  by  experience,  and  by  the  example  of  their  parents,
to  provide  for  their  own  subsistence  and  safety.  With  what
assiduity  and  tender  affection  this  is  done  by  the  parents,  in
every  species  that  requires  it,  is  well  known.

The  eggs  of  the  feathered  tribe  are  commonly  hatched  by  in-
cubation of  the  dam,  who  leaves  off  at  once  her  sprightly  mo-
tions and  migrations,  and  confines  herself  to  her  solitary  and
painful  task,  cheered  by  the  song  of  her  mate  upon  a  neigh-
bouring bough,  and  sometimes  fed  by  him,  sometimes  relieved
in  her  incubation,  while  she  gathers  a  scanty  meal,  and  with
the  greatest  dispatch  returns  to  her  post.

The  yoimg  birds  of  many  species  are  so  very  tender  and  de-
Ucate,  that  man,  with  all  his  vnsdom  and  experience,  would  not
be  able  to  rear  one  to  maturity.  But  the  parents,  without  any
experience,  know  perfectly  how  to  rear  sometimes  a  dozen  or
more  at  one  brood,  and  to  give  every  one  its  portion  in  due
season.  They  know  the  food  best  suited  to  their  delicate  con-
stitution, which  is  sometimes  afforded  by  nature,  sometimes
must  be  cooked  and  half  digested  in  the  stomach  of  the  parent.

In  some  animals,  nature  hath  furnished  the  female  with  a  kind
of  second  womb,  into  which  the  young  retire  occasionally,  for
food,  warmth,  and  the  conveniency  of  being  carried  about  with
the  mother.


172  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  IV.

It  would  be  endless  to  recount  all  the  various  vsrays  in  vsrhich
the  parental  affection  is  expressed  by  brute-animals.

[He  must,  in  my  apprehension,  have  a  very  strange  complexion
of  understanding,  who  can  survey  the  various  ways  in  which  the
young  of  the  various  species  are  reared,  without  wonder,  without

{)ious  admiration  of  that  manifold  Wisdom,  wliich  hath  so  skil-
iilly  fitted  means  to  ends,  in  such  an  infinite  variety  of  ways.]

In  all  the  brute-animals  we  are  acquainted  with,  the  end  of
the  parental  affection  is  completely  answered  in  a  short  time ;
and  then  it  ceases  as  if  it  had  never  been.

II.  Duration  of  parental  affection  limited  in  inferior  animals  ;
not  so  in  the  human  species, —  [The  infancy  of  man  is  longer  and
more  helpless  than  that  of  any  other  animal.  The  parental  affec-
tion is  necessary  for  many  years ;  it  is  highly  useful  through
life  ;  and  therefore  it  terminates  only  with  life.  It  extends  to
children's  children  without  any  diminution  of  its  force.]

How  common  is  it  to  see  a  young  woman,  in  the  gayest  period
of  life,  who  has  spent  her  days  in  mirth,  and  her  nights  in  pro-
found sleep,  without  solicitude  or  care,  all  at  once  transformed
into  the  careful,  the  solicitous,  the  watchful  nurse  of  her  dear
infant :  doing  nothing  by  day  but  gazing  upon  it,  and  serving
it  in  the  meanest  offices ;  by  night,  depriving  herself  of  sound
sleep  for  months,  that  it  may  lie  safe  in  her  arms.  Forgetful  of
herself,  her  whole  care  is  centred  in  this  little  object.

Such  a  sudden  transformation  of  her  whole  habits,  and  occu-
pation, and  turn  of  mind,  if  we  did  not  see  it  every  day,  would
appear  a  more  wonderful  metamorphosis  than  any  that  Ovid  has
described.

This,  however,  is  the  work  of  nature,  and  not  the  effect  of
reason  and  reflection. For  we  see  it  in  the  good  and  in  the  bad,
in  the  most  thoughtless^  as  well  as  in  the  thoughtful.

Nature  has  assigned  different  departments  to  the  father  and
mother  in  rearing  their  offspring.  This  may  be  seen  in  many
brute-animals ;  and  that  it  is  so  in  the  human  species,  was  long
ago  observed  by  Socrates,  and  most  beautifully  illustrated  by
him,  as  we  learn  from  Xenophon's  "  QEconomics."  The  pa-
rental affection  in  the  different  sexes  is  exactly  adapted  to  the
office  assigned  to  each.  The  father  would  make  an  awkward
nurse  to  a  new-born  child,  and  the  mother  too  indulgent  a. guar-
dian. But  both  act  with  propriety  and  grace  in  their  proper
sphere.

It  is  very  remarkable,  that  when  the  office  of  rearing  a  child
is  transferred  from  the  parent  to  another  person,  nature  seems  to
transfer  the  affection  along  with  the  office.  A  wet  nurse,  or
even  a  dry  nurse,  has  commonly  the  same  affection  for  her  nurs-
ling as  if  she  had  borne  it. The  fact  is  so  well  known,  that


OP  PARTICULAR  BENEVOLENT  AFFECTIONS.  |73

notHing  needs  be  said  to  confirm  it ;  and  it  seems  to  be  the  work
of  nature.

III.  Parental  affection  the  effect  of  our  natural  constitution, —
Our  affections  are  not  immediately  in  our  power,  as  our  outward
actions  are.  Nature  has  directed  them  to  certain  objects.  We
may  do  kind  offices  without  affection  ;  but  we  cannot  create  an
affection  which  nature  has  not  given.

Reason  might  teach  a  man  that  his  children  are  particularly
committed  to  his  care  by  the  providence  of  God,  and,  on  that
account,  that  he  ought  to  attend  to  them  as  his  particular  charge ;
but  reason  could  not  teach  him  to  love  them  more  than  other
children  of  equal  merit,  or  to  be  more  afflicted  for  their  misfor-
tunes or  misbehaviour.

[It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  that  peculiar  sensibility  of  affec-
tion, with  regard  to  his  own  children,  is  not  the  effect  of  rea-
soning or  reflection,  but  the  effect  of  that  constitution  which
nature  has  given  him.]

There  are  some  affections  which  we  may  call  rational,  because
they  are  grounded  upon  an  opinion  of  merit  in  the  object.  The
parental  affection  is  not  of  this  kind.  For  though  a  man's  affec-
tion to  his  child  may  be  increased  by  merit,  and  diminished  by
demerit,  I  think  no  man  will  say,  tnat  it  took  its  rise  from  an
opinion  of  merit.  It  is  not  opinion  that  creates  the  affection,
but  affection  often  creates  opinion.  It  is  apt  to  pervert  the
judgment,  and  create  an  opinion  of  merit  where  there  is  none.

The  absolute  necessity  of  this  parental  affection,  in  order  to
the  continuance  of  the  human  species,  is  so  apparent,  that  there
is  no  need  of  arguments  to  prove  it.  The  rearing  of  a  child  from
its  birth  to  maturity  requires  so  much  time  and  care,  and  such
infinite  attentions,  that,  if  it  were  to  be  done  merely  from  consi-
derations of  reason  and  duty,  and  were  not  sweetened  by  affec-
tion in  parents,  nurses  and  guardians,  there  is  reason  to  doubt,
whether  one  child  in  ten  thousand  would  ever  be  reared.

IV.  Further  uses  of  'parental  affection. — [Beside  the  absolute
necessity  of  this  part  of  the  human  constitution  to  the  preserva-
tion of  the  species,  its  utility  is  very  great,  (1)  for  tempering  the
giddiness  and  impetuosity  of  youth,  and  (^)  improving  its  know-
ledge by  the  prudence  and  experience  of  age,  for  (3)  encouraging
industry  and  frugality  in  the  parents,  in  order  to  provide  for
their  children,  (4)  for  the  solace  and  support  of  parents  under  the
infirmities  of  old  age ;  not  to  mention  that  (5)  it  probably  gave
rise  to  the  first  civil  governments.]

It  does  not  appear  that  the  parental,  and  other  family  affec-
tions, are,  in  general,  either  too  strong  or  too  weak  for  answer-
ing their  end.  If  they  were  too  weak,  parents  would  be  most
apt  to  err  on  the  side  of  undue  severity ;  if  too  strong,  of  undue


174  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  IV.

indulgence. As  they  are  in  fact,  I  believe  no  man  can  say,  that
the  errors  are  more  general  on  one  side  than  on  the  other.

When  these  affections  are  exerted  according  to  their  intention,
under  the  direction  of  wisdom  and  prudence,  the  economy  of
such  a  family  is  a  most  delightful  spectacle,  and  furnishes  the
most  agreeable  and  affecting  subject  to  the  pencil  of  the  painter,
and  to  the  pen  of  the  orator  and  poet.

V.  2.  The  next  benevolent  affection  I  mention  is  gratitude  to
benefactors.

That  good  offices  are,  by  the  very  constitution  of  our  nature,
apt  to  produce  good-vsrill  towards  the  benefactor,  in  good  and
bad  men,  in  the  savage  and  in  the  civilized,  cannot  surely  be
denied  by  any  one,  in  the  least  acquainted  with  human  nature.

The  danger  of  perverting  a  man's  judgment  by  good  deeds,
where  he  ought  to  have  no  bias,  is  so  well  knov^ni,  that  it  is  dis-
honourable in  judges,  in  witnesses,  in  electors  to  offices  of  trust,
to  accept  of  them ;  and,  in  all  civilized  nations,  they  are,  in  such
cases,  prohibited,  as  the  means  of  corruption.

Those  who  would  corrupt  the  sentence  of  a  judge,  the  testi-
mony of  a  witness,  or  the  vote  of  an  elector,  know  well,  that  they
must  not  make  a  bargain,  or  stipulate  what  is  to  be  done  in
return.  This  would  shock  every  man  who  has  the  least  preten-
sion to  morals.  If  the  person  can  only  be  prevailed  upon  to
accept  the  good  office,  as  a  testimony  of  pure  and  disinterested
friendship,  it  is  left  to  work  upon  his  gratitude.  He  finds  him-
self under  a  kind  of  moral  obligation  to  consider  the  cause  of  his
benefactor  and  friend  in  the  most  favourable  light.  He  finds  it
easier  to  justify  his  conduct  to  himself,  by  favouring  the  interest
of  his  benefactor,  than  by  opposing  it.

Thus  the  principle  of  gratitude  is  supposed,  even  in  the  nature
of  a  bribe.  Bad  men  know  how  to  make  this  natural  principle
the  most  effectual  means  of  corruption.  The  very  best  things
may  be  turned  to  a  bad  use.  But  the  natural  tendency  of  tins
principle,  and  the  intention  of  nature  in  planting  it  in  the  human
breast,  are,  evidently,  to  promote  good-will  among  men,  and  to
give  to  good  offices  the  power  of  multiplying  their  kind,  like
seed  sown  in  the  earth,  which  brings  a  return,  with  increase.

Whether  there  be,  or  be  not,  in  the  more  sagacious  brutes,
something  that  may  be  called  gratitude,  I  will  not  dispute.  We
must  allow  this  important  difference  between  their  gratitude  and
that  of  the  human  kind,  that,  in  the  last,  the  mind  of  the  bene-
factor is  chiefly  regarded,  in  the  first,  the  external  action  only.
A  brute-animal  vrill  be  as  kindly  affected  to  him  who  feeds  it  in
order  to  kill  and  eat  it,  as  to  him  who  does  it  from  affection.

A  man  may  be  justly  entitled  to  our  gratitude,  for  an  office
that  is  useful,  though  it  be,  at  the  same  time,  disagreeable  ;  and


OF  PARTICULAB  BENEVOLENT  AFFECTIONS.  175

not  only  for  doing,  but  for  forbearing  what  he  had  a  right  to  do.
Among  men,  it  is  not  every  beneficial  office  that  claims  our
gratitude,  but  such  only  as  are  not  due  to  us  in  justice.  A  favour
alone  gives  a  claim  to  gratitude ;  and  a  favour  must  be  something
more  dian  justice  requires.  It  does  not  appear  that  brutes  have
any  conception  of  justice.  They  can  neither  distinguish  hurt
from  injury,  nor  a  favour  from  a  good  office  that  is  due.

VI.  3.  A  third  natural  benevolent  affection  is,  piti/  and  com-
passion towards  the  distressed.

Of  all  persons,  those  in  distress  stand  most  in  need  of  our  good
offices.  And,  for  that  reason>  the  Author  of  Nature  hath  planted
in  the  breast  of  every  human  creature  a  powerful  advocate  to
plead  their  cause.

In  man,  and  in  some  other  animals,  there  are  signs  of  distress,
which  nature  hath  both  taught  them  to  use,  and  taught  all  men
to  understand  without  any  interpreter.  These  natural  signs  are
more  eloquent  than  language ;  they  move  our  hearts,  and  produce
a  sympathy,  and  a  desire  to  give  relief.

There  are  few  hearts  so  hard,  but  great  distress  will  conquer
their  anger,  their  indignation,  and  every  malevolent  affection.

We  sympathise  even  with  the  traitor  and  with  the  assassin,
when  we  see  him  led  to  execution.  It  is  only  self-preservation,
and  the  public  good,  that  makes  us  reluctantly  assent  to  his  being
cut  off  from  among  men.

The  practice  of  the  Canadian  nations  toward  their  prisoners
would  tempt  one  to  think,  that  they  have  been  able  to  root  out
the  principle  of  compassion  from  their  nature.  But  this,  I
apprehend,  would  be  a  rash  conclusion.  It  is  only  a  part  of  the
prisoners  of  war  that  they  devote  to  a  cruel  death.  This  gratifies
the  revenge  of  the  women  and  children  who  have  lost  their  hus-
bands and  fathers  in  the  war.  The  other  prisoners  are  kindly
used,  and  adopted  as  brethren.*

Compassion  with  bodily  pain  is  no  doubt  weakened  among
these  savages,  because  they  are  trained  from  their  infancy  to  be
superior  to  death,  and  to  every  degree  of  pain ;  and  he  is  thought
unworthy  of  the  name  of  a  man,  who  cannot  defy  his  tormentors,
and  sing  his  death-song  in  the  midst  of  the  most  cruel  tortures.
He  who  can  do  this,  is  honoured  as  a  brave  man,  though  an
enemy. But  he  must  perish  in  the  experiment.

A  Canadian  has  the  most  perfect  contempt  for  every  man  who
thinks  pain  an  intolerable  evil.  And  nothing  is  so  apt  to  stifle
compassion  as  contempt,  and  an  apprehension,  that  the  evil  suf-
fered is  nothing  but  what  ought  to  be  manfully  borne.

It  must  also  be  observed,  that  savages  set  no  bounds  to  their
revenge. Those  who  find  no  protection  in  laws  and  government

*  This  illustration  has  lost  its  propriety  by  the  extension  of  civilization  in
Canada.


|7g  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  IV.

never  think  themselves  safe,  but  in  the  destruction  of  their  enemy.
And  one  of  the  chief  advantages  of  civil  government  is,  that  it
tempers  the  cruel  passion  of  revenge,  and  opens  the  heart  to
compassion  with  every  human  woe.

It  seems  to  be  false  religion  only,  that  is  able  to  check  the
tear  of  compassion.

We  are  told,  that,  in  Portugal  and  Spain,  a  man  condemned
to  be  burned  as  an  obstinate  heretic,  meets  with  no  compassion,
even  from  the  multitude.  It  is  true,  they  are  taught  to  look
upon  him  as  an  enemy  to  God,  and  doomed  to  hell-fire.  But
should  not  tliis  very  circumstance  move  compassion  ?  Surely  it
would,  if  they  were  not  taught,  that,  in  this  case,  it  is  a  crime  to
show  compassion,  or  even  to  feel  it.*

VII.  4.  A  fourth  benevolent  affection  is,  esteem  of  the  wise
and  the  good.

The  worst  men  cannot  avoid  feeling  this  in  some  degree.
Esteem,  veneration,  devotion,  are  different  degrees  of  the  same
affection.  The  perfection  of  wisdom,  power  and  goodness,  which
belongs  only  to  the  Almighty,  is  the  object  of  the  last.

It  may  be  a  doubt,  whether  this  principle  of  esteem,  as  well  as
that  of  gratitude,  ought  to  be  ranked  m  the  order  of  animal
principles,  or  if  they  ought  not  rather  to  be  placed  in  a  higher
order.  They  are  certainly  more  allied  to  the  rational  nature  than
the  others  that  have  been  named ;  nor  is  it  evident,  that  there  is
any  thing  in  brute-animals  that  deserves  the  same  name.

There  is  indeed  a  subordination  in  a  herd  of  cattle,  and  in  a
flock  of  sheep,  which,  I  believe,  is  determined  by  strength  and
courage,  as  it  is  among  savage  tribes  of  men.  I  have  been
informed,  that,  in  a  pack  of  hounds,  a  stanch  hoimd  acquires  a
degree  of  esteem  in  the  pack ;  so  that,  when  the  dogs  are  wan-
dering in  quest  of  the  scent,  if  he  opens,  the  pack  immediately
closes  in  with  him,  when  they  would  not  regard  the  opening
of  a  dog  of  no  reputation.  This  is  something  like  a  respect  to
wisdom.

But  I  have  placed  esteem  of  the  wise  and  good  in  the  order  of
animal  principles,  not  from  any  persuasion  that  it  is  to  be  found
in  brute-animals,  but  because,  I  think,  it  appears  in  the  most
unimproved  and  in  the  most  degenerate  part  of  our  species,  even
in  those  in  whom  we  hardly  perceive  any  exertion,  either  of
reason  or  virtue.

I  will  not,  however,  dispute  with  any  man  who  thinks  that  it
deserves  a  more  honourable  name  than  that  of  an  animal  prin-
ciple. It  is  of  small  importance  what  name  we  give  it,  if  we  are
satisfied  that  there  is  such  a  principle  in  the  human  constitution.

VIII.  5.  Friendship  is  another  benevolent  affection.

•  The  infamous  ceremony  of  the  Auto  de  fS,  here  alluded  to,  was  abolished
by  Napoleon  Buonaparte  in  1808.


\


OF  PARTICULAR  BENEVOLENT  AFFECTIONS.  |77

Of  this  we  have  some  instances  famous  in  history :  few  indeed ;
but  sufficient  to  show,  that  human  nature  is  susceptible  of  that
extraordinary  attachment,  sympathy  and  affection,  to  one  or  a
few  persons,  which  the  ancients  thought  alone  worthy  of  the
n^e  of  friendship.
The  Epicureans  found  it  very  difficult  to  reconcile  the  exist-
une  ence  of  friendship  to  the  principles  of  their  sect.  They  were  not
jsioj  so  bold  as  to  deny  its  existence.  They  even  boasted  that  there
lod  had  been  more  attachments  of  that  kind  between  Epicureans
Be  than  in  any  other  sect.  But  the  difficulty  was,  to  account  for
Iji  real  friendship  upon  Epicurean  principles.  They  went  into  dif-
ferent hypotheses  upon  this  point,  three  of  which  are  explained
by  Torquatus  the  Epicurean,  in  Cicero's  book,  "  De  Finibus."

Cicero,  in  his  reply  to  Torquatus,  examines  all  the  three,  and
shows  them  all  to  be  either  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  true
friendship,  or  inconsistent  with  the  fundamental  principles  of  the
Epicurean  sect.

[As  to  the  friendship  which  the  Epicureans  boasted  of  among
those  of  their  sect,  Cicero  does  not  question  the  fact,  but  ob-
serves, that,  as  there  are  many  whose  practice  is  worse  than  their
principles,  so  there  are  some  whose  principles  are  worse  than
their  practice,  and  that  the  bad  principles  of  these  Epicur^lftis
were  overcome  by  the  goodness  of  their  nature.]

IX.  6.  Among  the  benevolent  affections,  the  passion  of  love
between  the  sexes  cannot  be  overlooked.

Although  it  is  commonly  the  theme  of  poets,  it  is  not  im-
worthy  of  the  pen  of  the  philosopher,  as  it  is  a  most  important
part  of  the  human  constitution.

It  is  no  doubt  made  up  of  various  ingredients,  as  many  other
principles  of  action  are,  but  it  certainly  cannot  exist  without  a
very  strong  benevolent  affection  toward  its  object ;  in  whom  it
finds,  or  conceives,  every  thing  that  is  amiable  and  excellent,
and  even  something  more  than  human.  I  consider  it  here,  only
as  a  benevolent  affection  natural  to  man.  And  that  it  is  so,  no
man  can  doubt  who  ever  felt  its  force.

It  is  evidently  intended  by  nature  to  direct  a  man  in  the
choice  of  a  mate,  with  whom  he  desires  to  live,  and  to  rear  an
offspring.

It  has  effectually  secured  this  end  in  all  ages,  and  in  every
state  of  society.

[The  passion  of  love,  and  the  parental  affection,  are  counter-
parts to  each  other ;  and  when  they  are  conducted  with  pru-
dence, and  meet  with  a  proper  return,  are  the  source  of  all  do-
mestic felicity,  the  greatest,  next  to  that  of  a  good  conscience,
which  this  world  affords.]

As,  in  the  present  state  of  things,  pain  often  dwells  near  to
pleasure,  and  sorrow  to  joy,  it  needs  not  be  thought  strange,

N


2Y8  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  IV.

that  a  passion,  fitted  and  intended  by  nature  to  yield  the  greatest
worldly  felicity,  should,  by  being  ill-regulated,  or  wrong  (firected,
prove  the  occasion  of  the  most  pungent  distress.

But  its  joys  and  its  griefs,  its  different  modifications  in  the
different  sexes,  and  its  influence  upon  the  character  of  both,
though  very  important  subjects,  are  fitter  to  be  sung  than  said ;
and  I  leave  them  to  those  who  have  slept  upon  the  two-topped
Parnassus.

X.  7.  The  last  benevolent  affection  I  shall  mention  is,  what
we  commonly  call  public  spirit,  that  is,  an  affection  to  any  com-
munity to  which  we  belong.

If  there  be  any  man  quite  destitute  of  this  affection,  he  must
be  as  great  a  monster  as  a  man  bom  with  two  heads.  Its  effects
are  manifest  in  the  whole  of  human  life,  and  in  the  history  of
all  nations.

The  situation  of  a  great  part  of  mankind,  indeed,  is  such,
that  their  thoughts  and  views  must  be  confined  within  a  very
narrow  sphere,  and  be  very  much  engrossed  by  their  private
concerns.  With  regard  to  an  extensive  public,  such  as  a  state
or  nation,  they  are  like  a  drop  to  the  ocean,  so  that  they  have
rarely  an  opportimity  of  acting  with  a  view  to  it.

In  many,  whose  actions  may  affect  the  public,  and  whose  rank
and  station  lead  them  to  think  of  it,  private  passions  may  be  an
overmatch  for  public  spirit.  All  that  can  be  inferred  from  this
is,  that  their  public  spirit  is  Weak,  not  that  it  does  not  exist.

If  a  man  wishes  well  to  the  public,  and  is  ready  to  do  good  to
it  rather  than  hurt,  when  it  costs  him  nothing,  he  has  some  affec-
tion to  it,  though  it  may  be  scandalously  weak  in  degree.

I  believe  every  man  has  it  in  one  degree  or  another.  What
man  is  there  who  does  not  resent  satirical  reflections  upon  his
country,  or  upon  any  community  of  which  he  is  a  member  ?

Whether  the  affection  be  to  a  college  or  to  a  cloister,  to  a
clan  or  to  a  profession,  to  a  party  or  to  a  nation,  it  is  public
spirit.  These  affections  differ,  not  in  kind,  but  in  the  extent
of  their  object.

The  object  extends  as  our  connexions  extend ;  and  a  sense  of
the  connexion  carries  the  affection  along  with  it  to  every  com-
mimity  to  which  we  can  apply  the  pronouns  we  and  our.

Friend,  parent,  neighbour,  first  it  will  embrace,
His  country  next,  and  then  all  human  race. — Pope.

Even  in  the  misanthrope,  this  affection  is  not  extinguished.
It  is  overpowered  by  the  apprehension  he  has  of  the  worthless-
ness,  the  baseness,  and  the  ingratitude  of  mankind.  Convince
him,  that  there  is  any  amiable  quality  in  the  species,  and  imme-
diately his  philanthropy  revives,  and  rejoices  to  find  an  object  on
which  it  can  exert  itself.


OF  PARTICULAR  BENEVOLENT  AFFECTIONS.  179

XI.  Necessity  for  submitting  public  spirit  to  the  control  of
reason  and  virtue ,  evident. — [Public  spirit  has  this  in  common
with  every  subordinate  principle  of  action,  that,  when  it  is  not
under  the  government  of  reason  and  virtue,  it  may  produce
much  evil  as  w^ll  as  good.]  Yet,  where  there  is  least  of  reason
and  virtue  to  regulate  it,  its  good  far  overbalances  its  ill.

[It  sometimes  kindles  or  inflames  animosities  between  com-
munities, or  contending  parties,  and  makes  them  treat  each
other  with  little  regard  to  justice.  It  kindles  wars  between
nations,  and  makes  them  destroy  one  another  for  trifling  causes.]
But,  without  it,  society  could  not  subsist,  and  every  community
would  be  a  rope  of  sand.

When  under  the  direction  of  reason  and  virtue,  it  is  the  very
image  of  God  in  the  soul.  It  diffuses  its  benign  influence  as  far
as  its  power  extends,  and  participates  in  the  happiness  of  God,
and  of  the  whole  creation.

These  tire  the  benevolent  affections  which  appear  to  me  to  be
parts  of  the  human  constitution.

If  any  one  thinks  the  enumeration  incomplete,  and  that  there
are  natural  benevolent  affections,  which  are  not  included  under
any  of  those  that  have  been  named,  1  shall  very  readily  listen
to  such  a  correction,  being  sensible  that  such  enumerations  are
very  often  incomplete.

if  others  should  think  that  any,  or  all,  the  affections  I  have
named  are  acquired  by  education,  or  by  habits  and  associations
grounded  on  self-love,  and  are  not  original  parts  of  our  consti-
tution ;  this  is  a  point  upon  which,  indeed,  there  has  been  much
subtile  disputation  in  ancient  and  modem  times,  and  which,  I
believe,  must  be  determined  from  what  a  man,  by  careful  reflec-
tion, may  feel  in  himself,  rather  than  from  what  he  observes  in
others.  But  I  decline  entering  into  this  dispute,  till  I  shall
have  explained  that  principle  of  action  which  we  commonly  call
self-love.

XII.  I  shall  conclude  this  subject  with  some  reflections  upon
the  benevolent  affections.

\T\ieflrst  is,  that  all  of  them,  in  as  far  as  they  are  benevolent,
in  which  view  only  I  consider  them,  agree  very  much  in  the  con-
duct  they  dispose  us  to,  with  regard  to  their  objects,^

They  dispose  us  to  do  them  good  as  far  as  we  have  power  and
opportunity ;  to  wish  them  well,  when  we  can  do  them  no  good ;
to  judge  favourably,  and  often  partially,  of  them ;  to  sympathise
with  them  in  their  afflictions  and  calamities  ;  and  to  rejoice  with
them  in  their  happiness  and  good  fortune.

It  is  impossible  that  there  can  be  benevolent  affection  without
sympathy,  both  with  the  good  and  bad  fortune  of  the  object;
and  it  appears  to  be  impossible  that  there  can  be  sympathy
without  benevolent  affection. Men  do  not  sympathise  with  one


180  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  IV.

whom  they  hate  ;  nor  even  with  one  to  whose good  or  ill  they
are  perfectly  indifferent.

We  may  sympathise  with  a  perfect  stranger,  or  even  with  an
enemy  whom  we  see  in  distress ;  but  this  is  the  effect  of  pity ;
and  if  we  did  not  pity  him,  we  should  not  sympathise  with  him.

I  take  notice  of  this  the  rather,  because  a  very  ingenious
author*  in  his  "  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,"  gives  a  very  dif-
ferent account  of  the  origin  of  sympathy.  It  appears  to  me  to  be
the  effect  of  benevolent  affection,  and  to  be  inseparable  from  it.

[A  second  reflection  is,  that  the  constitution  of  our  nature  very
powerfully  invites  us  to  cherish  and  cultivate  in  our  minds  the
benevolent  affections.^

The  agreeable  feeling  which  always  attends  them  as  a  present
reward,  appears  to  be  intended  by  nature  for  this  purpose.

Benevolence,  from  its  nature,  composes  the  mind,  warms  the
heart,  enlivens  the  whole  frame,  and  brightens  every  feature  of
the  countenance.  It  may  justly  be  said  to  be  medicinal  both  to
soul  and  body.  We  are  bound  to  it  by  duty  ;  we  are  invited  to
it  by  interest ;  and  because  both  these  cords  are  often  feeble,  we
have  natural  kind  affections  to  aid  them  in  their  operation,  and
supply  their  defects;  and  these  affections  are  joined  with  a
manly  pleasure  in  their  exertion.

[A  third  reflection  is,  that  the  natural  benevolent  affections
furnish  the  most  irresistible  proof,  that  the  Author  of  our  nature
intended  that  we  should  live  in  society y  and  do  good  to  our  felloto-
men  as  we  have  opportunity  ;  since  this  great  and  important  part
of  the  human  constitution  has  a  memifest  relation  to  society,  and
can  have  no  exercise  nor  use  in  a  solitary  state.]

[The  last  reflection  is,  that  the  different  principles  of  action
have  different  degrees  of  dignity,  and  rise  one  above  another  in
our  estimation,  when  we  make  them  objects  of  contemplation.]

We  ascribe  no  dignity  to  instincts  or  to  habits.  They  lead  us
only  to  admire  the  wisdom  of  the  Creator,  in  adapting  them  so
perfectly  to  the  manner  of  life  of  the  different  animals  in  which
they  are  found.  Much  the  same  may  be  said  of  appetites.  They
serve  rather  for  use  than  ornament.

The  desires  of  knowledge,  of  power,  and  of  esteem,  rise  higher
in  our  estimation,  and  we  consider  them  as  giving  dignity  and
ornament  to  man.  The  actions  proceeding  from  them,  though
not  properly  virtuous,  are  manly  and  respectable,  and  claim  a
just  superiority^  over  those  that  proceed  merely  from  appetite.
This,  I  think,  is  the  uniform  judgment  of  mankind.

If  we  apply  the  same  kind  of  judgment  to  our  benevolent
affections,  they  appear  not  only  manly  and  respectable,  but
amiable  in  a  high  degree.

They  are  amiable  even  in  brute-animals. We  love  the  meek-

*  Adam  Smith«


OF  PARTICULAR  BENEVOLENT  AFFECTIONS.  JgJ

ness  of  the  larnb^  the  gentleness  of  the  dove,  the  affection  of  a
dog  to  his  master.  We  cannot,  without  pleasure,  observe  the
timid  evs^e,  who  never  showed  the  least  degree  of  courage  in  her
own  defence,  become  valiant  and  intrepid  in  defence  of  her  lamb,
and  boldly  assault  those  enemies,  the  very  sight  of  whom  was
wont  to  put  her  to  flight.

How  pleasant  is  it  to  see  the  family  economy  of  a  pair  of
little  birds  in  rearing  their  tender  offspring ;  the  conjugal  affec-
tion and  fidelity  of  the  parents ;  their  cheerful  toil  and  industry
in  providing  food  to  their  family ;  their  sagacity  in  concealing
their  habitation ;  the  arts  they  use,  often  at  the  peril  of  their
own  lives,  to  decoy  hawks,  and  other  enemies,  from  their  dwel-
ling-place, and  the  affliction  they  feel  when  some  unlucky  boy
has  robbed  them  of  the  dear  pledges  of  their  affection,  and  frus-
trated all  their  hopes  of  their  rising  family  ?

If  kind  affection  be  amiable  in  brutes,  it  is  not  less  so  in  our
own  species.  Even  the  external  signs  of  it  have  a  powerful
charm.

ts^  Every  one  knows  that  a  person  of  accomplished  good
breeding,  charms  every  one  he  converses  with.  And  what  is  this
good  breeding  ?  If  we  analyse  it,  we  shall  find  it  to  be  made
up  of  looks,  gestures,  and  speeches,  which  are  the  natural  signs
of  benevolence  and  good  affection.  He  who  has  got  the  habit
of  using  these  signs  with  propriety,  and  without  meanness,  is  a
well-bred  and  a  polite  man.

What  is  that  beauty  in  the  features  of  the  face,  particularly  of
the  fair  sex,  which  all  men  love  and  admire  ?  1  believe  it  con-
sists chiefly  in  the  features  which  indicate  good  affections.  Every
indication  of  meekness,  gentleness,  and  benignity,  is  a  beauty.
On  the  contrary,  every  feature  that  indicates  pride,  passion,  envy,
and  malignity,  is  a  deformity.

Kind  affections,  therefore,  are  amiable  in  brutes.  Even  the
signs  and  shadows  of  them  are  highly  attractive  in  our  own  spe-
cies. Indeed  they  are  the  joy  and  the  comfort  of  human  life,
not  to  good  men  only,  but  even  to  the  vicious  and  dissolute.

Without  society,  and  the  intercourse  of  kind  affection,  man  is
a  gloomy,  melancholy  and  joyless  being.  His  mind  oppressed
with  cares  and  fears,  he  cannot  enjoy  the  balm  of  sound  sleep :
in  constant  dread  of  impending  danger,  he  starts  at  the  rustling
of  a  leaf.  His  ears  are  continually  upon  the  stretch,  and  every
zephyr  brings  some  sound  that  alarms  him.

When  he  enters  into  society,  and  feels  security  in  the  good
affection  of  friends  and  neighbours,  it  is  then  only  that  his  fear
vanishes,  and  his  mind  is  at  ease.  His  courage  is  raised,  his  im-
derstanding  is  enlightened,  and  his  heart  dilates  with  joy.

BgF  Human  society  may  be  compared  to  a  heap  of  embers,
which  when  placed  asunder,  can  retain  neither  their  light  nor


182  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  V.

heat,  amidst  the  surrounding  elements ;  but  when  brought  toge-
ther they  mutually  give  heat  and  light  to  each  other  ;  the  flaine
breaks  forth,  and  not  only  defends  itself,  but  subdues  every  thing
around  it.

[The  security,  the  happiness,  and  the  strength  of  human  so-
ciety, spring  solely  from  the  reciprocal  benevolent  affections  of
its  members.]

The  benevolent  aflFections,  though  they  be  all  honourable  and
lovely,  are  not  all  equally  so.  There  is  a  subordination  among
them  ;  and  the  honour  we  pay  to  them  generally  corresponds  to
the  extent  of  their  object.

The  good  husband,  the  good  father,  the  good  friend,  the  good
neighbour,  we  honour  as  a  good  man,  worthy  of  our  love  and
affection.  But  the  man  in  whom  these  more  private  affections
are  swallowed  up  in  zeal  for  the  good  of  his  country,  and  of
mankind,  who  goes  about  doing  good,  and  seeks  opportunities  of
being  useful  to  his  species,  we  revere  as  more  than  a  good  man,
as  a  nero,  as  a  good  angel.


CHAPTER  V.

OF  MALEVOLENT  AFFECTION.


I.  Of  emulation  and  resentment. — Are  there,  in  the  consti-
tution of  man,  any  affections  that  may  be  called  malevolent  ?
What  are  they  ? And  what  is  their  use  and  end  ?

To  me  there  seem  to  be  two,  which  we  may  call  by  that  name,
[They  are  emulation  and  resentment.  These  I  take  to  be  parts
of  the  human  constitution,  given  us  by  our  Maker  for  good  ends,
and,  when  properly  directed  and  regulated,  of  excellent  use.]
But,  as  their  excess  or  abuse,  to  which  human  nature  is  very
prone,  is  the  source  and  spring  of  all  the  malevolence  that
is  to  be  found  among  men,  it  is  on  that  account  I  call  them
malevolent.

If  any  man  thinks  that  they  deserve  a  softer  name,  since  they
may  be  exercised  according  to  the  intention  of  nature,  without
malevolence,  to  this  I  have  no  objection.

By  emulation,  I  mean,  a  desire  of  superiority  to  our  rivals  in
any  pursuit,  accompanied  with  an  uneasiness  at  being  surpassed.

Human  life  has  justly  been  compared  to  a  race.  The  prize  is
superiority  in  one  kind  or  another.  But  the  species  or  forms  (if
I  may  use  the  expression)  of  superiority  among  men  are  infinitely
diversified.

There  is  no  man  so  contemptible  in  his  own  eyes,  as  to  hinder
him  from  entering  the  lists  in  one  form  or  another  ;  and  he  will
always  find  competitors  to  rival  him  in  his  own  way.


OP  MALEVOLENT  AFFECTION.  188

We  see  emulation  among  brute-animals.  Dogs  and  horses
contend  each  with  his  kind  in  the  race.  Many  animals  of  the
gregarious  kind  contend  for  superiority  in  their  flock  or  herd,
and  show  manifest  signs  of  jealousy  when  others  pretend  to
rival  them.

The  emulation  of  the  brute-animals  is  mostly  confined  to  swift-
ness, or  strength,  or  favour  with  their  females.  But  the  emula-
tion of  the  human  kind  has  a  much  wider  field.

In  every  profession,  and  in  every  accomplishment  of  body  or
mind,  real  or  imaginary,  there  are  rivalships.  Literary  men
rival  one  another  in  literary  abilities.  Artists  in  their  several
arts.  The  fair  sex  in  their  beauty  and  attractions,  and  in  the
respect  paid  them  by  the  other  sex.

In  every  political  society,  from  a  petty  corporation  up  to  the
national  administration,  there  is  a  rivalship  for  power  and  in-
fluence.

Men  have  a  natural  desire  of  power  without  respect  to  the
power  of  others.  This  we  call  ambition.  But  the  desire  of
superiority,  either  in  power,  or  in  any  thing  we  think  worthy  of
estimation,  has  a  respect  to  rivals,  and  is  what  we  properly  call
emulation.

The  stronger  the  desire  is,  the  more  pungent  will  be  the  un-
easiness of  being  foimd  beliind,  and  the  mind  will  be  the  more
hurt  by  this  humiliating  view.

II.  [Emulation  has  a  manifest  tendency  to  improvement.
Without  it  life  would  stagnate,  and  the  discoveries  of  art  and
genius  would  be  at  a  stand.]  This  principle  produces  a  constant
fermentation  in  society,  by  which,  though  dregs  may  be  pro-
duced, the  better  part  is  purified  and  exalted  to  a  perfection
which  it  could  not  otherwise  attain.

We  have  not  suflSicient  data  for  a  compariscm  of  the  good  and
bad  effects  which  this  principle  actually  produces  in  society  ;  but
there  is  ground  to  think  of  this,  as  of  other  natural  principles,
that  the  good  overbalances  the  ill.  As  far  as  it  is  under  the
dominion  of  reason  and  virtue,  its  effects  are  always  good ;  when
left  to  be  guided  by  passion  and  folly,  they  are  often  very  bad.

Reason  directs  us  to  strive  for  superiority,  only  in  things  that
have  real  excellence,  otherwise  we  spend  our  labour  for  that
which  profiteth  not.  To  value  ourselves  for  superiority  in  things
that  have  no  real  worth,  or  none,  compared  with  what  they  cost,
is  to  be  vain  of  our  ovni  folly ;  and  to  be  uneasy  at  the  supe-
riority of  others  in  such  things,  is  no  less  ridiculous.

Reason  directs  us  to  strive  for  superiority  only  in  things  in
our  power,  and  attainable  by  our  exertion,  otherwise  we  shall  be
like  the  frog  in  the  fable,  who  swelled  herself  till  she  burst,  in
order  to  equal  the  ox  in  magnitude.

To  check  all  desire  of  things  not  attainable,  and  every  uneasy


234  ESSAY  III.- PART  II.  CHAP.  V.

thought  in  the  want  of  them,  is  an  obvious  dictate  of  prudence,
as  well  as  of  virtue  and  religion.

If  emulation  be  regulated  by  such  maxims  of  reason,  and  all
undue  partiality  to  ourselves  be  laid  aside,  it  ynW.  be  a  powerful

?rinciple  of  our  improvement,  without  hurt  to  any  other  person,
t  will  give  strength  to  the  nerves,  and  vigour  to  the  mind,  in
every  noble  and  manly  pursuit.

111.  [But  dismal  are  its  effects,  when  it  is  not  under  the  direc-
tion of  reason  and  virtue.  It  has  often  the  most  malignant
influence  on  men's  opinions,  on  their  affections,  and  on  their
actions.]

It  is  an  old  observation,  that  affection  follows  opinion ;  and  it
is  undoubtedly  true  in  many  cases.  A  man  cannot  be  grateful
without  the  opinion  of  a  favour  done  him.  He  cannot  have
deliberate  resentment  without  the  opinion  of  an  injury ;  nor
esteem  without  the  opinion  of  some  estimable  quality ;  nor  com-
passion Mdthout  the  opinion  of  suffering.

But  it  is  no  less  true,  that  opinion  sometimes  follows  affection,
not  that  it  ought,  but  that  it  actually  does  so,  by  giving  a  false
bias  to  our  judgment.  We  are  apt  to  be  partial  to  our  friends,
and  still  more  to  ourselves.

Hence  the  desire  of  superiority  leads  men  to  put  an  undue
estimation  upon  those  things  wherein  they  excel,  or  think  they
excel.  And,  by  this  means,  pride  may  feed  itself  upon  the  very
dregs  of  human  nature.

The  same  desire  of  superiority  may  lead  men  to  undervalue
those  things  wl\erein  they  either  despair  of  excelling,  or  care  not
to  make  the  exertion  necessary  for  that  end.  The  grapes  are
sour,  said  the  fox,  when  he  saw  them  beyond  his  reach.  TRe
same  principle  leads  men  to  detract  from  the  merit  of  others,  and
to  impute  their  brightest  actions  to  mean  or  bad  motives.

He  who  runs  a  race  feels  uneasiness  at  seeing  another  out-
strip him.  This  is  uncorrupted  nature,  and  the  work  of  God
within  him.  But  this  uneasiness  may  produce  either  of  two  very
different  effects.  It  may  incite  him  to  make  more  vigorous  exer-
tions, and  to  strain  every  nerve  to  get  before  his  rival.  This  is
fair  and  honest  emulation.  This  is  the  effect  it  is  intended  to
produce.  [But  if  he  has  not  fairness  and  candour  of  heart,  he
will  look  with  an  evil  eye  upon  his  competitor,  and  will  endea-
vour to  trip  him,  or  to  throw  a  stumbling-block  in  his  way.  This
is  pure  envy,  the  mbst  malignant  passion  that  can  lodge  in  the
human  breast ;  which  devours,  as  its  natural  food,  the  fame  and
the  happiness  of  those  who  are  most  deserving  of  our  esteem.]

If  there  be,  in  some  men,  a  proneness  to  detract  from  the
character,  even  of  persons  unknown  or  indifferent,  in  others  an
avidity  to  hear  and  to  propagate  scandal,  to  what  principle. in
human  nature  must  we  ascribe  these  qualities  ? The  failings  of


OF  MALEVOLENT  AFFECTION.  185

others  surely  add  nothing  to  our  worth,  nor  are  they,  in  them-
selves, a  pleasant  subject  of  thought  or  of  discourse.  But  they
flatter  pride,  by  giving  an  opinion  of  our  superiority  to  those
&om  whom  we  detract.

Is  it  not  possible,  that  the  same  desire  of  superiority  may  have
some  secret  influence  upon  those  who  love  to  display  their  elo-
quence in  declaiming  upon  the  corruption  of  human  nature,  and
the  wickedness,  fraud  and  insincerity  of  mankind  in  general  ?  It
ought  always  to  be  taken  for  granted,  that  the  declaimer  is  an
expeption  to  the  general  rule,  otherwise  he  would  rather  choose,
even  for  his  own  sake,  to  draw  a  veil  over  the  nakedness  of  his
species.  But  hoping  that  his  audience  will  be  so  civil  as  not  to
include  him  in  the  black  description,  he  rises  superior  by  the
depression  of  the  species,  and  stands  alone,  Kke  Noah  in  the  an-
tediluvian world. This  looks  like  envy  against  the  human  race.

IV.  Effects  of  emulation  in  brute-animals. — It  would  be  end-
less, and  no  ways  agreeable,  to  enumerate  all  the  evils  and  all  the
vices  which  passion  and  folly  beget  upon  emulation.  Here,  as
in  most  cases,  the  corruption  of  the  best  things  is  the  worst.  [In
brute-animals,  emulation  has  little  matter  to  work  upon,  and  its
effects,  good  or  bad,  are  few.]  It  may  produce  battles  of  cocks
and  battles  of  bulls,  and  little  else  that  is  observable.  But  in
mankind,  it  has  an  infinity  of  matter  to  work  upon,  and  its  good
or  bad  effects,  according  as  it  is  well  or  ill  regulated  and  directed,
multiply  in  proportion.

[The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  what  has  been  said  upon
this  principle  is,  That  emulation,  as  far  as  it  is  a  part  of  our
constitution,  is  highly  useful  and  important  in  society  ;  that  in
the  wise  and  good,  it  produces  the  best  effects  without  any  harm  ;
but  in  the  foolish  and  vicious,  it  is  the  parent  of  a  great  part  of
the  evils  of  life,  and  of  the  most  malignant  vices  that  stain  human
nature.]

We  are  next  to  consider  resentment,

V.  Definition  of  resentment. — [Nature  disposes  us,  when  we
are  hurt,  to  resist  and  retaliate.  Besides  the  bodily  pain  occa-
sioned by  the  hurt,  the  mind  is  ruffled,  and  a  desire  raised  to
retaliate  upon  the  author  of  the  hurt  or  injury.  This,  in  general,
is  what  we  call  anger  or  resentment.'\

A  very  important  distinction  is  made  by  Bishop  Butler  between
sudden  resentment,  which  is  a  blind  impulse  arising  from  our
constitution,  and  that  which  is  deliberate.  The  first  may  be
raised  by  hurt  of  any  kind  ;  but  the  last  can  only  be  raised  by
injury,  real  or  conceived.

The  same  distinction  is  made  by  Lord  Kames,  in  his  "  Ele-
ments of  Criticism."  What  Butler  calls  sudden,  he  calls  in^
stinctive.

We  have  not,  in  common  language,  different  names  for  these


136  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  V.

different  kinds  of  resentment ;  but  the  distinction  is  very  neces-
sary, in  order  to  our  having  just  notions  of  this  part  of  the
human  constitution.  It  corresponds  perfectly  with  the  distinc-
tion I  have  made  between  the  animal  and  rational  principles  of
action.  [For  this  sudden  or  instinctive  resentment,  is  an  animal
jorinciple  common  to  us  with  brute-animals.  But  that  resentment
which  the  authors  I  have  named  call  deliberate^  must  fall  under
the  class  of  rational  principles.]

It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that,  by  referring  it  to  that
class,  I  do  not  mean,  that  it  is  always  kept  within  the  bounds
that  reason  prescribes,  but  only  that  it  is  proper  to  man  as  a
reasonable  being,  capable,  by  his  rational  faculties,  of  distin*
guishing  between  hurt  and  injury  ;  a  distinction  which  no  brute
animal  can  make.

Both  these  kinds  of  resentment  are  raised,  whether  the  hurt
or  injury  be  done  to  ourselves,  or  to  those  we  are  interested  in.

Wherever  there  is  any  benevolent  affection  towards  others,  we
resent  their  wrongs,  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  our  affec-
tion. Pity  and  sympathy  with  the  sufferer,  produce  resentment
against  the  author  of  the  suffering,  as  naturally  as  concern  for
ourselves  produces  resentment  of  our  own  wrongs.

VI.  I  shall  first  consider  that  resentment  which  I  call  animal^
which  Butler  calls  sudden,  and  Lord  Kames  instinctive.

In  every  animal  to  which  Nature  hath  given  the  power  of
hurting  its  enemy,  we  see  an  endeavour  to  retaliate  the  ill  that
is  done  to  it. Even  a  mouse  will  bite  when  it  cannot  nm  away.

Perhaps  there  may  be  some  animals  to  whom  nature  hath
given  no  offensive  weapon.  To  such,  anger  and  resentment
would  be  of  no  use  ;  and  I  believe  we  shall  find,  that  they  never
show  any  sign  of  it. But  there  are  few  of  this  kind.

Some  of  the  more  sagacious  animals  can  be  provoked  to  fierce
anger,  and  retain  it  long.  Many  of  them  show  great  animosity
in  defending  their  young,  who  hardly  show  any  in  defending
themselves.  Others  resist  every  assault  made  upon  the  flock  or
herd  to  which  they  belong.  Bees  defend  their  hive,  wild  beasts
their  den,  and  birds  their  nest.

[This  sudden  resentment  operates  in  a  similar  manner  in  men
and  in  brutes,  and  appears  to  be  given  by  nature  to  both  for  the
same  end,  namely,  for  defence,  even  in  cases  where  there  is  no
time  for  deliberation.^  jgS^  It  may  be  compared  to  that  natural
instinct,  by  which  a  man,  who  has  lost  his  balance  and  begins  to
fall,  makes  a  sudden  and  violent  effort  to  recover  hin(iself,  with-
out any  intention  or  deliberation.

In  such  efforts,  men  often  exert  a  degree  of  muscular  strength
beyond  what  they  are  able  to  exert  by  a  calm  determination  of
the  will,  and  thereby  save  themselves  from  many  a  dangerous  fall.

By  a  like  violent  and  sudden  impulse,  nature  prompts  us  to


OF  MALEVOLENT  AFFECTION.  137

repel  hurt  upon  the  cause  of  it,  whether  it  be  man  or  beast.
The  instinct  before  mentioned  is  solely  defensive,  and  is  prompted
by  fear.  This  sudden  resentment  is  offensive,  and  is  prompted
by  anger^  but  with  a  view  to  defence.

[Man,  in  his  present  state,  is  surrounded  vdth  so  many  dangers
from  his  own  species,  from  brute-animals,  from  every  thing
around  him,  that  he  has  need  of  some  defensive  armour  that
shall  always  be  ready  in  the  moment  of  danger.  His  reason  is
of  great  use  for  this  purpose,  when  there  is  time  to  apply  it.
But,  in  many  cases,  the  mischief  would  be  done  before  reason
could  think  of  the  means  of  preventing  it.]

[The  wisdom  of  nature  hath  provided  two  means  to  supply
this  defect  of  our  reason.  (1)  One  of  these  is  the  instinct  before
mentioned,  by  which  the  body,  upon  the  appearance  of  danger,
is  instantly,  and  without  thought  or  intention,  put  in  that  pos-
ture which  is  proper  for  preventing  the  danger,  or  lessening  it.]
JB^  Thus,  we  wink  hard  when  our  eyes  are  threatened ;  we  bend
the  body  to  avoid  a  stroke  ;  we  make  a  sudden  effort  to  recover
our  balance,  when  in  danger  of  falling.  By  such  means  we  are
guarded  from  many  dangers  which  our  reason  would  come  too
late  to  prevent.

[(2)  But  as  offensive  arms  are  often  the  surest  means  of  defence,
by  deterring  the  enemy  from  an  assault,  native  hath  also  pro-
vided man,  and  other  animals,  with  this  Idnd  of  defence,  by  that
sudden  resentment  of  which  we  now  speak,  which  outrims  the
quickest  determinations  of  reason,  and  takes  fire  in  an  instant,
direatening  the  enemy  with  retaliation.]

[The  first  of  these  principles  {instinct)  operates  upon  the
defender  only;  but  this  (resentment)  operates  both  upon  the
defender  and  the  assailant,  inspiring  the  former  with  courage
and  animosity,  and  striking  terror  into  the  latter.]  fiSF  It  pro-
claims to  all  assailants,  what  our  ancient  Scottish  kings  did
upon  their  coins,  by  the  emblem  of  a  thistle,  v\rith  this  motto,
**  Nemo  me  impune  lacesset."  By  this,  in  innumerable  cases,
men  and  beasts  are  deterred  from  doing  hurt,  and  others  thereby
secured  from  suffering  it.

But  as  resentment  supposes  an  object  on  whom  we  may  retali-
ate, how  comes  it  to  pass,  that  in  brutes  very  often,  and  some-
times in  our  own  species,  we  see  it  wreaked  upon  inanimate
things,  which  are  incapable  of  suffering  by  it  ?

Perhaps  it  might  be  a  sufiicient  answer  to  this  question.  That
nature  acts  by  general  laws,  which,  in  some  particular  cases  may
go  beyond,  or  fall  short  of  their  intention,  though  they  be  ever
so  well  adapted  to  it  in  general.

But  I  confess  it  seems  to  me  impossible,  that  there  should  be
resentment  against  a  thing,  which  at  that  very  moment  is  consi-
dered as  inanimate,  and  consequently  incapable  either  of  intend-


Igg  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  V.

ing  hurt,  or  of  being  punished.  For  what  can  be  more  absurd,
than  to  be  angry  with  the  knife  for  cutting  me,  or  with  the
weight  for  falling  upon  my  toes  ?  There  must  therefore,  I  con-
ceive, be  some  momentary  notion  or  conception  that  the  object
of  our  resentment  is  capable  of  punishment ;  and  if  it  be  natural,
before  reflection,  to  be  angry  with  things  inanimate,  it  seems
to  be  a  necessary  consequence,  that  it  is  natural  to  think  that
they  have  life  and  feeling.

Vll.  Children  and  rude  nations  generally  ascribe  life  and
intelligence  to  inanimate  things, — [Several  phenomena  in  human
nature  lead  us  to  conjecture  that,  in  the  earliest  period  of  life^
we  are  apt  to  think  every  object  about  us  to  be  animated.  Judg-
ing of  them  by  ourselves,  we  ascribe  to  them  the  feelings  we  are
conscious  of  in  ourselves.]  So  we  see  a  little  girl  judges  of  her
doll  and  of  her  play-things.  And  so  we  see  rude  nations  judge
of  the  heavenly  bodies,  of  the  elements,  and  of  the  sea,  rivers,
and  fountains.*

If  this  be  so,  it  ought  not  to  be  said,  that  by  reason  and  ex-
perience, we  learn  to  ascribe  life  and  intelligence  to  things  which
we  before  considered  as  inanimate.  It  ought  rather  to  be  said,
[That  by  reason  and  experience  we  learn  that  certain  things  are
inanimate,  to  which  at  first  we  ascribed  life  and  intelligence.]

If  this  be  true,  it  is  less  surprising  that,  before  reflection,  we
should  for  a  moment  relapse  into  this  prejudice  of  our  early
years,  and  treat  things  as  if  they  had  life,  which  we  once  believed
to  have  it.

It  does  not  much  affect  our  present  argument,  whether  this
be,  or  be  not  the  cause,  why  a  dog  pursues  and  gnashes  at  the
stone  that  hurt  him ;  and  why  a  man  in  a  passion,  for  losing  at
play,  sometimes  wreaks  his  vengeance  on  the  cards  or  dice.

Jt  is  not  strange  that  a  blind  animal  impulse  should  sometimes
lose  its  proper  direction.  In  brutes  this  has  no  bad  consequence ;
in  men  the  least  ray  of  reflection  corrects  it,  and  shows  its
absurdity.

[It  is  sufficiently  evident,  upon  the  whole,  that  this  sudden,  or
animal  resentment,  is  intended  by  nature  for  our  defence.  It
prevents  mischief  by  the  fear  of  punishment.]  ^^  It  is  a  kind
of  penal  statute,  promulgated  by  nature,  the  execution  of  which
is  committed  to  the  sufierer.

It  may  be  expected  indeed,  that  one  who  judges  in  his  own
cause,  will  be  disposed  to  seek  more  than  an  equitable  redress.
But  this  disposition  is  checked  by  the  resentment  of  the  other
par^.

Yet,  in  the  state  of  nature,  injuries  once  begun,  will  often  be
reciprocated  between  the  parties,  until  mortal  enmity  is  pro-

•  Vide  sec.  1 .  chap.  iii.  Essay  IV.  seq.


OF MALEVOLENT  AFFECTION.  J  89

duced,  and  each  party  thinks  himself  safe  only  in  the  destruction
of  his  enemy.

This  right  of  redressing  and  punishing  our  own  wrongs,  so  apt
to  be  abused,  is  one  of  those  natural  rights,  which,  in  political
society,  is  given  up  to  the  laws,  and  to  the  civil  magistrate ;  and
this  indeed  is  one  of  the  capital  advantages  we  reap  from  the
political  union,  that  the  evils  arising  from  ungoverned  resentment
are  in  a  great  degree  prevented.

VIII.  Although  deliberate  resentment  does  not  properly  belong
to  the  class  of  animal  principles ;  yet,  as  both  have  the  same
name,  and  are  distinguished  only  by  philosophers,  and  as  in  real
life  they  are  commonly  intermixed,  I  shall  here  make  some
remarks  upon  it.

[A  small  degree  of  reason  and  reflection  teaches  a  man  that
injury  only,  and  not  mere  hurt,  is  a  just  object  of  resentment  to
a  rational  creature.]  A  man  may  suffer  grievously  by  the  hand
of  another,  not  only  without  injury,  but  with  the  most  friendly
intention ;  as  in  the  case  of  a  painful  surgical  operation.  Every
man  of  common  sense  sees,  that  to  resent  such  suffering,  is  not
the  part  of  a  man,  but  of  a  brute.

Mr.  Locke  mentions  a  gentleman  who,  having  been  cured  of
madness  by  a  very  harsh  and  offensive  operation,  with  great  sense
of  gratitude,  owned  the  cure  as  the  greatest  obligation  he  could
have  received,  but  could  never  bear  the  sight  of  the  operator,
because  it  brought  back  the  idea  of  that  agony  which  he  had
endured  from  his  hands.

In  this  case  we  see  distinctly  the  operation  both  of  the  animal,
and  of  the  rational  principle.  The  first  produced  an  aversion  to
the  operator,  which  reason  was  not  able  to  overcome ;  and  prob-
ably in  a  weak  mind  might  have  produced  lasting  resentment
and  hatred.  But,  in  this  gentleman,  reason  so  far  prevailed,  as  to
make  him  sensible  that  gratitude,  and  not  resentment,  was  due.

Suffering  may  give  a  bias  to  the  judgment,  and  make  us  appre-
hend injury  where  no  injury  is  done.  But,  I  think,  without  an
apprehension  of  injury,  there  can  be  no  deUberate  resentment.

Hence,  among  enlightened  nations,  hostile  armies  fight  with-
out anger  or  resentment.  The  vanquished  are  not  treated  as
offenders,  but  as  brave  men  who  have  fought  for  their  country
unsuccessfully,  and  who  are  entitled  to  every  office  of  humanity
consistent  with  the  safety  of  the  conquerors.

IX.  Agreements  and  disagreements  between  deliberate  and  mere
animal  resentment. — [If  we  analyze  that  deliberate  resentment
which  is  proper  to  rational  creatures,  we  shall  find  that  though  it
agrees  with  that  which  is  merely  animal  in  some  respects,  it  differs
in  others.  Both  are  accompanied  with  an  uneasy  sensation,  which
disturbs  the  peace  of  the  mind.  Both  prompt  us  to  seek  redreds
of  our  sufferings,  and  security  from  harm. But,  in  deliberate


IQQ  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  VI.

resentment,  there  must  be  an  opinion  of  injury  done  or  intended.
And  an  opinion  of  injury  implies  an  idea  of  justice^  and  conse'
quently  a  moral  faculty.  \

The  very  notion  of  an  injury  is,  that  it  is  less  than  we  may
justly  claim  ;  as,  on  the  contrary,  the  notion  of  a  favour  is  that
it  is  more  than  we  can  justly  claim.  Whence  it  is  evident,  that
justice  is  the  standard,  by  which  both  a  favour  and  an  injury
are  to  be  weighed  and  estimated.  Their  very  nature  and  defini-
tion consist  in  their  exceeding  or  falling  short  of  this  standard.
No  man,  therefore,  can  have  the  idea  either  of  a  favour  or  of  an
injury,  who  has  not  the  idea  of  justice.

That  very  idea  of  justice  which  enters  into  cool  and  deliberate
resentment,  tends  to  restrain  its  excesses.  For  as  there  is  injus-
tice in  doing  an  injury,  so  there  is  injustice  in  pimishing  it
beyond  measure.

To  a  man  of  candour  and  reflection,  consciousness  of  the
frailty  of  human  nature,  and  that  he  has  often  stood  in  need  of
forgiveness  himself,  the  pleasure  of  renewing  good  understand-
ing, after  it  has  been  interrupted,  the  inward  approbation  of  a
generous  and  forgiving  disposition,  and  even  the  irksomeness  and
imeasiness  of  a  mind  ruffled  by  resentment,  plead  strongly  against
its  excesses.

Upon  the  whole,  when  we  consider.  That,  on  the  one  hand,
every  benevolent  affection  is  pleasant  in  its  nature,  is  health  to
the  soul,  and  a  cordial  to  the  spirits ;  that  nature  has  made  even
the  outward  expression  of  benevolent  affections  in  the  counte-
nance, pleasant  to  every  beholder,  and  the  chief  ingredient  of
beauty  in  the  human  face  divine  ;  that,  on  the  other  hand,  every
malevolent  affection,  not  only  in  its  faulty  excesses,  but  in  its
moderate  degrees,  is  vexation  and  disquiet  to  the  mind,  and  even
gives  deformity  to  the  countenance,  it  is  evident  that,  by  these
signals,  nature  loudly  admonishes  us  to  use  the  former  as  our
daily  bread,  both  for  health  and  pleasure,  but  to  consider  'the
latter  as  a  nauseous  medicine,  which  is  never  to  be  taken  with-
out necessity ;  and  even  then  in  no  greater  quantity  than  the
necessity  requires.


CHAPTER  VI.


OF  PASSION.


I.  Passion,  Disposition,  Opinion. — Before  I  proceed  to  con-
sider the  rational  principles  of  action,  it  is  proper  to  observe,  that
[there  are  some  things  belonging  to  the  mind,  which  have  great
influence  upon  human  conduct,  by  exciting  or  allaying,  inflaming
or  cooling  the  animal  principles  we  have  mentioned.


OF  PASSION.  igj

Three  of  this  kind  deserve  particular  consideration.  I  shall
call  them  by  the  names  oi  passion,  disposition,  and  opinion,']

^  The  meaning  of  the  word  passion  is  not  precisely  ascertained,
either  in  common  discourse,  or  in  the  writings  of  philosophers.

II.  JDefiniiion  of  passion, — I  think  it  is  commonly  put  to  sig-
nify [some  agitation  of  mind,  which  is  opposed  to  that  state  of
tranquillity  and  composure,  in  which  a  man  is  most  master  of
himself.]

The  word  iraOos,  which  answers  to  it  in  the  Greek  language,
is,  by  Cicero,  rendered  by  the  word  perturbatio,

IST  It  has  always  been  conceived  to  bear  analogy  to  a  storm
at  sea,  or  to  a  tempest  in  the  air.  It  does  not  therefore  signify-
any  thing  in  the  mind  that  is  constant  and  permanent,  but  some-
thing that  is  occasional,  and  has  a  limited  duration,  like  a  storm
or  tempest.

Passion  commonly  produces  sensible  effects  even  upon  the  body.
It  changes  the  voice,  the  features,  and  the  gesture.  The  exter-
nal signs  of  passion  have,  in  some  cases,  .a  great  resemblance  to
those  of  madness ;  in  others,  to  those  of  melancholy.  It  gives
often  a  degree  of  muscular  force  and  agility  to  the  body,  far
beyond  what  it  possesses  in  calm  moments.

The  eflFects  of  passion  upon  the  mind  are  not  less  remarkable.
It  turns  the  thoughts  iavoluntarily  to  the  objects  related  to  it,
so  that  a  man  can  hardly  think  of  any  thing  else.  It  gives  often
a  strange  bias  to  the  judgment,  making  a  man  quicksighted  in
every  thing  that  tends  to  inflame  his  passion,  and  to  justify  it,
but  blind  to  every  thing  that  tends  to  moderate  and  allay  it.
fliF  Like  a  magic  lantern,  it  raises  up  spectres  and  apparitions
that  have  no  reality,  and  throws  false  colours  upon  every  object.
It  can  turn  deformity  into  beauty,  vice  into  virtue,  and  virtue
into  vice.

The  sentiments  of  a  man  under  its  influence  will  appear
absurd  and  ridiculous,  not  only  to  other  men,  but  even  to  him-
self when  the  storm  is  spent  and  is  succeeded  by  a  calm.  Pas-
sion often  gives  a  violent  impulse  to  the  will,  and  makes  a  man
do  what  he  knows  he  shall  repent  as  long  as  he  lives.

That  such  are  the  effects  of  passion,  I  think  all  men  agree.
They  have  been  described  in  fively  colours  by  poets,  orators
and  moralists,  in  all  ages.  But  men  have  given  more  attention
to  the  effects  of  passion  than  to  its  nature  ;  and  while  they
have  copiously  and  elegantly  described  the  former,  they  have
not  precisely  defined  the  latter.

III.  [The  controversy  between  the  ancient  Peripatetics  and
the  Stoics,  with  regard  to  the  passions,  was  probably  owing  to
their  affixing  different  meanings  to  the  word,]  The  one  sect
maintained,  that  the  passions  are  good,  and  useful  parts  of  our
constitution,  while they are held under  the government of


192  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  VI.

reason.  The  other  sect,  conceiving  that  nothing  is  to  be
called  passion  which  does  not,  in  some  degree,  cloud  and
darken  the  understanding,  considered  all  passion  as  hostile  to
reason,  and  therefore  maintained,  that  in  the  wise  man  passion
should  have  no  existence,  but  be  utterly  exterminated.

If  both  sects  had  agreed  about  the  definition  of  passion,  they
would  probably  have  had  no  difierence.  But  while  one  con-
sidered passion  only  as  the  cause  of  those  bad  effects  which  it
often  produces,  and  the  other  considered  it  as  fitted  by  nature
to  produce  good  effects,  while  it  is  under  subjection  to  reason,  it
does  not  appear  that  what  one  sect  justified  was  the  same  thing
which  the  other  condemned.  Both  allowed  that  no  dictate  of
passion  ought  to  be  followed  in  opposition  to  reason.  Their
difference,  therefore,  was  verbal  more  than  real,  and  was  owing
to  their  giving  different  meanings  to  the  same  word.

IV.  [The  precise  meaning  of  this  word  seems  not  to  be  more
clearly  ascertained  among  modern  philosophers,^

Mr.  Hume  gives  the  name  of  passion  to  every  principle  of
action  in  the  human  mind ;  and,  in  consequence  of  this,  main-
tains, that  every  man  is,  and  ought  to  be  led  by  his  passions,
and  that  the  use  of  reason  is  to  be  subservient  to  the  passions.

Dr.  Hutcheson,  considering  all  the  principles  of  action  as  so
many  determinations  or  motions  of  the  will,  divides  them  into
the  calm  and  the  turbulent.  The  turbulent,  he  says,  are  our
appetites  and  our  passions.  Of  the  passions,  as  well  as  of  the
calm  determinations,  he  says,  that  "  some  are  benevolent,  others
are  selfish ;  that  anger,  enyy,  indignation,  and  some  others,  may
be  either  selfish  or  benevolent,  according  as  they  arise  from  some
opposition  to  our  own  interests,  or  to  those  of  our  friends,  or
persons  beloved  or  esteemed."

It  appears,  therefore,  that  this  excellent  author  gives  the  name
of  passions,  not  to  every  principle  of  action,  but  to  some,  and  to
those  only  when  they  are  turbulent  and  vehement,  not  when
they  are  calm  and  deliberate.

Our  natural  desires  and  affections  may  be  so  calm  as  to  leave
room  for  reflection,  so  that  we  find  no  difiiculty  in  deliberating
coolly,  whether,  in  such  a  particular  instance,  they  ought  to  be
gratified  or  not.  On  other  occasions,  they  may  be  so  importu-
nate as  to  make  deliberation  very  difficult,  urging  us,  by  a  kind
of  violence,  to  their  immediate  gratification.

Thus,  a  man  may  be  sensible  of  an  injury  without  being
inflamed.  He  judges  coolly  of  the  injury,  and  of  the  proper
means  of  redress.  This  is  resentment  without  passion.  It  leaves
to  the  man  the  entire  command  of  himself.

On  another  occasion,  the  same  principle  of  resentment  rises
into  a  flame.  His  blood  boils  within  him  ;  his  looks,  his  voice,
and  his  gesture  are  changed ;  he  can  think  of  nothing  but  imme-


OP  PASSION.


193

diate  revenge,  and  feels  a  strong  impulse,  without  regard  to
consequences,  to  say  and  do  things  which  his  cool  reason  cannot
justifjr. This  is  the  passion  of  resentment.

What  has  been  said  of  resentment  may  easily  be  applied  to
other  natural  desires  and  affections.  When  they  are  so  calm  as
neither  to  produce  any  sensible  effects  upon  the  body,  nor  to
darken  the  understanding  and  weaken  the  power  of  self-com-
mand, they  are  not  called  passions.  But  the  same  principle,
when  it  becomes  so  violent  as  to  produce  these  effects  upon  the
body  and  upon  the  mind,  is  a  passion,  or,  as  Cicero  very  properly
calls  it,  a  perturbation.

V.  Hume's  paradoxes  generally  reducible  to  abtises  of  words. —
It  is  evident  that  this  meaning  of  the  word  passion  accords  much
better  with  its  common  use  in  language,  than  that  which  Mr.
Hume  gives  it.

[When  he  says,  (1)  that  men  ought  to  be  governed  by  their
passions  only,  and  {2)  that  the  use  of  reason  is  to  be  subservient
to  the  passions,  this,  at  first-  hearing,  appears  a  shocking  para-
dox, repugnant  to  good  moreJs  and  to  common  sense ;  but,  like
most  other  paradoxes,  when  explained  according  to  his  meaning,
it  is  nothng  but  an  abuse  of  words. 1

For  if  we  give  the  name  oi  passion  to  every  principle  of  action,
in  every  degree,  and  give  the  name  of  reason  solely  to  the  power
of  discerning  tibe  fitness  of  means  to  ends,  it  will  be  true,  that
the  use  of  reason  is  to  be  subservient  to  the  passions.

[As  I  wish  to  use  words  as  agreeably  as  possible  to  their  com-
mon use  in  language,  I  shall,  by  the  word  passion,  mean,  not  any
Erinciple  of  action  distinct  from  those  desires  and  affections
efore  explained,  but  such  a  degree  of  vehemence  in  them,  or  in
any  of  them,  a«  is  apt  to  produce  those  effects  upon  the  body  or
upon  the  mind  which  have  been  above  described.*]

Our  appetites,  even  when  vehement,  are  not,  I  think,  very
commonly  called  passions,  yet  they  are  capable  of  being  inflamed
to  rage,  and  in  that  case  their  effects  are  very  similar  to  those
of  the  passions ;  and  what  is  said  of  one  may  be  applied  to
both.

VI.  Common  division  of  the  passions. — Having  explained  what
I  mean  by  passions,  I  think  it  unnecessary  to  enter  into  any  enu-
meration of  them,  since  they  differ,  not  in  kind,  but  rather  in
degree,  from  the  principles  already  enumerated.

The  common  division  of  the  passions  into  desire  and  aversion,
hope  and  fear,  joy  and  grief,  has  been  mentioned  almost  by  every
author  who  has  treated  of  them,  and  needs  no  explication.  But
we  may  observe,  that  these  are  ingredients  or  modifications,  not
of  the  passions  only,  but  of  every  principle  of  action,  animal  and
rational.

♦  Vide  Definition  of  Passion,  sec.  ii.  of  this  chap.

O.


194  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  VI-

All  of  them  imply  the  desire  of  some  object ;  and  the  desire
of  an  object  cannot  be  without  aversion  to  its  contrary ;  and,
according  as  the  object  is  present  or  absent,  desire  and  aversion
will  be  variously  modified  into  joy  or  grief,  hope  or  fear.  It  is
evident,  that  desire  and  aversion,  joy  and  grief,  hope  and  fear,
may  be  either  calm  and  sedate,  or  vehement  and  passionate.

Vll.  Influence  of  passion. — Passing  these,  therefore,  as  com-
mon to  all  principles  of  action,  whether  calm  or  vehement,  I
shall  only  make  some  observations  on  passion  in  general^  which
tend  to  show  its  influence  on  human  conduct.

[^First^  It  is  passion  that  makes  us  liable  to  strong  temptations.
Indeed,  if  we  had  no  passions,  we  should  hardly  be  under  any
temptation  to  wrong  conduct.  For,  when  we  view  things  calnaly,
and  free  from  any  of  the  false  colours  which  passion  throws  upon
them,  we  can  hardly  fail  to  see  the  right  and  the  wrong,  and  to
see  that  the  first  is  more  eligible  than  the  last.]

I  believe  a  cool  and  deliberate  preference  of  ill  to  good  is  never
the  first  step  into  vice.

**  When  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  was  good  for  food,  and
that  it  was  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make
one  wise,  she  took  of  the  fruit  thereof  and  did  eat,  and  gave  also
to  her  husband  vrfth  her  and  he  did  eat ;  and  the  eyes  of  them
both  were  opened."  Inflamed  desire  had  blinded  the  eyes  of
their  understanding.

Fix*d  on  the  fruit  she  gazed,  which  to  hehold

Might  tempt  alone ;  and  in  her  ears  the  sound

Yet  rung  of  his  persuasive  words  impregn'd

With  reason  to  her  seeming,  and  witn  truth.

—  Fair  to  the  eye,  inviting  to  the  taste.

Of  virtue  to  make  wise,  what  hinders  then

To  reach  and  feed  at  once  both  body  and  mind  T-^Milton .

Thus  our  first  parents  were  tempted  to  disobey  their  Maker,
and  all  their  posterity  are  liable  to  temptation  from  the  same
cause.  Passion,  or  violent  appetite,  first  blinds  the  understand-
ing, and  then  perverts  the  will.

[It  is  passion,  therefore,  and  the  vehement  motions  of  appetite,
that  make  us  liable,  in  our  present  state,  to  strong  temptations
to  deviate  from  our  duty.  This  is  the  lot  of  human  nature  in
the  present  period  of  our  existence.]

Human  virtue  must  gather  strength  by  struggle  and  eflfort.
Bs^  As  infants,  before  they  can  walk  without  stumbling,  must
be  exposed  to  many  a  fall  and  bruise ;  as  wrestlers  acquire  their
strength  and  agility  by  many  a  combat  and  violent  exertion ;  so
it  is  in  tlie  noblest  powers  of  human  nature,  as  well  as  the  mean-
est, and  even  in  virtue  itself.

It  is  not  only  made  manifest  by  temptation  and  trial,  but  by
these  means  it  acquires  its  strength  and  vigour.


OF  PASSION.  195

Men  must  acquire  patience  by  suffering,  and  iFortitude  by
being  exposed  to  danger,  and  every  other  virtue  by  situations
that  put  it  to  trial  and  exercise.

This,  for  any  thing  we  know,  may  be  necessary  in  the  nature
of  things. It  is  certainly  a  law  of  nature  with  regard  to  man.

Whether  there  may  be  orders  of  intelligent  and  moreJ  crea-
tures who  never  were  subject  to  any  temptation,  nor  had  their
virtue  put  to  any  trial,  we  cannot  without  presimiption  deter-
mine. But  it  is  evident,  that  this  neither  is,  nor  ever  was  the
lot  of  man,  not  even  in  the  state  of  innocence.

Sad,  indeed,  would  be  the  condition  of  man,  if  the  temptations
to  which,  by  the  constitution  of  bis  nature,  and  by  his  circum-
stances, he  is  liable,  were  irresistible.  Such  a  state  would  not  at
all  be  a  state  of  trial  and  discipline.

Our  condition  here  is  such,  that,  on  the  one  hand,  passion
often  tempts  and  solicits  us  to  do  wrong;  on  the  other  hand,
reason  and  conscience  oppose  the  dictates  of  passion.  The  flesh
lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh.  And
upon  the  issue  of  this  conflict,  the  character  of  the  man  and  his
fate  depend.

If  reason  be  victorious,  his  virtue  is  strengthened ;  he  has  the
inward  satisfaction  of  having  fought  a  good  fight  in  behalf  of  his
duty,  and  the  peace  of  his  mind  is  preserved.

If,  .on  the  other  hand,  passion  prevails  against  tlie  sense  of
duty,  the  man  is  conscious  of  having  done  what  he  ought  not,
and  might  not  have  done.  His  own  heart  condemns  him,  and  he
is  guilty  to  himself.

This  conflict  between  the  passions  of  our  animal  nature  and
the  calm  dictates  of  reason  and  conscience,  is  not  a  theory  in-
vented to  solve  the  phenomena  of  human  conduct ;  it  is  a  fact,  of
which  every  man  who  attends  to  his  own  conduct  is  conscious.

rar  In  the  most  ancient  philosophy,  of  which  we  have  any
account,  I  mean  that  of  the  Pythagorean  school,  the  mind  of  man
was  compared  to  a  state  or  commonwealth^  in  which  there  are
various  powers,  some  that  ought  to  govern,  and  others  that  ought
to  be  subordinate.

The  good  of  the  whole,  which  is  the  supreme  law  in  this,
as  in  elvery  commonwealth,  requires  that  this  subordination  be
preserved,  and  that  the  governing  powers  have  always  the  ascend-
ant over  the  appetites  and  the  passions.  All  wise  and  good  con-
duct consists  in  this.  All  foUy  and  vice  in  the  prevalence  of
passion  over  the  dictates  of  reason.

[This  philosophy  was  adopted  by  Plato ;  and  it  is  so  agreeable
to  what  every  man  feels  in  himself,  that  it  must  always  prevail
with  men  who  think  without  bias  to  a  system.]

The  governing  powers,  of  which  these  ancient  philosophers
speak,  are  the  same  which  I  call  the  rational  principles  of  action

o  2


jgg  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  VI.

and  which  I  shall  have  occasion  to  explain.  I  only  mentioii
them  here,  because,  without  a  regard  to  them,  the  influence  of
the  passions,  and  their  rank  in  our  constitution,  cannot  be  dis-
tinctly understood.

VIII.  [A  second  observation  is,  that  the  impulse  of  passion  is
not  always  to  what  is  bad,  but  very  often  to  what  is  good,  and
what  our  reason  approves.  There  are  some  passions,  as  Dr.
Hutcheson  observes,  that  are  benevolent,  as  well  as  others  that
are  selfish.]

The  affections  of  resentment  and  emulation,  with  those  that
spring  from  them,  from  their  very  nature,  disturb  and  disquiet
the  mind,  though  they  be  not  carried  beyond  the  bounds  which
reason  prescribes ;  and  therefore  they  are  conmionly  called  pas-
sions, even  in  their  moderate  degrees.  From  a  similar  cause,  the
benevolent  affections,  which  are  placid  in  their  nature,  and  are
rarely  carried  beyond  the  bounds  of  reason,  are  very  seldom  called
passions.  We  do  not  give  the  name  of  passion  to  benevolence,
gratitude  or  friendship.  Yet  [we  must  except  from  this  general
rule,  love  between  the  sexes,  which,  as  it  commonly  discomposes
the  mind,  and  is  not  easily  kept  within  reasonable  bounds,  is
always  called  a  passion.]

All  our  natural  desires  and  affections  are  good  and  necessary
parts  of  our  constitution ;  and  passion,  being  only  a  certain
degree  of  vehemence  in  these,  its  natural  tendency  is  to  good,
and  it  is  by  accident  that  it  leads  us  wrong.

Passion  is  very  properly  said  to  be  blind.  It  looks  not  beyond
the  present  gratification.  It  belongs  to  reason  to  attend  to  the
accidental  circumstances  which  may  sometimes  make  that  grati-
fication improper  or  hurtful.  When  there  is  no  impropriety  in
it,  much  more  when  it  is  our  duty,  passion  aids  reason,  and  gives
additional  force  to  its  dictates.

Sympathy  with  the  distressed  may  bring  them  a  charitable
relief,  when  a  calm  sense  of  duty  would  be  too  weak  to  produce
the  effect.

Objects,  either  good  or  ill,  conceived  to  be  very  distant,  when
they  are  considered  coolly,  have  not  that  influence  upon  men
which  in  reason  they  ought  to  have,  igir  Imagination,  like  the
eye,  diminisheth  its  objects  in  proportion  to  their  distance.  The
passions  of  hope  and  fear  must  be  raised,  in  order  to  give  such
objects  their  due  magnitude  in  the  imagination,  and  their  due
influence  upon  our  conduct.

The  dread  of  disgrace  and  of  the  civil  magistrate,  and  the
apprehension  of  future  punishment,  prevent  many  crimes,  which
bad  men,  without  these  restraints,  would  commit,  and  contribute
greatly  to  the  peace  and  good  order  of  society.

[There  is  no  bad  action  which  some  passion  may  not  prevent ;
nor  is  there  any  external  good  action,  of  which  some  passion  may


OF  PASSION.  J97

not  be  the  main  spring ;  and,  it  is  very  probable,  that  even
the  pctssions  of  meUy  upon  the  whole,  do  more  good  to  society
than  hurtJ]

The  ill  that  is  done  draws  our  attention  more,  and  is  imputed
solely  to  human  passions.  The  good  may  have  better  motives,
and  charity  leads  us  to  think  that  it  has ;  but,  as  we  see  not  the
heart,  it  is  impossible  to  determine  what  share  men's  passions
may  have  in  its  production.

IX.  [The  last  observation  is,  that  if  we  distinguish,  in  the
effects  of  our  passions,  those  which  are  altogether  involuntary,
and  without  the  sphere  of  our  power,  from  thfe  eflFects  which  may
be  prevented  by  an  exertion,  perhaps  a  great  exertion,  of  self-
government  ;  we  shall  find  the  ^rst  to  be  good  and  highly  useful,
and  the  last  only  to  be  bad.^

Not  to  speak  of  the  effects  of  moderate  passions  upon  the
health  of  the  body,  to  which  some  agitation  of  this  kind  seems
to  be  no  less  useful  than  storms  and  tempests  to  the  salubrity  of
the  air  ;  every  passion  naturally  draws  oiu*  attention  to  its  object,
and  interests  us  in  it.

The  mind  of  man  is  naturally  desultory,  and  when  it  has  no
interesting  object  in  view,  roves  from  one  to  another,  without
fixing  its  attention  upon  any  one.  A  transient  and  careless
glance  is  all  that  we  bestow  upon  objects  in  which  we  take  no
concern.  It  requires  a  strong  degree  of  curiosity,  or  some  more
important  passion,  to  give  us  that  interest  in  an  object  which  is
necessary  to  our  giving  attention  to  it.  And,  without  attention,
we  can  form  no  true  and  stable  judgment  of  any  object.

Take  away  the  passions,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  say  how  great  a
pari  of  mankind  would  resemble  those  frivolous  mortals,  who
never  had  a  thought  that  engaged  them  in  good  earnest.

It  is  not  mere  judgment  or  intellectual  ability  that  enables  a
man  to  excel  in  any  art  or  science.  He  must  have  a  love  and
admiration  of  it  bordering  upon  enthusiasm,  or  a  passionate
desire  of  the  fame,  or  of  some  other  advantage  to  be  got  by  that
excellence.  Without  this,  he  would  not  undergo  the  labour  and
fatigue  of  his  faculties  which  it  requires.  So  that,  I  think,  we
may  with  justice  allow  no  small  merit  to  the  passions,  even  in
the  discoveries  and  improvements  of  the  arts  and  sciences.

If  the  passions  for  fame  and  distinction  were  extinguished,  it
would  be  diflicult  to  find  men  ready  to  undertake  the  cares  and
toils  of  government ;  and  few  perhaps  would  make  the  exertions
necessary  to  raise  themselves  above  the  ignoble  vulgar.

The  involuntary  signs  of  the  passions  and  dispositions  of  the
mind,  in  the  voice,  features,  and  action,  are  a  part  of  the  human
constitution  which  deserves  admiration.  The  signification  of
those  signs  is  known  to  aU  men  by  nature,  and  previous  to  all
experience.


198  ESSAY  111,-PAET  TI.  CHAP.  VII.


They  are  so  many  openings  into  the  souls  of  our  fellow
men,  by  which  their  sentiments  become  visible  to  the  eye.  They
are  a  natural  language  common  to  mankind,  without  which  it
would  have  been  impossible  to  have  invented  any  artificial
language.

X.  [It  19  from  the  natural  signs  of  the  passions  and  disposi-
tions of  the  mind,  that  the  human  form  derives  its  beauty  ;  that
painting y  poetry ,  and  mtbsicy  derive  their  expression;  that  eh^
quence  derives  its  greatest  force,  and  conversation  its  greatest
charm.]

The  passions,  when  kept  wdthin  iJieir  proper  bounds,  give  Ufe
and  vigour  to  the  whole  man.  Without  them  man  would  be  a
slug.  We  see  what  polish  and  animation  the  passion  of  love,
when  honourable  and  not  unsuccessful,  gives  to  both  sexes.

The  passion  for  military  glory  raises  the  brave  commander  in
the  day  of  battle,  far  above  himself,  making  his  countenance  to
shine,  and  his  eyes  to  sparkle.  The  glory  of  Old  England  warms
the  heart  even  of  the  British  tar,  and  makes  him  despise  every
danger.

As  to  the  bad  effects  of  passion,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that
it  often  gives  a  strong  impulse  to  what  is  bad,  and  what  a  man
condemns  himself  for,  as  soon  as  it  is  done.  But  he  must  be
conscious  that  the  impulse,  though  strong,  was  not  irresistible,
otherwise  he  could  not  condemn  himself.

We  allow  that  a  sudden  and  violent  passion,  into  which  a  man
is  surprised,  alleviates  a  bad  action ;  but  if  it  was  irresistible,  it
would  not  only  alleviate,  but  totally  exculpate,  which  it  never
does,  either  in  the  judgment  of  the  man  himself,  or  of  others.

To  sum  up  all,  passion  furnishes  a  very  strong  instance  of  the
truth  of  the  common  maxim,  that  the  corruption  of  the  best
things  is  worst.


CHAPTER  VII.


OF  DISPOSITION.


I.  [By  disposition  I  mean  a  state  of  mind  which,  while  it  lasts,
gives  a  tendency,  or  proneness,  to  be  moved  by  certain  animal
principles,  rather  than  by  others ;  while,  at  another  time,  another
state  of  mind,  in  the  same  person,  may  give  the  ascendant  to
other  animal  principles.]

It  was  before  observed,  that  it  is  a  property  of  our  appetites
to  be  periodical,  ceasing  for  a  time,  when  sated  by  their  objects,
and  returning  regularly  after  certain  periods.

Even  those  principles  which  are  not  periodical,  have  their  ebbs
and  flows  occasionally,  according  to  the  present  disposition  of
the  mind.


OF  DISPOSITION.  199

Among  some  of  the  principles  of  action  there  is  a  natural  affi-
nity, so  that  one  of  the  tribe  naturally  disposes  to  those  which
are  allied  to  it.

Such  an  affinity  has  been  observed  by  many  good  authors  to
be  among  all  the  benevolent  affections.  The  exercise  of  one
benevolent  affection  gives  a  proneness  to  the  exercise  of  others.

There  is  a  certain  placid  and  agreeable  tone  of  mind  which  is
common  to  them  all,  which  seems  to  be  the  bond  of  that  con-
nexion and  affinity  they  have  with  one  another.

The  malevolent  affections  have  also  an  affinity,  and  mutually
dispose  to  each  other,  by  means,  perhaps,  of  that  disagreeable
feeling  common  to  them  all,  which  makes  the  mind  sore  and
uneasy.

II.  [As  far  as  we  can  trace  the  causes  of  the  different  dispositions
of  the  mind,  they  seem  to  be  in  some  cases  owing  (1)  to  those  asso-
ciating powers  of  the  principles  of  action,  which  have  a  natural
affinity,  and  axe  prone  to  keep  company  with  one  another ;
sometimes  (2)  to  accidents  of  good  or  bad  fortune,  and  sometimes,
no  doubt,  (3)  the  state  of  the  body  may  have  influence  upon  the
ilisposition  of  the  mind.]

At  one  time  the  state  of  the  mind,  like  a  serene  unclouded
sky,  shows  every  thing  in  the  most  agreeable  light.  Then  a
man  is  prone  to  benevolence,  compassion,  and  every  kind  affec-
tion ;  unsuspicious,  not  easily  provoked.

The  poets  have  observed  that  men  have  their  molUa  tempora
fandi,  when  they  are  averse  from  saying  or  doing  a  harsh  thing ;
and  artful  men  watch  these  occasions,  and  know  how  to  improve
them  to  promote  their  ends.

III.  'The  excellent  consequences  of  good  humour, — This  dispo-
sition, I  think,  we  commonly  call  good  humour ,  of  which,  in  the
fair  sex,  Mr.  Pope  says,

Good  humour  only  teaches  charms  to  last,

Still  makes  new  conquests,  and  maintains  the  past.

[(1)  There  is  no  disposition  more  comfortable  to  the  person
himself,  or  more  agreeable  to  others,  than  good  humour.  (2)  It
is  to  the  mind,  what  good  health  is  to  the  body,  putting  a  man
in  the  capacity  of  enjoying  every  thing  that  is  agreeable  in  life,
and  of  using  every  faculty  without  clog  or  impediment.  (3)
It  disposes  to  contentment  with  our  lot,  (4)  to  benevolence  to  all
men,  (5)  to  sympathy  with  the  distressed.  (6)  It  presents  every
object  in  the  most  favourable  light,  and  (7)  disposes  us  to  avoid
giving  or  taking  offence.]

[This  happy  disposition  seems  to  be  the  natural  fruit  of  a  good
conscience,  and  a  firm  belief  that  the  world  is  under  a  wise  and
benevolent  administration ;  and,  when  it  springs  from  this  root,
it  is  an  habitual  sentiment  of  piety.


gQO  ESSAY  III.— PART  11.  CHAP.  Vll-

Good  humour  is  likewise  apt  to  be  produced  hy  happy  succeu^
or  unexpected  good  fortune.  Joy  and  hope  are  favourable  to  it;
vexation  and  disappointment  axe  unfavourable.]

The  only  danger  of  this  disposition  seems  to  be,  that  if  we
are  not  upon  our  guard,  it  may  degenerate  into  levity,  and
indispose  us  to  a  proper  degree  of  caution,  and  of  attention  to
the  future  consequences  of  our  actions.

IV.  [There  is  a  disposition  opposite  to  good  humowr  which  we
call  bad  humour,  of  which  the  tendency  is  directly  contrary,  and
therefore  its  influence  is  as  malignant  as  that  of  the  other  is
salutary.]

Bad  humour  alone  is  suflScient  to  make  a  man  unhappy ;  it
tinges  every  object  with  its  own  dismal  colour ;  and,  like  a  part
that  is  galled,  is  hurt  by  every  thing  that  touches  it.  It  takes
offence  where  none  was  meant,  and  disposes  to  discontent,  jea-
lousy, envy,  and,  in  general,  to  malevolence.

V.  Elation,  magnanimity,  a  sense  of  honour  and  pride. — An-
other couple  of  opposite  dispositions  are  elation  of  mind,  on  the
one  hand,  and  depression  on  the  other.

These  contrary  dispositions  axe  both  of  an  ambiguous  nature  ;
their  influence  may  be  good  or  bad,  according  as  they  are
grounded  on  true  or  false  opinion,  and  according  as  they  are
regulated.

That  elation  of  mind  which  arises  from  a  just  sense  of  the  dig^
nity  of  our  nature,  and  of  the  powers  and  faculties  with  which
God  hath  endowed  us,  is  true  magnanimity ^  and  disposes  a  man
to  the  noblest  virtues,  and  the  most  heroic  actions  and  enterprises.

There  is  also  an  elation  of  mmd  which  arises  from  a  conscious-
ness of  our  worth  and  integrity,  such  as  Job  felt,  when  he  said,
"  Till  I  die,  I  will  not  remove  my  integrity  from  me.  My
righteousness  I  hold  fast,  and  will  not  let  it  go ;  my  heart  shall
not  reproach  me  while  I  live."  This  may  be  called  the  pride  of
virtue ;  but  it  is  a  noble  pride.  It  makes  a  man  disdain  to  do
what  is  base  or  mean. This  is  the  true  sense  of  honour.

But  there  is  an  elation  of  mind  arising  from  a  vain  opinion
of  our  having  talents,  or  worth,  which  we  have  not ;  or  from
putting  an  undue  value  upon  any  of  our  endowments  of  mind,
body,  or  fortune.  This  is  pride,  the  parent  of  many  odious  vices;
such  as  arrogance,  undue  contempt  of  others,  self-partiality,  and
vicious  self-love.

VI.  Depression,  humility,  meanness. — The  opposite  disposi-
tion to  elation  of  mind,  is  depression,  which  also  has  good  or  bad
eflects,  according  as  it  is  grounded  upon  true  or  false  opinion.

[A  just  sense  of  the  weakness  and  imperfections  of  human
nature,  and  of  our  own  personeJ  faults  and  defects,  is  true
humility.  It  is  not  to  think  of  ourselves  above  what  we  ought
to  thiyik :"] a  most  salutary  and  amiable  disposition;  of  great


OF  DISPOSITION.  201

price  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man.  Nor  is  it  inconsistent  with
real  magnaniinity  and  greatness  of  soul.  They  may  dwell  toge-
ther with  great  advantage  and  ornament  to  both,  and  be  faithful
monitors  against  the  extremes  to  which  each  has  the  greatest
tendency.]

But  there  is  a  depression  of  mind  which  is  the  opposite  to
magnanimity,  which  debilitates  the  springs  of  action,  and  freezes
every  sentiment  that  should  lead  to  any  noble  exertion  or  en-
terprise.

Suppose  a  man  to  have  no  belief  of  a  good  administration  of
the  world,  no  conception  of  the  dignity  of  virtue,  no  hope  of
happiness  in  another  state. Suppose  him,  at  the  same  time,  in
a  state  of  extreme  poverty  and  dependence,  and  that  he  has  no
higher  aim  than  to  supply  his  bodily  wants,  or  to  minister  to  the
pleasure,  or  flatter  the  pride,  of  some  being  as  worthless  as  him-
self. Is  not  the  soul  of  such  a  man  depressed  as  much  as  his
body  or  his  fortune  ? And,  if  fortune  should  smile  upon  him
while  he  retains  the  same  sentiments,  he  is  onlv  the  slave  of  for-
tune. His  mind  is  depressed  to  the  state  of  a  brute,  and  his
human  faculties  serve  only  to  make  him  feel  that  depression.

Depression  of  mind  may  be  owing  to  melancholy ^  a  distemper
of  mind  which  proceeds  from  the  state  of  the  body,  which  throws
a  dismal  gloom  upon  every  object  of  thought,  cuts  all  the  sinews
of  action,  and  often  gives  rise  to  strange  and  absurd  opinions  in
religion,  or  in  other  interesting  matters.  Yet,  where  there  is
real  worth  at  bottom,  some  rays  of  it  will  break  forth  even  in
this  depressed  state  of  mind.

BST  A  remarkable  instance  of  this  was  exhibited  in  Mr.  Simon
Brown,  a  dissenting  clergyman  in  England,  who,  by  melancholy,
was  led  into  the  belief  that  his  rational  soul  had  gradually  de-
cayed within  him,  and  at  last  was  totally  extinct.  From  this
belief  he  gave  up  his  ministerial  function,  and  would  not  even
join  with  others  in  any  act  of  worship,  conceiving  it  to  be  a  pro-
fanation to  worship  God  without  a  soul.

In  this  dismal  state  of  mind,  he  wrote  an  excellent  defence  of
the  Christian  religion,  against  Tindal's  "  Christianity  as  old  as
the  Creation."  To  the  book  he  prefixed  an  epistle  dedicatory
to  Queen  Caroline,  wherein  he  mentions,  "  That  he  was  once
a  man,  but,  by  the  immediate  hand  of  God,  for  his  sins,  his
very  thinking  substance  has,  for  more  than  seven  years,  been
continually  wasting  away,  till  it  is  wholly  perished  out  of  him,
if  it  be  not  utterly  come  to  nothing."  And,  having  heard  of
her  Majesty's  eminent  piety,  he  begs  the  aid  of  her  prayers.

The  book  was  published  after  his  death  without  the  dedica-
tion, which,  however,  having  been  preserved  in  manuscript,  was
afterwards  printed  in  the  ^*  Adventurer,"  No.  88.

Thus  this  good  man,  when  he  believed  that  he  had  no  soul.


202  ESSAY  III.*PART  II.  CHAP.  Via

showed  a  most  generous  and  disinterested  concern  for  those  who
had  souls.

As  depression  of  mind  may  produce  strange  opinions^  espe-
cially in  the  case  of  melancholy,  so  our  opinions  may  have  a  very
considerable  influence,  either  to  elevate  or  to  depress  the  mind,
even  where  there  is  no  melancholy.

Suppose,  on  the  one  hand,  a  man  who  believes  that  he  is  destined
to  an  eternal  existence  ;  that  he  who  made,  and  who  governs  the
world,  maketh  account  of  him,  and  hath  furnished  him  with  the
means  of  attaining  a  high  degree  of  perfection  and  glory.  With
this  man  compare,  on  the  other  hand,  the  man  who  believes  no-
thing at  all,  or  who  believes  that  his  existence  is  only  the  play
of  atoms,  and  that,  after  he  hath  been  tossed  about  by  blind
fortune  for  a  few  years,  he  shall  again  return  to  nothing.  Can
it  be  doubted,  that  the  former  opinion  leads  to  elevation  and  great-
ness of  mind,  the  latter  to  meanness  and  depression  ?


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF  OPINION.


I.  Influence  <j/*  opinion  upon  our  animal  principles. — ^When
we  come  to  explain  the  rational  principles  of  action,  it  will
appear  th^t  opinion  is  an  essential  ingredient  in  them.  Here  we
are  only  to  consider  its  influence  upon  the  animal  principles^
Some  of  those  I  have  ranked  in  that  class  cannot,  I  think,  exist
in  the  human  mind  without  it.

Gratitude  supposes  the  opinion  of  a  favour  done  or  intended ;
resentment  the  opinion  of  an  injury;  esteem  the  opinion  of
merit ;  the  passion  of  love  supposes  the  opinion  of  uncommon
jnsnt  and  perfection  in  its  pbject.

Although  natural  affection  to  parents,  children,  and  near  re-
lations, is  not  grounded  on  the  opinion  of  their  laerit,  it  is  much
increased  by  that  consideration.  So  is  every  benevolent  affection.
On  the  contrary,  r^al  malevolence  can  luurdly  exist  without  the
opinion  of  demerit  in  the  object.

There  is  no  natural  desire  or  aversion,  which  may  not  be
restrained  by  opinion.  Thus,  if  a  man  were  athirst,  and  had  a
strong  desire  to  drink,  the  opinion  that  there  was  poison  in  the
cup  would  make  him  forbear.

It  is  evident  that  hope  and  fear,  which  every  natural  desire  or
affection  may  create,  depend  upon  the  opinion  of  future  good
or  ill.

[Thus  it  appears  that  our  passions,  our  dispositions,  and  our
opinions^  have  great  influence  upon  our  animal  principles^  to
strengthen  or  weaken,  to  excite  or  restrain  them ;  and,  by  that
means,  have  great  influence  upon  human  actions  and  characters.]


OF  OPINION.  gQ3

IL  [That  bruite  animals  have  both  passions  and  dispositions
similar,  in  many  respects,  to  those  of  men,  cannot  be  doubted.
Whether  they  have  opinions,  is  not  so  clear.  I  think  they  have
not,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word.]  But,  waving  all  dispute
upon  this  point,  it  will  be  granted  that  opinion  in  men  has  a
much  wider  field  than  in  brutes.  No  man  vrill  say,  that  they
haye  systems  of  theology,  morals,  jurisprudence  or  politics ;  or
that  they  can  reason  from  the  laws  of  nature,  in  mechanics,
medicine,  or  agriculture.

They  feel  the  evils  or  enjoyments  that  are  present ;  probably
they  imagine  those  which  experience  has  associated  with  what
they  feel.  But  they  can  take  no  large  prospect  either  of  the
past  or  of  the  future,  nor  see  through  a  train  of  consequences.

fBF  A  dog  may  be  deterred  from  eating  what  is  before  him,
by  the  fear  of  immediate  punishment,  which  he  has  felt  on  like
occasions;  but  he  is  never  deterred  by  the  consideration  of
health,  or  of  any  distant  good.

jgSS"  I  have  been  credibly  informed  that  a  monkey  having  once
been  intoxicated  with  strong  drink,  in  consequence  of  which  it
burnt  its  foot  in  the  fire,  and  had  a  severe  fit  of  sickness,  could
never  after  be  induced  to  drink  any  thing  but  pure  w|J»r.  I  be-
Keve  this  is  the  utmost  pitch  which  the  faculties  of  brutes  can  reach.

III.  [From  the  influence  of  opinion  upon  the  conduct  of  man-
kind, we  may  learn  that  it  is  one  of  the  chief  instruments  to  be
used  in  the  discipline  and  government  of  men.']

All  men,  in  the  early  part  of  life,  must  be  under  the  discipline
and  government  of  parents  and  tutors.  Men  who  live  in  society
must  be  under  the  government  of  laws  and  magistrates,  through
life.  The  government  of  men  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  noblest
exertions  of  human  power.  And  it  is  of  great  importance  that
those  who  have  any  share,  either  in  domestic  or  civil  government,
should  know  the  nature  of  man,  and  how  he  is  to  be  trained
and  governed.

Of  all  instruments  of  government,  opinion  is  the  sweetest,  and
the  most  agreeable  to  the  nature  of  man.  Obedience  tliat  flows
from  opinion,  is  real  freedom,  which  every  man  desires.  That
which  is  extorted  by  fear  of  punishment,  is  slavery;  a  yoke
which  is  always  galUng,  and  which  every  man  will  shake  ofi*
when  it  is  in  his  power.

The  opinions  of  the  bulk  of  mankind  have  always  been,  and
will  always  be,  what  they  are  taught  by  those  whom  they  esteem
to  be  wise  and  good ;  and  therefore,  in  a  considerable  degree,
are  in  the  power  of  those  who  govern  them.

Man,  uncorrupted  by  bad  habits  and  bad  opinions,  is  of  all
animals  the  most  tractable ;  corrupted  by  these,  he  is  of  all  ani-
mals the  most  untractable.

IV.  Analogy  between  the  discipline  of  body  and  mind. — I  appre-


204  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  VHI-

hend,  therefore,  that,  if  ever  civil  government  shall  be  brouglit
to  perfection,  it  must  be  the  principeJ  care  of  the  state  to  make
good  citizens  by  proper  education,  and  proper  instruction  and
discipline.

0gr  The  most  useful  part  of  medicine  is  that  which  strength-
ens the  constitution,  and  prevents  diseases  by  good  regimen;
the  rest  is  somewhat  like  propping  a  ruinous  fabric  at  great  ex-
pense, and  to  little  purpose.  The  art  of  government  is  the  me-
dicine of  the  mindy  and  the  most  useful  part  of  it  is  that  which
prevents  crimes  and  bad  habits,  and  trains  men  to  virtue  and  good
habits,  by  proper  education  and  discipline.

The  end  of  government  is  to  make  the  society  happy,  which
can  only  be  done  by  making  it  good  and  virtuous.

That  men  in  genereJ  will  be  good  or  bad  members  of  society,
according  to  the  education  and  discipline  by  which  they  have
been  trained,  experience  may  convince  us.

The  present  age  has  made  great  advances  in  the  art  of  training
men  to  military  duty.  It  wm  not  be  said  that  those  who  enter
into  that  service  are  more  tractable  than  their  fellow-subjects  of
other  professions.  And  I  know  not  why  it  should  be  thought
impossible  to  train  men  to  equal  perfection  in  the  other  duties
of  good  citizens.

What  an  immense  difference  is  there,  for  the  purpose  of  war,
between  an  army  properly  trained,  and  a  militia  hastily  drawn
out  of  the  multitude  ?  What  should  hinder  us  from  thinking
that,  for  every  purpose  of  civil  government,  there  may  be  a  like
difference  between  a  civil  society  properly  trained  to  virtue,  good
habits  and  right  sentiments,  and  those  civil  societies  which  we
now  behold  ? — But  I  fear  I  shall  be  thought  to  digress  from  my
subject  into  Utopian  speculation.

V.  Man  actuated  by  no  sense  of  duty^  considered. — [To  make
an  end  of  what  I  have  to  say  upon  the  animal  principles  of
action,  we  may  take  a  complex  view  of  their  effect  in  life,  by
supposing  a  being  actuated  by  principles  of  no  higher  order,  to
have  no  conscience  or  sense  of  duty^  only  let  us  allow  him  that
superiority  of  understanding,  and  that  power  of  self-government
which  man  actually  has.  Let  us  speculate  a  little  upon  this
imaginary  being,  and  consider  what  conduct  and  tenor  of  action
might  be  expected  from  him.]

It  is  evident  he  would  be  a  very  different  animal  from  a  brute,
and  perhaps  not  very  different,  in  appearance,  from  what  a  great
part  of  mankind  is.

He  would  be  capable  of  considering  the  distant  consequences
of  his  actions,  and  of  restraining  or  indulging  his  appetites,
desires,  and  affections,  from  the  consideration  of  distant  good
or  evil.

He  would  be  capable  of  choosing  some  main  end  of  his  life.


OF  OPINION.  205

and  planning  such  a  rale  of  conduct  as  appeared  most  subservient

to  it. Of  this,  we  have  reason  to  think  no  brute  is  capable.

We  can,  perhaps,  conceive  such  a  balance  of  the  animal  prin-
ciples of  action,  as,  with  very  little  self-government,  might  make
a  man  to  be  a  good  member  of  society,  a  good  companion,  and
to  have  many  amiable  qualities.

The  balance  of  our  animal  principles,  I  think,  constitutes
what  we  call  a  man's  natural  temper  ;  which  may  be  good  or  bad
with  regard  to  his  virtue,

A  man  in  whom  the  benevolent  affections,  the  desire  of  esteem
and  good  humour,  are  naturally  prevalent,  who  is  of  a  calm  and
dispassionate  nature,  who  has  the  good  fortime  to  live  with  good
men,  and  associate  with  good  companions,  may  behave  properly
with  little  effort.

His  natural  temper  leads  him,  in  most  cases,  to  do  what
virtue  requires.  And  if  he  happens  not  to  be  exposed  to  those
trying  situations,  in  which  virtue  crosses  the  natural  bent  of  his
temper,  he  has  no  great  temptation  to  act  amiss.

But  perhaps  a  happy  natural  temper,  joined  with  such  a  happy
situation,  is  more  ideal  than  real,  though  no  doubt  some  men
make  nearer  approaches  to  it  than  others.

The  temper  and  the  situation  of  men  is  commonly  such,  that
the  animal  principles  alone,  without  self-government,  would
never  produce  any  regular  and  consistent  train  of  conduct.

One  principle  crosses  another.  Without  self-government,  that
which  is  strongest  at  the  time  will  prevail.  And  that  which  is
weakest  at  one  time  may,  from  passion,  from  a  change  of  dis-
position or  of  fortime,  become  strongest  at  another  time.

Every  natural  appetite,  desire,  and  affection,  has  its  own  pre-
sent gratification  only  in  view.  [A  man,  therefore,  who  has  no
other  leader  than  these,  would  be  like  a  ship  in  the  ocean  with-
out hands,  which  cannot  be  said  to  be  destined  to  any  port.  He
would  have  no  character  at  ally  but  be  benevolent  or  spiteful,
pleasant  or  morose,  honest  or  dishonest,  as  the  present  wind
of  passion  or  tide  of  humour  moved  him.]

VI.  [Every  man  who  pursues  an  end,  he  it  good  or  bad,  must
be  active  when  he  is  disposed  to  be  indolent;  he  must  rein
every  passion  and  appetite  that  would  lead  him  out  of  his  road.]

Mortification  and  self-denial  are  found  not  in  the  paths  of
virtue  only ;  they  are  common  to  every  road  that  leads  to  an  end,
be  it  ambition,  or  avarice,  or  even  pleasure  itself.  Every  man
who  maintains  an  uniform  and  consistent  character,  must  sweat
and  toil,  and  often  struggle  with  his  present  inclination.

Yet  those  who  steadily  pursue  some  end  in  life,  though  they
must  often  restrain  their  strongest  desires,  and  practise  much
self-denial,  have,  upon  the  whole,  more  enjoyment  than  those
who  have  no  end  at  all,  but  to  gratify  the  present  prevailing
inclination.


•«


i


gO(;  ESSAY  III.— PART  III.  CHAP.  I.


A  dog  that  is  made  for  the  chase,  cannot  enjoy  the  hap-
piness of  a  dog  without  that  exercise.  Keep  him  within  doora,
feed  him  with  the  most  delicious  fare,  give  him  all  the  plea*
sures  his  nature  is  capable  of,  he  soon  becomes  a  dull,  torpid,
unhappy  animal.  No  enjoyment  can  supply  the  want  of  that
employment  which  nature  has  made  his  chief  good.  Let  him
hunt,  and  neither  pain  nor  hunger,  nor  fatigue  seem  to  be  eyils.
Deprived  of  this  exercise,  he  can  relish  nothing.  Life  itself
becomes  burdensome.

It  is  no  disparagement  to  the  human  kind  to  say,  that  man,
as  well  as  the  dog,  is  made  for  hunting,  and  cannot  be  happy
but  in  some  vigorous  pursuit.  He  has  indeed  nobler  game  to
pursue  than  the  dog,  but  he  must  have  some  pursuit,  other-
wise life  stagnates,  all  the  faculties  are  benumbed,  the  spirits
flag,  and  his  existence  becomes  an  unsurmountable  burden.

Even  the  mere  foxhunter,  who  has  no  higher  pursuit  than
his  dogs,  has  more  enjoyment  than  he  who  has  no  pursuit  at
all.  He  has  an  end  in  view,  and  this  invigorates  his  spirits,
makes  him  despise  pleasure,  and  bear  cold^  hunger,  and  fatigue,
as  if  they  were  no  evils.

"  Manet  sub  Jove  frigido
Venator,  tenerae  conjugis  immemor;
Seu  visa  est  catulis  cerva  iidelibus
Seu  rupit  teretes  Marsus  aper  plagas."

"  The  hunter,  chill'd  by  midnight  Jove
Forgets  his  tender,  wedded  love,
Whether  his  faithful  hounds  pursue,
And  hold  the  bounding  hind  in  view  :
Or  Marsian  boar,  fierce- foaming,  foils
The  chace,  and  breaks  the  spreading  toils.*'


PAKT  III.

OF  THE  RATIONAL  PRINCIPLES  OP  ACTION.

CHAPTER  I.

THERE  ARE  RATIONAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  ACTION  IN  MAN.

I.  Mechanical  principles*  of  action  produce  their  effect
without  any  will  or  intention  on  our  part.  We  may,  by  a
voluntary  eflfort,  hinder  the  effect ;  but  if  it  be  not  hindered  by
will  and  effort,  it  is  produced  without  them.

Animal  principles  of  action  require  intention  and  will  in  their
operation,  but  not  judgment.  They  are,  by  ancient  moralists,
very  properly  called  c^ecce  cupidines,  blind  desires.

Having  treated  of  these  two  classes,  [I  proceed  to  the  third,
*  Vide  Essay  III.  chap,  iii.,  sect.  1,  p.  151.


RATIONAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  ACTION  IN  MAN.  g07

the  rational  principles  of  action  in  man ;  which  have  that  name,

because  they  can  have  no  existence  in  beings  not  endowed  with
reason,  and,  in  all  their  exertions,  require,  not  only  intention
and  will,  but  judgment  or  reason.]

That  talent  which  we  call  reason,  by  which  men  that  are  adult
and  of  a  sound  mind,  are  distinguished  from  brutes,  idiots,  and
infants,  has,  in  all  ages,  among  the  learned  and  unlearned,  been
conceived  to  have  two  oflSces,  to  regulate  our  belief,  and  to  regu-
late our  actions  and  conduct.

Whatever  we  believe,  we  think  agreeable  to  reason,  and,  on
that  account,  yield  our  assent  to  it.  Whatever  we  disbelieve,
we  think  contrary  to  reason,  and,  on  that  account,  dissent  from
it.  Reason,  therefore,  is  allowed  to  be  the  principle  by  which
our  belief  and  opinions  ought  to  be  regulated.

But  reason  has  'been  no  less  universally  conceived  to  be  a
principle,  by  which  our  actions  ought  to  be  regulated.

To  act  reasonably,  is  a  phrase  no  less  common  in  all  languages,
than  to  judge  reasonably.  We  immediately  approve  of  a  man's
conduct,  when  it  appears  that  he  had  good  reason  for  what  he
did.  And  every  action  we  disapprove,  we  think  unreasonable,
or  contrary  to  reason.

A  way  of  speaking  so  universal  among  men,  common  to  the
learned  and  the  unlearned  in  all  nations,  and  in  all  languages,
must  have  a  meaning. To  suppose  it  to  be  words  without  mean-
ing,  is  to  treat,  with  undue  contempt,  the  common  sense  of
mankind.

Supposing  this  phrase  to  have  a  meaning,  we  may  consider  in
what  way  reason  may  serve  to  regulate  human  conduct,  so  that
some  actions  of  men  are  to  be  denominated  reasonable,  and
others  unreasonable.

I  take  it  for  granted,  that  there  can  be  no  exercise  of  reason
without  judgment,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  any  judgment  of
things  abstract  and  general,  without  some  degree  of  reason.

K,  therefore,  there  be  any  principles  of  action  in  the  human
constitution,  which,  in  their  nature,  necessarily  imply  such  judg-
ment, they  are  the  principles  which  we  may  call  rational,  to  dis-
tinguish them  from  animal  principles,  which  imply  desire  and
will,  but  not  judgment;  and  from  mechanical,  which  imply
neither  will  nor  intention.

II.  Humes  error  as  to  one  of  the  chief  offices  of  reason, — Every
deliberate  human  action  must  be  done  either  as  the  means,  or  as
an  end ;  as  the  means  to  some  end,  to  which  it  is  subservient,
or  as  an  end,  for  its  own  sake,  and  without  regard  to  any  thing
beyond  it.  •

That  it  is  a  part  of  the  oflSce  of  reason  to  determine,  what
are  the  proper  means  to  any  end  which  we  desire,  no  man  ever
denied. But  some  philosophers,  particularly  Mr.  Hume,  think


g08  ESSAY  III.— PART  III.  CHAP.  IF-

that  it  is  no  part  of  the  office  of  reason  to  determine  the  ends  we
ought  to  pursue^  or  the  preference  due  to  one  end  above  another*
This,  he  thinks,  is  not  the  office  of  reason,  but  of  taste  or  feeling.

If  this  be  so,  reason  cannot,  with  any  propriety,  be  called  a
principle  of  action.  Its  office  can  only  be  to  minister  to  the
principles  of  action,  by  discovering  the  means  of  their  gratifi-
cation. Accordingly,  Mr.  Hume  maintains,  that  reason  is  no
principle  of  action ;  but  that  it  is,  and  ought  to  be,  Ihe  servant
of  the  passions.

-  I  shall  endeavour  to  show,  that,  among  the  various  ends  of
human  actions,  there  are  some,  of  which,  without  reason,  we
could  not  even  form  a  conception  ;  and  that,  as  soon  as  they  are
conceived,  a  regard  to  them  is,  by  our  constitution,  not  only  a
principle  of  action,  but  a  leading  and  governing  principle,  to
which  all  our  animal  principles  are  subordinate,  and  to  which
they  ought  to  be  subject.

These  I  shall  call  rational  principles ;  because  they  can  exist
only  in  persons  endowed  with  reason,  and  because,  to  act  from
these  principles,  is  what  has  always  been  meant  by  acting  accord-
ing to  reason.

The  ends  of  human  actions  I  have  in  view,  are  twoy  to  wit,
what  is  good  for  us  upon  the  whole,  and  what  appears  to  be  our
duty.  They  are  very  strictly  connected,  lead  to  the  same  course
of  conduct,  and  co-operate  with  each  other ;  and,  on  that  ac-
count, have  commonly  been  comprehended  under  one  name,  that
of  reason.  But  as  they  may  be  disjoined,  and  are  really  distinct
principles  of  action,  I  shall  consider  them  separately.


CHAPTER  II.

OF  REGARD  TO  OUE  GOOD  ON  THE  WHOLE.

I.  Chief  spring  of  our  early  actions. — It  will  not  be  denied
that  man,  when  he  comes  to  years  of  understanding,  is  led  by
his  rational  nature,  to  form  the  conception  of  what  is  good  for
him  upon  the  whole.

How  early  in  life  this  general  notion  of  good  enters  into  the
mind,  I  cannot  pretend  to  determine.  It  is  one  of  the  most
general  and  abstract  notions  we  form.

Whatever  makes  a  man  more  happy,  or  more  perfect,  is  good,
and  is  an  object  of  desire  as  soon  as  we  are  capable  of  forming
the  conception  of  it.  The  contrary  is  ill,  and  is  an  object  of
aversion.

In  the  first  part  of  life  we  have  many  enjoyments  of  various
kinds ;  but  very  similar  to  those  of  brute-animals.

They  consist  in  the  exercise  of  our  senses  and  powers of


OP  REGARD  TO  OUR  GOOD  ON  THE  WHOLE.  ^9

notion,  the  gratification  of  our  appetites,  and  the  exertions  of
our  kind  affections.  These  are  chequered  with  many  evils  of
pain,  and  fear,  and  disappointment,  and  sympathy  with  the  suf-
fering of  others.

But  the  goods  and  evils  of  this  period  of  life  are  of  short
duration,  and  soon  forgot.  The  mind  being  regardless  of  the
past,  and  unconcerned  about  the  future,  we  have  then  no  other
measure  of  good  but  the  present  desire ;  no  other  measure  of
evil  hut  the  present  aversion.

Every  animal  desire  has  some  particular  and  present  object,
and  looks  not  beyond  that  object  to  its  consequences,  or  to  the
ccmnexions  it  may  have  with  other  things.

The  present  object,  which  is  most  attractive,  or  excites  the
strongest  desire,  determines  the  choice,  whatever  be  its  conse-
quences. The  present  evil  that  presses  most  is  avoided,  though
it  should  be  the  road  to  a  greater  good  to  come,  or  the  only  way
to  escape  a  greater  evil.  [This  is  the  way  in  which  brutes  act,
and  the  way  in  which  men  must  act,  ti^  they  come  to  the  use  of
reason.]

II.  The  conception  of  what  is  good  or  ill  for  us  upon  the  whole,
the  offspring  of  reason. — As  we  grow  up  to  understanding,  we
extend  our  view  both  forward  and  backward.  We  reflect  upon
what  is  past,  and,  by  the  lamp  of  experience^  discern  what  will
probably  happen  in  time  to  come.  We  find  that  many  things
which  we  eagerly  desired,  were  too  dearly  purchased,  and  that
things  grievous  for  the  present,  like  nauseous  medicines,  may
be  salutary  in  the  issue.

We  learn  to  observe  the  connexions  of  things,  and  the  conse-
quences of  our  actions ;  and,  taking  an  extended  view  of  our
existence,  past,  present,  and  future,  we  correct  our  first  notions
of  good  and  ill,  and  form  the  conception  of  what  is  good  or  ill
upon  the  whole ;  which  must  be  estimated,  not  from  the  present
feeling,  or  from  the  present  animal  desire  or  aversion,  but  from
a  due  consideration  of  its  consequences,  certain  or  probable,
during  the  whole  of  our  existence.

That  which,  taken  with  all  its  discoverable  connexions  and
consequences,  brings  more  good  than  ill,  I  call  good  upon  the
whole.

That  brute  animals  have  any  conception  of  this  good,  I  see  no
reason  to  believe.  And  it  is  evident,  that  man  cannot  have  the
conception  of  it,  till  reason  be  so  far  advanced,  that  he  can
seriously  reflect  upon  the  past,  and  take  a  prospect  of  the  future
part  of  his  existence.

[It  appears  therefore,  that  the  very  conception  of  what  is  good
or  ill  for  us  upon  the  whole,  is  the  offspring  of  reason,  and  can
be  only  in  beings  endowed  with  reason.  And  if  this  conception
give  rise  to  any  principle  of  action  in  man,  which  he  had  not

p


210  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  IL

before,  that  principle  may  very  properly  be  called  a  rational
principle  of  action.]

I  pretend  not  in  this  to  say  any  thing  that  is  new,  but  what
reason  suggested  to  those  who  first  turned  their  attention  to  the
philosophy  of  morals.  I  beg  leave  to  quote  one  passage  from
Cicero,  in  his  first  book  of  "  OflSces ;"  wherein,  veithhis  usual  ele-
gance, he  expresses  the  substance  of  what  I  have  said.  And
there  is  good  reason  to  think  that  Cicero  borrowed  it  from  Panae-
tius,  a  Greek  philosopher,  whose  books  of  Offices  are  lost.

"  Sed  inter  hominem  et  belluam  hoc  maxime  interest,  quod
ha9c  tantum  quantum  sensu  movetur,  ad  id  solum  quod  adest,
quodque  praesens  est  se  accommodat,  paululum  admodum  sen-
tiens  praeteritum  aut  futurum :  homo  autem  quoniam  rationis
est  particeps,  per  quam  consequentia  cemit,  causas  rerum  videt,
earumque  praegressus  et  quasi  antecessiones  non  ignorat :  simili-
tudines  comparat,  et  rebus  praesentibus  adjimgit  atque  annectit
futuras ;  facile  totius  vitae  cursum  videt,  ad  eamque  degendam
preparat  res  necessarias." — Lib.  I.  sect.  iv.

"  But  between  man  and  the  lower  animals,  there  is  ia  other
respects  the  greatest  difference.  The  latter,  guided  by  the  im-
pulse of  their  senses  alone,  are  confined  to  what  is  present,  or
near,  with  a  very  slight  knowledge  of  the  past  or  the  future.
Man,  however,  who  partakes  of  reason,  distinguishes  the  causes
and  the  consequences  of  events,  observes  the  progress,  compares
similar  circumstances,  connects  the  past  with  the  future,  easily
surveys  the  whole  course  of  life,  and  makes  the  necessary  provi-
sion for  its  well-being." — Book  I.  sect.  iv.

III.  [I  observe,  in  the  next  place,  that  as  soon  as  we  have  the
conception  of  what  is  good  or  ill  for  us  upon  the  whole,  we  are
led,  by  our  constitution,  to  seek  the  good  and  avoid  the  ill ;  and
this  becomes  not  only  a  principle  of  action,  but  a  leading  or
governing  principle,  to  which  all  our  animal  principles  ought  to
be  subordinate,^

I  am  very  apt  to  think,  with  Dr.  Price,  that,  in  intelligent
beings,  the  desire  of  what  is  good,  and  aversion  to  what  is  iU,  is
necessarily  connected  with  the  intelligent  nature ;  and  that  it  is
a  contradiction  to  suppose  such  a  being  to  have  the  notion  of
good  without  the  desire  of  it,  or  the  notion  of  ill  without  aver-
sion to  it.  Perhaps  there  may  be  other  necessary  connexions
between  understanding  and  the  best  principles  of  action,  which
our  faculties  are  too  weak  to  discern.  That  they  are  necessarily
connected  in  him  who  is  perfect  in  understanding,  we  have  good
reason  to  believe.

To  prefer  a  greater  good,  though  distant,  to  a  less  that  is  pre-
sent ;  to  choose  a  present  evil,  in  order  to  avoid  a  greater  evil,  or
to  obtain  a  greater  good,  is,  in  the  judgment  of  all  men,  wise  and
reasonable  conduct ;  and,  when  a  man  acts  the  contrary  part,  all


OF  REGARD  TO  OUR  GOOD  ON  THE  WHOLE.  gH

men  will  acknowledge,  that  he  acts  foolishly  and  unreasonably.
Nor  will  it  be  denied,  that,  in  innumerable  cases  in  common  life,
our  animal  principles  draw  us  one  way,  while  a  regard  to  what  is
good  on  the  whole,  draws  us  the  contrary  way.  Thus  the  flesh
lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh,  and
these  two  are  contrary.  That  in  every  conflict  of  this  kind  the
rational  principle  ought  to  prevail,  and  the  animal  to  be  subor-
dinate, is  too  evident  to  need,  or  to  admit  of  proof.

Thus,  I  think,  it  appears,  that  [to  pursue  what  is  good  upon
the  whole,  and  to  avoid  what  is  ill  upon  the  whole,  is  a  rational
principle  of  action^  grounded  upon  our  constitution  as  reasonable
creatures.]

It  appears  that  it  is  not  without  just  cause,  that  this  principle
of  action  has  in  all  ages  been  called  reason,  in  opposition  to  our
animal  principles,  which  in  common  language  are  called  by  the
general  name  of  the  passions.

The  first  not  only  operates  in  a  calm  and  cool  manner,  like
reason,  but  implies  re^  judgment  in  all  its  operations.  The
second,  to  wit,  the  passions,  are  blind  desires,  of  some  particular
object,  without  any  judgment  or  consideration,  whether  it  be
good  for  us  upon  the  whole,  or  ill.

It  appears  also,  that  the  fundamental  maxim  of  prudence  and
of  all  good  morals.  That  the  passions  ought,  in  all  cases,  to  be
under  the  dominion  of  reason,  is  not  only  self-evident,  when
rightly  understood,  but  is  expressed  according  to  the  common
use  and  propriety  of  language.

The  contrary  maxim  maintained  by  Mr.  Hume,  can  only  be
defended  by  a  gross  and  palpable  abuse  of  words.  For,  in  order
to  defend  it,  he  must  include  under  the  passions,  that  very  prin-
ciple which  has  always,  in  all  languages,  been  called  reason,  and
never  was,  in  any  language,  called  a  passion.  And  from  the
meaning  of  the  word  reason  he  must  exclude  the  most  important
part  of  it,  by  which  we  are  able  to  discern  and  to  pursue  what
appears  to  be  good  upon  the  whole.  And  thus,  including  the
most  important  part  of  reason  under  passion,  and  making  the
least  important  part  of  reason  to  be  the  whole,  he  defends  his
favourite  paradox,  that  reason  is,  and  ought  to  be,  the  servant  of
the  passions.

IV.  Office  of  practical  reason. — [To  judge  of  what  is  true  or
false  in  speculative  points,  is  the  office  of  speculative  reason ;
and  to  judge  of  what  is  good  or  ill  for  us  upon  the  whole,  is  the
office  of  practical  reason.]  Of  true  and  false  there  are  no  de-
grees ;  but  of  good  and  ill  there  are  many  degrees,  and  many
kinds ;  and  men  are  very  apt  to  form  erroneous  opinions  concern-
ing them ;  misled  by  their  passions,  by  the  authority  of  the  mul-
titude, and  by  other  causes.

Wise  men,  in  all  ages,  have  reckoned  it  a  chief  point  of  wisdom,

r2


212  ^^®8AY  III.-PART  n.  CHAP.  xt.

to  make  a  right  estimate  of  the  goods  and  evils  of  life.  Thc^
have  laboured  to  discover  the  errors  of  the  multitude  on  thi^
important  point,  and  to  warn  others  against  them.

The  ancient  moralists,  though  divided  into  sects,  all  agreed
in  this,  that  opinion  has  a  mighty  influence  upon  what  we
commonly  account  the  goods  and  ills  of  life,  to  alleviate  or  to
aggravate  them.

The  Stoics  carried  this  so  far,  as  to  conclude  that  they  all
depend  on  opinion.  Uivra  ^TTT6Xrjylns  was  a  favourite  maxim
with  them.

We  see,  indeed,  that  the  same  station  or  condition  of  life
which  makes  one  man  happy,  makes  another  miserable,  and  to
a  third  is  perfectly  indifferent.  We  see  men  miserable  through
life,  from  vain  fears,  and  anxious  desires,  grounded  solely  upon
wrong  opinions.  We  see  men  wear  themselves  but  with  toilsome
days,  and  sleepless  nights,  in  pursuit  of  some  object  which  they
never  attain ;  or  which,  when  attained,  gives  little  satisfaction,
perhaps  real  disgust.

The  evils  of  Ufe,  which  every  man  must  feel,  have  a  very  dif-
ferent effect  upon  different  men.  What  sinks  one  into  despair
and  absolute  misery,  rouses  the  virtue  and  magnanimity  of
another,  who  bears  it  as  the  lot  of  humanity,  and  as  the  disci-
pline of  a  wise  and  merciful  Father  in  heaven.  He  rises  supe-
rior to  adversity,  and  is  made  wiser  and  better  by  it,  and  conse-
quently happier.

It  is  therefore  of  the  last  importance,  in  the  conduct  of  life,
to  have  just  opinions  with  respect  to  good  and  evil ;  and  surely
it  is  the  province  of  reason  to  correct  wrong  opinions,  and  to  lea-d
us  into  those  that  are  just  and  true.

It  is  true  indeed,  that  men's  passions  and  appetites  too  often
draw  them  to  act  contrary  to  their  cool  judgment  and  opinion  of
what  is  best  for  them.  "  Video  meliora  proboque,  deteriora
sequor," — (I  perceive  and  approve  of  better  things,  I  follow
worse,)  is  the  case  in  every  wilful  deviation  from  our  true  in-
terest and  our  duty.

When  this  is  the  case,  the  man  is  self-condemned,  he  sees  that
he  acted  the  part  of  a  brute,  when  he  ought  to  have  acted  the
part  of  a  man.  He  is  convinced  that  reason  ought  to  have
restrained  his  passion,  and  not  to  have  given  the  rein  to  it.

When  he  feels  the  bad  effects  of  his  conduct,  he  imputes  them
to  himself,  and  would  be  stung  with  remorse  for  his  folly,  though
he  had  no  account  to  make  to  a  superior  Being.  He  has  sinned
against  himself,  and  brought  upon  his  own  head  the  punishment
which  his  folly  deserved.

From  this  we  may  see,  that  this  rational  principle  of  a  regard
to  our  good  upon  the  whole,  gives  us  the  conception  of  a  right
and  a  wrong  in  human  conduct,  at  least  of  a  wise  and  a  foolish.


THE  TENDENCY  OF  THIS  PRINCIPLE.  213

It  produces  a  kind  of  self-approbation,  when  the  passions  and
appetites  axe  kept  in  their  due  subjection  to  it ;  and  a  kind  of
remorse  and  compunction,  when  it  yields  to  them.

In  these  respects,  this  principle  is  so  similar  to  the  moral  prin-
ciple, or  conscience,  and  so  interwoven  with  it,  that  both  are
commonly  comprehended  under  the  name  of  reason,  [This  simi-
larity led  many  of  the  ancient  philosophers,  and  some  among  the
modems,  to  resolve  conscience,  or  a  sense  of  duty,  en^reiy  into  a
regard  to  what  is  good  for  us  upon  the  whole.]

That  they  are  distinct  principles  of  action,  though  both  lead  to
the  same  conduct  in  life,  I  shall  have  occasion  to  show,  when  I
come  to  treat  of  conscience.


CHAPTER III.


THE  TENDENCY  OP  THIS  PRINCIPLE

I.  Question  of  the  ancient  moralists ^  "  What  is  the  greatest
good  ?" — It  has  been  the  opinion  of  the  wisest  men,  in  all  ages,
that  this  principle,  of  a  regard  to  our  good  upon  the  whole,  in  a
man  duly  enlightened,  leads  to  the  practice  of  every  virtue.

This  was  acknowledged,  even  by  Epicurus ;  and  the  best
moralists  among  the  ancients  derived  all  the  virtues  from  this
principle.  For,  among  them,  the  whole  of  morals  was  reduced
to  this  question,  what  is  the  greatest  good  ?  Or  what  course  of
conduct  is  best  for  us  upon  the  whole  ?

In  order  to  resolve  this  question,  they  divided  goods  into  three
classes,  the  goods  of  the  body ;  the  goods  of  fortune,  or  external
goods];  and  the  goods  of  the  mind ;  meaning,  by  the  last,  wisdom
and  virtue.

Comparing  these  different  classes  of  goods,  they  showed,  with
convincing  evidence,  that  the  goods  of  the  mind  are,  in  many
respects,  superior  to  those  of  the  body  and  of  fortune,  not  only
as  they  have  more  dignity,  are  more  durable,  and  less  exposed
to  the  strokes  of  fortune,  but  chiefly  as  they  are  the  only  goods
in  our  power,  and  which  depend  wholly  on  our  conduct.

II.  Fallacy  of  the  Epicurean  doctrine.  —  Epicurus  himself
maintained,  that  the  wise  man  may  be  happy  in  the  tranquillity
of  his  mind,  even  when  racked  with  pain,  and  struggling  with
adversity.

They  observed  very  justly,  that  the  goods  of  fortune,  and  even
those  of  the  body,  depend  much  on  opinion ;  and  that,  when  our
opinion  of  them  is  duly  corrected  by  reason,  we  shall  find  them
of  small  value  in  themselves.

[How  can  he  he  happy  who  places  his  happiness  in  things  which
it  is  not  in  his  power  to  attain,  or  in  things  from  which,  when


2i4f  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  Ill-

attained,  a  fit  of  sickness,  or  a  stroke  of  fortune,  may  tear  him
asunder?]

The  value  we  put  upon  things,  and  our  uneasiness  in  the  want
of  them,  depend  upon  the  strength  of  our  desires ;  correct  the
desire,  and  the  uneasiness  ceases.

The  fear  of  the  evils  of  body  and  of  fortune,  is  often  a
greater  evil  than  the  things  we  fear.  As  the  wise  man  mode-
rates his  desires  by  temperance,  so  to  real  or  imaginary  dangers
he  opposes  the  shield  of  fortitude  and  magnanimity,  which  raises
him  above  himself,  and  makes  him  happy  and  triumphant  in  those
moments  wherein  others  are  most  miserable.

III.  Doctrine  of  the  Stoics  not  original. — These  oracles  of
reason  led  the  Stoics  so  fax  as  to  maintain,  that  all  desires  and
fears,  with  regard  to  things  not  in  our  power,  ought  to  be  totally
eradicated;  that  virtue  is  the  only  good;  that  what  we  call  the
goods  of  the  body  and  of  fortune,  are  really  things  indifferent,
which  may,  according  to  circumstances,  prove  good  or  ill,  and
therefore  have  no  intrinsic  goodness  in  themselves ;  that  our  sol&
business  ought  to  be,  to  act  our  part  well,  and  to  do  what  is
right,  without  the  least  concern  about  things  not  in  our  power,
which  we  ought,  with  perfect  acquiescence,  to  leave  to  the  care
of  Him  who  governs  the  world.

[This  noble  and  elevated  conception  of  human  wisdom  and
duty  was  taught  by  Socrates,  free  from  the  extravagances  which.
the  Stoics  afterwards  joined  with  it.] We  see  it  in  the  Alci-
biades  of  Plato ;  from  which  Juvenal  hath  taken  it  in  his  tenth
satire,  and  adorned  it  with  the  graces  of  poetry.

Omnibus  in  terris  quae  sunt  a  gadibus  usque
Auroram  et  Gangen,  pauci  dignoscere  possunt
Vera  bona,  atque  illis  multum  diversa,  remoU
Erroris  nebuM. Quid  enim  ratione  timemus?
Aut  cupimus? Quid  tarn  dextrd  pede  concupis  ut  te
Conatus  non  poeniteat,  votique  peracti?
Nil  erjgo  oj^tabunt  homines 'f Si  consilium  vis,
Permittes  ipsis  expendere  numinibus,  quid
Conveniat  nobis,  rebusque  sit  utile  nostris.
Nam  pro  jucundis  aptissima  quseque  dabunt  Dii.
Charier  est  illis  homo  quam  sibi. Nos  animorum
Impulsu,  et  caeca  magnaque  cupidine  ducti,
Conjugium  petimus,  partumque  uxoris ;  at  illis
Notum  quipuerif  qualisque  futura  sit  uxor.
Fortem  posce  animum,  et  mortis  terrore  carentem,
Qui  spatium  vitae  extremum  inter  munera  ponat
Naturae ;  qui  ferre  queat  quoscunque  labores,
Nesciat  irasci,  cupiat  nihil,  et  potiores
Herculis  aerumnas  credat,  saevosque  labores
£t  venere,  et  coenis,  et  plumis,  Sardanapali.

Monstro  quid  ipse  tibi  possis  dare. Semita  certe
Tranquillae  per  virtutem  patet  unica  vitae.
Nullum  numen  abest  si  sit  prudentia;  sed  te
Nos  facimus  fortuna  Deam,  coeloque  locamus.


THE  TENDENCY  OP  THIS  PRINCIPLE.  gl5

"In  all  lands  tbat  extend  from  Gades  to  the  east  and  the  Ganges,  few  can
distinguish  true  good  things,  and  those  greatly  different  from  them,  the  cloud
of  error  being  removed :  for  what,  with  reason,  do  we  fear  or  desire? What  do
you  contrive  so  prosperously,  that  you  may  not  repent  of  your  endeavours  and
of  your  accomplished  wish? Shall  men,  therefore,  wish  for  nothing? If  you
wish  for  advice,  permit  the  gods  themselves  to  consider  what  may  suit  us  and
be  useful  to  our  afl&irs. For  instead  of  what  are  pleasant,  the  gods  will  give
things  that  are  fittest. Man  is  dearer  to  them  than  to  himself. Led  by  the
impulse  of  our  minds,  and  by  a  blind  and  great  desire,  we  ask  marriage  and  fruit-
fulness  in  a  wife  ;  but  the  gods  alone  know  what  sort  those  children  and  that
wife  may  prove  to  be. Ask  for  a  mind  firm  and  free  from  the  fear  of  death,
which  counts  the  last  stage  of  life  amongst  the  gifts  of  nature, — which  can
endure  any  troubles  whatsoever, — is  unconscious  of  anger, — covets  nothing, —
and  which  thinks  the  sufferings  of  Hercules  and  his  cruel  labours  preferable
to  the  lasciviousness,  luxury,  and  plumes  of  Sardanapalus. I  point  out  what
you  yourself  may  give  to  yourself, — undoubtedly  the  only  path  to  a  tranquil
life  lies  open  through  virtue. You  would  have  no  divinity,  O  Fortune,  if  we
had  prudence;  but  we  make  you  a  goddess,  and  place  you  in  heaven."

Even  Horace,  in  his  serious  moments,  falls  into  this  system.

Nil  admirari,  prope  res  est  una  Numici,
Solaque  quae  possit  facere  et  servare  beatum.

'*  Not  to  admire,  is  of  all  means  the  best.
The  only  means,  to  make,  and  keep  us  blest."

We  cannot  but  admire  the  Stoical  system  of  morals,  even
>vhen  we  think  that,  in  some  points,  it  went  beyond  the  pitch  of
human  nature.  The  virtue,  the  temperance,  the  fortitude,  and
magnanimity  of  some  who  sincerely  embraced  it,  amidst  all  the
flattery  of  sovereign  power  and  the  luxury  of  a  court,  will  be
everlasting  monuments  to  the  honour  of  that  system,  and  to  the
honour  of  human  nature.

That  a  due  regard  to  what  is  best  for  us  upon  the  whole,  in  an
enlightened  mind,  leads  to  the  practice  of  every  virtue,  may  be
argued  from  considering  what  we  think  best  for  those  for  whom
we  have  the  strongest  affection,  and  whose  good  we  tender  as
our  own.  In  judging  for  ourselves,  our  passions  and  appetites
are  apt  to  bias  our  judgment ;  but  when  we  judge  for  others,
this  bias  is  removed,  and  we  judge  impartially.

What  is  it  then  that  a  wise  man  would  wish  as  the  greatest
good  to  a  brother,  a  son,  or  a  friend  ?

Is  it  that  he  may  spend  his  life  in  a  constant  round  of  the
pleasures  of  sense,  and  fare  sumptuously  every  day  ?

No,  surely :  we  wish  him  to  be  a  man  of  real  virtue  and  worth.
We  may  wish  for  him  an  honourable  station  in  life ;  but  only
with  this  condition,  that  he  acquit  himself  honourably  in  it,  and
acquire  just  reputation,  by  being  useful  to  his  country  and  to
mankind.  We  would  a  thousand  times  rather  wish  him  honour-
ably to  undergo  the  labours  of  Hercules,  than  to  dissolve  in
pleasure  with  Sardanapalus.

Such  would  be  the  wish  of  every  man  of  understanding  for


216  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  III^

the  friend  whom  he  loves  as  his  own  soul.  Such  things,  there-
fore, he  judges  to  be  best  for  him  upon  the  whole;  und  if  he
judges  otherwise  for  himself,  it  is  only  because  his  judgment  is
perverted  by  animal  passions  and  desires.

IV .  JRecapitulation  of  what  has  been  advanced  relative  to  the
rational  principles  of  action. — The  sum  of  what  has  been  said
in  these  tnree  chapters  amounts  to  this  :

[  (1)  There  is  a  principle  of  action  in  men  that  are  adult  and
of  a  sound  mind,  which,  in  all  ages,  has  been  called  reason,  and
set  in  opposition  to  the  animal  principles  which  we  call  the  pas-
sions,"]  [{2)  The  ultimate  object  of  this  principle  is  what  we
judge  to  be  good  upon  the  whole.]  This  is  not  the  object  of
any  of  our  animal  principles,  thev  being  all  directed  to  parti-
cular objects,  without  any  comparison  with  others,  or  any  consi-
deration of  their  being  good  or  ill  upon  the  whole.

[  (3)  fFhat  is  good  upon  the  whole  cannot  even  be  conceived
without  the  exercise  of  reason,  and  therefore  cannot  be  an  object
to  beings  that  have  not  some  degree  of  reason.]

[  (4)  As  soon  as  we  have  the  conception  of  this  object,  we  are
led,  by  our  constitution,  to  desire  and  pursue  it.]  It  justly  claims
a  preference  to  all  objects  of  pursuit  that  can  come  in  compe-
tition with  it.  In  preferring  it  to  any  gratification  that  opposes
it,  or  in  submitting  to  any  pain  or  mortification  wliich  it  requires,
we  act  according  to  reason ;  and  every  such  action  is  accompanied
with  self-approbation  and  the  approbation  of  mankind.  The
contrary  actions  are  accompanied  with  shame  and  self-condemna-
tion in  the  agent,  and  with  contempt  in  the  spectator,  as  foolish
and  unreasonable.

[  (5)  The  right  application  of  this  principle  to  our  conduct
requires  an  extensive  prospect  of  human  life,  and  a  correct  judg-
ment and  estimate  of  its  goods  and  evils,  with  respect  to  their
intrinsic  worth  and  dignity,  their  constancy  and  duration,  and
their  attainableness.]  He  must  be  a  wise  man,  indeed,  if  any
such  man  there  be,  who  can  perceive,  in  every  instance,  or  even
in  every  important  instance,  what  is  best  for  him  upon  the  whole,
if  he  have  no  other  rule  to  direct  his  conduct.

However,  [  (6)  according  to  the  best  judgment  which  wise
men  have  been  able  to  form,  this  principle  leads  to  the  practice
of  every  virtue."]  It  leads  directly  to  the  virtues  of  prudence,
temperance,  and  fortitude.  And,  when  we  consider  ourselves
as  social  creatures,  whose  happiness  or  misery  is  very  much  con-
nected with  that  of  our  fellow-men;  when  we  consider,  that
there  are  many  benevolent  affections  planted  in  our  constitution,
whose  exertions  make  a  capital  part  of  our  good  and  enjoyment ;
from  these  considerations,  this  principle  leads  us  also,  though
more  indirectly,  to  the  practice  of  justice,  humanity,  and  all  the
social  virtues.


DEFECTS  OP  THIS  PRINCIPLE.  gjy

It  is  true,  that  a  regard  to  our  own  good  cannot,  of  itself,  pro-
duce any  benevolent  affection.  But,  if  such  affections  be  a  part
of  our  constitution,  and  if  the  exercise  of  them  make  a  capital
part  of  our  happiness,  a  regard  to  our  own  good  ought  to  lead
us  to  cultivate  and  exercise  them,  as  every  benevolent  affection
makes  the  good  of  others  to  be  our  own.


CHAPTER  IV.

DEFECTS  OF  THIS  PRINCIPLE.

I.  The  rational  principle  of  action  not  the  only  regulator  of
human  conduct. — Having  explained  the  nature  of  this  principle
of  action,  and  shown  in  general  the  tenor  of  conduct  to  which  it
leads,  I  shall  conclude  what  relates  to  it,  by  pointing  out  some
of  its  defects,  if  it  be  supposed,  as  it  has  been  by  some  philo-
sophers, to  be  the  only  regulating  principle  of  human  conduct.

[Upon  that  supposition,  it  would  (1)  neither  be  a  sufficiently
plain  rule  of  conduct,  (2)  nor  would  it  raise  the  human  character
to  that  degree  of  perfection  of  which  it  is  capable,  (3)  nor  would
it  yield  so  much  real  happiness  as  when  it  is  joined  with  another
rational  principle  of  action,  to  wit,  a  disinterested  regard  to
duty.]

First,  I  apprehend  the  greater  part  of  mankind  can  never
attain  such  extensive  views  of  human  life,  and  so  correct  a  judg-
ment of  good  and  ill,  as  the  right  application  of  this  principle
requires.

The  authority  of  the  poet  before  quoted  is  of  weight  in  this
point.  "Pauci  dignoscere  possunt  vera  bona,  remota  erroris
nebula."*  The  ignorance  of  the  bulk  of  mankind  concurs  with
the  strength  of  their  passions  to  lead  them  into  error  in  this
most  important  point.

Every  man,  in  his  cahn  moments,  wishes  to  know  what  is  best
for  him  on  the  whole,  and  to  do  it.  But  the  difficulty  of  disco-
vering it  clearly,  amid  such  variety  of  opinions,  and  the  impor-
tunity of  present  desires,  tempt  men  to  give  over  the  search,
and  to  yield  to  the  present  inclination.

Though  philosophers  and  moralists  have  taken  much  laudable
pains  to  correct  the  errors  of  mankind  in  this  great  point,  their
instructions  are  known  to  few ;  they  have  little  influence  upon
the  greater  part  of  those  to  whom  they  are  known,  and  sometimes
little  even  upon  the  philosopher  himself.

[Speculative  discoveries  gradually  spread  from  the  knowing
to  the  ignorant,  and  diffuse^,  themselves  over  all,  so  that,  with

•  Page  214.


220  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  IV.

and  godly  in  the  world,  and  that  he  follows  the  same  course  of
conduct  from  the  motive  of  his  own  good  only,  which  the  other
does,  in  a  great  measure,  from  a  sense  of  duty  and  rectitude.

We  put  the  case  so  as  that  the  difference  between  these  two
persons  may  be,  not  in  what  they  do,  but  in  the  motive  from
which  they  do  it :  and,  I  think,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he
who  acts  from  the  noblest  and  most  generous  motive,  will  have
most  happiness  in  his  conduct.

The  one  labours  only  for  hire,  without  any  love  to  the  work.
The  other  loves  the  work,  and  thinks  it  the  noblest  and  most
honourable  he  can  be  employed  in.  To  the  first,  the  mortifica-
tion and  self-denial  which  the  course  of  virtue  requires,  is  a
grievous  task,  which  he  submits  to  only  through  necessity.  To
the  other  it  is  victory  and  triumph  in  the  most  honourable
warfare.

It  ought  further  to  be  considered.  That  although  wise  men
have  concluded  that  virtue  is  the  only  road  to  happiness,  this
conclusion  is  founded  chiefly  upon  the  natural  respect  men  have
for  virtue,  and  the  good  or  happiness  that  is  intrmsic  to  it  and
arises  from  the  love  of  it.  If  we  suppose  a  man,  as  we  now
do,  altogether  destitute  of  this  principle,  who  considered  virtue
only  as  the  means  to  another  end,  there  is  no  reason  to  think
that  he  would  ever  take  it  to  be  the  road  to  happiness,  but
would  wander  for  ever,  seeking  this  object  where  it  is  not  to  be
found.

[IV.  Do  the  roads  of  duty  and  happiness  coincide  ? — The  road
of  duty  is  soplainy  that  the  man  who  seeks  it,  with  an  upright
heart,  cannot  greatly  err  from  it.  But  the  road  to  happiness^  if
that  be  supposed  the  only  end  our  nature  leads  us  to  pursue,
would  be  found  dark  and  intricate,  full  of  snares  and  dangers,
and  therefore  not  to  be  trodden  without  fear,  and  care,  and  per-
plexity.]

The  happy  man,  therefore,  is  not  he  whose  happiness  is  his
only  care,  but  he  who,  with  perfect  resignation,  leaves  the  care
of  his  happiness  to  Him  who  made  him,  while  he  pursues  with
ardour  the  road  of  his  duty.

This  gives  an  elevation  to  his  mind,  which  is  real  happiness.
Instead  of  care,  and  fear,  and  anxiety,  and  disappointment,  it
brings  joy  and  triumph.  It  gives  a  relish  to  every  good  we  en-
joy, and  brings  good  out  of  evil.

And  as  no  man  can  be  indifferent  about  his  happiness,  the
good  man  has  the  consolation  to  know  that  he  consults  his  hap-
piness most  effectually,  when,  without  any  painful  anxiety  about
future  events,  he  does  his  duty.

Thus,  I  think,  it  appears.  That  although  a  regard  to  our
good,  upon  the  whole,  be  a  rational  principle  in  man,  yet,  if
it  be  supposed  the  only  regulating  principle  of  our  conduct,


lAfi  OF  THE  NOTION  OP  DUTY,  ETC.  ggj

rsei it  would  be  a  more  uncertain  rule,  it  would  give  far  less  per-
)M faction  to  the  human  character,  and  far  less  happiness,  than
when  joined  with  another  rational  principle,  to  wit,  a  regard  to

duty.


CHAPTER  V.

OP  THE  NOTION  OF  DUTY, RECTITUDE,  MORAL  OBLIGATION.

L  A  sense  qf  interest  or  a  sense  of  duty,  or  both,  necessary  to  the
social  state, — A  being  endowed  with  the  animal  principles  of
action  only,  may  be  capable  of  being  trained  to  certain  purposes
by  discipline,  as  we  see  many  brute  animals  are,  but  would  be
altogether  incapable  of  being  governed  by  law.

The  subject  of  law  must  have  the  conception  of  a  general  rule
of  conduct,  which,  without  some  degree  of  reason,  he  cannot
have.  He  must  likewise  have  a  sufficient  inducement  to  obey
the  law,  even  when  his  strongest  animal  desires  draw  him  the
contrary  way.

This  inducement  may  be  a  sense  ofinterest,  or  a  sense  of  duty,
or  both  concurring.

These  are  the  only  principles  I  am  able  to  conceive,  which
can  reasonably  induce  a  man  to  regulate  all  his  actions  according
to  a  certain  general  rule  or  law.  They  may  therefore  be  justly
called  the  rational  principles  of  action,  since  they  can  have  no
place  but  in  a  being  endowed  with  reason,  and  since  it  is  by
them  only,  that  man  is  capable  either  of  political  or  of  moral
government.

feF  Without  them,  human  life  would  be  like  a  ship  at  sea  with-
out hands,  left  to  be  carried  by  winds  and  tides  as  they  happen.
It  belongs  to  the  rational  part  of  our  nature  to  intend  a  certain
port,  as  the  end  of  the  voyage  of  life  ;  to  take  the  advantage  of
\dnds  and  tides  when  they  are  favourable,  and  to  bear  up  against
them  when  they  are  unfavourable.

A  sense  of  interest  may  induce  us  to  do  this,  when  a  suitable
reward  is  set  before  us.  But  there  is  a  nobler  principle  in  the
constitution  of  man,  which,  in  many  cases,  gives  a  clearer  and
more  certain  rule  of  conduct,  than  a  regard  merely  to  interest
would  give,  and  a  principle,  without  which  man  would  not  be  a
moral  agent.

A  man  is  prudent  when  he  consults  his  real  interest,  but  he
cannot  be  virtuous,  if  he  has  no  regard  to  duty.

II.  Of  a  sense  of  duty  only. — I  proceed  now  to  consider  this
regard  to  duty  as  a  rational  principle  of  action  in  man,  and  as
that  principle  alone  by  which  he  is  capable  of  virtue  or  vice.


224  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  V.

Mr.  Hume's  authority,  if  there  were  any  need  of  it,  is  of
weight  in  this  matter,  because  he  was  not  wont  to  go  rashly  into
vulgar  opinions.

"  Those,"  says  he,  "  who  have  denied  the  reality  of  moral
distinctions,  may  be  ranked  among  the  disingenuous  disputants
(who  really  do  not  believe  the  opinions  they  defend,  but  engage
in  the  controversy,  from  affectation,  from  a  spirit  of  opposition,
or  from  a  desire  of  showing  wit  and  ingenuity  superior  to  the
rest  of  mankind) ;  nor  is  it  conceivable  that  any  human  creature
could  ever  seriously  believe  that  all  characters  and  actions  were
alike  entitled  to  the  regard  and  affection  of  every  one.

"  Let  a  man's  insensibility  be  ever  so  great,  he  must  often  be
touched  with  the  images  of  right  ahd  wrong ;  and  let  his  preju-
dices be  ever  so  obstinate,  he  must  observe  that  others  are  sus-
ceptible of  like  impressions.  The  only  way,  therefore,  of  con-
vincing an  antagonist  of  this  kind  is  to  leave  him  to  himself.  For,
finding  that  nobody  keeps  up  the  controversy  with  him,  it  is  pro-
bable he  will  at  last,  of  himself,  from  mere  weariness,  come
over  to  the  side  of  common  sense  and  reason."

What  we  call  right  and  honourable  in  human  conduct,  was,  by
the  ancients,  called  honestum^  rh  Kokbv;  of  which  Tully  says,
'^  Quod  vere  dicimus,  etiamsi  a  nullo  laudetur,  natura  esse  lau-
dabile." De  Officiis,  lib.  i.  sect.  3.

All  the  ancient  sects,  except  the  Epicureans,  distinguished  the
honestum  from  the  utile^  as  we  distinguish  what  is  a  man's  duty
from  what  is  his.  interest.

The  word  officium  {KaBrJKov)  extended  both  to  the  honestum  and
the  utile:  so  that  every  reasonable  action,  proceeding  either
from  a  sense  of  duty  or  a  sense  of  interest,  was  called  officium.
It  is  defined  by  Cicero  to  be,  "  Id  quod  cur  factum  sit  ratio  pro-
babilis  reddi  potest." — Such  a  one  as  a  fair  and  reasonable  ac-
count may  be  given  for  the  doing  of  it.  We  commonly  render
it  by  the  word  duty,  but  it  is  more  extensive  ;  for  the  word  duty^
in  the  English  language,  I  think,  is  commonly  applied  only  to
what  the  ancients  called  honestum.  Cicero,  and  Paimaetius  be-
fore him,  treating  of  offices,  first  point  out  those  that  are
grounded  upon  the  honestum,  and  next  those  that  are  grounded
upon  the  utile,

V.  The  most  ancient  philosophical  system  concerning  the  prin^
ciples  of  action  in  the  humxin  mind,  and,  I  think,  the  most
agreeable  to  Nature,  is  that  which  we  find  in  some  fragments  of
the  ancient  Pythagoreans,  and  which  is  adopted  by  Plato,  and
explained  in  some  of  his  dialogues.

According  to  this  system,  there  is  a  leading  principle  in  the
sold,  which,  like  the  supreme  power  in  a  commonwealth,  has
authority  and  right  to  govern.  This  leading  principle  they  called
reason. It  is  that  which  distinguishes  men  that  are  adult  from


OT  THE  NOTION  OF  DUTY,  ETC.  225

brutes,  idiots,  and  infants.  The  inferior  principles,  which  are
under  the  authority  of  the  leading  principle,  are  our. passions
and  appetites,^  which  we  have  in  common  with  the  brutes.

Cicero  adopts  this  system,  and  expresses  it  well  in  few  words.
**  Duplex  enim  est  vis  animorum  atque  natur«.  Una  pars  in
appetitu  posita  est,  quae  hominem  hue  et  illuc  rapit,  quae  est
opfx^  grsBce,  altera  in  ratione,  quae  docet,  et  explanat  quid
faciendum  fugiendumve  sit.  Ita  sit  ut  ratio  praesit  s^petitus
obtemperet." — "  For  the  impulse  of  our  minds  and  nature  is  two-
fold ;  one  part  consists  in  appetite,  which  hurries  man  hither
and  thither,  which  is  opfiri  in  Greek ;  the  other  in  reason,  which
teaches  and  explains  what  is  to  be  done,  what  to  be  avoided.
Whence  it  is  that  reason  should  guide,  appetite  obey."

This  division  of  our  active  principles  can  hardly  indeed  be
accounted  a  discovery  of  philosophy,  because  it  has  been  common
to  the  unlearned  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  and  seems  to  be  dictated
by  the  common  sense  of  mankind.

What  I  would  now  observe  concerning  this  common  division
of  our  active  powers,  is,  that  the  leading  principle,  which  is
called  reason,  comprehends  both  a  regard  to  what  is  right  and
honourable,  .and  a  regard  to  our  happiness  upon  the  whole.

Althoi:^h  these  be  really  two  distinct  principles  of  action,  it  is
very  natural  to  comprehend  them  under  one  name,  because  both
are  leading  principles,  both  suppose  the  use  of  reason,  and,
"when  rightly  understood,  both  lead  to  the  same  course  of  life.
I®!"  They  are  like  two  fountains  whose  streams  ujiite  and  run  in
the  same  channel.

When  a  man,  on  one  occasion,  consults  his  real  happiness  ia
things  not  incoHsistent  with  his  duty,  though  in  opposition  to  the
solicitation  of  appetite  or  passion ;  and  when,  on  another  occa-
sion, without  any  selfish  consideration,  he  does  what  is  right  and
honourable,  because  it  is  so ;  in  both  these  cases,  he  acts  reason-
ably ;  every  man  approves  of  his  conduct,  and  calls  it  reasonable,
or  according  to  reason.

So  that,  when  we  speak  of  reason  as  a  principle  of  action  in
man,  it  includes  a  regard  both  to  the  honestum  and  to  the  utile.
Both  are  combined  under  one  name^  and  accordingly  the  dic-
tates of  both,  in  the  Latin  tongue,  were  combined  under  the
name  officium,  and  in  the  Greek  imder  KaOi}Kov.

VI.  Moral  obligation  a  relation. — [If  we  examine  ^ie  abstract
notion  of  duty,  or  moral  obligation,  it  appears  to  be  neither  any
real  quality  of  the  action  considered  by  itself,  nor  of  the  agent
considered  without  respect  to  the  action,  but  a  certain  relation
between  the  one  and  the  other.]

When  we  say  a  man  ought  to  do  such  a  thing,  the  ought,
which  expresses  the  moral  obligation,  has  a  respect,  on  the  one
hand,  to  the  person  who  ought,  and,  on  the  other,  to  the  action


ggg  ESSAX.  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  V.

which  he  ought  to  do.  Those  two  correlates  are  essential  to
every  moral  obligation ;  take  away  either,  and  it  has  no  exist-
ence. So  that,  if  we  seek  the  place  of  moral  obligation  among
the  categories,  it  belongs  to  the  category  of  relation.

[There  are  many  relations  of  things,  of  which  we  have  the
most  distinct  conception,  without  being  able  to  define  them  Ic^-
cally.  Equality  and  proportion  are  relations  between  quantities,
which  every  man  understands,  but  no  man  can  define,']

Moral  obligation  is  a  relation  of  its  own  kind,  which  every
man  understands,  but  is  perhaps  too  simple  to  admit  of  logical
definition.  Like  all  other  relations,  it  may  be  changed  or  anni-
hilated by  a  change  in  any  of  the  two  related  things,  I  mean  the
agent  or  the  action.

VII.  Perhaps  it  may  not  be  improper  to  point  out  briefly
the  circumstances,  both  in  the  action  and  in  the  agent,  which  are
necessary  to  constitute  moral  obligation.  The  imiversal  agree-
ment of  men  in  these,  shows  that  they  have  one  and  the  same
notion  of  it.

With  regard  to  the  action,  it  must  be  a  volimtary  action,  or
prestation  of  the  person  obliged,  and  not  of  another.  There
can  be  no  moral  obligation  upon  a  man  to  be  six  feet  high.  Nor
can  I  be  under  a  moral  obligation  that  another  person  should  do
such  a  thing.  His  actions  must  be  imputed  to  lumself,  and  mine
onlv  to  me,  either  for  praise  or  blame.

I  need  hardly  mention,  that  a  person  can  be  under  a  moral
obligation  only  to  things  within  the  sphere  of  his  natural  power.

As  to  the  party  obUged,  it  is  evident,  there  can  be  no  moral
obligation  upon  an  inanimate  thing. To  speak  of  moral  obliga-
tion upon  a  stone  or  a  tree  is  ridiculous,  because  it  contradicts
.  every  man's  notion  of  moral  obligation.

The  person  obliged  must  have  understanding  and  will,  and
some  degree  of  active  power.  He  must  not  only  have  the  natural
faculty  of  understanding,  but  the  means  of  knowing  his  obligation.
An  invincible  ignorance  of  this  destroys  all  moral  obligation.

The  opinion  of  the  agent  in  doing  the  action  gives  it  its  moral
denomination.  If  he  does  a  materially  good  action,  without  any
belief  of  its  being  good,  but  from  some  other  principle,  it  is  no
good  action  in  Mm.  And  if  he  does  it  with  the  belief  of  its
being  ill,  it  is  ill  in  him.

Thus,  if  a  man  should  give  to  his  neighbour  a  potion  which  he
really  believes  will  poison  him,  but  which,  in  the  event,  proves
salutary,  and  does  much  good ;  in  moral  estimation,  he  is  a  poi-
soner, and  not  a  benefactor.

These  qualifications  of  the  action  and  of  the  agent,  in  moral
obligation,  are  self-evident;  and  the  agreement  of  all  men  in
them  shows,  that  all  men  have  the  same  notion  and  a  distinct
notion  of  moral  obligation.


227


CHAPTER  VI.

OF  THE  SENSE  OF  DUTY.

I.  The  moral  sense, — the  moral  faculty,— conscience,  —  We
are  next  to  consider,  how  we  learn  to  judge  and  determine,  that
this  is  right,  and  that  is  wrong.

The  abstract  notion  of  moral  good  and  ill  would  be  of  no  use
to  direct  our  life,  if  we  had  not  the  power  of  applying  it  to  par-
ticular actions,  and  determining  what  is  morally  good,  and  what
is  morally  ill.

Some  philosophers,  with  whom  I  agree,  ascribe  this  to  an  ori-
ginal power  or  faculty  in  man,  which  they  call  the  moral  sense,
the  moral  faculty,  conscience..  Others  think,  that  our  moral
sentiments  may  be  accounted  for  without  supposing  any  original
sense  or  faculty  appropriated  to  that  purpose,  and  go  into  very
different  systems  to  account  for  them,

I  am  not,  at  present,  to  take  any  notice  of  those  systems,
because  the  opinion  first  mentioned  seems  to  me  to  be  the  truth,
to  wit,  that,  by  an  original  power  of  the  mind,  when  we  come  to
years  of  understanding  and  reflection,  we  not  only  have  the  no-
tions of  right  and  wrong  in  conduct,  but  perceive  certain  things
to  be  right,  and  others  to  be  wrong.

The  name  of  the  moral  sense,  though  more  frequently  given  to
conscience  since  Lord  Shaftesbury  and  Dr.  Hutcheson  wrote,  is
not  new.  The  "  sensus  recti  et  honesti,"  is  a  phrase  not  unfre-
qu^it  among  the  ancients,  neither  is  the  sense  of  duty  among  us.

IL  This  analogy  excusable, — [It  has  got  tlus  name  of  sense,
IM>  doubt,  from  some  analogy  which  it  is  conceived  to  bear  to
the  external  senses.  And  if  we  have  just  notions  of  the  office  of
the  external  senses,  the  analogy  is  very  evident,  and  I  see  no
reascHi  to  take  offence,  as  some  have  done,  at  the  name  of  the
moral  sense,"]

The  offence  taken  at  this  name  seems  to  be  owing  to  this,  that
philosophers  havfe  degraded  the  senses  too  much,  and  deprived
them  of  the  most  important  part  of  their  office.

We  are  taught,  that,  by  the  senses,  we  have  only  certain  ideas
which  we  could  not  have  otherwise.  They  are  represented  as
powers  by  which  we  have  sensations  and  ideas,  not  as  powers  by
which  we  judge.

This  notion  of  the  senses  I  take  to  be  very  lame,  and  to
contradict  what  nature  and  accurate  reflection  teach  concerning
them.

A  man  who  has  totally  lost  the  sense  of  seeing,  may  retain
very  distinct  notions  of  the  various  colours ;  but  he  cannot  judge
of  colours,  because  he  has  lost  the  sense  by  which  alone  he  could


ggg  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP. VI.

judge.  By  my  eyes  I  not  only  have  the  ideas  of  a  square  and  a
circle,  but  I  perceive  this  surface  to  be  a  square,  that  to  be
a  circle.

By  my  ear,  I  not  only  have  the  idea  of  sounds,  loud  and  i^ft,
acute  and  grave,  but  I  immediately  perceive  and  judge  this  sound
to  be  loud,  that  to  be  soft,  this  to  be  acute,  that  to  be  grave.
Two  or  more  synchronous  sounds  I  perceive  to  be  concordant,
others  to  be  discordant.

These  are  judgments  of  the  senses.  They  have  always  been
called  and  accounted  such,  by  those  whose  minds  are  not  tinc-
tured by  philosophical  theories.  They  are  the  immediate  testi-
mony of  nature  by  our  senses ;  and  we  are  so  constituted  by
nature,  that  we  must  receive  their  testimony,  for  no  other  reason
but  because  it  is  given  by  our  senses.

In  vain  do  sceptics  endeavour  to  overturn  this  evidence  by
metaphysical  reasoning.  Though  we  should  not  be  able  to  answer
their  arguments,  we  believe  our  senses  still,  and  rest  our  most
important  concerns  upon  their  testimony.

If  this  be  a  just  notion  of  our  external  senses,  as  I  conceive  it
is,  our  moral  faculty  may,  I  think,  without  impropriety,  be  called
the  moral  sense.

III.  Further  shown. — In  its  dignity  it  is,  without  doubt,  far
superior  to  every  other  po\yer  of  the  mind ;  but  [there  is  this
analogy  between  it  and  the  external  senses,  that,  as  by  them  we
have  not  only  the  original  conceptions  of  the  various  qualities  of
bodies,  but  the  original  judgments  that  this  body  has  such  a
quality,  that  such  another ;  so  by  our  moral  faculty,  we  have
both  the  original  conceptions  of  right  and  wrong  in  conduct,  of
merit  and  demerit,  and  the  original  judgments  that  this  con-
duct is  right,  that  is  wrong  ;  that  this  character  has  worth,  that,
demerit.]

The  testimony  of  our  moral  faculty,  like  that  of  the  external
senses,  is  the  testimony  of  nature,  and  we  have  the  same  reason
to  rely  upon  it.

The  truths  immediately  testified  by  the  external  senses  are  the
first  principles  from  which  we  reason,  with  refgard  to  the  mate«
rial  world,  and  from  which  all  our  knowledge  of  it  is  deduced.

The  truths  immediately  testified  by  our  moral  faculty,  are  the
first  principles  of  all  moral  reasoning,  from  which  all  our  know-
ledge of  our  duty  must  be  deduced,

IV.  [By  moral  reasoning,  I  understand  all  reasoning  that  is
brought  to  prove  that  such  conduct  is  right,  and  deserving  of
moral  approbation,  or  that  it  is  wrong,  or  that  it  is  indifferent^
and,  in  itself,  neither  morally  good  nor  ill.]

I  think  all  we  can  properly  call  moral  judgments  are  reducible
to  one  or  other  of  these,  as  all  human  actions,  considered  in  a
moral  view,  are  either  good,  or  bad,  or  indifferent.


OP  THE  SEKSE  OF  DUTY.  ggg

I  know  the  term  moral  reasoning  is  often  used  by  good  writers
in  a  more  extensive  sense ;  but  as  the  reasoning  I  now  speak  of
is  of  a  peculiar  kind,  distinct  from  all  others,  and  therefore  ought
to  have  a  distinct  name,  I  take  the  liberty  to  limit  the  name  of
moral  reasoning  to  this  kind.

Let  it  be  understood,  therefore,  that  [in  the  reasoning  I  call
morale  the  conclusion  always  is,  that  something  in  the  conduct
of  moral  agents  is  good  or  bad^  in  a  greater  or  a  less  degree,  or
indifferenU^

[All  reasoning  must  be  grounded  on  first  principles.  This
holds  in  moral  reasoning,  as  in  all  other  kinds.  There  must,
therefore,  be  in  morals,  as  in  all  other  sciences,  first  or  self-
evident  principles,  on  which  all  moral  reasoning  is  grounded,
and  on  which  it  ultimately  rests.]  From  such  self-evident  prin-
ciples, conclusions  may  be  drawn  synthetically  with  regard  to
the  moral  conduct  of  fife  ;  and  particular  duties  or  virtues  may
be  traced  back  to  such  principles,  analytically.  But,  without
such  principles,  we  can  no  more  establish  any  conclusion  in  morals,
than  we  can  build  a  castle  in  the  air,  without  any  foundation.

An  example  or  two  will  serve  to  illustrate  this.

[It  is  a  first  principle  in  morals,  that  we  ought  not  to  do  to
another  what  we  should  think  wrong  to  be  done  to  us  in  like
circumstances.]  If  a  man  is  not  capable  of  perceiving  this  in
his  cool  moments,  when  he  reflects  seriously,  he  is  not  a  moral
agent,  nor  is  he  capable  of  being  convinced  of  it  by  reasoning.

From  what  topic  can  you  reason  with  such  a  man  ?  You  may
possibly  convince  him  by  reasoning,  that  it  is  his  interest  to  ob-
serve this  rule ;  but  this  is  not  to  convince  him  that  it  is  his
duty.  To  reason  about  justice  with  a  man  who  sees  nothing  to
be  just  or  unjust ;  or  about  benevolence  with  a  man  who  sees
nothing  in  benevolence  preferable  to  malice,  is  like  reasoning
with  a  blind  man  about  colour,  or  with  a  deaf  man  about  soimd.

1®"  It  is  a  question  in  morals  that  admits  of  reasoning,  whether,
by  the  law  of  nature,  a  man  ought  to  have  only  one  wiife  ?

We  reason  upon  this  question,  by  balancing  the  advantages
and  disadvantages  to  the  family,  and  to  society  in  general,  tha't
are  naturally  consequent  both  upon  monogamy  and  polygamy.
And  if  it  can  be  shown  that  the  advantages  are  greatly  upon  the
side  of  monogamy,  we  think  the  point  is  determined.

But  if  a  man  does  not  perceive  that  he  ought  to  regard  the
good  of  society,  and  the  good  of  his  wife  and  children,  the  rea-
soning can  have  no  effect  upon  him,  because  he  denies  the  first
principle  upon  which  it  is  grounded.

Suppose  again,  that  we  reason  for  monogamy  from  the  inten-
tion of  nature,  discovered  by  the  proportion  of  males  and  of
females  that  are  bom ;  a  proportion  which  corresponds  perfectly
with  monogamy,  but  by  no  means  with  polygamy. This  argu-


230  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  GHAP.  VI.

ment  can  have  no  weight  with  a  man  who  does  not  perceive  that
he  ought  to  have  a  regard  to  the  intention  of  nature.

Thus  we  shall  find  that  all  moral  reasonings  rest  upon  one  or
more  first  principles  of  morals,  whose  truth  is  immemately  per-
ceived without  reasoning,  by  all  men  come  to  years  of  under-
standing.

V.  Universality  of  first  principles. — And  [this  indeed  is  com-
mon to  every  branch  of  human  knowledge  that  deserves  the  name
of  science.  There  must  be  first  principles  proper  to  that  science,
by  which  the  whole  superstructure  is  supported.]

The  first  principles  of  all  the  sciences  must  be  the  immediate
dictates  of  our  natural  faculties ;  nor  is  it  possible  that  we
should  have  any  other  evidence  of  their  truth.  And  in  different
sciences,  the  faculties  which  dictate  their  first  principles  are  very
different.

USg'  Thus,  in  astronomy  and  in  optics,  in  which  such  wonderful
discoveries  have  been  made,  that  the  unlearned  can  hardly  believe
them  to  be  within  the  reach  of  human  capacity,  the  first  prin-
ciples are  phenomena  attested  solely  by  that  little  organ,  the
human  eye.  If  we  disbelieve  its  report,  the  whole  of  those  two
noble  fabrics  of  science  falls  to  pieces  like,  the  visions  of  the
night.

The  principles  of  music  all  depend  upon  the  testimony  of  the
ear.  The  principles  of  natural  philosophy,  upon  the  facts  at-
tested hy  the  senses.  The  principles  of  mathematicsy  upon  the
necessary  relations  of  quantities  considered  abstractly,  such  as,
that  equal  quantities  added  to  equal  quantities  make  equal  sums,
and  the  like ;  which  necessary  relations  are  immediately  per-
ceived by  the  imderstanding.

The  science  of  politics  borrows  its  principles  from  what  we
know  by  experience  of  the  character  and  conduct  of  man.  We
consider  not  what  he  ought  to  be,  but  what  he  is,  and  thence
conclude  what  part  he  wdU  act  in  different  situations  and  circum-
stances. From  such  principles  we  reason  concerning  the  causes
and  effects  of  different  forms  of  government,  laws,  customs,  and
manners.  If  man  were  either  a  more  perfect  or  a  more  imper-
fect, a  better  or  a  worse  creature  than  he  is,  politics  would  be  a
different  science  from  what  it  is.

VI.  The  first  principles  of  morals  are  the  immediate  dictates  of
the  moral  faculty.  They  show  us,  not  what  man  is,  but  what  he
ought  to  be.  Whatever  is  immediately  perceived  to  be  just,
honest,  and  honourable,  in  human  conduct,  carries  moral  obli-
gation along  with  it,  and  the  contrary  carries  demerit  and  blame ;
and,  from  those  moral  obligations  that  are  immediately  perceived,
all  other  moral  obligations  must  be  deduced  by  reasoning.

He  that  will  judge  of  the  colour  of  an  object,  must  consult  his
eyes,  in  a  good  light,  when  there  is  no  medium  or  contiguous


OP  MORAL  APPROBATION  AND  DISAPPROBATION.  ggj

objects  that  may  give  it  a  false  tinge. But  in  vain  will  he  con-
sult every  other  faculty  in  this  matter.

In  like  manner,  he  that  will  judge  of  the  first  principles  of
morals,  must  consult  his  conscience  or  moral  faculty  when  he  is
calm  and  dispassionate,  unbiassed  by  interest,  affection,  or  fashion.

As  we  rely  upon  the  clear  and  distinct  testimony  of  our  eyes,
concerning  the  colours  and  figures  of  the  bodies  about  us,  we
have  the  same  reason  to  rely  with  seciirity  upon  the  clear  and
unbiassed  testimony  of  our  conscience,  with  regard  to  what  we
ought  and  ought  not  to  do.  In  many  cases,  moral  worth  and
demerit  are  discerned  no  less  clearly  by  the  last  of  those  natural
faculties,  than  figure  and  colour  by  the  first.

The  faculties  which  nature  hath  given  us,  are  the  only  engines
we  can  use  to  find  out  the  truth.  We  cannot  indeed  prove,  that
those  faculties  are  not  fallacious,  unless  God  should  give  us
new  faculties  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  the  old.  But  we  are  bom
under  a  necessity  of  trusting  them,*

Every  man  in  his  senses  believes  his  eyes,  his  ears,  and  his
other  senses.  He  believes  his  consciousness,  with  respect  to  his
own  thoughts  and  purposes ;  his  memory,  with  regard  to  what  is
past ;  his  understanding,  with  regard  to  abstract  relations  of  things ;
and  his  taste,  with  regard  to  what  is  elegant  and  beautiful.  And
he  has  the  same  reason,  and,  indeed,  is  under  the  same  necessity
of  believing  the  clear  and  unbiassed  dictates  of  his  conscience,
with  regard  to  what  is  honourable  and  what  is  base.

VII.  Recapitulation, — [The  sum  of  what  ha^  been  said  in  this
chapter  is,  (1)  that,  by  an  original  power  of  the  mind,  which  we
call  conscience  y  or  the  moral  faculty  y  we  have  the  conceptions  of
right  and  wrong  in  human  conduct,  of  merit  and  demerit,  of  duty
and  moral  obligation,  and  our  other  moral  conceptions ;  and  that,
(2)  by  the  same  faculty,  we  perceive  some  things  in  human  con-
duct to  be  right,  and  others  to  be  wrong ;  (3)  that  the  first  prin-
ciples of  morals  are  the  dictates  of  this  faculty ;  and  (4)  that  we
have  the  same  reason  to  rely  upon  those  dictates,  as  upon  the
determinations  of  our  senses,  or  of  our  other  natural  faculties.]


CHAPTER  VII.

OF  MORAL  APPROBATION  AND  DISAPPROBATION.

I.  Of  affections  and  feelings  included  in  our  moral  judgments,
— Our  moral  judgments  .are  not  like  those  we  form  in  specula-
tive matters,  dry  and  unaffecting,  but,  from  their  nature,  are

♦  Vide  Essay  IV.  chap,  vi.  sect.  1.


23^  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  Vi  f"

necessarily  accompanied  with  aflfections  and  feelings  j  which  w^
are  now  to  consider.

It  was  before  observed,  that  every  human  action,  considereci
in  a  moral.view,  appears  to  us  good,  or  bad,  or  indifferent. Wher^
we  judge  the  action  to  be  indifferent,  neither  good  nor  bad^
though  this  be  a  moral  judgment,  it  produces  no  affection  nor"
feeling,  any  more  than  our  judgments  in  speculative  matters.

But  we  approve  of  good  actions^  and  disapprove  of  bad ;  and
this  approbation  and  disapprobation,  when  we  analyse  it,  appears
to  include,  not  only  a  moral  judgment  of  the  action,  but  some
affection,  favourable  or  unfavourable,  towards  the  agent,  and
some  feeling  in  ourselves.

Nothing  is  more  evident  than  this,  that  moral  worth,  even  in
a  stranger,  with  whom  we  have  not  the  least  connexion,  never
fails  to  produce  some  degree  of  esteem  mixed  vnth  good  will.

The  esteem  which  we  have  for  a  man  on  account  of  his  moral
worth,  is  different  from  that  which  is  groimded  upon  his  intel-
lectual accomplishments,  his  birth,  fortune,  and  connexion  with
us.

|g^  Moral  worth,  when  it  is  not  set  off  by  eminent  abilities,
and  external  advantages,  is  like  a  diamond  in  the  mine,  which  is
rough  and  unpolished,  and  perhaps  crusted  over  with  some  baser
material  that  takes  away  its  lustre.

But,  when  it  is  attended  with  these  advantages,  it  is  like  a
diamond  cut,  polished,  and  set.  Then  its  lustre  attracts  every
eye.  Yet  these  things  which  add  so  much  to  its  appearance,  add
but  little  to  its  real  value.

II.  [We  must  further  observe,  that  esteem  and  benevolent  re-
ga/rd,  not  only  accompany  real  worth  by  the  constitution  of  our
nature,  but  are  perceived  to  be  really  and  properly  due  to  it ;
and  that,  on  the  contrary,  imworthy  conduct  really  merits  dis-
like and  indignation.]

There  is  no  judgment  of  the  heart  of  man  more  clear  or  more
irresistible  than  this, — that  esteem  and  regard  are  really  due  to
good  conduct,  and-  the  contrary  to  base  and  unworthy  conduct.
Nor  can  we  conceive  a  greater  depravity  in  the  heart  of  man,
than  it  would  be  to  see  and  acknowledge  worth  without  feeling
any  respect  to  it ;  or  to  see  and  acknowledge  the  highest  worth-
lessness  without  any  degree  of  dislike  and  indignation.

The  esteem  that  is  due  to  worthy  conduct  is  not  lessened
when  a  man  is  conscious  of  it  in  himself.  Nor  can  he  help
having  some  esteem  for  himself,  when  he  is  conscious  of  those
qualities  for  which  he  most  highly  esteems  others.

Self-esteem,  grounded  upon  external  advantages,  or  the  gifts
of  fortune,  is  pride.  When  it  is  grounded  upon  a  vain  conceit
of  inward  worth  which  we  do  not  possess,  it  is  j^rrogance  and
self-deceit. [Bui  when  a  man,  without thinking  of  himself


OP  MORAL  APPROBATION  AND  DISAPPROBATION.  233

more  Hghly  than  he  ought  to  think,  is  conscious  of  that  inte-
grity of  heart  and  uprightness  of  conduct,  which  he  most  highly
esteems  in  others,  and  values  himself  duly  upon  this  account ;
this  perhaps  may  be  called  the  pride  of  virtue,  but  -it  is  not  a
vicious  pride. It  is  a  noble  and  magnanimous  disposition,  with-
out which  there  can  be  no  steady  virtue*]

A  man  who  has  a  character  with  himself  which  he  values,  will
disdain  to  act  in  a  manner  unworthy  of  it.  The  language  of  his
heart  will  be  like  that  of  Job, "  My  righteousness  I  hold  fast,  and
will  not  let  it  go ;  my  heart  shall  not  reproach  me  while  I  live."

A  good  man  owes  much  to  his  character  with  the  world,  and
will  be  concerned  to  vindicate  it  from  unjust  imputations.  But
he  owes  much  more  to  his  character  with  himself.  For  if  his
heart  condemns  him  not,  he  has  confidence  towards  God ;  and
he  can  more  easily  bear  the  lash  of  tongues  than  the  reproach  of
his  own  mind.

The  sense  of  honour,  so  much  spoken  of,  and  so  often  mis-
applied, is  nothing  else,  when  rightly  understood,  but  the  dis-
dain which  a  man  of  worth  feels  to  do  a  dishonourable  action,
though  it  should  never  be  known  nor  suspected,

A  good  man  will  have  a  much  greater  abhorrence  against  doing
a  bad  action,  than  even  against  having  it  unjustly  imputed  to
him.  The  last  may  give  a  wound  to  his  reputation,  but  the  first
gives  a  wound  to  his  conscience,  which  is  more  difficult  to  heal,
and  more  painful  to  endure.

III.  Moral  disapprobation, — [Let  us,  on  the  other  hand,  con-
sider how  we  are  affected  by  disapprobation ,  either  of  the  conduct
of  others  or  of  our  own.]

Every  thing  we  disapprove  in  the  conduct  of  a  man,  lessens
him  in  our  esteem.  There  are  indeed  brilliant  faults,  which,
having  a  mixture  of  good  and  ill  in  them,  may  have  a  very  dif-
ferent aspect,  according  to  the  side  on  which  we  view  them.

In  such  faults  of  our  friends,  and  much  more  of  ourselves,  we
are  disposed  to  view  them  on  .the  best  side,  and  on  the  contrary
side  in  those  to  whom  we  are  ill  affected.

This  part:iality,  in  taking  things  by  the  best  or  by  the  worst
handle,  is  the  chief  cause  of  wrong  judgment  with  regard  to  the
character  of  others,  and  of  self-deceit  with  regard  to  our  own.

But  when  we  take  complex  actions  to  pieces,  and  view  every
part  by  itself,  ill  conduct  of  every  kind  lessens  our  esteem  of  a
man,  as  much  as  good  conduct  increases  it.  It  is  apt  to  turn
love  into  indifference,  indifference  into  contempt,  and  contempt
into  aversion  and  abhorrence.

When  a  man  is  conscious  of  immoral  conduct  in  himself,  it
lessens  his  self-esteem.  It  depresses  and  humbles  his  spirit,  and
makes  his  countenance  to  fall.  He  could  even  punish  himself
for  his  misbehaviour,  if  that  could  wipe  out  the  stain. There  is


^34  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  VII.

a  sense  of  dishonour  and  worthlessness  arising  from  guilt,  as  well
as  a  sense  of  honour  and  worth  arising  from  worthy  conduct.
And  this  is  the  case,  even  if  a  man  could  conceal  his  guilt  from
all  the  world,

IV.  We  are  next  to  consider  the  agreeable  or  uneasy  feeUngs,
in  the  breast  of  the  spectator  or  judge,  which  naturally  accom-
pany moral  approbation  and  disapprobation.

Ihere  is  no  affection  that  is  not  accompanied  with  some  agree-
able or  uneasy  emotion.  It  has  often  been  observed,  that  all  the
benevolent  anections  give  pleasure,  and  the  contrary  ones  pain,
in  one  degree  or  another.

BgiT  When  we  contemplate  a  noble  character,  though  but  in
ancient  history,  or  even  in  fiction;  like  a  beautiful  object,  it
gives  a  lively  and  pleasant  emotion  to  the  spirits.  It  warms  the
heart,  and  invigorates  the  whole  frame.  Like  the  beams  of  the
sun,  it  enlivens  the  face  of  nature,  and  diffuses  heat  and  light  all
around.

We  feel  a  sympathy  with  every  noble  and  worthy  character
that  is  represented  to  us.  We  rejoice  in  his  prosperity,  we  are
afflicted  in  his  distress.  We  even  catch  some  sparks  of  that
celestial  fire  that  animated  his  conduct,  and  feel  the  glow  of  his
virtue  and  magnanimity.

[This  sympathy  is  the  necessary  effect  of  our  judgment  of  his
conduct,  and  of  the  approbation  and  esteem  due  to  it ;  for  real
sympathy  is  always  the  effect  of  some  benevolent  affection,  such
as  esteem,  love,  pity,  or  humanity.]

When  the  person  whom  we  approve  is  connected  with  us  by
acquaintance,  friendship,  or  blood,  the  pleasure  we  derive  from
his  conduct  is  greatly  increased.  We  claim  some  property  in  his
worth,  and  are  apt  to  value  ourselves  on  accoimt  of  it.  This
shows  a  stronger  degree  of  sympathy,  which  gathers  strength
from  every  social  tie.

V.  But  the  highest  pleasure  of  all  is,  when  we  are  conscious  of
good  conduct  in  ourselves. This,  in  sacred  scripture,  is  called ,
the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience;  and  it  is  represented,  not
only  in  the  sacred  writings,  but  in  the  writings  of  all  moralists,
of  every  age  and  sect,  as  the  purest,. the  most  noble  and  valuable
of  all  human  enjoyments.

Surely,  were  we  to  place  the  chief  happiness  of  this  life  (a
thing  that  has  been  so  much  sought  after)  in  any  one  kind  of
enjoyment,  that  which  arises  from  the  consciousness  of  integrity,
and  a  uniform  endeavour  to  act  the  best  part  in  our  station,
would  most  justly  claim  the  preference  to  all  other  enjoyments
the  human  mind  is  capable  of,  on  account  of  its  dignity,  the
intenseness  of  the  happiness  it  affords,  its  stability  and  duration,
its  being  in  our  power,  and  its  being  proof  against  all  accidents
of  time  and  fortune.


OF  MORAL  APPROBATION  AND  DISAPPROBATION.  235

On  the  other  hand,  the  view  of  a  vicious  character,  like
that  of  an  ugly  and  deformed  object,  is  disagreeable.  It  gives
disgust  and  abhorrence.

If  the  unworthy  person  be  nearly  connected  with  us,  we  have
a  very  painful  sympathy  indeed.  Wp  blush  even  for  the  smaller
faults  of  those  we  are  connected  vdth,  and  feel  ourselves,  as  it
were,  dishonoured  by  their  ill  conduct.

But,  when  there  is  a  high  degree  of  depravity  in  any  person
connected  with  us,  we  are  deeply  humbled  and  depressed  by  it.
The  sympathetic  feeling  has  some  resemblance  to  that  of  guilt,
though  it  be  free  from  all  guilt.  We  are  ashamed  to  see  our
acquaintance ;  we  would,  if  possible,  disclaim  all  connexion  with
the  guilty  person.  We  wish  to  tear  him  from  our  hearts,  and  to
blot  him  out  of  our  remembrance.

Time,  however,  alleviates  those  sympathetic  sorrows  which
arise  from  bad  behaviour  in  our  friends,  and  connexions,  if  we
are  conscious  that  we  had  no  share  in  their  guilt.

VI.  Social  ties  auxiliary  to  virtue,  unfavourable  to  vice, —
[The  wisdom  of  God,  in  the  constitution  of  our  nature,  hath
intended,  that  this  sympathetic  distress  should  interest  us  the
more  deeply  in  the  good  behaviour,  as  well  as  in  the  good  fortune,
of  our  friends ;  and  that  thereby  friendship,  relation,  and  every
social  tie,  should  be  aiding  to  virtue  and  unfavourable  to  vice.]

How  common  is  it,  even  in  vicious  parents,  to  be  deeply
afflicted  when  their  children  go  into  these  courses  in  which  per-
haps they  have  gone  before  them,  and,  by  their  example,  shown
them  the  way.

If  bad  conduct  in  those  in  whom  we  are  interested,  be  uneasy
and  painful,  it  is  so  much  more  when  we  are  conscious  of  it  in
ourselves.  This  uneasy  feeling  has  a  name  in  all  languages.  We
call  it  remorse.

It  has  been  described  in  such  frightful  colours  by  writers
sacred  and  profane,  by  writers  of  every  age  and  of  every  persua-
sion, even  by  Epicureans,  that  I  vrill  not  attempt  the  description
of  it.

VII.  Consequences  of  remorse. — It  is  on  accoimt  of  the  un-
easiness of  this  feeling,  that  bad  men  take  so  much  pains  to  get
rid  of  it,  and  to  hide,  even  from  their  own  eyes,  as  much  as  pos-
sible, the  pravity  of  their  conduct.  [Hence  arise  (1)  all  the  arts
of  self-deceit,  by  which  men  varnish  their  crimes,  or  endeavour
to  wash  out  the  stain  of  guilt.  Hence  (2)  the  various  methods
of  expiation  which  superstition  has  invented,  to  solace  the  con-
science of  the  criminal,  and  give  some  cooling  to  his  parched
breast.  Hence  also  arise,  very  often,  (3)  the  efforts  of  men  of
bad  hearts  to  excel  in  some  amiable  quality,  which  may  be  a
kind  of  counterpoise  to  their  vices,  both  in  the  opinion  of  others
and  in  their  own.]


236  ESSAY  III.— PART  II.  CHAP.  Vl^-

For  no  man  can  bear  the  thought  of  being  absolutely  destitute
of  all  worth.  The  consciousness  of  this  would  make  him  detests
himself,  hate  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  fly,  if  possible,  out  of
existence.

VIII.  Operations  of  tho^  faculty  called  moral  sense. — I  have
now  endeavoured  to  delineate  the  natural  operations  of  that  prin-
ciple of  action  in  man,  which  we  call  the  moral  sense,  the  moral
faculty i  conscience.  We  know  nothing  of  our  natural  faculties,
but  by  their  operations  within  us.  Of  their  operations  in  our
own  minds,  we  are  conscious,  and  we  see  the  signs  of  their  ope-
rations in  the  minds  of  others.  [Of  this  faculty  the  operations
appear  to  be,  the  judging  ultimately  of  what  is  right,  what  is
wrong,  and  what  is  indifferent,  in  the  conduct  of  moral  agents ;
the  approbation  of  good  conduct  and  disapprobation  of  bad  in
consequence  of  that  judgment,  and  the  agreeable  emotions  which
attend  obedience,  and  disagreeable  which  attend  disobedience  to
its  dictates.]

The  Supreme  Being,  who  has  given  us  eyes  to  discern  what
may  be  useful  and  what  hurtful  to  our  natural  life,  hath  also
given  us  this  light  within  to  direct  our  moral  conduct.

Moral  conduct  is  the  business  of  every  man;  and  therefore
the  knowledge  of  it  ought  to  be  within  the  reach  of  all.

Epicurus  reasoned  acutely  and  justly  to  show,  that  a  regard
to  our  present  happinessi  should  mduce  us  to  the  practice  of
temperance,  justice,  and  humanity.  But  the  bulk  of  mankind
cannot  follow  long  trains  of  reasonings  The  loud  voice  of  the
passions  drowns  the  calm  and  still  voice  of  reasoning.
'  Conscience  commands  and  forbids  with  more  authority,  and,
in  the  most  common  and  most  important  points  of  conduct,  with-
out the  labour  of  reasoning.  Its  voice  is  heard  by  every  man,
and  cannot  be  disregarded  with  impunity.

The  sense  of  guilt  makes  a  man  at  variance  with  himself.  He
sees  that  he  is  what  he  ought  not  to  be.  He  has  fallen  from  the
dignity  of  his  nature,  and  has  sold  his  real  worth  for  a  thing  of
no  value.  He  is  conscious  of  demerit,  and  cannot  avoid  the
dread  of  meeting  with  its  reward.

On  the  other  hand,  he  who  pays  a  sacred  regard  to  the  dictates
of  his  conscience,  cannot  fail  of  a  present  reward,,  and  a  reward
proportioned  to  the  exertion  required  in  doing  his  duty.

The  man  who,  in  opposition  to  strong  temptation,  by  a  noble
effort  maintains  his  integrity,  is  the  happiest  man  on  earth.  The
more  severe  his  conflict  has  been,  the  greater  is  his  triumph.
The  consciousness  of  inward  worth  gives  strength  to  his  heart,
and  makes  his  countenance  to  shine.  Tempests  may  beat  and
floods  roar ;  but  he  stands  firm  as  a  rock,  in  the  joy  of  a  good
conscience,  and  confidence  of  Divine  approbation.

[To  this  I  shall  only  add,  what  every  man's  conscience  die-


OBSERVATIONS  CONCERNING  CONSCIENCE.  ggy

tates,  that  he  who  does  his  duty,  from  the  conviction  that  it  is
right  and  honourable,  and  what  he  ought  to  do,  acts  from  a
nobler  principle,  and  with  more  inward  satisfaction,  than  he  who
is  bribed  to  do  it,  merely  from  the  consideration  of  a  reward  pre-
sent or  future.]


CHAPTER VIII.

OBSERVATIONS  CONCERNING  CONSCIENCE.

I.  Our  judgment  of  moral  conduct  advances  from  infancy  hy
insensible  degrees.—!  shall  now  conclude  this  Essay  with  some
observations  concerning  this  power  of  the  mind  which  we  call
conscience y  by  which  its  nature  may  be  better  understood.

The  first  is,  that,  like  all  our  other  powers,  it  comes  to  matu-
rity by  insensible  degrees,  and  may  be  much  aided  in  its  strength
and  vigour  by  proper  culture.

All  the  human  faculties  have  their  infancy  and  their  state  of
maturity.

The  faculties  which  we  have  in  common  with  the  brutes  ap-

f)ear  first,  and  have  the  quickest  growth.  In  the  first  period  of
ife,  children  are  not  capable  of  distinguishing  right  from  wrong
in  human  conduct ;  neither  are  they  capable  of  abstract  reason-
ing in  matters  of  science.  Their  judgment  of  moral  conduct,  as
well  as  their  judgment  of  truth,  advances  by  insensible  degrees,
like  the  com  and  the  grass.

BSF  In  vegetables,  first  the  blade  or  the  leaf  appears,  then  the
flower,  and  last  of  all  the  fruit,  the  noblest  production  of  the
three,  and  that  for  which  the  others  were  produced.  These
succeed  one  another  in  a  regular  order.  They  require  moisture
and  heat  and  air  and  shelter  to  bring  them  to  maturity,  and  may
be  much  improved  by  culture.  According  to  the  variations  of
soil,  season,  and  culture,  some  plants  are  brought  to  much
greater  perfection  than  others  of  the  same  species.  But  no
variation  of  culture  or  season  or  soil  can  make  grapes  grow  from
thorns,  or  figs  from  thistles.

We  may  observe  a  similar  progress  in  the  faculties  of  the
mind :  for  there  is  a  wonderful  analogy  among  all  the  works  of
Gody  from  the  least  even  to  the  greatest.

The  faculties  of  man  imfold  themselves  in  a  certain  order,  ap-
pointed by  the  great  Creator.  In  their  gradual  progress,  they
may  be  greatly  assisted  or  retarded,  improved  or  corrupted,  by
education,  instruction,  example,  exercise,  and  by  the  society
and  conversation  of  men,  which,  like  soil  and  culture  in  plants,
may  produce  great  changes  to  the  better  or  to  the  worse.

II.  [But  tliese  means  can  never  produce  any  new  faculties y
nor  any  other  than  were  originally  planted  in  the  mind  by  the


238  feSSAY  III.-PART  TI.  CHAP.  VIII.

Author  of  nature.  And  what  is  common  to  the  whole  species,  in
all  the  varieties  of  instruction  and  education,  of  improvement
and  degeneracy,  is  the  work  of  God,  and  not  the  operation  of
second  cati8es,\

Such  we  may  justly  account  conscience^  or  the  faculty  of  dis-
tinguishing right  conduct  from  wrong ;  since  it  appears,  and  in  all
nations  and  ages  has  appeared,  in  men  that  are  come  to  maturity.

The  seeds,  as  it  were,  of  moral  discernment  are  planted  in
the  mind  by  Him  that  made  us :  they  grow  up  in  their  proper
season,  and  are  at  first  tender  and  delicate,  and  easily  warped.
Their  progress  depends  very  much  upon  their  being  duly  culti-
vated and  properly  exercised.

.  It  is  so  with  the  power  of  reasoning,  which  all  acknowledge
to  be  one  of  the  most  eminent  natural  faculties  of  man.  It  ap-
pears not  in  infancy.  It  springs  up,  by  insensible  degrees,  as
we  grow  to  maturity.  But  its  strength  and  vigour  depend  so
much  upon  its  being  duly  cultivated  and  exercised,  that  we  see
many  individuals,  nay,  many  nations,  in  which  it  is  hardly  to  be
perceived.

Our  intellectual  discernment  is  not  so  strong  and  vigorous  by
nature,  as  to  secure  us  from  errors  in  speculation.  On  the  con-
trary, we  see  a  great  part  of  mankind,  in  every  age,  sunk  in
gross  ignorance  of  things  that  are  obvious  to  the  more  enlight-
ened, and  fettered  by  errors  and  false  notions,  which  the  human
understanding,  duly  improved,  easily  throws  off.

III.  Scepticism  twofold. — [It  would  be  extremely  absurd,  from
the  errors  and  ignorance  of  mankind,  to  conclude  (1)  that  there
is  no  such  thing  as  truth ;  or  {2)  that  man  has  not  a  natural
faculty  of  discerning  it^  and  distinguishing  it  from  error.]*

In  Hke  manner,  our  moral  discernment  of  what  we  ought,  and
what  we  ought  not  to  do,  is  not  so  strong  and  vigorous  by
nature,  as  to  secure  us  from  very  gross  mistakes  with  regard  to
our  duty.

In  matters  of  conduct,  as  well  as  in  matters  of  speculation,
we  are  liable  to  be  misled  by  prejudices  of  education,  or  by
wrong  instruction.  But,  in  matters  of  conduct,  we  are  also
very  liable  to  have  our  judgment  warped  by  our  appetites  and
passions,  by  fashion,  and  by  the  contagion  of  evil  example.

We  must  not  therefore  think,  because  man  has  the  natural
power  of  discerning  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong,  that  he  has
no  need  of  instruction  ;  that  this  power  has  no  need  of  cultiva-
tion and  improvement ;  that  he  may  safely  rely  upon  the  sug-
gestions of  his  mind,  or  upon  opinions  he  has  got,  he  knows
not  how.

fSW  What  should  we  think  of  a  man  who,  because  he  has  by
nature  tTie  power  of  moving  all  his  limbs,  should  therefore  con-
♦  Vide  Locke*8  Essays,  book  I.  Sect  2.  Introduction.


OBSERVATIONS  CONCERNING  CONSCIENCE.  239

elude  that  he  needs  not  be  taught  to  dance,  or  to  fence,  to  ride,
or  to  swim  ?  All  these  exercises  are  performed  by  that  power
of  moving-  our  limbs,  which  we  have  by  nature  ;  but  they  will
be  performed  very  awkwardly  and  imperfectly  by  those  who
have  not  been  trained  to  them,  and  practised  in  them.

What  should  we  think  of  the  man  who,  because  he  has  the
power  by  nature  of  distinguishing  what  is  true  from  what  is
false,  should  conclude  that  he  has  no  need  to  be  taught  mathe-
matics, or  natural  philosophy,  or  other  sciences  ?  It  is  by  the
natural  power  of  human  understanding  that  every  thing  in  those
sciences  has  been  discovered,  and  that  the  truths  they  contain
are  discerned.  But  the  undei*standing,  left  to  itself,  without  the
aid  of  instruction,  training,  habit,  and  exercise,  would  make
very  small  progress,  as  every  one  sees,  in  persons  uninstructed
in  those  matters.

IV.  l^Our  natural  power  of  discerning  between  right  and  wrong
needs  the  aid  of  instruction^  education,  exercise,  and  habit,  as
well  as  our  other  natural  powers.]

There  are  persons  who,  as  the  scripture  speaks,  have,  by
reason  o^  use,  their  senses  exercised  to  discern  both  good  and
evil ;  by  that  means,  they  have  a  much  quicker,  clearer,  and
more  certain  judgment  in  morals  than  others.

The  man  who  neglects  the  means  of  improvement  in  the  know-
ledge of  his  duty,  may  do  very  bad  things,  while  he  follows  the
Ught  of  his  mind.  Ana  though  he  be  not  culpable  for  acting
according  to  his  judgment,  he  may  be  very  culpable  for  not
using  the  means  of  having  his  judgment  better  informed.

V.  It  may  be  observed,  That  there  are  truths,  both  specula^
tive  and  moral,  which  a  man  left  to  himself  would  never  discover  ;
yet,  when  they  are  fairly  laid  before  him,  he  owns  and  adopts  them,
not  barely  upon  the  authority  of  his  teacher,  but  upon  their  own
intrinsic  evidence,  and  perhaps  wonders  that  he  could  be  so  blind
as  not  to  see  them  before.

gglT  Like  a  man  whose  son  has  been  long  abroad,  and  sup-
posed dead.  After  many  years  the  son  returns,  and  is  not
knovm  by  his  father.  He  would  never  jSnd  that  this  is  his  son.
But,  when  he  discovers  himself,  the  father  soon  finds,  by  many
circumstances,  that  this  is  his  son  who  was  lost,  and  can  be  no
other  person.

[Truth  has  an  afiinity  with  the  human  understanding,  which
error  has  not.  And  right  principles  of  conduct  have  an  affinity
with  a  candid  mind,  which  wrong  principles  have  not.]  When
they  are  set  before  it  in  a  just  light,  a  well  disposed  mind  recog-
nises this  affinity,  feels  their  authority,  and  perceives  them  to
be  genuine.  It  was  this,  I  apprehend,  that  led  Plato  to  con-
ceive that  the  knowledge  we  acquire  in  the  present  state,  is  only
reminiscence  of  what,  in  a  former  state,  we  were  acquainted  with.


240  ESSAY  III.— PART  H.  C^AP.  VI

A  man  bom  and  brought  up  in  a  savage  nation,  may  be  taugt^^^
to  pursue  injury  with  unrelenting  malice,  to  the  destruction
his  enemy. Perhaps  when  he  does  so,  his  heart  does  not  coi
demnhim.

Yet,  if  he  be  fair  and  candid,  and,  when  the  tumult  of  passioi^
is  over,  have  the  virtues  of  clemency,  generosity,  and  forgive^ —
ness,  laid  before  him,  as  they  were  taught  and  exemplified  b^"
the  Divine  Author  of  our  religion,  he  ynU  see,  that  it  is  more^
noble  to  overcome  himself,  and  subdue  a  savage  passion,  than.
to  destroy  his  enemy. He  will  see,  that  to  make  a  friend  of  an
enemy,  and  to  overcome  evil  vnth  good,  is  the  greatest  of  all
victories,  and  gives  a  manly  and  a  rational  delight,  with  which  the
brutish  passion  of  revenge  deserves  not  to  be  compared. He  will
see,  that  hitherto  he  acted  like  a  man  to  his  friends,  but  like  a
brute  to  his  enemies  :  now  he  knows  how  to  make  his  whole  cha-
racter consistent,  and  one  part  of  it  to  harmonize  vdth  another.

He  must  indeed  be  a  great  stranger  to  his  own  heart,  and  to
the  state  of  human  nature,  who  does  not  see  that  he  has  need  of
all  the  aid  which  his  situation  affords  him,  in  order  to  know
how  he  ought  to  act  in  many  cases  that  occur.

VI.  [A  second  observation  is.  That  Conscience  is  peculiar  to
man.  We  see  not  a  vestige  of  it  in  brute-animals.  It  is  one  of
those  prerogatives  by  which  we  are  raised  above  them.]

Brute-animals  have  many  faculties  in  common  vrith  us.  They
see,  and  hear,  and  taste,  and  smell,  and  feel.  They  have  their
pleasures  and  pains.  They  have  various  instincts  and  appetites.
They  have  an  affection  for  their  offspring,  and  some  of  them  for
their  herd  or  flock.  Dogs  have  a  wonderiul  attachment  to  their
masters,  and  give  manifest  signs  of  sympathy  v^dth  them.

We  see,  in  brute-animals,  anger  and  emulation,  pride  and
shame.  Some  of  them  are  capable  of  being  trained  by  habit,  and
by  rewards  and  punishments,  to  many  things  useful  to  man.

All  this  must  be  granted ;  and  if  our  perception  of  what  we
ought,  and  what  we  ought  not  to  do,  could  be  resolved  into  any
of  these  principles,  or  into  any  combination  of  them,  it  would
follow,  that  some  brutes  are  moral  agents,  and  accountable  for
their  conduct.

But  common  sense  revolts  against  this  conclusion.  A  man
who  seriously  charged  a  brute  vrith  a  crime,  would  be  laughed
at.  They  may  do  actions  hurtful  to  themselves,  or  to  man.
They  may  have  qualities,  or  acquire  habits,  that  lead  to  such
actions;  and  this  is  all  we  mean  when  we  call  them  vicious.
But  they  cannot  be  immoral ;  nor  can  they  be  virtuous.  They
are  not  capable  of  self-government ;  and,  when  they  act  accord-
ing to  the  passion  or  habit  which  is  strongest  at  the  time,  they
act  according  to  the  nature  that  God  has  given  them,  and  no
more  can  be  required  of  them.


OBSERVATIONS  CONCERNING  CONSCIENCE.  gAJ

They  cannot  lay  down  a  rule  to  themselves,  which  they  are
i^ot  to  transgress,  though  prompted  by  appetite,  or  ruffled  by
passion.  We  see  no  reason  to  think  that  they  can  form  the  con-
ception of  a  general  rule,  or  of  obligation  to  adhere  to  it.

They  have  no  conception  of  a  promise  or  contract ;  nor  can
you  enter  into  any  treaty  with  them.  They  can  neither  affirm
tier  deny,  nor  resolve,  nor  plight  their  faith.  If  nature  had  made
them  capable  of  these  operations,  we  should  see  the  signs  of
them  in  their  motions  and  gestures.

[The  most,  sagacious  brutes  never  invented  a  language^  nor
learned  the  use  of  one  before  invented. They  never  formed  a
John  of  government^  nor  transmitted  inventions to  their  pos-
terity.]

These  things,  and  many  others  that  axe  obvious  to  common
observation,  show,  that  there  is  just  reason  why  mankind  have
always  considered  the  brute-creation  as  destitute  of  the  noblest
:faculties  with  which  God  hath  endowed  man,  and  particularly  of
that  faculty  which  makes  us  moral  and  accountable  beings.

VII.  [The  next  observation  is,  That  conscience  is  evidently
intended  by  nature  to  he  the  immediate  guide  and  director  of  our
4:onduct,  after  we  arrive  at  the  years  of  understanding.]

There  are  many  things  which,  from  their  nature  and  structure,
show  intuitively  the  end  for  which  they  were  made.

BS^  A  man  who  knows  the  structure  of  a  watch  or  clock,  can
lave  no  doubt  in  concluding  that  it  was  made  to  measure  time.
And  he  that  knows  the  structure  of  the  eye,  and  the  properties
of  light,  can  have  as  little  doubt  whether  it  was  made  that  we
might  see  by  it.

In  the  fabric  of  the  body,  the  intention  of  the  several  parts
is,  in  many  instances,  so  evident,  as  to  leave  no  possibility  of
doubt.  Who  can  doubt  whether  the  muscles  were  intended  to
move  the  parts  in  which  they  were  inserted?  Whether  the
bones  were  intended  to  give  strength  and  support  to  the  body  ;
and  some  of  them  to  guard  the  parts  which  they  inclose  ?

When  we  attend  to  the  structure  of  the  mind,  the  intention  of
its  various  original  powers  is  no  less  evident.  Is  it  not  evident,
that  the  external  senses  are  given,  that  we  may  discern  those
qualities  of  bodies  which  may  be  useful  or  hurtful  to  us  ?
Memory,  that  we  may  retain  the  knowledge  we  have  acquired  :
judgment  and  understanding ,  that  we  may  distinguish  what  is
true  from  what  is  false  ?

VIII.  The  intention  or  end  of  our  active  powers  obvious. — The
natural  appetites  of  hunger  and  thirst,  the  natural  affections  of
parents  to  their  offspring,  and  of  relations  to  each  other,  the
natural  docility  and  credulity  of  children,  the  affections  of  pity
and  sympathy  with  the  distressed,  the  attachment  we  feel  to
neigh Dours,  to  acquaintance,  and  to  the  laws  and  constitution  of

R


242  ESSAY  III.— PART  11.  CHAP.  VIII

our  country ;  these  are  parts  of  our  constitution,  which  plainly
point  out  their  end,  so  that  he  must  be  blind,  or  very  inattentive-
who  does  not  perceive  it.  [Even,  the  passions  of  anger  and
resentment,  appear  very  plainly  to  be  a  kind  of  defensive  armour-
given  by  our  Maker  to  guard  us  against  injuries,  and  to  deter  the
injurious.]

Thus  it  holds  generally  with  regard  both  to  the  intellectual
and  active  powers  of  man,  that  the  intention  for  which  they  are
given  is  vratten  in  legible  characters  upon  the  face  of  them.

IX.  Office  of  conscience. — [Nor  is  this  the  case  of  any  of  them
more  evidently  than  of  conscience.  Its  intention  is  manifestly
implied  in  its  office ;  which  is,  to  show  us  what  is  good,  what
bad,  and  what  indifferent  in  human  conduct.]

It  judges  of  every  action  before  it  is  done.  For  we  can  rarely
act  so  precipitately,  but  we  have  the  consciousness  that  what  we
are  about  to  do  is  right,  or  wrong,  or  indifferent.  Like  the
bodily  eye,  it  naturally  looks  forward,  though  its  attention  may
be  turned  back  to  the  past.

To  conceive,  as  some  seem  to  have  done,  that  its  office  is  only
to  reflect  on  past  actions,  and  to  approve  or  disapprove,  is,  as  if
a  man  should  conceive,  that  the  office  of  his  eyes  is  only  to  look
back  upon  the  road  he  has  travelled,  and  to  see  whether  it  be
clean  or  dirty ;  a  mistake  which  no  man  can  make  who  has  made
the  proper  use  of  his  eyes.

Conscience  prescribes  measures  to  every  appetite,  affection,  and
passion,  and  says  to  every  other  principle  of  action,  so  far  thou
mayest  go,  but  no  farther.

We  may  indeed  transgress  its  dictates,  but  we  cannot  trans-
gress them  with  innocence,  nor  even  with  impunity.

[We  condemn  ourselves,  or,  in  the  language  of  Scripture,
our  heart  condemns  us,  whenever  we  go  beyond  the  rules  of  right
and  vn:ong  which  conscience  prescribes.

Other  principles  of  action  may  have  more  strength,  but  this
only  has  authority.^  Its  sentence  makes  us  guilty  to  ourselves,
and  guilty  in  the  eyes  of  our  Maker,  whatever  other  principle
may  be  set  in  opposition  to  it.

It  is  evident  therefore,  that  this  principle  has,  from  its  nature,
an  authority  to  direct  and  determine  with  regard  to  our  conduct ;
to  judge,  to  acquit,  or  to  condemn,  and  even  to  punish;  an
authority  which  belongs  to  no  other  principle  of  the  human
mind.

i^  It  is  the  candle  of  the  Lord  set  up  within  us,  to  guide  oui
steps.  Other  principles  may  urge  and  impel,  but  this  only
authorises.  Other  principles  ought  to  be  controlled  by  this;
this  may  be,  but  never  ought  to  be,  controlled  by  any  other,  and
never  can  be  with  innocence.

The  authority  of  conscience  over  the  other  active  principles  oi


OBSERVATIONS  CONCERNING  CONSCIENCE.  g^g

the  mindy  I  do  not  consider  as  a  point  tliat  requires  proof  by
argument,  but  as  self-evident.  For  it  implies  no  more  than  this,
That  in  all  cases  a  man  ought  to  do  his  duty.  He  only  who
does  in  all  cases  what  he  ought  to  do,  is  the  perfect  man.
.  X.  Stoical  perfection  ideal.— [Oi  this  perfection  in  the  human
nature,  the  Stoics  formed  the  idea,  and  held  it  forth  in  their
writings  as  the  goal  to  which  the  race  of  life  ought  to  be  directed.
Their  wise  man  was  one  in  whom  a  regard  to  the  honestum  swal-
lowed up  every  other  principle  of  action.]

The  wise  man  of  the  Stoics,  like  the  perfect  orator  of  the  rheto-
ricians, was  an  ideal  character,  and  was,  in  some  respects,  carried
beyond  nature ;  yet  it  was  perhaps  the  most  perfect  model  of
virtue,  that  ever  was  exhibited  to  the  heathen  world ;  and  some
of  those  who  copied  after  it,  were  ornaments  to  human  nature.

XI.  [The  last  observation  is.  That  the  moral  faculty  or  con-
science is  both  an  active  and  an  intellectual  power  of  the  mind.]

It  is  an  active  power,  as  every  truly  virtuous  action  must  be
more  or  less  influenced  by  it.  Other  principles  may  concur  with
it,  and  lead  the  same  way ;  but  no  action  can  be  called  morally
good,  in  which  a  regard  to  what  is  right  has  not  some  influence.
Thus  a  man  who  has  no  regard  to  justice,  may  pay  his  just  debt,
from  no  other  motive,  but  that  he  may  not  be  thrown  into  prison.
In  this  action  there  is  no  virtue  at  all.

The  moral  principle,  in  particular  cases,  may  be  opposed  by
any  of  our  animal  principles.  Passion  or  appetite  may  urge  to
what  we  know  to  be  wrong.  In  every  instance  of  this  kind,  the
moral  principle  ought  to  prevail,  and  the  more  difficult  its  con-
quest is,  it  is  the  more  glorious.

[In  some  cases,  a  regard  to  what  is  right  may  be  the  sole
motive,  without  the  concurrence  or  opposition  of  any  other  prin-
ciple of  action ;  as  when  a  judge  or  an  arbiter  determines  a  plea
between  two  indifferent  persons,  solely  from  a  regard  to  justice.

Thus  we  see,  that  conscience,  as  an  active  principle,  sometimes
concurs  with  other  active  principles,  sometimes  opposes  them,
and  sometimes  is  the  sole  principle  of  action.]

I  endeavoured  before  to  show,  that  a  regard  to  our  own  good
upon  the  ;Lwhole  is  not  only  a  rational  principle  of  action,  but  a
leading  principle,  to  which  all  our  animal  principles  are  subordi-
nate. As  there  are,  therefore,  two  regulating  or  leading  princi-
ples in  the  constitution  of  man,  a  regard  to  what  is  best  for  us
upon  the  whole,  and  a  regard  to  duty,  it  may  be  asked,  Which
of  these  ought  to  yield  if  they  happen  to  interfere  ?

XII.  Extravagance  of  Mysticism. — Some  well  meaning  per-
sons have,  maintained,  [That  all  regard  to  ourselves  and  to  our
own  happiness  ought  to  be  extinguished ;  that  we  should  love
virtue  for  its  own  sake  only,  even  though  it  were  to  be  accom-
panied with  etenial  misery.]

r2


344  ESSAY  III.— PART  II. .  CHAP.  VIII.

This  seems  to  have  been  the  extravagance  of  some  Mystics,
which  perhaps  they  were  led  into,  in  opposition  to  a  contrary
extreme  of  the  schoolmen  of  the  middle  ages,  who  made  the
desire  of  good  to  ourselves  to  be  the  sole  motive  to  action,  and
virtue  to  be  approvable  only  on  account  of  its  present  or  future
reward.

Juster  views  of  human  nature  veill  teach  us  to  avoid  both  these
extremes.

On  the  one  hand,  the  disinterested  love  of  virtue  is  undoubt-
edly the  noblest  principle  in  human  nature,  and  ought  never  to
stoop  to  any  other.

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  active  principle  which  God
hath  planted  in  our  nature  that  is  vicious  in  itself,  or  that  ought
to  be  eradicated,  even  if  it  were  in  our  power.

They  are  all  useful  and  necessary  in  our  present  state.  The
perfection  of  human  nature  consists,  not  in  extinguishing,  but  in
restraining  them  within  their  proper  bounds,  and  keeping  them
in  due  subordination  to  the  governing  principles.

XIII.  [As  to  the  supposition  of  an  opposition  between  the  two
governing  principles^  that  is,  between  a  regard  to  our  happiness
upon  the  whole,  and  a  regard  to  duty,  this  supposition  is  merely
imaginary. There  can  be  no  such  opposition.]

While  the  world  is  under  a  vrise  and  benevolent  administra-
tion, it  is  impossible  that  any  man  should,  in  the  issue,  be  a  loser
by  doing  his  duty.  Every  man,  therefore,  who  believes  in  God,
while  he  is  careful  to  do  his  duty,  may  safely  leave  the  care  of
his  happiness  to  Him  who  made  him.  He  is  conscious  that  he
consults  the  last  most  effectually,  by  attending  to  the  first.

Indeed,  if  we  suppose  a  man  to  be  an  atheist  in  his  belief,  and,
at  the  same  time,  by  wrong  judgment,  to  believe  that  virtue  is
contrary  to  his  happiness  upon  the  whole,  this  case,  as  Lord
Shaftesbury  justly  observes,  is  without  remedy.  It  will  be
impossible  for  the  man  to  act  so  as  not  to  contradict  a  leading
principle  of  his  nature.  He  must  either  sacrifice  his  happiness
to  virtue,  or  virtue  to  happiness ;  and  is  reduced  to  this  miserable
dilemma,  whether  it  be  best  to  be  a  fool  or  a  knave.

[This  shows  the  strong  connexion  between  morality  and  the
principles  of  natural  religion  ;  as  the  last  only  can  secure  a  man
from  the  possibility  of  an  apprehension,  that  he  may  play  the
fool  by  doing  his  duty.]

Hence  even  Lord  Shaftesbury,  in  his  gravest  work,  concludes.
That  virtue  without  piety  is  incomplete.  Without  piety  it  loses
its  brightest  example,  its  noblest  object,  and  its  firmest  support.

XIV.  [I  conclude  with  observing.  That  conscience,  or  the
moral  faculty,  is  likewise  an  intellectual  power. ^

By  it  solely  we  have  the  original  conceptions  or  ideas  of  right
and  wrong  in  human  conduct. And  of  right  and  wrong,  there


OBSERVATIONS  CONCERNING  CONSCIENCE.  g^g

are  not  only  many  different  degrees,  but  many  different  species*
Justice  and  injustice,  gratitude  and  ingratitude,  benevolence  and
maKce,  prudence  and  folly,  magnanimity  and  meanness,  decency
and  indecency,  are  various  moral  forms,  all  comprehended  under
the  general  notion  of  right  and  wrong  in  conduct,  all  of  them
objects  of  moral  approbation  or  disapprobation,  in  a  greater  or  a
less  degree.

The  conception  of  these,  as  moral  qualities,  we  have  by  our
moral  faculty ;  and  by  the  same  faculty,  when  we  compare  them
together,  we  perceive  various  moral  relations  among  them.  Thus
we  perceive  that  justice  is  entitled  to  a  small  degree  of  praise,
but  injustice  to  a  high  degree  of  blame ;  and  the  same  may  be
said  of  gratitude  and  its  contrary.  When  justice  and  gratitude
interfere,  gratitude  must  give  place  to  justice,  and  unmerited
beneficence  must  give  place  to  both.

Many  such  relations  between  the  various  moral  qualities  com-
pared together,  axe  immediately  discerned  by  our  moral  faculty.
A  man  needs  only  to  consult  his  own  heart  to  be  convinced  of
them.

All  our  reasonings  in  morals,  in  natural  jurisprudence,  in  the
law  of  nations,  as  well  as  our  reasonings  about  the  duties  of
natural  religion,  and  about  the  moral  government  of  the  Deity,
must  be  grounded  upon  the  dictates  of  our  moral  faculty,  as  first
principles.

As  this  faculty,  therefore,  furnishes  the  human  mind  with
many  of  its  original  conceptions  or  ideas,  as  well  as  with  the  first
principles  of  many  important  branches  of  human  knowledge,  it
may  justly  be  accounted  an  intellectual,  as  well  as  an  active
power  of  the  mind.


ESSAY  IV.

OF  THE  LIBEKTT  OF  MORAL  AGENTS.

CHAPTBB  L


I

».


THE  sonoxs  or  mcaal  ubertt  and  necessitt  stated.

I.  Moral  liberty. — By  the  liberty  of  a  moral  agent,  I  under-
sund.  a  poorer  orer  the  determimatums  of  hit  own  will.

If,  in  any  action,  he  had  power  to  wiU  what  he  did,  or  not  to
will  it,  in  that  action  he  is  fiee.  But  if,  in  every  voluntary
action,  the  determination  of  his  will  he  the  necessary  conse-
quence of  something  iuToluntary  in  the  state  of  his  mind,  or  of
:^on]ething  in  his  external  circumstances,  he  is  not  free ;  he  has
not  what  I  call  the  liberty  of  a  moral  agent,  but  is  subject  to
necessity.

This  liberty  supposes  the  agent  to  have  understanding  and
will ;  for  the  determinations  of  the  will  are  the  sole  object  about
which  this  power  is  employed ;  and  there  can  be  no  will  without,
at  least,  such  a  decree  of  understanding  as  gives  the  conception
of  that  which  we  will.

[The  liberty  of  a  moral  agent  implies,  not  only  a  oonceptm
of  what  he  wills,  but  some  degree  of  practical  jztdgment  or
reason.]

For  if  he  has  not  the  judgment  to  discern  one  determination
to  be  preferable  to  anotlier,  either  in  itself,  or  for  some  purpose
which  he  intends,  what  can  be  the  use  of  a  power  to  determine?
His  determinations  must  be  made  perfectly  in  the  dark,  without
reason,  motive,  or  end.  They  can  neither  be  right  nor  wrong,
wise  nor  foolish.  Whatever  the  consequences  may  be,  they
:annot  be  imputed  to  the  agent,  who  had  not  the  capacity  of
foreseeing  them,  or  of  perceiving  any  reason  for  acting  otherwise
:han  he  did.

We  may  perhaps  be  able  to  conceive  a  being  endowed  with
)ower  over  the  determinations  of  his  will,  without  any  light  in
lis  mind  to  direct  that  power  to  some  end.  But  such  power
vould  be  given  in  vain.  No  exercise  of  it  could  be  either
»lamed  or  approved. As  nature  gives  no  power  in  vain,  I  see

Tound  to  ascribe  a  power  over  the  determinations  of  the

o  any  being  who  has  no  judgment  to  apply  it  to  the  direction


THE  NOTIONS  OF  MORAL  LIBERTY,  ETC.  ^47

of  his  conduct,  no  discernment  of  what  he  ought  or  ought  not
to  do.

For  that  reason,  in  this  Essay,  I  speak  only  of  the  liberty  of
moral  agents,  who  are  capable  of  acting  well  or  ill,  wisely  or
foolishly,  and  this,  for  distinction's  sake,  I  shall  call  moral
liberty,

11.  The  voluntary  actions  of  brutes  determined  by  the  present
predominant  passion. — What  kind,  or  what  degree  of  liberty
belongs  to  brute  animals,  or  to  our  own  species,  before  any  use
of  reason,  I  do  not  know.  We  acknowledge  that  they  have  not
the  power  of  self-government.  [Such  of  their  actions  as  may
be  called  voluntary,  seem  to  be  invariably  determined  by  the
Jassion  or  appetite,  or  affection  or  habit,  which  is  strongest  at
the  time.]

This  seems  to  be  the  law  of  their  constitution,  to  which  they
yield,  as  the  inanimate  creation  does,  without  any  conception  of
the  law,  or  any  intention  of  obedience.

But  of  civil  or  moral  government,  which  are  addressed  to  the
rational  powers,  and  require  a  conception  of  the  law  and  an
intentional  obedience,  they  are,  in  the  judgment  of  all  mankind,
incapable.  Nor  do  I  see  what  end  could  be  served  by  giving
them  a  power  over  the  determinations  of  their  own  will,  unless  to
make  them  intractable  by  discipline,  which  we  see  they  are  not.

III.  [The  effect  of  moral  liberty  is,  That  it  is  in  the  power  of
the  agent  to  do  well  or  ill.]  This  power,  like  every  other  gift
of  God,  may  be  abused.  The  right  use  of  this  gift  of  God  is  to
do  well  and  wisely,  as  far  as  his  best  judgment  can  direct  him,
and  thereby  merit  esteem  and  approbation.  The  abuse  of  it  is
to  act  contrary  to  what  he  knows  or  suspects  to  be  his  duty  and
his  wisdom,  and  thereby  justly  merit  disapprobation  and  blame.

IV.  [By  necessity,  I  understand  the  want  of  that  moral  liberty
which  I  have  above  defined.]

If  there  can  be  a  better  and  a  worse  in  actions  on  the  system
of  necessity,  let  us  suppose  a  man  necessarily  determined  in  all
cases  to  will  and  to  do  what  is  best  to  be  done,  he  would  surely
be  innocent  and  inculpable.  But,  as  far  as  I  am  able  to  judge,
he  would  not  be  entitled  to  the  esteem  and  moral  approbation
of  those  who  knew  and  believed  this  necessity.  WTiat  was,  by
an  ancient  author,  said  of  Cato,  might  indeed  be  said  of  him.
He  was  good  because  he  could  not  be  otherwise.  But  this  saying,
if  understood  literally  and  strictly,  is  not  the  praise  of  Cato,  but
of  his  constitution,  which  was  no  more  the  work  of  Cato,  than
his  existence.

On  the  other  hand,  if  a  man  be  necessarily  determined  to  do
ill,  this  case  seems  to  me  to  move  pity,  but  not  disapprobation.
He  was  ill,  because  he  could  not  be  otherwise.  WTio  can  blame
him  ? Necessity  has  no  law.

If  he  knows  that  he  acted  under  this  necessity,  has  he  not  just


248  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  I.

ground  to  exculpate  himself?  The  blame,  if  there  be  any,  is
not  in  him,  but  in  his  coj^titution.  If  he  be  charged  by  his
Maker  with  doing  wrong,  may  he  not  expostulate  with  him,  and
say.  Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus  ?  I  may  be  sacrificed  at  thy
pleasure  for  the  common  good,  like  a  man  that  has  the  plague,
but  not  for  ill  desert ;  for  thou  knowest  that  what  I  am  charged
with  is  thy  work,  and  not  mine.

V.  [Such  are  my  notions  of  moral  liberty  and  necessity ^  and
of  the  consequences  inseparably  connected  with  both  the  one  and
the  other.]

This  moral  liberty  a  man  may  have,  though  it  do  not  extend
to  all  his  actions,  or  even  to  all  nis  voluntary  actions.  He  does
many  things  by  instinct,  many  things  by  the  force  of  habit  with-
out any  thought  at  all,  and  consequently  without  will.  In  the
first  part  of  life,  he  has  not  the  power  of  self-government  any
more  than  the  brutes.  That  power  over  the  determinations  of
his  own  will,  which  belongs  to  him  in  ripe  years,  is  limited,  as
all  his  powers  are ;  and  it  is  perhaps  beyond  the  reach  of  his
understanding  to  define  its  limits  with  precision.  We  can  only
say,  in  general,  that  it  extends  to  every  action  for  which  he  is
accountable.

This  power  is  given  by  his  Maker,  tod  at  his  pleasure,  whose
gift  it  is :  it  may  be  enlarged  or  diminished,  continued  or  with-
drawn. No  power  in  the  creature  can  be  independent  of  the
Creator.  His  hook  is  in  its  nose ;  he  can  give  it  line  as  far  as
he  sees  fit,  and  when  he  pleases,  can  restrain  it,  or  turn  it
whithersoever  he  will.  Let  this  be  always  understood,  when  we
ascribe  liberty  to  man,  or  to  any  created  being.

VI.  [Supposing  it  therefore  to  be  true.  That  man  is  a  free
agent,  it  may  be  true,  at  the  same  time,  that  his  liberty  may  be
impaired  or  lost,  (1)  by  disorder  of  body  or  mind,  as  in  melan-
choly, or  in  machiess ;  it  may  be  impaired  or  lost  (2)  by  vicious
habits ;  it  may,  in  particular  cases,  (3)  be  restrained  by  Divine
interposition.]

We  call  a  man  a  free  agent  in  the  same  way  as  we  caU  him
a  reasonable  agent."  In  many  things  he  is  not  guided  by  reason,
but  by  principles  similar  to  those  of  the  brutes.  His  reason  is
weak  at  best.  It  is  liable  to  be  impaired  or  lost,  by  his  own
fault,  or  by  other  means.  In  like  manner,  he  may  be  a  free
agent,  though  his  freedom  of  action  may  have  many  similar
limitations.

The  liberty  I  have  described  has  been  represented  by  some
philosophers  as  inconceivable,  and  as  involving  an  absurdity.

"  Liberty,  they  say,  consists  only  in  a  power  to  act  as  we  will;
and  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  in  any  being  a  greater  liberty
than  this.  Hence  it  follows,  that  liberty  does  not  extend  to  the
determinations  of  the  will,  but  only  to  the  actions  consequent  to


THE  NOTIONS  OF  MORAL  LIBERTY,  ETC.  ^9

its  determination^  and  depending  upon  the  will.  To  say  that
we  have  power  to  wiU  such  an  actioi.vis  to  say,  that  we  may  wiU
it,  if  we  wiU.  This  supposes  the  wiU  to  be  determined  by  a
prior  will ;  and,  for  the  same  reason,  that  will  must  be  deter-
mined by  a  wiU  prior  to  it,  and  so  on  in  an  infinite  series  of
wills,  which  is  absurd.  To  act  freely,  therefore,  can  mean
nothing  more  than  to  act  voluntarily;  and  this  is  all  the  liberty
that  can  be  conceived  in  man,  or  in  any  being."

This  reasoning,  first,  I  think,  advanced  by  Hobbes,  has  been
very  generally  adopted  by  the  defenders  of  necessity.  It  is
grounded  upon  a  definition  of  liberty  totally  different  from  that
which  I  have  given,  and  therefore  does  not  apply  to  moral
liberty,*  as  above  defined.

VII.  Three  additional  meanings  of  the  word  liberty, — [But  it
is  said  that  this  is  the  only  liberty  that  is  possible,  that  is  con-
ceivable, that  does  not  involve  an  absurdity.]

It  is  strange,  indeed !  if  the  word  liberty  has  no  meaning  but
this  one.  I  shall  mention  three ^  all  very  common.  The  objec-
tion applies  to  one  of  them,  but  to  neither  of  the  other  two.

[Liberty  is  sometimes  opposed  to  external  force  or  confine-
ment of  the  body.  Sometimes  it  is  opposed  to  obligation  by
law,  or  by  lawful  authority.  Sometimes  it  is  opposed  to
necessity.]

1.  It  is  opposed  to  confinement  of  the  body  by  superior  force.
So  we  say  a  prisoner  is  set  at  liberty  when  his  fetters  are  knocked
off,  and  he  is  discharged  from  confinement.  This  is  the  liberty
defined  in  the  objection  ;  and  I  grant  that  this  liberty  extends
not  to  the  will,  neither  does  the  confinement,  because  the  will
cannot  be  confined  by  external  force.

2.  Liberty  is  opposed  to  obligation  by  law,  or  lawful  authority.
This  liberty  is  a  right  to  act  one  way  or  another,  in  things  which
the  law  has  neither  commanded  nor  forbidden ;  and  this  liberty
is  meant  when  we  speak  of  a  man's  natural  liberty,  his  civil
liberty,  his  Christian  liberty.  It  is  evident  that  this  liberty,  as
well  as  the  obligation  opposed  to  it,  extends  to  the  will :  for  it
is  the  will  to  obey  that  makes  obedience ;  the  will  to  transgress
that  makes  a  transgression  of  the  law.  Without  will  there  can
be  neither  obedience  nor  transgression.  Law  supposes  a  power
to  obey  or  to  transgress ;  it  does  not  take  away  this  power,  but
proposes  the  motives  of  duty  and  of  interest,  leaving  the  power
to  yield  to  them,  or  to  take  the  consequence  of  transgression.

3.  Liberty  is  opposed  to  necessity,  and  in  this  sense  it  extends
to  the  determinations  of  the  will  only,  and  not  to  what  is  conse-
quent to  the  will.

In  every  voluntary  action,  the  determination  of  the  will  is  the
first  part  of  the  action,  upon  which  alone  the  moral  estimation  of

*  Vide  sect.  i.  and  ii.  of  this  chapter.


250  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  I.

it  depends.  It  has  been  made  a  question  among  philosophers.
Whether,  in  every  instance,  this  determination  be  the  necessary
consequence  of  the  constitution  of  the  person,  and  the  circum-
stances in  which  he  is  placed ;  or  whether  he  had  not  power  in
manv  cases,  to  determine  this  way  or  that  ?

Tnis  has,  by  some,  been  called  the  philosophical  notion  of
liberty  and  necessity ;  but  it  is  by  no  means  peculiar  to  philoso-
phers. The  lowest  of  the  vulgar  have,  in  all  ages,  been  prone
to  have  recourse  to  this  necessity,  to  exculpate  themselves  or
their  jfriends  in  what  they  do  wrong,  though,  in  the  general
tenor  of  their  conduct,  they  act  upon  the  contrary  principle.

VIII.  Whether  this  notion  of  moral  liberty  be  conceivable  or
not,  every  man  must  judge  for  himself.  To  me  there  appears  no
difficulty  in  conceiving  it.  I  consider  the  determination  of  the
will  as  an  effect.  This  effect  must  have  a  cause  which  had  power
to  produce  it ;  and  the  cause  must  be  either  the  person  himself,
whose  will  it  is,  or  some  other  being.  The  first  is  as  easily  con-
ceived as  the  last.  If  the  person  was  the  cause  of  that  deter-
mination of  his  own  will,  he  was  free  in  that  action,  and  it  is
justly  imputed  to  him,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.  But,  if
another  being  was  the  cause  of  this  determination,  either  by
producing  it  immediately,  or  by  means  and  instruments  under
his  direction,  then  the  determination  is  the  act  and  deed  of  that
being,  and  is  solely  imputable  to  him.

But  it  is  said,  "  That  nothing  is  in  our  power  but  what  depends
upon  the  wiU,  and  therefore  the  will  itself  cannot  be  in  our
power."

I  answer.  That  this  is  a  fallacy  arising  from  taking  a  common
saying  in  a  sense  which  it  never  was  intended  to  convey ^  and  in  a
sense  contrary  to  what  it  necessarily  implies.

In  common  life,  when  men  speak  of  what  is,  or  is  not,  in  a
man's  power,  they  attend  only  to  the  external  and  visible  effects,
which  only  can  be  perceived,  and  which  only  can  affect  them.
Of  these,  it  is  true,  that  nothing  is  in  a  man's  power,  but  what
depends  upon  his  will,  and  this  is  all  that  is  meant  by  this  com-
mon saying.

But  this  is  so  far  from  excluding  his  will  from  being  in  his
power,  that  it  necessarily  implies  it.  For  to  say  that  what  de-
pends upon  the  will  is  in  a  man's  power,  but  the  will  is  not  in
his  power,  is  to  say  that  the  end  is  in  his  power,  but  the  means
necessary  to  that  end  are  not  in  his  power,  which  is  a  con-
tradiction.

[In  many  propositions  which  we  express  universally,  there  is
an  exception  necessarily  implied,  and  therefore  always  under-
stood. Thus  when  we  say,  that  all  things  depend  upon  God,
God  himself  is  necessarily  excepted.  In  like  manner,  when  we
say,  that  all  that  is  in  our  power  depends  upon  the  will,  the  will


OF  THE  WORDS  CAUSE  AND  EFFECT,  ETC.  ggj

itself  is  necessarily  excepted :  [for  if  the  will  be  not,  nothing
else  can  be  in  our  power.  J  Every  effect  must  be  in  the  power  of
its  cause*  The  determinatioA  of  the  will  is  an  effect,  and  there-
fore must  be  in  the  power  of  its  cause,  whether  that  cause  be
the  agent  himself,  or  some  other  being*

From  what  has  been  said  in  this  chapter,  I  hope  the  notion  of
moral  liberty  will  be  distinctly  understood,  and  that  it  appears
that  this  notion  is  neither  inconceivable,  nor  involves  any  ab-
surdity or  contradiction.


CHAPTER  II.

OF  THE  WORDS  CAUSE  AND  EFFECT,  ACTION,  AND  ACTIVE  POWER.

I.  The  use  of  ambiguous  terms  has  impeded  owr  reasonings
about  moral  liberty, — The  vratings  upon  liberty  and  necessity
have  been  much  darkened,  by  the  ambiguity  of  the  words  used
in  reasoning  upon  that  subject.  The  words  cause  and  effect^  action
and  active  power ^  liberty  and  necessity,  are  related  to  each  other.
The  meaning  of  one  determines  the  meaning  of  the  rest.  When  we
attempt  to  define  them,  we  can  only  do  it  by  synonymous  words
which  need  definition  as  much.  There  is  a  strict  sense  in  which
those  words  must  be  used,  if  we  speak  and  reason  clearly  about
moral  liberty ;  but  to  keep  to  this  strict  sense  is  difficult,  be-
cause in  all  languages  they  have,  by  custom,  got  a  great  latitude
of  signification.

As  we  cannot  reason  about  moral  liberty,  without  using  those
ambiguous  words,  it  is  proper  to  point  out,  as  distinctly  as  pos-
sible, their  proper  and  original  meaning,  in  which  they  ought  to
be  understood  in  treating  of  this  subject,  and  to  show  from  what
causes  they  have  become  so  ambiguous  in  all  languages,  as  to
darken  and  embarrass  our  reasonings  upon  it.

[Every  thing  that  begins  to  exist,  must  have  a  cause  of  its  ex-
istence, which  had  power  to  give  it  existence.]  [And  every
thing  that  undergoes  any  change,  must  have  some  cause  of  that
change.]

That  neither  existence,  nor  any  mode  of  existence,  can  begin
without  an  efficient  cause,  is  a  principle  that  appears  very  early
in  the  mind  of  man ;  and  it  is  so  universal,  and  so  firmly  rooted
in  human  nature,  that  the  most  determined  scepticism  cannot
eradicate  it.

.  It  is  upon  this  principle  that  we  ground  the  rational  belief  of
a  Deity.  But  that  is  not  the  only  use  to  which  we  apply  it.
Every  man's  conduct  is  governed  by  it  every  day,  and  almost
every  hour  of  his  life.  And  if  it  were  possible  for  any  man  to
root  out  this  principle  from  his  mind,  he  must  give  up  every


OP  THE  WORDS  CAUSE  AND  EFFECT,  ETC.  ggg

We  are  conscious  of  maMng  an  exertion,  sometimes  with  dif-
ficulty, in  order  to  produce  certain  effects.  An  exertion  made
deliberately  and  volimtarily,  in  order  to  produce  an  effect,  im-
plies a  conviction  that  the  effect  is  in  our  power*  No  man  can
deliberately  attempt  what  he  does  not  believe  to  be  in  his  power.
The  language  of  aU  mankind,  and  their  ordinary  conduct  in  life,
Remonstrate,  that  they  have  a  conviction  of  some  active  power  in
themselves  to  produce  certain  motions  in  their  own  and  in  other
bodies,  and  to  regulate  and  direct  their  own  thoughts.  This  con-
viction we  have  so  early  in  life,  that  we  have  no  remembrance
when,  or  in  what  way,  we  acquired  it.

That  such  a  conviction  is  at  first  the  necessary  result  of  our
constitution,  and  that  it  can  never  be  entirely  obliterated,  is,  I
think,  acknowledged  by  one  of  the  most  zealous  defenders  of
necessity. — "  Free  Discussion,"  &c.  p.  298.  "  Such  axe  the  influ-
ences to  which  all  mankind,  without  distinction,  are  exposed,  that
they  necessarily  refer  actions  (I  mean  refer  them  ultimately)  first
of  all  to  diemselves  and  others ;  and  it  is  a  long  time  before  they
begin  to  consider  themselves  and  others  as  instruments  in  the  hand
of  a  superior  agent.  Consequently,  the  associations  which  refer
actions  to  themselves,  get  so  confirmed,  that  they  are  never  en-
tirely obliterated ;  and  therefore  the  common  language,  and  the
common  feelings  of  mankind,  will  be  adapted  to  the  first,  the
limited  and  imperfect,  or  rather  erroneous,  view  of  things."

It  is  very  probable  that  the  very  conception  or  idea  of  active
power,  and  of  efficient  causes,  is  derived  from  our  voluntary
exertions  in  producing  effects ;  and  that,  if  we  were  not  con-
scious of  such  exertions,  we  should  have  no  conception  at  all  of
a  cause,  or  of  active  power,  and  consequently  no  conviction  of
the  necessity  of  a  cause  of  every  change  which  we  observe  in
nature.

IV.  [It  is  certain  that  we  can  conceive  no  kind  of  active  power
but  what  is  similar  or  analogous  to  that  which  we  attribute  to  our-
sehes  ;  that  is,  a  power  which  is  exerted  by  will  and  with  under-
standing. Our  notion,  even  of  Almighty  power,  is  derived
from  the  notion  of  human  power,  by  removing  from  the  former
those  imperfections  and  limitations  to  which  the  latter  is  sub-
jected.]

It  may  be  difficult  to  explain  the  origin  of  our  conceptions  and
belief  concerning  efficient  causes  and  active  power.  [The  com-
mon theory,  that  all  our  ideas  are  ideas  of  sensation  or  reflection,
and  that  all  our  belief  is  a  perception  of  the  agreement  or  the
disagreement  of  those  ideas,  appears  to  be  repugnant,  both  to
the  idea  of  an  efficient  cause,  and  to  the  belief  of  its  necessity.]

An  attachment  to  that  theory  has  led  some  philosophers  to
deny  that  we  have  any  conception  of  an  efficient  cause,  or  of
active  power,  because  efficiency  and  active  power  are  not  ideas,


252  *^AY  IV.  CHAP.  II.

thing  that  is  called  common  prudence,  and  be  fit  only  to  be  con-
fined as  insane.

From  this  principle  it  follows,  that  every  thing  which  under-
goes  any  change,  must  either  be  the  efficient  cause  of  that  change
m  itself,  or  it  must  be  changed  by  some  other  being.

In  Xhef/rst  case  it  is  said  to  have  (wtive  power y  and  to  act  in
producing  that  change.  In  the  second  case  it  is  merely  passive,
or  is  acted  upon,  and  the  active  power  is  in  that  being  only  which
produces  the  change.

II.  Active  power. — The  name  of  a  cause  and  of  an  agent,  is
properly  given  to  that  being  only,  which,  by  its  active  power,
produces  some  change  in  itself,  or  in  some  other  being.  The
change,  whether  it  be  of  thought,  of  will,  or  of  motion,  is  the
effect.  Active  power,  therefore,  is  a  quality  in  the  cause,  which
enables  it  to  produce  the  effect.  And  the  exertion  of  that  active
power  in  producing  the  effect,  is  called  action,  agency,  efficiency.

[In  order  to  the  production  of  any  effect,  there  must  be  in  the
cause  not  only  power,  but  the  exertion  of  that  power :  for  power
that  is  not  exerted  produces  no  effect.]

All  that  is  necessary  to  the  production  of  any  effect,  is  power,
is  an  efficient  cause  to  produce  the  effect,  and  the  exertion  of
that  power :  for  it  is  a  contradiction  to  say,  that  the  cause  has
power  to  produce  the  effect,  and  exerts  that  power,  and  yet  the
effect  is  not  produced.  The  effect  cannot  be  in  his  power,  un-
less all  the  means  necessary  to  its  production  be  in  his  power.

It  is  no  less  a  contradiction  to  say,  that  a  cause  has  power  to
produce  a  certain  effect,  but  that  he  cannot  exert  that  power :
for  power  which  cannot  be  exerted  is  no  power,  and  is  a  contra-
diction in  terms.

To  prevent  mistake,  it  is  proper  to  observe,  that  a  being  may
have  a  power  at  one  time  which  it  has  not  at  another.  It  may
commonly  have  a  power,  which,  at  a  particular  time,  it  has  not.
Thus,  a  man  may  commonly  have  power  to  walk  or  to  run ;  but
he  has  not  this  power  when  asleep,  or  when  he  is  confined  by
superior  force.  In  common  language,  he  may  be  said  to  have  a
power  which  he  cannot  then  exert.  But  this  popular  eiroression
means  only  that  he  conunonly  has  this  power,  and  will  have  it
when  the  cause  is  removed  which  at  present  deprives  him  of  it :
for  when  we  speak  strictly  and  philosophically,  it  is  a  contradic-
tion to  say  that  he  has  this  power,  at  that  moment  when  he  is
deprived  of  it.

[These,  I  think,  are  necessary  consequences  from  the  prin-
ciple first  mentioned,  that  every  change  which  happens  in  nature
must  have  an  efficient  cause  which  had  power  to  produce  it.]

III.  [Another  principle,  which  appears  very  early  in  the  mind
of  man,  is,  That  we  are  efficient  causes  in  our  deliberate  and
voluntary  actions.^


OP  THE  WORDS  CAUSE  AND  EFFECT,  ETC.  ggg

We  are  conscious  of  maMng  an  exertion,  sometimes  with  dif-
ficulty, in  order  to  produce  certain  effects.  An  exertion  made
deliberately  and  volimtarily,  in  order  to  produce  an  eflfect,  im-
plies a  conviction  that  the  effect  is  in  our  power.  No  man  can
deliberately  attempt  what  he  does  not  believe  to  be  in  his  power.
The  language  of  all  mankind,  and  their  ordinary  conduct  in  life,
demonstrate,  that  they  have  a  conviction  of  some  active  power  in
themselves  to  produce  certain  motions  in  their  own  and  in  other
bodies,  and  to  regulate  and  direct  their  own  thoughts.  This  con-
viction we  have  so  early  in  life,  that  we  have  no  remembrance
when,  or  in  what  way,  we  acquired  it.

That  such  a  conviction  is  at  first  the  necessary  result  of  our
constitution,  and  that  it  can  never  be  entirely  obliterated,  is,  I
think,  acknowledged  by  one  of  the  most  zealous  defenders  of
necessity. — "  Free  Discussion,"  &c.  p.  298.  "  Such  are  the  influ-
ences to  which  all  mankind,  without  distinction,  are  exposed,  that
they  necessarily  refer  actions  (I  mean  refer  them  ultimately)  first
of  all  to  diemselves  and  others ;  and  it  is  a  long  time  before  they
begin  to  consider  themselves  and  others  as  instruments  in  the  hand
of  a  superior  agent.  Consequently,  the  associations  which  refer
actions  to  themselves,  get  so  confirmed,  that  they  are  never  en-
tirely obliterated ;  and  therefore  the  common  language,  and  the
common  feelings  of  mankind,  will  be  adapted  to  the  first,  the
limited  and  imperfect,  or  rather  erroneous,  view  of  things."

It  is  very  probable  that  the  very  conception  or  idea  of  active
power,  and  of  efficient  causes,  is  derived  from  our  voluntary
exertions  in  producing  effects ;  and  that,  if  we  were  not  con-
scious of  such  exertions,  we  should  have  no  conception  at  all  of
a  cause,  or  of  active  power,  and  consequently  no  conviction  of
the  necessity  of  a  cause  of  every  change  which  we  observe  in
nature.

IV.  [It  is  certain  that  we  can  conceive  no  kind  of  active  power
but  what  is  similar  or  analogous  to  that  which  we  attribute  to  our-
selves ;  that  is,  a  power  which  is  exerted  by  will  and  with  under-
standing. Our  notion,  even  of  Almighty  power,  is  derived
from  the  notion  of  human  power,  by  removing  from  the  former
those  imperfections  and  limitations  to  which  the  latter  is  sub-
jected.]

It  may  be  difficult  to  explain  the  origin  of  our  conceptions  and
belief  concerning  efficient  causes  and  active  power.  [The  com-
mon theory,  that  all  our  ideas  are  ideas  of  sensation  or  refiection,
and  that  all  our  belief  is  a  perception  of  the  agreement  or  the
disagreement  of  those  ideas,  appears  to  be  repugnant,  both  to
the  idea  of  an  efficient  cause,  and  to  the  belief  of  its  necessity.]

An  attachment  to  that  theory  has  led  some  philosophers  to
deny  that  we  have  any  conception  of  an  efficient  cause,  or  of
active  power,  because  efficiency  and  active  power  are  not  ideas.


254  ESSAY  IV.  CftAP.  II.

either  of  sensation  or  reflection.  They  maintain,  therefore,  that
a  cause  is  only  something  prior  to  the  effect,  and  constantly  con-
joined with  it.  This  is  Mr.  Hume's  notion  of  a  cause,  and  seems
to  be  adopted  by  Dr.  Priestley,  who  says,  "  That  a  cause  cannot
be  defined  to  be  any  thing,  but  such  previous  circumstances  as
are  constantly  followed  by  a  certain  effect,  the  constancy  of  the
result  making  us  conclude,  that  there  must  be  a  sufficient  reason,
in  the  nature  of  the  things,  why  it  should  be  produced  in  those
circumstances."

But  theory  ought  to  stoop  to  fact,  and  not  fact  to  theory.
Every  man  who  understands  the  language  knows,  that  neither
priority,  nor  constant  conjunction,  nor  both  taken  together,
imply  efficiency.  Every  man,  free  from  prejudice,  must  assent
to  what  Cicero  has  said :  *^  Itaque  non  sic  causa  intelligi  debet,
ut  quod  cuique  antecedat,  id  et  causa  sit,  sed  quod  cuique
efficienter  antecedit."  — "  That  which  precedes  any  thing  is
not  to  be  considered  as  its  cause,  but  that  which  precedes  it
efficiently.**

[The  very  dispute,  whether  we  have  the  conception  of  an
efficient  cause,  shows  that  we  have.  For  though  men  may  dis-
pute about  things  which  have  no  existence,  they  cannot  dispute
about  things  of  which  they  have  no  conception.]

V.  Recapitulation. — What  has  been  said  in  this  chapter  is
intended  to  show.  That  the  conception  of  causes,  of  action  and
of  active  power,  in  the  strict  and  proper  sense  of  these  words,  is
found  in  the  minds  of  all  men  very  early,  even  in  the  dawn  of
their  rational  life.  ,  It  is  therefore  probable,  that,  in  all  lan-
guages, the  words  by  which  these  conceptions  were  expressed
were  at  first  distinct  and  unambiguous ;  yet  it  is  certain,  that,
among  the  most  enlightened  nations,  these  words  are  applied  to
so  many  things  of  different  natures,  and  used  in  so  vague  a  man-
ner, that  it  is  very  difficult  to  reason  about  them  distinctly.

This  phenomenon,  at  first  view,  seems  very  imaccountabl'e.
But  a  little  reflection  may  satisfy  us,  that  it  is  a  natural  conse-
quence of  the  slow  and  gradual  progress  of  human  knowledge.

And  since  the  ambiguity  of  these  words  has  so  great  influence
upon  our  reasoning  about  moral  liberty,  and  furnishes  the
strongest  objections  against  it,  it  is  not  foreign  to  our  subject  to
show  whence  it  arises.  [When  we  know  the  causes  that  have
produced  this  ambiguity,  we  shall  be  less  in  danger  of  being  mis-
led by  it,  and  the  proper  and  strict  meaning  of  the  words  vnll
more  evidently  appear.]


255


CHAPTER  III.

CAUSES  OF  THE  AMBIGUITY  OP  THOSE  WORDS.

I.  Premature  conclusion  as  to  objects  indued  with  motion. —
When  we  turn  our  attention  to  external  objects,  and  begin  to
exercise  our  rational  faculties  about  them,  we  find,  that  there
are  some  motions  and  changes  in  them,  which  we  have  power
to  produce,  and  that  they  have  many  which  must  have  some
other  cause.  Either  the  objects  must  have  life  and  active  power,
as  we  have,  or  they  must  be  moved  or  changed  by  something
that  has  life  and  active  power,  as  external  objects  are  moved
by  us.

[Our  first  thoughts  seem  to  be.  That  tlie  objects  in  which  we
perceive  such  motion  have  understanding  and  active  power  as  we
have.]

"  Savages,"  says  the  Abb^  Raynal,  "  wherever  they  see  motion
which  they  cannot  account  for,  there  they  suppose  a  soul.'**

All  men  may  be  considered  as  savages  in  this  respect,  until
they  are  capable  of  instruction,  and  of  using  their  faculties  in  a
more  perfect  manner  than  savages  do.

The  rational  conversations  of  birds  and  beasts  in  ^sop's  Fables
do  not  shock  the  belief  of  children.  To  them  they  have  that
probability  which  we  require  in  an  epic  poem.  Poets  give  us  a
great  deal  of  pleasure,  by  clothing  every  object  with  intellectual
and  moral  attributes  in  metaphor  and  in  other  figures.  May  not
the  pleasure  which  we  take  in  this  poetical  language,  arise,  in
part,  from  its  correspondence  with  our  earliest  sentiment^i  ?

II.  However  this  may  be,  the  [Abbe  Raynal's  observation  is
sufficiently  confirmed,  both  jfrom  /ac^,  and  firom  the  structure  of
all  languages.^

Rude  nations  do  really  believe  sun,  moon  and  stars,  earth,  sea
and  air,  fountains  and  lakes,  to  have  understanding  and  active
power.  To  pay  homage  to  them,  and  implore  their  favour,  is  a
kind  of  idolatry  naturjd  to  savages.

All  languages  carry  in  their  structure  the  marks  of  their  being
formed  when  this  belief  prevailed.  [The  distinction  of  verbs
and  participles  into  active  and  passive,  which  is  found  in  all  lan-
guages, must  have  been  originally  intended  to  distinguish  what
is  reaUy  active  from  what  is  merely  passive ;  and,  in  all  lan-
guages, we  find  active  verbs  applied  to  those  objects,  in  which,
according  to  the  Abbe  Raynal's  observation,  savages  suppose  a
souL]

Thus  we  say  the  sun  rises  and  sets,  and  comes  to  the  meridian,
the  moon  changes,  the  sea  ebbs  and  flows,  the  winds  blow.

♦  Vide  sect.  vii.  chap.  5,  Essay  III.


256  ^SAY  IV.  CHAP.  III.

Languages  were  formed  by  men  who  believed  these  objects  to
have  life  and  active  power  in  themselves.  It  was  therefore  pro-
per and  natural  to  express  their  motions  and  changes  by  active
verbs.

III.  [There  is  no  surer  way  of  tracing  the  sentiments  of  nations
before  they  have  records  than  by  the  structure  of  their  language^
which,  notwithstanding  the  changes  produced  in  it  by  time,  will
always  retain  some  signatures  of  the  thoughts  of  those  by  whom
it  was  invented.  When  we  find  the  same  sentiments  indicated
in  the  structure  of  all  languages,  those  sentiments  must  have
been  common  to  the  human  species  when  languages  were
invented.]

When  a  few  of  superior  intellectual  abilities  find  leisure  for
speculation,  they  begin  to  philosophize,  and  soon  discover,  that
many  of  those  objects  which,  at  first,  they  believed  to  be  intel-
ligent and  active,  are  really  lifeless  and  passive.  This  is  a  very
important  discovery.  It  elevates  the  mind,  emancipates  from
many  vulgar  superstitions,  and  invites  to  farther  discoveries  of
the  same  kind.

As  philosophy  advances,  life  and  activity  in  natural  objects
retire,  and  leave  them  dead  and  inactive.  Instead  of  moving
voluntarily,  we  find  them  to  be  moved  necessarily ;  instead  of
acting,  we  find  them  to  be  acted  upon ;  and  nature  appears  as
one  great  machine,  where  one  wheel  is  turned  by  another,  that
by  a  third ;  and  how  far  this  necessary  succession  may  reach,  the
philosopher  does  not  know.

IV.  \The  weakness  of  human  reason  makes  men  prone ^  when
they  leave  one  extreme^  to  rush  into  the  opposite;*  and  thus  philo-
sophy, even  in  its  infancy,  may  lead  men  from  idolatry  and  poly-
theism into  atheism,  and  from  ascribing  active  power  to  inani-
mate beings,  to  conclude  all  things  to  be  carried  on  by  neces-
sity.]

Whatever  origin  we  ascribe  to  the  doctrines  of  atheism  and  of
fatal  necessity,  it  is  certain,  that  both  may  be  traced  almost  as
far  back  as  philosophy ;  and  both  appear  to  be  the  opposites  of
the  earliest  sentiments  of  men.

It  must  have  been  by  the  observation  and  reasoning  of  the
speculative  few^  that  those  objects  were  discovered  to  be  inani-
mate and  inactive,  to  which  the  many  ascribed  life  and  activity.
But  while  the  few  are  convinced  of  this,  they  must  speak  the
language  of  the  many  in  order  to  be  imderstood.  t^  So  we
see,  that  when  the  Ptolemaic  system  of  astronomy^  which  agrees
with  vulgar  prejudice  and  with  vulgar  language,  has  been  uni^
versally  rejected  by  philosophers,  they  continue  to  tise  the  phrase^
ology  that  is  grounded  upon  it,  not  only  in  speaking  to  the  vul-
gar, but  in  speaking  to  one  another. They  say.  The  sun  rises

*  As,  from  dogmatism  to  scepticism.


OP  THE  AMBIGtlTT  OP  THOSE  WORDS.  257

and  sets,  and  moves  annually  through  all  the  signs  of  the  zodiac,
while  they  believe  that  he  never  leaves  his  place.

[In  like  manner,  those  active  verbs  and  participles,  which
were  applied  to  the  inanimate  objects  of  nature,  when  they  were
believed  to  be  really  active,  continue  to  be  applied  to  them  after
they  are  discovered  to  be  pa^sive.l

V.  \The  forms  of  language^  once  established  by  custom,  are
not  so  easily  changed  as  the  notions  on  which  they  were  originally
founded.  While  the  sounds  remain,  their  signification  is  gra-
dually enlarged  or  altered.]  This  is  sometimes  found,  even  in
those  sciences  in  which  the  signification  of  words  is  the  most
accurate  and  precise.  Thus,  in  arithmetic,  the  word  number,
among  the  ancients,  always  signified  so  many  units,  and  it  would
have  been  absurd  to  apply  it  either  to  unity  or  to  any  part  of  an
unit ;  but  now  we  call  unity,  or  any  part  of  unity,  a  number.
With  them,  multiplication  always  increased  a  number,  and  divi-
sion diminished  it ;  but  we  speak  of  multiplying  by  a  fraction,
which  diminishes,  and  of  dividing  by  a  fraction,  which  increases
the  number.  We  speak  of  dividing  or  multiplying  by  unity,
which  neither  diminishes  nor  increases  a  number.  These  forms
of  expression,  in  the  ancient  language,  would  have  been  absurd.

VI.  ji  chief  cause  of  the  imperfection  of  language. — [By  such
changes,  in  the  meaning  of  words,  rar  the  language  of  every  civil-
ized nation  resembles  old  furniture  new  modelled,  in  which  many
things  are  put  to  uses /or  which  they  were  not  originally  intended,
and  for  which  they  are  not  perfectly  fitted.]

This  is  one  great  cause  of  the  imperfection  of  language,  and  it
appears  very  remarkably  in  those  verbs  and  participles  which  are
active  in  their  form,  but  are  frequently  used  so  as  to  have
nothing  active  in  their  signification.

Hence  we  are  authorised  by  custom  to  ascribe  action  and
active  power  to  things  which  we  believe  to  be  passive.  The
proper  and  original  signification  of  every  word,  which  at  first
signified  action  and  causation,  is  buried  and  lost  under  that  vague
meaning  which  custom  has  affixed  to  it.

That  there  is  a  real  distinction,  and  perfect  opposition,  between
acting  and  being  acted  upon,  every  man  may  be  satisfied  who  is
capable  of  reflection.  And  that  this  distinction  is  perceived  by
all  men  as  soon  as  they  begin  to  reason,  appears  by  the  distinc-
tion between  active  and  passive  verbs,  which  is  original  in  all
languages,  though,  from  the  causes  that  have  been  mentioned,
they  come  to  be  confounded  in  the  progress  of  human  im-
provement.

VII.  [Jlnother  way  in  which  philosophy  has  contributed  very
much  to  the  ambiguity  of  the  words  under  our  consideration,  de-
serves to  be  mentioned.]

The  first  step  into  natural  philosophy,  and  what  hath  com-


258  EOBAY  IV,  CHAP.  III.

monly  been  considered  as  its  ultimate  end,  is  the  investigation  of
the  causes  of  the  phenomena  of  nature  ;  that  is,  the  causes  of
those  appearances  in  nature  which  are  not  the  eflFects  of  human
power,  "  Felix  qui  potuit  rerum  cognoscere  causas,"  is  the  sen-
timent of  every  mind  that  has  a  turn  to  speculation.

The  knowledge  of  the  causes  of  things  promises  no  less  the
enlargement  of  human  power  than  the  gratification  of  human
curiosity;  and  therefore,  among  the  enlightened  part  of  man-
kind, this  knowledge  has  been  pursued  in  all  ages  with  an  avidity
proportioned  to  its  importance.

In  nothing  does  the  difference  between  the  intellectual  powers
of  man  and  those  of  brutes  appear  more  conspicuous  than  in  this.
For  in  them  we  perceive  no  desire  to  investigate  the  causes  of
things,  nor  indeed  any  sign  that  they  have  the  proper  notion  of
a  cause,

[There  is  reason,  however,  to  apprehend,  that,  in  this  investi-
gation, men  have  wandered  much  in  the  dark,  and  that  their
success  has  by  no  means  been  equal  to  their  desire  and  expec-
tation.]

We  easily  discover  an  established  order  and  connexion  in  the
phenomena  of  nature.  We  learn,  in  many  cases,  from  what  has
happened,  to  know  what  will  happen.  The  discoveries  of  this
kind,  made  by  common  observation,  are  many,  and  are  the  foun-
dation of  common  prudence  in  the  conduct  of  life.  Philosophers,
by  more  accurate  observation  and  experiment,  have  made  many
more ;  by  which  arts  are  improved,  and  human  power,  as  well  as
human  knowledge,  is  enlarged.

But,  as  to  the  real  causes  of  the  phenomena  of  nature,  how
little  do  we  know  !  [all  our  knowledge  of  things  external,  must
be  grounded  upon  the  information  of  our  senses  ;  but  causation
and  active  power  are  not  objects  of  sense  ;  nor  is  that  always  the
cause  of  a  phenomenon  which  is  prior  to  it,  and  constantly  con-
joined with  it;  otherwise  night  would  be  the  cause  of  day,  and
day  the  cause  of  the  following  night.]

It  is  to  this  day  problematical,  whether  all  the  phenomena  of
the  material  system  be  produced  by  the  immediate  operation  of
the  First  Cause,  according  to  the  laws  which  his  wisdom  deter-
mined, or  whether  subordinate  causes  are  employed  by  him  in
the  operations  of  natuie;  and,  if  they  be,  what  their  nature,
their  number,  and  their  different  offices  are  ?  And  whether,  in
all  cases,  they  act  by  commission,  or,  in  some,  according  to  their
discretion  ?

When  we  are  so  much  in  the  dark  with  regard  to  the  real
causes  of  the  phenomena  of  nature,  and  have  a  strong  desire  to
know  them,  it  is  not  strange,  that  ingenious  men  should  form
numberless  conjectures  and  theories,  by  which  the  soul,  hunger-
ing for  knowledge,  is  fed  with  chaff  instead  of  wheat.


OP  THE  AMBIGUITY  OP  THOSE  WORDS.  259

VIII.  Absurd  theories  of  philosophers  to  explain  cattsalion. —
In  a  very  ancient  system,  love  and  strife  were  made  the  causes  of
things.  In  the  Pythagorean  and  Platonic  system,  matter,  ideas,
and  an  intelligent  mind.  By  Aristotle,  matter,  form,  and  priva-
tion. Des  Cartes  thought,  that  matter,  and  a  certain  quantity
of  motion  given  at  first  by  the  Almighty,  are  sufficient  to  account
for  all  the  phenomena  of  the  natural  world.  Leibnitz,  that  the
universe  is  made  up  of  monades,  active  and  percipient,  which,  by
their  active  power  received  at  first,  produce  all  the  changes  they
undergo.

While  men  thus  wandered  in  the  dark  in  search  of  causes,
luiwilling  to  confess  their  disappointment,  they  vainly  conceived
every  thing  they  stumbled  upon  to  be  a  cause,  and  the  proper
notion  of  a  cause  is  lost,  by  giving  the  name  to  numberless  things
which  neither  are  nor  can  be  causes.

IX.  Not  mischievous. — [Tliis  confusion  of  varums  things  under
the  name  of  causes^  is  the  more  easily  tolerated,  because  however
hurtful  it  may  be  to  sound  philosophy,  it  ha>s  little  influence  upon
the  concerns  of  lifeJ]  A  constant  antecedent,  or  concomitant,  of
the  phenomenon  whose  cause  is  sought,  may  answer  the  purpose
of  the  inquirer,  as  well  as  if  the  real  cause  were  known.  ffiiT  Thus
a  sailor  desires  to  know  the  cause  of  the  tides,  that  he  may  know
when  to  expect  high  water :  he  is  told  that  it  is  high  water  when
the  moon  is  so  many  houri^  past  the  meridian :  and  now  he  thinks
he  knows  the  cause  of  the  tides.  What  he  takes  for  the  cause
answers  his  purpose,  and  his  mistake  does  him  no  harm.

Those  philosophers  seem  to  have  had  the  justest  views  of  nature,
as  well  as  of  the  weakness  of  human  imderstanding,  who,  giving
up  the  pretence  of  discovering  the  causes  of  the  operations  of
nature,  have  applied  themselves  to  discover,  by  observation  and
experiment,  the  rules,  or  laws  of  nature  according  to  which  the
phenomena  of  nature  are  produced.

In  compliance  with  custom,  or  perhaps,  to  gratify  the  avidity
of  knowing  the  causes  of  things,  we  call  the  laws  of  nature  causes
and  active  powers.  So  we  speak  of  the  powers  of  gravitation,  of
magnetism,  of  electricity.

We  call  them  causes  of  many  of  the  phenomena  of  nature ;
and  such  they  are  esteemed  by  the  ignorant,  and  by  the  half
learned^

[But  those  of  juster  discernment  see,  that  laws  of  nature  are
not  agents.  They  are  not  endowed  with  active  power,  and  there-
fore cannot  be  causes  in  the  proper  sense.  They  are  only  the
rules  according  to  which  the  unknown  cause  acts.J

Thus  it  appears,  that  our  natural  desire  to  know  the  causes  of
the  phenomena  of  nature,  our  inability  to  discover  them,  and
the  vain  theories  of  philosophers  employed  in  this  search,  have
made  the  word  cause  and  the  related  words  so  ambiguous^  and  t^

s  2


260  ES8AY  IV.  CHAP.  III.

signify  so  many  things  of  different  natures,  that  they  have  in  a
manner  lost  their  proper  and  original  meaning,  and  yet  we  have
no  other  words  to  express  it.

Every  tiling  joined  with  the  effect,  and  prior  to  it,  is  called  its
cause.  An  instrument,  an  occasion,  a  reason,  a  motive,  an  end,
are  called  causes.  And  the  related  words  effect^  agent,  power ,
are  extended  in  the  same  vague  manner.

[Were  it  not  that  the  terms  cause  and  aqent  have  lost  their
proper  meaning  in  the  crowd  of  meanings  tkt  have  been  given
them,  we  should  immediately  perceive  a  contradiction  in  the
terms  necessary  cause  and  necessary  agent Jl  And  although  the
loose  meaning  of  those  words  is  authorised  by  custom,  the  ar-
biter of  language,  and  therefore  cannot  be  censured,  perhaps
cannot  always  be  avoided,  yet  we  ought  to  be  upcm  our  guard,
that  we  be  not  misled  by  it  to  conceive  things  to  be  the  same
which  are  essentially  different.

To  say  that  man  is  a  free  agent,  is  no  more  than  to  say  that,
in  some  instances,  he  is  truly  an  agent  and  a  cauLse,  and  is  not
merely  acted  upon  as  a  passive  instrument.  On  the  contrary,  to
say  that  he  acts  from  necessity,  is  to  say  that  he  does  not  act  at
all,  that  he  is  no  agent,  and  that,  for  any  thing  we  know,  there  is
only  one  agent  in  the  universe,  who  does  every  thing  that  is  done,
whether  it  be  good  or  ill.

If  this  necessity  be  attributed  even  to  the  Deity ,  the  conse-
quence must  be,  that  there  neither  is  nor  can  be  a  cause  at  allf
that  nothing  acts,  but  eveir  ttdng  is  acted  upon ;  nothing  moves,
but  every  thing  is  moved;  all  is  passion  without  action;  all
instrument  without  an  agent ;  and  that  everv  thing  that  is,  or
was,  or  shall  be,  has  that  necessary  existence  m  its  season  which
we  commonly  consider  as  the  prerogative  of  the  First  Cause.

This  I  take  to  be  the  genuine  and  the  most  tenable  system  of
necessity.  It  was  the  system  of  Spinoza,  though  he  was  not  the
first  that  advanced  it ;  for  it  is  very  ancient.  And  if  this  system
be  true,  our  reasoning  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  first  cause  of
evenr  thing  that  begins  to  exist,  must  be  given,  up  as  fallacious.

JC,  Proof  of  a  Deity  on  these  principles  presents  no  difficulty .
— If  it  be  evident  to  the  human  understanding,  as  I  take  it  to  be,
that  what  begins  to  exist  must  have  an  efficient  cause,  which  had
power  to  give  or  not  to  give  it  existence  ;  and  if  it  be  true,  that
effects  well  and  wisely  fitted  for  the  best  purposes,  demonstrate
intelligence,  wisdom,  and  goodness,  in  the  efficient  cause,  as  well
as  power,  the  proof  of  a  Deity  from  these  principles  is  very  easy
and  obvious  to  all  men  that  can  reason.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  our  belief  that  every  thing  that  begins
to  exist  has  a  cause,  T)e  got  only  by  experience ;  and  if,  as  Mr.
Hume  maintains,  the  only  notion  of  a  cause  be  something  prior
to  the  effect,  which  experience  has  shown  to  be  constantly  con-


OF  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  MOTIVES.  ggj

joined  with  such  an  eSect,  I  see  not  hoWj  from  these  principles,
it  is  possible  to  prove  the  existence  of  an  intelligent  cause  of  the
universe.

Mr.  Hume  seems  to  me  to  reason  justly  from  his  definition  of
a  cause,  when,  in  the  person  of  an  Epicurean,  he  maintains,  that
with  regard  to  a  cause  of  the  universe,  we  can  conclude  nothing ;
because  it  is  a  singular  effect.  We  have  no  experience  that  such
effects  are  always  conjoined  with  such  a  cause.  Nay,  the  cause
which  we  assign  to  this  effect,  is  a  cause  which  no  man  hath  seen,
noF  can  see,  and  therefore  experience  cannot  inform  us  that  it
has  ever  been  conjoined  with  any  effect.  He  seems  to  me  to
reason  justly  from  his  definition  of  a  cause,  when  he  maintains,
that  any  thing  may  be  the  cause  of  any  thing ;  since  priority  and
constant  conjunction  is  all  that  can  be  conceived  in  the  notion  of
a  cause.

Another  zealous  defender  of  the  doctrine  of  necessity  says,
that  **  a  cause  cannot  be  defined  to  be  any  thing  but  such  pre^
vious  circumstances  as  are  constantly  followed  by  a  certain  effect,
the  constancy  of  the  result  making  us  conclude,  that  there  must
be  a  sufficient  reason,  in  the  nature  of  things,  why  it  should  be
produced  in  those  circumstances."

This  seems  to  me  to  be  Mr.  Hume's  definition  of  a  cause  in
other  words,  and  neither  more  nor  less ;  but  I  am  far  from  think-
ing that  the  author  of  it  will  admit  the  consequences  which  Mr.
Hume  draws  from  it,  however  necessary  they  may  appear  to
others.


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  MOTIVES.


I.  The  modem  advocates  for  the  doctrine  of  necessity  lay  the
stress  of  their  cause  upon  the  influence  of  motives,

"  Every  deliberate  action,"  they  say,  "  must  have  a  motive,
"When  there  is  no  motive  on  the  other  side,  this  motive  must
determine  the  agent :  when  there  are  contrary  motives,  the
strongest  must  prevail :  we  reason  from  men's  motives  to  their
actions,  as  we  do  from  other  causes  to  their  effects  :  if  man  be  a
free  agent,  and  be  not  governed  by  motives,  all  his  actions  must
be  mere  caprice,  rewards  and  punishments  can  have  no  effect,
and  such  a  being  must  be  absolutely  ungovernable."

In  order  therefore  to  understand  distinctly,  in  what  sense  we
ascribe  moral  liberty  to  man,  it  is  necessary  to  understand  what
influence  we  allow  to  motives.  To  prevent  misunderstanding,
which  has  been  very  common  upon  this  point,  I  offer  the  follow-
ing observations :


2(52  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  IV.

I.  I  grant  that  all  rational  beings  are  influenced,  and  ought  to
be  influenced  by  motives.  But  tl^  influence  of  motives  is  of  a
very  different  nature  from  that  of  efficient  causes.  They  are
neither  causes  nor  agents.  They  suppose  an  efficient  cause,  and
can  do  nothing  without  it.  We  cannot,  without  absurdity,  sup-
pose a  motive,  either  to  act,  or  to  be  acted  upon ;  it  is  equally
incapable  of  action  and  of  passion  ;  because  it  is  not  a  thing  that
exists,  but  a  thing  that  is  conceived ;  it  is  what  the  schoolmen
called  an  ens  rationis.  Motives,  therefore,  may  influence  to  action,
but  they  do  not  act«  They  may  be  compared  to  advice,  or  ex-
hortation, which  leaves  a  man  still  at  liberty.  For  in  vain  is
advice  given  when  there  is  not  a  power  either  to  do,  or  to  for-
bear, what  it  recommends.  In  like  manner,  motives  suppose
liberty  in  the  agent,  otherwise  they  have  no  influence  at  all.

It  IS  a  law  of  nature,  with  respect  to  matter,  that  every  motion
and  change  of  motion  is  proportional  to  the  force  impressed,  and
in  the  direction  of  that  force.  The  scheme  of  necessity  supposes
a  similar  law  to  obtain  in  all  the  actions  of  intelligent  beings ;
which,  with  little  alteration,  m?iy  be  expressed  thus :  every  action,
or  change  of  action,  in  an  intelligent  being,  is  proportional  to
the  force  of  motives  impressed,  and  in  the  direction  of  that
force.

The  law  of  nature  respecting  matter  is  grounded  upon  this
principle — that  matter  is  an  inert,  inactive  substance,  which  does
not  act,  but  is  acted  upon ;  and  the  law  of  necessity  must  be
grounded  upon  the  supposition,  that  an  intelligent  being  is  an
inert,  inactive  substance,  which  does  not  act,  but  is  acted  upon.

II.  {2,  Rational  beings,  in  proportion  as  they  are  wise  and
good,  will  act  according  to  the  best  motives;  and  every  rational
being,  who  does  otherwise,  abuses  his  liberty.]  The  most  per-
fect being,  in  every  thing  where  there  is  a  right  and  a  wrong,  a
better  and  a  worse,  always  infallibly  acts  according  to  the  best
motives.  This  indeed  is  little  else  than  an  identical  proposition  ;
for  it  is  a  contradiction  to  say,  that  a  perfect  being  does  what
is  wrong  or  unreasonable.  But  to  say,  that  he  does  not  act
freely,  because  he  always  does  what  is  best,  is  to  say,  that  the
proper  use  of  liberty  destroys  liberty,  and  that  liberty  consists
only  in  its  abuse.

The  moral  perfection  of  the  Deity  consists,  not  in  having  no
power  to  do  ill,  otherwise,  as  Dr.  Clarke  justly  observes,  there
would  be  no  ground  to  thank  him  for  his  goodness  to  us  any
more  than  for  his  eternity  or  immensity;  but  his  moral  perfection
consists  in  this,  that,  when  he  has  power  to  do  every  thing,  a
power  which  cannot  be  resisted,  he  exerts  that  power  only  in
doing  what  is  wisest  and  best.  To  be  subject  to  necessity  is  to
have  no  power  at  all;  for  power  and  necessity  are  opposites.
We  grant,  therefore,  that  motives  have  influence,  similar  to  that


OP  THE  INFLUENCE  OP  MOTIVES.  263

of  advice  or  persuasion ;  but  this  influence  is  perfectly  consistent
with  liberty,  and  indeed  supposes  liberty.

III.  [3.  Whether  every  deliberate  action  mtist  have  a  motive^
depends  on  the  meaning  we  put  upon  the  word  deliberate.^  If,
by  a  deliberate  action,  we  mean  an  action  wherein  motives  are
weighed,  which  seems  to  be  the  original  meaning  of  the  word,
surely  there  must  be  motives,  and  contrary  motives,  otherwise
they  could  not  be  weighed.  But  if  a  deliberate  action  means
only,  as  it  commonly  does,  an  action  done  by  a  cool  and  calm,
determination  of  the  mind,  vdth  forethought  and  will,  I  believe
there  are  innumerable  such  actions  done  without  a  motive*

This  must  be  appealed  to  every  man's  consciousness.  I  do
many  trifling  actions  every  day,  in  which,  upon  the  most  careful
reflection,  I  am  conscious  of  no  motive ;  and  to  say  that  I  may
be  influenced  by  a  motive  of  which  I  am  not  conscious,  is,  in  the
first  place,  an  arbitrary  supposition  without  any  evidence,  and
then,  it  is  to  say,  that  I  may  be  convinced  by  an  argument  which
never  entered  into  my  thought.

Cases  frequently  occur,  in  which  an  end  that  is  of  some  import-
ance may  be  answered  equally  well  by  any  one  of  several  different
means.  In  such  cases,  a  man  who  intends  the  end  finds  not  the
least  difficulty  in  taking  one  of  these  means,  though  he  be
firmly  persuaded,  that  it  has  no  title  to  be  preferred  to  any  of
the  others.

To  say  that  this  is  a  case  that  cannot  happen,  is  to  contradict
the  experience  of  mankind ;  for  surely  i®°  a  man  who  has  occa-
sion to  lay  out  a  shilling,  or  a  guinea,  may  have  two  hundred  that
are  of  equal  value,  both  to  the  giver  and  to  the  receiver,  any
one  of  which  will  answer  his  purpose  equally  well.  To  say,
that,  if  such  a  case  should  happen,  the  man  could  not  execute
his  purpose,  is  still  more  ridiculous,  though  it  have  the  autho-
rity of  some  of  the  schoolmen,  who  determined,  that  the  ass,
between  two  equal  bundles  of  hay,  would  stand  still  till  it  died
of  hunger.

lY .  [If  a  man  could  not  act  without  a  motive,  he  would  have  no
power  at  all;  for  motives  are  not  in  our  power ;  and  he  that  has
not  power  over  a  necessary  mean,  has  not  power  over  the  end.]

That  an  action  done  without  any  motive  can  neither  have
merit  nor  demerit,  is  much  insisted  on  by  the  writers  for  neces-
sity, and  triumphantly,  as  if  it  were  the  very  hinge  of  the  con-
troversy. I  grant  it  to  be  a  self-evident  proposition,  and  I  know
no  author  that  ever  denied  it.

How  insignificant  soever,  in  moral  estimation,  the  actions  may
be  which  are  done  without  any  motive,  they  are  of  moment  in
the  question  concerning  moral  liberty.  For,  if  there  ever  was
any  action  of  this  kind,  motives  are  not  the  sole  causes  of  human
actions. And  if  we  have  the  power  of  acting  without  a  motive,


2»-^T  IT.  CHAP.  IT.

:■.  ^-- .' -'='-  --  ^  "^r-i^tz  mctlvey  may  counterbalance t

when  there  is  a  motiyeoi


■r -v*.*;^' ^^


-« -.' -


■ :.-.:  ii'iCTf  :^ji*i  ceiermine  the  action.]
■  ■  -  --  " --'^  -^•s  -^  r^iscruEg-  the  proof  is  incumbent  on
" ^  -  -  — '-  i::L::z-i::Te  :  ana  I  have  never  seen  a  shadow

-  ,  ..:. :  ■  VI  :  J. _  .t::*  -.:r  ^^j.  ^^j-  granted  the  thing  in  que*-
■■ ^ '•' »'•"  rr^J  «sv  :.w  i';i>  causes  of  actions.

: . ?--:-:^  V'-j:  15  wiifulness,  caprice,  or  obstinacy
.^ ::.^:.i_:  1 J.  p^er*  be  no:,  it  is  wonderful  that  thej
...  :.. ■  lA^z-  -JL  i^  -iz^,ii^e5. If  there  be  such  things,  a
.c  :^z-  fini  noiiteSf  may  be  resisted,
.1 j.i- - i^  iiziii  ci%'£  may  be  compared. — [5.  Whenil 1
.. _;..■ .-.'i.-'-z-y n^icic-ij  the  strongest  always  prevaikf
.. : -if-r  :c  i:f-*nei -or  denied  with  understanding,  until
• :^.-ci^..'-  •  vz^z  1?  zi-fii::  bv  the  strongest  motive.]  ,

z,:^L,  ii*i:  :-i«:s«:  w-o  have  advanced  this  as  a  self-
._-.. :.. :.:•:  ="r:  irifziricd  to  explain  what  they  mean

-  '"■  ".;  :>c  ^'.  c"  f .  :  r  Live  pven  any  rule  by  which  we  may

*  ■..  1 .  ~\  .  zi'.CTr*  ii  lie  strongest,
k  ^: — v.-  iz«>v  vzjzZZxz  tae  strongest  motive  always pre-

* .  i::-  V  -..c  "^11 c'::  Is  snoogest  ? There  must  besme

Vs.:  '.:«;_■  <r:wii  -s  :o  be  cried,  some  balance  in  which

•^ %  .  ^  '•..:.  ::-'ir*~l5c-  :o  say  that  the  strongest  motive

- ..  ^ -  :: sTcik  wi:l»-u:  any  meaning. We  must

-  ^ .:-. .  •  :  .L  iJ-j  :csc  cr balizce..  since  they  who  have  laid

*  *  -.«^  -:».■:  :^:  J?  jjci:z:-  "zLive  left  us  wholly  in  the  dark

*  :  -^  .^  I  ^r.'-i.:.  i2m1Z  when  the  contrary  motives  are
.. '  .  .•  u:.  11-  i.  iiz;:r  ciily  ui  quantity,  it  may  be  easy  to
.  • > *.  -:"",-  .j-:>:- i-us  a  bribe  of  a  thousand  pounds

-  -.r.  -  •  •. ::-  :  t-.jn  i  rrlbe  of  a  hundred  pounds.  But
•i.  • .. .-  ,s  lt:  -•:  •".'jV'-s^'iJ  kinds,  as  money  and  fame,
.•  '. -  .:  -. -  -...-^^i:.  .:^.L.:~  Jind  strength,  riches  and  honoui}

-. :  >  .'. ■  ^-  ;  ~  V^'  •^- ■-^-  -=^  ^^^  strongest  motive  ?
.?  •*. , -•,.->.. ri  :!.:  >:r^:'-ctli  ci  motives,  merely  by  their

tl^ir  sijuliid  distinct  from  their  preva-


S.  -.'i


1:  •*,•  v,,'-^.::v  iJi.'-r  str^rr.rri  merely  by  their  prevalence,  and
'?■■  :'v  >:t*.-  j-vs:  r.vi.Vi  uuji:  only  the  motive  that  prevails,  it
«:".  '.V  :t-,u  :::.'UW.  :>.-i:  :ii  snvngest  motive  prevails ;  but  the
yr.iv*::-..::  «:.".  Iv  :.u::-vm1.  .u:vi  mean  no  more  than  that  the
s:rv  vcv>:  :v..':>.i is  ::*.«:  srror.irest  motive. From  this  surely  no

^1:"  :: s'.:o;:Ik;  Iv  s^iid.  that  by  the  strength  of  a  motive  is  not

nu\uit its  prx. Wilonco,  but  r.v  cause  of  its  prevalence;  that  we

moasurt^  the  oauso  by  the  effect,  and  from  the  superiority  of  the

lude  ilie  superiority  of  the  cause,  as  we  conclude  that


OF  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  MOTIVES.  265

to  be  the  heaviest  weight  vrhich  bears  down  the  scale :  I  answer^
that,  according  to  tlus  expHcation  of  the  axiom,  it  takes  for
granted  that  motives  are  the  causes,  and  the  sole  causes  of  actions.]
Toothing  is  left  to  the  agent,  but  to  be  acted  upon  by  the  mo-
tives,  as  the  balance  is  by  the  weights.  The  axiom  supposes,
that  the  agent  does  not  act,  but  is  acted  upon ;  and,  from  this
supposition,  it  is  concluded  that  he  does  not  act.  This  is  to
leason  in  a  circle,  or  rather  it  is  not  reasoning  but  begging  the
.question.

(BF  Contrary  motives  may  very  properly  be  compared  to  advo-
cates pleading  the  opposite  sides  of  a  cause  at  the  bar.  It  would
le  very  weak  reasoning  to  say,  that  such  an  advocate  is  the  most
.fowerful  pleader,  because  sentence  was  given  on  his  side.  The
lentence  is  in  the  power  of  the  judge,  not  of  the  advocate.  It
ii  equally  weak  reasoning,  in  proof  of  necessity,  to  say,  such  a
motive  prevailed,  therefore  it  is  the  strongest ;  since  the  defend-
cn  of  uberty  maintain  that  the  determination  was  made  by  the
man,  and  not  by  the  motive.

VII.  [We  are  therefore  brought  to  this  issue,  that  unless
tome  measure  of  the  strength  of  motives  can  be  found  distinct
torn  their  prevalence,  it  cannot  be  determined,  whether  the
itrongest  motive  always  prevails  or  not.  If  such  a  measure  can
k  found  and  applied,  we  may  be  able  to  judge  of  the  truth  of
thk  maxim,  but  not  otherwise.]

Every  thing  that  can  be  called  a  motive  is  addressed  either  to
the  animal  or  to  the  rational  part  of  our  nature.  Motives  of  the
fimer  kind  are  common  to  us  with  the  brutes ;  those  of  the
litter  are  peculiar  to  rational  beings.  We  shall  beg  leave,  for
diitinetion's  sake,  to  call  the  former,  animal  motives,  and  the
litter,  rational.

Hunger  is  a  motive  in  a  dog  to  eat ;  so  is  it  in  a  man.  Ac-
cording to  the  strength  of  the  appetite,  it  gives  a  stronger  or  a
weaker  impulse  to  eat.  And  the  same  thing  may  be  said  of
I  e?ery  other  appetite  and  passion.  Such  animal  motives  give  an
impulse  to  the  agent,  to  which  he  yields  with  ease ;  and,  if  the
impulse  be  strong,  it  cannot  be  resisted  without  an  effort  which
requires  a  greater  or  a  less  degree  of  self-command.  Such  motives
»e  not  addressed  to  the  rational  powers.  Their  influence  is  im-
mediately upon  the  will.  We  feel  their  influence,  and  judge  of
dieir  strength,  by  the  conscious  effort  which  is  necessary  to  resist
theoL

VIII.  Animal  test  of  the  strength  of  motives. — When  a  man
is  acted  upon  by  contrary  motives  of  this  kind,  he  finds  it  easy
to  yield  to  the  strongest.  They  are  like  two  forces  pushing  him
in,  oontrary  directions.  To  yield  to  the  strongest,  he  needs  only
to  be  passive.  By  exerting  his  own  force,  he  may  resist ;  but
this  requiieft  an  effort  of  which  he  is  conscious. [The  strength


2Qi,  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  IV.

that  power,  joined  to  a  weaker  motive,  may  counterbalance  a
stronger.

V.  [4.  It  can  never  be  proved,  that  when  there  is  a  motive  on
one  side  onlyy  that  motive  must  determine  the  action.]

According  to  the  laws  of  reasoning,  the  proof  is  incumbent  on
those  who  hold  the  affirmative  ;  and  I  have  never  seen  a  shadow
of  argument  which  does  not  take  for  granted  the  thing  in  ques-
tion, to  wit,  that  motives  are  the  sole  cattses  of  actions.

Is  there  no  such  thing  as  wilfulness,  caprice,  or  obstinacy
among  mankind?  If  there  be  not,  it  is  wonderful  that  they
should  have  names  in  all  languages.  If  there  be  such  things,  a
single  motive,  or  even  many  motives,  may  he  resisted.

VI.  Motives  of  the  same  kind  may  he  compared. — [5.  When  it
is  said,  that  of  contrary  motives  the  strongest  always  prevails,
this  can  neither  be  affirmed  nor  denied  with  understanding,  imtil
we  know  distinctly  what  is  meant  by  the  strongest  motive.  J

I  do  not  find,  that  those  who  have  advanced  this  as  a  self-
evident  axiom,  have  ever  attempted  to  explain  what  they  mean
by  the  strongest  motive,  or  have  given  any  rule  by  which  we  may
judge  which  of  two  motives  is  the  strongest.

How  shall  we  know  whether  the  strongest  motive  always  pre-
vails, if  we  know  not  which  is  strongest  ?  There  must  he  some
test  by  which  their  strength  is  to  be  tried,  some  balance  in  which
they  may  be  weighed,  otherwise,  to  say  that  the  strongest  motive
always  prevails,  is  to  speak  without  any  meaning.  We  must
therefore  search  for  this  test  or  balance,  since  they  who  have  laid
so  much  stress  upon  this  axiom,  have  left  us  wholly  in  the  dark
as  to  its  meaning.  I  grant,  that  when  the  contrary  motives  are
of  the  same  kind,  and  differ  only  in  quantity,  it  may  be  easy  to
say  which  is  the  strongest.  Thus  a  bribe  of  a  thousand  poimds
is  a  stronger  motive  than  a  bribe  of  a  hundred  pounds.  But
when  the  motives  are  of  different  kinds,  as  money  and  fame,
duty  and  worldly  interest,  health  and  strength,  riches  and  honour,
by  what  rule  shall  we  judge  which  is  the  strongest  motive  ?

Either  we  measure  the  strength  of  motives,  merely  by  their

{)revalence,  or  by  some  other  standard  distinct  from  their  preva-
ence.

If  we  measure  their  strength  merely  by  their  prevalence,  and
by  the  strongest  motive  mean  only  the  motive  that  prevails,  it
will  be  true  indeed  that  the  strongest  motive  prevails ;  but  the
proposition  will  be  identical,  and  mean  no  more  than  that  the
strongest  motive  is  the  strongest  motive.  From  this  surely  no
conclusion  can  be  dravni.

[If  it  should  be  said,  that  by  the  strength  of  a  motive  is  not
meant  its  prevalence,  but  the  catise  of  its  prevalence ;  that  we
measure  the  cause  by  the  effect,  and  from  the  superiority  of  the
effect  conclude  the  superiority  of  the  cause,  as  we  conclude  that


OP  THE  INFLUENCE  OP  MOTIVES.  g(J5

to  be  the  heaviest  weight  which  bears  down  the  scale :  I  answer,
that,  according  to  this  explication  of  the  axiom,  it  takes  for
granted  that  motives  are  the  causes,  and  the  sole  causes  of  actions.]
Nothing  is  left  to  the  agent,  but  to  be  acted  upon  by  the  mo-
tives, as  the  balance  is  by  the  weights.  The  axiom  supposes,
that  the  agent  does  not  act,  but  is  acted  upon ;  and,  from  this
supposition,  it  is  concluded  that  he  does  not  act.  This  is  to
reason  in  a  circle,  or  rather  it  is  not  reasoning  but  begging  the
question,

a@^  Contrary  motives  may  very  properly  be  compared  to  advo-
cates pleading  the  opposite  sidea  of  a  cause  at  the  bar.  It  would
be  very  weak  reasoning  to  say,  that  such  an  advocate  is  the  most
powerful  pleader,  because  sentence  was  given  on  his  side.  The
sentence  is  in  the  power  of  the  judge,  not  of  the  advocate.  It
is  equally  weak  reasoning,  in  proof  of  necessity,  to  say,  such  a
motive  prevailed,  therefore  it  is  the  strongest ;  since  the  defend-
ers of  liberty  maintain  that  the.  determination  was  made  by  the
man,  and  not  by  the  motive.

VII.  [We  are  therefore  brought  to  this  issue,  that  unless
some  measure  of  the  strength  of  motives  can  be  found  distinct
from  their  prevalence,  it  cannot  be  determined,  whether  the
strongest  motive  always  prevails  or  not.  If  such  a  measure  can
be  found  and  applied,  we  may  be  able  to  judge  of  the  truth  of
this  maxim,  but  not  otherwise.]

Every  thing  that  can  be  called  a  motive  is  addressed  either  to
the  animal  or  to  the  rational  part  of  our  nature.  Motives  of  the
former  kind  are  common  to  us  with  the  brutes ;  those  of  the
latter  are  peculiar  to  rational  beings.  We  shall  beg  leave,  for
distinction's  sake,  to  call  the  former,  animal  motives,  and  the
latter,  rational.

Hunger  is  a  motive  in  a  dog  to  eat ;  so  is  it  in  a  man.  Ac-
cording to  the  strength  of  the  appetite,  it  gives  a  stronger  or  a
weaker  impulse  to  eat.  And  the  same  thing  may  be  said  of
every  other  appetite  and  passion.  Such  animal  motives  give  an
impulse  to  the  agent,  to  which  he  yields  with  ease ;  and,  if  the
impulse  be  strong,  it  cannot  be  resisted  without  an  effort  which
requires  a  greater  or  a  less  degree  of  self-command.  Such  motives
are  not  addressed  to  the  rational  powers.  Their  influence  is  im-
mediately upon  the  will.  We  feel  their  influence,  and  judge  of
their  strength,  by  the  conscious  effort  which  is  necessary  to  resist
them.

VIII-  Animal  test  of  the  strength  of  motives, — ^When  a  man
is  acted  upon  by  contrary  motives  of  this  kind,  he  finds  it  easy
to  yield  to  the  strongest.  They  are  like  two  forces  pushing  him
in  contrary  directions.  To  yield  to  the  strongest,  he  needs  only
to  be  passive.  By  exerting  his  own  force,  he  may  resist ;  but
this  requires  an  effort  of  which  he  is  conscious. [The  strength


/■


^


266  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  IV.

of  motives  of  this  kind  is  perceived,  not  bv  our  judgment,  but
by  o\xT  feeling  ;  and  that  is  the  strongest  oi  contrary  motives  to
which  he  can  yield  with  ease,  or  which  it  requires  an  effort  of
self-command  to  resist ;  and  this  we  may  call  the  animal  test  of
the  strength  of  motives.]

If  it  be  asked,  whether,  in  motives  of  this  kind,  the  strongest
always  prevails  ?  I  answer,  That  in  hrute-animah  I  believe  it  does.
They  do  not  appear  to  have  any  self-command ;  an  appetite  or
passion  in  them  is  overcome  only  by  a  stronger  contrary  one.
On  this  account,  they  are  not  accountable  for  their  actions,  nor
can  they  be  the  subjects  of  law.

But  in  men  who  are  able  to  exercise  their  rational  powers,
and  have  any  degree  of  self-command,  the  strongest  animal  mo^
tive  does  not  always  prevail.  The  flesh  does  not  always  prevail
against  the  spirit,  though  too  often  it  does.  And  if  men  were
necessarily  determined  by  the  strongest  animal  motive,  they
could  no  more  be  {Accountable,  or  capable  of  being  governed  by
law,  than  brutes  are.

IX.  Rational  motives  defined. — Let  us  next  consider  rational
motives^  to  which  the  name  of  motive  is  more  commonly  and
more  properly  given.  Their  influence  is  upon  the  judgment,
by  convincing  us  that  such  an  .action  ought  to  be  done,  that  it  is
our  duty,  or  conducive  to  our  real  good,  or  to  some  end  which
we  have  determined  to  pursue.

They  do  not  give  a  blind  impulse  to  the  will  as  animal  motives
do.  They  convince,  but  they  do  not  impel,  unless,  as  may
often  happen,  they  excite  some  passion  of  hope,  or  fear,  or  de-
sire. Such  passions  may  be  excited  by  conviction,  and  may
operate  in  its  aid  as  other  animal  motives  do.  But  there  may  be
conviction  without  passion;  and  [the  conviction  of  what  we
ought  to  do,  in  order  to  some  end  which  we  have  judged  fit  to  be
pursued,  is  what  I  call  a  rational  motived]

Brutes,  I  think,  cannot  be  influenced  by  such  motives.  They
have  not  the  conception  of  ovght  and  ought  not.  Children  ac-
quire these  conceptions  as  their  rational  powers  advance ;  and
they  are  found  in  all  of  ripe  age,  who  have  the  human  faculties.

X.  national  test  of  the  strength  of  motives, — [If  there  be  any
competition  between  rational  motives,  it  is  evident  that  the
strongest,  in  the  eye  of  reason,  is  that  which  it  is  most  our  duty
and  our  real  happiness  to  follow.]  Our  duty  and  our  real  hap-
piness are  ends  which  are  inseparable ;  and  they  are  the  ends
which  eveiy  man,  endowed  with  reason,  is  conscious  he  ought
to  pursue  m  preference  to  all  others.  [This  we  may  call  the
rational  test  of  the  strength  of  motives.  A  motive  which  is  the
strongest,  according  to  the  animal  testy  may  be,  and  very  often
is,  the  weakest  according  to  the  rational,^

[The  grand  and  the  important  competition  of  contrary  motives


OP  THE  INFLUENCE  OP  MOTIVES.  gg7

is  between  the  animal,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  rational  on  the  *
other. This  is  the  conflict  between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit j  upon
the  event  of  which  the  character  of  men  depends.]

If  it  be  asked,  which  of  these  is  the  strongest  motive  ?  The
answer  is,  That  the  first  is  commonly  strongest,  when  they  are
tried  by  the  animal  test.  If  they  were  not  so,  human  life  would
be  no  state  of  trial.  It  would  not  be  a  warfare,  nor  would  vir-
tue require  any  effort  or  self-command.  No  man  would  have
any  temptation  to  do  wrong.  But  when  we  try  the  contrary
motives  by  the  rational  test,  it  is  evident  that  the  rational  mo-
tive is  always  the  strongest.

And  now,  I  think,  it  appears  that  the  strongest  motive,  ac-
cording to  either  of  the  tests'  I  have  mentioned,  does  not  always
prevail.

[In  every  wise  and  birtuous  action,  the  motive  that  prevails  is
the  strongest,  according  to  the  rational  test,  but  commonly  the
weakest  according  to  the  animal.  In  every  foolish,  and  in  every
vicious  action,  the  motive  that  prevails  is  commonly  the  strong-
est according  to  the  animal  test,  but  always  the  weakest  according
to  the  rational.]

XI.  [6.  It  is  true,  that  we  reasonfrom  mevis  motives  to  their
actions,  and  in  many  cases  vtrith  great  probability,  but  never  with
absolute  certainty.  And  to  infer  from  this,  that  men  are  neces-
sarily determined  by  motives,  is  very  weak  reasoning.]

For,  let  us  suppose,  for  a  moment,  that  men  have  moral  liberty,
I  would  ask,  what  use  may  they  be  expected  to  make,  of  this
liberty  ?  It  may  surely  be  expected  that,  of  the  various  actions
within  the  sphere  of  their  power,  they  will  choose  what  pleases
them  most  tot  the  present,  or  what  appears  to  be  most  for  their
real,  though  distant  good.  When  there  is  a  competition  be-
tween these  motives,  the  foolish  will  prefer  present  gratification ;
the  wise,  the  greater  and  more  distant  good.

Now,  is  not  this  the  very  way  in  which  we  see  men  act  ?  Is
it  not  from  the  presumption  that  they  act  in  this  way,  that  we
reason  from  their  motives  to  their  actions  ?  Surely  it  is.  Is  it
not  weak  reasoning,  therefore,  to  argue,  that  men  have  not  li-
berty, because  they  act  in  that  very  way  in  which  they  would
act  if  they  had  liberty  ?  It  would  surely  be  more  like  reasoning,
to  draw  tiie  contrary  conclusion  from  the  same  premises.

XII.  [7.  Nor  is  it  better  reasoning  to  conclude,  that  if  men
are  not  necessarily  detennined  by  motives,  all  their  actions  mu^t
be  capricious J\

To  resist  the  strongest  animal  motives  when  duty  requires,  is
so  far  from  being  capricious,  that  it  is,  in  the  highest  degree,
wise  and  virtuous.  And  we  hope  this  is  often  done  by  good
men.

To  act  against  rational  motives,  must  always  be  foolish,  vicious^


268  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP. IV.

or  capricious.  And  it  cannot  be  denied  that  there  are  too
many  such  actions  done.  But  is  it  reasonable  to  conclude,  that
because  liberty  may  be  abused  by  the  foolish  and  the  vicious,
therefore  it  can  never  be  put  to  its  proper  use,  vsrhich  is  to  act
wisely  and  virtuously  ?

XIII.  [8.  It  is  equally  unreasonable  to  conclude,  that  if  men
are  not  necessarily  determined  hy  motives^  rewards  and 'punishments
would  have  no  effect.  With  wise  men  they  will  have  their  due
effect ;  but  not  always  with  the  foolish  and  the  vicious.]

Let  us  consider  what  effect  rewards  and  punishments  do  really,
and  in  fact,  produce,  and  what  may  be  inferred  from  that
effect,  upon  each  of  the  opposite  systems  of  liberty  and  of  ne-
cessity.

I  take  it  for  granted  that,  in  fact,  the  best  and  wisest  laws,
both  human  and  divine,  are  often  transgressed,  notwithstanding
the  rewards  and  punishments  that  are  annexed  to  them.  If  any
man  should  deny  this  fact,  I  know  not  how  to  reason  with  him.

From  this  fact,  it  may  be  inferred  with  certainty,  upon  the
supposition  of  necessity,  that,  in  every  instance  of  transgression,
the  motive  of  reward  or  punishment  was  not  of  sufficient  strength
to  produce  obedience  to  the  law.  This  implies  a  fault  in  the
lawgiver ;  but  there  can  be  no  fault  in  the  transgressor  who  acts
mechanically  by  the  force  of  motives.  fSBT  We  might  as  well
impute  a  fault  to  the  balance,  when  it  does  not  raise  a  weight
of  two  poimds  by  the  force  of  one  pound.

XIV.  I%e  supposition  of  necessity  precludes  rewards  and  pu-
nishments — liberty  gives  efficacy  to  both. — [Upon  the  supposition
of  necessity,  there  can  be  neither  reward  nor  punishment,  in  the
proper  sense,  as  those  words  imply  good  and  ill  desert.]  Reward
and  punishment  are  only  tools  employed  to  produce  a  mechani-
cal effect.  When  the  effect  is  not  produced,  the  tool  must  be
unfit  or  wrong  applied.

Upon  the  supposition  of  liberty ,  rewards  and  punishments  will
have  a  proper  effect  upon  the  wise  and  the  good  ;  but  not  so  upon
the  foolish  and  the  vicious,  when  opposed  by  their  animal  passions
or  bad  habits  ;  and  this  is  just  what  we  see  to  be  the  fact.  Upon
this  supposition,  the  transgression  of  the  law  implies  no  defect  in
the  law,  no  fault  in  the  lawgiver ;  the  fault  is  solely  in  the  trans-
gressor. And  it  is  upon  this  supposition  only  that  there  can  be
either  reward  or  pumshment,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  words,
because  it  is  only  on  this  supposition  that  there  can  be  good  or  ill
desert.


S69


CHAPTER  V.

LIBERTY  CONSISTENT WITH GOVERNMENT.

I.  Mechanical  and  moral  government. — When  it  is  said  that
liberty  would  make  us  absolutely  ungovernable  by  God  or  man ;
to  understand  the  strength  of  this  conclusion,  it  is  necessary  to
know  distinctly  what  is  meant  by  government.  There  are  two
kinds  of  government y  very  different  in  their  nature.  The  one
we  may,  for  distinction's  sake,  call  mechanical  government,  the
other  moral.  The  first  is  the  government  of  beings  which  have
no  active  power,  but  are  merely  passive  and  acted  upon ;  the
second,  of  intelligent  and  active  beings.

ggar  An  instance  of  mechanical  government  may  be,  That  of  a
master  or  commander  of  a  ship  at  sea.  Supposing  her  skilfully
built,  and  furnished  with  every  thing  proper  for  the  destined
voyage,  to  govern  her  properly  for  this  purpose  requires  much
art  and  attention :  and,  as  every  art  has  its  rules,  or  laws,  so  has
this.  But  by  whom  are  those  laws  to  be  obeyed,  or  those  rules
observed  ?  not  by  the  ship,  surely,  for  she  is  an  inactive  being,
but  by  the  governor.  A  sailor  may  say  that  she  does  not  obey
the  rudder ;  and  he  has  a  distinct  meaning  when  he  says  so,  and
is  perfectly  understood.  But  he  means  not  obedience  in  the
proper,  but  in  a  metaphorical  sense :  [for,  in  the  proper  sense,
the  ship  can  no  mor^  obey  the  rudder,  than  she  can  give  a  com-
mand. Every  motion,  both  of  the  ship  and  rudder,  is  exactly
proportioned  to  the  force  impressed,  and  in  the  direction  of  that
force.  The  ship  never  disobeys  the  laws  of  motion,  even  in
the  metaphorical  sense  ;  and  they  are  the  only  laws  she  can  be
subject  to.]

The  sailor,  perhaps,  curses  her  for  not  obeying  the  rudder ;
but  this  is  not  the  voice  of  reason,  but  of  passion,  like  that  of
the  losing  gamester,  when  he  curses  the  dice.  The  ship  is  as
innocent  as  the  dice.

Whatever  may  happen  during  the  voyage,  whatever  may  be  its
issue,  the  ship,  in  the  eye  of  reason,  is  neither  an  object  of
approbation  nor  of  blame ;  because  she  does  not  act,  but  is
acted  upon.  If  the  material,  in  any  part,  be  faulty  ;  Who  put
it  to  that  use  ?  If  the  form  ;  Who  made  it  ?  If  the  rules  of
navigation  were  not  observed ;  Who  transgressed  them  ?  If  a
storm  occasioned  any  disaster,  it  was  no  more  in  the  power  of
the  ship  than  of  the  master.

Another  instance  to  illustrate  the  nature  of  mechanical
government  may  be.  That  of  the  man  who  makes  and  exhibits  a
puppet-show.  The  puppets,  in  all  their  diverting  gesticulations,
do  not  move,  but  are  moved  by  an  impulse  secretly  conveyed.


270  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  V.

which  they  cannot  resist.  If  they  do  not  play  their  parts  pro-
perly, the  fault  is  only  in  the  maker  or  manager  of  the  ma^
chinery.  Too  much  or  too  little  force  was  applied,  or  it  was
wrong  directed.  No  reasonable  man  imputes  either  praise
or  blame  to  the  puppets,  but  solely  to  their  maker  or  their
governor.

If  we  suppose  for  a  moment,  the  puppets  to  be  endowed  with
understanding  and  vnll,  but  vnthout  any  degree  of  active  power,
this  will  make  no  change  in  the  nature  of  their  government :  for
understanding  and  will,  vnthout  some  degree  of  active  power,
can  produce  no  effect.  They  might,  upon  this  supposition,  be
called  intelligent  machines ;  but  they  would  be  machines  still,
and  as  much  subject  to  the  laws  of  motion  as  inanimate  matter,
and  therefore  incapable  of  any  other  than  mechanical  government.

II.  Let  ti8  next  consider  the  nature  of  moral  government.
This  is  the  government  of  persons  who  have  reason  and  active

})ower,  and  nave  laws  prescribed  to  them  for  their  conduct,  by  a
egislator;  Their  obedience  is  obedience  in  the  proper  sense ;  it
must  therefore  be  their  own  act  and  deed,  and  consequently  they
must  have  power  to  obey  or  to  disobey.  To  prescribe  laws  to
them  which  they  have  not  power  to  obey,  or  to  require  a  service
beyond  their  power,  would  be  tyranny  and  injustice  in  the  high-
est degree.

When  the  laws  are  equitable,  and  prescribed  by  just  authority,
they  produce  moral  obligation  in  those  that  are  subject  to  them,
and  disobedience  is  a  crime  deserving  punishment.  [But  if  the
obedience  be  impossible;  if  the  transgression  be  necessary;  it
is  self-evident,  that  there  can  be  no  moral  obligation  to  what  is
impossible,  that  there  can  be  no  crime  in  yielding  to  necessity,
and  that  there  can  be  no  justice  in  punishing  a  person  for  what
it  was  not  in  his  power  to  avoid.  2'hese  are  first  principles  in
moralSf  and,  to  every  unprejudiced  mind,  as  self-evident  as  the
axioms  of  mathematics.  The  whole  science  of  morals  must
stand  or  fall  with  them.]

III.  Having  thus  explained  the  nature  both  of  mechanical  and
of  moral  government,  the  only  kinds  of  government  I  am  able  to
conceive,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  far  liberty  or  necessity  agrees  with
either.

On  the  one  hand,  I  acknowledge  that  necessity  agrees  per-
fectly with  mechanical  government.  This  kind  of  government  is
most  perfect  when  the  governor  is  the  sole  agent ;  every  thing
done  is  the  doing  of  the  governor  only.  The  praise  of  every
thing  well  done  is  his  solely  ;  and  his  is  the  bl^ne  if  there  be
any  thing  ill  done,  because  he  is  the  sole  agent.

It  is  true  that,  in  common  language,  praise  or  dispraise  is
often  metaphorically  given  to  the  work ;  but,  in  propriety,  it
belongs  solely  to  the  author. Every  workman  understands  this


LIBERTY  CONSISTENT  WITH  GOVERNMENT  g71

perfectly,  and  takes  to  himself  very  justly  the  praise  or  dispraise
of  his  own  work.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  no  less  evident,  that,  on  the  supposi-
tion of  necessity  in  the  governed,  there  can  be  no  moral  govern-
ment. There  can  be  neither  wisdom  nor  equity  in  prescribing
laws  that  cannot  be  obeyed.  There  can  be  no  moral  obligation
upon  beings  that  have  no  active  power.  There  can  be  no  crime
in  not  doing  what  it  was  impossible  to  do ;  nor  can  there  be  jus-
tice in  punishing  such  omission.

[If  we  apply  these  theoretical  principles  to  the  kinds  of  govern-
ment which  do  actually  exist,  whether  human  or  divine,  we
shall  find  that,  among  men,  even  mechanical  government  is
imperfect,']

Men  do  not  make  the  matter  they  work  upon.  Its  various
kinds,  and  the  qualities  belonging  to  each  kind,  are  the  work  of
God.  The  laws  of  nature,  to  which  it  is  subject,  are  the  work
of  God.  The  motions  of  the  atmosphere  and  of  the  sea,  the
heat  and  cold  of  the  air,  the  rain  and  wind,  which  are  useful
instruments  in  most  human  operations,  are  not  in  our  power.  So
that,  in  all  the  mechanical  productions  of  men,  the  work  is  more
to  be  ascribed  to  God  than  to  man.

IV.  Civil  government  among  men  is  a  species  of  moral  govern-
mentf  but  imperfect,  as  its  lawgivers  and  its  judges  are.  [Human
laws  may  be  unwise  or  unjust ;  human  judges  may  be  partial  or
imskilful.  But  in  all  equitable  civil  governments,  the  maxims  of
moral  government  above  mentioned,  are  acknowledged  as  rules
which  ought  never  to  be  violated.]  Indeed,  the  rules  of  justice
are  so  evident  to  all  men,  that  the  most  tyrannical  governments
profess  to  be  guided  by  them,  and  endeavour  to  paUiate  what  is
contrary  to  them  by  the  plea  of  necessity.

That  a  man  cannot  be  under  an  obligation  to  what  is  impossi-
ble ;  that  he  cannot  be  criminal  in  yielding  to  necessity,  nor
justly  punished  for  what  he  could  not  avoid,  are  maxims  admitted,
in  all  criminal  courts,  as  fundamental  rules  of  justice.

[In  opposition  to  this,  it  has  been  said  by  some  of  the  most
able  defenders  of  necessity.  That  human  laws  require  no  more  to
constitute  a  crime y  but  that  it  be  voluntary  ;  whence  it  is  inferred,
that  the  criminality  consists  in  the  determination  of  the  will,
whether  that  determination  be  free  or  necessary.]  This,  I  think
indeed,  is  the  only  possible  plea  by  which  criminality  can  be
made  consistent  with  necessity;  and  therefore  it  deserves  to  be
considered.

I  acknowledge  that  a  crime  must  be  voluntary  ;  for,  if  it  be
not  voluntary,  it  is  no  deed  of  the  man,  nor  can  be  justly  im-

Suted  to  him ;  but  it  is  no  less  necessary  that  the  /criminal
ave  moral  liberty. In  men  that  are  adult,  and  of  a  sound
mind,  this  liberty  is  presumed. But  in  every  case  wheneL  it


272  ESgAY  IV.  CHAP.

cannot  be  presumed,  no  criminality  isimputed^  even  to  voluntary
actions.

This  is  evident  from  the  following  instances  : Firsts  Th^
actions  of  brutes  appear  to  be  voluntary ;  yet  they  are  never  con-
ceived to  be  criminal,  though  they  may  be  noxious. Secondly^
Children  in  nonage  act  voluntarily,  but  they  are  not  chargeable
with  crimes. Thirdly y  Madmen  have  both  understanding  an
will,  but  they  have  not  moral  liberty,  and  therefore  are  not=-
chargeable  with  crimes. Fourthly,  Even  in  men  that  are  adult,
and  of  a  sound  mind,  a  motive  that  is  thought  irresistible  by  any
ordinary  degree  of  self-command,  such  as  the  rack,  or  the  dread
of  present  death,  either  exculpates,  or  very  much  alleviates  a
voluntary  action,  which,  in  other  circumstances,  would  be  highly
criminal ;  whence  it  is  evident,  that  if  the  motive  were  absolutely
irresistible,  the  exculpation  would  be  complete. So  far  is  it
from  being  true  in  itself  or  agreeable  to  the  common  sense  of
mankind,  that  the  criminality  of  an  action  depends  solely  upon
its  being  voluntary,

V.  [The  government  of  brutes,  so  far  as  they  are  subject  to  man,
is  a  species  of  mechanical  government,  or  something  very  like  to
it,  and  has  no  resemblance  to  moral  government.]  As  inanimate
matter  is  governed  by  our  knowledge  of  the  quaUties  which  God
hath  given  to  the  various  productions  of  nature,  and  our  know-
ledge of  the  laws  of  nature  which  he  hath  established ;  so  brute-
animals  are  governed  by  our  knowledge  of  the  natural  instincts,
appetites,  affections  and  passions,  which  God  hath  given  them.
By  a  skilful  application  of  these  springs  of  their  actions,  they
may  be  trained  to  many  habits  useful  to  man.  After  all,  we
find  that,  from  causes  unknown  to  us,  not  only  some  species,
but  some  individuals  of  the  same  species,  are  more  tractable
than  others.

Children  under  age  are  governed  much  in  the  same  way  as  the
most  sagacious  brutes.  The  opening  of  their  intellectual  and
moral  powers,  which  may  be  much  aided  by  proper  instruction
and  example,  is  that  which  makes  them,  by  degrees,  capable  of
moral  government.

Reason  teaches  us  to  ascribe  to  the  Supreme  Being  a  govern-
ment of  the  inanimate  and  inactive  part  of  his  creation,  ana-
logous to  that  mechanical  government  which  men  exercise,  but
infinitely  more  perfect.  This,  I  think,  is  what  we  call  God's
natural  government  of  the  universe.  [In  this  part  of  the  Divine
government,  whatever  is  done  is  God*s  doing.  He  is  the  sole
cause,  and  the  sole  agent,  whether  he  act  immediately,  or  by
instruments  subordinate  to  him ;  and  his  will  is  always  done :
for  instruments  are  not  causes,  they  are  not  agents,  though  we
sometimes  improperly  call  them  so.]

It  is  therefore  no  less  agreeable  to  reason,  than  to  the  language


FIRST  ARGUMENT.  277

by  nature  to  admit  this  condition  in  all  promises,  whether  it  be
expressed  or  not.  For  it  is  a  dictate  of  common  sense,  that
we  can  be  under  no  obligation  to  do  what  it  is  impossible  for  us
to  do.

If  we  act  upon  the  system  of  necessity y  there  must  be  another
condition  implied  in  all  deliberation,  in  every  resolution,  and  in
every  promise,  and  that  is,  if  we  shall  he  willing.  But  the  will
not  bemg  in  our  power,  we  cannot  engage  for  it.

If  this  condition  be  imderstood,  as  it  must  be  understood  if
we  act  upon  the  system  of  necessity,  there  can  be  no  deliberation
or  resolution,  nor  any  obligation  in  a  promise.  A  man  might
as  well  deliberate,  resolve,  and  promise,  upon  the  actions  of  other
men  as  upon  his  own.

It  is  no  less  evident,  that  we  have  a  conviction  of  power  in
other  men,  when  we  advise,  or  persuade,  or  command,  or  con-
ceive them  to  be  under  obligation  by  their  promises.

[5.  7*  it  possible  for  any  man  to  blame  himself  for  yielding  to
necessity  ?  Then  he  may  blame  himself  for  d3dng,  or  for  being
a  man.]  Blame  supposes  a  wrong  use  of  power ;  and  when  a
man  does  as  well  as  it  was  possible  for  him  to  do,  wherein  is  he
to  be  blamed  ?  Therefore  all  conviction  of  wrong  conduct,  all
remorse  and  self-condemnation,  imply  a  conviction  of  our  power
to  have  done  better.  Take  away  this  conviction,  and  there  may
be  a  sense  of  misery,  or  a  dread  of  evil  to  come,  but  there  can
be  no  sense  of  guilt,  or  resolution  to  do  better.  •

Many  who  hold  the  doctrine  of  necessity,  disown  these  conse-
.quences  of  it,  and  think  to  evade  them.  To  such  they  ought
not  to  be  imputed ;  but  their  inseparable  connexion  with  that
doctrine  appears  self-evident :  and  therefore  some  late  patrons
of  it  have  had  the  boldness  to  avow  them.  "  They  cannot  accuse
themselves  of  having  done  anything  wrong  in  the  ultimate  sense
of  the  words.  In  a  strict  sense,  they  have  nothing  to  do  with
repentance,  confession,  and  pardon,  these  being  adapted  to  a
fallacious  view  of  things."

Those  who  can  adopt  these  sentiments,  may  indeed  celebrate,
with  high  encomiums,  the  great  and  glorious  doctrine  of  necessity.
It  restores  them,  in  their  own  conceit,  to  the  state  of  innocence.
It  delivers  them  from  all  the  pangs  of  guilt  and  remorse,  and
from  all  fear  about  their  future  conduct,  though  not  about  their
fate.  They  may  be  as  secure  that  they  shall  do  nothing  wrong,
as  those  who  have  finished  their  course.  A  doctrine  so  flatter-
ing to  the  mind  of  a  sinner,  is  very  apt  to  give  strength  to  weak
arguments.

After  all,  it  is  acknowledged  by  those  who  boast  of  this
glorious  doctrine,  "  That  every  man,  let  him  use  what  efforts
he  can,  will  necessarily  feel  the  sentiments  of  shame,  remorse.


274  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  V.

the  master,  but  a  servant,  in  the  proper  sense,  who  has  a  cer-
tain trust,  and  is  accountable  for  the  discharge  of  it.  Within
the  sphere  of  his  power,  he  has  a  subordinate  dominion  or  go-
vernment, and  therefore  may  be  said  to  be  made  after  the  image
of  God,  the  Supreme  Governor.  But  [as  his  dominion  is  sub-
ordinate, he  is  under  a  moral  obligation  to  make  a  right  use  of  it,
as  far  as  the  reason  which  God  hath  given  him  can  direct  him.]
When  he  does  so,  he  is  a  just  object  of  moral  approbation  ;  and
no  less  an  object  of  disapprobation  and  just  punishment  when  he
abuses  the  power  with  which  he  is  intrusted.  And  he  must
finally  render  an  account  of  the  talent  committed  to  him,  to
the  Supreme  Governor  and  righteous  Judge.

[This  is  the  moral  government  of  God,  which,  far  from  being
inconsistent  with  liberty,  supposes  liberty  in  those  that  axe  sub-
ject to  it,  and  can  extend  no  farther  than  that  liberty  extends ;
for  accountableness  can  no  more  agree  with  necessity  than  light
with  darkness.]

VIII.  [It  ought  likewise  to  be  observed,  that  as  active  power
in  man^  and  in  every  created  being,  is  the  gift  of  God,  it  de-
pends entirely  on  his  pleasure  for  its  existence,  its  degree  and
its  continuance,  and  therefore  can  do  nothing  which  he  does  not
see  Jit  to  permit.^

Our  power  to  act  does  not  exempt  us  from  being  acted  upon,
and  restrained  or  compelled  by  a  superior  power;  and  the  power
of  God  is  always  superior  to  that  of  man.

It  would  be  great  folly  and  presumption  in  us  to  pretend  to
know  all  the  ways  in  which  the  government  of  the  Supreme
Being  is  carried  on,  and  his  purposes  accomplished  by  men,  acting
freely  and  having  different  or  opposite  purposes  in  their  view.
For,  as  the  heavens  are  high  above  the  earth,  so  axe  his  thoughts
above  our  thoughts,  and  his  ways  above  our  ways.

That  a  man  may  have  great  influence  upon  the  voluntary  de-
terminations of  other  men,  by  means  of  education,  example,  and
persuasion,  is  a  fact  which  must  be  granted,  whether  we  adopt
the  system  of  liberty  or  necessity.  How  far  such  determinations
ought  to  be  imputed  to  the  person  who  applied  those  means,  how
far  to  the  person  influenced  by  them,  we  know  not,  but  God
knows,  and  will  judge  righteously.

But  what  I  would  here  observe,  is,  that  if  a  man  of  superior
talents  may  have  so  great  influence  over  the  actions  of  his  feUow-
creatures,  without  taking  away  their  liberty,  it  is  surely  reason-
able to  allow  a  much  greater  influence  of  the  same  kind  to  him
who  made  man.  Nor  can  it  ever  be  proved,  that  the  wisdom
and  power  of  the  Almighty  are  insufficient  for  governing  free
agents,  so  as  to  answer  his  purposes.

[He  who  made  man  may  have  ways  of  governing  his  determi-
nations, consistent  with  moral  liberty,  of  which  we  have  no  con-


FIRST  ARGUMENT.  276

ception.  And  he  who  gave  this  liberty  freely ^  may  lay  any  re-
straint upon  it  that  is  necessary  for  answering  his  wise  and
benevolent  purposes.]  The  justice  of  his  government  requires
that  his  creatures  should  be  accountable  only  for  what  they  have
received,  and  not  for  what  was  never  intrusted  to  them.  And
we  are  sure  that  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  what  is  right.

[Thus,  I  think,  it  appears  that,  tipon  the  supposition  of  ne-
cessity, there  can  be  no  moral  government  of  the  universe.  Its
government  must  be  perfectly  mechanical,  and  every  thing  done
in  it,  whether  good  or  ill,  must  be  God*s  doing ;  and  that,  upon
the  supposition  of  liberty,  there  may  be  a  perfect  moral  govern'
ment  of  the  universe,  consistent  with  his  accomplishing  all  his
purposes,  in  its  creation  and  government.]

The  arguments  to  prove  that  man  is  endowed  with  moral
liberty,  which  have  the  greatest  weight  with  me,  are  three :
First,  Because  he  has  a  natural  conviction  or  belief,  that,  in
many  coses,  he  acts  freely;  secondly.  Because  he  is  account-
able ;  and,  thirdly,  Because  he  is  able  to  prosecute  an  end  by  a
long  series  of  means  adapted  to  it.


CHAPTER  VI.


FIRST  ARGUMENT.


I.  We  have,  by  our  constitution,  a  natural  conviction  or  belief
that  we  act  freely :  a  conviction  so  early,  so  imiversal,  and  so
necessarv  in  most  of  our  rational  operations,  that  it  must  be  the
result  oi  our  constitution,  and  the  work  of  Him  that  made  us.

Some  of  the  most  strenuous  advocates  for  the  doctrine  of  ne-
cessity acknowledge  that  it  is  impossible  to  act  upon  it.  They
say  that  we  have  a  natural  sense  or  conviction  that  we  act  freely,
but  that  this  is  a  fallacious  sense.

[This  doctrine  is  dishonourable  to  our  Maker,  and  lays  a  foun-
dation for  universal  scepticism.  It  supposes  the  Author  of  our
being  to  have  given  us  one  faculty  on  purpose  to  deceive  us,
and  another  by  which  we  may  detect  the  fallacy,  and  find  that
he  imposed  upon  us.]*

If  any  one  of  our  natural  faculties  be  fallacious,  there  can  be
no  reason  to  trust  to  any  of  them ;  for  he  that  made  one  made
all.

The  genuine  dictate  of  our  natural  faculties  is  the  voice  of
God,  no  less  than  what  he  reveals  from  heaven ;  and  to  say  that
it  is  fallacious,  is  to  impute  a  lie  to  the  God  of  truth.

•  Vide  Essay  III.  chap.  vi.  sect.  5  ;  "The  Intellectual  Powers/*  Essay  II.
chap.  xxii.  sect.  3;  and  Lssay  VII.  chap.  xxiL  sect  11.

t2


280  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  VI.

[(3)  Between  the  darkness  of  infancy  y  which  is  equal  to  that  of
idiots,  and  the  maturity  of  reason,  there  is  a  long  twilight,  which,
by  insensible  degrees,  advances  to  the  perfect  day.

In  this  period  of  life,  man  has  but  little  of  the  power  of  self-
government.]  His  actions,  by  nature,  as  well  as  by  the  laws  of
society,  are  in  the  power  of  others  more  than  in  his  own.  His
folly  and  indiscretion,  his  levity  and  inconstancy,  are  considered
as  the  fault  of  youth,  rather  than  of  the  man.  We  consider
him  as  half  a  man  and  half  a  child,  and  expect  that  each  by
turns  should  play  its  part.  He  would  be  thought  a  severe  and
unequitable  censor  of  manners,  who  required  the  same  cool
deliberation,  the  same  steady  conduct,  and  the  same  mastery
over  himself  in  a  boy  of  thirteen,  as  in  a  man  of  thirty.

[(4)  It  is  an  old  adage,  that  violent  anger  is  a  short  Jit  of  mad-
ness. If  this  be  literally  true  in  any  case,  a  man,  in  such  a  fit
of  passion,  cannot  be  said  to  have  the  command  of  himself.]  If
real  madness  could  be  proved,  it  must  have  the  effect  of  mad-
ness while  it  lasts,  whether  it  be  for  an  hour  or  for  life.  But
the  madness  of  a  short  fit  of  passion,  if  it  be  really  madness,  is
incapable  of  proof;  and  therefore  is  not  admitted  in  human
tribunals  as  an  exculpation.  And,  I  believe,  there  is  no  case
where  a  man  can  satisfy  his  own  mind  that  his  passion,  both  in
its  beginning  and  in  its  progress,  was  irresistible.  The  Searcher
of  hearts  alone  knows  infEdlibly  what  allowance  is  due  in  cases
of  this  kind.

[But  a  violent  passion^  though  it  may  not  be  irresistible,  is
difficult  to  be  resisted:  and  a  man,  surely,  has  not  the  same
power  over  himself  in  passion  as  when  he  is  cool.  On  this
account  it  is  allowed  by  all  men  to  alleviate^  when  it  cannot
exculpate  ;  and  has  its  weight  in  criminal  courts,  as  well  as  in
private  judgment.]

It  ought  likewise  to  be  observed,  that  he  who  has  accustomed
himself  to  restrain  his  passions,  enlarges  by  habit  his  power  over
them,  and  consequently  over  himself.  When  we  consider  that
a  Canadian  savage  can  acquire  the  power  of  defying  death,  in  its
most  dreadful  forms,  and  of  braving  the  most  exquisite  torment
for  many  long  hours,  without  losing  the  command  of  himself  ;*
we  may  learn  from  this,  that,  in  the  constitution  of  human
nature,  there  is  ample  scope  for  the  enlargement  of  that  power
of  self-command,  without  which  there  can  be  no  virtue  nor  mag-
nanimity.

[(5)  There  are  cases,  however,  in  which  a  man's  voluntary
actions  are  thought  to  be  very  little,  if  at  all,  in  his  power,  on.
account  of  the  violence  of  the  motive  that  impels  him.  The
magnanimity  of  a  hero,  or  of  a  martyr ,  is  not  expected  in  every
man,  and  on  all  occasions.]

*  Vide  note  to  page  1 75.


FIRST  ARGUMENT.  ggl

If  a  man  trusted  by  the  government  with  a  secret,  which
it  is  high  treason  to  disclose,  be  prevailed  upon  by  a  bribe,  we
have  no  mercy  for  him,  and  hardly  allow  the  greatest  bribe  to
be  any  alleviation  of  his  crime.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  secret  be  extorted  by  the  rack,
or  by  the  dread  of  present  death,  we  pity  him  more  than  we
blame  him,  and  would  think  it  severe  and  imequitable  to  con-
demn him  as  a  traitor.

What  is  the  reason  that  all  men  agree  in  condemning  this
man  as  a  traitor  in  the  first  case,  and  m  the  last,  either  excul-
pate him,  or  think  his  faiJt  greatly  alleviated  ?  If  he  acted
necessarily  in  both  cases,  compelled  by  an  irresistible  motive,  I
can  see  no  reason  why  we  should  not  pass  the  same  judgment
on  both.

But  the  reason  of  these  different  judgments  is  evidently  this,
that  the  love  of  money,  and  of  what  is  called  a  man's  interest,  is
a  cool  motive,  which  leaves  to  a  man  the  entire  power  over
himself :  but  the  torment  of  the  rack,  or  the  dreaa  of  present
death,  are  so  violent  motives,  that  men,  who  have  not  imcommon
strength  of  mind,  are  not  masters  of  themselves  in  such  a  situa-
tion, and  therefore  what  they  do  is  not  imputed,  or  is  thought
less  criminal.

If  a  man  resist  such  motives,  we  admire  his  fortitude,  and
think  his  conduct  heroical  rather  than  human.  If  he  yields,  we
impute  it  to  himian  frailty,  and  think  him  rather  to  be  pitied
than  severely  censured.

[(6)  Inveterate  habits  are  acknowledged  to  diminish  very  con-
siderably the  power  a  man  has  over  himself.  Although  we  may
think  him  highly  blameable  in  acquiring  them,  yet,  when  they
are  confirmed  to  a  certain  degree,  we  consider  him  as  no  longer
master  of  himself y  and  hardly  reclaimable  without  a  miracle.]

VI.  [Thus  we  see,  that  the  power  which  we  are  led,  by  com-
mon sense,  to  ascribe  to  many  respects  his  voluntary  actions  only,
and  that  it  has  various  limitations  even  with  regard  to  them.]
Some  actions  that  depend  upon  our  will  are  easy,  others  very
difficult,  and  some,  perhaps,  beyond  our  power.  In  different
men,  the  power  of  self-government  is  different,  and  in  the  same
man  at  different  times.  It  may  be  diminished,  or  perhaps  lost,
by  bad  habits ;  it  may  be  greatly  increased  by  good  habits.

These  are  facts  attested  by  experience,  and  supported  by  the
common  judgment  of  mankind.  Upon  the  system  of  liberty,
they  are  perfectly  intelligible ;  but,  I  think,  irreconcilable  to
that  of  necessity ;  for,  how  can  there  be  an  easy  and  a  difficult
in  actions  equally  subject  to  necessity  ?  or,  how  can  power  be
greater  or  less,  increased  or  diminished,  in  those  who  have  no
power  ?

This  natural  conviction  of  our  acting  freely,  which  is  acknow-


ggg  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  VII.

ledged  by  many  who  hold  the  doctrine  of  necessity,  ought  to
throw  the  whole  burden  of  proof  upon  that  side :  for,  by  this,
the  side  of  liberty  has  what  lawyers  call  a  jus  qtussitum,  or  a
right  of  ancient  possession,  which  ought  to  stand  good  till  it  be
overturned.  If  it  cannot  be  proved  that  we  always  act  from
necessity,  there  is  no  need  of  arguments  on  the  other  side,  to
<;onvince  us  that  we  are  free  agents.

To  illustrate  this  by  a  similar  case :  If  a  philosopher  would
persuade  me,  that  my  fellow-men  with  whom  I  converse,  are  not
thinking  intelligent  beings,  but  mere  machines,  though  I  might
be  at  a  loss  to  find  arguments  against  this  strange  opinion,  I
should  think  it  reasonable  to  hold  the  belief  which  nature  gave
me  before  I  was  capable  of  weighing  evidence,  until  convincing
proof  is  brought  against  it.


CHAPTER  VII.


SECOND  ARGUMENT.


I.  Certain  first  principles  universally  conceded^ — That  there
is  a  real  and  essential  distinction  between  right  and  wrong  con-
duct, between  just  and  unjust ;  that  the  most  perfect  moral  rec-
titude is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  Deity;  that  man  is  a  moral  and
accountable  being,  capable  of  acting  right  and  wrong,  and  an-
swerable for  his  conduct  to  him  who  n^ade  him,  and  assigned
him  a  part  to  act  upon  the  stage  of  life;  are  principles  pro-
claimed by  every  man's  conscience ;  principles  upon  which  the
systems  of  morality  and  natural  religion,  as  well  as  the  system
of  revelation,  are  grounded,  and  which  have  been  generally
acknowledged  by  those  who  hold  contrary  opinions  on  the
subject  of  human  liberty.  I  shall  therefore  here  take  th^m  for
granted.

These  principles  afford  an  obvious,  and,  I  think,  an  invincible
argument,  that  man  is  endowed  with  moral  liberty.

[Two  things  are  implied  in  the  notion  of  a  moral  and  account-
able being ;  understanding  and  active  power  J]

First,  He  must  understand  the  law  to  which  he  is  bound,  and
his  obligation  to  obey  it.  Moral  obedience  must  be  volimtary,
and  must  regard  the  authority  of  the  law.  I  may  command  my
horse  to  eat  when  he  himgers,  and  drink  when  he  thirsts.  He
does  so ;  but  his  doing  it  is  no  moral  obedience.  He  does  not
understand  my  command,  and  therefore  can  have  no  will  tp
obey  it.  He  has  not  the  conception  of  moral  obligation,  and
therefore  cannot  act  j&om  the  conviction  of  it.  In  eating  and
drinking  he  is  moved  by  his  own  appetite  only,  and  not  by  my
authority.


SECOKD  ARGUMENT.  283

Brute  animals  are  incapable  of  moral  obligation,  because  they
have  not  that  degree  of  understanding  which  it  implies.  They
have  not  the  conception  of  a  rule  of  conduct,  and  of  obligation
to  obey  it,  and  therefore,  though  they  may  be  noxious,  they
cannot  be  criminal.

Man,  by  his  rational  nature,  is  capable  both  of  understanding
the  law  that  is  prescribed  to  him,  and  of  perceiving  its  obligation.
He  knows  what  it  is  to  be  just  and  honest,  to  injure  no  man,  and
to  obey  his  Maker.  From  his  constitution,  he  has  an  immediate
conviction  of  his  obligation  to  these  things.  He  has  the  appro-
bation of  his  conscience  when  he  acts  by  these  rules ;  and  he  is
conscious  of  guilt  and  demerit  when  he  transgresses  them.  And,
without  this  knowledge  of  his  duty  and  his  obligation,  he  would
not  be  a  moral  and  accountable  being.

Secondly,  Another  thing  implied  in  the  notion  of  a  moral  and
accountable  being,  is  power  to  do  what  he  is  accountable  for.

That  no  man  can  be  under  a  moral  obligation  to  do  what  it  is
impossible  for  him  to  do,  or  to  forbear  what  is  impossible  for
him  to  forbear,  is  an  axiom  as  self-evident  as  any  in  mathematics.
It  cannot  be  contradicted  without  overturning  aJl  notion  of  moral
obligation ;  nor  can  there  be  any  exception  to  it,  when  it  is
rightly  understood.

Some  moralists  have  mentioned  what  they  conceive  to  be  an
exception  to  this  maxim.  The  exception  is  this :  [When  a  man,
by  las  own  fault,  has  disabled  himself  from  doing  his  duty,  his
obligation,  they  say,  remains,  though  he  is  now  unable  to  dis-
chal-ge  it.  Thus,  if  a  man  by  sumptuous  living  has  become
bankrupty  his  inability  to  pay  his  debt  does  not  take  away  his
obligation.]

To  judge  whether,  in  this  and  similar  cases,  there  be  any
exception  to  the  axiom  above  mentioned,  they  must  be  stated
accurately.

No  doubt  a  man  is  highly  criminal  in  living  above  his  fortune,
and  his  crime  is  greatly  aggravated  by  the  circumstance  of  his
being  thereby  unable  to  pay  his  just  debt.  Let  us  suppose,
therefcHre,  that  he  is  punished  for  this  crime  as  much  as  it
deserves ;  that  his  goods  are  fairly  distributed  among  his  credi-
tors, and  that  one  half  remains  tmpaid :  let  us  suppose  also,  that
he  adds  no  new  crime  to  what  is  past,  that  he  becomes  a  new
maa,  and  not  only  supports  himself  by  honest  industry,  but  does
all  in  his  power  to  pay  what  he  still  owes.

I  would  now  ask,  Is  he  further  punishable  and  really  guilty
for  not  paying  more  than  he  is  able  ?  Let  every  man  consult  his
conscience,  and  say  whether  he  can  blame  this  man  for  not  doing
more  than  he  is  able  to  do.  His  guilt  before  his  bankruptcy  is
out  of  the  question,  as  he  has  received  the  punishment  due  for
it. But  Uiat  his  subsequent  conduct  is  unbkmeable,  every  man


284  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  VII.

must  allow ;  and  that^  in  his  present  state,  he  is  accountable  for
no  more  than  he  is  able  to  do.  His  obligation  is  not  cancelled^
it  returns  with  his  ability  y  and  can  go  no  farther,

i^"  Suppose  a  sailor^  employed  in  the  navy  of  his  country,
and  longing  for  the  ease  of  a  public  hospital  as  an  invalid,  to
cut  off  his  fingers,  so  as  to  disable  him  from  doing  the  duty  of  a
sailor;  he  is  guilty  of  a  great  crime;  but,  after  he  has  been
punished  according  to  the  demerit  of  his  crime,  will  his  captain
insist  that  he  shall  still  do  the  duty  of  a  sailor  ?  Will  he  com-
mand him  to  go  aloft  when  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  do  it,  and
punish  him  as  guilty  of  disobedience  ?  Surely  if  there  be  any
such  thing  as  justice  and  injustice,  this  would  be  unjust  and
wanton  cruelty.

W^  Suppose  a  servant^  through  negligence  and  inattention,
mistakes  the  orders  given  him  by  his  master,  and,  from  this
mistake,  does  what  he  was  ordered  not  to  do.  It  is  commonly
said  that  culpable  ignorance  does  not  excuse  a  fault :  this  deci-
sion is  inaccurate,  because  it  does  not  show  where  the  fault
lies :  the  fault  was  solely  in  that  inattention,  or  negligence,
which  was  the  occasion  of  his  mistake :  there  was  no  subsequent
fault.

This  becomes  evident,  when  we  vary  the  case  so  far  as  to  sup-
pose that  he  was  unavoidably  led  into  the  mistake  without  any
fault  on  his  part.  His  mistake  is  now  invincible,  and,  in  the
opinion  of  all  moralists,  takes  away  all  blame ;  yet  this  new  case
supposes  no  change,  but  in  the  cause  of  his  mistake.  His  sub-
sequent conduct  was  the  same  in  both  cases.  The  fault,  there-
fore, lay  solely  in  the  negligence  and  inattention  which  was  the
cause  of  his  mistake.

[The  axiom,  that  "  Invincible  ignorance  takes  away  all
blame,"  is  only  a  particular  case  of  the  general  axiom,  "  That
there  can  be  no  moral  obligation  to  what  is  impossible;"  the
former  is  groimded  upon  the  latter,  and  can  have  no  other
foundation.]

Igr*  I  shall  put  only  one  case  more.  Suppose  that  a  man,
by  excess  and  mtemperance,  has  entirely  destroyed  his  rational
faculties,  so  as  to  have  become  perfectly  mad  or  idiotical ;  sup-
pose him  forewarned  of  his  danger,  and  that  though  he  foresaw
that  this  must  be  the  consequence,  he  went  on  still  in  his  crimi-
nal indulgence.  A  greater  crime  can  hardly  be  supposed,  or
more  deserving  of  severe  punishment.  Suppose  him  punished
as  he  deserves ;  will  it  be  said,  that  the  duty  of  a  man  is  incum-
bent upon  him  now,  when  he  has  not  the  faculties  of  a  man,  or
that  he  incurs  new  guilt  when  he  is  not  a  moral  agent?  Surely
we  may  as  well  suppose  a  plant,  or  a  clod  of  earth,  to  be  a
subject  of  moral  duty.

The  decisions  I  have  given  of  these  cases,  are  grounded  upon


SECOND  ARGUMENT.  gg5

the  fundamental  principles  of  morals,  the  most  immediate  dic-
tates of  conscience.  If  these  principles  are  given  up,  all  moral
reasoning  is  at  an  end,  and  no  distinction  is  left  between  what
is  just  and  what  is  unjust.  And  it  is  evident,  that  [none  of
these  cases  ♦  furnishes  any  exception  to  the  axiom  above  men-
tioned. No  moral  obligation  can  be  consistent  with  impossi-
bility in  the  performance.]

II.  {^Active  power f  therefore,  is  necessarily  implied  in  the  very
notion  of  a  moral  accountable  being.  And  if  man  be  such  a
being,  he  must  have  a  degree  of  active  power  proportioned  to
the  account  he  is  to  make.  J  He  may  have  a  model  of  perfection
set  before  him  which  he  is  unable  to  reach ;  but,  if  he  does  to
the  utmost  of  his  power,  this  is  all  he  can  be  answerable  for.
To  incur  guilt  by  not  going  beyond  his  power  is  impossible.

What  was  said,  in  the  first  argument,-!-  of  the  limitation  of  our
power,  adds  much  strength  to  the  present  argument.  A  man's
power,  it  was  observed,  extends  only  to  his  voluntary  actions,
and  has  many  limitations,  even  with  respect  to  them.

His  accountableness  has  the  same  extent  and  the  same  limita-
tions.

In  the  rage  of  madness  4ie  has  no  power  over  himself,  neither
is  he  accountable,  or  capable  of  moral  obligation.  In  ripe  age
man  is  accoimtable,  in  a  greater  degree  than  in  non-age,  because
his  power  over  himself  is  greater.  Violent  passions,  and  violent
motives  alleviate  what  is  done  through  their  influence,  in  the
same  proportion  as  they  diminish  the  power  of  resistance.

There  is,  therefore,  a  perfect  correspondence  between  power,
on  the  one  hand,  and  moral  obligation  and  accountableness,  on
the  other.  They  not  only  correspond  in  general,  as  they  respect
voluntary  actions  only,  but  every  limitation  of  the  first  produces
a  corresponding  limitation  of  the  two  last.  This,  indeed,  amounts
to  nothing  more  than  that  maxim  of  common  sense  confirmed
by  Divine  authority,  That  to"  whom  much  is  given,  of  him  much
will  be  required.

III.  [The  sum  of  this  argument  is,  (1)  That  a  certain  degree  of
active  power  is  the  talent  which  God  hath  given  to  every  rational
accountable  creature,  and  of  which  he  will  require  an  account.
(2)  If  man  had  no  power,  he  would  have  nothing  to  account  for.
(S)  All  wise  and  all  foolish  conduct,  all  virtue  and  vice,  consist
in  the  right  use  or  in  the  abuse  of  that  power  which  God  hath
given  us.  If  man  had  no  power,  he  could  neither  be  wise  nor
foolish,  virtuous  nor  vicious.]

If  we  adopt  the  system  of  necessity,  the  terms  moral  obligation

""and  accountableness,  praise  and  blame,  merit  and  demerit,  justice

and  injustice,  reward  and  punishment,  toisdom  and  folly,  virtue

*  The  bankrupt,  sailor,  servant,  and  spendthrift,
f  Vide  preceding  chapter,  sec.  5,  et  seq.


2SS  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  YIII.

and  vice^  ought  to  be  disused^  or  to  have  new  meanings  given  to
them  when  they  are  used  in  religion,  in  morals,  or  in  civil
government ;  for  upon  that  system,  there  can  be  no  such  things
as  they  have  been  always  used  to  signify.


CHAPTER  VIII.


THIRD  ARGUMENT.


I.  That  man  has  power  over  his  own  actions  and  volitions
appears,  because  he  is  capable  of  carrying  on,  wisely  and  pru-
dently, a  system  of  conduct,  which  he  has  before  conceived  in
his  mind,  and  resolved  to  prosecute.

I  take  it  for  granted,  that,  among  the  various  characters  of
men,  there  have  been  some,  who,  after  they  came  to  years  of
understanding,  deliberately  laid  down  a  plan  of  conduct,  which
they  resolved  to  pursue  through  life ;  and  that  of  these,  some
have  steadily  pursued  the  end  they  had  in  view,  by  the  proper
means.

It  is  of  no  consequence  in  this  argument,  whether  one  has
made  the  best  choice  of  his  main  end  or  not ;  whether  his  end
be  riches,  or  power,  or  fame,  or  the  approbation  of  his  Maker.
I  suppose  only,  that  he  has  prudently  and  steadily  pursued  it ;
that,  in  a  long  course  of  deliberate  actions,  he  has  taken  the
means  that  appeared  most  conducive  to  his  end,  and  avoided
whatever  might  cross  it.

That  such  conduct  in  a  man  demonstrates  a  certain  degree  of
wisdom  and  understanding,  no  man  ever  doubted ;  and,  I  say,  it
demonstrates,  with  equal  force,  a  certain  degree  of  power  over
his  voluntary  determinations.

This  vrill  appear  evident,  if  we  consider,  that  [understanding
without  power  may  project,  but  can  execute  nothing.  A  regular
plan  of  conduct,  as  it  cannot  be  contrived  without  understanding,
so  it  cannot  be  carried  into  execution  without  i)Ower;  and,
therefore,  the  execution^  as  an  effect,  demonstrates^  with  equal
force,  both  power  and  understanding  in  the  cause.]  Every  indi-
cation of  wisdom,  taken  from  the  effect,  is  equally  an  indication
of  power  to  execute  what  wisdom  planned.  And,  if  we  have  any
evidence,  that  the  wisdom  which  formed  the  plan  is  in  the  man,
we  have  the  very  same  evidence,  that  the  power  which  executed
it  is  in  him  also.

II.  Argument  from  analogy. — In  this  argument,  we  reason
from  the  same  principles,  as  in  demonstrating  the  being  and  per-
fections of  the  First  Cause  of  all  things.

The  effects  we  observe  in  the  course  of  nature  require  a  cause.


THIRD  ARGUMENT.  gg7

ESects  wisely  adapted  to  an  end,  require  a  wise  cause.  Every
indication  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Creator  is  equally  an  indication
of  his  power.  His  wisdom  appears  only  in  the  works  done  by
his  power ;  for  wisdom  without  power  may  speculate,  but  it  can-
not act :  it  may  plan,,  but  it  cannot  execute  its  plans.

The  same  reasoning  we  apply  to  the  works  of  men.  ffip°  In
a  stately  palace  we  see  the  wisdom  of  the  architect.  His  wisdom
contrived  it,  and  wisdom  could  do  no  more.  The  execution  re-
quired, both  a  distinct  conception  of  the  plan,  and  power  to
operate  according  to  that  plan.

III.  Its  djyplication. — Let  us  apply  these  principles  to  the
supposition  we  have  made.  That  a  man,  in  a  long  course  of  con-
duct, has  determined  and  acted  prudently  in  the  prosecution  of
a  certain  end.  If  the  man  had  both  the  wisdom  to  plan  this
course  of  conduct,  and  that  power  over  his  own  actions  that  was
necessary  to  carry  it  into  execution,  he  is  a  free  agents  and  used
his  liberty,  in  this  instance,  with  understanding.

But  if  all  his  particular  determinations,  which  concurred  in
the  execution  of  this  plan,  were  produced,  not  by  himself,  but
by  some  cause  acting  necessarily  upon  him,  then  there  is  no
evidence  left  that  he  contrived  this  plan,  or  that  he  ever  spent  a
thought  about  it.

[The  cause  that  directed  all  these  determinations  so  wisely,
whatever  it  was,  must  be  a  wise  and  intelligent  cause  ;  it  must
have  understood  the  plan,  and  have  intended  the  execution
of  it.]

IV.  Objection  and  answer. — [If  it  be  said,  that  all  this  course
of  determinations  was  produced  by  ^motives  ;  motives  surely  have
not  understanding  to  conceive  a  plan,  and  intend  its  execution.
We  must  therefore  go  back  beyond  motives  to  some  intelligent
being  who  had  the  power  of  arranging  those  motives,  and  apply-
ing them,  in  their  proper  order  and  season,  so  as  to  bring  about
the  end.]

This  intelligent  being  must  have  understood  the  plan,  and
intended  to  execute  it.  If  this  be  so,  as  the  man  had  no  hand
in  the  execution,  we  have  not  any  evidence  left,  that  he  had  any
hand  in  the  contrivance,  or  even  that  he  is  a  thinking  being.

If  we  can  believe,  that  an  extensive  series  of  means  may  con-
spire to  promote  an  end  without  a  cause  tliat  intended  the  end,
and  had  power  to  choose  and  apply  those  means  for  the  pur-
pose, we  may  as^well  believe,  that  this  world  was  made  by  a  for-
tuitous concourse  of  atoms,  without  an  intelligent  and  powerful
cause.

BSr  If  a  lucky  concourse  of  motives  could  produce  the  conduct
of  an  Alexander  or  a  Julius  Caesar,  no  reason  can  be  given  why
a  lucky  concourse  of  atoms,  might  not  produce  the  planetary
svstem.


^88  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  VIII.

If,  therefore,  wise  conduct  in  a  man  demonstrates  that  he  has
some  degree  of  wisdom,  it  demonstrates,  with  equal  force  and
evidence,  that  he  has  some  degree  of  power  over  his  own  deter-
minations.

All  the  reason  we  can  assign  for  believing  that  our  fellow-men
think  and  reason,  is  grounded  upon  their  actions  and  speeches.
If  they  are  not  the  cause  of  these,  there  is  no  reason  left  to  con-
clude that  they  think  and  reason.

Des  Cartes  thought  that  the  human  body  is  merely  a  mechani-
cal engine,  and  that  all  its  motions  and  actions  are  produced  by
mechanism.  If  such  a  machine  could  be  made  to  speak  and  to
act  rationally,  we  might  indeed  conclude  with  certainty,  that  the
maker  of  it  had  both  reason  and  active  power ;  but  if  we  once
knew,  that  all  the  motions  of  the  machine  were  purely  mechani-
cal, we  should  have  no  reason  to  conclude  that  the  man  had  rea-
son or  thought.

[The  conclusion  of  this  argument  is.  That,  if  the  actions  and
speeches  of  other  men  give  us  sufficient  evidence  that  they  are
reasonable  beings,  they  give  us  the  same  evidence^  and  the  same
degree  of  evidence,  that  they  are  free  agentsJ]

V.  There  is  another  concltision  that  may  be  drawn  from  this
reasoning,  which  it  is  proper  to  mention.

Suppose  a  fatalist,  rather  than  give  up  the  scheme  of  neces-
sity, should  acknowledge  that  he  has  no  evidence  that  there  is
thought  and  reason  in  any  of  his  fellow-men,  and  that  they  may
be  mechanical  engines  for  all  that  he  knows ;  he  will  be  forced
to  acknowledge,  that  there  must  be  active  power,  as  well  as
understanding,  in  the  maker  of  those  engines,  and  that  the  First
Cause  is  a  free  agent.  We  have  the  same  reason  to- believe  this,
as  to  believe  his  existence  and  his  wisdom.  [And  if  the  Deity
ads  freely,  every  argument  brought  to  prove  that  freedom  of
action  is  impossible,  must  fall  to  the  ground.]

The  First  Cause  gives  us  evidence  of  his  power  by  every
effect  that  gives  us  evidence  of  his  wisdom.  And,  if  he  is
pleased  to  communicate  to  the  work  of  his  hands  some  degree  of
his  wisdom,  no  reason  can  be  assigned  why  he  may  not  com-
municate some  degree  of  his  power,  as  the  talent  which  wisdom
is  to  employ.

That  the  j&rst  motion,  or  the  first  effect,  whatever  it  be,  cannot
be  produced  necessarily,  and,  consequently,  that  the  First  Cause
must  be  a  free  agent,  has  been  demonstrated  so  clearly  and  unan-
swerably by  Dr.  Clarke,  both  in  his  "  Demonstration  of  the
Being  and  Attributes  of  God,"  and  in  the  end  of  his  Remarks
on  Collins's  "  Philosophical  Inquiry  concerning  Human  Liberty,"
that  I  can  add  nothing  to  what  he  has  said ;  nor  have  I  found
any  objection  made  to  his  reasoning,  by  any  of  the  defenders  of
necessity.


289


CHAPTER  IX.


OP  ARGUMENTS  FOR  NECESSITY.


I.  Three  classes  of  arguments  against  human  liberty. — Some
of  the  argiunents  that  have  been  offered  for  necessity  were
already  considered  in  this  Essay,

It  has  been  said,  That  human  liberty  respects  only  the
actions  that  are  subsequent  to  volition ;  and  that  power  over
the  determinations  of  the  will  is  inconceivable,  and  involves  a
contradiction.  This  argimient  was  considered  in  the  first
chapter.

It  has  been  said,  That  liberty  is  inconsistent  with  the  influ-
ence of  motives,  that  it  would  make  human  actions  capricious,
and  man  ungovernable  by  God  or  man.  These  arguments  were
considered  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  chapters,

[I  am  now  to  make  some  remarks  upon  other  arguments  that
have  been  urged  in  this  cause.  They  may,  I  think,  be  reduced
to  three  classes.  They  are  intended  to  prove,  either  (1)  tliat
liberty  of  determination  is  impossible,  or  (2)  that  it  would  be
hurtful,  or  (3)  that,  in  fact,  man  has  no  such  liberty.]

To  prove  that  liberty  of  determination  is  impossible,  it  has
been  said.  That  there  must  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  every  thing.
For  every  existence ^  for  every  events  for  every  truth,  there  mv>st
he  a  sufficient  reason,

II.  Boast  of  Leibnitz. — The famous German Philosopher
Leibnitz  boasted  much  of  having  first"  applied  this  principle  to
philosophy,  and  of  having,  by  that  means,  changed  metaphysics
from  being  a  play  of  unmeaning  words,  to  be  a  rational  and  de-
monstrative science.  On  this  account  it  deserves  to  be  considered.

A  very  obvious  objection  to  this  principle  was.  That  two  or
more  means  may  be  equally  fit  for  the  same  end ;  and  that,  in
such  a  case,  there  may  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  taking  one  of
the  number,  though  there  be  no  reason  for  preferring  one  to
another,  of  means  equally  fit.

To  obviate  this  objection,  Leibnitz  maintained,  that  the  case
supposed  could  not  happen ;  or,  if  it  did,  that  none  of  the  means
could  be  used,  for  want  of  a  sufficient  reason  to  prefer  one  to
the  rest.  Therefore  he  determined,  with  some  of  the  school-
men, That  if  an  ass  could  be  placed  between  two  bundles  of
hay,  or  two  fields  of  grass,  equally  inviting,  the  poor  beast  would
certainly  stand  still  and  starve ;  but  the  case,  he  says,  could  not
happen  without  a  miracle.

When  it  was  objected  to  this  principle.  That  there  could  be
no  reason  but  the  will  of  God  why  the  material  world  was
placed  in  one  part  of  unlimited  space  rather  than  another,  or

u


290  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  IX.

created  at  one  point  of  unlimited  duration  rather  than  another,
or  why  the  planets  should  move  from  west  to  east,  rather  than  in
a  contrary  direction  ; these objections  Leibnitz obviated  by
maintaining,  That  there  is  no  such  thing  as  unoccupied  space  or
duration  ;  that  space  is  nothing  but  the  order  of  things  co-exist-
ing, and  duration  is  nothing  but  the  order  of  things  successive ;
that  all  motion  is  relative,  so  that  if  there  were  only  one  body  in
the  universe,  it  would  be  immoveable ;  that  it  is  inconsistent
with  the  perfection  of  the  Deity,  that  there  should  be  any  part
of  space  unoccupied  by  body ;  and,  I  suppose,  he  understood  the
same  of  every  part  of  duration. So  that,  according  to  this
system,  the  world,  like  its  Author,  must  be  infinite,  eternal,  and
immoveable ;  or,  at  least,  as  great  in  extent  and  duration  as  it  is
possible  for  it  to  be,

III.  Identity  of  indiscernibles, — When  it  was  objected  to  the
principle  of  a  sufficient  reason.  That  of  two  particles  of  matter
perfectly  similar,  there  can  be  no  reason  but  the  will  of  God
for  placing  this  here  and  that  there;  this  objection  Leibnitz
obviated  by  maintaining.  That  it  is  impossible  that  there  can  be
two  particles  of  matter,  or  any  two  things,  perfectly  similar.
And  this  seems  to  have  led  him  to  another  of  his  grand  princi-
ples, which  he  calls.  The  identity  of  indiscernibles.

When  the  principle  of  a  sufficient  reason  had  produced  so
many  surprising  discoveries  in  philosophy,  it  is  no  wonder  that
it  should  determine  the  long  disputed  question  about  human
liberty.  This  it  does  in  a  moment.  [The  determination  of  the
will  is  an  event  for  which  there  must  be  a  sufficient  reason,  that
is,  something  previous,  which  was  necessarily  followed  by  that
determination,  and  could  not  be  followed  by  any  other  deter-
mination ;  therefore  it  was  necessary.]

Thus  we  see,  that  this  principle  of  the  necessity  of  a  sufficient
reason  for  every  thing,  is  very  fruitful  of  consequences ;  and  by
its  fruits  we  may  judge  of  it.  Those  who  wdll  adopt  it,  must
adopt  all  the  consequences  that  hang  upon  it.  To  fix  them  all
beyond  dispute,  no  more  is  necessary  but  to  prove  the  truth  of
the  principle  on  which  they  depend.

IV.  Leibnitz^  proof  of  the  truth  of  his  principle  only  a  petitio
principii. — I  know  of  no  argument  offered  by  Leibnitz  in  proof
of  this  principle,  but  the  authority  of  Archimedes,  who,  he
says,  makes  use  of  it  to  prove,  that  a  balance  loaded  with  equal
weights  on  both  ends  will  continue  at  rest.

I  grant  it  to  be  good  reasoning  with  regard  to  a  balance,  or
with  regard  to  any  machine.  That,  when  there  is  no  external
cause  of  its  motion,  it  must  remain  at  rest,  because  the  machine
has  no  power  of  moving  itself.  But  to  apply  this  reasoning  to
a  man,  is  to  take  for  granted  that  the  man  is  a  machine,  which  is
the  very  point  in  question.


OP  ARGUMENTS  FOR  NECESSITY.  29  J

Leibnitz^  and  his  followers,  would  have  us  to  take  this  principle
of  the  necessity  of  a  sufficient  reason  for  every  existence,  for
every  event,  for  every  truth,  ds  a  first  principle,  without  proof,
without  explanation ;  though  it  be  evidently  a  vague  proposi-
tion, capable  of  various  meanings,  as  the  word  reason  is.  It
must  have  different  meanings  when  applied  to  things  of  so  dif-
ferent nature  as  an  event  and  a  truth  ;  and  it  may  have  different
meanings  when  applied  to  the  same  thing.  We  cannot  therefore
form  a  distinct  ju^ment  of  it  in  the  gross,  but  only  by  taking  it
to  pieces,  and  applying  it  to  different  things,  in  a  precise  and
distmct  meaning.

V.  Three  meanings  of  the  principle  of  '^  a  sufficient  reason'
applied  to  the  determinations  of  the  will, — It  can  have  no  con-
nexion with  the  dispute  about  liberty,  except  when  it  is  applied
to  the  determinations  of  the  will.  Let  us  therefore  suppose  a
voluntary  action  of  a  man ;  and  that  the  question  is  put,  Whether
was  there  a  sufficient  reason  for  this  action  or  not  ?

The  natural  and  obvious  meaning  of  this  question  is,  (1)  JVas
there  a  motive  to  the  action  sufficient  to  justify  it  to  be  wise  and
good,  or,  at  least,  innocent  ?  Surely,  in  this  sense,  there  is  not
a  sufficient  reason  for  every  human  action,  because  there  are
many  that  are  foolish,  unreasonable  and  unjustifiable.

If  the  meaning  of  the  question  be,  {2)  Was  there  a  cause  of
the  action  ?  Undoubtedly  there  was :  of  every  event  there  must
be  a  cause,  that  had  power  sufficient  to  produce  it,  and  that
exerted  that  power  for  the  purpose.  In  the  present  case,  either
the  man  was  the  cause  of  the  action,  and  then  it  was  a  free
action,  and  is  justly  imputed  to  him ;  or  it  must  have  had
another  cause,  and  cannot  justly  be  imputed  to  the  man.  In
this  sense,  therefore,  it  is  granted  that  there  was  a  sufficient  rea-
son for  the  action  ;  but  the  question  about  liberty  is  not  in  the
least  affected  by  this  concession.

If,  again,  the  meaning  of  the  question  be,  (3)  Was  there  some-
thing  previous  to  tlie  action,  which  made  it  to  be  necessarily  pro-
duced ?  Every  man,  who  believes  that  the  action  was  free,  will
answer  to  this  question  in  the  negative.

[I  know  no  other  meaning  that  can  be  put  upon  the  principle
of  a  sufficient  reason,  when  applied  to  the  determinations  of  the
human  will,  besides  the  three  I  have  mentioned.  In  the  first,
it  is  evidently /a&^;  in  the  second,  it  is  true,  but  does  not  affect
the  question  about  liberty ;  in  the  third,  it  is  a  mere  assertion  of
necessity  without  proof.]

VI.  The  principle  further  examined.— Before  we  leave  this
boasted  principle,  we  may  see  how  it  applies  to  events  of  another
kind.  When  we  say  that  a  philosopher  has  assigned  a  sufficient
reason  for  such  a  phenomenon.  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?
The  meaning  surely  is.  That  he  has  accounted  for  it  from  the

u  2


292  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  IX.

known  laws  of  nature.  The  sufficient  reason  of  a  phenomenon
of  nature  must  therefore  be  some  law  or  laws  of  nature,  of  which
the  phenomenon  is  a  necessary  consequence.  But  are  we  sure
that,  in  this  sense,  there  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  every  pheno-
menon of  nature  ? I  think  we  are  not.

For,  not  to  speak  of  miraculous  events,  in  which  the  laws  of
nature  are  suspended,  or  counteracted,  we  know  not  but  that,  in
the  ordinary  course  of  God's  providence,  there  may  be  particular
acts  of  his  administration,  that  do  not  come  under  any  general
law  of  nature.

Established  laws  of  nature  are  necessary  for  enabling  intelli-
gent creatures  to  conduct  their  affiiirs  with  wisdom  and  prudence,
and  prosecute  their  ends  by  proper  means ;  but  still  it  may  be
fit,  that  some  particular  events  should  not  be  fixed  by  general
laws,  but  be  directed  by  particular  acts  of  the  Divine  govern-
ment, that  so  his  reasonable  creatures  may  have  sufficient  induce-
ment to  supplicate  his  aid,  his  protection  and  direction,  and  to
depend  upon  him  for  the  success  of  their  honest  designs.

We  see  that,  in  human  governments,  even  those  that  are  most
legal,  it  is  impossible  that  every  act  of  the  administration  should
be  directed  by  established  laws.  Some  things  must  be  left  to
the  direction  of  the  executive  power,  and  particularly  acts  of
clemency  and  bounty  to  petitioning  subjects.  That  there  is
nothing  analogous  to  this  in  the  Divine  government  of  the  world,
no  man  is  able  to  prove.

We  have  no  authority  to  pray  that  God  would  counteract  or
suspend  the  laws  of  nature  in  our -behalf.  Prayer,  therefore,
supposes  that  he  may  lend  an  ear  to  our  prayers,  without  trans-
gressing the  laws  of  nature.  Some  have  thought,  that  the  only
use  of  prayer  and  devotion  is,  to  produce  a  proper  temper  and
disposition  in  ourselves,  and  that  it  has  no  efficacy  with  the
Deity.  But  this  is  a  hypothesis  without  proof.  It  Contradicts
our  most  natural  sentiments,  as  well  as  the  plain  doctrine  of
Scripture,  and  tends  to  damp  the  fervour  of  every  act  of
devotion.

It  was  indeed  an  article  of  the  system  of  Leibnitz,  That  the
Deity,  since  the  creation  of  the  world,  never  did  any  thing,
excepting  in  the  case  of  miracles  ;  his  work  being  made  so  per-
fect at  first,  as  never  to  need  his  interposition.  But,  in  this,  he
was  opposed  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  and  others  of  the  ablest  philo-
sophers, nor  was  he  ever  able  to  give  any  proof  of  this  tenet.

[There  is  no  evidence,  therefore,  that  there  is  a  sufficient  rea-
son for  every  natural  event;  if,  by  a  sufficient  reason,  we  under-
stand some  fixed  law  or  laws  of  nature,  of  which  that  event  is  a
necessary  consequence."

VIT.  [But  what,  shall  we  say,  is  the  sufficient  reason  for  a
truth  ? For  our  belief  of  a  truth,  I  think,  the  sufficient  reason


OF  ARGUMENTS  FOR  NECESSITY.  293

is  our  having  good  evidence ;  but  what  may  be  meant  by  a  suflS-
cient  reason  for  its  being  a  truth,  I  am  not  able  to  guess,  unless
the  sufficient  reason  of  a  contingent  truth  be,  That  it  is  true  ;
and,  of  a  necessary  truth,  that  it  must  be  true.  This  makes  a
man  little  wiser.]

From  what  has  been  said,  I  think  it  appears.  That  this  prin-
ciple of  the  necessity  of  a  sufficient  reason  for  every  thing,  is
very  indefinite  in  its  signification.  If  it  mean,  That  of  every
event  there  must  be  a  cause  that  had  sufficient  power  to  produce
it,  this  is  true,  and  has  always  been  admitted  as  a  first  principle
in  philosophy,  and  in  common  life.  If  it  mean  that  every  event
must  be  necessarily  consequent  upon  something  (called  a  suffici-
ent reason)  that  went  before  it ;  this  is  a  direct  assertion  of  uni-
versal fatality,  and  has  many  strange,  not  to  say  absurd,  conse-
quences :  but,  in  this  sense,  it  is  neither  self-evident,  nor  has  any
proof  of  it  been  offered.  [And,  in  general,  in  every  sense  in
which  it  has  evidence,  it  gives  no  new  information ;  and,  in
every  sense  in  which  it  would  give  new  information,  it  wants
evidence.]

VIII.  Another  argument  that  has  been  used  to  prove  liberty
of  action  to  be  impossible  is.  That  it  implies  ^*  an  effect  without
a  cause."*

To  this  it  may  be  briefly  answered,  [That  a  free  action  is  an
effect  produced  by  a  being  who  had  power  and  will  to  produce  it ;
therefore  it  is  not  an  effect  without  a  cause.]

To  suppose  any  other  cause  necessary  to  the  production  of  an
effect,  than  a  being  who  had  the  power  and  the  will  to  produce
it,  is  a  contradiction ;  for  it  is  to  suppose  that  being  to  have
power  to  produce  the  effect,  and  not  to  have  power  to  pro-
duce it.

But  as  great  stress  is  laid  upon  this  argument  by  a  late  zealous
advocate  for  necessity,  we  shall  consider  the  light  in  which  he
puts  it.

He  introduces  this  argument  with  an  observation  to  which  I
entirely  agree :  it  is,  [That  to  establish  this  doctrine  of  necessity,
nothing  is  necessary  but  that,  throughout  all  nature,  the  same
consequences  should  invariably  result  from  the  same  circum-
stances.]

I  know  nothing  more  that  can  be  desired  to  establish  universal
fatality  throughout  the  universe.  When  it  is  proved  that,
through  all  nature,  the  same  consequences  invariably  result
from  the  same  circumstances,  the  doctrine  of  liberty  must  be
given  up.

To  prevent  all  ambiguity,  I  grant,  that,  in  reasoning,  the  same
consequences,  throughout  all  nature,  will  invariably  follow  from
the  same  premises  :  because  good  reasoning  must  be  good  rea-

♦  Vide  sect.  1.  of  this  chapter,  p.  289.


294  ESSAY  IV.  cHi:^.  a

soning  in  all  times  and  places.  But  this  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  doctrine  of  necessity.  [The  thing  to  be  proved,  therefore,
in  order  to  establish  that  doctrine,  is.  That,  through  all  nature,
the  same  events  invariably  result  from  the  same  circumstances.]

Of  this  capital  point,  the  proof  offered  by  that  author  is,  That
an  event  not  preceded  by  any  circimistances  that  determined  it
to  be  what  it  was,  would  be  an  effect  without  a  cause.  Why  so?
"  For,"  says  he,  "  a  cause  cannot  be  defined  to  be  any  thing  but
such  previous  circumstances  as  are  constantly  followed  by  a  certain
effect;  the  constancy  of  the  result  making  us  conclude,  that  there
must  be  a  sufficient  reason,  in  the  nature  of  things,  why  it  should
be  produced  in  those  circumstances."

I  acknowledge  that,  if  this  be  the  only  definition  that  can  be
given  of  a  cause,  it  will  follow.  That  an  event  not  preceded  by
circumstances  that  determined  it  to  be  what  it  was,  would  be,
not  an  effect  without  a  cause,  which  is  a  contradiction  in  terms,
but  an  event  without  a  cause,  which  I  hold  to  be  impossible.
[The  matter  therefore  is  brought  to  this  issue.  Whether  this  be
the  only  definition  that  can  be  given  of  a  cause  ?]

IX.  Four  consequences  of  this  definition  of  a  cause. — With
regard  to  this  point,  we  may  observe,  first,  That  this  definition
of  a  cause,  bating  the  phraseology  of  putting  a  caicse  under  the
category  of  circumstances,  which  I  take  to  be  new,  is  the  same,
in  other  words,  with  that  which  Mr.  Hume  gave,  of  which  he
ought  to  be  acknowledged  the  inventor.*  For  I  know  of  no
author  before  Mr.  Hiune,  who  maintained,  that  we  have  no  other
notion  of  a  cause,  but  that  it  is  something  prior  tothe  effect,
which  has  been  found  by  experience  to  be  constantly  followed
by  the  effect.  This  is  a  main  pillar  of  his  system ;  and  he  has
drawn  very  important  consequences  from  this  definition,  which  I
am  far  from  thinking  this  author  will  adopt.

Without  repeating  what  I  have  before  said  of  causes  in  the
first  of  these  Essays,  and  in  the  second  and  third  chapters  of
this,  I  shall  here  mention  some  of  the  consequences  that  may  be
justly  deduced  from  this  definition  of  a  cause,  that  we  may  judge
of  it  by  its  fruits.

First,  It  follows  from  this  definition  of  a  cause,  that  night  U
the  cause  of  day,  and  day  the  cause  of  night.  For  no  two  things
have  more  constantly  followed  each  other  since  the  beginning  of
the  world.

Secondly,  It  follows  from  this  definition  of  a  cause,  that,  for
what  we  know,  any  thing  may  be  the  cause  of  any  thing,  since
nothing  is  essential  to  a  cause  but  its  being  constantly  followed
by  the  effect.  If  this  be  so,  what  is  unintelligent  may  be  th^
cause  of  what  is  intelligent ;  folly  may  be  the  cause  of  wisdom^
and  evil  of  good ;  all  reasoning  from  the  nature  of  the  effect  to

*  Essay  I.  chap.  iv.  sect.  2.


OF  ARGUMENTS  FOR  NECESSITY.  ^5

he  nature  of  the  cause^  and  all  reasoning  from  final  causes^  must
)e  given  up  as  fallacious*

Thirdly,  From  tliis  definition  of  a  cause^  it  follows,  that  we
lave  no  reason  to  conclude,  that  every  event  must  have  a  cause :  for
nnumerable  events  happen,  when  it  cannot  be  shown  that  there
uxe  certain  previous  circumstances  that  have  constantly  been
ibflowed  by  such  an  event.  And  though  it  were  certain,  that
jvery  event  we  have  had  access  to  observe  had  a  cause,  it  would
lot  follow,  that  every  event  must  have  a  cause:  for  it  is  contrary
X)  the  rules  of  logic  to  conclude,  that,  because  a  thing  has  always
been,  therefore  it  must  be ;  to  reason  from  what  is  contingent,
:o  what  is  necessary.

Fourthly,  From  this  definition  of  a  cause,  it  would  follow,
that  we  have  no  reason  to  conclude  that  there  was  any  cause  of
the  creation  of  this  world  :  for  there  were  no  previous  circum-
stances that  had  been  constantly  followed  by  such  an  effect.  And,
forthe  same  reason,  it  would  follow  from  the  definition,  that  what-
ever was  singular  in  its  nature,  or  the  first  thing  of  its  kind,
could  have  no  cause.

Several  of  these  consequences  were  fondly  embraced  by  Mr.
Hume,  as  necessarily  following  from  his  definition  of  a  cause,
^i  as  favourable  to  his  system  of  absolute  scepticism*  Those
who  adopt  the  definition  of  a  cause,  from  which  they  follow,
may  choose  whether  they  will  adopt  its  consequences,  or  show
that  they  do  not  follow  from  the  definition.

X.  A  second  observation  with  regard  to  this  argument*  is,
that  a  definition  of  a  cause  may  be  given,  which  is  not  burdened
with  such  untoward  consequences.

Why  may  not  an  efiicient  cause  be  defined  to  be  a  being  that
had  power  and  vnYL  to  produce  the  effect  ?  The  production  of
an  effect  requires  active  power,  and  active  power,  being  a  qual-
ity, must  be  in  a  being  endowed  with  that  power.  Power,  with-
out will,  produces  no  effect;  but, where  these  are  conjoined,  the
effect  must  be  produced.

This,  I  think,  is  the  proper  meaning  of  the  word  cause,  when
it  is  used  in  metaphysics ;  and  particularly  when  we  affirm  that
every  thing  that  begins  to  exist  must  have  a  cause ;  and  when,
by  reasoning,  we  prove  that  there  must  be  an  eternal  First  Cause
of  all  things.

Was  the  world  produced  by  previous  circiunstances  which  are
constantly  followed  by  such  an  effect  ?  or,  Was  it  produced  by
a  Being  that  had  power  to  produce  it,  and  willed  its  production  ?

In  natural  philosophy,  the  word  cause  is  often  used  in  a  very
different  sense.  When  an  event  is  produced  according  to  a
known  law  of  nature,  the  law  of  nature  is  calleid  the  cause  of

•  i. «.  That  a  cause  is  "  such  previous  circumstances  as  are  constantly  fol-
lowed by  a  certain  effect."


094  ESSAY  IV.  CfL£B.  n.

soning  in  all  times  and  places.  But  this  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  doctrine  of  necessity.  [The  thing  to  be  proved,  therefore,
in  order  to  establish  that  doctrine,  is,  That,  through  all  nature,
the  same  events  invariably  result  from  the  same  circumstances,]

Of  this  capital  point,  the  proof  offered  by  that  author  is,  That
an  event  not  preceded  by  any  circumstances  that  determined  it
to  be  what  it  was,  would  be  an  effect  without  a  cause.  Why  so?
"  For,"  says  he,  "  a  cause  cannot  be  defined  to  be  any  thing  but
such  previous  circumstances  as  are  constantly  followed  by  a  certain
effect;  the  constancy  of  the  result  making  us  conclude,  that  there
must  be  a  sufficient  reason^  in  the  nature  of  things,  why  it  should
be  produced  in  those  circumstances."

I  acknowledge  that,  if  this  be  the  only  definition  that  can  be
given  of  a  cause,  it  will  follow.  That  an  event  not  preceded  by
circumstances  that  determined  it  to  be  what  it  was,  would  be,
not  an  effect  without  a  cause,  which  is  a  coiitradiction  in  terms,
but  an  event  without  a  cause,  which  I  hold  to  be  impossible.
[The  matter  therefore  is  brought  to  this  issue.  Whether  this  be
the  only  definition  that  can  be  given  of  a  cause  ?]

IX.  Four  consequences  of  this  definition  of  a  cause. — ^With
regard  to  this  point,  we  may  observe,  firsty  That  this  definition
of  a  cause,  bating  the  phraseology  of  putting  a  cav^e  under  the
category  of  circumstances ^  which  I  take  to  be  new,  is  the  same,
in  other  words,  with  that  which  Mr.  Hume  gave,  of  which  he
ought  to  be  acknowledged  the  inventor.* For  I  know  of  no
author  before  Mr.  Hiune,  who  maintained,  that  we  have  no  other
notion  of  a  cause,  but  that  it  is  something  prior  to  the  effect,
which  has  been  found  by  experience  to  be  constantly  followed
by  the  effect. This  is  a  main  pillar  of  his  system  ;  and  he  has
drawn  very  important  consequences  from  this  definition,  which  I
am  far  from  thinking  this  author  will  adopt.

Without  repeating  what  I  have  before  said  of  causes  in  the
first  of  these  Essays,  and  in  the  second  and  third  chaptei-s  of
this,  I  shall  here  mention  some  of  the  consequences  that  may  be
justly  deduced  from  this  definition  of  a  cause,  that  we  may  judge
of  it  by  its  fruits.

Firsts  It  follows  from  this  definition  of  a  cause,  that
the  cattse  of  day,  and  day  the  cause  of  night,
have  more  constantly  followed  each  other  si
the  world.

Secondly,  It  follows  from  this  def^'^'
what  we  Know,  any  thing  may  be
nothing  is  essential  to  a  cause  bu
by  the  effect. If  this  be  so,  w1
cause  of  what  is  intelligent ;  ff
and  evil  of  good ;  all  reason?


POH  NECESSITY.  ^5

3  nature  of  the  cause,  and  all  reasoning  from  final  causes,  must

given  up  as  fallacious.

I%irdlg,  From  this  deiinition  of  a  cause,  it  follows,  that  we
ive  no  reason  to  conclude,  that  every  event  must  have  a  cause :  for
unmerable  events  happen,  when  it  cannot  be  shown  that  there
ere  certain  previous  circumstances  that  have  constantly  been
illowed  by  such  an  event.  And  though  it  were  certain,  that
itry  event  we  have  had  access  to  observe  had  a  cause,  it  would
Dt  follow,  that  every  event  must  have  a  cause :  for  it  is  contrary
)  the  rules  of  logic  to  conclude,  that,  because  a  thing  has  always
een,  therefore  it  must  be ;  to  reason  from  what  is  contingent,
}  what  is  necessary.

Fowrthly,  From  this  definition  of  a  cause,  it  would  follow,
bat  we  have  no  reason  to  conclude  that  there  wat  any  cause  of
U  creation  of  this  toorld  :  for  there  were  no  previous  circum-
tances  that  had  been  constantly  followed  by  such  an  effect.  And,
Jtthe  same  reason,  it  would  follow  from  the  definition,  thatwhat-
rer  was  singular  in  its  nature,  or  the  first  thiug  of  its  kind,
ould  have  no  cause.

Several  oi  these  consequences  were  fondly  embraced  by  Mr.
lume,  as  necessarily  following  from  his  definition  of  a  cause,
ai  as  favourable  to  Ilia  system  of  absolute  scepticism.  Those
'ho  adopt  the  definition  of  a  cause,  from  which  they  follow,
lay  choose  whether  they  will  adopt  its  consequences,  or  show
bat  they  do  not  follow  from  the  definition.

X.  A  second  observation  with  regard  to  this  argument*  is,
hat  a  definition  of  a  cause  may  be  given,  which  is  not  burdened
vith  such  untoward  consequences.

Why  may  not  an  eflicient  cause  be  defined  to  be  a  being  that
lad  power  and  will  to  produce  the  effect  ?  The  production  of
in  effect  requires  active  power,  and  active  power,  being  a  qual-
ty,  must  be  in  a  being  endowed  with  that  power.  Power,  with-
lutwill,  produces  no  effect;  but, where  these  are  conjoined,  the
iffect  must  be  produced.

This,  I  think,  is  the  proper  meaning  of  the  word  cause,  when
'tt  metaphysics;  and  particularly  when  we  affirm  that
hat  begins  to  eadgt  must  l\ave  a  cause ;  and  when,
n  eternal  First  Cause

tous  circumstances  which  are
n?  or,  Was  it  produced  by
-  ,  and  willed  its  production  ?

'came  is  often  used  in  a  very

according to a

the  cause  of

!  cimttandy  fol-


QQ^  ESSAY  IV.  CKJCP.  IX.

soning  in  all  times  and  places.  But  this  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  doctrine  of  necessity,  [The  thing  to  be  proved,  therefore,
in  order  to  establish  that  doctrine,  is,  That,  through  all  nature,
the  same  events  invariably  result  from  the  same  circumstances.^

Of  this  capital  point,  the  proof  offered  by  that  author  is,  That
an  event  not  preceded  by  any  circumstances  that  determined  it
to  be  what  it  was,  would  be  an  effect  without  a  cause.  Why  so  ?
"  For,"  says  he,  "  a  cause  cannot  be  defined  to  be  any  thing  but
such  previous  circumstances  as  are  constantly  followed  by  a  certain
effect;  the  constancy  of  the  result  making  us  conclude,  that  there
must  be  a  sufficient  reason,  in  the  nature  of  things,  why  it  should
be  produced  in  those  circumstances,"

I  acknowledge  that,  if  this  be  the  only  definition  that  can  be
given  of  a  cause,  it  will  follow.  That  an  event  not  preceded  by
circumstances  that  determined  it  to  be  what  it  was,  would  be,
not  an  effect  without  a  cause,  which  is  a  contradiction  in  terms,
but  an  event  without  a  cause,  which  I  hold  to  be  impossible,
[The  matter  therefore  is  brought  to  this  issue.  Whether  this  be
the  only  definition  that  can  be  given  of  a  cause  ?]

IX.  Four  consequences  of  this  definition  of  a  cause. — ^With
regard  to  this  point,  we  may  observe,  firsts  That  this  definition
of  a  cause,  bating  the  phraseology  of  putting  a  cav^e  under  the
category  of  circumstances,  which  I  take  to  be  new,  is  the  same,
in  other  words,  with  that  which  Mr.  Hume  gave,  of  which  he
ought  to  be  acknowledged  the  inventor.*  For  I  know  of  no
author  before  Mr.  Hume,  who  maintained,  that  we  have  no  other
notion  of  a  cause,  but  that  it  is  something  prior  tothe  effect,
which  has  been  found  by  experience  to  be  constantly  followed
by  the  effect.  This  is  a  main  pillar  of  his  system ;  and  he  has
drawn  very  important  consequences  from  this  definition,  which  I
am  far  from  thinking  this  author  will  adopt.

Without  repeating  what  I  have  before  said  of  causes  in  the
first  of  these  Essays,  and  in  the  second  and  third  chapters  of
this,  I  shall  here  mention  some  of  the  consequences  that  may  be
justly  deduced  from  this  definition  of  a  cause,  that  we  may  judge
of  it  by  its  fruits.

First,  It  follows  from  this  definition  of  a  cause,  that  night  is
the  cause  of  day,  and  day  the  cause  of  night.  For  no  two  things
have  more  constantly  followed  each  other  since  the  beginning  of
the  world.

Secondly,  It  follows  from  this  definition  of  a  cause,  that,  for
what  we  know,  any  thing  may  he  the  cause  of  any  thing,  since
nothing  is  essential  to  a  cause  but  its  being  constantly  followed
by  the  effect.  If  this  be  so,  what  is  unintelligent  may  be  the
cause  of  what  is  intelligent ;  folly  may  be  the  cause  of  wisdom,
and  evil  of  good ;  all  reasoning  from  the  nature  of  the  effect  to

*  Essay  I.  chap.  iv.  sect.  2.


OF  ARGUMENTS  FOR  NECESSITY.  ^5

the  nature  of  the  cause,  and  all  reasoning  from  final  causes,  must
be  given  up  as  fallacious.

Thirdly,  From  this  definition  of  a  cause,  it  follows,  that  we
have  no  reason  to  conclude,  that  every  event  must  have  a  cause:  for
inniimerable  events  happen,  when  it  cannot  be  shown  that  there
were  certain  previous  circumstances  that  have  constantly  been
followed  by  such  an  event.  And  though  it  were  certain,  that
every  event  we  have  had  access  to  observe  had  a  cause,  it  would
not  follow,  that  every  event  must  have  a  cause :  for  it  is  contrary
to  the  rules  of  logic  to  conclude,  that,  because  a  thing  has  always
been,  therefore  it  must  be ;  to  reason  from  what  is  contingent,
to  what  is  necessary.

Fourthly  J  From  this  definition  of  a  cause,  it  would  follow,
that  we  have  no  rea^son  to  conclude  that  there  was  any  cause  of
the  creation  of  this  world  :  for  there  were  no  previous  circum-
stances that  had  been  constantly  followed  by  such  an  efiect.  And,
for  the  same  reason,  it  would  follow  from  the  definition,  that  what-
ever was  singular  in  its  nature,  or  the  first  thing  of  its  kind,
could  have  no  cause.

Several  of  these  consequences  were  fondly  embraced  by  Mr.
Hume,  as  necessarily  following  from  his  definition  of  a  cause,
and  as  favourable  to  his  system  of  absolute  scepticism*  Those
who  adopt  the  definition  of  a  cause,  from  which  they  follow,
-may  choose  whether  they  will  adopt  its  consequences,  or  show
that  they  do  not  follow  from  the  definition.

X.  A  second  observation  with  regard  to  this  argument*  is,
that  a  definition  of  a  cause  may  be  given,  which  is  not  burdened
with  such  untoward  consequences.

Why  may  not  an  efficient  cause  be  defined  to  be  a  being  that
had  power  and  will  to  produce  the  effect  ?  The  production  of
an  effect  requires  active  power,  and  active  power,  being  a  qual-
ity, must  be  in  a  being  endowed  with  that  power.  Power,  with-
out will,  produces  no  effect ;  but,  where  these  are  conjoined,  the
effect  must  be  produced.

This,  I  think,  is  the  proper  meaning  of  the  word  cause,  when
it  is  used  in  metaphysics ;  and  particularly  when  we  affirm  that
every  thing  that  begins  to  exist  must  have  a  cause ;  and  when,
by  reasoning,  we  prove  that  there  must  be  an  eternal  First  Cause
of  all  things.

Was  the  world  produced  by  previous  circiunstances  which  are
constantly  followed  by  such  an  effect  ?  or.  Was  it  produced  by
a  Being  that  had  power  to  produce  it,  and  willed  its  production  ?
In  natural  philosophy,  the  word  cause  is  often  used  in  a  very
different  sense.  When  an  event  is  produced  according  to  a
known  law  of  nature,  the  law  of  nature  is  called  the  cause  of

•  i.  e.  That  a  cause  is  "  such  previous  circumstances  as  are  constantly  fol-
lowed by  a  certain  effect."


2QQ  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  IX.

that  event.  But  a  law  of  nature  is  not  the  efficient  cause  of  any
event.  It  is  only  the  rule,  according  to  which  the  efficient
cause  acts.  A  law  is  a  thing  conceived  in  the  mind  of  a  rational
being,  not  a  thing  that  has  a  real  existence ;  and,  therefore,  like
a  motive,  it  can  neither  act  nor  be  acted  upon,  and  consequently
cannot  be  an  efficient  cause.  If  there  be  no  being -that  acts  ac-
cording to  the  law,  it  produces  no  eflfect.

This  author  takes  it  for  granted,  that  every  voluntary  action  of
man  was  determined  to  be  what  it  was  by  the  laws  of  nature,  in
the  same  sense  as  mechanical  motions  are  determined  by  the
laws  of  motion;  and  that  every  choice,  not  thus  determined,
"  is  just  as  impossible,  as  that  a  mechanical  motion  should  de*
pend  upon  no  certain  law  or  rule,  or  that  any  other  effect  should
exist  without  a  cause."

[It  ought  here  to  be  observed,  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  laws,
both  very  properly  called  laws  of  nature,  which  ought  not  to  be
confounded.  There  are  moral  laws  of  nature,  and  physical  laws
of  nature.]  The  first  are  the  rules  which  God  has  prescribed
to  his  rational  creatures  for  their  conduct.  They  respect  volun-
tary and  free  actions  only ;  for  no  other  actions  can  be  sub-
ject to  moral  rules.  These  laws  of  nature  ought  to  be  always
obeyed,  but  they  are  often  transgressed  by  men.  There  is  there-
fore no  impossibility  in  the  violation  of  the  moral  laws  of  nature,
nor  is  such  a  violation  an  effect  without  a  cause.  The  transgressor
is  the  cause,  and  is  justly  accountable  for  it.

The  physical  laws  of  nature  are  the  rules  according  to  which
the  Deity  commonly  acts  in  his  natural  government  of  the  world ;
and,  whatever  is  done  according  to  them,  is  not  done  by  man,
but  by  God,  either  immediately,  or  by  instruments  under  his
direction.  These  laws  of  nature  neither  restrain  the  power  of
the  Author  of  nature,  nor  bring  him  under  any  obligation  to  do
nothing  beyond  their  sphere.  He  has  sometimes  acted  contrary
to  them,  in  the  case  of  miracles,  and  perhaps  often  acts  with-
out regard  to  them,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  his  providence.^
Neither  miraculous  events,  which  are  contrary  to  the  physical
laws  of  nature,  nor  such  ordinary  acts  of  the  Divine  administra-
tion as  are  without  their  sphere,  are  impossible,  nor  are  they
effects  without  a  cause.  God  is  the  cause  of  them,  and  to  him
only  they  are  to  be  imputed.

That  the  moral  laws  of  nature  are  often  transgressed  by  man,
is  undeniable.  If  the  physical  laws  of  nature  make  his  obedience
to  the  moral  laws  to  be  impossible,  then  he  is,  in  the  literal  sense,
horn  under  one  law,  hound  unto  another,  which  contradicts  every
notion  of  a  righteous  government  of  the  world.

But  though  this  supposition  were  attended  with  no  such
shocking  consequence,  it  is  merely  a  supposition  ;  and  until  it
be  proved  that  every  choice  or  volimtary  action  of  man  is  deter-


OP  ARGUM£NTS  FOR  NECESSITY.  29*7

mined  by  the  physical  laws  of  nature^  this  argument  for  necessity
is  only  the  taking  for  granted  the  point  to  be  proved.

Of  the  same  kind  is  the  argument  for  the  impossibility  of
liberty,  taken  from  a  balance,  which  cannot  move  but  as  it  is
moved  by  the  weights  put  into  it.  This  argument,  though  urged
by  almost  every  writer  in  defence  of  necessity,  is  so  pitiful,
and  has  been  so  often  answered,  that  it  scarce  deserves  to  be
mentioned.

Every  argument  in  a  dispute,  which  is  not  grounded  on  prin-
ciples granted  by  both  parties,  is  that  kind  of  sophism  which
logicians  call  petitio  prin'cipii ;  and  such,  in  my  apprehension,
are  all  the  arguments  offered  to  prove  that  liberty  of  action  is
impossible.

It  may  farther  be  observed,  that  every  argument  of  this  class
if  it  were  really  conclusive,  must  extend  to  the  Deity,  as  well
as  to  all  created  beings  ;  and  necessary  existence,  which  has  al-
ways been  considered  h&  the  prerogative  of  the  Supreme  Being,
must  belong  equally  to  every  creature  and  to  every  event  even
the  most  trifling.

This  I  take  to  be  the  system  of  Spinosa,  and  of  those  among
the  ancients  who  carried  fatality  to  the  highest  pitch.

I  before  referred  the  reader  to  Dr.  Clarke's  argument,  which
professes  to  demonstrate  that  the  First  Cause  is  a  free  agent.
Until  that  argument  shall  be  shown  to  be  fallacious,  a  thing
which  I  have  not  seen  attempted,  such  Weak  arguments  as  have
been  brought  to  prove  the  contrary,  ought  to  have  little  weight.


CHAPTER  X.

THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

I.  With  regard  to  the  second  class  of  arguments  for  necessity,
which  are  intended  to  prove  that  liberty  of  action  would  he  hurt-
ful  to  many*  I  have  only  to  observe,  that  it  is  a  fact  too  evident
to  be  denied,  whether  we  adopt  the  system  of  liberty  or  that  of
necessity,  that  men  actually  receive  hurt  from  their  own  volun-
tary actions,  and  from  the  voluntary  actions  of  other  men  ;  nor
can  it  be  pretended  that  this  fact  is  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine
of  liberty,  or  that  it  is  more  unaccountable  upon  this  system
than  upon  that  of  necessity.

In  order,  therefore,  to  draw  any  solid  argument  against
liberty,  from  its  hurtfulness,  it  ought  to  be  proved,  that  if
man  were  a  free  agent,  he  would  do  more  hurt  to  himself,  or  to
others,  than  he  actually  does.

To  this  -purpose  it  has  been  said,  that  liberty  would  make

*  Chap.  ix.  sect.  I.


298  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  X-

men's  actions  capricious ;  that  it  would  destroy  the  influence  of
motives  ;  that  it  would  take  away  the  effect  of  rewards  and  pu-
nishments ;  and  that  it  would  make  man  absolutely  ungovern-
able.

11.  Third  class  of  arguments  against  human  liberty, — These
arguments  have  been  already  considered  in  the  fourth  and  fifth
chapters  of  this  Essay ;  and,  therefore,  I  shall  now  proceed  to
the  third  class  of  arguments  for  necessity,  which  are  intended
to  prove  thaty  in  fact^  men  are  not  free  agents.

[The  most  formidable  argument  of  this  class,  and,  I  think,  the
only  one  that  has  not  been  considered  in  some  of  the  preceding
chapters,  is  taken  from  the  prescience  of  the  Deity, ^*

God  foresees  every  determination  of  the  human  mind.  It
must  therefore  be  what  he  foresees  it  shall  be ;  and  therefore
must  be  necessary.

This  argument  may  be  understood  three  different  ways,  each
of  which  we  shall  consider,  that  we  may  see  all  its  force.

The  necessity  of  the  event  may  be  thought  to  be  a  just  conse-
quence, either  barely  from  its  being  certainly  future,  or  barely
from  its  being  foreseen,  or  from  the  impossibility  of  its  being
foreseen,  if  it  was  not  necessary.

First,  It  may  be  thought,  that,  as  nothing  can  be  known  to  be
future,  which  is  not  certainly  future,  so,  if  it  be  certainly  future,
it  must  be  necessary.

[This  opinion  has  no  less  authority  in  its  favour  than  that  of
Aristotle,  who  indeed  held  the  doctrine  of  liberty,  but  believing
at  the  same  time  that  whatever  is  certainly  future  must  be  neces-
sary; in  order  to  defend  the  liberty  of  human  actions,  main-
tained, that  contingent  events  have  no  certain  futurity ;  but  I
know  of  no  modem  advocate  for  liberty  who  has  put  the  defence
of  it  upon  that  issue.]

It  must  be  granted,  that  as  whatever  was,  certainly  was,  and
whatever  is,  certainly  is,  so  whatever  shaU  be,  certainly  shall
be.  These  are  identical  propositions,  and  cannot  be  doubted  by
those  who  conceive  them  distinctly.

But  I  know  no  rule  of  reasoning  by  which  it  can  be  inferred
that;  because  an  event  certainly  shall  be,  therefore  its  produc-
tion must  be  necessary.  The  manner  of  its  production,  whe-
ther free  or  necessary,  cannot  be  concluded  from  the  time  of
its  production,  whether  it  be  past,  present,  or  future.  That  it
shall  be,  no  more  implies  that  it  shall  be  necessarily,  than  that
it  shall  be  freely  produced ;  for  neither  present,  past,  nor  future,
have  any  more  connexion  with  necessity  than  they  have  with
freedom.

I  grant,  therefore,  that,  from  events  being  foreseen,  it  may

*  Compare  this  passage  with  what  has  been  observed  by  the  author  on  the
same  subject,  in  his  Treatise  on  the  Intellectual  Powers.  Essay  III.  chap.  ii.
sect.  3.


OF  ARGUMENTS  FOR  NECESSITY.  299

be  justly  concluded  that  they  are  certainly  future ;  hut  from
their  heing  certainly  future,  it  does  not  follow  that  they  are
necessary.

Seccmdhfi  If  it  be  meant  by  this  argument,  that  an  event  must
be  necessary,  merely  because  it  is  foreseen,  neither  is  this  a
just  consequence :  for  it  has  often  been  observed,  that  prescience
and  knowledge  of  every  kind,  being  an  immanejit  act,  has  no
effect  upon  the  thing  known.  Its  mode  of  existence,  whether  it
be  free  or  necessary,  is  not  in  the  least  affected  by  its  being
known  to  be  future,  any  more  than  by  its  being  know^n  to  be
past  or  present.  The  Deity  foresees  his  own  future  free  actions,
but  neither  his  foresight  nor  his  purpose  makes  them  necessary.  •
The  argument,  therefore,  taken  in  this  view,  as  well  as  in  the
former,  is  inconclusive.

A  third  way  in  which  this  argument  may  be  understood,  is
this :  It  is  impossible  that  an  event  which  is  not  necessary  should
be  foreseen;  therefore  every  event  that  is  certainly  foreseen,
must  be  necessary.  Here  the  conclusion  certainly  follows  from
the  antecedent  proposition,  and  therefore  the  whole  stress  of
the  argument  lies  upon  the  proof  of  that  proposition.

III.  [Let  us  consider,  therefore,  whether  it  can  be  proved,  that
no  free  action  can  he  certainly  foreseen.  If  this  can  be  proved,  it
will  follow,  either  that  all  actions  are  necessary,  or  that  all  actions
cannot  be  foreseen.]

With  regard  to  the  general  proposition,  that  it  is  impossible
that  any  free  action  can  be  certainlv  foreseen,  I  observe.

First,  that  every  man  who  beheves  the  Deity  to  be  a  free
agent,  must  believe  that  this  proposition  not  only  is  incapable  of
proof,  but  that  it  is  certainly  false :  for  the  man  himself  foresees,
that  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  always  do  what  is  right,  and
that  he  will  fulfil  whatever  he  has  promised;  and  at  the  same
time,  believes,  that,  in  doing  what  is  right,  and  in  fulfilling  his
promises,  the  Deity  acts  with  the  most  perfect  freedom.

Secondly,  I  observe,  that  every  man  who  believes  that  it  is  an
absurdity  or  contradiction,  that  any  free  action  should  be  cer-
tainly foreseen,  must  believe,  if  he  will  be  consistent,  either  that
the  Deity  is  not  a  free  agent,  or  that  he  does  not  foresee  his  own
actions ;  nor  can  we  foresee  that  he  will  do  what  is  right,  and
will  fulfil  his  promises.

Thirdly,  without  considering  the  consequences  which  this
general  proposition  carries  in  its  bosom,  which  give  it  a  very  bad
aspect,  let  us  attend  to  the  arguments  offered  to  prove  it.

Dr.  Priestley  has  laboured  more  in  the  proof  of  this  proposi-
tion than  any  other  author  I  am  acquainted  with,  and  maintains
it  to  be,  not  only  a  difficulty  and  a  mystery,  as  it  has  been  called,
that  a  contingent  event  should  be  the  object  of  knowledge,  but
that,  in  reality,  there  cannot  be  a  greater  absurdity  or  contradic-
tion. Let  us  hear  the  proof  of  this.


300  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  X.

"  For,"  says  he,  "  as  certainly  as  nothing  can  be  known  to  exist,
but  what  does  exist,  so  certainly  can  nothing  be  known  to  arise
from  what  does  exists  but  what  does  arise  from  it  or  depend  upon
it.  But,  according  to  the  definition  of  the  terms,  a  contingent
event  does  not  depend  upon  any  previous  known  circumstances,
since  some  other  event  might  have  arisen  in  the  same  circum-
stances."

•

This  argument,  when  stripped  of  incidental  and  explanatory
clauses,  and  affected  variations  of  expression,  amounts  to  this :
nothing  can  be  known  to  arise  from  what  does  exist,  but  what
does  arise  from  it :  but  a  contingent  event  does  not  arise  from
what  does  exist.  [The  conclusion,  which  is  left  to  be  drawn  by
the  reader,  must,  according  to  the  rules  of  reasoning,  be :  there-
fore a  contingent  event  cannot  be  known  to  arise  from  what
does  exist.]

It  is  here  very  obvious,  that  a  thing  may  arise  from  what  does
exist,  two  ways,  freely  or  necessarily.  A  contingent  event  arises
from  its  cause,  not  necessarily  but  freely,  and  so,  that  another
event  might  have  arisen  from  the  same  cause,  in  the  same  cir-
cumstances.

The  second  proposition  of  the  argument  is,  that  a  contingent
event  does  not  depend  upon  any  previous  known  circumstances,
which  I  take  to  be  only  a  variation  of  the  term  of  not  arising
from  what  does  exist.  Therefore,  in  order  to  make  the  two
propositions  to  correspond,  we  must  understand  by  arising  from
what  does  exists  arising  necessarily  from  what  does  exist.  When
this  ambiguity  is  removed,  the  argument  stands  thus :  nothing
can  be  known  to  arise  necessarily  from  what  does  exist,  but  what
does  necessarily  arise  from  it :  but  a  contingent  event  does  not
arise  necessarily  from  what  does  exist ;  therefore  a  contingent
event  cannot  be  known  to  arise  necessarily  from  what  does  exist.

I  grant  the  whole ;  but  the  conclusion  of  this  argument  is  not
what  he  imdertook  to  prove,  and  therefore  the  argument  is  that
kind  of  sophism  which  logicians  call  ignoratio  elenchi.

The  thing  to  be  proved  is  not,  that  a  contingent  event  cannot
be  known  to  arise  necessarily  from  what  exists ;  but  that  a  con-
tingent future  event  cannot  be  the  object  of  knowledge.

To  draw  the  argument  to  this  conclusion,  it  must  be  put  thus :
nothing  can  be  known  to  arise  from  what  does  exist,  but  what
arises  necessarily  from  it :  but  a  contingent  event  does  not  arise
necessarily  from  what  does  exist ;  therefore  a  contingent  event
cannot  be  known  to  arise  from  what  does  exist.

The  conclusion  here  is  what  it  ought  to  be ;  but  the  first  pro-
position assumes  the  thing  to  be  proved,  and  therefore  the  argu-
ment is  what  logicians  call  petitio  principii.

To  the  same  purpose  he  says,  "  That  nothing  can  be  known  at
present,  except  itself  or  its  necessary  cause  exist  at  present."

This  is  aflirmed,  but  I  find  no  proof  of  it.


OF  ARGUMENTS  FOR  NECESSITY.  301

Again  lie  says,  "  That  knowledge  supposes  an  object,  which,
in  this  case,  does  not  exist."  It  is  true  that  knowledge  supposes
an  object,  and  every  thing  that  is  known  is  an  object  of  know-
ledge, whether  past,  present,  or  future,  whether  contingent  or
necessary.

Upon  the  whole,  the  arguments  I  can  find  upon  this  point,
bear  no  proportion  to  the  confidence  of  the  assertion,  that  there
cannot  be  a  greater  absurdity  or  contradiction,  than  that  a  con-
tingent event  should  be  the  object  of  knowledge.

IV.  To  those  who,  without  pretending  to  show  a  manifest
absurdity  or  contradiction  in  the  knowledge  of  future  contingent
events,  are  still  of  opinion,  that  it  is  impossible  that  the  future
free  actions  of  man,  a  being  of  imperfect  wisdom  and  virtue,
should  be  certainly  foreknown,  I  would  humbly  offer  the  follow-
ing considerations.

[1.  I  grant  that  there  is  no  knowledge  of  this  kind  in  man  ;  and
this  is  the  cause  that  we  find  it  so  difficult  to  conceive  it  in  any
other  being.]

All  our  knowledge  of  future  events  is  drawn  either  from  their
necessary  connexion  with  the  present  course  of  nature,  or  from
their  connexion  with  the  character  of  the  agent  that  produces
them.  Our  knowledge,  even  of  those  future  events  that  neces-
sarily result  from  the  established  laws  of  nature,  is  hypothetical.
It  supposes  the  continuance  of  those  laws  with  which  they  are
connected.  And  how  long  those  laws  may  be  continued,  we
have  no  certain  knowledge.  God  only  knows  when  the  present
course  of  nature  shall  be  changed,  and  therefore  he  only  has
certain  knowledge  even  of  events  of  this  kind.

The  character  of  perfect  wisdom  and  perfect  rectitude  in  the
Deity,  gives  us  certain  knowledge  that  he  will  always  be  true  in
-  all  his  declarations,  faithful  in  all  his  promises,  and  just  in  all
his  dispensations.  But  [when  we  reason  from  the  character  of
men  to  their  future  actions,  though,  in  many  cases,  we  have  such
probability  as  we  rest  upon  in  our  most  important  worldly  con-
cerns, yet  we  have  no  certainty,  because  men  are  imperfect  in
tvisdom  and  in  virtueJ]  If  we  had  even  the  most  perfect  know-
ledge of  the  character  and  situation  of  a  man,  this  would  not
be  sufficient  to  give  certainty  to  our  knowledge  of  his  future
actions ;  because,  in  some  actions,  both  good  and  bad  men  deviate
from  their  general  character.

The  prescience  of  the  Deity,  therefore,  must  be  different  not
only  in  degree,  but  in  kind,  from  any  knowledge  we  can  attain  of
futurity.

[2.  Though  we  can  have  no  conception  how  the  future  free
actions  of  men  may  be  known  by  the  Deity,  this  is  not  a  sufficient
reason  to  conclude  that  they  cannot  be  Imown.]  Do  we  know,
or  can  we  conceive,  how  God  knows  the  secrets  of  men's  hearts  ?
Can  we  conceive  how  God  made  this  world  "Without  any  pre-


302  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  X.

existent  matter  ?  All  the  ancient  philosophers  believed  this  to
be  impossible:  and  for  what  reason  but  this,  that  they  could
not  conceive  how  it  could  be  done.  Can  we  give  any  better
reason  for  believing  that  the  actions  of  men  cannot  be  certainly
foreseen  ?

[3.  Can  we  conceive  how  we  ourselves  have  certain  knowledge
by  those  faculties  with  which  God  has  endowed  us  ?  If  any  man
thinks  that  he  understands  distinctly  how  he  is  conscious  of  his
own  thoughts  ;  how  he  perceives  external  objects  by  his  senses ;
how  he  remembers  past  events,  I  am  afraid  that  he  is  not  yet  so
wise  as  to  understand  his  own  ignorance.]

[4.  There  seems  to  me  to  be  a  great  analogy  between  the
prescience  of  future  contingents,  and  the  memory  of  past  con-
tingents. We  possess  the  last  in  some  degree,  and  therefore  find
no  difficulty  in  believing  that  it  may  be  perfect  in  the  Deity.
But  the  first  we  have  in  no  degree,  and  therefore  are  apt  to  think
it  impossible.]

[In  both,  the  object  of  knowledge  is  neither  what  presently
exists,  nor  has  any  necessary  connexion  with  what  presenuy  exists.
Every  argument  brought  to  prove  the  impossibility  of  prescience,
proves,  with  equal  force,  the  impossibility  of  memory.^  If  it
be  true  that  nothing  can  be  known  to  arise  from  what  does  exist,
but  what  necessarily  arises  from  it,  it  must  be  equally  true,  that
nothing  can  be  known  to  have  gone  before  what  does  exist,  but
what  must  necessarily  have  gone  before  it.  If  it  be  true  that
nothing  future  can  be  known  unless  its  necessary  cause  exist  at
present,  it  must  be  equally  true  that  nothing  past  can  be  known
unless  something  consequent,  with  which  it  is  necessarily  con-
nected, exist  at  present.  If  the  fatalist  should  say,  that  past
events  are  indeed  necessarily  connected  with  the  present,  he  will
not  surely  venture  to  say  that  it  is  by  tracing  this  necessary  con-
nexion that  we  remember  the  past.

Why,  then,  should  we  think  prescience  impossible  in  the  Al-
mighty, when  he  has  given  us  a  faculty  which  bears  a  strong  an-
alogy to  it,  and  which  is  no  less  unaccountable  to  the  human
understanding  than  prescience  is.  It  is  more  reasonable,  as  well
as  more  agreeable  to  the  sacred  writings,  to  conclude  with  a
pious  father  of  the  church,  "  Quocirca  nullo  modo  cogimur,  aut
retenta  praescientia  Dei  tollere  voluntatis  arbitrium,  aut  retento
voluntatis  arbitrio,  Deum,  quod  nefas  est,  negare  praescium  fu-
turorum :  sed  utrumque  amplectimur,  utrumque  fideliter  et  ve-
raciter  confitemur :  illud  ut  bene  credamus ;  hoc  ut  bene  viva-
mus." — Aug.  "  Wherefore  we  are  under  no  necessity  of  rejecting
the  freedom  of  the  will,  in  case  we  admit  the  prescience  of  the
Deitjr,  or  in  case  we  admit  the  freedom  of  the  will  to  fall  into
the  unpiety  of  denying  such  prescience:  on  the  contrary,  we
acknowledge  both  points — one  as  essential  to  the  soundness  of  our
faith,  the  other  to  righteousness  of  life."


OF  THE  PERMISSrON  OF  EVIL.  303


CHAPTER  XI.

OP  THE  PERMISSION  OF  EVIL.

I.  Another  use  has  been  made  of  Divine  prescience  by  the
advocates  for  necessity,  which  it  is  proper  to  consider  before  we
leave  this  subject.

It  has  been  said,  "  that  all  those  consequences  follow  from
the  Divine  prescience  which  are  thought  most  alarming  in  the
scheme  of  necessity ;  and  particularly  God's  being  the  proper
cause  of  moral  evil.  For,  to  suppose  God  to  foresee  and  permit
what  it  was  in  his  power  to  have  prevented,  is  the  very  same
thing  as  to  suppose  him  to  will,  and  directly  to  cause  it.  He
distinctly  foresees  all  the  actions  of  a  man's  life,  and  all  the  con-
sequences of  them.  If,  therefore,  he  did  not  think  any  parti-
cular man  and  his  conduct  proper  for  his  plan  of  creation  and
providence,  he  certainly  would  not  have  introduced  him  into
being  at  all."

In  this  reasoning  we  may  observe,  that  a  •  supposition  is  made
which  seems  to  contradict  itself.

That  all  the  actions  of  a  particular  man  should  be  distinctly
foreseen,  and,  at  the  same  time,  that  that  man  should  never  be
brought  into  existence,  seems  to  me  to  be  a  contradiction :  and
the  same  contradiction  there  is,  in  supposing  any  action  to  be
distinctly  foreseen,  and'  yet  prevented.  For,  if  it  be  foreseen,
it  shall  happen ;  and,  if  it  be  prevented,  it  shall  not  happen ;
and  therefore  could  not  be  foreseen.

II.  [Scientia  media, — The  knowledge  here  supposed  is  neither
prescience  nor  science,  but  something  very  different  from  both.
It  is  a  kind  of  knowledge  which  some  metaphysical  divines,  in
their  controversies  about  the  order  of  the  Divine  decrees,  a  sub-
ject far  beyond  the  limits  of  human  understanding,  attributed  to
the  Deity,  and  of  which  other  divines  denied  the  possibility,
while  they  firmly  maintained  the  Divine  prescience.]

It  was  called  scientia  media,  to  distinguish  it  from  prescience ;
and  by  this  scientia  media  was  meant,  not  the  knovring  from
eternity  all  things  that  shall  exist,  which  is  prescience,  [nor  the
knowing  all  the  connexions  and  relations  of  things  that  exist  or
may  be  conceived,  which  is  science  ;]  but  a  knowledge  of  things
contingent,  that  never  did  nor  shall  exist.  For  instance,  the
knowing  every  action  that  would  be  done  by  a  man  who  is  barely
conceived,  and  shall  never  be  brought  into  existence.

Against  the  possibility  of  the  scientia  media  arguments  may  be
urged,  which  cannot  be  applied  to  prescience.  Thus  it  may  be
said,  that  nothing  can  h^  known  hut  what  is  true. It  is  true


304  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  XI.

that  the  future  actions  of  a  free  agent  shall  exist,  and  therefore
we  see  no  impossibility  in  its  being  known  that  they  shall  ex-
ist :  but  with  regard  to  the  free  actions  of  an  agent  that  never
did  nor  shall  exist,  there  is  nothing  true,  and  therefore  nothing
can  he  known.  To  say  that  the  being  conceived,  would  certainly
act  in  such  a  way,  ifplaced  in  such  a  situation,  if  it  have  any
meaning,  is  to  say.  That  his  acting  in  that  way  is  the  conse-
quence of  the  conception ;  but  this  contradicts  the  supposition  of
its  being  a  free  action.

Things  merely  conceived  have  no  relations  or  connexions  but
such  as  are  implied  in  the  conception,  or  are  consequent  from
it.  Thus  I  conceive  two  circles  m  the  same  plane.  If  this  be
all  I  conceive,  it  is  not  true  that  these  circles  are  equal  or  un-
equal, [because  neither  of  these  relations  is  implied  in  the  con-
ception; yet  if  the  two  circles  really  existed,  they  must  be
either  equal  or  unequal.]  Again,  I  conceive  two  circles  in  the
same  plane,  the  distance  of  whose  centres  is  equal  to  the  sum  of
their  semidiameters.  It  is  true  of  these  circles,  that  they  will
touch  one  another,  because  this  follows  from  the  conception ;
but  it  is  not  true  that  they  will  be  equal  or  unequal,  because
neither  of  these  relations  is  implied  in  the  conception,  nor  is
consequent  from  it.

In  like  manner,  I  can  conceive  a  being  who  has  power  to  do
an  indifferent  action,  or  not  to  do  it.  It  is  not  true  that  he
would  do  it,  nor  is  it  true  that  he  would  not  do  it,  because  nei-
ther is  implied  in  my  conception,  nor  follows  from  it ;  and  what
is  not  true  cannot  be  known.

Though  I  do  not  perceive  any  fallacy  in  this  argument  against
a  scientia  media,  I  am  sensible  how  apt  we  are  to  err  in  apply-
ing what  belongs  to  our  conceptions  and  our  knowledge,  to  the
conceptions  and  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Being :  and,  there-
fore, without  pretending  to  determine  for  or  against  a  scientia
media,  I  only  observe,  that,  to  suppose  that  the  Deity  prevents
what  he  foresees  by  his  prescience,  is  a  contradiction,  and  that
to  know  that  a  contingent  event  which  he  sees  fit  not  to  permit
would  certainly  happen  if  permitted,  is  not  prescience,  but  the
scientia  media,  whose  existence  or  possibility  we  are  under  no
necessity  of  admitting.

III.  Prescience  of  the  Deity  indisputable, — Waving  all  dis-
pute about  scientia  media,  we  acknowledge  that  nothing  can  hap-
pen under  the  administration  of  the  Deity,  which  he  does  not
see  fit  to  permit.  The  permission  of  natural  and  moral  evil  is  a
phenomenon  which  cannot  be  disputed.  To  account  for  this  phe-
nomenon under  the  government  of  a  Being  of  infinite  goodness,
justice,  wisdom,  and  power,  has,  in  all  ages,  been  considered  as
difficult  to  human  reason,  whether  we  embrace  the  system  of
liberty,  or  that  of  necessity. [But  if  the  difficulty  of  account-


OP  THE  PERMISSION  OP  EVIL.  305

ing  for  this  phenomenon  upon  the  system  of  necessity,  be  as  great
as  it  is  upon  the  system  of  liberty,  it  can  have  no  weight  when
used  as  an  argument  against  libertgJ]

The  defenders  of  necessity,  to  reconcile  it  to  the  principles  of
Theism,  find  themselves  obliged  to  give  up  all  the  moral  attri-
butes of  God,  excepting  that  of  goodness,  or  a  desire  to  produce
happiness.  This  they  hold  to  be  the  sole  motive  of  his  making
and  governing  the  universe.  Justice,  veracity,  faithfulness,  are
only  modifications  of  goodness,  the  means  of  promoting  its  pur-
poses, and  are  exercised  only  so  far  as  they  serve  that  end.  Vir-
tue is  acceptable  to  him,  and  vice  displeasing,  only  as  the  first
tends  to  produce  happiness  and  the  last  misery.  He  is  the  pro-
per cause  and  agent  of  all  moral  evil  as  well  as  good ;  but  it  is
for  a  good  end,  to  produce  the  greater  happiness  to  his  crea-
tures. He  does  evil  that  good  may  come,  and  this  end  sancti-
fies the  worst  actions  that  contribute  to  it.  All  the  wickedness
of  men  being  the  work  of  God,  he  must,  when  he  surveys  it,
pronounce  it,  as  well  as  all  his  other  works,  to  be  very  good.

[This  view  of  the  Divine  nature,  the  only  one  consistent  with
the  scheme  of  necessity,  appears  to  me  much  more  shocking  than
the  permission  of  evil  upon  the  scheme  of  liberty.  It  is  said,
that  it  requires  only  strength  of  mind  to  embrace  it :  to  me  it  seems
to  require  much  strength  of  countenance  to  profess  it.]

eS^  In  this  system,  as  in  Cleanthe's  "  Tablature  of  the  Epicu-
rean System,"  pleasure  or  happiness  is  placed  upon  the  throne
as  the  queen,  to  whom  all  the  virtues  bear  the  humble  office  of
menial  servants.

As  the  end  of  the  Deity,  in  all  his  actions,  is  not  his  own
good,  which  can  receive  no  addition,  but  the  good  of  his  crea-
tures; and,  as  his  creatures  are  capable  of  this  disposition  in
some  degree,  is  he  not  pleased  with  this  image  of  himself  in  his
creatures,  and  displeased  with  the  contrary  ?  Why,  then,  should
he  be  the  author  of  maHce,  envy,  revenge,  tyranny  and  oppres-
sion, in  their  hearts  ?  Other  vices  that  have  no  malevolence  in
them  may  please  such  a  Deity,  but  surely  malevolence  cannot
please  him.

If  we  form  our  notions  of  the  moral  attributes  of  the  Deity
from  what  we  see  of  his  government  of  the  world,  from  the  dic-
tates of  reason  and  conscience,  or  from  the  doctrine  of  revelation ;
justice,  veracity,  faithfulness,  the  love  of  virtue  and  dislike  of
vice,  appear  to  be  no  less  essential  attributes  of  his  nature  and
goodness.  ^

In  man,  who  is  made  after  the  image  of  God,  goodness  or  be-
nevolence is  indeed  an  essential  part  of  virtue,  but  it  is  not  the
whole.

I  am  at  a  loss  what  arguments  can  be  brought  to  prove  good-
ness to  be  essential  to  the  Deity,  which  will  not,  with  equal

X


306  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  XI.

force,  prove  other  moral  attributes  to  be  so ;  or  what  objections
can  be  brought  against  the  latter,  which  have  not  equal  stren^
against  the  former,  unless  it  be  admitted  to  be  an  objection
against  other  moral  attributes,  that  they  do  not  accord  with  the
doctrine  of  necessity.

If  other  moral  evils  may  be  attributed  to  the  Deity  as  the
means  of  promoting  general  good,  why  may  not  false  declara-
tions and  false  promises  ?  And  then  what  ground  have  we  left
to  believe  the  truth  of  what  he  reveals,  or  to  rely  upon  what  he
promises  ?

Supposing  this  strange  view  of  the  Divine  nature  were  to  be
adopted  in  favour  of  the  doctrine  of  necessity,  there  is  still  a
great  difficulty  to  be  resolved.

Since  it  is  supposed  that  the  Supreme  Being  had  no  other  end
in  making  and  governing  the  imiverse,  but  to  produce  the  great-
est degree  of  happiness  to  his  creatures  in  general,  how  comes
it  to  pass  that  there  is  so  much  misery  in  a  system  made  and  go-
verned by  infinite  wisdom  and  power  for  a  contrary  purpose  ?

IV.  The  solution  of  this  difficulty  leads  us  necessarily  to  an-
other  hypothesis f  That  all  the  misery  and  vice  that  is  in  the  world
is  a  necessary  ingredient  in  that  system  which  produces  the  great-
est sum  of  happiness  upon  the  whole.  This  connexion  betwixt
the  greatest  sum  of  happiness  and  all  the  misery  that  is  in  the
universe,  must  be  fatal  and  necessary  in  the  nature  of  things,  so
that  even  Almighty  power  cannot  breiak  it :  for  benevolence  can
never  lead  to  inflict  misery  without  necessity.

This  necessary  connexion  between  the  greatest  sum  of  happi-
ness upon  the  whole,  and  all  the  natural  and  moral  evil  that  is,
or  has  been,  or  shall  be,  being  once  established,  it  is  impossible
for  mortal  eyes  to  discern  how  far  this  evil  may  extend,  or  on
whom  it  may  happen  to  fall ;  whether  this  fatal  connexion  may
be  temporary  or  eternal,  or  what  proportion  of  the  happiness
may  be  balanced  by  it.

A  world  made  by  perfect  wisdom  and  almighty  power,  for
no  other  end  but  to  make  it  happy,  presents  the  most  pleasing
prospect  that  can  be  imagined.  We  expect  nothing  but  imin-
terrupted  happiness  to  prevail  for  ever.  But,  alas!  when  we
consider  that  in  this  happiest  system,  there  must  be  necessarily
all  the  misery  and  vice  we  see,  and  how  much  more  we  know
not,  how  is  the  prospect  darkened !

[These  two  hypotheses,  the  one  limiting  the  moral  character
of  the  Deity,  tne  other  limiting  his  power,  seem  to  me  to  be
the  necessary  consequences  of  necessity,  when  it  is  joined  vdth
Theism ;  and  they  have  accordingly  been  adopted  by  the  ablest
defenders  of  that  doctrine.]

If  some  defenders  of  liberty,  by  limiting  too  rashly  the  Divine
prescience,  in order  to  defend  that  system,  have  raised  high


OP  THE  PERMISSION  OF  EVIL.  gQY

indignation  in  their  opponents ;  have  they  not  equal  ground  of
indignation  against  those  who,  to  defend  necessity,  limit  the
moral  perfection  of  the  Deity,  and  his  almighty  power  ?

V.  [I^et  us  consider,  on  the  other  hand,  what  consequences
may  be  fairly  drawn  from  God's  permitting  the  aimse  of  liberty
in  agents  on  whom  he  has  bestowed  i^.]

If  it  be  asked.  Why  does  God  permit  so  much  sin  in  his  crea-
tion ?  I  confess  I  cannot  answer  the  question,  but. must  lay  my
hand  upon  my  mouth.  He  giveth  no  account  of  his  conduct  to
the  children  of  men.  It  is  our  part  to  obey  his  commands,  and
not  to  say  imto  him.  Why  dost  thou  thus  ?

Hypotheses  might  be  framed ;  but  while  we  have  groimd  to
be  satisfied  that  he  does  nothing  but  what  is  right,  it  is  more
becoming  us  to  acknowledge  that  the  ends  and  reasons  of  his
universal  government  are  beyond  our  knowledge,  and  perhaps
beyond  the  comprehension  of  human  understanding.  We  can-
not penetrate  so  far  into  the  counsel  of  the  Almighty,  as  to  know
all  the  reasons  why  it  became  him,  of  whom  are  aU  things,  and
to  whom  are  all  things,  to  create,  not  only  machines,  which  are
solely  moved  by  his  hand,  but  servants  and  children,  who,  by
obeying  his  commands,  and  imitating  his  moral  perfections,
might  rise  to  a  high  degree  of  glory  and  happiness  in  his  favour,
or,  by  perverse  disobedience,  might  incur  guilt  and  just  punish-
ment. In  this  he  appears  to  us  awful  in  his  justice,  as  well  as
amiable  in  his  goodness.

But,  as  he  disdains  not  to  appeal  to  men  for  the  equity  of  his
proceedings  towards  them  when  his  character  is  impeached,  we
may,  with  humble  reverence,  plead  for  God,  and  vindicate  that
moral  excellence  which  is  the  glory  of  his  nature,  and  of  which
the  image  is  the  glory  and  the  perfection  of  man.

Let  us  observe,  first  of  all,  that  to  permit  hath  two  meanings.
It  signifies,  not  to  forbid ;  and  it  signifies,  not  to  hinder  by  superior
power.  In  the  first  of  these  senses,  God  never  permits  sin.  His
law  forbids  every  moral  evil.  By  his  laws  and  by  his  govern-
ment, he  gives  every  encouragement  to  good  conduct,  and  every
discouragement  to  bad.  But  he  does  not  always^  by  his  superior
power,  hinder  it  from  being  committed.  This  is  the  ground  of
the  accusation ;  and  this,  it  is  said,  is  the  very  same  thing  as
directly  to  vrill  and  to  cause  it.

As  this  is  asserted  without  proof,  and  is  far  from  being  self-
evident,  it  might  be  sufficient  to  deny  it  until  it  be  proved.  But,
without  resting  barely  on  the  defensive,  we  may  observe,  that
the  only  moral  attributes  that  can  be  supposed  inconsistent  with
the  permission  of  sin,  are  either  goodness  or  justice.

The  defenders  of  necessity,  with  whom  we  have  to  do  in  this
point,  as  they  maintain  that  goodness  is  the  only  essential  moral
attribute  of  the  Deity,  and  the  motive  of  all  his  actions,  must,  if

X  2


308  ESSAY  IV.  -CHAP.  XI.

they  will  be  consistent,  maintain,  That  to  will,  and  directly  to
cause  sin,  much  more  not  to  hinder  it,  is  consistent  with  perfect
goodness,  nay,  that  goodness  is  a  sufficient  motive  to  justify  the
willing  and  directly  causing  it.

With  regard  to  them,  therefore,  it  is  surely  unnecessary  to
attempt  to  reconcile  the  permission  of  sin  with  the  goodness  of
God,  since  an  inconsistency  between  that  attribute  and  the  caus-
ing of  sin  wo]ild  overturn  their  whole  svstem.

If  the  causing  of  uioral  evil,  and  being  the  real  author  of  it,
be  consistent  with  perfect  goodness,  what  pretence  can  there  be
to  say,  that  not  to  hinder  it  is  inconsistent  with  perfect  good-
ness ?

[What  is  incumbent  upon  them,  therefore,  to  prove  is,  "That
the  permission  of  sin  is  inconsistent  with  justice ;"  and,  upon  this
point,  we  are  ready  to  join  issue  with  them.]

But  what  pretence  can  there  be  to  say,  that  the  permission  of
sin  is  perfectly  consistent  with  goodness  in  the  Deity,  but  incon-
sistent with  justice  ?

Is  it  not  as  easy  to  conceive,  that  he  should  permit  sin,  though
virtue  be  his  deUght,  as  that  he  inflicts  misery,  when  his  sole
delight  is  to  bestow  happiness  ?  Should  it  appear  incredible,  that
the  permission  of  sin  may  tend  to  promote  virtue,  to  them  who
believe  that  the  infliction  of  misery  is  necessary  to  promote
happiness  ?

The  justice,  as  well  as  the  goodness  of  God*s  moral  govern-
ment of  mankind,  appears  in  this :  That  his  laws  are  not  arbitrary
nor  grievous,  as  it  is  only  by  the  obedience  of  them  that  our
nature  can  be  perfected  and  qualified  for  future  happiness ;  that
he  is  ready  to  aid  our  weakness,  to  help  our  infirmities,  and  not
to  sufiTer  us  to  be  tempted  above  what  we  are  able  to  bear ;  that
he  is  not  strict  to  mark  iniquity,  or  to  execute  judgment  speedily
against  an  evil  work,  but  is  long-suflering,  and  waits  to  be  gra-
cious ;  that  he  is  ready  to  receive  the  humble  penitent  to  his
favour ;  that  he  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  but  m  every  nation
he  that  fears  God  and  works  righteousness  is  accepted  of  him ;
that  of  every  man  he  will  require  an  account,  proportioned  to  the
talents  he  hath  received ;  that  he  delights  in  mercy,  but  hath  no
pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked  ;  and  therefore  in  punishing
will  never  go  beyond  the  demerit  of  the  criminal,  nor  beyond
what  the  rides  of  his  universal  government  require.

There  were,  in  ancient  ages,  some  who  said,  "  The  way  of  the
Lord  is  not  equal ; "  to  whom  the  prophet,  in  the  name  of  God,
makes  this  reply,  which,  in  all  ages,  is  sufficient  to  repel  this
accusation :  "  Hear  now,  O  house  of  Israel,  Is  not  my  way
equal  ?  are  not  your  ways  unequal  ?  When  a  righteous  man
turneth  away  from  his  righteousness,  and  committeth  iniquity,
for  his  iniquity  which  he  hath  done,  shall  he  die." Again,  when


OP  THE  PERMISSION  OF  EVIL.  30J)

the  wicked  man  tumeth  away  from  his  wickedness  that  he  hath
committed,  and  doeth  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall  save
his  soul  alive.  O  house  of  Israel,  are  not  my  ways  equal  ?  are
not  your  ways  unecj^ual  ?  Repent,  and  turn  from  all  your  trans-
gressions ;  so  iniqiuty  shall  not  be  your  ruin.  Cast  away  from
you  all  your  transgressions,  whereby  ye  have  transgressed,  and
make  you  a  new  heart,  and  a  new  spirit :  for  why  vnll  ye  die,  O
house  of  Israel  ?  For  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him
that  dieth,  saith  the  Lord  God."

VI.  Another  argument  for  necessity  has  been  lately  offered,
which  we  shall  very  briefly  consider.

[It  has  been  maintained,  that  the  power  of  thinking  is  the  re-
sult of  a  certain  modification  of  matter ,  and  that  a  certain  con-
figuration of  brain  makes  a  soul ;  and,  if  man  be  wholly  a  mate-
rial being,  it  is  said  that  it  will  not  be  denied  that  he  must  be
a  mechanical  being;  that  the  doctrine  of  necessity  is  a  direct
inference  from  that  of  materialism,  and  its  undoubted  conse-
quence.]

As  this  argument  can  have  no  weight  with  those  who  do  not
see  reason  to  embrace  this  system  of  materialism ;  so,  even  with
those  who  do,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  a  mere  sophism.

Philosophers  have  been  wont  to  conceive  matter  to  be  an  inert
passive  being,  and  to  have  certain  properties  inconsistent  with
the  power  of  thinking  or  of  acting.  But  a  philosopher  arises,
who  proves,  we  shall  suppose,  that  we  were  quite  mistaken  in
our  notion  of  matter ;  that  it  has  not  the  properties  we  supposed,
and,  in  fact,  has  no  properties  but  those  of  attraction  and  repul-
sion ;  but  still  he  thinks  that,  being  matter,  it  will  not  be  denied
that  it  is  a  mechanical  being,  and  that  the  doctrine  of  necessity
is  a  direct  inference  from  that  of  materialism.

Herein,  however,  he  deceives  himself.  If  matter  be  what  we
conceived  it  to  be,  it  is  equally  incapable  of  thinking  and  of  acting
freely.  But  if  the  properties,  from  which  we  drew  this  conclu-
sion, have  no  reality,  as  he  thinks  he  has  proved  ;  if  it  have  the
powers  of  attraction  and  repulsion,  and  require  only  a  certain
configuration  to  make  it  think  rationally,  it  will  be  impossible  to
show  any  good  reason  why  the  same  configuration  may  not  make
it  act  rationally  and  freely.  If  its  reproach  of  solidity,  inert-
ness, and  sluggishness,  be  vriped  off;  and  if  it  be  raised  in  our
esteem  to  a  nearer  approach  to  the  nature  of  what  we  call  spirit-
ual and  immaterial  beings,  why  should  it  still  be  nothing  but
a  mechanical  being  ?  Is  its  solidity,  inertness,  and  sluggishness,
to  be  first  removed  to  make  it  capable  of  thinking,  and  then  re-
stored in  order  to  make  it  incapable  of  acting  ?

[Those,  therefore,  who  reason  justly  from  this  system  of  ma-
terialism will  easily  perceive  that  the  doctrine  of  necessity  is  so
far  from  being  a  direct  inference,  that  it  can  receive  no  support
from  it."]


310  ESSAY  IV.  CHAP.  XI.

VII.  To  conclude  this  Essay :  Extremes  of  all  kinds  ought
to  be  avoided ;  yet  men  are  prone  to  run  into  them ;  and,  to
shun  one  extreme,  we  often  run  into  the  contrary.

Of  all  extremes  of  opinion,  none  are  more  dangerous  than
those  that  exalt  the  povsrers  of  man  too  high,  on  the  one  hand,
or  sink  them  too  low,  on  the  other.

By  raising  them  too  high,  we  feed  pride  and  vainglory,  we
lose  the  sense  of  our  dependence  upon  God  and  engage  in  at-
tempts beyond  our  abilities.  By  depressing  them  too  low,  we
cut  the  sinews  of  action  and  of  obligation,  and  are  tempted  to
think  that,  as  we  can  do  nothing,  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  to
be  carried  passively  along  by  the  stream  of  necessity.

Some  good  men,  apprehending  that,  to  kill  pride  and  vain-
glory, our  active  powers  cannot  be  too  much  depressed,  have
been  led,  by  zeal  for  religion,  to  deprive  us  of  all  active  power.

Other  good  men,  by  a  like  zeal,  have  been  led  to  depreciate
the  human  understanding,  and  to  put  out  the  light  of  nature
and  reason,  in  order  to  exalt  that  of  revelation.

Those  weapons  which  were  taken  up  in  support  of  religion,
are  now  employed  to  overturn  it ;  and  what  was,  by  some,  ac-
counted the  bulwark  of  orthodoxy,  is  become  the  stronghold  of
atheism  and  infidelity.

[Atheists  join  hands  with  theologians,  (1)  in  depriving  man
of  all  active  power,  that  they  may  destroy  all  moral  obligation^  and  *
all  sense  ot  right  and  vsrong. They  join  hands  with  theologi-
ans, {2)  in  depreciating  the  human  understanding,  iliat  they  may
lead  us  into  absolute  scepticism.'\

God,  in  mercy  to  the  human  race,  has  made  us  of  such  a
frame,  that  no  speculative  opinion  whatsoever  can  root  out  the
sense  of  guilt  and  demerit  when  we  do  wrong,  nor  the  peace  and
joy  of  a  good  conscience  when  we  do  what  is  right.  No  specu-
lative opinion  can  root  out  a  regard  to  the  testimony  of  our
senses,  of  our  memory,  and  of  our  rational  faculties.  But  we
have  reason  to  be  jealous  of  opinions  which  run  counter  to  those
natural  sentiments  of  the  human  mind,  and  tend  to  shake,  though
they  never  can  eradicate  them.

There  is  little  reason  to  fear,  that  the  conduct  of  men,  with
regard  to  the  concerns  of  the  present  life,  will  ever  be  much
affected,  either  by  the  doctrine  of  necessity,  or  by  scepticism.  It
were  to  be  wished  that  men's  conduct,  with  regard  to  the  con-
cerns of  another  life,  were  in  as  little  danger  from  those  opinions.

In  the  present  state,  we  see  some  who  zealously  maintain  the
doctrine  of  necessity,  others  who  as  zealously  maintain  that  of
liberty.  One  would  be  apt  to  think  that  a  practical  belief  of  these
contrary  systems  should  produce  very  different  conduct  in  them
that  hold  them ;  yet  we  see  no  such  difference  in  the  affairs  of
common  life.


OP  THE  PERMISSION  OP  EVIL.  gH

The  fatalist  deliberates,  and  resolves,  and  plights  his  faith.
He  lays  down  a  plan  of  conduct,  and  prosecutes  it  vdth  vigour
and  industry.  He  exhorts  and  commands,  and  holds  those  to  be
ansv^^erable  for  their  conduct  to  vsrhom  he  hath  committed  any
charge.  He  blames  those  that  are  false  or  imfaithful  to  him,  as
other  men  do.  He  perceives  dignity  and  worth  in  some  charac-
ters and  actions,  and  in  others  demerit  and  turpitude.  He  re-
sents injuries,  and  is  grateful  for  good  offices.

If  any  man  should  plead  the  doctrine  of  necessity  to  exculpate
murder,  theft,  or  robbery,  or  even  wilful  negligence  in  the  dis-
charge of  his  duty,  his  judge,  though  a  fatalist,  if  he  had  com-
mon sense,  would  laugh  at  such  a  plea,  and  would  not  allow  it
even  to  alleviate  the  crime.

In  all  such  cases,  he  sees  that  it  would  be  absurd  not  to  act
and  to  judge  as  those  ought  to  do  who  believe  themselves  and
other  men  to  be  free  agents — just  as  the  sceptic,  to  avoid  absur-
dity, must,  when  he  goes  into  the  world,  act  and  judge  like
other  men  who  are  not  sceptics.

If  the  fatalist  he  as  little  influenced  by  the  opinion  of  neces-
sity in  his  moral  and  religious  concerns^  and  in  his  expectations
concerning  another  world,  as  he  is  in  the  common  affairs  of  life,  his
speculative  opinion  will  probably  do  him  little  hurt.  But,  if  he
trust  so  far  to  the  doctrine  of  necessity,  as  to  indulge  sloth  and
inactivity  in  his  duty,  and  hope  to  exculpate  himself  to  his
Maker  by  that  4octrine,  let  him  consider  whether  he  sustains  this
excuse  from  his  servants  and  dependants,  when  they  are  negli-
gent or  unfaithful  in  what  is  committed  to  their  charge.

Bishop  Butler,  in  his  "  Analogy,"  has  an  excellent  chapter
upon  the  opinion  of  necessity  considered  as  influencing  practice y
which  I  think  highly  deserving  the  consideration  of  those  who
are  inclined  to  that  opinion.*

•  "Analogy  of  Religion,  Natural  and  Revealed,  to  the  Constitution  and
Course  of  Nature,"  Part  I.  chap.  vi.


ESSAY  V.

OF  MORALS.

CHAPTER  I.

OF  THE  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  MORALS.

I.  Morals,  like  all  other  sciences,  must  have  first  'principles^
on  which  all  moral  reasoning  is  grounded.

In  every  branch  of  knowledge  where  disputes  have  been  raised,
it  is  useful  to  distinguish  the  first  principles  from  the  super-
structure. They  are  the  foundation  on  which  the  whole  fabric
of  the  science  leans ;  and  whatever  is  not  supported  by  this
foundation  can  have  no  stability.

[In  all  rational  belief,  the  thing  believed  is  (1)  either  itself  a
first  principle,  or  (2)  it  is  by  just  reasoning  deduced  from  first
principles.]  When  men  differ,  about  deductions  of  reasonings
the  appeal  must  be  made  to  the  rules  of  reasoning,  which  have
been  very  imanimously  fixed  from  the  days  of  Aristotle.  But
when  they  differ  about  a  first  principle,  the  appeal  is  made  to
another  tribunal ;  to  that  of  common  sense.

How  the  genuine  decisions  of  common  sense  may  be  distin-
guished from  the  counterfeit,  has  been  considered  in  Essay  VI.
on  "  The  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man,"  chapter  fourth,  to  which
the  reader  is  referred.  What  I  would  here  observe  is,  that  as
first  principles  diflfer  from  deductions  of  reasoning  in  the  nature
of  their  evidence,  and  must  be  tried  by  a  different  standard
when  they  are  called  in  question,  it  is  of  importance  to  know  to
which  of  these  two  classes  a  truth,  which  we  would  examine,
belongs.  When  they  are  not  distinguished,  men  are  apt  to
demand  proof  for  every  thing  they  think  fit  to  deny :  and  when
we  attempt  to  prove  by  direct  argument,  what  is  really  self-
evident,  the  reasoning  will  always  be  inconclusive :  for  it  will
either  take  for  granted  the  thing  to  be  proved,  or  something  not
more  evident ;  and  so,  instead  of  giving  strength  to  the  conclu-
sion, will  rather  tempt  those  to  doubt  of  it,  who  never  did  so
before.

II.  I  propose,  therefore,  in  this  chapter,  to  point  out  some  of
the  first  principles  of  morals,  without  pretending  to  a  complete
enumeration.


OF  THE  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  MORALS.  gjg

rrhe  principles  I  am  to  mention,  relate  either  to  virtue  in
funeral,  or  to  the  different  particular  branches  of  virtue,  or  to
th-e  comparison  of  virtues  where  they  seem  to  interfere.

1.  There  are  some  things  in  human  conduct,  that  merit  appro-
^3.tion  and  praise,  others  that  merit  blame  and  punishment ;  and
different  degrees  either  of  approbation  or  of  blame,  are  due  to
different  actions.

2.  What  is  in  no  degree  voluntary,  can  neither  deserve  moral
approbation  nor  blame.

3.  What  is  done  from  unavoidable  necessity  may  be  agreeable
<>T  disagreeable,  useful  or  hurtful,  but  cannot  be  the  object
either  of  blame  or  of  moral  approbation.

4.  Men  may  be  highly  culpable  in  omitting  what  they  ought
to  have  done,  as  well  as  m  doing  what  they  ought  not.

5.  We  ought  to  use  the  best  means  we  can  to  be  well  informed
of  our  duty,  by  serious  attention  to  moral  instruction;  by  ob-
serving what  we  approve,  and  what  we  disapprove,  in  other  men,
whether  our  acquaintance,  or  those  whose  actions  are  recorded
in  history  ;  by  reflecting  often,  in  a  calm  and  dispassionate  hour,
on  our  own  past  conduct,  that  we  may  discern  what  was  wrong,
what  was  right,  and  what  might  have  been  better;  by  deli-
berating coolly  and  impartially  upon  our  future  conduct,  as  far
as  we  can  foresee  the  opportunities  we  may  have  of  doing  good,
or  the  temptations  to  do  wrong ;  and  by  having  this  principle
deeply  fixed  in  our  minds,  that  as  moral  excellence  is  the  true
worth  and  glory  of  a  man,  so  the  knowledge  of  our  duty  is  to
every  man,  in  every  station  of  Ufe,  the  most  important  of  all
knowledge.

6.  It  ought  to  be  our  most  serious  concern  to  do  our  duty  as
far  as  we  know  it,  and  to  fortify  our  minds  against  every  tempta-
tion to  deviate  &om  it;  by  maintaining  a  lively  sense  of  the
beauty  of  right  conduct,  and  of  its  present  and  future  reward,  of
the  turpitude  of  vice,  and  of  its  bad  consequences  here  and  here-
after ;  by  having  always  in  our  eye  the  noblest  examples ;  by
the  habit  of  subjecting  our  passions  to  the  government  of  rea-
son ;  by  firm  purposes  and  resolutions  with  regard  to  our  con-
duct ;  by  avoiding  occasions  of  temptation  when  we  can ;  and
by  imploring  the  aid  of  Him  who  made  us,  in  every  hour  of
temptation.

III.  These  principles  concerning  virtue  and  vice  in  general,
must  appear  self-evident  to  every  man  who  hath  a  conscience,
and  who  hath  taken  pains  to  exercise  this  natural  power  of  his
mind. I  proceed  to  others  that  are  more  particular.

1.  We  ought  to  prefer  a  greater  good,  though  more  distant,
to  a  less  ;  and  a  less  evil  to  a  greater.

A  regard  to  our  own  good,  though  we  had  no  conscience,
dictates  this  principle ;  and  we  cannot  help  disapproving  the


314  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  I.

man  that  acts  contrary  to  it,  as  deserving  to  lose  the  good  which
he  wantonly  threw  away,  and  to  suffer  the  evil  which  he  know-
ingly brought  upon  his  own  head.

We  observed  before,  that  the  ancient  moralists,  and  many
among  the  modem,  have  deduced  the  whole  of  morals  from  this
principle,  and  that  when  we  make  a  right  estimate  of  goods  and
evils  according  to  their  degree,  their  dignity,  their  duration,
and  according  as  they  are  more  or  less  in  our  power,  it  leads  to
the  practice  of  every  virtue :  more  directly,  indeed,  to  the  virtues
of  self-government,  to  prudence,  to  temperance,  and  to  fortitude  ;
and,  though  more  indirectly,  even  to  justice,  humanity,  and  all
the  social  virtues,  when  their  influence  upon  our  happiness  is
well  understood.

Though  it  be  not  the  noblest  principle  of  conduct,  it  has  this
peculiar  advantage,  that  its  force  is  felt  by  the  most  ignorant,
and  even  by  the  most  abandoned.

Let  a  man's  moral  judgment  be  ever  so  little  improved  by
exercise,  or  ever  so  much  corrupted  by  bad  habits,  he  cannot  be
indifferent  to  his  own  happiness  or  misery.  When  he  is  become
insensible  to  every  nobler  motive  to  right  conduct,  he  cannot  be
insensible  to  this.  And  though  to  act  from  this  motive  solely
may  be  called  prudence  rather  than  virtue^  yet  this  prudence
deserves  some  regard  upon  its  own  account,  and  much  more  as
it  is  the  friend  and  ally  of  virtue,  and  the  enemy  of  all  vice  ;  and
as  it  gives  a  favourable  testimony  of  virtue  to  those  who  are
deaf  to  every  other  recommendation.

[If  a  man  can  be  induced  to  do  his  duty  even  from  a  regard
to  his  own  happiness,  he  will  soon  find  reason  to  love  virtue  for
her  own  sake,  and  to  act  from  motives  less  mercenary. "l

I  cannot  therefore  approve  of  those  moralists  who  would
banish  all  persuasives  to  virtue  taken  from  the  consideration  of
private  good.  In  the  present  state  of  human  nature  these  are
not  useless  to  the  best,  and  they  are  the  only  means  left  of  re-
claiming the  abandoned.

%  As  far  as  the  intention  of  nature  appears  in  the  constitution
of  man,  we  ought  to  comply  with  that  intention,  and  to  act
agreeably  to  it.

The  Author  of  our  being  hath  given  us  not  only  the  power  of
acting  within  a  limited  sphere,  but  various  principles  or  springs
of  action,  of  different  nature  and  dignity,  to  direct  us  m  the
exercise  of  our  active  power.

From  the  constitution  of  every  species  of  the  inferior  animals,
and  especially  from  the  active  principles  which  nature  has  given
them,  we  easily  perceive  the  manner  of  life  for  which  nature
intended  them ;  and  they  uniformly  act  the  part  to  which  they
are  led  by  their  constitution,  without  any  reflection  upon  it,  or
intention  of  obeying  its  dictates. Man  only,  of  the  inhabitants


OF  THE  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  MORALS.  315

of  this. world,  is  made  capable  of  observing  his  own  constitution,
what  kind  of  life  it  is  made  for,  and  of  acting  according  to  that
intention,  or  contrary  to  it.  He  only  is  capable  of  yielding  an
intentional  obedience  to  the  dictates  of  his  oatare,  or  of  rebelling
against  them.

In  treating  of  the  principles  of  action  in  man,  it  has  been
shown,  that  as  his  natural  instincts  and  bodily  appetites  are  well
adapted  to'  thie  preservation  of  his  natural  Ufe,  and  to  the  con-
tinuance of  the  species;  so  his  natural  desires,  affections,  and
passions,  when  uncorrupted  by  vicious  habits,  and  imder  the
government  of  the  leading  principles  of  reason  and  conscience,
axe  excellently  fitted  for  the  rational  and  social  Ufe.  Every
vicious  action  shows  an  excess,  or  defect,  or  wrong  direction  of
some  natural  spring  of  action,  and  therefore  may,  very  justly,
be  said  to  be  unnatural.  Every  virtuous  action  agrees  with  the
uncorrupted  principles  of  human  nature.

The  Stoics  defined  virtue  to  be  a  life  according  to  nature.
Some  of  them,  more  accurately,  a  life  according  to  the  nature  of
man,  in  so  far  as  it  is  superior  to  that  of  brutes.  The  life  of  a
brute  is  according  to  the  nature  of  the  brute ;  but  it  is  neither
virtuous  nor  vicious.  The  life  of  a  moral  agent  cannot  be  accord-
ing to  his  nature,  unless  it  be  virtuous.  That  conscience,  which
is  in  every  man's  breast,  is  the  law  of  God  written  in  his  heart,
which  he  cannot  disobey  without  acting  unnaturally,  and  being
self-condemned.

The  intention  of  nature,  in  the  various  active  principles  of
man,  in  the  desires  of  power,  of  knowledge,  and  of  esteem,  in
the  affection  to  children,  to  near  relations,  and  to  the  communi-
ties to  which  we  belong,  in  gratitude,  in  compassion,  and  even
in  resentment  and  emulation,  is  very  obvious,  and  has  been
pointed  out  in  treating  of  those  principles.  Nor  is  it  less  evi-
dent, that  reason  and  conscience  are  given  us  to  regulate  the
inferior  principles,  so  that  they  may  conspire,  in  a  regular  and
consistent  plan  of  life,  in  pursuit  of  some  worthy  end.

3.  No  man  is  born  for  himself  only.  Every  man,  therefore,
ought  to  consider  himself  as  a  member  of  the  common  society
of  mankind,  and  of  those  subordinate  societies  to  which  he
belongs,  such  as  family,  friends,  neighbourhood,  country,  and
to  do  as  much  good  as  he  can,  and  as  little  hurt  to  the  societies
of  which  he  is  a  part.

[This  axiom  leads  directly  to  the  practice  of  every  social  vir-
tue, and  indirectly  to  the  virtues  of  self-government,  by  which
only  we  can  be  qualified  for  discharging  the  duty  we  owe  to
society.]

4.  In  every  case,  we  ought  to  act  that  part  towards  another,
which  we  would  judge  to  be  right  in  him  to  act  towards  us,  if
we  were  in  his  circumstances  and  he  in  ours  ;  or,  more  generally,


316  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  T.

what  we  approve  in  others,  that  tve  ought  to  practise  in  like
circumstances ;  and  what  we  condemn  in  others,  we  ought  not
to  do.

If  there  be  any  such  thing  as  right  and  wrong  in  the  conduct
of  moral  agents,  it  must  be  the  same  to  all  in  the  same  circum-
stances.

We  stand  all  in  the  same  relation  to  Him  who  made  us,  and
will  call  us  to  account  for  our  conduct ;  for  with  Him  there  is
no  respect  of  persons.  We  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  one
another  as  members  of  the  great  community  of  mankind.  The
duties  consequent  upon  the  different  ranks  and  offices  and  rela-
tions of  men  are  the  same  to  all  in  the  same  circumstances.

[It  is  not  want  of  judgment,  but  want  of  candour  and  impar-
tiality, that  hinders  men  from  discerning  what  they  owe  to
others.]  They  are  quicksighted  enough  in  discerning  what  is
due  to  themselves.  When  they  are  injured,  or  ill  treated,  they
see  it,  and  feel  resentment.  It  is  the  want  of  candour  that
makes  men  use  one  measure  for  the  duty  they  owe  to  others,
and  another  measure  for  the  duty  that  others  owe  to  them  in
like  circumstances.  That  men  ought  to  judge  with  candour,  as
in  all  other  cases,  so  especially  in  what  concerns  their  moral
conduct,  is  surely  self-evident  to  every  intelligent  being.  The
man  who  takes  offence  when  he  is-  injured  in  his  person,  in  his
property,  in  his  good  name,  pronounces  judgment  against  himself
if  he  act  so  toward  his  neighbour.

[As  the  equity  and  obligation  of  this  rule  of  conduct  is  self-
evident  to  every  man  who  hath  a  conscience  ;  so  it  is,  of  all  the
rules  of  morality,  the  most  comprehensive,  and  truly  deserves  the
encomium  given  it  by  the  highest  authority,  that  it  is  the  law
and  the  prophets,"]

It  comprehends  every  rule  of  justice  without  exception.  It
comprehends  all  the  relative  duties,  arising  either  from  the  more
permanent  relations  of  parent  and  child,  of  master  and  servant,
of  magistrate  and  subject,  of  husband  and  wife,  or  from  the
more  transient  relations  of  rich  and  poor,  of  buyer  and  seller,  of
debtor  and  creditor,  of  benefactor  and  beneficiary,  of  friend  and
enemy.  It  comprehends  every  duty  of  charity  and  humanity,
and  even  of  courtesy  and  good  manners.

Nay,  I  think  that,  without  any  force  or  straining,  it  extends
even  to  the  duties  of  self-government.  For,  as  every  man
approves  in  others  the  virtues  of  prudence,  temperance,  self-
command,  and  fortitude,  he  must  perceive,  that  what  is  right  in
others  must  be  right  in  himself  in  like  circumstances.

To  sum  up  all,  he  who  acts  invariably  by  this  rule  will  never
deviate  from  the  path  of  his  duty  but  from  an  error  of  judgment.
And,  as  he  feels  the  obligation  that  he  and  all  men  are  under
to  use  the  best  means  in  his  power  to  have  his  judgment  well


OF  THE  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OP  MORALS.  817

informed  in  matters  of  duty,  his  errors  will  only  be  such  as  are
invincible,

[It  may  be  observed,  that  this  axiom  supposes  (1)  a  faculty
in  man  by  which  he  can  distinguish  right  conduct  from  wrong.
It  supposes  also,  (2)  that,  by  this  faculty,  we  easily  perceive  the
right  and  the  wrong  in  other  men  that  are  indifferent  to  us ;  but
are  very  apt  to  be  blinded  by  the  partiality  of  selfish  passions
when  the  case  concerns  ourselves.]  Every  claim  we  have  against
others  is  apt  to  be  magnified  by  self-love,  when  viewed  directly.
A  change  of  persons  removes  this  prejudice,  and  brings  the  claim
to  appear  in  its  just  magnitude.

5.  To  every  man  who  believes  the  existence,  the  perfections,
and  the  providence  of  God,  the  veneration  and  submission  we
owe  to  him  is  self-evident.  Right  sentiments  of  the  Deity  and
of  his  works,  not  only  make  the  duty  we  owe  to  him  obvious  to
every  intelligent  being,  but  likewise  add  the  authority  of  a  divine
law  to  every  rule  of  right  conduct.

IV.  [There  is  another  class  of  axioms  in  morals,  by  which,
when  there  seems  to  be  an  opposition  between  the  actions  that
different  virtues  lead  to,  we  determine  to  which  the  preference
is  due.]

Between  the  several  virtues,  as  they  are  dispositions  of  mind,
or  determinations  of  will  to  act  according  to  a  certain  general
rule,  there  can  be  no  opposition.  They  dwell  together  most
amicably,  and  give  mutual  aid  and  ornament,  without  the  possi-
bility of  hostility  or  opposition,  and,  taken  altogether,  make  one
uniform  and  consistent  rule  of  conduct.  But,  between  particular
external  actions,  which  different  virtues  would  lead  to,  there
may  be  an  opposition.  Thus,  the  same  man  may  be  in  his  heart
generous,  grateful,  and  just.  These  dispositions  strengthen,  but
never  can  weaken  one  another.  Yet  it  may  happen  that  an
external  action  which  generosity  or  gratitude  solicits,  justice
may  forbid.

That  in  all  such  cases,  unmerited  generosity  should  yield  to
gratitude,  and  both  to  justice,  is  self-evident.  Nor  is  it  less  so,
that  immerited  beneficence  to  those  who  are  at  ease  should  yield
to  compassion  to  the  miserable,  and  external  acts  of  piety  to
works  of  mercy,  because  God  loves  mercy  more  than  sacrifice.

At  the  same  time,  we  perceive,  that  [those  acts  of  virtue  which
ought  to  yield  in  the  case  of  a  competition,  have  most  intrinsic
worth  when  there  is  no  competition.  Thus,  it  is  evident  that
there  is  more  worth  in  pure  and  unmerited  benevolence  than  in
compassion,  more  in  compassion  than  in  gratitude,  and  more  in
gratitude  than  in  justice.]

I  call  Xhe^e  first  principles,  because  they  appear  to  me  to  have
in  themselves  an  intuitive  evidence  which  I  cannot  resist.  I  find
I  can  express  them  in  other  words. I  can  illustrate  them  by.


318  ^*®^Y  V.  CHAP.  I.

examples  and  authorities^  and  perhaps  can  deduce  one  of  them
from  another ;  but  I  am  not  aole  to  deduce  them  from  other
principles  that  are  more  evident.  And  I  find  the  best  moral
reasonings  of  authors  I  am  acquainted  with,  ancient  and  modem,
heathen  and  Christian,  to  be  grounded  upon  one  or  more  of
them.

The  evidence  of  mathematical  axioms  is  not  discerned  till  men
come  to  a  certain  degree  of  maturity  of  understanding.  A  boy
must  have  formed  the  general  conception  of  quantity,  and  of
more  and  less  and  egualy  of  sum  and  difference;  and  he  must
have  been  accustomed  to  judge  of  these  relations  in  matters  of
common  life,  before  he  can  perceive  the  evidence  of  the  mathe-
matical axiom,  that  equal  quantities,  added  to  equal  quantities,
make  equal  sums.

In  like  manner,  our  moral  judgment,  or  conscience,  grows  to
maturity  from  an  imperceptible  seed,  planted  by  our  Creator,
When  we  are  capable  of  contemplating  me  actions  of  other  men,
or  of  reflecting  upon  our  own  calmly  and  dispassionately,  we
begin  to  perceive  in  them  the  qualities  of  honest  and  dishonest,
of  honourable  and  base,  of  right  and  wrong,  and  to  feel  the
sentiments  of  moral  approbation  and  disapprobation.

These  sentiments  are  at  first  feeble,  easily  warped  by  passions
and  prejudices,  and  apt  to  yield  to  authority.  By  use  and  time,
the  judgment,  in  morals,  as  in  other  matters,  gathers  strength,
and  feels  more  vigour.  We  begin  to  distinguish  the  dictates  of
passion  from  those  of  cool  reason,  and  to  perceive  that  it  is  not
always  safe  to  rely  upon  the  judgment  of  others.  By  an  impulse
of  nature  we  venture  to  judge  for  ourselves,  as  we  venture  to
walk  by  ourselves.

Ue^  There  is  a  strong  analogy  between  the  progress  of  the
body  from  infancy  to  maturity,  and  the  progress  of  all  the
powers  of  the  mind.  This  progression  in  botih  is  the  work  of
nature,  and  in  both  may  be  greatly  aided  or  hurt  by  proper
education.  It  is  natural  to  a  man  to  be  able  to  walk  or  run  or
leap ;  but  if  his  limbs  had  been  kept  in  fetters  from  his  birth,
he  would  have  none  of  those  powers.  It  is  no  less  natural  to  a
man  trained  in  society,  and  accustomed  to  judge  of  his  own
actions  and  those  of  other  men,  to  perceive  a  right  and  a  wrong,
an  honourable  and  a  base,  in  human  conduct ;  and  to  such  a
man,  I  think,  the  principles  of  morals  I  have  above  mentioned
will  appear  self-evident.  Yet  there  may  be  individuals  of  the
human  species  so  little  accustomed  to  think  or  judge  of  any
thing  but  of  gratifying  their  animal  appetites,  as  to  have  hardly
any  conception  of  right  or  wrong  in  conduct,  or  any  moral  judg-
ment; as  there  certainly  are  some  who  have  not  the  concep-
tions and  the  judgment  necessary  to  understand  the  axioms  of
geometry.


OF  SYSTEMS  OF  MORALS.  gl9

V.  Cofusltman. — From  the  principles  above  mentioned^  the
whole  system  of  moral  conduct  follows  so  easily,  and  with  so
little  aid  of  reasoning,  that  every  man  of  common  miderstanding
who  wishes  to  know  his  duty  may  know  it.  The  path  of  duty
is  a  plain  path,  which  the  upright  in  heart  can  rarely  mistake.
Such  it  must  be,  since  every  man  is  bound  to  walk  in  it.  There
are  some  intricate  cases  in  morals  which  admit  of  disputation ;
but  these  seldom  occur  in  practice ;  and  when  they  do,  the
learned  disputant  has  no  great  advantage :  for  the  unlearned
man,  who  uses  the  best  means  in  his  power  to  know  his  duty,
and  acts  according  to  his  knowledge,  is  inculpable  in  the  sight
of  God  and  man.  He  may  err,  but  he  is  not  guilty  of  immo-
rality.


CHAPTER  II.

OF  SYSTEMS  OF  MORALS.


I.  Instruction  in  morals  necessary, — If  the  knowledge  of  our
duty  be  so  level  to  the  apprehension  of  all  men,  as  has  been
represented  in  the  last  chapter,  it  may  seem  hardly  to  deserve
the  name  of  a  science.  It  may  seem  that  there  is  no  need  for
instruction  in  morals.

From  what  cause  then  has  it  happened,  that  we  have  many
large  and  learned  systems  of  moral  philosophy,  and  systems  of
natural  jurisprudence,  or  the  law  of  nature  and  nations ;  and
that,  in  modem  times,  public  professions  have  been  instituted  in
most  places  of  education  for  instructing  youth  in  these  branches
of  knowledge?

This  event,  I  think,  may  be  accounted  for,  and  the  utility  of
such  systems  and  professions  justified,  without  supposing  any
diflSiculty  or  intricacy  in  the  knowledge  of  our  duty.

[I  am  far  from  thinking  instruction  in  morals  mmecessary.
Men  may,  to  the  end  of  life,  be  ignorant  of  self-evident  truths.
They  may,  to  the  end  of  life,  entertain  gross  absurdities.  Expe-
rience shows  that  this  happens  often  in  matters  that  are  indiffer*
ent.  Much  more  may  it  happen  in  matters  where  interest,
passion,  prejudice,  and  fashion,  are  so  apt  to  pervert  the  judg-
ment.]

The  most  obvious  truths  are  not  perceived  without  some  ripe-
ness of  judgment.  For  we  see  that  children  may  be  made  to
believe  any  thing,  though  eVer  so  absurd.  Our  judgment  of
things  is  ripened,  not  by  time  only,  but  chiefly  by  being  exer-
cised about  things  of  the  same  or  of  a  similar  kind.

Judgment,  even  in  things  self-evident,  requires  a  clear,  dis-
tinct, and  steady  conception  of  the  things  about  which  we  judge


ggQ  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  U.

Our  conceptions  are  at  first  obscure  and  wavering.  The  habit
of  attending  to  them  is  necessary  to  make  them  distinct  and
steady;  and  this  habit  requires  an  exertion  of  mind  to  which
many  of  our  animal  principles  are  unfriendly.  .  The  love  of  truth
calls  for  it ;  but  its  still  voice  is  often  drowned  by  the  louder
call  of  some  passion,  or  we  are  hindered  from  listening  to  it  by
laziness  and  desultoriness.  Thus  men  often  remain  through  life
ignorant  of  things  which  they  needed  but  to  open  their  eyes  to
see,  and  which  they  would  have  seen  if  their  attention  had  been
turned  to  them.

[The  most  knowing  derive  the  greatest  part  of  their  knowledge ^
even  in  things  obvious,  from  instruction  and  information,  and
from  being  taught  to  exercise  their  natural  faculties,  which,
without  instruction,  would  lie  dormant.]

WS^  [I  am  very  apt  to  think,  that,  if  a  man  could  be  reared
from  infancy  without  any  society  of  his  fellow-creatures,  he
would  hardly  ever  show  any  sign,  either  of  moral  judgment,  or
of  the  power  of  reasoning.  His  own  actions  would  be  directed
by  his  animal  appetites  and  passions,  without  cool  reflection,  and
he  would  have  no  access  to  improve  by  observing  the  conduct  of
other  beings  like  himself.]

The  power  of  vegetation  in  the  seed  of  a  plant,  without  heat
and  moisture,  would  for  ever  lie  dormant.  The  rational  and
moral  powers  of  man  would  perhaps  lie  dormant  without  instruc-
tion and  example.  Yet  these  powers  are  a  part,  and  the  noblest
part,  of  his  constitution ;  as  the  power  of  vegetation  is  of  the
seed.

Our  first  moral  conceptions  are  probably  got  by  attending
coolly  to  the  conduct  of  others,  and  observing  what  moves  our
approbation,  what  our  indignation.  These  sentiments  spring
from  our  moral  faculty  as  naturally  as  the  sensations  of  sweet
and  bitter  from  the  faculty  of  taste.  They  have  their  natural
objects.  But  most  human  actions  are  of  a  mixed  nature,  and
have  various  colours,  according  as  they  are  viewed  on  diflferent
sides.  Prejudice  against,  or  in  favour  of  the  person,  is  apt  to
Yf&rp  our  opinion.  It  requires  attention  and  candour  to  distin-
guish the  good  from  the  ill,  and,  without  favour  or  prejudice,  to
form  a  clear  and  impartial  judgment.  In  this  we  may  be  greatly
aided  by  instruction.

He  must  be  very  ignorant  of  human  nature,  who  does  not
perceive  that  the  seed  of  virtue  in  the  mind  of  man,  like  that  of
a  tender  plant  in  an  unkindly  soil,  requires  care  and  culture  in
the  first  period  of  life,  as  well  as  our  own  exertion  when  we  come
to  maturity.

If  the  irregularities  of  passion  and  appetite  be  timely  checked,
and  good  habits  planted ;  if  we  be  excited  by  good  examples,
and  bad  examples  be  shown  in  their  proper  colour;  if  the  atten-


OP  SYSTEMS  OF  MORALS.  3gl

tion  be  prudently  directed  to  the  precepts  of  wisdom  and  virtue,
as  the  mind  is  capable  of  receiving  them ;  a  man  thus  trained
will  rarely  be  at  a  loss  to  distinguish  good  from  ill  in  his  own
conduct^  without  the  labour  of  reasoning.

II.  [The  bulk-i,'^ mankind  have  but  little  of  this  culture  in  the
proper  season ;  and  what  they  have  is  often  unskilfully  applied ;
by  which  means  bad  habits  gather  strength,  and  false  notions  of
pleasure,  of  honour,  and  of  interest,  occupy  the  mind.]  They
give  little  attention  to  what  is  right  and  honest.  Conscience  is
seldom  consulted,  and  so  little  exercised,  that  its  decisions  are
weak  and  wavering.  Although,  therefore,  to  a  ripe  understand-
ing, free  from  prejudice,  and  accustomed  to  judge  of  the  morality
of  actions,  most  truths  in  morals  will  appear  self-evident,  it  does
not  follow  that  moral  instruction  is  unnecessary  in  the  first  part
of  life,  or  that  it  may  not  be  very  profitable  in  its  more  advanced
period.

III.  Necessity  of  instruction  in  morals  shown  from  the  evidence
of  history. — The  history  of  past  ages  shows  that  nations,  highly
civilized  and  greatly  enlightened  in  many  arts  and  sciences,
may,  for  ages,  not  only^iold  the  grossest  absurdities  with  regard
to  the  Deity  and  his  worship,  but  with  regard  to  the  duty  we
owe  to  our  fellow-men,  particularly  to  children,  to  servants,  to
strangers,  to  enemies,  and  to  those  who  differ  from  us  in  religious
opinions.

Such  corruptions  in  religion,  and  in  morals,  had  spread  so  wide
among  mankind,  and  were  so  confirmed  by  custom,  as  to  require
a,  light  from  heave'n  to  correct  them.  Revelation  was  not  intended
to  supersede,  but  to  aid  the  use  of  our  natural  faculties  ;  and  I
doubt  not,  but  the  attention  given  to  moral  truths,  in  such  systems
as  we  have  mentioned,  has  contributed  much  to  correct  the  errors
and  prejudices  of  former  ages,  and  may  continue  to  have  the
same  good  effect  in  time  to  come.

IV.  It  needs  not  seem  strange,  that  systems  of  morals  may
swell  to  great  magnitude,  if  we  consider  that,  although  the
general  principles  be  few  and  simple,  their  application  extends
to  every  part  of  human  conduct,  in  every  condition,  every  rela-
tion, and  every  transaction  of  life.  [They  are  the  rule  of  life  to
the  magistrate  and  to  the  subject,  to  the  master  and  to  the  ser-
vant, to  the  parent  and  to  the  child,  to  the  fellow-citizen  and  to
the  alien,  to  the  friend  and  to  the  enemy,  to  the  buyer  and  to
the  seller,  to  the  borrower  and  to  the  lender.  Every  human
creature  is  subject  to  their  authority  in  his  actions  and  words,
and  even  in  his  thoughts.]  They  may,  in  this  respect,  be  com-
pared to  the  laws  of  motion  in  the  natural  world,  which,  though
few  and  simple,  serve  to  regulate  an  infinite  variety  of  opera-
tions throughout  the  universe.

And  as  the  beauty  of  the  laws  of  motion  is  displayed  in  the


322  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  H-

most  striking  manner,  when  we  trace  them  through  all  the  variety
of  their  effects ;  so  the  divine  beauty  and  sanctity  of  the  princi-
ples of  morals,  appear  most  august  when  we  take  a  comprehen-
sive view  of  their  application  to  every  condition  and  relation,
and  to  every  transaction  of  human  society. ?*•

This  is,  or  ought  to  be,  the  design  of  systems  of  morals.  They
may  be  made  more  or  less  extensive,  having  no  limits  fixed  by
nature,  but  the  wide  circle  of  human  transactions.  When  the
principles  are  applied  to  these  in  detail,  the  detail  is  pleasant
and  profitable.  It  requires  no  profoimd  reasoning,  (excepting,
perhaps,  in  a  few  disputable  points.)  It  admits  of  the  most
agreeable  illustration  from  examples  and  authorities ;  it  serves
to  exercise,  and  thereby  to  strengthen  moral  judgment.  And
one  who  has  given  much  attention  to  the  duty  of  man,  in  all
the  various  relations  and  circumstances  of  life,  will  probably  be
more  enlightened  in  his  own  duty,  and  more  able  to  enlighten
others.

V.  The  first  writers  in  morals^  we  are  acquainted  with,  deli-
vered their  moral  instructions,  not  in  systems,  but  in  short
unconnected  sentences,  or  aphorisms.  They  saw  no  need  for
deductions  of  reasoning,  because  the  truths  they  delivered  could
not  but  be  admitted  by  the  candid  and  attentive.

Subsequent  writers,  to  improve  the  way  of  treating  this  sub-
ject, gave  method  and  arrangement  to  moral  truths,  by  reducing
them  under  certain  division^  and  subdivisions,  as  parts  of  one
whole.  By  this  means  the  whole  is  more  easily  comprehended
and  remembered,  and  from  this  arrangement  gets  the  name  of  a
system  and  of  a  science.

A  system  of  morals  is  not  like  a  system  of  geometry,  where
the  subsequent  parts  derive  their  evidence  from  the  preceding,
and  one  cnain  of  reasoning  is  carried  on  from  the  beginning ;  so
that,  if  the  arrangement  is  changed,  the  chain  is  broken,  and  the
evidence  is  lost.  It  resembles  more  a  system  of  botany,  or
mineralogy,  where  the  subsequent  parts  depend  not  for  their
evidence  upon  the  preceding,  and  the  arrangement  is  made  to
facilitate  apprehension  and  memory,  and  not  to  give  evidence.

VI.  [Morals  have  been  methodized  in  different  ways.  The
ancients  commonly  arranged  them  under  the  four  cardinal  virtues
of  prudence,  temperance,  fortitude,  and  justice.  Christian
writers,  I  think  more  properly,  under  the  three  heads  of  the  duty
we  owe  to  God,  to  ourselves,  and  to  our  neighbour.  One  divi-
sion may  be  more  comprehensive,  or  more  natural,  than  another;
but  the  truths  arranged  are  the  same,  and  their  evidence  the
same  in  all.]

I  shall  only  further  observe,  with  regard  to  systems  of  morals,
that  they  have  been  made  more  voluminous,  and  more  intri-
cate, partly  by  mixing  political  questions  with  morals,  which  I


*^]  OP  SYSTEMS  OP  NATURAL  JURISPRUDENCE.  ggg

^1  think  improper,  because  they  belong  to  a  diiFerent  science,  and
J^l  are  grounded  on  different  principles ;  partly  by  making  what  is
"^1  commonly,  but  I  think  improperly,  called  the  "  theory  of
^*» morals,"  a  part  of  the  system.

VII.  By  the  theory  of  morals  is  meant  a  just  account  of  the
structure  of  our  moral  powers ;  that  is,  of  those  powers  of  the
inind  by  which  we  have  our  moral  conceptions,  and  distinguish
right  from  wrong  in  human  actions.  This,  indeed,  is  an  intri-
cate subject,  and  there  have  been  various  theories  and  much
controversy  about  it  in  ancient  and  in  modem  times.  But  it
has  little  connexion  with  the  knowledge  of  our  duty ;  and  those
who  differ  most  in  the  theory  of  our  moral  powers,  agree  in  the
practical  rules  of  morals  which  they  dictate.

As  a  man  may  be  a  good  judge  of  colours,  and  of  the  other
visible  qualities  of  objects,  without  any  knowledge  of  the  ana-
tomy of  the  eye,  and  of  the  theory  of  vision ;  so  a  man  may
have  a  very  clear  and  comprehensive  knowledge  of  what  is  right
and  what  is  wrong  in  human  conduct,  who  never  studied  the
structure  of  our  moral  powers.

A  good  ear  in  music  may  be  much  improved  by  attention  and
practice  in  that  art ;  but  very  little  by  studying  the  anatomy  of
the  ear,  and  the  theory  of  sound.  In  order  to  acquire  a  good
eye  or  a  good  ear  in  the  arts  that  require  them,  the  theory  of
vision  and  the  theory  of  sound  are  by  no  means  necessary,  and
indeed  of  very  Jittle  use.  Of  as  little  necessity  or  use  is  what
we  call  the  theory  of  morals,  in  order  to  improve  our  moral
judgment.

I  mean  not  to  depreciate  this  branch  of  knowledge.  It  is  a
very  important  part  of  the  philosophy  of  the  human  mind,  and
ought  to  be  considered  as  such,  but  not  as  any  part  of  morals.
By  the  name  we  give  to  it,  and  by  the  custom  of  making  it  a
part  of  every  system  of  morals,  men  may  be  led  into  this  gross
mistake,  which  I  wish  to  obviate.  That  in  order  to  understand
his  duty,  a  man  must  needs  be  a  philosopher  and  a  metaphysician.


CHAPTER  III.

OP  SYSTEMS  OF  NATURAL  JURISPRUDENCE.

I.  Jurisprudence  and  morals  closely  related, — Systems  of
natural  jurisprudence,  of  the  rights  of  peace  and  war,  or  of  the
law  of  nature  and  nations,  are  a  modem  invention,  which  soon
acquired  such  reputation,  as  gave  occasion  to  many  public  estab-
lishments for  teaching  it  along  with  the  other  sciences.  It  has
so  close  a  relation  to  morals,  that  it  may  answer  the  purpose  of
a  system  of  morals,  and  is  commonly  put  in  the  place  of  it,  as

Y  2


g24  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  ffl.

far,  at  least,  as  concerns  our  duty  to  our  fellow-men.  Tk^
differ  in  the  name  and  form,  but  agree  in  substance.  This  will
appear  from  a  slight  attention  to  the  nature  of  both.

[The  direct  intention  of  morals  is  to  teach  the  duty  of  men:
that  of  natural  jurisprudence,  to  teach  the  rights  of  men.]  Right
and  duty  are  things  very  different,  and  have  even  a  kind  of  oppo-
sition ;  yet  they  are  so  related,  that  the  one  cannot  even  be  con-
ceived without  the  other ;  and  he  that  understands  the  one  must
understand  the  other.

They  have  the  same  relation  which  credit  has  to  debt.  As  all
credit  supposes  an  equivalent  debt ;  so  all  right  supposes  a  cor-
responding duty.  Tnere  can  be  no  credit  in  one  party  vrithout
an  equivalent  debt  in  another  party ;  and  there  can  be  no  right
in  one  party,  without  a  corresponding  duty  in  another  party.
The  sum  of  credit  shows  the  sum  of  debt;  and  the  sum  of
men's  rights  shows,  in  like  manner,  the  sum  of  their  duty  to  one
another.

II.  [The  word  right  has  a  very  different  meaning,  according  as
it  is  applied  to  actions  or  to  persons.  A  right  action  is  an  action
agreeable  to  our  duty.  But  when  we  speak  of  the  rights  of  men,
the  word  has  a  very  different  and  a  more  artificial  meaning.  It
is  a  term  of  art  in  law,  and  signifies  all  that  a  man  may  lawfully
do,  all  that  he  may  lawfiilly  possess  and  use,  and  all  that  he  may
lawfully  claim  of  any  other  person.]

This  comprehensive  meaning  of  the  word  right,  and  of  the
Latin  word  jus,  which  corresponds  to  it,  though  long  adopted
into  common  language,  is  too  artificial  to  be  the  birth  of  common
language.  It  is  a  term  of  art,  contrived  by  civilians  when  the
civil  law  became  a  profession.

The  whole  end  and  object  of  law  is  to  protect  the  subjects  in
all  that  they  may  lawfully  do,  or  possess,  or  demand.  This
threefold  object  of  law,  civilians  have  comprehended  under  the
word  jus  or  right,  which  they  define,  "  Facultas  aliquid  agendi,
vel  possidendi,  vel  ab  alio  consequendi :"  a  lawful  claun  to  do  any
thing,  to  possess  any  thing,  or  to  demand  some  prestation  from
some  other  person.  The  first  of  these  may  be  called  the  rjght
of  liberty,  the  second  that  of  property,  which  is  also  called  a
real  right,  the  third  is  called  personal  right,  because  it  respects
some  particular  person  or  persons  of  whom  the  prestation  may
be  demanded.

We  can  be  at  no  loss  to  perceive  the  duties  corresponding  to
the  several  kinds  of  rights.  What  I  have  a  right  to  do,  it  is  the
duty  of  all  men  not  to  hinder  me  from  doing.  What  is  my
property  or  real  right,  no  man  ought  to  take  from  me ;  or  to
molest  me  in  the  use  and  enjoyment  of  it.  And  what  I  have  a
right  to  demand  of  any  man,  it  is  his  duty  to  perform.  Between
the  right,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  duty,  on  the  other,  there  is


OF  SYSTEMS  OF  NATURAL  JURISPRUDENCE.  325

not  only  a  necessary  connexion,  but,  in  reality,  they  are  only
different  expressions  of  the  same  meaning ;  just  as  it  is  the  same
thing  to  say  I  am  your  debtor,  and  to  say  you  are  my  creditor ;
or  as  it  is  the  same  thing  to  say  I  am  your  father,  and  to  say  you
are  my  son.

[Thus  we  see,  that  there  is  such  a  correspondence  between  the
rights  of  men  and  the  duties  of  men,  that  the  one  points  out  the
other ;  and  a  system  of  the  one  may  be  substituted  for  a  system
of  the  other.]

III.  [But  here  an  objection  occurs.  It  may  be  said,  That
although  every  right  implies  a  duty,  yet  every  duty  does  not
imply  a  right.]  Thus,  it  may  be  my  duty  to  do  a  humane  or
kind  office  to  a  man  who  has  no*  claim  of  right  to  it ;  and  there-
fore a  system  of  the  rights  of  men,  though  it  teach  all  the  duties
of  strict  justice,  yet  it  leaves  out  all  the  duties  of  charity  and
humanity,  without  which  the  system  of  morals  must  be  very
lame.

[In  answer  to  this  objection,  it  may  be  observed.  That,  as
there  is  a  strict  notion  of  justice,  in  which  it  is  distinguished  from
humanity  and  charity,  so  there  is  a  more  extensive  signification
of  it,  in  which  it  includes  those  virtues.]  The  ancient  moralists,
both  Greek  and  Roman,  under  the  cardinal  virtue  of  justice,
included  beneficence ;  and,  in  this  extensive  sense,  it  is  often
used  in  common  language.  The  like  may  be  said  of  right,
which,  in  a  sense  not  uncommon,  is  extended  to  every  proper
claim  of  humanity  and  charity,  as  well  as  to  the  claims  of  strict
justice.  But,  as  it  is  proper  to  distinguish  these  two  kinds  of
claims  by  different  names,  writers  in  natural  jurisprudence  have
given  the  name  of  perfect  rights  to  the  claims  of  strict  justice,
and  that  of  imperfect  rights  to  the  claims  of  charity  and
humanity.  Thus,  all  the  duties  of  humanity  have  imperfect
rights  corresponding  to  them,  as  those  of  strict  justice  have  per-
fect rights.

IV.  [^Another  objection  may  be.  That  there  is  still  a  class  of
duties  to  which  no  right,  perfect  or  imperfect,  corresponds.]

We  are  bound  in  duty  to  pay  due  respect,  not  only  to  what  is
truly  the  right  of  another,  but  to  what,  through  ignorance  or
mistake,  we  believe  to  be  his  right.  Thus,  if  my  neighbour  is
possessed  of  a  horse  which  he  stole,  and  to  which  he  has  no  right ;
while  I  believe  the  horse  to  be  really  his,  and  am  ignorant  of  the
theft,  it  is  my  duty  to  pay  the  same  respect  to  this  conceived
right  as  if  it  were  real.  Here,  then,  is  a  moral  obligation  on  one
party,  without  any  corresponding  right  on  the  other.

To  supply  this  defect  in  the  system  of  rights,  so  as  to  make
right  and  duty  correspond  in  every  instance,  writers  in  jurispru-
dence have  had  recourse  to  something  like  what  is  called  afic^
tion  of  law. [They  give  the  name"  of  right  to  the  claim  which


326  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  I^^

even  the  thief  hath  to  the  goods  he  has  stolen,  while  tfie  theft  ^
unknown,  and  to  all  similar  claims  grounded  on  the  ignorance  of
mistake  of  the  parties  concerned.  And  to  distinguish  this  kind
of  right  from  genuine  rights,  perfect  or  imperfect,  they  call  it  an
external  right.]

Thus  it  appears.  That  although  a  system  of  the  perfect  rights
of  men,  or  the  rights  of  strict  justice,  would  be  a  lame  substitute
for  a  system  of  human  duty ;  yet  when  we  add  to  it  the  imper-
fect and  the  external  rights,  it  comprehends  the  whole  duty  we
owe  to  our  fellow-men.

But  it  may  be  asked.  Why  should  men  be  taught  their  duty
in  this  indirect  way,  by  reflection,  as  it  were,  from  the  rights  of
other  men  ?

Perhaps  it  may  be  thought,  that  this  indirect  way  may  be
more  agreeable  to  the  pride  of  man,  as  we  see  that  men  of  rank
like  better  to  hear  of  obligations  of  honour  tlian  of  obligations
of  duty  (although  the  dictates  of  true  honour  and  of  duty  be  the
same)  for  this  reason,  that  honour  puts  a  man  in  mind  of  what
he  owes  to  himself,  whereas  duty  is  a  more  humiliating  idea.
For  a  like  reason,  men  may  attend  more  willingly  to  their  rights,
which  put  them  in  mind  of  their  dignity,  than  to  their  duties,
which  suggest  their  dependence.  And  we  see  that  men  may
give  great  attention  to  their  rights  who  give  but  little  to  their
duty.

V.  True  origin  of  systems  of  natural  jurisprudence. — What-
ever truth  there  may  be  in  this,  I  believe  better  reasons  can  be
given  why  systems  of  natural  jurisprudence  have  been  contrived
and  put  in  the  place  of  systems  of  morals.

Systems  of  civil  law  were  invented  many  ages  before  we  had
any  system  of  natural  jurisprudence ;  and  the  former  seem  to
have  suggested  the  idea  of  the  latter.

Such  is  the  weakness  of  human  understanding,  that  no  large
body  of  knowledge  can  be  easily  apprehended  and  remembered,
unless  it  be  arranged  and  methodized,  that  is,  reduced  into  a
system.  When  the  laws  of  the  Roman  people  were  multiplied
to  a  great  degree,  and  the  study  of  them  became  an  honourable
and  lucrative  profession,  it  became  necessary  that  they  should  be
methodized  into  a  system.  And  the  most  natural  and  obvious
way  of  methodizing  law  was  found  to  be  according  to  the  divi-
sions and  subdivisions  of  men's  rights,  which  it  is  the  intention  of
law  to  protect.

The  study  of  law  produced  not  only  systems  of  law,  but  a
language  proper  for  expressing  them.  Every  art  has  its  terms
of  art,  for  expressing  the  conceptions  that  belong  to  it ;  and
the  civilian  must  have  terms  for  expressing  accurately  the  divi-
sions and  subdivisions  of  rights,  and  the  various  ways  whereby
they  may  be  acquired,  transferred,  or  extinguished,  in  the  vari-


OP  SYSTEMS  OF  NATURAL  JURISPRUDENCE.  3^7

ous  transiactions  of  civil  society.  He  must  have  terms  accurately
defined,  for  the  various  crimes  by  which  men's  rights  are  vio-
lated, not  to  speak  of  the  terms  which  express  the  different
forms  of  actions  at  law,  and  the  various  steps  of  the  procedure
of  judicatories.

[Those  who  have  been  bred  to  any  profession  are  very  prone
to  use  the  terms  of  their  profession  in  speaking  or  writing  on  sub-
jects that  have  any  analogy  to  it.  And  they  may  do  so  with
advantage,  as  terms  of  art  are  commonly  more  precise  in  their
signification,  and  better  defined,  than  the  words  of  common  lan-
guage.] To  such  persons  it  is  also  very  natural  to  model  and
arrange  other  subjeycts,  as  far  as  their  nature  admits,  into  a  method
similar  to  that  of  the  system  which  fills  their  minds.

It  might,  therefore,  be  expected,  that  a  civilian,  intending  to
give  a  detailed  system  of  morals,  would  use  many  of  the  terms
of  civil  law,  and  mould  it,  as  far  as  it  can  be  done,  into  the  form
of  a  system  of  law,  or  of  the  rights  of  mankind.

The  necessary  and  close  relation  of  right  to  duty,  which  we
before  observed,  justified  this :  and  moral  duty  had  long  been
considered  as  a  law  of  nature  ;  a  law,  not  wrote  on  tables  of
stone  or  brass,  but  on  the  heart  of  man ;  a  law  of  greater  anti-
quity and  higher  authority  than  the  laws  of  particular  states ;  a
law  which  is  binding  upon  all  men  of  all  nations,  and  therefore  .
is  called  by  Cicero  the  law  of  nature  and  of  nations.

VI.  The  idea  of  a  system  of  this  law  was  worthy  of  the  genius
of  the  inmiortal  Hugo  Grotius,  and  he  was  the  first  who  exe-
cuted it  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  learned
in  all  the  European  nations ;  and  to  give  occasion  to  several
princes  and  states  to  establish  public  professions  for  the  teaching
of  this  law.

The  multitude  of  commentators  and  annotators  upon  this  work
of  Grotius,  and  the  public  establishments  to  which  it  gave  occa-
sion, are  sufficient  vouchers  of  its  merit.

It  is,  indeed,  a  work  so  well  designed,  and  so  skilfully  exe-
cuted ;  so  free  from  the  scholastic  jargon  which  infected  the
learned  at  that  time,  so  much  addressed  to  the  common  sense  and
moral  judgment  of  mankind,  and  so  agreeably  illustrated  by  ex-
amples from  ancient  history,  and  authorities  from  the  sentiments
of  ancient  authors,  Heathen  and  Christian,  that  it  must  always
be  esteemed  as  the  capital  work  of  a  great  genius  upon  a  most
important  subject.

VII.  The  utility  of  a  just  system  of  natural  jurisprudence  ap-
pears, 1.  As  it  is  a  system  of  the  moral  duty  we  owe  to  men,
which,  by  the  aid  they  have  taken  from  the  terms  and  divisions
of  the  civil  law,  has  been  given  more  in  detail  and  more  sys-
tematically by  writers  in  natural  jurisprudence  than  it  was  for-
merly. 2.  As  it  is  the  best  preparation  for  the  study  of  law.


3^8  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  IH.

being,  as  it  were,  east  in  the  mould,  and  using  and  explaining
many  of  the  terms  of  the  civil  law,  on  which  the  law  of  most  of
the  European  nations  is  grounded.  3.  It  is  of  use  to  lawyers,
who  ought  to  make  their  laws  as  agreeable  as  possible  to  the
laws  of  nature.  And  as  laws  made  by  men,  like  all  human
works,  must  be  imperfect,  it  points  out  the  errors  and  imperfec-
tions of  human  laws.  4.  To  judges  and  interpreters  of  the  law
it  is  of  use,  because  that  interpretation  ought  to  be  preferred
which  is  founded  in  the  law  of  nature.  5.  It  is  of  use  in  civil
controversies  between  states,  or  between  individuals  who  have  no
common  superior.  In  such  controversies,  the  appeal  must  be
made  to  the  law  of  nature  ;  and  the  standard.systems  of  it,  par-
ticularly that  of  Grotius,  have  great  authority.  And,  6.  to  say
no  more  upon  this  point,  it  is  of  great  use  to  sovereigns  and
states  who  are  above  all  human  laws,  to  be  solemnly  admonished
of  the  conduct  they  are  bound  to  observe  to  their  own  subjects,
to  the  subjects  of  other  states,  and  to  one  another,  in  peace  and
in  war.  The  better  and  the  more  generally  the  law  of  nature  is
understood,  the  greater  dishonour,  in  public  estimation,  will
follow  every  violation  of  it.

VIII.  Some  authors  have  imagined,  that  systems  of  natural
jiuisprudence  ought  to  be  confined  to  the  perfect  rights  of  men,
because  the  duties  which  correspond  to  the  imperfect  rights,
the  duties  of  charity  and  humanity,  cannot  be  enforced  by  hiunan
laws,  but  must  be  left  to  the  judgment  and  conscience  of  men,
free  from  compulsion.  But  the  systems  which  have  had  the
greatest  applause  of  the  public,  have  not  followed  this  plan,  and,
I  conceive,  for  good  reasons.  First,  because  a  system  of  perfect
rights  could  by  no  means  serve  the  purpose  of  a  system  of  morals,
which  siurely  is  an  important  purpose.  Secondly,  because,  in
many  cases,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  fix  the  precise  limit  between
justice  and  humanity,  between  perfect  and  imperfect  right.  Like
the  colours  in  a  prismatic  image,  they  run  into  each  other,  so
that  the  best  eye  cannot  fix  the  precise  boundary  between  them.
Thirdly,  as  wise  legislators  and  magistrates  ought  to  have  it  as
their  end  to  make  the  citizens  good,  as  well  as  just,  we  find,  in
all  civilized  nations,  laws  that  are  intended  to  encourage  the
duties  of  humanity.  Where-  human  laws  cannot  enforce  them
by  punishments,  they  may  encourage  them  by  rewards.  Of  this
the  wisest  legislators  have  given  examples ;  and  how  far  this
branch  of  legislation  may  be  carried,  no  man  can  foresee.

The  substance  of  the  four  following  chapters  was  written  long
ago,  and  read  in  a  literary  society,  with  a  view  to  justify  some
points  of  morals  from  metaphysical  objections  urged  against  them
in  the  writings  of  David  Hume,  Esq.  If  they  answer  that  end,
and,  at  the  same  time,  serve  to  illustrate  the  account  I  have
given  of  our  moral  powers,  it  is  hoped  that  the  reader  will  not


OBJECT  OF  MORAL  APPROBATION.  g^

think  them  improperly  placed  here;  and  that  he  will  forgive
some  repetitions,  and  perhaps  anachronisms,  occasioned  by  their
being  wrote  at  different  times,  and  on  different  occasions.


CHAPTER  IV.

WHETHER  AN  ACTION  DESERVING  MORAL  APPROBATION,  MUST  BE  DONE
WITH  THE  BELIEF  OF  ITS  BEING  MORALLY  GOOD.

I.  There  is  no  part  of  philosophy  more  subtile  and  intricate
than  that  which  is  called  "  the  theory  of  morals."  Nor  is  there
any  more  plain  and  level  to  the  apprehension  of  man  than  the
practical  part  of  morals.

In  the  former^  the  Epicurean,  the  Peripatetic  and  the  Stoic,
had  each  his  different  system  of  old ;  and  almost  every  modern
author  of  reputation  has  a  system  of  his  own.  At  the  same  time,
there  is  no  branch  of  human  knowledge  in  which  there  is  so
general  an  agreement  among  ancients  and  modems,  learned  and
unlearned,  as  in  the  practical  rules  of  morals.

From  this  discord  in  the  theory,  and  harmony  in  the  practical
part,  we  may  judge,  that  the  rules  of  morality  stand  upon  another
and  a  firmer  foimdation  than  the  theory.  And  of  this  it  is  easy
to  perceive  the  reason.

For,  in  order  to  know  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong,  in
human  conduct,  we  need  only  listen  to  the  dictates  of  our  con-
science, when  the  mind  is  calm  and  unruffled,  or  attend  to  the
judgment  we  form  of  others  in  like  circumstances.  But,  to
judge  of  the  various  theories  of  morals,  we  must  be  able  to  ana-
lyze and  dissect,  as  it  were,  the  active  powers  of  the  human
mind,  and  especially  to  analyze  accurately  that  conscience  or
moral  power  by  which  we  discern  right  from  wrong.

(^  The  conscience  may  be  compared  to  the  eye  in  this,  as  in
many  other  respects.  The  learned  and  the  unlearned  see  objects
with  equal  distinctness.  The  former  have  no  title  to  dictate  to
the  latter,  as  far  as  the  eye  is  judge,  nor  is  there  any  disagree-
ment about  such  matters  But,  to  dissect  the  eye,  and  to  explain
the  theory  of  vision,  is  a  difficult  point,  wherein  the  most  skilful
have  differed.

From  this  remarkable  disparity  between  our  decisions  in  the
theory  of  morals  and  in  the  rules  of  morality,  we  may,  I  think,
draw  this  conclusion,  that  wherever  we  find  any  disagreement
between  the  practical  rules  of  morality,  which  have  been  received
in  all  ages,  and  the  principles  of  any  of  the  theories  advanced
upon  this  subject,  the  practical  rules  ought  to  be  the  standard  by


33Q  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  IV.

which  the  theory  is  to  be  corrected,  and  that  it  is  both  unsafe
and  unphilosophical  to  warp  the  practical  rules,  in  order  to  make
them  tally  with  a  favourite  theory.

II.  The  question  to  be  considered  in  this  chapter  belongs  to
the  practical  part  of  morals,  and  therefore  is  capable  of  a  more
easy  and  more  certain  determination.  And,  if  it  be  determined
in  the  affirmative,  I  conceive  that  it  may  serve  as  a  touchstone  to
try  some  celebrated  theories  which  are  inconsistent  with  that
determination,  and  which  have  led  the  theorists  to  oppose  it  by
very  subtile  metaphysical  arguments.

Every  question  about  what  is  or  is  not  the  proper  object  of
moral  approbation,  belongs  to  practical  morals,  and  such  is  the
question  now  under  consideration :  whether  actions  deserving
moral  approbation  must  be  done  with  the  belief  of  their  being
morally  good  ?  Or,  whether  an  action,  done  without  any  regard
to  duty  or  to  the  dictates  of  conscience,  can  be  entitled  to  moral
approbation  ?

In  every  action  of  a  moral  agent,  his  conscience  is  either  alto-
gether silent,  or  it  pronounces  the  action  to  be  good,  or  bad,  or
indifferent.  This,  I  think,  is  a  complete  enumeriation.  If  it  be
perfectly  silent,  the  action  must  be  very  trifling,  or  appear  so.
For  conscience,  in  those  who  have  exercised  it,  is  a  very  prag-
matical faculty,  and  meddles  with  every  part  of  our  conduct,
whether  we  desire  its  counsel  or  not.  And  what  a  man  does  in
perfect  simplicity,  without  the  least  suspicion  of  its  being  bad,
his  heart  cannot  condemn  him  for,  nor  wiU  he  that  knows  the
heart  condemn  him.  If  there  was  any  previous  culpable  negli-
gence or  inattention  which  led  him  to  a  wrong  judgment,  or
hindered  his  forming  a  right  one,  that  I  do  not  exculpate.  I
only  consider  the  action  done,  and  the  disposition  with  which  it
was  done,  without  its  previous  circumstances.  And  in  this  there
appears  nothing  that  merits  disapprobation.  As  little  can  it
merit  any  degree  of  moral  approbation,  because  there  was  neither
good  nor  ill  intended.  And  the  same  may  be  said  when  con-
science pronounces  the  action  to  be  indifferent.

If,  in  the  second  place,  I  do  what  my  conscience  pronounces
to  be  bad  or  dubious,  I  am  guilty  to  myself,  and  justly  deserve
the  disapprobation  of  others.  Nor  am  I  less  guilty  in  this  case,
though  what  I  judged  to  be  bad  should  happen  to  be  good
or  indifferent.  I  did  it  believing  it  to  be  bad,  and  this  is  an
immorality.

Lastly,  if  I  do  what  my  conscience  pronounces  to  be  right  and
my  duty,  either  I  have  some  regard  to  duty,  or  I  have  none.
The  last  is  not  supposable;  for  I  believe  there  is  no  man  so
abandoned,  but  that  he  does  what  he  believes  to  be  his  duty,
with  more  assurance  and  alacrity  upon  that  account.  The  more
weight  the  rectitude  of  the  action  has  in  determining  me  to  do


OBJECT  OF  MORAL  APPROBATION.  332

it,  the  more  I  approve  of  my  own  conduct.  And  if  my  worldly
interest,  my  appetites  or  inclinations,  draw  me  strongly  the  con-
trary way,  my  following  the  dictates  of  my  conscience,  in  oppo-
sition to  these  motives,  adds  to  the  moral  worth  of  the  action.

When  a  man  acts  from  an  erroneous  judgment,  if  his  error  be
invincible,  all  agree  that  he  is  inculpable :  but  if  his  error  be
owing  to  some  previous  negligence  or  inattention,  there  seems  to
be  some  difference  among  moralists.  This  difference,  however,
is  only  seeming,  and  not  real.  For  wherein  lies  the  fault  in  this
case  ?  It  must  be  granted  by  all,  that  the  fault  lies  in  this,  and
solely  in  this,  that  he  was  not  at  due  pains  to  have  his  judgment
well  informed.  Those  moralists,  therefore,  who  consider  the
action  and  the  previous  conduct  that  led  to  it  as  one  whole,  find
something  to  blame  in  the  whole ;  and  they  do  so  most  justly.
But  those  who  take  this  whole  to  pieces,  and  consider  what  is
blameable  and  what  is  right  in  each  part,  find  all  that  is  blame-
able  in  what  preceded  this  wrong  judgment,  and  nothing  but
what  is  approvable  in  what  followed  it.

IBF  Let  us  suppose,  for  instance,  that  a  man  believes  that  God
has  indispensably  required  him  to  observe  a  very  rigorous  fast  in
Lent ;  and  that,  from  a  regard  to  this  supposed  Divine  command,
he  fasts  in  such  a  manner  as  is  not  only  a  great  mortification  to
his  appetite,  but  even  hurtful  to  his  health.

His  superstitious  opinion  may  be  the  effect  of  a  culpable  neg-
ligence, for  which  he  can  by  no  means  be  justified.  Let  him,
therefore,  bear  all  the  blame  upon  this  account  that  he  deserves.
But  now,  haying  this  opinion  fixed  in  his  mind,  shaU  he  act
according  to  it  or  against  it  ?  Surely  we  cannot  hesitate  a  mo-
ment in  this  case.  It  is  evident,  that  in  following  the  light  of
his  judgment,  he  acts  the  part  of  a  good  and  pious  man ;  whereas,
in  acting  contrary  to  his  judgment,  he  would  be  guilty  of  wilful
disobedience  to  his  Maker.

IBF  If  my  servant,  by  mistaking  my  orders,  does  the  contrary
of  what  I  commanded,  believing,  at  the  same  time,  that  he  obeys
my  orders,  there  may  be  some  feult  in  his  mistake,  but  to  charge
him  with  the  crime  of  disobedience,  would  be  inhuman  and
unjust.

These  determinations  appear  to  me  to  have  intuitive  evidence,
no  less  than  that  of  mathematical  axioms.  A  man  who  is  come
to  years  of  understanding,  and  who  has  exercised  his  faculties  in
judging  of  right  and  wrong,  sees  their  truth  as  he  sees  daylight.
Metaphysical  arguments  brought  against  them  have  the  same
effect  as  when  brought  against  the  evidence  of  sense ;  they  may
puzzle  and  confound,  but  they  do  not  convince.  It  appears
evident,  therefore,  that  those  actions  only  can  truly  be  called
virtuous,  or  deserving  of  moral  approbation,  which  the  agent


332  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  IV.

believed  to  be  right,  and  to  which  he  was  influenced,  more  or
less,  by  that  belief.

III.  If  it  should  be  objected,  [that  this  principle  makes  it  to
be  of  no  consequence  to  a  man's  morals,  what  his  opinions  may
be,  providing  he  acts  agreeably  to  them,  the  answer  is  easy.]

[Morality  requires,  not  only  that  a  man  should  act  according
to  his  judgment,  but  that  he  should  use  the  best  means  in  his
power  that  his  judgment  be  according  to  truth.]  If  he  fail  in
either  of  these  points,  he  is  worthy  of  blame ;  but,  if  he  fail  in
neither,  I  see  not  wherein  he  can  be  blamed.

When  a  man  must  act,  and  has  no  longer  time  to  deliberate,
he  ought  to  act  according  to  the  light  of  his  conscience,  even
when  he  is  in  an  error.  But,  when  he  has  time  to  deliberate,
he  ought  surely  to  use  all  the  means  in  his  power  to  be  rightly
informed.  When  he  has  done  so,  he  may  still  be  in  an  error ;
but  it  is  an  invincible  error,  and  cannot  justly  be  imputed  to  him
as  a  fault.

IV.  A  second  objection  is,  that  we  immediately  approve  of
benevolence,  gratitude,  and  other  primary  virtues,  without  in-
quiring whether  they  are  practised  from  a  persuasion  that  they
are  our  duty.  And  the  laws  of  God  place  the  sum  of  virtue  in
loving  God  and  our  neighbour,  without  any  provision  that  we  do
it  from  a  persuasion  that  we  ought  to  do  so.]

The  answer  to  this  objection  is,  [that  the  love  of  God,  the
love  of  our  neighbour,  justice,  gratitude,  and  other  primary
virtues,  are,  by  the*  constitution  of  human  nature,  necessarily
accompanied  with  a  conviction  of  their  being  morally  good.  We
may  therefore  safely  presume,  that  these  things  are  never  dis-
joined, and  that  every  man  who  practises -these  virtues  does  it
with  a  good  conscience.]  In  judging  of  men's  conduct,  we  do
not  suppose  things  which  cannot  happen,  nor  do  the  laws  of  God
give  decisions  upon  impossible  cases,  as  they  must  have  done,  if
they,  supposed  the  case  of  a  man  who  thought  it  contrary  to  his
duty  to  love  God  or  to  love  mankind.

But  if  we  wish  to  know  how  the  laws  of  God  determine  the
point  in  question,  we  ought  to  observe  their  decision  with  regard
to  such  actions  as  may  appear  good  to  one  man  and  ill  to  another.
And  here  the  decisions  of  Scripture  are  clear :  Let  every  man  he
persuaded  in  his  own  mind.  He  that  doubteth  is  condemned  if  he
eaty  because  he  eateth  not  of  faith,  for  whatsoever  is  not  of  faith
is  sin.  To  him  that  esteemeth  any  thing  to  be  unclean,  it  is  un^
clean.  The  Scripture  often  placeth  the  sum  of  virtue  in  living
in  all  good  conscience,  in  acting  so  that  our  hearts  condemn
us  not,

V.  The  last  objection  I  shall  mention  is  a  metaphysical  one
urged  by  Mr.  Hume.


OBJECT  OP  MORAL  APPROBATION.


333

It  is  a  favourite  point  in  his  system  of  morals,  that  justice  is
not  a  natural  but  an  artificial  virtue.  To  prove  this,  he.  has
exerted  the  whole  strength  of  his  reason  and  eloquence.  And
as  the  principle  we  are  considering  stood  in  his  way,  he  takes
pains  to  refute  it.

"  Suppose,"  says  he,  "  a  person  to  have  lent  me  a  sum  of
money,  on  condition  that  it  be  restored  in  a  few  days.  After
the  expiration  of  the  term  he  demands  the  sum.  I  ask,  what
reason  or  motive  have  I  to  restore  the  money  ?  It  will  perhaps
be  said,  that  my  regard  to  justice,  and  abhorrence  of  villany  and
knavery,  are  sufficient  reasons  for  me."  And  this,  he  acknow-
ledges, would  be  a  satisfactory  answer  to  a  man  in  a  civilized
state,  and  when  trained  up  according  to  a  certain  discipline  and
education.  "  But  in  his  rude  and  more  natural  condition,"
says  he,  "  if  you  are  pleased  to  call  such  a  condition  natural,
this  answer  would  be  rejected  as  perfectly  unintelligible  and  so-
phistical.

"  For  wherein  consists  this  honesty  and  justice  ?  Not  surely
in  the  external  action.  It  must,  therefore,  consist  in  the  mo-
tive from  which  the  external  act  is  derived.  This  motive  can
never  be  a  regard  to  the  honesty  of  the  action.  For  it  is  a  plain
fallacy  to  say,  that  a  virtuous  motive  is  requisite  to  render  an
action  honest,  and,  at  the  same  time,  that  a  regard  to  the  ho-
nesty is  the  motive  to  the  action.  We  can  never  have  a  regard
to  the  virtue  of  an  action,  unless  the  action  be  antecedently
virtuous."

And,  in  another  place,  "  To  suppose  that  the  mere  regard  to
the  virtue  of  the  action  is  that  which  rendered  it  virtuous,  is  to
reason  in  a  circle.  An  action  must  be  virtuous,  before  we  can
have  a  regard  to  its  virtue.  Some  virtuous  motive,  therefore,
must  be  antecedent  to  that  regard.  Nor  is  this  merely  a  meta-
physical subtilty,"  &c. — Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  book  iii.
part  2,  sect.  1.

VI.  /  am  not  to  consider  at  this  time,  how  this  reasoning  is
applied  to  support  the  author's  opinion,  that  justice  is  not  a
natural  but  an  artificial  virtue,  I  consider  it  only  as  far  as  it
opposes  the  principle  I  have  been  endeavouring  to  establish,
"  That,  to  render  an  action  truly  virtuous,  the  agent  must  have
some  regard  to  its  rectitude."  And  I  conceive  the  whole  force
of  the  reasoning  amounts  to  this :

When  we  judge  an  action  to  be  good  or  bad,  it  must  have
been  so  in  its  own  nature  antecedent  to  that  judgment,  other-
wise the  judgment  is  erroneous.  If,  therefore,  the  action  be
good  in  its  nature,  the  judgment  of  the  agent  cannot  make  it  bad ;
nor  can  his  judgment  make  it  good,  if,  in  its  nature,  it  be  bad.
For  this  would  be  to  ascribe  to  our  judgment  a  strange  magical


334  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  IV.

power  to  transform  the  nature  of  things,  and  to  say,  that  my
judging  a  thing  to  be  what  it  is  not,  makes  it  really  to  be  what
I  erroneously  judge  it  to  be.  This,  1  think,  is  the  objection  in
its  full  strength. And,  in  answer  to  it.

First,  If  we  could  not  loose  this  metaphysical  knot,  I  think
we  might  fairly  and  honestly  cut  it,  because  it  fixes  an  absur-
dity upon  the  clearest  and  most  indisputable  principles  of  morals
and  of  common  sense.  For  I  appeal  to  any  man  whether  there  be
any  principle  of  morality,  or  any  principle  of  common  sense,
more  clear  and  indisputable  than  that  which  we  just  now  quoted
from  the  Apostle  Paul,  that  although  a  thing  be  not  unclean  in
itself,  yet  to  him  that  esteemeth  it  to  be  unclean,  to  him  it  is
unclean.  But  the  metaphysical  argument  makes  this  absurd.
For,  says  the  metaphysician,  if  the  thing  was  not  unclean  in  it-
self, you  judged  wrong  in  esteeming  it  to  be  imclean ;  and  what
can  be  more  absurd,  than  that  your  esteeming  a  thing  to  be
what  it  is  not,  should  make  it  what  you  erroneously  esteem  it
to  be?

Let  us  try  the  edge  of  this  argument  in  another  instance.  No-
thing is  more  evident  than  that  an  action  does  not  merit  the
name  of  benevolent,  unless  it  be  done  from  a  belief  that  it  tends
to  promote  the  good  of  our  neighbour.  But  this  is  absurd,
says  the  metaphysician.  For,  if  it  be  not  a  benevolent  action  in
itself,  your  belief  of  its  tendency  cannot  change  its  nature.  It  is
absurd,  that  your  erroneous  belief  should  make  the  action  to
be  what  you  believe  it  be.  Nothing  is  more  evident,  than  that
a  man  who  tells  the  truth,  believing  it  to  be  a  lie,  is  guilty
of  falsehood;  but  the  metaphysician  would  make  this  to  be
absurd.

In  a  word,  if  there  be  any  strength  in  this  argument,  it  would
follow,  that  a  man  might  be,  in  the  highest  degree,  virtuous,
.without  the  least  regard  to  virtue ;  that  he  might  be  very  bene-
volent, without  ever  intending  to  do  a  good  office ;  very  mali-
cious, without  ever  intending  any  hurt ;  very  revengeful,  without
ever  intending  to  retaliate  an  injury  ;  very  grateful,  without
ever  intending  to  return  a  benefit ;  and  a  man  of  strict  veracity,
with  an  intention  to  lie.  We  might,  therefore,  reject  this  rea-
soning, as  repugnant  to  self-evident  truths,  though  we  were  not
able  to  point  out  the  fallacy  of  it.

2.  But  let  us  try,  in  the  second  place,  whether  the  fallacy  of
this  argument  may  not  be  discovered.

We  ascribe  moral  goodness  to  actions  considered  abstractly,
without  any  relation  to  the  agent.  We  likewise  ascribe  moral
goodness  to  an  agent  on  account  of  an  action  he  has  done ;  we
call  it  a  good  action,  though,  in  this  case,  the  goodness  is  pro-
perly in  tibe  man,  and  is  only  by  a  figure  ascribed  to  the  action.


OBJECT  OF  MORAL  APPROBATION.  335

Now,  it  is  to  be  considered,  whether  moral  goodness^  when  ap-
plied to  an  action  considered  abstractly,  has  the  same  meaning
as  when  we  apply  it  to  a  man  on  account  of  that  action ;  or  whe-
ther we  do  not  unawares  change  the  meaning  of  the  word,  accord-
ing as  we  apply  it  to  the  one  or  to  the  other.

[The  action,  considered  abstractly,  has  neither  understanding
nor  will ;  it  is  not  accountable,  nor  can  it  be  under  any  moral
obligation.]  But  all  these  things  are  essential  to  that  moral  good-
ness which  belongs  to  a  man  :  for  if  a  man  had  not  understanding
and  will,  he  could  have  no  moral  goodness.  Hence  it  follows
necessarily,  that  the  moral  goodness  which  we  ascribe  to  an  action
considerea  abstractly,  and  that  which  we  ascribe  to  a  person  for
doing  that  action,  are  not  the  same.  The  meaning  of  the  word
is  changed  when  it  is  applied  to  these  dijflFerent  subjects.

This  will  be  more  evident,  when  we  consider  what  is  meant
by  the  moral  goodness  which  we  ascribe  to  a  man  for  doing  an
action,  and  what  by  the  goodness  which  belongs  to  the  action
considered  abstractly.  A  good  action  in  a  man  is  that  in  which
he  applied  his  intellectual  powers  properly,  in  order  to  judge
what  he  ought  to  do,  and  acted  according  to  his  best  judgment.
This  is  all  that  can  be  required  of  a  moral  agent ;  and  in  this  his
moral  goodness,  in  any  good  action,  consists.  But  is  this  the
goodness  which  we  ascribe  to  an  action  considered  abstractly  ?
No,  surely.  For  the  action,  considered  abstractly,  is  neither
endowed  with  judgment  nor  with  active  power ;  and,  therefore,
can  have  none  of  that  goodness  which  we  ascribe  to  the  man  for
doing  it.

But  what  do  we  mean  by  goodness  in  an  action  considered
abstractly  ?  To  me  it  appears  to  lie  in  this,  and  in  this  only,
that  it  is  an  action  which  ought  to  be  done  by  those  who  have
the  power  and  opportunity,  and  the  capacity  of  perceiving
their  obligation  to  do  it.  I  would  gladly  know  of  any  man  what
other  moral  goodness  can  be  in  an  action  considered  abstractly.
And  this  goodness  is  inherent  in  its  nature,  and  inseparable
from  it.  No  opinion  or  judgment  of  an  agent  can  in  the  least
alter  its  nature.

ftir  Suppose  the  action  to  be  that  of  relieving  an  innocent
person  out  of  great  distress.  This  surely  has  all  the  moral  good-
ness that  an  action  considered  abstractly  can  have.  Yet  it  is
evident,  that  an  agent,  in  relieving  a  person  in  distress,  may  have
no  moral  goodness,  may  have  great  merit,  or  may  have  great  de-
merit.

Suppose,  firsty  that  mice  cut  the  cords  which  bound  the  dis-
tressed person,  and  so  bring  him  relief.  Is  there  moral  goodness
in  this  act  of  the  mice  ?

Suppose,  secondly,  that  a  man  maliciously  relieves  the  dis-
tressed person,  in  order  to  plunge  him  into  greater  distress. In


ggg  ESSAY  V.  CHAF-

this  action  there  is  surely  no  moral  goodness,  but  much  mat*^
and  inhumanity.

If,  in  the  last  place,  we  suppose  a  person,  from  real  symp^
thy  and  humanity,  to  bring  relief  to  tlxe  distressed  person,  vail^
considerable  expense  or  danger  to  himself; here  is  an  Sictiot^
of  real  worth,  which  every heart  approves  and  every  tongu^
praises. [But  wherein  lies  the  worth  ? Not  in  the  action  con-^
sidered  by  itself,  which  was  common  to  all  the  three,  but  in  the
man  who,  on  this  occasion,  acted  the  part  which  became  a  good
man. He  did  what  his  heart  approved,  and  therefore  he  is  ap-
proved by  God  and  man.]

VII.  Upon  the  whole,  if  we  distinguish  between  that  good-
ness which  may  be  ascribed  to  an  action  considered  by  itself,  and
that  goodness  which  we  ascribe  to  a  man  when  he  puts  it  in  exe-
cution, we  shall  find  a  key  to  this  metaphysical  lock.  We  ad-
mit that  the  goodness  of  an  action,  considered  abstractly,  can
have  no  dependence  upon  the  opinion  or  belief  of  an  agent,  any
more  than  the  truth  of  a  proposition  depends  upon  our  believ-
ing it  to  be  true.  But  when  a  man  exerts  his  active  power  well,
or  ill,  there  is  a  moral  goodness  or  turpitude  which  we  figur-
atively impute  to  the  action,  but  which  is  truly  and  properly
imputable  to  the  man  only ;  and  this  goodness  or  turpitude  de^
pends  very  much  upon  the  intention  of  the  agent,  and  the  opinion
he  had  of  his  action.

This  distinction  has  been  understood  in  aQ  ages  by  those  who
gave  any  attention  to  morals,  though  it  has  been  variously  ex-
pressed. The  Greek  moralists  gave  the  name  of  KaOrjKov  to  an
action  good  in  itself ;  such  an  action  might  be  done  by  the  most
worthless.  But  an  action  done  with  a  right  intention,  which
implies  real  worth  in  the  agent,  they  called  KaTSpOonfia.  The
distinction  is  explained  by  Cicero  in  his  "Offices."  He  calls
the  first  officium  medium^  and  the  second  officium  perfectum,  or
rectum.  In  the  scholastic  ages,  an  action  good  in  itself  was  said
to  be  materially  good,  and  an  action  done  with  a  right  intention
was  ceSXedi  formally  good.  This  last  way  of  expressing  the  dis-
tinction is  still  familiar  among  theologians ;  but  mx.  Hume
seems  not  to  have  attended  to  it,  or  to  have  thought  it  to  be
words  without  any  meaning.

Mr.  Hume,  in  the  section  already  quoted,  tells  us  with  great
assurance,  "  In  short,  it  may  be  established  as  an  undoubted
maxim,  that  no  action  can  be  virtuous  or  morally  good,  unless
there  be  in  human  nature  some  motive  to  produce  it  distinct
from  the  sense  of  its  morality."  And  upon  this  maxim  he  founds
many  of  his  reasonings  on  the  subject  of  morals.

Whether  it  be  consistent  with  Mr.  Himie's  own  system,  that
an  action  may  be  produced  merely  from  the  sense  of  its  morality,
without  any  motive  of  agreeableness  or  utility,  I  shall  not  now


OBJECT  OF  MORAL  APPROBATION.  337

wqiiire.  But,  if  it  te  true,  and  I  think  it  evident  to  every  man
of  common  understanding,  that  a  judge  or  an  arbiter  acts  the
J^ost  virtuous  part  when  his  sentence  is  produced  by  no  other
motive  but  a  regard  to  justice  and  a  good  conscience,  nay,  when
8ll  other  motives  distinct  from  this  are  on  the  other  side:  if
tliis,  I  say,  be  true,  then  that  undoubted  maxim  of  Mr.  Hume
must  be  false,  and  all  the  conclusions  built  upon  it  must  fall  to
the  groimd.

VIII.  From  the  principle  I  have  endeavoured  to  establish,  I
think  some  consequences  may  be  drawn  with  regard  to  the  theory
of  morals.

.  First  J  If  there  be  no  virtue  without  the  belief  that  what  we
do  is  right,  it  follows,  that  a  moral  faculty,  that  is,  a  power  of
discerning  moral  goodness  and  turpitude  in  human  conduct,  is
essential  to  every  being  capable  of  virtue  or  vice.  A  being  who
has  no  more  conception  of  moral  goodness  and  baseness,  of  right
and  wrong,  than  a  blind  man  hath  of  colours,  can  have  no  regard
to  it  in  his  conduct,  and  therefore  can  neither  be  virtuous  nor
vicious.

He  may  have  qualities  that  are  agreeable  or  disagreeable,
useful  or  hurtful,  so  may  a  plant  or  a  machine.  And  we  some-
times use  the  word  virtue  in  such  a  latitude,  as  to  signify  any
agreeable  or  useful  quality,  as  when  we  speak  of  the  virtues  of
plants.  But  we  are  now  speaking  of  virtue  in  the  strict  and
proper  sense,  as  it  signifies  that  quality  in  a  man  which  is  the
object  of  moral  approbation.

This  virtue  a  man  could  not  have,  if  he  had  not  a  power  of
discerning  a  right  and  a  wrong  in  human  conduct,  and  of  being
influenced  by  that  discernment.  For  in  so  far  only  he  is  vir-
tuous as  he  is  guided  in  his  conduct  by  that  part  of  his  constitu-
tion. Brutes  do  not  appear  to  have  any  such  power,  and  there-
fore are  not  moral  or  accountable  agents.  They  are  capable  of
culture  and  discipline,  but  not  of  virtuous  or  criminal  conduct.
Even  human  creatures,  in  infancy  and  non-age,  are  not  moral
agents,  because  their  moral  faculty  is  not  yet  unfolded.  These
sentin^ents  are  supported  by  the  common  sense  of  mankind,
which  has  always  determined,  that  neither  brutes  nor  infants
can  be  indicted  for  crimes.

IX.  Cadence,  or  moral  sense, — [It  is  of  small  consequence
what  name  we  give  to  this  moral  power  of  the  human  mind  ;  but  it
is  so  important  a  part  of  our  constitution,  as  to  deserve  an  appro-
priated name.  The  name  of  conscience,  as  it  is  the  most  com-
mon, seems  to  me  as  proper  as  any  that  has  been  given  it.  I
find  no  fault  with  the  name  moral  sense,  although  I  conceive
this  name  has  given  occasion  to  some  mistakes  concerning  the
nature  of  our  moral  power.]  Modem  philosophers  have  con-
ceived of  the  externiEj.  senses  as  having  no  other  office  but  to

z


338  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  V.

give  us  certain  sensations,  or  simple  conceptions,  which  we  could
not  have  without  them.  And  this  notion  has  been,  applied  to  the
moral  sense.  But  it  seeiiis  to  me  a  mistaken  notion  in  both.
By  the  sense  of  seeing,  I  not  only  have  the  conception  of  the
different  colours,  but  I  perceive  one  body  to  be  of  this  Colour,
another  of  that.  In  like  manner,  by  my  moral  sense,  I  not
only  have  the  conceptions  of  right  and  wrong  in  conduct,  but  I
perceive  this  conduct  to  be  right,  that  to  be  wrong,  and  that
indifferent.  All  our  senses  are  judging  faculties,  so  also  is  con-
science. Nor  is  this  power  only  a  judge  of  our  own  actions  and
those  of  others,  it  is  likewise  a  principle  of  action  in  all  good
men ;  and  so  far  only  can  our  conduct  be  denominated  virtuous,
as  it  is  influenced  by  this  principle.

X.  [A  second  consequence  from  the  principle  laid  down  in
this  chapter  is.  That  tlie  formal  nature  and  essence  of  that  virtue
which  is  the  object  of  moral  approbation  consists  neither  in  a
prudent  prosecution  of  our  private  interest,  nor  in  benevolent
affections  towards  others,  nor  in  qualities  useful  or  agreeable  to
ourselves  or  to  others,  nor  in  sympathizing  with  the  passions
and  affections  of  others,  and  in  attuning  our  own  conduct  to  the
tone  of  other  men's  passions  ;  but  it  consists  in  living  in  all  good
conscience,  that  is,  in  using  the  best  means  in  our  power  to
know  our  duty,  and  acting  accordingly.]

Prudence  is  a  virtue,  benevolence  is  a  virtue,  fortitude  is  a
virtue ;  but  the  essence  and  formal  nature  of  virtue  must  lie  in
something  that  is  common  to  all  these,  and  to  every  other  virtue.
And  this  I  conceive  can  be  nothing  else  but  the  rectitude  of
such  conduct,  and  turpitude  of  the  contrary,  which  is  discerned
by  a  good  man.  And  so  far  only  he  is  virtuous  as  he  pursues
the  former,  and  avoids  the  latter.


CHAPTER  V.

WHETHER  JUSTICE  BE  A  NATURAL  OR  AN  ARTIFICIAL  VIRTUE.

I.  Hume  consistent  as  a  writer  on  morals. — Mr.  Hume's  phi-
losophy concerning  morals  was  first  presented  ta  the  world  in
the  third  volume  of  his  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"  in  the
year  1740;  afterwards  in  his  "Enquiry  concerning  the  Princi-
ples of  Morals,"  which  was  first  published  by  itself,  and  then  in
several  editions  of  his  "  Essays  and  Treatises."

In  these  two  works  on  morals  the  system  is  the  same.  A  more
popular  arrangement,  great  embellishment,  and  the  omission  of
some  metaphysical  reasonings,  have  given  a  preference  in  the
public  esteem  to  the  last ;  but  I  find  neither  any  new  principle!^


OP  JUSTICE.  339

in  it,  nor  any  new  arguments  in  support  of  the  system  common
to  both.

In  this  system,  the  proper  object  of  moral  approbation  is  not
actions  or  any  voluntary  exertion,  but  qualities  of  mind ;  that
is,  natural  affections  or  passions,  which  are  involuntary,  a  part
of  the  constitution  of  the  man,  and  common  to  us  with  many
brute  animals.  When  we  praise  or  blame  any  voluntary  action,
it  is  only  considered  as  a  sign  of  the  natural  affection  from  which
it  flows,  and  from  which  all  its  merit  or  demerit  is  derived.

Moral  approbation  or  disapprobation  is  not  an  act  of  the
judgment,  which,  like  all  acts  of  judgment,  must  be  true  or
false,  it  is  only  a  certain  feeling,  which,  from  the  constitution  of
human  nature,  arises  upon  contemplating  certain  characters  or
qualities  of  mind  coolly  and  impartially.

This  feeling,  when  agreeable,  is  moral  approbation;  when
disagreeable,  disapprobation.  The  qualities  of  mind  which  pro-
duce this  agreeable  feeling  are  the  moral  virtues,  and  those  that
produce  the  disagreeable,  the  vices.

II.  These  preliminaries  being  granted,  the  question  about  the
foundation  ojt  morals  is  reduced  to  a  simple  question  of  fact,  viz.
[What  are  the  qualities  of  mind  which  produce,  in  the  disinter-
ested observer,  the  feeling  of  approbation,  or  the  contrary  feeling  ?]

In  answer  to  this  question,  the  author  endeavours  to  prove,
by  a  very  copious  induction,  that  aU  personal  merit,  all  virtue,
all  that  is  the  object  of  moral  approbation,  consists  in  the  qua-
lities of  mind  which  are  agreeable  or  useful  to  the  person  who
possesses  them,  or  to  others.

The  dulce  and  the  utUe  is  the  whole  sum  of  merit  in  every
character,  in  every  quality  of  mind,  and  in  every  action  of  life.
There  is  no  room  left  for  that  honestum  which  Cicero  thus  defines,
"  Honestum  igitur  id  intelligimus,  quod  tale  est,  ut  detracta
omni  utilitate,  sine  uUis  premiis  fructibusve,  per  se  ipsum  possit
jure  laudari." — "  Moral  worth  is  of  such  a  character,  that,  setting
aside  all  idea  of  utility,  without  rewards  or  fruits  of  any  kind,  it
m^  justly  be  praised  on  its  own  account  solely."

III.  Hume  agrees  with  the  Epicuream  in  one  respect. — [Among
the  ancient  moralists,  the  Epicureans  were  the  only  sect  who
denied  that  there  is  any  such  thing  as  honestum,  or  moral  worth,
distinct  from  pleasure.  In  this  Mr.  Hume's  system  agrees  with
theirs.  For  the  addition  of  utility  to  pleasure,  as  a  foundation
of  morals,  makes  only  a  verbal,  but  no  real  difference.]  What
is  useful  only  has  no  value  in  itself,  but  derives  all  its  merit
from  the  end  for  which  it  is  useful.  That  end,  in  this  system,
is  agreeableness  or  pleasure.  So  that,  in  both  systems,  pleasure
is  the  only  end,  the  only  thing  that  is  good  in  itself,  and  desirable
for  its  own  sake ;  and  virtue  derives  all  its  merit  from  its  ten-
dency to  produce  pleasure.

z  2


340  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  V.

Agreeableness  and  utility  are  not  moral  conceptions,  nor  have
they  any  connexion  with  morality.  What  a  man  does,  merely
because  it  is  agreeable,  or  useful  to  procure  what  is  agreeable,
is  not  virtue.  Therefore  the  Epicurean  system  was  justly  thought
by  Cicero,  and  the  best  moralists  among  the  ancients,  to  subvert
morality,  and  to  substitute  another  principle  in  its  room ;  and
this  system  is  liable  to  the  same  censure.

IV.  Disagrees  in  another, — [In  one  thing,  however,  it  differs
remarkably  from  that  of  Epicurus. It  allows,  that  there  are
disinterested  affections  in  human  nature ;  that  the  love  of  chil-
dren and  relations,  friendship,  gratitude,  compassion,  and  hum»^'
ity,  are  not,  as  Epicurus  maintained,  different  modifications  ^^
self-love,  but  simple  and  original  parts  of  the  human  consti^^'
tion  ;  that  when  mterest,  or  envy,  or  revenge,  pervert  not  o^
disposition,  we  are  inclined,  from  natural  philanthropy,  to  desi>^®*
and  to  be  pleased  with  the  happiness  of  the  human  kind.]

All  this,  in  opposition  to  the  Epicurean  system,  Mr.  Hun^^
maintains  with  great  strength  of  reason  and  eloquence,  and,  :^  ^
this  respect,  his  system  is  more  liberal  and  disinterested  thm^^
that  of  the  Greek  philosopher.  According  to  Epicurus,  virtu  ^
is  whatever  is  agreeable  to  ourselves.  According  to  Mr.  Hum^>f
every  quality  of  mind  that  is  agreeable  or  useful  to  ourselves  oi
to  others.

V.  Effect  of  this  doctrine, — [This  theory  of  the  nature  of  vir-
tue, it  must  be  acknowledged,  enlarges  greatly  the  catalogue  of
moral  virtues^  by  bringing  into  that  catalogue  every  quality  of
mind  that  is  useful  or  agreeable.]  Nor  does  there  appear  any
good  reason  why  the  useful  and  agreeable  qualities  of  body  and
of  fortune,  as  well  as  those  of  the  mind,  should  not  have  a
place  among  moral  virtues  in  this  system.  They  have  the  essence
of  virtue ;  that  is,  agreeableness  and  utility,  why  then  should
they  not  have  the  name  ?

But,  to  compensate  this  addition  to  the  moral  virtues,  one
class  of  them  seems  to  be  greatly  degraded  and  deprived  of  all
intrinsic  merit.  The  useful  virtues,  as  was  above  observed,  are
only  ministering  servants  of  the  agreeable,  and  purveyors  for
them ;  they  must,  therefore,  be  so  far  inferior  in  dignity,  as
hardly  to  deserve  the  same  name.

VI.  Natural  and  artificial  virtues. — [Mr.  Hume,  however,
gives  the  name  of  virtue  to  both ;  and  to  distinguish  them,  calls
the  agreeable  qualities  natural  virtues,  and  the  useful  artifidaLI

[The  natural  virtues  are  those  natural  affections  of  the  human
constitution  which  give  immediate  pleasure  in  their  exercise.
Such  are  all  the  benevolent  affections.]  Nature  disposes  to  them,
and  from  their  own  nature  they  are  agreeable,  both  wheft  we
exercise  them  ourselves,  and  when  we  contemplate  their  exer-
cise in  others.


OP  JUSTICE.  341

[The  artificial  virtues  are  such  as  are  esteemed  solely  on
account  of  tteir  utility,  either  (1)  to  promote  the  good  of  society,
as  justice,  fidelity,  honour,  veracity,  allegiance,  chastity ;  or  (^)
on  account  of  their  utility  to  the  possessor,  as  industry,  discre-
tion, frugality,  secrecy,  order,  perseverance,  forethought,  judg-
ment, and  others,]  of  which,  he  says,  many  pages  could  not  con-
tain the  catalogue.

This  general  view  of  Mr.  Hume's  system  concerning  the  foun-
dation of  morals,  seemed  necessary,  in  order  to  understand  dis-
tinctly the  meaning  of  that  principle  of  his,  which  is  to  be  the
subject  of  this  chapter,  and  on  which  he  has  bestowed  much
labour,  to  wit,  "  that  justice  is  not  a  natural  but  an  artificial
-virtue."

VII.  [This  system  of  the  foundation  of  virtue  is  so  contradic-
tory  in  many  of  its  essential  points  to  the  account  we  have  before
given  of  the  active  powers  of  human  nature,  that,  if  the  one  be
true,  the  other  must  be  false.]

If  God  has  given  to  man  a  power  which  we  call  conscience^
the  moral  faculty y  the  sense  of  duty,  by  which,  when  he  comes
to  years  of  understanding,  he  perceives  certain  things  that  depend
on  his  will  to  be  his  duty,  and  other  things  to  be  base  and  un-
worthy ;  if  the  notion  of  duty  be  a  simple  conception,  of  its  own
kind,  and  of  a  different*  nature  from  the  conceptions  of  utility
and  agreeableness,  of  interest  or  reputation ;  if  this  moral  faculty
be  the  prerogative  of  man,  and  no  vestige  ojf  it  be  found  in  brute
animals ;  if  it  be  given  us  by  God  to  regulate  all  our  animal
afiections  and .  passions ;  if  to  be  governed  by  it  be  the  glory  of
man  and  the  image  of  God  in  his  soul,  and  to  disregard  its  dic-
tates be  his  dishonour  and  depravity :  I  say,  if  these  things  be
so,  to  seek  the  foundation  of  morality  in  the  aifections  which  we
have  in  common  with  the  brutes,  is  to  seek  the  living  among  the
dead,  and  to  change  the  glory  of  man,  and  the  image  of  God  in
his  soul,  into  the  similitude  of  an  ox  that  eateth  grass.

If  virtue  and  vice  be  a  matter  of  choice,  they  must  consist  in
.  voluntary  actions,  or  in  fixed  purposes  of  acting  according  to  a
certain  rule  when  there  is  opportunity,  and  not  in  qualities  of
mind  which  are  involuntary.

It  is  true,  that  every  virtue  is  both  agreeable  and  useful  in  the
highest  degree  ;  and  that  every  quality  that  is  agreeable  or  use-
ful, has  a  merit  upon  that  account.  But  virtue  has  a  merit
peculiar  to  itself,  a  merit  which  does  not  arise  from  its  being
useful  or  agreeable,  but  from  its  being  virtue.  This  merit  is
discerned  by  the  same  faculty  by  which  we  discern  it  to  be
virtue,  and  by  no  other.

VIII.  Esteem, — [We  give  the  name  of  esteem  both  to  the
regard  we  have  for  things  useful  and  agreeable,  and  to  the  regard
we  have  for  virtue ;  but  these  are  different  kinds  of  esteem.] I


342  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  V.

esteem  a  man  for  his  ingenuity  and  learning.  I  esteem  him  for
his  moral  worth.  The  sound  of  esteem  in  both  these  speeches
is  the  same,  but  its  meaning  is  very  different.

Good  breeding  is  a  very  amiable  quality ;  and  even  if  I  knew
that  the  man  had  no  motive  to  it  but  its  pleasure  and  utility  to
himself  and  others,  1  should  like  it  still,  but  I  would  not  in  that
case  call  it  a  moral  virtue.

A  dog  has  a  tender  concern  for  her  puppies ;  so  has  a  man
for  his  children.  The  natural  affection  is  the  same  in  both,  and
is  amiable  in  both.  But  why  do  we  impute  moral  virtue  to  the
man  on  account  of  this  concern,  and  not  to  the  dog?  The
reason  surely  is,  that,  in  the  man,  the  natural  affection  is  accom-
panied with  a  sense  of  duty,  but,  in  the  dog,  it  is  not.  The  same
thing  may  be  said  of  all  tie  kind  affections  common  to  us  v^th
the  brutes.  They  are  amiable  qualities,  but  they  are  not  moral
virtues.

IX.  The  merit  of  justice,  according  to  Hume. — What  has  been
said  relates  to  Mr.  Hume*s  system  in  general.  We  are  now  to
consider  his  notion  of  the  particular  virtue  of  justice,  that  its
merit  consists  wholly  in  its  utility  to  society.

That  justice  is  highly  useful  and  necessary  in  society,  and  on
that  account,  ought  to  be  loved  and  esteemed  by  all  that  love
mankind,  will  readily  be  granted.  And  as  justice  is  a  social
virtue,  it  is  true  also  that  there  could  be  no  exercise  of  it,  and
perhaps  we  should  have  no  conception  of  it  without  society.
But  this  is  equally  true  of  the  natural  affections  of  benevolence,
gratitude,  friendship,  and  compassion,  which  Mr.  Hume  makes
to  be  the  natural  virtues.

It  may  be  granted  to  Mr.  Hume,  that  men  have  no  conception
of  the  virtue  of  justice  till  they  have  lived  some  time  in  society.
It  is  purely  a  moral  conception,  and  our  moral  conceptions  and
moral  judgments  are  not  bom  with  us.  They  grow  up  by
degrees,  as  our  reason  does.  Nor  do  I  pretend  to  know  how
early,  or  in  what  order,  we  acquire  the  conception  of  the  several
virtues.  The  conception  of  justice  supposes  some  exercise  of
the  moral  faculty,  which,  being  the  noblest  part  of  the  human
constitution,  and  that  to  which  all  its  other  parts  are  subservient,
appears  latest.

It  may  likewise  be  granted,  that  there  is  no  animal  affection
in  human  nature  that  prompts  us  immediately  to  acts  of  justice,
as  such.  We  have  natural  affections  of  the  animal  kind,  which
immediately  prompt  us  to  acts  of  kindness;  but  none,  that  I
know,  that  has  the  same  relation  to  justice.  The  very  concep-
tion of  justice  supposes  a  moral  faculty ;  but  our  natural  kind
affections  do  not ;  otherwise  we  must  allow  that  brutes  have  this
faculty.

X.  What  I  maintain  is,  Jirst,  That  when  men  come  to  the


OP  JUSTICE.  343

exercise  of  their  moral  faculty,  they  perceive  a  turpitude  in
injustice,  as  they  do  in  other  crimes,  and  consequently  an  obU^
gallon  to  justice,  abstracting  from  the  consideration  of  its  utility.
And,  secondly y  That  as  soon  as  men  have  any  rational  conception
of  a  favour,  and  of  an  injury,  they  must  have  the  conception  of
justice,  and  perceive  its  obligation  distinct  from  its  utility.

The  first  of  these  points  hardly  admits  of  any  other  proof,  but
an  appeal  to  the  sentiments  of  every  honest  man,  and  every  man
of  honour,  whether  his  indignation  is  not  immediately  inflamed
against  an  atrocious  act  of  viUany,  without  the  cool  consideration
of  its  distant  consequences  upon  the  good  of  society  ?

We  might  appeal  even  to  robbers  and  pirates.  Whether  they
have  not  had  great  struggles  with  their  conscience,  when  they
first  resolved  to  break  through  all  the  rules  of  justice  ?  And
whether,  in  a  solitary  and  serious  hour,  they  have  not  frequently
felt  the  pangs  of  guilt  ?  They  have  very  often  confessed  this  at
a  time  when  all  disguise  is  laid  aside.

The  common  good  of  society,  though  a  pleasing  object  to  all
men,  when  presented  to  their  view,  hardly  ever  enters  into  the
thoughts  of  the  far  greatest  part  of  mankind ;  and  if  a  regard  to
it  were  the  sole  motive  to  justice,  the  number  of  honest  men
must  be  small  indeed.  It  would  be  confined  to  the  higher  ranks,
who,  by  their  education,  or  by  their  ofiice,  are  led  to  make  the
public  good  an  object ;  but  that  it  is  so  confined,  I  believe  no
man  will  venture  to  affirm.

The  temptations  to  injustice  are  strongest  in  the  lowest  class
of  men ;  and  if  nature  had  provided  no  motive  to  oppose  those
temptations  but  a  sense  of  public  good,  there  would  not  be  found
an  honest  man  in  that  class.

To  all  men  that  are  not  greatly  corrupted,  injustice,  as  well  as
cruelty  and  ingratitude,  is  an  object  of  disapprobation  on  its  own
account.  There  is  a  voice  within  us  that  proclaims  it  to  be  base,
unworthy,  and  deserving  of  punishment.

That  there  is,  in  all  ingenuous  natures,  an  antipathy  to  roguery
and  treachery,  a  reluctance  to  the  thoughts  of  villany  and  base-
ness, we  have  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Hume  himself ;  who,  as  I
doubt  not  but  he  felt  it,  has  expressed  it  very  strongly  in  the
conclusion  to  his  "  Enquiry,"  and  acknowledged  that,  in  some
cases,  without  this  reluctance  and  antipathy  to  dishonesty,  a
sensible  knave  would  find  no  sufficient  motive  from  public  good
to  be  honest.

I  shall  give  the  passage  at  large  fix>m  the  "  Enquiry  concerning
the  Principles  of  Morals,**  sec.  9,  near  the  end.

"  Treating  vice  with  the  greatest  candour,  and  making  it  all
possible  concessions,  we  must  acknowledge  that  there  is  not,  in
any  instance,  the  smallest  pretext  for  giving  it  the  preference
above  virtue,  with  a  view  to  self-interest ;  except,  perhaps,  in


344  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  V.

the  case  of  justice,  where  a  man,  taking  things  in  a  certain  light,
may  often  seem  to  he  a  loser  by  his  integrity.  And  though  it  is
allowed  that,  without  a  regard  to  property,  no  society  could  sub-
sist ;  yet,  according  to  the  imperfect  way  in  which  human  affairs
are  conducted,  a  sensible  knave,  in  particular  incidents,  may
think,  that  an  act  of  iniquity  or  infidelity  will  make  a  consider-
able addition  to  his  fortune,  without  causing  any  considerable
breach  in  the  social  union  and  confederacy.  That  honesty  is  the
best  policy,  may  be  a  good  general  rule,  but  it  is  liable  to  many
exceptions :  and  he,  it  may  perhaps  be  thought,  conducts  him-
self with  most  wisdom  who  observes  the  general  rule,  and  takes
advantage  of  all  the  exceptions.

"  I  must  confess  that,  if  a  man  think  that  this  reasoning  much
requires  an  answer,  it  will  be  a  little  difiicult  to  find  any  which
will  to  him  appear  satisfactory  and  convincing.  If  his  heart
rebel  not  against  such  pernicious  maxims,  if  he  feel  no  reluc-
tance to  the  thoughts  of  villany  and  baseness,  he  has  indeed  lost
a  considerable  motive  to  virtue,  and  we  may  expect  that  his
practice  will  be  answerable  to  his  speculation.  But  in  all  ingenu-
ous natures,  the  antipathy  to  treachery  and  roguery  is  too  strong
to  be  counterbalanced  by  any  views  of  profit  or  pecuniary  advan-
tage. Inward  peace  of  mind,  consciousness  of  integrity,  a  satis-
factory review  of  our  own  conduct ;  these  are  circumstances  very
requisite  to  happiness,  and  will  be  cherished  and  cultivated  by
every  honest  man  who  feels  the  importance  of  them."

The  reasoning  of  the  sensible  knave  in  this  passage,  seems  to
me  to  be  justly  founded  upon  the  principles  of  the  "  Enquiry,"
and  of  the  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"  and  therefore  it  is  no
wonder  that  the  author  should  find  it  a  little  difiicult  to  give
any  answer  which  would  appear  satisfactory  and  convincing  to
such  a  man.  To  counterbalance  this  reasoning,  he  puts  in  the
other  scale  a  reluctance,  an  antipathy,  a  rebellion  of  the  heart
against  such  pernicious  maxims,  which  is  felt  by  ingenuous
natures.

XI.  [Let  us  consider  a  little  the  force  of  Mr.  Hume's  answer
to  this  sensible  knave,  who  reasons  upon  his  own  principles.]  I
think  it  is  either  an  acknowledgment,  that  there  is  a  natural
judgment  of  conscience  in  man,  that  injustice  and  treachery  is  a
base  and  unworthy  practice,  which  is  the  point  I  would  esta-
blish ;  or  it  has  no  force  to  convince  either  the  knave  or  an
honest  man.

A  clear  and  intuitive  judgment,  resulting  from  the  constitution
of  human  nature,  is  sufficient  to  overbalance  a  train  of  subtile
reasoning  on  the  other  side.  Thus,  the  testimony  of  our  senses
is  sufficient  to  overbalance  all  the  subtile  arguments  brought
against  their  testimony.  And,  if  there  be  a  like  testimony  of
conscience  in  favour  of  honesty,  all  the  subtile  reasoning  of  the


OF  JUSTICE.  34,5

knave  against  it  ought  to  be  rejected  without  examination,  as
fallacious  and  sophistical,  because  it  concludes  against  a  self-
evident  principle ;  just  as  we  reject  the  subtile  reasoning  of  the
metaphysician  against  the  evidence  of  sense.

If,  therefore,  the  reluctance,  the  antipathy,  the  rebellion  of  the
heart  against  injustice,  which  Mr.  Hume  sets  against  the  reason-
ing of  the  knave,  include  in  their  meaning  a  natural  intuitive
judgment  of  conscience,  that  injustice  is  base  and  unworthy,  the
reasoning  of  the  knave  is  convincingly  answered ;  but  the  prin-
ciple. That  justice  is  an  artificial  virtue,  approved  solely  for  its
utility,  is  given  up.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  antipathy,  reluctance,  and  rebellion
of  heart,  imply  no  judgment,  but  barely  an  uneasy  feeling,  and
that  not  natural,  but  acquired  and  artificial,  the  answer  is  indeed
very  agreeable  to  the  principles  of  the  "  Enquiry,"  but  has  no
force  to  convince  the  knave  or  any  other  man.

The  knave  is  here  supposed  by  Mr.  Hume  to  have  no  such
feelings,  and  therefore  the  answer  does  not  touch  his  case  in  the
least,  but  leaves  him  in  the  full  possession  of  his  reasoning.  And
ingenuous  natures,  who  have  these  feelings,  are  left  to  deliberate
whether  they  will  yield  to  acquired  and  artificial  feelings,  in
opposition  to  rules  of  conduct,  which,  to  their  best  judgment,
appear  wise  and  prudent.

XII.  [The  second  thing  I  proposed  to  show  was.  That  as  soon
as  men  have  any  rational  conception  of  a.  favour  and  of  an  injury,
they  must  have  the  conception  of  justice,  and  perceive  its  obli-
gation.]*

The  power  with  which  the  Author  of  nature  hath  endowed
us,  may  be  employed  either  to  do  good  to  our  fellow  men,  or  to
hurt  them.  When  we  employ  our  power  to  promote  the  good
and  happiness  of  others,  this  is  a  benefit  or  favour ;  when  we
employ  it  to  hurt  them,  it  is  an  injury.  Justice  fills  up  the
middle  between  these  two.  It  is  such  a  conduct  as  does  no
injury  to  others ;  but  it  does  not  imply  the  doing  them  any
favour.

The  notions  of  a  favour  and  of  an  injury,  appear  as  early  in
the  mind  of  man  as  any  rational  notion  whatever.  They  are
discovered  not  by  language  only,  but  by  certain  afiections  of
mind,  of  which  they  are  the  natural  objects.  A  favour  natu-
rally produces  gratitude.  An  injury  done  to  ourselves  produces
resentment ;  and  even  when  done  to  another,  it  produces  indig-
nation.

I  take  it  for  granted  that  gratitude  and  resentment  are  no  less
natural  to  the  human  mind  than  hunger  and  thirst;  and  that
those  affections  are  no  less  naturally  excited  by  their  proper
objects  and  occasions  than  these  appetites.

•  Vide  p.  343,  sect.  10.


346  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  V.

It  is  no  less  evident,  that  the  proper  and  formal  object  of  grar
titude  is  a  person  who  has  done  us  a  favour ;  that  of  resentment,
a  person  who  has  done  us  an  injury.

Before  the  use  of  reason,  the  distinction  between  a  favour  and
an  agreeable  office  is  not  perceived.  Every  action  of  another
person  which  gives  present  pleasure  produces  love  and  good  will
towards  the  agent.  Every  action  that  gives  pain  or  uneasiness
produces  resentment.  This  is  common  to  man  before  the  use  of
reason,  and  to  the  more  sagacious  brutes ;  and  it  shows  no  con-
ception of  justice  in  either.

But  as  we  grow  up  to  the  use  of  reason,  the  notion,  both  of  a
favour  and  of  an  injury,  grows  more  distinct  and  better  defined.
It  is  not  enough  that  a  good  office  be  done ;  it  must  be  done
from  good-will,  and  with  a  good  intention,  otherwise  it  is  no
favour,  nor  does  it  produce  gratitude.

igF  I  have  heard  of  a  physician  who  gave  spiders  in  a  medi-
cine to  a  dropsical  patient,  with  an  intention  to  poison  him,  and
that  this  medicine  cured  the  patient,  contrary  to  the  intention  of
the  physician.  Surely  no  gratitude,  but  resentment,  was  due
by  the  patient,  when  he  knew  the  real  state  of  the  case.  It  is
evident  to  every  man,  that  a  benefit  arising  from  the  action  of
another,  either  without  or  against  his  intention,  is  not  a  motive
to  gratitude ;  that  is,  is  no  favour.

Another  thing  implied  in  the  nature  of  a  favour  is,  that  it  be
not  due.  A  man  may  save  my  credit  by  paying  what  he  owes
me.  In  this  case,  what  he  does  tends  to  my  benefit,  and  perhaps
is  done  with  that  intention ;  but  it  is  not  a  favour,  it  is  no  more
than  he  was  bound  to  do.

IBF  If  a  servant  do  his  work,  and  receive  his  wages,  there  is
no  favour  done  on  either  part,  nor  any  object  of  gratitude;  be-
cause, though  each  party  has  benefited  the  other,  yet  neither  has
done  more  than  he  was  bound  to  do.

What  I  infer  from  this  is.  That  the  conception  of  a  favour  in
every  man  come  to  years  of  understanding,  implies  the  concep-
tion of  things  not  due,  and  consequently  the  conception  of  things
that  are  due.

A  negative  cannot  be  conceived  by  one  who  has  no  conception
of  the  correspondent  positive.  Not  to  be  due  is  the  negative  of
being  due;  and  he  who  conceives  one  of  them  must  conceive
both.  The  conception  of  things  due  and  not  due  must  there-
fore be  found  in  every  mind  which  has  any  rational  conception
of  a  favour,  or  any  rational  sentiment  of  gratitude.

XIII.  [If  we  consider,  on  the  other  hand,  what  an  injury  is
which  is  the  object  of  the  natural  passion  of  resentment,  every
man,  capable  of  reflection,  perceives,  that  an  injury  implies  more
than  being  hurt  J]  If  I  be  hurt  by  a  stone  falling  out  of  the  wall,
or  by  a  flash  of  lightning,  or  by  a  convulsive  and  involuntary


OF  JUSTICE.  347

tnotion  of  another  man's  arm,  no  injury  is  done,  no  resentment
raised  in  a  man  that  has  reason.  In  this,  as  in  all  moral
actions,  there  must  be  the  will  and  intention  of  the  agent  to  do
the  hurt.

Nor  is  this  sufficient  to  constitute  an  injury.  The  man  who
breaks  my  fences,  or  treads  down  my  corn,  when  he  cannot  other-
wise preserve  himself  from  destruction,  who  has  no  injurious
intention,  and  is  willing  to  indemnify  me  for  the  hurt  which
necessity,  and  not  ill-will,  led  him  to  do,  is  not  injurious,  nor  is
an  object  of  resentment.

The  executioner  who  does  his  duty,  in  cutting  off  the  head  of
a  condemned  criminal,  is  not  an  object  of  resentment.  He  does
nothing  unjust,  and  therefore  nothing  injurious.

From  this  it  is  evident,  that  an  injury,  the  object  of  the
natural  passion  of  resentment,  implies  in  it  the  notion  of  injus-
tice. And  it  is  no  less  evident,  that  no  man  can  have  a  notion
of  injustice  without  having  the  notion  of  justice.

XIV.  [To  sum  up  what  has  been  said  upon  this  point :  a  favour,
an  act  of  justice,  and  an  injury,  are  so  related  to  one  another,
that  he  who  conceives  one  must  conceive  the  other  two.  They
lie,  as  it  were,  in  one  line,  and  resemble  the  relations  of  greater,
less  and  equal.]  If  one  understands  what  is  meant  by  one  line
being  greater  or  less  than  another,  he  can  be  at  no  loss  to  under-
stand what  is  meant  by  its  being  equal  to  the  other ;  for,  if  it
be  neither  greater  nor  less,  it  must  be  equal.

In  like  manner,  of  those  actions  by  which  we  profit  or  hurt
other  men,  a  favour  is  more  than  justice,  an  injury  is  less  ;  and
that  which  is  neither  a  favour  nor  an  injury  is  a  just  action.

As  soon,  therefore,  as  men  come  to  have  any  proper  notion  of
a  favour  and  of  an  injury ;  as  soon  as  they  have  any  rational
exercise  of  gratitude  and  of  resentment ;  so  soon  they  must  have
the  conception  of  justice  and  of  injustice ;  and  if  gratitude  and
resentment  be  natural  to  man,  which  Mr.  Hume  allows,  the
notion  of  justice  must  be  no  less  natural.

The  notion  of  justice  carries  inseparably  along  with  it,  a  per-
ception of  its  moral  obligation.  For  to  say  that  such  an  action
is  an  act  of  justice,  that  it  is  due,  that  it  ought  to  be  done,  that
we  are  under  a  moral  obligation  to  do  it,  are  only  different  ways
of  expressing  the  same  thing.  It  is  true,  that  we  perceive  no
high  degree  of  moral  worth  in  a  merely  just  action,  when  it  is
not  opposed  by  interest  or  passion  ;  but  we  perceive  a  high
degree  of  turpitude  and  demerit  in  unjust  actions,  or  in  the
omission  of  what  justice  requires.

Indeed,  if  there  were  no  other  argument  to  prove,  that  the
obligation  of  justice  is  not  solely  derived  from  its  utility  to  pro-
cure what  is  agreeable  either  to  ourselves  or  to  society,  this,
would  be  sufficient.  That  the  very  conception  of  justice  implies  its


34.3  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  V.

obligation.  The  morality  of  justice  is  included  in  the  very  idea
of  it :]  nor  is  it  possible  that  the  conception  of  justice  can  CDter
into  the  human  mind,  without  carrying  along  with  it  the  concep-
tion of  duty  and  moral  obligation.  Its  obligation,  therefore,  is
inseparable  from  its  nature,  and  is  not  derived  solely  from  its
utility,  either  to  ourselves  or  to  society,

XV.  We  may  further  observe,  That  as  in  all  moral  estimation,
every  action  takes  its  denomination  from  the  motive  that  producei
it ;  so  no  action  can  properly  be  denominated  an  act  of  justice,
unless  it  be  done  from  a  regard  to  justice.

IBF  If  a  man  pays  his  debt,  only  that  he  may  not  be  cast  into
prison,  he  is  not  a  just  man,  because  prudence,  and  not  jusjice,
is  his  motive. And  if  a  man,  from  benevolence  and  charity,
gives  to  another  what  is  really  due  to  him,  but  what  he  believes
not  to  be  due,  this  is  not  an  act  of  justice  in  him,  but  of  charity
or  benevolence,  because  it  is  not  done  from  a  motive  of  justice.
These  are  self-evident  truths ;  nor  is  it  less  evident,  that  what  a
man  does,  merely  to  procure  something  agreeable,  either  to  him-
self or  to  others,  is  not  an  act  of  justice,  nor  has  the  merit  of
justice.

Good  music  and  good  cookery  have  the  merit  of  utility,  in
procuring  what  is  agreeable  both  to  ourselves  and  to  society,  but
they  never  obtained  among  mankind  the  denomination  of  moral
virtues.  Indeed,  if  this  author's  system  be  well  founded,  great
injustice  has  been  done  them  on  that  account.

XVI.  I  shall  now  make  some  observations  upon  the  reasoning
of  this  author,  in  proof  of  his  favourite  principle,  'That  jitstice  is
not  a  natural  but  an  artificial  virtue ;  or,  as  it  is  expressed  in
the  "  Enquiry,"  That  public  utility  is  the  sole  origin  of  justice,
and  that  reflections  on  the  beneficial  consequences  of  this  virtue
are  the  sole  foundation  of  its  merit.

1 .  It  must  be  acknowledged,  that  this  principle  has  a  necessary
connexion  with  his  system  concerning  the  foundation  of  all  virtue ;
and  therefore  it  is  no  wonder  that  he  hath  taken  so  much  pains
to  support  it ;  for  the  whole  system  must  stand  or  fall  wdth  it.

If  the  dulce  and  the  utilcy  that  is,  pleasure,  and  what  is  useful
to  procure  pleasure,  be  the  whole  merit  of  virtue,  justice  can
have  no  merit  beyond  its  utility  to  procure  pleasure.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  an  intrinsic  worth  injustice,  and  demerit  in  injustice,
be  discerned  by  every  man  that  hath  a  conscience ;  if  there  be  a
natural  principle  in  the  constitution  of  man,  by  which  justice  is
approved,  and  injustice  disapproved  and  condemned,  then  the
whole  of  this  laboured  system  must  fall  to  the  ground.

2,  We  may  observe.  That  as  justice  is  directly  opposed  to
injury,  and  as  there  are  various  ways  in  which  a  man  may  be
injured,  so  there  must  be  various  branches  of  jmtice  opposed  to
the  different  kinds  of  injury »


OF  JUSTICE.  349

XVII.  Six  branches  of  justice. — A  man  may  be  injured,  ^r^^,
in  his  person,  by  wounding,  maiming  or  killing  him ;  secondly,
in  his  family,  by  robbing  him  of  his  children,  or  any  way  injur-
ing those  he  is  bound  to  protect ;  thirdly,  in  his  liberty,  by  con-
finement ;  fourthly,  in  his  reputation ;  fifthly,  in  his  goods  or
property;  and,  lastly,  in  the  violation  of  contracts  or  engage-
ments made  with  him.  This  enumeration,  whether  complete  or
not,  is  sufficient  for  the  present  purpose.

The  different  branches  of  justice,  opposed  to  these  different
kinds  of  injury,  are  commonly  expressed  by  saying,  that  an
innocent  man  has  a  right  to  the  safety  of  his  person  and  family,
a  right  to  his  liberty  and  reputation,  a  right  to  his  goods,  and  to
fidelity  to  engagements  made  with  him.  To  say  that  he  has  a
right  to  these  things,  has  precisely  the  same  meaning  as  to  say,
that  justice  requires  that  he  should  be  permitted  to  enjoy  them,
or  that  it  is  unjust  to  violate  them.  For  injustice  is  the  viola-
tion of  right,  and  justice  is,  to  yield  to  every  man  what  is  his
right.

XVI I I.  [These  things  being  understood  as  the  simplest  and
most  common  ways  of  expressing  the  various  branches  of  justice,
we  are  to  consider  how  far  Mr.  Hume's  reasoning  proves  any  or
all  of  them  to  be  artificial,  or  grounded  solely  upon  public
utility.]  The  last  of  them,  fidelity  to  engagements,  is  to  be  the
subject  of  the- next  chapter,  and  therefore  I  shall  say  nothing  of
it  in  this.

The  four  first  named,  to  wit,  the  right  of  an  innocent  man  to
the  safety  of  his  (1)  person  and  (^)  family,  to  his  (3)  liberty  and
(4)  reputation,  are,  by  the  writers  on  jurisprudence,  called  natural
rights  of  man,  because  they  are  grounded  inthe  nature  of  man  as
a  rational  and  moral  agent,  and  are,  by  his  Creator,  committed  to
his  care  and  keeping.  By  being  called  natural  or  innate,  they
are  distinguished  from  acquired  rights,  which  suppose  some  pre-
vious act  or  deed  of  man  by  which  they  are  acquired,  whereas
natural  rights  suppose  nothing  of  this  kind.

When  a  man's  natural  rights  are  violated,  he  perceives  intui-
lively,  and  he  feels,  that  he  is  injured.  The  feeling  of  his  heart
arises  from  the  judgment  of  his  understanding ;  for  if  he  did  not
believe  that  the  hurt  was  intended,  and  unjustly  intended,  he  would
not  have  that  feeling.  He  perceives  that  injury  is  done  to  himself,
and  that  he  has  a  right  to  redress.  The  natural  principle  of
resentment  is  roused  by  the  view  of  its  proper  object,  and  excites
him  to  defend  his  right.  Even  the  injurious  person  is  conscious
of  his  doing  injury ;  he  dreads  a  just  retaliation ;  and  if  it  be
in  the  power  of  the  injured  person^  he  expects  it  as  due  and
deserved.

[That  these  sentiments  spring  up  in  thfe  mind  of  man  as
naturally  as  his  body  grows  to  its  proper  stature ;  that  they  are


350  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  V.

not  the  birth  of  instruction,  either  of  parents,  priests,  philoso-
phers or  politicians,  but  the  pure  growth  of  nature,  cannot,  I
think,  without  effrontery,  be  denied.]  We  find  them  equally
strong  in  the  most  savage  and  in  the  most  civilized  tribes  of  man-
kind ;  and  nothing  can  weaken  them  but  an  inveterate  habit  of
rapine  and  bloodshed,  which  benumbs  the  conscience,  and  turns
men  into  wild  beasts.

The  public  good  is  very  properly  considered  by  the  judge
who  punishes  a  private  injury,  but  seldom  enters  into  the  thought
of  the  injured  person.  In  all  criminal  law,  the  redress  due  to
the  private  sufferer  is  distinguished  from  that  which  is  due  to  the
public ;  a  distinction  which  could  have  no  foundation,  if  the
demerit  of  injustice  arose  solely  from  its  hurting  the'public.  And
every  man  is  conscious  of  a  specific  difference  between  the  resent-
ment he  feels  for  an  injury  done  to  himself,  and  his  indignation
against  a  wrong  done  to  the  public.

I  think,  therefore,  it  is  evident,  that,  of  the  six  branches  of
justice  we  mentioned,  four  are  natural,  in  the  strictest  sense,
being  founded  upon  the  constitution  of  man,  and  antecedent  to
all  deeds  and  conventions  of  society ;  so  that,  if  there  were  but
two  men  upon  the  earth,  one  might  be  unjust  and  injurious,  and
the  other  injured.

XIX,  But  does  Mr.  Hume  maintain  the  contrary  ?

To  this  question  I  answer.  That  his  doctrine  seems  to  imply  it^
but  I  hope  he  meant  it  not.

He  affinns  in  general,  that  justice  is  not  a  natural  virtue ;  that
it  derives  its  origin  solely  from  public  utility,  and  that  reflections
on  the  beneficial  consequences  of  this  virtue  are  the  sole  founda-
tion of  its  merit.  He  mentions  no  particular  branch  of  justice
as  an  exception  to  this  general  rule  ;  yet  justice,  in  conamon  lan-
guage, and  in  all  the  writers  on  jurisprudence  I  am  acquainted
with,  comprehends  the  four  branches  above  mentioned.  His
doctrine,  therefore,  according  to  the  common  construction  of
words,  extends  to  these  four,  as  well  as  to  the  two  other  branches
of  justice.

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  attend  to  his  long  and  laboured  proof
of  this  doctrine,  it  appears  evident,  that  he  had  in  his  eye  only
two  particular  brancnes  of  justice.  No  part  of  his  reasoning
applies  to  the  other  four.  He  seems,  I  know  not  why,  to  have
taken  up  a  confined  notion  of  justice,  and  to  have  restricted  it
to  a  regard  to  property  and  fidelity  and  contracts.  As  to  other
branches  he  is  silent.  He  nowhere  says,  that  it  is  not  naturally
criminal  to  rob  an  innocent  man  of  his  life,  of  his  children,  of
his  liberty,  or  of  his  reputation ;  and  I  am  apt  to  think  he  never
meant  it.

XX.  Mr.  Hobbes'  system. — [The  only  philosopher  I  know  who
has  had  the  assuirance  to  maintain  this,  is  Mr.  Hobbes,  who  makes


OF  JUSTICK  ggj

the  state  of  nature  to  be  a  state  of  war,  of  every  man  against
eveiy  man ;  and  of  such  a  war  in  which  every  man  has  a  right  to
do  and  to  acquire  whatever  his  power  can,  by  any  means,  accom-
plish ;  that  is,  a  state  wherein  neither  right  nor  injury,  justice
nor  injustice,  can  possibly  exist.]

Mr.  Hume  mentions  this  system  of  Hobbes,  but  without
adopting  it,  though  he  allows  it  the  authority  of  Cicero  in  its
favour.

He  says  in  a  note,  "  This  fiction  of  a  state  of  nature  as  a  state
of  war  was  not  first  started  by  Mr.  Hobbes,  as  is  commonly  ima-
gined. Plato  endeavours  to  refute  an  hypothesis  very  like  it,  in
the  second,  third  and  fourth  books,  ^  De  Republica.'  Cicero,
on  the  contrary,  supposes  it  certain  and  universally  acknowledged,
in  the  following  passage,  &.c. :  ^  Pro  Sextio,'  1.  42."

The  passage,  which  he  quotes  at  large,  from  one  of  Cicero's
"  Orations,"  seems  to  me  to  require  some  straining  to  make  it
tally  with  the  system  of  Mr.  Hobbes.  Be  this  as  it  may,  Mr.
Hume  might  have  added,  That  Cicero,  in  his  "  Orations,"  like
many  other  pleaders,  sometimes  says,  not  what  he  believed,  but
what  was  fit  to  support  the  cause  of  his  client.  That  Cicero's
opinion,  with  regard  to  the  natural  obligation  of  justice,  was
very  different  from  that  of  Mr.  Hobbes,  and  even  from  Mr.
Hume's,  is  very  well  known.

XXI.  3.  As  Mr.  Hume,  therefore,  has  said  nothing  to  prove
the  foiu:  branches  of  justice  which  relate  to  the  innate  rights  of
men,  to  be  artificial,  or  to  derive  their  origin  solely  from  public
utility,  I  proceed  to  the  fifth  branch,  which  requires  us  not  to
invade  another  man's  property.

The  right  of  property  is  not  innate,  but  acquired.  It  is  not
grounded  upon  the  constitution  of  man,  but  upon  his  actions.
Writers  on  jurisprudence  have  explained  its  origin  in  a  manner
that  may  satisfy  every  man  of  common  understanding.

The  earth  is  given  to  men  in  common  for  the  purposes  of  life,
by  the  bounty  of  Heaven.  But,  to  divide  it,  and  appropriate  one
part  of  its  produce  to  one,  another  part  to  another,  must  be  the
work  of  men  who  have  power  and  understanding  given  them,  by
which  every  man  may  accommodate  himself  without  hurt  to  any
other.

^F  This  common  right  of  every  man  to  what  the  earth  pro-
duces, before  it  be  occupied  and  appropriated  by  others,  was,  by
ancient  moralists,  very  properly  compared  to  the  right  which
every  citizen  had  to  the  public  theatre,  where  every  man  that
came  might  occupy  an  empty  seat,  and  thereby  acquire  a  right
to  it  while  the  entertainment  lasted ;  but  no  man  had  a  right  to
dispossess  another.

The  earth  is  a  great  theatre,  furnished  by  the  Almighty,  with
perfect  wisdom  and  goodness,  for  the  entertainment  and  employ-.


352  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  V.

nient  of  all  mankind.  Here  every  man  has  a  right  to  accommo-
date himself  as  a  spectator,  and  to  perform  his  part  as  an  actor,
but  without  hurt  to  others.

He  who  does  so  is  a  just  man,  and  thereby  entitled  to  some
degree  of  moral  approbation ;  and  he  who  not  only  does  no  hurt,
but  employs  his  power  to  do  good,  is  a  good  man,  and  is  thereby
entitled  to  a  higher  degree  of  moral  approbation.  But  he  who
jostles  and  molests  his  neighbour,  who  deprives  him  of  any
accommodation  which  his  industry  has  provided  without  hurt  to
others,  is  unjust,  and  a  proper  object  of  resentment.

It  is  true,  therefore,  that  property  has  a  beginning  from  the
actions  of  men,  occupying,  and  perhaps  improving,  by  their
industry,  what  was  common  by  nature.  It  is  true  also,  tliat
before  property  exists,  that  branch  of  justice  and  injustice  which
regards  property  cannot  exist.  But  it  is  also  true,  that  where
there  are  men,  there  will  very  soon  be  property  of  one  kind  or
another,  and  consequently  there  will  be  that  branch  of  justice
which  attends  property  as  its  guardian.

XXII.  There  are  two  kinds  of  property  which  we  may  dis-
tinguish.

The  ^rst,  is  what  must  presently  be  consumed  to  sustain  life ;
the  second,  which  is  more  permanent,  is  what  may  be  laid  up
and  stored  for  the  supply  of  future  wants.

Some  of  the  gifts  of  nature  must  be  used  and  consumed  by
individuals  for  the  daily  support  of  life ;  but  they  cannot  be  used
till  they  be  occupied  and  appropriated.  If  another  person  may,
without  injustice,  rob  me  of  what  I  have  innocently  occupied
for  present  subsistence,  the  necessary  consequence  must  be,  that
he  may,  without  injustice,  take  away  my  life.

A  right  to  life  implies  a  right  to  the  necessary  means  of  life.
And  that  justice  which  forbids  the  taking  away  the  life  of  an
innocent  man,  forbids  no  less  the  taking  from  him  the  necessary
means  of  life.  He  has  the  same  right  to  defend  the  one  as  the
other ;  and  nature  inspires  him  with  the  same  just  resentment
of  the  one  injury  as  of  the  other.

The  natural  right  of  liberty  implies  a  right  to  such  innocent
labour  as  a  man  chooses,  and  to  the  fruit  of  that  labour.  To
hinder  another  man's  innocent  labour,  or  to  deprive  him  of  the
fruit  of  it,  is  an  injustice  of  the  same  kind,  and  has  the  same
effect  as  to  put  him  in  fetters  or  in  prison,  and  is  equally  a  just
object  of  resentment.

Thus,  it  appears,  that  some  kind,  or  some  degree,  of  property
must  exist  wherever  men  exist,  and  that  the  right  to  such  pro-

Eerty  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  natural  right  of  men  to
fe  and  liberty.
It  has  been  further  observed,  that  God  has  made  man  a  saga-
cious and  provident  animal,  led  by  his  constitution  not  only  to


OF  JUSTICE.  353

occupy  and  use  what  nature  has  provided  for  the  supply  of  his
present  wants  and  necessities,  but  to  foresee  future  wants,  and  to
provide  for  them ;  and  that  not  only  for  himself,  but  for  his
family,  his  friends,  and  connexions.

He  therefore  acts  in  perfect  conformity  to  his  nature,  when  he
stores,  of  the  firuit  of  ms  labour,  what  may  afterwards  be  useful
to  himself  or  to  others ;  when  he  invents  and  fabricates  utensils
or  machines  by  which  his  labour  may  be  facilitated,  and  its  pro-
duce increased;  and  when,  by  exchanging  with  his  fellow-men
commodities  or  labour,  he  accommodates  both  himself  and  them.
These  are  the  natural  and  innocent  exertions  of  that  understand-
ing wherewith  his  Maker  has  endowed  him. He  has  therefore
a  right  to  exercise  them,  and  to  enjoy  the  fruit  of  them. Every
man  who  impedes  him  in  making  such  exertions,  or  deprives  him
of  the  fruit  of  them,  is  injurious  and  unjust,  and  an  object  of
just  resentment.

fegr  Many  brute-animals  are  led  by  instinct  to  provide  for
futurity,  and  to  defend  their  store  and  their  store-house  against
all  invaders.  There  seems  to  be  in  man,  before  the  use  of  reason,
an  instinct  of  the  same  kind.  When  reason  and  conscience  grow
up,  they  approve  and  justify  this  provident  care,  and  condemn,
as  unjust,  every  invasion  of  others,  that  may  frustrate  it.

XaIII.  [Two  instances  of  this  provident  sagacity  seem  to
be  peculiar  to  man.  I  mean  (1)  the  invention  of  utensils  and
machines  for  facilitating  labour,  and  (2)  the  making  exchanges
with  his  fellow-men  for  mutual  benefit.]  No  tribe  of  men  has
been  found  so  rude  as  not  to  practise  these  things  in  some
degree.  And  I  know  no  tribe  of  brutes  that  was  ever  observed
to  practise  them.  They  neither  invent  nor  use  utensils  or  ma-
chines, nor  do  they  traffic  by  exchanges.

[From  these  observations,!  think  it  evident,  that  man,  even  in
the  state  of  nature ,  by  his  powers  of  body  and  mind,  may  acquire
permanent  property,  or  what  we  call  riches,  by  which  his  own
and  his  family's  wants  are  more  liberally  supplied,  and  his  power
enlarged  to  requite  his  benefactors,  to  relieve  objects  of  compas-
sion, to  make  friends,  and  to  defend  his  property  against  unjust
invaders.]  And  we  know  from  history,  that  men,  who  had  no
superior  on  earth,  no  connexion  with  any  public  beyond  their
own  family,  have  acquired  property,  and  had  distinct  notions  of
that  justice  and  injustice,  of  which  it  is  the  object.

Every  man,  as  a  reasonable  creature,  has  a  right  to  gratify  his
aatural  and  innocent  desires  without  hurt  to  others.  No  desire
is  more  natural,  or  more  reasonable,  than  that  of  supplying
lis  wants.  When  this  is  done  without  hurt  to  any  man,  to
linder  or  frustrate  his  innocent  labour,  is  an  unjust  violation  of
lis  natural  liberty. Private  utility  leads  a  man  to  desire  pro-

2a


354  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  V.

f)erty,  and  to  labour  for  it ;  and  his  right  to  it  is  only  a  right  to
abour  for  his  own  benefit.

XXIV. [That  public  utility  is  the  sole  origin,  even  of  that
branch  of  justice  which  regards  property,  is  so  far  from  being
true,  that  when  men  confederate  and  constitute  a  public,  under
laws  and  government,  the  right  of  each  individual  to  his  property
is,  by  that  confederation,  abridged  and  limited.^ In  the  state  of
nature,  every  man's  property  was  solely  at  his  own  disposal,
because  he  had  no  superior. In  civil  society,  it  must  be  subject
to  the  laws  of  the  society. He  gives  up  to  the  public  part  of
that  right  which  he  had  in  the  state  of  nature,  as  the  price  of
that  protection  and  security  which  he  receives  from  civil  society.
In  the  state  of  nature,  he  was  sole  judge  in  his  own  cause,  and
had  a  right  to  defend  his  property,  his  liberty,  and  life,  as  far  as
his  power  reached. In  the  state  of  civil  society,  he  must  submit
to  the  judgment  of  the  society,  and  acquiesce  in  its  sentence,
though  he  should  conceive  it  to  be  unjust.

What  was  said  above,  of  the  natural  right  every  man  has  to
acquire  permanent  property,  and  to  dispose  of  it,  must  be  under-
stood with  this  condition,  that  no  other  man  be  thereby  deprived
of  the  necessary  means  of  life.  The  right  of  an  innocent  man  to
the  necessaries  of  life,  is,  in  its  nature,  superior  to  that  which
the  rich  man  has  to  his  riches,  even  though  they  be  honestly
acquired.  The  use  of  riches,  or  permanent  property,  is  to  sup-
ply future  and  casual  wants,  which  ought  to  yield  to  present  and
certain  necessity.

8^  As,  in  a  family,  justice  requires  that  the  children  who  are
unable  to  labour,  and  those  who,  by  sickness,  are  disabled,
should  have  their  necessities  supplied  out  of  the  common  stock,
so,  in  the  great  family  of  God,  of  which  all  mankind  are  the
children,  justice,  I  think,  as  well  as  charity,  requires,  that  the
necessities  of  those  who,  by  the  providence  of  God,  are  disabled
from  supplying  themselves,  should  be  supplied  from  what  might
otherwise  be  stored  for  future  wants.

From  this  it  appears,  that  the  right  of  acquiring  and  that  of
disposing  of  property,  may  be  subject  to  limitations  and  restric-
tions, even  in  the  state  of  nature,  arid  much  more  in  the  state  of
civil  society,  in  which  the  public  has  what  writers  in  jurispru-
dence call  an  eminent  dominion  over  the  property,  as  well  as  over
the  lives  of  the  subjects,  as  far  as  the  public  good  requires.

XXV.  [If  these  principles  be  well  founded,  Mr.  Hume's
arguments  to  prove  that  justice  is  an  artificial  virtue,  or  that  its
public  utility  is  the  sole  foundation  of  its  merit,  may  be  easily
answered^]

He  supposes,  first,  a  state  in  which  nature  has  bestowed  on
the  human  race  such  abundance  of  external  goods,  that  every


OF  JUSTICE.  355

roan,  without  care  or  industry,  finds  himself  provided  of  what-
ever he  can  wish  or  desire.  It  is  evident,  says  he,  that  in  such
a  state,  the  cautious,  jealous  virtue  of  justice  would  never  once
have  been  dreamed  of.

It  may  be  observed,  firsts  that  this  argument  applies  only  to
^>ne  of  the  six  branches  of  justice  before  mentioned.  The  other
five  axe  not  in  the  least  affected  by  it ;  and  the  reader  will  easily
perceive  that  tliis  observation  applies  to  almost  all  his  arguments,
so  that  it  needs  not  be  repeated.

Secondly y  all  that  this  argument  proves  is,  that  a  state  of  the
human  race  may  be  conceived  wherein  no  property  exists,  and
where,  of  consequence,  there  can  be  no  exercise  of  that  branch
of  justice  which  respects  property.  But  does  it  follow  from
this,  that  where  property  exists,  and  must  exist,  that  no  regard
ought  to  be  had  to  it  ?

He  next  supposes  that  the  necessities  of  the  human  race  con-
tinuing the  same  as  at  present,  the  mind  is  so  enlarged  with
friendship  and  generosity,  that  every  man  feels  as  much  tender-
ness and  concern  for  the  interest  of  every  man,  as  for  his  own.
It  seems  evident,  he  says,  that  the  use  of  justice  would  be  sus-
pended iby  such  an  extensive  benevolence,  nor  would  the  divi-
sions and  barriers  of  property  and  obligation  have  ever  been
thought  of.

I  answer,  the  conduct  which  this  extensive  benevolence  leads
to,  is  either  perfectly  consistent  with  justice,  or  it  is  not.  First,
if  there  be  any  case  where  this  benevolence  would  lead  us  to  do
injustice,  the  use  of  justice  is  not  suspended.  Its  obligation  is
superior  to  that  of  benevolence;  and,  to  show  benevolence  to
one,  at  the  expense  of  injustice  to  another,  is  immoral.  Secondly,
supposing  no  such  case  could  happen,  the  use  of  justice  would
not  be  suspended,  because  by  it  we  must  distinguish  good  ofiices
to  which  we  had  a  right,  from  those  to  which  we  had  no  right,
and  which  therefore  require  a  return  of  gratitude.  Thirdly^
supposing  the  use  of  justice  to  be  suspended,  as  it  must  be  in
every  case  where  it  cannot  be  exercised,  will  it  follow,  that  its
obligation  is  suspended,  where  there  is  access  to  exercise  it  ?

A  third  supposition  is,  the  reverse  of  the  first,  that  a  society
falls  into  extreme  want  of  the  necessaries  of  life  :  the  question  is
put,  whether,  in  such  a  case,  an  equal  partition  of  bread,  without
regard  to  private  property,  though  effected  by  power,  and  even
by  violence,  would  be  regarded  as  criminal  and  injurious  ?  And
the  author  conceives,  that  this  would  be  a  suspension  of  the  strict
laws  of  justice.

I  answer,  that  such  an  equal  partition  as  Mr.  Hum6  mentions,
is  so  far  from  being  criminal  or  injurious,  that  justice  requires
it ;  and  surely  that  cannot  be  a  suspension  of  the  laws  of  justice,
which  is  an  act  of  justice. [All  that  the  strictest  justice  requires

^  A  2


356  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  V.

in  such  a  case,  is,  that  the  man  whose  life  is  preserved  at  the
expense  of  another,  and  without  his  consent,  should  indemnify
him  when  he  is  able.  His  case  is  similar  to  that  of  a  debtor  who
is  insolvent,  without  any  fault  on  his  part.  Justice  requires  that
he  should  be  forbom  till  he  is  able  to  pay.]  It  is  strange  that
Mr.  Hume  should  think  that  an  action,  neither  criminal  nor
injurious,  should  be  a  suspension  of  the  laws  of  justice.  This
seems  to  me  a  contradiction,  for  justice  and  injury  are  contra-
dictory terms.

The  next  argument  is  thus  expressed :  "  When  any  man,  even
in  political  society,  renders  himself,  by  crimes,  obnoxious  to  the
public,  he  is  punished  in  his  goods  and  person ;  that  is,  the  ordi-
nary rules  of  justice  are,  with  regard  to  him,  suspended  for  a
moment,  and  it  becomes  equitable  to  inflict  on  him,  what  other-
wise he  could  not  suffer  without  wrong  or  injury."

This  argument,  like  the  former,  refutes  itself.  For  that  an
action  should  be  a  suspension  of  the  rules  of  justice,  and  at  the
same  time  equitable,  seems  to  me  a  contradiction.  It  is  possible
that  equity  may  interfere  with  the  letter  of  human  laws,  because
all  the  cases  that  may  fall  under  them  cannot  be  foreseen ;  but
that  equity  should  interfere  with  justice  is  impossible.  It  is
strange  that  Mr.  Hume  should  think,  that  justice  requires  that
a  criminal  should  be  treated  in  the  same  way  as  an  innocent
man.

Another  argument  is  taken  from  public  war.  What  is  it,  says
he,  but  a  suspension  of  justice  among  the  warring  parties  ?  The
laws  of  war,  which  then  succeed  to  those  of  equity  and  justice,
are  rules  calculated  for  the  advantage  and  utility  of  that  parti-
cular state  in  which  men  are  now  placed.

I  answer,  when  war  is  undertaken  for  self-defence,  or  for  repa-
ration of  intolerable  injuries,  justice  authorises  it.  The  laws  of
war,  which  have  been  described  by  many  judicious  moralists,  are
all  drawn  from  the  fountain  of  justice  and  equity ;  and  every
thing  contrary  to  justice,  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of  war.  That
justice,  which  prescribes  one  rule  of  conduct  to  a  master,  another
to  a  servant ;  one  to  a  parent,  another  to  a  child ;  prescribes,  also
one  rule  of  conduct  towards  a  friend,  another  towards  an  enemy.
I  do  not  understand  what  Mr.  Hume  means  by  the  advantage
and  utility  of  a  state  of  war,  for  which  he  says  the  laws  of  war
are  calculated,  and  succeed  to  those  of  justice  and  equity.  I
know  no  laws  of  war  that  are  not  calculated  for  justice  and
equity.

The  next  argument  is  this.  Were  there  a  species  of  creatures
intermingled  with  men,  which,  though  rational,  were  possessed
of  such  inferior  strength,  both  of  body  and  mind,  that  they  were
incapable  of  all  resistance,  and  could  never,  upon  the  highest
provocation,  make  us  feel  the  effects  of  their  resentment ;  the


OF  JUSTICE.  357

necessary  consequence,  I  think,  is,  that  we  should  be  bound,  by
the  laws  of  humanity,"  to  give  gentle  usage  to  these  creatures,  but
should  not,  properly  speaking,  lie  under  any  restraint  of  justice
with  regard  to  them,  nor  could  they  possess  any  right  or  pro-
perty, exclusive  of  such  arbitrary  lords.

If  Mr.  Hume  had  not  owned  this  sentiment  as  a  consequence
of  his  "  Theory  of  Morals,"  I  should  have  thought  it  very  un-
charitable to  impute  it  to  him.  However,  we  may  judge  of  the
Theory  by  its  avowed  consequence.  For  there  cannot  be  better
evidence,  that  a  theory  of  morals,  or  of  any  particular  virtue,  is
false,  than  when  it  subverts  the  practical  rules  of  morals.  [This
defenceless  species  of  rational  creatures  is  doomed  by  Mr.  Hume
to  have  no  rights.  Why  ?  Because  they  have  no  power  to  defend
themselves.  Is  not  this  to  say,  that  right  has  its  origin  from
power;  which,  indeed,  was  the  doctrine  of  Mr.  Hobbes.]  And
'  to  illustrate  this  doctrine,  Mr.  Hume  adds,  that  as  no  inconve-
nience ever  results  from  the  exercise  of  a  power,  so  firmly  estab-
Ushed  in  nature,  the  restraints  of  justice  and  property  being
totally  useless,  could  never  have  place  in  so  unequal  a  confede-
racy ;  and,  to  the  same  purpose,  he  says,  that  the  female  part  of
our  own  species,  owe  the  share  they  have  in  the  rights  of  society,
to  the  power  which  their  address  and  their  charms  give  them.  If
this  be  sound  morals,  Mr.  Hume's  "  Theory  of  Justice"  may
be  true.

We  may  here  observe,  that  though,  in  other  places,  Mr.  Hume
founds  the  obligation  of  justice  upon  its  utility  to  ourselves,  or
to  others,  it  is  here  founded  solely  upon  utility  to  ourselves.  For
surely  to  be  treated  with  justice  would  be  highly  useful  to  the
defenceless  species  he  here  supposes  to  exist.  But  as  no  incon-
venience to  ourselves  can  ever  result  from  our  treatment  of  them,
he  concludes  that  justice  would  be  useless,  and  therefore  can
have  no  place. Mr.  Hobbes  could  have  said  no  more.

XXVI.  This  argument  would  prove  all  social  virtues  to  be
artificial,  as  well  as  justice, — [He  supposes,  in  the  last  place,  a
state  of  human  nature,  wherein  all  society  and  intercourse  is  cut
off  between  man  and  man*  It  is  evident,  he  says,  that  so  soli-
tary a  being  would  be  as  much  incapable  of  justice  as  of  social
discourse  and  conversation.]

And  would  not  so  solitary  a  being  be  as  incapable  of  friend-
ship, generosity,  and  compassion,  as  of  justice  ?  If  this  argu-
ment prove  justice  to  be  an  artificial  virtue,  it  will,  with  equal
force,  prove  every  social  virtue  to  be  artificial.

These  are  the  arguments  which  Mr.  Hume  has  advanced  in  his
Enquiry,  in  the  first  part  of  a  long  section  upon  justice.

XXVII.  In  the  second  part,  the  arguments  are  not  so  clearly
distinguished,  nor  can  they  be  easily  collected.  I  shall  offer
some  remarks  upon  what  seems  most  specious  in  this  second  part.


353  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  V.

He  begins  with  observing,  "  That,  if  we  examine  the  particu-
lar laws  by  which  justice  is  directed  and  property  determined,
they  present  us  with  the  same  conclusion.  The  good  of  man-
kind is  the  only  object  of  all  those  laws  and  regulations."

It  is  not  easy  to  perceive  where  the  stress  of  this  argument  lies.
The  good  of  mankind  is  the  object  of  all  the  laws  and  regulations
hy  which  justice  is  directed  and  property  determined  ;  therefore
justice  is  not  a  natural  virtue y  but  has  its  origin  solely  frm
public  utility,  and  its  beneficial  consequences  are  the  sole  fouth
dation  of  its  merit.

Some  step  seems  to  be  wanting  to  connect  the  antecedent  pro-
position with  the  conclusion,  which,  I  think,  must  be  one  or
other  of  these  two  propositions ;  first,  Jill  the  rules  of  justice
tend  to  public  utility;  or,  secondly.  Public  utility  is  the  only
standard  of  justice,  from  which  alone  all  its  rules  must  be
deduced.

If  the  argument  be,  That  justice  must  have  its  origin  solely
from  public  utility,  because  all  its  rules  tend  to  public  utility,
I  cannot  admit  the  consequence ;  nor  can  Mr,  Hume  admit  it
without  overturning  his  own  system.  For  the  rule?  of  benevo-
lence and  humanity  do  all  tend  to  the  public  utility,  and  yet  in
his  system  they  have  another  foundation  in  human  nature ;  so
likewise  may  the  rules  of  justice.

I  am  apt  to  think,  therefore,  that  the  argument  is  to  be  taken  in
the  last  sense,  That  public  utility  is  the  only  standard  of  justice,
from  which  all  its  rules  must  be  deduced ;  and  therefore  justice
has  its  origin  solely  from  public  utility.

This  seems  to  be  Mr.  Himie's  meaning,  because,  in  what  fol-
lows, he  observes.  That,  in  order  to  establish  laws  for  the  regu-
lation o{  property,  we  must  be  acquainted  with  the  nature  and
situation  of  man;  must  reject  appearances  which  maybe  false,
though  specious ;  and  must  search  for  those  rules  which  are,*  on
the  whole,  most  useful  and  beneficial ;  and  endeavours  to  show,
that  the  established  rules  which  regard  property  are  more  for  the
public  good  than  the  system,  either  of  those  religious  fanatics
of  the  last  age,  who  held  that  saints  only  should  inherit  the
earth ;  or  of  those  political  fanatics  who  claimed  an  equal  divi-
sion of  property.

XXVIII.  Obvious  defect  in  Mr.  Hume's  reasoning  as  to  the
standard  of  justice  generally, — We  see  here,  as  before,  that  though
Mr.  Hume's  conclusion  respects  justice  in  general,  his  argument
is  confined  to  one  branch  of  justice,,  to  wit,  the  right  of  property ;
and  it  is  well  known  that  to  conclude  from  a  part  to  the  whole
is  not  good  reasoning.

Besides,  the  proposition  from  which  his  conclusion  is  drawn
cannot  be  granted,  either  with  regard  to  property,  or  with  regard
to  the  other  branches  of  justice.


n


OP  JUSTICE.  359

[We  endeavoured  before  to  show  that  property,  though  not
an  innate  but  an  acquired  right,  may  he  acquired  in  the  state
of  nature f  and  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  nature ;  and  that  this
right  has  not  its  origin  from  human  laws,  made  for  the  pub-
lic good,  though,  when  men  enter  into  political  society,  it  may
and  ought  to  be  regulated  by  those  laws.]

If  there  were  but  two  men  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  of  ripe
faculties,  each  might  have  his  own  property,  and  might  know  •
his  right  to  defend  it,  and  his  obligation  not  to  invade  the  pro-
perty of  the  other.  He  would  have  no  need  to  have  recourse  to
reasoning  from  public  good,  in  order  to  know  when  he  was  in-
jured, either  in  his  property,  or  in  any  of  his  natural  rights,  or
to  know  what  rules  of  justice  he  ought  to  observe  towards  his
neighbour.

The  simple  rule  of  not  doing  to  his  neighbour  what  he  would
think  wrong  to  be  done  to  himself,  would  lead  him  to  the  know-
ledge of  every  branch  of  justice,  without  the  consideration  of
public  good,  or  of  laws  and  statutes  made  to  promote  it.

It  is  not  true,  therefore,  that  public  utility  is  the  only  stand-
ard of  justice,  and  that  the  rules  of  justice  can  be  deduced  only
from  their  public  utility.

XXIX.  Standard  of  justice  among  the  ancients, — Aristides,
and  the  people  of  Athens,  had  surely  another  notion  of  justice,
when  he  pronounced  the  counsel  of  Themistocles,  which  was
communicated  to  him  only,  to  be  highly  useful,  but  unjust;
and  the  assembly,  upon  this  authority,  rejected  the  proposal
unheard.  These  honest  citizens,  though  subject  to  no  laws  but
of  their  own  making,  far  from  making  utility  the  standard  of
justice,  made  justice  to  be  the  standard  of  utility,

"  fFkat  is  a  man's  property  ?  Anything  whicb  it  is  lawful
for  him,  and  for  him  alone,  to  use.  But  what  rule  have  we  by
which  we  can  distinguish  these  objects  ?  Here  we  must  have
recourse  to  statutes,  customs,  precedents,  analogies,  &c."

Does  not  this  imply  that,  in  the  state  of  nature,  there  can  be
no  distinction  of  property  ?  If  so,  Mr.  Hume's  state  of  nature
is  the  same  with  that  of  Mr.  Hobbes.

It  is  true,  that  when  men  become  members  of  a  political  so-
ciety, they  subject  their  property,  as  well  as  themselves,  to  the
laws,  and  must  either  acquiesce  in  what  the  laws  determine,  or
leave  the  society.  But  justice,  and  even  that  particular  branch
of  it  which  our  author  always  supposes  to  be  the  whole,  is  ante-
cedent to  political  societies  and  to  their  laws ;  and  the  intention
of  these  laws  is,  to  be  the  guardians  of  justice,  and  to  redress
injuries.

As  all  the  works  of  men  are  imperfect,  human  laws  may  be
unjust;  which  could  never  be,  if  justice  had  its  origin  from  law,
as  the  author  seems  here  to  insinuate.


3(30  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  tJ

Justice  requires  that  a  member  of  a  state  should  submit  iA
the  laws  of  the  state  when  they  require  nothing  unjust  or  inhfte
pious.  There  may,  therefore,  be  statutory  rights  and  statutmyftj^
crimes.  A  statute  may  create  a  right  which  did  not  beforeltt
exist,  or  make  that  to  be  criminal  which  was  not  so  before.  Batlo
this  could  never  be,  if  there  were  not  an  antecedent  obligatioala]
upon  the  subject  to  obey  the  statutes.  In  like  manner,  thejta
command  of  a  master  may  make  that  to  be  the  servant's  duty  Ic
wliich,  before,  was  not  his  duty,  and  the  servant  may  be  charge- 1
able  with  injustice  if  he  disobeys,  because  he  was  under  an  I  ft
antecedent  obligation  to  obey  his  master  in  lawful  things.  I 'J

We  grant,  therefore,  that  particular  laws  may  direct  justice  Ip
and  determine  property,  and  sometimes  even  upon  very  sUght  II
reasons  and  analogies,  or  even  for  no  other  reason  but  that  it  is  I
better  that  such  a  point  should  be  determined  by  law  than  that  1^
it  should  be  left  a  dubious  subject  of  contention.  But  this,  far  I
from  presenting  us  with  the  conclusion  which  the  author  would  I
establish,  presents  us  with  a  contrary  conclusion.  For  all  these  I
particular  laws  and  statutes  derive  their  whole  obligation  and  '
force  from  a  general  rule  of  justice  antecedent  to  them,  to  wit,
that  subjects  ought  to  obey  the  laws  of  their  country.

XXX.  The  author  compares  the  rules  of  justice  with  the
most  frivolous  superstitions,  and  can  find  no  foundation  for  moral
sentiment  in  the  one  more  than  in  the  other,  excepting  that  jus-
tice is  requisite  to. the  well-being  and  existence  of  society.

It  is  very  true,  that,  if  we  examine  mine  and  thine  by  the
senses  of  sight,  smell,  or  touch,  or  scrutinize  them  by  the  sciences
of  medicine,  chemistry,  or  physics,  we  perceive  no  difference.
But  the  reason  is,  that  none  of  these  senses  or  sciences  are  the
judges  of  right  or  wrong,  or  can  give  any  conception  of  them,
any  more  than  the  ear  of  colour,  or  the  eye  of  soimd.  Every
man  of  common  understanding,  and  every  savage,  when  he
applies  his  moral  faculty  to  those  objects,  perceives  a  difference
as  clearly  as  he  perceives  daylight.  When  that  sense  or  faculty
is  not  consulted,  in  vain  do  we  consult  every  other,  in  a  question
of  right  and  wrong.

To  perceive  that  justice  tends  to  the  good  of  mankind,  would
lay  no  moral  obligation  upon  us  to  be  just,  unless,  we  be  con-
scious of  a  moral  obligation  to  do  what  tends  to  the  good  of  man-
kind. If  such  a  moral  obligation  be  admitted,  why  may  we  not
admit  a  stronger  obligation  to  do  injury  to  no  man  ?  The  last
obligation  is  as  easily  conceived  as  the  first,  and  there  is  as  clear
evidence  of  its  existence  in  human  nature.

XXXI.  The  last  argument  is  a  dilemma,  and  is  thus  ex-
pressed :  "  The  dilemma  seems  obvious.  As  justice  evidently
tends  to  promote  pubUc  utility,  and  to  support  civil  society,  the
sentiment  of  justice  is  either  derived  from  our  reflecting  on  that


OF  THE  NATURE  AND  OBLIGATION  OF  A  CONTRACT.  361

tendency,  or,  like  hunger,  thirst,  and  other  appetites,  resentment,
love  of  Hfe,  attachment  to  offspring,  and  other  passions,  arises
from  a  simple  original  instinct  in  the  human  breast,  which  nature
has  implanted  for  like  salutary  purposes.  If  the  latter  be  the
case,  it  follows,  that  property,  which  is  the  object  of  justice,  is
also  distinguished  by  a  simple  original  instinct,  and  is  not  ascer-
tained by  any  argument  or  reflection.  But  who  is  there  that
ever  heard  of  such  an  instinct,"  &c.

I  doubt  not  but  Mr.  Hume  has  heard  of  a  principle  called  con^
science,  which  nature  has  implanted  in  the  human  breast.  Whe-
ther he  will  call  it  a  simple  original  instinct,  I  know  not,  as  he
gives  that  name  to  all  our  appetites  and  to  all  our  passions.
From  this  principle,  I  think,  we  derive  the  sentiment  of  justice,
^r  As  the  eye  not  only  gives  us  the  conception  of  colours,
but  makes  us  perceive  one  body  to  have  one  colour,  and  another
body  another ;  and  as  our  reason  not  only  gives  us  the  concep-
tion of  true  and  false,  but  makes  us  perceive  one  proposition  to
be  true  and  another  to  be  false;  so  our  conscience,  or  moral
faculty,  not  only  gives  us  the  conception  of  honest  and  dishonest,
but  makes  us  perceive  one  kind  of  conduct  to  be  honest,  another
to  be  dishonest.  By  this  faculty  we  perceive  a  merit  in  honest
conduct,  and  a  demerit  in  dishonest,  without  regard  to  public
utility.

That  these  sentiments  are  not  the  effect  of  education  or  of  ac-
quired habits,  we  have  the  same  reason  to  conclude,  as  that  our
perception  of  what  is  true  and  what  false,  is  not  the  effect  of
education  or  of  acquired  habits.  There  have  been  men  who
professed  to  believe,  that  there  is  no  ground  to  assent  to  any  one
proposition  rather  than  its  contrary ;  but  I  never  yet  heard  of  a
man  who  had  the  effrontery  to  profess  himself  to  be  under  no
obligation  of  honour  or  honesty,  of  truth  or  justice,  in  his  deal-
ings with  men.

Nor  does  this  faculty  of  conscience  require  innate  ideas  ofpro^
perty,  and  of  the  various  ways  of  acquiring  and  transferring  it,
or  innate  ideas  of  kings  and  senators,  of  pretors  and  chancellors,
and  Juries,  any  more  than  the  faculty  of  seeing  requires  innate
ideas  of  colours,  or  than  the  faculty  of  reasoning  requires  innate
ideas  of  cones,  cylinders,  and  spheres.


CHAPTER  VI.

OF  THE  NATURE  AND  OBLIGATION  OF  A  CONTRACT.

I.  Promise  and  contract  different, — The  obligation  of  con-
tracts and  promises  is  a  matter  so  sacred,  and  of  such  consequence
to  human  society,  that  speculations  which  have  a  tendency  to


ggg  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VI.

weaken  that  obligation,  and  to  perplex  men's  notions  on  a  sub-
ject so  plain  and  so  important,  ought  to  meet  with  the  disappro-
bation of  all  honest  men.

Some  such  speculations,  I  think,  we  have  in  the  third  volume
of  Mr.  Hume's  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"  and  in  his  "  En-
quiry into  the  Principles  of  Morals ; "  and  my  design  in  this
chapter  is,  to  offer  some  observations  on  the  nature  of  a  contract
or  promise,  and  on  two  passages  of  that  author  on  this  subject.

I  am  far  from  saying  or  thinking,  that  Mr.  Hume  meant  to
weaken  men's  obligations  to  honesty  and  fair  dealing,  or  that  he
had  not  a  sense  of  these  obligations  himself.  It  is  not  the  man
I  impeach,  bvlt  his  writings.  Let  us  think  of  the  first  as  cha-
ritably as  we  can,  while  we  freely  examine  the  import  and  ten-
dency of  the  last.

Although  the  nature  of  a  contract  and  of  a  promise  is  perfectly
understood  by  all  men  of  common  understanding,  yet,  by  atten-
tion to  the  operations  of  mind  signified  by  these  words,  we  shall
be  better  enabled  to  judge  of  the  metaphysical  subtleties  which
have  been  raised  about  them.  A  promise  and  a  contract  difier
so  little  in  what  concerns  the  present  disquisition,  that  the  same
reasoning  (as  Mr.  Hume  justly  observes)  extends  to  both.  [In
a  promise,  one  party  only  comes  under  the  obligation,  the  other
acquires  a  right  to  the  prestation  promised.  But  we  give  the
name  of  a  contract  to  a  transaction  in  which  each  party  comes
under  an  obligation  to  the  other,  and  each  reciprocally  acquires
a  right  to  what  is  promised  by  the  other.]

II.  Definition  of  a  contract. — The  Latin  word  pactum  seems  to
extend  to  both ;  and  the  definition  given  of  it  in  the  civil  law,
and  borrowed  from  Ulpian,  is,  "  Duorum  pluriumve  in  idem  pla-
citum  consensus."  Titius,  a  modem  civilian,  has  endeavoured  to
make  this  definition  more  complete,  by  adding  the  words,  "  Obli-
gationis  licite  constituendae  vel  tollendae  causa  datus,"  With  this
addition,  the  definition  is.  That  [a  contract  is  the  consent  of  two
or  more  persons  in  the  same  thing,  given  with  the  intefttion  of
constituting  or  dissolving  lawfully  some  obligation.]

Thi^  definition  is  perhaps  as  good  as  any  other  that  can  be
given ;  yet,  I  believe,  every  man  will  acknowledge,  that  it  gives
him  no  clearer  or  more  distinct  notion  of  a  contract  than  he  had
before.  If  it  is  considered  as  a  strictly  logical  definition,  I
believe  some  objections  might  be  made  to  it ;  but  I  forbear  to
mention  them,  because  I  believe  that  similar  objections  might  be
made  to  any  definition  of  a  contract  that  can  be  given.

Nor  can  it  be  inferred  from  this,  that  the  notion  of  a  contract
is  not  perfectly  clear  in  every  man  come  to  years  of  imderstand-
ing.  For  this  is  common  to  many  operations  of  the  mind,  that
although  we  understand  them  perfectly,  and  are  in  no  danger  of
confounding  them  with  any  thing  else;  yet  we  cannot  define


OF  THE  NATURE  AND  OBLIGATION  OF  A  CONTRACT.  gQQ

them  according  to  the  rules  of  logic,  by  a  genus  and  a  specific
difference.  And  when  we  attempt  it,  we  rather  darken  than
give  light  to  them.

Is  there  any  thing  more  distinctly  understood  by  all  men,  than
what  it  is  to  see,  to  hear,  to  remember,  to  judge  ?  Yet  it  is  the
most  difficult  thing  in  the  world  to  define  these  operations  ac-
cording to  the  rules  of  logical  definition.  But  it  is  not  more
difficult  than  it  is  useless.

Sometimes  philosophers  attempt  to  define  them  ;  but,  if  we
examine  their  definitions,  we  shall  find,  that  they  amount  to  no
more  than  giving  one  synonymous  word  for  another,  and  com-
monly a  worse  for  a  better.  So  when  we  define  a  contract,  by
calling  it  a  consent,  a  convention,  an  agreement,  what  is  this  but
giving  a  synonymous  word  for  it,  and  a  word  that  is  neither  more
expressive  nor  better  understood  ?

ISSF  One  boy  has  a  top,  another  a  scourge ;  says  the  first  to
the  other,  "  If  you  will  lend  me  your  scourge  as  long  as  I  can
keep  up  my  top  v^th  it,  you  shall  next  have  the  top  as  long  as
you  can  keep  it  up."  "  Agreed,"  says  the  other.  This  is  a  con-
tract perfectly  understood  by  both  parties,  though  they  never
heard  of  the  definition  given  by  Ulpian  or  by  Titius.  And  each
of  them  knows,  that  he  is  injured  if  the  other  breaks  the  bar-
gain, and  that  he  does  wrong  if  he  breaks  it  himself.

III.  [The  operations  of  the  human  mind  may  be  divided  into
two  classes,  the  solitary  and  the  social.  As  promises  and  con-
tracts belong  to  the  last  class,  it  may  be  proper  to  explain
this  division.]*

I  call  those  operations  solitary,  which  may  be  performed  by  a
man  in  solitude,  without  intercourse  with  any  other  intelligent
being.

I  call  those  operations  social,  which  necessarily  imply  social
intercourse  with  some  other  intelligent  being  who  bears  a  part  in
them.

A  man  may  see,  and  hear,  and  remember,  and  judge,  and  rea-
son ;  he  may  deliberate  and  form  purposes,  and  execute  them,
without  the  intervention  of  any  other  intelligent  being.  They
are  solitary  acts.  But  when  he  asks  a  question  for  information,
when  he  testifies  a  fact,  when  he  gives  a  command  to  his  servant,
when  he  makes  a  promise,  or  enters  into  a  contract,  these  are
social  acts  of  mind,  and  can  have  no  existence  without  the  inter-
vention of  some  other  intelligent  being,  who  acts  a  part  in  them.
Between  the  operations  of  the  mind  which,  for  want  of  a  more
proper  name,  I  have  called  solitary,  and  those  I  have  called  social,
there  is  this  very  remarkable  distinction,  that,  in  the  solitary,
the  expression  of  them  by  words,  or  any  other  sensible  sign,  is

*  Vide  "  Essays  oii  the  Intellectual  Powers,"  Essay  I.  chap,  viii.,  where
the  arguments  used  in  this  section  are  given  more  at  length.


gQ4i  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VI.

accidental.  They  may  exist,  and  be  complete,  without  being
expressed,  without  being  known  to  any  other  person.  But,  in
the  social  operations,  the  expression  is  essential.  They  cannot
exist  without  being  expressed  by  words  or  signs,  and  known  to
the  other  party.

If  nature  had  not  made  man  capable  of  such  social  operations
of  mind,  and  furnished  him  with  a  language  to  express  them,  he
might  think,  and  reason,  and  deliberate,  and  will ;  he  might  have
desires  and  aversions,  joy  and  sorrow  ;  in  a  word,  he  might  exert
all  those  operations  of  mind  which  the  writers  in  logic  and  pneu-
matology  have  so  copiously  described ;  but,  at  the  same  time,
he  would  still  be  a  solitary  being,  even  when  in  a  crowd  ;  it  would
be  impossible  for  him  to  put  a  question,  or  give  a  command,  to
ask  a  favour,  or  testify  a  fact,  to  make  a  promise  or  a  bargain.

I  take  it  to  be  the  common  opinion  of  philosophers,  that  the
social  operations  of  the  human  mind  are  not  specifically  diJHFerent
from  the  solitary,  and  that  they  are  only  various  modifications
or  compositions  of  our  solitary  operations,  and  may  be  resolved
into  them.

It  is  for  this  reason,  probably,  that,  in  enumerating  the  opera-
tions of  the  mind,  the  solitary  only  are  mentioned,  and  no  notice
at  all  taken  of  the  social,  though  they  are  familiar  to  every  man,
and  have  names  in  all  languages.

I  apprehend,  however,  it  will  be  found  extremely  difficult,  if
not  impossible,  to  resolve  our  social  operations  into  any  modifi-
cation or  composition  of  the  solitary :  and  that  an  attempt  to  do
this  would  prove  as  ineffectual  as  the  attempts  that  have  been
made  to  resolve  all  our  social  affections  into  the  selfish.  The
social  operations  appear  to  be  as  simple  in  their  nature  as  the
solitary.  They  are  found  in  every  individual  of  the  species,
even  before  the  use  of  reason.

The  power  which  man  has  of  holding  social  intercourse  ynth
his  kind,  by  asking  and  refusing,  threatening  and  supplicating,
commanding  and  obeying,  testifying  and  promising,  must  either
be  a  distinct  faculty  given  by  our  Maker,  and  a  part  of  our  con-
stitution, like  the  powers  of  seeing,  and  hearing,  or  it  must  be  a
human  invention.  If  men  have  invented  this  art  of  social  inter-
course, it  must  follow,  that  every  individual  of  the  species  must
have  invented  it  for  himself.  It  cannot  be  taught,  for  though
when  once  carried  to  a  certain  pitch,  it  may  be  improved  by
teaching ;  yet  it  is  impossible  it  can  begin  in  that  way,  because
all  teaching  supposes  a  social  intercourse  and  language  already
established  between  the  teacher  and  the  learner.  This  inter-
course must,  from  the  very  first,  be  carried  on  by  sensible  signs ;
for  the  thoughts  of  other  men  can  be  discovered  in  no  other  way.
I  think  it  is  likevrise  evident,  that  this  intercourse,  in  its  begin-
ning, at  least,  must  be  carried  on  by  natural  signs,  whose  mean-


OF  THE  NATURE  AND  OBLIGATION  OF  A  CONTRACT.  gQg

ing  is  understood  by  both  parties,  previous  to  all  compact  or
agreement.  For  there  can  be  no  compact  without  signs,  nor
without  social  intercourse.

I  apprehend,  therefore,  that  the  social  intercourse  of  mankind,
consisting  of  those  social  operations  which  I  have  mentioned,  is
the  exercise  of  a  faculty  appropriated  to  that  purpose,  which  is
the  gift  of  God,  no  less  than  the  powers  of  seeing  and  hearing.
And  that,  in  order  to  carry  on  this  intercourse,  God  has  given
to  man  a  natural  language,  by  which  his  social  operations  are
expressed,  and,  without  which,  the  artificial  languages  of  articu-
late sounds,  and  of  writing,  could  never  have  been  invented  by
human  art.

The  signs  in  this  natural  language  axe  looks,  changes  of  the
features,  modulations  of  the  voice,  and  gestures  of  the  body.
All  men  understand  this  language  without  instruction,  and  all
men  can  use  it  in  some  degree.  But  they  are  most  expert  in
it  who  use  it  most.  It  makes  a  great  part  of  the  language  of
savages,  and  therefore  they  are  more  expert  in  the  use  of  natural
signs  than  the  civilized.

Ig^  The  language  of  dumb  persons  is  mostly  formed  of  natural
signs ;  and  they  are  all  great  adepts  in  this  .language  of  nature.
All  that  we  call  action  and  pronunciation,  in  the  most  perfect
orator,  and  the  most  admired  actor,  is  nothing  else  but  super-
adding the  language  of  nature  to  the  language  of  articulate
sounds.  The  pantomimes  among  the  Romans  carried  it  to  the
highest  pitch  of  perfection.  For  they  could  act  part  of  comedies
and  tragedies  in  dumb-show,  so  as  to  be  understood,  not  only  by
those  who  were  accustomed  to  this  entertainment,  but  by  all  the
strangers  that  came  to  Rome,  from  all  the  comers  of  the  earth.

For  it  may  be  observed  of  this  natural  language,  (and  no-
thing more  clearly  demonstrates  it  to  be  a  part  of  the  human
constitution,)  that  although  it  require  practice  and  study  to
enable  a  man  to  express  his  sentiments  by  it  in  the  most  perfect
manner ;  yet  it  requires  neither  study  nor  practice  in  the  spec-
tator to  understand  it.  The  knowledge  of  it  was  before  latent
in  the  mind,  and  we  no  sooner  see  it,  than  we  immediately  recog-
nise it,  as  we  do  an  acquaintance  whom  we  had  long  forgot,  and
could  not  have  described ;  but  no  sooner  do  we  see  him,  than  we
know  for  certain  that  he  is  the  very  man.

This  knowledge,  in  all  mankind,  of  the  natural  signs  of  men's
thoughts  and  sentiments,  is  indeed  so  like  to  reminiscence,  that
it  seems  to  have  led  Plato  to  conceive  all  himian  knowledge  to
be  of  that  kind.

It  is  not  by  reasoning,  that  all  mankind  know,  that  an  open
countenance,  and  a  placid  eye,  is  a  sign  of  amity ;  that  a  con-
tracted brow,  and  a  fierce  look,  is  the  sign  of  anger.  It  is  not
from  reason  that  we  learn  to  know  the  natural  signs  of  consent-


ggg  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VI.

ing  and  refusing,  of  aflSrming  and  denying,  of  threatening  and
supplicating.

No  man  can  perceive  any  necessary  connexion  between  the
signs  of  such  operations,  and  the  things  signified  by  them.  But
we  are  so  formed  by  the  Author  of  our  nature,  that  the  ope-
rations themselves  become  visible,  as  it  were,  by  their  natural
signs.  This  knowledge  resembles  reminiscence,  in  this  respect,
that  it  is  immediate.  We  form  the  conclusion  vnth.  great  assur-
ance, without  knowing  any  premises  from  which  it  may  be  drawn
by  reasoning.

[It  would  lead  us  too  far  from  the  intention  of  the  present
inquiry,  to  consider  more  particularly,  in  what  degree  the  social
intercourse  is  natural,  and  a  part  of  our  constitution ;  how  far
it  is  of  human  invention.]

It  is  sufficient  to  observe,  that  this  intercourse  of  hiunan
minds,  by  which  their  thoughts  and  sentiments  are  exchanged,
and  their  souls  mingle  together  as  it  were,  is  common  to  the
whole  species  from  infancy.

Like  our  other  powers,  its  first  beginnings  are  weak,  and
scarcely  perceptible.  But  it  is  a  certain  fact,  that  we  can  per-
ceive some  communication  of  sentiments  between  the  nurse  and
hex  nursling,  before  it  is  a  month  old.  And  I  doubt  not,  but
that,  if  both  had  grown  out  of  the  earth,  and  had  never  seen
another  human  face,  they  would  be  able  in  a  few  years  to  con-
verse together.

There  appears  indeed  to  be  some  degree  of  social  intercourse
among  brute-animals,  and  between  some  of  them  and  man.  A
dog  exults  in  the  caresses  of  his  master,  and  is  himibled  at  his
displeasure.  [But  there  are  two  operations  of  the  social  kind,
of  which  the  brute-animals  seem  to  be  altogether  incapable.
They  can  neither  plight  their  veracity  by  testimony,  nor  their
fidelity  by  any  engagement  or  promise.]  If  nature  had  made
them  capable  of  these  operations,  they  would  have  had  a  lan-
guage to  express  them  by,  as  man  has :  but  of  this  we  see  no
appearance.

A  fox  is  said  to  use  stratagems,  but  he  cannot  lie ;  because  he
cannot  give  his  testimony,  or  plight  his  veracity.  A  dog  is  said
to  be  faithful  to  his  master ;  but  no  more  is  meant  but  that  he
is  affectionate,  for  he  never  came  under  any  ehg^ement.  I  see
no  evidence  that  any  brute-animal  is  capable  of  either  giving
testimony,  or  making  a  promise.

A  dumb  man  cannot  speak  any  more  than  a  fox  or  a  dog ;  but
he  can  give  his  testimony  by  signs  as  early  in  life  as  other  men
can  do  by  words.  He  knows  what  a  lie  is  as  early  as  other  men,
and  hates  it  as  much.  He  can  plight  his  faith,  and  is  sensible  of
the  obligation  of  a  promise  or  contract.

[It  is,  therefore,  a  prerogative  of  man,  that  he  can  communi-


OF  THE  NATURE  AND  OBLIGATION  OF  A  CONTRACT.  ggY

cate  his  knowledge  of -facts  by  testimony,  and  enter  into  engage-
ments by  promise  or  contract.^  God  has  given  him  these  powers
by  a  part  of  his  constitution,  which  distinguishes  him  from
all  brute-animals.  And  whether  they  are  original  powers,  or
resolvable  into  other  original  powers,  it  is  evident  that  they
spring  up  in  the  human  mind  at  an  early  period  of  life,  and
are  found  in  every  individual  of  the  species,  whether  savage  or
civilized.

IV.  These  prerogative  powers  of  man,  like  aU  his  other
powers,  mitst  be  given  for  some  end,  and  for  a  good  end.  And  if  we
consider  a  little  farther  the  economy  of  nature,  in  relation  to  this
part  of  the  human  constitution,  we  shall  perceive  the  wisdom  of
nature  in  the  structure  of  it,  and  discover  clearly  our  duty  in
consequence  of  it.

It  is  evident,  in  the  first  place,  that  if  no  credit  was  given  to
testimony,  if  there  was  no  reliance  upon  promises,  they  would
answer  no  end  at  all,  not  even  that  of  deceiving.

Secondly,  supposing  men  disposed  by  some  principle  in  their
nature  to  rely  on  declarations  and  promises ;  yet  if  men  found
in  experience,  that  there  was  no  fidelity  on  the  other  part  in
making  and  in  keeping  them,  no  man  of  common  understanding
would  trust  to  them,  and  so  they  would  become  useless.

Hence  it  appears,  thirdly,  that  this  power  of  giving  testimony,
and  of  promising,  can  answer  no  end  in  society,  unless  there  be
a  considerable  degree,  both  of  fidelity  on  the  one  part,  and  of
trust  on  the  other.  These  two  must  stand  or  fall  together,  and
one  of  them  cannot  possibly  subsist  without  the  other.

Fourthly,  it  may  be  observed,  that  fidelity  in  declarations  and
promises,  and  its  counter-part,  trjist  and  reliance  upon  them,
form  a  system  of  social  intercourse,  the  most  amiable,  the  most
useful,  that  can  be  among  men.  Without  fidelity  and  trust,
there  can  be  no  human  society.  There  never  was  a  society,  even
of  savages,  nay,  even  of  robbers  or  pirates,  in  which  there  was
not  a  great  degree  of  veracity  and  of  fidelity  among  themselves.
Without  it  man  would  be  the  most  dissocial  animal  that  God  has
made.  His  state  would  be  in  reality  what  Hobbes  conceived  the
state  of  nature  to  be,  a  state  of  war  of  every  man  against  every
man ;  nor  could  this  war  ever  terminate  in  peace.

It  may  be  observed,  in  the  fifth  pkce,  that  man  is  evidently
made  for  living  in  society.  His  social  affections  show  this  as
evidently  as  that  the  eye  was  made  for  seeing.  His  social  ope-
rations, particularly  those  of  testifying  and  promising,  make  it
no  less  evident.

V.  Contracts  and  promises  have  a  foundation  in  nature, —
[From  these  observations  it  follows,  that  if  no  provision  were
made  by  nature,  to  engage  men  to  fidelity  in  declarations  and
promises,  human  nature  would  be  a  contradiction  to  itself,  made


ggg  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VI.

for  an  end,  yet  without  the  necessary  means  of  attaining  it.]  As
if  the  species  had  been  furnished  with  good  eyes,  but  without
the  power  of  opening  they:  eye-lids.  There  are  no  blunders
of  this  kind  in  the  works  of  God.  Wherever  there  is  an  end
intended,  the  means  are  admirably  fitted  for  the  attainment  of
it ;  and  so  we  find  it  to  be  in  the  case  before  us.

For  we  see  that  children,  as  soon  as  they  are  capable  of  under-
standing declarations  and  promises,  are  led  by  their  constitution
to  rely  upon  them.  They  are  no  less  led  by  constitution  to
veracity  and  candour,  on  their  own  part.  Nor  do  they  ever
deviate  from  this  road  of  truth  and  sincerity,  until  corrupted  by
bad  example  and  bad  company.  This  disposition  to  sincerity
in  themselves,  and  to  give  credit  to  others,  whether  we  call  it
instinct,  or  whatever  name  we  give  it,  must  be  considered  as  the
efiect  of  their  constitution.

[So  that  the  things  essential  to  himian  society,  I  mean  good
faith  on  the  one  part,  and  trust  on  the  other,  are  formed  hy
nature  in  the  minds  of  children,  before  they  are  capable  of  know-
ing their  utility,  or  being  influenced  by  considerations  either  of
duty  or  interest.]

When  we  grow  up  so  far  as  to  have  the  conception  of  a  right
and  a  wrong  in  conduct,  the  turpitude  of  lying,  falsehood,  and
dishonesty,  is  discerned,  not  by  any  train  of  reasoning,  but  by
an  immediate  perception.  For  we  see  that  every  man  disapproves
it  in  others,  evep  those  who  are  conscious  of  it  in  themselves.

Every  man  thinks  himself  injured  and  ill  used,  and  feels  re-
sentment when  he  is  imposed  upon  by  it.  Every  man  takes  it
as  a  reproach  when  falsehood  is  imputed  to  him.  These  are  the
clearest  evidences  that  all  men  disapprove  of  falsehood,  when
their  judgment  is  not  biassed.

I  know  of  no  evidence  that  has  been  given  of  any  nation  so
rude  as  not  to  have  these  sentiments.  It  is  certain  that  dumb
people  have  them,  and  discover  them  about  the  same  period  of
life  in  which  they  appear  in  those  who  speak.  And  it  may  rea-
sonably be  thought  that  dumb  persons,  at  that  time  of  life,  have
had  as  little  advantage,  with  regard  to  morals,  from  their  educa-
tion, as  the  greatest  savages.

Every  man  come  to  years  of  reflection,  when  he  pledges  his
veracity  or  fidelity,  thinks  he  has  a  right  to  be  credited,  and  is
affironted  if  he  is  not.  But  there  cannot  be  a  shadow  of  right  to
be  credited,  imless  there  be  an  obligation  to  good  faith.  For
right  on  one  hand,  necessarily  implies  obligation  on  the  other.

When  we  see  that  in  the  most  savage  state  that  ever  was
known  of  the  human  race,  men  have  always  lived  in  societies
greater  or  less,  this  of  itself  is  a  proof  from  fact,  that  they  have
had  that  sense  of  their  obligation  to  fidelity,  without  which  no
human  society  can  subsist.


OF  THE  NATURE  OF  A  CONTRACT.  QQQ

From  these  observations,  I  think,  it  appears  very  evident,  that
as  fidelity  on  one  part,  and  trust  on  the  other,  are  essential  to
that  intercourse  of  men,  which  we  call  human  society ;  so  the
Author  of  our  nature  has  made  wise  provision  for  perpetuating
them  among  men,  in  that  degree  that  is  necessary  to  human
society  in  aJl  the  different  periods  of  human  life,  and  in  all  the
stages  of  hmnan  improvement  and  degeneracy.

In  early  years  we  have  an  innate  disposition  to  them.  In  riper
years  we  feel  our  obligation  to  fidelity  as  much  as  to  any  moral
duty  whatsoever.

VL  [Nor  is  it  necessary  to  mention  the  collateral  inducements
to  this  virtue,  from  considerations  of  prudence,  which  are  ob-
vious to  every  man  that  reflects.]  Such  as,  that  it  creates  trust,
the  most  efiectual  engine  of  human  power  ;  that  it  requires  no
artifice  or  concealment ;  dreads  no  detection ;  that  it  inspires
courage  and  magnanimity,  and  is  the  natural  ally  of  every  vir-
tue ;  so  that  there  is  no  virtue  whatsoever  to  which  our  natural
obligation  appears  more  strong  or  more  apparent.

An  observation  or  two  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  a  contract,
will  be  sufficient  for  the  present  purpose.

It  is  obvious  that  the  prestation  promised  must  be  understood
by  both  parties.  One  party  engages  to  do  such  a  thing,  another
accepts  of  this  engagement.  An  engagement  to  do,  one  does
not  know  what,  can  neither  be  made  nor  accepted.  It  is  no  less
obvious  that  a  contract  is  a  voluntary  transaction.

But  it  ought  to  be  observed  that  the  will,  which  is  essential  to
a  contract,  is  only  a  will  to  engage,  or  to  become  bound.  We
must  beware  of  confounding  this  will,  with  a  will  to  perform
what  we  have  engaged.  The  last  can  signify  nothing  else  than
an  intention  and  fixed  purpose  to  do  what  we  have  engaged  to
do.  The  will  to  become  bound,  and  to  confer  a  right  upon  the
other  party,  is  indeed  the  very  essence  of  a  contract ;  but  the
purpose  of  fulfilling  our  engagement  is  no  part  of  the  contract
at  all.

A  purpose  is  a  solitary  act  of  mind,  which  lays  no  obligation
on  the  person,  nor  confers  any  right  on  another.  A  fraudulent
person  may  contract  with  a  fixed^ purpose  of  not  performing  his
engagement.  But  this  purpose  makes  no  change  with  regard  to
his  obligation.  He  is  as  much  bound  as  the  honest  man,  who
contracts  with  a  fixed  purpose  of  performing.

As  the  contract  is  binding  without  any  regard  to  the  purpose,
so  there  may  be  a  purpose  without  any  contract.  A  purpose  is
no  contract,  even  when  it  is  declared  to  the  person  for  whose  be-
nefit it  is  intended.  I  may  say  to  a  man,  I  intend  to  do  such  a
thing  for  your  benefit,  but  I  come  under  no  engagement.  Every
man  understands  the  meaning  of  this  speech,  and  sees  no  con-
tradiction in  it :  whereas,  if  a  purpose  declared  were  the  same

2  B


370  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VI.

thing  with  a  contract,  such  a  speech  would  be  a  contradiction,
and  would  be  the  same  as  if  one  should  say,  I  promise  to  do  such
a  thing,  but  I  do  not  promise.

All  this  is  so  plain  to  every  man  of  conunon  sense,  that  it
would  have  been  unnecessary  to  be  mentioned,  had  not  so  acute
a  man  as  Mr.  Hume  grounded  some  of  the  contradictions  he  finds
in  a  contract,  upon  confounding  a  will  to  engage  in  a  contract
with  a  will  or  purpose  to  perform  the  engagement.

VI  I.  Natural  tendency  of  Mr. Hum  e^s  principles, — I  come  now  to
consider  the  speculations  of  that  author  with  regard  to  contracts.

[In  order  to  support  a  favourite  notion  of  his  own.  That  jus-
tice is  not  a  natural  but  an  artificial  virtue,  and  that  it  derives
its  whole  merit  from  its  utility,  he  has  laid  down  some  principles
which,  I  think,  have  a  tendency  to  subvert  all  faith  and  fair-
dealing  among  mankind.]

In  the  third  volume  of  the  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"  p.  40,
he  lays  it  down  as  an  undoubted  maxim,  [That  no  action  can  be
virtuous  or  morally  good,  unless  there  be,  in  human  nature,
somfe  motive  to  produce  it,  distinct  from  its  morality.]  Let  us
apply  this  undoubted  maxim  in  an  instance  or  two.  If  a  man
keeps  his  word,  from  this  sole  motive,  that  he  ought  to  do  so,
this  is  no  virtuous  or  morally  good  action.  If  a  man  pays  his
debt,  from  this  motive,  that  justice  requires  this  of  him,  this  is
no  virtuous  or  morally  good  action.  If  a  judge  or  an  arbiter
gives  a  sentence  in  a  cause,  from  no  other  motive  but  regard  to
justice,  this  is  no  virtuous  or  morally  good  action.  These  appear
to  me  to  be  shocking  absurdities,  which  no  metaphysical  subtilty
can  ever  justify.

Nothing  is  more  evident  than  that  every  human  action  takes
its  denomination  and  its  moral  nature  from  the  motive  from  which
it  is  performed.  That  is  a  benevolent  action,  which  is  done
from  benevolence.  That  is  an  act  of  gratitude,  which  is  done
from  a  sentiment  of  gratitude.  That  is  an  act  of  obedience  to
God,  which  is  done  from  a  regard  to  his  command.  And,  in
general,  that  is  an  act  of  virtue,  which  is  done  from  a  regard  to
virtue.

Virtuous  actions  are  so  far  from  needing  other  naotives,  be-
sides their  being  virtuous,  to  give  them  merit,  that  their  merit  is
.  then  greatest  and  most  conspicuous,  when  every  motive  that  can
be  put  in  the  opposite  scale  is  outweighed  by  the  sole  considera-
tion of  their  being  our  duty.

This  maxim,  therefore,  of  Mr.  Hume,  That  no  action  can  be
virtuous  or  morally  good,  unless  there  be  some  motive  to  pro-
duce it  distinct  from  its  morality,  is  so  far  from  being  undoubt-
edly true,  that  it  is  undoubtedly  false.  It  was  never,  so  far  as  I
know,  maintained  by  any  moralist,  but  by  the  Epicureans;  and
it  savours  of  the  very  dregs  of  that  sect. It  agrees  well  with  the


OF  THE  NATURE  OF  A  CONTRACT.  371

principles  of  those  who  maintained,  that  virtue  is  an  empty  name,
and  that  it  is  entitled  to  no  regard,  but  in  as  far  as  it  ministers
to  pleasure  or  profit.

V I II.  Mr.Hume^s practice  probably  contradicted  his  principles, —
I  believe  the  author  of  this  maxim  acted  upon  better  moral  prin-
ciples than  he  wrote  ;  and  that  what  Cicero  says  of  Epicurus,
may  be  applied  to  him :  **  Redarguitur  ipse  a  sese,  vincunturque
scripta  ejus  probitate  ipsius  et  moribus,  et  ut  alii  existimantur
dicere  melius  quam  facere,  sic  ille  mihi  videtur  facere  melius
quam  dicere." — "  He  is  refuted  by  himself,  and  his  writings  de-
feated by  his  probity  and  moral  worth ;  and  as  some  imagine  that
he  spoke  better  than  he  acted,  so  to  me  he  appears  to  have. acted
better  than  he  spoke."

But  let  us  see  how  he  applies  this  maxim  to  contracts.  I  give
you  his  words  from  the  place  formerly  cited.  "  I  suppose,"  says
he,  "  a  person  to  have  lent  me  a  sum  of  money,  on  condition  that
it  be  restored  in  a  few  days ;  and,  after  the  expiration  of  the
term  agreed  on,  he  demands  the  sum.  I  ask,  what  reason  or
motive  have  I  to  restore  the  money  ?  It  will,  perhaps,  be  said,
that  my  regard  to  justice,  and  abhorrence  of  villany  and  knavery,
are  sufficient  reasons  for  me,  if  I  have  the  least  grain  of  honesty,
or  sense  of  duty  and  obligation.  And  this  answer,  no  doubt,  is
just  and  satisfactory  to  man  in  his  civilized  state,  and  when  trained
up  according  to  a  certain  discipline  and  education.  But,  in  his
rude  and  more  natural  condition,  if  you  are  pleased  to  call  such
a  condition  natural,  this  answer  would  be  rejected  as  perfectly
unintelligible  and  sophistical."

The  doctrine  we  are  taught  in  this  passage  is  this — that  though
a  man,  in  a  civilized  state,  and  when  trained  up  according  to  a
certain  discipline  and  education,  may  have  a  regard  to  justice,
and  an  abhorrence  of  villany  and  knavery,  and  some  sense  of
duty  and  obligation ;  yet,  to  a  man  in  his  rude  and  more  natural
condition,  the  considerations  of  honesty,  justice,  duty,  and  obli-
gation, will  be  perfectly  unintelligible  and  sophistical.  And  this
is  brought  as  an  argument  to  show,  that  justice  is  not  a  natural,
but  an  artificial  virtue.

IX.  I  shall  offer  some  observations  on  this  argument.

1.  Although  it  maybe  true,  that  what  is  unintelligible  to  man
in  his  rude  state  may  be  intelligible  to  him  in  his  civilized  state,
I  cannot  conceive,  that  what  is  sophistical  in  the  rude  state
should  change  its  nature,  and  become  just  reasoning,  when  man
is  more  improved.  What  is  a  sophism,  will  always  be  so  ;  nor
can  any  change  in  the  state  of  the  person  who  judges,  make  that
to  be  just  reasoning  which  before  was  sophistical.  Mr.  Hume's
argument  requires,  that  to  man  in  his  rude  state,  the  motives  to
justice  and  honesty  should  not  only  appear  to  be  sophistical,  but
should  really  be  so. If  the  motives  were  just  in  themselves,

2  B  2


37£  ESSAY V.  CHAP.  VI.

then  justice  would  be  a  natural  virtue,  although  the  rude  man,
by  an  error  of  his  judgment,  thought  otherwise.  But  if  justice
be  not  a  natural  virtue,  which  is  the  point  Mr.  Himie  intends  to
prove,  then  every  argument,  by  which  man  in  his  natural  state
may  be  urged  to  it,  must  be  a  sophism  in  reality,  and  not  in  ap-
pearance only  ;  and  the  effect  of  discipline  and  education  in  the
civilized  state  can  only  be  to  make  those  motives  to  justice  appear
just  and  satisfactory,  which,  in  their  own  nature,  are  sophistical.

2.  It  were  to  be  wished,  that  this  ingenious  author  had  shown
us,  why  that  state  of  man,  in  which  the  obligation  to  honesty,
and  an  abhorrence  of  villany,  appear  perfectly  unintelligible  and
sophistical,  should  be  his  more  natural  state.

It  is  the  nature  of  human  society  to  be  progressive,  as  much
as"  it  is  the  nature  of  the  individual.  In  the  individual,  the  state
of  infancy  leads  to  that  of  childhood,  childhood  to  youth,  youth
to  manhood,  and  manhood  to  old  age.  If  one  should  say,  that
the  state  of  infancy  is  a  more  natural  state  than  that  of  manhood
or  of  old  age,  I  am  apt  to  think,  that  this  would  be  words  with-
out an}'  meaning.  In  like  manner,  in  human  society,  there  is  a
natural  progress  from  rudeness  to  civilization,  from  ignorance  to
knowledge.  What  period  of  this  progress  shall  we  call  man's
natural  state  ?  To  me  they  appear  all  equally  natural.  Every
state  of  society  is  equally  natural,  wherein  men  have  access  to
exert  their  natural  powers  about  their  proper  objects,  and  to  im-
prove those  powers  by  the  means  which  their  situation  affords.

Mr.  Hume,  indeed,  shows  some  timidity  in  affirming  the  rude
state  to  be  the  more  natural  state  of  man;  and,  therefore,  adds
this  qualifying  parenthesis.  If  you  are  pleased  to  call  such  a  con-
dition natural.

But  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that  if  the  premises  of  his  argu-
ment be  weakened  by  this  clause,  the  same  weakness  must  be
communicated  to  the  conclusion ;  and  the  conclusion,  according
to  the  rules  of  good  reasoning,  ought  to  be — that  justice  is  an
artificial  virtue,  if  you  be  pleased  to  call  it  artificial.

3,  It  were  likewise  to  be  wished,  that  Mr.  Hume  had  shown
from  fact,  that  there  ever  did  exist  such  a  state  of  man  as  that
which  he  calls  his  more  natural  state.  It  is  a  state  wherein  a
man  borrows  a  sum  of  money,  on  the  condition  that  he  is  to
restore  it  in  a  few  days ;  yet  when  the  time  of  payment  comes,
his  obligation  to  repay  what  he  borrowed  i»  perfectly  unintelli-
gible and  sophistical.  It  would  have  been  proper  to  have  given
at  least  a  single  instance  of  some  tribe  of  the  human  race  that
was  found  to  be  in  this  natural  state.  If  no  such  instance  can
be  given,  it  is  probably  a  state  merely  imaginary ;  like  that  state
which  some  have  imagined,  wherein  men  were  ouran  outangs,
or  wherein  they  were  fishes  with  tails.

Indeed,  such  a  state  seems  impossible. That  a  man  should


OF  THE  NATURE  OP  A  CONTRACT.  373

lend  without  any  conception  of  his  having  a  right  to  be  repaid ;
or  that  a  man  should  borrow  on  the  condition  of  paying  in  a  few
days,  and  yet  have  no  conception  of  his  obligation,  seems  to  me
to  involve  a  contradiction.

I  g^ant,  that  a  humane  man  may  lend  without  any  expectation
of  being  repaid  ;  but  that  he  should  lend  without  any  conception
of  a  right  to  be  repaid,  is  a  contradiction.  In  like  manner,  a
fraudulent  man  may  borrow  without  an  intention  of  paying  back ;
but  that  he  should  borrow,  while  an  obligation  to  repay  is  per-
fectly unintelligible  to  him :  this  is  a  contradiction.

The  same  author,  in  his  "  Enquiry  into  the  Principles  of  Mo-
rals," sect,  iii.,  treating  of  the  same  subject,  has  the  following
note : —

"  'Tis  evident,  that  the  will  or  consent  alone  never  transfers
property,  nor  causes  the  obligation  of  a  promise,  (for  the  same
reasoning  extends  to  both,)  but  the  will  must  be  expressed  by
words  or  signs,  in  order  to  impose  a  tie  upon  any  man.  The
expression  being  once  brought  in  as  subservient  to  the  will,
soon  becomes  the  principal  part  of  the  promise  ;  nor  will  a  man
be  less  bound  by  his  word,  though  he  secretly  give  a  different
direction  to  his  intention,  and  withhold  the  assent  of  his  mind.
But  though  the  expression  makes,  on  most  occasions,  the  whole
of  the  promise,  yet  it  does  not  always  so  ;  and  one  who  should
make  use  of  any  expression,  of  which  he  knows  not  the  meaning,
and  which  he  uses  without  any  sense  of  the  consequences,  would
not  certainly  be  bound  by  it.  Nay,  though  he  know  its  meaning ;
yet  if  he  uses  it  in  jest  only,  and  with  such  signs  as  show  evi-
dently he  *has  no  serious  intention  of  binding  himself,  he  would
not  be  under  any  obligation  of  performance  ;  but  it  is  necessary
that  the  words  be  a  perfect  expression  of  the  will,  without  any
contrary  signs.  Nay,  even  this  we  must  not  carry  so  far  as  to
imagine,  that  one  whom,  from  our  quickness  of  understanding,
we  conjecture  to  have  an  intention  of  deceiving  us,  is  not  bound
by  his  expression,  or  verbal  promise,  if  we  accept  of  it,  but  must
limit  this  conclusion  to  those  cases  where  the  signs  are  of  a  dif-
ferent nature  from  those  of  deceit.  All  these  contradictions  are
easily  accounted  for,  if  justice  arises  entirely  from  its  usefulness
to  society,  but  will  never  be  explained  on  any  other  hypothesis."

[Here  we  IPave  the  opinion  of  this  grave  moralist  and  acute
metaphysician,  that  the  principles  of  honesty  and  fidelity  are  at
bottom  a  bundle  of  contradictions,']  This  is  one  part  of  his  moral
system  which,  I  cannot  help  thinking,  borders  upon  licentious-
ness. It  surely  tends  to  give  a  very  unfavourable  notion  of  that
cardinal  virtue,  without  which  no  man  has  a  title  to  be  called  an
honest  man.  What  regard  can  a  man  pay  to  the  virtue  of  fide-
lity, who  believes  that  its  essential  rules  contradict  each  other  ?
Can  a  man  be  bound  by  contradictory  rules  of  conduct  ? Nq


374  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VI.

more,  surely,  than  he  can  be  bound  to  believe  contradictory  prin-
ciples.

He  tells  us,  "  That  all  these  contradictions  are  easily  accounted
for,  if  justice  arises  entirely  from  its  usefulness  to  society,  but
will  never  be  explained  upon  any  other  hypothesis."

I  know  not  indeed  what  is  meant  by  accoimtin^  for  contradic-
tions,  or  explaining  them.  I  apprehend,  that  no  hypothesis  can
make  that  which  is  a  contradiction  to  be  no  contradiction.  How-
ever, vdthout  attempting  to  account  for  these  contradictions  upon
his  own  hypothesis,  he  pronounces,  in  a  decisive  tone,  that  they
will  never  be  explained  upon  any  other  hypothesis.

X.  Origin  of  the  contradictions  in  Mr. Hume's  arguments. — What
if  it  shall  appear,  that  the  contradictions  mentioned  in  this  para-
graph, do  all  take  their  rise  from  two  capital  mistakes  the  author
has  made  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  promises  and  contracts  ;
and  if,  when  these  are  corrected,  there  shall  not  appear  a  shadow
of  contradiction  in  the  cases  put  by  him  ?

The  first  mistake  is.  That  a  promise  is  some  kind  of  vrill,  4Con-
sent,  or  intention,  which  may  be  expressed,  or  may  not  be  ex-
pressed. This  is  to  mistake  the  nature  of  a  promise :  for  no
will,  no  consent  or  intention  that  is  not  expressed,  is  a  promise.
A  promise,  being  a  social  transaction  between  two  parties,  with-
out being  expressed,  can  have  no  existence.

Another  capital  mistake  that  runs  through  the  passage  cited  is,
That  this  will,  consent  or  intention,  which  makes  a  promise,  is  a
will  or  intention  to  perform  what  we  promise.  Every  man
knows  that  there  may  be  a  fraudulent  promise,  made  without
intention  of  performing.  But  the  intention  to  perform  the  pro-
mise, or  not  to  perform  it,  whether  the  intention  be  knovm  to
the  other  party  or  not,  makes  no  part  of  the  promise,  it  is  a  so-
litary act  of  the  mind,  and  can  neither  constitute  nor  dissolve  an
obligation.  What  makes  a  promise  is,  that  it  be  expressed  to
the  other  party  with  understanding,  and  vsdth  an  intention  to
become  boimd,  and  that  it  be  accepted  by  him.

XI.  Carrying  these  remarks  along  with  us,  let  us  review  the
passage  cited.

First f  He  observes,  that  the  vsdll  or  consent  alone  does  not  cause
the  obligation  of  a  promise,  but  it  must  be  expressed.

I  answer :  The  will  n>ot  expressed  is  not  a  promlie ;  and  is  it  a
contradiction  that  that  which  is  not  a  promise  should  not  cause
the  obligation  of  a  promise  ?  He  goes  on :  The  expression  being
once  brought  in  as  subservient  to  the  vdll,  soon  becomes  a  prin-
cipal part  of  the  promise.  Here  it  is  supposed,  that  the  expres-
sion was  not  originally  a  constituent  part  of  the  promise,  but  it
soon  becomes  such.  It  is  brought  in  to  aid  and  be  subservient
to  the  promise  which  was  made  before  by  the  will.  If  Mr.
Hume  had  considered,  that  it  is  the  expression  accompanied  with


OF  THE  NATURE  OF  A  CONTRACT.  375

understanding  and  will  to  become  bound,  that  constitutes  a  pro-
mise, he  would  never  have  said,  that  the  expression  soon  becomes
a  part,  and  is  brought  in  as  subservient.

He  adds.  Nor  will  a  man  be  less  bound  by  his  word,  though  he
secretly  gives  a  different  direction  to  his  intention,  and  with-
holds the  assent  of  his  mind.

The  case  here  put  needs  some  explication.  Either  it  means,
that  the  man  knowingly  and  voluntarily  gives  his  word,  without
^ny  intention  of  giving  his  word,  or  that  he  gives  it  without  the
intention  of  keeping  it,  and  performing  what  he  promises.  The
last  of  these  is  indeed  a  possible  case,  and  is,  I  apprehend,  what
Mr.  Hume  means.  But  the  intention  of  keeping  his  promise  is
no  part  of  the  promise,  nor  does  it  in  the  least  affect  the  obligation
of  it,  as  we  have  often  observed.

If  the  author  meant  that  the  man  may  knowingly  and  volun-
tarily give  his  word,  without  the  intention  of  giving  his  word,
this  is  impossible  :  For  such  is  the  nature  of  all  social  acts  of  the
mind,  that,  as  they  cannot  be  without  being  expressed,  so  they
cannot  be  expressed  knowingly  and  willingly,  but  they  must  be.
If  a  man  puts  a  question  knowingly  and  willingly,  it  is  impossible
that  he  should  at  the  same  time  will  not  to  put  it.  If  he  gives  a
command  knowingly  and  willingly,  it  is  impossible  that  he  should
at  the  same  time  will  not  to  give  it.  We  cannot  have  contrary
wills  at  the  same  time.  And,  in  like  manner,  if  a  man  knowingly
and  wilhngly  becomes  bound  by  a  promise,  it  is  impossible  that
he  should  at  the  same  time  will  not  to  be  bound.

To  suppose,  therefore,  that  when  a  man  knowingly  and  wil-
lingly gives  his  word,  he  withholds  that  will  and  intention  which
makes  a  promise,  is  indeed  a  contradiction ;  but  the  contradiction
is  not  in  the  nature  of  the  promise,  but  in  the  case  supposed  by
Mr.  Hume.

He  adds,  though  the  expression,  for  the  most  part,  makes  the
whole  of  the  promise,  it  does  not  always  so.

I  answer.  That  the  expression,  if  it  is  not  accompanied  with
understanding,  and  will  to  engage,  never  makes  a  promise.  The
author  here  assumes  a  postulate,  which  nobody  ever  granted,
and  which  can  only  be  groimded  on  the  impossible  supposition
made  in  the  former  sentence.  And  as  there  can  be  no  promise
without  knowledge,  and  will  to  engage,  is  it  marvellous  that  words
which  are  not  understood,  or  words  spoken  in  jest,  and  without
any  intention  to  become  bound,  should  not  have  the  effect  of  a
promise  ?

XII.  [The  last  case  put  by  Mr.  Hume,  is  that  of  a  man  who
promises  fraudulently  with  an  intention  not  to  perform,  and  whose
fraudulent  intention  is  discovered  by  the  other  party,  who,  not-
withstanding, accepts  the  promise.  He  is  bound,  says  Mr.  Hume,
by  his  verbal  promise.] Undoubtedly  he  is  bound,  because  an


376  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VII.

intention  not  to  perform  the  promise,  whether  known  to  the  other
party  or  not,  makes  no  part  of  the  promise,  nor  affects  its  obli-
gation, as  has  been  repeatedly  observed.

From  what  has  been  said,  I  think  it  evident,  that  to  one  who
attends  to  the  nature  of  a  promise  or  contract,  there  is  not  the
least  appearance  of  contradiction  in  the  principles  of  morality
relating  to  contracts.

It  would  indeed  appear  wonderful,  that  such  a  man  as  Mr.
Hume  should  have  imposed  upon  himself  in  so  plain  a  matter,  if
we  did  not  see  frequent  instances  of  ingenious  men,  whose  zeal
in  supporting  a  favourite  h3rpothesis,  darkens  their  understanding,
and  hinders  them  from  seeing  what  is  before  their  eyes.


CHAPTER  VII.

THAT  MORAL  APPROBATION  IMPLIES  A REAL  JUDGMENT.

I.  The  approbation  of  good  actions,  and  disapprobation  of
bad,  are  so  familiar  to  every  man  come  to  years  of  understanding,
that  it  seems  strange  there  should  be  any  dispute  about  their
nature.

Whether  we  reflect  upon  our  own  conduct,  or  attend  to  the
conduct  of  others  vsdth  whom  we  live,  or  of  whom  we  hear  or
read,  we  cannot  help  approving  of  some  things,  disapproving  of
others,  and  regarding  many  with  perfect  indifference.

These  operations  of  our  minds  we  are  conscious  of  every  day,
and  almost  every  hour  we  live.  Men  of  ripe  understanding  are
capable  of  reflecting  upon  them,  and  of  attending  to  what  passes
in  their  ovm  thoughts  on  such  occasions ;  yet,  for  half  a  century,
it  has  been  a  serious  dispute  among  philosophers,  what  this  ap-
probation and  disapprobation  is,  Whether  there  be  a  real  judg-
ment included  in  it,  which,  like  all  other  judgments,  must  be
true  or  false ;  or,  Whether  it  include  no  more  but  some  agree-
able or  uneasy  feeling  in  the  person  who  approves  or  disapproves.

IT.  [Mr.  Hume  observes  very  justly,  that  this  is  a  contro-
versy started  of  late.  Before  the  modem  system  of  ideas  and
impressions  was  introduced,  nothing  would  have  appeared  more
absurd  than  to  say.  That  when  I  condemn  a  man  for  what  he  has
done,  I  pass  no  judgment  at  all  about  the  man,  but  only  express
some  uneasy  feeling  in  myself.]

Nor  did  the  new  system  produce  this  discovery  at  once,  but
gradually,  by  several  steps,  according  as  its  consequences  were
more  accurately  traced,  and  its  spirit  more  thoroughly  imbibed
by  successive  philosophers.

Des  Cartes  and  Mr.  Locke  went  no  farther  than  to  maintain,
tliat  the  secondary  qualities  of  body,  heat  and  cold,  sound,  colour.


APPROBATION  IMPLIES  JUDGMENT.  g^^

taste  and  smell,  which  we  perceive  and  judge  to  be  in  the  external
object,  are  mere  feelings  or  sensations  in  our  minds,  there  being
nothing  in  bodies  themselves  to  which  these  names  can  be  ap-
plied ;  and  that  the  office  of  the  external  senses  is  not  to  judge  of
external  things,  but  only  to  give  us  ideas  or  sensations,  from
which  we  are  by  reasoning  to  deduce  the. existence  of  a  material
world  without  us,  as  well  as  we  can.

Arthur  Collier  and  Bishop  Berkeley  discovered,  from  the  same
principles,  that  the  primary ^  as  well  as  the  secondary,  qualities
of  bodies,  such  as  extension,  figure,  solidity,  motion,  are  only
sensations  in  our  minds  ;  and  therefore,  that  there  is  no  material
world  without  us  at  all.

The  same  philosophy,  when  it  came  to  be  applied  to  matters
of  taste,  discovered  that  beauty  and  deformity  are  not  anything
in  the  objects  to  which  men,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,
ascribed  them,  but  certain  feelings  in  the  mind  of  the  spectator.

III.  l^The  neat  step  was  an  easy  consequence  from  all  the  pre-
ceding,  that  moral  approbation  and  disapprobation  are  not  judg-
ments, which  must  be  true  or  false,  but  barely,  agreeable  and
uneasy  feelings  or  sensations.]

Mr.  Hume  made  the  last  step  in  this  progress,  and  crowned
the  system  by  what  he  calls  his  hypothesis,  to  wit,  That  belief  is
more  properly  an  act  of  the  sensitive,  than  of  the  cogitative
part  of  our  nature.

Beyond  this  I  think  no  man  can  go  in  this  track ;  sensation  or
feeling  is  all,  and  what  is  left  to  the  cogitative  part  of  our  nature,
I  am  not  able  to  comprehend.

I  have  had  occasion  to  consider  each  of  these  paradoxes,  ex-
cepting that  which  relates  to  morals,  in  Essays  on  the  Intellectual
Powers  of  Man ;  and,  though  they  be  strictly  connected  with
each  other,  and  with  the  system  which  has  produced  them,  I  have
attempted  to  show,  that  they  are  inconsistent  with  just  notions  of
our  intellectual  powers,  no  less  than  they  are  with  the  common
sense  and  common  language  of  mankind.  And  this,  I  think,  will
likewise  appear  with  regard  to  the  conclusion  relating  to  morals,
to  wit.  That  moral  approbation  is  only  an  agreeable  feeling,  and
not  a  real  judgment.

IV.  [Of  feeling  and  judgment. — To  prevent  ambiguity  as
much  as  possible,  let  us  attend  to  the  meaning  of  feeling  and
of  judgment.  These  operations  of  the  mind,  perhaps,  cannot  be
logically  defined ;  but  they  are  well  understood,  and  easily  dis-
tinguished, by  their  properties  and  adjuncts.^

Feeling  or  sensation  seems  to  be  the  lowest  degree  of  anima-
tion we  can  conceive.  We  give  the  name  of  animal  to  every
being  that  feels  pain  or  pleasure ;  and  this  seems  to  be  the
boundary  between  the  inanimate  and  animal  creation.


378  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VII.

We  know  no  being  of  so  low  a  rank  in  the  creation  of  God,  as
to  possess  this  animal  power  only  without  any  other.

We  commonly  distinguish  feeling  from  thinking,  because  it
hardly  deserves  the  name ;  and  though  it  be,  in  a  more  general
sense,  a  species  of  thought,  is  least  removed  from  the  passive  and
inert  state  of  things  inanimate.

A  feeling  must  be  agreeable,  or  uneasy,  or  indifferent.  It
may  be  weak  or  strong.  It  is  expressed  in  language  either  by
a  single  word,  or  by  such  a  contexture  of  words  as  may  be  the
subject  or  predicate  of  a  proposition,  but  such  as  cannot  by
themselves  make  a  proposition.  For  it  implies  neither  affirma-
tion nor  negation ;  and  therefore  cannot  have  the  qualities  of
true  or  false,  which  distinguish  propositions  from  all  other  forms
of  speech,  and  judgments  from  all  other  acts  of  the  mind.

That  I  have  such  a  feeling,  is  indeed  an  affirmative  proposi-
tion, and  expresses  testimony  grounded  upon  an  intuitive  judg-
ment. But  the  feeling  is  only  one  term  of  this  proposition ;  and
it  can  only  make  a  proposition  when  joined  with  another  term,
by  a  verb  affirming  or  denying.

[As  feeling  distinguishes  the  animal  nature  from  the  inanimate;
so  judging  seems  to  distinguish  the  rational  nature  from  the
merely  animal.]

Though  judgment  in  general  is  expressed  by  one  word  in  lan-
guage, as  trie  most  complex  operations  of  the  mind  may  be ;  yet
a  particular  judgment  can  only  be  expressed  by  a  sentence,  and
by  that  kind  of  sentence  which  logicians  call  a  proposition,  in
which  there  must  necessarily  be  a  verb  in  the  indicative  mood,
either  expressed  or  understood.

Every  judgment  must  necessarily  be  true  or  false,  and  the
same  may  be  said  of  the  proposition  which  expresses  it.  It  is  a
determination  of  the  understandings  with  regard  to  what  is  true,
or  false,  or  dubious.*

In  judgment,  we  can  distinguish  the  object  about  which  we
judge,  from  the  act  of  the  mind  in  judging  of  that  object.  In
mere  feeling  there  is  no  such  distinction.  Tlie  object  of  judg-
ment must  be  expressed  by  a  proposition ;  and  belief,  disbelief,
or  doubt,  always  accompanies  the  judgment  we  form.  If  we
judge  the  proposition  to  be  true,  we  must  believe  it ;  if  we  judge
it  to  be  false,  we  must  disbelieve  it ;  and  if  we  be  uncertain
whether  it  be  true  or  false,  we  must  doubt.

The  toothache,  the  headache,  are  words  which  express  uneasy
feelings ;  but  to  say  that  they  express  a  judgment  would  be
ridiculous.

That  the  sun  is  greater  than  the  earth,  is  a  proposition,  and
therefore  the  object  of  .judgment ;  and  when  affirmed  or  denied,

*  Vide  Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man,  Essay  VI.  chap.  i.


APPROBATION  IMPLIES  JUDGMENT.  379

believed  or  disbelieved,  or  doubted,  it  expresses  judgment ;  but
to  say  that  it  expresses  only  a  feeling  in  the  mind  of  him  that
believes  it,  would  be  ridiculous.

These  two  operations  of  mind,  when  we  consider  them  sepa-
rately, are  very  different,  and  easily  distinguished.  When  we
feel  without  judging,  or  judge  without  feelmg,  it  is  impossible,
without  very  gross  inattention,  to  mistake  the  one  for  the  other.

But  in  many  operations  of  the  mind,  both  are  inseparably
conjoined  under  one  name ;  and  when  we  are  not  aware  uiat  the
operation  is  complex,  we  may  take  one  ingredient  to  be  the
whole,  and  overlook  the  other.

In  former  ages,  that  moral  power,  by  which  human  actions
ought  to  be  regulated,  was  called  reason,  and  considered,  both
by  philosophers,  and  by  the  vulgar,  as  the  power  of  judging  what
we  ought,  and  what  we  ought  not  to  do.

This  is  very  fully  expressed  by  Mr.  Hume,  in  his  "  Treatise
of  Human  Nature,'  Book  ii.  Part  iii.  sec.  3:  "  Nothing  is  more
usual  in  philosophy,  and  even  in  common  life,  than  to  talk  of  the
combat  of  passion  and  reason,  to  give  the  preference  to  reason,
and  assert  that  men  are  only  so  far  virtuous  as  they  conform
themselves  to  its  dictates.  Every  rational  creature,  'tis  said,  is
obliged  to  regulate  his  actions  by  reason ;  and  if  any  other  motive
or  principle  challenge  the  direction  of  his  conduct,  he  ought  to
oppose  it,  till  it  be  entirely  subdued,  or,  at  least,  brought  to  a
conformity  to  that  superior  principle.  On  this  method  of  think-
ing, the  greatest  pait  of  moral  philosophy,  ancient  and  modem,
seems  to  be  founded."

That  those  philosophers  attended  chiefly  to  the  judging  power
of  our  moral  faculty,  appears  from  the  names  they  gave  to  its
operations,  and  from  the  whole  of  their  language  concerning  it.

V.  [The  modern  philosophy  has  led  men  to  attend  chiefly  to
their  sensations  and  feelings,  and  thereby  to  resolve  into  mere
feeling,  complex  acts  of  the  mind,  of  which  feeling  is  only  one
ingredient.]

I  had  occasion,  in  the  preceding  Essays,  to  observe,  That
several  operations  of  the  mind,  to  which  we  give  one  name,  and
consider  as  one  act,  are  compounded  of  more  simple  acts,  insepa-
rably imited  in  our  constitution,  and  that  in  these,  sensation  or
feeling  often  makes  one  ingredient.

Thus  the  appetites  of  hunger  and  thirst  are  compounded  of  an
uneasy  sensation,  and  the  desire  of  food  or  drink.  In  our  bene-
volent affections,  there  is  both  an  agreeable  feeling,  and  a  desire
of  happiness  to  the  object  of  our  affection ;  and  malevolent  affec-
tions have  ingredients  of  a  contrary  nature.

In  these  instances,  sensation  or  feeling  is  inseparably  con-
joined with  desire.  In  other  instances,  we  find  sensation  inse-
parably conjoined  with  judgment  or  belief,  and  that  in two


330  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VII.

different  ways.  In  some  instances,  the  judgment  or  belief  seems
to  be  the  consequence  of  the  sensation,  and  to  be  regulated  by
it.  In  other  instances,  the  sensation  is  the  consequence  of  the
judgment.

When  we  perceive  an  external  object  by  our  senses,  we  have
a  sensation  conjoined  vsdth  a  firm  belief  of  the  existence  and
sensible  qualities  of  the  external  object.  Nor  has  all  the  subtilty
of  metaphysics  been  able  to  disjoin  what  nature  has  conjoined  in
our  constitution.  Des  Cartes  and  Locke  endeavoured,  by  rea-
soning, to  deduce  the  existence  of  external  objects  from  our
sensation,  but  in  vain.  Subsequent  philosophers,  finding  no
reason  for  this  connexion,  endeavoured  to  throw  off  the  belief  of
external  objects  as  being  unreasonable ;  but  this  attempt  is  no
less  vain.  Nature  has  doomed  us  to  believe  the  testimony  of
our  senses,  whether  we  can  give  a  good  reason  for  doing  so  or
not.

In  this  instance,  the  belief  or  judgment  is  the  consequence  of
the  sensation,  as  the  sensation  is  the  consequence  of  the  impres-
won  made  on  the  organ  of  sense.

But  in  most  of  the  operations  of  mind  in  which  judgment  or
belief  is  combined  with  feeling,  the  feeling  is  the  consequence
of  the  judgment,  and  is  regulated  by  it.

Thus,  an  account  of  the  good  conduct  of  a  friend  at  a  distance
gives  me  a  very  agreeable  feeling,  and  a  contrary  account  would
give  me  a  very  uneasy  feeling ;  but  these  feelings  depend  entirely
upon  my  belief  of  the  report.

In  hope,  there  is  an  agreeable  feeling,  depending  upon  the
belief  or  expectation  of  good  to  come :  fear  is  made  up  of  con-
trary ingredients ;  in  both,  the  feeling  is  regulated  by  the  degree
of  belief.

In  the  respect  we  bear  to  the  worthy,  and  in  our  contempt  of
the  worthless,  there  is  both  judgment  and  feeling,  and  the  last
depends  entirely  upon  the  first.

The  same  may  be  said  of  gratitude  for  good  offices,  and  resent-
ment of  injuries.

VI.  Let  me  now  consider  how  I  am  aiffected  when  I  see  a  man
exerting  himself  nobly  in  a  good  cause.  I  am  conscious  that4he
effect  of  his  conduct  on  my  mind  is  complex,  though  it  may  be
called  by  one  name.  I  look  up  to  his  virtue,  I  approve,  I  admire
it.  In  doing  so,  I  have  pleasure  indeed,  or  an  agreeable  feeling;
this  is  granted.  But  I  find  myself  interested  in  his  success  and
in  his  fame.  This  is  affection;  it  is  love  and  esteem,  which  is
more  than  mere  feeling.  The  man  is  the  object  of  this  esteem ;
but  in  mere  feeling  there  is  no  object.

I  am  likewise  conscious  that  this  agreeable  feeling  in  me,  and
this  esteem  of  him,  depend  entirely  upon  the  judgment  I  form
of  his  conduct, I  judge  that  this  conduct  merits  esteem ;  and.


APPROBATION  IMPLIES  JUDGMENT.  381

while  I  thus  judge,  I  cannot  but  esteem  him,  and  contemplate
his  conduct  with  pleasure.  Persuade  me  that  he  was  bribed,  or
that  he  acted  from  some  mercenary  or  bad  motive,  immediately
my  esteem  and  my  agreeable  feeling  vanish.

[In  the  approbation  of  a  good  action,  therefore,  there  v&  feeling
indeed,  but  there  is  also  esteem  of  the  agent ;  and  both  the  feel-
ing and  the  esteem  depend  upon  the  judgment  we  form  of  his
conduct.]

When  I  exercise  my  moral  faculty  about  my  own  actions  or
those  of  other  men,  I  am  conscious  that  I  judge  as  well  as  feel.
I  accuse  and  excuse,  I  acquit  and  condemn,  I  assent  and  dissent,
I  believe  and  disbelieve,  and  doubt.  These  are  acts  of  judgment,
and  not  feelings.

Every  determination  of  the  understanding,  with  regard  to  what
is  true  or  false,  is  judgment.  That  I  ought  not  to  steal,  or  to
kill,  or  to  bear  false  witness,  are  propositions,  of  the  truth  of
which  I  am  as  well  convinced  as  of  any  proposition  in  Euclid.
I  am  conscious  that  I  judge  them  to  be  true  propositions  ;  and
my  consciousness  makes  ^  other  arguments  unnecessary,  with
regard  to  the  operations  of  my  own  mind.

That  other  men  judge,  as  well  as  feel,  in  such  cases,  I  am  con-
vinced, because  they  imderstand  me  when  I  express  my  moral
judgment,  and  express  theirs  by  the  same  terms  and  phrases.

Suppose  that,  in  a  case  well  known  to  both,  my  friend  says.
Such  a  man  did  well  and  worthily ;  his  conduct  is  highly  approv-
able.  This  speech,  according  to  all  rules  of  interpretation,  ex-
presses my  friend's  judgment  of  the  man's  conduct.  This  judg-
ment may  be  true  or  false,  and  I  may  agree  in  opinion  with  him,
or  I  may  dissent  from  him  without  offence,  as  we  may  differ  in
other  matters  of  judgment.

Suppose  again,  that,  in  relation  to  the  same  case,  my  friend
says,  The  maris  conduct  gave  me  a  very  agreeable  feeling .

This  speech,  if  approbation  be  nothing  but  an  agreeable
feeling,  must  have  the  very  same  meaning  with  the  first,  and
express  neither  more  nor  less.  But  this  cannot  be,  for  two
reasons.

First,  Because  there  is  no  rule  in  grammar  or  rhetoric,  nor  any
usage  in  language,  by  which  these  two  speeches  can  be  construed,
so  as  to  have  the  same  meaning.  The^r*^  expresses  plainly  an
opinion  or  judgment  of  the  conduct  of  the  man,  but  says  nothing
of  the  speaker.  The  second  only  testifies  a  fact  concerning  the
speaker,  to  wit,  that  he  had  such  a  feeling.

Aiiother  reason  why  these  two  speeches  cannot  mean  the  same
thing  is,  that  the  first  may  be  contradicted  without  any  ground
of  offence,  such  contradiction  being  only  a  difference  of  opinion,
which,  to  a  reasonable  man,  gives  no  offence.  But  the  second
speech  cannot  be  contradicted  without  an  affront ;  for,  as  every


gg2  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VII.

man  must  know  his  own  feelings,  to  deny  that  a  man  had  a  feel-
ing which  he  affirms  he  had,  is  to  charge  him  with  falsehood.

If  moral  approbation  be  a  real  judgment,  which  produces  an
agreeable  feeling  in  the  mind  of  him  who  judges,  both  speeches
are  perfectly  intelligible,  in  the  most  obvious  and  literal  sense.
Their  meaning  is  different,  but  they  are  related,  so  that  the  one
may  be  inferred  from  the  other,  as  we  infer  the  effect  from  the
cause,  or  the  cause  from  the  effect.  I  know,  that  what  a  man
judges  to  be  a  very  worthy  action,  he  contemplates  with  plea-
sure ;  and  what  he  contemplates  with  pleasure  must,  in  his  judg-
ment, have  worth.  But  the  judgment  and  the  feeling  are  dif-
ferent acts  of  his  mind,  though  connected  as  cause  and  effect.
He  can  express  either  the  one  or  the  other  with  perfect  pro-
priety ;  but  the  speech  which  expresses  his  feeling  is  altogether
improper  and  inept  to  express  his  judgment,  for  this  evident
reason,  that  judgment  and  feeling,  though  in  some  cases  con-
nected, are  things  in  their  nature  different.

If  we  suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  moral  approbation  is
nothing  more  than  an  agreeable  feeling,  occasioned  by  the  con-
templation of  an  action,  the  second  speech  above  mentioned  has
a  distinct  meaning,  and  expresses  all  that  is  meant  by  moral
approbation.  But  the  first  speech  either  means  the  very  same
thing,  (which  cannot  be,  for  the  reasons  already  mentioned,)  or  it
has  no  meaning.

Now,  we  may  appeal  to  the  reader,  whether,  in  conversation
upon  human  characters,  such  speeches  as  the  first  are  not  as  fre-
quent, as  familiar,  and  as  well  understood,  as  anything  in  lan-
guage ;  and  whether  they  have  not  been  common  in  all  ages  that
we  can  trace,  and  in  aU  languages  ?

[This  doctrine,  therefore,  That  moral  approbation  is  merely  a
feeling  without  judgment,  necessarily  carries  along  ynth  it  this
consequence,  that  a  form  of  speech,  upon  one  of  the  most  common
topics  of  discourse,  which  either  has  no  meaning,  or  a  meaning
irreconcilable  to  aU  rules  of  grammar  or  rhetoric,  is  found  to  he
common  and  familic^r  in  all  languages,  and  in  all  ages  of  the
world,  while  every  man  knows  how  to  express  the  meaning,  if  it
have  any,  in  plain  and  proper  language.]

Such  a  consequence  I  think  sufficient  to  sink  any  philosophical
opinion  on  which  it  hangs.

A  particular  language  may  have  some  oddity,  or  even  absur-
dity, introduced  by  some  man  of  eminence,  from  caprice  or  wrong
judgment,  and  followed  by  servile  imitators,  for  a  time,  till  it  be
detected,  and,  of  consequence,  discountenanced  and  dropt;  but
that  the  same  absurdity  should  pervade  all  languages,  through  all
ages,  and  that,  after  being  detected  and  exposed,  it  should  still
keep  its  countenance  and  its  place  in  language  as  much  a«  before,
this  can  never  be  while  men  have  understanding.


APPROBATION  IMPLIES  JUDGMENT.  383

VI  I.  [It  may  be  observed  by  the  way,  that  the  same  argument
may  he  applied^  with  equal  force,  against  those  other  paradoxical
opinions  of  modern  philosophy  which  we  before  mentioned  as  con-
nected with  this,  such  as,  that  beauty  and  deformity  are  not  at  all
in  the  objects  to  which  language  universally  ascribes  them,  but
are  merely  feelings  in  the  mind  of  the  spectator ;  that  the  secon-
dary qualities  are  not  in  external  objects,  but  are  merely  feelings
or  sensations  in  him  that  perceives  them ;  and,  in  general,  that
our  external  and  internal  senses  are  faculties  by  which  we  have
sensations  or  feelings  only,  but  by  which  we  do  not  judge.]

That  every  form  of  speech  which  language  affords  to  express
our  judgments,  should,  in  all  ages,  and  in  all  languages,  be  used
to  express  what  is  no  judgment ;  and  that  feelings,  which  are
easily  expressed  in  proper  language,  should  as  universally  be  ex-
pressed by  language  altogether  improper  and  absurd,  I  cannot
believe ;  and  therefore  must  conclude,  that  if  language  be  the
expression  of  thought,  men  judge  of  the  primary  and  secondary
qualities  of  body  by  their  external  senses,  of  beauty  and  defor-
mity by  their  taste,  and  of  virtue  and  vice  by  their  moral  faculty.

A  truth  so  evident  as  this  is,  can  hardly  be  obscured  and
brought  into  doubt,  but  bj  the  abuse  of  words.  And  much
abuse  of  words  there  has  been  upon  this  subject.  To  avoid  this,
as  much  as  possible,  I  have  used  the  word  judgment,  on  one  side,
and  sensation  or  feeling,  upon  the  other ;  because  these  words
have  been  least  liable  to  abuse  or  ambiguity.  But  it  may  be
proper  to  make  some  observations  upon  other  words  that  have
been  used  in  this  controversy.

Mr.  Hume,  in  his  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"  has  employed
two  sections  upon  it,  the  titles  of  which  are.  Moral  Distinctions
not  derived  from  Reason,  and  Moral  Distinctions  derived  from  a
Moral  Sense.

When  he  is  not,  by  custom,  led  unawares  to  speak  of  reason
like  other  men,  he  limits  that  word  to  signify  only  the  power  of
judging  in  matters  merely  speculative.  Hence  he  concludes,
"  That  reason  of  itself  is  inactive  and  perfectly  inert."  That
"  actions  may  be  laudable  or  blameable,  but  cannot  be  reason-
able or  unreasonable."  That  "  it  is  not  contrary  to  reason,  to
prefer  the  destruction  of  the  whole  world  to  the  scratching  of  my
finger."  That  **  it  is  not  contrary  to  reason,  for  me  to  choose
my  total  ruin  to  prevent  the  least  uneasiness  of  an  Indian,  or  of
a  person  wholly  unknown  to  me."  That  "  reason  is,  and  ought
only  to  be,  the  slave  of  the  passions,  and  can  never  pretend  to
any  other  office,  than  to  serve  and  obey  them."

If  we  take  the  word  reason  to  mean  what  common  use,  both  of
philosophers  and  of  the  vulgar,  hath  made  it  to  mean,  these
maxims  are  not  only  false,  but  licentious. It  is  only  his  abuse  of


g34  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VII.

the  words  reason  and  passion,  that  can  justify  them  from  this
censure.

The  meaning  erf  a  common  word  is  not  to  be  ascertained  by
philosophical  theory,  but  by  common  usage  ;  and  if  a  man  will
take  the  liberty  of  limiting  or  extending  the  meaning  of  common
words  at  his  pleasure,  he  may,  like  Mandeville,  insinuate  the
most  licentious  paradoxes  with  the  appearance  of  plausibility.  I
have  before  made  some  observations  upon  the  meaning  of  this
word.  Essay  II.  chap.  2,  and  Essay  III.  Part  iii.  chap.  1,  to  which
the  reader  is  referred.

When  Mr.  Hume  derives  moral  difficulties  from  a  moral  sense,
I  agree  with  him  in  words,  but  we  differ  about  the  meaning  of
the  word  sense.  Every  power  to  which  the  name  of  a  sense  has
been  given,  is  a  power  of  judging  of  the  objects  of  that  sense,
and  has  been  accounted  such  in  all  ages ;  the  moral  sense  there-
fore is  the  power  of  judging  in  morals.  But  Mr.  Hume  will
have  the  moral  sense  to  be  only  a  power  of  feeling,  without
judging :  This  I  take  to  be  an  abuse  of  the  word.

[Authors  who  place  moral  approbation  in  feeling  only,  very
often  use  the  word  sentiment,  to  express  feeling  without  judgment.
This  I  take  likewise  to  be  an  abuse  of  the  word.]  Our  moral
determinations  may,  with  propriety,  be  called  moral  sentiments.
For  the  word  sentiment,  in  the  EngUsh  language,  never,  as  I  con-
ceive, signifies  mere  feeling,  but  judgment  accompanied  with
feeling.  It  was  wont  to  signify  opinion  or  judgment  of  any  kind,
but,  of  late,  is  appropriated  to  signify  an  opinion  or  judgment,
that  strikes,  and  produces  some  agreeable  or  uneasy  emotion.  So
we  speak  of  sentiments  of  respect,  of  esteem,  of  gratitude.  But
I  never  heard  the  pain  of  the  gout,  or  any  other  mere  feeling,
called  a  sentiment.

Even  the  woidjudgment  has  been  used  by  Mr.  Hume  to  express
what  he  maintains  to  be  only  a  feeling.  "  Treatise  of  Human  Na-
ture," Part  iii.  p.  3.  "  The  term  perception  is  no  less  applicable
to  those  judgments  by  which  we  distinguish  moral  good  and  evil,
than  to  every  other  operation  of  the  mind."  Perhaps  he  used
this  word  inadvertently ;  for  I  think  there  cannot  be  a  greater
abuse  of  words,  than  to  put  judgment  for  what  he  held  to  be
mere  feeling.

VIII.  [Improper  use  of  words  has  impeded  the  study  of  moral
philosophy, — All  the  words  most  commonly  used,  both  by  philo-
sophers and  the  vulgar,  to  express  the  operations  of  our  moral
faculty,  such  as  decision,  determination,  sentence,  approbation,
disapprobation,  applause,  censure,  praise,  blame,  necessarily
imply  judgment  in  their  meaning.  When,  therefore,  they  are
used  by  Mr.  Hume,  and  others  who  hold  his  opinion,  to  signify
feelings  only,  this  is  an  abuse  of  words.] If  these  philosophers


APPROBATION  IMPLIES  JUDGMENT.


385

wish  to  speak  plainly  and  properly,  they  must,  in  discoursing
of  morals,  discard  these  words  altogether,  because  their  estab-
lished signification  in  the  language,  is  contrary  to  what  they  would
express  by  them.

They  must  likewise  discard  from  morals  the  words  ought  and
ought  noty  which  very  properly  express  judgment,  but  cannot  be
applied  to  mere  feelmgs.  Upon  these  words  Mr.  Hume  has
made  a  particular  observation  in  the  conclusion  of  his  first  section
above  mentioned.  I  shall  give  it  in  his  own  words,  and  make
some  remarks  upon  it.

"  I  cannot  forbear  adding  to  these  reasonings,  an  observation
which  may^  perhaps,  be  foiuid  of  some  importance.  In  every
system  of  morality  which  I  have  hitherto  met  with,  I  have  always
remarked,  that  the  author  proceeds  for  some  time  in  the  ordinary
way  of  reasonings  and  establishes  the  being  of  a  God,  or  makes
observations  concerning  human  affairs ;  when,  of  a  sudden,  I
am  surprised  to  find,  that,  instead  of  the  usual  copulations  of
propositions,  w,  and  is  not,  I  meet  with  no  proposition  that  is  not
connected  with  an  ought,  or  an  ought  not.  This  change  is  im-
perceptible, but  is,  however,  of  the  last  consequence.  For  as  this
ought  or  ought  not  expresses  some  new  relation  or  affirmation,  it  is
necessary  that  it  should  be  observed  and  explained :  and,  at  the
same  time,  that  a  reason  should  be  given  for  what  seems  altoge-
ther inconceivable ;  how  this  new  relation  can  be  a  deduction
from  others  which  are  entirely  different  from  it.  But  as  authors
do  not  commonly  use  this  precaution,  I  shall  presume  to  recom-
mend it  to  the  readers  ;  and  am  persuaded,  that  this  small  atten-
tion would  subvert  all  the  vulgar  systems  of  morality,  and  let  us
see,  that  the  distinction  of  vice  and  virtue,  is  not  founded  merely
on  the  relations  of  objects,  nor  is  perceived  by  reason."

We  may  here  observe,  that  it  is  acknowledged,  that  the  words
ought  and  ought  not  express  some  relation  and  affirmation  ;  but
a  relation  or  affirmation  which  Mr.  Hume  thought  inexplicable,
or,  at  least,  inconsistent  with  his  system  of  morals.  He  must,
therefore,  have  thought,  that  they  ought  not  to  be  used  in  treat*
ing  of  that  subj  ect.

He  likewise  makes  two  demands,  and,  taking  it  for  granted  that
they  cannot  be  satisfied,  is  persuaded,  that  an  attention  to  this  is
sufficient  to  subvert  all  the  vulgar  systems  of  morals.

The  jf?r*^  demand  is,  that  ought  and  ought  not  be  explained.

To  a  man  that  understands  English,  there  are  surely  no  words
that  require  explanation  less.  Are  not  all  men  taught,  from  their
early  years,  that  they  ought  not  to  lie,  nor  steal,  nor  swear  falsely  ?
But  Mr.  Hume  thinks,  that  men  never  understood  what  these  pre-
cepts mean,  or  rather  that  they  are  imintelligible.  If  this  be  so,
I  dunk  indeed  it  will  follow,  that  all  the  vulgar  systems  of  morals
are  subverted.

2c


386  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VII.

Dr.  Johnson,  in  his  Dictionary,  explains  the  word  ought  to  sig-
nify, being  obliged  by  duty ;  and  I  know  no  better  explication
that  can  be  given  of  it.  The  reader  will  see  what  I  thought  ne-
cessary to  say  concerning  the  moral  relation  expressed  by  this
word,  in  Essay  III.  part  iii.  chap.  5.

The  second  demand  is,  that  a  reason  should  be  given  why  this
relation  should  be  a  deduction  from  others  which  are  entirely
different  from  it.

This  is  to  demand  a  reason  for  what  does  not  exist.  The  first
principles  of  morals  are  not  deductions.  They  are  self-evident ;
and  their  truth,  like  that  of  other  axioms,  is  perceived  without
reasoning  or  deduction.  And  moral  truths,  that  are  not  self-
evident,  are  deduced,  not  from  relations  quite  different  from
them,  but  from  the  first  principles  of  morals.

In  a  matter  so  interesting  to  mankind,  and  so  frequently  the
subject  of  conversation  among  the  learned  and  the  unlearned  as
morals  is,  it  may  surely  be  expected,  that  men  will  express  both
their  judgments  and  their  feelings  with  propriety,  and  consist-
ently with  the  rules  of  language.  An  opinion,  therefore,  which
makes  the  language  of  all  nations,  upon  this  subject,  to  be  im-
proper, contrary  to  all  rules  of  language,  and  fit  to  be  discarded,
needs  no  other  refutation.

As  mankind  have,  in  all  ages,  understood  reason  to  mean  the
power  by  which  not  only  our  speculative  opinions,  but  our  ac-
tions, ought  to  be  regulated,  we  may  say,  with  perfect  propriety,
that  all  vice  is  contrary  to  reason ;  that,  by  reason,  we  are  to
judge  of  what  we  ought  to  do,  as  well  as  of  what  we  ought  to
believe.

But  though  all  vice  be  contrary  to  reason,  I  conceive  that  it
would  not  be  a  proper  definition  of  vice  to  say,  that  it  is  a  con-
duct contrary  to  reason,  because  this  definition  would  apply
equally  to  folly,  which  all  men  distinguish  from  vice.

IX.  [There  axe  other  phrases  which  have  been  used  on  the
same  side  of  the  question,  which  I  see  no  reason  for  adopting,
such  as,  acting  contrary  to  the  relations  of  things,  contrary  to  the
reason  of  things,  to  the  fitness  of  things,  to  the  truth  of  things,
to  absolute  fitness,"]  These  phrases  have  not  the  authority  of
common  use,  which  in  matters  of  language,  is  great.  They  seem
to  have  been  invented  by  some  authors,  with  a  view  to  explain
the  nature  of  vice ;  but  I  do  not  think  they  answer  that  end.
If  intended  as  definitions  of  vice,  they  are  improper :  because,
in  the  most  favourable  sense  they  can  bear,  they  extend  to  every
kind  of  foolish  and  absurd  conduct,  as  well  as  to  that  which  is
vicious.

I  shall  conclude  this  chapter  with  some  observations  upon  the
five  arguments  which  Mr.  Hume  has  offered  upon  this  point  in
his  Inquiry.


APPROBATION  IMPLIES  JUDGMENT.  ggy

The  jint  is,  that  it  is  impossible  that  the  hypothesis  he
opposes  can,  in  any  particular  instance,  be  so  much  as  rendered
intelligible,  whatever  specious  figure  it  may  make  in  general  dis-
course. "  Examine,"  says  he,  "  the  crime  of  ingratitude,  anato-
mise all  its  circumstances,  and  examine,  by  your  reason  alone,
in  what  consists  the  demerit  or  blame,  you  will  never  come  to
any  issue  or  conclusion."

I  think  it  unnecessary  to  follow  him  through  all  the  accounts
of  ingratitude  which  he  conceives  may  be  given  by  those  whom
he  opposes,  because  I  agree  with  him  in  that  which  he  himself
adopts,  to  wit,  "  That  this  crime  arises  from  a  complication  of
circumstances,  which,  being  presented  to  the  spectator,  excites
the  sentiment  of  blame  by  the  particular  structure  and  fabric  of
his  imnd."

This  he  thought  a  true  and  intelligible  account  of  the  crimi-
nality of  ingratitude.  So  do  I.  And  therefore  I  think  the  hy-
pothesis he  opposes  is  intelligible,  when  applied  to  a  particular
instance.

Mr.  Hume,  no  doubt,  thought,  that  the  account  he  gives  of
ingratitude  is  inconsistent  with  the  hypothesis  he  opposes,  and
could  not  be  adopted  by  those  who  hold  that  hypothesis.  He
could  be  led  to  think  so,  only  by  taking  for  granted  one  of  these
two  things.  Either,  ^r*^,  That  the  sentiment  of  blame  means  a
feeling  only,  without  judgment;  or  secondly,  That  whatever  is
excited  by  the  particular  fabric  and  structure  of  the  mind  must
be  feeling  only,  and  not  judgment.  But  I  cannot  grant  either
the  one  or  the  other.

For,  as  to  the  first,  it  seems  evident  to  me,  that  both  sentiment
and  blame  imply  judgment ;  and,  therefore,  that  the  sentiment
of  blame  means  a  judgment  accompanied  with  feeling,  and  not
mere  feeling  without  judgment.

The  second  can  as  little  be  granted ;  for  no  operation  of  mind,
whether  judgment  or  feeling,  can  be  excited  but  by  that  particu-
lar structure  and  fabric  of  the  mind  which  makes  us  capable  of
that  operation.

By  that  part  of  our  fabric  which  we  call  the  faculty  of  seeing,
we  judge  of  visible  objects ;  by  taste,  another  part  of  our  fabric,
we  ju^e  of  beauty  and  deformity  ;  by  that  part  of  our  fabric,
which  enables  us  to  form  abstract  conceptions,  to  compare  them,
and  perceive  their  relations,  we  judge  of  abstract  truths ;  and  by
that  part  of  our  fabric  which  we  caU  the  moral  faculty,  we  judge
of  virtue  and  vice.  If  we  suppose  a  being  without  any  moral
faculty  in  his  fabric,  I  grant  that  he  could  not  have  the  sentiments
of  blame  and  moral  approbation.

[There  are,  lihexeiore,  judgments,  as  well  as  feelings,  that  are
excited  by  the  particular  structure  and  fabric  of  the  mind.  But
there  is  this  remarkable  difference between  them,  That  every

2  c  2


388  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VII.

judgment  is,  in  its  own  nature,  true  or  false;  and  though  it
depends  upon  the  fabric  of  a  mind,  whether  it  have  such  a  judg-
ment or  not,  it  depends  not  upon  that  fabric  whether  the  judg-
ment be  true  or  not.  A  true  judgment  will  be  true,  whatever  be
the  fabric  of  the  mind ;  but  a  particular  structure  and  fabric  is
necessary,  in  order  to  our  perceiving  that  truth.  Nothing  like
this  can  be  said  of  mere  feelings,  because  the  attributes  of  true
or  false  do  not  belong  to  them.]

Thus  I  think  it  appears,  that  the  hypothesis  which  Mr.  Hume
opposes  is  not  unintelligible,  when  applied  to  the  particular
instance  of  ingratitude  ;  because  the  account  of  ingratitude
which  he  himself  thinks  true  and  intelligible,  is  perfectly  agree-
able to  it.

The  second  argument  amounts  to  this :  That  in  moral  delibera-
tion, we  must  be  acquainted  beforehand  with  all  the  objects  and
all  their  relations.  After  these  things  are  known,  the  under-
standing has  no  further  room  to  operate.  Nothing  remains  but
to  feel,  on  our  part,  some  sentiment  of  blame  or  approbation.

Let  us  apply  this  reasoning  to  the  office  of  a  judge.  In  a
cause  that  comes  before  him,  he  must  be  made  acquainted  with
all  the  objects,  and  all  their  relations.  After  this,  his  under-
standing has  no  further  room  to  operate.  Nothing  remains,  on
his  part,  but  to  feel  the  right  or  the  wrong ;  and  mankind  have,
very  absurdly,  called  him  di  judge;  he  ought  to  be  called  2i  feeler.

To  answer  this  argument  more  directly :  the  man  who  deli-
berates, after  all  the  objects  and  relations  mentioned  by  Mr.
Hume  are  known  to  him,  has  a  point  to  determine ;  and  that  is,
whether  the  action  under  his  deliberation  ought  to  be  done  or
ought  not.  In  most  cases,  this  point  will  appear  self-evident  to
a'  man  who  has  been  accustomed  to  exercise  his  moral  judgment ;
in  some  cases  it  may  require  reasoning.

In  like  manner,  the  judge,  after  all  the  circumstances  of  the
cause  are  known,  has  to  judge,  whether  the  plaintiff  has  a  just
plea  or  not.

The  third  argument  is  taken  from  the  analogy  between  moral
beauty  and  natural,  between  moral  sentiment- and  taste.  As
beauty  is  not  a  quality  of  the  object,  but  a  certain  feeling  of  the
spectator,  so  virtue  and  vice  are  not  qualities  in  the  persons  to
whom  language  ascribes  them,  but  feelings  of  the  spectator.

But  is  it  certain  beauty  is  not  any  quality  of  the  object  ?  This
is  indeed  a  paradox  of  modern  philosophy,  built  upon  a  philoso-
phical theory ;  but  a  paradox  so  contrary  to  the  common  lan-
guage and  common  sense  of  mankind,  that  it  ought  rather  to
overturn  the  theory  on  which  it  stands,  than  receive  any  sup-
port from  it.  And  if  beauty  be  really  a  quality  of  the  object,
and  not  merely  a  feeling  of  the  spectator,  the  whole,  force  of  this
argument  goes  over  to  the  other  side  of  the  question.


APPROBATION  IMPLIES  JUDGMENT.  ggg

"  Euclid,"  he  says,  "  has  fully  explained  all  the  qualities  of
the  circle,  but  has  not,  in  any  proposition,  said  a  word  of  its
beauty.  The  reason  is  evident.  The  beauty  is  not  a  quality  of
the  circle."

By  the  qualities  of  the  circle^  he  must  mean  its  properties ;
and  there  are  here  two  mistakes.  /

Firsty  Euclid  has  not  fully  explained  all  the  properties  of  the
circle.  Many  have  been  discovered  and  demonstrated  which  he
never  dreamt  of.

Secondly,  The  reason  why  Euclid  has  not  said  a  word  of  the
beauty  of  the  circle,  is  not,  that  beauty  is  not  a  quality  of  the
circle ;  the  reason  is,  that  Euclid  never  digresses  from  his  sub-
ject. His  purpose  was  to  demonstrate  the  mathematical  pro-
perties of  the  circle.  Beauty  is  a  quality  of  the  circle,  not  de-
monstrable by  mathematical  reasoning,  but  immediately  perceived
by  a  good  taste.  To  speak  of  it  would  have  been  a  digression
from  his  subject ;  and  that  is  a  fault  he  is  never  guilty  of.

The  fourth  argument  is,  That  inanimate  objects  may  bear  to
each  other  all  the  same  relations  which  we  observe  in  moral
agents.

If  this  were  true,  it  would  be  very  much  to  the  purpose ;  but
it  seems  to  be  thrown  out  rashly,  without  any  attention  to  its
evidence.  Had  Mr.  Hume  reflected  but  a  very  little  upon  this
dogmatical  assertion,  a  thousand  instances  would  have  occurred
to  him  in  direct  contradiction  to  it.

May  not  one  animal  be  more  tame,  or  more  docile,  or  more
cunning,  or  more  fierce,  or  more  ravenous,  than  another  ?  Are
these  relations  to  be  found  in  inanimate  objects  ?  May  not  one
man  be  a  better  painter,  or  sculptor,  or  shipbuilder,  or  tailor,  or
shoemaker,  than  another  ?  Are  these  relations  to  be  found  in
inanimate  objects,  or  even  in  brute-animals  ?  May  not  one
moral  agent  be  more  just,  more  pious,  more  attentive  to  any
moral  duty,  or  more  eminent  in  any  moral  virtue,  than  another  ?
Are  not  these  relations  peculiar  to  moral  agents  ?  But  to  come
to  the  relations  most  essential  to  morality.

When  I  say  that  I  ought  to  do  such  an  action,  that  it  is  my
duty,  do  not  these  words  express  a  relation  between  me  and  a
certain  action  in  my  power ;  a  relation  which  cannot  be  between
inanimate  objects,  or  between  any  other  objects  but  a  moral  agent
and  his  moral  actions ;  a  relation  which  is  well  understood  by  all
men  come  to  years  of  understanding,  and  expressed  in  all
languages  ?

Again,  when  in  deliberating  about  two  actions  in  my  power,
which  cannot  both  be  done,  I  say  this  ought  to  be  preferred  to
the  other ;  that  justice,  f6r  instance,  ought  to  be  preferred  to
generosity  ;  I  express  a  moral  relation  between  two  acticms  of  a


390  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VII.

moral  agent,  which  is  well  understood,  and  which  cannot  exist
between  objects  of  any  other  kind.

[There  are,  therefore,  moral  relations  which  can  have  no  exist-
ence but  between  moral  agents  and  their  voluntary  actions.
To  determine  these  relations  is  the  object  of  morals;  and  to
determine  relations,  is  the  province  of  judgmenty  and  not  of  mere
feeling,^

The  last  argument  is  a  chain  of  several  propositions,  which
deserve  distinct  consideration.  They  may,  I  think,  be  summed
up  in  these  four:  1.  There  must  be  ultimate  ends  of  action,
beyond  which  it  is  absurd  to  ask  a  reason  of  acting.  2.  The
ultimate  ends  of  human  actions  can  never  be  accoimted  for  by
reason ;  3.  but  recommend  themselves  entirely  to  the  sentiments
and  affections  of  mankind,  without  any  dependence  on  the  intel-
lectual faculties.  4.  As  virtue  is  an  end,  and  is  desirable  on  its
own  account,  without  fee  or  reward,  merely  for  the  immediate
satisfaction  it  conveys ;  it  is  requisite,  that  there  should  be  some
sentiment  which  it  touches,  some  internal  taste  or  feeHng,  or
whatever  you  please  to  call  it,  which  distinguishes  moral  good
and  evil,  and  which  embraces  the  one  and  rejects  the  other.

To  the  first  of  these  propositions  I  entirely  agree.  The  ulti-
mate ends  of  action  are  what  I  have  called  the  principles  of  actiony
which  I  have  endeavoured,  in  the  third  Essay,  to  enumerate,
and  to  class  imder  three  heads  of  mechanical,  animal  and
rational.

The  second  proposition  needs  some  explication.  I  take  its
meaning  to  be,  That  there  cannot  be  another  end  for  the  sake  of
which  an  ultimate  end  is  pursued :  for  the  reason  of  an  action
means  nothing  but  the  end  for  which  the  action  is  done ;  and
the  reason  of  an  end  of  action  can  mean  nothing  but  another
end,  for  the  sake  of  which  that  end  is  pursued,  and  to  which  it
is  the  means.

That  this  is  the  author's  meaning  is  evident  from  his  reasoning
in  confirmation  of  it.  "  Ask  a  man,  whg  he  uses  exercise  ?  he
will  answer,  because  he  desires  to  keep  his  health.  If  you  then
inquire,  whg  he  desires  health?  he  will  readily  reply,  because
sickness  is  painful.  If  you  push  your  inquiries  further,  and
desire  a  reason  why  he  hates  pain,  it  is  impossible  he  can  ever
give  any.  This  is  an  ultimate  end,  and  is  never  referred  to  any
other  object."  To  account  by  reason  for  an  end,  therefore,  is
to  show  another  end,  for  the  sake  of  which  that  end  is  desired
and  pursued.  And  that,  in  this  sense,  an  ultimate  end  can  never
be  accounted  for  by  reason,  is  certain,  because  that  cannot  be
an  ultimate  end  which  is  pursued  only  for  the  sake  of  another  end.

I  agree  therefore  with  Mr.  Hume  in  this  second  proposition^
which  indeed  is  implied  in  the  first.


APPROBATION  IMPLIES  JUDGMENT.  39]

The  third  proposition  is,  That  ultimate  ends  recommend  them-
selves entirely  to  the  sentiments  and  affections  of  mankind^  with-
out any  dependence  on  the  intellectual  faculties.

By  sentiments  he  must  here  mean  feelings  without  judgment,
and  by  affections,  such  affections  as  imply  no  judgment.  For
surely  any  operation  that  implies  judgment,  cannot  be  indepen-
dent of  the  intellectual  faculties.

This  being  understood,  I  cannot  assent  to  this  proposition.

The  Author  seems  to  think  it  implied  in  the  preceding,  or  a
necessary  consequence  from  it,  that  because  an  ultimate  end  can-
not be  accounted  for  by  reason ;  that  is,  cannot  be  pursued  merely
for  the  sake  of  another  end ;  therefore  it  can  have  no  dependence
on  the  intellectual  faculties.  I  deny  this  consequence,  and  can
see  no  force  in  it.

I  think  it  not  only  does  not  follow  from  the  preceding  propo-
sition, but  that  it  is  contrary  to  truth.

A  man  may  act  from  gratitude  as  an  ultimate  end ;  but  grati-
tude implies  a  judgment  and  belief  of  favours  received,  and  diere-
fore  is  dependent  on  the  intellectual  faculties.  A  man  may  act
from  respect  to  a  worthy  character  as  an  ultimate  end  ;  but  this
respect  necessarily  implies  a  judgment  of  worth  in  the  person,
and  therefore  is  dependent  on  the  intellectual  faculties.

I  have  endeavoured  in  the  third  Essay  before  mentioned,  to
show  that,  beside  the  animal  principles  of  our  nature,  which  re-
quire will  and  intention,  but  not  judgment,  there  are  also  in
human  nature  rational  principles  of  action,  or  ultimate  ends,
which  have,  in  all  ages,  been  called  rational,  and  have  a  just  title
to  that  name,  not  only  from  the  authority  of  language,  but  be-
cause they  can  have  no  existence  but  in  beings  endowed  with
reason,  and  because,  in  all  their  exertions,  they  require  not  only
intention  and  will,  but  judgment  or  reason.

Therefore,  until  it  can  be  proved  that  an  ultimate  end  cannot
be  dependent  on  the  intellectual  faculties,  this  third  proposition,
and  all  that  hangs  upon  it,  must  fall  to  the  ground.

The  last  proposition  assumes,  with  very  good  reason,  that
virtue  is  an  ultimate  end,  and  desirable  on  its  own  account.  From
which,  if  the  third  proposition  were  true,  the  conclusion  would
undoubtedly  follow,  that  virtue  has  no  dependence  on  the  intel-
lectual faculties.  But  as  that  proposition  is  not  granted,  nor
proved,  this  conclusion  is  left  without  any  support  from  the
whole  of  the  argument.

I  should  not  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  insist  so  long
upon  this  controversy,  if  I  did  not  conceive  that  the  consequences
which  the  contrary  opinions  draw  after  them  are  important.

If  what  we  call  moral  judgment  be  no  real  judgment,  but  merely
a  feeling,  it  follows,  that  the  principles  of  morals  which  we  have
been  taught  to  consider  as  an  immutable  law  to  all  intelligent


392  ESSAY  V.  CHAP.  VII.

beings,  have  no  other  foundation  but  an  arbitrary  structure  and
fabric  in  the  constitution  of  the  human  mind :  so  tnat,  by  a  change
in  our  structure,  vsrhat  is  immoral  might  become  moral,  virtue
might  be  turned  into  vice,  and  vice  into  virtue.  And  beings  of
a  cfifferent  structure,  according  to  the  variety  of  their  feelings,
may  hare  different,  nay  opposite  measures  of  moral  good  and  evil.

It  follows,  that,  from  our  notions  of  morals,  we  can  conclude
nothing  concerning  a  moral  character  in  the  Deity,  which  is  the
foundation  of  all  religion,  and  the  strongest  support  of  virtue.

X.  Impiety  of  the  assertion,  that  moral  judgment  is  merely  a
feeling. — Nay,  this  opinion  seems  to  conclude  strongly  against  a
moral  character  in  the  Deity,  since  nothing  arbitrary  or  mutable
can  be  conceived  to  enter  into  the  description  of  a  nature  eternal,
immutable,  and  necessarily  existent.  Mr.  Himie  seems  perfectly
consistent  with  himself,  in  allowing  of  no  evidence  for  the  moral
attributes  of  the  Supreme  Being,  whatever  there  may  be  for  his
natural  attributes.

On  the  other  hand,  if  moral  judgment  be  a  true  and  real  judg-
ment, the  principles  of  morals  stand  upon  the  immutable  foun-
dation of  truth,  and  can  imdergo  no  change  by  any  difference  of
fabric  or  structure  of  those  who  judge  of  them.  There  may
be,  and  there  are  beings,  who  have  not  the  faculty  of  conceiving
moral  truths,  or  perceiving  the  excellence  of  moral  worth,  as
there  are  beings  incapable  of  perceiving  mathematical  truths ;
but  no  defect,  no  error  of  understanding,  can  make  what  is  true
to  be  false.

If  it  be  true  that  piety,  justice,  benevolence,  wisdom,  temper-
ance, fortitude,  are  in  their  own  nature  the  most  excellent  and
most  amiable  qualities  of  a  human  creature ;  that  vice  has  an  in-
herent turpitude  which  merits  disapprobation  and  dislike ;  these
truths  cannot  be  hid  from  Him  whose  understanding  is  infinite,
whose  judgment  is  always  according  to  truth,  and  who  must
esteem  every  thing  according  to  its  real  value.

[The  Judge  of  all  the  earth,  we  are  sure,  will  do  right.  He
has  given  to  men  the  faculty  of  perceiving  the  right  and  the
wrong  in  conduct,  as  far  as  is  necessary  to  our  present  state,  and
of  perceiving  the  dignity  of  the  one,  and  the  demerit  of  the
other ;  and  surely  there  can  be  no  real  knowledge  or  real  excel-
lence in  man,  which  is  not  in  his  Maker.]

We  may,  therefore,  justly  conclude,  that  what  we  know  in  part,
and  see  in  part,  of  right  and  wrong,  He  sees  perfectly ;  that  the
moral  excellence  which  we  see  and  admire  in  some  of  our  fellow-
creatures,  is  a  faint  but  true  copy  of  that  moral  excellence  which
is  essential  to  His  nature  ;  and  that  to  tread  the  path  of  virtue  is
the  true  dignity  of  our  nature,  an  imitation  of  God,  and  the
way  to  obtain  his  favour.
