Res Gestae Divi Augusti (The Achievements of Augustus)
Augustus (Frederick W. Shipley, trans.)

Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/paterculus-and-deeds-of-augustus-1924-loeb
Edition: Frederick W. Shipley's translation (Loeb Classical Library, 1924), via Internet Archive scan. Latin facing-page text removed; English translation only.
Public domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel library, 2026-10-09.

INTRODUCTION


AMoNa extant historical documents there is none
that outweighs in importance the account of his
stewardship which the Emperor Augustus left among
the papers deposited with the Vestal Virgins before
his death, preserved to us in a copy chiselled upon
the walls of the Temple of Rome and Augustus at
Ancyra in Asia Minor, the modern Angora. This
copy, known as the Monumentum Ancyranum, has
justly been called by Mommsen the “ Queen of
Inscriptions."

Suetonius, Augustus, 101, states that Augustus had
deposited with the Vestal Virgins, along with his
will, three other documents, all of which were
opened and read in the Senate. The first contained
instructions for his funeral; the third, a summarized
statement of the condition of the whole empire ; the
second, the one with which we are here concerned,
contained “‘a résumé of his acts which he wished to
have engraved upon bronze tablets to be set up
before his mausoleum.” More than forty years
before his death Augustus had built this mausoleum
on the Tiber at the northern edge of the Campus
Martius, in the midst of a small park, which was
opened by the Emperor to the public. The mauso-
leum itself was probably surrounded by an enclosing
wall, at the entrance: to which, facing the Campus
Martius, stood the pillars, or pilasters, on which was
engraved the index rerum gestarum. The shell of the


INTRODUCTION


mausoleum itself has outlived the centuries and is
still standing on the Ripetta, but the bronze tablets
have long since disappeared. The original docu-
ment, however, was copied on the walls of many of
the temples of Augustus throughout the empire, and
remains of three copies have come to light in Asia
Minor alone. In addition to the Augusteum at
Ancyra, inscribed with both the Latin text and a
Greek version, there was found another ruined
temple at Apollonia with remnants of the same
Greek version ; it is fairly certain that the Augusteum
at Pergamon had both the Latin and the Greek
versions ; and finally at Antioch in Pisidia (Colonia
Caesarea) Sir W. M. Ramsay discovered, in 1914, a
number of fragments of the Latin text from a fourth
copy. But the inscription on the temple of Rome
and Augustus at Ancyra is relatively so complete,
although marred in places by the scaling of the
stone, that it outweighs all the others in importance,
and the designation Monumentum Ancyranum has
become synonymous with Res Gestae Divi Augusti.

The temple of Rome and Augustus at Ancyra is
still in a fair state of preservation. The Latin text
is chiselled upon both sides of the inner walls of the
pronaos or vestibule. It was arranged in six pages,
three of forty-six lines each, on the left as one entered,
surmounted by the title, which runs in two and a
half lines across the top of all three, and three pages
on the right of fifty-four lines each. The arrangement
undoubtedly was in general a replica of that of the
inscription at Rome. Each line contained on the


1 Ramsay, ** Colonia Caesarea (Pisidian Antioch) in the
Augustan Age," Journal of Roman Studies, vol. vi., 1916,
London, pp. 108-129.


average about sixty letters. The height of the inscrip-
tion is 2-70 metres on each wall, and the length on
each wall is about 4 metres. To mark the para-
graphs, the first letter projects beyond the margin,
and to indicate periods, a symbol like a figure 7 was
used, which is usually, however, printed in the texts
as $. On one of the outer walls of the temple was
inscribed a Greek translation of the Latin. The
fact that several Turkish houses had been built
against this wall long made it difficult to read all of
the Greek inscription and still more difficult to
secure casts.

The Monumentum Ancyranum was first made
known to the western world by Buysbecche, a Dutch
scholar who was sent, in 1555, by Ferdinand II. on
an embassy to the Sultan Soliman at Amasia in Asia
Minor. He first read and identified the inscription
and published a copy of parts of it. After him the
inscription was copied in part by many travellers,
but the first faithful and trustworthy copy was made
by Georges Perrot and Edmund Guillaume, who had
been commissioned by Napoleon III. to explore
Asia Minor. They made a facsimile copy, but no
casts, of the whole of the Latin, and as much of the
Greek as they could get at. Their plates were the
basis of Mommsen's edition of the text in 1865, and
of that of Bergk in 1873; also of the text in
the Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum. In 1859 the
Berlin Academy commissioned Mordtmann to make
a cast in papier-máché, but after visiting the site he
reported that the owners of the Turkish houses
would not permit his getting at the parts of the
Greek inscription which were hidden, and that the
making of a cast would still further injure the


INTRODUCTION


inscription itself. In 1882, however, at the sugges-
tion of Mommsen, the Academy commissioned Carl
Humann to make a plaster cast. He not only made
casts of the Latin inscription, but also of the Greek
as well, having persuaded the owners of the houses
to allow their walls to be partially torn down for the
purpose, and the casts were safely transported to
Berlin in the autumn of 1882, where they are now
among the treasures of the Museum. Humann’s
casts have superseded in value all previous copies,
except in a few places where the wall had scaled
since these earlier copies were made, as, for instance,
in page 5, lines 34-48, and page 6, lines 1-6. In
1883, using these casts as a basis, Mommsen published
his great critical edition, with a supplement con-
taining heliogravure reproductions from the casts.
This edition of Mommsen has become the basis for
all subsequent work. There are still passages in
which the lacunae in the Latin cannot be supplied
with certainty from the Greek translation, either
because of lacunae or illegibility in the Greek text,
and concerning which subsequent scholars have
exercised their ingenuity in conjecture. Some of
these conjectures are clearly more probable than
Mommsen's, while others raise debatable questions
which will never be cleared up until another copy
either of the Latin text or the Greek translation is
found in one of the many Augustea in Asia Minor.


! Sir W. M. Ramsay's work at Colonia Caesarea (Pisidian
Antioch) was stopped by the local authorities soon after he
began to find fragments of the Latin inscription. When
the work of excavation is continued it may be that other
fragments will come to light which will clear up a number
of the vexed passages. See Ramsay's article in the Journal
of Roman Studies, vol. vi., 1916.


*


But for by far the greater portion of the document
we have the actual words of Augustus, and for a
considerable portion in addition the substance
Puppuco from the Greek or from sure conjecture.

In a style of studied simplicity, and almost tele-
graphic brevity, with not a word too many or a word
too few, and, except for the personal pronoun which
is used throughout, with an objectivity worthy of
the commentaries of his adopted father, the docu-
ment sets forth, (1) the honours conferred upon
Augustus from time to time by the Senate and the
Roman people and the services for which they were
conferred, chapters 1-14, (2) the donations which he
made from his own personal account to the Republic,
to the discharged soldiers, and the Roman plebs ;
also the games, shows, and spectacles given to the
people at his own expense, chapters 15-24, and (3) an
account of his acts in peace and war, chapters 25-35.
The title provided by Tiberius includes only the last
two, namely, the Impensae and the Res Gestae, but
the first group may easily be reckoned with the
third, since the services are there recorded as well
as the honours conferred in reward for them. There
is no attempt at literary embellishment. The
document is almost statistical in its conciseness, and
the facts of a long life are allowed to speak for them-
selves. The superlative is purposely avoided, and
there is also an absence of the usual descriptive
adjectives and adverbs. Nowhere does the emperor
refer by name to any of his public enemies, such as
Antony, Brutus and Cassius, Lepidus, or Sextus
Pompey. Not even his own name appears in the
body of the document, except in the statement that
the Senate, out of honour to him, had conferred upon


INTRODUCTION


him the title of Augustus. No mention is made of
his father, his mother, or his wife, nor, indeed, of any
member of his family, except that he does mention
Agrippa, Tiberius, Gaius, and Lucius, when their
names were linked with his in public honours and
public affairs. In a word, everything of a personal
nature is omitted with yrudied. óbjectivity,)and his
narration is limited to his relations with the Senate
and the Roman people and theirs with him.

For a long time there waged in Germany a con-
troversy as to the purpose and literary classification
of the document. Was it intended as a political
testament,! or a statement of credit and debit in his
account with the Roman people,” or an account of
his stewardship,® or an apologia pro vita sua,’ or as
an epitaph®? Each of these theories had its
defenders. If it was intended for an epitaph,
Augustus must have contemplated that it would be
thrown into epitaph form by his successor, Tiberius,
who, in any event, allowed it to stand in the form in
which it was written. Mommsen declares against
ascribing it to any particular class of composition.’


1 Hirschfeld, Wiener Studien, iii. (1881) and vii. (1885) ;
Wochenschrift für class. Philol., 1884; Plew, Quellenunter-
suchungen zur Gesch. des Kaisers Hadrian, Strassburg, 1890.

* Wolfflin, ** Epigraphische Beiträge,” S.-B. der Münch.
Akad., 1886, p. 225, and 1896, p. 162.

3 Mommsen, von Sybel's Historische Zeitschrift, N.F.
xxi., 1887.

4 Cantarelli, '* L’ Iscrizione di wd Bullettino della
com. arch. comunale, iii. ser. 4 (1889), p

§ Bormann, Bemerkungen zum Paeiftlichen Nachlass
des Kaisers Augustus, Marburger Program, 1884; also
" Veranlassung und Zweck des Mon. Anc.," Verhandl. der
43. Philologen- Versammlung in Köln, 1895. Supported by
Nissen, Schmidt, and Peter.


Z 337


It is clear that the document was not originally
written in A.D. 14, as the last sentence would seem to
indicate, but that it was begun much earlier, with
later additions from time to time. As to when
Augustus wrote his original draft, and what additions
were subsequently made, and at what time, there
has been much controversy. Some of the details of
these problems will be discussed in the historical
notes. It is sufficient to say here that it is fairly
sure that an early draft of the document was already
complete in his twelfth consulship, 2 B.c., and perhaps
long before that; that subsequently changes were
made in some of the statements as, for instance, in
the case of the donations to the city plebs in his
twelfth and thirteenth consulships, where the
amounts are reckoned in denarii and not, as usual, in
sesterces ; that the statement in regard to the sub-
jugation of the German tribes as far as the Elbe,
while true at the time at which it was written, was
no longer true in a.D. 14, when the last words were
added, if, indeed, these were added by Augustus
himself; and that the mention of his third census
made in A.D. 14 is of course a later addition made
either by himself or by Tiberius.


—


Tuer Text


The Latin text of the Res Gestae, as here printed,
is based upon that of Mommsen’s Second Edition
of 1883, supplemented by that of the third edition
of the Monumentum Ancyranum by Ernst Diehl,
Bonn, 1918. Diehl has had the advantage of the


INTRODUCTION


twenty-five years of study which scholars have
devoted to the Monumentum since the publication
of Mommsen's second edition and has adopted a
number of readings which better fill the spaces in
the lacunae, or better correspond with the content
of the Greek version. In some of the passages
Mommsen's readings have been retained as against
Diehl, and in a few the conjectures of other scholars
have been adopted as indicated in the notes on the
text. Use has also been made of the fragments
of the Latin text of the Res Gestae found by Sir
William Ramsay at Colonia Caesarea (Pisidian
Antioch) in 1914, and published by him in the
Journal of Roman Studies, vol. vi., 1916, pp. 114-134.
These fragments are exceedingly small, but, placed
in position, some of them serve to determine which
of the conjectures of various scholars is the correct
or more probable one.

In the general typography it has seemed best,
for the purposes of the Loeb Library, to follow Diehl
rather than Mommsen. Mommsen’s lines, which
correspond to those of the inscription, are too long
for the width of the page of so small a volume. The
ends of the lines in the original monument are here
indicated by a perpendicular line thus, | , and the
beginning of each fifth line, numbered in the margin
5, 10, 15, etc., in the various paragraphs is indicated
by two perpendicular lines thus, ||. In the original,
the first letter of each paragraph projects beyond
the margin. To save space, the paragraphs are
. here indented according to modern practice. The
lacunae and illegible passages are indicated by
parentheses thus, (), and the words which have
been supplied to fill them are, in the case of the


Latin text, printed in italics. In the Greek text
the parentheses alone are used. In the Latin in-
scription the long vowels are indicated on the stone,
but not always consistently, either by an apex, or
in the case of long i, by an elongation of that letter.
In printing the Latin text the apex (^ has been
used for all vowels whose length is indicated on the
stone by either method. The sign $ is used to
represent a symbol on the stone which resembles
sometimes the figure 7, sometimes an open 3.

In printing the Greek text, Diehl has been followed
except in a very few passages.

Wherever it has seemed essential, the Latin text
has been provided with critical footnotes. These
have been omitted for the Greek version, partly
for economy of space, and partly because the Greek
version is of value chiefly as a subsidiary aid.


Tue HisroRicAL Nores


The interest which the Monumentum Ancyranum
will have for most readers is chiefly historical. For
the benefit of the general reader, and also of the
student of history, the translation has been supple-
mented by historical notes, to amplify or explain
the statements of the first emperor, which are
throughout characterized by epigraphic brevity.
In compiling these notes it has sometimes been
exceedingly hard to draw the line between saying
too much or too little. Owing to the nature of the
document itself, these notes are necessarily much
more numerous than is usual in the volumes of the
Loeb Classical Library.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


So many articles and comments on the Monumentum
Ancyranum have appeared, especially since 1861, that a
complete bibliography is out of the question here, and
the list will have to be limited to the more important
books and articles, and particularly to those referred to
in the introduction, and the critical and historical notes.


Epitions !


Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum, vol. iii., Pars II., pp.
169 ff., Berlin, 1873.

Mommsen, Theodor, Res Gestae Divi Augusti ex Monu-
mentis Ancyrano et Apolloniensi, with eleven photo-
gravure plates, Berlin, 1883.

R. Cagnat and G. Lafaye, Inscriptiones Graecae ad Res
Romanas pertinentes iii., 1, 1902, p. 65 ff.

Ernst Diehl, Res Gestae Divi Augusti, third ed., Bonn, :
1918.


ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS


William Fairley, Monumentum Ancyranum in Transla-
tions and Reprints from the Original Sources of
European History, Philadelphia, Pa., 1898.

E. S. Shuckburgh, Augustus, T. Fisher Unwin, London,
pp. 298-301.


CoMMENTS ON TEXT


E. Bormann, Bemerkungen zum schriftlichen Nachlass
des Kaisers Augustus, Marburg, 1884; also, Ver-
handlungen der 43. Versammlung deutscher Philologen
und Schulmünner in Kölin, Leipzig, 1895, p. 184 ff.

1 E, G. Hardy, The Monumentum Ancyranum, Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1923, appeared after this volume was in
page proof, and therefore too late to be used by the translator.


F. Gottakda, Suetons Verhältnis zu der Denkschrift des
Augustus, Dissertation, Munich, 1904, p. 50 ff.;
also Blätter für das bayerische Gymnasialschulwesen,
1913, p. 121 ff.

Fr. Haug, Bursians Jahresberichte über die Fortschritte
der Altertumswissenschaft, lvi., 1888, p. 87 ff.

J. Schmidt, Philologus, xliv., 1885, p. 448 ff.; ib. xlv.,
1886, p. 393 ff. ; ib. xlvi., 1887, p. 70 ff.

O. Seeck, Wochenschrift für klassische Philologie, 1884,
col. 14765 ff.

R. Wirtz, Ergünzungs- und Verbesserungsvorschlige zum
Monumentum Ancyranum, Program, Trier, 1912.

E. Wölfflin, Sitzungsberichte der kgl. bayer. Akademie der
Wissenschaften, 1886, p. 253 ff. ; 1896, p. 160 ff.

Sir W. M. Ramsay, “ Colonia Caesarea (Pisidian Antioch)
in the Augustan Age," Journal of Roman Studies,
vol. vi., 1916, London, pp. 108-129.


Books AND ARTICLES DEALING WITH LITERARY
AND HISTORICAL PROBLEMS


V. Gardthausen, Augustus und seine Zeit, i. 1279 ff. ;
ii. 874 ff., Leipzig, 1904.

M. Schanz, Römische Litteraturgeschichte, vol. ii. pt. i.

. 12, Munich, 1911.

M. Beanier, * Récents travaux sur les Res Gestae Divi
Augusti,” in Mélanges Cagnat, p. 119 ff.

Th. Mommsen, von Sybel’s Historische Zeitschrift, N.F.
xxi., 1887, p. 385 ff.; also Róm. Gesch. v. 600 ff. ;
Journal des Savants, xii. 176 ff.

A. von Domaszewski, ** Untersuchungen zur römischen
Kaisergeschichte," Rheinisches Museum, lix., 1904, p.
302 ff.

W. Fuerst, Suetons Verhältnis zu der Denkschrift des
Augustus. Erlangen dissertation, 1904, p. 58.

O. Hirschfeld, ** Die kaiserlichen Grabstátten in Rom,"
Sitzungsber. der Kgl. preuss. Akad., 1886, p. 1154;
* Die Abfassungszeit des Regierungsberichtes des
Augustus,” ib., 1915, p. 423.


INTRODUCTION


E. Kornemann, Beitrüge zur alten Geschichte, ii., 1902, .
p. 141 ff; ib. iii., 1908, p. 74 ff.; iv., 1904, p.
88 ff.; v., 1905, p. 317 ff.; Berliner philologische
Wochenschrift, 1906, col. 120; Klio, xiv., 1915, p.
377 f.

F. Koepp, Mittheilungen des rémisches Instituts, xix.,
1904, p. 51 ff.

F. Marks, “Zur Komposition des Res Gestae des Kaisers
Augustus,’ ' Festschrift d. Püdagogiums in Putbus,
1908.

H. Peter, Die geschichtliche Litteratur über die römische
Kaiserzeit, i. 453 ff.

G. Sigwart, “ Sueton und das Monumentum Ancyranum,”’
Klio, x., 1910, p. 394.

P. Viereck, Sermo Graecus, Góttingen, 1888, p. 85.

Vulic, Rivista di storia antica, xiii., 1909, p. 41 ff.

W. L. Westermann, “ The Monument of Ancyra,”
American Historical Review, 17, 1911.

U. Wilcken, Hermes, xxxviii., 1903, p. 618 ff.

M. Rostowzew, Title and Character of the Mon. Anc. (in
Russian), St. Petersburg, 1913.

Chr. Huelsen, Topographie von Rom, 1907, p. 620 ff.

E. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa, p. 268 ff.


Rérum! gestárum díví Augusti, quibus orbem terra-
(rum) imperio populi Rom. subiécit, § et inpensarum,
quas in rem publicam populumque Ro(ma)num fecit,
incísarum in duabus aheneís pilfs, quae su(»n)t Romae
positae, exemplar sub(z)ectum.


I 1 Annós undéviginti natus exercitum  priváto
consilio et privatá impensá | comparávi, (8) per quem
rem publicam (do)minatione factionis oppressam | in


! For an explanation of the apices (') and other symbols
such as $, used in printing the text, see Introd. pp. 334, 339 f.


Me0ünpumqvevuévac omeypd$oav mpáfew Te kai
dwpeat 2MeBaarToU heod, ds amédurev emi '"Pouns
evKexapaypevas yaàkaîs ornAais Svat.


I 1. Erôv Sdexae(v)véea wv Trò orparevpa èii

/ A , ^ > / € [4 >
yruopne kai | épots av(aA)wpacw yroi(uaca), de
o? Ta Kowa mTpá|ypara (èk TH)s T(@)v avvo(pooco)-


a The title Res Gestae Divi Augusti is that assigned by
Mommsen.

The superscription, which was engraved in large letters
across the top of the first three columns of the Mon. Anc.,
was of course not by Augustus. It was adapted, as is
indicated by the words ?ncisarum . . . exemplar subiectum,
from the superscription provided by "Tiberius, or some
one acting under his orders, for the bronze pillars before


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS


AS RECORDED ON


THE MONUMENTUM ANCYRANUM


Berow is a copy of the acts of the Deified Augustus
by which he placed the whole world under the
sovereignty of the Roman people, and of the amounts
which he expended upon the state and the Roman
people, as engraved upon two bronze columns
which have been set up in Rome.


1. At the age of nineteen, on my own initiative
and at my own expense, I raised an army ^ by means
of which I restored liberty 4 to the republic, which


the Mausoleum of Augustus at Rome. Its original form
on that monument was probably: Res gestae divi Augusti,
quibus orbem terrarum imperio populi Romani subiecit, et
impensae quas in rem publicam populumque Romanum fecit.

The Greek superscription reads: ** Below is a translation
of the acts and donations of the Deified Augustus as left by
him inscribed on two bronze columns at Rome."

è Octavian was nineteen on September 23, 44 B.C.

e During October, by offering a bounty of 500 denarii,
he induced Caesar's veterans at Casilinum and Calatia to
enlist, and in November the legions named Martia and
Quarta repudiated Antony and went over to him. This
activity of Octavian, on his own initiative, was ratified by
the Senate on December 20, on the motion of Cicero.

4 [n the battle of Mutina, April 43. Augustus may also
have had Philippi in mind.


libertátem vindicá(v. Quas ob res! sen)atus decretis
honor(zft)efs in | ordinem suum m(e adlegit C. Pansa
A. Hirti)o consulibu(s, c)on(sula)|rem locum s(ententtae
dicendae simul dans, et im)perium mihi dedit. (8) |
Rés publica n(e quid detrimenti caperet, me) pro praetore
simul cum | consulibus pro(videre iussit. § Populus)
autem eódem anno mé | consulem, cum (cos. uterque


- bello cect)disset, et trium virum reí publicae con-


wa


Ld
le]


stituend(ae creavit.) ||

2. Qui parentem meum (interfecerjun(t, eó)s in
exilium expulí iudiciis legi|timís ultus eórum ( fa)ci-
n(us, § e)t posted bellum inferentís reí publicae | vici
b(zs a)cie. |

1 Quas ob res Wólfflin, Ob quae Mommsen, Propter quae


Bormann.
3 s(imul dans sententiae ferendae et im)perium Mommsen.


pévov Sovdrjas | (2Aev)0€(poca. Ed’ ojis $
awvKAnTos émauvécaod || (ue Yndiopact) mpoo-
karéAefe tHe Bovdje Late Ila(vog | (AvAo«
“Ipriwe $)m(à)ro()s, ev THe Tae. TOV vrar(ucó)v |
(dua 7)0 o(vpBov)Aevew ooa, padBdovr(s) 7” pot
&Óckev. | (Ilep)i ta Sydow mpáypara uý T.
Bàaßiı, epot pe|(rà rÀv )ma)rwov mpovoeiv èr-
érpejev  dvri otparnyo(s) || (övre. § “O de
(uos Tat aùrôı eviavTd., appotépwv | (rÀv
jmárov m)oAeuwe memre(k)d(r)wv, epè vrma|(rov
amédeE)ev kai THY THY TpLdv avdpav éxov|(ra
apxnv èni) THe karaordoei TÀv 9(n)uootov mpal(y-
pro) €(tA)ar(o). || |

2. (Tods TÓv marépa TOv épÓv hovev)o(av)r(a)s e£-
opioa Kpi|(ceow evdi)Kous Teysw(p)nodpe(vos) adrav
TO | (&céBqua x)at (ue)rà Tatra aùroùs móňepov
€|(updpovras Tit 7ra)7(p) ide Sis eveiKnoa mraparager.|


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, I. 1-2


had been oppressed by the tyranny of a faction.*
For which service the senate, with complimentary
resolutions, enrolled me in its order, in the consul-
ship of Gaius Pansa and Aulus Hirtius, giving me
at the same time consular precedence in voting ;
it also gave me the imperium. As propraetor it
ordered me, along with the consuls, " to see that
the republic suffered no harm." In the same year,
moreover, as both consuls had fallen in war, ^ the
people elected me consul and a triumvir for settling
the constitution.4

2. Those who slew my father * I drove into exile,
punishing their deed by due process of law, and
afterwards when they waged war upon the republic
I twice ? defeated them in battle.


e By “faction” he means Antony, whom he never
mentions by name.

> On January 2, 43 B.c., the Senate decreed that Octavian
should be classed as a quaestorius (Dio, xlvi. 29. 41), should be
a member of the Senate (Livy, Epit. cxviii.), should have the
consularia ornamenta, and for that reason should give his
opinion along with the consuls (App. B.C. iii. 51); he was
ales iven the rank of propraetor with imperium, i.e. the
constitutional right to command soldiers.

ʻe Pansa died of his wounds, and Hirtius was killed in
action in the operations about Mutina.

4 Octavian became consul August 19, 43 B.c., after march-
ing his army from Cisalpine Gaul to intimidate the Senate.
On November 27 the appointment of Octavian, Antony,
and Lepidus as triumvirs was brought about by their
arrival in the city with armed forces.

¢ Julius Caesar.

f By the lex Pedia.

? The two battles at Philippi.


f
I


3. (B)ella terra et mari c(ivilia exter)naque tóto in
orbe terrarum s(uscepi!) | victorque omnibus (veniam
15 pelentib)us? civibus pepercí. § Exte(rnas) || gentés,
quibus tuto (ignosci pot)ui(t, co)nserváre quam exci-
dere m(alu. §) | Millia civium Róma(norum adacta)
sacramento meo fuerunt circiter (quingen)|ta. § Ex
quibus dedü(a: in colonz)ás aut remisi in municipia sua
stipen(dis emert)|tis millia aliquant(o plura qu)am
trecenta et iis omnibus agrós a(dsignavwi?) | aut
pecuniam pro p(raemis miljitiae* dedi. § Naves cépi
20 sescen(tas praeter) || eas, si quae minóre(s quam tri-
r)emes fuerunt. § |
4. (Bis) ováns triumpha(v, tris eg? c)urulís triumphós
1 s(uscepi) Mommsen, s(aepe gessi) Bormann.
2 (superstitibus Mommsen.
3 a(dsignavi) Bormann, a (me emptos) Mommsen.


* p(raemis miljitiae Bergk and Bormann, p(raediis a) me
Mommsen.


(IHodépovs Kai KATA yf) Kal Kara ÜdAaccav
20 "T (Atovs kat e€wrixovs) ev oq THe oikovpévni
TOA |( (Aovs a veu))cas Te TMÁVTWV ep-
eoan | ( TOV TEPLÓVTWV moAevrÓyv. Tja at ols
dopañės nv cw|( YVON éxew, €owoa u)&A(Aov)
I7 é£éxoja. § Mupuddes || Popatov oTpar( (ev) -
a(ac)ac óm(Óó TO)v Opkov TOV enov | éyévovr(o)
évyvs m(evT7K)o (vr)a- (èé dv KaT7(y)ayov eis |
Tà(s) azo(t)Kkias 7) a(mémeuiba eis Tas) ias TróAets
ék|Avop.évas _bupiddas Toc mAeious 5 Tpid.-
5 KovTa, || Kat vrácaus aùraîs 7 Gypovs èpépioa Ù
xphpara THs | oTpareias Swpeav Ewka. Naôs §
06... elAov efa|Koaias TAnv ToUTOVv, el TWES
7ocoves éyévovro 7 | Tpinpets.) |
4. Ais é(mi. KéAnros  éÜpiápBevoa), trpis (è?


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, I. 3-4


3. Wars, both civil and foreign, I undertook
throughout the world, on sea and land, and when
victorious I spared all citizens who sued for pardon.
The foreign nations which could with safety be
pardoned I preferred to save rather than to destroy.
The number of Roman citizens who bound themselves
to me by military oath was about 500,000. Of these
I settled in colonies or sent back into their own
towns, after their term of service, something more
than 300,000, and to all I assigned lands, or gave
money as a reward for military service. I captured
six hundred ships,? over and above those which were
smaller than triremes.

4. Twice I triumphed with an ovation,? thrice I


a He is referring in particular to the clemency which he
showed after the battle of Actium, for which he received a
crown of oak leaves in 27 B.c. ob cives servatos.

* Of the 300,000 soldiers who received honourable dis-
missal from the service, 120,000 had been settled in colonies
by the year 29 s.c. (see chap. 15); the remaining 180,000
must CODE Cc have been mustered out in the succeeding
42 years of his reign. ‘There were in service at the death
of Augustus 25 legions (Tac. Ann. iv. 5), or about 150,000
men, exclusive of the praetorian and urban cohorts. "Those
who were killed in battle or died in service therefore num-
bered about 50,000.

* From Sextus Pompeius at Mylae 30 ships (Appian v.
108) and at Naulochus 283 (ib. 108); from Antony at
Actium 300 (Plutarch, Ant. 68).

4 “ Bis ovans ingressus est urbem, post Philippense (40
B.C.) et rursus post Siculum bellum " (Nov. 13, 36 B.c.),
Suet ug. 22. An ovation was a minor triumph. In this
the cóRqueror entered the city on foot or on horseback
instead of in the four-horse chariot, as in the case of the
curule triumph. l


et appellá(fus sum viciens) | (se)mel imperátor. (Cum
autem! plá)ris triumphos mihi se(natus decrevisset,)
(s su)persedi. (8) L(aurum de fascib)us? depos
§ in Capi(foko votis, quae) | quóque bello nuncu-
(paveram, solu)tís. § Ob res & (me aut per legatos) ||
25 meds auspicís meis terra m(artqu)e pr(o)spere gestás
qu(inquagiens et quin)|quiens decrevit senátus supp(li-
ca)ndum esse dis immo(rtalibus. Dies autem,) | (pe)r
quós ex senátüs consulto (s)upplicátum est, fuere
nc(ccLxxxx. In triumphis) | (mets) ducti sunt ante
currum m(ejum regés aut r(eg)um lib(eri novem.


Consul) | (fuer)am terdeciens, c(u)m (scribeb)a(m)


1 deinde Mommsen.
2 (aurum de fascibjus Wehofer, Y(tem saepe laur)us
Mommsen.


10 appatos. Eixollod(kus Kat dma£ mpoonyopevOnv
advro)Kkpatwp. Tis | (è ovvkàńrov poi mAetovs
OpiauBov)s Vudvoc(apé|vgs, aùrôv amndAdyny (?)
Kal amo TrÓÀv papd)wy tiv (Saddvyv | KareDeunv év
tot KarmitwAiwr, Trà)s edxds, (ds ev dede) rol.
TÓL TroAcuwe émowcápmv, dmoó)ovs. (Aw ra

15 Trpá.yp.a||ra, a Wy adros 7) dia THY mpeoBevróv THV
€)u(@v aiotow | oiwvoîs kai kara yiv kat xarà
0aAarrav)  karcpÜc|ca,  m(evr)gkovrákuws (Kal)
mevta(kis es)npicato 7) | av(vkAqr)os 8eots Set(v)
Qveo8ar. — ((Hy)épas ov a|ó(ra)u é(« ov)v(KAnrov)

20 O(ó)yp.aT(o)s éyévovro oKxta(k)dova évevrj||(«ovra).
"Ev (7)ots épots (Üpwáp)Bows (mpo To)Ó €uo0 ap-|
p(aros BaogAets 7 (BactAdwv zrai)des (map)x0)n-
cav | évvéa. § (Ysár)e(v)ov pis xai 8ék(aro)v,


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, I. 4


celebrated curule triumphs,* and was saluted as im-
perator twenty-one times? Although the Senate de-
creed me additional triumphs I set them aside. When
I had performed the vows which I had undertaken
in each war I deposited upon the Capitol the laurels
which adorned my fasces. For successful opera-
tions on land and sea, conducted either by myself or
by my lieutenants under my auspices, the senate on .
fifty-five occasions decreed that thanks should be
rendered to the immortal gods. The days on which
such thanks were rendered by decree of the senate
numbered 890. In my triumphs there were led
before my chariot nine kings or children of kings.? At
the time of writing these words I had been thirteen


e “ Curulis triumphos tris egit Delmaticum, Actiacum,
Alexandrinum continuo triduo omnes " (Aug. 13, 14, 15 of
the year 29), Suet. dug. 22. “ Tres triumphos egit, unum ex
Illyrico, alterum ex Achaica victoria, tertium de Cleopatra ”
( Livy, Epit. 133).

b These acclamations as imperator, for military successes,
must not be confused with the title of imperator prefixed to
the name of Augustus and succeeding emperors. Mommsen
gives the list, Res Gestae Divi Augusti, p. 11.

* Under the Republic the consul or praetor when startin
on an expedition took his vows on the Capitol ; if acclaime
is eae by his troops he decked his fasces with laurel,
and on his return deposited the wreath upon the Capitol.

4 [n the three triumphs of the year 29 s.c. the following
names are known: Alexander of Emesa, Adiatorix the
Galatian prince with his wife and sons, and Alexander and
Cleopatra, children of Cleopatra, whose statue was borne
in the procession of the Egyptian triumph (Gardthausen,
Aug. i. 473).


haec, (et agebam! se)p(timum et trigensimum annum) ||
3o (tribu)niciae potestatis. |
5. (Dictatura)m et apsent(? et praesenti a populo et
senatu Romano mihi oblatam?) | (M. Marce)llo e(t) L.
Ar(runtio consulibus non accept. Non recusavi in
summa) | (frumenti p)enuri(a c)uratio(ne)m an(nonae,
qu)am ita ad(ministravi, ut intra) | (paucos die)s* metu
et per(2)c(lo praesenti populu)m univ(ersum mets tm-)|
35 (pensis liberarem). § Con(sulatum tum dat)um annuum
- e(t perpetuum non) i (accept.) |
6. (Consulibus M. Vinucio et Q. Lucretio et postea
P.) et Cn. L(entulis el tertium) | (Paullo Fabio Maximo
! et agebam Mommsen, eramque Bergk.
* a populo . . . oblatam Wélffin, mihi datam a populo
et senatu Mommsen.


3 intra paucos dies Wölflin and Seeck, paucis diebus
Mommsen.


ore T(a0)ra €ypadov, | kat univ Tpw)k(oaró)v
Kai pie ov Ónuapx) uis | e£ovatas.

II 5. Adre€ovoidv por dápy)v kai dmovr. Kal
vapóvr, | didopevnv (D)mó Te Tob Onuov Kal THs
cvvkAjrov | M(dpx)ov (M)apkéMo rai Aevxian


5 ‘Appouvriont Umdrots | o(vK ed)eEaunv. § Où
mapiruaáun ev Tí peylorne | (rod) o(eir)ou


omdver TTV emyuehevav Tis ayopas, v ov|( (reos
émerijóev)aa, WoT év óMyaus Huépalıs TO) srapóv-
Tos | $ófov Kal xwvó))vov tais épais Oamávaus
Tov Ojpov | éAevÜepica(). — 'Yrareiav Té pou Tore
o 9)ouévqv kai || é(v)cavovov Kali iu Biov ov«
eóe&dpmy.

6. ‘Yrarois Mápico Otwovkian Kai Koivrax
A(ovxp)nr (tex) ) | «at pera, Ta(0)ra IlomAéew Kat

arwi AévrAow Kat | Tpírov IlavAAar DaBiax


I


o


i


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, I. 4—6


times consul, and was in the thirty-seventh year of
my tribunician power.”

5. The dictatorship ® offered me by the people and
the Roman Senate, in my absence and later when
present, in the consulship of Marcus Marcellus and
Lucius Arruntius I did not accept. I did not
decline at a time of the greatest scarcity of grain
the charge of the grain-supply, which I so ad-
ministered that, within a few days, I freed the entire
people, at my own expense, from the fear and
danger in which they were. The consulship, either
yearly or for life, then offered me I did not accept.

6. In the consulship of Marcus Vinucius and
Quintus Lucretius,? and afterwards in that of Publius
and Gnaeus Lentulus,’ and a third time in that of
Paullus Fabius Maximus and Quintus Tubero;


a Augustus held his thirteenth consulship in 2 B.c. He
held his thirty-seventh tribunicia potestas in A.D. 14.

* Dio (liv. 4) says in this connexion: ‘“‘ As for the
dictatorship, however, he did not accept the office, but went -
so far as to rend his garments when he found himself unable
to restrain the people in any other way either by argument
or entreaty ; for, since he was superior to dictators in the
power and honours he already possessed, he properly guarded
against the jealousy and hatred which the title would arouse ”
(Cary's trans.). See also Vell. ii. 89. 5. ^ 22 B.C.

4 According to Dio (liv. 1) the offer of the dictatorship
and the request that Augustus become commissioner of the
grain-supply were made at the same time. The crisis
was caused by the conjunction of an overflow of the Tiber,
a pestilence which interfered with agriculture in Italy, and
consequent famine.

. * 19 Bc. 7 18 B.C. 9 11 B.c.


9A 353


et Q. Tuberone senatu populog)u(e Romano consen-)|
(Gentibus). ...... TTE ee


(Princeps senatus fui usque ad eum diem, quo scrip)seram
4s (haec,) || (per annos quadraginta. Pontifex maximus,
1 The substance of the lacuna in the Latin text is supplied


by the Greek, supplemented, by the Greek text of the Fragment
of Apollonia.


Magipwe kai Koi(rox) Tov|Bépov. § rûs (re
15 O)uvkAjrov kai ToU SHpov ToU || “Pwyatwy oópoAo-
y(o )Uvrcov, iv(a empe)AnTns TÓV TE vópwv kal TÓV
TpoTwy é(mi THe pe) yiorne | (é£)ovo(ta: 4) 0(vo)s
xetporovnbar, § apxynv ovdellu(ia)y Tma(pa Ta
qa) Tp(ta) €(9)n SwWoperny avede|Edunv> § a de
ao TOTE Ou ELO 7) GUVKANTOS oi||kovop.etoOa. eBovAeTo,
THs ónpapxucijs .e&o( (v) |ovas Qv ércAe(oo.. K)ai
rarus aùrs THS dpxüs | gvvápxovra. (adr)os
amo THs cuvKAnTOU m(ev) Taxus aitjoas (éA)aBov. ||
v 7. Tpouwv avdpa@v éyevounv pocta Tpay-
párov | Katopbwris guvexéaw ereow  Óéxa.
$ ITpérov | dfwoparos TÓTOV oxov THS ovvicArrov
xpi | rares THS "Hépas, As Tatra éypapov, emt

s éT) Teo||oapdkovra. § 'Apxwpe?s, § avyoup,
* There seems to be a conflict here between the statement

of Augustus and that of Suetonius (Aug. 27), who states
that he received the morum legumque regimen in perpetuum,
and of Dio (liv. 10. 5) that **he accepted an election dois


to the position of supervisor of morals for five years." It is
probable that the two writers had in mind the decrees of the


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, I. 6-7


when the Senate and the Roman people unanimously
agreed [that I should be elected overseer of laws
and morals, without a colleague and with the fullest


power, I refused to accept any. power.offered me |
which was contrary to the traditions of our ancestors.? .


Those things which at that time the senate wished
me to administer I carried out by virtue of my
tribunician power. And even in this office I five
times received from the senate a colleague at my own
request.»

7. For ten years in succession I was one of the
triumvirs for the re-establishment of the constitu-
tion)? To the day of writing this I have been
princeps senatus? for forty years. I have been
pontifex maximus, augur, a member of the fifteen


Senate offering him the title of praefectus moribus and his
subsequent legislation, while Augustus has in mind his
refusal of a new and extraordinary title, although he carried
out the intent by virtue of his tribunician power.

> Agrippa for five years in 18 B.c., and again for five
years in 13 s.c., Tiberius for five years in 12 B.c., after the
death of Agrippa, and again for five years in 6 B.c. His
tribunate was apparently twice extended after that, each time
for a period of ten years.

¢ Neither the words ''ten years" or ''in succession ”
are quite exact. The triumvirate began November 27,
43 B.c. The first quinquennium should have ended at the
latest December 31, 38 s.c. The triumvirs functioned de
facto, but not de iure, during the year 37. The formal five-
year renewal began January 1, 36 s.c., and should have
ended December 31, 32. Their de facto tenure was therefore
eleven years; their de iure tenure was ten, but was not
consecutive. See Gardthausen, ii. 175.

4 Augustus became princeps senatus in 28 B.c. In the
summer of a.D. 14 he had held the title for forty years not
counting fractions. By it he became the ranking Senator
with the right of speaking first in debate. M


w


augur, quindecimviru)m sacris (faciundts,) | (septem-
virum  epulonum, frater arvalis, sodalis Titius,
fetialt)s fuí. |

II 8. Patriciórum numerum auxí consul quintum iussu
populi et senátüs. § Sena|tum ter légi. Et! In
AU sexto cénsum populi conlegá M. Agrippá
égí. § | Lüstrum post annum alterum et quadragen-
simum féc(?. 8 Quó lüstro civijlum Románórum
censa sunt capita quadragiens centum millia et

s sexalig(z)nta tria millia. (8) (Jteru)m consulari cum
imperio lástrum | (s)ólus féci C. Censorin(o et C.)
Asinio cos. § Qué lüstro censa sunt | civium Roma-
nóru(m capita) quadragiens centum millia et ducen|ta
triginta tria m(ulia. Tertium consulári cum imperio

1 Et deleted by Mommsen.


§ trav Oekxamévre avldpa@v rv iepomowOv, § Tv
émrrà avopa@v iepororðv, § a(de)Adds apovüAs,
§ éraipos Tittos, § dyriaAcs. |
8. Tay (aT) pixiwy tov apiOuov ev&noa nméurrov |
10 UraT(os émuT)ayHe TOD Te SHpov Kal THS avvkArj||rov.
$ (Tov av)vKAntov  7pis éméAefa. S “Exrov
vra|ros THY am(o)Tetunow ToU Sýuov ovvdpxov-|
(tja éyov Mápkov 'Aypirmav €AaBov, Aris azro-|
(reiun)ous perà (Bo Kal) reocapakogróv év.av|róv
(c)uve(x)Aeto0n. "Ev ĝe oe "Popaiov |
rs ére(uxjo)a(vro) Ke$aAai TeTpaxd(ovat oe
pu(puddes kal tpioxidtat.  Aevrepov  Óymari|ict
e€(ovaias uóvos Taiw: Kyvowpivwı xai) | Tatwe
e Ümrous. TIV daroretunow éàaßov') | év
20 (Tt) ar (oretunoes eTEULHTAVTO 'Popat)|lov TE-
T(pakócıat ElKoot Tpets pupiddes Kat 7)pu(a-)|
xo. Kat rpirov vraTucju é£fovoia, tas dmo-


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, I. 7—II. 8


commissioners for performing sacred rites, one of the
seven for sacred feasts,.an arval brother, a sodalis
Titius, a fetial priest.?

8. As consul for the fifth time, by order of the
people and the senate I increased the number of
the patricians. Three times I revised the roll of
the senate. In my sixth consulship, with Marcus
Agrippa as my colleague, I made a census of the
people. I performed the lustrum * after an interval
of forty-one years. In this lustration 4,063,000
Roman citizens were entered on the census roll.
A second time,’ in the consulship of Gaius Censorinus
and Gaius Asinius, I again performed the lustrum
alone, with the consular imperium. In this lustrum
4,933,000 Roman citizens were entered on the census
rol. A third time, with the consular imperium,


5 Augustus became pontifex maximus in 19 B.C., quin-
decimvir between 37 and 34, augur in 41 or 40, septemvir
epulonum before 15, fetialis in 32. It is not known when he
became a frater arvalis, or a sodalis Titius. The last three
colleges had fallen into abeyance in the last days of the
republic and were apparently revived by Augustus.

29 B.c.

¢ The three revisions of which he speaks apparently
correspond to the taking of the census in 28 and 8 B.c.,
and in a.p. 14, but the Senate was also revised in 18 s.c.
and A.D. 4, that is to say, about every ten years. See
Gardthausen, ii. 311. The first of these revisions is de-
scribed by Dio, lii. 42; Suet. Aug. 35. At that time the
Senate had reached the unwieldy number of 1000, and
contained many undesirables. 4 28 B.C.

¢ The lustrum was the expiatory sacrifice made at the close
of the census ; in the sentences which follow it is synonymous
with the census. The census had not been taken since
69 s.c. At that time the number of citizens of military
age was only 450,000. The enormous increase in the
census of 28 z.c. is probably due to the exact enumeration
of citizens throughout the empire. f 8 B.C.


~


lustrum | conlegá Tib. Cae(sare filio meo! fect) § Sex.


10 Pompeio et Sex. Appuleio cos. || Qué lüstro ce(nsa


I


wa


sunt civium Ro)manérum capitum quadragiens |
centum mill(za et nongenta tr)iginta et septem millia.
8 | Legibus novi(s latis complura? exempla maiorum
exolescentia | iam ex nost(ro usu revocavi? et tpse)
multárum  rér(um exe)mpla  imi|tanda pos(teris
EU |

9. (Vota pro valetudine mea suscipi* per cons)ulés et
sacerdotes qu(znto) | qu(oque anno senatus decrevit.
Ex iis) votis s(ae)pe fecerunt vivo | (me ludos aliquo-
tiens sacerdotuym quattuor amplissima collé|(gia, ali-
quotiens consules. Privati)m etiam et municipatim


1 meo not in Mommsen.

? complura, Ramsay, fills the space better than the multa
of Mommsen. * reduxi Mommsen.

t suscipi Mommsen, supported by Ramsay. The Greek
would seem to demand suscipere.


Teu) |oe(t)s cAa (Bo) )v, (Exo) (cvvápxovra Tı-
éptov) | Kaicapa TOV VLOV po(v LeFrov Tloparnin


V kai) || LeErwe ArsrovAnian tbadtois: ev hu dro-


reuujaet | érewjocavro ‘Pwyaiwy | rerpakóouat
^ e

evevýkovra | rpeîs pupiades Kai érrakwaxetuo.

$ Eicayaywv Ka|vovs vópovs moa òn TÕV


sapyaiwy ¿ðv rka||raàvõueva StwpPwoapnv Kat


avros TOÀÀÓv | mpaypdárww petunia épavróv Tots
perémeira mapéðwka.

9. Edyas ú Úmèp TIS eus owTnpias dvadopBdvew |
dua THY Dmárov Kal tepéwy Kal” exdorny qev-||


1 TeTnpioa éjmdicaro 17) evvkAqros. `Ek Tov|rwv


Tov eoxóv mÀewrrákis €yvovro éar, | Tore Her
ék THs, ouvapxias TOV Tecodpuw iepé|wv, ToTEe óc
úno Tov baratwv. Kai kar iðiav 0€ kai | Kara


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, II. 8-9


and with my son Ti iberius Caesar as my colleague, I


Rep t


performed the lustrum in the consulship of Sextus
Pompeius and Sextus Apuleius.^ In this lustrum
4,937,000 Roman citizens were entered on the census
roll By the passage of new laws I restored many
traditions of our ancestors which were then falling
into disuse, and I myself set precedents in many
things for posterity to imitate.^

9. The senate decreed that every fifth year °
vows should be undertaken for my health by the
consuls and the priests. In fulfilment of these
vows games were often held in my lifetime, some-
times by the four chief colleges of priests, some-
times by the consuls. In addition the entire body


a A.D. 14, three months before the death of Augustus. _
The gain in the number of citizens in the twenty-two years
since the census of 8 B.c. was 704,000.

ò Cf. Suetonius, Aug. 34 and 89. one such laws
Suetonius specifically mentions the sumptuary law, the law
concerning adultery and chastity, the law concerning
bribery, and that concerning the marriage of the orders.

e That is to say “ every four years."

4 According to Suetonius, Aug. 81, Augustus suffered from
chronic ill-health. The divinity invoked in these vows was
the Actian Apollo. These games were held for the first
time in 28 s.c, and celebrated thereafter at four-year
intervals. Dio (liii. 4) states that they were in charge of
the following four priesthoods in succession: the pontiffs,
the augurs, the septemviri epulonum, the quindecimviri
sacris faciundis.


üniver(sz) | (cives uno animo continente)! apud omnia
2> pulvínária pró vale||(tudine mea sacrificauerunt.) |
10. (Nomen meum senatus consulto inc)lusum est in
saliáre carmen et sacrosan|(ctus ut essem in perpetuum?
et qjuoa(d) víverem, tribünicia potestás mihí | (esset,
er legem? sanctum est. Pontifex maximus ne fierem
in víví (c)onle|(gae locum, populo id sace)rdotium
as deferente mihi, quod pater meu(s) || (habuerat, ^
recusavi? ^ Cepi id9) sacerdotium aliquod post annós
eó mor|(tuo demum, qui td tumultus o)ccasione occu-
paverat ($), cuncta ex Italia | (ad comitia mea coeunte


1 (cives . . . continente)r Wirtz. Mommsen’s (cives
ratu sempe)r did not translate the ópuo0vuaóov
gvvexós of the Greek. ? in perpetuum Bergk.


* per legem Ramsay, Mon. Ant., lege Mommsen.

* habuerat. Bormann, confirmed by Ramsay, Mon. Ant.,
habuit Mommsen.

5 recusavi Mommsen, confirmed by Mon. Ant.

* Cepi id Mommsen, Quod Bormann.

7 demum Ramsay, Mon. Ant. Bormann had con-
jectured suscepi, but the fragment of the Mon. Ant. shows
that the letter after mortuo was not S but probably D.


15 TÓÀeuws GUvmavTes ol seu opoÜvpa||B(0v) ovv-
exas éÜvcav úrėp Tis éuíjs ow(rT)npias.

10. To ów(ou)à pov ovvkàýrov óOóyuar. èv-
meprerAy|pOn eils fan debe vpvous. Kai tva
(epos we | dia (Bio)v (rje THY ónpapxucv EXWL
e&ovoiav, | vo(wae MM § “Apxepwouvny,

20 Tv ò mar» || (u)ov (éox)riket, Tou O7jpou por
Katapépovtos | eis TOv ToU COvtos TómOV, ov
mpocedeEd|u(n)v. |. S (“H)v apyvepareiav pera twas

viévuavToUs || amofavevtos rod mpoxaretAnpdros
a)|r)v ev qmodeitikats Tapaxais, aveiAnda, eis |
Tà Epa apyxaipeota e£ Ans THs *ItaAlas Toco)|rov


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, II. 9-10


of citizens with one accord,? both individually and by
municipalities, performed continued sacrifices for my
health at all the couches of the gods.

10. By decree of the senate my name was included
in the Salian hymn; and it was enacted by law that
my person should be sacred in perpetuity and that
so long as I lived I should hold the tribunician
power. I declined to be made Pontifex Maximus
in succession to a colleague still living, when the
people tendered me that priesthood which my father
had held. Several years later I accepted that
sacred office when he at last was dead who, taking
advantage of a time of civil disturbance, had seized
it for himself, such a multitude from all Italy


a An interesting coin, struck by L. Mescinius Rufus
IIIvir, has on the reverse a cippus or altar with the
words IMP: CAES-AUGU: COMM: CONS: (Imperatori
Caesari Augusto communi consensu), and on the obverse,
with initial abbreviations, the following legend: Iovi
Optimo Maximo Senatus Populusque Romanus votum
susceptum pro salute Imperatoris Caesaris quod per eum
respublica in ampliore atque tranquilliore statu est.

è Mentioned by Dio, li. 20: “ When the letter came
concerning the Parthians (29 m.c.) they further arranged
that his name should be included in their hymns equally
with the gods."

* On the overthrow of Lepidus in 36 z.c., the tribunician
poe was given to Octavian, as it had been to Julius, for
ife. One of the privileges of the tribunate was that the
person of the tribune should be inviolate. In 23 B.c. it was
made annual as well as perpetual, and from that time on
the years of his principate were reckoned by it.


tanta mu)ltitudine, quanta Romae nun(q)uam | (antea
Suisse narratur! 8) P. Sulpicio C. Valgio consulibu(s) §. |
11. (Aram Fortunae Reducis? iuxta ae)dés Honoris
30 et Virtutis ad portam || (Capenam pro redttu meo se)-
nátus consacravit, in qua pontil fices el virgines
Vestales anni)versárium sacrificium facere | (iussit eo?
die, quo consulibus Q. Luc)retio et (M. Vinuct)o in
urbem ex | (Syria redi, et diem Augustalt)a ex (c)o(gno-
mine nost)ro appellavit. |
12. (Senatus consulto eodem tempor)e pars (praetorum
35 et trt)bunorum || (plebis cum consule Q. Lucret)io et
princi(pt)bus (viris ob)viam mihi | mis(s)a e(st in
Campan)ia(m, qui) honos (ad hoc tempus) nemini


! coeunte . . . narratur is based upon the conjecture
of Seeck.


3 reduci Mommsen. * eo inserted by Bormann.


À ‘6 À À bó Ld Jo A v
s mous cvveAgAvÜóros, gov ovdets || €vzpocOev
tordpnoe emi "Pops yeyovevat IIo|mAéee XovA-
mio Kat Taiws OvaXy(ox Úrdros. |
11. Bwyov Tuxns Lwrnpiov rèp ris ents
émavóOov | mpos THe Kasrüvm avdAne 7) ovvKAnTtos
adiépwoev: | mpòs de Tovs iepeîs Kal Tas lepetas
10 eviavatov Üv||otav moreîv ékéAevaev év Exelvne THe
npepar, | ev te dararos Koivraxr Aovxpnriws Kat
dpxwe | Oùwovkiwi èk Xupias eis ‘Popnv
emraveAnAd|Be(v), Tcv Te Huepay k THS TweTepas
émovv|uias mpoonyopevoey AdyovordaAa. ||
1s 19. Adypare o(v)vKAjrov of Tas peyioras apxas
dp|€avre(s o))v pépet oTparnyav Kat Snuapywv |
peta óm(d)rov Koivrov Aovxpnriov éméud0n|cáv
pov $ravrácovres pexpt Kapzravias, Aris | Teu)


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, II. 10-12


assembling for my election, in the consulship of
Publius Sulpicius and Gaius Valgius, as is never
recorded to have been in Rome before.*

11. The Senate consecrated in honour of my
return an altar to Fortuna Redux at the Porta
Capena, near the temple of Honour and Virtue, on
which it ordered the pontiffs and the Vestal virgins
to perform a yearly sacrifice on the anniversary of
the day on which I returned to the city from Syria,
in the consulship of Lucius Lucretius and Marcus
Vinucius, and named the day, after my cognomen,
the Aügustalia.*

12. At the same time, by decree of the senate,
part of the praetors and of the tribunes of the
people, together with the consul Quintus Lucretius °
and the leading men of the state, were sent to
Campania to meet me, an honour which up to the


* M. Lepidus (like Antony never mentioned by name
in the Mon. Anc.) had seized upon the office of poe
maximus at Caesar's death, Livy, Epit. cxvii. ; Vell. ii. 63.
Lepidus died in 13 s.c. and Caesar's election, as we are
informed by the fasti Praenestini, took place March 6, 12 s.c.

d> On the return of Augustus in 19 s.c. after settling the
affairs of Sicily, Greece, Asia, and Syria, many honours,
according to Dio, liv. 10, were decreed to Augustus, but
he accepted none except those here mentioned. The Altar
of Fortuna Redux was dedicated October 12, and its dedica-
tion was celebrated on coins struck in that year. The Porta
Capena is the gate by which Augustus entered the city,
coming from the south by the Appian Way.

e Quintus Lucretius Vespill was not consul when he
started out with the deputation. The year had been one
of tumults in the consular comitia and the second consul
had not been elected, Dio, liv. 10. One of the purposes of
the deputation was to ask Augustus either to accept the
consulship, or to name some one to it. His choice fell upon
Lucretius, who was one of the delegates.


prae|ter (m)e e(st decretus. Cu)m ex H(ispa)nia
Gal(liaque, rebus in his p)rovincis prosp(e)|re (gest)i(s),
R(omam redi) Ti. Ne(r)one P. Qui(ntiko consulibu)s
(S, áram | (Pacis A)u(g)ust(ae senatus pro) redi(t)á
40 meó co(nsacrari censuit) ad cam||(pum Martium, in qua
ma)gistratüs et sac(erdotes et virgines) V(est)á(les) |

(anniversarium sacrificium facer(e tussit.) |
13. (lanum) Quirin(um, quem cl)aussum  ess(e
maiores nostri voluer)unt, | ee p)er totum i(mpertum
po)puli Roma(n: terra marique es)set parta vic|(torit)s
pax, cum pr(?us, quam) náscerer, (a condita) u(rb)e
4s bis omnino clausum || (f)uisse prodátur m(emorz)ae,
ter me princi(pe senat)us claudendum esse censui(t). |
14. (Filios meos, quós iuv(enes mz)hi eripuit for-


20 péxpi TOUTOU ovde evi el py épo} epnpiollðn.
§ "Ore e ‘Tomravias kal l'aAarías, Tov ev TOU |raus
rais emrapxetas vpayudrov KaTa Tas evd|yas
TeÀeo0évrov, eis '"Popqv eravndOov § | Tipepionr
(Népwv rai IIomAox Kowridiwi Ümárois, Il

vit pwuòrv E(ip)yvns LeBaorijs Oirep tis é€uíjs er-|
avodou apiepwbivar epnpicaro 7 , QUvk ros ev
me|Otcwe “Apews, mpos au TroUs T€ v rais apxais
Kal Tovs | tepets Tas TE tepeias eviavoiovs Îvoias
éKéAevae moiy. ||

s 18. IIvAnv "Evudhov, iv kexAtoBar oí marépes
Tiv 70€|Anoav etpnvevowevns THs b70 Popaiow
maons ys te | kai BaAacons, mpó pev eHo0, ef
od 1 moXs éxricby, | Tat mavri aiðvı bis povov
kekAetoÜa, OnoAoyei|ra,, emt de épo mTyeuóvos

10 TpiS Ù GUVKANTOS epn||pioaro KAevcÜ fjvas. |

14. Ytovs pov Tduov kai Ae/kwv Kaio(a)pas,


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, II. 12-14


present time has been decreed to no one except
myself. When I returned from Spain and Gaul,
in the consulship of Tiberius Nero and Publius
Quintilius, after successful operations in those
provinces, the senate voted in honour of my return
the consecration of an altar to Pax Augusta in the
Campus Martius, and on this altar it ordered the
magistrates and priests and Vestal virgins to make
annual sacrifice.?


13. Janus Quirinus, which our ancestors ordered
to be closed whenever there was peace, secured by
victory, throughout the whole domain of the Roman
people on land and sea, and which, before my birth
is recorded to have been closed but twice in all
since the foundation of the city, the senate ordered
to be closed thrice while I was princeps.^


14. My sons Gaius and Lucius Caesar, whom


* Augustus was absent for three years in Spain and Gaul,
16 to 13 s.c. The altar was built on the Via Flaminia, by
which Augustus returned to the city, and formally dedicated
on January 30, 9 s.c. The site was systematically excavated
in 1903. For the now famous sculptures see Strong, Rom.
Sculpture, pp. 39-58.

ò Tradition records that the Arch of Janus was closed
for the first time under Numa. It was closed again after
the First Punic War in 235. It was closed by Augustus
after the Battle of Actium in 31 B.c., again in 25 B.c. after
the Cantabrian war. The year of the third closing of the
arch is not known. It stood on the Forum where the
Argiletum entered it. See Virg. Aen. vii. 607, xii. 198.

* Gaius (born in 20 z.c.) and Lucius (born in 17 B.c.),
the sons of Agrippa and Julia, the daughter of Augustus.
They were adopted by their grandfather in 17 s.c. at the
time when Agrippa was associated with Augustus in the
tribunicia potestas, thus securing the succession. But
Agrippa died 12 s.c., Lucius in a.D. 2, and Gaius in A.D. 4.


s


HI (tuna,) Gaium et Lucium Caesares || honoris mei
caussá senatus populusque Romanus annum quíntum
et deci[mum agentís consulés designávit, ut (e)um
magistrátum inírent post quin|quennium. Et ex eó
die, qué deducti (s)unt in forum, ut interessent con-
siliís | publicis decrevit sena(é)us. § Equites (a)utem
Romani universi principem || iuventátis utrumque
eórum parm(zs) et  hastís argenteís donátum
ap|pelláverunt. 8

15. Plebei Románae viritim #9 trecenos numeravi
ex testámento patris | meí, § et nomine meo H$
quadringenos ex bellórum manibiís consul | quintum
dedí, iterum autem in consulátá decimo ex (p)atri-
ro monio || meo #6 quadringenos congiári viritim per-


wm


ovs veavias alvyptacey *) TUXN, Els THY èuùv
reul 5j r(e) ovvKAn|Tos kai 6 ĝuos TeV ‘Pw-
paiwy mevrexadeKaerets | óvras Umarous amédertev,

13 Wa perà mévre éry || eis THY UTaTwWY apyùv eic-
éMOwow: kal ad’ fs àv | Hye(pa)s (eis THY a)yopav
(kar)ax0(G)ow, iva (ue)réxw|ow Tíjs ov(vjkàńrov
eyndicaro. § 'Lrmets 9é ‘Pw|uaiwv ovv(r)avres
jyepóva veórgros ékdTe|pov avràÀv (mp)oonydpev-

20 gav, aomiaw apyupéats || Kat 6ópaow (ér)eiumoav. |
15. Avo ‘Pwpa(iw)y kar’ avdpa eBdourKovra
a(evr)e | Onvapia ExdoTrwe npiOunoa Kara d1a-|
Onknv Tod maTpós pov, kai THe Eude ovouare |
ex Aaddpwv (m)o(Aé)uov ava éxaróv dnvapta ||
VII méumrov Umatos éðwka, § mdÀw te Oé(xaro)v |
brarevwv èk T(f)s épis vrdpSews ava Snvalpra


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, III. 14-15


fortune snatched away from me in their youth, the
senate and the Roman people to do me honour
made consuls designate, each in his fifteenth year,”
providing that each should enter upon that office
after a period of five years? The senate decreed
that from the day on which they were introduced
to the forum * they should take part in the counsels -
of state. Moreover, the entire body of Roman
knights gave each of them the title of princeps
iuventutis ^ and presented them with silver shields
and spears.

15. To the Roman plebs I paid out three hundred
sesterces per man in accordance with the will of my
father, and in my own name in my fifth consulship
I gave four hundred sesterces apiece from the spoils
of war;* a second time, moreover, in my tenth
consulship I paid out of my own patrimony four


e In the year in which they assumed the toga virilis,
Gaius in 5 s.c. and Lucius in 2 s.c. Augustus assumed
the consulship in each of these years in order to introduce
them to public life.

* Lucius died before reaching the consulship. Gaius
was consul A.D. 1.

e As their adopted father was princeps senatus, so each
of his adopted sons was called princeps iuventutis, or first
among the young men in the class of knights. It seems to
have been an honour rather than an official title.

4 This first donation was in 44 B.c. The amount was
$12. oe or £2, 8s. per man, distributed to at least 250,000

eople
ar "In 29 s.c., on the occasion of his triple triumph. The
amount was about $16.00, or £3, 6s. per man.


numer(a)ví, 8 et consul | undecimum duodecim
früámentátiónes frimento pr(z)vatim coémpto | emen-
sus sum, (§) et tribuniciá potestáte duodecimum
quadringenós | nummós tertium viritim dedí. Quae
mea congiaria p(e)rvenerunt | ad (hominum millia
ts nunquam minus quinquáginta et ducenta. § || (Tri-
bu(nzc)iae potestátis duodevicensimum consul xir
trecentís et | vigint(?) millibus plebís urbánae sexa-
genós denariós viritim dedí. § | In colon(2)s militum
meórum consul quintum ex manibiís viritim | millia
nummum singula dedi; acceperunt id triumphale
congiárium | in colo(z)ís hominum circiter centum
2 et viginti millia. § Consul ter|tium dec(2mum
sexagenós denáriós plebeí, quae tum frimentum


éka.TÓv 7pt8(u)noa, (S xai evdexarov Urraros |
dwdexa CELTOMETpHGELS ék TOU èuo Biov an-
5 e|uérpnoa, (§) Kal óypapxucfie éfovoias TO w-
iet ékarTóv Snvdpia kar’ avdpa €Ocka: at-
(t)|ves épai érrióóneis ovd€erroTE Tacov 7)A0(o)v E(t)s
| Spas pupiddwy etkoot névre. Anyua(p)xexfs
el£ovoias éxTwKaidéxaTov, Umar(os) 9(wóékorov) ||
10 TOLAKOVTA  TpuO() pupiaow — ÓxAov — mroAevruk(o0
é)En|kovra Snvapia Kar avdpa čðwk(ļa, ka)
amoiko.s oTpa|r«oTÓv eua@v méumrov vmaros é(k)
Aadipwv kara | avdpa ava Owkóoia mevrýkovra
Onvdpia éO(ca.) | éAaBov rasTqv TT)» dwpeav èv rais
15 ü7roukiaus. av||Dperev pupiddes mA(et)ov dwde(Ka.
"Y)yraros r(pı)o|kaðékarov ava ééńýkovra 9qvápia.


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, III. 15


hundred sesterces per man by way of bounty,’
and in my eleventh consulship I made twelve
distributions of food from grain bought at my own
expense, and in the twelfth year of my tribunician
power I gave for the third time four hundred sesterces
to each man.^ These largesses of mine reached a
number of persons never less than two hundred and
fifty thousand. In the eighteenth year of my
tribunician power, as consul for the twelfth time,
I gave to three hundred and twenty thousand of the
city plebs sixty denarii apiece. In the colonies of
my soldiers, as consul for the fifth time, I gave one
thousand sesterces to each man from the spoils of
war; about one hundred and twenty thousand men
in the colonies received this triumphal largesse
When consul for the thirteenth time I gave sixty
denarii apiece to the plebs who were then receiving


a 94 B.C., on his return from the war in Spain. The
amount per man was the same as in 29 s.c. > 23 B.C,

* 12 B.c., on the occasion of his assumption of the office
of Pontifex Maximus.

4 [t will be noted that the number of the city plebs is here
a quarter of a million. In the donation of 5 s.c. the number
had reached 320,000. The donation of 2 B.c. is to those
receiving public grain. That this number had been reduced
to 200,000 is attested by Dio, lv. 10. 1.

e 5 B.c, on the occasion of introducing Gaius to the
forum. The amount per man is about $9.60, or about
£2 apiece.

7 99 B.c. The amount is about $40.00 or £8, 5s. F


2B 369


publicum | accipieba(f), dedi; ea millia hominum
paullo plára quam ducenta fuerunt. |
16. Pecuniam (pro) agrís, quós in consulátá med
quárto et posteá consulibus | M. Cr(asso e)t Cn.
Lentulo augure adsignávi militibus, solví münicipís.
Ea | (su(mma sest)ertium circiter sexsiens milliens
25 fuit, quam (p)ró Italicís || praed(zs) numeravi, § et
ci(r)citer bis mill(ze)ns et sescentiens, quod pro agris |
próvin(c)ialibus solví. § Id primus et (s)olus omnium,
qui (d)edáxerunt | colonias militum in Italiá aut in
provincís, ad memor()am aetátis | meae feci. Et
postea Ti. Nerone et Cn. Pisone consulibus, (8)
item(q)ue C. Antistio | et D. Laelio cos., et C. Calvisio
et L. Pasieno consulibus, et L. Le(ntulo et) M. Mes-
30 salla || consulibus, 8 et L. Cánínio (8$) et Q. Fabricio
TÓL Gcevroper(pov)|uévew | Ore €dw(Ka* odTO)s
ap()8p(0s mAetwv eto) |(o)v (uv) piddwr vmfpx(e)v. |
16. Xpýpara év úrareiat rerdpryt pie a(i)
20 perà abra, v||\maTots Mapxwe Kpacour kai Natox
AévrÀe. avyou|p. Tais moAcow jpiOunoa Úrèp
aypa@v, ods euepioa | rots orpar(iw)tais. Keda-
Aaiov éyévovro ev “ItaXiar | prev púpiar n(evrari)-
a(x)e(tAcae pov)piddes, (7rad)v (8e €)rraplyertexay
àypóv (u)u(puddes e€axioyiA)vat zev(raxd)o(tat.) ||
IX Toóro mpóTos Kai póvos amavTwyv émónca TÓv
(karajyayóvrwv dmowias orparwrav év "Ira|Mas
Ñ €v émapyetaus uéypu THS épíjs nAtkias. § Kai |
perémevra. Tigepieoow Népow kat Nato Ieiown
omd||row xai maAw Tater " AvÜcarie kai Adkpwre
AatlAiws )márow Kat Tatwe KaAovtote kat. Aev-
«tox | IHaoovjvox (b)máro()s (xat A)evitox AévrAwe
«ai Madp|xwt MeoodX(at) vrárow K(a)i (A)evuitax
Kaviv(t)we (kjai | (K)oivrov Oa(B)pucon vrárois,


e


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, III. 15-16


public grain; these were a little more than two
hundred thousand persons.?

16. To the municipal towns I paid money for the
lands which I assigned to soldiers in my own fourth
consulship ^ and afterwards in the consulship of
Marcus Crassus and Gnaeus Lentulus the augur.
. < The sum which I paid for estates in Italy was about
six hundred million sesterces, and the amount
which I paid for lands in the provinces was about
two hundred and sixty million. I was the first
and only one to do this of all those who up to my
time settled colonies of soldiers in Italy or in the
provinces. And later, in the consulship of Tiberius
Nero and Gnaeus Piso, likewise in the consulship
of Gaius Antistius and Decimus Laelius, and of
Gaius Calvisius and Lucius Pasienus, and of Lucius
Lentulus and Marcus Messalla, and of Lucius Caninius
and Quintus Fabricius, I paid cash gratuities to the


a 2 B.c., on the occasion of introducing Lucius to the
forum. $9.60 or £2 per man. The donation to the soldiers
breaks the chronological narration of donations to the
plebs. This donation therefore looks like a later addition.
For a discussion of the problem see Introduction. The
total of these donations amounts to something over
$27,000,000 or about £5,550,000.

ò 30 B.c. After Actium he had sent back to Italy a
detachment of veterans of his own army and that of
Antony. These soldiers mutinied at Brundisium and he
was obliged to return from Samos to settle this mutiny, by
assigning to the oldest veterans towns in Italy which had
favored Antony and by giving money to the rest. Those
who were thus dispossessed were in part reimbursed by
lands at Dyrrachium and at Philippi and in part by the
moneys here referred to. See Dio, li. 3.4; Suet. dug. 17.

° 14 B.C.

4 $24,000,000 (about £4,980,000), and $10,400,000
(£2,140,000) respectively. | xmi


co(s.) milit(zbus, qu)ós emel|riteis stipendís in sua
municipi(a deduz)i, praem(ia n)umerato | persolví,
(8 quam in rem seste(rtzum) q(uater mjllien(s l:)-
b(ente)r | impendi. |

17. Quater (pe)cuniá meá iuví aerárium, ita ut

35 sestertium míllien(s) et || quing(ez)t(?en)s ad eos quí
praerant aerário detulerim. Et M. Lep(z)do | et L.
Ar(r)unt(z)o cos. i(n) aerarium militare, quod ex
consilio m(eo) | co(nstitut)um est, ex (q)uo praemia
darentur militibus, qui vicena | (aut plu)ra sti(pendt)a
emeruissent, (§) HS milliens et septing(e)nti|(ens ex
pa)t(rzm)onio (m)eo detuli. § ||

4 18. (Inde ab eo anno, q)uo Cn. et P. Lentuli c(on-
sjules fuerunt, cum d(e)ficerent | (vectz)g(alia, tum)
centum millibus h(omz)num tu(m pl)uribus (mul)to

! remisi Mommsen.

10 OTpaTLWTats AToÀv|jopévois, os karýyayov eis Tas
idtas moX(ets), duAav|Üpermov òvóparı wra p(v-
p)iadas epyds (pvpia)s. |

17. Terpá(k)s ypńpla)jow épots (av)éAaBov ro
a4pápuov, (eis) ô | (k)arývevra (x)e«Mas (émr)akoatas
mevT')Kovra | pupiadas. Kat) M(d)pko (Aerióo)

:5 Kal Aevkiwi ` Appowv||rtex $(zárow e)is (0) or(p)a-
(rTiwr)iKov atpapiov, 6 Tfj | (Eure) y(v)e(uqu karéor,
iva (€)€ aùroô ai dwp(e)al eto |(érevra Tots é)uots
a(tpatiwrats didwvrat, oft et«o)|(o)v éviavro())s
7) TÀeiovas éorparevcavTo, p(v)pt|dda(s) rerpd(k)us

ao yer\ias Suakooias Tevr)kovra || (êk THs é£)u(fs)
birapEews karývevka. |

18. (Ar éx)etvov 7(0)8 évavrot, èlh’) ob Natos
kal IlómAos | (A)évrÀAow vaTow éyévovro, Ore
oméAevrov ai Om|(uó)owa. mpocodot, aAAoTe pev
déxa puptacw, dA|(Aore) Sè aAcloow oeiTiKas kai


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, III. 16-18


soldiers whom I settled in their own towns at the
expiration of their service, and for this purpose I
expended four hundred million sesterces as an act
of grace."

17. Four times I aided the public treasury with
my own money, paying out in this manner to those
in charge of the treasury one hundred and fifty
million sesterces. And in the consulship of Marcus
Lepidus and Lucius Arruntius I contributed one
hundred and seventy million sesterces out of my
own patrimony to the military treasury, which was
established on my advice that from it gratuities- —
might be paid to soldiers who had seen twenty or:
more years of service. 7
7718. Beginning with the year in which Gnaeus
and Publius Lentulus were consuls, whenever taxes
were in arrears, I furnished from my own purse and
my own patrimony tickets for grain and money,


a The years were 7, 6, 4, 3, 2 B.c. The amount is about
$16,000,000 (£3,329,000).

ò Two of these four occasions are known from other
evidence. Dio Cassius, liii. 2, mentions that of 28 B.c.,
and a coin of 16 s.c. (cf. Eckhel, vii. 105) has the inscription,
“ The Senate and the Roman people to Imperator Caesar
because the roads have been paved with money which he
contributed to the treasury." The amount is about
$6,000,000 (£1,234,000). Up to 28 s.c. the treasury was in
charge of the quaestors. From then to 23 s.c. it was in
charge of two ex-praetors. From that time until the reign
of Claudius two praetors had charge of it.

* Augustus founded the aerarium militare in a.n. 6. In
addition to his own subvention, amounting to $6,809,000
(about £1,400,000), it was also supported by a five per cent
tax on inheritance and a one per cent tax on sales. From
13 p.c. the length of service had been 12 years for praetorians
and 16 for legionaries. It was now increased to 16 and 20
years respectively. 4 18 B.c.


fru|(mentarias et n)umma(rid)s t(esseras ex aere) et

pat(rimonio) m(e)o | (dedi). |
IV 19. Cüriam et continens ef chalcidicum, templum-
que Apollinis in | Palatio cum porticibus, aedem dívi
Juli, Lupercal, porticum ad cir[cum Fláminium, quam
sum appellári passus ex nómine eius quí pri|órem
eódem in solo fecerat Octaviam, pulvinar ad circum
maximum, || aedés in Capitolio Iovis Feretrí et Iovis
Tonantis, (8) aedem Quiriní, 8 | aedés Minervae § et
Iánonis Reginae § et Iovis Libertatis in Aventíno,
§ | aedem Larum in summá sacra vid, $ aedem deum


isl


1 multo . . . aere Schmidt. Mommsen conjectured :
inlato frumento vel ad nummarios tributus ex agro.


, A 4 ? ^ >, A € 4
Xadpyupixas ovvrages || ex ths êus stmapfews
édwxa. |

19. BovAeutyp(to)y kai rò wAnolov aùrôı yad-
Kioucdv, | vaóv re “AzrdAAwvos ev Iladariwı oiv

^ A ^ /? , M e /, A
atoais, | vaóv Beod ('I)ovAov, Haves tepov, oroay
mpos in|roðpópwi tat Tpocayopevouévot àa-
puvien, nv | elaca mpocayopevea0a, e£ óvóparos
éxeivov 'Oxra|ovtav, ó(s) mp@ros adr àvéargoev,

A A ^ / e / A b
vaov TpOs Tat | weydAws émmroópópox, (S) vaovs ev
Kamırwàiwı | Atos Tpomasopdpov kai Aros Bpov-
10 Toiov, vaov || Kupeiv(o)u, (S vaods 'A0qvàs xai

"Hpas BaotAidos kai | Atos "EXevBepiov èv ' Aovev-


wm


^ e ^ m ^
Tivwl, 7)pcwv Tipos THL | tepGe dda, Pedy karo-


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, III. 18—IV. 19


sometimes to a hundred thousand persons, sometimes
to many more. | :
19. I built the curia% and the Chalcidicum
adjoining it, the temple of Apollo on the
Palatine with its porticoes,o the temple of the
deified Julius? the Lupercal,? the portico at the
Circus Flaminius which I allowed to be called
Octavia ° after the name of him who had constructed
an earlier one on the same site, the state box at the
Circus Maximus, the temples on the capitol of
Jupiter Feretrius and Jupiter Tonans,? the temple
of Quirinus,^ the temples of Minerva, of Juno the
Queen, and of Jupiter Libertas, on the Aventine,‘
the temple of the Lares at the highest point of the
Sacra Via, the temple of the Di Penates on the


.  * This is the Curia Iulia dedicated in 29 s.c. on the site
of the old Curia Hostilia.

> The Temple of Apollo was begun soon after 36 s.c.
(Vell. ii. 81) and dedicated 28 s.c.

¢ At eastern end of the forum, on the site where Caesar's
body was burned. Dedicated August 18, 29 B.c. v.e

4 Formerly a cave in the rock on the south-west of the! _:
Palatine, where the she-wolf was supposed to have suckled | "
the twins. It was now converted into a nymphaeum. =~

* Near the theatre of Pompey. For the original portico
built by Octavius, who defeated the fleet of Perses in 168,
see Vell. ii. 1. |

f A restoration at the suggestion of Atticus, in 31 B.C.,
of the chapel near the large temple of Iupiter Optimus
Maximus, in which Roman generals hung the arms taken
from their enemies slain in single combat.

9 Dedicated September 1, 22 B.C., to commemorate his
miraculous escape from a bolt of lightning when on his
Cantabrian expedition, 26-25 s.c. It was at the entrance
to the Area Capitolina.

^ On the Quirinal, dedicated in 16 B.c.

* These three temples on the Aventine were restorations
of earlier temples.


Penátium in Velia, 8 | aedem Iuventátis, 8 aedem
Mátris Magnae in Palátio fécí. § |
20. Capitolium et Pompeium theatrum utrumque
ro opus impensá grandí reféci || sine ullá inscriptione
nominis meí. § Rívos aquarum complüribus locís |
vetustáte labentés refécí, (§) et aquam quae Marcia
appellátur duplicavi | fonte novo in rivum eius
inmisso. § Forum Iúlium et basilicam, | quae fuit
inter aedem Castoris et aedem Saturni, (§) coepta
profligata|que opera á patre meó perféci § et eandem
15 basilicam consumptam in||cendio ampliáto eius solo
sub titulo nominis filiórum m(eorum :)n|cohavi ($) et,
si vivus nón perfecissem, perfici ab heredib(us tussi.)
Duo et octoginta templa deum in urbe consul sex(tum


Siwy ev OveAa:, vaóv Neó|rgTo(s, va)óv Mnrpds
Gedv èv Iladariwı é emonoa.
20. Kamirwa(vo)y Kal TO Toparniou Ücarpov é éká-
15 Tepov || TO épyov dvaAcpacw peyiorous émeakeva-
oa à |vev émuypadíje Tob epoî óvóparos. § 'Ayoyovs
j|ódre(v èv màeijorois TÓTOLS Tij. mraÀaióTtTU
oÀuc|Üdvov(ras ém)eokevaca Kal vdwp TÓ Kadov -
pevov | Map(kuov di)rAwoa myyùv véav eis TO
20 petOpor || (adrod érroxerevo)as. ($) ' Ayopàv 'lovAclav
«ai Baoi|(Aucrv THY pera£) T)oÜ Te vaoD TÓV
Avockó|( ri Kai Tob Kpóvov xara)BeBAnpeva € epya
vro TOU | (marpòs pov erehetwoa ka). THY avrny
Baowdixny | (xavdeioay € emt avgnGevri) ) eddder auTis
XI é£ em|lypadys óvóuaros rÀv pôv viðv bn(np£d-
py | kai eL p) avros TeTeAewwK(o)t(ut, T)eA€E(t)w-
(Oiva ú bao) | TOv epôv KAnpovopwy éréra£a. § A(v)o
(kai 990) |jcovra vaoùs év THe TOA(EL ékr)ov Um(aTos


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, IV. 19-20


Velia," the temple of Youth,® and the temple of the
Great Mother on the Palatine.*

20. The Capitolium ¢ and the theatre of Pompey,’
both works involving great expense, I rebuilt -with-
out any inscription of my own name. I restored
the channels of the aqueducts which in several
places were falling into disrepair through age, and
doubled the capacity of the aqueduct called the
Marcia by turning a new spring into its channel.’
I completed the Julian Forum ? and the basilica
which was between the temple of Castor and the
temple of Saturn, works begun and far advanced
by my father, and when the same basilica was
destroyed by fire I began its reconstruction on an,
enlarged site, to be inscribed with the names of my `
sons, and ordered that in case I should not live to —
complete it, it should be completed by my heirs.” `
In my sixth consulship,* in accordance with a decree

a These two temples in the neighbourhood of the later
arch of Titus apparently disappeared to make room for
the colossal constructions of Hadrian and Constantine.

> On the Palatine facing the Circus Maximus, destroyed
by fire 16 s.c.

e Dedicated in 191 s.c. ; destroyed by fire, 3 a.D.

4 The temple of Iupiter Optimus Maximus, built accord-
ing to tradition by Tarquinius Superbus, burned to the
ground in 83; the rebuilding was begun by Sulla and
completed by Catulus in 69 s.c.

e The first stone theatre in Rome, built in 55 s.c. It
continued to be the most important theatre in the city.

? For these restorations of the Baueducte see Frontinus,
De aquis, 125, translated by Herschel.

? Dedicated along with the Basilica Iulia on the occasion
of the triumph after the battle of Thapsus. |

^ The basilica was soon destroyed by fire. The rebuild-
ing was begun in 12 B.c. The later name, basilica Gai et
Luci, never gained general acceptance. :

t Augustus was-consul for the sixth time in 28 mc.


ex decreto) | senatus reféci, nullo praetermisso quod
e(o) temp(ore refici debebat.) | Con(s)ul septimum viam
20 Flaminiam a(b urbe) Ari(minum feci et pontes) || omnes
praeter Mulvium et Minucium. |
21. In privato solo Mártis Vltoris templum( f)orum-
que Augustum (ex mani)biís fecí. § Theatrum ad
aede! Apollinis in solo magna ex parte á p(r)i(v)atis |
empto féci, quod sub nomine M. Marcell(?) generi
mei esset. $ Don(a e)x | manibiís in Capitolio et in
25 aede divi Ió(Dí et in aede Apollinis et in ae||de
Vestae et in templo Martis Vltoris consacrávi, § quae
mihi constilterunt s circiter milliens. 8 Aurí
coronárí pondo triginta et quinque millia münicipiís


1 aede (sic).


, ld > 4 9 ,

s Soypa)||re evvk(A)jrov émeokesac(a) o(0)8éva m(e)pc-
(vreóv, ôs) | êkeivwi THe ypdven émiokevfjs éOetvro.
$ ("Y)ma(ros é&)|Bé(o)uov dddv D(Aapwiay azo)
e L4 > ; 2 M > 9 A
Pons ('Aptpwov) | y(ed)Upas re tas ev aùrñı
macas é£« Ovetv Tov py | ém()8eopévov ém()okevigs
érrónoa.. ||

1 21. Ev iSwwrikds eddder “Apews 'Ausvropos
> Id M , , , 4
ayopav Te Le|Baornv ex Aadvpwv émómoa. (8)
©darpov mpós trt | “AmcdAAwvos vaðı émi edddous
ek TÀeioTov pépous ayo|pacbevros avnyerpa (S) emi
> ^ , ^ ^ > ld
ovopatos MapkéMov | roô yaußpoô pov. 'Ava0é-

, lA , , M ^ 9 /
15 pata ex Aadpwr ev Karı||rwàiwi kat vac '"IovAcex
A ^ ? 4 1€ , 1x

kai vad. ' AgqóM vos | kai ‘Eorias kai “A(pew)s
adiépwoa, à epot karéar | évy?s puptddw(v di)o-
xe()Mov. mevrak(ooicv.) | Eis xpvootv orépavov
Aevrpóv tpio(vupiwv) | wevraxvoyxetAiwy karadepov-


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, IV. 20-21


of the senate, I rebuilt in the city eighty-two temples
of the gods, omitting none which at that time stood
in need of repair. As consul for the seventh time 4
I constructed the Via Flaminia from the city to
Ariminum, and all the bridges except the Mulvian
and the Minucian.*

21. On my own ground I built the temple of Mars
Ultor and the Augustan Forum from the spoils of
war. On ground purchased for the most part
from private owners I built the theatre near the
temple of Apollo which was to bear the name of
my son-in-law Marcus Marcellus./ From the spoils
of war I consecrated offerings on the Capitol, and in
the temple of the divine Julius, and in the temple
of Apollo, and in the temple of Vesta, and in the
temple of Mars Ultor, which cost me about one
hundred million sesterces.^ In my fifth consulship
I remitted thirty-five thousand pounds weight of —


a 27 B.C.

b Now the Ponte Molle over the Tiber. The location of
the Minucian Bridge is not known. In the Greek version
these two bridges are not named but simply referred to as
“two bridges not in need of repair."

¢ This temple was vowed before the battle of Philippi,
but only completed and dedicated in 2 s.c. Part of the
temple still stands, as also part of the surrounding wall of
the Forum.

_ 4 The theatre of Marcellus on the Campus Martius was
dedicated May 4, 11 s.c. Marcellus died in 23. Part of
the outer wall still stands.

¢ Suet. Aug. 30, states that at one single donation he
presented to the temple of Iupiter Capitolinus 16,000
pounds of gold (64,000,000 sesterces) and in addition gems
and pearls amounting to 50,000,000 sesterces. That such
statements were grossly exaggerated is shown by the fact
that his total donations, 100,000,000 sesterces ($4,000,000
or £800,000) fell short of the amount reported for this one gift.


et colonís Italiae conferentibus ad triumphó(s) | meós
quintum.consul remisi, et posteá, quotienscumque
imperátor a(ppe)l|látus sum, aurum coronárium nón

3o accepi decernentibus municipii(s) || et coloni(s) aequ(e)
beni(g)ne adquo antea decreverant.

22. T(e)r munus gladiátorium dedí meo nomine
et quinquens! filiórum me(o)rum aut n(e)pótum
nomine; quibus muneribus depugnaverunt homi-|
nu(m) ci(rc)iter decem millia. (8) Bis (at)hletarum
undique accitorum | spec(ta)c(lum po)pulo pra(ebus

35 ey nómine et tertium nepo(és) meí no||mine.

§ L(w)dos fecí m(eo no)m(ine) quater, (§) aliorum
autem m(agist)rá|tu(um) vicem ter et vicie(ns).
(Pr) conlegio xv virorum magis(ter con)|(l)e(gz)i
CORREIA) M. Agrippa (§) lud(os s)aecl(are)s C. Furnio


1 quinquens (sic), quinquiens Mon. Ant.


20 gais Talis ev 'l)raAd|a« voAevretaus Kal amoikiais
ouvexwpn(a)a TO (men) |mrrov UTaTEvwY, kai UoTEpov
oodKis (adr)oxpatwp | mpoonyopevOny, Tas els TOV
eréQavo( y €)mayye|Atas ouK éAaBov Ynpulopevesy
TÓv T(oAÀevre)óàwv | Kat droucucov e Tijs avris

XII mpoO(upias, xa)0|l&(rep Kai éJnjduo(ro m)po(repov.) |
22. (Tpis povo)pay(iav édw)ka Té êu dvopare

Kai | (mevrdkis THY viðv pou Ñ vi)wvdv: ev als
povo|(uayiais  épaxécavro é)(y)s pu)pi(o)t. Ais

s a0AnTa@(v) Tav|lr(axó0ev) pe (rameupbevren yup-
vko) àyd&vos Oéav | (rà Draco T)apéaxov T(t
e)ur ovóparı kai Tpit(ov) | r(o0 viwvod pov. Oéas
énón)oa Ov épno0 TeTpa(ts,) | dua 06 THY dAÀÀov
Gpxóv ev uépet Tpis kai etkoodxts. § | ‘Yaep rev

10 Oekarrévre (av8p) av, exw gvvápxovra || Mapxov
" Aypirr(av, tas 0)éas (d)ta Exarov erdv yewo|uévas


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, IV. 21-22


coronary gold^ contributed by the municipia and
the colonies of Italy, and thereafter, whenever I
was saluted as imperator, I did not accept the
coronary gold, although the municipia and colonies
voted it in the same kindly spirit as before.


22. Three times in my own name I gave a show of
gladiators, and five times in the name of my sons
or grandsons; in these shows there fought about
ten thousand men. Twice in my own name I
furnished for the people an exhibition of athletes
gathered from all parts of the world, and a third
time in the name of my grandson.^ Four times
I gave games in my own name; as representing
other magistrates twenty-three times. For the
college of quindecemvirs, as master of that college
and with Marcus Agrippa as my colleague, I con-


a The custom had grown up for cities affected by a
victory to give crowns of gold to a triumphing imperator.
These crowns seem later to have been commuted for cash
which was called coronarium aurum. The amount named
here, 35,000 pounds, corresponds to the number of the tribes
and would seem to have come from them. The occasion
was his triumph in 29 s.c.

ò Of these eight gladiatorial shows, seven are mentioned
in other sources: 29 B.c., on the occasion of the dedication
of the temple of Julius ; 28 p.c. ; 16 B.c. ; 12 B.c., in honour
of Gaius and Lucius; 7 B.c.; 2 B.c., at the dedication of
the temple of Mars Ultor; a.n. 6, in honour of the elder
Drusus.

¢ Suet. Aug. 43, states that on one occasion (probably
28 B.c., cf. Dio, liii. 1) wooden seats for the spectators were
erected in the Campus Martius. Which grandson, whether
Germanicus or Drusus, is referred to in connexion with the
third exhibition is not known.

4 These were the usual games of the circus and theatre
given by magistrates when entering upon their offices.


C. (S)ilano cos. ( feci.) | (C)on(sul x11) ludos Max(tia)les
pr(zmus fect), qu(os) p(ost :)d tempus deincep(s) |
ins(equen)ti(bus ann)is (s. c. mecum! fecerunt co)n(su)les.
4» (8) (Ven)ati(o)n(es) best(ia)|rum Africandrum meo
nómine aut filio(ru)m meórum et nepotum in ci(r)|co
aut (#)n foro aut in amphitheatris popul(o d)edi
sexiens et viciens, quibus | confecta sunt bestiarum
circiter tria m(illjia et quingentae. |
23. Navalis proelí spectaclum populo de(d: tr)ans
Tiberim, in quo loco | nunc nemus est Caesarum,
45 cavato (solo) in longitudinem mille || et octingentós
pedés, (8) in látitudine(m mille) e(t) ducenti. In quo
triginta rostrátae náves trirémes a(ut birem)és, (8)


1 s. c. mecum supplied by Wirtz.
2 ducenti (sic).


ov(opalopeéva)s o(at)KAdpets exronoa Taiw: | Doup-
view klai) Tatwe Le()Aavds $márow. (S) “Yraros
tpio|Kadéxarov (0éas “Apews mp)@ros êrónoa, as
uer é|ketvo(v x)póvov é€ijs (rots p)erémevra. évuav-
15 Tots || S(dypare ovvkàńrov avv é)uoi émóqcav ot
UTG(TOL) Be 3 28. to map d RC oh Aq -


23, N(avpayias Oday rôt O9 €dw)Ka mré(p)av

ToU Til(Bépidos, ev dw TÓmww« éori võjv dAdgos

Ka«od(po)v, | ék«eye(kces rò Edados) «(is ufj«(o)s

YEelAiwy ókrako|otcv mod(av, eis m)Aat(o)s xuAcev

xi duaxo(c)iwv. "Ev He || rpwiko(v)ra vais €uBoAa

éyovcau Tpinpets 7) 5i|Kpor(ot, ai) dé Hooves mÀciovs


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, IV. 22-23


ducted the Secular Games in the consulship of
Gaius Furnius and Marcus Silanus.^ In my thir-
teenth consulship I gave, for the first time, the
games of Mars, which, since that time, the consuls
by decree of the senate have given in successive
years in conjunction with me. In my own name,
or that. of my sons or.grandsons, on twenty-six
occasions I gave to the people, in the circus, in the
forum, or in the amphitheatre, hunts of African
wild beasts, in which about three thousand five
hundred beasts were slain.

3:3. I gave the people the spectacle of a naval
battle beyond the Tiber, at the place where now
stands the grove of the Caesars, the ground having
been excavated for a length of eighteen hundred
and a breadth of twelve hundred feet.^ In this
spectacle thirty beaked ships, triremes or biremes,


a The fifth celebration of the secular games, June 1-3,
17 s.c. An inscription reporting this celebration of the
end of the century was found in 1890, C.I.L. vi. 32,323.


For an interesting account of it see Lanciani, Pagan and `


Christian Rome, p. 7

d The Ludi M celebrated for the first time in
2 p.c., on the occasion of the dedication of the temple of
Mars Ultor.

* The Naumachia Augusti was directly across the Tiber
from the lower corner of the Aventine. The present church
of S. Francesco a Ripa is located near one focus of the
ellipse and that of S. Cosimato near the other. Remains
have been found of the pavement and the travertine walls.
The water was supplied by the Aqua Alsietina, 33 kilometres
long, built by Augustus expressly for this purpose.


plures autem | minóres inter se conflixérunt. Q(uibus

in) classibus pugnave|runt praeter rémigés millia
ho(minum tr)ia circiter. § |

24. In templis omnium civitátium pr(ovinct)ae Asiae

so victor orna||menta reposui, quae spoliátis tem(plis is)

cum quó bellum gesseram | privátim possederat.

8 Statuae (meáje pedestrés et equestres et in | quad-

rigeis argenteae steterunt in urbe xxc circiter, quas
ipse | sustuli (§) exque eá pecuniá dona aurea in áede
Apol(i)nis meó nomi|ne et illórum, qui mihi statuá-
rum honórem habuerunt, posui.

V 25. Mare pacávi á praedonibus. Eó bello servó-
rum, qui fugerant á dominis | suis et arma contrá
rem publicam céperant, triginta fere millia capta § |
dominis ad supplicium sumendum tradidi. § lIuravit


évaupaynoav. § | 'Ev r(ovran) TG ordAws Tyyo»i-
cavro é£« Tay éperóv | vpóom(o)v avdpes rp()o-
xau. |

24. (Ev vaot)s m(ac)@v móAeo(v) ras ('A)ot(a)s
vexnoas Ta àvaÜé|(uara am)okaréarqoa, (à elxev)
i(Star) fepoovAnoas 6 | úm (épo0) 9()aycvioOeis
voÀé(uuvos). *Avdpiavres Te|Low xai €dummoi pov
| Kai é$ dpuaow apyupot eiornKe|oav ev THe vróAec
évyüs oydonKovTa, os avTos hpa, || ex TovTOU TE
Tod ypnpatos àvaÜéuaTa xpvod ev | TÓ vade ToO
"AmroAAwvos THL T€ ui GvduaTt Kal | exEivwr,
otrwés pe (rtj)ovrois Tots avdpiGow èreiun|oav,
avéOna. |

25. OdAÀacoca(v) meiparevopevyv bro amooraTav
Sov||Awy (elpyv)evoa: £ ðv Tpets vov pupiddas
tots | 9e(ovórau)s ets kóAaow mapéðwra. § “Quocev


wm


-
(e)


od
wm


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, IV. 23—V. 25


and a large number of smaller vessels met in conflict.
In these fleets there fought about three thousand
men exclusive of the rowers.”

24. After my victory ® I replaced in the temples
in all the cities of the province of Asia the ornaments
which my antagonist in the war,? when he despoiled
the temples, had appropriated to his private use.
Silver statues of me, on foot, on horseback, and in
chariots were erected in the city to the number of
about eighty ; these I myself removed, and from
the money thus obtained I placed in the temple of
Apollo golden offerings in my own name and in the
name of those who had paid me the honour of a
statue.?

25. I freed the sea from pirates. About thirty
thousand slaves, captured in that war, who had run
away from their masters and had taken up arms
against the republic, I delivered to their masters
for punishment. ^ The whole of Italy voluntarily


a For this spectacle see Vell. ii. 100. The date was
2 p.c. on the occasion of the dedication of the temple of
Mars Ultor. Dio, lv. 10, states that the fight represented
a battle of Athenians and Persians, and that the former
were victorious.

> At Actium in 31 B.C.

¢ Antony is never mentioned by name. He had robbed
of their statues and ornaments various temples at Samos,
Ephesus, Pergamos, and Rhoeteum in the province of
Asia and had given them to Cleopatra. Cf. Dio, li. 17.

4 For the melting up of these statues see Suet. Aug. 52,
and Dio, liii. 52. Suetonius says that these golden offerings
were tripods.

* He is referring to the war with Sextus Pompey, ter-
minated in 36 s.c. Pompey's following was made up largely
of runaway slaves, and his fleet, so manned, had cut off the
grain fleets on their way to Rome. See Vell. ii, 73.


2c 385


in mea verba tóta | Italia sponte sua et me be(ll),
quó vici ad Actium, ducem depoposcit. § Iura;
5 verunt in eadem ver(ba provz)nciae Galliae Hispaniae
Africa Sicilia Sar|dinia. § Qui sub (signis mets tum)
militaverint, fuerunt senátóres plüres | quam pcc, in
ii(s qui vel antea vel pos)teá consules facti sunt ad eum
diem | quo scripta su(nt haec, Lxxx, sacerdo)tés
ci(rc)iter c1xx. § |
26. Omnium próv(inciarum populi Romani), quibus
ro finitimae fuerunt || gentés quae n(on parerent imperio
nos)tro, fines auxi. Gallias et Hispa|niás próviciá(s!
et Germaniam qua inclu)dit Oceanus a Gádibus ad
óstilum Albis flúm(inis pacavi. Alpes a re)gióne ea,
quae proxima est Ha|driánó mari, (ad Tuscum pacari
! provicias (sic).


| (eis To?s épov)s Adyous aca 7) 'lraAa ékoboa
Ka|(we moàépov,) à em ° Akrion eve(i)Knoa, T)yepóva
é£n|(rjcaro. “Q)uooav eis roùs (aùroù)s Aoyous
20 éma(p)|xe(ta« l'aAa)ria. ‘lomavia Apin Xi(xeAia
Lap)dw. Ot $m élu(ats onuéais TO)re orparev-
(odpevor Hoav cuvKAntt) (koi mÀciovs érr)a(xoot)cv:
(€)v (adrots ot 7 mporepov 7) | (ueréreira) éy(évov)ro
(vm)a(rou ets éx)e())v(qv THY 7)p€|(pav, év 5 Tabra
xıv yéypamra)t, o(yOorjko)vra tpe(i)s, tep(et)s || mpóorrov
éxatov eBdou7n(k)ovra.

26. Ilacdv érapxewv Sypo(v ‘Pw)uaiwy, als
6popa. | hv €Ovn rà wn noraco(óp)eva THe Nperépai
nlyeHwovia, Tovs Opovs émevf£(no)a. (8 Tadariav

s Kat 'le||ravías, opotws 96 kat Teppaviav rabos
"Oxea|vós vepukÀete, am(o) l'a8e(ip)eov pépi oró-
paros | “AABtos morapo(ô èv) eipývn karéarqoa.

" AXrrs àmo | kàipaTos ToU mànoiov Eroviov kóXrov


i THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, V. 25-26
/


took oath of allegiance to me.and demanded me as
its leader in the war in which I was victorious at
Actium. The provinces of the Spains, the Gauls,
Africa, Sicily, and Sardinia took the same oath of
allegiance.^ Those who served under my standards
at that time included more than 700 senators,
and among them eighty-three who had previously
or have since been consuls up to the day on which
these words were written, and about 170 have been
priests.

26. I extended the boundaries ? of all the provinces
which were bordered by races not yet subject to
our empire. The provinces of the Gauls, the Spains,
and Germany, bounded by the ocean from Gades
to the mouth of the Elbe, I reduced to a state of
peace. The Alps, from the region which lies
nearest to the Adriatic as far as the Tuscan Sea, I


a In other words, all the provinces in the half of the
Empire ruled by Octavianus.

> The number of senators at that time was about 1000.

¢ The extensions included : the temporary pushing forward
of the German frontier from the Rhine to the Elbe; the
creation of the new provinces of Pannonia and Moesia ; the
addition of the new provinces of Galatia and Paphlagonia in
Asia Minor; the expedition of Aelius Gallus to Arabia
Felix; and in Africa, in addition to the formal annexation
of Egypt, some minor expeditions by the various pro-consuls.

é i the Gallic and Cantabrian expeditions of Augustus
himself, 27-25 B.c., in that of Carrinas against the Morini,
of Messala against the Aquitani, 27 s.c., and the numerous
campaigns in Germany, particularly of Drusus and Tiberius.
` Pacavi could apply to Germany for a very brief period only.


~ 387


fec)i nullí genti bello per iniáriam | inláto. § Cla(ssis
mea per Oceanum) ab óstio Rhéni ad sólis orientis
15 re|gionem usque ad fi(nes Cimbroru)m navigavit, (S)
quó neque terra neque | mari quisquam Romanus
ante id tempus adit, § Cimbrique et Charydes | et
Semnones et eiusdem tractás alií Germánórum
popu(Di per legátós amiciltiam meam et populi
Romani petierunt. § Meo iussú et auspicio ducti
sunt | (duo) exercitás eódem fere tempore in Aethio-
2» piam et in Ar(a)biam, quae appell||(/atur) eudaemón,
(maxim)aeque hos(é)ium gentís utr(zw)sque cop(iae) |
caesae sunt in acie et (c)om(plur)a oppida capta. In
Aethiopiam usque ad oppildum Nabata pervent(um)


L4 ^ 4 , 2 4
péxpi Tvplpqvucijs Oaddoons etpnvevecOar merónka,
, A ” 3067 > 4 [4
10 (S oddevi || EOver adixws  émevexÜcvros moAéuov.
(8 £XróÀos | dnos ða 'Qxecavoü amo ordparos
‘P , e A > À M 4 z0 Ki
"vov ws mpos | àvaroAàs uéypi EBvovs KiuBpov
duemAevoev, o? od|Te kara yiv ovre kara ÜdAaccav
‘Pwpaiwv Tw mpo | rovrov tod xpóvov mpoaíA0ev-
13 kat KipBpot kai. XaAv||Bes kat Léuvoves adda Te
\ y ^ A ^ A > AN
moAAa €bvn l'epuavóv | Sea mpeoßperðv tiv éunp
[4 A A / € [4 , / > ^
diriay kai THY Sypov “Pwluawwv prýoavro. “Ere
émvrayíj Kal olwvois atotlos óo orTparevpara
éméfn Aiwmía,. kai "ApaPias | rH eddaipov ka-
20 Aovpevnt, peyadAas Te TOV 1o||Aeutcv Suvdpers kar-
4 , / M [4 /
ékoijev. ev vapard£ew Kat | mÀeioras mdAes Sopi-
aAdwrous €Aafev Kat mpo|égm ev Aibioriai péxpe
388 |


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, V. 26.


brought to a state of peace without waging on any
tribe an unjust war. My fleet sailed from the
mouth of the Rhine eastward as far as the lands of
the Cimbri to which, up to that time, no Roman
had ever penetrated either by land or by sea, and the
Cimbri and Charydes and Semnones and other
peoples of the Germans of that same region through
their envoys sought my friendship and that of the
Roman people? On my order and under my
. auspices two armies were led, at almost the same
time, into Ethiopia and into Arabia which is called
the " Happy," and very large forces of the enemy
of both races were cut to pieces in battle and many
towns were captured. Ethiopia was penetrated
as far as the town of Nabata,¢ which is next to Meroé.


a At Torbia (Tropaea Augusti) near Monaco, stood a
monument, of which only fragments now exist, commemorat-
ing the subjugation of the Alpine peoples. Pliny, N.H.
iii. 20. 136, has preserved the inscription: '' The Senate
and the Roman people to Caesar... Augustus...
because under his leadership and auspices all the Alpine
nations from the upper to the lower sea have been brought
into subjection to the Roman people." There follows a
list of forty-six peoples.

è For this naval expedition to the Elbe in a.D. 5 see
Vell. ii. 106. The Cimbri inhabited the coast of Schleswig |
and Jutland, the Charudes (the Greek text gives “ Chalybes 3
were their close neighbours, and the Semnones were locate
between the Elbe and Weser.

e The Arabian expedition of Aelius Gallus, 25-24 s.c.
The two other portions were called Arabia petraea and
Arabia deserta.

4 Queen Candace, taking advantage of the withdrawal
of Egyptian garrisons for the Arabian expedition, captured
some towns in upper Egypt. They were retaken by
C. Petronius, 24-29 s.c. His punitive expedition pene-
trated Aethiopia.


est, cuí proxima est Meroé. In Arabiam usque | ín
fínés Sabaeorum pro(cess)it exerc(2t)us ad oppidum
Mariba. § |
27. Aegyptum imperio populi (fo)mani adieci.
25 § Armeniam maiorem inter|fecto rége eius Artaxe
§ c(u)m possem facere provinciam, málui maiórum |
nostrórum exemplo regn(u)m id Tigrani regis Arta-
vasdis filio, nepoti au|tem Tigránis regis, per T(t.
Ne)ronem trad(er)e, qui tum mihi priv(zg)nus erat. |
Et eandem gentem posted d(esc)iscentem et rebel-
lantem domit(a)m per Gaium | filium meum regi
Ario(barz)ani regis Medorum Artaba(z?) filio regen-||
3o dam tradidi (8) et post e(?4s) mortem filio eius Arta- .
vasdi. (8$) Quo (inte)rfecto (T*gra)|ne,; qui erat ex
régió genere Ármeniorum oriundus, in id re(gnum)


1 Read Tigranem.


4 , Ld $ 1 N , >
TóÀeos NaBarns, aris éoTiv evyiora Mepon, ev
* , A 8 / L4

ApaBia 8€ péxpe mrdAe|ws Maptfas. ||
XV At o /, ‘P , e j , =

27. Atyvmrov Ó)LOU F wpaiwv Nyepoviat Tpos
éÜnka. | 'Appeviav ùv p(et)Cova avarpehévros rob
Baowrélws  Bvvduevos eézrapyeiay mojoar paddov

, 2 A A / € ^ LÁ ,
éBov|AnOnv kara .Tà marpa nudv €0m Bactrciav
s Teypá||vqc “Apraovdodou vide, viwvas Sè Trypdavou
Baou|Adws 3(o)óv(a). dua TiBepiov Népovos, ôs tor’
éuod | mpóyovos Hv: kai TO adro &Üvos adiord-
p.evov kat | avarroAenoby Sayacbev bao l'atov Tob
viod | pov BacuMet ' ApvoBapldvew BaouAées Mydwv
io " Apra||BáCov vidi, mapédwKa Kal perà Tov éketvov
Üdva|rov tat vide avtod "Apraovdodyn: od dva-

0 , T 4 a > Ld >A ,
peÜcvros | Tuypávqv, ôs fv èk yévovs *Appeviouv
Baewukob, eis | rv Baoireiav érejiba. § 'Em-


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, V. 26-27


In Arabia the army advanced into the territories
of the Sabaei * to the town of Mariba.

27. Egypt I added to the empire of the Roman
people? In the case of Greater Armenia, though
I might have made it a province after the assassina-
tion of its King Artaxes, I preferred, following the
precedent of our fathers, to hand that kingdom over
to Tigranes, the son of King Artavasdes, and grand-
son of King Tigranes, through Tiberius Nero who
was then my stepson.° And later, when the same
people revolted and rebelled, and was subdued by
my son Gaius,? I gave it over to King Ariobarzanes
the son of Artabazus, King of the Medes, to rule,
and after his death to his son Artavasdes. When
he was murdered I sent into that kingdom Tigranes,
who was sprung from the royal family of the


a [n southern Arabia.

> In 30 z.c., after Actium. Before that time Egypt had
been a nominally independent kingdom, though, in a sense,
a Roman protectorate. Since 57 B.c., when Ptolemy Auletes
was restored, a considerable Roman force had been main-
tained there. After Actium, Egypt, unlike other provinces,
was treated as the personal domain of the emperor. For the
peculiar status of Egypt as a part of the empire see Arnold,
Roman Provincial Administration, p. 113.

e [n 20 s.c. See Vell. ii. 94.
- 4 Jt was in the factional struggle which followed the

setting up of Artavasdes that Gaius received the wound
from which he died in February, 4 a.p.


mísí. $ Pro|vincias omnis, quae trans Hadrianum mare
vergun(é a)d orien(fe)m, Cyre|násque, iam ex parte
magná regibus eas possidentibus, e(f) antea Siciliam
et | Sardiniam occypatas bello servili reciperavi. § ||
35 28. Colonias in Africa Sicilia (M)acedoniá utráque
Hispania Achai(a) Asia S(y)ria | Galliá Narbonensi
Pi(sdia militum dedáxí. § Italia autem xxvi
Sese n quae vívo me celeberrimae et frequentis-
simae fuerunt, me(is auspicis) | deductas habet. |
29. Signa militaria complur(a per) aliós d(u)cés
go ám(2ssa) devictí(s hostibu)s re(cipe)raví || ex Hispania
et (Gallia et a Dalm)ateis. 8 Parthos trium exercitum
Roman(o)|rum spolia et signa re(ddere) mihi supplices-
que amicitiam populí Romaní | petere coegi. § Ea


apxeias amdoas, Goat | 7épav Tob Kioviov kóXrov
15 OlaTetvovot mpos àva||roÀds, Kat Kupyynv èk pei-
alovos. uépovs tro BactlAdwy Kateoxnuevas kai
épmpoaÜev LixeAiav kai Lap|dw. mpoxarerAnuwévas
TroÀéjot ovk averaBor. |
28. 'Asroucas ev AiBine LixeAtar Maxedoviar ev
ékaré|pa (sic) re ‘lomravias Ayaias Aciar Xupia (sic)
20 Tadarias rie zre|lpt NapBwva IIvotiótac orparwwrav
Kkatnyayov. S 'Ira|Àa dé etkoot oxTw àzroukias
exer UT eot karaxÜei|oas, at êpot mepióvros màn-
Üvovca. érovxavov.
29. Lnpéas orparwwtixas (rÀeloras ))moó dAÀcv
hyeuó|vwv àvoBeBAnuévas (vucdv To))s voAepovs ||
XVI azéAaBov § é£ ‘lomavias kai l'aAarías kai mapa |
Aaduarav. llápÜovs tpv oTrparevudáTrov 'Po-
p.ai|lev oxdAa Kat onpéas aroðoðvar uot ixéras Te
gul|Aiav Sruov ‘Pwpaiwv afi@oat Tvdykaca. (§)


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, V. 27-29


Armenians.* I recovered all the provinces extend-
ing eastward beyond the Adriatic Sea, and Cyrenae,
which were then for the most part in possession of
kings, and, at an earlier time,¢ Sicily and Sardinia,
which had been seized in the servile war.

28. I settled colonies of soldiers in Africa, Sicily,
Macedonia, both Spains, Achaia, Asia, Syria, Gallia
Narbonensis, Pisidia. Moreover, Italy has twenty-
eight colonies founded under my auspices which
have grown to be famous and populous during my
lifetime.¢

29. From Spain, Gaul, and the Dalmatians,’ I
recovered, after conquering the enemy, many
military standards which had been lost by other
generals. The Parthians I compelled to restore to
me the spoils and standards of three Roman armies,’
and to seek as suppliants the friendship of the Roman


a For the complicated question of the Armenian succession
see Mommsen, Res Gestae, pp. 109-117.

d Antony had received by the treaty of Brundisium in
40 s.c. Macedonia, Achaia, Asia, Pontus, Bithynia, Cilicia,
Cyprus, Syria, Crete, the Cyrenaica. The last five he had
given over to foreign kings. These alienations of foreign
territory were the occasion of the civil war which ended
at Actium.

Y the defeat of Sextus Pompey in 36 s.c.

4 For these colonies of Augustus see Mommsen, Res
Gestae, pp. 119-222 ; also Hermes, xviii. 161 ff.

* The standards lost to the Dalmatians during the civil
wars by Gabinius in 48 B.c., and Vatinius in 44 B.c., were
restored to Augustus in 23 B.c. We have no account of
the standards lost in Gaul. The loss of standards in Spain
was during the wars with Pompey's sons, and the recovery
must have occurred in the Cantabrian campaign of 25 s.c.

f Of Crassus at Carrhae in 53, of Antony in 40 and 36 s.c.
The standards were restored by Phraates, the Parthian
king, in 20 B.c.


autem si(gz)a in penetrálí, quod e(s)t in templo
Martis Vltoris, | reposui. |
30. Pannoniorum gentes, qua(s a)nte me principem
4s populi Romani exercitus nun||quam ad(f)t, devictas
per Ti. (Ne)ronem, qui tum erat privignus et
legátus meus, | imperio populi Romani s(ubte)ci pro-
tulique finés Illyrici ad r(zp)am fláminis | Dan(wu)i.
Citr(a) quod (D)a(cor)u(m tr)an(s)gressus exercitus
meis a(u)sp(zcts vict)us profliga|tusque (est, et) pos(ted
tran)s Dan(u)vium ductus ex(ercitus me)u(s) Da(cor)um
| gentes im(perta populi Romani perferre coegit.) ||
so 31. Ad me ex In(dia regum legationes saepe missae
sunt, nunquam antea visae) | apud qu(em)q(uam)
R(omanorum du)cem. § Nostram am(icitiam petierunt)
| per legat(os) B(a)starn(ae Scythae)que et Sarma-


s Tavras || 96 tas onpéas éy Tau “Apews Tod ' Ausv-
Topos vao aldvrwu dareDe pny.

30. Tlavvoviwy ébvn, ols mpò euo Tyyepóvos
oTpárev|pua Popatov ovK Tvyuwev, hoonlévra à Ümó
TiBeptov | Né épavos és TOT E00 7v mrpóyovos Kal

to mpeopevr'js, | ýyepoviat ôýuov ‘Pwpaiwv bméra£a
(S ta Te ‘TAdupt|Kod 6 Gpia expt "lorpov morapoî
Tmporyayov: ov emret|Tabe Adkwv Sua paco. TOAT)
duvayus Enos a.icious oic |vots. Karekómm. Kai
vorepov petaxGev TO èpòv orpa|revpa Tépay

15 "Iorpov Tà Adrwv Evn mpocTáypara || Sýpov
"Popatov ù Drropevew Tvéykaaev.

31. IIpos éué eé *Ivdias Baouéov mrpeapetaa
vmoAMákus | àme|oráAnoav, ovdemore mpo TOUTOU
xpóvov odbeioa mapa | 'Popatov 9yepóv. § Thv
nuerépav duMav Néiwoav | ia mpéoDeov 8 Baordp-


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, V. 29-31


people. These standards I deposited in the inner
shrine which is in the Temple of Mars Ultor.?

30. The tribes of the Pannonians, to which no
army of the Roman people ‘had ever penetrated
before my principate, having been subdued by
— Tiberius Nero who was then my stepson and my^! `
legate, I brought under the sovereignty of the
Roman people, and I pushed forward the frontier of
Illyricum as far as the bank of the river Danube.
An army of Dacians which crossed to the south of
that river was, under my auspices, defeated and
crushed, and afterwards my own army was led
across the Danube and compelled the tribes of the
Dacians to submit to the orders of the Roman
people.4

31. Embassies were often sent to me from the
kings of India,’ a thing never seen before in the
camp of any general of the Romans. Our friend-
ship was sought, through ambassadors, by the Bas-


a Only after its completion in a.D. 2. They were tem-
porarily placed on the Capitol.

ò Augustus had himself fought the Pannonians in 35-34
B.C. See Dio, xliv. 36-38.

e 12-9 B.c.

4 The Dacians had invaded Roman territory many times
during the late republic. Julius Caesar was about to make
an expedition against them. Augustus, in 35 B.c., occupied
Segesta on the Save as an outpost against their invasions.
They figure in the civil war as allies of Antony. He is
Here referring probably to an invasion in 10 s.c. See Dio,
iv. 36.

* Two such embassies are mentioned : the first, frequently
referred to in Augustan literature, while Augustus was in
Spain, 26-25 ,5.c. ; the second visited him at Samos, 20 B.c.


tarum q(uw sunt citra flu)men | Tanaim (et) ultra reg(es,
Alba)norumque réx et Hibér(orum et Medorum). |
32. Ad mé supplices confug(erunt) regés Parthorum
vi Tirida(tes et postea) Phrat(es) || regis Phrati(s filius) ;
(8 Medorum (Artavasdes ; Adiabenorum A)rtaxalres ;
§ Britann(o)rum Dumnobellau(nus) et Tim...... :
(Sugambr)orum | Maelo; § Mar(c)omanórum Sue-
boru(m..... rus). (4d me rex) Parthorum | Phrates
Orod(z)s filius filiós suds nepot(esque omnes misit) in
s Italiam, non || bello superátu(s), sed amicitiam
nostram per (liberorum) suorum pignora | petens.
. 8 Plárimaeque aliae gentes exper(tae sunt p. R.) fidem
me prin|cipe, quibus anteá cum populo Roman(o
nullum extera) legationum | et amícitiae (c)om-
mercium. $ |


2 var kat LavOar Kal Zoppo|[ràv oí emiTade OvTes
Tob Tavaidos ToT aLob Kat | ot mépav dé Pacideîs,
Kai "AMavàv be kal "TBrpwy | kat Mydwyv Baocıàeîs. |

32. II pos ene ikéTat karéjvyov pBaouets IIápBcv

pev | Te«wibárqs kai perérerta Dpadrns, DaouMécos
xvi § || párov (vids, M)ynd(wv) Sè 'Aprao(váoc)ns,
"AdiaB(n)|vav (A)pra(Edpyns, Bpvra)vwóv Aop-
voeAratvos | wat Tw ........ , 2o)v-
y)àuBpov | (M)aiAov, Mapko|pávcov. (LounBwy
eee oe )pos. § (IIpo)s eye Baotreds ||

5 Id pBwv Dpa(arns "Qpcoo)v vio(s v) iods (aro)
viw|vovs Te mávras Emrepuipev eig IraMav, ov
Todépwt | AerhBeis, ana Thy ny(e)TEpav $i May
afiav émi Té|kvov évexópois, mÀeiorá, T€ a
Ehv meipav €A(a) Bev uov Pwpaiwv TLOTEWS em

10 €00 Tyyep.óvos, || ofs rò mpiv ovdeuia "V mpos
nuov ‘Pwpaiwv (pe)o|Bevdv kat ciias Kowwvia.|


' THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, V. 31— VI. 32


tarnae and Scythians,* and by the kings of the
Sarmatians who live on either side of the river
Tanais,’ and by the king of the Albani ^ and of the
Hiberi 4 and of the Medes.

32. Kings of the Parthians, Tiridates,’ and later
Phrates,/ the son of King Phrates, took refuge with
me as suppliants ; of the Medes, Artavasdes ;? of
the Adiabeni,^ Artaxares ; of the Britons, Dumno-
bellaunus and Tim ...... ; of the Sugambri,’
Maelo; of the Marcomanni and Suevi . . . .. rus.
Phrates, son of Orodes, king of the Parthians, sent
all his sons and grandsons to me in Italy, not because .
he had been conquered in war, but rather seeking
our friendship by means of his own children as
pledges.* And a large number of other nations
experienced the. good. faith-ef -the- Roman people- -

ing my princi who never before had had
any interchange of embassies or of friendship with
the Roman people.


* The Bastarnae were a Teutonic people then settled at
s mouth of the Danube. The Scythians lived in Southern
ussia.


>’ The Don. ¢ On the Caspian Sea.
45 In what is now Georgia. * 26 s.c.
f 20 B.c. ? 31-30 B.C.


^ An Assyrian people, mentioned here for the first time.

* Probably the same Dumnobellaunus whose coins have
been found in England. Cf. J. Evans, Coins of the Ancient
Britons.

-4 The Sugambri, a German tribe living to the east of the
Rhine, were finally defeated in 8 s.c., and transferred to
the west bank.

* [t was really in order to get his legitimate sons out of
the way, so as to secure the succession for his illegitimate
son, Phraataces, whose motber was an Italian slave, a
present from Augustus. The date was 10 B.c.


33. A me gentés Parthórum et Médóru(m per
10 legatos) principes eárum gen|[ium régés pet(7)tós
accéperunt: Par(thi Vononem regis Phr)átis filium, |
régis Oródis nepótem, § Médí Ar(iobarzanem), regis
Artavazdis fillium, regis Ariobarzanis nep(otem). |
.£- $4. In consulátü sexto et septimo, b(ella ubi civilia
exstinxeram | per consénsum (üniversórum (potitus
15 rerum omn)ium, rem publicam || ex meá potestáte (8)
in senát(us populique Romani a)rbitrium transtul. |
Quó pro merito meó senatu(s consulto Augustus
appe)látus sum et laureís | postés aedium meárum
v(estitt publice coronaq)ue civíca super | iánuam meam


33. Hap uo év IlápÜcw xai Mýðwv da
mpéoBeov tov | map aùroîs mpwrwy paotets
airnodpevot éAa(ov)- | ITápo. Ovovaivnv, Bactréws

15 Dpdrov vi(ijov, BactA(éw)s || 'Opdo9ov viwver,
Mfóov *ApwoBaplavnv, Ba(c)iAdws | 'ApraBáLov
vidv, Baciéws “AptoBapldy(ov viw)vor. |
. 84. "Ev marea. éxrq kai éBdoune pera TO
tovs évóv|Movs CBéoar pe moAéuovs (k)arà Tas
e)yàs TOv é€ludv «oAe()rÀv éeveparys yevópevos

2o TavTwy TOV || zpaypárov, ex THs éuns e€ovoias
eis THY THS cvv|kAwWrov kai Tod Syjpov TaV ‘Pw-
paiwy perýveyka | kvpujav. "EE Hs arias
Sdypart ovvKAjtov LeBaoros | mpoo(nyope)vOnv
Kai Sddvats Synpociat ta mpómv|Ad pov éoré-

xvi $0), 6 Te Spvwos orépavos 6 Sddpevos || eri
cwrTnpia trv soÀevrÓv drepa(v)w Tod avdAd|vos
tris épíjs oixias avereOn, S om(A)ov re xypv|coóv ev

* [n 4-5 B.c. the Parthians asked that the throne, vacated
by the fligbt of Phraataces (see last note), be filled by


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, VI. 33-34


83. From me the peoples of the Parthians and of
the Medes received the kings for whom they asked *
through ambassadors, the chief men of those peoples ;
the Parthians Vonones, son of King Phrates, grandson
of King Orodes; the Medes Ariobarzanes, the son
of King Artavazdes, grandson of King Ariobarzanes.

34. In my sixth and seventh consulships, when
I had extinguished the flames of civil war, after
receiving by universal consent the absolute control
of affairs, I transferred the republic from my own
control to the will of the senate and the Roman
people. For this service on my part I was given
the title of Augustus ^ by decree of the senate,
and the doorposts of my house were covered with
laurels by public act, and a civic crown was fixed
above my door,’ and a golden shield was placed in


Vonones, the legitimate son of Phraates, then a hostage in
Rome. For Ariobarzanes see Chap. 27.

> 28 and 27 s.c. In these and the following years he
gradually divested himself of his extraordinary powers and
contented himself with ordinary offices, but held in an
extraordinary way, such as the tribunicia potestas, and the
imperium. In form he restored the republic ; in substance
the real power rested with him, perhaps, in view of the
circumstances, unavoidably. The statement which he
makes here is clearly the one which he wishes to be the
view of posterity. At any rate, the revolutionary and
extraordinary acts of the triumviral period ceased, by his
own edict (Dio, liii. 2), with the expiration of 28 B.c.

^ January 16, 27 s.c. The title was suggested by
Munatius Plancus.

4 This crown, or the laurels, or both, are represented
upon coins. See Cohen, Nos. 43-48, 50, 207-212, 301, 356,
385, 426, 476-478, 482. Most of them have the inscription
Ob cives servatos. The civic crown was the reward of the
soldier who had saved the life of a citizen. It was given
to Augustus because, by putting an end to the civil wars,
and by his clemency, he had saved the lives of many citizens.


fixa est (§) (clupeusque aureu)s in (c)áriá Iúliá posi|tus,
quem mihi senatum (populumque Romanu)m dare
2o virtutis cle||m(entta)e iustitia(e pietatis caussa testatum)
est pe(r ejus clüpei | (enscription)em.) § Post id
tem(pus praestiti omnibus dignitate, potes|t)atis au(tem
njhilo ampliu(s kabui quam qui fuerunt m)ihi quo|que
in ma(gis)tra(f)u conlegae. |
35. Tertium dec(?)mum consulátu(m cum gerebam,
25 senatus et equ)ester ordo || populusq(ve) Romanus
. -üniversus (appellavit me patrem p)atriae idque | in
vestibu(/o a)edium meárum inscriben(dum esse atque!
in curia e)t in foró Aug. | sub quadrig(?)s, quae mihi
(ex) s. c. pos(ttae sunt, decrevit. Cum scri)psi haec, |
annum agebam septuagensu(mum sextum). |


! atque Wirtz, et Mommsen.


tat Bo(v)Aeurnpiws àvareO(c)v bad re THs | ovv-
KAnTov kai roô O5uov TOV ‘Pw(ua)iwv dua Tis ||
s émvypadíjs apeTnv kai emeixeray Kali 5)txatoovrny |
Kat evoeBevav pol paprupet. § 'A£wou(a)r. (S)
vávrov | dunveyxa, (§) eLovaias dé ovdev tu vÀetov
éoxyov | TOv cvvap£ávrov por. |
35. ''ovokauBeká qv  Dmareiav dyovrós pov ù
10 T€ aUy||KANTOS Kal TO immKov Táypa 6 T€ OUVTTAaS
djuos rv | ‘Pwyatwy mpoonydpevo€ pue marépa
matpioos Kat ToÜTo | éri Tod mpom/Aov ris oiKias
pov kai év TÔ. Bovdrevry|piwt kai év THe ayopae
The LeBaorh bro Tat àpuart, 6 pov | Sdypare
15 GvvkA]rov aveTeOn, emypadjvar ébndicallro.
(8 "Ore éypadov rara, yov éros eBdounkoorov |
EKTOV.


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, VI. 34-35


the Curia Julia whose inscription testified that
the senate and the Roman people gave me this in
recognition of my valour, my clemency, my justice,
and my piety.* After that time I took precedéiice
of all in rank, but of power I possessed no more
than those who were my colleagues in any magistracy.

35. While I was administering my thirteenth con-
sulship the senate and the equestrian order and
the entire Roman people gave me the title of Father
of my Country, and decreed that this title should
be inscribed upon the vestibule of my house and
in the senate-house and in the Forum Augustum
beneath the quadriga erected in my honour by
decree of the senate. At the time of writing this
I was in my seventy-sixth year.?


a Not mentioned by ancient writers, but represented
upon coins and inscriptions. Cf. C.I.L. ix. 5811, with two
Victories supporting a shield and the words, ** The Senate
and Roman people have given to Augustus a shield on
account of his valour, clemency, justice, and piety.” Korne-
mann in Klio, vol. xv., points out that virtus, iustitia,
clementia, and pietas are the subjects of the first four chapters
of the Mon. Anc.

* Formally bestowed February 5, 2 s.c. Before that he
had often been called pater, or parens patriae informally.
Suetonius, Augustus, 58, gives part of the address of Messala
including the actual salutation, ''senatus te consentiens
cum populo Romano consalutat patriae patrem."

e Augustus was seventy-six on September 23, a.D. 13.
Chap. 8 of the Mon. Ane. refers to his third census which
was completed one hundred days before his death. This
would bring the date of writing to between May 11, A.D. 14,
and his departure for Campania. Augustus died at Nola,
August 19, in that year.


2n 401


1. Summé pectin(z)ae, quam ded(it in aerarium vel
30 plebei Romanae vel di)mis|sis militibus: denarium
se(xi)e(ns milliens). |
2. Opera fecit nova 8 aedem Martis, (Jovis Tonantis
et Feretri, Apollinis,) | divi Tuli, § Quirini, § Minervae,
(Iunonis Reginae, lovis Libertatis,) | Larum, deum
Penátium, (8) Iuv(entatis, Matris deum, Lupercal,
pulvina | ad circum, (8) cáriam cum ch(alcidico,
35 forum | Augustum, basilica)m || Iuliam, theatrum
Marcelli, (5) (p)or(ticus .......... , nemus trans
iberím | Caesarum. § |
8. Refécit Capito(lium sacra)sque aedes (nu)m(ero
octoginta) duas, thea(t)rum Pom|pef, aqu(arum rivos,
vijam Flamin(zam). |


1. LuvKedhadaiwois (§) HpiOunuevov  xp5juaros
eis TO aipá|ptov 7) eis Tov uov Tov ‘Pw(pai)wy 1
eis Tovs damoAelÀvnévovus orparworas (§): 2
pupiades pupiadwyv. § ||

2 2. "Epya rawa éyévero úm a)roÜ vaol pev
"Apews, Atos | Bpovrqgotiov kai Tpomasogopov,
IIavós, 'AaóMl|vos, (§) Oco "IovAiov, Kvpeivov,
(S 'A(09vàs, (S "Hpas Baorri|dos, (S As
"EAev0epiov, (8) npw(wv, bev mjarpiwv, (§) Ne-|
órqros, (S Myrpòs bev, (S B(ovAevrüpiov) ovv

xix xaAxkul|dicdu, (8) ayopds 2efaorí, (S8) Oéarpov
MapxéAdov, (§) B(a)ow|Auc) *IovAia, (§) dAgos
Katodpwv, (S oroai é(v) IlIaAar(t)ox, | oroa èv
innoðpóuwi OAÀapuwiox.

3. $ "Emeokevác0(n trò Ka)|murdAov, (8) vaot
s oyOonkovra dvo, (S 69é(ar)pov ll(op)|mqtov, (S)
660s DAapivia, (8 aywyol vddTwr.


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, Summary 1-3


SuMMARY 4


1. The sum total of the money which he contri-
buted to the treasury or to the Roman plebs or to
discharged soldiers was 600,000,000 denarii.^

2. The new works which he built were: the
temple of Mars, of Jupiter Tonans and Feretrius, of
Apollo, of the Deified Julius, of Quirinus, of Minerva,
of Juno the queen, of Jupiter Libertas, of the Lares,
of the Di Penates, of Youth, of the Mother of the
gods, the Lupercal, the state box at the circus, the
senate-house with the Chalcidicum, the Augustan
Forum, the Basilica Julia, the theatre of Marcellus,
+... e e the grove of the Caesars beyond the
Tiber.^ 7

8. He restored the Capitol and sacred buildings
to the number of eighty-two, the theatre of Pompey,
the aqueducts, the Flaminian Way.4


a This summary, as Mommsen points out, is not by
Tiberius, but apparently by one of the local magistrates of
Ancyra.

d The total of the expenditures mentioned by Augustus
in this connexion was  2,199,800,000  sesterces. The
600,000,000 denarii—2,400,000,000 sesterces—is accordingly
a round sum. See Mommsen, Res Gestae, p. 157.

* A summary of Chapter 19 and part of 20. Temples are
mentioned first to simplify grammatical construction, the
other buildings at random. The Greek does not correspond
with the Latin: there is no equivalent in the Greek version
for pulvinar ad circum, nor exact equivalent in the Latin
text for croal év IIaXar(o, crod év Urmoópójep Pravi.

4 A summary of Chap. 20.


\


4. Impensa p(raestita in spect)acul(a scaen:ca et

4o munera) gladiatorum at||(que athletas et venationes et
naum)ach(zam) et donata pe(c)unia a(?)|.......
UE grape di wo ese ee ede i (terrae motu 8 in-
cendioque consum|pt(is) a(ut viritim) a(micis sena-
t)oribusque, quórum census explevit, | ín(z)umera-


(bilis. §


4. (Aam)avar 9€ | eis 0éas kai povopdyous Kal
abAnras Kat vavpalyiav kai Onpopayiay Swpeat
(re) azrouxiats móAeow | év 'lraMau, móàcow év
émapyeiaus (S) cetopa@e kali) évrv|piopots mero-

io V]Kviaus 7] kar. avdpa diÀow Kat cw||kAqruots,
dv tas Teysnoes  mpooe£emXpooev : almeipov
aAíjÜos. | |


THE ACTS OF AUGUSTUS, Summary 4


4. The expenditures provided for theatrical shows,
gladiatorial sports, for exhibitions of athletes, for
hunts of wild beasts, and the naval combat,* and
his gifts [to colonies in Italy, to cities in the provinces]
which had been destroyed by earthquake or con-
flagration, or to individual friends and senators,
whose property he raised to the required rating,
are too numerous to be reckoned.”


¢ Summarizes Chaps. 22, 23.

* These donations to cities and to individuals are not
covered by Augustus in his account. The names of some
of the cities aided are supplied by the authors and inscrip-
tions: in Italy, Venafrum in Campania (C.I.L. x. 4842),
and Naples (Dio, lv. 10); in the provinces, Paphos in
Cyprus, 15 s.c. (Dio, liv. 93), and several cities in Asia in
12 s.c. (Dio, liv. 30), and lastly Laodicea and Tralles (Strabo,
xii. 8. 18 ; Suet. Tib. 8

The census rating fos a senator was raised from 800,000
sesterces to 1,200,000, and where senators were worthy,
though poor, he raised their fortunes to that amount (Suet.
Aug. 41).
