Revised Odd-Fellowship Illustrated (John Blanchard, 1893)
==========================================================
Blanchard's 1893 exposé of Odd Fellows ritual; the complete revised ritual of the lodge. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/revisedoddfello00blangoog).

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http : //books . google . com/|


REVISED

-FELLOWSHIP ILLUSTRATED:


THE OOHPLETB


REVISED RITUAL


Loige, EiaiMiil, PaMarclis MiM,

AUD THE

Rebekah Degrees

THE AMENDED WORK


PRDFUSELT ILLUSTRATED,

By EL FAST O-R.AN'r) FATK.IA.ROH.

WITH AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE ORDER, AND AN INTHODCC

TION A>T} cniTIUAL ANALYSIS OF THE CHAE-

ACTEK OF EACH DEGKEK BY

Pres't. J, Blakchard of Wheaton College,

ASD FOOT NOTE QUOTATIONS FROSl STANDARD AUTHORITIES

OF TUB OBDEK, BHOWINC ITS CU4UACTEK

AMD TKACIUNOS,


rFFJVTY SECOKn EDITIOX.


IZBA A. COOK, PtTBLISHBR.


^h>.


K vt.ty^t.


■ EZRA A. COOK,


PUBLISHER'S PREFACE.

Is tbk ritual accurate and the analyse of it fair and
IcandidP is doubtless the question which interests the
Reader most. ""

That the Soverpign Grand Lodge changed the ritual
f the Order mainly because of the extensive circula-
ion of our published ritual entitled "Odd-fellowship
UIuRtrated," is conclusively provi;d by the statements,
both verbal and written, of many members or the
Order, besides admissions in the public prints, which
Announced that the Revised Ritual would be fumiahed
to the lodges and Encampments in January, 1881.
Before that date we had propositions to'' furnish the
V ritual aa soon as it was issued. One of these prop-
iBitions was accepted with an agreement that ample
iiroof of the accuracy of the ritual should accompany
jrfbllow the copy.

The signs, grij>s, passwords, etc., which are known as
;he secret or nnwjitten work of the Order, were given
the lodges and Encampments orally, but all of the
est of the ritual was furnished them printed In what
re called "Charge Books." The three "Charge
iooks" contaiuing the ritual of the lodge and En-
mpment were furnished us, and every line of the
ttual was carefully corrected thereby.

The secret work had been taken down in short-hand.
lad even the description of the signs, grips, etc, is
I in the very words prescribed by the Soverc'cr
hand 'Mit**-


Aa to the faimesa and caador of the Ajialysis of the
ritual, each reader must jadge. It seems to ns that th«
statements made are all cooclusively proved by quota-
tions from standard and acknowledged authorities, auj
that the conclusions drawn are perfectly logical. Not
the enemies, but the friends, founders and exponents of
the Order are cited as witnesses.

This volume is on the same plan as "Freemasonry
Illustrated" and "Knight Templarism lilnstrated,"
which" are acknowledged to be the most comprehensive
and valuable norks on the subject in the market.

In the preface of "Odd-fellowship Illustrated," first
issued in 1874, we remarked that " careful observation
shows that very few honest men care to pay for being
put through ridiculous boys'-play ceremonies, even with
solemn charges sandwiched in between, especinlhj if
they know what theij are beforehand." We are most
thoroughly contirmeii in the opinion just quoted. The
ofBcial Btatiatica of the Ordur quoted on pages 25 and 36
of thia volume show that not only has the growth of
the Order been stopped, but its membership red iced;
and we think this is largely due to the wide circuUtion
of our former ritual of the Order. As the present
ritual is a great improvement on the other, in that it
contains most valuable information in reference to the
origin, history and character of the Order, we are en-
couraged to hope and pray that its circulation may be
still more potent, both in keeping men out of the lodge
and leading others, especially Christians, to see that
Odd'fellowahip is a false religion and therefore utterly
at variance with the religion of the Bible.

Ths PuBUaHBB.


CONTENTS.

INTRODUCTION.

atUSgDd of tblg world, nod Hcrcc orileri hli wonta<pi ;

\t ordera Kklni iDUIation ud nxcseratloD: Hcnit -wonblpi coun-

us: m mUlennLuin tbmngh CWfl-felloirililp 1

(woitli on nnwlitlngdevU-WDratipi Ideotliyof modorii (Bcrot orHan wlih

ftOGlBtlCldOlklTLU............ ..,, 1

> KmcdVi lu HumiiaE sdapLcd br'tbs order In imi '..,.'. i

CHAPTER I.— HisTOBiCAL Sketch.

irlBlDBl purpoieot the order; iDtrodncltoa Into Amertw; Gropli

mtLfluIly I

ma knd cbsracter la U. B. ; cUsriclermodlDed !

nfmeo, Ibe deaf, blind, Isflmi, tudUDi, etc.; laltlBllau fer ; flral

' iBnnd Lodge; di'sreei conferred on tba BabbKb !

Ed, OnadLalEe irpiruea from the Eogllali bodj; tbe rllual nrlKd In

'mti EeniwIUailan oaualng [rouble S

IMBnaat Rebckah" adopted; proiioud nulun of Encliata and AmerluD
[ Ma-MloirB dscllEed b; the Ifttcer: Grand Lodfls tcfuiDS lo nyln tha

___ It Grand Lodge to Sovereign Grand LodgB; aiulatlcn of Ibe

FjUdntorlSSO, atiowloe n lost ot lil.BU mumben In foorxesn: other
T IMli»rrt>niSovi!rolgnGrBPd LoSbb ropgrl i

' . — . Kcrecylllaralurei orgnuliallon ot onlorei! tadgealroinHiil

r itop In regard to changea In tbe rltiiali rHiiiKUcredat Toronto, Caosda.
t UBOt reaolBtlonln regard to tbe aauiH, declaring otbar worK Illegal and

' *Bld S

ItBlktn tegacdiog Old ubargu-booKa; aiimmar; o( blstoiy, etu i

[CHAPTER II. — CHAaAOTEB op Oiid-fellowship.

geman-a acconnli the ConiVliiitlonof 'tiia Unliefl" HtBliatraT-

liiiSaiotM '. )

olBDeei Grosn-s delcojo of Iha ooKly ngaUa '.'.'.'.'. i

leneBrfltD rlcb and pool Mike; Ibe " deceitful naak;" Odd-
fjHlowBblp»Cbrt8tleia religion i

(. J. H-BrockDianon tbeeaeciiDt'lDltl'&Uinit nu loftirniell CbrMlan can

Jnamcmber 1

lat bo oanlGBHd u-cordlag la Horlpture; Hembeta nuil vmi.
DevU DiuuifUiral tbe older >.,..■ ■■> — —


6 CX)KTEHTS.

CHAPTER in.— iNTTiATonT Deoiieb.

OPENING CEREMONIES. |

•poor Hiidrlcli tmed cquallr sod paid equal amoanuUiatckneu, IM
beluamideioreallteihelr eqaiiit;; uldri^Bg of Kobls anndi *Hin^


W
U

sa
u

M

S8
60 .

n
m

m


OmrolnsBQosi •thachuruhofClirljliiotbrqadmoughin Hi teiio'vdiipM

OpenlngprajEr'-i-'i'ii'iyi* '!'■ ^'.'Vinyir'adopUd bjttrQiid LmiieJ
Ordurof liii.'.i.,- ■,-:; •lo'am'rolWBot'iKiieToiiBBft'iJi


CHAPTER IV.— Initiatohy Degree. IinnATift


tuHoo 1 •early progrcii of the ordor obstrucicd bj Iha cburacLor at iU
members and lUnnmc

Btlonln Odd-fellow'slilp corresponds lo ragencralLon Is ChrUdsnlty

HilCbefore a cufflnc'dctarpaei cunductor'BcbBree; •flntrarof light; 'Dan.
dldKlobonndmoroolotelj 10 lulTerlnB bmnuilt)' by tbns reaUIlHg Wb


tndlnBin light and Joy char«et*mtlo of the anclBnl myiMrlei


No^]nGl■'.l!d■^cbWBV•VlngaIar'It^'of'^amoi"■BMtl'|art^


Love tbH remed]! for ill wwtal evils < vatoh-oniciBJincd over mcmberai Put
A "broBd platform opon wblob mmlilnd mWonlVe'!" 'aid not a fsvur bni il


^^ Batluni renufred In JolQlnn ibt order; fraii'mliy iho corner-rtonoi
^^^^^ •tiUwrltood or 6od aud ttaebroUicrhoodor man tliBK»aC irlucKKH..


CONTENTS.


Atreu. iL^ at ncogaiUon, vol[Dg alga nod bonoiv (5 cule)
CRAPTEll v.— IsiTIATOBlf DEQaBB.
CLOSING GEREUONIES AND ANALYSIS.


Upuwarot UBgiiTUidiiiiifka: Dr. Lcomra Biean'i Impreaalon of Fne-
■ BMUCUT; an ninitntlon ol tbe tuilKeuauDe nelgliban TX

■tons; eTKij lodge mcicemr of pcidliLonllirDiieta'*l>e woHUpiUmnged
I hy sTUtplrtU M, 76

CHAPTER VI.— Degree of Friendship.

OENERAL REGULATIONS AND OPENING CEREMONIES.


» (mm Kubordlnile


SAPTEfi Vr[.— Degree of Fribndseiip. Initiation.

Mtuwhtln thelhreedegreei: ■" benntlfal leiBOna" S3


iiiillilaii'i vltlu KingSftuJ. Is

n«t'iBfnri *ltn -t ianeer, ETlii nil) c
"" — OffcliisCntn ilodgg. etc


CHAPTER VIIL— Degree OF Friendship.


CEHEMONIEa AND ANALYSIS.


S CDFTEtnS.

CHAPTER IX.— Dbseek of Bbotherli Lots, j
nrrrtAuos jjed asaitsis.

a« OM-(i«*wi«^ «ipca4 •■ ite BMc ta( ihctr Ha> at TiriK m
| il iMi rH»win AnkH
Iv^^ O Ax Mm ■■< ■-

-- -^-jub

CHAPTER X.— Degkk* of Tbtth. IsmATios.

0**TlltB)


. 1


■#iiebw eye (oui), the ihreollnKaC.'ot) ■'wielded In the are* of pnrttrbT
the liored hindi ot Jcbovih;" •emblem of friendship. Ion. ud truth,

Bbm, tore and Iriuh le the "best BataEnardagsInU the Ills of life'-....
fliiBdoroM-honea (out) emblem of deelh and of Ihe ohllgBtlon to burr
■ deaeued hrolherj •leaohsi etio the runll? of *ortdlr thlngi, uid


IM


i»i^llio(eut) ibP emblem ot lime end symiioi of ilesth'i "only throngh
death to Bin In time thu eteraul life Is «tsliiiJd! "UiB qnHcr ud bow
-emblem of reBdleesai the aastruns boa ttHcbea leliiiktloa; B Icdd
Odd-teilow irlll aLways protect abroiher, TPhelher in peue or w»r

andJDDstbiD, nod that ve sboatd alwiyii be resdy to da bsttle lo the


ISS


•tta ™*Kvtafl tmh m'uil'^'r aVv "a '
Odd-lellowihlpcMiberesllzed: oolleetlons UlCB
la band (cat) , ua emiUem ot aUiceilty i ■ ■ pure


mun B™thB o^^fo't
on the aie; 'tha bean
esrta and clean bauds"


libera; •sloba In olonds, the emblem of DieUInd needing the order to
dltaBlo Its millennial period; •IbeBlohe In full light, emblem ot a re-
■Bno«tediTOrlfl"whenpurt1ledfrom»ln"by the prinolplei taught by


On iBva of Odd-tellowBhlp ; * • 'emblem of ibepr
&K1, onpaeavanly F.thf n" u Ibe I>rielltes' p
rfiail reverence 10 ibe arlt and Us deposits, so


and of falthfalneaa lo
senceol the Uost High
osperlty depc ailed upon
he Odd-Iello Vb depends


iMcptal (EDO, emblem ot wisdom. Indlcallug t

teas ';■'?■ r'":a:;s,r r

fSttyi" "IhB sonles in emblem ot equity, repre
dflBllHiB. and rqmlnding thsC dullcs must not

fmW (cnt), the storehouse ot Odd-tL'llo« prin
.ttaUdaplritnmtrmhi" naludiie can be held .

l««ap (OBth polMii lo the J«it homo of mas


the brwwn serpent of


false dtsil notions of lo-
eaiing the weighing of

IplBBi •"emblem Of n
Itbout It; teachEB that
OiIhohour-glaM{otit);
prove Hying moments..
lighted upby -'a bow
In troth that all earthly
rge, eipumingthsmhe
hto the "Graod Lodge


1«
ISO


MTpaMwordandoorUngBlBD (cut), answer to worklng.lgn S^nt), «<■

■1»iM conferred by tlia degrees 13B-I41

W,Wl»:-A»r"thlei» "Delr^of Truth;- ahodgo-podge of heatbenand
JbwWi symboli. wim a codln for so^eomliy.— to teaQh maohlsdnlri


uolor Bsirlel In Odd -fellowship, the Papacy and


thebookofReTelalloni; 1


1 "soarlet wouisu" of Bevelslloos the aplrltna


photograph of mcAs.™


,. 1


■nadrMeifillBA secret ordera, liMh n Bsut ai


^^^^^


-1


10 CONTENTS.


OHAPTES XL— Encampment Degbees.

•EaeniTipmontuBnmeimlUCarrtorinB; *I{lgbl of Sovereign Onnd Lodge tji
iQterTcroln trie ananijUB of Joil^B{ •pDworJiolHuborrUnHle ]aitge»i ai "" '
ordlDALes tornicd *' VDrkTivglodBes "..... _...........,

flELuampmeot ofipalng oeramuDloB; *tbo SoycroL^ Grand IfOdEB i

EnuDiTuncnta doDe aa Lu BabofdlQALe lodge ; aeaalona opcuod and 01
Dalles of EncuopmeDi olSiiers; ■lodge meetloga dnlgoEl to Improia U

ThE Huly BLblB an tntcgnil part o( Odd-telloiriMp; •rarlelyof reJlgiMiillS
DUCBUI roB Fateuecuii, Dibbbi

CHAPTER XII.— PiTBIJBCHil Dboebh.

Efcal'a uicd; 'every Oild-fellow ibould take the encampm


t Isaao (th9 GiDdldiile}

, ilgo and grip (cuu)

cK apron; Chlet Patriarch'! Dbarge; TlTEBs' .


^rlbl a aEnn^bllflg^blotifc; a RfsTem of aolvatlon by cerumonl
anceaoT lodgo abarlt7,^iil Grand Lodge mlnutca; drying v... _

_, „Br» r. 1«»-181

K.t»iGB*M TOB GDIJIEH KCiB DSQBEB ISA

^CHAPTER SIIL— Golden RdleDeokee. Initiatiok. I

itlon; the mtborityi


flclonca to ba reapocted ; obllgatloi

the princIplEi of ilita dOBroe

High PrJeit'i oharge; prepa ration of lodge-room and regalUforPnrtl

Ihelilgli blniirlKbt o( liuniuil[7,"*n'til]e eiolu ding Dearly all or hi
III

Alarm, pouword, ilgn and grip (S <"■'■) ^ iDltrDCtlona to candlLlnu- ..

fllgb FrlEit to oaBdldate— cen:monJ« dealgned to (IIUBtniie iuWi
whrub la to uaber lo a mllleonJuni, eto.: •■ulborlty of cnti-.L^
•Ion8llotoraor(roml87T-lSV9

AnALTtiiB —The objeot of thla degree to cbeclcmsu Cbrtat'i plu ol

Inhlin; a unity In batted of ChriK; IWiobooda .._. .

Ctolmi tho oredrt of ChrlKlanlly'a woti; a counterfeit aaluallon; oad-teIlo»

CHAPTER XrV.— EOTAL PUBPLE Deorbb.
BaBXUaaadaxiureai "luuraia Mint wUle'vciilUautareU'* Isugbl M


I


I


CONTENTS. 11

iHonloBcnpaocrfta, loobeylsEnl BuminonMi, etc BOB

IT of MniUd»ia tliruugb wjWcrncsi to Moil EicellentHlgh Pr]r»l.20T, fll3

^Ji^'womV >1^ Brip (a CO") i' in>t™«LonV w'iiuuU'.V.' ' ■ " : ■ *318: BIT
plUan (cul) ; •emhlemB of Faith, Hope mod CSarlly. Wisdom,
ranph uid Beauty; the toot (out), •erablom o( hoapltallty— pHgrlim

imot wjrahip— peculiar emblflm of tUa'dceree; " bo reconciled to tbe

oibcr," etc BM, SSIl

'Glgn QTBud Laae;e bu powur to control Indivldunt Odd-tullows !S3

CHAPTER XV. — Closing Cbremonies .ind Analtsis.

tils:— Bough us.gL>; mimtu Jiiumcy lo lieaTeii; 'thoOofiitirilBlVar«r-


Dt Uraterles and th


CHAPTER XVI. — Rebekah, or Ladies' Degree.

, — dlmy and objBotB of tSladegrec; "confemd wllbout chargB - . S

JnallfliHltloiiB for mdTOborahlp; "orphan ■ " "

Ji»lBinenilje««inaj-bo alargB majorlly


dr's ntanitlnff dupi*rjdj 01'
wahlp— wamEn eieiudor


6,2»T


CHAPTER XVir.— Rebbkah Openinq Ceremonies

Bullcsiit olHcera, ode, etc 338.240

CHAPTER XVIII.— Rebek AH Degree; Initiation.


CHAPTER XTX.— Rebekah Deoree.

CLOSING CEREMONIEa AND ANALYSIS.
odo;pBrer ..^ ._


iwleilgeil [


U, MO


CHAPTER XX.~Secbet Work.

ECBET WOBKot the InitlBloiT.FrleiidBhip.BroliiBrly Love, Truth, Pn-
Iriatobaln Oolden Rule, Royal Fnrnlc and Ksbekahdegrues. giving nbmie,

p«>iiwocd8,a!sni,cli.'i;k-BlgnBand gripe, niih tbeircipluniitlons 261-171

PATRIARCHS lUMTANT DEGREE,— tMilltarj Do£rcu,t ...■!?VWa,


INTRODUCTION.


K -Tnfrlii'T"Ti to the Odd
CbrtMlta— Wenhip F*ld to DerUt— The A.

DD t<r ChrUl— cnrUUui M
ItOBlum Wlihoit CbrU>~Hi>ii me


UovJOT-Odd-ldM**


Milp promtHi Bui to

When Satan aaked Christ to worship him he i
to be recognized as the "god of this world;' for the g
of its worehipa is the god of the world. Moses, Dea^
82;17;aud David, Ps.l06:87;aQd Paul, 1 Cor
and John thti Divine, Rev. 9:20 and 16:14, speak fnni
iarly of faUo worships as paid to devils, or evil deinoiU
ThcBt! demuiiM are represented, throughout the Sci
turuM, as fallen angels and spirits of the wicked dead,l

The deluge of secret orders, Odd-fellowship among ■
them, are the modern forms of these old idolatries, i
which Niirik the lost nations, from Egypt down. The
proof of this is ubutidant.

In Orosh, p. 91, the highest Odd-fellow authority, we
read:

"Among all the Mysteries of the Ancients, those

Lelebrated at the city of Eleusis, henc-e called the Eleu-

l MiiJjiti Myntaries, arc best known. These were copied


TNTRODnCTIOS.

frum the Egyptian, aad bore a correspondence to i
similar institutions, and hence an account of one is, in. 1
the maifl, an account of all the others,"

On the preceding page (90), Grosh explicitly showB I
these heathen worships to have been counterfeits of i
Bible religion, thus: " What regeneration by the word
of truth is in religion, initiation is in Odd-fellowship.
In this, as in many other particulars, our institution
has instinctively, as it were, copied after nearly all
secret associations of a religious and moral character.
In Egypt, the most ancient among the ancient king-
doms, an institution of this kind existed from the
earliest period." Again (page 92): "'From the earliest
agea to the present day, there have been similar associ-
ataona, founded upon the same general principles, with
Eimilar rites and ceremonies/" Again, same page:
" These rites and ceremonies were oriijinally of a religtoits
character, copied * • feom a divine inbtit0tion."(!)

Tf the object of this fundamental authority in Odd-
fellowship (Groa!])k had been to declare the secret wor-
ships to be counterfeits of the religion of the Bible he
could not have spoken more clearly. And if so, every
ceremony and prayer in Odd-fellowship is worship paid
to devils.

But he is more explicit still. Thus (page 91): " ' It
was a leading characteristic of all the ancient rites,
that they began in sorrow and gloom, but ended in light
and joy; they were all calculated to remind men of
their weakness, their ignorance, their helplessness, and
theirsinfulness of character; * * and the rising of the
just to life eternal and immortal." (!) If this language
doeflnot describeacounterl'eit repentance andsoul-sorrn IV
for Bin, leading to "the joys of salvation," then ii la


'■-'■■ Prrtil>yt«ma Macknight. la Im
* I', ■i»tui" cottentM from Biaii.ip Vtw

ttur . IN Mid Qnok wrtten the same ac-

(•/nirii "I Til'"'- "I'l iiijfttitntiv given by the Old-feliow
(tftnth. Th'> f<'rlli>TVinK arn extntcU froiD Macknight:

" Knfh "f tht) hnnthnn godH, beside tb« worship paid
l/r film in piililic, liO'lAMMcrM wonhip t/) vhich none |
»f«f" iuIiiiiU,M] (mi thiwfl who were prepared by previoofll
«nri<iiiiiiiii>H)" Mia(. i*, ifU^h paft^n nhrine or temple vraal
R liiilg", Th«»« woriilMtMi worp paid, in Egypt, to laisi
Mill f)NlrlN| in Aiiin, l^p Mlt.ltraH; in ijamothrace, to thoS
MiHtlomr tlj«f["<'ii ii> K(Hiutiu,to Bacchus; inCyproSfl
tu Vflilidj in '!r(tl(t, tfi Jiipitor; in Athene, to Ceres and 1
I'r<)i0r|iin4): mid in other phtcen, to an incredible num- I
bar. "ll'iir/'w ZnKinniN tnlU un, "Theso most holy rites I
<npr« Ni oititniilvD w i\i Uke in thu whole race of man- I
hiiiil." 1

AlinthHr iilil writer, PnmliiH.diwcrihinp; theae myster'l
tl>i lllvtin, H* will bi> Hfien in thin volume, an exact de-l
•i>|-i|ilini) of t\w I'itoti of Odd-fflllowHhip. Thus: "tnl
kh« iHiMt holy myaloriw thnro i» a terror diffused into I
khff iniudN uf tlu> ihJliKtiKl." And, " In the K-sser mys- 1
ittSif* inntt^m Wvn' mi i-oiitrivtHi that tho person to be I
iultittvd, nt hi« etitmiioo, was fill*d with inexpressibl* I
ln»tn*r," And, " It si'^'Uis. darknras was dispelled by J
llii^ iinil<l<i>n HAslitiiK •^r ttitht." t^Ui, 1

'Itttixlhi' rtvmA.-nw tN hi«rnlipd by bpin^M, stripped I

t iMp«> nliKvvit his necli. titl knocked I

rh<> Daa^etlov is M UindfoUl

^ v< dn>|^M<d. nai be coofreiUadI

>' frmk method; in tW HoniKNi b-l


,.h>IM,>vUV„U.lM


raTRODUOTIOl*.

dowm en t House, and tlie same ettl-cts are prodm
small way iu every iifctle k'niperaiice lodge, by tlioJ
night-mystery and mouk solemn lectures aod obligaJ
tions.

Thus says Odd-fellow Grosh: " All the ancient rites
began in sorrow umi gloom, but euded in light and
joy." This is the deyil'M caricature of salviition by
Christ through repentance and faith: leading through
sorrow for sin to "joif in the Holy GhoM." Indeed, thi;
is that " Divine institution " which Grosh says Odil-
fellowship was "copied from" (page 92). And in \U
nature and effects it resembles salvation as whoredoni>J
resembles marriage — one leading to hell, the othei
heaven. Hence idolatry is branded as sonl-adalteryl
ttroughout the Bible. Christ is the bridegroom in the
Scriptures, the 3evil in the lodge. Christiana, in wor-
ship, are sanctified by the Holy Ghost; lodge-men are
mesmerized by demons.

Both systems lead through sorrow to joy — Christ's to9
"joj/ iinspeakahU and /nil of glorij" {1 Pet. I'iS); the|
lodge's to the joy of a frolic. The Hebrews, on the
great day of Atonement, " afflicted their souls," while
Christ was offered in symbol to cleanse them from their
sins "before the Lord" (Lev. 16:29); and they were led I
to "rejoice in the Lord" and "joy in the God of their*
salvation " (Hab. 3: 13), while idolatrous Hebrews were ^
led to an Odd-fellows' dance around a golden calf.
Christian joy is holy and therefore eternal :
jollification and therefore empty and evanesr^ot. The
Christian sings:


The Odd-fellow ainga:


le "
.■e 1

le

f. ^n

is


TXTttOOrOTtOW.


-oad/iUem^ MirutnX. p.m. M

Any who will patiently coasnlt thesequotedauthoh-l
i\K^ will Kiid proof abundant and Buperabuodant thala
Odd-fellowship is part and parcel ofthe false worships de-l
vixed by Satan to mislead men, by turning them, throug^|
worwh ip of himsel f,f rom findi a g their way to God througlJ
Christ; that initiation is counterfeit regeneration; aii^|
Batanic mesniemni, o£ sanctification by the Holy Ghost.1

And, like Christianity, tbe lodge proceeds from par-fl
ticuJare to generals; from false salvation of persons toil
R false millennium for the race. Grosh, amid a multi-fl
tude of like promiees of an Odd-fellowa' millennium'^
without Christ, on page 141 says, if men should becomefl
imbiiod with the principles of the Fourth Degree, I
"happier families and more loving nations would ban- I
ish clashing interest';, diRcordant feelings, hoary preju- 1
dices and wrongs from our earth, luid mahe the world 1
a Paradise." I

And ^hi« " Fatherhood of God and Brotherhood of I
Man" is to bo produced by Odd-fellowship, — a society I
whose name is a burlesque; whose origin a dramshop; I
its ritual devil worship, aud its membership open only j
to " free white males of 21 years," excluding, by book, J
" Cliineae, Polynesians, Indians, half-breeds and mixed I
bloodfl" (Donaldson, page 321), and shutting out alii
women iutn a contemptible Rebekah's Degree 1 Auni-4
vHrsal brotherhood and millennium excluding at least 1
nine teen-twentieths of mankind! \

But as the thousands of Od'^. fellows are our neigh-
bors and enlightened Americans, how can it be, one '
asks, that they practice that "fellowship with devils,"
which Paul denounces (1 Cor. 10: 20), and which baa


nTTEOD0CTIO».


1?1


ODiTersally cursed and degradej mankind':' The a
s-weris: Satan, tlie giid of this world charms them,
other serpents charm their victims. But if these secret^
orders are Gentile worships paid to demons, why have'
nnt good men found it out long since and warned their;
fellow-men of the horrible fact?

The answer is: the Bible is replete with warnings,
also the writings of eminent Christian scholars, down,,
to the present Sjidducean age of materialistic unbelief.

Take the following extended extracts from Cudworth's
" True Intellectual System of the Universe," published
first in London, 1678, and again issued at Andoyer, Mas-
sachusetts, in 1837, with repeated intervening editions,
thus endorsed by the piety and learning of Europe and
America for more than a century and a half. This'
great and learned writer says:

" There is a perpetual warfare betwixt two polities or
kingdoms in the world; the one of light, the other of
darkness: and our Savior, Christ, is appointed head or
Chieftain of the heavenly militia, or the forces of the
kingdom of light. There will be, at length, a palpable
and signal overthrow of the Satanical power and the
whole kingdom of darkness."^ TrKe Intellectual Si/s-
tem of the Universe, Vol. 1, p. 263.

This leatlership of Christ against Satan runs through.
the whole Bible. Thus, in the Garden, he appears as the
" serpen t-bruiaer to come;" in Moses, as the Paschal
Lamb, whose blood shelters and saves; in Joshua, aS'
"Cftptain of the Lord's host;" in the prophets, aa the
suffering Conqueror; in the Gospels, as " the Son of
Sod;" in the Acts and Epistles, as the one Mediator
and only " way" to God; and in the Apocalypse he ap-^
peaxB " the Lamb in the midst of ttit tlnQiift" " sNaaa


I


M


IHTHODtTOTIOIT.


from the foundation of the world;" and the Drama oi
Time closes with " the battle of God Almighty," t
tween the hosts of Satan and of Christ.

Such was the iiniveraal belief of Christiana befo
Satan ha^ chloroformed the churches by false worshipu. 1
It is still the belief of honest receivers of the Bible.

In the fourth chapter of his wonderful book, Cnd- 1
worth teaches —

"That the pagans were devil worshipers, not )
though they intended all their worship to evil demons
'Or devils as such, but because their polytheism i
idolatry, unacceptable to God and good spirits, ^
promoted by evil spirits; that others hesid
worshiped devils, as proved by their bloody and obscene<l
rites and mysteries, especially man-sacrifices, which the J
God of Israel neither required nor accepted; and that 1
their religion, unsound in its foundation, was i
corrupted and depraved by four things, viz.: The igno- j
ranee and superstition of the vulgar; licentious figments. 1
of poets and fable-mongers; the craft of priests aad'J
politicians, and lastly the impostare of demons otj
devils."

Kow pages might be filled with quotations from M»-fl
sonic and Odd-fellowship authorities declaring \
identity of their orders with those ancient mysteriej
condemned by Pali as too vile for description. Thel
identity coQsists in their human origin, their decept'onja
their lying legends and high-sounding professioi

They infest Christian lands to find members whtffl
" have visible means of support," and so can pay "dues,"j
yet boast universal fellowship with heathen tribes wli(
have no " visible means of support;" and the legion (
temperance and other inferior orders needs no proof a


INTKOlH-fTlDN. 19

its itieiititj- viith M;i^oiiry and Oddfellowship but the
closeiiesR o£- their imitation, and their swindling and
imposing on mankind in the name of one popular vir-
tue and another.

And they light on the Christian Scriptures as night-
bngs on green trees, devouring their leaves and robbing
them of their glory. They appropriate everything in
the Bible but Christ, who is the substance of the Book.
They seize on the Scripture narratives, symbols ami
morals (cutting out the name of Christ where it occurs),
to give dignity to their frivolity and vulgarity and cover
their robbery of the money and religion of the people,
as pirates run up the flags of the vessels which they
board, rob and scuttle. These accursed pests hare
eeuttled nations, from Egypt down.

Turn over their Manuals and look at their pictures.
The Holy (metallic) Bible; the mimic Ark of the Cove-
nant; the Brazen Serpent, representing Christ's sin-
ofiering, whom they cast from their prayers; the Stone
Tables of the Law; the Dove of the retiring deluge,
and the rainbow-pledge that it is not to return. What
are these but emblems filched from the Bible to give
seeming sanctity to an opposition religion, and cover
the corruption of a mutual aid society which takes three
dollars in dues and pays back one in benefitsl (See
Sovereign Grand Lodge Rep., 1980.)

This might be borne, or charged to the account cur-
rent of human folly, but that Odd-fellowship, as the
following pages will show, is part of a conspiracy to
subvert the true religion and destroy our race, promis-
h)g men " rest to their souls" by the Royal Purple De-
gree, and all the benefits of Chnat'» ^ftaRRWv twv"©i.i


20 ll^TRODUCTION.

while rejecting Christ himself." (See Grosh, page 285
and pages U5, 292-3),

This book is intended as a complete remedy for Odd-
fellowship, as " Freemasonry Illustrated " is for that
order. Its ritual is given with the latest changes made
by the Sovereign Grand Lodge in 1880 to defeat former
exposures of its secrets, confirmed by its own authority
in the notes, and its nature dissected by a thorough
analysis.


CHAPTER I.

"The institution of Odd-fellowship originated
Manchester, England, in 1812, although isolated lod,
existed in various parts of the country for some time
prerioosly. * * * On its institution in Manchester
pBnglandJ, the main purpose of Odd-fellowship was
declared by its laws to he to render assistance to every
hrother who may apply, through sickneaa, distress or
otherwise, if he be well attached to the Queen and gov-
ernment and faithfid to the order." — Chambers' Ency~'
clopedia. Art. Odd-fellows.

Odd-fellowship was organized in North America inj
1819.

" Thos. Wildey and four others organized Washing-
ton Lodge No. 1, in Baltimore, Maryland, April 26,
1819, to work according to the usages of the London
Union order, A lodge was organized in Boston March
96, 1820, and one iu Philadelphia December 26. 1821,
both of which received grand charters from Baltimore
in June, 1&23. At the same time a grand charter wasj
granted to the Past Grands iu New York," — American:
Encyclopedia, Art. Odd-fellowship.

Some writers have claimed great antiquity for Odd'
feUovrship. Of this claim Rev. A, B, Grosh, a P;
Grand and Past Chief Patriarch, states that well-mean-
ing raerabera of the order, " confounding principles with
the institutions embodying them, have claimed equal
witiquity for both." • * * That "the greatest ex-
ertion of tradition was to make qm ^^'^'^ iotsSaSSoiBx


y
w

i

h

lai, J


. cbjet-ts were fa »-

d are for tlie wiABV

^M-'.ticoes, "there

::--ch nonl

ijij &t eadi

-i deepened

'. until it' beneiicial and leti^ mean-

' "iid«, biire become grans to a )ii^i«r

t/> iuprore and elerste tke dtancto*

m; t/^ itulyu« bim with coucepHoiia of tiis capalnl-

r ^yj; U> «i]Ii(^t«t his mind; to enlarge Out

I fif )il> tiffncti'VU. and thofl to lead him to the

ut4 tha inie tiuiemal rabtiou daiigawihy


HIBTOBIOAI^ SSXToa.
the Great Author of his beiug ! Brother Wildej 1
planted the seed and cultivated the tree. It bore fruit
richer and better than he had imticipiLted. ' He builded
better tlian lie knew.' But as Founder and Architect
ha dwelt in the temple which he had reared for more J
limited obiecta. Hia cherished aims and details were I
all retained, but directed beyond the merely social and I
physical to the moral and spiritual — to lift its members I
np to their proper position — to hold man to a atricfc J
standard of duty — to impress him with the value ofl
character among his fellow?, and lead him to a true ap- %
preciation of hia whole duty, whether to God, himself, J
or to hia brother man." — GrosWs Manual, p. 34. J

Odd-fellow3 esclude from their order all women, the I
totally deaf, dumb and blind, men witli chronic diseaaea ■
(aay consumption), an infirmity which may prevent a I
man's gaining a liyelihood, Indiana, half-breeds, ne- 1
groes, Chinese, Polynesians — all races and colors exceptl
the pure white Caucasian are excluded from member- 1
ship in the order. (See Wlute's.DiKest Laws, etc., of "l
the Eight Worshipful Grand Lodge I. 0. 0. F. of the I
United States, sections 1101, 195, 1097, 1099, 1090). J
Thirty or forty dollars ia the customary price ofl
initiation. Three black balls exclude a candidate. m

" The Grand Lodge of the United States, organized I
January 15, 1825, held its first annual communication 1
February 22d following, but immediately adjourned to J
March 30tb following, when its officers were installed J
and reports received showing four grand and nine sub- 4
ordinate lodges ^ connection." — Grosh'sManual,p.35.%

Until 1829, degrees were conferred in the lodge-room J
OQjSondays. (See GrosKaMBAUQX,'^.^r>. I


In l»t2 th« Oraa<l Lodge of the tTnited S
iaootlf KTered its eoDaeetwii wUk the J
Ihii^, and, 0*73 Ber. A. R GroBh, ** in liew of tin &Kt |
that the Unity had altered the ancient landtnaiks, t
]ated the pnitciplra and changed the work otthe oA
and attempted to inrsde our chartered lights the Grand ]
Lodge of the United States declared itself the onlx
foaotaiii and depositoty of Independent Odd-fellow-
ship on the globe.**

"The Manchester Unity, in accordance with ita fir&- '
qtient thrciit«, sulMequentlj attempted to estahliah
lodges in this coaatr}', but failed. Oar National Grand
Lodge attempfed estabE'^hing todgi-s in Great Britain,
but failed alHo."—GrosA*«i»fanMfl/, p.*?.

In 1844 five Pnst Grand officers revised the entire
ritnal of Odd-feilowjihip.

lu 1843 or J644a movement commenced to change
the bafliHof representation in Gniud Lodges and Grand
Encampments, which representation had become veiy
unwieldy.

*' Tiie election of' grand officers being held only in
grand bodiea, fi'w beside the nearest resident Past
Qrandn and Pfwt Chief Patriarchs could participate
therein. All this centralization of absolute power be-
cuino moro and more grievous as the order increased,
until ageueriLl dumand was made for a limited repre-
(Hjntation by annual elections in the Bubordinate, and
for tlio election of grand officers by voting in the sub-
ordiniifes, Such a great change was naturally resisted
DM un invasion of ' vested rights,' and dangerous to the
iitftbility of tlio iufltitution."— Gms/i'a Manual, p. 42.

From 1847 to 18dl the agitation of this question
A/imyoitgediiturm, which threatened ytirmomint^


ly to dinds the brotherhood. At lengtli, however, a ^H

satisfactory adjustmeut of difficulties was made. ^^t

In 1851 Bchuyler Colfax, of Indiana, " reported the ^^M

'Degree of Rebecca' for the wives of Scarlet Degree ^H

members." — GrosJi's Maniial,p. 44. ^^M

In 1852 the "London oi-der of Odd-fellows " (Eng- ^H

land), numbering 233,000 members, proposed a union. ^H

with the order in America, which was decliuyd. ^H

In 1853, Grand Lodges of Odd-fellows existed in all ^H

the States and some of the Territories. ^^M

The annual celebration of the anniversary of Odd- ^H

fellowship (April 26, 1819) commenced in 1859. ^M

In 1863 the order was prospering in the Sandwich ^H

Islands and " in danger of dying out " in Vermont. ^H

In 1867 the Grand Lodge of the United Slates de- ^1

cidedly refused to make alterations in its ritual or secret ^^M

work. ^1

Grosh cliums that Odd-fellowship hag "moulded into
a Hudred likeness of benevolence not afew institutions

nearly as powerful for good as itself." — Grosh'a Man- •.

ual, p. 49. ^m

During the Centennial year, 1876, the Grand Lodge ^^M

met in Philadelphia. From the statistics there report- ^^M

ed we quote the following^ ^^M

Number Grand Lodges 48 ^H

Kumber Subordinate Lodges 6895 ^^M

Number Grand Encampments 39 ^^

Number Subordinate Encampments 1756

Number Lodge Members 454,689

Number Encampment Members 87,450

Total itelief .«1. 6 98,868. 92

Total Revenue |!4,714,241.70

From report of Grand Sire M. J. Durham, Pliiladel-
phio, Pa. G. L. U. S. Proceedings (1876), p. 6748.


Sfplrmber 20, 1880. the Grand iK^dge met at Toronio,
Canada, and changed Ha title to the " Sovereign Grand
Lodge,'* as the body had jurisdiction over Switzerland,
Brttiifb Oolumbia, Chili, and the Lower Provinces of
British North America, Ontario and Quebec.

On page 82tJ9 of the published proceedings, the Grand ■
Sire gives the follo«-ing statistics for 1879:

Number Grand Lodges _ .

Number Subordinate Lodges 6,9^ 1

Number Subordinate Encampments ISM |

Number Lodge Members 440,783 f

Number Encampment Members ^,Sll i

Total Revenue ^,391,215.S»i|

HwouM be a serious error to add together thanamber J
of lodge and encampment members, for probably fuUy I
nine-tenths of the encampment members bold lodge f
memWr^bi]) also, and are included in the lodge statistics.

It will be observed that in the space of fouryeao *
thin order has lost 13,906 lodge members and 7,939 en-
eampment members.

Some of the " general correspondence " connected *
with reports from Grand Lodges ia interesting. On J
page 8,228, the report from Iowa gives 10 nevr lodges, '■
two "reclaimed" and one "surrendered," with a netj
loss in membership of 133. On same page Kentucliy I
reports two new lodges and six surrendered, vrith a loss 'i
of 250 in meml>ership during the year. On page 8,883, ■
Ohio reports a loss of 1,030 lodge members and 240 ,
encanijimenl meml)ers, and Ontario of 163 lodge mem-
bcre. On page 8,234, Pennsylvania reports a loss of '
3,749 lodge members and 1,434 encampment members.
On the same page Rhode Island reports a loss of 318
lodge members. None of the States show large gains, '
and on jiage 8.S36 L. B. Hills, Grand Secretary and
Grand Scribe of Wisconsin, says: " I regret to say that ■
'""'*'*^mpments are in a chronic decline."


During the Anti-masoQlc excitement whieh followed
the abduction and murder of Captain William Morgan, ,
Odd-fellowship properly suffered with FreemasonryJ
" In Massachusetts the order died away. In Rhodffl
Island • * * it took no root. In New York alB
growth was stopped. Almost eyerywhere the exciteJ
ment lessened the immbers or prevented increase." — I
Grosh's Manual, pp 36', 37. 1

In 1868 the National Christian Association, opposed!
to ail orgiinized secret societies, was formed in Pitts- '
burgh, Pennsylvania, and in the name and strength of '.
the triune God lifted up the standard of supreme love]
to God and equal love to man, in opposition to tbeaei
secret, counterfeit brotherhoods. Soon afterwai-d thiaa
Association began the publication of a semi-munthlyl
paper, the Christian Cynosure, which later became^
weekly. Additions now began to be frequently made '
to the scanty library of anti-secret literature. In 1874
& correct exposition of the ritual of Odd-fellowship was
published. There waB a good demand for the book and
overwhelming proof as to its authenticity was from
time to time received from members of the order. In
18S0 this work had reached its tenth edition of 3,000
volumes each. Some colored men, among others, ob-
tained the book, organized lodges, and took out a char-
ter for a Grand Lodge of I. 0. 0. F. A. D. (The Inde-
pendent Order of Odd-fellows of African Descent).

The Grand Secretary of this brotherhuod wrote to
Ezra A. Cook, under date of January 31, 1881 , as fol-
lows:

" Dear S'/r— Having obtained a few copies of your
Odd-fellowship Illustrated, Exposition of all the Degrees
of the Lodjre and Encampment, and the Rebekah or
ladies' Dtrgrtie, eiyhlh edUion^ revised, about two yeavs


I


Ago. SHetn at DA, who at tha,t time bad JTiat witbdiswn
ftota IhB Manchester Unity, on receiTing ytrar booksai .

— , *>pen«d a lodge in , and trailed it ' Key of the i

Wesrt,' • • • Wp tried the wort and foand that |
(jnile A oQOiber of Odd-fellows recognized the work aa •
b^niK genome. • • • We then aought adjncssion
inU> a iKgaily (>r{;8ni»-d I'idge, bat we being men of
AfnCNii diswont (ofgnjcs) conld not be admitted.
Then wc formed a Grand Lodge and sent a petition to
Hpringfleld and vmrf. inorporated." • • •

One may reiulily we many reasons why any prosper-
f>M« institution would dislike l.o make frequent i;hange8.
Thi! iinaTiimriuH vote of the Grand Lodge in 1867
ngainftt nlterationH in the ritual, aa well as the followin^r
from their lawn, «hows Odd-fellowship to be no excep-
tion to thi* general rnle.

Section 36 of the laws of Odd-fellowship is as fol-
lows:

"The unwritten work of the order shall in nowise
bo altered or amended, except by a unanimous vote of
thin Grand Lodffe; nor shull the written work of the '
order lie in anywise altered or amended, except with the
cionciirreuce of four-fifths of the members of this Grand i
Lodge."— ir/(*7^'« Digest Lnws, elc, R. W. G. L. U. S.

In yeptember, 1880. the Sovereign Grand Lodge of the
world met in Toronto, Canada, and altered its secret
riliial and written work, lUid adopted tlie following res-
olutions:

" Hemlvfcl, That the revised Initiatory, Degree and
Uncum|)ment work, iw iidoptud at this session, shall go
into operation on the first day of January. 1881, and
ft^m the tiini' it takes effect be the only lawful work,
and any other or different work, declared illegal and
Toid.


BI8X0BICAI. SKETCH. ^9

* Resolved, That Grand Secretaries and Grand Scribes
in tlie distribution of tne revised work be charged
with the collection of the Charge-books containing the
old work, and that said ofGcers be anthorized and direct-
ed to bum or destroy the same and make report of the
result to the Sovereign Grand Lodge."

From the foregoing sketch of Odd-fellowship, the
facta of which have been taken from writers approved
by the highest authority of the order, we learn that the
order is of English origin. That it was formed by
humble, improvident laborers for the relief of those
whom their own prodigality combined with the
crushing burdens imposed on laborers by the aris-
tocracy of a dissipated, semi -despotic government,
left in a destitute condition. That after being
imported to America it gradually assumed as its
chief work the divine task of leading mao " to a true
appreciation of his whole duty, whether to God, him-
self, or to bis brother man." {Grosh's Manual, p. 35).
That the order puts beyond the reach of its cliaritiea,
remarkable instructions and other privileges, all who
are in apparent danger of needing charitable assistance.
That although only about sixty-two years old it has
several times altered its so-called secret ritual, and uaes
great care to prevent those which it excludes from its
temporal and financial benefita from enjoying its moral
and spiritual admonitions, lectures and advantages also.
Odd-fellowship duringthe last fifty years has become
strong numerically and financially, but if it is founded
upon the saitd, " great vrill be the fall of it."


I


CHAPTER II.

CHARACTER OF OIID-FELLOWSHIP.

The nmiii object of English Odd-feilowsbip seems
from its own history to have been conviviality and
fienaiml gratification.

IIh rounder in America seems to have had a little
htgla-r aim, and these convivial proclivities being ex-
tliided, his professed object was to develop the humane
traits of caring for the sick, the widow and the orphan.
While intoxicating beverages are forbidden in the
ludge-room, much to the credit of the order, Od-i-fel-
lownhip is far from being a temperance organizatiDn, or
even an aid to the temperance cause. Though wine,
beer and whiskey may uot be sen'ed in the lodge
(though a fln-nk of liquor from some intemperate mem-
ber's pocket is occasioually pu^ed round in committee-
room), at the close of each meeting it is a general cus-
tom (or members to adjourn to saloons; and Grosh's
dencritilion of an earl,v meeting of the order gives us a
fair picture of such n saloon gathering of the Odd-fel-
lows of lo-dny. He sa>'s:

"Tbo bwnnug, tbo pipe and the toast circulated
(rwly, M the song and jest excited their mirth and
Itil»rit,v, until by frequent r«|»ti(ion.calling for increased
indntgence, it is no wondt-r that the noble objects of '<
their meetiu KB were too frequently made liecondary to
mere nen.'^ual gratifications." — Gi^xk's Manual, p. 23. .

A ChristiAn g^ntlemitn of tfaia city tells as tlwfc be- i


■ OBAMAtatB. OV THE OHDEB. 3l

fore his converaioQ he attended the meetings of the
order; and his lodge, which was and is one of the aristo-
cratic lodges of Chicago, after adjournment used to go
to a saloon and there indulge in smoking, drinking,
card-playing, jesting and filthy eonversntion, the mem-
bers often entertaining each other hy rehearsing the
false stories about important lodgf work, etc., which
they were accustomed to tell their wives in order to ac-
count for not returning home until one or two o'clock
in the morning following lodge night.

The ninth section of the United States Constitution
contains the following clause: " No title of nobility
shall be granted by the United States." This clause
was not inserted without good reason, and Odd-fellow-
ship by educating half a million American voters to
use and love such titles shows itself an enemy of Amer-
ican civilization. It calls its collective bodies Cfrand
Lodge, Supreme Grand Lodge, Grand Encampment, etc.,
and the officers, even of the subordinate lodge, assume
the titles of Noble Grand, Past Grand and Vice Grand,
and in the Encampment we have a Chief Patriarch,
High Priest, etc. The ordinary history in some parts
In BO interlarded with grandiloquent titles as to nauseate
a refined and sensitive taste.

A comparison of some of the pompous assertions of
this order with certain of its laws, rules, etc., shows its
character to be hypocritical and false.

On page 99 of Grosh's Manual it is stated that " Odd-
fellowship is a miniature representation among a chosen
few of that fraternity which God has instituted among
men. Few na are those who would represent it, the
great principle is wide enough for all. On the broad
platform of brotherhood all nations, parties and sects


i


32 CQAR&CTEB OF THZ OKDEB.

can meet and freely miugle in offices of needed kind-
ness and mutual well-doiug. Fraternity, therefore, is
the corner-stone on which our forefathers based ou]
order. Eraternity in the family of mankind illui
in our family, the lodge and the order. As all men h
Goil for their father, all are brethren."

With the above or similar statements which sbooi
in Grosh's Manual, compare sections 195,1090,101
and 1101 of White's Digest of Laws, Decisions, etc.

These and others show that Odd-fellowship, the Q
called illustration of the fraternity of mankind, ei
eludes from its fellowship the defenseless, the poor, \
weak and afflicted:

1st. All women.

2d. All colored men, Polynesians, negroes, Chine^
Indians and half-breeds— all persons except free whj
Caucasian males; and of these it cscludes

3d. Ail afflicted with chronic diseases, such i
sumption; aUo the deaf, dumb and blind.

4th- All others who, on account of poverty,
unable to pay their dues, or on account of i
enemies in the lodge are unable to secure a dat
baUot.

While persons who have to struggle against the d
advantages of an unpopular color, infirmity, disease or
poverty need, if there is to be any discrimination, the
favorable consideration of the strong, it is evident that
Odd-feilowahip is a menace against that fundamental
principle of our civil government that all men are
created free and equal.

The professed benevolence of the order is thus seen
to be a sham and pretense. At Iiest ifc is but a mutual
msurance society, and a fourth-class one at that, lot


CHABACTEK OF TEE ORDER. 33

mnah more is expended on regalia and other lodge ex-
ipensea than ie paid out in " benefits."

The attempted defense of eiich a waste of money is
m a par with the moat popular line of defense of the
liquor traffic, as the following quotation shows:

" The cost of our decorations has been employed in
giving needed labor (and ty that labor honorable suli-
statence) tohundredsand thousands 4f industrious men,
women and children. So far, then, it has not been
expended in vain." — Grosh's Manual, p. 56.

It is thus admitted that thousands are employed in
fche manufacture of the emblems, jewels and regalia in
which Odd-fellows deck themselves in the name of
tcne vole nee.

As to the valuable educational influence of these
trinkets, gewgaws and " horse collars," let us hear the
testimony of Mr. Grosh:

" When the humble and grateful Mary {Mark 14:
3-9, and John 12: 3-8) took a pound of spikenard, very
costly, and anointed the head and feet of Jesus, there
■was complaint that the expensive article had not been
Bold for the benefit of the poor. But Jesus declared
that the act had a utility worthy of its cost, and remind-
ed them that the poor could be remembered at any
other time and in some other manner. So, if our re-
jgaliaajid emblems tend to increase our benevolence
»nd stimulate us to greater activity in well-doing, then
s their manufacture no idle work, their cost no useless
Expense. The food or raiment that money would have
jmrchased would.in afew months, have been consumed
ir worn out." — Grosh's Manual, p. 56.

To compare the waste of money for lodge regalia and
ihB&p jewelry with the loving tribute of a i(«^i<iB


ania«r for iier Divioe Sarior is HCEle shot of h

miKH, and tiie actempt to pn>*e that thu e

a ii>T« for gaaij de^tlq tenib to iuenawA h

u ill certainly amvac it tt does noi &gwt fiTa;^ a

licraon.

That there is no benerolence ia the pajneBtuC'^
lien^tits of the order is Airtbershown hj two b
liona fn»n paffe>i4%/ Grtush'a Manmti: "That w»n
the poorest applicant to contribute ad mBcfaaatikew
iest, 19 true." " We psj the rich member, wbes s
the same amount per week that we pay to our |
brethren." This oaght to forever settle the qw
of the " benevolence " of the order.

Odd'fellowahip not only maintains a most c
and partial brotherhood of aeifishness, but encoun
hypocrisy. On pagp, 97 of Grosh's Manual, we i
" The world may move in a vain show, each mna s
in^ to disguise himself from others, often even f
hiiiiHolf, but in our lodge-room we expect brethren |
lity lutiAo tim doceitfiil mask, and look each ottaf
loviii«ly in the eyes, knowing and known of each o
B» thpy iiri'."

A ilnvilV brotlierhood indeed! Such a morality worn
IwRt a KiLiiR of thieves. "Lay aside the <
mask" whi'ii ymi arc with tlic gang, your brethren,!
th" luHcliinii of this " noble order."

lint tho (irowiiiup obiectiou to this order, and the 0(
Wwidfi which all uiliora pale into iusiguidoance, is
flut Umt

OtiIV.FKl,U>Wf<tllI' 1* A CimiSTLKSS RKLIQIOS.

tu OrviflhV SkUiiug)), pOKv ISl, is fouud a Cbrii


OHABAOTBB OT THE OBDER.


8S


prayer, and on the previous page the following explan-
atory note, which we copy in full, italicizing the same
words that are italicized in the Manual, and which show
the evident intention to exclude Christ.

The note is as follows:

" Adopted by the Grand Lodge of the United States,
to exclude prayers offensive to members of the order in
many of our lodges. It also ordered that on alt
occasions of the order, 'the same spirit as observed in
the foregoing, shall be strictly followed by the officiat-
ing clergyman or chaplain.'

" It IS desirable and eminently proper that all lodges
should open and close with prayer. Each subordinate
may determine for itself upon opening and closing its
session with prayer, and may determine upon the form
to be \i%eA."— Digest G. i. tl. S., p. 123.

On this point we have the moat unequiyocal declara-
tions. On page 90 of Grosh's Manvnt, we read: " What
regeneration by the word of truth is in religion, initia-
tion ia in Odd-fellowship." On page 98, same book, we
read: " May your initiation and consequent practice aid
in releasing you from all blindness of moral vision, set
you free from the fetters of ignorance and error, and
bring you from a death in selfishness into a life of active
T>enevolence and virtue."

It ia doubtless true that very few Odd-fellows realize
fufly this Christless yet professedly aoul-aaving charac-
ter of the order, for it does not carry on an open war
against Christianity. On this point we quote from
page 174 of a valuable work by itev. J. H. Brockman,
entitled, Odd-fellowahip Judged by its Own Utterances:

" The lodge also suffers no new-comers to look into
hs secret designs and plans, but uses them, unconscious
to themselves, as tools, and only by degrees instils its


fnlse doctriuca into them. Their eyea «re Aaikt
they aru gradually, without observiuo it, turned 1
from the word of God and the churcli, income e_
indifferent to the preaching and the saoraments; _
panegyrics and boasting or the many good works a.
sweet music tu the natural heart, and the doctrine «
being made good by our own virtues pleases more thi
repentance and faith, and so they are gradually, witiioi
knowing it, converted to the doctrine of the order. Tl,
forbidden communion with unbelievers exercises .'^
fearful influence, and that is the reason why so fewn
have joined with the intention of investigating (
subject, come to a perception of the false doctrines a
witnd raw, from the lodge."

Though the entire ritual, signs, grips, passwords a
other secrets of the order are published to the world,.

ODD-FELLOWSHIP 18 A SECRET OHDER.

The work of the order is done in a guarded lodgilh
room, and no " book Odd-fellow," if an honorable m^
will enter an Odd-fellows' lodge pretending that he k
paid his fees and is a loyjd member of the order.

It is also true that no real Christian, having seen ii
true character of the order, can innocently remuail
member; nor, having seen its anti-Christian chara
can he innocently refuse to lift a warning voice agal
the institution, notwithstanding the fact that formal
lodge brethren will denounce him and endeavor to^i
jure his character for so doing. While good men diffi
as to the duty of disclosing the so-called secret i
or ritual of the order, the Word of God seems plw
It is doubtless safe to assume that no Christian knoi
the obligations and teachings of the order would en
join, and therefore such ignomnthj fall into sin. Inde«
it iB clear from Leviticus 5: i, 5, that even if the loo


OnABACTER OF THE ORDKB. 37

otiligation proved to be only a promise to do good, guilt

would be iiicurrediindfOH/Vss/o/i must follow.

He must help fulfill the declaration of Christ, "Tb«re
13 nothing hidden that shall not be revealed." He
must show others the character of the order, and he can
not do this fully without forever renouncing hia lodge
allegiance and revealing the secrets of the institution.

A clear-minded, wise student of the history and
character of Odd-fellowship will see that the only hope
for the real and permanent change of the order from
Deism to Christianity is, first, to receive Christ as the
only Redeemer from siu of every kind and the source of
all real friendship, love anA truth. By thus letting in
the "light of the world" all its organized secret ways
will be aboliahed. Its clannishness, putting men into
layers, each upper one pledged to concealment from all
'below, will be changed. Its grand titles will vanish.
■Its exclusion of all except "free white males" will
ceoNe. Supreme love to God and equal love to man will
change the name and nature of this foe of the home, of
our simple and sublime American principles, and the
pure Christian church, into a Sab bath -keeping, Bible-
jObeying Christianity,


REVISED ODD-FELLOWSHIF ILLDOTATED.


CHAPTER III.

Initiatouy Degree.'
opening ceremo hiss.

Th* tDllowlngara Ibo ceremsnieB fiiil rituol preBcribed by a
Omni Lodge 1. O. O. P , tesBton of JS80. ai Toronto, CMi»d«, at
the ital latica t^ tlie fSoBcreign grand Lodge.

Nobis Grand (one rap) — Offiuerw, take your n
slaiioiis; Guardians, secure the doors.

i> hale cloBod the doors.DDone ebsll be w


Noble (??-u?irf— Warder
lodge- room.

11 1« the amy of Ihc Warden to receive I
and the pasBWord of the Tbird degree from i^>
opened He ia not reqaired to rcepond with i
Biiy one li present wlthoat the password of tta
of the tbird degree the Warden shall no repor


, examine the brethren in v


e paibnord of thecnrrenttd


lotth


HOTB S— "Dpnn the petition of tic brotben at the Order, in good «

Ine.prajine tora Charter In open a Sabordlnate Lodge, or of n-.j.

for one to open s Sntaordlnale Encampment In a State, Dieti
where ■.Orand Lodge or Grand Encampment bai not liren

(ITUid Lodge of the United BCatea, wUrgranC Ibe eame. Sn „.

ounpmentwIllbDO^uilaed bj aPaHtOrand or a J'aet Chief Patrla..
Finthonttr from the Grand Sire. Such petition, accompanied b; the d
tee (IblrtT dullare,) must ho rorwarded to the Orand Secretary of t" '
LodinotthEUnltedSUlea, atBaltlranre, Marjiand. The form of

onlBilmlUr la IhDt aubmltted to n Btato Grand Lodge,"- ~


OPENING CEfiEMONIES. 39

Warden (having completed the examinatioD) — All is
ight. Noble Grand.
Noble Grand — Vice Grand, what ia your duty in the
dge?

T'ice Orand — To act in conjunction with you in main-
lining order; to require brethren to be decorouB during
[)dge hours; to enforce, in your absence, a due observ-
of the laws; and to aseiat you in the performance
f your duties.
Noble Grmid—Vioe Grand, examine your BUpporters.
Vice Orand — Bight Supporter, what is your duty?
Right Supporter — To observe that brothers give the
gns correctly and behave properly; to report to you
Lo names of such brothers as do not conduct themselves
icording to the regulations of the order,' and to occupy
rar chair temporarily, when vacated by you during
jdge hours.
Vice Grand — Left Supporter, what is your duty?
Ii^t Supporter — To act in conjunction with your
iight Supporter, and to officiate for him in his absence.
Rce Orand — My ofScers are correct, Noble Grand.
Noble Grand — Secretary, what is your duty?
Swretary — To keep accurate minutes of the transac-
ons of this lodge. [When the duties are divided be-
een a Recording and a Permanent Secretary the an-
■er of the Recording Secretary ends here, and the
'ennanent Secretary gives the remainder.] To keep
irrectly the accounts between this lodge and its mem-
era, without prejudice or partiality; to receive all

re Wilder, dnrlog bin •iait to Bagland. In ISSO, pni-
lodges Ihere an fmblem representing Adam IsringthH
•.nrlcT, wbicb emblem ho prsBeDted to the Oruid Lode's


INITIATORY DBObBE.


(Honeys' due this lodge, and pay the same to the Tn
Noble Orand — Warden, what ie your duty?


Warden— Toe


B the brethre


with c


b ciroams^

tion before the lodge is opened; to give the charg
offiue at the initiation of a candidate; to perform i
other duties as may be required of me in conferring ^
degrees; to place and replace the regalia in acara
way and to report to you any damages k may hs'
ceived,

Noble Grand — Right Supporter, what is your di

Right Supporter — To support you in keeping (

to execute your commands; to assist at the initiati

a candidate; to open and close the lodge iu due form, J

to see thai the signs are given correctly.

Noble Grand — Left Supporter, what is your dntyn

i^ Supporter — To see that brothers who enter i

room are in proper regalia, and give the signs correol

to officiate for your Right Supporter in his absence, a

to assist at the initiation of a candidate.

Noble Grand — Outside Guardian, what is your d

Outside Guardian — When candidates are to be ii

ated, or brothers admitted, to see that they are ord<

and qualified according to lodge rules; to examine d

reject any one I suspect, until your opinion is t


NOTI 4 — "ThBt WB reqnlre the poo


'eat appUcsDt to contribute as n


the weallhieBt. la Imc, us it 19 a matti


r of neceaaltr. EqoalltT In pa.
nefitabutalaolnfaellngs. *e
r povertT lu our traiernliy; to m


is essential not only to uqnality to be


BboLien aUconaideratlons o[ vanllh o


are not only brethren, bhi aqa


«SuldfwUb»ttEe"w"e''iotblBjnB


uld feel dugraaea at tBceiyfng'lH


doe. but alma. Under Ihiale


.lepundence on hlaweiltliltrbrellifcn


hcwoaldnottaelfrea to set Uld


inoDpuBitiuu to tbeir wlataea— would


ot feel that he had an equal


nircct the eipendltnre of onr fnnda.


rlhBflffalraof the order. He


pay the rich member, when aick. the


same amonai per week that w«


our imoKr brulhren. Wb wonld co


userve the Independence ol the


periorllj Irom the former. Thi-


uot only be foU that nil ore . quai. bu


ttarj niuat ne made lo moa, V> s


Jt Jo ever; pusaible w>t, iUst tbsj m


y freely act on it under aU dm


M." '-tfnaa'jJfaHBOtp.S*.


OPENINO CEBEJIIINIES.


41


the ^jassword [irevioiisly to ad mi 88 inn, and to
uard the lodge agaiii8t improper intrusion. To prevent
admittance of any one during a makiug or at other
imes, when so directed; to prevent any person from
Bteniiig to acquire a knowledge of what is going on in
ifi lodge, and to act in conjunction with the Supporters
nd the InRide Guardian ia the execution of your com-


Nbble Grand — Inside Guardian, what iu your duty?
Tnaiiie Guardian — To act in conjunction with the

lutfiide Guardian; to receive the password of the degree
which the lodge is open, during his absence to officiate
r htm, and obey your commands.
Noble Granrf— Officers aud brothere, I hope and ex-

BCt each officer will do his duty, and that brothers will
I orderly and attentive to the huainess of the evening,

> that we may riot be under the necessity of enforciny
e restrictive laws oi- fines. It is a duly inoumbent on
e Noble Grand to judge impartially of every trans-
tion, and to admit no brother {except a member of
ifl lodge) who has not received the password of the
rrent term* and the password of the degreee in whicli
filodge is operR I, therefore, trust that all will act
iH) prudence, zeal and integrity, as on the exercise of
ese virtues depends our happiness and comfort; keeji-
gin view lliat philaiUhropic j)rinciple by which we


INITiATOKY DEGREE.

liail each oLlier as lirotlitirs" — regarding our lodge a
I family; anil whose aotluas, if founded on that f
} principle, are calculated to make men social and hum
Officers and brotht^rB, I will thank you to be ata

and assist my Right Supporter in opening the lodj


ilDnurhere aBnartg harBw«y;
All within OUT iBcred border

Must her blgH commiiDdBobeT.
Join Odd-fBllowahtp of broUiBrB,

In Iho BonE o( Trnth md Lots;
Leave dleputee and etrllo to olbers.

We in liBrmonj miiat mois.
Hnnnt to ber canrts Invites na ;

Worthjr enbjoctB let UB prove;
Strong Ihe chain that here nnltea at,

Linked witb FriesdBhlp, Trnth and I
Id uur hesrU, eniihrlned and cberliho

May these (eellnga ever bloom—
Faliln); not wben lilo has perished,

Living still beyond the tomb.

Noble Grand — Officers and brothers advance J
I eign of the third degree

Right Supporter — Proclaim this lodge opened,

Riff/tt Supporter — By direction of our Noble C
I proclaim this lodge duly opened, for the tranaactifa
such bnainess as may be lawfully brought before ii
for the diffusion of the principles of benevolence 1
charity,

Noble Grand — During which time we admit o

NoTsB.— "No Church in Its present sts^e 1b oitcnBivo enonsh Inltah
ship lu embrace munyBoodmcnvr bo ncedlbaminietratton of kindtsd IB.
nor far raacbing eiionah to reach even its own membara when dietuiQ
1C and needing aid and protectlun. Itnt it an Odd-rellow. tar Bwu^
kindred and home, fails ddwn by tbewajeide. penniless and faint, helli

watchere are at bis aide to uphold bla drooping rramc. Or, l[ be r^lM
IbeCDldBuspiciDnBDfauDnMendly world, and is ciat umnerltedly U

t.lriu'Boell, hrotherB are active aroond him »1"- ' —' '-•-—-

mora the dark web of clrcumetanCBa that beclc ^

Id, and, ItlangiD^ii ui^aiV'i'VkBdaiiil* n


tawclatr'ndltl»adt."—Oreth'iilamal,t.Bt.


OPENING CEREMONIES.


Heal, sectarian or other improper debate, under


penalty.


u option, mty open «


1 oloflo Tlth pn,yer, it tt


OPENING PRAYER.

" Thou King eternal, immortal, and invisible ! the only
wise God, our Saviour! Thou art the Sovereign of
universal nature, the only true object of our best and
holiest affections. We render Thee hearty thanks for
that Icind providence which has preserved us during the
past week, protecting ua from the perils and dangers of
thia life; and for permittiug U9 now to assemble in Thy
name for the transaction of business.

We humbly beseech Thee, our Heavenly Father, to
preside over our assembly, to breathe into our hearts
the spirit of love and of a sound mind; and may each
and all be governed by an anxious desire to advance Thy
glory and ameliorate the condition of mankind.

Let Thy blessing rest upon our order, upon all the
lodges, Grand and subordinate, belonging to our entire
family of brothers. Let Friendship, Love and Truth
j»revail, until the last tear of distress be wiped away,
and the lodge below be absolved by the glory and
grandeur of the Grand Lodge above. This we ask in
humble dependence upon, and in most solemn adoration
of thy One mysterious and glorious Name. Amen." —
Groak's Manual, p. 181,


Bora 8.— " Adopted by Ibe &r«nd Lodge oi


idUjlbe offlclatUiBclernmul at cbiplals. '"-


H DnHATOHT DSQ&SB.

O&DBB OF BDSUfEfiS.

lo the Saboidinate Lodge (anlLke Freemasonry), Uie
bosiness of each degree has been trajisacted in that de-
gree, and even Initiatory members are entitled to pe-J
eimiary benefits' while in good standing, but in one c
these two points the two orders have been rendere
alike by the following amended resolution of the SaT<4
ereign Grand Lodge, session of 1881:


QENEBAL IN3TEUCTI0NS.

When a candidate is to be initiated, after he has beeul
elected, and it has been announced to the Noble Graai:
Niat he is in waiting, it will be the duty of that officerJ
U> appoint a Fast Grand or the Vice Grand to act i
Outside Conductor, who will retire to the ante or prepa-a
ration-room, receive the candidate, propound to him theM
questions laid down in the Charge-Boob, record the a
Bwers received (which must he signed by the candidate]
and attested by the Outside Conductor), and require o£a
him the prmary obligation necessary for all persons toF
take prior to initiation. (Page 48).

While this is being done, the Warden, by direction!

NoT» 7.— "BvBo irtmn 8itr»ordloiHT oYBnli reodsr ft neceHsry tog)'


iil/rwn aU."~OrOlVi jKoKual, p. *6.


OPENING CERKMONMKS. 45 \

B Noble Grant!, will propara tlie ludge-room I
the initiiition. The officera shall clolKe' themselves |
appropridtely, and the mciiibere shall ts-icli Ui furnish-
ed with a mask or covering fi>r the face, not of a lu- 1
dicrous nature. Ihiring an initiMtion the Noble Granil I
shall wear a scarlet rolie; the Vice Grand ft blue robe; '
the Warden and Conductor each a black robe, and thol
Scene Suppoiters each a white robe; and all of said I
offieera shall wear caps color of their robes. No other 1
officer or memlwr shall wear caps or robes. The Con- f
ductor ami Scene Supportera shall, during an initia-|
tion, bear wands color of their robes; the Supporters I
of the Noble Grand and Vi(!e Grand shall boar wandi^l
color of the robes of the officers they support, and the 1
Warden shall bear a staff.

When the Outside Conductor has performed his duty,
he will report to the Noble Giand.

If the answers are unsatisfactory, the Outside Con-
ductor shall receive directions as tofurthei proceedings.

When everything is ready in the lodge, the Noble
0rand will request the Oateide Conductor to retire,
prepare and introduce the candidate. The Noble Grand j
will then place the lodge under the charge of the Vice i
Grand, while he {the Noble Grand) retires behind, or J
the curtain is dropped before him, in accordance with |
the work.

Not* Bi— "If oarropillii urn! pmliiimi rernl lotncnaiie nnr henevoTence, mud \
HarK melt txn ao imcHiii ^ttmoK ■• erjiii Uapval.p M.


Pi_ix o» ScBOEDnriTB Jj^aiiErRtxot.


liZIZ2


ui


itio/ tli» unrloiiii olBccra . . . _

iPBf and BoOMUry nro liilurctsugoolilo anfl tl ,

'UDlB* ilio oppKiklla HlduDfthB room, bat tlio CbkpltJn, iftlitrtit
Id fit at'iHuaCa tlio I>iu( Onuid.


10 ultove diagTAin fihowfl
Lodije. but Eb« plaoe of
L tbetsetQriuid aome-


EX AMIS" ATI ON."


prlnud questloui uid a hlan^ for aoiwcn.

1. What is yoiiT name?
, Where do you reside?

3. What ia your occupation?

4. How old are you?

5. Do yon hold membership in or are you suspended I
or expelled from any Lodge of this Order?

6. Are you, so far as you know, iu sound health?


'( Fvtttt CeBVanto", P' »■


48 nnruTOBT qebbkb.

7. Do you Ijelievc in tin' esi^tenct' of fi Supreme, In-
JelligtiiL Beiiiij," the Creator and preserver of the Uni^

TUe utDiUanle alBoi bli DsiDB to UH soawen Eliea vut hli eiunliiBr uiuu Un
■Jgniiuie with hliuvra niimo belgir. Sboulil tUe cHndldnW give nn uuallllulolT
■Biwcr lu moj at [be qaiMllDDi. bs la dlimlaHd fraoi Ltic room uid (ba cua la
repOfWil to tbelodei. SboDldal] proiciatlrtsctorj, tbo oiamloer ulu [bacas-


PLEUOE :

" I hereby pledge my sjicred honor that I will keep

secret" whatever may transpire during my initiation." •

Whlla Iba ODUlde Couauctor l> wli


mm u Beer from Hew. Tbo Vaoerablu Warden pruvidun biinselt witli a long
gray iiard, long gray wig, u lumt blMlc robs tied clutely itiout ibcnuekuia
walal. and rencblnc lu bin tHat.ovi'rytbtag being daav to give bim tbe appeiriDESaf
a varT old mm. TUuItlBbt ioHLetlSaiHt Support fri am i:lutlied Id wblte robot

wblleall LUs olber memben weKrHiultllailEiuTcr liiQlr racni, Iha upper pDtirt

tU« itali tiD wlilcb atandi tbs ebaJr ot ILe Nob)e Onuiil. 1h doh brougbt am uid
plBCHl m iha water o( tholodBeTgoni and ibaSighl and £<!/l Scmt BupportJTt


Inside Ouardian — Who comes there?

Outside Conductor — The ulsideyConduetor, with a


BlIflDoa and tnnral ebamcler. luEg^pI. the mail
nallDDi. r . latllDtlon of this kind eilited Crom 111*
lure i lat I '' tntton its know very llttla. BUtorf
OH *■ iqppDHd ■ -ilBrlvBilfrQinB jMrCloliwtlDn tn
that titDHBK. 1 ivare revenli'il onir Id tba InlbtatM.
lion wa^ > I c&iiMilated to miles a Krioui and abMIni
IbB roulpleut."— iJrOift'i Annual, p BO


nrtTTATION. 4fl

stranger who desire.^ to In iuitiateil" into the laHepen-
deat Older of Oddfellows."


COSDUCTOR 3 CHABOB.

fou are now withJM alodge of Odd-fellows" — here the
world ia shut out — yon are separated from its cares and
diotinctioua, its dissensions and its vices. Here Frieud-
sliip and Love assert their mild dominiou, while Faith
and Charity combine to bless the mind with peace and
aoften the heart with sympathy. Those who surround
you ha^e all assumed the obligations and endeavor to
cbensh the sentiments peculiar to Odd-fellowship;" but
before you can unite with them j'ou must pass through
an initiatory ceremony, which will ultimately lead you

Ron la " Tlis qtuUflcutinu nqtUrrd >re Ihocths caadldsts miiBt ba • fiw,

WMle mtn. tvcalj-ouejttnot igc, ot guoJmoml clmniclerBiidBjuadlnillh,
■mUbellMFrlBlbcBnpruaioBfrde, (be Milt,.r um Balurof Ibo CnlvBrie. "—
CeHOMiani Pocket Companion, p. 19.

Kmi 14. — ■■Biyi Brother BLdgiily. InblB ' BnlDgyon (hi LltoiDd CbuscUr


gMDeredwIiblaltaf


KJi. bj iDlttaHca, «S


■ m"m!«^


IBSS u


»!,] It h«


taaa wegklr contrlb


tlop»(7arjlDB(rom


six 10 twelvB eeol*) from


ho™. blH ILmDUDlcd


oWl).B88,aW. Oftb


»KoelpU(.flEr


dliban


0i4li»rrei[»ii»<»i


OQDtlag 10 W.0IU.UO


)ItbM.ppll«l.


Mdt. tbe barlml ol I


BllDn at Ihi: orpb


UDIOf H,.


.aai»oftS.4Ti.a)aTu


Ibo lame oh] ecu.


TbMe


mmilared. ha.e «ll


Tod 658,068 mi^mlKn, und ST.MT wia


wed f


BraAt Manual, p


4».


V<mK.-"AfU


now It. Ii 11 reaUr u


InsiltuiloD of Am


erfcBD grovlli, Hud


a tanb eiccpt whctc


11 b« (W^l. pl.W


unared W


ibff anai Lodge o


-Donala-oix-i J-


p. a.


HffTBlK.— ■■Fori


.TonJjran-bcurd.-


mwl*bnl1lia<ipn>BKii.


lufoaaA-


p«Jodle.»


wl.teblliHrcoiirt.1.


•Dd tbua obiound


^a,^u.--aro,A;


Xa,.ua


.p.».


i
1


so


CnTUTOCT mflSDL


to primjiry troth."

C</mlMct'>r — Are yoo willing t.ri proceed?

Candidate ansicem.

Conductor — Be patient, therefore, and firm.

Conductor — Brothera, the stranger now awaiia «
myatic rites.

Right Scene Supporter — Then at once the i
|>re|>are!

Lf/t Scene Supporter — They are here! entwine t]
linka about hliu! (^The chain is pot acroashUshonldej
hrooKht around nnder hia arms and tied behind].

Left Scene Supporter — Now! bind him tothesL.

Ctmdudor — flold! Brotbere! Shall we proceed k
these, our mystic rites, or shall we mercy show?

Vice Grand and brothers (slowly and in a low b
voice) — Mercy — mercy show!

Cmdw^tor — Then mercy I will show, bat will fit*
wteron warning give.


ptli:a wliliu tbo iiroeiiuloaUnwtliigknriuidttiDruam.

Conductor to Supporters — Lead on our friend. fT
pOHH slowly around the room].

Conductor — Man in darkness and in chains!" Hoi,
mournful the spectacle! Yet it 13 bub the condition q
millions of our race, who are void of wisdom, thou|^
they know it not. We have a lesson to impart to hia
— one of great moment and deep solemnity; a faithM
exhibition of the vanity of worldly things — of thciffl


" Whui roBtiinMlon hf tb" w
iintiii>."—0ro4lt't Jfaimal, p. w.


I of tmtli IB In rcli^IOD, tiitU*HI


!li llwr nellher behold nar ftel. IjJ


ItJTTlATIOM',


stability of wealth and power— of tlie certain decay of
all earthly greatness.


dnntor beelm to take on the blindrold aod eaya to ibe cwtdldaiej

CoTutuctor — Be serious, for our lesson is as melancholy
asit iH truthful. (_B!inda" are now oif ], Behold a rep-
resentation of the effect of death. That silent yet im-
pressive lecturer — to rice, confusion, but to virtue,
peace — is all that remains on earth of one who was
born as you were bom, who lived as you now live, who
for many days enjoyed his possp^siona, his power and
his pleasures. But now, alas! nothing is left of him
aaye that sad memorial of man's mortality," The warm
heart that throbbed for others' woes, or the cold one
which held no sympathy, has mouldered away and
joined its kindred dnst. Contemplate the scene! [A
solemn dirge may be sung or played]. Should it not
humble human pride? Shauld it not awake the soul to
a just sense of responsibility to its God — of duty to
itself? And in view of thjs, the common lot of all,
should it notenlistthetenderest of human sympathies?
My friend, tliat gloomy monitor is but ati emblem of
what you are sure to be.and what yonmay soon become.
Serioaaly meditate the solemn admonition it affords;
ponduf it well, and see that your own heart fosters not
evil — the bane of society, the fountain of all wrong, the
progenitor of crime, hatred and violence, whose eouse-
quencea mu^t continue to afflict mankind until that
period to which Hope looks forward with ardent joy.
when one law shall bind all nations, tongues and


Wora 19,-


Tho flnit ™r of Ugh


I Inn


ora Blrvnd/ lU


Uyof


bKvlt.y ot llfl


of


life'


KSTf ullj legrat


^


■at Iporciuca 6y 168 tlTitet.


l!«co


tiflDHfrom hu


te>or>»»*»d


ms. ana mi a


ndiiat


'o^O!)


lifaaual


p ».


»OT«B0.-


Uu


raonaUty


lUUl


Hho-natl.™


ence BDllJielptei


DWlll


iiEly pona


rth


lBMbIiulIi[m


and )u/o


mir


fcTW«lllK.lhll


sss^tsss-p-s—'


IKat


.byt


u rtl


aut


""'"


""""


"""


^^^


^^^


^^


kinrfr.


il^ '.f -hn i^firt.b: sod tiiat law will be


—I tiavi? seen the nw
1)^.;( - - '^-^ t'jthe uuirmoginui. In

an.'! ,. .: -lym^ npuath^BEidk. Itsgnuwai

fcprm w-^re goa«; it* lo«eime!ia was vanished awaj;
t«s7«( w^-re ficatt«re^ to ttie groond, ind no one g
ernl them a^in. I have neea maSL ia the pride o

strenfCth; hn cheeks glowed with beantv; his I

w«re fnli of actirity: he wiiked.be rau. lie lea4)ed, ]|
rqw<;e(I in that he was more excellent than the n«e.
nrtiirneij, ao'l behold! life w^ departed from him, ai
the bresth from out of hi* nostrils. Death ia in f
world and the Bpoiier i^ among the workd of I
Almiffhty. All that is bom most die.

Ijfft Srene Supporter — I have seen the leaves fall a
|j« think upon the gronnd; I hare heard the wial
bla#it.4 ning «ad requiems over their decay; and ]
ftpring came ; the soft zephyrs played among the bra
CD, they budded lorth again, and in the place of c
there watt life, beauty and joy. [Candidate is ag
blindfolded].

Conductor — You may think itstrange, my finend, t
WB thus blindfold" you; its symbolic purpose will, L
duu time, be fully exi'lained. "[Candidate ia led to tU
Warden, where the blinds are reraovedj. 1

Conductor — This, my friend, is our Venerable Wa^
den; he hat* a charge to deliver to you; listen attentirel|
tfi wimt he may say. Assist him to rise.

Warden— iMatitW presumptuous mortal! How i
itrt thou?


lalf't In r


■"tlumtalniiUng 'iharactirlitlt of allth4 ancitntrVt.,

TOW and gloom. mUm-iiiHn tight and jay; l./inf icin alt eo
ilnil mtn nf \ht\,r vttaknm.tt^r igiioraii^t. IhtVr JulpUr-
•ifiiliftr -ir chnrantrr,' 0/ iMthBTtaeta and uncertainlji ^


Candiaate ansiceis.

Warden — Wiat trade, profession or calling haat tbou ? I

Candidate answers.

Wanien — Canst tbou keep a secret?

Candidate answers,

TTardew— Ah! but wilt thou ?

Candidate ansuvrs.

Warden — Be serious, theu, while I address you aa a
man. Listen f;o the voice of wisdom speaking from age
and experience, and let it sint deep into your iieart.
These trembling limbs and this wrinkled brow betoken
that the weight of years is upon me. I have indeed
seen many years, and many solemn changes have passed
before me. A wise man has said: " I have been young
but now am old, yet have I not seen the ripfateoiis for-
saken or his seed begging bread." I would impress this
npon your mind, and add another maxim, which I pray
yon also heed and be wise. It is this: that in the prac-
tice of Friendship, Love and Truth will be found the
best safeguard against the ills of life. Forget it not;
forget it not. '

Warden to Cfrnditcttyr — Brother Conductor, you will
now present the stranger to the Vice Grand.


Conductor — You are now at the chair of our Worthy.
Vice Grand.

TICE GBAHd's CHAHGB.

Vice Grand — Stranger, having entered within these
walls, you are never to make known the secrets of this
Order, or make any discovery to any person or persons
npon any pretense or for any purpose. Will you com-
ply with these rules ?

Candidate — I will.

Vice Grand to Conductor — Restore him to light and j
libertT. [Lights are turned up, blindfold is taken off. ]
uid tiie cnains also].

Vice Grand to Candidate — Stranger, it is ray duty to '


i


Mm winds «* w«all

mmmmtjn, «e von ini&R« to taikHKb
fav gnw a J Phea row a^ band


f, . ia tbe pmewx oT Oe 1

tfi« Opt«r 04W MwmMM. 4o soiemdy |

I mil iMr7«r eofBDinneate to a^ on

«(( tfi ((<'» ar^ tif is Iffid lodge, the t

((rifis, th« t«nD. traTRljti;^ or otberpa

Ifitf i^ tlw; IiM«pmdmt Order of (Mu-wiiu«a.

trill I incpowi; or l«n<] any «< tbe fanAs or l

raliitiiiK i<j the f«oH» or secret woric of the (

t*< any p«wwi or i)er»i>na, except to one

autbori/«d to rG<»ivii tlwin. That I will neTer lere

Bfiy (>rivBt« IfiiRJnfnH which may be tranaacted in i

rranpncii ill thin fir iiny 'ither lodge. I also promise tl
will iihide hy th<! tiiwx, nilat and regulations of t
l<iilK''t of the Ontiiil I^^lge of the Independent Ord
Od'l-ffi||ow« uFlhiTi' ndTTiG the State) or any other Q
or Wiij'lilrix liidg» to which I may be attached.

I I'lirlhni' jiromiNo that I will never wrong a SubordiJ
iKit." or (Uniud JjuilKi) to the value of anything, N
will I l.ikk" iNirfc or Himrc, directly or indirectly, in a .
llli<lfiLl (Itwirilnitinn of the funds or other property o
till' k"li;"; liiili will, U) tlie bout of my ability, endeavdi
hi |ir"vi'iil, llic niLiiii', Nor will I wrong a brother c
Mm> Mill w'liii^i'd without apprifllag him of approach!
iliililtt'i'. il' ill my |"'Wi'i' HO to do. Should I be expe'
III' (■oliiul.iiiilv It'iin' I'h'' Ordor, I will consider i
nniHit'"' »» l>ih<liii|> out of il a-4 in it. To the faithl

to)H\'niinu f .ill wlii, li I |,I,..iy.- ii.v >.mx>^\ honor,

^ \'m iMlftif— |uiK< l-i<|>, all i\\\> Ht'ntod.)


DrniATios,

Yice Grand to Ctindidnfe — Stranger(s). you have m
Altered into a society that i::i far more important
you may at firat iraagine. It conforms to law, reli;
*iid sound morality, and does not permit auytbing
trary to the allegiance we owe to oar country', or
dnty we owe to ourselves. Let Rood conduct proci
yon the esteem of your family and friends. Let afi
^ution guard yon against making any improper dis«
fries to the uninformed, so that oy your example yi
may convince the world that good faith and virtue iuv
the peculiar characteristics of a true Odd-fellow; for
Bccording to our laws we can be Odd-fellows only while
we act like honest men- I will now recommend you I
the Noble Grand, who will further instruct you, and
hope your deportment will he 8uch after your initiatii
as to give us no cause to regret that we have accept
yon as a brother.

Vife Grand to Conductor — Proceed with our friend to
the principal chair, there to be introduced to the Noble
Grand.

Vice Grand — (three raps, all rise).

IKITIATlf'N ODE.


lue


'^Conductor— Brother Right Supporter, is the Nnl4
Grand engaged 'f

Right Supporter — He is, my brother.

Conductor — Business of importance demands his i ^
teation. A stranger desires to be introduced to him. *


56 IKITIATOET fEeBEE.

Bight Supporter — Then he may be disturbed. [RiBlit
Supporter passes behiad tlie curtain and holds tlie fol-
lowing dialogue with the Noble GrandJ.

Bight Supporter — Noble Grand!

Noble Grand — Well, my brother.

Bight Supporter — A stranger stands before you-

N^le Graml — A stranger stands before mei' How
gained that stranger admittance within these walls?

Bight Supporter — By the recommendation of worthy
brothers and the permission of the Vice Grand.

Noble Grand — Has he taken upon himself that serious,
aoleuin and binding obligation?

Bight Supporter — He has, Koble Grand,

Noble Grand — Then let him be introduced to me.

Curtain li tbrown back and Koble Or>Dd riKV.

Noble Grand — (one rap, seating the lodge).

OOmtb now tska alt tbclr rabei ind tbo mEmtien tbelr mulis.

Conductor — Noble Grand, by direction of the Vice
Grand. I present to you a stranger forinstructioninthe
mysteries of our Order.


NOBLE OHANDS CHARGE.

Noble Grand — My friend, I welcome you among the
fraternity of Odd-fellows, with whose customs I trust
you will soon become better acquainted. Undefour
disguise J have no doubt you took us for odd fellows"
indeed. Leiiru from this that men are not always to be
taken for what they^ appear." Some may have a rough
and unseemly exterior, but a ^ood, true heart within,
while others possessing a captivating person aud man-
ners, niiiy be destitute of all genuine principle, t hope


Apwy your 1

■.^M biiDded


you will pardon us tbe iDDucent deception atid make
[■roper application ol the moral it is designed to oonveyS

We will now proceed to instruct yoii in the mysterie*
of the initiatory degree of this order, they are:

^rst — The entersign.

Second— The countersign.

Third — The password of the Initiatory degree.

Fourth — The password of the current term, which ia.
changed eacli term, and will be given to you privately^
in the course of the evening by the Noble Grand, whoj
alone is authorized to communicate it or cause it to b^
communicated to members.

i^irA— The grip.


The En'
bell if there be i
the inner door.

has three motmi


consists of o
at the oute


or one pull of thd
and three raps


IE COITNTERSICJN

First, with thi' thumb of the righd
hiinO in thepaliU
thereof, place ihs
four fingers perJ
I pen d 1 c u I a r ! ji
\ across the moutlifl
I the back of the"
n d outward.
•Second, close the
last three fingers
upon the thumb
in the palm of
the hand, the in-
dex or fore finger
' being eztendeda]
carry it to
outer corner oi tht. ught lyt,, liu-lntk of the hand be
outward, forming a right angle m itb the nose, TTtir^
let the hand drop toward the ground, open and pain)
outward, the thumb to be nearly parallel with the fingei '
and the hand about six inches from the body,

Explanation of the Covnter Sign — The first raotiorq
signifies silence, and reminds us that we are boi


2ll MOIIDI


58 INITUTOfiY DBQKUR.

keep iiiviuliite ihe eecretB of thv Onler. Tbe seconu ^
motion sigiiifiea OmniHcience, and reminds us that the
all-seeing eye of Uod is continually walcliiog over ou
actions. The third motion aigDifies fralernity, and re-
minds us that the baud of an Odd-fellow should always ■
be open to a brother. The password is Fides to be let-
Lered at all limes when used for working purposes, work-
ing into a lodge or in examination prior to opening. In
uommnnioaling this v.'ord either to the Inside Guardian
or to the Warden tho brother must give the letters F. I,
aud if required by the Inside Guardian or tbe Warden,
he must give the remainder of the word, D. E. S., let
tured as hefoiv. Tbe Inside Guardian and the Warden
must be Hatiafied.

INITIATORY GEIP.

With the first two fingers
of the right hand seize and
•\'^^i^. ^^ ''"'' 'WiHi the first two fin-
gers of the brotlier's right
hand; with the thumb (your
own) touch each of tlie two '
fingers (your own) and thus form the link. No shaking
hands in making the grip.

Noble Grand — This Grip has never been broken by
any gnnd Odd-fellow, aud we bopi.' and trust that it
never will be by you.

INSTItllCTIONS TO CANDIDATE.

Noble Grand — In all lodges there ia an outer and an
inner door, and between them what is termed an ante-
room, At the outer door tliere is stationed an officer
called the Outside Guardian, and at the inner door an
officer called the Inside Guardian.

Wishing to visit a lodge which is open in the initia-
tory degree, you will announce your presence at the
outer door by giving one rap, or one pull of the bell, if
there be one; but any alarm will be attended to.

The Outside Guardian will open the wicket, and re-
quire from vrtu the Password of the current term, whieh
inUHt be given in full. If given correctly you will be
admitted to tbe ante-room.~ You will then clothe your-


ENITIATIOM.

Belf in the regalia appropriate to yoar rank and station I
in ihti lodge, which fortho pi'eecnt will be a plaiu wbitel
collar; advance to the inner door and give three raps.

The Inside Guardian will announce to the proper I
officer (either the Noble Grand or Vice Grand of tha ^
lodge, as the rules of the lodge shall have prescribed),
that there is an alarm at the door. The Inside Guard-
ian is directed by such officer to inquire the cause —
whereupon the Inside Guardian will open the wicket,
and obtain from you your name, rank, and tho number
of the lodge to which you belong.

The Inside Guardian will close the wicket and inform i
the proper officer, who, if he is satisfied, will direct the I
Inside Guardian to admit you, if correct. The Inside I
Guardian re-opens the wicket, and you must give him '
the Password of the initiatory degree. If correct the
Inside Guardian will admit you, when you will advance
to the center of the room and address the Noble Grand
with the Conntersign, who will acknowledge you as ajl
brother by giving the same Conntersign. Fou will then-
turn and address the Vice Grand with the Countersign,, I
who will acknowledge you as a brother with the samel
Countersign. Yon will then be seated.

Wishing to leave the lodge before ii is closed, you. J
will make the same Countersign to the Noble Grandl
which will be answered by hira.

It yon are visiting your own lodge when it is open In-I
the Initiatory degree and are without either the Password I
of the current term or the Password of this degree, thCi^
proper officer of the lodge (the Noble Grand) being so
informed asks the Secretary as to yonr standing in tha!
lodge. If the Secretary reports favorably, directiouaS
will bo given to admit you, but if the i-eport is onfavor^
able you are so informed by the Outside Guardian tkuam
you cannot be admitted.


^WMflk^oiilvptmcrsiKaMi. Wcfdai
«laia«4t7e0t«Bfanwari ' "*

M»«*r tA • kwKwtedge nf hiirlf hir daty;'
4«>tiJD^; » ditrkiKM noi aaljr of re»oft, faotfll'thea
ii«tam. And yon were hcnai with dniiM,to3
tfant nlnmry uf aual" to aeiiNe — that nbjectiait fa

injtiVftr'l unA pf^iniAn, into which o

)iJ4 uwn pftMi/iiM. Vr/u were then led to a m

»N nffiliWn of mr/rtolity was exhibited, to i

fipi Itw t^nd »f tkw wrvitude, to remind yoa a

fiftniftcttnt Mii't i^nrijihable nature of all t

lAt^eetn ttmt tH> iittva «xdte men's passions

iUm. AtUiT tliix reprettcntation, intended to reach ;

l>un»ci<<ii''« mill t'liich your heart, yon have been B

lit WkUI ftii'l \i\Mty, Une of these Hctsisemblematji

(if Hint llhurty whi(!h the virtuous enjoy when c<

(if lining iliMtinthrallvd from nenHuolity and passion;


r >ll«y wvtn t
tn lliuir UH. i
uu. knd tg yi


t."—araih-t Kanual, p. OB,


INITIATION. 61

other is emblematic j,! ol' the light of that truth which
rei'eub to us Love ad the granU remedy for all social
tvils, as it is indeed the foundation of all good towards
God or man. In this light we trust you will ever walk;
this liberty we hope you will ever maintain. It will be
our duty — it is one of the great ends of our institution
— to aid you in so doing. We claim the privilege,
therefore, of watching over your conduct, not only in
the lodge-room, but in your intercourse with the world
at targe.

Noble Grand — The Conductor will introduce the can-
didate to the acting Past Grand. [Noble Grand dis-
robes,]

Conductor — Worthy Past Grand, by direction of the
Noble Grand I present to you this candidate for farther
instruction.

PAST grand's CHABQE.

My friend: Ton are now initiated" into and made
acquainted with the organization and work of a lodge
of the Independent Order of Odd-£ellows, and are recog-
nized as a member. The institution of Odd-fellowship
is progressive in its character. You have passed its
threshold, and, after a reasonable probation, may ad-

yoTB «S,— "Tbe Belccdoa at a trv tndlrlilnalsant at IbH msat to unite UiEn


attiuMd blm tbB pragenllor of tbu ' ctaoien people' wtao were to bu t
Itorr gf DLtLds UMti unILt lAt ucrfd abould ba prepu^d [a receive ad<

lilieted pupiii of Qod ' a peculiar people. ' Tbey were to bo 'Qii
■DiDUIbeBaLlotit amuDd ibem, nocaDirHr beredlurr duoent. bni i
•Inpiltrtuni] ol EnTETnment, s ilneulir code of 1kw>, snd it flnguUr
wonhlR all adapwd lo keep Lhem from roloBllngwllh other nullDm •nd


i


natloniiHa clearly defined, end certain pbrslcai defect! ud candUlons of beallb
wtro OlnlB BKoiei at perpetual eioluiloo from * tbe oonsregatlsa of IirHl.


MsU fa»ie &^r »"Mn"< » kMrwJBdlp rf it*

1 fvtfaefRMK)tHB«r,


fife.

Weksr« at tlw tine s few gm
catc wkkik. IB aJ dit i iM i to these jam ksn nes«e<

titynmtoike chancier aad trae olqeets of OU-M-

Itnnbtp.

Odid-lellowKhip » fona fe d spoo that etcxnal p rinwpU
whieb. recjfrnBUis aua aa aeonstito^t of
m1 hrotberbood, t«aehes biai that as he came fro»
hsndi of acominon PareotbeUboandtocbenshaiidto!
prot<r^" hi* fellow cuao. It tbospreaeDtsabroad plat-
(r/na up'/n wbich iDsnkind may uniteinoSeeaof hDnuui
beiu^&ctiria. Undtr its comprebeosiTe inSaencea,
•11 ttic imtioD" uf th« eartii may concentrate tbeir eaer-
gtMf'frthtt good of thi! comnfon rac«. Batted i^rao^
certain truthn wbich are like axioms among all natioi
UiaKii<» and ctwiU, iU sacred tolerance presente
flucliruH which, by iix gentle intlneace, gathers within
Ito (rrhit uiiUgonistic natures, controls the elements
dixcord, iitillH th» ittonn and soothes the spirit ot
liun, nnd dircctN in harmony man's united efforts to
fmtcnilzd tlio world. Tina is the great first principle,
of our fuUownhip, which we denominate fratemi^; a,
liiiipiimHl fniternity in the family of man. Ourfors-
fuihora hiivi) wirtely luiulo this principle the comer-Btone


|l(lTltf.-"Io»11M.rill
Uf inn i™»lnill.iT Bid, Hill
M li /Uier Hitnlti, Au' f


mot llfuln ffhlob ■ brother miirlMpiMi


tjf Odd-fellowship," Upon its solid basis the whole
superstructare has securely rested, and, as we believe, is
destined immovably to repose until time shall benomore.

From this principle we learn to regard the Great
Aathor of our existence as our Father," " in whom
atone we live and move and have our being;" to recog-
nize each other as alike the offspring of the same
Parent, as the master-piece of hia handiwork, and de-
aigaed as such to reflect iu our nature and relations the
image of Him after whose likeness man was formed.
We are, therefore, brothers; and in all our intercourse
we illustrate the truthfulness of this profession by re-
ciprocal relief and kindly offices to one another in the
day of trial. With the divisions and classifications of
human society our Order holds no fellowship. While
it inculcates a veneration for religion and subordination
to civil government and its laws, it studiously avoids all
affinity with systems of faith or sects, whether religious
or political.

In becoming an Odd-fellow no sacrifice of your opin-
ions, no change of your relations to_ the State, no
loosening of the obligations whidii as a good citizen,
you owe to the laws and institutions under which you
live, is required.

None8.-"FRATElHnTTl tWsIsonr oomor-Btonii. Upon Iti BolW lisili
MoorbrMlinin, chniren o( ooa HuBvenJy Fsthcr. the Great Aulbor Dt diu-ei-


■UM."— SrOiA'(X(liHUlI,{i. "iS.


Oo thvcoBtTBry, Imm now and fimrrer, that jottci
ttOt hrc^m* fui Oflij-fpllow. in spirit s;i.l '.r:i\ -i
jrou Mrs Kfit^'il to your Creator, fajii.:
try and fraternal to your fellf>w raan.
of ft lo<1a''-i'''Oin w« nuwt for mncua]
i*f Ainifm, airl tb« elevation** of hun!,.n char;
With (jiin; hrurtH iiinl cl(;an hiuids must we cw
N'lrh '*fli''i-<<. Btnfo and ilvtconl, party and sect,i
Aro«to h'-iift-lmrfiioitii and divi^ons among met
Imniithpd hy our laws williotit tbu counsel; and it,p
f^hunt", mtmtt thouithtlesn brother abouM so far i
ri^r>m thi>* injiiiictirm an to permit evil ia&iiences too
trol hia tu-.^.'um*, ha inu.>4t atone to the offended
Wb war at(uio«t viiw in all its forms. Frieiu
townrd mtin prompt*) the contest; the gentle infloi
iif Lov<! Kiippiy the wtjapoiu; Truth condecratea i
otfort and Innds to victory.

fltich, my friend, are among the first principles J
O'lrl-frUowMhip; itjt objects you will more clearly a
■taint nit yiii wlvuncft in the order. Tf you have bew
Initiut"'! into thi* institution from the inJ
too common error, nunieJy, that Odd-fellowship
m^re linat'llt'iul nociety, having forits single purpose t]
rKltur" of iU mombfiri lu the Htruggle incident to hum
llff— if you hiive united yourself with thia great b

Hm* (n.-*-Tl)» »™»H'i'l»iDf ouf atitt. br md Ihrougli which


I'roih'f Manual.p. Bt.
irnlljlolhi- tmniljol


ih olbtr trulsnul «


—OtviK* tfOHuul.p. m.


EsmiATioir. 65

hood from the promptings of idle cariosity, be at once
undeceived. Mutual relief, it is true, is a leading office
In our affiliation. To visit the sick, relieve the dis-
tressed, to bury the dead and educate the orphan, is the
command of oar laws, and an imperative duty which
Odd-tellowship enjoins. But these, although its fre-
quent and almost daily ministrations, are but a tithe of
the intrinsic virtues of onr beloved order. We seek to
improve and elevate the character of man — to imbue
him with proper conceptions of his capabilities for
good; to enlighten" his mind — to enlarge the sphere of
his affections — in a word, our aim is to lead man to the
'Cultivation of the true fraternal relation designed by
the Oreat Author of his being. Brother, for by tbut
endearing name you are now privileged to be hailed, 1
greet you as an Odd-fellow of the Independent Order,

ind welcome you as a member of Lodge No. — ,

inder the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of ,

Hay you ever be animated by the pure principles of
Md-fellowship, and may your life and conduct" afford

mm K.— ■■The ordsr u fonnded by Brotlier Wilder. "" »i™plT » humam
la widow (Dd orphin. BnC graUusIlT Jbere weie Infniud Inlo tn l«Iiirti snd


itlelp»lfld. •Beta
KX lie dwell In IliE Temple wMch
biMJt't jraniiat, p. 34.
#OT»a«.— "M»r j^jorlallUHon ind oontoq
iOmallblliutaieiaof monl rtilQit. lei yon rn

■MMdvtitoe."— StimA'j JlanunJ.p. 98.


with <shom be will retire ta
: cuidldate. wbo will woikifl


6S INITIA.TORY DKGltEE.

DO reproach to the new character which you have 1
night voluntarily assiim

Noble Orandto Conductor — ^Conduct tlie candidate
the Secretary, where he will sign the Constitution.

Afler tbis tbe candidate Ib led lif thf cunductor ta IhD lett-hud EUa oi

NohieOfuid'ichait. Budiaby hlDipriittl*'-'- '■ - -

Ibe term SDd lis ElplBnBlloll.

He is I ben Blvsn In charge of Ihe Warden

aprnn. the proper regalia Df aa in]tiaU>ry u

The Warden will then enler and awiit tl
way Id by Elving Ibu Alann and the Biplan

On arrlviihgattlie cenierof the room, he wm, wiia inc naraen, aaurei*
Ihe Noble Grand with the CoDntfrBlEn, wbo will inewer wtib tbe samoaiKn:
turning ta(be Vice Grand, he will addresB blm with [be CoDDteralgn, i?ho

The Warden will then lead blm to'the chair ur Ibti Noble Qtand. who will

Noble Grand — Brother, I congratulate you upon hav-
ing worked your way into a lodge of our Order. I wUt
now proceed to give you further instruction.

SIGN OF DISTBESB.

Place the open right hand palm downward on the top
of the head, raise the hand upward about nine inches;
drop the hand
to the head;
i do three
--.nes; the
I hand after be-
ing placed on
t^e head is to
be raised and
replaced o n
the head three
times; then
drop the hand
to the aide.
Answer — ex-
aignolDiaitesB, Answer. tendthehands

at ann'slength off from the aides and at right angle§ to
the body, palms outward; panee a moment and ilrop the
hands to the Bide; this is not repeated.
£xpiaruition — The Sign of Distress gives information
to a brother at a distance tbat a bioOiet oi \,Ve Order is


of assistance. The aoswer is given by a brotlier
'ho Bhall observe and recognize the Sign and denotes a
iadiness to give the requisite assistance. When this
ign cannot be observed the brother in distress may iiBt-
le words" Give ear, Oye MeavemP' which words must
le pronounced in fall and not the initials thereof.

THE SIGN OF RECOGNITION.

I^rat — When a brother shall desire to be recognized

.H an Odd-fellow by a member of

he Order, he shall grasp with his

right hand the lapel of bis coat,

the hand being placed over the

I right nipple, the thumb extended

j upward Second^Aii Odd-fellow

I observingthisSignshallrecognize

and answer the same by taking

hold of the right lapel of bis coat

with bis left hand, the same being

also placed over the right nipple,

thumb Goncealedbeneiith the coat

^TXiVrf— When the brother who

made the Sign shall observe the

answer he shall advance to the

person making the answer and

txtend to bim hts right hand, which the person (if he

)e an Odd-fellow) Khali accept and shake with bia right

land and althesame time shall ask, Are you looking for

when the other shall respond. For you.

either of the brothers should be at the time without

k ouat he shall place his band on his person in the same

loaition, the challengingbrother with bis fingers turned

Wder, the brother answering with his thumb concealed

n the palm of his hand.

yvraa Siaii— Tha rtgbc hand aplitted,

HiMt eriBia—\a Ibe nee of tile gavcI, one blow (NobLo Onnd glvFi one
Kp) callB the lodge lo order, ot epAla h when Btandlng; Uirce blown (eiiei
in) call np Ibe lodga. Tbe can did ate it made to (ace the Vice Grand-

"BcofaaDd brolhera.l now IntrpdnCB to joa'dtoftioi

M/onr Cfieodihip and prototttou.


CHAPTER V.

Initiatory Deobee.

CLOSIlia CEREM0NIE6.

Noble Grand (three raps, all rise) — Officers and bro
ers, I will thank you to rise and assist me in closing tJ
lodge,

• SONQ.

Fat tbLi your fcJendly call


Froi


Dpitni


Ldd(c,r.


Good-i


nlBUl!.


insuionp..


Bum


BBM. >l


ad tallT Dioir


Noble Grand — Vice Grand, I will thank you to p
form the last duty of your station.

Vice Grand — Bretliren, we thank you for your i
tendance this evening, and invite the company off
many of you as can make it convenient to attend d
any future meeting.

Noble .Grand — Warden, what is the last duty of yo(
station ?


0L08Iir& CBREM0NTB8. 09

Warden — It is to collect the regalia and deposit it in
ts proper iilace.

Noble Grand — Guardian, what is the last duty of your
Itation P

Guardian — It is to open the door, that the brothers
tcay depart in peace.

Noble Grand — 1 will thank you to do that duty as
aoon aa the lodge is closed.

Gitardian — I will.

Noble Grand — Right Supporter, I will thank you to
lerform the last duty of your station.

Right Supporter — By desire of our Noble Grand, I

proclaim this lodge closed until next lodge night, at

o'clock, when it will be re-opened for the transaction of
Buch buainesB as may be lawfully brought before the
lodge, and for the diffusion of the principlcB of benev-
olenee and charity.

Noble Grand {one rap, repeated by Vice Grand) — I,
^i^ore, declare this lodge closed.


ASALTSE anUTORT


tjkMMlLtAXE had thiM arts hy -miadi he nbteel ft

•al'jjugitted mankind: bribing, diTiding, and amni
Odd^ellowiihip briba men by the hope of I
ditidfi iU members fi-om oatsideis and those of «
AftgT^j: from another by secrecy, and amuses them I
ceremooieB,

Wliat redeems these opening ceremonies from i
xat itupidity, is their religious character. All beyog
kOutfidc Guardian, hoodwink and pledge of Bscre
hipi BAd pate and holds the mind in a ]


VESUEHIC IITFLCESCE — KKNTAL DEBJLUCHES. Tl

br receiving the mesmeric or spiritual infiuence of the
B]'3tem and of the spirits who inhabit and wield it.
They, also, in apparently harmless and unimportant
particnlars, commence the perpetual lodge lesson of
BDhmissioQ and obedience to superiors. Thi» is calcu-
lated, by degrees, to weao the mind of the initiate from
the open and free subordination to law, governmeut,
And the religion of Christ, by a weekly uiglit-drill in
obedience to another system, unknown to the true God,

—the secret empire of " the god of this world."

Walking, as a risitor, through the Gray Nunnery at
Montreal, and a convent at Quebec, I saw beautiful
jroung females busy at their devotions in inaccessible
galleries in sight from the chapel floor. In a long hall

r corridor I saw pale, wan women in a row oa one side^
working with their needles under the eye of a lady
superior, like convicts under keepers; and, on the other
ride of the apartment, a row of ninety cots, beside each
' which. Bitting or kneeling, were extremely aged
|>eople whose lips moved in silence as they counted
their beads. The Papacy keeps its votaries submissive
[ Imstf. Odd-fellowship, like every false system of
religion, mast do the same; and these "opening ceremo-
" which cover six or seven pagesin describing them,
—though a single paragraph might answer the ends of
opening the lodge — are an initiatory drill of subjection,
copied, in some parts, nearly verbatim from the opening
of a Masonic lodge. Every such initiation is a mental
debauch, operating on mind like tricks, sorcery and
Ebrtuue telling.


r fte poerile regolstioiu. Dr. Leottard Ba
of tbtr Hatooie JoittitntioD: **It seems to
otiliNflutuuii iiUM of dreary aonxense." And yet Presi-
itnU *it tbu Republic have been Hasons and Odd-fel-
IdWii, (Mirf to Hty tliey have joined the lodges for popu-
liirlty i* U) cAinhnH thoir power over civilized mind io
Mm liiwlliltf uniioim uf the earth.

\ liiiiiiiriil of iiuitthliorH in n hall, at night, get an-
oflitir iiiilfthliiir HN u ciindidate for initiation. He is
liikoii liitii nil iiiilc-rDuii., ikikud his name, residenie,


IIELUBTRATIOIT— " BROAD PLAtFORM "—A RELIGIOIT. 73

KOpattOQ, age, lodge relations, liealtli, aad belief in a
Supreme Intelligent Beiag." Hia answers are taken
own and signed by his name*. He then begins to be
ledged to conceal what is to happen to him in the
Kige, which gives a deril'a dignity to the- unknown
rifles before liim. He ia blindfolded and led in, lectured,
hained, and threatened with binding " to the stake."
1 this plight he is led around, his blind taken off, and
e confronted with a grinning human skeleton, with
anting torches held each side. His eaptora then te-
eat some school-boy lessons on death. Hoodwinked
, he is led to one officer after another, hia blinder
leing put on and off, till the Vice Grand orders the
bains off and re-p!edgea him, with hia hand on his
ea^^., to conceal the whole work of the lodge, and not
) wrong it. He is then further lectured, twaddled,
}iarged, told the falsehood that " Odd-feliowahip pre-
enta a broad platform upon which mankind may unite,"
rhen he is just now pledged, and afterward sworn, to
Onceal the whole thing called Odd-feilowahip from
bat very " munkind " who are to unite on ita platform.
le ia now hailed as a brother, and told that Odd-fellow-
hip is not " a mere beuKficial society;" that its aim is
to elevate man," and " lead him to cultivate the true
ratemal relations designed by the Great Author of hia
etng" (See the decree); that, in short, it is a religion;
bat it will bring men out of the blindness of error and


PBATzaFPI. FABOZ — 6ATAH ITS GOD.

the chains of siu, into the liberty of the aons of God.
And this contemptible farce is preceded by a aolenm
prayer to the god of the lodge, and closed with an ode
on friendship, love and truth. This is Odd-fellowship,
and the whole of it, the further degrees being but repe-
titions of similar doses.

There is but one possible explanation 'of the fact that
hundreds of thousands of grown, -rational men repeat
this farrago weekly, and from year to year. It is that
Satan is its god, and that he imposes these and other
pagan puerilities on man, made in the image of God
and redeemed by Christ, to avenge himself on the God
k whom he hates for casting him and his angels out of
n; to travesty the Christian religion and shut the
Bonly door of hope for man through Christ, by opening
[false doors leading to himself. To treat such a system
8 frivolous " nonsense " is to commit a dreadful rais-
^ take. If " the heavens and earth " were now in fiames
5 they one day vrill he (2 Pet. 3: 7) — if one only
B'bridge of escape, built by Christ, coold give safety to
L those fleeing from the conflagration of the world, and a
L revolted angel should set open false doors, promising to
r lead to Paradise, but actually leading to hell, "where
\ their worm dieth not and their fire is not quenched,"
I —such is the door of every secret lodge. Every pagan
\ ehrine, or temple, or man-made religion, ia such a gate-
way of perdition, no matter what the worahipB an> n


ipB aw»- \\^


FROM WHENCE THE LODQe's POWER. 75

made of, or what frivolities are practiced within them.
Legions of devils give them their mesmeric power over
mind; and while the motives of the worshipers are as
various as their callings and hopes, ''their way is as
darkness; they know not at what they stumble." — Prov,
4:19.


\


CHAPTER VI.

Fnwr, OE DsoaEE of FaEKirDSHip.'*

QENKKil. REQUIATIOSS.
tptad by Qu Sovereign Grand Loigt. 1. 0. 0. F., Satim 0/I88O.

When Bubordinate lodges open in the degrees for the
purpose of balloting for or conferring the degrees, the
titles of the officers shall be the same as in the laitiatoiy
Degree; and the of&cers shall, respectively, occupy the
Bame chairs aa in the Initiatory Degree.

No officer or member can enter a lodge open and
working in the degrees, without addressing the presid-
ing officer, except the Conductor when he enters or re-
tires with a candidate; nor can any officer or member
retire without addressing the presiding officer with the
proper aign. All voting is by the voting sign, unless
otherwise provided.

Working Lodges must close in the Initiatory Degree
before opening in the higher degrees.

In voting to advance brethren to the degrees, when
the balloting takes place, the lodge must be opened in
the particular degree applied for, and when balloting,
the ballot-box shall be placed on a pedestal near the
center of the room, and the Noble Grand shall supervise
the balloting.


GBsr^LA^L RBeriATioKa. 77

The right of a lodge to grant two or more degrees to
^ brother at the same time is left for local legialation,

A lodge can confer the degrees upon a member of
another lodge, provided he presents a certihcate of his
lodge that they have been voted him and paid for, with
a request that they be conferred.

In all the degrees three rups call up Ihe lodge and
one rap seats the lodge.

The dramatic parts of the degrees should be acted
quite alowly. Proper pauses should occur between eacli
event in the drama, so that the candidate may be duly
impressed with each incident.

The work in the degrees must be done in regular
numerical sequence, closing in one degree and opening
in another, according to the number of the degrees.

Any number of candidates may receive the First
Degree at the same time, and in the Second Part, when
David and Jonathan kneel, members should be assigned,
one to each of the other candidates, who shall kneel
with him and claisp bauds in proper form and unite in
the covenant. Such members may be styled Assistant
Outside Conductors.

Upon closing a Subordinate Lodge in the Initiatorj'
Degree, the lodge must open in the Third Degree, and
in that degree the minutes must be read and acted upon;
then, after balloting in or conferring the First or Sec-
ond degrees, the lodge must re-open in and close from
the Third Degree.

DEGREE LODGES."

In aregularly-conetituted Degree Lodge, the titles of

■oi»!5.— "UeirrteLodgos wcreqstBljIlHheil In IBM, h/ (he Grand I


7B

tht oSeen shall be Degree Haaier (who o

priadpal cfaair). Depa^ Decree Master (^u> «

the dtair o( Vice Qnnd), Fast. Seeood, Third and
Fourth Aenvtut Degree Hasten, wbose etatuuLs are to
tlie right and leA of tiie D^ree Hasb-rand the Bepa^
Degree Hasto-; Past Grand, Warden, Condactor, Secre-
tary, TressuTK', Outside Gaaidian and Inside GoardiaEi,
whose poeitioQs are the same as io the Soboidinate
Lodge.

Where the title uf Noble Grand is used in aSabordi-
nate Lodge, that of Decree Master is to be snbstitQted
in a D^ree Lodge.

A Degree Lodge shBli also have such other offic»« as
the degrees may require.

In all other respects a Degree Lodge may do anything
nhich a Subordinate Lodge may do when working in
the degrees, for the purpose of eonfemng them in a
proper manner.

OFENlSa CKEEHOXTFS.
The Opening Owmoniet art tht tame in the Firti, S
Third Dtgrui, viCh very slight variatioiu.


At the time appointed for opening a Degree Lodgea
the degrees, the proper officer shall take the chair, a
after calling to order, with one rap, will proceed to o
the lodge aa follows:

Noble Grand {or Degree Master) — Officers and brotu
iT», we are about to open the lodge in the First Dej
tor the transaction of business. If any one present J


<^£inirS CEREHOinBS. 7S

not qualtGed to ait with ua in this Degree, he will please
retire.

Noble Gra>id {or Detjree Master) — The Inside Giitirdiat)
will close the door, and the brethren will please clothe
themselves in appropriate regalia," No one will be
admitted during the opening ceremony.

Inside Guardian — Noble Grand (or Degree Maat«r),
the door is secured.

Noble Gi-and {or Degree Master) — Warden, examine
the brothers in the lodge-room in the password of the
First Degree, and in the password and explanation of
the current term. [It is not required of the Warden
or either of the Gnardians to respond to brothers by-
giving any portion of the password]-

Warden — Noble Grand (or Degree Master), I have
examined the brothers and find them nil correct and
dnly qualified to ait with us in this degree.

Noble Grand {or Degree Master) — Vice Grand (or
Deputy Degree Master), what ts your duty in the lodge P

Vice Grand (or Deputy Degree Master) — To a.iai3t you
according to my office in any work which may lawfully
come before the lodge, and to aid you in preserving
order.

Noble Grand {or Degree Master) — Secretary, what is
your duty ?

Secretary — To keep accurate minutes of the proceed-
ings of this lodge; to receive all moneys due the lodge,
and pay the same to the Treasurer. [Proceedings of
lodges, when opened in particular degrees for the pur-
pose of conferring degrees or for balloting for degrees,

SOT* BB.— "One ot Bur niei of reg»lla. It to teicb ni lo bownre how wii


I

!

I
I


are r4.for(Ie(I in a dUuact tniimte ur rrourd book.]

NuMc Oninl {or Ueifree Muster) (rtsiug) — Office
and brothers, we have met for the purpose of tmuai
ing busJDCss io the degrees, in which I trast I shall <l
receive your fratema! assistance and cordial co-openi:- '
tioti. The interest of the Degree Lodge de]>endsgrcAtIy
npon the prompt attendance, strict attention and gen-
tlemanly deportment of the memhers. It is your da tv
to remain until the work for wfaieh we have assembled
"hall have been completed, and to aid me with your.J
presence and support. It is my duty to preserve order 1
and to see that our work conforms to the laws and'.j
regulations of the Sovereign Grand L"dge of the Inde- J
pendent Order of Odd-fellows; but I feel confident that j
I shall not be nnder the uecessily of exercising any ra* J
straining authority on the present occasion.

JVbble Grand (or Degree Master) (three rap8)~BrotherH,^
rise and advance the sign of the First Degree,


Tlie Sign is made as follows — extend tbel
fingers of the right hand; place the thumbj
inside of, and parallel with, the first fitnl
_ger; carry the hand to the brow, with t
thumb resting on the left temple; drawn
line across the furehead {fingers touching^ ^j
until the end of the thumb reaches tiia' j
right temple describing a bow, then drop J
the hand.


onwiKa csBKKoiriBS.
ifohh Grand (w Degree J/ff-i/pi)— Warden, declara-j

' ihe h>dge opened.

Warden — By direction of tbe Nubio Grand (or
Degree Master), I detJare this lodge duly opeocd in the
First Degree, for thp transaction of such 1
may be lawfully brought before it.

Noble Grand (or Degree Master) — Officers and broth-
rre, BO be it.

All " So \>e it."

Koble Grand — (one rap, seating the lodge.)

llAfSlNfl OR KKDUCINR THE T.ODQK.

N(^le Grand [three raps,' all rise) — Brothers, we i

aboat to close the lodge in the Degree, to be re- I

opened in the Degree, for the purpose of con-
ferring the same (or to ballot for the degree).

Noble Grand {or Degree Master) — Warden, declare I
the lodge closed accordingly.

Warden — Bydirectionof the Noble Grand (or Degree I
Master), 1 declare the lodge closed in the -
to re-open in the Degree.

Noble Grand [or Degree Master) — Officers and broth- 1
ers. 90 be it.

All — " So be it."

Noble Grand — (one rap, seating the lodge).

Should it become necessary to open the Degree Lodge I
in any other degree during the meeting, it shall be done I
as follows; or when a Subordinate Lodge has closed in [
tlie Initiatory to open in the degrees, the following form j
ahall be used;

Noble Grand {or Degree Master) — Brothers, '


about to open U>e lodge in tbe D^ree. Hw]

Warden will ezamioe in the paaawori of the de
\ThB order is obeyed.}

Warden — Noble Grand (or Decree Master), 1 hxn

exaouned tb« brotlieis and find them correct.

Ao&Ze Grand (three rape) — The brethren will rise aod
advance the sign of the Degree. Warden, de-
clare the lodge dal; opened in this degree.

Warden — By direction of the Noble Grand (or De-
gree toaster), I proclaim this lodge duly opened in the

■ Degree, for the transaction of snch busincM at

may be lawfully brought before it.

NobU Grand {or Degree Jfasfar)— OflGcers and broth-
em, ao be it.

/(//-"So be it."

Noble Grand — (one rap, seating the lodge.)


CHAPTER VII.

FlBST, OB Degree of FBiEKDSHrp."

INITIATION."

Pajit I.


trom lliou uieil In


e Ufa or lli« degrBU, hUsd ha jsroceetli at


Outside Conductor — (with candidate; three rapa on
door).

Inside Guardian — Nobte Qraad, there is an alarm at J
the door. I

Noble Grand — Attend to the alarm.


NOT» 8T-


-"The.


FirslDigrtti


fiBobea


lbs lore] [ae


■lofcbirlty.


b; ■ IjencvD


..(GBihiee<i<«i.


riD-ympMby


«1. The SiiKind Digrii (euUea ii


Una et mi


it. Tbe


mirdBiVr,*


frIriDdatilp. nil


mutuamT


( bencBii


nnciiu!,


LHteil by


mgugb


imtly o( oaa-


feilowihlp.'


■-Oroih


.>ifan»Di,p


HaT>aS.


-•■Br I


be moil iMsnt


Itol tei


mm, vs li


MtTUCC blm I


n IhoH tn%l


priiiclflHv


DWQ mind I


.nd render fun


tocoodncH


teBrt, Lnt wl:


. bim. If bt


«o«oe ui ipt


unple M othBI


U ibu« TlnuH that ad


on udblMt


—Orath


'< JTmhoJ. y.


U.


1


Inaidt Guardian (opening t)ie mcket) — Wlio eantta

Oufaide Conductor — A brother who, having been ini-
tiated, now seeks to obtain the mysteries" of the Fir^
Degree of Odd-fellowship,

Inside Guardian (closing the wicket) — Noble Srand^
R brother, having been initiated, now aeeka to obtain
the mysteries of the First Degree of Odd-fellowship.

Nob!e O-rand — Why does he seek to obtain, thest
mysteries ?

Ininde Guardian (opening the wicket) — Why doea he
seek to obtain the mysteries?

Outside Conductor — Because he wishes to be mor^
fraternal."

Inside Guardian (closing the wicket) — Because he
wishee to be more fraternal.

Nnbh Grand — Admit him, then, in friendship, which
is the bond of fraternity." [Candidate is admitted toA
conducted before the Noble Grand].

Outside. Con/iucfor — Noble Grand, I present to yoa
(give the candidate's name), a worth J* brother, who,
having h^fm duly elected, seeks to obtain the mysteries
of this degree.

Noble Grand (rising) — Brother, in presenting your-
self for advaurement in our order, it becomes my doty
to remind yon of the importance of the step yon pro-


I


— Oroih't Kanuai, p. loa.


pose to take, and to caution j-ou against makiuf; en-
gBgemente that you inE»y be unwilling to fulfill, or, for
the gratitication of idle curiosity, taking upon yourself
oUigstions which may hereafter prove burdensome. It
will be necessary before you receive this degree for you
to take a solemn obligation, pledging yonrself not to
disclose any of its mysteries to persona whom you do
not know to be lawfully in possession of them, and
binding yourself to the performance of the duties pre-
scribed iu this degree, so far as it may be in your power
to perform them. Have you duly considered the sub-
ject, and are you now prepared to advance? [If candi-
date answers in the affirmative, the N^oble Orand con-
tinues]:

N<Ale Graitd — Then place yourself in the attitude
in which you were initiated into this order, and repeat
after me (Noble Qrand calls up the lodge by three raps):

OBLIGATION, DEGREE OF FRIEND8HIP.

I, , in the presence of the covenanted

brothers of the Degree of Friendship here assembled,
do solemnly promise, that I will never improperly
divulge the secrets of the degree about to be intrusted
to my keeping; and I hereby pledge myself to help and
support my afflicted and persecuted brother, and warn
him of approaching danger, whether it be from his own
imprudence or from the evil designs of others, or from
some accidental cause. I will point out his advantage"
and interest, where they do not conflict with the rights


not. BlBO, IbitlhB obllmtloB li mBtuil
•t JfonuaJ, p. 100.


you

J


MoUe Gramd (toc Mrfi fa te )— Aie y— wg^tPtalwA
Utiht ariai by wUefc job mafheeeme ■ Iwiijfcii iT

JVA6b tfram/ (to Uie Ootnde C<mdD«tor)— Let l)ie|
IffotluT be token to the aote-tooauUBthenLaj-re-ente
sndUkehtiDcntiitepin&atemit;. [Outside Cfflidoctor J
intlunit itopping t« lalate tlie "ebaii" with the a'
wodaeta candidate u> the aate-room, when he blindfolds f
bin uul comea with him to the doorj.


PJXT 11.
Outnde Conductor — (three raps on inside docn:).
tntide Guardian — Noble Grand, there is &n alarm at 1
the door.

Noble Oranti — Atteud to the alarm.

Irmitle Guardian (opening the wicket) — Who comes
tlinrof

Outside Conductor — A brother who is ready to receiraf
lliH myntorioH uf this degree.

Non M. — "!.■( Mm noi wonder IHX hell ret natble to )i«tiald itudllr Uila I
llfllttliriiu|li>uin>uRain|i]trlin*u. MinkdvuoeiEriduillylullgbtudliQOWl-
■dli. Out bvw «*D ha ulipl/ tlino pclnollilo' of ttttoTulir bo u la enUiliteD ud
IlktMl* 111 uwi) i>i>iil. IbiD (nllgbttm tbc dtrkneaa kod break ib« bond! ot oUicrf, ]
*l«*iillui»lM«oinln«uf lliiB •!■ wbsn tbli
rirwllM, ind DluHIBi Inlnraiti and Jirrlntf
NKlun or i»l (niiwlai for llii t*iiiir*l ouad, U


IBTPIATIOK. 8T'l

Inaide Guardian {closing the wicket) — Noble Grantl,
a brother is ready to receive the mysteries of thia \
degree.

Noble Grand — What is his namep

Inside Guardian (opening the wicket) — What ia hia
aame ?

Outside Conductor — David, the son of Jesse.

Inside Gwan/ian (closing the wicket) — David, the son
of Jesse.

Noble Grand — Why comes he here?

Inside Guardian (opening the wicket) — Why comes
he here? I

Outside Conductor — To visit Saul, king of Israel. |

Inside Guardian {closing the wicket) — To viait Saul,
kiufj of Israel.

Noble Grand — Admit him to the presence of the king.

Nolile Grand — (three raps, all rise).

«nl(v.' '

Outside Conductor — Hail to the king!

Nof^le Grand (as king)— Welcome, son of Jesae! Thou ,
hast smitten mine enemies and brought me the spoils
of victory.

The Lodge {led by Warden)— Saul has slain his
thousands, and David his tens of thousands!

Nobh Grand (as king) — This is treason to the king! ;
Ho! myguai-ds! I will smite htm with the sword!

The Lodge (W-A by Warden)— Fly!— Away!— He will 1
kill thee! Away! Away!

Tlw OutBldc CandiiDlor liurrlia tliD osnillrlBlc ontlrelr aronnd Xba iodso-raami ]
llisD wslklDK ilowly, bB !• mel nnr Ibe Vtce Gnod'i ohslr br Ibe loilds Con- J
4mBim, irbD raievHBH JonubM. 1


Jiii


Inside Conductor (laying hia hand upon the shoulder
of the candidate) — David, I am thy friend; my father
seeketh to kill" thee; now, therefore, take heed and
abide here. I will go and stand by my father, and what
I aee I will tell thee. Hide thyself by the stone Ezel;
I will shoot three arrows on its side as though I shut at
a mark. And will send a lad, saying, " 60, find the
arrows." If I say to him, " Behold, the arrows are on
this side of thee," then come thou, for there is peace to
thee, and no hurt; but if I say to the lad, " Behold, the
arrows are beyond thee," go thy way.

Noble Grand— {ona rap, seating the lodge).


Outside Conductor — Let ua hide by this rock.

Inside Conductor (as Jonathan, from opposite side of
the room, after a pause, loudly) — Here, lad, find out the
arrows that I shoot. [Twangs his bow loudly several
times, then shoots three blunt arrows].

Sight Scene Supporter (as lad, standing between
David and Jonathan, loudly) — Where are they?

Hon 44, — "1 Smnoelili: 1-7: AndSiul epakela JoniUban hli lon.Bnd Id all
mDcti Id Daiid^ and Junatbui igid David, tayliiK. Soul, mr lubar, wehelll 10
■ad klilde tn H lecrei plu^e, and hldn th^ieli: md 1 will eo out uniL atand Milria
tbBc; ind whU I dub. thai 1 will tell Ibce. AnA JonatluiD ipake good or DHvfd


Daild, aod Jonathan


—Oraik'* ltanml.p, llf,


tNTTIATION.

Inside Condttctor — Are not the arrows beyond thee?
Mftke haste! speed! stay not!

Inside Conductor {aiter waiting for lad to run and gd
the arrowa) — Here, lad, take this bow and arrows; go,
carry them to the city.

Right Scene Supporter (as lad, near the inside door a
the lodge-room) — t go, my noble prince.

Alter a lenetti]- psHC. (be Outalde Conductor leiuli tbs candldtta iri
roDRi, and bUU neir Itae middle ot the lodgc-roum. wbere lie/ sre bli
luilde Condnclar u JoDtlban.

Inside Conductor (as Jonathan, laying his hand iipoitf^
the shoulder of the candidate) — David, aon of JesseJ
behold my father would kill" thee, and yet I love thee
as my own soul. Let us swear the one to the other ii
friendship forever.

Tbe laolde CoDdHClor (tu JnaitbBii) fennels down ujion hli rjgbt knee,


The Lord be between me and thee, and between my
seed and thy seed forever.

Tbe candldaic and tlie tnalde Gondnelor eontlnae kneeling, llie lodgs li sailed


The Lodge — The Lord be between me ^d thee, andj

between thy seed and my seed forever.


Vice Grand — Hail to the covenant of friendship!"

N0T» «.— '■Bnt ■oomhooTlliplrlligslBCBinDnpoii Ssol, and bis »i


HOTB «.— '■Tblileleherot pasl Bgea ulan lays ibat FrtcndBblp, Lovo ai
Tnlb are not odIj a laf^nanl, but t, remedy far all Ibe tooli
thNaaioloarrace."— SroiA'i JfUBUal. p. 96,


90 DEOKBB OF FBIENDSHtP.

Caiidliliile la m sac to tun the Past Q ran d.

Past Grand- — Hail lo the covenaDt of frieudahip!

Cnndldate le nude to face tbe I4oble Qraiid.

77ic Xodffe {led by the Ward od)- Hail to the covenant
of friendship!

NbbU Grand to Outside Conductor (after a pause) —
Conductor, restore our brother to light.

Tbe OutBiile Condaclor temovei tlie bllndfald. the lodge Ib aeatsd, and
tbe cundidau Is lead to thu Noble Orsod'a cbalr.

Noble Grand — My brotlier, I will now instruct you
lu the mysteries of this degree.

In this degree there is an alami at theHnner door, a
Password and Explanutiun of tlie Password, a Counter-
Bign an answer to the Countersign, a Sign, an answer
to the Sign, a Memento, the Warning Sign, the Sign of
Safety, the Sign of Danger, a Grip and a Token,

Thk Alahu at the inner door is three raps.

The Password is QUIVER to be lettered at al! times
when used for working purposes, working into a lodge
or in examination prior to opening. In communicating
this word,eitUer to the Inside Guardian or to tbe Warden
the brother must give the letters Q-U-I, and if required
by the Inside Guardian or Warden, he must give the re-
mainder of the word V-E-R— lettered as before. The In-
side Guardian B^nd Warden must be satisfied.

Explanation-^haX from which Jonathan
drew his arrows, given in full but not used
for working purposes.


^^ ' Ajmn^O^."


The Sign is made as follows — extend the
fingers of the right hand ; place the thumb
inside of, and parallel with, the first fin-
ger; carry the hand to the brow, with the
thumb resting on the left temple; draw a
line across the forehead (fingers touching)
until tbe end of the thumb reaches the
right temple describing a bow, then drop I
llie hand.


Graap the root of the left ear with thai
fore fiDger and tbQmb of the right han<l,l
fingere below, thumb above the root of the J


THE HEUBNTO

Ib a bundle of sticks, to represent the
strength of union; united cannot be-
broken; a single stick to represent that
separated each may be easily broken.


WAENING SIGN.


Olose the fingers of eaob band, wit]
thumb in front of the first finger; place
each elbow by the eide of the body; extend
each arm and closed hand horizontally.


' FUlENDSUir-


Tbe hands and arms being in the same
position as in the Warning Sign, extend
the index finger of the right hand, with
which point to and just touch the second
or knuckle joint of the thumb of the left
hand.


SIGN OF DANGBE,


Elbows same as before described, place the |
wrist of the right hand on the second or '
knuckle joint of the thumb of the left hand;
extend tho index finger and point towardB
the ground.


Form a link with the thnraba
of the right hand; claep hands, A
" oncloBing it,(^\ink of thumbs.)


Token — The rainbow.


SPECIAL UtSTKUCTlONS,


opBued In the degreea, fnt tbv ]
degreeE. or Cot nay othec purpo
cvary csadidale rccelTlDg dugn
Id I


1 Degree Lodge, or n SnbordinKte Lodge.

lOBo of conferring degroei, bsUoMng (*r

Theee Intlmctlons ehoolclbe given to-


Soile Orand Ui Candida's— Wtebing to liait s Degree Lodge, or a Snbotdl-
nste LoflgB opened in the flrat degree, you will nnnonnce jonr presenoe by
an alBrm nt the onlBldc door (the al&mi al the onlside dour 1b the Bime bb in
thelnitlitory-one rap,) Hbrn theOutaicle Qoordlan will open the wicket and
reqnire (rom yon the PasBWord o[ the current term. If correct, yon will be
■rtmltled lothesate-Toam. Alter clothinif yonrBeif iu appropriate regilU
(hsTing secertaincd from tbo Outside Onsrdian (bat the lodge ia open in the
nnt degree) jaa will give three rapa at the inside door. The Iniide Qnaid-

ber at thu lodge to VFbicb you belong. The ineldc Onaidiln will cloBe lli«

BiiloGanrdlan to ndmil JOB if correct. Tbo Inside Goardian re-opens the
wii:ketandyouniuEtgiVDbini tbePssBwordoribeBrst degree. If cocrccl

tbo room and addroas the Noh^e Grand with tiie ConnterBlgn, who will
«cl(nowledgB you as a brolUer by giving tho same Connteraign. Yon will
then mm snil adilreee the Vice Grand wilh tho Connlereign who will ae-
knnwledKc you as a brother by giying the same Connterslgn. Yuu will Iben
■gsin turn to the Noble Grand and address bim with the sign of the Brst de-
gree. The NoblQ Giand will gire the proper answer to the algn. Ton will
IhenliBseBtoa. Wiahingio luaTe thelodge betore ItUclnaed in the flrstde-
gneyou nillnddreeetbeprcBldinganiFeTontr with the sign of the flrat de-
gr« and that officer will answer joa with tho proper sign. Tbelnsldn
GuardlAn will than allou' yon to depart. If you am vleftlng your own lodge
tod are without either the Paasicoid uI the coirBut tvrm or the Pasiword of
[Ilia degree, the Noble Orsud being eo lulonncd aakB the Secretary aa to your
■Umdltig in the lodge. It the Secretary reports favorably, direcdonB will b«
fiiTen hi admit yun. BuCit the report ie unfavorable you are so intonncd by
the proper guardian and yoD cannot be admltlcd. (Tbo Noble Grand ahonld
eirefnlly Instruct tbe brother In the uietbod of nslng the FaeBwurda in work
■ log-lDloaLodgeaudineiaiuiDfttlouprloitooBeiiuigV


I
I


mvnxDvta nuitsK>


iB(MCCni« and beaadfol exsmpte of eanUv finonfafatp
Km Imwh [tre*ent«il before yoa, and yq« &ave in jonr
own pcrmm iltnctnted a noble {uscary. In due taadk-
tngdrtnu j-<ki stood ia the pruenoe af rovaltf^ and
listened u> the voice of pnuse:, liat yoor merit prorgfced
tmmtf, and 700 were bimted down aa x tnhor, wlm
yon wtm full of tnctb and honor. Too have diu en-
Betod a part of the commoR life. Eovj is ihe naUaomB
foe of vinne, u>d is ever rea^ to destroy whas is ean
■Mi imiurte or snrpaM; it ia tJie rice of tlie weak and
the vdn »n<i the weapon of no ignoble mind. In §■£•
fertng iM perjienntion jou have learned a lesson nevo-
lo be forf^ott^n. Man in prone 10 velfiabneas and UtM
to livefor himtplf atone; in this isolation he biHbttt
little ttympAthy with his fellow-man. In iucb a mind
envy taken jronttmion and hatred follows with its horrid
brood, Bnt there in also a divinitT" in tnan which weds
him to lofty raotiven and honorable actions. The good
have ftn affliiity for uach other which grows up into
C0nl1den(Ms and afTnction. Oeneroue deeds aod unselSab
plirpoiitiN arp thi! tttrongeiit bonds of union — in his bigb
estaU*, no mtin livrth to himself. Ton have acted a


1

I


nrtn«.-


ee of Wisdom and Tnitb;


CONCLUDINO Ch;-BQB. 'J:

part where all was oppression upon the one hnud, am
all was love and protection upon the other. Thus you
have seen the picture upon both sides. It is possible
that men should combine for the common good; lienee
we have societies communities, states and nations uuited
by a compact which protects their meiabers. But the
bond if) stronger when individuals are united by personal
contact and held together by ax)ersonaI covenant. Suck"
a covenant we have all entered into, and you have been.'
solemnly added to our fraternal union. By such a tie
has God bound himself to his creatures on the scroll of
heaven, with the rainbow as his seal. Such obligations
have come down to us from every age and country; by
these, the mystic rights of all nations have been pro-
tected, and men everywhere brought into fellowship..
By your solemn pledge you are now entitled to give and
receive the tokens of a deathless friendship." Every
Odd-fellow" is your brother, and his family the sacred
object of your fraternal care. You have become one
of a vast brotherhood" which extends to many lands,
and in their assemblies you will always be welcome.
The mysteries you have learned will insure you an hon-
orable reception in strange cities and distant states,


I


unlisd tU tbeH lodgei tn a gt
u lliB f iBiU; of miui OB Mrtb. "-


n


'—DoitaUton't Poeiul Companlirn, p, U.


98 DEGREE OP FRIENB8HIP.

where you will be the subject o£ tejider attentions "
because you are an Odd-fellow.

Brother (naming the candidate), mich is the nature ''
and effect of the covenant yon hare taken; the emblem-
atic color of this degree is pink.

I now welcome you as a brother of the Degree of
Friendship."


«ad eiectrlcUr) Ir


tlimBl. — "Inaperfect flnuFlHl i
pLiwe fur cbtT\ls ; mi eVEtj dullkr 1&I
li robbery or tliM fond."— jour. Proc


—Orot\'t JfaniHil. p. 7S.


3upr*mt Grand Lodgt, Simon It/IBSO;


CHAPTER VIII.

FntsT, OB Degeee of Feiekdship.

GLOSIKG CEBEMOKIES.

Noble Chrand (or Degree Master) — Brothers, having
concluded our business for the evening, you will pleas**
rise (three raps) while we proceed to close the lodge.
We thank you for your presence, and wish your attend-
ance at our future meetings. You will now advance
the sign of the Third Degree. Warden, proclaim the
lodge duly closed.

Warden — By direction of the Noble Grand (or Degree
Master) I proclaim the lodge duly closed.

NobU Qrand (or Degree Master) — (one rap).


ANALYSIS DEGREE OF FRIENDSHIP.


loitb at Oatj Writ.

-JEuAvdiH:

Tbe^man; simple gnlU'^ of Sbakspeare'sdayannet
all dead yet. Who could ima^ne, were there not facts
to prore it, that grown men of ordinary sense and
capacity could act over, year after year, weekly, the
puerilities of this " Friendship Degree " in Odd-fellow-
thipl All of this "oBUEB," beyond initiation, which '
waa at first a drinking-bout in an ale-house, as Grosh
coofesseH (Manwil, p. 23), and which still retains a -
tinge from the completion of its origin, has bees in-
Vented and added by designing men for the purposes of '
greed or ambition. What else ever moved Schujfler
Co^ai to invriit an outside A^^rcc. for wnmeo? The J

ne which moved the hunch back politician, Richard, to 4
and quote Scripture moved Colfax. Ilichaid;J


OFFICE EEEKiyO — tlKCOUKS A l>EVII^ WORSHIPER. 89

wanted a crown, and he got it, Colfax wanted office,
which he gained by the same "old, odd ends stolen forth '
of Holy Writ," and aeemiug saintship.

This story of David and Jonathan, beautiful as a
sacred historic fact, acted over in a lodge, at night, by
a promiscuons body of men selected for their "sound
health " and capacity to pay dues, is literally " stolen "
for selfish ends, and becomes an affront and a sacrilege.
Its use in Odd-fellowship, like thatof all the "degrees,"
is that of splints to a weak back. Thousands of initi-
ates, when put through the initiation, feel as did Hon.
Samuel D. Greene, after being made an Entered Ap-
prentice, and sitting down beside the Senior Deacon, who
was also deacon in Greene's church. He turned and
pleadingly asked his Christian brother in a whisper:
" Deacon, won't you tell me if this is real Masonry, or
have they been fooling me?"

The cure for this rational, natural disgust at being
hoodwinked, handled and profaned, ia repetition. Now,
t'lfl initiate knows the fool's play as he did not at first.
Lni the first time a man imposes on me, the fault is
his; the second time, the fault is my own. The three
knocks of the entersign, the hollow rattle of the gayel
strokes, the mock-solemn wording and mouthing of the
lecture and the charge, all leading to the practical real-
ities, degree fees and obligations of concealment, en-
larged and deepened by repetition, and all canonized by
prayer and song; when all this is gone over with the
second time iu this " friendship degree," the dupe be-
comes a voluntary devil-worshiper. The sacredness of
his body gone by handling, his will habituated to yield-
ing without a reason, and he practicing religious wor-
^p in what he now knows to be a farce— a change


100 CHAKXED MES — ISm IS DlVESStTT. "

,:<i«ty cornea over him. He becomes possessed, and be
goes forward uoder an impulse like that nbicb lakes
the charmed bird of frog into the snake's month! His
virgin disgust is now gone, and he delights in the lodge
a» |>ra!ititutea delight in a brothel; and when onceSatan
lias Ihui! infected hi£ moral nature with his sorcery,
nothing bat the blood of Chribt can ever take it out of
him.

The t^ndless diversity in the forms of false worships
conceals from the worshiper the fact that a saper- .
natural power is evermore present in tbem. And the
rank and file of Masonry and Odd-fellowship are filled
op by yoang men artizaas, .-jludents and shopmen,
whoseoccupationorfrolie. orboth, prevents comparison. .
and generalization ; and hence the dupe of one lodge j
imagines that his is the only thing of its kind, little 1
dreaming that, as Grosh says, "one lodge is a moral copy .
of another." from the Pyramids and the " rite of Miz-
raim" down, to ajnggling spirit-circle or a village lodge.
So that whik- the poor deluded bouI supposes he is
favored ahove and beyond the rest of mankind he ia
only being put through bodily and mental processes
identical with the experience of the myriads of false
worshipers over tlie whole earth. ,

Thf heathen god Pruteus was said to escape detection
by changing his uhapes — now a tiger, a lion, a flame of
fire, 11 whirlwind or a rushing stream. So Satan shifts 1
tliL> furniB of his worships to hide his hateful presence, j
I he meanness of their moral nature and tlieir disastrous I
effects. It was " H shame even to speak " of the filthy 1
abominations covered by these pretentious and lofty 1
" mysteries " in the days of the Apostle Paul. They ■]
trere suppressed at Rome. As soon as Christianity !>&• ,'


KKlriUTS OF THE TUMPI.E — EnTB


BELIGIOIT, lOlfl


came popular they shifted their shapes into the knight- 1
hoods of the Temple and St. John : and, like Aaron and I
Jeroboam, addeda heathen ritual toan orthodox creed. T
They swindled, strutted, strumpeted, prayed and grew I
rich,till the maddened multitude whom they had imposed
upon and whose money they had absorbed suppressed
their lodges and executed them by hundreds in a day.
{See any authentic history of medieval Europe.)

The explanation of this rapid and fearful degenerat- I
ing process iu all false worships is that Satan is their 1
god — the deity of all the worships on earth which leave '
out Christ. And Satan is an unclean spirit, a " liar,"
" murderer," and. as Judas was after he entered him, a
" thief."

And a careful inspection, comparison and pondering J
of these dark orders will show that they never grow \
and spread rapidly till they begin to worship^that is,
till Satan enters them and receives what he asked of
Christ — WORSHIP. Masonic and Odd-fellows' lodges
were but semi -occasional drinking frolics till they ceased
to be trades-unions and set up worship. Then they
grew. And as nothing hardens like religious rites
practiced without religion, their leaders turned to stone.
Their secrets were re^'ealed and they murdered the
vealers. And though they cease to murder where they I
lose more than they gain by it, they are still nfirses of^l
Nihilism, whose creed is nothing but bloodt


CHAPTER IX.

Second," ob Deqkeb of Beotheely ]

raTTLiTION.
OEHBRAl ISSTRUcnoHB.

CondocMr, In coDferrlng lUii degree. «lu pntctea veir dclllMli«Ulr. iB §
«Biu1cf4rt«liei1topl4l. kEter uylne, "A prleat It psHlnff/'mppeirtonll I


ribsSunulUB',]


lippl/io ItKfmnat


Ti»y reMlte Ihe FInt Pi


iwed la cgnUcl wllb. or J
t or tbe Second D^nK. J


objection (o trnvlng n


' ■ WajsKis, The <


liuttved, TtaBl


inibon 0( the 5«™»d Dogrue u
if tbe UUriJ Define of tbe revIied work n


Orami Loigi, StuU>n of 1860. p. MO.


I. "— journal q/ A^S


^^■^ DfrriATioif. 108 1

^r P^BT 1.

Noble Grand — Conductor, you will retire to the ante-
room, receive and introduce the candidate.

Toom. condncH tlic swiilldiile (not blladfulded} la llie Imldc dour ud ■!><!■ the
lUnii— three npB.

Inside Ouardian — Vice Grand, there is an alarm at
the door.

Vice Orand — Attend to the alarm.

Inside Gttardian (opening the wicket) — Who comes
there?

Conductor — A brother who has taken the covenant of |
the order, and now seeka to advance further into our
mysteries. I

Inside Ouardian (cloaiug the wicket) — A brother
has taken the covenant of the order and now seeka to
advance further into our myateriea.

Vice Grand — Why doea he aeek to advance?

Inside Guardian (opening the wicket) — Why does he
seek to advance?

Conductor — Because he would learn how to discharge
his obligation.

Inside Guardian (closing the wicket) — Because he
would learn how to discharge his obligation, j

Vice Grand — Admit him, that he may be instructed
in the divine lesson of humanity. [Conductor enters
and proceeds with candidate to chair of Vice Grand.]

Conductor — Vice Grand, I preaent to you for instruc-
tion in the Degree of Brotherly Love, our worthy

brother, , who haa been duly elected thereto.

Vice Grand (to candidate) — Before you receive the
oiyateries of this degree, are you willing to enter iutoa


104


P BBOTHSaLT LOVE.


eolemn obligation to retain its secrets, and to perfor
all the lawful duties which it may enjoin? [If the can-
didate answers in the affirmative, the Vice Grand con-
tinues]: Then place yourself in the attitude in which
you were initiated into this order and repeat after me.
Nobh Gratid — (three raps, all rise)-

OBLIOATIOS DEQBEE OP BKOTHERLT LOVE.

I, , in the presence of the brethren of the

Degree of Brotherly Love now assembled, do solemnly
promise that I will never reveal the signs, secrets or
mysteries of the Degree of Brotherly Love, to any per-
son, nnleas by the laws and usages of this order he is
entitled to receive such information; but will guard
them with jealous care from all persons who have not
lawfully obtained the same. To the faithful perform-
ance of all which I pledge ray sacred honor.

Noble Grand — (one rap, seating the lodge).

Vice Grand (to the candidate) — Are you willing to
submit to the ordeal by which you may become a broth-
er of this degree ?

Candidate answers.

Vice Grand{to Conductor) — Let the brother be taken
to the ante-room, that he may re-enter and take another
step in fraternity.

Tba CoDductor, wltbdul "aflilreMtintheeliaJr." irtllretLfe wIlhllifleMiiWM*
lo tlis SDts-nwDi, «liere tie plBoei s tbort cloak Da blm. b:iailtoldi blm. *ail
coDdugu bim lo tbo InildB door.

Past II.
Conductor (three raps on inside door).
Inside Guardian — Noble Grand, there is an alarm at
the door.
Noble Grand — Attend to the alarm.


iNmATio». 106

Inside Guardian (opening Lhe wicket) — Who comes
there?

Conductor — A brother who ia ready to receive the
mysteries of this degree.

Inside Guardian (closing the wicket) — Noble Grand,
a brother is ready to receive the mysteries of this degree.

Noble Grand — Whence comes he?

Inside Guardian (opening the wicket) — Whence
comes hep

Conductor — From Jerusalem, and is traveling to
Jericho on a mission of bumanity.

Inside Guardian (closing the wicjtet) — From Jerusa-
lem, and is traveling to Jericho on a mission of human-

"■>'•

Noble Grand — Admit him in the name of that hu-
manity which he invokes, [The Conductor enters with
the candidate and conducts him to the chair of the
Noble Grand].

Conductor — Noble Grand, a stranger is passing this
way.

JVo6fcGra»rf— Traveler, whither art thou journeying?

Conductor (for the candidate)— To Jericho.

Noble Grand — Let the traveler go down to Jericho,
and may no danger meet him by the way. [The Con-
ductor walks aiound the room with the candidate, ad-
dressing bim as follows]:

Condticlor — The day is fine; the way is pleasant, and
let ua hope that the journey will be safe. How those
pines cluster on the mountain side, and in the distance
the sea is so calm and beautiful! That row of green
trees marks the course of Jordan, the sacred river of
the chosen people. But see, we are entering a
defile of the hills.


4


DEGREE OF BROTHBELT LOVB.
tt SB robbcra eurntund ibem La the mlddls of iba lodf
.d ana dertverr' -'SlrlSu:" •■Li7Dnr '■Desthr ai


Daring tlie


oDtmlo


n


ptrioa bat


hall b


rnucA l/it can


hBilmrlftc thecs


Willi hia open


e down. Wben


« Ijiug


y. uklDB iw


A low bene


agHlnKJ bo


provided u p«ri


fnrnltai


be Lid- No


«nBliuH«otohe»no-^


Tbe MBdld


tBConild


ue


lytngdown


nd sftcr m psuie


t I ID


mBBUl


eCon-


Conductor (speakiiig slowly and painfully to himself)
— Alas! alas! I am stripped of my raiment and wound-
ed and left for dead.

Conductor (calling a little louder) — Help! Help!

C()«rf«c(or (again speaking to himself) — Ah! a priest \
is passing. I

Conductor (after a pause, then calling a little louder) ■*
— Help! holy servant of the Temple, I am robbed and
wounded.

Conductor (pausing, then speaking to himself) — Bat
MO, he will not look upon me, but passes by on the other J
side. '

CoMt^Mc/or (calling alittle louder)— Help! Help! i

Conductor (to himself) — God of Israel, help me — he J
is gone! Must I linger here and die? No! behold, a j
Levite — he stops — he cornea this way — he is here. I

Conductor (calling a little louder) — son of Levi, J
aervantof thealtar,helpme! I am robbed and wounded, i

Conductor (pausing, then speaking to himself ) — Bat' J
no, he looks upon me and has no pity. He also paeseu
by ou the other side, A

Condticfor (calling a little louder) — Help! Help! SoitJ
of Levi, help! j

Conductor (to himself) — He also has forsaken me. \
But who comes this way? It is a hated Samaritan, aa
enemy of my people. ^


INrtlATION. lOi

Conductor pausing, then calling a little louder)—
Help! man of Samaria — I am wounded and dying!

Tlje WRrden ilowlf ippruachua ibt: eudldktD, and u he approKtiea wib:

Warden (as Samaritan) — What have we here? an
Israelite wounded and bleeding by the wayside! the
poor man is about to perish. Is he not after all my
brother?

Warden (taking hold of him) — Ah, my frieDd, you ,
shall not perish.

Warden — Take this garment for your protection,
[Assisted by the Conductor he puts a cloak upon him. J

Warden — Arise and lean upon mc.

[Lifts him up.]

Warden — Come, cheer up and take heart, and we wil'
find It place of safety.

Warden (to the traveler) — Here is an inn— a place of
refuge. ^Cillling a little louder) — Ho, there! ho! open,
landlord!

[Warden kuocks loudly on a table or pedestal.]

Past Grand (as host, after a pauue) — The door is open;
enter, travelers.

[The candidate is led near to the Past Grand and

Warden — Here, host, is a wounded man, who fell


108 DKGEEE OF BEOTHEELT LOTB.

among thieves; give Iiim attention, for lie has been i
robbed and left for dead. Take this money and proride '
for him.

[Shakes some small coins in his hand.]

Warden — Whatsoever thou spendest more, when I
eome again, 1 will repay thee.

Past Grand (as host) — He shall be cared for, good
Samaritan.

After ■ lAnso. the candldftCe vlU be ui[iLed ut rlie aod be Mken Gwlefl ilDVIr
arooDd tbfl iDd^-rtKim bf tin: Oondiicuir. uid be Led » the ohftlr of tha NobLv

Conductor — Noble Grand, the traveler has returned.

Noble Grand — Traveler, thou hast been robbed and
left for dead; a priest has seen thee, and a Levite has
looked upon thee. A Samaritan, an enemy of thy peo-
ple, came vrhere thou wast. The priest and the Levite
were thy brothers of the seed of Abraham. Which of
these was thy true brother" and friend?

Conductor (for the traveler) — He was my brother uid
friend who had mercy on me.

Noble Grand— Go thou, traveler, and do likewise;
and know that the true priest is not of the Temple, nor
the true Levite of the altar, but he alone is the servant

Soxx H.— "aiDrulirMthUiiiniBl*— y««. odiom Mil mar lonnd loiDme—
rt taBi bun nDdcnd deirCoonr hsirU b^ tha (lartDua dMdi or b«DCTolenca ud


—OrotVi Manuat, p. t».


of God .111(3 tliy brntla'T who .IdivxTs tlie neeJy wli
ho rvietli, ihe poor also, timl Imu that hath no helper.

Nohlo Grand — (lliree raii.-', calling up ihe lodge),

Xfuble Grand (to the lodge) — Brothers, what thiill
yi>u of that whloh you have witnessed?

i"/(eio(/(/e (led by the Warden) — He is my brolliel
and friend who had mercy on me,

[This is repealed.]

Noble Grand (to Conductor) — Let the eyes of till
brother be opened, that he may see a lodge of Brollierl<
Love.»

[Blindfold is removed.]

Noble Grand — {one rap, seating the lodge).

Noble Grand — My brother, I will now inslnict you !i
_the myBteries of this degree.

In this degree there is an Alarm at the inner c
Password, a Couniernign, an answer to the Counti
a Sign, an answer to the Sign, a Grip and a Token.
. alarm at the inner iloor is three raps.

The Password is JVIoaes, to be lettered at all timi
when used for working purposes; working into a lodj
or in examination prior to opening.

In eommnniealingthiswordeitherto the Inside Gaai
ian or to the Warden; the brother must give the lettei-a
M O, and if required by the Inside Guardian or Warden,
he must give the remainder of the word, S E S, lettered
ax before. The Inside Guardian and Warden must hi
satisfied.


h itnfortanate tor c.


Order, Boa for not a. few

B oeBii gonerBlly gWen In I

katrt null deaOi. und peeunitrv xl

'litliii oV oar ;>im9 anil n^jecU, By tbl

■ ttliufafforrtedcven onr o. ■—

I l^reatl/ withdrawn frum tb
I ta eni.jently i^aLculMed lo


I


DBGBKU OF UKOTIISBLY ].0TK


The coiintersigu ami answer a.
the preceding degrees.


The right hatiJ is placeil across the lel'i
hand, palms touching; claep the hands
both by fingers and thumbs, thumbs
tueeting. The answer is the same as the


Bign.

Sign 2i Dugree,

ToKKN— The Token in Moses' Rod.


Clasp the right hands with
the thumbs pressing llie third
or knuckle joint of the second
linger. No shaking hands in
making the Grip.


LErxrRE 111" THE pkgukk of brothkri.y love.

Noble Grand — My brother, in the Degree of Friend-
ship you assumed an obUgation ivliich changed your
rfialions tr» a vast number of persons. You can never
furjtp t the hour when you were the object of envy and


hatred, and were cheered by a spectacle of confidence
and devotion. It was a moment of heart-felt enjoyment
when your hand was grasped in frieudahip, and a Totce
full of sympathy gave you encouri^ement. It was then
that two hearts melted into one in a solemn league and
fraternal covenant." By that engagement you were
bound to perform the offices of Brotherly Love. Heaven
has witnessed your vow, and the Common Father has
smiled on that compact. All Odd-fellows are now yonr
comrades, your advisers and yoiu" friends. A solemn
dnty has been devolved upon you, and you have been
taught how itought to be performed. The central link
in the chain of Odd-fellowship is " mutual assistance."
Fraternity, unless embodied iji acts of humanity, is but
an empty name. If a brother be naked and destitute
of daily food, and one of you say unto him, "Depart
la peace, be ye warmed and filled!" notwithstanding
ye give him not those things which are needful for the
body, what doth it profit? The answer is obvious: he
who witnesses suffering and does not hasten to relieve
it, is ignorant of the lesson that it is more blessed to
give than to receive. He is an enemy of hia race who
does not eare for its welfere, and is wedded to selfishness
and greed. Friendship leads to Brotherly Love, which


i


to ihai irb«D tbtlttr ratumi i
Uie Ordar «Mo° ■niUIud ud


'Up«r dlgaltT nod MltrHpant,
lwlagalllu/'^~a^oA^^ Man-


OMkn tlu* Dtrong tu $npport the wt-ak, the yoang to
retematx lUe M, the rich to help the poor, the educated
to instnict the ignonnt, the well to Dime tbe 2iek.uid
inak«i aJl giiod tarn aeek to ioiitatf the goodness of th*
Father of all men.

My brother, in the Degree of Brotherly Lore yon
hate actM a part in a famoas drama, which has rweiTed
the plaiidit« of the world for many generatioits. Too
were assaulted and robbed, wounded, and left upon th€
highway to pertuh." A priest of the Temple jonmeTed
that way and saw your condition; hb office required
that he eboald have pity, but be passed on and left yon
to die by the wayside. A Levite, whoswnng the golden
censers in the holy place and served at the consecrated
altar, also saw yon, and approached and looked upon
yo'i; but he. like the robbers and the priest, abandoned
yon to your fate. But wonderful to relate, an enemy
on his journey came that way and found yoa bleeding
and suffering. Althongh he knew that you were not of
his religion, nor of bis people, and that yon were not
his Friend; though he had no fortune and no tithes with
which to pay for your nursing and support, yet his
bowels of compassion were moved; he stopped — he ran
to your relief." How tenderly he raised yoar stricken


Denaldton't Fattet Companion, p. idB.


leir pon^ra mud enixcLiici. gli
il TEtpandblllllM, BlhKilltlc t
[novlcd^ uid practloB gj
— 0rM4'( JToitiia^ p. eu


I

i
I


LECTUBE. ml

iKxly and poured balm into your wounds, and how
gently be brought you to life by words of pity and
encouragement! You can never forget that be exposed
himself to the keen mountitiu winda when he took off
his cloak and wrapped it around you. How carefully
lie led you to the inn. and with what liberality he gave
the money that assured you of elielter and safety.
Such is the story of the good Samaritan. All Odd-fel-
lows, so far aa they have the ability, seek to imitate
this memorable example. Learn from this history that
he only is an Odd-fellow who has pity and mercy, and
who hastens to the relief" of a brother in distress.
Membership in a lodge is nothing, the obligation of
friendship is nothing, the assertion of our principles less
than nothing" unless we have Brotherly Love," which
is the bond of unity. Of all historical men, Moaes ex-
hibited the most self-denial and fraternal affection. He
represents an ideal of uuselBshness without a parallel.
A man of rare learning, he cast his lot among a multi-


I


Ken BOi— "Let na, then, j»«lnla the glorioui work wo hs™ eommenced,
villi vtgDrudunainclilnBBUbmi;: Icl our bark, wblle ealllnKon tlieeiKniln
QCUnDf Fcllonglllp. benoldFiI bf tbecompiiuor JvstlGt; and, If we maycon-
tlnauthe meuphar, Icl u> pencTiiiiDEly puraiie the tmcfc [licntidlfl Indlcatcsi


d frQin I1i)a inblDDiirr apbtn


ihere Is no cause for ttae filliire. Tbli l> uol. obarttr-"— journal e/ Proa
hSlSovtrelgn Orand Lodgi. Stuton of [B80. p. S2!3.

NoTB 63. — "Tbli Order obd sever be made smsrelr beneSclal iBiUtaCloa.
!■ more tban IHali II li » iDFtr u btrntan thought and aiplmlon.
Of i^M«din?> SweTt\gi^ Ordnd iJiiQt, 8«uien of 188A f. BUt


OBOREI O? BBOTHSItLT LOTB.

tade of nncQUured slaves; the adopted son of ngralty,
he laid down bis rank and riches, and became an ont-
cast for defending one of his lowly people, [t was

enough for him that they were poor and afflicted. For
them he left a royal court and became an exile in the
wilderness; and, having led them to national greatness.
he meekly died in sight of that inheritance which>
denied to him, became the pori;ion of his ungrateful*'
brethren. Such are the examples which compose the
instraction in this degree, whose emblematic color is
blue. And now, by authority of the Independent Order j
of Odd-fellows, I .declare you a brother of the Royi'
Blue, or Degree of Brotherly Love


tudtagi Sovtritfa Grand Lodgt, Sftlon of 1880. p. 8


ANALYSIS DEGREE OF BROTHERLY LOVE.


Cbrtal-H Furabld


In ft Sftisn*


Lodg


Thus


Hutcad


Chittt. Wb


ads an


Kej«


— YetTbcjCimnithaCrs


dll of OrtglO'i


TlloLod*B


Tbu. D=[>iii


■nil infldelity-


ItCumocP


erly L


"BrotberU


Lovo,"gl.o


by lb


L*ap


IDd Odd-te


DW PMWr-B


IriHlgeLDT


CoDtrKileil-


-Tbls


Jcgrea


Cbrlal.

This degree is Christ's parable of the Good Samaritan,
dramiitiKed by, aad acted in, a lodge which excludes
Christ! The lecture calls it "a famous drama, which
baa received the plaudits of the world," but suppresses
the name of its Author! thus, literally,

• • • ■WBllBBihallvBryof IbeCourt of He»Tea

Why do Masonry and Odd-fellowship take their sa-
cred lessonsfrom the Christian Bible? Why not from
the Koran or the Book of Mormon? And why are
there no "degrees" of brotherly love taught by Odd-
fellows in the kingdom of Dahomey or the Cannibal
Islands? The answer is, the lodges depend on Christ
for their ideas of virtue. Christ has come, baa "ele-
T&ted " mankind by his teachings, sufferings, death, and
by sending his Holy Spirit on Christians; and these
Satanic lodges impudently put his Bible on a level with
the false revelations, which they nuver quote. And
when Christianity has civilized a land, these lodges


/t6 COSTEMPT OF


-GALESBtma rJTCIDElTT.J


staud by and seize on the CbriHtiaa virtues as their d
I* itai stock and claim the merit of originating the yiit
r.thus stolen from Christ 1 And in this Degree of Brt
Lerly Love they dramatize Christ's wonderful paral
[■ while they treat its Author with silent contempt!
I lodge is thus deism and infidelity. If it were Ij
Ldeists and infidels would not love it as they r
KAnd, with an amazing e&routery which sinks I
fiehame, they claim superiority for the lodge
rwide religion, for casting out Christ, whose Scriptui

give them their ideas of virtue, and whose ctvilizatji

furnishes them members, degree fees and dues!
The idea that " Brotheriy Love" can be promoted J
. such a concern is simply preposterous.

A Colonel, now in our regular array, and who foQ^
^at the head of a regiment of volunteers in the horr
I battles of James River, joined the Odd-fellowa in QsS^
tburgh, Illinois, while he was a member of my Sem
i'Class in Knor College. He was an amiable young n
[and made a brave and capable officer. I remonstra^
l^with him and he left the lodge. He afterwards told^

ihat, after all their " brotherly love " professions, I
Euight on which he took, as he had a right by theiril

a take, his withdrawal card, the tone, looks and demeB

tor of his lodge brethren was such that he should h
^feared to be alotie with them that nijjht in thetooodst \

respected pastor of the Congregational church in Sat
I wich, Illinois, who had been both Mason and Odd-^

toY, said to me: " It is devil-worship, as you say."
"Why, brother," said I, "you never belooj
tihem, did you?"

" Yes," he replied. " when clerk in a busi

iu New York I joined both lodges; and as I look b


A PASTOb's TEBDICT — PAID-rOE BEKTIVOLENCE. 117

over the aights I spent in those lodges, and see, at thia
distance, the facea and mien of tlie members, the whole
thing eeems to me simply diabolical."

There is but one person in the Universe who can
overthrow this system of lodges. That person is the
" Stronger than the strong man armed."

The direst of all hatred is counterfeit love. It is the
best thing corrupted into the worst: corruptio opti'ml,
peasima ! It is, indeed, the kiss of Judas Iscariot. Such
is the " Brotherly Love " of Odd-fellowship.

True love is natural; that of the lodge, artificial.
Bible love "worketh no ill to his neighbor:" lodge love
worketh no good. Its very favor \s " for value received,'
and dies a certain number of weeks after its victim
stops paying dues. John Kaudolph said his philoso-
pher's stone was "Pay as you go." Grosh says that
Odd-feUowahip is " Pay iu advance " the dues of the
lodge. — Odd-fellows^ Manual, pp. 192-3.

And, curiously enough, a member in the Encamp-
ment must still keep paying in the lodge below, whether
he attends there or not. "/« fact^ good standing in the
Subordinal<: Lodge, which signifies freedom from disabil-
ity by non-payment of dues, is essential to good standing
everywhere else in the Order." — GrosKs Manual, p. 255,

To call such a thing " Friendship " is treason to hu-
man language! Paying for and entering higher degrees
does not exonerate from steady payment in the lower
degrees. So that, as the Odd-fellow goes on from one
degree to another in this temple of mock friendship, he
increases his taxes, and so he literally " drags at each
remove a lengthened chain." The love of husband, wife,
parents, children, brothers, friends, wells up in the ho-
tnau heart at Che mandate of nature. The artificial love


EBAL VS. LODGE LOVE — A COUNTBEPEIT.

of the lodge is pledged to Etrangers, asd springs from
grips, signs, oaths and obligations. It is not even that
love of bomanity which led the Roman poet to exclaim :
*" I am a man, and what concerns man concema me!'-
For Odd-fellowship excludes humanity from its portals
by denying its instructions to nineteen-twentieths ot
the race; and, like all other mystic secret orders, feeds
the religious cravings of man on the ashes and chaff of
its ritual; excites his veneration by scenic mystery and
show; pays back a fraction of its "dues" in benefits to
the sick — to rich and poor alike — provided they are not
too poor or unfortunate to be able to pay the dues, and
calls this swindling imposture " Brotheily Love!"

But all its manifold mischiefs center in and subserve
this one grand purpose. It is a counterfeit or mimicry
of the friendship of Jesua Christ. The New Testament
teaching is that God sends " the Spirit of his Son," the
Holy Ghost, into a soul, and he immediately calls God
his " Father," and Christ becomes his Elder Brother and
"Friend." — Jno. 15:15. He not only called his dis-
ciples " friends," but they are called " hia brethren,"
— Heb. 2: 17. This stupendooa endearment, essentially
sublime and magnificent in the very theory and thought
of it, is met and counterfeited by Satan in the lodge,
by putting His spirit on the members, leading them to «
worship him and calling them "brothers," and all out-
side of the lodges "Gentiles" and " profane!" Thus
the infinite and infinitely glorious friendship and
brotherhood with the eternal Qod through Jeaus Christ
is counterfeited, caricatured and counteracted by Satan
by means of hia degrees of " Friendship " and " Broth-
erly Love!"
'Somt ««». (■/»!«(/ AumoBumoiMolienitmimM.


CHAPTER X.


Thihd, or Dkgrbr op THUTn."

ORDKH OF BUSINESS,
ttj TVfenmcB lu imtt 44 II vlU be Ken thBl preTlogn tg Jnlf, lESl, 1
«IL[ prodta to buBlucBBby nlvtBg one r»p wU


■ bicb ll


1. Noble Grand — Brother Secretary,! will thank yoi

to call the roll of officers, aud read the proceedings of-1
last lodge night. I

2. Does auy brother know of a sick brother, or ]
brother in disti'ess?

3. Cunaideration of preTious proposal for membership. J
i CimdidateR adniitted. 1

5. Has any brother a friend to propose to become aJ
member of this lodge? 1

6. Unfinished business appearing on the minutes tol
be attended to.

7. Has auy brother anything to offer i'or the good o
this order?

Iba loilie mir proocDdto clctc itttr thr- asceaBu-r Uuslnese 1b tnuiBBeled.


DEBKEB DP TBCTB.

Part J.

Imide Gunrdinn — \oble Grand, then ta aa *lua m
the dor.r.

SoMe (irand — Attend to the alarm.

tnnide (iuiird'tuH (opening the wicket) — Wbj •
there ?

Cimduetor — A brother, who, having taken the c
Uiint of the Order, had learned the divine lesMo <
liiimanity, and now aeekH to obtain the Degree ofTrath^

/iinide Omirdiau (cloning the wicket) — -Noble Grsuifl
H lirotlier, liuvirig taken the covenant of the Order, li^
Wrned the diviu'i Ie»!<on of humanity, and now s
to obtain the Degree ot Truth.

Noble Grand — Why doe^heReekto obtain thisd^reen

Insidf Guardian (opening the wicket) — Why does h
seek to obtain this degree?

Ctnidudor—ihcaaaj, Truth is the Inywrial"

Itinidf Gtuirdian (clusmg the wicket) Because Trutf
is tht! Irnperifil virtae.

Nolilf. Gmnd—What does he expect from the TratiW

Jngide Guardian (a|>ening the wicket) — What doesm
he expect from the Truth?

Condwdor — That it will teach him his duty to (
and his fellow-niiui.

Inside Gunrdian {closing the wicket) — That it
teach him his duty to God and his fellow-man,

Nfb})! Griiiid — Admit the brother to the mysteriea (j
the Degree of Truth.


NOn W. — "4Hlm Jmperlil vfrmc,
RTdlni coLiiri mid cmbletnu. WhUi n
pnnHHHIDrlrmtnirwmllKy, Btui ILipei
Itapcrpctanl tnihncMandrternliyi u
In llm If tliH Scarlil likdm. lod xraya
rbfnforc. vliu U*a ibl> vlrtno fhOituiii
htniinlf uil (II iFOUDl him; for Iti po>
U irllT (he briithnr of thli atstee flnda
I* enalilM M ipoM u by luiDorilr ooi


OEirBBAL INSTHUCnOKS.


131


{'tmdurtor — Vice (rrdnJ, I present tn ymi .

worthy brotlier. who hnving been duly elected, seeks

I obtain the iiiystf riea of this degree,

P'ice Gmwrf (standing) — Has ho heen found worthy

I the degrees he has alre;uly received, and is he one

who ia likely to perform with fidelity the obligations of

an Odd-fellow?

Conductor — He seems in all respects worthy of our
ionfidence.
Vice Grand — Have you carefully examined the broth-
in the preceding degrees?
Conductor — 1 have, and find him correct,

7ICE QRAND'3 CHABSE.

Vice Grand — Brother, you are now tntering upon the
[aat degree of a Subordinate Lodge — that wliich crowns
the fabric; and we devote it to tlie principle of truth,"
which is appropriately iutroduci-d in this portion of onr
work; for it follows close after Love, and has an inti-
mate connection with it. It is the spontaneous result
of genuine and (constant Love. If you are faithful to
the duties enjoined in the last degree, Truth will appear
in all you sav and do, as an intrinsic ornament of your
character. If Love is the fundamental element of
all morality, Truth is the Imperial virtue. It ia the
treasure for whieh the canrfid mind ever seeks, the con-
summation for which we apuly in all our investigations.
It is the sanction of every appeal that ia made for the
good and the right. It condemns the wrongs, the sins,


ItcdJr, tfasreforu.


toe. lt[JtbCKTOi.
tnlQmtj aud wrong,


'< Manual, p. 1S3,


3 invol-
id him.
OB, tli^^H

(her ^H
±1 ^M


199 moBEB <CT mrrs.

and the falsehoods of the world. It ntsy be long in
achieving its victory, bnt it is omaipotent, and most
triamph at last. The man of Trath i? the best and the
strongest man; his soul, like a spring of clear water,
reflects the light of heaven and is full of life. His
speech and his actions are always just — he wins invol-
nntary respect — he blesses and purifies all around him.
He is a sulid landmark amid the wavex of faction,
storms of passion, and the conflicts of error.

Vke Grand {to Conductor) — Conduct the brother
our Noble Grand. [Vice Grand resumes his seat

Tbe CoDdnclaT lotda lbs cuidld41« la Ibe Oa-li at Ihs K<

Conilucloi — Noble Grand, by orderof the Vice
I present to you this bnitberfor obligation.

NnHe Grand (standing) — Brother, in view of what
has been intimated in this degree by our worthy Vice
Grand, are yon willing to enter into an obligation with
us?


Noble Grand — Place your right hand on your left']
breast and repeat after me;

OBLIGATION DEGREE OP TBPTH.

I, , in the presence of the members of the -J

Degree of Truth now assembled, do solemnly prom^e, J
that I will conceal and never reveal the signs, secrets
and mysteries of this degree, unless it be to a brothers
Odd-fellow of this degree in good standing, or in a law-T
ful lodge of brothers who shall be legally authorized to i
receive the same. And, furthermore, I promise to be -j
faithful to my former obligations in this Order to tbffj


rSTTUTTOS. 128

extent of my power so to do. To the faithful perform-
ice uf all which I pledge my sacred honor.

Tio Boble Orand givci one f»p, Kmlng Hie iodge.

Noble Grand — Brother, are you willing to advance,
that you may become a brother of this degree?


If Uie dondMste ai


LLIn. Noble Orud addreHoa tbc CoB-


Noble Grand — Brother Conductor, let the brother be
taken to the ante-room, that he may re-euter and be
instrncted in the Degree of Tnith.


Tbe OHulldBte to tlili pert w\


Inside Guardian — Vice Grand, there is an alarm at
;be door.

Vice Grand — Attend to the alarm.

Inside Guardian (opening the wicket)— Who comes
there?

Conductor — A brother who is ready to receive the
mysteries of this degree.

Inside Guardian (closing the wicket)— A brother is
ready to receive the mysteries of this degree.

Vice Grand — Admit him.

BetDSKdmltted, tbo Condnctor win iirocced nitb Ibe cBodlduM to the Vlc<

Conductor — Vice Grand, I have the pleaenre of pre-


IM


DBSAEBOF mOTB,


sentiiig to yon for instruction Brother -
is a probationer, has served his time as such, and has '
proved to be obedient and willing to do his duty in con-
formity with his obligations.

Vice Grand — Brother , I welcome you, and

commend your zeal for promotion in our Order, fully
believing that you have an ambition to do good. Be-
fore you can be advanced to the full enjoyment of this ,
degree it is necessary that you give acceptable answers
to the following questions in presence of the brothers
here assembled:

Bcyeral broihan Oim nmr, eo u to nearljr jurroonii tt
OrmDd procecOi.

Vice Grand — Do you know of any reason why i
should not intrust to you the mysteries of this degi

Candidate a

Vice Grand — Is it your desire to receive the Scarlet***
Degree, for the purpose of promoting your moral" an4j
intellectual welfare?

Candidate answers.

Vice Grand — Brethren of the Priestly" Order, are yoi
satisfied with the a


eontUCDeDt pirt at tl


, arc given to tbe Fifth, or Degrei
•ThoB shKit nute holj gaimenO
«Qlr. ' (E>od. .BVILC 2). In Hid ■

8, the eptod. tHa ourlQu.Blnlle of t


QranS Ledgt. Stition of 18K), p. 8209.
KOTB e9.-'MllaopHQnoI

Ihe prescrtbcd form), la Htli


JlanatdtOKt Pocket Compaaiua, p. IBS.


IinTlATlON. 13B

If Utlaaod ailll lllc an.wi-r?, i-arh mnmlirr nay.. I tm.

Vice Grand — Condactor,you will introduce thj broth-
er to the High Priest of this degree.

Tbe CODduclor l«u1s the CBDdliUta aeikr the prlnclpil cbalr.

Conductor — High Priest Aaron, 1 present to jou

Brother , & probationer, who is qualified to

receive the Scarlet Degree or Priestly Order.

Noble Grand (as High Priest) — My brother, you will
take your position in charge of the Conductor, and be
attentive to the instruction yuu are about to receive.

Tbe cudldBte ma; here b« tKtAufi imlll tlie symbola tilTe all beea dsiciibed UHl
■bDnn la blm.

Noble Grand — Brother Warden, what are the sym-
bols of the Initiatory Degree?

Warden— The All-Seeing Eye," the Three Links, the
Skull and Cross-Bones, and the Scythe-

Noble Grand (as High Priest) — Priest of the Initia-
tory Degree, vrhat do these symbols te&eh?

Mors 70.— "TnE All-skkino Eta.— Smbhm 0/ OmnUctiact, Ihtiijiteial


slodj


Mill the llgbc are botli
tindfv iDd pU]/iru/ty 1


Glou^mnd OftrlncM are round Bboii.c'

Id ItBlit.'BPd 'In Blm iBnodarlmeuKtsll.'

LIB tlie Boul-cfaeerloe trutti


llEKTUf. AltllQIIgh,
dt BU tbrono/Md


vrercnllr, no live nnderHli iilt-«dDg


ISH DEfiSSE DP TRUTH.

Left Supporter of the Vice Grand (aa Priest of t
InilLatory IJegreey—

THB ALL-SEEDTO EYE

^^-'"~~ '" - "^ ""^^^ Enveloped in !

---" .-^='_ hla?* of Ijghta

r^^_ glory, reminds t
~ri^5 th;itthescrutin:

-^^ iitgeyeoiOiD
- ^5 otence is ever n
~^^ on us; tbatKllotq
thuuglits, wordal
!irid actions :
open to bis vieW
The light of morning and thednrkness of night are atil
to him; and he trieth the reins and searcheth the heai
of the children of men. Yet, at the same time it illu^]
trates that sleepless goodness which looks down :
mercy upon our frailties, and kindly ministers to oiflj
ever returning wants.

THE THEEH LINKS"
Represent the grand motto of our Order: Friendship)
Love, and Truth, They belong to that long chain (
moral principles that bind us together
as a fraternity. They are welded in !
the fires of purity by the sacred hands

Sntii 71, — "Thb TmtmliHKB.— ftnS/<w>o/ JT, Z. AT. Itn


'"-Soom^^^


>i lUo will tw foilBd IB n


1W

of Jehovah. Thus bound with the chain i F Jiuicere
friendship, unfeigued love, and simple trLth, we may
live in the bonds of peace, and harmoniously pursue
our labors for the amelioration of our race.

THE SKtTLL AND CBOSS-BOHEB"
Are to remind us of the consuming process of nature.
To-day we are in the full realization of health, and
enjoyment of th"
pleasures of tliii
world. In a little
while, the ever-
burning furnace'
of time will con-
sume to ashes all
that hath life
and vigor in this
terrestial sphere.
They most forci-
bly remind us that we are bound by solemn engage-
ments to give to the mortal remains of a departed
brother decent sepulture; and, while we lay his body in


Nora 73.— "Tne Brnn.!. akh C


—Smbltm of XortalUu.


!■ ImpBrfcctloDB vJtb bli body benestb tbe clodA i
nllr of worlflly thlngi— Uie InstKblUtr of wmllli M


111 pvBOe."— Ori»A'( Jfantiaf, j). 102.


TTB {tfpumw OFTRCTS.

tbii- tomb, to cberish n livrly recollection of bis Tirt
tuiti Uary 3I) bis imperfections beneath the clod t
rrU upon hie baeom.

THB SCTTHK,'*
The anirer^ emblem of time, is
to us the symbol of death. As the
graa4 falls before the mower's
scytUc. 50 m.iu. like the flower and
gra» of the field, mnat wither be-
neath the touch of Time, and fall
before the scythe of the King of
TerroR.

Xoble ffranrf{as High Priest)— Warden, what are the
symbob belonging to the First Degree, or the Decree
of Friendship?

M'arflen — The Bow and Arrows, the QuiTer,'
the Bundle of Sticks.

\fjjle Grand (aa High Priest)— Priest of the
Degree, what do these symbols teach?


Koti74.-"Tb«


liU.-—OroMK-a ilaaacd. p. ao.
HB iXU THB Bow. — £'mSi«B of f
peuo prcp4ra lor war.' Traly. IIip hdw \t ouitr
■rruwi lindriwii— but nil ure ttaiyl Thej rem

wurfiirc. ■D'l of tlio niBDlfeitillDDK or deroiedfrleu<Iatal[ibetKcFD Joulbu nA'\
Uivlil,

" Tlic uulrtinE bow tesebea tbc bemBt of
mlDd or hud/. wliuB reonntlon cin bs sstely b
pniiitlvvlf iiMCl-gii llie linparunce of prcpanilon ror BCilou.
d( cue and cnjorirsnt.

"TbatriMOdd-tclloir trill nlwari Iisvc n^a^F bit qnlrer sn
• bnicnirr trom Ouikcf. or \a promoLs h
PMM, "—*««**« JfDMialtP. IK-


tSiTiATioit. 129

Bight Supporter of the Vice Grand (as Priest of the
"'rat Degree) —

TBtE BOW, ABR0W8, AND (JUIVER,
f Are to remind us of the covenant between Jonathan
and David, and by
them we are
tanght to put
forth every laud-
able effort to save
a brother from
the wrath of au
enemy. They also
remind lis that
we should always
of truth and justice.

THE liONDLE Op'STICKS"

Is a beautiful emblem of union,, and
teaches us the importance of that virtue
in our benevolent enterprise, Separate
the sticks, and the strength of a child
may destroy them; but while united a
giant's power might be esei^ed in vain
to breali them. Separated, we should be
speedily broken and destroyed by the ac-
cumulating tide of worldly selfishness;
but united as brothers we bid defiance to
all opposition. and triumph over the great-
est difficulties.


WOM TB.— " TBI BDSOLlt o


RoDn.-EmbltmO/SlrtnglMaPHion. The


pteuhar emblem ot thp Co.rn


"TbUinemcnlo of sdjrlDgtl


iher, >Q teach Wa cbUdrea the vuloe of anion,


Rpmb no Ie>i Impr^aslrelr lo


n, and ba ■uitalned bj, tte olbon. when all ite


ind> or F, Tj. * T.— msklDg the InterestE ud


lalwnofall thecommoQ prope


irofeioh. In Odd-ff Uowshlp, nnlonliiininjth


band. Od8 rod, Kptinied (r


dlBhpirleni^ and destroyed— but In Ibo Ormly


««(IT reiiat tvLl and appomplHh piDd. K»cb


MHiiatheiii IhB othf m <w>lD»


dbiliowed oppo»ltU)ii. *nd all stand Ural and on-


Mni Id iliB mlghtr power of


utF«il«w-t.lp,"-efD.A'( Jfanuul, p. WO.


DEGKEE OF TECTH.

Nolle Grand {as High Priest) — Warden, what are the
Bj^mboU helou^Qg to the Secoud Degree, or the Degree
of Brotherly Love?

Warden — The Axe.'Hhe Heart and Hand"the Globe,
Ihe Ark and the Serpent.

Noble Grand (as High Priest) — Priest of the Second
Degree, what do these symbols teach ?

Left Supporter of the Noble Grand (as Priest of the
Second Degree) —

THE AXE
Ta an ancient implement
of the artisan. It is an .
emblem of progress, as v
by it the pioneer makes ^

advancement through xiJ

the forest for the spread
of -civilization. . _=


tteea of tlie


irtWerBem


m lint (all hi^


ore [he flxd, <■


e the BiiDlleht


gloom -nd


ho ]>nd b


ortDlvi™Tmlil«.pplledt«


eitrj eunm


rluglrefl


gfolalelow


uid fnlly


profit by 11.B


InHupncei o(


our lo,lgfl. 001'


ORtL'r. >Dd 1


r evary hllnH'


1n>pre]uiUi>


BniiniM


■eetbatbrtnge


tb not roitb good fniJl'— and


c»[ them In


the con


rlf:rlqg fires.


ylnilKoe


to collect do


neriy«iddl.-


truiedgntb


e Warden


bai pulnled


otprfliil


D Biart IH Hand1."—Broth-i Mai-aal, p


104.


KonTT.-


■■Th» H


■.BT .K HA.B


And, InclndM


iD tbii. Can


■n emblem


or Ihe [n


lnfl him or


ehargo— lh«l


■&M1» or .


Tfinple.'wb


cb our (eel pr


trance, iiiiil whoso Ira


oub. opi^nlng


■B wo ad Tan


brongh alt tlio


•nfferlng call, tliB tli
etb the ckeirful glrs


—OroiA'M Jfanuat, p. VH.


nrrciATioH. 131

IHB HEART AND HAND

mply, that when we greet our brethren, it should be
with that aincerity and af-
fection which proceeds
from the heart. Tliis em-
blem, also, reminds us of
that constant and uuif onn
desire for the welfare of
I our brothers, which should
impel U3 to action in the
furtherance of those plans
that will most promote
their happiness.

THE globe"
"fscuts the extensive field of our labors. It not
■ W.—"Th« Globs rsCixHJTK.—ffinSinn cf tht World Of ManlAnlt.


w f or grerii Ing and Inbor, la stlJI partly In cLouda; anil Ihei
R there Is mucli to IMm wirt la teacti [a tula great field, over whlcli our tirel

I*. BaniB)raar Ilgbt aid IndlgiifpitlnK Ibo IgDoranca wlt1i:li fet obscnrEa Ibc

nolon wTierPVtr iBODmoee tieeda llio one, or want and w
ebj quloken our ■ympnthlcs— ticootDH *iDore belptul lo t
(ulariy tbouBhltuI of tlic hajiplLcss of otheri '—until, br I
bopE, we have a prpilbatlon of that gtan* period when 1
Lsk In tbfl llgtaC of Ood-i Fatherhood, and kll lu va>t fr
iven, In grftlllnde and pralie, tbc radlBDCu of Bli glory, "
.'« jVannoi, p. 118.

FULL LieaT,— fflnfilnn of the Etgenerated World.


133 DEGIIIEE OF TRITTH.

only tpaebes that we are to moTe ouward in our worit'
until misfortiiae
has no want to re-
lieve and sorrow no
tears to dry; but,
also, that from
whatever nation
our brethren may
i come, they are not
to be sent eraptji^
away.


Reminds us of the receptacle of the two tables of atom
upon which the Ten Commandments were written; and


I


Id goDduEii ud Crutb, keeptng luerey tat thaoBB
'■ntgreaBlon. and aln, ud thu will bj no ni«in> eU
■ Ir-aehet at, IbBt'u tbe proii^rlt; of IncleDi Imi

flepoBlts, so will onr purity, peice, lod proiperity'
bedlcDce to, and wmmuDlon irllli, tba Moat HUb uid BtOf'
Dt He&YCDiT Talhci."—Or0tA'i Mamial, p. SM.


rSTTTATIOS'. 183

as the prosperity of
the ancient Israelitea
depended upon their
observance of that
law deposited in the
Ark of the Coyeaant,

P BO will our happiness be promoted by aa observance of

I 0(ir good and wholesome laws.

THE 8EEPENT"
Is an emblem of wisdom,
and is placed among our
symbols to indicate the
necessity of a wise cau-
tion, which will protect
our mysteriea from im-
proper disclosing, and
I guide lis in the proper
' regulation of life and
conduct.

N'oble Gmri'l {as High Priest)— Warden, what are the
I eymbolB belonging to the Third Degree, or the Degree
t of Truth?"


■pcclnlly Its sppllotluoi tor taciKoE. wblch, igiLi
Waii»vn.lDn."—Oro»h't Jfanual, p. 131.

[in ibtlr true timboILD meaDlngB ihe; ill If ich truth.


W'-OtMh'i Manuat, p. I


134 DEOBEK OF TBI7TH.

Warden — The Scales and Sword, the Bible, the Hour*
■Glass, and the Coffin.

Noble Grand {as High Priest)— Priest of the Thir
Degree, what do these symbols teach?

Bight Supporter of the Noble Grand (as Priest of t
Third Degree)—

THE SCALES AND SWOBD"

Are emblematical of justice, which judges with candor
and rewards with impartiality. Among Odd-fellowa,
both justice and
mercy are admin
tered without
gard to the false
distinctions of i
ciety. Inthelodj
room the high a
low, the rich a
the poor, the leari
and the unleamec

rsBl— "ThbSoiuu.— Jtrnftins of Snaity. It repKi


tNITUTIoS. 135

meet as brothers, and unitedly engage in the promo-
tion of benevolence and truth.

THE bible"
Is an exhaiistless fountain of Truth, the store-hoiisff
from which all oar principles are derived. Guided by
its instruetiona, we may ap-
proximate that golden age
when the fetters of prejudice
will be broken, the shackles
of mental and moral bondage
fall off, and man, redeemed j
and disenthralled from the

slavish life of the passions,

will assert his high birthright, and own the ties which
bind himinouiversal consanguinity with hiabrotherman.

THE hour-glass"

Indicates the march of time, and tells us of the frailty
of human life. Like the sands of the
glass, we are passing away. How im-
portant that we improve our fleeting
hours, in order that we may meet our
end with peace!

i.StrAlemCf Revtalid {SpirUttati Truth. Thire-


"IM tnelilngi of Bod. ai


llTlDg Ood la oL
elen»l life, lu i


— dKiA'i MawH, p- s


OKSRSK or TRCTH.
THH COFFLS"

Points to the last home of man. Hov great or small.

Iiigh or I'jw. all must meet on thia commoD level — ail

must submit to the

'lominion of death, t

How cheerless the

home of the dead n

relieved by the prospect of immortal life! Bot hope

bends over man's last resting-place a bow bright with

immortality, which, based upon earth, extends far into >

the i-acred realms of eternity.

11 IM cuutliUtt bu been Kstcd be rami dov rUe.

CONCLrDIKQ CHABOE.

Nolle Grand (as High Priest) — My brother, you arel
now admitted to the Third Degree, known also aa th^
Priestly Order. You have already been informed thoif
it is dedicated to the principle of truth. Yoo were pivfl
pared for admission by baring placed on yon s^ wbitfll
robe. This was intended to represent ^le purity t
truth. But the emblematic color of this degree is
Scarlet, implying that truth is an Imperial virtue. The
pure white robe is an external symbol, representing
that yoar lips should speak the truth, and at all t
be ready to administer" words of affection to a brc

Not* ».— "Tm Corns.— Xmblim of Certain TVufA. it npnun


Aaau."—ffiv*i'»Jf<iniial,pAeJ.


OHTIATION. 137

reqTiutegconsoIatioti. You are now placed in a posi-
tinn among us to gain rank, the highest in a lodge. It,
therefore, becomes your duty to enforce by example,*'
as well as by precept, the tenets of our Order. Its mys-
teries are conlided to your charge; you are to preserve
them inviolate; duty and honor, your own solemn
vowH, all require that you be faithful, and that you also
guard your brethren against any breach of fidelity. Be
true and steadfast in this as well as in all things, and
thus demonstrate tliat merit" constitutes the great title
to our privileges, and that on you they have not been
undeservedly conferred.

Noble Grand (three raps, all rise)— Members of the

Priestly Order, are you willing for Brother to

receive the decoration of the Third Degree or Priestly
Order?

The liodge answers.

Noble Grand — (one rap, seating the lodge.)

NobU Grand (as High Priest) — Conductor and War-
den, you will now disrobe the brother. [They take off


m o( the wflekly m


e Odd -Cello V. nslaE


ritmndlnglT m
— 9raih'l Ml luol. p. IBB,


IIK'iKlli: tir TKtDI.

hU robe-]. 3Hy brullier, 1 jiresunt Xa> you iliis collar; it
'm<licat«ii your rank. We tniBl that your zeal for ihe
promotion of the imncipk-s of the Order will be ardent
and pure. I will now instruct you Id the mysteries of
thin degret:.

In thin degree there is an Alarm, at the inner door, a
Pom Word, a Counter Sign, an Answer to the Counter
Sign, a Working Sign and Answer, an Explanation of
the Working Sign and Answer, a Principal Sign, a Grip,
a Voting Sign, and the Honors of the Order.

Tlie Alarm at the inner door is three raps.

pAitftwoito— The Password is AARON to be lettered
ut all times when used for working purposes; working
into a lodge orinex-tmination prior to opening. In com-
municating this word either to the Inside Guardian or
to the Warden the brother must give the letters A-A
and if refjuired by the Inside Guardian or Warden he
must give the remainder of the word, R-O-N, lettered
an hefori!. The Inside Guardian and Warden must be
Miktlxlicd.


I


WORKING SIGS.
Ttir> Blgn IB maile hb tollowB; Claer
rl^bl hmid exii'pl tbs Index tinker v
Ib pltcD'ledi OiiiuiL over BngerBi pres
Ki'Uttu lit Iho [orflheid witU tUe point


E'flflufullon— Tlilak t»[orD joa Bpoiik.


PRINCIPAL SIGN.
>e Ibamb a[ Ibp rigbi hand on the riglil nipple.
:B a plvQl;mako ji ap&n down Willi tbc I
D mike a apin acrues Ibe Ijreset wllb Ibe (


VOTIKG SioH— Tho Voting Sign Is the rIgUt hind upUItad.


TbeHnno


■ ot


ha Order SM glveB se (o


lowB:Ofl]


Btandinif, the Waiden standi


tbecbiirof


beN


oble Grand, Ibe mernbem


ooking to


iDllDWlug bU


una which are: Plsca t]


hMd KrOBB


hBl


rt band palma londHnEl clip the h


Dne.paaee a moment anl


■guln uid repeat.


Wiihing t<


t a Degree Lodge or


> aobord


Lodi-Bopen


ntb


Uilrd degree, jou will aononnce j


an


alarm at the ouHlde door


[the alar


luthfipa


rdntib


■air tn appioprlate regalia [having aacertain
Outside Onardian that (be lodge la open in I
&tte raps at the loeide dnot. The Inside On

belung. The Inside Gnardlan will close the
oOlceT, who, It he la BBtlsaed, will diruc
cormcL The Inalde Gnardlui re-openi


d

I


lhopM»wurdo


rtbb third


egre


e. UcD


lect the IneidB


Gnardl


n will admit;


yon. when jou


will adyano


he oenlre


ot the room a


daddre


sa the Noblo


CDanlcrslg


nwb


o will Kk


nowledgp 70 a


ther bjgiv-


Iagtho.»meC


win the


reaa the Vice Grand


who will ack


owledge yo


a brothe


with the Ban


fitslen. Vtrn


wOiatangala


tnjn to th


Nobla Gtana ani a44K»


a^\m.-«


UCCCOn^N^^o


140

Iha Ihhd degree. Tbe Noble Orsnd wUl give tli« proper inaner to tha 81g
You will tben be sealed. WUblng tn leave tbe lodge before II is clOMd Ji
will sddreBB Ibo piciildtiig officer witb tbe atgu ot the tblrd degree and tl
ofBcer willauBwcTjoDwltb tbe proper eigo ^ ;oa will Uen receiTS ftom t
Vice Grand the password of tbe eieniog whlcli job mnst give to the tmlda J
Guardian before job will be allowed to depart, Should yon wish to re-
the lodge on tbe aame evening yon may nae the Vice Grand's paaswa
tlie paBswoid of the third degree at the inner door tor that purpoae. Tb<t 1
Vice Grand'e retirlngpaKBHord )a only asEd In this degree. It j
iting yonr own lodge and are without the paaawonl of the cnirent
paaawordof tbia degtee, the Noble Q rand, beiugaointonned, aakatheSecra^ ^
tacy aa to yonr alandlng in the lodge. It the Secretary reportn faverahly, di- J
rectione will be given to admit yon. but it the report la untavarable yon are 1
eo iotonned by tbe proper Goardian and }nD can not be admitted. (Tha H
NoUle Grand should carefully inetrnct the brother In the method at naliig tb»i
paeaworda In working Iniii a lodge and In eiamlnstlon prior to openla|Ji_J
After which the Kohle Grand will call np tbe lodge and luetrnct the brothi— ^
In tbe Honors of the order and to whom thoy are lo be given, requiring tt
brother to face the Warden, and to participate with the membera In the pe
tormance ot the ceremony, according to the work; tbe candidate tiUngpaat^J
tlon to the left of the conductor. [After the performance ot thia ceiemaoj^d
and the candidate h " -----

' Noble Grand — (lo tlie Conduotor) — Conductor, yoOsJ
will proceed with the closing ceremony.

M>ble trrawrf— (one rap, calling up the lodge).

[The Conductor proceeds with the candidate to thel
centre of the room, and turning faces the Past Grand.] j

Past Graiid (advancing to the candidate) — ^By this 1
grip [he gives the grip of the First Degree as on page 9aJ1
I greet you in Friendship, as one who has attained tQ'<fl
the First Degree.

[The Conductor turns the candidate to face the Vioefl
Grand.]

Vice Grand (advanoing to the candidate) — By tiaaM
grip [he gives the grip of the Second Degree as oi^
page 110] I greet yon in Brotherly Love, as a memlx
of the Second Degree.

[Tho Condactor turns the candidate to face tbe Notd
Grsnd.J


Noble Grand (advanciug tn tlie caoilidale) — Brother,
I welcome you in Truth, and urge you to attend our
meetings, that you may assist your bruthren and pro-
mote your own happiness Ly acts of mutual assistance.
By this grip [hu gives the grip of the Third Degree as
described] I greet you as a brother of the Degree of
Truth, and I now declare you fully entitled to all the
rights and privileges of the three degrees of Odd-fel-
lowship.

[The Noble Grand resumes his station.]

Noble Grand — Brothers, I now introduce to you

Brother — ; — , who lias been advanced*" to the

Degree of Truth. Ton will welcome him as a brother
of this degree.

J^e Jjodge — Welcome, Brother.

Noble Grand — (one rap, seating the lodge).


ANALYSIS DEGREE OF TRUTH.


tTnthleHDci


trK ot Trnib— HodEe-podR


■Dd JiwUb


WortWp Uied— AM


ml « Bft


i u Rtllgton— The Brua Berpe


Wruiuc Bn


lie. A/l: of Ihc Cott


1 llu.hUDt.iy to God «aw.F«


;~— H«d« Nuiftlni Fnnbci— BM>


L «tlo.lo.


. Olorioai Immonalj


red—Hair Ameriiaii* ud Fuit


■ DiDPrutIc


CiU-worahi^j-Tbe Surlei ColH


r Bcv«luloiu— Tkc E<»rliit Won


i Beut-Goa-i Phai


,oe™pli<


•t FitK nnnHlpt— Dcbucha 1


lie Wonbliw iDcln.


XQuUim, Itac Eurlcl Wamin Of 1


ApmaljpM-


-rmlK VonblsKir MidUIIt


•nd Monllr DruDk-All Monl •


S|><rUuil IT


neleuDCHei CaDiUaea In ¥:


il>e W<,r.mi»- BODH In WhBrtl


llEr Bll« A


»-ThelHueln lbs


Uniled 1


Breibnn Cbnrrb—One Hmidradl


irei Ordcraln Eiliicnoc — E»ch nn EmbodltneDt ot ibeApoe*

Tbis is a " Degree of Truth " in which no partdcid
truth is taught: like the conclusion of JohneoiiS
Raaselas, in which nothing is concluded. It is decided
insipid, even beyond the others, and bears the marks
exhausted invention lite poetry written without inspirq
tion.

The friendship of David and Jonathan, and tin
neighborly kindness of the Good Samaritan, are i
spoiled by repetition or shorn of their power and beao^
even when filched from the simple, sacred narrative a
woven into a Christlesa worship. Indeed, their eeasela
rppetitions, as dramatized and acted over and on
mi^bt be of some real benefit to the actors if t


A 8T8TBir OF SOCIAL BWHTDLINO — SYMBOLS. 148
were not made part of a Bystem of social Hwindling
in which men's topes of heaven itself are used as means
and motives to get money and votes. So this last and
crowning " degree " of a Subordinate Lodge is a hodge-
podge of heathenism made up of the symbols of pagan
and Jewish worship; as"The All-seeing Eye," " The
Skull and Crossed-Bones," " Scythe of Time," " Arrows .
and Quiver," "Aie," "Heart in Hand," "Globe," andfl
other pictures whose explanation constitutes the degree;!
and which taste, after the stories of David and Jonathan!
and the Good Samaiitan, lifee a dish of hash-victuala I
after a feast of lamb. Indeed, if the ritual had gone!
on quoting the Bible much farther, Odd-fellows would I
have thought the joke carried too far, and considered it.]
about as bad as religion. So the contrivers turned from
Scripture narratives to the above symbols and others, tu
the serpent on a pole, which the Lecture explains, with
the pagans, to mean "wisdom," while the notes say J
(note 80), " It represents the brazen serpent raised by 1
Moses," to show Christ as made sin for the people, tha 1
sight of which healed them. But still, these wicked I
inventors cannot get on without Christ's Scriptures, \
but put into this hodge-podge degree, in addition to the I
above, a little metallic Bible, an Ark of the Covenant^ ]
and a Globe in Light, as " the field of our [their] la-
bors," to copy Christ's saying: " The field is the world,"
to sanctity the absurd mass; and a pictured co££n isfl
thrown in at the end to solemnize the play.


114 RESURRECTION TAtTOHT — AAROn'S CALF-WOBSHIP.

AnJ this devil's compound, seasoned with pagan
prayer, is cailbd " The Ditgree of Truth,'" practiced,
>:iiictioned and taught by Schuyler Colfax and Ruther-
ford B. Hayes, once Vice-President and President of the
United States! And the duped initiate is told by
Conductor that this strange medley, which does
leave one sound, substantia) idea in his mind,

TEACH HIM HIS DUTY TO GOD AST) HI3 FELLOW-MAHI'

(See Ritual, p. 120.)

Of course, after receiving this "Degree of Truth,"he
needs neither Mosea nor prophets, Christ nor apostles,
I he Bible nor the Holy Ghost, to teach him his whole
duty and the way of life. He has graduated; takenhia
degree from the Subordinate Lodge, and is assured of
" a happy reaurrection to a glorious immortality." (See
the Grand Sirens Address Consecrating the Odd-fellows'
Burying Ground, Chicago.)

But are not Schuyler Colfax, R. B. Hayes, and a host
of such men, Americans and patriots? If this analysis
be true, why are such men in Odd-fellowship?

The answer is: The same cause that took "Aaron the
Saint of the Lord," into that calf-worship and joUificO"
tion at Sinai. The explanation which hegave to
was popular: "Thou knowest the people that they ar*.*-
set on mischief." The motive in both cases ia popular.'
favor: "For theij loved the praise of men more than tiia^
praise of God." — Jokn 12:43,


•fthe ^
ythe^l
1 not-^H


SCAJtLBT IN ODD-FIXLOWSmi' AND BEVELATIONS. 145

And we read iu the Ritual (p. 136), " The emblematic
color of this degree is scablet;" a color prominent i
Odd-fellowship regalia, as iu the Apocalypse.

"And there came one of the seven angels, which h;i(i
the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me:
Come hither, and I will shew thee the judgment of the
great whore that sitteth ou many waters;

" With whom the kings of the earth have committed
fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have
been made druuk with the wine of her fornication.

" So he carried me away in the Spirit into the wilder-
ness ('o/' America ?^ and I saw the woman sit upon a
scarlet-colored beast, full of names of blasphemy,
having seven heads and ten hums.

"And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet
color, and decked with gold and precious stones and
pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abom-
inations and filthiness of her fornication."

" These shall make war with the Lamb, and the
Lamb shall overcome them; for he is Lord of lords, and
King of kings: and they that are with him are called,
and chosen, and faithful."

"And he saith unto me, The waters which thou saw-
est, where the whore sitteth. are peoples, and multi-
tudes, and nations, and tongues."

"And the woman which thou sawest is that great
cily, which reigneth over the kings of the earth." — Rev.
17: 1-4, 14, 15, 18.


Tbic w God's pbotBgrapIi td &L>c -vnt^bip^ diaw«d

Aik* wtudniiifAnbha tin bouI, wfaoBe wondiip, Ekt
MmMf n waman. is lor «■«. The scarlet woouui oo Uw
eon lie- aevna biSs. "tiiat
iVBT tlip kings oT i2ie eartli^a
n dw^BUitlaer tf liarlote and [all a piriha lB^

«rdl W9a««^»»«k8iaGieinQ5 vnrsHps sv ix


« 1%M» miw war «aAi ia» VamV* eiA li» lame «nt j
li«KlKUKtw«Uknhb«at«f«iHnib nJliK alaB«.
«l«W««A<£«hMt|aiVAS..«nAF ion x&nPa^atj

4mk a nMW» mil -it mm^Mum n On Staafe rf|ginlB,
I'Wn^ biat ia 4


BOUE BTBBY WUKEE — THE ' nUTTBD BBETHREN.


147


No Scripture, least of all Scripture prophecy, is of
any local or particular interpretation. Rove is not
alone on the Tiber. She ia everywhere where her rites
are. For in them is " the hiding of her power." And
" the great whore, sitting on many waters," which are
the tongues, peoples and nations who have been made
drunk with her filthiness and false worships, is the
spiritual photograph of false worships to-day, as it was
when John was " in Patmos for the word of God and
the testimony of Jesus Christ."

These now, as then, "make war with the Lamb."*
Certain " United Brethren," falsely ao-ealled, denounce
their brethren who resist the moral filthiness of the
false worships, because they make their church unpop-
ular, especially in the cities, which are almost " wholly
given to idolatry," as in the days of Paul.

But if the world hateth them, we know that it hated
Christ before it hated them, "If," says Christ, "ye
were of the world, the world would love his own; but
because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." —
John 15: 18, 19.

The world does not hate Bishops Gloshrenner and
Weaver, and Agent Shuey, and their helpers in the
church of the United Brethren in Christ. But it hates
all those who, by prayer and testimony, are seeking the
overthrow of the lodge. Though if Otterhein, and


<


148 THE 8CART.KT VEABT OF TffK APOOALTPSB.
Boehm, and Newcomer, Guething and the sainted dead
who founded that church were now here, CTery well-
informed member of it knows they woald be among the
sternest abhorrers of the lodge. And, till lately, those
who would have stood by those founders, in the wholftB
membership of one hundred and fifty-nine thousaoc
would have been more than one hundred to one.

The coincidence in hue between the scarlet w
and her scarlets-colored beast filled with the nan
blasphemy, and the scarlet caps, robes and degree o
Odd-fellowship, and the same color also prominent i
the regalia of Rome, may be thought incidental. BaH
there is no mistaking the identity of their nature. Th(
filthiness of false worship ia the same in all three,
their moral effect is the same. The people are drs
with it.

There are now about one hundred secret order
working nightly, outside and inside of our courta, leg!
latures, schools, colleges and churches; and every such ■'
order, little or large, is an apocalyptic Beast or image
of a Beast; each one is a living embodiment of an
anti-Christian force, and each lifts the same serpent
head which appeared in Eden to estrange man from his
Maker; each swears or pledges its votaries to conceal
they know not what, and each subjugates them for life
to unseen and unknown superiors. Nor is their poison
restricted to their own membership. The outside world


THE LAMB SHALL OYEBCOHE. 149

•* wonder after the Beast, saying: Who is able to make
war with him?"— fiet?. 13:3, 4.

These all make war upon the Lamb; but, blessed be
God, '^ the Lamb shall overcome them."


Plait ov Encaxpment Kooic.


FARAf EERNALIA ROOM.


ANTE ROOH.


THSTTBULB, | ■


Till loCBllou of tb


wr sa wblcli *Id« of Ua room the Tent >lull bo.


CHAPTER XI.


The Encampment'


DEGREEa.


Book turnlslied b^ lUe Sg.


^reirOrUdLo


Snb
dge.


"S'o


Ea-


BY-LAW OF THE SOVEBBIGN QliAND LODGE 1. O. O. P.

"All State, District or Territorial Grand Lodges and
Grand Encampments shall enforce upon their Subordi-
nates" a strict adherence to the Work" of the Order,


nat af FrcutiUngi Sovirtiga Orand Lttdgi, &


«n InltliiBd, moni «nd lootsl [niiruoUom giTod. and proTtilon aincllv mido
lartntsrmlDDbtKllve warluul Oii-tellntitUf"—OT'>»A'tJlanuiU. p. 1st.


158


EtrCAXPlIEKT DBtntRES.


ocordiDg to the forms furnished by the SoTsreiyB**
Grand Lodge, I, 0, 0. F., and shall be held responsible
for any irr^nlarities that they may allow nnder their
jarisdictioD. They shall neither adopt nor nse, or saffer
to be adopted or^nsed, in their jurisdiction, any other
Charges, Lectures, Degrees, Ceremonies,*' Forms of
Installation, or flegalia, than those prescribed by the
Sovereign Grand Lodge, I. 0. 0. F."

escampment" ofeninq cerbuonibs.

TheM cerelDoiiln are the rrgitiar opening ei
win be obierrcd, Cbe EncAmpmenl [■ opened In


le £aciiDpinenl moit Iw tnaiwcled tntbuDegne.

Cki^ Patriarch (one rap, c^ling to order) — Jtmior
Warden, see that all present are Patriarchs, that tht
Sentinels are at their stations, and the password of the'
evGiiing is given.

Cbeck Puntord (In full), and lb? puiwDid of the Rojal Parpls ]
Mred). bnl DeUbertbs acnllneli nor Junior Warden arc rmulred Co
membEri bj «l?inE anr partlon n[ th« pauffordi. Ths Jnnldr Warri<


I


renre of two


hlrtiof


IfiOID


mbtn


Df tb


1 Grand Lodge. "—JowriHiJ of Pro-


S«ti


Bo/lBao.p. 8Sa.


SnT.«i.-


•Sttolt


d, Tb


Initiatory. DeireB an


EDcampmenl


Work, ai ado


nlooperalKmoBlhell


•t day or Jan-


Grand


ot 1°


rlH and Qrand


eorlbp.. by I


al time.


■-Jo


mat of Prowidingi Sovfreign


Bronrf iodj*.


J*.<lonO/IB80.p. 8«6.


Bl.™98,-


re obiervod In It. open!


g and cloalng.


Bub


rdlnato Lodga. the ofllo


ng. and


by(l»p«lj«


oaMt.'—Or


ual.p


SOi.


■


OVWSnUQ CBBSHOmES. IBS

Taut, la at Ut ton, ud II li alio bli Haij Eu Btceniln KDetlier tlis puiirard of
tlu cveDlnjt tau traea alTen bj ibe Senior Wudi^nto cbe Inilde BbbUuIi bui IM
Junior Wiraaii nolilier flvei nor recolVH tbv psHword o( the evening from

Junior Warden — Chief Patriarch, all present are Pa-
trmrchs, the Sentinels are at their Rtationa, and the
password of the evening ia given.

Chief Patriarch — Has the High Priest assumed his
station?

Junior Warden— {answers accordingly).

Chief Patriarch (two raps, ail rise)— The officers and
Patriarchs will rise while the Junior Warden assists me
ia opening the Encampment in the Koyal Purple De-
gree.

Junior Warden— By direction of the Chief Patriarch,
I proclaim this Encampment open in the Royal Purple
Degree.

Chief Patriarch — Senior Warden, what is your duty
in the Encampment?

Senior Warden — It is my duty to perform the cere-
monies intrusted to rae, and to support the Chief Pa-
triarch and the High Priest in the discharge of their
duties.

Chief Patriarch — Junior Warden, what is your
duty?

Junior Warden — To examine the Patriarchs prior to
opening; to assist the Chief Patriarch and High Priest
according to my office, and to see that the signs are
given correctly.

Chief Patriarch — Scribe, explain your duty.

Scribe — It is my duty to record all proceedings of
this Encampment [tchen the duties are divided between
a Recording and a Financial Scribe, the answer </ the
Becording Scribe ends here, ami the Financial Scribe


girta the remainder]: to keep aecarmte aceoonts between
tbia Encampment and iU members; to receive all ite
raoueysi" and par them to the Treasurer, taking hia
reteipt for the same.

Chief Patriarch — Oateide Sentinel, explain yoor
daty.

Outside Sentinel — It is my duty to take chai^ of tlie
ante-room, and to admit no Patriarch [^except a Patri-
arch with a carif} withont the Chief Password of the
term, unless directed by the Chief Patriarch so to do.

Chief Patriarch — Inside Sentinel, explain your doty.

Inside Sentinel — It is my duty to prove every Patri-
arch before he is admitted; to report his name to thf
Chief Patriarch, upon whose direction to obtain tho j
posHWurd of tbe dejrree in which the encampment i
opened, and, when the Encampment is open in tli^l
Hoyal Purple Degree, to suffer none to retire withoid
tbe password of the evening, or to return without tbi
password or the password of the degree.


Chief Patriarch—iJLost Excellent High Priest, e
plain the duties of your office.

High Priest — It is ray duty to counsel the membt
of the encampment to improve themselves in the I
tiires and Charges, as well as in the practice of t
doctrines; to conform to the General Regulations,]
thus preserve the uniform mode of working in this I


OPBKINQ CBBSHOHiaS.
mmpment; and to give such iustructiona to newly
litiated members as the good of the frateraity may
require.

Chief Patriarch — Patriarchs, my oiBce gives me
charge of this Encampment, and requires rae to see that
the respective ofEcers and brethren perform their duties
[n a proper manner. It is unnecessary now to recapit-
ulate tho^ duties, or to enlarge upon the relations which
we all bear to each other. Our own experience has
established the value of our laws and regulations, and
are pledged strenuously to support them, and be
teady at all times to aid in their execution. We are not
to palliate or aggravate the offenses of our brethren,
but in the defiision of every trespass we should jadge
with candor, admonish with friendship, and reprehend
iVrith justice. Such is the nature of the engagements
which we are bound by the most sacred ties to perform.

Chief Patriarch — Officers and Patriarchs, be attentive
while the Most Excellent High Priest offers a prayer,

PRAYER BY THE HIOH PRIEST.

Heavenly Father, we pray thee to look with favor
npon this meeting. Guide us in our efforts to improve
the time before ua; let thy care and the good we receive
at thy hands instruct us in our duties toward each
other; and so direct all our acts that thy name may be
minified now and forever. Ameu.

Chief Patriarch — {one rap, all are seated).

ORDER OF BUaiNESa,

One rap calls to order, two raps call up the Encamp-
st and one rap seats it.


«jiMltr iMdbB dr tatel.* &r )» aid ■?? taiir.l

(#v4il«w i> nfcMi fa;, dl ^» «i«r m ife J

m Urn mgut^ tim mi ibuA <Ma& taaaiA. If t
Smiftf Wm4m amatmOv &«*»■ «< tk CU^ P>-
HAWvIt A<iwmw). btwainrfsfntlieCkkf ^brurdi of

tint (iNNiW fif v<7t*« fiir oik! agaiBBt tlie pfopositioa,
im4 It)- f'hi*it t'ninstrch aaaooBces the reooit When
tmU'Mnn IN Jt Htilir/Hinate Eacompment. the ballot-box
«IinII Irp irliC^I "H (I pfMltntal Dear the center of the
mim, (MHl Hi" t'liWf Patriarch shall supervise the bal-


<f ■iinli— 'J^vlnadviMM.'"


OBirEKAl. KEQULATIOKS.

When a brother is initiated into the Eucampment it
shalt he called admitted.

When the Golden Rule Degree is conferred, it shall
be called advanced.

When the Royal Purple Degree is conferred, it shall
be called exalted; to-wit:

Admitted to the Patriarchal Degree.

AdTanced to the Golden Rule Degree.

Exalted to the Royal Purple Degree.

MlSCELLASEOUa.

The Check Password is determined upon by the Grand
Patriarch of the State, District or Territorial Grand
Encampment. It is communicated to the Chief Patri-
arch and Senior Warden of each Subordinate Encamp-
ment at the installation of its officers, each term. After
hia installation the Chief Patriarch shall himself, or by
the Junior W'arden or other member of the Encamp-
ment, give the Check Password, privately, to each mem-
ber of the Encampment who shall he present and
entitled to receive it.

The Check Password shall be given to proper officers
of Encampments immediately subordinate to the Sov-
ereign Grand Lodge of the Independent Order of Odd-
fellows, by the District Deputy Grand Sireof the juris-
diction.

The Chief Patriarch, or in his absence the Senior
Warden, can alone give (or cause to be given) the Check
Password to members entitled thereto.

No officer, nor, of course, member, can enter or retire
from an Encampment when open and working as such,
without the proper sign, etc, (addressing the chairs),
' the Junior Warden in charge of a candidate.


15S ENCAUFUENT DEGBEGS.

The law in rfg;ii-(l to the Honors of (he Order refen '
to Subordinate ijiQcampments as well as to Subordinata
Lodgea.

The Holy Bible" ia an integral part of Odd-fellow-
shjp, and it is necessary that it should he present ia
every Encampment while open for biiainess.

qualifications' °° FOR MEMBERSHIP.

Brothers in good standing in lodges under the juris-
diction of the Sovereign Grand Lodge of the Independ-
ent Order of Odd-fellowa, and who have attained the
Degree of Truth, may be admitted to and retain mem-
bership in an Encampment of Patriarchs, subject to thft i
regulations applicable to this branch of the Order.

The High Priest of an Encampment shall, when con-
ferring any of tlie degrees, wear a robe'"' made of royal (
purple fabric, trimmed with ermine or white fabric, with
a white surplice of muslin, linen or silk, together wiUi
a mitre and breastplate.


Nora Bfl.— ■


ThB cum


tlMlt.


la lawful o


DDO


aolmogd


aryll


^, l«p


Qoal


ether dde. D


or Ui cnildnn


ofhe


■w>: doE4 »c It


B.fQr


opl


dn All the


rcUglo


ni [11 tbo worlil, Ho


aneci SDt onlj bBtflGen


IwHo


HvlBffimlillhe


reHnemon


of


n uid


A.1.tlc. WHO. t


oum llv


BBln


nd Dt Adam


oihcrBlblowo


hlut. rel


■OtHlh


tBook


mod CIlnEB


a th


rii'dgB DoC the sulhorltr or CauIailiUi arlU- J
k"— ffrt^'fJfanual, p. 271. *
tie dBicendiiat- of AbrHhtun. Chs dlrerw (ollnweTi at Jena, 1


iBdmtrlouiinBa, wobieb. BndtW
' iBvatB.'— Oro«A'»ifo»liOl,]1.6l


GENERAL REGULATIOKS,


I5d


The guards of the tent shall, during the conferring
of degrees, be clothed with a pilgrim's blouse and cap,
bearing each a spear and shield.


DiAORAM FOR PATRIARCHAL DeGREE,
PARTS I AND n.


Altar wf


CVBTAIH OH HOBSBN.


WILDERNESS OF PARAN. .


CHAPTER XII.

Patbiaeobal,'" or FifiST Encampmbnt Desksb.

INITIATION.

Clothing"' of Members and Officers.

CHIEF PATBIABOH.

Purple gown, yellow belt; turban with black band
and yellow top; crook.

BBNtOR WARDEN.

Purple gown, yellow belt; turbau with black baud
and yellow top.

JUNIOa WAKDElf.

Purple gown, yellow belt; turban same as Senior
Warden,

SUBORDINATE OFFICERS.

Purple gowns, yellow belts, black turbans.

ROTBlM.— "Tlie iMlrlircli*! brniich of the Order 1B, la the eillmMlua p(
1U17. Or man deilnble thm the InJMiiorfbriuch. Every Odd-tellow iliuvid
Like It hlB ilm lu retch itB'iopiniisirdi.i.d of ihelsdderuf Odd-feilowiiBlp,'
Iha ttofa) Pqrple Degree."— Donaldioift Poctst Companlaa. p. 1S7,

Indbaai-dHonMoni. emblcmi, udtortnaire tout. The 1]«ht

le uid blahly uiBful. The thougblful Odd-fellow la DODilnudlf


162 PATRIABCHAL rFJlKEK.

HBUBKBS OENEBAXLV.

Purple gowns and belts.

The High Priest acta aa " Abraham " in ttis dean's,
and occupies a tent, which should be of the ridge-pojfi
style. His dress should he like the Chief Pattiarcl
and he should have a very heavy white heard and t
— no turban.

In parts I and II the official stations are vacat|
excepting Senior Warden's, and that officer has chai
of the Encampment.

The Chief Patriarch occupies a tent in part I of t
degree.

The Jonior Warden acta as a companion caodidatefl
parts I and II.


PEBPAHATION OF CANniDATB.

The Junior Warden proceeds to the ante-room i
dresses the candidate as himself, in a i
brown gown, with a rope around the waist for a girdle
a brown turban and a staff to carry. The candidate i^
blindfolded and sometimes has a sacic ou his back a
sandats upon his feet. There is a dim light in the I
campmeni room. A curtain or screen is so arranged a
tn conceal the altar. The Watches act aa " Wildemw
Sentinels," and also as Torch Bearers. All rough usaj
"■hen conferring this degree is strictly forbidden.

Junior Warden (entering Encampment door, whi^
IS left a little ajar, with candidate) — Hallool Hal

Member! rlie ■■ 1( onprepirwl tar »B lo

Inside Sentinel —Thu camp is a
Others — The camp is assailed)


Junior Warden — Hold! we are not eiieiiiies,'"we an
brothers and frienda. We desire to see the Chief Pa-
triarch and be instructed, that we may become herda-
men, and at the proper time Patriarchs.

Fimt Sentinel (nith spear elevated to the breast of
candidate) — You cannot pass except as captives. Bring
forth the chains. [They are brought,] Now bind the
prisoners, [Candidate is bound and blindfolded,]

Senior Warden — (one rap, seating the Encampment),

Junior Warden — Bind us as yon will, but true friend-
ship will ultimately sustain us in all our trials. And
remember, though prejudice impose bonds and t'ettora,
that justice will award the greetings of a brother.

First Sentinel — Captives, you have permission to ajH
proach the Chief Patriarch with a Guide.

Guide (taking him in charge)^ — Captives, come thi»
way. If you are friends he will give you welcome , but
jon must prove to him that you are not impostors.

The trial to which you are to be subjected will serr*
to test your faith and sincerity. Be not weary in well-
doing, forin due season you shall reap if you faint not.
You are as one entering a pathless forest, relying on
patience and perseverance for his guides. But all cause
for gloom and doubt will soou be dispelled.

UarkI 1 hear the tramping of feet. What can it
mean? Oh, I see; it is the Patriarchs returning from
their visit to the venerable Abraham at Beersheba. It
is their custom to visit him and do him honor at certain


1«4


PATRIABCHAL DSOBEE.


feasts, and receive his blessing. [They pause, and'

proccAdion passes nearthe candidate. Sometimes lliered
ia music and singing.] They are traveling in the direi-
tion of Mt. Horeb, and we will follow them. We are
still crossing the wilderness of Paran, the mountains
are near, and our journey will soon be at an end. Ah.
here are the inner sentinels, and we shall have to stop.

Third Sentitiel — ^Who comes there?

Guide — Friends from Mt. Hor, traveling, by pern
sion, to see the Chief Patriarch, desiring to get emploj
ment as herdsmen.

Fourth Sentinel — Friends, you look fatigued,
and rest with the Chief Patriarch,

Qiiide — That sentinel was very kind. He has I
experience as an old Patriarch, and he has sympathy fi
you. Ah! here is the tent.

First Guard to Tent — Who comes there?

Guide — Travelers from Mt. Hor, who desire to see tl
Chief Patriarch. They hare passed the sentinels a
desire food and rest.

Firat Guard ta Tent — Wait, and I will report their
presence.

First Guard to Tent — Chief Patriarch, there are
travelers without who need food and rest, and wish
employment that they may become herdsmen.

Chief Patriarch — Whence came they, aal did they
properly pass the sentinels ?

First Guard to Tent— They are from Mt. Hor, and
have crossed the plains of Paran. The outer sentinels
passed them as captives, and gave them a guide.

Chief Patriarch (seated) — Let the strangers enter and
provide them, with seats. [They enter the tent or are
seated at the door.l Take off the bandage and remore


URTLiTIOW.

those chains. [The bandage and chains are removed,]
Travelers, I welcome you. The door of a Patriarch's
tent is never closed against any one in distress. Quard,
bring forth refreshments, that we may give food to the
strangers, for they must be hungry and thirsty, after
having crossefl the wilderness. [He brings bread, salt
imd water, placing them on a small table in or before
the tent.]

Chief Patriarch (seated) — Strangers, partake with me
of some bread and salt, and drink of this pure water.
I have but little, but that little I clieerfuily share with
you. Hospitality to the stranger is a solemn duty,
acknowledged and practiced among the Patriarchs.
The God whom we worship is the Father of all men; he
sends his rain and his sunshine alike upon the evil and
the good. The ties of a common humanity unite us
with every creature, and stamp the character of broth-
ers upon, the whole intelligent creation. But while
this is our duty and should ever be our practice, it is
equally imperative upon us to admit no traitor or spy
into our camp to mar our happiness or disturb our
peace. It is necessary, therefore, having relieved your
'present wants, that you should now undergo a strict
examination, to prove that you are not enemies in dis-
guise, but true and honest men. Strangers, are you
willing to prove, by an examination, that you are friends
and not spies?

Jitttior Wnrden — We are.

Chief Patriarch — Give me the Password of the Degree
of Friendship. [Candidate gives it.]

Chief Patriarch — Give me thii! Grii} of the Degree of
tly Love. [Candidate gives it.]


Chief Patriarch— Give me the Password and €
the Degree of Truth. [Candidate gives them].

Chief Patriarch — lam satisfied with your proficiency
and greet you as Odd-fellows. Ever remember that
you must be hailed and recognized as the representatives
of the Oracle of Truth, and that it behooves you to
form your characters by that expressive symbol which
hai been selected as the basis of the Scarlet Degree.
And now, my brethren, what is it that you desire?

Junior Warden (for candidate) — To be admitted as
novitiates of the Patriarchal Degree, that we may
obtain employment us herdsmen.

Chief Patriarch — That being your wish, and being
Odd-fellows, I have confidence in your fidelity, and you
have now my permission to become novitiate Patri-
archs. Guide, conduct the brothers to the Senior War-
den, with my request to administer to them the Patri-
archal obligation. [The candidate is led to the chair of
the Senior Warden].

Guide — Senior Warden, I am instructed by the Chief
Patriarch to request you to administer to these brethren
the Patriarchal obligation.

Senior Warden — My brethren, it being your wish to
take the obligation of the Patriarchal Degree, you will
place yourselves in the attitude in which you were
initiated into Odd-fellowship and repeat after me the
following:

Stnior Warden — (two raps, calling up tht Encamp-
rneut).

OBLIGATION.

T, ,do solemnly promise never to reveal the

secrets, signs, passwords or grips of th* PatiiBrch^


iinTi*iio».

trder to any person or persons, except to a legal Patri-
rch, or within a legal Encampment of Patriarchs. I

11 never reveal, directly or indirectly, any transaction
£ this or of any other Encampment, which, by the
Bgulations of the Order, should be kept secret. And

I know that a brother has violated this duty, I will
■port him at the first meeting of the Encampment
[lereafter. To the keeping and performance of all this,
pledge my sacred honor.

Senior Warden — (one rap. seating the Encampment).

Senior Warden — Brothers, having taken the obliga-
!on of the Patriarchal Degree, you are now qualified
} enter upon your course of life as shepherds. As
erdsmen, watch well your flocks; fiee that none perish
)r want of attention. It is your duty to be good and
ithfiil to all that ma; be placed in your charge.
Jrothers, you will now have three days for preparing
ourselves for service as herdsmen. You will then
eport to me for employment.

Junior Warden (for Isaac, the candidate)— I am the
an of Abraham who is at Beersheba. Before I enter
ith my fnend upon my duties as herdsman, I desire to
Lake obedience to my father, that 1 may receive his
ilessing.

Senior Warden — I commend your zeal and filial af-
ection. Go to your father; and that you may travel
Bfely across the wilderness of Paran, I will give to you
be wilderness pass, which will insure your safety —
dvance and receive it. [Junior Warden and candidate
dvance close to the Senior Warden J.

Senior Warden — The pass is " Chosen Friends." You
lay now proceed on your journey.


"Firtt Sattitut (Mopptng Junior Wardra and candi-
) who hare just entered tfae r6om>— Who (
tb«re, and where are yoa going?

Junior WarxUn — ^We are novitiale Patiiarehs, tnTi
iog to Beersheba.

First Sentinel — Hare yon the paaa?

Junl&r Warden — We hare.

First Sentinet^yfhai. b it?

Junior Warden—** Chosen Friends."

First Sentinel — The pasa is correct Proceed, and |
careful not to aggraTate by arrogance or otherwise, i
jfou may find that many are stronger than afew. [T
psiia on.]

Junior Warden — We will be careful, for we are I
two, and we may find, when too late, that many i
itrouger than a few. [They proceed around the r
until they meet the Second Sentinel.]

Stcitnd Sentinel — Who cornea there, and where i
you going?

Junior Warden — Travelers, going to Beersbeba.

Second Sentinel — Qive me the wilderness pass.

Junior Warden — " Cboaen Frienda."

Second Sentinel — The pass is correct. Should j
nioet with difflcultieB on your journey from qui
miemtjer that a soft answer tumeth a
rralb, but grievous words atir ap strife. [Th^ f


lould yo.^^J
1 qoarrei^^l
leth aw^^^H


tSITIATIO*. 188

Junior Wnrden — We have nearly completed our
joyraey. I gee the walla of Beersheba. There we shall
have rest. Our sandals are worn out, and onr feet are
bleeding. Ah, here we are at the Third Sentinel.

Third Sentinel — Who comes there, and where are you
going?

Junior Wardtn—^We are travelers, and wish to enter
through the gates of Beersheba.

Third Sentinel — Give me the pass.

Junior Warden — "Choaen Friends."

Third Sentinel — The pass is correct. Whom do yon
desire to see in Beersheba?

Junior Warden — Abraham, the promised father pf
nations.

Third Sentinel — You will find his tent within the
walls of the city. Ton have my permission t,o pass
through the gates. My words of exhortation are, A
wise son maketli a glad father.

Junior Warden — We are now passing through the
walls of the city,

TtiBj ixua on u lludugb tbe lEslss ul lbs Foarth B«li(lliel Btopi them.

Fourth Sentinel — Who cornea there, aad where axe
you going?

Junior Warden — We are herdsmen, traveling to see
the venerable father Abraham.

Fourth Sentinel — ^There ia bis tent and he sita at the
door- Listen to wisdom. The glory of young men is
their strength, and the beauty of old men is the gray
head.

Junior Warden — The glory of young men is their
strength: and the beauty of old men is the gray head.


g„at kmd,.e»J "f ""fj^;;, take charge of » 4^
footttepsk.'. ton '«"' I°drfmetomak,atteed.y.
a sacrifice. I.aacl— le' obedience cto«

piS'rtheLee_d^^J.n-J;..,


lormed. licwl=« "» ''


,„ mil cMTjlnS


rt'l^rU»r tttc bltadfoH U remove ^

this is Mount Monah ^i,^t shall we do «

Ju.ior rorto ('»' '"""'^

sacrifice? ,;„t mv son, and the Lord irilll

iirakam-Be patient, myon,

X»to.-Weh.,.l»» Messed hitherto.,


must hanten to serve the Lord, for his will must be
done, that we may realize honor and glory. His com-
id that I, Abraham, shall make this sacrifice, in not
for an idle purpose, but that it may serve as an illuatri-
ous example to generations unborn, to show that God
STer blesses the obedient, and accords to Ihem prosperity.
My son Isaac, be not surprised; it is God's order that
'ou shall be the sacrifice. The angel of the Lord shall
gather and keep your ashes sacred in a golden um ae a
memorial of your submisaive obedience, and of my faith


Abraham — Patriarchs, let us place the fagots upon
the altar. Isaac, wash your hands with me in this
bowl which contains pure water. With this white
linen dry your hands. [They wash and wipe their
hands].

Abraham — Patriarchs, place Isaac upon the altar.

Abi-ukam — ^Let us unite in praise to God.

Pitr]uchi>urroDiidlhe*ltar, Lfiliti sre Umed low. Toruhci an URhwd.

tIMj ta UK tbe tltir. The HIgb Prlelt. u A.bntiim, •Imdi vttb bin left bun)

Hue, rUtht btnd eleyHed, lod recltB« tne flnl (our ventt of P>«lin XXIJI.

Abraham — The Lord is my shepherd: I shall not
want.

He maketb me to lie down in green pastures: he
leadeth me beside the still waters.

He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the patTjB of
righteousness for his name's sake.

Tea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow
ol death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with m«; thy
zed and thy ataff th«y e«mfort ate.


17a PATBIABCHAL OBGREB.

Abraham — Now, let the torch be applied!

At > dtiuuce from Ib« tlur, Ihe muffled f ow la itruck ntru tUa«

^troAattt — Let the tiagots be fired.

Tbe mufflsil KDUf U t[rDcl( Ibree llmca, totlomd b; ■ abort Man.

Abraham — Isaac is not to be sacrificed. Let him
removed from the altar and restored to light, and t
come a member of the Patriarchal family, and I '

return and dwell at Beersheba.


nt, mi order belni nitaml, tha MK'J

Junior Warden — Chief Patriarch, 1 present to j

Brother , who has been duly qualified t

instructed am a novitiate Patriarch, and now denraa #
be admitted to the rank of a Patriarch.

Chief Patriarch — My brother. I will proceed to ins
struct you in the mysteries of this degree.

In this Degree there is an Alarm at the inner door oi
EntenigiL « Check Sisn and Answer, a Sign and -Ajl-||
swer, and a Drrp.

The Alarm at the inner door is two rape; the fat


hnxiAtroS. IB

W«rd IB Adam {A.d-am), to be divided at all times whei
oaad for working purposes; working into an Enuampmentj
er in examination prior to opening. In communicating
the Password either to the Inside Sentinel or Juniou
Warden the Patriarch must give the :;yllable " Jrf.*a
pronounced; and if required by the Inside SentineB
or Junior Warden, the rest of the word, "am,"

nounced; the Inside SeuJ
tinel and Junior War-J
den must be satisfied.


CHECK SIGN.

Place the right handJ
open, on the left breast,!
thumb parallel with the 1
fingers; withdraw the J
hand and extend it near-
ly to a line off from the
side, palm outward and
the thumb parallel with
the fingers; let the arm
drop to the side. The
Answer is the same with
the left hand.


P * fM>1W1tr AT . DUQBBB.


Place tbe fingers of the right hand in
and across the left hand, palm upward:
grasp the fingers of the right hand with
the last three fingers of the left hand;
elevate the two thumhs and the index
finger of the left hand so as to form three
pillars. The Answer is the some as the
Sign.


Grasp the fingens of the
Patriarch's right hand -with
your right hand; press the
same with the thumh,
which muHt be acrose the fingers below the knuckle
joint No ahaking handi in making the Orip.


INSTEnOTIOMa TO OANDIDATB.


Chiif Patriarch (to candidate) — Deiiroui of being
admitted to an Encampment, you will giv9 at the outer
door the lame alarm as in the Subordinate Lodge. The


Ontside Sentinel will open the wicket, and require of
you the Check Password of the term, tvhich is given in
full. If correct, he will admit you to the ante-roora.
Tou will then clothe yourself in regalia appropriate to
your rank and station, and, after ascertaining from the
Outaide Sentinel that the Encampoieut ia open in the
Patriarchal Degree, you will give three rapa at the inner
door, when the Inside Sentinel will open the wicket,
and obtain from you your name, rank, and the number
of the Encampment to which you belong, which he
will report to the Chief Patriarch, who will instruct
him to admit you if correct. The wicket is again
opened, when you will be required to give the Password
of the Patriarchal Degree (divided). If correct, you
will be admitted, and will advance to the centre of the
room and addresa the Chief Patriarch with the Check
Sign. The Chief Patriarch will acknowledge you aa a
Patriarch with the answer to the Check Sign. You
will then turn and address the Senior Warden with the
Check Sign, who will also acknowledge you as a, Patri-
arch with the answer to the Check Sign. You will again
turn to the Chief Patriarch and address him with the
Sign of the Patriarchal Degree. The Chief Patriarch
will give the proper answer to the sign. On leaving
the Encampment, before it ia closed, you will address
the Chief Patriarch only, with the Sign ot the Patri-
archal Degree, and that officer will answer you with the
appropriate sign.

THo Chief PitHiitrfi BbouiJ carediliy IniLruti ihe cinaidKle In ihe mtilu^ q(
opCDlne-

Ch4ff Patriarch — My brother, I now present to you
black apron. It indicates that you have served as


TTR patriaechal deorbe.

II novitiate Palriarcii. You have sought employmenl
to qualify yourself to assume the high duties of man-
hood. You have traveled across the wilderneaa to reach
the Chief Patriarch's tent, and, on your arrival, a wel-
come was given you. Yon have been obligated, that
you mi(tht become a shepherd in the fieldn, on the
mountains and in the valleys, preparatory to full
recognition as a Patriarch. You aasiated in the ex-
pmplification of Abraham's faith in God. You have
I oiled ardently in the pursuit of truth, a cardinal virtue
of Odd-fellowship, and you have been instructed in the
unerring law by which you are to be governed. Vihtob
should be the great aim of your life — that virtue which
gives whatever is great and good in man. Honor,
Fidelity, Friendship, social and domestic happiness, are
but empty sounds in the mouth of any but a virtuous
man. Virtue gives joy which vice with all herflatter-
ing promises never pretends to offer, and bestows a zest
upon those joys that are common to all which they
can never have without it. Its influence spreads through
life, diverges in every direction, and penetrates every
condition. It is the guardian of youth, the honor of
manhood, the crown of age, the shield of prosperity,
the prop of affliction, our guide in active life, and our
solace in retirement. It holds the keys of life, and will
finally open to us the gates of immortality. My
brother, it is proper that you be prepared to test the
presence of an intruder, in case he should invade our
camp.

How shall I distinguish a Patriarch of this degree?

Junior Warden — By the signs and tokens of i
Patriarchal rank.


INITIATIOS.


in


Chief Pa//7'ffjTA— Advance tlie Patriarchal Sign.
ICandidate gives sigu].

^hief Patriarch — What does it represent?

Junior Warden (for candidate) — The three pillars of

le Order— Faith, Hope and Charity.

Chief Patriarch — What else does it represent?

Junior Warden (for candidate) — The motto of oar
Order — Friendship, Love and Truth.

Chief Patriarch— Have you a Password?

Junior Warden (for candidate) — We have. Ad-am.

Chief Patriarch — My brother, I commend your skill,
and trust that the remembrance of these symbols and
the virtues which they imply will never fade from your
mind. Our institution is ascience of symbols, convey-
ing by striking emblems the most interesting and
exalted truths. There are momenta in the experience
of the most virtuous life when incentives are needed to
dispel the lethargy of the soul and excite it to action.

I now present to you a crook, an implement of your
vocation as a Patriarchal herdsman. It was used by
the Patriarchs of old, and strikingly reminds us of the
aimplicity of their lives and the purity of their faith.
They dwelt in tents, and, surrounded by their flocks
and herds, spent their lives in the inculcation of the
most exalted social virtues. The onward march of
civilization, and th» advance of human society, have
deprived the world of much of that simplicity and vir-
tue which gave its richest charm to the Patriarchal life.
Here, in this siiered retreat, we would revive that sim-
plicity and inculcate that purity. Here we would lay
the broad foundation of that universal brotherhood.
which shall link in the golden chain of oar ever ev


178


PATKIABCOAL DEQItKB.


paoding sympathy, heart with heart, man to man.i
the vices which dedle aud the passions and prejudiii
which separate the cbildren of a common Father i
be cstirpated from earth, and the abodes of sorrow a
sutfering be lighted with the beuignaat beams of peg
and love.


[To effect the great moral and social revolutid
individual action must be combined with oMocia
effort. Each should believe that his individual d
essential to the integrity of the whole. Ever let t
principle of generous beneficence dwell in your ha|
which, silently and unseen, like the dew of heavi
blesses and refreshes with the gentle droppings (
bounty. Cherish the beautiful teachings of our Ord
which, falling upon the heart like rays of light, j
color to every affection of our nature, and dictate e
act of our lives. Succor the stranger in distress; grp
him food and rest when he is hungry and weary, witt
out inquiring his country or creed, by whatsoei
fortune he may have fallen, by what destiny he may be
controlled. With your brother shepherd, guard against
jealousy and strife. Remember that he is your brother.
If, under the influence of imperfection, the common lot
of mortals, he wrongs you, go to him, and in the lan-
guage of affection tell him his fault between him and
you. If he repent, forgive him; enter no harsh judg-
ment against him. Conscious of your own frailty,
remi^mber that to err is human, to forgive divine.
These, my brother, are the principles we should ever
practice. A man may enter our camp and dwell beneath
our tent; mistaken confldence may invest him with our


raiTIATION,


179


mTsterioB, and clothe him with the badges of our Order;
he may be exalted tp ofScial station among ua; but all
this does not make him an Odd-fellow, unlesa he behaves
and acts as becomes a,n Odd-fellowj.

Chief Patriarch — Brother , yoTi have passed

through the" several degrees of the Order to reach the
diatinetionof Patriarchal fellowship. You aresoletnnly
pledged to practice the virtues which, in your progress
here, have been illugtrated.

They teach sentiments that you will find useful to
cultivate through life. They will give tone and honor
to your manhood.

And now, in the name and by authority of the Inde-
pendent Order of Odd-fellows, I declare you duly admit-
ted to the Patriarchal Degree,


ANALYSIS PATRIARCHAL DEGREE.

iHl«ioriiof B Fob— An KneUih Alo-lmme— TbeBlrthplaceDt Odfl-teUow


If tha BncunpiiienC D


— RillEloo Ihe Cbl«t E


I The history of Odd-fellowship ia the history of a fog
'It ia a moral miasm rising from a human morass, a
its analysia is as difficult as its history. I faaye see
respectable-looking English women, wives of mechai
and laborers, sitting in rows on benches in a tap-hoiu
some with babies in their arms, waiting wishfully £c^
some one to give them a glass of beer, while, farther iaj
their husbands sat guzzling at their mugs around dir
tables in rooms filled with tobacco smoke. Such a
ale-house was the birthplace of Odd-fellowship, both j]
England and in this country.

Their standard historian, Grosh ([p. 23; see also n
22), says: "Meeting, as they did, in public houses of it
the most select character, the beer mug, the pipe s
the toast circulated freely." And on the same p«j
(23d) of bis volume Grosh gives the following chon
sang till their tongues became too heavF*


Seeing what could be made of it, cuuuiiig meD turned
this social row into a rowdy rcligioa, gave the lodge a
devil's constitution by packing it in degrees pledged to
secrecy from the world and each other — a secrecy grow-
ing dense to the top. Then they gave it a creed of one
article, which is belief in the god of this world, with
Christ left out in compliment to Jews and deists. They
named its degrees " Friendship," " Love " and " Truth,"
held up their fingers, when not too drunk, to signify
"Faith," "Hope" and "Charity;" and as more money
can be got by secret societies than by anything else ex-
cept Popery, they put on masks and red, blue, white,
purple, yellow and black robes, and Odd-fellowship
flourished I

But there came to be too many at the top of the
lodge, and an upper aide-ahow called " Encampment "
was invented, with Patriarchal, Gtolden Rule and Royal
Purple degrees. This Encampment answered a double
purpose. It brought more degree fees, and. by long
lectures which none but men of strong memories and
much leisure could commit, it increased the funds and
diminished the leaders among whom, after paying small
benefits, the money was to be, and is, divided. Thus
Odd-fellowship, like Masonry, became a model for
Mormonism.

There is a true old pagan proverb which says, " Man
is a worshiping animal." When the plough was intro-
IdmA to Asiatics, and the pedlar's back was turned, it is


ISS ASXASAM — SALTATIOX BT CSKEHOHIES.

Bftid they painted it red, set it op on end and worshiped.
it. This explains the euccess of Odd-fellowship, whea
turned from s, drinking-bout into a religion.

This First Encampment or Patriarchal Degree ifl''
saved from insipidity by theft from the Bible, like the
first two degrees of the lodge. It is to make Odd-fel-
lows Patriarchs by playing Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac,
but says nothing about Abraham's faith in the promise
of God that Christ, the Messiah, should come through
his posterity. The sublime part of Abraham's trial was
his belief that Christ should come through the posteri-
ty of Isaac, whom he was about to kill, " accounting
that God was able to raise Isaac irom the dead." — Heb.
11: 19. Of this the inventors of the Patriarchal De-
gree either knew nothing or cared nothing, or both.
They had no occasion for Christ. He is to Odd-fellow-
ship a sectary, a "stone of stumbling and rock of offense."
They were inventing a system of salvation without
Him; a system in which Odd-fellows should lift tliei
selres to heaven, as it were, by their own boot-atraps-— j
save themselves by symbols and ceremonies and


without atonement, without the Holy Spirit, the pi
chase of Christ's blood, and in contempt of that very'
Savior who was symbolized by Abraham's offering of '
son which they are playing, and the sheep which suf-
fered in his (Isaac's) stead. So they make balderdash of
the Scripture. And as the future Messiah is the
and substance of Abraham's faith and trial, this Pal
archal Degree is like the poor strollers' " play of ffai
with the part of Hamlet left out;" whili the whi


sm- j

IS— -^^^H

lur^^^l

hia^^

raf-
thof ,

end.^J
atrv^H


RKLIOIOS- THE CHJEF END OF THU ORDER — CHARITY. I^
aignificaiice of llie lliinir is, th.it the lodge leaders get
their money and Satan gets hia worehip,


And, be it Remembered, this extemporized, got-up
religion is, by its own authorities, declared to be the
chief end of Odd-fellowship.

An excellent little book by a Lutheran pastor — Eev.
J, H. Brockman, which every one should read, gives
abounding proof from the utterances of the Order
itself that it does not claim to be a charitable society,
but pays the weekly allowance to rich and poor alike.
Hence, as rich and idle men are quite as apt to be sick
and die as the poor and industrious, it may happen, in
a given lodge, that the poor pay in all the money and
the rich get all the benefits!

Rev. Mr. Brockman gives from Grand Lodge minutes
— year and page given — the ease of Henry L. Gunther,
wbo mailed live dollars to pay his lodge dues on the
fourth day of October. The money was received, cred-
ited, paid all his dues and left a balance in his favor.
Meantime (October eleventh) Gunther's wife died, while
the money was on the road. The letter was registered
and the money belonged to the lodge when it left Gun-
ther's hands, yet the State Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania
allowed his local lodge to keep his money, hut refused
the funeral benefit for his dead wife.

The same Grand Lodge minutes, 1871, p. 486, give
the case of Jacob Daumb, Chambersburg (Pennsyl-
vania) lodge. He sent five dollars from Ft. Wayne,
whither he had removed. The money paid up his duea


anil left a balnace of seventy-five cents in his favor.
D;iumb died while his money was on the road, and his
wife was refused the conetitutional funeral benefit.
Those men may have paid dues regularly for twenty-
five or thirty years, and drawn out nothing; but dying
five cents in debt, alter paying hundreds of dollars,
would deprive them of the funeral benefit! And as the
poor and unfortunate Odd-fellows are the ones moat
likely to fail to keep np their dues, the rich and well-
to-do members are the ones likely to receive the bene-
fits. These are but specimens of a multitude of similar
cases reported in the minutes of the lodges. For such
an order to sing in their odes of " drying the widow's
tears," etc., etc., is a mockery and profanation, as all
sensible Odd-fellows would see if Satan did not blind
their minds by his false worships.


W DiAGBAM FOB Golden Rule Deobek.


1


oi

n!

oi


■■"ii""'


n


1


1
i
I


.„IS....


1


J


CHAPTER XIII.

Golden Rule, or Second Encampment Deqebe.


Junior Warden — [Having retired to the ante-room
addresses the candidate there aa followa:] fou are now
to be advanced to the Degree of the Golden Rule.
There is a solemn and impressive ceremony through
which you must pass. Be candid and firm, and answer
truly and without hesitation such questions as may be
put to you,

Juniur Warden — (three raps).

Inside Sentinel — Who cornea there?

Junior Warden — A Patriarch who wishes to be in-
structed in the Golden Rule. ■

Inside Sentinel — la he prei>ared to learn the mysteries
and practice the duties of this degree?

Junior Warden— B.e has hitherto proved himself a
f lithfu! and true man, and I have no doubt he is
worthy of further confidence. '

Inside Sentinel— Tie has permission to enter.


ui/or Warden— Chief Patriarch, I present


ZMITIATION.

Patriarch , who has faithfully servfld his time

as a herdsman in the field, and has been admitted to the
rank of a Patriarch. He has been instructed to bestow
upon those in want a generous hospitality, and he now
wishes to be taught the principle of Tolebatiow".

Chief Pa/rta re A— Patriarch, I congratulate you on
baying a desire to comprehend the cardinal virtue of
Odd-fellowship. Practical toleration is one of the
noblest of human actions. The authority of conscience
should be respected in all the relations of life; and our
Order teaches that there should be no discrimination in
the exercise of this right.

Chief Patriarch — Junior Warden, present the Patri-
arch to the Senior Warden for ohhgation.

Junior Warden — Senior Warden, by direction of the

Chief Patriarch, I present to you Patriarch ■ ■ ■ ■ ,

who desires to take the obligation of the Golden Rule
Degree.

Senior Warden — Patriarch , the lesson of

this degree is toleration. It permits others to think
and act according to their convictions of duty. If you
are willing to recognize this principle of action, you
will place yourself in the attitude in which you were
initiated into this Order, and repeat after me the follow-
ing:

Senior Warden — (two rapa, calling up the Encamp-
ment).

OBLIGATION.

I, , do sincerely promise, that I will never

reveal the secrets of the Degree of the Golden Rule to
any one not legally authorized to receive them. And I
do further promise on my sacred honor, that I will truly


Junior >' „ j,ijKh M, to

»"' " -Ted A" •"' Sev*"" • S «« •"
.« '«°«"'^Sie4«**' Se »'« "' S*1 me- »«

, Ji is ien""' „e„e of »» ,^ ^ lotew jji„

tteb.m^"'*^ th3t li«. B^ ^oirt oj. b^ eoa.

h-i»' ;t»et«o»'°^,;^Uo'»-Td« «. «


rHITlATION. 189

bntHierhood we claim sympathy in distress, truth in
interuourse, and full aiid free toleratiou. As we claim
these for ourselves, afld yield them up at the mandate
of none, so we are bound freely and fully to accord
them to others.

High Priest — Junior Warden, you will retire with
the candidate.


bUnitfataed. atui wl


g prepa


TBIcb U letl %)tr.


nd tMs


="'" wUht.


Part II.


The Putiiirchi rc


preieoIli«lh^<HIIer.


ni™.:i;


uMnlly rep


religion, etc.


iBna.


TlielIglK>»«ioniDillow


nd Ihe bllD


(old Ib


SUGGESTED 008TCME3.


Ths Whitb riee;


Thr T»Llow ncet tUi


Junior Warden (to candidate)— You see before yon
representatives of the different peoples of the earth.

There is the White Race, now scattered throughout
the world. Its origin was in ancient Asia, the region
ence occupied by Adam, Noah and Abraham, but aotv


oveiTun by semi- barbarous hordi's oi different in re-
ligiuus faith as in maimete. Many of them still cling
to the aocieot worship of JudaiBm, some to the Crescent
and some to the Cross. The religion of the Cross pre-
vails where civilization exists, and yet its devotees are
divided into sects as antagonistic in creed as though
they were dissimilar in origin.

The Brown Racb inhabits parts of southern Asia.
It is far advanced in the arts and sciences. Itstemple!<
of worship are of great splendor, and exhibit archi-
tectural skill equaling that of any other people. Ita
religion is Paganistic; and its social habits are defined
by strict and rigid caste.

The Yellow Race, consisting of the Mongolians of
Asia, are votaries of Pagan rites, according to the
teachings of Confucius. For centuries they have given
practical evidence of advanced mental power, by the
production of handiwork whose mysteries have remained
unfathomed by other races.

The Red Race consists of unlettered savages, roam-
ing through the pathless wilderness, chasing the fleet
doer with the quiver and bow. The sun, moon, and the
myriads of stare receive their profound adoration as
symbols of an eternal Great Spirit.

And there you behold the Black Race. It inhabits,
as hordes, the wilds of Africa. In general they are
barbarians and monsters in the practice of the moat
dire rapine; yet some of them are more gentle — as the
Nubians, who dwell upon the burning sands of the
Equator and dance to the music of a reed beneath (
spreading palm.

Itcbr. ariliin iDd proteiiloiml Dtairaaran ue amilted, ibe fatlowlnKlabt;


mitiatioh,

["These races are employed to some extent, as artisans,
"by whose hands are constructed palaces, temples, and
all the implements required for man's convenience and
mental culture. Some are devoted to tlie pursuit of
letters or the sciences, such as chemistry, geography
and astronomy. By their genius and mental power,
man is educated and advanced tu a higher and better
condition.]

In recognition of the Benign Power that created all
things, man seeks to honor the Creator by ceremonies
of adoration. That group embraces men of different
creeds, who are followers of the Christian religion, and
there is the Pagan, a worshiper of idols, or of the ele-
ments of fire.

And here are the intolerant and persecuting Moham-
medans, who are ever ready to immolate the man of
another creed upon the altar of their own peculiar
faith.

Mokamtnedan — Of what country are you?

Candidate answers.

Mohammedan — What is your religion?

Candidate answers.
■ Moitammedans (all hurriedly rise and exclaim) — Seize
him! Bind him in chains! Cost him into prison! Put
him to the sword! [Or exclamations of similar char-
acter].


Chief Patriarch (one rap, calling to order) — Silence!
What means this uproar and confusion?

Imiiiid; euD one >ttiidi mutloDleBS until ihe Chlet PUriiroh gives uiatliei


193 GOLDEN RULE DEOREE.

Junior Warden — The Patriarch haring declared t

be is and ,tliey have seized and boandfl

him.

Chief Patriarch — Junior Warden, bring hither thai
disturbers of the peace; also the Patriarch.

Junior Warden — ^Let us proceed to the presence of
the Chief Patriarch.

Ttie HabunmedBDi tnllow ihc Junior Wirdea md •undldate, ud form a uml-

Chief Patriarch (to the .Junior Warden) — Remove
the chains which have been imposed by the intolerance
of man, and let our brother feel that a code prevails
here which tramples on human prejudieea,'" and asserts
the high birthright of humanity.

Chief Patriarch (to the candidate) — My friend, be
always just and fear not, You have not hesitated when
occasion demanded, though surrounded with danger, to
avow your principles. This is the solemn duty of every
honest man.

Chief Patriarch — Warden, you will proceed in the
duties of your office. [Chiet Patriarch resumes his
seat],


Junior Warden (on arriving at the chair of the Chief

Patriarch) — Chief Patriarch, I present Patriarch

to you for further instruction.

Chief Patriarch (standing) — Restore him to light.
[It is done.]

Chief Patriarch — Patriarch, look around you.


IKITIATION',


lfl3


hoH t.Tio cliuuge a few moiiieiits have wrought! ein-
Ijlemni'c 'if that change which shall occur when the
Golden Rule shall have asserted its power and ohtaJiied
its domiuiori over the world, Thu high and impassable
barriers tliat separate man from his fellow-man are
broken down. All sit together as brothers in harmony
and love. The deseendunta of Abraham and the
followers of the Crescent are commiugled with those
of the Cross as one happy family,'"" knowing no diversi.
ty'" of faith or creed, and a calm repose has come upon
the elements of strife. The apear of the warrior is
broken and the sword of the conqueror lies rusting in
the scubbard, and discord and contention shall be known


No UbH, °a n


rf tbB jiTtcedtns be ro


I WtFden Md cKcdldoti


I puee' smlil adli^^ralty of t»lth."—Qroih's Manual, p. 3TS.
HOT»10T.-"Jpworaeal!le, CfLthulIo or Proioatanl, la, ;ii
W tan oor liesrM."— ilonaM*oti'» Pocltfl Companloi


Paet III.


regtf Ik^ OOnn mzse dwir nuws^

Jt6<itr W'lfden (|irooe«ding with the candidate to
Kbe cliair «f ihe Chief Pstriarch) — I present to too

Palrinrch , who desires final in^trucuoiu in

Che (;<ilden RhIl-

Chiff Piitri-trrh — Patriarch, it ia now my dnty to in
mnict voit ill Ilir Riygteries of this degret^.

In this degree there is an Alarm at the iuoer door,c
Eutersi^n, a Password and Explanation of the_Passworj
a Sign ati'l Answer to the Sign, a Check Sigii and Ail
ewer and a Grip.
The Alakm at the inner door is two raps
The Passwokd is A. M., to be lettered at all tim^
when used for working purposes; working into lui 'Eia^
cani|>ment or in examination prior to opei
ing. In communicating this paasw
cither to the Inside Sentinel or Jnnlfl
Warden the Patriarch must giie the let
ter A, and if required by the Inside Stintii
nel or Junior Warden, he must give 1"
remaining lelter M. The Inside SentiiH
and Junior Warden mnst, be 8atis6ed. TIm^
Explanation of the Password is. Gold a
Metal, given infnll, but not used, for work-
ing purposes.

The Check. Sign and Answer are made
the same as in the Patriarchal Degree.

8IOV,

i- Dnsrec, Press the elbow of the light arm to the

Mide, close the right hand, thumb uver fingers; extend
the index finger; when extended raise l.lie tiriu from the
olbow ill a perpendicular direction; tlrop the arm tn
Ifiiii, Lh(- index finger jiointing to the ground. Tba
Answer is tJie same astXie Sign.


INITIATION.


With the index finger of
' e right liand form a link
second joint, and with
*11 of the thumb press
ick of the index finger
lit' the Patriarch forming the link with you, between
the knuckle and secondjoiut. "So shaking hands in
milking the Grip. J

ENSTRUCTIUNB TO CANDIDATE, I

CItief Patriarch (to candidate) — Desirous of being 1
admitted to an Encampment, you will give at the outer
door the same alarm as in the Subordinate Lodge. [One
rap, or one pull of the bell, if there ia one]. The Out-
side Sentinel will open the wicket, and require of you
the Check Password of the torm [which is given in full]. J
If correct, he will admit you to the ante-room. You J
will then clothe yourself in regalia appropriate to your 1
rank and station, and, after ascertaining from the Out- 1
aide Sentinel that the Encampment is open in the I
Golden Rule Degree, you will give two raps at the inner I
door, when the Inside Seutmel will open the wicket, I
and obtain from you your name, rank, and the number J
of the Encampment to which you belong, which he will 1
report to the Chief Patriarch, who wdl instruct him to 1
admit you, if correct. The wicket is again opened, when I
you will be required to give the Password of the Qolden I
Rule Degree [lettered ]. If correct you will be admitted, 1
and will advance to the center of the room, and address |
the Chief Patriarch with the Check Sign. The Chief I
Patriarch will acknowledge you as a Patriarch with the J
Answer to the Check Sign. You will then turn and 1


196 GOLDEN RtJLE DEQKEE.

address the Senior Warden with the Clieck Sign, wB
will acknowledge you as a Patriarch with the atiswera
the Check Sign. You will again turn to the Cbfl
Patriarch and address him with the Sign of the Golds
Rule Degree; the Chief Patriarch will give the answi
to the sign.

On leaving the Encampment hefore it is closed, j
will address the Chief Patriarch only, with the 8
the Golden Rule Degree, and that officer will aiisw
you with the appropriate sign.


Chief Patriarch — Junior Warden, you will now p
sent the Patriarch to the Most Execlieut High Priaj
for further instruction.

Junior Warden— lAost Excellent High Priest,
direction of the Chief Patriarch, I present to yel

Patriarch , for further instruction .

degree.

High Priest — Patriarch, the scene that has been p
Rented to you illustrates an era'"' for which kings a
patriarchs waited and sought, but never found.
trust that the lessons of this occasion will be deep]
engraven on your heart. The ceremoniea yoa h
witnessed are especially designed to impress yoa T
the great principle of Toleration. In the present e
dition of mankind, owing to the prejudices of e'
tion or habit, it cannot be expected that men s
think alike. This is philosophically im


IBTTTATIOIT.

honest in oiiv own opinions, we should accord the aame
boneaty to uthi-rs; anil, wliili' wb should in no instance
tolerate licentiousness or vice, we should overlook ail
differences of a minor nature which may divide us from
(lur brethren, and cordially unite with the virtuous and
goodj irrespective of country, religion'" or polities, in
the discharge of those duties which all agree to be
paramount. As a brother of this sublime degree, it is
eicpected that yon will always act upon the Golden Rule,
doing unto others as you would have them under similar
circumstances do unto you. Thus will you co-operate
with the great mission of Odd-fellowship and hasten
the period when man shall hail his brother-man with
fraternal greetings; when falsehood shall be driven from
the earth, and the race of man form a universal family
acknowledging the God of the Universe as Father, and
every child of man aa a brother.

Hiffh Priest — Junior Warden, you will present the
Patriarch to the Chief Patriarch.


Junhr Warden — Chief Patriarch, by direction of the
High Priest, I present to you Patriarch ■ ,

Chtpf Patriarch — Recognizing you as a Patriarch of
the Golden Rule, the Junior Warden will invest you
with a black apron trimmed with yellow, emblematical
of this degree, [An apron is placed upon the candi-

NOTi 109.— "DiiMng Ilic ycnn XSTl. 1878 enil I8Tlt. ws have IdbE from qui
(out 16,348 memlwra, wduelng tMe grind BgjregBtc from 456, IBB nctlvE Odd-tol-
I lowslniare, Io4«.7B3ltilSTM, yet lti*re raDOCBaBP tordi]iimiiiienrj-,nnrBnini«1
ramSIDein 1ST7 having bRonrsdnccd Id 1906 Ln WI9,"— Journal Of Pro-
tigt Soviril^n OraadLodga, Saiioa of mO, f . SKO.


108 CMSiDBir vwbK msMgm.

dftcej Patriarch , in the name and by the

authonty of the Independent Order of Odd-fellows, I
deelarp you duly advanced as a Patriarch of the Golden
Srule Degree.


ANALYSIS GOLDEN RULE DEGREE.


The professed object of this degree ia to teach " the
principle of toleration." (See ritual, p. 187.) The
reai object, aa of Odd-fellowship throughout, ia to hold
up Christ's religion to contempt, by concealing ita unitj-
fmd expoding its diRsensions and divisions, and claiming
Buperiority for the motley and many-hued religiona of
Satan over that of Christ.

The object and end of Christianity as taught by
Christ himself is, " That they all may be one: aa thou,
Father, art in me, aud I in thee; that they a!so may be
one in us," — Juhn 17: 21.

To checkmate and foil this magnificently sublime
pictnre of the spiritual oneness of all God s children,
through "one Mediator" and "one Spirit," with the
inEnite God himself — and thus counteract the moral
•ffect, on the intellects of other worlds gazing on God's
redemption in this, of a cone of 8piritual oneneHa, hajed
«n regenerated souls and hiding its apex intha infimty


wfakh veiU God'a thmne. the lod^ nlisioas, yarim
M the dnat of Otwav'a " Old Wonun "* —


most needs Iiare s mock onily of their own.

And yet their amtj, like the Taonted nnity of
druskards in their cups, b all the time ending in
brawU. They are truly one only in their malic« against
Christ; and their malic« is excelled by their bald hypocri-
■y. Take this Golden Rnle Degree as a Epecimen. They
meet as a sect or lodge which exclndes more than nine-
teea-twentietha of mankind. They admit only " free
white males" over twenty-one and ander sixty, and
thoneonly when hale and able-bodied : and with tbia
badgered, blindfolded and bewildered handful of hnmai
ity they set themselves to anify mankind- They
and deplore over the sects of Cliristianitry, and tei
their own little sect, divided from other secret seel
and the ouUide world by walla of secrecy, and excludii
all who inherit the least tinge of brown or yellow
their complexion, they boast {see note 10.% p. 192,,
" Here no artificial distinctions of nation, sect; or tribtt
are known!"

To utter such lofty falsehoods must require the bra-
zen tongue and brow of the hypocrite. Yet they
insist, " The rule by which we walk is founded upon the
imniiitahle truth that all mankind are brethren." (Rit-
ual, p. ImH.) And this fearful untruth is uttered of an
order where, on the face of it, the single word "free,"
defining its membership, excludes millions of unhappy
uluven.

The degree then proceeds to act the lie which it bad
uttered. To do this they dress up some members of
their loii^e ris Turks. und when thebliiidfolded candidate
lUiswens that In; i.^ nut ii Muliimimedan, but of aootl


idate V

>tluflH


FKUOHBS TOLEBAIIOS AND PHACTICBB EStTOLEKAlTCE. SOl^

creed, then the turbaaed Turks seize and chain him.
The Chief Patriarch {that is to say. Odd -fellowship), j
then loftily commanda; "Remove the chains which
have heeii imposed by the in tolerance of man." — Ritual, I
p. 192.

Now this play is a slander on the Turte, There are 1
now Armenian fitudenta in Wheaton College '
Turkish rulers and neighbors tolerated them at home I
L'ven after they became Cliristiana in the American I
Reuse. So so our missionaries are tolerated by the i
Asiatic aud African races,

Thas when the benign hand of Christianity has I
pulled down the Chinese walla of intolerance; while j
Fanny "Wright, Victoria Woodhull, and the lugersolls
and eveu Mormons are tolerated, while they abstain j
from tbe crimea of polygamy and assassinations which J
they teach, forth steps this spruce Order of Odd-fellow- I
ship, aud, excluding from its " brotherhood " nineteen- <
twentieths of the human race, proclaims that all "mnn- |
kind are brethren;" sneers at Christianity as intolemnf , I
and invites to its religious brotherhood all who can pay i
their dues, and keeps them in its world-wide fellowship"!
until poverty or misfortune has made them uo longer j
able to keep them paid.


The success of such swindling pretenses — so thin and I
self-contradictory throughout — is owing to one aingli!
fact, vis., the toiling uiafises of Papists, Mormons and 1
members of secret orders read little and reason les
There are probably not one hundred Odd-fellows of the J
hundred thousands who can, to-day, repeat withoi
prompting the whole of their ritual of near two-him-
dred pages. The little secret orders are short-lived. ,
The pcrmiinent ones are those enVax^'^i 'o'^ -^iL-JwroaMl


209 PROTBCTBD BY FALSEHOOD AND FRrVOLETT.

the top, until the honest and induatrioiiB who '
visible means nf9up[)ort"(ian not learn the rituals; andf
the lodges are thus managed by depraved and hardened
men, who make secret orders their trade. ■

The falsehood and frivolity of Odd- fellowship are its
protection. . Sensible people cannot believe a system so
shallow and self -contradictory can be very dangerous.
The leading Roman and Greek oracles were equally
puerile and contemptible. Cicero said he could not aee
how one augur or priest of the mysteries could meet
another in the street "without laughing each other in
the face." Some of the most popular Grecian oracles
"owed their celebrity to exhilarating or stupefying
gases issuing from subterranean caverns." Yet the
wealth which they accumulated was, like the funds of
Odd-fellowship, fabulous. "One hundred and seven-
teen tiles of gold were presented to one of these oracles
by a single man. — Stowe'a Int., p. 177.

The philosophy of their power over mind is in the
fact that they are each a counterfeit salt'athn. The
prayer at the dedication of a cemetery asks the lodge
god to " puriiy our hearts, elevate our desires, and fit ua
for thy service." And the Grand Master aeaures the
Odd-fellows that over their " departed dwells ever the
bright halo of the hope of a glorious resurrection." —
Grosh, pp. 374,375.

And this Golden Rule Degree assures the brethren
that " Confessions of faith ' are mere " differences of
opinion." "Followers of different teachers, ye ore wor-
shipers of one God, who is Father of all, and therefore
ye are brethren."

That is, theirs is the Masonic reli^on, in which all
mankind agree : and every reflectiuEj child must
understand that the end of this religion la the god and
" prince of this world." Each new degree is hut a new
modification and statement of this religion.


CHAPTER XIV.

toTAL PUBPLE, Oa ThIHU ENCAMPMENT DeQKKB.

Part I.

INSTRUCTrONS.

CsiSE Patriarch, should have a purple gown, yelton
belt, yellow and Itiack turban and a crook.

High Priest, should wear a robe made of royal pui
pie fabric, a white surplice of muslin, liueii or t
iogether with a mitre and breastplate.


1. Every fixture should have in view its use, ac
to injure or be offensive to the caudidate.

2. All fast walking, rushing or rough usa^e of tbi
candidate is forbidden.

3. The bridge should be at least two feet wide, '
rough i)o]es as railings, and it should be level with t
roadway or floor.

i. Rough road to be of stone, pieces of wood, stumpi
limbs of trees or brushwood.

6, A railing may be used to guide the candidate ovn
the rough road. The guide in advance, seeminglj
passes evei- it.


ao4


EOTAr, PtntPLB DE9HEE.


Any number o£ candidates may be conducted tliroBi
parts 1 and III of this degree. When inorii than
the officers will add the plural numher to the test.

Junior Warden — (with the candidate — two raps oa
inside door.)

Inside Sentinel — Who comes there?

Junior Warden — The Junior Warden, with a Pal
arch who has BerveS as a herdsman on the mountains
of Horeb and in the wilderness of Paran, has suffered
persecution by the prejudices of selfish and bigoted
men, and now seeks further instruction, teaching him
the good and evil that beset the pathway of life.

Inside Sentinel — Enter. Your appeal shall not be in
vain.

Tbe Junior Warden I«*d« tbs osiidldfttpuauodtlieroam, nd tliar BUllT


on 1


Junior Warden — ^Patriarch, you are now about
recei-ve the laat degree of Patriarchal Odd-fellowship.
Thus far in youi- progress through the Order, each
degree has illustrated morals that will, if observed by
you, gi™ ultimate rest. Here is the Senior Warden,
let us seek his advice.

Jv/nior Warden — Senior Warden, I present to

Patriarch , who has served as a novitiata

the mountains and in the wilderness with the hi
has been assailed and has sufl'ered for bis religious faai
and he now hopes among the Patriarchs to find rest.,

Senior Warden — Rest? Knows he not there id
rest but one? That once launched on life's bi
wilderness, thenceforward all is turmoil even &om
cradle to the grave? Rest cannot be found on
Behold the joyous child basking in affection's Bun,


le i n m


IfilfiATioM.
careless honrs are eacli beguiled with wonie new Iiiipe orJ
beauty. See, next, the gladsoiiie yoiith^his ardeutW
heart, deep filled with young ambitioira firea, is ever!
mounting to some new ai'hievement. Then view man-
hood's loftier state, and mark through what imniensityj
of danger, toil and strife he struggles on to reach s
wished-for, though intaginary. goal. Thus it is ever.B
Proud aspiration and never-ending hope lure on uian'til
restless spirit, until exhausted nature sinks, and th<g
weary body finds repose beneath its kindred earth.

Junior Warden — Nay, but njy friend ia sound ofg
body and of mind. The world is before him, tempting
his stem energy; and heha.s confidence to stem its wild
and reckless torrent, shunning the rocks and whirl ])ool8
which have proved the wreck of others' hopes.

Senior Warden — I am glad to hear of his laudabld
Mnbition to enter upon the career of life, with i
determination to avoid the errors that have destroyeclJ
the hopes and usefulness of others. Animated hy suclu
a sentiment he will ever have the encouragement c
good men, and the commendation of his God. What]
assistance, Junior Warden, can we give the brother?

Junior Warden — The protection of the Patriarchs oti
the Royal Purple Degree.

Senior Warden — That being your wish, my hrotherJ
I will adminbter to yoii the obligation of this, tbel
highest degree of Patriarchal Odd-fellowship. Yoih
will place yourself in the attitude in which you were
initiated, and repeat after me the following obligation.!

Senior Warden — (two raps, culling up the Encamp-1
ment).

OBLIGATION.

I, , do solemnly promise, in the presence s


Wb ROYAL PIIRPLB rEGBEE.

the witnesses hero assembled, that I will never iaipro|^-
erly disclose or make known t.o any pecson, by any
ineuis whatever, any of the signs, iiusswordw or mys-
teries of the Royal Purple Degree, or thoae of any iitUer
of the Patriarchal degrees of the Independent Order of
Odd-fellows. I also promise to obey all legal sum-
monsea that may be issued by authority of any En-
campment to which I may belong, I also promise that
I will not write, print or indite, in any manner or foi'
any purpose, any of the written or unwritten work or'-
mysteries of this degree, or of any other degree which
I have received in this Order. For the faithful per-
forraaiice of all which, I pledge my sacred honor.

Senior Warden^one rap, seating the Encampment).

Senior Warden — You are now an obligated Royal
Purple Degree member of this Order. 1 need not add
more than to call your attention to the moral teachings
of the preceding degrees.

Senior Warden — Junior Warden, yon will retire with
the candidate to the ante-room, and prepare him foe
further instructions.

jBnlor WarArn wil candldale Kdrcto thfl uite-roDBi. whci'c tliociUiiUiliilii IB)
bUndtolilad aoil n ibon dark gaiiB ^laatd apos blB.

Past II.

Junior Warden — (with candidate at inside door-
two raps).

Bat OH (udldBtB U ■ ctm* eu prSMtl thnngh purllL

Inside Sentinel— Who zomes there?

Junior Warden— Th* Junior Warden, with i fi


i


IKtTIATIOF.

who wishes to make the jotiruey to the- Most. E;
High Priest-

Inside Sentinel — He may enter, but lie must bewai
of pretended friends. [Ciindidate is conducted to chi
of Senior Warden].

Junior Ward-im — Senior Warden, I present to you
n brother Odd-fellow, who hiis become an obligated
Patriarch. He wishes to make the joTtrney to the Moat
Exceilunt High Priest. ~

Senhr Warden — Is he aware of the difficultie
will meet in the journey haiom him?

Junior Warden— ^s is not; but he is prepared i
meet them, and he hits faith in his ultimate success.

Senior Warden — Then let him onward. Goon!
that the word — even the countersign. Go on! Bid
give him safe guidance and the heat protection,
should think, Junior Warden, that you are too ine^
perienccd to conduct the brother along the diSco]
pathway of life.

Junior Wart/cn — There is a Guide near by, whois bj
good habits well qualified to conduct the brother, so aa
to shun all places of vice and men of evil habits. This
Guide has been a sinful man, hut now he is willing by
industry and example, to make atonement for I
errors of his past life.

Senior }Varden — Place him in chai-ge then,
remember the word — Go on.

Junior Warden — Halloo! Halloo! Guide of the v
derness!

Guide — Who comes there?

Junior Warden — A pilgrim awuitsyou.


SOIAL FU&fU DESBBE.

Junior Warden {to Senior Waiilen) — Here comes the
Guiilt!, who will conilurt the hrother safely through the
wilderQesa.

Seiiinr Warden^-Gaide, in tiikiug care of Ihit* brother
you assume a great responsibility. Be sure that you
warn him of all dangerous places, bo that he will be
benefited by the light of your experieuce.

Gwide — I will pi-ove to him a faithful compani oti. '
Intrusted to me I will couduct him safely. Bat i^
prepared £or the hard, uncertain fare that awiute 1
by the way ?

Junior Warden — No, except through mere inti
tion; but you can advise him as yon proceed,

fiuide — Well, be it so. We must take our leave,!
we have a long and toilsome journey to perform.

Junior Warden — My friend, give me your hd
Here we part, and may never meet again. You hJ
as through life, a rugged journey before you.
beset with difficulties; you must meet them with c
dence and courage. Be not too haaty in forming od
ions against the one having you in charge. Farew^
my brother, [They bid adieu.J

Guide — You are safe with me, my friend, thotigS
you hear mo spoken of, no terms of flattery wii*
used, as you will find. Be cautious now — we are ]
Ihe First Watch, an unerring indication of our onni
progress.

First Walch — Hold! How entered you the wild
ness?

Gu irfe— La wf ull y .

First Watch — Have you the countersign?

Guide — Yes, or rather my pilgrim has.


First Wufch—Ywir pilgrim! Whu iiilnistea him to
you?

Gmde—Jlia friend, aiid he did well.

Fim Wiitck — r have seen such lus yon buf'ore, nwi
know yon think soj yet many have been led astray on
this ronte. But now to talk is profitless. Stranger,
give me the word.

Ciiuiiitidle — Go on.

First Watrh — Ay, go on — and beware how yon tread.
The way is encompassed with ditficiiltiea. On the one
hand is a stmii^ht and narrow path, presenting a toil-
some and laborious progress; while on the other your
saiisty is hourly endangered in a broad and expansive
plain, beautiful to the sight, but ahoundizig with in-
t'ectioDS the most poisonous and destructive to hnnian
happiness. Death, in its most frightful shapes, lurks
constantly by the wayside. May heaven grant you safe
deliverance.

Guide^Come^ my pilgrim, you must have confidence;
be not alarmed by the words of that miw. Here the
pathway is narrow.

Guide^We here meet an impediment s'ic'i aa too
often discourages a timorous spirit. But press on, be
not dismaj'ed. And now [entering the woods] we seem
encircled by a wild and dismal thicket. The living
liere is very bad, for the traveler is often in want of
water as well as bread. But here is the Second Watch,
another index of our progr:;ss.

Second Watch — ^Stand! What is your object in en-
tering this wilderness?


Guide — It is di'Creed that we shall travrl tlirotigh U.
Secottd Watch — Have you passed the First Wiitsh.*
' Guide — Yea, he directed us to go on.
, Second Wntck — Then I will not detain you, except
_n!ierely to admonish the pilgrim tliat, ua tlie roiul grows
rougher, he be not tempted to seeli luoraeutary ease at
the expense of future pain and sorrow, A singln aher-
ratiou may tarnish and forever overcast a rash though
well-meaning spirit. One false atep may cost a. limb,
or even life itself. Beware, then, that you plunge not
down some dark and deep abyss, involving disaster the
most sad and irreparable. Beware how you proceed.

Guide—Come, let ua go. We can make our- way.
pPausing.] Yet, how strangely varied are the paths
before ua, [Merriment, seeming to be distant.] Hark!
Heard you the voice of mirth and revelry? How
fascinating, how easy of access is the path that leads
that way. Yet it is beset with dangers. Lust, intem-
perance, sensuality — vice, in all its odious forma and sU
its horrors, lies deep concealed beneath tempting blan-
dishments. We must not be deceived, [The clash of
arms heard at a distance.J There, again! from a differ^
ent direction come the clang of arms and sounds of
deadly strife — a sad display of worldly glory, where
cruel war tramples meek humanity in the dust. It is
the stern warrior's sport to gratiiy the statesman's
oroud ambition, Fame would tempt us on, but we
^ust keep aloof, lest we be slain, or, surviving, imbibe
Bie same fell spirit of destruction. No. we will not
'"inni aside, either for fleeting pleasures or the soldier's
honors. They who till the soil or ply the loom and
hammer are far more happy. There surely is eqi


ISTTIATION.

good in store for ua. We will cross I


9U


ragged path

and see what lies beyond. [Passing the ruins or other
rough place]. Ah! what ia this? It is the ruins of an
old castle where pomp and vanity once held sway. Can
we already have come so far? Howquick tirae flies! I
see by the waning light througli the dense forest before
U8 that our course lies around a steep declivity, beyond
which will terminate our pilgrimage. Be careful, and
not too hasty.

Third Watch— Sta,adl Whence come you?

Guide — Through the wilderness.

Third Watch— And passed the Watches?

Quids — yes. Informed of our purpose, they bade ua
go on.

Third Watch— YoM have done well in arriving &t
■ibis Watch, for ere they get thus far on their journey,
.many sink by the wayside, overcome with difficulties
which (hey cannot surmount. You are now far ad-
vanced, though some troubles, sucli as you have passed,
still appear in the distance. There is yet another
Watch, whom many have tried in vain to reach. You
must be careful when you get to the river Jordan. The
recent rains have raised the water almost to the bridge,
and you may not be able to cross. The stream there is
very deep and rapid; be careful, therefore, and follow
your Guide. While his reputation is said by some to
"be bad, he was never known to be unfaithful to a pil-
grim placed in hit care. Go on — my best wishes attend
you.

Guide — Yes, we will go from such a oomforternsthii;
tut so it is all along this road, and no one can eT«r
jud^a of his treatmunt tQt he reach its eud, and than,


212 ROYAL PURPLE DEGEfifi.

alas! it is too late. Our progress, however, shoaM be
more calm, much less exciting, and with our present
experience, more free from danger. Yo'ur eyes are
'covered for your good; all who travel here are blinded;
they neither see nor know what may befall them. A
sudden change has come upon the air, indicative of an
approaching storm. [Thunders.] It is near us, but
we have naught to fear. Let us pause beneath this oak
tree until the rain is over. How strangely significant,
for the oak is the symbol of hospitality! [Pause.] We
will now proceed, for I see in the heavens the bright
rainbow of promise, reminding us that we are under
the protection of a covenant-keeping Father, whose
goodness is effectual to dispel the wretchedness of man.

But here we are at the river. It is very high and
muddy'. I am afraid we cannot cross, and it is danger-
ous for us to stay here at night, as beasts of prey infest
these woodlands. We must venture to cross on this
bridge. I will go before you. Hold to the side sup-
ports, and be careful. Fear not! [They cross the
bridge.] We are now over the worst of our journey.
But here is the Fourth Watch.

Fourth Watch — Hold! How far have you come?

Giiide — Through the wilderness, travehng by night
as well as by day.

Fourth Watch — Pilgrim, I congratulate you on having
journeyed so far with such a Guide.

Guide — He that has experienced my care is best qual-
ified to judge of me. Good or bad, few would desire to
try the journey over again, even could they endure its
fatigue.

Fourth Watch — I merely apprised the pilgrim of the


rSTTIATIOK. 1

my he is ia. I am rejoiced at his arrival, and, if
titted to the society of just men, he will find the
way more pleasant, and the paths more smooth.

Guidf — I suppose, pilgrim, you think it very strange
that all these Watchea tell you of jjiy bad character.
You will see that it is prejudice. If a man commits an I
error, some people can neither forgive nor forget it, nor j
consider the beam in their own eyes. This last Watch
has given me the credit of not neglecting a pilgrim
placed in my charge, and that is all that you require.
We must pass on, for night ia approaching,

jitter mUklDg a tcirngiimentB, inuilc la heard In the dtaianeu and cuniluiiBi to
be lienrd until It dleaaway ta tliu eu. TlilB muilsmaf bdliutruiaeDialDr vocal.

GKjrfe— Hark! I hear music. How sweet those uotea!
They soothe the heart and fill it with aspirations fop ]
the eternal home. Let us pause for a while, and learn i
the cause for such a charm in these solitudes. Oh!
see people full of joy coming this way. They are '
harvesters. " They have finished their work, and are ,
now keeping their annual festival. We,have passed all i
danger, and soon shall he at the end of our journey.
You have escaped bad company and journeyed saiely ]
through dangerous places, Ho! here we are at the
High Priffst'a tent, and we are safe,

Ouide — Guards of the Tent, 1 have a pilgrim, who
desires to see the high Priest,

First Gmrd—Uosi Excellent High Priest, a pilgrim
has arrived, and desires your blessing.

ffijA Pn'es(— Present the pilgrim. [Heispresented.j ,
Bieatore him to light. fBlindfold is removed,]


914 BOTAl PUBPtB DBftRfeg.

H!<ih PriVs^— Patriarch, T welcome you to ihis 1
pie of our Order. Your progress hither may havJ
peared tedious, but we trust that the-lessons yon 1
gathered by the wny will prove profitable. All liufl
excellence is the reward of perseverance, toil, and f
ger, such as we have endeavored to picture to thej
agination in the mimic journey of life through wB
you have been conducted — a scene that has not 1
rehearsed for idle amusement, but to awaken ratlfl
meditation in a mind as mature as yours. The uiC
tainties of life are ever present to the understandiiifl
considerate men. Literally blindfold, and \
every side with danger and temptation, we struggle
through this earthly pilgrimage. With desires never
gratified, we are the subjects of endless toil and care, of
never-ceasing hope and never-ending disappointmeLt.
The false and flattering charms, which in the distance
Bo attract our admiration, disappear the moment they
are placed within our reach. Frail mortals that we are,
we know not What a day or an hour may bring forth.
Encompassed with peril on every side, with the seeds of
disease implanted in our nature, and the very air we
breathe impregnated with death, all the promises of life
are but dust. They fade as a leaf, and pass as the
shadow that fleeth away. How essential, then, that we
should understand our true position, and keep constant-
ly in view the realities that surround us 1 How essential
that we should learn to practice those living and im-
mortal virtues, which, while they secure ultimate hap-
piness, contribute so largely to smooth the troubles and
soften the asperities of life!

Ilii/k Priest — Junior Warden, you will rittire <


INTTIATION. ai8

caudidate, and, aftur havmg prepared him, re-enter mid
present liim to the Chief Patriarch fur further instruc-
tiona.


Paht II f.

Junior Wa^-den—By direction of the Most Excellent

High Priest, 1 present to you Putriarch fur

further instruction.

Chief Patriarch — Patriarch, in congratulating you on
your elevation to the highest rank in this Order, it
would be useless for me to attempt to add a word to the
moTsX instruction wliiiih haa been already bestowed
upon you. If this instruction shall have served to im-
press your mind <7ith a train of moral thought, founded
in piinciples the most pure and exalted, our labor will
not have been in vain, your time will not have been
WHstid, and neither yOn nor your brethren will have
cause to regret your connection with our fraternity.
We earnestly hope that such may be the case, and that,
as your mind shall advance in the progress of calm in-
Te3tigation,it may be continually blessed with a brighter
and yet stronger light, until it realizes the fruition of
all its earthly desires, and the care-worn man shall have
bowed him down before his God.

Patriarch, it is now ray duty to instruct you in the
mysteries of this degree.

In this degree there is an Alarm at the inner door, or
Bntersign, a Password, an Explanation of the Password


1


..- - -i_r. JUL


".-."■ ■


■-


vn-


_ -


• '•% *


i:i-ri


■ ^-- ■


—


T~ \.


c-:-i


• . —


1.7


-v


JT a-!l


- -^PW


r" -• -


>-H-


Ani=Sc-<!


_


""


. * • ,


- '- _n"


ic-rr


-r-


- _x'~.-n


—


• k.^


1. nr:


- :_- - .-zir u a


y
/


-■- -« . ! - ^ f 4* - -

- " -.11 i. ur-i;ii:«'i li

-'■•■■•- ~ ■"■*»— ~ *rv«-


^


i • ~ ,

,/ .' ^ . • ' _• -- .. I' :. TTi-h the

^^ .:*... "... i::.'. iOT'/'is the

: ; ...: .n the back of
*i'. •■..■."/...'■ ..'i.'. . '. ... .'.. i.--.r-_r int: (jrip.
f//,,f,.r l',ii.iimt.h (V* <,>j.i.ii'Vd.V:)— \J«;Vvi:ovi^ of being


h" •


• • I


imitted to an Encampment, you *ill give at the outer
K)r the aame Alaroi as in the Suhordinate Lodge. [One
ip or ring of the bell]. The Outside Sentinel will
pen the wicket and require of you the Check Password
' the term [which is given in full]. If correct, he will
imit you to the ante-room. You will theu clothe
ourself in regalia appropriate to your rank and sta-
on, and, after ascertaining from the Outside Sentinel
lat the Encampment ia open in the Royal Purple
tegree, you will give two raps at the inner door, when
be Inside Sentinel will open the wicket and obtain
t)m yon your name, rank and number of the Encamp-
lent to which you belong, which he will report to the
Ihief Patriarch, who will instruct him to admit you, if
orrect. The wicket is again opened, when you will be
squired to give the Password of the Royal Purple De-
ree [lettered J. If correct you will he admitted, and
ill advance to the center of the room and address the
hief Patriarch with the Cheek Sign. The Chief Pa-
riarch will acknowledge you as a Patriarch with the
.nswer to the Check Sign. You will then turn and
idreaa the Senior Warden with the Check Sign, who
■ill also acknowledge you as a Patriarch with the
jiawer to the Check Sign. You will again turn to the
Ihief Patriarch and address him with the Sign of the
loyal Purple Degree; the Chief Patriarch will give the
roper answer to the Sign.

On leaving the Encampment before it ia closed, you
fill address the Chief Patriarch, only, with the Sign of
he Royal Purple Degree, and that officer will make the
Lnawer to the Sign. You will then obtain from the
enior Warden the Password of the evening [which is
nlfused in this degree], wbich must be given to the


BOTAL FTBFLB DBBKIX.


Insiiie Sentiiiiil before he will allow you tn depart.
Shonlrl yoa wiah tore-enter the Eneampment the wns
>vH'nmg, you may use tlie Pasaword of the eyening, or
the PaiMword of this degree, for that parpiMe.


'^hiff Piitriarrh — ^Junior Warden, condact the cm-
(lidAte to the Must Excellent High Priest for farther
iastnictton.

Junior Wardat — Most Excellent High Priest, by
directiflQ of theOTiief Patriarch I present to you Pabi-

h for fiirther instruction.

Ugh Priest — Patriarch, I will now iastract you in
1^ signiliL'ation of the emblems belonging to the P»-
fLirchal Order.


te RlBli fMnt. Slid tli*<ri


THE THEEB FILLAflS.

e Three Pillars represent Faith, Hope and C
he greatest of these is Charity. Although ¥
ss all other rirtnes, if we are destitute of chd
we are bat as sounding brass]
tinkling cymbal. As symbolsfl
Three Pillars direct to an enlif
ened faith in God, the Fathq
Spirits, the Maker and Pre
the Univerae, and impress up<
the importance of always we^
! mantle of Charity and Brod
ly Love.


EtrrnAnoiT.


The patriarclis dwelt in tents, and esteemed hospital-
ity as one of the greatest
of Tirtues; to them cost-
ly mansiona were not
necessary to acts of hu-
manity. The sympa- ,^^"^1
thizing heart will providf ^^. tt
th« cooling draught and \
shiltar for the strauger
in the humblest places of abode; without it they can-
not be found within palace gates.

The Pilqhim's Scrip, SAMDAia m> Staff. — ^Theae
emblems symbolize the journey of life. The Scrip to
eontain the food, the Sandals to protect the feet, and
th« Staff to support the wearied limbs. How much
more important to make provision for a jouruey which
begins in infancy, lasts through life, and ends in death;
for all beyond three score years and ten are but labor
and soiTow. We soon pass away and are gone; and be
your journey long or short, let it ba guided by well-


no™ in—'

of tbli degree.
hoipILallir we 1
tiT oUien. Bui


TbiTimt. £mlilfm of BaipUality.-—


c pttullfo' emblcB


Tat nlsbLIf plMb m


—Oroih'» Xanual, f. m.


290 BOTAL PURPLE DXOSn

regulated industry, perseverance in all good works and
a Bumble reliance upon God.

The Altar op Sacrtficb. — The Altar of Sacrificu
aymbolizea Faith in God, and obedience to his cooi-
maada, and implies that no sacrifice is too great for the
creature to please the Creator. Self-deuial aad submis-
sion are constantly recurrine events in a virtuous life.
and when called upon you should not hesitate to sacri-
fice comfort and personal gratification upon the altar ol
duty.

THE TABLES OF STOSE,"* CEE80EHT ASD CB088.

The Tables of Stone, the Crescent and the Cross, are
symbols that
signify to an
Odd-fellow Uiii-
versal Tolera-
tion. In worltf
of humanity all
differ eiices iii
politics, creeds,
or worship
should be i'oTBoi-
ten. TpsTA-


Fmtaer oC all. and Ihertfore ye an brtikran! At luoh. Cbsrlty, snd Bp»klii>
Uia tralh In lo»e. ihould prevBll imooK as— UBf/B Ih good iBorki. wherelii all


OF Stokte, with the moral law written upon
jbbem, t>resent a common basis of worshiji and pure
■morality for all mankind. They teach that GtOd is our
Father, and we are brethren Let the Golden Rule
prevail, and whatboeverye would that men should do to
^011, do ye even so to them

THE 4LTAB OF IN0FIf8E ' '

The Altar of Facense reminds u* of the rude altar of
le patriarchs, ind of the sirapbcitv of that true wor-

Bbip which the " "

Ruler of the Urn

Terse requires of

his intelligent

creatures no cost-
ly oblation no

rendering of th

■fruit of the boh
the sin of tl

Boul — but to t

justly, love minv

Hnd walk nambi'

JtoTBiia.— ■■The ALTASof


It; of TcLJUuTioi'— not k


1 Iba Ineenie df Praior uiil pralae. of gritltnde lui
uig lie ■ Kccptuble iBCMOcei of Ood. tie a brake
trlto lieert'Hp will not fleiplBB. "Thorafow, W 1
■r, and Uicrs nimemlwreal [hal Ibr bralher Imtll
re 1117 gKllJEfore Uie lltar, tad go Ibj Trty ; fint tl I
tm* OHM Ui Biter lb; gin. '— UUi. t. tS, M."-


99f KOTix. mtetx miaax.

trirl. God Tp^t^loih if th-in bring thj gift to Ow

ftltar, ^iil then; tememberest ih&t tbj brother haik
■aght ti^n^t thee, leare tbere tbj gift before tli« alin
and ^Q thy way; first be recuadled to thj farotber, *iii
, tfaes eoine and offer tliy gift.

tfii/fi /'ri>3/ — JoaJor Warden, present the emdidttf
I to cbe Chief Patriarch.

Junior Warden — Cbief Patnareli, I present tw yon
I Patriarch .

Chief Patriarch — Patriarch, the Junior Warden wiU
RjM)w inrest yoa with a Royal Purple collar, embi^static
P.fll this degree.

And now, in^the name and by the authority of the
I Independent Order of Odd-fellows, I declare you duly
C sxalted to the Royal Purple Degree.

I WB'Uai.Xr \m [bcD pUuwt (k1B0 ItiE Sealor Wuden, ud Ore EuunpmCU


Chief Pa/mrcA— Patriarchs,
vOOniniend to you Patriarch —
I ;the Patriarchal family.


w introduce and
- aa a member of


'— ./aunuil of TroctrHagtSoMrBga


CHAPTER XV.


ttoTAL Purple, or Thied Encampment Dbgri

CLOSING CEBEMONIEB.'"


Chief Patriarch (two raps, nil rise) — The officers and
Pal-riarchs wiU rise while our Junior "Warden closes the
Ejicampment in the Royal Purple Degree. Officers and
Patriarchs, be attentive while our Most Excellent High
Priest offers a prayer.

TUe Dbifl PBtrlarcb ghoutd remain In hli place In clusLng the Encampinftit. ind


Father of all mercy, God of love, we beseech thee, of
thy great goodness, to defend us from the perils and
dangers of this night. Let thj blessing rest upon us;


jiBBB. mil ojoses anally, (


ta highest degree.


conten daring SKb aeaaloli "-


teb


-•:;■>.».


•^- . -z^r -1 -r -wans — Teym. !gnn.inupg md -siisd—
pr' j-i o :r" zioT^ uxo. die' jassiziesB ir lil TumV^irrt


l»=r:irTr-, _- -^ "'"-i^^ • ii^-n imic^a. wtlujc:; *?ri^Tio


Jonraoy— Odd-teJlomlilp .
t OrlDdlDK Tbere— Tbvl


— AliMadB Subwrvlcnt to Political Endi, ii Now— Gud's Uttanioces AboBl Se-
em tlani—Soini! iKDorance ot Kaaverjf on lliB Pirt of MMdnln Anthore— No
Cbeitcinbe PorpEiuai.

Tile secret orders have exhausted the vocabulary of
Ingcraft and priestcraft, which have scourged our race
ir 8ix thousand years and still scourge it. And, during
all that time, regalia, mock mysteries and sounding
titles have been their stock in trade and tools of incan-
tation.

This Royal Purple Degree ends the present sorcery
of Odd-fellowship, amid purple gowns, yellow belts,
black turbans and white surplices, with mitres and
lireaatplates. (See ritual, p. 303.) And ia this, as in
preceding degrees, " special " warning is given against
"rough usage" of the candidate, which shows the
'hole thing to be a religious horse-play. But one
ground idea underlies and runs through the whole. It


S96 A HIHIO JOUHKBT THIKHJ8H tlFB TO HBATEIT.

is a misletoe on the tree of life; a travesty and degrad-
ing caricature of God's system and Christ's way tv
heaven. The professed purpose and intent of this de-
gree, as given by the contrivers (ritual, p. 214), la " a
mimic journey of life."

Now the Bible picture of the Christian's life-jonmey
is to " run with patience," " through much tribulation."
" looking to Jesus," " by whom we have access " to the
infinite and eternal God.

Christ existed " before the foundation of the world,"
and has, ever since, been the " Way " for a man out of
the trouble and guilt of sin into the rest and holiness
of heaven. This crowning "royal purple degree"
mimics or burlesques this " way '■' in God's eternal sys-
tem of redemption. Thus: The candidate goes blind-
fold, looking on nothing, insteadl^f Christ. The " tribu-
lation" is " mimicked " by leading him over " stones.
pieces of wood, stumps, limbs of trees or brushwood."
(See ritual,, p. 203.) But thu guide of the poor simple-
ton is forbidden ■' all fast walking, rushing or rough
nsage of the candidate." This is the devil's mimicry of
Christ's "strait and tkornij road," through a world
which sin has made one of suffering.

And when the candidate has been badgered and bam-
boozled over the " stoues, brush, stumps," etc., in the
night, across a "bridge two feet wide, with rough poles
as railings," over a swollen stream, amid home-made
" thunder " and other frights, he is brought by the guide
into the Odd-fellows' mimic heaven, his ears tilled with
Bweet music, asid he is told that he is among " people
full of loy^r— Ritual, p. 313.

It is not a happen-so that, from the old Egyptian and
Greek Mysteries down through Freemasonry and 0<h


DAKKNESS TO LIGHT — AN INITIATIOF MURDEE. 327

fellowship to little secret college clubs, this " mimicry "
of the struggle with sin and sorrow through to peace
with God is kept up. " Our rites," says Grosh, " begin
in gloom and end iu joy." A.ad in this he says Odd-
fellowship is a copy of all secret religious orders.

The students of Cornell University, N. Y., bound
young Mortimer D. Leggett's hands behind him, at
midnight, and rau him up and down a bluff six miles
out of Utica, N. Y.,and when wearied and bruised with
" rough usage," pulled off his blinder to make him, at
midnight, look down the bluff (by measure) forty feet,
where they had prepared an artificial hell, whose flames
were Chinese lanterns, and its devils students in horned
masques! They intended, after giving him a devifa
" broken heart." to lead him to " mimic " " joys of sal-
vation." m nightly revelry and debauch; but, being too
drunk to carry out the programme, they let him fall
down the bluff and broke his neck. And when the poor
boy was dying- -when the dimness of death was coming
over him^ — he ttought they were putting on the hood-
wink, and beggftd pit:oualy, "Don'tl Take it off! Do
take it off !" The coroner's inquest revealed these facts
to President White and his Faculty, but the literal mills
of hell still grind on in Cornell University, and others.
Sir.ilar, if not worse, " initiations " are practiced in
Tale College. A New Haven daily told the putlic that.
at one of these initiations into a Greek-letter fraterni-
ty, one student had his arm broken by " rough usage,"
and several others were su bruised that they had to be
taken home in a carriage after the savage handling and
night of debauch.

Now remember that these grim travesties of " sorrow
for sin " and " rest to the soul " in Christ all have re-


mAiMfbllom:

**I»w&EL8^-To the qootios 'Can l

LM|C« U-fpJIjr approre a b^v of a Sabonljnate «

or^/vui*^ that " Infidels shall not be prapoeed as mem-
l*f-. ' ■ the (imai LrJ^ of the United Statea answeis:
'Hifi';* n'l ()*ciilisu- reljgiotis Tiews which do not affect
Hi" Miirf of the pCTBOn asldng admission into the
(hiift • in A Huijreme Being, the Creator and Preserver
of tliiT llniviTHC,' tan disqualiff him for ra embers hip,
fi"iUiiir Clin llii^ir vipwH be allowed to interfere with the
[xifilni;.' of inrmbern iu respect to propositions for i
iri(p>»ioii." IH-I!I, Jounial, 1503, 1513.

ArllH.. KK'i.,


mH,..


ivhoJu


book, ia still more conclosive, a

m bject:


ODD-PELLOWSmP SOT A TEKFEEANCB ORDHE. 22?

" No Pecuuauitiks of Reltoious Beij^ef or practice
are requisite to adiuission into tlie Order, and none
aiaqaalily."— iS^, Journal, 1198, 1246.

Nor ia the morality enforced by this professedly soul-
saving religioii any better than its infidel creed.
Article 975 of White's Digest reads as ibllowa:

"Temperance a CardinalPrinciple; Total Abbti-
KENCB Not ENFOKOBit. — Lodges cannot abridge the
liberties of the citizen, nor dictate to him tehat he shall

i or what he shall drink. All good Odd-fellows despise
Bsauch the ahise of intoxicating drinks, and in their 'war
against; vice' they look upon drunkenness ao incompat-
(me with every principle of the Order. But neither
will the laws nor the principles of Odd-fellowship
descend to the restriction or regulation of the be^fei-age
of its members.

"While temperance is a cardinal principle of the Order
md mnst be observed, they will nut attempt to enforce
fatal aistinence, a principle never intended by the
tamers to be ingrafted upon our Order." — 1S49, Jour-
nal, 1504, 15J3.

The next article (976), same book, is as follows:

" Traffic in Intoxicating Liquors. — On a petition
lieing presented to the Grand Lodge of the United
Btates to enact a. law allowing State Grand Bodies to
prohibits members of Subordinates iinder their respec-
tive jurisdictions from engaging in the traffic in intoxi-
eating liquors, it was decided that it is 'contrary to the
Bpirit and policy of our institution to pass any law on
the subject referred to, creating a new test of member-
Ship in the Order."— IS70, Journal, 4S36, -1669.

These last two quotations form also a most conclusive
Mbuttal of the frequent and loud-mouthed claims of the
institution as a " temperance " order.

If the analysis and notes of this volume are carefully
and prayerfully read, no honest, intelligent reader will
fail to see that, in the words of the learned Cudwortli,


•H Mjtttc»«aii Fill II iiiiHiij a^ OU-frQovbv.
-^fby bo*^" Bffs XaKbT. '[■■ihi froH one oon-
Boa MOBS.'* flakm^p. 3»J I«t w »« a Itttk


I tf CkriA. &«■ Xaefa? (Lexitam. p. 315}

dearij nfieaimg a cflBBM orieinr -Tbey
cdebntcJ tW dcaifa sad tke imim e t ioo of some cher-
■bed bnsg^, the otfect of e&Lo' eslcein w a hero, or of
dcTotioD M » god." He B «|ie>kiBe of Egyptian. Per^
aaaJQnA. Botaait, Seanfaanaa, Dnndical, Gottie wtd
Celtie mj^^rteries.

ad. And tktyaUprtmatd A^uwn or w/rafioN. ^l.«r-
Kvwi. ;>. 32/.^ " Ckero telb os, that in the mysteries of
Orel at Eleosis. the initiated were taaght to Utc hap-
|rily and to die in the hope of a blessed fnturity." Thft
name promises are, over and again, made io Odd-fellows
and also t<> Masons, whose well-known death and resur-
rection of Hiram Ahiff is Satan's caricature of Christ's

Hitli and rwmrrection.

Thff ApfJBtle Paul, who was well-read in all tlieee

cri'-i", denounces them BS " unf'rnitfnl works of

darkaotn" afl " idolatry," and, in his terse and terrible


THE AirCIEST KTBTERHS — T.Iin; P0LTP8.


231


(rords, their -icp ia " ui^ cap cf devils," and their table
•* the table of devila." f.%? / Cor., 10th chap.) And
le commands (Jhristians to " have no tellowahip " with
them. (Epii. 5: 11, 12.)

Tl 3 anci.-it masteries, too, like the modem, were all
the time sending off shoots and starting new centers.
And as every slice cut off from the Polyp becomes a
new animal, so of these mysteries, ancient and modern
alike; every offshoot, and even every new degree of an
offahoot, becomes a perfect secret order, putting the in-
itiate through from gloom to gaiety, from fear to fun
and frolic, from awe and terror to joy and jollification.
In short, the object is to produce in the initiate, aa
nearly as possible, feelings like those produced by the
Holy Spirit's correction of sin and joya of pardon, and
thus give him a devil's regeneration, in which Satan
officiates aa the Holy Ghost.

The oracle of Apollo at Delphi, according to Diodo-

3 Siculus, (B. C. 16) originated thwa:

"Upon Mt. Parnassus there was a deep cavern, with
1 small, narrow mouth; to which when any goats ap-
proached, they began to leap after an unusual and antic
Kiftmier, uttering strange and unheard-of sounds."

" The goatherd, observing this, went himself to view
the cavern, whereupon he also was seized with a like fit
F madness, leaping and dancing, and foretelling future
events."

A temple was erected over that jet of exhilarating
^fas, and the priestess was inspired by it. " Whoever,"
Bays Archbishop Potter, " went to consult the oracle

B required to make large presents to thegod; whereby
it came to pass that this temple, in riches, splendor and
DUignificence, waa superior to almost all others in the
wBrld." . Tho priestess, called the Pythoness, like the
damsel in Acts 16: 16 who " brought her masters moch


gain 1)7 aMtliai^uig,'* wor doubtte^ aided by the j
o€ >I1 Qentile wonhipe. to rlec^ir? and delude tbe tf
■Doet eoltghtened p>w|)Le ao earth. Theimfoatunb
■nd when iU repiitaCioa wa^ establsbed kings ^
their wealth into its Mchwiner for the sake of hs {i
ical inHuenct. ami the nualtitudc paid dues for mib
auA decrees.

The worshiper at Trophonina Care went tbroi^,
preparatory ceremonies, lasting screral days. oSering-
m.toy sacrifices, which, of course, enhchetl the shriBe:
tbt^n he was taken out by night and washed in a rirer,
etc., etc. These oracles were made subservient to poli-
tics. The Council of the Ampiiietyon^ met at Delphi
alternately, and its decisions were iailuenced by the
purcbaned responses of the priestess, as the vote of
JdaHona and (Md-fellows is by the .sham religion of the
lodge.

It was in abhorrence of this secret cave-worship that
Ood declared " / have not spoken in secret, in a dark
place of /!« earth." (Jm. 45:19.) So the words of
Kh risti " In secret have I said nothing," (John 18 : 20}
condemne.1 the mystic religions of his day. whose fiiih-
ineoB, Paul said, was too shamefal to be spoken of,
nnd which he comraandHd Christians to dbfellowship.
And yft Masonic and Odd-feUowship writers, either in
their' own ignorance or relying on the ignorance of
tbt'ir rnemhers, boast the moral sameness of those
~ aicient abominations with their lodges as if it were an


No cheat can be perpetual. The moral meanness of
. results soon condemns it; hence those old mystenes,
I do kept shifting their shapes and truudhng
b-oni one tolly and wickedness until they tinally su^k
rith tlio nations they had debauched.


Chapter XVI.

LoDOB OF THE Daughters of Rkbkkah "


UISTOKT AND KEGULATJONS.

ThiB revised work of the Rebekah Lodge was adopted
Y the Sovereign Grand Lodge at Baltimore, I\lii„ Sept.
Srd, 1S82 and as in the old work was termed tlie Re-
ekah Degree, and was conferred in a regular Siibovdi-
ite Lodge of the order. By order of tlie Sovereign
rand Lodge, from Jan. Ist. lf^93 the word "Degree" is
roppedand the ritual is given only in aRebekihLoilge.
The following instrnctions of the Sovereign Grand
odjje sLill remain in force.- Foot Note 116 was
;ken from Grosb's Manuul before it was revised to
I the new work, hence the reference to the Scarlet De-
inatead of Degree of Trulb.

It Degree »f Rabekih ie a fiiie degree o[ llie todependent Ordcrof Odd


rheDegiea oIRvbekab is confer
MutTrnth, in good stnndjog, at

MOT« 116.— "The EeErao ot Be
bardlimte Lodge, on Ihe wime
jDBa basbands died !u good slfln^l
proper guardians. He as«H ur b


Deeding Bid dc protecLIOD."—


It clitrge in a
leir baebSEdB


Chapter XVII.

>OUGB OF THE DaCGIITEKs'" OF Ue[1EK411.


Noble Grand. [Stayiding.^ Officers and Members, we
have assembled for the purpose of traasactiDg business
in the Degree of Kebekah, and we are enjoined to keep
inviolate our secret work and^see that no unworthy per-
son ia allowed to be preaeul at the performance of our
sacred riles. Therefore, those who are not entitled to a.
seat with us in this degree are kindly requested to re-
tire to the anteroom. The Inaide Guardian will close
the door, and the Warden will prove those present ac-
lawsand uBages.


ordtngto o

(In Lodges af


anehler


DcErveof Rdlivkah
lond by giTins Uif


t DegHC who hu nltaiaed Ihv a^n ot clsbleen juare
dead, may li« udmilted \o membcttblp In n lodge o
:llebsliab nlwc iiroposcd by the Ncilile Grand of Ihc lodge

the Osenw oZ Rebekah. when [arnlahtd wiili ■ ceTtificoto fr

— -Lodge otwfctchlbr'—— ■— - '■" ""' *■- »■

let Degree and waa

M of Procccdimw Sov


as« allovcd to c


aafaa f orteddo b; tte Sofale Gnad.


Jf«Al> dmA Cood wcto r, Tfa«i ue the dntin
jvttioficeT

To ooadBet caadidaLes tliriMghj
TieB of tbe decree, sod tw acnst the Ward«o ii
is of hla ^ficc

t Grmd. W&rdeti, wbu is yoordnty?
itH. To prove those present Kt opeoing, i
uwords; lo sec ibat the irwoi U neat, and in orJ
Uiatiiiemb«n mxv' be comfonable, and sp«nd apleag
AS well iu aprofitabie eTeoiog vbeneTer thej meetii
get her.

AbUe Grand. Secretary, what ia yQnr duly?

SterUary. To keep accurate miaates of all traij
Uani and liuiinesaof the Lodge vhen opea in this 1
gree

■■Kobn»liiMe»b»tey«. «Iceptth»tot conrstrioE, cm be do
•-■--"•• - "- - 1 mil b« aeided in Ihe 8


— lb. The prellminiinei m
'c fnnlVDlattjr make Ifil* aUI
ftaiied IhU ' wumeD ■» to I
I.*', IVwAet TBI* 0uulE:,i>.ti


U Dol oBtltlrcl
'leinsliy iirund _
riuons U hM nnderewiB bave"?
not, with ptvipHeijr, In tantanBtif
i«enibUBe», wtthiin"


«lte uarl In onrjiriTiite an , , „


°ntv--- ^Mk


OPEWTNG CXEKUOirlSS. S37

- Ifobk Grand. Vice Grand, what are the duties of
your sution ?

Vice Grand. To officiate ici my statiuD, and, if qual-
ified, for the Noble Grand iu his abseDue, and to give
my assistance in the perfornyiuce of the business of the
Lodge.

Noble Grand. Worthy Chapla-n, what are the gen-
eral duties prescribed for our members?

Chaplain. To live peaoeably, to do good unto aU,
as we have opportunity, and especially to obey the Gol-
den Rule, "Whatsoever ye would that others should
do unto you, do ye even so to them."
Noble Grand. Such are our duties — see ye that they
are duly performed,

[Calls op the Lodge, by giTing l«o raps.)

Noble Grand. The members will slug the opening
ode.

DPBNINO ODB.


LatiDilntaercaaaBt^viiie.

WbiMi the doads of alu Had BuIneBi
lihrond la glonm tbe wesrT bead.

Tbem in peMB. nudjoy, stid gXiUiais
Sbill Ihe light nt Lorn bo ahed.

aoble Grand. Worthy Chaplain, please invobf
blessings of the Supreme Ruler of the Universe i
9ur convocation.


(Ftafarny a*niipiAin |
(Tlw CoUnwlDc Bxr tie neert.;

Almighty God, our CreaUtt and Prcserrer, wetmofce'
Thj bleaaing iii'on the members of this Lodge and
eaure brotbcrLood. May we be ever f&ithfal to tbe
prin«tp)ca of our beloved Order, bo that beDeTol«nce
aim] cbahC)' may be promoted. Bleaa the wi>iov and
orpbao, and alt in affliction or distress, and relieve their
nAceseitie*. "Our Father who art in beaven, bAllowcd
be Thy name: Thy kingdom come: Tby will be done, on
earth as it is in heaven: Give ub ibis day our daily bread:
Forgive us oar trespaases aa we forgive those who trea-
pana against ti8, and lead os not into temptation, but de-
IiTtr ui from evi!: For Thine ia the kingdom, and tbfl
[lower and the glory, foreyer. Aukv.

NobU (Jrnnd. Warden, joa will proclaim this Lodga
duly opened.

Warden. By order of the Noble Grand, I proclaim
ihiM Lodge of the Daughters of Rebekab, open for the
traniiactioii of any business that may be legally brought
btiforc it.

Nohle firrand. Officers and members, so be jt

Mtmbert. Ho be it.

{Tb* Nobl« Crand cnJla down oilh ddb npO


I


t


Order OF Business


IN


Lodges of the Daughters of Rebekah.


■♦♦■


Nbhle Chrand^ The Secretary will call the roll of
oflScers.

II. — The Secretary will read the proceedings of th^
last meeting.

in. — Reports on applications for Memberships,

IV. — The Degree will be conferred.

V. — Consideration of proposals for membership.

VI. — Report of Sick Committee.

VII. — Reports of Committees by senioriy

VIII. — Unfinished Business.

IX, — New Business.

X. — Good and Welfare.


Chapter xviii.

Lodge or tse DAcaama op Reskeab.


rarriATios.


T hnlac n«aii«4 the l^in u


.Awlife Ottardian. What do roa desire?

CartductoT. To be admitled with a Uly (or
ber of Udi«9) who desires {or desire) to be ii '
thitd«gree.

ITIu lB*Idc OunliiB rcponc thi* lo the Habl* Onad.]

Noble Grand. Admit them.

LC»lllns Uw Lortge up, wlih iwo npe, u Ibey eoler.]
|Bcin^■llm[(Wd. the Oondallai, Hllb the euididju«<<|. i
bands ur (irupunenit if prcpent, tiro hjtwa (tf more ihin aub'
•HmuO th> roam wblle Ibc ode U being anag. and at tbt
Ibc CuBdochir (hall pnMal (hem to tbc Vice Gcud.]


Ibraworit'r


BMeilfe-ipnreiljoTW
Morcj'iMdUnliJeedip


'■FrieodBbtp. Troth, aud Love,"

(hndur.tor. Worthy Vice Grand, I present I
. ^lit'/to )>(]icB, who are desirous of obtaining the


rSPTHTION.

■egea and lienors of a degree that will enable them
more/ttUt/ lo oo-operate in the work of our beloved Or-
der.

[The namben. IncladLng Cbc brolhers iFcompuijuig tbe l*ille>. ar*
itcsted bf Ibe NobJoGOBd, wilb one rap.j

Vice Grand. Ladies, are 70U deairouB to unite in
tbia degree of Odd Fellowship with ihoae who have da-
voted thomeelves through life — in siiuahine and in
atorm — through good or evil report — to visit the aick —
relive tbe distreaHed^bnrythe dead — and protect and
educate the orphan?

Conductor. We are,

[Th« ladiea AlBD boil stBent ]

Vice Grand. Will you devote yonrselves to this
work in our way? Will you silently do good, as good
ought always to be performed; and, in spite of envyings
or calomny, keep your charities and your labors of love
secret from the selfish world? Will you pursue the
thorny pathway that we have trod, where the slanders
of prejudice and bigotry ai^sail on every side, atill doing
good for its own sake — returning kindness for hostility
— and ever striving, quietly and unboastingly, to mitigate
the vast amount of suffering and pain in our world?

Condtictor. We will.

Vice Grand, You must be warned beforo you pro-
ceed. We seek to impose on you no obligation that
in after life you may regret. No reluctant vows are
asked for here. Pause, therefore! for you may not
think — you cOHJiot realize how difficult is the duty you
are, in common with us, about to assume. It in a con-
stant war with selfishness, unaided by even human praise,
for which alone so many toih are undertaken. Our
law is: "When thou doest alms, let not thy left hand
know what thy right hand doelh; that thine alms may
be secret; and thy Father, which seeth in secret, him-
self shall reward thee openly," Behold inthat law the
only recompense you can hope for^ — the only praise to
which you can aspire. We have none other to offer.
Still more: consider the sacrifice implied in that second
great commandment — "Thou shall love thy neighbor as


84S


DAUQHTEBS OVVEBEKAB.


ihyaelf." Yob aie yet free. Pause theo, before
cODKDt to Uke apon yoanelves obtigatioDs that wlL
bind you, as they have bound us before you, to duties
tike these. Pauae and reSect — for it mai/ happen that
yon will be called upon to give up the pleasures of life
to miuiBter at the couch of suffering — you may be so
moned from the whirl of gayely to eland, with br«thi
and with sisters, at a bedside of aitgulsti — you may
»<>ked to forego the pleasures of some social evenil
tiirv^a to watch through the long vigils of night,
fllruggle between life and death, and to poor oil,
possible, into the expiring lamp of life,

Before imparting the secrets of this degree to yott?
it is your duty to take a solemn obligation with us,
both to impress on your mind and conscience the hu-
mane duties of our Order, and to rivet on your
hrance the deep importance of strictly guarding
' tests of the degree.

With this explanation of our object in asking
to pledge to us, and to each other, your word of hont
are you willing to enter into an obligation with us?

Candidates. We are.

[TheVlceOrHDd will then call tbe hnabiindB oipropoeeiaoCUiecandidtilM
rorwBtd. who, with Ibe ludiM, will plate their lighc I
Vhlch will be optn at llio arteeiitb cfiHptor of Ssoilae,
euli •epest Ihe rolloHiog obligation.]

[Tbs Koble Grtbd mUb tbo Lodgo up, with two rapB.'

OBLIGATION.

I, , in the presence of the members of the

Independent Order of Odd Fellowa of Lodge,

No. — ,of the State of , do most solemnly promise

that I will never reveal to any one this degree, or the
password, signs, countersign, and token belonging to
It, and now about to be intrusted to me, except to a
member of this degree, whom I may find, on due trial,
to be equally in possession of them, or when in the di
charge of official duties within the Lodge; and to
due secrecy in this respect, I hereby pledge my saei
word of honor, without any mental reservation ""■
ever, and with a. full determination to pi
I plighted faith inviolate utiu\ \.\ib tui oi Ufe.


ities
that
life ■

i
1

US, ■

hn-

01 em- II

lidaiM ^

%


Vice Grand. Conductor, you will now preaent these
Kaisters to the Noble Grand for the necessary instruo-
\ltiona.

Condtictor. I will, wurLhy Vice (Jraod.

[The Ooiidnctot ah«ll proceed wilh t
D>ll*ndBor porpncern, uoand the roam
I tlte t>d(! iliiil] beennE-1

When eatUt red 'roDDi
Wbich (nvH and duty


Conductor. Nohle Grand, I have .the pleasure of
pruaeutiug to you these ladies, for further instruc on in
(he work of this degree. They have passed honorably
ilirough all our ordeaU, and have pledged to our wor-
tty ^C8 Grand their sacred honornever to reveal the
Biecrets nowabout to be intrusted to their keeping.

ITIi« neuliiira inclnding Ihc hrolhcrs accomiiunying tlicladiee, are scat-
oj iae Hoble Urand, vritn ohb rap.)

Noble Grand. [Standi7ig.~\ Reposing confidence in
Jour plighted faith. I will now proceed to give you
ADob inalruclions as appertain to this degree, and as

ill also enable you to know a brother or sister who

\a received it,

In this degree there is an Alarm at the inner door, a
Permanent Password, a Test or Trial sign for a sister
and answer, a Countersign for recognizing brothers
nnd answer.

f {The Alarm st Ibe Inner door is one rap.)

■ The pEKMANI!:^^T Password of tli
jMIKLAM, to be lettered at all time
lor working purposes: workii
in examination prior to oiienin|
\h,\n word, either to Ihi
Warden, the brother oi

H-I-K-, and if required by the Inside Guardian or Ward-
en, be or she must give the remainder of the word
I-A-M, lettered as before. The Inside Guardian and
V^^rden must be satisfied.


I times when used
into a Lodge, or
In communicating
inside Guardian or to the
sister must give the letters


.tIGBTBBB or 8

Thb Test OB Trial Sign for a sister,

A made by placing the indi^x or fore fin-

r of the right hand, nail outward, perpen-

uicuiarly to the right corner of the mouth;

■ that portion of the fore finger beneath the

nail reEting on the corner indicated, the

other three fingers being closed, with the

J thumb closed over them.

Siynijication. Are you of the Degree
•prKt^hekahf


Thb Answer TO tiikTest oe 'J'kiaj. Sign
is made by closing the last three fingers and
tbumbof the right hand aajust described and
place the fore finger thereof perpendicular-
ly on the chin, resting the end of said finger,
with the nail outward, about the center of


the chin.


The Countekbign for recognizing
brothers, is made by placing the first
three fingers of the right hand, extend-
ed but closely touching each other,
(thumb and little linger concealed) on
a table, a chair or any other object; or
by placing tb^m on a book, recticule,
hankerobief, or other object held iu
the left band.
The Answkk to thb CouNTEBeiGii

s made the same as the Trial Sign \

a Bistei.


Trial Sign^^M


fSTKUCTIONS IN A LODGE OF THE DAUGH-
TERS OF REBEKAtl.

(Tho Moble Gcsni] Iwutog IdstfuctEd In the Bccrol work, will aildrcBS lli
cBDdldataBaeCollDH'a.]

Wishlngto visit nLMau of the Dfliiirhteraiir ReliuHiHi, when open. yM
will RiTB at Iha ontor door two tups, an.f tlis Si^nii-Aiinual Paaswotd ul Ibi


which roil boiong
will Bi»B ■■•-■' —
wUlSeid


If LoclB>- ,


which thnl olD-
I Nnbld annd


littBd to the Lodge-room- when yoii eh,

a sddrBSB tho Noble Grnnri with Ihp To

Mr will reipond hj glrliig ibe anewer to tlia Toat

OaretlHnE, whilo the Lodge is open, yna will i
with Iho Test Sts". " whitti ha will fespaui with

[ThatB 1« no retiring paisword lo be oaad in a I.
Etebekah, or B Sabordinato Lodjce, when open In tl

Led me state tu yon (Iistitit;tl7 and emphatically, thati
that these signs are never to be used merely for pleas-
ure or curiosity. Thpy are intended for useful purpos.
es only; ami though you are at, liberty to practice thera-
in iha securest privacy, with others whura you may
know, OP TOUR ows KNOWLBOGE, to have received thom
legally, you are not allowed to use ihem .it home or a-
broad, without aotoe practical, useful e
times of distress or peril or difficulty, you are not only
at liberty to use them, but are also instructed to do

The Semi-Annual Password of the present term is


(Tobt


^'.]


This word is intended as a test of good
a Lodge of the Daughters of Rebetah, aud is anl-j ta


940


TIACOBTRBS OF ItKBKEXH.


! particiitaT jurisdiO'
§ degree for the preaenifl


be uBcd hy nuuli Ludgen, and j
tion lo wliioli it.belongs,

Tiie Aiiiiiial PftHSfford of Uui
year is

ThiH last word ia intended a,i a further proof test of
membfrHliiji in the degree. Il is therefore changed an-
nually by the Sovereign Graud Lodge, and goss into
ojiDialion on the first of January of each year. Ton
will receive all annual pasawords from the Noble G-ranl
of thu Rebiikah Lodge to which you may be attached,
who alone oan inHtmct. yoa therein. This Annual pass-
word is used Ska a test, thus: After having received some
■ign, whioh would seem to indioate membership in this
degree, you ure at liberty to ask her or him for the
pwaword, and upon being answered, "Coramence your-
wlf," you will coratiienoe with the last letter of the
word. Thia ia replied to by the person you oballengt
with till! ./"■«( letter of the word, and you then respoiU
with the middle or any of the middle letters, to
plied to, "Even so." The password is nsoer to be giv-
en in full under any oircumstancea whatever — neo«r to
be wrlLt.eii — never even to be spoken as a word, except
in giving instructions as in the present case; and eapi
ially no experiments, arc to bo tried with it for the n
sake of oxperraent without some useful or friencl^
ly purpose in view.

The annual password is also to be used in conjai
tion with a card, aa a traveling password, when visiting-"
Lodges of the Daughters of Rebekah in other jurisdic-
tions than the one to which the visitor belongs. The
Noble Grand of the Lodge will communicate or cause t<


lonc^H

giv-
r to
>xcept ^1
sapse^H

siting-^"
isdic-
The
r cause t<^^^


rWlTIATlOS,


be oommunicated to you the annuj
pasBWords of the Rebekali Degree.


If you desire to be recognized by one of your own
lejt, you should give the teat or trial sign, to which the
lady addressed should respond by giving the answer to
jt.

If you desire to be recognized by a gentleman, you
should give the countersign for recognizing a brother,
to which he should respond by giving the teit sign.

The coiintei'sign is not to be used by a brother at all.
A gentleman has no right to challenge a lady under
any circam fiances, but only to respond when he is chal-
lenged, and then St must be with the test sign,

[Tbe Noble (irand mar delivertheFBelKoblsOniQil'iChark-x. Ill t)i<i ll>-
bekab.]

Noble Grand. The Condactor will proceed with the
sister(B) to the chair of the Past Noble Grand, there to
receive the lecture of the Rebekab Degree,

CoTuiuctor. Past Noble Grand, by direction of the
Noble Grand, I present lo you this (op iheKe) itiKtor(H),
who has {or have) been instructed, and i* (or arc) now
prepared to receive the lecture a|)pertaining to Ihii
degree.

Rxet Noble Grand, Our sister(s) will pluane be Heat-
ed fronting this chair.

He who reads the page of Holy Writ inU'tllgontly,
often finds hia memory wandering bacli to thoMO Hkatoll*
ea of the women of the Bible, which uppnar u delS|;{lit-


. potDted out

hf OodkMKef wEbenrMtWfini^vife for Isuc,
fM»(«(th frant-tbaTxleol Hani at tkat bidding, torn-
{>f Wr back spas borne. faaiW, aad Eriaad^ ta travel
l^jaamrjof UfrwUka ctiaagcrof a diataatlaad; aor
|« tkc HoTBBS or Saidos. wfco held discanrae, timlil
yctew&dio^ with tke Angvl Thosesaawia Wonderfol;
ortoH«yw.ui, wbo de<iieaied her firat-bom to tlul
iUutrioB* Mt-vii:!^ of tbe Almigfatj, «bicli has linked
tb« Mine of Samtid Xn all our bngfatest recolleodons of
propbMj ani [>ne«lbood; to Dkbobah, who. aa has been
§0 besutifally laid, in tbat era of her widoirhood, rose.
In tiineB of trouble, like a morning itar over the
of laruri calamities, and at whose word the stars,
ibeir coiir»cii, fmight aginst Sisera; nor lo that
and r)U<enly Ektiiis, who promptly risked station
lifeto obield her people and her race; or to
Wli')*e character is enihrined in the pastoral record
Itears her name, and that has handed down to
furiituile, her affuction, and her piety in a simple narra-
ti*u more thriUiiigly fascinating than the most highly
wrouglil BceneB of fiction. Need we even allude, in
pa««ing, to that heroic and well- remember^ decision
lb("'<l'i'»'L<'J ill her sad but fearless reply to "


ITS, in
selfiak^

rd thaP^


< Naomi. li


INITIiTION.

when 'm spite of the dangers of toil and eiposiire, of
poverty and trial, of frowniug and adverse prospects,
she attested her filial piety in that strain of &s lofty and
impassioned eloquence as ever fell from human lips —
"Entreat me not to leave thee, or lo return from follow-
ing afterthee; for whither thou goest, I will go; and
where thou iodgest, I will lodge; thy people shall be my
people, and thy God my God; where tbou diest, will I
die, and there will I be buried: the Lord do bo to me,
»nd more also, if aught but death parttheo andmc"

Noryet alone would we cite you to the history of
Sarah, emphatically chief among the Mothers of ths
Bible — the ancestress of Israel's hosts — the wife of the
patriarch of patriarchs- atwhose tent the Angels of the
Lord sal down at meat— and who was indeed the most
specially honored of God.

Nor alone to the vestal prophetess, Miriam, the sis-
ter of Moeea and Aaron, who stands forth inferior to
none in whatever makes a true woman memorable in
action or suffering — who in the afflictions of Egypt, id
the triumph of the Red Sea, and in the perils of the
Wilderness, towers resplendent in her xeal and her de-
votion. From the time that at the river's bank she
watched her infant brother's ark, tSiroiigh that long
journey, where quails and manna mysteriously fed the
wandering hosts, and water poured from the flinty rock
to assuage their thirst, till the hour that entombed her
in her sequestered gr^ve, she proved herself a woman in
all that was noble and pure and holy. And it was no un-
meaning song of rejoicing that poured from her lips,
when at the head of the Hebrew women, on the banks
of the rapidly closing Rpd Sea, her clear, loud voice
rang forth in notes of rejoicing and praise to God —


SSO DACaBTK&8 or REBEKAH.

Mauiiil ttic loud timhril o'er BgrpradukH*.
Juliimli tiiui IriamplitKl— liii people are tree.

But, the liisUiry uf Lbfse 3.uA otherB that we migl
name-, wlioia the irie|>ircd penmen felt m»tt bo recorded
to make iheir teBliiriony perfeci — such a record, taken
iti tbo aggregate, is a oubler testimony to womau, a
worthier eulogy of lier ranV and honor than she can find
in the liifltones of thousands of Earth's mightiest — of
Eliaiiibeth, of Cleopatra, of Catharine or Isabella. Such
wedo notcite foryoLir emutalion aud imitation. But
rather the record of those whom the Bible commends —
who signalized their lives, not by bloody victories on
fields of carnage and of death — not by despotic sway
over a nation of millions — -not by the meretricious
charms of beauty — but hy their zeal in doing good — in
vindicating the true modesty and worth of '
natural character— in pouring the oil of consola
to the wonnds of the afflicted — in wispering words (
sympathy in the ears of the heart-stricken.

Such, too, is woman's nohleat work. It is a daty 1
angels might nut, nay do not scorn to perform. Itis U
sphere in which your (or oar) aei has gained its most
unfading laurels. Nobly, right nobly, has she perform-
ed her mission. Poets have sung in glowing numbere ni
of her constancy in hours of trial, of darknfesa, and j~"
peril^ of her labors at the bedside of the sick and j
tlicted — of her patient endurance of life's roughest I
when shared by those she loves. Wherever sorrow^
cry isheard, whereversickness lays its paralyzing hand
--fellow, ladies, the innate sympathies of your nature.
Whorever the hardships of adversity fall the heaviest
upon those about you be ityoura as far as possible to soften
the blow. Wherever misery can be ameliorated or keen
anguish assuaged, remember that you are women; audU


la 0^2
most m

'' "" III


J


rNITIATION. 251

fnrtber promptingatoduty could be iieeded, remember
tb« aDietnn obligation you bave tbis night voluntarily
takeD, and write upon the tablet of your hearts tb.U
Oolden Rule — "WhatBoever ye would ibat others
should do unto you, do ye even so uuto tliem."

While we shall expect the prompt and cheerful per-
formance of these duties by those now afGliated with
our Order as you are, we pledge to you duty in return.
The benefits of our Order are not confined to our own
members, nor to time, place, or circumstance. Iia
pleasant associations greet us Hiuilingly when in the eu
joymentof health and prosperity, its ministrations cheer
us when the band of sickness and disease is laid upon
ns, and when death, the fell destroyer, tears asunder
the dearest ties of love, its highest excellence is mani-
fested.

We aeelt tp clrr Oie ¥.iilow"s gusliiog iMrn.
We aeiak tut^F^rin tbe trbmblmg orpbAu'b tenep.

And vhea Ihe Imla 1b lold, anil man resigns tiis Itust.

But we need not add more. We have alluded to
some of the duties enjoined by Odd Fellowship, It is
Strang* in a cold, calculating world like ours, where so
many walk through life with ears hermetically sealed
against the calls of humanity, encased in a frozen garb
that repulses all approach — petrifying what little heart
and Boul tbey own — we say it is odd, to t;ee a society
like ours, banded together for the benevolent duties we
have bound ourselves to perform. Hence we are Odd
Follows. To-night you have entered with us into a
closer bond than ever before — you have assumed a part
of our obligations — you are become of us and with us.
Learn then, 'n conclusion, that to rectify, to correct this
beaeltingBiQ of selfishness is one of the highest aims


aaddbjffuU' t£ our OnW. Il ':eiicbda oa tbat I
in hue one fainilv — titt wbtilu imman rii>;e^-~«od tb«C i
ara aent hers iii^reUt^r — the muh ami the poor —
bangficy xniL cli« hamlife — aat luenabcrei^ <if ibeB
b«t w jihnren it eaah nthers bitrtltfos. Jt la
that, vtbuTWKX wa huur :tie ai^ of mmw, the moaa of
the bestvfiFaiUn. die sopeai a{ t&e iIcstiGaLe, or th«
vaUiif Lhtt mtst-nbls. wi± abiiulii be i^aitik is oor minifi-
tniioam 'if iiiiirt:T, oat ptUHtu^ bTon the och«r side, bat
-flying tn relLeTF It teaches oa dial wa are lent her« Ui
labor for .^mr fgIlo*-mea, for ooe igis for »ar cuantiy.
:, wb«D we «ball have pu<tetl amr into the stern
tea of the Hereafter, we aay leare behind us a
k; Eionore'i 3D>I beloTed -for tb« good ve liave
iC to acu>inpliah^ — for the happiness we bare striv-
o enaie — for the mUenr we have labored to ameli-
—It history more vsloable in ihe sight of Hiia m-
beve than th»t of tliieftaiii. Wwrior, or Sage.

Teaching «nch lessons within ita walls — built on these
itniniiMble comer-sloo«s. Friendship, Love and Truth,
the miglily fabric of Odd Fellowship reara its sutely
form toward the skies; and though the gtorm<; ot oppo-
•ition may beat aronnd its base, and the •urges of prej-
udice Ktrivu to engulf it in the billows that they hurl
upon il, iUt BUlely and majestic form will still remain
nnhaniied amid the contending tempests, and crumble
int^i atoms only when the Earth upon which it statu
yielil* in the wreck of matter and the crash of worl^
There it will stand

A( K'miE lull cllfl tb»l Ufls lie mlgbty torm,
HwelLjt (roin Ihe v»lc. nnd mlilwii leaves the «to
TbinKb ronofl Iti hrcOBl the rolling <:lDoa« msj
Rwrnsl imnnlilne H«(lie« on iu hoaii.

pMtNobh Grmd. [To the ladits.'] You will i


INITIiTIOX,


Tlie Conductor will present tbe lailie
Noble Grand tor final instruction in this lodge


Conductor. Noble Grand, I now present to you
these Biatera, wlio liave just listened to the beautiful
teachings of our ritual, and now await the concluding
tnBtruGtioiiB in this lodge.

Noble Grand. Ladies, having entered within our
laored circle and assumed with na obligations like those

e have spoken of, it now becomes my duty in the olos-

g ceremony of your initiation to confer on you the
badge appropriate to this lodge. It is a pink and
^een ribbon, emblematic of steaSfast Friendship and
Btemal Love, twisted or intertwined together like this;
md this combination of colors may be thus worn,
irhenever you see fit to do so, as a bow, a collar, a
bracelet, or on any part of the dress as a trimtaing. When

»u see this combination you may prove the wearer as

ts been stated to yoti.

[Bere Jlvii Ihe emblcniB nad 6iEniflc»tionB.]


NriliL On


You will now

: 111II urfvioue la front <rf the chiiiot the
lili a badge or collar ol pluk and green

Simur , receive this collar as the Token of

the Daaditerfl of Rebekah lodge, to which iu the name
and by the authority of the Independent Order of Odd
Fellowa, I nowdeoUrayou admitted. Faithful to your
own obligations, you will ever find us faithful to ours.
Fail not — falter not — weary not in well-doins
■-. iR»^.,i„ tjirfm.. n( th,- n,„.»i„„,. „f B.....tai, (loae^ ^i,g» u,, i,n*ui£«i


Chapter XlX-

Lodge of the Daughters of Reiibkah.

closing ceeem okies.

Jfoble Grand. [Sia/idtJiff,] Officers and Merabera,

our buBineas being concluded, you will [jlease be stand-

ing and assist in the performance of the closing cere-

moDies. [Two raps, all rise. J

CLOSING ODE.
ODod nlfbt! • trutbtnl. bind sdlea;


Audio


IT Order'


nglii Siirtiln.

AiieLul Good nlfhlT GondnlgbU

iToble Grand. Our worthy Chaplain will please per-
form the duties of his office. [Chaplain prava.]

[ThafoUowiaeinayheoiied J

Almighty Father, we pray thee to bless whalevtr uf
good we have accompHfihed at this time, and foryive
what we have done amiss. We now commend our-
selves to Thy care and protection. The Lord bless us,
and keep ua. The Lord lift up his fatherly countenance
upon us, and give us peace now and eVL'rmore. Ambn.

JVbi/e Grand. Warden, you will please declare this
Lodge of the Daughters of fiebekab, cio&ed.

Warden. By order of the KoWe Grand, I declare
this Lodge of the Daughters of Kebekah. closed.

N(>f>le Grand. Officers and members, ao be it.

Memberi. So be it-


ANALYSIS REBEKAH DEGREE.


ji OrEBDited Tcmplstlan— MallT


be Tonured VtrglD at the


Oracle o


e Ac


owjhlp — Comp»ri


e LodecB— Tbe Acltngwledeed Re»l Design o( ctta


f HuoBrr— Boi


cb TemplE


a HOOM of Spl


Itail Cor


nipMon. s[ LtMt


It is difficult to analyze thia degree without indigKa-
tion and disgust. It is a degree which is not a degree,
but an excrescence. It inducts women into a secret or-
der, intended and named only for men (see p. 236), and
kept to its masculine gender from its origin to the jasx
of grace 1851. It is a woman's degree, practiced in the
sight, in which men, known and unknown to the initi-
ates, may be a majority of ten to one (see note, p. 23S),
(rbile women, as before, are excluded trom the Order it-
jelf; and, while the degree itself is an organized tempta-
tion, by its formal and flimsy guards against pollution
it suggests the verj' evil against which it affects i'i
piard.

With the customary formalities of an oath, with hov
right hand on the Bible fp. 244), the deluded woman is;
dedged to conceal — not, indeed, the secrets of Odd-fel-
Dwabip, of which she is permitted to know uothia^..


S58 HSA8oir9 rciR Tttis ueokee — X aiSAKTio swonuA.

t to cODcenl the secrets of her single degree; and she

III Rohrmnly enjoined to see that her hosbaod is ponctiul

1 pnyiug hia "dues," aa her standing in this outside

i: tivimnia on his punctual pajrmenta within. {Pp.

1^6, i47.J

The motives which caused the adoption of this de-

' gTP.e, Mtattid liy Mr. Colfax himself, are the foilovriag:

1. " It will tend to XQcreane the resoorces of the SuV

onliiute Lodges, " and "to indace them (members) to

, proRress upward in the Order"; i. t., pay for-more de-

'grees.

S. Save th« trouble of " wives' and widows' cards,"

8. " Leaima and ultimately destroy the prejudice felt

■gfunnt the Order by many of the fairer ses," which

** prevents accessions of members." (Pp. 333,234.) In

K word, we shall get more money hy it.

Thru summary of selfish, money-making motives, re-
member, is given by the inventor of the degree. They
were the motives by which he carried it. And when
e remember that ttie Grand Lodge statistics show that
ibe Order receives three dallarninduestoone paid back
a benefits — taking these avowed motives and this pub-
linhed practice together the Order must, on its own
authority, be regarded as a gigantic swindle. And
nothing but the wide reputation of Mr. Colfax, and
the Huccess and popularity of the imposition, pre-
vents its being handled by the law like mock-auctions,
lotteries, and other swindling practices. And the ben-
efits, fiiich as they are, being paid indiscriminately to
rich and poor, proves ita perpetually re])eated boaat of
being " a ministry of love," " drying the widows' tears,"
etc. etc., to be bald hypocrisy and wicked pretense.
All this in a world. vslaCTe,tiQa\ w«xia\!V\aa. ia so com-


WOUAJS miDER FALSE BELIfllONS. 2S9

tnoD, Trould not justify a natioual appeal against it,
were not this secret order, like the others, a false relig-
ion, aa is shown abundantly in the Analyses of the Order
proper. Even the poor Rebekah-ite, after being be-
idrabbled through her weak decree, is told that she is
now " within our sacbed ciecle," and receives a pink
■nd green ribbon as an " emblem of eternal lote."{ !)
(Seep. 254.) The Bible is quoted abundantly to make
the farce solemn, and the most fulsome adulation of
woman, merely as a sex, is poured into the ears of the
initiate throughout the lecture of the degree. Who-
ever reads and ponders the degree itself will see that its
wicked and hateful nature is not and cannot be over-
stated.

The Philippian damsel who "brought her masters much
min by soothsaying" (Acts 16: 16), is a type of the
condition of women in all false religions, ancient and
modern.

A missionary of the A. B. C. F. M. informed the
writer that no females were educated by the pagans in
hia part of Asia but a few brilliant and beautiful girls
for the uses of the temple and companionship of the
priests. Two thousand such were kept in the single
Temple of Diana at Ephesus, which was 220 years in
bnilding, at the expense of all Asia Minor. The priests
were pimps and panderers to the prostitution of these
anfortunates, and gained untold wealth by renting their
persona. The poor Pythian damsel at Delphi was placed
npon a tripod over the exhilarating gaa, when " she
immediately began to swell and foam at the mouth,
tearing her hair and cutting her flesh." Her masters
took her ravings, while in this state, for oracles, and
interpreted them for money. Such are some of tha


260 A LOIXrC DEBAUCH.

Greek " Mysteries" from n^.v'i Masonic and Odd-fel
lowahip writers boast their o",d?r3 descended! AuJ
women in Freemasons' and Odd-fellows' side-lodgea are
Bfl near the condition of women in the old lodgea of
paganism as a Christian country will allow. They on^
under " masters." Every lodge of females was fiuallj
obliged to be adopted by, and iinderthe guardianship ofi
e regular Masonic lodge (Mackey's Lexicon, ji>. 33);
lad " a banquet and a ball," says Clavel, " are losepara-
e from a lodge of adoption, and are, in fact, the real
(Resign of its organization." (Lexicon, p. S6.) I passed
Etbrough the Masonic Temple, Boston, on the morning
fter such a pagan debauch, while the vast dining halls
' and unrcmoved tables were in the condition in which
the night revel had left them. The Boston Journal,
next morning, in four solid columns, informed its lead-
s that there were women of Boston and vicinity who
meed with strange men fi'om all parts of the country
J 4 o'clock in the morning, — their secret worships
liaring closed at ten. Every such " temple,'* as were
those of old, is a spiritual, and doubtless algo ■ literal
Siothel.


CHAPTER XX.

Retised Odd-felloivship Illubthated.

bxcbetb of the lodge, shcampmknt and ketiekah degbes3.

In the Subordinate Lodge the Entehsion consists

of one rap, or one pull at the bell if there be onu, at

the outer door, and three raps at the inner door.

THE CODSTEKSIGN

Lai three motions: First, with the thumb of the
righthandinthe
palm thereof,
place the four
fingers perpen-
dicularly across
the mouth, the
back of the hand
outward. Sec-
ond, place the
last three fingers
upon the thumb
in the palm of
the band, the in-
dex or fore fin-
ger being extended; carry it to the outer corner of the
right eye, the back of the hand being outward, forming
a right angle with the noae. Third, let the hand drop
toward the pound and open , palm outward, the thumb
nearly parallel with the fingers and the hand about six
mches nrom the body.


863 IMITIATOBT GRIP AND SIGIT OF DISTKBM.

Explanation of the Countersign- — The I'mt notii
uigDifiea silencs, and reminds us that we are boand
keep inviglate the secrets of the Order. The second
motion eignifiea omniscience, and reminds ue that the
all-seeing eve of God is continually watching over oar
aottons. The third motion signifies fraternity, and re-
mindit us that the hand of an Odd-fetlow should always
be open to a brother.

GBIP.

With the first two fingers
of the right hand seize and
link with the first two fin-
gers of the brother's right
hand; with the thumb (your
own) touch each of the two-
fingers (your ownl and thus form the link. No abak-
itig bauds in malting the grip.

SIGN OF DIHTBSBS.

l>lace the open right hand, palm downward, on the top
of the bead, raise the hand upward about nine inches,
droptbo band to
\-^j VTl the head^tbisdo

^ -^ ^^*-^ — gtliree times; the

/hand after be-
placed on
the head ia to
be raised and
replaced on
the head three
timea; then
drop the hand

_ _ to the side.

"3,t;™r'.-EJt.»d tieSS'. at .rm'. length offtrom
ll.e Bides and »t right angle, to the body, palmB ontw.rf;
loment .nd drop the hands to the Bid- ft...


L is not


rej.e


MGS OF rkcogSitiox akd no50BB. S8S

^Bxplaruilirm — The Sign of Distress given infirraaiirfii
t a lirolber at a distance that a brother of tlic (Jrder in
I want of aasislauce. The answir U giveu by a, bruUicr
■bo shall observe and recognize iJie Sign a«it] dcnutei n
;adine88 to give the requisite assistance. Wb«n tliia
ign cannot be observed the brother in distrfiMi uay iioe
lu vor&i" Give ear, Oye HvaneiixP' which wurdN muat
li pronounced iu full and not Ibe initiali< tb^rt^jf.

THK SIGHT OF BBCOIiiriTIOM.

Fint — When a brother eball de«ire Lo be recoguiuMi
an Odd-feliow by a m«nil>iT <ff
: Order, be shall ;^i>b with hli
bt hand the l^>e] ol hi)


■ 11..-


lh<' hand being |jlac«d <
rigbtiiipt,k. ■ ■ ■

hold Ji ti,". ■ '!.'■;

wiibhi-i. I-

aU.. i-U-'-i ■ |.|.'.,

tljiinil.f..i . . .,*(

TI,ir.l—\Si.-.^ .,!..*

made tile hi ^ •i^tli ulfA^tvi tbi'
answer be •ball a/lvanov iu Uli>
[terMD ni«kiitx tb« anawttt «iii>i
txtend to him hit right band, whicj) tJw pt^rnon iU itv
Odd-fellow) Khali acM{it auxl abalu witb )ii« rlKlii
band and at the samv time ihall atk, Ar>- y^u I'^trkiiiu Urf
neV when the olber »hall rt^p'/ud, l'''/t yi't.
If either of thebrotbers «h'juld bf allli'- Uhi« i0\liir»*
coat he sliall plac« his baud "» bit jf^rr'/n in lli« M'Mf
)08ition, the chatlengiu^ brvtJi>:r witk hia fiiJt(*M ImimoiJ
inder, the brother answrriog with bin Ibutwb «'/ft«w«l«'l
n the palm of biB band.
Voting Sign — Tbe ri^t baud upiiftvd.


.Uir, rAMWuUt, SIGIt, AKSWSBA2ID)tMMEa,-C.

liiZES or FBIEITDSHIP.

Tbs A1.AKM at th« inner door is three raps.

The Passwukd is QUIVEB to be lettered at all times
wh«n nu.-4 for working porposes, working into a lodge
or in examination prior to opening. In com muni eating
tbU wbrd,<^it]ierto tlieloaid^ Goardianor to the Warden
the brollier niUHl gire the ItlWru Q-U-I, and if required
hy the Inside Gnardtan or Warden, he must give the re-
mainder of the word V-E-R — lettered as before. The In-
i^ide Guardian and Warden must be satisfied.

SIGS. DEGBKB OF FRIBNDSHIP.

Tbe Sign is made as follows— extend the
fingers of the right haDd',place tbe ihnmb
inside of, and parallel with, tbe first fin-
ger; carry tbe band to tbe brow, with tbe
thumb resting on the left temple; draw a
Hue across tbe forehead (fingers touching)
uutil tbe end of tbe thumb reaches the
right temple describing a bow, then drop
the band.

ANSWEB, DEGBEE OF rBISHtt-
6EIIP.

Grasp the root of tbe left
ear with the fore finger and
til limb of the right band, fin-


THE MKMBSTO

Is a bundle of Bticks, to
reijresent tbe strength of
union; united cannot be
broken; a single stick to rep-
resent that separated each
may be easily brokei:,


WABSING BIIJH, SlUN OF SiPKTY


WAfiNISG SIGN.

Close the fingers of each hand, with the
Ihuixib in front of the first finger; plauo
feachelbowby the side of the body; extend
each arm and closed hand horizontally.


SIGN OF SAFETY.

The hands and arms being in the same
position as in the Warning Sign, extend
the index finger of the right hand, -with
which point to and jnat touch the second
or knuckle joint of the thumb of the lel't
hand.

SIGN OF DANGKE.

Elbows same as before de-
scribed, place the wrist of tlif
right hand on the second or
knuckle joint of the thumb of

.afciy. 1'^'' 1"^^* hand; extend the index

Lnd point towards the ground,

rBIP, DEOKBB OF FKLESTDSHIP

Form a link w

the thumbs of the

right hand; clasp <

hands, enclosing it,

"""'^ (Link of thumbs.)

ToKEM — The rainbow.


Clasp Ibe right taDds i
the tiimnba pressing the third
i>r knnckle joint of the sueond
Sngcr. No shaldag hands in
making the Grip.


Degree of Tbdth.

Pahkwobd — The Password ie AARON to be lettered

,'tt iill times when used for working pnrposes; working

into a lodgo or in examination pri'.ir t'l opening. Tn nom-

/ijwnioalirig ibis word e\i.\ier Wt i]t<s "VosiAa Guardian or


TRUTH WOBKINQ SIGN, AN&WEB * FBIKCIFAL SIGN. S67

to tlie Warilen the brother must give the letters A-A
and if required by ilie Insidu Guardian or Warden he
must give the remainder of the word, R-O-N, lettered
as before. The Inside Guardian and Warden miisl be
satis lied.


WOEKING SIGN, DEGREE OF TRUTH.

The sign is-made as followa: Close the
right hand except the index finger which
is extended, tliumb over fingers; press the
centre of the forehead with tlie point of
the index finger.


Place the 0|>f n rightham
the mouth, the fingers to conform to the faci
looking the brother addressing earnestly ii
tlie faee.
Meplanation. — Tliink before you speak.


PRINCIPAL SIGN, DEGREE OF TliVTIT.

Place the thnmh of the right hand on
the right nipple; using it as a pivot, make
a ppan dov.-n with the little finger, then
make a span across the breast with the
forefinger.


t^Gc^


la tbttaaumfnemtOtK Alarm M tWn
JBotcnagB, 11 f W9 npf;

Paword or Patsuichal Diaai, ADAM (A-I
A'H): tj) tw dindcd at aH thaea -mhea med for woAmg
parp«M»i when ia an Bicsmpmeot. or is <

prif/T U> opfniing, in cjmiaiaaeaiiag the Piaiiiijijji
liiiide Bentiael or to the Joaior Warden. '

CHECK MBS, PATBIASCHAI.


J

king
ttion


Plac« the right hand,
open, on the left breast,
thamb parallel with the
fingers; witbclraw the
hand and extend it near-
ly to a line off from the
Bide, palm outw&rd and
the thumb parallel with
the fingers; let the arm
drop to the side. The
Answer is the same with
the left hand.


[f INK GRIP, rATltrATifllAI. HEGREK.
SION, PATRIARCHAL RKGUEE.


Place the fingers of Hie riglit hand in
md across the left huntl, palm upwiivd;
grasp the fingers of ihe right hand wiih
Ite last three fingers of the left hand;
elevate the two thumbs .ind the index

iger of the left hand so as to form three
pillars. The Answer is the same as the


Sign.


GRIP, PATRIARCHAL DEGREE.

Grasp the fingers of the
Patriarch's right hand witL
your right hand; press (lie
same with the thumb,
the fingers below the knuckle
Joint No shaking hands in making the Grip.
Golden Rule Degree.
Teb Alarm at the inner door ia two raps.
The Pabsworji is A. M., to be lettered at all times
■when used for working ' purposes, whether in an En-
eampment or in examination prior to opening. The
Explanation of the Password ia Gold a Metal, given
a full, but not used for working purposes.
The Check Sign and Answer are made tb" same aa
a the Fatriarchal Degree.


which must


HtnS A^tD IRJP, nOtOSS SVLZ


EtDLDBX fUnx


Prpsa ihe elbow of th« right arm to iBe
isiile, close the rigbt Iud'), thamb utut
fingers; extend the index fin^r; wiuMi
extended raise the arm from the elbow in
a perpendicular direction; drop the arm
in front, the index Soger pointiog to tb^
ground. The Answer is the
Sign.


GBtP, OOLDKN BULK DB6RBR.


~^


With the index finger of the right hand form a link
atthesecond joint, and with
the ball of the thumb press
the back of the Index finger
of the Patriarch forming the

ik with yon, between the knuckle and second joint.

flhakiiig handa in making the Grip.


ROTAL PUBFLE DeGBES.


4


tn this degree there is an Alarm at the
■ Sntsrsign, a Password, an Explanation of the Password,
nnd Interpretation of the Password, a Check Sign and

Anfwor to the Check Sign and a Grip.

^ r«K A LAUM at the iimer dooT Va Vbo xb^.


The Passwokd is M. K., to be lettered at. all times
when iisod for working purposes; working into an En-
campment or in examination prior to opening. In com-
municnting this password eitber to the Inside Sentinel
or Junior Warden, the Patriarch must give the letter M,
and if required by the Inside Sentinel or Junior Warden
he must give the remaining letter K. The Inside Sen-
tinel and Junior Warden mnet be satisfied. The Ex-
planation of the Password is K. S, The Interpretation
is Melchizedek, King of Salem, both given in full, bnt
not used for working purposes.

The Check Sign and Answer are made the same as in
the former Encampment degrees.

SIGN, ROYAI. PURFI.E DEGKEE.

Conceal the last two fingers of the right
\ band in the palm thereof; place the first two
fingers and thumb together, ends touching,
nnd with them trace a line from the leftside
of the brow to the centre of the forehead;
then drop the hand to the side.

Answer. — With the left hand arranged as
In Sign, trace a similar line from the right
side of the brow to the centre of the fore-
j head, then drop the hand to the side.

PurpiD Dfkiee.

GRIP, BOYAI. PUEPLE DEGREE.

Each Patriarch will grasp
lie index finger of the oth-
er's right band, with the
ball of the thumb across the
knuckle joint on the bac'i if
be band. No shaking handy in making the Qri\.


2T2


DAUOBTKBS OF BBUSKAH.


TiiK Test ob Trial Sign for a siBter,
is made by placing the index or fore fin-
ger of the right hand, nail outward, perpen-
dioiilarly to the right corner of the month;
that portion of the fore finger beneath the
nail reatiDg on the comer indicated, the
other three fingers being closed, with the
thuDib closed over them.

Si</n\/ication. Ar» you of the Degree
or Rebekah?


Tns Answer TO THE Test ob Tblu. Siof

is made by closing the last three fingers i
thumb of the right hand as just described and
place the fore finger thereof perpendicular.
ly on the chin, resting the end of said fingeu^
with the nail outward, about the center i]
=,the chin.

The Cotjntebsign for recognizing
brothers, is made by placing the first
three fingers of the right hand, extend-
ed but closely touching each other,
{thumb and little linger concealed) on
a table, a chair or any other object; or
by placing them on a book, recticule,
hankerchief, or other ■


nd


the left hand.
The Answkk ■


■ object 1

R CoUNTEBIld


lade the same as the Trial Sign 1


PATBIARCHS MiLIMT iLLnSTEATED.

The Complete Ritual

Ittlth Eightcsa jllUtui Qlagi&ms

AB ASOFTEII ASS FBOHUIGATEI) BY TEE

Sovereign Grand Lodge

OF THB

MmiM Mw Of Oi-Felliws,

At Baltimore, Maryland, Sept, 24th, 1885,

CoupiLED iKQ Arransed 8y Joun C. Uhderwoou, Lieutehakt GEmski,
Unwritten or Secret Work Added,


HISTORICAL SKETCH AND INTRODUCTION

By Pres't. J. Blanohard of Wlieiitoo College.


A A. COOK, FOBLIsnEB,


ADOPTION OP THIB EITIIAL.


S7S ^M


1 This Rilunl. and the Forroe a


nd CcremonicB nnnpiad


r»r th. ■


vow ut the BovEteign Grand Lodge'


t the IndependenlQfdet


uroddFuiloom ^H


Bl Iho city of Balllraoro, Id (he 8UW uf Maryland, od LLd IMth d»i ot Septem. ^H


ber, 1885. aod ot tlM Otder tHe «lWy


seventh year.


qjTteM ctr lAe BoBenrlgn Grana Lodgi.


nENBT5'.QAHKT,.,Qrand9[rB.


HIT. .1. W. VKNABLE


.a. cbtpiio.


J01INaWHlTE..:.Dep,aaire.
THBO. A.ROSS Q.^ecrelary.


JOHN T.JAKES


J, R-EABWRLL


Q.'Quanliao.


ISAAOA.SUBPPARD..G. Trcu.


K. a.WHITNBY


ALLEN JBNCRB8. -Asfl. B. Si^c.


OLIVER J, 8BMMBS, Alabama.


Q. W. TRIMBLE


isssr


WM.H HOMER ...^ -


HENRY CABLE


M. T. HKKZOO ...Aiiiona.


CHAS, D. LOOAS....


SAH'L. W. UALLORY.ArkaaaaB.


.'Montana.


J^HNN!'S'Vii.SON::Camr«,la.


w.K C0BT18. ..'..':;


J.T.HEDBICK


H.T.DORRANCK .... '■


GEO, HENNINO


iBerada.


ALBBRT E. QIPSOK.. Colorado.
cnA8.K. WALDO... . "


A-M.McCABE


N. Bunp'n,


JAS.W,ODLlN.... .


LUCIDSP.DEMINO..


wM-a^iszABD.;.::


N. JBtaey.


A.K.CLOUQU Dakota.


JA9.S.KIQBR


RALFHS.BRIGGB...


, Now York.


tt. W. COOPBR .. ..Delawue


JSO. J. GALLAGHBB. -


jno.e.'woodardV.


".N. CujJlIn*.


J. THOMAS FBTTY-Dist. Colnm.


J.F.PAYNE


H.D.BRAINARD...


.Ohio.


CHAB.C.PKAHCB..morida.


HENRY C. HEDGES.'.


CDAS. H. DOKSKTT-GeorgJa.


CL. T.CAMPBELL...


lOnlMfo.


JOffNB. GOODWIN- "


JAMES WOODYATT.


MONTIB B. QWINV-ldaha,


iOregoD.


AUG. W. BERGGBKN.UllnoiB.


t'o."barker :


ALF.ORENDORFF.... "


FRANCIS M.BBA...


H.McCOY Indiana,


S.P. OTLEB ■'


H. A. JACKSON


'tti..™.


J. YAM VALKENBURG-Iowa.


GILD.F. ROBBINS...


GBOHGE WHIPPLE "


LESTER S.HILL ...


JOHN HEBSB MANN


'.S. Caroltaa.


Isaac SHARP...."!.'.'."! ""


RUDOLPH WEBER. .


.SwitierlftDd.


J. C. UNDERWOOD.. ..Kentucky.


WM.W.M0RKI9


WM.' A.* BARRY .'.'.".'.


JACOBHOTH LooIaUns.


W. K-MAKEMSON...


'.Texae.


KOBEET HOCKIN.. L. P.. B.N.A.


C R. GIBSON


'.Vlab.


SDW. W. CONANT:.".Ha1na


J. a. CROCKETT.... "


H.M.CUBJIIER ....


CD, ANDEKSON.. .Manitoba.


J.\S.B.BCiNKS....


-VlrgliiU.


WH. H. RUBY Maryland.


JOHNM. JONB8-- "


JOHN M. SWAN....'


".Waililngton.


HENRY K. BHALSY.Mas..


W.G.ALBAN


SAHUBL COCHRAN


J.T.HOKE


.■.;w. viijlnU.


LAW. N. BURKE... Michigan.


PHINEASGANO...


HARRISON SODLE. ■


•v'S.'sS^Tt:.:


.'.'.WlMonain.


CCHUED Minueeota.


WALTEEG. DTE..


W. L. KUYKBNDALl


:,*:WjDialDg.


IBAACT.aABT....lUulMlppl.


^^^H


!i8 BltPRFSKSTATrVKg OF GBAim ESCAICPVESTA.


mt. A- mtELDS... Alsbnni

j.n. rRiEDueiK-.-AttuM

cnA.1. II ltA:«DALL ClUifon


Zi:(A I{1C1(8Y Dakoli.

E0W1S HIRST..., PelJiwun


. ... S(.-|lt(,TIEl..
BD ft. niKTER .
W II. JACKS .


R II KELHBT

C. C. FliKLKV

WM. RKINECKB Kestarky.


ilENRV P- COX


JOIIN B. 1

C. N ALEXANDEK...Kiu«.
JOHN IT, I-BRKINS ... ■'
HIHKON S. KRENClf-.SlchigBii.
ALFRED MILNES ....


TDOHAti RILEY...,


ENOCH J.\(«B! .

WM. 1 (ORSWKLL...


JOSEPH f.l.lVER-
FRASCESHAK....

J.P. bACREXSTO, Olceni.

M, R. MLCKLR PemHjI'i


LI5D AVDERSQX Bhode Is'd.

WM,a JOHSSON.

A O- M.tGRATH,jB,....8 CBTolloa.

MARCUS JOKES TConecBec.

FRED CARLBTON. Texas.

LEU. J.RBTTCra VennoBt.

A.L.HILL Vlfginl.

J. T. BROWN WMbing

JACOBMORRIS,

P. ViH VBCHTBN, Jb.
CHA3. L DERIHQ,.. ..
LOUIS HILLBB,


iblDE'n


Pait anaid Bfref if l?it Smirre^^n Grand Lodge.


HILTON J, UURHAM..


COMMITTEE ON REVISION.
John H. Albin, P- G. M., New Hampshire.
.Tno. C. Undkrwodo, p. 0. M., Kentucky.
Edward A. Stevemb, P. G. M., Minnesota.


NEW COMMITTEE.
John H. Aj,bin, p. G. M., New Hampshire.
Jonn U. Prrkinb, P. G- M.. MassaeiiusettB.
■dWjLBD a, Stevess, p. G.TA..,^\an.«MA*.


RESOLIfflON RAISING COMIITTEE OF REVISION, ETR


mpsh

on the Patriarclml Branch of the Order, made the follow-
ing report, which was adopted.

To the Sovereign 6fand Lodge of the I/td^endent
Order ((f Odd J'ellotos .-

Your committee, to whom was referred the resolution
of Bep. Furley, of Kansas, relating to additional legisla-
tion for tJie government of Uniformed Degree Camps,
and also that changes be made in the secret working of
the degree, ao that the same may be made more effec-
tive and interesting to the candidate, beg leave to report
that a large number of memorials, petitions, and resolu-
tions, coming from very many juris diction a, have been
presented at this session and referred to your committee,
relating in various ways to legislation for the degree,
as well as for the government of the Camps themsplvea,
thereby showing an imperative demand for a degree and
the necessary legislation for the government and the
successful working of the various Camps instituted in
accordance therewith, that shall meet with the demands
and necessities of the fraternity at large.

The session of this Grand Ivodge is too short, and the
work committed to its committee ia too large, to enable
us to give BO important a matter the careful considera-
tJOQ and attention that it deserves, either at this or any
Other session.

We believe that, in order to make the degree what
it ehonld be, and to give itthat position and importance
by way of legislation for its government, which the large
membership demands, the whole subject-matter should
be referred to a committee of three, with instruoUons to
what the demands of the fraternity require, aa


I tHee be ifoomted by
s to give the tTiiif ormed
Degvecv bI all vf &e lift.wliliiw hmtftocc adopted in
telattOB i&s«t0, ^Bi^d iiiiiMJiTi iilJiiii. aaoeiuin irhat
ntev and legisla-
i the degree aa
ctiTeaep«Blr)e,ai>d report tbe same
B of tbb waad Boil; for its considers-

RespectfaH; nlnitted,

A a. ALBCt. B. T, BOBSaSCX, FBAXCI9 JKWKIT,

A. J, WWDaTBT, U. O. BUCHEKT. ■. CWABRT,

MBS BSiOKKAirS. EAAC F. CI.AKK.

The Chair named u the coounhtee:

Repg. Albin, of Nev HampeluTe; Underwood, of
KentDckv; Stereos, of Slinoesota.

(Proceedings of the Sov. Grand Lodge, L. O. O. F_
MaaioD at MioneapoUsiUiaiL, September 1884. Jim
9378, 9813.)


THE PATRIARCHS MILITANT DEGREE.,

HiBTOBICAL AND InTKODUCTOBY.


This is a new degree in Odd-fellowsbip. It is an ii
portant event, at least to the five or six hundred tl
Band Odd-fellows; and to all thoughtful Americans who
concern tliemaelvea about the destiny of the United
States and that of the world as affected by our destiny,

I propose to consider: 1st. The History. £nd. Mo-
tives. Srd. Nature, and 4th. Relations of this degi'ee.

The history of Odd-fellowship as given in "Revised
Odd-fellowship Illustrated* Chapter I, (from Standard
writers; particularly from Qrosk) with the ritual, now
osed in many Odd-fellow lodges, and the accompanying
notes from their highest standard authorities put th^
whole system of Odd-fellowship; its origin, nature ;
history, under a shower of sunbeams.

The order thus (Revised Odd-fellowship pp. 21-30j
appears to have sprung up from old English olubs i
immemorial usage, such as still exist in the back Btreet|
and blind alleys of London. There amid beei'-n
dirty dealboard tables, the poorer class of mechai

•SCTSiiil mantbi before tbcLodgee and EDcampmenU ot tbe Order ._
neelvedUialr"OftorffeBi»*«" trom the Sovereign Grand Lodge, the iiublialier
Bita A. Cook hna made a contract foe copies of the Charge Book i — '"- ■■■-
"QDWrltlen work" added, bo Lodeei and Encampmeata Inslead o
(he Sovereiga Grand Lodge S«.GO (or the Lodge and ViX for the. ._..

.. 7. ..._.... ...._.. ---eorelWurk tn,uow get Ih.- eiaol

L the unwrlUpn vrnik added aoAm
LU clotU bitidiug, ■


tow ORletN OF TH£ OSOEB.

and tlieir wives, even with babes at thoirbosatnai (El
have seen them) sit and drink, and listen to such songa J


e Jolly b'


'e ot good tellon:


From this low origin has sprung the whole secret 1
lodge system. WitnesB the four old masonic lodges in
four little Inns in London viz: " The Gooee and Grid- '
iron, " Crown and Anc/tor,'" "Rummer and Grapes;"
and "Api»lL'tree Tavern" in 1717. These four formed
tiho first Grand Lodge. Satan, "the god of this world,"
kindles the fires of false religion al the bottom of the
human grate. Ninety five years after these low Inn
Clubs formed the first devil worshiping Grand Lodge in
London , the same sort of drinklng-ulubs formed the first
Odd-fellows Lodge in Manchester, England. The name
they chose, Odd-fellows, shows their vulgar and rowdy
origin. This was in 1612; only seven years later, (1619)
nios. Wildey, inoculated the United States, with this
peligious epidemic, in a Baltimore tavern and it spread
like small pox. Wildey's substitute for Christianity
was "to improve and elevate the character of man,"
( Grosh't Man. p. SI, by making able bodied white men,
above 21 years of age " Odd-Jellows;" stealing from the
Bible, but omitting Christ; while believingin a "Supreme i
Being. "-( Wltite's Dig. p. J,S.)

first: — UISTOKY OP THIS DBGBSE.

A few years since, aa Odd-fellowsbip was getting
familiar and stale, observing that the war had made the
false "Grand Army," and Knights Templar popular;
some Odd-fellows invented atlniformed Odd-fellowship
which they called The Patriarchal Circle, and initiated
some who were not Odd-fellows. The thing took and
Circle set up for indojiendiinGe of the Sovereign


A PROFITABLB SWINDLa

Oraod Lodge TLis Circle charged $30 for its cliartoi
and tlO for four copies of its ritual and was doing a

thriving business, which, of course, cut into the revenues
of the Odd-feilow8, and war at once arose between the
Sovereign Grand Lodge and the "Supreme Temple,"

Some Encampment Oddfellows, in the "Patriarchal"
degree of which system the candidate represfnts iHaau
and his attersptcd Bacrifice by Abraham on Mount
Moriah, met in Wisconsin to contrive a ITnifor
the Knights Templar. Learning that some Rhode IbI;
and New Hampshire Patriarchs had already Invented
one, they sent for and adopted it; this was in 1
Two Grand Sirea of the Odd-fellows forbid, by procli
tion, wearing that uniform. Grand Sire Stuart '
to Providence to abolish the uniform. The G
Patriarch and Scribe of Bhode Island, met the G
^ire oi ihe Lodge of the World at a tavern, doubtless
took something to drink; and gut him into an opeoj
carriage and the Patriaroha, with the brave unifoi
which he had forbidden them to wear, marohed before'
him through the City and back to hiH Hotel. "Well"
boys said Grand Sire Stuart, "il is Bnc, but yon must
not do it." Seeing the cap, plume and gauntlets were
to be the rage, and the Circle would beat the Grand
Lodge, Odd-fellowa, who were also in the Patriarchal
Circle, attempted to merge the Circle in this new degree
which the Odd-fellows were getting up, called "Th^
Patriarchs Militant," to swallow up the "Supi
Temple" of the Circle in the Sovereign Grand Lodge o\
the Odd-fe!low8. This attempt to merge the Circle in
the lodge was made at a special session of the Supreme
Temple in Chicago, November 1885. It was defeated
by ^es, 25; Noea, 37. — So the Sovereign Grand Lodge
and Supreme Temple are still (1S80) running head aud^


and
ited^^

and

tlesB^J
opea^H

tfore^H
^ell" H

lUBt

ere
ind
hal

rh9^


SSS LODGH VATOIAI. STILL LtfC:,

heail. The 3wpr«ne Temple meets this y^ar (Joly 1
I9M) in Grand Bapids, Michigan, and tboogfa eoine-
wtut depleted hj eececuons to the Odd-fellows Grand
Lodge, boast th^t bat one in fifteen of the young men
of America, are yet drawn into these lodg\^, and tb«y
we confident their swindle is to succeed.

Thos thi;§ degree of PaCriarehs Militant is a fiy-lr^
degree, to cat«h and bring back Odd-feltows who h^ve
wsndered into the Patriarchal Cirele.

This military degree was completed and itB
moanted against the Patriart^&I Circle by the Soverngn
Grand Lodge at its meeting in Baltimore, Septembet
1885. This waa "the principal bosiness" of thi
sod this is from the report adopted:

"SPXCIAL COmnTTEE OS FATBIASCBAL OBI


-rtiepri


eipalb


eiuoibcl


OR thil


committee nu tb


rerition ol Ou


rBUom Depet Rita


sL Tbe


pn.Tid«» (or a


mulurj»jil.


cm. Kim


thing elm


lUrtoth


the Drxree


■ cb»oged to -P


Iriatrtis


Militant," ud the


.Unito


rn.Cmmp.ua anil


otor^aaiutioD. TbeOnndSlnU


aiBudc


m-chiel,>


Ueoten


ant-General who ii


the actiie Com-


maiMler ot tbe tore*


>, ■ Optala-^^nenl, m Major-Genenl.


a Brigadier, a


Tluw»m>tl


MteMnt-Colonel,
ate the commlHio


Msjor,
nedDlSc


CapUin, a Lleoleii


ant, an EnsipL


i


■The Dun-commlSBioned ofllcen are a SetgeaDt-UaJoc, a Qoarternuuter-
Serseant a CommliBacy-Setgeant, a Colar-Sergeatit, an Eqnipment-Sereeuit,
■ IlMpUBl-Ser{Kant.aTniiDpe(er, a Standard Bearer, a epedal ^d la (he
UeuteiisnI-aeucnt, nith the rank oILleDteaant^^alonel (or each State oi
TtrrltorlftI department,

"TIleTe are lo be CantonB and Orand Cantons, and tbe Sovereign Oiand
Lodge la Ihe aopfeme Canton, trom which »11 antbntlty emauales. Member*
«j( lu be addre«ied as OheTallen. Warrants and onUlta are tote provided
hr lb* SoYeruIgn Grand Lodge, Au auUlt ia composed o[ 3 Degree Boiilu,
ptooUmatlon, nilWarj blonki, etc,, at a coet ot»30, Tbe earns onMt bo*-
«v#r 1* Is be tmnlBhod budlsB alreBdiF orgaotsed, who hate attained the Bo^al
PnrploDoijfoBand whodealre lo be morgeiilntoaCanlon of PalriarchalUU-
tanl. at actual com. (W.OO.

"A banner, ao Incbea wide by 54 rnchee long, ot ecarlal ailk, trimmed with
laliu:!! trlnae itud iMielt. A UnE. *» tnehea wide hy BO Inches long, coio-
i« rvrtlcuJ Btrl|W(— pUCplc.Vi'bUe iLn4.ac«\eX,«\Nbi:BldaaaX4i3I


8E0RET SFBRRBLLA BAKD6. 383

InchaK. bklf vhlte and half si^Hrlet. n'ero Bdopl«d. Also, a jenct compoacd
ol the eecntcheon itilelds of tUe bnancr.

"Tba nnironn in a full dtese coat, UDdrcEB. a bluk broad clotb mllllar;
Hciliie, wblle vcit, black cloth panta. Tbe Cbspesa tbo aame as now aaed,
except that two wblle and one porple teaUier are ueed. Sbouldor knot* an
wom. The baldilc-ie cbnngcd aad ii nom by ail Offl»H and CbeiaUen over
Ebe left Hboolder and oader the Tight ann, eo that the pouch or dispatch boK
will be nbove the belt. The pouch it made or pateot leather, with gi'A ends
and binding, and haves railed gilt crown enclosed on cover, with appropriatu
backlet and omamenta. The belt ol Rnesia leather, and the »wDtd tbe aanut
u now in nee.

"The report la vor; Icngtby, too moch so to be presented In tail In this
namber. The ritnal and laws ){avenilng the Degree win be leenoS a* Boon
a«tbey can be printed, and will at once go Into effccl.

1 Lleuienant-GenoraL The


ThU 18 the official report on this degree, adopted by
the Sovereign Grand Lodge, and published in The
Companion and American Odd-f«llow, Columbus, Ohio,
October 1885.

Mormons, Knights Templar, Grand Army of the
Republic, Armed Secret Socialists and Dynamiters, The
Patriarchal Circle; and now this Patriarchs degree, rest^
ing on half a million tif Odd-fellows, are turning these
United States into a nation of Secret Guerrilla bands,
armed and drilling nightly, sworn to obey orders and
waiting for something to do! And while this writing
proceeds, news comes of a new Secret Order of "Minute
Men," started by a preacher, Edmonston of Sedalia, Mo.,
professedly to swear the friends of "law and order" in
the United States, to aid in suppressing "Strikes and
Boy:otta"by armed secrecy, oaths, signs and grips, and, in
a-few weeks this new secret order reports seventeen Uiou-
aand members. As tho daily papers inform us that large
nambers of Knights of Labor, Freemasons and Odd-
fellows have joined ihia new order and as it is given out
that the order proposes to investigate the causes of strikes
and boycotts, and oppose them if they are unwarranted.


984 ALL HnjTAET I0D0E8 tTHI^TPUL.

there is no reasonable donbt but the real purpose
organize an armed force to eustain Strikes and Boycotts,'
while professing their object to be to regulate them.
Another secret order against Strikes is jast started
Chicago, called " ConservatovB of Order,'^ to concentrate.
and aid in suppressing laborers' strikes wherever the]
may occur. Of course they must be armed.

Now these secret "law and order" bands, the Sovereigal
Grandljodge of Odd-fellows included, exist in violation
of the laws, which forbid bands of men to uniform, drill
and parade, unless they belong to our open, organized
Militia, and when their work is completed, "law and
order" are at an end. Is not this Military outburst the
flaming sword which spanned the heavens of the Hebrew
Commonwealth before it fell? We have only to
suppose some miscount in a Presidontal Election; some
Mormon outbreak and secret league with a politiual
party suoh as Joe Smith attempted, and partly accom-
plished with Stephen A. Douglas, or some spark from
the laborer's anvil, to ignite these magazines of political
and military dynamite, and we shall have a war of
internal factions, such as made the blood run ankle deep
from the principal gate of Jerusalem; and such as kept
the French guilotine wet, and the rivers of France red in
the reiga of terror under Robespierre, Couthon and St.
Just.

Not counting Christians outside; if American chareh
members, or one half of them, can be enlightened and
brought to "vote as they pray," for God, the Sabbath and
the Bible; impenitent and ungodly men cannot and will-
not rule this Country: — Oaths will again become sacred
and jurors honest. Our Presidcntal Campaigns will be-
come, like the campaign of John Knox in Scotland^
which overturned Popery witiUovA e^wiAding a drop


te^^B

n


I


BORBOWIKQ FROM THB BIBLE A DBVII£ TBICK. 985-1
Llood. Liquor will be prohibitiid; not lieensed; the I
oarth will open Ikt mouth and swallow np this flood of 1
darkness and crime which now issues from the mouth I
of the dragon and the promised and predicted reign of 1
Peace, (not war) will come.


second: — THK MOTIVES.

The prime motive of this new Odd-fellows degree, as I
seen above, is to win back its military wanderers j)y [
adopting cap, plume and gauntlets; and so out-strip and I
swallow up the Patriarchal Circle. But swindlers, like '
conquerore, must go on; and secretiats are swindlers.
There must be new degrees to get more money: — To
prevent disgust by familiarity with the old degrees:—
To diminish the number at the top who divide and share j
the funds and to amuse and bewilder those half sincere |
Bonis who float In the "troubled sea" of imposture, by a
perpetual mirage of new inventions. So was it in France. 1
So is it hero.

third: — ITS NATURE.

The Patriarchal Degree scares its candidate by making J
believe to sacrifice him, as Isaac. The Pariarchs Militant J
play mustering in the candidates to fight Chedorlaomer I
and rescue Lot, Abraham's Nephew. This perpetual I
borrowing from the Bible, a trick practiced by the devil <
before Christ; bas the doable effect of giving seeming
sanctity to the lodge, while it weakens faith in the Scrip-
tures. The scene is the Plain of Mamre; the members
Abraham's "trained servants:" — the moral to intimidate
traitors to Odd-fellowship; and the whole drama to ]
substitute lying legends for divine truth; to sanctify 1
fraud; to seize on the popular taste for military mu


Bt4 W ^ vhAcAHk^Hhef ^Rfiuulx
« •» G«l ^id pvfcne. la Hmn ihe elrments
», Seweery, An'i-

■ tlmogfa the
! Am ■■iliiiHiiiTTin^ wraken

I ^ht, beat, afannon and
Efe; ■• At •osl of Haa gsbft Lk i Mi on, growth and
^vken IB wvnUfc^ God. This oomii^ lo God, by
VBi^p ■ * ' "ig* Ckriet,tat for the &]], w«b oar nonnal
aMi4itis*; ibretm^ to drink in g^orr, growth md {
■n* &OV God, s» l0W«]x get strength, colore Bod fn'_
P lim by openuig to the fsn. SatAn's object is to stu
that prati ! a » by by substhatiBg M^m^thing else; for «
riup, wo«der; for joy, giddine^; for the Holy SpiritJ
binselL And thos exery lodge, mesmeric or 8pin>
orele; every dan«e of derriEhe^, Ehakers, Bondoo <
Purrowin Africa, or among onrown Indian^ Isadenl'sfl
waltz, in which the bead nrtms, the brain reels, C
lu^t.nee elurabere; mind grows weak and the passions
Ktrung. Worship is the might«st effort of mind. To
kniiw Gitd in tlirist, is "life eternal." Worship, witlt.
out Clirist, is to wander from the way of anderstanding
And rirmain in the congregation of the dead. To open
one** hoiiite to thieves is barmlesE, to opening one's wor-
vhip to d(!vils. Look in the faces of a crowd coming
Ottl of a iiinrroon tompic, a masonic hall, a spirit danoe
f » broUicI, and jou are struck with the sami


8UPEENATDBAL POWER OF ALL FALSE BELIGIOHB 987
meenieric expressioii in them all. They all worship
devils. I have seen mediums and false prophets who
could pass into the cataleptic state at wiil; and in that
state exhibit tokens of super-human and supernatural
power.

Br. Samuel Collins told me he had seen snakes, in bis
father's pasture in Indiana, crawl up npon stumps and
ohann birds on summer afternoons. It is said that
charmed creatures, men or animals, see beautiful rain-
bow colora which entrance them and experience strange-
ly delicious sensations, which enslave dieir wills, as
liquor enslaves drunkards.

The newspapers, once in a while, give an uncontradict-
ed account of a girl pining away, who went daily to a
jungle and sat down on a rock, from which an adder
crawled and coiled himself upon her lap, whose eyes
held hers in a fixed gaze till the spell was over. Her
father watched his child, shot the snake, and the girl
recovered.

Rev. J . R. Baird also who had taken seventeen degrees,
addressing our Pittsburgh Convention (1868) said; "You
ask: "why did you go on to seventeen degrees of sueh
stuff after you knew what it was? I answer, we go on
in those degrees, as a charmed frog goes into a snake's
monUil" The story of his escape on the night of a re-
vival, was thrilling in the extreme. An otherwise
respectable'neighbor, in Wheaton, Illinois, has said ho
was never conscious of such full and perfect satisfactioii
and delight as while going through with the masonic
ritual in a. lodge at night. Yet. to some outsiders,
nothing seems more loathsome and disgusting. But we
need not particularize. The inspired writers from Moses
to Paul, nay from Genesis to the Apocalypse, set before
US legjona of devils who temptftd ClimS ft^J^etftd. J'liaa,


«8B LOCCSTS FEOM TH8 B0TT0MIJ68 PIT.

sifted Peter, pOBseSHed demouiaca, helped sorcerers ai
■wrongbl miracles to "deceive theKings oftheEisrth a
the whole toorld."

Tfais is Kfw Testament teaching, wfaUe in the OIJ
the same fallen spirits everywhere appear, receiving (J
worship of Gentile nations, withstanding God'sProphet
overturning dynasties; instituting false religions witi
out law, gospel or mediator, and in their chosen chara
ter of "unclean spirits," setting up temples to impuriH
and divorcing bouIb from the true bridegroom Chriaf
who is the source and fountain of moral goodness, I
enslaving those to

"Qoiie pBiilnl, changetnl, pnesiDnate, iinjast,
Whose attflbole*. were tsge, revenge and Inat.'

Buch is the family to which this new Patriarchs degree
of Odd-fellowship belongs. Dues any believer of -the
the Bible suppose these evil spirits are less active now
than formerly? Now that their time is short, and as
we prove by reditctio ad abstirdum that the shoitest
line is straight, because between two points there can be
no other; so we know that devils run these lodges, 1
cause, within the scope of finite intelligence, or t
revelation of tJie infinite mind to ours, there i
order or clasa of creatures who ever did or could indut
men to practice the degrading mummeries of idolatd
but these. And if the facts and reasonings here givei
are correct, the dusky broods of secretism now, weekly^
pouring in upon the Christian nations, are iDcust* from
the "bottomless pit" whose smoke now "darkens the sun
and the air." The Masonic Lodge sits chief and i
the lai^e temples in which she shelters her dusky broo^
and they together form one system whose law Is despof
ism, whose religion is heathenism, and its end blooj
Never since Mahomet, did an armed false religion (
otberwiae.


DR. LTKAUr BEBCHIEB^ FRTOIOTIOK.


989


And if history repeats itself, if rejecting Christ from
their religion sunk the Hebrew Cum mon- wealth, this
sudden burst of night drilling lodges, Mormons, Grand
Army, Knights Templar, Patriarchal Circle, and this
degree of Patriarchs Militant; with a reserve corps of
Secret Dynamiters behind, swearing the same obedience
to they know not whom: — these are not only facts hut
precureora. They are the cohorts which Josephua tella
ua were aeen in the olouds above Judea and the flaroiug
Bword which hung over Jerusalem before Titua burned
their temple; and that wonderful nation went down by
"rapine, murder, famine and pestilence within; and fire,
BWOrd and all the terrors of war without," (Jos. p. 557.)
When "the people fed on one another, and even ladies
broiled their sucking infants and ate them."

Juat fifty years ago when the white haired Dr. Lyman
Beeohor taught us that the terrible predictions of Christ
and bis Apostles would be fulfilled on American soil;
his words seemed to ua harmless vaticination. But a
brief quarter of a century passed and Julia Ward Howe's
"Battle Hymn of the Republic" showed theae prophetic
pictores turned to real life and set them to music whose
echoes still live:

Mine eyes have seen the glorj ot the coming o( the Lord,

Be 1b lieadiag ont hia vintage where tbe grapes ol wrath are Itored.

Yet how few of the million who have sung those
words saw in them the literal fulfilment of the prophecy
of John, (Rev. 14, SO.) When the Angel oast "the vine
of the earth into the great wine press of the wrath ot
God, and blood came out of the wine press."

There is but one preventive of a repetition of these
horrors; that is the repentance, fasting and prayer which
saved Nineveh. This will save ua. The Hebrews never
turned from their idol vanitiea, to the altars where Chript
was worshipped astheirMcssiah, but their enemies made
peace with them; their Common-wealth was restored and
the hills and valleys of Judea rang with the joyoas
anthems of that "happy people whose God is the Lord."


i


QOAIIFICATIORS FOR IffiMBERSHIP, ETd


This Military Degree shall be open to Patruirabi of
vhe Royal Purple Degree everywhere, the conditloo r»-
quiBite for receiving or retaining membership being good
Btanding in a. regular Encampment of the Order, without
reference to juriB diction. Thufi an applicant for enroll-
ment on the roster of a Canton shall furnish only a
certificate of membership and good standing in his En-
campment, and make application in the form prescribed
by law, and it shall be received and considered, regard-
less of the jurisdiction from which he hails; but it shall
require a three-fourths (f ) ball vote of the members pr efr
«iit at the time the ballot is taken to uleot ^"


Instructions.


The word to he given at the outer door is the Counte
sign, selected annually by the grand Sire and promulgi
ted by the Lieutenant General.

When the Commandant of a Canton is absent, tl
Lieutenant will assume command and take theCaptainl
tent; the Ensign will lake the Lieutenant's station; an*
the acting Commandant will appoint a temporary Ofiioei
of the Guard, etc. ,

V?hen the Commandant of a Grand Canton is absent,
the next Field Officer in rank, or the senior Captain

§ resent, will assume command, and take the Cotnmai
ant's tent, etc.

Should all the commissioned officers be absent, i
Benior retired officer present will take the Commandant^
tent, etc.

In. floor work by a Grand Canton, the officer next id
rank to the Commandant will take the Lieutenant's tentg
and the next in rank the Ensign's station; and all be a
dressed by their proper military titles.

The uniform to be worn in this degree must confort.
to the regulations adopted by the Sovereign Grand Lodra
of the I. O. O. F., and the floor movements must bi
executed after the manner of ritualistic requirements, i

When the Canton is open and at work, it will bf
necessary for each Chevaber present to be clothed in thj
stipulated uniform, or as may be modified by prbviaionj
of law.

In petitioning a Canton for membership, it is neoei
sary to annex to the application for membership, a certlfl
cate from the Encampment of which the applicant is a
member, setting forth the fact that be is a Patriarch a
the Royal Purple Degree in good standing.

The elective officers of a Canton are a Captain,
Lieutenant, and an Ensign, cunimisBioneJ; and a Clet


and an Accountant, non-commissioned. They hold
office for one year, and until their Bucceasors shall be
mastered and installed.

The appointed officers are a Standard-Bearer, a Guard,
a Sentinel, and a Picket, who rank in the Canton in the
order named. They are appointed by and hold their
positions at the will of the Commandant.

The quorum for a Canton is nine (8) Chevaliers pres-
ent.

Balloting on applications for membership shall be by
ball ballot.

The manner of voting (except upon an application for
membership) shall be Yea or No.

There should be a circular tent at the stations of Cap-
tain and Lieutenant.

(For other and detailed law, see Organization, regula-
tions, etc.)

(In the arrangement of this work, founded upon the
narrative contained in the fourteenth chapter of Genesis
of the Old Testament, the Ritualistic charges, lectures,
obligations, etc., were prepared by John H. Albin, Grand
Rep. from New Hampshire; the Military features, in-
cluding Plates showing floor manfeuvrea, etc., Forms for
opening and closing a Canton, for the installation of
officers, for mustering a Canton into service, for the
burial of a Chevalier, etc., were prepared by Jno. C.
Underwood, Grand Rep. from Kentucky.)

KoTK — In all the military manceuvree that I have pre-
pared, I have adopted the movement by "three8"inatead
of by "fours," as the number of files to be. made the
ordinary unit for breaking into column. Not that I pre-
fer such file unit, where numbers are unlimited, but with
a small command a much greater display can thereby be
made. Thus; 24 file will break from line into column
of 8 Bets of "threes," or 6 sets of "fours." Now the
casual observer will never notice the alight difference iu
the width of the column, but will very likely count the
nnmber of "threes" as they pass; and, consequently, the
display is practically one-lourth greater.


In order to make the greatest possible display with
tlic fewest men, I have dispensed with the "file closers,"
and place the Lieutenaat and Ensign on the right andi
Ipftofthe line, and use them, if necessary, as guidf-
AIbo, that the Canton may always appear to advantaj
in public, I have designated 24 file and 3 officers, 27
all, as tile minimuia number to be allowed to torn out
and parade as a Canton on display occasions.

In the arrangement of special military movements for
display purposes in a hall, some lioesse should be allowed
in the formation of bodies, position of oflicerB, and in
distances. Where double ranks are used in the follow-
ing ritual mantBuvres, the distances have been extended
for floor effect (see Diagrams 4, 5, 6 and 8;) however,
the !<ingle rank movements (Diagram 7) are easier and
equally handsome.

In the Tactics, approved and promulgated, the
Chevaliers fai,i, in with swords at a "Carry;" but in
the floor manoeuvres, I desire the effect of the display
derived from the jfesA of steel, obtained by drawing the
swords simultaneously. Hence the command to Draw^ —
Swords, and return— Swoeds, ^ven to Canton in line.

To execute the movements hereinafter described, the
Canton should be counted off by sixes. For formations
of Canton (except in special movements and positions
of Officers and Chevaliers, hereinafter explained by text
or diagrams,) and plate representations of Officers, eto.,
see Diagram 1.

J. C. TT.


ith '

8," M

3ut m


SM


■^ " I I I I I I I I I M I n I I I I I I I M


m

B SI

DDDDDaaaanoa

Oyeo. Oider<


Q«.^Otipt!ilii, ot Coimnnuflgnti

^ [^ Tifftntenaafc

• EnalgBb

Q , PnBt C miiiiuuidm it>

Q GberaUen

Q[~Oaiiflidate,
I ^p — fiotening OffioQA

80 Oboo^


FORM FOR OPENING A CANTON. I


lertlgii ntia Di'MPtm


lent, Al tbe Vmt
en of tbe unL tbe

Ha will iiitartualJir

;«■; " ■ ,; '

eaoa: stter Htiicli he will report lo the Llealeliom. wbo bee Fi
heyftliera in line, at s "earru" nnd then lalw hia poEJllon in [rontoi
the eecond plHtocn; tie LlenlEDsnt irill then eommaad']

IJieutetumt — Continue the march. Platoon, Right
wheel — March; Forward, Column left — March; Guide .
left; Continue the march, Left into line wheel — M^cii;
Forward — March; Guide right; Canton — Halt; Right I
— ^Drers; Feokt; Present — Swokds. I

[Gee Diagram 3. In wheeling i-iatooiia, the Cblef or cuch Platoon givaa 1
tha propereuu-ioinniaad. <S«e luetics.*) Ttaa Lieutenant wlU About F:ics, I
Hlnte the Comnundaiit. and repari uB tollDwet) ]

Xiewfewawi— Sir, the Sentinel and Guards are at their |
stations, the Canton pass has been communicated, the ]
banner has been unfurled, and the lines are formed. I

[The ConiTaaBduat aalutee tbe Llcnlengiit with hand, and cominamJa:] *

Chnanmidant — ExamiDe^ — Canton; and Prepare for ]
— Insfectioit. I

Lieutenant — Carry — Swords; Rear open order — I
March; Front. [See Diagram 2.] (Addressing En- I
sign.) Sir, you will ascertain if all Chevaliers in rear
rank are in possessiou of the countersign and Depart-
ment check.

[The Lleolensnt Cakea poalUon tn front of ibr right Sle tn tbe trout I
tnnk, and the Enaign lakes puslilon In front of Hie fight Ue in tbe rear |

Lieutenant — (Addreeslng the first Chevalier in front j
rank.) Give countersign and Department check — |
Adtanob. ' I

■NoTB—Hpton'e work on UllltaiyTaEtica haa been adopted oa the Btaudud 1


2flfl poiiH OF op«rnto A CjUetok.

^niiij/n— (AddreBsing the first CbcTalier ioraarraok.)!
Givi? eouiit(;rHign sod Department check — Advakcs.


F next Cbtraller. ma
nd Departmeiit cbeck


^hl«E


bli poalttoni lUu Kmlgs will face sod iddm

£'n*ij7n— Lieutenant. (Whereupon that officer wilt
fftco the ensign, who saluteB and reports:) Sir, all cor^
roct in rear rank.


t nod Bob lei


e the C


imsaduit, imd bolll'


1 poseession i


lAeutenanl — Sir, all Chevaliers are
tho countersign and Department check.

Owimandant — (Addressing the officers.) Gentlemen,
you will accompany me in the inspection.

(The Lieutenant tiuxt ths Caatoa and gives tbe order:]

Limtenan t — Inspection — Swoeds,

[And iHth Ihs Bnslgn. iccompanlea the CommuiJanl in tbs Inapectloa.
Vttei pan In front ind rear or eacli line, and laakc anch ezamluatian of
Uto CbsvallBri and arma b> tbe Commaadsut deems auffiLiant, The offlcera
tvlnrii to thair ponltionB, and, wlUi Ibe Commandant «Undine in Irunt <>(
tb« tenl, tbe LieLt«niuil pommauda. carry— SwOrdb ; Close orilei— Mahch^
anil tb« canton paaeoa In reilew, (Bee Taottca.) After review, Ihe bodj
will lie moved to a iiroper poiltlon in line, facing the Commandonl:)

Z»'««(ena«(-Preaent — Swoeds; {and, saluting, reports:^!
Sir, the Canton awaits orders.

Commandant — Canton, Carry — Swoeds; Retnrc
Swobdb; Right — Face; Break ranks — Maech.

[Tba Cbevallera will takeaeati, Iht offlMre take Uiolr cbalra ai


i<! bueUiMi nlll pi


■ball


ead,]
' openiuft. Cbavalien


[Tho CoBimnndant '
ta <^Dl0Dt)l, aocordliig U


ORDER OF BUSINESS.


1. Call ro8t«r of ofBcers.

2. ReaA minutes of ihe last Cantonment; which must
be declared approved unless objections are made, in
which ease, errors (if any) must be corrected, and then
the minutes must be approved and signed.

-3, Consideration of reports upon prerioua applica-
UonB for membership.

4. Candidates admitted and mustered into eei-vice.

6. Proposals for membership received and referred.

6. XJnfinlslied buainess.

Y. New business.

8. Has any Chevalier anything to offer for the good
of the Canton?

fl. Closing ceremony.

[A CftDton Dill; adopt snch Order oF Basineaa u It deonu necDSBUJ'i
bnttbe abore taia moBt be ueed whim ua other hai becu provided.]


(Patriarchal Pioclamatloii.)


Lot, my brother's son, has been taken prisoner by
Chedorlaomer, King of Elam, and carried away into
captivity. Now, therefore, I do command all of my
tr&ined servants, bom in my own house, to report with-
out delaj, at my teat beneal\i \.\ie Os^ q^ ^^■ois*i.,isssait I


300 PATEIAHCHAI. PHOTLAJCATIOK-

licbroD; (licrc to be enrolled and supplied wiLb weapow
itf war, and march at once in pnrsoit of the eneoiy;
capture my brother's eon at all haEardG, and bring
back to his home.

ABBAJU,
JkuriarcA.


iThe rnrcgolog Pnclun&Uon iluktl be of udCDt deslgo. rad be tenied
leSoTercIgnOnnd Lodge ae enpnliei. It eliall be pruted in red ink.
In ImlMtioB ot tbc blon) of ■ Hilif twnr. the tvpe lo tw Itrge, (nd w
nutilo tliU the procbunikliDn will sppeBt to lure Oiseii nidelT iellend with
I Btlck, dipped in biood to mulii: a muk, oa Iraiulinn ot old lund-tHistea
p^>«r (nttde tij the sncieiita ont at the inner back or the paptmi, ipiewl
BpOD aod beat Into Uiii poroDB muramT-clolh) or ■ dreiwd hide, " -* '
copr tiiereol ghiJI be pisctd in a consplcooiia pMltlon. Deal the "
itatlan, during Part Flsil ul the iDlUBUoa.)


302


I

V


i


eK


BlAgmuiS


DEGREE


Patriarchs Militant.


PART FIRST.

Ifcpofl enppcaed to be on tbe Flsln at Mamrir, near the tenl of Lleutenint
ixiiriiisndiDg ouIpDel. The mcmbera sre Basted abunt tbs room in nndti'sa
DnltD.-m«: Ibc Ll^^uK'Hsnt i« Ibe onlr ointi.'r at bis euitlon. (Sec Ulaenini Hi
The cuKlldnie. v/ilh Blkepherd> crook In bis tisad and eccumpaDkif by llio
PutCommsDdBnt, enters Ihe room « liliont (urm and passes in front of ibo
Ueutepant'atilslioD. As (be; reacb Uie LieDteaant's sistlan. that oRlivr
ralatee the Fast Commaadant, who H'ltb tbe candidate bait, aud tbo Llcutcn-
BDtaddreeBea blmaBfoUowa:]

Jjieutenant — Welcome, my friend.

Past Commandant — Hail, ■worthy Patriarch. Thia
stranger, whom I now present to yon, has read the
proclamation of PatriarcL Ahram; and, in obedience to
his command, is hastening to the tent beneath the Oak
of Mam re, near Hebron,

[Tbe Lieutenant advances to the candidate, ebakcB bande with him. Rod
proceeds as [oIIowb :)

Xieiitenant — Welcome, my friend, I now recall that
we have met in the past. I well remember tbo many
perils and dangers through which yon passed on your
way to iho tent of the excellent High Priest. Abram
the Patriarch, is sore distresBed. A terrible battle has
been fought in the V, 'e of Siddim, in which the King
of Elam and bis associates were victorious. Thereupon,
tbe victors took all of the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah,
and all of their victuals, and went their way; and took
also LotjAbram's brother's sen, who dwelt '■* SodOB^


»M


DSOSeZ OF PATBUW-BS VtUfAHT.


aii<l >J1 of liu goodi, and <!e|/aned. And thera
ofMT, who had estsp^, and told Abram all of
tliing!>', and when he heard that his brother'§ son
taiken vafitive, he issued a Patriarchal proclamation
all of Ilia trained senants, horn in his own honse,
whoin there were three hundred and eighteen in nam her,
to fepon immediately at his tent at the Oak of Mamre,
near Hebron, in order that they might become dniy en-
rolled, armed, and eqnipped to redress the wrong. Ton
will, therefore, proceed to the Plain of Mamre, where
you will find the army of Patriarch Abram Beeurely in-
trenched, with picket lines thrown out, and guards
etationed at every point. The utmoet precautions are
everywhere taken to prevent the admission
or spies within the lines or ranks; hence you must
pect to be subjected to many inconveniences during y'
progress to the tent, I shall meet you again in cami
and on the march; side by side we will njnder ^-alia]
service in the cause of our good Patriarch Ahi
Farewell.

FindldBte proceed nn llic


w BUtlanB at the Con


A« the"


liloqaiEUig, ^u

to t^^fl

r thin^^H

idy a^^H
timus of \Tl


or the Gaard. H
le*vg (he etBtlon ol tbe
DDtt] Ibey have proceei
ptnrecdi at Collowa;]

Lieutenant — Alas, what a strange contrast to
usually quiet life of a Patriarch, this state of thinj
presents. In "peace or war" he is equally
earnest in the discharge of his duties. In timus of
peace, his attention is taken up with his flocks and herdi
ho 18 then thoroughly engrossed in rural pursuitf
doing good among his fellow-men. His sheep know
voice and seek his presence. The needy and distresi
reverence him. He mingles with them in their jo;
sympathizes with them io their sorrows, and never alloi
them to go empty-handed £iom b\a lent,. But


rtnnATioir. 305

of war all is changed. The Patriarch then becomes
tlioi'ougbly armed and equipped; be submits to and aids
in enforcing the most rigid military discipline. He
never resorts to arma for piirposes of mere personal
aggrandizement. His conflicts are always waged for tbe
redresa of injustice, or for the establishment of some
high moral principle; and at the termination of the con-
test, he quietly returas to his flocks and herds, and re-
sumes tbe life of the noble Patriarch. His crowning
motto is "Universal Justice."

PART SECONU.

[The Comiaandant <e In his tent Ibc Bneien (Offle«r of the Otntd) IB
itrlllingSoTieGuBrdsintheiireof the«nonl lec^e UiaEnm4ciT,) and the
mL'mben are acuttered aboDl the CbdIod Jd fitlgae nnitorm. Tbe ciodldale
and PoBt CommaQdaiit arrive at the Inner door dd their way to the tent,
where the Fast Commandant gives the entersign, and In reply is challenged
hy the Sentinel ae follows:}

Sentinel— B.aU. Who comes there?

Past Commandant — A servant and kinsman of Pa-
triarch Abram, who desirea an interview with the Com-
mandant.

si] ■
Sentinel— ^u sign.

(The Officer ot the Gaard tarns lownrd the Sentinel, who reporta:]

Sentinel— Sir, I have here one who desires to cc
munioate with the Commandant,

Officer of the Gwarrf— (Facing and addresBiDg the
candidate. ) Who a

Past Comm«»i(fanf— (Replying for candidate.) I am !
a servant of Abram, born in his own house.

Officer of Che Cwnrrf— How old art thou?

Past Commandant — I am of lawful age.

Officer of the Guard — Whence came you?

I^t Commandant— VTom the flocks and herds t
milted to my care.


SM DMRn 07 pinuBon ulizaxt.

Off^^er oflhe Oiutrd — Toor aiu^era are «
Tou may paiM tfarongb the lines, under guard, to t
Uot of oiir commandant, npoo the strict ccsditifiii tJ
yoa jrlodgc your eaored honor that yoo are Dot ao eoen
nor a apy, and that you will not disclose aujtldng ihit '
ymi may diBcovfir during yonr stay within oar lines.
Arc you willing to bind yourself Ity sneh an obligarion?

f'andidfite — I am.

Officer of the Guard — Rsisc yonr right band and re-
peal aflcr met tho following obligation: (and, tnming to
MiH Guard, commands:) With Bworde — Cbabgk. (See
Diagram 4 or 7.)

[Tbo (inillditi. ■[■DilInK Inut wllhia the Inner iovt, wiiich lui been
alotiNi bcbliid bini, mltM hia rliilit buu) and Rpcsu the roUoiwlBK oi
tlUr tli> OnirHi III the ()u»d:]

FIRST OIILIOATION PATKIARCH8 MIIj:rAirr>

I, , do Bolemoly declare that I am of

Patriiirulial Order; that I am a friend to tlie canBe whicl
this army iHcndunvoiingto vindicate; that I am actuated
by lionoMt and worthy motives, and am not an enemy
BCL'king to pass through theae lines for hostile or un-
worthy (mrposeB. I will never improperly disclose any-
thing that 1 may learn whilo within this Canton. All
this I pri>mi8e upon ray hoDor as a Patriarch of the
Royal Furjile Degree.

Officer of the Ottard — If you are what you claim to be^
you linv^i n(»thing to fear. I will escort you under atriol
giiitrd, to the tent of the Commandant: (and, faoii
Guard, commaudR:) Carry — Swokds; Right forwai
Threes right — ^Mabch; Guard — Halt. [See Diagram
or 7.] {And, placing candidate between the middle
"threes" of column, at extended or wheeling distance,
oommandB.) Forward — March; Column right — Maboh;
Commn right — Mabch; Threea left — Makch; Qui
"~ itr. fSee Diagram 4 or T ."^


De,

iU 1


307


1


ro/theGvard — (Addre$Mi]gGa&rdof tfael _

I, I iuTe in charge one who declares that he is
HXj from tbc care of his flocks aod herds; that he
1 the proclamation of Ahram, aod presents him-
■^ in obedience thereto. Ascertain the pleasare of the
"ommandant, and mafce the same known to me.

Guard of the Tent — (Ap|««aching the Commandant
m his tent, sad draviugthe cnnaiDaside,di^Iajiug ilie
Commandant eittingat table with papery addresses him:)
Captain, the Officer of the Guard stands before voor ten^
baring in costody one who desires to confer with you.

Commandant — (Coming to the entrance of Ms tent
and addressing the officer of the Guard.) Ensign, why
has this Btraog.r ~ e-n allowed to pass through ogr linee
and approach my tent? Do yoa not know that in our
campa every precaution most be taken to admit no one
who may be an enemy or a spy?

Officer (if the Guard — Captain, this stranger has as-
sured me that he is not an enemy nor a spy, but that he
has come in obedience to Abram's proclamation, to en-
roll himself with t. e .rmy which you so ably command.

Commandant -(Addr:ssing the candidate.) Your
purpose, if sincere, is .ommcndablej but you cannot be
enrolled under our banner ' ntil I am certain tliat yon
are neither an enemy nor a spy. I must lirst asDertain
whether you ar truly of the Patriarchal Order, of lawful
age, and recently from the society of the Patriarchs.
Advance the Sign of Becognition in the Initiatory De-
gree.

tCnndldate gives tbo atgii ae dd piga S7 of Seaitiil Oad FtUoiaW^
tUuilnttait.]

Conrnmndant — ^Advance the Sign of Safety in the
Degree of Frit-ndship.

/Oandldul* glvuB tbe elgn as on co^g VI d( Bevised


raTTIATIOH.


30«


BrotherlyLove?


-What


a the Token of the Degree or


[Caadldato ^vea t
IttuiiraOa.]


eiok..^


on page 110


ot RnitMl Odd FeaoaOi^


Commandant—
Degree of Truth


-Advao


u the Pri


icipal Sign nf the


Jltelratoi.l


e.i,.ue


f Rei'lwd oan F-dlnmMp


euBpmentdogreee, flDd
A> >Don » the omdldi
may pnl, Iha Command


is

ntwlUprt


TorcHoinE qn
iceed HE toUow


Btlnng oorrcctly, the Com-
snbotdinftte LoflEe or En-
Be him to tail of Tismtale.


Commandant — Now I know that you are an enemy |
and a spy. Ensign, why did you allow this person to

pass through our lines without some pledge as to the j

truth of hia statement? I

Officer of the Guard — Captain, I did require of him a 1

solemn pledge that he was neither an enemy nor a spy, 1

but a true and honest Patriarch. I

Commandant — Can it he possible that he is bo base, I

so devoid of honor? Drive this man beyond the lines, j

and in&ict the punishment merited for his perfidy. j

Officer of the ft/arrf— Threes right, double time —

Masch; Column right — Mabch. (See Diagram 5 or 7.) J

tin cflmpllanca «!th tho commaiKl ol tbe ConnDandHot, Ihe priaoner it

beiog forced Dotal 'MoDblB time," wbiiD tbe movement in aireatcd by ths I

LlenleDBiit, b; whose aUtlon tbe Guard 1» paietDg.) 1

JjieutenanS — Hold. I

Officer of the Gwarti— Guard— Halt. (See Diagram '

6 or 7.) I
Lieutenant — (Addressing Ensign, the Officer of th*

Guard.) Sir, why this oviLrage V> uvj tt\au4.1


310


U

2.


7.


s^


.-' -. ■ •


r ir


ija


i


IHITIAIIOir. 311

(^giceroflh^ Guard — Lieutenant, this man cannot be

jronr friend. He came here as a Patriarch, and asked

to be enrolled into our ranks; yet, out of his own mouth

has he been condemned. Tbe Commandant has ordered

that he be immediately driven beyond the lines, there

receiTe merited punishment for his perfidy,

IAeutenant—'G.& ia neither enemy nor spy. I know

him well. Halt here, while I proceed to the tent and

confer with the Commandant.

ITbe LlenteniDt pcoceeda lapidl; to


a tbe Commandant at leisure?
1 upon a matter of pressing im-


Lietttenant — Guard, i
I would confer with hin
portance.

Guard of the Tent — (Approaching the entrance of the
4ent, and drawing the curtain aside, says:) Captain, the
Lieutenant stands without, and desires to confer with
you upon a matter of pressing importance.

Oommandant — {Coming to the entrance of the tent.)
Xiieatenant, what do you desire?

JAeutenant — Captain, a deserving friend of mine pre-
sented himself before your tent, desiring to be enrolled
under our banner; he was not allowed to do bo; but is
l>eing driven beyond the lines in disgrace, and is to re-
ceive punishment. I saw him, recognized his deplorable
condition, and commanded the Guard to halt. I pray
you that he may be returned to your tent, and hia re-
j^uest be eomplied with.

Chmmandant — Permit bim to be enrolled under onr
lisnserf Impossible! We admit neither enemy nor
vpj within our ranks.

Zdeutetiane — Captain, be is neither an enemy nor a
spy, but a true and honest Patriarch,

ComTnandant — How do you know all this?


31»


imOEEE OF PATRIARCHS WLTTAHT.


lAmttenavt —I have tnown him long and well. I fi
Mw him ttitiing at the feet of "age and experieDos
patiently learning that in the practice of frieoc
love, and truth would be found the beet eafegi
against the ilia of life; after this, I obsen-ed him at ti
"Stone K«el," where he devoutly stndied the beaatift
truths taught by the Degree of Friendship; I next t
liini "traveling from Jerusalem to Jericho on a misBi
of humanity;" afterward, I saw him with those of t
Prii'stly Order inculcating the principles of the Degi
of Truth; later I aal with him in the High Priest's fc
where he partook of refrealimeats; thence he went a
to imju'i'Bs ujion the different nations of the earth ti
important doctrine of toleration; and, before to-day,]
last saw him puisiiing bis weary way past the fonj
Wutohes in the wilderneBH, determined to "go
at laslil fiawhim [jreeented ns a weary and wompilgi
at the tent of Uie High Priest, and surrounded by^ I
Patriarch«.

Commandant — ('an this be so? If it be true, he {
neither an enemy nor a spy, but worthy to be enrolls
under our banner. Command the officer of the Gdi
to return him to my presence, at once, that I may v.
amine him further.


[Tbs Lie a


iclnG hliDsett by tha A


'«DlBgnnilSorT.)«»;

Jjieutenant — Ensign, the Commandant directs that y<
immediately return this my friend to his presence.

[Aud, n^UiliilitK pnBltlun Blongalde oC candidate, iccompaaicB bitn U

Officer of the G'warrf— Forward— Mabch; Colni
right — Makou; Column right — Mabch; Column rid
— MiscH; Threes left — Mabch; Guard — Halt. (A


313


IHITIATIOK- Slfi

Iresaing Captain, who isetandingin front of tent watch-

ng for them.) Sir, in ohedignoe to orders, I return

(See Diagram 6 or 1.)

Commandant — Stranger, the Lieutenant haa spolcen

in your behalf; at his earnest entreaty, I am inclined to

ixamine you further and ascertain whether you are what

u profess. How did you first come into the society

of the Patriarchs?

Jjimitenant — (Answepng for the candidate.) I came

Xiugh the wilderness, paBsed the four Walshes; at one
ime I was beset by wild beasts; at another, the ulash of
e Bounded in my ears; then, again, I heard the voice
if mirth and revelry; over rough roads and dangerous
fays my path lay; the flood-gatea of heaven opened upon
I sought the shelter of a friendly oak; at laat
here appeared in the heavens above me the bright
'Rain-bow of Promise," reminding me that ours ia a
ovenant keeping Father; soon the sweet music of the
*atriarohs greeted my ears, and under ila sublime infiu-
ince I found my way to the tent of the excellent High
~rieBt, and was safe.

Commandant — Had you a word in mind to cheer you
rhile upon that dismal journey?

JAeulenant — I had such a word; ay, it was my counter-
ign.

Chmmamianl — What was it?

Jjieutenanl — "Go on,"

Commandant — It was a good word. Your zeal and
Ination to reach my tent betokens how well you
ave lived up to the injunction so solemnly given to
OU before you entered the wilderness. Lieutenant pre-
are to enroll your friend beneath our banner.


jAcuCe/uint — (AddrcBsing Standaril-Bearer, and deeig-
naling with eworii the ceuler of the room as the place,
oommandB:) Chovaiier, With banner — Advance. (Ad*J
dressing Ensign.) Sir, AboulStandard; Form — Cbow


(Hfll


to (b« renUr ot fbe i


^nst'^w-Threes right — March; Column righ^-M
Column right-MAscH;Tak£ wheeling distance— Marcb.*|
Reserves — Fall in; Column left — Mabch.

[On commBiKl "Rivcrv«i— Fill ik," (be ligbl die ol the RcHrvea -m

Threes left — Makch; Canton — Halt; Bight — Dress;
Fkont; Form — Ckown; Right forward, Threes right —
Mabch; Right by file — Makch.

[And, if the CnnEnn la bidbII. commandE: Take doable dlBtsHw— Mabcb;
and Ukini.' ponltion on ibe leFt of the leiding die, Mid giving neceeenrr dud
bcr ot commandt (Column hair Islt-MAHCH,) condnote line in a circle abonl
tbe StBudutd, BB center Eor Ibe Ciowa, ond. when tbc CroHa la taroied. com
mandBiJ

Canton — Halt; Left — Fack. (See Diagram 8

TTha rsndlilntE nill nTEnitre la Uko tlio obllgatiou b; kngcllDg , .

[ brenat, and lett band gruplnStB
J wbicbbeing done, th~ " — .--—


Parade — Rest; Canton — Kneel; Rest on Swobds.

[Ot. if tbe Cinfnn Is very Iscge. tbe command to take doable diati
Mahcd. sbould be omIIIcd. and after Ibe circle baa been [cnned and ihi
ion laced lo Ibe letl. tbo Llcatenant will command:)

Front open files — Ma£Ch; (whereupon tbe odd i
bers step forward;) Halt; Parade — Best; Front i
(or Canton) — Kneel; Rest on — Swoeds. (See
gram 9.)

Zieutenani — Repeat after me;


INITIATION. 319

SECOND OBLIGATION PATKIARCHS MILITANT.

, kneeling within this Crown, formed of

living witnesses, do solemnly promise, declare and avow,
that I will never, in any manner wbatever, communicate
or eanse to be communicated, any of the signs, secrete,
mysterieB, rites, written or nnwritten work of the
Patriarchs Militant, to any person or persons whomsoever,
imless he or they be legally entitled to receive the same
from me; that I will promptly and cheerfully obey the
oommandB of my euporior officers in this or any other
Canton to which I may be attached; and will at all
times render to them that respect which their official
position entitles them to receive at my hands; that I will
constantly use my best endeavors to promote harmony,
peace, and concord within the ranks, always avoiding
discord and strife. For the faithful performance of all
these obligations, I pledge my sacred honoras a Patriarch
of the Royal Purple Degree, as well as whatever military
rank or preferment I may hereafter receive through the
medium of this degree.

[ir it (b desired to iDCTease the martliil fltct. the roll of n KftUv-drinn
■jljohore trodnced, »ncl, If nBcd, the roll Bhonld commen« ImmadlaleJj
tec Ibe obUgBtioD, sod couUune unull the Can ton ts in line ]

t^ftep the cHDdldatahsB arieen, under the direcOon at the Lieutenant,
nilgncommuids:]

Ensign — Canton — BisB. (The Chevaliers execute
oommandjleaving sword at "Order.") Carry — Swords;
Right — Face; Form — Threes; Left oblique — Mabch.

t At eonunand "Form— Tbbkbb ; Leti obllqae— SUbch," Nob I and 4 itjuid
fait, Nob. 2 .- : » maicb oUltquelf and form on the left of Nob. land!
lespecUielj, and Nob. 8 md ■:■ on the lett of Nob. a tod i reapccUve r.j

forward — Mabcu; Column left — March; Column lelt
—Mabch; Column left — Maech; Threea left — March;
Canton — Halt, Right — Dbess; Front; Parade — Rest.
(See Diagram 10.)


DJTTIATION. 821

Zdeutenaftt — Stand ard — St ati on.

[The Standird-Bsurei. vitb binncr. returns to h!a poiltton at right of
Bill, and tbe U^utenanC conducts tbe CBnatdate tn a position In rcont of the

low Instrncts the candidate in the unwritten worli, and; atler giving the

Commandant — When desirous of being admitted into
a Canton, yon will give [any] the alarm, [which will be
attended to] at the outer door. The Picket will there-
tipon open the wicket, and require of you the oounter-
fiign, f Justitia] which ia given in full. If correct, he
Trill admit you to the aiite-room. You will then clothe
yourself with a fatigue cap, belt, and sword. You will
ihen advance at a "carry" to the inner door, and give
the signal, [which ia four raps.] The Sentinel will re-
itpond by giving four rapa, and will then open the wicket
tmd receive from you your name, rank, the name and
liumberofyour Canton, and the Department to which you
lire attached, and the Department check of the Canton
visited. [The Department check is the check pass- word
of the subordinate encampment which ia changed yearly.]
(If you are not in possesaion of the Department check, or
belong to a Canton in another Department, you may be
^dmittedon the order of the Commandant on Batisfactory
evidence of your memberahip.) The Sentinel will then
filose the wicket, open tbe door, and you will enter, make
the enteraign [which is "sword's port"] and give the teat
to Sentinel, [which ia Corona, lettered at all times. When
nsed for workingpurposea, give the lettera C.*.0.-.R.-.0.'.
. and if the Sentinel is not satisfied, he requires you to
l^ve the balance of the word lettered na before N,-. A,] If
correct, you will advance at a "carry" to the center of
1, face the Commandant's tent, and make the
lign of the degree; [Bring the sword to a "present;" re-
a in that position until the Commandant acknowl-


999


DEOREB OP PATRIABCHS jrTLTTAUT.


edges yon as a Chevalier by making the answer to the
sign, which is a "full hand salute." You will tben com-
plete the sign by making a "salute swords."] He will
acknowledge yo\i as a Chevalier of this degree by mak-
ing thp answer to the sign of the degree; after whl
yon will salute with sword, eome to the position ol
"carry," Bight (or left) — Face, march to a seat and
turn — SwoKD.

On leaving the Canton before it is closed, yon will
come to the position of a "carry," march to the center
of the floor, face the Commandant, and make the retir-
ing sign; [Bring ihe sword to a"present," remain in that
poBitioB until the Commandant acknowledgee you as a
Chevalier by making the answer to the sign which is
a "full hand salute," You will then complete the sign by
making a "salute swords," which he will acknowledge by
making the answer to the retiring sign. You will re-
sume a "carry," and advance to the Officer of the Guard,
salute him, and receive from him the Canton pass (a
word given by the Officer of the Guard at opening of
Canton, and used the same as the pass-word of the even-
ing in the Subordinate Lodge,) which yoii mnst give to
the Sentinel before he will allow you to retire.

You will always salute when addressed by or address-
log a superior in rank.

[After tha
__i tho «—


lak-

^

will ■


Commandant — Sir, you have now attained the highest
and most exalted rank in Odd Fellowship. Step by step
you have been deservedly advanced to this high and ,
honorable distinction, and I am gratified that you hs^^


been found worthy lo be enrolled as one of our number,
The true soldier, engaged in a just warfare, presaea for-
ward and strikes valiantly against the stronghold of the
adversary, never yielding until that adversary capitulates.
He is noteasily turned aside; he feara no danger,he heeds
no voice excepting that of hia commander; and when
the conflict is ended, he is equally ready to grant quar-
ter and regard the rights of those who can no longer
protect themselves.

So you, as a soldier in our cause, must always earnest-
ly contend for those reforma best calculated to promote
the moral welfare and advance thecondition of mankind.
Upon all questions affecting the good and well-beijig of
the community in which you live, you must have an
opinion of your own, which you should fearlessly ex-
preaa whenever occasion may require; yet at all times
bearing in mind that others have an equal right -to en-
tertain honest opinions of their own.

On taking the obligation, you were required to kneel,
in token of obedience to those in authority, and of prop-
er humility; you were required to place your right haad
ovpr your heart, lo indicate the aiocerity of your purpose
to faithfully adhere to your sacred pledge of honor; and
your left band was made to grasp the naked blade of
the sword, in order to teach you that justice will sooner
or later overtake you, should you disregard your obliga-
tions.

Tour inability to satisfactorily prove yourself a Pa-
triarch woald have prevented your admission to our
ranks, and might have resulted in disgraceful conse-
quences to yourself, had it not been for the timely inte^
ference of a friend who interceded for you.

Learn from this, that you should condemn no one
hastily; strive rather, by Itiudly words, to- correct and


I


DEQBEB OP PATRIARCHS HTLITAltf.
counteract the inflnence of errors. Do all in your pow-
er to restore those who are worthy to the confidence and
respect of their associatee, never forgetting that "tJni-
veraalJustice" is the first principle of soldierly manhood,
to be carried into effect, first, by means of peace, but
right of every cause should be enforced, even to

waging of war.

Such is the lesson that we inculcate at this time, ai

trust that its influence eball not be without good eSet

upon your future life, {Addressing Ensign.) Sir, foi

Arc of the Covenant.

Ensign — Right forward, Threes rigbt-MiECH; Threes

left — 'IVIakch; Guide right; By the right flank — Mab<

Column left — Mabch; Form — Raimbow; Column

left — March.


[And plictDg himseU on tbo len at tbe luBdiUE Ble. and giving
urrnnniUETof commatidB (Colnian balf iGrt—HARCH,} conducts him
the Hue or D circular arc. DhUl th« ralobow 1b properly shaped,
wimtnBndB;]

Canton — Halt; Left — Face; Rear open files — I
liALT. {See Diagram 1.)


(On comnuDd


•■Hear open fllea-SUacB," euh eTen nom


bei alepa back-


ward sndoppoBtte


hie place In [Ini;. When Ihe- moTemcnl


. completed by


hulting tbe flics


ona or two paces lo Ihc re»r, the Ensign a


mandnnt, BOfl Buy


iViSj^n— Sir, the arc is formed.
Commandant — Prepare for enrollment; Standards—
Post.


puwa uouDd the right (
ceatet of the Canton ; the Standard-Bearer
ice from flrataioln (lonl rank with on-
ea poaldoD oa the left, two pacea tram lait
the wind; and Ibo Clork, with dmm,


[Wherenpon Uio
and takea poiltlon in front i
taket poelUoD on the right,
furled banner; the LienUma
Sis tn (root rank, with colo
Bnaign form on line at cnnd
Diagram 11. Tlie movBineii


Jni-
>od,

1

I


i, the rnmrnnnflanl


1


Wfl DBGHEF OF PATEUECH9 JtlLITjUre.

Commandant — Enroll — Candidate.

[Haaiingtbe cDmmand, Us (
In BdvsDca aad face each otbcr; uiu i^imo
rMter of the Caiibin, iprvad iipou the drum-head, wblcb lie p
him on acuap-Bloal; llic cnndldate kneels, on aciubkiii, aiul
amndiint bands bim pen and tnk. Tbe candldato algna tl»
aiL-DHlure laatteBtcfltjr cha PastCnnimaiidant; wiiitlibeing
maiidnnt. stepping torward. ktrlkcE tha cnndldaU Ugtltly wltl

CommandaM-l thus, in imitation of ancient ceremony, J
confer upon yon the tnightly rank of Chevalier in the I
array of Palriarcha Militant. Arise, Sir Knight.

[And wben the candidate has tUsta, at a algn glTen b; tbeComnu
tbe KOFlga commanda;]

JEmiffn — Present — SwOH»8.

[WbereQpoti tbo ComioiindBDt, with aword In band, (given bin by Put
Comniandani,] addrcaaeH candidate:)

Cbmmandant — Noble comrade, Chevalier

receive this aword as the mark of your knightly rank;
let it never be drawn except in the enforcement of |
neoeasary justioe. I now, by virtue of the authority con-
ferred upon me as Commandant of this Canton, declare
you duly and legally enrolled as a Patriarch Militant,
and member of my command. {Facing Canton.) i Trum-
peter, herald the additon of another Chevalier.

trhe Trarapcter Btape from center of front rsnif and blonji K aoltabla
, in acknowledgement of the addition to the TaolcB, This con be dis-
penBed witli, oc it may be increneed by appropiiateir beatloe ki '

Her, and takee poallton by hla aide, tacisg tbe Canton. Tbe Lied
banda (be colora to tbe nearest Sle, anil, advaaclng, alao congre
new member, and tben retarna to bia poaUlon on tbe Icltof i
atterwlilch the Eneign comes forwaid and wrikohieB tbe Cbevs
nrnka, and returna to Mb position; tbeCommaodanl Uieu c(

Cormnandant — Officers and Standards — Station.

tWberenpon the Commandant, tbe Llenteuaut, and SMndacd-Beani
tnm In their etaClDUb In tlis room, and (he Ensign commandB:]

Ensiffn — ^Carry — Swobds; Cloae order — Mabch; B* j
turn — SwoEDs; Right — Faob; Break ranks — Mabch.

J f-ind tbe CbevHiierB aurronad and oongratnlato tbe new metabM'. ■■


FORM FOR CLOSING A CANTON.


Oommattdant — Li eutcnant.

[TbitufflcerfueBtheCoinmuidDiitaad Bslntei.]

Sir, form the lines and annonnce that the Canton will I
now be dismissed until the next regular Gantonmen^.l
unlesa sooner assembled by special order.

JAeutenojU — Fall in; Left^— Face; Right— Dehs8;J
Feost; Draw — Swobds. Chevalierfi, it is the ord
the Commandant that the Canton be now dismissed tia-l
til the next regular Cantonment, unless sooner aasem-J
bled by special order.

[TheLIeaUninttliea tixot about, and. Bolating the Commsnda[it,a^i;] I

IJieutmant — Sir, your orders are published.

Commandant — (Addressing Canton.) Chevaliers re-J
member your vows to promote harmony, peace, and oon-I
cord, avoiding discord and strife.

Xicuferactn (^Return — Swoedb; Right — Face; Break-1
ranks — Masch.

[Tlw CbsTillsn nUra iritliOBt lanher Miemoar.]


form for the
Installation of Officers.!


S'bo InatalUog officer, actlDK tor sndtcprcaentlnglhe LIcateDint-Qensral, '
Acting AdjutiTil-GenEral. Bad Aid da CaDi|>, (wbtch eUB msT be in-
creaicd tor effect, where the InstaJlatlou la public)^ipeBr >t the Innet door
Had give BLguiil.l

Senti7tel~~Who comeis there?

Installing Officer — The representative of the Com-
mander and Suff, vith countersign.

[The SBnUnol reports the Bsme to the Commandant, who caoBeB the Cm-
ton to be drawn up in line, with swords at n'-rarr^T," and officciB to the tronl,
DBihuwa by flrBt position on Dlagrom 12. He tben commands the SbdUdoI
to »dmlt the General's Lieolenant and Staff if "correct." Wherenpon the
Sentinel opiasltae door, and standing in rrontontwithdmwn enord, sstb:]

Sentinel — Advance one, and communicate the counter-
sign:

[The Aid will bring sword to "port," advance, and give It In a whisper!]

Sentinel — Correct. Pass, Chevaliers.

[The Sentinel will step aside. Taco and salate the officers as t&ey pui
him, pnd when they have entered the room 'iv. will close the door, and re
suine his proper station. The laetaUtnu Officer and Staff will march to ItiL
ci'nter of the floor, and aala to theCommanitaDt. who will arise, re tnm aalDle,

Commandant — Canton, Extend — Hoxobs.
Jjieutenant — Pres e nt— S wo kds .

[The Installing Officer will then step to the Iroat, and, addressing the
■Conmiandanl,sayBn

InttaUing Officer — Sir, we are here for the purpoRe of
installing the officers of this Canton, and bear with ua
their commissions issued by the Commander ^ the
Lieutenant of the Grand Sire. Are lliey present?

Commandant — They are,

InstaUing 0£icer — Sir, you will surrender your chair
tume.

[Wherenpon the Commandant vacate
the Btttnd, oad the StaS take positions st
helugmade, the Lieutenant commands:;

lieutenant — Carry — Swoeds; Left wheel — Mabcb; .
Canton — Halt; Right — Dbbss; Feont.

Sle then takes position la front or the llrBt platoon, and (he Enaign, np- |
om the n-heelliaB brtn mode, retakes poBIIlon Id front of the second I
platoon, andtheCamiDBndanCcomcBlorwardBDri tabes poeltloa law'


4
4


in.) Tbeci


r oppo:]lte th


d, Ihiu lonued, nlll BWsit li


le Canton. <Sm DU- i


IKSTALLATIOX CEBBHONIES.

Oj^cet^fAddresaing A. A. G.) Sir, you I

t names of the officers eloct to the Canton.


Tnatatling

will ruad th


Ingtalling OMeer — Chevalierg, ie the report corr«et? \
Shall the inBtafiation proceed?

Rank and File — It is. Proceed.

Installing O^cer — (To Commandant.) Sir, disnuM I
jrour command.

Oommandant — (FaoingCanton, commandB:) Officen^ I
To place in line — Mabcb.

[Tbo LloQtBDuit ind Snilgn toTm en right and l([t iif< Una reipMtlvelfJ ]

Return — Swokds; Right — Face; Break ranks — Mabcb. I
InMalling Officer — {To Aid.) Sir, yon ■will retire with '
the officers elect. See that they are properly attired, and
return and present them to this Chair for installation.

[The Aid p
dress nnilDTin <
BlgDal:]

Sentinel — Who comes there?

4id — The General's Aid de Camp and officers elect j
for installation.

InsWltog Offlcar, who w


[The EeDUnel to reparta U>

DligrniD IS, comiBGnd "Draw— SwoRDa." and take portion on lb« right: ud
the Aid and otBcuTa etixU being adcQltlcd, (onn ib ihown b; Dligrua IS, uid
marcb once aronnd tbo roum to b polDt la trout of tbn laetBlllne ODcer. uiil
the Aid, tddteteing bim, ss;s:]

Aid — Sir, I have the honor to present the officers eleot
of this Canton for installation.

Installing Officer — Chevaliers, before installing yon
into office yon must take upon yourselves a solemn ob-
ligation to faithfully perform the duties incidant to the
offices you are about to assume. Are you willing to
take such obligation?

Officers Mect—Wo are.

Acting Adjutant- General — Right forward, threes rigUt

—Maecb; Threes left— Mahch; Guide rightj Canton-^

"~ j.t; Bight— I)3X.&&\ Feost-, With Swords — CaaWL

BDiagisaa 13.)


4
4


881


■^mv.'^)^Ay,,//.v)M::7'mmmmmm


D


iBi


ap6pS"Si


P
a


a

D


INSTALLATION" CEREKOmEB.

Aid — {Addressing officers elect.) Officera — Knbxl;
TIncovke.

Installing Officer — Toe will each raise your left hand
and repeat after me: I, do solemnly prom-
ise tbat I will perform all of the duties of the office to
which I have been elected, to the beatof my abilityjthat
I will obey all orders that may be issued by my superiors
in command; and that I will not wrong this Canton, nor
anyChevalier thereof, to the value of anything. To the
faithful performance of ail whicD, I pledge my sacred
honor.

Aid — (Addressing officers elect.) Officers — Covbb;'
Rise.

Acting Adjutant- General — Carry — Swobdb; Return —
Swords; Right — Face; Break ranks — Mabcu.

Installinff Offic&r — (Addressing Aid.) Sir, you will
retire with the officers elect to the ante-room, where they
will clothe themselves in the uniform of their respective
grades, and return them, thus attired, before me.


4


Ihef lorm In


_ tThB AW

feid'Tiei— Who comes there?

Aid — The Aid to the General, with the officers elect!
of this Canton.

[The Sentinel reports is In nrcvfnna
BtractlanB. idmits Ibum. Oa befag admit
le Tnecnlllng Ofllcci, .
■ ~ie A. A. G., re


i:ltaeofflCen elect ■

givee ttiQ ElgDst "t^^^H

I officers eleot^^H


and npon receivfDK In-

d Gondacts Ibe offlCBci


Acting Adjutant- General — Draw — Swords; Threes
right — March; Column left — Mabch; Column left —
March; Loft, front into line — March; Canton — HaltS
Right — Deesb; Front.

Siee (eciind poBitlon. TilsgrniD 14, ind adisnclne to u point IwoplCo iij
of the center of ths line, Kill tue and salate (he iDsUlllni DBlber .-.ii>l3
{t5"Et!?l?I%|'.?" °' ** C»aion, Tub iMWUlngOfflWf retnnn the en


aa4 INSTALLATION CEREMONIES.

InftaJling Officer — Sir, prepare to publiali commit
Bions.

Acting Adjutant- General — Bear, open order — MAXcad
Fbost; Parade— Rkst; Banner — Post.


lAiidI


Omcer. will fslut


king poaHlan [hree paces


TheStnndsrd-Bi


Jt the Cm


ecDDd poiltlDu on Dlt^rain U.J


(iclDg IllBtalllDI


Irtstalling Officer — {Addressing A. A. G.) Sir, Com
misBiona — Publish .


[Wberrnpon
CmUiD eitcudcd


IE CinLon, snd Uie Aid, BddreHlne i


command.:)

^td— Officers, Left half wheel—

[Set DtSBiiuii H. Ot ha nrny wheel Ihcm t(
uton and omFera elect. The A. A. G. Ih«ti
hen befaseaDlBbed, foces about, uid, addrc


I Bait the relative poalthHu aM
reads the commisiioiie. ■odfl
sHjng the loeuilllDg C


Acting A^utan^ General — Sir, the commiBBlonH atn

pnbliHhed.

Installing Officer — Sir, form line to receive officers.
Acting Adjutant- General — Carry — Swords; ClDse oT- "

der — March; Present — Swords.

[At the commandMincD, lb« A. A. O. re -Ukes poBltlon on Ibe right, two
pacea frutu Standard-B Barer, and the InBtatliuH Officer, addieealng offlcera.B
elect. comiaandB:) ■■

In»talli?ig Officer — Officers, To your posts — Masch.
Aid — Officers, Eight half wheel — March; Forward^
March.


tTUe rammlselDned ofll(


■proper places, al
See Ltiogrein IR.)


ind the Clerk Ufl


Installing Officer — Canton, Carry — Swoeds; Capt^m
(thai officer salutes.)


, foopgtmUUatt lilit'.l


i(. :« olnfiranilCanU


S3S


3»« IWBTALLATIOIT CERlMOKniB.

fnslallinff Officer — Sir, I congratiilat* yon upon yonr
elevalion to tbu highest oommand in this Cauton, and
feel confident you will perform the duties of your office
in a faithful manner.

[Thu Cuiiiain caioea lu a "carry."]

Justailing 0;ffi<:er — ^Lieutenant. (That officer salutes.)
Sir, when the Captain is absent, you will take command
of the Canton. It istherefore importanttbat you should
be familiar with his duties, as well as those of your own
office.

Installing Officer — Ensign. (That officer salutes.) Sir,
you are third in command in this Canton. It is your
special duty to see that the outposta of the Canton are
properly guarded, and it will be expected of you to
promptly execute the orders of your superior officers in
command.

mmBneien COmeB to a "carry.")

Installing Officer — Clerk, (That officer steps one pace
in advance of the line and salutes.) Chevalier, you have
been elected and elevated to a responsible position. It
will be your duty to keep a correct account of the transac-
tions of this Canton; to collect all moneys due, and pay
the same to the Accountant, taking a receipt therefor.
Subject to the orders of the Commandant, you will take
charge of the minute book, order book, roster and seal
of the Canton.

[Tba ClflTk cornea W n "carry." nnd retakes position In line.)

Installing Officer — Has the bond of the Accountant
been approved? (Upon receiving an affirmative answer,
continues:)

jSiataZ/inj? Q^cer— Accountant. (That officer advances
cme step from line and salutes.) Chevalier, you have been
'electeato the responsible position ot Aoconntant to this


4


IKSTALLAXIOK CZBEHOITIES. 337

Canton. It will be your duty to receive, recei jtt for, and
hold all the funds belonging to it; to keep a regular and
correct account of the same; and pay oijt aiich amounts
ily, as may be called for by the warrant of your Cap-
tain or Commandant, when directed to do bo by the vote
of the Canton. Yon will bo expected to account for, and
pay over to your succeBHor, any balance in your hands at
the time of his installation.

LThe AccoDnUnt comes to n "cutif ," and reminca his position Id Hue.]

Installing Officer — The officers will now take their
stations in the room, and assume their duties. Return —
Stand ABi>.

^e Dlsgtam lH. All of which h&Ting been ilane, the A. A. O. com.

Acting Adjutant- General — Present — Swokds.

InetaHing Officer — Now, by the authority of the
Lieuten ant-General Co mm an ding, I proclaim tlie ofQcers

of Canton , No , Patriarchs Militant, of the

Independent Order of Odd Fellows, in the Department

of , to be legally mustered and installed for and

during the current term of their commissions, and until
the installation of their succeBSors, (Addressing A. A.
G,:) Sir, dismiss the command.

Acting At^utant- General — Canton, Carry — Swords;
Return — SwoBos; Right — Face; Break ranks — Makch.

ITbe iDBlalllng Officer &nd StaQ aiaaity VOcit IntcDtlou of iL'tirinE, and
i Bnaiea will turm unnlon In line, ob in the beginmng.]

Muign — Fall in; Left— Face; Rigbl^DEESs; Fhont;
Draw — Swords; Present — Swords,

[The InBlallingOfHcer and stair will snlul* the Commandnnl, and being
■alnted In Ktnm, will march eiam Lbo line and iibbb out. the Sentinel aalnt-
iDsulhey pasa. The Bnaign will then cuuiiuaua:]

Snsign — Carry — Swords; Return — Swoeds; Rights
Face; Break ranks — March.

[Akd tha Cuiloa will praceed with bnaluesi,]


FORM FOR

Mustering a Canton.


lApplIUDts for Tarrant, tr in
nHotB.: it R. P. Degree Patri.Hl
■At. «Dd Eimrd Tbe MuMeriDe


intzed body. miiBt appesr tn full dresi
nil, Ibey msy sppeir in latiane cap,
»r, repreEentiDe ibeCammaodcr. lus
mn, aud ChT"'-'^ >■-' --


,j. Tha MnBlertng CMBcer will sppctet a tempotarj Beo^cl,

coinmuntcate to him the '^CaDtonHsB,'^ and Inniuct him to ckwe and piard
thedoor, andcansaallpreMntlo Depiaperlyeumliied, BO u to piotactUie
Degree. The Senthiel having taken posCtloii and doced the door, the Hailer-
ing Officer win antioriiiGe the object of the aHaemblage, and if tiie qmlicaDtfl
for the warrant are Royal Pnrplo Degree Patriarchs onlr, be VDl conter upon
them the Degree of PatrUrrbs Militant, wbicb aboald Be done In rltnaliatlc
form. If he h»a present a gnfflcient and properly drilled


le Mnatering '


arges. T
Omeer, w


y-]


Acting A^utant €f&teral — Sir I have the pleasure to
inform you that a number of Royal Purple Degree
Patriarchs, Chevaliers Militant, duly conversant with the
principlea of "Universal Justice," and actuated by a de-
sire to promote the interests of our beloved Order, liavo
applied to our Commander fur a warrant to establiBh a
Canton of Patriarchs Militant of the Independent Order
of Odd Fellows; -which warrant has been duly granted,
and the Chevaliers are here convened for the pqipose of
being regularly mustered into the eervice as a Cailtoi
and of electing officers and having them commisaioDed,
maetered, and installed confonnably to the usages of tti«
degree and the Order.

Mustering Officer — (Addressing Aid.) You will
sent the applicants for the warrant.

[Tbe Aid will form the appUcukU In Inat of and ti


lioned,
lofthA ~^_

illpi^l

J


iniBTBttlNa CEREUOKtES. 339

Aid — Draw — Swokds; Preaent — Swobdb. Sir, I pro-
flenl these applicants for warrant.

Mustering Office) — Carry — Swords. (AddresBing ap-
plioanta.) Worthy Patriareha and ChevaUera, it is with
great eatisfaction that I appear before you as the bearer
of the legal instminent which conveys to you, as a body
all the rights, privileges, and immunities that are con-
ferred on a Canton of Patriarchs Militant of the Inde-
pendent Order of Odd Fellows. Acting by authority of
the Commander, tlio Lieutenant of the Grand Sire, it
becomes my duty, previous to presenting you with this
warrant, to aBcerlain whether you are the CheYaliers
who applied for the same. (Addressing A. A. G.) Sir,
yon will call the roster of applicants.


[The A. A. G. reads the nsi
u tt la colled. Upon tbi
Ing found r ■ ■■•- "


Mustering
the warrant.


Mualering Officer pn>cov<


^cer — (Addressing A. A. G.) Sir, i


Bind tbc \


ihich ItGlDg completed, Itao


Mustering Officer — Chevaliers, previous to delivering
this instrument into your .possession, it is proper that
you should enter into an obligation, for which purpose
you will place yourselves in proper attitude, and repeat
after me, as follows:

Aid — Parade — R£:st; (Calling name) — Knkkl; TJn-

COTEB.

We, each for himself, in the presence of these noble
witnesses.dosolemnlyand sincerely promise and declare,
that the warrant for a Canton of Patriarchs Militant,
read in our hearing, was applied for in good faith; and
that it shall not be used for any other purpose thivu thaJt.


SiO


jnTSTBRINQ CEEEHONlEa.


for whiph it has been granted. To the faithfn! perfoi
anoe of which, ve pledge our Patriarchal and Military
honor.

Aid — ( Addreasing Body by name, commandB — Covkb;
Rise; Carry — Swoeds.

Mustering Officer — Worthy Chevaliers, by virtue of the
high power vested in me, I do hereby institnte and pr^
claim youa lawfully constituted body, regularly must«l
into tlieserviceunderthestyleand title of Canton,..
No. . . ., of Patriarchs Militant of the Independent
der of Odd Fellows, in the Department of. .... ; and
authorize and empower you henceforth to do and per-
form all such things as may of right belong to a regular-
ly constituted Canton of Patriarchs Militant. In alt your
transactions you must faithfully conform to the land-
nkarks of the Order, obey the commands of your officers,
obsene Uie requirements of the Military Council, and
maintain and abide by the mandates and laws of thei
Sovereign Grand Lodge of tho Independent Order
Odd Fellows; and may all your acts be governed and-i
directed by the principles of "Universal Justice," Lo'
and Truth. I Addressing the Chaplain.) Sir, invoke


ins
pro- ^

:|i

»er-

lar-

our

nd-

ers,

ind ^_

the^H


Aid — Parade— Rest; Uncover; Bow.
CJiaplain — Most holy and Gracious Father, Supreme
Ruler of tho Universe, with reverence and humility we
invoke and implore Thy blessing and protection for this
Canton. We Inirably beseech Thee to inspire its mem-
bers with principles of "Universal Juatice," with love
for each other, and with fear of offending Thee. In Thy
great mercy pardon all our transgressions; be with
and direct us along the paths of righteousness; and teaoh
as to be gi-ateful to Tliee iov tUc manifold blesein^ «
receive. Amen,


MUSTERING CEREMOIOES. 341

Aid — Cover; Cany — Swords.

Mustering Officer — (Addressing the Staff.) Gentle-
men, prepare for the election of officers.

Aid — Return — Swords; Right — Face; Break ranks —
March.

[The A. A. G. will prepare ballots, which the Aid will distribute and col-
lect when the yote is ready.]

Mustering Officer — Chevaliers, nominations for Cap-
tain are now in order.

[After nominations are made, the vote will be taken, and the result an-
nomced by the Mustering Officer; and so on throughout the various grades
of offices to be filled, until all the officers are elected, when the A. A. G. will
fill out commissions (which he must have in blank.) Wtien all is in readiness,
the Mustering Officer will proceed with the installation of the officers, com-
mencing at the point of such ceremony where the Aid is instructed and or-
dered to "retire with the officers elect, see that they are properly attired, and
return and present them^' for installation. See Form of Installation.]

[In installing the officers of newly instituted Cantons, the Mnsterins
Officer must exercise judgment, and ma> omit the ceremony where it canncMt
be properly executed by an undisciplined and undrilled command.]


FUNERAL ESCORT.


Burial of a Chevalieb


ralheEnTe:tliiafaim lor- Bnrtal tors

[Cpon «1] tuneralocculDTiiitbeCBiitaiisbiillCnnioiiliaCnlldrau aaitonn,
irlU) ■tiiinl hUtii, atHiiljiKl, and gDldonn ■ppropriitel* Irlmmed wlUi cnpt.
_. . ,. ._ . ■ It Bil pJi-b - "


X luted
• It at


ind nt tbe r«ld«DCC ot tbe decewaif gi


, '■ftriilB— R«BT." 1

' proKchwttb till) cflrpid, [he Captain wU.^—t^..^., _

C'lptain — AtteutioD, Cany — Swoeds; Present-S
* SwoBua. ^

[Aftortho coffin bMbesn placed within tb« beirM. the CipUin will CUB-

Captain — Carry — Swobds; Reyeree— SwoKDs;ThreeB
left — Maboh; Column left — Mabcu; Column left —
March.

[And mnrchltii;, Uxe Canton. Itlt In front, nlll lake poilUon Immedlttalr
infrootoflho he Brae, and condnct the column andproceaelon to the nIacBOf
httermsnt. The uall bearorawtU take poslUoa along each aldeofttieiiatrM:
two oppoalla tbo iront whcela. two oppoalte the tear wheeln, and two oppotlu
lb* center, mid var between 1 and I on eaob aide, Tba; will march wfth n-
*erted awordB. and nwre wltli aacb cadence u will keep pace wttb the beine.
On appmacblne' and at ■ aaltable diatonce from the ptn, with the grave to
either (Ida of the line el tbo colama extended, the Captain will commtBd:]

Captain — Carry — Swokds; Threes right — i

Cauton — Halt; Left — Dsitss; Fbont; Rear open

— JMabch; Frontrank, About — Fack; With Svords!

— Aaco. (See Diagram V6.'^


-MABO^|fl


ut ^M


tri 1


D


g


■


^


^


^K m^m^


O'O


>. 5fi 1


□ a


lo tha ettne. Wbeti thi
right (or left,) MiDByW.
b8 withdrawn Bnd pl&ceill


Id etQCpea.


eGllYSly. The Lleatenmt, ii


!, the CKpCain
loD nt the foot


Xiieutenant — Carry — Swobds; Front rank, Abont —
Face; Close order — Makch; Threes left — Mabch.


[And moTlnE Ih


suitable poilUoD.K


[,An__. . ,
CordlnB lo tho location or the gtave,

JJieutenant — Column right (or left) — Mabch; Form —
Ceown; Left (or right) by file — March (and, if necessa-
ry;) Take double distance — Maecu.

lAnd, placlne himeelt br the aids of the leading file, and eltiDgtbe
neceMnrrooniherofeonimiinda IDolumn halt lett-MiBoo,) wlir confluft
bin In B circle aronndtUe grave: ond when the circle (or crown) ie Conned,
commKndb:)

lAeHlenant — Canton^HALT; Right (or left) — Face;
Parade — Rest; Uncoykb; Bow. (See Diagram 17.)

(The Captain, obacrrlng that the crown baa been [oriQcd, will prorj:ed:]

Captain — Chevaliers, we are here to render the last
rite the living may minister to the dead. Man is born
to die. The coffin, the grave, the sepulcher, apeak in
silent language of human mortality. Youth, manbood,
age, weakness, vigor, strength ; poverty, affluence, riches;
humility, pride, arrogance; influence, power, greatness;
are all leveled by the immutable hand of death.

The handiwork of the Creator constantly displays tho
unerring certainty of the end and decay of all things.
The beautiful and exquisite plant creation, from the
gloriea of the Tropics, to the ever agreeable verdure of
the North, alike, fade, wither, and die. So it is with
the human family; the living of to-day become the dead
of to-morrow; and wc, mortals, ean but bow in recogni-
tion of the Divine law, whieh Inevitably brings man to


mother earth. Be who now apeaki to yon, tOMj, *r« he
moves from this sepulcher, be called to enter eternity;
for all in time mnat occupy the silent tomb. The strong
and mighty may, in a moment, be swept into tbe mi-
fathomable void between the living and the dead.

As we behold the remains of our departed companion,
let us, as "Patriarchs Militant," inwardly vow to throw
the cloak of charity over the errors of the deceased
Chevalier, and bury them from recollectioo under an
arch of steel, as we bury the body in this grave; and let
ns monument the memory of his noble worth by herald-
ing the good, great, and knightly deeds only of his
honorable life.


[Tbe pill-beann lomir the co


re.]


Captain — The dust has returned to the earth,
spirit has gone to God who gave it. Have mercy oo
O Lord.


[Tht Cherallflr

Chevaliers-


leapond :]

-Mercy, have mercy, O Lord.


Captain — We place this orown within the grave as aai
emblem of the Order; and as the evergreen ia a token of
immortality, so let our remembrance be iindyiog.
Chevaliera, you will now inspect the tomb, and depoail
your last tribute.

tWhanDpon. ttii LiBUtenant. Enilgn, ■
i^fi 4M1 rnrnji tn ft "rsFFT." and rtna at ft (Jrr .

.,Lu.„ », t-.. le- »t Pftnds— Rut: nn

rooT»ni81it hft-dng bi

rr^qBeHtli relieTiniir ihr."hiVeirngM7tTeeYf iww "dFliilB. V"^,?i'*''j!
rtlieied. (t "■111 renmnf position in fin*. The B'"" ''■'"'E ^"n BSti. ud
UcmaDDdpropcrir ttitpuA bj' ItaE nnddWIier, the UeaMaOt MU C(


,..„ _ om« to« "wsft"' '^

Pftnds— Rut; nocoTBred. with head bawM. Thu
FompleUd. the gms will ba filled witb»Hhilba


irtrt*

1


FCKERAL CER£H0ItTB8. 3i,

XitettUnattt — Csinton — Covsk; Carry — Swokds; Pre-
flcnt — SwoKDs.

[WhercDpoD. tlie Cbaplain nill ftdmiee and Uke poBittun under tbe bin-
TBI the he&daC tbe gravt. and oBeternjet. WlicD UieCbui>liim btut&ktn
•iltlou, Ihg LlenteiiaDl will commaDiTO

Lieutenant — Carry— Swords; Parade — Rest; Ganlon
'Kkebx; Rest on — Swobds.

[The above icovemeiitB bavlog been executed, the Cbsplain will offer
ererMfoUowt;]

Chaplain — Onr Father, who art the great creator of
all things, who in Thy wise providence does dispense
Universal Justice, we beseech Thee to hear the voice of
Thy creatures here assembled in bumhle supplication.
O God, tbe Almighty Ruler of the univerae, we implore
Thee, in our entire helplessness, to bless and comfort
those whom ithas pleased Thee to add to the number of
tbe disconsolate; bear them up under their great afflic-
tion, and sustain them against despondency.

O Heavenly Father, imbue ua with the conviction of
the uncertainty of life, and of the certainty of death; and
we pray Thee to bless the brethren here prepared to
commit the remains of a companion to their last resting-
iplace on earth. Constantly remind tbem of their obliga-
tions and duties as men and brethren through the various
walks of life; and grant Thy Holy Spirit to those whom
Thou hath spared, and confirm their faith in Thee
forever. Great Commander of Heaven and Earth, pre-
serve the principles and purposes of our beloved Order,
snd defend it in the right; guard it against doing or
flountenancing evil, and lead its members along the
paths of virtue and righteousness. Amen.

Captain — Chevaliers, we liave administered the last

ite to our departed friend, the Chevalier ,

nd M the Supreme Judge extends mercy to our deceased


oomriidc,
mercy sh


• let U8 hope that He will to as, in i


[Tbe CbevsUen Ripunil :]

Chevaliera — Mercy sbov, O Lord. To ub mercy slioi

Chaplain and Captain — Amen.


'%


lAeulenant — Canton — Riss; Cany — Swords; Rij
(orLeft)— Face; Form— Threes; Left (or Bight) obli
— Mabch; Forward — March.

[See DlHgriun 18, inil more [Us Canton at option, accordlBKl
tngs ot (ho grnve, bo at to (onn line (sdng eillicr aide o( Uie grgTe, mm
Hcvcrsl pacee frum It, Tb]s being done, itewlircomoiaDd:]

JAeutenarU — Present — Swobds (and, saluting and ad-
dressing the Captain, says:) Sir tlie line is formed.
—Ban n e r — Post.


Publications of EZRA A. COOR,

No. laWabBSh Avenue, Chicago. 111.

Books at Ketnll Pricea sent post paid. Sookn by Mial am at ritlC^penm
ontorits, UMfcw 10 eenl» atni i» eent (n pajifiir nalDtcriiui Ihem, vAenllitit
lajedetivery a guaranteed. Booke at relull nrderedby^'P'^'!'-^!^ '"'••^ >' '0

BLUE LODGE AND CHAPTER. :

PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED.

By JACOB O. DOESBURC,


nltyiTN
A HISTORICAL SKETCH C
ASAlYBIa OF THE C

PresllBit J. Blanclarl of Wleaton CollBp.

Honltoniil QnoUtlonB and nearly Four HmidjL-d Nolas frum Stundord Ul

sonic Ad thorltles, conflnD IhetrutlirqiDeeeoI IhiB Eit«^i,lau<uid

Show Iho cbatacler at Masonic Teathlng and Doctrine.

J, O, DaeBborg, Past Haater Unit; i=i No. Idl. Holland, Mlcblgao, and Otben |

OVER ONE HUNDRED ILLTTSTRATIONS,
Sereralot them full page, give a piclorial representation of the
anilChafitar, cenrnDniesoftlie degreeE, d[eaBO[cundi<latee, Sig

Tms is IbelargoBt. molt accarsta and complete ExiKiBltlon of Sluu Loilse I
and Chapttrliaaonry. ^' ■

OoinpJete Work of.840pBKP6, in cloth, gl.OO; pupet coyer, TS eeuls.
Firil Three Degrees, (Sra pages) in cloth, TScentsi pape'roovor, « cents

Knight Templartsm Illustrated.

A Fall ninatraled Hlloal of the aiJt degrees of the Council and Comtn
dery. comprising the dcerEes of lloyal Maaler.iielecl Maalcr. Bnper-„,
cellentMuslEr, liulubt of the Red Cross, Knight Templar and Ksightof »alta.
A boob ot 341 pages. In cloth Sl.OO. Paper cover, SI) cents.

Revised Oddfellowship Illustrated.

^Fan COKPLETB KKVTSED BITCM, OF TOE lODHE. IBCiimiHST iKD BIB

I (LiunB') DBOBEEB, VDOFOBELT iLLUSTRiTKO. and EOBranteed tobflf
ly BCCDratfi, witb a sketch of tt
OTeronti hundred tool-noto qnoi...
cbsraeler and leachlDgt ot the on!
J Blancbard. TMe ritual correi p.
nlBbod by tbc Sovereign Grund Lodge, ,


United Sons of Industry Illustrated.

AriI.I.ANrnOJ(PI.ETEILlBilf»l^Hf ■ - ■


•■. ffloInK Uu sl£u, (irtpa. fi

Oood Templarism Illustrated.

C«ir.cll. -Ml, . .u-.^>.|.,; -1.,^- inc >lgn^ Gripe, *«. Sc.

Eipositlon of the Grange.

EDITBD ItV UKV, A. W ilRKSl.fX. ■" ^ - -
Inn l—lKU Kfwm, SIKni, /tlpi»l». clr


w>


Ritual of the C. A. of the Republic

ITII HKtVM Olf KienlflSITIOM, PASS W0BD8. GHIPS, B-c., ud II
■ ■" m MACUI.flSTS' AXD BLACKSSfirns- rXloS.


10 CI


Temple of Honor Illustrated,

ftirn''J3""w?d "n'""u'l'?"f""l »• ('Wm
Hlh-rdiiiiilo Tmiiplii kriil iho Dukki-i
pill uf ridxlllj unil Pul Wurtby Ch!


iplaof HoDor, i Htstorical Slirtcllj
.. tf. A Complete Eipoelliaa of
oM^e^ P'"^^ "".^ Fidellly. B j ■


Adoptive Masonry Illustrated.

iMiilii1t!uniiilvti'IJIn>trBlea8UD*lnTl)i«Pt>eDegieeiot^auuPi
iJniHiiv. IITThoiDH L<mi>i runi|>rlHlug Iha DegreeE ot Jcd1iUu_
Kir, It nth, BHthrr. HurUinaiiaElecia, end known u th* DMgbtcL.
, Wlilim'i ])n(irii>i, WItu'ji DeGnc, Hlitor'i De^rve uiil Uie BubevoI^

Freemasonry Exposed.

BVi'AfT.WIttlAM MORGAN. Thfl (l^nnlno .,lrt Morj
liithlti-liiiii. Willi KntCPilVtligi. otiowlng Ibe Lodge Ruom,
1..,, Nii(.iK. riiii-flunnli. tJrlij», Kle.

wrllli.if IL, WN tonli. oaoh.

Five Rituals Bound Together.

"Oddlolluinhlu UluiilHiIwI," (n!d wnrk, > '■ Kiilgms of PjthiM UlnsWitH
"(l<H>d Tninuinrliia IllDitroUil," "KipoHmon ofliie GcniiKe," ud "Jtitoal.
U» Ormd Army of thii llnimbllo," aro eold bound tQgether In eloth. (ur Sl,^

Secret Societies Illustrated.

SinilnlnlnKlhufilitHii,Orlpi,ra*iiworf«, EmbleniB. Klc., ot th.
MMoiilo Unanuw n! Urn Blno Lodge, Chuplcr, Connrli und Con. „„_
utlviiMuonry,)(«v1>oiia'ldrul]nwiihlp, Rood Tumnlarlim. Temple of IIb3
nr, rnllud aoin oniidunlry, KDlgbMof Pythlss »nd Ilip Grauge, Wai ■""
*tl>i.U', OvflrUWculB. TOpiigUB. S5 cbiHb each.

Rituals and Secrets illustrated.

^^oinpnipd of "Ti'inplu "f llnnof ninstfstcd," "Adoptive MH»onry I
W tud." '■United Sonii or induatty IllnBtnMd," and "SecnL 9t
iUuftntvi)," lu cloUi ti.UU DUCti.


Hoklen With Cords.

OR THB rOWEB OF THE SECRET EMPIK8. A lalthfn! fBpteipnlattcm
m vtonr or !hi.' evil lunaencu ot Freemiennry. Bt E. E. Flaoh, AnClinrof
"Liiao People," "A Sunny Life," Etc. Thiu ts a thiilUnely tolflrBStlng ttorr
wcnmtfily troo lo life beciinM mainly a narraUon o' tiatorieol (sots. US
pBgeB. In clotb, tl.OO. PaperSO cenla.

The Broken Seal

*^RPERS0KALItEMENiaCESCK9 0FTHE ABDUCTION uidMIIKDBH
\foT Cat't. Wk. MoKQis. By Samoel D. Greune. One of the moat tn-
tctesliog bookB ever pnlillsbed. In Cloth 75 cents. Paper covers 40 c*al8.

Secret Societies Ancient and Modern.

A BOOK OP GKBAT DJTEHEST. This wnrit la partlcnlarly com-
toamied to the attention ot OiTiCHHa of the Abut iNU KiVY, the Bchch

TABLE OF CONTESTS; TUB AEtlquftyot Secret SocieHea; The Life of
Jnlian, The ElraelnlanMyeleriea, The OilKin of Masonry, Was WashingMn ■
Uasou! Fillmore and Wcbstei'BDErence to Muonty, A Brief Ontline of the
prngreeeof MBBonry In ttae United Btatea, The Taninisny King, MaBonIc Be.
nevolence, The aaoa ot Hasonry, An niiutratlon, Ttie Couclnaion. BOc. esch^

Hon. John Quincy Adams' Letters to

COL. WM. STONE. EDWAHD LIVrSGSTON, and othera.on thenatnre
oIMaeoDicOBCtie,0bligaUacEandPenaltles. Cloth$l.UO. FapercoverSSc

Coiiege Secret Societies.

THETR CUSTOMS, CHABACTER AND THB EFFORTS FOR THEIR
SCPPRESSION. By H. L. KfillngK. Containinu the opinion ot many
pnn^incNt CollaRa Preaidenta, and othoie, nnd a tall aeconnt of the mnrdet
of Mortimer Leggett. 25 cents each.

History of the Abduction and Murder of CKpt. Wm.
Morgan.

AS PBBPARKD BY SEVEN COMMITTKEB OF CITIZBNa, appointed
to Mcottain the fate of Morean.
Thle hook conUlne indiBpntublc, lenl ovidonce that Freemaaona ahdaeled.
MidmnrdercdWm. Morgan, fgr no other ottenao than the rovftlatlDn of Ma-
Boniy. It contalna the aworn testimony of over twonW persons, iDclndlae
UorgBn's Wife, and na cuJidId porsnn, after roadlne this booli, can donbt that
many of the most respectable Freemasons Id the Empire Stale, with othsra,
Rare concerned la thts crime. SScentaeoch.

The Mystio Tie, or Freemasonry a League with the Devi)

Tins IS AN ACCOUNT OF THE CHURCH TRLVL of Peter Cook and
wife, of Elkhart, Indluna, torrcrneingto cnpportalteTerendFreeniuoo:
and their very able defense presented hy Mis. Lncia C. Conk, In which ehe
clearly ehowe that Freemasonry is antagonlBtlc to the Christian Reliiiion.
IB ceniB each.

Narratives and Arguments.

SHOWING THB CONFLICT OF SECRET SOCIETIES with the Conatt-
The fact that Secret Soclentlo intetfero with tbo ciecollon and pervert the

The Anti-Mason's Scrap Book.

CONSISTING OP ai CYW09CBE TRACTS. In this book are the view*
of more than a Bcore of men, many of them o( diatfngniahed sbllitj, on
(be Bnbjeot ol Secret Soclellea.

The dangerona tendency and positive evil of o^anized Secrecy Is bere ahowo
hy the moat varied and powerful argnmenta and llluetrBliona that have ever
been given to the nnhlie. Lerturen and otbcrs who wish to And tbe bast bt-
Snmenta sgeiaat tbe Lodge ebunld send [or thla honk. Those who wish to
wcDlale AnQ-UaeonlcTm^tsought (o bavethe book to select fcotn. SOceacb,


I


I


Judge Whitney's Detanse before the Grand Lodge at ' '
Illinois.

y itn- Mnslst ot tho Lorlga when S. L.
mardernd Ellen SInde. jDdgr Whiniey, hj
D, brought on blmwir tbe vengesnct ot the


RemEnfsoences of Morgan Times.

By ELDER DAVID BERNARD, Author or Dernarf'i Llolit on Vllfl
TbiBlsatb . . . _ .


Minutes of the Syracuse Convention.


CONTAISIXO A
Ktq^.Pnif. C. A -

"-B. M.^. Qago, Elder J. R. Boird


„_.. ., _ . mnrd; Recollection a of Iho Morgan

Trial!, as Tclali'd hy Vlclorr Btrdaeve, Eeo.. and urenentod by ble dausbler,

- - " ' - - _ BrtiHollotDeiegitfiBiSongBot Mf7o.W-

1; ConBtitnllon K. C. A.; Rep "


hard, Re

„ „., _ ... Boird K --.,

ot tbo Uorgan llmee, by Eld^r David Bernard; RecoUectiona of Ibe Mi

. Miller; Secretary-BRi
Clnrli: Pupur liy Eiwb lloncvm
tnitk'CI! and u ficpnrl ot the Ptli

Proceedings of the Pittsburgh Conventl<Mj

T,D.D„

', D, a.


by Rev. T). R. Kerr, D. D.,
.R.V " "'- - "


, , ..„ , .._(. Woodruff P(

ryCagawell. Fror. a A. Bluicbardsiidltev. W. £. CoqoUette;


Masonry a Work of Darkness.

ISTMICAll
_rniBtn>.ig, (Pf
[Fllin; work em


itiglw4^

on. ^H

""""^

I

"1

in.. ^


History National Christian Association.

I u mp ab the end on b he \ U ea □[ In orporBtloIi, Conelltu^on
n By Bwsot tbo Aeso a n ondi ou of the Brpenter Uonatlnn with
Fn d b M Catp nte Tablea Bhowtog Ibe

n U e and National Convtr-

I. Na o al ChriBtlan Afsociii-


■iipHH

3 blDS Dll TSH 51t


STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES

STANFORD AUXILIARY LIBRARY

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-600

1650) 723-9201

solcirc@sulmail.slanford.edu

All books are subjecl to recoil.

DATE DUE
