Remarks on a Review of Symmes' Theory, which Appeared in the American Quarterly Review (Jeremiah N. Reynolds, 1827)
===================================================================================================================
Jeremiah N. Reynolds — Remarks on a Review of Symmes' Theory (Washington, 1827). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (remarksonreviewo00reyn).

:Raat&ms&


MVIEW  OF  SYMMES'  THEORY


WHICH   APPEARED    IN   THE

s

AMERICAN  QUARTERLY  REVIEW,


<  CITIZEN  OF  THE  UNITE©  STATES.


WASHINGTON  :

PRISTID  BY  GALES  &  SEA.TON-

1827.


TO  THE  READER.

The  following  numbers  were  written  in  reply
to  a  review  of  Capt.  Symmes'  Theory,  which  ap-
peared in  the  American  Quarterly ;  and  were  first
published  in  the  National  Intelligencer.  In  look-
ing over  them,  the  reader  will  find  the  fir3t  de-
voted to  a  physical  view  of  the  Theory,  and,
without  entering  into  any  detail,  some  general
analogies  of  the  solar  system  were  urged  in  favor
of  the  doctrine.  It  was  intended  to  shew  that  it
was  a  pleasing  and  rational  inquiry  ;  but  not  so
clear  and  well  defined,  as,  in  any  degree,  to  jus-
tify an  expedition,  predicated  upon  it.  Accord-
ingly, in  the  second  number,  it  has  been  urged,
that  the  Quarterly  might  possibly  have  been  in
error,  in  supposing  the  polar  seas  encumbered
with  perpetual  ice  ;  and  that,  independent  of  all
speculation,  the  field  for  inquiry  and  scientific
research  was  immense  in  the  remote  polar  re-
gions ;  and  in  the  third  and  last  number,  it  will
be  clearly  seen,  that  every  movement  in  relation
to  the  expedition  has  been  on  those  broad  and  li-
beral principles,  which  have  always  marked  simi-
lar exertions  by  the  citizens  of  other  countries.


REMARKS,  &c.


To  the  Editor  of  the  American  Quarterly  Review  .♦

Sib  :  In  looking-  over  the  first  number  of  your  very
able  and  interesting1  Review,  I  perceived  some  twenty
or  thirty  pages  devoted  to  an  examination  of  the  princi-
ples of  Captain  Symmes'  Theory,  as  written  by  a  "  Ci-
tizen of  the  United  States."  In  the  most  part,  T  shall
leave  it  for  the  author  to  manage  his  own  controversy
with  you,  in  time  and  manner,  as  it  shall  suit  his  own
convenience  :  he  may  resist  your  deductions,  or  ac-
quiesce in  the  correctness  of  your  conclusions.

But,  as  doctrines,  from  the  fact  of  being  long  receiv-
ed, acquire  a  greater  degree  of  credit,  and,  as  new  opi-
nions contrary  to  these,  and  in  other  respects,  perhaps,
extraordinary  in  themselves,  meet,  from  these  causes,
not  only  slow  and  difficult  belief,  but  even  with  a  very
partial  examination,  I  trust  it  will  not  be  deemed  impro-
per in  roe,  briefly  to  write  a  review  of  your  review,  I  feel
myself  called  on  tofdo  so,  not  from  any  wish  tenaciously
to  maintain  an  abstract  theory,  but  because  you  have
blended  the  exertions  now  making  to  get  up  an  expedi-
tion, with  what  you  call  *'  visionary  speculations."  I
intend  to  separate  them — or  rather  to  show  that  they
have  not  been  united — by,  in  the  first  place,  treating
of  the  Theory,  and  in  the  second  place,  of  the  expedi-
tion, and  the  principles  upon  which  it  is  placed.  For
the  sake  of  originality,  (in  common  with  the  Edinburgh
and  London  Quarterly)  you  commence  by  giving,  a  pret-
ty general  review  of  all  the  past  theories  and  specula-
tions on  the  subject,  upon  which  you  are  about  to
write.  Of  Burnet,  forming  the  earth  from  oil,  and  other
matter  ;  of  Woodward,  and  his  doctrine  of  gravity  af-
ter the  flood ;  of  Whiston,  and  his  comet  system  ;  of
the  theories  of  HalUr  and  Euler.  You  pay  a  passing
compliment  to  Buffbn,  who  regards  the  earth  as  a  part
of  the  sun,  knocked  off  by  some  wandering  comet ;  and
tlius,  from  the  ease  with  which  you  handle  and  explode


old  and  long  exploded  systems,  convince  every  reader^
long  before  you  arrive  at  the  '*  New  Theory/*  how
admirably  you  are  qualified  to  treat  it.

You  appear  to  consider  all  these  theorists  by  far  out-
done by  Capt.  Symmes,  though  you  admit  and  say,  the
doctrine  of  concentric  spheres  "has  been  one  of  the
oldest  in  geology.*'  How  can  it  surpassthera  if  it  be  the
same  ?

Inquiries  concerning  the  figure  of  the  earth  we  in-
habit, are  among  the  noblest  speculations  of  the  human
mind.  They  enlarge  our  views,  and  frequently  bring
remote  parts  of  the  earth  into  a  knowledge  and  inter-
change with  each  other.  Indeed,  the  learned  world  has
seldom  been  the  loser ;  and  you  must  in  candor  admit,
it  has  frequently  been  the  gainer,  by  those  short  con-
flicts carried  on  between  inventive  genius  and  the  adhe-
rents to  old  systems.

By  collision  of  the  flint  and  steel,  the  spark  is  eli-
cited. I  readily  own,  we  should  not  lend  a  too  credu-
lous ear  to^  every  novelty  that  may  arise  in  this  age,
"  prolific  in  improvement  and  discovery  ;"  and  that
systems  long  established,  and  founded  on  experiments,
and  sanctioned  by  the  wise  and  learned,  for  ages,  de-
serve our  confidence,  and  should  not  be  yielded,  until
new  ones  are  demonstrated  to  be  true.  On  the  other
hand,  we  have  something,  also,  to  apprehend.  We
cling  with  instinctive  feeling  to  our  early  impressions.
We  doubt  all  systems  and  tenets  but  our  own,  and  seem,
not  unfrequently,  to  forget,  that  the  doctrines  of  which
we  are  so  very  tenacious,  when  first  given  to  the
world,  were  pronounced  by  learned  reviewers,  to  be  the
splendid  visions  of  madmen,  and  in  their  usual  facility
at  demonstration,  were  proven  to  be  "impossible."
However  proud  we  may  feel  of  our  boasted  improve-
ments and  discoveries,  I  apprehend  you  will  readily
admit  there  is  much  to  be  learned;  that  there  are  still
within  the  mightybosom  of  the  universe,many  unexplain-
ed phenomena,  that  may  shed  light  upon  our  systems
of  philosophy.  There  is  nothing  in  human  science  and
industry,  fixed  and  certain,  except  those  calculations,
founded  exclusively  on  numbers  ;  and  as  long  as  the
human  mind,  invincible  in  its  pursuit  after  knowledge,
is  constantly  acquiring  new  materials,  and  making  new
developments,  old  systems  must  be  enlarged  and  im-
proved, or  give  place  to  new  ones.  We  have  scarcely
entered  XheVestibule  of  Nature's  greatTemple— though,
from  your  remarks,  one  would  be  led  to  suppose  every


thing  fixed,  and,  especially,  that  the  figure  of  the  earth
was  so  strictly  defined,  that,  even  to  propose  a  further
inquiry,  is  to  deserve  the  name  of"  visionary."

To  this  I  must  beg  leave  to  enter  my  caveat.  I  trust
I  shall  do  it  courteously,  and,  fearful  as  the  odds  are
against  me,  attempt  to  reason  with  you.  Not  by  sarcasm:
for  that  is  not  reasoning— nor  by  witticism  :  for  it  is  not
the  best  method  to  arrive  at  truth,  in  the  investigation
of  any  subject.

That  the  earth  is  composed  of  five  spheres,  concen-
tric with  each  other,  and  each  sphere  supplied  with  a
"mid  plain  space,"  and  that  the  water  extends  quite
through  the  sphere,  in  some  places,  are  points  I  shall
not  defend.  I  have  never  defended  them.  Your  views
of  the  Magellanic  clouds  are  in  strict  accordance  with
my  own.  That  they  are  nebulae  belonging  to  theHeavens,
and  revolve,  will  scarcely  admit  of  a  doubt.  In  addition
to  your  authority,  I  have  seen  an  intelligent  officer,  who
saw  them  in  their  regular  positions,  at  a  time,  when  his
vessel  was  anchored  at  New  Zealand.  If  this  be  a  fact,
New  Zealand  cannot  form  one  of  them.  But  notwith-
standing these  concessions,  1  must  still  maintain,  as  a
matter  of  pleasing  speculation,  if  you  please,  that  the
earth  we  live  on,  may  be  a  hollow  sphere,  and  widely
open  at  the  poles.

And  paradoxical  as  it  may  appear,  that  such  a  state
of  things  is  reconcileable  with  the  admeasurements  of  the
earth,  with  the  voyages  performed,  and  more  especially
when  really  understood,  is  not  at  variance  with  the  great
principles  laid  down  by  Newton,  and  received  by  the
learned  world.  That  the  theory  is  sustained  by  some
strong  and  powerful  analogies  of  the  other  planets,  I
trust  will  be  clearly  seen,  though  you  dispose  of  them,
without  the  least  trouble.

1  would  merely  remark,  in  transitu,  that  you  have  not
been  remarkable  for  fairness,  in  your  examination  of  the
third  chapter,  where  the  author  institutes  an  inquiry
into  the  principles  and  properties  of  matter,  of  the  cen-
trifugal and  centripetal  forces.  The  insulated  paragraph
you  quote  gives  no  very  correct  view  of  the  premises
he  assumed,  and  of  course,  you  get  greatly  the  better  of
him  in  argument.

Such  statements  could  not  be  intended,  on  your  part,
and  oug!*t  to  be  excused  by  the  author,  as  it  is  the  first
quarterly  you  ever  wrote.  On  this  point,  however,  I  feel
no  tenacity,  though  I  do  believe  there  can  be  some  good
reasons  urged  in  favor  of  the  doctrine,  that,  if  the  earth
1*


6

was  ever  in  so  yielding*  and  pliant  a  state,  as  to  take  its
form  from  motion,  the  result  would  be  a  hollow  sphere.
So  little  s  known  of  the  principles  inherent  in  matter,
that  such  inquiries  are  attended,  at  every  step,  by  in-
surmountable difficulties.  Hi  nee  it  is,  that  speculations
about  the  original  formation  of  the  earth,  have  always
been  various,  contradictory,  and  discordant  to  each
other.  To  study  them  is  to  distrust  them.  In  such  re-
veries, we  leave  the  field  of  true  philosophy,  and  roam
at  large,  in  the  regions  of  fancy  and  of  vague  conjec-
ture. We  have  not  data  upon  which  to  build  ;  nothing1
with  which  to  compare ;  we  are  off"  our  moorings,  lost  in
the  unfathomable  depths  of  infinity,  without  anchor  to
sustain,  compass  or  landmark  to  guide  our  course  and  to
enlighten  our  researches.

Man  may,  with  great  precision,  measure  the  disk  of
the  sun,  calculate  the  force  of  gravity  on  the  most  dis-
tant orb,  mark  the  bold  planet  in  bis  course,  and  unfold
the  laws  that  govern  him.  In  the  field  of  experimental
philosophy  he  may  snatch  the  lightning  from  the  clouds,
and  yet,  as  a  child,  he  must  acknowledge  his  ignorance
of  the  original  process  by  which  the  earth  was  formed,
of  the  movings  of  that  mighty  power,  who  spake  and  it
sprang  into  existence.

To  account  for  every  thing,  is  attempting  too  much,
either  by  the  old  or  new  Theory.  It  is  almost  assuming
the  dangerous  ground,  that  matter  may,  by  its  own  en-
ergies, spring  into  systems — the  very  idea  of  which  is
not  only  unphilosopfoical,  but  irreverent  and  absurd;
yet,  I  think  I  shall  be  able  to  show  that,  to  some  such
speculation,  you  are  indebted  for  the  premises,  in  part,
from  which  you  demonstrate,  that  the  earth  is  solid
with  an  increased  density  at  the  centre.

The  question,  however,  between  us  is  of  a  very  dif-
ferent kind.  What  is  the  form  of  the  earth  ?  Not  how  it
was  formed.  If  its  figure  has  been  determined,  to  Ma-
thematical exactness,  all  further  inquiry  is  worse  than
useless.  This  then,  is  properly  the  point  first  to  be  ex-
amined.

In  approaching  this  inquiry,  you  state  "  that  the  fact
of  the  earth's  having  a  globular  form,  is  strong  evidence
that  it  must  once  have  been  composed  of  fluid,  or  at
least  of  piastre  materials,  F<  om  this  position  it  becomes  a
problem  nrmechanics,  thathasbeen  frequently  solved  by
Mathematicians,  and  all  prove  from  it  the  earth  is  solid."

Again,  you  say,  "the  figure  of  the  earth  has  been  de-
termined, not  only  on  the  hypothesis  of  its  being  homo-


geneous,  but  on  the  more  probable  supposition  of  the  in*
crease  in  the  density  of  the  strata;  as  e  descend  below
the  surface.  In  every  case  the  earth  must  be  a  solid
spheroid."

If  from  the  hypothesis,  or  more  probable  supposition,
these  things  must  be  so,  then  there  is  no  room  for
further  inquiry.  The  hypothesis  and  supposition  decide
the  point  in  controversy.  Yet,  I  unhesitatingly  believe,
you  dare  not  venture  your  reputation  as  a  philosopher
to  the  world,  in  argument,  in  favor  of  the  supposition,  or
the  hypothesis  of  the  earth's  homogenity,  csince  every
fact,  as  fctr  as  the  eye  of  observation  has  extended,  with
any  degree  of  accuracy,  proves  to  the  contrary.  That
it  was  ence  in  a  fluid  state,  may,  for  aught  1  know,  be  a
rational  hypothesis;  but  surelv  you  were  not  in  earnest
when  you  supposed  it  "entered  as  an  element  in  the
calculation. "  I  say  nothing  about  the  probabilities  of
»uch  conjectures,  but  must  believe  that  demonstrations
from  such  premises  will  be  regarded  by  Mathematicians
as  the  •'  baseless  fabric  of  a  vision."

Archimedes  said,  give  him  a  place  to  rest  his  lever,
and  he  could  move  the  earth.  So,  give  you  premises,
and  you  can  demonstrate  any  thing:  not  only  that  the
earth  is  solid,  but,  with  Homer,  that  it  rtstfd  on  pillars,
guarded  by  Atlas,  or,  with  the  worshippers  of  Bramah, '
that  it  rested  on  the  back  of  some  huge  elephants*
There  is  nothing  so  easy  as  demonstration  !

Seemingly  aware  of  the  objections  which,  in  truth,
may  be  urged  against  your  premises,  you  proceed
with  other  inquiries,  deemed  less  objectionable,  viz.
the  collateral  support  of  these  positions,  from  the  differ-
ent measurements  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.

Let  us  examine  them.  Newton  ascertained,  by  in-
vestigating the  principles  and  properties  of  matter,  that
■the  earth  is  flattened  at  the  poles.

The  French  philosophers,  the  principal  of  whom  was
Cassini  and  his  colleague  Bunioulli  of  Switzerland,
doubted  his  conclusions,  and  still  maintained  that  the
polar  diameter  of  the  earth  was  the  greater.  By  the
order  of  the  King  of  France,  these  cui.flicting  opinions
were  decided  by  nc'uitl  measurement.

In  the  year  1735,  Condamine,  Godin  and  Bougnier,
all  able  mathematicians,  proceeded  to  the  South,  and
measured  the  length  of  a  degree,  in  Quito,  near  the
Equator.  A  degree  having  already  been  measured  at
45°  North  latitude,  Maupertius,  Clairauldt,  and  Morier
proceeded  to  take  similar  measurements  near  the  Arctic


8

Circle.  As  a  general  result,  the  labors  of  these  gentle-
men confirmed  the  views  of  Newton ;  though  I  do  not
think  you  will  maintain  that  they  were  attended  with
the  degree  of  regularity  that  might  have  been  expected;
nay,  that  would  really  be  required  by  the  "hypothesis
of  the  earth's  being  homogeneous,  or  from  the  more
probable  supposition  of  the  increased  density  of  the
strata,  as  we  descend  beneath  the  surface."  Neither
will  you  maintain  that  the  past,  as  well  as  recent,  at-
tempts to  ascertain  the  real  figure  of  the  earth,  by  actu-
al measurement,  have  been  attended  with  the  success
that  might  be  expected  from  such  Theories;  especially
when  we  take  into  consideration,  the  exquisite  con-
struction of  the  instruments,  made  for  the  purpose,  the
intelligence  evinced  in  the  use  of  them,  and  the  scru-
pulous accuracy,  with  which  these  observations  have
been  computed.

The  eight  admeasurements  taken  in  England,  during
the  survey  of  that  Kingdom,  under  the  direction  of  Col.
Mudge,  has  produced  a  result  different,  nay,  opposite
to  all  former  trials,  and  directly  in  the  teeth  of  your
favorite  hypothesis.  In  these  measurements,  made  with
the  most  costly  instruments,  and  under  the  direction  of
the  most  able  mathematicians,  the  degree  was  found  to
decrease  as  the  observer  approached  the  North.  You
know  the  ablest  mathematicians  admit,  the  measure-
ments have  not  followed  a  regular  and  constant  pro-
gression, that  no  meridian  can  be  a  regular  ellipsis ;
and  that  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  the  earth
itself  is  not  a  solid  of  revolution,  yea,  in  the  words
of  La  Place,  "  that  the  two  hemispheres  are  not  of
the  same  size"  This  singular  result,  says  Malte  Brun,
in  his  physical  writings,  "seems  to  prove,  decidedly,
that  the  spheroidical  figure  of  the  earth  is  subject  to  ir-
regularities, which  can  only  be  determined  by  multipli.
ed  measurements."  Sufficiently  for  all  practical  pur-
poses the  earth  is  globular.  But,  before  we  say  too
much  about  demonstrations,  and  evince  too  much  tena-
city about  our  knowledge  of  it,  small  as  it  is,  we  ought
to  measure,  at  least,  a  degree  on  twelve  meridians
North  and  South  of  the  Equator,  and  twelve  places  on
each  meridian,  making  in  all  288  places  of  observation,
whereas,  in  point  of  fact,  not  fifty  places  have  yet  been
measured,  some  of  them  very  imperfectly,  and  otheia
disagreeing  in  the  general  result.  There  is,  perhaps,
much  truth  in  the  condensed  remarks  of  Keith,  who
concludes  a  very  interesting  article  on  the  globes,  in  the


9

following-  words:  "  Notwithstanding  all  the  admeasure-
ments that  have  hitherto  been  made,  it  has  never  been
ascertained,  in  a  satisfactory  manner,  that  the  Earth  is
strictly  a  spheroid :  indeed,  from  observations  made
in  different  parts  of  the  earth,  it  appears  that  its  figure
is  by  no  means,  that  of  a  spheroid  ;  nor  that  of  any
other  known  regular  mathematical  figure  ;  and  the  only
certain  conclusion  that  can  be  drawn,  from  the  works
of  the  several  gentlemen  employed  to  measure  the
earth,  is,  that  the  earth  is  something  more  flat,  at  the
poles,  than  at  the  equator."  With  you  the  case  is  very
different  ;  every  thing  is  fixed  and  determined,  as  con-
clusively as  demonstration  can  make  it,  and  wo  betide
the  luckless  fellow,  who  shall  propose  a  further  inquiry.
Your  familiar  and  ready  recollection,  on  all  matters  of
this  kind,  will  at  once  bring  to  your  mind,  that  what  I
have  here  stated,  is  confirmed  in  Newton's  Principia,
Book  3d,  page  240,  c.  Phil.  Trans.  No.  386.  Mauper-
tius'  Measures  of  the  Earth,  with  a  compend  of  all  these
authorities,  in  Rees'  Encyclopaedia,  article  Degree.

But  granting  you  all  you  ask,  from  the  experiments
on  the  pendulum,  and  what  do  they  prove  i  Examine
the  various  and  extensive  labors  of  Sabine,  and  you  will
find,  only,  as  a  general  result,  that  the  pendulum  must
be  shortened,  in  going  from  the  North  towards  the
equator,  according  to  the  increased  centrifugal  force,
and  the  consequent  diminution  of  gravity.  In  a  word,
they  prove  the  force  of  gravity  on  the  surface  of  the
earth,  but  do  not  at  all  determine,  nor  begin  to  deter-
mine, that  that  attraction  is  the  result  of  four  thousand
miles  of  matter,  or,  that  it  may  not  be  the  effect  of  a
sphere  of  one  thousand  miles  in  thickness.

Say  the  length  of  a  pendulum  suited  to  beat  seconds
at  the  equator  was  39  inches  27  hundredths,  at  latitude
20°,  it  must  be  increased  to  39  in.  44",  at  the  latitude  of
this  City  39  in.  97',  at  70°  39  in.  177",  and  at  90°  39  in.
197",  each  of  these  considered  as  a  medium  length.
With  all  your  accuracy  at  demonstration,  I  should  like  to
see  you  attempt  to  show  that  these  might  not  have  been
the  results  of  the  pendulum,  vibrating  seconds  on  the
surface  of  a  hollow  %lobe  ?

Other  reasons,  "thick  as  black  berries,"  crowd  on
you  against  the  possibility  of  the  earth  being  hollow:
"sententise  numerantur  non  ponderantur."  You  state,
'*  the  greater  density  of  the  earth,  towards  the  centre,  is
proved  in  a  most  direct  manner,  by  the  experiments  of  Dr.
Maskylene  and  of  Mr.  Cavendish."  I  admit,  most  readily.


10

the  experiments  of  the  Astronomer  Royal,  with  the
plumet,  at  the  base  of  the  mountain  Schehdlian,  in  Scot-
land, were  ingenious  and  learned ;  but,  certainly,  liable
to  some  objections.  Did  the  Astronomer  know  the  spe-
cific gravity  of  the  materials  composing  the  mountain  ?
Did  he  know  the  exact  deviation  of  the  plumb  line,  or
the  quantity  of  matter  between  it  and  the  centre  of  gra-
vity ?  How  could  be  make  the  proper  allowances  for
the  influence  of  other  matter  on  the  plumet,  besides
the  mountain  ?  And,  without  these  points,  so  essential
to  be  known,  were  first  ascertained  to  mathematical
precision,  will  you  say  the  result  must  be  regarded  with
determined  accuracy  ?  I  own,  this  is  the  nearest  ap-
proximation that  has  been  made  ;  but  to  talk  about  de-
monstrations, is  a  sad  perversion  of  the  term.'

However,  as  I  intend  to  treat  yau  courteously,  as  be-
comes one  of  my  age,  to  a  "  grave  and  reverend  senior,"
I  will,  admit,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  all  you  require
from  this  experiment,  that,  proportionally,  the  attraction
of  the  earth  is  nearly  double  that  of  the  mountain,  as  5
to  9 ;  and  then,  what  follows  ?  You  say,  the  earth  must
increase  in  density  to  the  centre.  1  suppose  the  expe-
riment proves,  if  it  proves  any  thing,  the  quantity  of
matter  the  e*irth  contains,  but  not  how  that  matter  is
arranged.  Here  we  are  at  issue,  and  the  reader  may  de-
cide between  us.

If  you  object  to  all  this,  I  will  then  maintain,  that  the
quantity  of  matter  given  to  the  earth  by  calculation,  may
be  found  in  a  sphere  of  one  thousand  miles  in  thickness,
and  then  not  be  so  dense  as  the  planet  Mercury,  by  one
fifth.  That  such  arrangement  of  the  material  would  be
in  strict  accordance  with  your  experiments,  and  with
the  general  and  regulating  effects  of  gravity,  I  appre-
hend would  have  been  admitted  by  Ne-wton  himself,
though  you  may  doubt  it.

That  there  is  an  increased  density  in  the  strata,  as  we
descend  beneath  the  surface,  you  appear  to  regard  in
the  light  of  an  axiom.  Hence,  it  would  be  useless  for
me  to  attempt  argument.  I  will,  however,  present  one
.or  two  ideas  for  your  consideration,  should  you  again
give  the  subject  a  passing  thought.

If  matter  attracts  matter,  in  proportion  to  quantity,
and  inversely,  as  the  square  of  the  intermediate  distance,
then  the  particles  at  the,  centre  of  the  globe  must  be
equally  attracted  in  all  directions,  which  is  the  same  as
the  total  absence  of  all  attractions.  How  then  can  there
be  any  pressure  or  increased  density  in  that  direction  ?


11

Again,  every  Mathematician  is  acquainted  with  the  rules
by  which  the  increased  density  of  the  earth  is  calculat-
ed, at  any  given  depth.  By  the  application  of  these
rules,  it  will  probably  be  found,  that  the  weight  on  eve*
ry  square  inch,  at  the  depth  of  only  two  miles,  will  be
20,532  pounds,  on  every  square  foot  it  will  be  2,956,508
pounds,  and  on  every  square  >»rd,  the  astonishing
weight  of  26, 608, 572  pounds.

I  might  go  on  and  make  calculations,  what  would  be
the  increased  pressure  on  every  square  rood  or  acre,  but
it  would  exceed  the  powers  of  the  imagination  to  con-
ceive. It  is  by  some  such  calculation  the  earth  is  made
out  to  be  four  times  as  hard  as  hammered  iron  at  the
centre.

It  is  hard  to  reason  on  matters  of  this  kind,  from  our
total  ignorance  of  the  principles  and  properties  of  matter.
The  eye  of  philosophy  has  never  penetrated  far  be-
neath the  surface  of  the  earth.  On  this  subject,  Gold-
smith has  very  justly  remarked,  "that  the  little  bee,
which  darts  its  sting  into  a  huge  elephant,  does  more,  in
proportion,  towards  investigating  the  structure  of  those
animals,  than  man  has  yet  done,  towards  investigating
the  internal  structure  of  the  globe  he  inhabits."

If,  indeed,  we  are  to  regard  the  granite,  rock,  and
other  heavy  substances,  found  upon  and  near  the  sur-
face of  the  earth,  as  the  mere  alluvial  soil,  when  com-
pared with  the  more  solid  parts  lying  beneath  and  ex-
tending to  the  centre-  how  can  you  account  for  the  sin-
gle phenomenon  of  earthquakes  ?  There  are  many  well
attested  instances,  where  whole  islands  and  sections  of
countries  have  disappeared,  and  others  emerged  from
the  bottom  of  the  ocean.  Countries  have  been  shaken
like  the  undulations  of  the  ocean,  and  other  parts  of  the
same  continent  not  disturbed.  How  can  you  move  one
part  of  a  body  solid  as  the  earth  attbe  surface,  and  grow-
ing more  dense  towards  the  centre,  without,  at  least
agitating  all  its  parts  ?  How  can  explosions  beneath  the
surface,  communicate  wi  h  each  other)  a«  has  been  the
case  from  South  America  to  the  Azores,  and  that,  too,
with  nearly  the  same  velocity  that  sounds  fly  through
the  air,  unless  there  be  caverns  of  immense  extent,  be-
neath the  surface  ?  Yet,  according  to  your  doctrines,
no  such  caverns  could  exist,  the  ponderous  weight  of  the
materials,  "from  a  fluid  state,"  gravitating  towards  the
centre,  would  destroy  them,  if,  in  the  first  instance,  they
had  existed.

Of  gravity,  nothing  is  known,  except  in  its  regulating
effects;  that  it  is  a  principle  inherent  in  matter,  at  least


12

In  all  matter  tkat  has  hitherto  been  the  subject  of  hu-
man investigation.

You  cannot  demonstrate  the  attractive  influence  of
one  particle  of  matter  on  another ;  how,  then,  can  it  be
shown,  that  there  must  be  four  thousand  miles  of  mat-
ter from  the  surface  to  the  centre,  in  order  to  keep  bo-
dies from  flying  off  at  a  tangent,  by  the  centrifugal
force  ?  There  is  no  magic  in  a  centre  particle.  Matter
attracts  as  a  masss  and  if  we  allow  the  centre  of  the
sphere  to  have  the  same  attraction,  which  by  hypothesis
is  given  to  the  centre  of  the  earth,  1  cannot  perceive  why
the  regulating  effects  of  gravity  would  not  remain  pre-
cisely the  same.

I  am  quite  amused  at  your  notions  of  gravity  on  the  »«•
terior.  You  suppose  men  might  leap  twelve  hundred  feet
high,  and  fly  from  place  to  place,  by  the  use  of  a  lady's
fan— that  they  would  only  adhere  to  the  inner  surface
by  the  centrifugal  force.  In  nothing  have  you  so  com-
pletely failed.  I  will  not  allow  myself  to  use  a  harsh  ex-
pression, but,  really,  in  this,  your  deductions  are  as  un-
philosophical  as  your  attempt  at  wit  is  clumsy  and  point-
less. In  a  regular  symmetrical  sphere,  your  position  is
tenable.  But  you  do  know,  or  ought  to  have  known,
that  the  very  instant  you  admit  polar  openings,  the  case
is  altered,  the  nice  balance  is  destroyed,  and  bodies  must
adhere  in  the  concave,  hy  the  same  law  of  gravity,  that
they  do  on  the  exterior.  You  might  just  as  well  at-
tempt to  leap  to  the  moon  «*  by  the  use  of  a  lady's  fan,"
because  there  is  an  attraction  between  that  planet  and
the  earth,  as  to  jump  from  one  side  of  the  sphere  to  the
other,  formed  on  the  principles  of  the  "New  Theory."

You  may  lay  aside  all  uneasiness  about  the  diminution
of  gravity.  There  is,  upon  a  globe,  neither  high  nor
low,  up  nor  down.  Antipodes  on  a  sphere,  like  those
on  a  globe,  would  stand  on  the  earth  as  we  do.  The
sky  would  be  over  their  heads,  and  their  view  would  be
limited  by  the  apparent  horizon.  You  might  just  as  well
start  East  from  Philadelphia,  and  travel  with  a  view  of
arriving  at  the  edge  of  the  Earth,  and  of  looking  down
over  it,  as  to  expect  any  fantastic  appearances  on  the
verge  of  a  polar  opening.

Nature  operates  on  a  larger  scale,  if  she  operates  on
this  principle  at  all ;  and  so  easy  and  gradual  would  be
the  convexity,  that,  to  an  observer,  it  would  appear  like
an  immense  plain,  or  any  other  part  of  the  earth — the
eye  of  the  philosopher  alone  would  be  able  to  discover
a  new  state  of  things.


13

From  the  Earth  you  "ascend  to  the  Heavens."  Al-
low me,  at  an  humble  distance,  to  follow  you  there,  and
see  what  light  can  be  thrown  on  the  doctrine  of  spheres,
from  celestial  analogy.  This  will  assist  us  without  an
exploring1  p^rty.  We  are,  by  the  use  of  glasses,  better
acquainted  with  some  of  the  other  planets,  than  with  all
the  parts  of  our  own.  What  spot  within  the  bounds  of
Herschel's  orbit,  that  has  not  been  examined,  nay,  atten-
tively examined  by  man,  except  a  large  portion  of  his
own  little  spot  of  earth.  Hence  we  hope,  from  the  an-
nals of  these  celestial  voyagers,  to  find  some  accounts  of
other  worlds  that  will,  by  the  force  of  fair  analogy,  lead
us  to  a  better  knowledge  of  our  own  ,•  the  poles  or  which
have  never  been  explored.

From  these  researches,  do  we  not  find,  that  all  the
planetary  bodies  partake,  more  or  less,  of  a  spherical
figure,  agreeably  to  the  circumstances  under  which  they
are  placed,  in  relation  to  the  known  laws  of  nature,  in
motion  and  forces  ?  They  all  revolve  on  their  own  axis,
by  a  diurnal  rotation,  and  by  an  annual  revolution  around
the  Sun,  as  the  centre  of  the  system;  all  present  reflect-
ing disks,  and  no  doubt  habitable  surfaces.  Hence,  is  it
unphilosophical  to  suppose  the  strictest  analogy  subsists
throughout,  and,  that  any  theory  which  will  explain  one
phenomenon,  ought  to  explain  all  phenomena  that  are
alike  situated,  in  respect  to  these  la'vs  ?  The  planet
Saturn  belongs  to  the  same  system  of  the  Earth,  revolves
around  the  same  common  centre,  and  is  governed  by
the  same  general  and  universal  laws— so  that  the  same
physical  causes  on  one  planet,  ought  to  produce  like
results  on  the  other.  If  this  be  the  case,  is  not  the  old
theory  obviously  defective,  when  applied  to  Saturn's
rings;  and  must  not  any/  theory,  which  precludes  the
possibility  of  a  hollow  planet,  or  even  concentric  spheres,
preclude,  in  like  manner,  the  possibility  of  the  concen-
tric spheres  or  rings  around  the  planet  Saturn  ?  Let  ill
natured  dogmatism  be  laid  aside,  and  let  us  fairly  and
honestly,  with  a  single  eye  to  truth,  examine  the  analo-
gies this  and  other  planets  may  unfold,  and  see  whether
it  is  probable  the  principle  of  spheres  exists  in  the  solar
system.

The  rings  of  Saturn  are,  at  least,  two  in  number;  some
Astronomers  have  supposed  more.  They  no  where  ad-
here to  each  other,  or  to  the  body  of  the  planet.  They
lie  in  the  plane  of  the  planet's  equator,  revolve  in  about
the  same  time  of  the  planet,  and  undergo  phases,  which
prove  them  to  be  opaque  bodies,  and,  like  other  orbs  of
2


14

the  Universe,  shining  by  reflected  light,  received  from
the  Sun  ;  indeed  they  reflect  a  more  briliant  light  than
the  planet,  and  casta  strong  shadow  on  his  disk.

What  conclusion  do  you  draw  respecting  this  planet  ?
Boy  ou  consider  these  rings,  the  onetwenty,and  the  other
seven  thousand  miles  broad,  to  be  mere  anomalies  of  na-
ture ?  Are  there  any  laws  of  matter  on  Saturn  differ-
ent from  those  exerted  on  Jupiter  or  the  Earth  ?  And
does  not  this  planet,  notwithstanding  your  demonstra-
tions, strong  as  the  thunderbolt  that  splinters  the  gnarled
oak,  clearly  establish  the  fact,  that  concentric  spheres  do
exist,  at  least,  in  One  instance,  in  the  solar  system  ?  If,
by  occular  demonstration,  we  know  they  do  exist  in  one
instance,  is  it  an  unreasonable  inquiry  to  examine  whe-
ther they  do  not  exist  in  all,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  ?
Is  not  nature  generally  uniform  in  all  her  operations  ?  Do
not  similar  causes,  acting  under  like  circumstances,  ever
produce  like  effects  ?  Physical  nature  seldom  departs
from  her  regular  line  of  operation  ;  if  she  does,  can  there
not  generally  be  assigned  some  good  cause  for  the
change  ?

Let  us,  then,  examine  the  phenomena  of  Saturn's  rings
abstractly,  and  see  if  science  can  afford  a  solution,  why
this  planet  should  be  different  from  all  other  orbs  in  the
Universe.

What  is  the  use  of  these  appendages  to  the  planet
they  circumvolve,  though  the  time  of  their  revolution,
by  the  la^s  of  Kepler,is  the  same  that  would  be  required
of  satellites  ?  Are  they  to  shed  a  faint  light  on  the
planet  ?  How  can  the  inhabitants  be  benefited  by  the
light  they  reflect  ?  Those  on  whom  the  direct  rays  of
the  Sun  fall,  are  the  only  ones  who  could  receive  the  di-
rect rays  from  the  rings,  and,  of  course,  this  light  would
not  be  needed.

Again  :  Are  not  the  rays  reflected  from  the  rings,  in-
tercepted from  falling  on  that  part  of  the  planet  which
has  just  emerged  from  fifteen  years'  darkness  ;  or.  they
are  intercepted  from  falling  on  these  parts  that  are
about  to  enter  into  the  depth  of  the  Saturnian  night  ?
In  both  these  cases,  must  we  not  conclude,  that  for  the
purpose  of  lighting  the  planet,  the  rings  were  not  in-
tended ?  Do  you  suppose  the  rings  of  this  planet  are  to
assist  the  moons  in  lessening  the  gloom  of  fifteen  years'
darkness  that  reigns  alternately  around  each  of  his  poles,
only  reflect  that  the  unenlightened  side  of  the  rings  are
always  towards  the  dark  pole  of  the  planet.

Should  you  still  persist  in  supposing  they  may  be  in-
tended to  cheer  the  night  in  the  oppesite  hemisphere.,


1'  answer,  that  but  little  of  the  enlightened  part  of  the
disk  of  the  rings  can  be  seen  in  the  night :  for  on  that
part  of  the  planet  they  are,  themselves,  eclipsed  by  it.
And  further  :  1  can  scarcely  suppose  the  presence  of  the
rings  so  absolutely  necessary,  when  seven  moons  cheer
the  night,  and  when  the  nights  are  less  than  five  hours
in  length.

If,  then,  these  concentric  rings  be  not  purposely  in-
tended, by  Creative  Wisdom,  to  increase  the  light  and
heat  of  the  planet,  what  conclusion  can  we  come  to,  but
that  they  were  so  disposed,  in  order  to  increase  the  pla-
netary surface,  for  the  accommodation  of  organized  life  ?
If  we  draw  this  conclusion,  in  this  instance,  must  we  not
draw  it,  in  all  instances,  where  we  suppose  the  same
laws  of  matter  to  be  exerted  ?

The  matter  composing  the  rings,  if  added  to  the  body
of  the  planet,  would  increase  planetary  surface,  agreea-
bly to  the  principles  of  the  old  theory.  And  why  should
the  never-varying  effects  of  nature  depart  in  this  in-
stance from  her  regular  line  of  conduct  ?  It  is  believed
she  has  not ;  but  that  the  same  principle  extends,  in  a
more  or  less  degree,  to  all  the  planets  belonging  to  the
same  system,  governed,  as  they  most  unquestionably  are s
by  the  same  laivs.

And  have  we  no  reason  for  believing  the  planet  Jupi-
ter constituted  similarly  to  that  of  Saturn  I  Let  us  in-
quire. The  moons  of  Saturn,  seven  in  number,  are
known  to  revolve,  nearly  in  the  plane,  and  over  the  edge
of  the  rings;  for  Herschell  saw  them,  like  beads  on  a
string,  moving  round  the  outer  edge  of  the  rings,  when
they  presented  their  edges  to  him,  and  appeared  like  a
white  thread,  drawn  around  the  disk  of  the  planet.
This  as  La  Place  says,  is  in  strict  accordance  with  the
laws  of  gravity,  to  which,  of  course,  you  will  most  scru-
pulously adhere.  The  accumulation  of  matter,  upon
and  over  the  equatorial  regions  of  Saturn,  by  the  posi-
tion of  his  rings,  would  cause  the  satellites  to  revolve  in
the  same  plane,  by  virtue  of  the  superabundant  influ-
ence ot  gravity  exerted  there.

If  this  be  the  fact,  is  not  the  same  disposition  of  mat-
ter necessary  to  produce  the  same  results  in  other  plan-
ets ?  In  other  words,  Are  not  the  same  physical  causes
necessary  to  produce  the  same  physical  effects  ?  If  you
are  disposed  to  reason  fairly,  you  certainly  must  admit
it.  The  satellites  of  the  planet  Jupiter  are  known  to
revolve,  with  even  less  deviation  from  the  plane  of  his
equator,  than  those  of  Saturn  from  the  plane  of  his  rings.


16

Does  not  this  circumstance  indicate  the  high  probabili-
ty, that  Jupiter  is  also  surrounded  by  concentric  ringsR
and  thus,  by  a  like  accumulation  of  matter  over  his  equa-
tor,  cause  his  moons  to  revolve  in  the  same  manner  of
those  belonging  to  his  next  neighbor,  Saturn  ;  but  from
the  position  they  constantly  keep  to  the  earth,  and  the
rays  of  the  Sun,  have  never  been  seen.  When  the
plane  of  Saturn's  rings  pass  through  the  Sun,  as  Jupiter's
always  do,  it  is  difficult  to  see  them,  even  with  Dr.
Herscheil's  powerful  and  best  reflecting  telescope  :  or,
to  use  your  own  language,  "that  when  their  edges  are
turned  towards  us,  they  are  completely  invisible,  even
with  the  aid  of  very  powerful  telescopes."  Now,  this  is
the  unvarying  position  Jupiter  always  maintains  to  the
earth,  and  according  to  your  own  acknowledgments
his  spheres  could  not  be  seen.

For  the  sake  of  science,  I  have  thus  insisted  on  the
analogy  between  these  immense  globe?,  and  not  on  ac-
count of  the  new  Theory  ;  for  its  principles  or  possibili-
ty, I  do  conceive  is^clearly  established  by  the  planet  Sa-
turn.

But,  the  analogies  between  these  immense  plan*
ets  do. not  stop  here.  You  know  they  are  both  encir-
cled with  belts,  or  zones,  which  in  5aturn£vary  in  ap-
pearance according  to  the  direction  of  his  rings.  Why
are  these  belt-like  appearances  alternately,  light  and
dark  ?  Why  do  they  vary  in  their  appearance,  some-
times run  into  each  other,  again  separate,  and  appear  to
move  with  different  velocities  ?  Have  they  ever  been
satisfactorily  accounted  for?  or  have  they  not  always
been  matters  of  dispute,  and  of  vague  conjecture  ?

If  Jupiter  be  a  plain  globe,  how  is  it  possible  to  ac-
count for  the  various  changes  which  take  olace  in  his
belts,  or  how  account  for  the  belts  at  all  ?  How  account
for  their  parallelism  with  the  planet's  equator,  or  how
account  for  the  well  known  and  acknowledged  fact,  tfeat
the  spots  on  one  belt  rotate  faster  than  those  on  another?

The  City  of  Baltimore,  when  she  gets  her  rail  road,
may  advance  faster  than  Philadelphia  in  commerce,  but
as  •'  out  side  passengers,"  on  the  same  sphere,  I  appre-
hend they  must  go  round  together.  If  these  belts  are
not  the  verges  of  spheres,  overhanging  each  other,  and
becoming  narrow  as  they  recede  from  the  centre,  what
are  they  ?  You  may  say,  as  others  have  said,  that  they
are  clouds  dispersed  into  belts  or  strakes,  by  the  great
diurnal  velocity  of  the  planet.  This  is  as  unsatisfacto-
ry  as  it  is  unphilosophical,  aod  contrary  tQ  every  tfuog


17

we  see  around  us.  Such  a  supposition  is  subverting  the
foundation  of  the  Newtonian  philosophy,  and  re  estab-
lishing- the  old  and  long  exploded  doctrine,  that,  if  the
earth  revolve  from  West  to  East,  we  should  be  constant-
ly assailed  by  an  Easterly  storm.  If  the  velocity  of  a
planet  be  ever  so  great,  I  apprehend  its  atmosphere
moves  with  it.

But  if  we  adopt  the  principle  of  concentric  spheres,
in  those  enormous  planets,  which  are  from  one  thousand
to  sixteen  hundred  times  as  large  as  the  earth,  it  does
really  appear,  that  we  shall  be  no  longer  at  a  loss  to  ac-
count for  these  various  appearances,  which  have  hither-
to been  deemed  inexplicable.  Perhaps  I  am  too  san-
guine in  my  temperament,  and  see  reasons  where  none
exist.  You  cannot,  however,  be  charged  with  any  pre-
dilection in  favor  of  going  beyond  the  beaten  track,
therefore  I  am  willing  you  shall  decide  on  the  soundness
of  my  positions.

These  concentric  spheres,  it  is  supposed,  are  narrower
as  they  lie  above  each  other,  and  are  removed  farther
from  the  centre  of  the  aggregate.  Now,  sir,  is  not  this
supposition  within  the  pale  of  sound  philosophy  ?  Does
not  the  force  of  gravity  diminish,  according  to  the  in-
verse ratio  of  the  squares  of  the  distance,  while  the
centrifugal  force  increases  in  proportion  to  the  distance
from  the  centre  of  revolution  ?

Then,  according  to  this  principle— and  it  is  strictly  a
Newtonian  principle — will  not  bodies,  which  lie  more
remote  from  the  centre  of  the  aggregate,  subject  to  a
greater  centrifugal  force,  yield  more  sensibly  to  that
force,  according  to  the  diminution  of  gravity  ?  Those
concentric  spheres,  therefore,  which  lie  farthest  from
the  centre,  would  yield  most  to  the  centrifugal  force,
and  lie  narrower  and  narrower  around  the  equatorial
parts  of  the  planet,  while  some  that  were  very  remote
would  be  flattened  into  rings,  or,  as  you  express  it*
"plates  of  matter."

Your  views  of  the  want  of  analogy  between  this  plan-
et  and  the  earth  appear  to  have  been  formed  without
any  reference  to  the  relative  forces  exerted  on  these
planets.  You  remark,  "  Nothing,  surely,  can  less  re-
semble  concentric  spheres  than  these  rings ;"  whilst,  in
the  very  next  paragraph,  you  own,  "  they  are  placed
under  circumstances  entirely  different  from  those  of  the
imaginary  terrestrial  crust."  It  requires  a  very  small
share  of  sagacity  to  discover  a  contradiction  in  these
statements.  Do  you  require  bodies,  "  placed  under  very
different  circumstances,"  to  be  precisely  the  same  ?
2*


IS

But,  the  difference  between  the  spheres  of  Saturn
and  the  Earth  is  just  what  ought  to  be  expected  from
this  "  difference  of  situation.

The  Earth  is  about  eight  thousand  miles  in  diameter,
and  revolves  once  in  twenty-four  hours.  From  this  slow
rotary  motion,  the  sphere  would  lie  wide,  as  it  is  known
to  do,  whether  it  be  hollow,  or  a  solid  globe.

The  outer  spheres  of  Saturn  are  from  one  hundred
and  seventy-six  to  more  than  two  hundred  thousand
miles  in  diameter,  and  revolve  once  in  ten  hours  and  a
half  and  therefore  would  lie  narrower  in  proportion  to
their  velocity.  Hencet  the  difference  of  appearance  and
situation  of  which  you  speak  does  not  arise  from  the
effect  of  different  laws,  but  in  the  difference  in  the  force
of  these  laws.

The  verges  or  edges  of  inner  spheres  showing1  be-
yond those  that  lie  higher  and  are  narrower,  will  ac-
count for  the  general  appearance.  And  if  we  suppose
the  verges  to  be  deflected,  as  the  appearance  of  nature
indicates  on  our  Earth,  we  can,  appartntly,  account  for
the  minutia  of  the  planet.  By  its  diurnal  revolution
with  these  spheres,  all  the  regular  and  various  appear-
ances of  the  belts  might  be  produced.  The  different
angles  at  which  the  SHm's  rays  would  strike  the  deflect-
ed verges  would  account  for  the  more  luminous  parts  of
the  belts,  while  the  vacancies  between  the  spheres
would  appear  dark.  The  belts  of  comparative  shade
would  be  produced  by  refraction  of  the  rays  of  light.
One  verge  would  sometimes  eclipse  the  next  below  it,and
at  other  times  not,  according  to  the  position  of  the  rings.
The  edge  of  one  sphere  rather  overhanging  another  in
one  place,  and  receding  from  it  in  another,  would  ap-
pear to  make  the  belts  run  into  each  other  ;  and  is  not
this  the  very  state  of  things  presented  by  these  planets?

The  spheres  revolving  on  different  axes  and  with  dif-
ferent velocities  will  satisfactorily  explain  that  which,
on  the  old  theory,  does  really  appear  inexplicable,  that
the  spots  or  objects  seen  on  the  belts  of  a  solid  globe
should  rotate  with  different  velocities.

Now,  your  objection  to  all  this  is  really  overwhelm-
ing. It  displays  all  that  profundity  in  research,  acuteness
in  thought,  and  happy  facility  at  "  demonstration"  one
would  naturally  be  led  to  expect  from  the  modest  de-
claration in  your  circular,  that  "  Philadelphia  has  within
herself  a  larger  fund  of  talent,  erudition,  and  science,
than  any  other  American  City  can  boast."

That  I  may  not  do  you  injustice,  I  will  carefully  trans-
cribe your  own  words  :  *' In  this  case,  the  outer  crusts


19

must  be  supposed  to  extend  but  a  few  degrees  beyond
the  equator  of  Jupiter,  but  each  one  further  than  that
which  is  above  it ;  so  that  the  edge  of  the  planet  would
exhibit  the  appearance  of  notches  or  steps.  But,  in
fact,  the  outline  is  perfectly  well  defined  and  unbroken;
and  thus  we  have  the  direct  evidence  of  our  senses
against  this  wild  hypothesis."

In  looking  at  the  roof  of  a  house,  at  a  great  distance,
do  you  see  the  "  notches  or  steps"  made  by  the  layer  of
shingles,  or  is  there  any  thing  more  plain,  that  the  part
of  reflection  wanting  in  the  exterior  sphere  would  be
supplied  by  the  one  beneath,  and  thus  render  the  disk
complete  ?  For  illustration  :  when  the  poles  of  Saturn
are  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  his  orbit,  as  Jupiter's
always  are,  his  spheres,  as  you  justly  observe,  "are
completely  invisible  ;"  no  "notches,  steps,"  or  ridges,
to  be  seen  ;  the  disk  is  "  perfectly  well  defined  and  un-
broken;" and  thus  we  have  your  own  declaration,  and
the  direct  evidence  of  our  own  senses,  in  favor  of  this  -wild
hypothesis.

I  must  admit  the  force  of  your  objection  in  relation  to
the  Sun.  I  was  unaware  that  his  poles  had  ever  been  ex-
amined. I  had,  indeed,  been  taught  to  regard  him  as
affording  but  little  evidence  one  way  or  the  other,  from
the  fact  that  he  is  always  surrounded  by  a  very  luminous
atmosphere,  so  much  larger  than  the  Earth,  and  that  the
earth  was  never  very  far  from  the  plane  of  the  Sun's
equator.

The  clearness  with  which  you  speak  about  the  figure,
attraction,  and  influence  of  the  Moon,  requires  a  passing
notice.

The  poles  of  the  Moon,  even  at  the  time  of  libration,
are  not  turned,  in  any  perceptible  degree,  towards  the
Earth ;  hence,  it  is  difficult  to  tell,  from  observation,
whether  there  are  polar  openings  or  not :  and  you  must
own,  this  difficulty  would  be  greatly  increased  from  the
atmosphere  around  the  Moon  being  so  extremely  rare
as  to  produce ,  little  or  no  refraction.  Moreover,  if  the
Moon,  or  any  other  planet,  be  near  the  opposition  or
conjunction,  the  polar  openings  will  not  be  very  easily
discovered  :  for,  if  we  are  nearly  in  the  direction  of  the
light,  no  hollow  would  be  visible,  if  the  poles  were  ever
so  much  turned  to  us,  unless  in  the  direction  that  would
present  an  extended  view  through  the  planet.

The  shadow  of  the  earth  on  the  Moon  in  partial
eclipses,  is,  perhaps,  among  the  most  plausible  objec-
tions you  have  urged.    It  presents  a  difficulty  to  roy


20

own  mind  that  has  never  been  satisfactorily  solved.
However,  on  reflection  and  examination,  I  have  conclud-
ed, in  my  own  mind,  that  it  is  not  "  demonstration,"  and
especially,  in  part,  from  the  following  considerations  :

1st.  The  number  of  visible  eclipses  are  few.

2d.  The  author  may  have  placed  the  verges  of  the
polar  openings  too  near  the  equator.

Sd.  The  plane  of  the  opening  being  inclined  to  the
plane  of  the  equator,  when  the  rays  of  the  sun  should
happen,  in  an  eclipse,  to  pass  over  the  high  part  of  the
verge,  the  shadow  would  be  sensibly  circular;  when
they  passed  over  the  low  part,  the  same  result  might  be
expected.

Should  an  eclipse  happen  at  a  time  when  the  rays  of
the  sun  must  pass  over  the  plane  of  the  opening,  it
would  seem  that  a  prolongation  should  appear  on  the
shadow  cast  on  the  moon,  occasioned  by  the  high  part
of  the  verge;  and  on  the  authority  of  Ticho  Brahi,
Cassini,  and  Kepler,  I  am  authorized  to  say,  that  such
appearances  have  been  seen.

A  gentleman  of  high  attainments  in  solid  science,  of
your  own  city,  informed  me,  that  such  a  prolongation
of  the  shadow  of  the  earth,  on  the  moon,  had  been  no-
ticed, and  I  believe,  recorded,  in  the  city  of  Philadel-
phia. If  these  authorities  can  at  all  be  relied  on,  the
tables  will  be  turned,  and  this  objection  brought  as  one
of  the  strongest  arguments  in  favor  of  "  this  -wild  hy-
pothesis.3*

4ch.  It  is  also  very  possible  that,  since  no  observations
have  been  made  in  reference  to  such  a  state  of  things,
a  slight  deviation  in  the  shadow  from  a  true  curve,  might
have  happened,  without  being  recorded.  I  leave  it,  if
you  please,  in  medio.

Within  the  effulgence  ot  the  Sun's  rays,  Mercury  is
lost  from  observation  ;  and  little  is  known  of  the  planet
Georgium  Sidus,  owing  to  his  immense  distance.  If  the
spheres,  or  rings  of  Saturn,  are  to  be  regarded  as  mere
appendages  to  light  him,  or  to  assist  the  moons  in  cheer-
ing the  inhabitants,  I  suppose  you  can  easily  demon-
strate how  many  spheres  would  be  required  to  give  the
same  light  on  Georgium  Sidus,  which,  being  double  the
distance  from  the  Sun,  enjoys,  according  to  Newton's
calculation,  only  one  fourth  the  quantity  of  light.

I  would  willingly  pursue  the  analysis  of  the  planets
in  extenso,  but  am  warned  by  the  increasing  length  of
this  article  to  desist.  I  leave  you,  therefore,  en  passant,
in  the  undisturbed  possession  of  your  reveries  about  the


21

planet  Mars,  to  account  for  the  phenomena  of  his  polar
regions,  by  arranging"  the  circles  of  ice  to  suit  your  own
fancy.  Still  more  unwilling  am  I  to  snatch  from  you  the
meed  of  praise,  you  will  doubtless  acquire  from  the  as-
tronomers of  Europe,  when  they  learn  that  you  doubt
their  authority,  that  the  cusp,  or  horn  cf  Verlits,  when  a
crescent,  or  nearly  so  on  the  Sun,  ever  bends  in,  as  it
were,  on  the  body  of  the  planet,  to  an  extent  of  nearly
fifteen  degrees.  For  this  you  ought  to  be  elected  Felbw
of  the  Royal  Society  of  London.

Ere  1  conclude,  there  is  one  more  physical  view 'of
this  subject,  to  which  I  beg  leave,  most  especially  to
invite  your  attention  :  it  is,  the  law  regulating  the  dif-
ferent densities  of  the  planets.

With  the  solitary  exception  of  Georgium  Sidus,  about
which,  however,  there  is  but  little  known,  their  densi-
ties decrease,  as  the  habitable  world  recedes  from  the
centre  of  light  and  heat.

Mercury  being      -  9T^

Venus  ------        5\%

Earth -        4f

Mars    ------        Sf

Jupiter 1^

Saturn-        -        :        -        -        -  ff

Georgium  Sidus,  supposed  to  be       -  T9^

Or,  regarding  the  earth  as  five  times  the  density  or
solidity  of  water,  Mercury  will  be  more  than  ten  times
the  density  of  water,  Venus  about  the  same  as  the
earth,  Mars  a  little  more  than  one  half,  Jupiter  will  be
the  density  of  water,  white  the  planet  Saturn  is  only  one
half  the  solidity  of  Jupiter

On  these  calculations  of  density  is  reared  the  whole
structure  of  the  Newtonian  Philosophy.  Deny  them,  and
that  splendid  and  well  proportioned  edifice,  that  has
been  reared  by  so  many  master  workmen,  will  lose  its
foundation,  and  fall  to  the  ground.

And  yet,  have  you  never  discovered  any  difficulty  in
this  matter  ?  Have  you  never  reflected  on  the  singular
calculation,  when  you  admit  the  planet  to  be  sixty-eight
thousand  miles  in  diameter,  and  only  one-half  the'so-
lidity  of  water — one  thousand  times  as  large  as  the
Earth,  and  to  contain  only  ninety-eight  times  the  quan-
tity of  matter  ?  To  this  very  doctrine  you  subscribe,
and  at  the  same  time  affect  to  laugh  at  the  idea  of  the
Earth  being  hollow.


£2

I  arm  not  informed  (perhaps  you  are)  whether  any
Astronomer  Royal  on  Saturn,  has  demonstrated,  "  in  a
most  direct  manner,"  his  density  by  the  experiments  of
the  plumet  at  the  base  of  his  mountains.  .  On  this  point
however,  you  stand  committed,  and  must,  for  the  sake
of  consistency,  admit,  that  similar  experiments  on  other
planets,  would  prove  this  "  increased  density  of  the
strata"  in  descending  toward  the  centre.

Then,  sir,  as  the  mean  density  of  the  planet  Saturn
is  only  one-half  that  of  water,  and  if  the  heavy  part  of
his  materials  lie  in,  around,  and  about,  his  centre,  what
do  you  suppose  his  surface  is  composed  of?  I  will  not
attempt  accuracy  in  calculation  ;  1  leave  this  depart-
ment for  you ;  but  I  will  venture  to  say,  that  when  you
have  made  acute  relative  calculations,  you  will  find  the
surface  of  that  planet  te  be  about  one-fifth  the  density
of  water,  and  the  ocean  not  much  more  solid  than  the
comltnon  atmospheric  air  we  breathe.

How  does  Saturn  present  a  reflecting  disk,  or  a  habit-
able surface  ?  Fairies  could  scarce  live  on  such  a  planet.
I  do  not  say  Almighty  power  could  not  cause  each  pla-
net to  be  inhabited  by  beings  suited  to  it ;  so  he  could
cause  water  to  run  up  hill,  or  one  planet  to  revolve
and  another  to  remain  stationary,  and  at  the  same  time
produce  all  the  variety  of  season,-  but,  does  he  do  it?
Do  we  see  our  orb  wheeling  in  its  stately  course,  and
another  remaining  stationary,  or  do  we  not  see  them
alike  in  appearance,  and  in  the  laws  which  govern  them  ?

Is  the  infinite  divisibility  of  the  particles  of  matter,  or
the  principle  of  chrystalization  resorted  to,  for  an  expla-
nation of  this  singular  state  of  things  ?  What  is  this,  but
adopting  for  each  planet,  if  not  different  laws,  at  least
a  different  application  of  the  same  laws,  to  sustain  which,
I  should  like  to  see  where  you  can  get  the  shadow  of
analogy  ?  1  will  go  further,  and  say,  that  to  suppose
such  an  arrangement  of  the  materials  in  a  planet,  is  tin-
philosophical,  because,  it  is  admitting,  "as  an  element
into  the  calculation  "  a  state  of  things,  of  which,  in  truth,
we  can  form  no  idea;  we  have  nothing  to  compare  it  to  :
for  we  have  seen  nothing  in  nature  like  it.

By  this  time,  I  can  readily  conceive  your  patience
pretty  well  exhausted,  and  that  you  are  about  to  take
leave  of  the  subject,  by  pronouncing  me  a  heretic  in
philosophy.  Allow  me,  however,  to  advise  you  to  keep
cool,  and  read  on — there  is  nothing  like  being  dispas-
sionate. On  no  account,  allow  yourself  to  follow  the
example  of  a  distinguished  Editor  of  your  cityt  who  has,


on  several  occasions,  indulged  in  expressions  and  low
comparisons,  (against  those  who  supposed  there  was
any  thing  new  to  be  learned,)  that  might  have  put  to
blush  the  fisher xv omen  in  Billingsgate.  I  would  insert
some  of  them  here,  were  I  not  fearful  they  might  mil-
dew this  communication,  and  disqualify  it  from  appear-
ing in  any  respectable  journal.

How  then  do  you  suppose  I  shall  meet  this  question,
of  density  ?  By  denying  the  possibility  of  attaining  a
knowledge  of  the  fact  ?  No  !  you  would,  then  charge
me  with  departing  from  the  Newtonian  principles.  I
will  own  that  these  calculations  are  well  founded.  If
I  may  use  the  expression,  the  planets  are  weighed  with
determined  accuracy,  especially  those  which  have  satel-
lites. Then  my  conclusion  is  this :  if  they  cannot  con-
tain more  matter  than  would  render  their  mean  density
such  as  has  been  stated,  is  it  not  more  philosophical,
more  consistent  with  common  sense,  with  what  we  see
and  know  of  nature  around  us,  and  will  it  not  render
the  planets  more  analogous  to  each  other,  to  suppose
them  to  be  more  or  less  hollow,  instead  of  different  den-
sities, agreeably  to  the  quantities  of  matter,  which,
from  rigid  calculation,  they  are  known  to  contain  ?

Does  not  this  restore  a  harmony  hitherto  unknown  to
the  system  ?  Instead  of  regarding  one  planet  with
spheres,  and  the  rest  solid,  one  like  iron,  and  others
like  vapor,  they  are  rendered  more  completely  analo-
gous to  each  other.  Can  philosophy  reject  this  ar-
rangement of  the  material  ?  Wherein  does  it  do  vio-
lence to  any  of  your  favorite  doctrines  and  darling
principles  ?  Does  it  add  one  particle  of  matter  to,  or
substract  one  from,  the  planets  ?  And^is  not  the  harmo-
ny of  the  system  maintained  by  the  relative  influence
of  the  planets  on  each  other,  and  is  not  this  relative  in-
fluence produced  by  the  relative  quantities  of  matter
they  contain  ?  I  repeat,  how  can  it  interfere,  or  be  at
variance  with  a  single  calculation  that  has  been  made
on  correct  principles  since  the  days  of  Plato  ?  Here  I
apprehend  is  the  great  difficulty  :  We  have  a  new  doc-
trine broached  ;  the  mind  startles  ;  our  pride  is  aroused ;
we  cannot  brook  the  idea  of  beginning  our  studies
again,  de  novo,  and  we  pass  sentence  without  further
inquiry.

If  the  doctrines  of  spheres  have  any  foundation  in  aa-
ture,  it  is  in  strict  accordance  with  the  laws  laid  down
by  Newton  ;  it  is  founded  on  them,  and  instead  of  be-
ing considered  a  new  system,  might  be  called  merely


24

one  step  in  advance  of  the  old,  and  by  that  step,  at  least,
apparently  account  for  the  phenomena  of  nature  hither-
to deemed  inexplicable.

Are  these  the  mere  visions  of  fancy,  idle  and  specula-
tive amusements  ?  Are  these  viexvs  which  a  Newtonian
philosopher  cannot  indulge  with  consistency  and  plea-
sure, not  even  when  he  finds  the  principles  held,  by  that
great  master  in  science,  so  well  adapted  to  the  explana-
tion of  the  phenomena  within  the  sphere  of  their  influ-
ence ?  Does  it  not  give  us  enlarged  ideas  of  nature,
and  additional  reasons  to  admire  the  power  and  wisdom
of  that  Being,  who  spake,  and  worlds  sprang  into  ex-
istence, and  by  the  energies  of  whose  power  they  are
still  sustained  ?  Would  not  the  mind  soar  beyond  its
accustomed  limits,  in  beholding  a  Jupiter  wheeling  in
his  Kingly  course,  and  supporting,  as  he  would,  more
organized,  and  no  doubt,  intelligent  beings,  than  the
whole  solar  system,  on  the  principle  of  the  old  doctrine?

How  grand  the  thought,  to  see  a  Saturn  with  his
splendid  equipage  of  spheres  and  moons,  not  as  anoma-
lies of  nature,  but  as  a  part  of  a  mighty  system  of  worlds,
that  extends  not  only  throughout  the  whole  solar  sys-
tem, but  in  other  worlds  "where  the  concave  heaven
unfolds  its  broad  blue  bosom."

And  when  we  go  still  further,  and  contemplate  the
eighty  millions  of  fixed  stars,  which  a  good  glass  pre-
sents to  our  view,  each  the  centre  of  another,  and  a
mighty  system,  around  which  other  planets,  similar  to
our  own,  are  revolving  in  their  respective  orbits — and
then  on  fancy's  wing,  go  on,  on,  still  on,  till  our  own
sun  has  become  like  one  of  the  most. distant  of  the
twinkling  stars,  and  then  reflect  that  all  this  is  the  mere
outpost  of  creation  Yes,  that  all  these,  with  more  than
thought  has  ever  told,  are  probably  revolving  around
some  other  centre,  and  that  centre  perhaps  the  Throne
of  Deity.  Grand  and  sublime,  and  at  the  same  time
overwhelming  as  is  such  thought,  it  is  even  enlarged,
in  contemplating  this  new  arrangement  of  the  material,
where  every  planet  within  itself  becomes  to  a  certain
extent,  a  system  of  worlds.  This  view,  though  alto-
gether fanciful,  and  not  at  all  to  be  regarded  in  the  light
of  arguments,  nevertheless,  one  which  natural  theology
will  ever  delight  to  trace  in  the  works  of  the  Great  Ar-
chitect.

Surely,  then,  the  mere  possibility  of  the  truth  of  such
a  doctrine,  would  seem  to  entitle  it  to  a  serious
thought  from  the  wisest  philosopher  of  the  present  day.


25

And,  speaking  for  myself,  and  on  my  own  responsibili-
ty, this  is  all  I  require.  1  will  go  further,  and  say,  that
it  should  not  be  expected,  in  so  early  a  stage  of  the  in-
vestigation, that  the  evidence  in  favor  of  it  should  com-
mand a  determined  belief.  I  will  go  still  further,  and
remark,  that  I  would  not  myself  give  up  my  faith  *'  in
the  old  fashioned  philosophy"  in  the  present  state  of  the
inquiry.  But,  while  there  are  any  phenomena  to  be
explained,  I  would  maintain  the  doctrine  fearlessly,  to
extend  our  researches,  alike  regardless  whether  they
established  a  new  theory,  or  gave  confirmation  to  an
old  one.  Indeed,  I  regard  theories  as  mere  cob-ivebs,  at
best,  which  are  true  or  false,  in  exact  proportion  to
the  number  of  well  authenticated  facts  upon  which  they
are  founded.

I  did  not  set  down  to  my  desk,  therefore,  with  the
expectation  of  convincing  you,  or  any  other  individual,
that  the  earth  is  tollo-w.  1  have  attempted  to  show  that
it  might  be  so — with  what  success  I  leave  for  you  and
the  candid  to  determine.  I  have,  indeed,  thought  you
failed  very  materially  in  your  attempts  to  prove  its  im-
possibility. You  will  get  along  better  with  such  demon-
strations, after  you  have  pulled  down  the  spheres  of
Saturn,  erased  the  belts  of  Jupiter,  extended  the  cusp
of  Venus,  shown  how  the  spots  on  the  belts  of  a  solid
globe  can  rotate  with  different  velocities,  rendered  more
rational  the  doctrine  of  densities,  and  "  demonstrated"
that  the  same  physicaWaws  ought  not  to  produce  the
same  results  on  planets  alike  situated.

If  I  have  successfully  repelled  the  idea  you  would
convey,  that  the  whole  subject  is  ridiculous  and  impos-
sible, it  is  the  ultimatum  of  this  communication.  I  shall
resume  the  subject  again,  not  with  a  view  to  say  much
more  about  the  theory,  but  to  give  a  few  remarks  in  re-
lation to  the  contemplated  expedition.  I  shall  show
how  unfair,  or  misinformed,  you  have  been,  and  how
contrary  to  facts  you  have  gone,  in  blending  them  to«
gether,  discouraging  the  one,  because  you  could  not
subscribe  to  all  the  doctrines  of  the  other.  I  conclude
this  article,  in  the  very  appropriate  remarks  of  an  ex-
cellent contemporary  writer:  "that  the  fate  of  many
projectors  have  been  so  melancholy,  that  it  requires  at
this  time,  the  daring  spirit,  and  the  enthusiasm,  which
are  naturally  allied  to  genius  in  any  man,  to  announce
himself  as  the  inventor  of  any  thing  new  and  extraordi*
nary.  The  patience  and  perseverance  of  a  Gallileo,
and  the  adventurous  spirit  of  a  Fulton,  are  necessary  to
3


>  26

bira  who  would  benefit  his  species  by  the  results  of  ori-
ginal plans  and  forms,  or  that  of  new  combinations  of
old  and  tried  ones.  Hence  we  cannot  but  respect  and
admire  the  man,  who,  regardless  of  the  hard  fate  of  so
many  who  have  trodden  before  him  in  the  thorny  path
of  improvment,  still  has  the  fortitude  and  philosophy  of
mind  to  spend  years  in  toil  and  study,  and  trim  the  mid-
night lamp  with  the  vigilance  ascribed  to  the  ancient
vestals,  in  bringing  to  perfection  an  idea,  from  which  he
hopes  to  reap  fame  and  benefit  to  himself,  and  to  reflect
credit,  at  the  same  time,  on  the  genius  of  his  country."
Respectfully,  I  am  your  obedient  servant,

J.  N.  REYNOLDS.


No.  ir.

To  the  Editor  of  the  American  Quarterly  Review.

Sir  :  I  shall  redeem  my  promise,  made  in  the  conclu-
sion of  the  last  number,  to  say  but  little  about  the  "teild
hypothesis."  I  do  this  the  more  readily,  because  I  have
no  solicitude  or  ambition  to  carry  on  a  paper  warfare
against  such  heavy  metal.  The  very  name  of  a  grave  re-
vietoer,  enthroned  in  his  editorial  chair,  Procrustes  like,
cutting,  carding,  and  spliceing,  inspires  me  with  respect
and  a  little  timid  dread.

Indeed,  I  know  of  no  good  that  could  result  from  a
prolonged,or  stubborn  controversy  about  an  abstract  pro-
position. If  the  doctrine  of  spheres  be  any  thing  more
than  the  dream  of  fancy,  its  leading  principles  have  been
sufficiently  unfolded  in  the  past  communication,  to  elicit
the  spirit  of  inquiry,  and  to  answer  all  my  purpose  in  the
controversy,  so  far  as  I  am  interested.

Simple  declamation,  nor  perhaps  reasoning,  with  the
materials,  as  yet  acquired,  cannot  prove  it  true,  and
equally  unsuccessful  will  you  be  in  refuting  it,  by  seiz-
ing on  weak  points,  laughing  when  you  ought  to  reason,
destroying  the  symmetry  of  the  system,  and  then  bringing
all  your  strength  to  beat  it  down,  for  its  want  of  regulari-
ty. I  will  only  notice  two  or  three  points,  merely  to
show  how  you  might  be  followed,  and  answered,  even
where  you  are  encircled  in  all  the  self  complacency  of
''demonstration"

1  quote  from  your  review  the  following  very  platonic
sentence  :  "  We  come  now  to  consider  the  arguments
which  are  drawn  from  the  evidence  of  voyagers  and  tra-


27

vellers  in  the  arctic  regions.  This  evidence,  it  would,
indeed,  seem,  must  be  decisive  of  the  question,  if  any
question  still  remain  ;  [If  any  question  still  remain  :  thai
is  to  say,  gentle  reader,  dont  you  think  my  past  reasoning
has  been  very  conclusive.  ]  for  seas  and  lands,  far  within
the  imaginary  verge?,  have  been  repeatedly  traversed,
in  all  directions,  and  no  signs  of  a  polar  opening  have
been  perceived. "  '  (

This  is,  indeed,  an  objection  I  did  not  expect  from
you — one  l  have  seldom,  if  ever,  heard  made  by  men  of
science.  "  No  signs  of  a  polar  opening  have  been  per-
ceived." And  what  signs  do  you  suppose  ought  to  have
been  perceived  ?  The  same  as  descending  into  a  well,
or  some  other  such  appearance,  /  suppose.  A  sphere
of  one  thousand  miles  in  thickness,  must,  necessarily,  be
fifteen  hundred  miles  around  it,  from  the  exterior  to  the
supposed  interior:  and  such  a  gradual  convexity  would
present  the  same  appearance  and  plain  sailing  of  any
other  part  of  the  Globe.

It  is  true,  on  the  verge  of  a  polar  opening,  there  are
some  phenomena  that  ought  to  be  noticed  in  accurate
observations ;  nor  are  they  wanting.  The  latitude  and
longitude  found  by  celestial  observation,  would  some-
times differ  very  materially  from  the  rua  of  the  log  line,
In  sailing  around,  or  obliquely  across  the  verge,  the  al-
titude of  a  heavenly  body  would  not  rise  and  fall,  in  pro-
portion tokthe  distance  sailed  by  the  measurement  of
the  log  {  while,  sailing  directly  across  the  verge,  the
contrary  phenomenon  would  be  noticed.  Now  it
happens,  that  just  such  things  have  very  frequently
been  noticed  and  recorded  by  navigators  in  high  lati-
tudes. As  late  and  good  authority,  see  Ross's  Voyages,
London  edition,  vol.  2,  p.  4.

Corresponding  to  this  would  be  the  extent  of  vision
on  the  plane  of  the  verge.  A  conformation,  however,  to
be  received  with  caution,  owing  to  the  refractive  quali-
ty of  the  atmosphere  in  the  polar  regions.

There  is  no  part  of  the  Earth  where  optical  delusions
are  so  frequent.  Objects  are  sometimes  reflected  from
the  ice,  depicted  in  the  sky,  in  inverted  positions  ;  over-
turned and  reflected  in  a  thousand  different  ways,  offer-
ing to  the  view  castles  of  crystal  in  ruins,  shattered  py-
ramids and  obelisks,  arches  and  vaults,  churches,  towers,
and  battlements,  all  suspended  in  the  air.

It  is  not,  however,  to  such  cases  as  these  I  allude ;  but,
where  objects  are  really  seen  farther,  (as  it  were  by  the
eye  extending  along  the  verge,)  than  could  be  expect-


28

ed  from  the  curve  of  a  regular  sphere,  or  sp/mroid.  And
if  the  phenomena  recorded  by  Ross  and  others,  of  seeing
land  at  the  distance  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  and  two
hundred  miles,are  to  be  exclusively  accounted  for  by  re-
fraction, then  the  refractive  poxver  of  the  atmosphere
must  raise  the  land  four  miles  and  a  half  high,  in  order
to  bring  it  to  a  plain,  with  the  eye  of  the  observer.  Now,
the  single  paragraph  you  quote  from  Ross,  suits  your
purpose  very  well ;  but  it  proves  nothing  more  than  has
been,  and  will  alv/ays  be,  readily  admitted.  It  does  not
at  all  reach  the  case,  where  the  powers  of  vision  have
been  greatty  extended,  independent  of  all  refraction.
See  Ross,  pp.  71,  135,  199,  206  ;*  Capt.  Parry's  2d  voy-
age, June  15th,  page  not  recollected  ;  and  many  others
that  might  be  noticed.

One  reason  why  I  believe  the  power  of  vision  is  not
always  explained  by  simple  refraction  is,  that  Captain
Scoresby,  one  of  the  most  scientific  seamen  who  ever
sailed  to  the  North,  informs  us  that  the  power  of  seeing
objects  at  an  immense  distance,  appeared  to  be  confined
to  two  directions,  while  in  the  other  two  points  of  the
compass  the  vision  was  even  more  limited  than  on  the
equatorial  parts  of  the  Earth.  Evanescent  and  uncer-
tain as  these  observations  may  be,  this  is  pretty  strong  ;
though  1  have  little  doubt,  from  the  examples  I  have
witnessed  of  your  facility  at  demonstration ,  it  will  appear
to  be  the  natural  remit  of  a  regular  sphere.

If  you  will  take  the  trouble  of  walking  to  the  respect-
able house  of  Messrs.  Reed  and  Gray,  in  Market  street,
in  your  own  City,  you  will  find,  that  while  Captain  Reed
commanded  a  vessel  in  commercial  pursuits,  he  was
once  in  those  remote  parts  of  the  Earth  which  answers
to  the  supposed  verge — that  he  saw  land  distinctly  at
the  astonishing  distance  of  180  miles, 'at  a  time  when  the
atmosphere  was  so  clear,  that  stars  of  the  third  magni-
tude was  visible.  He  considered  it  extraordinary  at  the
time— made  a  regular  entry  of  the  distance  in  his  log
book,  which,  I  have  no  doubt,  you  can  see  at  any
moment.

There  are  many  other  phenomena  of  those  regions
that  might  be  adduced  in  further  confirmation,  and  I
omit  them,  only  because  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  ren-
der them  clear  to  the  comprehension  of  the  reader,
without  the  use  of  globes.

There  is  one  reflection  which  would  seem  very  natu-

*  The  pages  will  be  found  to  vary  in  different  editions.


29

rally  to  follow  in  this  place.  These  observations  have
all  been  made  strictly  in  reference  to  the  Earth's  being1
a  sphere,  and  when  objects  have  been  seen  at  a  greater
distance  than  could  be  expected  from  its  globular  form,
the  subject  has  been  referred  to,  and  accounted  for,  on
the  principle  of  refraction.

**  Land  and  seas  far  within  the  imaginary  verges,  have
frequently  been  traversed  in  all  directions,"  &c.  This
is  very  imposing,  and  requires  a  passing  notice.  You
admit,  that  meridians  in  high  latitudes  would  form
curve  lines,  occasioned  by  the  deflexion  of  the  verge  to
the  plane  of  the  equator.  If  the  theory  be  true,  such,
indeed,  will  be  the  fact.  A  meridian  is  not  necessarily
a  straight  line.  The  very  definition  of  the  term  is,  12
o'clock.  Hence,  take  as  many  points  from  the  equa-
tor to  the  high  part  of  the  verge,  as  will  show  the  Sun
farthest  above  the  horizon  at  the  same  instant,  then
draw  a  line  uniting  these  points,  and  it  w*ill  be  a  true
meridian,  whether  a  direct  or  curved  line.

The  navigator  or  the  traveller,  therefore,  proceeding
North  from  the  Equator,  on  the  continent  of  America,
when  he  arrives  in  the  neighborhood  cf  the  verge,  the
meridian  on  which  he  is  travelling  or  sailing,  will  turn
imperceptibly  to  the  right,  and  will  be  first  indicated  by
an  increased  variation  of  the  magnetic  needle  to  the
West,  occasioned, as  it  unquestionably  would  be,  by  the
meridians  forming  curve  lines  to  the  highest  point  of  the
verge.

A  traveller,  in  like  manner,  proceeding  North  on  the
continent  of  Asia,  when  in  corresponding  latitudes,
would  observe  an  Easterly  variation  of  the  needle*  cor-
responding to  the  Westerly  variation  on  the  continent
of  America,  occasioned,  also,  in  like  manner,  by  the
meridian  winding  along  the  verge  to  its  highest  or  most
Northerly  point.  That  such  are  the  phenomena  of  the
needle,  you  have  not  attempted  to  deny,  or  to  afford
any  other  solution.

As  it  regards  that  mysterious  agency  which  gives  po*
larity  to  the  needle,  I  profess  not  to  be  able  to  remove
the  veil  which  obscures  it  from  the  eye  of  philosophy.
There  are,  however,  some  phenomena  of  the  needle,
that  would  seem  strongly  to  corroborate  the  doctrine  of
winding  meridians.

For  many  years  after  the  discovery  of  the  compass,  it

was  believed  that  the  needle  exactly  coincided  with  the

plane  of  the  meridian,  and,  consequently,  that  all  the

points  of  the  compass  agreed  with  the  corresponding

3*


so

points  of  the  horizon.  Columbus  was  the  first  who  disco-
vered the  variation  of  the  needle  from  a  true  meridian;
but  he  was  not  aware  that  the  variation  was  different, at
different  periods  of  time  in  the  same  place.

In  the  year  1394,  we  find,  from  the  works  of  Edw.Gil-
librand,  Professor  of  Astronomy  in  Gresham  College,
that  the  variation  of  the  needle  was  not  always  the  same
in  the  same  place ;  and  a  thousand  recent  observations
have  confirmed  it.

From  the  observations  of  Mr.  Burrows,  in  1580,  the  vari-
ation had  diminished  more  than  7°  in  54  years.  In  the
year  1657,  according  to  Mr.  Bond's  observations,  there
was  no  variationof  the  needle  at  London ;  but  since  that
time  it  has  been  declining  Westward,  and  is,  at  this
time,  about  24°  Westerly  of  a  true  meridian.

We  may  then  say,  that  on  any  meridian,  ta  the  50°
or  60°  North  latitude,  there  is  a  slight  variation,  or,  per-
haps, more  properly  speaking,  an  oscillation  of  the  nee-
dle, alternately  varying  from  East  to  West,  and,  after  a
succession  of  years,  from  West  to  East  again.

The  observations,  within  the  above  latitudes,  are
recorded,  alike  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  America.  Now,
the  application  or  inquiry  to  be  made  is  s  mply  this:
Why  does  the  needle  vary  from  24°  to  124°  West,  in
high  latitudes,  as  has  been  recorded  by  Ross  and  Parry,
and  never  East,  unless  the  meridian  deviate*  from  a
true  line  ?  The  same  may  be  asked  in  relation  to  Asia.
Proceeding  North  of  Spitzbergen,  the  needle  does  not
appear  to  vary,  very  materially,  from  low  latitudes  ;  and
this  isjust  what  ought  to  be  expected,  from  the  meridi-
an crossing  more  directly  over  the  high  point  of  the
verge.  Thefrequent  sallies  of  the  needle  prove^othing
against  the  general  results ;  they  only  prove  that,  in  high
latitudes,  it  is  more  easily  affected  by  local  attraction.

It  is  believed,  a  navigator  may  proceed  North,  from
our  continent,  guided  by  celestial  observation,  until  he
arrives  at  the  90°,  where  the  meridians  all  meet  under
the  pole-star  or  nearly  so — and  where  the  plane  of  the
hor'rzon  will  cut  the  axis  of  the  earth  at  right  angles ;
proceeding  on  in  the  same  direction,  until  he  arrives
an  Siberia,  in  Asia,  suppose  he  had  exploded  the  new
Theory,  and  at  the  same  time  a  polar  opening  of  more
than  four  thousand  miles  in  diameter  may  exist.  Hence
all  your  observations  about  navigators  having  traversed,
in  all  directions  in  the  interior,  does  .not  need  a  com-
ment, unless  it  be,  the  simple  remark,  that  before  a  man
attempts  to  criticise  a  Theory,  he  should,  at  least,  make
himself  acquainted  with  it.


SI

In  remarking  on  the  observations  made  on  a  meridian
passing-  near  Spitzbergen,  you  are  equally  unfortunate.
You  say  they  have  been  ten  degrees  within  the  verge,
The  error  in  your  calculation  appears  to  be  founded  on
miscalculating'  the  extent  of  the  curve.  Suppose  the
verge  North  of  Europe  commenced  at  70*  that  it  was
20°  around  it — would  experiments  made  at  80°,  be  "  10°
■within  it  ?u  Apply  the  same  to  the  South.  Besides,  I
know  of  no  measurements  taken  in  those  high  latitudes,,
and  suppose  you  had  reference  to  the  vibrations  of  the
pendulum.  If  the  Theory  be  true,  the  labors  of  Sa-
bine, will  probably,  when  analyzed,  indicate  a  greater
flattening-  *t  the  poles,  than  was  dreamed  of  in  our  old
fashioned  philosophy.

But,  I  have  pursued  this  subject  too  far  already,  I  did
not  intend  to  be  led  into  a  prolonged  controversy,  on  the
abstract  question  of  the  figure  of  the  Earth.  Such  re-
marks as  I  supposed  your  review  required,  in  relation  to
it,  I  have  made

I  have  purposely  refrained  from  saying  much  about
the  general  style  of  the  investigation  ;  I  feared  that  I  was
nCtsufficiently  impartial  to  do  so.  To  examine  the  prin-
ciples of  the  Theory  was  legitimately  within  the  sphere
of  your  Editorial  labors,  and  no  one  lias  a  right  to  com-
plain. I  leave  it,  however,  for  others  to  determine,
now  far  you  have  been  fortunate  in  the  manner  of  your
analysis.

If  the  subject  deserved  notice  at  all,  it  was  as  a  mat-
ter of  science,  and  ought  to  have  been  treated  as  such.
Your  play,  therefore,  upon  words,  and  labored  witti-
cisms, will,  I  fear,  be  generally  regarded  as  a  small  busi-
ness for  the  Editor  of  a  Quarterly.

Be  this  as  it  may,  I  come  now  to  notice  those  parts  of
your  review  which  I  deem  by  far  the  most  essential  to  be
examined.  They  relate  not  so  much  to  the  theory  a?  to
matters  of  science  and  discovery  in  general,  and  this  is
the  only  light  in  which  I  shall  treat  them.  If  the  posi-
tions you  have  so  strongly  assumed,  be  really  true,  then,
there  is  at  once  an  end  to  all  further  inquiry,  and  suc-
cessful research  toward  the  pole;  there  is  a  line,  an
jtltima  Thufe,  beyond  which,  human  enterprise  and
adventure  cannot  extend.

Now,  1  have  been  taught  to  regard  this  in  a  very  dif-
ferent point  of  viewr.  I  shall  maintain,  and  with  what  suc-
cess will  hereafter  appear,  that  there  are  important  dis-
coveries to  be  made  independent,  and  altogether  dis-
connected from  "visionary  speculation,"


32

I  shall  meet  you  on  this  point,  and  at  the  same  time
most  studiously  avoid  saying  any  thing  that  can  even  be
extorted  into  theory.  If,  in  this  inquiry,  you  sbali,  at
any  time,  find  yourself  unpleasantly  situated,  the  fault
is  yours,  not  mine.  In  the  fervency  of  your  zeal  to  ex-
plode a  new  doctrine,  you  may  very  imperceptibly  and
innocently  have  gone  beyond  the  pale  of  well  authenti-
cated facts.

Not  content  with  having  demonstrated  that  the  Earth
must  be  solid,  with  an  increased  density  to  the  centre,  you
go  still  further,  and  block  up  the  polar  regions  with
eternal  and  interminable  fields  of  ice.  And  in  relation  to
©pen  seas  in  those  directions,  you  observe,  "as  to  the
North  pole,  ive  may  noxo,  perhaps,  consider  this  as  doubtful,
as  it  is  certainly  nst  confirmed  by  the  results  of  the  late
voyages."

This  is  the  great  and  important  point  of  inquiry.  It  is
one  on  which  we  are  directly  at  issue  ;  as  I  shall  main-
tain, that,  so  far  from  being  the  fact,  the  reverse  is  true  ,-
that  there  is  apparently  an  icy  circle,  both  to  the  North
and  to  the  South,  which  being  once  passed,  the  ocean
becomes  less  encumbered  with  ice,  "  and  the  nearer  the
pole  the  less  ice."  This  is,  perhaps,  a  bold  proposi-
tion, one  certainly  not  to  be  decided  by  abstract  calcu-
lation, or  speculation,  or  hypothesis,  or  more  probable
suppositions;  but  must  be  received  or  rejected,  in  pro-
portion to  the  evidence  that  can  be  collected  and  re-
lied on.

I  shall  first  examine  the  papers  read  before  the  Royal
Society  of  London,  by  the  Hon  D.  Barrington,  and
Col.  Beaufoy,  on  the  possibility  of  reaching  the  North
Pole,  as  well  as  other  authors.  I  shall  make  no  attempts
at  originality,  or  chronological  arrangement.  Captain
Robinson,  in  the  year  1773,  appears  to  have  reached
North  latitude  82°  307,  and  found  the  ocean  open  to  the
East,  Northeast,  and  West,  as  far  as  he  could  distinguish
from  the  mast  head.  His  longitude  was  8°  East  from
the  meridian  of  London.  Captain  Robinson  is  repre-
sented as  having  been  an  intelligent  seaman,  and  with
the  experience  of  twenty  years  in  the  Greenland  seas,
gives  it  as  his  opinion,  that  the  cold  North  of  Spitzber-
gen,  even  in  Winter,  is  by  no  means  intolerable.  See
pages  17, 18,  19.  In  the  year  1751,  between  the  Spring
and  Fall  fisheries,  Capt.  McCallam,  an  able  seaman,  de-
termined to  make  an  adventure  towards  the  North  pole,
and  accordingly  did  advance  to  84°.  The  ocean  was
entirely  unencumbered  with  ice.    He^maintains  that  he


might  easily  have  gone  North  much  farther,  had  it  not
been  for  the  unnecessary  fears  of  his  mate,  who  entered
his  protest  against  his  advancing  in  those  remote,  and
perhaps,  dangerous  seas,  especially  as  their  business
was  fishing,  and  not  d  scovery — page  21.

Many  years  ago,  the  Dutch  were  in  the  custom  of
sending  a  ship  of  war,  to  superintend  and  protect  their
Northern  fisheries.  On  the  authority  of  Dr.  Campbell,
the  able  continuator  and  revisor  of  Harris's  Collection
of  Voyages,  it  is  mentioned,  that  one  of  these  vessels
sailed  North,  in  like  manner,  and  with  the  same  object
of  Captain  McCallam,  to  the  8S°  of  North  latitude,  or
within  2°  of  the  pole,  where  the  "  weather  was  warm,
the  sea  perfectly  free  from  ice,  and  rolling  like  the  Bay
of  Biscay."  The  Captain  would  have  proceeded  fur-
ther, but  for  his  fears  of  being  censured  in  Holland,  and
charged  with  neglecting  his  station  at  Spitzbergen.

For  a  long  time  after  the  Royal  Society  was  instituted,
it  was  customary  for  the  Secretary  to  send  questions  to
gentlemen  residing  in  England,  who  had  spent  any  time
in  distant  countries.  Nineteen  questions  were  put  to  a
Mr.  Grey,  who  had  remained  some  time  in  Greenland.
The  last  question  was  :  "  How  near  any  one  hath  been
known  to  approach  the  North  pole  ?"  Answer:  "  I
once  met,  upon  the  coast  of  Greenland,  a  Hollander,
who  swore  that  he  had  been  but  half  a  degree  from  the
pole,  showing  me  his  journal,  which  was  also  attested
by  his  mate,  when  they  had  seen  no  ice,  or  land,  but  all
water."  You  will  firrd  a  complete  history  of  this  ac-
count in  Dr.  Birch's  History  of  the'  Royal  Society,
vol.  1,  p.  202.  I  am  well  aware  that  this  account  may
not  ordy  be  considered  as  extraordinary,  but  improbable
and  impossible.  Of  its  probability  I  shall  say  nothing —
the  fact  is  stated,  whether  with  the  intention  to  deceive,
or  from  incorrect  observations,  I  know  not,neither  shall
I  stop  to  inquire.     Of  its  possibility,  I  would  say  a  word.

Almost  every  voyage  to  those  seas  which  abound  with
floating  ice,  proves  the  great  difference  between  the
quantities,  as  well  as  size,  of  those  impediments  to  na-
vigation, though  in  the  same  latitude,  and  in  the  same
time  of  year.  As  illustration,  when,  Davis  west  on  his
two  first  voyages  to  discover  the  Northwest  Passage*
he  was  not  enabled  to  go  beyond  latitude  66°,  while  in
his  third  voyage  he  penetrated  to  72°  12',  with  about
the  same  difficulty.  Around  the  great  bank  of  New-
foundland, and  in  the  harbor  of  Louisburgh,  the  ice  is
at  some  seasons  so  packed  in  with  the  land,  that  ves-


34

sels  cannot  sail  beyond  latitude  46°,  while  in  other
years  Davis  and  Baffin  have  passed  on  nearly  the  same
meridian,  and  in  the  same  season,  to  latitude  70°.  In*
deed,  there  is  nothing  better  established  than  the  fre-
quent changes  and  fluctuations  of  the  field  ice.  A
barrier,  may  be  presented  to-day  of  a  hundred  leagues
in  extent,  and  by  the  influence  of  winds  and  currents
be  removed  in  a  few  days  or  weeks,  and  afford  a  sate  and
easy  passage  to  much  higher  latitudes.

If,  however,  the  ice  found  in  the  Spitzbergen  seas,
come  from  the  North,  of  course,  the  ocean  round  the
pole  must  be  free  from  such  encumbrance,  after  the  ice
has  left  it.  I  cannot  perceive,  therefore,  any  impossibi-
lity attending  a  vessel  in  some  favorable  season,  reach-
ing even  the  above  stated  latitude.

It  is  not  very  probable  that  the  ice  found  in  those
seas,  comes  from  the  North  pole.  Mr.  Grey,  as  is  stated
in  Brick's  History  of  the  Royal  Society,  says  the  South-
east winds  always  bring  the  greatest  qui-ntity  of  ice  to
the  coast  of  Spitzbergen,  which  is,  indeed,  highly  pro-
bable. These  winds  sweeping  along  the  coast  of  Siberia
and  Tartary,  in  Asia,  carry  along  the  ice  which  has  been
formed  in  the  bays  and  among  numerous  islands,  as  well
as  in  the  immense  rivers  of  those  countries.  In  either  case,
it  would  not  appear  impossible  to  reach  those  high  lati-
tudes, unless  from  the  difficulty  of  penetrating  the  field
ice,  in  the  first  instance,  of  which  I  shall  speak  in  ano-
ther place.

There  is  an  account  in  Harris's  Collection  of  voyages,
p.  396,  given  by  Moxon,  hydrographer  to  Char'es  the
Second,  of  a  Dutch  captain,  who  sailed  beyond  the  90°
and  returned.  The  narrative  is  circumstantial  and  in-
teresting.

You  will  find  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for  the
year  1675,  and  No.  118,  the  following  allusion,  and  in-
deed acknowledgment,  of  a  vessel  having  reached  a
very  high  latitude :  "  For  it  is  well  known  to  all  that  sail
Northward,  thac  most  of  the  Northern  coasts  are  frozen
up  many  leagues,  though  in  the  open  sea  it  is  not  so,  «o,
nor  under  the  pole  itself ,  unless  by  accident."

Captain  Huston,  who  hai  been  engaged  in  the  whale
fishery  for  nearly  forty  years,  frequently  visited  the  Se-
ven Islands,  and  the  Straits  of  Waygat.  In  several  of
his  voyages  the  sea  was  perfectly  clear  from  ice  to  the
North,  as  far  as  he  could  distinguish  it  with  his  best
glasses.  In  one  instance,  he  determined  to  make  a
bold  attempt  to  reach  the  90°,  and  maintains  he  would


35

have  accomplished  his  object,  had  the  mutiny  of  the
common  sailors,  from  superstitious  notions,  not  prevent-
ed :  they  feared  the  attraction  of  the  pole  would  pull
all  the  nails  out  of  the  vessel,  and  leave  them  to  perish !
—p.  55.

In  the  same  year  and  month  Captain  Gray  was  on  the
Western  coast  of  Spitzbergen,  and  North  latitude  79°
35'.  After  remaining  in  this  bay  for  several  days,  pro-
ceeded North  with  an  easy  sail,  for  four  days,  expect-
ing to  meet  with  fields  of  ice,  to  which  they  might  make
fast ;  but  they  did  not  so  much  as  encounter  a  piece
that  flouted,

Mr.  Adams,  a  gentleman  of  science,  who  was  after-
wards the  Principal  of  an  Academy  atWaltham  Abbey,
in  Essex,  was  on  board,  and  made  accurate  observa-
tions, and  found  the  latitude  to  be  83°  North.  The  Cap-
tain, Mate,  and  Mr.  Adams,  went  to  the  foretop-mast-
head,  from  whence  they  saw  a  sea  as  free  from  ice  as
any  part  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  and  they  all  concurred
in  opinion,  that  had  they  been  on  a  voyage  of  disco-
very, they  might  have  advanced  to  a  very  high  latitude,
if  not  to  the  pole  it-elf — p.  56.

Jonathan  Wheatly,  master  of  a  Greenland  ship,  found
an  open  sea,  at  lat,  81°  30,  and  says  he  saw  Dutch
Captains  who  had  been  much  farther  North — p.  58.

Hans  Derick,  in  the  German  employ,  reached  latitude
86°  North*,  with  five  vessels  in  company  ;  they  expe-
rienced iittie  or  no  impediments  from  the  floating  ice —
p.  60.

All  the  Greenland  Captains  agree,  that  the  wind
blowing  a  strong  gale  for  any  time  from  the  North,
opens  the  fiela  ice.  Such  would  hardly  be  the  case  if
the  field  ice  covered  the  whole  Northern  ocean.

Among  other  papers  read  before  the  R.  Society,  on
the  subject  of  the  North  Pole,  was  a  letter  from  Samuel
Standridge,  dated  Hull,  March  4th,  1774.  It  contains
in  substance,  that,  having  made  an  easy  fortune  in  com-
merce, and  trade  becoming  dull,  he  determined  to  visit
the  Greenland  seas,  to  ascertain  what  opportunity  there
might  be  for  making  or  losing  a  fortune.  Ii>  April,  he
whs  in  latitude  72°,  catching  seals  among  great  bodies
of  floating  ice.

After  sailing  through  much  loose  ice,  which  is  com-
monly the  case,  about  the  6th  of  M^y  he  arrived  at  lati-
tude 80°,  which  is  near  what  the  Masters  call  a  good
fishing  latitude.  He  found  the  farther  North,  the  lest
quantity  of  ice  ;  and   from  the  inquiry  he  made  both


36

from  the  English  and  Dutch,  which  was  very  considera-
ble, there  was  a  great  probability  of  ships  going  to  the
Pole,  if  not  stopped  by  meeting  land  or  rocks.  It  ap-
peared to  him,  that  the  narrowest  place  in  those  seas,
was  betwixt  Spitzbergen  and  the  American  coast,
where  the  current  is  observed  to  come  always  from  the
North,  which  fills  this  narrow  place  with  ice,  but  gene-
rally loose  and  floating.  Those  from  whom  he  inquired,
informed  him  that  the  sea  ivas  abundantly  clearer  to  the
North  ef  Spitzbergen,  "  and  the  further  North  the  clear-
er**'  This,  he  very  justly  concluded,  went  very  strong-
ly  to  prove  a  "  wide  ocean,  and  a  great  opening  to  the
North"  as  the  current  comes  from  thence,  that  fills  this
passage  as  aforesaid.

The  Astronomer  Royal  handed  the  following  narra-
tive of  Captain  Stephens,  to  the  Hon.  D.  Barrington.
As  it  comes  from  the  Astronomer  Royal,  I  suppose  you
will  regard  it  as  very  high  authority  :

Captain  S.  was  two  years  engaged  in  the  Greenland
fisheries-  In  his  second  voyage,  his  vessel,  in  company
with  a  Dutch  ship,  were  driven  North  by  a  Southerly
wind,  to  latitude  84°  30',  or  within  5°  30'  of  the  Pole.
He  did  not  find  the  cold  excessive,  met  with  but  little
ice,  and  the  less  the  farther  they  went  to  the  North-
ward— p.  79.

Such  was  the  account  given  by  Dr.  Maskylene,  and
while  we  give  him  credit  for  his  ingenious  experiments
on  the  base  of  the  mountain  Scheliallian,  we  must,  for
consistency's  sake,  give  our  full  faith  to  this  statement  of
a  navigator  going  far  to  the  North,  and  finding  an  open
sea.  "  As  to  the  North  Pole,  this  may  now  be  doubt-
ed. " — Astronomer  Royal  against  the  Editor  of  the  Ame-
rican Quarterly,  Greek  against  Greek.

One  of  the  most  interesting  articles  on  the  North  Po-
lar Seas  I  have  met  with,  may  be  found  in  the  Encyclo-
paedia Britannic  a,  vol.  6th,  p.  214.  It  concludes  in  these
words :

"On  the  whole,  then,  we  should  say,  that  the  proba-
bility of  an  open  sea  towards  the  North  Pole,  rather
predominates  ;  it  is  a  theory  which  has  been  entertain-
ed since  the  days  of  Dr.  Hooke,  and  all  the  Greenland
fishermen  are  impressed  With  this  opinion."

The  Rev.  Mr.  Tooke.  Chaplain  to  the  factory  at
Petersburgh,  has  given  several  facts,  which,  if  they  can
at  all  be  relied  on,  go  strongly  to  prove  that  the  sea  is
open  to  the  Pole.  Mr.  Tooke  says  he  has  been  in-
formed by  persons  who  passed  the  Winter  at  Kola,  in


37

Lapland,  that  in  the  severest  weather,  whenever  a
Northerly  wind  blows,  the  cold  diminishes  instantly,
and  that,  if  it  continues,  it  always  brings  on  a  thaw,  as
Jong  as  it  lasts.  Extraordinary  as  this  account  may  ap-
pear, it  is,  nevertheless,  strengthened  by  Barrentz,  who
wintered  on  Nova  Zembla,  and  by  the  Russians,  on  Ma-
loy  Brun.  If  my  memory  does  not  deceive  me,  Ross
and  Parry  speak  of  the  Northerly  winds  being  very
little,  if  any  colder,  than  those  from  other  points  of  the
compass.  The  Northerly  winds,  therefore,  cannot  be
supposed,  in  the  coldest  seasons  of  the  year,  to  sweep
over  ten  or  twenty  degrees  of  ice.

Should  we,  for  a  moment,  leave  the  path  of  experi-
ence and  observation,  and  reason  from  an  abstract  analy-
is  of  the  polar  ice,  the  same  conclusion  may  be  legiti-
mately drawn.  The  ice  generally  formed  in  the  ocean
is  seldom  more  than  six  inches  in  thickness.  It  appears
like  partially  melted  snow,  that  has  become  hardened  :
is  more  easily  broken  into  pieces,  less  transparent,  and
when  melted,  is  found  to  be  intermixed  with  salt.

When  the  salt  water  is  frozen  around  islands,  in  bays,
in  shallow  water,  and  near  the  land,  it  is  very  different
from  that  formed  in  fresh  water.  It  is  by  no  means  so
solid  and  transparent  ;  consists  of  thin  lamina,  or  plates,
between  which  the  brine  is  deposited.  If  the  ice  be
washed,  the  brine  may  be  removed,  and  the  ice  be-
come sweet  ;  if  melted  together,  it  is  brackish  to  the
taste.

Now  the  great  body  of  the  polar  ice  is  not  of  this
kind,  but  solid  and  transparent,  and  must  have  been
formed  in  fresh  water,  or  at  least,  less  salt  than  the  main
ocean  ;  from  all  of  which,  I  conclude,  that  if  the  ice  is
not  formed  in  the  mid  oce^n,  there  is  a  time  when  the
ocean  is  comparatively  unincumbered  with  it,  and  that
that  time  is  late  in  the  season,  after  the  ice  has  melted  ;
or  earlier  in  the  Spring,  before  it  becomes  detached
from  the  shore,  from  around  islands,  and  in  bays,  and
from  thence  thrown  out  into  the  main  ocean,  forming
what  is  called  islands  of  floating  ice.

Hence  it  is  not  a  matter  of  astonishment,  that  ex-
plorers have  so  often  failed.  They  commence  their
voyage  in  the  Spring  ;  encounter  the  field  ice  ;  struggle
with  the  rigor  of  nature  all  Summer,  and  go  inti>  Winter
quarters  at  the  very  time,  when,  if  they  were  distant
from  land,  the  ocean  would  be  unincumbered  with  ice.
The  British  navigators  seeking  a  Northwest  passage,
were  bound  by  their  instructions  to  find  it  by  scrutiniz
4


38

injar  the  bays  and  coasts  of  the  continent,  and  thus  have
been  frequently  stopped  by  the  young  ice,  which  begins
to  form  near  the  shore,  almost  as  soon  as  the  heat  of  the
Summer  sun  begins  to  decline.  It  is  impossible,  there-
fore, that  voyages  thus  conducted  should  be  more  suc-
cessful than  the  preceding.  I  appeal  to  any  practical
seaman  to  say,  what  can  be  expected,  even  from  the  in-
trepidity and  daring  adventure  of  a  Parry,  while  con-
tending with  the  impediments  experienced  by  creeping
around  the  indentations  of  the  coast  in  the  coldest  part
of  the  globe,  or  making  way  among  numerous  islands,
each  of  which  serves  as  a  point  of  retardation,  by  af-
fording the  means  of  support  and  extension  to  the  earli-
est ice  which  forms.  But,  suppose  Parry  had  found  an
impassable  barrier  sailing  West,among  numerous  islands,
what  has  that  to  do  with  the  possibility  or  practicability
of  exploring  the  polar  regions,  by  a  bold  adventure  m
the  mid  ocean,  to  be  persevered  in,  even  when  the  ice
begins  to  form  near  the  land  ?

Take  the  broad  principles  of  nature,  ever  the  same*
xmder  like  circumstance?,  for  our  guide.  Observe  a
large  river,  the  ice  is  compact,  and  firmly  attached  to
the  s^iore,  long  before  it  is  frozen  in  the  centre.  In
Baffinr's  Bay,the  Esquimaux  go  out  in  mid  Winter.some
twenty  or  thirty  miles,  and  fish  for  seal  over  the  edge  of
the  ice  ;  so  that  a  vessel  might  sail  through  the  middle
of  that  bay  at  any  time  before  the  ice  has  left  the  land.
As  proof  of  this,  it  is  on  authentic  record,  that  the  ice
in  a  harbor  in  Hudson's  bay,  being  broken  up  by  an  unu-
sual swell,  a  vessel  was  driven  out,  and  contrary  to  ex-
pectation, passed  through  the  Straits  without  any  im-
pediments, and  arrived  in  England  in  the  middle  of
Winter,  while  in  May  and  in  June  following,  the  Straits
was  blocked  up  with  floating  ice. — Harrington.

It  is  useless  to  multiply  instances  in  which  navigator*
have  reached  high  latitudes.  You  say  that  the  polar  seas
are  not  open,  and  especially,  that  recent  authority  does
not  -warrant  such  a  conclusion.  Ancient  authority  is
decidedly  against  you.  Let  us  examine  that  which  is
more  recent.  You  will  find  in  Mr.  Walsh's  "  National
Gazette"  of  November  9tb,  1825,  the  following  strong
confirmation  of  what  I  have  already  stated  :

"  We  have  much  reason  to  believe,  that  there  is  no
great  extent  of  land  approaching  the  North  Pole.
Whales  that  have  been  harpooned  in  the  Greenland
seas,  have  been  found  in  the  Pacific  Ocean.  They
have  been  taken  with  stone  lances  sticking  in  their  fat,


S9

(a  kind  of  weapon  used  by  no  nation  now  known)  both
in  the  s?a  of  Spitsbergen  and  in  Davis's  Straits.  The
whalers  uniformly  agree  in  their  statements  relative  to
the  diminution  of  ice  beyond  the  eightieth  degree  of
North  latitude  ;  and  as  Mr.  Scoresby  is  of  the  most
respectable  authority,  I  quote  the  following  passage
from  him  :  «  Our  latitude,  on  those  occasions,  in  the
month  of  May,  [1806]  as  decided  from  observations  ta-
ken with  a  sextant,  bv  myself  and  my  father,  was  86°
50\  81°  2°,  and  80°  i2';  after  which  we  sailed  so  far
to  the  Northward,  as  made  about  81°  30'.'  Here  Mr.
S.  could  not  have  been  repelled  by  ice,  or  he  would
have  mentioned  it.  He  does  not  assign  any  cause  for
returning.  It  is  to  be  presumed  that  his  fishing  requir-
ed his  attendance.  The  Hon.  James  Barrington  col-
lected much  valuable  information  on  this  head,  which
he  read  before  the  Royal  Society,"  &c.  he.  In  the  pa-
per containing  the  above  extracts,  you  will  find  a
very  interesting  article  written  on  the  J\orth  West  Pas*
sage,  by  a  gentleman  of  the  first  order  of  intelligence,
to  whose  correction  I  would  advise  you  to  submit  all
future  articles  that  may  appear  in  the  Quarterly,  on  the
geography  of  the  Poles.

All  the  world  knows,  that  Captain  Ross,  in  the  year
1818,  penetrated  the  icy  circle,  and  put  back,  while
there  was  an  open  sea,  with  every  necessary  encou-
ragement to  advance  to  the  North  and  Northwest.  It  is
just  as  well  known,  that  Parry  saw  an  open  sea  to  the
North,  while  he  was  steering  West,  on  his  second
voyage.  Franklin,  in  the  year  1818,  when  North  of
Baffin's  Bay,  informs  us  in  his  Journal,  that  all  the  ice
he  met  with,  would  not  have  impeded  the  progress  of
a  long-boat.  Despatches  from  the  same  hardy  and
daring  spirit,  only  two  years  ago,  North  of  the  same
Bay,  dated  Winter  quarters,  inform  us,  "that  from  an
elevation  of  two  hundred  feet,  and  with  the  best  glass,
not  a  speck  of  ice  to  be  seen  in  the  Polar  sea.  The
white  Whale  and  Seal  were  seen  in  greater  abun-
dance."

So  much  for  the  past  and  recent  evidence  in  favor  of
open  seas  about  the  Pole.

I  know  the  objections  that  may  be  urged  against
some  of  the  accounts  detailed.  You  may  say  they  were
not  all  men  of  science,  and  that  they  may  have  been
deceived  in  the  accuracy  of  their  observations.  This
objection  may  be  substantially  true,  and,  at  the  same
time,  their  evidence  in  favor  of  open  seas,  and  the  uni


40

versaldimunitionofice  beyond  latitude  80°,  not  in  the
least  impaired.  It  does  not  require  an  astronomer  to
know  and  to  distinguish  the  difference  between  fields  of
floating  ice,  and  an  open  ocean.  And,  without  the
least  disrespect  for  you,  I  must  say,  that  I  would  rather
rely  on  the  opinion  and  information  given,  by  a  man  of
plain,  practical  sense,  who  had  been  twenty  or  thirty
years  in  those  high  latitudes,than  on  all  the  calculations
and  demonstrations  you  and  I  could  make,  at  our  desks,
in  a  dozen  years.
In  addition  to  all  this,  Harrington  and  Beaufoy,  as  well
as  Pinckerton,  in  his  voyages,  maintain  that  the  cli-
mate is  not  only  milder,  but  the  productions  of  nature
more  abundant  at  latitude  80°,  North,  than  at  76°.  Oa
ibis  point,  as  well  as  open  seas,  I  shall  introduce  one
more  authority,  in  relation  to  the  North  Pole  ;  an  autho-
rity which,  of  itself,  will  put  to  blush  the  declarations
you  have  made,  as  well  as  many  an  American  citizen,
that  the  Editor  of  an  American  Quarterly  should  have
made  it.  I  mean  J.  Barrow,  F.  R.  S*  and  present  Chief
Clerk  in  the  British  Admiralty.  In  his  "  Voyages  into
the  Polar  Regions,"  I  find  the  following  :  «•  That  the
North  Pole  may  be  approached  by  sea,  has  been  an  opi-
nion entertained  both  by  experienced  navigators,  and
by  men  eminent  for  their  learning  and  science  [ex.
Ed.  American  Quarterly]  that  several  ships  have,  at
different  times,  been  carried  3°  or  4°  beyond  Spitsber-
gen, and  the  usual  limits  of  the  whale  fishery,  is  not
merely  a  matter  of  opinion  ;  and  if  the  Polar  Sea  be
navigable  to  the  height  of  84°,  there  seems  to  be  no
other  physical  obstruction,  than  the  intervention  of
land,  to  the  practical  navigation  of  that  sea,  to  the
North  Pole  itself ;  as  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that
the  temperature  of  that  point  is  lower  in  the  Winter,
while  it  is  probably  much  higher  in  the  Summer,  than
on  the  parallel  of  80°  ;  as  it  is  -well  known  that  the  la*
titude  of  SO0  is  generally  not  colder  on  the  same  meri-
dian, and  in  many  places  much  less  severe,  than  that
of  70°  is  in  others.  The  Russians  pass  the  Winter  very
well  on  Spitsbergen,  but  they  had  not  ventured  to  Win-
ter on  Nova  Zembla,  many  degrees  to  the  Southward
of  it.  Deer  live  and  thrive  in  80°  latitude  in  Spitsber-
gen, but  cannot  live  in  75°  in  Nova  Zeisbla."—  Page
373.

Barrington  says '  "  Nova  Zembla  hath  no  soil;  her-
bage, or  animals";  and  yet,  in  Spitsbergen,  in  six  de-
grees higher  latitude,  there  are  all  three  ;  and  on   the


41

top  of  the  mountains,  in  the  most  Northern  part,  men
strip  themselves  to  their  shirts*  from  the  warmth.  The
celebrated  Mr.  Beyle,  from  these  and  many  other  in-
stances, rejected  the  long-received  notion,  that  the
Pole  was  the  principle  of  cold." — Page  101,  and
Morden's  Account  of  Spitsbergen,  page  105.

It  is  the  invariable  tradition  of  the  Samoides  and
Tartars,  who  live  beyond  the  Waygat,  that  the  sea  is
open  to  the  mouth  of  Nova  Zembla,  all  the  year  ;  and
the  most  knowing  people  of  Russia  are  of  the  same
opinion.  These  authorities  ought  certainly  to  have
more  weight  than  simple  conjectures. — Page  103.

To  the  South,  our  information  is  limited  to  fewer
facts.  Little  has  been  discovered  in  that  hemisphere
since  the  days  of  Cook  :  who,  it  is  true,  was  notable  to
advance  beyond  71°,  25' ;  but  this  attempt  was  not
made  in  the  most  favorable  season  of  the  year.  The
cold  is  known  to  commence  nearer  to  the  equator  in  the
Southern  than  in  the  Northern  hemisphere,  55°  being
quite  as  intense  as  70°  in  Lapland.

From  this  fact,  the  ancients  took  up  the  opinion,
that  the  Southern  Polar  regions  were  composed  of  no-
thing but  impassable  barriers  of  field  and  floating  ice,
which,  of  course,  increased  and  became  excessive  In
approaching  the  Pole.  The  philosophers  and  learned
Reviewers  adopted  the  same  belief.  And  yet,  who-
ever will  take  the  trouble  to  examine  impartially  their
statements,  weigh  the  contrariety  of  their  opinions,  and
consider  the  singularity  of  their  reasoning,  will  see,  and
be  convinced  how  unsatisfactory  their  notions  were,  and
how  totally  insufficient  the  subtle  speculations  and
demonstrations  of  the  human  mind  ever  must  he,  in  re-
lation to  matters  of  this  kind,  when  altogether  un-
assisted by  the  lights  of  experience  and  of  actual  ob-
servation.

An  opinion  hazarded,  ten  years  ago,  in  favor  of  open
seas  to  the  South,  beyond  the.  icy  circle,  would  pro*
bably  have  been  regarded,  and  no  doubt  pronounced,
by  you,  visionary  and  impracticable.  Kecent  facts  show
that  such  is  the  case.  The  London  Reviewers  admit
it,  and  you  follow  very  gracefully  in  the  wake,  and  say,
•*  th-  South  Pole  is  differently  circumstanced."

You  sre  compelled,  from  the  example  of  the  transat-
lantic Reviewers,  to  admit  the  account  of  the  intrepid
Weddeil,  who  has  lately  shown  that  the  icy  circle  to
the  South,  as  well  as  vo  the  North,  may  be  passed.  To
use  his  own  words,  "  In  latitude  74°,  25',  South,  hoi  a
4*


42

speck  of  ice  to  be  seen  ;  the  mildness  of  every  thing
around  us  is  such,  that  our  situation  might  be  envied,
were  it  not  for  the  well  known  fact,  that  we  have  to
penetrate  immense  fields  of  ice,  in  returning  to  the
equator."

This  is  a  most  intensely  interesting  and  imposing
fact,  and  well  calculated  to  arouse  the  spirit  of  inquiry.
Does  not  this  fact,  a  navigator  dreading  the  ice  in  put-
ting back  towards  the  equator,  but  describing  easy  and
plain  sailing  towards  the  Pole,  awaken  new  thoughts,
and  more  clearly  show  the  propriety  of  extending  our
researches  into  those  remote  regions  of  our  globe  ?  In
the  words  of  Captain  Parry,  "  who  can  tell  what  there
is  where  man  has  never  been  ?"

The  experience  and  observations  of  Captain  Wed*
dell,  led  him  to  maintain  the  doctrine  of  a  milder  cli-
mate about  the  Poles  ;  and  that  he  believes  there  is  an
icy  circle,  may  be  very  clearly  inferred  from  the  fol-
lowing paragraph  :  •*  The  difficulties  attendant  on  the
navigation  of  the  Antarctic  sea,  so  far  as  I  have  seen,
consist  in  having  to  pass  through  chains  of  ice  islands,
floating  between  latitude  60°  and  the  Polar  Circle.
Within  this  portion  of  both  hemispheres,  probably,  the
principal  ices  will  be  met  with."

The  above  authorities  which  I  have  quoted  from  in
favor  of  a  milder  temperament  and  open  sea  about  the
poles,  is  very  powerfully  sustained  by  the  collateral
evidence  derived  from  natural  history.  The  migration
offish  and  animals  of  the  arctic  regions,  is  flatly  denied  ;
you  say  "  it  is  by  far  more  reasonable  and  probable,  that
the  fish  find  a  Winter  retreat,  in  the  deep  sea  where
the  temperature  is  uniform  and  moderate."

It  is  indeed  very  difficult  to  contend  with  a  person
who  reasons  as  you  do,  denying  a  position,  By  saying
something  else  is  more  probable  or  reasonable,  and  at
the  same  time,  not  adducing  a  single  fact,  in  support  of
your  "probability."

The  history  of  the  Northern  regions  is  one  of  cu-
rious inquiry,  doubtless  involved  in  some  obscurity,
and  about  which  there  is  some  contrariety  in  evi-
dence. I  regret  that  the  limits  of  this  communication
will  not  allow  me  to  enter  into  a  full  discussion  of  it.
Such  as  1  have  time  and  space  to  give,  you  shall  have.
All  whalers  agree  in  their  account  of  the  immense  ehoals
of Jish,  of  various  kinds,  which  appear  to  come  down  from
the  North  in  the  Spring  season  of  the  year,  progressing
from  the  arctic  regions  towards  the  equator.  The  herring


43

is  well  known  to  be  a  fish  of  passage.  I  do  not  say  that
they  come  from  the  interior,  but  trom  beyond  the  icy
circle.  At  any  rate  they  set  out  from  high  latitudes,  in
vast  colonies,  and  their  number  exceeds  the  power  of
the  imagination  to  conceive.

As  they  begin  their  course  to  the  South,  they  sepa-
rate into  two  great  divisions  ;  one  body  moves  to  the
West,  and  pours  down  the  continent  of  America,  as  far
South  as  the  Carolinas.  When  they  are  first  caught  on
the  coast  of  Labrador  or  Newfoundland,  they  are  in
their  finest  and  best  condition  ;  but,  as  they  progress
further  South,  became  unfit  for  the  market.

The  other  division  takes  a  more  Easterly  direction,  to-
wards Europe,  and  falls  in  with  the  coast  of  Iceland
about  March.

Upon  their  arrival  at  that  coast,  their  phalanx,  which
must  have  suffered  much,  by  the  indiscriminate  attacks
made  upon  it,  by  the  sunfish,  cacholot,  porpoise,  gram-
pus, whaie,  &c.  is  nevertheless  found  to  be  many  hun-
dred miles  in  extent,  or  in  the  words  of  some  authors,
*  larger  in  extent  than  the  Island  of  Great  Britain  and
Ireland  united."

That  those  shoals  ever  return  North  again  is  certainly
a  matter  of  great  doubt ;  I  know  of  no  author  that  says
they  do  ;  it  is  known  they  become  very  poor  towards
mid-summer,  and  millions  of  them  die,  and  render  many
parts  of  our  coasts  offensive  by  floating  on  the  shore.
The  young  herring  are  found  in  great  numbers  in  many
,piaces  in  low  latitudes.  I  know  of  no  direct  evidence,
that  they  go  North  to  complete  their  growth,  and  pre-
pare for  the  market.  It  is  probable,  however,  they  do  ;
and  yet,  one  could  hardly  suppose  they  goto  the  bottom
of  the  sea,  where  the  temperature  "  is  more  uniform,"
or  huddle  round  ice  bergs,  in  the  rigorous  climate  of  the
"  icy  beltt*  which  Weddell  informs  us  extends  from  the
60°  to  the  polar  circles.

The  German  navigators,  who,  at  various  periods,  have
been  detained  in  ice,  say  the  ocean  is  almost  desti-
tute offish  in  the  Winter,  which  goes  very  strongly  to
prove  that  the  migratory  fish  do  not  winter  on  this
side  or  amongst  the  ice.  Where  then  do  they  come
from  ?

Basking  shark  are  migratory  from  the  arctic  seas.
They  frequent  the  coast  of  Norway,  Orkney  Isles,  and
the  West  coast  of  Wales,  some  time  in  June,  and  at  the
end  of  July  return  again  to  the  North.

In  open  seasons  the  vessels  engaged  in  the  whale


44

fisheries,  generally  find  a  passage  through  which  they
*hoot  forward  along  the  coast  of  Spitsbergen,  to  latitude
79°  or  80°,  where  the  whale  are  most  abundant.  The
chase  of  whale  seldom  lasts  more  than  two  months  in
the  year,  commencing  at  the  close  of  April,  and  termi-
nating with  the  month  of  June,  when  these  vast  monsters
of  the  deep  disappear.  Where  do  they  go  ?  That  they
do  not  come  South  is  within  the  knowledge  of  every  in-
telligent individual.

Do  you  suppose  they  retire  "  into  the  deep  sea,  where
the  temperature  is  more  uniform  and  moderate."  How
can  this  be  (to  equal  you  in  authority)  since  Dr.  Mitchill
says  a  -whale  is  not  ajish  ?  There  is  some  philosophy  in
the  doctor's  remarks.  A  whale  is  constituted  with  lungs,
and  breathes  as  an  ox,  and  cannot  remain  under  water
more  than  20  or  30  minutes.  So  that  in  this  the  accu-
racy of  your  knowledge  is  only  equalled  by  your  physi-
cal demonstrations,  where  you  attempt  to  show  that  a
man,  by  the  use  of  a  lady's/an,  might  fly  from  one  place
to  another,  on  the  interior  of  a  hollow  sphere,  consti-
tuted with  polar  openings.

In  latitude  73°,  in  Baffin's  Bay,  Parry  informs  us  that
the  number  of  whale  was  astonishing;  that  not  less  than
50  were  seen  in  the  course  of  a  single  watch.  He  con-
sidered it  as  a  strong  indication  of  an  opening  from  Baf-
fin's Bay  into  some  sea  still  farther  to  the  North,  into
which  the  whales  were  going,  in  consequence  of  being
pursued  by  the  fishermen  in  the  lower  seas.  Page  58,
Voyage  of  the  year  1818,  1819,written  by  Fisher.  On  the
2d  of  August,  when  still  further  to  the  North,and  at  lon-
gitude 80°,  30,  West,  the  number  of  whales  was  still
greater,  spouting  in  shoals  like  porpoises,  many  of  them
appeared  yeung,  at  least  of  a  small  size — page  66.  Vast
number  of  beluga  or  white  whale,  were  seen,  the  same
which  M'Kenzie,  Hearne,  and  Franklin  describe  in  the
open  polar  seas.  B&rrington  (page  50)  says,  "if  the  ice  ex-
tends from  North  latitude  80°,  30',  to  the  pole,  all  the
intermediate  space  is  denied  to  the  Spitsbergen  whales,
as  well,  perhaps,  as  to  other  fish.  The  whales  which  re-
quire so  much  room  will  be  confined  to  two  or  three
degrees  of  latitude  in  the  neighborhood  of  Spitsbergen;"
and  yet  the  Germans  inform  us  that  these  seas  .>re  desti-
tute of/Js/tand  -whale*  in  the  Winter.  Where  then  shall
we  look  for  their  Winter  retreats,  if  not  beyond  the  icy
circle  ?


*  See  Pinkerton's  Voyages.


45

In  relation  to  land  animals,  our  information  may  not
be  so  well  defined  ;  few  travellers  having  been  North
by  land,  compared  with  the  many  who  have  been  in
high  latitudes  by  sea.  Hearne,  however,  has  given  us
much  useful  and  interesting  information.  His  opportu-
nity has  been  very  good  to  do  so,  having  remained  ma-
ny years  North  of  Hudson's  Bay.  He  states  that  large
droves  of  musk  oxen  abound  within  the  polar  circle,  few
of  which  are  ever  seen  so  far  South  as  the  Hudson's  Bay
factories.  That  the  Winter  retreat  of  the  white  bear  ap-
pear to  be  unknown.  Page  357, 368.  The  white  arc-
t\c  foxes  come  down  from  the  North,  in  incredible  num-
bers, and  that  there  is  much  conjecture  as  to  the  place
where  they  originate — page  364,  365.  Hearne  also  in-
forms us,  that  swans,  geese,  brants,  ducks,  and  other
wild  water-fowl,  are  so'  numerous  about  Hudson's  Bay,
in  the  Spring  and  Summer,  that  the  company  every
season"  salt  up  vast  quantities  of  them,  sometimes  60
or  70  hogsheads — page  442.

He  enumerates  ten  different  species  of  geese,  several
of  which  (particularly  the  snow  geese,  blue  geese,  brent
geese  and  horned  wavey,)  raise  their  young  in  some
country  unknown  even  to  the  Indians — pages  442,  43,
44,  45,  46.  Their  eggs  and  young  are  never  seen  by
them.neither  have  the  most  accurate  observers  been  able
to  discover  where  they  make  their  Winter  residence,  as
it  is  well  known  that  they  do  not  migrate  to  the  South-
ward ;  but  few  of  them  ever  pass  South,  and  some  of
the  species  are  said  never  to  have  been  seen  South  of
latitude  fifty-nine  degrees — page  445.

Most  of  those  fowls  moult  or  shed  their  feathers  in  a
peculiar  manner,  in  the  Summer,  and  become  nearly
naked.  Hence  it  would  seem,  the  time  of  their  incu-
bation must  be  in  Winter,  while  absent,  as  it  would  not
probably  be  while  moulting  ;  whereas,  the  migratory
geese  and  ducks  of  this  country  are  not  known  to  shed
their  feathers  in  any  great  degree  ;  and  are  all  well
known  to  raise  their  young  in  the  Summer,while  North.
It  may,  therefore,  be  inferred,  that  many  of  those  water
fowl,  which  Hearne  describes,  raise  their  young  beyond
the  icy  circle.  As  many  of  the  ten  species  of  geese  he
saw  there,  are  unknown  further  South,  it  establishes  the
fact,  that  they  do  not  come  South  to  winter.

The  cold  Winter  of  1709  is  within  the  recollection  of
every  reader  of  history.  Birds  and  beasts  were  found
dead  in  the  fields,  sentinels  were  frozen  at  their  posts,
and  men  perished,  in  every  part  of  Europe,     The  olive


46

plantations  in  the  Southern  part  of  France  were  nearly
all  destroyed,  the  Mediterranean  was  frozen  over  about
Geneva,  and  the  orange  groves  suffered  in  the  finest
parts  of  Italy.  It  was  during  this  Winter  that  swans
and  various  other  water  fowl  migrated  farther  North
than  they  had  ever  before  been  seen,  where  they  found
the  sea  unincumbered  wilh  ice,  while  all  was  solid  and
compact  to  the  South.  See  Pontotidam's  Natural  His-
tory of  Norway.  Also,  the  History  of  Greenland,  b/  the
Moravian  Missionary  Crantz,  p.  45.

In  Rees'  Cyclopedic,  article  Reindeer,  I  find  the  fol-
lowing: "The  reindeer  are  found  in  the  neighbor-
hood of  Hudson's  Bay,  in  most  amazing  numbers  ;  co-
lumns of  eight  or  ten  thousand  are  seen  annually  passing
from  North  to  South,  in  the  month  of  March  or  April,
driven  out  of  the  ivoodaby  the  musketoes,  (diiven  out  of
the  woods  from  the  North,)  seeking  refreshment  on  the
shore.  In  the  Autumn,  the  deer,  with  their  fa-urns,  re-
migrate  Northward  again.

The  Indians,  also,  kill  great  numbers  of  them  during
the  season  of  migration,  watching  in  their  canoes,  and
spearing  them,  while  passing  over  the  rivers  of  their
country,  or  from  Island  to  Island."

In  the  article  Hudson's  Bay  it  is  stated  "The  reindeer
pass  in  vast  herds  towards  the  North,  in  October,  seek-
ing the  extreme  of  cold."

Hudson's  Bay  is  between  North  latitude  60°  and  65°,
From  which  it  appears  they  start  North  *'  to  seek  the
woods,"  Now  let  us  see  what  Parry  says:  "  On  the  25th
October,  (1818)  at  lat.  74°  30*  and  long.  110°  W.  all
the  deer  set  off  to  the  West  and  N.  W.  when  pursued,
and  even  when  not  molested  are  observed  to  be  travel-
ling in  that  direction,"  p.  146-47.  In  latitude  75°  speak-
ing of  the  soil  he  says,  "  The  soil  of  this  land  is  much
superior  to  any  we  have  yet  seen  in  those  regions;  along
the  shore,  indeed,  and  for  a  little  distance  inland,  it
consists  only  of  fine  sand,  but  beyond  this  the  surface
is  covered  with  a  black  mould,  which,  in  a  temperate
climate,  I  have  no  doubt,  would  be  very  productive  :  for
even  here,  in  the  valleys  and  the  places  where  there  is
any  moisture,  it  produces  grass  of  a  considerable  length,
and  finest  moss  in  abundance."  Speaking  of  the  musk
ox  he  observes,  "  Although  we  have  not  yet  seen  many
of  these  animals,  it  is  very  evident  that  this  land  must  be
frequented,  if  not  constantly  inhabited  by  them  in  great
numbers;  for  their  bones  and  horns  are  found  scattered
abo*t  in  all  directions,"  p.  109.


47

It  is  true,  the  reindeer  remain  in  Lapland  during  the
Winter,  and  this  they  may  very  readily  do,  finding  shel-
ter and  sustenance  in  the  thick  forests  and  productions
of  the  country.  You  speak  very  correctly,  that  the  buffa-
loes Franklin  saw,  retire  to  the  woods  in  the  Winter  :
and  that  "  Michel"  should  propose  to  Franklin,  a  jour-
ney to  the  West  or  Northwest,  with  the  view  of  find-
ing1 deer,  in  the  woods,  is  just  what  any  other  Indian
would  have  done.  But  why  expect  forests  in  that  di-
rection, since  we  have  generally  been  taught  to  regard
that  as  the  point  where  vegetation  is  destroyed  by  the
intensity  of  the  climate  1
I  am  strengthened  in  my  opinion  that  the  Winter  retreat
of  these  animals  is  still  a  matter  of  curious  conjecture,
and  not  too  well  understood,  from  the  remarks  of  Com-
modore Phipps.  on  the  natural  history  of  Spitsbergen  :
"  But  the  most  wonderful  thing  of  all  is,  how  the  deer
can  survive  an  eight  months*  famine.  They  feed  upon
nothing  that  can  be  perceived,but  the  vegetables  which
the  earth  spontaneously  produces,  and  yet  for  eight
months  in  the  year  the  earth  produces  neither  plant,
shrub,  nor  blade  of  grass  of  any  kind  whatsoever.  They
are  besides  but  thinly  clad  for  such  a  climate,  and  what
seems  still  worse,  there  is  no  woods  to  shelter  them,
within  the  distance  that  man  has  yet  discovered.  The
means  of  their  subsistence  must  remain,  therefore,
among  the  secrets  of  nature,  never  to  be  disclosed,  as
no  human  being  can  ever  live  here  so  as  to  trace  these
creatures  to  their  Winter  residence."

Trace  these  creatures  to  their  winter  residences ;
from  which  it  would  seem,  the  Commodore  supposes
they  leave  the  Island,  but  where  they  go,  is  the  great
secret.  Malte  Brun,  in  his  account  of  the  same  Island
has  this  remark  :  "another  animal,  the  amiable  and  tim-
id reindeer,  browses  the  moss  with  which  all  the  rocks
are  covered  ;  but  as  soon  as  the  polar  day  is  over,  these
animals  return  across  the  unknown  countries  to  Asia  or
America."

Now,  that  they  do  not  come  to  the  continent  of  Amer-
ica, would  seem  pretty  evident,  from  the  immense  dis-
tance; and  that  they  do  not  migrate  Southeast  to  Asia,
I  would  conclude  from  the  fact,  that  the  rein-deer  in  Si-
beria, from  latitude  70°,  migrate  North  and  Northeast,
in  the  month  of  Oct.  and  return  in  the  Spring.  At  least
such  is  the  fact,  if  the  testimony  of  Professor  Adams,  of
St.  Petersburg!),  can  be  relied  on:  in  other  matters  he
is  regarded  as  good  authority.    You  will  find  it  among


48

the  l*ransactionst  and  in  the  number  containing  the  ac-
count of  the  large  animal  taken  oat  of  the  Siberian  ice,
by  the  Professor,  and  under  the  direction  of  Alexander,
late  Emperor  of  Russia.

An  author,  on  the  Russian  discoveries,  makes  use  of
the  following  arguments,  drawn  from  Natural  History,
in  favor  of  the  Island  Alaksu  being  united  to  the  conti-
nent of  America.  "  River  otters,  wolves,  bears,  and
wild  hogs,  which  were  observed  upon  the  island,  will,
perhaps,  be  thought  to  afford  strong  presumptions  in
favor  of  a  neighboring  continent :  Martins  were  also
caught  there,  an  animal -which  is  not  known  in  the  Eastern
part  of  Siberia,  nor  found  upon  any  of  the  other  islands  ;
also,  reindeer  and  idld  dogs.  To  these  proofs  from  Na-
tural History,  we  must  add,  the  reports  of  a  mountain-
ous countty  covered  with  forests,"  &c.

The  late  Russian  discoveries,  and  especially  those  of
Baron  Wrangle,  show  conclusively,  that  the  continents
of  America  and  Asia  are  not  united.  The  above  argu-
ments, therefore,  prove,  if  they  prove  any  thing,  that
the  island  Alaksu  is  connected  with,  or  lying  near  to,
some  more  extensive  region  of  country,  extending  on  to
the  North,  East  of  the  Fox  and  Aluthian  islands,  **  cov-
ered with  forests,"  and  the  boundaries  of  which  are  not
yet  known.  (Coxe's*  Russian  Discoveries,  pp.  23*2,233.)

Again,  there  were  Indians,  whom  Hearne,  in  his  Jour-
nal, calls  strangers.  They  lived  far  to  the  Northwest,
travelled  a  year  in  that  direction,  and  agreeably  to  their
account,  there  was  no  end  to  the  country.  In  this,  we
must  make  due  allowances  for  the  limited  knowledge
of  natives  in  the  distance  and  course  of  countries,  though
in  both,  they  have  sometimes  shown  great  sagacity.
On  the  11th  of  Jan.  as  some  of  the  Indians  belonging
to  Hearne's  party,  were  engaged  in  hunting,  they  ob-
served the  tract  of  a  single  snow  shoe,  and  tracing  it
came  to  a  little  hut,  containing  a  lonely  female.  She
appeared  to  be  one  of  the  natives  who  lived  far  to  the
Northwest,  and  had  been  taken  prisoner,  together
with  her  party,  by  the  Athapusco  Indians,  and  was  the
only  one  of  her  party,  who  had  not  fallen  a  victim  to
their  inhumanity.    She  had  eloped  from  them  with  a

*  William  Coxe,  A.  M.  F.  R.  S.  one  of  the  senior  fellows
of  King's  College,  Cambridge^  Member  of  the  Imperial  ./Eco-
nomical Society  at  St.  Petersburgh,  of  the  Royal  Academy  of
Sciences,  at  Copenhagen,  and  Chaplain  to  his  Grace  the
Duke  of  Mabxbokough — I  suppose  you  will  readily  admit,  he
has  titles  enough,  in  all  ednfccieuce,  to  make  his  authority  good


49

■view  of  returning  to  her  own  tribe,  but  the  distance
was  so  great  she  had  lost  the  track,  and  had  therefore
made  a  little  hut,  and  supported  herself  by  snaring  rab-
bits, for  "  seven  moons"  without  seeing  a  human  being.

The  rigid  philosopher,  who  regards  nothing  as  cer-
tain, except  squared  by  a  mathematical  calculus,  may
not  consider  this  fact  as  very  imposing  ;  neither  do  I.  It
is  not  intended  as  demonstration.  I  am  willing  to  let  it
pass  without  comment,  for  just  what  it  is;  a  fact  which
would  go  to  show  a  chain  and  continuation  of  human
beings,  residing  on  to  the  Northwest.

This  appears  to  be  a  proper  place  to  notice  your  re-
marks on  the  Arctic  Highlanders.  In  the  year  1818,
Captain  Ross,  when  North  of  Baffin's  Bay,  in  latitude
75°  55',  met  with  natives,  hitherto  unknown  to  civilized
man,  and  of  whom,  in  substance,  he  gives  the  following
account:

When  Sacheuse,  the  Esquimaux  interpreter,  inquired
from  whence  they  came,  they  pointed  to  the  North,
where  they  said  there  were  great  many  people,  by  their
figurative  expresBion,  more  than  pieces  of  ice  in  the
sea  around  the  ships.  They  would  not  believe  Ross
when  he  informed  them  that  he  came  from  a  contrary
direction,, pointing  £outh,  because,  say  they,  "there  is
nothing  but  ice  there."  Beyond  the  land  to  the  North,
"  much  water  there,"  open  sea.  "  They  seemed  most
happy  and  contented,  their  clothing  was  in  good  condi-
tion, and  very  suitable  to  the  climate,  and  by  their  ac-
count, they  had  plenty  of  provisions.  They  had  a  king,
whom  they  called  Tulootvah,  his  residence  was  near  an
island,"  which  Ross  supposes  must  have  been  Wolsten-
holm,  but  did  wot  ascertain  the  fact.  He  is  represented
as  living  in  a  house  built  of  stone,  as  large  as  a  ship;
•'great  many  houses  and  people  there  •"  that  he  was  a
strong^  and  good  man}  they  gave  him  a  portion  of  all
tfhey  caught,  "  and  returned  to  this  place,  when  the
sun  went  away,  with  the  fruit  of  their  labors." — p.  134.

I  shall  never  forget  the  grave  and  dignified  tone  in
which  j  ou  respond  to  this  evidence  in  favor  of  the  con-
tinuation of  human  beings  and  open  seas  North.

"  Now  it  happens  that  this  mysterious  country,  was
but  a  short  distance  from  the  places  where  the  inter-
view occurred  ;  that  it  was  soon  after  visited  by  Capt.
Ross ;  and  that  he  describes  the  nature  of  the  country,
their  mode  of  living,  dress,  religion,  and  the  very  lati-
tude and  longitude."  That  I  might  not  do  you  injus-
tice, you  see  I  have  quoted  your  own  words.  What
5


50

continent  shall  I  make  on  them  i  It  will  net  do  to  say  the
Editor  of  the  American  Quarterly  is  unacquainted  with
the  facts  upon  which  he  comments,  and  still  worse  to
suppose  he  misunderstood  them  ;  and  yet  one  of  these
two  is  most  certainly  true  !

Let  any  reader,  of  the  most  ordinary  sagacity,  exam-
ine Ross's  voyages,and  he  will  most  unquestionably  and
unequivocally  find,  that  the  whole  number  of  natives
seen  was  eighteen  ;  that  they  were  merely  on  a  fishing
excursion  ;  that  their  habitations,  seen  from  the  ships,
were  on'y  temporary,  and  that  they  returned  North
"  with  the  fruit  of  their  labor,  when  the  same  went
away."  Every  fact  which  Captain  Ross  acquired,  in
relation  to  their  country,  manners,  customs,  religion,  dress,
&c.  was  got,  not  as  you  say,  by  visiting  toeir  habitations,
for  that  he  never  did,  but  derived  exclusively  from  the
eighteen  that  visited  his  ship?.  Had  you  examined  more
than  the  index  to  Ross's  voyage,  or  read  further  than
the  mere  caption  of  chapter  7th,  where  these  facts  are
given,  you  would  have  found  the  following  in  page  135,
and  w-  ich  must  be  decisive  of  the  point  at  issue,  viz  :
that  Ross  never  examined  or  visited  the  regular  resi-
dence of  these  natives.  These  are  his  words:  "We
had  not  an  opportunity  of  visiting  the  habitations  of  the
Arctic  Highlanders.'*  After  acquiring,  through  an  in-
terpreter, the  facts,  as  detailed,  of  their  manners,  cus-
toms, religion,  &c. ,  be  continues — "Such  is  the  sub-
stance of  what  we  collected,  in  our  short  intercourse
with  this  interesting  People,  which  may  appear  to  be
defective ;  but  it  must  be  recollected  that  the  ships
were  always  in  motion,  principally  from  the  state  of  the
weather,  which  rendered  it  impossible  to  send  parties
on  shore  after  the  first  day.  We  still  had  daily  hopes  of
obtaining  a  more  complete  access  to  them,  even  to  the
last  moment,  -when  ive  -were  obliged  to  leave  this  part  of  the
coast ,-  and  proceeding  Northward  from  our  last  station,
had  still  the  prospect  of  visiting  the  King,  and  filling
up  the  measure  of  our  i;  formation  respecting  them.
These  hopes  were  ultimately  disappointed,  as  will  appear
from  the  events  of  the  ensuing  chapter."  So  much  for
the  Arctic  Highlanders.  Further  comment  is  not  ne-
cessary ;  and  the  fact,  that  Ross  met  with  natives  North
of  BafTii  *s  Bay,  who  resided  further  North  than  has  yet
been  explored  on  that  meridian,  and  that  they  would
not  believe  that  he  came  from  the  South,  stands  unim-
paired, let  the  inference  drawn  from  it  be  what  it  may  !
.    To  this  I  may  add,    that  the  extent  of  Greenland  to


51

the  North  west,  has  evaded  the  persevering  researches  of
the  Danish  Missionaries.  All  that  is  known,  is,  that  the
Greenlanders,  after  passing  a  strait,  have  communicated
with  tribes  of  their  own  race, North  of  Baffin's  Bay — see
the  highest  authority  in  physical  and  historical  Geogra-
phy, Malte  Brun,  book  64,  p.  46.

I  shall  conclude  this  communication  with  a  few  re-
marks on  the  phenomenon  of  drift  wood,  in  the  Polar
seas,  which,  as  there  is  nothing  new  with  you,  you  may
dispose  of  and  account  for  at  your  leisure.

On  the  currents  flowing  from  the  North,  between
Spitsbergen  and  the  continent  of  America,  large  trees
have  frequently  been  found  at  latitude  80°,  whereas,  no
timber  is  known  to  grow  above  latitude  70°.  Every
season,  vast  quantities  of  this  floating  timber  is  lodged
on  the  coast  of  Norway,  some  of  a  tropical  kind,  and
seeds  evidently  tropical  in  so  recent  a  state  as  to  germi-
nate and  grow.  What  makes  the  matter  more  aston-
ishing, is,  that  these  things  appear  to  come  by  currents
flowing  from  the  North,  whereas,  according  to  your
doctrine,  these  regions  are  covered  with  perpetual  ice.
It  is  believed,  that  these  tropical  seeds  could  not  come
from  the  Gulf  stream,  as  that  current  loses  itself  in  the
great  expanse  of  the  Atlantic  ocean  long  before  it  could
be  thrown  into  so  high  a  latitude  as  to  come  South  by-
currents  flowing  by  Spitsbergen.  Again  :  the  Southeast
currents,  from  Hudson's  Bay  and  Davis's^Straits  would
be  likely  to  intercept  its  course  to  the  North.  The
current  from  Hudson's  Bay  across  to  Europe,  appears  to
be  proven,  from  one  of  Capt  Parry's  experiments.  It
was  customary  with  Parry  to  throw  a  bottle  over  board
every  day,  with  their  latitude,  and  other  observations
sealed  in  it.  One  of  them  was  found  in  the  Bay  of  Kit-
la  bra,  in  Ireland,  after  floating  10,080  miles,  at  the  rate
of  three  miles  per  day.

If  this  current  be  regular  across  t'ne  Atlan*  c,the  course
of  the  Gulf  stream  must  necessarily  be  intercepted.  The
Europeans  who  reside  in,  or  rather  visit  Greenland,  as
well  as  the  inhabitants  of  that  country,  depend  exclu-
sively on  drift  wood  for  fuel,  as  well  as  every  other  use
they  make  of  timber.  Among  this  wood  are  great  trees
torn  up  by  the  roots,  which,  being  in  the  water  a  long
time,  rubbing  and  dashing  against  the  ice,  are  quite
bare  of  branches  and  bark,and  corroded  withworm  holes,
which  proves  it  must  once  have  been  in  milder  climes.
There  is  some  green,  with  buds  on  it.  The  greatest
part  of  this  drift  is  pine  and  fir.    There  is  also  a  good


52

deal  of  a  species  of  wood  finely  veiRed,  and  with  f <  w
branches.  There  is  also  a  solid  reddish  wood,  of  more
agreeable  fragrancy  than  the  common  fir,  with  visible
cross  veins ;  it  is  supposed  to  be  of  the  same  species  as
the  beautiful  silver-fir,  or  zerbils.  Crantz,in  his  history
of  Greenland,  says  :  "  It  is  plain  this  drift  wood  Comes
out  of  a  cold  but  fruitful  and  mountainous  country,  bu
it  is  difficult  to  determine  where  that  country  is.'*  D©
you  say  it  comes  from  Terra  Labrador ;  how  can  this  be.
since  it  comes  with  the  currents,  and  beats  on  that
coast?  Do  you  consider  Canada  the  origin  of  this  timber;
I  ask  you  why  the  ash,  oak,  and  other  species  of  tim-
ber, which  grows  in  Canada,  is  not  found  with  it,  which
is  not  the  case.  This  drift  wood  is  found  in  great  abun-
dance in  Iceland.

Let  us,  ihen*  pursue  this  subject  still  further,  and  see
if  its  origin  can  be  derived  from  Siberia  in  Asia.  The
Russian  vessel  which  set  out  in  the  year  1Y3S-,  by  Im-
perial order,  from  the  river  Lena,  to  Kamschatka,  in
search  of  a  N.  E.  passage,  met  with  immense  quantities
of  this  umber  in  their  Winter  quarters;  the  shores  were
covered  with  it,  which  floated  there  from  other  coun-
tries. The  shores  between  the  rivers  Gennesse  and  Ob
were  lined  with  it.  The  freshest  lies  close  to  the  shore,
and  further  on  the  land  lie  dry  and  rotten  trunks,  which
clearly  establishes  the  fact  that  this  timber  comes  from
some  other  than  the  interior  of  that  country.

On  Kamschatka  great  quantities  of  the  same  drift
wood  is  found,  where  there  is  no  fir  growing;  but,  as
the  inhabitants  report,  comes  from  countries  unknown
to  them.  See  Miller's  collection  of  Russian  Transactions,
vol.  3d,  p.  60.  That  I  have  not  attached  an  importance
or  thrown  a  mystery  over  this  subject,  that  does  not  be-
long to  it,  will  be  admitted  from  the  following1  remarks
of  the  sagacious  Malte  Brun:  ,sBut  the  wood  that  is
denied  to  the  Icelanders  by  the  earth  is  brought  to  them
by  the  ocean.  The  immense  quantities  of  pines,  and  firs,
and  other  trees  which  are  thrown  upon  the  Northern
parts  of  Iceland*  is  one  of  the  most  astonishing-  phenomena
in  nature.  The  masses  of  floating  wood  thrown  upon
the  Island  of  John  T>e  Mayen,  often  equals  the  whole
of  this  Island  in  extent"— book  77,  p.  105.  If  yon  say
a  part  of  this  drift  may  be  carried  by  the  current  putting
North  through  Behring's  Straits,  into  the  polar  basin,
and  from  thence  brought  down  upon  these  islands ;  this
will  subvert  your  own  position,  and  establish  the  one  I
have  been  laboring  to  maintain— the  free  and  unobstruct-


ed  navigation  of  the  polar  sea?,  after  the  icy  circle  has
once  been  passed.  Without  indulging-  in  any  visionary
or  theoretical  speculations,  what  an  extensive  and  in-
teresting field  is  here  opened  for  the  contemplation  of
the  philosopher  and  the  naturalist!  How  very  different
from  any  thing  the  reader  would  be  led  to  suppose,  by
the  perusal  of  your  article.  In  that  he  looks  in  vain  for
one  liberal,  one  redeeming  sentiment.  If  destined  to
preside  over  the  republic  of  letters,  to  exercise  an  influ-
ence in  forming  the  taste  and  directing  the  sentiments
and  thoughts  of  the  community,  how  well  it  would  be-
come you  to  encourage  the  spirit  of  enterprise  and  ad-
venture, and  all  the  noble  workings  of  genius  of  your
own  countrymen.  In  this  I  do  not  mean  that  you  should
tolerate  visionary  speculation,  or  admit  without  a  gallant
struggle  any  thing  new  in  philosophy.  The  history  of
Reviewers  will  not  allow  me  to  indulge  in  any  such  ex-
pectation. They  stand  like  watch  dogs,  on.  the  Hill  of
Science,  and  snarl  and  bark  at  every  votary,  who  has  the
hardihood  to  go  one  step  beyond  the  beaten  track.  But
no  sooner  is  a  new  path,  in  any  department  of  science
successfully  marked  out,  and  received  the  sanction  of
public  opinion,  than  you  find  certain  great  -writers,  who,
a  short  time  before,  had  denounced,  place  themselves
in,  advance  and  in  the  most  soothing  and  encouraging
manner,  beckon  to  the  child  of  genius  to  come  on.  Hence
your  strictures  on  the  New  Theory  lias  occasioned  no
surprise — it  is  such  a  pretty  target  to  shoot  at,  and  upon
which  to  display  your  extraordinary  powers  of  demon-
stration, that  they  might  have  been  looked  for.  With  me
it  is  only  a  matter  of  regret  that  in  your  zeal  to  blow  it
sky  high  you  should  be  led  into  a  train  of  reasoning,which
has  an  obvious  tendency  to  retard  the  general  progress  of
science  and  discovery.  I  appeal  to  any  and  every  indivi-
dual who  has  read  your  communication  on  this  subject,
if  he  can  lay  it  down  subscribing  to  your  general  conclu-
sions,(not  in  relation  to  the  Theory)  of  the  settled  and-well
defined  state  of  things  about  the  Poles,  and  feel  the  least
interest  in  any  further  attempts  at  discovery  in  those  re-
mote parts  of  our  globe.  It  is  to  this  general  sentiment
I  would  reply,  rather  than  quibble  about  Theories  and
enter  into  the  small  business  of  discussing  the  size  of
the  Esquimaux.  It  is,  and  has  been,  my  object  to  show
the  reasonableness  of  an  expedition  to  the  Poles,  and
that  there  is  a  high  probability  of  making  interesting
discoveries,  independent  of  all  visionary  speculation.
5*


54

Had  you  admitted  this,  and  stated  a  few  other  things
a  little  differently  from  wha^  you  have,  these  hasty  re-
marks, with  the  next  and  concluding  number,  had  ne-
ver been  given  to  the  public.     .

Very  respectfully,  I  am,  yours,  &c.

J.  N.  REYNOLDS,


No.  III.

To  the  Editor  of  the  American   Quarterly  Review.

Sib  :  In  page  237,  of  your  Review,  1  find  the  follow-
ing sentence  ■  "  The  newspapers  have  teemed  with  es-
says, circulars  have  been  addressed  to  all  the  learned
Societies  in  Europe  and  America,  addresses  and  peti-
tions have  been  presented  to  our  National  and  State  Le-
gislatures, certificates  of  conviction  and  adhesion  have
been  procured  by  men  in  high  literary  and  political  sta-
tions, in  favor  of  the  theory.*9

By  this  gratuitous  sentence,  what  an  elevated  station
you  have  assumed,  and  with  what  complacency  you  can
look  down  upon  the  busy,  bustling,  productive  multi-
tude below  !  Newspapers  editors,  men  in  high  literary
and  political  stations,  National  and  State  Legislatures,
are  all  to  be  enlightened,  instructed,  and  corrected,  by
the  fulminations  of  your  luminous  pen.

Is  it  not,  however,  a  little  strange,  that,  while  hun-
dreds of  the  most  intelligent  citizens,  legislators,  edit-
ors, and  all,  have  simply  thrown  the  weight  of  their  in-
fluence, and,  in  many  instances,  contributed  their  means,
towards  an  expedition  to  extend  and  improve  the  bound-
aries of  human  knowledge,  strictly  on  the  principles  up.
on  whjch  other  nations  have  acted,  you  -hould  pretend
to  have  misunderstood  the  nature  of  their  efforts,  disre-
gard their  declarations  and  publications,  and  then  at-
tempt to  demonstrate  that  they  too  are  visionary  ?  In
extenuation,  it  must  be  admitted  the  inducement  to  do
so  was  very  hard  to  be  resisted.

Your  Quarterly  is  ta  be  republished  in  London  and
Paris ;  and,  besides  convincing  the  literati  of  the  Old
World  that  Philadelphia  "  can  boast  of  a  greater  fund
of  talent,  erudition,  and  science,  than  any  other  Ameri-
can City,"  you  will  stand  forth  in  a  most  imposing
and  enviable  attitude,  as  the  mighty  Jljax,  the  great  cor-
recting and  redeeming  genius  of  your  country  !

Now,  sir,  these  things  may  do  well  enough  when  con-
fined  to  a  Gazette;   but,  when  embodied  in  a  regular


.      55

work,  which  will  be  read  and  preserved,  if  only  for  the
sake  of  the  versatility  of  talent  displayed  in  the  commu-
nications contained  in  it,  the  case  is  very  materially  al-
tered, and  it  becomes  necessary  that  the  facts  should  be
stated  as  they  are,  and  as  they  have  been  received  and
considered  by  the  community.

I  might,  with  great  justice,  call  on  you  for  the  evi-
dence in  favor  of  your  declarations,  but  shall  not  do  it.
i  will  take  the  onus  probandi  on  myself.  I  shall  show,
that  although  lectures  have  been  and  may  again  be  de-
livered on  the  figure  of  the  Earth,  and  on  the  import-
ance of  exploring  the  polar  regions,  yet,  so  far  as  1  am
interested,  it  was  not  with  the  intention  or  expectation
of  making  proselytes  to  any  new  doctrine,  bit  simply  with
the  view  of  eliciting  a  spirit  of  enterprise,  and  ot  acquir-
ing the  means  of  prosecuting  a  voyage  strictly  on  na-
tional and  scientific  principles  :  and  that  such  is  the  on-
ly light  in  which  it  has  been  regarded  by  editors,  legis-
lators, &c.  You,  therefore,  stand  alone,  and  hold  all
the  honors  in  your  own  hands  that  are  due  your  candort
either  in  this  country,  or  beyond  the  waters.

It  then  becomes  necessary  to  inquire  into  the  nature
of  the  various  essays  which  appeared  at  different  times
on  this  subject.  The  inquiry  will  be  interesting  at  this
time,  not  only  to  ascertain  how  well  informed  you  have
been,  and  how  fairly  you  have  represented  the  spirit  of
those  essays,  but  that  which  is  of  far  more  importance,
the  expression  it  may  afford  of  public  sentiment,
in  relation  to  such  an  undertaking  by  the  citizens
of  this  country,  at  this  time,  under  the  direction,  pro-
tection, and  aid,  of  the  Navy  Department,

I  shall  confine  myself  to  the  essays  which  have  appear-
ed in  relation  to  mv  own  labors.  1  he  first  was  the  in-
telligent editor  of  the  Scioto  Gazette,  Ohio.  He  main-
tained, at  some  length,  and  with  his  usual  ability,  that,
leaving  all  theories  out  of  the  question,  the  importance
of  an  expedition  to  the  Poles  could  not  be  doubted  by
any  intelligent  individual,  and  that  there  were,  most
certainly,  to  say  the  least,  many  unexplained  phenome-
na in  those  regions  well  deserving  the  serious  inquiry  of
w*y  enlightened  nation.  The  editors  in  Zanesville  and
other  parts  of  Ohio  responded  in  the  same  liberal  spirit.
In  Wheeling,  Virginia,  a  most  lively  interest  was  taken
in  favor  of  an  expedition.  The  editor  said,  the  doctrine
of  spheres  was  imposing,  but  advocated  the  expedition
strictly  on  scientific  and  national  considerations.  The
remarks  of  the  Wheeling  editor  were  republished  ia


3$

Washington,  Pennsylvania,  and  the  same  sentiments
concurred  in.  In  Pittsburg",  there  was  much  published
on  the  nature  and  condition  of  the  polar  regions.

The  abstract  question  of  the  figure  of  the  Earth  was
discussed  at  some  length,  but  all  agreed  that,  so  far  as
a  voyage  of  discovery  was  the  object  to  be  decided  on,
it  should  receive  the  encouragement  and  hearty  co-ope-
ration  of  all  the  friends  of  science.

The  editor  of  the  Mercury,  present  Mayor  of  the  City,
has  given  a  liberal  and  persevering  support  in  favor  of
such  an  undertaking.  Essays  have  also  appeared  in
the  papers  of  Brownsville,  Uniontown,  Greensburgh,
Bedford,  Chambersburgh,  Carlisle,  Harrisburgh,  Lancas-
ter, York,  and  other  places  in  the  State,  and  all  have
been  in  favor  of  science  and  exploration.  Now,  sir,  I
venture  the  assertion  you  cannot  find  a  paragragh  in  one,
or  from  one  of  these  papers,  expressive  of  the  "  adhe-
sion" of  the  editor  or  writer  in  full  belief  of  the  Earth
being  hollow.  They  were  not  called  on  to  make  any
such  declaration  ;  they  heard  a  theory  explained,  as  a
head  under  which  facts  could  be  arranged  ;  and  the  on-
ly  conclusion  urged  was,  the  "  utility  of  extending  our
researches  into  those  regions,  with  the  view  to  collect
facts,  alike  regardless  of  old  or  new  doctrines;"  and,  to
this  proposition,  such  an  expression  has  been  given,  as
would,  on  any  political  subject,  be  regarded  as  decisive
of  the  sentiments  of  the  community.

Is  positive  testimony  of  this  required  ?  Then,  let  the
language  of  the  editor  of  the  Franklin  Repository  speak
for  itself:  "  Few  can  resist  the  reasoning  in  favor  of
extending  scientific  research  to  the  South  seas,  and  we
are  not  a  little  pleased  to  see  the  liberal  ground  on
which  the  contemplated  expedition  is  put,  not  being
connected  with  any  favorite  or  specific  doctrine,  but  for
discovery,  as  connected  with  matters  of  science  and
commerce.  The  undertaking  from  tins  country  is  no-*
vel,  but  not  so  from  others.  Many  expeditions  from  Eng-
land and  other  countries  have  been  fitted  out,  aided  by
private  subscriptions;  and  if  they  have  not  all  been  suc-
cessful in  making  important  discoveries,  they  have  at
least  done  something  for  the  progressive  stock  of  know-
ledge, and  of  course  deserve  the  thanks  of  the  human
race."

The  editors  in  the  State  of  New  Jersey,  as  far  as  I
have  been  able  to  collect,  have  spoken  but  one  lan-
guage in  relation  to  the  expedition.  1  know  of  none
who  are  proselytes  to  new  doctrines t  but  the  ablest  of


57

them  have  maintained  that  an  expedition  to  the  South
Pole  could  scarcely  fail  in  adding  much  to  our  present
limited  knowledge  of*  jthose  regions,  and  to  the  honor
of  our  country.

In  New  York,  I  have  seen  the  most  liberal  sentiments
expressed,  especially  in  Utica,  Schenectady,  Albany,
and  the  City  of  New  York,and  yet  you  will  not  find  in  any-
one of  them  an  advocate  of  the  New  Theory.  And  why"
you  should  have  attempted  to  blend  them  together  is
to  me  a  matter  of  astonishment !  Ever  since  an  expe-
dition has  been  spoken  of,  it  has  been  advocated  exclu-
sively on  those  broad  and  liberal  principles  upon  which
the  friends  of  science  can  all  unite.

The  first  public  annunciation  of  the  expedition  wats
from  the  Edito*  of  the  New  York  Mirror,  and.  what  does
he  say  ?  «•  This  will  be  no  Utopian  expedition.  It  fis  not
undertaken  on  the  presumption  of  the  truth  of  any  defi-
nite Theory,  or  supported,  by  its  advocates  alone.  The
plan  is  taken  up  upon  liberal  views,  for  the  extension
of  geographical  knowledge,  and  the  benefit  of  mankind,
and  is  untrammelled  by  the  fetters  of  any  bigoted  doctrine.
All  intelligent  and  scientific  persons  agree  that  the  Po-
!ar  Regions  still  offer  an  extensive  field  for  enterprise
and  discovery ;  and  they  cannot  fail  to  look  with  inter*
est  and  encouragement  upon  any  attempts  to  penetrate
the  mysteries  of  those  unknown  regions  of  the  glebe-
A  great  many  individuals  of  this  kind,  proselytes  to  no
new  doctrine,  have,  therefore,  combined  to  give  counte-
nance  and  support  to  the  projected  expedition."

There  is  an  article,  which  appeared  in  the  New  York
Advertiser,  of  the  6th  ultimo,  under  the  head  of  "  Voy-
ages and  Travels,"  of  more  than  ordinary  merit.  I  do
not  recollect  to  have  met,  in  any  place,  a  communication
embracing  so  much  useful  and  interesting  information  ;
I  give  an  extract :

"  At  a  period  when  the  principal  nations  of  Europe  are  ex-
emplifying their  claims  to  that  distinction  by  the  most  laudable
means  ;  when,  instead  of  rivalry  in  war,  we  see  them  cultivat-
ing the  arts  of  peace,  and  proving  themselves  worthy  of  the  title
of  civilized  and  enlightened,  by  assiduously  prosecuting  inqui-
ries likely  to  benefit  mankind  bv  the  improvement  of  science,
we  have  thought  that,  to  throw  together,  in  a  single  point  of
view,  a  considerable  mass  of  the  floating  intelligence  upon  one
branch  of  pursuit,  that  of  geographical  information  and  im-
provement, might  be  acceptable  to  tlie  public.  England,  Ger-
many, Russia,  and  France,  are  all  distinguished  for  the  activi-
ty with  which  they  have  recently  been,  and  are  exerting  them-
selves to  augment  our  information  with  respect  to  those  parts


58

"tf  the  globe  which  we  inhabit,  that  are  either  altogether  uo~
known  to  as,  or  very  partially  or  imperfectly  known.  Surely  5
next  to  the  grand  lesson,  'Know  thyself,'  the  most  obvious
business  of  human  beings,  endowed  with  reasoning  faculties,  is
to  make  themselves  acquainted  with  their  species  throughout
the  earth,  which  is  their  inheritance,  and  with  the  various
forms,  productions,  and  phenomena,  of  the  earth  itself.  Other-
wise, we  resemble  persons  who  live  in  ancient  edifices,  and  are
content  with  the  apartments  in  common  use,  without  caring
for  suites  of  rooms,  gaUeries,  turrets,  vaults,  and  other  pi  aces
which  surround  them,  and  might  be  made  to  contribute  great-
ly to  their  comforts  and  enjoyments.  Indeed,  it  seems  to  be  a
reproach  to  Europe,  that,  during  the  last  five  hundred  years,
though  so  much  hns  been  done,  so  much  has  been  left,  undone,
in  this  matter.  Of  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe,  it  may  be
said  that  even  Europe  has  several  portions  unvisited— and  Asia
immense  regions  •  that  Africa  is  little  understood  even  on  her
coasts — and  that  of  America  on  three  sides,  we  are  all  but  ig-
norant. With  the  new  quarter,  (if  it  is  so  called,)  Australia,
we  have  still  less  familiarity ;  and  yet  we  direct  our  most  earn-
est attention  to  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  in  order  to  ascertain
their  courses,  movements,  climates,  &c.  &c,  while  so  misera-
bly defective  in  the  intelligence  respecting  ourselves  and  our
own  planet.  Let  us  hope  that  the  spirit  now  abroad  will,  in
good  time,  remove  this  cloud  of  darkness  ;  and  that,  as  becomes
an  age  which  boasts  of  its  skill,  and  science,  and  enlighten-
ment, we  may,  ins'ead  of  hardly  knowing  one  half, of  our  ball^
be  able  to  give  a  tolerable  account  of  the  world  on  which  we
have  our  being."

I  might  adduce  a  thousand  facts  to  prove  that  the  me«
mortal  presented  to  Congress  during  the  past  session,
was  never  regarded  by  those  who  signed  it,  even  at  a
distance,  as  in  any  respect  connected  with  speculations
about  the  figure  of  the  earth.

Noah,,  in  the  New  York  Enquirer,  speaks  of  this  tnat-
t  v  as  follows:  "  We  mentioned  a  few  days  since,  the
memorial  (now  in  a  course  of  signature  at  Baltimore)  to
Congress,  for  aid  and  authority  towards  prosecuting  a
voyage  of  science  and  discovery  in  the  Polar  seas.  It
may  be  well  to  refer  to  that  petition  again.  The  En-
glish periodicals  have  expressed  an  opinion,  that  the  dis-
covery of  a  Northwest  passage  must  he  reserved  for  o«r
country,  should  it  be  abandoned  by  Great  Britain.  And
this  opinion  is  certainly  true.  We  have  no  jealousies
on  the  subject;  but  still  our  pride  and  triumph  would
be  inexpressibly  great,  if  such  an  achievement  *  hould
fall  to  the  lot  of  this  country.  Hitherto  we  have  con-
tributed almost  nothing  to  the  science  of  maritime  geo-
graphy.  The  period  has  at  length  arrived,  when  the
resources'  and  experience  of  our  rulers   enable  them 'to


59

enter  upon  new  projects  with  greater  certainty  and
more  libera! means."

In  speaking  on  this  subject,  the  Editors  of  the  State
of  Delaware  have  been  very  explicit.  The  Statesman
says,  "  the  memorial  has  been  signed  by  a  large  num-
ber of  the  most  respectable  citizens  of  this  place,  and
vicinity,  who  would  give  their  hearty  approbation,  to
an  expedition  of  the  kind  suggested  in  the  memorial.'3
The  Gazette  concludes  an  essay  on  the  subject  in
these  words  :

"  The  recollection,  however,  should  be  distinctly  borne  in
mind,  that  the  immediate  object  of  his  present  pursuit  is  not
to  establish  any  particular  theory  ;  bur.  to  induce  an  investiga-
tion into  matters  of  science,  and  to  lead  to  a  voysge  of  disco-
very, with  a  view  to  a  general  advancement  of  knowledge,
and  the  benefit  of  mankind ;  without  regard  to  the  effect  it
may  have  in  establishing  former  opinions,  or  in  producing  new
ones.  It  is  for  this  purpose  that  he  is  endeavoring  to  procure
signatures  to  a  memorial  to  Congress  ;  and  it  affords  us  plea-
sure to  say  that  the  number  and  weight  of  ch&racter  of  the  in-
dividuals who  have  signed  it  in  this  place,  is  such  as  to  show
that  the  general  sense  of  our  citizens  is  decidedly  in  its  favor."
Inacard  which  I  had  the  honor  of  addressing  to  the
citizens  of  Baltimore,  will  be  found  the  following  plain
exposition  of  the  grounds  upon  which  the  expedition
has  unif  rmly  been  placed  :  "  It  is  essential  to  the  suc-
cess of  the  enterprise,  that  the  principles  on  which  it  is
founded,  be  distinctly  known  ;  and  I  avail  myself  of
this  opportunity  of  again,  repeating,  that  its  object  is  to
collect  facts,  without  reference  to  the  support  of  any
theory.*'

I  wiil  select  a  few  extracts  from  the  Baltimore  jour-
nals, for  ycur  special  instruction.

"  Whether  the  theory  be  true  or  not,  the  fact  of  its
being  either  the  one  or  the  other,  has  nothing  to  do  with
ours,  and  what  appears  to  us  to  be  the  object  of  Mr.
R.  We  wish  simply  to  promote  an  exploring  expedi-
tion to  the  South.  That  there  are  interesting  disco-
veries to  be  made  in  those  seas,  no  one  of  sufficient  in-
telligence to  form  an  opinion  will  deny."  Again,  "in
addition  to  the  liberal  and  appropriate  contributions  of
nautical  instruments,  noticed  yesterday,  as  having  been
offered  for  the  use  of  the  proposed  expedition  of  dis-
covery, another  gentleman  of  this  city  has  offered  a
first  rate  day  and  night  telescope,  and  another  gentle-
man proffers  a  liberal  contribution  of  ship-bread  for  the
same  service.  These  are  all  voluntary  offerings  to  the
c  ause  of  science,  and  evince  a  spirit  in  our  citizens  both


60

liberal  and  enlightened.  Should  Congress  patronise
such  an  expedition,  we  have  no  doubt  the  citizens  of
the  United  States  would  be  well  pleased.  Of  this,
however,  the  formidable  list  of  namesthat  will  accom-
pany the  memorial  will  afford  the  best  testimony."

How  much  theory  can  you  make  out  of  the  following
editorial  remarks  of  the  Baltimore  Chronicle,  of  Sep-
tember 27th  ?  "  With  the  object  of  Mr.  R's  visit  to
the,  seaboard,  we  confess  we  are  pleased,  and  do  hope
he  will  find  in  bis  Atlantic  brethren,  a  patronage  that
will  enable  him  to  carry  his  enterprise  into  full  and  per-
fect effect.  The  subject  of  an  exploring  expedition  to
the  South,  prosecuted  by  competent  individuals,  on  sci-
entific principles,  must  necessarily  meet  with  the  appro-
bation of  all  who  are  friendl)  to  the  cause  of  science.
In  other  cities  Mr.  R.  has  been  patronized  by  many  dis-
tinguished individuals,  and  comes  before  our  citizens
thus  recommended  to  their  notice,"  &c.

It  was  about  this  time,  some  Editor,  I  believe  in  the
city  of  Philadelphia,  toot  it  into  his  head,  as  you  have
recently  done,  not  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  con-
templated expedition,  and  made  some  very  witty  re-
marks about  the  doctrine  of  spheres  being  the  true  phi-
losophy of  nature,  instead  of  solid  globes,  which  elicit-
ed from  a  Baltimore  pap^r  the  following  reply  :  "  But
why  all  this  excitement  ?  Why  do  not  editors  state
things  as  they  are  gven  ?  Has  not  Mr.  R.  said  in  print,
in  public,  and  in  private,  that  his  object  was  to  ex-
cite inquiry,  and  to  elicit  the  patronage  necessary  to
explore  the  South  seas,  unconnected  and  untrammelled
with  any  bigoted  doctrine  or  favorite  theory  ?  We  haye
heard  him  repeut  i  *  his  lectures,  '  no  matter  what  the
contrariety  of  opinion  may  be,  concerning  the  abstract
figure  of  the  earth,  there  can  scarcely  be  but  one  opin-
ion on  the  importance  of  extending  scientific  research.*
It  was  the  presentation  of  these  liberal  views,  that
elicited  tne  few  remarks  we  have  made.  It  is  in  ac
cordance  with  these  views  alone,  Mr.  R.  soli  cits  the  pa-
tronage of  the  public.  We  have  no  doubt  but  Mr.  R's
highest  expectations  will  be  fully  realized  by  his  visit
to  our  city.  The  liberality  of  his  views  does  not  require
the  question  of  the  theory  to  be  taken  into  considera-
tion, by  those  who  aid  this  laudable  undertaking."

I  might  go  on  to  notice  all  t»at  has  been  published  on
this  subject,  in  Fredericktown,  Hagerstown,  and  Anna-
polis, in  Maryland  ;  of  the  spirited  and  liberal  expres-
sion of  the  most  Intelligent  citizens  in  each  of  those


places,  but  it  is  deemed  unnecessary.  In  spirit  it  is  pre-
cisely the  same  as  that  which  has  been  given  above.

In  every  part  of  Virginia,  where  the  memorial  has  been
presented,  the  same  generous  and  ardent  spirit  has
been  evinced,  and  the  memorial  signed  by  such  num-
bers and  such  characters.,  as  evidently  to  show,  thaf
the  citizens  of  the  old  domain  would  not  be  the  last  in
community,  in  throwing  the  weight  of  their  influence,
in  favor  of  an  undertaking,  which  has  for  its  object,
even  in  a  remote  bearing,  the  improvement  of  science*
the  interest  and  glory  of  our  common  country,  and  the
benefit  of  the  human  race,  by  enlarging  the  boundaries
of  human  knowledge.

Of  the  encouragement  given  in  this  City  and  District,
I  need  scarcely  speak.  The  officers  of  Government
and  citizens  have  shown  a  liberal  spirit,  and  were  among
the  first  on  the  list  of  patrons  in  favor  of  an  expedition
to  be  prosecuted  on  principles  strictly  national  and
scientific,  as  Englands  Russia,  and  France  have  done.

The  Potomac  Chapter,  with  a  liberality  congenial  with
the  leading  principles  of  its  institution,  ordered  a  con-
tribution from  its  funds,  accompanying  which  was  this
appropriate  expression:  "The  donation  was  made,  with
the  view  to  further  whatever  rational  efforts  should  be
made  by  men  of  science,  or  the  philanthropist,  to  ame-
liorate the  condition  of  the  human  race,  and  to  aid  in
the  general  objects  of  a  maritime  expedition,  uncon-
nected with  any  theery  whatever,  respecting  the  figure
of  the  Earth/'

Such  is  a  substantial,  though  very  brief  review  of  the
interest  manifestec'in  this  large  portion  of  the  commu-
nity in  favor  of  the  present  projected  voyage  of  disco-
very. That  I  have  not  colored,  or  set  aught  down  in
malice,  1  appeal  to  the  Editors  and  citizens  of  every
place,  of  whose  encouragement  I  have  made  mention.

It  is  not  an  appeal  for  protection.  I  feel  able  to  de-
fend myself  against  all -who  are  censurably  misinformed,
or  improperly  represent,  as  you  appear  to  have  done.
I  mean  nothing  harsh,  but  1  do  mean  to  be  understood,
and  to  call  things  by  their  names.  A  few  individuals
might  be  set  down  as  visionary,  but  it  is  ridiculous  in
the  extreme,  to  insinuate  or  suppose  the  thousands  who
have  stood  forward  as  the  supporters  and  encouragers
of  a  vovage  of  discovery  from  this  country,  and  who
have  petitioned  Congress  to  that  effect;  should  at  the
same  time  be  engaged  in  abstract  and  philosophical
speculations  and  disquisitions  about  the  figure  of  the
"Earth.

6


62

The  memorial  has  been  published  and  republished
in  many  places  ;  Legislatures  have  signed  and  sanction-
ed it ;  an4  Congress  has  referred  the  whole  subject  to
the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  for  his  disposal,  within  his
discretionary  power.     I  give  an  extract  from  it :

"  The  period  of  our  national  existence  ha6  been  only  about
fifty  years — and  the  history  of  man  shows  no  parallel  of  the
progress  we  have  made  in  population,  improvement,  and  pow-
er. From  a  small  nation  struggling  for  liberty,  we  have  grown
into  a  powerful  one,  capable  of  defending  on  the  land  or  at
sea,  the  blessings  won  by  the  war  for  independence.  The
American  name  is  known  and  respected  to  the  utmost  verge
of  civilization — our  eagle  is  a  denizen  of  every  clime — our
sails  are  unfurled  on  every  sea — our  vessels  are  nailed  in  eve-
ry foreign  port  as  the  harbingers  of  plenty — and  the  enter-
prise and  perseverance,  courage  and  constancy  of  the  Ameri-
can People,  are,  if  not  unrivalled,  at  least  not  surpassed.
What  man  can  do,  it  is  our  character  to  feel  able  to  attempt —
What  man  has  accomplished,  the  American  feels  that  he  is
able  to  do— Whether  it  be  to  defend  his  liberties  on  the  field
of  battle,  to  grapple  with  an  enemy  on  the  deep,  or  to  pene-
trate the  burning  line,  and  pursue  his  gigantic  game  within  the
iey  circle,  and  with  an  ardor  that  insures  success,  where  the
People  of  other  nations  would  fail,  because  of  a  waut  of  the
same  energy  and  zeal  to  excel.

"  The  enlightened  British  nation  have  been  extending  their
researches  to  the  North  by  land  and  by  water;  the  final  result
of  neither  is  yet  given  to  the  world  ;but  if  either  should  suc-
ceed in  presenting  any  thing  interesting  to  science,  the  glory
of  the  discovery  will  justly  belong  to  the  British  nation.  We
would  rival  them  in  all  that  is  great  and  good,  and  return  light
to  them  for  light  received,  in  whatever  is  useful  to  science  and
the  arts — and,  therefore,  respectfully  suggest,  that,  under  the
patronage  of  the  United  States,  an  expec.ition  should  be  fitted
out  without  delay,  and  prooeed  to  acquire  a  more  perfect
knowledge  of  the  Northern  parts  of  our  own  continent,  or,
if  possible,  to  enter  the  more  interesting  and  extensive  field
for  enterprise,  in  the  Southern  hemisphere,  and  provided  for
the  purpose,  with  hardy  seamen,  and  scientific  persons,  bring
home  to  us  the  result  of  their  labors  for  the  honor  of  our  coun-
try, and  the  benefit  of  mankind.  It  is  believed,  that  Indivi-
duals proper  for  such  an  expedition  might  easily  be  prevailed
upon  to  undertake  it,  and  that  the  expenditure  of  a  small  sum,
for  an  object  so  interesting,  wou!d  meet  with  the  approbation
and  support  of  the  great  body  of  the  American  People."

In  this  memorial  you  cannot  find  a  single  expression,  or
even  an  obscure  allusion  to  the  theory  of  Capt.  Symmes  j
there  was  none  intended.  It  is,  therefore,  an  unfortu-
nate and  too  late  an  hour  for  your  mystifications,  anr;
you  will  be  more  successful  in  attempting

"  To  pluck  bright  honor  from  the  pale  faced  moon.'-


63

than  to  acquire  fame  by  this  new  method  of  making  war
on  community  ;  unless,  indeed,  it  be  a  distinction  of
which  few  will  be  invidious— the  distinction  of  being1
justly  pitied.

It  would  seem  enough  has  now  been  said  to  place  this
matter  in  its  true  point  of  view,  and  to  throw  back,  with
leadened  weight,  the  allegations  you  have  made,  on  the
sources  from  whence  they  emanated.

The  memorials  presented  to  the  State  Legislatures  only
remain  to  be  noticed.  It  is  very  true  the  memorial  was
presented  to  the  General  Assembly  of  the  State  of  Ma-
ryland ;  and,  in  reference  to  it,  Mr.  Tyson  introduced  a
preamble  and  resolutions,  which  passed,  I  believe,  with
but  one  or  two  dissenting  votes  :

*'  Whereas  foreign  nations  have  long  turned  their  attention
towards  the  acquirement  of  a  more  perfect  knowledge  of  the
geography  of  the  earth,  by  means  of  voyages  of  discovery  ;  and
by  their  exertions  have  not  only  acquired  reputation,  but  ex-
tended the  weight  of  their  influence,  opened  new  channels  for
commercial  enterprise,  and  benefited  the  human  race  by  en-
larging and  improving  the  boundaries  of  knowledge :  And
whereas  the  Government  of  the  United  States  lias  attained  a
high  standing  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  (the  practical  re-
sult of  the  most  stupendous,  as  well  as  successful  experiment
ever  made  in  polities,)  a  population  fast  increasing,  commercial
relations  and  interest  co-extensive  with  the  civilized  world,
nautical  skill,  perseverance,  and  enterprise,  if  not  unequalled,
at  least  unsurpassed  :  And  whereas,  the  sending  out  of  one  or
two  vessels  on  a  voyage  of  discovery,  would  not  be  attended
with  any  very  heavy  demands  on  the  public  treasury, and  would
seem  to  be  in  strict  accordance  with  the  character  and  liberal
policy  which  ought  to  be  pursued  by  a  Government,whose  poli-
tical existence  is  in  a  great  measure  dependent  on  the  general
intelligence  of  her  People  :  And  whereas,  a  great  number  of
the  most  enlightened  citizens  of  different  seotions  of  our  coun-
try, have  memorialized  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representa-
tives of  the  United  States  in  Cougress  assembled,  and  have  set
forth  in  their  memorial — '  That,  under  the  patronage  of  the
United  States,  an  expedition  should  befitted  out  without  delay,
and  proceed  to  acquire  a  more  correct  knowledge  of  our  own
continent,  or,  if  possible,  to  enter  the  more  interesting  and  ex-
tensive field  for  enterprise  in  the  Southern  Hemisphere  •  and,
provided  for  the  purpose,  with  hardy  seamen  and  scientific
persons,  to  bring  home  to  us  the  result  of  their  labors,  for  the
honor  of  our  country  and  the  benefit  of  mankind.'  And
whereas,  voyages  of  this  kind,  even  when  they  fail  in  making
important  discoveries,  bespeak  a  liberal  policy,  and  give  charac-
ter to  the  people  who  undertake  them.     Therefore,

Resolved  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the  State  of  Mary*
land,  That  we  do  highly  approve  of  the  views  of  the  said  m$~


64

rnorialists,  believing  that  a  polar  expedition^  if  properly  cou-
ducted,  could  scarcely  fail  in  adding  something  to  the  general
stock  of  national  wealth  and  knowledge,  and  to  the  honor  and
glory  of  the  United  States."

Is  there  any  thing  ambiguous  in  this  resolution  ;  or,  is
it  not  a  liberal  declaration,  in  behalf  of  a  science  alike
credible  to  the  members,  to  the  State,  and  to  the  na-
tion r  Is  there  any  thing  visionary  in  it  ?  Do  you  not
suppose  they  were  as  well  acquainted  with  their  own  in=
tentionsj  and  the  import  of  their  own  language,  as  you
are  f  If  they  had  intended  this  declaration  as  an  ex-
pression in  matters  of  philosophy,  do  you  suppose  they
had  not  independence  enough  to  have  said  so  ?  If  you
do,  you  have  yet  much  to  learn  of  the  Maryland  cha-
racter.

Mr.  Tyson,  in  his  remarks  in  favor  of  the  immediate
passage  of  the  resolution,  in  the  House  of  Delegates,
said,  **  I  do  not  stand  here  as  a  philosopher,  or  a  specu-
latist,  or  the  advocate  of  any  theory  whatever  ;  but  as  a
legislator,  bound  to  look  upon  all  undertakings  in  the
light  of  their  probable  effect  upon  the  honor  and  inter-
ests of  my  country.  Who  will  say,  that  the  polar  expe-
ditions, fitted  out  under  the  British  Government,  have
not  added  to  her  glory-^though  they  have  failed  of  the
desired  success.  We  should  not  only  emulate  her  in
this  struggle  of  enterprise,  but  aim  at  surpassing  her.
We  have  surpassed  her  in  the  science  of  Government —
we  have  beaten  her  on  the  ocean  and  on  the  land;  we  have
conquered  the  conquerors  of  the  conquerors  of  Europe;
now  let  us  surpass  her  in  the  field  of  discovery,  the
great  regions  yet  open  to  nautical  enterprise.the  extreme
North  and  South,  where,  if  we  fail,  we  fail  with  honor.
Some  gentlemen  are  deterred  from  voting  for  this
resolution  because  they  think  the  expression  of  the
opinions  of  this  Legislature  will  have  little  effect  upon
the  decisions  of  Congress.  1  cannot  think  so  meanly
©f  the  judgment  of  this  Legislature,  as  to  suppose  it  un-
worthy of  a  rational  attention,  nor  can  I  have  so  poor  a«
opinion  of  the  good  sense  and  liberality  of  Congress,  as
to  suppose  they  would  look  upon  that  judgment  with
indifference.  If  they  should,  however,  we  will,  by  the
passage  of  this  resolution,  shew  ourselves  superior,  in
public  spirit  and  general  intelligence,  to  those  who,
being  superior  to  us  in  authority  and  power,  should  be
not  inferior  in  those  qualifications  necessary  to  constitute
a  great  and  growing  Nation."

I  will  pursue  the  history  of  this  subject  further,  and
show  that  i^  has  been  viewed  and  acted  on,  in  like  (najv


65

ner,  by  other  Legislative  bodies.  The  memorial  was
presented  to  the  members  of  the  Pennsylvania  Legisla-
ture, and  was  signed  by  them.  This  act,  to  one  or  two
editors  of  your  city,  has  been  a  fruitful  theme  for  remark,
on  several  occasions.  "  Saul  was  among  the  prophets."
They  appear  to  have  considered  the  honor  of  the  State
as  compromised,  and  brought  their  small  shot  to  act  in
concert  with  the  heavy  guns  of  the  Quarterly,  to  redeem
it.  Monstrous  offence,  that  ond  hundred  members  of
the  Legislature  should  so  far  have  lost  sight  of  the  dig-
nity of  the  State,  so  far  detracted  from  the  "  talented  city
of  Philadelphia,"  as  to  admit  there  were  any  new  dis-
coveries to  be  made,-  and  that  they  should  suppose  it
would  be  honorable  in  this  country  to  add  something  to
the  common  stock  of  science,  exactly  on  the  same  prin-
ciple, and  with  the  same  motives,  that  England  and
other  countries  have  done;  and,  worse  than  all,  that
they  should  have  joined  with  their  sister  State,  and  with
thousands  of  the  most  distinguished  and  intelligent  citi-
zens of  the  community,  in  simply  recommending  such
an  undertaking,  to  the  consideration  and  patronage  of
Congress ;  that  they  should  have  done  all  this,  (and  I
challenge  you  to  show  that  they  have  done  more)  ap-
pears sufficient  to  call  down  the  displeasure  of  the  Edi*
lor  of  the  Quarterly,  who,  by  this,  it  would  seem,  in-
tends to  bear  down,  with  a  heavy  hand,  upon  all  under-
takings in  which  he  is  not  consulted:  to  admit  or  reject
with  the  same  inflexibility  of  purpose,  and  much  in  the
same  manner,  that  is  ascribed  to  Lady  Hauton,  in  her
supercilious  rule  of  the  "imperium  in  imperio"  of
Almacks.  v.

After  all,  what  are  the  simple  facts  of  the  case  ?  A
memorial  was  presented  to  the  members  of  the  Legis-
lature, setting  forth  the  propriety  of  an  expedition,
without  attempting  to  establish  any  hypothesis,  that  the
example  of  European  Nations  to  further  the  cause  of
science  might  be  followed ;  that  we  might  add  some-
thing to  science,  or,  at  least,  show  the  will  to  contribute
our  share  ;  that,  however  young  in  years,  as  a  Nation,
we  would  not  remain  behind  any  other  in  zeal  to  im-
prove and  benefit  the  human  r?ce.  Such  was  the  na-
ture and  import  of  the  memorial,  and  as  such,  they
promptly  sustained  it,  and,  thereby,  shewing  a  liberali-
ty of  sentiment  and  zeal  in  the  cause  of  general  improve-
ment, from  which  the  Editor  of  the  Quarterly  might
draw  some  instructive  lessons.

Had  I  room,  and  were  it  proper  to  introduce,  in  this
6*


place,  the  csncise  address  I  had  the  honor  of  delivering
before  that  Legislature,  it  would  forever,  with  the  can-
did, show  the  principles  upon  which  this  whole  matter
has  been  uniformly  conducted*

Some  of  these  remarks  appear  to  have  been  taken
down  and  published  in  the  Pennsylvania  Intelligencer.
If  an  apology  be  necessary  for  inserting  an  extract  here,
let  it  be  found  in  your  article,  which,  unresisted,  must
have  a  tendency  to  paralyte  the  efforts  now  making,
however  humble,  in  the  field  of  discovery,  by  placing
it  before  the  public  eye  in  colors  and  dress  of  your
own  selection.

"  What  is  the  nature  of  the  memorial  which  I  present
for  your  sanction  ?  Does  it  call  on  you  to  legislate  on
matters  of  philosophy — to  decide  on  the  relative  merits
of  conflicting  doctrines?  No:  let  these  be  left  for
schoolmen.  You  have  a  higher  and  mere  important  du-
ty to  perform.  You  are  called  on  to  throw  the  weight
of  your  influence,  not  in  favor  of  any  special  doctrine.but
in  favor  of  an  attemp^on  the  part  of  the  General  Govern-
ment to  extend  the  boundaries  of  geographical  know-
ledge. It  is  proposed  to  send  one  or  two  vessels  to  ex-
plore the  immense  and  unknown  regions  surrounding  the
Southern  pole,  or  to  acquire  a  more  perfect  knowledge
of  the  Northern  parts  of  our  own  continent.  In  this
proposition  there  is  nothing  concealed — no  recommend-
ing one  thing,  and  meanirg  another.  There  is  nothing
which  has  not  been  acted  on  by  other  Nations.
It  will  be  no  Symmzonian  expedition,  though  the
truth  or  fallacy  of  his  doctrines  may  possibly  come  within
the  scope  of  observation  ;  it  will  be  one,  in  some  de-
gree, of  National  concern  ;  placed  under  the  direction,
and  act  under  the  instruction  of  the  Navv  Depart-
ment, to  which  it  properly  belongs.  It  is  on  these
broad  and  national  views,  that  I  place  the  conside-
ration of  this  subject;  it  is  on  these  alone  I  would
act,  were  a  nation's  resources  at  my  own  dispo-
sal ;  it  is  on  these  principles  alone  you  are  called  to
act  ;  it  is  on  these  general  and  liberal  principles  hun-
dreds of  your  fellow  citizens,  in  various  parts  of  the
country,  have  acted,  when  signing  the  memorial  which
is  now  before  a  Committee  in  the  House  of  Repre-
sentatives of  the  United  States.  It  was  in  accordance
with  these  high  and  national  considerations  that  the
House  of  Delegates  of  your  sister  State  of  Maryland
gave  its  decisive  vote  in  favor  of  the  undertaking.
With  such  views,  also,  did  the  Chief  Magistrate  and


$7

Council  of  that  State  add  their  names  to  the  memo-
rial. Yes,  and  it  has  also  been  signed  by  the  only  hand
•which  death  has  not  palsied,  of  the  list  of  choice  spi-
rits, who  pledged  their  lives,  their  fortunes,  and  their  sa-
cred honor,  in  favor  of  our  invaded  rights  and  liberties —
Charles  Carroll,  of  Carrollton.  He  is  still  amongst  us,
like  the  proud  Mausoleum  of  another  age,  scowling  on
the  assaults  of  Time.  The  spirit  of  freedom  hovers
around  him;  he  lives  in  the  affections  of  ten  millions  of
freemen.  Yonder  sun  that  has  just  set  beneath  theWest-
ern  horizon, that  has  rolled  around  the  heavens,from  the
commencement  of  time,  never  saw  their  equal,  not  even
when  he  looked  down  upon  the  immortal  Greeks,  and
beheld  them  spurning  the  Persian  yoke,  and  nobly  de-
fending themselves  on  the  bloody  plains  of  Marathon.
But  this  is  a  digression — perhaps,  the  impulse  of
feeling. *

It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  say  more  on  this  part  of
your  review.  I  should  not  have  said  so  much  had  I
been  the  only  individual  interested.  Sufficient  has
been  presented,  to  show  conclusively,  that  the  expe»
dition  is  by  no  means  predicated  on  other,  than  princi-
ples upon  which  all  the  friends  of  science  can  unite.  One
conclusion,  therefore,  only,  remains  to  be  drawn.  You
have  either  been  miserably  misinformed,  in  part,  on  the
subject  upon  which  you  have  written,  or,  being  inform-
ed,"have  not  acted  in  regard  to  the  light  received.
You  are  forced  to  one  alternative,  and  may  select  be-
tween them.

In  the  House  of  Representatives,  the  proposed  ex-
pedition was  regarded  and  treated  in  its  proper  light.
Mr.  Buchanan,  the  able  and  efficient  member  from  the
State  of  Pensylvania,  introduced  the  memorials  from
his  Slate,  accompanied  by  a  few  remarks:  "  that  he  held
in  his  hand  a  memorial  signed  by  a  number  of  individu-
als, whose  character  in  society,  and  whose  sound  judg-
ment was  not  to  be  impeached,  recommending  an  expe-
dition, not  in  relation  to  theory.,  but  for  the  purpose  of
discoveryr  in  high  Northern  and  Southern  latitudes;
and  he  hoped  an  expedition  would  be  granted  to  ex-
plore the  seas  which  wash  the  polar  regions."

That  the  Select  Committee,  ,to  whom  the  memorials
were  referred, regarded  the  subject  in  the  same  manner,
will  be  seer,  from  the  subjoined  statement,  which  I  had
the  honor  of  submitting  to  them :

Gentlemen  .■  I  beg  leave,suecinctly,  to  state  the  case  now  be-
fore you  as  a  Select  Committee,  in  relation  to  a  voyage  of  dis-
covery.   1st.  The  memorial  is  most  respectably  sustained  by


68

a  resolution  of  the  State  of  Maryland,  and  by  the  Governor
and  Council.  By  the  Governor  of  Pennsylvania,  and  by  near
one  hundred  members  of  the  State  Legislature.  By  the  Go-
vernor and  other  citizens  of  Ohio.  You  will  also  find  memo-
rials from  the  States  of  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Delaware,
Virginia,  Maryland,  Ohio,  &c.  of  the  most  respectable  char-
acter. Presuming  that  the  memorial,  from  the  number  and  re-
spectability of  those  who  signed  it,  is  deserving  the  most  cour-
teous consideration,  I  proceed,  in  the  second  place,  to  remark,
that  the  objects  of  the  memorialists  will  be  promoted  by  ;  sim-
ple reference  of  the  whole  subject  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Na-
vy, with  a  view,  that,  if  an  expedition  be  undertaken,  in  part,
by  individual  means,  it  may  receive  the  protection  and  aid  of
the  Department,  so  far  as  is  consistent  with  the  general  interest
of  the  service,  without  increasing  the  expenses  of  it.  The  me-
morialists wish  a  reference,  for  the  following  reasons  :

1st.  The  expeditions  hitherto  fitted  out  have  not  all  return-
ed, because  it  was  impracticable  to  proceed  further.

2d.  Those  who  have  gone  furthest  have,  in  more  than  one
instance,  put  back  with  an  open  sea  before  them.

3d.  The  experience  acquired  by  preceding  attempts  would
enable  an  expedition  to  go  to  sea  at  this  time,  prepared  to
avoid  manv  of  the  obstacles  heretofore  encountered.

4th.  As  far  as  explorers  have  yet  gone  North  or  South,  hu-
man inhabitants,  land,  and  marine  animals,  have  been  found.

5th.  Our  officers  are  brave  and  persevering,  and  our  sea-
men arnong  ihe  most  hard-  and  auventurous  on  earth.

6th.  The  history  of  maritime  expeditions  abundantly  prove
that  successful  adventure,  in  hi^h  latitudes,  depend  rather  up-
on small,  strong,  and  comfortable  barks,  with  a  well  chosen
and  determined  crew,  than  upon  large  vessels,  with  splendid
and  cosily  outfits.

7th.  All  these  circumstances  combined,  justify  us"  in  believ-
ing, that  an  expedition,  undertaken  at  this  time,  strictly
with  a  view  to  the  improvement  of  science,  collect  interesting
facts  in  natural  history,  open  new  channels  for  commercial  en-
terprise in  animal  furs  and  oil,  could  scarcely  fail  in  adding
something  to  the  stock  of  general  knowledge,  and  to  the  honor
and  glory  of  the  United  States.

8th.  It  is  confidently  believed  that,  with  the  protection  of  the
Department,  hundreds  of  the  most  distinguished  citizens  of
our  country  will  encourage  the  enterprise  ;  this,  joined  to  the
means  already  tangible,  will  give  strength  and  character  to  the
expedition.

9th.  To  refuse  a  reference,  is  to  discourage  the  spirit  of  en-
terprise of  our  citizens.  To  refer  it,  is,  perhaps,  the  most  un-
exceptionable method  by  which  such  adventures  can  be  en-
couraged, as  it  cannot  interfere  with  the  powers  assumed  or
denied,  as  belonging  to  the  General  Government.
JieepectfallyJam,  yours,  fce.

^  '  J.N.REYNOLDS."


69

REPORT.

"The  Select  Committee,  to  whom  were  referred  the  memo*-
rials  of  sundry  citizens  of  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Delaware,
Maryland,  Virginia,  and  Ohio,  proposing  that,  "  under  the
patronage  of  the  United  States,  an  expedition  should  be  fitted
out  to  acquire  a  more  perfect  knowledge  of  the  Northern  part
of  our  own  Continent ;  or,  if  possible,  to  enter  the  more  inter-
esting and  extensive  field  for  enterprise,  in  the  Southern  He-
misphere," beg  leave  to  Report —

That,  from  the  number  and  respectability  of  the  memoria-
lists, and  the  character  of  the  proposed  Expedition,  the  memo-
rials are  entitled  to  the  most  respectful  consideration  ;  but,
your  Committee,  waiving  the  discussion  of  any  present  advan-
tage to  be  derived  from  a  more  "  perfect  knowledge  of  the
Northern  parts  of  our  own  Continent,"  or  the  utility  or  feasi-
bility of  making  further  discoveries  in  the  Polar  regions  of  the
South,  deem  it  inexpedient,  at  this  time,  to  make  an  appro-
priation of  money  to  set  on  foot  the  expedition  contemplated
by  the  memorialists  ;  but  they  nevertheless,  recommend,  that
the  said  memorials  be  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy."

This  report  was  concurred  in  by  the  House.

The  memorials  being-  thus  referred  to  the  Secretary
of  the  Navy,  become  a  matter  of  record  in  that  Depart-
ment ;  and  I  am  at  liberty  to  state,  have  received  tke
respecful  consideration,  to  which  the  number  and  re-
spectability of  the  petitioners  are  so  justly  entitled;  and
further,  that  so  far  as  it  relates  to  an  expedition,  on  such
principles  as  have  been  set  forth  in  this  number,  and
contemplated  by  the  memorialists,  the  most  cordial  co
operation  and  friendly  feelings  of  the  Secretary  may  be
relied  on  ;  that  within  his  discretionary  power,  he  wil!
extend  the  aid  and  protection  of  the  Department  so  far
as  is  consistent  ivith  the  general  interests  of  the  service*
-without  increasing  the  expenses  of  it.

In  this  expedition  there  are  no  extravagant  feelings
or  expectations  entertained.  Is  is  a  plain  practical  com-
mon  sense  undertaking,  such  as  other  nations  and  Pec-
pie  of  other  countries  have  encouraged  and  carried  into
full  and  perfect  effect  :  one,  which,  though  it  may  not
strike  out  deeds  of  wonder,  may  nevertheless  be  the
means  of  acquiring  much  useful  information  in  the  hy-
drography and  geography  of  the  Antarctic  regions  ;  as
well  as  many  important  and  interesting  observations,  on
the  atmospherical,  magnetical,  and  electrical  phenome-
na, which  cannot  fail  materially  to  advance  the  science  of
Meteorology  ;  and  also  in  many  valuable  collections  of
objects  in  natural  history,  which  inhabit  a  part  of  the
globe,  where  few  researches  have  yet  been  made  in  this
branch  of  science ;  especially  concerning  the  Winter  rea


70

treats  of  these  sea  animals,  which  are  peculiarly  inter-
esting as  sources  of  commercial  prosperity.

The  hunting- of  the  whale  and  seal,  heretofore  carri-
ed on  with  so  much  vigor,  has  produced  the  natural
and  necessary  consequence  of  rendering  those  animals
more  timid  and  fewer  in  number,  by  their  destruction,
without  reference  to  season.

This  makes  it  extremely  desirable  that  new  situations
should  be  explored,  where  these  animals  may  be  found
in  greater  abundance,  and  procured  with  less  uncer-
tainty and  risk.  The  result  of  the  voyages,  heretofore,
show,  conclusively,  that  the  objects  o*  value  to  this
branch  of  commercial  enterprise,  are  to  be  found,  with
great  facility,  in  the  remote  polar  regions.

In  relation  to  Captain  Parry's  expedition,  an  able
French  writer  makes  these  very  judicious  and  liberal
remarks  :  "  Were  the  discoveries  which  Parry  made,
in  relation  to  the  obscure  laws  that  govern  the  magnet,
the  only  fruit  of  the  English  expeditions,  they  had  not
been  undertaken  in  vain.  But  they  have,  besides,  ex-
panded the  bounds  of  geographical  knowledge,and  add-
ed greatly  to  the  whale  fisheries;  and,above  all,they  have
thrown  a  new  splendor  over  the  nautical  glories  of
Great  Britain,  and  enhanced  the  dignity  and  value  of
human  nature.  They  have  proven,  that  man,  enlight-
ened by  the  arts,  is  more  than  a  match  for  the  obsta-
cles of  nature,  in  her  wildest  ferocity."

The  Ssuthern  seas  present,  by  far,  the  most  interest-
ing and  extensive  field  for  inquiry,  and  scientific  re-
search.

It  is  true,  v/e  find  the  whole  surrounding  coast  of  the
North  Polar  Sea  inhabited ;  the  European  part  with
Laplanders  and  Fins  ;  the  Asiatic  shores  with  Ostiacks,
Samoyedes,Tchustskies,  and  Koriacks,  who  derive  their
subsistence  from  rein  deer  and  dried  fish  ;  and  the
Northern  shores  of  America,  by  the  various  tribes  of  the
Esquimaux  ;  and  it  has  yet  to  be  determined  how  far
human  inhabitants,  land,  and  marine  animals  extend  to-
wards the  North  Pole.

In  looking,  however,  upon  a  globe,  it  will  be  found,
that,  from  60°  to  70°  North,  more  than  half  its  circumfe-
rence is  land.  Such  great  extent  of  coast  must  necessa-
rily furnish  large  quantities  of  ice,  which  is  thrown  out
in  the  Spring,  an d  floated  by  the  Northerly  currents  into
the  channel  or  sea  between  Spitsbergen  and  Greenland,
choaking  up  this  narrow  part,  and  rendering  a  Northerly
passage  more  difficult  than  to  the  South,  where  there
is  a  great  expans'  of  ocean,  through  which  it  is  always


71

more  ?asy  to  pass  the  field  ice ;  and  yet,  if  human  testi-
mony can  be  relied  on,  even  the  icy  circle  to  the  North
may  be  passed.

I  will  make  all  the  allowances  you  can  require,  for
the  want  of  science,  in  the  observations  of  those  men,
stated  in  the  second  communication,  as  having  attained
high  latitudes.  T&V  e  them,  however,  as  a  mass  of  evi-
dence, joined  with  those  which  have  been  more  recent
and  accurate,  and  do  they  not  speak  a  language  that
can  scarcely  be  misinterpreted.

One  can  hardly  suppose  that  so  many  men,  at  differ-
ent periods  of  time,  and  entirely  unknown  to  each  oth-
er, should  have  combined  to  deceive  mankind  :  so  that
the  universal  diminution  of  ice  North  of  latitude  80°,
and  of  open  seas  about  the  poles,  rest  on  the  same  kind
of  testimony,and  on  a  chain  of  evidence  by  far  more  inter-
esting and  irresistible  than  a  thousand  other  facts  in
history,  now  in  the  entire  possession  of  the  public  con-
fidence-

The  unexplored  part  of  the  Northern  sea  may  be
considered  about  twenty-four  hundred  miles  across  it,
or  seven  thousand  two  hundred  miles  in  circumference  ;
whereas,  to  the  South,  there  are  more  than  a  million
and  a  half  of  square  miles,  which  have  never  been  vi-
sited by  the  footsteps  of  man.

The  circumnavigation  of  the  Southern  hemisphere
will  not  bear  an  average  of  more  than  57°  South  lati-
tude ;  hence,  there  may  yet  be  many  large  islands  un-
discovered in  that  direction,  which,  indeed,  is  rendered
very  probable,  from  the  quantity  of  field  ice  found  in
those  seas.

A  navigator  might  sail  North,  from  the  equator,  on  a
meridian  between  Europe  and  America,  to  latitude  60*
or  70°,  and  return,  believing  there  was  no  land  North
of  the  equator.  In  the  same  manner,  the  few  advances
South  prove  nothing  against  the  existence  of  land  in
that  direction;  the  three  farthest  of  which,  even  to  lati-
tude 71°  10',  67°,  and  67°  30',  and  two  of  these,  on
meridians  136°  and  148°  West,  which  still  leaves  about
340°  of  longitude,  in  which  the  Antarctic  circle  has  ne-
ver been  approached.  To  the  above  advances  South,
we  may  now  add  that  of  Weddell,  who,  a  few  years
since,  at  latitude  74°  25',  hailed  an  iceless  ocean,  and
gave  it,  as  his  opinion,  that  the  great  body  of  ice  would
be  met  with  from  lat.  60°  to  the  circle.

If  the  icy  barrier  has  been  passed  in  one  instance,  it
may  be  passed  again ;  if  Englishmen  have  crossed  it,
Americans  **  can  try.'*


72,

All  the  world  know  our  seamen  are  hardy  and  adven*
turoHS;  and  especially,  that  those  from  the  Eastern
States,  v/ho  have  been  engaged  in  the  whaling  and
sealing  business,  inured  to  cold,  to  hardship,  and  ice,
would  be  inferior  to  none  on  earth  for  such  a  service.
It  has  been  justly  said,  by  Burke,  of  England,  many
years  ago,  that  the  farthermost  verge  of  the  civilized
world,  was  a  mere  stepping  stone  for  them  to  go  still
further.

It  is  not  intended  to  run  heedlessly  and  without  due
preparation  into  this  undertaking.  Such  an  expedition
as  this  is  not  a  party  of  pleasure,  and  the  dangers,  hard*
ships,  and  privations  of  navigating  the  polar  seas,  must
be  provided  for,  by  furnishing  the  vessels  with  many
comforts.  We  hear  much  about  the  splendor  and  cost
of  British  Expeditions,  and  no  doubt,  they  are  splendid
and  costly.  Their  vessels  were  from  350  to  450  tons
burden  ;  furnished  not  only  with  the  necessary  conven-
iences, but  even  with  luxuries  ;  with  printing  appara-
tus, for  issuing  a  small  paper  on  board,  and  with  proper
articles  to  keep  up  the  London  fashions  in7  masquerades,
on  the  vessels.  Plain  Republicans  can  do  very  well
without  any  such  extra  preparations ;  and  with  two
vessels  of  only  200  tons  burden  each  ;  with  such  little
barks,  well  braced,  made  comfortable,  and  provisioned
for  at  least  two  years,  we  would  put  oft,  without  making
any  more  parade  than  old  Nantucket's  sons  do,  when
they  go  a  sealing :  and,  if  we  did  not  make  such  inter-
esting discoveries  as  the  British,  might,  at  least,  make  a
beginning,  see  whether  American  officers  and  seamen
can  stand  frost  as  well  as  Englishmen  ;  and,  perhaps
plant  some  land  marks,  that  may  guide  the  future  and
more  successful  mariner.

If  the  expedition  should  only  succeed  in  throwing  a
harposn,  catching  a  seal,  or  chasing  a  whale  nearer  the
South  Pole  than  any  other  Nation  or  People  have  done,
it  had  not  been  undertaken  in  vain.  But  suppose,  like
Weddell,  under  some  fortuitous  circumstances,  the  icy
circle  should  be  passed,  a  few  days  press  of  sail  would
reach  the  90°,  where  anchor  might  be  cast  on  the  axis  of
the  earth,  our  eagle  and  star-spangled  banner  unfurled
and  planted,  and  left  to  wave  on  the  very  pole  itself,
where,  amid  the  novelty,  grandeur,  and  sublimity,  of  the
scene,  the  two  little  vessels  would  turn  once  around  in
twenty-four  hours.  Such  an  achievement  would  add
new  lustre  to  the  name  of  American  philosophy,  and
new  laurels  to  the  hardy  and  daring  enterprise  of  our


73

seamen.  To  say  nothing  about  probabilities,  just  such
a  result  is  certainly  possible,  even  to  the  present  pro-
posed expedition ;  and  if  so,  where  is  the  individual,  so
illiberal  as  to  diseourage,  though  he  may  not  approve,
or  rather,  where  is  the  individual  in  community,  who
has  the  means,  and  would  not  contribute  something  to-
wards its  accomplishment  ?

The  British  have  long  taken  the  lead,  in  maritime  dis-
covery ;  the  rivers,  bays,  promontories,  and  capes,  of  the
North,  bear  the  names  of  their  Lords,  their  Dukes,  and
Admirals :  Are  there  no  discoveries  to  be  made  by
Americans,  that  shall  perpetuate  the  names  and  memo*
ries  of  our  own  distinguished  citizens,  statesmen,  patri-
ots, sages,  and  heroes  ?

It  is  urged  that  such  adventures  should  be  underta-
ken only  by  an  act  of  Congress  ?  However  desirable  such
an  event  might  be,  who  will  say  that  it  is  even  probable  ?
To  wait  for  such  an  event,  it  is  believed,  would  be  much
like  the  man  in  the  fable,  who  loitered  on  the  banks  of
a  river,  waiting  for  the  waters  to  flow  by,  that  he  might
pass,  not  recollecting  that  the  source  from  whence  it  em-
anated, was  inexhaustible.  The  constitutional  powers
of  the  General  Government,  to  make  a  direct  appropri-
ation, is  a  point  on  which  politicians  are  divided,  and
no  resolution  could  pass,  without  a  prolonged  and  a
doubtful  controversy.  This  expedition  is  free  from
such  objections ;  and  is  placed,  perhaps,  on  the  only
principles  that  will  be  likely  to  succeed,  at  this  time,  or
for  many  years.

So  fond  are  we  of  every  thing  European,  and  fre-
quently so  much  disposed  to  follow  exactly  in  their  foot-
steps, that  some  suppose  nothing  can  ever  again  be
done  in  the  field  of  discovery,  without  the  expensive
equipages  of  a  Ross  and  Parry.  1  own,  vessels  must
be  comfortable;  but,  it  remains  yet  to  be  decided,
how  far  such  splendid  and  costly  outfils,  with  the  public
hopes  raised  so  high,  will  surpass  those,  with  smaller
vessels,  fewer  men,  in  behalf  of  which  there  is  no  na-
tional character  pledged,or  high  expectation  entertained.

Let  the  labors  of  a  Hudson,  a  Davis,  and  a  Baffin,
speak  in  relation  to  this  point.  Let  it  be  remembered
that  these  men,  in  frail  vessels,  of  only  five  and  twenty
tong,  ill-provided,  by  intrepidity,  perseverance,and  skill,
with  the  facility  of  managing  small  vessels  among  the
ice,  extended  their  researches  nearly  as  far  as  the  more
recent  adventurers  have  gone.  Parry  pays  the  highest
tribute  of  respect  to  their  memories,  and  to  the  fidelity
7


74

and  accuracy  of  their  observations,  even  in  the  longi-
tude. "  I  feel,  (says  he)  the  highest  pride  on  the  one
band,  approaching  almost  to  humiliation  on  the  other :
of  pride,  in  remembering  it  was  our  countrymen  who
performed  these  exploits  ;  of  humiliation,  when  I  con-
sider how  little,  with  all  our  advantages,  we  have  suc-
eeeded  in  going  beyond  them."

To  this  expedition,  some  of  the  choicest  spirits  of  the
Navy  have  offered  their  services.  Several  gentlemen
of  science  have  presented  their  names  as  volunteers ;
not  mere  pretenders,  but  men  who  are  willing  to  go  be-
fore any  Board,  and  be  examined  as  to  their  qualifica-
tions to  fill  a  department  in  the  scientific  corps.  A
number  of  valuable  instruments,  the  means  for  furnish-
ing, provisioning,  manning,  and  officering  two  ves-
sels of  two  hundred  tons  each,  for  the  term  of  two
years ;  besides  a  small  part  of  the  funds,  towards  pro-
curing the  use  and  refitting  the  vessels,  are  at  this  mo-
ment in  readiness.  It  is  hoped,  and  confidently  believed,
that  from  the  friends  of  science,  the  liberal,  and  the
wealthy,  the  remaining  and  requisite  amount  can  be
raised.  At  any  rate,  every  exertion  can  be  made  to
effect  it,  and  if  successful,  October  next  will  be  the
time  of  setting  sail.  I  have  thus  dwelt,  in  some  degree,
on  particulars,  that  not  only  you,  but  the  community,  so
far  as  it  is  interested,  might  not  be  misinformed.  If
there  be  any  who  do  not  approve  of  this  undertaking ,and
do  not  think  proper  to  add  their  names  to  the  list  of  pa-
trons, it  is  at  least  hoped,  they  will  find  nothing  in  it  re-
quiring or  deserving  their  opposition  ;  let  its  merits  be
judged  of  in  their  proper  light,  such  as  have  been  pre-
sented in  this  number.

Parry  very  justly  says,  "  Such  enterprises,  so  disinter-
ested and  useful  in  their  objects,  do  honor  to  the  coun-
try which  undertakes  them,  even  when  they  fail ;  they
cannot  but  excite  the  admiration  and  respect  of  every
liberal  and  cultivated  mind,  and  the  page  of  future  his-
tory will  undoubtedly  record  them  as  every  way  wor-
thy of  a  powerful,  a  virtuous,  and  an  enlightened  na-
tion."

I  must  now  take  my  leave  of  you,  and  it  will  be
with  great  reluctance*  if  ever  I  resume  my  pen  on  this
subject  again.  I  have  no  objections  to  your  writing  as
many  reviews  and  criticisms  as  you  please  about  the
New  Theory ;  it  has  nothing  more  to  do  with  this  ex-
pedition, than  the  variation  of  the  needle,  or  any  other


75

unexplained  phenomena ;  but  don*t  block  vp  the  Polar
regions  "with  ice  !

In  the  full  flow  of  good  feeling  and  good  nature,  I
wish  you  a  prosperous  and  pleasant  Editorial  career ;
and,  if  it  should  so  happen,  two  or  three  years  from
this  time,  that  you  sit  down  to  write  a  review  of  a  Jour-
nal to  the  Southern  Polar  regions,  it  is  hoped  no  re-
membrances of  the  present  controversy  will  cause  other
than  the  milk  of  human  kindness  to  flow  from  your
pen.    Respectfully,  I  am  yours,  &c.

J.  N.  REYNOLDS.


Erratum. — In  page  41,  1st  paragraph,  3d  line,  for
*'  mouth  of  Nova  Zembla,"  read,  iATorth  of  Nova  Zem-
bla.


RB-ie.6.


.8  D  '05'


^      »WJ&W*      ^    *$*        9%


•^0«


roK


cr


O  <*&■  r    °   "    °  *  <£  ^  .  *2>


■c,


DOBBS  BROS.

LIBRARY  BINDING  •      ~


I  •     ST.  AUGUSTINE


rifa

■P

Ban         .       ■ ;


IS  ft U k  8  *i*M  3  3  *  $l!»ffi$aR$

■HHH


mfSmBSBBBBBm

WiHI  H H  !


ilMMMliiiWm    ^


BVHEBH
