Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion as Illustrated by Celtic Heathendom (John Rhŷs, 1888)
=================================================================================
Rhŷs's 1888 Hibbert Lectures — the founding academic work on Celtic pagan religion, still cited on druidic belief. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/lecturesonorigi00rhys).

ini


Hi


THEOLOGICAL  TRANSLATION  FUND  LIBRARY.

A  Series  of  Translations  by  which  the  best  results  of  recent  theological
investigations  on  the  Continent,  conducted  without  reference  to  doctrinal  con-
siderations, and  with  the  sole  purpose  of  arriving  at  truth,  are  placed
within  reach  of  English  readers.  Three  volumes  8vo.  annually  for  a  Guinea
Subscription,  or  a  selection  of  six  or  more  volumes  at  js  per  vol.

1.  BAUR  (F.  C.)  Church  History  of  the  First  Three  Cen-
turies. Translated  from  the  Third  German  Edition.  Edited  by  the
Rev.  Allan  Menzies.    2  vols.    Svo.     215.

2  BAUR  (F.  C.)  Paul,  the  Apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  his  Life
and  Work,  his  Epistles  and  Doctrine.  A  Contribution  to  a  Critical
History  of  Primitive  Christianity.  Second  Edition.  By  the  Rev.  Allan
Menzies.    2  vols.    21s.

3.  BLEEK'S  Lectures  on  the  Apocalypse.     Edited  by  the  Rev.

J  lr.  S.  Davidson,     ios  6d.

4.  EWALD   (H.)  Commentary  on  the  Prophets  of  the  Old

Testament.     Translated  by  the  Rev.  J.  Frederick  Smith,     s  vols.   8vo.


-D-DT-Km-tfTTl-Nr      "NT      .T


PRINCETON,  N.  J.


Division         Jo.L-SjQO

Section »...r\...  '

Shelf  Number


(Icneral  and  Special  Introductions  to  the  Books,  by  Lipsius,  Holsten,
Lang,  Plleiderer,  Iloltzmann,  Hilgenfeld,  and  others  Translated  by  the
Rev.  F.  H.J0NES.     3  vols.     8vo.     31s  6d.

13.  REVILLE   (Rev.    Dr.)    Prolegomena   of   the    History   of

Religion,  with  Introduction  by  Professor  Max  Muller.     ios  Qui.

14.  SCHRADER  (Professor  E.)  The   Old  Testament  and  the

Cuneiform  Inscriptions.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  Owen  C.Whiteiiouse
2  vols.     Svo.     Map.     Each  10s  Gd.

15.  ZELLER  (E.)  The  Acts  of  tho  Apostles   Critically  Ex-

amined.     To  winch  is  prefixed  Overbcck's  Introduction  from  Dc  Wette's

Handl k.    Translated  by  Joseph  Dare.    2  vols.    Svo.    21s.

The  price  of  the  Works  to  Subscribers,  7s  per  vol.

All  new  Subscribers  may  purchase  any  of  the  previous  volumes  at  75  instead  of
10s  Cxi  per  volume.  A  selection  of  six  or  more  volumes  may  also  be  had  at  the
Subscriber's  price,  or  js  per  volume.

WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE,  14,  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London;
and  20,  South  Frederick  Street,  Edinburgh.


THE    HIBBERT    LECTURES.


1887—  Professor  Sayee.    Lectures  on  the  Religion  of  Ancient

Assyria  and  Babylonia.     8vo.     Cloth,     ios  Gd.

1886.— Professor  J.  Rhys,  M.A.    Lectures  on  the  Origin  and

Growth  of  Religion  as  illustrated  by  Celtic  Heathendom.     Svo.     Cloth,
ios  Gd.
1885  —Professor  Pfloiderer.    Lectures  on  the  Influenco  of  the
Apostle  Paul  on  the  Development  of  Christianity.     Svo.     Cloth,     ios  Gd.

1884— Professor  Albert  Reville.      Lectures  on  the   Ancient

'  Religions  of  Mexico  and  Peru.     Svo.     Cloth,     ios  Gd.

1883  —The  Rev.  Charles  Beard.  Lectures  on  the  Reforma-
tion of  the  Sixteenth  Century  in  its  Relation  to  Modern  Thought  and
Knowledge.     Svo.     Cloth,     ios  Gd.     (Cheap  Edition,  4s  Gd).

1882.— Professor   Kuenen.     Lectures   on   National  Religions

and  Universal  Religions.     Svo.     Cloth,     ios  Gd.

1881— T.W.  Rhys  Davids.     Lectures  on  some  Points  in  the

History  of  Indian  Buddhism.     Svo.     Cloth,     ios  Gd.

1880—  M.  Ernest  Renan.    On  the  Influence  of  the  Institutions,

Thought  and  Culture  of  Rome  on  Christianity,  and  the  Development  of
the  Catholic  Church.     Svo.     Cloth,     ios  Gd.     (Cheap  Edition,  2s  6(f).

1879.— p.  Le  Page  Renouf.  Lectures  on  the  Religion  of  Ancient

Egypt.     2nd  Edition.     Svo.     Cloth,     ios  Gd.

1878.— Professor  Max  Muller.     Lectures  on  the  Religions  of

India.     Svo.     Cloth,     ios  Gd.


WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  THE  HIBBERT  TRUSTEES.

Wallis.— Tho  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda:  An  Essay.    By  H.  W.
Wallis,  m.a.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.   Svo.    Cloth.    5s.

Poole— Illustrations  of  the  History  of  Medieval  Thought,  in

the  departments  of  Theology  and  Ecclesiastical  Politics.  By  Reginald
Lane  Poole,  m.a.,  Balliol  College,  Oxford,  ph.d.  Leipzig.  Svo.  Cloth,
ios  Gd.
Stokes.— The  Objectivity  of  Truth.  By  George  J.  Stokes,  b.a.,
Senior  Moderator  and  Gold  Medallist,  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  late
Hibbert  Travelling  Scholar.     Svo.     Cloth.     5s.

Evans.— An  Essay  on  Assyriology.  By  George  Evans,  m.a.,  Hibbert
Fellow.     With  an  Assyriology  Tablet  in  Cuneiform  type.    Svo.  Cloth.    5s.

Seth.— Tho  Development  from  Kant  to  Hegel,  with  Chapters

on  the  Philosophy  of  Religion.  By  Andrew  Seth,  Assistant  to  the
Professor  of  Logic  and  Metaphysics,  Edinburgh  University.  Svo.  Cloth.
5*.
Schurman.— Kantian  Ethics  and  the  Ethics  of  Evolution.
A  Critical  Study  by  J.  Gould  Schukman,  m.a.,  d.sc,  Professor  of  Logic
and  Metaphysics  in  Acadia  College,  Nova  Scotia.     Svo.     Cloth.     5s.

Macan.— The  Resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  An  Essay,  in  Three
Chapters.  By  Reginald  W.  Macan,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.  Svo
Cloth.     5s.


WILLIAMS  &  N'ORGATE,  14,  Henrietta  Street,  Covcnt  Garden,  London;
and  20,  South  Frederick  Street,  Edinburgh.


MR.   HERBERT  SPENCER'S  WORKS.


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  EVOLUTION.

FIRST  PRINCIPLES.     7th  Thousand.     165.

PRINCIPLES  OF  BIOLOGY.     4th  Thousand.     2  vols.     345.

PRINCIPLES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.     4th  Thousand.     2  vols.     365.

PRINCIPLES  OF  SOCIOLOGY.    Vol.  I.    Third  Edition.    215.

CEREMONIAL  INSTITUTIONS.     2nd  Thousand.     75.

POLITICAL  INSTITUTIONS.     2nd  Thousand.     12s.

ECCLESIASTICAL     INSTITUTIONS.      2nd    Thousand.      Svo
Cloth.    5s.

THE  DATA  OF  ETHICS.    4th  Thousand.    8s.


Other  Works.
THE  STUDY  OF  SOCIOLOGY.      Library  Edition   (the  9th).     8vo.

105  Od.

EDUCATION.   Gth  Thousand.    6s.    Also  cheap  Edition.    12th  Thousand.
25  Cd.

ESSAYS.     2  vols.    4th  Thousand.     165.

ESSAYS.     (Third  Series.)     3rd  Thousand.    85.

THE  MAN  versus  THE  STATE.      In  cloth,   2nd  Thousand.      2s  6d
Also  cheap  Edition,  7th  Thousand.     15.

THE  FACTORS  OF  EVOLUTION.    Cloth.    25  6i.


Also    Mr.   SPENCER'S

DESCRIPTIVE    SOCIOLOGY,

COMPILED   AND   ABSTRACTED    BY

Prof.   Duncan,  Dr.   Scheppig,  and    Mr.  Collier.


Folio,  Boards.

].

English

...     i8j

2.

Ancient  American  Races

1 6s

3-

Lowest  Races,  Negritos,  Polynesians...

...     18*

4-

African  Races

...     16s

5-

Asiai  ic  R  ICES

...     j8*

6.

American  Races

...     18*

7-

Hebrews  and  Phoenicians

21s

8.

French

...     30s

THE    HIBBERT    LECTURES,

1886.


THE  IIIHBERT  LECTURES,  1SS6,


LECTURES


ON    THE


ORIGIN  AND  GROWTH  OF  RELIGION


AS    ILLUSTRATED    BY


CELTIC   HEATHENDOM.


BY


JOHN  KHYS,


FELLOW  OF  JESUS  COLLEGE,    AND  LATE  FELLOW   (IF   MF.RTON  COLLEGE  ,
PROFESSOR  OF  CELTIC  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY   OF  OXFORD.


WILLIAMS    AND    NORGATE

14,   HENRIETTA  STREET,   COVENT   GARDEN,   LONDON;
And  20,  SOUTH  FREDERICK  STREET,  EDINBURGH.


1888.
[All  liiyhts  reserved.]


LONDON  :

PRINTED    BY    0.     GREEN    AND    SON,

178,    STRAND.


PREFACE.


These  Lectures  were  delivered  in  London  and  here,  in  the
months  of  May  and  June,  1886  ;  and  it  was  intended  that  they
should  appear  in  the  book  market  soon  after.  So  I  take  this
opportunity  of  publicly  thanking  the  Hibbert  Trustees  for  their
forbearance,  and  of  explaining  the  causes  of  the  delay.  The  first
and  foremost  was  my  ignorance,  above  all  as  to  the  magnitude
of  the  task  I  was  undertaking ;  and  this  ignorance  pursued  me
into  the  arrangement  of  the  Lectures,  so  that  it  had  to  be
seriously  modified  more  than  once  in  the  course  of  the  work.
Among  other  things,  I  found  it  necessary  to  make  some  sort  of
survey  of  the  whole  ground,  and,  in  a  word,  to  circumnavigate
the  whole  subject  before  committing  to  type  my  ideas  about
any  part  of  it.  This  led  to  my  studying  much  that  could  not
be  included  in  this  volume ;  I  was,  however,  allowed  to  deliver
two  lectures  besides  the  six  agreed  upon.  Those  two,  as  I  could
not  expect  the  Hibbert  Trustees  to  have  them  printed,  are  to
form  part  of  a  volume  on  the  Arthurian  Legend,  which  I  hope
soon  to  publish ;  not  to  mention  that  I  contemplate  devoting  a
separate  volume  some  day  to  the  Dark  Divinities  of  the  Celts.
It  was  necessary  to  go  carefully  into  the  questions  raised  by
these  and  kindred  subjects,  and  it  all  required  time.  But  I
may  plead  that  the  history  of  religion  had  never  before  been
■  i  »mprehensively  studied  from  the  Celtic  point  of  view.    Scarcely

h


vi  PREFACE.

any  pioneer  could  have  been  so  feeble  in  his  efforts  as  not  to
have  rendered  material  aid  to  any  one  who  came  after.

The  next  cause  of  delay  was  the  necessity  I  felt  of  writing  the
Lectures  at  a  greater  length  than  would  occupy  six  hours  in  the
delivery.  It  arose  chiefly  from  the  fact,  that  the  Celtic  litera-
ture bearing  on  the  history  of  Celtic  paganism  is  so  little  known
to  the  vast  majority  of  English  readers,  that  acquaintance  with
it  could  not  be  taken  for  granted.  It  remained  for  me,  therefore,
to  give  the  substance  of  the  sagas  and  epic  tales  in  point  at
a  length  which  has  considerably  increased  the  bulk  of  this
volume.  But  it  afforded  many  opportunities  of  making  com-
parisons, never  made  before,  between  Irish  and  Welsh  myths,
comparisons  which  cannot  but  be  of  help  in  any  future  treatment
of  the  subject,  even  though  some  of  the  more  ambitious  theories
may  prove  untenable.  I  consider  that  event  a  certainty  for
several  reasons,  such  as  my  innate  liability  to  err,  and  the  dis-
covery of  more  Gallo-Eoman  remains  on  the  Continent,  or  the
publication  of  more  Irish  manuscripts  hitherto  comparatively
inaccessible.  Still  the  attempt  to  draw  a  comprehensive  picture
of  Celtic  Heathendom  seemed  to  be  worth  making,  even  though
it  should  prove  nothing  but  that  there  is  a  great  mass  of  data
at  one's  service.  Those  data  are  not,  it  is  true,  such  as  the
student  of  Greek  or  Latin  paganism  is  wont  to  handle;  but,
taking  them  as  they  offered  themselves,  I  found  that,  far  from
having  reasons  to  complain  of  their  scarcity,  the  slowness  of  my
progress  was  aggravated  by  an  embarras  de  richesse.  This  is  all
the  more  striking  as  many  of  my  English  friends  wondered,  at
first,  what  in  the  world  I  should  find  to  occupy  half-a-dozon
Lectures.

Having  thus  alluded  to  the  quantity  of  the  materials  at  my
disposal,  I  would  only  add  as  to  their  nature,  that  a  large  pro-
portion of  them  is  of  a  philological  order  ;  and  I  fear  that  I  have


PREFACE.  Vll

not  always  taken  care  enough  to  make  it  as  easy  to  skip  the
etymological  passages  as  the  general  reader  could  wish,  at  any
rate  if  publishers  and  reviewers  do  not  grossly  exaggerate  the
requirements  of  his  comfort.  With  regard  to  comparisons  extend-
ing beyond  the  Celtic  group  itself,  most  assistance  has  been
derived  from  the  ancient  literature  of  Scandinavia.  From  one
branch  of  the  Aryan  family,  the  Slavonic,  I  have  been  almost
wholly  unable  to  draw  any  help,  as  I  found  the  existing  works
on  the  subject  of  old  Slavonic  religion  and  mythology  either  too
antiquated  or  too  brief  to  consult  with  advantage.  This  I  regret
all  the  more,  as  I  do  not  believe  that  materials  are  wanting  to
illustrate  the  religious  and  mythic  aspect  of  Slavonic  history.

After  these  remarks,  it  is  needless  to  say  that  I  have  not
attempted  to  discuss  the  early  fortunes  of  Christianity  among
the  Celts.  That  is  a  large  subject  worthy  of  being  treated  in  a
separate  series  of  lectures  by  some  one  well  versed  in  the  mass
of  old  literature  devoted  to  the  lives  of  the  saints  of  Erinn  and
both  Britains.  Of  course  it  is  not  pretended  that  anything
connected  with  the  history  of  religion  among  the  Celts — or  among
the  Teutons,  if  it  comes  to  that— could  vie  in  popularity  with
the  pedigree  of  the  last  idol  unearthed  in  the  East,  or  even  with
the  discovery  of  a  new  way  of  spelling  Nebuchadnezzar's  name.
Still  the  Celtic  field  of  research  has  a  rapidly  growing  interest
for  scholars,  who  now  regard  it  as  one  in  which  the  investigator's
labours  are  most  certain  to  be  crowned  with  brilliant  results.
'The  great  attraction  of  Celtic  philology  consists  in  the  very
fact  that  every  haul  of  the  net,  without  exception,  brings  in  a
rich  spoil.'  So  wrote  a  distinguished  German  scholar  the  other
day ;  and  his  words  are  true  of  Celtic  philology  in  that  wider
sense  of  the  term  which  would  embrace  not  only  the  study  of
Celtic  speech,  but  also  of  Celtic  archceology  and  history,  of  Celtic
religion  and  folk-lore,  of  Celtic  myth  and  saga.


yiil  PREFACE.

I  have  reserved  to  the  last  the  pleasant  task  of  thanking  the
kind  friends  who  have  given  me  unstinted  assistance  in  bringing
this  volume  through  the  press.  Foremost  among  them  stands
the  well-known  Celtic  scholar,  Whitley  Stokes,  through  whose
hands  most  of  the  sheets  have  passed.  I  am  indebted  to  him
for  many  valuable  suggestions  ;  but  neither  he  nor  any  one  but
myself  is  responsible  for  the  errors  or  blunders  which  the  accu-
rate reader  may  find  the  book  to  contain.

JOHN  RHYS.


GwynvAj  Oxford,

Christmas  Eve,  1887.


CONTENTS.


Lecture  I.
THE  GAULISH  PANTHEON.

PAQE

Part  1 1

Mercury      .........  5

Apollo 20

Mars           ......•••  32

Part  II.     Mars  (continued) 49

Jupiter 64

Minerva           .........  73

Die 77

Minor  Divinities     .........  99

Lecture  II.
THE  ZEUS  OF  THE  INSULAR  CELTS.

Part  1 107

Nuada  of  the  Silver  Hand 119

Nodens,  NM  and  Llud 125

Cormac,  Conaire,  Conchobar     .         .         .         .         .         .133

The  Mac  Oc  and  Merlin 144

Merlin  Emrys  and  Maxen         .         .         .         .         .         .ICO

Part  II.     Camulos,  Cumall  and  Nwyvre .           .         .         .  176

Sites  sacred  to  the  Celtic  Zeus 182

The  God's  Mounds,  Fetishes  and  Symbols     .         .         .  204

The  God  of  Druidisrn 216


CONTENTS.

Lecture  III.
THE  CULTURE  HERO.

PAGE

Gwydion  Son  of  Dun  ......  236

The  Culture  Hero  acquiring  certain  Animals  for  Man  .  241

Poetry  associated  in  its  Origin  with  the  Culture  Hero    .  250
Gwydion  and  other  Names  of  the  Culture  Hero          .         .270

Gwydion  compared  with  Woden  and  Indra  .         .         .  282

Lecture  IV.
THE  CULTURE  HERO  (continued).

Gwydion  and  Cairbre        .......  305

Gwydion  and  Aitherne         .         .         .         .         .         .  324

Pwytt  and  others  visiting  Hades       .....  337

The  Culture  Hero  and  the  Nine-night  Week          .         .  360


Lecture  V.
THE  SUN  HERO.

Part  I.     Lieu  and  Lug  .......     383

The  widely  spread  Cult  of  Lug 409

Ciichulainn's  Birth  and  Education     .          .         .          ,  .431

Some  of  Ciichulainn's  Adventures         ....  444

Ciichulainn  and  his  Foes           .         .         .         .         .  .468

Part  II.     Kulhwch  and  Gwri  of  the  Golden  Hair        .         .  486
Core  and  Diarmait             .......     503

Diarmait's  Home  and  Duben's  Name     .         .         .         .  521

The  Celtic  Sun-hero  and  the  Norse  Balder          .         .  .      529

Tuliessin     .........  543

The  Stratification  of  Solar  Myths      .         .         .         .  .570


CONTENTS.  XI


Lecture  VI.
GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

PAOR

Irish  Mythography  on  tho  Gods  and  their  Foes      .  .          579

Greek  and  Norse  Comparisons           .         .         .  .         .     G10

The  Distress  of  tho  Gods  and  tho  Sun  Hero's  Aid  .          622

Celtic  Accounts  of  tho  Aryan  Deluge         .         .  .         .641

The  earliest  Creed  of  the  Celts  inferred          .         .  .          669

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS 675

INDEX  OF  NAMES  AND  OTHER  WORDS        .         .         679


Lecture  I.

THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.


PART   I.


The  inhabitants  of  ancient  Gaul  were  the  earliest  Celts
of  whose  religion  we  possess  any  knowledge  :  the  sources
of  our  information  are  twofold,  namely,  the  testimony  of
ancient  authors  and  that  of  votive  tablets  or  other  epi-
graphic  monuments.  Of  the  ancients  who  touch  on
Gaulish  religion,  Caesar,  in  his  account  of  the  Gallic
War,  may  be  regarded  as  far  the  most  important  for  our
propose,  partly  because  he  wrote  at  a  time  when  the
process  of  assimilating  the  gods  of  Gaul  to  those  of  Italy
was  only  beginning,  and  partly  because  he,  who  was
pontiff  at  home,  had  opportunities  of  understanding  like-
wise much  about  Gaulish  religion,  not  the  least  of  which
consisted  in  his  having  the  druid  Diviciacus  as  his  con-
stant companion  and  intimate  friend  throughout  the  war ;
still  there  are  many  reasons  for  accepting  Caesar's  account
of  the  Gaulish  pantheon  with  great  caution.  His  words,
so  far  as  they  bear  on  the  individuality  and  respective
rank  of  what  he  considered  to  be  the  chief  divinities  of
the  Gauls,  are  to  the  following  effect : l  They  worship
Mercury,  he  says,  above  all  others,  and  of  him  they  have

1  Bellum  Gallicum  (ed.  Holder),  vi.  17.
B


2  I.    THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

very  many  images.  Their  traditions  make  him  the  inventor
of  all  the  arts  and  the  patron  of  roads  and  journeys,  and
they  think  him  the  most  powerful  in  the  matter  of  acquir-
ing money  and  in  the  transactions  of  commerce.  After
him,  they  worship  Apollo,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Minerva :
of  these  they  entertain  much  the  same  opinion  as  other
nations,  namely,  that  Apollo  drives  away  diseases,  that
Minerva  teaches  the  elements  of  the  various  trades  and
arts,  that  Jupiter  rules  over  the  sky,  and  that  Mars  has
the  direction  of  wars.  Indeed,  it  is  usual  for  them,  as
soon  as  they  have  resolved  to  engage  in  battle,  to  vow
beforehand  to  Mars  all  the  spoils  they  may  take  in  the
war ;  so  they  sacrifice  to  him  all  the  animals  captured,
and  bring  all  the  rest  of  the  booty  together  to  one  spot.
In  many  of  their  cities,  heaps  of  these  things  may  be
seen  piled  up  in  their  sacred  places.  Nor  does  it  often
happen  that  anybody  so  far  disregards  the  traditional
custom  as  to  dare  either  to  conceal  any  of  the  booty  at
home  or  carry  away  any  of  the  booty  set  aside :  in  case
such  a  crime  is  committed,  the  offender  is  tortured  and
most  severely  punished.

Such  is  the  purport  of  Caesar's  words,  and  it  will  be
well  to  see  how  far  Gaulish  epigraphy  is  found  to  corro-
borate or  correct  them.  Unfortunately  for  the  study  of
Celtic  religion  and  philology,  few  of  the  monuments  of
Gaul  supply  us  with  inscriptions  in  the  national  tongue ;
and  probably  all  of  them,  whether  in  Gaulish  or  in  Latin,
date  after  the  advent  of  the  Eoman  conqueror  and  the
initiation  of  his  policy  of  assimilating  the  gods  of  van-
quished Gaul  with  those  of  Borne.  This  policy  took  a
very  definite  form  under  Augustus.  He  as  pontifex  max-
imus  united  the  religions  of  the  Boman  world ;  but  the


I.    THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  6

manner  in  which  Africa  and  the  East  were  treated  could
not  be  recommended  in  the  case  of  Gaul  and  Spain  ;  so,
when  he  undertook  to  restore  the  position  of  the  Lares  and
Penates,  he  included  among  them  the  Gaulish  divinities,
who  were  henceforth  styled  Augusti.  The  result  in  each
instance  was  that  the  name  of  the  Gaulish  god  came  to
be  treated  more  or  less  as  a  mere  epithet  to  that  of  the
Eoman  divinity,  with  which  he  began  to  be  regarded
as  identical:  thus  the  Gaulish  Grannos  became  Apollo
Grannus,  and  Belisama  became  Minerva  Belisama,  and  so
in  other  cases.  Nay,  the  Eoman  god  not  unfrequently
seized  on  the  attributes  of  the  native  one  even  to  the
extent  of  assuming  his  Gaulish  costume  and  non-classical
appearance,  as  is  amply  proved  by  the  images  extant
in  great  numbers  in  France :  among  others,  Mercury,
instead  of  retaining  the  aspect  given  him  by  Italian  art,
appears  often  in  a  form  which  has  been  found  to  recall
rather  the  beauty  and  artistic  perfection  of  the  Greek
Apollo.  The  Eoman  policy  which  reduced  the  Gaulish
divinities  to  Lares  Augusti  did  not  stop  at  that  point ;  for
the  cult  of  the  Eoman  gods  as  such  had  been  introduced,
and,  as  it  established  itself  over  the  country,  it  brought
with  it  also  that  of  Mithras,  Cybele,  and  other  non-Italian
gods  and  goddesses  to  whom  the  Eoman  pantheon  opened
its  doors.  Further,  it  is  found  that  the  worship  of  the
Eoman  and  quasi-Eoman  divinities  was  conducted  under
the  superintendence  of  men  of  good  birth,  who  bore  the
title  of  pontiffs,  augurs  or  flamens ;  but  those  in  charge
of  the  cult  of  the  Gaulish  Lares  Augusti  were  usually
freedmen,  who  bore  the  designation  of  Seviri  Augusti,  and
had  to  discharge  their  office  free  of  expense  to  the  state.
In  a  word,  the  Gaulish  gods  and  goddesses  were  reduced

b2


4  I.    THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

iu  rank  and  forced,  so  to  say,  to  become  more  or  less
Eoman ;  but  they  were  not  banished  or  in  any  way  pro-
scribed.1

To  come  to  the  monuments,  I  may  say  tbat  they  are
to  be  found  in  the  local  museums  of  France,  Switzerland,
and  portions  of  neighbouring  lands  formerly  or  still
occupied  by  the  Celts  :  they  are  moreover  numerous,
and  the  accounts  of  them  are  to  be  sought  up  and  down
the  voluminous  transactions  of  some  scores  of  provincial
societies,  whose  publications  are  not  always  easy  to  con-
sult. So  I  find  that,  in  the  absence  of  a  complete  corpus
of  the  ancient  inscriptions  of  France,  I  cannot  do  better
than  set  out  from  one  district,  the  monuments  of  which,
as  far,  at  least,  as  concerns  the  subject  of  this  lecture,
have  been  laid  before  the  public  in  a  manageable  form
by  competent  archaeologists.  The  district  I  have  chosen
is  that  which  was  occupied  in  Eoman  times  by  the  Gaulish
state  of  the  Allobroges.  It  lay  mostly  on  the  eastern
side  of  the  Ehone,  stretching  from  that  river  to  the  Alps,
and  from  the  Lake  of  Geneva  to  the  Isere.  To  this  must
be  added  a  certain  tract  on  the  other  bank  of  the  Ehone
as  also  probably  belonging  to  the  Allobroges,  and  cover-
ing at  least  most  of  the  present  department  of  the  Ehone.2
The  metropolis  of  the  Allobroges  was  the  city  of  Vienna,
now  called  Vicnne :  their  country  consisted  in  part  of
some  of  the  most  fertile  land  in  Gaul,  and  in  part  of  very

1  For  the  substance  of  these  remarks  I  am  indebted  to  an  excellent
article  by  M.  Florian  Vallentin,  entitled,  Les  Dieux  de  la  Cite  des
Allobroges,  in  the  Revue  Celtique,  Vol.  iv.  1 — 36,  to  which  I  shall
have  frequently  to  refer  in  this  lecture.

2  Vallentin,  ibid.  p.  1 ;  see  also  Desjardins,  Geogrciphie  historique  et
administrative  de  la  Gaule  romaine,  ii.  351.


I.    THE   GAULISH   PANTHEON.  O

mountainous  regions.  The  Allobroges  were  Celts,  though
their  name  means  '  those  of  another  march  or  district : '
they  were  so  called  doubtless  by  some  of  their  Celtic
neighbours,  but  the  name  which  they  gave  themselves  is
unknown.  The  peoples  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Ehone
formed  a  confederation,  at  the  head  of  which  stood  the
Allobroges,  so  that  they  may  be  said  to  have  had  the
control  of  the  navigation  of  that  river  and  of  the  impor-
tant traffic  carried  on  by  means  of  it.  The  Allobrogic
confederation  formed  in  its  turn  a  member  of  the  larger
one  headed  by  the  Arverni.1  Lastly,  my  principal  autho-
rities for  the  inscriptions  found  in  the  country  of  the
Allobroges  are  Allmer's  collection  of  the  inscriptions  of
Yienne,2  and  a  succinct  account  of  the  gods  of  the  Allo-
broges by  the  late  M.  Florian  Yallentin,  one  of  the  best
known  archaeologists  of  the  south  of  France.

Mercury

is  the  god  with  whom  the  monuments  lead  one  to  begin,
and  the  first  inscription  to  which  I  would  call  your  atten-
tion was  found  among  some  Eoman  ruins  near  the  village
of  Beaucroissant  in  the  department  of  the  Isere,  and  it  is
said  to  have  read :  Mercurio  Aug(usto)  Artaio  Sacr(um)
Sex(tus)  Geminius  Cupitus,  ex  voto.3  The  place  of  find-
ing is  recorded  to  have  been  once  called  Artay,  though
the  name  is  unknown  there  now ;   but  the  names  Artas

1  Vallentin,  Rev.  Celtique,  iv.  1,  2.

2  Inscriptions  antiques  et  du  Moyen  Age  de  Vienne  en  Dauphini;
consisting  of  six  octavo  volumes  of  letter-press  description  of  them,
supplemented  by  a  quarto  one  of  plates,  published  at  Vienne  in  the
year  1875.

8  Allmer,  iij.  112;  Vallentin,  Rev.  Celtique,  iv.  17.


6  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

and  Artay  occur  near  Yienne  and  Grenoble.  This  hardly
enables  one,  however,  to  decide  whether  the  god  gave  his
name  to  one  or  more  of  these  places,  or  the  reverse  was
the  case ;  but  one  is  inclined  to  the  former  view  by  the
occurrence  of  Artio  as  the  name  of  a  goddess  in  an  inscrip-
tion in  the  museum  at  Berne,1  for  one  can  hardly  be  wrong
in  associating  with  Artio' s  name  such  a  Celtic  word  as  the
"Welsh  dr  '  plough-land ' ;  whence  it  would  seem  by  no
means  improbable,  that  Mercurms  Arteritis  was  the  Gallo-
lloman  title  of  the  god  called  Mercurim  Cultor  in  an
inscription  from  "Wurtemberg.2  This  would  serve  to  show
that  Mercury  was  associated  by  the  Gauls  with  agricul-
ture, especially  ploughing.

The  next  inscription  to  be  mentioned  was  found  at
Ilieres,  also  in  the  department  of  the  Isere,  and  the  first
portion  of  it  reads :  Aug(usto)  Sacr(um)  Deo  Mercurio
Victori  Magniaco  Yeilauno.3  Here  the  god  is  styled
'August,'  as  in  the  other  instance,  but  the  less  usual
epithet  of  victor  is  added,  which  is  to  be  noticed,  as  he
was  no  mere  Mercury  in  the  Latin  sense.  Then  follow
in  the  inscription  two  words  of  Gaulish  origin,  of  which
Magniaco  would  seem  to  be  the  name  of  a  place,  though
it  must  be  admitted  to  lack  the  support  to  be  expected
from  the  identification  of  its  modern  form  as  the  name  of
a  spot  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  other,  Veilawio,  even
though  it  should  not  prove  a  misreading  of  Vellavno,

1  Mommsen,  Inscriptiones  Helveticae  (in  Vol.  x.  of  the  Mittheilungen
der  Antiq.  Gesellschaft  in  Zurich),  No.  215;  Rev.  Celt  iv.  loc.  cit.

2  Branibach's  Corpus  Inse.  Rhenanarum,  No.  1591.

3  Allmer,  iii.  191,  pi.  38-8;  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  16.  There  seems  to  bo
some  doubt  as  to  whether  Magniaco  or  Macniaco  is  the  correct  reading  :
Allmer  gives  both  without  remarking  on  the  discrepancy.


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  7

cannot  but  be  regarded  as  practically  identical  with  it :
compare  such  names  as  Cassivellaunos,  which  meant  the
king  or  ruler  of  the  hanse  or  league,  and  Catuvellauni,  of
the  same  import  as  Caturiges ;  both  peoples  being  wont,
as  it  would  seem,  to  boast  themselves  lords  of  battle  or
war-kings.  It  is  after  the  analogy  of  such  compounds
that  the  Gaulish  element  in  the  Hieres  inscription  is  to
be  read ;  that  is  to  say,  it  makes  one  compound  epithet,
Magniaco-vellaunoS)1  meaning,  as  it  may  provisionally  be
rendered,  king  or  ruler  of  Magniacon  or  Magniacum,  in
allusion  to  some  place  with  which  the  god's  name  was
associated.

Besides  the  two  foregoing  inscriptions  in  honour  of  a
distinctly  Gaulish  Mercury,  there  is  monumental  evidence
that  there  were  temples  dedicated  to  the  god  at  no  less
than  twenty-six  different  spots2  in  the  country  of  the
Allobroges.  Some  of  the  twenty-six  very  possibly  be-
longed to  the  Greco-Eoman  Mercury  of  an  imported  cult ;

1  The  Gauls,  like  the  modern  Celts,  had  no  objection  to  compound
terms,  and  they  even  used  foreign  elements  in  such  place-names  as
Augustonemetum,  the  grove  of  Augustus  ;  Caesarodunum,  Caesar's  for-
tress ;  and  Juliomagus,  the  field  of  Julius.  Some  of  their  personal
names  were  quite  as  long  :  witness  Conconnetodumnos,  Veriugodumnos
and  Vercassivellaunos.  These  and  the  like  must  have  seemed  cum-
brous to  the  Romans ;  and  Englishmen  of  the  present  day  profess  to
be  amused  with  German  compound  terms,  forgetting  that  they  are
usually  the  shortest  way  of  expressing  what  is  meant,  and  that  few
languages  form  compounds  more  readily  or  complicately  than  their  own,
though  the  longer  terms  are  never  written  as  single  words  :  take,  for
example,  such  instances  as  'university  examinations,'  'university  exa-
mination-papers,' '  London,  Chatham  and  Dover  Railway,'  or  '  London,
Chatham  and  Dover  Railway  Company.'  It  is  only  an  accident —
doubtless  an  inseparable  accident  of  perversity — that  English  gram-
marians usually  conceal  the  fact  of  the  composition.

2  See  them  enumerated  by  M.  Vallentin  in  the  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  15.


8  T.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

but  the  majority  may  perhaps  be  assumed  to  have  been
those  of  the  native  divinity.

So  far,  then,  the  monuments  agree  with  the  purport
of  Caesar's  words  in  regard  to  Mercury ;  and  if  we  now
go  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  Allobrogic  state,  we
shall  find  them  strongly  supported  both  by  the  distribu-
tion of  the  inscriptions  and  the  number  of  the  statuettes
of  the  god:  the  latter  prove  in  some  instances  of  very
considerable  metallic  value — such,  for  example,  as  the
massive  silver  Mercury  dug  up  in  the  gardens  of  the
Luxembourg.  M.  Gaidoz,  in  his  far  too  brief  account
of  the  religion  of  the  Gauls,  speaks  of  the  univer-
sality of  the  worship  of  Mercury  among  the  Gauls,
and  calls  attention  to  the  number  of  place-names  which
bear  evidence  to  it.1  He  mentions  the  following,  but
the  list  might  be  enlarged :  Montmercure,  Mercoeur,
Mercoiray,  Mercoire,  Mercoiset,  Mercuer,  Mercurette,
Mercurey,  Merourie,  Mercurot,  Mercury.  Several  such
names  occur  on  Allobrogic  ground,  and  the  department
of  the  Puy  de  Dome,  so  named  from  the  late  Latin  word
podium,  a  hill  or  mountain,  contains  another  podium  or
puy,  known  as  the  Puy  de  Mercoeur ;  and  this  last  desig-
nation, accommodated  to  the  habits  of  another  dialect,
yields  Montmercure,  the  name  of  another  place.  This
completes  M.  Gaidoz' s  list,2  and  I  would  call  special
attention  to  the  last  two  as  it  is  noticed  that  the  Gaulish


1  Esquisse  de  la  Religion  des  Gauluis  (Paris,  1879),  p.  10.

'  A  somewhat  shorter  one  was  given  by  M.  Mowat  in  the  Rev.
Archrologique  (1875),  Vol.  xxix.  p.  34,  where  he  gives  a  reason  for
connecting  the  place-name  Montmartre  with  the  god,  a  view  also  taken
by  M.  Gaidoz.


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  V

Mercury  greatly  affected  high  ground  and  conspicuous
positions.     Thus  it  is  supposed  that  there  was  a  temple
dedicated  to  Mercury  on  Montmartre :  it  is  known  that
he  had  one  on  Mont  du  Chat,1  near  the  blue  lake  of  the
Bourget,  in  the  land  of  the  Allobroges ;  another  on  Mont
de  Sene,  in  the  Cote  d'Or ;   and  a  third  of  considerable
importance   on   the  Donon,  one  of  the   more  elevated
heights  of  the  Yosges.2      But  far  the  most  celebrated
one  remains  to  be  mentioned:    it  stood  on  the  summit
of  the  Puy  de  Dome,  in  Auvergne,  and  its  foundations
are  said  to  prove  it  to  have  been   an  extensive   and
costly  building.     It  was  in  fact  the  great  temple  of  the
Arverni;  and  for  it  was  probably  destined  the  colossal
Mercury  in   bronze,    stated   by  Pliny  in  his   Historic*
JYaturalis,  xxxiv.  18,  to  have  been  made  by  the  Greek
artist  Zenodorus  for  the  Gaulish  state  of  the  Arverni.    It
stood  120  feet  high,   and  the  work  took  ten  years  to
accomplish.3     The  expense  connected  with  the  worship
was  probably  borne  by  the  cities  of  Gaul  in  common,
and  the  fame  of  the  temple  lasted  to  the  time  of  Gregory
of  Tours ;  for  he  relates  in  his  Historic/,  Francorum,  i.  32,
how  it  was  destroyed  by  Chrocus,  king  of  the  Alamanni,
which  according  to  the  historian  happened  in  the  time  of
Valerian  and  Gallien.4     A  fragmentary  inscription  dis-
covered on  the  spot  happens  to  have  been  set  up  by
certain  negotiator cs  or  men  of  business,  and  it  serves  to

1  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  15.

2  Jollois,  Memoires  sur  quelques  Antiquites  remarquables  du  Departe-
ment  des  Vosges  (Paris,  1843),  p.  126,  &c.

3  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  15  and  ii.  426 ;  Bulletin  Monumental,  1875,  p.  557,
et  seq.

4  See  also  Mowat  in  the  Rev.  Arch.  (1875),  Vol.  xxix.  31.


10  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

show  that  one  of  the  names  under  which  the  god  received
honour  there,  was  that  of  Mercurius  Arvernus.1  The
focus  of  his  cult  has  to  be  sought  in  Auvergne,  but  we
find  from  votive  tablets  that  he  was  also  known  in  Bavaria,
in  some  districts  of  Ehenish  Prussia,  and  on  the  banks
of  the  Meuse  in  the  Netherlands.2  With  these  must
be  ranked  an  inscription  at  Bittburg,  in  Ehenish  Prussia,
to — Deo  Mercur(io)  Yassocaleti.3

But  to  understand  the  term  Vassocaleti,  it  would  be  well
to  study  carefully  Gregory's  words  in  the  passage  already
alluded  to.  He,  a  native  of  Auvergne,  seems  to  have
been  well  acquainted  with  the  ruins  on  the  Puy  de  Dome,
and  the  following  is  his  account  of  them :  Veniens  vero
[Chrocus]  Arvernos,  delubrum  illud,  quod  Gallica  lingua
Vasso  Galate  vocant,  incendit,  diruit  atque  subvertit.
Miro  enim  opere  factum  fuit  atque  firmatum.  Cuius  paries
duplex  erat,  ab  intus  enim  de  minuto  lapide,  a  foris  vero
quadris  sculptis  fabricatum  fuit.  Habuit  enim  paries
ille  crassitudinem  pedes  triginta.  Intrinsecus  vero  mar-
more  ac  museo  variatum  erat.  Pavimentum  quoque  eedes
marmore  stratum,  desuper  vero  plumbo  tectum.4     Now

1  Rev.  Celt.  ii.  426,  iv.  15;  Rev.  des  Soc.  savantes  (1875),  Yol.  i.
p.  249.

*  Brambach,  Nos.  256,  257,  593,  1741,  2029  add.  p.  xxvii.

3  Kuhn's  Beitrcege  zur  vergleichenden  Sprachforschung,  iij.  169;
Brambach,  No.  835;  Rev.  Arch.  (1875),  Vol.  xxx.  pp.  367,  368,  where
M.  Mowat  corrects  Brambach's  Vasso -caleti  into  Vassooaleti.  In
the  same  article,  p.  361,  he  gives  facsimiles  of  the  readings  of  the
corresponding  form  in  the  chief  manuscripts  of  Gregory's  text.

4  Gregorii  Turonensis  Opera,  Historia  Francorum  (contained  in
Monumenta  Germaniae  Historica),  Lib.  i.  c.  32,  where  the  reading
preferred  by  the  editors  begins  with  Veniens  vero  Arvernus,  &c,  but
A  1  reads  Arvernos.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  11

there  seems  to  be  no  sufficient  reason  to  sever  the  Vasso
Galate  of  the  manuscripts  of  Gregory  from  the  Vasso-
caleti  of  the  Khenish  inscription.1  One  should  rather
correct  the  former  according  to  the  latter,  and  then  the
whole  becomes  intelligible  in  the  light  of  Gregory's
description  of  the  Gaulish  temple.  For  caleti  proves  to
be  the  genitive  of  the  adjective  which  is  in  modern
Welsh  caled,  'hard,'  in  older  Welsh  calet,  Irish  calath
of  the  same  meaning.  The  other  part  of  the  Gaulish
term  vasso  is  to  be  equated  with  the  Welsh  word  gtvas?
1  mansion  or  palace;  Irish  foss,  'a  staying  or  rest,'  of  the
same  origin  as  the  Greek  acr™,  '  town  or  city ; '  Sanskrit
vastu,  'a  seat  or  place,'  vas,  'to  dwell  or  remain;'  Eng.
was,  were.  So  Vasso-calet  must  have  meant  the  hard
mansion  or  hard  palace ;  perhaps  one  should  rather  say
the  hard  temple,  since  it  is  believed  that  the  Gaulish
noun  survived  in  the  old  French  vas,  which  meant  a
chapel,  church,  temple  or  cloister.  As  to  the  build-
ing being  called  hard,  one  has  only  to  recall  what
Gregory  has  left  on  record  concerning  its  walls  of  thirty
feet  in  thickness  and  the  solid  nature  of  the  structure
generally.

Lastly,  I  should  construe  Mercurius  Vassocaleti  some-
what in  a  Celtic  fashion,  as  meaning  'Mercury  of  the


1  Even  those  who  preferred  doing  so  -would  have  to  explain  Vasso
Galate  as  meaning  the  Gaulish  temple,  and  to  refer  it  probably  to  the
same  edifice.

2  Much  conjecture  has  been  wasted  on  this  term,  especially  by
writers  aware  only  of  a  Welsh  word  givas,  meaning  a  young  man  or
servant,  Gaulish  vassos  (as  in  Dagovassus),  and  not  of  gwas,  meaning
a  palace  or  mansion,  which  alone  is  the  one  here  in  point.


12  I.    THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

Vasso-calet,'1  or  the  god  who  dwelt  in  that  temple.  Be
that  so  or  not,  the  Vasso-calet  was  a  very  remarkable
temple;  and  what  is  still  more  remarkable  perhaps  is,
that  the  god  should  have  been  known  by  the  name  of
this  Arvernian  temple  of  his  so  far  away  as  Bittburg
on  the  Ehine.  But  besides  the  fragmentary  inscription
already  noticed  as  found  on  the  Puy  de  Dome,  a  complete
inscription  has  been  dug  up  there  which  supplies  us  with
still  another  way  of  designating  the  god.  It  is  said  to
read:  Num(ini)  Aug(usto)  et  Deo  Mercurio  Dumiati,
Matutinius  Yictorinus  D(ono)  D(edit).2

Now  the  name  of  the  mountain,  Puy  de  Dome,  or  as
it  is  called  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  district  simply  le
Doum,  and  the  epithet  Dumias  or  Dumiates  given  to  the
god  whose  temple  adorned  the  top  of  it,  cannot  well  be


1  This  is  according  to  a  rule  still  obtaining  in  "Welsh,  as  when  we
eay  Ivan  Hirnant,  '  Evan  of  Long-brook,'  or  Tudur  Penllyn,  *  Tudor  of
Penllyn,'  in  both  of  which  the  place-name  is  to  be  construed  as  a
genitive  ;  and  we  have  an  instance  from  a  time  before  the  case-endings
were  dropped,  in  a  bilingual  inscription  from  Brecknockshire,  which
reads  Maccutreni  Saliciduni,  '  (the  Stone  of)  Maccutreni  of  Salicidu-
non'  (Ehys,  Lectures  on  Welsh  Phil.  p.  382).  Then  as  to  the  com-
pound Vasso-calet,  one  has  to  compare  the  Welsh  treatment  of  permanent
epithets.  Thus  we  say  Maelgwn  Fychan,  'M.  Vaughan  or  M.  the  Little,'
while  a  little  Maelgwn,  to  whom  the  adjective  was  not  constantly
applied,  would  be  Maelgivn  bychan,  '  little  Maelgwn.'  Put  back  into
an  early  form,  the  latter  would  be  Maglocunos  biccanos,  while  the
former  would  be  Maglocuno-biccanos  ;  and  it  is  in  this  way  that  I  would
explain  the  Gaulish  Vasso-caleti  as  a  compound  in  the  genitive  case.
Compare  the  Irish  genitive  na  Cr&b-ruadi,  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  99  b  :
it  was  the  name  of  the  king  of  Ulster's  palace,  and  literally  meant  the
Ked  Branch,  a  designation,  however,  of  uncertain  connotation.  One
may  also  probably  compare  the  Ogmic  genitive  Neta-Ttrenalugos,  with
tt  for  later  th,  and  a  neta  which  is  in  my  opinion  not  a  genitive.
2  Rev.  des  Soc.  sav.  Vol.  i.  (1875),  p.  250;  Rev.  Celt.  ii.  426.


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  13

supposed  unconnected,  and  the  question  arises  as  to  the
nature  of  the  connection  between  them.  Now  Dome  or
Doum  is  here  probably  a  Celtic  word,  and  it  could  in  that
case  hardly  be  doubted  that  it  should  be  referred  to  the
same  origin  as  the  Irish  word  duma,  'a  tumulus  or  mound
of  any  kind ; ' 1  but  the  Irish  duma  means  an  early  Celtic
form,  dumjo-s  or  dumjo-n,  and  this  stem  dump  we  seem
to  have  exactly  in  Dumiati.  The  Gaulish  word  as  applied
to  the  mountain  may  have  simply  meant  the  top  or  sum-
mit, in  which  case  the  epithet  of  the  god  would  refer  to
him  as  the  divinity  of  the  top  of  the  Puy;  but  other
explanations  are  possible,  though  I  do  not  think  it  neces-
sary to  detain  you  with  an  examination  of  them.

So  much  as  to  the  god's  epithets ;  but  none  of  the
Allobrogic  monuments  seem  to  supply  us  with  any  of
his  Gaulish  names,  while  a  curious  inscription  referring
to  him  comes  from  Thornbury  on  the  Swale,  in  York-
shire, where  no  name  or  epithet  is  given :  he  is  described
simply  as  the  discoverer  of  roads  and  paths.  The  words
are :  Deo  qui  vias  et  semitas  commentus  est.2  There
is,  however,  no  great  difficulty  in  identifying  him  under
a  Gaulish  name.  He  was  called  Ogmios,  or  at  any  rate
that  was  one  of  his  principal  names,  and  under  that  we
have  a  very  curious  account  of  his  attributes  from  the
pen  of  Lucian,  a  chatty  Greek,  who  wrote  and  travelled
in  the  second  century  of  our  era.     His  words  are  to  the

1  Connac's  Glossary,  translated  by  O'Donovan  and  edited  by  Stokes
(Calcutta,  1868),  p.  40;  Meyer's  Ventry  Harbour  (Oxford,  1885),  x.  87;
O'Curry's  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Irish,  i.  pp.  dexxxvij,
dexxxix.

2  Tbe  Berlin  Corpus  Inscr.  Latinarum,  Vol.  vii.  (Inscr.  BHtanniae
Latinae,  edited  by  Hlibner),  No.  271.


14  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

following  effect,  and  though  they  treat  him  as  Heracles,
you  will  at  once  see  that  he  was  no  Heracles  in  the
classic  sense  of  that  name  :  The  Celts,  he  says,  call
Heracles  in  the  language  of  their  country  Ogmios,  and
they  make  very  strange  representations  of  the  god.  With
them  he  is  an  extremely  old  man,  with  a  bald  forehead
and  his  few  remaining  hairs  quite  grey;  his  skin  is
wrinkled  and  embrowned  by  the  sun  to  that  degree  of
swarthiness  which  is  characteristic  of  men  who  have  grown
old  in  a  seafaring  life :  in  fact,  you  would  fancy  him
rather  to  be  a  Charon  or  Japetus,  one  of  the  dwellers  in
Tartarus,  or  anybody  rather  than  Heracles.  But  although
he  is  of  this  description,  he  is,  nevertheless,  attired  like
Heracles,  for  he  has  on  him  the  lion's  skin,  and  he  has
a  club  in  his  right  hand ;  he  is  duly  equipped  with  a
quiver,  and  his  left  hand  displays  a  bow  stretched  out :
in  these  respects  he  is  quite  Heracles.1  It  struck  me,
then,  that  the  Celts  took  such  liberties  with  the  ap-
pearance of  Heracles  in  order  to  insult  the  gods  of  the
Greeks  and  avenge  themselves  on  him  in  their  painting,
because  he  once  made  a  raid  on  their  territory,  when  in
search  of  the  herds  of  Geryon  he  harassed  most  of  the
western  peoples.  I  have  not  yet,  however,  mentioned
the  most  whimsical  part  of  the  picture,  for  this  old  man
Heracles  draws  after  him  a  great  number  of  men  bound
by  their  ears,  and  the  bonds  are  slender  cords  wrought
of  gold  and  amber,  like  necklaces  of  the  most  beautiful
make ;  and  although  they  are  dragged  on  by  such  weak
ties,  they  never  try  to  run  away,   though  they  could


1  In  fact,  the  god's  equipment  shows  that  a  determined  effort  had
been  made  to  get  him  up  in  the  classical  way.


I.    THE   GAULISH   PANTHEON.  15

easily  do  it ;  nor  do  they  at  all  resist  or  struggle  against
them,  planting  their  feet  in  the  ground  and  throwing
their  weight  back  in  the  direction  contrary  to  that  in
which  they  are  being  led.  Quite  the  reverse  :  they  follow
with  joyful  countenance  in  a  merry  mood,  and  praising
him  who  leads  them,  pressing  on  one  and  all,  and  slack-
ening their  chains  in  their  eagerness  to  proceed  :  in  fact,
they  look  like  men  who  would  be  grieved  should  they
be  set  free.  But  that  which  seemed  to  me  the  most
absurd  thing  of  all  I  will  not  hesitate  also  to  tell  you :
the  painter,  you  see,  had  nowhere  to  fix  the  ends  of  the
cords,  since  the  right  hand  of  the  god  held  the  club  and
his  left  the  bow;  so  he  pierced  the  tip  of  his  tongue,
and  represented  the  people  as  drawn  on  from  it,  and  the
god  turns  a  smiling  countenance  towards  those  whom  he
is  leading.  Now  I  stood  a  long  time  looking  at  these
things,  and  wondered,  perplexed  and  indignant.  But  a
certain  Celt  standing  by,  who  knew  something  about  our
ways,  as  he  showed  by  speaking  good  Greek — a  man
who  was  quite  a  philosopher,  I  take  it,  in  local  matters —
said  to  me,  Stranger,  I  will  tell  you  the  secret  of  the
painting,  for  you  seem  very  much  troubled  about  it.  We
Celts  do  not  consider  the  power  of  speech  to  be  Hermes,
as  you  Greeks  do,  but  we  represent  it  by  means  of
Heracles,  because  he  is  much  stronger  than  Hermes.
"Nor  should  you  wonder  at  his  being  represented  as  an
old  man,  for  the  power  of  words  is  wont  to  show  its  per-
fection in  the  aged ;  for  your  poets  are  no  doubt  right
when  they  say  that  the  thoughts  of  young  men  turn  with
every  wind,  and  that  age  has  something  wiser  to  tell  us
than  youth.  And  so  it  is  that  honey  pours  from  the
tongue  of  that  Nestor  of  yours,  and  the  Trojan  orators


16  I.    THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

speak  with  a  voice  of  the  delicacy  of  the  lily,  a  voice  well
covered,  so  to  say,  with  bloom  ;a  for  the  bloom  of  flowers,
if  my  memory  does  not  fail  me,  has  the  term  lilies  applied
to  it.  So  if  this  old  man  Heracles,  the  power  of  speech,
draws  men  after  him,  tied  to  his  tongue  by  their  ears,
you  have  no  reason  to  wonder,  as  you  must  be  aware  of
the  close  connection  between  the  ears  and  the  tongue.
"Nov  is  there  any  injury  done  him  by  this  latter  being
pierced ;  for  I  remember,  said  he,  learning  while  among
you  some  comic  iambics,  to  the  effect  that  all  chattering
fellows  have  the  tongue  bored  at  the  tip.  In  a  word,
we  Celts  are  of  opinion  that  Heracles  himself  performed
everything  by  the  power  of  words,  as  he  was  a  wise
fellow,  and  that  most  of  his  compulsion  was  effected  by
persuasion.  His  weapons,  I  take  it,  are  his  utterances,
which  are  sharp  and  well-aimed,  swift  to  pierce  the  mind ;
and  you  too  say  that  words  have  wings.  Thus  far  the
Celt.

According  to  this  account,  Ogmios,  or  the  Gaulish
Heracles,  was  the  personification  of  what  the  Greeks
understood  by  Aiyos :  he  was  the  god  of  speech  and  all
that  conduced  to  make  speech  a  powerful  agency — elo-
quence and  wisdom,  the  craft  of  Hermes,  and  the  varied
experience  of  the  travelled  old  man  who  had  seen  many
peoples  and  visited  many  lands.  Now  if  we  wished  to
discover  the  equivalent  of  Ogmjos  in  the  languages  of  the

1  I  am  not  quite  sure  that  I  comprehend  this  allusion  to  the
lily;  but  here  is  the  original  for  those  who  may  object  to  being  led
astray  :  /ecu  ol  dyop-qral  twv  Tpioiov  tv)v  oira  ttjv  \upi6e<T(rav  d<f>iu<j-iv
cvavOyj  Ttva'  Xecpia  yap  KaXelrat,  ei  ye  p.ep.vqp.a.1,  rd  avdrj.  The  whole
prolalia  is  No.  7  (pp.  23 — 25)  in  Bekker's  edition,  and  No.  55  (pp.
598 — 600)  in  Dindorf's;  extracts  from  it  will  also  be  found  in  Zeuss's
Grammatica  Celiica,  edited  by  Ebel,  pp.  J,  2.


I.    THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  17

Celts  of  the  British  Islands,  we  should  have  to  suppose
the  word  submitted  to  the  operation  of  phonetic  processes
suggested  by  other  words  in  their  respective  vocabularies:
thus,  according  to  Old  Irish  phonology,  the,;  would  go  and
the  word  must  appear  as  Ogma,  as  indeed  it  does,  while
in  Welsh  the  changes  implied  would  be  rather  greater :
thus  it  would  first  become  Ogmijos  with  j,  sounded  like
English  y  in  the  word  yes,  liable  to  be  modified  into  d,
or  the  sound  of  th  in  the  English  word  this  ;  moreover,
the  case-termination  must  go,  and  if  the  word  happened
to  have  survived  among  the  Welsh  glosses  of  the  9th
century,  it  would  have  been  found  written  '  ogmid '  or
'ogmid.'  The  next  stage  would  be  represented  with  m
softened  to  v  and  g  to  gh,  sounded  like  g  in  the  softest
pronunciation  of  the  German  word  sagen,  and  soon  elided
altogether,  just  as  sagen  not  unfrequently  becomes  saen
in  colloquial  German,  with  as  little  or  less  trace  of  the
guttural  consonant  left  as  in  the  English  equivalent  say.
The  use  of  the  word  is  first  attested  in  the  Black  Book  of
Carmarthen,  a  Welsh  manuscript  of  the  12th  century,  and
the  spelling  has  since  then  varied,  according  to  the  ortho-
graphy adopted,  from  ouit,  oivit,  ouyd,  ovyd  to  ofydd,  which
is  the  present  orthography,  the  pronunciation  being  ap-
proximately 'oviid,'  with  its  second  vowel  nearly  like  a
German  u.  The  exact  meaning  of  the  word  in  the  earliest
passages  where  it  occurs  is  not  easy  to  fix ;  but  that  of '  one
skilled  or  versed  in  anything,  a  teacher  or  leader,'  would
suit  them  all.1  Later,  the  duties  of  an  '  ovyd'  were  said  to
be  'to  improve  and  multiply  knowledge;'  and  it  is  now  the
name  of  one  of  the  three  kinds  of  graduates  or  professors

1  Khys's  Lectures,  pp.  293—295.
C


18  I.    THE   GAULISH  PANTHEON.

recognized  by  the  Eistedvod,  the  other  two  being  bards
and  drnids.  Thus  if  I  presented  myself  as  a  candidate
for  a  degree  without  having  any  claims  to  be  considered
a  bard  or  a  druid,  I  should,  in  case  I  was  not  plucked  by
the  presiding  druid  and  his  bardic  assessors,  assume  the
degree  of  '  ovyd,'  together  with  a  Welsh  proper  name.  In
Welsh  the  equivalent  of  the  Gaulish  word  Ogmios  has
always  remained  an  appellative;  but  not  so  in  Irish,  where
Ogma  figures  as  the  name  of  one  of  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann,
as  the  gods  of  the  Goidelic  pantheon  are  collectively
called  in  Irish.  Nor  is  this  all :  he  is  signalized  in  Irish
mythology  as  the  inventor  of  writing,  that  is  to  say  of
the  Ogam  alphabet;  for  Ogma  being  much  skilled  in
dialects  and  in  poetry,  it  was  he,  we  are  told,1  who  in-
vented the  Ogam  to  provide  signs  for  secret  speech  only
known  to  the  learned,  and  designed  to  be  kept  from  the
vulgar  and  poor  of  the  nation.  The  motive  attributed
to  Ogma  is  an  invention  of  a  comparatively  late  age,  for
there  was  nothing  cryptic  about  the  Ogam  alphabet ;  but
the  allusion  to  Ogma's  skill  in  poetry  and  dialects  is
important,  especially  as  there  was  not  only  a  mode  of
writing  called  Ogam,  but  also  a  kind  of  pedantic
jargon  which  bore  that  name.2  Now  Irish  legend  will
have  it  that  the  Ogam  was  so  called  from  the  name  of
Ogma,  which  is  etymologically  impossible ;  so  we  are
left  to  conclude  from  the  relation  in  which  the  words


1  Mr.  M.  Atkinson  (quoting  from  the  Irish  MS.  called  the  Book  of
Ballymote),  in  the  Kilkenny  Journal  of  the  Royal  Hist,  and  Arch.  Ass.
of  Ireland,  for  1874,  p.  207;  see  also  my  Lectures  on  W.  Phil.  p.  293.

2  O'Donovan,  Irish  Grammar,  p.  xlviij  ;  also  the  Rev.  Celt.  vii.
369-74,  where  the  true  nature  of  a  large  part  of  the  Ogmic  jargon  has
been  explained  for  the  first  time  by  Thurneysen.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  19

stand  to  one  another,  that  Ogma  was  so  called  from
Ogam  or  that  with  which  he  had  to  do.  Supposing  that
the  latter  word,  the  meaning  of  which  is  only  a  matter
of  inference,  signified  a  letter  or  a  written  character,  then
Ogma  would  mean  he  who  had  to  do  with  writing — the
inventor,  let  us  say,  of  writing ;  but  that  is  inadmissible,
as  the  Celts  probably  had  no  knowledge  of  writing  when
the  god  was  first  called  Ogmios.  So  we  have  to  look  for
the  key  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  Ogam  in  the  direction
of  spoken  rather  than  of  written  language.  In  Scotland,
Ogmic  writing  does  not  appear  to  have  become  known
till  it  was  nearly  going  out  of  use  in  Ireland ;  so  one
is  not  surprised  to  find  that  in  Scotch  Gaelic  the  word
Ogam,  which  is  there  written  oidheam,  had  no  technical
meaning,  its  ordinary  significations  being  that  of  'a  notion
of  anything,  an  idea,  inference,  meaning,  hint ;'  to  which
are  to  be  added  that  of  a  '  book  or  pamphlet,'  which  it  is
also  said  to  have  had.1  "We  have  probably  cognate  words
in  the  Greek  6'y/ios,  i  any  straight  line,  a  furrow,  a  swathe
in  reaping,  a  path  or  orbit ;'  Sanskrit  ajma-s,  l  a  course,
run,  expedition ;'  ajman,  which  had  the  meaning  of  the
cognate  Latin  agmen,  as  when  employed  in  speaking  of
waters,  of  boatmen's  oars,  and  of  speech.2  The  various
conditions  of  the  problem  of  fixing  the  meaning  attached
to  the  word  Ogam,  and  the  word  standing  in  the  same
order  of  priority  to  Ogmios  in  Gaulish  as  Ogam  does  to
Ogma  in  Irish,  seem  best  satisfied  by  supposing  the  com-
mon noun  to  have  meant  a  round  or  train  of  words,  fluent
speech  or  ready  utterance.     This  harmonizes  well  with

1  Gram.  Celtica,  p.  2 ;  Ehys,  Lectures,  p.  298.

-  Bohtlingk  and  Roth's  Sanskrit  Dictionary,  s.  v.  ajma,  ajman.

c2


20  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

the  sketch  of  Ogmios  as  the  old  man  Heracles  of  the
Gauls,  whose  talk  and  ready  wit  charmed  his  hearers.
Lucian's  picture  enables  one  to  portray  to  oneself  the
wrinkled,  sun-burnt  face  of  the  travelled  old  man,  who
poured  forth  the  stream  of  his  irresistible  eloquence,  while
his  eye  flashed  with  delight  and  kindly  interest.  Lucian
says  that  he  turned  towards  his  willing  captives  with  a
smiling  face,  and  we  have  the  same  touch  preserved  in
the  Irish  legend,  when  it  calls  the  hero  Ogma  Grian-
ainech,  or  Ogma  of  the  Shining  Countenance.1  The
combining  of  the  attributes  of  Heracles  and  Hermes  in
one  personage,  which  puzzled  the  Greek  traveller,  was
no  passing  whim  of  the  Gauls.  The  view  taken  of  the
god  by  the  Celts  was  even  more  comprehensive,  for  we
find  him  in  Ireland  wearing  not  only  the  character  of
inventor  of  the  Ogam  alphabet,  but  also  that  of  champion
of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann.

Apollo.
This  god  is  placed  before  us  by  Caesar  simply  in  the
character  of  a  repeller  of  diseases — Ajppollinem  morbos
depellerc — and  not  in  that  of  the  sun-god  he  was  believed
by  the  Greeks  to  be.  Nevertheless,  it  will  be  seen  as
we  proceed  that  some  of  the  Gaulish  divinities,  equated
with  him  on  certain  of  the  monuments  of  Gaul  and  other
parts  of  the  Celtic  world,  appear  to  lay  a  just  claim  to  be
regarded  as  forms  of  the  sun-god.  But  to  come  to  the
monuments  themselves,  an  altar  found  at  a  place  near
Annecy  in  Haute  Savoie  testifies  to  the  worship  of  a

1  The  Kilkenny  Journal  for  1874,  p.  229,  and  my  Lectures  on  Welsh
Phil.  p.  293,  where  I  have  rendered  Grian-ainech — less  correctly,  as  I
now  think — '  sun-faced.'


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  21

Gaulish  Apollo  called  Virotutes  or  Virotus.  The  inscrip-
tion is  imperfect,  and  now  reads  only  : l  Apollini  Virotuti
T.  Eutil(ius)  Buricus.  We  have  no  further  information
about  this  god,  and  it  is  unfortunate  that  the  interpreta-
tion of  his  Gaulish  name  or  epithet  is  a  matter  of  mere
conjecture.  It  seems,  however,  pretty  evident  that  it
is  a  compound  of  which  the  first  part  viro  may  be  the
Gaulish  equivalent  of  the  Latin  verus,  Welsh  givir,  Irish
fir,  '  true,'  or  else  of  Latin  vir,  Welsh  gwr,  0.  Irish  fer,
<  a  man.'  The  preference,  if  given  to  the  latter,  would
suggest  that  the  epithet  may  have  meant  man-healing  or
man-protecting,  and  thus  one  might  be  led  to  expect  in
the  second  element  of  the  name  of  the  god  a  Gaulish
word  related  in  point  of  origin  and  meaning  to  the  Latin
tutor,  'protector  or  defender;'  but  the  vocabulary  of
modern  Celts  fails  to  render  us  any  aid  in  this  matter :
all  that  can  be  said  is,  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  such
a  word  as  we  want  did  not  exist  in  Gaulish.

Beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  Allobroges,  the  Gaulish
Apollo  appears  to  have  been  known  all  over  the  Celtic
world,  and  he  bore  several  names,  of  which  the  most
important  were  Maponos,  Grannos  and  Toutiorix.  Three
inscriptions2  in  honour  of  Apollo  Maponos  have  been
discovered  in  the  north  of  England,  and  in  one  of  them,
found  near  Ainstable,  in  Cumberland,  he  is  called  Dcus
Mapomts,  without  any  allusion  to  Apollo.  Fortunately
the  name  Maponos  offers  no  difficulty:  it  is  the  same
word  as  the  old  Welsh  mapon,  now  mabon,  '  boy  or  male
child,'  which  occurs,  for  example,  in  a  Welsh  poem  in
the  Book  of  Taliessin,  a  manuscript  of  the  13th  century:


1  Rev.  Celt,  iv.  25.  "  HiLbner,  Nos.  218,  332,  1315.


22  I.    THE   GAULISH   PANTHEON.

it  is  there  applied  to  the  infant  Jesns  in  a  passage  describ-
ing the  coming  of  the  Magi  to  him  at  Bethlehem.1  Thus
it  seems  certain  that  some  of  the  Celts  worshipped  an
Apollo  whom  they  described  as  an  infant,  and  this  is
borne  out  by  a  group  of  inscriptions  at  the  other  extremity
of  the  Celtic  world  of  antiquity :  I  allude  to  the  ancient
province  of  Dacia,  and  especially  Carlsburg  and  its  neigh-
bourhood, in  Transylvania,  where  we  find  him  styled2
Deus  Bonus  Pner  Posphorus  Apollo  Pythius,  Bonus  Puer
Posphorus  or  Bonus  Deus  Puer  Posphorus.  Our  Maponos
is  in  all  probability  the  Bonus  Puer  attested  by  these
inscriptions.

"We  come  now  to  the  name  Grannos  :  it  occurs  in  the
districts  formerly  inhabited  by  Belgic  tribes  and  in  the
basin  of  the  Ehine.  Grannos  is  probably  to  be  referred
to  the  same  origin  as  the  Sanskrit  verb  ghar,  i  to  glow,
burn,  shine ; '  ghrna,  ghrni,  '  heat,  glow,  sunshine,'
Lithuanian  z'ereti,  '  to  glow,'  English  gleam:  in  point  of
form,  Grannos  would  exactly  correspond  to  the  Sanskrit
word  ghrna-s  already  mentioned,  but  the  former  had
probably  the  force  of  an  adjective,  conveying  much  the
same  meaning  as  the  posphorus,  '  light-bringing,'  in  the
Dacian  inscriptions.  Nor  indeed  does  the  correspondence
between  them  end  here ;  for  we  find  that  an  inscription
from  the  neighbourhood  of  Horburg,  in  the  Haut-Khin,
calls  the  god  Apollo  Grannus  Mogounus?  But  the  inter-
pretation of  the  word  Mogounus  compels  me  to  trouble
you  with  some  more  glottological  details,  which  I  will

1  See  Skene's  Four  Ancient  Boohs  of  Wales,  ii.  174.

2  The  Berlin  Corpus,  iii.  Nos.  1130,  1132,  1133,  1136,  1137,  1138.

3  Brambach,  No.  1915.


T.     THE    GAULISH    TANTHEON.  23

put  as  briefly  as  possible :  in  the  first  place,  we  clearly
have  in  Mogounus,  from  which  is  derived  by  one  or  two
further  steps  the  well-known  place-name  Moguniiacum,
from  the  shorter  form  of  which,  Moguntia  or  Mogonliu,
are  derived  its  modern  representatives,  French  Mayence
and  German  Mainz.  The  original  Gaulish  comes  doubtless
from  the  same  source  as  the  Irish  for-mach,  '  increase,'
tor-mag  or  tor-much,  '  increase,  the  act  of  adding  to ; '
Latin  magnus,  'great;'  German  mogen,  macht ;  English
may,  might  and  main.  But  words  of  this  origin  vary
widely  in  point  of  meaning  in  the  different  Aryan
languages,  and  one  group  of  them  supplies  expression
for  the  idea  of  a  youth  who  is  growing  or  has  just
grown  to  the  might  and  vigour  of  manhood :  sometimes
a  transition  from  this  meaning  takes  place  to  that  of  a
boy  or  young  man  as  a  servant  or  slave,  much  as  in  the
case  of  Trough  becoming  the  French  and  English  page,
or  the  Welsh  givas,  '  young  man,'  used  mostly  now  in
the  sense  of  servant.  The  words  in  point  from  the  stem
mag  are  such  as  the  Gothic  magu,  '  boy,'  mavi  (for  magvi),
'girl;'  the  old  Irish  mug  (genitive  moga),  'servant  or
slave;'  Welsh  meu-divy,  'a  hermit,'  literally  scrims  Dei;
Cornish  maw,  'a  lad  or  servant;'  Breton  maouez,  'a
woman.'  Kindred  words  are  also  copious  in  the  Aryan
languages  of  the  East,  but  their  divergence  of  meaning-
is  very  remarkable :  thus  Sanskrit,  dwelling  on  another
kind  of  increase  of  strength  or  importance,  presents  us
with  a  vocable  magha,  meaning  'a  gift  or  reward,'  and
maghavan,  which  means  'freely  giving,  a  giver,'  said
especially  of  one  who  rewards  priests  and  minstrels  with
offerings  :  the  same  two  words  existed  also  in  Zend,
but   in    that    language    they    retained   a    more    ancient


24  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

meaning,  maga  being  used  in  the  sense  of  size  or  mag-
nitude, and  magavan  in  that  of  a  young  man  who  is
grown  up  but  not  married,  a  bachelor.  This  brings
me  back  to  Mogounus,  since  magavan  corresponds  with
it  letter  for  letter  excepting  only  the  declension;  and
this  difference  is  probably  due  to  Mogounus  being  only
known  to  us  as  used  in  a  Latin  inscription.

Whatever  maybe  thought  of  this  conjecture,  the  analogy
of  the  words  we  have  just  examined  brings  us  round
again  to  much  the  same  idea  which  we  found  underlying
the  word  Maponos,  namely,  that  of  a  boy  or  youth ;  and
I  have  very  little  doubt  in  my  mind  that  Apollo  Grannus
Mogounus  expressed  very  closely  the  same  meaning  which
we  found  rendered  by  the  words  Puer  Posphorus  Apollo
in  the  Dacian  inscriptions  which  have  already  been  refer-
red to.  As  the  dispenser  of  light  and  warmth,  Apollo
made  himself  the  repeller  of  disease,  and  it  is  quite  in
keeping  with  this  that  the  god  is  found  to  have  been
not  infrequently  associated  with  spots  celebrated  for  their
mineral  or  warm  springs,  such  as  Aix-la-Chapelle  or
Aachen,  the  Eoman  name  of  which  was  Aquae  Granni.
Several  other  places  derive  their  name  from  him,  such
as  Graux,  in  the  Yosges,  where  an  inscription1  in  his
honour  was  discovered ;  and  as  the  stream  called  Eaux
Grammes,2  which  receives  the  hot  waters  of  Plombieres
in  the  Vosges ;  and  as  Granheim,  near  Mengen,  in  Wiir-
temberg,  a  spot  in  or  near  which  another  tablet3  to  Gran-
nos  was  found.    Lastly,  Dion  Cassius  tells  us,  lxxvii.  15,


1  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  134;   Mem.  de  la  Soc.  roxjale  des  Antiquaires  de
France  (1823),  v.  p.  xxii.

2  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  144.  3  The  Berlin  Corpus,  iii.  No.  5861.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  25

how  Granmis  was  invoked  as  the  equal  of  Aesculapius
and  Serapis  by  Caracalla.

Apollo  Grannos  as  a  god  of  medicinal  springs  cannot
be  severed  from  the  Apollo  Borvo  of  an  inscription1  at
Bourbonne-les-Bains,  in  the  Haute-Marne,  which  reads
Deo  Apollini  Borvoni  et  Damonae,  &c.  The  monuments
show  the  name  to  have  had  several  forms :  Borvo  and
Bormo  are  said  to  be  attested  in  central  France,  Bormanus
in  Provence,  and  Bormanicus  in  Spain;2  while  the  god's
associate  is  in  some  instances  called  Bormana.  Thus,  to
return  to  the  land  of  the  Allobroges,  one  inscription  at
Aix-les-Bains,  in  Savoie,  has  been  read:  Cn.  Eppius(?)
Cuticus  Bor.  u(t)  v(overat)  s(olvit)  l(ibens)  m(erito) ;
and  another :  M.  Licin(ius)  Euso  Borm.  u(t)  v(overat)
s(olvit)  l(ibens)  m(erito).  In  both  of  these  it  would  be
natural  to  regard  Bor  and  Borm  as  standing  for  Bor-
mano,  unless  the  preference  were  to  be  given  in  one  or
both  to  the  female  divinity,  in  which  case  the  full  form
would  be  Bormanae.  For  it  is  certain  at  any  rate  that
in  another  part  of  the  Allobrogic  land  this  goddess  had  a
temple,  namely,  at  Saint-Yulbaz,  formerly  called  Saint-
Bourbaz,  near  Belley,  in  the  Ain,  where  an  altar  reads :

Bormanae  Aug(ustae)  sacr(um)  Capri(i)  Atratinus

(et)  Sabinian(us)  d(e)  s(uo)  d(ant).3  The  two,  Bormanus
and  Bormana,  were  worshipped  at  Aix-en-Diois,  in  the
department  of  the  Drome;  while  atBourbon-Lancy(Saone-
et-Loire)  the  pair  bore  the  names  Bormo  and  Damona,  as
well  as  Borvo  and  Damona,  as  at  Bourbonne-les-Bains.4

1  Greppo's  Eaux  thermales  ou  minerales  de  la  Gaule  (Paris,  18-16),
p.  29.

2  Vallentin,  Rev.  Celt,  iv.  116.  3  Ibid.  iv.  6,  9.
4  Greppo,  p.  56.


2G  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHE0X.

Among  other  places,  the  god  has  left  his  name  to  Bour-
bon-l'Archambault,  in  the  department  of  the  Allier,
whence  the  Bourbons  derive  theirs.  The  exact  relation
between  the  kindred  forms  Borvo  and  Bormo,  together
with  Bormanus  and  Bormana,  is  not  very  clear ;  but  it  is
Borvo,  and  not  Bormo,  that  is  re-echoed  by  the  French
Bourbon,  Bourbonne ;  and  it  is  Borvo  that  has  its  reflex
in  the  vocabulary  of  the  Celts  of  modern  times :  I  allude
to  the  Welsh  beriv,  'a  boiling,'  berivi,  'to  boil;'  Irish
berbaim,  'I  boil,  cook,  smelt,'  which  are  of  the  same
origin  as  the  Latin  fervere  and  fervere,  i  to  boil  or  to  be
boiling  hot.'  It  does  not  appear  why  the  Gaulish  word
was  Borvo  rather  than  Bervo,  but  there  can  be  no  serious
doubt  as  to  the  close  kinship  of  the  words  mentioned,  or
the  fact  that  the  god  received  his  name  in  allusion  to
the  hot  springs  over  the  bubbling  volume  of  which  he
was  supposed  to  preside.  Whether  he  was  originally
identical  with  the  Gaulish  Apollo  it  is  impossible  to  say,
but  even  in  case  he  was,  he  comes  before  us  in  most  of
the  inscriptions  considerably  disengaged  from  the  Gaulish
Apollo,  as  may  be  gathered  from  his  having  a  distinct
associate  Bormana  or  Damona.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  a
passage  in  one  of  the  Panegyrics  of  Eumenius  is  supposed
to  refer  to  the  hot  springs  of  Bourbon-Lancy:  the  author
would  seem  to  treat  Apollo  as  the  chief  divinity  of  the
place,  and  he  describes  him  as  punishing  perjury  by
means  of  the  boiling  streams,1  though  the  monuments
found  referring  there  to  Borvo  or  Bormo  make  no  allu-
sion to  Apollo's  own  name.

1  Eumenii  Panegyricus  Constantino  Dictns,  xxi,  xxij  (in  Migne's
Potrofogia,  viij  ;  sec  col.  637-8);  Greppo,  pp.  51,  52;  Rev.  Celt.  iv.
144.


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  27

Having  said  so  much  of  the  Gaulish  Apollo,  it  would
hardly  be  fair  to  pass  in  silence  over  the  female  divinity-
associated  with  him.     Her  name  was  Sirona,  sometimes
lisped  into  Dirona,  and  a  monument  now  in  the  museum
at  Munich  gives  a  bas-relief  representation  of  her  and
Apollo  Grannos.1     The  latter  holds  a  very  large  lyre  in
his  left  hand,  and  what  may  have  been  a  plectrum  in  the
other,  while  on  another  face  of  the  stone  stands  Sirona  in
a  long  dress :  she  has  the  general  appearance  of  one  of
the  class  of  Gaulish  divinities  called  Mothers  or  Matrons :
in  her  left  hand  she  has  a  bunch  of  fruit,  and  in  her  right
some  ears  of  corn,  which  she  is  holding  up.     What  rela-
tion she  bore  to  the  god  we  are  nowhere  told ;  but  there
is  nothing  to  suggest  that  she  was  his  wife,  even  if  his
names  Maponus  and  Mogounus  did  not  tend  to  render
such  a  supposition  inadmissible,  which  I  think  they  do.
She  was  probably  regarded  as  his  mother,  and  she  was
certainly  capable  of  being  treated  independently;  for
there  are  monuments  in  honour  of  her  alone.     One  of
these  last  is  surmounted  with  her  bust  in  bas-relief,  and
the  face  seems  to  bear  the  appearance  of  extreme  old  age.
The  sculptor  can  hardly  have  considered  her  the  wife  of
Apollo  Maponus,  nor  need  he  have  represented  her  so
aged  even  as  his  mother.     He  had  probably  a  reason  for
doing  so,  and  this  brings  me  back  to  her  name.     It  will
be  seen  that,  if  we  discard  the  ending  common  to  it  with
such  Gaulish  names  as  Epona,  Divona,  Matrona  and  the
like,  we  have  remaining  only  the  syllable  sir,  which  one
cannot  help  interpreting  in  the  light  of  the  Irish  sir,
Welsh  Mr }  both  of  which  mean  long;  it  would  thus  seem


1  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  137—139.


28  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

that  the  name  Sirona  referred  to  the  goddess  as  one  who
was  held  to  be  aged  and  long-lived.  This  may  be  corro-
borated by  a  related  Irish  name,  Siorna  Saoghlach,1  men-
tioned in  the  mythic  history  of  Ireland :  the  epithet
Saoghlach  means  long-lived,  but  it  was  probably  added  on
as  an  after-thought,  for  Siorna  may  have  already  conveyed
the  same  meaning ;  at  any  rate,  Siorna  may  be  regarded,
according  to  the  ordinary  rules  of  Irish  phonology,  as
representing  an  early  Celtic  form,  Sironjos.  The  person
called  Siorna  is  said  to  have  been  engaged  in  the  govern-
ment of  Ireland  for  a  century  and  a  half ;  and  his  entire
lifetime  may  be  reckoned  as  considerably  longer.  I
venture  accordingly  to  regard  Siorna's  name  as  glossed
by  Saoghlach  or  long-lived,  and  to  treat  the  goddess
Sirona' s  name  in  a  similar  manner.  Thus  we  seem  to
have  in  the  Celtic  Apollo  and  Sirona  the  ever-young  sun-
god  and  an  old  goddess  :  the  pair  invite  comparison  with
the  young  Apollo  of  the  Greeks  and  his  mother  Leto ;
but  Greek  mythology  sheds  no  decided  light  on  the  aged-
ness  of  the  mother  as  represented  by  Gaulish  remains.
The  same  remark  applies  to  what  I  take  to  be  the  equi-
valents in  Welsh  mythology,  of  which  a  word  must  now
be  said ;  for  it  has  already  been  mentioned  that  Maponos
is  in  Welsh  mabon  ;  but  it  should  be  added  that  it  also
occurs  as  a  proper  name  in  the  Welsh  story  of  Kulhwch
and  Olwen ;  to  be  more  correct,  one  should  say  that  the
proper  name  was  Mdbon  mab  Moclron  or  '  Mabon  son  of


1  See  The  Annals  of  the  Kingdom  of  Ireland  [compiled,  in  the  17th
century,  by  the  Four  Masters,  and  edited  by  O'Donovan  (second  edi-
tion, Dublin,  1856),  a  work  which  will  briefly  be  referred  to  as  the
'Four  Masters'  in  the  rest  of  this  volume],  A.M.  4003,  4019,  4020,
41G9,  4178.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  29

Modron.'  The  latter  was  the  mother's  name,  and  is  a
word  of  the  same  origin  as  the  Latin  matrdna,  though  it
would  have  sounded  in  early  Celtic  matrona,  which,  as
the  name  of  the  river  in  France  now  called,  by  a  short-
ened form  of  the  word,  the  Marne,  was  its  pronuncia-
tion. One  cannot  help  suspecting  that  in  Mabon  and
Modron — the  father's  name  is  never  mentioned — we  have
the  exact  equivalents  of  Grannos  and  Sirona,  and  one's
curiosity  is  at  once  roused  to  inquire  what  Welsh  litera-
ture has  to  say  about  the  former.  We  are,  however,
doomed  in  part  to  disappointment :  the  few  allusions  to
Modron  are  so  obscure  that  they  have  not  yet  succeeded
in  teaching  us  anything  definite  as  to  her  attributes ;  but
the  story  of  Kulhwch  tells  us  the  following  things  about
her  son.  He  was  a  great  hunter,  who  had  a  wonderful
hound,  and  rode  on  a  steed  swift  as  a  wave  of  the  sea :
when  he  was  three  nights  old  he  was  stolen  from  between
his  mother  and  the  wall,  no  one  knew  whither  :  number-
less ages  later,  it  was  ascertained  by  Arthur  that  he  was
in  a  stone  prison  at  Gloucester,  uttering  heartrending
groans  and  undergoing  treatment  with  which  Apollo's
bondage  in  the  house  of  Admetus  could  not  compare  in
severity  :  Arthur  and  his  men  succeeded  in  releasing  him
to  engage  in  the  mythic  hunt  of  Twrch  Trwyth  that
could  not  take  place  without  him  : x  and  lastly,  he  distin-
guished himself  by  riding  into  the  waters  of  the  Bristol
Channel  after  Twrch  Trwyth  and  despoiling  him  of  one
of  his  trinkets.2

1  The  Text  of  the  Mabinogion,  &c,  from  the  Red  Book  of  Hergest,
edited  by  Rhys  &  Evans  (Oxford,  1887),  pp.  124,  131-2.  [This  text
will  hereafter  be  referred  to  as  R.  B.  Mab.]  Guest's  Mabinogion,  ij.
287-8,  300-1.

2  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  HI ;  Guest,  ii.  315.


30  I.     THE    GAULISH   PAJNTTHEON.

The  third  epithet  of  the  god  which  has  been  mentioned
was  that  of  Toutiorix,  which  occurs  in  an  inscription  at
Wiesbaden  containing  the  datives  Apollini  Toutiorigi.1
That  neighbourhood,  you  will  notice,  is  also  celebrated
for  its  waters,  and  the  interest  attaching  to  the  word
Toutiorix  is  out  of  all  proportion  to  its  single  occurrence.
It  can  only  mean  king  of  the  people,  which  as  applied  to
the  god  reminds  one  of  the  role  of  Apollo  in  the  history
of  the  Hellenic  race,  that  gave  him  the  titles  of  leader  and
founder — apx^y"-^  KTwmjs,  chWttjs.  The  name  Toutiorix,
for  which  one  would  have  expected  Toutorix,  has  its
modern  representative  in  the  Welsh  Tudri,  old  Welsh
Tutri:  it  is  also  well  known  among  Teutonic  nations  from
the  time  of  Strabo,  who  gives  it  as  AevSo>£,  while  Byzan-
tine authors  preferred  QevStpixos  or  0eoSe>x°s ;  and  Latin
writers  supply  us  with  Tkeodoricus,  whence  the  form
usual  in  English  books,  Theodoric,  which  comes  pretty
near  the  Anglo-Saxon  sj)elling  Theodric.  The  corre-
sponding High  German  is  Dietrich,  so  well  known  as
that  of  Dietrich  of  Bern,  where  Bern  is  the  German  for
Verona.  Now  the  great  historical  Teuton  of  this  name
was  a  remarkable  king  of  the  Ostrogoths,  and  conqueror
of  Italy  in  the  5  th  century  :  Yerona  was  one  of  his  head-
quarters. But  it  is  found  that  with  his  history  so  much
unhistorical  matter  has  been  incorporated,  that  modern
authors  usually  distinguish  between  the  historical  man
as  Theodoric  the  Great,  and  a  mythical  personage  to
whom  the  name  Dietrich  von  Bern  is  left.  Many  attempts
have  been  made  to  disentangle  the  legends  from  the  his-


1  Brambach.,  No.  1529.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  31

torical  portions  of  the  story  of  the  Teutonic  conqueror;1
but  it  has  never  been  satisfactorily  shown  why  such  and
such  mythic  stories  should  have  attached  themselves  to
this  particular  man.  The  inscription  alluded  to  yields
the  key :  the  historical  Teuton  bore  one  of  the  names  of
the  Gaulish  Apollo,  and  the  eventual  confusion  of  myth
and  history  was  thereby  made  easy.  This  is  borne  out
by  the  general  similarity  between  the  mythic  statements
made  about  Dietrich  and  what  is  known  in  Celtic  lite-
rature about  Celtic  sun-gods.  Among  other  things  may
be  mentioned  his  riding,  like  Mabon,  into  the  sea  after
an  enemy,  who  was  only  enabled  to  escape  by  the  inter-
vention of  a  mermaid,  who  was  his  ancestress.  As  one
of  Dietrich's  solar  peculiarities  may  probably  be  men-
tioned his  breathing  fire  whenever  he  was  made  angry ;
and,  like  more  than  one  of  the  Celtic  sun-heroes,  he  is
made  to  fight  with  giants  and  all  manner  of  wild  beasts.
One  of  the  localities  associated  with  his  story  is  the  well-
known  Drachenf  els  above  Bonn  ;  nor  is  it  beside  the  mark
to  mention  that  Yerona  was  the  name  not  only  of  a  city
in  Italy,  but  also  one  of  the  ancient  names  of  Bonn,2  a
town  which  is,  like  Wiesbaden,  situated  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  Ehine.  It  has  puzzled  historians
that  Theodoric,  the  grandest  figure  in  the  history  of
the  migration  of  the  Teutonic  peoples,   should  appear


1  One  of  the  most  recent  writers  on  this  subject  is  Wilhelm  Muller,
in  his  Mythologie  der  deutschen  Heldensage  (Heilbronn,  188G),  pp.
148 — 189  ;  and  a  succinct  account  of  the  original  literature  embodying
the  Dietrich  legend  will  be  found  in  Karl  Meyer's  Dietrichssage  (Basle,
1868),  pp.  4—9.

2  W.  Muller,  p.  186;  Jahrbucher  des  Vereins  von  Alterthumsfreun-
den  im  Rheinlandet  i.  12 — 21,  xiij.  1.


32  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHE0X.

in  the  Nibeltmgen  Lied,  not  as  a  great  king  and  con-
queror on  his  own  account,  but  merely  as  a  faithful
squire  of  the  terrible  Attila,  whose  empire  had  in  fact
crumbled  into  dust  before  the  birth  of  Theodoric.1  But
from  the  mythological  point  of  view,  the  subordinate
position  ascribed  to  Theodoric  is  quite  correct,  and  it
serves  to  show  how  profoundly  the  man's  history  has
been  influenced  by  the  legend  of  the  Celtic  god.

Mars.

The  next  god  to  be  mentioned  in  the  order  adopted
by  Caesar  is  Mars ;  and  an  inscription  at  Chougny,  near
Geneva,  equates  with  him  a  Gaulish  god  called  Caturix.
It  reads  thus :  Marti  Catur(igi)  sacr(um),  pro  salut(e)
et  incolumitate  D.  Val(erii)  Am(a)ti,  Sex.  Cr(is)pin(ius)
Nigrinus  v(otum)  s(olvit)  l(ibens)  m(erito).2  This  form
of  the  god's  name  is  rendered  certain  by  that  of  an  in-
scription at  Stuttgardt  in  Wiirtemberg,  in  which  Marti
Caturigi3  is  written  in  full,  and  by  a  third  instance,
namely,  one  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Yverdon  in
Switzerland.4  The  word  Caturix  is  a  compound,  meaning
the  king  of  war  or  lord  of  battle,  from  catu,  which  is  in
Welsh  cad,  and  in  Irish  cath,  l  a  battle,'  and  fix,  i  a  king,'
in  Welsh  rhi  and  in  Irish  ri,  genitive  rig :  the  cognates  of
both  words  are  so  familiar  that  I  need  not  enumerate
them.     The  plural  Caturigcs  was  the  well-known  name

1  See  Hodgkin's  Italy  and  her  Invaders  (Oxford,  1885),  iij.  341.

2  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  10;  Mommseu,  Insc.  Helvet.  No.  70;  Allmer,  iij.
255.

3  Brambach,  No.  1588.

4  De  Bonstetten,  Receuil  a"  Aniiquites  Suisse  s  (Berne,  1855),  pp.  35,37.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  33

of  a  Gaulish  people ;  and,  transferred  to  their  town,  it  is
now  continued  in  the  abbreviated  form  of  Chorges.  The
Teutonic  name  of  the  same  etymology  was  common  as
that  of  a  man,  and  in  fact  is  still  so :  witness  the  Anglo-
Saxon  Heactoric,  the  modern  German  Hedrich,  and  other
variations  of  the  same  compound.

Another  Allobrogic  inscription  gives  the  Gaulish  Mars
another  name :  an  altar  found  at  Culoz,  near  Belley,
in  the  department  of  Ain  reads:  N"(umini)  Aug(usto),
Deo  Marti  Segomoni  Dunati,  Cassia  Saturnina  ex  vot(o),
v(otum)  s(oluit)  l(ibens)  m(erito).1  Segomo  is  known
to  us  by  other  inscriptions  at  Arinthod 2  in  the  Jura,  at
Contes3  near  Nice,  at  Lyons,4  and  at  Nuits  in  the  Cote
d'Or.  The  god's  name  is  found  also  in  Ireland;  for
with  the  word  netta  (in  later  Irish  nia,5  genitive  math
or  niadh,  'a  champion  or  warrior'),  it  forms  the  per-
sonal name  Netta- Scgamonas,  which  may  be  rendered
Propugnatoris  Segomom's,  '  (of)  Segomo's  Champion.'  It
was  a  kind  of  name  very  congenial  to  ancient  Irish  ideas,
and  it  occurs  in  three6  distinct  Ogam  inscriptions  in  the

1  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  11;  Rev.  Archcoloyique  (1S52),  ix.  315.

2  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  11;  Monnier,  Annuaire  du  Jura  for  1852,  plate  1,
which  I  have  not  heen  able  to  consult.

3  Mem.  de  la  Soc.  des  Ant  de  France  (1850),  xx.  58-9.

4  Gruter,  lviii.  5.

5  Rhys,  Lectures,  p.  395  ;  Stokes,  Celtic  Declension,  which  appeared
first  in  Vol.  xi.  of  Bezzenberger's  Beitrcege  (Gottiugen,  188G),  p.  87.

6  Nevertheless,  the  name  is  not  given  by  Brash  in  his  book  on  The
Ogam  inscribed  Monuments  of  the  Gaedhil ;  but  by  correctly  reading
Brash's  copies  I  had  detected  it  in  the  case  of  the  Stradbally  inscrip-
tion (Brash,  p.  254,  pi.  xxxv),  and  of  one  of  those  at  Ardmore  (Brash,
p.  247).  In  1883  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing,  by  inspection  of  the
stones,  that  my  readings  were  correct,  and  also  of  finding  Netas(eyam)-
onas  in  an  inscription  at  Seskinan  (Brash,  p.  262).

D


34  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

county  of  Waterford;  it  is  also  to  be  found  in  lists  of
the  early  kings  of  Erinn.1  The  exact  signification  of  the
god's  name  Segomo  is  not  easy  to  fix  :  it  may  have  meant
the  strong  one,  the  holder  or  upholder,  the  defender  or
protector,  or  else  the  victorious  one  that  overpowers
and  conquers  :  all  one  can  feel  certain  about  is,  that
the  word  is  derived  from  the  root  segh  or  sagh,  l  to  hold,
restrain,  withstand,  overpower,'  from  which  such  words
come  as  the  Greek  Zxw,  1 I  hold  or  have,'  zvxov,  ia-x^,  eXvp6s,
and  the  like,  also  the  Gothic  sigis  and  the  German  sieg,
1  victory.'  It  is  clear,  however,  that  such  a  name  would
suit  the  god,  whether  viewed  more  especially  as  the  chief
of  the  gods  or  as  a  mighty  and  victorious  warrior.

Let  us  now  return  to  Segomo's  epithet  Dunates.  Here
again  uncertainty  must  prevail,  whether  the  word  be
derived  or  not  from  the  name  of  a  place  ;  but  no  archaeolo-
gist has,  so  far  as  I  know,  been  able  to  identify  any  place-
name  in  point :  so  we  are  at  liberty  to  interpret  the  epithet
in  another  way  and  to  refer  it  to  the  same  origin  as  the
duniim,  Gaulish  dunon,  of  such  names  as  Augustodumim
or  Autun  and  Lugdunum  or  Lyons.  This  dun-  is  of  the
same  etymology  as  the  familiar  English  word  town  and
the  German  zaun,  '  a  hedge  or  field-fence ;'  but  its  long
vowel  was  probably  pronounced  as  it  is  in  modern  French;
for  the  Welsh  equivalent  is  din,  '  a  fortress  or  stronghold,'
whence  dinas,  '  a  fortress,  town  or  city.'  The  Irish  is  dun,
of  the  same  meaning,  but  of  a  different  declension ;  but

1  Nia  Segamain  in  the  Book  of  Fenagh,  edited  by  Prof.  Hennessy
(Dublin,  1875),  p.  29,  and  simply  Nia  at  p.  56;  the  Four  Masters,
A.M.  4881,  4887,  4990,  write  Nia  SedJiamain  (dative)  and  Niadh
Sedhamain  (genitive).  The  older  and  more  correct  forms  would  be,
genitive  Segamon  or  Segaman,  dative  Segamain,  unless  there  was  an
optional  0-stem.


1.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  35

Irish  has  further  a  derived  verb  dunaim,  1 1  shut  or  bar-
ricade,' and  dunad,  '  a  camp,  an  array.'  Hence  it  would
seem  that  Segomo  Dunates  meant  either  Segomo  the  sur-
rounder  and  defender,  or  else  Segomo  as  the  god  who
presided  over  the  stronghold,  the  camp  and  the  army,
that  is  to  say,  a  Gaulish  Mars  Castrensis.  Lastly,  two
inscriptions  at  Bouhy,1  in  the  department  of  the  Nievre,
are  dedicated  to  Mars  Bolvinnus,  and  one  of  them  to
Marti  Bolvhmo  et  Duna(ti).  This  is  a  considerable  dis-
tance from  the  place  of  finding  the  Allobrogic  inscription  ;
so  that  if  the  name  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  topical  epithet
of  the  god,  it  must  refer  to  some  celebrated  temple  of
his,  like  that  of  Mercury  on  the  Puy  de  Dome ;  but  as
no  such  temple  has  been  heard  of,  the  probability  is
strengthened  that  Dunates  is  to  be  interpreted  in  one  of
the  ways  suggested.

Mention  has  already  been  made  of  Segomo  Cuntinus2
connected  with  Conte;  there  was  also  a  Mars  Yintius,  who
was  worshipped  at  Yence,  near  Nice,  and  who  gave  the
former  place  its  name :  this  is  proved  by  an  inscription
found  on  the  spot,  mentioning  Marti  Vint  to.  Vintius,
in  Gaulish  Vintjos,  must  have  meant  'relating  to  the
wind,1  as  it  is  of  the  same  origin  as  the  English  word,
the  Welsh  givynt,  Latin  ventus ;  but,  more  exactly,
Vintjos  is  an  adjective  from  ventos,  which  was  probably
the  Gaulish  word  for  wind,  and  from  Ventjos  was  pro-
duced by  a  modulation  of  the  vowel  the  attested  form.
It  is  remarkable  that  the  Welsh  gwynt,  wind,  is  the  exact

1  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  12;  Con; /res  Arch,  de  France,  1873,  p.  215.  Can
Bouhy  and  Bolcumus  be  of  the  same  origin  ?

2  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  12;  Mem.  de  la  Soc.  des  Ant.  de  France  (1850),
xx.  59.

D  2


36  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

equivalent,  not  of  the  simpler  noun  meaning  wind,  but
of  the  adjective  denoting  the  wind-god.  Several  reasons
might  be  adduced  why  the  wind  should  be  associated
with  the  war-god ;  among  others,  it  might  be  suggested
that  all  violent  gales  that  commit  general  havoc  and
destruction  might  not  unnaturally  be  referred  to  the
agency  of  the  god  of  war.  But  the  wind  is  not  always
destructive,  not  always  adverse ;  it  is  sometimes  the  fair
breeze  for  which  the  mariner  whistles.  So  it  happens  that
Yintios,  associated  with  fair  wind,  is  found  identified  with
Pollux,  a  god  propitious  to  sailors.  This  is  attested  by  an
Allobrogic  inscription1  on  an  altar  at  Seyssel,  in  Haute-
Savoie,  reading :  Deo  Yintio  Polluci,  Cn.  Terentius,  Bil-
lonis  fil(ius)  Terentianus,  ex  voto.  Another,  in  which
Vint  ins  stands  alone,  was  found  in  the  Yigne  des  Idoles,
near  the  castle  of  Hauteville 2  in  the  same  department,  and

reads:  Aug(usto)  Yin(tio)  sacr(um),  T.  Yalerius  ( )

Crispinus,    sacer  Yinti   pra3f(ectus)  Pag(i)   Dia( )

sedem  d(at).  The  navigation  of  the  Ehone  at  the  pre-
sent day  begins  at  Seyssel,  and  in  Eoman  times  the
mariners  of  that  river  formed  a  powerful  and  influential
body  which  had  its  head-quarters  at  Lyons :  one  old
inscription  describes  it  as  a  splendidissimum  corpus.3  It
is  probable  that  the  god  Yintios  had  many  temples  and
altars  in  that  neighbourhood,  and  the  site  of  one  of  them
is  marked  out  by  the  name  Yence  or  Yens,  borne  by  a
hill  near  Seyssel,  at  whose  foot  stands  now  a  chapel
dedicated  to  the  Yirgin,  who  is  in  great  esteem  among
the  boatmen  of  the  Ehone :    their  ancestors   doubtless

1  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  23 ;  Allmer,  iii.  243.

2  Rev.  Celt.  ib. ;  Allmer,  ii.  345.  3  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  24.


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  37

worshipped  and  supplicated  Yintios  on  the  same  spot.
The  curious  instance  we  have  here  of  a  Gaulish  god
being,  so  to  say,  split  up  into  two  Latin  ones,  throws
some  light  on  the  treatment  which  the  Gaulish  deities
experienced  under  the  influence  of  Eome.  For  we  are
under  no  necessity  to  suppose  with  M.  Yallentin1  that
the  Gaulish  mind  regarded  the  Yintios  at  Nice  as  a  sepa-
rate and  distinct  deity  from  the  Seyssel  one.  The  Gaulish
wind-god  was  more  probably  one,  whether  the  wind  he
granted  at  a  particular  moment  happened  to  be  fair  or
foul.  There  was  a  mythological  reason  for  associating
the  wind  with  the  Celtic  war-god,  as  will  be  seen  later :
hence  the  difficulty  in  rendering  his  personality  in  the
terms  of  Latin  theology.  So  long  as  it  was  a  question
of  the  wind  as  a  violent  or  malignant  agency,  the  equa-
tion of  Yintios  with  Mars  would  doubtless  fit ;  but  when
the  wind  was  favourable  to  the  mariner,  then  Mars  was
probably  thought  out  of  place,  which  led  to  the  prefer-
ence for  Pollux.

The  names  and  epithets  borne  by  the  Celtic  war-god
beyond  the  limits  of  the  Allobrogic  land  are  too  numerous
to  be  discussed  one  by  one  here,  and  I  will  only  call  your
attention  to  a  few  of  them.  Several  inscriptions  in  honour
of  Mars  Cocidius2  have  been  found  in  this  country ;  but
the  meaning  of  the  word  Cocidius  is  unknown,  as  well  as
that  of  a  related  form  Cocosus,3  which  also  occurs.  A
more  transparent  epithet  is  Belatucadrns,  given  the  god  on
monuments  also  found  here.4    This  is  a  Celtic  compouud

1  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  25.  2  Hiibner,  Nos.  286,  643,  886,  914,  977.

3  Gaidoz,  Esquisse,  10.

4  Hiibner,  Nos.  294,  333,  369,  745,  873,  934,  935.  Belatucadms
ends  with  a  word  to  be  identified  with  the  Welsh  each;  '  powerful,


38  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

meaning  handsome  in  the  slaughter  or  mighty  to  kill.
The  epithet  was  doubtless  meant  as  a  flattering  one,
acceptable  to  the  god  in  his  character  of  warrior  and
slaughterer  of  his  worshippers'  enemies.

The  next  to  be  mentioned  is  Camulos,  which  I  hesitate
to  call  an  epithet,  as  it  is  not  a  compound  and  possibly
not  an  adjective,    but  a  noun,   and   one  of  the  god's


strong,  robust;'  Breton  caer,  formerly  cazr,  'beautiful,  fine,  magnifi-
cent :'  so  the  whole  word  means  fine  or  powerful  at  the  kind  of  action
indicated  by  the  vocable  belatu,  which  has  the  appearance  of  being  a
"verbal  noun.  We  have  the  stem  bel  (mutated  into  fel  and  pronounced
vel)  in  the  Welsh  word  for  war,  namely,  rhyfel ;  it  is  also  added  to
oer,  '  cold/  to  make  oerfel,  l  cold  weather,'  or  cold  as  productive  of
inconvenience  and  harm.  Again,  we  have  it  in  ufel,  '  fire  or  conflagra-
tion,' Irish  oibell,  oibel,  which  meant  a  spark,  fire  or  heat,  and  was
applied,  for  instance,  to  the  summer  heat  that  drives  cattle  to  stand
in  pools ;  the  other  element  in  these  words  is  the  Celtic  reflex  of
the  first  syllable  of  the  Greek  avo>  or  of  the  Latin  uro,  '  I  burn.'
Irish  supplies  us  with  a  strung  verb  from  the  stem  bel,  as  in  bebla
(for  be-bela),  'mortuus  est,'  atbail,  'interit,'  atbel,  'peribo.'  A  cor-
responding Welsh  compound  has  yielded  a  derivative  adfeilio,  '  to
decay  or  fall  into  ruins ; '  but  the  Irish  verb  had  as  its  base  bel,  mean-
ing '  to  die,'  while  belatu  implies  a  derivative  verb  from  a  theme  beta,
associated  probably  with  a  modified  meaning,  namely,  the  causative
one  of  killing  or  slaying ;  and  an  instance  of  it  occurs  in  Welsh  in  a
poem  in  the  Book  of  Taliessin,  where  reference  is  made  to  the  cattle  of
the  Egyptians  killed  by  the  fifth  plague  or  the  grievous  murrain  spoken
of  in  the  Book  of  Exodus,  ix.  1 — 7.  See  Skene,  ii.  171,  where  the
form  used  is  belsit,  which  would  seem  to  mean  'had  been  killed.'
Having  found  a  strong  verb  bel,  we  ought  to  be  able  to  identify  it  in
some  of  the  kindred  languages  :  now  the  Aryan  combination  gv  becomes
b  in  Celtic,  while  in  the  Teutonic  languages  it  would  be  hardened  into
cw  or  qu  ;  so  we  look  in  them  for  a  verb  beginning  with  quel  or  cioel
to  correspond  to  our  Celtic  bel,  and  we  readily  find  it,  without  going
out  of  this  country,  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  verb  cicelan,  '  to  die  or  perish,'
from  which  was  formed  a  causative  cicellan  or  cicelian,  '  to  slay  or  cause
to  perish,'  represented  by  the  modern  English  verb  to  kill.


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  39

proper  names,  like  Segomo.  An  inscription  recording
the  building  of  a  temple  for  Mars  Camulus  has  been  met
with  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Diisseldorf,1  and  others  are
known  elsewhere2  on  the  Continent,  while  one  is  preserved
in  a  museum  at  Glasgow.3  It  is  right  to  say  that  most  of
the  Eoman  inscriptions  found  in  this  island  may  be  the
outcome  of  the  piety  of  continental  Celts,  so  that  the  gods
in  whose  honour  they  were  set  up  were  not  necessarily
worshipped  by  the  natives  of  Britain ;  but  even  here  we
have  evidence  of  the  popularity  of  Camulos  in  the  name
of  the  capital  of  the  Trinovantes,  which  was  Camulodunon,
or  the  stronghold  of  Camulos.4  The  meaning  of  the  god's
name  is  regarded  as  unknown,  but  a  very  safe  conjecture
may  be  made  on  that  point ;  for  though  there  is  a  scarcity
of  Celtic  words  to  explain  it,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that
it  is  to  be  equated  with  the  Old  Saxon  himil  and  the
German  word  himmel,  heaven  or  sky,  which  etymologists
refer  to  a  stem,  hem,  Aryan  kam,  inferred  to  mean  l  curv-
ing, vaulting  or  covering  over.'  Among  other  words
from  this  origin  have  been  reckoned  the  Greek  Kapapaf


1  Brambach,  164.

2  At  Rome  :  see  the  Berlin  Corpus,  vi.  No.  46  ;  and  a  Camido  Viro-
manduo  is  reported  from  Auvergne  in  the  Rev.  des  Soc.  sav.  (1875),
i.  251.

3  Hiibner,  1103.

4  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  in  the  post-Roman  personal
names  Camelvrigi  from  Pembrokeshire,  and  Camidoris,  Camuloriijlto,
fiom  Anglesey  1  For  some  notes  on  them,  see  my  Lectures,  pp.  364,
400.  The  name  Camidogcnus,  which  Caesar  {Bell.  Gall  vii.  57,  59,
62)  gives  the  defender  of  Paris  against  the  legions  of  Rome,  would
mean  the  descendant  of  Camulos,  and  similarly  Camulorpiata.

5  On  the  difficulties  of  this  etymology,  see  Kluge's  Etym.  Wvrtcr-
buch  des  deufsehen  >$j>raehe,  s.  v.  Himmel.


40  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

1  anything  covered  or  arched  over,'  such  as  a  vaulted
chamber,  a  covered  barge,  or  a  tester  bed  ;  Lat.  camera,
'a  vault,  an  arch,  a  chamber;'  camurus,  'crooked,  curved;'
Zend  kamara,  l  a  vault,  a  girdle ; '  kamaredha,  '  the  skull
or  the  head,'  with  which  is  connected  the  Greek  {xkXadpov,
i  the  ceiling  of  a  room  or  the  main  beam  that  bears  it,
the  roof,  a  house : '  this  supposes  the  Greek  noun  to
stand  for  ttpekadpov,  and  to  be  identical  with  an  attested
KfjicXedpov^  explained  to  mean  rds  Sokovs,  c  the  beams  or
timber  of  a  house.'  As  a  personal  name,  Camulos  has
its  etymological  equivalent  in  later  Celtic  in  that  of
Cumall,  king-warrior  of  Ireland  and  father  of  the  great
Finn,  whose  doings  occupy  so  much  room  in  Goidelic
story.  The  name  is  to  be  compared  in  the  first  instance
with  that  of  Ovpavos  or  Uranus  and  the  Sanskrit  Yarunas ;
but  as  that  of  a  Celtic  Mars  one  should  undoubtedly
regard  it  as  a  synonym  rather  of  the  Greek  Zeus  or
Italian  Jove,  both  of  which  names  were  expressive  also
of  the  idea  of  the  sky  or  the  heavens.  In  the  light  of  this
explanation  it  becomes  intelligible  how  the  Celtic  Mars,
associated  with  the  sky,  should  have  to  do  with  the  wind,
as  proved  by  his  Gaulish  title  of  Vintios  ;  and  in  answer
to  the  question  what  a  god  thus  associated  with  the  sky
should  have  to  do  with  war,  let  it  for  the  present  suffice
to  say  that  throughout  the  literatures  of  Greece  and
Eome,  Zeus  or  Jove  was  the  supreme  arbiter  of  the  for-
tunes of  war.  It  may  be  hazardous  perhaps  to  construe
in  the  same  sense  the  words  from  the  Big- Veda  about
Dyu  or  Dyaushpitar  as  a  god  of  mighty  works :  I  refer
to  a  hymn  to  his  son  Indra,  who  mostly  superseded  him,
and  the  passage  is  thus  rendered  by  Prof.  Max  Mtiller :
'  Dyu,  thy  parent,  was  reputed  strong,  the  maker  of  Indra


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  41

was  mighty  in  his  works ;  he  (who)  begat  the  heavenly
Indra,  armed  with  the  thunderbolt,  who  is  immoveable,
as  the  earth,  from  his  seat.'1  But  there  can  be  no  such
doubt  with  regard  to  the  Teutonic  Tiu,  whose  name  (Anglo-
Saxon  Tin,  gen.  Tiues  ;  old  H.  German  Ziu,  gen.  Ziives  ;
old  Norse  Tyr,  gen.  Tys)  is  etymologically  identical  with
Zeus  and  Dyu,  while  all  the  little  that  is  known  of  him
makes  him  the  war-god  of  the  Teutons,  before  he  was
surpassed  and  superseded  by  Woden :  witness  the  name
of  the  day  which  Frenchmen  and  Welshmen  call  the  day
of  Mars — English  Tuesday,  Ger.  Dienstag,  formerly  Zies-
tay,  Old  Norse  Tysdayr  and  Tyrsdayr.  The  only  differ-
ence, then,  between  Sky  as  the  war -god  of  the  early
Teutons  and  that  of  the  Gauls,  was  that  the  latter  chose
to  render  Zeus,  Jove  and  Dyu,  by  another  word  meaning
equally  the  sky  or  the  heavens,  and  that  word  was
Camulos.  The  Gauls  stood  between  the  Eomans  and
the  Teutons :  linguistic  affinities  connect  the  Celtic  lan-
guages closely  with  the  Aryan  dialects  of  ancient  Italy ;
but  since  I  began  to  write  these  lectures,  I  have  been
repeatedly  impressed  by  the  striking  similarity  between
the  ancient  theologies  of  Celts  and  Teutons,  and  we
have  here  an  instance  in  point.  There  is,  however,
further  evidence  to  prove  beyond  doubt  the  identity  of
the  Teutonic  Tiu  with  the  Celtic  war-god  under  another
name  than  Camulos,  but  the  discussion  of  it  must  be
postponed.  Let  it  suffice  for  the  present  that  we  have
discovered  the  Jupiter  of  the  Celts,  and  found  that
Gaulish  theology  ascribed  to  him  the  discharge  of  func-


1  Max  Miiller's  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Languages*,  ij.  473;  Rig-
Veda,  iv.  17,  4.


42  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

tions  wliich  the  Romans  would  have  regarded  as  more
properly  belonging  to  Mars.

Such  a  god  as  I  have  alluded  to  must  have  once  been
the  greatest  of  all  the  Celtic  gods,  the  chief  of  the  Celtic
pantheon,  a  conjecture  which  is  favoured  by  the  natural
interpretation  of  some  of  the  attested  epithets  of  the  Celtic
Mars.  Take,  for  instance,  the  dative  Rigisamo,1  which
occurs  in  an  inscription  found  in  this  country,  in  the
county  of  Somerset.  The  word  seems  to  be  a  superlative,
meaning  most  royal  or  kingly.  A  still  more  remarkable
epithet  was  Albiorix,  applied  to  him  in  an  inscription2  in  a
museum  at  Avignon.  The  compound  should  mean  king  or
ruler  of  Albio,  a  word  which  may  be  identified  with  the
Welsh  word  ;elfyd,'  used  by  Welsh  poets  in  the  sense
of  the  world  or  the  universe :  so  we  may  suppose  that
Albiorix  signified  king  of  the  world.  Lastly,  the  war-
god's  associate  is  called  Nemetona  on  the  monuments,  as,
for  instance,  on  one  at  Bath.3  She  has  been  identified
by  M.  Gaidoz4  with  Nemon,  the  wife,  according  to  Irish
tradition,  of  N&,  the  war-god  of  the  ancient  Irish.  Ano-
ther tradition,  however,  gives  to  the  latter  as  his  wife  the


1  Hiibner,  61.

2  Orelli-Henzen,  Vol.  iij.  No.  5867;  J.  de  Wal,  Mythologiae  Sep-
tenlriunalis  Monumenta  epigraphica  Latina,  No.  ccxcij.;  L'Institut  for
1841,  p.  160.

3  Hiibner,  36.

4  Esquisse,  p.  10 ;  but  this  is  not  certain,  and  the  name  seems  to  be
the  same  that  was  meant  by  Nidmdn  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  81  b,
printed  in  O'Curry's  Manners,  &c,  iij.  418-9.  The  former,  I  may  say
in  passing,  is  a  MS.  of  the  1 2th  century,  and  my  reference  is  to  the
lithographed  facsimile  published  with  an  introduction  by  Prof.  Atkin-
son, Dublin,  1880.


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  43

war-goddess  called  the  Morrigu,  which  is  important,  as
her  name  means  the  great  qneen.  "Why  she  should  have
been  so  called  has  always  appeared  a  puzzle,  but  it  becomes
at  once  intelligible  if  we  suppose  her  husband  as  war-
god  to  have  been  once  the  supreme  or  great  god  of  the
Goidels:  the  role  assigned  her  by  Irish  mythology  is,
caeteris  paribus,  not  very  unlike  that  of  Here  or  Juno ;
but  it  is  her  name  that  chiefly  concerns  us  at  this  point.
It  is  further  to  be  noticed  that  with  the  Morrigu  Irish
literature  is  wont  to  associate  another  war-fury  called  the
Bodb  (or  Baclb)  Catha ;  nor  is  it  clear  that  the  two  names
may  not  have  originally  referred  to  one  and  the  same
mythological  being ;  but,  be  that  as  it  may,  one  finds  a
Gaulish  goddess  who  bore  inferentially  much  the  same
name  as  the  Irish  Bodb  Catha,  as  proved  by  an  Allo-
brogic  altar  discovered  in  the  commune  of  Mieussy  in
Haute-Savoie.  In  its  present  state  it  reads:1  Athu-
bodvae  Aug(ustae),  Servilia  Terentia  (votum)  s(olvit)
l(ibens)  m(erito).  But  as  the  stone  is  imperfect  on
the  right  side,  it  is  conjectured  that  the  full  name
was  Cathubodvae,  which  has  been  supposed  to  stand  for
Catubodvae.  Although  our  knowledge  of  Gaulish  does
not  suffice  to  enable  us  to  show  that  Athubodva  was  an
impossible  form,  still  Cathubodva  appears  to  coincide  in  a
manner  which  can  hardly  be  the  result  of  accident  with
the  Irish  Bodb  Catha,  in  which  we  have  the  compound
name  analysed.  This  last  meant  the  Bodb  of  war  and
carnage,  to  whom  Irish  literature  makes  frequent  refer-
ence. The  signification  of  the  word  bodva  or  bodb  may
readily  be  guessed  from  the  fact  that  it  corresponds  letter

1  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  19.


44  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

for  letter  to  the  Anglo-Saxon  beadu  and  the  Norse  'bod,'
<  war  or  battle.'  This  vocable,  both  in  its  Celtic  and  its
Teutonic  forms,  enters  freely  into  the  composition  of
proper  names  of  men ;  but  it  will  here  suffice  to  mention
the  Bodvogenus  of  another  inscription.  It  would  mean
a  man  descended  from  the  goddess  Bodva ;  and-  much  the
same  must  have  been  the  import  of  the  Gaulish  Bod-
vognatus,2  a  name  to  be  detected  reduced  in  Welsh  to
Bodnod.  The  equation,  if  well  grounded,  of  the  name
of  the  Gaulish  goddess  with  that  of  the  Irish  war-fury,
would  imply  that  her  cult  was  widely  spread,  and  that
she  was  a  considerable  figure  in  the  Celtic  pantheon,
whether  she  is  to  be  identified  or  not  with  the  M6rrigu
or  great  queen.

Lastly,  the  poet  Lucan  makes  us  acquainted  with
another  important  designation  of  the  war -god,  in  his
well  known  lines  in  the  Pharscdia,  i.  444,  &c. :

'  Et  quibus  immitis  placatur  sanguine  diro
Teutates,  horrensque  feris  altaribus  Hesus ;
Et  Taranis  Scythicse  non  mitior  ara  Dianse.'

The  name  of  the  first  of  Lucan's  triad  occurs  in  an
inscription  found  in  Hertfordshire,  which  gives  the  dative
Marti  Toutati2  and  one  cannot  help  regarding  Toutates


1  Caesar,  Bell.  Gall.  ii.  23.

2  Hiibner,  No.  84.  An  inscription  found  at  York,  and  another  at
old  Carlisle,  suggest  the  respective  spellings  Totati  (Hiibner,  Ephemeris
Epigraphica,  iii.  313,  No.  181)  and  TutaU  Cocidio  (ibid.  p.  128;  Hiibner,
No.  335) :  they  are  difficult  to  read,  but  Totati  is  countenanced  by  the
name  Totatigens  borne  by  a  Gaulish  soldier  in  the  Cohortes  Vigiles
at  Eome  (Rev.  Celt.  iii.  272  ;  Berlin  Corpus,  vi.  2407),  while  TutaU
must  be  left  doubtful,  though  not  only  Toutati,  but  also  Totati  and
TutaU  seem  to  be  perfectly  legitimate  forms.  Here  it  may  also  be
mentioned  that  Toutati  derives  some  confirmation  from  a  monument


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  45

as  a  more  usual  Gaulish  form  than  the  Teutates  of  the
best  manuscripts  of  Lucan.  The  meaning  of  the  name
has  never  been  ascertained,  but  there  is  no  room  for  doubt
as  to  the  group  of  words  to  which  it  belongs :  we  have
had  a  closely  kindred  element  in  the  first  part  of  the
compound  name  Toutiorix,  and  the  principal  words  in
point  in  the  Celtic  languages  of  the  present  day  are  the
Irish  tuathj  l  a  tribe ;'  Breton  tud,  used  as  a  plural  in  the
sense  of  the  English  word  people;  and  Welsh  tud,  which
has  had  its  meaning  shifted  from  that  of  a  people  to  its
country.  Outside  the  Celtic  area  the  word  appears  in
Italy  as  Oscan  tauta,  touto,  and  Sabine  touta,  tota,  'a
community :  it  was  also  a  Lithuanian  and  a  Teutonic
word :  as  the  latter  it  was  well  known  as  the  term  for
the  German  political  body  called  the  Diet,  and  it  yields
the  adjective  Deutsch  or  Dutch,  meaning  the  vernacular
language  of  the  Germans  as  distinguished  from  the  Latin
formerly  preferred  by  scholars  and  pedants :  the  Anglo-
Saxon  form  was  theod,  l  a  people,'  and  a  foreigner  or  alien
was  eltheod,  just  as  it  is  'atttud'  in  Welsh :  the  Gothic  was
thiuda,  Old  Norse  'thjud,'  'a  people.'  In  all  these  lan-
guages the  word  was  feminine,  and  we  should  therefore
probably  be  right  in  assuming  that  the  Gaulish  word  for
a  people  or  community  was  touta :  a  derived  form  toutjus
is  attested  by  one  of  the  few  inscriptions  extant  in  the
Gaulish  tongue.     It  was  found  at  Vaison,  and  is  pre-


at  the  other  extreme  of  the  Celtic  world,  namely,  one  found  at  Seckau
in  Styria:  see  the  Berlin  Corpus,  iii.  5320;  but  M.  Mowat,  in  the
Bull.  Epigraph ique  de  la  Gaule,  i.  (1881),  123,  reads,  not  Toutati,
but  Tioutati,  which  has  a  suspicious  look  about  it.  M.  d'Arbois  de
Jubainville  is  inclined  to  contest  M.  Mowat's  reading  :  see  his  Cycle
Mythologique  irlandais  et  la  Mythologie  celtique,  p.  378.


46  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

served  in  the  museum  at  Avignon.    It  is  to  the  following

effect  :    Seyo/Aa/Jos  OiuAAoveos  toovtiovs  NafJ.avcra.Tis  etwpov  BeAr;cra//.i

o-oo-iv  ve/xv/Tor.1  That  is  to  say,  Segomaros  (son)  of  Willo,
toutias  of  Nimes,  made  Belisama  this  grove.  It  is  not
certain  whether  toutius  meant  merely  a  citizen  or  some
public  official  among  the  people  of  Nimes.  Perhaps  the
latter  view  is  preferable,  and  I  would  suggest  that
Toutates  in  a  somewhat  similar  way  meant  king.  We
have  a  Teutonic  parallel  of  the  same  etymological2  origin
in  the  Gothic  thiudans,  /WiAevs,  Norse  'thjodann,'  'a king,'
and  A.-Saxon  theoden,  which  also  meant  a  king  or  lord :
both  the  Norse  and  the  A.-Saxon  words  are  found  only  in
poetry,  which  is  an  indication  that  they  are  very  ancient
formations,  going  back  probably  far  behind  the  time  of
Ulfilas,  as  may  be  shown  by  approaching  the  question
from  another  direction  :  the  word  touta  and  its  congeners
entered  into  many  proper  names,  and  when  the  Eomans
had  to  write  these  names  they  represented  the  Teutonic
dental  as  they  did  the  Gaulish  one,  as  a  simple  t:  wit-
ness Caesar's  Teutones,  Ammianus  Marcellinus'  Teutomeres,
Eutropius'  Teutobodus,  and  Floras'  Teutolochus.  Now  in
Teutones  or  Teutoni  we  have  the  plural  as  given  by
Eoman  authors  of  the  word  'thiudans,'  'thjodann'  and
'theoden;'  and  that  a  people  should  have  given  themselves
such  a  name  as  Teutones*  meaning  kings,  will  surprise

1  Stokes  in  Kuhn's  Beitrcege,  i.  451,  ii.  107;  Becker,  ibid.  iii.  1G2.

2  Also  a  parallel  of  a  different  etymological  origin  in  the  Old  Norse
fylkir,  a  poetic  word  for  king,  derived  from  folk ;  and  the  derivation
of  the  word  king  itself,  Anglo-Saxon  cgning,  is  in  point,  though  it
involves  several  difficulties.      See  Kluge,  s.  v.  Kihiig.

3  The  singular  of  this  word  would  be  the  Teutonem,  which  Holder
has  preferred,  in  his  recent  edition  of  the  Germcmia,  to  the  more  usual
Tuisconem  or  Tuistonem.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  47

no  one  who  has  noticed  such  Celtic  names  as  that  of  the
Remi,  which  signified  princes ;  those  of  the  Caturiges  and
Catuvellauni,  meaning  war-kings  or  battle-princes ;  and
that  of  the  Bituriges,  which  actually  meant  Wei therr scho-
ol' lords  of  the  world.  This  explanation  of  the  origin
of  the  modern  term  Teutonic  is  doubtless  open  to  th'e
objection  of  implying  that  a  natural  inclination  to  brag
was  not  quite  confined  to  the  Celt.1

Before  leaving  Lucan's  lines  about  the  Gaulish  divi-
nities, it  is  right  to  quote  the  following  words  used  by  an
ancient  scholiast  in  reference  to  the  passage :  '  The  Gauls
believe^  Hesus  to  be  Mercury,  since  he  is  worshipped  by
merchants ;  and  Taranis,  the  ruler  of  wars  and  the  greatest
of  the  celestial  gods,  him  who  was  accustomed  formerly  to
be  appeased  with  human  lives,  but  now  glad  of  those  of
animals,  to  be  Jupiter.' 2  The  scholiast  was  utterly  wrong
in  the  view  he  took  of  Hesus,  and  not  much  less  so  in
identifying  Taranis  with  the  Eoman  Jupiter ;  but  it  was
probably  the  result  of  no  similar  blunder  on  his  part,
that  he  represents  the  Gauls  assigning  to  the  king  of
their  gods  the  superintendence  of  war  as  his  special
province.  The  chief  god  of  the  Celts  before  the  rise  of
the  Celtic  Mercury  was  their  god  of  war :  how,  then,
was  a  Eoman  to  express  this  in  terms  of  Latin  theology  ?

1  Toutates,  which  the  scanning  of  Lucan's  verse  would  make  into
Toutotcs,  was  apparently  formed  in  the  same  way  as  the  Gaulish  Dunates
and  Dumiates  already  cited,  to  which  may  be  added  Baginates,  to  be
mentioned  presently.

2  The  original  note  will  be  found  in  Usener's  Lucani  Commenta
Bernensia  (Leipsic,  18G9),  p.  32:  '  Hesum  Mercurium  credunt,  si
quidem  a  mercatoribus  colitur,  et  praesidem  bellorum  et  caelestium
deorum  maximum  Taranin  Iouem  adsuetuin  olim  humanis  placari
capitibus,  nunc  uero  gaudere  pecorum.'


48  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

To  be  both  intelligible  and  approximately  correct,  he
must  either  say  that,  according  to  the  Gauls,  Mars  was
the  chief  of  the  gods,  or  else  that  Jupiter  was  the  god
of  war.  The  latter  was  the  way  in  which  the  scholiast
chose  to  put  it,  and  he  is  supported  by  certain  statues
purporting  to  be  those  of  a  Gaulish  Jupiter,  which  repre-
sent him  as  clad  like  a  Eoman  warrior  in  a  cuirass  and
a  paludamentum :  one  such  was  found  at  Yaison,  while
another  of  colossal  dimensions  was  discovered  some  ten
years  ago  at  Se*guret  in  the  department  of  Vaucluse.1

1  See  the  first  of  M.  Gaidoz's  Etudes  de  Mythologie  gauloise  (Paris,
1886),  pp.  5-6  and  plate ;  also  M.  Rochetin's  article  in  the  Mem.  de
VAcad.  de  Vaucluse,  1883,  pp.  184 — 189,  which  I  have  not  been  able
to  consult.


Lecture  I.

THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

PART   II.


Mars  f continued).

All  the  facts  bearing  on  the  history  of  the  Gaulish
war-god  conspire  to  prove  that  he  was  once  the  supreme
divinity  of  the  Celtic  race ;  and  though  it  is  found  con-
venient to  term  him  briefly  the  Celtic  Zeus  or  Jupiter,
it  would  be  more  correct  to  speak  of  him  in  terms  of
Eoman  theology  as  a  Mars-Jupiter.  But  the  fact  of  his
occupying  only  the  third  position  of  honour  in  Caesar's
time,  is  weighty  evidence  to  the  great  progress  in  the
arts  of  peace  and  their  ideas  of  a  settled  mode  of  life
which  the  Continental  Celts  had  made  since  the  time  of
their  conquering  those  portions  of  Europe  which  they
inhabited  when  they  became  subject  to  Eome.  The  old
god  associated  with  the  sky  was  eclipsed  by  the  younger
gods,  the  Gaulish  Mercury  and  the  Gaulish  Apollo,  just
as  even  before  the  Wicking  period  Tyr  had  been  cast
into  the  cold  shade  by  the  rude  glories  of  Woden,  a
younger  god  of  a  many-sided  character.  But  there  were
abundant  traces  in  Caesar's  time  of  the  past  greatness
of  Toutates,  nay  as  late  as  that  of  Lucan  in  the  first
century,  unless  I  am  mistaken  in  regarding  the  fact  of

E


50  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

his  giving  Toutates  the  first  place  in  the  lines  quoted  to
yon  as  no  mere  accident.  The  most  important  evidence,
however,  is  to  be  found  in  Caesar's  words,  which  I  take
the  liberty  of  bringing  under  your  notice  again :  '  With
regard  to  Mars,'  he  says,  l  it  is  usual  for  the  Gauls,  as
soon  as  they  have  resolved  to  engage  in  battle,  to  vow
beforehand  to  him  all  the  spoils  they  may  take  in  the
war ;  so  they  sacrifice  to  him  all  the  animals  captured,
and  they  bring  all  the  rest  of  the  booty  together  to  one
spot.  In  many  of  their  cities,  heaps  of  these  things  may
be  seen  piled  up  in  their  sacred  places.  Nor  does  it
often  happen  that  anybody  so  far  disregards  the  tradi-
tional custom  as  to  dare  either  to  hide  any  of  the  booty  at
home  or  to  carry  any  away  that  has  been  set  aside :  in
case  such  a  crime  is  committed,  the  offender  is  tortured
and  most  severely  punished.'  The  meaning  of  these
words  is  quite  clear:  the  god's  aid  and  sympathy,  nay  his
active  co-operation,  were  to  be  engaged  by  giving  him
the  spoils  which  his  worshippers  took  from  their  enemies,
and  he  who  failed  to  give  the  god  his  due  was  held  to
bring  the  divine  displeasure  on  the  state,  which  the
criminal  thereby  rendered  liable  to  defeat  and  ravage :
in  other  words,  he  became  guilty  of  the  most  heinous
crime  possible  against  the  community.

Plenty  of  parallels  may,  doubtless,  be  found  among
other  ancient  nations,  but  I  will  only  call  your  attention
to  the  familiar  case  of  the  Jahveh  of  the  Hebrews  as  fully
described  in  the  Book  of  Joshua.  We  read  in  the  7th
chapter  that  Joshua,  in  his  distress  at  finding  his  men
defeated  in  their  attack  on  a  small  town  called  Ai,  was
addressed  by  the  Lord  in  the  following  words :  '  Israel
hath  sinned ;  yea,  they  have  even  transgressed  my  cove-


I.    THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  51

nant  which  I  commanded  them :  yea,  they  have  even  taken
of  the  devoted  thing;  and  have  also  stolen,  and  dissembled
also,  and  they  have  even  pnt  it  among  their  own  stuff.
Therefore  the  children  of  Israel  cannot  stand  before  their
enemies,  they  turn  their  backs  before  their  enemies,
because  they  are  become  accursed :  I  will  not  be  with
you  any  more,  except  ye  destroy  the  devoted  thing
from  among  you.'  The  narrative  then  proceeds  to
relate  how  the  Lord  assisted  in  discovering  the  thief
who  had  defrauded  him  of  the  shekels  and  fine  raiment
which  were  his :  the  transgressor  proved  to  be  Achan,
a  man  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  The  sequel  reads  as
follows,  beginning  with  Achan' s  confession :  '  When  I
saw  among  the  spoil  a  goodly  Babylonish  mantle,  and
two  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  and  a  wedge  of  gold  of
fifty  shekels  weight,  then  I  coveted  them,  and  took  them ;
and,  behold,  they  are  hid  in  the  earth  in  the  midst  of
my  tent,  and  the  silver  under  it.  So  Joshua  sent  mes-
sengers, and  they  ran  unto  the  tent ;  and,  behold,  it  was
hid  in  his  tent,  and  the  silver  under  it.  And  they  took
them  from  the  midst  of  the  tent,  and  brought  them  unto
Joshua,  and  unto  all  the  children  of  Israel;  and  they
laid  them  down  before  the  Lord.  And  Joshua,  and  all
Israel  with  him,  took  Achan  the  son  of  Zerah,  and  the
silver,  and  the  mantle,  and  the  wedge  of  gold,  and  his
sons,  and  his  daughters,  and  his  oxen,  and  his  asses,
and  his  sheep,  and  his  tent,  and  all  that  he  had:  and
they  brought  them  up  unto  the  valley  of  Achor.  And
Joshua  said,  Why  hast  thou  troubled  us  ?  the  Lord
shall  trouble  thee  this  day.  And  all  Israel  stoned  him
with  stones ;  and  they  burned  them  with  fire,  and  stoned
them  with  stones.     And  they  raised  over  him  a  great

e2


52  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

heap  of  stones,  unto  this  day ;  and  the  Lord  turned  from
the  fierceness  of  his  anger.  Wherefore  the  name  of  that
place  was  called,  The  Valley  of  Achor,  unto  this  day.'

Thus  far  of  Achan's  high  treason :  whether  the  Gauls
would  have  involved  all  the  members  of  his  family  in
his  terrible  death,  one  cannot  say;  but  it  is  clear  that
they  would  have  regarded  his  transgression  in  exactly
the  same  light  as  the  Hebrews  did ;  and  Caesar's  words
suggest  the  inference  that  even  in  his  time,  when  the
war-god  had  been  surpassed  in  popular  esteem  by  the
more  genial  divinities  of  trade  and  health,  the  former
still  remained  the  god  of  the  state  in  a  sense  in  which
no  other  could  well  have  been.  It  may  help  us  to  under-
stand the  scrupulous  regard  for  the  rights  of  the  god  of
war  entertained  by  the  Gauls,  the  Hebrews  and  other
nations  of  antiquity,  if  we  look  for  a  moment  at  the
traces  of  this  feeling  which  manifest  themselves  among
the  civilized  nations  of  modern  times :  I  need  only  allude
to  the  singing  of  solemn  Te  Deums  after  victory,  or  to
our  praying  in  this  country  that  our  Queen  '  may  be
strengthened  to  vanquish  and  overcome  all  her  enemies,'
and  to  our  adorning  our  cathedrals  with  the  tattered
flags  of  the  foreigner.  That  l  the  Lord  is  a  man  of  war'
is  a  sentiment  by  no  means  confined  to  the  Song  of
Moses :  it  is  found  to  be  still  a  natural  one ;  and  I  need
only  remind  you  of  the  poet  Wordsworth's  ode  for  the
English  thanksgiving  on  the  morning  of  the  18th  day
of  January,  1816,  and  more  especially  the  following
lines :

'The  fierce  tornado  sleeps  within  Thy  courts —
He  hears  the  word — he  flies —
And  navies  perish  in  their  ports ;


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  53

For  Thou  art  angry  with  thine  enemies  !

For  these,  and  for  our  errors,

And  sins  that  paint  their  terrors,
We  bow  our  heads  before  Thee ;  and  we  laud
And  magnify  Thy  name,  Almighty  God  !

But  Thy  most  dreaded  instrument,

In  Avorking  out  a  pure  intent,

Is  man — array 'd  for  mutual  slaughter.

Yea,  Carnage  is  Thy  daughter ;
Thou  cloth'st  the  wicked  in  their  dazzling  mail,
And  by  Thy  just  permission  they  prevail;
Thine  arm  from  peril  guards  the  coasts
Of  them  who  in  Thy  law  delight :
Thy  presence  turns  the  scale  of  doubtful  fight,
Tremendous  God  of  battles  !  Lord  of  hosts  !'

I  am  quite  aware  that  these  utterances  have  been  made
the  subject  of  severe  criticism;  but  has  any  one  ever
shown  that  they  do  not  accurately  portray  the  public
feeling  in  this  country  at  the  time  ?  For  the  parochial
picture  of  the  Almighty  they  expose  to  our  view,  the
poet  drew  not  so  much  on  his  own  imagination  as  on
that  of  a  war-wearied  people,  and  the  paints  were  mixed
by  the  confident  hand  of  a  self-commending  Pharisaism.
That  the  ancient  Celts  and  Teutons  should  have  agreed
at  one  time  in  making  their  war-god  their  greatest  divi-
nity, or  their  greatest  divinity  a  war-god,  need,  then,
astonish  no  one  who  will  bear  in  mind  the  ever-present
tendency  of  their  descendants  to  treat  in  much  the  same
way  a  God  whom  they  regard  as  infinitely  greater.
There  are  reasons,  however,  for  thinking  that  the  war-
like attributes  of  their  war-god  never  led  the  ancient
Celts  wholly  to  forget  the  other  aspects  of  his  being,
though  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that,  as  long  as  they  retained
the  original  habits  of  the  Aryan  warrior,  the  martial
qualities  of  their  supreme  divinity  would  be  likely  to


54  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

attract  undue  emphasis ;  and  this  state  of  things  among
them  continued  probably  a  considerable  time  after  a  more
settled  mode  of  life  in  a  more  genial  climate  had  set  the
Greek  mind  at  liberty  freely  to  develop  the  many-sided
character  of  the  Hellenic  god  identified  with  the  heavens,
who,  as  the  Zeus  portrayed  by  a  few  masterly  touches
in  the  Odyssey,  may  safely  be  regarded  as  the  grandest
product  of  heathen  theology.

Jupiter.

An  inscription  from  Morestel,  near  La  Tour-du-Pin,
in  the  department  of  the  Isere,  reads:  Iovi  Baginati,
Corinthus  Nigidi  Aeliani  ex  vot(o).1  Unfortunately
the  epithet  Baginates,  which  may  or  may  not  be  topical,
is  of  unknown  origin ;  but  compare  the  Zend  bagha,
c  god,'  and  the  0.  Bulgarian  bogu,  of  the  same  meaning.2
"We  are  no  better  off  in  the  case  of  our  next  inscription,
discovered  on  a  small  altar  at  Yienne  :  Deo  Sucello,
Gellia  Iucund(a)  v(otum)  s(olvit)  l(ibens)  m(erito).3  The
dative  is  likewise  written  Sucello^  on  a  stone  found  at
Yverdun  in  Switzerland.  The  name  of  the  god  occurs
also  on  a  silver  ring  found  at  York  and  inscribed  with
the  words  Deo  Sucelo.5  These  inscriptions  identify  the
god  with  no  Eoman  divinity ;  but  that  has  at  last  been

1  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  21;  Allmer,  iij.  197.

2  Baginates  admits  also  of  being  derived  from  the  same  root  as  the
Latin  word  fagus,  and  in  that  case  one  might  compare  the  Dodonian
Zeus  ^yos  or  ^vyyovaibs :  see  Overbeck's  Griechische  Kunstmyfliologie,
i.  4.     What  did  the  Phrygian  epithet  of  Zevs  Baycuos  mean  1

8  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  13;  Allmer,  ij.  454.

4  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  14;  Mommsen,  Jnsc.  Helv.  jNo.  140.

5  Hiibner,  Ephemeris  Epigraphica,  iij.  313  (No.  181);  Rev,  Celt.
iv.  446.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  55

compensated  for  by  the  discovery  of  a  stone  at  Mainz
reading :  I(ovi)  o(ptimo)  m(aximo)  Sucaelo,  &C1  In
spite  of  the  variations  in  the  spelling,  the  same  divinity
is  probably  meant  in  all  these  instances,  and  he  is  iden-
tified by  the  Mainz  monument  with  Jupiter.

It  is  needless  to  add  that  these  data  do  not  enable
us  to  guess  in  what  respect  Baginates  and  the  other  god
were  supposed  to  resemble  the  Eoman  Jupiter;  nor  is
it  by  any  means  clear  how  Caesar  fixed  on  the  fourth
god  in  his  list,  the  fourth  in  the  order  of  importance
and  popularity  from  the  Gaulish  point  of  view,  as  the
one  to  be  placed  over  against  Jupiter.  It  has  some-
times been  supposed  that  the  thunderbolt  must  have
been  the  decisive  attribute;  but  M.  Gaidoz2  reasoning
from  the  monuments  combats  that  view,  and  rightly
points  out  that  Caesar  confined  himself  to  the  words,
Iovem  imperium  caelestium  tenere,  which  tell  us  nothing
direct  about  the  thunderbolt.  M.  Gaidoz,  who  has  written
at  great  length  on  the  Gaulish  God  of  the  Sun  and  the
Symbolism  of  the  Wheel,  regards  Jupiter  originally  as
the  god  of  light  par  excellence,  and  as  having  become  by
an  expansion  of  his  attributes  the  god  of  the  sky  or  the
heavens.  He  entertains  the  same  idea  of  the  Gaulish
god  represented  with  a  wheel  in  his  hand,  while  he  re-
gards the  thunderbolt  as  a  Eoman  accessory,  the  Gaulish
symbol  for  thunder  being  undoubtedly  the  hammer,  as
among  the  Teutons.3  His  conclusions,  then,  are  that  the
wheel  represents  the  sun ;   that  the  Gaulish  god  with

1  Gaidoz,  Etudes,  p.  105  ;  Jahrbilcher  des  Vereins  von  Alterthums-
freunden  im  Rheinlande  (1882),  lxxiv.  p.  189  ;  Bull,  epigr.  de  la  Gaulet
iij.  (1883),  p.  154;  iv.  (1884),  p.  200.

2  Etudes,  p.  96.  s  lb.  pp.  93,  96.


56  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

the  wheel,  whom  he  identifies  with  the  fourth  god  in
Caesar's  list,  was  the  god  of  the  sun;  and  that,  the  Romans
having  no  special  god  of  the  sun  till  after  Caesar's  time,
the  latter  could  not  avoid  identifying  him  with  Jupiter.1
This  view  deserves  to  be  carefully  studied,  and  may  be
expected  to  lead  to  a  better  understanding  of  the  original
nature  of  the  chief  god  of  the  early  Aryans,  but  I  am
inclined  to  doubt  its  applicability  to  Gaulish  mythology
so  late  as  the  time  of  Caesar.  On  the  other  hand,  it  can
scarcely  be  denied  that  a  Roman  must  have  always  been
ready  to  identify  with  Jupiter  any  Gaulish  god  associated
with  the  phenomenon  of  thunder,  however  symbolized.

But  no  one  has  more  accurately  estimated  the  value  of
such  identification  than  M.  Gaidoz :  he  tells  us,  for  instance,
that  it  would  not  be  made  under  the  influence  of  scien-
tific comparisons  ;  that  it  was  not  writers  like  Macrobius
that  saw  it  done,  but  Caesar,  the  soldiers  and  the  Roman
colonists  in  Gaul ;  that  it  took  place  as  the  result  of  reports
which  could  do  justice  only  to  one  of  the  attributes  of  the
god  concerned ;  that  it  may  have  been  based  even  on  acci-
dental resemblances;  and  that,  in  a  word,  the  Gaulish
religion  as  known  to  us  is  a  palimpsest,  in  which  the  new
writing  allows  isolated  words  of  the  older  hand  to  be
read,  but  not  much  more.2  Later,  in  speaking  of  the
whole  passage  devoted  to  the  Gaulish  gods  by  Caesar,
M.  Gaidoz  urges  the  same  view  in  words  to  which  I
could  not  do  justice  without  quoting  them  verbatim : 3
'  En  voulant  juger  la  mythologie  gauloise  d'apres  ce
texte,  je  me  suis  dit  plus  d'une  fois  que  nous  etions
dans  la  situation  des  sultanes  d'Egypte  avcc  les  lecons  de

1  JStudes,  p.  98.  2  lb.  p.  90.  3  lb.  p.  91.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  57

musique  de  Felicien  David.  C'^tait  au  Caire,  en  1834,
pendant  un  voyage  que  douze  saint-simoniens  faisaient
en  Orient.  Le  vice-roi  demanda  a.  Felicien  David  de
donner  des  lecons  de  musique  k  ses  femmes ;  mais  pour
observer  les  convenances  inusulmanes,  Felicien  David
devait  donner  les  lecons  aux  ennuques  qui  les  auraient
transmises  et  re'p^te'es  ensuite  aux  sultanes  I'

In  spite  of  Caesar's  words,  then,  I  cannot  help  re-
garding the  Gaulish  god  whom  he  equated  with  Jupiter
as  far  from  possessing  the  importance  or  rank  which  that
equation  would  suggest ;  nor  is  it  improbable,  after  all,
that  the  phenomenon  of  thunder  was  treated  as  one  of
the  forms  of  his  activity;  and  at  this  point  something
must  be  said  on  that  subject.  The  Welsh  word  for
thunder  is  tar  an,  which  enables  us  to  identify  several
god-names  in  ancient  inscriptions.  One  of  them  was
Taraniicus  on  a  monument  from  Dalmatia,  which  reads :
Iovi  Taranuco,  Arria  Successa  v(otum)  s(olvit) : l  ano-
ther was  the  related  form  Taranucnus  attested  by  two
inscriptions2  on  the  banks  of  the  Ehine,  neither  of
which  alludes  to  Jupiter  by  that  appellation,  nor  indeed
need  they  be  supposed  to  have  meant  him.  Both  names
seem  to  be  derived  from  a  simpler  one,  Taranus,  borne
by  a  divinity  identified  with  thunder ;  and  Taranuc-
nus, in  Gaulish  Taranucnos,  is  formed  like  the  Gaulish
patronymics  Oppianicnos,  l  son  of  Oppianos',  and  Toutis-
sicnos,  l  son  of  Toutissos.'  Treated  analogously,  we  have
to  interpret  Taranucnos  as  meaning  the  Son  of  Taranus,
or  Thunder.      A  curious  inscription  found  at  Yienne,

1  Berlin  Corpus,  iii.  No.  2804  ;  Rev.  Celt.  v.  385.

2  Brambach,  1589,  1812;  Rev.  Celt.  v.  386.


58  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

the  ancient  capital  of  the  Allobroges,  identifies  Jupiter
with  his  thunder  and  lightning,  since  it  reads  :  Iovi
Fulguri  Fulmini.1  Still  more  important  is  one  found  at
Chester  many  years  ago,  and  now  preserved  in  the  Ash-
molean  Museum  at  Oxford:  it  begins  with  a  dedica-
tion, I(ovi)  O(ptimo)  M(aximo)  Tanaro.2  The  Yienne
inscription  may  perhaps  be  of  Celtic  origin,  but  I  doubt
the  Celticity  of  the  other :  it  should  rather  be  regarded
as  a  monument  of  the  piety  of  a  German  in  the  army
at  Chester  in  the  year  154,  to  which  it  belongs.  To
begin  with,  there  can  be  no  grave  doubt  as  to  the
identity,  roughly  speaking,  of  Tanaro  with  the  English
word  thunder,  for  the  Anglo-Saxon  thunor,  gen.  thunres,
German  donner  (for  an  older  donar),  and  the  name  of  the
Norse  god  Thor,  nom.  Thorr,  gen.  Thors,  from  a  stem
thonr-.  To  have  identified  the  god  with  his  thunder
cannot  have  been  greatly  at  variance  with  the  habits  of
thought  ascribed  to  the  Germans  of  an  earlier  time,  at
any  rate  if  one  were  to  be  guided  by  Caesar's  statement,
vi.  21,  as  to  their  positivism :  Deorum  numero  eos  solos
ducunt,  quos  cemunt  et  quorum  aperte  opibus  juvantur,  Solem
et  Vidcanum  et  Lunam.  In  any  case,  the  evidence  of  the
name  Thor  may  be  relied  on.

1  Allmer,  ij.  p.  426;  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  21,  v.  383,  where  it  is  given  as
I.  0.  M.  Fulguri,  &c.

2  Hubner,  No.  168.  Since  writing  the  above  I  have  found  that
M.  Gaidoz,  Etudes  de  Myth.  gaul.  p.  97,  suggests  the  same  idea  as
I  do  as  to  the  nationality  of  the  inscription :  I  have  again  examined
the  stone,  and  I  am  obliged  to  admit  that  the  reading  of  the  god's
name  is  doubtful ;  but  one  thing  is  certain,  namely,  that  it  was  never
Tarano,  as  some  will  have  it :  that  is  out  of  the  question.  The  alter-
native reading  which  the  present  state  of  the  stone  would  suggest
would  be  something  like  Innaro  with  nn  conjoint.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  59

Now  that  Thor  and  a  Gaulish  thunderer  have  been
brought  together,  they  cannot  be  allowed  to  part  company
at  once.  The  former  is  known  to  have  been  credited
with  possessing  a  celebrated  hammer  called  Mjolnir,  with
which  he  performed  his  feats  of  might,  and  the  word  is
probably  of  the  same  origin  as  the  Welsh  main,  'to
grind ;'  Latin  molo,  1 1  grind,'  molina,  l  a  mill ;'  English
meal ;  and  related  words,  with  a  certain  option  between
r  and  I,  occur  in  the  Latin  martulus,  '  a  hammer ; '  Old
Bulgarian  mlatu,  the  same,  mlaMii,  i  to  hammer  or  beat.'
Moreover,  as  the  lightning  was  the  hammer  or  the  bolt
of  the  thunder-god,  several  of  the  kindred  vocables  had
that  meaning,  such  as  Old  Bulgarian  mlumj\  Old  Prussian
mealde,  and  Welsh  '  ment,'  singular  '  mettten,'  '  a  light-
ning.' Thor's  manner  of  using  his  mighty  hammer  was  to
throw  or  hurl  it ;  and  a  similar  idea  underlies  the  Welsh
word  'ffuched,'  '  ttucheden,'  a  lightning,  which  literally
means  what  is  cast  or  thrown,  as  it  comes  from  the  same
etymon  as  '  ttuchio,'  *  to  cast  or  throw.'  Here  may  be  men-
tioned three  remarkable  terms  for  thunderbolts,  recorded
by  Dr.  Pughe  in  his  Dictionary  under  the  word  '  nuched:'
they  are  Ceryg  y  Lluched,  '  the  stones  of  the  cast  or
the  lightning;'  Ceryg  y  Cythraul,  'the  stones  of  the
devil ; '  and  Ceryg  y  Gythreulies,  '  the  stones  of  the
she-devil.'  Before  the  thunderer's  weapon  developed
into  a  hammer,  it  must  have  been  a  stone,  more  nearly
resembling  Thor's  dreaded  weapon.1  It  was  hard,  how-
ever, for  a  Eoman  to  avoid  falling  into  error  in  regard
to  the  Gaulish  thunder-divinities.     Thus  the  wheel-god,

1  Compare  the  A. -Saxon  reference  to  the  thunder  'with  the  fiery
axe'  (mid  dsere  fyrenan  secxe)  in  the  Dialogue  of  Salomon  and  Saturn,
ed.  Kenable  (London,  1848),  p.  118,  also  177.


60  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

the  Celtic  Zeus,  was,  I  take  it,  the  greatest  of  them ;  but
the  hammer-god  was  also  one  of  the  number,  and  it  is
he  that  we  appear  to  have  in  the  fourth  Gaulish  god  in
Caesar's  enumeration.  But  the  fact  of  his  calling  him
Jupiter  and  of  the  Dalmatian  dedication  to  Jovi  Taranuco
belong  to  the  misleading  identifications  so  felicitously
estimated  at  their  proper  value  by  M.  Gaidoz.  Had  we
more  information  about  the  Gaulish  hammer -god,  we
should  probably  find  him  resembling  Thor  still  more
strikingly.  We  are  told1  of  the  latter  that  he  was
a  less  complex  divinity  than  Woden,  that  he  had  a
well-marked  and  individual  character,  that  he  was  ever
associated  with  Earth,  whose  son  he  was,  and  whose
proudest  distinction  was  to  be  called  the  mother  of  Thor.
He  figures  as  the  friend  of  man ;  he  was  the  husband-
man's god,  whose  wrath  and  anger  were  ever  directed
against  the  evil  powers  that  injure  mortals  :  his  bolt
destroyed  the  foul  thick  blights  that  betrayed  the  pre-
sence of  the  wicked  ones,  and  smote  through  the  huge
cloud-masses  that  seemed  to  be  crushing  the  earth.  Lastly,
he  was  the  husband  of  the  golden-haired  goddess  Sif,  in
whom  one  recognizes  the  corn-field  divinity  of  Ceres.

A  good  deal  of  this  description  of  Thor  would  probably
have  applied  equally  well  to  his  Gaulish  counterpart,
and  the  name  or  title  I  am  inclined  to  identify  with  the
latter  is  that  of  the  second  god  in  Lucan's  triad.  To
begin  with  its  form  and  pronunciation,  it  is  to  be  observed
that  the  poet's  verse  requires  the  first  syllable  to  be  con-
sidered long,  while  some  of  the  manuscripts  read  JEsus
without  the  aspirate,  and,  as  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose

1    By  Vigfusson  and   Powell   in  their   Cuvjjus  Poeticum  Boreale,
ij.  463.


I.     THE   GAULISH    PANTHEON.  61

the  word  in  its  Gaulish  form  to  have  had  a  right  to  it,
Esus  may  be  taken  as  a  more  correct  spelling.  This  is
proved  by  one  of  the  inscriptions  on  an  altar  dug  up  at
Notre-Dame  in  Paris,  where  we  have  nouns  of  the  second
declension  written  with  0,  such  as  tarvos,  l  bull,'  and
CemunnoSj  the  name  of  another  Gaulish  god,  while  the
one  which  here  concerns  us  duly  appears  as  Esus  of  the
U  declension.  The  fact  strongly  corroborates  the  view
of  Pictet  and  others  who  connect  Esus  with  the  Sanskrit
asu-s,  l  the  breath  of  life,  life  both  as  a  force  and  as  a
condition;'  Zend  afihu-s,  l a  lord  or  master,  also  world
and  place  generally,'  an/wa,  i  one's  own  self  or  individual
existence,  the  soul ; '  Old  Norse  ass,  genitive  dsar,  plural
cesir,  '  gods  generally,  but  more  especially  the  older  group
of  Norse  divinities,'  to  which  may  be  added  the  Anglo-
Saxon  genitive  plural  esa,  i  of  gods.'

This  identification  is  of  great  interest,  and  I  venture
to  mention  one  or  two  particulars  of  a  nature  to  confirm
it :  the  Norse  word  points  to  an  original  nominative
ansu-s,  the  former  existence  of  which  is  countenanced
by  Jordanis'  allusion  to  the  title  of  Amis,1  which  the
Goths  gave  to  the  deified  heroes  of  their  race.  On  the
other  hand,  Sanskrit  and  Zend  give  evidence  only  to  a
weakened  form,  asu-s,  and  it  is  with  this  rather  than
with  ansu-s  that  Esus  seems  to  go,  in  so  far  as  con-
cerns its  phonology.  For  the  Celtic  languages,  not
unfrequently  setting  out  with  the  combination  es,  cor-
responding to  as  in  Sanskrit,  modified  it  by  eliding
the  sibilant  and  making  the  vowel  into  z,  which  in  Welsh
mostly  represents  a  vowel  etymologically  long  :  the  stages
would  seem  to  be  es,  ez,  Tz,  1,  i,  as  in  the  Irish  siur  or

1  Jordanis  de  Orlgiae  Acbibunque  Getarum  (ed.  Holder),  cap.  13,  p.  18.


62  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

fiur,  'sister;'  Welsh  'chwior-,  chwioryd:,'  'sisters;'  San-
skrit svasdr-as,  the  same;  or  Welsh  tei,  now  tai,  'houses,'
for  tegi  ( =  teges-a)  of  the  same  formation  as  the  Greek
o-Teyos  or  Teyos,  'a  roof,  a  house,'  plural  (i-eyea)  Teyrj.  Ac-
cording to  this  conjecture,  the  Gaulish  god's  name  may
have  been  pronounced  Ezus.  The  word  is  not  known  to
survive  in  the  modern  languages  of  the  Celts  as  an  inde-
pendent name,  but  Welsh  has  a  remarkable  derivative
from  it.  For  just  as  Sanskrit  asu-s  yields  asura-s,  '  living,
spiritual,  said  especially  of  the  gods,  of  Varuna,  and  of
the  sky;  any  spirit  or  non-material  being  of  an  evil
nature,'  and  the  Zend  ahhu  or  ahu  yields  ahura-s,  'lord
or  ruler,'  as  in  Ahuro  Mazdao,  Old  Persian  Auramazdd,
the  Ornmzd  of  Milton's  great  epic,  so  the  Gaulish  Esu-s
may  be  regarded  as  having  given  rise  to  a  derivative
esuro-s,  which  may  be  detected  in  the  Welsh  tor,  a  word
meaning  lord  or  ruler,  but  seldom  applied  to  any  one
but  God.  The  term  has  been  reduced  to  a  monosyllable
pronounced  jor,  with  a  semi-vowel  initial  indicating,  if
this  equation  be  well  founded,  that  the  first  of  the  three
syllables  which  originally  made  up  the  word  was  not
accented  by  the  ancient  Celts.  A  similar  remark  applies
to  another  title  of  God  in  Welsh,  namely,  Ion,  which  is
of  the  same  origin  and  meaning  as  lor,  and  reminds  one
of  the  Old  Norse  dsynja,  '  a  goddess.'

We  may,  then,  guess  the  Gaulish  divinity's  name  to
have  meant  lord,  ruler  or  god ;  but  why  should  the  ham-
merer have  been  called  lord  or  god  k«*t  Qoxty  ?  For  the
present  let  it  suffice  that  I  cite  the  analogy  of  Thor,  as  he
likewise  was  treated  as  the  lord  or  Anse1  par  excellence.

1  Vigfusson  &  Powell,  Corpus  Poet.  Boreale,  ij.  464 ;  Cleasby  &
Vigfusson,  Icelandic-English  Die.  s.  v.  ass,  which  is  the  Norse  form.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  63

The  terms  'Anse,'  'the  Anse  of  the  Country,'  and  'the
almighty  Anse/  always  refer,  we  are  told,  to  Thor  in
the  Old  Norse  carmina  of  oaths  and  vows :  the  Swedish
word  dska,  'lightning,  thunder,'  is  explained  to  mean
the  careering  of  the  Anse ;  and  the  first  syllable  of  such
proper  names  as  Norse  'Asleikr,'  Anglo-Saxon  '  Oslac,'
Norse  'Asmodr,'  Anglo-Saxon  'Osmod:,'  and  Norse  'As-
biorn,'  Anglo-Saxon  '  Osbeorn,'  mod.  English  '  Osborne,'
referred  to  Thor,  as  esu-  probably  did  to  his  Celtic  counter-
part in  Gaulish  proper  names  like  Esunertus,1  '  possessed
of  the  might  of  Esus,'  Esugenus,  '  offspring  of  Esus,'  and
notably  Esugenonertus,  which  must  have  meant  'endowed
with  the  might  of  a  descendant  of  Esus,'  a  term  sug-
gestive of  a  class  or  group  of  Esugeni,  but  whether
men  or  gods  must  remain  undecided,  though  the  singular
is  found  to  assume  mythological  importance  in  its  con-
tinuators  in  Irish  and  Welsh  romance,  where  we  detect
it  in  Eogan  and  Owein  respectively.2  It  is  uncertain
whether  the  Gaulish  people  of  the  Esuvii  or  Esubii  men-
tioned by  Caesar,  ii.  34,  iii.  7,  v.  24,  meant  by  so  calling
themselves  to  claim  descent  from  Esus,  since  the  name
may  simply  be  derived  from  esus  as  a  common  noun,
meaning  a  lord  or  ruler,  in  which  case  it  would  signify

1  Htibner,  No.  1334,  61 ;  Mommsen,  Inscr.  Helo.  No.  80.

2  In  living  Celtic  the  s  of  Esugen-  must,  according  to  analogy,  be
dropped,  and  Eugen-  becomes  in  Irish  Eogan,  now  written  Eoghan,
owing  to  the  shifting  of  the  accent  forward  leaving  the  vowel  of  the
last  syllable  neutral,  while  in  early  Brythonic  the  reverse  was  more
nearly  the  case,  and  Eugen-  was  made  the  basis  of  a  derivative  Exigen-
ts, whence  the  Welsh  forms  Eugein,  Euein  and  Ywein,  of  which  the
colloquial  form  was  Owein,  now  reduced  to  Owen  :  compare  Welsh
bywyd,  '  life,'  colloquially  pronounced  bowyd,  and  the  like.  The  oldest
spelling  appears  to  have  been  Eugein,  which  was  Latinized  as  Eugenius,
just  as  Anglo-Irish  Eoghans  call  themselves  Eugenes.


64  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

the  lordly,  princely  or  ruling  race,  and  supply  another
instance  of  the  brag  underlying  names  of  a  type  already
pointed  out.

Now  where  the  name  Esus  occurs,  it  stands  written
over  a  figure  of  the  god,  which  has  been  carefully  studied
by  a  distinguished  French  archaeologist,  M.  Eobt.  Mowat.1
He  describes  the  bas-relief  as  representing  the  god  clad
in  a  short  tunic,  tucked  round  his  waist  so  as  not  to  im-
pede the  free  action  of  the  body.  He  brandishes  a  square,
short-hafted  axe,  with  which  he  is  felling  or  lopping  a  tree,
the  lance-like  form  of  the  leaves  of  which  show  it  to  be
a  willow  such  as  must  have  grown  in  abundance  on  the
banks  and  islands  of  the  Seine.  M.  Mowat  classes  this
figure  with  the  bronze  images  and  bas-reliefs  of  the  god
known  by  his  Latin  name  as  Silvanus.  Other  repre-
sentations make  him  hold  in  one  hand  a  branch  which
he  has  just  cut  off  a  tree  with  a  woodman's  bill,  while
a  great  many  monuments  give  him  as  his  attributes  a
hammer  and  a  goblet ;  but  in  some  instances  the  goblet
is  absent,  while  in  others  the  hammer  has  smaller  ham-
mers growing  as  it  were  out  of  it  in  tree-like  fashion :
a  remarkable  specimen2  of  this  kind  has  been  discovered
at  Yienne.  The  goblet  and  hammer  sometimes  accom-
pany dedications  to  Silvanus  by  name ;  but  the  variations
are  too  numerous  to  be  enumerated.  One  of  the  most
remarkable  is  an  altar  at  Lyons,  which  brings  the  hammer
and  the  billhook  together :  it  shows  the  god  using  a
billhook  with  his  right  hand  and    supporting  himself

1  Bull.  Epigr.  i.  62—68.

2  Figured  and  described  by  M.  Anatole  de  Barthelemy,  in  the  Musee
Archeulogique,  ij.  (1877),  p.  8;  and  in  Melusine,  col.  353:  see  also
Gaidoz's  Etudes,  p.  88.


I.     THE   GAULISH    PANTHEON.  65

with,  the  other  on  a  hammer  with  a  long  handle,  while
the  goblet  stands  at  his  feet.

The  reasoning  of  M.  Mowat  leaves  one  in  no  doubt
that  the  Gauls  identified  Esus  with  the  Eoman  god
Silvanus,  who  presided  over  woodlands,  clearings  and
gardens,  together  with  the  shepherds'  interests.  But
one  group  of  this  class  of  images  has  been  the  subject
of  another  attribution,  which  has  the  weighty  authority
of  M.  Gaidoz  and  M.  Cerquand :  they  see1  in  the  per-
sonage with  the  hammer  and  goblet  the  god  of  thunder,
whose  name  they  take  Taranis  to  have  been,  and  one
of  the  best  preserved  specimens  is  a  bronze  image  found
at  Pr^meaulx  in  the  Cote-d'Or.  It  is  described2  as
representing  a  bearded  figure  holding  a  cup  in  his  right
hand,  while  the  other  grasps  the  handle  of  a  hammer
which  stands  taller  than  his  own  person.  His  dress  con-
sists of  a  short  tunic  and  some  kind  of  closely  fitting
trousers :  his  waist  is  provided  with  a  thick  girdle,  which
one  might  be  tempted  to  compare  with  Thor's  so-called
belt  of  strength.  The  Chester  dedication  to  the  German
thunder -god  shows  no  trace  of  the  hammer,  but  only
a  goblet  on  one  side  of  the  inscription  and  what  appears
to  have  been  a  rose  on  the  other :  the  monument  is
unfortunately  in  a  very  bad  state  of  preservation.  The
museums  of  the  Louvre,  Saint- Germain,  Lyons  and  Avi-
gnon, says  M.  Mowat,  contain  more  than  a  score  of  images

1  Gaidoz,  Esquisse,  pp.  i,  11;  Cerquand,  Rev.  Celt.  v.  386.

2  By  A.  de  Barthelemy,  Rev.  Celt.  i.  1 — 8,  where  the  attempt  is
made  to  prove  the  personage  meant  to  have  been  Dis  Pater ;  but  that
is  no  longer  the  way  to  look  at  the  question,  since  M.  Mowat  has
succeeded  in  showing  that  the  infernal  deity  is  to  be  identified  with
the  Gaulish  Cernunnos,  as  will  be  shown  later.

F


CG  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

of  the  same  type  as  that  of  Pr^meaulx;  moreover,  he
states  that  one  was  discovered  at  Metz,  and  that  a  ring
found  at  Yendeuil-Caply  (Oise)  has  the  same  image  cut
on  it.  These  serve  to  show  that  the  cult  of  the  god  in
question  was  not  confined  to  the  south  of  Gaul.

M.  Mowat  associates  all  these  with  Esus  as  Silvanus,  and
adds  to  them  a  remarkable  altar  from  Ober-Seebach,  near
Strasbourg,  which  represents  the  god  supporting  himself
with  his  right  hand  on  a  hammer  with  a  long  handle  and
holding  a  cylindrical  vase  in  the  other,  while  to  the  left
at  his  feet  is  seen  a  dog,  the  habitual  companion  of  Sil-
vanus,1 and  on  the  right  a  female  figure  in  a  long  robe,
with  her  hand  on  a  cornucopia.  In  the  next  place  he
calls  attention  to  an  inscription  found  at  Carlsburg  in
Transylvania,  which  reads :  Silvano  Dom.  Terrae  Matri,
Herculi,  Sacrum.2  Both  M.  Mowat  and  M.  Gaidoz  seem
to  be  in  the  main  right,  and  the  solution  of  the  difficulty
is  to  be  sought  in  the  character  of  the  Gaulish  god,  who
was  in  all  probability,  like  Thor,  not  only  the  hammerer
but  also  the  friend  of  the  farmer,  one  most  laborious  part
of  whose  work  consisted  in  cutting  down  the  woods  and
forests  that  confined  the  domain  of  the  ancient  plough
and  hoe :  perhaps  it  would  be  more  correct  to  regard  him
as  armed  with  the  thunderbolt  or  hammer  as  being,  and

1  According  to  M.  A.  de  Barth61emy,  the  dog  lias  three  heads,  so
that  he  treats  it  as  a  Cerberus  (Rev.  Celt.  i.  3),  and  the  same  view  is
adopted  by  M.  Flouest  (Rev.  Arch.  1885,  v.  20).  An  engraving  of
the  altar  will  be  found  in  the  Rev.  Arch.  1879,  xxxvij.  pi.  xii,  and
another  in  a  previous  volume,  1854,  where  M.  Chardin  also  gives  the
dog  three  heads,  p.  310.

2  Bull,  ejrig.  de  la  Gaule,  i.  65;  Berlin  Corpus,  iij.  1152,  where
Mommsen  suggests  that  the  second  word  was  meant  to  be  domestico  ;
but  the  reading  of  the  letters  originally  written  is  difficult.


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  67

because  of  his  being,  the  protector  of  the  farmer.  The
hammer,  doubtless,  symbolized  thunder  and  lightning;
and  possibly  the  drinking  -  cup,  goblet,  vase,  poculum,
tircens,  or  whatever  you  may  choose  to  call  it,  which  has
been  explained  variously  as  Tibullus'  scyphus  faginus,
Columella's  alveolus  ligneus,  and  Vergil's  sinum  lactis  or
milk-pail,  was  the  symbol  of  rain  and  rustic  plenty.  The
presence  of  the  hammer  and  the  dog,  or  of  the  hammer
and  the  woodman's  billhook,  appropriately  represent  the
two  sides  of  the  god's  character  as  the  hammerer  and
the  farmer's  friend,  while  the  same  idea  is  the  key  to  the
meaning  of  the  multiple  sledge  or  branching  hammer.

In  all  the  images  referred  to,  the  god  is  said  to  wear  a
goodnatured  face,  and  seldom  to  have  the  hammer  in  his
right  hand  ready  for  action :  so  it  may  be  inferred  that
he  was  chiefly  invoked  as  the  protector  of  the  farmer
and  the  friend  of  the  woodman.  Though  he  did  not
habitually  brandish  his  dread  hammer,  he  was  still  the
owner  and  wielder  of  the  weapon,  which  he  could  handle
whenever  occasion  arose:  this  was  possibly  uppermost
in  the  mind  of  the  man  who,  at  the  end  of  a  success-
ful boar-hunt,  dedicated  a  temple  to  Silvanus  Invictus
at  Stanhope  in  the  county  of  Durham ;  and  possibly  the
application  to  Silvanus  of  the  adjective  Cocidius,  usually
reserved  for  the  Celtic  war-god,  was  meant  to  describe  a
god  more  closely  resembling  Thor  in  his  more  warlike
moods,  a  Silvanus  such  as  that  described  by  Livy,  Hist.
Rom.  ii.  7,  driving  the  Sabines  to  flight  by  the  terrifying
voice  he  caused  to  issue  from  the  forest  of  Arsia  after  a
contest  between  the  Eomans  and  Tarquin.  The  designa-
tion Silvanus  Cocidius1  occurs  in  a  dedication  at  House-

1  Hiibner,  No.  642.

f2


68  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

steads  on  the  Roman  "Wall,  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  it
was  set  up  by  the  prefect  of  a  cohort  of  Tungrians ;  but
the  fact  does  not  prove  the  god  to  have  been  Teutonic :
witness  the  Germans  who  honoured  the  Celtic  god
Maponos  in  an  inscription  at  Ainstable  near  Armthwaite :
those  ancient  warriors  could  have  taught  a  lesson  in
religious  toleration  to  some  of  the  fanatics  of  the  Teutonic
race  at  the  present  day.

Another  instance  showing  how  another  Gaulish  god
was,  so  to  say,  split  up  into  two  Eoman  ones,  was  brought
under  your  attention  in  the  case  of  Vintios;  and  it  is  not
impossible  that  Hercules  in  the  Carlsburg  inscription  was
meant  to  stand  for  Camulos,  Toutates,  or  Segomo,  the
strong  god  equated  with  Mars,  in  which  case,  Silvanus
Dom(esticus),  Terra  Mater  and  Hercules,  would  be  vir-
tually Lucan's  triad  with  the  order  changed.  Be  that  as
it  may,  the  analogy  of  the  treatment  of  Vintios  may,  I
think,  be  carried  further,  and  I  should  be  inclined  on
Italian  ground  to  equate  Esus  not  only  with  Silvanus,
but  also  with  the  agricultural  god  Saturn,  whose  old-
world  characteristics  remind  one  of  Thor  as  the  '  old
Anse.'  Allusion  has  been  made  to  the  twofold  cha-
racter of  Thor  as  a  thunderer  and  the  farmer's  friend,
and  similarly  to  Esus ;  but  this  may  possibly  be  an
inexact  way  of  describing  him,  since  it  would  perhaps
be  preferable,  as  already  suggested,  to  regard  him  as
armed  with  the  hammer  in  consequence  and  by  reason  of
his  being  looked  to  as  the  farmer's  friend  and  protector,
his  thunder  being  his  means  of  vanquishing  the  evil
powers  constituting  the  farmer's  foes.  This  would  leave
us  free  to  suppose  that  thunder  and  lightning  originally
and  naturally  belonged  to  the  divinity  associated  with


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  G9

the  sky,  the  divinity  with  whom  the  Gauls  continued  to
connect  the  wind,  and  to  whom  a  Latin  inscription  gives
the  name  of  3Iars  Vintius.  But  the  god  here  in  question
was  associated  probably  not  so  much  with  the  sky  as
with  the  earth ;  and  hence  it  is  that  some  of  his  attri-
butes are  common  to  him  and  the  divinity  of  the  earth
par  excellence,  the  Gaulish  Pluto :  so  much  so,  in  fact,
that  M.  A.  de  Barthelemy1  has  tried  to  prove  that  the
god  likened  by  others  to  Silvanus  should  be  recognized
as  the  Gaulish  Dis  Pater  of  whom  Caesar  speaks.  Some-
what the  same  opinion  has  since  then  been  advocated  by
another  distinguished  French  archaeologist,  M.  Flouest.2
He  takes  a  view  which  seems  to  me  to  be  more  in  harmony
with  the  rapid  advance  made  by  Gaulish  archaeology
within  recent  years  in  his  country,  namely,  that  the
identifications  suggested  by  the  other  writers  mentioned
are,  from  the  nature  of  Gaulish  theology,  in  a  great
measure  compatible  with  one  another.

Lucan's  Esus  is  not  to  be  disposed  of  without  noticing
his  Taranis.  Some  of  the  manuscripts  read  Taranns,  and
the  same  form  might  be  inferred  from  Taranucus  and
Taranucnas  already  mentioned ;  but  the  existence  of  Ta-
ranus  has  recently  been  placed  beyond  doubt  by  the
discovery  in  the  south  of  France  of  a  Gaulish  inscription3

1  Rev.  Celt.  i.  1—8.  2  Rev.  Arch.  v.  (1885),  7—30.

8  I  owe  my  information  to  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Stokes,  who  states
that  the  inscription  I  allude  to  in  the  text  was  discovered  at  Orgon,  in
the  Bouches  du  Rhone.  The  Brythonic  word  for  thunder  is  tarcui,
masculine  in  Breton  and  feminine  in  Welsh.  This  taran  does  not
correspond  declensionally  to  Taranis,  but  it  may  either  to  taranus  of
the  U  declension,  or  else  to  forms  of  the  0  declension,  such  as  taranos
(masc.)  or  taranon  (neut.),  with  which  the  Goidelic  ones  agree,  namely,
Irish  toru?in,  'thunder;'  Sc.  Gaelic  torrunn,  the  same.  These  last  lan-
guages had  also  toirn,  or  tairn,  of  a  dilferent  declension,  of  which  more


70  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

in  which  its  dative,  Tapavoov  of  the  U  declension,  occurs
as  the  name  of  a  divinity.  I  should,  however,  hesitate
to  substitute  Taranus  for  Taranis  in  Lucan's  verse,  as  I
believe  both  to  have  been  real  names  of  a  divinity  asso-
ciated with  thunder.1  One  or  both  were  also  probably
the  Gaulish  for  thunder  itself,  and  careful  study  of  the
cognate  Celtio  words  inclines  me  to  regard  Taranis,  or
Taranus,  not  as  a  god  but  as  a  goddess,  which  is  coun-
tenanced by  Lucan's  verse  in  that  it  institutes  a  com-
parison with  a  Diana  (p.  44).  The  corresponding  Goidelio
form  appears  in  an  Ograic  inscription  on  a  remarkable
stone  at  Ballycrovane,  near  a  bend  of  the  long  sea-arm
called  Kenmare  River,  in  the  west  of  the  county  of  Cork.
It  reads : 2

/  inn       ii     mi  mi    it  ii  m      /////


Maq    i  De   c   ced  das  Aw  i  T  o  r   a  n    i   as.

Monuments  commemorative  of  persons  styled  Mac  Decet
have  been  found  not  only  in  Munster,but  also  in  the  county
of  Kildare,  in  Anglesey  and  even  in  Devon.  Awi  is  a
genitive  like  the  Latin  fili  (for  filii),  and  the  nominative
plural  would,  as  in  Latin,  be  of  the  same  form ;  further,
Aivi  ToraniaSj  or  better  Aivi  Toranjas  (with,;  =  Eng.  y  in
yes),  would,  subject  to  the  known  laws  of  Irish  phonology,
have  to  become  in  later  times  JJi  Torna,  and  the  name
was  borne  by  a  people  so-called  in  the  county  of  Kerry,

anon.  The  rest  of  the  difference  between  toim  and  torunn  is  paralleled
by  the  Irish  iarn,  '  iron,'  which  takes  also  the  form  of  iarann,  of  the
same  meaning.

1  See  also  Cerquand,  Rev.  Celt.  v.  381-8;  Mowat,  Bull.  £pig.  i.  123-9.

2  I  examined  it  in  1883,  but  could  not  feel  quite  certain  whether
Toranias  or  Turanias  was  the  better  reading,  though  I  was  inclined
to  the  former.


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  71

in  a  district  where  Abbey  O'Dorney  has  perpetuated
the  ancient  designation ;  while  a  certain  family  called
O'Cuirres,  connected  with  the  barony  of  Kerrycurrihy
in  the  connty  of  Cork,  are  also  styled  Claim  Torna,
1  Children  of  Toranis,'  in  an  old  poem,1  and  the  name
seems  to  have  been  pretty  widely  spread  in  the  king-
dom of  Munster.2  The  genitive  Toranjas  implies  a
nominative  Toranis,  differing  only  in  its  o  from  Lucan's
Tar  an  is,  which  with  its  a  is  probably  less  original
than  the  Irish  one.  Now  the  later  form  which  Toranis
should  take  in  Irish  would  be  Toirn,  and  that  is  also
the  nominative  which  should  have  as  its  genitive  Torna.
But  just  as  the  Welsh  word  givynt,  corresponding  ety-
mologically  to  Vintios,  the  name  of  the  Gaulish  god
associated  with  the  wind,  has  lost  all  reference  to  the
divinity,  and  become  simply  a  masculine  noun  meaning
wind,  so  Toirn,  the  Irish  equivalent  of  the  older  Toranis,
Gaulish  Taranis,  has  ceased  to  be  a  proper  noun,  and
come  down  to  modern  times  in  the  signification  of  'a
great  noise  or  thunder ; '  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  it  is
feminine.3

1  By  O'Huidhrin  :  see  The  Topographical  Poems,  edited  by  O'Dono-
van  (Dublin,  1862),  p.  102,  and  note  lxiv  (555).

2  There  was  also  a  poet  called  Torna  supposed  by  some  to  have  lived
in  the  4th  century,  and  it  has  become  usual  to  trace  the  Ui  Torna  to
him  as  their  ancestor.  This  is  probably  an  error  dating  from  the  time
when  a  nominative  Torna  would  be  Torna  also  in  the  genitive ;  the
former  would  presuppose  an  early  Toranjo-s,  an  adjectival  form  of  the
same  origin  as  the  words  here  in  question,  but  parallel  with  such  Latin
formations  as  Jovius,  Martius,  Veneria,  and  the  like.  However,  it
would  matter  little  here  if  one  were  forced  to  suppose  some  of  the
Torna  families  descended  from  the  poet  alluded  to  ;  the  rest  may  still  be
regarded  as  deriving  their  name  from  Torna  =  the  genitive  of  Toranjas.

3  O'Reilly's  Irish-Eng.  Did.  s.  v. ;  see  also  Foley's  English-Irish
Did.  s.  v.  thunder.


(I  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

Induced  by  these  and  the  like  considerations  to  regard
Taranis  as  the  name  of  a  goddess,  I  can  of  course  not
identify  her  with  Taranucos  or  Taranucnos.  These  names
I  should  regard  rather  as  belonging  to  Esus,  and  borne
by  him  as  the  wielder  of  the  hammer  or  thunderbolt.
Taranis  would  then  take  her  natural  place  by  his  side
as  his  associate ;  and  the  mistake,  which  this  way  of
looking  at  the  question  would  suppose  the  ancient
scholiast  to  have  committed  when  he  made  Taranis  into  a
Gaulish  Jupiter  (p.  47),  becomes  easily  intelligible.  But
Zeus  was  not  the  only  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt  even
in  Greek  mythology;  both  Here  and  Athene  could  on
occasion  make  use  of  that  dread  missile;  and  even
Typho  is  known  to  have  handled  it,  though  not  with
signal  success.  That  the  ancestors  of  the  Welsh  once
associated  thunder  and  lightning  with  a  goddess  as  well
as  with  a  god,  is  rendered  fairly  certain  by  the  fact  that
one  of  the  terms  for  a  thunderbolt  is  Careg  y  Gi/threuUes,
the  Stone  of  the  She- demon.  But  when  we  come  to
the  question  of  the  attributes  of  Taranis,  we  are  embar-
rassed by  a  lack  of  information ;  the  analogy,  however,
of  Thor  helps  one  to  form  a  consistent  theory.  For,
as  in  his  case,  it  may  be  supposed  that  the  associate
of  Esus  was  either  the  Earth  in  the  character  of  his
mother,  or  else,  more  probably,  some  personification  of
the  same  origin,  but  conceived  more  like  Thor's  wife  Sif,
the  Scandinavian  Ceres  of  the  yellow  corn-field.

If,  then,  the  idea  has  anything  in  its  favour,  that  Esus —
and  likewise  Thor — was  provided  by  ancient  imagination
with  thunder  as  a  means  of  defending  his  friend  the  shep-
herd and  farmer,  it  would  be  natural  also  that  his  associate
should  possess  the  same  means  of  repelling  the  powers


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  73

of  evil  that  attacked  the  crops ;  and  it  may  here  be  men-
tioned, in  anticipation  of  the  remarks  to  be  made  on  Irish
mythology  later  in  these  lectures,  that  it  represents  the
corn-field  as  the  chosen  battle-ground  where  the  powers
favourable  to  man  make  war  on  those  other  powers  that
would  blight  his  crops  and  blast  the  fruits  of  his  labour.
Possibly  one  would  not  be  far  wrong  in  supposing  Artio
to  have  been  the  companion  divinity  of  Esus,  and  Taranis
one  of  her  names.  The  goddess  Artio  has  already  been
noticed  as  bearing  a  name  kindred  with  the  epithet  Artaius
of  an  Allobrogic  Mercury  (p.  5),  and  of  the  same  origin
as  the  English  Earth,  the  Teutonic  divinity  whom  Tacitus,
in  the  Germama,  cap.  xl,  calls  Mammun  Urth&m,  i  Terrain
Matrem?  But  the  name  Artio  refers  especially  to  plough-
ing, and  the  bas-relief  accompanying  the  inscription  on  the
statue  at  Berne  represents  the  goddess  standing  robed
and  holding  a  patera  in  her  right  hand  and  fruit  in  the
left,  while  close  by  stand  an  oak  and  an  altar  loaded  with
fruits.1

Minerva.

Caesar,  in  his  too  brief  list  of  the  divinities  worshipped
by  the  Gauls,  gives  the  last  place  to  Minerva,  to  whom
he  states  that  they  ascribed  the  initiation  of  the  various
trades  and  arts.  What  Gaulish  goddess  he  had  in  view  it
is  impossible  to  say,  and  the  land  of  the  Allobroges  seems
to  yield  no  inscription  identifying  any  Gaulish  divinity
with  the  Eoman  Minerva.  But  one  found  at  Saint  Bertrand
de  Cominges,  in  the  Haute  Garonne,  mentions  a  temple  of


1  Mommsen,  Inscr.  Helv.  No.  215,  where  the  inscription  is  read:
Deae  Artioni  Licinia  Sdbinilla.


74  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

Minerva  Belisama;1  and  we  have  the  same  name  in  its
Gaulish  form  of  the  dative  case,  BeA^o-a^i,  in  the  Yaison
inscription  (p.  46),  which  commemorates  the  making  of
a  grove  for  the  goddess  by  Segomaros.  A  trace  of  the
goddess'  name  is  to  be  detected  in  the  cognomen  read
Belismius2  in  a  Eoman  inscription  at  Carleon  on  the  Usk ;
and  Ptolemy  gives  a  river  on  the  west  coast  of  Britain
the  name  BeAto-a/m  :  it  was  probably  the  Eibble.  Compare
the  case  of  the  Dee,  which  the  Welsh  always  regarded
as  a  goddess,  in  all  probability  a  goddess  of  death  and
war.

"Were  one  to  be  guided  by  the  apparent  similarity  of
the  name  Belisama  to  the  first  element  in  that  of  the
god  Belatucadros,  one  might  be  led  to  suppose  that
Belisama's  chief  concern  was  war,  and  that  she  only
resembled  Minerva  as  a  war-goddess;  but  it  must  be
admitted  that  Caesar's  words — Minervam  operum  atque
artificiorum  initia  tradere — afford  no  ground  for  supposing
that  it  was  any  such  a  martial  Minerva  he  had  in  view.
Further,  if  we  only  turn  to  Irish  literature,  we  there  find
traces  of  exactly  such  a  Celtic  goddess  as  he  too  briefly
mentions :  an  article  in  the  Irish  Glossary,  called  after
the  name  of  Cormac,  king-bishop  of  Cashel  in  the  9th
century,  tells  us  that  there  was  a  goddess  called  Brigit,
poetess  and  seeress,  worshipped  by  the  poets  of  ancient
Erinn ;   that  she  was  daughter  of  the  Irish  god  known

1  Orelli,  1431,  1969.  The  two  entries  seem,  owing  to  an  oversight
of  the  editor's,  to  represent  one  and  the  same  inscription.

2  Hiibner,  No.  97.  Belismius  is  the  reading  adopted  by  Hiibner,
but  it  is  not  at  all  certain:  see  Lee's  Iaca  Silurum,  pp.  19 — 21,  pi.
viii.  1,  where  he  reads  Belisimnus.  What  one  would  expect  is  Beli-
samius,  Belisemius  or  even  Belisimius.


I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.  75

as  Dagda  the  Great ;  and  that  she  had  two  sisters  who
were  also  called  Brigit,  the  one  the  patroness  of  the
healing  art,  and  the  other  of  smith- work.1  This  means,
in  other  words,  that  the  Goidels  formerly  worshipped  a
Minerva  called  Brigit,  who  presided  over  the  three  chief
professions  known  in  Erinn:  to  her  province  in  fact
might  be  said  to  belong  just  what  Caesar  terms  operum
atque  artificiorum  initia.  How  largely  the  prestige  of
the  goddess  helped  to  make  the  fortune  of  the  saint  who
took  her  name,  St.  Bridget  or  Bride,  it  would  perhaps  be
difficult  to  say,  and  I  pass  on  to  the  name  Brigit,  which
makes  in  the  genitive  Brigte.  This  implies  an  early
Goidelic  nominative  Brigenti,  and  enables  us  to  identify
a  presumably  corresponding  goddess  in  the  Brigantia2
of  Latin  inscriptions  found  here,  namely  in  the  country
of  her  namesakes  the  Brigantes.3  Add  to  this  that  a
Gaulish  inscription  found  at  Volnay,  near  Beaune,  reads  :
Iccavos  Oppianicnos  ieuru  Brigindoni  cantalon.4  This
literally  means  that  Iccavos,  son  of  Oppianos,  made  for
Brigindo  something  denoted  by  the  accusative  cantalon

1  Three  Irish  Glossaries,  ed.  by  Stokes  (London,  1862),  p.  8,  and
O'Donovan's  translation  of  Cormac's  Glossary,  ed.  by  the  same  scholar
(Calcutta,  1868),  p.  23.

2  Stokes's  Three  Ir.  Gloss,  p.  xxxiii ;  M.  d'A.  de  Jubainville's  Cycle
Mythol.  p.  146;  Rhys's  Celt.  Brit.  p.  282.

3  One  comes  from  Doncaster,  and  one  from  the  neighbourhood  of
Leeds ;  the  other  two  belong  to  the  line  of  the  Roman  Wall  in  Cum-
berland, and  to  Middleby  in  Scotland  respectively  :  they  are  numbered
200,  203,  875  and  1062  in  Hiibner's  volume  of  the  Berlin  Corpus.
The  last  mentioned  is,  unfortunately,  the  only  one  which  preserves  the
name  of  the  goddess  in  full.  Thurneysen,  in  Kuhn's  Zeitschrift,
xxxviij.  146,  equates  the  name  with  the  Sanskrit  'Brihatf,'  'die  hohe.'

4  De  Belloguet's  Ethnogenie  gauloise2,  i.  289  ;  Stokes'  Celtic  Declen-
sion (Gbttingen,  1886),  p.  67.


76  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

a  word  of  unknown  meaning.  In  Brigindo  we  have  the
name  of  a  divinity  probably  the  Gaulish  counterpart  of
Brigit.

If  one  may  trust  these  conjectures,  we  have  before  us
traces  of  a  goddess  whose  cult  was  practised  in  Gaul,  in
Britain  and  in  the  sister  island,  one  whose  attributes,
so  far  as  we  know  anything  about  them,  favour  the  con-
jecture that  she  was  the  Celtic  divinity  mentioned  by
Ceesar.  To  the  threefold  name  here  ascribed  her  by  way
of  conjecture,  should  be  added  that  Brigit  was  also  called
Brig  ; l  in  fact,  this  last  seems  to  have  been  a  favourite
Irish  name  for  genius  personified  :  thus  there  was  a  Brig
Brethach,2  whose  epithet  meant  judicial,  relating  to  ver-
dicts or  the  giving  of  judgment ;  while  a  mythic  poet  and
chief  judge  of  Ulster  called  Sencha  had  a  daughter  Brig,
whose  business  it  was  to  criticize  and  correct  her  father's
errors :  this  Egeria  closely  resembles,  it  will  be  seen,
one  of  the  Brigits  daughters  of  the  Dagda.  In  brief,
the  word  brig  meant  in  Irish  pre-eminent  power  or  influ-
ence, authority  or  high  esteem  ;  while  Welsh  has  reduced
the  word  to  bri,  '  renown  or  high  estimation.'  Among
other  words  related  to  the  names  here  in  question  may
be  mentioned  the  "Welsh  word  braint,  for  an  earlier  breint,
still  earlier  bryeint,  which  also  occurs,  and  represents,  as
it  is  a  feminine,  an  ancient  Brythonic  form  brigantja,
identical  with  that  of  the  goddess  Brigantia  of  the  inscrip-
tions. The  Welsh  braint  means  prerogative  or  privilege,
which,  involving  the  idea  of  power  not  shared  in  by

1  For  instance,  in  the  British  Museum  MS.,  Harl.  5280,  fol.  68  a.

2  See  Sullivan's  note,  p.  clxxi  of  the  introductory  volume  to  O'Curry's
Manners,  &c. ;  O'Curry's  MS.  Mat.  p.  46  ;  Windisch's  Irische  Texte,
p.  266  (§  28).    A  Brig  Briuguid  is  alluded  to  in  the  Senclms  Mar.  i.  144.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  77

all,  agrees  well  enough  with  the  meaning  here  suggested
for  Brigantia.  The  name  of  the  Brigantes  was  doubtless
of  the  same  origin,  as  was  also  the  old  Cornish  adjective
brentyn  or  bryntyn,  '  noble,  free,'  a  word  represented  in
"Welsh  by  brenhin,  'king,'  for  an  older  breenhin,  which
would  imply  an  early  form  brigantinos.1  The  idea  ori-
ginally expressed  by  all  these  words  was  that  of  power
or  greatness  of  some  kind,  whence  the  derivative  ones
of  freedom,  nobility,  authority  and  prerogative ;  and,  so
far  as  we  can  judge,  her  names  of  this  origin  correctly
described  the  goddess  in  whom  the  power  of  initiating
and  teaching  the  arts  was  supposed  to  reside,  the  Minerva

of  the  Celts.

Dis.

Caesar,  in  his  brief  list  of  the  gods  worshipped  by  the
Gauls,  makes  no  allusion  to  Dis;  but  in  a  subsequent
passage  he  states,  vi.  18,  that  they  believed  themselves
descended  from  Dis  Pater,  a  doctrine  which,  according
to  him,  the  druids  had  taught  them.  For  this  reason
also  they  measured  the  lapse  of  time  not  by  days  but
by  nights,  and  calculated  the  dates  of  their  birthdays,
together  with  the  beginnings  of  their  months  and  years,
in  such  a  way  as  to  make  the  night  precede  the  day.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  territory  of  the  Allobroges
is  not  known  to  supply  a  single  inscription  equating
any  Gaulish  god  with  Dis,  and  so  far  it  would  seem
as  though  one  might  construe  Caesar's  silence  into  evi-
dence that  the  Gaulish  Dis  was  not  worshipped.  That
would,  however,  be  an  error,  and  Caesar's  treatment  of
him  is  perhaps  to  be  ascribed  to  the  Eoman  view  of  Dis
as  a  sombre  and  inexorable  deity  honoured  on  the  coasts

1  See  Celt.  Britain2,  p.  282.


78  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

of  the  Mediterranean  with,  comparatively  few  altars :  be
that  as  it  may,  French  archaeology  has  succeeded  in  iden-
tifying the  Gaulish  god,  and  in  showing  at  the  same  time
that  his  cult  had  very  firm  hold  on  the  Gaulish  mind.  M.
Mowat1  is  again  our  guide  to  the  interpretation  of  another
of  the  early  Gallo-Eoman  altars  dug  up  in  Paris,  namely,
one  with  the  figure  of  the  god  surmounted  by  his  name,
which  in  its  perfect  state  is  known  to  have  read  Cemun-
nos, a  kindred  form  of  which  occurs  on  a  wax  tablet  at
Pesth  in  a  mention  of  a  funerary  college  holding  its
meetings  in  the  temple  of  a  Jupiter  Cemenus?  In  this
last  one  cannot  help  recognizing  a  chthonian  divinity
corresponding  to  the  Jupiter  Stygius  of  the  Eomans.  The
form  Cemunnos  and  the  Latinized  one  Cemenus  contain
the  common  stem  cern-,  which  may  be  assumed  to  be  of
the  same  origin  as  the  native  words  for  the  Gaulish  horn
or  trumpet,  variously  given  by  Greek  writers3  as  xdpvov
and  Kdpwg :  the  "Welsh  and  Irish  form  is  corn,  of  the  same
etymology  and  meaning  as  the  Latin  comu,  English
horn.  How  this  name  suits  the  god,  a  glance  at  the
Paris  altar  suffices  to  explain ;  for  underneath  the  word
Cemunnos  is  to  be  seen,  bearded  and  clothed,  a  central
figure  whose  forehead  is  adorned  with  the  two  horns4
of  a  stag,  from  each  of  which  hangs  a  torque.      The

1  Bull.  JEpigr.  de  la  Gaule,  i.  Ill — 116.

2  Ibid.  p.  113  j  Orelli-Henzen,  No.  6087;  B.  Corpus,  Vol.  iii.  p.  926.

3  Hesychius,  Kapvov  •  rr)v  o-aA.7riyya.  TaXaTai  ;  and  Eustathius
(Leipsic,  1829),  ad  Homeri  II.  1139,  57,  K.apw£.

4  With  the  Gaulish  divinities  of  this  kind  M.  d'Arhois  de  Jubain-
ville  would  compare,  Cycle  Myth.  p.  384,  an  Irish  Buarainech,  which
he  renders  'a  la  figure  de  vache  :'  the  person  so  called  is  said  to  have
been  the  father  of  Balor.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  79

monument  is  unfortunately  in  a  bad  state  of  preserva-
tion ;  but  the  head  and  shoulders  are  on  such  a  large
scale  as  compared  with  the  other  figures  on  the  same
block,  that  the  god  cannot  have  been  represented  as
standing  or  even  as  sitting  on  a  raised  seat :  in  fact
there  is  no  alternative  but  to  suppose,  with  M.  Mowat,1
that  the  god  was  seated  cross-legged  on  the  ground,  like
Buddha.  Granted  that  posture,  we  are  at  once  led  to
connect  the  whole  figure  with  certain  well-known  sculp-
tures representing  a  horned,  squatting  divinity,  such  as
those  found  at  Eheims,  at  Saintes,2  the  chief  town  of
Charente-Infe'rieure,  and  at  Vendceuvres-en-Brenne.  The
last,  which  is  preserved  at  Chateauroux,  in  the  depart-
ment of  the  Indre,  represents  the  god  holding  a  follis  or
sack  in  his  lap,  and  on  either  side  there  stand  two  figures
of  a  diminutive  Genius,  with  their  feet  planted  on  the
coils  of  a  serpent,  while  each  grasps  with  one  hand  either
horn  of  the  central  personage :  the  other  hand  of  the  one
Genius  holds  a  torque,  and  that  of  his  fellow  a  purse.  A
contiguous  face  of  the  block  shows  an  Apollo  Citharoedus
sitting  in  the  posture  illustrated  by  a  colossal  statue  of
him  at  Entrain,3  in  the  Mevre.    The  Eheims  monument4

1  Bull.  Epigr.  i.  111-2.

3  L'Autel  de  Saintes  et  les  Triades  gaidoises  is  the  title  of  an  able
and  copiously  illustrated  account  of  the  most  important  monuments
representing  the  Gaulish  Pluto,  by  the  well-known  keeper  of  the
museum  at  Saint-Germain,  M.  Alex.  Bertrand,  in  the  Revue  Archeolo-
gique  for  1880  :  I  refer  here  more  especially  to  the  offprint,  published
in  Paris  in  1880  :  see  pp.  1,  7,  38;  also  the  Rev.  Arch,  for  1882,  xliij,
p.  322,  and  plate  ix.

3  Bull.  Epigr.  ibid. ;  also  Les  Antiquites  d' Entrain,  by  M.  de  Ville-
fosse,  which  I  have  not  been  able  to  consult.

4  Bull.  Apigr.  ibid. ;  Bertrand,  pp.  7,  8.


80  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

represents  the  horned  god  squatting  on  a  seat  between
Apollo  and  Mercury,  who  have  to  stand :  in  the  bend  of
his  left  arm,  which  rests  on  his  knee,  Cernunnos  holds  a
bag,  from  which  he  pours  forth  a  profusion  of  acorns  or
beech-mast,1  which  he  helps  out  with  his  right  hand;
they  drop  down  between  an  ox  and  a  stag,  figured  below
in  an  attitude  of  attention ;  while  a  rat  has  been  carved
above  the  god's  head  on  the  tympanum  of  the  pediment,
a  detail  thought  to  be  of  significance,  seeing  that  it  is  an
animal  dwelling  underground.

Lastly,  the  block  from  Saintes2  has  the  unusual  feature
of  displaying  two  groups  carved  back  to  back  on  opposite
faces  of  the  stone.  In  both  cases  the  squatting  god  holds
a  torque  in  his  right  hand  and  in  the  other  a  purse  or
bag,  which  is  supported  on  his  knee.  He  appears  to  be
Cernunnos,  though  the  horns  are  no  longer  there  to  prove
his  identity,  as  the  monument  is  imperfect.  In  the
principal  bas-relief,  his  associate  sits  on  a  seat  near  him,
with  a  cornucopia  resting  on  her  left  arm,  while  a  little
female  divinity  stands  close  to  her.  The  bas-relief  on
the  opposite  face  of  the  block  shows  the  god  squatting
on  a  base  ornamented  with  two  bucrania  :  to  the  left,  on
a  base  with  a  single  bucranium,  stands  a  naked  god,  who
supports  himself  on  a  club ;  and  on  the  right,  on  a  base
devoid  of  ornament,  stands  a  goddess  in  a  long  robe.  It
is  to  be  noted  that  the  squatting  attitude  of  the  god  in
these  instances  has  been  observed  also  in  the  case  of
a  little  bronze  figure  discovered  at  Autun,  now  in  the

1  Bertrand,  p.  7,  pi.  xi.  Why  M.  Mowat  regards  the  contents  of
the  bag  which  the  god  empties  as  pieces  of  money  (Bull.  Epigr.  i.  11")
I  do  not  exactly  understand.

2  Bull.  Jipigr.  ibid.


I.    THE   GAULISH   PANTHEON".  81

museum  at  Saint-Germain,  and  in  that  of  certain  Gaulish
coins,  on  one  side  of  which  is  seen  a  squatting  figure
holding  a  torque  in  its  right  hand.1

Such  are  some  of  the  principal  data  for  our  purpose,
and  from  them  I  infer  that,  like  Dis  and  Pluto,  Cer-
nunnos  was  the  god  of  the  dead  or  the  nether  world.
As  a  corollary,  we  may  regard  all  three  as  the  gods  of
riches  or  the  lords  of  the  metallic  wealth  of  the  world :
this  role  of  the  classical  deities  is  indicated  by  their
names.  Thus  Pluto,  in  Greek  UXovrw^  is  derived  from
ttAoutos,  '  wealth,'  just  as  Dis,  genitive  Ditis,  is  supposed
to  be  a  contraction  of  dives,  gen.  divitis,  'wealthy  ;'  though
the  name  Cernunnos  did  not,  at  least  directly,  connote
wealth  of  any  kind,  the  attributes  of  the  god,  such  as
the  money-bag  and  the  torques,  than  which  no  symbols
more  expressive  of  wealth  were  known  to  the  Gauls,
amply  made  up  for  it;  it  appears  they  also  conveyed
much  the  same  meaning  to  the  minds  of  the  Germans  and
the  Romans.2

There  are  at  least  two  questions  which  will  have  occur-
red to  you  respecting  the  Gaulish  Dis :  why  he  squatted


1  It  is  worth  mentioning,  as  bearing  on  the  question  of  the  distribu-
tion of  the  statues  of  the  god,  that  a  mutilated  one  of  him  was  dis-
covered in  the  department  of  the  Puy  de  Dome  in  the  year  1833  :  if
not  again  lost,  it  should  be  now  in  the  museum  at  Clermont.  I  owe
this  information  to  a  notice  by  M.  Gaidoz  in  the  Rev.  Arch,  for  1880,
iv.  299—301.  See  also  the  Rev.  Arch,  for  1882,  xliij.  125,  where  the
wide  distribution  of  the  tricephal  has  induced  M.  Movvat  to  declare  for
the  improbable  hypothesis,  that  it  was  after  all  but  the  Roman  Janus
more  or  less  completely  naturalized  in  Gaul.

2  Mowat,  Bull.  Ejpigr.  de  la  Gaule,  i.  114-5,  where  he  gives,  besides
other  authorities,  Diod.  Siculus,  v.  27  ;  Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.  xxxiij.  10,
and  others ;  also  sundry  coins  and  inscriptions.

G


82  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

and  why  lie  had  horns.  M.  Mowat  would  answer  the
first  by  showing  that  the  squatting  position  was  familiar
to  the  Gauls,  as  proved  by  more  than  one  ancient  author  ;x
whence  it  was  that  they  thought  proper  to  give  some
of  their  gods,  and  especially  the  one  whom  they  regarded
as  their  universal  parent,  an  attitude  which  was  familiar
to  them  and  characteristic  of  their  race;  so  they  also
represented  him  wearing  the  sagum ;  other  gods  might
take  to  Eoman  ways,  but  he  must  remain  true  to  old-
fashioned  Gaul.  With  regard  to  the  horns,  the  same
archaeologist  would  account  for  them  by  suggesting  that
the  Amalthean  horn  had,  in  the  form  of  a  cornucopia,
single  or  double,  everywhere  become  the  emblem  of  abun-
dance, and  further  that  the  Gauls  were  in  the  habit  of
using  the  cornucopia  as  an  ornament  for  the  head.2  Nei-
ther answer  can  be  said  to  go  far  enough,  for  it  seems
probable  that  both  the  squatting  posture  and  the  horns
had  a  mythological  signification  reaching  back  beyond  the
history  of  the  Celts  as  a  distinct  branch  of  the  Aryan
family,  though  we  may  never  be  able  to  find  out  its
precise  meaning.

Fortunately  there  remains  one  source  of  light  on  the
genesis  and  history  of  Cernunnos  which  no  one,  so  far
as  I  know,  has  tried,  namely,  Teutonic  and  especially
Norse  mythology.  At  the  very  threshold  of  the  latter,
one's  eyes  light  at  once  on  an  ancient  god,  Heimdal,
the  allusions  to  whom  are,  so  to  say,  so  scanty  that
Norse  students  have  never  been  able  to  draw  a  complete
or  consistent  picture  of  him.   This  god  is  briefly  described


1  Strabo,  iv.  4,3;  Diod.  Sic.  v.  28.

2  Bull.  Epigr.  de  la  Gaule,  i.  115 ;  Diod.  Sic.  v.  30.


T.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  83

by  Yigf usson  and  Powell l  as  follows :  '  An  ancient  god
is  Heimdal,  from  whom  the  Amals  spring.  There  are
strange  lost  myths  connected  with  him ;  his  struggle
with  Loki  for  the  Brisinga  necklace ;  the  fight  in  which
they  fought  in  the  shape  of  seals.  He  is  '  the  gods'
warder,'  dwelling  on  the  gods'  path,  the  Eainbow.  There
he  sits,  'the  white  god,'  'the  wind-listening  god,'  whose
ears  are  so  sharp  that  he  hears  the  grass  grow  in  the
fields  and  the  wool  on  the  sheep's  backs,  with  his  Blast-
horn,  whose  trumpet-sound  will  ring  through  the  nine
worlds,  for  in  the  later  legends  he  has  some  of  the  attri-
butes of  the  Angel  of  the  Last  Trumpet.  His  teeth  are
of  gold ;  hence  he  is  '  stud-endowed.'  Curious  genealo-
gical myths  attach  themselves  to  him.  He  is  styled  the
son  of  nine  mothers ;  and  as  Eig's  father,  or  Eig  himself,
the  'walking  or  wandering  god,'  he  is  the  father  of  men
and  the  sire  of  kings,  and  of  earls  and  ceorls  and  thralls
alike.  His  own  name  is  epithetic,  perhaps  the  World-bow.
The  meaning  of  Hallinskidi  [another  name  of  his]  is
obscure.'  Such  is  a  summary  of  the  most  important  pas-
sages referring  to  Heimdal.

The  classics  picture  Pluto  holding  in  his  hands  the  keys
of  the  nether  world,  from  whose  bourne  no  mortal  returns,
and  Heimdal  survived  to  be  transformed  into  St.  Peter
with  the  keys :  previous  to  this,  his  last  stage,  he  was  the
porter,  watchman  or  warder  of  the  gods,  and  as  such  Loki,
the  enfant  terrible  of  Norse  mythology,  makes  fun  of  him
sitting  in  the  rain ;  but  this  view  of  the  northern  gods
living  together  and  having  occasion  for  a  warder  at  their
gates,  is  a  comparatively  late  one.    So  it  may  be  inferred

1  In  their  Corjnis  Poeticvm  Boreale,  ij.  465.

g2


84  I.    THE   GAULISH   PANTHEON.

that  one  of  Heimdal's  earlier  occupations  was  to  sit  at  the
entrance  to  the  nether  world,  which  position,  besides  partly
accounting  for  his  reputation  as  the  most  stupid  of  the
gods,  might  legitimately  be  compared  with  the  squatting  of
Cernunnos  :  Pluto  also  sat,  but  it  is  said  to  have  been  on
a  throne  of  sulphur.  Heimdal  was  a  stud-endowed  god,
with  teeth  of  gold,  which  clearly  involves  an  allusion  to
the  metallic  wealth  of  the  earth  so  pointedly  symbolized
in  the  representations  of  Cernunnos.  They  were  both
in  all  probability  also  the  guardians  of  treasure ;  and  it
is  in  this  capacity,  doubtless,  that  Heimdal  fought  with
Loki  in  his  attempt  to  steal  the  Brisinga  necklace,  which
was  the  property  of  the  goddess  Freija.  But  you  will
perhaps  ask  whether  the  fact  that  Heimdal  was  called
the  whitest  of  the  Anses  does  not  overthrow  all  these
speculations.  On  the  contrary,  if  we  examine  Welsh
literature,  we  find  the  king  of  the  fairies  and  the  hunts-
man who  fetches  to  his  abode  the  souls  of  the  deceased,
named  Givyn,  that  is  to  say  White.

It  is  known  that  the  ruling  families  among  both  Celts
and  Teutons  claimed  descent  from  particular  gods,  a  fact
seemingly  contradictory  of  Caesar's  statement  that  the
Gauls  believed  themselves  the  descendants  of  their  native
Dis ;  but,  as  in  the  case  of  Heimdal,  who  was  reckoned
by  the  Norsemen  to  be  the  father  of  all  classes  of  men,
kings  and  thralls  alike,  the  two  views  were  in  a  manner
consistent,  the  special  descent  of  the  heads  of  particular
families  from  particular  deities  being  not  so  much  contra-
dicted as  covered  by  the  general  descent  from  the  god
of  the  nether  world.  The  notion  that  their  Pluto  was
reckoned  by  the  Gauls  thefons  et  origo  of  all  things,  the
gods  included,  is  countenanced  by  Caesar's  words,  which


I.     THE    GAULISH    PAXTHE0N.  85

connected  with  the  god  the  Gaulish  habit  of  reckoning
the  night  before  the  day ;  but  precedence  was  also  given
the  night  by  the  ancient  Germans,  as  we  are  expressly
told  by  Tacitus  in  his  Cfermania,  cap.  xi. ;  and  they  did
so  most  likely  for  the  same  reason  as  the  Celts,  who
considered  night  and  death  to  have  existed  before  light
and  life.  This  would  explain  the  myth  describing  how
Heimdal  was  in  the  beginning  of  days  born  of  nine  giant
maidens,  nine  sisters  or  nine  mothers,  in  whom  we  may
see  a  reference  to  a  nonary  week :  thus  Heimdal  proves
to  be  the  first  offspring  of  time.

His  name  must  have  been  epithetic ;  but  he  had  other
names,  which,  together  with  his  blast-horn,  remind  one
of  the  horned  Cernunnos :  I  allude  to  Hallinskicti  and
Heimdali,  both  of  which  are  said  to  mean  a  ram,  which
suggests  that  Heimdal  was  originally  represented  as  a  ram.
That  he  was  horned  is  implied  likewise  by  a  curious  term
in  Norse  poetry  for  a  man's  head,  namely,  '  Heimdal's
sword  : '  Gretti  the  Strong  so  speaks :  of  his  own  head,  and
it  called  forth  the  explanation  that  Heimdal  had  some  time
or  other  fought  in  Samson-like  fashion  with  somebody's
head  as  his  weapon;  but  as  it  is  not  called  a  club  or
hammer,  but  hjorr,  which  meant  a  sword,  also  a  missile
weapon,  and  even  a  shield,  it  is  highly  probable  that  the
original  myth  represented  him  as  fighting  with  no  head
but  his  own,  the  horns  on  which  served  him  for  sword,
spear  and  shield  all  at  once.  A  jpropos  of  Heimdal  as  a
ram,  the  fact  should  perhaps  be  mentioned  that  the  Celtic
Pluto  and  his  associate  frequently  have  as  one  of  their
attributes  a  serpent  or  two  with  a  ram's  head.2

1  Corpus  Pod.  Bar.  ij.  114.  2  Bertram!,  pp.  10,  28—31.


86  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

On  the  Rheims  monument  Cernunnos  has  below  him,
as  we  have  already  seen,  a  stag  and  an  ox,  while  the
Saintes  monument  has  on  it  several  bucrania :  both  stag
and  ox  were  probably  animals  sacred  to  the  god,  and  I
am  inclined  to  see  a  reference  to  him  in  the  bull  repre-
sented on  the  western  face  of  the  Gallo-Eoman  altar1  in
Paris.     It  bears  no  god's  image  or  name,  but  the  figure
of  a  bull,  with  three  cranes  standing  on  him,   one  on
his  head,  one  on  his  withers,  and  a  third  on  his  rump,
while  above  are  to  be  read  Tarvos*  Teigaranvs*,2  which
doubtless  mean  a  '  three-craned  bull.'     The  beast  cannot
be  regarded  as  exactly  representing  the  god,  as  he  is
adorned  with  a  dorsuale.5  which  marks  him  out  as  a  victim
to  be  sacrificed :  the  cranes  were  probably  viewed  in  the
same  light,  but  it  is  right  to  add  that  their  number  was
presumably  not  a  matter  of  accident ;  for  the  idea  of  a
triad  appears  to  have  played  as  important  a  role  in  ancient
Gaul4  as  in  Ireland  and  Wales.     Now  with  respect  to
Jupiter,   the  bull  and  the  birds  occupy  on  the  block
exactly  the  place  which  they  should  in  case  they  referred
to  Cernunnos ;   and  the  reason  why  his  victims  take  up
the  room  where  his  own  figure  might  be  expected,  is
probably   to   be    sought   in  some   religious   scruple    or
artistic   difficulty   which   prevented   the   sculptor   from
portraying  this  god,  who  was  so  unlike  the  others  as

1  It  is  the  one  with  the  name  and  figure  of  Esus  on  its  northern
face,  while  its  principal  face  looking  towards  the  east  hears  the  figure
and  name  of  Iovis,  and  the  southern  one  those  of  Volcanvs  :  see  the
Bull.  Epigr.  i.  pp.  60,  61,  68.

2  See  Stokes's  reading  in  the  Academy  for  Sept.  25,  1886,  p.  210  a.

3  This  also  is  a  discovery  of  M.  Mbwat's,  ibid.  pp.  68 — 70.

4  Bertrand,  pp.  20,  33-9.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  87

regards  both  form  and  posture.  Possibly  the  early  date
of  the  altar  would  warrant  our  supposing  that  the  bold
step  had  not  as  yet  been  taken  of  attempting  any  kind
of  image,  at  least  in  northern  Gaul,  of  this  unwieldy
divinity,  whom  Gaulish  theology  had  hardly  succeeded
in  anthropomorphizing  sufficiently  to  fit  him  to  figure  in
a  group  bearing  the  stamp  of  Eoman  respectability.

All  the  facts  at  our  disposal  tend  to  show  that  the
chthonian  deity  of  Celts  and  Teutons  was  held  to  have
the  form  of  a  horned  beast,  such  as  a  stag,  bull,  goat  or
ram,  and  it  is  now  needless  to  show  why  one  cannot
accept  the  conventional  cornucopia  as  an  adequate  expla-
nation of  that  idea.  At  the  same  time  it  would  be  rash
to  say  that  they  had  no  connection  with  one  another,  for
the  usual  account  of  the  Cornu  Copiae,  or  horn  of  plenty,
traces  it  back  to  the  Greek  Kepas  'A/iaA0«as  or  horn  of  the
goat  Amaltheia,  from  which  Zeus  was  nourished,  and  in
which  was  to  be  found  all  that  one  could  desire.  Here
we  have  also  a  horned  beast  older  than  Zeus,  and  the
form  of  the  myth  does  not  compel  us  to  assume  that  the
goat  was  originally  regarded  as  a  she-goat :  so  it  is  pos-
sible that  the  Amalthean  goat  and  the  horned  deities  are
to  be  referred  to  a  common  origin.

This  would,  however,  not  be  any  answer  to  the  ques-
tion whence  the  idea  of  a  horned  god  of  the  nether
world  was  derived ;  one  might,  for  example,  look  for
it  in  a  still  cruder  manner  of  regarding  him  not  only
as  the  first  offspring  of  time,  but  also  as  the  first  in
point  of  order  in  space — that  is,  as  the  foundation  and
upholder  of  the  mass  of  the  universe.  In  that  capacity
he  may  have  been  originally  pictured  as  a  huge  elk  or
a  gigantic  urus  sitting  quietly  under  the  weight  of  the


88  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

world,  save  when  he  shook  himself  and  produced  earth-
quakes. Such  a  piece  of  cosmogony  would  not  be  without
a  parallel  elsewhere,  and  it  calls  to  mind  such  a  Gaulish
proper  name  as  TJrogenonertus^  which  may  be  interpreted
to  mean  a  man  'endowed  with  or  possessed  of  the  might  of
an  TJrogen,  that  is,  of  a  descendant  of  UrusJ  which  possibly
meant  more  than  the  mere  beast  described  by  Caesar  as
living  in  the  great  forests  of  Germany.  Having  due
regard,  however,  to  the  god's  connection  or  identity
with  the  earth,  that  is  to  say  with  the  solid  ground,  one
should  rather  suppose  the  horns,  with  which  the  god
was  endowed,  to  be  the  mythical  exponents  of  the  hills
and  mountains  which  diversify  the  surface  of  the  globe.

After  this  digression,  let  us  return  to  the  data  pro-
vided us  by  French  archseology  :  the  monuments  I  have
described  associate  with  Cernunnos  certain  other  and
younger  gods  who  cluster  round  him  like  children  by
the  side  of  their  father.  Among  others  we  have  found
Apollo  and  Mercury  in  his  company,  and  there  would
be  no  difficulty  in  explaining  this  grouping.  Thus  the
Gaulish  Apollo  was  especially  connected  with,  and  wor-
shipped near,  the  mineral  springs  of  the  country,  those
perennial  sources  of  health  which  poured  forth  their
invigorating  volume  from  the  deep  realm  of  Cernunnos  ;
and  as  to  Mercury,  who  was,  among  other  things,  the
genius  of  commerce  and  money -making,  much  of  his
stock  in  trade,  so  to  say,  belonged  to  the  same  chthonian
deity  as  the  owner  and  dispenser  of  the  metallic  wealth
of  the  world.  Another  of  the  figures  associated  with
Cernunnos  is  represented  with  a  club,  which,  if  meant

1  Gliick's  Keltischen  Namen,  p.  97.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  89

for  a  Heracles,  would  remind  one  of  the  Greek  myth
which  makes  the  god  of  that  name  assist  Atlas  in  bearing
the  burden  of  the  superincumbent  world  ;  but  it  must  be
confessed  that  the  groupings  alluded  to  are  open  to  the
suspicion  of  having  been  made  in  some  measure  under
the  influence  of  classical  ideas,  including  possibly  that  of
the  Greek  mysteries.

There  remains  the  associate  of  Cernunnos  on  the  Saintes
monument,  where  she  is  represented  sitting  in  the  ordinary
way  near  to  the  cross-legged  god :  she  has  a  cornucopia,
which  implies  that  she  was  regarded  there  as  a  benignant
goddess  ;  but  beyond  that,  one  knows  nothing  about  her,
not  even  whether  she  should  be  regarded  as  identical
with  the  goddess  standing  on  the  other  face  of  the  stone.
But  with  one  or  both  of  these  goddesses  may  perhaps  be
compared  a  divinity  that  figures  in  the  Irish  and  Welsh
pedigrees  of  the  gods.  Her  Irish  name  was  Danu  or
Donu,  genitive  Danaun  or  Douann 1  (also  written  with  nd
for  nn).  She  is  treated  as  a  goddess  par  excellence,  in
Irish  dea,  of  which  the  genitive  had  various  forms,  such
as  de,  dee,  dei,  dea  and  dae.  So  the  Irish  gods,  who
are  reckoned  her  descendants,  are  promiscuously  called
Tnatha  De  Danann,  'the  Tribes  of  (the)  Goddess  Danu,'
Taath  Dea  or  Dei,  'the  Tribe  of  (the)  Goddess,'  and  Fir
Dea,  '  the  Men  of  (the)  Goddess.'  In  Welsh  her  name
takes  the  form  Don,  and  the  gods  descended  from  her
are  accordingly  called  the  Children  of  Don.  The  more
important  of  them  will  come  under  our  notice  as  we  go

1  The  consonantal  declension  was  always  liable  to  be  replaced,  so
we  have  Donand  and  Danann  used  in  the  nominative,  whence  a  new
genitive,  Danainne,  was  sometimes  made.  See  O'Donovan's  note,  Four
Masters,  A.M.  3450  (i.  p.  23),  A.D.  112-1  (ij.  p.  1020).


90  I.     THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

on:  they  are  Gwydion  son  of  Don,  Gilvaethwy  son  of
Don,  Amaethon  son  of  Don,  Govynion  or,  as  he  is  more
usually  called,  Govannon  son  of  Don,  the  smith,  whose
name  is  etymologically  equivalent  to  Goibniu,  genitive
Goibnenn,  that  of  the  smith  of  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann,
and  Aranrod  or  Arianrhod,  daughter  of  Don.

Their  father  is  not  usually  mentioned,  but  Arianrhod  is
called  daughter  of  Beli  in  the  Welsh  Triads1  (i.  40  =  ii.5),
whence  it  may  be  inferred  that  Beli  was  reckoned  Don's
husband.  He  is  usually  called  Beli  the  Great,  son  of
Mynogan,2  and  his  name  figures  as  that  of  the  king  of  the
Brythons  in  the  golden  age  of  their  mythic  history.  It  is
also  doubtless  to  be  identified  with  that  of  Bile,  father  of
Mile3  and  of  most  of  the  human  inhabitants  of  Ireland  as
distinguished  from  gods  and  demons.  But  Bile  is  fabled
to  have  been  king  of  Spain,  so  that  his  descendants  are
described  invading  Ireland  from  Spain :  what  could  that
mean  ?  Now  visits  by  the  heroes  of  the  Brythons  to  Hades
are,  as  we  shall  see  in  a  later  lecture,  sometimes  repre-
sented as  made  to  Ireland,  and  the  heroes  of  Ireland  setting
out  for  a  similar  destination  are  conversely  said  to  come
to  Britain.  But  in  some  instances  Spain  appears  to  have
been  substituted  for  Hades.  Thus  a  mythic  dog  forming
a  terrible  Cerberus  killed  by  the  sun-hero  Cuchulainn  is

1  The  reference  is  to  the  Triads  published  in  three  versions  in  the
Myvyrian  Archaiology  of  Wales  (London,  1801),  Vol.  ij.  pp.  1 — 22.
Version  ij.  is  from  the  Red  Book  of  Hergest,  and  has  been  published
by  me  in  the  Cymmrodor,  Vol.  iij.  52 — 61  :  it  now  forms  an  appendix
to  the  R.  B.  Mabinogion,  pp.  297—309.

2  Nennius  calls  him  Bellinus,  son  of  Minocannus,  and  makes  him
king  of  Britain  in  the  time  of  Caesar,  with  whom  he  fights  :  see  San-
Marte's  Nennius  §  Gildas,  pp.  40-1  (§  1 9).

3  Bk.  of  Leinater,  4</,  and  elsewhere.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  91

described  as  brought  from  Spain ;  Ciichulainn l  receives
a  visit  from  a  warlike  maiden  who,  having  fallen  in  love
with  him,  comes  to  see  him  from  the  Plains  of  Spain;2
and  Eogan  Mor,  another  form  of  the  solar  hero,  is  ena-
bled by  his  leman  Eadaoin,  or  Etain,  a  goddess  dwelling
in  Great  Beare  Island,  to  escape  from  his  enemies  to  Spain,
and  to  return  thence  in  due  time  to  overcome  them.3  Fur-
ther, a  giant  of  infernal  origin,  slain  on  Mont  St.  Michel
in  France  by  king  Arthur,  is  similarly  said  to  have  come
to  settle  there  from  Spain.4  So  the  descent  of  the  ancient
Irish  from  Mile,  son  of  Bile,  king  of  Spain,  meant  nothing
more  than  what  Caesar  expressed  differently  when  stating
that  the  druids  taught  the  Gauls  that  they  were  all
descended  from  Dis  Pater.

The  names  Bile  and  Beli  corroborate  this  conjecture,
as  they  are  doubtless  to  be  interpreted  to  mean  death
or  some  kindred  idea,  and  to  be  referred  to  the  same
origin  as  the  words  mentioned  (p.  37)  in  connection
with  the  name  of  the  Celtic  Mars  Belatucadros.  The
meaning  of  the  name  of  Don,  Beli's  consort,  was  analo-
gous, for  Welsh  Don,  Irish  Donu  or  Danu,  are  to  be
referred  to  the  same  origin  as  the  English  word  dwindle,
North -Eng.   dwyne,    'to  fall  into   a  swoon,'   A. -Saxon

1  See  folio  60/;  of  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  a  MS.  compiled,  about  the
year  1100,  from  older  sources:  its  Irish  name  is  Lebor  na  huidre  or
Leabhar  na  h-Uidhre.  My  references  are  to  the  lithographed  facsimile
published  by  the  Koyal  Irish  Academy  (Dublin,  1870).

2  Bk.  of  Leinster,  254  b.

3  Battle  ofMagh  Leana,  ed.  by  O'Curry  (Dublin,  1855),  pp.  30,  36.

4  Geoffrey's  Historia  Begum  Britanniae  (ed.  San-Marte)  x.  3.  M.
d'Arbois  de  Jubainville  has,  by  a  different  route,  arrived  at  the  same
conclusion  as  to  the  meaning  to  be  attached  to  the  term  Spain  in  such
contexts:  see  his  Cycle  Mythoh  pp.  85,  137.


92  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

dwinan,  l  tabescerc,'  Old  Norse  dvina,  l  to  dwindle,  pine
away,'  Sanskrit  dhvcm,  'to  be  hidden,  to  go  out  or  be
extinguished,'  dhvanta,  'hidden,  dark,'  and  as  a  neuter
noun  '  darkness ;'  possibly  also  the  Greek  word  OdvaTos,
1  death.'  On  the  other  hand,  the  Celtic  names  are  not
to  be  severed  from,  the  Welsh  word  dpi,  l  a  human  being
or  man  in  the  sense  of  homo,  not  of  virj  Irish  duine  of  the
same  meaning,  both  of  which  postulate  an  early  form
donjos,1  meaning  literally  and  etymologically  a  Ov-qros:  to
the  early  Celt,  as  to  the  Greek,  man  was  a  mortal,  as  dis-
tinguished from  the  immortal  gods  and  the  ancestors  who
had  taken  their  departure  to  the  Plain  of  Pleasure  in  the
other  world  where  death  was  unknown.

A  word  must  now  be  devoted  to  the  position  of  the
goddess  as  regards   her  consort:     Cernunnos  was    the

1  This  etymology  was  suggested  to  Dr.  Stokes,  who  has  approved  of
it  and  explained  by  means  of  it,  in  his  Celtic  Declension,  p.  37,  the
irregularity  of  an  Irish  duine  making  doini  in  the  plural  :  the  former,
according  to  his  rule,  comes  from  an  oxytone  dunjo-,  and  the  latter  from
a  paroxytone  diinjo-.  The  Welsh  dijn  postulates  the  latter;  hut  we  have
a  trace  of  the  former  in  a  'dyned,'  from  which  was  sometimes  formed  a
plural  'dynedon,'  written  dyneton  in  the  Black  Bk.  (Skene,  ij.  29,  line  11),
and  dynedun  in  the  Bk.  of  Taliessin  (Skene,  ij.  196,  line. 10).  The  Celtic
root  being  divan  or  dran,  the  evolution  of  doini  from  it  has  its  parallel
in  Old  Irish  coic,  '  five,'  from  a  base  corresponding  to  the  Latin  quinque.
The  Welsh  dyn  is  now  masculine,  and  a  feminine  dynes,  '  woman,'  has
been  made  fur  it,  but  so  recently  that  it  is  not  yet  a  book-word ;  but
in  the  Middle  Ages  dyn  was  often  used  in  the  feminine  by  the  poets,
and  it  occurs  of  that  gender  also  in  old  Cornish  (see  Stokes's  Beunans
Meriasek,  verse  1006)  :  this  means  that  the  word  was  originally,  like
OvrjTos,  an  adjective,  donjos,  donja,  donjon,  of  three  genders.  Lastly,
we  seem  to  have  an  element  of  the  same  origin  in  the  Dontaurios  of  a
magic  spell  extant  in  the  Gaulish  language  :  see  Stokes's  Celt.  Decl,
p.  78.  For  a  different  account  of  the  origin  of  Ouvaros,  see  Brugmann's
Grundriss  der  vergleichenden  Grammaiik  der  indogermanischen  Sprachen
(Strassburg,  1886),  i.  §§  236,  429  &,  1.


T.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  93

great  figure  according  to  Gaulish  ideas,  and  his  asso-
ciate was  apparently  of  smaller  consequence  in  their
sight :  did  the  insular  Celts  reverse  the  relative  posi-
tion of  the  Plutonic  pair?  When  the  facts  are  duly
weighed  it  will  be  found  that  there  is  no  evidence  to
that  effect.  This  view  is  countenanced  by  the  all  but
complete  absence  of  any  statements  as  to  the  nature  or
attributes  of  the  goddess :  she  looms  darkly  in  the  back-
ground as  the  mother  of  the  gods,  and  any  further  predi-
cate about  her  is  to  be  reached  only  as  a  matter  of  infer-
ence. The  prominence,  on  the  other  hand,  given  to  her
name  in  connection  with  those  of  her  descendants  is  to  be
accounted  for,  it  seems  to  me,  as  a  survival  of  the  custom
of  describing  persons  as  the  children  of  such  and  such
a  woman,  without  making  any  reference  to  the  father's
name  :  other  instances  of  the  same  kind  are  not  numerous
in  the  mythological  tales  of  Wales ;  they  are  more  fre-
quently met  with  in  those  of  Ireland  j1  while  in  Scotland,
that  is  to  say,  among  the  Picts,  it  was  the  rule  that  the
father  was  absolutely  of  no  account  in  the  succession.

To  return  from  this  digression  to  Cernunnos,  he  has,
so  far  as  we  have  gone,  been  treated  as  a  horned  god ;
but  it  would  not  be  right  to  dismiss  him  without  calling
attention  to  another  peculiarity  of  his  figure,  as  shown
by  some  of  the  representations  of  him.  Thus,  a  statuette
found  at  Autun,  besides  giving  him  one  principal  face,
has  on  either  side  of  the  head  a  spot,  above  each  of
his  ears,  fashioned  into  a  small  face;  so  that  the  god
was  enabled  not  only  to  look  forward,  but  also  to  see
on  both  sides.2    Some  monuments  give  his  three  faces  the

1  See  Stokes,  in  the  Rev.  Celt.  v.  362,  note  3.       2  Bertrand,  pp.  9, 10.


94  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.

same  dimensions,1  while  others  provide  him  with  three
complete  heads;2  and  the  Antim  figure  combined  all  his
most  salient  attributes,  the  horns,3  the  three  faces,  the
cross-legged  posture,  the  torque  round  his  neck,  and  ano-
ther resting  on  his  lap  and  separating  two  ram-headed
serpents.4  Lastly,  the  triple  head  was  sometimes  con-
sidered enough,  and  the  artist  made  no  attempt  to  give
the  god  a  body,  the  lower  portion  of  the  block  being
utilized  for  other  purposes,5  such  as  the  representation
of  the  god's  associates.

Now  this  strange  god,  reduced  to  a  wonderful  head,
which  identifies  him  with  Janus,  the  Eoman  god  of  begin-
nings and  endings,  has  his  counterpart  in  Welsh  literature,
though  attention  has,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,  never
been  called  to  the  fact :  I  allude  to  Bran,  of  whom  the
Mabinogi  speaks,6  which  is  called  after  the  name  of  his
sister  Branwen,  daughter  of  Llyr.  He  is  there  described
sitting  on  the  rock  of  Harlech  in  Merioneth,  with  his
courtiers  around  him,  when  he  descried  ships  sailing
rapidly  towards  the  land :  he  sent  some  of  his  men  down
to  meet  them  and  to  ascertain  the  business  of  those  in
them.  It  turned  out  to  be  the  fleet  of  Matholwch,  a
king  of  Ireland,  who  was  come  to  ask  for  Bran's  sister
Branwen  to  wife.  Bran,  without  moving  from  his  seat
on  the  rock,  conversed  with  Matholwch,  and  bade  him
land;  after  due  deliberation  the  latter's  request  was
granted,  and  he  returned  to  Ireland  with  Branwen  as

1  Bertrand,  pp.  22-7.  2  lb.  p.  23.

3  The  horns  are  gone,  but  the  sockets  remain,  with  a  trace  of  iron
rust  in  them.

4  Bertrand,  pp.  9,  10.  5  lb.  pp.  24-6.
6  R.  B.  Mob.  pp.  34-8;  Guest,  iij.  103—129.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  95

his  queen.  Some  years  elapsed  when,  owing  to  court
intrigues  of  uncertain  details,  Branwen  was,  for  no  fault
of  hers,  disgraced  and  driven  from  the  king  to  the  kitchen,
where  she  was  badly  used.  At  length  she  contrived  to
send  word  to  her  brother,  who  at  once  resolved  to  make
an  expedition  to  Ireland  to  avenge  her  wrongs.  But
instead  of  sailing  across  as  the  others  did,  Bran  had  to
wade  through  the  intervening  waters,  as  no  ship  had
ever  been  built  of  a  size  to  receive  this  colossal  kins;  on
board.  As  he  approached  the  Irish  shore,  the  swineherds
of  Erinn  hastened  to  Matholwch's  court  with  the  strange
story  that  they  had  seen  a  forest  on  the  sea,  and  near  it
a  great  mountain  with  its  spur  flanked  by  two  lakes :  they
added  that  both  forest  and  mountain  were  in  motion
towards  the  land.  Nobody  could  explain  this  until  Bran-
wen  was  summoned,  and  she  told  them  that  the  trees
were  the  masts  of  her  countrymen's  vessels,  that  the
mountain  they  had  seen  must  be  her  brother  wading
through  shallow  water,  and  that  the  mountain  spur  with
the  two  lakes  were  his  nose  and  eyes :  she  opined  that
his  countenance  betokened  anger  towards  Erinn.  Matho-
lwch  and  his  hosts  hastened  to  place  a  river  between  them
and  the  invaders.  When  the  latter  reached  the  stream,
they  found  the  bridge  over  it  gone  and  the  current  impas-
sable, until  Bran  laid  himself  across  its  bed  and  hurdles
were  placed  on  his  body,  so  that  his  men  passed  over  safely.
He  then  got  up  and  received  ambassadors  with  offers  of
peace  from  Matholwch,  which  were  rejected.  But  recon-
ciliation was  effected  with  Bran  by  the  Irish  paying  him
the  compliment  of  building  a  house  large  enough  for  him,
which  was  a  novelty  to  him,  as  he  had  never  before  been
able  to  enter  a  house.     He  had,  however,  a  brother  who


96  I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHE0X.

was  the  genius  of  discord,  and  he  succeeded  in  bring-
ing on  a  quarrel  between  the  hosts  of  Britain  and  Erinn,
and  in  converting  the  spacious  edifice  into  a  slaughter-
house, whence  only  seven  of  Bran's  men  escaped  alive.
The  whole,  it  may  be  observed  in  passing,  is  the  Celtic
counterpart  of  the  great  carnage  in  the  Nibelungen  Lied ;
and  the  description  of  the  waters l  separating  this  country
from  Ireland  suggests  that  the  original  story  spoke  of
Hades  rather  than  Erinn.

As  to  Bran  himself,  he  rescued  his  sister,  but  received
a  poisoned  arrow  in  his  foot,  whereupon  he  ordered  the
seven  survivors  of  his  army  to  cut  off'  his  head  and  to  take
it  with  them  to  their  country.  He  told  them  that  they
would  sit  long  at  dinner  at  Harlech,  and  find  the  society
of  his  Head  as  pleasant  as  it  had  ever  been  to  them  when
it  was  on  his  body.  From  Harlech  they  would  proceed,
he  said,  to  Gwales,  the  island  now  called  Gresholm,2  far
off  the  coast  of  Pembrokeshire,  and  remain  there  feast-
ing in  the  society  of  his  Head  so  long  as  they  did  not
open  a  certain  door  looking  towards  Cornwall.  Once,
however,  they  opened  that  door,  it  would  be  time  for
them  to  set  out  for  London,  and  there  in  the  White  Hill
to  bury  it  with  its  face  towards  France ;  so  long  as  the
Head  remained  undisturbed  in  that  position,  this  country
would  have  nothing  to  fear  from  foreign  invasion.

1  The  story-teller  experienced  some  difficulty  in  describing  them  :  he
makes  Bran's  ships  sail  across  them  ;  then  he  says  they  were  but  two
rivers,  called  Lli  and  Archan  ;  and  he  dismisses  them  with  the  signifi-
cant remark  that  it  is  since  then  "  the  Sea  has  multiplied  his  realms  :"
see  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  35  ;  Guest,  iij.  117,  where  the  passage  is  egregiously
mistranslated.

2  See  Lewis  Morris'  Celtic  Remains,  edited  for  the  Cambrian  Arch.
Association  by  the  Rev.  D.  Silvan  Evans  (London,  1878),  p.  436.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  97

The  Mabinogi  relates  how  it  happened  to  the  seven  men
as  Bran  had  foretold  them ;  how  they  sat  seven  years  at
dinner  at  Harlech  enjoying  the  friendly  society  of  Bran's
Head  and  the  song  of  the  Birds  of  Khiannon,  and  how
they  enjoyed  themselves  eighty  years  in  the  island  of
Gwales.  This  part  of  the  story  takes  its  name  from
Bran's  Urdawl  Benn,  that  is  to  say,  the  Venerable  or
dignified  Head.  Time  would  fail  me  to  discuss  the  pro-
bable identity  of  this  Venerable  Head  with  the  Uthr  Ben,
the  Wonderful  Head,  forming  the  subject  of  one  of  the
most  mythological  poems  ascribed  to  Taliessin;1  and  I
will  close  these  remarks  with  a  brief  mention  of  what
would  seem  to  be  an  echo  of  the  Cernunnos  myth  in
modern  Wales.  Lewis  Morris,  an  antiquarian  and  patriot
well  known  in  the  Principality  in  the  last  century,
writing  to  a  friend  of  his  about  his  protege*  the  Welsh
poet  Goronwy  Owen,  complains  of  the  uselessness  of
giving  that  genius  of  Bohemian  proclivities  any  more
money,  as  it  seemed  only  to  sink  him  deeper  in  diffi-
culties, and  he  uses  the  words :  '  It  is  surprising  what
confusion  money  will  make.  Is  it  any  wonder  that  the
devil  should  sit  cross-legged  in  Ogo  Maen  Cymwd  to  guard
the  treasures  there  ? ' 2  Whether  Lewis  Morris  had  delibe-
rately meant  to  represent  the  devil  as  a  wellwisher  of  man
need  not  be  seriously  discussed :  what  interests  us  at  this

1  Skene,  ii.  203-4.

2  The  Brython  for  1861,  p.  312  a,  where  the  name  of  the  cave  is
wrongly  printed  as  that  of  Maen  Cymnod  instead  of  Maen  Cymwd,
for  which  information  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  the  editor  of
the  Brython,  Mr.  Silvan  Evans.  Unfortunately,  neither  he  nor  I  can
find  where  the  cave  was  situated,  but  I  have  in  my  childhood  heard
similar  descriptions  of  the  devil,  though  I  can  no  longer  localize  them.

H


98  I.    THE    GAULISH   PANTHEON.

point  is  the  fact  that  the  picture  he  projects  of  the  devil
reproduces  exactly  two  characteristics  of  Cernunnos,  in
that  he  was  supposed  to  sit  cross-legged  guarding  the
treasures  in  his  cave.  That  a  divinity  like  Cernunnos
should  end  his  career  by  being  absorbed  into  the  incon-
gruous character  of  the  devil,  seems  just  what  one  might
have  expected.

With  the  aid  of  the  Welsh  instances,  one  is  enabled  to
identify  the  Head  in  Irish  literature  likewise,  where  it  is
called  that  of  Lomna,  Finn's  Fool,  who  is  treated  as  an
imbecile  and  as  a  poet  or  prophet :  I  allude  to  an  article
in  Cormac's  Glossary,1  where  verses  ascribed  to  Lomna's
Head  are  quoted.  The  story,  strange  and  obscure  as  it  is,
may  briefly  be  summarized  thus :  Finn  and  his  men  had
set  up  their  hunting-booth  in  Tethba,  Anglicized  Teffia,  a
district  of  considerable  extent  in  the  modern  counties  of
Westmeath  and  Longford ;  and  while  Finn  was  busy  with
the  chase,  Lomna  lurked  about  home,  where  he  came  one
day  across  Cairbre,  champion  of  the  Luigni,  with  the
Luignian  woman  who  was  Finn's  wife  in  that  district.
She  entreated  Lomna  not  to  tell  Finn  what  he  had  seen ;
but  unwilling  to  be  a  party  to  the  disgracing  of  Finn,
he  wrote  an  Ogam  couched  in  quaint  metaphors,  which
Finn  on  his  return  did  not  fail  to  interpret.  The  result
was  that  Cairbre,  coming  again  at  the  suggestion  of  the
Luignian  lady  when  Finn  was  away,  cut  off  Lomna's
head  and  carried  it  away  with  him.  Finn  in  the  evening
found  a  headless  body  in  the  booth  and  soon  convinced
himself  that  it  was  Lomna's ;  so  the  hounds  were  let  loose,
and  Finn  with  his  Fiann,  as  his  men  were  called,  tracked

1  See  pp.  129-30  of  O'Donovan's  translation  (ed.  Stokes),  s.v.  Ore
Treith.


I.     THE    GAULISH    PANTHEON.  99

the  murderer  and  his  party  to  an  empty  house  where  they
had  been  cooking  fish  on  a  stone,  with  Lomna's  Head  on
a  spike  by  the  fire.  The  first  charge  cooked  on  the  stone
Cairbre  divided,  we  are  told,  among  his  thrice  nine  fol-
lowers ;  but  he  did  not  put  a  morsel  of  it  in  the  mouth
of  Lomna's  Head.  Now  this  was  a  (/ess,  '  prohibition,'
to  the  Fiann,  and  the  Head  sang  a  very  obscure  verse
about  the  fish.  The  second  charge  cooked  on  the  stone
was  distributed  as  before,  and  the  Head  sang  another
verse,  referring  to  the  unjust  division  and  foretelling  the
retribution  that  was  quickly  to  follow.  Cairbre  then  said
to  his  men,  '  Put  out  the  Head,  though  it  is  an  evil  word
for  us.'  No  sooner  had  the  order  been  obeyed  than  the
Head  outside  uttered  a  third  verse,  and  Finn  with  his
Fiann  arrived  on  the  spot.

The  association  of  poetry,  prophecy  and  idiocy  with
one  another  is  so  thoroughly  Celtic  as  to  need  no  remark,
and  I  would  only  point  out  that  the  offence  taken  by  the
Head  at  being  refused  a  morsel  of  the  meal  which  Cairbre
and  his  men  were  making,  seems  to  imply,  that  it  was  a
custom  to  set  apart  some  of  one's  food  as  an  offering  to
the  Celtic  Dis,  and  that  meals  began  with  a  religious
ceremony  of  that  nature.

Minor  Divinities.
The  foregoing  gods  and  goddesses  formed  the  leading
figures  in  the  fashionable  circle,  so  to  say,  of  the  Gaulish
pantheon;  but  some  notice  must  now  be  taken  of  the
crowd  of  minor  gods  and  goddesses  that  also  belonged
to  it.  We  must  begin  with  the  Genius  Loci  Every
Gaulish  city,  and  British  too  probably,  had  its  eponymous
divinity,  under  whose  protection  it  was  supposed  to  be.

h2


100  I.  THE  GAULISH  PANTHEON.

The  dedication  of  their  cities  was  annually  celebrated
by  the  Gauls  with  libations  made  to  the  Genius  of  the
place;  and  the  practice  lasted  far  into  Christian  times.
The  names  of  some  of  these  Genii  are  known,  such  as
Nemausus,  Yesontio  and  Vasio,  the  tutelary  divinities
of  Kiines,  Besancon  and  Yaison  respectively  ;l  but  the
Allobroges  have  left  no  monuments  of  great  interest  in
this  respect.  However,  one  from  Geneva  may  be  men-
tioned ;  it  reads : 2  Deo  Invicto,  Genio  Loci,  Firmidius
Severinus,  mil(es)  leg(ionis)  viiiae  Aug(ustae)  P(iae),  &c.
The  name  of  the  god  is  not  given,  and  all  we  learn  from
the  inscription  is  that  he  was  assimilated  with  Deus  Sol
Invictus  or  Mithras,  whose  worship  was  introduced  by
the  Eomans,  as  inscriptions  in  various  places  in  the  Allo-
brogic  land  clearly  prove.

Next  come  the  mother  goddesses,  who  are  usually
called,  in  Gaulish  inscriptions  written  in  Latin,  Ifatrae,
Matres  or  Matronae:  the  dative  is  the  only  case  that
occurs  in  those  of  the  Allobroges,  and  it  is  found  to  be
matris  or  matrabas,3  for  which  the  pure  Gaulish  form
would  have  been  mdtrebo,  as  in  a  vernacular  inscription
at  Nimes.4  As  figured  in  ancient  bas-reliefs,  the  Mothers
take  the  form  of  three  young  women  of  a  benevolent
countenance  and  clad  in  long  robes.  They  are  mostly
represented  in  a  sitting  posture,  with  fruit  on  their  laps
or,  occasionally,  an  infant  on  their  knees ;  but  an  unin-
scribed  altar  in  the  museum  of  Yienne  shows  the  Mother
in  the  middle  sitting  with  a  basket  full  of  fruit  on  her  lap,
while  her  two  sisters  stand  by  her  in  long  robes  which

1  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  26.  2  lb.  p.  27.

3  lb.  p.  33.  4  Stokes,  Celt.  Declension,  p.  62.


I.  THE  GAULISH  PANTHEON.  101

cover  their  heads ;  and  a  monument  found  at  Metz  repre-
sents the  three  standing,  and  holding  in  their  hands  fruit
or  flowers.  To  come  back  to  the  land  of  the  Allobroges,
one  is  led  to  suppose,  from  the  number  of  inscriptions
and  sculptures  in  honour  of  the  Mothers,  that  their  wor-
ship was  far  the  most  popular  there,  and  the  same  remark
would  probably  apply  to  the  rest  of  Gaul.

Usually,  but  not  always,  they  have  the  official  title  of
Augustae  given  them,  as  in  the  following  inscription  found
at  Sainte-Colombe,  near  Lyons:  Matris  Augustis,  C.  Titius
Sedulus  ex  voto.1  And  a  remarkable  specimen  on  a  piece
of  stone  at  the  church  of  Aoste,  near  La  Tour-du-Pin  in  the
Isere,  reads:2  Matris  Aug(ustis)  ex  stipe  annua  denariorum
xxxv  et  d(onis). . . .  Here  it  may  be  observed  that  an  offer-
tory of  only  thirty-five  denarii  in  the  course  of  a  whole
year  is  pretty  clear  evidence  that  the  faithful  who  prac-
tised the  cult  of  the  Mothers  at  Aoste  were  all  poor
people,  and  that  the  service  was  of  the  simplest  and  most
rustic  nature.  One  more  of  these  inscriptions  deserves
to  be  mentioned,  namely,  that  found  at  Grenoble,  and
reading,  so  far  as  it  is  still  legible : 3  Matris  jSTemetiali(bus)
Lucretia  Q.  Lib(erta)  ....  After  the  analogy  of  other
instances,  Nemetiali  is  taken  to  be  an  abbreviation  for
Nemetialibus,  and  this  last  has  further  been  supposed
to  be  a  sort  of  Gallo-Eoman  equivalent  of  the  official
Augustis ;  but  it  is  much  more  likely  to  be  a  topical
epithet  referring  to  some  spot  where  they  had  a  shrine :
compare  Matrebo  Namausicabo,  '  to  the  Mothers  of  Xmies,'
and  Matribus  Treveris,  l  to  the  Mothers  of  Treves.'  But
if  this  should  be  thought  an  unsatisfactory  explanation,

1  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  p.  30.  2  lb.  p.  31.  3  lb.


102  I.  THE  GAULISH  PANTHEON.

several  others  might  be  easily  suggested :  for  instance,
Nemetialibus  might  mean  that  the  goddesses  were  referred
to  as  worshipped  in  ve^ra  or  groves,  as  it  was  not  unusual
for  sacred  spots  to  have  a  grove  of  trees  close  by  the
shrine  of  the  presiding  divinity ;  nor  was  it  otherwise  in
the  case  of  the  Mothers,  as  may  be  seen  from  an  in-
scription found  at  Monterberg,  near  Xanten,  reading:
Matribus  Quadruburg.  et  Genio  Loci  Sep.  Flavius  Seve-
rus  Vet.  Leg.  X.  G.  P.  F.  Y.  V.  Templum  cum  Arboribus
constituit.1  But  as  vepjrov,  which  we  have  already  met
with  in  the  Gaulish  inscription  found  at  Yaison,  may  be
regarded  as  meaning  not  simply  a  grove,  but  a  sacred
grove,  and  connected  with  the  Welsh  word  nyfed,  sup-
posed to  mean  '  sanctity  or  purity,'  it  would  perhaps  be
right  to  render  Nemetialibus  by  Sanctis,  and  to  compare
the  Sanctis  Virginibus  of  an  inscription  in  a  cartouche  on
a  broken  pillar  at  Saint-Komain-  en-Gal,  near  Lyons.2
These  Virgins  probably  belonged  to  much  the  same  class
of  divinities  as  the  Matrae :  the  probable  reading  of  the
whole  inscription,  which  is  in  a  bad  state,  is  said  to  be :
Sanctis  Virginibus,  Sacrum  Avitus  (et)  Campana  posu-
erunt.

Christianity  failed  to  put  an  end  to  the  belief  in
these  divine  Mothers  and  Virgins  :  it  was  continued
in  connection  with  benignant  fairies  and  the  Madonna,
whence  a  certain  number  of  the  churches  known  by  the
name  of  Notre-Dame,  built  on  spots  where  legend  asserts
images  of  the  Virgin  to  have  been  miraculously  disco-
vered. These  heathen  statues  are  usually  of  wood,  which
has  turned  black  in  the  ground,  whence  the  chapels  of

1  OreUi,  No.  2090.  2  Rev.  Celt.  iv.  34.


I.  THE  GAULISH  PANTHEON.  103

the  Black  Madonnas,  such  as  the  one  in  the  commune
of  La  Tronche,  near  Grenoble.  The  story  there  goes  that
the  statue  of  the  Virgin,  consisting  of  black  wood,  was
discovered  in  a  vineyard ;  and,  though  the  original  has
been  since  lost  and  superseded  by  one  of  blackened  stone,
the  sanctuary  of  the  Yierge  Noire  is  very  popular,  pil-
grimages being  made  to  it  on  Whit-Monday  by  persons,
especially  of  the  fair  sex,  who  wish  to  be  married;  if
the  Virgin  is  favourable,  the  desired  marriage  takes  place,
we  are  told,  within  the  year.1

Besides  Matres  and  Virgines,  Gaulish  paganism  had
also  its  Dominae,  who  cannot  have  been  very  different
from  them :  thus  a  tablet  found  at  Saint-Innocent,  near
Chamb^ry  in  Savoie,  reads : 2  Dominis  exs  voto  s(olvit)
l(ibens)  m(erito)  M.  Carminius  Magnus  pro  salute  sua
et  suorum.  Lastly,  a  Gaulish  word  which  may  possibly
be  the  equivalent  of  this  Dominis  is  used  in  an  interesting
inscription  found  at  Aix-les-Bains,  in  Piedmont,  which
reads  as  follows : 3  Comedovis  Augustis  M.  Helvius  Severi
Fil(ius)  Iuventius  ex  voto.  No  other  monument  in  honour
of  the  Comedovae  is  known  except  one  near  Cologne,  on
which  the  dative  has  been  read  both  Comedovibus  and
Comedonibus.*  In  either  case  we  have  a  common  stem
corned-,  which  is  also  that  of  the  Old  Irish  word  coimdiu  or
comdiu,  genitive  comdeth,  which  is  found  mostly  applied  to
God:  in  modern  Irish  it  is  superseded  by  tighearna,  'lord.'
It  has  been  analysed  con-med-,  in  which  med  would  be  of
the  same  origin  as  "Welsh  ( mediant,'  'power,  authority,

1  Rev.  Celt  iv.  30;  Rev.  des  Soc.  savantes,  1875,  ij.  pp.  113-4.

2  Rev.  Celt  iv.  34.  3  lb.
4  lb.  p.  35 ;  Brambach,  No.  469.


104  I.  THE  GAULISH  PANTHEON.

ownership : '  we  have  the  same  root  probably  in  the
English  word  mete,  'to  measure;'  and  one  may  go  fur-
ther and  point  out  that  the  stem  mediot,  of  the  Irish
eorndiu,  comdeth,  is  probably  to  be  found  bodily  in  the
Anglo-Saxon  metod,  which  applied  only  to  God,  and
in  its  Norse  equivalent  '  mjotudr,'  as  when  in  the
Volospa  mention  is  made  of  '  a  glorious  judge  beneath
the  earth,' x  supposed  to  be  Heimdal.  These  facts  suggest
that  the  word  Comedovae  was  applied  to  a  class  of  Matrae
or  Domtnae,  who,  in  their  capacity  of  guardians  of  the
weak  against  the  strong,  were  supposed  to  discharge  to
some  extent  the  functions  of  a  judge  or  dispenser  of
justice  by  avenging  his  crimes  on  the  wrong-doer ;  but
it  would  probably  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  them  to  have
partaken  to  any  great  extent  of  the  character  of  the
Greek  Erinnyes.

As  to  these  last,  however,  it  may  be  gathered  from
later  indications  that  vulgar  imagination  peopled  all
Celtic  lands  at  the  early  time  we  are  speaking  of,  with
an  indefinite  number  of  hurtful  and  malevolent  spirits,
goblins  and  ogresses  of  all  kinds,  whose  cult  of  terror
seldom  probably  attained  to  the  dignity  of  monumental
record.  But  a  characteristic  exception  occurs  in  this
country  in  the  case  of  an  inscription  found  at  Benwell,
near  Newcastle  on  Tyne :  its  brevity  is  remarkable,  as
the  whole  consists  of  the  two  words  Lamiis  Tribus,2  '  To
the  Witches  Three  '  The  devotee,  who  did  hot  wish  his
name  known,  may  have  been  a  soldier  from  the  Conti-
nent ;  but  the  three  Lamiae  were  doubtless  as  British  as
the  Three  Witches  in  Shakspear's  Macbeth.


1  Corpus  Poet,  Bar.  i.  193,  ii.  G21.  2  Iliibner,  No.  507.


I.  THE  GAULISH  PANTHEON.  105

It  has  often  been  noticed  that  all  these  divinities,
whether  friendly  or  unfriendly  to  man,  usually  muster
in  threes;  but  they  probably  resembled  the  Genius  Loci
in  being  local  and  attached  to  particular  spots,  and  it
would  therefore  not  be  always  easy  to  draw  a  clear  line
of  demarcation  between  them  and  the  other  gods  and
goddesses  associated  with  the  salient  features  of  a  Celtic
landscape.  The  number  of  these  minor  divinities  was
legion ;  and,  without  attempting  to  draw  a  hard  and
fast  line  between  them  and  the  greater  divinities,  who
also  lent  themselves  to  localization,  one  may  say  that
among  the  former  must  be  included  the  spirits  of  par-
ticular forests,  mountain  tops,  rocks,  lakes,  rivers,  river
sources,  and  all  springs  of  water,  which  have  in  later
times  been  treated  as  holywells,  whether  in  France  or
the  other  lands  inhabited  by  the  Celts.  It  has  been
supposed,  and  not  without  reason,  that  these  landscape
divinities  re-acted  powerfully  on  the  popular  imagination
in  which  they  had  their  existence,  by  imparting  to  the
physical  surroundings  of  the  Celt  the  charm  of  a  weird
and  unformulated  poetry.  But  what  race  was  it  that
gave  the  Celtic  landscape  of  antiquity  its  population  of
spirits?  The  Celtic  invaders  of  Aryan  stock  brought
their  gods  with  them  to  the  lands  they  conquered  just
as  much  as  the  ancestors  of  the  English  brought  with
them  theirs  to  the  Christian  land  of  Eoman  Britain ;  and
the  former  continued  to  be  in  the  main  the  great  figures
of  the  Celtic  pantheon  until  that  rude  edifice  crumbled
to  dust  under  the  attacks  of  Christianity ;  but  as  to  the
innumerable  divinities  attached,  so  to  say,  to  the  soil,
the  great  majority  of  them  were  very  possibly  the  crea-
tions of  the  peoples  here  before  the  Celts.     In  any  case,


106  I.  THE  GAULISH  PABTHBDN.

it  is  curious  to  observe  that,  while  Christian  missionaries
appear  to  have  made  comparatively  short  work  of  the
greater  Celtic  gods  of  Aryan  origin,  the  Church  fulmi-
nated in  vain  against  the  humble  worship  of  wells  and
stocks  and  stones.     That  cult  required  no  well-defined
and  costly  priesthood  which  could  be  overturned  once  for
all,  and,  a  little  modified,  it  thrives  in  some  Celtic  lands
to  this  day.    All  that  the  Church  could  do  was  to  ignore
it  for  a  time,  and  ultimately  to  assimilate  it :  to  effect
its  annihilation  has  always  been  beyond  her  power.    We
have  a  good  parallel   in  modern  Greece,   of  which  it
has  been  well  said,1  that  '  the  high  gods  of  the  divine
race  of  Achilles  and  Agamemnon  are  forgotten,  but  the
descendants  of  the  Penesta?,  the  villeins  of  Thessaly,  still
dread  the  beings  of  the  popular  creed,  the  Nereids,  the
Cyclopes,  and  the  Lamia.'     The  greater  divinities  of  the
Celts  were  undoubtedly  Aryan ;  but  to  what  extent  the
motley  mob  of  lesser  gods  and  goddesses  were  likewise
Aryan  is  a  question  that  must  remain  unanswered,  until,
at  any  rate,  the  ethnologist,  the  archaeologist  and  the
historian  have  succeeded  in  placing  before  us  in  a  clearer
light  than  has  yet  been  done,  the  role  played  by  those
ancient  peoples  who  occupied  the  west  of  Europe  before
the  Celts  first  beheld  the  Atlantic  or  approached  the
sunny  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.

1  By  Andrew  Lang  in  his  Custum  and  Myth,  p.  178.


Lecture  II.

THE  ZEUS  OF  THE  INSULAR  CELTS.

PART  I.


In  the  foregoing  lecture  I  tried  to  reconstruct,  mainly
out  of  the  ruins  of  the  Gaulish  pantheon,  the  fallen
edifice  of  Celtic  paganism;  and  in  so  doing,  I  endea-
voured to  confine  myself  as  much  as  I  conveniently  could
to  what  may  be  called  the  theology  of  the  early  Celts ;
but  it  is  impossible  to  do  justice  to  our  subject  without
pursuing  it,  as  I  now  briefly  propose  to  do,  into  its  later
stages,  represented  by  such  myths  as  the  Celtic  nations
of  modern  times  happen  to  retain  embedded  in  their
literature  or  woven  into  their  folk-lore.  I  make,  how-
ever, no  attempt  to  draw  any  line  of  demarcation  between
theology  and  mythology;  for  who  is  there  to  tell  me
where  precisely  theology  and  religion  end,  and  where
myth  and  fiction  begin  ?  Professor  Max  Mtiller,  when
speaking  of  the  storm-gods  of  the  Hindus,  uses  the  words,
" '  They  can  pound  us,  we  cannot  pound  them ; '  this  feel-
ing, too,  contained  a  germ  of  religious  thought."1  Ilis
later  utterances2  on  this  point  are  still  more  explicit,  as
when  he  says  that  '  the  living  germ  of  all  religion '  is  to

1  Hibbert  Lectures,  i.  211.

2  Biographical  Essays,  pp.  162-3,  &c.


108  II.    THE   ZEUS   or

be  found  in  the  '  sensation  of  the  Infinite,'  which  Infinite
we  can  know  ( as  the  Indefinite  only,  or  as  the  partially
defined.'  For  '  could  we  define  it  nil,'  he  goes  on  to  say,
'  it  would  cease  to  be  the  Infinite,  it  would  cease  to  be
the  Unknown,  it  would  cease  to  be  the  Inconceivable  or
the  Divine.'  Anything,  then,  which  surpasses  man's
comprehension  and  man's  power  would  seem  to  be  fraught
with  religious  germs.  Thus  while  there  remains  any-
thing unknown,  there  is  room  for  the  religious  germ
to  develop,  a  fact  which  men  of  little  faith  never
thoroughly  realize ;  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  every
addition  to  our  knowledge  and  means  of  understanding
the  universe,  tends,  however  insignificant  it  may  be,  to
narrow  the  domain  of  what  passes  for  religion.  'We
have  lived,'  says  Dr.  Tylor,  in  a  work1  which  forms
an  account  of  the  genesis  of  religion,  'to  see  the  time
when  men  shrink  from  addressing  even  to  Supreme
Deity  the  old  customary  rain-prayers;  for  the  rainfall
is  passing  from  the  region  of  the  supernatural,  to  join
the  tides  and  seasons  in  the  realm  of  physical  science.'
Conversely,  if  we  look  back  in  the  direction  of  the  early
history  of  man,  we  have  to  acknowledge  that  the  province
of  prayer  was  considerably  larger  and  wider  formerly
than  it  is  now ;  that  is  to  say,  many  things  which  seem
to  us  to  have  nothing  in  particular  to  do  with  religion,
wore  an  essentially  religious  aspect  in  the  eyes  of  our
pagan  ancestors,  and  rightly  so,  if  we  consider  the  extent
of  their  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  the  world  around
them.  But  it  would  be  at  variance  with  all  that  is
known  to  us  about  nations  in  a  low  state  of  civilization,


1  Primitive  Culture,  ii.  261.


THE   INSULAR   CELTS.  109

to  ascribe  to  the  Aryans  before  their  separation,  or  during
what  is  sometimes  called  their  pro-ethnic  period,  any
approach  to  a  habit  of  striving  after  the  infinite  or  even
of  consciously  contemplating  it ;  nor  would  anybody  pro-
bably be  prepared  to  maintain  such  an  opinion.

It  is,  however,  not  to  be  denied  that  they  have  not
unfrequently  been  credited  with  a  theology  far  too  ad-
vanced for  them,  and  this  error  was  a  very  natural  one  :
the  discovery  that  certain  languages  spoken  by  nations
dwelling  in  different  lands  between  the  Ganges  and  the
Loire  formed  one  family  of  speech,  to  which  the  name
Aryan  is  given,  was  followed  by  the  identification  of  a
considerable  vocabulary  which  they  possessed  in  common,
and  among  the  most  interesting  words  in  that  common
vocabulary  were  the  prototypes  of  the  following  :  Sanskrit
Dyaus,  l  Heaven  or  Sky,'  and  Dyaushpitar,  '  Sky  or  Hea-
ven  as  Father  j'    Greek   Zeus,  Zeus  ttcitt^,  VOCative   Zed  irdrep  •

Latin  Diespiter  or  Jupiter,  gen.  Jovis;  Norse  Tyr;  0.  H.
German  Ziu;  A. -Saxon  Tin,  whence  the  modern  English
Tuesday.  It  was  inferred  from  these  words  and  kindred
ones  that  the  pro-ethnic  Aryans  were  familiar  with  the
idea  of  a  Father  Heaven  or  Sky,  which  was  probably  right;
but  there  was  a  strong  temptation  to  look  at  that  early
Father  Sky  more  or  less  through  the  colouring  medium
of  the  most  elevated  representations  of  him  in  later  times,
namely,  as  the  Zeus  and  Jove  of  the  best  aspects  of  Greek
and  Latin  religion.  It  would  be  tedious  to  enumerate
one  by  one  the  mythologists  and  other  writers  who  gave
way  to  that  temptation.  Suffice  it  to  mention  the  most
insignificant  of  the  latter :  in  a  little  book1  published  by

1  Lectures  on  Welsh  Philology,  p.  10.


110  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

me  some  ten  years  ago,  words  to  the  following  effect
were  used :  The  pro-ethnic  Aryan's  ideas  of  religion  and
morals  can  only  be  guessed,  and  how  many  gods  he  had,
it  is  impossible  to  say.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  he
worshipped  one  above  all  others,  if  others  he  had,  and
that  he  spoke  of  him  in  terms  expressive  at  once  of  the
light  of  day  and  of  the  wide  expanse  of  the  sky,  which
looked  down  upon  him  wherever  he  roamed.  This  may
have  been  merely  his  way  of  saying  that  his  great  Hea-
ven-father was  the  god  of  light,  and  that  he  was  present
everywhere.

So  I  was  led  to  think  then ;  but  I  should  now  say  that
those  words,  which  are  perhaps  more  faulty  in  what  they
imply  than  what  they  directly  express,  are  pitched  in
far  too  high  a  key.     For  if  the  Aryans  in  question  had
attained  to  the  idea  of  so  transcendent  a  god  as  this  would
suggest,   there  would  be  a  difficulty  in  understanding
how,  as  the  Dyaus  of  Sanskrit  literature,  he  should  have
become  comparatively  a  lay  figure,  that  as  Tiu  he  should
have  been  superseded  by  Woden  and  Thor  among  the
Teutons,  and   that  among   the  Gauls  his  pre-eminence
should  at  any  time  have  been  threatened  by  a  Mercury.
This  would  look  somewhat  like  a  reversion  of  the  great
law  of  evolution,  a  serious  argument  against  any  theory
of  religion  or  mythology.     So  we  cannot  do  better  than
go  back  to  find  whether  our  too  hastily  formed  notions  of
the  Father  Sky  of  the  pro-ethnic  Aryans  will  not  admit  of
revision.

The  task  has  been  rendered  comparatively  easy  by  the
labours  of  the  student  of  anthropology :  that  science  of
man  is  not  quite  new,  but  the  cunabula  of  the  Aryan
were  thought  too  sacred  to  be  handled  by  the  anthropo-


THE   INSULAR   CELTS.  Ill

logist  and  student  of  comparative  folk-lore ;  so  he  was,  as
it  were,  warned  off  the  ground  with  the  polite  request
that  he  should  be  content  to  amuse  himself  with  observ-
ing the  queer  ways  and  learning  the  strange  stories  of
contemporary  savages.  This  was  of  course  of  no  avail,
for  he  soon  returned  to  lay  ruthless  hands  on  our  most
cherished  theories  of  mythology,  and  to  tell  us,  that,
whether  we  liked  it  or  not,  our  Aryan  ancestors  were
savages  who  did  not  greatly  differ  from  other  savages  of
other  times  and  other  lands.  We  are  forced  to  listen
and  to  admit  that  his  method  of  working  is  in  principle
both  simple  and  sound.  Thus  when  he  finds  a  civilized
people  in  possession  of  a  savage  myth  or  a  savage  rite,  he
tries  to  find,  for  the  purposes  of  comparison,  the  like  myth
or  the  like  rite  cherished  by  savages,  among  whom  the
meaning  of  the  same  is  well  known  or  easy  to  ascertain.
This  has  been  successfully  done1  with  the  Greek  myth
of  Cronus,  which  is  not  only  instructive  as  an  instance
of  the  true  method,  but  important  to  us  as  bearing  on
one  of  the  subjects  of  this  lecture.  The  chief  features
of  the  myth,  as  drawn  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  from
Greek  literature,2  were  the  following:  Gaea  or  Earth
gave  birth  to  Uranus  or  Heaven,  and  later  she  became
her  son's  wife :  they  had  many  children,  some  of  whom
were  gods  of  the  elements,  such  as  Oceanus,  the  deep,
Hyperion,  the  sun,  and  Cronus  of  Crooked  Counsel,
who  ever  hated  his  mighty  sire.  Now  Heaven  used  to
hide  his  children  from  the  light  in  the  hollows  of  Earth,

1  Andrew  Lang,  Custom  and  Myth,  pp.  23,  44,  45,  &c.

2  Hesiod,  Theogonia,  166 — 192;  Apollodorus'  Bibliutheca  in  "Wes-
termann's  MythograpM,  i.  1,  l.


112  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

which  both  she  and  they  resented.  The  children  con-
spired against  their  father,  and  their  mother  assisted  them
by  producing  iron,  with  which  she  bade  them  avenge
their  wrongs.  But  fear  fell  on  them  all  except  Cronus,
who  determined  to  deliver  his  mother  from  Heaven's
embraces ;  so  when  the  latter  was  amorously  approaching
his  wife  from  a  distance,  their  son  Cronus,  armed  with  a
sickle  of  iron  or  steel,  mutilated  him.  Thus  the  wedded
pair,  Heaven  and  Earth,  were  practically  divorced,  but
Oceanus  clung  to  his  father  ever  after  the  shameful  treat-
ment which  the  latter  had  undergone.

The  Chinese1  likewise  possess  the  myth;  and  it  is
known  to  various  peoples  of  the  Pacific,  including  the
Maori,  whose  version  is  in  the  highest  degree  interesting
on  account  of  its  close  resemblance,  even  in  details,  to
the  Greek  one ;  but  I  must  be  content  to  pass  over  them
in  silence,  giving  you  the  story  alone  as  reproduced  by
Mr.  Lang  : 2  '  In  the  beginning,  the  Heaven,  Eangi,  and
the  Earth,  Papa,  were  the  father  and  mother  of  all  things.
In  these  days  the  Heaven  lay  upon  the  Earth,  and  all
was  darkness.  They  had  never  been  separated.  Heaven
and  Earth  had  children,  who  grew  up  and  lived  in  this
thick  night,  and  they  were  unhappy  because  they  could
not  see.  Between  the  bodies  of  their  parents  they  were
imprisoned,  and  there  was  no  light.     The  names  of  the


1  Lang,  p.  50;  Pauthier,  Llvres  sacres  de  V Orient  (Paris,  1852),
p.  19.

2  Lang,  pp.  45-6,  who  gives  as  his  authorities  Taylor's  New  Zealand,
pp.  118 — 121,  where  the  story  is  given  with  more  detail,  and  Bastian,
Die  liellirje  Sage  der  Polynesler,  pp.  36 — 39,  adding  that  a  crowd  of
similar  myths,  in  one  of  which  a  serpent  severs  Heaven  and  Earth,
are  printed  in  Turner's  Samoa:  see  more  especially  pp.  198,  292,  300.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  113

children,  were  Tumatuenga,  Tane-Mahuta,  Tutenganaliau
and  some  others.  So  they  all  consulted  as  to  what  should
be  done  with  their  parents,  Eangi  and  Papa.  '  Shall  we
slay  them,  or  shall  we  separate  them?'  'Go  to,'  said
Tumatuenga,  '  let  us  slay  them.'  '  No,'  cried  Tane-Ma-
huta, '  let  us  rather  separate  them.  Let  one  go  upwards,
and  become  a  stranger  to  us ;  let  the  other  remain  below,
and  be  a  parent  to  us.'  Only  Tawhiri-Matea  (the  wind)
had  pity  on  his  own  father  and  mother.  Then  the  fruit-
gods,  and  the  war -god,  and  the  sea -god  (for  all  the
children  of  Papa  and  Eangi  were  gods)  tried  to  rend
their  parents  asunder.  Last  rose  the  forest-god,  cruel
Tutenganaliau.  He  severed  the  sinews  which  united
Heaven  and  Earth,  Eangi  and  Papa.  Then  he  pushed
hard  with  his  head  and  feet.  Then  wailed  Heaven  and
exclaimed  Earth,  'Wherefore  this  murder?  Why  this
great  sin?  Why  destroy  us ?  Why  separate  us ? '  But
Tane  pushed  and  pushed :  Eangi  was  driven  far  away
into  the  air.  They  became  visible,  who  had  hitherto  been
concealed  between  the  hollows  of  their  parents'  breasts.
Only  the  storm-god  differed  from  his  brethren :  he  arose
and  followed  his  father,  Eangi,  and  abode  with  him  in
the  open  spaces  of  the  sky.'

There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  Maori  borrowed
their  myth  from  the  Greeks,  or  the  Greeks  from  the
Maori :  the  similarity  is  to  be  traced  either  to  a  common
origin,  or,  as  most  writers  of  the  present  day  seem  in-
clined to  suppose,  to  the  independent  workings  of  the
human  mind  under  similar  circumstances.  The  Greek
myth,  which  distressed  thoughtful  and  pious  minds  like
that  of  Socrates,  was  a  survival,  like  the  other  scandalous
tales  about  the  gods,  from  the  time  when  the  ancestors

i


114  II.     THE   ZEUS   OP

of  the  Greeks  were  savages  like  the  Maori ;  and  its  origin
is  to  be  sought  in  the  animism  so  characteristic  of  the
savage  mind,  that  is  to  say,  its  tendency  to  endow  the
sun,  the  moon,  the  sky,  or  any  feature  of  the  physical
world  admitting  of  being  readily  individualized,  with  a
soul  and  a  body,  with  parts  and  passions,  like  their  own.1
In  the  instance  in  question,  the  Aryan  ancestors  of  Greeks
and  Hindus  are  found  to  have  been  at  one  with  those  of
the  Chinese  and  the  Polynesians  of  later  times,  in  making
of  the  sky  and  the  earth  a  wedded  couple  of  savages  like
themselves;  and  to  the  savage  idea  this  would  be  no
mere  metaphor  or  simile,  for  the  childish  simplicity  of
his  mind  is  such  as  to  be  realized  by  us  only  with  great
difficulty.  But  the  effort  to  do  so  in  the  instance  which
more  especially  concerns  us  just  now,  will  serve  to  correct
the  views  we  had  formed  of  the  Father  Sky  of  the  early
Aryans  by  taking  up  the  study  of  the  myth  at  the
wrong  end.

Among  the  Aryan  nations,  however,  the  Greeks  were
not  singular  in  possessing  the  myth  here  in  question :  it
was  known  in  a  modified  form  to  the  Hindus,  and  it  is
to  be  found  in  the  Norse  Edda;  while  in  the  light  of
these  kindred  literatures  it  is  possible  to  detect  traces
of  it  in  Celtic.  In  Sanskrit,  the  god  known  by  the  name
of  Dyaus,  a  word  identical  with  one  of  the  names  of  the
Sky  or  the  Heavens,  is  usually  referred  to  in  company
with  Prithivi,  or  Earth,  which  were  once  joined,  and
subsequently  separated  from  one  another.2  The  Norse
version  is,  however,  more  explicit;    and  instead  of  a

1  Tylor's  Prim.  Cult.  i.  284—292,  et  passim.

2  Muir's  Sanskrit  Texts,  v.  23.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  115

partial  mutilation,  as  of  Uranus  by  Cronus,  it  repre-
sents the  vast  frame  of  the  world-giant  Hymi  completely
cut  up  by  the  sons  of  Bor,  that  is  to  say,  the  Anses
or  Norse  gods  with  Woden  at  their  head :  from  Hymi's
flesh  they  made  the  earth,  from  his  bones  the  moun-
tains, from  his  skull  the  heavens,  from  his  blood  the
sea,  from  his  brows  the  earth  for  the  sons  of  men  to
dwell  on,  and  from  his  brain  the  threatening  clouds.1
The  previous  stage  was  the  subject  of  a  very  natural
vagueness,  and  we  are  told  nothing  very  detailed  about
it ;  but  Hymi  existed,  and  the  existence  may  also  be
supposed  of  that  whereon  he  rested,  a  cosmic  consort
corresponding,  roughly  speaking,  to  Gaea  or  Prithivi.
Further  we  are  informed  who  Hymi  was,2  at  least  rela-
tively to  the  Anses:  he  was  the  grandfather  of  Thi,
called  in  Norse  Tyr.  This  means,  as  Tiu  or  Tyr  is  the
equivalent  of  Zeus,  that  Hymi  is  to  be  rendered  by
Uranus,  the  grandfather  of  Zeus,  which  is  in  fact  borne
out  by  the  etymological  meaning  of  these  names  respec-
tively. The  name  Hymi,  which  in  Norse  makes  Hymir
in  the  nominative  case,  is  akin,  for  instance,  to  the  Norse
verb  hyma,  'to  sneak  in  the  dark,'  huma,  'to  become
dusk,'  all  from  hum,  '  twilight  or  dusk ;'  while  the  Greek
Oipauos,  '  Uranus,'  and  its  Sanskrit  equivalent  Yaruna,
come  from  a  root  var,  meaning  '  to  cover.'  This  chimes
in  with  the  grievance  of  which  the  children  of  Uranus
complained,  that  he  used  to  hide  them  from  the  light  in

1  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  64.

2  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  220 — 225.  The  giant's  name  is  sometimes
treated  as  Ymi,  but  its  identity  with  Hymi  can  scarcely  be  doubted  :
see  ii.  469,  where  Hymis  hauss  and  Ymis  hauss  are  given  ;  also  the
editors'  remarks,  p.  468,  i.  219,  and  Hymiss  meyjar,  p.  106.

i2


116  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

the  hollows  of  the  earth.  The  English  word  sky  con-
veyed a  similar  meaning,  since  it  is  traced  back  to  the
Scandinavian  origin  from  which  is  derived  the  Old  Norse
ski),  '  a  cloud.'

The  second  part  of  the  Cronus  myth  relates  how  Cronus,
afraid  of  his  own  offspring,  used  to  destroy  them  by
swallowing  them  at  their  birth,  and  how  the  youngest  of
them,  Zeus,  escaped  and  grew  up,  how  he  banished  his
father  Cronus  and  became  the  chief  of  the  gods.  Now
his  Greek  name  Zcu's  has  its  exact  etymological  counter-
part, as  already  mentioned,  in  that  of  the  Eoman  Jove,
of  the  Teutonic  Tiu  and  of  the  Hindu  Dyaus.  But  this
group  of  words  contains  a  good  many  forms ;  and,  as  it  is
expedient  not  to  confound  them,  they  may  be  arranged
as  follows  under  their  respective  stems  : 1

1.  Diu,  diau,  diau : — Sanskrit  dyaus,  mas.  and  fern,
'heaven,  sky,  clay,  the  god  Dyaus'  (as  in  Dyaush-pitar),
nom.  dyaus  (i.e.  didus),  voc.  dyaus  (i.e.  didus),  instr.  diva,
dat.  dyave  and  dive,  gen.  dyos  and  divas,  dual  dydvd  and
dyavl,  pi.  nom.  dydvas,  ace.  dyun,  instr.  dyubhis ;  Greek
nom.  Zei's,  voc.  Zev,  gen.  Aids  (for  Ai/ds);  Latin  Jou-  or
Ju(-piter),  gen.  Diovis,  Jovis ;  A. -Saxon  Tiu,  gen.  Tiives
in  Tiivcsdwg,  ' Tuesday;'  0.  H.  Ger.  Ziu,  gen.  Ziwes ;
O.  Norse  Tyr,  gen.  Tys,  as  in  Tysdagr,  '  Tuesday,'  ace.
and  dat.  Ty  ;  "Welsh  duw,2  'a  god,  God,'  dieu  (as  in
tri-dicu,  'three  days')  and  dieuoect,  'days.'

1  These  numbered  articles  are  chiefly  meant  for  reference,  so  the
general  reader  may  pass  them  by  and  resume  his  perusal  at  p.  118.

2  The  Old  Welsh  diu,  in  Cormac's  Glossary  and  in  the  Juvencus  Codex
(see  Stokes  in  Kuhn's  Beit  rouge,  iv.  407),  only  differs  probably  in  spel-
ling from  duw,  which  is  written  dim  and  duv  in  the  Black  Book,  while
the  word  for  day,  cited  in  ISTo.  2,  occurs  as  dyv  in  Dyv  Merchir,  '  on


THE    INSULAR   CELTS.  117

2.  Divo  : — Skr.  diva,  neut. '  heaven,  day,'  as  in  naJctan-
divam,  '  by  night  and  by  day ;'  Greek  eV8fcs  (for  -St/bs),
'  at  noon,  in  the  open  air ;'  Latin  bi-duum,  '  the  space  of
two  days,'  tri-duum,  l  the  space  of  three  days ;'  Welsh
dyw,  adverbial,  as  in  he- dyw,  '  to-day,'  dyw  Llun  (now
Dywllun  and  even  Dwyllun),  '  on  Monday,'  and  dyiu  Iau
(now  in  N.  Wales  Dific?  and  Dufid),  '  on  Thursday.'

3.  Dives: — Skr.  divasa,  mas.  and  neut.  'heaven,  day,'
from  a  stem  divas ;  Greek  Si«  for  Si/is  in  ev8i«vos,  'calm,
sheltered,'  evSieo-repos,  evSieo-TaTo?,  used  as  comp.  and  sup.  of
cvStos ;  Lat.  Dies-piter  (for  Dives-piter),  '  Jupiter.'

4.  Divio,  divia:  —  Skr.  divya,  *  heavenly,  divine;'
Greek  Sios  (for  St/ios),  of  the  same  meaning;  Lat.  dio  (for
divio)  in  s?^  ^"o,  '  under  the  open  sky.'

5.  Devo,  deva : — Skr.  deva,  l  godlike,  divine,'  mas.  '  a
god ;'  Lat.  divus,  l  godlike,'  contracted  into  dens,  '  a  god,'
like  oleum  for  ollvum;  Lithuanian  deva-s,  l  God ;'  Gaulish
devo-s,  in  such  names  as  Devo-gndta,  with  which  compare
such  Greek  names  as  Atoyevi/s;  Irish  dia,  'a  god,  God,'
gen.  dei  (for  devi) ;  Welsh  doiu,  dime  (now  divyf  or  dwy\
as  in  Gwas  Duiu,  a  man's  name  meaning  '  God's  servant,'
dwywol,  divyfol,  '  divine,'  and  meu-dwy,  l  a  hermit,'  lite-
rally '  Servus  Dei?

6.  Devia : — Skr.  devi,  '  a  goddess ;'  Lith.  d'eve,  l  a  god-
dess ;'  Welsh  doiu  or  duiu  (now  <tfwy/  and  mostly  d/cy),
as  in  Dubr-Duin,  Dyfrdwyf "or  Dyfrdwy,  'the  river  Dee,'


Wednesday,'  and  Ztyu  Jew,  'on  Thursday'  (Skene,  ii.  16).  The  diphthong
uw  in  duw  is  probably  to  be  compared  with  that  in  uwd,  '  porridge,'
Breton  iot,  Irish  ith,  all  of  the  same  origin  as  the  Latin jUs,  'broth,'
Skr.  yu,  yauti, '  draws,  harnesses,  connects  or  mixes,'  Lhh.jauti,  '  aquam
fervidam  supra  infundere,'  Lett,  jaut,  '  to  stir  dough  or  soup.'


118  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

literally  '  the  Water  of  the  Goddess ;'  Irish  de,  i  a  god-
dess,' gen.  dee,  del,  de,  dea,  dae,1  ace.  de.

7.  More  distantly  related  but  still  of  the  same  origin
are  such  words  as  the  Latin  dies,  '  a  day ;'  Welsh  dyd,
the  same ;  Irish  in-dia,  l  to-day.'

Now  the  question  must  sooner  or  later  present  itself,
what  did  the  words  Zeus,  Dyaus,  and  their  congeners,
originally  mean?  Two  answers  at  least  are  given,  of
which  the  one  is,  that  they  meant  the  heavens  or  the  sky.
The  other  view  is  that  the  truer  meaning  of  the  word
Dyaus,  for  instance,  would  be  '  the  bright  or  the  shining
one,'  since  it  is  derived  from  the  root  div  or  djju,  l  to  shine,
to  lighten ; '  and  that  it  was  this  activity  of  shining  and
illuminating  the  world  which  was  embodied  in  the  name.
This  is  corroborated  in  the  main  by  the  recent  researches
of  M.  Gaidoz,  who  finds  that  the  wheel-symbol  is  to  be
understood  as  an  image  of  the  sun,2  and  that  the  warrior-
like Jupiter — that  is  the  Gaulish  god  whom  I  should  treat
as  a  Eoman  Mars  and  Jupiter  in  one — was  originally  the
god  of  the  sun,  who  by  extension  became  that  of  the
heavens,  and  otherwise  acquired  attributes  which  made
the  ancient  Eomans  regard  him  as  their  good  Father  in
Heaven.3  But  his  name,  which  has  been  interpreted  to
mean  the  shining  or  bright  one,  has  not  invariably  ceased
to  be  an  appellative.  Thus  in  Old  Norse,  where  it  was
T/'/r,  it  was  by  no  means  confined  to  him :  it  remained
more  or  less  of  an  appellative,  as  may  be  inferred  from
compounds  such  as  Sig-tyrf  '  the  god  of  victory,'  which

1  Of  these,  de  and  dei  are  also  unfortunately  forms  of  the  genitive
of  the  masculine  dia,  '  god.'

2  Eludes,  p.  8.  3  lb.  p.  93.  4  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  50,  79.


THE    INSULAR   CELTS.  119

probably  meant,  at  least  in  the  first  instance,  Tyr  himself.
It  occurs  also  in  the  case  of  Woden,  when  he  is  called
Farma-tyr1  and  Hanga-tyr,2  or  the  God  of  the  Gallows,
and  Gauta-tyr*  or  the  God  of  the  Gauts ;  and  in  that  of
Thor  when  he  is  termed  Eeidi-tyr,4  or  the  Car-god;  nor
is  tivar,  'gods,'  to  be  left  out  of  the  reckoning.  The
Welsh  duw  means  any  god,  except  when  used  in  the
monotheistic  Christian  sense,  and  there  is  every  reason
to  believe  that  it  and  its  earlier  forms,  unlike  Tyr,  Zeus
or  Dyans,  never  acquired  the  force  of  a  proper  name,
even  to  the  same  extent  as  the  Norse  equivalent ;  and
this  is  just  as  if  Greek  Christians  had  consecrated  the
word  Zevs  to  Christian  uses  instead  of  0e6s.  In  their  lan-
guage, however,  that  could  not  be,  since  the  former  had
become  the  name  of  a  special  pagan  deity,  and  ceased  ages
before  the  Christian  era  to  be  an  appellative  or  generic
name ;  but  in  the  Celtic  languages,  where  this  was  not
the  case,  Christianity  was  free  to  appropriate  such  a  word
as  dmv  for  its  own  uses.

NlJADA   OF   THE    SlLVER   HAND.

From  the  remarks  already  made,  it  will  have  been
seen  that  we  must  cast  about  us  for  other  means,  than
the  mere  name,  to  discover  the  insular  Celt's  god  who
should  be  identified  with  Zeus.  Now  in  Irish  and  Welsh
literature,  the  great  figures  of  Celtic  mythology  usually
assume  the  character  of  kings  of  Britain  and  of  the  sister-
island  respectively,  and  most  of  the  myths  of  the  modern
Celts  are  to  be  found  manipulated  so  as  to  form  the

1  Corpus  Poet  Bor.  i.  253,  ii.  462.  2  lb.  ii.  75,  462.

3  lb.  i.  262.  *  lb.  ii.  17,  464.


120  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

opening  chapters  of  what  has  been  usually  regarded  as
the  early  history  of  the  British  Isles.  This  is  especially
the  case  with  Ireland,  and  there  we  meet  with  the
divinity  we  are  in  quest  of,  bearing  the  Irish  name  of
Nuada,  genitive  Nuadat,  and  acting  as  the  king  of  a
mythical  colony  that  took  possession  of  Erinn  in  very
early  times :  it  is  commonly  known  as  Tuatha  De  Danann
(p.  89),  forming  a  group  made  up  of  the  gods  and  god-
desses believed  in  by  the  ancient  Goidel.  The  oldest
account  of  their  origin  tells  us  that  they  came  from  Hea-
ven ; l  but  as  the  Celtic  mind  was  in  the  habit  of  regard-
ing darkness  and  death  as  preceding  light  and  life,2  the
invaders  from  Heaven  are  said  to  have  found  the  island
already  peopled  by  a  race  called  the  Fir  Bolg  or  Bag  Men,
together  with  their  hideous  and  horrid  allies.  These  were
in  due  time  attacked  and  defeated  by  the  new-comers ;  but
in  one  of  the  conflicts,  Nuada,  king  of  the  latter,  had  his
right  arm  cut  off,  which  was  all  the  more  serious,  as
it  constituted  a  blemish  incompatible  with  the  Goidelic
idea  of  a  king.  So  he  had  to  retire  from  the  kingship ;
but  a  clever  man  at  his  court  made  him  a  silver  hand,
which  another  perfected  so  that  it  was  finally  endowed
with  motion  in  every  joint,  with  the  result  that  Nuada,
after  a  retirement  of  seven  years,  was  allowed  to  resume
the  office  of  king,  and  was  from  that  time  forth  known
as  Nuada  Argetldm,  that  is  to  say,  Nuada  of  the  Silver
Hand.

AVith  this  may  be  compared  the  following  story  of  Tiu
the  Tyr  of  Old  Norse  literature :  Loki  was  the  father  of  mis-
chief and  of  a  brood  of  monsters,  of  which  Fenri's  Wolf


1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  1G6.  2  Compare  Caesar's  words,  vi.  18.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  121

was  one.    This  latter  had  escaped  killing  at  the  hands  of
the  Anses  because  they  were  loth  to  pollute  them  with  his
blood ;  but  he  was  found  to  grow  so  fast,  and  the  things
foreboded  of  him  were  of  such  a  terrible  nature,  that  they
became  alarmed  and  proceeded  to  tie  the  Wolf ;  but  he
shook  off  the  bonds  with  ease.     They  then  had  a  magic
rope  made,  which  the  Wolf,  suspecting  treachery,  would
not  let  them  fasten  him  with,  till  one  of  their  number
became  bail  by  placing  his  hand  in  the  beast's  mouth
whilst  he  was  being  bound.     Tyr  was  the  brave  one  who
came  forward  to  do  so,  and  the  bonds  proving  effective,
the  Wolf  bit  off  the  god's  hand  on  the  spot ;  nor  do  we
read  of  his  being  provided  with  an  artificial  hand,  as  was
the  case  with  the  Irish  ISTuada,  or  of  his  being  healed,  as
the  corresponding  Greek  story  which  describes  the  conflict
between  Zeus  and  his  monster  antagonist  Typho  would
suggest.1    For  Zeus,  after  plying  Typho  with  his  thunder-
bolt without  the  desired  result,  engaged  him  at  close
quarters  with  a  sickle,  which  Typho  wrested  from  the  god
and  used  against  him :  it  was  then  that  Zeus  lost  the  use
not  only  of  one  hand  but  of  both,  for  his  foe  cut  out  the
tendons  of  his  hands  and  feet  and  carried  him  away  on  his
shoulders,  a  helpless  mass,  to  be  thrown  into  a  cave,  while
the  muscles  were  hidden  away  in  the  charge  of  a  dragon.
Hermes,  however,  came,  and  with  his  usual  cleverness
stole  them  and  restored  them  to  their  proper  places  in  the
god's  frame,  who  then  recovered  his  strength  and  at  last
overcame  Typho.     The  stories,  you  will  see,  differ  con-
siderably, but  they  are  sufficiently  similar  to  make  it  in
the  highest  degree  probable  that  the  Irish  Nuada  is  to  be

1  See  Apolloilorus,  i.  6,  3.


122  n.    THE  ZEUS  OF

equated  with  Tiu  and  Zeus :  in  other  words,  Nuada  may
safely  be  regarded  as  a  Celtic  Zeus  or  Jupiter.

Add  to  this  that  in  case  a  god  has  several  names,  their
existence  tends  to  lead  him  to  be  regarded  as  so  many
distinct  divinities,  and  this  tendency  can  beyond  doubt
be  proved  in  the  history  of  Nuada :  for  besides  the
Nuada  to  whom  my  remarks  were  thus  far  intended
to  apply,  Irish  legendary  history  had  other  Nuadas  to
show,  such  as  Nuada  Derg,  or  the  Eed ;  but  what  proves
his  virtual  identity  with  the  Celtic  Mars-Jupiter,  is  the
fact,  that  the  sun  hero  Eogan  Mor  (p.  91)  is  called  Mog
Nuadat,1  '  Nuada's  Slave.'  Then  there  was  also  a  Nuada
Finnfail  and  a  Nuada  Necht  Now  Nuada  of  the  Silver
Hand  is  said  to  have  landed  in  Erinn  A.M.  3303,
while  Nuada  Finnfdil  is  made  to  begin  his  reign  A.M.
4199,  and  Nuada  Necht  is  connected  with  Leinster  in
A.M.  5089.  So  disposed,  they  would  seem  to  have
been  placed  at  a  safe  distance  from  one  another ;  but
the  artificial  nature  of  the  arrangement  betrays  itself  in
various  ways :  thus  it  can  hardly  be  an  accident  that  the
king  who  superseded  Nuada  of  the  Silver  Hand,  when  he
lost  his  natural  hand,  should  have  borne  the  same  unusual
name  Bres,  as  the  one  who  succeeded  Nuada  Finnfail
some  900  years  later.2  But  let  us  try  to  force  the
vocables  Finnfail  and  Necht  to  disclose  their  history.
The  latter  looks  as  if  it  had  a  derivative  in  the  well-known
name  Nechta  or  Nechtan,  borne,  among  others,  by  a
remarkable  king  of  the  Picts  of  Scotland  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  8th  century,  and  by  the  mythic  owner  of

1  O'Curry's  Magh  Leana,  pp.  2 — 5,  also  p.  xxii.

2  The  Four  Masters,  A.  M.  3304,  4238.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  123

a  fairy  precinct,  now  called  Trinity  Well,  into  which
one  could  not  gaze  with  impunity,  and  from  which  the
river  Boyne  first  burst  forth,  in  pursuit  of  a  lady  who
had  insulted  it.1  In  point  of  phonological  equivalence,
the  syllable  necht  exactly  renders  in  Irish  the  nept  of
Neptune's  name.  One  cannot  say,  however,  whether  they
should  be  regarded  as  of  the  same  meaning  and  origin ;
nor  does  this  matter  for  our  purpose,  since  Irish  itself  has
kindred  words  to  show.2  Whether  you  associate  Necht
with  Neptune  or  with  the  other  words,  it  may  be  pre-
sumed to  connect  Nuada  Necht  with  the  world  of  waters.
As  to  the  other  name,  Nuada  Finnfail,  it  would  seem
literally  to  have  meant  Nuada  of  Finnfal,  that  is,  Nuada
of  the  White  Fal.  But  what  did  fdl  mean?  One
attested  signification  of  the  word  was  that  of  a  wall  or
enclosure ;  and  according  to  this  interpretation  Nuada
Finnfail  might  be  interpreted  to  mean  Nuada  of  the
White  Wall,  which  might  be  regarded  as  referring  to  the
sky  or  the  heavens  in  somewhat  the  same  way  as  names
like  Camulos,  Nivyvre  and  others  to  be  discussed  in  the
course  of  this  lecture.  Now  fdl,  '  a  wall,'  is  in  Welsh
gwaivlz  of  the  same  import ;  but  Welsh  has  also  a  givatvl
meaning  radiance  or  light ;  and  I  am  inclined  to  think
that   the  Irish  fdl  in  the  compound  Finnfdl  had  that

1  Bk.  of  Leinstcr,  191a;  MS.  (formerly  Lord  Ashburnham's)  D.  iv.  2,
in  the  library  of  the  Koyal  Ir.  Academy,  fol.  81c?;  Book  of  Rights,
p.  9,  ed.'s  note.

2  For  instance,  the  verb  nigim,  'lavo,'  negar,  'lavitur,'  and  other
forms  (see  Stokes'  Goidelica,  p.  133)  of  the  same  origin  as  the  Greek
vi£o>,  llavo,'  and  the  A. -Saxon  nicor,  'a  water-monster,'  Mod.  Eng.
Nick,  Ger.  Nix,  'the  water-spirit.'

3  Gwawl  is  the  name  of  a  solar  hero  in  the  Welsh  Mabinogi  which
is  called  after  Manawydan,  son  of  Llyr  :  see  R.  B.  Mabiiiogion,  pp.
12—16,  57.


124  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

signification,  in  which  case  Nnada  Finnfdil  should  be
rendered  Nuada  of  the  White  Light.  This  would  fit
still  better  as  one  of  the  names  of  a  god  of  the  origin
which  I  have  ventured  to  ascribe  to  Nuada  of  the  Silver
Hand,  that  is  to  say,  to  a  divinity  of  the  sun  and  of  light.
The  epithet  appears  as  an  independent  name  in  the  case
of  a  place  called  Ath  Finnfdil,  or  Finnfal's  Ford,  the  site
of  which  is  not  exactly  known ;  but  Prof.  O'Curry  guessed
it1  to  have  been  somewhere  not  far  from  Beg  Eire,  or
Little  Erinn,  an  islet  in  the  bay  of  Wexford,  now  known
as  Beggery  Island,  but  anciently  called,  according  to  the
same  authority,  Info  Fail,  or  the  Island  of  Fal.  More
usually  the  designation  Inis  Fdl  refers  to  Ireland  itself,
which  was  also  sometimes  termed  Mag  Fail,'1  l  Fal's
Plain  or  Field.'  In  these  instances  I  take  Fdl  and  Finn-
fdl  to  be  names  of  the  god ;  nor  is  it  other  than  natural
that  the  country  should  be  called  the  island  or  the
plain  of  its  chief  god,  especially  if  it  be  correct  to  regard
him  as  originally  the  god  of  the  sun  and  of  light.  At
the  same  time  his  owning  or  inhabiting  an  islet  on
the  east  coast,  such  as  the  one  near  Wexford,  becomes
intelligible :  from  certain  points  on  the  mainland,  the
sun  might  be  fancied  to  commence  his  daily  journeys
from  a  sea-girt  isle ;  and  the  complement  of  that  fancy

1  In  a  note  to  his  text  of  an  ancient  poem  containing  an  allusion  in
point,  MS.  Mat.  pp.  480-1,  where  he  has  had  printed  Ath  Finn  Fail,
'the  fair  (or  white)  Ford  of  Fal.'  In  inis  find  fail  (Bk.  of  Leinster,  8a)
means  'in  the  fair  Island  of  Fal,'  but  were  one  to  read  Findfdil,  it
would  be  'in  the  Island  of  Finnfal.'

2  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  p.  131,  where  Fail  is  once  written  fail  and  once
fail,  but  to  assonate  both  times  with  mdir,  '  magni.'     The  passages

will  be  found  in  Windisch's  Irische  Tezte,  pp.  132-3,  and  in  O'Curry,
iij.  191.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  125

would  be  to  call  that  spot  after  him  the  Isle  of  Fal.  It
is  needless  to  say  more  at  present  on  this  subject,  as  the
discussion  of  the  myths  associated  with  the  name  of
Merlin  will  afford  us  an  opportunity  of  looking  at  it  from
another  point  of  view.

NODENS,  NUD  AND  LLUD.
The  god's  Irish  name  Nuada  assumes  on  Brythonic
ground  the  form  of  Nodens,  genitive  Nodcntis,  to  be
found  in  Latin  inscriptions,  of  which  more  anon.  One
of  the  forms  in  which  this  survives  in  Welsh  literature
is  'Nuct,'  but  the  mythic  personage  of  that  name  is  not
known  as  the  subject  of  any  story  like  that  of  Nuada,
and  the  more  complete  counterpart  of  Nuada  is  to  be
recognized  in  a  mythical  "Welsh  king,  called  Lluct
Llawereint,  or  Lliict  of  the  Silver  Hand,  where  we
detect  the  story  in  question  compressed  into  the  epithet
Llaivereint,  or  Silver-handed.  It  is  important  to  observe
that  the  elements  of  the  compound  are  differently  ar-
ranged in  the  two  languages :  in  Irish,  an  approach  is
made,  as  it  were,  to  Argented  Manu,  but  in  Welsh  rather
to  Mann  Argented.  Now  the  name  Lluct  Llawereint,
put  back  to  its  early  form,  would  be  Lodens  Ldm.argentjos,
in  which  one  could  not  help  recognizing  a  modification
of  Nodens  Ldmargenfjos,  subjected  to  the  influence  of
the  analogy  of  personal  names  with  alliterative  epithets.
Thus,  for  the  Irish  Nuada  and  the  inscriptional  Nodens,
Welsh  has,  thanks  to  alliteration,  the  two  names  Nuct
and  Lluct.  This  latter  is  well  known  in  English  in
the  name  of  '  King  Lud,'  and  from  the  same  '  Lluct,'  or
rather  its  antecedent  Lodens,  come  Lothus  and  the  Loth
or  Lot  of  the  Arthurian  romances.


126  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

A  few  words  must  now  be  said  of  the  worship  of
Nodens  in  Eoman  times.  The  remains  of  his  temple
have  been  found  at  Lydney,  on  the  western  bank  of
the  Severn,  in  the  territory  of  the  ancient  Silures.1  One
inscription  there  calls  him  Devo  Nodenti,  in  the  dative
case,  while  another  reads  D.  M.  Nodonti,  and  a  third
Deo  Nudente  31.  Moreover,  the  mosaic  floor  of  his
temple  is  said  to  show,  besides  a  variety  of  figures,  an
inscription  which  would  seem  to  have  commenced  with
D.  M. ;  but  it  is  unfortunate  that  nowhere  has  the  word
represented  by  the  M  been  found  written  in  full :  the
consequence  is,  that  it  has  been  differently  treated,  some
making  it  into  maximo  or  magno,  and  others  into  Marti.
The  former  is  not  duly  supported  by  the  analogy  of
other  Eoman  inscriptions,  while  the  latter,  which  is  the
one  suggested  by  Dr.  Hiibner,2  the  editor  of  the  Prussian
Academy's  volume  of  Latin  inscriptions  occurring  in  this
country,  is  probably  the  correct  one.

But  though  it  is  right  to  regard  the  Silurian  god  as  a
Mars,  most  of  the  remains  of  antiquity  connected  with
his  temple  make  him  a  sort  of  Neptune.  The  following
are  worthy  of  notice :  the  mosaic  floor  displayed  not  only
the  inscription  alluded  to,  but  also  representations  of
sea-serpents  or  the  irfpea.  accompanying  Glaucus  in  Greek
mythology,  and  fishes  supposed  to  stand  for  the  salmon

1  The  whole  has  been  described  in  a  volume  entitled,  Roman  Anti-
quities at  Lydney  Park,  Gloucestershire,  being  a  posthumous  work  of
the  Rev.  William  Hiley  Bathurst,  M.A.,  with  Notes  by  C.  "W.  King,
M.A.  (London,  1879),  pp.  vii,  127,  cr.  octavo,  with  numerous  plates.

2  Nos.  137  — 141:  see  also  a  paper  by  the  same  scholar  on  the
Sanctuary  of  Nodens  in  the  Jahrbuch  des  Vereius  fur  Alterthumsfor-
schung  im  Iiheinlande,  lxvii.  pp.  29 — 46.


THE    INSULAR   CELTS.  127

of  the  Severn ;  moreover,  an  ugly  band  of  red,  within  the
lines  of  the  inscription,  surrounded  the  mouth  of  a  funnel
leading  into  the  ground  beneath ;  this  hole  is  supposed
to  have  been  used  for  libations  to  the  god.1  Further,
a  small  plaque  of  bronze  found  on  the  spot  gives  us  pro-
bably a  representation  of  the  god  himself.  The  principal
figure  thereon  is  a  youthful  deity  crowned  with  rays  like
Phoebus :  he  stands  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  four  horses,
like  the  Roman  Neptune.  On  either  side  the  winds  are
typified  by  a  winged  genius  floating  along,  and  the  rest
of  the  space  is  left  to  two  Tritons ;  while  a  detached  piece
probably  of  the  same  bronze  represents  another  Triton,
also  a  fisherman  who  has  just  succeeded  in  hooking  a
salmon.2  Moreover,  the  site  on  a  hilly  ground  near  the
tidal  bed  of  the  Severn  makes  likewise  for  the  divinity's
connection  with  the  world  of  waters.  The  temple  to
whose  remains  I  have  alluded  was  undoubtedly  con-
structed under  Eoman  auspices,  but  it  is  equally  probable
that  the  god  was  worshipped  and  consulted  on  the  spot
long  before  the  Eomans  first  crossed  the  Severn.

The  oldest  form  of  the  god's  name  known  to  epigraphy
is,  as  we  have  seen,  Nodens,  for  which  we  have  in  Welsh
the  two  forms  Nud:  and  Llud: ;  but  "Welsh  literature,  it
must  be  admitted,  recognizes  no  connection  between
them.  Nevertheless,  the  original  identity  of  the  names
warrants  us  in  combining  the  attributes  of  the  personages
called  Niid  and  Llud:  respectively,  in  the  attempt  to  repro-
duce the  character  of  the  god  in  something  like  its  original

1  I  visited  Lydney  a  few  years  ago,  but  I  could  not  see  the  mosaic
floor ;  and  unfortunately  the  inscriptions  I  was  anxious  to  examine
happened  to  be  locked  up  in  a  glass-case.

2  King,  pp.  22-3,  39,  40,  and  passim  ;  also  plates  viii,  xiii.


128  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

completeness.  Now  nothing  hardly  is  known  of  Nud:
except  that  a  Welsh  Triad  styles  him  one  of  the  Three
Generous  Heroes  of  the  Isle  of  Britain,1  and  that,  accord-
ing to  another  Triad,2  he  had  a  herd  of  cattle  consisting
of  no  less  than  21,000  milch-cows,  as  to  which  it  cannot
be  considered  certain,  whether  or  not  they  should  be  in-
terpreted to  mean  the  monsters  of  the  deep ;  but  Nu&'s
generosity  is  doubtless  to  be  added  to  the  attributes  of
the  god  as  represented  at  Lydney.  Nor  is  it  improbable
that  the  name  Nodens  referred  originally  to  that  quality,
though  it  would  seem  as  if  it  were  to  be  interpreted  '  the
rich  or  wealthy '  god ; 3  but  I  should  prefer  supposing  it
to  have  had  the  causative  meaning  of  one  who  enabled
others  to  enjoy  riches  and  wealth,  especially  in  the  matter
of  cattle — one,  in  fact,  who  was  supposed  to  be  the  giver
of  wealth,  whence  his  traditional  character  for  generosity.
But  all  this  must  be  considered  highly  conjectural  until
a  related  Celtic  word  is  identified.

The  other  name  representing  that  of  Nodens  in  "Welsh,
as  already  stated,  is  '  Llud,'  with  which,  or  an  earlier
form   of  it,   such  as  Lodens,   should   be  connected  the


1  i.  8  =  ii.  32  =  Hi.  30.  2  iii.  85.

3  Nodens  looks  like  a  participle  belonging  to  a  strong  or  primitive
verb,  but  no  verb  that  would  satisfy  the  conditions  happens  to  be
known  to  me  in  Celtic ;  the  Teutonic  languages,  however,  supply  one,
as  will  be  at  once  recognized  in  the  German  ge-niessen,  ge-noss,  ge-nossen,
•  to  eat,  drink,  enjoy,  or  have  the  use  of,'  Gothic  niutan,  naut,  nutum,
of  much  the  same  meaning,  as  was  the  case  also  with  the  Anglo-Saxon
neotan  and  the  Norse  njdta;  and  among  the  related  nouns  may  be
mentioned  the  Norse  naut,  'a  head  of  cattle,  a  horned  beast,'  English
neat,  of  the  same  meaning;  also  German  niitze,  'use;'  while  outside
the  area  of  the  Teutonic  languages  we  have  a  Lithuanian  nauda,  mean-
ing use,  profit,  proceeds,  harvest,  possessions  or  property  generally.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  129

Loth  or  Lot  of  the  romances,  which  make  the  person
so  called  king  of  Lodonesia  or  the  Lothians,  of  the
Orkneys  and  of  Lochlann.  In  all  these  he  is  more  or
less  associated  with  the  sea ;  and  even  the  Welsh  tale,
bearing  his  name  in  its  form  of  Llud,  gives  him  a  fleet.
But  on  the  whole  the  Welsh  have  been  in  the  habit  of
regarding  him  rather  as  a  great  and  thriving  king  of  their
ancestors,  as  one  who  delivered  his  subjects  from  three
or  more  dire  scourges  to  which  they  were  subject,  and
as  the  hero  whom  Geoffrey  makes  the  builder  of  the  walls
of  London.  The  association  of  Livid,  or  '  King  Lud '  as
he  has  come  to  be  called  in  English,  with  London,  is
apparently  founded  on  a  certain  amount  of  fact :  one  of
the  Welsh  names  for  London  is  Caer  Lud  or  Lud's  Fort,
and  if  this  is  open  to  the  suspicion  of  having  been  sug-
gested first  by  Geoffrey,  that  can  hardly  be  supposed
possible  in  the  case  of  the  English  name  of  Laclgate  Hill.
The  probability  is,  that  as  a  temple  on  a  hill  near  the
Severn  associated  him  with  that  river  in  the  west,  so  a
still  more  ambitious  temple  on  a  hill  connected  him  with
the  Thames  in  the  east ;  and  as  an  aggressive  creed  can
hardly  signalize  its  conquests  more  effectually  than  by
appropriating  the  fanes  of  the  retreating  faith,  no  site
could  be  guessed  with  more  probability  to  have  been
sacred  to  the  Celtic  Zeus  than  the  eminence  on  which
the  dome  of  St.  Paul's  now  rears  its  magnificent  form.

The  Irish  Nuada  was  the  same  sort  of  god  as  his  Welsh
namesake :  he  was  king  of  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann  and
their  leader  in  war.  When  the  Boyne  is  called  the  fore-
arm of  Nuada's  wife,  that  queen  would  seem  to  be  a
personification  of  the  land  of  Erinn ;  but  it  is  not  clear
whether  Nuada,  as  her  consort,  is  to  be  regarded  as  god

K


130  II.     THE    ZEUS    OE

of  the  incumbent  air  or  of  the  surrounding  sea,  or  else  as
the  god  of  light,  from  whom  the  country  derived  its  name
of  the  Island  or  Plain  of  Fal.  As  compared  with  Llud,
distinguished  at  most  as  a  king  and  hero  on  land  and  a
warrior  at  sea,  Nuada  was  split  into  no  less  then  three
personages,  one  of  whom  was  Nuada  of  the  Silver  Hand,
the  martial  king,  and  another  Nuada  Finnfdil,  god  of  light
and  of  the  heavens,  while  we  have  a  third  in  Nuada
Necht,  whose  connection  with  the  world  of  waters  has
already  been  hinted  at.  Thus  it  appears  that  the  mytho-
logy of  the  Celts  was  assuming  a  departmental  form  as
far  as  regarded  their  chief  divinity,  out  of  whose  wide
character  they  specialized  a  warlike  Posidon  or  Neptune,
with  a  tendency  to  make  that  element  predominate.  This
specializing  presumably  began  before  the  Celts  divided
themselves  into  Gallo-Brythons  and  Goidels  or  settled  in
the  British  Isles ;  for  it  is  not  improbable  that  some  of
them  accustomed  themselves  to  a  seafaring  life  long  before
the  time  when  they  began  to  cross  in  sufficient  numbers  to
conquer  these  islands  from  their  ancient  inhabitants,  and
very  long  before  the  Parisii  sent  a  colony  down  the  Seine
to  seek  a  home  on  the  other  side  of  the  Humber.  But
Nodens,  the  Celtic  Zeus,  was  not  simply  a  Neptune  or  a
Posidon,  in  his  connection  with  the  sea :  he  was  also  a
Mars,  as  the  inscriptions  at  Lydney  testify.  That  the
Celts  of  Britain  should  have  been  inclined  to  transform
their  Zeus  into  a  marine  Mars  at  so  early  a  date  is  a
remarkable  fact :  it  lends  fresh  significance  to  the  words
of  Pomponius  Mela1  when  he  speaks  of  the  two  giants
eponymous  of  Britain  and  Ireland,  who  fought  with  the

1  Parthey's  ed.  pp.  50-1.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  131

vagrant  Hercules,  as  two  sons  of  Neptune,  while  it  forms
a  curious  prelude  to  the  history  of  that  composite  British
people  whose  merchantmen  and  men-of-war  now  cover
all  the  seas.

This  leads  me,  however,  in  a  direction  contrary  to  the
one  I  wish  to  take ;  for  I  am  less  interested  at  this  point
in  the  way  in  which  the  Celtic  Zeus  was  split  into  several
characters,  than  in  the  formation  of  an  estimate  of  his
character  and  attributes  before  the  time  of  his  trans-
formation. As  a  god  of  the  Celts  in  the  earliest  period
of  their  existence,  he  was  probably  king  of  their  gods,
giver  of  wealth  and  increase,  leader  in  war,  and  lord
equally  of  both  land  and  sea,  if  they  then  knew  the  sea.
To  compare  Nodens  or  the  Celtic  Zeus  with  the  Greek
Zeus,  one  has  to  submit  the  latter  to  somewhat  the  same
process  of  collecting  his  early  attributes ;  that  is  to  say,
Nodens  is  not  strictly  to  be  compared  with  the  classic
Zeus,  but  with  the  pre-classic  Zeus  who  was  Zeus,  Posi-
don  and  Pluto  all  in  one ;  who  also  discharged  the  func-
tions of  several  of  his  classically  so-called  sons,  such,  for
example,  as  Ares.  Greek  literature  usually  presents
Greek  theology  in  a  highly  departmental  state  ;  but
traces  are  not  lacking  of  a  previous  stage.  We  have
a  well-knoAvn  instance  in  Pluto,  who  was  always  a
Zeus,  that  is  to  say  a  chthonian  or  catachthonian  Zeus,
with  his  realm  in  the  deep  earth  as  far  below  its  surface
as  the  sky  is  above  it.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  Orphic
myth  of  the  union  with  Persephone  of  Zeus  in  the  form
of  a  snake,  but  still  as  father  Zeus ;  and  by  the  Pontic
cult  which  did  not  distinguish  between  Zews  vVaTos  and
Zeus  x^ovios ; l  not  to  mention  how  near  the  idea  of  Pluto,
1  Preller  in  Pauly's  Real-Eiirycl.  s.  v.  Jupiter  (Vol.  iv.  588).

k2


132  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

or  IIAot-Twvj  as  a  god  associated  with  wealth,  comes  to
that  of  Zevs  TrAowrtos.1  Similarly  with  regard  to  the  sea,
Zeus  is  sometimes  spoken  of  interfering  with  it,2  and
Posidon  occasionally  bears  the  designation  of  Zevs  'EvaAios ;
but  the  original  identity  of  Posidon  with  Zeus  is  even
more  strikingly  shown  in  the  case  of  Zeus  ovpio^  or  the
giver  of  the  fair  winds  desired  by  the  mariner.  His
temple  was  not  unfrequently  built  on  a  headland  looking
over  the  sea ;  somewhat  like  that  of  Nodens  as  regards
the  estuary  of  the  Severn.  A  celebrated  image  of  the
headland  Zeus,  the  controller  of  wind  and  weather,  was
brought  from  Macedon  to  the  Capitol  in  Eome,  where
it  was  known  as  Jupiter  Imperator.3  Here  should  also
be  mentioned  Zeus  cbro/Ja-nfcios,  or  the  Zeus  who  protected
the  voyager's  landings.  It  is  thus  clear  that  the  pro-
vinces of  Zeus  and  Posidon  cannot  be  wholly  separated,
and  they  betray  traces  of  a  stage  when  a  well-defined
department  of  activity  had  not  as  yet  been  entrusted
to  the  latter  god.4  Much  the  same  remark  applies  in
the  case  of  some  of  the  sons  of  Zeus,  whose  functions
originally  belonged  to  an  undifferentiated  Zeus.  For
instance,  Ares  looks  like  a  personality  developed  out  of
the  warlike  aspect  of  Zeus's  character,  since  his  attri-
butes coincide  mostly  with  those  of  Zeus  apeios.  This  was,
however,  only  one  of  Zeus's  epithets  which  had  regard
to  him  as  a  god  of  war :  as  leader  he  was  Zeus  dyrjTup  j
as  possessed  of  great  strength  he  was  20mos ;  as  a  helper
in  the  conflict  he  was  'E-n/o-ios ;  and  as  giver  of  triumph
TpoTralos,  not  to  mention  the  fact  that  the  Zeus  of  the

1  Preller's  Gr.  Mythol.  (third  ed.)  i.  117.

2  lb.  i.  123,  note  5.  3  lb.  i.  126.
*  Pduly,  iv.  588.


THE    INSULAR   CELTS.  133

Carians  was  equipped  with  a  battle-axe  and  clad  in  the
complete  armour  of  a  hoplite,1  which  calls  to  mind  the
Zeus  of  the  Gauls,  their  Mars-Jupiter,  as  one  might  ven-
ture to  term  him  (p.  48).  It  is  needless  to  say  that  the
Roman  Mars  was  in  no  sense  a  mere  counterpart  of  the
Greek  Ares,  but  rather  a  sort  of  duplicate  of  Jupiter,
owing  his  existence  alongside  of  the  greater  god  to  the
composite  character  of  the  ancient  Roman  community.
Mars  shared  with  Jupiter  the  title  of  father,  and  such
epithets  as  Loucetius  or  bright,  while  the  chief  honours
of  a  successful  campaign  belonged  to  Jupiter  alone :  the
spolia  opima  were  his,  and  Mars  came  only  second.  But
to  step  again  on  Greek  ground,  the  pre-classic  Zeus,  with
whom  one  should  compare  the  Nodens  of  the  earliest  Celtic
period,  may  be  described  in  almost  the  same  terms  which
were  used  of  the  latter :  he  was  sovereign  of  gods  and
men,  the  giver  of  wealth  and  prosperity,  the  supreme
arbiter  of  the  fortunes  of  war,  and  lord  both  of  land  and
sea.  By  what  steps  the  Zeus  of  the  Celts  came  to  be
especially  associated  with  the  sea  by  some  of  their  num-
ber, will  appear  more  clearly  in  a  later  portion  of  this
lecture.

CoRMAC,  CONAIRE,  C0NCH0BAR.

Though  Nuada  under  his  various  names  has  detained
us  long,  he  is  by  no  means  the  only  representative  in
Irish  literature  of  the  Mars-Jupiter  of  the  Celts.  As  one
of  the  most  remarkable  personages  of  this  origin,  may  be
mentioned  Cormac  mac  Airt,  grandson  of  Conn  the  Hun-
dred-fighter :  he  is  regarded  as  having  reigned  at  Tara
in  the  third  century,  and  his  story  may  contain  some

1  Prellei's  Gr.  Myth.  i.  111-12.


134  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

slight  admixture  of  history.  His  reign  is  represented  as
one  of  remarkable  prosperity,1  and  he  himself  as  exceed-
ing '  all  his  predecessors  in  magnificence,  munificence,
wisdom  and  learning,  as  also  in  military  achievements.'2
So  great  was  his  reputation  for  legal  knowledge,  that  a
well-known  book  of  Irish  law  has  been  attributed  to
him.3  One  version  of  his  history  as  king  of  Erinn  repre-
sents him  driven  from  his  throne  by  an  enemy  called
Fergus  the  Black-toothed,  but  enabled  afterwards,  like
Nuada,  to  recover  the  sovereignty.4  Another,  however,
found  in  an  older  manuscript,5  but  not  necessarily  an  older
account,  describes  his  court  at  Tara  invaded  by  a  cham-
pion called  Aengus  of  the  Poisoned  Spear,  whose  brother
had  lost  his  daughter  to  a  son  of  Cormac's  called  Cellach.
Aengus  slew  Cellach  between  his  father  and  the  wall,
and  in  so  doing  put  out  one  of  the  king's  eyes.  This
Aengus  was  a  Plutonic  prince  associated  with  a  historical
people  called  the  Ddisi,  which  probably  means  that  he
was  a  god  specially  worshipped  by  them.  Be  that  as  it
may,  his  deed  of  violence  is  represented  as  the  beginning
of  a  revolt  against  Cormac.  In  the  war  which  followed,
Aengus  fell  at  the  head  of  the  Ddisi,  who  were  then
driven  out  of  their  land  by  Cormac's  son  Cairbre  and  his
sons.  On  the  other  hand,  Cormac  himself  had  to  quit
the  office  of  king  on  losing  his  eye,  so  that  he  lived  some
time  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tara  and  helped  his  son

1  The  Bl:  of  Bally  mote,  quoted  by  O'Curry  in  his  Manners,  &c,
ij.  18.

2  O'Curry,  ibid.

3  The  Book  of  Acaill,  forming  Vol.  iij.  of  the  Senrhtis  Mot  ;  see  also
O'Curry,  ij.  27.

*  O'Curry,  ij.  139-40.  5  The  Bk,  of  the  Dun,  536,  54a.


THE   INSULAR   CELTS.  135

and  successor  with  his  counsel  until  he  was,  according
to  one  account,  killed  by  demons.1  In  any  case  he  is  not
described  in  these  stories  as  restored  again  to  his  throne  ;
but  the  blemish  incompatible  with  kingship  is  brought
into  relief  in  his  person  as  in  that  of  Nuada.

A  description  of  Cormac's  person  on  the  occasion  of  his
entering  a  great  assembly  in  state,  tells  us  that  the  equal
of  his  form  had  never  been  seen,  except  that  of  Conaire
the  Great,  of  Conchobar  son  of  Nessa,  or  of  Aengus  son
of  the  Dagda.2  It  is  remarkable  that  the  ancient  writer
should  mention  these  three,  as  they  are  adumbrations  of
the  same  god  as  Cormac.  Thus  I  may  here  say,  without
anticipating  the  remarks  to  be  presently  made  on  the
Aengus  to  whom  I  have  alluded,  that  he  was  the  constant
aider  and  protector  of  the  sun-hero  Diarmait,3  while
Conaire  was  the  subject  of  one  of  the  most  famous  epic
stories  in  Irish  literature.  The  plot4  centres  in  Conaire's
tragic  death,  which  is  brought  about  by  the  fairies  of
Erinn,  through  the  instrumentality  of  outlaws  coming
from  the  sea  and  following  the  lead  of  a  sort  of  cyclops
called  Ingcdl,  said  to  have  been  a  big,  rough,  horrid,
monster  with  only  one  eye,  which  was,  however,  wider
than  an  ox-hide,  blacker  than  the  back  of  a  beetle,  and
provided  with  no  less  than  three  pupils.5     The  death  of

1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  50b.

2  0' Curry,  from  the  Bk.  of  Ballymoie,  ij.  18.

3  See  passim,  The  Pursuit  of  Diarmuid  and  Grainne,  now  available
in  an  excellent  edition  published  by  the  Soc.  for  the  Preserv.  of  the
Ir.  Language  (Dublin,  1881).

4  The  oldest  version  is  given  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  83a — 99a,  but
it  is  incomplete.

5  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  Bib.


136  II.     THE   ZEUS   OF

Conaire  at  his  hands  is  one  of  the  Celtic  renderings  of
the  story  which  in  its  Greek  form  describes  the  treatment
of  Zeus  by  Typho.

In  another  cycle  of  stories,  which  may  be  called  Ulto-
nian, the  Celtic  Zeus  finds  his  representative  in  Conchobar
mac  Nessa,  or  Conor  son  of  Nessa,  king  of  Ulster,  who
cannot  be  dismissed  quite  so  briefly  as  the  others.  As
in  Cormac's  case,  a  highly  coloured  picture  is  drawn
of  his  reign,  which  the  Euhemerists  synchronize  with
the  time  of  Christ,  boldly  fixing  the  Ultonian  king's
death  on  the  day  of  the  Crucifixion.1  His  death  was
occasioned  by  a  ball,  with  which  he  had  been  wounded
in  the  skull  years  before,  and  which  the  surgeons  of  the
court  had  never  ventured  to  extract :  it  had  been  made,
according  to  a  savage  practice,  of  the  brains  of  a  fallen
foe  called  Mesgegra,  by  mixing  it  with  lime.  There  was
a  prophecy  that  Mesgegra  would  avenge  himself  on  the
Ultonians,  and  a  champion  of  Conchobar's  enemies,  called
Cdt,  having  surreptitiously  got  possession  of  the  ball  thus
made  of  Mesgegra's  brain,  found  an  opportunity  of  hurl-
ing it  at  the  Ultonian  king's  head,  with  the  result  already
mentioned.  Both  Ce't  and  Mesgegra  belonged  to  the
mythological  party  of  darkness  and  death,  and  here  we
have  them  helping  to  produce  an  Ultonian  parallel  to
Cormac  losing  one  of  his  eyes,  and  JSTuada  one  of  his  hands,
especially  as  the  ball  was  in  Conchobar's  head  for  years
before  it  caused  his  death,  and  partly  disabled  him  all
that  time,  as  he  had  to  abstain  from  all  violent  exercise


1  This  part  of  the  story  and  what  immediately  follows  will  be  found
summarized  in  O'Curry's  MS.  Mat.  p.  275,  &c.  See  also  the  original,
printed  (from  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  123b— 124ft)  with  a  literal  transla-
tion, pp.  636—643.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  137

or  excitement.  But  the  early  history  of  Conchobar  is
still  more  interesting,  as  it  contains  one  of  the  Goidelic
versions  of  the  story  which  in  its  Greek  form  relates
how  Cronus  was  driven  from  power  by  his  son  Zeus.
Conchobar' s  mother's  name  was  Nessa,  after  whom  he
was  called  Conchobar  mac  Nessa.  She  was  a  warlike
virago  with  a  strange  history ;  but  who  the  father  was
is  not  quite  certain  :  according  to  some  accounts,  he  was
a  great  Ulster  druid  or  magician  called  Cathbad ;  but
according  to  others,  he  was  a  monarch  called  Fachtna
Fathach  or  the  Poetic,  who  died  when  Conchobar  was
a  child.  The  king  of  Ulster  at  the  time,  Fergus  mac
Eoig,  fell  passionately  in  love  with  Nessa,  and  made
proposals  of  marriage  to  her ;  but  she  would  only  listen
to  him  on  the  condition  that  he  should  hand  over  to  her
boy  Conchobar  the  sovereignty  of  Ulster  for  the  space
of  one  year.  Fergus  consented,  and  JNTessa  made  things
so  pleasant  for  the  Ulster  nobles  during  the  year,  that  at
its  close  they  declined  to  restore  Fergus  to  the  kingship.
He  thereupon  made  war  on  Conchobar,  but  as  he
proved  unsuccessful  he  had  to  submit.  He  remained
some  years  in  Ulster,  in  the  course  of  which  Conchobar
married  a  daughter  of  the  king  who  reigned  over  Erinn
at  Tara.  She  bore  the  name  of  Medb,  and  she  had  a  will
of  her  own;  for,  becoming  soon  tired  of  Conchobar,  she  left
him,  and  we  read  of  her  afterwards  as  the  wife  of  a  prince
called  Ailill.  They  are  styled  respectively  king  and  queen,
of  Connaught.  As  to  Fergus,  he  undertook  to  reconcile
Conchobar  to  the  return  of  certain  exiles  known  as  the
Sons  of  Usnech,  whose  misfortunes  form  the  subject  of  a
well-known  Irish  tale ;  but  Conchobar  behaving  treach-
erously towards  them,  Fergus  and  all  his  followers  went


138  II.    THE   ZEUS   OF

into  exile ;  and  here  it  may  be  mentioned  in  passing  that
Fergus  had,  some  time  before  departing  from  Ulster,  acted
as  foster-father  and  tutor  to  the  son  of  a  sister  of  Concho-
bar's :  this  was  Cuchulainn,  who,  as  the  greatest  of  the
solar  heroes  of  the  Ultonian  cycle,  will  have  to  be  referred
to  repeatedly  as  we  go  on.  Fergus  and  his  adherents,
while  in  exile,  were  hospitably  received  by  Ailill  and
Medb.

This  completes  the  part  of  the  story  which  is  here
in  point,  and  it  requires  one  or  two  remarks.  In  the
first  place,  Ailill  has  various  descents  ascribed  him,  or
else  Medb  must  have  married  two  Ailills  in  succession,
which  is  the  view  sometimes  adopted ;  but  that  is  of  no
great  consequence.  The  name  Ailill  seems  to  be  the
Irish  equivalent  of  the  "Welsh  ellyll,  l  an  elf  or  demon,'
and  Medb's  Ailill  belongs  to  a  race  which  is  always  found
ranged  against  the  Tuatha  De"  Danann.1  Medb  herself,
married  first  to  Conchobar  and  then  to  Ailill,  is  to  be
classed  with  what  I  may,  in  default  of  a  better  term,
designate  goddesses  of  the  dawn  and  dusk,  who  are  found
at  one  time  consorting  with  bright  beings  and  at  another
with  dark  ones.  They  also  commonly  associate  themselves
with  water ;  thus  Medb,  after  the  death  of  her  husband
Ailill  at  the  hands  of  an  Ulster  hero  called  Conall  Cernach,
one  of  the  solar  heroes  of  the  Ultonian  cycle  of  stories,
dwelt  in  an  island  in  Loch  Eee,  on  the  east  side  of  which

1  It  is  right,  however,  to  say  that  an  Ailill  Find,  '  Ailill  the  White
or  Fair,'  belongs  to  the  opposite  race,  as  his  wife  Flidais  is  carried  away
by  Fergus,  at  the  end  of  a  series  of  tragic  events  forming  the  subject
of  a  well-known  story  introductory  to  the  epic  tale  of  the  Tain,  of
which  more  anon.  See  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  247 a — -248 a;  also  O'Curry's
Manners,  &c,  iii.  3l>8-y.


THE    INSULAR   CELTS.  139

there  was  a  spring  where  she  bathed  herself  every  morn-
ing :  there  she  was  at  last  killed  by  the  avenging  hand
of  one  of  Conchobar's  sons.1  To  this  may  be  added  that
Conchobar,  when  he  lost  Medb,  married  a  sister  of  hers
named  Eithne,  who  is  fabled  to  have  given  her  name  to  a
river  in  Westmeath,  called  after  her  Eithne,  Anglicized
into  Inny.2  But  there  were  two  other  sisters  of  Medb,
severally  mentioned  as  Conchobar's  wives,  namely,  Clothru
of  Inis  Clothrann,  or  Clothru's  Isle,  in  Loch  Eee,3  and
Mugain,  who  is  perhaps  most  commonly  spoken  of  as
Conchobar's  queen.4  In  Fergus,  usually  called  Fergus
mac  Eoig  after  his  mother,5  we  have  a  kind  of  good-
natured  Cronus  of  gigantic  proportions,  endowed  with
the  strength  of  700  ordinary  men,6  wielding  a  sword  of
fairy  make,  which  extended  itself  to  the  dimensions  of  a
rainbow  whenever  he  chose  to  use  it.7  Nevertheless,  he
could  not  prevail  over  Conchobar,  so  he  thought  it  best
to  leave  the  kingdom.  Fergus'  relationship  to  Conchobar
differed  from  that  of  Cronus  to  Zeus,  in  that  he  was  not
Conchobar's  father  but  his  uncle.8

1  O'Curry's  Manners,  &c,  ij.  290-1;  but  see  also  the  Bk.  o/Leinster,
12Ab,  125a,  where  the  story  differs  considerably  from  the  version  given
by  O'Curry  from  another  source.

2  O'Curry,  ib.  p.  290.  3  Bk.  o/Leinster,  125a.

4  Windisch's  Ir.  Texte,  pp.  255,  258,  259,  et  passim.

5  O'Curry's  MS.  Mat.  p.  483.

6  Bk,  o/Leinster,  106Z>.  This  Fergus  is,  mythologically  speaking,
to  be  identified  probably  with  the  Black-toothed  Fergus  of  the  story  of
Cormac  :  see  p.  134.

7  Ib.  102?;.

8  Fergus  was  son  of  Ross  the  Red,  who  was  the  father  of  Fachtna
Fathach,  said  to  be  tbe  father  of  Conchobar  :  see  Bk.  o/  Leinsta;  976,
102  6;  also  O'Curry,  p.  483.


140  II.    THE    ZEUS   OF

Given  Conchobar  king  of  the  Ultonians,  his  runaway
wife  queen  of  Connaught,  and  the  exile  Fergus  enjoying
more  than  hospitality  at  her  court,  we  have  the  relative
positions  of  some  of  the  principal  forces  marshalled  in
the  greatest  epic  story  of  the  Irish,  that  which  their
literary  men  most  endeavoured  to  elaborate.  It  purports
to  describe  the  events  of  an  expedition  by  Ailill  and
Medb,  writh  their  numerous  allies,  to  the  kingdom  of
Ulster.  Their  chief  object  is  said  to  have  been  the  pos-
session of  a  marvellous  bull,  called  the  Black  of  Ciiailnge,
from  the  district  in  which  he  grazed.  Cuailnge  is  in
modern  Irish  Cuailghe,  Anglicized  Cooley,  the  name  of  a
mountainous  part  of  the  county  of  Louth : 1  ancient  Ulster
extended  to  the  Boyne,  and  sometimes  even  further  south-
wards.2 The  story  serves  as  the  centre  around  which  other
stories  cluster,  and  the  whole  is  known  as  the  Tain  or
i  Driving'  of  the  Kine  of  Cooley.3  Ailill  and  Medb  made
use  of  Fergus  on  the  Tain  as  the  captain  of  the  vanguard
of  their  army,  he  being  acquainted  with  the  district  they
wished  to  reach ;  and  they  arrived  there  during  the  cou-
vade4  of  the  Ultonians,  when  none  of  their  heroes  could
stir,  excepting  Cuchulainn,  who  accordingly  had  to  face

1  Bk.  of  Rights,  p.  21,  O'Donovan's  note.

2  O'Curry's  MS.  Mat.  p.  269.

3  It  is  called  in  Irish  Tain  Bo  Ciiailnge,  or  simply  in  Tain,  literally
'  the  Driving'  away  of  the  cattle  in  question.  The  fragment  of  the
tale  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun  occupies  fol.  55  a — 82  b,  and  in  the  Bk.  of
Leinster  it  takes  up  much  more  space,  namely,  fol.  535 — 104 b,  but
neither  is  that  complete.  For  references  to  other  manuscripts  of  it,
analyses  and  abstracts,  see  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville's  Eftsai  d'un  Cata-
logue de  la  Litterature  epique  de  VIrlande  (Paris,  1883),  pp.  214 — 216.

4  For  an  account  of  this  strange  custom,  see  Tylor's  Researches  into
the  Early  History  of  Mankind,  pp.  289 — 297.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  141

the  invaders  single-handed.  The  principal  part  of  the
Tain  describes  the  astounding  feats  of  valour  performed
by  him,  and  it  forms  the  Irish  counterpart  to  the  Greek
story  of  Heracles  defending  the  gods  of  Olympus  by
despatching  their  foes  for  them  with  his  invincible  arrows.
Conchobar,  though  he  showed  himself  capable  on  occa-
sions of  being,  like  Zeus,  unscrupulous  and  cruel,  is
described  as  an  exemplary  king  of  the  heroic  period.
His  palace  was  considered  a  model  of  magnificence  and
comfort — a  view,  however,  to  be  accepted  in  a  strictly
relative  sense,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the
sleeping  arrangements  for  the  king  and  his  adult  sister
Dechtere  disclose  the  most  awkward  feature  of  modern
over-crowding.1  The  king's  own  life  at  home  shaped
itself  into  a  routine  which  divided  the  day-time  into  three
parts;2  and  his  administration  of  his  kingdom  is  treated
as  a  pattern  of  what  kingly  rule  should  be.  He  is  even
represented  as  a  reformer  of  the  administration  of  justice,
in  that  he  had  put  an  end  to  the  exclusive  right  of
the  poet-seers  to  give  judgment.  The  chief  seer  of
Ulster  had  died,  so  goes  the  story,3  and  the  succes-
sion to  his  office  was  contested  by  his  son  and  an  older
man  of  the  same  profession :  the  two  argued  their  claims
at  great  length  with  much  eloquence,  and  even  settled
the  case  to  their  own  satisfaction;  but  the  king  and
his  nobles  understood  naught  of  their  abstruse  and
obscure  language ;  so  that  when  it  was  over,  the  former
determined,  with  a  pardonable  weakness  for  what  he

1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  128&;  Windisch's  Irische  Texte,  p.  139.

2  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  59  a.

3  It  will  be  found  in  O'Curry's  MS.  Mat.  pp.  45-6,  383,  and  in  his
Mamiers,  &c,  iij.  316.


142  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

could  understand,  that  the  seers  and  poets  should  no
longer  arrogate  to  themselves  the  right  to  administer
justice.  Conchobar's  time  was  one  of  great  prosperity
for  his  people,  and  he  is  himself  styled  Cathbuadach,  or
victorious  in  war,1  though  he  is  more  than  once  found
overcome  by  his  enemies,  like  Zeus  by  Typho.  Thus
on  one  occasion  a  battle  took  place  between  the  Ulto-
nians  and  a  prince  called  Eogan  mac  Durthacht,2  who
more  than  once  in  Conchobar's  history  appears  as  the
representative  of  darkness  and  treachery  :  the  Ultonians
were  beaten,  Conchobar  was  left  on  the  field,  and  night
supervened.  The  king's  life  was  only  saved  by  the
coming  of  Cuchulainn,  who  found  him  exhausted  and
almost  wholly  covered  over  with  earth.  He  dug  him
out,  procured  food  for  him  and  took  him  home  to  the
court.3  On  another  occasion  the  Ultonians  were  pursuing
Ailill  and  Medb  with  their  forces,  when  Ailill's  charioteer,
called  Ferloga,  concealed  himself  in  the  heather,  whence
he  sprang  on  Conchobar's  chariot  and  seized  hold  of  the
king's  neck  from  behind ;  nor  did  he  loosen  his  grasp
until  the  latter  had  promised  to  ransom  himself.  When
Ferloga  specified  his  demand,  it  proved  to  be  merely  that
Conchobar  should  take  him  to  his  capital  and  bid  the  un-

1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  128&;  also  124  a,  where  the  Irish  word  occurs
abbreviated  in  the  MS.  to  each,  first  explained  by  Zimrner  in  bis
Keltische  Studien  (Berlin,  1881),  i.  38-9.

2  Durthacht,  for  which  Dairthechta  also  occurs  (see  "VVindisch,  s.  v.),
is  probably  of  the  same  origin  as  the  reduplicate  doruthethaig,  '  deper-
didit,'  Gram.  Celt.  p.  448  (incorrectly  rendered  celebravit  at  p.  351),
and  Stokes'  Goidelica,  pp.  4,  14;  so  that  Mac  Durthacht  would  seem
to  have  had  much  the  same  meaning  as  the  name  of  another  character
of  the  same  class  :  I  mean  Mac  dull,  '  Son  of  Perdition  or  Destruction.'

3  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  59  b,  60  a.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  143

married  women  and  maidens  of  Ulster  sing  around  him
every  evening  a  rhyme,  the  burden  of  which  was  l  Fer-
loga,  my  sweetheart.'1  The  mythological  meaning  of
this  insult  to  the  heroes  of  Ulster  is  not  quite  evident ;
but  after  a  time  Ferloga  was  sent  home  to  the  west  with
a  present  consisting  of  Conchobar's  two  steeds  richly
caparisoned  in  gold.2

Lastly,  whatever  elements  of  a  historical  nature  have
been  absorbed  by  the  Conchobar  legend,  his  well-defined
position  as  a  king  of  Ulster  becomes  at  once  obscured
when  one  begins  to  look  a  little  more  closely  into  the
so-called  early  history  of  Ireland.  Thus  it  speaks  of
another  Conchobar,  known  as  Conchobar  Abrad-ruad,
4  Conchobar  of  the  Eed  Eyebrows,'  who  alone  has  been
admitted  to  a  place  in  the  Annals  of  the  Kingdom  of
Ireland,  compiled  by  the  Four  Masters  in  the  earlier
part  of  the  17th  century.  In  that  work  he  is  repre-
sented as  reigning  over  Erinn  six  years  before  the
Incarnation,  and  dying  at  the  hands  of  a  son  of
Lugaid,3  a  contemporary  of  Cuchulainn,  son  of  Conchobar
mac  Nessa's  sister,  Dechtere :  so  that  the  time  of  this
Conchobar,  king  of  Erinn,  coincides,  roughly  speaking,
with  that  of  the  king  of  Ulster  of  the  same  name,  and  I
have  very  little  doubt  that  the  two  were  originally  one,
a  view  corroborated  by  the  fact  that  Conchobar  is  by
no  means  a  common  name  in  the  remoter  portions  of

1  Bk.  of  Leinster,  114a;  Windiscli's  Irische  Tezte,  p.  106;  and
O'Curry's  Manners,  iij.  372.

2  This  looks  as  if  Ferloga,  though  called  Ailill's  charioteer,  should  he
a  sun-god  j  and  the  name  Fer-loga  meaning  the  '  Man  oi'  Lug  or  lug,'  a
word  to  be  discussed  later,  would  seem  to  point  in  the  same  direction.

3  Four  Masters,  A.  M.  5192.


144  II.     THE    ZEUS   OP

Irish  pedigrees,  which  are  here  quite  in  point,  as  they
make  both  Conchobars  grandsons  of  one  and  the  same
Boss  the  Bed.1  Conchobar  was  doubtless  not  a  man;
his  sister  Dechtere,  the  mother  of  Ciichulainn,  is  called
a  goddess  ;2  and  the  scribe  of  an  old  story  in  the  Book  of
the  Dun  is  obliged,  in  spite  of  his  Euhemerism,  to  remark
in  passing  that  Conchobar  was  a  dia  talmaide,3  or  terres-
trial god,  of  the  Ultonians  of  his  time.  He  is,  in  short,
to  be  regarded  as  holding,  in  the  Ultonian  cycle,  a  place
analogous  to  that  of  Nuada  and  Llud  in  the  cycles  to
which  they  belong.

The  Mac  Oc  and  Merlin.
In  respect  of  his  partially  acknowledged  divinity,
Conchobar  differs  from  Cormac  mac  Airt,  who  is  treated
throughout  as  a  mere  man.  The  next  to  be  mentioned
is  Aengus,4  who,  on  the  other  hand,  is  never  treated  as
a  historical  character :  he  is  described  as  son  of  the  god
called  Dagda  the  Great,  and  the  goddess  Boann,5  from

1  The  Four  Masters  had  not  the  courage  to  make  Conchobar  mac
Nessa  a  historical  character,  but  they  call  the  other  Conchobar  the  son
of  Finn  File,  'Finn  the  Poet  or  Seer'  (A.M.  5192),  in  whom  we  seem
to  have  the  same  son  of  Ross  the  Red  that  is  called  Fachtna  the
Poetic,  as  the  reputed  father  of  Conchobar  mac  Nessa.

2  Bk.  of  Leinster,  1235,  where  Ciichulainn  is  called  mc  dea  dechtiri,
'  of  (the)  son  of  (the)  goddess  Dechtire.'

3  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  1016;  Fled  Bricrenn,  in  Windisch's  Ir.  Texte,
p.  259.

4  Here,  as  elsewhere,  there  is  some  difficulty  as  to  which  form  of
the  name  to  choose  :  the  modern  Irish  spelling  is  Aonglius,  while
Aengus  is  older ;  but  older  still  is  Oengus,  while  Oingus,  or  Oinguss,
would  be  the  oldest  to  be  found  in  manuscripts.

5  Boann,  also  Boand,  genitive  Boinne  or  Boinde,  was  the  name  of
the  lady  pursued  by  the  Boyne  :  see  p.  123.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  145

whom  the  river  Boyne  takes  its  name.  The  younger  god,
fully  described,  was  'Aengus  son  of  the  (two)  Young
Ones.' 1  What  this  exactly  meant  is  not  clear ;  for  though
his  parents  as  immortals  might  perhaps  be  regarded  as
ever  young,  no  reference  is  made,  so  far  as  I  know,  to
the  youthfulness  of  either :  on  the  contrary,  the  Dagda
is  represented  both  as  old  and  old-fashioned,  fond  of
porridge,  and  generally  a  good  subject  for  comic  treat-
ment.2 Aengus  is  also  called  In  Mac  Oc,  l  the  Young
Son,'  possibly  'the  Young  Fellow,'  which  is  in  harmony
with  the  stories  extant  about  his  youthful  beauty  and
personal  attractions ;  as,  for  example,  when  he  once  on  a
time  appeared  to  king  Cormac  and  gave  him  prophetic
answers  to  his  questions  about  the  future :  on  that  occa-
sion he  carried  a  musical  instrument,  and  he  is  usually
described  much  devoted  to  music  of  an  irresistible  nature.
The  Mac  Oc's  foster-father  was  Mider,  king  of  the  Fairies,
whose  wife  was  Etain,  another  dawn-goddess ;  but  a
fragmentary  story3  represents  a  rival  of  hers  succeeding
by  her  wiles  and  magic  arts  in  severing  her  from  Mider.
When  her  husband  lost  her,  she  was  found  in  great
misery  by  the  Mac  Oc,  who  had  her  clad  in  purple  and
placed  in  a  glass  grianan  or  sun-bower,  where  she  fed  on
fragrance  and  the  bloom  of  odoriferous  flowers.  One  of
the  most  curious  things  in  this  very  curious  story  is  the

1  In  Irish  Oengus  war  ind  Oc,  or  merely  Mac  ind  Oc,  a  name  which
probably  belonged  to  a  lost  pedigree  of  the  god,  differing  from  the  one
ordinarily  given.

2  See  the  British  Museum  MS.  Harl.  5280,  fol.  66b;  also  Dr.  Sul-
livan's introductory  volume  to  O'Curry's  Manners,  Sec,  pp.  dexxxix,
dcxl.

3  Bk.  of  the  Dan,  p.  129  ;  Windiscb,  pp.  130—132.

L


146  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

statement,  that,  when  the  Mac  Oc  travelled,  he  carried  the
glass  grianan  about  with  him,  and  slept  in  it  at  night
in  order  to  attend  on  Etain  while  awaiting  the  return
of  her  former  health  and  vigour.  Once  more  Etain's
rival  succeeded  in  separating  her  from  her  protector  and
in  reducing  her  to  a  condition  of  great  wretchedness,
prior  to  her  entering  on  a  new  state  of  existence.  The
role  of  protecting  a  dawn-goddess  is  ascribed  to  the  Mac
Oc  in  another  story,1  where  she  appears  under  the  name
of  Grainne,  daughter  of  Cormac  mac  Airt,  and  the  Mac
Oc  is  called  Aengus.  Grainne  declines  to  wed  Finn,
the  counterpart  of  the  Welsh  god  Gwyn,  king  of  the
fairies  and  the  dead ;  but  she  elopes  with  Diarmait,
a  solar  hero  who  was  Aengus'  foster-son;  and  when
Diarmait  and  Grainne  found  themselves  hard  pressed  by
Einn  and  his  men  in  pursuit,  Aengus  repeatedly  aided
them  by  throwing  his  magic  mantle  around  Grainne  and
carrying  her  away  unobserved  by  Finn.  Here  the  mantle
answers  the  purpose  of  the  more  cumbrous  glass  grianan.
The  latter,  however,  is  of  prime  importance  from  a
mythological  point  of  view,  as  it  seems  to  be  a  sort  of
picture  of  the  expanse  of  the  heavens  lit  up  by  the  light
of  the  sun ;  and  in  the  Mac  Oc,  going  about  with  this
glass  structure,  we  have  a  representation  of  the  Aryan
Zeus  in  his  original  character  of  god  of  the  sun  and
daylight.  Now  if  the  Mac  Oc  be  regarded  as  a  Goi-
delic  Zeus,  the  Dagda  should  be  a  Cronus,  and  that  is
corroborated  by  the  peculiar  relations  in  which  the  two
Irish  gods  are  placed  with  regard  to  one  another.     For


1    Tlie  Pursuit  of  Diarmuid  and  Grainne,  already  alluded  to  :  see
note,  p.  135.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  147

as  Cronus  is  disinherited  by  his  youngest  son  Zeus,  so  is
the  Dagda  by  his  Young  Son  the  Mac  Oc,  excepting  that
it  is  brought  about  in  Irish  mythology,  not  by  war,  but
by  craft.  The  story  is  recorded  that  the  Dagda,  as  king
of  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann,  allotted  them  their  respective
habitations,  but  that  in  so  doing  he  happened  to  forget
the  Mac  Oc,  who  presently  called  on  his  father  to  claim
his  inheritance.  The  Dagda  replied  that  he  had  none
left,  at  which  his  son  naturally  grumbled,  and  asked  to
be  allowed  to  stay  at  the  Dagda's  palace  till  night.  The
Dagda  assented ;  but  at  the  end  of  the  allotted  time  he
told  his  son  to  go.  The  son  replied  that  he  had  been
granted  day  and  night,  which  was  the  sum  of  all  exist-
ence. So  he  stayed  on  in  the  palace  of  his  father,  who
had  to  move  out1  to  seek  a  home  elsewhere.  This
scene  doubtless  belonged  originally  to  Irish  mythology
before  any  Celts  had  settled  in  Ireland,  but  the  story
came  to  be  localized  in  due  time  in  that  country,  thus
associating  the  name  of  the  Mac  Oc  with  one  of  the
abodes  of  the  happy  departed.

How  this  was  brought  about  may  be  gathered  from  the
following  facts.  The  Tuatha  De*  Danann  were  regarded,
nobody  knows  how  early,  as  one  of  the  races  inhabiting
Erinn,  so  that  upon  the  arrival  of  the  Sons  of  Mile,  or  the
mythic  race  from  which  most  of  the  human  dwellers  in
the  island  are  regarded  as  derived,  a  great  battle  took

1  See  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  pp.  2466,  247a.  According  to  a  story
summarized  from  the  Bk.  of  Fermoy  by  Dr.  Todd  in  the  K.  Irish
Academy's  Irish  MSS.  Series,  i.  46,  the  dispossessed  owner  was  not
the  Dagda  but  Elcmar,  foster-father  to  the  Mac  6c,  who  expelled  him
with  the  aid  of  the  magic  arts  of  Manannan  mac  Lir.  See  also  M.
d'A.  de  Jubainville's  Cycle  Mythol.  pp.  276—282.

l2


148  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

place  between  them  at  Tailltinn,  situated  between  Kells
and  Navan  in  the  present  county  of  Meath.1  The  gods,
defeated,  withdrew  from  the  ken  of  the  invaders,  forming
themselves  into  an  invisible  world  of  their  own.  They
retreated  into  the  hills  and  mounds  of  Erinn ;  so  tradition
associates  them  especially  with  the  burial  mounds  and
cemeteries  of  the  country.  A  very  remarkable  group  of
these  dot  the  banks  of  the  Boyne  :  take,  for  example,  the
burial  remains  of  Newgrange,  in  Meath ;  of  Knowth,  near
Slane,  in  the  same  county,  and  only  separated  by  the
river  from  the  ancient  cemetery  of  Eos  na  Kigh ;  of  Dowth,
near  Drogheda;  and  of  Drogheda  itself — all  of  which
appear  to  have  been  plundered  by  the  Norsemen  in  the
ninth  century.2  Add  to  these  the  Brugh  of  the  Boyne,
the  home  of  the  Dagda,  which  he  lost  to  his  crafty  son
the  Mac  Oc,  known  thenceforth  as  the  Aengus  of  the
Brugh.3  Euhemeristic  tradition  came  to  represent  the
Dagda  and  his  sons  as  buried  there,  and  pointed  to  the
Sid,  or  Fairy  Mound,  of  the  Brugh,  as  covering  their
resting-place.

The  older  account,  however,  which  relates  how  the
Mac  Oc  got  possession  of  it,  says  nothing  about  it  as
a  cemetery;  in  fact  it  describes  it  as  an  admirable
place,  more  accurately  speaking  as  an  admirable  land,  a


1  Four  Masters,  A.  M.  3500,  &  ed.'s  note,  p.  22.

2  lb.  A.D.  861,  &  ed.'s  notes.

3  lb.  A.  M.  3450,  &  note  ;  Petrie's  Round  Towers  of  Ireland,  in  the
Transactions  of  the  R.  Irish  Academy,  xx.  100-1  ;  also  O'Curry,  iij.
122,  362.  It  may  here  be  explained,  that  the  word  brugh,  in  older
spelling  brug  or  brud,  is  usually  translated  a  'palace.'  The  one  in
question  was  on  the  Boyne,  at  Broad-Boym  Bridge,  near  Slane,  in  the
county  of  Meath.


THE   INSULAR   CELTS.  149

term  which,  betrays  the  usual  identification1  of  the  fairy
mound  with  the  nether  world  to  which  it  formed  the
entrance.     Admirable,  it  says,  is  that  land ;    there  are
three   trees   there  always   bearing  fruit;    there  is  one
pig  there  always  alive,  and  another  pig  always  ready
cooked ;  and  there  is  a  vessel  there  full  of  excellent  ale.2
Nobody  who  is  familiar  with  the  literature  of  ancient
Erinn  requires  to  be  told  that  this  description  is   an
expression  of  the  old  Irish  idea  of  the  Land  of  the  Blessed.
So  the  myth  placing  the  Dagda  at  the  head  of  the  departed,
simply  happy  on  fruit  and  pork  and  ale,  is  the  coun-
terpart, and  a  very  ancient  one,  of  the  Greek  story  of
Cronus,  vanquished  and  driven  from  power,  wandering
to  the  Isles  of  the  Blessed,  there  to  reign  over  them  and
share  the  functions  of  Ehadamanthus.     The  Irish  idea  of
the  Dagda  as  a  Goidelic  Cronus,  ruling  over  an  Elysium
with  which  a  sepulchral  mound  was  associated,  nay  even
confounded,  contributed  possibly  to  the  formation  of  the
story  that  all  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann,  beaten  in  battle,
withdrew  into  the  hills  and  mounds  of  Erinn;  but  be
that  as  it  may,  this  latter  belief  in  its  turn  put  an  end  to
the  singularity  of  the  Dagda's  position  by  making  that
of  the  other  gods  much  like  his.     Further,  the  transfer-
ence to  his  new  sphere  in  Erinn  of  the  incident  of  his
replacement  by  his  son,  had  the  mythologically  strange
effect  of  making  into  a  king  of  the  dead  in  nether  dusk
the  Mac  Oc,  who  should  have  been  the  youthful  Zeus  of

1  It  was  here  helped  by  confounding  brug,  as  applied  to  the  Mac  Oc's
'house'  (Bk.  of  the  Dun,  bib),  with  some  form  of  bruig,  for  an  earlier
mruig  (see  Windisch,  s.  v.)  of  the  same  origin  as  the  English  Marches,
Ger.  mark,  Welsh  bro,  '  a  land  or  district,'  Gaulish  AMobrogzs  (p.  5).

-  Bk.  of  Lei  aster,  246  a.


150


II.     THE    ZEUS    OF


the  Goidelic  world,  rejoicing  in  the  translucent  expanse
of  the  heavens  as  his  crystal  bower.

A  somewhat  similar  localizing  of  mythic  personages  is
observable  in  connection  with  the  ancient  stone  strong-
holds of  the  west.     One  of  the  most  remarkable  stands
in  the  island  of  Arann,  off  the  coast  of  Galway :   it  is
not  known  when  or  by  whom  its  cyclopean  walls  were
built,  but  it  is  called  Dun  Aengus,  after  an  Aengus  son
of  Timor,1   a  father  otherwise  obscure.     Now  we  read
of  a  lady  called  Maistiu,  daughter  to  this  Aengus,  acting
as  embroideress  to  the  other  Aengus ; 2  and  it  is  by  no
means  improbable  that  the  Dagda's  Son  of  the  one  set  of
stories  was  Timor's  Son  of  the  other,  whence  it  would
follow  that  Aengus's  daughter  who  embroidered  for  him
might  be  regarded  as  corresponding  to  Zeus's  daughter
Athene,  who  excelled  in  the  same  kind  of  work.     The
story  of  Aengus,   son  of  Umdr,  associates  him  with  a
mythic  people  called  the  Fir  Bolg,  and  brings  him  and
the  Clann  TImoir3  from  Scotland;  they  obtained  land  in
Meath  from  the  king  of  Erinn,  but  finding  his  yoke  too
heavy,  they  escaped  to  the  west,  when  Aengus  and  his
household  settled  in  Arann.     The  meaning  of  this  myth
will  readily  be  seen  by  comparing  it  with  its  Welsh
counterpart,  to  which  we  are  now  coming.     But  before
dismissing  the  Mac  Oc,  it  may  be  worth  while  mentioning

1  O'Curry's  Manners,  &c,  ij.  122,  iij.  5,  74,  122  ;  and  there  appears
to  have  been  a  tale,  now  unknown,  about  the  Destruction  of  Dun  Oen-
gusa  (in  modern  Irish  Dun  Aonglntis),  the  Fortress  of  Aengus  :  see
M.  d'A.  de  Jubainville's  Essai  d'un  Catalogue,  p.  244.

2  Bk.  of  Lecan,  fol.  233a,  b,  quoted  by  O'Curry,  iij.  122.

3  Some  more  references  to  Aengus  and  the  other  sons  of  Umur  will
be  found  in  O'Donovan's  note  to  t\\Q  Four  Makers,  A.D.  1599  (p.  2104),
and  O'Curry's  Battle  of  Magh  Leana,  p.  157.


THE    INSULAR   CELTS.  151

that  he,  like  Zeus,  figures  in  love  adventures,  and  Irish
literature  contains  many  allusions  to  him,  some  of  which
remain  unexplained,  such  as  one  which  speaks  of  the
four  kisses  of  Aengus  of  the  Brugh  of  the  Boyne,  that
were  converted  by  him  into  '  birds  which  haunted  the
youths  of  Erinn.' l

The  counterpart  of  Aengus  in  Welsh  is  to  be  found,
I  think,  in  Myrdin,  better  known  in  English  as  Merlin,
and  in  Ambrosius  called  in  Welsh  Emrys  or  Emrys
Wledig,  that  is  to  say  Prince  Emrys  or  Ambrose  the
Givledig.  In  Nennius'  Ilistoria  Brittonum  we  find  him
brought  as  a  child  before  old  king  Yortigern  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Snowdon,  where  he  was  trying  to  build
a  great  fortress  for  himself  and  his  household.  Emrys
then  gave  his  name  as  Ambrosius,  and,  though  a  mere
child,  he  confounded  Yortigern's  magicians  and  fright-
ened the  old  king  to  leave  him  the  fortress,  together  with
all  the  western  portion  of  the  island.2  The  former  was
thenceforth  called  Dinas  Emrys,  the  Town  of  Ambrosius,
a  name  still  borne  by  a  hill -spur  near  Bedgelert  in
Carnarvonshire.  Now  this  Ambrosius  is  otherwise  iden-
tified with  the  king  Emrys,  who  was  brother  to  Uthr,  or
Uther  as  he  is  called  in  English : 3  the  former  is  called
in  Latin  Aurelius  Ambrosius,  in  whom  we  seem  to  have
a  historical  man,  while  the  latter  is  to  be  identified  with
the  god  of  the  Wonderful  Head  mentioned  in  the  last
lecture  (pp.  94 — 97).  But  the  Emrys  whom  Nennius
brings  before  Yortigern  is  the  Myrdin  or  Merlin  of  other

1  0 'Curry,  p.  478.

2  San-Marte,  Gildas  et  Nennius,  pp.  53 — 55.

3  Geoffrey's  Historia  Regum  Britanniae,  ed.  San-Marte,  pp.  78-9,  &c.


152  IT.     THE    ZEUS    OF

versions1  of  the  story.  So  a  distinction  of  persons  has
been  sometimes  made,  according  to  which  there  was  a
prophet  Merlin  and  a  prince  Emrys :  even  this  was  not
found  sufficient,  for  some  have  subdivided  Merlin  into
three,  to  wit,  Merlin  Ambrosius,  Merlin  Cakdonius,  and
Merlin  Sylvaticus.  In  order  to  approach  the  original  con-
ception our  course  is  clear:  we  must  give  all  the  attributes
of  Emrys  and  the  Merlins  to  one  Merlin  Emrys ;  but  this
is  only  theoretically  clear,  as  the  process  is  disturbed  by
the  historical  element  introduced  in  the  person  of  Aurelius
Ambrosius,  who  may  possibly  be  regarded  as  in  a  sense
responsible  for  some  of  the  chief  difficulties  in  our  way,
looked  at  from  a  mythological  point  of  view.  We  should,
however,  not  be  far  wrong  in  treating  Merlin  Emrys  as
an  adumbration  of  a  personage  who  was  at  once  a  king
a  id  warrior,  a  great  magician  and  prophet,  in  a  word  a
Zeus  of  Brythonic  paganism.

But  if  Merlin  Emrys  be  a  Brythonic  Zeus,  then
Vortigern  ought  to  be  a  Brythonic  Cronus;  and  this
is,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  in  harmony  with  the  evidence
of  Yortigern's  name,  which  means  a  supreme  lord  or
over-king,  corresponding  to  the  position  of  Cronus  before
he  was  driven  from  power.  The  Mac  6c  is  represented
as  the  Dagda's  son,  which  cannot  be  paralleled  by  any  of
the  accounts  of  Merlin  Emrys'  birth ;  but  this  may  be
one  of  the  results  of  the  disturbing  influence  of  the
historical  element.  On  a  third  point  we  are  more  for-
tunate:  the  Dagda  and  Cronus,  supplanted  by  their
respective  sons,  go  to  preside  over  the  departed;  and
the  parallel  extends  to  Vortigern.     Eor,  when  leaving


1  Such  as  Geoffrey's,  pp.  DO— lOi.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  153

his  kingdom  to  Merlin  Emrys,  lie  proceeded  to  the
north,  a  part  of  the  island  supposed  at  one  time  to
have  been  the  abode  of  the  dead,  a  notion  attested
by  so  late  an  author  as  the  Greek  writer  Procopius
in  the  Gth  century.  Further,  the  district  in  the  north
to  which  Vortigern  is  made  to  go  is  called  Givi/nmvcsi,1
a  derivative  used  probably  as  the  plural  of  Givymvas,
which  would  mean  the  White  or  Blissful  Abode.  The
compound,  analysed  into  Givas  Gtvi/n,2  of  the  same
meaning,  occurs  in  another  story,  which  represents  a
solar  hero,  called  Caswallawn  son  of  Beli,  going  in
pursuit  of  his  mistress,  Ffltlr  daughter  of  Mygnach  the
Dwarf,  who  was  carried  away  by  the  Eomans,  according
to  one  account  to  Borne,  and  according  to  another  to
Gwasgwyn.  He  recovered  her  after  a  great  battle  with
the  Eomans,  who,  to  avenge  their  defeat,  afterwards
invaded  Britain  under  Julius  Caesar : 3  another  reference
to  the  same  mythic  expedition  of  Caswallawn's  makes
him  and  his  host  settle  permanently  in  Gwasgwyn.4
Now  Caswallawn  belongs  to  Welsh  mythology,  but  his
name  happens  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  historical
man  Cassivellaunus  of  Caesar's  narrative,  and  Givasgivyn,

1  San-Marte,  in  his  Gildas  et  Nennius,  p.  55,  adopts  the  reading
Guunnesi,  but  there  are  diverse  others  all  consistent  with  an  original
Gucnnuessi,  which  may  also  have  had  the  shortened  form  Gunnuessi.

2  Compare  the  use  of  gwas  in  speaking  of  an  abode  or  mansion  in
Heaven  in  the  Bk.  of  Taliessin,  Skene,  ij.  110;  see  also  p.  11  above.
Probably  the  Gwysmeuryc  of  the  Welsh  version  of  Geoffrey,  ij.  1946,
derives  its  gwys  from  a  very  different  origin,  as  the  Latin  version  has
Westimaria,  p.  57,  and  Westmarialanda,  p.  G6.

3  The  Triads,  i.  53,  77,  ii.  58,  iii.  102  :  see  also  San-Marte's
Geoffrey,  p.  253,  note.

4  lb.  i.  40,  ii.  5.


154  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

in  the  stories  mentioned,  originally  meant  Givas  Gwyn,  the
White  Mansion,  the  mythical  abode  of  the  happy  dead ;
but  it  was  misinterpreted  to  refer  to  Gascony,  which
came  to  be  known  in  Welsh  as  Givasgivyn.1  It  is  to  this
mythic  land  of  the  White  Mansion  or  Blissful  Abode,
whither  the  sun-god's  bride  had  been  hurried  away  by  a
rival,  that  the  boy  Merlin  Emrys  drove  the  aged  and
uxorious  monarch  once  correctly  styled  Yortigern  or
supreme  king.

It  may  here  be  remarked  that  Yortigern  resembled
Cronus  more  closely  in  point  of  character  than  did  the
Dagda,  whose  name  appears  to  stand  for  an  earlier  Dago-
devos,  meaning  the  'good  god,'2  in  reference  probably  to
the  goodnatured  disposition  usually  ascribed  him  in  his
last  sphere  of  activity ;  but  no  description  of  the  corre-
sponding portion  of  Yortigern's  career  has  reached  us,
while  we  know  that  previous  to  his  expulsion  from  his
realm  his  reputation  for  cruelty  and  treachery  was  such
that  he  was  hated  of  his  subjects.  The  crowning  crime
of  his  reign  was  his  alliance  with  the  enemies  of  his
country  and  his  marrying  Ehonwen,3  '  White -mane/
daughter  of  one  of  their  two  leaders,  known  by  the  simi-
larly equine  names,  Hengist  and  Horsa.  This  has  to
some  extent  to  be  regarded  as  history,  for  the  confound-
ing of  Aurelius  Ambrosius,  who  was  probably  engaged
in  opposing  German  invasions,  with  a  mythic  Ambrosius

1  Gwasgwyn  also  meant  in  Welsh  a  kind  of  horse  for  which  Gascony
was  formerly  famous.

2  For  Dagda  the  decompounded  Dagan  also  occurs  :  see  the  Bl\.  of
Leinster,  245  b.

3  The  form  Rowen,  or  Rowenna,  was  obtained  by  a  very  easy  mis-
reading of  Rvucnn,  or  Ronuenii,  Geoffrey,  pp.  84,  86.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  155

in  the  person  of  Merlin  Ermys,  would  bring  in,  as  its
natural  complement,  the  explanation  that  the  king,  fabled
to  have  been  driven  from  power,  deserved  it  because  of
his  alliance  with  the  invader ;  but  it  fails  to  account  for
the  original  truculence  of  Vortigern's  character,  which,
looking  at  the  Greek  story  of  Cronus,  I  take  to  be  part
and  parcel  of  the  ancient  myth.

It  would  be  impossible,  within  the  compass  of  these
remarks,  to  touch,  however  slightly,  on  the  many  ques-
tions which  the  mention  of  Merlin  must  suggest  to  your
minds ;  but  before  we  have  done  with  him,  let  us  see  in
what  form  the  crystal  bower  of  the  Mac  Oc  appears  in
his  story.  First,  then,  and  foremost  may  be  mentioned
the  legend  which  represents  him  going  with  his  suite  of
nine  bards  into  the  sea  in  a  Glass  House,  after  which
nothing  more  was  ever  heard  of  either  him  or  them.1  But
another  story  appears  to  have  placed  the  Glass  House  in
Bardsey,2  which  probably  derives  its  name  from  Merlin
as  the  bard  and  prophet  par  excellence  ;  and  we  read  that
Merlin  took  with  him  into  the  Glass  House  the  thirteen
treasures3  of  Britain,  including  among  them  such  rarities
as  Arthur's  tartan  that  rendered  its  wearer  invisible,
Gwydno's  inexhaustible  basket,  and  other  articles  of
equally  fabulous  virtues.

Further,  a  Welsh  poet4  of  the  15th  century  tells  us  that

1  Triads,  iij.  10.

2  The  Brython  for  1860,  pp.  372-3  ;  the  Greal  (London,  1805),
p.  188.

3  Enumerated  in  the  Brython,  loc.  cit. ;  also  in  Guest's  Mab.  ij.  354,

4  Ieuan  Dyfi,  quoted  by  Morris  in  his  Celtic  Remains,  s.  v.  Enfti,
p.  170,  where  the  author  gravely  disposes  of  the  great  enchanter  as
follows  :  'This  house  of  glass,  it  seems,  was  the  museum  where  they


156  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

the  reason  why  Merlin  entered  the  Glass  Honse  was  in
order  to  please  his  leman.  This  tallies  with  the  account,
in  the  romances,  of  Merlin's  final  disappearance ;  the  per-
son whom  Merlin  loved  is  called  the  Lady  of  the  Lake,  to
whom  he  is  represented  as  disclosing  the  secrets  of  his
magic  art ;  but  she  would  not  rest  satisfied  until  she  had
the  means  of  detaining  him  for  evermore.  Merlin  must
teach  her  how  she  might  imprison  a  man  by  enchant-
ment alone  in  '  a  tour  with-outen  walles,  or  with-oute
eny  closure.'  He,  understanding  what  it  meant,  declined
for  a  while  to  consent;  but  her  winning  ways  proved
irresistible,  for  he  showed  her  at  length  how  to  make
'a  place  feire  and  couenable,'  so  contrived  by  art  and
by  cunning  that  it  might  never  be  undone,  and  that  he
and  she  '  should  be  there  in  joy  and  in  solace.'  So  one
day  when  they  were  going  hand  in  hand  through  the
forest  of  Br^cilien,  they  found  a  'bussh  that  was  feire
and  high  of  white  hawthorne  full  of  floures,'  and  beneath
that  bush  they  sat  them  down  in  the  shade.  He  fell  asleep
with  his  head  on  the  lady's  lap ;  but  as  soon  as  she  found
him  fast  asleep,  she  arose  and  gave  effect  to  the  feat
of  magic  she  had  learned :  she  '  made  a  cerne  with  hir
wymple  all  a-boute  the  bussh  and  all  a-boute  Merlin,  and
be-gan  hir  enchauntementz  soche  as  Merlin  hadde  hir
taught,  and  made  the  cerne  ix  tymes,  and  ix  tymes  hir
enchauntementes.'  When  he  woke  he  looked  around
c  and  hym  semed  he  was  in  the  feirest  tour  of  the  worlde,
and  the  moste  stronge.'  He  could  not  issue  thence,  but
the  Lady  of  the  Lake  promised  to  spend  the  greater  part

kept  their  curiosities  to  be  seen  by  everybody,  but  not  handled ;  and
it  is  probable  Myrddin,  who  is  said  to  live  in  it,  was  the  keeper  of  their
museum  at  thtt  time.'


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  157

of  every  day  with  him,  as  she  could  go  in  and  out  at  will.
Such  is  a  summary  of  the  story,1  to  which  should  be
added  that  when  Merlin  had  been  missed  at  Arthur's
court  and  several  knights  had  gone  in  search  of  him,  one
of  them,  as  he  was  passing  through  the  forest  of  Brettlien,
heard  a  groaning  close  by  him ;  so  he  looked  up  and
down,  'and  nothinge  he  saugh,  but  as  it  hadde  ben  a
smoke  of  myste  in  the  eyre  that  myght  not  passe  oute.'
Merlin  then,  speaking  out  of  the  smoke  of  mist  to  the
knight,  explained  to  him  how  he  came  to  be  thus  impri-
soned, adding  that  no  one  should  any  more  address  him,
save  his  mistress  alone,  since  the  knight  would  never  be
able  to  find  the  spot  again.2  Another  story  places  the
scene  in  another  forest.  Lastly,  Merlin's  prison  is  repre-
sented as  a  sepulchre  of  marvellous  beauty,  in  which  his
leman  has  by  magic  arts  entombed  him  alive,8  a  view
partially  reflected  by  old  Welsh  poetry  in  that  it  makes
Merlin  'the  man  who  speaks  from  the  grave,'  where  he
is  consulted  with  deference  and  respect  by  Grwendyd:,
who  is,  moreover,  not  associated  with  his  interment :  they
address  one  another  as  brother  and  sister,4  which  recalls
the  romance  that  represents  the  Lady  of  the  Lake  always
a  virgin,  as  regarded  the  enchanter,  who  doted  on  her
charms.    According  to  another  legend,  of  Breton  origin,5

1  See  the  Early  English  Text  Society's  edition  of  Merlin  (1865 —
1869),  pp.  680-1;  and  Southey's  Introd.  to  his  ed.  of  Kyng  Arthur,  &c.
(London,  1817),  pp.  xlv — xlviij,  quoted  in  Guest's  Mob.  i.  216 — 218.

2  E.  Eng.  T.  Society's  Merlin,  pp.  692-3  ;  Southey's  Introd.  p.  xlviij.

3  Southey's  notes  to  his  Kyng  Arthur,  ij.  463—468 ;  Guest,  i.  219.

4  Red  Book  of  Hergest,  see  Skene,  ij.  234,  and  i.  462—478  et  seq.

5  Southey's  Introd.  p.  xlviij,  where  he  refers  to  Anne  Plumptre  as
his  authority.  He  meant,  I  find,  her  Narrative  of  a  "Three  Yearn'
Residence  in  France,  &c.  (London,  1810),  iij.  187.


158  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

his  mistress  chose  to  enclose  him  in  a  tree,  but  nobody
knows  where,  though  it  is  sometimes  surmised  to  have
been  on  a  little  island,  off  the  Bee  du  Eaz,  called  Sein,
which  is  fabled  to  have  been  also  the  scene  of  his  birth.
Tennyson  describes  Merlin's  prison  as

'  an  oak,  so  hollow  huge  and  old
It  look'd  a  tower  of  ruin'd  masonwork.'

This  deviates  greatly  from  the  original  myth,  but  it
retains  one  important  feature  :  it  makes  Merlin  immortal.
He  may  pine  away  like  Tithonus,  but  he  is  a  god,1  who
cannot  die ;  his  living  spirit  abides  with  his  dead  body,
an  idea  which  Ariosto  expresses  with  ghastly  vividness
in  the  words —

'Col  corpo  niorto  il  vivo  spirto  alberga.'2

Similarly,  the  fact  of  the  Lady  of  the  Lake  being
represented  coming  every  day  to  solace  Merlin  in  his
loneliness,  is  in  thorough  harmony  with  the  mytho-
logical notion  that  made  the  dawn-goddess  sometimes
ally  herself  with  the  sun-god  and  sometimes  with  one  of
his  dusky  rivals.  The  same  remark  applies  with  even
more  force  to  the  descriptions  of  Merlin's  abode  as  a
house  of  glass,  as  a  bush  of  white  thorns  laden  with
bloom,  as  a  sort  of  smoke  of  mist  in  the  air,  or  as  l  a  clos
....  nother  of  Iren,  ne  stiell,  ne  tymbir,  ne  of  ston,  but
....  of  the  aire  with-oute  eny  othir  thinge  be  enchaunte-
mente  so  stronge,  that  it  may  neuer  be  vn-don  while  the
worlde  endureth.'3     These  pictures  vie  with  one  another

1  Is  it  possible  that  we  owe  Merlin's  name  or  surname  of  Ambrusius
to  some  pedant  who  had  Merlin's  divinity  in  view  ?

2  Orlando  Furioso,  canto  iij.  11;  Guest,  i.  219.

3  Merlin,  p.  693.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  159

in  transparent  truthfulness  to  the  original  scene  in  nature,
with  the  sun  as  the  centre  of  a  vast  expanse  of  light,
which  moves  with  him  as  he  hastens  towards  the  west.
Even  when  at  length  one  saw  in  Merlin  but  a  magician,
and  in  his  pellucid  prison  but  a  work  of  magic,  the
answer  to  the  question,  what  had  become  of  him  and  it,
continued  to  be  one  which  the  storehouse  of  nature-myths
had  supplied.  Where  could  Merlin  have  gone  but  whither
the  sun  goes  to  rest  at  night,  into  the  dark  sea,  into  an
isle  surrounded  by  the  waves  of  the  west,  or  into  the
dusk  of  an  impenetrable  forest  ?  So  it  came  about  that
legend  sends  Merlin  to  sea  in  his  house  of  glass  never
more  to  be  heard  of,  or  dimly  moors  him  in  the  haze  of
Bardsey,  or  else  it  leaves  him  bound  by  the  spells  of  his
own  magic  in  a  lonely  spot  in  the  sombre  forest1  of
Brecilien,  where  Breton  story  gives  him  a  material  prison
in  a  tomb,  at  the  end  of  the  Yal  des  F^es,  hard  by  the
babbling  fountain  of  Baranton,  so  beloved  of  the  muse  of
romance.  For  me,  however,  the  other  stories  which  leave
Merlin  in  an  isle  off  the  Welsh  or  the  Armoric  coast  have
more  interest  just  now,  as  they  help  more  than  anything
else  to  explain,  how  the  Zeus  of  the  Celts  could  become
so  intimately  associated  with  the  sea  as  we  found  him  to
be  under  the  names  Lliict,  Nud,  Nodens.


1  The  Drython  for  1861,  p.  341,  mentions  an  Anglesey  legend,
recorded  by  Lewis  Morris,  which  represented  Merlin  living  in  a  wild
spot  in  a  forest,  with  his  sister  keeping  house  for  him.  He  was  a  great
magician,  but  whoever  wished  to  consult  him  must  offer  him  drink,  as
he  never  remained  any  time  in  the  same  place  without  drink.  What
the  interpretation  of  this  curious  statement  may  bo,  I  know  not  for
certain  ;  but  compare  the  libation  funnel  in  the  floor  of  the  temple  of
Nodens.


160  ii.   the  zeus  of

Merlin  Emrys  and  Maxen.
This  is  all  corroborated  by  the  name  of  Merlin,  which
is  in  "Welsh  Myrdyn,  and  by  its  association  with  Car-
marthen, in  Welsh  '  Caer  Vyrdin,'  '  Myrdin's  Caer  or
Fortress.'  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  matter  of  no
doubt  that  here  Myrdin  is  the  regular  and  correct  form
of  the  ancient  Brythonic  name  of  the  place,  namely,
Moridihwn,  which  meant  a  sea-fort,  and  correctly  described
the  spot,  in  that  it  is  reached  by  the  tides  in  the  Towy.
Thus  we  have  Myrdin  as  the  name  of  the  enchanter  and
as  that  of  the  town,  which  is  to  be  explained  by  an  acci-
dent of  Welsh,  my  conjecture  being  that  the  two  names
were  distinguished,  in  an  earlier  stage  of  the  language,
by  a  difference  of  termination.  We  have  only  to  take
Moridunon  as  given  by  Ptolemy,1  and  to  suppose  a
derivative  of  a  common  form  made  from  it,  and  we
have  Moridilnjos,2  which  might  mean  '  him  of  Moridunon
or  the  sea-fort.'  Taken  in  reference  to  Carmarthen,
it  would  explain  the  legend  which  makes  the  prophet
a  native,  under  peculiar  circumstances,  of  that  town;
but  taken  in  connection  with  his  mythic  home  and  prison,
it  suits  his  abode  in  Bardsey  or  the  Armoric  isle  of
Sein,  where  he  was  also  believed  to  have  been  born ;

1  GeograpMa,  ed.  C.  Miiller  (Paris,  1883),  lib.  ij.  cap.  3, 12  (i.  p.  101).
As  the  name  of  another  town  south  or  east  of  the  Severn  sea,  it  reads
in  the  Antonine  Itinerary  Moriduno  and  Mariduno,  and  Parthey  prints
Muriduno:  see  his  ed.  pp.  231,  234.

2  As  a  parallel  to  Muridunjos  shortened  into  'Myrdin,'  I  may  mention
the  Gaulish  toovtiovs  (p.  46),  which  we  have  in  Welsh  in  the  epithet
of  Morgant  Tud  in  the  romance  of  Gereint  and  Enid  (R.  B.  Mob.  pp.
261,  286-7).  Morgant  was  the  great  physician  of  Arthur's  court;  can
tud  have  originally  meant  a  public  leech  or  the  medicine  man  of  the
state  1


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  101

and  as  pedantry  has  had  a  hand  in  naming  him,  we  may
render  Merlinus  Ambrosius  into  English  as  '  the  Divine
or  Immortal  One  of  the  Stronghold  of  the  Sea.'  Car-
marthen enters  into  another  legend  which  represents  that
town  built  by  a  princess  called  Elen  Liiydawg,  or  El  en
Mistress  of  a  Host :  that  is  but  another  way  of  describing
the  Lady  of  the  Lake  constructing  a  house  of  glass  or
some  still  more  pellucid  material  to  be  Merlin's  prison.
It  is  also  remarkable  that  Elen  is  represented  as  causing
to  be  built  the  highest  fortress  in  Arvon,  wherein  we
seem  to  have  a  reference  to  Dinas  Emrys,  the  spot  from
which  Merlin  Emrys  expelled  Vortigern.

The  Elen  I  have  referred  to  is  a  personage  of  no
merely  incidental  interest,  and  her  story  is  essential  to
the  theory  of  the  identity  of  Aengus  the  Mac  Oc  with
our  Merlin  Emrys.  The  name  Elen  still  belongs  to
mythology  in  Wales  :  thus  in  Arvon,  for  instance,  Arian-
rhod  (p.  90)  is  said  to  have  had  three  sisters  who  lived
with  her  in  her  castle  in  the  sea.  They  were  named  Given
or  Gtvennan,  Maelan  and  Elen ; 1  all  appear,  like  Arian-
rhod,  to  have  belonged  to  the  class  of  goddesses  asso-
ciated with  the  dawn.  So  also  with  an  Elen  said  hy
Geoffrey  to  have  been  ravished  on  Mont  St.  Michel  by
the  Spanish  giant  to  whom  a  passing  reference  has
already  been  made  (p.  91).  That  incident  is  to  be
interpreted  to  mean  the  dawn  passing  into  the  gloaming,
and  finally  losing  itself  in  the  darkness  of  night,  a  view-
corroborated  by  the  fact  that  she  is  treated  as  sister  of

1  See  my  Fairy  Talcs  in  the  Cymmrodor^  vi.  162-3.  In  Arvon  the
mythic  name  Elen  becomes,  according  to  rule,  Elan ;  while  the  ordinary
name  Ellen,  much  usod  in  Wales,  is  pronounced  in  Arvon  Elin,  when-
ever E'linor,  of  which  it  is  a  shortened  form,  is  not  preferred.

M


162  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

a  solar  knight  of  Arthur's  court,  called  Howel : a   this
last  name  means  able  to  see  or  easy  to  be  seen,  that  is
to    say,    conspicuous,    a   fitting  designation,   whichever
meaning  you  take,  for  a  sun  hero.     But  to  return  to
Elen  Luyctawg:  she  is  the  heroine  of  an  old  Welsh  saga
known  as   the   Dream   of   Maxen  the  Gwledig.      The
following  is  an  abstract  of  it :  2 — Maxen  was  emperor  of
Home  and  the  handsomest  of  men,  as  well  as  the  wisest,
with  whom  none  of  his   predecessors   might  compare.
One  day  he  and  his  courtiers  went  forth  to  hunt,  and  in
the  course  of  the  day  he  sat  himself  down  to  rest,  while
his  chamberlains  protected  him  from  the  scorching  rays
of  the  sun  with  their   shields.      Beneath  that  shelter
he  slept,   and  he  dreamt  that  he  was  travelling  over
hill  and  dale,  across  rich  lands  and  fine  countries  until
at  length  he  reached  a  sea-coast.     Then  he  crossed  the
sea  in  a  magnificent  ship  and  landed  in  a  great  city  in
an  island,  which  he  traversed  from  the  one  shore  till  he
was  in  sight  of  the  other :  there  we  find  him  in  a  district
remarkable  for  its  precipitous  mountains  and  lofty  cliffs,
from  which  he  could  descry  an  isle  in  front  of  him,  sur-
rounded by  the  sea.      He  stayed  not  his  course  until
he  reached  the  mouth  of  a  river,  where  he  found  a  castle
with  open  gates.      He  walked  in,   and  there  beheld  a
fair  hall  built  of  stones  precious  and  brilliant,  and  roofed
with  shingles  of  gold.     To  pass  by  a  great  deal  more
gold  and  silver  and  other  precious  things,  Maxen  found


1  Howcl  is  the  colloquial  pronunciation  of  what  would,  in  book-
Welsh,  be  Hyivel :  compare  the  note  on  Owein,  p.  63.

2  R.  B.  Mab.  pp.  82—92 ;  Guest,  iij.  276—290  ;  but  I  have  also
made  use  of  a  copy  by  Mr.  J.  Gwcnogvryn  Evans  of  the  fragment  in
the  Hen"\vrt  MS.  numbered  5-1.


Till)    INSULAR   CELTS.  163

in  the  hall  four  persons,  namely,  two  youths  playing  at
chess :  they  were  the  sons  of  the  lord  of  the  castle,  who
was  a  venerable,  gray-haired  man,  sitting  in  an  ivory
chair  adorned  with  the  images  of  two  eagles  of  ruddy
gold.  He  had  bracelets  of  gold  on  his  arms  and  many  a
ring  glittered  on  his  fingers:  a  massive  gold  torque
adorned  his  neck,  while  a  frontlet  of  the  same  precious
metal  served  to  restrain  his  locks.  Hard  by  sat  his
daughter  in  a  chair  of  ruddy  gold,  and  her  beauty  was
so  transcendent,  that  it  would  be  no  more  easy  to  look
at  her  face  than  to  gaze  at  the  sun  when  his  rays  arc
most  irresistible.  She  was  clad  in  white  silk,  fastened
on  her  breast  with  brooches  of  ruddy  gold,  and  over  it
she  wore  a  surcoat  of  golden  satin,  while  her  head  was
adorned  with  a  golden  frontlet  set  with  rubies  and
gems,  alternating  with  pearls  and  imperial  stones.  The
narrator  closes  his  description  of  the  damsel  by  giving
her  a  girdle  of  gold  and  by  declaring  her  altogether  the
fairest  of  the  race.  She  rose  to  meet  Maxen,  who
embraced  her  and  sat  with  her  in  her  chair.  At  this
point  the  dream  was  suddenly  broken  off  by  the  rest-
lessness of  the  horses  and  the  hounds,  and  the  creaking
of  the  shields  rubbing  against  each  other,  which  woke
the  emperor  a  bewildered  man.  Eeluctantly  and  sadly
he  moved,  at  the  advice  of  his  men,  towards  home ;  for
he  could  think  of  nothing  but  the  fair  maiden  in  gold.
In  fact  there  was  no  joint  in  his  body  or  even  as  much
as  the  hollow  of  one  of  his  nails  which  had  not  become
charged  with  her  love.  When  his  courtiers  sat  at  table
to  eat  or  drink,  he  would  not  join  them,  and  when  they
went  to  hear  song  and  entertainment,  he  would  not  go,
or,  in  a  word,  do  anything  for  a  whole  week  but  sleep  as

M  2


1G4  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

often  as  the  maiden  slept,  whom  he  beheld  in  his  dreams.
"When  he  was  awake  she  was  not  present  to  him,  nor
had  he  any  idea  where  in.  the  world  she  was.  This  went
on  till  at  last  one  of  his  nobles  contrived  to  let  him
know,  that  his  conduct  in  neglecting  his  men  and  his
duties  was  the  cause  of  growing  discontent.  Thereupon
he  summoned  before  him  the  wise  men  of  Eome  and
told  them  the  state  of  mind  in  which  he  was.  Their
advice  was  that  messengers  should  be  sent  on  a  three
years'  quest  to  the  three  parts  of  the  world,  as  they
calculated  that  the  expectation  of  good  news  would  help
to  sustain  him.  But  at  the  end  of  the  first  year  the
messengers  returned  unsuccessful,  which  made  Maxen
sad;  so  other  messengers  were  sent  forth  to  search
another  third  of  the  world.  They  returned  at  the  end
of  their  year,  like  the  others,  unsuccessful.  Maxen,
now  in  despair,  took  the  advice  of  one  of  his  courtiers
and  resorted  to  the  forest  where  he  had  first  dreamt  of
the  maiden.  When  the  glade  was  reached,  he  was  able  to
give  his  messengers  a  start  in  the  right  direction.  They
went  on  and  on,  identifying  the  country  they  traversed
with  the  emperor's  description  of  his  march  day  by  day,
until  at  last  they  reached  the  rugged  district  of  Snowdon,
and  beheld  Mona  lying  in  front  of  them  flat  in  the  sea.
They  proceeded  a  little  further  and  entered  a  castle
where  Carnarvon  now  stands,  and  there  beheld  the  hall
roofed  with  gold :  they  walked  in  and  found  Kynan  and
Adeon  playing  at  chess,  while  their  father  Eudav,  son
of  Karadawg,  sat  in  his  chair  of  ivory,  with  his  daughter
Elen  seated  near  him.  They  saluted  her  as  empress  of
Borne,  and  proceeded  to  explain  the  meaning  of  an  act
she  deemed  so  strange.     She  listened  courteously,  but


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  165

declined  to  go  with,  them,  thinking  it  more  appropriate
that  the  emperor  should  come  in  person  to  fetch  her.
In  due  time  he  reached  Britain,  which  he  conquered
from  13eli  the  Great  and  his  sons ;  then  he  proceeded
to  visit  Elen  and  her  father,  and  it  was  during  his  stay
here,  after  the  marriage,  that  Elen  had  Carmarthen  built
and  the  stronghold  in  Eryri.  The  story  adds  Caerleon
to  them,  but  distinguishes  the  unnamed  Snowdon  city
as  the  favourite  abode  of  her  and  her  husband.  The
next  thing  she  undertook  was  to  employ  the  hosts  at  her
command  in  the  construction  of  roads  between  the  three
towns,  which  she  had  caused  to  be  built  in  part  payment
of  her  maiden-fee.  But  Maxen  remained  here  so  many
years  that  the  Komans  made  an  emperor  in  his  stead.
So  at  length  he  and  Elen,  and  her  two  brothers  and
their  hosts,  set  out  for  Eome,  which  they  had  to  besiege
and  take  by  storm.  Maxen  was  now  reinstated  in  power,
and  he  allowed  his  brothers-in-law  and  their  hosts  to
settle  wherever  they  chose;  so  Adeon  and  his  men
came  back  to  Britain,  while  Kynan  and  his  reduced
Brittany  and  settled  there.

Such  is  a  summary  of  this  curious  story,  which  sounds
far  too  native  to  have  originally  had  a  Eoman  emperor
for  its  hero.  Whose  place,  then,  has  Maxen  usurped  in
it,  you  may  ask.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  suggesting  that
it  was  that  of  Emrys,  and  I  think  I  can  assign  at  least
one  of  the  reasons  why  Maxen  the  Gtvledig  took  the
place  of  Emrys  the  Gwledig.  The  heroine  is  called  Elen
Liiyttawg,  that  is,  Elen  mistress  and  owner  of  a  host,
or  the  Elen  who  made  expeditions  with  a  host ;  but  I
take  her  host  to  have  been  of  a  mythical  nature,  and  the


106  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

Triads1  treat  it  as  one  of  the  Three  Silver  Hosts  led  out
of  Britain,  leaving  it  a  prey  to  its  foes :  in  fact,  Elen's
host  is  virtually  to  be  equated  with  St.  Ursula's  host  of
11,000  virgins,  whom  the  Euhemerists  wish  to  treat  as
brides  intended  for  Maximus  and  his  men.  These  virgins
may  be  compared  with  the  smaller  suite  of  the  heroine
of  an  Irish  romance  to  be  mentioned  shortly ;  but  for
those  who  tried  to  translate  myth  into  history,  they
were  hosts  of  armed  men ;  so  it  became  necessary  to  face
the  question,  who  the  tyrant  was  who  led  those  troops
abroad,  and  the  choice  very  naturally  fell  on  Maximus,
the  Maxen  of  the  Welsh  Dream  with  which  you  are  now
acquainted.  For  history  speaks2  of  his  revolt  in  Britain,
of  his  landing  on  the  continent  with  the  troops  he  could
muster  here,  of  his  success  in  acquiring  possession  of
Gaul  and  Spain,  of  the  flight  and  death  of  the  Emperor
Gratian  in  the  year  383.  This,  I  take  it,  together  with
national  vanity,  was  the  cause  that  led  to  the  substitution
of  Maxen  for  Emrys,  and  it  supplies  the  key  to  a  puzzle
in  the  Nennian  Genealogies,3  which  make  Maxen  descend
from  Constantine  the  Great :  this  was  because  Emrys  is
commonly  represented  as  the  son  of  Constantine.

1  i.  40  =  ij.  5.

2  See  Gibbon's  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  (London,
1881),  iij.  358 — 362.  Gibbon  is  seldom  detected  napping,  but  I  cannot
help  finding  somewhat  too  much  of  the  myth  in  his  statement  about
Maximus  (p.  360),  that '  the  youth  of  the  island  crowded  to  his  standard,
and  he  invaded  Gaul  with  a  fleet  and  army  which  were  long  afterwards
remembered  as  the  emigration  of  a  considerable  part  of  the  British
nation.'

3  The  British  Museum  MS.  Harl.  3859,  fol.  193ft;  see  also  the
Annales  Gambrice,  Preface,  p.  x.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  1G7

The  narrator  of  the  Dream  of  Maxon  remarks,  in  con-
nection with  the  mention  of  Elen  ordering  the  roads  to
be  made  from  one  town  to  another,  that  they  were  there-
fore called  the  roads  of  Elen  Liiydawg :  this  is  still  the
case,  as  it  is  not  unusual  to  find  a  mountain  track  in
Wales  termed  Fford  Elen,  'Elcn's  Eoad,'  or  Sarn  Elen,1
'Elen's  Causeway;'  and  there  is  a  certain  poetic  pro-
priety in  associating  the  primitive  paths  and  roads  of  the
country  with  this  vagrant  goddess  of  dawn  and  dusk.
Similarly,  Nennius'  account  of  the  British  auxiliaries  of
Maximus  has  a  mythic  tone  about  it,  which  is  worth
noticing.  '  The  seventh  emperor,'  he  says,  '  who  reigned
in  Britain  was  Maximianus,2  the  man  who  went  with  all
the  soldiers  of  the  Brythons  from  Britain,  and  killed
Gratian  king  of  the  Eomans;  and  he  held  the  govern-
ment of  the  whole  of  Europe,  and  would  not  allow  the
soldiers  who  had  gone  with  him  to  return  to  Britain  to
their  wives,  their  children  and  their  possessions ;  but  he
gave  them  numerous  tracts  of  country  from  the  lake  on
the  top  of  lions  Jovis  as  far  as  the  city  which  is  called

1  Our  charlatans  pretend,  of  course,  that  it  is  Helen  and  not  Elen.
At  Carnarvon  the  Helen  mania  is  so  acute,  that  a  place  not  far  off,
called  Coed  Alun  ever  since  the  14th  century  (R.  B.  Mab.  p.  63),  runs
the  risk  of  having  its  name  permanently  transmogrified  into  Coed
Helen.

2  See  Nennius  and  Gildas,  §  27  (p.  44),  where  our  Maxen  is  called
Maximianus,  while  Maximus  is  the  name  given  his  predecessor.  There
is  considerable  confusion  as  to  these  names,  and  the  shortened  form
Maxen  points,  though  somewhat  irregularly,  to  a  Maxentuis  as  its
starting-point;  but  in  the  Nennian  Genealogy  I  have  just  referred  to,
I  read  the  MS.  abbreviation  as  Maxim,  which  points  unmistakably
to  a  Maximus.  But  neither  Maxen  nor  Maxim,  be  it  noticed,  is  to
be  treated  as  a  genuine  Welsh  form  :  both  cume  from  pedants  and
are  faulty  in  point  of  phonology.


108  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

■Cantguie  and  as  far  as  Cruc  Ochidient,  that  is  to  say,  the
Western  Mound.  These  are  the  Armoric  Brythons,  and
they  have  never  returned  hither  to  this  day.'  The
Cumulus  Occidentalis  alluded  to  sounds  mythic  enough  to
figure  in  the  same  sort  of  stories  as  the  forest  of  Brecilien
or  the  isle  of  Sein ;  not  to  mention  that  the  choice  of
Brittany  as  the  seat  of  the  discharged  auxiliaries  may
have  been  from  the  first  dictated,  at  least  in  part,  by
mythology.  For  the  Welsh  for  Brittany  is  Llydaw,1  a
name  which  may  have  originally  meant  an  abode  of  the
dead,  a  light  in  which  almost  any  land  situated  on  the
other  shore  would  seem  to  have  appeared  to  the  Celts  of
antiquity.

Be  that  as  it  may,  I  have  tried  to  reinstate  Emrys  or
Myrciin  Emrys  in  the  place  usurped  by  Maxen.  From
this  it  would  follow,  among  other  things,  that  he  was  the
conqueror  of  this  country  from  the  chthonian  divinity
Beli  the  Great,  which  derives  unexpected  confirmation
from  a  hitherto  unexplained  Triad,  i.  1,  which  states  that
Britain's  first  name,  before  it  was  inhabited,  was  Clas
Myrdin,  or  Merlin's  Close.  In  this  Triad,  which  must
be  the  echo  of  an  ancient  notion,  the  pellucid  walls
confining  Merlin  become,  by  a  touch  of  the  pencil  of  the
mythic  muse,  co-extensive  with  the  utmost  limits  of  our
island  home.  Here  may  be  compared  Erinn  when  called
the  Island  of  Fdl,  which  suggests  the  possibility  that  the
double  meaning  of  'wall'  and  'light'  attaching  to  its
Welsh  equivalent  gwawl  (pp.  123-4)  has  helped  to  give
the  Merlin  myth  the  form  in  which  we  know  it.    But  let


1  One  of  the  tarns  on  Snowdon,  several  of  which  have  very  uncanny
associations,  is  called  Llyn  Llydaw,  or  the  Lake  of  Llydaw.  What
can  the  meaning  of  the  name  have  been  ?


THE    INSULAK    CELTS.  1G9

me  now  bring  your  attention  back  to  the  dreams  about
the  dawn-goddess  Elen,  and  the  conjecture  that  the  real
dreamer  was  not  Maxen  but  Merlin  Emrys;  for  I  am
persuaded  that  you  will  not  fail  to  recognize  a  more
primitive  version  of  the  same  story  in  the  following  Irish
tale,  called  the  Vision  of  Aengus : l —

One  night  Aengus  the  Mac  Oc  dreamt  that  he  saw  at  his
bedside  a  maiden  the  most  beautiful  in  Erinn :  he  made
a  move  to  take  hold  of  her,  but  she  vanished  he  knew
not  whither.  He  remained  in  his  bed  till  the  morning,
but  he  was  in  an  evil  plight  on  account  of  the  maiden
leaving  him  without  vouchsafing  him  a  word,  and  he
tasted  no  food  that  day.  The  next  night  the  same  lovely
form  appeared  again  at  his  bedside,  and  this  time  she
played  on  the  sweetest  of  musical  instruments.  The
effect  on  him  was  much  the  same  as  before,  and  he  fasted
that  day  also.  This  went  on  for  a  whole  year,  and  he
became  the  victim  of  love;  but  he  told  nobody  what
ailed  him.  The  physicians  of  Erinn  were  called  in,  and
one  of  them  at  length  guessed  by  his  face  what  he  was
suffering  from :  he  bade  his  mother  Boann  be  sent  for
to  hear  her  son's  confession.  She  came  and  he  told  her
his  story.  She  then  sent  for  the  Dagda  his  father,  to
whom  she  explained  that  their  son  was  the  victim  of  a
wasting  sickness  arising  from  unrequited  love,  which  was
considered  a  fatal  disease  in  ancient  Erinn.  The  Dagda
was  in  bad  humour  and  declared  he  could  do  nothing,
which  was  promptly  contradicted ;  for  he  was  told  that  as
he  was  the  king  of  the  Side,  that  is  of  the  gods  and  fairies

1  Published  in  the  Rev.  Celtique,  iii.  342 — 350,  from  the  Egerton  MS.
1782  at  the  British  Museum,  by  Dr.  Ed.  Midler.  See  also  M.  J'A.
do  Jubainville's  Cycle  Myth.  pp.  282-9.


170  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

of  Erinn,  lie  might  send  word  to  Bodb  the  Red,  king  of
the  fairies  of  Munster,  to  use  his  great  knowledge  of  the
fairy  settlements  of  Erinn  to  discover  the  maiden  that
haunted  the  Mac  Oc's  dreams.  Aengus  had  now  been
ill  two  years,  and  Bodb  required  a  year  for  the  search,
but  he  proved  successful  before  the  year  was  out ;  so
he  came  with  the  news  to  the  Dagda  and  took  the  Mac
6c  to  see  if  he  could  recognize  the  lady.  The  Mac  Oc
did  so  the  moment  he  descried  her,  among  her  thrice  fifty
maiden  companions.  These,  we  are  told,  were  joined  two
and  two  together  by  silver  chains,  and  their  mistress
towered  head  and  shoulders  above  the  rest.  Her  name
was  Caerabar,  or  more  shortly  Caer,  daughter  of  Etal
Anbual,  of  the  fairy  settlement  of  Uaman  in  the  land  of
Connaught.  She  wore  a  silver  collar  round  her  neck  and
a  chain  of  burnished  gold.  Aengus  was  grieved  that  he
had  not  the  power  to  take  her  away ;  so  he  returned
home,  and  the  Dagda  was  advised  to  seek  the  aid  of  Ailill
and  Medb,  the  king  and  queen  of  the  western  kingdom.
But  Caer's  father  declining  to  answer  the  summons
that  he  should  appear  before  them,  an  attack  was  made
on  his  residence,  when  he  himself  was  taken  and  brought
before  Ailill  and  Medb.  He  then  explained  to  them
that  he  had  no  power  over  his  daughter,  who  with  her
companions  changed  their  forms  every  other  year  into
those  of  birds.  In  fact,  he  added  that  on  the  first  day
of  the  ensuing  winter  they  would  appear  as  150  swans
on  Loch  lei  draccon  occruit  cliach,  or  the  Lake  of  (the)
mouths  of  (the)  Dragons,  near  Cliach's  Crowd.  Peace
Avas  accordingly  made  with  Etal,  and  Aengus  betook
him  to  the  shore  of  the  lake  on  the  day  mentioned.
Kccognizing  Caer  in  the  form  of  a  swan,  he  called  to  her


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  171

and  said,  { Come  to  speak  to  me,  Cacr.'  '  Who  calls  me  ?'
was  the  reply.  '  Aeugus  calls  thee,'  he  said.  '  I  will
come,'  said  she,  'provided  I  obtain  that  thou  wilt  on  thy
honour  make  for  the  lake  after  me.'  '  I  will,'  said  he.
She  accordingly  came  to  him,  whereupon  he  placed  his
two  hands  on  her ;  then  they  flew  off  in  the  form  of  a  pair
of  swans  and  they  went  thrice  round  the  lake.  They
afterwards  took  their  flight  to  the  Brugh  of  the  Boyne,
where  they  made  such  enchanting  music  that  it  plunged
everybody  in  a  deep  sleep,  which  lasted  three  days  and
three  nights.  Caer  remained  at  the  Brugh  of  the  Boyne
as  the  Mac  Oc's  consort.

Here  must  be  added  one  or  two  extracts  from  the
Irish  manuscript,  of  the  14th  century,  called  the  Speckled
Book :  the  first  runs,  in  the  words  of  O'Curry's  transla-
tion, as  follows:1  "It  is  in  the  reign  of  Flann  Cinaidh
\_Ginach,  or  'the  voracious']  that  the  Eowing- wheel,
and  the  Broom  out  of  Fanaid,  and  the  Fiery  Bolt,  shall
come.  Cliach  was  the  harper  of  Smirdubh  Mac  Smdil,
king  of  the  three  Rosses  of  Sliabh  Ban  [in  Connacht].
Cliach  set  out  on  one  occasion  to  seek  the  hand  in  mar-
riage of  one  of  the  daughters  of  Bodhbh  Derg,  of  the
[fairy]  palace  of  Femhen  [in  Tipperary].  He  continued
a  whole  year  playing  his  harp,  on  the  outside  of  the
palace,  without  being  able  to  approach  nearer  to  Bodhbh,
so  great  was  his  [necromantic]  power ;  nor  did  he  make

1  Tho  italics  and  the  parentheses  are  O'Curry's,  whose  rendering,
though  not  quite  accurate  or  without  one  'bull,'  will  do  for  my  pur-
pose :  see  his  MS.  Materials,  pp.  426-7,  632-3,  and  the  original  in  the
Lebar  Brecc  or  Speckled  Book,  fol.  242  b :  the  reference  is  to  the
lithographed  facsimile  published  by  the  R.  Irish  Academy,  Dublin,
1876.     See  also  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  L69a.


172  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

any  impression  on  the  daughter.  However,  he  continued
to  play  on  until  the  ground  burst  under  his  feet,  and
the  lake  which  is  on  the  top  of  the  mountain  sprang  up
in  the  spot :  that  is  Loch  Bel  Sead."  One  of  the  previous
names  of  the  lake  was  Loch  Crotta  Cliach,  or  the  Lake  of
Cliach's  Harps,  as  O'Curry  renders  it ;  but  the  instru-
ment was  a  crowd,  not  a  harp,  and  its  bulging  shape  may
have  helped  to  give  a  part  of  a  hill  a  highly  descriptive
name.  The  passage  goes  on  as  follows  to  explain  the  name
Loch  Bel  Sead  : — "  Coerabar  boeth,  the  daughter  of  Etal
Anbuail  of  the  fairy  mansions  of  Connacht,  was  a  beautiful
and  powerfully  gifted  maiden.  She  had  three  times  fifty
ladies  in  her  train.  They  were  all  transformed  every
year1  into  three  times  fifty  beautiful  birds,  and  restored
to  their  natural  shape  the  next  year.  These  birds  were
chained  in  couples  by  chains  of  silver.  One  bird  among
them  was  the  most  beautiful  of  the  world's  birds,  having
a  necklace  of  red  gold  on  her  neck,  with  three  times  fifty
chains  depending  from  it,  each  chain  terminating  in  a
ball  of  gold.  During  their  transformation  into  birds,
they  always  remained  on  Loch  Crotta  Cliach  [that  is,  the
Lake  of  Cliach' '§  Harps],  wherefore  the  people  who  saw
them  were  in  the  habit  of  saying :  '  Many  is  the  Sead
[that  is,  a  gem,  a  jewel,  or  other  precious  article]  at
the  mouth  of  Loch  Crotta  this  day.'  And  hence  it
is  called  Loch  Bel  Sead  [or  the  Lake  of  the  Jewel
Mouth].  It  was  called  also  Loch  Bel  Dr  again  [or  the
Dragon-Mouth  Lake] ;  because  Ternog's  nurse  caught
a  fiery  dragon  in  the  shape  of  a  salmon,  and  St.  Fursa
induced  her  to  throw  it  into  Loch  Bel  Sead.     And  it  is

1  The  original  means  'every  secund  year.'


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  173

that  dragon  that  will  come  in  the  festival  of  St.  John,
near  the  end  of  the  world,  in  the  reign  of  Flann  Cinaidh.
And  it  is  of  it  and  out  of  it  shall  grow  the  Fiery  Bolt
which  will  kill  three-fourths  of  the  people  of  the  world,
men  and  women,  boys  and  girls,  and  cattle,  as  far  as  the
Mediterranean  Sea  eastwards.  And  it  is  on  that  account
it  is  called  the  Dragon-Mouth  Lake."

How  closely  the  story  of  Aengus  and  Caer,  which  in
some  respects  recalls  that  of  Leda  and  the  Swan,  cor-
responds to  the  "Welsh  Dream,  I  leave  you  to  judge ;
further,  the  Irish  prophecy  reminds  one  to  a  certain
extent  of  the  event  termed  in  Norse  literature,  the  Doom
of  the  Powers  ;  but  the  reference  to  the  Dragon  should  be
examined  in  the  light  of  the  conjecture  that  the  Welsh
Elen's  northern  stronghold  occupied  the  site  of  Dinas
Emrys,  where  Lluot  in  a  previous  age  had  imprisoned
the  dragons  that  disturbed  the  peace  of  his  dominions.
Welsh  story  lays  it  to  Yortigern's  charge  as  one  of  his
great  crimes  that  he  disturbed  them,  whereby  he  brought
calamity  on  his  unfortunate  country,  which  was  destined
to  be  free  from  oppression  and  safe  against  the  sword  of
the  foreigner  so  long  as  the  dragons  continued  securely
encisted  in  the  subterranean  lake  in  the  fastness  of
Snowdon.  Lastly,  Caer's  150  companions  with  their  silver
chains  supply  an  explanation  of  the  name  Elen  Luyotawg,
that  is  Elen  of  the  Host :  her  maiden  attendants  were
her  host,  and  it  becomes  also  clear  why  her  expedition
in  company  with  her  husband  is  spoken  of  as  the  de-
parture of  one  of  the  three  Silver  Hosts  of  the  Isle  of
Britain ;  for  the  silver  was  not  of  the  common  terrestrial
kind,  but  the  ancient  metal  of  a  Celtic  myth.  How-
ever, this  is  no  answer  to  the  further  question  which


174  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

suggests  itself,  namely,  what  interpretation  one  is  to
put  on  the  presence  of  the  attendant  maidens,  whether
of  Caer  or  Elen.  Some,  having  regard  to  the  number
of  St.  Ursula's  companions,  would  say  that  they  mean
the  starry  host  of  heaven,  which  goes  away,  so  to  say,
with  the  dawn  and  appears  again  with  the  dusk.  But
another  hypothesis  is  possible,  and  I  venture  to  sketch
it,  chiefly  as  a  means  of  connecting  certain  facts  which
are  not  altogether  irrelevant.  It  is  to  the  effect  that  the
11,000  companions  of  Ursula  might  be  regarded  as  an
exaggeration  of  a  far  smaller  number,  and  that  those
making  up  the  latter  might  be  reckoned  the  priestesses
in  attendance  on  the  dawn-goddess,  herself  the  consort
of  the  god  represented  in  the  Merlin  story  as  imprisoned.
The  attendant  damsels  might  then  be  compared  with
the  virgin  priestesses  of  the  isle  of  Sein,  described  by
Mela  as  capable  of  taking  any  animal  form  they  chose.
In  the  case  of  Caer  and  her  train  the  form  preferred
seems  to  have  been  that  of  swans,  while  in  other  cases
they  are  mostly  described  more  vaguely  as  birds,  as  when
the  goddess  Dechtere  is  mentioned  escaping,  together
with  her  fifty  maiden  companions,  from  her  brother's
court  in  that  form;  but  the  coupling-chains1  of  silver
or  gold  are  seldom  wanting.  The  corresponding  Welsh
superstition  prefers  the  goose  to  the  swan,  and  makes  an
approach  to  Mela's  description  of  the  maiden  priestesses
of  Sein,  in  that  it  treats  those  who  assume  the  anserine
form  as  witches.2     This  dates  from  remote  antiquity,  as

1  See  Windisch,  pp.  136-7,  143-4,  207.

2  I  take  the  following  from  the  MS.  of  a  Welsh  essay  on  the  folk-
lore of  Carnarvonshire,  written  hy  Mr.  E.  Lloyd  Jones,  of  Dinorwig,
for  a  competition  at  the  Eistedvod  held  at  Carnarvon  in  August,  1 880,


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  1  t  O

it  readily  explains  why  the  flesh  of  the  goose  was  tapu
to  the  Brythous  of  Caesar's  time :  leporcni  et  gallinam  ct
anserem  gustare  fas  non  putant.  Nor  is  it  irrelevant  to
add,  that  the  goose  was  sacred  in  ancient  Kome  to  Jupiter's
consort  Juno.

and  printed  since  in  the  American  newspaper  called  the  Drych :  '  It
was  an  evil  omen/  he  says,  '  to  see  geese  on  a  lake  at  night ;  those
likewise  must  be  witches,  and  especially  in  case  the  time  was  the  first
Thursday  night  of  the  lunar  month.'  My  wife  has  also  a  distinct
recollection  of  the  same  belief  prevailing  in  Arvon  when  she  was  a
child,  and  of  the  importance  attached  to  the  first  Thursday  night  (of
the  moon).  This  is  all  the  more  deserving  of  mention,  perhaps,  as
Thursday  is  in  Welsh  '  Dyd  Iau,'  that  is  to  say  Jeadi,  or  Jove's  Day.


Lecture  II.

THE  ZEUS  OF  THE  INSULAR  CELTS.

PART  II.


Camulos,  Cumall  and  Nwyvre.

Let  me  now  touch  on  a  question  which  ought  perhaps
to  have  been  dealt  with  at  an  earlier  stage :  how  could
the  Aryan  Jupiter  have  acquired  the  comprehensive  cha-
racter which  has  just  been  ascribed,  in  the  early  stages
of  their  history,  to  Nodens,  together  with  the  other  Celtic
gods  to  be  identified  with  him,  and  to  Zeus  ?  It  has  not,
so  far  as  I  know,  been  minutely  studied  from  this  point
of  view  ;  but  M.  G-aidoz  has  devoted  to  the  Eoman  Jupiter
some  general  remarks,  which  are  highly  relevant  and
deserving  of  being  given  at  greater  length  than  was  done
in  the  passing  reference  already  made  to  them  (p.  55).
According  to  him,1  the  god  of  light  and  the  sun  became
the  god  of  the  heavens  by  extension,  and  he  points  out
certain  traces  of  an  ancient  notion  which  ascribed  the
phenomenon  of  thunder  to  the  sun  :  more  correctly  speak-
ing, the  lightning  may  have  been  represented  as  a  spark
from  the  fiery  body  of  the  sun ;  but  the  god  that  occa-
sioned the  lightning  might  also  be  said  to  cause  both
the  thunder  and  the  rain  that  usually  followed :  in  fact,

1  Etudes,  pp.  88—90,  93.


II.     THE    ZEUS   OF   THE    INSULAR   CELTS.  177

there  arc  even  now  nations,  such  as  the  Samoans,1  that
directly  attribute  rain  to  the  sun.  In  other  words,  the
sun  is  the  king  of  the  heavens,  as  poets  have  so  often
told  us ;  and  even  when  one  does  not  feel  the  immediate
effect  of  his  power,  one  supposes  his  presence  behind  the
clouds  that  conceal  him.  The  confusion  between  the
sun-god  and  the  sky-god  is  frequent  in  mythology,  as  it
would  seem  to  be  in  nature  itself.  Once  one  believes  in
the  existence  over  our  heads  of  a  god  in  the  sky,  that  is
to  say,  of  a  man  with  more  than  human  power,  it  is  easy
at  one  time  to  fancy  there  several  gods,  relations  of  one
another,  rivals  or  enemies,  and  at  another  to  attribute  all
atmospheric  phenomena  to  one  and  the  same  god,  one's
good  father  in  the  heavens — all  that  depends  on  the
subjective  disposition  of  man ;  so  the  variety  of  his
opinions,  and,  therefore,  of  his  conceptions,  must  be
understood  in  relation  to  epochs  and  surroundings  in
which  his  beliefs  have  not  been  reduced  to  the  immutable
regularity  of  dogmas.  Such  are  the  views  entertained  by
M.  Gaidoz ;  but  how  the  sun  should  have  been  thought
a  great  hunter  and  warrior,  needs  no  remark ;  and  how
a  god  of  this  origin  should  become  likewise  that  of  the
sea  and  the  nether  world,  is  a  form  of  the  question  which
did  not  come  in  M.  Gaidoz's  way  to  discuss.  It  admits,
however,  of  being  readily  answered  in  the  same  spirit  as
the  other  forms  of  it ;  for  the  sun  is  seen  to  sink  to  the
world  beneath  the  horizon  every  evening,  and  to  rise
thence  in  the  morning,  so  that  he  might  be  said  to  pass
half  his  time  in  the  lower  world.     For  the  inhabitants  of

, — «;

1  Turner's  Samoa,  p.  331.

N


178  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

a  maritime  land  this  could  not  fail  to  present  itself  in  a
still  more  vivid  light :  he  would  be  seen  to  rise  from  the
ocean  in  the  morning  to  career  over  the  waves  and  to
deal  slaughter  among  his  enemies,  the  shades  of  night
and  the  clouds  that  would  hide  his  face  from  man ;  while
at  the  end  of  the  day  the  converse  phenomenon  would
present  itself  in  the  splendours  of  his  setting  in  the
billows  of  the  west.

All  these  remarks  must  be  taken  for  what  they  are
worth,  as  an  attempt  to  show  how  it  is  conceivable  that
a  divinity  originally  a  god  of  light  and  the  sun  should
come  by  degrees  to  have  the  character  of  a  Eoman  Jupiter
or  of  a  Celtic  Nodens.  The  theory  of  the  extension
whereby  a  divinity  originally  a  sun-god  became  also  that
of  the  heavens,  has,  as  already  explained,  its  etymological
complement  in  the  interpretation  of  his  name  Zeus  or
Jove  as  the  Bright  or  Shining  One,  together  with  the
fact  that  the  word  remained  also  an  appellative  applicable
to  the  sky  or  the  open  air.  Now,  though  the  Celtic
god  is  not  known  to  us  under  any  form  of  this  name  of
double  import,  we  seem  to  detect  him  under  names  of
other  origin,  but  agreeing  with  that  of  Zeus  or  Jove  in
connoting  sky  or  atmosphere ;  one  should  rather  say  that
sky  or  atmosphere  is  otherwise  their  only  signification.
To  one  or  two  of  them  I  would  now  call  your  attention :
the  most  important  is  the  Camulus  of  the  inscriptions
alluded  to  in  the  first  lecture.  In  Camulus — in  early
Celtic  probably  Camulos — we  seem  to  have,  as  was  then
suggested,  the  Celtic  equivalent  of  the  German  himmel
and  its  congeners ;  the  Irish  form  was  Cumall,  the  name
of  the  father  of  Finn,  who  fills  a  great  place  in  Irish


THE    INSULAR    CELTS,  179

legend  and  is  usually  called  Finn  mac  Cumaill)  or  Finn
son  of  Cumall :  the  latter  was  the  king- warrior  of  Erinn. '
Now  the  name  of  one  of  the  Welsh  equivalents  of  Finn
mac  Cumaill  is  Gwyn  mab  NM,  or  Gwyn  son  of  Niid  ;
and  in  both  jinn  and  gtvtjn  we  have  the  ordinary  words
for  white  or  fair,  and  both  personages  so  called  were
celebrated  as  great  hunters,  while  Gwyn  is  usually  known
to  the  Welsh  as  the  king  of  the  Fairies  and  the  other
world  generally.  The  designations  Finn  mac  Cumaill  and
Gwyn  mab  Niid  would  seem  to  oppose  Cumall  and  Niid
to,  or  equate  them  with,  one  another.

Further,  the  story  of  Kulhwch  and  Olwen  mentions
Gwyn  son  of  Niid  with  two  other  Gwyns,  called  respec-
tively the  son  of  Esni  and  the  son  of  Nwy vre ; 2  but  the
composition  of  the  lists  of  names  in  that  piece  is  such  as
to  allow  of  our  supposing  Gwyn  son  of  Nuct,  and  Gwyn
son  of  Nwyvre,  to  have  been  really  only  one :  Esni  is  a
name  otherwise  unknown  to  me  ;  but  Nwyvre  is  the  Welsh
for  the  atmosphere,  or  the  space  in  which  the  clouds
float  above  the  earth ;  and  in  the  designation  Gwyn  son
of  Nwyvre,  we  seem  to  have  the  exact  rendering  of  Finn
son  of  Cumall.  The  story  also  associates  with  Gwyn  son
of  Nwyvre,  a  certain  Fflam  mab  Nwyvre  f  whose  name
would  mean  Flame  son  of  Atmosphere :  he  is  probably
to  be  identified  with  the  personage  otherwise  called  in
the  same  story  Fjlcwdur  Fflam  Wlcdicf  or  Prince  Ffleudur

1  See  Fotha  Catha  Cnucha  in  the  Rev.  Celt.  ij.  89  ;  Bk.  of  the  Dun,
42a.

2  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  106  :  Lady  Charlotte  Guest's  edition  omits  these
two  Gwyns  both  in  the  text  ami  the  translation  :  see  ij.  205,  259.

3  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  107  ;  Guest,  ij.  261.

4  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  1(JG  ;  Guest,  ij.  259.

N  2


180  II.     THE    ZEUS    or

Fflam,  and  also  Ffleudor  mab  Naf,  or  Ffleudor  son  of  Nav ; l
while  the  Triads  (i.  15  =  ij.  26  =  iij.  114)  seem  to  speak
of  the  same  personage  as  Ffleudur  Fflam  son  of  Godo ;
but  Godo  is  not  known  to  have  any  other  meaning  than  that
of  a  cover,  shelter  or  roof ;  and  in  this  kind  of  word,  used
as  a  proper  name,  we  seem  to  have  a  synonym  of  Nwyvre
or  Sky  in  the  sense  of  Ovpavos  and  Varuna.  Nwyvre  is
also  mentioned  in  another  Triad  (i.  40  =  ij.  5),  which
alludes  to  an  expedition  to  Gaul  under  the  leadership  of
Gwenwynwyn  and  Gwanar,  sons  of  Lliaw  son  of  Nwyvre
and  of  Arianrhod  their  mother.  With  the  reference  to
Ffleudor  son  of  Nav,  may  be  mentioned  an  allusion  in
the  same  story  to  a  Gwenwynwyn  son  of  Nam,2  to  be
corrected  doubtless  into  Nav  ;  for  there  is  a  third  passage
in  point  which  describes  Gwenwynwyn  as  Arthur's  rhyswr
or  huntsman,  and  calls  him  the  son  of  Nav  Gyssevin?
which  means  'first  or  original  lord.'  Thus  it  is  not
improbable  that  in  spite  of  the  Lliaw  or  Lliaws  of  the
Triads,  Nwyvre  was  the  same  personage  who  is  here
•called  Nav  Gyssevin.

It  is,  however,  a  matter  of  some  doubt  whether  the
names  Nav  Gyssevin  and  Nwyvre  or  Godo  referred  to  the
Celtic  Zeus  in  the  first  instance,  and  not  rather  to  a  for-
gotten Uranus  or  Hymi,  whose  name  also  meant  the  sky,
considered  as  a  cover,  a  darkening  cover  (p.  115).  The  same
doubt  would  likewise  attach  to  the  ancient  name  Camulos
and  the  Irish  Cumall.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  to
be  believed  that  a  cosmic  giant  subjected  to  the  treatment

1  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  110;  Guest,  ij.  265.     The  MS.  reads  fflendor.

2  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  107;  Guest,  ij.  259:  the  MS.  has  na6,  while  the
other,  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  110,  is  naf.

3  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  108;  Guest,  ij.  262.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  181

of  Uranus  or  Hymi  could  figure  as  the  Celtic  Zeus ;  so
we  should,  in  the  case  suggested,  be  left  to  suppose  that
the  precarious  personality  of  the  former  had  been  early
forgotten,  and  that  his  names  had  come  to  be  treated
as  mere  synonyms  of  those  of  the  god  whom  one  may,
for  brevity's  sake,  call  the  Celtic  Zeus  or  Mars-Jupiter.
Hence  the  confusion  that  was  likely  to  follow,  as,  for
example,  when  Welsh  Ntid  and  Irish  Nuada  are  found
to    occur  in  the  pedigree  of  Gwyn  and  Finn   respec-
tively.    It  is  worthy  of  a  passing  remark  that  we  have
a  glimpse  of  somewhat  similar  confusion  in  the  East,
where  Dyaus  and  Varuna  look,  from  our  western  poiut
of  view,  just  as  if  they  had  exchanged  places.     Thus  it
is  Dyaus,  the  namesake,  so  to  say,  of  Zeus,  that  his  son
Indra  severs  from  Prithivi  or  Earth,  and  it  is  he  that  is
usually  consigned  to  insignificance  and  oblivion;  while
it  is  Varuna,  the  namesake  of  Uranus,  that  assumes  the
role  of  a  supreme  god,   the  upholder  of  the  universe,
and  the  preserver  of  order  both  physical  and  moral.     It
is  right,  however,  to  say  that  another  view  is  possible,
namely,  that  the  Aryans  of  the  pro-ethnic  period  used
the  prototypes  of  the  names  Zeus  and  Uranus  loosely,
without  settling  which  was  to  be  Zeus  and  which  Uranus,
and  that  their  descendants  decided  their  respective  appli-
cation independently  of  one  another,  and  in  such  a  way
that  he  who  was  called  Zeus  by  one  branch  of  the  family
was  called  Uranus  by  another.    But  on  the  whole  it  seems
safer  to  regard  the  usage  as  fixed  for  all  in  the  earlier
stage,  and  to  treat  the  difference  to  which  reference  has
just  been  made  as  of  later  growth,  the  result,  in  fact,  of
the  synonymity  of  the  two  sets  of  names.


182  ii.   the  zeus  of

Sites  Sacred  to  the  Celtic  Zeus.

By  way  of  recapitulating  the  burden  of  these  last
remarks,  one  may  on  the  whole  say  that  the  supreme
god  of  the  ancient  Aryans  was  originally  designated,
not  the  Sky  or  Heaven,  but  the  Bright  Being,  a  name
known  in  Greek  as  Zevs,  genitive  Aios,  and  its  congeners,
which,  while  recalling  the  idea  of  sky,  heaven  or  atmo-
sphere, referred  to  him,  in  the  first  instance,  as  the  great
light  and  sun  of  the  world  of  the  early  Aryans  (p.  116).
This  harmonizes  with  the  fact  that  Zeus  was  represented
as  haunting  the  elevated  points  of  the  countries  inhabited
by  the  Hellenic  race,  whether  one  regard  the  highest
ground  in  Greek  cities,  which  was  usually  crowned  with
his  temple,  or  the  loftiest  mountains  in  their  lands,  the
summits  of  which  were  also  sacred  to  him.  It  might,
however,  be  urged  that  it  was  but  natural  for  the  high
esteem  in  which  the  god  was  held  to  find  its  expression
in  the  placing  of  his  image  or  fane  on  a  site  physically
high,  and  especially  in  the  case  of  him  whom  the  wor-
shipper thought  supreme.  It  might  be  added  in  the
same  direction  that  this  haunting  the  heights  was  not
peculiar  to  him  or  any  special  kind  of  divinity,  seeing
that  the  Welsh  god  of  the  dead,  Gwyn  ab  Nud,  displayed
the  same  predilection  for  high  ground,  and  that  in  Gaul
a  god  of  a  very  different  nature,  the  Gaulish  Mercury,
had  his  temples  crowning  the  Puy  de  Dome,  the  Donon
and  other  elevations  in  that  country.  Still  it  may  be
doubted  whether  this  way  of  looking  at  the  matter  could
lead  us  to  the  true  and  original  reason  for  associating
Zeus  with  the  mountain-tops  and  the  pure  ether  in  which
he  was  supposed  to   dwell  in  his  celestial   city  on  the


THE    [NSUL'AE    CELTS.  183

summit  of  Olympus  in  Thcssaly,  that  land  which  was
the  home  of  the  Greeks  before  they  spread  further  south-
wards. The  choice  of  the  god's  seat  of  superiority,  over-
looking the  landscape  below,  would  certainly  seem  to
have  been  dictated,  at  least  in  part,  by  his  solar  origin
and  connection  with  the  sky.  There  on  the  mountain-
top  he  was  supposed  to  rule  the  weather :  there  the
clouds  gathered  themselves  together  before  making  their
descent  on  the  plains  below ;  thence  the  Hashes  of  the
god's  lightning  burst  forth  at  one  time,  and  thither  the
mists  might  be  seen  at  another  lazily  creeping.  Such
were  the  phenomena  which  the  ancient  Greeks  associated
with  Zeus,  and  a  richly  mythical  poem  in  the  Welsh
language  refers  to  the  Celtic  Zeus  as  the  blazer  of  the
mountain-top.1

Further,  the  views  of  the  Greeks  and  the  Celts  as  to
the  method  of  procuring  rain  from  the  god,  when  the
earth  suffered  from  excessive  drought,  will  be  seen  from
the  following  instances  to  have  coincided  to  a  remarkable
extent :  I  allude  to  the  Lycsean  mountain  in  Arcadia,  the
top  of  which  was  sacred  to  Zeus  and  stood  so  high  that
the  greater  part  of  the  Peloponnese  was  to  be  seen  from
it.2  Now  there  was  a  story  current  to  the  effect  that
it  was  on  that  Peloponnesian  height  that  the  god  had
spent  his  childhood,  and  that  once  in  times  in  the  distant
past  an  Arcadian  king  had  there  sacrificed  his  child  on
his  altar.  Within  the  sacred  enclosure  the  god's  presence
was  always  believed  to  shine  so  that  nothing  there  could
cast  a  shadow,  and  on  the  same  mountain  there  bubbled

1  Bk.  of  Taliessin,  xlviij. :  see  Skene,  ij.  203.

2  Teubncr's  Pausanias  (cd.  Schubart),  ij.  153  (Arcadia,  viij.  38,  7).


184  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

a  sacred  spring  to  which  the  priest  went  in  times  of  great
drought  to  procure  rain.  This  he  effected  by  touching
the  water  in  the  holy  well  with  a  branch  of  oak;  a  vapour
would  then  be  seen  to  arise  from  it  and  go  on  forming  till
the  country  round  had  been  blessed  with  the  wished-for
showers.1  The  means  adopted  to  get  the  god  to  grant
rain  were  borrowed  from  the  arsenal  of  ancient  magic,
which  relied  to  a  great  extent  on  a  sort  of  association  of
ideas,  solemn  mimicry  of  the  action  wished  for  being
regarded  as  forcing  the  god  whom  the  worshipper  intended
to  influence,  to  put  forth  the  activity  desired.

With  the  sacred  Arcadian  well  I  would  now  compare
a  Breton  one  to  which  recourse  is  had  with  the  same
object :  I  allude  to  the  Fountain  of  Baranton  in  the
forest  of  Brecilien,  so  famous  in  the  romances.  Thither
the  people  of  the  country  resorted  in  the  early  Middle
Ages ;  when  they  wanted  rain,  they  would  take  up
the  tankard  always  at  hand  and  throw  some  of  the
water  from  the  spring  on  a  slab  near  it.  Eain  would
then  fall  in  abundance,  and  one  romancer2  makes  this
the  means  of  bringing  on  a  terrific  storm  of  thunder  and
lightning.  Now  the  water,  on  the  brink  of  which  fairies
loved  to  disport  themselves,  issued  near  the  perron  or
tomb  in  which  Merlin  had  been  incarcerated,  and  the
whole  was  overshadowed  by  a  mighty  tree.3  This  is  all
the  more  to  the  point,  since  the  enchanter  as  the  youth
Merlin  Ambrosius  expelling  the  old  duke  Vortigern  from

1  Teubner's  Pausanias,  ij.  152  (Arcadica,  viij.  38,  4);  Preller's  Gr.
Myth?  i.  100-2.

'2  Huon  de  Mery  (ed.  Tarbe,  Kheims,  1851),  pp.  126-7,  quoted  in
Guest's  Mab.  i.  220.

3  Gift's  Mab.  note,  i.  219—224.


THE    INSULAB    CELTS.  185

his  own,  is  one  of  the  Brythonic  equivalents,  as  already

suggested,  of  the  Mac  Oc  driving  his  father  the  Dagda
from  his  house  and  home,  and  young  Zeus  banishing
his  father  Cronus  (pp.  147,  151).  So  we  should  pro-
bably be  right  in  assuming  the  spring,  the  tomb,  the
slab  and  the  tree,  to  have  all  belonged  to  the  Celtic
Zeus,  and  that  it  was  he  who  was  originally  supposed  to
give  the  rain,  and  to  cause  the  storm  of  thunder  and
lightning.  An  incident  of  the  same  kind  is  related  in
connection  with  the  story  of  Owein  ab  Urien:  he  was
told  that,  in  order  to  make  the  Black  Knight  he  desired
to  encounter  come  forth  to  fight  with  him,  he  should  go
to  a  spot  where  a  large  tree  overshadowed  a  well,  hard
by  which  lay  a  marble  slab  with  a  silver  tankard  fastened
to  it.  Owein  finds  the  place,  takes  up  the  silver  tankard,
and  dashes  water  from  it  with  such  effect  on  the  slab
that  it  brings  on  a  fearful  hail-storm,  which  strips  the
tree  of  all  its  foliage,  and  causes  wide-spread  devastation
in  the  domains  of  the  Black  Knight,1  who  in  consequence
thereof  rides  forth  to  avenge  himself  on  the  intruder.

Lastly  may  be  mentioned  the  case  of  the  Snowdonian
tarn  Dulyn  or  Black  Lake,  of  which  we  have  an  account,
published  in  the  year  1805,  to  the  following  effect:2
1  There  lies  in  Snowdon  Mountain  a  lake  called  Dulyn,
in  a  dismal  dingle  surrounded  by  high  and  dangerous
rocks :  the  lake  is  exceedingly  black,  and  its  fish  are
loathsome,  having  large  heads  and  small  bodies.  No
wild  swan  or  duck  or  any  kind  of  bird  has  ever  been
seen  to  light  on  it,  as  is  their  wont  on  every  other  Snow-

1  R.  B.  Mnh.  pp.  167-9,  171-2;  Guest,  i.  47-9,  53-4.
-  The  Brytkott  for  1859,  p.  88;  Guest's  Mob.  note,  i.  226;  The  Great
for  1805,  p.  285,  whero  an  authority  is  quoted  from  the  year  17l'1.


180  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

donian  lake.  In  this  same  lake  there  is  a  row  of  stepping-
stones  extending  into  it;  and  if  any  one  steps  on  the  stones
and  throws  water  so  as  to  wet  the  furthest  stone  of  the
series,  which  is  called  the  Eed  Altar,  it  is  but  a  chance
that  you  do  not  get  rain  before  night,  even  when  it  is
hot  weather.'  This  helps  us  to  understand  the  others ;
for  the  fact  of  the  furthest  stone  being  called  the  Eed
Altar,  even  supposing  it  to  have  been  naturally  red,
which  is  not  suggested,  leaves  us  the  word  allaivr,
1  altar,'  which  cannot  be  explained  except  on  the  suppo-
sition, that  the  slab  in  the  other  stories  was  originally
an  altar  on  which  to  sacrifice  to  the  god.  What  the
sacrifices  consisted  of,  we  cannot  tell ;  but  it  is  not  impro-
bable that  the  victims  were  now  and  then  human,  espe-
cially in  times  of  great  distress  or  national  calamity :  in
the  Celtic  instances,  the  water  was  thrown  on  the  god's
altar  instead  of  being  touched  with  the  sacred  twig  of
oak  as  in  Arcadia,  when  rain  was  the  object  of  the  cere-
mony.

One  at  least  of  these  sacred  spots  retains  to  this  day
some  of  its  ancient  prestige,  namely,  the  Fountain  of
Baranton :  it  is  true  that  it  is  no  longer  regarded  with
the  awe  which  made  one  of  the  romancers  speak  of  it  as
la  perilleuse  fontaine ;l  for  owing  to  its  mineral  nature,
and  the  bubbling  of  its  water  when  a  bit  of  iron  or  copper
is  thrown  into  it,  little  children  amuse  themselves,  we
are  told  by  M.  de  Yillemarqud,  by  dropping  pins  into  it,
whilst  addressing  it  in  the  most  familiar  manner,  Bis  done,
fontaine  de  Berendon.  But  it  still  retains  its  pluvial
importance;   for  in  seasons  of  drought  the  inhabitants

1  Guest's  Mai.  note,  i.  220.


THE    IXSILAK    CELTS.  1ST

of  the  surrounding  parishes,  we  are  told,  go  to  it  in  pro-
cession, headed  by  their  five  great  banners  and  their
priests  ringing  bells  and  chanting  psalms.  On  arriving,
the  rector  of  the  canton  dips  the  foot  of  the  cross  in  the
water,  and  it  is  sure  to  rain  within  a  week's  time.1  This
ingenious  compromise  between  Christ  and  Merlin  has
probably  no  exact  parallel  in  this  country :  we  have  no
bannered  processions  to  the  temenos  of  an  effete  Jupiter  :
we  have  rain-prayers  instead.

There  is  an  Irish  tale  which  is  worth  citing  here,  as  it
gives  a  somewhat  detailed  account  of  a  spot  sacred  to  a
god,  to  be  identified  probably  with  the  subject  of  this
lecture.  It  relates  to  an  adventure  which  happened  to
Diarmait  or  Derinot,  a  well-known  hero  of  Goidelic
romance,  of  whom  much  is  said  in  Irish  legend  and
romance.  Diarmait  and  Finn  mac  Cumaill  once  on
a  time  set  out  in  search  of  certain  of  the  hitter's
men  who  had  been  carried  away  by  a  wizard  chief,
and  they  sailed  together  towards  the  west  till  they
came  near  a  steep  cliff  which  seemed  to  reach  to  the
clouds.  Leaving  Finn  and  his  party  below,  Diarmait
undertook  to  climb  the  cliff  and  search  the  island,  and
after  incredible  perils  and  exertions  he  found  himself  on
the  top.  "  He  now  looked  inland" — to  give  the  story  in
the  words  of  Dr.  Joyce2 — "and  saw  a  beautiful  country
spread  out  before  him  : — a  lovely,  flowery  plain  straight
in  front,  bordered  with  pleasant  hills,  and  shaded  with

1  lb.  i.  225,  where  Lady  Ch.  Guest  quotes  from  Villemarque'a
charming  account  of  his  Visite  an  Tombean  de  Merlin,  in  the  Remu
de  Paris,  Vol.  xli.  pp.  47—58.

2  Old  Celtic  Romances,  translated  from  the  Gaelic  (London,  1879),
pp.  246—259,  266.


188  '  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

groves  of  many  kinds  of  trees.  It  was  enough  to  banish
all  care  and  sadness  from  one's  heart  to  view  this  country,
and  to  listen  to  the  warbling  of  the  birds,  the  humming
of  the  bees  among  the  flowers,  the  rustling  of  the  wind
through  the  trees,  and  the  pleasant  voices  of  the  streams
and  waterfalls.  Making  no  delay,  Diarmait  set  out  to
walk  across  the  plain.  He  had  not  been  long  walking
when  he  saw,  right  before  him,  a  great  tree  laden  with
fruit,  overtopping  all  the  other  trees  of  the  plain.  It
was  surrounded  at  a  little  distance  by  a  circle  of  pillar-
stones  ;  and  one  stone,  taller  than  the  others,  stood  in
the  centre  near  the  tree.  Beside  this  pillar-stone  was  a
spring  well,  with  a  large,  round  pool  as  clear  as  crystal ;
and  the  water  bubbled  up  in  the  centre,  and  flowed
away  towards  the  middle  of  the  plain  in  a  slender  stream.
Diarmait  was  glad  when  he  saw  the  well ;  for  he  was  hot
and  thirsty  after  climbing  up  the  cliff.  He  stooj)ed
down  to  take  a  drink;  but  before  his  lips  touched  the
water,  he  heard  the  heavy  tread  of  a  body  of  warriors,
and  the  loud  clank  of  arms,  as  if  a  whole  host  were  com-
ing straight  down  on  him.  He  sprang  to  his  feet  and
looked  round ;  but  the  noise  ceased  in  an  instant,  and  he
could  see  nothing.  After  a  little  while  he  stooped  again
to  drink ;  and  again,  before  he  had  wetted  his  lips,  he
heard  the  very  same  sounds,  nearer  and  louder  than
before.  A  second  time  he  leaped  to  his  feet ;  and  still
he  saw  no  one.  He  knew  not  what  to  think  of  this;
and  as  he  stood  wondering  and  perplexed,  he  happened
to  cast  his  eyes  on  the  tall  pillar- stone  that  stood  on  the
brink  of  the  well ;  and  he  saw  on  its  top  a  large,  beautiful
drinking-horn,  chased  with  gold  and  enamelled  with
precious  stones.     'Now  surely,'  said  Diarmait,  'I  have


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  180

been  doing  wrong;  it  is,  no  doubt,  one  of  the  virtues  of
this  well,  that  it  will  not  let  any  one  drink  of  its  waters
except  from  the  drinking-horn.'     So  he  took  down  the
horn,  dipped  it  into  the  well,  and  drank  without  hindrance,
till  he  had  slaked  his  thirst.     Scarcely  had  he  taken  the
horn  from  his  lips,  when  he  saw  a  tall  gruagach1  coming
towards  him  from  the  east,  clad  in  a  complete  suit  of  •
mail,  and  fully  armed  with  shield  and  helmet,  sword  and
spear.    A  beautiful  scarlet  mantle  hung  over  his  armour,
fastened  at  his  throat  by  a  golden  brooch ;  and  a  broad
circlet  of  sparkling  gold  was  bended  in  front  across  his
forehead,  to  confine  his  yellow  hair,  and  keep  it  from
being  blown  about  by  the  wind.     As  he  came  nearer,  he
increased  his  pace,  moving  with  great  strides;  and  Diar-
mait  now  observed  that  he  looked  very  wrathful.     lie
offered  no  greeting,  and  showed  not  the  least  courtesy ;
but  addressed  Diarmait  in  a  rough,  angry  voice — '  Surely,
Diarmait  O'Duibne,  Erinn  of  the  green  plains  should  be
wide  enough  for  you ;  and  it  contains  abundance  of  clear,
sweet  water  in  its  crystal  springs  and  green -bordered
streams,  from  which  you  might  have  drunk  your  fill.
But  you  have  come  into  my  island  without  my  leave,
and  you  have  taken  my  drinking-horn,  and  have  drunk
from  my  well ;  and  this  spot  you  shall  never  leave  till
3tou  have  given  me  satisfaction  for  the  insult."1     Then
began  a  duel  which  lasted  all  day  ;  but  when  the  evening
came,  the  gruagach  suddenly  sprang  outside  the  range  of


1  The  word  gruagach  is  usually  supposed  to  mean  a  longdiaired  eiea-
ture,  and  it  is  commonly  applied  to  a  giant  or  any  kind  of  uncanny
fellow,  for  instance,  in  the  stories  in  Campbell's  Popular  Tales  yf  the
West  Highh  nd< ;  but  it  is  also  employed  of  a  female  :  see  Campbell,
i.  23-4.


190  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

Diarmait's  sword,  and  with  a  groat  bound  leaped  into  the
well:  down  he  went,  leaving  his  antagonist  wondering
at  his  disappearance  and  smarting  from  his  wounds.
Diarmait  then  walked  towards  the  end  of  a  great  forest
that  stretched  from  the  mountain  to  the  plain,  and,  espy-
ing a  herd  of  speckled  deer,  he  killed  one  of  them ;  then
he  lit  a  fire  and  cooked  a  part  of  the  deer's  flesh,  which,
together  with  some  draughts  of  clear  water  from  the
drinking-horn,  formed  his  supper.  He  slept  soundly,  and
his  breakfast  was  of  the  same  description  as  his  previous
meal.  When  he  had  done,  he  went  to  the  well  and  found
the  gruagach  there  awaiting  him :  he  was  more  wroth
than  the  first  day,  as  he  now  complained  that  Diarmait
had  hunted  on  his  land  and  killed  some  of  his  speckled
deer ;  so  they  fought  as  before  and  with  the  same  result,
that  the  gruagach  disappeared  at  dusk  into  the  well.
This  scene  repeated  itself  each  day  till  the  evening  of
the  fourth,  when  Diarmait,  finding  his  antagonist  draw-
ing towards  the  well,  threw  his  arms  round  him,  and  both
sank  into  the  well.  At  length  they  reached  the  bottom
in  Tir  fa  Tonn,  or  the  Land  beneath  the  Billow,  and  the
gruagach,  disengaging  himself,  left  Diarmait  alone  in  a
strange  land,  where,  however,  he  fell  in  with  the  grua-
gach1 s  brother,  who  complained  that  he  had  been  disin-
herited by  the  gruagach,  or  the  Knight  of  the  Fountain
as  he  called  him.  So  Diarmait  allied  himself  with  the
former,  and  they  made  war  on  the  Knight  of  the  Foun-
tain, who  was  ultimately  routed  and  slain  by  the  hero  of
the  tale.

A  story  of  which  Diarmait  was  a  principal  figure
required  him  of  course  to  be  victorious  in  his  contests,
and  this  applied  with  special  force  to  one  in  which  the


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  101

romancer  could  make  his  herb  right  a  wrong.  On  the
other  hand,  the  Knight  of  the  Fountain  taking  possession
of  his  brother's  kingdom  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  version
of  the  disinheritance  of  the  Dagda  by  his  son  the  Mao
60  ;  and  the  story  comes  pretty  near  a  Welsh  one,  the
hero  of  which  is  called  Pwyll,  who  is  made,  as  related
in  the  Mabinogion,1  to  rid  Arawn  Head  of  Hades  of  a
troublesome  neighbour.  This  last  would  seem  practically
analogous  to  the  Knight  of  the  Fountain  in  the  Irish  story,
and  he  bore  the  name  Havgan  or  Summer-white,  which
may  be  viewed  as  a  corroboration  of  the  conjecture  here
offered.  In  the  tree  and  the  sacred  spring  one  cannot
help  recognizing  an  early  specimen  of  the  holy  wells  still
so  numerous  in  Ireland;  and  as  to  the  richly  adorned
horn,  which  in  the  story  of  Diarmait  takes  the  place  of
the  silver  tankard  in  that  of  Owein,  we  have  a  reference
to  the  custom  of  providing  wells,  probably  only  holy
ones,  with  vessels  mentioned  in  Cormac's  Glossary.
From  an  article  there  devoted  to  the  word  ana,2  we  learn
that  it  was  the  name  for  small  vessels  at  the  wells  under
'  the  strict  laws,'  that  they  were  most  usually  of  silver
and  intended  for  the  weary  to  drink  from,  and  that  they
served  the  kings  of  the  country  as  a  test  of  the  respect
in  which  the  law  of  the  land  was  held.  This  allusion  to
the  weary  drinking  and  the  kings  testing  their  subjects
dates  probably  from  a  time  when  the  original  signification
of  the  vessels  had  been  forgotten :  it  was  doubtless  of  a
religious  nature.

The  circle  of  pillar-stones  in  the  sacred  island  invaded

1  It.  D.  MaJb.  pp.  1—7;  Guest,  i.  37 — 16.
-  The  Stokixs-O'Donuvan  edition,  p.  7.


192  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

by  Diarmait  may,  in  the  light  of  other  allusions,  be  in-
ferred to  have  represented  the  gods  honoured  there.
Thus,  according  to  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,1  Merlin,  on
being  asked  to  assist  with  his  advice  in  the  matter  of
building  Stonehenge,  said  that  the  best  thing  to  do
would  be  to  bring  to  this  country  the  pillar-stones  called
the  Choir  of  the  Giants,  that  stood  on  a  spot  in  Ireland
described  in  the  Latin  text  as  Killaraus  Mons,  and  to  set
them  up  here  in  the  order  in  which  they  stood  there.
With  the  enchanter's  marvellous  aid,  that  was  done,  and
Stonehenge  came  soon  into  being.  This  story  proves,
among  other  interesting  things,  that  formerly  a  circle  of
stones  like  that  of  Stonehenge  or  like  a  portion  of  it,  was
well  known  to  exist  in  Ireland ;  and  its  site  can  hardly
have  been  other  than  the  Hill  of  Usnech,  which  plays  a
great  role  in  Irish  legend.  It  stood  in  the  parish  of
Killare,2  in  the  barony  of  Eathconrath,  in  the  county  of
Westmeath.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  speaking  of  the  five
provinces  into  which  Ireland  used  to  be  divided,  when
Meath  was  reckoned  one  of  them,  uses  the  following
words  with  regard  to  the  Hill  of  Usnech  :  '  Et  earn
[Hiberniam]  vacuam  invenientes,  in  quinque  portiones
requales  inter  se  diviserunt :  quarum  capita  in  lapide
quodam  conveniunt  apud  Mediam  juxta  castrum  de  Kilair,
qui  lapis  et  umbilicus  Hibernise  dicitur,  quasi  in  medio
et  meditullio  terrae  positus.'3     The  stone  is  described  as

1  Sans-Marte's  ed.  pp.  108-9,  361.

2  Four  Masters,  A.P.  507,  editor's  note.

3  Topographia  Hibernice,  Dist.  iij.  c.  4.  Giraldus  himself  recognized
no  connection  between  the  stone  and  the  Giants'  Choir  :  in  fact,  he
speaks  in  another  passage,  Dist.  ij.  e.  18,  of  the  latter  and  the  story
about  Merlin  remuving  it  to  this  country,  and  states  that  it  was  in


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  193

a  very  largo  one,1  and  it  is  believed  to  have  been  cursed
by  St.  Patrick  on  account  of  the  pagan  worship  there ;
or,  more  correctly  speaking,  the  stones  of  Usnech — for
there  were  more  than  one — became  so  accursed  owing
to  that  saint's  malediction,  that  they  never  failed  to  prove
the  ruin  of  any  structure  into  which  they  happened  to
be  built :  in  fact,  a  bad  stone  in  a  building  was  prover-
bially said  to  be  one  of  the  stones  of  Usnech  cursed
by  St.  Patrick.2     This  I  mention  by  the  way :  what  T
wish  to  call  your  attention  to,  is,  the  reason  Merlin  is
represented  giving,   for  fetching  those  stones  from  so
far,  namely,  that  they  were  endowed  with  various  vir-
tue's, especially  for  healing :   the  giants  of  old  had,  he
said,  ordained  that  bodily  ailments  might  be  healed  by
bathing  the  patient  in  the  water  in  which  the  stones  had
first  been  bathed,  or  by  the  application  of  herbs  dipped
in  the  same  holy  bath.     This  would  seem  to  point  in
particular  to  those  of  the  Stonchenge  stones  which  geo-
logists have  hitherto  failed  to  recognize  as  belonging  to
the  rocks  of  the  district ;  and  the  idea  of  washing  them,
and  the  virtues  thereby  imparted  by  them  to  the  water,
presumably  implies  that  the  stones  were   regarded  as
divine   or  as  the  seats  of  divine  power :   compare  the
story3  of  St.  David  splitting  the  capstone  of  the  Maen
Ketti  cromlech  in  Gower,  in  order,  as  we  are  told,  to

Kildarensi pianitie,  non  i<r<>cul  a  castro  Nasensi,  where  one  might  sen
it  in  his  day.  To  me,  however,  the  two  stories  appear  to  have  heen
originally  one,  the  error  having  arisen  from  the  place-names  Killare
and  Kildare.

1  See  Cambrensls  Eversns  (Dublin,  1848),  editor's  note,  i.  416.

2  Ari'i  Sanctorum,  March  17,  Vol.  ij.  p.  561.

3  Jolo  MS3.  pp.  83,  473.

0


194  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

prove  to  the  people  that  it  was  not  divine.  It  is  not
improbable  that  many  of  the  stone  circles  one  meets  with
in  this  country  were  similarly  sacred,  and  used  at  times
for  some  such  a  purpose  as  that  specified  in  the  case  of
the  alleged  prototype  of  Stonehenge.

We  cannot  leave  this  point  without  alluding  to  the
question,  whose  temple  Stonehenge  was,  or  whose  it
chiefly  was.  After  giving  it  all  the  attention  I  can,  I
have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  we  cannot  do  better
than  follow  the  story  of  Geoffrey,  which  makes  Stone-
henge the  work  of  Merlin  Emrys,  commanded  by  another
Emrys,  which  I  interpret  to  mean  that  the  temple  belonged
to  the  Celtic  Zeus,  whose  later  legendary  self  we  have
in  Merlin.  It  would  be  in  vain  to  look  for  any  direct
argument  for  or  against  such  an  hypothesis :  one  can
only  say  that  it  suits  the  facts  of  the  case,  and  helps  to
understand  others  of  a  somewhat  similar  nature.  What
sort  of  a  temple  could  have  been  more  appropriate  for
the  primary  god  of  light  and  of  the  luminous  heavens
than  a  spacious,  open-air  enclosure  of  a  circular  form  like
Stonehenge  ?  Nor  do  I  see  any  objection  to  the  old  idea
that  Stonehenge  was  the  original  of  the  famous  temple
of  Apollo  in  the  island  of  the  Hyperboreans,  the  stories
about  which  were  based  in  the  first  instance  most  likely
on  the  journal  of  Pytheas'  travels.1  In  spite  of  the
fabulous  element  introduced,  one  cannot  help  seeing  that
the  northern  island,  which  was  as  large  as  Sicily  and
situated  opposite  the  mouth  of  a  mighty  river,  must  have

1  The  version  here  chiefly  referred  to  is  that  to  he  found  in  the
Bibliotheea  of  Diodorus  Siculus,  ij.  cap.  47,  where  Hecatajus  of  Ahdera
is  quoted  as  one  of  the  writer's  authorities.  See  also  Elton's  Origins
of  English  History,  pp.  88-9,  426.


THE    IXsl'LAR    CELTS.  I  95

been  Britain.  The  inhabitants,  we  are  told,  were  much
devoted  to  the  worship  of  Apollo,  whence  it  was  inferred
that  his  mother  Latona  was  a  native  of  the  island:  it
contained  a  magnificent  temple  for  her  son,  and  a  circular
shrine  whose  walls  were  adorned  with  votive  offerings.
Further,  the  kings  of  the  city  containing  the  temple
and  the  overseers  of  the  latter  were  the  Boreads,  who
took  up  the  government  in  succession,  according  to  their
tribes.  The  citizens  gave  themselves  up  to  music,  harping
and  chanting  in  honour  of  the  Sun-god,  who  was  every
nineteenth  year  wont  himself  to  appear  about  the  time
of  the  vernal  equinox,  and  to  go  on  harping  and  dancing
in  the  sky  until  the  rising  of  the  Pleiades.  To  interpret
this  in  connection  with  Stonehengc,  we  are  not  obliged
to  lay  any  stress  on  the  guess  which  recognized  in  the
Boreadae  the  Celtic  bards ;  and  we  have  only  to  substitute
for  Apollo  a  native  divinity  of  light.  No  one  would  fit
better  than  the  Celtic  Zeus ;  nor  is  it  likely  to  have  been
an  accident  that  his  temple  should  be  without  a  roof :  it
had  probably  been  thought  appropriate  that  it  should
receive  unrestrained  the  rays  of  the  god's  presence,  and
stand,  as  a  Roman  might  literally  say,  sub  Jove.

After  all,  it  is  a  matter  of  no  great  importance  whether
Stonehengc  was  or  was  not  the  Hyperborean  temple
about  which  the  Greek  writers  of  antiquity  romanced ;
for  there  were  in  the  British  Islands  other  stone  circles
which  would  suit  the  story  nearly  as  well.  I  need  not
mention  instances  still  in  existence ;  but  I  wish  to  call
your  attention  for  a  moment  to  a  temple  elsewhere,  which
is  only  known  to  us  from  the  pages  of  antiquity.  Allusi<  m
has  been  made  to  the  Breton  isle  of  Sein  (p.  158)  as  one
of  the  scenes  of  Merlin's  birth  and  of  his  imprisonment  at

o2


196  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

the  last;  but  the  mythological  reputation  of  the  spot  is  of
no  modern  date,  for  Pomponius  Mela,  who  calls  the  island
Sena,  speaks  of  it  as  follows :  '  Sena,  in  the  Britannic
Sea,  opposite  the  coast  of  the  Osismi,  is  famous  for  its
oracle  of  a  Gaulish  god,  whose  priestesses,  living  in  the
holiness  of  perpetual  virginity,  are  said  to  be  nine  in
number.  They  call  them  Gallizenae,  and  they  believe
them  to  be  endowed  with  extraordinary  gifts,  to  rouse
the  sea  and  the  wind  by  their  incantations,  to  turn  them-
selves into  whatsoever  animal  form  they  may  choose,  to
cure  diseases  which  among  others  are  incurable,  to  know
what  is  to  come  and  to  foretell  it.  They  are,  however,
devoted  to  the  service  of  voyagers  only  who  have  set  out
on  no  other  errand  than  to  consult  them.' r  Mela  says
nothing  about  the  divinity's  temple ;  but  all  the  islands
on  the  coast  of  Brittany  had  their  religious  associations,
and  one  of  these  spots,  more  to  the  south  than  Sein,  was
spoken  of  by  Posidonius,  a  Greek  who  travelled  in  the
first  century  B.C.  Strabo  and  others  who  made  use  of
his  narrative  speak  of  it  as  possessed  by  the  women  of
the  Namnites?  whose  name  probably  survives  in  that  of
Nantes  on  the  Loire.  These  Namnite  women  are  repre-
sented as  priestesses  of  a  god  whom  ancient  authors  iden-
tified with  Bacchus,  on  account  solely,  as  it  would  seem,
of  the  noisy  and  orgiastic  nature  of  the  cult  to  which

1  De  Chorographia,  ed.  Parthey,  iij.  cap.  6.  The  best  MSS.  read
GalUzenas  vocant,  which  one  is  tempted  to  emendate  into  Galli  Senas
vocant ;  but  it  is  open  to  doubt.

2  The  readings  of  this  name  vary:  Meineke  in  his  edition  of  Strabo,
iv.  4,  6,  reads  -ras  twv  Sa/zvi-rcov  ywaucas ;  while  Dionysius  Periegetes,
Orbis  Descriptio  (Midler's  Geog.  Gr.  Minorcs,  ij.  140),  line  571,  has
dyavdv  'AfiviTawv ;  but  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  people  meant
were  those  whom  Caesar,  iij.  9,  calls  Namnites.


THE    FNSULA.B    CELTS.  107

they  devoted  themselves :  the  rest  of  the  account  is  very-
curious,  and  states  that  the  women  used  to  pay  visits  to
the  men  on  the  mainland,  but  that  no  man  durst  place
his  foot  on  the  island.  The  god  worshipped  there  had  a
temple  which  was  roofed,  but  it  was  the  custom  of  the
priestesses  to  unroof  it  once  a  year;  it  must,  however,
be  roofed  again  before  sunset.  So  each  of  the  women  came
to  the  work  bringing  on  her  shoulders  a  burden  of  the
requisite  materials,  and  in  case  any  one  allowed  her
burden  to  fall  to  the  ground,  she  was  instantly  torn  to
pieces  by  her  companions,  who  carried  her  mangled
remains  round  the  temple  with  jubilant  exultation  until
the  flame  of  their  fury  burnt  itself  out.  It  so  happened,
we  are  further  told,  that  each  succeeding  year  saw  the
horrid  scene  repeated.

Several  things  in  these  ancient  accounts  of  the  Armoric
isles  are  deserving  of  special  notice :  take,  for  example,
the  one  last  mentioned :  there  we  have  a  covered  temple
or  sanctuary  of  some  kind,  which  it  was  thought  neces-
sary to  unroof  once  a  year.  This  clearly  implies  that
originally  it  had  no  roof  but  the  sky,  as  in  the  case  of
Stonehenge  and  other  stone  circles.  Further,  in  the
case  of  the  nine  priestesses  of  the  isle  of  Sein,  we  find
that  they  were  believed  to  possess  the  power  of  disturbing
the  sea  and  raising  storms,  a  notion  which  postulates  as
its  complement  a  belief,  that  the  god  to  whose  cult  they
devoted  themselves  had  the  control  of  the  elements,  espe-
cially the  wind  and  the  wave ;  and  this  exactly  fits  the
Celtic  Zeus,  with  his  tendency  in  Brythonic  mythology
to  become  a  sea-god.  The  same  remark  might  be  made
as  to  the  nine's  gift  of  prophecy  :  in  a  word,  the  Gaulish
oracle  in  the  isle  of  Sein,  spoken  of  by  Mela,  need  not  bo


198  II.     THE    ZEVS    OF

supposed  other  than  that  of  the  great  prophet  Merlin,  who

prophesied  from  his  prison  to  the  knight  from  Arthur's

court  (p.  157).

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  this  kind  of  paganism  died

hard  in  the  islands  on  the  Armoric  coast :   in  fact,  it

lasted,  in  spite  of  Church  and  State,  down  to  the  time  of

the  Norsemen's  ravages.    For  the  Eddie  poems  called  the

Helgi  Lays,  which  Dr.  Vigfusson  has   shown  to  refer,

among  other  localities,  to  the  island  of  Guernsey,1  allude

to  such  sibyls  as  Mela  mentions.     In  the  flyting  in  one

of  these  lays,  one  of  the  characters  taunts  another  in

words  which  have  been  rendered  as  follows : 2

'  Thou  wert  a  sibyl  in  Guernsey,
Deceitful  hag,  setting  lies  together.'

They  are  also  called  'Bearsark  brides  in  Hlessey,'  who
injured  the  rover's  boat,  and  were  represented  by  him
as  l  hardly  women.' 3  But  other  passages  in  the  Helgi
Lays  describe  them  very  differently  as  '  mysterious  half-
human  half-supernatural  "Walcyries,  riding  through  the
air  in  groups  of  nine,  acting  as  guardian-angels  to  sailors,
who  come  to  heal  wounded  wickings,  and  who  have  the
knowledge  of  dreams,  the  power  of  stilling  as  well  as  of
raising  tempests.' 4  Such  notions  as  these  are  distributed
by  the  modern  Celt  between  mermaids,5  who  have  most
of  the  characteristics  of  the  Helgi  sibyls,  and  witches,
who,  as  pictured  by  Welsh  superstition,  strongly  remind

1  See  Vigfusson  and  Powell's  Sigfred-Arminius,  &c.  (Oxford,  1886),
pp.  28—36.

2  lb.  p.  32.  3  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  121.

4  Sigfred-Arminius,  &c.  p.  33.

5  Tor  some  Welsh  ideas  about  mermaids,  see  my  Fairy  Tales  in  the
Cyrnmrodor,  v.  86 — 92,  119.


THE    [NSULAB    CELTS.  L99

ono  of  the  nine  priestesses  of  Sein  in  the  pages  of  Mela.

The  Avitcli  can  not  only  raise  storms  and  cause  disease,
but  also  reverse  both  processes;  and  she  is  also  remark-
able on  account  of  her  capacity  to  take  other  forms  than
her  own,  the  favourite  one  being  that  of  the  hare.  The
faculty  of  turning  oneself  into  a  hare  at  will  is  regarded  as
hereditary  in  certain  families  in  Wales;1  but  it  is  con-
fined, as  the  theory  here  suggested  would  lead  one  to
expect,  to  the  women  of  those  families,  none  of  their  male
relatives  being  ever  supposed  capable  of  any  such  a  change
of  their  nature.  The  witch-hare  differs  in  several  respects
from  an  ordinary  hare  :  among  other  things,  it  cannot  be
successfully  hunted  except  with  a  jet  black  greyhound
without  a  white  hair  in  his  coat.  The  blackness  of  the
hound  is  suggestive,  and  still  more  so  is  the  leporine  form
selected  by  the  witch,  for  the  hare  stands  foremost  among
the  animals  whose  flesh  was,  according  to  Caesar,-  tabooed
by  the  Celts  of  this  country  in  his  day.  Perhaps  one
would  not  be  wrong  in  regarding  it  as  an  animal  sacred
to  the  Celtic  Zeus  or  to  his  associate ;  and  it  would  be
in  harmony  with  the  account  given  by  Dio  Cassius3  of
Boudicca,  queen  of  the  Eceni,  who,  while  exhorting  her
subjects  to  rise  against  the  rule   of  Eome,  let  loose  a

1  My  nurse  belonged  to  one  of  these  families,  ami  was  supposed  to
possess  its  hereditary  characteristics ;  but  in  my  boyhood  few  people
of  my  acquaintance  in  Cardiganshire  believed  in  this  superstition:  it
was  only  a  sort  of  joke.  There  is,  however,  a  valley  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Snowdon,  whither  I  have  been  warned  not  to  go  to  ques-
tion the  inhabitants  on  the  subject  of  witch-hares.  For  certain  other
superstitions  about  the  hare,  see  Elton,  pp.  297-8,  and  Pennant's  Tout*
in  Wales  (Carnarvon,  1883),  iij.  164.

2  B>U.  Gall.  v.  12.

3  Historia  Romana  (Tauchnitz  ed.),  lxij.  Nero,  6, «.


200  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

hare,  and  thanked  the  goddess  Andraste  as  soon  as  she
saw  the  course  taken  by  the  frightened  beast  to  be  one
of  good  omen :  the  address  put  into  her  mouth  further
represents  her  praying  to  Andraste1  for  victory,  salvation
and  liberty.  Nothing  is  otherwise  known  of  this  goddess;
so  that  we  are  at  liberty  provisionally  to  regard  her  name
as  one  of  those  borne  by  the  associate  of  the  Celtic  Zeus
as  god  of  war  and  victory.

After  this  digression,  I  wish  to  return  to  the  question
of  stone  circles,  and  to  call  your  attention  to  a  Goidelic
instance  which  shows  a  certain  advance  in  point  of  art.
In  this,  the  rude  stones  give  way  to  images,  more  or  less
richly  adorned,  of  the  gods  they  were  supposed  to  repre-
sent. In  the  Tripartite  Life  of  St.  Patrick,  one  reads  as
follows:  "Thereafter  went  Patrick  over  the  water  to
Mag  Slecht,  a  place  wherein  was  the  chief  idol  of  Ireland,
to  wit,  Cenn  Cruaich,  covered  with  gold  and  silver,  and
twelve  other  idols  about  it,  covered  with  brass.  When
Patrick  saw  the  idol  from  the  water  whose  name  is
Guth-ard  (i.e.  elevated  its  voice)  and  when  he  drew
nigh  unto  the  idol,  he  raised  his  hand  to  put  Jesus'
crozier  upon  it  and  did  not  reach  [it],  but  it  bowed  west-
wards to  turn  on  its  right  side,  for  its  face  was  from  the
south,  to  wit,  to  Tara.  And  the  trace  of  the  crozier
abides  on  its  left  side  still,  and  yet  the  crozier  moved
not  from  Patrick's  hand.  And  the  earth  swallowed  the
twelve  other  images  as  far  as  their  heads,  and  they  are


1  On  the  difficulties  of  identifying  this  name  with  the  modern  Welsh
Andras,  pronounced  Andros  in  Arvon  and  Anglesey,  see  the  Kev.  I).
Silvan  Evans's  Dictionary  of  the  Welsh  Language,  s.  v.  Andras  and
Anras.


THE    INSULAB   CELTS.  20  J

thus  in  sign  of  the  miracle,  and  he  cursed  the  demon,
and  banished  him  to  hell."1  This  legend  is  contained  in
a  version  of  St.  Patrick's  Life  attributed  to  St.  Eleranus,2
who  is  said  to  have  lived  in  the  seventh  century ;  but
whatever  the  date  of  the  life,  it  would  seem  that,  by  the
writer's  time,  the  pagan  sanctuary  had  been  so  long  falling
into  decay,  that  of  the  lesser  idols  only  their  heads  were
to  be  then  seen  above  ground,  and  that  the  idol  of
Coin  Oruaichj  which  meant  the  Head  or  Chief  of  the
Mound,  was  slowly  hastening  to  its  fall,  whence  the
story  of  its  having  had  an  invisible  blow  dealt  it  by
St.  Patrick.  This  is  also,  possibly,  the  explanation  of
another  name  sometimes  given  to  the  chief  idol,  namely,
that  of  Cromm  Cruaich,  l  the  Crooked  or  Bent  One  of  the
Mound,'  in  reference  merely  to  the  attitude  of  the  image
in  the  later  days  of  its  decadence.

In  some  verses  of  difficult  interpretation  in  the  Book
of  Leinster,3  a  manuscript  of  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth
century,  Cromm  Cruaich  has  applied  to  him  the  adjective
crin,  which  usually  means  withered  and  ready  to  fall,  as
in  the  case  of  a  tree  which  the  sap  has  left.  The  verses  I
allude  to  were  written  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  name
of  the  place  called  Mag  Slecht,  but  they  tell  us  further
that  the  ancient  Irish  used  to  sacrifice  there  the  first-born


1  The  translation  is  by  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes  in  the  Rrr.  Celt.  i.  260  ;
another  version  will  be  found  in  O'Curry's  MS.  Materials,  pp.  538-'J  ;
and  a  variety  of  references  are  given  by  M.  d'A.  cle  Jubainville  in  his
Ci/c/r,  pp.  10G-8.

2  For  references  to  Colgan  and  others  with  regard  to  the  ancient
authors  of  lives  of  St.  Patrick,  see  T.  Duffus  Hardy's  Descriptive
Catalogue  (Rolls  edition,  1862),  I.  i.  pp.  64-5.

3  Fol.  213/)  of  the  facsimile.


202  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

of  their  children  and  of  their  flocks,1  in  order  to  secure
power  and  peace  in  all  their  tribes,  and  to  obtain  milk
and  corn  for  the  support  of  their  families.     The  place,
Mag  Slecht,  was,  we  are  told,  so  called  from  the  kneeling
and  other  more  violent  acts  of  adoration  through  which
the  people  went  before  the  god :    it  is  ascertained2  to
have  been  near  the  village  of  Bally magauran,  in  the
barony  of  Tullyhaw,  in  the  county  of  Cavan ;   and  St.
Patrick  is  said  to  have  built  there  a  church  called  Domh-
nach  Mor,3  the  name  of  which  is  worth  a  passing  remark.
The  adjective  mor,  '  great,'  was  added  to  distinguish  it
from  other  churches  called  Domhnach :  this  word  is  no
other  than  the  Latin4  dominkum,   'a  church  or  edifice
sacred  to  the   Lord,'  borrowed,  and  it  can  hardly  be
regarded  as  an  accident  that  the  edifice  to  supersede  the
sanctuary  of  the  chief  of  the  Goiclelic  pantheon  should
have  been  called  after  the  Lord  and  Head  of  the  Christian
religion.     It  would,  however,  be  hazardous  to  conclude
as   much   regarding   all  the  localities  in  Ireland   now
marked  by  churches  bearing  this  name  of  Domhnach.5

Be  that  as  it  may,  there  is  on  record  a  place-name
which  bears  evidence  to  the  worship  of  the  heathen  god
in  the  centre  of  ancient  Britain.     For  if  we  turn  the


1  O'Conor's  Bibliotheca  Manuscripta  Stowensis  (Buckingham,  1818),
i.  40-1,  and  his  Eerum  Hibernicarum  Scriptores  (Buckingham,  1814),
Vol.  I.  (proleg.  i.)  pp.  xxii,  xxiii ;  also  the  Four  Masters,  A.M.  3656,
note  by  O'Donovan ;  and  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  loc.  cit.

2  Four  Masters,  ibid.  3  Four  Masters,  ibid.

4  Domhnach  has  also  become  the  regular  word  for  Sunday,  that  is
Dies  Dominions,  '  the  Lord's  Bay,'  French  Dhnanche.

5  No  less  than  twenty  such  figure  in  the  index  to  The  Martyrology  of
Donegal  (Dublin,  1864).


THE    OT81  LAB    CELTS.  'Jli:!

Irish  Cenn  ('match,  'Chief  of  the  Mound,'  into  its  etymo-
logical equivalents,  in  modern  "Welsh  we  have  Pen  Cray,1
which  was  written  formerly  Penn  Cruc,  while  at  a  much
earlier  date,  when  the  language  still  retained  its  case-
endings,  it  must  have  had  the  form  Pernios  Cmci,  or
else  that  of  a  compound  Pcnnocruci.2  This  last,  as
the  basis  of  an  adjective  relating  to  the  god  so-called,
would  yield  the  forms  Pennocrucjo-s,  Pennocrucja,  Pen-
nocruejo-n ;  and  the  last  mentioned,  the  neuter,  actually
occurs,  namely,  Latinized  into  Pennocrucium,  which  would
accordingly  seem  to  have  meant  a  place  associated  with
the  god  who  was  called  Chief  of  the  Mound,  that  is  to
say,  a  spot  devoted  to  his  worship.  The  station  called
Pennocrucium  in  the  Itinerary  of  Antoninus3  has  been
variously  identified  with  Stretton  and  Penkridge,  in
Staffordshire ;  and  the  name  PenJcriilgc,  written  Pencri/c,


1  This  would  in  its  turn  admit  of  two  translations,  according  as  one
took  pen  to  mean  the  top  or  end  (in  the  physical  sense)  of  the  mound,
or  else  the  top,  in  the  metaphorical  sense  of  head  or  chief ;  and  so  far
as  I  know,  Pen  Or&g  or  Pencrug  as  a  modern  Welsh  place-name  means
nothing  more  than  the  Top  of  the  Mound,  the  Mound's  End,  or  the  like.

2  This  compound  is  like  Vassoccdeti  (see  note,  p.  12),  except  that
the  qualifying  element  is  a  genitive  and  not  an  adjective;  but  this
way  of  compounding  words  would  seem  to  have  fallen  early  out  of
fashion  both  in  Welsh  and  in  Irish,  where  we  should  otherwise  have
had  Cenn  Chrunich,  and  not  Cenn  Oruaick.  Neta(-Ttrenalugoa)  has
been  mentioned  at  p.  12,  but  considerable  irregularity  prevails  with
regard  to  its  later  equivalent,  nom.  nut,  gen.  mad,  as,  for  instance,  in
the  case  of  the  name  Cairbre  Nia-fer,  Cairbro  Champion  of  Men  ;  for
the  nominative  nia  is  found  used  for  the  crude  form,  which  should  bo
niad  :  thus  in  two  passages  cited  in  O'Curry's  MS.  Mat.  pp.  507,  513,
Nia-fer  has  to  be  construed  as  a  genitive,  while  the  Bk.  qf  Lemster,
161  b,  has  Nia-fer  as  a  dative.

3  Tarthey  and  Tinder's  edition,  pp.  224,  368.


204  IT.     THE    ZEUS   OF

in  an  eighth  century  charter  of  iEthilheard  of  Wessex,1
is  beyond  all  doubt  a  continuation  of  that  in  the  Itinerary.
That,  however,  does  not  quite  decide  the  question  of  site,
as  there  may  have  been  not  a  few  localities  entitled  to
the  same  interesting  appellation.

The  God's  Mounds,  Fetishes  and  Symbols.

What,  it  may  now  be  asked,  can  have  been  the  mean-
ing of  calling  the  god  by  a  name  signifying  the  Chief  of
the  Mound  ?  The  answer  must  depend  a  good  deal  on
what  was  meant  by  the  word  which  I  have  thus  far
rendered  'mound.'  Now  the  Irish  word  cruach  might
mean  a  heap  of  anything,  and  it  is  attested  in  the  more
restricted  sense  of  a  rick  of  hay  or  the  like ;  the  Welsh
crug  admits  of  much  the  same  use,  but  it  is  especially
employed  in  the  case  of  artificial  mounds  or  tumuli ;  and
so  it  appears  in  a  great  many  names  of  places,  such  as
that  of  Crug  Hywel,  Anglicized  Crickhoioel,  the  name  of
a  village  near  Abergavenny,  and  the  Wt/ddgrug,  which
seems  to  have  meant  the  Burial  Mound:  the  town  so
called  is  in  Flintshire,  and  it  is  found  formerly  named
Mons  Alius,2  modern  English  Mold.  Let  us  now  look
at  some  of  the  synonymous  terms  :  one  of  these  is  tommen,
usual  in  North  Wales,  and  well  known  as  applied  to  a
tumulus  at  Bala,  which  served  till  lately  as  the  rallying-
point  of  the  great  open-air  services  of  the  Calvinistic
Methodists ;  but  a  more  promising  word  is  gorsed,  which
while  etymologically  meaning  any  high  station  or  position,

1  Kemble's  Codex  Diplomatims,  No.  lxxvi.

2  The  feature  so  called  is  said  by  Pennant  to  be  partly  natural  and
partly  artificial :  see  his  Tours  in  Wales  (Carnarvon,  1883),  i.  35-6.


TUE    INSULAR    CELTS.  205

and  us(> (I  in  the  Welsh  literature  of  the  Middle  Ages  in
the  sense  of  a  mound  or  tumulus,  came  to  be  the  word
for  a  throne  or  a  judgment- seat :  it  may  also  mean  a
court  or  tribunal,  and  Pen  yr  Orsed,  'the  Gorsed  Top
or  Hill,'  is  not  an  uncommon  name  of  conspicuous  posi-
tions in  certain  parts  of  the  Principality.  Some  of  the
ancient  gorseds  continued  long  in  story  to  be  the  seats
of  supernatural  power:  take,  for  example,  that  known
as  the  gorsed  of  Arberth,  in  South  Wales,  of  which  it  is
said  in  the  Mabinogi  of  Pwyll  Prince  of  Dyved,1  that  no
one  ever  ascended  it  without  receiving  wounds  and  bodily
harm,  or  witnessing  some  kind  of  miracle,  which  the  tale
hears  out  by  relating  how  Pwyll  repeatedly  went  up  on
the  gorsed,  and  how  very  strange  adventures  befel  him,
all  of  which  began  from  the  gorsed.

Similarly,  wonderful  things  are  related  as  happening
in  Irish  story  to  kings  of  Tara  who  chanced  to  ascend
the  gorsed2  of  that  city  in  the  early  morning:  in  one
instance,  it  is  related3  that  Conn  the  Hundred-fighter,
having  done  so,  happened  to  tread  on  a  stone,  which  there-
upon screamed  all  over  the  land.  This  was  followed  by
a  thick  fog,  out  of  which  rode  a  fairy  prince,  who  led
Conn  away  to  his  residence  to  be  informed  of  the  future

1  R.  B.  Mob.  p.  8  ;  Guest,  iij.  46.

2  The  Irish  terra  used  in  the  story  of  Echaid  Airem  (Bk.  of  the
Dun,  p.  1307;)  is  sosta,  the  plural  ofsoesad,  'a  station  or  scat;'  but  in
the  story  of  Conn  about  to  be  mentioned  in  the  text,  it  is  n'-raitJi,  '  a
royal  rdih  or  fortification;'  for  sometimes  the  rdths,  as  may  still  bo
seen  in  Ireland,  consisted  of  earth  heaped  up  over  rooms  previously
formed,  a  kind  of  work  which  an  outsider  still  fancies  he  can  trace  at
Dover,  and  more  fortresses  than  one  on  tbe  Rhine.

3  Bee  <»  (/mry  in  bis  MS  Mat.  p.  618,  quoting  MS.  Hati.  5280
(p.  119)  in  the  British  Museum.


206  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

history  of  Ireland,  and  to  be  told  the  length  of  his  reign
and  the  names  of  his  successors  for  many  centuries  after-
wards. This  stone,  of  which  something  must  now  be
said,  was  the  so-called  Lia  Fail,  or  Stone  of  Fal,  and
Irish  legend  speaks  of  it  as  one  of  the  four  precious
things  brought  to  Ireland  by  the  Tuatha  ~D6  Danaan :  it
was  one  of  its  properties  that,  wherever  it  was  taken,  a
Goidel  of  Milesian  descent,  like  Conn,  would  be  sovereign
there,  and  at  Tara  it  gave  a  scream1  under  every  king
whom  it  recognized  in  the  sovereignty.  From  the  pos-
session of  the  warlike  descendants  of  Conn,  it  is  supposed
by  some2  to  have  been  traced  to  Scone,  the  capital  of
the  kingdom  of  Alban,  where  Edward  I.  found  it  in
such  esteem  that  he  thought  it  worth  his  while  to  have
it  brought  to  the  English  capital;3  and  the  stone  from
Scone  is  believed,  as  you  know,  to  be  now  in  the  Coro-
nation chair  at  Westminster  Abbey.  But  its  removal
to  England  was  not  the  end  of  the  beliefs  attached  to  it ;
in  fact,  Irish  and  Scotch  historians  saw  them  verified
anew  when  the  throne  of  England  came  to  be  occupied
by  the  Stuarts,  who  were  supposed  to  be  descended  from
Goidelic  ancestors  of  Milesian  race.  In  the  name  of  the
Lia  Fail,  sometimes  called  the  Stone  of  Destiny,  the  word
Fal  is  probably  to  be  treated  as  in  the  case  of  Inis  Fail
1  the  Island  of  Fal,'  where  I  take  the  word  to  have  meant
light,  and  to  have  referred  to  the  god  in  his  early  identi-
fication with  the  sun.      In  other  words,   the  Lia  Fail

1  Irish  Netmius  (Dublin,  1848),  pp.  200-1.

2  O'Curry  was  not  one  of  them  :  see  his  MS.  Mat.  p.  480.

3  Keating's  History  of  Ireland  (Dublin,  1880),  p.  7;  Skene's  Chron.
of  the  Picts  and  Scots,  pp.  196-7,  266,  280,  333,  335;  O'Curry'a  MS.
Mat.  pp.  618—621.


THE    IXSILAK    CELTS.  207

was  a  fetish  connected  with  his  worship ;  and  however
one  looks  at  it,  one  cannot  regard  it  as  singular  in  the
religious  world  of  the  Aryans.  Witness  the  stone  swal-
lowed by  Cronus  under  the  impression  that  it  was  his
child  Zens,  and  set  up  afterwards  b}7"  the  latter  at  Delphi.
"  It  was  not  a  large  stone,"  says  Andrew  Lang,1  inter-
preting Pausanias,  who  saw  it,  "and  the  Delphians  used
to  anoint  it  with  oil  and  wrap  it  up  in  wool  on  feast-days.
All  Greek  temples,"  he  goes  on  to  say,  "  had  their  fetish-
stones,  and  each  stone  had  its  legend."

But  not  only  was  the  Irish  fetish  called  the  Stone  of
Fal,  but  it  was  first  heard  of  in  Erinn  at  Temair  Fail,'2
1  the  Temair  of  FAL/  that  is  to  say,  the  ancient  capital,
the  site  of  which  is  known  as  Tara  Hill,  in  the  present
county  of  Meath.  There  were  in  Ireland  several  other
places  called  Temair,  genitive  Temrach  (Auglicizcd  Tarn),
and  the  name  may  be  guessed  to  have  had  some  such
signification  as  that  of  a  height  or  an  acropolis ;  but  the
Tara  par  excellence  may  be  assumed  to  have  been  one  of
the  oldest  and  most  important  centres  of  the  warlike
Celts  who  conquered  the  country,  and  it  would  not  be
surprising  if  it  had  occurred  to  them  to  call  it  after  their
chief  divinity,  who  was  both  god  of  war  and  of  light,  and
one  of  whose  names,  recalling  him  in  the  latter  character,
was,  as  it  is  here  contended,  the  Fal  in  question.  Temair
Fail)  or  Fal's  Tara,  would  thus  have  meant  Fal's  Ilill  or
Height;  and  one  may  compare  the  case  of  a  warlike
people  of  this  country,  who  called  their  capital  Camulo-


1  Custom  and  Myt7i,  p.  52;  Pausanias,  x.  24.

2  O'Curry.  MS.  Mat.  p.  179;  Book  of  Rights  (ed  O'Donovan),  p.  56;
Book  of  Fenagh  (ed.  Hennessy),  pp.  322  3.


208  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

clunon  or  the  Acropolis  of  Camulos,  with  the  name  of
which  that  of  Fal's  Tara  may  perhaps,  mythologically
speaking,  be  equated.

These  scattered  facts,  which  I  have  tried  to  connect
with  one  another,  not  only  suggest  that  Nuada  Finnfail,
or  the  Goidelic  Nodens,  was  the  same  divinity  as  F&1,
and  the  latter  as  Cenn  Cruaich ;  but  they  further  go  to
prove  a  connection  between  his  cult  and  the  high  places,
which,  whether  artificial  or  natural,  agree,  so  far  as  con-
cerns the  object  in  view,  with  the  selection  in  Greece
and  Kome  of  elevated  positions  for  the  temple  of  Zeus
and  Jupiter.  It  would  agree  even  more  closely  with  the
custom,  still  practised  by  the  Parliament  of  the  Isle  of
Man,  of  promulgating  the  laws  made  by  it  from  an
artificial  mound  called  the  Tynwald,  which  was  done  at
Midsummer  under  the  Old  Style,  but  now  on  the  5th  of
July,  a  date  of  no  institutional  significance.  It  is  in
this  light,  perhaps,  that  one  should  chiefly  regard  the
cruach  or  '  gorsect '  sacred  to  the  Celtic  god  and  his  asses-
sors :  in  other  words,  the  Irish  probably  assembled  on
Mag  Slecht,  for  example,  not  only  to  worship  Cenn
Cruaich,  but  also  to  hold  their  courts  under  the  sanction
of  the  chief  of  the  nation's  gods,  much  as  the  English
House  of  Lords  pays  homage  to  Christianity  by  opening
its  proceedings  with  a  public  prayer.  But  one  need  not
leave  Celtic  ground  to  look  for  an  instance  more  pagan
and  far  more  in  point :  I  allude  to  the  gorsect  or  court
under  the  authority  of  which  the  Eistectvod  is  held  as
a  sort  of  session,  as  its  name  indicates,  for  letters  and
music.  The  gorsect  is  held  in  the  open  air,  a  circle  of
stones  being  formed,  with  a  stone  bigger  than  the  others
in  the  middle ;  the  proceedings  are  opened  with  prayer


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  209

by  the  presiding  druid  as  he  is  called ;  afterwards  he
goes  on  to  admit  to  degrees  the  candidates  recommended
by  persons  technically  competent  to  do  so.  When  all
the  business  is  over,  the  company  goes  in  a  procession  to
the  building  fixed  for  holding  the  Eisteetvod,  which  it  is
necessary  to  have  announced  at  a  gorsect  held  a  year  at
least  previously.  As  regards  the  gorsect  itself,  the  rule
is  "that  it  be  held  in  a  conspicuous  place  within  sight
and  hearing  of  the  country  and  the  lord  in  authority,
and  that  it  be  face  to  face  with  the  sun  and  the  eye  of
light,  as  there  is  no  power  to  hold  a  gorsect  under  cover
or  at  night,  but  only  where  and  as  long  as  the  sun  is
visible  in  the  heavens." l  In  the  absence  of  documentary
evidence  bearing  on  the  history  of  the  gorsect,  we  have
to  judge  of  it  as  we  find  it,  and  it  is  remarkable  that
eveiything  connected  with  it  seems  to  suggest  that  it  is
but  a  continuation  of  a  court  of  which  the  Celtic  Zeus
was  originally  regarded  as  the  spiritual  president :  wit-
ness the  circle  of  stones,  the  importance  attached  to  the
sun  and  the  eye  of  light,  and  also  the  nature  of  the
prayer  pronounced  by  the  officiating  druid.  There  are
several  versions2  of  it,  and,  though  not  one  of  them  is

1  The  original  is  printed  in  the  Iolo  M&S.  p.  50,  from  the  manu-
scripts of  Llewelyn  Si6n,  who  died  in  the  year  161G.

2  Four  of  these  versions  are  to  be  found  in  the  Iolo  MS.  pp.  79,  80,
469-70,  and  the  one  breathing  the  purest  pantheism  is  there  ascribed
to  the  ancient  poet  Talhaearn ;  it  runs  thus  :

'Oh  God  !  grant  strength  ;
And  from  strength,  discretion  ;
And  from  discretion,  knowledge  ;
And  from  knowledge,  the  right  ;
And  from  the  right,  the  love  of  it  ;
And  from  that  love,  love  for  all  things  ;
And  in  love  for  all  things,  the  love  of  God.'

P


210  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

probably  early  in  the  form  in  which  we  have  it,  the  fact
of  their  containing  nothing  distinctively  Christian  is  all
the  more  remarkable,  and  it  favours  the  belief  in  the
antiquity  of  their  origin.

I  may  explain  that  in  the  remarks  to  which  the  name
Cenn  Cruaich  has  here  given  rise,  the  Celtic  Zeus  or
Mars-Jupiter  has  been  regarded  as  standing  before  us  in
his  character  of  a  god  of  light  and  the  sun,  but  that  at  a
very  early  stage  in  his  history,  his  attributes  expanded
themselves  to  such  an  extent  that  he  ceased  to  be  in  any
very  strict  sense  of  the  term  a  sun-god :  other  sun-gods
of  a  far  simpler  and  narrower  nature  grew  up,  and  one
of  them  appears  in  the  story  of  Conn  and  the  Stone  of
Fal.  For  at  the  same  time  that  the  name  Fal  seems  to
have  referred  to  the  more  ancient  god  of  light,  the  fairy
prince  (p.  205)  who  disclosed  the  future  history  of  his
country  to  Conn  is  stated  to  have  been  called  Lug,1  who
as  a  sun-god  occupies  a  distinguished  place  in  Irish  legend.
When  the  connection  of  the  other  god  with  light  had  been
forgotten,  the  name  of  Lug  as  a  sun-god  was  still  familiar,
and  the  story  shaped  itself  accordingly.

The  observations  made  in  reference  to  the  term  FaM  as
a  name  of  the  god  would  be  incomplete  without  some
allusion  to  the  mythical  creation  known  as  Roth  Fail,
or  Fal's  Wheel,  and  Both  Rdmach,  or  the  Wheel  with
Paddles.2    It  is  said  to  have  been  made  by  Simon  Magus,


1  O'Curry's  MS.  Mat.  p.  618,  where  the  ancient  text  calls  him  Lug
mac  Edlend  mic  [sic]  Tighernmais.     Edlend  was  his  mother's  name.

2  O'Curry  in  his  MS.  Mat.  pp.  385,  401-3,  423,  speaks  of  it  as
a  'Eowing  Wheel;'  and  at  p.  428  he  calls  it  also  an  'Oar  Wheel,'
which  is  likewise  correct  enough,  since  rdmach  means  '  provided  with
rdma,'  which  signified  hoth  oars  and  shovels  or  spades  (the  Cymmrodor,


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  211

assisted  by  Mog  Ruith,  a  celebrated  Irish  druid  from
the  island  of  Valencia,  who,  having  learned  all  the
druidism  or  magic  that  could  be  learned  in  these  islands,
went  with  his  daughter  to  take  lessons  from  Simon
Magus,  in  whose  contest  with  St.  Peter  he  is  represented
taking  a  part.  The  Wheel  was  to  enable  Simon  to  sail
in  the  air ;  but  it  met  with  an  accident,  and  Mog  Ruith's
daughter  brought  certain  fragments  of  it  to  Ireland,  one
of  which  she  fixed  as  the  rock  or  pillar-stone  of  Cnam-
choill,  a  place  near  Tipperary,  the  name  of  which  has
been  Anglicized  into  Cleghile.  The  stone  was  believed
to  produce  blindness  if  looked  at,  and  death  if  touched.1
But  there  were  other  versions  which  made  the  coming
of  the  Wheel  a  great  calamity,  not  only  to  Ireland,  but
to  a  great  portion  of  the  west  of  Europe :  it  became  a
recognized  element  in  so-called  prophecies  of  calamities
to  overcome  Erinn.  Thus  in  one  called  the  Ecstasy  of  St.
Moling,  the  Wheel  is  represented  as  destined  to  come
followed  by  a  dreadful  scourge  which  was  to  destroy
three-fourths  of  the  people  as  far  as  the  Tyrrhene  Sea
(p.  173),  in  the  reign  of  a  king  Flann  Ginach  of  Durlas.2
Another  extravagant  prophecy,  vainly  attributed  to  St.
Columba,  made  the  Wheel  into  an  enormous  ship  con-
taining a  fabulous  number  of  warriors,  and  sailing  over
sea  and  land  with  equal  ease;   but  it  was  fated  to  be

vij.  65;  Scnchus  M6r,  iij.  204,  210);  and  the  reference  implied  in
the  adjective  must  have  been  to  the  paddles  or  iloat-boards  of  an  under-
shot water-wheel.

1  O'Curry,  MS.  Mai.  pp.  402-3  ;  Irish  Nenniut,  pp.  264-5  (also
editor's  note  with  references  to  Duald  Mac  Firbia'a  MS.  in  the  Lib.  of
the  Royal  Irish  Academy,  and  to  the  Bk.  of  Lecan,  fol.  133);  Stokes-
O'Donovan  ed.  of  Cormac,  p.  74.

2  O'Curry,  MS  Mat.  pp.  402-3.

P  2


212  II.     THE    ZEUS    or

wrecked  on  the  pillar-stone  of  Clegliile,  and  the  warriors
would  all  be  cut  off  in  the  reign  of  Flann  Ciothach.1
For  a  reason  not  assigned,  Cleghile  appears  to  have  been
fixed  upon  as  the  terminus  for  the  course  of  the  Wheel,
which  is  called  in  such  legends  the  Roth  Rdmach ;  but
the  allusion  to  Cleghile  enables  one  to  recognize  a  refer-
ence to  the  same  thing  in  Cormac's  Glossary,  namely,
under  the  word  Foi,  which  is  explained  to  have  meant
the  place  called  Cnamchoill,  '  Cleghile.'  So  far  as  it  can
be  translated  without  context  as  it  stands,  the  passage
represents  the  druid  Mog  Euith  saying  that  somebody  or
something  would  perish  because  the  Roth  Fail  would
come  as  far  as  the  king  of  Durlas  west  of  Foi,  i.e.  west
of  Cnamchoill.2  I  am  not  aware  that  the  Wheel  is  called
Roth  Fail  anywhere  else ;  the  passage  in  the  Glossary,
however,  proves  the  identity  of  the  Roth  Fail  with  the
Roth  Ramach.

But  what,  you  will  ask,  does  all  this  mean,  and  espe-
cially the  introduction  of  Simon  Magus  ?  The  appear-
ance of  Simon  on  Celtic  ground  is  not  very  difficult  to


1  O'Curry,  loc.  cit.

2  See  the  Stokes-O'Donovan  ed.  of  Cormac,  p.  74,  and  Stokes'  Old
Irish  Glossaries,  p.  20,  where  the  passage,  which  is  partly  Latin  and
partly  Irish,  reads  :  '  Item  Mog  Euith  peribit  quod  Roth  Fail  perveniet
dicens  cori  Durluis  find  iar  Foi .  i.  iar  Cnamchaill.'  Here  dicens  refers
to  the  sentence  beginning  with  peribit,  which  is  used  in  Irish  fashion  for
periturum  esse,  and  the  whole  is  introduced  as  an  instance  of  the  occur-
rence of  the  name  Foi.  I  translate  accordingly :  'Also  Mog  Ruith  saying,
that* it  (he  or  she)  will  perish  because  Roth  Fail  will  come  to  the  king
of  fair  Durlas  [Thurles]  west  of  Foi,  that  is,  west  of  Cnamchoill.'  The
place  called  Thurles  is  not  west  of  Cleghile,  though  the  king  of  Thurles
may  at  any  given  time  have  been ;  Durlas  was,  however,  not  an  un-
common place-name,  so  it  is  not  certain  that  the  one  now  called  Thurles
was  intended.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  213

explain.  Tie  was  known  to  the  early  Church  as  a  noto-
rious opponent  of  the  apostles,  and  his  name  became
identified  with  all  that  was  pagan  and  anti-christian :
thus  the  ancient  druidic  tonsure  usual  among  the  clergy
of  the  British  Church  till  the  latter  half  of  the  eighth
century,  and  among  those  of  the  Irish  Church  not  quite
so  late,  was  probably  a  druidic  tonsure  continued :  at
any  rate,  it  was  described  by  those  who  had  adopted  the
Roman  tonsure  as  that  of  Simon  Magus.1  As  to  Ireland
in  particular,  all  the  fiercest  opposition  there  to  Chris-
tianity is  described  as  headed  by  the  druids,  who  com-
peted with  Patrick  and  other  saints  in  working  miracles.
So  it  would  be  natural  enough  for  Christian  writers  to
liken  the  chief  druids  of  Ireland  to  Simon,  especially
seeing  that  when  they  used  the  Latin  tongue  the  native
Avoid  drui}  'druid,'  had  to  be  rendered  by  magus,  'a
magician.'  Vice  versa,  Simon  Magus  became  in  Irish
Simon  Drui,  or  Simon  the  Druid : 2  nay,  he  was  at  last
claimed  as  an  Irish  ancestor,3  and  as  such  he  appears  as
Simeon  Brec,  or  Simeon  the  Freckled,  son  of  Starn  or
St  aria th,  of  the  family  of  Nemid,  and  as  ancestor  of  the
Fir  Bolg,  who,  owing  to  Simon's  eastern  origin,  are  made

1  Haddan  and  Stubbs,  Councils,  &c.  i.  112,  113;  Reeves,  Adam-
nan's  Vita  Columbce,  note,  p.  350;  Stokes's  Goidelica  (London,  1872),
pp.  86,  91 ;  Rhys,  Celtic  Britain^  p.  74.

2  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  p.  79a,  where  mention  is  made  of  a  garment  which
had  found  its  way  to  Ireland,  though  originally  made  by  Sim6n  Drui
fur  Dair  [Darius?],  king  of  the  Romans;  see  Rhys,  Celt  Brit.\  p.  71,
for  reference  to  the  name  in  the  T.  C.  D.  MS.  (of  O'Mulcury's  Glos-
sary), H.  2,  16,  col.  116  ;  and  //-.  Nenniita,  p.  266,  foi  a  reference  to  it
in  the  R.  Ir.  Ac.  MS.  (of  Duald  Mac  Firbis),  p.  535,  and  the  Bk.  of
Lean,  fol.  133.

•  l  ('Curry,  Manner*,  &c  ij.  213


214  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

to  come  from  the  East  on  one  of  the  motiveless  wander-
ings so  common  in  the  legendary  history  of  Ireland.1

Now  the  prophecies  about  the  Wheel  appear  to  have
consisted  partly  of  an  ancient  Irish  belief  in  a  mythic
wheel  and  a  mythic  ship,2  and  partly  of  Christian  tales
about  Simon  Magus,  such  as  the  one  about  his  flying  in
the  air,  or  ascending  like  Elijah  in  a  fiery  chariot,  in
order  to  show  his  superiority  over  Peter  and  Paul  ;3  but
his  brief  aerial  success  contrasts  most  markedly  with  the
ease  with  which  Irish  druids,  and  Mog  Kuith  in  parti-
cular, are  described  soaring  in  the  air  by  means  of  a
simple  pair  of  wings,4  put  on  or  off  at  pleasure  like  an
ordinary  article  of  dress.  So  here  no  room  is  left  for
the  clumsy  expedient  of  a  wheel,  and  we  have  to  look
for  that  in  another  direction — the  one,  in  fact,  indicated
by  the  name  Roth  Fail,  which  may  be  rendered  the
Wheel  of  Light,  and  regarded  as  probably  referring
in  the  first  instance  to  the  disk  of  the  sun :  I  said,  '  in
the  first  instance,'  as  one  has  only  to  glance  at  M.  Gaidoz's
account  of  the  symbolism  of  the  wheel  to  see  how  capable
it  was  of  modification,  as,  for  example,  when  it  took
the  form  of  a  winged  disk  or  even  of  a  cross.5  The
importance  attached  to  the  place  called  Cnamchoill,
1  Cleghile,'  which  translated  would  mean  the  Forest  of

1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  p.  16  b ;  Keating's  Hist,  of  Ireland,  pp.  90-7.

2  Melusine,  ij.  134,  159;  Gaidoz,  Etudes,  pp.  99,  100.

3  Arnobius,  ij.  12  (in  Migne's  Patrologia,  v.  827-9);  St.  Ambrose,
Hexaem.  iv.  8  (Migne,  xiv.  205) ;  Maximus  Taurinensis,  Homil.  lxxii.
ci.  (Migne,  lvii.  405-6,  488-90) ;  and  for  more  authorities,  see  Herzog's
Real-Encyklopddie,  s.v.  Simon,  Vol.  xiv.  252.

4  O'Curry's  Manners,  &c.  ii.  214,  215.
6  ittudes,  pp.  49,  68,  &  passim.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  2  1  5

(the)  Bonos  or  Bone-wood,  is  not  to  be  understood
without  ampler  data  than  we  have  ;  but  it  looks  as  though
the  spot  had  been  another  Mag  Slecht  adorned  Avith
another  and  ruder  figure  of  Cenn  Cruaich,  covered  with
gold  and  credited  with  glory  exposed  to  no  vulgar  gaze
but  fenced  around  by  the  solitude  of  a  sacred  forest,  like
one  which  figures  in  the  history  of  ancient  Prussia.1

Lastly,  we  have  another  proof  of  the  existence  in
ancient  Ireland  of  a  wheel  myth  in  the  name  Mog  Ruith
of  the  druid  involved  in  the  stories  occupying  our  atten-
tion at  present.  It  meant  Servus  Motae,  or  the  Slave  of
the  Wheel,  and  most  probably  of  no  other  wheel  than
the  one  here  in  question,  the  Roth  Fail  or  Wheel  of
Light.  Personal  names  formed  in  this  analytic  fashion,
so  familiar  to  Semitic  scholars  in  such  instances  as  Abdiel,
4  Servant  of  El,'  Abdullah,  'Servant  of  Allah,'  and  the
like,  are  not  unusual  in  Irish ;  and  they  not  unfrequently
involve  a  god's  name,  as  in  the  case  of  Mog  Niiadat,
'  Servus  Nodentisf  and  Mog  Neit  or  Slave  of  Ndt,  this
last  being  a  name  of  the  Goidelic  god  of  war,  as  we  are
told  in  Cormac's  Glossary.2  The  habit  of  forming  proper
names  of  men  in  this  way  is  probably  of  pre-Celtic  origin
in  Ireland ;  but  it  was  continued  in  Christian  times  with
the  aid  of  the  words  mael,  'bald,  tonsured,'  and  gille,
'boy,  servant-boy,'  as  in  Maelpadraic,  rendered  into
Latin  as  Calms  Patricii,3  or  the  Tonsured  Slave  of  Patrick,
still  current  as  Mulpatrick ;  Maelmuiri.  '  Marianas,'  or
the  Tonsured  Slave  of  Mary;  and  GilUcrist^  'Christ's
Servant,'  curtailed  into  Gilchrist;    Gillecomded,  'Servus

1  Voigt's  Geschiehte  Preumeru  (Berlin,  1S27).  i.  599 — G14.

2  Stokes-O'Don.  s.v.  Neit,  p.  122.

3  Nigra,  Rdiquie  Celtiche,  p.  19  ;  Rhys,  C-lt.  Britain,  pp.  73,  202.


21 G  IT.     THE    ZEUS   OF

Domini]  or  the  Servant  of  the  Lord,  and  many  more.
Should  these  guesses  prove  well  founded,  it  would  follow
that  the  Roth  Fail  had  a  well-defined  place  in  Irish  theo-
logy long  before  any  such  a  name  as  that  of  Mog  Kuith
could  have  come  into  existence;  and  it  is  also  to  be
observed  that  the  attempt  to  replace  its  name,  Roth  Fail,
by  a  later  designation  meaning  the  Eowing  or  Paddle
Wheel,  corroborates,  so  far  as  it  goes,  the  opinion  here
advanced  as  to  the  relative  antiquity  of  the  belief  in  the
Wheel.

The  God  of  Druidism.

Eeference  has  been  made  in  this  lecture  several  times
to  a  tree  overshadowing  the  sacred  well  of  the  god,  and
to  the  slab  hard  by.  Others  might  be  added;  and  I
would  call  your  attention  to  the  well-known  type  of  Irish
holy-well  overshadowed  by  a  tree  whose  branches  are
loaded  with  such  votive  offerings  as  bits  of  cloth ;  not  to
mention  that  at  the  spot  where  the  pious  visitor  there
makes  his  cross  are  to  be  found  other  gifts,  containing
among  them,  as  I  have  seen  more  than  once,  coins  of  the
present  clay.  The  placing  of  offerings,  however  humble,
among  the  branches  of  the  tree  had  probably  the  same
meaning  as  the  hanging  up  in  the  like  manner  by  the
ancient  Gauls  and  Germans  of  the  heads  of  the  animals
sacrificed  to  the  gods.  The  subject  has  been  treated  in
his  thorough  way  by  Jacob  Grimm  in  his  well-known
work  on  Teutonic  Mythology,  where  he  has  brought  toge-
ther many  allusions  to  the  trees  marking  the  holy  places
of  his  race  in  old  times.1  Especially  deserving  of  men-
tion is  the  evergreen  tree  with  wide-spreading  branches

1  Deutsche  Myth*,  i.  53—71.


Tin:    TXSULAR   CELTS.  217

said  to  have  stood  in  close  proximity  to  the  temple  of
the  gods  in  the  ancient  town  of  Upsala,1  and  the  mythic
tree  called  Glass,  described  as  standing  with  leaves  of
gold  before  the  hall  of  Sig-tyr,  or  the  Norse  Zeus  of
Victory.2  On  the  whole,  the  oak  would  seem  to  have
been  the  tree  far  the  most  closely  associated  with  the
supreme  god  of  the  Aryans.  Thus  in  ancient  Greece
the  mighty  growth  of  the  oak  was  regarded  as  symbolic
of  him.3  Not  only  was  it  a  twig  of  oak  that  was  used
in  the  Greek  ceremony  of  rain-making,  but  several  cele-
brated oaks  sacred  to  Zeus  are  alluded  to  in  Greek  and
Roman  literature  :  suffice  it  to  recall  the  Trojan  oak
famed  in  the  Iliad,  and  the  words  of  Virgil  in  the
Georgics,  iij.  332,  &c. :

'  Sicubi  magna  Jovis  antiquo  robore  quercus
Ingentes  tendat  ranios.'

There  were  also  at  Dodona,  one  of  the  most  ancient
Greek  seats  of  the  Zeus  worship,  sacred  oaks,  the  mur-
muring of  the  wind  among  whose  branches  and  leaves
was  watched  and  treated  as  oracular  ;4  and  sometimes  the
oak  was  something  more  than  a  tree  merely  sacred  to  the
god  or  marking  out  the  place  of  his  abode :  it  was  itself
regarded  as  the  seat  of  his  divinity,  as  in  the  case  of
'Aw  </>7?yo's  or  «^7/yovaios  also  at  Dodona,5  of  which  Silius
Italicus  says,  iij.  G91:

'Arbor  nuruen  habet  coliturquo  tepentibus  aria.'

In  the  Celtic  instances  alluded  to,  no  predilection  for

1  Voigt  (quoting  Schol.  to  Adam  of  Bremen,  233),  i.  580.

2  Corpus  Poet.  Dor.  i.  79.

3  Prellex  in  Pauly's  Real-EnrykJ.  s.v.  Jupiter,  p.  .")90.

4  II).  p.  G04.  5  Overbeck's  Kunstmyth,  i.  J.


218  IT.     THE    ZETTS    OF

the  oak  seems  to  suggest  itself;  but  if  we  go  back  to
the  ancient  Gauls,  their  preference  for  it  is  placed  beyond
all  doubt.  Witness  Pliny's  well-known  account  of  the
druids  in  his  Natural  History,  xvi.  95;  the  whole  pas-
sage is  so  much  to  the  point  that  I  cannot  help  quoting
it  at  full  length:  "  Nor  is  the  admiration  of  Gaulish  lands
in  this  matter  to  be  passed  over  in  silence :  the  druids,
for  so  they  call  their  magicians,  have  nothing  which
they  hold  more  sacred  than  the  mistletoe  and  the  tree
on  which  it  grows,  provided  only  it  be  an  oak  \j,obur~].
But  apart  from  that,  they  select  groves  of  oak,  and  they
perform  no  sacred  rite  without  leaves  from  that  tree,  so
that  the  druids  may  be  regarded  as  even  deriving  from  it
their  name  interpreted  as  Greek.  For  they  believe  what-
ever grows  on  these  trees  to  be  actually  sent  from  heaven,
and  to  form  a  mark  in  each  instance  of  a  tree  selected
by  the  god  himself.  That  is,  however,  very  rarely  to
be  met  with,  and  when  it  is  found  it  is  sought  with
much  religious  ceremony.  They  do  this  especially  at
the  time  of  the  sixth  moon,  the  luminary  which  marks
the  beginning  of  their  months  and  their  years,  and  after
the  tree  has  passed  the  thirtieth  year  of  its  age,  because
of  its  having  even  then  plenty  of  vigour,  though  not
half  the  size  to  which  it  may  grow.  Addressing  it  in
their  language  as  the  universal  healer,  and  taking  care  to
have  sacrifices  and  banquets  prepared  with  the  correct
ceremony  beneath  the  tree,  they  bring  to  the  spot  two
white  bulls,  whose  horns  have  never  been  bound  before.
The  priest,  clad  in  a  white  robe,  climbs  the  tree,  and
with  a  golden  sickle  cuts  the  mistletoe :  it  is  caught  in
a  white  cloth.  Then  at  length  they  sacrifice  the  victims,
with  a  prayer  that  god  may  make  his  own  gift  benefit


THE   INSULAB    CELTS.  219

those  to  whom  lie  lias  given  it.  They  believe  thai  drink-
ing of  a  potion  prepared  from  it  gives  fecundity  to  barren
animals,  and  that  it  is  a  remedy  against  all  poison."

Add  to  this  important  passage  the  statement  of  Maxi-
mus  Tyrius  to  the  effect  that  the  Celts  worshipped  Zens,
and  that  the  Celtic  ayaXfia  or  image  of  the  god  was  a
lofty  oak,1  and  that  the  name  of  the  Gralatian  place
of  assembly  in  Asia  Minor,  as  given  by  Strabo,2  was
Apwefierov  or  the  sacred  Oak-grove.  The  words  of  Maxi-
mus  Tyrius  might,  according  to  Jacob  Grimm,  have  been
applied  to  the  Teutons  also  and  all  nations  originally
related  to  them;3  he  establishes  his  opinion  as  regards
the  former,  and  briefly  alludes  to  some  of  the  latter,  and
among  them  to  the  Lithuanian  branch  as  represented
by  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Prussia.  Their  place  of
greatest  holiness  was  a  spot  called  Romove,  in  a  meadow
where  a  high  and  mighty  oak  afforded  shelter  against
rain  and  the  heat  of  the  summer  sun.  Here,  in  niches
cut  in  the  sacred  tree,  were  placed  images  of  their  three
principal  gods,  and  of  these  the  chief  was  placed  in  the
middle  between  the  two  others.  His  name  was  Perkunos,
and  he  was  reckoned  the  god  of  thunder,  of  rain,  and
other  atmospheric  phenomena.  He  was  also  the  giver
of  health  and  the  helper  of  those  who  suffered  from
disease.  The  water  of  the  lakes  held  sacred  to  him  was
considered  to  possess  remedial  virtues,  and  so  were  the
ashes  of  the  perpetual  fire  kept  up  before  the  sacred  oak.
The  priest  who  happened  to  let  that  fire  go  out  atoned
for  his  negligence  with  his  life,  and  the  sacrifices  made

1  Dissert,  viij.  (Keiske's  ed.  i.  142).

2  Meineke's  (Teubner)  edition,  xii.  5,  1  (Vol.  ii.  p.  79G).

3  Deutsche  Myth4,  i.  55  et  sor|.


220  IT.     THE    ZEUS    OF

to  Perkunos  and  his  two  assessors  not  unfreqiiently  con-
sisted of  human  victims.1  ]Sow  Perkunos  was,  under
slightly  modified  forms  of  the  name,  worshipped  by  all
the  Litu-Slavic  nations,  and  it  would  be  interesting  to
ascertain  his  exact  mythological  position,  but  that  is  not
a  very  easy  matter.  Grimm  saw  in  the  name  Perkunos
a  form  related  to  the  Norse  Fjorgynn,  genitive  Fjorgvins,
of  the  same  origin  as  the  Gothic  fairguni,  '  mountain,'
Anglo-Saxon  fir  gen  of  the  same  meaning ;  and  he  has
suggested  the  possibility  that  Fjorgynn  was  an  ancient
name  for  Thor,  whom  it  would  suit  well  enough  as  a
thunderer  to  be  designated  a  god  of  the  mountains  or
dweller  on  the  heights ;  or  else  that  the  Goths  may
have  preferred  it,  in  the  form  of  Fairgwms,  to  Thor's
more  usual  designation.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the
Teutonic  god  corresponding  to  Zeus  had  even  more  right
to  be  called  the  god  of  the  mountain -tops.  May  not
the  right  solution  be  that  Perkunos  and  its  congeners
represent  the  Gothic  name  of  Thor,  borrowed  and  given
by  the  Litu-Slaves  to  a  god  of  their  own,  who  was  the
counterpart  of  Zeus  rather  than  of  Thor,  though  resem-
bling the  latter  in  his  having  the  attribute  of  thunder  ?
That  borrowing  by  somebody  took  place  in  the  matter
of  the  name  is  proved  by  the  related  word  Porguini,  cited
by  Grimm  as  the  name  of  the  Mordvinian  thunder-god.2
There  have  also  been  futile  attempts  to  connect  the  name
of  Perkunos  with  that  of  the  Hindu  god  of  rain  and
thunder,  Parjanya,  who  would  seem  to  have  been  a  form
or  aspect  of  Dyaus,  whose  son  he  was  sometimes  called.3

1  Voigt,  i.  582.  2  lb.  i.  143  :  see  also  iij.  64.

3  For  a  comprehensive  account  of  Parjanya,  see  an  article  by  Biihler
in  I-ienfey's  Orient  und  Occident,  i.  214-29.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  2'2  L

Whatever  the  origin  of  the  name  of  the  god  Perkunoa
may  prove  to  have  been,  the  priesthood  devoted  to  the
holy  place  of  which  he  was  the  chief  divinity  is  described
as  forming  one  of  the  most  despotic  hierarchies  the  world
has  ever  seen;  and  its  head  is  represented  enjoying
absolute  power  and  seclusion  more  impenetrable  than
could  probably  be  secured  by  the  most  influential  druid
among  the  Celts.  For  to  read  of  the  priests  connected
with  the  holy  forest  of  Eomove  in  ancient  Prussia  un-
avoidably leads  one  to  this  comparison,  and  reminds  one
in  a  striking  manner  of  what  is  told  us  in  the  classics
about  the  druids  of  Gaul,  and  in  a  later  literature  about
those  of  Ireland.  Seeing  the  importance  of  sacred  tree-;
in  the  ancient  cult  of  the  chief  god  of  the  Aryans  of
Europe,  and  the  preference  evinced  for  the  oak  as  the
tree  fittest  to  be  his  emblem  or  even  the  residence  of  his
divinity,  I  am  inclined  to  regard  the  old  etymology  of
the  word  druid  as  being,  roughly  speaking,  the  comet
one.  Pliny,  alluding  to  the  druids'  predilection  for  groves
of  oak,  adds  the  words :  ut  inde  appellati  quoque  interpreta-
tione  Graeca  possint  Druidae  vidcri}  The  necessity  lie
seems  to  have  been  under  of  interpreting  the  term  by  refer-
ence to  the  Greek  word  &pvs,  'an  oak,'  was  probably  what
made  him  express  himself  so  hesitatingly.  Had  he  pos-
sessed knowledge  enough  of  the  Gaulish  language,  he
would  have  seen  that  it  supplied  an  explanation  which
rendered  it  needless  to  have  recourse  to  Greek,  namely,
in  the  native  word  dru,  which  we  have  in  Druncmcfon,  or
the  sacred  Oak-grove,  given  by  Strabo  as  the  name  of
the  place  of  assembly  of  the  Galatians.    In  fact,  one  has,

1  Hist,  Ned.  xvi.  Oo  ;  Diefenbach,  [>.  3H.


222  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

if  I  am  not  mistaken,  been  sceptic  with  regard  to  this
etymology,  not  so  much  on  phonological  grounds  as  from
failing  exactly  to  see  how  the  oak  could  have  given  its
name  to  such  a  famous  organization  as  the  druidic  one
must  be  admitted  to  have  been.  But  the  parallels  just
indicated  as  showing  the  importance  of  the  sacred  tree
in  the  worship  of  Zeus  and  the  gods  representing  him
among  nations  other  than  the  Greek  one,  help  to  throw
some  light  on  this  point.  According  to  the  etymology
here  alluded  to,  the  druids  would  be  the  priests  of  the
god  associated  or  identified  with  the  oak  ;  that  is,  as
we  are  told,  the  god  who  seemed  to  those  who  were
familiar  with  the  pagan  theology  of  the  Greeks,  to  stand
in  the  same  position  in  Gaulish  theology  that  Zeus  did
in  the  former.

This  harmonizes  thoroughly  with  all  that  is  known
about  the  druids.  On  the  one  hand,  Zeus  was  the  source
of  all  divination : l  the  rustling  of  the  wind  in  the  leaves
of  the  sacred  oaks  at  Dodona,  the  voices  of  the  doves,
and  the  bubbling  of  the  spring  near  the  sacred  oak,  were
all  held  to  be  oracular ;  and  even  in  the  case  of  the  cele-
brated oracle  of  the  Pythian  Apollo  at  Delphi,  the  latter
was  no  more  than  the  irpofrj-nis  or  mouthpiece,  so  to  say,
of  Zeus.  On  the  other  hand,  one  may  sum  up  the  im-
pressions of  ancient  authors  as  to  the  druids  by  describ-
ing them  as  magicians  who  were  medicine-men,  priests,
and  teachers  of  the  young.  This  applies  more  especially
to  Gaul,  but  their  characteristics  appear  to  have  been
much  the  same  in  Ireland — in  both  they  were  above
all  things  magicians ;  for  we  have  Pliny's  express  state-


1  Preller  in  Fauly's  Real-Encykl.  s.v.  Jupiter,  iv.  601.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  223

merit  that  the  name  which  the  Gauls  gave  their  magi-
cians was  that  of  druids;  and  Irish  literature  teaches  ns
the  like  lesson1  as  to  the  kindred  Irish  term,  as  already
instanced  in  the  case  of  Simon  Magus,  called  in  Irish
Simon  Drui.  But  let  us  examine  the  druids  a  little  more
closely  on  Irish  ground.  Now  Ciichulainn,  whose  name
has  already  been  mentioned  (p.  138),  was  educated  at  the
school  of  which  Cathbad  a  druid  was  the  master;  but
what  the  latter' s  teaching  mostly  consisted  of  we  know
not ;  incidentally  we  find  that  he  told  his  pupils  of  lucky
and  unlucky  days.  One  morning,  for  instance,  he  in-
formed an  elder  pupil  that  the  day  then  beginning  would
be  a  lucky  one  for  anybody  who  should  take  arms  on  it
for  the  first  time,  which  Ciichulainn  overhearing,  at  once
carried  out,  to  the  surprise  of  his  teacher  and  the  king,
both  of  whom  he  outwitted  in  the  matter.2  To  be  able
to  make  the  declaration  ascribed  to  the  druid  would  seem
to  imply  that  he  began  the  day  with  augury  or  some
other  kind  of  divination.  Years  later,  when  Ciichulainn
was  asked  as  to  his  education,  he  is  represented  enume-
rating among  the  advantages  he  had  enjoyed,  that  of
having  been  taught  by  Cathbad  the  druid,  which  had,
he  said,  made  him  a  master  of  inquiry  in  the  arts  of
the  god  of  druidism  or  magic,  and  rendered  him  skilled
in  all  that  was  excellent  in  visions.  With  regard  to
this  latter  statement,  suffice  it  to  say  that  the  druids
were  always  ready  to  interpret  a  dream,  which  was  pro-
bably done  according  to  canons  they  had  elaborated  for
their  use.     What  interests  one  most  is,  the  remarkable

1  Celtic  Britain'1,  pp.  71-2.

2  Book  of  the  Dun,  61a,  Gib;  Book  of  Leimter,  Gib— 656.


224  II.     THE    ZEIS    OF

allusion  contained  in  the  term  cle  driddechta,  '  of  the  god
of  dmidism,'  which  doubtless  meant  the  divinity  with
whom  the  druids  as  magicians  had  to  do,  and  with  whose
aid  they  practised  their  magical  arts.  We  are  unfor-
tunately not  told  the  name  of  the  god ;  but  it  is  natural
to  suppose  that  it  was  the  chief  of  the  Goidelic  pantheon,
and  this  is  practically  settled  by  the  kind  of  miracles
which  the  druids  are  usually  represented  as  able  to  per-
form with  most  success,  in  their  competition  with  the
early  saints  engaged  in  the  task  of  Christianizing  Ireland.
These  miracles  may  be  described  as  mostly  atmospheric,
consisting  of  such  feats  as  bringing  on  a  heavy  snow,
palpable  darkness,  or  a  great  storm,  such  as  the  one  by
means  of  which  a  druid  tried  to  effect  the  shipwreck  of
St.  Columba  on  Loch  Ness  in  Scotland.1  The  reason,  I
may  observe  in  passing,  why  the  druids  are  such  familiar
figures  in  Irish  literature,  at  any  rate  as  compared  with
the  literatures  of  Wales  and  Brittany,  is  that  the  Goidel's
faith  in  druidism  was  never  suddenly  undermined;  for
in  the  saints  he  only  saw  more  powerful  druids  than
those  he  had  previously  known,  and  Christ  took  the  jdosi-
tion  in  his  eyes  of  the  druid  *aT  e£ox^v.2  Irish  druidism
absorbed  a  certain  amount  of  Christianity ;  and  it  would
be  a  problem  of  considerable  difficulty  to  fix  on  the  point
where  it  ceased  to  be  druidism,  and  from  which  onwards
it  could  be  said  to  be  Christianity  in  any  restricted  sense
of  that  term.

Though  druidism  is  far  harder  to  discover  in  the  oldest
literature  of  the  Welsh,  it  is  possible  there  to  recognize

1  Eeeves'  Adamnan's  Vita  S.  Columbae,  ij.  34  (pp.  148-50).

2  See  .Reeves'  note  on  Magi,  ibid.  pp.  73-4.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  225

the  Welsh  counterpart  of  the  Goidelic  god  of  Druidism,
namely,  in  Math  ab  Mathonwy,  also  called  Math  Hen,  or
M.  the  Ancient.  Besides  the  meagre  references1  to  him
in  Welsh  poetry,  one  of  the  Mabinogion  takes  its  name
from  him.2  There  he  is  described  as  king  of  Gwyned
or  Venedotia,  with  his  head- quarters  at  a  place  called
Cacr  Dathal,  supposed  to  have  been  the  fortified  hill-top
now  known  as  Pen  y  Gaer,  or  the  Hill  of  the  Fortress,
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Conwy,  a  short  distance  from
the  ferry  and  railway-station  of  Tal  y  Cavn,  as  you  go
from  Llandudno  to  Bettws  y  Coed,  in  Carnarvonshire.
Among  other  characteristics,  Math  shared  with  Welsh
fairies  and  demons  the  peculiarity  of  hearing,  without
fail  and  without  regard  to  the  distance,  every  sound  of
speech  that  reached  the  air;3  and  as  the  Greek  Zeus
was  the  source  of  divination,  so  Math  is  named  the  first
and  foremost  of  the  three  great  magicians  of  Welsh
mythology,4  in  which  respect  he  is  to  be  compared  with
Merlin  and  the  Mac  Oc.  Moreover,  he  taught  his  magic
arts  to  Gwydion  ab  Don,  the  Culture  Hero,  with  whose
assistance  he  was  able,  for  example,  to  create  a  woman
out  of  flowers;5  and,  roughly  speaking,  his  relations
with  Gwydion  resembled  those  of  Zeus  with  Heracles
and  Prometheus,  except  that  Math  was  never  guilty  of
the  unscrupulous  and  cruel  conduct  not  infrequently
ascribed  to  Zeus.     But,  in  fact,  no  negative  praise  of

1  Skene's  Four  Anc.  Bha.  of  Wales,  ij.  142  (i.  281),  147  (i.  269),
303  (i.  28G),  where  Matheu  should  be  Math  Hen.

2  R.  B.  Mab.  pp.  5S— 81  ;  Guest,  iij.  217-51.

3  R  B.  Mab.  p.  60  j  Guest,  iij.  219.
*  Triads,  i.  32  =  ij.  20  =  iij.  90.

■  R  /.'.  Mab.  p.  73  ;  Guest,  iij.  239.

Q


226  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

the  kind  could  render  justice  to  Math's  good  qualities,
among  which  the  Mabinogi  enables  one  to  recognize  a
calm  and  complete  freedom  from  the  feelings  of  jealousy
and  revenge,  and  a  supreme  regard — lacking  in  Merlin
and  the  Mac  Oc — for  justice  and  right,  leading  him
to  punish  the  wrong-doer  and  indemnify  the  injured
with  a  certainty  of  power  and  purpose  no  one  durst
oppose.1  For  various  reasons  it  is  not  pretended  that
Math  could  compare  with  the  Zeus  of  the  Odyssey  at
his  best ;  but  he  may  be  distinctly  pronounced  the  high-
est ideal,  as  regards  the  sense  of  justice  and  equity,  that
can  be  associated  with  the  heathen  element  in  Welsh
literature.

Since  Celts  and  Teutons  have  been  repeatedly  com-
pared with  one  another  in  these  lectures,  the  subject  of
druidism  may  be  supposed  to  offer  an  inviting  occasion
to  do  so  once  more ;  but  the  result  proves  in  some  mea-
sure not  so  much  a  similarity  as  a  contrast,  and  that  a
contrast  which  may  be  said  to  maintain  itself  to  a  certain
extent  to  this  very  day.  The  Celts  had  their  druids  to
attend  to  religious  matters  and  even  a  good  deal  more,
while  the  Teutons  had  no  such  a  highly  developed  order
of  men.  It  is  true  the  Teutons  had  their  priests  and
even  their  priestesses;  but  religious  functions  were,  it
may  be  supposed,  not  so  exclusively  discharged  by  them
as  by  the  druids  among  their  neighbours.  The  Teutonic
chiefs  and  kings  could  on  occasion  act  also  as  priests.
Take,  for  example,  the  Norsemen  as  late  as  the  time  of
King  Hacon  in  the  tenth  century :  they  had  priests  to
take  charge  of  the  temples,  but  any  family  or  individual

1  lb.  passim,  but  see  more  especially  pp.  G5,  67;  Guest,  iij.  227,  230.


THE    INSULAR    CELTS.  227

might  have  a  high  place  for  the  gods,  and  at  the  great
festivals  he  who  made  the  feast  and  was  chief  had  to
hallow  the  toast  and  all  the  meat  of  the  sacrifice,1  a  state
of  partial  independence  of  a  priestly  order  probably
not  to  be  found  where  the  druid  was  in  power  among
the  Celts.  The  same  comparative  independence  of  the
hierarchy  of  the  Eoman  Church  was  no  inconsiderable
factor  in  bringing  about  the  Protestant  secession  in  Ger-
many ;  while  in  England  the  King  was  always  very  sen-
sitive in  respect  of  any  papal  interference,  and  made
himself  in  the  person  of  the  second  Tudor  formally  the
Head  of  the  Church  within  the  realm ;  so  our  Queen  is
at  this  moment  declared  supreme  over  all  British  courts,
not  only  civil  but  ecclesiastical ;  and,  acting  through  her
Ministers,  she  appoints  to  the  highest  offices  in  the
Church.  That  is  the  one  side  of  the  picture,  with  the
Queen  head  of  one  of  the  two  Churches  recognized  by
the  State;  while  the  other  side  displays  the  Celt  in  a
State  of  chronic  revolt  from  both  the  State  Churches,  and
in  the  attitude  either  of  an  adherent  of  the  Church  of
Eome,  as  in  Ireland,  or  of  a  dissenter,  as  in  Cornwall,
Wales  and  the  Gaelic  districts  of  Scotland.

Such  a  difference  of  temper  is  often  regretted,  but
nobody  can  deny  its  existence ;  and  whatever  explanation
of  details  the  history  of  many  centuries  has  to  offer,  the
contrast  may  be  said  to  be  as  great  now  as  it  was  in  the
time  of  Julius  Caesar.  But  evident  as  is  its  persistence,
its  origin  is  by  no  means  easy  to  define.  On  the  one
hand,  it  may  be  said  that  the  Celts,  who  delivered  reli-
gious  matters   over  to  their   druids,   that    is,   to  their

1  Vigfusson  and  Powell  in  the  Corpus,  i.  404,  407.

q2


228  II.     THE    ZEUS    OF

magicians  and  medicine-men  acting  as  priests,  showed
themselves  proner  to  superstition  and  lent  themselves
more  readily  to  spiritual  thraldom;  but,  on  the  other
hand,  some  of  the  modern  students  of  institutions  would
probably  tell  us  that  a  community  where  the  chiefs  dis-
charged both  civil  and  religious  functions  was  on  a
lower  level  of  civilization  and  culture  than  one  in  which
they  belonged  respectively  to  different  persons.  This
might  be  said  doubtless  to  apply  to  the  Celts  and  the
Teutons  of  Caesar's  time,  since  the  former  were  more
advanced  in  culture  than  the  latter,  owing,  if  to  nothing
else,  to  their  standing  in  closer  connection  with  the
centres  of  Mediterranean  civilization.  In  ancient  Rome,
the  differentiation  alluded  to  was  greatly  advanced  by
the  abolition  of  the  office  of  king  and  the  transference  of
his  civil  functions  to  the  consuls,  his  religious  duties
being  left  to  one  who  continued  to  be  called  king,  that
is  to  say,  the  Rex  Sacrorum.  The  Teutonic  nations
might,  perhaps,  have  in  their  own  way  and  their  own  time
effected  a  complete  differentiation  of  state  and  religion ;
but  the  fact  that  they  have  not  gone  further  than  they
have  in  that  direction,  would  seem  to  be  somehow  con-
nected with  the  state  of  political  development  they  had
reached  when  their  institutions  came  under  the  influence
of  Christianity;  and  their  comparative  independence  of  a
priesthood  having  been  then,  as  it  were,  stereotyped,
may  be  taken  as  the  historical  antecedent  of  the  whole-
some intolerance  they  have  on  many  subsequent  occasions
evinced  in  the  matter  of  priestly  rule.

This  manner  of  reasoning  would,  however,  presuppose
Celts  and  Teutons  to  be  of  the  same  race,  which  would
be  doubtless  true  of  their  common  origin  in  so  far  as  they


THE    INSVLAR   CELTS.  229

arc  both  Aiyan ;  but  both  families  may  be  supposed  to
have  largely  absorbed  other  elements  aud  thereby  become
more  or  less  mixed.  Such  is  doubtless  the  case  with
South  Germany,  where  the  bulk  of  the  population  still
adhere  to  the  Church  of  Eome,  and  such  it  is  in  most
Celtic  lands ;  nor  is  it  irrelevant  to  note  that  druidism
would  seem  to  have  been  most  powerful  in  those  districts
where  a  pre-Celtic  population  may  naturally  be  conjec-
tured to  have  survived  in  the  greatest  numbers,  namely,
in  the  west  of  Gaul,  in  the  west  of  Britain,  and  in  Ire-
land. That  could  not,  however,  afford  an  adequate
foundation  for  the  sweeping  generalizations  often  made
with  regard  to  the  Celts  of  the  present  day,  that,  as
compared  with  nations  of  the  Teutonic  stock,  they  are
naturally  and  essentially  superstitious  and  fanatic,  only
fit  to  be  ridden  by  priest  or  preacher,  even  where  the
parson  has  just  been  thrown  off.  Such  a  belief  may
prove  as  unfounded  as  another  lately  shattered,  namely,
that  our  Celts  were  incapable  of  advance  in  their  political
ideas ;  for  it  has  come  to  this,  that  they  are  now  hated
of  Jute  and  Saxon  for  entertaining  views  which  Jute
and  Saxon,  rightly  or  wrongly,  hold  to  be  too  advanced.
In  matters  of  religion  and  dogma,  a  Celt  can  undoubtedly
go,  for  better  or  for  worse,  as  far  as  a  Teuton :  witness
the  case  of  the  ancient  Brythonic  heresiarch,  Morien,1

1  The  Welsh  account  of  Morien  as  a  heretic  will  be  found  in  the
Mo  MSS.  pp.  42-3,  420-1.  The  oldest  attested  form  of  the  name
Morien  is  Morgen,  which  must  have  meant  Sea-born  or  Offspring  of
the  Sea,  whence  he  was  called  Pelagius ;  but  Morgen  is  not  to  be  con-
fused with  the  modern  name  Morgan,  the  old  form  of  which  was  Mor~
cant,  though  the  error  has  the  sanction  of  the  translators  of  the  Book
of  Common  Prayer,  who  have  made  the  'Pelagians'  of  Article  IX.  into
Morganiaid,  or  'Morgans.'


230  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

better  known  as  Pelagius,  and  that  of  the  Gallic  Celt
Voltaire,  one  of  the  founders  of  freedom  of  thought  and
of  the  forerunners  of  the  Kevolution  in  France;  or,  to
come  to  our  own  day,  take  that  of  Eenan,  than  whom  no
one  can  be  said  to  write  with  wider  sympathies  and  more
fascination  of  frankness  as  regards  matters  of  religion
and  theology,  whatever  you  may  think  of  the  correctness
of  his  views,  or  be  found  to  dwell  with  more  fondness  on
his  Celtic  origin  and  Breton  boyhood.

These  are  after  all,  you  might  say,  but  individual  cases,
which  is  not  to  be  denied.  But  I  could,  if  time  allowed,
produce  a  larger  though  humbler  witness  from  my  native
county  of  Cardigan:  I  allude  to  a  small  community
which  has  been  in  existence  there  for  the  last  century
and  a  quarter  or  more.  There  in  an  agricultural  tract
between  the  rivers  Aeron  and  Teivi,  the  ordinary  beliefs
of  Trinitarian  Christians  have  passed  into  those  known
as  Unitarian.  Now  it  is  believed  by  the  inhabitants  of
the  country  round  this  Black  Spot,  as  they  call  it,  that
Unitarian  theology  can  have  no  attraction  for  the  reli-
gious mind:  still  that  theology  has  deeply  and  firmly
taken  root  there.  The  Black  Spot  is  a  quiet  rural  dis-
trict without  a  town  or  even  a  village  of  any  large  size.
The  small  farmers  and  farm-labourers  of  Llandyssul,
thoughtful  and  intelligent  men  as  they  are,  cannot  in
any  sense  be  reckoned  Eenans  or  Voltaires;  and  the
question  inevitably  thrusts  itself  upon  us,  why  should  a
creed  believed  to  have  no  charm  for  the  mass  of  men,
and  views  verging,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  on  extreme
scepticism,  exercise  a  decided  sway  over  their  minds?
Let  those  answer  who  believe  the  Celt  essentially  a
superstitious  fanatic.     Of  the  merits  or  demerits  of  Uni-


THE    INSULAR   CELTS.  231

tarianism  I  say  of  com*se  nothing,  lest  the  Calvinism  of
my  early  training  should  prove  to  have  made  me  inca-
pal  >le  of  forming  an  impartial  estimate ;  and  I  need  scarcely
add,  that  I  am  quite  willing  to  leave  the  conflict  of  the
oreeds  to  be  decided  by  the  inexorable  logic  of  natural
selection,  feeling  confident,  as  I  do,  that  the  fittest  of
them  and  best  calculated  to  meet  the  wants  of  man  will
survive.

It  is  right,  however,  to  say  that  we  arc  not  compelled
to  account  for  the  fact,  that  druidism  seems  to  have
been  most  flourishing  in  the  western  parts  of  the  Celtic
world  of  Caesar's  time,  wholly  by  postulating  a  mixture
of  race  to  which  it  may  have  been  more  congenial  than
to  the  thoroughbred  Aryan  Celt :  the  explanation  may
partly  be,  that  in  the  more  progressive  parts  of  southern
Gaul,  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Rhone  and  the  Roman
province,  the  palmy  days  of  druidism  were  even  then
over.  In  Ireland,  for  instance,  druidism  and  the  kingship
went  hand  in  hand ;  nor  is  it  improbable  that  it  was  the
same  in  Gaul,  so  that  when  the  one  fell,  the  other  suffered
to  some  extent  likewise.  It  would  thus  seem  probable
that  druidism  had  here  and  there  begun  to  lose  a  good
deal  of  its  power  and  influence  during  the  revolutions,
which  had  resulted  in  the  abolition  of  the  ancient  king-
ship in  most  of  the  more  important  Gaulish  communities
mentioned  by  Caesar.  This  would  be  the  political  side
of  the  question ;  but  it  had  also  a  more  purely  religious
aspect,  and  there  was  a  cause  at  work  the  action  of  which
cannot  have  tended  to  the  greater  glory  of  druidism :
I  allude  to  the  change  which  must  have  come  over
Gaulish  paganism  some  time  or  other,  and  the  outward
effect  of  which  was  to  make  the  Gaulish  Mercury  or


232  II.     THE    ZEUS   OF

culture-god  practically  the  head  and  chief  of  the  Gaulish
pantheon.  Here,  again,  it  is  worth  the  while  to  compare
Celts  and  Teutons  together :  in  the  next  lecture  it  will
be  attempted  to  show  that  the  Teutonic  counterpart  of
the  Gaulish  Mercury  and  culture-god  was  Woden ;  and
it  is  interesting  to  find  that  in  this  matter  both  families
of  nations,  as  represented  by  the  Gauls  and  the  Norsemen
respectively,  proceeded  on  the  same  lines,  in  that  they
made  the  culture  hero  paramount  over  the  old  gods.
Even  in  the  far  east,  the  same  thing  is  to  be  noticed  in
the  case  of  Indra  becoming  the  head  of  the  Hindu
pantheon,  and,  as  it  is  put  in  the  Rig  Yeda,  sending  the
other  gods  away  like  (shrivelled -up)  old  men.1  It  is
gratifying  to  come  upon  such  traces  of  progress  in  the
theology  of  our  early  ancestors,  whether  Celts  or  Teutons ;
and  still  more  so  to  think  that  in  the  practice  of  their
heathen  religion  it  meant  the  establishment,  probably,
of  a  milder  worship,  making  in  some  small  degree  for
humanity  and  greater  regard  for  human  life.  The  older
cult  of  the  divinity  that  was  par  excellence  the  god  of
druidism,  with  its  direst  horrors,  would  probably  have
left  in  the  hands  of  the  druids  despotic  power,  which  the
spread  of  the  worship  of  the  Culture  hero  or  Man-god
may  be  supposed  to  have  indirectly  tended  to  lessen.
That  is,  however,  but  an  inference,  and  the  data  only
amount  to  negative  evidence  to  the  effect,  that  the  sacri-
fice of  human  victims  to  the  Gaulish  Mercury  is  unknown,
while  the  contrary  is  the  case  as  regards  the  older  divi-
nities, Teutates,  Esus  and  Taranis.  This  would  seem  like-
wise to  apply  to  the  Scandinavian  Woden,  as  contrasted

1  Max  Muller's  Eib.  Lectures,  p.  280.


THE   INSULAR   CELTS.  233

with  the  more  old-fashioned  god  Thor : l  the  former,  we
are  told  in  one  of  the  Eddie  poems,  owned  all  the  gentle-
folk that  fall  in  fight,  but  Thor  the  thrall-kind,  which
would  seem  to  refer  to  an  ancient  custom  of  sacrificing
thralls  on  Thor's  altar.2  This  last  is  described  in  a  well-
known  passage  which  speaks  of  a  place  called  Thors-
ness ;  and,  in  its  allusion  to  the  blood,  it  reminds  one  of
the  Snowdonian  stone  called  the  Red  Altar.  "There,"
says  the  writer,  "is  still  to  be  seen  the  doom -ring
wherein  men  were  doomed  to  sacrifice.  Inside  the  ring
stands  Thor's  stone,  whereon  those  men,  who  were  kept
for  the  sacrifice,  had  their  backs  broken,  and  the  blood
is  still  to  be  seen  on  the  stone."3  As  to  Woden,  those
who  fell  in  battle  were  regarded  as  belonging  to  him,
but  it  may  be  doubted  that  men  were  sacrificed  by  the
Old  Norsemen  to  him  in  the  literal  and  ceremonial  sense
in  which  they  were  to  Thor.

Were  one  inclined  to  draw  a  parallel  in  the  spirit  of
Casaubon  or  Bishops  Lowth  and  Ilorsley,  one  might  point
to  the  rise  of  the  figure  of  the  Man-god  in  Celtic  and
Teutonic  heathendom,  as  helping  to  introduce  a  cult  less
given  to  the  shedding  of  human  blood  than  that  which
went  before  ;  and  with  it  one  might  compare  the  worship
of  a  very  different  kind  of  Man-god  who  abolished  for
Christians  all  the  blood  sacrifices  in  which  the  Jewish

1  It  is  right,  however,  to  note  that  with  the  ancient  Germans  human
sacrifices  to  their  Mercury  were,  according  to  Tacitus,  not  unusual;
see  hi3  Germania,  ix.

2  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  120.  Criminals  also  of  the  worst  kind  were
sacrificed  to  Thor  :  see  the  same  work,  i.  410.

3  See  the  Eyrbyggia  Saga,  cited  by  Vigfusson  and  Powell  in  the
Corpus,  i.  409,  where  they  call  attention,  by  way  of  comparison,  to  the
Blood-stonea  in  the  Fiji  Islands.


234      II.  THE  ZEUS  OF  THE  INSULAR  CELTS.

religion,  like  most  other  ancient  cults,  took  no  small
delight  in  spite  of  the  reforming  voice  of  an  Isaiah.  It
is  better,  however,  to  abide  on  the  safer  ground  of  con-
fronting one  Aryan  religion  with  another;  and  in  this
instance  one  may  contrast  the  direction  which  progress
took  in  the  theology  of  our  ancestors  with  that  which  it
followed  in  Greece  and  Italy,  where  Zeus  or  Jove,  ethe-
realized  and  expanded  like  his  namesake  the  heavens,
was  able  to  hold  his  own,  though  it  must  be  confessed
that  he  came  near  having  a  formidable  rival,  not  in  any
one  of  the  older  divinities,  but  in  Heracles,  a  god  whom
Greek  theology  regarded  as  by  birth  a  mortal.  In  this
matter  at  least,  Celts,  Teutons  and  Hindus  take  a  respect-
able position  in  the  comparison  with  Greeks  and  Eomans,
when,  unlike  the  latter,  some  of  them  proceeded  to  raise
to  the  highest  seat  in  their  pantheon  the  representative
of  the  intellectual  aspect  of  man's  nature,  and  the  expo-
nent, however  narrow  and  inadequate,  of  the  striving  of
human  reason  to  conquer  all  things  and  surmount  all
difficulties  by  dint  of  genius  and  persistent  effort.


Lecture  III.

THE    CULTURE    HERO.


The  great  difficulty  in  studying  the  religion  and
mythology  of  the  ancient  Celts,  is  to  bridge  over  the
gulf  of  ages  dividing  the  literature  of  the  Celtic  nations
of  the  present  day  from  the  narrative  of  the  writers  of
antiquity  and  the  testimony  of  the  stones.  But  that  a
few  slender  lines  of  connection  can  be  thrown  across,
has  been  shown  in  the  case  of  Nodens ;  and  I  now  pro-
pose to  make  a  similar  attempt  in  that  of  a  very  different
figure  in  the  Celtic  pantheon.  It  is  but  sparingly  that
the  literature  of  the  Goidel  speaks  of  a  god  or  goddess  as
such,  and  this  applies  still  more  emphatically  to  that  of
the  Brython.  That  is,  however,  but  an  accident  of  the
medium,  so  to  say,  through  which  our  information  about
Celtic  paganism  has  reached  us:  the  gods  have,  hTtho
course  of  the  transmission  of  the  legends  about  them
through  Christian  channels,  been  reduced  to  the  status
of  men  playing  parts,  more  or  less  heroic,  in  a  mythic
history.  So  it  is  only  by  careful  comparison  that  one  is
enabled  to  find  that  such  and  such  a  hero  of  our  stories
was,  in  the  pagan  period,  such  and  such  a  god.  Let  me
call  your  attention  to  one  of  the  kind,  who,  in  the
Mabinogion,  bears  the  name


236  iii.   the  cultuee  heeo.

Gwtdion  Son  of  Don.

He  is  intimately  associated  with  the  district  in  North
Wales,  which  is  somewhat  loosely  termed  Arvon.1  In
order  to  place  Gwydion's  character  in  a  clear  light,  I
venture  to  give  you  an  abstract  of  one  or  two  connected
tales  about  him,  contained  in  the  Mabinogi,  bearing  the
name  of  his  uncle  and  tutor  Math,2  who  was  mentioned
in  the  last  lecture  (p.  225),  as  having  his  head-quarters
in  the  Arvonian  district  with  which  the  name  of  Gwydion
was  also  connected.  The  first  story  relates  how  Gwydion
thrice  thwarted  his  mistress,  Arianrhod,  with  regard  to
a  son  of  theirs  whom  she  wished  to  disown.  Gwydion
had  the  boy  reared  at  Dinas  Dinne,  a  town  or  fortress
now  represented  by  a  huge  mound,  into  which  the  sea,
not  far  from  the  western  entrance  into  the  Menai  Straits,
is  fast  eating  its  way :  the  site  seems  to  have  been  turned
to  use  by  the  Eomans.  But  be  that  as  it  may,  a  short  dis-
tance thence,  one  is  shown  a  spot  where  the  waves  break
on  a  rock  visible  only  at  low  water.  It  is  the  supposed
remains  of  Caer  Arianrhod,  or  Arianrhod's  Castle,  which
local  legend  affirms  to  have  subsided  owing  to  the  wicked-
ness of  its  occupants.  Well,  Gwydion  one  day  took  his
boy  with  him  to  visit  his  mother,  who  had  not  seen  him
since  his  birth ;  she  was  disgusted  to  find  that  his  father
had  had  him  reared,  as  she  was  desirous  of  passing  for  a
virtuous  maid :  so  she  laid  the  boy  under  a  destiny  that
he  was  never  to  have  a  name  till  she  gave  him  one  her-

1  It  is  the  country  looking  towards  the  sea  between  the  Conwy  and
the  Eivl  Mountains,  or  the  Rivals,  as  they  are  sometimes  called  by
Englishmen ;  but  the  coast  from  the  Conwy  to  Bangor  or  thereabouts
used  to  be  called  Arttechwed,  and  not  included  in  Arvon.

2  R.  B.  Mob.  pp.  70—81  j  Guest,  iij.  233-51.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  2-')>7

self,  intending  that  he  should  ever  be  nameless.  Gwydion
went  his  way,  declaring  that  the  boy  should  have  a  name
nevertheless;  so  one  day  some  time  afterwards,  he  took
the  lad  with  him  for  a  walk  on  the  sea-shore.  There,  by
dint  of  magic,  in  which  he  was  an  adept,  he  converted
some  sedges  and  sea-weeds  into  a  ship  fully  rigged  out
with  sails  and  everything  requisite  for  a  vessel ;  and  by
another  effort  of  his  art  he  transformed  himself  and  the
lad  into  cordwainers.  They  moored  beneath  the  walls
of  Arianrhod's  castle,  where  it  was  soon  announced  to
the  lady  that  there  lay  hard  by  a  vessel,  with  a  man  and
a  boy  on  board  busily  engaged  in  fashioning  shoes  of
the  most  exquisite  Cordovan  leather  anybody  had  ever
seen.  She  sent  to  have  a  pair  made  for  her ;  but  when
the  shoes  came  to  be  tried  on,  they  proved  too  large,  so
that  others  were  ordered.  These  latter  were  as  much  too
small;  so  the  cordwainer  would  work  no  more  for  her
without  measuring  her  foot  himself.  She  came  down  to
the  vessel ;  and  when  she  had  got  on  board  and  expressed
her  surprise  that  he  could  not  make  a  shoe  according  to
measure,  a  wren  lighted  on  the  ship,  and  the  lad  took
his  aim  and  so  cleverly  hit  it  that  Arianrhod  laughed
aloud  and  exclaimed,  that  it  was  with  a  steady  hand1

1  This  is  a  guess  at  the  meaning  required  by  the  context;  but  the
real  signification  of  the  adjective  gxjffes  or  (in  its  dictionary  form)  cyffes
has  not  been  ascertained :  it  must  be  analysed  cyf-hes,  otherwise  one
cannot  account  for  the/,  and  in  that  case  the  syllable  hea  may  possibly
be  a  word  of  the  same  origin  as  hyd,  'length,'  and  the  whole  word
cyffea  might  be  conjectured  to  have  had  the  meaning  of  'long.'  "Wo
should  then  interpret  Llaw-gyffes  to  mean  Lnngl-uinnns,  as  in  the  caso
of  Llew's  Goidelic  counterpart,  Lug  Ldm-fada.  It  is  scarcely  necessary
to  add  that  Itew,  'lion,'  is  entirely  out  of  place  here,  as  the  older  form
of  the  name  was  Lieu,  the  etymological  equivalent  of  Lug  and  the


238  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

(tlawgyffes)  the  lion  (new)  hit  the  wren.  Gwydion
quickly  declared  himself  pleased  with  her  utterance,  and
said  that  the  boy's  name  should  thenceforth  be  Llew
Llawgyffes.  Of  course  Arianrhod's  dainty  foot  was  left
unmeasured,  while  the  ship  and  its  belongings  returned
into  their  former  elements.  Arianrhod  was  wroth  beyond
measure,  and  laid  the  boy  under  another  destiny,  namely,
that  he  was  never  to  wear  arms  till  she  put  them  on  him
with  her  own  hands.  His  father  declared  that  it  would
not  avail  her ;  so  when  he  found  young  Llew  begin-
ning to  become  an  idler  for  want  of  arms,  he  took  him
out  some  distance ;  and  then  they  came  back  on  horse-
back in  the  guise  of  bards  from  South  Wales.  They
announced  themselves  at  Arianrhod's  gate,  and  were
admitted  to  receive  the  most  hearty  welcome  and  good
cheer.  In  the  evening,  when  eating  was  over,  Arianrhod
conversed  with  Gwydion  respecting  story  and  history :
the  Mabinogi  adds,  '  And  he,  Gwydion,  was  a  good  his-
torian.' When  it  was  time,  they  went  to  sleep ;  but
Gwydion  got  up  very  early  in  the  morning  and  betook
him  to  his  magic  arts.  By  daybreak  the  whole  country-
side was  in  commotion ;  and  it  was  not  long  ere  Arian-
rhod and  her  handmaid  knocked  at  Gwydion's  door,
which  was  opened  by  the  younger  bard :  she  had  come
to  tell  them  in  what  a  plight  they  were,  as  the  sea  could
not  be  seen  for  ships,  and  as  invaders  were  landing  in
all  directions.  Gwydion  told  her  to  have  the  gates  of
the  castle  secured,  and  to  bring  arms  for  him  and  his
fellow-bard.      That  was  done  at  once;   and  while  the


Gaulish  Lugtis,  Lugoves :  it  probably  meant  light,  and  referred  to  the
sun-god.


Ill      THE    CULTURE    IIEU0.  2-°>9

handmaid  helped  Gwydionto  put  on  his  arms,  Arianrhod
herself  put  arms  on  the  younger  man.  When  she  had
done,  Gwydion  asked  if  his  friend  had  been  completely
equipped;  she  answered  that  he  had,  whereupon  she
was  told  that  there  would  be  no  further  need  of  the
arms,  since  the  hostile  fleet  and  forces  had  disappeared.
Her  anger  then  was  greater  than  the  other  time ;  and  she
laid  the  boy  under  another  destiny,  to  the  effect  that  he
should  have  no  wife  of  the  race  then  inhabiting  the  earth.
Gwydion  went  away  somewhat  disconcerted  at  this,  and
journeyed  to  his  uncle,  the  master  magician  Math,  com-
plaining bitterly  of  Arianrhod.  They  resolved  to  fashion
a  woman  out  of  flowers  to  be  Llew's  wife :  they  called
her  Blodeued,1  a  name  which  meant  flowers  in  a  collec-
tive sense.  She  was  the  fairest  of  the  women  of  her
time ;  nor  was  she  less  faithless  than  the  most  notorious
of  those  utilized  by  poets  to  point  a  moral  or  adorn  an
epic.  She  fell  in  love  with  another  prince,  who  advised
her  to  ascertain  from  Llew  in  what  way  he  could  be
killed.  She  found  out  at  length  that  it  could  only  be
done  if  a  bath  were  made  for  him  beneath  a  thatched  roof
in  the  open  air,  and  if  he  stood  with  one  foot  on  the  side
of  the  bath  and  the  other  on  the  back  of  a  he-goat :  if
he  were  wounded  in  that  position,  it  would  be  his  death.

1  Another  account  of  her  origin  is  given  by  the  poet  D.  ab  Gwilym,
who  makes  her  daughter  of  March  ah  Meirchion ;  see  poem  clxxxiii.
p.  365  of  the  (London)  edition  of  1789.  She  is  more  commonly  called
Blodeuwcd,  which  may  he  explained  as  Antho-eides  or  Flower-like  :
this,  as  the  more  generally  intelligible,  is  probably  the  later  of  the  two.
The  name  translated  is  that  of  Filur,  Caawallawn's  Ionian  (p.  153);
but  whether  Fflur,  directly  represents  fids,  fldris,  '  flower,  blossom,'  or
Fl&ra,  the  name  of  an  Italian  goddess  of  no  better  morals  than  Blodeued,
is  not  easy  to  decide,  aaffldr  occurs  in  the  sense  of  Uoom.


240  HI.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

By  simulating  innocent  curiosity  and  concern  for  his
safety,  she  succeeded  in  persuading  him  to  go  to  the
bath  and  place  himself  in  the  perilous  position,  when
her  paramour,  lying  in  wait,  cast  a  spear  at  him,  the
head  of  which  remained  in  his  body,  whereupon  Llew
uttered  an  unearthly  cry  and  flew  off  in  the  form  of  an
eagle.  When  Gwydion  heard  of  it,  his  grief  was  incon-
solable, and  he  wandered  all  over  the  country  for  many
a  weary  day  in  search  of  his  son.  At  length  he  came
to  a  place  near  the  Lakes  of  Nanttte,  where  he  saw  in
the  branches  of  an  oak  a  wretched  eagle,  whose  flesh
kept  falling  from  him  to  the  ground.  He  guessed  that
it  was  Llew,  and  sang  an  englyn  to  him,  whereupon  the
eagle  descended  to  a  lower  branch:  he  sang  a  second
englyn,  and  a  third,  with  the  result  that  the  bird  alighted
at  last  on  his  lap.  He  touched  Llew  with  his  wand,  when
he  assumed  his  former  shape,  excepting  that  there  was
nothing  of  him  left  but  skin  and  bones.  When  Llew
recovered,  Gwydion  and  he  proceeded  to  avenge  his
wrongs  :  his  murderer  had  to  place  himself  in  the  position
in  which  Llew  was  when  he  was  killed ;  and  so  Goronwy
Pevr,  for  that  was  the  name  of  Blodeued's  paramour,
died  by  Llew's  unerring  spear,  while  she  herself  was
subjected  to  a  terrible  punishment  by  Gwydion,  who
overtook  her  as  she  was  making  for  the  recesses  of  a
dark  lake.  It  is  known,  however,  that  there  once
existed  another  and  older  version  of  the  story,  which
placed  the  scene  in  the  skies,  and  connected  the  stars  in
the  Milky  Way  with  Gwydion's  hurried  pursuit  of  the
erring  wife.1     The  more  common  account,  given  in  the


1  See  Lewis  Morris'  Celtic  Remains,  p.  231,  s.  v.  Clicydion.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  241

Mabinogi,  explains  that  the  punishment  which  he  in-
flicted on  her  was  to  strike  her  with  his  wand  into  an
owl,  whence  it  is,  we  are  told,  that  all  other  birds  hate
the  owl  and  permit  her  to  come  out  only  at  night.
Popular  superstition,  it  may  be  added  on  the  other  hand,
gives  expression  to  the  feeling  of  Blodeucd  in  her  changed
condition  :  she  takes  delight  in  spiting  the  fair  sex  of
which  she  was  once  the  fairest,  by  beginning  early  in
the  evening  to  proclaim  from  the  churchyard  yew  to  the
villagers  of  Glamorgan  the  tripping  in  their  midst  of
some  unwary  maid.1  With  the  fate  of  Blodeued,  doomed
by  the  touch  of  Gwydion's  wand  to  sleep  her  days
away  as  an  owl,  may  be  compared  the  Norse  account  of
Sigrdrifa,  sometimes  identified  with  Brynhild,  punished
by  Woden  for  bringing  about  the  death  of  a  hero  favour-
ably regarded  by  him  :  Woden,  we  are  told,  touched  the
helmed  maid  with  his  wand  of  sleep  and  she  forthwith
fell  into  a  slumber,  the  pale  spells  of  which  she  had  no
power  of  her  own  to  cast  off.2

The  Culture  Hero  acquiring  certain  Animals  for

Man.
The  Mabinogi   of   Math  gives  another  curious   tale
about  Gwydion:    the  south-western  portion  of  Wales,

1  For  this  I  am  indebted  to  a  prize  essay  on  thr  F<>1k-lore  of
Glamorgan  at  the  Aberdare  Eistedvod  in  1885  :  Mr.  Thomas  Evans,
the  author,  writes  as  follows  :  "  When  an  owl  was  heard  hooting  early
in  the  night  from  the  yew-tree  in  our  village  churchyards,  it  was  looke  I
upon  as  a  sure  sign  that  some  unmarried  girl  of  the  village  had  forsaken
the  path  of  chastity.  There  are  even  now  in  some  places  persons  who
maintain  the  trustworthiness  of  this  sign  (p.  166  of  the  MS.,  which,  I
believe,  has  nol  yet  been  published).

2  Oorptu  Poet.  Bar.  L  1">8.

R


242  HI.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

including  the  counties  of  Pembroke  and  parts  of  those
of  Cardigan  and  Carmarthen,  used  to  be  called  Dyved,
from  its  ancient  inhabitants  the  Demetse.  Now  it  had
come  to  Gwydion's  knowledge  that  the  king  of  Dyved,
who  was  called  Pryderi,  son  of  Pwyll  Head  of  Hades,
had  been  presented  from  Hades  with  a  species  of  ani-
mals never  before  met  with  in  this  country,  namely,
hobeu,  that  is  to  say,  swine;  and  Gwydion  resolved  to
bring  some  of  them  into  Gwynect  or  his  own  Yenedotian
country,  in  North  Wales.  He  set  out,  accordingly,  to
ask  for  some  of  the  swine;  but  he  did  not  expect  his
errand  to  be  an  easy  one.  He  had,  however,  full  confi-
dence in  his  own  powers ;  for  when  Math  hinted  that  he
might  be  refused  the  swine,  his  answer  was,  '  I  am  not
a  bad  hand  at  a  bargain :  I  shall  not  come  without  the
swine.'  So  he  and  eleven  followers,  all  disguised  as
bards  from  North  Wales,  presented  themselves  in  due
time  at  the  court  of  Pryderi,  on  the  banks  of  the  river
Teivi.  They  met  with  an  excellent  reception;  and  on
the  evening  of  the  first  day,  Pryderi  suggested  that
one  of  the  young  men  in  Gwydion's  suite  should  tell  a
tale  or  relate  a  history — I  use  both  words,  because  the
Mabinogi,  touched  by  no  nice  discrimination  born  of
the  bolder  wisdom  of  a  later  age,  makes  no  distinction
between  story  and  history,  between  story-tellers  and
historians.1  Gwydion  replied  in  the  following  words:
'It  is  a  custom  of  ours  that  the  chief  professional  of
the  company  should  recite  the  first  night  we  come  to  a

1  This  will,  however,  scarcely  be  treated  as  irrefragable  evidence  of
antiquity  by  any  one  who  has  thought  of  the  number  of  the  stories
which  historians  still  allow  to  count  as  history.  More  than  one  instance
has  been  noticed  in  these  lectures.


III.     THE    CULTURE    11KU0.  243

great  man's  house:  I  will  tell  a  story  willingly.'  The
Mabinogi  thereupon  remarks  as  follows  :  'Now  Gwydion
\\as  the  best  story-teller  in  the  world  ;  and  he  entertained
the  court  that  night  with  amusing  entertainments  and
history,  so  that  he  was  admired  of  everybody  in  the  court ,
and  so  that  Pryderi  was  delighted  to  converse  with  him.'
By  and  by,  when  Gwydion  had  charmed  the  king  with
his  eloquence,  he  said  he  wondered  whether  another
would  be  likely  to  transact  his  business  with  him  better
than  he  should  himself,  to  which  the  king  replied,  that  it
was  not  at  all  probable,  adding  words  to  the  effect,  that
his  was  an  excellent  tongue.  Pryderi,  on  being  told
Gwydion's  errand,  said  that  he  was  bound  by  an  engage-
ment with  his  people  to  part  with  none  of  the  swine
until  they  had  bred  double  their  number  in  his  kingdom.
Gwydion  asked  him  not  to  give  him  a  refusal  that  eve-
ning ;  and  retired  unsuccessful  but  not  disheartened.  By
the  morning,  Gwydion  produced  by  magic  twelve  steeds,
fitted  out  with  saddles  and  bridles  mounted  with  gold
wherever  iron  might  have  been  expected,  and  twelve
jet  black  white-breasted  greyhounds  with  collars  and
leashes  such  as  no  one  could  tell,  that  they  were  not
likewise  made  of  gold.  These  Gwydion  offered  to  Pryderi
in  exchange  for  some  of  his  swine,  urging  that  he  would
be  thereby  freed  from  his  engagement  to  his  country
neither  to  sell  nor  to  give  the  swine  away  for  nothing.
Pryderi  and  his  nobles  were  tempted  by  the  splendour
of  the  gift,  and  Gwydion  set  off  with  the  swim1  as  hur-
riedly as  he  could,  for  the  charm  would  only  last  twenty-
four  hours,  when  the  horses  and  the  hounds  would  again
become  the  fungus  out  of  which  they  had  been  made.
Gwydion  and  his  men  barely  succeeded  in  reaching  the

r2


244  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

strongholds  of  Arvon  ere  Pryderi  and  his  army  arrived
in  pursuit  of  them;  but  the  war  that  ensued  proved
most  disastrous  to  the  Demetians,  and  those  of  them
who  regained  their  country  returned  without  their  arms
and  without  their  king,  who  was  slain  by  Gwydion  in
single  combat  at  the  ford  called  the  Velenryd,  between
Portmadoc  and  Maen  Twrog :  in  fact,  Maen  Twrog1  is
mentioned  as  the  spot  where  he  was  buried.

Now  Gwydion' s  obtaining  some  of  the  swine  of  the
Head  of  Hades  is  alluded  to  in  the  Book  of  Taliessin,2  a
manuscript  of  the  thirteenth  century,  in  a  manner  imply-
ing that  it  was  considered  a  great  achievement  on  his
part ;  and  the  story  must  have  formed  part  of  a  tradition
pretending  to  trace  some  or  all  of  the  domestic  animals
to  Hades,  whence  they  were  brought  by  fraud  or  force
by  the  benefactor  of  the  human  race.  But  the  story  of
the  swine  does  not  stand  alone :  in  the  great  collection
of  Welsh  manuscripts  published  by  Owen  Jones  (Myvyr)
and  his  friends,  under  the  title  of  the  Myvyrian  Archaio-
logij  of  Wales,  on  the  first  day  of  this  century,  a  few
verses  occur,  i.  167,  which  are  attributed  to  Gwydion,
and  they  are  prefaced  in  words  to  the  following  effect :
"  These  are  the  englyns  sung  on  the  occasion  of  the  battle
of  Gocteu,  which  others  call  the  battle  of  Achren.  It
was  fought  on  account  of  a  white  roebuck  and  a  puppy,
which  were  of  Hades  —  Amathaon  son  of  Don  had
caught  them.  Therefore  Amathaon  son  of  Don  fought
with  Arawn  king  of  Hades,  and  there  was  in  the
engagement  [on  the  side  of  Hades]  a  man  who  could  not

1  11  B.  Mab.  p.  64,  where  the  MS.  has  Tyuawc  instead  of  Tyryawc,
so  printed  in  Guest's  Mab.  iij.  19G.

2  Skene,  ij.  158.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  245

be  vanquished  unless  his  name  could  be  discovered;  while
there  was  a  woman  on  the  other  side,  called  Achrcn,
whose  name  was  to  be  found  out  before  her  side  could
be  vanquished.  Gwydion  son  of  Don  guessed  the  man's
name  and  sang  the  two  following  englyns."  They  arc
the  verses  alluded  to,  and  they  embody  Gwydion's  guess
as  to  the  man's  name,  which  he  discovered  to  be  Bran ;
and  as  Bran,  which  means  '  a  crow,'  is  one  of  the  appel-
lations of  the  terrene  god,  he  may  be  supposed  to  have
been  a  principal  in  the  conflict,  that  is  to  say,  he  was
probably  the  king  of  Hades  himself.  So  the  woman
called  Achren  is  cither  to  be  altogether  discarded,  or  else
to  be  ranged,  as  appears  more  probable,  on  Bran's  side ;
for  Gwydion's  first  verse,  in  spite  of  the  obscurity  of  its
language,  seems  to  give  the  woman's  name  as  Olgen,
which,  if  correct,  proves  that  she  was  among  his  adver-
saries, and  that  the  author  of  the  note  in  the  My  vyrian
misunderstood  the  text,  a  thing  by  no  means  to  be  won-
dered at.1  The  struggle  is  called  in  the  Triads2  one  of
the  Three  Frivolous  Battles,  as  it  is  said  to  have  been
fought  on  account  of  a  bitch,  a  roe  and  a  lapwing,  at  the
expense  of  71,000  lives.  Dogs  and  deer  are  anim;;]s
useful  to  man  in  different  degrees  and  different  ways,

1  The  anonymous  note  in  tho  My  vyrian  is  couched  in  language  which
is  inaccurate,  not  to  say  illiterate;  hut  it  is  doubtless  to  be  regarded
as  the  echo  of  an  ancient  myth,  though  it  must  be  accepted  with  cau-
tion :  thus  the  words  relating  to  the  woman  called  Achren  cannot  pass
unchallenged,  They  appear  to  come  as  we  have  them  from  somebody
who  thought  the  symmetry  of  the  quarrel  required  them  ;  but  nothing
could  be  more  mistaken  ;  for  it  was  a  peculiarity  of  the  terrene  beings,
from  their  king  down  to  the  tiniest  of  Welsh  fairies,  to  conceal  their
names.

-  i.  47  -  iij.  50.


246  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

but  the  introduction  of  the  lapwing  is  remarkable.  But
to  call  the  battle  a  frivolous  one  shows,  as  regarded
from  my  point  of  view,  that  the  original  account  of  it
had  been  forgotten ;  and  the  lapwing  may  have  been
thrown  in  by  way  of  emphasizing  the  frivolity  alluded
to.  Possibly  one  should  take  a  different  view,  and
regard  the  lapwing,  called  in  Welsh  cornicf/ll,  from
corn  ;a  horn,'  as  sacred  to,  or  in  some  way  associated
with,  the  terrene  god,  whom  the  Gauls  represented  with
the  antlers  of  a  stag ;  and  the  same  may  have  been  the
cause,  partly  or  wholly,  of  introducing  here  an  animal  of
the  deer  kind.  But  that  does  not  touch  the  statement
in  the  Mabinogi  of  Math,  that  before  Pryderi  had  swine
sent  him  from  Hades,  none  had  ever  been  heard  of  here
before.

It  is  worth  while  noticing  that  the  pig  is  believed  to
have  been  one  of  the  first  animals  to  be  domesticated,
the  first  of  all  being  probably  the  dog ;  and  the  story  of
the  latter  is  to  be  found  at  length  in  Irish  literature,
with  the  important  substitution  of  Albion  for  Hades  and
lapdog  for  dog  :  thus  in  Cormac's  Glossary1  we  read  that
in  the  time  of  Cairbre  Muse  "no  lapdog  had  come  into
the  land  of  Erinn,  and  the  Britons  commanded  that  no
lapdog  should  be  given  to  the  Gael  on  solicitation  or
by  free  will,  for  gratitude  or  friendship.  Now  at  this
time  the  law  among  the  Britons  was,  Every  criminal  for
his  crime  such  as  breaks  the  law.  There  was  a  beautiful  lap-
dog  in  the  possession  of  a  friend  of  Cairbre  Muse  in
Britain,  and  Cairbre  got  it  from  him  [thus].  Once  as
Cairbre  (went)  to  his  house,  he  was  made  welcome  to

1  Stokes-O'Donovan,  pp.  11 1-12,  s.v.  Mug-eime.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  247

everything  save  the  Lapdog.  Cairbre  Muse  had  a  won-
derful skene,  around  the  haft  whereof  was  adornment  of
silver  and  gold.  It  was  a  precious  jewel.  Cairbre  put
much  grease  about  it  and  rubbed  fat  meat  to  its  haft,
and  afterwards  left  it  before  the  lapdog.  The  lapdog
began  and  continued  to  gnaw  the  haft  till  morning,  and
hurt  the  knife,  so  that  it  was  not  beautiful.  On  the
morrow  Cairbre  made  great  complaint  of  this,  and  was
sorry  for  it,  and  demanded  justice  for  it  of  his  friend.
'  That  is  fair,  indeed :  I  will  pay  for  the  trespass,'  said
he.  'I  will  not  take  aught,'  says  Cairbre,  'save  what
is  in  the  law  of  Britain,  namely,  every  animal  for  his
crime!  The  lapdog  was  therefore  given  to  Cairbre,  and
the  name,  i.e.  Mug-etme  [slave  of  a  haft]  clung  to  it,
from  mug  'a  slave1  [and  vim  'a  haft'],  because  it  was
given  on  account  of  the  skene.  The  lapdog  (being  a
bitch)  was  then  with  young.  Ailill  Flann  the  Little
was  then  king  over  Munster,  and  Cormac,  grandson  of
Conn,  at  Tara ;  and  the  three  took  to  wrangling,  and  to
demand  and  contend  for  the  lapdog;  and  the  way  in
which  the  matter  was  settled  between  the  three  of  them
was  this,  that  the  dog  should  abide  for  a  certain  time  in
the  house  of  each.  The  dog  afterwards  littered,  and
each  of  them  took  a  pup  of  her  litter,  and  in  this  wise
descends  every  lapdog  in  Ireland  still."  The  Irish  sub-
stitution, for  such  I  take  it  to  be,  of  lapdog  for  dog,  and
Britain  for  the  Sid  or  Fairy-land,  in  this  tale,  go  both
t<>  show  that  the  original  signification  of  the  story  had
broil  forgotten;  but  other  traces  of  the  Goidel's  indebted-
ness  to  the  terrene  powers  are  to  be  found  in  the  story
of  Eehaid  Airem,  or  Eochy  the  Ploughman,  which  cannot,
however,  be  gone  into  at  thi>  point.


248  in.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

To  return  to  the  battle  of  Gocleu ;  it  is  one  frequently
mentioned  in  Welsh  poetry,  especially  in  the  Book  of
Taliessin.  The  poet  pretends  to  have  been  present  at
all  the  great  events  which  have  taken  place  from  the
beginning  of  the  world,  and  he  says  in  Poem  xiv.1  that
he  was  with  Llew  and  Gwydion  in  the  battle  in  question ;
but  in  another  poem,  usually  known  by  the  title  of  the
Harryings  of  Hades,2  the  poet  speaks  of  himself  accom-
panying Arthur  on  board  his  ship  Prydwen  to  a  variety
of  places — more  correctly  speaking,  perhaps,  to  one  aud
the  same  mythical  region  spoken  of  under  a  variety  of
names.  Here  we  have  the  exploits  of  Gwydion  and
Arthur  overlapping :  thus  one  of  the  expeditions  was  to
Caer  Wydyr,  or  Glass  Fortress,  and  to  a  Caer  Ochren,  or
Castle  of  Ochren,  in  which  we  have  a  name  to  be  identi-
fied probably  with  the  Achren  already  mentioned  (p.  245):
in  fact,  the  allusion  seems  to  be  to  the  same  battle  in
which  Gwydion  is  said  to  have  guessed  Bran's  name.
The  poem  opens  with  the  usual  tribute  to  Christianity,
which  not  unfrequently  begins  and  ends  the  Welsh  poems
most  replete  with  heathen  lore,  and  then  it  plunges  into
what  proves  to  be  a  reference  to  Gwydion  and  Arthur.
The  first  stanza  is  to  the  following  effect :

'  The  Lord,  I  adore  him,  princely  sovereign,
"Whose  sway  is  over  earth's  strand  extended.
Stout  was  the  prison  of  Gweir  in  Caer  Sidi,
Through  the  messenger  of  Pwyll  and  Pryderi :
Before  him  no  one  entered  thereinto.
The  heavy  dark  chain  held  the  faithful  youth,
And  while  Hell  was  spoiled,  he  grievously  sang,
And  thenceforth  till  doom  he  remains  a  bard.

1  Skene,  i.  154.

2  Poem  xxx.:  see  Skene,  ij.  181.


III.     THE    CULTURE    IIERO.  249

Thrice  Prydwen'a  freight  went  wo  to  Cacr  Sidi,
Thence  but  seven  did  wo  regain  our  country.'

The  sumo  couplet,  slightly  modified  to  suit  the  rhyme,
closes  the  remaining  six  stanzas  of  the  poem,  with  the
exception  of  the  last,  which  ends  with  a  short  prayer;
and  we  know  from  another  poem1  in  the  same  manuscript
that  Caer  Sidi  was  in  a  mythical  country  beneath  the
waves  of  the  sea.  Pryderi  and  his  father  Pwyll  Head  of
Hades  have  already  been  mentioned,  though  it  is  not
evident  who  was  meant  by  their  apostle  or  messenger;
but  it  may  be  guessed  that  it  was  the  porter  of  Hades.
His  masters,  however,  could  not  be  expected  to  have
treated  Gweir  with  tenderness  in  case  he  should  prove
to  have  been  Gwydion ;  and  here  it  may  be  asked  why
Gweir  should  be  supposed  to  have  been  Gwydion.
Now  Gweir  son  of  Gweiryoed  occurs  in  one  of  the
Triads,  where  he  is  called  one  of  the  Three  Paramount
Prisoners  of  the  Isle  of  Britain,  the  other  two  being
Llud2  and  Mabon  (p.  28),  both  gods  of  the  pagan  Celts ;
and  we  seem  to  be  warranted  in  assuming  Gweir  to  have
been  of  similar  rank.  But  it  is  right  to  mention,  as  an
instance  of  Arthur's  intrusion,  that,  in  spite  of  the  triadic
arrangement,  his  name  is  here  added  as  that  of  a  fourth
and  greater  prisoner  than  the  other  three.  The  triad
referred  to  is  found  in  one  of  the  collections  in  the  Red
Book  of  Hergest,  a  Jesus  College  manuscript  of  the
thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries ;  but  it  occurs  in  a
brief  and  presumably  old  form  in  an  earlier  group  in


1   No.  xiv. :  see  Skene,  ij.  155,  i.  276.

-  ij.  49  :  see  also  R.  13.  Mab.  p.  131  j  the  other  versions  have  Lhjr,
Triads,  i.  50,  iij.  01.


250  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

the  same  manuscript,  where,1  instead  of  Gtveir  son  of
Giveiryoed,  we  read  Geir  son  of  Geiryoed2  and  the  pro-
bable identity  of  Geir  with  Gwydion  will  appear  when
the  etymology  of  the  latter  name  comes  to  be  discussed
later.

Poetry  associated  in  its  Origin  with  the  Culture

Hero.

One  of  the  most  remarkable  things  in  the  Taliessin
poem  just  cited,  is  the  statement  that,  in  consequence
of  what  he  went  through  in  his  captivity,  Geir  should
for  ever  continue  a  bard  or  poet ;  but  traces  of  a  some-
what similar  notion  meet  one  in  the  once  prevalent
belief,  that  if  a  man  spent  a  night  on  the  Merioneth
mountain,  where  the  giant  Idrys  was  thought  to  have

1   Triads,  ij.  7;  R.  B.  Mob.  p.  300.

8  The  difference  is  of  importance,  and  the  reading  Geir  is  supported
by  the  other  versions  (Triads,  i.  50,  iij.  61)  in  which  the  name  is  men-
tioned. The  genuineness  of  the  latter  has  in  its  favour  the  fact  that
they  say  nothing  about  Arthur,  while  they  describe  the  personage
here  in  question  as  Geir  son  of  Geiryon,  lord  of  Geirionyd,  a  locality
whose  name  survives  in  connection  with  the  Lake  of  Geirionyd,
whose  waters  fall  from  Gwydion's  country  into  the  Conwy  a  little
below  Llanrwst.  Thus  the  earlier  Triad  in  the  Red  Book  and  all  the
other  published  versions  of  the  Triads  read  Geir,  while  the  later  Triad
in  the  Red  Book  and  the  verse  in  the  Taliessin  poem,  which  may  be
regarded  as  of  about  the  same  age,  probably,  as  the  portion  of  the  Red
Book  in  which  the  Triads  occur,  give  us  Gweir :  which  then  is  to  be
regarded  as  having  the  prior  claim  1  The  probability  is  decidedly  in
favour  of  Geir,  which,  as  meaning  '  word,'  and  otherwise  unknown  as
a  proper  name,  may  readily  be  supposed  to  have  been  replaced  by  the
better  known  personal  name  Gweir;  I  should,  however,  not  discard
the  latter,  but  rather  regard  both  Geir  and  Gweir  as  referring  to  the
same.  Geiryoed  was  pronounced,  as  in  modern  Welsh,  Geirioed ;
similarly  the  Gioeiryoed  of  the  Triads  was  Gweirioed.  Add  to  this
that  the  old  forms  Gweir  and  Geir  become  later  Givair  and  Gair.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  251

his  coder  or  scat,  one  would  descend  in  the  morning  a
bind  or  a  madman ;  while  on  Snowdon  the  place  to  pass
the  night  with  a  view  to  the  same  result  was  the  hollow
underneath  the  huge  block  called  the  Black  Stone  of
the  Ardu,  near  the  Black  Tarn  of  the  Ardu.  It  is  some-
times assumed  that  the  exposure  chiefly  constituted  the
ordeal,  but  that  view  is  untenable  in  the  case  of  the
latter  sheltered  position;  while  the  dismal  tarn  of  the
Arclu  was  formerly  believed  to  be  haunted  by  a  race  of
fairies,1  and  the  word  Arclu,'2  'black,'  found  elsewhere
applied  to  the  terrene  god,  suggests  that  the  hardship
consisted  in  passing  a  night  in  the  society  of  him  and
his  fairies.  These  last,  regarded  from  the  popular  point
of  view,  may  be  said  to  delight  chiefly  in  music  and
dancing,  while  instances  are  also  mentioned  of  their
expressing  themselves  in  verse  and  of  their  joining  to
sing  stanzas  of  poetry  in  a  sort  of  chorus.3  But  in  Irish
literature,  poetry  is  even  more  explicitly  associated  with
them,  as,  for  example,  in  a  curious  story  published  by
O' Curry,4  to  the  following  effect:  "Finn  observed  a
f  ivourite  warrior  of  his  company,  named  Gael  O'Neamh-
ain,  coming  towards  him,  and  when  he  had  come  to
Finn's  presence,  he  asked  him  where  he  had  come  from.
Cael  answered  that  he  had  come  from  Brugh  in  the  north
(that  is  the  fairy  mansion  of  Brugh,  on  the  Boyne).


1  Rhys  in  the  Cymmrodor,  iv.  180.

"  Book  of  Taliemn,  poem  xlviij.  (Skene,  ij.  '.203).
Rhys  in  the  Cymmrodor,  v.  127.

4  MS.  Mat.  pp.  308-9  :  the  poem  referred  to  is  translated  at  pp.
309-11,  and  the  Irish  text  and  the  rest  of  the  Btory,  from  the  Book  of
Lismore,  foL  206.  b.  ",  is  given  at  pp.  594-7.


252  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

"What  was  your  business  there?  said  Finn.  To  speak
to  my  nurse,  Muirn,  the  daughter  of  Derg,  said  Cael.
About  what  ?  said  Finn.  Concerning  Crede,  the  daughter
of  Cairbr£,  king  of  Kerry  \_Ciaraighe  Ltiachrci],  said
Cael.  Do  you  know,  said  Finn,  that  she  is  the  greatest
deceiver  [flirt,  coquette]  among  all  the  women  of  Erinn  ;
that  there  is  scarcely  a  precious  gem  in  all  Erinn  that
she  has  not  obtained  as  a  token  of  love ;  and  that  she
has  not  yet  accepted  the  hand  of  any  of  her  admirers  ?
I  know  it,  said  Cael ;  but  do  you  know  the  conditions
on  which  she  would  accept  a  husband  ?  I  do,  said  Finn :
whoever  is  so  gifted  in  the  art  of  poetry  as  to  write  a
poem  descriptive  of  her  mansion  and  its  rich  furniture,
will  receive  her  hand.  Good,  said  Cael;  I  have  with
the  aid  of  my  nurse  composed  such  a  poem ;  and  if  you
will  accompany  me,  I  will  now  repair  to  her  court  and
present  it  to  her."  They  went  there,  and  the  sequel
relates  that  Crede  was  so  charmed  with  Cael's  genius
that  she  gave  him  her  hand  and  left  off  her  life  of
flirtation.

0' Curry  also  gives  the  substance  of  a  story  which
may  be  regarded  as  the  Irish  parallel  to  Gweir's  cap-
tivity, of  which  Welsh  literature  tells  us  so  little :  it
even  relates  what  happened  to  the  captive  ;  or,  to  be  more
accurate,  the  meaning  of  the  original  incident  having
been  clean  forgotten,  no  captive  or  prisoner  figures  in
0' Curry's  version,  but  only  a  poet  who  failed  to  meet
with  due  hospitality.  It  will  be  remembered  that  ISTuada
of  the  Silver  Hand  had  lost  his  hand  and  arm  in  a  con-
flict with  the  mythic  race  of  the  Fir  Bolg  or  the  Bag-
men, and  that  on  account  of  that  blemish  he  had  to  give
up  his  throne,  when  it  was  taken  possession  of  by  Bres


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  253

(pp.  120,  122).  Now  this  Bros1  belonged  by  race  to
the  terrene  or  submarine  folk  called  the  Fomori,  more  or
less  closely  associated  with  the  Fir  Bolg,  though  Irish
legend  usually  tries  to  distinguish  them.  "We  are  told
that  while  Bros  was  in  power,  "  a  certain  poet  and  satirist
named  Cairbre,  the  son  of  the  poetess  Etan,  visited  the
king's  court ;  but  in  place  of  being  received  with  the
accustomed  respect,  the  poet  was  sent,  it  appears,  to  a
small  dark  chamber,  without  fire,  furniture,  or  bed,
where  he  was  served  with  three  small  cakes  of  dry  bread
only,  on  a  very  small  and  mean  table.  This  treatment,"
0' Curry  goes  on  to  say,  "  was  in  gross  violation  of  public
law,  and  could  not  fail  to  excite  the  strongest  feeling.
The  poet  accordingly  arose  on  the  next  morning,  full  of
discontent  and  bitterness,  and  left  the  court  not  only
without  the  usual  professional  compliments,  but  even
pronouncing  a  bitter  and  withering  satire  on  his  host.
This  was  the  first  satire  ever,  it  is  said,  written  in  Erinn ;
and  although  such  an  insult  to  a  poet,  and  the  public
expression  of  his  indignation  in  consequence,  would  fall
very  far  short  of  penetrating  the  quick  feelings  of  the
nobility  or  royalty  of  these  times  (so  different  arc  the
customs  of  ancient  and  modern  honour),2  still  it  was  suffi-
cient in  those  early  days  to  excite  the  sympathy  of  the
whole  body  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  chiefs  and  people."3
The  result  was  that  Bros  had  to  escape  and  seek  the  aid
of  his  kinsmen  the  Fomori :  the  Tuatha  De  Danaan  came
and  foughl  a  great  battle  with  them,  in  which  the  Fomori

1  The  lit  it  Bpelling  is  Breae,  and  some  have  attempted  to  base  a
distinction  of  persona  on  that  unstable  foundation.

2  O'Cuiry'a  Lectures  were  published  in  1860.

3  M8.  Mat.  pp.  248-?.


254  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

were  defeated  and  their  great  captains  killed.  So  goes
the  story  as  related  by  O'Curry,  and  no  one  knew  Irish
literature  better  than  he,  but  one  can  no  longer  follow
him  in  treating  this  as  history.  Without  the  aid,  how-
ever, of  the  meagre  allusions  in  Welsh  poetry  and  prose,
we  should  have  been  groping  about  in  vain  for  the  mean-
ing of  such  a  myth.  Gwydion,  as  Gweir,  let  us  say,
goes  to  Caer  Sidi  beneath  the  waves  of  the  sea,  and
Cairbre  visits  the  court  of  the  Fomorian  king  Bres,  of
submarine  origin.  The  Welsh  hero  becomes  a  bard —
originally  the  story  made  him  probably  the  first  bard  of
Welsh  legend — as  the  result  of  the  treatment  dealt  out  to
him  there;  while  Cairbre  gives  utterance  to  the  first
satire  composed  in  Erinn,  which  comes  to  the  same
thing,  as  the  first  effort  of  the  Celtic  muse  was  pre-
sumably of  the  nature  of  a  magic  spell,  which,  according
to  Irish  belief,  was  irresistible,  and  productive,  among
other  effects,  of  immediate  blotches  on  the  face  of  him
against  whom  it  was  pronounced  :  in  this  instance  it  was
the  means  of  hurriedly  driving  from  his  throne  the
Fomorian,  whose  treatment  of  Cairbre  is  to  be  ascribed
to  jealousy  rather  than  contempt  for  the  poet's  art ;  for
Bres  is  doubtless  to  be  identified  with  the  personage  of
that  name  said  to  be  the  son  of  Brigit  goddess  of  poetry
(p.  75),  and  of  Elathan  king  of  the  Fomori.1  In  both
versions  the  individual  efforts  of  the  man  of  poetry  was
followed  by  the  coming  of  his  friends,  to  harry  Hades,
according  to  the  Welsh  account,  and  to  overthrow  the
Fomori,  according  to  the  Irish  one.  With  Cairbre,
poet  and  satirist,  is  doubtless  to  be  identified  a  Cairbre

1  Bk.  of  Leinstcr,  187  c.


III.     THE   CULTURE    HEEO.  255

known  as  the  possessor  of  a  wonderful  crowd  or  Celtic
banjo,  in  which  there  was  a  so-called  chord  of  science,
which,  tuned  by  Cairbre's  hand,  left  him  in  ignorance
of  no  secret  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  that  day  to  fche
setting  thereof:  his  crowd  told  him  everything.1  One
may  further  venture  to  identify  with  Cairbre,  poet  and
musician,  Cairbre,  the  father  of  the  poetic  lady  Credo,
to  whom  allusion  has  just  been  made.  As  Gwydion  was
king  of  a  part  of  Wales,  so  this  Cairbre  was  king  of
Kerry;  and  above  all  is  he  probably  to  be  identified
with  Cairbre  Muse,  who  figures  in  the  story  of  the  Dog
and  the  Skene,  in  which  we  found  a  parallel  to  Gwydion
cheating  Prydcri  son  of  Pwyll  Head  of  Hades,  in  the
matter  of  his  swine.  That  this  Cairbre  corresponds  to
Gwydion  and  may  even  be  equated  with  him,  will  appear
still  more  probable  when  we  come  to  compare  their
families  with  one  another.  Suffice  it  for  the  present  to
say,  that  many  Minister  houses  traced  their  descent
back  to  Cairbre  Muse,  and  that  many  districts  in  the
south-west  of  Ireland  are  called  after  his  name  or  some
one  of  his  various  surnames2  to  this  day.  Nor,  lastly,
is  the  Cairbre  who  was  mentioned  in  the  story  of
Lomna's  Head  (p.  98)  to  be  overlooked;  for  his  relations
with  the  Luignian  wife  of  Finn  seem  beyond  doubt  to


1  O'Curry's  Manners,  &c.  iij.  250-1.

2  O'Donovan,  Book  of  Bights,  pp.  42,  45,  48,  83  ;  Four  Marti  r*,
A.D.  165,  186.  The  name  Cairbre,  Cairpre,  C.'oirpri  ami  (,'orjui,  lor
it  is  found  spelled  in  these  and  other  ways,  was  not  an  uncommon
one;  but  its  etymology  is  obscure,  uor  is  it  evident  whether  it  was  in
use  before  it  was  given  to  the  counterpart  of  Gwydion.  In  Welsh  it
was  Corbre,  which  occurs  in  the  Black  Book:  sec  .Skene,  ij.  2'J.


256  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

form  part  of  an  older  and  more  complete  account  of  the
culture  hero.

To  return  to  the  Welsh  poem  on  the  harrying  of  Hades,
among  the  things  which  the  spoilers  found  there  was  the
cauldron  of  the  Head  of  Hades ;  and  we  are  told  of  it
that  it  had  a  ridge  of  pearls  round  its  brim,  that  voices
issued  from  it,  that  it  was  kept  boiling  by  the  breath  of
nine  maidens,  and  that  it  was  a  discriminating  vessel,
which  would  not  cook  food  for  a  coward,  a  peculiarity  to
be  compared  with  the  knack  of  refusing  to  cook  during
the  narration  of  an  untrue  story,  which  was  supposed  to
characterize  the  food  in  the  fairy  palace  of  Manannan  mac
Lir.1  The  invaders  left  the  cauldron  in  the  hands  of  one
of  their  number,  for  it  was  in  all  probability  the  chief
object  of  their  incursion  into  the  realm  of  Hades.  All
this  would  have  been  very  puzzling  had  not  Welsh  litera-
ture preserved  other  references  to  the  mysterious  vessel.
The  Mabinogi  of  Branwen  speaks2  of  a  cauldron  which
a  giant  called  Llassar  had  brought  up  out  of  a  lake  in
Ireland  and  given  to  Bran  son  of  Llyr :  one  of  its  pro-
perties was,  that  a  dead  warrior  thrown  into  it  would  be
alive  and  well  by  the  next  morning,  but  unable  to  speak.
This  was  a  use  it  was  put  to  in  the  war  which  Bran
waged  later  in  Ireland,  and  on  account  of  this  property
which  it  was  supposed  to  have,  it  is  occasionally  referred
to  as  Pal?'  Dadeni*  or  the  Cauldron  of  Eegeneration.
Now  the  names  both  of  Bran  and  Llassar  connect  the
cauldron  with  Hades,  and  on  Irish  ground  we  meet  with

1  Ossianic  Soc.  Trans,  iij.  221-9.

2  R.  B.  Mab.  pp.  31-2,  39,  40;  Guest,  iij.  110-1,  123-4.

3  D.  ab  Gwilym,  poem  exxxviij.  (London,  1789,  p.  276).


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO,  257

its  like  as  the  cauldron  of  the  Dagda,  which  was  one  of

the  treasures  of  the  Tuatha  De*  Danaan  :  it  was  called  the
Undry,1  as  it  was  never  empty,  and  it  was  so  discreet
that  each  one  had  out  of  it  what  was  in  proportion  to  his
merit.  No  company  ever  rose  from  it  unsatisfied,  and
the  legend  concerning  it  is  that  the  Tuatha  De"  Danaan
had  brought  it  from  a  mythical  place  called  3furias,2  in
which  we  have  a  reference  doubtless  to  some  locality
beneath  the  sea  (in  Irish  muir\  like  Caer  Sidi  in  Talics-
sin's  poems :  it  was  probably  one  of  the  objects  of  their
seven  years'  sojourn  in  the  country  called  Dobar  and
Iardobarf  or  'Water'  and  'Behind  Water.'

The  Welsh  poem  already  cited  is  not  the  only  one  in
the  Book  of  Taliessin  which  refers  to  the  harrying  of
Iladcs  by  Gwydion :  I  would  now  refer  to  another,  in
which  Gwydion  is  mentioned  by  that  name.  The  poem
is  entitled  Kat  Godeu,  or  the  Battle  of  GocJeu,  which,
interpreted,  appears  to  mean  the  Battle  of  Trees;  and
accordingly  various  trees  and  shrubs  are  described  as
taking  part  in  the  fighting;  and  the  whole  idea  challenges
comparison  with  that  of  the  Battle  of  the  Birds  in  the
popular  tales  of  the  West  Highlands.4  Taliessin  pretends,
after  his  wont,  to  have  been  present  in  the  fray,  and  to


1  Irish  Caire  Ainsic,  '  the  Undry  Cauldron  :'  see  the  Stokes-O'Dono-
van  ed.  of  Cormac,  p.  45 ;  also  O'Donovan's  Battle  of  Magh  Rath
(Dublin,  184-2),  pp.  50-3,  where,  besides  the  Dagda's,  other  cauldrons
are  mentioned  of  similar  virtues.

2  Keating'*  History  of  Ireland  (Dublin,  1880),  p.  117.

3  Ibid.  p.  112;  O'Flaherty's  Ogyjia,  i.  12.

4  Campbell,  i.  25,  et  scq.


258  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

have  taken  no  mean  part  in  it :  he  boasts  to  the  following

effect : 1

"  I  am  not  a  man  not  to  sing  :
I  have  sung  since  I  was  little ;
I  sang  in  the  battle  of  Godeu  of  the  foliage,
In  front  of  Britain's  gwledig.
I  pierced  in  their  midst  the  chargers
Of  the  fleets  of    ...     .
I  pierced  the  beast  of  the  great  gem,
Which  had  a  hundred  heads,
And  a  formidable  batallion
Under  the  root  of  its  tongue.
Another  batallion  there  is
In  the  back  of  its  head.
A  gaping  black  toad
There  is  with  a  hundred  claws.
A  crested  snake  of  many  colours —
A  hundred  souls  by  reason  of  sin
Are  tormented  in  its  flesh.
I  have  been  in  the  fort  of  Nevenhyr
Where  hurried  grass  and  trees  ;
There  men  of  arts  made  music,
There  men  of  battle  made  haste.
A  resurrection  for  the  Brythons
Was  made  by  Gwydion  :
They  had  called  on  Neivon,
On  Christ  from     ....
To  the  end  He  might  rescue  them,
The  Supreme  who  had  made  them.
To  them  the  Lord  responded
Both  in  words  and  in  the  elements  :
'.Fashion  kingly  trees
Into  hosts  under  his  lead,
And  frustrate  Peblic
Of  the  ignoble  fight  hand  to  hand.' "

The  reference  to  a  person  called  Peblic  is  obscnre  to
me;  but  besides  the  expedient  of  converting  a  forest,  with

1  Skene,  ij.  138,  and  i.  277-8.


rn.   the  cultube  hero.  259

its  various  kinds  of  trees,  shrubs  aud  grasses,  into  an
army  by  enchantment,  we  have  a  reference,  probably  in
the  resurrection  effected  for  the  Brythons  by  Gwydion,
to  his  having  secured  the  Head  of  Hades'  Cauldron  of
Eegeneratiou,  and  to  its  use  by  Gwydion  to  resuscitate
his  fallen  friends.  Before  the  poet  makes  the  trees  begin
to  fight,  with  the  alder  foremost  in  the  fray,  he  indulges
in  some  score  of  lines  which  are  too  obscure  for  me  to
offer  you  a  translation :  this  is  the  more  unfortunate  as
he  introduces  a  woman  into  his  narrative,  and  her  inter-
vention, as  I  learn  from  other  sources,  was  probably  of
the  essence  of  the  story.  But  a  more  transparent  refer-
ence to  her  will  be  found  in  the  Irish  poem  which  is
now  to  be  introduced  for  comparison  with  the  Welsh
one.  St.  Patrick,  trying  to  convert  Loegaire  mac  N&ll,
king  of  Ireland,  was  told  by  the  latter  that  he  would
not  believe  unless  he  called  up  Ciichulainn  from  tho
dead  :  this  was  done,  but  the  unwilling  convert  cherished
doubts  as  to  his  identity,  and  said  that  he  must  speak  to
him ;  so  Ciichulainn  was  called  up  again,  and  he  improved
the  opportunity  to  bid  the  king  believe  in  God  and
St.  Patrick ;  but,  said  that  curious  king,  if  it  be  Ciichu-
lainn, let  him  discourse  of  his  great  deeds.  I  should
premise  that  Ciichulainn  was  the  most  celebrated  of  the
heroes  known  to  Irish  story,  but  that  he  does  not  cor-
respond exactly  to  Gwydion,  as  he  combines,  roughly
speaking,  the  role  in  Irish  story  which  should  answer  to
that  both  of  Gwydion  and  of  his  son  Llew  in  Welsh.  But
more  of  this  elsewhere :  for  the  present  let  it  suffice  to
say  that  Ciichulainn  complied  with  the  king's  wish,  and
the  poem  put  into  his  mouth  describes,  among  other
things,  his  expedition  to  tho  stronghold  of  Scath,  iu  tho

s2


260  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

land  of  Scath:  the  term  Scath  means  shadow  or  shade,
and  is  of  the  same  origin  as  the  English  word.  His
story  runs  thus : x

"A  journey  I  made,  0  Loegaire,

"When  I  went  to  the  land  of  Scath  ;
There  was  the  fort  of  Scath  with  its  lock  of  iron —

I  laid  hands  upon  it.
Seven  walls  there  were  around  this  city  ;

Hateful  was  its  stronghold  :
An  iron  palisade  there  was  on  each  wall,

On  which  seven  heads  were  biding ;
Doors  of  iron  there  were  on  every  side ;

No  serious  defences  against  women.
I  struck  them  with  my  foot,

So  that  they  fell  into  fragments.
A  pit  there  was  in  the  fort,

That  belonged  to  the  king,  as  they  say ;
Ten  serpents  burst  forth

Over  its  brim2 — it  was  a  deed  !
Thereupon  I  ran  at  them,

Though  the  throng  was  huge,
And  reduced  them  to  bits

Between  my  two  fists.
There  was  a  house  full  of  toads,

That  were  let  loose  upon  us,
Sharp  and  beaked  beasts

That  clave  to  my  snout.
Ugly  dragon-like  monsters

Were  sent  against  us  ;

1  The  text  occupies  folios  113 — 115  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun,  and  it
lias  been  published,  with  a  translation  and  notes,  by  Mr.  O'Beirne  Crow,
in  the  Journal  of  the  Kilkenny  Arch,  Society  for  1870-1,  pp.  371 — 448.
Important  corrections  will  be  found  in  Stokes'  Remarks  on  the  Celtic
Additions  to  Curtius'  Greek  Etymology,  &c.  (Calcutta,  1875),  pp.  55-7.

2  Somewhat  similar  adventures  are  related  of  Connall  Cernach  in
the  story  called  Tain  Bo  Frdich  :  see  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  252  a,  and
the  whole  story  as  published  with  a  translation  by  O'Beirne  Crow  in
the  R.  Ir.  Academy's  Irish  MS.  Series,  i.  136 — 171.


III.     THE    CULTUEE    UEKO.  -01

Strong  were  their  witcheries,

Though  they     ....
After  this  I  ran  at  them,

When     ....
I  ground  them  in  small  pieces

Between  my  two  palms.
There  was  a  cauldron  in  that  fort :

It  was  the  calf  of  the  three  cows,
Thirty  joints  of  meat  in  its  gullet

Were  not  its  charge.

Much  gold  and  silver  was  there  in  it,

Splendid  was  the  find  :
That  cauldron  was  given  [to  us]

By  the  daughter  of  the  king.
The  three  cows  we  took  them  away,

They  swam  the  sea  :
There  was  of  gold  a  load  for  two  men,

To  each  of  them  on  her  neck.
When  we  went  on  the  ocean

That  was  vast  by  the  north,
The  crew  of  my  coracle  was  drowned

By  the  cruel  tempest.
After  this  I  brought,

Though  it  was  a  sharp  danger,
Nine  men  on  each  of  my  hands

And  thirty  on  my  head ;
Eight  on  my  two  sides

Clung  to  my  body.
It  is  thus  I  swam  the  sea

Until  I  was  in  haven."

This  curious  poem  tells  us  why  so  few  of  those  who
invaded  Hades  returned :  they  were  overwhelmed  by  a
cruel  squall  on  the  vast  sea  in  the  north.  The  previous
Welsh  poem  reduces  the  survivors  to  seven,  but  Cuchu-
lainn  makes  them  sixty-four,  while  the  sundry  attempts
of  Irish  history  to  give  what  appeared  a  more  rational
I  irm  to  the  story  has  reduced  them  to  exactly  thirty —


202  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

the  crew,  as  they  would  say,  of  one  boat  that  escaped.
According  to  Keating,1  who  wrote  his  History  of  Ireland
out  of  materials  such  as  were  accessible  in  that  country
in  his  time,  certain  of  the  Fomori  called  More  and
Conaing2  held  Ireland  under  a  grievous  tribute :  they
had  built  themselves  a  stronghold  called  Tor  Conaing,
1  Conaing's  Tower,'  in  Torinis,  or  Tower  Island,  now
better  known  as  Tory  Island,  off  the  coast  of  Donegal ;
and  that  spot  served  them  as  a  rendezvous  for  their  preda-
tory fleets.  At  length  the  children  of  Nemed,  who  were
then  the  inhabitants  of  Ireland,  mustered  30,000  armed
men  by  sea,  with  as  many  by  land,  and  succeeded  in
demolishing  Conaing's  Tower  and  slaying  its  owner;
but  More  arriving  with  reinforcements,  another  battle
ensued,  in  which  the  combatants,  busied  in  the  fray,
allowed  the  sea  to  overwhelm  them  so  completely  that
on  the  Fomorian  side  only  More  and  a  few  followers
escaped,  while  the  surviving  children  of  Nemed  con-
sisted of  only  thirty  strong  men,  the  crew  of  a  single
boat.  One  of  the  chief  men  of  the  thirty  is  mentioned  as
bearing  the  name  Iobath  son  of  Beothach,  who  should  be
the  counterpart  of  Cuchulainn,  or  more  likely  of  Gwydion ;
but  nothing  is  known  further  about  him,  except  that  he
is  represented  as  being  grandson  of  a  faith  or  vates  called
Iarbhoinel.3  The  Four  Masters  undertook  in  their  Annals
of  the  Kingdom  of  Ireland  to  date  the  event  they  call  the
Demolition  of  Conann's  Tower,  and  to  fix  on  the  year

1  Pp.  87—91.

2  He  is  also  called  Cunann  or  Conand,  as  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinsier,
127  a.

3  Also  called  (in  the  genitive)  Iardonel,  namely,  in  the  Bk.  of  the
Dun,  fol.  16  b,  where,  however,  the  name  of  Iobuth  is  not  mentioned.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  263

30GG  A.M.  But  the  most  curious  account  of  this  mythic
event  occurs  in  the  stories  associated  with  the  name  of
Nennius.  The  whole  paragraph  in  point  is  worth  citing,
as  it  enumerates  briefly  the  legendary  colonizations  of
Erinn,  beginning  with  the  customary  Bartholomew,  whose
name  in  this  connection  has  always  elicited  more  ques-
tions than  answers.  After  him  comes  Nemed  and  his
race,  and  then  the  three  sons  of  the  Miles  Hispaniae,
whence  the  so-called  Milesian  Irish;  and  it  is  by  this
race,  and  not  by  the  children  of  Nemed  that  Conaing's
Tower  was  destroyed,  according  to  Nennius.  His  words
are  to  the  following  effect :

"  Latest  of  all  came  the  Scotti  from  the  coasts  of  Spain
to  Erinn ;  but  the  first  to  come  was  Partholomaeus,  with
a  thousand  followers,  both  men  and  women,  and  they
increased  to  four  thousand  souls ;  and  a  mortality  came
upon  them  in  which  they  all  perished  in  one  week,  so
that  not  even  a  single  one  of  them  remained.  The  second
to  come  to  Erinn  was  Nimeth,  son  of  a  certain  Agnomen,
who  is  said  to  have  been  on  sea  for  a  year  and  a  half,
and  to  have  at  last  made  land  in  Erinn,  when  his  ships
had  been  wrecked :  he  remained  there  for  many  years,
but  taking  again  to  the  sea  with  his  men,  he  returned
to  Spain.  Afterwards  came  the  three  sons  of  a  certain
soldier  from  Spain,  having  with  them  thirty  keels  and
their  thirty  consorts  in  each  keel,  and  they  abode  there
for  the  space  of  one  year.  Afterwards  they  beheld  a
glass  tower  in  the  middle  of  the  sea,  and  they  used  to
see  men  on  the  tower,  to  whom  they  sought  to  speak,
but  they  never  used  to  be  answered ;  so  with  one  accord
they  hastened  to  attack  the  tower,  with  all  their  keels
and   all  their  women,    excopt  one  keel  which  Buffered


261  HI.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

from  shipwreck,  and  in  which  there  were  thirty  men  and
as  many  women.  Now  the  other  vessels  sailed  to  the
attack  on  the  tower,  and  whilst  all  were  stepping  on
the  shore  around  the  tower,  the  sea  overwhelmed  them,
so  that  they  were  drowned.  Not  one  of  them  escaped ;
and  it  is  from  the  family  in  the  keel  left  behind  on
account  of  its  having  been  wrecked,  the  whole  of  Erinn
has  been  filled  with  people  to  this  day."1

The  more  a  tale  of  this  kind  is  touched  up  by  historians,
the  less  it  appears  what  is  called  'a  cock-and-bull  story,'
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  on  the  whole,  the  Ciichu-
lainn  verses  come  much  nearer  the  original  than  the  prose
versions  mentioned.  Still  that  associated  with  the  name
of  Nennius  supplies  two  most  important  omissions  in  the
former :  it  calls  the  stronghold  a  glass  tower,  which  was
doubtless  the  glass  fort  to  which  Taliessin  extends
Arthur's  fame ;  and  in  the  next  place  it  states  that  the
guardians  of  the  glass  tower  would  not  answer  the
Milesians,  which  has  also  its  counterpart  in  Taliessin' s
words,  when  he  says  : 2

1  Beyond  the  Glass  Fort,  Arthur's  valour  they  had  not  seen ;
Three  score  hundreds  stood  on  the  wall  :
It  was  hard  to  converse  with  their  watchman.'

What,  it  may  be  asked,  is  the  meaning  of  stories  like
these  about  expeditions  into  a  country  in  or  beneath  the
sea  to  steal  the  cauldron  of  the  king,  to  carry  away  the
cows  that  supplied  milk  for  it,  and  the  other  treasures
to  be  found  there  ?  Let  it  suffice  for  the  present  that  I
should  somewhat  vaguely  indicate  their  origin.   The  Celts,

1  For  the  original,  see  San-Marte's  Nennius  et  Gildas,  §  13  (pp.  34-6).

2  For  the  text,  see  Skene,  ij.  182.


III.     THE    CULTUKE    HERO.  263

in  common  probably  with  all  other  peoples  of  Aryan
race,  regarded  all  their  domestic  comforts  as  derived  by
them  from  their  ancestors  in  the  forgotten  past,  that  is
to  say,  from  the  departed.  They  seem,  therefore,  to
have  reasoned  that  there  must  be  a  land  of  untold  wealth
and  bliss  somewhere  in  the  nether  world  inhabited  by
their  dead  ancestors  ;  and  the  further  inference  would  be
that  the  things  which  they  most  valued  themselves  in
life  had  been  procured  from  the  rulers  of  that  nether
world  through  force  or  fraud  by  some  great  benefactor
of  the  human  race ;  for  it  seldom  seems  to  have  entered
their  thoughts  that  the  powers  below  would  give  up
anything  for  nothing.  This  is  illustrated  over  and  over
again  in  the  fairy  tales  of  the  Celts,  when  they  represent
persons  who  have  lived  on  the  most  friendly  terms  with
the  fairies,  trying,  wThen  returning  to  their  friends  in
this  world,  to  smuggle  into  it  some  of  the  wealth  of  the
country  visited  by  them  under-ground :  they  always  fail
in  their  object,  and  only  succeed  in  rousing  the  indigna-
tion of  the  fairies.  The  same  thing  might  be  illustrated
from  the  beliefs  of  other  nations  at  considerable  length ;
but  I  will  only  adduce  as  instance  a  Maori  tale,  which
represents  a  woman  who  visited  her  dead  relatives  trying
to  bring  back  with  her  some  sweet  potatoes,  a  most  im-
portant article  of  food  to  the  aborigines  of  New  Zealand.
The  story  is  told  by  Dr.  Tylor,1  to  the  effect  that  the
narrator  of  it  had  a  servant  named  Te  "Wharewera,  wl.o
related  to  him  that  "  an  aunt  of  this  man  [Te  Wharewera]
died  in  a  solitary  hut  near  the  banks  of  Lake  Rotorua.
Being  a  lady  of  rank  she  was  left  in  her  hut,  the  door

1  In  his  Primitive  Culture,  ij.  50-2,  from  the  seconded,  of  Short-
land's  Traditio)    of  Neva  Zealand,  p.  150.


2G6  III.     THE    CI'LTURE    HERO.

and  windows  were  made  fast,  and  the  dwelling  was
abandoned,  as  her  death  had  made  it  tapu.  But  a  day
or  two  after,  Te  Wharewera  with  some  others  paddling
in  a  canoe  near  the  place  at  early  morning  saw  a  figure
on  the  shore  beckoning  to  them.  It  was  the  aunt  come
to  life  again,  but  weak  and  cold  and  famished.  When
sufficiently  restored  by  their  timely  help,  she  told  her
story.  Leaving  her  body,  her  spirit  had  taken  flight
toward  the  North  Cape,  and  arrived  at  the  entrance  of
Eeigna.  There,  holding  on  by  the  stem  of  the  creeping
akeake-plant,  she  descended  the  precipice,  and  found
herself  on  the  sandy  beach  of  a  river.  Looking  round,
she  espied  in  the  distance  an  enormous  bird,  taller  than
a  man,  coming  towards  her  with  rapid  strides.  This  ter-
rible object  so  frightened  her,  that  her  first  thought  was
to  try  to  return  up  the  steep  cliff ;  but  seeing  an  old  man
paddling  a  small  canoe  towards  her  she  ran  to  meet  him,
and  so  escaped  the  bird.  When  she  had  been  safely
ferried  across,  she  asked  the  old  Charon,  mentioning  the
name  of  her  family,  where  the  spirits  of  her  kindred  dwelt.
Following  the  path  the  old  man  pointed  out,  she  was
surprised  to  find  it  just  such  a  path  as  she  had  been  used
to  on  earth ;  the  aspect  of  the  country,  the  trees,  shrubs,
and  plants  were  all  familiar  to  her.  She  reached  the
village,  and  among  the  crowd  assembled  there  she  found
her  father  and  many  near  relations;  they  saluted  her,
and  welcomed  her  with  the  wailing  chant  which  Maoris
always  address  to  people  met  after  long  absence.  But
when  her  father  had  asked  about  his  living  relatives,
and  especially  about  her  own  child,  he  told  her  she
must  go  back  to  earth,  for  no  one  was  left  to  take  care
of  his  grandchild.     By  his  orders  she  refused  to  touch


III.    T1IE  CULTUBE   HERO.  2G7

the  food  that  the  dead  people  offered  her,  and  in  spite  of
their  efforts  to  detain  her,  her  father  got  her  safely  into
the  canoe,  crossed  with  her,  and  parting  gave  her  from
under  his  cloak  two  enormous  sweet  potatoes  to  plant  at
home  for  his  grandchild's  especial  eating.  But  as  she
began  to  climb  the  precipice  again,  two  pursuing  infant
spirits  pulled  her  back,  and  she  only  escaped  by  flinging
the  roots  at  them,  which  they  stopped  to  eat,  while  she
scaled  the  rock  by  help  of  the  akeake-stem,  till  she
reached  the  earth  and  flew  back  to  where  she  had  left
her  body."

So  much  for  the  Maori  story ;  but  the  jealousy  of  the
powers  below  is  sometimes  got  over,  as  in  the  case  of
a  mortal  who  has  been  of  service  to  a  fairy,  and  has  as
a  recompence  some  of  his  treasure  given  to  him ;  and
there  are,  as  we  need  scarcely  say,  some  important  myths,
Welsh  and  Irish,  which  represent  the  heroes  of  them
conferring  a  benefit  on  one  of  the  powers  of  Hades,  and
coming  away  with  goodwill  from  that  country,  and  in
possession  of  some  of  its  treasure  and  wealth.  But  they
must  be  passed  by,  as  I  have  not  yet  done  with  the
cauldron  stories,  especially  those  which  give  it  a  spiritual
or  intellectual  aspect.  Welsh  literature  has  preserved
some  references  in  point,  such  as  one  in  a  Taliessin
poem1  to  the  effect  that  three  muses  had  emerged  from
Giant  Ogyrven's  cauldron.  But  Ogyrven  seems  to  be
one  of  the  names  of  the  terrene  god,  so  that  Ogyrven's
cauldron  should  be  no  other  probably  than  that  which
we  have  found  ascribed  to  the  Head  of  Hades.  Further,
by  another  kind  of  treatment,  the  elements  of  poetry  and

1  Skene,  ij.  156,  i.  260.


208  TIT.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

knowledge  came  to  be  themselves  called  ogyrvens,  which
applied,  among  other  things,  to  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,
as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  extract  from  a  manu-
script supposed  to  date  from  the  end  of  the  fifteenth
century  :  "  The  three  elements  of  a  letter  are  /  |  \,  since
it  is  of  the  presence  of  one  or  other  of  the  three  a  letter  con-
sists ;  they  are  three  beams  of  light,  and  it  is  of  them  are
formed  the  sixteen  ogyrvens,  that  is,  the  sixteen  letters.
There  belong  also  to  another  art  seven  [score]  and  seven
ogyrvens,  which  are  no  other  than  the  symbols  of  the
rank  of  the  seven  score  and  seven  words  in  the  parentage
of  the  Welsh  language,  and  it  is  from  them  all  other
words  are  derived."1  As  to  the  /|\,  they  form  the
component  parts  of  such  letters  as  those  of  the  Ogam,
the  Welsh  bardic  letters,  and  the  Eunic  alphabets,  which
were  made  up  of  straight  lines  fitted  for  cutting  on  slips
of  wood ;  but  more  obscurity  surrounds  the  seven  score
and  seven  ogyrvens  alluded  to ;  they  were  probably  not
very  definitely  fixed  in  point  of  number,  and  they  are
doubtless  to  be  identified  with  the  exactly  seven  score
ogyrvens  said  to  be  in  awen,  'poesy  or  muse.'  This
statement,  in  a  context  connecting  the  ogyrvens  with
Hades,  occurs  in  another  Taliessin  poem,2  which,  while
obscure  throughout  and  relating  in  part  probably  to
alchemy,  bears  the  curious  title  of  Angar  Kyfyndaivt,
or  Steam  of  Combination,  and  contains  a  reference  to
cauldrons  made  to  boil  without  the  aid  of  fire.  Treated
as  a  personality,  Ogyrven  appears  as  the  father  of  poetry :
thus  Kynctelw,  a  poet  of  the  twelfth  century,  calls  himself

1  Ibid.  ij.  324  (note  by  Mr.  Silvan  Evans);  Rhys,  Lectures  on  Welsh
Phil  pp.  302—305.

2  Skene,  ij.  132.


III.     THK    CULTUBB    HERO.  269

'a  bard  of  the  bards  of  Ogyrven;'1  and  Cuhelyn,  another
Welsh  poet,  begins  two  of  his  poems,  as  they  appear  in  a
manuscript  of  the  twelfth  century  called  the  Black  Book
of  Carmarthen,  with  a  formula  which  makes  Kerridwen,

the  goddess  still  supposed  to  be  invoked  by  Welsh  bards
in  the  undertakings  of  their  art,  to  be  the  offspring  of
Ogyrven.2  But  it  is  not  easy  precisely  to  see  how  the
name  of  Ogyrven  came  to  mean  any  element  of  poetry,
art  or  science;  it  is  remarkable,  however,  that  another
Taliessin  poem3  makes  the  terrene  god,  under  the  name
Uthr  Ben,  or  Wonderful  Head,  say  of  himself,  not  only
that  he  was  bard,  harper,  piper  and  crowder,  but  '  seven
score  professionals'  all  in  one,  which  is  doubtless  another
account  of  the  seven  score  ogyrvens.  The  difficulty  of
this  mystery  was  disposed  of  by  the  cuhemerist  of  the
Mabinogi  of  Bran  wen  by  simply  making  Bran,  whoso
marvellous  head  was  the  subject  of  some  remarks  in  the
first  lecture  (pp.  78,  97),  carry  on  his  own  shoulders
the  musicians4  of  his  court,  when  he  waded  through  the
waters  to  Ireland.  Ogyrven  has  Kerridwen  associated
with  him,  not  only  by  Cuhelyn,  but  also  by  Kyndelw,
in  a  poem  already  mentioned ;  she  is,  however,  best  known
in  connection  with  her  Cauldron  of  Sciences,  from  which,
together  with  its  owner  herself,  the  wisdom  and  know-
ledge of  Taliessin  were  supposed  to  be  derived.

1  Myv.  Archaiulogij,  i.  230.  2  Skene,  ij.  5,  6.

3  lb.  ij.  203-4.

*  It.  B.  Mab.  p.  35  :  the  original  roads,  Ac  yna  ykerd6ys  ef  ac  <>  1
ogerd  ar6est  ar  y  geuyn  ehun.  This  was  too  much  for  the  translator
in  the  Guest  edition,  who  has  extracted  from  it  the  statement)  "Then
he  proceeded  with  what  provisions  he  had  on  his  own  back  :"  Bee
Guest's  Mab.  iij.  117.


270  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

GWYDION  AND    OTHER   NAMES   OF   THE    CULTURE    HERO.

Even  Taliessin,  the  most  extravagant  in  his  pretensions
of  all  Celtic  bards,  acknowledged  one  who  took  precedence
over  him,  and  that  was  Gweir,  whom  we  have  found
called  also  Geir,  and  whom  Taliessin  is  made  to  describe
as  the  first  to  go  into  Caer  Sidi,  where  he  underwent
captivity  which  resulted  in  his  being  a  bard  for  ever
afterwards.  The  name  Geir  has  been-  provisionally  claimed
as  one  of  Gwydion's,  and  he  is  now  to  be  considered
under  another  and  a  third  name.  A  line  occurs  in  a
Taliessin  poem1  where  Gwydion  is  called  Givydion  Seon
tewdor,  where  Seon  tewdor  is  probably  to  be  taken  as
standing  in  grammatical  apposition  to  Givydion.  To  dis-
pose of  tewdor,  suffice  it  to  say  that  in  the  Welsh  ortho-
graphy of  the  present  day  it  would  be  written  tetvddor,
meaning  literally  thick-door,  but  used  poetically  here  in
the  sense  of  stout  defence  or  strong  protection :  that  is
to  say,  the  poet  regarded  Seon  as  a  strong  protection  or
one  that  gave  it,  and  the  word  is  applied  in  another  of
these  poems2  to  the  gtvledig  Cuneda.  But  our  interest
centres  in  the  vocable  Seon;  it  occurs  also  in  another
poem,3  where  mention  is  made  of  the  planets  in  the  fol-
lowing verses :


lo


'  Seith  seren  yssyd.  '  Seven  stars  are  there
0  seithnawn  dofyd.  Of  the  seven  gifts  of  the  Lord  ;

Seon  sywedyd.  Seon  the  philosopher,

A  wyr  eu  defnyd.'  He  knows  their  nature.'

Here  Seon  is  seen  in  the  character  of  a  philosopher  or
man  of  science,  who  knows  the  nature  or  substance,  lite-

1  Skein,  ij.  199.  2  lb.  ij.  201.  3  lb.  ij.  162.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  271

rally  the  timbering  or  material,  of  the  planets.  The  next
reference  to  be  mentioned  is  to  a  Taliessin  poem  called
the  Ale  Song,1  where  we  have  the  following  couplet :

'  Ef  kyrch  kerdoryon.  '  It  they  seek,  the  artists

Se  syberw  Seon.'  Of  Se  Seon  the  Stately.'

The  bards  have  suffered  enormously  from  thirst  for  ages
unnumbered,  and  the  pronoun  here  probably  stands  for
the  cwrw  or  ale  they  desired  ;  but  the  passage  is  interest-
ing as  promiscuously  describing  poets  and  musicians  of  all
descriptions  as  the  artists  of  Se  Seon,  and  as  recording
the  simpler  form  of  the  name  Seon  :  compare  Nav  Neivion,
March  Meirchion  and  the  like,  not  forgetting  an  instance
in  the  case  of  the  very  god  in  question,  namely,  that  of
Givyd  Gtvydion,2  to  be  mentioned  presently.

There  was  a  place  in  North  Wales  called  Caer  Seon
or  Scion,  that  is  to  say,  Scon's  Town  or  Fortress,  and  it
was  probably  no  other  than  that  which  the  Eomans
called  Segontium,  the  site  of  which  is  now  occupied
by  the  town  of  Carnarvon.  This  appears  from  a  poem
printed  in  the  Myvyrian  Archaiology  of  Wales,  i.  470,
and  supposed  to  date  from  the  thirteenth  century  or  the
earlier  part  of  the  succeeding  one.  It  alludes  to  Maelgwn
and  his  court  coming  from  *  Tir  Mab  Don  Duect,'  or  the
side  of  the  Son  of  Don's  Land,  whereby  Mona  was  meant,
to  Caer  Seion;  and  the  story  goes  that  Maelgwn,  who
took  a  delight  in  fomenting  the  natural  rivalry  existing
between  the  poets  and  the  musicians  of  his  court,  ordered
them  all  to  swim  across,  which  they  did,  with  the  result
of  rendering  the  strings  on  which  the  latter  depended

1  Skene,  ij.  167.

2  Compound  forms  also  occur,  namely,  in  Cynwyd  Oymoydion.


272  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

for  the  effect  of  their  art  useless  to  them,  to  the  great
satisfaction  of  the  poets,  who  could  sing  as  well  as  ever
when  once  they  got  on  land.  ~No  other  part  of  the  Menai
would  suit  the  story  so  well  as  that  near  Carnarvon.
Further,  a  dialogue1  is  given  in  the  Black  Book  between
Taliessin  and  the  lord  of  the  Dinas  or  stronghold,  the
remains  of  which  give  its  name  to  a  railway-station
between  Carnarvon  and  Dinas  Dintre,  or  the  Fortress  of
Llew  and  Gwydion.  Taliessin  is  asked  the  whence  and
whither  of  his  journey ;  to  which  he  is  made  to  reply,
as  it  stands  in  this  manuscript  of  the  twelfth  century,
that  he  was  coming  from  Caer  Seon  from  fighting  with
Jews,  and  that  he  was  going  to  Llew  and  Gwydion's
Town.  The  reference  to  the  Jews  is  probably  the  result
of  somebody's  mistaking  Caer  Seon  for  Sion  or  Jerusalem :
the  poem  in  its  original  form  had  probably  no  reference
to  the  Jews,  and  Caer  Seon  doubtless  meant  Segontium.
Se,  Seon  or  Seion,  point  back  to  stems  aS^-  and  Segon-,  and
there  is  little  room  for  doubt  that  the  name  Segontium2

1  Skene,  ij.  57.

2  Besides  the  Welsh  name  Caer  Seon,  and  the  other  which  we  know
only  in  its  Latin  form  of  Segontium,  this  last  was  naturalized  in  Welsh,
probably  at  an  early  date,  as  Segeint,  whence  Cair  Segeint  in  the  British
Museum  MS.  Harl.  3859,  fol.  1 9 5 « ;  it  is  also  mentioned  by  Nennius.
Segeint  is  regularly  formed  from  Segontium,  and  is  also  regularly
reduced  in  later  Welsh  into  Seint  and  Sein,  which  occurs  as  the  name
of  the  river  washing  the  base  of  Edward's  Castle  at  Carnarvon,  its
mouth  being  termed  Aber  Sein,  and  the  town  Kaer  Aber  Seiv,  in
Maxeyi  s  Dream  (R.  B.  Mab.  pp.  87-8).  In  fact,  this  vocable  in  one
of  its  forms  is  indispensable  to  the  explanation  of  the  name  Carnarvon
itself,  which  is  in  Welsh  Caer  yn  Arfon,  meaning  literally,  '  a  castle  in
Arvon,'  not  even  the  castle  in  Arvon ;  but  the  key  is  not  far  to  seek  :
the  full  name  occurs  in  the  Mabinogi  of  Branwen  (R.  B.  Mab.  p.  34)
as  Kaer  Seint  yn  Arvon,  or  'the  Castle  of  Seint  in  Arvon.'     Seint  in


ITT.     THE    CULTURE    BERO.  273

itself  is  formed  from  that  of  the  god.  Further,  not  only
was  there  a  people  in  the  south  of  this  island  called
Segontiaci,  who  were  of  those  who  sent  ambassadors  to
Caesar;1  but  an  inscription  which  has  been  taken  to
connect  them  with  Silchester  has  been  found  there  and
discovered  to  have  been  a  dedication  Deo  •  Her\culi  •]
Saegon  ....  It  is  not  certain  what  the  dative  of  the  god's
name  was  in  full ;  but  probably  Saegono,  or  Saegoni,  pos-
sibly a  participial  Saegonti.  The  stone  is  no  longer  to  be
found ;  but  the  way  in  which  it  has  been  described  by
those  who  saw  it,  makes  it  difficult  to  read  Segontiaco
or  Segontiacorum,  as  though  the  god  derived  his  name
from  that  of  the  people  called  Segontiaci.  This  leaves
the  conjecture  that  would  connect  the  Segontiaci  of
Caesar  with  the  town  of  Silchester  much  as  it  was  before,
since  it  is  natural  to  suppose,  that  the  god  in  question
would  occupy  a  place  of  honour  in  the  pantheon  of  a
people  calling  itself  or  its  chief  city  after  him.  The
weakness  of  the  assumption  lies  in  the  probable  fact,  that
more  than  one  town,  more  than  one  people,  took  its  name
from  tile  god ;  and  the  more  popular  and  general  his  cult
is  found  to  have  been,  the  more  clearly  that  weakness  is
seen.  But  it  is  a  question  of  no  immediate  interest  here,
as  the  fact  not  to  be  lost  sight  of  is  rather  the  identifica-
tion of  Saegon-,  or  Seon,  with  Ilercules.

Now  there  was  a  remarkable  Gaulish  god,  and  a  tho-
roughly Celtic  one,  whom  we  have  distinct  evidence  for

modem  Welsh  Incomes  Saint,  so  that  the  river  is  now  Afon  S>ti>>f,
while  a  late  Kyinririzing  of  the  Latin  Segontium  has  yielded  a  much
less  correct  Welsh  form  Seiont,  which,  as  far  as  I  know,  is  only  to  be
found  in  books  or  in  the  modern  names  of  houses  in  the  town.
1  Caesar,  v.  21.

T


274  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

identifying  with  Hercules,  that  is  to  say,  so  far  as  one
may  speak  of  identification  at  all  in  such  a  case.  He
was,  you  will  remember,  called  Ogmios,  and,  according
to  Lucian's  account  of  him,  he  was  the  personification  of
speech  and  all  that  conduced  to  make  speech  a  powerful
agency ;  but  we  found  reasons  for  identifying  him  also
with  Hermes  and  Mercury,  and  moreover  with  the  deo,
qui  vias  et  semitas  commentus  est.  His  counterpart  in
Irish  was  pointed  out  in  that  of  Ogma  (p.  17),  the
inventor  of  a  kind  of  learned  jargon  and  of  a  kind  of
writing,  both  of  which  were  indifferently  called  ogam.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Welsh  word  corresponding  ety-
mologically  to  Ogmios  and  Ogma,  is  ovycl,  which  has
remained  an  appellative,  meaning  a  leader  or  teacher
(p.  17);  and  the  Welsh  and  Irish  accounts  of  the  origin
of  writing  are  accordingly  not  the  same.  They  may,
however,  be  regarded  as  supplementing  one  another.
Thus  the  term  ogyrven  for  a  letter  of  the  alphabet  con-
nects writing  with  the  terrene  god,  but  without  telling
us  through  whose  instrumentality  the  knowledge  of  the
art  of  writing  was  first  brought  from  him  to  man.  The
Irish  legend,  on  the  other  hand,  makes  the  divine  ovyd
or  Ogma  the  inventor  of  writing ;  but  it  does  not  let  us
into  the  secret  of  the  origin  of  his  knowledge,  except
indirectly  by  making  him  the  son  of  Elatha  king  of  the
Fomori,  or  dwellers  of  the  world  beneath  the  sea ;  and
to  this  placing  of  Gwydion  over  against  Ogma  as  sub-
stantially the  same  person,  the  mythic  pedigrees  oppose
no  serious  obstacle.  For  Gwydion  is  called  son  of  Don,
and  her  husband  is  inferred  to  have  been  Beli  the  Great,
the  god  of  death  and  darkness  (pp.  90-1);  so  that  here
13eli  fills  the  place  ascribed  in  Irish  to  Elatha,  and  Don


III.     TUE    CULTURE    IIi:i:<>.  'J7:>

that  ascribed  to  Brigit,  mother  of  Bres  and  goddess  of
poetry  (p.  74),  all  things  being  supposed  to  derive  their
origin  from  the  powers  of  the  nether  world,  the  arts
and  sciences  included.  The  story  about  Elatha  intro-
ducing himself  to  her  who  was  to  be  Bres's  mother  is,
that  he  came  out  of  the  sea,  whither  he  returned,  having
left  her  a  ring  which  he  had  on  his  hand ;  and  Bres
their  son,  when  driven  from  his  throne  by  Nuada  on  his
return  to  power  with  a  silver  hand  (p.  120),  was  pro-
vided with  the  ring,  and  enabled  by  means  of  it  to  make
his  way  to  the  fairy  land  inhabited  by  the  Fomori,  where,
he  found  his  father  and  his  people  holding  a  great  assem-
bly on  Mag  Mor,  or  the  Great  Plain,  one  of  the  names
commonly  associated  with  the  geography  of  the  nether
world.  Bres's  business  was  to  enlist  the  Fomori  on  his
side  against  the  Tuatha  ~D6  Danann.  This  story1  has
been  reduced  to  sober  history  by  Prof.  O'Curry  and
others;  but  I  wish  to  point  out  before  proceeding  fur-
ther, that  as  Ogyrven's  name  came  in  Welsh  to  mean
a  letter  of  the  alphabet  and  other  elements,  so  that  of
Elatha  is  found  used  as  an  appellative  in  the  sense  of
science,  art  or  artistic  work,  especially  literary  composi-
tions.2 Nor  did  this  stand  alone  in  Irish ;  for  one  finds
that  a  certain  kind  of  poetic  composition  was  called  ctan,
which  is  homophonous  with  the  name  of  the  poetess  Etan,

1  Given  at  length  in  the  British  Museum  MS.  Harl.  5280,  fol.
53  b;  for  O'Curry's  version  of  it,  see  the  passages  in  his  MS.  M"t.
pp.  248-9,  already  referred  to  at  p.  253.

-  Fox  references,  Bee  Windisch's  Irische  Texte,  p.  521,  b.v.  elatha;
Stok.'~'<  Calendar  of  Oengtu,  p.  eclvi ;  also  d' A.  de  JubainviUe'a  c
Myth.  p.  306.     The  word  seems  to  have  been  declined  in  two  ways,
Ebitha,  gen.  Elot/ian,  and  Elathan,  gen.  Eluthain.

t2


276  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

to  be  identified,  probably,  with  Brigit,  goddess  of  poetry  :
Cairbre,  the  first  satirist  in  Erinn,  is  distinguished  us
son  of  Etan.  The  name  Elatha  or  Elathan,  for  both
forms  occur,  may  possibly  have  referred  to  eloquence
and  wisdom;  and  in  that  case  the  personage  so  called
may  be  compared  with  the  king  of  Hades  under  his
Welsh  name  of  Arawn,  which  likewise  referred  to  speech
and  wisdom.  The  "Welsh  Arawn  is  styled  one  of  the
Three  counselling  Knights  of  Arthur's  Court,1  and  is
possibly  to  be  recognized  under  the  slightly  different
name  Alawn,  given  to  one  of  the  three  originators  of
bardism.2

Gwydion's  name  must  next  be  considered :  it  can  only
be  derived  from  a  root  of  the  form  vit,  vot  or  vet ;  and
of  these  the  only  one  found  to  satisfy  all  the  conditions  is
vet,  which  in  old  Welsh  must  become  [cf]wet:  liable  to  be
reduced  in  the  later  stages  of  the  language  to  \_g~\wedf  as

1  Triads,  i.  86  =  iij.  116.

2  Triads,  iij.  58  j  Iolo  MSS.  pp.  48,  428.  The  other  name,  Arawn,
is  derived  from  the  same  source  as  the  Welsh  term  wraith,  '  an  oration
or  speech,'  a  word  represented  in  Irish  by  aireclit  or  oirecht,  which
bears  the  secondary  signification  of  an  assembly  :  Irish  public  meet-
ings appear  to  have  never  lacked  oratory  and  declamation.  See,  for
instance,  O'Curry's  Manners,  &c.  ij.  20,  53,  and  MS.  Mat.  pp.  383-4,
where  references  are  made  to  a  suit  pleaded  before  the  king  of  Ulster
in  such  eloquent  and  unintelligible  language  that  he  deprived  the  poets
of  their  right  to  be  the  expounders  of  the  laws  of  the  realm,  as  they
had  been  till  then.

3  In  a  ninth  century  manuscript  (Skene,  ij.  2)  we  meet  with  a  word
of  this  origin  written  guetid,  pronounced  gwetid,  which  meant  either
'a  say'  or  'a  sayer,'  and  in  South  "Wales  a  verb  gwe'yd  (for  gtvedyd),
1  to  say,'  is  much  used:  take,  for  instance,  gioed,  'die;'  gwedweh,  'dicite;'
gwedais,  '  dixi.'  But  in  North  Wales  and  generally  in  Welsh  literature
the  preference  is  given  to  the  same  verb  with  the  prefix  dy,  for  an
older  do,  the  Celtic  equivalent  of  the  English  to.      Thus  dywedyd


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  12 7 7

in  gwedyd)  i  to  say.'     A  modification  of  the  same  stem
gives  us  the  gwyd  in  Gwydion,  and  a  third  form  is  exem-


(redaced  also  to  dytvefyd,  d'we'yd,  and  even  d'e'yd)  means  'to  say,
Baying;'  dywed,  Mir;'  dywedaf,  Mieam;'  flfj{/yd  (North  Welsh  for
dyunjd), '  dicet ;'  dywawd,  also  dywod  and  (now  in  North  Wales)  dywad,

'dixit.'  The  umlaut  ?/  in  dyfyd  (dywyd)  is  caused  by  the  semi-vowel
which  once  followed,  as  in  Gwyd  (Skene,  ij.  135)  or  still  follows  as
in  Qwydion  (with  the  i  pronounced  like  English  y  in  yea).  The  effects
of  the  semi-vowel  are  perceptible  in  other  words,  especially  verbs,  such
as  gwyl,  '  videbit,'  from  gwel-ed, '  to  see,'  or  salf,  '  stabit,'  from  sof-ijll,  '  to
stand  :'  for  some  remarks  on  this  subject  see  my  Lectures,  pp.  116-18.
With  regard  to  Gwyd,  it  is  right  to  notice  that  Welsh  has  another
word  gwyd,  'vice,'  which  is,  in  fact,  the  Latin  word  vitium  naturalized;
but  the  line,  'Aches  gvyd  gwydion,'  in  the  Taliessin  line  referred  to,  could
only  mean  'the  land  of  Gwydion's  vice,'  which  would  be  utterly  at
variance  with  Taliessin's  usual  tone  with  regard  to  Gwydion  ;  so  I  have
no  doubt  that  it  should  be  rendered  '  the  land  of  Gwyd  Gwydion.'
Unless  the  form  Gwyd  was  called  into  existence  to  accompany  the
■  other,  they  may  be  treated  as  standing  for  an  ancient  nominative  Vetjo
and  genitive  Vetjonos  respectively.  In  ilium  id  or  dyicawd,  'dixit,'  we
have  an  ablaut  or  by-vowel  in  the  diphthong  aw,  representing  an  early
a  which  remains  written  a  in  Irish  words.  Similarly  from  Welsh
rhed,  'run,'  we  have  gwa-red,  ' suc-currere,'  Irish  fo-reth-  of  the  same
meaning  ;  but  the  old  perfect  was  gwa-rawt,  Irish  fo-rdith  for  *vo-rd(-e.
This  recourse  to  a  different  vowel  in  the  perfect  was  formerly  fully
recognized  in  Celtic  grammar,  but  it  probably  never  had  the  impor-
tance which  is  attached  to  it  in  the  economy  of  the  Teutonic  verb,
as,  for  example,  in  the  English,  give,  gave,  ride,  rode,  bear,  bore,  and
see,  8<xio.  Celtic  verbs  of  the  class  in  epiestion  had  two  stems,  one
with  e  and  the  other  with  a ;  and  I  wish  to  call  attention  to  the  fact
that  tlnre  were  also  nouns  cognate  with  both  the  one  and  the  other.
Thus  in  the  case  of  the  Welsh  rhed-,  'run,'  we  have  not  only  rind,,,,
'  the  act  of  running,'  but  also  rhaiod,  '  a  course,  path  or  orbit  :'  similarly
Irmn  the  other  verb  we  have,  beside  guetid  already  instanced,  a  word
gwawt,  now  gwawd,  'a  poem  or  song,'  and  in  modern  Welsh  more
usually  'a  satire  or  a  sarcastic  remark.'  The  Irish  equivalent  was
faath  ovfdth, '  a  learning  or  study  of  the  poet's  art'  (Cormae,  B.v./aatt),
whence  fditsine,  'prophecy,'  and  probably  Fdthacli,  the  name  of  the
of  the  Fir  Bolg.     But  Crish  had  besides  this  a  related  word/tft'M,


278  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

plified  by  gwawd,  a  Welsh  term  for  poetry,  but  now
restricted  to  satire  and  sarcasm.  Among  the  cognate
words  may  be  mentioned  the  Irish  faith,  '  a  prophet  or
poet/  Latin  vates,  Old  Norse  octr,  'mind,  soul,  song;'
also  Odenn  or  Octinn,  English  Woden,  and  wood,  '  mad,'
German  wuth,  '  rage.'

The  appearance  in  close  connection  of  words  relating
to  poetry  and  prophecy  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  madness
and  possession  on  the  other,  is  just  what  would  be
expected  by  the  student  of  anthropology  familiar  with

'  a  prophet  or  poet,'  to  which  the  Welsh  has  no  etymological  equivalent,
since  it  would  have  sounded  gwawt,  givatcd,  like  the  word  meaning  '  a
satire;'  but  it  existed  in  Gaulish  and  was  probably  ivdtis  or  vdiis,  as
Strabo,  iv.  4, 4,  has  placed  on  record  the  nominative  plural  in  the  form  of
owTei?.  Now  Latin,  though  not  possessing  exact  parallels  in  such
verbal  forms  as  venio,  veni,  or  ago,  egi,  matches  faith  and  wdtis  exactly
in  vowel  and  declension  with  its  noun  vates,  '  a  poet  and  prophet.'
The  following  classification  will  render  intelligible  at  a  glance  what  I
mean — the  hypothetical  forms  have  an  asterisk  prefixed  to  them :
1.  Stems  with  e,  of  the  consonantal  declension  :  Irish,  *Fethiu,  *Fethenn;
Welsh,  Givyd,  Gwydion;  Latin,  *  Velio,  *Vetionis.  2.  Stems  with  a:
(1)  of  the  0  declension  :  Ir.  fdth,  'learning;'  Welsh,  gwaivd,  'poem,
satire;'  Lat.  *vdtum  (=  vaticinum);  the  German  is  ivuth,  'rage,'  toge-
ther with  the  adjective,  which  was  in  Gothic  vuds,  '  Scu/xovi£d//,evos,
8ou/i.ono-#eis.'  Add  to  these  the  0.  Norse  ud-r,  '  mad,  frantic  ;'  A.-Saxon
wod,  'mad;'  Mod.  English  wood;  Broad  Scotch  wud  or  wuth,  'mad,
distracted.'  (2)  Of  the  /  declension:  Ir.  faith,  'poet;'  Gaulish
ivatis,  'poet;'  Lat.  vates,  'poet;'  O.  Norse  6d-r,  genitive  odar,  'mind,
wit,  soul,  sense,  spirit,  song,  poetry.'  (3)  Derivatives  of  the  0  declen-
sion :  Ir.  Elathan  (a  form  of  the  name  of  the  Fomorian  king,  husband
of  the  goddess  of  poetry),  in  case  it  be  for  El-fdthan  (with  el  of  the
same  origin  as  eol  in  eolus,  '  knowledge,'  the  vowel  variation  being
produced  by  the  accent,  as  in  beothu,  '  life,'  genitive  hethad) ;  Weksh
*Givodan;  Lat.  *vdtanus ;  0.  Norse,  Oden-n,  genitive  Oden-s;  A.-Sax.
Woden,  gen.  Woden-es,  perpetuated  in  Wednes-d&y.  The  relation
between  Gwydion  and  Woden  did  not  escape  Grimm  :  see  his  Deutsche
Myth.*  pp.  xxiij,  124,  296,  342.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  279

the  habits  of  nations  who  are  wont  to  regard  idiots  and
maniacs  as  inspired  persons,  a  view  which  can  also  be
studied  now  and  then  in  our  own  country.  In  the  case
of  the  Celts  we  see  this  idea  in  the  superstition  as  to
the  hardship  which  a  man  should  undergo  on  Cader
Idris  or  Snowdon  in  order  to  be  inspired  as  a  bard ;  but
he  might  become  a  madman,  that  is  to  say,  the  inspira-
tion might  prove  different  from  that  of  the  bard.  Per-
haps the  distinction  is  not  old  enough  to  be  considered ;
at  any  rate,  we  have  an  instance  of  the  idiot  of  the  family
playing  the  part  of  a  prophet  in  the  Irish  story  concerning
the  formation  of  Lough  Neagh.1  Moreover,  the  idea  of
inspired  raving  is  familiar  to  the  reader  of  the  classics  :
take,  for  example,  the  Sibyl  whom  Vergil  in  the  JEneid
calls  a  sanctissima  rates,  and  of  whom  he  gives  an  un-
lovely picture,  vi.  4G — 51 :

'  Cui  talia  fanti
Anto  fores  subito  non  vultus,  non  color  onus,
Non  comtao  mansere  comae ;  sed  pectus  anhelum,
Et  rabie  fera  corda  tuinent ;  majorque  videri,
Nee  niortale  sonans ;  aillata  est  numiiie  quando
Jam  propiore  dei.'

And  a  little  later,  vi.  77 — 80  :

1  At  Phoebi  nondum  patiens,  immanis  in  antro
Baccbatur  vates,  magnum  si  pectore  possit
Excussisso  deum  ;  tanto  magia  ille  fatigat
Os  rabidum,  fera  corda  domans,  fingitque  premendo.'

To  return  to  the  words  which  I  have  begun  to  discuss,
the  idea  underlying  them  all  was  that  of  saying  or  utter-
ing, and  secondarily  perhaps  of  singing,  chanting  or
muttering,  whether  as  a  poet  or  as  a  raving  madman.  So
Gwyd  Gwydion  might  be  rendered  Say  of  Saying,  or  Say

1  B  ok  of  the  Dun,  39  b;  Joyce's  Old  Otitic  Romances,  pp.  100-1.


280  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

son  of  Saying,  with  which  his  name,  Geir  son  of  Geiryoect,
(p.  250)  is  palpably  identical,  as  it  means  Word  son  of
Words ;  but  if  a  name  relating  to  his  power  of  utterance
and  eloquence,  and  amounting  to  calling  him  rates  or
prophet,  became  Gwydion,  it  could  surprise  nobody  if
the  same  kind  of  name  were  found  given  to  one  of  them
who  were  reckoned  pre-eminent  in  this  respect,  namely,
the  mythic  beings  of  the  nether  world.  Such  a  name
we  seem  to  have,  in  fact,  in  that  of  the  king  of  the
Fomori,  called  Elathan,  which,  according  to  the  surmises
already  made,  conveyed  probably  some  such  an  idea  as
that  of  speaking,  vaticinating  or  soothsaying,  and  might
be  compared  to  a  certain  extent  with  that  of  the  much-
saying  connoted  by  the  Greek  name  Uo\v<f>->][ios.  In  fact,
the  Cyclops,  so-called,  may  be  regarded  as  a  being  here
in  point,  since  Gwydion  and  Woden  bear  a  striking
resemblance  to  Odysseus ;  and  though  the  view  here
suggested  of  the  character  of  Polyphemus  had  probably
ceased  to  be  familiar  to  the  Greek  mind  before  the
Odyssey  was  composed,  still  that  most  charming  of  epics
says  enough  about  him  and  his  country  to  leave  one  in
no  doubt  that  in  Polyphemus  we  have,  at  least  in  point
of  origin,  one  of  the  potentates  of  the  nether  world.  All
about  his  wisdom  and  knowledge  had  been  forgotten,  and
the  only  reminiscence  of  that  aspect  of  his  character  is  to
be  found  in  the  retention  of  the  name  Polyphemus  or  the
Much-saying.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark  that  to
a  people  in  a  low  stage  of  culture  such  a  name  would
mean  very  much  more  than  it  would  to  us ;  they  would
not  be  inclined  quite  so  much  to  contrast  words  with
things  as  to  regard  them  as  being  themselves  things;
and  the  antithesis,  so  trite  and  sterile  in  such  authors  of


III.     THE    CTLTl'RE    HERO.  281

antiquity  as  Thucydides,  between  Aoyo?  and  ipyov,  word
and  deed,  is  one  of  the  growths  of  an  age  beginning  to
devote  itself  to  philosophy  and  conceited  moralizings
over  the  hollowness  of  human  nature.  Formulae  of  words
have  always  been  the  backbone  of  magic  as  well  as  the
means,  in  most  religious  systems,  of  moving  the  gods  to
accede  to  the  worshipper's  prayer:  in  ancient  Erinn  the
words  of  the  satirist  were  believed  to  raise  hideous
blotches  on  the  face  of  him  who  happened  to  be  the
object  of  them,  and  the  Gaulish  cuhemerist  who  under-
took to  enlighten  Lucian  was  content  to  believe  Ogmios
to  have  performed  the  labours  of  Heracles,  without  the
grosser  club  and  bow,  by  the  irresistible  force  of  his
charms  of  speech.

The  two  names  Gwydion  and  Geir  point,  as  we  have
seen,  distinctly  to  the  character  of  their  bearer  as  a  per-
sonification of  speech  or  eloquence,  while  it  would  appear
that  his  other  name  of  Se  or  Seon  (for  Segon-)  must  have
referred  directly  and  originally  to  him  in  respect  of  his
strength  or  power,  and  recalled  labours  like  those  of
ITeracles.  For  these  forms  are  doubtless  of  the  same
origin  as  the  name  of  the  war-god  Segomo ;  but  in  the
face  of  the  German  word  sieg,  l  victory,'  and  its  cognates,
we  should  perhaps  treat  them  as  meaning  more  exactly
a  god  of  victory,  in  a  word  the  Mercurius  Victor  of  an
inscription  in  Gaul.  The  remarkable  thing,  however,  is
that  under  the  name  of  Se  or  Scon  here  in  question,
Gwydion  is  only  referred  to  as  a  philosopher  or  astro-
nomer and  patron  of  artists  and  professional  men,  which
looks  as  though  force  and  victory,  in  his  case,  were
chiefly  to  be  explained  somewhat  in  the  way  the  native
guide  of  Lucian  represented  to  him,  that  the  labours  of


282  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

Heracles  were  performed  by  the  charm  of  speech  rather
than  by  the  force  of  arms.  But  we  seem  to  be  again  led
back  to  the  latter  by  the  name  Giveir  which  we  found
alternating  with  Geir;  for  it  probably  meant  manly :  at
any  rate,  that  is  the  natural  inference  from  the  fact  that
it  is  a  derivative  from  an  earlier  form  of  gwr,  the  Welsh
equivalent  in  sense  and  etymology  of  the  old  Irish  fer
and  the  Latin  vir.  Another  of  his  names  of  this  origin
is  probably  to  be  detected  in  Givron,  which  means  a  great
man  or  hero,  and  is  given  as  the  name  of  the  third  of  the
three  originators  of  bardism.1

GWYDION   COMPARED    WITH   WODEN    AND    INDRA.

If  it  were  asked  why  the  foregoing  names  should  be
assumed  to  have  referred  to  one  and  the  same  person  or
character,  it  might  be  answered  that  there  is  no  a  priori
objection  to  construing  them  in  the  contrary  sense,  since,
on  the  one  hand,  a-  mythical  personage  may  under
favourable  circumstances  attract  tales  originally  said  of


1  See  the  Triads,  iij.  58.  Welsh  gicr  stands  for  an  earlier  giver,
which,  with  the  Irish  fer,  points  to  an  early  nominative  vivos,  geni-
tive veri,  represented  in  Irish  Ogmic  inscriptions  "by  viri,  later  Irish
fir.  In  Gaulish  an  adjective  verjos  was  formed  from  ver-,  but  the
semi- vowel  caused  it  to  assume  the  form  virios,  as  in  Voretu-virius,  i.  e.
son  of  Voretoveros  (  =  Welsh  Givaredwr,  '  Salvator')  :  compare  Vintjos
(Welsh  gwynt,  'wind')  from  ventos.  Welsh  could,  however,  have
other  forms,  and  vptjos  might  either  become  vcirjos,  which  would  he
our  Gioeir,  or  virjos,  which  would  now  be  Gwyr ;  in  one  instance
both  forms  happen  to  occur ;  I  refer  to  a  mythic  personage  mentioned
in  the  Triads  (i.  30  =  ij.  56  =  iij.  101)  as  Daftwyr  Daftben  and  Daft-
weir  Dattben,  not  to  mention  a  third  derivative  Dattwaran  also  applied
to  him  :  the  former  two  names  would  in  their  early  forms  be  Dallo-
verjos  Dallopennos,  which  would  seem  to  mean  Blind-bead  (son)  of
Blind-man.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  283

another,  while,  on  the  other,  the  acquisition  by  him  of
several  names  would  tend  to  split  him  up  into  as  many
individuals.  Some  reasons  have  already  been  given  for
looking  at  the  Welsh  names  referred  to  from  the  latter
point  of  view  rather  than  from  the  former ;  but  there  is
a  more  comprehensive  one,  and  that  is  the  argument  to
be  derived  from  a  comparison  with  the  mythology  of
other  branches  of  the  Aryan  family,  that  Gwydion,  or
whatever  name  you  choose  to  give  him,  was  a  complete
and  complex  character  familiar  to  our  remote  ancestors,
before  they  could  as  yet  be  called  Celts,  or  before  those
of  the  English  could  be  called  Teutons,  that  is  to  say,  at
a  time  when  the  Aryans  had  not  passed  out  of  their  pro-
ethnic  period.  For  our  immediate  purposes  the  question
reduces  itself  to  that  of  the  identification  of  Gwydion
with  the  Woden  of  Teutonic  peoples.  The  name  Woden
is  referred1  to  the  same  origin  as  the  Latin  word  vatcs
by  Fick,  Vigfusson  and  others ;  further,  it  is  impossible
to  sever  the  Irish  faith,  l  a  prophet  or  poet,'  from  vates  on
the  one  hand,  and  from  the  Welsh  givaivd,  l  poetry,  poem,
satire,'  on  the  other;  and  with  all  three  the  name  of
the  Welsh  Gwydion  is  probably  closely  connected.  It
remains,  then,  to  be  seen  how  far  the  legends  about
Gwydion  and  Woden  coincide  on  particular  points,  such
as  the  following : 2

i.  Their  family  relations.

1.  Gwydion's  mother  was  Don,  of  whom  very  little  is

1  By  Fick  in  his  Vergleichendes  Worterbuch  der  indogermemischen

Sprachen*,  iij.  308,  and  by  Vigfusson  in  the  Corpus  Poet.  Boreale,
i.  civ;  seo  also  the  Academy  for  Jan.  1885,  p.  46.

■  Excursus  i.  §  2,  in  the  Corpus  Poet.  Boreale,  i.  civ,  ij.  458-63  :  the
references  are,  where  not  specified,  to  that  excursus.


284  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

known,  and  his  father  is  inferred  to  have  been  Beli,  of
whom  nearly  as  little  can  be  said  to  be  known.

Woden  was  the  son  of  Bestla  and  Bor,  still  less  known
as  to  their  origin.

2.  Gwydion  had  a  mistress  called  Arianrhod,  whose
name  meant  Silver  -  wheel :  she  dwelt  in  her  castle  in
the  sea.  She  remained  a  maiden  and  wished  to  pass
for  a  virgin,  whence  her  indignation  at  finding  her  son
living.

"Woden  (as  Gylfe)  had  a  leman  called  Gefjon,  a  word
which  occurs  as  a  name  for  the  sea,  and  she  had  associated
with  her  a  'diiip  rodul,'1  to  be  interpreted  alius  rotulus  or
deep-sinking  wheel :  she  led  a  maiden's  life  like  Arianrhod,
and  she  changed  into  oxen  the  sons  she  bore  Woden.

3.  Gwydion  had  a  son  Llew,  whose  death  was  no  less
peculiar  than  that  of  Woden's  son  Balder ;  and  the  grief
of  Gwydion  was  very  great,  like  Woden's :  both  fathers
wandered  far  and  wide  until  they  discovered  each  his
son,  who  was  afterwards  to  be  recalled  to  this  life.

ij.  Their  character  as  warriors.

Gwydion  was  a  successful  general ;  he  was  Heracles,
and  he  was  Seon  or  Segon-,  '  the  victorious : '  he  fought
a  single  combat  with  fatal  effect  to  his  adversary,  who
was,  however,  said  to  have  been  overcome  by  Gwydion's
magic.

Woden  was  called  sire  or  lord  of  hosts,  lord  of  spears,
father  of  victory  or  battle,  and  he  was  the  wielder  of  the
magic  spear  Gungnir.

iij.  Their  creative  power.

Gwydion,  with  the  aid  of  his  uncle  Math,  made  a  beau-
tiful woman  out  of  flowers.

1  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  ij.  8.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  285

Woden  and  his  fellow-gods  made,  among  other  crea-
tions, a  man  and  a  woman  out  of  trees,  and  called  them
Ash  and  Embla  respectively.

iv.  Their  wisdom.

1.  Gwydion  was  the  cleverest  person  ever  heard  of  by
Taliessin,  who  reckoned  himself  no  poor  judge  in  such  a
matter ;  and,  as  described  by  Lucian  under  the  name  of
Ogmios,  he  was  the  god  of  eloquence  and  the  wisdom
thereto  appertaining.

Woden  is  hymned  in  early  Norse  poems  as  the  sage
of  the  powers  and  the  charmer  of  the  gods.

2.  Gwydion's  Gaulish  name  Ogmios  referred  possibly
to  his  association  with  ways  and  paths  :  he  was  probably
the  divinity  attested  by  a  monument  in  this  country  as
the  god  qui  vias  ct  scmitas  common tus  est,  while  in  Gaul
he  as  the  Celtic  Mercury  was  held  to  have  been,  accord-
ing to  Caesar,  viarum  atque  itinerum  dux.

Woden  is  called  Way-wont  or  Traveller,  and  the  like
names.

3.  Gwydion  was  a  consummate  magician,  and  he  is
found  among  those  who  consult  the  sorcerers  of  Arianrhod.1

Woden  was  taunted  with  acquiring  his  wisdom  by
magic,  with  sitting  under  waterfalls  and  conversing  with
the  dead.

4.  Gwydion  (as  Gweir)  acquired  his  gifts  of  poetry  and
music  from  the  nether  world :  he  visited  the  submarine
city  of  Caer  Sidi,  where  he  underwent  vile  treatment  at
the  hands  of  the  Head  of  Hades  ;  but  thenceforth  he  was
for  ever  a  bard,  and  poets  and  musicians  are  the  artists
of  Gwydion  under  the  name  Seon.

Woden  submitted  himself  to  a  course  of  prolonged
1  Bk.  of  Taliessin,  Skene,  y.  1">9.


286  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

privation  and  pain,  of  long  fastings  and  strange  penances,
in  order  to  get  his  wisdom :  according  to  another  account,
he  pledged  one  of  his  eyes  to  Sokk-mimi,  the  Giant  of
the  Abyss,  for  a  draught  of  the  deep  well  of  wisdom :
poetry  is  '  the  billows  of  Woden's  breast'  and  '  the  stream
of  the  lip-beard  of  Woden.'

5.  Gwydion  eats  and  drinks  with  Arianrhod,  and  they
converse  of  stories  and  histories  in  her  castle,  now  ridden
over  by  the  billows  of  the  Irish  Sea.

Woden  and  Saga  the  seeress  drink  joyously  out  of
golden  cups  at  her  abode  of  Sunk-bench,  over  which  the
cold  waves  ever  murmur.1

6.  Gwydion' s  favourite  disguise  was  to  take  the  form
of  a  bard,  for  which  he  was  fitted  as  being  the  best
historian  or  story-teller  in  the  world.

Woden  figures  in  story  as  a  cowled,  one-eyed,  long-
bearded  old  sage,  who  tells  king  Olaf  tales  of  days  long
gone  by.

v.  Their  Promethean  role.

1.  Gwydion,  with  his  brother  Amaethon  the  farmer,
procures  from  the  powers  terrene  the  animals  useful  to
man,  such  as  the  dog,  the  pig,  and  others.

No  corresponding  myth  about  Woden  seems  to  be
extant.

2.  Gwydion  and  his  friends  harry  Hades  in  order  to
secure  its  king's  cauldron,  which  was  one  of  the  mystic
vessels  out  of  which  voices  issued  and  the  inspiration  of
wisdom  and  poetry.

One  of  Woden's  most  striking  adventures  was  his
journey  in  quest  of  the  holy  draught  from  giant  Sup-

1  Vigfusson  and  Powell,  Corpus  Poet.  Boreal  e,  i.  70.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  287

tung's  daughter:  the  draught  was  otherwise  called  the
Dwarfs'  Cup,  the  Dwarfs'  Ship,  and  other  curious  names
symbolic  of  thought,  wisdom,  and  especially  the  inspira-
tion of  poetry.

3.  Gwydion  obtained  the  boons  which  he  conferred
on  man  mostly  by  force  or  by  craft  from  the  powers
terrene,  with  whom  he  dealt  in  an  utterly  unscrupulous
fashion.

Woden  procured  the  precious  draught  which  was  to
be  a  gift  and  joy  for  men  by  wiliness,  Ulysses- like
patience,  and  even  perjury,  as  when  he  became  the
guileful  lover  of  Gundfled,  daughter  of  Suptung  the
giant,  who  owned  the  holy  drink,  in  order  to  steal  the
latter,  which  he  did  successfully.1

From  these  and  similar  items  of  agreement  between
their  stories,  together  with  the  close  kinship  of  their
names,  one  seems  to  be  fully  warranted  in  regarding
Gwydion  and  Woden  respectively  as  Celtic  and  Teutonic
representatives  of  one  and  the  same  hero,  belonging  to
a  time  anterior  to  the  separation  of  the  Celts  and  the
Teutons.  It  has  already  been  hinted  how  Gwydion  as
Ogmios  was  both  Heracles  and  Hermes  when  translated
into  a  classical  form ;  while  Vigf usson  and  Powell  have
suggested  comparisons  between  Woden  and  both  Ulysses
and  Prometheus,2  and  they  are  undoubtedly  well  war-
ranted in  so  doing.  Prometheus,  on  the  one  hand,  gets
fire  for  the  comfort  of  man  ;  while,  on  the  other,  Gwydion
procures  certain  breeds  of  animals  for  his  use,  as  well  as
the  gift  of  poetry  and  wisdom  for  the  benefit  of  his  mind  ;
and  Woden  undergoes  indescribable  danger  and  hardship

1   Corpus  Poet.  Boreale,  i.  23.  2  lb.  i.  civ,  ij.  460.


288  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

in  order  to  secure  a  draught  of  the  precious  drink.   Nor
does  the  parallel  end  there,  or  with  the  fact  that  in  all
three  cases  the  benefactor  of  man  had  to  undergo  dire
punishment  for  what  he  had  done.    It  extends  to  details  ;
for  Prometheus,  like  Woden  and  Gwydion,  created  human
beings,  and  it  was  only  with  the  friendly  aid  of  Athene
that  he  got  access  to  heaven  to  steal  the  fire  he  conferred
on  them.     And  in  spite  of  the  highly  respectable  cha-
racter usually  ascribed  to  the  grey-eyed  goddess,  the
scandal  found  its  way  into  Greek  literature,  that  Pro-
metheus' relations  with  her  were  somewhat  like  those  of
Woden  with  Gundfled,  and  that  it  was  for  his  amours
with  the  divine  spinster  that  he  was  so  terribly  punished
by  her  father  Zeus.1     Here,  however,  the  similarity  is
somewhat   more  concentrated  than   between  Gwydion,
Woden  and  Ulysses,  where  it  is  found  to  extend  to  the
general  character  of  the  chief  figures  in  the  stories  and  to
some  of  the  incidents  associated  with  them,  as,  for  exam-
ple, the  tale  of  Ulysses  visiting  the  island  of  Polyphemus
and  his  journey  to  the  nether  world.     But  in  all  pro-
bability the  parallel  appeared  still  more  striking  to  the
pagans  of  Italy  and  Greece  in  the  first  and  second  cen-
turies ;  this,  at  any  rate,  is  the  inference  I  should  draw
from  a  passage  in  the  third  chapter  of  the  Germania  of
Tacitus,  in  which  he  states  that  the  Germans  had  tradi-
tions about  a  Hercules  of  their  own,  whom  they  hymned
above  all  other  mighty  men  of  valour  in  the  songs  which
they  used  to  sing  when  about  to  engage  in  battle,  and
that  it  was  the  notion  of  some,  that  Ulysses,  borne,  in
the  course  of  the  wanderings  ascribed  to  him  in  story,

1  See  the  Scholiast  on  Apollonius'  Arg.  ij.  1249;  Servius,  Com.  in
Vergil.  Eel.  vi.  42.


TIT.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  289

to  Hie  sea  that  washed  the  shores  of  Germany,  visited
that  country.  They  went  on  to  specify  that  Ascibur-
gium,1  a  town  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  which  existed
in  the  historian's  time,  had  been  established  and  named
by  Ulysses.

The  evidence  offered  to  Tacitus  for  these  beliefs
was,  that  an  altar  had  formerly  been  found  at  Asci-
burgium  consecrated  to  Ulysses,  to  whose  name  was
added  that  of  his  father  Laertes ;  and  that  monuments
and  tombs  were  still  extant  in  Greek  characters  on  the
confines  of  Germany  and  of  Eaetia.  Now  Ascibur-
gium  should  mean  Ash-burgh  or  Ash-town ;  and  the
natural  conclusion  from  the  name  is  that  the  native
legend  represented  Woden,  here  called  Ulysses,  placing
the  man  Ash  whom  he  created  at  Ash-burgh,  and  giving
it  that  name.  When  Romans,  acquainted  with  the  reli-
gion and  mythology  of  their  own  country  and  those  of
Greece,  began  to  inquire  about  the  gods  of  the  Germans,
it  may  be  supposed  that  they  found  much  the  same  diffi-
culty with  regard  to  Woden  as  they  did  in  the  case  of
Ogmios.  The  accounts  they  heard  of  him  made  some
equate  him  with  Hercules,  while  they  reminded  others
of  Ulysses  beyond  all  question.  In  other  words,  the
Ilercules  and  Ulysses  of  the  Germania  represented  one
and  the  same  Teutonic  god  or  hero,  who  was  no  other
than  Woden.  According  to  this  interpretation  of  the
historian's  words,  the  ancient  Germans  had  poems  about
him  which  constituted  at  once  the  story  of  the  labours
of  the  Teutonic  Ilercules  and  a  rude  sort  of  Odyssey :
what  a  vista  of  lost  literature  this  discloses  to  the  gaze

1  It  is  supposed  to  be  represented  by  Asburg,  or  else  to  have  stood
near  Eesenberg.

D


290  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

of  the  student  of  the  early  history  of  a  great  race  !  "With
regard  to  the  altar  bearing  the  names  of  Ulysses  and  his
father  Laertes,  which  gives  the  story  the  air  of  the  exact-
ness that  proves  too  much,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the
words  of  Tacitus  do  not  compel  us  to  suppose  that  his
informant  mentioned  the  name  Laertes  or  had  ever  heard
it :  this  may  be  of  the  writer's  own  supplying.  But
even  granting  that  Tacitus' s  informant  asserted  that  he
had  with  his  own  eyes  read  the  names  of  both  Ulysses
and  Laertes  on  an  altar  in  the  Ehine-land,  such  a  state-
ment would  not  in  the  least  surprise  any  one  who  is
familiar  with  the  startling  results  obtained  by  untrained
or  careless  readers  from  ancient  but  intelligible  inscrip-
tions of  the  most  commonplace  kind ;  and  it  would  still
be  evidence  to  the  occurrence  there  of  altars  dedicated
to  a  god  who  resembled  Ulysses.  It  is  considerably  more
difficult  to  understand  the  mention  of  Greek  inscriptions
on  the  confines  of  Germany  and  Kaetia,  as  it  can
hardly  be  supposed  to  refer  to  an  occasional  tomb-
stone raised  over  a  Greek  serving  in  the  legions  of  Eome ;
while  epigraphy  has  nothing  more  nearly  in  point  to
show  than  the  inscriptions  in  southern  Gaul  composed
in  the  Gaulish  language  but  written  in  Greek  letters.
So  it  would  seem  as  though  Tacitus  or  his  informant
had  to  a  certain  extent  confounded  Gaulish  and  Greek.
With  regard  to  Woden  and  his  Celtic  counterpart,  it
would  probably  have  been  somewhat  hard  to  draw  a
sharp  line  between  them,  as  they  may  have  been  wor-
shipped under  practically  identical  names  in  the  districts
where  Germany  and  Gaul  were  conterminous :  thus  the
Gaulish  name  prevailing  there  may  have  been  the  one
corresponding  to  Welsh  Se  or  Seon,  the  Silchester  Saegon-,


IN.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  291

to  which  the  Teutonic  languages  would  answer  with  a
name  beginning  with  Beg-,   as  in  those  of  Arminius'

family,  such  as  Segimundus,  Segestis  and  the  like,  his
own  name  being  possibly  an  early  form  of  that  which
is  now  written  in  German  Siegfried.  In  such  a  case  the
Segi-  nomenclature  of  the  ruling  Cherusci  may,  perhaps,
have  had  reference  not  so  much  to  sieg  or  victory  in  the
abstract,  as  to  a  god  bearing  a  name  derived  from  his
attributes  as  a  victor.1

It  is  needless  to  say  that  Heracles,  Odysseus  and
Prometheus,  by  no  means  exhaust  the  list  of  Greek
equivalents,  so  to  say,  to  Gwydion  -  Woden ;  we  have
another  in  Orpheus,  with  his  marvellous  music — his  visit
to  Hades  and  his  all  but  successful  attempt  to  recover
his  Eurydice  are  well  known.  Still  more  striking  is
the  likeness  between  Jason  and  Woden,  as  any  one  may
perceive  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  study  together  the
story  of  Jason  with  Medea,  and  that  of  Woden  with
Gundiled  ;  also  the  way  he  disposed  of  the  iron  warriors
that  sprang  from  the  ground  in  a  formidable  crop,  as
compared  Avith  the  expedient  adopted  by  Woden  to  get
rid  of  the  nine  hay-mowing  slaves  of  the  giant  Suptung,

1  Solinus  mentions  Caledonia  or  the  north  of  this  island  as  a  distant
coast  visited  by  the  wandering  figure  of  Ulysses.  Prima  facie  there  is
nothing  improbable  in  the  notion  implied,  that  Romans  who  had  visited
the  north  of  Britain  had  found  worshipped  there  a  hero  or  god  who
reminded  them  of  Ulysses ;  hut  the  words  of  Solinus  lose  most  of  their
weight  from  the  fact  that  he  regarded  Ulysses'  visit  as  demonstrated
by  the  occurrence  there  of  an  altar  dedicated  to  him  in  Greek  writing.
The  passage  Looks  like  an  inaccurate  and  confused  reproduction  of  the
words  in  the  Germaniaj  but,  be  that  as  it  may,  there  is  hardly  room
to  doubt  that  strangers  from  the  Mediterranean  found  in  vogue  in
Celtic  and  Teutonic  lands  the  cult  of  a  god,  in  whom  they  sometimes
recognized  Hercules  or  Heracles,  and  sometimes  Ulysses  or  Odysseus.

D  2


292  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

when  he  was  plotting  to  get  a  draught  of  the  precious
mead  of  which  the  latter  was  the  owner.  Jason,  at  the
bidding  of  Medea,  threw  a  stone  among  the  armed  sons  of
the  dragon's  teeth,  and  they  fought  for  it — nobody  tells
us  why — until  they  all  fell  by  one  another's  hands ;  while
in  the  case  of  Woden  the  stone  was  a  marvellous  hone,
with  which  he  had  sharpened  the  scythes  of  Suptung's
men  with  such  satisfactory  results  that  each  of  them
was  anxious  to  possess  such  a  treasure,  and  Woden,
consenting  to  part  with  it,  threw  it  up  into  the  air,
whereupon  a  scramble  followed  in  which  each  of  the
mowers  swung  his  scythe  about  his  fellow's  neck.1  The
Jason  myth  and  those  which  mythologists  are  wont  to
connect  with  it  bring  us  face  to  face  with  a  most  fasci-
nating and  difficult  question  of  origin;2  but  we  may
pass  it  by  for  the  present  and  proceed  to  inquire  whether
the  religion  and  mythology  of  any  other  Aryan  people
afford  any  kind  of  parallel  to  Gwydion  and  Woden.
Without  much  trouble  we  come  across  what  we  want  in
Sanskrit  literature.  The  god  to  whom  I  wish  to  direct
your  special  attention  is  Indra :  it  is  needless  here  to
trouble  you  with  extracts  from  the  Kig-Veda,  speaking
of  him  as  a  supreme  divinity  of  the  Indian  pantheon ;
it  is  nevertheless  noteworthy  that  Indra  was  not  sup-
posed to  be  one  of  the  uncreated  gods,  but  one  who  had
been  born,  one  who  had  obtained  his  position  by  sacrifice
and  prayer.  Yedic  scholars  are  wont  to  take  for  granted
that  Indra  was,  like  most  of  the  ancient  gods  of  the
Vedas,  a  personification  of  something  in  nature;   they

1  Vigfusson  and  Powell,  i.  4G5.

2  See  Lang's  chapter  on  A  far-travelled  Tale  in  his  Custom  and  Myth,
pp.  87  &  seq.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  293

are,  however,  obliged  to  admit  that  in  Ins  case  the  per-
sonification is  more  thorough,  and  that,  while  the  other
anthropomorphic  divinities  were  ever  and  anon  liable  to
be  confounded  with  the  elements  of  which  they  were
personifications,  Indra  was  subject  to  nothing  analogous,
his  personality  being,  as  they  would  say,  far  more  fixed,
far  more  profoundly  modified  and  transformed  by  the
anthropomorphism  to  which  they  assume  it  to  have  been
subjected:  in  other  words,  Indra  was  far  more  human
than  the  elemental  gods,  and,  in  fact,  so  much  so  that  no
one  has  been  able  to  say  with  any  great  probability
what  he  was  originally  a  personification  of.  In  a  word,
the  evidence,  such  as  I  have  been  able  to  find  adduced,
leaves  the  personification  resting  on  no  solid  foundation,
it  being,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  just  as  probable  that,  in
point  of  origin  and  history,  Indra  should  be  regarded  as
a  deified  man.

The  following  things  concerning  him  are  worth  no-
ticing by  way  of  comparison  with  Gwydion  and  Woden :

1.  As  the  Norsemen  of  the  Wicking  period  fixed  their
gaze  on  the  warlike  side  of  Woden's  character,  so,  accord-
ing to  one  of  the  most  recent  expounders  of  Vedic  reli-
gion, Indra  was  above  all  things  the  warrior-god  of  the
Aryans  of  India.1  His  spoils  are  for  men,  and  it  is  on
their  behalf  that  he  fights.2    He  is  metaphorically  a  wall


1  I  refer  to  M.  Bergaigne  ami  his  work  entitled  La  Religion  I
d'apres  lea  Hymnea  du  Rig-Veda  (BibliotJieque  de  VEcole  dea  11
rftudes:  Paris,  1878,  1883),  i.  p.  xvi.

-  Ibid.  ij.  172,  178  (Rig-Veda,  i.  55,  5,  vij.  32,  14,  vij.  32,   17,
viij.  43,  13,  viij.  45,  40-1,  x.  120,  4).


294  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

of  defence,  and  he  is  a  castle,1  just  as  Gwydion  was  a
thick  door  of  protection.

2.  With  regard  to  wisdom  and  poetry  he  is  the  most
sagacious  of  the  wise2  and  the  most  skilled  in  song;3  he
is  called  an  old  friend  of  the  poets,4  and  he  is  not  unfre-
quently  associated  with  an  ancient  race  of  singers  known
by  the  name  of  Angiras;5  he  has  assumed  the  inspira-
tion of  prophets,6  and  he  can  take  all  forms  through  his
magic  power ; 7  lastly,  he  gives  his  friends  faithful  gui-
dance,8 like  Ogmios  or  Mercury.

3.  Daylight  and  rain  are  among  the  chief  boons  con-
ferred on  man  by  Indra ;  so  he  is  described  as  recovering
from  the  dark  powers  the  dawns  and  the  rains,9  which
in  Sanskrit  phraseology  are  called  the  cows : 10  in  other
terms,  he  is  said  to  split  open  the  sides  of  the  mountain
in  order  to  bring  forth  the  cows  from  their  stone  prison,
to  overthrow  the  mountain  or  to  dissolve  it  for  the  same
purpose.11     It  is  right,  however,  to  call  attention  to  the

1  See  Rig-Veda,  viij.  69,  7 ;  also  p.  188  of  the  Journal  of  the  Ame-
rican Oriental  Society  for  1882-5,  in  which  a  long  and  elaborate  paper
has  been  published  on  Indra  in  the  Rig-Veda,  by  Dr.  E.  D.  Perry.

2  Perry,  p.  196  {Rig-Veda,  x.  112,  9).

3  lb.  (Rig-Veda,  i.  100,  4).

4  lb.  p.  188  (Rig-Veda,  vi.  18,  5,  vi.  21.  5,  8).

5  Bergaigne,  i.  150  (Rig-Veda,  x.  108,  8),  ij.  175,  183;  Perry,  pp.
140-1  (Rig-Veda,  i.  62,  3,  i.  83,  4,  iv.  16,  8).

6  Perry,  p.  196  (Rig-Veda,  iij.  36,  5).

7  lb.  (Rig-Veda,  iij.  53,  8,  vi.  47,  18).

8  lb.  p.  189  (Rig-Veda,  v.  31,  8).

9  Bergaigne,  i.  pp.  xvi,  xviii.  10  lb.  ij.  179.

11  lb.  ij.  180  (Rig-Veda,  v.  30,  4,  vi.  17,  5,  vi.  43,  3,  viij.  45,  30,
x.  112,  8).


III.     TIIE    CULTURE    HERO.  205

fact  that  India  is  not  said  to  rain  in  the  sense  in  which
Parjanya,  or  Zeus  and  Jupiter,  were  said  to  rain;1  and
the  etymology  which  was  supposed  to  prove  his  name  to
have  made  him  a  pluvial  divinity  has  been  superseded
by  a  better  one  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  rain.2
But  to  return  to  Indra's  gifts,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed
that  the  cows  he  acquired  for  his  worshippers  were
always  of  the  nature  here  suggested ;  for  he  is  celebrated
in  some  of  the  hymns  as  the  giver  of  cows,  horses  and
women.3  One  of  the  chief  differences  between  Indra  and
Gwydion-Woden  is  that  Indra's  other  boons  have  to  be
constantly  conquered  afresh  from  the  powers  of  darkness,
who  as  often  carry  them  away.  In  the  case  of  light,  for
example,  the  conflict  repeats  itself  every  day,  as  it  is
Indra  who  brings  the  dawn  back  and  makes  the  sun
rise.4  This  necessary  intervention  of  Indra  to  make  the
sun  rise  recalls  the  habit,  which  Europeans  ascribe  to  the
Pueblo  Indians,  of  sending  their  sun-priest  to  salute  the
morning-star  and  the  dawn,  and  to  get  the  sun  up,  an
event  not  expected  to  happen  in  case  he  be  not  duly
invoked.5     And  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  Aztecs

1  Bergaigne,  ij.  184-5.

2  See  Bezzenberger  in  his  Beitrcege,  i.  342,  where  he  points  out  the
correspondence  between  Sanskrit  indra,  Zend  andra  (indra),  and  the
Teutonic  stem  (antra-)  from  which  he  derives  ().  H.  Ger.  antrisc,  entrisc,
'antiquus,  vetustus;'  M.  H.  Ger.  entrisch,  'old;'  Upper  Ger.  Dialects
mterisch,  enz&risch,  'ungeheuer,  seltsam.'  He  would  trace  the  stem
suggested  to  a  simpler  one  postulated  by  the  A. -Saxon  word  <  id,  'a
giant,'  and  the  0.  II.  Ger.  adjective  entisc,  andisc,  of  the  same  meaning
as  antrisc

3  Bergaigne,  ij.  177-9  (Rig-Veda,  iv.  17,  1G  &  saepc).

4  lb.  i.  p.  xvi,  ij.  187-8.

5  Dr.  E.  B.  Tylor  tells  mo  that  he  has  witnessed  this  ceremony  at
Zuni  ;  but  be  adds  that  until  one  Las  got  an  exact  translation  of  the


296  III.    THE    CULTURE   HERO.

thought  that  the  rising  of  the  sun  at  the  end  of  the  cycle
which  they  called  the  Sheaf  of  Years  was  an  open  ques-
tion ;  so  they  proceeded  by  means  of  human  sacrifice  to
persuade  him  to  do  so  as  before.1  Indra's  principal  weapon
in  all  his  conflicts  with  the  dark  powers  is  his  thunder-
bolt,2 but  he  is  also  very  materially  aided  by  his  wor-
shippers' prayers,3  and  in  some  of  his  most  difficult
undertakings  he  has  associated  with  him  Brahmanaspati,
the  lord  of  prayer,4  and  likewise  the  Angiras.5  He
breaks  open  the  enemies'  gates  by  the  spell  of  song ; 6  and
the  importance  of  the  worshipper's  prayers  to  the  Hindu
god  in  his  conflicts  with  the  dark  powers  is  the  Hindu
equivalent  to  the  Aoyo?,  eloquence  and  wisdom,  which
enable  the  Gaulish  Ogmios  to  accomplish  the  labours  of
Heracles.

4.  Another  of  the  things  which  Indra  acquires  by
conquest  from  the  dark  powers  is  the  soma,7  the  drink
of  the  gods,  which  in  Sanskrit  literature  holds  a  place
similar  to  nectar  and  ambrosia  in  Greek  mythology.  It
is  a  sort  of  water  of  life,  which,  among  many  other  won-
derful qualities  belonging  to  it,  makes  the  sick  well  and
gives  the  blind  his  sight ;  it  prolongs  life 8  and  is  a  means
of   rejuvenescence  generally,  which  calls  to   mind  the

prayer  formulae,  it  would  be  uusafe  to  say  that  the  proceeding  is  exactly
what  strangers  have  supposed  it  to  be.

1  Bancroft's  Native  Races  of  the  Pacific  States  (London,  1875),  iij.
393-6.

2  Perry,  p.  138  (Rig-Veda,  v.  31,  4,  &c).  3  Bergaigne,  ij.  235.

4  Perry,  pp.  165-6  (Rig-Veda,  viij.  85,  15).

5  lb.  pp.  141,  143  (Rig-Veda,  iv.  16,  8).

6  Bergaigne,  ij.  312  (Rig-Veda,  vi.  35,  5).

7  lb.  ij.  195  (Rig-Veda,  i.  32,  12,  iij.  36,  8,  iij.  44,  5,  vi.  44,  23).
s  lb.  i.  152  (Rig-Veda,  viij.  61,  17,  viij.  GS,  2).


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  207

Welsh  Cauldron  of  Regeneration.  The  rishis  or  the
sages  of  Sanskrit  tradition  carry  it  in  their  hearts,1  while
India  makes  rishis,  wise  men  or  poets,  of  those  who
have  drunk  of  it;  and  it  is  said  to  untie  the  poet's
tongue.2  The  Hindu  divinities  in  the  highest  heaven
quaff  soma  with  Yama,  the  god  of  the  dead,  under  a
tree  with  large  leaves.3  The  soma  is  theirs,  and  they
made  it  for  themselves,4  but  it  was  brought  to  this  world
by  an  eagle,0  which  reminds  one  of  Woden,  after  (banking
the  giant  Suptung's  mead,  flying  away  as  an  eagle,
whence  poetry  was  called  by  the  Norsemen  the  billows
of  Woden's  breast  and  other  names  of  the  like  nature ;
on  the  other  hand,  the  soma  from  the  sacrifices  is  said  to
be  carried  aloft  to  Indra  by  an  eagle.6  More  usually  the
one  of  the  dark  powers,  who  conceals  the  soma  coveted  by
Indra  is  Tvashtar,  a  sort  of  Dis  and  Vulcan  in  one.  Indra
overpowers  him  in  his  own  house  and  drinks  his  soma,7
though  Tvashtar  was  sometimes  reckoned  Indra's  own
father:8  this  has  a  kind  of  parallel  in  Gwydion's  con-

1  Bergaigne,  i.  149  {Rig-Veda,  x.  32,  9).

2  lb.  i.  150  {Rig-Veda,  i.  87,  5,  iij.  43,  5).
a  lb.  i.  86,  90  {Rig-Veda,  x.  135.  1,  7).

4  lb.  i.  149  {Rig-Veda,  ix.  18,  3,  ix.  78,  4,  ix.  85,  2,  ix.  109,  15).
s  lb.  i.  199  {Rig-Veda,  iv.  26,  6),  i.  173  {Rig-Veda,  viii.  84,  3,
ix.  86,  24,  ix.  87,  6,  ix.  89,  2).

■  Perry,  p.  165  {Rig-Veda,  i.  80,  2,  i.  93,  6,  iv.  26,  5,  vi.  20,  6) :
tlie  Sanskrit  word  is  cyena,  which  Dr.  Perry  renders  by  '  falcon '  and
M.  Bergaigne  by 'aigle,' while  the  definition  in  the  Petersburg  Dic-
tionary is  'der  grbsste  und  starkete  Raubvogelj  Adlerj  auch  Falko
oder  EabichV

7  Bergaigne,  i.  158  {Rig-Veda,  i.  84,  15),  iij.  58,  59  {Rig-Veda,  iij.
48,  4,  iv.  18,  3;  see  also  iv.  18,  11);  Perry,  pp.  MS,  149,  177.
s  lb.  iij.  58-9  {Rig-Veda,  ij.  17,  6,  iij.  48,  I  I.


298  III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

duct  towards  his  uncle  Math  and  his  virgin  footholder,
in  that  the  latter  is  outraged  by  one  of  Gwydion's
brothers  with  Gwydion's  active  intervention.1  Another
account  makes  Indra's  mother  give  him  the  soma  to
drink,2  wherein  one  may  perhaps  see  a  faint  correspond-
ence between  the  story  of  Woden  and  Gundfled  at  the
mead-giant's  house.  But  a  far  closer  parallel  is  to  be
detected  in  a  story3  in  the  Kamayana,  relating  how
Indra  assumed  the  garb  of  his  tutor  and  seduced  the
latter' s  wife,  for  which  he  cursed  Indra  to  undergo,  not
the  agonies  of  Prometheus,  but  a  nameless  punishment
to  be  compared  rather  with  that  inflicted  on  Gwydion
by  Math.  It  is  right  to  say  that  the  poet  of  the  Eama-
yana simply  makes  Indra  revoltingly  lewd,  and  knows
of  no  palliation  for  his  crime  such  as  that  suggested  by
the  motive  of  Woden  in  his  conduct  towards  Gundfled ;
but,  apart  from  this  story,  one  may  be  said  to  find  in
all  three  cases  of  Gwydion,  Woden  and  Indra,  the  same
remarkable  unscrupulousness  with  regard  to  the  other
powers,  who  are  treated  as  the  avaricious  and  jealous
owners  of  boons  which  they  wish  to  keep  to  themselves.
In  Norse  poetry  the  stealing  of  the  precious  mead  is
spiritualized  into  a  story  of  the  origin  of  poetry  and
wisdom,  and  the  Welsh  tradition  makes  the  cauldron
of  the  Head  of  Hades  a  vessel  whence  the  muses  and
their  inspiration  ascend;  while  Yedic  literature  clings
rather  to  the  more  original  idea  of  an  intoxicating  drink,
in  that  it  loves  to  dwell  on  Indra's  excessive  fondness  of

1  R.  B.  Mob.  pp.  63-5 ;  Guest,  iij.  224-7.

2  Bergaigne,  ij.  165,  iij.  58  {Rig-Veda,  iij.  48,  2),  104.

3  Ramayana,  ed.  A.  von  Schlegel  (Bonn,  1829, 1838),  Book  i.  chap,
xlviij.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  290

soma,  and  on  its  power  to  stimulate  and  strengthen  him
to  fight  the  powers  of  darkness.  He  is  accordingly
entreated  with  prayerful  vehemence  to  make  himself
tipsy  on  soma,1  and,  with  the  taste  characteristic  of  the
hymning  sages  of  the  Eig-Veda,  he  is  even  termed  a
cask  of  soma.2

5.  Indra  is  the  giver  of  women,3  and  he  provides  an
aged  friend  of  his  with  a  young  wife.4  Moreover,  he
rejuvenates  old  maids,5  and  rescues  from  death  the  child
of  the  maiden  who  had  from  shame  done  away  with  it,
and  which  the  ants  were  gnawing,6  a  curious  parallel  to
Gwydion's  providing  his  son  Llew  with  a  wife,  and
especially  to  his  saving  his  life  at  his  birth  and  rearing
him  to  the  intense  disgust  of  his  maiden  mother,  Arian-
rhod.

6.  Indra  is  sometimes  said  to  be  the  father  of  both
the  Sun  and  the  Dawn,7  while  the  Sun  is  also  treated
as  the  husband  and  lover  of  the  Dawn.8  But  Indra
is  more  than  once  described  making  war  on  the  Dawn,
who  is  then  called  a'  wicked  woman;  he  chases  her,
and  with  his  thunderbolt  smashes  her  chariot,  which
remains  wrecked  near  one  of  the  rivers  of  Heaven,  and
she  herself  rushes  headlong  from  the  height  of  that
realm.9     The  meaning  of  all  this  is  not  considered  very

1  Perry,  p.  165.  2  lb.  p.  173  (Big- Veda,  vi.  G9,  2).

3  lb.  p.  187  (Rig-Veda,  iv.  17,  16).

4  lb.  p.  189  {Rig-Veda,  i.  51,  13).
s  lb.  p.  190  (Rig-Veda,  iv.  19,  7).

t;  lb.  (Rig-Veda,  ij.  15,  7,  iv.  19,  9).

7  Bergaigne,  ij.  188,  191  (Rig-Veda,  iij.  31,  15,  iij.  32,  S).

8  lb.  ij.  2  (Rig-Veda,  i.  92,  11,  i.  115,  2,  vij.  76,  3),  14.

»  lb.  ij.  192,  193  (Rig-Veda,  iv.  30,  8—11;  also  ij.  15,  6,  x.  73,  6,
x.  138,  5).


300  III.     THE    CULTURE   HEEO.

clear,  but  a  reference  to  the  slowness  of  the  Dawn1  is
supposed  to  supply  the  key  to  it :  in  other  words,  the
Dawn  Avas  dallying  too  long  with  one  of  the  powers  of
night,  an  interpretation  which  is  favoured  by  the  fact
that  the  verses  preceding  one  of  the  passages  in  question
mention  Indra  taking  the  Sun  from  them  in  order  that  he
might  be  seen  of  men.2  If  this  view  be  approximately
correct,  we  have  in  it  a  remarkable  parallel  to  the  story
of  Blodeueet :  Llew  the  sun-god  was  Gwydion's  son,  and
Gwydion  had  created  Blodeued:,  a  personification  of  the
Dawn  and  the  Gloaming,  to  be  his  son's  wife ;  but  one
day  when  Llew  was  away,  his  wife  was  visited  in  the
evening  by  a  stranger,  who  made  love  to  her  and  with
whom  she  compassed  her  husband's  death.  This  was
followed,  as  you  will  remember,  by  Gwydion  bringing
Llew  back  to  this  life  to  avenge  his  sufferings.  The
wicked  woman  fled  in  terror  before  Gwydion,  until  her
maidens  fell  into  a  lake  and  she  herself  was  converted
by  the  touch  of  Gwydion's  wand  into  an  owl;  but
according  to  another  story,3  the  one  here  in  point,  it
was  across  the  heavens  that  Gwydion  chased  her,  when
he  left  the  landmarks  of  the  Milky  Way  to  indicate  the
course  of  his  march  when  he  was  engaged  in  the  pursuit.
Such  are  some  of  the  points  of  similarity  between
Indra  and  Gwydion- Woden ;  and  some  of  the  differences
between  their  stories  have  also  been  indicated  :  the  recur-
rence of  Indra's  help  to  man  is,  as  already  suggested,
not  emphasized  in  the  case  of  his  European  counterpart ;
and  the  prayers  of  his  worshippers  stand  in  his  case  in

1  Bergaigne,  ij.  193  (Rig- Veda,  ij.  15,  6,  v.  79,  9).

2  lb.  ij.  192  (Rig- Veda,  iv.  30,  3—6).

3  Morris'  Celtic  Remains,  p.  231,  s.v.  Gwydion.


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.


the  place  of  the  Aoyos  of  Ogmios.  It  is  probable,  how-
ever, that  he  owes  certain  of  his  attributes  to  his  having
assumed  some  of  those  of  an  ancient  storm-god  Trita,1
or  perhaps  of  Dyaus;  and  among  them  may  be  reckoned
the  thunderbolt.  Above  all,  one  has  to  bear  in  mind  the
distortion  which  the  Hindu  side  of  the  picture  has  under-
gone in  consequence  of  the  removal  of  the  abode  of  the
dead  from  the  nether  world  to  the  most  distant  heaven.
But  when  it  is  considered  what  a  far  cry  it  is  from  the
shores  of  the  Baltic  to  the  land  of  the  Five  Eivers,  how
long  it  must  have  taken  our  kindred  to  reach  it,  and
how  largely  their  blood  had  by  that  time  been  mixed
with  that  of  other  races,  it  is  a  matter  of  surprise  that
Sanskrit  literature  yields  so  many  points  of  contact
between  Indra  and  CI  wydion- Woden.  Some  of  them
are  brought  into  prominence  in  the  following  verses2
from  the  Big-Ycda,  with  which  these  remarks  may  be
closed  (i.  53.  2,  5,  G) :


'  Thou  art  the  giver  of  horses,  In-
dra, thou  art  the  giver  of  cows,  the
giver  of  corn,  the  strong  lord  of
wealth  :  the  old  guide  of  man,  dis-
appointing  no  desires,  a  friend  to
friends.  .  .  .'

'Let  us  rejoice,  Indra,  in  treasure
ami  food,  in  wealth  of  manifold  de-
light and  splendour.  Lei  us  rejoice
in  the  blessing  of  the  gods,  which
as  the  strength  of  offspring,
yives  us  cows  first  and  horses.'


'  Du,  Indra,  schenkest  Rosse,  schenk-

est  Kinder  auch,
du  Bchenkest  Korn  and  hist  des  Gutes

starker  Heir,
Beschenkst  die  Manner,  Bchmalerst

ilnv  Wunsche  trie,
ein  Fivund  den  Freunden.     .     .     .'

1  Lass  Reichthum,  Indra,  lass  erlang-

en  Labung  una,
BehrglaMendeQenusse,himmelstreb-

ende,
Und  Huld  der  Gotter,  die  den  Man-

nern  Kraft  verleiht
und  reich  zuerst  an  Rindern  und  an

Rossen  ist.'


1  Perry,  pp.  142-6.

2  Tlic  English  translation  is  from  Mas  Mutter's  Chips,  i.  31-2,  and
the  German  ono  from  Grassmann's  Rig-Veda  Uebereetzt,  ij.  pp.  57-8.


302


III.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.


'These  draughts  inspired  thee,  O
lord  of  the  brave  !  these  were  vigour,
these  libations,  in  battles,  when  for
the  sake  of  the  poet,  the  sacrificer,
thou  struckest  down  irresistibly  ten
thousands  of  enemies.'


'  Dich    haben    diese    Tranke,    diese

Kraf  tiger,
die  Soma's  dich  berauscht,  o  Fiirst,

im  Vritrakampf,
Als  du  dem  Sanger,  der  die  Streu

bereitete,
zehntausend  Feinde  schlugest  ohne

Widerstand.'


The  inference  to  be  drawn  from  the  foregoing  com-
parisons is,  that  the  Aryan  nations  before  their  separation
cherished  a  belief  in  a  hero  or  god  to  whom  they  owed  all
their  comforts  in  life  :  it  was  he  that  made  the  Sun  shine
and  the  Dawn  keep  her  time ;  and  it  was  to  him  they
looked  for  the  weather  they  wanted.  The  first  breeds
of  animals  useful  to  man,  whether  domestic  or  wild,
were  believed  to  have  been  obtained  by  him  through
craft  or  violence  from  the  jealous  powers  who  wished  to
keep  them  from  the  human  race.  They  traced  probably
to  the  same  origin  the  fire  that  served  to  cook  their  food,
and  the  intoxicating  drink  which  they  knew  as  a  stimu-
lant and  a  source  of  inspiration.  But  their  benefactor
was  believed  to  have  undergone  unspeakable  hardship  in
his  quest  of  the  boons  he  conferred  on  their  kin,  and
that  for  a  time  the  jealous  powers  were  able  to  wreak
their  wrath  on  him  for  his  goodwill  to  man.  It  was
probably  this  goodwill  that  constituted  the  gravamen  of
his  crime,  and  not  the  crafty  and  unscrupulous  way  in
which  he  had  gone  to  work ;  for  that  was  calculated  in
certain  stages  of  civilization  to  call  forth  admiration
rather  than  the  contrary,  while  the  habit  of  imagining
both  gods  and  demons  to  be  jealous  of  the  human  race
is  familiar  to  all  in  the  literatures  of  various  ancient
nations.  Among  others,  that  of  the  Greeks  has  already
been  alluded  to  in  this  connection  more  than  once ;  but


III.     THE    CULTURE    IIFRO.  303

nowhere,  perhaps,  is  the  criminality  of  human  progress
more  ostentatiously  recognized  than  in  the  Latin  classics.
Witness  the  qnaint  conservatism  ascribed  by  Horace  to
the  gods,  Odes,  i.  3,  where  it  is  hinted  that  he  who  first
entrusted  his  frail  bark  to  the  waves  committed  a  sin
against  their  majesty,  that  they  had  meant  the  sea  to
keep  men  apart  and  not  to  be  a  highway  of  intercourse :

'  Nequicquam  deus  abscidit

Prudens  Oceano  dissociabili
Terras,  si  taraen  impiae

Non  tangenda  rates  transiliunt  vada.'

But  I  may  be  charged  with  forgetting  the  most  remark-
able parallel  of  all,  to  wit,  that  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,
where,  instead  of  the  intoxicating  soma,  or  the  draught
from  the  deep  well  of  wisdom,  or  the  cauldron  of
science  and  regeneration,  we  are  told  of  a  tree  with  a
knowledge-giving  crop  of  forbidden  fruit,  whereof  it  was
a  crime  for  man  to  taste,  while  he  who  induced  him  to
commit  it,  is  represented  as  a  reptile,  as  a  serpent  to
have  his  head  bruised.  This  would,  however,  involve
the  discussion  of  Semitic  questions,  the  settling  of  which
is  neither  within  my  competence  nor  in  any  way  essen-
tial to  the  understanding  of  the  history  of  Aryan  religion.
Let  it  suffice  that  the  course  of  that  history  is  intelligible
in  itself ;  that  it  is,  on  the  whole,  a  history  of  progress ;
and  that,  so  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  study  it  in  these
lectures,  it  may  briefly  be  summed  up  thus :  some  of  the
Celts  of  antiquity,  as  also  of  the  Teutons  and  the  Hindus,
avenged  themselves  in  their  own  time  on  the  narrowness
of  the  divine  creatures  of  their  ancestors'  imagination  by


304  III.     THE    CULTURE    HEEO.

thrusting  thorn  aside  to  make  room  at  the  head  of  their
respective  pantheons  for  Ogmios  and  Gwydion,  for  Woden
and  Indra,  as  divinities  more  adequately  representative
of  man  and  the  aspirations  of  his  being.


Lecture  IV.

THE    CULTURE    HERO.

(continued.)


The  whole  ground,  so  far  as  concerns  the  Culture  Hero
of  the  Celts,  has  now  been  in  a  sense  rapidly  traversed,
in  order  that  you  may  see  at  a  glance  the  view  advocated ;
but  in  so  doing,  a  great  many  data  had,  for  fear  of  over-
loading the  discourse,  to  be  passed  over  in  silence.  Thus,
for  example,  the  story  of  the  birth  of  Llew  has  been
omitted ;  but  it  will  be  convenient,  for  the  sake  of  com-
parison, to  give  it  before  proceeding  any  further.

GWYDION   AND    CAIRBRE.

The  Laws  of  Wales  speak  of  an  officer  of  the  court,
who  was  called  the  troediog,  or  the  foot-holder,  one  of
whose  duties,  according  to  the  Ycnedotian  version,  was
to  hold  the  king's  feet  in  his  lap  from  the  time  he  took
his  scat  at  table  to  the  moment  when  he  retired  to  rest.1
He  had  also  to  discharge  the  more  delicate  function  of
scratching  his  majesty's  person  whenever  the  royal  skin
happened  to  itch.    Now  Math  ab  Mathonwy  used  to  have

1  Ancient  Laws  owl  Institutes  of  Wales  (London,  1841),  "Vol.  L
bk.  i.  chap,  xxxiv.  Conaire  Mor  (p.  135),  monarch  of  Erinn,  had  also
a  foot-holder:  see  O'Curry,  iij.  143.

X


306  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

a  lady  to  act  as  his  foot-holder,  and  she  must  be  a  virgin.
This  office  was  filled  by  a  most  lovely  damsel  whose  name
was  Goewyn ;  but  while  Math  was  away  in  the  war  with
the  men  of  Dyved  (p.  244),  she  was  outraged  by  Gil-
vaethwy  son  of  Don,  with  his  brother  Gwydion's  con-
nivance. Math,  whose  conduct  is  always  represented  as
just  and  righteous,  indemnified  Goewyn  by  making  her
his  queen,  while  he  punished  Gwydion  and  his  brother
by  changing  them  into  deer,  wild  boars  and  wolves,
forms  which  they  had  for  three  successive  years.  When
the  term  of  their  punishment  was  completed,  Math
changed  them  back  into  their  own  shapes,  and  admitted
them  again  to  his  court.  He  next  asked  Gwydion  to
recommend  him  a  duly  qualified  foot-holder,  and  Gwydion
brought  his  own  mistress  to  Math,  namely,  Arianrhod,
daughter  of  Math's  sister  Don,  whereupon  Math  addressed
her  as  follows  :  '  Ha,  damsel,  art  thou  the  maiden  ? '  'I
know  not,  Lord,  other  than  that  I  am,'  was  the  reply;
at  which  Math  took  up  his  magic  wand  and  bent  it,
saying,  l  Step  over  this,  and  I  shall  know  if  thou  art
the  maiden.'  That,  I  ought  to  state,  is  Lady  Charlotte
Guest's  translation ; l  but  to  do  justice  to  the  sense  of  the
original,2  one  has  to  substitute  both  times  for  the  words
'the  maiden,'  the  words  '  a  virgin.'  To  continue  the  story,
Arianrhod  complied  with  Math's  request,  and  left  behind
her  a  fine  chubby,  yellow-haired  boy,  at  whose  screaming
she  made  for  the  door,  near  which  she  left  a  smaller  form ;
but  before  anybody  caught  a  second  sight  of  the  latter,
Gwydion  had  wrapped  it  in  a  sheet  of  satin,  and  con-
cealed it  in  a  chest  at  the  foot  of  his  bed.     Math  took

1  Guest's  Mab.  iij.  231.  2  E.  B.  Mab.  p.  68.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  30/

the  chubby  boy  and  had  him  christened;  but  no  sooner
was  he  christened,  the  story  goes  on  to  say,  than  he
made  for  the  sea  ;  and  no  sooner  was  he  in  the  sea  than
he  acquired  the  nature  thereof,  for  he  swam  as  well  as
the  best  fish  in  its  waters,  wherefore  he  was  called  Dylan
son  of  the  Wave :  no  wave  ever  broke  under  him.  The
rest  of  his  story  is  compressed  into  the  single  statement
that  his  death  was  caused  by  a  blow  dealt  by  his  uncle
the  smith,  Govannon  son  of  Don.  To  return  to  Gwydion  :
he  heard  one  morning  as  he  lay  awake  in  his  bed  a  low-
sound  issuing  from  the  chest  at  the  foot  of  it ;  getting
up  quickly,  he  opened  the  chest,  and,  as  he  did  so,  he
there  beheld  a  little  boy  swaying  his  arms  about  from
the  folds  of  the  satin  sheet  and  scattering  it.  He  took
the  child  in  his  arms,  and  made  for  a  town  where  he
knew  of  a  nurse  and  engaged  her.  The  boy  was  in
her  charge  for  a  year,  in  the  course  of  which  he  attained
to  such  a  size  as  would  have  been  surprising  even  if  he
had  been  two  years  old;  and  in  the  second  year  he  was
a  big  lad  able  to  come  to  the  court  by  himself.  Gwydion
took  notice  of  him,  and  the  boy  became  fonder  of  him
than  of  anybody  else.  He  was  afterwards  brought  up
at  the  court1  until  he  was  four ;  and  at  that  age  it  would
have  been  a  wonder,  the  story  tells  us,  to  find  a  boy  of
eight  as  big  as  he  was.  One  day,  when  he  was  out
walking  with  his  father,  the  latter  took  him  to  Arianrhod's
castle.     What  then  happened,  owing  to  her  disgust  at

1  At  firsl  sight  this  looks  as  if  it  meant  Math's  court  in  the  I
bourhood  of  the  Conwy,  lmt  the  drift  of  the  story  is  beal  understood
apposing  the  court  meant  to  have  been  Gwydion'a  own  court,
which  was  probably  al  Dinas  Dintte  or  at  Caer  Seon  (p.  271).    It  was
doubtless  some  place  nearer  to  Caer  Arianrliod  than  Math's  court.

x2


308  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

finding  her  child  alive,  has  been  told  elsewhere  (p.  236) :
but  she  is  not  represented  as  making  any  allusion  to  his
brother,  who  had  made  the  sea  his  habitat.

Such  is  the  story  of  Llew's  birth  and  early  years,  as
given  in  the  Mabinogi  of  Math  ab  Mathonwy,  where
alone  it  occurs ;  and  it  puts  us  in  a  position  to  do  justice
to  the  parallel  between  Gwydion  and  Cairbre  Muse,  toge-
ther with  the  other  Cairbres  whose  identity  with  him  has
been  suggested.  For  Cairbre  Muse,  like  Gwydion,  had
two  sons  by  his  sister.  Her  name  was  Duben,  and  theirs
were  Core  and  Cor  mac  respectively.  The  children  were
twins,  and  the  story  of  their  birth  is  no  less  strange  than
that  of  Dylan  and  Llew,  for  one  of  them  was  found  to
have  nipped  off  his  brother's  ears  before  his  birth.  The
crime  of  their  parents  caused  the  crops  to  fail,  which,
according  to  the  idea  prevalent  in  ancient  Ireland,  was
its  natural  result,1  and  Cairbre  was  obliged  to  confess  his
guilt  to  the  nobles  of  his  realm,  who,  when  the  children

1  Rhys,    Celtic  Britain,  p.   64  ;   but  to  the  references  there  given
may  be  added  traces  of  the  same  belief  among  the  Welsh.     Take,  for
instance,  the  following  couplet  from  a  prophecy  of  evil  days,  in  the
12th  century  MS.  called  the  Black  Book  of  Carmarthen :
'An  bit  ni  bluitinet  a  Mr  diev.
Ariev  enwir  edwi  fruytheu.'
'  We  shall  have  years  and  long  days
With  false  kings  (and)  failing  fruit-crops.'
The  second  'and'  rests  on  an  emendation  suggested  by  the  metre,  and
if  one  omit  it  the  rendering  will  be,   '  With  false  kings  (causes)  of
failing  fruit-crops,'  as  the  grammatical  relation  of  the  words  might  then
be  represented  thus  :  'With  false  kings  of  withering  of  fruits.'     The
original  is  given  (with  a  serious  misprint)  by  Skene,  ij.  23,  and  trans-
lated, i.  485,  as  follows  :

'  To  us  there  will  be  years  and  long  days,
And  iniquitous  rulers,  and  the  blasting  of  fruit.'


IV.     THE    CULTUEB    1IEK0.  309

were  born,  ordered  thorn  to  be  burnt,  that  the  incest  might
not  remain  in  the  land.  '  Give  me,'  said  Cairbre's  druid,
'that  Core1  there,  that  I  may  place  him  out>iilc  Erinn,  so
that  the  incest  may  not  be  within  it.'  Core  was  given
to  the  druid,  and  the  latter,  with  his  wife,  whose  name
was  Bdi,  took  him  to  an  island.  They  had  a  white  cow
with  red  ears,  and  an  ablution  was  performed  by  them
every  morning  on  Core,  placed  on  the  cow's  back ;  so  in
a  year's  time  to  the  day  the  cow  sprang  away  from  them
into  the  sea,  and  she  became  a  rock  in  it ;  to  wit,  the
heathenism  of  the  boy  had  entered  into  her.  Do  Bui,  or
Bui's  Cow,  is  the  name  of  the  rock,  and  Inis  Bui,  or  Boi's
Isle,  that  of  the  island.  The  boy  was  afterwards  brought
back  into  Erinn.  Such  is  the  story2  how  Core  was  purged
of  the  virulence  of  his  original  sin,  and  the  scene  is  one
of  the  three  islets  called  the  Bull,  the  Cow  and  the  Calf,
not  far  from  Dursey  Island,  in  the  gulf  called  Kenmare
River.

Now  I  have  only  to  reproduce,  word  for  word,  as  it
occurs  in  the  Book  of  Zeinstcr,  the  account  of  another

1  Core  means  croppy  or  cropped  :  in  this  instance  the  name  refers
to  the  bearer's  ears,  and  the  verb  used  as  to  the  action  of  his  brother
maiming  him  is  ro-chorc.  The  correctness  of  this  interpretation  is
borne  out  by  a  passage  in  the  Bodley  Ms.  /.<"/</  (HO,  fol.  98aI,  where
we  read  of  a  boy  called  Core  or  Con. ill  Core  hidden  under  the  hearth,
where  lire  dropping  on  him  burnt  off  one  of  his  ears  (?  both),  and
caused  him  to  be  named  or  surnamed  Core.  The  original  runs  thus  :
'  Foluigi  amac  foantellug  fontalam  ....  Bruinnith  intene  forsin  mac
conloisc  alio  isde  bacorc  core  mac  luigt/dg.'

2  Bk.  of  the  Dim,  54a  ;  see  also  O'Curry's  M<i<jh  Lnm,  p.  28,  note,
where  he  calls  the  druid  Dinioch.  That  is  probably  the  word  dinech,
which  I  have  ventured  to  render  by  'ablution,'  on  the  supposition  that
it  is  the  same  word  as  the  Welsh  duutt,  '  the  act  of  pouring  or  shedding
a  liquid.'


310  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

Cairbre,  whom  Irish  historians  treat  as  distinct  from
Cairbre  Muse,  in  order  to  enable  the  reader  to  see  that
they  are  mistaken,  and  that  the  two  Cairbres  were
originally  one  and  the  same  character.  There  are  several
important  reasons  for  giving  the  story  as  there  related : 1
it  is  part  of  a  longer  tract  concerning  an  Irish  triad  of
men  said  to  have  spoken  as  soon  as  they  were  born.
The  one  here  in  point  was  called  Morann  son  of  Cairbre
Cinnchait.  The  following  is  the  reason  why  he  spoke :
all  the  offspring  of  the  privileged  classes  in  Erinn  were
killed  by  the  Cairbre  alluded  to ;  for  he  belonged  to  the
Peasant  Tribes,  and  he  seized  the  sovereignty  of  Erinn
by  force.  And  his  reign  was  bad ;  for  the  corn  would
have  only  one  grain  in  each  ear,  the  holly  but  one
berry,  and  the  oak  but  one  acorn  in  his  time.  Three
sons  were  born  to  this  Cairbre,  and  they  [or  rather  two
of  them]  were  drowned  together  by  his  orders;  for  it
appeared  that  they  were  monsters,  because  they  were
born  helmeted.  The  same  thing  was  attempted  in  the
case  of  the  third  son :  two  of  the  king's  men  were
charged  to  go  with  him  to  throw  him  into  the  billow's
mouths.  But  as  soon  as  they  cast  the  boy  from  them
into  the  sea,  the  billow  broke  his  helmet,  so  that  they
beheld  his  face  on  its  ridge.  It  is  then  he  spoke,  saying,
1  Rough  is  wave.'  They  hastened  to  him  and  lifted  him
up.  '  Do  not  lift  me,'  said  he :  '  Cold  is  wind.'  '  What
shall  we  do  with  the  boy  ? '  said  one  of  the  men.  '  "We
shall  do  thus,'  said  the  other:  'we  shall  leave  him  in  a
box  on  the  top  of  the  stone  of  the  smith's  door — that  is

1  Bk.  of  Leinster,  126b;  see  also  Prof.  Atkinson's  analysis  of  the
tale  in  the  Introduction,  p.  31.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  3]  1

Mden's,  the  smith  of  the  king — and  we  shall  keep  watch
over  the  child  to  see  whether  the  smith  will  take  to  it.'
When  the  latter  came  forth  from  his  house  he  saw  the
child  in  the  box,  and  he  proceeded  to  carry  it  into  the
house.  '  Light  a  candle,  "wife,'  said  he,  '  that  this  find  I
have  made  may  be  seen.'  A  candle  was  then  brought
him,  and  then  Morann  [speaking  for  the  third  time]
said,  'Bright  is  candle.'  The  child  was  brought  up  by
Moen  as  his  own.  The  two  men  aforesaid,  however,
knew  that  it  was  not  his.  Once  on  a  time  afterwards,
Cairbre  went  to  drink  beer  in  Moon's  house,  and  just
when  they  found  the  drinking  most  agreeable,  the  child
went  from  lap  to  lap  until  he  went  on  Cairbre's.  'The
lad  takes  to  me :  whose  is  the  boy  ?'  said  Cairbre,  with
a  heavy  sigh.  The  child's  mother,  that  is,  Cairbre's  wife,
heaved  another  sigh.  '  What  is  the  matter  with  you,'  said
j\Ioen;  'is  it  envy  that  seizes  you?  Though  the  boy  be
dear  to  me,  and  though  he  be  my  son,  I  had  rather  he
were  yours,  on  account  of  the  love  you  bear  me,  and
because  you  have  need  of  him.'  '  That,  however,  does
not  help  us,'  said  Cairbre.  '  Good  now,'  said  the  two
men  afore -mentioned;  'the  reward  of  one  who  would
bring  thee  a  child  like  that  would  be  good.'  '  That  it
would  be,'  said  Cairbre ;  '  I  should  give  him  its  weight  in
silver  and  one-third  its  weight  in  gold ;  but  it  is  useless
to  talk,  as  you  are  but  uttering  idle  words.'  'But  as
we  are  on  this  subject  of  the  boy,'  said  the  two  men,
'  let  the  bargain  be  made  binding  on  thee.'  The  bargain
is  accordingly  bound  on  him,  and  no  sooner  was  that
done  than  the  two  men  went  to  him  and  placed  the  boy
in  his  bosom;  they  proved  to  him  that  he  was  his.
'That  is  the  boy,'  said  they,  'whom  we  took  from  thee


312  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

to  be  drowned,  and  we  did  so  and  so  with  him.'  'All
that  is  true,'  said  the  smith.  It  is  therefore  the  boy-
was  called  the  son  of  Moen ;  and  these  are  the  three  first
sentences  that  Morann  sj)oke  immediately  after  his  birth,
namely,  Bough  is  wave,  Cold  is  wind,  and  Bright  is
candle.  Morann  afterwards  took  the  office  of  chief  judge
of  Erinn,  and  his  father  Cairbre  died.  And  he  sent  his
son  to  Feradach  Finn  Fechtnach,1  in  the  land  of  Alban,
to  invite  him  to  the  sovereignty  of  Erinn ;  for  he  had  fled
before  Cairbre  over  the  sea  to  escape  death  at  his  hands.
He  came  at  Morann's  invitation  and  took  the  sovereignty
of  Erinn,  while  Morann  occupied  the  office  of  chief  brehon
or  judge.

Here  the  story  abruptly  ends,  owing  to  the  loss  of  a
leaf  in  the  manuscript.  But  elsewhere  the  Peasant  Tribes
are  represented  inviting  all  the  nobles  of  Erinn  to  a  great
banquet,  at  which  they  murder  them  and  make  Cairbre
their  king :  the  scene  is  associated  with  Mag  Cro,  or  the
Field  of  Blood,  near  Knockmaa,  in  the  county  of  Galway,
and  the  whole  is  usually  regarded  as  the  echo  of  a  great
political  revolution  in  Ireland  during  the  first  decades  of
the  Christian  era.  Further,  the  attempt  to  convert  the
myth  into  history  has  long  since  been  much  aggravated
by  a  notion  that  we  have  the  Atecotti  of  the  Eoman
history  of  Britain  in  the  Peasant  Tribes  of  Erinn,  because
the  Irish  which  that  term  is  meant  to  render  was  Aithech
Tuatha.2  But  the  story  admits  of  a  very  different  inter-
pretation :   Cairbre,  as  we  take  it,  was  originally  one  of

1  Elsewhere  described  as  one  of  the  heroes  of  Ulster  :  see  O'Curry's
Mnimers,  &c.  iij.  95.

2  See  the  Four  Masters,  A.D.  9,  10,  also  14  and  O'Donovan's  notes;
likewise  the  editor's  Introduction  to  O'Curry's  Manners,  pp.  xxiv — xxxi.


IV.     TIIE    CULTURE    HERO.  313

the  names  of  the  Culture  Hero,  whose  attacks  were
directed  against  the  avaricious  powers  of  Hades ;  but  the
-rent  burial-places  of  pagan  Ireland,  near  the  head- quarters
of  its  princes,  brought  Hades  very  near  to  this  world.  So
it  comes  about  that  Cairbre,  instead  of  being  made  to
take  a  long  journey  to  the  nether  world,  as  one  might
have  been  led  by  the  story  of  Gwydion  to  expect,  finds
his  foes  in  El-inn  itself.  But  in  spite  of  this  shifting  of
the  scene  to  this  upper  world,  the  parallel  between
Cairbre  and  Gwydion  is  preserved,  one  might  say,  to  a
nicety.  Gwydion  gains  his  victory  over  the  powers  of
Hades,  a  deified  man  over  the  gods ;  so  Cairbre  differs
from  those  whom  he  vanquishes  by  a  corresponding  infe-
riority of  race,  he  being  of  ignoble  descent,  while  they
are  described  as  of  the  noble  and  princely  lineage  of  Mile.1
We  must  not  leave  this  story  without  noticing  the
addition  to  Cairbre's  name  of  the  term  Cinnchait,  consist-
ing of  the  genitive  of  Cenncait,  meaning  Cat's  Head,
which  also  occurs  as  Caitchenn,  l  Cat-headed.' 2    As  a  rule,

1  According,  however,  to  another  account,  Cairhre  was  the  son  of  a
king  of  Lochlann  :  see  O'Curry,  p.  2G4.

2  The  Four  Masters,  A.D.  10,  have  Cairpve  Cinncait,  while  under
A.D.  14  they  speak  of  him  as  Cairhre  Caitrend.  The  Booh  of  Fencujh
(ed.  Hennessy)  has  Cauyre  Caitchenn  at  p.  34,  and  Cairjpre  chin  cait
(witli  Cairjire  in  the  nom.  case)  at  p.  56.  Cairbre's  name  happens  to
occur  mostly  in  the  genitive,  so  that  it  might  he  supposed  that  the
genitive  Cinnduiit  was  merely  in  apposition  to  it;  hut  O'Curry,  who
was  well  read  in  such  matters,  treats  it  as  Cairhre  Cin/i-Cait  in  his
Lectures  on  the  MS.  Materials;  and  a  passage  in  the  BJc  of  L<  insti  r,
129c/,  has  Corpri  Chindchaitt,  where  Corpri  is  not  itself  genitive.  The
verse  runs  thus :

'Lanri  corpri  cMndcAaitt  c/miaid.
osin  temraig  taile  to»dlniai/j ;
c6ie  bliadan  arat/i  asinraind.
^c  atbat/t  ath«;>  moramd.'


314  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

however,  it  is  the  representatives  of  darkness  that  are
pictured  as  deformed  about  the  head  and  ears,  as  in
the  case  of  Core  and  the  drowned  brothers  of  Morann,
together  with  many  others.  There  would  be  nothing
surprising  in  making  Cairbre  the  Culture  Hero  a  son  of
dark  parents,  just  as  Gwydion  is  son  of  Don,  the  goddess
of  death  (p.  91),  and  this  would  explain  the  use  of  the
genitive  in  Cairbre  Cinnchait,  which  would  mean  that
Cairbre  was  the  son  of  Cenncait,  just  as  the  son  of  Duben
is  briefly  called  Core  Duibne.  This  view  derives  some
confirmation  from  the  principal  name  in  the  following
story:  the  original,  of  which  it  is  an  abstract,  has  the
interest  of  being  one  written  down  in  Tory  Island  in
1835,  by  the  Irish  scholar  and  antiquary  O'Donovan,
from  the  dictation  of  Shane  O'Dugan,  whose  ancestors
are  said  to  have  been  living  there  in  St.  Columba's  time:1
In  days  of  yore  there  were  three  brothers  called  Gavida,
Mac  Samthainn  and  Mac  Kineely,  living  on  the  coast  of
Donegal,  opposite  Tory  Island,  which  was  so  called  from
its  tors  or  prominent  rocks.  Gavida  was  a  distinguished
smith  who  had  his  forge  at  Drumnatinne  (Fire-ridge),
while  Mac  Kineely  was  lord  of  the  district  around,  com-
prising what  is  now  the  parishes  of  Kath-Finan  and
Tullaghobegly,  and  he  possessed  such  a  valuable  grey
cow  that  attempts  were  always  being  made  to  steal  her
from  him.  At  the  same  time  Tory  Island  was  the  head-
quarters of  a  notorious  robber  called  Ealor,  who  had  one
eye  in  the  middle  of  his  forehead  and  another  in  the  back
of  his  head ;  this  latter,  by  its  foul  distorted  looks  and
its  venomous  rays  and  glances,  would  strike  one  dead,  so

1  The  Four  Masters,  A.M.  3330,  editor's  note  (i.  18—21).


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  3  I  5

he  used  to  cover  it  unless  he  wished  to  petrify  his  foes ;
and  even  to  this  day  an  evil  or  overlooking  eye  is  called
by  the  Irish  Balor's  eye.  Once  on  a  time  his  druid
revealed  to  Balor  that  he  should  die  by  the  hands  of  a
grandson  of  his  ;  and  as  he  had  only  one  child,  a  young
daughter  called  Ethnea,  he  made  sure  against  any  future
danger  by  having  her  shut  up  on  a  lofty  and  almost
inaccessible  height  called  Tor  More,  or  the  big  tor,  at  the
eastern  extremity  of  the  island.  There  she  was  guarded
by  twelve  matrons,  who  were  never  to  mention  the  other
sex  to  her.  Balor  went  on  with  his  robberies,  and  he
was  clever  enough  at  last  to  steal  Mac  Kineely's  grey
cow.  lie  transformed  himself  for  the  purpose  into  a  red-
headed lad,  and  told  Mac  Samthainn,  who  happened  to
be  holding  the  grey  cow  by  a  halter,  that  he  had  over-
heard his  brothers  at  the  forge  agreeing  to  use  his  steel
for  their  own  swords,  whereupon  Mac  Samthainn  asked
the  foxy  lad  to  take  the  halter,  while  he  went  to  the
forge  in  a  towering  passion.  The  next  sight  Mac  Kineely
had  of  his  cow  was  to  see  her  with  Balor  in  the  middle
of  the  sound.  Mac  Kineely  learnt  from  a  druid  that
the  cow  could  not  be  recovered  till  Balor  had  been
killed,  as  he  would,  in  order  to  keep  her,  never  shut
the  basilisk  eye;  but  Mac  Kineely  had  a  fairy  friend
who  told  him  how  Balor  was  to  be  brought  to  his  fall.
This  lady,  called  Biroge  of  the  Mountain,  took  Mac
Kineely  dressed  as  a  woman  through  the  air  to  the  Tor
More,  and  asked  shelter  for  a  lady  she  had  just  rescued
from  the  hands  of  a  cruel  tyrant.  The  twelve  matrons
could  not  think  of  disobliging  the  banshee,  and  >he  in
her  turn  put  them  all  to  sleep  as  fairies  can ;  but  when
they  woke   they  found   that  Biroge  and   her   protegee


316  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

were  gone.  The  matrons  tried  to  persuade  their  ward
that  it  was  but  a  dream ;  but  the  fair  Ethnea  knew
better,  and  in  due  time  she  gave  birth  to  three  boys
together.  Balor  was  furious  on  finding  this  out,  and
had  the  three  boys  wrapped  in  a  sheet  and  sent  out  to
be  drowned  in  a  certain  whirlpool  which  he  indicated ;
but  before  the  boat  had  reached  the  spot,  the  pin  fell  out
of  the  sheet,  and  the  eldest-born  baby  tumbled  into  the
sea.  The  two  others  were  taken  to  the  whirlpool,,  while
the  previous  one  was  picked  up  by  the  banshee  and
taken  to  its  father  Mac  Kineely,  and  he  gave  it  to  his
brother  Gavida  to  foster  and  bring  up  a  smith,  a  great
profession  in  those  days.  Balor,  finding  out  that  Mac
Kineely  was  the  father  of  his  grandchildren,  who,  he
was  pleased  to  think,  were  all  three  at  the  bottom  of  the
sea,  crossed  with  a  party  of  his  followers  to  the  mainland,
and  took  Mac  Kineely  out  to  a  large  white  stone,  and
thereon  chopped  his  head  off.  The  warm  blood  gushed
forth  and  penetrated  the  white  stone  to  its  very  centre ;
and  there  it  remains  to  speak  of  the  cruel  deed  and  to
give  its  name  of  Clock  Chinnfhaolaidh,  l  Kineely's  Stone,'
to  a  district  comprising  two  parishes.  Balor  pursued  his
life  of  depredation  more  boldly  than  before ;  but  in  the
course  of  years,  Lug,  for  that  was  the  name  of  the  son  of
Mac  Kineely  and  Ethnea,  grew  up  to  be  a  most  excellent
smith  and  to  learn  his  own  history :  he  was  observed  to
gaze  frequently  at  the  blood-red  veins  in  the  white  stone,
and  to  be  subject  to  fits  of  sullenness  and  gloom.  He
bided  his  opportunity,  for  Balor  was  again  in  the  habit
of  frequenting  Gavida's  forge;  and  one  day,  when  Lug's
uncle  was  absent,  Balor  came  and  was  foolish  enough  to
boast  of  his  victory  over  Mac  Kineely  years  before.    Lng


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  317

worked  for  him  and  watched  his  movements:  presently
he  took  out  of  the  fire  a  glowing  rod  of  iron,  which  he
adroitly  thrust  into  Balor's  evil  eye,  and  out  through  his
skull  on  the  other  side.  This  was  at  the  forge  at  Drum-
natinne,  though  others  will  have  it  that  the  scene  of
Balor's  death  was  at  Cnoc  na  fvl<i,  or  the  Bloody  Fore-
land.

Such  is  the  modern  version  of  a  very  ancient  story,  in
which  one  cannot  help  seeing  that  Lug,  saved  from
drowning  with  his  anonymous  brothers,  and  brought  up
by  Gavida  the  smith,  his  father's  brother,  is  the  same
person  as  Morann,  rescued  from  drowning  with  his  mon-
ster brothers,  and  brought  up  as  the  son  of  Moen  the
king's  smith.  The  parallel  between  the  two  stories  may
be  drawn  still  closer  if  one  take  into  account  that  Cairbre
may  be  inferred  to  have  been  the  brother  of  Moen.  It
seems  to  be  fairly  established  by  the  fact  that  Cairbre,  in
the  person  of  the  satirist  of  that  name,  who  disturbs  the
reign  of  the  Fomorian  tyrant  Bros,  is  called,  the  son  of
Etan  the  poetess  (p.  253);  and  that  Moen  the  seer,  in
whom  we  doubtless  have  Moen  the  smith,  as  every  great
smith  was  chiefly  famous  for  his  spells  and  divination,  is
also  called  Moen  son  of  Etan.1  It  occurs,  be  it  noticed,
in  the  legend  showing  how  by  cunning  and  craft  Cairbre
— there  called  Cairbre  Muse — got  the  first  lapdog  from
Britain  (p.  246).  The  story  ends  with  the  statement  thai
after  the  dog  died,  its  bare  skull  was  one  day  shown  by  a

1  In  Cormac's  Glossary  in  the  Three  Irish  Glossaries,  ed  by  Stokes,
p.  30,  and  the  Stokea-O'Donovan  translation  of  Cormac's  Glossary,
p.  Hi',  the  genitive  is  Edaine,  of  Eddin  or  Etdin  ;  but  in  the  Bodleian
fragment,  Laud  010,  also  ed.  by  Stokes,  it  is  Etna,  the  gen.  probably

of  Etan,  while  the  Die.  of  the  Dun,  3Sb,  has  Etan,  gen.  Elaine.


318  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HEE0.

wag  to  a  seer  and  poet,  to  see  if  the  latter  could  find  whose
it  was,  and  that,  by  a  process  of  divination  familiar  to  him,
he  discovered  that  it  was  the  skull  of  the  dog  imported
by  Cairbre.  That  the  seer  should  have  been  no  other
than  M<5en  son  of  Etan,  looks  quite  an  accident.  In
reality  it  was  probably  nothing  of  the  kind,  and  it  just
serves  to  show  how  the  legends  centring  around  Cairbre' s
name  must  have  originally  hanged  together.  This  is  not
all ;  for  the  father's  name  in  the  one  story  was  Cairbre
Cinnchait,  or  C.  (son)  of  Cat's  Head,  while  in  the  other  he
was  Mac  Kineely^  or  Son  of  Wolf's  Head.  This  parallel
between  Cenn-cait  and  Cenn-faelad  or  Kineely  can  hardly
be  considered  an  accidental  coincidence  of  no  significance,
but  rather  a  result  of  the  original  identity  of  the  two
tales ;  and  it  may  be  surmised  that  in  an  older  version  of
the  Donegal  one,  Mac  Kineely's  full  name  was  Carpri
mac  Cmnfaelad,  or  C.  mac  Kineely.

Looked  at  from  another  point  of  view,  Mac  Kineely
and  his  brother  Gavida  just  exactly  match  Gwydion  and
his  brother  Govannon.  Gwydion  was  the  principal  cha-
racter and  father  of  Llew ;  so  Mac  Kineely  was  lord  of
the  country  round  his  home  and  father  of  Lug,  who  will
be  shown  later  to  have  been  the  counterpart  of  Llew2  in


1  In  later  Irish  orthography,  Mac  Cinnfhaoladh,  '  the  Son  of
Cenvfhaoladlt,'  or,  as  it  was  written  in  mediaeval  Irish,  Cennfaelad,
which  meant  Fad's  Head  ;  but  fael  is  explained  to  signify  a  wolf,  Rev.
Celt.  iv.  415.  That  fdelad  was  the  genitive  of  /del  is  proved  by  the
occurrence  of  the  accusative  as  fuelaid  in  Stokes  &  Wiudisch's  //•.
Texte,  i.  pp.  45, 114.  Cenncait  occurs  independently  in  Clochan  Chinn-
chait,  where  the  Gilla  Dacker  lands,  Joyce,  pp.  272,  417.

2  Treating  the  Welsh  Beli  as  the  consort  of  Don  (p.  90),  and
regarding  Irish  Balor  as  well  as  Irish  Bile  as  etymologically  related


IV.    THE   CUI/TUBE   HERO.  319

more  than  one  respect.  Govannon,  or  Govynnion  as  he
is  also  called,  was  the  great  smith  of  "Welsh  story,  and
we  have  his  counterpart  in  Gavida,  who  would  probably,
had  we  got  the  myth  in  an  ancient  form,  have  appeared
under  the  name  Goibniu,  genitive  Goibnenn,  the  exact
equivalent  of  the  Welsh  Govynion,  and  the  name  of  the
great  smith  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann.  But  in  fact  it
would  be  more  accurate  to  say  that  his  name  does  occur
in  the  story;  for  though  the  cow  is  said  to  have  been
Mac  Kineely's,  its  name,  as  given  to  O'Donovan,  was
Glas  Gaivlen,  which  he  rightly  corrects  into  Glas  Gaivuc??,
that  is,  in  later  Irish  spelling,  Glas  Gaibhncnn,  l  Goib-
niu's  Grey  or  Brindled  (Cow):'  practically,  then,  the
legend  gives  the  smith  two  names — one  the  direct  repre-
sentative of  the  ancient  Goibiiiu,  and  the  other,  Gavida,
of  a  more  obscure  origin.  Lastly,  Amacthon,  the  Cul-
ture Ilero  of  Welsh  agriculture,  might  at  first  sight  seem
to  be  here  duly  represented  by  Mac  Samthainn,  who  takes
charge  of  Mac  Kineely's  cow  while  the  latter  steps  into  his
brother's  forge.  But  as  we  have  no  further  information
about  Mac  Samthainn,  the  parallel  must  be  acknowledged


to  Brfi,  we  may  put  the  pedigrees  of  Llew  and  Lug  side  by  side  as
follows  :


Ceithlenn  (wife  of  Balor),

I
Eithne  (mistress  of  Mac  Kineely

|  brother  of  ( ravida  the  smith).
Lug  (the  Solar  Hero).


Don  (wife  of  Beli).

I
Arianrhod  (mistress  of  Gwydion

|  brother  of  Govannon  the  smith).
Llew  (the  Solar  Hero).
Ceithlenn)  of  which  the  nominative  should  he  Ceithliu  (for  an  older
Ceithniu,  gen.  Ceithnenn),'was  possibly  another  name  of  Dauu  or  Puna,
Welsh  I  >6n  ;  and  it  is  probably  after  her  that  Tnis  (.'<  ithh  nn,  or  Ceith-
liu's  [ale,  that  is,  Enniakillen,  a  town  on  Lough  Erne,  has  been  called;
but  see  M.  d'A.  de  Jubainville's  Cycle,  p.  2li2.


320  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

to  be,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  very  faintly  drawn ;  and  it
is  possible  that  we  should  rather  recognize  in  Mac  Sam-
thainn  the  herdsman's  dog ;  for  the  name  seems  to  claim
kinship  with  the  Irish  word  samthach,  'a  haft  or  hilt,'
also  '  an  axe  with  a  long  handle  ; '  so  that  one  may  pro-
bably translate  it  *  the  Boy  of  the  Haft,'  and  compare  the
name  of  the  dog  introduced  to  Erinn  by  Cairbre  Muse's
craft,  which  was  Mug-eime,  or  '  the  Slave  of  the  Haft.'
The  story,  as  you  will  remember,  explains  how  the  dog
came,  in  acquiring  it,  into  Cairbre's  possession  (p.  247).
The  coincidence  is  so  striking  that  I  cannot  help  thinking
that  we  have  here  traces  of  another  version  of  the  story  of
Cairbre  Muse  and  the  dog  he  imported  into  Erinn.  The
old  one,  somewhat  perversely,  makes  the  animal  into  a
lapdog ;  while  the  modern  story  is  probably  more  faith-
ful to  the  original  in  that  it  suggests  a  dog  useful  to  the
herdsman.1

From  the  foregoing  stories  and  those  mentioned  in

1  The  name  Mac  Samthainn  explains  how  in  time  the  story-tellers
got  into  the  way  of  interpreting  it  to  mean  a  man,  a  brother  in  fact
to  Mac  Kineely,  as  the  somewhat  indefinite  signification  of  the  word
mac  was  favourable  to  the  error.  For  though  it  is  commonly  rendered
'son'  in  pedigrees,  it  means  no  more  than  'boy,'  and  the  genitive  fol-
lowing it  need  be  no  parent's  name  :  thus  a  student  was  called  Mac
Legind,  'Boy  of  Beading;'  and  there  was  an  old  name,  Mac  Naue,
which  Adamnan  {Vita  S.  Columbae,  ed.  Reeves,  Prcef.  p.  ij.  9)  rendered
Filius  Navis,  but  it  meant  more  nearly  '  Boy  of  the  Ship  or  Ship-boy.'
Still  more  to  the  point  is  the  name  of  Diarmait's  favourite  hound,  Mac
an  Chuill,  usually  rendered  '  Son  of  the  Hazel,'  but  it  Avould  be  more
exactly  'Boy  of  the  Hazel,'  in  spite  of  which  the  pronoun  used  for  the
name  is  si,  'she'  (Pursuit,  ij.  43,  §  41).  The  vocabulary  of  the  Celtic
languages  will  be  searched  in  vain  for  a  word  for  son  or  daughter  as
distinguished  from  boy  or  girl,  a  fact  of  no  little  negative  importance
when  weighed  along  with  Caesar's  ugly  account  of  the  menage  of  the
ancient  Britons  (v.  14).


IV.     THE    CULTURE   HERO.  321

connection  with  Gwydion,  it  is  evident  that  Cairbre  was
one  of  the  principal  names  of  the  Mercury  of  the  ancient
Irish ;  but  the  epic,  so  to  say,  in  which  he  played  the
leading  part  has  only  come  down  to  us  in  fragments
appropriated  by  different  tribes,  though  they  are  hardly
more  disconnected  and  inconsistent  than  one  would  natu-
rally expect  in  such  a  case.  In  the  first  place,  Cairbre
is,  as  it  were,  split  up  into  a  number  of  brothers,  mostly
to  meet  the  exigencies  of  tribal  genealogies.  Foremost
among  them  stands  Cairbre  Muse,  from  whose  descendants
at  least  six  different  districts  in  Minister  were  called
Muscraigc,  Anglicized  Muscrtj  or  Muskevry?-  The  next
in  importance  was  Cairbre  Niafer,  or  C.  the  Champion
of  Men,  and  that  significant  designation2  reminds  one  of
the  Culture  Hero  under  his  name  Ogma,  who  was  repre-
sented as  the  champion  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann.  Cairbre
Niafei  was  monarch  of  Erinn  and  dwelt  at  Tara  of  the
Kings,3  and  he  was  father  of  Ere,  who  survived  him  at
Tara4  to  figure  in  the  story  of  Ciichulainn.  This  Cairbre
is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  avengers  of  his  father  Conaire
(p.  135),  and  it  was  in  his  reign  that  the  Fir  Bolg  were

1  See  p.  255,  above  ;  also  the  Bk.  of  Mights,  p.  42,  note.

2  The  scribe  of  the  story  of  the  Deisi  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  5  [a,
calls  hiru  Corpri  Niad,  which  should  mean  Cairbre  'of  Champions,'  or
'of  (the)  Champion.'

:;  See  a  poem  by  a  poet  called  OTIartagan  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,
161  a,  161 /<;  also  O'Curry's  edition  of  it  in  his  MS.  Materials,  pp.
51  1-6.  This  clashes  with  other  supposed  facts,  and  it  has  been  repre-
sented that  Cairbre  was  only  king  of  Leinster,  and  that  he  lived,  QOl
at  Tara  of  the  Kings,  but  at  another  Tara  :  see  O'Curry,  ibid.  p.
and  (/Donovan's  note  to  his  Battle  of  Afagh  Bath,  p.  138;  but  there
is  no  mistaking  O'llartagan's  meaning.

*  Winduch,  p.  :il2;  O'Curry's  Manners,  &c.  ij.  199.

Y


322  IV.     THE    CULTUKE    HERO.

driven  westwards  to  the  islands  including  Arann.1  The
third  brother  is  called  Cairbre  Eigfota,  who  is  described
as  assisting  his  brothers  to  avenge  their  father  ;2  but  he
is  chiefly  known  as  the  ancestor  of  the  Dal  Riada,  l  the
division  or  tribe  of  Eiada,'  better  known  as  the  Dalriad
Scots  of  Antrim  and  Alban,  Riada  and  Rigfota  being  the
same  name,  which  Bseda  wrote  Reuda?  These  three
Cairbres  are  usually  mentioned  together  as  the  sons  of
Conaire;4  but  sometimes  a  fourth,  Cairbre  Baiscinn,  is
added  to  them;  and  from  him  were  supposed  to  be  derived
the  Corco  Baiscinn,  a  people  in  the  south-west  of  the  pre-
sent county  of  Clare.5  Probably  Cairbre,  king  of  Kerry
and  father  of  the  poetess  Crede  (p.  252),  should  be  added
to  our  Cairbres ;  and  identification  with  the  Culture  Hero
has  been  suggested  in  the  case  of  the  harpist  Cairbre,
who  had  the  so-called  chord  of  knowledge  in  his  lyre
(p.  255).  The  meaning  also  of  the  reign  of  the  tyrant
Bres  the  Fomorian  being  disturbed  by  the  Cairbre  who

1  See  a  poem  by  Mac  Liag  in  the  Bit.  of  Leinster,  152 a,  152&,  and
O'Curry's  Manners,  &c.  ij.  122-3.

2  Bk.  of  the  Dim,  5ia.

3  Historia  Ecclesiastica,  i.  1,  where  it  is  not  quite  evident  whether
Baeda  left  out  the  consonants  gf  as  being  both  silent  even  in  his  time,
or  subsequent  etymologists  have  thrust  them  into  a  word  where  they
had  no  business.  Cairbre  Rigfota  would  mean  Cairbre  of  the  long
elle  or  fore-arm,  but  this  spelling  does  not  appear  to  occur  in  connection
with  the  name  of  the  Dalriad  Scots.

4  But  there  were  doubtless  plenty  of  accounts  inconsistent  with  this.
For  instance,  Cairbre  Niafer  is  made  son  of  Bos  Baud,  or  R.  the  Red,
and  brother  to  Ailill  the  husband  of  Medb,  and  to  Finn  of  Ailinn  :  see
the  passages  cited  in  O'Curry's  MS.  Mat.  pp.  483,  513,  515  ;  also  the
pedigrees  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  fol.  311^.

5  O'Donovan's  note  to  the  Bk.  of  Bights,  p.  48,  and  to  the  Topo-
graphical Boems,  p.  lxxi,  note  61C.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  323

composed  the  first  satire  in  Erinn  has  been  indicated
(p.  253).  It  now  only  remains  to  be  said  that  the  great
(  ulture  Ilero  who  bore  the  name  of  Cairbre  was  doubt-
less placed  on  a  level  with  the  gods,  and  this  seems  to
be  the  meaning  of  the  fact  that  Cairbre  occurs  in  a  triad
of  the  poets  of  the  Tuatha  De"  Danann.1  This  is  brought
into  still  greater  relief  in  a  poetic  version  of  an  oath  in
the  epic  story  of  the  Tain  (p.  140)  as  told  in  the  Book  of
Zcinster,  where  Medb  is  represented  urging  a  famous
champion  called  Fer-diad  to  undertake  a  duel  against
her  mighty  enemy  Ciichulainn.  Fer-diad,  wishing  to
feel  certain  that  Medb's  promises  would  be  faithfully
kept  to  his  race  in  case  he  fell  in  the  contest,  says  that
it  is  not  enough  for  him  to  have  the  pledging  by  sun  and
moon,  by  earth  and  sea,  which  seems  to  have  constituted
the  ordinary  oath;  he  must  have  the  fulfilment  bound
on  six  sureties  and  no  less  :  the  queen  concedes  it  readily
in  the  following  order  : 2


Cid  domnal  na  charpat.
na  niaman  an  airgne
gidi'at  lucht  na  bairddnc
rotfi'atsu  gid  acht
fonasc  latt  ar  morand.
madaill  latt  a  chomall
naisc  carpri  min  manand.
isnaisc  ar  damacc.


Though  it  be  Domnal  in  his  chariot,
Or  Niaman  of  noble  slaughter,
Tho'  they  be  the  folk  of  the  bardism,
Thou  shalt  have  them  notwithstanding
Thine  (shall  be)  a  bond  on  Morann,
If  thou  would'st  have  its  fulfilment,
Bind  Cairbre  the  smooth  of  Man ;
And  bind  our  two  sons.


Which  of  the  sons  of  Medb  the  two  were  to  whom
allusion  is  made,  it  would  perhaps  be  difficult  to  say,
as  she  had  many ;  but  Cairbre  and  Morann  come  before
them,  and  after  the  more  dread  divinities  of  the  deep
and  of  death,  who,  according  to  the  Celtic  notion,  were

1  Mac  Firbis,  quoted  by  O'Curry,  pp.  217,  573.

2  Bh  qfLoiiuter,  SI  A;  (/Curry,  iij.  418-9.

Y2


324  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

the  patrons  of  poetry  and  bardism.  Why  Cairbre  should
here  be  called  smooth  is  not  very  clear,  unless  it  be  in
reference  to  his  manners  and  speech,  supposing  them  to
have  been  such  as  those  of  Gwydion  would  lead  one  to
expect.1  The  obscurity  of  the  allusions  is  a  matter  of
no  great  importance ;  and  what  one  has  rather  to  notice
is,  that  the  names  of  Morann  and  Cairbre  go  together  in
the  oath,  just  as  those  of  Llew  and  Gwydion  are  insepa-
rable in  Welsh  literature.  Nay,  one  may  go  further  and
point,  as  will  be  done  later,  to  distinct  traces  of  the  two
corresponding  divinities  in  the  ancient  inscriptions  of
Gaul  and  the  Celtic  portion  of  the  Iberian  peninsula.

GWYDION   AND    AlTHERNE.

The  next  group  of  tales  to  be  mentioned  gives  us,  for
comparison  with  Gwydion  and  others,  a  remarkable  Ulto-
nian  poet  called  Aitherne,  who  belonged  to  Conchobar
mac  Nessa's  court  at  a  time  when  the  Ultonians  are
represented  enjoying  such  prosperity  and  power  that
they  were  occasionally  much  puzzled  how  to  find  an
excuse  for  invading  and  plundering  their  neighbours;
but,  when  no  other  means  of  fomenting  a  respectable
quarrel  could  be  found,  the  poets  and  bards  might  be
safely  entrusted  to  do  the  work ;  for  "  it  was  customary,"
to  quote  Prof.  0' Curry's  words,2  "  for  distinguished  poets
and  bards  (who  were   also    the   philosophers,   lawyers,

1  The  local  reference  is  still  more  obscure,  since,  besides  the  Isle  of
Man  and  a  district  of  Man  in  Scotland,  which  is  partly  represented  by
Clackmannan,  there  was  a  Diin  Manann,  or  Fort  of  Man,  somewhere
in  the  territory  of  Fermoy  in  the  county  of  Cork :  see  O'Donovan,
Topographical  Poems,  pp.  102-3,  notes  544-6;  and  the  Bk.  of  Rights,
p.  82,  note.

2  Lectures  on  the  MS.  Materials  of  Ancient  Irish  History,  p.  265.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  325

and  most  educated  men  of  their  day)  to  pass  from  one
province  into  another,  at  pleasure,  on  a  circuit,  as  it  may
bo  called,  of  visits  among  the  kings,  chiefs,  and  nobles  of
tlic  country;  and,  on  these  occasions,  they  used  to  receive
rich  gifts,  in  return  for  the  learning  they  communicated,
and  the  poems  in  which  they  sounded  the  praises  of  their
} nitrons  or  the  condemnation  of  their  enemies.  Some-
times the  poet's  visit  bore  also  a  diplomatic  character ;
and  he  was  often,  with  diplomatic  astuteness,  sent,  by
direction  of  his  own  provincial  king,  into  another  pro-
vince, with  which  some  cause  of  quarrel  was  sought  at
the  moment.  On  such  occasions  he  was  instructed  not
to  be  satisfied  with  any  gifts  or  presents  that  might  be
offered  to  him,  and  even  to  couch  his  refusals  in  language
so  insolent  and  sarcastic  as  to  provoke  expulsion  if  not
personal  chastisement.  And,  whenever  matters  proceeded
so  far,  then  he  returned  to  his  master,  and  to  him  trans-
ferred the  indignities  and  injuries  received  by  himself,
and  publicly  called  on  him,  as  a  matter  of  personal  honour,
to  resent  them.  And  thus,  on  occasions  where  no  real
cause  of  dispute  or  complaint  had  previously  existed,  an
ambitious  or  contentious  king  or  chief  found  means,  in
those  days  just  as  in  our  own,  to  pick  what  public  opinion
regarded  as  an  honourable  quarrel  with  his  neighbour."
To  these  words  of  O'Curry's  I  should  add,  that  the  rules
of  hospitality  and  honour  with  regard  to  the  poets  in
ancient  Erinn  forbade  the  refusal  to  them  of  anything,
whatsoever  it  might  be,  they  chose  to  ask  for ;  and  this
was  now  and  then  made  the  means  of  embarrassing  an
enemy.  Thus,  on  the  day  of  Ciichulainn's  death,  his
cunning  foes  sent  a  poet  to  ask  him  for  his  spear1  when

1  Jin:  OH.  iij.  177—180.


326  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

the  owner  had  most  need  of  it  himself.  Not  daring  to
refuse,  he  presented  it  in  a  way  that  proved  instantly
fatal  to  the  recipient ;  but  even  so,  it  hastened  Ciiclm-
lainn's  fall.  Now  Conchobar  chose  as  his  emissary  to
pick  quarrels  with  his  neighbours  the  poet  Aitherne,
who  is  represented  as  notoriously  the  most  unreasonable
and  avaricious  of  men ;  but  it  is  to  be  remembered  that
his  story,  treated,  of  course,  as  a  narration  of  facts,  comes
to  us  from  the  Book  of  Leinster,  written  by  the  scribes
of  the  hereditary  foes  of  Ulster.  So  it  has  to  be  dis-
counted very  considerably  in  so  far  as  regards  the  poet's
private  character ;  and  I  think  you  will,  as  we  proceed,
see  that  it  does  not  belong  to  history,  but  that  Conchobar
and  Aitherne  are  Irish  reflexes  of  Math  and  Gwydion,
when  the  latter  (pp.  243-6)  got  possession  by  stealth  or
cunning  of  certain  animals  from  Hades.

Having  premised  this  much,  one  may  proceed  to  make
an  abstract  of  Aitherne's  story.1  He  first  made  for  the
northern  part  of  Connaught,  where  nothing  is  recorded
of  him.  He  then  proceeded  to  the  court  of  a  king  called
Echaid  mac  Luchtai,  near  the  Shannon.  This  king  was
one-eyed ;  so  the  only  gift  that  would  satisfy  Aitherne
was  the  king's  eye,  and  the  latter,  pulling  it  out  at  once,
gave  it  him.  His  servant  then  led  the  king  to  the  bank
of  the  lake  that  was  hard  by,  and  therein  he  washed  the
blood  from  his  face.  Hence  the  lake,  so  goes  the  story,
was  named  Loch  Dergdcircf  or  Eed- eye's  Lake.  In
consideration  of  the  value  Echaid  attached  to  his  honour,

1  Bk.  of  Leinster,  114  b — 117a;  see  the  whole  story,  edited  with  a
translation  by  Stokes,  in  the  Rev.  Celt.  viij.  47 — 63.

2  It  is  now  more  briefly  called  Loch  Derg,  and  it  is  situated  above
Killaloe  on  the  Shannon.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  327

in  that  lie  gave  his  only  eye  to  save  it,  Heaven  is  said  to
have  given  him  thenceforth  two  eyes  instead  of  the  ono
he  had  parted  with.  He  is,  moreover,  mentioned  as  ono
of  the  great  judges  of  early  Ireland ;  and  if  one  is  right
in  treating  this  tragic  story  as  having  been  distorted  by
the  quasi-historical  treatment  it  met  at  the  hands  of  the
euhemerists  of  Leinster,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  seeing
that  we  have  in  this  Echaid  some  such  a  representative,
for  example,  of  the  world  of  darkness  and  death  as  Bal<  >r
of  the  Evil  Eye,  and  one  of  his  names  may  be  inferred
to  have  been  Dergderc,  or  He  of  the  Eed  Eye,  whose
abode  was  associated  with  the  lake.  Looking  at  it  in  this
light,  and  presuming  the  sympathy  of  the  Irish  narrator
to  have  been,  for  the  reason  already  suggested,  transferred
to  the  wrong  side,  one  may  regard  his  story  as  a  blurred
version  of  the  same  original,  which,  in  the  ingenious  hands
of  the  poet  of  the  Odyssey,  speaks  of  Odysseus  blinding
the  single  eye  of  Polyphemus.

From  the  Shannon,  Aitherne  makes  his  way  to  the
court  of  Tigerna,  king  of  Munster,  where  he  insists  on  a
monstrous  demand  of  a  different  nature.  Thence  he  pro-
ceeds to  South  Leinster,  where  he  was  met  by  the  king
and  the  nobles  of  the  country,  who  offered  to  give  him
the  most  handsome  presents,  provided  only  he  abstained
from  entering  their  territory;  but  he  paid  no  heed  to
their  request.  When,  in  the  course  of  his  progress,  he
sat  with  the  king  and  his  nobles  in  an  assembly  at  a
place  called  Ard  Brcstine,  near  Tullow,  in  the  county  of
Carlow,  he  said  that  the  only  thing  that  would  satisfy
him  was  to  have  the  finest  treasure  there.  They  could
not  divine  what  it  was,  and  their  distress  was  exceedingly
great,  but  an  accident  delivered  them  out  of  their  straits.


328  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

for  there  chanced  to  be,  on  the  outskirts  of  the  multitude,
a  young  man  showing  off  his  horse;  and  in  wheeling
round,  the  animal's  hind  hoofs  cast  a  big  sod  into  the  air,
which  came  down  on  the  king's  lap.  Before  anybody
else  could  look  at  it,  he  espied  in  it  a  brooch,  containing,
as  the  story  has  it,  no  less  than  fourscore  ounces  of  red
gold.  He  bade  Aitherne  guess  what  he  had  in  his  lap,
to  which  the  poet  promptly  replied  in  rhyme,  that  he
had  the  brooch  that  had  served  to  fasten  Maine  mac  Dur-
tlmcht's  cloak,  adding  that  this  was  the  very  thing  he
wanted,  as  Maine  was  his  mother's  brother,  and  it  was  he
that  had  buried  the  brooch  there  after  the  defeat  and
slaughter  of  the  Ultonians  by  the  men  of  Leinster  in  a
battle  on  that  spot.  Now  with  regard  to  this  story,  it
is  to  be  observed,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  name  of  the
king  of  South  Leinster  was  Fergus  Fairge,  that  is  to
say,  Fergus  Ocean  or  of  (the)  Ocean,  which  sufficiently
explains  his  non-historical  character;  for  not  only  does
the  name  Fergus  take  us  back  to  Fergus  Mac  Eoig
(p.  139),  but  the  world  of  waters  and  that  of  darkness
are  persistently  associated  with  one  another  in  Celtic
mythology;  and  it  looks  natural  to  find  that  Lugaid1
was  his  son,  who,  so  far  as  concerns  the  Solar  Hero,  is
the  personification  of  darkness  and  evil.  But  we  are  not
altogether  left  to  rely  on  these  indications  as  to  the  real
scene  of  the  story,  namely  Hades ;  for  in  Maine's  brooch
we  have  a  counterpart  of  Woden's  ring,  Draupnir  or
Dropper,  which,  as  will  be  mentioned  when  we  come  to
speak  more  in  detail  of  the  story  of  the  summer  Sun-god,
he  placed  on  Balder' s  funeral  pile,  whereby  it  found  its

1  O'Curry,  pp;  465,  472.


IV.     TIIE    CULTURE   HERO.  329

way  with  Balder  to  Hell.  It  was  afterwards  retained
as  ;i  token  by  Balder  to  his  father  when  the  latter  sent
his  son  Hermocir  to  Hell  to  ask  for  Balder's  release :
]  (alder  was  not  allowed  to  go  back  with  Hermocir,  but  he
gave  his  brother  his  father's  gold  ring  to  carry  home
again :  it  had  the  peculiarity,  that  every  ninth  night  it
dropped  eight  others  like  itself.1  Thus  it  symbolized
the  ancient  week,  and  its  recovery  by  Woden  its  owner
must  mean  the  restoration  of  the  regular  vicissitude  of
day  and  night.

Aitherne,  having  got  the  brooch,  went  on  to  the  court
of  the  king  of  North  Leinster,  which  was  at  Naas,  on  the
Liffey.  There  he  was  not  satisfied  with  the  rich  presents
given  him,  but  he  insisted  on  sharing  the  queen's  love,
and  in  leading  captive  to  Ulster  150  of  the  chief  ladies
of  Leinster,  with  700  red-eared  white  cows.  The  poet
and  the  Leinster  men  did  not,  we  are  told,  bless  one
another  when  they  parted ;  and  no  sooner  had  the  former
crossed  the  boundary  into  his  own  country,  than  the  latter,
released  from  the  obligations  of  hospitality,  pursued  him
and  rescued  their  wives  and  daughters.  They  further
forced  him  and  the  Ultonian  army  that  arrived  to  protect
him  to  fortify  themselves  on  Howth  Head,  near  Dublin,
where  they  underwent  a  siege  for  some  days.  Finally,
the  Ulster  braves  sallied  forth  and  routed  the  men  of
Leinster,  and  their  king,  overtaken  on  the  banks  of  the
Liffey,  was  beheaded  by  Conall  Cernach.2  I5ut  it  would
be  useless  to  attempt  to  interpret  this  story  bit  by  bit  ;
suffice  it  to  say  that  Conall  Cernach,  or  C.  tin-  Victorious,


1  Corpus  Poet.  Bar.  i.  111.

2  Bk.  of  Leinster,  HG/<,  117'/  :  compare  Rev.  Celt.  i\j.  1   -  5,


330  IV.     THE    CULTURE   HERO.

is  to  be  regarded  as  a  sun-hero,  and  the  Leinster  king's
name  was  Mesgegra  mac  Datho,  that  he  was  the  owner
of  a  fabulous  pig,  and  his  brother  Mesroida  of  a  kind  of
Cerberus,  which  cannot  be  discussed  at  this  point.  There
is  nothing  historical  about  them,  and  if  one  wash  out  the
colouring  given  to  the  story  by  the  Leinster  story-tellers,
we  have  the  outlines  left  us  of  a  picture  which  was
originally  that  of  the  conflicts  of  the  Culture  Hero  and
his  friends  with  the  powers  of  darkness ;  but  it  must  be
confessed  it  can  only  be  recognized  in  the  light  reflected
on  it  by  the  cognate  pictures  of  Gwydion  and  Woden.
It  may  seem  strange  that  not  only  Connaught  and  the
west  should  be  made  to  stand  for  Hades,  but  also  Leinster.
This  latter  appears,  however,  to  have  been  so  treated  in
other  stories,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  relations  between
the  Ultonian  court  at  Emain  Macha  and  the  Leinster
court  at  Naas  on  the  Liffey;  as,  for  example,  in  the
story  of  Conchobar  and  Medb,  in  which  ISTaas  is  made
the  head-quarters  of  Ailill,  whose  wife  Medb  became
after  deserting  Conchobar,  her  former  husband.  Ailill
is,  so  to  say,  divided  between  Connaught  and  Leinster
after  his  marriage  with  Medb,  who  possessed  Connaught
as  her  inheritance  from  her  mother.1  It  is  from  their
capital  in  the  west  that  Ailill  and  Medb  set  out  on  the
Tain  (p.  140);  but  the  former's  portion  of  the  army  on
that  occasion  consisted  of  a  force  from  Leinster  called
the  Gailioin,  whose  superiority  over  the  rest  of  the  troops

1  Bk.  of  Leinster,  53  b;  O'Curry,  p.  282.  Their  capital  in  the  west
was  Cruachan  Ai,  a  place  near  Belanagare,  in  the  county  of  Roscom-
mon, where  the  remains  of  the  earthen  forts  distinguishing  the  site  go
by  the  name  of  Rath  Croghan  :  see  the  Bk.  of  Rights,  O'Donovan's
note,  p.  20.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  331

so  excited  his  wife's  jealousy  that  she  wished  to  have
them  all  massacred:  instead  of  that  she  was,  however,
only  allowed  to  have  them  dispersed  among  the  other
1. at  alliens.1  The  narrative  permits  it  to  be  seen  that  the
superiority  of  the  Gailioin  is  merely  an  interpretation  of
the  magic  arts  ascribed  to  them  ;2  and  this  is  in  harmony
with  the  fact  that  Irish  legend  makes  the  Gailioin  a  part
of  an  early  invasion  of  Erinn,  to  whose  share  Leinster
fell,  where  they  ranged  themselves  always  against  the
Tuatha  De*  Danann,  or  the  race  of  the  gods.  Similarly,
Leinster,  no  less  than  Connaught  and  the  west,  appears
to  represent  Hades  in  the  story  of  Aitherne.

This  view  of  Aitherne' s  doings  is  not  a  little  counte-
nanced by  a  strange  story  told  in  the  Book  of  Leinster
about  Aitherne's  notorious  churlishness.  In  that  manu-
script3 it  follows  those  of  which  an  abstract  has  just  been
given,  and  it  is  so  curious  that  I  venture  to  give  a
literal  translation  of  it  as  follows:  "Aitherne  the  Im-
portunate, son  of  Ferchertne,  he  is  the  most  inhospi-
table man  that  dwelt  in  Erinn.  He  went  to  Mider  of
Bri  Leith  and  took  the  cranes  of  denial  and  churlishness
away  from  him  surreptitiously ;  that  is,  with  a  view  to
refusal  and  churlishness,  that  no  man  of  the  men  of
Erinn  should  visit  his  house  for  hospitality  or  mendi-
cancy. 'Do  not  come,  not  come,'  says  the  first  crane.
'  Get  away,'  says  her  mate.  '  [Go]  past  the  house,  past
the  house,'  says  the  third  crane.  Any  man  of  the  men  of
Erinn  who  should  see  them  would  not  betake  himself  to


1  Bl:  of  the  Dun,  56?>,  58a;  see  also  O'Curry's  remarks  on  them  in
Ins  Manners,  Sec  ij.  259-G1.

-  Bk.  of  the  Dan,  57a.  3  117a,  117/'.


332  IV.     THE    CULTUEE    HERO.

his  engagement  to  fight  that  day.  He  (Aitherne)  never
devoured  his  full  meal  in  a  place  where  one  should  see
him.  He  proceeded,  therefore,  [one  day]  to  take  with
him  a  cooked  pig  and  a  pot  of  mead,  in  order  that  he
might  eat  his  fill  all  alone.  And  he  set  in  order  before
him  the  pig  and  the  pot  of  mead,  when  he  beheld  a  man
coming  towards  him.  'Thou  wouldst  do  [it]  all  alone,'
said  the  stranger,  whilst  he  took  the  pig  and  the  pot
away  from  him.  'What  is  thy  name?'  said  Aitherne.
'  Nothing  very  grand,'  said  he :

'  Sethor.  ethor.  othor.  sele.  dele,  dreng  gerce.

mec  gerlusce.  ger  ger.  dir  dir  issed  moainmse.'
Sethor,  ethor,  othor,  sele,  dele,  dreng  gerce,

Son  of  Gerlusce,  sharp  sharp,  right  right,  that  is  my  name.

Aitherne  neither  got  the  pig  nor  was  he  able  to  make
rhymes  to  the  satire.  It  is  evident  that  it  was  one  come
from  God  to  take  away  the  pig ;  for  Aitherne  was  not
stingy  from  that  hour  forth."

From  this  little  story  one  may  gather,  among  other
things,  that  Aitherne,  unable  to  master  on  the  spur  of
the  moment  metrical  skill  enough  to  manipulate  the  name
of  the  angel  in  possession  of  the  pig  and  the  pot  of  mead,
was  powerless  to  curse  him :  it  had  to  be  done  according
to  the  rules  of  the  poetic  art,  and  the  form  of  words  was
of  course  all-important.  But  let  us  come  to  the  birds :
Aitherne  got  them  for  the  purposes  of  denial  and  stingi-
ness, crimes  treated  in  a  version  of  the  Vision  of  Adamnan
as  characteristic  of  a  very  bad  class  of  men,  who  undergo
punishment  in  Hell  in  the  company  of  '  thieves  and  liars,
and  folk  of  treachery  and  blasphemy,  and  robbers,  and
raiders,  and  false-judging  brehons,  and  folk  of  contention,
and  witches,  and  slanderers,  men  who  mark  themselves


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  333

to  the  devil,  and  readers  who  preach  heresy.'1  But
what,  you  may  ask,  had  the  three  cranes  to  do  with
denial  and  stinginess?  Directly,  perhaps,  they  had
nothing  to  do  with  them;  but  it  is  suggested  that  tiny
were  stolen  by  Aithcrne  to  keep  people  away  from  his
house.  They  answered  that  purpose  by  reason  of  their
association  with  Mider,  who  was  one  of  the  kings  of  the
fairies  and  the  other  world,  which  nobody  would  willingly
visit.  In  other  words,  they  were  birds  of  evil  omen,  and
so  much  so  that  no  warrior  who  chanced  to  see  them
would  proceed  on  his  way  to  battle  that  day  in  spite  of
his  having  bound  himself  to  go.  I  should  hesitate  to
extract  any  more  meaning  out  of  the  story,  especially  as
one  does  not  read  that  Mider  was  reckoned  notorious  for
his  churlishness ;  and  if  it  were  asked  why  the  cram4
should  be  associated  with  Mider,  we  should  give  the
question  rather  the  form.  Why  a  triad  of  cranes  ?  Even
then  I  could  not  pretend  to  answer  it;  but  one  might,
perhaps,  venture  to  point  out  that  they  are  not  impro-
bably of  the  same  origin  as  the  three  cranes  perched  on
the  back  of  the  bull  on  the  Paris  monument,  to  which
attention  was  called  in  the  first  of  these  lectures  (p.  80).
In  Welsh  they  would  seem  to  be  matched  by  the  three
living  things  stolen  by  Amaethon  son  of  Don  from  Hades,
a  plover,  a  bitch  and  a  roe,  for  which  Gwydion  and  ho
fought  with  Arawn  the  king  of  that  country,  and  beat
him  in  one  of  the  Three  Frivolous  Battles  at  the  expense
of  71,0(M)  lives  (p.  245).  Here  the  Welsh  story,  with  its
three  different  kinds  of  creatures,  is  possibly  less  original
than  the  Irish  one,  with  its  three  cranes  or  herons;  and,

1  Stokes'  Fis  Adarrmdin  (Simla,  1  S7(J),  pp.  14,  15;  ami  Windisch,
pp.  187-8  j  also  B.V.  diuflaii/t  (p.   185).


334  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HEEO.

to  be  more  exact,  the  Welsh  version  may  have  compressed
into  a  triad  the  stories  of  several  thefts  from  Hades,  so
that  one  wonld  be  left  to  compare  the  bird  alone  with  the
cranes  of  the  Irish  tale.  One  of  the  accounts  of  Arthur
killing  the  infernal  giant  residing  on  Mont  S.  Michel
(p.  91),  represents  three  baleful  birds  turning  his  spits
for  the  giant ;  but  another  makes  them  into  three  maidens
forced  to  cook  for  him.1  One  is  tempted  to  interpret  the
association  of  the  three  with  the  terrene  powers  as  a
reference  to  their  supposed  wisdom  and  knowledge  ex-
tending over  time  in  its  three  divisions  of  future,  present
and  past;  and  the  'come,'  'go'  and  'past'  of  the  cranes'
cries  readily  lend  themselves  to  such  an  explanation.
We  might  perhaps  go  so  far  as  to  bring  the  three  maidens
into  comparison  with  the  Norns  or  three  weird  sisters  of
Norse  mythology,  and  even  with  other  threes  in  our
mythologies.  Be  that  as  it  may,  one  may  venture  to
hint  that  the  story  of  Aitherne  stealing  Mider's  cranes
was  the  echo  of  a  more  ancient  story  with  a  far  deeper
meaning ;  one,  in  fact,  which  represented  him  procuring
knowledge  and  wisdom  from  the  powers  of  the  nether
world  by  stealth.  But  the  Leinster  euhemerist  was
bound,  so  to  say,  to  construe  everything  relating  to
Aitherne  in  pejorem  partem.

You  might  now  be  left  to  think  the  best  of  Aitherne
in  his  reformed  character ;  but  one  cannot  dismiss  him
without   giving    the    tale    of   his    death.      Irish    story

1  See  Thornton's  Morte  Arthurs,  ed.  by  Perry  for  the  E.  Eng.  Text
Society  (London,  1865),  p.  31,  line  1029  :  'Thre  balefulle  birdez  his
brochez  they  turne  ;'  and  Wright's  Malory,  i.  176-7  :  'Three  damosels
turning  three  broches  whereon  was  broached  twelve  young  children
late  borne,  like  young  birds.'


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  335

represents  Coneihobai  marrying  several  times  (p.  139),
mid  one  of  the  ladies  given  to  him  as  consort  was  called
Derdriu,  whose  name  Macpherson  has  made  into  Darthula.
Her  birth  had  been  attended  with  prophecies  that  she
would  have  a  somewhat  Ilelen-like  history ;  so  some  of
Conchobar's  nobles  advised  that  the  ill-starred  child
should  not  be  reared ;  but  the  king  would  have  none  of
that  advice,  and  he  ordered  rather  that  she  should  be
brought  up  to  be  his  own  wife.  So  when  she  had  grown
up  a  young  woman  of  unsurpassed  beauty,  the  king  took
her  to  wife.  But  she  fell  in  love  with  one  of  the  sons
of  Usnech,  and  they,  to  avoid  the  wrath  of  Conchobar,
took  her  out  of  his  kingdom ;  but  when  they  had  been
years  in  exile  in  different  parts  of  Erinn,  and  lastly  in
Britain,  they  longed  to  return  to  their  country,  and
Fergus  mac  Roig  undertook  on  their  behalf  to  conciliate
the  king,  and  he  thought  that  he  had  succeeded  (p.  137) ;
but  no  sooner  had  the  sons  of  Usnech  reached  Emain
than  they  were  cruelly  murdered  by  Eogan  mac  Durthacht,
which  he  did  as  the  price  of  peace  with  Conchobar.
Fergus  himself  left  Ulster  to  go  as  an  exile  to  Connaught,
while  Conchobar  obtained  possession  of  Derdriu  for  the
second  time,  though  he  knew  that  she  by  that  time  hated
him  with  all  her  heart.  One  day  it  entered  his  head
to  ask  her  whom  she  most  hated  to  see.  The  answer
Avas,  'Thee  and  Eogan  mac  Durthacht.'  'Good,'  said
the  king,  '  thou  shalt  be  a  year  with  Eogan.'  Then  he
took  her  out  in  his  chariot  in  order  to  hand  her  over  to
the  latter;  but  on  the  way  she  put  an  end  to  herself  in
the  mosl  tragic  manner.1    Conchobar  after  that  event  was


Wmdisch,  pp.  81-2.


336  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

observed  to  be  sad,  and  a  search  was  accordingly  made  for
a  beautiful  maiden  to  take  the  place  of  the  unfortunate
Derdriu.  Such  a  one  was  found,  and  married  by  the
king  with  due  solemnity  and  state.  Her  name  was  Luain,
and  two  sons  of  Aitherne,  who,  like  their  father,  were
poets,  came  to  her  to  seek  the  rich  presents  it  was  usual
to  give  to  men  of  their  profession;  but  on  seeing  her
they  fell  in  love  with  her,  and  as  she  would  lend  no
ear  to  their  passion,  they,  together  with  their  father
Aitherne,  satirized  her  so  virulently  that  her  face  became
covered  with  blotches,  as  the  result  of  their  potent  incan-
tations. This  drove  her  back  distracted  to  her  father's
house,  where  she  died  of  grief.  The  men  of  Ulster,  at
the  instigation  of  the  king,  who  was  furious  at  what  had
been  done  by  the  poets,  killed  Aitherne  with  his  whole
family,  and  levelled  his  house  with  the  ground.  Such  is
the  story  of  Aitherne's  end ; 1  and  it  comes  very  close  to
that  of  Gwydion  and  Goewyn  (p.  305)  in  the  "Welsh
Mabinogi  of  Math.  Here  Conchobar,  though  not  por-
trayed so  noble  a  character,  takes  the  place  of  Math,  and
the  former's  young  and  beautiful  wife  that  of  Goewyn,
Math's  virgin  foot-holder.  But  instead  of  Aitherne  and
his  two  sons,  we  have  in  the  Welsh  tale  Gwydion  and
his  brother  Gilvaethwy,  who  had  a  passion  for  Goewyn,
and  was  enabled  by  the  scheming  of  Gwydion  to  execute
his  purpose.  In  the  next  place,  Math  marries  the  out-
raged Goewyn — Luain  is  married  earlier  in  the  Irish
sequence — and  he  then  jDroceeds  to  punish  Gwydion  and
his  brother,  where  one  notices  that  the  euhemerist  has  laid

1  O'Curry's  Manners,  &c.  iij.  373-4,  where  he  bases  his  summary
on  the  original  in  the  Bk.  of  Balhjmote  and  another  Dublin  manu-
script which  unfortunately  I  have  not  yet  seen.


IV.     THE   CULTURE    HERO.  337

liis  hand  more  heavily  on  the  Irish  narrative  than  on  the
Welsh  one.  For,  while  Conchobar  and  his  Ultonians
annihilate  Aithernc  and  his  house,  Math  only  punishes
the  two  brothers  by  transforming  them  into  beasts  for
three  years,  at  the  end  of  which  he  restores  them  to  their
previous  form  and  position.  Lastly,  the  two  stories  agree
as  to  the  motive  or,  more  correctly  speaking,  the  lack  of
adequate  motive,  attributed  to  Gwydion  and  Aitherne  in
their  lawless  conduct  towards  Goewyn  and  Luain  respec-
tively. In  this  particular,  both  stories,  together  with
that  of  Cairbre  with  Finn's  Luignian  wife  (p.  98),  may
justly  be  suspected  of  having  undergone  serious  distortion
or  blurring:  the  original  myth,  I  doubt  not,  supplied
some  such  an  intelligible  motive  as  that  attributed  to
"Woden  in  his  guileful  treatment  of  Gundfled  (p.  288)
the  mead -giant's  daughter,  or  such  a  one  as  may  be
detected  in  the  scandal  whispered  about  Prometheus  and
Zeus's  daughter  Athene.

Pwyll  and  Others  visiting  Hades.
There  remain  to  be  noticed  in  this  lecture  certain  tales
which  show  a  general  similarity  to  that  of  Gwydion
and  those  that  are  inseparable  from  it,  namely,  in  that
they  turn  mostly  on  the  dealings,  whether  hostile  or
friendly,  of  their  respective  heroes  with  the  powers  of
the  other  world.  It  is,  however,  to  be  premised,  that
owing  to  a  blending,  especially  common  on  Irish  ground,
of  the  characteristics  of  the  Culture  Hero  with  those  of
the  Sun  Ilero,  and  to  another  source  of  complication  to
be  touched  on  later,  some  of  the  tales  I  refer  to  ought  in
strictness  to  find  their  places  elsewhere  in  tin-so  lectures  ;
but  the  arrangement  about  to  be  here  followed  has  in  its


ddb  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

favour  the  desirability  of  keeping  them  with  those  which
they  otherwise  most  closely  resemble,  and  of  facilitating
reference  to  them  later  as  occasion  may  arise.  One  may
begin  with  the  story  of  Pwylt  Prince  of  Dyved,  other-
wise known  as  Pwylt  Head  of  Hades,  who  has  hitherto
been  treated  exclusively  in  the  latter  capacity.  He  forms
the  subject  of  one  of  our  Welsh  stories,1  but  it  is  too
long  to  be  reproduced  here  word  for  word.  The  follow-
ing extract  will  suffice  for  the  present  purpose.  Pwylt
set  out  one  day  from  his  court  at  Arberth,  near  the  Teivi,
to  hunt  in  the  valley  of  the  Cuch,  a  tributary  of  the
Teivi,  which  divides  Pembrokeshire  from  Carmarthen-
shire. When  the  morning  of  the  following  clay  was  still
young,  the  horn  was  blown  and  the  dogs  were  let  loose
under  the  wood  which  filled  the  Cuch  valley,  and  Pwylt,
following  after  them,  soon  found  himself  separated  from
his  friends.  Presently  he  heard  a  pack  that  was  not  his
coming  towards  him,  and  just  as  his  own  dogs  were
reaching  an  open  place  in  the  forest,  he  beheld  a  stag
before  the  strange  pack,  and  they  met  him,  and  in  pass-
ing threw  him  down.  After  he  had  got  on  his  feet  again
and  wondered  for  an  instant  at  the  colour  of  the  hounds
that  had  just  gone  past,  he  went  after  them,  and  came
up  with  them  just  as  they  had  killed  the  stag.  He  then
proceeded  to  drive  them  away,  and  to  lure  his  own  dogs
to  the  stag ;  but  whilst  he  was  thus  engaged,  the  owner
of  the  strange  pack  arrived  on  a  big  horse  of  a  dismal
grey  colour :  he  had  a  huntsman's  horn  hanging  from  his
neck,  and  he  was  clad  in  a  hunting-dress  of  a  kind  of
grey  cloth.     'Ah,  prince,'  said  he,  'I  know  who  thou

1  i?.  B.  Mai.  pp.  1—25;  Guest,  iij.  37—71.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  339

art,  and  I  will  not  salute  thee.'  'In  that  case,'  said
Pwytt,  'perhaps  thy  dignity  is  such  that  thou  shouldst
not.  ( By  my  faith,'  said  he,  '  it  is  not  the  dignity  of  my
rank  that  prevents  me.'  'Ah,  prince,'  said  Pwyfl,  'what
else?'  'By  my  faith,'  said  he,  'it  is  thy  bad  manners
and  ungentlemanly  conduct.'  'What  ungentlemanly
conduct,  prince,'  said  Pwylt,  'hast  thou  seen  me  guilty
of  ?'  'I  have  never  seen  a  man  guilty  of  more  ungentle-
manly conduct  than  to  drive  away  from  the  stag  the  dogs
that  had  killed  him,  and  to  lure  thy  own  dogs  to  him  :
that,'  said  he,  '  I  call  ungentlemanly  conduct ;  and  though
I  avenge  myself  not  on  thee,  by  my  faith  I  shall  cause
thee  disgrace  exceeding  the  value  of  a  hundred  stags.9
'Ah,  prince,'  said  Pwytt,  'if  I  have  done  wrong  I  will
purchase  thy  good- will.'  '  In  what  way,'  said  he,  k  wilt
thou  purchase  it  ?'  'According  to  thy  rank,'  said  Pwytt  :
'  I  know  not  who  thou  art.'  '  I  am,'  said  he,  '  a  crowned
king  in  the  country  from  which  I  come.'  'Lord,'  said
Pwytt,  '  good  day  to  thee,  and  what  country  is  it  from
which  thou  comest?'  'From  LTades,'  said  he;  'I  am
Arawn  king  of  Hades.'  'Lord,'  said  Pwytt,  'how  can
I  obtain  thy  good- will?'  'This  is  how  thou  shalt,'  said
Arawn:  'one  whose  territory  is  over  against  mine  is
always  making  war  on  me,  and  that  is  Ilavgan,  a  kiDg
of  Ilades.  In  return  for  ridding  me  of  that  scourge,
which  thou  canst  easily  do,  shalt  thou  have  my  good-
will.' 'That  will  I  do  gladly,'  said  Pwytt;  'and  do
thou  tell  me  in  what  way  I  may  succeed.'  '  I  will  make
a  strong  covenant,'  said  Arawn,  'with  thee;  and  this  is
what  I  shall  do:  I  shall  set  thee  in  my  place  in  Hades,
and  give  thee  the  most  beautiful  woman  thou  hast  ever
seen  to  sleep  with  thee  every  night.     Thou  shalt  have

z  2


340  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

my  form  and  shape,  so  that  no  valet,  no  officer,  or  any-
body else  who  has  ever  been  in  my  suite,  should  know
that  it  is  not  I.  That,'  said  he,  'is  to  last  till  this  time
to-morrow  twelvemonth,  when  this  spot  is  to  be  our
meeting-place.'  'But,'  said  Pwytr,  'though  I  remain
there  a  year,  what  certainty  have  I  of  engaging  him  thou
speakest  of?'  'This  night  twelvemonth,'  said  Arawn,
'  I  have  an  appointment  to  meet  him  in  the  ford ;  be
thou  there  in  my  form,  and  from  one  blow  thou  shoulclst
give,  he  will  not  recover;  and  though  he  should  ask
thee  to  give  him  another  blow,  give  it  not,  however  much
he  may  implore  thee :  no  matter  how  many  I  should
give  him,  he  would  be  as  well  as  ever  the  next  morning.'
After  this  arrangement  between  the  two,  Arawn  showed
Pwytr  the  way  to  his  court  in  Hades,  and  then  hastened
in  Pwytt's  form  to  Arberth  to  rule  over  Dyved.  Pwytr
was  successful  in  his  doings  :  he  gave  Havgan  his  mortal
wound,  and  annexed  his  kingdom  to  that  of  Arawn,
whom  he  then  hastened  to  meet  in  the  glade  in  the
valley  of  the  Cuch.  Pwytt  returned  to  his  kingdom  to
find  that  it  had  been  governed  better  than  usual  that
year.  Arawn  likewise  was  pleased  with  what  Pwytr"
had  done,  and  to  find  that  not  even  the  queen  had  dis-
covered his  absence,  though  she  unintentionally  let  him
know  that  she  could  not  understand  why  he  had  slept
every  night  during  the  year  with  his  face  turned  away
towards  the  outside  of  the  bed.  Arawn  then  told  her  all
about  his  absence,  and  both  wondered  greatly  at  the
exceeding  fidelity1  with  which  Pwytr  had  kept  his  cove-

1  This  is  quaintly  put  in  the  original,  but  without  the  slightest
impropriety  of  speech ;  and  as  the  whole  story  turns  on  it,  I  cannot
imitate  Lady  Charlotte  Guest  when  she  omits  it  in  toto  in  her  trans-


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  341

nant.  In  fact,  this  proved  the  means  of  stamping  the
friendship  between  Pwyti  and  Arawn  with  the  seal  of
endurance ;  and  afterwards,  the  one  used  to  send  the  other
presents  of  what  he  most  thought  would  rejoice  his
friend's  heart,  such  as  horses,  greyhounds  and  falcons ;
to  which  may  be  added  from  another  tale  that  the  same
relation  of  friendliness  continued  between  Arawn  and
Pwytt's  son  Pryderi,  who  got  from  Hades  the  swine
that  Gwydion  coveted.  Thus  Pwytt  and  Pryderi  were
able  to  get  by  friendship  from  the  powers  below  what
Gwydion  was  only  able  to  procure  by  craft  and  to  retain
by  force  of  arms.  But  of  the  two  ways  of  procuring
boons  from  Hades,  the  one  in  Gwydion's  story  is  proba-
bly the  older,  with  this  difference :  Pwytt,  whose  name
means  sense,  intelligence,  deliberation,  is  in  the  one  tale
the  counterpart  of  Gwydion  in  the  other ;  so,  likewise,
is  Pryderi  that  of  Gwydion's  son  Llew.  When,  how-
ever, these  heroes  of  parallel  myths  are  brought  into
contact  with  one  another,  a  complication  arises,  which
the  Mabinogi  indicates  in  a  sense  when  it  states,  that
when  Pwytt  made  it  known  that  he  had  ruled  Hades  for
a  year  and  reduced  the  two  kingdoms  to  one,  his  title  of
Pwytt  Prince  of  Dyved  came  to  be  superseded  by  that  of
Pwytt  Head  of  Hades.  So  when  Pryderi  meets  Gwydion,
we  have  to  treat  the  former  just  as  if  he  had  always  been
one  of  the  dark  powers,  and  such  is  the  role  one  has  to
assign  him  elsewhere;  but  it  raises  a  question  of  con-
siderable difficulty,  which  I  cannot  solve.

Let  us  now  turn  to  some  of  the  Irish  stories  that  cor-
respond in  a  manner  to  that  of  Pwytt's  doings  in  Hades.

latum  (Vol.  iij.   pp.   42  and  45),  which  makes  the   tale  cuii.seipiently
uninlel!i;'ihle.


342  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

The  first  to  claim  our  attention  relates  to  Cuchulainn's
relations  with  Labraid  of  the  Swift  Hand  on  the  Sword,
king  of  an  Irish  Hades  or  Elysium.1  His  wife's  name  is
given  as  Liban,  and  she  had  a  sister  Fand,  who  had  been
deserted  by  her  husband  Manann&n  mac  Lir.  Fand  fell
iu  love  with  Ciichulainn  on  account  of  his  fame,  and  she
and  her  sister  the  queen  tried  to  induce  Ciichulainn  to
visit  them  in  Labraid's  Isle ;  but  it  was  all  in  vain,  until
Labraid  appealed  to  him  to  come  on  a  certain  day  to  his
aid  against  his  enemies,  the  chief  of  whom  are  called
Senach  the  Demoniac,  Echaid  of  Eol,  and  Eogan  of  Inber :
at  last  Ciichulainn  was  induced  to  drive  forth  in  his
scythed  chariot  to  the  assistance  of  Labraid.  Ciichulainn,
when  he  arrived  in  Labraid's  kingdom,  would  have  made
short  work  of  the  enemy,  if  Labraid  himself  had  not
intervened  to  put  a  stop  to  the  slaughter,  but  for  no  more
evident  reason  than  that  it  was  forbidden  Pwytf  to  inflict
more  than  one  blow  on  Havgan.  Just  as  Arawn  promised
Pwytt  the  handsomest  woman  he  had  ever  seen  as  his
consort,  so  the  reward  held  out  to  Ciichulainn  for  descend-
ing to  assist  Labraid  was  the  hand2  of  his  sister-in-law
Fand,  who  in  consequence  came  away  with  Ciichulainn
to  Erinn.  The  next  story  to  be  mentioned  relates  also
to  Ciichulainn  visiting  Hades,  but  it  differs  from  the
foregoing  in  several  important  respects,  besides  introduc-
ing us  to  another  set  of  names.     It  is  to  the  effect3  that


1  The  story  is  printed  in  Windisch's  Irische  Texte,  pp.  205 — 227,
from  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  pp.  43—50  :  for  O'Curry's  translation,  see
the  Atlantis  for  1858.

2  Windisch,  Ir.  Texte,  p.  209.

3  It  will  be  found,  accompanied  with  a  translation  into  German,  in
Stokes  &  Windisch's  Irische  Texte  (Leipsic,  1884),  pp.  173—209.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  343

a  prince  of  the  Ey-Many  iu  Connaught,  haying  been
triumphed  over  by  Ciichulainn,  left  to  the  latter  as  a  sort
of  a  souvenir  of  himself  a  '  destiny'  that  he,  Ciichulainn,
should  enjoy  no  rest  or  peace  till  he  discovered  what  had
taken  the  three  Sons  of  Duel  Dermait  out  of  their  country.
Ciichulainn  could  find  no  one  at  the  court  of  Conchobar
to  answer  this  strange  question,  which  made  him  utterly
restless,  and  proved  well-nigh  fatal  to  the  king  of  Alban's
son.  This  prince  was  accidentally  met  by  Ciichulainn  as
he  was  landing  to  proceed  on  business  to  the  king  of
Ulster's  court :  a  mistake  made  by  him  brought  on  him
( Yichulainn's  fury,  but  he  craved  for  mercy,  which  he
obtained  with  the  question,  whether  he  knew  what  had
taken  the  Sons  of  Duel  Dermait  out  of  their  country.
The  prince  replied  that  he  could  not  tell,  but  that  if
Ciichulainn  would  step  iuto  his  boat  he  would  set  it  sailing
towards  a  land  where  he  should  get  the  mystery  cleared
up.  This  was  agreed  to,  and  Ciichulainn  took  with  him
two  friends,  Lugaid  and  Loeg,  while  he  gave  the  king
of  Alban's  son  his  little  spear,  with  an  ogam  on  it  which
he  cut  for  him  at  the  time :  he  was  to  take  it  with  him
and  to  seat  himself  in  Ciichulainn's  seat  at  the  court
of  Ulster,  and  we  hear  no  more  about  him.  The  boat
brought  Ciichulainn  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Hades,  to  a
very  beautiful  island  surrounded  by  a  wall  of  silver  and
a  palisade  of  bronze.  Here  Ciichulainn  was  heartily
welcomed  on  account  of  his  friends  Lugaid  and  Lee--.
In  answer  to  his  question  about  the  Sons  of  Duel  Der-
mait, he  was  told  he  should  presently  find  it  all  out,
as  he  would  be  directed  to  the  next  island,  which  was
inhabited  by  the  daughter  of  Duel  Dermait  and  her
husband:  the  name  of  the  former  was  Aehtlann,  and  of


344  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

the  latter  Conclla  Coel  Corrbacc.  When  they  reached
this  second  island,  they  found  Condla  lying  across  it  from
east  to  west,  and  sending  a  mighty  wave  over  the  face  of
the  deep  every  time  he  breathed.  Achtlann  accompanied
Cuchulainn  and  his  friends  to  a  third  island,  where  they
were  to  find  the  Sons  of  D6el  Dermait.  This  at  last  was
Hades,  and  it  seems  to  have  been  ruled  by  two  giants,
called  respectively  Coirpre  Cundail,  brother  to  the  Chil-
dren of  D6el  Dermait's  father,  and  Echaid  Glas  or
the  Grey :  these  two  were  always  at  war  with  one
another,  like  Arawn  and  Havgan  in  the  Mabinogi  of
Pwytt.  On  his  way  to  Coirpre's  court,  Cuchulainn  was  so
irritated  by  the  impertinence  of  one  of  his  drudges  that
it  drove  him  to  commit  an  act  of  violence ;  and  the  news
of  it  made  Coirpre  challenge  Cuchulainn  to  fight,  which
they  did  the  rest  of  the  day.  At  last  the  giant  was
compelled  to  surrender,  and  he  hospitably  entertained
Cuchulainn  that  night,  lending  him  his  daughter  and
relating  the  history  of  the  Children  of  Ddel  Dermait.
On  the  morrow  Coirpre  was  challenged  to  do  battle  with
Echaid  Glas,  his  hostile  neighbour ;  so  he  and  Cuchulainn
proceeded  to  a  place  of  torture  called  the  Glenn,  and  it
was  not  long  ere  Cuchulainn  engaged  Echaid.  It  was  so
difficult,  however,  to  reach  his  person  that  Cuchulainn
had  to  perch  himself  on  the  brim  of  his  shield,  whence
Echaid  repeatedly  blew  him  off  into  the  sea.  At  last
Cuchulainn  bethought  him  of  an  expedient  whereby  he
was  wounded  from  above  and  instantly  killed.  ~No  sooner
had  this  been  done  than  the  three  Sons  of  Duel  Dermait,
and  the  other  wretched  creatures  kept  in  bondage  by
Echaid  Glas,  flocked  together  to  bathe  in  his  blood,
whereupon  they  were  healed  of  all  their  ailments  and


IV.     THE   CULTUItE    HERO.  345

enabled  to  return  to  their  own  land.      In  passing,   it

may  be  suggested  that  the  Sons  of  Doel  Dermait,  which
means  the  Beetle  of  Forge  tfulness,1  were  personifications
of  the  divisions  of  the  day,  as  will  be  seen  from  compari-
son with  Welsh  stories  to  be  mentioned  by  and  by,  con-
taining clear  references  to  the  twenty-four  hours  personi-
fied; and  it  is  worth  while  to  recall  here  the  fact  men-
tioned in  another  lecture,  that  the  'twenty-four,'  as  we
term  them,  were  divided  by  the  Irish  into  day  and  night,
and  the  former  subdivided  by  Conchobar  into  three  parts :
these  may  be  considered  the  three  Sons  of  Doel  Dermait
whom  Cuchulainn  fetches,  while  there  was  no  question
of  doing  so  with  their  sister:  she  stands  for  the  night.
But  to  pursue  Cuchulainn's  story  further :  he  was  loaded
with  treasure,  given  him  when  he  left,  by  Coirpre  Con-
dail,  who  was  now,  like  Arawn,  rid  of  his  rival ;  and
when  he  reached  the  king  of  Ulster's  court  he  found
his  rations  of  ale  and  food  duly  served  as  usual.  I
mention  this,  as  it  touches  on  a  part  of  the  story  which
had  been  blurred  and  forgotten,  namely  that  relating  to
the  owner  of  the  boat  used  by  Cuchulainn.  He  is  repre-
sented as  the  son  of  the  king  of  Alban  or  Albion  ;  but  we
have  found  Alban  in  the  story  of  Cairbre  Muse  and  the
dog,  where  the  "Welsh  myth  would  lead  one  to  expect
Hades,  and  not  Britain  (p.  246);  and  if  one  assume  the
same  substitution  to  have  been  made  here,  the  boat  that
took  Cuchulainn  to  his  destination  and  brought  him  back
would  stand  comparison  with  the  little  ship  of  bronze'2


1  The  name  may  be  compared  with  the  Norse  Omirmis  hegri,  or  the
Heron  of  r^urgetfulness,  said  to  hover  over  banqueta  ami  to  steal  away
t lie  minds  of  men  :  see  Vigfusson  and  Powell's  C<>rj>//s  I'm  I.  /;,,/•.  i.  23,

-  Windisch,  Irische  Taste,  p.  210.


346  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

that  ferried  passengers  across  to  Labraid's  Isle.  Further,
the  allusion  to  Cuchulainn's  finding  his  rations  served  as
usual  at  the  court,  seems  to  mean  that  his  seat  had  been
occupied  during  the  days  of  his  absence  in  quest  of  the
Sons  of  Doel  Dermait ;  and  the  story  of  Pwytt  suggests
the  explanation  that  it  had  been  all  the  while  filled  by
the  son  of  the  king  of  Alban  as  Cuchulainn's  substitute,
bearing  the  personal  semblance  of  Cuchulainn  so  com-
pletely that  the  absence  of  the  real  Cuchulainn  was  not
discovered  by  his  comrades :  this  was  probably  the  virtue
of  the  ogam  which  Cuchulainn  wrote  on  the  little  spear
the  prince  was  to  carry  with  him  to  Conchobar's  court  at
Emain.  That  the  tale  was  at  one  time  more  explicit
with  regard  to  Cuchulainn's  substitute,  is  rendered  certain
by  the  terms  in  which  he  ordered  the  prince  from  Alban
to  go  to  the  court :  they  are  to  the  effect  that  he  was  to  go
and  occupy  Cuchulainn's  seat  at  Emain  Macha  till  he
returned.1  Finally,  as  to  the  geography  of  Cuchulainn's
voyage,  the  two  first  islands  he  reaches  are  not  exactly
Hades,  but  they  are  near  it,  especially  the  one  occupied
by  C.  C.  Corrbacc  and  Achtlann  his  wife ;  for  not  only
does  this  latter  name  betray  itself  by  its  likeness  to  Talies-
sin's  Ochren  and  the  Achren2  with  which  the  latter  has

1  Windisch  gives  them  thus :  Erich  co  ro  bi  im  slmidhi-se  ind  Emain
Macha  corris,  and  translates,  Much  dich  auf,  bis  dass  es  an  meinem
Sitze  in  Emain  Macha  ist,  dass  da  ankommst  (pp.  178,  196).  But  I
take  them  literally  to  mean,  'Arise,  so  that  thou  be  in  my  seat  at
Emain  Macha  until  I  come.'

2  This  would  require  us  to  correct  the  spelling  Achtlann  to  Acclann;
possibly,  however,  the  Irish  name  is  to  be  treated  as  correct  and  as  the
equivalent  of  what  appears  in  the  story  of  Kulhwch  and  Olwen  as
Acthlem  (for  Aethlenl),  said  to  have  followed  Twrch  Trwyth  into  the
sea  to  be  never  heard  of  afterwards :  see  the  R.  D.  Mob.  pp.  125,  141.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  347

already  been  compared  (p.  248),  but  Corrbacc  is  unmis-
takably to  be  identified  with  Welsh  K/jrrach,  the  sous  of
(iwawrrtur  Kyrvach  from  the  confines  of  Hell1  being
among  the  strange  personages  enumerated  in  the  story  of
Kulhwch  and  Olwen.

All  the  visits  of  Ciichulainn  to  Hades  were  not  of  the
same  description  as  the  one  just  mentioned.  In  the  one
previously  detailed  he  proceeded  more  like  Gwydion  than
IVytt,  and  obtained  the  king's  cauldron  from  the  hand  of
the  king's  daughter.  The  same  poem  (p.  261)  from  which
that  was  taken  also  relates  how  he  invaded  and  conquered
Lochlann,  laying  it  under  a  heavy  tribute  of  gold  and
silver.  But  all  these  tales  agree  in  making  the  visitor
to  Hades  obtain,  whether  by  force  or  friendship,  some-
what of  the  property  of  the  powers  of  that  country.  There
are,  however,  other  tales  which  differ  in  their  treatment
of  this  matter,  especially  a  Welsh  one  which  makes  the
invader  of  Hades  kill  its  king  and  marry  his  widow.  I
allude  to  the  story  of  Owein  son  of  Urien.  This  I  must
now  introduce,  in  order  partly  to  be  able  to  refer  to  it
later,  and  partly  to  compare  it  with  the  story  of  Diar-
mait's  expedition  to  Tir  fa  Tonn,  or  the  Land  beneath  the
Billow,  and  also  to  show  how  it  agrees  in  some  respects
with  the  story  of  Ciichulainn's  quest  of  Duel  Dermait's
three  Sons.     The  following  is  an  abstract  of  it : 2

I\Vi  son  of  Kynyr,  Owein  son  of  Urien,  Kynon  son  of
Klydno,  and  others  of  the  knights  of  Arthur's  court,  were
sitting  together  at  Carlcon,  when  it  became  Kynon1  s  turn
to  entertain  his  comrades  with  a  story.     So  he  related

1  R.  /A  Mob.  p.  106  ;  Guest,  ij.  259.

-  It.  B.  M«h.  pp.  163-92  j  for  Lady  Charlotte  Guest's  translation,
i  Muh.  i.  :jy — 84.


348  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

one  about  himself,  showing  how  he,  when  young  and
curious,  came  across  a  fine  valley  with  a  stately  castle
in  it,  where  he  was  hospitably  received.  When  he
had  been  refreshed  with  food  and  drink,  his  host  made
the  usual  inquiries ;  and  he  was  told  by  Kynon  that  he
was  a  knight  travelling  in  quest  of  adventure,  where-
upon his  host  said  he  could  tell  him  where  he  might
find  more  than  enough,  but  that  he  should  be  sorry  to
be  the  means  of  bringing  him  into  trouble.  This  only
made  Kynon  more  curious  and  restless.  At  last  his  host
was  prevailed  upon  to  give  him  proper  directions  how  to
find  the  place  he  had  in  view,  which  he  did  by  telling
him  to  go  into  the  forest  he  had  come  through  the  pre-
vious day,  and  to  proceed  until  he  found  a  branch  road  on
his  right.  ' '  Follow  that  road, ' '  said  he,  ' '  until  thou  comest
to  a  large  open  field  with  a  mound  on  it  with  a  big  black
man,  no  smaller  than  two  of  the  men  of  this  world,  sitting
on  the  top  of  the  mound.  He  has  but  one  foot,  and  only
one  eye  in  the  centre  of  his  forehead ;  and  he  has  an  iron
staff  which,  as  thou  wilt  perceive,  there  is  no  couple  of
men  in  the  world  who  would  not  find  it  a  load.  He
is  not  unkind,  though  he  is  ugly;  he  is  the  keeper  of
that  forest,  and  thou  wilt  see  a  thousand  wild  beasts
grazing  around  him.  Ask  him  the  way  thence  ....  and
he  will  point  out  to  thee  the  road  to  take  so  as  to  find
what  thou  art  in  quest  of."  Early  on  the  morrow  Kynon
set  out  on  his  journey,  and  he  found  the  Black  Man  just
as  his  host  had  told  him,  except  that  he  seemed  to  be  far
bigger,  and  that  the  wild  animals  around  him  appeared
to  be  three  times  as  many  as  he  had  been  told :  he
guessed  also  that  the  iron  rod  would  be  a  load  for  four
warriors,  and  not  two  as  he  had  been  given  to  understand.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  349

Kynon  asked  the  Black  Fellow  what  his  power  over  the
animals  might  be.  "  I  will  show  it  thee,  little  man,"  said
he ;  while  he  took  the  iron  staff  in  his  hand  and  struck  a
great  blow  with  it  at  a  stag,  so  that  he  gave  a  loud  bell.
At  that  bell  there  nocked  together  so  many  animals
that  they  were  as  numerous  as  the  stars  in  the  sky,  and
that  it  was  hard  for  Kynon  to  find  room  to  stand  on  the
plain  with  them,  including  as  they  did  among  them  ser-
pents and  vipers  and  various  kinds  of  beasts.  The  Black
Man  looked  at  them  and  told  them  to  go  to  graze :  they
lowered  their  heads  and  made  obeisance  to  him,  like  men
doing  homage  to  their  liege  lord.  Then  the  Black  Fellow
said  to  Kynon,  "  Seest  thou,  little  man,  the  power  I  have
over  the  animals  ?"  Then  Kynon  asked  him  the  way,  and
was  treated  rudely  by  him ;  nevertheless,  he  inquired
about  his  business,  and  when  he  had  been  answered  he
said  to  him,  "  Take  the  road  at  the  end,  and  proceed  up-
hill until  thou  reachest  the  top ;  from  there  thou  wilt
behold  a  strath  resembling  a  large  valley,  and  in  the
middle  of  the  strath  thou  wilt  see  a  large  tree  whose
foliage  is  greener  than  the  greenest  fir-tree.  Beneath
that  tree  there  is  a  fountain ;  close  to  the  fountain  there
is  a  marble  slab;  and  on  the  marble  there  is  a  silver  tankard
fastened  by  a  silver  chain,  so  that  they  cannot  be  sepa-
rated. Take  the  tankard  and  throw  its  full  of  the  water
over  the  slab.  Then  thou  wilt  hear  a  great  thunder,  and
it  will  seem  to  thee  to  make  earth  and  sky  tremble.  Alter
the  thunder  will  come  a  cold  shower,  and  with  difficulty
wilt  thou  live  through  the  shower  ;  it  will  be  one  of  hail,
and  afterwards  the  weather  will  be  fair  again;  but  thou
wilt  not  find  a  single  leaf  left  on  the  tree  by  the  shower.
Then  a  flight  of  birds  will  come  and  light  on  the  tree :


350  IV.     THE    CULTUEE    HERO.

thou  hast  never  heard  in  thy  country  such  good  music
as  they  will  make ;  but  when  the  music  is  most  enter-
taining, thou  wilt  hear  a  sighing  and  a  wailing  coming
along  the  valley  towards  thee.  Thereupon  thou  wilt
behold  on  a  jet-black  charger  a  knight  clad  in  jet-black
satin,  with  a  flag  of  jet-black  silk  on  his  spear,  making
for  thee  as  fast  as  he  can.  In  case  thou  fleest,  he  will
overtake  thee;  and  in  case  thou  awaitest  him,  he  will  leave
thee  a  pedestrian  instead  of  a  rider.  Shouldst  thou  not
find  trouble  there,  thou  needest  not  seek  any  as  long  as
thou  livest?"  The  story  goes  on  to  relate  how  all  hap-
pened to  Kynon  just  as  the  Black  Woodward  had  told
him,  and  how  the  knight  overthrew  him  and  took  away
his  horse :  he  had  to  trudge  back  on  foot  as  best  he
could  past  the  Black  Woodward,  whose  mockery  made
him  all  but  melt  with  shame ;  and  when  he  finished  the
story  at  Arthur's  court,  Kynon  was  willing  to  admit
that  no  man  ever  confessed  to  a  more  shameful  adven-
ture ;  but  it  stirred  up  Owein  son  of  Urien  to  seek  the
place,  and  to  try  a  duel  with  the  Black  Knight  of  the
Fountain.  So  it  was  not  long  ere  he  stole  away  from
Arthur's  court,  and  took  the  path  described  by  Kynon  :
in  due  time  he  reached  the  fountain,  and  the  Black
Knight  came  forth  in  his  anger  and  fought  with  Owein ;
but  ere  long  he  perceived  that  he  had  received  a  mortal
wound  from  Owein,  and  he  turned  and  fled  towards  his
castle.  Owein  pursued  so  closely,  that,  while  the  owner
was  admitted,  he  found  himself  caught  between  two
heavy  doors,  one  of  which  was  let  down  behind  him,  so
that  it  cut  his  horse  in  two  close  to  his  spurs.  While  in
this  evil  plight,  he  saw  through  a  crevice  an  auburn-
haired,  curly-headed  maiden,  with  a  diadem  of  gold  on


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  351

her  head,  coming  towards  the  gate :  she  asked  him  to
open  it,  which  he  said  he  should  be  only  to  glad  to  do
if  he  could.  The  lady  was  a  dear  friend  of  the  Black
Knight's  wife,  and  her  name  was  Elunct,  shortened
always  in  this  tale  to  Lunet,  Tennyson's  Lynette  in  his
Idylls  of  the  King.  We  are  not  told  how  she  knew
Owein,  but  in  the  conversation  which  ensued  she  ex-
pressed the  highest  opinion  of  his  gallantry,  and  gave
him  a  sort  of  Gyges'  ring  to  make  him  invisible,  and  to
enable  him  to  get  free  when  the  Black  Knight's  men  should
come  to  fetch  him  for  execution.  He  used  it  as  he  was
directed,  and  Lunet  kept  him  in  concealment  until  the
Black  Knight  had  expired  and  his  funeral  was  over.  Now
the  holding  of  the  Black  Knight's  dominions  depended
on  successfully  holding  the  Fountain,  and  no  one  could
do  that  but  one  of  Arthur's  knights  ;  so  Lunet  pre-
tended to  go  to  Arthur's  court  and  in  due  time  to  return
with  one  of  them.  The  widow  at  once  detected  that
neither  Lunet  nor  Owein  had  travelled  far  that  day,  and
she  elicited  the  confession  from  her  friend  that  Owein
was  the  man  who  had  killed  the  Black  Knight  of  the
Fountain.  It  was  then  urged  that  Owein  was  of  all  men
the  most  fitted  to  hold  the  Fountain,  and  nolens  volcns
she  had  to  give  him  her  hand.  He  stayed  there  with
her  three  years.  By  that  time,  Arthur's  longing  for
Owein  had  grown  so  grievous  that  he  and  his  knights
set  out  in  quest  of  Owein.  Suspecting  that  it  was
Kynon's  story  that  had  led  him  to  leave  the  court,  they
came  to  the  Fountain ;  and  in  time  they  found  Owein
out,  and  were  feasted  by  him  for  three  months  at  his
castle.  Then  Arthur  departed,  and  sent  to  ask  the  Lady
of  the  Fountain,  OwehTs  wile,  if  she  would  permit  hi  in


352  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

to  take  Owein  with  him  in  order  to  show  him  for  three
months  to  the  nobles  of  Britain.  Mnch  against  her  will,
she  gave  her  permission  ;  but  Owein,  finding  himself  once
more  among  his  fellows,  forgot  his  wife,  and  remained
there,  not  three  months,  but  three  years,  until,  in  fact,  a
strange  maiden,  on  a  horse  caparisoned  with  gold,  rode  one
day  into  the  hall  of  Arthur's  court.  She  went  right  up
to  Owein  and  took  away  the  ring  that  was  on  his  hand,
saying,  '  Thus  is  done  to  a  deceiver,  a  false  traitor,  for  a
disgrace  to  thy  beard.'  She  then  rode  away,  and  his
former  adventure  came  back  to  Owein's  mind.  This  made
him  sad,  and  he  left  the  society  of  men  to  live  with  wild
beasts ;  but  it  would  take  me  too  long  to  relate  how  he
was  restored  to  his  former  life,  how  he  rescued  a  lion
from  a  serpent,  and  how  the  former  followed  him  ever
after  as  his  faithful  ally.  At  last  Lunet  brought  Owein
back  to  his  wife,  the  Lady  of  the  Fountain ;  and  when
he  came  away  he  brought  her  with  him  to  Arthur's
court,  and  she  was  his  wife  as  long  as  she  lived.  So
ends  the  tale;  but  it  recommences  by  telling  us  how
Owein  one  day  went  to  the  castle  of  a  robber  knight
called  the  Du  Tratvs,  or  the  Perverse  Black  One.  The
owner  was  at  the  time  not  in  his  castle;  and  Owein  found
there  twenty-four  of  the  finest  women  one  had  ever  seen,
but  they  were  in  rags  and  extreme  wretchedness.  They
had  come  there,  they  said,  each  with  her  husband,  and
at  first  they  were  hospitably  and  kindly  treated,  but
later  they  were  made  drunk  and  stripped  of  their  cloth-
ing, of  their  gold,  and  of  their  silver ;  while  their  hus-
bands were  murdered  and  their  horses  taken  away.
They  pointed  out  to  him  where  the  corpses  of  their
husbands  and  many  others  were  heaped  together ;  and


IV.     THE   CULTURE    IIHRO.  353

they  lamented  his  coming  among  thorn,  as  they  had  no
doubt  about  his  fate.  Owein  then  went  out  and  fell  in
with  the  Perverse  Black  Fellow  himself;  they  fought,
and  Owein  bound  the  robber  with  his  hands  behind  him.
The  latter  said  that  it  was  prophesied  that  Owein  was
to  overcome  him,  and  he  asked  for  mercy,  which  was
granted  by  Owein  on  condition  that  his  castle  was  in
future  to  be  a  hospice.  But  Owein  took  away  with  him
to  Arthur's  court  the  twenty-four  ladies,  with  their  horses,
their  apparel,  and  all  the  treasure  they  had  when  they
were  robbed.

With  regard  to  this  episode,  it  is  a  matter  of  consider-
able doubt  where  it  should  stand  in  the  story :  as  the
lion  has  no  part  in  it,1  one  should  possibly  regard  it  as
connected  with  Owein's  first  stay  with  his  wife  in  the
Earldom  of  the  Fountain,  and  not  with  his  second  visit
to  the  same.  But  in  any  case  the  doubt  seems  to  attach
exclusively  to  the  sequence  of  the  story,  while  the  descrip-
tion of  the  castle  of  the  Perverse  Black  Fellow  and
Owein's  triumph  over  him,  together  with  the  release  of
the  twenty-four  matrons,  has  the  air  of  being  genuinely
ancient.  For  the  Perverse  Black  Eobber,  whose  castle
may  be  inferred  to  have  been  not  very  far  from  the
dominions  of  the  Lady  of  the  Fountain,  corresponds  in
this  tale  to  the  giants  against  whom  Labraid  of  the  Swift
Hand  on  the  Sword  was  aided  by  Cuchulainn ;  but,  above
all,  he  forms  the  counterpart  of  Echaid  Glas,  whom  Cuchu-
lainn is  made  to  kill  in  order  to  release  the  three  Sons

1  This  is  in  contradiction  to  the  sentences  which  introduce  the  Per-
verse Black  One  ;  but  they  form  a  clumsy  anticipation  of  the  account
of  Owein's  contest  with  him,  and  they  are  practically  contradicted  by
it :  I  refer  to  p.  191,  and  to  Lady  Charlotte's  translation,  i.  82.

2  A


db4  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

of  Doel  Dermait.  The  latter  probably  represent,  as  al-
ready suggested,  the  tripartite  day  of  the  ancient  Goidels ;
in  Welsh  they  are  three  brothers  slain  every  day  by
the  Avanc  of  the  Lake,1  and  brought  to  life  again  dur-
ing the  night ;  while  we  recognize  them  in  a  later  form
in  the  imprisoned  ladies  released  by  Owein,  whose  num-
ber, twenty-four,  can  hardly  be  mistaken  as  relating  to
the  hours  of  the  day,  viewed  as  always  passing  away
into  the  world  of  oblivion  and  darkness.  If  one  were  to
press  the  story  of  Pwylr  and  Arawn  as  a  parallel  through-
out, one  would  have  to  set  the  Perverse  Black  Bobber
over  against  Havgan  or  Summer-white,  which  forms  a
difficulty.  There  is  also  another  difference,  namely,
that  Pwyit  wins  his  title  of  Head  of  Hades  in  a  friendly
way,  while  Owein  gets  possession  of  the  Black  Knight  of
the  Fountain's  dominions  by  killing  him  and  marrying
his  widow.  The  Black  Knight  was  probably  no  other
than  Arawn ;  for  we  detect  a  reference  to  this  transaction
in  the  pages  of  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  when  he  repre-
sents Arawn  succeeded  by  Owein  in  the  kingship  of
Alban  or  Scotland : 2  it  is  needless  here  to  dwell  on  the
ancient  idea  which  made  of  the  northern  part  of  this
island  a  sort  of  Hades  and  abode  of  the  departed.

The  meaning  to  be  attached  to  Owein's  releasing  the
twenty-four  ladies,  and  Cuchulainn's  bringing  back  to
their  country  the  three  Sons  of  Doel  Dermait,  together
with  the  liberation  and  healing  of  a  swarm  of  other
captives  at  his  coming  to  the  dominions  of  Echaid  Glas,
has  just  been  suggested.     The  same  kind  of  liberation

1  R.  B.  Mob.  pp.  223-6  ;  Guest,  i.  342-6.

2  xi.  1,  where  Arawn  is  called  Auguselus ;  see  also  Myv.  Arch.  ij.
354.


TV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  "V.

of  captives1  will  be  found  to  figure  also  in  tho  Arthurian
romances  in  various  forms,  as,  for  example,  in  the
account  of  Arthur's  intervention  between  Gwyn  and
(iwvthur;  and  it  forms  a  feature  of  the  story  which
begins  with  Diarmait's  visit  to  the  Land  beneath  the
Billow,  and  which  was  brought  under  your  notice  in
the  first  lecture  (p.  187).  That  narrative  ends  with  an
account  of  both  Finn  (as  Culture  Hero)  and  Dermait  (as
Sun  Hero)  sailing  towards  the  west  to  recover  their  friends
that  had  been  carried  away  by  a  fairy  giant  on  the  sharp-
ridged  back  of  his  monster  steed.  The  realms  of  Faery
and  the  other  world  generally  had  a  variety  of  names  in
Irish  legend;  but  the  isle  in  which  Finn  and  Diarmait
found  their  friends,  is  called  the  Land  of  Promise ;  and
another  of  the  names  belonging  to  the  same  mythi<:
geography  was  that  of  Lochlann,  which,  like  the  Welsh
Llychlyn,  before  it  came  to  mean  the  home  of  the  Norse-
men, denoted  a  mysterious  country  in  the  lochs  or  the
sea.  I  mention  this,  because  I  wish  to  close  this  group
of  tales  with  another  about  Diarmait :  it  relates  how  he
attacked  a  giant  who  was  the  guardian  of  the  berries  of
a  certain  divine  rowan  or  quicken-tree  which  grew  in
the  midst  of  a  wood,  wherein  no  one  durst  hunt,  called
Dubhros,  or  Black  Forest,  in  the  country  of  the  Hy  Fiach-
rach,  in  the  present  county  of  Sligo;  but  though  the  scene
is  laid  this  time  within  Erinn  itself,  the  giant  was  of  Loch-
lann, and  his  name  was  Searbhan,  which  may  be  inter-
preted to  mean  the  Bitter  or  Sour  One.     The  story  is  to


1  I  hope  to  return  to  this  in  my  treatment  of  the  Arthurian  L<  .
for  the  present  it  will  sufliee  to  refer  t<»   M-  Gaston  J 'aris' allusion  to
the  captives,  in  the  Romania,  xij.  47G-7,  479.

2  a  2


356  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

the  following  effect : 1  Once  on  a  time  the  Tuatha  De"
Danann  played  a  game  of  hurley  against  the  Fe'ni  on
the  plain  near  the  Lake  of  Lein  of  the  Crooked  Teeth,
that  is  to  say,  the  Lakes  of  Killarney.  The  game  was
continued  three  days  and  three  nights  without  either
side  succeeding  in  winning  a  single  goal  from  the  other ;
and  when  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann  saw  that  they  could
not  prevail,  they  went  away  and  journeyed  northwards
in  a  body.  Their  food  during  the  contest  and  during  their
journey  afterwards  consisted  of  crimson  nuts,  arbutus
apples  and  scarlet  quicken-berries,  which  they  had  brought
from  the  Land  of  Promise.  These  fruits  were  gifted  with
many  secret  virtues,  and  their  owners  were  careful  that
neither  apple  nor  nut  should  touch  the  soil  of  Erinn;
but  in  passing  through  Dubhros  they  dropped  a  quicken-
berry  without  observing  it.  From  the  berry  there  grew
up  a  tree  which  had  the  virtues  of  the  quicken-tree  grow-
ing in  fairy-land,  for  all  the  berries  on  it  had  many
virtues :  every  one  of  them  had  in  it  the  exhilaration  of
wine  and  the  satisfying  of  old  mead  ;  and  whoever  should
eat  three  of  them,  would,  though  he  had  completed  his
hundredth  year,  return  to  the  age  of  thirty.

When  the  Tuatha  De"  Danann  heard  of  that  tree  in
Dubhros  and  of  its  many  virtues,  they  wished  nobody
but  themselves  to  eat  of  the  fruit ;  so  they  sent  Searbhan
of  Lochlann  to  guard  it,  that  no  man  might  approach
the  tree.  Searbhan  was  a  giant  of  the  race  of  the  wicked
Cain ;  he  was  burly  and  strong,  with  heavy  bones,  a
large  thick  nose,  crooked  teeth,  and  a  single  broad  fiery


1  Pursuit  of  Diarmuicl,  &c.  ij.  §§11,  13 — 18  :  I  have  freely  used  in
this  abstract  Dr.  Joyce's  wording  in  his  Old  Celt.  Rom.  pp.  313 — 322.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  oG7

eye  in  the  middle  of  his  black  forehead.  lie  was  armed
with  a  great  club,  tied  by  a  chain  to  an  iron  girdle  round
his  body,  and  he  was  such  a  magician  that  he  could  not
be  killed  by  fire,  by  water,  or  by  weapons  of  war :  there
Mas  only  one  way  of  overcoming  him,  and  that  was  by
giving  him  three  blows  of  his  own  club.  By  day  he
watched  at  the  foot  of  the  tree,  and  at  night  he  slept  in
a  hut  he  had  made  him  aloft  in  its  branches.  He  did  not
allow  the  Feni  to  hunt  in  the  neighbourhood,  so  that  it  was
a  wilderness  for  many  miles  around  the  tree.  Therefore
Diarmait,  when  pursued  by  Finn,  took  refuge  there;
this  he  did  with  the  giant's  surly  permission,  provided
only  he  did  not  eat  of  the  berries  of  the  quicken-tree.
But  Grainne,  Diarmait's  wife,  hearing  of  the  berries,
was  seized  with  a  longing  desire  for  them ;  knowing  the
danger,  she  concealed  her  desire  as  long  as  she  could,
until,  in  fact,  she  thought  she  must  die  unless  she  got
some  of  the  forbidden  fruit.  So  Diarmait,  fearing  danger
to  her,  went,  much  against  his  inclination,  to  ask  for  some
of  the  berries.  The  giant's  reply  was  a  brutal  negative.
"  I  swear,"  quoth  he,  "  were  it  [even]  that  thou  shouldst
have  no  children  but  that  birth  [now]  in  her  womb,  and
were  there  but  Grainne  of  the  race  of  Cormac  the  son  of
Art,  and  were  I  sure  that  she  should  perish  in  bearing
that  child,  that  she  should  never  taste  one  berry  of  those
berries."1  Diarmait  replied,  that,  as  he  did  not  wish  to
deal  treacherously  by  him,  the  giant  must  understand  that
he  had  no  intention  of  going  his  way  without  them;  a  duel
then  began,  which  soon  ended  in  Diarmait's  killing  the


1  This  is  from  the  Pursuit  of  Diarmuid,  &c,  as  translated  l»y  the
Irish  tchular,  Mr.  Standish  II.  O'Grady,  ij.  §  15.


358  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

giant  with  his  own  club,  and  taking  a  quantity  of  the  for-
bidden berries  to  his  wife  and  to  certain  others  who  had
asked  for  some.  Such  is  the  stoiy  of  the  berries,  in  which
the  brief  allusion  to  the  crimson  nuts  forming  part  of  the
food  of  the  Tuatha  De'  Danann,  seems  to  refer  to  the
same  mysterious  fruit  that  used  to  fall  from  the  nine
hazels  into  the  secret  well  and  to  be  devoured  by  the
Salmon  of  Knowledge,  to  be  mentioned  in  a  later  lecture.
At  this  point  we  are  not  so  much  interested  in  the
crimson  nuts  as  in  the  scarlet  berries  of  the  fairy  rowan :
both  kinds  of  fruit  formed  part  of  the  sustenance  of  the
gods,  according  to  Goidelic  notions ;  and  the  description
which  has  been  quoted  of  the  berries  makes  them  a  sort
of  Celtic  counterpart  to  the  soma-plant  of  Hindu  mytho-
logy. I  said  '  Celtic,'  but  it  would  perhaps  be  more
accurate  to  say  '  Celtic  and  Teutonic ; '  for  not  only  the
Celts,  but  some  also  of  the  Teutons,  have  been  in  the
habit  of  attaching  great  importance  to  the  rowan  or  roan
tree,  and  regarding  it  as  a  preservative  against  the
malignant  influence  of  witches  and  all  things  uncanny.
The  English  name1  appears  to  be  of  Scandinavian  origin,
the  Old  Norse  being  reynir,  Danish  ronne,  Swedish  r'onn  ;
and  the  old  Norsemen  treated  the  tree  as  holy  and  sacred
to  Thor,  to  whom  it  was  fabled  to  have  been  of  great
service  when  he  clutched  its  branches  once  on  a  time  in


1  The  rowan  is  also  called  mountain-ash,  though  it  is  no  kind  of
ash ;  and  as  to  its  other  name,  there  is  a  lack  of  evidence  that  the
quicken  or  quick-beam  of  old  English  meant  the  rowan.  The  Welsh
for  rowan  is  in  books  cerddm,  singular  cerddinen ;  but  the  pronuncia-
tion familiar  to  me  is  cerdin,  cerdinen,  and  even  cerdingen  ;  and  the
berries  are  called  in  Welsh  criafol.  The  Irish  name  of  the  tree  is
caerthann,  which  corresponds  in  its  consonants  to  cerdin,  not  to  cerddin;
but  the  etymology  of  these  words  offers  more  than  one  difficulty.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  359

crossing  a  stream.  Moreover,  the  Swede  of  modern  times
believes  the  rowan  a  safeguard  against  witchcraft,  and
likes  to  have  on  board  his  ship  something  or  other  made
of  its  wood,  to  protect  him  against  tempests  and  the
demons  of  the  water  world.1  All  this  only  renders  more
conspicuous  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the  importance
and  sacredness  of  the  rowan :  I  mention  it  in  the  hope
that  somebody  else  may  answer  it,  for  I  do  not  pretend
to  be  able  to  do  so,  or  to  regard  the  Eddie  explanation,  to
which  allusion  has  been  made,  as  giving  us  the  real  key.
Possibly  the  inaccessible  rocks  on  which  the  tree  is  not
{infrequently  found  to  grow,  and  the  conspicuous  colour
of  its  berries,  may  have  counted  for  something ;  but  that
something  falls  decidedly  short  of  a  solution  of  the  ques-
tion. One  kind  of  answer  that  would  meet  the  case,
provided  it  be  countenanced  by  facts,  may  be  briefly
indicated,  namely,  that  the  berries  of  the  rowan  were
used  in  some  early  period  in  the  brewing  of  an  intoxicat-
ing drink,  or,  better  still,  of  the  first  intoxicating  drink
ever  known  to  the  Teuto-Celtic  Aryans.  Such  a  use
would  render  the  belief  intelligible,  that  they  formed
part  of  the  sustenance  of  the  gods,  and  that  the  latter
kept  them  jealously  for  themselves  until  they  were  baffled
in  their  purpose  by  some  benefactor  of  man  who  placed
them  within  the  reach  of  his  race.  It  is  needless  to
repeat  here  the  somewhat  parallel  conjectures  (p.  29G),
that  the  many  virtues  ascribed  to  the  soma  in  Hindu
religion,  and  the  Norse  account  of  the  acquisition  for  man
of  the  gift  of  poetry  by  Woden,  agree  in  postulating
as  their  ultimate  explanation  some  kind  of  food  or  drink

1  See  Grimm's  Deutsche  Myth,4  ij.  101G;  and  Yigfusson's  Icelandic-
Eixj.  Die.  s.  v.  reynir.


3 GO  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

calculated  to  intoxicate  and  exhilarate  those  who  partook
of  it.

The  Culture  Hero  and  the  Nine-night  Week:.

As  allusion  has  more  than  once  been  made  to  an  ancient
reckoning  of  nine  nights  to  a  week,  a  word  must  now  be
said  in  explanation  of  that  term.  The  Celts  reckoned
Dis  the  father  of  all,  and  regarded  darkness  and  death
as  taking  precedence  over  light  and  life  ;  so  in  their
computation  of  time  they  began  with  night  and  win-
ter,1 and  not  with  daylight  and  summer.  The  Teutons
reckoned  similarly,  and  probably  for  the  same  mytho-
logical reason.2  In  ancient  Italy  we  have  a  trace  of  the
same  idea  in  the  Roman  habit  of  considering  the  calends
of  every  month  sacred  to  Janus,  one  of  the  undoubted
counterparts  of  the  Celtic  Dis ;  and  especially  was  this  the
case  with  the  winter  month  called  after  Janus,  of  which
the  calends  and  the  ninth  day,  that  is  to  say,  the  first
day  of  the  two  first  nine-night  weeks  of  January,  were
sacred  to  that  god.  Further,  we  know  that  the  Celts  must
have  formerly  reckoned  not  only  the  night  with  which
the  week  or  any  period  began,  but  also  the  night  with
which  it  ended.  Witness  such  Celtic  terms  as  the  Welsh
word  tvythnos,  'a  week,'  which  literally  means  'an  eight-


1  This  is  probably  the  key  to  reckoning  years  as  winters,  of  which
we  have  instances  in  Med.  Welsh  literature,  as  when  Kulhwch's  horse
is  described  as  'four  winters'  old  (R.  B.  Mab.  p.  102).  The  habit
appears  to  have  been  also  English  and  Gothic,  not  to  mention  that  it
is  Icelandic  to  this  day.

2  The  words  of  Tacitus,  in  his  Germania,  chapter  xi.,  are  worth
quoting  :  Nee  dierura  numerum,  ut  vos,  sed  noctium  com/futant,  sic
comtituunt,  sic  ccndicunl ;  nox  ducere  diem  uidetiir.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  ?>C,\

night,'  where   an   Englishman   might   use   'sennight;'

similarly,  a  fortnight  is  in  Welsh  pythewnos,  'a  fifteen-
night,'  and  the  Irish  coicthigcs  (genitive  c6icthigm\  of
the  same  meaning,  is  also  derived  from  the  name  of  the
fifteenth  numeral  in  its  Irish  form  :  compare  the  French
huitaine  and  quinsaine  respectively.1  This  way  of  count-
ing, then,  was  the  same  as  that  usual  in  music,  where  a
third  is  said  to  consist  of  two  tones,  or  whatever  the
description  of  the  intervals  in  any  given  case  may  happen
to  be ;  so  a  nine-night  week  would  contain  only  eight
days  or  eight  portions  of  daylight,  and  that  was,  I  believe,
the  ancient  week  of  the  Aryans,  at  least  of  the  Aryans  of
Western  Europe.  In  Italy  we  have  traces  of  it  in  the
Roman  nundince  or  markets  held  every  ninth  day :  the
word  is  supposed  to  represent  an  older  and  longer  form,
novendincBj  from  the  ninth  numeral ;  and  it  happens  that
nundince,  in  a  manuscript  of  the  eighth  or  ninth  century,


1  A  curious  instance  of  this  way  of  reckoning  occurs  in  the  Isle  of
Man,  where  the  oath  administered  to  the  deemster  since  the  revestment
in  1765,  makes  the  six  days  of  creation  in  the  book  of  Genesis  into
six  days  and  seven  nights.  It  runs  thus  :  '  By  this  book,  and  by  the
holy  contents  thereof,  and  by  the  wonderful  works  that  God  hath
miraculously  wrought  in  heaven  above  and  in  the  earth  beneath  in  six
days  and  seven  nights,  I,  A  B,  do  swear  that  I  will,  without  respect  of
favour  or  friendship,  love  or  gain,  consanguinity  or  affinity,  envy  or
malice,  execute  the  laws  of  this  isle  justly,  betwixt  our  sovereign  lady
the  Queen  and  her  subjects  within  this  isle,  and  betwixt  party  and
party,  as  inditl'eiv.ntly  as  the  herring  backbone  doth  lie  in  the  midst  of
the  fish.'  So  stands  the  oath  in  Harrison's  Records  of  the  Tynwald,  &c
(Douglas,  1871),  p.  37;  but  it  has  been  the  practice  of  late  years  to
make  'the  six  days  and  seven  nights'  into  'six  days  and  nights  ;'  and
I  have  heard  it  characterized  as  an  unwarranted  innovation.  This
curious  oath  otherwise  reminds  one  of  old  Irish  oaths,  with  their  invo-
cation of  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  earth  and  the  elements.


3G2  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

is  explained  by  means  of  the  Brythonic  word  notation,1
which  would,  in  modern  Welsh,  be  newidieiu,  the  plural
of  netvid,  l  change,  exchange,  barter.'  This  last  is  in
its  turn  derived,  like  the  Latin  term  just  mentioned,
from  the  ninth  numeral,  which  is  written  in  modern
Breton  and  Welsh  new  and  naw  respectively.  It  would
thus  seem  that  we  have  traces  here  of  markets  or  fairs
on  the  ninth  day  as  an  institution  common  to  the  Celts
and  the  Italians  of  antiquity.

It  might,  however,  be  objected  that  the  Brythons  had
merely  adopted  it  from  the  Eomans  ;  but,  over  and  above
this,  there  is  Irish  evidence  to  which  the  objection  will
not  apply,  for  the  Irish  term  etymologically  equivalent  to
nundince  occurs  in  the  form  noinden  or  noenden,2  explained
to  have  meant  an  assembly,3  and  a  compound  ard-noenden,
1  a  great — literally  '  a  high' — assembly,'  with  which  com-
pare the  term  '  high  festival '  in  English.  Whether  the
assemblies  to  which  this  term  would  apply  recurred  regu-
larly, and  what  the  interval  might  be,  I  know  not ;  but
we  have  practically  irrefragable  evidence  that  the  simple
term  noinden  meant  just  half  the  duration  of  the  nine-

1  It  occurs  in  the  Bodley  MS.  Auct.  F.  iv.  32,  fol  7b,  among  the
Glosses  on  Eutychius,  which  are  now  reckoned  old  Breton  rather  than
old  Welsh  :  see  Stokes'  edition  of  them  in  the  Trans,  of  the  (London)
Phil.  Society  for  1860-1,  p.  233  ;  also  the  Gram.  Celtica2,  p.  1054.

2  See  O'Davoren's  Glossary  in  Stokes'  Three  Irish  Glossaries  (London,
1862),  p.  108;  also  the  Berichte  der  K.  Sachs.  Gesellschaft  der  Wissen-
schaften  (Phil.-Hist.  Classe),  1884,  p.  336,  where  Windisch  has  ren-
dered Celtic  scholars  the  service  of  publishing  (with  a  translation)  two
versions  of  the  story  accounting  for  the  Ultonian  couvade.

3  Such  is  the  meaning  in  a  line  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  81  b,  where
in  noindin  seems  to  mean  the  oenach  or  fair  at  which  the  men  of  Ulster
used  to  meet.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  303

night  week,  that  is  to  say,  five  nights  and  four  days,
which  is  given  as  the  length  of  the  Ultonian  coavade.1
This  was  called  cess  noinden  Ulad,  which,  if  we  call
noinden  a  week,  would  mean  '  (the)  Ulster  men's  sickness
or  indisposition  of  a  week,'  or,  as  one  would  put  it  in
English,  'the  Ulster  men's  week  of  sickness;'  and  it
■was  more  briefly  termed  either  cess  noinden,  '(the)  sickness
of  (the)  week,'  that  is  to  say,  '  (the)  week's  sickness,'  or
noinden  Ulad,  '  the  Ultonians'  week' — a  term,  however,
which  did  not  necessarily  refer  to  the  couvade.2  It  is
not  clear  to  me  what  the  original  meaning  of  the  word
noinden  was,  whether  a  heterogeneous  nine  consisting  of
five  nights  and  four  days,  or  a  uniform  reckoning,  say
one  of  nine  nights.  In  the  latter  case,  one  might  be
tempted  to  regard  the  word  as  the  Latin  nundince  bor-
rowed ; 3  but  in  any  case  the  Irish  could  not  be  said  to
have  borrowed  anything  beyond  the  word,  inasmuch  as  the
reckoning  by  nines  was  clearly  more  in  vogue  in  Ireland
than  in  Italy  as  represented  in  the  classics.  In  fact,  the
favourite  expression  for  a  small  number  of  days  in  Irish


1  Windisch,  ibid.  pp.  342,  344,  347,  339,  where  it  is  stated  that
the  noinden  lasted  either  five  days  and  four  nights,  or  four  days  and
five  nights.  The  narrator  of  the  first  version  (Bk.  of  Leinster,  125/;)
was  in  doubt  ;  and  that  of  the  other  (British  Museum  MS.  Harl.
5280)  omitted  altogether  the  right  reckoning,  namely,  four  days  and
five  nights.  The  old  account  was  doubtless  five  nights  and  four  days  ;
but  the  later  scribes,  failing  to  see  why  the  nights  should  be  mentioned
fust,  may  readily  be  supposed  to  have  introduced  the  alternative  ex-
planation.

'-'  Noinden  Ulad  is  applied,  for  instance,  to  the  raiding  into  tho
other  provinces,  which  was  arranged  at  a  feast  given  to  Conchobai  and
his  braves  by  one  of  theii  number  called  Bricriu  :  see  Stokea  and
Windisch'a  TriacJu  Texts,  pp.  174,  188.

8  Windisch,  ibid.  p.  330,  is  inclined  to  this  view.


364  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

literature  is  exactly  the  length  of  the  nine-night  week,
the  term  used  being  nomad,  genitive  feminine  nomaide,
'(the)  ninth  (night),'  as  in  co  cend  nomaide,  'till  the  end
of  (a)  ninth,'  that  is  to  say,  to  the  end  of  the  nine-night
week.  This  is  continued  in  Welsh  with  the  incorrect
substitution  of  day  for  night,  for  the  favourite  Welsh
period  is  naw  diwrnod,  or  nine  days ;  as  in  fact  it  is  in
certain  cases  in  English  likewise,  as  when  one  speaks  of
'  the  nine  days'  wonder.'  From  this  point  of  view,  the
Germans  are  more  correct  with  the  space  of  acht  tage,  or
eight  days,  to  which  they  colloquially  give  a  decided
preference.

What,  it  may  be  asked  in  passing,  should  have  led
anybody  to  fix  on  a  week  of  nine  nights  and  eight  days
as  a  unit  of  time  ?  It  would  be  useless  to  demand  an
answer  from  the  moon,  and  one  should  rather  look  at  the
fingers  on  one's  hands :  the  half  of  a  nine-night  week
would  be  the  Irish  noinden  of  five  nights  and  four  days ;
that  is  to  say,  a  hand  of  nights,  if  you  reckon  the  nights
alone,  as  the  ancient  Celts  must  have  done;  and  just
as  a  third  in  music  added  to  another  third  yields  not  a
sixth  but  a  fifth,  so  two  hands  of  nights  reduced  to  one
sum  make  not  ten  nights  but  nine.  But  why  the  two
hands  should  have  been  preferred  as  a  unit  to  the  single
hand,  I  cannot  say,  though  it  may  be  guessed  that  the
latter  was  too  short  a  reckoning  to  be  as  useful  as  the
longer  one.  The  nine-night  reckoning  of  eight  days  to
the  week  could  not,  of  course,  be  made  in  any  way  to
coincide  with  the  months  as  measured  by  the  moon  ;  but
that  cannot  be  urged  as  an  objection.  In  fact,  the  more
hopeless  the  discrepancy  appeared,  the  more  room  it  gave
for  the  interference  of  the  professional  man,  one  of  the


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  3G5

strongholds  of  whose  influence  was  doubtless  the  ancient
calendar.     Thus  we  find  among  the  Taliessin-like  boasts
of  Amorgin,  the  seer  and  poet  of  the  Milesian  invaders  of
Erinn,  the  challenge  who  but  he  could  tell  them  the  age
of  the  moon.1     But  to  return  to  the  practice  of  counting
on  the  fingers,  we  have  evidence  of  it  elsewhere  among
the  Aryans,  and  I  need,  for  instance,  only  remind  you  of
the  Greek  word  jrc/Mrofw,  'I  count,  reckon  or  cast  up,'  or,
still  better,  of  an  old  Norse  word  connoting  the  applica-
tion of  finger-counting  to  time :  I  allude  to  fimt,  a  legal
term  derived  from  the  fifth  numeral,  which  was  in  old
Horse  fimm.     The  former  meant  a  summoning  to  a  court
of  law  with  five  days'  notice,  all  Norse  notices  of  the  kind
being  given  for  either  five  days  or  some  small  multiple
of  five  days.     At  first  this  would  seem  as  if  five  days
had  been  an  incorrect  translation  of  an  older  habit  of
giving  notices  of  five  nights,  that  is  to  say  of  four  days,
which  would  yield  a  welcome  equivalent  to  the  Irish
noinden ;  but  that  can  hardly  be,  for  the  Norsemen  gave
five  days'  notice,   exclusive  of  the  day  of  serving  the
summons,  so  that  in  Christian  times  no  summons  woidd
be  served  on  a  Tuesday,  as  no  court  sat  on  Sundays.2
Thus  the  shortest  notice  intended  by  the  law  would,  in
term  of  nights,  be   either  six  or  seven,   and  not  five.
There  is,  however,  no  lack  of  allusions  in  Norse  mytho-
logy to  the  nine-night  week.     Among  the  most  remark-
able, HeimdaPs  nine  maiden  -  mothers  have  been  men-
tioned as   symbolic   of   time  under  its  weekly  aspects
(p.  85),  and  Woden's  gold  ring  Dranpnir,  regarded  as

1  Bh  o/Leiruter,  12b.

2  For  this  and  further  details  relating  to  thajimt,  see  Vigfusson's
Dictionary  under  that  word.


366  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

matched  in  the  Irish  legend  of  Aitherne  by  Maine's  gold
brooch.  But  that  is  not  all ;  for  Draupnir  was  said  to
drop  eight  rings  like  itself  every  ninth  night,  and  this,
interpreted  in  reference  to  the  nine-night  week,  means
that  the  ninth  night  was  regarded  as  containing  the  other
eight :  it  was  the  limit  and  boundary,  so  to  say,  of  that
space  of  time.

This  idea  is  reflected  in  a  remarkable  way  in  Irish
mythology,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  details.
When  Christian  missionaries  made  the  Irish  familiar  with
the  Eastern  week  of  seven  days,  they  taught  them  its
Latin  name  septimana ;  and  this  word,  treated  by  the
Irish  in  their  own  way,  became  sechtmain,  genitive  secht-
maine — a  word  seemingly  beginning  with  secht,  the  Irish
for  septem  or  seven,  and  suggesting,  therefore,  the  ques-
tion, 'seven  of  what?'  The  answer  was  Secht  Maini,
seven  persons  bearing  the  name  Maine  or  Mane}  How
they  came  to  acquire  the  personal  form  will  appear  pre-
sently ;  but  what  the  Maini  were  pictured  to  be  in  Irish
mythology,  we  learn  from  the  fact  that  the  single  one
in  the  story  of  Aitherne  is  termed   son  of  Durthacht,

1  For  the  first  idea  of  this  treatment  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Plummer.
I  use  Maine  or  Mane  in  the  singular,  and  Maini  or  Mani  in  the
plural.  The  former  rhymes  with  baili  in  the  Tribes  and  Customs  of
the  Hy-Many,  ed.  O'Donovan  (Dublin,  1843),  p.  13 ;  and  in  the  Bh.  of
Leinster,  256  a,  with  the  same  word  written  bah',  which  now  means
'  a  place,'  but  originally  '  an  enclosed  place,'  as  in  the  bally  of  Anglo-
Irish  local  names  like  Ballymote,  Ballyadams,  and  many  more.  It  is
a  loan-word  not  to  be  severed  from  the  English  bailey,  as  in  the  Old
Bailey,  or  Vetus  Ballium,  of  York  as  well  as  London.  It  was  intro-
duced (probably  by  the  Normans)  to  South  Wales,  and  is  used  to  this
day  in  Glamorgan  in  the  form  beili  for  the  enclosure  at  the  back  of  a
farm-house.  See  Du  Cange  under  Ballium,  to  which  he  gives  three
meanings  :  '  propugnaculi  species,  seu  locus  palis  munitus  et  circum-
septus;'  also  'custodia,  career,  quia  locus  munitus.'


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  307

whose  name  we  have  already  met  with  (p.  142),  and  that
the  group  is  usually  treated  as  the  offspring  of  Ailill  and
Modb.     Accordingly,  the  brothers  always  fight  against
tlie  sun-hero  Cuchulainn  on  the  Tain.1     Similarly,  in
another  story,  that  of  the  death  of  Conaire  M6r  (p.  135),
they  figure  as  the  haughtiest  of  the  exiles  following  the
lead  of  the  cyclops  Ingcdl  on  the  occasion  of  his  landing
in  Erinn  in  the  night.2    While  the  Latin  word  septimaiia,
and  the  Irish  scchtmain  made  out  of  it,  seemed  to  fix  the
number  of  the  Maini  at  seven,  the  early  Christians  of
Ireland  must  have  treated  the  new  week  after  the  ana-
logy of  the  old ;   that  is  to  say,  they  reckoned  it,  not  as
seven  days,  but  as  eight  nights,  as  the  Welsh  have  also
done ;    and  the  discrepancy  arising  from  the  habit  of
speaking  of  seven  Maini,  when  they  reckoned  them  eight,
has  led  to  curious  results ;  for  instance,  in  the  Book  of
the  Dun.     The  scribe  of  that  manuscript,  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  twelfth  century  or  a  little  earlier,  can  have
had  no  idea  that  the  Maini  had  anything  to  do  with  the
week ;  but  he  gives  us,  more  or  less  faithfully,  the  stories
of  previous  generations  when  that  must  have  been  no
secret.     The  following  arc  the  Maini  in  the  order  and
with  the  surnames  given  to  them  by  him  in  the  Tain :
(1)  Maine  Mathremail,  or  M.  like  his  Mother;  (2)  Maine
Athremail,  or  M.  like  his  Father;   (3)  Maine  Mnrgor,  or
M.  very  Dutiful;  (4)  Maim  Mingor,  or  M.  little  Duti-
ful ;    (5)   Maine  mo  Ej>ert,   or  M.   greater  than  Said  ;

1  See  the  Tain,  passim  ;  but  the  list  of  the  Maini  occurs  near  the
beginning,  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  566.

2  The  story  is  called  Togail  Bruden  Da  Derga,  or  the  Destruction  of
the  Hostel  of  Da  Derga,  where  Conaire  lodged  on  the  night  of  his
murder ;  the  list  of  the  Maini  comes,  ibid,  t>4  /».


368  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

(6)  Maine  Milscothach,  or  M.  of  Honey  -  bloom  ;l  (7)
Maine  Andoe,  the  meaning  of  whose  surname  I  cannot
find ;  (8)  Maine  cotageib  TJle,  or  M.  that  contains  them
All.  This  last  name  has  called  forth  from  the  scribe  of
the  Tain  the  explanation  that  the  Maine  bearing  it  par-
took of  the  form  of  his  mother  Medb  and  of  his  father
Ailill,  together  with  the  nobility  and  dignity  of  both
combined  in  his  own  person;  but  it  fails  to  meet  the
words  used,  which  are  to  the  effect  that  the  last  Maine
contained  or  comprehended  all  the  others.  One  cannot
help  seeing  in  it  a  case  corresponding  to  that  of  Woden's
ring,  which  dropped  eight  others  like  itself:  the  last
Maine  contains  all  the  others,  as  being  the  boundary  and
limit  within  which  the  week  was  comprised.  The  only
other  Maine  calling  for  a  remark  is  that  called  Maine  mo
Upert,  which  I  interpret,  with  some  diffidence,  to  have
meant  a  Maine  that  was  greater  than  was  said,  or  greater
than  uttering  the  name  would  imply;  this  is  favoured  by
its  being  set  in  the  fifth  place ;  for  the  fifth  night  would
just  mark  the  end  of  the  first  noinden,  or  half  of  the
nine-night  week ;  and  in  regarding  the  week  as  made
up  of  two  noindens,  this  fifth  night  would  have  to  be
reckoned  twice  over,2  namely,  as  the  end  of  the  one
noinden  and  the  beginning  of  the  other.  That,  I  think,
is  the  explanation  of  the  description  of  this  middle  Maine.


1  The  scribe  identified  Nos.  5  and  6  ;  but  the  group  remains  eight
in  the  Bruden,  also  in  Stokes  &  Windisch's  Ir.  Texte,  II.  ij.  225,  where
Milscothach.  is  Milbel,  '  Honey-mouth.'

2  This  is  the  sort  of  reckoning,  probably,  which,  applied  by  the
Greeks  to  the  last  day  of  the  month,  gave  rise  to  the  term  evrj  koX  vka,
1  old  and  new.'  Compare  the  Irish  '  full  week  between  two  dige,'  or
termini  (?),  in  Stokes  &  Windisch's  Ir.  Texte,  II.  ij.  211,  219.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  300

Tho  importance  of  this  conjecture  consists  in  the  fad
that,  in  ease  it  prove  well  founded,  it  would  make  the
name  of  the  fifth  Maine  such  that  it  can  have  only  be-
longed to  the  older  week  of  nine  nights,  and  not  to  the
new  one  of  eight.  Later  in  the  Tain  we  come  across
a  second  treatment  of  the  Maini,  for  it  makes  them
amount  to  seven  after  Cuchulainn  had  slain  one  of  them.1
They  appear  on  another  occasion  on  the  western  bank  of
a  ford  that  had  been  running  blood  for  a  week  ;  and  on
the  day  they  show  themselves  there,  Cuchulainn  parades
himself  on  the  opposite  bank  in  his  Oenach  clothes,  that
is  to  say,  those  in  which  he  would  go  to  the  Oenach  or
Irish  ayopa.  His  enemies  crowd  to  the  river-bank  to
behold  him  ;  and  the  women,  including  the  queen,  climb
on  the  men's  shoulders  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  him.2  The
appearance  of  the  Maini  together  in  this  story  probably
means  the  end  of  the  week,  and  the  coming  round  of  the
day  for  the  market  or  the  fair  and  the  meetings,  political
and  other,  which  took  place  then :  this  is  signalized  in
the  Tain  by  Cuchulainn  wearing  his  gala  dress  and  paus-
ing for  a  while  from  harassing  the  enemy's  camp.  In
the  story  of  Conaire  the  Maini  arc  dealt  with  in  a  third
way,  differing  from  both  treatments  in  the  Tain;  for  here3
Maine  mo  Epert  is  placed  at  the  end,  even  after  the  Maine
that  contained  all  the  others,  as  though  the  scribe  meant

1  Bk.  of  (he  Dim,  64  b.

2  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  74  b ;  Rhys's  Celtic  Britain,  p.  65.

3  Bk,  of  the  Dun,  84ft,  where  the  passage  giving  their  names  runs
thus:  Batax  a»d  iarsin  ffallacA  batar  dallcAu  .i.  uii.  mate  a.Uella  jy
inedba  .7  mane  for  cac/t  fir  dib  .7  forainm  for  cat//  mini  I. i.  mani
gt/iremail.7  in.  mat///-,  mnil  .7  in.  mfagOT.7  in.  niorgor./  .m.  anddo
.7  m.  milacotacA  .in.  cotageib  uli  .7  m.  as  /mo  epert

2b


370  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

the  reader  to  construe  mo  epert  to  mean  that  this  Maine
was  one  over  and  above  the  proper  reckoning  of  secht  (or
seven)  Maini,  with  which  he  had  begun  the  allusion  to
them.  If  that  was  his  idea,1  I  should  be  inclined  to
think  that  he  was  mistaken,  and  that  Maine  mo  Epert's
name  is  to  be  explained  by  reference  to  the  nine-night
week,  and  the  habit  of  reckoning  it  as  two  noindens  or
half-weeks  of  five  nights  each.2

The  Welsh  treatment  of  the  new  week  closely  resem-
bled that  already  mentioned  as  Irish ;  but  as  the  Welsh
did  not  borrow  the  Latin  term,  they  called  it  wythnos,
that  is  to  say,  '  a  (period  of )  eight  nights.'  This  week  of
nominally  eight  nights  and  seven  days  might  be  said  to
consist  of  seven  and  a  half  days,  in  our  sense  of  the  word
day  of  twenty-four  hours ;  and  in  this  form  we  have  a
most  remarkable  reference  to  it  in  one  of  the  Welsh
Triads,  which  I  must  now  mention,  as  it  incidentally
discloses  a  trace  of  the  older  week.  The  triad  in  question,
i.  93  =  ij.  11,  speaks  of  the  Three  Horse-loads  of  the  Isle
of  Britain,  one  of  which  it  describes  as  borne  by  Du  Moro3
or  the  Black  of  Moro,  the  horse  of  Elidyr  Mwynvawr,

1  This,  however,  could  not  be  said  of  the  scribe  of  the  Tain  in  the
Bk.  of  Leinster,  who  mentions,  at  55a,  Mane  Condamoepert  last,
though  his  group  consists,  owing  probably  to  his  carelessness,  of  only
six,  no  mention  being  made  of  M.  And6e  or  M.  Milscothach.

2  Possibly  other  nines  in  Irish  myths  are  to  be  similarly  explained
by  means  of  the  ancient  week,  such  as  the  nine  chariots  always  required
by  Medb  on  the  Tain  (Bk.  of  the  Dim,  56  b),  and  the  nine  doors  of
the  palace  called  Bruden  Da  Derga  (ib.  91&),  in  which  Conaire  was
slain.  It  may  likewise  be  that  the  four  winged  kisses  of  Aengus,  that
haunted  the  youths  of  Erinn  (p.  151),  were  but  the  four  intervals  of
daylight  in  the  Goidelic  half-week.

3  In  the  Bed  Book  version  (see  B.  B.  Mob.  p.  300),  this  horse  is
called  Du  y  Moroed,  'the  Black  One  of  the  Seas;'  but  the  older  and


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  371

said  to  have  carried  seven  and  a  half  persons  on  his  back
from  Penllech  in  the  North  to  Penllech  in  Mona :  they
Mere,  to  wit,  Elidyr  and  his  wife  Eurgein ;  Gwyn  da
Gyuetf,  or  White  the  good  Drink-mate,  and  Gwyn  da
Eeimat,1  a  designation  of  doubtful  interpretation ;  My-
nach  Nawmon,  Elidyr's  counsellor ;  Petrylew  Vynestyr,
his  cup-bearer ;  Aranuagyl,  his  servant ;  and  Albeinwyn,
his  cook,  who  swam  with  his  hands  on  the  horse's  crupper:
it  was  he  that  was  reckoned  the  half-man  in  the  load.
It  would  take  too  much  of  our  time  to  discuss  all  the
questions  which  this  curious  passage  suggests,  and  I
shall  only  make  a  remark  on  one  or  two  of  the  names.
Petrylew  Vynestyr  means  a  minister  or  servant  whose
name  was  Petrylew,  and  this  last  might  be  interpreted
to  mean  him  of  the  four  lights.2  Petrylew  was  therefore
the  fifth  night  in  the  reckoning,  that  is  to  say,  the  last
night  of  the  first  noinden  or  half-week,  as  that  would  be
the  one  preceded  by  four  intervals  of  daylight.  The  cook
reckoned  as  the  half-person  was  the  night  with  which
the  week  began,  though  the  triad  in  its  present  form
contemplates  this  as  occupying  the  last  place  ;  originally,

less  transparent  name  is  Du  Moro,  as  in  the  oldest  copy  of  the  Triads
(Hengwrt  MS.  54,  p.  53),  or  Du  Man-//  Moro  Oeruedawc,  '  Black,  the
Horse  of  Moro  Oervectawc,'  in  the  story  of  Kulhwch  (JR.  />'.  Mab.
p.  124),  where  the  rider  of  the  beast  is  no  other  than  Gwyn  ab  Nud.
The  Welsh  Moro,  Moroed,  and  the  French  Morois,  are  probably  names
of  the  same  mythic  place  as  the  Irish  Murias,  whence  the  Tuatlia  De
Danann  brought  the  Undry  Cauldron  of  the  Dagda  (p.  257) ;  the  name
Afttreif,  borne  by  a  district  in  the  north,  given  to  Urien,  also  belongs
here,  as  I  hope  to  show  in  my  Arthurian  Legend.

1  I  guess  it  to  stand  for  an  older  reading  Keimat :  the  name  would
then  mean  '  G.  the  good  Comrade.'

2  Petrylew  is  the  reading  of  the  Red  Book  ;  most  of  the  other  MSS.
have  Pryddaw,  Pryiehr,  or  the  like,  which  I  cannot  explain.

2  r2


372  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

however,  that  place  must  have  been  reserved  for  another.
Ko  less  than  three  of  the  names  seem  to  refer  to  the
nights  of  the  week  as  the  time  for  eating  and  carousing ;
but  one  seems  to  reflect  the  idea  that  night  cools  the
head  and  gives  room  for  deliberation  and  good  counsel :
I  allude  to  Mynach  Naivmon,  where  Mynach  is  the  Welsh
for  'monk,'  and  Natvmon  is  a  word  partly  derived  from
naw,  the  Welsh  for  '  nine ;'  while  the  remainder  of  the
word  Nawmon  challenges  comparison  with  the  Irish  Ifaiiie,
so  that  Kawmon  might  be  interpreted  to  mean  a  Maine
who  was  in  some  way  nine  or  possessed  of  some  ninely
attribute.  This,  it  will  be  seen,  takes  us  back  beyond
the  seven  and  a  half  of  the  later  week  to  the  nineness,
so  to  say,  of  the  more  ancient  one.  The  Christian  week
as  a  period  of  eight  nights  is  also  represented  in  the
Arthurian  romances,  namely,  by  the  eight  officers  of
Arthur's  court  who  acted  as  his  porters  and  watchmen :
they  are  said  to  have  divided  the  year  between  them,  and
seven  of  them  served  as  the  subordinates  of  one  of  their
number,  who  bore  a  name  which  suggests  comparison
between  him  and  the  Maine  that  contained  the  others,
for  he  was  Gletvlwyd  Gavaelvawr,  'Brave  Grey  of  the
Great  Grip.'1

So  Celtic  mythology  probably  indulged  in  a  two-fold
treatment  of  the  ancient  week :  it  was  made  either  the
basis  of  nine  distinct  personifications  of  a  more  or  less  uni-
form character,  or  else  of  a  single  j)ersonincation  with  the
attribute  of  nine  in  some  way  attaching  to  it.  Of  the
former,  one  may  give  as  an  instance  the  nine  porters  at

1  M.  B.  Mab.  p.  245  ;  Guest,  ij.  6  ;  but  in  two  other  passages  (R.  B.
Mab.  pp.  103,  138;  Guest,  ij.  254,  312)  lie  and  Lis  make  only  five,
representing  the  half-week.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.  373

the  nine  gates  of  the  dark  being  described  as  Yspadadeu
Pencawr,  'Hawthorn  chief  of  Giants,'  in  the  story  of
Kulliwrh  and  Olwen;1  also  the  Nine  Witches  of  Glou-
cester, who,  like  the  brothers  Maini,  were  aided  in  their
ravages  by  their  father  and  mother:  it  was,  however,
all  in  vain,  as  they  were  vanquished  by  the  hero  Feredur,
who  afterwards  completed  his  military  education  under
the  care  of  one  of  their  number.2  We  have  the  same
idea,  with  the  malignity  of  the  witches  replaced  by  the
teaching  of  the  muses,  incorporated  in  the  nine  maidens
who  feed  with  their  breath  the  fire  beneath  the  Cauldron
of  the  Head  of  Hades  (p.  25G),  which  is  matched  in  Irish
by  the  nine  sacred  hazels  growing  over  the  Well  of  Wis-
dom. The  other  treatment  is  reserved  for  Maine  mac
Durthacht,  who  is  not  mentioned  in  company  with  any
brothers  of  his :  he  was  the  owner  of  the  brooch  on
which  Aitherne  set  such  value,  and  in  that  brooch  some
nincly  characteristic  like  that  of  Woden's  Draupnir  may
be  supposed  to  have  resided.  Moreover,  the  manner  in
which  Maine  son  of  Ailill  is  mentioned  by  himself  in
the  Tain  epic,3  would  suggest  that  under  that  name  the
myth  originally  contemplated  but  one  personage,  who
was  only  multiplied  into  seven  or  eight  under  the  influenco
of  the  Christian  week  and  its  Latin  name,  the  Maine  of
the  older  treatment  being  made  into  a  Maine  said  to
contain  all  the  others.  Irish  literature  makes  mention
of  other  Maini,  one  of  whom  was  styled  Maine  the  Great,
and  also  Maine  Muineamon,  or  M.  of  the  Rich  Neck,  as
O'Curry  has  suggested,  the  surname  being  explained  by

1  R.  11  M'U>.  p.  118;  Guest,  ij.  277.

-  ft  /;.  Mob.  pp.  210-1  j  Guest-.,  i.  323;  sec  also  i.  3G0.

::  See  more  especially  pp.  GGb,  67'/,  G9",  of  the  We.  oftlie  Dun.


374  IV.     THE    CULTURE   HERO.

a  statement  that  he  was  the  first  king  of  Erinn  to  have
torques  of  gold  made  for  wearing  round  the  neck,  which
is  in  Irish  muin  ; l  in  this  reference  to  the  gold  torques
or  collars,  we  have  probably  the  echo  of  a  myth  like  that
of  Maine  mac  Durthacht's  brooch.  Further,  Maine  M6r
was  the  mythic  ancestor  of  the  Hy-Many,2  whose  prince
was  caught  by  Cuchulainn,  on  whom  he  avenged  himself
by  adjuring  him  to  find  what  had  happened  to  the  Sons
of  Ddel  Dermait,  a  quest  which  involved  the  sun-hero  in
a  visit  to  the  other  world.  The  name  of  Cuchulainn's
captive  was  Echaid  Eond,  or  E.  of  (the)  Chains,  so  called
from  a  seven-ounce  chain  or  thread  of  gold  which  formed
part  of  his  head-gear.3  This  may  be  regarded  as  another
of  the  treasures  associated  with  the  Maini :  we  have  thus
no  less  than  three,  a  brooch,  a  torque,  and  a  chain,  all
perhaps  originally  characterized  by  the  number  nine  in
the  tales  to  which  they  belonged.  One  more  Maine  may
be  mentioned:  he  is  called  Maine  son  of  Mall  of  the
Nine  Hostages.4  Mall  is  fabled  to  have  reigned  over
Ireland  in  the  fifth  century  of  our  era,  and  to  have  con-
quered Britain,  France  and  other  lands ;  so  his  is  a  great
name  in  Irish  pedigrees,  but  it  is  probably  altogether
mythic,  and  to  be  equated  with  that  of  the  Welsh  JVeol.5

1  See  O'Curry,  iij.  84,  178,  and  the  Four  Masters,  A.M.  3868,  3872.

2  That  is  to  say,  the  Ui  Maini,  or  Descendants  of  Maine,  whose  ter-
ritory may,  roughly  speaking,  be  said  to  have  consisted  of  the  counties
of  Galway  and  Roscommon.

3  Stokes  &  Windisch's  Ir.  Texte,  pp.  177,  192;  O'Curry,  iij.  106.

4  O'Curry's  Manners,  &c.  ij.  161.

5  Fully  described  he  is  Neol  cyn  Croc,  which  seems  to  mean  '  Neol
before  the  Crucifixion;'  tbe  person  so  called  is  spoken  of  as  the  father
of  a  lady,  Eftylw,  said  to  have  lived  for  three  generations.  See  the
story  of  Kulhwch,  JR.  B.  Mab.  p.  113;  Guest,  ij.  212.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    IIERO.  37 -J

At  any  rate  his  name  looks  like  evidence  of  the  two
treatments  of  the  nine-night  week ;  for  the  nine  hostages
serving  as  Niall's  distinction  possibly  referred  to  the
nine  nights  of  the  ancient  week,  while  they  may  be  sup-
posed also  represented  in  the  single  person  of  Niall's  son
Maine.

Enough  has  now  been  said  to  suggest  that  the  parallel
here  lies  between  Woden's  ring  and  the  gold  brooch,
torque  or  chain  of  Maine,  and  the  question  then  arises,
what  Maine  himself  was  as  a  mythological  being.  It  has
already  been  shown  that  his  name  was  associated  with
darkness  and  night.  Let  us  now  see  what  fresh  light
can  be  thrown  on  his  character  by  a  further  study  of  his
name.  To  begin,  the  word  Maiu<\  Mane  or  JLaii,  is  bodily
identical  with  the  Menyw  of  Welsh  literature.  The
person  so  called  belonged  to  Arthur's  court,  but  his
character  is  in  no  wise  thereby  defined,  as  it  is  one  of  the
peculiarities  of  Arthur  that  he  draws  his  men  from  all
the  Brythonic  cycles  of  mythology  ;  but  Menyw  even  in
Arthur's  service  preserved  a  character  and  role  corre-
sponding closely  to  that  which  might  be  ascribed  to  the
Irish  Maine  as  a  personification  of  darkness  and  night.
Thus  we  read  that  a  party  of  Arthur's  men  starting  on  a
dangerous  quest  were  ordered  by  him  to  be  accompanied
by  Menyw,  in  order  that,  in  case  they  came  to  a  heathen
land,  Menyw  might  cast  glamour  and  magic  over  his  com-
panions, so  that  they  might  be  seen  of  nobody  while  they
saw  everybody.1  Menyw  is  called  the  son  of  Teirgwaeci,
a  feminine  compound  meaning  Her  of  the  Three  Shouts,
in  which  we  have  a  reference  to  the  triple  division  of  the

1  ft  B.  Mob.  p.  114-5;  Guest,  ij.  271-2.


376  IV.    THE    CULTURE    HERO.

working  portion  of  the  day  (p.  141),  or  else,  perhaps,  of
time  into  present,  past  and  future.  This  looks  at  first
sight  like  a  reversal  of  the  Celtic  habit  of  giving  darkness
precedence  over  light  and  day ;  but  had  we  the  myth  in
its  original  completeness,  we  should  probably  find  that
Teirgwaed:  had  as  her  husband  and  father  of  Menyw  a
representative  in  some  form  or  other  of  darkness,  all
reference  to  him  being  omitted  in  favour  of  the  matro-
nymic  style  of  naming  certain  of  the  oldest  Celtic  divi-
nities. All  this  is  corroborated  by  the  Triads1  treating
Menyw  as  one  of  the  three  chief  magicians  and  glamour-
men  of  the  Isle  of  Britain.

It  was  suggested  that  the  mon  in  the  "Welsh  Nawmon
was  of  the  same  origin  as  the  Irish  name  Maine,  and
that  is  doubtless  right,  so  that  Mynach  Nawmon  may  be
rendered  the  Monk  of  the  Nine  Tricks ; 2  for  Irish  proves
the  existence  of  a  Celtic  word  mon,  l  a  trick,'  from  which
was  derived  an  Irish  adjective  monach  or  manach,  l  tricky
or  dodgy.'  This  was  applied  to  a  notorious  Fomorian
called  Forgall  Monach,  or  Forgall  the  Tricky,  who  was  an
adept  at  magic  and  shape-shifting.  In  harmony  with  a
very  wide-spread  kind  of  myth,  he  lost  his  life  in  trying
to  prevent  Ciichulainn  from  carrying  away  his  daughter
to  be  his  wife.  The  Welsh  word  mynawg  corresponding
to  monach,  however,  means  a  courteous  or  polite  person ;
the  difference  of  meaning  looks  wide,  but  it  is  partly  to
be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  Welsh  literature  of  the
Middle  Ages  treats  courteousness  or  good  breeding  as

1  i.  31,  32,  33,  ij.  20,  iij.  90.

2  Some  of  the  Triad  versions  have  Naivmod,  which  would  mean,
'of  nine  modes  or  forms.'  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  original  was
Mynawg  Nawmon,  with  the  mynawg  explained  below.


IV.     THE    CULTURE    1IER0.  377

knowledge,  a  polite  or  courteous  person  being  called  ilyn
da  ci  wybod,  or  one  who  is  good  as  to  his  knowledge,
which  is  paralleled  in  English  when  a  rude  person  is
excused  on  the  ground  of  his  'knowing'  no  better.  The
meanings  of  these  names  may,  then,  be  said  to  centre
around  the  ideas  of  knowledge  and  trickiness,  and  these
admit  of  being  traced  in  their  turn  back  to  the  one  idea
of  thought  or  mental  activity,  which  may  on  the  one
hand  result  in  praiseworthy  skill,  and  on  the  other  in
ingenuity  of  the  contrary  nature.  This  appears  illustrated
probably  by  the  Welsh  word  mynatvg  of  a  good  significa-
tion, as  compared  with  its  derivative  mynoyoi,  which  may
be  guessed  to  have  had  the  reverse ;  for  it  is  known  as
the  name  of  the  father  of  the  death-god  Beli  the  Great,
the  Irish  Bile  (p.  90).  Similarly,  Manawychm,  a  good
character  in  Welsh,  is  matched  in  Irish  by  Manannan,
represented  as  a  very  tricky  druid  or  magician.1

Maine  or  Menyw  was  a  male  personification,  but  Celtic
mythology  did  not  confine  itself  here  to  that  sex,  as  it
was  in  possession  also  of  a  female  personification  regarded
as  of  cognate  origin  and  endowed  with  nine  forms ;  this

1  Both  names  are  of  the  same  origin  as  those  here  in  question,  and
the  whole  group  is  to  be  referred  to  the  same  source  as  the  Irish  menma,
'mind,'  do-muiniur,  'I  mean,  think  or  believe,'  and  other  compounds;
■while  in  English  may  be  mentioned  such  words  as  mind,  meaning,  and
probably  man  as  the  thinking  being.  Further  may  be  added  such
instances  as  Latin  memini,  'I  remember;'  mens,  mentis,  'mind;'  eom-
mentum,  'a  lie;'  moneo,  'I  cause  to  think,  I  warn:5  Greek,  fievos,
'•courage,  sense;'  /HrwiVw,  'I  desire;'  (it/iova,  'I  wish  for;'  ftdiTis,
'  a  seer  or  prophet :'  Sanskrit,  >ihi»,  '  think  ;'  manas,  '  courage,  sense  or
mind;'  manman,  'mind.'  Among  the  proper  names  connected  with
this  group  of  words  may  be  mentioned  such  as  Mint  n-,/,  Mmos,  Mevtiap,
the  Sanskrit  Manu,  and  the  old  German  Manniu,  mentioned  by  Tacitus
in  thf  Qi  rmania.


378  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

served  not  only — perhaps  not  chiefly — to  represent  the
nine  nights  of  the  week,  or  even  the  dawns  or  dusks
of  the  same,  so  much  as  that  which  allowed  of  being
measured  by  the  limits  of  the  week,  that  is  to  say,  that
metaphorical  kind  of  space  which  we  call  time,  and  time
for  the  most  part  contemplated  as  the  bringer  of  boons
and  the  teacher  of  wisdom.  It  was  a  sort  of  Athene
with  nine  forms  of  beauty ;  so  in  the  Ultonian  cycle  of
Irish  tales  she  is  the  daughter  of  king  Conchobar,  and
known  as  Fedelm  of  the  Nine  Forms,1  who  will  come
under  our  notice  later  as  she  who  sends  her  handmaid  to
comfort  Cuchulainn  at  night  and  to  give  him  his  bath  in
concealment.2  In  Welsh,  the  nine  forms  of  the  mythic
beauty  have  been  effaced  by  the  blanching  hand  of  obli-
vion ;  but  one  recognizes  her  person  in  the  Lady  of  the
Fountain  who  becomes  Owein's  wife,  after  her  handmaid
Lunet  had  rescued  him  from  death  by  giving  him  a
Gygean  ring  to  conceal  him  from  his  enemies.  In  the
case  of  Fedelm,  the  reference  to  the  nine  nights  of  the
week  is  involved  in  the  nine  forms  of  her  beauty,  and  in
that  of  Lunet  they  are  symbolized  by  the  ring  which
makes  its  possessor  invisible  whenever  he  pleases.  The
rest  of  the  parallel  is  still  more  obvious,  for  Lunet  is
described  not  only  giving  Owein  refuge  and  food,  but
also  administering  to  him  such  services  as  that  of  washing
his  head  and  shaving  his  beard,3  somewhat  in  the  same
way  that  Athene  is  represented  weaving  a  peplos  for  her
favourite  Heracles,  or  causing  springs  of  warm  water  to

1  Some  of  the  spellings  suggest  '  Nine  Hearts '  rather  than  '  Nine
Forms.'

2  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  57a;  Bk.  of  Leinster,  58  a.

3  R.  B.  Mab.  pp.  173-6;  Guest,  i.  55-9.


IV.     TIIE   CULTURE    HERO.  379

gush  forth  from  the  ground  to  supply  him  at  the  end  of
the  day  with  a  refreshing  bath.1  The  ring  associated
with  Lunet  becomes  in  some  stories  a  wheel,  as,  for
instance,  in  that  from  which  Gwydion's  mistress  was
called  Arianrhod,  or  She  of  the  Silver  Wheel ;  and  the
same  conception  probably  entered  into  the  story  which
made  Cilchulainn's  sister  Dechtere  the  charioteer  of  her
brother,  king  Conchobar;  while  in  Norse  literature  we
meet  with  it  in  the  obscurely  mentioned  'deep  wheel'  of
Gefjon  (p.  284).

In  these  goddesses  and  others  like  them,  such  as  Duben
the  mother  of  Cairbre's  children  (p.  308),  we  seem  to
have  a  group  of  the  mythic  beings  loosely  called  dawn-
goddesses  ;  but  the  location  of  some  of  the  Celtic  ones
here  in  question,  on  an  island  or  peninsula  towards  the
west,  would  suggest  that  they  at  least  would  be  as  cor-
rectly designated  dusk-goddesses.  Neither  dusk,  how-
ever, nor  dawn  can  help  us  so  much  to  understand  their
nature  as  their  connection  with  the  ancient  week  and  all
it  connoted.  This  gives,  among  other  things,  a  very
pregnant  meaning  to  the  intimate  relations  between  them
and  the  Culture  Hero,  whom  the  most  important  versions
of  the  myth  treat  as  the  father  by  them  of  the  Sun  Hero,
and  sometimes  of  another  birth  representing  darkness
and  night.  It  may  perhaps  seem  at  first  sight  somewhat
daring  to  place  Athene  in  the  category  of  goddesses  of
the  kind  here  discussed ;  but  I  would  go  further,  and  add
that  the  name  of  Athene's  Italian  counterpart  Minerva
or,  as  it  is  less  usually  written,  Menerva,  brings  us  back
again  to  the  group  of  names  which  have  been  already

1  Preller'a  Or.  Mythciogu  ■;  ij.  161.


380  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

touched  upon ;  for  Mcnerva  is  supposed  to  represent  an
early  Menezva,  derived  from  the  same  stem,  menes,  which
we  have  in  the  Greek  /«vos,  genitive  ^evov?,  l  mind,  spirit,
courage,'  Sanskrit  manas,  genitive  manasas,  of  much  the
same  meaning.  But  such  a  name  as  Menezva  would  have
to  became  Meneva  in  the  early  history  of  the  Celtic  lan-
guages still  living ;  and  from  that  name  would  be  formed
an  adjective  Menevjos,  Menevja,  Mencvjon,  'relating  to
Meneva]  or  the  Celtic  Minerva ;  but  in  later  Welsh  all
these  would  be  cut  down  to  Memjw  or  Mynyw.  The  one
representing  the  masculine  Menevjos  is  mostly  written
Menyw  or  Memo,  and  is  the  name  which  has  been  equated
with  the  Irish  name  Maine ;  while  the  feminine  would
seem  to  have  been  preserved  uncurtailed  as  Menevia,  to
pass  for  the  Latin  name  of  St.  David's,  whence  also  the
adjective  Meneviensis}  while  in  Welsh  it  has  mostly  been
treated  as  Mynyw  or  Menyw?  This  indirect  evidence  to
a  goddess  of  the  name  Meneva,  corresponding  to  that
of  Minerva  in  Latin,  would  mean  that  the  district  around
St.  David's,  the  western  position  of  which  near  the  sea
fits  in  with  other  instances,  was  called  after  this  Celtic
Minerva,  and  treated  perhaps  as  in  some  sense  or  other
peculiarly  hers.     This  allusion  to  Minerva  will  have  pro-


1  Meneviensium  episcopo  in  the  Life  of  Sf.  Davit! ,  written  by  Rhygy-
varch  (Ricemarchus)  in  the  twelfth  century  :  see  the  Lives  of  the  Cam-
Iro-Brit.  SS.  (Llandovery,  1853),  p.  121.

2  This  is  attested  by  the  Welsh  name  of  Old  Mynyw  (a  church  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Aberaeron,  in  Cardiganshire),  which,  called  Hen
Fenyw,  just  like  the  words  hen  fenyw,  'an  old  woman,'  considerably
exercises  the  popular-etymology  man,  especially  when  he  takes  it  in
conjunction  with  the  name  of  a  church  on  the  other  side  of  the  Teivi,
called  Eglwys  Wrw,  which  could  not  help  striking  him  as  meaning  the
'  Male  Church.'


IV.     THE    CULTURE    IIKRO.  381

luihly  suggested  to  you  the  Greek  goddess  Athene;  but
I  may  say  in  passing  that  one  of  her  Celtic  equivalents  is
possibly  to  be  detected  in  Tlachtga  daughter  of  Mog
Ruith,  both  of  whom  have  already  been  mentioned  (p.  21 1).
Greek  religion  closely  associated  Athene  with  Hephaestus,
but  Mog  Ruith's  ability  to  fly  forces  us  to  compare  him
rather  with  Daedalus  than  with  Ilephoestus ;  for  the  lines
of  classification  do  not  coincide  in  Greek  and  Celtic  ;  and
if  we  followed  Daedalus  further,  we  should  find  that  the
story  of  his  jealousy  and  murder  of  a  too  promising-
nephew  and  pupil  would  lead  one  to  compare  him  with
another  Goidelic  character,  namety,  Dian  Cecht,  who  made
his  silver  hand  for  Nuada :  this  was  improved  upon  by
the  son  of  Dian  Cecht,  who  was  so  enraged  at  being
excelled,  that  he  slew  him.1  It  is  right,  however,  to  say
that  ancient  authors  sometimes  went  so  far  as  to  identify
Hephaestus  with  Daedalus;2  and  that  Yolundr,  or  the
Way  land  Smith  of  the  Norse  Edda,  combines  the  charac-
teristics of  both  in  having  lost  the  use  of  his  feet  and
made  himself  efficient  wings.3  But  to  come  back  to
Tlachtga,  the  comparison  with  Athene  turns  on  the  lattcr's
ever- brandished  spear,  and  the  attribute  of  Tlachtga's
attested  by  her  name,  which  seems  to  refer  to  a  gdi,  that
is  to  say  a  gcesum,  or  spear.  It  was  possibly  the  gcesum
used  in  a  solemn  ceremony  of  kindling  fire  in  the  ancient
way  by  friction.

The  question  of  the  original  identity  with  one  another
of  the  goddesses  here  alluded  to,  is  too  large  to  be  now

1  See  O'Curry  in  the  Atlantis,  Vol.  iv.  p.  158 ;  Joyce,  p.  103.

2  See  Preller's  Gr.  Myth.  i.  148,  ij.  l'J7.

3  Corpus  Poet.  Bur.  i.  173-j.


382  IV.     THE    CULTURE    HERO.

discussed  at  length,  and  I  will  only  add  a  word  as  to  an
apparent  discrepancy  between  the  Celtic  and  Norse  myths
about  the  week :  the  gold  ring  in  the  latter  belongs  to
the  Culture  God  Woden,  and  it  is  to  him  that  it  is  brought
back  from  the  Hell-imprisoned  Balder  by  Hermodr,  after
he  had  travelled  nine  nights1  in  the  dark  to  find  his
brother  Balder's  place  of  confinement;  whereas  in  the
Irish  tale  the  gold  brooch  is  treated  as  the  property  of  a
very  different  kind  of  being,  Maine  son  of  Durthacht.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  Aitherne,  a  likeness,  however
distorted,  of  the  Culture  Hero,  that  recovers  possession
of  it  in  the  Irish  version  of  the  myth,  and  brings  it  back
to  Ulster;  so  that  the  two  accounts  may  be  said  to
amount  to  the  same  thing,  inasmuch  as  they  both  associate
the  week  and  the  alternation  of  day  and  uight  with  the
action  of  the  Culture  Hero.  In  Hindu  mythology,  Indra
is  represented  as  daily  engaged  in  bringing  back  the  sun
and  the  dawn  so  as  to  be  seen  of  men :  it  is  his  regular
work.  But  this  very  primitive  notion  is  not  conspicuous
in  Celtic  or  in  Norse  mythology ;  it  is  nevertheless  there,
but  buried  beneath  the  debris  of  sundry  metaphors  and
symbolisms ;  and  it  is  to  be  extricated  only  as  a  matter
of  inference  or  interpretation.  Even  so  it  is  valuable,  as
it  serves  to  strengthen  at  its  weakest  point  the  parallel  to
be  drawn  between  Indra  in  the  East  and  Gwydion- Woden
in  the  West.

1  Simrock's  Edda,  p.  318.


Lecture  V.

THE    SUN    HERO.


PAET   I.


Lleu  axd  Lug.

Frequent  allusions  have  already  been  made  to  Llew
Llawgyffcs,  and,  in  fact,  most  of  his  story  has  been  repro-
duced :  it  has  also  been  hinted  that  in  him  we  have  a
nature  myth  about  light.  It  is,  however,  of  capital
importance  in  dealing  with  the  solar  mythology  of  the
Celts,  and  especially  of  the  "Welsh,  to  bear  in  mind  that
the  nature  myth  did  not  prevent  the  Solar  Hero  from
being  regarded  as  partly  of  human  descent;  a  different
account  is  sometimes  implied  in  Welsh  stories,  but  this
is  far  the  most  fertile,  and  it  takes  us  back  to  a  pre-Celtic
and  Aryan  stage  of  culture,  when  it  was  possible  for  the
magician  and  medicine-man  of  the  tribe  to  claim  the  sun
as  his  offspring.  So  we  might  here  call  him  the  Sun-
man,  were  it  not  more  in  harmony  with  custom  to  speak
of  the  Sun-god  or  Solar  Hero.  In  order  to  establish  these
views,  we  have  now  to  examine  more  closely  the  literature
relating  to  Llew,  and  we  may  begin  with  the  strange
story  of  his  birth  (p.  30 G),  which  need  not  be  repeated.
One  of  the  first  things  in  it  to  strike  one  is  young  Llew's
rapid  growth;  and  the  vigour  with  which  he  scattered


384  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

the  sheet  in  which  he  had  been  wrapped,  invites  compa-
rison with  the  description  of  the  infant  Apollo,  whom  the
goddesses  present  bathed  in  a  crystal  stream  of  water  as
soon  as  he  leaped  to  life.  They  next  proceeded  to  wrap
him  in  a  white  robe,  fine  and  newly  wrought,  and  to
place  a  golden  band  round  his  body,  while  one  of  their
number  touched  his  lips  with  nectar  and  ambrosia.  No
sooner  had  he  tasted  of  the  food  of  the  immortals,  than  he
burst  the  bonds  of  his  swaddling  clothes  and  walked  forth
in  the  fulness  of  his  divinity,  while  Delos  rejoiced  and
bloomed  at  his  birth.1  The  same  sort  of  precocious  growth
as  in  the  case  of  Llew  is  ascribed  to  other  Celtic  personi-
fications of  the  Sun-god,  but  no  less,  be  it  noticed,  to
personifications  of  darkness.

One  might  probably  regard  the  account  (p.  240)  of
Llew's  death  on  the  side  of  his  bath  as  referring  origin-
ally to  the  sun  setting  in  the  sea ;  but  there  is  no  occa-
sion to  lay  great  stress  on  that,  as  we  have  what  seems
to  be  better  evidence  of  the  nature  myth  in  the  marriage
of  Blodeued:  to  Llew.  She  was  not  of  the  race  of  men,
but  created  from  flowers  by  Gwydion,  with  the  aid  of  the
master  magician  Math :  she  was  as  distinguished  for  her
beauty  as  her  classical  counterpart,  rosy-fingered  Eos.
The  dawn  represents  the  transition  from  the  darkness  of
night  to  the  light  of  day,  so  that,  pictured  by  the  primi-
tive mind  as  a  lovely  damsel,  she  would  be  regarded  as
dividing  her  love  between  the  Sun-god  and  the  princes
of  darkness  in  the  mythological  sense  of  the  term.  This
is  what  we  find  in  the  story  of  Blodeued: :    Llew  goes


1  See  the  Homeric  Hymn  to  Apollo  (in  Didot's  Homeri  Carmina  et
Cydi  Ejjicl  Beliquzcn),  lines  119 — 139.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  385

forth  on  a  journey;  whether  walking  or  riding  wc  are
not  told,  but  probably  the  latter,  for  he  had  been  taught
to  ride,  as  we  read  of  him  and  his  father  once  proceeding
on  horseback  towards  Arianrhod's  castle  (p.  238).     Be-
sides, he  is  known  to  have  had  a  famous  horse  called1
Melyngan  Gamre,  or  the  Steed  of  Yellow- white  Footsteps
— a  most  appropriate  name  for  the  horse  of  a  Sun  Ilcro.
But  to  proceed  with  the  story :  during  his  absence  from
home,  his  wife  is  visited  by  another  lover,  who  rests  not
till  he   has  slain  Llew  and   conquered  his  dominions.
Gwydion  brings  Llew  back  to  this  life,  that  is,  he  fetches
the  sun  back  to  illumine  the  world  once  more ;   and  he
chases  the  faithless  wife  across  the  heavens,  and,  accord-
ing to  one  version,  he  overtakes  her  in  the  lengthening
shades  which  the  cliffs  were  spreading  over  a  dark  lake ;
that  is,  the  Dawn  has  become  the  Dusk  or  the  Gloaming,
and  he  transforms  her  into  an  owl,  accursed  of  all  the  birds
that  love  the  light  of  the  sun.     Here  we  have  a  pretty
parallel  to  Indra's  daily  struggle  to  recover  the  sun  from
the  powers  of  darkness,  and  to  his  remarkable  chase  of  the
Dawn  when  he  smashed  the  wicked  woman's  chariot  and
routed  her  in  the  sky  (p.  299).    On  the  other  hand,  Llew,
brought  back,  is  enabled  to  vanquish  and  kill  his  rival
with  a  cast  of  his  spear,  the  only  one  which  the  story
lets  him  make  with  his  own  hand,  his  father  being  in  the


1  R.  B.  Mob.  p.  306;  Triads,  ij.  50;  but  i.  94  reads  Melyngan
Mangre,  w  lack  seems  less  correct:  it  would  mean  'the  Yellow-white
One  of  the  Habitation,'  which  looks  less  probable.  The  triad  describes
the  three  horses  as  each  a  'rhodedig  farch,'  which  can  only  mean  a
gift  horse;  but  I  know  of  no  legend  to  tkrow  any  light  on  the  term.
Llew's  horse  is  also  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  Taliessin,  poem  xxv.
(Skene,  ij.  176)  as  '  march  lieu  ftetuegin,'  where  it  is  uncertain  whether
ftetuegin  applies  to  the  horse  or  to  his  owner.


2  C


386  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

habit  of  doing  most  tilings  for  him.  If  it  should  here  be
objected,  that  while  Indra  brings  the  sun  back  every-
day, Gwydion  is  only  made  to  bring  Llew  back  once,
our  answer  would  be,  that  this  has  already  been  met,  at
least  in  part,  and  that  now  its  force  may  be  still  further
broken.  For,  to  begin  on  Irish  ground,  we  there  find
stories  which  mention  several  births  of  the  Sun-god,  that
is  to  say,  the  Sun-god's  father  and  the  Sun-god's  son  may
both  be  termed  Sun-gods  as  well  as  he.  This  agrees  well
enough  with  an  idea  which  seems  to  have  once  been  preva-
lent in  Ireland,  that  an  ancestor  might  return  in  the  person
of  one  of  his  descendants.  So  far  as  I  know,  the  ancient
Brythons  were  less  familiar  with  the  idea  of  a  series  of
Sun-gods  than  that  of  a  group  of  them ;  not  to  mention
that  they  are  found  to  have  less  dwelt  on  the  antagonism
between  day  and  night  than  that  between  the  summer
and  the  winter ;  but  Welsh  mythology  is  nevertheless
not  wholly  without  a  sort  of  analogue  to  Indra's  daily
exploit  in  bringing  back  the  sun ;  for  Llew  had  a  twin-
brother  who  reached  sudden  maturity  and  rushed  off
into  the  sea.  The  nature  of  that  element  became  his ;
he  swam  about  in  it  like  a  fish,  and  never  did  a  wave
break  beneath  him,  whence  his  name  Dylan  son  of  the
Billow.  He  fell  by  the  spear  of  the  Culture  Hero  Govan-
non,  Gwydion's  brother  the  smith ;  and  his  deed  came  to
be  recorded  in  a  triad 1  as  one  of  the  Three  nefarious  Blows
of  the  Isle  of  Britain.  A  pathetic  touch,  associated  with
the  muse  of  Taliessin,2  introduces  an  iEschylean  chorus
of  outraged  spectators,  consisting

1  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  68  ;  Guest,  iij.  201 ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  found  in  the
ordinary  lists  of  triads.

2  Poem  xliij. :  see  Skene,  ij.  199.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  381

'Of  the  Wave  of  Erinn,  of  Man,  and  of  the  North,

And  of  Britain,  of  comely  hosts,  as  the  fourth.' '

Nay,  according  to  another  utterance  of  the  same  poet,'2
the  wild  waves  when  they  dash  against  the  shore  arc.
chafing  to  avenge  the  death  of  Dylan.  Another  view  no
less  romantic  is  the  one  still  known  in  the  Vale  of  the
Conwy,  that  the  noise  of  the  waves  crowding  into  that
river  is  nought  but  the  dying  groans  of  Dylan.  Strange
as  it  may  seem,  and  in  spite  of  the  Mabinogi  describing
Dylan  as  a  big  yellow-haired  boy,  the  study  of  Irish
parallels  leaves  one  in  no  doubt  that  Dylan  represents
darkness,  the  darkness  that  hies  away  to  lurk  in  the  sea.
so  that  his  name  of  Dylan  has  become  a  synonym  for  that
of  the  Ocean.  But  how,  it  may  be  asked,  came  the  sym-
pathy of  the  poet  to  be  enlisted  on  the  wrong  side,  and
Govannon's  deed  to  be  execrated  ?  That  is  a  question
which  is  not  easy  to  answer  to  one's  own  satisfaction,
and  the  best  thing  to  do  is  to  point  out  the  parallel  story
in  Irish.  It  occurs  in  that  of  the  war  between  the
Tuatha  De  Danann  and  the  Fomori : 3  when  the  battle
of  Mag  Tured  (p.  253)  had  been  going  on  for  some  time,
the  Fomori  wondered  how  the  Tuatha  De*  continued  to
be  supplied  with  arms ;  in  order,  therefore,  to  find  this
out  and  to  procure  other  information  about  the  enemy,
they  sent  one  of  their  young  heroes  to  visit  him.     The

1  An  Irish  instance  of  the  waves  of  'the  melancholy  main'  bewail
ing  a  death  occurs  in  the  Bfa  of  Leinster,  lSGa;  see  also  the  editor's
Introd.  p.  47  a

2  Poem  ix. :  see  Skene,  ij.  145.

3  The  MS.  I  have  consulted  is  in  the  British  Museum,  and  is  num-
bered Haiti.  5280:  the  portion  of  the  story  here  in  point  incurs  -it
folio  OS  a  (57  a  of  an  older  paging).

2c2


388  V.     THE    StTN    HERO.

one  chosen  belonged  by  race  partly  to  the  Fomori  and
partly  to  the  Tnatha  Dd ;  he  was  son  of  Bres  the  Fomo-
rian  and  Brig  daughter  of  the  Dagda,  one  of  the  leaders
of  the  Tnatha  De*  in  the  war.  He  was  called  Euadan,
and  he  readily  got  access  to  the  camp  of  the  Tuatha  D6
and  visited  the  forge,  where  he  found  their  smith  Goibniu,
whose  name  makes  in  the  genitive  case  Goibnenn,  the
etymologic  and  inflectional  equivalent  of  the  Welsh  Govan-
non ;  he  then  gives  the  Fomori  a  full  account  of  the
celerity  with  which  Goibniu  and  his  fellow -artificers
despatched  their  work.  The  Fomori  send  Euadan  back
with  orders  to  kill  the  smith ;  so  Euadan  asks  Goibniu
to  make  him  a  spear,  and  the  smith  complies.  Euadan
receives  the  spear  duly  finished ;  but  just  as  he  was  start-
ing to  go  away,  he  suddenly  turned  round  and  hurled  his
new  spear  at  its  maker ;  Goibniu  was  wounded,  but  not  so
as  to  prevent  his  throwing  the  spear  back  at  Euadan  in
such  a  way  that  it  sped  right  through  him ;  Euadan  was
nevertheless  able  to  reach  his  friends,  when  he  fell  dead
at  his  father's  feet  in  the  assembly  of  the  Fomori.  His
mother  Brig  comes  and  makes  for  her  son  a  loud  lamen-
tation, which  is  specially  described  as  beginning  with  a
scream  and  ending  with  a  wail ;  for  it  was  then,  we  are
told,  that  wailing  and  screaming  were  heard  in  Erinn  for
the  first  time.1  Such  is  the  story  of  Euadan ;  and  the
wail  and  scream,  so  emphasized  in  it,  refer  to  the  ela-
borate 'keening,'  or  peculiar  and  far-reaching  cry  which
used  to  be  raised  on  the  occasion  of  a  death  in  the  family


1  Harl.  5280,  fol.  68a  :  Tic  Brie  7  cai??es  amarbnad  (l)eghis  ar  t<5s
goilis  fodeog  Conud  and  si?j  roclos  gol  7  egem  artos  anerimi  Is  si  di»
anprich  sin  roairic  feit.  &c.


V.     THE    BUN    HERO.  389

by  Irish  women — and  Welsh  ones  also1 — in  the  Middle
Ages.  The  statement  that  this  was  the  first  time  the
1  keen'  was  heard,  together  with  the  probable  allusion  in
the  name  Ruadan  to  weeping  and  mourning,2  admits  of
our  supposing  that  the  death  of  Buadan  came  to  be  com-
pared with  that  of  Abel — a  comparison,  which,  applied
in  like  manner  to  that  of  Dylan,  would  serve  to  explain
why  the  Welsh  story  took  a  turn  unfavourable  to  the
reputation  of  Govannon.  In  any  case,  the  Irish  ver-
sion proves  that  the  Welsh  one  is  very  incomplete,  and
makes  it  highly  probable  that  Dylan  was  originally  re-
presented acting  as  a  spy  or  assailant  on  behalf  of  the
enemies  of  Govannon,  when  the  latter  slew  him.  He  is
never  associated  with  Math,  Gwydion,  Llew  or  Arianrhod,
after  the  day  of  his  strange  birth,  and  at  the  last  his
mourners  are  the  Waves  of  the  British  waters,  which
might  pass  for  a  happy  expression  of  the  poet's  own
inspiration :  in  reality  it  is  older  and  probably  an  integral
part  of  the  myth,  as  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  the  Waves
in  the  Welsh  story  take  up  the  place  occupied  in  the
Irish  one  by  Euadan's  friends,  the  Fomori  or  the  mythic
dwellers  of  the  deep.  One  of  the  chief  points  of  interest
of  the  story  consists  for  us  in  the  ever-recurring  conquest
of  darkness  by  the  Culture  Hero  and  friend  of  man,  in

1  See  R.  B.  Mob.  p.  174  ;  Guest,  i.  57.

2  At  first  sight  Ruaddn  might  be  thought  derived  from  Ir.  ruad,
'red,'  a  colour  here  not  more  out  of  place  than  the  v  llownesa  of  Dylan's
complexion ;  but  the  name  is  probably  of  the  same  origin  as  Sanskrit

.  '  jammern,  henlen,  weinen  j  bejammern,  beweinen;'  rodana,  neut.
'  the  act  of  weeping,  tears  ;'  also  tin-,  name  of  the  god  Rudra,  together
with  Rodcuij  sometimes  given  as  the  fern,  oi  Rudra.     The  European

Mtes  include  among  them  Latin  rudo,  lL  roar,'  Lith.  raiidmi,  0.
Lulg.  rydajy,  'I  weep,'  A.-Sax.  rtdian,  'to  weep.'


390  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

the  Inclra-like  repetition  of  Govannon's  interference,
which  makes  Dylan  die  every  day  and  as  often  plunges
the  sympathizing  billows  in  loud  grief.  But  the  defeat
of  darkness  means  the  victory  of  the  sun's  light ;  so  the
story  of  Dylan,  in  its  most  modern  echo,  may  be  said  to
give  the  contest  that  iteration  which  Gwydion's  action  in
bringing  Llew  back  to  life  a  second  time  fails  to  express.
This  leads  us  round  to  where  we  were  before  setting
out  on  this  digression ;  we  were  then  occupied  with  the
story  of  Llew,  and  we  must  now  say  something  of  his
Irish  counterpart,  whom  it  is  impossible  not  to  recognize
in  Lug  Lam-fada,  or  L.  of  the  Long-hand,  though  the
stories  about  the  two  seldom  coincide ;  but  that  is  owing
in  a  great  measure  to  the  important  difference  of  treat-
ment, which  lets  Lug  act  for  himself  instead  of  under
the  aegis  of  his  father,  as  is  mostly  the  case  with  Llew.
The  Donegal  story  of  Lug's  birth  is  perhaps  the  one  that
comes  nearest  to  that  of  Llew :  according  to  the  former  he
was,  as  it  will  be  remembered  (p.  314),  the  son  of  Mac
Kineely  and  Ethnea,  a  name  more  correctly  written  Ethne,
with  a  genitive  Ethnenn,  also  written  Ethlenn  (or  Ethlend) ;
so  that  Lug  is  not  unfrequently  called  Lug  mac  Ethlenn,
with  the  usual  predilection  for  the  mother's  name.  But
there  is  another  account  of  Lug's  origin,  which  gives
him  for  father  one  who  would  seem  to  have  been  himself
a  personification  of  the  sun.  His  name  was  Cian,  which
appears  to  be  no  other  word  than  the  Irish  adjective
cian,  '  far,  distant,  remote : '  in  that  case  the  fitness  of
the  name  needs  no  remark,  the  Sun-god  being  not  unfre-
quently represented  as  coming  from  afar.  On  the  subject
of  Cian's  identity  there  were  different  opinions,  one  of
which  makes  him  son  of  Dian  Cecht,  and  says,  contrary


V.     TTIE    SUN    HERO.  301

to  tin*  modem  version,  that  Balor  betrothed  his  daughter
to  Hie  Latter  during  a  truce  between  the  Fomori  and  the
Tuatha  De  Danann.1  Another  story  makes  Lug's  father
Cian  the  son  of  one  Caintc,2  a  name  which  may  be  iden-
tified with  that  in  stories  which  mention  a  Cian  son  of
Ailill  Aulom  ;3  for  Caintc  meant  a  satirist,  and  Ailill  was
represented  as  a  poet,  there  being,  in  fact,  poems  extant
which  are  ascribed  to  him.4  He  was,  however,  more
than  a  poet  or  satirist,  being  a  form,  as  the  name  would
indicate,  of  the  Celtic  Dis,  or  god  of  darkness  and  death.
His  epithet  of  Aulom  or  Olom  literally  meant  '  ear-bare,'
which  is  explained  by  a  story  relating  how  on  a  November
eve  one  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  goddesses  stripped  the
skin  and  the  flesh  completely  off  one  of  his  ears,  leaving
him  ever  after  under  that  blemish,  which  she  is  said  to
have  inflicted  on  him  in  retaliation  for  injury  and  out-
rage.5 On  the  other  hand,  he  was  possessed  of  a  project-
ing tooth,  the  venom  from  which  was  irresistible,  and  he
is  said  to  have  treacherously  planted  it  in  the  check  of  a
step-son  of  his,  when  he  approached  to  bid  him  farewell  :6
Ailill  knew  it  would  kill  him  within  nine  days,  which
was  his  wish.

Ailill's  wife  was  called  Sadb,  and  she  was  a  druidess

1  Harl.  MS.  5280,  fol.  63 a.  In  the  same  MS.  19  a,  ami  in  the
Bk.  of  the  Dan,  1246,  Lug  is  called  son  of  Conn  .son  of  Ethne — Lug
mc  Cuind  m/c  EtAlend— a  pedigree  otherwise  unknown  to  me  :  possi-
bly, however,  Cuind  came  in  as  Ouinn  and  as  a  mistake  for  Ciin,  tho
gen.  of  Cian.  Then  Lthne  would  be  mother  of  Cian  and  grandmother
of  Lug.

-  Atlantis,  iv.  169;  Joyce's  Old  Celtic  Romances,  p.  43.

3  O'Curry,  ij.  139,  149;  Four  Masters,  A.D.  241.

4  O'Curry,  ij.  57-8.  5  Bk.  of  I.       '  r,  288a.
6  lb.  29U,  292a;  the  Bodley  MS.  Laud.  610,  fol.  9562.


392  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

given  to  poetry  and  divination,  that  is  to  say,  she  was  a
lady  of  the  same  class  as  Arianrhod,  who  was  also  a  sor-
ceress.1 As  she  was  one  day  sitting  by  her  husband  in
his  chariot,  they  passed  under  a  thorn  which  had  a  good
crop  of  sloes  on  it :  she  wished  to  eat  of  them,  and  Ailill
shook  the  branch  into  the  chariot,  so  that  she  had  as
many  as  she  liked.  They  returned  home,  and  she  gave
birth  to  Cian,  a  smooth,  fair,  lusty  son ;  but  he  had  the
peculiarity  that  a  sort  of  ridge  of  skin  or  caul  extended
over  his  head  from  ear  to  ear,  and  as  he  grew,  that  excres-
cence also  grew.  So  when  he  became  a  man,  he  did  not
suffer  those  who  shaved  him  to  live  to  divulge  the  secret.
At  length  he  had  a  barber  who  came  to  his  work  prepared
for  him,  and  told  him  so.  He  undid  the  covering  of
Cian's  head,  and  perceived  the  reason  why  he  had  his
barbers  killed ;  then  he  ripped  up  the  abnormal  skin  on
his  head,  whereupon  there  leaped  out  a  worm,  which
sprang  quickly  to  the  top  of  the  house,  and  subsequently
twisted  itself  about  the  point  of  his  spear.  The  barber
and  Ailill  wished  to  have  it  killed  at  once,  but  Sadb,
fearing  lest  Cian  was  fated  to  have  the  same  span  of  life
as  the  worm,  prevailed  on  her  husband  to  have  a  place
made  for  it,  where  it  should  be  supplied  with  plenty  to
eat.  The  worm  then,  like  Fenri's  Wolf,  grew  apace,  and
its  house  had  to  be  enlarged  for  it ;  by  the  end  of  the
year  it  had  a  hundred  heads,  each  of  which  would  have
swallowed  a  warrior  with  his  arms  and  all.  Such  was  its
voracity  and  the  ravages  it  began  to  commit,  that  it  created
consternation,  and  Ailill  obtained  Sadb's  consent  to  kill
Hie  monster ;  so  the  whole  place  was  set  on  fire,  in  the

1  See  the  Taliessin  poem,  No.  16;  Skene,  ij.  159.


V.    TTIE    SUN   IIERO.  393

hope  that  it  would  perish  in  the  flames.  It  was,  however,
all  in  vain,  for  it  made  its  way  out  of  the  fire  and  flew
westwards,  till  it  reached  the  dark  cave  of  Ferna,  in  the
district  of  Corcaguiny,  the  most  western  part  of  Kerry.
There  it  abode,  making  the  country  a  desert,  so  that  Finn
and  his  men  durst  not  hunt  there.1

Now  the  meaning  of  this  hideous  tale  is  perfectly  clear :
Cian  represents  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  the  worm  born
with  him  is  a  personification  of  darkness  and  winter.
The  ever-repeated  sequence  of  light  and  darkness,  of
summer  and  winter,  is  here  typified  in  even  a  more
remarkable  manner  than  by  the  birth  of  Llew  and  Dylan
from  the  same  mother ;  and  it  is  curious  to  notice  that
the  story  locates  the  dark  cave  inhabited  by  the  all-
devouring  worm,  in  the  country  with  which  the  name  of
I  Harmait  is  also  associated.  Had  the  story  reached  us
in  a  complete  and  consistent  form,  we  should  perhaps
have  been  told  that  Cian  was  killed  by  the  worm;  but,
as  it  happens,  we  have  only  another  account  of  his  death,
which  brings  that  event  into  a  sort  of  connection  with  the
story  of  Ciichulainn.  For  one  evening,  as  Cian  was  tra-
versing the  Plain  of  Murthemne,  with  which  Ciichulainn
is  associated  in  other  stories,  he  espied  the  three  sons  of
Tuirenn,  his  determined  foes,  Brian,  Iuchair  and  Iucharba.
So  he  changed  himself  into  the  form  of  one  of  the  swine
that  he  saw  not  far  off,  and  joined  them  in  rooting  the
ground ;  but  Brian  suspecting  this,  immediately  changed
his  brothers  into  two  fleet  hounds,  who  soon  found  out
the  druidic  pig.  Brian  then  wounded  the  beast:  the
1  itter  asked  to  be  spared,  which  was  declined ;  but  he


1  Pursuit  of  Diarmuid,  ij.  §§  3 — 8.


394  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

was  permitted  to  change  himself  back  into  the  human
form,  when  he  in  vain  repeated  his  previous  request.
Then  he  told  his  foes  that  he  had  outwitted  them,  as  they
would  now  have  to  pay  the  eric  for  killing  a  man  and
not  a  beast,  adding  that  their  arms  would  betray  the  deed
to  his  son  Lug.  But  Brian  said  that  they  would  use  no
arms,  so  they  began  stoning  Cian  until  they  had  reduced
his  body  to  a  crushed  mass.  When  they  proceeded  to
bury  it,  the  earth  would  not  retain  it ;  they  tried  it  six
times,  and  the  earth  cast  it  up  each  time ;  but  when  it
was  buried  the  seventh  time,  it  was  not  cast  up.  Cian
told  Brian  before  he  died  that  there  never  had  been  slain,
and  never  would  be  slain,  anybody  for  whom  a  greater
eric  would  have  to  be  paid  than  for  him :  it  turned  out
so;  for  Lug  discovered  the  murderers,  and  cunningly
imposed  on  them,  with  the  approval  of  the  Tuatha  De*
Danann,  an  eric  which  looked  a  trifle,  but  was  soon  found
to  involve  the  sons  of  Tuirenn  in  adventures  of  unheard-
of  toil  and  danger,  at  the  close  of  which  they  died  mise-
rably of  their  wounds.  The  tale  is  one  of  the  most
famous  in  Irish  literature;1  but  another  account2  makes
Lug  slay  the  three  with  his  own  hand  in  Man  beyond
the  Sea.  Brian  and  his  brothers  are  sometimes  called
tri  dee  ddnaf  or  the  three  gods  of  dan,  that  is  to  say  of
professional  skill  or  talent,  as  the  term  dan  is  commonly

1  It  is  known  as  the  Death  of  the  Children  of  Tuirenn,  and  will  be
found  edited,  with  an  English  translation  by  O'Curry,  in  the  Atlantis,
Vol.  iv.  159,  &c. ;  see  also  an  English  version  in  Joyce's  Old  Celtic
Romances,  pp.  37 — 96.

2  Only  known  to  me  from  a  verse  quoted  by  Keating,  p.  122.

3  Bk.  of  Leinster,  10a;  Keating,  p.  122;  compare  Cormac's  Glossary,
the  Stokes-U'Donovan  ed.  p.  145.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  395

interpreted  ;  but  though  Brian  is  represented  as  a  valiant
warrior  and  skilled  as  druid  and  poet,  one  fails  to  see
why  he  and  his  brothers  should  be  assigned  a  place  of
pre-eminence  in  this  respect  above  many  others  of  the
Tuatha  De*  Danann ;  and  I  should  be  inclined  therefore
to  give  the  word  dan,  in  connection  with  the  former,  its
other  meaning  of  destiny  or  fate,1  and  to  regard  the
brothers,  whose  number  three  reminds  one  of  Mider's
three  birds  and  their  cognates  (p.  332),  as  the  messengers
of  fate  and  death.  This  would  explain  why  they  are
also  found  mentioned  as  the  three  sons  of  Danu,  the
goddess  of  death,  from  whom  the  Tuatha  De  were  col-
lectively  so  called.  They  are  sometimes  further  made  to
be  par  excellence  the  three  gods  of  the  Tuatha  D6,  and
to  give  that  group  its  common  name,2  whereas  the  rule
ascribed  them  in  the  stories  extant  fail  completely  to
justify  such  a  distinction:  this  applies  to  Brian  even
when  due  account  is  taken  of  the  wonderful  feats  attri-
buted to  him  as  a  warrior,  engaged  in  procuring  the  eric
he  had  to  pay  Lug;  and  as  to  his  brothers,  they  are
associated  with  him  mostly  as  dummies.  Moreover,  no
trace  of  any  such  pre-eminence  as  that  here  suggested
can  be  detected  in  the  oldest  story  known  to  us  to  mention
Brian,  namely,  that  of  Cuchulainn  wooing  Emcr  daughter
of  the  Fomorian  chief,  Forgall  Monach.     There  Brian  is

1  As,  for  instance,  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  39a:  'boi  indan  d6ib
orba  do  gabail.'  The  Welsh  form  is  dawn,  'talent,  genius,'  and  com-
monly 'the  gift  of  oratory.'  The  Welsh  and  Irish  words  are  nearly
related  to  the  Latin  donum  ;  and  it  is  aeedless  to  say  tli.it  the  name  of
the  goddess  Danu,  genitive  Danann,  has  nothing  to  do  with  them,
though  something  approaching  to  a  confusion  of  these  words  may  be
found  evidenced  in  a  conjecture  repeated  by  Bleating,  p.  122.

-  See  this  view  quoted  by  Keating,  p.  120.


396  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

coupled  with  Balor1  as  one  of  the  stout  henchmen  of
Forgall,  and  we  have  to  regard  hirn,  like  Balor,  as  a
Fomorian ;  but  as  a  messenger  of  fate  and  death,  it  was
natural  to  associate  him  with  Danu  in  her  character  of
goddess  of  death,  and  it  was  also  natural  that  there
should  be  hostility  between  him  and  Lug,  who  punished
him  for  the  death  of  his  father  Cian.2

The  eric  imposed  by  Lug  on  the  three  brothers  com-
pelled them  to  procure  for  him  certain  fabulous  weapons,
which  he  should  require  in  a  great  battle  for  which  he
was  busily  preparing.  The  story  euhemerizes  the  conflict
into  an  important  historical  struggle ;  but  in  reality  the
antagonistic  parties  were  the  powers  of  evil  and  darkness
under  the  name  of  the  Fomori,  or  the  dwellers  in  the  sea,
and  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  under  the  rule  of  Nuada  of
the  Silver  Hand,  whose  connections  were  of  a  very  dif-
ferent kind.  His  subjects  were  under  tribute  to  the
Fomori,  who  oppressed  them  in  various  ways,  until  the
hero  Lug  successfully  led  his  host  to  their  attack.  But
one  day  previous  to  that  event,  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann
happened  to  be  holding  an  assembly,  when  they  beheld
coming  towards  them  Lug  and  his  followers.  This  is  the
description  given  of  them  :   "  One  young  man  came  in  the

1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  123  a,  where  they  are  called  'Brio;i  7  Bolor.'

2  A  different  account  from  the  foregoing  of  the  death  of  Cian  was
known  to  the  Four  Masters,  who  say  that  he  fell  in  the  year  241  at
the  Battle  of  Samhain,  which  the  learned  editor  O'Donovan  would
identify  with  a  Cuoc-Samhna  near  Bruree  in  the  county  of  Limerick  ;
but  this  is  quite  consistent  with  the  more  usual  meaning  of  Samhain
as  the  Irish  name  for  November-eve.  A  Samhain  battle  would  point
to  a  time  notoriously  inauspicious  to  Celtic  solar  heroes,  and  such  a
conflict  might  obviously  rage  at  more  than  one  spot  and  in  more  than
one  story.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  397

front  of  that  army,  high  in  command  over  the  rest;  and
like  to  the  setting  sun  was  the  splendour  of  his  counte-
nance and  his  forehead ;  and  they  were  not  able  to  look
in  his  face  from  the  greatness  of  its  splendour.  And
he  was  Liigh  Lamh-fada,  and  [his  army  was]  the  Fairy
Cavalcade  from  the  Land  of  Promise,  and  his  own  foster-
brothers,  the  sons  of  Manannan."1  The  story-teller  was
more  correct  than  he  knew  in  comparing  Lug  to  the  sun  ;
and  it  was  the  setting  of  the  same  luminary  that  had
given  rise  to  the  myth  that  Lug  was  brought  up  at  the
court  of  Manannan,  one  of  the  great  chiefs  of  Fairy-land,
here  called  the  Land  of  Promise.  It  was  thence  he  was
sometimes  represented  coming  in  the  morning,  as  in  this
instance,  and  as  in  the  story  of  Ciichulainn  when  he
comes  to  that  hero's  aid.  Put  to  return  to  Lug's  march  :
on  the  occasion  of  his  approaching  the  Fomori's  camp
later  in  the  day,  we  read  in  the  same  story  the  following
words :  "  Then  arose  Preas,  the  son  of  Palor,  and  he  said  :
It  is  a  wonder  to  me  that  the  sun  should  rise  in  the  west
to-day,  and  in  the  east  every  other  day.  It  were  better
that  it  were  so,  said  the  druids.  What  else  is  it  ?  said
he.  The  radiance  of  the  face  of  Lugh  of  the  Long  Arms,
said  they."2  In  the  protracted  conflict  which  ensued,
not  only  were  the  powers  of  darkness  routed,  but  Palor
of  the  Evil  Eye,  which  it  was  death  to  behold,  was  de-
spatched by  Lug  sending  a  stone  from  his  sling  into  the
evil  eye,  so  that  it  came  out  right  through  his  head.
Lug  was  not  only  surnamed  from  his  long  hands,  but  ho
was  famous  for  his  mighty  blows,  and  his  spear  became

1  See  O'Curry's  Fate  of  the  Children  of  Tuireann  in  the  Atlantic,
Vol.  iv.  pp.  160-3  ;  also  Joyce,  p.  38.
-  Ibid.  pp.  176-7.


o'Jb  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

one  of  the  treasures  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann ;  nor  is  it
necessary  to  point  out  the  parallelism  between  his  slaying
of  Balor  and  Llew's  transfixing  his  rival  by  a  cast  of  his
spear,  which  an  intervening  rock  was  not  enough  to  stop
in  its  fatal  course.

Before  proceeding  further,  it  will  be  well  to  say  some-
thing about  the  names  Llew  and  Lug.  The  former  is
in  point  of  sound  the  same  word  as  the  Welsh  for  lion ;
but  on  looking  closely  into  the  passages  where  the  name  of
the  Sun-god  occurs,  it  proves  to  have  been  originally  not
Llew  but  Lieu ; l  but  as  mediaeval  spelling  did  not  al-
ways carefully  distinguish  the  sounds  of  u,  iv  and  v,  it  is
only  the  assonances  and  rhymes  that  can  be  thoroughly
decisive  in  this  matter.  A  couple  of  such  instances  occur
in  a  poem  in  the  Book  of  Taliessin ; 2  on  the  other  hand,
the  Mabinogi  of  Math  has  always  Llew,  except  in  one
remarkable  place.3  It  will  be  remembered  that  when
Gwydion  suspected  that  he  had  found  Llew  in  the  form
of  a  wounded  and  wretched  eagle  on  the  top  of  an  oak-
tree,  he  sang  three  verses  of  poetry  to  him,  at  each  of
which  the  eagle  descended  a  little,  so  that  at  last  he  let
himself  down  on  Gwydion's  lap,  to  be  changed  by  the

1  The  difference  of  sound  amounts  to  this :  the  ew  in  Llew  is  sounded
like  Italian  eu  in  Europe^  and  somewhat  like  Cockney  ow  in  'down
town;'  while  the  eu  in  Lieu  consists  approximately  of  German  e  fol-
lowed by  German  il.

2  Skene,  ij.  158,  where  the  instances  are  lieu,  gynheu,  and  lieu,
Jcadeu.  I  have  noted  in  the  same  volume  an  indecisive  llev  at  p.  31,
while  passages  at  pp.  176,  190,  211,  make  for  Lieu  or  lieu.

3  But  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  where  the  scribe  first  came  across
the  name  he  began  to  write  lieu,  though  he  ended  by  making  it  into
tle6,  that  is  to  say,  Lleiv.  So  one  may  infer  that  the  MS.  before  him
read  cither  lieu  or  llev:  see  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  71,  and  ed.'s  note,  p.  312.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.


309


touch  of  his  wand  into  his  former  shape.  Now  the  scribe
of  the  Mahinogi  gives  these  verses  in  a  very  confused
orthography,  clearly  leaving  it  to  be  seen,  as  he  docs
also  in  other  parts  of  the  tale,  that  he  was  copying  from
an  old  manuscript  which  he  did  not  always  understand.
When  restored  to  what  must  have  approximately  been
their  original  form,  they  require  us  to  read  not  Llew  but
Zlcu,  and  they  would  then  run  somewhat  as  follows : l

1.

Dar  a  dyf  y  rwng  deulynn,
Gordufrych  awyi  a  glynn  :
Oni  tlywettaf  i  eu,
Eulodeu  Lieu  pan  y\v  hynn.


An  oak  grows  between  two  lakes  ;
Black  and  speckled  are  sky  and  glen
If  my  speech  be  not  untrue,
Here  are  the  members  of  Lieu.


Dar  a  dyf  yn  ardfaes

Kis  gwlych  gwlaw  nis  mwy

tawd  tes
Naw  ugein  angerd  a  borthes
Yn  y  blaen  Lieu  Llawgyffes

Dar  a  dyf  dan  anwaeret
Mirein  medr  i'm  i  welet
Oni  dywettaf  i  eu
Ef  dydaw  Lieu  i'm  harffet


An  oak  grows  in  a  ploughed  field —
Rain  wets  it  not  nor  beat  melts  it  more :
Nine  score  pangs  have  been  endured
In  its  top  by  Lieu  Llawgyffes.


3.


An  oak  grows  below  the  slope ;
A  fair  hit  that  I  should  see  him —
If  my  speech  be  not  untrue,
Lieu  will  come  to  my  lap.


1  The  manuscript  reads  :  '  Dar  a  dyf  y  r6ng  deu  lenn.  gorduwrych
awyr  a  glen,  ony  dywetaf  i  eu  oulodeu.  Ile6  pan  y6  hynn.'  '  1  >ai  a
dyf  yn  ard  uaes.  nys  g61ych  gla6.  nys  m6  y  ta6d.  na6  ugein  angerd
a  borthes.  yn  y  blaen  lle6  lla6  gyffes.'  'Dar  a  dyf  dan  anwaeret.
mirein  medux  ym  ywet.  ony  dywedaf  i  ef.  dyda6  lle6  ym  harffet.'
See  the  R.  B.  Mab.  pp.  78-9.  Lenn  for  lynn,  and  glen  for  glynn,  Bhow
the  same  fashion  of  spelling  as  Res  for  Rhys  on  a  highly  ornamented
cross  at  Llantwit,  winch  can  hardly  be  later  than  the  11th  century  :
see  Hiibner's  Inscriptiones  Brit.  Christiana,  No.  03,  and  Westwood's
Lapidarium  WaUiat,  p.  11,  plate  5.  The  on  of  oulodeu,  for  later
(■///"deu,  more  usually  written  aelodeu,  'limbs,  members,'  most  date,  if
my  translation  be  right,  from  the  spelling  of  ( >ld  Welsh  in  the  technical
sense  of  the  term,  let  us  say  of  the  9th  or  10th  century.


400  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

The  place  referred  to  in  these  verses  was  beyond  doubt
hard  by  the  deu-It/nn,  or  two  lakes  near  Bala  Deulyn,  in
the  valley  of  Nanttte  in  Carnarvonshire.  The  old  pro-
nunciation of  the  name  Nanttte  was  Nantifeu,  meaning
JSTant-Lleu,  the  Valley  or  Glenn  of  Lieu ;  but  when  it
came  to  be  pronounced  as  a  single  word  accented  on  the
first  syllable,  the  u  was  liable  to  be  dropped  off,  as  in
other  words  :  compare  bore  for  boreu,  l  morning,'  and  gele
for  gelcu,  i  a  leech ; '  but  we  need  not  rely  on  this  alone,
for  there  is  evidence  ready  to  hand  in  one  of  the  Verses
of  the  Graves,  which,  reduced  to  a  consistent  spelling,
runs  thus : 1


Y  bed  yngorthir  Nantffeu
Ni  wyr  neb  i  gynnedfeu
Mabon  fab  Modron  gleu


The  grave  in  the  upland  of  Nantite,

Nobody  knows  its  properties  :

It  is  Mabon 's,  the  swift  son  of  Modron.


The  scribe  of  the  Mabinogi  makes  the  valley  called  after
Lieu  into  Nant  y  Llew,  '  the  Lion's  Glen,'  as  he  was  led
to  do  so  by  his  habit  of  making  Lleu's  name  into  Llew,
and  confirmed  in  his  error  by  misinterpreting  the  Nantllev
or  Nantlleu  of  the  manuscript  he  had  before  him.  This
incidentally  proves  that  he  had  no  personal  acquaintance
with  the  neighbourhood  of  Snowdon ;  and  the  same  want
of  familiarity  with  North  Wales  is  suggested  by  his  once
making  into  Cynwael  the  Ffestiniog  river  Cynvael,  now
called  the  Kynval,  in  Merioneth.2  From  the  same  lack
of  acquaintance  with  the  district,  he  wrote  also  Dinttef 3

1  Published  in  the  Myvyrian  Arch,  of  Wales,  Vol.  i.  78,  where  it
is  printed  as  follows  :

'  Y  Bed  yngorthir  JSanllau
Ny  uyr  neb  y  gynneddfeu
Mabon  vab  Modron  glau.'

2  R.  B.  Mob.  p.  74.  3  R  R  Mfdh  p  7L


V.     THE    SL'N    HERO.  40]

for  Dinttcu,  of  which  more  anon.  All  this  is  by  no  means
to  be  wondered  at,  as  the  scribe  was  most  likely  a  nat  i  \  e
of  South  Wales ;  at  any  rate,  the  Bed  Book  was  probably
written  at  the  monastery  of  Strata  Florida,  in  north  Car-
diganshire, and  one  at  least  of  the  scribes  had  a  native's
acquaintance  with  Aberystwyth  and  its  immediate  neigh-
bourhood.1 It  is  not  altogether  improbable  that  the
change  of  the  name  Lieu  into  Lleiv,  which  cannot  be
phonologically  accounted  for,  was  similarly  originated  by
the  mistake  of  some  scribe  or  story-teller  who  was  a
stranger  to  the  district  where  the  hero's  name  was  fami-
liar. Once  the  example  was  set,  the  name  Llcw,  as
coinciding  with  new,  meaning  a  lion,  might  be  expected
to  hold  its  own  ground  against  the  older  name  Lieu,  which
either  conveyed  no  sense  to  the  story-teller's  mind,  or  no
sense  that  struck  him  or  his  listeners  as  fitting  the  cha-
racter of  his  hero,  such  as  they  would  conceive  it  to  have
been.

But  whatever  the  time  and  the  cause  of  the  change  of
Llcu's  name  to  Llew  may  have  been,  it  exercised  some.
influence  on  one  of  the  stories  about  the  Sun-god,  as  it
helped  to  give  its  form  to  a  portion  of  the  romance  of
Owein  ab  Urien,  whom  we  have  to  mention  later  as  play-
ing a  role  corresponding  in  several  respects  to  that  of
Cdchulainn.  Owein,  in  the  course  of  his  wanderings
near  the  utmost  limits  of  the  inhabited  world,  happened
to  pass  near  a  wood,  when  he  heard  a  loud  howl  proceed-
ing from  it.  On  hearing  it  repeated  he  drew  near,  and
found  a  great  knoll  in  the  wood,  and  in  the  side  of  the

1  I  allude  more  especially  to  the  entry  under  the  year  1113  in  Brut
U  Tywysogion  (London,  18G0),  pp.  130-3.

2d


402  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

knoll  a  grey  rock  with  a  cleft  in  it.  In  the  cleft  there
was  a  serpent,  and  close  by  a  pure  white1  lion  that  wished
to  pass,  but  the  serpent  would  dart  at  him  to  bite  him.
Owein,  judging  the  lion  the  nobler  animal,  approached,
and  quickly  cut  the  reptile  in  two  with  his  sword,  where-
upon the  lion  followed  him,  as  it  were  a  greyhound.  At
the  approach  of  night  the  grateful  beast  went  out  to
hunt  for  him,  and  brought  back  a  fine  roebuck,  which
Owein  cooked  and  duly  divided  between  him  and  the
lion.  Whenever  Owein  fought  afterwards  and  was  likely
to  be  hard  pressed,  the  lion  would  come  to  his  rescue
and  kill  his  antagonists :  nothing  could  prevent  him.
On  one  occasion  he  was  shut  up  within  the  high  walls
of  a  castle,  while  Owein  was  to  fight  a  duel  outside  with
a  brutal  giant  who  devoured  men  and  women;  but  it
was  not  long  ere  the  lion  got  on  the  battlements,  and
leaped  down  to  deal  Owein's  antagonist  a  fatal  wound.
Another  time  the  lion  was  confined  in  a  stone  jDrison,
while  Owein  fought  against  two  men  who  were  likely  to
give  him  trouble,  and  the  beast  never  rested  till  he  forced
his  way  out  and  killed  both.2  Some  would  say  that  the
lion  was  a  proper  representative  of  the  sun,  and  the  serpent
of  darkness,  which  may  do  for  countries  where  the  lion
is  at  home ;  but  that  the  Welsh  tale  should  have  fixed
on  that  particular  brute  form,  is  due  partly,  if  not  wholly,
to  the  name  Llew  and  its  ordinary  meaning  of  '  lion.'

1  See  the  R.  B.  Mah.  p.  186,  where  it  will  be  seen  that  the  MS.
calls  the  lion  purdu,  'purely  black;'  but  the  older  MS.,  called  Rhy-
derch's  White  Book  (in  the  Hengwrt  Collection),  col.  234,  calls  the
beast  pur6yn,  or  purely  white,  which  is  mythologically  doubtless  more
correct.

2  R.  B.  Mah.  pp.  186—191;  Guest,  i.  75—81.


V.    THE   BUN    HERO.  403

The  story,  shaped  accordingly,  reached  the  Continent,
and  was  elaborated  into  a  romance  called  the  Chevalier
au  Lion,  the  oldest  edition  of  which  is  ascribed  to  Chrcs-
tien  de  Troyes,  who  lived  in  the  twelfth  century:  it  be-
came popular  also  in  Germany,  and  reached  Scandinavia.
Why  a  wild  beast  of  any  kind  should  have  been  intro-
duced into  the  story  of  Owcin,  especially  as  it  would
seem  to  disturb  the  symmetry  of  the  myth,  is  a  question
of  some  difficulty,  reaching  beyond  the  influence  of  the
name  Llcw.  For  a  little  before  Owcin  came  across  the
white  lion,  he  had  been  avoiding  the  haunts  of  men  and
living  witli  wild  beasts.  lie  had  in  fact  been  like  one
of  them,  and  his  body  had  become  covered  with  hair  like
theirs.  Now  this  is  an  incident  which  has  its  parallel  in
the  madness  of  Ciichulainn,  and  in  the  pretended  dumb-
ness of  Perediu*  when  he  avoids  the  abodes  of  Christians ;
and  it  belongs  to  the  hero  as  a  form  of  the  Sun-god,  so
that  to  introduce  the  Sun-god  in  the  form  of  a  wild  beast
as  well  would  seem  to  be  de  trop.  To  this  it  might  per-
haps be  answered,  that  it  is  useless  to  expect  thorough
consistency  in  such  matters ;  and  one  might  even  quote
as  a  kind  of  parallel  the  case,  to  be  mentioned  later,  of
a  horse  of  the  Irish  Sun  Ilero,  Conall  Ccrnach,  follow-
ing him  to  fight  with  his  teeth  on  behalf  of  his  master,
lint  possibly  the  story  of  Cian  offers  a  better  parallel,
when  it  represents  him  taking  advantage  of  some  swine
he  saw  not  far  off  on  the  plain,  to  change  himself  to  the
form  that  was  theirs  ;  and  the  story  of  Owein  seems  to  us
to  suggest  that  originally  it  made  Owein  himself  become
a  beast,  and  not  simply  very  like  one.  The  strangeness
of  a  story  representing  the  same  individual  as  a  knight
and  as  a  wild  beast  successively,  would  be  eliminated  by

2  d  2


404  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

placing  the  beast  by  the  side  of  the  knight  as  his  com-
panion and  ally.  Add  to  these  sundry  points  of  contact
between  the  stories  mentioned,  the  verse  cited  as  placing
the  grave  of  Mabon,  the  Welsh  equivalent  of  the  Apollo
Maponos  of  the  Celts  of  antiquity  (pp.  21,  27-9)  at
Xantlie,  where  Lieu  was  at  last  discovered  by  Gwydion,
and  one  will  hardly  be  able  to  avoid  concluding,  that  we
here  have  related  stories,  handed  down  to  us  in  a  frag-
mentary form  which  leaves  it  impossible  to  ascertain  in
what  exact  way  they  were  related  to  one  another.  At
the  point  which  we  have  reached,  one  of  the  chief  things
wanting  is  evidence  that  Owein  was  at  any  time  called
Llew  or  Lieu.  We  have  evidence,  on  the  other  hand,
that  Lieu  was  represented  as  a  wild  beast ;  in  fact,  that
is  the  only  form  with  which  he  is  invested  by  the  folk-lore
of  modern  Snowdonia.  The  following  is  the  substance
of  what  I  have  been  able  to  learn  about  him : —

The  road  from  Carnarvon  to  the  romantic  village  of
Beclgelert  passes  pretty  close  to  a  lake  called  Llyn  y
Gadair,  the  Lake  of  the  Seat ;  and  there  is  a  story  cur-
rent in  that  part  of  the  country  that  a  long  while  ago  a
little  knoll  between  the  lake  and  the  road  was  the  seat  of
a  strange  beast  called  the  Aurwrychyn,  or  the  Gold-bristle:
in  fact,  the  name  of  the  lake  in  full  is  explained  to  have
been  Llyn  Cadair  yr  Atcnvrychyn,  l  the  Lake  of  the  Gold-
bristle's  Seat.'  He  is  said  to  have  been  in  form  some-
what like  an  ox ;  but  he  was  covered  with  gold  bristles,
and  he  appeared  one  mass  of  brilliant  gold,  so  that  when
the  sun  shone  on  him  nobody  could  look  at  him.  One
day,  however,  a  hunter's  hounds,  chasing  the  red  deer,
came  across  Gold-bristle  and  pursued  him  across  through
the   pass   called  Drws  y  Coed,   which   opens  into   the


N  .     THE    SIX    HERO.  Ill")

Nantiie  valley,  and  caught  him  near  Bala  Dculyn.  As
the  dogs  were  killing  him,  he  gave  a  cry  which  made
the  hills  resound,  and  from  this  tief  or  cry  the  v.illey
received  its  name  of  Nant-iief,  that  is  to  say,  Kant  tic.1
On  this  I  have  two  or  three  remarks  to  make  :  the
bristles  of  the  Aurwrychyn  remind  one  of  Cian  in  his
brute  form :  and  the  mention  of  the  dying  lief  or  cry
may  be  regarded  as  an  addition  to  explain  the  place-
name  Kanttte,  but  the  correct  analysis  of  that  word
is  into  Nant-Lleu,  that  is  to  say,  the  Glen  of  Lieu,
rhonologically,  however,  both  explanations  would  fit
alike,  as  Kant-tief,  as  well  as  Nant-tieu,  would  be  cur-
tailed to  Kant-tic  when  the  accent  fixed  itself  on  the
first  syllable.  Lastly,  the  coincidence  which  makes  the
beast  die  in  NanthY,  where  also  Gwydion  discovered
his  son  Lieu  in  the  form  of  an  eagle,  makes  it  probable
that  the  proper  name  of  the  beast  in  gold  bristles  was
originally  no  other  than  that  of  Lieu.

As  we  have  been  brought  to  the  Xantlie  valley,  let  us
follow  the  river  which  flows  from  the  lakes  in  the  direc-
tion contrary  to  that  taken  by  Gwydion  when  searching
for  Lieu  (p.  240):  this  stream  is  called  the  Llyvni,  and
it  reaches  the  sea  some  distance  west  of  the  western
mouth  of  the  Mcnai;   and  between  the  latter  and  the


1  The  author  is  indebted  for  this  to  the  Bnjthnn  (published  at
Tremadoc)  for  tin;  year  1861,  p.  252,  and  to  Mis.  Rhys'  memory,  for
when  she  was  a  child  she  often  heard  talk  of  the  Aurwrychyn  as  a
grand  extinct  animal  at  which  no  man  could  gaze  on  account  of  his
mass  of  gold  bristles.  The  beast  was  so  wild  that  nobody  could  get
near  him.  He  used  to  cross  the  mountains  from  Cwmglas  (bet\
Llanberis  and  the  Pass)  to  Nanttte,  where  he  was  at  last  caught;  but
she  has  never  heard  anything  said  <>f  his  death.


40 G  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

mouth  of  the  Llyvni  is  the  huge  artificial  mound  called
Dinas  Dintte,  which  dates  probably  before  the  Eoman
occupation,  the  Eomans  being  supposed  to  have  made
use  of  it.  Its  future  seems  to  be  gradual  demolition  by
the  waves  of  the  Irish  Sea,  unless  it  is  to  experience  the
still  worse  misfortune  of  being  desecrated  by  the  builders
of  so-called  watering-places.  It  was  at  Dinas  Dintte
that  Lieu  spent  a  part  of  his  boyhood ;  and  in  a  poem  in
the  Black  Book  of  Carmarthen  (p.  272)  it  is  called  caer
lev  a  gwidion,1  or  the  Fortress  of  Lieu  and  Gwydion.
The  present  name,  Dinas  Dintte,  is  tautological,  and  means
literally  'the  City  of  Lleu's  Town;'  the  word  din,  'a
town  or  fortress,'  having  become  obsolete,  has  here  been
explained  by  prefixing  its  synonymous  derivative  dinas,
'a  town  or  city.'2  The  reasons  for  going  into  these
details  will  appear  presently;  suffice  it  for  the  present
to  recall  the  statement  that  Dintte  stands  for  an  older
Dintteu  derived  from  Lleu's  name,  and  meaning  Lleu's
town.  This  is  proved  by  various  facts ;  among  others,
it  is  indirectly  proved  by  the  Dinttef  of  the  scribe  of  the
Mabinogi  of  Math,  as  already  hinted ;  also  by  one  of  the
Stanzas  of  the  Graves,  which  places  the  grave  of  Gwydion


1  Skene,  ij.  57.

2  Other  old  names  have  occasionally  been  treated  in  the  same  way :
thus  the  word  tref,  '  town,'  is  sometimes  substituted  for  din,  as  in  the
case  of  Dinmeircliiun,  which  has  become  Tre'ineirchion,  near  St.  Asaph
in  the  Vale  of  Clwyd ;  and  similarly  the  mythic  town  of  Ariaurhod  is
no  longer  spoken  of  in  Arvon  as  Caer  Arianrhod,  but  as  Tre'  Ga'r  'An-
throd.  See  the  Cymmrodor,  vi.  163,  where  other  forms  are  also  men-
tioned :  'AntJirod  stands  for  the  latter  part  of  Arianrhod,  with  a  th
inserted  betwen  n — rh,  as  in  penrhyn,  cynrhon,  pronounced  pentJiryn
and  cyntliron  in  N.  Wales,  while  in  S.  Wales  they  become  pendryn  and
cyndron.     For  the  case  of  Carmarthen,  see  p.  1  (JO.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  407

in  Morva  Dintteu,1  or  the  Marsh  of  Dinlleu.  But  we
have  evidence  that  the  shorter  form  Dintte  was  also
used,  especially  iu  the  spoken  languages,  as  early  as  the
thirteenth  century.2  It  is  interesting  to  add  that  there
was  another  Dintte,  called  in  the  Eed  Book,  where  it  is
mentioned,  Dintte  Urcconn,3  which  meant  the  Uriconian
or  Wrekin  Dintte,  in  the  present  county  of  Salop ;  the
longer  name  served  to  distinguish  it  from  the  one  in
Arvon.

Such  are  some  of  the  facts  connected  with  the  history
of  the  name  Lletv,  which  has  been  traced  to  the  older
form  Lieu.  The  next  step  is  to  ascertain  how  this  latter
stands  with  regard  to  the  Irish  Lug,  genitive  Loga.
Enough  is  known  of  the  laws  of  phonology  obtaining  in
the  Welsh  and  Irish  languages  respectively,  to  leave  us
practically  in  no  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  the  two
names.4     Treating  Lieu  and  Lug  henceforth  as  one  and

1  The  lines  in  point  will  be  found  printed  in  the  Myvyrian  Arch,  of
Wales,  i.  78 ;  but,  as  they  there  stand  they  look  exceedingly  corrupt,
Dintteu  having  been  printed  Dinften,  which  can  only  be  explained  as
here  suggested.

2  For  the  name  occurs  with  English  thl  for  Welsh  It  in  the  Record
of  Carnarvon  (Record  Office,  1838),  where  the  Villa  de  Dynthh  occurs
more  than  once,  pp.  20,  21,  22,  24.

3  Red  Book,  col.  1047;  Skene,  ij.  288;  Rhys,  Celtic  Britain*,  p.  314.

4  There  are  other  instances  of  Irish  ug  or  orj  being  represented  by
eu  in  mediaeval  Welsh,  such  as  the  case  of  the  Welsh  word  meu  (in
meu-dwy,  'a  hermit,'  literally  servus  Dei)  as  compared  with  the  Irish
mug,  genitive  moga,  'a  slave.'  Compare  also  the  Latin  "pugUlares,
'writing  tablets,'  which  yielded  Old  Welsh  poullor-ator,  glossing \pugil-
larem  paginam  (Stokes'  Capella  Glosses  in  Kiihn'a  Beitrcege,  vij.  393),
together  with  peuffa6r,  which  occurs  in  a  poem  in  the  Bk.  of  TaliesHn
in  the  sense  of  'books'  (Skene,  ij.  141).  In  Old  Welsh,  og  seems  to
have  occasionally  been  thus  made  into  ou  (later  eu  and  att)  much  in


408  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

the  same  name,  we  have  next  to  try  to  ascertain  its  ori-
ginal meaning.  It  is  unfortunate  that  Irish  literature  is
not  known  to  shed  any  light  on  this  point,  excepting
that  one  vocabulary !  gives  it  as  meaning  a  hero ;  that,
however,  looks  too  much  like  a  mere  guess  based  on  the
stories  about  Lug.  So  we  have  to  fall  back  on  Welsh,
which  supplies  related  forms  in  the  words  llcu-ad,  'a
luminary,  a  moon;'  lleu-fer  (also  lleu-er),  'a  luminary,
a  light;'  lleiv-ych,  'a  light,  or  lighting;'  llezvych-u,  'to
shine.'  Nay,  lieu  itself  occurs  as  an  appellative  meaning
light,  as,  for  example,  in  the  Book  of  Aneurin,2  a  manu-
script supposed  to  be  of  the  thirteenth  or  the  beginning
of  the  fourteenth  century,  where  we  meet  with  the  term
lieu  babir,  used  of  rush-lights  or  the  light  derived  from
the  rushes  used  for  lighting,  which  are  in  modern  Welsh
called  pabivyr?  The  term  lieu  babir  also  occurs  in  a
poem4  ascribed  to  Kynctelw,  a  poet  of  the  twelfth
century ;  but  the  fact  that  we  have  to  go  so  far  back  for
instances  of  the  word  lieu,  and  then  only  to  find  it  in  the
single  combination  lieu  babir,  only  serves  to  show  that  it

the  same  way  that  English  has  made  '  sorrow,'  '  tallow,'  *  morrow,'  out
of  older  forms  corresponding  to  the  German  sorg,  talg  and  morg-en.
For  more  about  the  phonology  of  the  change  in  question,  see  my  Led.
on  Welsh  Phil-  pp.  M,  67,  412.

1  O'Davoren  in  Stokes'  Three  Irish  Glossaries,  p.  103.  O'Reilly's
Dictionary  gives  Logh  the  meanings  of  '  God,  fire,  ethereal  spirits,  a
loosing,  dissolving,  untying.'

2  Skene,  ij.  66.

3  The  rush  is  peeled  almost  completely  and  then  dipped  in  tallow,
and  this  forms  a  common  means  of  lighting  rustic  homes  in  Wales.

4  See  the  Red  Booh,  cols.  1165-9 ;  the  poem  has  been  published  by
me  in  the  Montgomeryshire  Collections  issued  by  the  Powys-land  Club,
Vol.  xi.  p.  171-8  :  see  more  especially  pp.  171,  177.


V.     THE    SIN    NERO.  409

has  long  sinco  become  obsolete,  or  at  any  rate  of  very
rare  occurrence.  The  point  of  chief  importance  to  us  is
the  faol  that  lieu  meant  light,  and  that  there  is  no  reason
to  suppose  the  name  Lieu  to  be  of  a  different  origin  from
the  appellative ;  we  are  at  liberty  also  to  suppose  that  the
Irish  Lug  meant  light,  and  thus  we  arrive  at  a  significa-
tion of  the  name,  which  exactly  describes  the  Sun-god,
whom  we  have  identified  under  these  appellations.

The  widely  spread  Cult  of  Lug.

We  now  pass  on  from  the  names  of  the  Sun-god  to  the
widely  spread  cult  of  which  he  was  the  object  in  all  Celtic
lands.  In  Ireland  there  were  great  meetings,  which  con-
stituted fairs  and  feasts,  associated  with  Lug,  and  called
Lugnassad  after  him.  The  chief  day  for  these  was  Lam-
mas-day, or  the  first  of  August,  and  the  most  celebrated
of  them  used  to  be  held  at  Tailltin1  (p.  148),  in  Meath.
The  story  of  the  institution  of  the  fair  is  thus  told  by  the
Irish  historian  Keating  :  "  Lugh  Lamhfhada  son  of  Cian
....  took  the  kingship  of  Erinn  for  forty  years.  It  is
this  Lugh  that  first  instituted  the  fair  of  Tailltin,  as  an
annual  commemoration  of  Tailltiu,  daughter  of  Maghmor,
that  is  to  say,  the  king  of  Spain;  and  she  was  wife  to
Kochaidh  mac  Eire,  last  king  of  the  Fir  Bolg ;  she  was
afterwards  wife  to  Eochaidh  Gharbh,  son  of  Duach  Dall
and  chief  of  the  Tuatha  Do*  Danann.  It  is  by  this
woman  that  Lugh  Lamhfhada  was  fostered  and  educated,
until  he  was  fit  to  bear  arms.  It  is  as  a  commemoration
of  honour  to  her  that  Lugh  instituted  the  games  of  the


1  The  Irish  name  is  Tailltiu,  gen.  TaUIten,  ace.  and  dative  Tailltin.
It  is  Anglicized  Teltown,  the  name  of  a  place  where  the  remains  of  a
rath  exist  near  the  Boyne,     Cancel  an  n  in  Tailltin^  p,  1  18.


410  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

fair  of  Tailltin,  a  fortnight  before  Lammas  and  a  fortnight
after,  in  imitation  of  the  games  called  Olympic ;  and  it  is
from  this  commemoration  which  Lngh  made,  that  the  name
Lugnasadh  is  given  to  the  first  day  or  calends  of  August,
that  is  to  say,  Lugh's  nasadh  or  commemoration."1  This
is  in  harmony  with  what  is  briefly  said  in  Cormac's  Glos-
sary: "Liignasad,  i.e.  a  commemorating  game  or  fair,
thereto  is  the  name  nasad,  i.e.  a  festival  or  game  of  Lugh
mac  Ethne  or  Ethlenn,  which  was  celebrated  by  him  in
the  beginning  of  autumn."2

These  passages  do  not  quite  satisfactorily  explain  the
meaning  of  the  word  nassad;  but  let  that  pass  for  the  pre-
sent, and  let  us  add  that  O'Curry  in  mentioning  this  legend
says  that  Lug  buried  his  nurse  in  a  plain  in  the  present
barony  of  Kells,  in  the  county  of  Meath ;  that  he  raised
over  her  a  large  artificial  hill  or  sepulchral  mound,  which
remains  to  this  day ;  that  he  ordered  there  a  commemora-
tive festival,  with  games  and  sports  after  the  fashion  of
other  countries,  to  be  held  in  her  honour  for  ever,  and  that
they  were  continued  down  to  the  ninth  century.3  The
games  alluded  to  consisted  of  a  variety  of  manly  sports
and  contests,  but  one  of  their  chief  characteristics  was
horse-racing,  which  reminds  one  of  the  racing  near  the
tomb  of  Patroclus,  for  which  Achilles  provided  rich  prizes.4
A  fair  which  appears  to  have  been  of  the  same  nature
used  to  be  held  on  the  calends  of  August  also  at  Cruachan,
a  place  mentioned  in  connection  with  Ailill  and  Medb
(p.  330);  but  little  is  known  about  the  fair  there.     A

1  Keating,  pp.  126-9.

2  Cormac's  Glossary  (Stokes-O'Donovan  ed.),  p.  99.

3  Manners,  &c.  ij.  148  ;  MS.  Mat.  p.  287.

4  Iliad,  xxiij.  255—270.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  411

third  fair  was  held  triennially  at  Carman,  now  called
Wexford;  and  its  time  was  likewise  the  first  day  of
August.  The  stories  about  its  institution  vary  consider-
ably, and  offer  some  difficulty  of  interpretation  in  as  far
;is  regards  their  mythological  meaning;1  but,  like  the
Tailltin  fair,  it  is  represented  as  commemorative  of  a
deceased  person,  and  as  having  been  established  after  the
demons  of  blight  and  blast  had  been  overcome.  It  was
considered  an  institution  of  great  importance,  and  among
the  blessings  promised  to  the  men  of  Leinster  from  hold-
ing it  and  duly  celebrating  the  established  games,  were
plenty  of  corn,  fruit  and  milk,  abundance  of  tish  in  their
lakes  and  rivers,  domestic  prosperit}7,  and  immunity  from
the  yoke  of  any  other  province.  On  the  other  hand,  the
evils  to  follow  from  the  neglect  of  this  institution  were  to
be  failure  and  early  greyness  on  them  and  their  kings.

It  is  not  very  evident  why  the  stories  about  the  in-
stitution of  these  fairs  should  give  them  a  funereal
interpretation;  but  it  is  worth  while  mentioning  that
both  Tailltin  and  Cruachan  are  mentioned  as  among
the  chief  burial-places  in  pagan  Erinn ; 2  and  Carman  is
also  alluded  to  as  a  cemetery.3  Moreover,  Lug,  as  we
have  already  seen  (p.  397),  was,  when  he  came,  supposed
to  arrive  from  the  other  world,  and  to  be  followed  by  a
fairy  train  consisting  of  the  sons  of  Manannan  mac  Lir.
We  come  next  to  the  association  of  Lug's  name  with  the
fair;  for  this  there  was  a  special  reason:  it  has  already
been  stated  that  the  Lugnassad  corresponded  in  the  calen-
dar to  the  English  Lammas — a  word  which  was  in  A.-
Saxon  hlafmcesse,  that  is,  loaf-mass  or  bread-mass,  so

1  See  O'Curry,  i.j.  38—47,  iij.  527-17  ;  also  Bk.  of  Leinster,  215.

2  lik.  of  the  Dun,  3SA,  39a,  51a.  3  IU;.  of  U  imtt  r,  215a.


412  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

named  as  a  mass  or  feast  of  thanksgiving  for  the  first-
fruits  of  the  corn-harvest.  That  feast  'seems  to  have
been  observed  with  bread  of  new  wheat,  and  therefore  in
some  parts  of  England,  and  even  in  some  near  Oxford,
the  tenants  are  bound  to  bring  in  wheat  of  that  year  to
their  lord,  on  or  before  the  first  of  August,'  a  day  other-
wise called  the  Gule  of  August.1  In  Germany,  a  loaf  of
bread  had  to  be  given  to  the  shepherd  who  kept  one's
cattle.2  The  Church  has  assigned  the  day  to  St.  Peter
ad  Yincula,  which  supplies  no  key  to  the  choice  of  the
day  in  Teutonic  lands  as  a  sort  of  feast  of  first-fruits ;
so  we  seem  to  be  at  liberty  to  regard  the  latter  as  having
come  down  from  pagan  times,  which  enables  us  to  un-
derstand the  Irish  account  of  the  institution  of  the  fairs
and  meetings  held  on  that  day.  Thus  if  we  go  into  the
story  of  the  fair  of  Carman,  we  are  left  in  no  doubt  as  to
the  character  of  the  mythic  beings  whose  power  had  been
brought  to  an  end  at  the  time  dedicated  to  that  fair:
they  may  be  said  to  have  represented  the  blighting
chills  and  fogs  that  assert  their  baneful  influence  on  the
farmer's  crops.  To  overcome  these  and  other  hurtful
forces  of  the  same  kind,  the  prolonged  presence  of  the
Sun -god  was  essential,  in  order  to  bring  the  corn  to
maturity.  Why  Lug  should  have  made  the  feast  for
Tailltiu  does  not  at  first  sight  appear;  but  let  us  see
what  can  be  made  out  of  her.    She  is  strangely  described3


1  This  is  the  substance  of  a  part  of  a  note  by  Thos.  Hearne  in  his
edition  of  Robert  of  Gloucester's  Chronicles  (Oxford,  1724).  p.  679.

2  See  Leo's  Angelsachsisches  Glossar  (Halle,  1877),  s.  v.  hldfmcesse,
col.  543.

3  In  the  Book  of  Leinster,  9  a,  200ft,  which  is  followed  in  this  mat-
ter by  Keating,


V.    THE   SIN    HERO.  413

as  daughter  of  Mag  M6r,  king  of  Spain  :  now  Mag  ^l.'.r1
means  the  Great  Plain,  one  of  the  names  for  the  other
world,  which  is  corroborated  by  the  allusion  to  Spain,
another  of  the  Irish  aliases  for  Hades  (p.  90);  and  in
the  story  that  she  was  first  the  wife  of  the  king  of  the
Fir  Bolg,  and  then  of  that  of  the  Tuatha  Pe,  we  have  an
indication  that  she  belonged  to  the  class  of  dawn  and
dusk  goddesses ;  at  one  time  she  was  the  consort  of  a
dark  being,  and  at  another  of  a  bright  one,  while  the
Sun-god  was  her  foster-child,  which  recalls  the  fostering
of  Lieu  by  a  nurse  at  Dinas  Dinfle  or  some  adjacent  spot
near  the  sea.  That  this  is  the  way  to  regard  Tailltiu
is  proved  by  a  story  attributing  to  her  the  action  of  clear-
ing a  forest  and  of  thickly  covering  it  within  the  year
with  clover  blossom.2  This,  at  the  same  time  that  it  helps
us  to  understand  the  propriety  of  associating  her  with  an
agricultural  feast,  recalls  the  Welsh  myth  of  Olwen  and
the  white  trefoils  that  sprang  up  wherever  she  set  her
foot.3  Both  Olwen  and  Tailltiu  were  of  the  number
of  the  goddesses  of  dawn  and  dusk — a  class  of  divini-
ties, however,  much  less  differentiated  on  Celtic  than  on
classic  ground.  Thus  in  the  present  instance  I  should
claim  for  comparison  both  Aphrodite  and  Athene ;  the
former,  because  wherever  she  walked  on  landing  in  her
favourite  Cyprus,  she  likewise   made  roses  bloom   and

1  It  is  called  Mag  M6r  mi  Aonaig,  'the  Great  Plain  of  the  Assembly
or  tho  Fair,'  on  which,  the  Fomori  are  attacked  by  Lug,  according  to
one  of  the  stories  about  his  doings  :  see  the  Atlantis*,  iv.  178-9.  Simi-
larly, Bres,  when  driven  from  the  kingship  and  seeking  the  aid  of  his
Fomorian  kindred,  found  the  latter  with  their  king,  hi-  father,  holding
a  great  assembly  on  a  M  ■  j  M  r:  see  the  MS.  Hart.  52S0,  iul.  Gib.

2  Bk.  of  Leinster,  9"  :  see  also  200  b.

3  B.  B.  Mab.  p.  117;  Guest  ij.  276.


414  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

green  pastures  grow,  and  the  latter  as  occupying  the
foremost  place  at  the  Panathenrea,  just  as  Tailltiu  did
at  the  Lugnassad,  there  being  reasons,  to  be  mentioned
later,  why  one  should  identify  the  Celtic  and  the  Greek
feasts  with  one  another.  Such  lines  of  difference  as  that
drawn  between  Aphrodite  and  Athene,  or  between  either
and  such  a  goddess,  for  example,  as  rosy-fingered  Eos,
is  very  rudimentary  in  Celtic ;  and  in  that  respect  Celtic
mythology  appears  to  have  retained  a  more  ancient  and
rudimentary  form.

In  the  above-mentioned  stories,  the  Lugnassad  feasts
and  fairs  are  described  as  established  in  honour  of  the
dead,  one  by  Lug  himself  and  the  other  by  the  Tuatha
De  Danann.  But  there  is  a  different  account  in  one  of
the  manuscripts  till  recently  in  the  possession  of  Lord
Ashburnham,  where  one  meets  with  an  instance  of  those
quaint  explanations  of  place-names  so  characteristic  of
old  Irish  literature.  It  is  to  the  following  effect :  "  The
Eefuse  of  the  Great  Feast  which  I  mentioned,  that  is
Taillne.  It  is  here  that  Lug  Scimaig1  proceeded  to  make
the  great  feast  for  Lug  mac  Ethlenn  for  his  entertain-
ment after  the  battle  of  Mag  Tured ;  for  this  was  his
wedding  of  the  kingshij),  since  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann
made  the  aforesaid  Lug  king  after  the  death  of  Nuacla.
As  to  the  place  where  the  refuse  was  thrown,  a  great

1  Scimaig  looks  like  the  genitive  of  a  word  scimach ;  but  in  the
MS.  Harl.  5280,  fol.  21  b,  it  is  written  scimaig,  with  a  mark  of  un-
defined contraction  over  the  m.  Another  form  occurs  in  the  Bk.  of
Leinster,  which  identifies  this  Lug  with  Lug  mac  Ethlenn :  see  lib
and  the  top  margin,  which  has  the  following  verses  :

Cermait  mac  in  dagclse  de  rageogain  lug  scicmai?'*ge.

babara  bvoin  for  si?i  maig  aflaith  eehac/i  ollathir.
'For  sin  maig'  is  glossed  '.i.  for  brug  maic  [in]doc.'


v.   the  sun  111:110.  415

knoll  was  made  of  it:  this  was  [thenceforth]  its  name,
the  Knoll  of  the  Great  Feast,  or  the  Refuse  of  the  Great
Banquet,  that  is  to  say,  Taillne,  at  the  present  day."1
The  way  in  which  Lug's  personality  is  doubled  in  this
story  is  remarkable ;  and  it  is  possible  that  in  the  vocable
Taillne  we  have  a  name  nearly  related  to  that  of  Taill-
tin ; 2  while  the  festivities  of  the  Lugnassad  are  probably
referred  to  in  the  allusion  to  the  great  feast  made  by
Lug  for  Lug  as  a  reward  for  his  victory  over  the  powers
of  darkness  in  the  great  mythical  battle  of  Mag  Tared.
Further,  the  mention  of  his  assumption  of  sovereignty
as  his  act  of  wedding  or  marrying  the  kingdom  is
curious,  and  leads  to  a  further  examination  of  the  term
Lugnassad.  It  is  probable  that  nassad  did  not  mean  either
a  commemoration  or  a  festival,  as  might  be  gathered  from
Keating  and  Cormac,  since  it  is  a  word  of  the  same  origin
as  the  Latin  nexus,  '  a  tying  or  binding  together,  a  legal
obligation.'3   Moreover,  a  compound  ar-nass  is  used  more

1  The  manuscript  is  now  in  the  library  of  the  R.  Irish  Academy,
classed  D,  iv.  2;  and  (he  passage  here  translated  occurs  on  folio  82  A,
which  has  been  kindly  read  for  me  by  Prof.  Atkinson  :  I  have  also
consulted  the  British  Museum  Codex  already  referred  to  as  Harleian
5280,  and  especially  page  21  b.  The  former  reads  tall  ni  and  taill  ni,
the  latter  tailne  and  taillne,  a  name  which  looks  like  a  derivative  from
TaiUtiu,  genitive  Tailltcn,  as  it  admits  of  being  treated  as  a  curtailed
form  of  Tail  line.

2  Besides  the  place  called  Taillne,  and  the  Tailltin  where,  according
to  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  9a,  Lug's  foster-mother  lived,  the  forest  said  to
have  been  cleared  by  her  was  called  Cnill  Qdan,  the  situation  of  which
seems  to  be  defined  by  200h.  There  is  a  Cuan  TeUion,  or  Teelin
Harbour,  in  Donegal,  and  Strangford  Lough  is  Loch  Cuan;  but  see
Stokes  &  Windisch,  ij.  pp.  242,  248.

3  The  Latin  term  was  a  most  important  one,  and  we  have  an  Irish
word  of  kindled  origin  in  the  noun  nassad,  used  in  the  sense  of  a  legal


416  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

than  once  in  the  Ashburnham  manuscript  just  alluded
to,  in  the  sense  of  betrothing  one's  daughter,  or  giving
her  away  by  solemn  contract  to  a  husband ; l  and  lastly,
a  participial  form  nassa  occurs  of  a  girl  who  has  been
promised  or  betrothed  to  a  husband.2  These  facts,  and
the  curious  allusion  to  Lug's  wedding  the  kingdom,  go
to  prove  that  the  term  Lug-nassad  originally  meant  Lug's
wedding  or  marriage,  and  that  this  was  one  of  the  chief
things  the  festivities  on  that  day  were  meant  to  call  to
mind.

We  have  traces  of  this  idea  in  a  strange  story3  to
which  allusion  has  already  been  made  (p.  205).  Conn
the  Hundred-fighter  and  his  druid  were  one  day  over-
sanction,  in  a  verse  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun,  1185,  which  treats  the
death  of  Loegaire  Mac  Neill  as  a  punishment  for  his  violating  an  oath
he  had  sworn  by  the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  elements :
"  Loegaire  mac  Neill  died  beside  Casse — green  is  the  land  ;

God's  elements  by  him  pledged  brought  the  encounter  of  death  on
the  king  :

In  the  battle  of  Ath  Dara  the  Swift  was  Loegaire  taken,  son  of  Niall ;

The  just  sanction  of  God's  elements,  that  is  what  killed  Loegaire."
The  tract  in  which  it  occurs  has  recently  been  published  by  the  Kev.
Charles  Plummer  in  the  Rev.  Celt.  vi.  163.  A  different  version,  in
which  the  word  in  question  does  not  occur,  is  to  be  found  in  the  Bl\
of  Leinster,  43a  (see  also  Atkinson's  Introduction,  p.  23).  In  these
words  the  original  meaning  of  a  tying  or  binding  is  involved,  but  it
has  added  to  it  the  idea  of  what  makes  the  obligation  effective  or
avenges  the  violation  of  it.

1  Fol.  83/;:  arnaisai  sede  uile  do  feraib  remibsium,  'he  had  betrothed
all  these  to  husbands  before  them  ;'  and  further  on — arnais  iaram
Forsall  ami  mgin  dore  ri,  '  Forgall  then  betrothed  the  girl  to  the  king.'

2  See  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  92  a:  Ba  nassa  damsa  i?idi?2gen  ut  uair
c//ei?i,  '  that  girl  has  been  betrothed  to  me  long  ago.'

3  Edited  with  a  translation  in  O'Curry's  MS.  Med.  pp.  618-22,  from
the  British  Museum  MS.  Harl.  5280.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  417

taken  by  a  thick  mist,  whence  there  issued  a  knight  who
took  them  to  a  beautiful  plain,  whereon  they  saw  a  royal
rath  with  a  golden  tree  at  its  door.  They  entered  a
splendid  house  therein,  where  they  beheld  a  youthful
princess  with  a  diadem  of  gold  on  her  head,  and  a  silver
kieve  with  hoops  of  gold  standing  near  her,  full  of  red
ale  ;  and  they  saw  seated  before  them  on  a  royal  seat
a  personage  of  the  other  sex,  whose  like  had  never  been
seen  at  Conn's  court  at  Tara,  either  as  to  stature  or
beauty  of  face  and  figure.  He  explained  to  them  that  he
was  no  phantom,  but  that  he  was  Lug,1  and  that  it  was
his  pleasure  to  reveal  to  Conn  the  duration  of  his  rule,
and  that  of  every  prince  who  should  reign  at  Tara  after
him.  This  revelation  to  Conn  begins  with  the  crowned
lady  giving  him  two  huge  bones,  the  ribs  of  a  gigantic
ox  and  of  a  boar  respectively  ;  she  then  proceeds  to  distri-
bute the  red  ale,  with  the  question,  '  For  whom  is  this
bowl  ?'  Lug  answers,  '  For  Conn  the  Fighter  of  a  Hun-
dred ;'  and  the  same  distribution  of  the  contents  of  the
great  vat  is  repeated  in  respect  of  each  of  Conn's  successors;
but  I  should  have  said  that  the  queen  was  described  by
Lug  to  Conn  as  the  Sovereignty  of  Erinn  till  the  day  of
doom.  In  this  story  we  have  Lug  pictured  to  us  as  a
dweller  in  the  other  world,  where  the  Sun-god  was  sup-
posed to  spend  half  his  time,  and  there  with  him  lived
as  his  consort  the  youthful  beauty  typifying  the  kingdom
of  Erinn.    No  better  proof  could  perhaps  be  desired  that

1  He  describes  himself  as  Z,?/t7?nrtc/v //'»'/,  mic  Tighemmais,  that  is  to
say,  Lug  son  of  Edle  (better  Edne  or  Ethne),  son  of  Tigernmas,  which
is  noteworthy  as  virtually  identifying  Tigornmas  with  Balor ;  but  the
value  of  the  suggestion  is  reduced  by  the  display  of  ignorance  in  treat-
ing Edle  as  Lug's  father  and  not  his  mother.

"J   E


418  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

the  interpretation  here  suggested  of  the  term  Lugnassacl
is  in  the  main  correct ;  and  it  agrees  with  the  fact  that
after  Lug's  death — for  euhemerized  gods  must  die — the
husband  of  Erinn  is  represented  bearing  the  significant
name  of  Mac  Greinc,  or  the  Son  of  the  Sun.1  Nor  is  evi-
dence of  a  more  indirect  nature  altogether  "wanting,  for
if  the  Lugnassad  recalled  the  marriage  of  Lug,  it  might
also  be  expected  to  have  been  considered  an  auspicious
time  for  their  own  marriages  by  his  worshippers.  This
is  borne  out  by  tradition.  Dr.  O'Donovan,  after  briefly
describing  the  position  of  Tailltin  or  Teltown,  goes  on
to  say  that  there  were  in  his  day  vivid  traditions  of
the  Lugnassad  extant  in  the  country,  and  that  Teltown
was,  till  recently,  resorted  to  by  the  men  of  Meath  for
hurling,  wrestling,  and  other  manly  sports.  This  is  not
all,  for  '  to  the  left  of  the  road,  as  you  go  from  Kells  to
Donaghpatrick,  there  is,'  he  adds,  'a  hollow  called  Lag
an  Aonaigh,  i.e.  the  Hollow  of  the  Fair,  where,  according
to  tradition,  marriages  were  solemnized  in  pagan  times.'2
To  sum  up  these  remarks  :  the  Lammas  fairs  and  meet-
ings forming  the  Lugnassad  in  ancient  Ireland,  marked
the  victorious  close  of  the  sun's  contest  with  the  powers
of  darkness  and  death,  when  the  warmth  and  light  of
that  luminary's  rays,  after  routing  the  colds  and  blights,
were  fast  bringing  the  crops  to  maturity :  this,  more
mythologically  expressed,  was  represented  as  the  final

1  Bk.  of  Leinster,  10  a;  Keating,  p.  130-1.

2  The  Four  Masters,  A.M.  3370,  note.  Perhaps  the  marriages  at  the
Lugnassad  followed  a  season  of  no  marrying  :  in  Scotland  at  least  the
month  of  May  was  a  close  time  in  this  respect  :  see  Thos.  Stephens'
Gododin  (published  by  the  Cymmrodorion),  pp.  125-6,  where  he  quotes
Thomas  de  Quincey  in  Hogg's  Instructor  for  July,  1852,  p.  293.


V.     THE    SUH    HERO.  119

crushing  of  Fomori  and  Fir  Bolg,  the  death  of  their  king
and  tlic  nullifying  of  their  malignant  spells,  and  as  the
triumphant  return  of  Lug  with  peace  and  plenty  to  marry
the  maiden  Erinn  and  to  enjoy  a  well-earned  banquet,
at  which  the  fairy  host  of  dead  ancestors  was  probably
not  forgotten.  Marriages  were  solemnized  on  the  auspi-
cious occasion ;  and  no  prince  who  failed  to  be  present
on  the  last  day  of  the  fair  durst  look  forward  to  prosperity
during  the  coming  year.1  The  Lugnassad  was  the  great
event  of  the  summer  half  of  the  year,  which  extended
from  the  calends  of  May  to  the  calends  of  Winter.  The
Celtic  year  was  more  thermometric  than  astronomical,
and  the  Lugnassad  was,  so  to  say,  its  summer  solstice,
whereas  the  longest  day  was,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able
to  discover,  of  no  special  account.

We  have  not  yet  done  with  the  name  of  Lug  and  Lieu :
the  genitive  of  the  former  is  Loga,  so  it  is  known  from
the  analogy  of  other  words  that  if  Lug  were  put  back  into
its  Gaulish  form,  we  should  have  a  noun  of  the  u  declen-
sion making  in  the  nominative  singular  Lugus,  and  in
the  genitive  Lugovos,  with  a  nominative  plural  Lugovcs.
It  requires  no  great  stretch  of  imagination  to  see  also
that  we  have  the  same  word  in  the  Gaulish  name  which
has  become  in  French  Lyons;  in  Latin  authors  it  is
usually  Lugdunum;  but  there  is,  however,  evidence  which
places  it  beyond  doubt  that  the  older  Gallo-Roman  form
Mas  Lugudunvm?  that  is  to  say,  in  Gaulish  Lugudunon
or  Lugudounon,  which  would  mean  the  town  of  Lug.

1  O'Curry  (quoting  MS.  Harl  5280),  pp.  618,  620.

2  See  also  Dio  Cassius,  xlvi.  50  :  to  AovyovSovvov  fiev  6vo[j.aa0iv
vvv  Si  AorySowov  Kakox/itvov :  see  also  the  Berlin  f/u<cr.  ij.
2912,  3235,  iij.  5^32,  v.  875,  7213,  vij.  1334,  i.

2  E  2


420


V.     THE    SUX    HERO.


Moreover,  the  Gaulish  compound  is  made  up  of  the  self-
same elements  which  we  have  in  Din-tteu;  but  this  latter,
not  being  a  compound,  would  be  literally  represented  in
Gaulish  by  Drawn  Lugovos,  or  Lleu's  Town.    It  is  highly
probable,  however,  that  it  was  obtained  by  analysing  the
compound  name,1  which  may  be  supposed  to  have  been
the  original  in  this  country  as  well  as  in  Gaul.     Now
Lyons  was  not  the  only  Lugdunum,  for  there  was  one  in
the  Pyrenees,   distinguished  as  Lugdunum  Convenarum,
now  called  Saint-Bertrand  de  Comminges,  in  the  depart-
ment of  the  Haute  Garonne ;  moreover,  Laon,  the  chief
town  of  the  department  of  the  Aisne,  bore  this  name;2
and  so,  as  is  generally  known,  did  Leyden  on  the  Ehine  in
Holland,  for  Ptolemy  in  his  Geography  gives  its  old  name
as  AovyoSowov.3    Look  at  the  positions  of  these  places  on
the  map,  and  take  into  account  those  of  Dinlleu  in  Arvon,
and  Dintte  in  the  Wrekin  district  in  Shropshire,  also  the
places  where  the  Lugnassad  were  celebrated  in  Ireland,
and  you  will  readily  admit  that  the  name  Lugus,  Lug  or
Lieu,  was  that  of  a  divinity  whose  cult  was  practised  by
all  probably  of  the  Celts  both  on  the  Continent  and  in
these  islands.     In  fact,  to  go  more  into  detail,  it  may  be
inferred  that  the  Irish  Lugnassad  had  its  counterpart  at
one  at  least  of  the  Lugduna  of  the  Continent,  namely,
the  southernmost  city  of  that  name,  on  the  Ehone ;  for  it

1  A  place-name  into  which  Lug's  name  enters  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,
82  a,  is  (in  the  dative)  Modaib  Loga,  which  is  there  explained  to  be
the  same  as  the  compound  Lugmod.

2  For  this  I  am  indebted  to  my  learned  colleague,  the  Eegius  Pro-
fessor of  History  at  Oxford,  who  has  directed  my  attention  to  Gregory
of  Tours,  Hist.  Francorum,  vi.  4.

3  Traces  of  a  fifth  Lugdunum,  in  documents  belonging  to  the  church
of  Le  Mans,  are  mentioned  in  the  Rev.  Celt.  vij.  399.


V.    TIIK   SUN    HERO.  421

is  not  improbable  that  the  festival  held  there  every  first
of  August  in  honour  of  the  deified  Augustus  simply
superseded,  in  name  mostly,  an  older  feast  held  on  that
day  in  honour  of  Lug.1

What  took  place  in  the  south  of  Gaul  may  have  come
to  pass  also  in  Britain :  the  echoes  of  a  feast  or  fair  on
the  first  of  August  have  not  yet  died  out  of  Wales,  where
one  still  speaks  of  Givyl  Aivst,  which  would  now  mean
only  the  August  festival,  though,  according  to  the  ana-
logy of  other  names,2  it  should  be  rendered  the  Feast  of
Augustus.  Gwyl  Aivst  is  now  a  day  for  fairs  in  certain
parts  of  North  Wales,  and  it  is  remembered  in  central
and  southern  Cardiganshire  as  one  on  which  the  shepherds
used,  till  comparatively  lately,  to  have  a  sort  of  picnic  on
the  hills.  One  farmer's  wife  would  lend  a  big  kettle',
and  others  would  contribute  the  materials  held  requisite
for  making  in  it  a  plentiful  supply  of  good  soup  or  broth,
while,  according  to  another  account,  everybody  present
had  to  put  his  share  of  fuel  on  the  fire  with  his  own
hands.  But  in  Brecknockshire  the  first  of  August  seems
to  have  given  way,  some  time  before  Catholicism  had  lost
its  sway  in  Wales,  to  the  first  holiday  or  feast  in  August,


1  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  in  an  article  in  La  nouveUe  /«'-
h;.<t<>n'>/>ir  it'-  Droit  frangau  et  '/ranger  (sec  his  offprint  entitled  Etudes
but  I,  Droit  cdtique  (Paris,  1881),  p.  92),  was  the  first  to  notice  this
interesting  coincidence;  and  he  suggests  that  the  ludi  miscelh  and  the
tournaments  of  eloquence,  which  Caligula  ordered  to  take  place  there
in  his  presence  (Suetonius'  Caligula,  20  :  see  also  his  Claudiw,  2  ;
Strabo,  iv.  3,  2  [p.  2G1]),  formed  simply  the  Gallo-Roman  continua-
tion of  a  Celtic  custom  which  had  its  beginning  previous  to  the  advent
of  the  Roman.

2  Such  as  Qvryl  Fair,  Ghoyl  Iwan,  Choyl  Fihangel,  the  feasts  respec-
tively of  SS.  Mary,  John,  and  Michael  the  Angel.


422  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

that  is  to  say,  the  first  Sunday  in  that  month.  For  then
crowds  of  people  early  in  the  morning  made  their  way
up  the  mountains  called  the  Beacons,  both  from  the  side
of  Carmarthenshire  and  Glamorgan :  their  destination
used  to  be  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Little  Yan  Lake,
out  of  whose  waters  they  expected  in  the  course  of  the
day  to  see  the  Lady  of  the  Lake  make  her  momentary
appearance.  A  similar  shifting  from  the  first  of  August
to  the  first  Sunday  in  that  month  has,  I  imagine,  taken
place  in  the  Isle  of  Man.  For  though  the  solstice  used
to  be,  in  consequence  probably  of  Scandinavian  influence,
the  day  of  institutional  significance  in  the  Manx  summer,
enquiries  I  have  made  in  different  parts  of  the  island  go
to  show  that  middle-aged  people  now  living  remember,
that  when  they  were  children  their  parents  used  to  ascend
the  mountains  very  early  on  the  first  Sunday  in  August
(Old  Style),  and  that  in  some  districts  at  least  they  were
wont  to  bring  home  bottles  full  of  water  from  wells  noted
for  their  healing  virtues.  In  a  word,  the  memory  of
living  Manxmen  retains  enough  to  show  that  the  day
was  once  of  great  importance,  though  I  have  not  been
able  to  find  anything  to  connect  its  associations  with
Lug  and  the  Lugnassad  except  the  name  Lhuamjs  for  the
first  day  of  August.  The  story  of  the  Lady  of  the  Little
Yan  Lake,  whom  the  "Welsh  pilgrims  used  till  recently
to  go  forth  to  see,  is  too  long  to  be  given  here,1  and  also
too  modern,  in  the  form  we  have  it,  to  clear  up  the  details
of  the  myth  of  which  it  forms  a  part.  Suffice  it  to  say
that  she  may  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  numerous

1  The  whole  is  given  as  the  first  of  my  Welsh  Fairy  Tales  in  the
Cymmrodor,  iv.  1G3 — 179;  but  see  also  vi.  2034.


V.     THE    SUN    IIF.rtO.  4_!o

class  of  dawn-goddesses,  that  Bhe  wedded  a  husband  in

the  district,  and  that  after  a  time  she  left  both  him  and
her  children.  Now  and  then,  however,  she  returned  to
converse  with  the  latter,  especially  the  eldest  of  them,  a
youth  named  Khiwatton,  whom  she  carefully  instructed
as  to  the  virtues  of  all  kinds  of  herbs.  He  afterwards
proved  the  founder  of  a  famous  family  of  physicians,  whose
descendants  are  widely  spread  in  South  Wales.  The  Phy-
sicians of  Myttvai,  as  they  were  called,  were  historical,
and  attached  to  the  princely  house  of  Dinevor ;  but  their
ancestor  was  of  mythic  descent,  and  his  name  enables
one  to  identify  him  in  the  Welsh  Triads,  where  he  is
called  Khiwatton  of  the  Broom  (-yellow)  Hair,  and  in-
vested with  a  solar  character  :  among  other  things,  he  is
classed  with  two  other  solar  heroes  as  being,  like  them,
famous  for  his  intimate  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  all
material  things.1  It  is  impossible  to  say  how  far  the
original  myth  agreed  with  that  of  Lug,  but  the  one  thing
yearly  looked  for  was  the  appearance  of  Khiwatton' s
mother,  the  Lady  of  the  Lake:  she  occupied  on  the  Welsh
holiday  the  position  assigned  to  Tailltiu  at  the  Lugnassad,
and  to  Athene  at  the  Panathenaea.     Further,  the  great

1  See  Triads,  i.  10  =  ij.  216  =  iij.  70,  and  compare  i.  22  =  iij.  28,
also  i.  49  =  ij.  43  =  iij.  27,  which  go  to  prove  that  our  Khiwatton  is
to  be  identified  with  Rhiwafton  son  of  Urien.  Other  passages  in
Welsh  literature,  such  as  Triad  i.  52,  suggest  that  the  Lady  of  the
Van  Luke's  name  was  Modron  danghter  of  Avattach,  and  that  among
her  children  are  to  be  reckoned  not  only  Rhiwafton  but  also  the  solai
heroes  Mabon  and  Owein,  with  the  latter^  twin-sister  fcforvnd.  Urien,
the  father,  is  decidedly  to  be  classed  among  the  dark  divinities;  and  this
explains  why,  after  her  lover  had  long  wooed  the  Lady  thai  was  wont
to  row  on  the  Little  Van  Lake  in  a  golden  boat,  the  marriage  did  not
take  place  till  New-year's-eve,  that  is  to  say,  the  middle  of  wintei  :
see  the  Cymmrodor,  iv.  178-9.


424  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

importance  once  attaching  to  Lammas  among  the  Welsh,
admits  of  another  kind  of  proof,  namely,  the  fact,  for
such  it  seems  to  be,  that  the  Welsh  term,  in  the  modified
form  of  Gala  Augusti,  passed  into  the  Latinity  of  the
Chronicles,1  and  even  into  a  statute  of  Edward  III.2
The  widely  spread  observance  of  the  festival  of  Augustus
would  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for  on  the  supposition,
that  it  was  a  great  Celtic  feast  continued  under  a  new
name.

It  must  by  no  means  be  supposed  that  the  worship  of
the  Sun-god  here  in  question  rests  on  inferential  evidence
alone  of  the  kind  just  indicated,  for  proof  of  a  more
direct  nature  is  not  altogether  wanting.  Witness  the
following  Latin  inscription  from  the  ancient  Spanish
town  of  Uxama,  a  Celtic  name  now  changed  into  Osma  :
Lugovibus  sacrum,  L.  L.  Urcico  Collegia  Sutorum  d.  d?
This  seems  to  tell  us  that  a  man  whose  name  was  L.  L.
Urcico  built  a  temple  for  the  Lugoves  and  made  a  present
of  it  to  a  college  of  cobblers,  which  at  once  raises  several
questions,  such  as,  why  Lugovibus  and  not  Lugovi,  and
why  a  college  of  cobblers  ?  why  should  they  have  had
charge  of  the  temple?  It  is  a  far  cry  from  Spain  to
Snowdon,  but  I  know  of  no  means  of  answering  these
questions  except  those  provided  by  the  Mabinogi  of  Math,

1  Annales  Cambrics  (the  Eolls  edition,  1860),  p.  109  (A.D.  1287).

2  See  Ducange,  s.  v.  gala,  where  he  refers  to  a  statute  of  Edward  III.
a.  31,  c.  14,  and  quotes  therefrom:  Aueragium  aestiuale  fieri  debet
inter  Hokedai  et  gulam  Augusti.

3  The  Berlin  Corpus  Inscr.  Lat.  Hispaniarum,  ij.  No.  2818.  The
writer  in  the  Rev.  Celt.,  vij.  399,  already  referred  to,  cites  Pliny's
Hist.  Nat.  iii.  4,  11,  as  proving  Uxama  to  have  been  a  Celtic  city
belonging  to  the  Arevaci.  As  to  the  name  Uxama,  see  my  Celtic
Britain*,  p.  280.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  425

already  cited  move  than  once.     You  will  remember  how
it  is  there  told  that  Gwydion  and  his  son  Lieu  assumed
the  guise  of  shoemakers,  when  Gwydion  wished  to  out-
wit Arianrhod  so  as  to  force  her  to  give  her  disowned
son  a  name.     The  stratagem  proved  a  success ;  and  the
passage  tells  us  that  on  account  of  that  disguise  Gwydion
was  known  as  one  of  the  Three  Golden  Cordwainers  of
the  Isle  of  Britain ;  but  it  does  not  include  his  son  with
him,  though  he  took  also  an  active  part  in  the  shoemaking.
On  the  other  hand,  the  triad  in  question,  as  it  appears  in
the  ordinary  lists  (i.  77=ij.  58),  excludes  Gwydion,  the
three  being  Caswatton  son  of  Beli,  Manawychm  son  of
Llyr,  and  Lieu  respectively.    The  story  about  Caswatton
is  lost,  but  that  of  Manawychm  is  detailed  in  the  Mabi-
nogi  that  goes  by  his  name.     Probably  nothing  but  the
restricted  nature  of  the  triad  is  responsible  for  the  fact  that
( I  wydion  and  Lieu  are  not  both  included ;  and  it  is  hard
to  avoid  supposing  that  the  father  and  the  son  were  the
Lugoves  of  the  inscription  at  Osma,  as  that  supposition
would  explain  their  association  with  the  cobblers.    This,
however,  raises  the  question  how,  in  case  the  name  Lug
and  Lieu  have  been  rightly  explained  by  us,  the  father  and
the  son  could  have  been  called  Lugoves,  a  word  which
should,  according  to  the  view  expressed,  have  meant  lights
or  luminaries.    There  was  probably  an  inconsistency  un-
derlying this  use  of  that  term  ;  but  how  small  it  practi-
cally was  will  be  readily  seen  when  it  is  considered  thai
Gwydion  as  the  benefactor  of  man  stood   in  somewhat
the  same  relation  to  the  sun  as  did  India   in  Hindu
mythology,  which  represents  the  latter  daily  recovering
the  sun  for  mortals:   the  Norsemen  made  the  relation-
ship a  still  closer  one,  for  in  one  of  their  stories  they


426  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

regarded  the  sun,  not  as  Woden's  offspring,  but  as  Woden's
eye.  That  the  plural  Lugovcs  was  not  exceptional  or
peculiar  to  the  inscription  mentioned,  is  not  to  be  sup-
posed :  there  are  two  reasons  for  thinking  the  contrary.
In  the  first  place,  there  is  another  inscription  which  reads
Lugoves  in  large  bronze  majuscules  on  an  epistylium  of
white  marble  found  at  Avenches,  in  Switzerland,1  and  as
the  legend  consists  solely  of  this  word,  the  name  of  the
Lugoves  must  have  been  very  familiar  to  Gaulish  ears.
In  the  next  place,  the  inclusion  of  the  two  under  one
name  looks  like  the  beginning  of  a  process  of  running  the
character  and  personality  of  the  father  and  the  son  into
one,  with  that  of  the  latter  on  the  whole  prevailing ;  this
is  the  case  with  nearly  all  the  Irish  stories  about  the  Sun-
god,  while  that  of  Gwydion  and  Lieu  is  the  only  one  in
Welsh  which  keeps  them  well  apart.  The  distinction  is
a  small  one,  but  it  is  of  great  importance  when  Lieu  is
compared  with  the  Irish  sun-heroes.  The  former  does
next  to  nothing  for  himself,  since  nearly  everything  is
done  for  him  by  Gwydion ;  and  Balder  is  treated  much
in  the  same  way  by  his  parents.  On  the  other  hand,  the
wily  shrewdness  which  the  Welsh  story  ascribes  to  the
father  is  passed  on  by  the  Irish  one  to  his  son  Lug,  while
the  father  practically  disappears ;  and  altogether  a  view
which  made  the  sun  a  person  with  a  father  who  took  care
of  him,  looks  a  very  primitive  one,  and  the  existence  of
such  a  father  must  have  at  times  been  very  precarious
and  liable  to  effacement  by  the  transcendent  character  of
his  offspring,  who  absorbed  his  chief  attributes.  There
would,  moreover,  be  another  tendency  to  bring  the  two

1  Mommsen's  Inscrip.  Helvet.  No.  161.


V.     THE    SUN   HERO.  427

more  closely  together,  arising  from  the  wisdom  and  know-
ledge ascribed  to  the  Sun-god,  as  the  result  presumably
of  his  position  and  much  travelling ;  so  far  as  this  would
go,  it  would  tend  to  invest  him  with  the  same  cleverness
as  his  father,  the  Hermes  or  Culture  Hero  of  the  race.
Some  Irish  stories1  illustrate  this  to  a  nicety  in  the  case
of  Lug,  whom  they  surname  the  Ilddnach,  or  him  of
many  gifts  and  of  many  professions.  Thus  when  Lug,
coining  from  a  distance,  offers  the  Tuatha  Do  Danann
his  aid  against  the  Fomori  at  the  battle  that  was  going
to  be  fought  on  the  Plain  of  Tured,  he  was  asked,  on
presenting  himself  at  the  gates,  who  he  was,  whereupon
Lug  replied  that  he  was  a  good  carpenter.  The  porter
answered  that  they  had  a  good  carpenter,  so  that  they
had  no  need  of  him.  Then  Lug  said  he  was  an  excellent
smith,  to  which  the  same  reply  was  given.  He  then
went  through  a  large  number  of  professions,  including
those  of  soldier,  harpist,  poet,  historian  and  jurisconsult,
magician,  physician,  cup-bearer,  worker  in  bronze  and  the
precious  metals;  but  he  always  had  the  same  kind  of
answer,  until  he  told  the  porter  to  ask  Nuada  the  king  if
he  had  a  man  who  could  exercise  all  these  professions
and  trades  with  equal  skill.  The  king  was  only  too
delighted  to  engage  such  a  one,  and  Lug  ere  long  pro-
ceeded to  pass  under  review  all  the  king's  men  of  skill,
and  to  ascertain  what  service  each  could  render  in  the
struggle  that  was  to  take  place  with  the  Fomori.2  Had
we  no  other  account  of  Lug,  we  should  have  certainly  had

1  Such  as  that  of  the  Children  of  Tuirenn  already  mentioned.

2  O'Curry,  ij.  248-50,  iij.  42-3;  D'Arhois  de  Jubainville,  Etudes  mr

'    Droit  celtique,  pp.  85-6;  also  the  same  scholar's  Cycle  Myth.  pp.
176-7.


428  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

to  look  at  him  as  an  Irish  Mercury  :  we  should  be  wrong,
uo  doubt,  as  a  wider  view  of  his  character  serves  to  show,
but  this  helps  us  to  see  how  it  was  possible  to  call  father
and  son  by  the  one  name  of  Lugoves.

Before  leaving  this  part  of  the  subject,  a  word  more
has  to  be  said  of  the  name  Lugdununi,  and  the  various
ways  in  which  it  has  been  explained.  (1)  The  pseudo-
Plutarch  De  Fluminibus  speaks  of  it  in  these  words :
"  There  lies  close  by  it  [namely,  the  river  Arar]  a  moun-
tain called  Lugdunos,  and  it  had  its  name  changed  from
the  following  cause :  Momaros  and  Atepomaros  having
been  driven  from  the  government  by  Seseronis,  wished
to  found  a  city  upon  this  hill  according  to  the  direction,
and  suddenly,  while  the  foundations  were  being  dug,
there  appeared  ravens  fluttering  about,  and  they  filled
the  trees  all  round.  Now  Momaros  was  skilled  in  augury,
and  named  the  city  Lugdunon ;  for  in  their  idiom  they
call  a  raven  AoCyos,  and  an  eminence  they  call  SoiW,  as
Klitopho  narrates  in  the  13th  book  of  his  Foundations."1
Mountain  or  hill  may  do  as  the  translation  of  the  sort  of
town  or  acropolis  which  the  Grauls  called  dunon  ;  but  that
they  had  a  word  lnyos,  meaning  a  raven,  is  a  statement
which  the  vocabularies  of  the  Celtic  languages  seem  to
leave  open  to  doubt  :2  it  was  most  likely  a  guess  founded
on  the  alleged  appearance  of  the  ravens  during  the  found-

1  Plutarch,  ed.  Diibner  (Paris,  1855),  Vol.  v.  p.  85  (Pseudo-plutarchea
de  Fluvlia,  vi.  4) :  see  also  Midler's  (Didot)  Frag.  Hist.  Gr.  iv.  p.  367.

2  The  nearest  word  known  to  the  alleged  lugos,  '  a  raven,'  would  be
the  Irish  luch,  'a  mouse  ;'  lugliath,  'grey  as  a  mouse,'  Bk.  of  Leinstcr,
120a;  loc?m/na,  'dark  secrets,'  so  rendered  in  the  Stokes-O'Donovan
Cormac,  p.  100,  where  lochdub  is  also  translated  'all  black;'  Welsh,
////;/,  'a  shrew  or  field-mouse;'  llygoden,  'a  mouse;'  Uygliw,  'of  the
colour  of  a  mouse.'


V.     THE    SIX    IIHI;o.  429

ing  of  the  city.  ('2)  Some  notes  to  the  Bordeaux  Itine-
rary1 make  I/ugdunum  mean  Mom  Desideratum,  which
was  also  probably  a  guess,  like  the  other.  (3)  A  ninth-
century  Life  of  St.  Germanus  by  Hericus  devotes  to  the
name  the  following  lines:2

'Lucduno  celebrant  Gallomm  famine  nomen,
Impositum  quondam,  quod  sit  mom  lucidus  idem.'

The  motive  for  the  spelling  Lucduno  is  doubtless  to  be
sought  in  mons  lucidus  ;  but  it  is  possible  that  the  latter
represents,  somewhat  inaccurately  doubtless,  a  tradition
which  had  come  down  from  a  time  when  Gaulish  had  not
become  a  dead  language  :  at  any  rate  it  seems  to  approach
the  truth  more  nearly  than  the  other  etymologies,  and  it
may  be  inferred  that  what  underlay  the  passage  in  the
pseudo-Plutarch  was  this:  the  Gauls  regarded  the  raven
as  the  bird  of  the  Lugoves  or  of  one  of  them ;  there  was
a  tradition  that  ravens  appeared  while  Lugdunum  was
being  founded,  and  that  therefore  it  was  dedicated  to
Lugus,  whence  its  name  of  Lugu-dunon.  This  is  of
course  a  mere  theory ;  but  so  far  as  regards  the  ravens,
it  does  not  stand  alone;  for  Owein  son  of  Urien,  who
must  be  regarded  as  a  solar  hero,  had  a  mysterious  army
of  ravens ; 3  Ciichulainn,  an  avatar  of  Lug,  had  his  two
ravens  of  magic  or  druidism,4  and  from  hearing  them  his


1  Otherwise  called  Itinerarium  Hierosolymiianum,  and  cited  by
Diefenbach  in  bis  Originea  Europcece,  p.  325.

2  Diefenbach,  loc.  cit.  j  but  the  Bollandists  read  Lugduno.

3  R  B.  Mob.  pp.  153-9,  192  ;  Guest,  ij.  407-15,  i.  84.

4  Windisch'a  Iruche  Texte,  p.  220  ;  Bk.  of  ike  Dun,  48fr;  see  also
57«,  where  the  words  fCoicJi  Ittgbairt  are  used,  meaning,  as  it  would
seem,  'ravens  that  bring  Lug  or  light:'  compare  the  Welsh  lleu-fert
'  light -bearing  or  light-giving,  a  luminary.'


430  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

enemies  inferred  his  having  himself  come ;  and  Greek
mythology  represents  Apollo  occasionally  attended  by  a
raven,  as  in  the  story  of  Coronis.1

From  these  parallel  instances  it  would  seem  that  the
one  of  the  Lugoves  to  whom  the  ravens  strictly  belonged
was  Lugns,  and  that  fits  in  with  the  story  of  the  founding
of  the  Lyons  Lugdunum.  Another  conjecture  is  possible
as  to  the  Lugoves,  namely,  that  they  were  Lugus  with
one  or  more  solar  brothers  like  himself,  and  not  his  father.
There  would  be  no  lack  of  parallel  instances :  witness
the  three  comrades  at  Arthur's  court,  namely,  Pcrcdur,
Owein  and  Gwalchmai;  or  the  three  Ultonians,  one  of
whom,  Conall  Cernach,  avenges  Cuchulainn's  death,  while
the  third,  Loegaire,  has  no  very  distinct  role  assigned
him.  Similarly,  in  Norse  mythology,  Balder  had  several
brothers,  one  of  whom  visited  him  in  Hell,  and  a  third
avenged  his  death ;  even  in  Greek  we  have  something  of
the  same  kind  in  the  presence  together  of  Apollo  and
Heracles,  whose  disputes  remind  one  of  the  rivalry  be-
tween Ciichulainn,  Conall  and  Loegaire,  which  was  made
the  subject  of  an  elaborate  tale  entitled  Bricriu's  Banquet.
More  weight  attaches  here,  however,  to  the  fact  that
neither  Lieu  nor  Lug  is  associated  with  a  brother  of  a
nature  similar  to  his  own ;  the  former  had  an  elder  bro-
ther Dylan,  who  hied  away  to  the  sea  as  soon  as  he  was
christened ;  and  the  latter  had  two  brothers  who  were
dropped  into  the  sea,  never  more  to  be  heard  of,  whence
it  may  be  inferred  that  they  were  more  like  Dylan  than
Lieu.     On  the  whole,  then,  it  seems  more  probable  that

1  Ovid's  Metamorphoses,  ij.  542,  where  the  raven's  officiousness  re-
minds one  of  the  role  played  in  the  hamlets  of  Glamorgan  hy  Blodeued
as  an  owl :  see  p.  241,  ahove.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  431

the  Lugovcs  of  Gaulish  religion  consisted  of  Lugus  and
his  father,  whatever  the  name  may  have  been  which  the
latter  bore  in  that  connection.

Cuchulainn's  Birth  and  Education.

Eeference  has  more  than  once  been  made  in  this  course
to  the  Ultonian  hero  Ciichulainn ;  it  is  now  time  to  speak
of  him  more  in  detail.  Irish  literature  preserves  traces  of
a  belief  in  the  re-appearance  of  an  ancestor  in  the  person
of  a  descendant :  in  other  words,  the  same  person  or  soul
might  be  expected  to  appear  successively  in  different
bodies ;  and  in  no  case  could  this  seem  more  natural  than
in  that  of  the  Sun-god  who  constantly  descends  to  the
world  of  the  dead  and  as  often  emerges  from  it.  Now
Lug  seldom  appears  in  the  Ultonian  sagas ;  but  in  one
of  them  he  places  himself  more  than  once  on  the  way  to
be  re-born,  and  more  than  once  the  mother  is  Dechtere
sister  to  king  Conchobar.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  Bay
that  the  accounts  of  Ciichulainn' s  birth  are  very  confused
and  inconsistent.  This  is  due  partly  to  his  being  treated
as  the  son  of  Lug  in  the  ordinary  way  of  nature,  when  he
is  called  Lug's  lad  and  his  special  nurseling ; 1  and  partly
to  his  being  regarded  as  Lug  himself  re-appearing  in  the
flesh  after  several  more  or  less  unsuccessful  and  obscure
incarnations.2  One  of  these  made  the  nobles  of  Ulster
look  with  awkward  suspicion  at  Conchobar,  as  the  un-
married Dechtere  acted  as  her  brother's  charioteer3  and

1  Bit.  of  Leinster,  119a,  gein  Loga  (voc.) ;  123?;,  eainaltram  Loga.
-  Windisch,  p.  139  (§  5)  and  p.  138  (§  3).

3  She  is  called  his  ara,  'charioteer,'  in  the  Bk.  of  tin  Dun  ;  but  the
Egerton  Ms.  .says  that  she  sat  in  his  chariot  do  raith}  that  is  to

'to  drive  or  guide'  the  horses  :  the  verb  implied  is  rdim,  which  Win-


432  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

shared  his  ordinary  sleeping  accommodation :  compare  the
fact  that  Greek  mythology  treated  Here  as  sister  to  Zens,
and  also  the  Greek  legend  which  made  Zeus  the  father
of  Heracles.

The  oldest  account  we  have  of  Ciichulainn's  birth
occurs  in  the  eleventh-century  manuscript  called  the
Book  of  the  Dun;1  but  a  similar  version  is  found  in  a
later  one,2  which  adds  to  the  story  of  the  hero's  birth
the  mysterious  remark  that  he  was  then,  as  it  would
seem,  a  boy  of  three,3  which  probably  refers  to  his  size
and  strength  :  compare  the  rapid  growth  of  Lieu  (p.  307).
Neither  story  mentions  his  mother  taking  any  part  in
bringing  up  the  boy,  but  they  speak  of  another  of  the
king's  sisters,  who  was  called  Finnchoem,  setting  her
affection  at  once  on  little  Setanta,  for  that  was  one  of  the
boy's  names :  he  was  the  same  to  her,  she  said,  as  her
own  son  Conall  Cernach,  and  the  king  remarked  that
there  was  little  for  her  to  choose  between  her  own  son
and  her  own  sister's  son.  It  is  not  hinted  that  Dechterc
disowned  her  child  in  this  story,  but  it  describes  her,  some
time  before  his  birth,  trying  to  pass  off  for  what  she  no
more  was  than  Arianrhod  when  she  had  the  audacity  to
appear  as  candidate  for  the  office  of  foot-holder  to  king
Math  (p.  306).    The  parallel  between  Dechtere  and  Arian-

disch  explains  as  '  ich  befahre  (das  meer),  rudere,'  but  the  original
signification  must  have  been  wider  :  see  Windisch,  pp.  136,  139.

1  Folio  128  :  it  is  incomplete,  and  the  fragment  has  been  published
in  Windisch's  Irische  Texte,  pp.  136 — 141.

2  Namely,  the  British  Museum  MS.  Egrrton,  1782,  fol.  152,  which
is  assigned  to  the  fifteenth  century,  and  published  with  the  other  by
Windisch.

3  Windisch,  p.  141.


V.    THE    8TJN    HERO.

rliod  is,  however,  brought  into  much  clearer  lighf  in
another  and  a  second  version  in  the  same  manuscript,
which  materially  differs  from  the  other  two,  and  retains
very  old  features  of  the  myth  that  are  not  reproduced
in  them.  This  is  the  substance  of  it : l — Fifty  maidens
from  the  Ultonian  court,  with  Dechtere  at  their  head,  ran
away  from  Emain,  and  their  whereabouts  could  uot  be
discovered  for  the  spare  of  three  years ;  but  in  the  mean
time  Emain  was  visited  by  wild  birds  which  ate  up  the
grass  and  every  green  herb.  The  Ultonians  felt  this  to
be  a  great  scourge,  and  they  resolved  to  give  them  chase  ;
so  one  day  the  king  and  a  few  of  his  nobles  with  their
charioteers  set  out  to  kill  the  birds,  by  which  they  were
allured  over  the  hills  and  far  away  to  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  Brugh  of  the  Boyue,  notorious  for  its
fairy  inhabitants  (p.  171).  Night  overtook  them,  and,
having  lost  sight  of  the  birds,  they  unyoked  their  hoi-  3,
while  one  of  their  number  took  a  turn  to  see  if  he  could
discover  a  habitation  where  they  might  pass  the  night.
Ere  long  he  rejoined  his  friends  with  the  news  that  he
had  found  a  small  house  occupied  by  a  man  and  his  wife,
who  would  welcome  them  with  such  hospitality  as  their
means  admitted  of.  Thither  they  went  to  pass  the  night  ;
but  presently  one  of  their  number  went  outside,  and  was
surprised  to  come  across  a  fine  mansion,  at  the  door  of
which  stood  the  owner  of  it  bidding  him  welcome  to  his
house :  he  entered,  and  was  familiarly  saluted  by  the
owner's  wife.  He  asked  the  meaning  of  this,  and  was
told  that  she  was  Dechtere,  and  that  the  fifty  maidens
dwelt  there  with  her:  it  was  they,  in  fact,  that  had  in

1  Windisch,  pp.  140-2  and  U3-5,  where  it  has  been  divided  into

two  pieces.

2  r


434  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

the  guise  of  birds  devastated  Emain,  as  they  wished  to
bring  Conchobar  and  his  men  to  their  habitation.  Dech-
tere  then  gave  the  visitor  a  purple  mantle,  with  which
he  returned  to  his  friends;  but  he,  being  Bricriu  the
Ultonian  genius  of  mischief  and  discord,  only  told  them
that  he  had  found  a  fine  house ;  nor  did  he  fail  to  dwell
on  the  superior  appearance  of  its  owner  and  especially
the  beauty  of  his  consort.  Conchobar,  reasoning  in  the
way  natural  to  kings  and  princes,  said :  '  That  fellow  is
one  of  my  men ;  he  is  in  my  land ;  let  his  wife  come  to
me  to-night.'  But  no  sooner  had  she  been  brought  than
she  gave  it  to  be  understood  that  she  had  been  overtaken
by  the  throes  of  childbirth,  whereupon  she  was  allowed
to  depart.  The  king  and  his  men  in  due  time  went  to
sleep,  and  when  they  woke  in  the  morning,  what  was
their  surprise  to  find  themselves  alone  under  the  clear
sky  of  heaven  !  The  fairy  houses  and  their  fairy  inmates
had  all  disappeared,  and  all  they  had  left  behind  them
was  a  fine  baby-boy  in  the  king's  brogue.  The  baby  is
handed  over,  as  in  the  other  versions,  to  the  care  of  the
king's  sister  Finnchoem,  who  seems  now  to  have  been
his  charioteer;  but  when  she  expresses  her  affection
for  the  baby,  it  is  Bricriu,  and  not  Conchobar,  who  is
made  to  say  that  she  had  little  to  choose  between  her
own  son  and  her  own  sister's  son.  He  then  relates  all
that  he  had  learnt  the  previous  day  about  Dechtere's
escapade,  which  should  be  compared  with  the  story  of
Caer  (p.  170).  What  had  now  become  of  Dechtere,  how-
ever, we  are  not  told ;  but  her  deserting  her  son  in
the  manner  described1  is  not  the  only  parallel  between

1  It  is  right  to  say  that  the  story  of  the  Tain  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dim
makes  his  father  and  mother  rear  him  during  his  first  years  at  a  place


V.     THE    BUN    HERO.  43  ~>

her  and  Arianrhod ;  for,  besides  her  wish  to  pass  for  n
maiden  as  already  mentioned,  she  had  been  her  brother's
charioteer,  a  circumstance  in  which  we  have  the  Irish
equivalent  of  Arianrhod's  name,  which  meant  her  of  tin*
Silver  Wheel,  and  of  Woden's  leman  Gefjon  of  the  diup
rodul  or  deeply  ploughing  wheel,  mentioned  in  a  pre-
vious lecture  (p.  284 J.

Lug  re-born  is  best  known  as  Cuchulainn,  and  the
place  the  latter  occupies  in  Irish  legend  justifies  our
devoting  some  of  our  space  to  him  :  he  has  the  additional
attraction  that  what  is  said  of  him  may,  in  some  instances,
be  regarded  as  said  of  Lug,  who  has  already  occupied
our  attention.  Cuchulainn,  then,  is  the  sun,  but  the
sun  as  a  person,  and  as  a  person  about  whom  a  mass  of
stories  have  gathered,  some  of  which  probably  never
had  any  reference  to  the  sun.  So  it  is  in  vain  to  search
for  a  solar  key  to  all  the  literature  about  him  :  sometimes
he  is  merely  an  exaggerated  warrior  and  a  distorted
man;  sometimes  his  solar  nature  beams  forth  unmistak-
ably between  the  somewhat  unwieldy  attributes  with
which  he  has  been  invested  with  utter  disregard  to  con-
sistency or  the  general  effect.  There  is  probably  nothing
usually  considered  essential  to  a  solar  myth  which  could
not  be  found  in  the  various  stories  about  Cuchulainn,  as
may  be  seeu  from  the  following  things  collected  at
random  from  among  them.

After  the  curious  accounts  relative  to  his  birth,  the


in  the  Plain  of  Murthemne  ;  luit  the  passage  in  question,  fol.  50-/,  gives
the  name  of  neither  parent :  'Altasom  em  ol  Fergus  la  mathatr  j  la
athatr  ocond  dairggdig  immaig  mnrt/tewme.'     'Verily  ho  was  reared,'

said  Fergus,  'by  his  mother  and  his  father  at  the  Red-house  (()  in  thu
Plain  of  Murthemne.'

°  r  2


436


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.


next  thing  to  be  noticed  is  his  rapid  growth  and  precocious
manhood.  When  he  is  only  five,  he  sets  off  to  Emain  and
overcomes  all  the  Ultonian  youths  at  their  games  in  the
play-field.1  When  he  is  seven  he  longs  for  a  warrior's
arms ;  but  at  that  age  he  could  only  get  them  by  a  trick,
which  he  explained  as  a  misunderstanding  of  the  words
of  the  druid  who  was  his  tutor.2  This  reminds  one  of
Lieu,  though  the  obstacle  in  Cuchulainn's  way  was  not
like  that  which  Arianrhod  had  prepared  for  Lieu.  Arms
then  he  got,  namely,  from  the  king,  who  was  induced
even  to  lend  him  his  own  war-chariot :  he  next  bade  his
comrades  in  the  play-field  adieu,  and  compelled  the  king's
charioteer  to  drive  him  across  the  border  into  an  enemy's
land,  where  he  performed  wonders  of  valour.  He  at
length  returned  with  his  foes'  heads  in  his  chariot,  a
swift-footed  stag  between  its  hind  shafts,  and  a  string  of
wild  birds  fluttering  above  his  head,  as  the  trophies  of
his  achievements  in  war  and  his  neetness  in  the  chase,3
to  which  no  deer's  foot,  no  bird's  wing,  was  equal :
other  exploits  of  his  childhood  might  be  added.  As  he
rapidly  grew  to  more  than  a  man's  strength,  he  died
young,  though  not  too  young,  perhaps,  to  have  become
bearded,  but  it  was  a  subject  of  repeated  remark  that  he
remained  beardless.  Sometimes,  when  warriors  would
decline  to  fight  with  such  a  stripling,  he  would  put  on  a
beard,  or  pick  up  a  handful  of  grass  and  sing  a  charm
over  it,  which  would  convert  it  into  a  beard  for  him  for
the  time.4  Cuchulainn's  beardlessness  reminds  one  of  the
youthful  Apollo,  and  stands  in  contrast  to  the  conventional

1  Bk.  of  the  Dim,  p.  59.  2  lb.  p.  61.

3  lb.  61a— 63a.  *  lb.  6»b,  72  b,  lib.


V.     THE    BUN    TTERO.  43l

solar  hero  with  a  beard  representing  the  sun's  rays.  This
deficiency  was  more  than  made  up  for  in  his  case  in  the
matter  of  hair ;  for  though  he  is  called  at  his  birth  '  he  of
little  hair,'1  he  had  plenty  later,  and  it  was  remarkable
Eor  its  three  distinct  colours — dark  near  the  skin,  blood-
red  in  the  middle,  and  yellow  at  the  top,  shining  like  a
diadem  of  gold  in  front,  and  streaming  behind  over  his
shoulders  like  so  many  threads  of  the  precious  metal  over
the  edge  of  an  anvil  under  the  hammer  of  a  master  gold-
smith, or  the  irresistible  brilliance  of  the  sun  on  a  summer's
day  in  the  middle  of  the  month  of  May.2  If  this  is  to  be;
explained  in  strict  reference  to  the  appearance  of  the  sun,
the  Irish  picture  would  have  as  much  in  its  favour  perhaps
as  any  other ;  for  it  would  refer  the  rays  of  that  body  not
to  its  central  part,  but  rather  to  the  circumference  of  its
disk.  The  three  colours  would  seem  to  offer  more  diffi-
culty, but  not  so  much  as  the  four  dimples  which  were
said  to  adorn  both  his  cheeks,  and  to  have  been  yellow,
green,  blue  and  red  respectively.3  Possibly  the  flashes4
of  his  eyes,  or  the  gems  serving  as  pupils  in  the  middle
of  them,  which  are  described  as  seven  or  eight5  in  number,

1  "Windisch,  p.  140.

2  lb.  p.  221  ;  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  81  a;  and  Bk.  of  Leinster,  120 a.  A
different  account  is  to  be  found  in  the  story  of  the  Phantom  Chariot  of
Cuchulainn,  published  by  OBeirne  Crowe  in  the  Journal  of  the  Kil-
kenny Arch.  Ass.  tor  1870-1 :  pp.  376-7,  and  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  1 136.

:  Windisch,  p.  221,  from  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  486;  but  81a  gives
a  somewhat  different  description;  see  also  122/-.

*  Windisch,  p.  221  :  \fi/  aecht  tuilse  air  «  ruse.'

■'  'Seven'  is  the  stock  number  {Bk.  of  the  Dun,  1216),  but  it  is
unnatural  to  give  four  pupils  to  one  eye  and  only  three  to  the  other:
it  was  a  way  of  meeting  the  requirements  of  the  Christian  week,  while
'eight,'  which  is  the  number  in  the  story  o£ Bricriu's  Banquet  (Wiu-


488  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

referred  to  the  days  of  the  week  respectively,  as  the  three
colours  of  his  hair  possibly  did  to  the  three  parts  of  the
day.  And  a  reference  to  the  appearance  of  the  sun  shorn
of  his  rays  may  have  been  originally  involved  in  the
fancy  which  made  Ciichulainn's  hair  get  absorbed  into
his  body,  leaving  a  blood-red  drop  marking  the  place  of
each  individual  hair,  when  he  was  engaged  in  any  great
physical  effort.1  This  was,  however,  only  a  small  part  of
the  distortion  which  he  underwent  when  he  was  hard
pressed  in  battle :  he  prepared  himself  for  action  after
sleep  or  illness  by  drawing  his  hand  over  his  face,  which
had  the  effect  of  making  him  red  all  over,  and  of  driving
his  lethargy  from  him;2  but  when  he  got  thoroughly
angry  with  his  antagonists,  the  calves  of  his  legs  would
twist  round  till  they  were  where  his  shins  should  have
been ;  his  mouth  became  large  enough  to  contain  a  man's
head;  his  liver  and  his  lungs  could  be  seen  swinging  in
his  throat  and  mouth ;  every  hair  on  his  body  became  as
sharp  as  a  thorn,  and  a  drop  of  blood  or  a  spark  of  fire
stood  on  each;  one  of  his  eyes  became  as  small  as  a
needle's,  or  else  it  sank  back  into  his  head  further  than
a  heron  could  have  reached  with  its  beak,  while  the  other
protruded  itself  to  a  corresponding  length.  These  con-
tortions won  for  him  the  nickname  of  the  Biastartha,  or
the  Distorted  One ;  but  it  was  given  him  by  the  men  of

disch,  p.  279),  was  probably  the  original  number,  corresponding  to  the
eight  days  of  the  pagan  week.  It  would  not,  perhaps,  be  refining  too
much  to  regard  the  four  dimples  as  referring  to  the  four  days  of  the
noinden  or  half-week.

1  Windisch,  p.  265;  also  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  59  a,  72  a.

2  Windisch,  pp.  212,  216;  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  78b.


V.     TUT-     SUN    ITERO.  439

Connauglit  in  the  west,1  whereas  the  courtesans  of  Ulster,
looking  at  it  in  a  different  light,  inflicted  on  themselves,
by  way  of  love  for  him,  one  of  the  so-called  Three
Blemishes  of  the  Women  of  Ulster,  which  were  as  fol-
lows. Every  Ultonian  lady  who  loved  Ciichulaiun  made
herself  blind  of  one  eye  when  conversing  with  him  ;
every  one  who  loved  Conall  Cernach,  who  was  cross-eyed,
appeared  to  squint ;  and  every  one  who  loved  the  stutter-
ing Ultonian  hero,  Coscraid  Menu  Macha,  laid  her  speech
under  an  impediment2 — all  three  instances  of  very  earnest
flattery,  which  one  can,  however,  easily  understand  by
studying  cases  of  acute  loyalty  in  this  country.  Now
when  Ciichulainn  was  distorted  with  anger  and  battle-
fury,  he  became  gigantic  in  size,3  and  made  no  distinc-
tion between  friends  and  foes,  but  felled  all  before  and
behind  equally ;  so  it  was  highly  dangerous  to  stop  him
from  fighting  till  he  felt  that  he  had  enough,  and  when
he  stopped  it  was  requisite  to  have  three  baths  ready
for  him  of  cold  water  :  the  first  he  plunged  into  would
instantly  boil  over,  and  the  second  would  be  too  hot  for
anybody  else  to  bear,  while  the  third  alone  would  be  of
congenial  temperature.4  Whether  this  has  any  reference
to  solar  heat  or  not,  the  same  peculiarity  of  Cuchulainn's
is  described  in  another  way  :  during  hard  weather  he
would  sit  down  with  the  snow  reaching  to  his  girdle  and

1  Bk.  of  the  Dim,  59  a,  72a,  and  79h,  where  a  remarkable  passage
occurs  about  'his  lights'  (scoim,  "Welsh  ysgyfaint)  and  'his  heavies'
(tromma,  Welsh  <ifu,  'liver') : — Tdncatdr  ascoim  y  a  tromma  combdtdr
ar  etelaig  iaabil  y  inabrdgit,

-   Windisch,  pp.  206-7;  also  Stokes,  Rev.  Celt.  viij.  Gl.

*  Bk.  of  Leinster,  86/>;  O'Curry,  iij.  448  '.».

1  Windisch,  p.  220;  Bk.  of  the  Dan,  63a,  72a.


440  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

cast  off  his  clothes,  including  his  under-clothing,  where-
upon the  heat  of  his  body  would  melt  the  snow  for  a
man's  cubit  all  round  him.1

Cuchulainn  was  unrivalled  in  all  feats  of  arms  and
skill,  whether  he  handled  his  own  weapons  or  performed
tricks  with  the  needles2  of  the  astonished  ladies  of  a
king's  court.  It  is  difficult  to  understand  the  language
in  which  the  list  of  Ciichulainn's  feats  is  couched,  but
such  a  name  as  the  apple-feat  would  seem  to  suggest  that
some  of  them  were  of  the  nature  of  a  juggler's  tricks.
Others,  however,  were  doubtless  of  a  more  serious
nature,  as  he  often  brought  them  into  play  in  his  duels
with  his  foes.  But  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  thing
about  them  is  that  when  Cuchulainn  went  forth  in  his
chariot,  he  used  to  practise  them  above  the  horses,  above
his  head  and  that  of  his  charioteer.3  If  a  basis  for  this
fancy  is  to  be  sought  in  nature,  it  must  be  the  over-
powering play  of  the  sun's  rays  blinding  one's  attempts
to  gaze  at  its  midday  orb.  Ciichulainn's  agility  and
strength  were  such  that  hardly  any  kind  of  walls  could
confine  him,  however  high  they  might  be.4  His  most
usual  mode  of  fighting  was  to  hurl  his  spear  at  his
antagonist  or  a  stone  from  his  sling,  which  he  did  with
fatal  precision  even  at  an  incredible  distance  ;   but  in

1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  68«,  71  a;  but  the  Bk.  of  Leimter,  7  Oh,  makes
the  snow  melt  for  thirty  feet  all  round  him,  which  is  more  like  the
extravagance  to  be  expected.

2  Windisch,  p.  286;  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  108  ft.

3  Bk.  of  the  Bun,  73  a,  122  h;  Bk.  of  Leinster,  120a;  and  the  story
published  by  Crowe  in  the  Kilkenny  Journal  for  1870,  p.  379  ;  also
the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  113ft,  where  the  number  of  the  feats  rises  to
twenty-seven.     For  more  references,  see  Windisch,  s.v.  cless,  p.  426.

4  Windisch,  p.  299.


V.     THE    SUN    11EK0.  -M  I

extreme  cases  he  used  with  the  same  effect  a  barbed
weapon  called  the  gdi  bolya,  which  he  brought  to  bear
on  his  foe  from  below  or  from  above.1  lie  rode  forth
to  battle  in  a  scythed  chariot,'2  and  his  charioteer  Mas
Loeg  son  of  Riangabra,  who  with  his  wife  and  kindred
lived  in  an  island  which  Irish  mythology  places  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Hades.8  The  chariot  was  drawn
by  two  horses  of  no  ordinary  breed:  they  were  called
the  Grey  of  Macha  and  the  Black  Sainglend ;  and
they  gave  their  names  to  two  Irish  lakes  whence  they
emerged  when  Ciichulainn  caught  them  respectively,4
and  whither  they  returned  when  his  career  was  over.5
They  had  the  peculiarity,  that,  wherever  they  grazed,
they  ate  the  grass  root  and  stem,  licking  bare  the  very
soil.6  They  were  swifter  than  the  cold  blasts  of  spring,7
and  the  sods  from  their  hoofs  as  they  galloped  over  the
plain  looked  like  an  army  of  ravens  filling  the  sky  above
the  chariot,8  the  iron  wheels  of  which  sank  at  times  so
deep  into  the  soil  as  to  make  ruts  ample  for  dykes  and

1  O'Curry's  Maimers,  &c.  iij.  451 ;  Stokes  &  Winclisch,  Irische  l\xte,
pp.  184,  206.

-  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  79  a,  80a  :  see  also  1257>.

3  Stokes  &  Windiach,  Ir.  Texte,  pp.  178-80,  196—200.

*  Windiach,  p.  268.

5  Rev.  Critique,  iij.  180-1  ;  Bk.  of  Leinster,  121a,  121  h.  The  lake
called  after  the  Llath  (or  Grey)  of  Macha  was  Linn  Lri/h,  in  Sliab
Fua.it  or  Fuad's  Mountain,  near  Newtown  Hamilton,  in  the  county  of
Armagh  ;  and  the  one  called  after  the  Dub  (or  Black)  Sainglend  was
the  Loch  Dub  or  Black  Lake,  in  Mvseraige-Thire,  a  district  consisting
of  the  Baronies  of  Upper  and  Lower  Orniond,  in  the  county  of  Tip-
prrary.

'-  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  57  />.  7  Windiach,  p.  221.

*  Bk.  of  Un  Dun,  113a.


442  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

ditches  for  a  fortress.  Thus  Ciichulainn  is  on  one  occa-
sion made  to  describe  a  heavy  course  of  this  kind  round
the  camp  of  his  enemies,  and  to  extemporize  a  blockade
in  this  way  to  delay  their  inarch  until  his  friends  should
arrive  on  the  scene.1

Lastly,  Ciichulainn  was  distinguished  for  his  good
sense  and  wisdom,  for  the  sweetness  of  his  speech,  and
for  many  excellences  or  capacities  in  which  he  surpassed
his  contemporaries :  among  others  are  mentioned  his
superiority  in  the  matter  of  intelligence,  prophecy,  chess-
playing,  and  ability  to  tell  at  a  glance  the  number  of
men  in  an  enemy's  camp.2  In  fact,  two  of  the  three
cleverest  countings  of  this  kind  which  Irish  memory
handed  down  in  the  form  of  a  triad,  were  ascribed  to
Lug  and  Ciichulainn  respectively.3  But  the  parallel
extends  much  further  than  this  instance  would  have  led
one  to  expect;  for  just  as  Lug  excelled  all  the  profes-
sional men  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  because  he  knew
all  their  professions  himself,  so  Ciichulainn,  when  he
described4  himself  to  the  lady  he  wooed  to  be  his  wife,
was  made  to  say  that  he  yielded  superiority  to  the  king
alone,  that  he  surpassed  all  the  nobles  of  Ulster  because
he  had  learned  all  that  each  of  them  had  to  teach  in  his
own  profession.  For  besides  what  appertained  to  war
and  valour,  he  possessed  wisdom  in  legal  and  tribal
matters,  and  he  revised  the  judgments  of  the  Ultonians;
he  could  take  a  part  in  the  administrative  work  of  the
king's  realm ;  he  had  acquired  all  that  the  chief  file  or

1  Bh  of  the  Dun,  80a,  806.  2  lb.  1216.  3  lb.  58a.

4  The  whole  is  to  be  found  in  the  story  of  the  "Wooing  of  Emer,
especially  on  folios  123a — 1246;  and  some  of  the  textual  difficulties
way  be  disposed  of  by  comparing  with  it  Windisch,  pp.  141-2.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  1  !  3

seer  had  to  impart;  and  the  chief  druid  had,  for  his
mother's  sake,  made  him  a  proficient  scholar  in  the  arts
of  the  god  of  druidism  (p.  224),  so  that  ho  was  fit  to
take  part  in  the  vision-feast.1  This  is  borne  out  by  other
parts  of  the  story  of  Ciichulainn :  thus  on  one  occasion
lie  is  made  to  deliver  himself  of  an  elaborate  charge2  to
his  friend  Lugaid,  who  had  been  chosen  king  of  Ireland,
telling  him  how  he  was  to  conduct  himself  in  that  office  ;
and  if  we  turn  to  another  field  of  his  acquirements,  we
lind  him  more  than  once  writing  ogams  of  potent  magic,
which  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  advancing  hosts  of  his
enemies  seriously  embarrassed  and  delayed  their  march
on  the  Tain.3  The  superiority  which  he  claimed  over
the  nobles  of  his  country  he  ascribed  to  his  having  been
educated  by  every  one  of  them,  whether  captain  or
charioteer,  whether  king  or  ollave  :  so  he  held  him-
self bound  to  them  all  by  the  ties  of  fosterage,  and
he  avenged  the  wrongs  of  them  all  without  distinction.
'  Verily  it  is  therefore,'  he  says  in  concluding  his  account
of  himself  to  Emer,  '  I  was  called  by  Lug  ....  from
the  swift  journey  of  Dechtere  to  the  house  of  the  great
man  of  the  Brugh.'4  This  in  its  way  reminds  one  of  the
role  which  Apollo  played  in  the  politics  and  history  of
Greece,  not  to  mention  the  parallel  between  Dechtere's
flight  with  her  fifty  maidens  to  the  Brugh  of  the  Boyne

1  The  words  in  point  are — coftid  amfissid  focAmairc  hi  cerdaib  de
drnidccAta  comd  ameolac//  hi  febaib  fiss.  (Bk.  of  the  Dun,  124/>).  1
take  fise.  to  stand  for  y/W  (  =  fessi) :  compare  the  tarbfea,  or  bull-feast,
in  Windisch,  pp.  212-3.

2  Windisch,  pp.  213-4.  3  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  57'/,  57  b,  G3f>.

4  It  is  so  I  venture  to  translate  the  words,  124  6 — ls*r  em  domrim-
gartsa  6  lug  mr/c  enfold  maic  et/de»d  diec^tw  dian  dectiri  co  tech
mbuiir  in  broga.     S«  p.  391,  above.


444  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

and  the  wanderings  of  Leto  before  giving  birth  to  Apollo ;
but  far  the  most  instructive  comparisons  are  to  be  made
between  Ciichulainn  and  Heracles,  as  will  be  seen  later.

Some  or  Cuchulainn's  Adventures.

Thus  far  the  reader  has  had  presented  to  him  a
number  of  miscellaneous  particulars  about  Ciichulainn' s
person  and  attributes ;  let  us  now  say  something  more
about  his  actions  and  the  foes  he  had  to  face.  Of  these
last,  those  who  claim  the  first  place  are  Ailill  and  Medb,
the  king  and  queen  of  Connaught,  who  have  been  men-
tioned on  previous  occasions,  as  has  also  their  famous
expedition,  called  the  Tain,  to  Ulster,  and  especially
to  the  Plain  of  Murthemne,  or  the  district  which  was
in  Cuchulainn's  special  charge.  Ailill  may  briefly  be
treated  as  one  of  the  representatives  of  darkness,  while
his  queen,  who  had  been  Conchobar's  wife,  belongs  to  the
ambiguous  goddesses  of  dawn  and  dusk  found  allied  at
one  time  with  light  and  at  another  with  darkness.  So
Medb  did  not  always  show  herself  hostile  to  Ciichulainn  ;
in  fact,  later  instances  are  mentioned  of  her  displaying
considerable  partiality  for  him ;  and  when  he  happened
to  come  on  business  to  her  court  at  Cruachan,  she  would
treat  him  with  more  than  hospitality  in  the  sense  given
that  word  by  the  civilized  nations  of  our  day.  It  was
on  the  Tain  she  first  heard  of  him,  when  his  wondrous
deeds  of  valour  were  daily  brought  home  to  her  by  the
fall  of  the  great  champions  of  the  west,  whom  she  sent
forth  one  after  another  to  duel  with  him.  At  length
his  prolonged  attempt  to  keep  the  invaders  from  the
west  at  bay  proved  too  much  for  him  ;  and  one  day,  when
he  was  worn  out  by  fatigue  and  sleeplessness,  his  cha-


V.    THE    BUM    HERO.  1  I  •">

riotcer  beheld  a  big  man  with  yellow  curly  hair  on
his  head  coming  from  the  north-east,  and  making  his
way  towards  them  right  across  the  camp  of  his  enemies
without  noticing  them  or  being  noticed  by  any  of  them,
as  though  he  were  not  seen  of  them.  The  charioteer
described  the  dress  and  equipment  of  this  warrior  to
Ciichulaiim,  who  observed  that  it  must  be  some  one  of
his  friends  from  Faery.  So  it  was ;  for  the  stranger
announced  himself  to  Ciichulainn  as  his  father  Lug  from
Faery,  and  undertook  to  occupy  his  place,  at  the  same
time  that  he  sang  a  kind  of  fairy  music  which  put  Ciichu-
lainn to  sleep.  There  he  lay  sleeping  for  three  days  and
three  nights,  in  the  course  of  which  Lug  cured  all  his
wounds.  When  at  length  he  woke,  he  drew  his  hand
over  his  face  as  usual,  and  Lug  departed,1  while  Ciichu-
lainn,  refreshed,  began  again  to  check  the  men  of  Erinn
with  varying  success  till  his  friends  arrived,  too  late,
however,  to  prevent  the  capture  on  which  they  were
bent.

Ciichulainn  was  not  more  famous  for  his  prowess  in
the  field  of  battle  than  for  his  contests  with  beasts  and
fabulous  creatures  of  all  kinds,  and  the  following  story,
which  has  an  interest  of  its  own,  is  told  of  him  when  he
was  as  yet  only  six  years  of  age.  King  Conchobar,
happening  one  day  to  visit  the  field  where  the  noble
youths  of  his  kingdom  were  at  their  games,  was  so
struck  by  the  feats  performed  by  little  Setanta,  that  he
invited  him  to  follow  to  a  least  for  which  he  and  his
courtiers  were  setting  out.  The  boy  said  he  would  come
when  he  had   played  enough.     The  feast    was  to  lie  at

1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  776,  78«,  78/'.


446  V.     THE    SIN    HEPvO.

the  house  of  a  great  smith  called  Culann,  who  lived  not
only  by  his  art  of  working  in  metals,  but  also  by  the
wealth  which  prophecy  and  divination  brought  in.    When
the  king  and  his  men  had  arrived,  Culann  asked  them  if
their  number  was  complete,  and  the  king,  forgetting  the
boy  that  was   to   follow,   answered  in  the   affirmative.
Culann  explained   that  he  asked  the   question  because
when  his  gates  were  shut  in  the  evening  he  used  to  let
loose  a  terrible  war-hound,  which  he  had  obtained  from
Spain  to  guard  his  chattels  and  flocks  during  the  night.
So  it  was  done  then  ;  but  presently  the  boy  Setanta  came
along,   amusing  himself  with  his  hurlbat  and  ball  as
was  his  wont.1     He  was  hardly  aware  of  the  dog  bark-
ing before  it  was  at  him ;  but  he  made  short  work  of
the  brute,  though  not  without  rousing  the  Ultonians  to
horror  at  their  oversight,  for  they  had  no  doubt  in  their
minds  that  the  boy  had  been  torn  to  pieces.     The  gates
were  thrown  open,  and  the  boy  was  found  unharmed,
with  the  clog  lying  dead  at  his  feet.    Like  the  rest,  Culann
welcomed  him,  for  his  mother's  sake,  as  he  said,  but  he
could  not  help  expressing  his  regret  at  the  death  of  his
hound ;  for  he  declared  that  his  losing  the  guardian  of  his
house  and  his  chattels  made  his  home  a  desolation.    Little
Setanta,  who  could  not  see  why  so  much  fuss  should  be
made  about  the  dog,  bade  the  smith  have  no  care,  as  he
would  himself  guard  all  his  property  on  the  Plain  of
Murthemne  till  he  had  a  grown-up  dog  of  the  same  breed.
This  was  the  tract  between  Cuailgne  or  Cooley  and  the
river  Boyne,   and  he  was   subsequently  identified  with
it ;  so  that  he  is  found  called,  for  instance,  the  Rider  of

1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  60a— 61a;  Bk.  of  Leivskr,  63a— 64  6.


V.    THE    SUN    HERO.  447

jVIurthemne's  Plain,1  or  the  Warrior  and  the  Prince  of
it;  and  he  defended  it  more  strenuously  than  any  other
district  against  the  ravages  of  the  Western  hosts.  When
Setanta  offered  to  watch  Culann's  cattle  and  other  pro-
perty, the  druid  present  exclaimed  that  this  should
henceforth  be  his  name,  Cii-Ohulainn,  that  is  to  say,
Culann's  Hound.  Such  is  the  old  account  of  the  way
in  which  little  Setanta  obtained  the  name  by  which  he
is  best  known ;  but  when  this  tale  of  the  killing  of
Culann's  dog  comes  to  be  compared  with  others  in  point,
it  is  found  that  Culann  must  have  originally  been  a  form
of  the  divinity  of  the  other  world,  and  that  his  terrible
hound2  may  doubtless  be  compared  with  the  Cerberus  of
Greek  mythology.  The  sun  as  a  person  makes  war  on
the  powers  representing  darkness  and  the  inclemency  of
nature  ;  but  with  these  last  would  naturally  be  associated
evil  of  all  description,  including  death,  the  greatest  of  all
ills :  these  then  are  the  demons  and  monsters,  under
their  many  names,  with  which  Ciichulainn  repeatedly
fights.  But  none  of  them  can  withstand  him,  and  his
warfare  with  them  is  briefly  described  in  the  words :

'Proud  is  he  and  haughty,  of  valour  sublime,
Woe  to  the  demons  he  pursues  !'3

1  YVindisch,  pp.  216,  221.

-  The  Irish  is  dr-cku,  and  dr  moans  slaughter  of  any  kind,  including
of  course  slaughter  in  war;  and  Cuchulainn  himself  is  called  Archil
Emna,  or  the  Slaughter-hound  of  Emain,  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  87  h,
printed  by  O'Curry,  iij.  452.  But  while  recalling  the  dogs  trained
for  war  which  used  to  be  imported  by  the  Gauls  from  Britain  (Strabo,
iv.  5,  2),  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  story  in  the  Bk.  of the  /)»»  maki  a
the  smith's  'log  an  imported  one  from  Spain,  a  name  sometimes  used
instead  of  that  of  Hades  (pp.  90-1).

3  This  I  take  to  be  the  sense  of  a  verse  in  the  />7,\  of  the  Dun,  18ft,
which  reads  iu  the  facsimile  :    uallac/i    uabrec/f    ard    lagol    maiig   in


448  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

The  familiar  sight  of  the  sun  rising  and  setting  is  the
key  to  several  things  in  the  Cuchulainn  legend.  For
instance,  he  is  described  going  away  from  his  post  in
the  evening  to  visit  one  who  prepares  for  him  a  bath
before  he  quits  her  in  the  morning ; 1  and  another  time
one  of  his  enemies  finds  him  bathing  in  a  river  early  at
the  break  of  day.2  But  the  rising  of  the  sun  out  of  the
sea  in  the  morning  does  not  appear  to  have  had  anything
like  the  effect  of  sunset  on  the  popular  imagination,
which  is  to  be  traced  in  the  Cuchulainn  legend  in  the
stories  of  his  visits  to  the  other  world,  especially  in  quest
of  a  wife.3  The  maiden's  name  was  Emer  daughter  of
Forgall  Monach  (p.  376),  who  lived  in  a  place  called
Luglochta  Loga,4  explained  to  mean  the  Gardens  of  Lug,
another  name  for  the  world  whence  Lug  used  to  come,
and  the  description  of  Emer's  relatives  quite  bears  this
out,  as  she  calls  herself  daughter  of  the  Coal-faced  King,5

siabru  se  (Windisch,  p.  221,  prints  se).  It  should  be  restored  thus  —
Uallach  uabrech  ard  a  gal,  mairg  fri  siabru  sechethar.  The  previous
line — Br6ena?j  fola  fota  flared  latoeb  crawd  cowardade — is  more  difficult,
but  it  should  probably  end  with  craud  or  dechrand :  compare  Windisch,
p.  263,  lines  14  and  16.

1   Bk.  of  the  Dun,  57a,  58  a.  ?  lb.  63  b.

3  The  story  is  known  as  the  Wooing  of  Emer  :  it  is  to  be  found  in
a  fragmentary  state  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  121a — 127/).  For  the
portions  of  the  narrative  not  to  be  found  there,  I  have  made  use  of  the
Ashburnham  manuscript  already  referred  to  as  numbered  D,  iv.  2,  in
the  library  of  the  R  Ir.  Acad.

4  The  dative  Luglochtaib  is  glossed  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  123  a,
by  gortaib,  '  gardens  ;'  and  the  Loga  added  is  perhaps  redundant,  as  the
name  would  seem  to  be  complete  either  as  Luglochtaib  or  Lochtaib
Loga.  It  is  not  to  be  denied,  however,  that  it  is  possible  to  give^Lug
a  different  explanation  in  this  name.

5  Ingen  rig  Hchis garta,  with  garta  glossed  einech,  '  face,1  ibid.  123a.


V.     THE    BUN    HERO.  I  111

who  is  also  stated  to  be  the  sou  of  a  sister  of  Tethra
king  of  the  Fomori.  Now  the  dusky  father  discovers
that  his  daughter  has  been  wooed  by  the  Riastartha :
he  is  displeased  and  resolves  on  compassing  the  death
of  his  would-be  son-in-law.  So  he  sets  out  in  disguise
on  a  visit  to  Conchobar's  court,  and  he  persuades  lin-
king to  have  Cuchulainn's  military  education  perfected
by  sending  him  to  be  instructed  by  certain  friends  of
his,  from  whom  he  expects  him  never  to  return  alive.
The  first  of  these  is  represented  living  in  Alban  or
Britain,  but  his  country,  though  given  that  name,  be-
longed to  the  geography  of  the  other  world.  He  was
called  Domnall,  and  was  probably  the  same  mythic  being
as  Domnall1  the  terrible  chariot-god,  associated  with  the
bards  to  whom  allusion  has  already  been  made  (p.  323).
His  name  fits  in  with  what  is  said  of  him  in  the  story
of  Ciichulainn ;  for  Domnall,  the  genitive  of  which  is
well  known  in  the  Anglicized  form  of  Donnell,  would
seem  to  associate  him  with  the  deep  ;  and  in  Welsh  it  is,
letter  for  letter,  Dyvnival,  a  name  borne  by  one  of  the
mythic  legislators  mentioned  in  the  Triads,  one  of  which,
iij.  58,  associates  his  name  with  the  beginning  of  bardism.
He  has  usually  the  epithet  Mod,  '  bald,'  or  Moel-miul,
'bald  and  mute,  or  bald-mute,'  in  harmony  with  a
common  habit  of  representing  the  dark  gods  as  bald,
cropped  of  their  ears,  deprived  of  one  eye,  or  in  some  way
peculiar  about  the  head,  and  occasionally  lacking  the
power  of  speech.  When  Ciichulainn  had  Learned  all  the
feats  that  Domnall  could  teach  him,  he  proceeded  to  leave

1  In  the  Afihlmrnham  MS.,  fol.  82c,  he  is  called  Domnall  mil  d
mat,  'while  ILn-l.  5:!S0  gives  the  name  as  Domnall  miide  mon,

2g


450  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

Alban  for  an  island  to  the  east  of  it,  where  a  goddess  lived
who  bore  the  name  of  Scathach,  which  means  Shadowy
or  Shady  :  she  appears  to  have  been  the  same  who
was  named  Buanann,  and  described  as  the  nurse  of  the
heroes  of  Irish  mythology.1  Ciichulainn  had  not  gone
far  when  his  companions  resolved  to  turn  back ;  and  he
felt  dejected  and  uncertain  as  to  the  direction  to  take,
when  a  strange  beast  came  and  took  him  on  its  back.
Thus  he  travelled  for  four  days,  at  the  end  of  which  the
kind  beast  put  him  down  in  an  inhabited  island,  where
he  received  food  and  drink  from  a  maiden  he  had  met
before.  He  also  fell  in  with  a  certain  Echaid  Bairche,
who  directed  him  on  his  way  to  Scathach's  court.  Cii-
chulainn had  to  cross  the  plain,  he  said,  which  he  saw
before  him,  one-half  of  which  was  so  cold  that  the  tra-
veller's feet  would  cleave  to  the  ground,  and  the  other
half  had  the  peculiarity  that  the  ground  cast  him  on  the
points  of  the  spear-like  grass  which  grew  out  of  it ;  but
the  friendly  stranger  gave  him  a  wheel  and  an  apple,
which  he  was  to  follow  across  the  two  dismal  tracts
respectively.2  He  was  then  to  cross  a  perilous  glen,
which  was  a  terrible  gulf  with  no  bridge  but  a  slender
cord  stretched  across  it  from  one  cliff  to  the  opposite  one  ;
and  this  was  not  all,  for  at  the  end  he  was  to  encounter
the  demons  and  phantoms  sent  by  Forgall  Monach  to

1  See  the  Stokes-O'Donovan  ed.  of  Cormac,  p.  17.  Compare  also
the  words — 'ac  scatAaig  b/madaig  b/zuanared'  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,
88a,  quoted  in  O'Cuny's  Manners,  &c.  iij.  454-5,  and  rendered  'With
Scathach,  the  gifted  Buanand.'

2  The  story  occupies  fol.  82  c,  and  the  following  ones  in  the  Ashburn-
ham  MS.,  and  the  curious  passage  about  the  wheel  and  the  apple,  will
be  found  at  83  a,  while  the  Harl.  MS.  5280  has  it  at  32  b.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  1 5  I

work  his  destruction.  He  crossed  that  'bridge  of  dread,'
however,  in  spite  of  them,  and  found  himself  in  Scathach's
Isle;  there  were  more  obstacles  to  be  overcome  before
reaching  Scathach's  abode,  but  he  surmounted  them  also,
including  a  bridge  that  was  low  at  both  ends,  higli  in
the  middle,  and  so  constructed  that,  when  a  man  stepped
on  the  one  end,  the  other  end  would  rise  aloft,  and  he
would  be  thrown  down.  He  was  received  with  surprise
by  Scathach,  and  with  ardent  love  by  her  daughter
Uathach,  who  instructed  him  how  to  force  her  mother
to  teach  him.  There  is  a  general  similarity  between  this
journey  and  the  voyage  which  Ciichulainn  undertook
in  quest  of  the  sons  of  Doel  Dermait,  a  story  now
familiar  to  you ;  and  the  parallel  extends  even  to  the
internal  affairs  of  Scathach's  country.  We  read  that
Scathach  was  challenged  to  battle  by  another  queen  of
Hades  named  Aife,  and  sometimes  called  Scathach's
daughter.  The  fighting  took  place  in  part  on  the  cord
over  the  Perilous  Glen,1  and  Ciichulainn  duels  on  it  with
Aife,  and  succeeds  in  carrying  her  away  to  ScatharhV
camp,  where  she  is  compelled  to  give  hostages  to  Scathach.
Now  Scathach's  abode  was  the  land  of  death ;  and  the
accesses  to  it  are  variously  described.

But  before  proceeding  further,  let  us  recur  for  a  moment


1  The  Irish  name  is  glean  ?igaibthech,  which  appears  also  in  the
Vision  of  Adamnan  (Windisch's  Irische  Texte,  p.  185),  as  does  ale o
the  Vicious  Bridge  (ib.  p.  184),  but  placed  across  the  Glen,  and  called
droichet  analta,  or  Cliff  Bridge,  which  O'Curry  (ij.  309),  influenced  .
bably  by  a  slightly  different  reading,  .alls  the  Bridge  of  the  Pupils.  I
mention  these  as  instances  of  [riah  mythology  worked  into  the  religious
tales  of  the  converted  Irish.  The  idea  of  future  punishment  is  intro-
duced, and  hell-fire  liberally  borrowed  from  Christian  sources,  but  the
pagan  geography  of  Hades  remains  little  change  1.

2  g  2


452  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

to  the  dismal  plain  crossed  by  Ciichulainn  following  for
a  while  a  mysterious  wheel,  and  for  another  while  an
equally  mysterious  apple.  Why  the  story  should  have
both  a  wheel  and  an  apple  does  not  appear,  as  the  two
would  seem  to  suggest  one  and  the  same  interpretation ;
but  before  coming  to  that,  I  wish  to  point  out  that  the
apple  is  replaced  in  other  stories  by  the  ball  with  which
Ciichulainn,  when  he  was  a  child,  used  to  play  a  sort  of
solitary  hurley  or  golf  as  he  went  his  ways.  It  was  thus,
when  only  five  years  old,  he  left  his  home  on  the  Plain
of  Murthemne  and  crossed  the  mountains  to  Emain,1  and
it  was  so  he  was  proceeding  towards  Culann  the  Smith's
stronghold,  when  he  perceived  the  latter's  Spanish  hound
making  for  him,  and  killed  the  monster.  There  is  a
more  curious  instance  still : 2  young  Ciichulainn' s  slum-
bers durst  not  be  disturbed,  so  he  was  one  day  left  sleep-
ing in-doors  at  Emain,  when  a  battle  was  raging  between
the  heroes  of  Ulster  and  Eogan  mac  Durthacht,  whose
name  has  already  been  mentioned  (pp.  142,  335) :  the
victory  fell  to  the  share  of  the  latter,  and  Conchobar
and  others  of  the  Ultonians  were  left  on  the  battle-field.
When  the  wounded  survivors  reached  Emain,  it  was
night  and  already  dark,  but  the  lamentation  and  tumult
elicited  by  their  arrival  made  Ciichulainn  wake :  he
asked  at  once  where  the  king  was,  and,  as  nobody  could
tell,  he  rushed  off  to  the  scene  of  the  slaughter ;  but  no
sooner  had  he  reached  it  than  he  was  assailed  by  one  of
the  demons  revelling  there,  and  he  would  have  suc-
cumbed had  not  the  Bodb  (p.  43),  the  Morrigu,  per-

1  Bk.  of  the  Dim,  59  a,  and  Bk.  of  Leinster,  62  a,  where  the  ball  is
described  as  being  of  silver.

2  lb.  59  b,  60  a.


v.   the  sen  hero.  453

haps,  under  another  name  and  in  the  form  of  a  kind  of*
hoodie,  cried  out  in  an  upbraiding  tone,  '  13ad  materials
of  a  hero  are  those  there  under  the  feet  of  phantoms.'
Ciichulainn,  stung  by  that  taunt,  got  up  again,  and
struck  off  the  head  of  his  ghost-foe  with  his  hurl-
bat.  Then  he  drove  the  ball  before  him  over  the  field
and  shouted,  '  Is  my  father  Conchobar  on  this  field  of
slaughter  ?'  The  latter  answered  that  he  was,  and  Ciichu-
lainn came  and  found  him  all  but  wholly  buried  with
earth  over  him  on  almost  every  side.  lie  extricated
him,  and  found  that  he  would  live  if  he  could  get  him
some  food,  which  he  hastened  to  procure :  he  then  took
Conchobar  to  Emain,  whither  he  carried  at  the  same
time  a  wounded  son  of  Conchobar's  on  his  shoulders.
IIow  the  latter  had  got  into  the  position  Ciichulainn  found
him  in,  we  are  not  told,  but  it  reminds  one  of  the  dismal
plain  to  which  the  traveller's  feet  would  cleave  ;  further,
CYichulainn's  coming  Avas  so  late  that  the  night  was  then
dark,  and  it  looks  as  though  the  narrator  ought  to  have
told  us  that  the  ball  he  sent  over  the  field  was  luminous,
and  that  it  was  by  means  of  it,  and  not  by  calling  out,
that  he  found  the  king  in  the  earth :  as  it  stands,  the
narrative  is  not  very  intelligible.  Whatever  the  reason
for  that  may  be,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  we  have
traces  here  of  a  primitive  and  forgotten  myth  which
represented  the  sun  as  an  apple  or  ball,  after  which  an
infant  giant  used  to  run  daily  across  the  sky ;  and  the
other  form,  that  of  a  wheel,  given  to  that  heavenly  body,
is  of  even  greater  mythological  interest,  as  it  offers  an
Irish  instance  of  a  symbolism,  the  solar  origin  of  which,
as  mentioned  on  another  occasion  (p.  -55),  has  been  lately
discussed  by  M.  Gaidoz.


454  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

Let  us  now  come  back  to  Ciichulainn's  training  in
Scathach's  Island :  he  went  there  when  he  was  only  six
years  old,1  and  returned  as  soon  as  he  had  learned  all
that  could  be  taught  him  there.  But  the  details  of  his
journey  homewards  are  not  given;  we  are,  however,
told  that  on  his  way  he  visited  the  court  of  Eed,  king  of
the  Isles;2  but  there  must  have  been  a  story  or  stories
representing  him  coming  to  Erinn,  on  this  or  some  other
occasion,  direct  from  Britain  along  a  more  southerly
route,  and  I  must  now  briefly  explain  why  I  think  this
deserving  of  mention.  The  Sun-god  is  a  great  traveller :
thus  Lug,  for  example,  arrives  from  a  distance  to  help
the  Tuatha  De  Danaan,  and  Conall  Cernach  has  to  be
sought  for  in  foreign  lands.3  Like  them,  Ciichulainn
travels  too.  Moreover,  there  was  a  remarkable  difference
of  race,  to  be  noticed  later,  between  him  and  the  other
heroes  of  the  Ultonian  cycle.  On  the  other  hand,  he
had  the  charge  of  a  special  district  consisting  of  the  Plain
of  Murthemne,  which,  roughly  speaking,  meant  the  level
portion  of  the  modern  county  of  Louth.  In  case,  then,  he
was  at  any  time  represented  to  come  to  his  favourite
haunts  from  another  land,  what  land  could  more  natu-
rally have  been  regarded  the  one  he  journeyed  from
than  the  nearest  part  of  Britain  lying  in  the  same  lati-
tude?    This  would  be  the  coast  from  the  Mersey  to


1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  58b.

2  lb.  126  a  :  according  to  O'Curry,  p.  280,  he  returned  by  way  of
Cantire  and  the  island  of  Eathlin.

3  See  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  171b,  where,  besides  fScythia,  Dacia,
Gothia,  &c,  we  have  the  remarkable  words  :  '  icrichaib  leodiis  in  insib
cadd  J  in  insib  or.,'  'in  the  territories  of  Lewis,  in  the  Islands  of  Cat
and  in  the  Islands  of  Orkney  ('?).'


V.     TUT':    six    HERO.  lo-J

Morecambe  Bay,  and  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  this  trad
once  belonged  to  a  people  called  the  Setantii,  a  name
which  cannot  be  severed  from  that  of  the  Seteia  supposed
to  be  the  Dee,  or  from  that  of  the  ScTai/nW  Ai/^1  the
Harbour  of  the  Setantii,  the  position  of  which  corresponds
to  the  mouth  of  the  Eibblc.2     Hence  the  name  Setanta.

Shortly  after  his  return  from  Scathach's  Isle,  Ciichu-
lainn  set  out  for  the  Gardens  of  Lug  to  carry  away  Emer,
according  to  a  promise  he  had  made  to  her ;  but  for  a
whole  year  he  was  unable  to  communicate  with  her  on
account  of  the  efficient  watch  kept  over  her  by  Forgall's
henchmen ;  but  at  last  he  succeeded,  and  appeared  all  of
a  sudden  in  the  middle  of  the  stronghold,  where  he  per-
formed such  marvels  of  valour  that  Forgall  lost  his  life
in  leaping  terror-stricken  over  his  own  walls.  Cuchu-
laiun  then  made  his  way  out  with  Emer  and  her  foster-


1  The  readings  of  Ptolemy's  manuscript  are  various,  the  river  being
either  Serbia  or  ^ey^'a,  and  the  harbour  ^ctcivtiW  A.  (or  2eTavtu>i'  A.)
and  ItyavrLuiv  A.,  besides  less  important  ones  :  see  Midler's  edition
(Paris,  1883),  ij.  3  (Vol.  i.  pp.  84,  85).  But  if  the  hypothesis  here  sug-
gested, for  which  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Henry  Bradley,  prove  well-
founded,  it  will  dispose  of  the  alternative  readings  with  y.  There  is  a
difficulty  in  the  retention  of  nt  in  the  Irish  Setanta,  which  it  would
be  hard  to  account  for  except  on  the  supposition  that  the  name  was  not
a  native  Irish  word.  The  original  may  accordingly  be  regarded  as
Setantios  or  Setantjos,  meaning  a  Setantian,  or  one  of  the  people  called
the  S.tantii.  It  is  worth  noticing  that  a  very  obscure  poem,  in
which  Scathach,  who  was,  among  other  tilings,  a  poetess  or  prophetess,
speaks  of  Cuchulainn  when  she  prophesies  for  him,  alludes  to  a  Setan-
tian stream  :  the  words  are — curoe//  in  srut//  setiwti,  'a  coracle  against
the  stream  of  Setanta:'  see  the  BJc  of  the  Dun,  \'2r>/>.

*-'  Bradley's  Remarks  (in  the  Archseologia,  xlviij)  on  Ptolemy  (West-
minster, 1884),  p.  15.     For  Ribble,  p.  74  above,  read  Mersey.


456  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

sister.1  In  the  pursuit  which  took  place  on  the  part  of
Forgall's  men,  he  performed  all  the  deeds  of  valour  he
had  previously  boasted  himself  capable  of  to  Emer.  Now
she,  though  the  child  of  a  dusky  king,  was  herself  a
perfect  beauty,  and  endowed  with  all  the  accomplishments
of  a  superior  lady.  The  whole  picture  is  drawn  on  the
lines  of  the  nature  myth  connecting  the  Sun  with  the
Dawn:  the  latter,  though  the  daughter  of  darkness,  is
beautiful,  and  she  is  the  Sun-god's  wife.  The  same  idea
is  brought  into  relief  also  in  an  Icelandic  story  found  in
a  manuscript  of  the  fifteenth  century,  but  evidently  made
up  of  old  materials.  It  relates  how  one  of  king  Olaf's
men  landed  in  the  fairy  realm  of  Godmundr.  His  name
was  Thorsteinn,  and  he  had  met  with  other  strange  adven-
tures, in  one  of  which  he  had  procured,  among  diverse
articles  of  great  virtue,  a  small  stone  which,  when  con-
cealed in  his  hand,  would  make  him  invisible  to  others.
Falling  in  with  Godmundr  and  two  of  his  men  one  day,
he  was  questioned  as  to  who  he  was,  and  having  duly
answered,  he  in  his  turn  inquired  after  Godmundr's
history,  when  Godmundr  told  him  that  he  was  then  on  a
dangerous  journey  to  the  court  of  a  neighbouring  king
called  Geirrcedr,  who  claimed  him  as  his  tributary,  and
who  had  caused  the  death  of  Godmundr's  father  when
he  last  went  to  Geirrcedr's  court  to  pay  him  his  tribute.
Thorsteinn  expressed  a  desire  to  accompany  Godmundr,
but  the  latter,  who  was  a  giant,  was  amused  at  the  small

1  He  brought  with  them  their  two  erre  of  gold  and  silver,  which
would  seem  to  have  meant  their  two  burdens,  in  allusion  possibly  to
their  personal  ornaments:  the  words  in  the  Ashburnham  MS.  84b,
appear  to  be — '  conadib  nerrib  dior  j  arcat,'  and  they  recall  Elen
Liiy dog's  Silver  Host  (p.  173).


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  457

stature  of  Thorsteinn,  though  for  a  man  he  was  a  person
of  a  very  powerful  frame.    When,  however,  he  said  that
he  had  a  way  of  making  himself  invisible,  Gochnui un-
consented to  take  him  with  him,  and  Thorsteinn  proved
the  means  of  rendering  Godmundr  and  his  men  victors
in  all  the  contests  in  which  Geirrcectr  made  them  engage.
Finally,  Thorsteinn  killed  Geirrocdr  and  enabled  Goct-
mundr  to  annex  his  kingdom;  he  also  found  himself  a  wife
there  called  Godrun,  daughter  of  Agdi,  who  is  described
as  the  most  demon-like  of  Geirrcedr's  earls  :  among  other
tilings  he  had  claw-like  hands  and  a  dark  complexion.  The
maid  was,  however,  beautiful,  and  he  brought  her  and
her  treasures  to  king  Olaf's  court,  where  she  was  wedded
to  Thorsteinn.      Old  Norse  tales  make  Godmundr  the
king  of  a  Teutonic  Elysium,1  and  represent  him  as  a  very
great  personage ;  but  the  Icelandic  story  gives  him  an
antagonistic  neighbour,  over  whom  he  is  made  to  triumph
by  the  aid  of  a  stranger,  who,  looked  at  in  the  light  of
our  Celtic  stories,  should  be  the  Culture  Hero,  or  his
son  the  Solar  Hero.     The  latter  would  seem  best  to  suit
the  story  of  Thorsteinn,  who,  bringing  Gudriin  away
with  him  to  be  his  wife,  cannot  help  reminding  one  a  little
of  Ciichulainn  carrying  away  his  bride  from  her  father,
the  coal-faced  king  Forgall.    As  to  the  rest,  the  conquest
of  Geirrcedr  and  the  annexation  of  his  realm  to  Goct-
mundr's  recall  the  assistance  given  by  Pwytt  to  Arawn
king  of  Hades  (p.  340),  while  the  stone  which  rendered
Thorsteinn  invisible  challenges  comparison  with  the  ring
used  with  the  same  effect  by  Owein  ab  Urien  (p.  351).


1  Eafn's  Fomahlar  Sdgw  (Copenhagen,   1829),   i.   411  ;    and    the
Formanna  Sogur  (Copenhagen,  1827),  iij.  175 — 108,  appendix.


458  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

In  a  word,  the  Thorsteinn  story,  though  not  correspond-
ing through  and  through  to  any  of  the  Celtic  ones,
shows  a  general  similarity  to  them,  which  goes  to  form
evidence  of  a  notion  once  common  to  Celts  and  Teutons
as  to  the  nether  world ;  and  the  outlines  of  that  notion
are  probably  to  be  ranked  among  the  ancient  ideas  of  the
Aryan  family.1

To  return  to  Cuchulainn,  it  is  right  to  add  that  some
of  the  stories  give  his  wife  a  name  other  than  Emer,
namely  Ethne  Ingubai,2  wherein  we  have  a  discrepancy,
probably  not  to  be  got  over  by  saying  that  these  were
two  names  borne  by  one  and  the  same  person.  For  it
may  be  that  the  myth  pictured  the  Dawn  not  as  one  but
as  many,  to  all  of  whom  the  Sun-god  made  love  in  the
course  of  the  three  hundred  and  more  days  of  the  year.
Among  those  mentioned  as  his  wives  or  lemans  may  be
included  not  only  Emer  and  Ethne,  but  also  Uathach
and  Aife ;  nay,  he  seems,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  to
have  had  also  loves  of  a  somewhat  different  description,
reflecting  the  sparkling  of  the  dew-drop  in  the  rays  of
the  sun;  but  he  declines  to  have  anything  to  say  to
Dornolla,  the  big-fisted  daughter  of  Domnall :  she  was  too
hideous,  and  she  became  his  implacable  foe.

Another  tale3  of  Ciichulainn's  doings  in  the  world  of
darkness  and  death  must  now  be  briefly  mentioned,  as  it

1  On  the  question  of  the  relation  of  the  Thorsteinn  story  to  other
Teutonic  stories,  see  E.  Heinzel,  Ueber  die  N  ibelunyensage  (Vienna,
1 885),  where  a  great  variety  of  references  are  given  :  see  also  Cerquand's
Taranis  et  Thor  in  the  Rev.  Celt.  vi.  420.

2  As  in  the  first  part  of  the  story  of  Oiiclmlainris  Sick-bed.

3  BJc.  of  the  Dun,  43a— 50b;  Windisch,  pp.  205—227;  also  pub-
lished, with  a  translation  by  O'Curry,  in  the  Atlantis,  i.  370 — 392,
ij.  98—124.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  459

brings  out  the  unmistakable  features  of  the  myth  very
clearly.  While  the  Ultonians  were  celebrating  the  great
festival  which  marked  the  Calends  of  Winter  and  the  days
immediately  before  and  after  them,  a  flock  of  wild  birds
lighted  on  a  loch  near  them.  The  ladies  of  Conchobar's
court  took  a  fancy  to  them,  and  Cuchulainn  was  disgusted
to  find  that  they  had  nothing  better  for  the  men  to  do
than  that  they  should  go  bird-catching;  but  when  his
gallantry  was  duly  appealed  to,  with  an  allusion  to  the
number  in  Ulster  of  the  noble  ladies  who  were  one-eyed
out  of  love  for  him,  he  proceeded  to  catch  the  birds,
which  he  distributed  so  liberally  that  he  found  when
he  came  to  his  own  wife  he  had  none  left  for  her :  he
was  very  sorry  on  that  account,  and  promised  that  as
soon  as  ever  any  wild  birds  visited  the  Plain  of  Mur-
tliemne  or  the  river  Boyne,  the  finest  pair  of  them  should
be  hers.  It  was  not  long  ere  two  birds  were  seen  swim-
ming on  the  loch:  they  were  observed  to  be  joined  together
by  a  chain  of  ruddy  gold,  and  they  made  a  gentle  kind
of  music  which  caused  the  host  to  fall  asleep.  Ciichu-
lainn  went  towards  them ;  but  his  wife  and  his  charioteer
cautioned  him  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  them,  as  it
was  likely  that  there  was  some  hidden  power  behind
them.  He  would  not  listen,  but  cast  a  stone  from  his
sling  at  them,  which  to  his  astonishment  missed  them,
lie  cast  another,  with  the  same  result.  'Woe  is  me!'
said  he,  c  from  the  time  when  I  took  arms  to  this  day,
my  cast  never  missed.'  He  next  threw  his  spear  at
them,  which  passed  through  the  wing  of  one  of  the  birds,
and  both  dived.  Cuchulainn,  now  in  no  happy  mood,
went  and  rested  against  a  stone  that  stood  near,  and  he
fell  asleep.     He  then  dreamt   that   two  women,   one  in


4 GO  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

green  and  the  other  in  red,  came  up  to  him :  the  one  in
green  smiled  at  him  and  struck  him  a  blow  with  a  whip,
the  one  in  red  did  the  same  thing,  and  this  horse-whip-
ping of  the  hero  went  on  till  he  was  nearly  dead.  His
friends  came  and  would  have  waked  him,  had  not  one  of
them  suggested  that  he  was  probably  dreaming,  so  they
were  careful  not  to  disturb  his  nap.  When  at  length
he  woke,  he  would  tell  them  nothing,  and  he  bade  them
place  him  in  his  bed.  This  all  took  place  on  the  eve  of
November,  when  the  Celtic  year  begins  with  the  ascen-
dency of  the  powers  of  darkness.  When  Ciichulainn
had  lain  in  his  bed,  speaking  to  nobody,  for  nearly  a  year,
and  the  Ultonian  nobles  and  his  wife  happened  to  be
around  him,  some  on  the  bed  and  the  others  close  by,
they  suddenly  found  a  stranger  seated  on  the  side  of  the
bed.  He  said  he  had  come  to  speak  to  Cuchulainn,  and
he  sang  a  song  in  which  he  informed  him  that  he  had
come  from  his  sister  Fand  and  his  sister  Liban  to  tell
him  that  they  would  soon  heal  him  if  they  were  allowed.
Fand,  he  said,  had  conceived  great  love  for  him,  and
would  give  him  her  hand  if  he  only  visited  her  land,
and  treat  him  to  plenty  of  silver  and  gold,  together
with  much  wine  to  drink.  She  would,  moreover,  send
her  sister  Liban  on  November-eve  to  heal  him.  After
having  added  that  his  own  name  was  Aengus,  brother
to  Fand  and  Liban,  he  disappeared  as  mysteriously  as
he  had  come.  Cuchulainn  then  sat  up  in  his  bed  and
told  his  friends  all  about  the  dream  which  had  made
him  ill :  he  was  advised  to  go  to  the  spot  where  it
occurred  to  him  twelve  months  previously,  for  such  are
the  requirements  of  the  fairy  reckoning  of  time.  He
did   so,   and  he   beheld  the  woman    in   green    coming


V.     THE    BUN    IIKRO.  4G1

towards  him:  lie  reproached  her  for  what  she  had  done,
and  she  explained  that  she  and  her  sister  had  come,  imt
to  harm  him,  but  to  seek  his  love :  Fand,  she  said,  had
been  forsaken  by  Mananmin  mac  Lir,  and  had  set  her
heart  on  him,  Ciichulainn ;  moreover,  she  had  a  mes-
sage now  from  her  own  husband,  Labraid  of  the  Swift
Hand  on  the  Sword,  to  the  effect  that  he  would  give
him  Fand  to  wife  for  one  day's  assistance  against  his
enemies.  Ciichulainn  objected  that  he  was  not  well
enough  to  fight ;  but  he  was  induced  to  send  Loeg  his
charioteer  with  Liban  to  see  the  mysterious  land  to  which
he  was  invited.  Loeg,  after  conversing  with  Fand  and
Labraid  of  the  Swift  Hand  on  the  Sword,  returned  with
a  glowing  account  of  what  he  had  seen.  This  revived
the  drooping  spirits  of  his  master,  who  passed  his  hand
over  his  face  and  rapidly  recovered  his  strength.  Even
then  he  would  not  go  to  Labraid's  Isle  on  a  woman's
invitation,  and  Loeg  had  to  visit  it  again  and  assure  him
that  Labraid  was  impatiently  expecting  him  for  the
war  that  was  about  to  be  waged.  Then  at  length  he
went  thither  in  his  chariot  and  fought.  lie  abode  there
a  month  with  Fand,  and  when  he  left  her  he  made  an
appointment  to  meet  her  at  Ibar  Chin  Trachta,  or  the
Yew  at  the  Strand's  End,  the  spot,  according  to  O'Currv,
where  Xewry  now  stands.1  This  came  to  the  ears  of
Emer,  Cuchulainn's  wedded  wife,  and  she,  with  the  ladies
of  Ulster,  repaired  there,  provided  with  sharp  knives  to  slay
Fand.  A  touching  scene  follows,  in  which  Emer  recovers
Ciichulainn's  love,  and  Fand  beholds  herself  about  to  be
forsaken,  whereupon  she  begins  to  bewail  the  happy  days

1  Atlantis,  Vol.  ij.  p.  115.


4G2  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

she  had  spent  with  her  husband  Manannan  mac  Lir
in  her  bower  at  Dim  Inhir,  or  the  Fort  of  the  Estuary.
Nay,  Fand's  position  in  the  unequal  conflict  with  the
ladies  of  Ulster  became  known  to  Manannan,  the  shape-
shifting  Son  of  the  Sea,  and  he  hastened  over  the  plain
to  her  rescue.     'What  is  that  there?'  inquired  Ciichu-
lainn.      '  That,'  said  Loeg,   '  is  Fand  going  away  with
Manannan  mac  Lir,  because  she  was  not  pleasing  to
thee.'     At  those  words  Ciichulainn  went  out  of  his  mind,
and  leaped  the  three  high  leaps  and  the  three  southern
leaps  of  Luachair.2     He  remained  a  long  time  without
food  and  without  drink,  wandering  on  the  mountains
and  sleeping  nightly  on  the  road  of  Midluachair.    Emer
went  to  consult  the  king  about  him,  and  it  was  resolved
to  send  the  poets,  the  professional  men  and  the  druids
of  Ulster,  to  seek  him  and  bring  him  home  to  Emain.
He  would  have  slain  them,  but  they  chanted  spells  of
druidism  against  him,  whereby  they  were  enabled  to  lay
hold  of  his  arms  and  legs.     "When  he  had  recovered  his
senses  a  little,  he  asked  for  drink,  and  they  gave  him  a
drink  of  forgetfulness,  which  made  him  forget  Fand  and
all  his  adventures :  as  Emer  was  not  in  a  much  better
state  of  mind,  the  same  drink  was  also  administered  to
her ;  and  Manannan  had  shaken  his  cloak  between  Fand
and  Ciichulainn  that  they  might  never  meet  again.
This   story  of  Cuchulainn's    Sick-bed  calls  for  one


1  The  leaps  referred  to  were  places  called  Leim  Conculainn,  which
were  not  uncommon  in  Ireland  :  so  was  Luachair,  '  a  place  where
rushes  grow,'  frequent  enough,  and  is,  in  fact,  so  still.  The  one  here
in  question  is  placed  by  O'Curry  south  of  Emain,  with  the  road  of
Midluachair  from  Emain  to  Tara  passing  through  it :  see  the  Atlantis,
ij.  p.  122.


V.    THE   SUM    BEEO.  463

or  two  remarks  before  passing  on.  It  identifies  in  a
manner  the  world  of  waters  with  that  of  darkness  and
the  dead ;  for  elsewhere  Liban  is  a  woman  in  charge  of  a
magic  well,  which,  neglected  by  her,  overwhelms  her
and  changes  her  into  an  otter,1  while  the  waters  formed
the  lake  now  called  Lough  Neagh.  Liban  is  to  be
equated  with  the  Llivon  or  Llion  of  the  Welsh  story  of
the  deluge  occasioned  by  the  bursting  of  Llyn  Llion2  or
Llivon's  Lake,  and  with  the  girl  accused  of  neglecting
the  well,  which  Welsh  legend  describes  bursting  over
Cantre'r  Gtvaelod*  or  the  Bottom  Hundred,  a  country
fabled  to  have  flourished  where  the  billows  of  the  Irish
Sea  now  ride  at  large  on  the  shores  of  Keredigion.  As
to  Fand,  who  had  her  separate  apartment  at  Labraid's
abode,  she  is  called  in  the  story  the  daughter  of  Aed
Abrat,  that  is  the  Fire  of  the  Eyelid,  which  meant  the
Tear,  daughter  of  the  Pupil  of  the  Eye  :  she  was  so  called,
we  are  told,  on  account  of  her  brilliancy  and  comeliness.
With  this  the  probable  etymology  of  the  name  Fand
agrees,  being,  as  it  would  seem,  of  the  same  origin  as  the
English  word  water,  Lithuanian  vandit  of  the  same  mean-
ing, and  as  the  Latin  unda,  i  a  wave : '  it  recalls  De  la
Motte  Fouque's  Undine,  who  has,  however,  her  more
exact  counterpart  in  the  Welsh  story  of  the  Lady  of  the
Little  Yan  Lake  already  mentioned  (p.  422).    Now  Fand

1  See  the  story  of  Echaid  mac  Maireda's  Death  in  the  Bk.  of  the
Dun,  39  a  —41  h,  with  a  translation  by  O'Beirne  Crowe  in  the  Kilkenny
Association's  Journal  for  1870,  pp.  96 — 112.

2  The  Triads,  iij.  13  and  iij.  97.

3  See  the  Bk.  of  CarmartJien,  poem  xxxviij,  i^kenc,  ij.  59;  am]  the
Traethodydd  (Holywell)  for  1880,  pp.  479  81,  where  1  have  made  sumo
remarks  on  the  different  versions  of  the  tale.


464  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

had  been  married  to  the  great  sea-god  Manannan  mac
Lir  at  the  Dun  of  the  Estuary,  and  the  wooing  of
Cuchulainn  by  her  is  the  sparkling  of  the  pellucid  drop
in  the  sun's  rays  when  he  has  reached  the  dark  places
of  the  earth ;  but  that  was  to  last  only  for  a  time,  and
Fancl  returns  to  her  former  love ;  that  is  to  say,  the
crystal  drop  is  finally  carried  back  to  the  ocean.  These
pretty  myth-pictures  may  date  from  almost  any  age  in
the  history  of  an  imaginative  race ;  but  it  is  probably  a
touch  by  the  hand  of  hoary  antiquity  alone  that  repre-
sents the  Sun-god  gone  mad,  and  only  recalled  to  the
ways  in  which  he  should  go  by  the  king's  magicians  and
medicine-men.

Another  tale,1  proved  by  the  names  involved  to  belong
to  the  same  class,  must  now  be  briefly  added  :  it  relates
how  Cuchulainn,  on  his  way  back  from  Scathaeh's  country,
came  on  November-eve  to  a  city  whose  prince,  called
Ruad  or  Eed,  king  of  the  Isles,  had  been  obliged  to
expose  his  daughter  as  tribute  to  the  Fomori,  three  of
whom  were  to  come  from  their  distant  islands  to  carry
her  away  from  the  strand,  where  she  sat  alone  awaiting
their  dreaded  arrival.  Her  father  promised  her  to  wife
to  any  man  who  would  rescue  her,  and  Cuchulainn  hear-
ing of  it,  awaited  the  Fomori  and  killed  them,  wherefore
he  was  entitled  to  the  hand  of  the  daughter  of  the  king ;
so  the  king  told  him  to  take  her.  He  excused  himself,
and  told  the  maiden  to  come  after  him  to  Erinn  in  twelve
months'  time,2  but  he  forgot  to  fix  the  place  of  their  meet-

1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  126a;  the  Ashburnham  MS.  (D.  iv.  2  in  the
library  of  the  R  I.  Acad.),  846;  and  the  Bk.  of  Leimter,  125a,  125 b.

2  At  this  point  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun  breaks  off  without  giving  the
girl's  name,  but  it  calls  her  father  Ruad  or  Red,  king  of  the  Isles ;


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  4G5

ing.  On  the  day,  however,  which  had  been  appointed,
Ciichulainn  happened  to  be  careering  with  a  friend  near
Loch  Cnan,1  better  known  as  Strangford  Lough,  when  they
beheld  on  the  water  two  swans  joined  together  by  a  chain
of  gold.  Ciichulainn  cast  a  stone  at  them  from  his  sling,
which  wounded  one  of  them.  On  hastening  to  the  strand,
they  found  there,  not  two  swans,  but  two  of  the  finest
women  they  had  ever  seen.  Derborgaill,  for  that  was  the
name  of  the  maid  rescued  by  Ciichulainn,  explained  who
she  was,  and  how  she  and  her  handmaid  had  come  accord-
ing to  his  order,  though  he  had  now  wounded  her  with  a
stone  which  was  lodged  in  her  side.  Ciichulainn  was
very  sorry  for  what  he  had  rashly  done,  and  proceeded
to  suck  the  stone  out  of  the  wound  with  the  blood  around
it.  He  afterwards  gave  her  to  wife  to  Lngaid,  his  greatest
friend,  as  he  declared  that  one  whose  side  he  had  sucked
could  not  be  his  own  wife,  a  touch  of  refinement  overcast
with  gloom  by  the  sequel,  which  relates  how  Derborgaill
was  savagely  mutilated  by  the  women  of  Ulster  under
very  peculiar  circumstances,  and  how  her  death  was
grimly  avenged  on  them  by  the  enraged  Ciichulainn.
Now  one  version2  of  Derborgaill's  story  makes  her
daughter  to  Forgall  king  of  Loehlann,  which  meant  a
country  in  or  beneath  a  loch  or  the  sea,  the  home  in  fad

at  the  same  time  tlie  Ashburnham  version,  84 b,  speaks  of  her  as  the
daughter  of  Ruad,  and  as  Derborgaill  by  name.

1  The  Bk.  of  Letruter  begins  the  story  at  this  point  by  introducing
Derborgaill  in  love  with  Ciichulainn  on  account  of  his  fame,  the  stock
excuse  put  into  the  mouths  of  all  love-sick  maidens  who  take  the
initiative  in  Irish  tales.

-  The  <>nc  related  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  125&

2  h


4GG  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

of  the  Fomori,  whose  king  is  said  to  have  been  Tetlira,
nncle  to  Forgall.1  Much  consistency,  however,  is  not  to
be  looked  for  in  these  matters;  nor  is  Forgall's  connection
with  Lochlann  contradicted  by  the  situation  of  Luglochta
Loga,  where  Cuchulainn  finds  Forgall's  stronghold  and
his  daughter  Emer;  for,  according  to  another  account,
the  residence  of  Forgall  was  in  the  side  of  Lusca,  a  name
which  means  a  cave,  and  is  borne  by  a  place  in  the  pre-
sent county  of  Dublin,2  which  is  perhaps  not  too  far  from
the  coast  for  the  Sun-god  to  seem  to  emerge  from  the
direction  of  it ;  not  to  mention  that  the  Fomori,  though
belonging  to  the  world  of  waters,  may  be  encountered
anywhere  underground,  even  where  the  sea  is  far  away  :
we  may  compare  Undine  and  her  kinsmen,  who  had  access
to  this  world  wherever  there  was  a  stream  or  a  well.
According  to  one  of  the  foregoing  accounts,  Derborgaill
was  about  to  be  given  away  to  the  Fomori,  her  father's
foes  and  oppressors ;  while  according  to  the  other,  she  was
the  daughter  of  a  king  of  the  Fomori,  who,  we  may  infer,
wished  to  bestow  her  on  one  of  his  own  race,  when  she
set  out  to  Cuchulainn.  The  difference  amounts  to  little,
and  the  damsel  is  to  be  regarded  as  behaving  in  the
same  way  as  a  goddess  of  dawn  and  dusk.  She  might,
further,  be  said  to  combine  in  her  own  person  the  cha-
racteristics, to  a  certain  extent,  of  Emer  and  Fand ;  but
this  requires  to  be  explained  with  reference  to  her  name
Derborgaill,  more  familiar  to  most  of  you  in  its  Scotch
form  of  Dervorgild.     It  is  interpreted  in  the  Book  of

1  Bk,  of  the  Dun,  123  a;  and  the  Stowe  MS.  82  b.

2  O'Donovan's  Buttle  of  Magli  Math,  p.  52,  note.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  467

I-einstiT  to  mean  '/Ar,  or  Tear,  daughter  of  Forgall
king  of  Lochlann,'1  which  one  caunot  help  comparing
with  the  name  of  Fand,  and  associating  with  Derborgaill's
love  for  Ciichulainn,  as  an  analogous  case  of  the  nature
myth  representing  the  drop  glistening  in  the  sun's  rays.

1   Irish  der  means  a  'tear,'  and  is  in  fact  the  etymological  equivalent
of  that  English  word  and  its  congeners  in  other  languages,  such   as
Greek  Sdnpv  and  Welsh  deigr  of  the  same  signification,  both  Irish  and
English  having  levelled  the  path  of  the  voice  by  removing  the  guttural
consonant.     So  Derborgaill  literally  meant  Forgall's  tear.     As  to  the
structure  of  the  name,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  it  is  not  a  compound,
and  that,  though  cb'r,  '  a  tear,'  has  not  yet  been  met  with  except  as  a
feminine,  the  cognates  make  it  fairly  certain  that  it  was  originally
neuter  in  Irish.     It  is  known  that,  under  the  influence  of  neuters  of
the  O  declension  (Latin  ij.  decL),  other  neuters  in  Irish  sometimes  take
a  final  nasal,  which  should  correspond,  but  for  this  false  analogy,  to
the  v  of  ayafloi'  and  the  m  of  bellum,  and  is  found  written  in  Gaulish
v  or  n.    Thus,  though  the  Irish  muir  is  of  the  same  meaning,  etymology
and  declension  as  the  Latin  mare,  it  becomes  muirn  in  Mnir  n-Iclit,
'  the  Ictian  Sea,'  or  the  English  Channel ;  similarly,  teg  or  tech,  '  house,'
of  the  same  etymology  and  declension  as  the  Greek  reyos,  becomes  tegn,
as  in  teg  n-dagfir, '  domus  viri  boni :'  for  more  instances,  see  the  Gram-
matica  Celtica2,  pp.  235,  270.     Treated  in  the  same  way,  der  would
become  dern,  and  prefixed  to  Forgaill  would,  according  to  the  rule
as  to  n  +  / (earlier  n  +  v),  yield  Dervorgaill,  with  the  v  prevented
from  hardening  into/,  and  the  n  ultimately  elided.    Dervorgaill  would
be  written  in  the  ancient  Irish  orthography  Derborgaill,  which  the
scribe  of  the  story  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  125,  has  spelled  Uerbforgaill,
in  which  he  inserted  an  /with  the  ptmetum  delem  in  order  to  pre-
serve the  transparence  of  the  etymology  which  he  wished  to  advocate,
and  which  appears  to  have  been  the  right  one.    Accordingly  the  name
should  be  now  pronounced  Der  VorgaiU,  or,  in  one  word,  Derwr*
gtill  with  the  accent  on  the  middle  syllable  ;  and  that  it  is  so,  I  learn
from  Prof.  Mackinnon  of  Edinburgh,  who  recollects  this  name  home
by  an  old  woman  in  his  native  isle  of  Colonsay  when  he  was  a  child  :
it  was,  as  he  kindly  informs  me,  always  accented  on  the  syllable  c
The  der  here  in  question  is  to  be  distinguished  from  dert  said  to  mean
a  girl  ;  and  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  in  reading  this  conjecture.

2  h  2


4G8  v.   the  sun  hero.

Why  both  stories  should  treat  the  liquid  element  as  a,
tear  I  cannot  say  :  a  modern  author  would  in  such  a  case
probably  prefer  speaking  of  the  drop  of  rain  or  dew,  and
it  is  conceivable  that  the  Tears  of  Forgall  king  of  Loch-
lann  were  in  ancient  Erinn  the  mythic  definition  of  rain
or  dew ; l  but  I  must  confess  complete  ignorance  of  any
facts  that  would  serve  to  countenance  such  a  view.

CllCHULAINN    AND    HIS    FOES.

The  epic  tale  of  the  TAin  involves  Ciichulainn  in  a
quarrel  with  a  goddess  of  a  different  description  from
those  hitherto  mentioned :  I  mean  the  MxSrrigu,  or
Great  Queen  of  the  Mars- Jupiter  of  the  Goidels  (p.  43).
According  to  the  Book  of  the  Dun,  it  happened  one
day  during  Ciichulainn' s  defence  of  Ulster  against  the
forces  of  Ailill  and  Medb  from  the  west,  that  the  Mdrrigu
presented  herself  to  him  in  the  form  of  a  damsel  of
highly  distinguished  appearance,  clad  in  a  dress  of  all
colours.  '  Who  art  thou  ? '  inquired  Ciichulainn.  '  I  am
the  daughter  of  Buan  the  king,'  said  she;  'I  am  come
to  thee ;  I  have  loved  thee  on  account  of  thy  fame,  and
I  have  brought  with  me  my  treasures  and  my  herds.'
'Not  good,  indeed,'  said  he,  'is  the  time  of  thy  coming
to  us :  is  not  the  bloom  of  our  .  .  .  . 2  bad  ?  Not
easy,  then,  for  me  is  it  to  arrange  a  meeting  with  a
woman,'  said  he,  '  while  I  am  in  this  struggle.'  '  I  shall,'
said  she,  '  be  of  assistance  to  thee  in  it.'     Thereupon  he


1  Compare  the  Old  Norse  definition  of  dew  in  the  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.
i.  63  :  "Kime-mane  is  the  horse  called,  which  draws  the  night  from
east  over  the  blessed  Powers.  Every  morning  the  foam  drops  from
his  mouth ;  hence  the  dew  in  the  valleys."

2  The  word  ainmgorti  used  here,  74  a,  is  obscure  to  me.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  lG'J

gave  her  an  insulting  reply,  which  made  her  completely
change  her  tone,  and  say :  c  It  will  be  hard  for  thee  when
I  shall  come  against  thee  engaged  in  fighting  with  the
men  of  Erinn  :  I  shall  come  in  the  form  of  an  eel  beneath
thy  feet  at  the  ford,  so  that  thou  Avilt  stumble  and  fall.'
'That  strikes  me  as  a  more  likely  form  for  thee  than
that  of  a  king's  daughter ;  but  I  shall,'  he  added,  '  seize
thee  in  my  hand,  causing  thy  ribs  to  break,  and  thou
wilt  be  subject  to  that  blemish  till  I  pronounce  sentence
of  blessing  on  thee.'  '  I  shall,'  said  she,  '  in  the  form  of
a  grey  she- wolf ,  drive  the  cattle  to  the  ford  against  thee.'
1  I  shall  cast  a  stone,'  said  he,  '  at  thee  from  my  sling,
and  smash  one  of  thy  eyes  in  thy  head ;  and  thou  wilt
be  under  that  blemish  till  I  pronounce  sentence  of  bless-
ing on  thee.'  '  I  shall  come,'  said  she,  '  to  thee  in  the
form  of  a  hornless  red  heifer  at  the  head  of  the  herd,  so  that
they  will  rout  thee  at  the  mires,  at  the  fords  and  at  the
pools,  and  thou  wilt  not  perceive  me  meeting  thee.'  '  I
shall,'  said  he,  *  fling  a  stone  at  thee,  and  break  one  of
thy  legs1  under  thee,  and  thou  wilt  be  under  that  blemish
till  I  pronounce  sentence  of  blessing  on  thee.' 2  Thereupon
she  left  him  for  a  while ;  but,  according  to  her  threat,
she  returned  one  day  when  he  was  engaged  in  single
combat  with  a  formidable  foe ;  and,  in  the  form  of  an  eel,
she  gave  three  twists  round  his  feet,  so  that  he  fell  at
full  length  across  the  ford :  presently  he  got  up  and
seized  the  eel  in  his  hand,  so  that  her  ribs  broke  within


1  I  am  not  sure  whether  this  be  correct :  the  Irish  in  the  Bk.  of
tin  Dun,  74A,  is,  '  cowmema  do  fergara  i6t;'  but  when  it  is  described
done  at  77a,  we  have  'ger  gara'  instead  of  fergara,  which  is  perhaps
to  be  read  into  fergara.     The  nom.  sing,  occurs  BBfer  gain  at  776.

-  Ibid.  71",  lib.


470  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

her.  The  noise  of  the  strokes  dealt  by  Ciichulainn  and
his  antagonist  at  one  another  in  the  ford  was  such  as
to  frighten  the  western  army's  flocks  and  herds,  so  that
the  latter  broke  loose  and  rushed  eastwards  across  the
camp  with  the  tents  on  their  horns :  this  was  the  M6rrigu's
opportunity,  so  she  came  in  the  form  of  a  she-wolf  and
drove  the  cattle  in  the  other  direction  down  upon  Ciichu-
lainn,  whereupon  he  cast  a  stone  from  his  sling,  as  he
had  promised,  and  smashed  her  eye.  Afterwards  she
came  down  on  the  ford  in  the  form  of  the  hornless  red
heifer  at  the  head  of  the  herd,  and  was  lamed  by  Ciichu-
lainn,  as  he  had  foretold.1  The  Morrigu  had  now  to
bethink  herself  how  she  might  be  healed  of  her  triple
blemish,  for  wounds  inflicted  by  Ciichulainn  could  not
be  healed  without  his  own  intervention.  One  day,  as
Ciichulainn  felt  thirsty  after  the  performance  of  a  fabulous
feat  of  valour  against  the  troops  of  the  west,  the  Morrigu
presented  herself  to  him  in  the  guise  of  an  old  woman,
lame  and  blind  of  one  eye,  engaged  in  milking  a  three-
teated  cow.  He  asked  her  for  a  drink,  and  she  gave  him
the  milking  of  the  first  teat,  whereupon  he  wished  her  the
blessing  of  gods  and  not-gods,  and  she  was  healed  of  one
of  her  wounds.  He  asked  her  again  for  milk,  which  she
gave  him  from  the  second  teat,  and  he  repeated  the
blessing,  at  which  another  of  her  wounds  was  healed.
He  had  likewise  the  milk  of  the  third  teat,  and  on  his
pronouncing  his  blessing  on  her  a  third  time,  she  was
made  whole,  whereupon  she  reminded  him  that  he  had
said  that  he  would  never  heal  her.  '  Had  I  only  known
it  was  thou,'  said  he,  '  I  should  never  have  healed  thee

J  Bk.  of  the  Dan,  76  b,  77  a.


V.     THE    SIN    HERO.  171

to  the  cud  of  the  world.'1  Ciicliuluhm  and  the  Morrigu
were  now,  so  to  say,  quits,  and  the  story  ends  without
shedding  any  light  on  the  later  relations  between  them.
Another  story,2  however,  which  describes  Cdchulainn's
death,  makes  the  Morrigu,  out  of  friendship  for  him,
break  his  chariot  on  the  eve  of  the  fatal  day,  so  as  to
induce  him  to  stay  at  home ;  how  the  reconciliation  had
been  effected  I  cannot  say ;  and  I  have  only  entered
into  these  details  because  they  form  the  Irish  counter-
part of  the  hostility  evinced  by  Here  towards  Heracles,
and  their  final  reconciliation.

The  Morrigu,  it  is  needless  to  say,  failed  in  her  friendly
effort  to  keep  Ciiehulainn  at  home  on  the  day  already
referred  to,  for  the  warriors  of  Ulster  were  again  in  their
couvade,  and  he  alone  was  left  to  face  the  enemy,  who
was  this  time  under  the  command  of  Lugaid  king  of
Erinn,  and  Ere  king  of  Leinster.3  The  former  slew
Ciiehulainn  near  Loch  Lamraith4  in  the  Plain  of  Mur-
themne  on  the  very  day  when  the  Ultonians  were  able
to  come  out  of  their  confinement;  and  Conall  Cernach,
Ciiehulainn's  foster-brother,  pursued  Lugaid,  and  overtook
him  before  the  close  of  the  day  bathing  in  the  Liffcy.    A

1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  77  a,  77b,  where  the  wounds  healed  are  not  quite
the  three  inflicted  in  the  previous  part  of  the  story  :  the  Morrigu  hero
has  her  head,  an  eye  and  a  leg  healed,  whereas,  according  to  the  pre-
vious account,  they  should  have  been  her  ribs,  an  eye  and  a  leg
respectively.  But  such  inconsistencies  arc  quite  common  in  old  versions
of  Irish  tales,  showing  that  the  scribes  used  a  variety  of  oldei  editions.

1  Bk.  of  Leinster,  119a — 123//;  extracts  will  be  found,  published
with  a  translation  by  Stokes,  in  the  Rev.  Cell.  iij.  17a — 185.

3  O'Curry,  513-4.

4  Another  name  of  the  same  lake  given  in  the  LA:  of  Leinster  was
Loch  Tondchuil,  1216.


472  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

parley  took  place,  followed  by  a  protracted  duel,  resulting
in  Conall  slaying  Lugaid,  who  surrendered  to  him  both
his  realm  and  his  head.  In  this  singular  combat  Conall
had  the  aid  of  his  horse,  a  beast  said  to  have  been  pro-
vided with  a  dog's  head  in  order  to  aid  his  master  in  his
battles ;  so  when  Conall  had  been  bound  by  Lugaid  to
fight  with  only  one  hand,  as  the  latter  had  lost  one  of
his  hands  that  day,  Conall's  canine  horse  took  part  in  the
conflict  by  biting  a  piece  out  of  Lugaicl's  side,  which
rendered  the  rest  of  the  fight  easy  for  his  antagonist.1
This,  it  will  be  seen,  forms  a  remarkable  parallel  to
Owein  ab  Urien's  lion  assisting  him  in  his  duels  on  more
than  one  occasion  (p.  402).  But  to  return  to  Ciichulainn  :
his  slayer  was  Lugaid,  as  has  just  been  said,  and  he
is  so  important  a  character  that  his  history  must  here  be
detailed  at  some  length.  He  is  usually  called  Lugaid
Eiab  nDerg,  or  L.  of  the  Eed  Stripes,  represented  as
Cuchulainn's  special  friend,  or  else  as  his  foster-son  and
even  as  his  own  son.  He  is  variously  known  as  Lugaid
mac  Conrot,  'L.  son  of  Ciiroi,'  and  L.  mac  na  Tri  Con,2
1  L.  son  of  the  Three  Cws,'  or  Hounds,  and  he  is  possibly
to  be  also  identified  with  Lugaid  mac  Con,  or  L.  Hound's

1  Bk.  o/Leinster,  1226.

2  These  are  supposed  (O'Curry,  p.  479)  to  have  been  Ciichulainn,
Conall  Cernach  and  Ciiroi,  the  genitives  of  the  names  being  Con-
culainn,  Conaill  and  Con-roi  respectively.  Qu-roi  or  Gti-rui  (with  or
without  the  mark  of  length  on  the  diphthong)  seems  well  attested
(Bk.  of  the  Dun,  61a,  69  a,  71  b ;  Bk.  o/Leinster,  31b,  169  b),  but
it  must  have  also  had  the  form  Cii-ri,  as  the  genitive  occurs  in  the
i'orm  Conu-ri  in  ancient  ogam  on  a  stone  in  his  district :  this  pronun-
ciation is  again  approximated  in  the  Anglo-Irish  Caher  Conree,  which
late  Irish  authors  sometimes  write  Cathair  Chonrai  or  even  Cathair
ChonrigJi.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  I  V ,)

Son,  whose  story,  however,  differs  very  widely  from  the
others,  owing,  it  may  be,  at  least  in  part,  to  racial  reasons.
It  is  also  conceivable  that  Mac  Con  or  Mac  na  Tri  Con
originally  meant  merely  Him  of  the  Hound,  or  of  the  Three
Hounds,  in  reference  to  a  simple  or  triple  Cerberus  as
companion  of  the  Plutonic  deity:    Gwyn  ab  Niid:  had
likewise  both  a  horse  and  a  hound  of  a  formidable  kind.
Now  the  mother  of  Lugaid  of  the  Three  Hounds  was,
according  to  one  account,  Blathnat,  wife  of  Ciiroi  mac
Daire,  a  great  magician  associated  with  the  mountain
range  of  Slieve  Mis  in  Kerry,  where  his  stronghold  has
given  a  lofty  height  between  Tralee  and  Dingle  its  name
of  Cathair  Chonroi,  '  Ciiroi's  Fortress,'  Anglicized  Caher
Conree.      Now   BUithnat's    name,    derived    from    bl&th,
'bloom,'  reminds  one  of  that  of  Blodeued,  from  blodeu,
1  flowers,'  and  she  is  herself  represented  as  unfaithful  a
wife  to  Ciiroi  as  Blodeued:  was  to  Lieu  (p.  239);  for  she
is  not  only  said  to  have  loved  others,  but  a  tragic  tale
relates  how  she  became  Ciichulainn's  wife  after  he  had
slain  Ciiroi  with  her  aid.     Ciichulainn  and  two  other
Ultonians  had  paid  a  friendly  visit  to  Ciiroi  at  his  abode
in  the  west ;  and  Ciichulainn,  whether  then  or  later  we
arc  not  told,  found  opportunity  of  coming  to  a  treacher-
ous understanding  with  Blathnat.     So  at  the  time  fixed
upon  by  her,  namely,  November-eve,  Ciichulainn  and  his
followers  stationed  themselves  at  the  bottom  of  the  hill
watching  the  stream  that  came  down  past  Ciiroi's  fort;
nor  had  they  to  wait  long  before  they  observed  its  waters
turning  white:  it  was  the  signal  given  by  Blathnat,  for
she  had  agreed  to  empty  the  milk  of  Mider's  three  cows
from  Mider's  cauldron  into  the  stream,  which  has  ever


474  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

since  been  called  the  Finnghlais  or  White  Brook.1  Tho
sequel  was  that  Ciichulainn  entered  Curoi's  fort  unop-
posed, and  slew  its  owner,  who  happened  to  be  asleep
with  his  head  on  Blathnat' s  lap.  Ciichulainn  took  away
Blathnat,  with  the  famous  cows  and  cauldron;  but  he
was  not  long  to  have  possession  of  his  new  wife,  for
Curoi's  poet  and  harper,  called  Ferceirtne,  resolved  to
avenge  his  master;  so  he  paid  a  visit  to  Ciichulainn  and
Blathnat  in  Ulster,  where  he  was  gladly  received  by
them ;  but  one  day,  when  the  Ultonian  nobles  happened
to  be  at  a  spot  bordering  on  a  high  cliff,  Ferceirtne
suddenly  clasped  his  arms  round  Blathnat,  and  flinging
himself  with  her  over  the  cliff,  they  died  together.2

This  story  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  presenting  the
difficulty,  that  the  treachery  more  usually  characteristic
of  the  dark  powers  is  here  ascribed  to  the  Sun-hero,
somewhat  as  if  Lieu  and  Goronwy  had  changed  places
in  the  story  of  Blodeued's  infidelity ;  but  it  is  impossible
to  make    Cuchulainn   one  of  the  dark  beings,   among

1  Bk.  ofLeinster,  1696.  What  passes  as  Curoi's  cairn  is  known  on
the  shoulder  of  the  mountain ;  but  no  remains  of  his  cathalr  or  fort
have  ever  been  found,  and  O'Curry  (iij.  80),  looking  for  the  remains
of  walls,  would  not  identify  it  with  the  height  now  called  Caher  Conree,
which  O'Donovan  found  to  be  no  wall,  but  'a  natural  ledge  of  rocks'
{Battle  of  Magh  Rath,  note,  p.  212).  In  1883,  I  travelled  past  the
foot  of  the  mountain  to  Dingle,  and  returned  the  same  way,  but
failed  both  times  to  get  a  good  view  of  the  top  on  account  of  the  mist,
which  seemed  to  render  it  a  fitting  abode  for  a  god  resembling  the
Welsh  Gwyn  ab  Nud  or  the  Manx  Manannan.

2  With  the  exception  of  a  short  paragraph  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinstcr,
169&,  the  author  is  indebted  for  this  story  to  O'Curry.  ij.  97,  iij.
7'»-82,  and  Keating's  History  of  Ireland  (O'Connor's  ed.,  Dublin,
1865),  pp.  220-5  ;  they  differ,  however,  in  detail.


V.     THE    SUN    1IEH0.  475

whom  Ciiroi,  on  the  otlicr  hand,  must  be  classed.  For
fore  find  him  among  the  allies  who  gave  Ailill  and  Medb
jissistance  on  the  Tain,  in  which  he  was  ready  personally
to  engage  had  he  not  been  checkmated.  This  eharacter
of  a  His  or  Pluto  agrees  well  with  the  fact  that  Ciiroi
appears  as  an  ancestor  in  the  west,  which  is  attested,
among  other  things,  by  an  ancient  ogam,1  on  a  low
cromlech  near  Caher  Conree,  commemorating  a  man
described  as  Son  of  Ciiroi.  Like  Niall  of  the  Nine
Hostages,  and  others  of  the  same  type,  Ciiroi  engaged
in  wars  outside  Erinn  and  far  away :  one  story  places
his  exploits  even  among  the  Scythians.2  Like  the  solar
heroes,  the  princes  of  darkness  not  only  grew  to  manhood
in  a  short  time,  but  they  were  also,  like  them,  great
travellers,  conquering  far  and  wide,  the  reason  being,  in
the  last  resort,  that  wherever  the  light  of  the  sun  shines,
there  darkness  likewise  comes  in  its  turn.  It  is  right,
however,  to  add  that  there  is  a  story  which  represents
Ciichulainn  as  having  a  long-standing  cause  to  hate
Ciiroi.  Ciichulainn  and  the  heroes  of  Ulster  once  on  a
time  resolved  to  go  on  a  plundering  expedition  to  the
Isle  of  the  Men  of  Falga,  a  fairy  land  ruled  by  Mider
(p.  145)  as  its  king.  Ciiroi,  who  was  a  great  magician,
insinuated  himself  among  the  raiders  in  disguise,  and  by
means  of  his  arts  he  succeeded  in  leading  the  Ultonians
into  Mider's  stronghold,  after  they  had  repeatedly  failed
in  their  attempts.     He  did  this  on  the  condition  that  he

1  Celtic  Britain2,  p.  263;  Brash,  p.  175,  pi.  xvi :  see  note,  p.  472.

2  See  "Windisch's  Irisrhe  Texte,  pp.  294-5  ;  compare  also  the  Welsh
elegy  to  Ciiroi  in  the  Bk.  of  7bliesnn  (Skene,  ij.  198),  where  he  is
mentioned  as  one  who  'was  wont  to  hold  a  holm  on  the  Sea  of  the

South.'


476  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

was  to  have  of  the  plunder  the  jewel  that  pleased  him
best.  They  brought  away  from  Mider's  castle  Mider's
daughter  Blathnat,  as  she  was  a  damsel  of  exceeding
beauty ;  also  Mider's  Three  Cows  and  his  Cauldron,  which
were  objects  of  special  value  and  virtues.  When  they
came  to  the  division  of  the  spoils,  the  mean-looking  man
in  grey,  who  had  led  the  victorious  assault,  said  that  the
jewel  he  chose  was  Blathnat,  whom  he  took  to  himself.
Ciichulainn  complained  that  he  had  deceived  them,  as
he  had  only  specified  a  jewel,  which  he  insisted  on  inter-
preting in  no  metaphorical  sense ;  but  by  means  of  his
magic,  the  man  in  grey  managed  to  carry  the  girl  away
unobserved.  Ciichulainn  pursued,  and  the  dispute  came
to  be  settled  by  a  duel  on  the  spot,  in  which  Cuchulainn
was  so  thoroughly  vanquished  that  Oriroi  left  him  on
the  field  bound  hand  and  foot,  after  having  cut  off  his
long  hair,1  which  forced  Cuchulainn  to  hide  himself  for
a  whole  year  in  the  wilds  of  Ulster,  while  Curoi  carried
away  to  his  stronghold  of  Caher  Conree  both  Blathnat
and  her  father's  cows  and  cauldron.2  This  story  seems
to  mix  up  two  things,  the  first  of  which  was  the  carrying
away  of  the  Three  Cows  and  the  Cauldron  of  the  king
of  the  fairy  island,  of  which  a  very  different  version
represents  it  as  Ciichulainn's  own  doing  (p.  261).  Now
Falga  is  variously3  supposed  to  have  been  the  Isle
of  Man  or  Insi  Gall,  that  is  to  say,  the  Western  Isles ;
but,  according  to   Cormac's  Glossary,  the  cows,  which

1  That  was  not  all,  for  the  Bk  of  Leinster,  169&,  adds  the  words:
diarfumalt  (.i.  diarchommil)  cacc  nambo"  moac/iend.

2  O'Curry,  iij.  81 ;  O'Connor's  Keating,  loc.  cit.

3  See  O'Curry,  iij.  80,  and  a  gloss  on  Falga  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,
1696.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  477

were  white  cattle  with  red  ears,  belonged,  not  to  Mider,
hut  to  another  king  of  the  other  world,  who  was  called
Echaid  Echbel,  or  E.  Ilorsc-mouth.  lie  lived  in  Alban,
and  his  cows  used  to  come  to  graze  in  Dalriada,  on  a  head-
land, now  called  Island  Magee,  in  Antrim,1  Avhere  they
were  appropriated  by  Ciichulainn  and  his  men,  from
whom  they  were  then  stolen  by  Ciiroi  and  carried  away
whither  Ciichulainn  knew  not.  This,  it  will  be  seen,  is
a  Goidelic  version  of  the  story  of  Cacus  stealing  from
Hercules  some  of  the  heifers  he  had  taken  from  Geryon.
The  other  thing  confused  with  the  story  of  Echaid's  Cows
was  that  of  the  contest  for  the  daughter  of  Mider  kint^
of  the  fairies.  This  latter  story  taken  by  itself  is  trans-
parent enough :  it  is  devoted  to  the  different  stages  in
the  usual  conflict  between  the  representative  of  light  and
darkness  for  the  dawn-goddess:  in  the  first  engagement
the  former  is  vanquished  and  cropped  of  his  long  yellow
hair,  whereupon  his  retirement  takes  place  for  a  time,  just
as  he  withdraws  distraught  from  the  haunts  of  men,  when
Fand  is  taken  away  from  him  by  Manannan,  the  other
great  magician  of  Irish  story.  At  the  next  stage  the
Sun-god  succeeds  in  disposing  of  Ciiroi  and  carrying
away  his  wife  to  his  own  home  ;  but  the  powers  of  dark-
ness gain  possession  of  her  once  more,  for  that  is  pro-
bably the  meaning  of  her  being  borne  away  over  the  cliff.
According  to  these  stories,  Lugaid  was  the  son  of  the


1  The  Stokes-O'Donovan  Cormac,  p.  72;  also  the  /•'<-///•  Masters,
A.M.  2859,  O'Donovan's  notes  i,  t.  In  the  Bk.  of  Leinster these  cowa
are  called  in  the  genitive,  '  na  t/-i  nerc  (.i.  b<5)  iuchna,'  and  'nancrc
much//",'  and  t lie  same  ■word  Iuchna,  said  there  to  be  a  proper  name,
occurs  also  in  Cormac's  article;  but  I  have  seen  no  explanation  of
the  term.


47S  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

unfaithful  Blathnat ;  but  there  seem  to  have  been  plenty
of  different  accounts  of  his  parentage,  in  which  other  sets
of  names  figure ;  and  one1  of  them  is  interesting  as  an
instance,  to  a  certain  extent,  of  associating  with  darkness
and  death  the  ideas  of  guilt  and  depravity.  Medb,  queen
of  the  West,  had  two  sisters,  called  respectively  Clothru
and  Ethne  Uathach,  or  E.  the  Horrible.  They  had  three
brothers,  called  na  tri  Finn  Emna,  or  the  Three  "White
Ones  of  Emain.  Why  they  were  so  called  is  a  question
of  the  same  kind  as  why  the  corresponding  Welsh  name
should  have  been  borne  by  a  god  of  death  like  Gwyn
ab  Nud;  he  was,  however,  only  one,  according  to  the
story  of  Kulhwch,2  of  three  Grwyns,  who  are  possibly
to  be  equated  with  the  three  Finns  of  Emain.  The  indi-
vidual names  of  these  last  were  Bres,  Nar  and  Lothur,
which  one  might  perhaps  render  War,  Shame  and  Hell.3
Now  Lugaid  is  considered  the  son  of  this  Evil  Triad
and  Clothru  or  the  Horrible  Ethne.4     The  story  of  his

1  Bk.  o/Leinster,  124  ft.

2  R.  B.  Mob.  p.  106,  where  they  are  called  Gwyn  son  of  Esni,  Gwyn
son  of  Nwyvre,  and  Gwyn  son  of  Nud  :  Guest's  text  and  translation,
ij.  205,  259,  unaccountably  omit  the  two  first  Gwyns.

3  Nar  means  'shame'  and  'shameful;'  the  plural  of  bres  occurs  as
bressa,  meaning  'battles:'  see  Stokes'  Calendar  of  Oengus,  Prol.  74;
and  lothur  is  quoted  in  the  Gr.  Celtica-,  p.  782,  with  the  sense  of
alveus,  canalis :  it  seems  to  be  derived  from  loth,,  meaning  '  coenum,
Lerna'  (Gr.  Celt2,  p.  15),  '  Mefitis'  (Windisch's  Ir.  Texte,  s.  v.  p.  669),
and  'pains'  and  'hell'  (Stokes'  Goidelica2,  p.  69).  L6thar  or  Lothor,
gen.  Ldthair,  was  also  the  name  of  Medb's  herdsman  on  the  Tain,  Bk.
of  the  Dan,  65  a.

4  According  to  the  Bk.  o/Leinster,  124ft,  the  mother  was  Clothru,
who  became  Conchobar's  wife  after  her  sister  Medb  had  left  him  ;  but
O'Curry,  ij.  290,  following  probably  other  versions  of  the  story,  makes
Ethne  the  king's  wife.  The  name  Ethne  Uathach  occurs  also  in  the
story  of  the  Deisi :  see  the  Bk.  of  the  Dan,  54  a.


V.     THE    SUN"    HERO.  179

origin,  briefly  told  in  the  Book  of  Leinster,  forms  a  pic-
ture less  colossal  but  more  disgusting  than  that  sketched
by  Milton  of  the  relations  between  Death  and  Sin  and
Satan.  Now  the  four  provinces  of  Erinn  which  were
usually  hostile  to  Ulster  wished  to  choose  a  king  to  rule
over  the  kingdom  at  Tara ;  and  among  those  who  met
together  were  Ailill  and  Medb,  Ciiroi,  and  Ere  king  of
Leinster,  in  whose  palace  at  Tara  the  meeting  was  held.
The  Ultonians  were  of  course  not  consulted,  but  the
vision  of  the  seer  at  the  bull-feast  indicated  as  the  over-
king  that  was  to  be  chosen,  a  warrior  who  was  then  in
Ulster,  standing,  as  it  happened,  by  Ciichulainn's  sick-
bed. Messengers  were  sent  to  him,  and  it  was  when
they  announced  their  errand  that  Ciichulainn  sat  up  and
delivered  a  charge  to  Lugaid  as  to  how  he  was  to  conduct
himself  in  his  office  of  king.1

This  friendship  between  Ciichulainn  and  Lugaid  is
very  remarkable ;  it  is  illustrated  also  in  the  Tain  epic,
where  Lugaid  is  called  son  of  Nos  and  described  as  king
of  Munster.2  Ailill  and  Medb  are  represented  availing
themselves  of  that  friendship  to  make  use  of  Lugaid  as
their  intermediary  when  they  wish  to  negociate  with
their  great  enemy  Ciichulainn.  We  have  had  an  instance
also  of  it  in  the  story  of  Ciichulainn  giving  his  own  bride
Derborgaill  to  Lugaid  to  wife  (p.  465),  and  to  this  may
be  added  one  which  mentions  Forgall  Monach  betrothing
Emer  to  Lugaid  mac  Nois  king  of  Munster,  and  the
latter  declining  to  have  anything  to  do  with  her  as  soon

1  Windiscl.,  pp.  212,  213.

2  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  74a  :  the  other  Tain  references  to  him  are  G7 a,
69 or,  70/',  73'/,  73/',  also  possibly  G2a,  where  we  read  of  Fer  I'M  mac
Lugdach.


4 SO  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

as  she  explained  to  him  that  Ciichulainn  was  to  be  her
husband,  whom  Lugaid,  according  to  this  euhemerized
passage,  did  not  wish  to  anger.1  On  Welsh  ground  the
possession  of  the  bride  would  in  both  cases  have  only-
been  settled  as  the  result  of  a  battle  between  the
rival  suitors,  and  the  friendship  and  mutual  regard
ascribed  to  Ciichulainn  and  Lugaid  is  peculiarly  Irish.
It  arises  from  the  story  of  Ciichulainn' s  sojourn  in
Sc&thach's  Isle  as  Sc&thach's  pupil,  that  is  to  say,  as  her
foster-son ;  but  Sc&thach  had  other  foster-sons,  who  were
accordingly  Ciichulainn's  foster-brothers  there.  The
foster-brother2  was,  according  to  Celtic  ideas,  one's
friend  par  excellence,  and  this  is  the  origin  of  Ciichulainn
and  Lugaid's  friendship,  for  Lugaid  was  Ciichulainn's
foster-brother  in  Scdthach's  Isle ;  and  the  same  remark
applies  to  the  others  who  were  their  fellow-pupils  there,
several  of  whom,  including  two  called  Fer  Baeth  and
Fer  Diad  respectively,  were  induced  by  Medb,  much
against  their  inclination,  to  fight  with  Ciichulainn  on
the  Tain.  In  their  case  their  former  friendship  with
Ciichulainn  serves  to  deepen  the  tragic  tone  of  the  story.
The  most  formidable  of  all  the  old  friends  of  Ciichulainn
was  Fer  Diad,  and  the  duel  between  them  lasted  a  noinden
or  four  days ;  the  dialogues  preceding  each  conflict  turn
mostly   on   the  friendly  relations  between   the   heroes


1  See  the  Stowe  MS.  (R.  I.  Academy,  D.  iv.  2),  fol.  836,  which
maintains  the  consistency  of  the  story  it  relates  hy  not  naming  Lugaid
among  Ciichulainn's  fellow-pupils  in  Scathach's  Isle  :  see  83  a.

2  The  word  denoting  this  relation  was  in  Irish  comalta,  which  is  as
if  one  had  in  Latin  a  word  com-alt-ius,  meaning  'reared  together  with,'
and  so  is  the  Welsh  equivalent  cyfaillt  or  cyfaill,  the  only  term  in  the
language  for  'friend.'


v.    THE   BUN    BEBO.  lv  1

when  together  in  Scathaoh's  Isle,  and  thoy  have  been
elaborated  with  considerable  care,  while  Chichnlainn's
grief  when  his  friend  and  antagonist  fell  on  the  fourth
day  is  very  touching.  Fer  Diad,  it  may  be  explained,
was  a  match  for  Ciichulainn  so  long  as  they  fought  with
the  same  weapons,  but  Ciichulainn  at  last  called  for  the
Gdi  Bolga,  which  he  always  held  in  reserve.  This  wag
a  missile  which  he  directed  that  time  by  means  of  his
feet,  from  the  water  in  the  ford  upwards  into  his  antago-
nist's body,  and  it  proved  at  once  fatal.1  What  this
strange  weapon  may  have  been  in  actual  war,  one  cannot
exactly  say ;  but,  mythologically  speaking,  the  direction
of  it  from  the  water  upwards  would  seem  to  indicate  as
its  interpretation  the  appearance  of  the  sun  as  seen  from
the  Plain  of  Murthemne  when  rising  out  of  the  sea  to
pierce  with  his  rays  the  clouds  above.  In  another
instance  the  Gdi  Bolga  is  brought  down  on  the  head  of
Cuchulainn's  antagonist  with  the  effect  of  crushing  him,2
which  would  seem  to  refer  to  the  action  of  the  sun's  rays
on  the  clouds  below  from  his  position  on  high  in  the
heavens.

It  will  now  be  readily  understood  how  it  came  about
that  Irish  mythology  could  treat  the  Sun-god  and  certain
of  the  dark  beings  as  at  times  his  bosom  friends;  and
also  how  some  of  them  had  nevertheless  to  fight  with
him  and  fall  by  his  hand.  Lugaid  was  one  of  this  class,
but  the  euhemerism  of  Irish  tales,  in  the  form  we  have
them,  has  tried  hard  to  keep  Lugaid  as  the  friend  of
Ciichulainn  distinct  from  Lugaid  as  his  mortal  enemy  ;

1  For  the  whole  story,  original  text  and  translation,  see  O'Curry,  iij.
414— 463.

2  Stokes  k  Windisch,  Ir.  T>.rtr,  pp.  184,  206.

2  i


482  .       V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

and  one  of  the  results  is,  that  we  cannot,  with  our  imper-
fect knowledge  of  Irish  literature,  trace  how  the  story
originally  described  Lugaid  becoming  hostile  to  Crichu-
lainn.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  corresponding  Teutonic
story  of  Brynhild  wooed  to  be  Gunther's  wife  by  Sieg-
fried, who  some  time  afterwards  falls  the  victim  of  a  foul
murder  perpetrated  with  Gunther's  aid ;  for  the  narra-
tive tries  to  account  for  the  change  in  Gunther's  feelings
towards  his  friend  and  benefactor.1  But  in  the  case  of
Cuchulainn  and  Lugaid  we  have  to  make  a  spring,  so  to
say,  from  the  tenderness  of  their  friendship  into  the  thick
of  their  deadly  feud,  when  the  braves  of  Ulster  were
again  in  their  couvade,  and  their  land  was  devastated  by
their  enemies  from  the  other  provinces  of  Erinn.  For
they  were  this  time  under  the  leadership,  not  of  Ailill
and  Medb,  but  of  Lugaid  and  his  friend  Ere  king  of
Leinster,  aided  by  cunning  magicians  called  Calatin  and
his  Sons,  who  had  also  assisted  Cuchulainn's  foes  on  the
Tain.2  The  sequel  has  already  been  briefly  related,  how
Cuchulainn,  trying  to  make  head  against  them,  fell  by
the  hand  of  Lugaid.  Now  the  stories  which  treat  Lugaid
as  Ciichulainn's  friend  do  not  permit  the  former  to  be
seen  in  his  character  of  a  personification  of  darkness  and
death,  of  evil  both  physical  and  moral.  This  has  to  be
gathered  indirectly  from  such  facts  as  the  following.
The  flagstones  of  Lugaid's  court,  under  which  his  body
was  said  to  be  buried,  appear  to  have  been  so  well  known
to  Irish  folk-lore  as  to  have  elicited  an  explanation  which
interpreted  them  to  mean  blushes  and  disgrace,  or  else

1  Cox's  Tales  of  the  Teutonic  Lands,  pp.  96 — 106.

2  Bk  of  Leinster,  119a— 1206;  also  93a.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  -\s:',

developed  them  into  an  odious  triad  of  murder,  disgrace
and  treachery.1  All  this  was  doubtless  based  on  the  cha-
racter ascribed  to  Lugaid ;  and  a  similar  conclusion  is  to
be  drawn  from  the  story  of  Conall  Cernach  avenging  the
death  of  his  friend  Ciichulainn  on  Lugaid  by  slaying
him  and  carrying  away  his  head  as  a  trophy.  On  lii>
return  homewards,  Conall,  meeting  his  comrades,  laid  the
head  down  on  the  top  of  a  stone,  where  it  was  forgotten
by  him ;  and  when  one  was  despatched  to  bring  it  away,
it  was  found  to  have  corroded  its  way  through  the  stone  :
such  appears  to  have  been  the  virulence  of  its  nature.

Other  accounts  make  Ere  the  slayer  of  Ciichulainn  :
his  name  has  its  explanation  in  its  Welsh  equivalent
erc/i,  '  dun,  horrible,'  Gr.  tt^kos,  which  seems  to  indicate
that  he  belonged  to  the  same  class  of  dark  beings  as
Lugaid.  As  the  slayer  of  Ciichulainn,  he  also  is  described
having  his  head  cut  off  by  Conall,  and  the  tragedy  is
much  deepened  by  the  account  given  of  the  grief  of
Acall,  Erc's  wife,  or,  according  to  another  version,  his
sister,  who  dies  of  a  broken  heart.2  But  such  a  story
would  have  many  forms,  and  one  other  of  those  extant
makes  Conall  slay  a  king  of  Leinster  under  circumstances
which  might  be  not  inaccurately  described  as  those  of
the  deaths  of  Lugaid  and  of  Ere  taken  together  to  make
one  tragedy.  There  had  been  a  great  battle  at  the  end
of  Aitherne's  unspeakable  progress,  and  in  the  battle  the
king  of  Leinster  had  slain  two  brothers  of  Conall.  It
should  be  explained  that  the  king's  name  was  Mesgegra
mac  Dtitho,  who  was  a  decidedly  dark  personage  (p.  330),
and  that  Conall,  arriving  after  the  battle  had  been  fought,

1  O'Cuny'a  MS,  Mat.  pp.  478-9.         -  Ibid.  pp.  49,  483,  513-4.

Q    .    O

_    1    -j


484  T.     THE    SUN    HERO.

set  out  on  the  track  of  the  victorious  men  of  Leinster,
who,  on  reaching  their  own  country,  disbanded,  leaving
the  king  and  his  charioteer  alone.  The  latter  came  to  the
river  Liffey,  and  as  the  king  looked  at  the  water  he  saw
floating  down  the  stream  a  nut  as  big  as  a  man's  head :
he  alighted  to  pick  it  out  of  the  water,  when  his  charioteer
happened  to  nap  and  to  have  a  disturbing  dream.  When
he  woke  he  thought  the  king  had  eaten  the  whole  kernel,
so  he  cut  off  the  king's  hand  with  half  the  kernel  in  it ;
but,  on  discovering  his  mistake,  he  drove  his  sword
through  his  own  body.  This  was  not  all,  for  now  Conall
Cernach  arrived  on  the  scene ;  and  the  king  would  not
fight  unless  Conall  had  one  of  his  hands  tied,1  so  that
they  might  be  more  fairly  matched.  That  was  done,
and  they  reddened  the  Liffey  with  their  blood;  but
Conall  prevailed,  and  carried  the  head  of  his  opponent
away  with  him  :  the  same  story  is  related  of  it  when
laid  down  on  a  stone  as  of  Lugaid's.  On  his  way  back
towards  the  borders  of  his  own  country,  Conall  accidentally
met  Buan,  Mesgegra's  wife,  going  home  with  her  suite.
'  Whose  art  thou,  0  woman  ?'  said  Conall.  '  I  am  the  wife
of  king  Mesgegra,'  said  she.  '  Thou  hast  been  ordered  to
come  with  me,'  said  Conall.  '  Who  has  ordered  it  ?'  said
the  queen.  '  Mesgegra,'  answered  Conall.  '  Hast  thou
brought  a  token  ?'  asked  Buan.  'Here  are  his  chariot
and  his  horses,'  said  Conall.  '  Many,'  said  she,  '  are  they
to  whom  he  makes  presents.'  '  Here  is  his  head  then,'
said  Conall.  '  I  am  now  free,'  said  she.  Thereupon
the  king's  head  was  seen  to  change  colour,  red  and  pale
white  alternately.     'What  ails  the  head?'  said  Conall.

1  Compare  Lancelot  fighting  with  one  hand,  in  Wright's  Malory
(London,  18GG),  iij.  263.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  485

'T  know,'  said  she;  cit  is  the  words  thai  passed  be-
tween him  and  Aitherne:  he  said  that  no  man  of  the
Ultonians  should  cany  me  away.  It  is  the  conflict  on
account  of  what  he  then  said,  that  is  what  ails  the
head.9  'Come  thou  to  me  to  my  chariot,'  said  Conall.
1  Wait,'  said  Buan,  'for  me  to  bewail  my  husband.'  She
then  raised  her  cry  of  lamentation  so  that  it  was  heard
as  far  as  Tara  and  Aillen :  after  that  she  threw  herself
headlong  and  died  on  the  spot.  Her  grave  is  on  the
road,  and  it  is  called  Buan's  Hazel  from  the  tree  which
grows  through  it.1  Apart  from  this  incident  which
recalls  the  death  of  Acall,  the  story  of  Conall  fighting
with  Mesgegra  in  the  Liffey  is  so  like  that  of  his  over-
taking Lugaid  in  the  same  river,  that  we  may  treat  them
as  referring  to  the  same  mythic  event,  and  regard  Lugaid
and  Mesgegra  as  virtually  one  and  the  same  mythic  being.
This  is  countenanced  by  the  allusion  to  Mesgegra  in
Emer's  lamentation  over  her  husband's  death.2

1  Bk.  of  Leinster,  116b,  l\7 a  ;  Stokes,  Rev.  Celt.  viij.  47 — 63,

2  Bk.  of  Le  insler,  1 1 G  a— 1 1 7  a,  1 2  2  a—  1 2 1'  b,  and  1 2  3  b.


Lecture  V.

THE    SUN    HERO.

PAET  II.


KlJLHWCH   AND    GwRI   OF   THE    GOLDEN   HAIR.

Up  to  this  point  we  have  used  the  various  forms  of  the
Sun-god's  name,  Llew,  Lieu,  Lug  and  Lugus,  as  our
finger-posts ;  but  we  have  now  to  pass  from  the  range  of
their  guidance  to  consider  some  other  versions  of  the
solar  myth.  "We  may  begin  with  one  of  those  connected
with  the  Arthurian  legend,  but  not  so  closely  connected
with  it  as  not  to  be  readily  treated  by  itself :  I  mean
the  story  of  Kulhwch  and  01  wen.1  Now  Kulhwch's
mother's  name  was  Goleudyd,  '  Light-as-day  or  Day-
bright,'  and  she  was  daughter  to  a  prince  called  AnlawcT,
who  was  also  the  father  of  Eigr  or  Igrayne,  Arthur's
mother.2  His  father's  name  is  given  as  Kilyd,  which
meant  a  companion,  fellow,  and,  perhaps,  a  husband;  and
his  grandfather's  name  is  represented  as  being  Kelyeton
Wledig,  which  might  possibly  be  regarded  as  meaning

1  R.  B.  Mob.  pp.  100—143;  Guest's  Mob.  ij.  247—318.

2  R.  B.  Mab.  pp.  100,  102,  106;  Guest,  ij.  198,  252,  258;  also
Brut  Tysilio  in  the  Myv.  Arch.  ij.  289,  where  Eigr  is  said  to  have
Leen  dau&hter  of  Amb.i6d  6hdic.


V.     THE    SFN   HERO.  4S7

Prince  Kelydon,  with  the  latter  word  taken  as  the  equi-
valent of  a  Caledo,  in  the  sense  of  one  of  the  Caledonea
or  Caledonians;  but  there  is  no  evidence  for  the  existence
of  either  Caledo  or  KclycTon  as  a  masculine  singular.  So
it  is  preferable  to  treat  Kelycton  Wledig  as  an  archaism
for  Gwledig  Kelycton,  which  would  mean  Prince  of
Caledonians  or  of  Caledonia.  The  story  is  chiefly  inte-
resting as  a  kind  of  parallel  to  Ciichnlainn  wooing  and
marrying  Emcr,  daughter  of  Forgall  king  of  Lochlann,
as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  abstract  of  it.
Previous  to  the  birth  of  Kulhwch,  his  mother  lost  her
senses,  and  wandered  Leto-like  on  the  mountains  :  it  was
the  fright  caused  her  by  a  herd  of  swine  that  was  the
immediate  cause  of  her  being  delivered.  The  swine-herd
took  the  baby  to  his  father's  court,  where  men  called
him  Kulhwch,  or  Him  of  the  Pig-sty,  because  he  had
been  found  in  a  pig-sty.  He  was  nevertheless  noble ;
and  when  he  was  yet  a  stripling,  his  father,  who  had  been
for  some  time  a  widower,  married  a  woman  who  had  a
daughter  of  her  own.  The  step-mother  wished  Kulhwch
to  marry  her  daughter,  but  he  excused  himself  on  the
score  of  his  youth,  whereupon  the  mother  was  much
angered,  and  swore  him  a  '  destiny '  that  he  was  to  have
no  woman  to  wife  but  Olwen  the  daughter  of  Yspydaden
Pencawr,  or  Hawthorn  Head-giant.  The  step -mother
had  every  reason  to  believe  that  uncanny  father  likely
to  put  an  end  to  Kulhwch's  life  as  soon  as  he  came
to  him  with  a  request  for  his  daughter's  hand;  for  it
was  known  to  her  that  no  suitor  ever  returned  from
Yspydaden's  castle,  as  its  giant-owner  was  to  lose  his
life  the  day  his  daughter  married.  Kulhwch  told  his
father  what  his  step-mother  had  said  as  to  his  marrying


488  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

Olwen,  and  the  father  said  that  nothing  was  easier  if
he  would  only  go  to  the  court  of  his  cousin  Arthur,  and
follow  his  instructions  :  these  were,  that  he  should  ask
Arthur  to  cut  his  hair,  and,  when  it  was  done,  that
he  should  demand  Olwen  as  his  hjvanvs  or  boon;  for
the  ceremony  of  hair-cutting  by  the  king  meant  his  mak-
ing him  one  of  his  men,  and  his  acquiring  the  right  to
demand  a  boon  of  his  lord.  Kulhwch  complied,  and
Avent  to  the  court  of  Arthur,  who  took  his  golden  scissors
and  cut  Kulhwch's  hair,  whereby  he  discovered  that  he
was  of  his  kin ;  so  he  made  him  tell  him  who  he  was.
Kulhwch,  as  instructed  by  his  father,  asked  as  his  boon
that  he  should  have  Olwen  to  wife.  Arthur  had  no
objection ;  but  neither  he  nor  his  knights  had  ever  heard
of  Olwen,  and,  though  they  were  by  no  means  unused  to
travel,  they  had  not  the  remotest  idea  where  YspycTaden's
abode  might  be.  When  a  considerable  time  had  been
vainly  spent  in  the  search,  and  Kulhwch  was  beginning
to  grumble  that  he  was  still  without  his  boon,  he  was  chal-
lenged to  go  himself  on  the  search  with  a  small  party  of
Arthur's  knights,  selected  with  special  reference  to  their
skill  in  such  undertakings.  He  accordingly  went  with
them,  and  it  was  not  long  ere  they  arrived  near  a  great
stronghold,  on  the  way  to  which  they  came  across  an
endless  flock  of  sheep,  watched  by  a  shepherd  sitting  on
the  top  of  a  mound.  He  was  a  remarkable  person  clad
in  skins,  and  he  kept  at  his  side  a  shaggy  mastiff  bigger
than  a  stallion  nine  winters  old;  nor  was  it  his  habit
to  lose  even  a  lambkin  from  the  flock,  or  to  allow  any-
body to  pass  that  way  unharmed ;  nay,  the  plain  was
covered  with  tree-stumps  and  clumps,  the  green  of  which
had  been  scorched  away  to  the  very  soil  by  the  breath  of


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  489

liis  nostrils.  Gwrhyr  Gwals'awt  Ieithoed,1  who  knew
all  languages,  even  those  of  some  of  the  animals,  Mas
asked  to  address  the  shepherd  on  behalf  of  the  party;  hut
he  protested  that  he  was  under  no  obligation  to  go  a  step
further  than  the  others ;  so  they  all  advanced  together,
and  the  more  fearlessly  as  their  magician  Menyw  son  of
'IVirgwaed:,  strengthened  their  failing  courage  with  the
assurance  that  he  had  laid  the  mastiff  under  a  spell  which
rendered  him  harmless.  The  shepherd  told  them  that  he
was  Custennin,  brother  to  Yspydaden,  whose  castle  they
sought  and  could  now  see  not  far  off;  but  on  learning
what  their  business  was,  he  tried  to  persuade  them  to  go
back  the  way  they  had  come,  as  no  one  who  went  on  such
an  errand  to  Yspy  claden's  castle  was  ever  known  to  return.
They  would  not  listen,  and  Ivulhwch,  as  he  took  leave,
gave  Custennin  a  ring  of  gold;  but  it  would  not  go  on
any  one  of  his  fingers,  so  he  put  it  in  one  of  his  gloves,
and  when  he  reached  home  he  handed  it  to  his  wife.

1  The  name  (R.  B.  Mab.  pp.  115,  126,  129,  137,  265)  means
Gwrhyr,  Interpreter  of  Languages,  the  word  Gwalstaict,  -which  occurs
written  also  in  other  ways,  mostly  less  correct  (R.  B.  Mab.  pp.  112,
114),  heing  the  A. -Saxon  icealhstdd,  'an  interpreter.'  The  oldest
"Welsh  form  seems  to  be  gwalstot  in  Rhonabwy's  Dream  (R.  B.  Mab.
p.  160),  a  story  in  a  somewhat  older  hand  than  the  other  Red  Book
ones  to  which  the  page  references  have  just  been  given.  The  Irish
etymological  equivalent  of  the  name  Gwrhyr  was  Ferghoir,  borne  (in
The  Pursuit  of  Diarmuid  and  Gfrainne,  i.  §  17  ;  also  Joyce's  (>/d
Cdt.  Romances,  p.  288),  by  the  Stentor  of  Finn's  party,  whose  every
shout  was  audible  over  three  cantreds.  Qwrhyr  ami  Ferghoir  are  pro-
bably derived  from  the  Celtic  root  gar  or  ger,  'to  call,'  and  the
meaning  of  the  "Welsh  name  suggests  a  time  when  the  herald  had
to  shout  from  the  advanced  post  of  his  own  men  to  that  of  the  enemy.
Add  to  this  that  Arthur's  court  had  the  services  of  another  accomplished
interpreter  of  human  speech  in  a  person  called  Kadyrieith,  R.  B.  i
p.  160  ;  Guest,  ij.  417.


490  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

This  gave  her  occasion  to  extract  from  him  all  the  news
about  Kulhwch  and  his  party,  when  Cnstennin  said  she
would  see  them  very  shortly.  She  was  filled  with  two
feelings,  one  of  joy  at  the  coming  of  Kulhwch,  whose
mother  she  stated  to  have  been  her  sister;  and  the  other
of  sadness  at  the  thought  that  the  youth  was  not  likely
to  escape  alive  from  Yspyctaden's  hands.  Custennin's
wife  was  a  fit  consort  for  that  mighty  herdsman,  and  at
the  coming  of  Kulhwch  she  rushed,  overjoyed  by  their
approach,  to  embrace  him ;  but  Kei,  who  as  the  leader  of
the  party  had  his  eyes  open,  adroitly  reached  her  a
bundle  of  fire-wood  he  found  close  by  :  the  woman's  fond
hugging  instantly  reduced  it  to  the  dimensions  of  a
withy.  '  Ah,  lady,'  said  Kei,  '  had  it  been  I  that  were
so  squeezed,  nobody  else  would  ever  have  a  chance  of
loving  me.'  In  the  course  of  their  stay  at  Custennin's
house,  she  opened  a  stone  chest  near  the  fireplace,  and
out  came  a  yellow-haired,  curly-headed  youth.  This,  she
said,  was  the  only  one  left  of  her  twenty-four  sons,  who
were  one  by  one  destroyed  by  Yspydaden,  and  she  had  no
hope  of  his  escaping  any  more  than  his  brothers ;  but  Kei
advised  her  to  let  this  her  surviving  son  cling  to  him
and  his  friends.  She  then  prayed  them  not  to  go  to  Yspy-
claden :  they  would  not  be  dissuaded,  but  would  wait  until
Olwen  herself  arrived,  for  they  had  learned  that  it  was
her  habit  to  come  to  wash  herself  every  Saturday  at
Custennin's  house,  where  she  and  her  maid  always  left
behind  them  all  their  rings  and  jewels.  Then  follows  a
curious  description  of  Olwen,  in  which  it  is  stated,  among
other  things,  that  her  hair  was  yellower  than  the  flower
of  the  broom,  and  her  skin  whiter  than  the  foam  of  the
billow ;  that  wherever  she  trod  there  sprang  up  four  white


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  401

trefoils,  whence  her  name  Olwen,  meaning  Her  of  the
White  Track.  Kulhwch  wooed  her;  but  she  proceeded
to  explain  to  him,  that  he  must  ask  her  father,  who
had  obtained  her  word  of  honour  that  she  woidd  not
marry  without  his  consent.  She  advises  him  what
to  say  to  Yspyctadcn,  and  how  to  answer  him ;  so
Kulhwch  and  his  friends  set  out  to  call  on  Yspydaden,
and  on  their  way  they  kill  his  nine  porters  and  his  nine
mastiffs  without  any  ado.  They  make  their  way  to  the
giant  and  salute  him :  then  they  tell  him  their  business.
1  Where  are  my  servants  and  those  blackguards  of  mine  ?'
said  he,  referring  to  his  porters.  '  Lift  the  supports  under
my  eyebrows  that  have  fallen  over  my  eyes,  that  I  may
Bee  the  form  of  my  son-in-law.'  When  that  was  done,  he
promised  them  an  answer  on  the  morrow,  and,  as  they  were
departing,  he  cast  a  poisoned  javelin  at  them,  which  was
caught  by  one  of  the  party  and  hurled  back  through  the
giant's  knee-socket,  which  he  resented  in  strong  terms.
The  next  day  they  returned  for  his  answer,  but  he  put
them  off  with  the  excuse  that  he  must  consult  the  girl's
four  great-grandfathers  and  four  great-grandmothers,
who  were,  he  said,  still  alive.  As  they  were  going  away
he  cast  the  second  poisoned  javelin  at  them,  which  was
caught  by  one  of  the  party  as  on  the  previous  day,  and
hurled  back  with  such  effect  that  it  went  through  Yspy-
daden's  chest  and  out  through  his  spine :  this  annoyed
him  greatly,  for,  as  he  said,  it  was  likely  to  occasion
him  a  difficulty  of  breathing  when  walking  up-hill,  and
possibly  to  interfere  with  his  stomach.  They  returned  on
the  third  day,  and  had  a  javelin  cast  at  them  as  before,
which  Kulhwch  himself  caught  and  sent  back  through
the  apple  of  Yspydaden's  eye  and  out  through  the  back


492  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

of  his  head :  that  annoyed  him  rather  more  than  the
woundings  on  the  previous  days  ;  so  on  the  fourth  day  he
thought  it  proper  to  sit  down  with  his  would-be  son-in-
law  and  go  into  details.  He  stipulated  that  Kulhwch
was  to  have  Olwen  to  wife  provided  he  could  fulfil
certain  conditions  which  he  named :  these  last  involved
so  many  apparent  impossibilities  and  the  intervention  of
so  many  mythic  heroes,  that  their  chief  interest  may  be
said  to  consist  in  their  forming  a  catalogue  of  the  subjects
of  so  many  tales,  most  of  which  have  been  lost.  With
the  aid  of  Arthur  and  his  men,  Kulhwch  procures  all  the
impossibilities ;  Yspydaden's  castle  is  stormed  by  Goreu,
the  only  one  surviving  of  Custennin's  twenty -four  sons ;
the  giant  himself,  like  Forgall  on  a  similar  occasion,  loses
his  life ;  and  the  marriage  of  Olwen  is  consummated.

This  tale,  which  I  have  been  compelled  to  abridge  very
considerably,  contains  a  number  of  things  of  interest  to
the  student  of  mythology;  but  I  need  only  allude  to
one  or  two  of  them.  The  clover-blossoms  that  were
wont  to  spring  up  in  Olwen's  track  recall  the  roses  that
grew  where  Aphrodite  trod,  and  the  former's  giant-
father's  name  Yspydaden,  meaning  'hawthorn,'  reminds
one  of  the  thorn  of  winter,  the  pricking  of  which  makes
Sigrdrifa  fall  asleep,  and  of  the  mistletoe  which,  thrown
by  his  blind  brother,  gives  Balder  his  fatal  wound ;
but  the  story  of  Kulhwch  is  to  be  read  briefly  in  the
Norse  Lay  of  Skirni,  which  relates  how  Gerdr  Gymir's
daughter  was  successfully  wooed  for  the  love-smitten
Frey  by  his  messenger ;  how  the  latter  had  asked  of  the
shepherd  that  '  sat  on  the  ho  we  watching  all  the  ways,'
which  he  should  take  in  order  to  visit  Gerdr  in  spite  of
her  father's  hounds ;  and  how  the  shepherd  thought  him  a


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  403

fey  person  or  a  ghost  to  think  of  attempting  such  a  thing.1

Still  more  to  our  purpose  is  it  to  notice  the  parallel  between
Knlhwch  and  Ciichulainn,  excepting  always  a  difference,

already  indicated  between  the  former  and  Lieu,  namely,
that  while  Ciichulainn  does  almost  everything  for  himself,
Kulhwch  achieves  all  he  does  by  obliging  others  to  toil
for  him:  the  only  time  he  is  described  acting  of  his
own  initiative  is  when  he  receives  Yspychidcn's  poisoned
javelin  and  sends  it  back  with  the  greatest  precision
through  the  apple  of  the  giant's  eye,  which,  as  it  decided
Yspydaden  to  come  to  terms  with  Kulhwch,  forms  the
turning-point  of  the  story,  and  invites  comparison  with
Lleu's  one  hurl  of  his  spear  when  he  transfixed  his  foe.
The  parallel  is  still  further  pretty  close :  Kulhwch  was
born  in  a  hovel  belonging  to  a  swineherd,  or  in  a  sty
used  by  his  pigs,  as  Ciichulainn,  according  to  some  of
the  accounts,  was  born  in  the  bothie  of  the  man  in
the  Brugh  of  the  Boyne.  Both  were  of  noble  blood,  and
grew  to  be  greatly  admired  on  account  of  their  personal
charms ;  Kulhwch  had,  so  far  as  we  are  allowed  to  judge,
the  same  unerring  hand  that  characterized  Ciichulainn
in  the  use  of  his  spear;  Ciichulainn's  marrying  was  a
matter  of  great  importance  to  the  nobles  of  Ulster,  and
so  was  the  marriage  of  Kulhwch  one  of  great  interest — a
forced  interest,  it  is  true — to  the  knights  of  Arthur's
court.  Their  respective  brides  were  similar,  and  this
extends  to  the  difficulty  of  visiting  them.  Of  the  brides'
mothers  we  read  nothing ;  but  the  general  resemblance
between  their  fathers  Forgall  and  Yspydaden  is  too
obvious  to  need  discussion  in  detail,  and  both  lose  their

1   Corpus  Poet.  Bur.  i.  111-7.


494  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

lives  when  their  daughters  marry.  But  I  pass  over  this
to  make  a  remark  or  two  on  the  mothers  of  the  heroes
respectively.  Now  Kulhwch' s  mother  was  daughter  of
Anlawd  Wledig  or  Prince  Anlawd,  of  whom  we  know
nothing,  and  she  was  sister  to  the  wife  of  Custennin,
brother  and  herdsman  to  Yspy&aden:  her  own  name
was  Goleudyd,  or  Light-as-Day,  and  her  sister  was  the
mother  of  the  twenty-four  youths  slain  all  but  one  by
Yspydaden.  The  number  twenty-four  points  pretty
clearly,  in  my  opinion,  to  the  twenty-four  hours  of  the
day,  and  we  equate  the  twenty -four  sous  of  Custennin
with  the  twenty-four  ladies  liberated  from  the  strong-
hold of  the  Perverse  Black  Knight  by  Owein  ab  Urien.1
This  last  description  of  them  as  imprisoned  ladies  is  more
in  harmony  with  Greek  mythology,  which  also  made
them  such  and  called  them  the  Hours,  keepers  of  heaven's
cloud-gate  and  ministers  of  the  gods.  It  is  not  likely
that  twenty-four  was  the  original  number  in  "Welsh
mythology;  and  the  Irish  story  of  the  three  Sons  of  Doel
Dermait  opposes  to  it  those  three  and  their  sister.  The
latter,  whom  I  take  to  represent  night,  was  not  brought
back  by  Cuchulainn,  who  released  her  three  brothers
from  captivity,  just  as  Kulhwch  was  the  means  of  saving
the  life  of  the  only  surviving  son  of  his  aunt's  two  dozen
children,  who  thus  lived  to  see  the  wedding  of  Kulhwch
and  Olwen,  that  is  to  say,  the  time  when  the  sun  was
about  to  rise  to  illumine  the  world  for  another  day.  The
Irish  myth  was  consistent  in  not  making  Cuchulainn
bring  back  the  hours  of  darkness,  but  only  those  of  light ;
and  the  fixing  their  number  as  three  refers  probably  to

1  It.  B.  Mob.  pp.  191-2;  Guest,  i.  82-3.


V.     THE   SUN   HERO.  l'.»")

the  division  of  the  day  into  three  parts — morning,  noon
and  afternoon  or  evening.  In  any  case,  three  is  also  the
number  of  the  Hora3  as  given  by  Ilesiod,1  who  calls  them
Eunomia,  Dike  and  Eirene  respectively ;  and  I  am  not
sure  that  the  XapiTts  or  the  Graces2  of  Greek  mythology
were  not,  in  point  of  origin,  the  same  as  the  Hone :  be
that  as  it  may,  the  latter  were  supposed  to  watch  over
men  and  prosper  their  works,  presiding  chiefly  over  the
changes  of  time  and  the  seasons.  Whether  they  were
not  confined  originally  to  the  narrow  limits  of  the  day
I  cannot  say,  but  we  have  no  grounds  in  Celtic  litera-
ture for  extending  their  domain  beyond  it;  and  after
the  analogy  of  myths  relating  to  the  sun  and  to  light,  we
may  naturally  expect  them,  whether  three  or  twenty-four,
to  have  been  regarded  as  the  offspring  of  parents  more
or  less  allied  with  darkness.  This  is  borne  out  on  Irish
ground  by  the  description  already  alluded  to,  of  Duel  Der-
mait's  daughter  and  brother,  and  by  that  of  Custennin's
wife  in  the  Welsh  story,  not  to  mention  that  the  father
of  the  twenty-four  sons  was  brother  to  Yspychiden,  the
chief  of  the  giants  of  the  dark  world.  Now  Kulhwch's
mother  was  sister  to  the  wife  of  Custennin ;  what  then
are  we  to  make  of  her  name,  with  its  unmistakable
reference  to  the  light  of  day  ?  The  only  answer  which
would  seem  to  satisfy  these  conditions  is,  that  she  was  a
representative  of  either  the  dawn  or  the  gloaming.  In
case  we  fix  on  the  dawn,  the  Sun-god,  whose  spouse  is  a
dawn-goddess,  is  himself  the  son  of  a  dawn -goddess,

1  Theog.  902.

-  The  relation  between  the  Charites  and  the  Sanskrit  Harits  will  be
found  discussed  in  Max  Midler's  Lectured  uii  the  iSc.  of  Language?,  ij.
•108-11,  418.


496  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

which  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  objection  in  a  nature
myth  of  the  kind  in  question  here.  However,  I  am  dis-
posed, on  the  whole,  to  suppose  the  gloaming  or  dusk  to
suit  our  tales  better — that  light  which,  for  some  time
after  the  sun  himself  has  sunk  out  of  sight,  continues  to
illumine  the  skies  in  these  latitudes,  and  to  tip  the  moun-
tains and  the  clouds  with  colours  which  are  now  and
then  of  indescribable  beauty.  Out  of  that  blaze  of  de-
parting light  the  Sun  is  obscurely  born  during  the  hours
of  darkness  to  begin  his  career  anew ;  but  before  he
has  made  love  to  the  rosy-fingered  Morn,  he  has  lost  his
mother.  This  hypothesis  would  help  us  to  assign  a  pos-
sible meaning  to  Cuchulainn's  mother's  name  by  referring
it  to  her  as  the  dawn,  or  better,  perhaps,  as  the  gloaming.
The  story  of  her  escape  from  Emain  to  the  fairy  house
to  give  birth  to  her  son  during  the  night,  which  was  so
arranged  by  Lug  that  the  infant  should  be  brought  up
by  the  nobles  of  the  Ultonian  court,  need  not  be  further
gone  into  as  a  parallel  to  the  mad  wanderings  of  Goleudyct
and  the  bringing  home  of  her  son  by  the  swineherd  to
his  master's  court;  and  I  wish  to  dwell  only  on  her
name  as  suggesting  how  to  explain  that  of  the  goddess
Dechtere.  The  "Welsh  word  dyd",  'day,'  which  enters
into  the  composition  of  Ivulhwch's  mother's  name,  is
not  to  be  found  in  that  of  Dechtere ;  but  her  name  has
a  partial  resemblance  to  the  English  word  in  its  old  form
of  dwg :  the  kindred  German  word  tag  still  retains  the
guttural.  This  brings  one  to  a  group  of  well-known
words1  which  incline  me  to  consider  the  name  Dechtere

1  Sanskrit  dak,  '  burn/  dagdha,  '  burnt ;'  Lithuanian  degu,  '  I  burn,'
degti,  '  to  burn,'  degta-s,  nu-degta-s,  '  burnt,  destroyed  by  fire,'  daga,
'hot  weather,  harvest-time,  harvest;'  0.  Prussian  dagJHt  'summer;'


V.     THE   SUN    HERO.  497

to  belong  to  the  same  mythical  category  as  that  of
Goleudycr,  and  to  refer  to  the  goddess  as  the  mother
of  the  blazing  sun,  or  else,  more  probably,  to  her  as  a
personification  of  the  light  that  overspreads  the  sky
before  the  sun  appears  above  the  horizon,  or  after  he  has
just  sunk  below  it.  Originally,  however,  it  may  have
alluded  more  particularly  to  the  hot  days  of  summer ;
for  myths  about  the  sun  may  have  to  do  with  the  seasons
of  the  year  as  well  as  with  the  landmarks  within  the
narrower  space  of  a  day.  It  is  unfortunate  that  classical
scholars  have  nothing  certain  to  say  as  to  the  meaning
of  the  name  of  Apollo's  mother  Leto  or  Latona,  in  whom
we  undoubtedly  have  one  of  the  Ilcllenic  counterparts  of
the  Celtic  figures  which  we  have  been  trying  to  examine.
In  the  foregoing  stories  the  Sun-god  is,  as  a  rule,  not
brought  up  by  his  mother,  and  in  the  next  to  be  men-
tioned the  separation  between  mother  and  son  is  brought
about  in  a  remarkable  way.  The  following  is  the  purport
of  the  tale  : l — Pwytt  Prince  of  Dy ved  had  taken  to  wife

0.  Norse  dag-r,  Gothic  daga-s,  German  tag.  Having  got  thus  far,  ono
at  once  recognizes  the  equivalent  of  Sanskrit  dagdh-  or  of  the  Litli.
degt-  in  the  "Welsh  word  godaith,  formerly  godeith  or  gwodeith  (for
an  early  Celtic  ivo-de\t-) ,  'a  blaze,  especially  the  burning  of  a  p]
overrun  with  brakes,  brushwood  or  furze.'  Similarly  Glodaith,  the
name  of  a  place  near  Llandudno,  is  probably  to  be  analysed  into  Glo-
daith and  interpreted  as  the  place  for  burning  glo  or  charcoal  :  it
is  spelled  Olodeyfh  in  the  Record  of  Carnarvon,  p.  1.  It  may  be  con
jectured  that  we  have  the  element  deith,  deyth  or  daith  in  a  noun
cdeithor,  which  occurs  in  the  probable  sense  of  'burner,  scorcher  or
blazer,'  in  the  Bk.  of  Taliessin  (Skene,  ij.  203);  and  edeithor  without
the  prefix  would  b<>  deit/ior,  of  possibly  much  the  same  meaning,  and
involving  a  base  corresponding  to  that  from  which  Derhtere  has  been
derived  by  adding  the  ja  termination.  Windisch,  p.  13S,  gives  unce
the  shorter  form  Dertir.

1  R.  B.  Mob.  pp.  17—25;  Guest,  iij.  59—71.

2k


498  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

Ehiannon  daughter  of  Hyveid:  the  Old,  and  when  they
had  lived  together  two  years  without  any  issue,  the  nobles
of  the  land  began  in  the  third  year  to  demand  that  he
should  choose  another  wife  that  he  might  have  an  heir.
He  persuaded  them  to  wait  another  year,  in  the  course
of  which  a  son  was  born  to  Ehiannon.  But  the  night
he  was  born  his  mother  slept,  and  so  did  the  six
nurses  who  had  been  engaged  to  watch,  and  when
they  woke  in  the  morning  the  boy  was  nowhere  to  be
found,  for  it  was  the  eve  of  the  Calends  of  May,  when
all  evil  spirits  and  uncanny  things  roam  at  large.
The  nurses,  to  avoid  being  burnt  alive  for  their  negli-
gence, conspired  to  swear  that  Ehiannon  had  devoured
her  son,  so  they  smeared  her  face  with  the  blood  of  some
puppies  they  found  in  the  house.  This  could  not  be
concealed,  and  it  went  forth  to  the  country  that  Ehiannon
had  destroyed  her  own  baby,  and  the  nobles  again
wanted  Pwylr  to  put  her  away;  but  he  replied  that
they  could  not  demand  this,  unless  she  continued  with-
out offspring,  which  was  not  the  case,  and  that  if  she
had  done  wrong  she  should  be  punished.  Ehiannon
sent  for  doctors  and  wise  men,  so  that  rather  than  con-
tend with  the  lying  nurses  she  might  undergo  penance.
The  penance  fixed  was,  that  she  should  remain  for  seven
years  sitting  daily  by  the  horse-block  near  the  gate,  that
she  should  tell  her  story  to  every  one  who  came  or  was
thought  by  her  to  be  ignorant  of  it,  and  that  she  was  to
offer  to  all  guests  and  strangers  to  carry  each  of  them
on  her  back  to  the  hall :  it  was,  of  course,  a  rare  thing
for  anybody  to  accept  such  an  offer.  This  was  at  a  place
called  Arberth,  in  the  present  county  of  Cardigan,  where
Pwyft  held  his  court.     At  that  time,   Nether  Gwent,


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  499

ov  the  country,  roughly  speaking,  between  the  lower
courses  of  the  Wye  and  the  Usk,  was  ruled  over  by  a
prince  whose  name  was  Teyrnon  Twrv  Bliant,  and
he  is  said  to  have  been  the  best  man  in  the  world.
Now  Teyrnon  had  a  highly  prized  mare  that  foaled  on
the  eve  of  every  First  of  May,  but  nobody  knew  what
became  of  the  foals ;  and  the  year  Ehiannon  gave  birth
to  her  son,  Teyrnon  was  determined  to  find  out  what
happened  to  the  foals ;  so  he  had  the  foal  then  born,
together  with  its  mother,  placed  in-doors,  while  he  pro-
ceeded to  watch  over  them  himself  that  night.  It  was
not  long  ere  he  heard  a  great  noise,  and  after  the  noise
he  saw  a  claw  protruding  through  the  window  and  seiz-
ing the  colt  by  the  mane.  Teyrnon  quickly  drew  his
sword  and  cut  the  claw  off  at  the  elbow,  so  that  he  had
the  colt  and  the  claw  by  him  in  the  stable.  Then  he
heard  a  great  tumult  and  noise  outside,  whereupon  he
opened  the  door  and  rushed  for  some  distance  in  the
direction  of  the  noise,  but  the  night  was  too  dark  for
him  to  see  who  caused  it ;  so  remembering  that  he  had
left  the  stable-door  open,  he  hastened  back,  and  found
on  the  ground  close  by  it  a  baby  in  swaddling  clothes,
with  a  sheet  of  satin  wrapped  round  it.  He  fastened
the  stable-door  and  took  the  baby  to  his  wife's  bed-room ;
when  she  had  been  told  of  the  adventure,  she  examined
the  baby's  clothes  and  found  that  it  must  have  been  the
son  of  gentle  parents.  Moreover,  as  she  had  no  children,
she  arranged  to  make  people  believe  that  the  baby  was
her  own :  so  they  had  the  child  baptized  with  the  bap-
tism that  was  usual  at  that  time,1  and  they  called  him

1  This  charming  catholicity  of  the  story-teller  has  heen  completely
snuffed  out  in  Lady  CI).  Guest's  translation,  iij.  p.  Gf»,  wluch  is  as  fol-

9      TT      O

a  JL  -j


500  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

Gwri  Gwalft  Eurin,  or  Gwri  of  the  Golden  Hair,  for
what  hair  he  had  was  as  yellow  as  gold.  Before  he  was
a  year  old  he  could  walk  vigorously,  and  he  was  bigger
than  any  three-year-old  child  though  it  were  good  of
growth  and  stature ;  and  in  his  second  year  he  was  as
big  and  strong  as  a  child  of  six.  Ere  he  was  fully  four
he  would  contend  with  the  servants  to  be  let  to  take  the
horses  to  water,  and  Teyrnon,  at  his  wife's  suggestion,
had  the  colt  of  the  same  age  with  the  boy  broken  in  for
him  to  be  his  own.  In  the  mean  time,  the  news  about
Ehiannon  reached  Teyrnon,  and  he  had  begun  to  scrutinize
the  boy's  looks,  for  he  had  formerly  been  one  of  Pwytr's
men ;  and  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  lad  was
exactly  like  Pwyif,  that  in  fact  he  must  be  Ehiannon's
lost  child.  After  consulting  his  wife  and  agreeing  with
her  that  it  would  be  the  right  thing  to  restore  him  and
release  his  mother  from  her  penance,  he  took  him  to
Arberth.  When  they  arrived,  Ehiannon  offered  to  carry
them  to  the  hall,  which  they  very  naturally  declined;
but  in  the  course  of  the  feast  that  was  going  on,  Teyrnon
gave  the  history  of  the  boy,  and  followed  it  up  with  an
appeal  to  all  those  present  to  say  whether  they  did  not
think  he  was  Pwytt's  son :  nobody  had  any  doubt  in  his
mind  on  the  matter ;  and  Ehiannon  observed  that  if  that
were  true,  she  would  be  rid  of  her  pryderi  (the  "Welsh
for  anxiety).  '  Lady,'  said  Pendaran  Dyved,  one  of  the
chief  nobles  present,   'well  hast  thou  named  thy  son

lows :  '  and  they  caused  the  boy  to  be  baptized,  and  the  ceremony
was  performed  there.'  How  this  very  bald  statement  could  have  been
extracted  from  the  Welsh  words  I  do  not  quite  understand :  they  are,
'Peri  a  wnaethant  bedydya6  y  mab  or  bedyd  awneit  yna:'  see  the
R.  B.  Mab.  p.  21.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  bUl

Pryderi,  and  Pryderi  son  of  Pwytt  Head  of  ITadcs  is  the
name  that  suits  him  best.'  '  Consider,'  said  Rhiannon,
'whether  his  own  name  be  not  more  suitable  to  him.'
'What  is  the  name?'  said  Pendaran.  'Gwri  of  the
Golden  Hair  is  the  name  we  gave  him,'  said  Teyrnon.
'Pryderi,'  said  Pendaran,  'shall  be  his  name.'  'It  is
best,'  said  Pwytt,  '  to  take  the  boy's  name  from  the  word
his  mother  uttered  when  she  got  joyful  tidings  of  him.'
This  was  agreed  upon,  and  Teyrnon  was  thanked  for  his
behaviour  in  the  matter  and  offered  presents  of  all  kinds
to  carry  away.  Pryderi  was  given  over  to  Pendaran
Dyved  to  be  educated.  In  the  course  of  years  Pwytt
died ;  Pryderi  succeeded  him,  and  chose  as  his  wife
Ivicva,  daughter  of  Gwyn  Gohoyw,  son  of  Gloyw  Watt  t-
lydan,  son  of  Prince  Casnar  of  the  nobility  of  this  island.
So  ends  this  branch  of  the  Mabinogi.

Considerable  complication  arises  out  of  Pwytt  and
Pryderi's  relations  with  Hades,  and,  so  far  as  concerns
the  present  story,  we  have  to  distinguish  between  Pwytt
Prince  of  Dyved  and  Pwytt  Head  of  Hades,  and  between
Gwri  of  the  Golden  Hair  and  Pryderi  son  of  Pwytt
Head  of  Hades.  In  Gwri  we  have  a  sort  of  parallel  to
Ciichulainn  and  Lieu.  Gwri's  rapid  growth  recalls  both
Lieu  and  Ciichulainn,  in  common  with  whom  he  was
also  remarkable  for  his  golden  hair.  We  cannot  compare
his  life  with  Ciichulainn's,  as  no  action  of  his  is  described
besides  his  taking  his  father's  horses  to  drink,  which
reminds  one  of  Shakspear's  classic  picture  of  Phoebus
watering  his  steeds.  The  allusion  also  to  the  colt  born
at  the  time  of  Gwri's  own  birth  deserves  special  notice,
as  it  has  its  counterpart  in  the  story  of  one  of  the  obscure
incarnations  of  Lug  before  he  was  bom  Setanta  or  Ciichu-


502  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

lainn.  It  is  to  the  effect1  that  when  Conchobar  and
his  party,  including  his  charioteer  Dechtere,  were  over-
taken in  the  fairy  neighbourhood  of  the  Brugh  of  the
Boyne,  they  came  across  a  solitary  new  house  there,  the
owner  of  which  bade  them  enter.  They  hesitated,  both
on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  building  and  of  its
probable  lack  of  provisions  and  sleeping  accommodation :
in,  however,  they  went,  and  they  had  not  been  there  long
when  they  suddenly2  espied  a  kitchen  door.  In  due
time  they  had  food  and  drink  of  the  most  varied  and
luxurious  description  brought  them,  and  they  had  never,
they  thought,  found  themselves  better  served.  But
when  they  had  become  merry  and  rather  more,  their
host  informed  them  that  his  wife  in  the  kitchen  was
overtaken  by  the  pains  of  childbirth.  Dechtere  went  to
her,  and  a  boy  was  born,  at  the  same  time  that  a  mare
at  the  door  gave  birth  to  two  colts.  In  the  morning  the
Ultonian  party  found  themselves  alone  in  the  open  air
with  their  horses,  the  baby  and  the  two  colts.  The
colts  were  kept  as  a  present  for  the  baby,  and  the  latter
was  reared  by  Dechtere  for  some  time ;  but  one  day  the
child  fell  ill  and  died,  to  her  profound  grief;  but  for  the
next  avatar  of  Lug,  Dechtere  found  herself  chosen  to  be
the  mother,  as  she  was  informed  by  him  in  a  dream,
when  he  took  the  opportunity  also  of  charging  her  to
keep  the  colts  for  the  boy  that  was  to  be  born  and  to  be
called  Setanta.  The  coincidence  is  not  seriously  lessened
by  the  colts  being  two  in  the  one  story  and  only  one  in

1  Windisch,  pp.  138-40,  from  Egerton,  1782,  and  the  Bk.  of  the
Dun,  128  a,  128b.

2  Windisch's  talmi  [A.  iarsin)  dv  is  to  be  corrected  into  talmidu
(i.  iarsin),  p.  137;  see  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  128  a.


V.     T1IE    SUN    HERO.  <303

the  other,  as  that  is  a  consequence  of  the  fact  that  a
man  who  tights  on  horseback  in  the  Mabinogion  would
be  made  to  ride  forth  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  two  horses
in  the  epic  tales  of  Ireland.  Herein  Irish  would  seem
to  have  antiquity  on  its  side,  since  the  chariot  and
chargers  associated  with  the  Irish  Sun-god  find  their
counterpart  in  those  of  Helios  in  Greek  mythology.1

CORC   AND   D I  ARM  AIT.

Various  allusions  have  been  made  to  Diarmait,  and
now  something  more  must  be  said  of  him,  especially  as
both  his  parentage  and  his  death  have  an  important
bearing  on  the  view  here  taken  of  the  Sun-god.  Diar-
mait was  the  son  of  Core  and  grandson  of  Duben,  so  the
story  of  Core  has  now  to  be  briefly  resumed  where  we
left  it  off  (p.  309).  It  will  be  remembered  that  after
Core  had  been  completely  purged  of  the  paganism  of  his
nature  when  he  was  a  year  old,  he  was  taken  back  to
Erinn  :  the  next  thing  we  read  of  him  is  that,  years  later,
his  father  Cairbre,  as  provincial  king,  sent  him  as  a
hostage  to  Cormac  mac  Airt  king  of  Erinn,  who  had
his  court  at  Tara.  Cormac  entrusted  Core  to  a  mighty
warrior  called  Aengus  of  the  poisoned  Spear,  and  Aengus
treated  him  as  his  foster-son,  and  he  was  with  him  on  the
occasion  of  a  hurried  visit  by  Aengus  to  Tara  to  avenge
an  insult  to  his  family.  Aengus  then  killed  a  son  of
Cormac's,  and  in  so  doing  he  put  out  one  of  the  king's

1  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  to  bo  forgotten  that  Conall  Cernach,
when  pursuing  Lugaid,  had  his  chariot  drawn  by  a  single  charger,  the
canine  horse  to  which  allusion  has  already  been  made  (p.  403),  as  pos-
sibly the  Irish  counterpart  of  the  brute  auxiliary  of  the  Chevalier  au
Lion  and  oi'  Uwein  ab  Orien.


504  y.     THE    SUN    HERO.

eyes.  After  doing  this,  Aengus  and  Core  escaped,  and
the  latter  freed  himself  from  his  position  as  a  hostage.
A  war  ensued,  which  is  regarded  as  the  beginning  of
the  great  movement  of  the  tribes  of  Leinster  usually
known  as  the  Expulsion  of  the  Deisi,  some  of  whom
came  as  far  as  Dyved,  in  the  south-west  corner  of  Wales,
and  settled  there.  But  the  story  of  Core  makes  him,  after
Aengus'  death,  accompany  another  band  of  the  exiles  on
sea,  and  sail  westwards  until  they  came  to  BoTs  Island
(p.  309),  to  which  the  narrator  at  this  point  gives  the
name  of  Tech  nDuind  iar  nErinn,  or  Donn's  House  behind
Ireland.  When  Core  saw  the  island  where  he  had  been
reared,  he  asked  his  companions  to  stay  with  him  there ;
but  his  story  goes  no  further,  except  to  state  in  a  general
way  that  he  remained  in  the  south  of  Ireland.  His
mother's  name,  as  already  mentioned  (p.  308),  was  Duben,
genitive  Duibni  or  Duibne,  so  he  is  usually  known  as
Core  Duibne ,  or  Duben's  Cropped  One.  It  is  clear  at  a
glance  that  Duben's  twin  sons  Core  and  Cormac  are  to
be  compared  with  Arianrhod's  children  Dylan  and  Lieu,
and  that  they  may  be  taken  to  represent  darkness  and
light  respectively.  Of  Cormac,  however,  next  to  nothing
is  said,  but  we  are  left  to  suppose  that  he  was  handed
over  at  his  birth  to  the  nobles  of  Munster  to  be  burnt.
But  Core,  in  whom  the  interest  of  the  story  centres,
clearly  lends  himself  to  a  comparison  with  Dylan ;  for
as  Dylan  hies  away  to  the  sea  as  soon  as  he  is  christened,
so  Core  is  taken  as  soon  as  he  is  born  to  a  little  island
in  the  Atlantic,  and  in  the  course  of  his  later  wanderings
he  welcomes  the  sight  of  it  once  more  and  desires  to
remain  on  it.  This,  it  is  needless  to  say,  is  in  keeping
with  the  systematic  association  of  the  world  of  waters


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  505

with  that  of  darkness,  as  suggested  more  thai)  once
already.  Further,  the  identification  here  suggested  of  Core
with  darkness  has  in  its  favour  the  important  evidence
of  the  story  how  his  brother  deprived  him  of  one  of  his
ears.  That  seems  in  some  way  to  typify  the  action  of
the  sun  on  the  dark  shades  of  night,  and  it  is  impossible
to  avoid  seeing  that  it  refers  to  the  same  attribute  of  the
dark  being  as  that  which  gave  Ailill  Aulom,  or  A.  Bare-
ear,  his  surname  (p.  391).  Further,  Core  Duibne  may  bo
shown,  in  a  round-about  way,  to  have  had  another  name,
Donn,  '  brown  or  dark.'  For  Core  had  a  famous  son  called
Diarmait  O'Duibne,  or  D.  grandson  of  Duben.  But  the
accounts  given  of  his  parentage  vary,  some  calling  his
father  Core,  and  some  others,  not  to  say  most  others,
being  wont  to  give  him  the  name  Donn ; l  but  there  was
probably  no  contradiction  between  them,  as  his  name
may  be  inferred  to  have  been  in  full  Core  Donn,  or  the
Brown  Cropped  One.  This  would  exactly  explain  why
Boi's  Isle,  where  Core  was  reared  for  the  first  year  of
his  life,  appears  in  the  same  story  under  the  more  usual
name  of  Donn's  House  behind  Ireland.     Of  course  Donn

1  The  story  of  Tlie  Pursuit  always  calls  Diarniait's  father  Donn ;
but  the  editor  quotes  at  some  length,  ij.  84 — 92,  a  poem  which  he
thinks  the  production  of  some  Munster  poet  of  the  thirteenth  or  the
following  century,  and  in  this  the  father  is  called  Core  and  the
grandfather  Cairbre  (ij.  85,  89).  This  can  hardly  be  a  late  invention,
as  the  modern  tendency  seems  to  have  boon  to  ignore  the  Core  and
Duben  legend  in  favour  of  a  pedigree  such  as  that  quoted  by  the  editor
of  The  Pursuit,  ij.  93,  from  O'Flaherty's  0<jy<ji<<,  iij.  69,  making  Diar-
mait son  of  Donn,  son  of  Duibne,  son  of  Fothad,  &c.  But  the  value
of  a  pedigree  which  treats  Duibne  as  a  man's  name  is  not  very  gnat.
Donn,  however,  is  Diarmait's  father  throughout  The  Pursuit :  the  word
means  dark  or  brown,  and  is  possibly  to  be  regarded  as  a  BUrname  01
another  name  ol  both  Core  and  Diarmait.


506  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

in  his  connection  with  that  spot  in  the  sea  was  the  sub-
ject of  another  story  of  a  different  kind :  he  was,  it  is
said,  the  king  and  leader  of  the  Milesians  when  they
arrived  to  invade  Ireland,  but  he  happened  to  be  drowned
near  the  spot,  which  the  peasants  are  still  said  to  call
Donn's  House.  That  the  cropped  king  of  darkness
should  be  the  father  of  the  solar  hero  Diarmait  is  in  no
way  surprising,  as  it  amounts  probably  to  not  much
more  than  another  way  of  saying  that  the  darkness  of
night  precedes  the  light  of  day ;  and  the  way  in  which
his  mother  is  described  suggests  a  dawn  goddess  asso-
ciated with  the  Liffey;  for  she  is  called  Crochnuit,
daughter  of  Currach  Life,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  Plain  of
the  Liffey,  the  unenclosed  portion  of  which  is  now  known
as  the  Curragh  of  Kildare.1

It  would  take  up  too  much  of  our  space  to  examine
the  many  adventures  associated  with  Diarmait's  name:
I  can  only  give  you  here  the  story  of  Diarmait's  death
as  briefly  as  possible.2  After  Grainne,  who  had  been
promised  to  Finn,  had  compelled  Diarmait  to  elope
with  her,  and  Finn  had  given  up  his  attempt  to  recover
her  or  to  punish  her  husband,  peace  was  made  between
Diarmait  and  Finn,  who  nevertheless  remained  ever
jealous  of  Diarmait.  When  years  had  elapsed,  the  latter's
wife  and  daughter  had  a  feast  made  for  Finn  and  his
followers,  and  it  happened  whilst  Finn  was  their  guest
that  Diarmait  was  one  night  waked  by  the  voice  of  a
hound.    He  marvelled  at  that,  and  would  have  got  up  to

1  The  Pursuit,  ij.  §  39;  Stokes-O'Donovan's  Corraac,  pp.  43,  128;
the  Four  Masters,  A.D.  1234,  editor's  note,  iij.  272.

2  The  Pursuit,  ij.  §  36,  &c.  ;  Joyce's  Old  Celt.  Romances,  pp.
332—350.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  507

sock  the  dog,  but  it  was  the  last  night  of  the  year,  and
Grainne,  after  wishing  him  safety,  observed  that  it  was
the  Tuatha  De*  Danann  that  were  busying  themselves.
Presently  Diarmait  heard  the  hound's  voice  again,  and
he  would  have  gone  out  after  the  dog,  but  his  wife's
advice  prevailed.  lie  fell  into  a  deep  sleep,  but  by  and
by  he  was  waked  by  the  voice  of  the  dog  again,  and,  as  it
was  now  daylight,  he  went  out  lightly  armed  and  accom-
panied by  his  favourite  hound.  He  walked  on  and  on
until  he  reached  the  top  of  Bonn  Gulbain,  a  mountain
now  called  Benbulbin,  in  the  county  of  Sligo.  There  he
found  before  him  Finn  all  alone,  and,  without  greeting
him,  he  asked  him  if  it  was  he  that  was  hunting,  where-
upon Finn  answered  that  it  was  not,  but  that  a  party  of
his  men  who  had  gone  before  him  were  there,  and  that
one  of  the  dogs  had  come  across  the  track  of  a  wild  boar.
He  went  on  to  say  that  it  was  the  Boar  of  Bonn  Gulbain,
and  that  it  was  idle  for  them  to  hunt  him,  as  they  had
tried  it  often  before :  in  fact,  the  beast  had  killed,  he
said,  half  a  hundred  of  their  number  that  very  morning.
Moreover,  he  added,  that  the  boar  was  coming  up  the  hill
towards  where  they  now  were ;  the  huntsmen  were  fleeing
before  him,  and  he  thought  it  advisable  for  them  both
to  quit  the  knoll  where  they  were  standing.  But  Diar-
mait would  not  go,  and  Finn  told  him  he  had  better,
as  he  was  under  gessa  or  prohibitions  not  to  hunt  a
swine.  He  said  he  had  never  heard  that  before,  and  he
wished  Finn  to  explain.  The  latter  then  began  to  relate
to  him  how  he,  Diarmait,  was  brought  up  at  the  house
of  his  foster-father,  the  great  magician  Acngus  of  the
Brugh  of  the  Boyne,  and  how  his  mother  Crochnuit  was
the  mother  also  of  a  son  of  Roc  mac  Diocain,  who  was


508  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

Aengus'  steward.  As  a  matter  of  favour  and  considerable
pay,  it  was  conceded  to  Eoc  that  his  boy,  though  a
plebeian,  should  be  reared  as  the  playfellow  and  foster-
brother  of  Diarmait.  But  one  evening,  when  Aengus  had
Diarmait's  father  and  Finn  staying  at  his  house,  the
former's  jealousy  was  much  roused  by  the  attention
which  he  saw  some  of  Aengus'  men  paying  to  the  son  of
the  steward  ;  presently  two  of  Finn's  dogs  fell  to  fighting,
when  the  weaker  members  of  the  household  suddenly
rushed  away,  and  the  steward's  son  ran  for  shelter
between  the  knees  of  Diarmait's  father,  who  gave  him
a  squeeze  which  killed  him.  The  steward's  grief  was
great,  and  he  would  take  no  eric  but  that  Diarmait
should  be  placed  between  his  knees ;  but  being  unable  to
get  that,  and  having  learnt  something  of  his  master's  art,
he  fetched  a  magic  wand,  and  with  it  struck  the  corpse
of  his  child,  so  that  it  was  transformed  into  a  grey
cropped  pig.  Before  the  boar  had  had  time  to  rush  out,
Eoc  pronounced  an  incantation  over  him,  according  to
which  he  was  to  have  the  same  span  of  life  as  Diarmait,
who  was,  however,  to  fall  by  him.  It  was  then,  as
Diarmait  was  now  told,  that  the  gessa  were  laid  on  him
by  his  foster-father  Aengus  that  he  was  never  to  hunt  a
pig.  Finn,  therefore,  advised  Diarmait  again  to  move
away  from  the  knoll  where  they  stood  talking  together,  but
he  was  not  to  be  frightened.  So  Finn  left  him,  and  refused
even  to  leave  him  his  dog  Bran  to  encourage  Diarmait's.
'By  my  honour,'  said  Diarmait,  'it  is  to  kill  me  that
thou  hast  made  this  hunt,  0  Finn ;  and  if  it  be  here  that
I  am  fated  to  die,  I  have  no  power  to  shun  it.'  Presently
the  boar  came,  and  inflicted  a  fatal  wound  on  Diarmait
before   the    monster   himself   perished.      According   to


V.    THE    SUN    HERO.  509

another  account,  said  to  be  the  one  now  current  among
the  peasantry)1  Diarmait  killed  and  flayed  the  boar
without  receiving  any  harm :  then  Finn  asked  him  to
measure  the  hide,  which  he  did  by  pacing  it;  but  not
being  satisfied,  he  asked  him  to  pace  it  again,  which
he  did,  walking  against  the  lie  of  the  bristles,  so  that
he  had  one  of  his  feet  pricked  by  a  venomous  bristle,
which  caused  his  death  in  a  very  short  time.  In  either
case,  Finn  and  his  men  had  arrived  on  the  spot  before
Diarmait  was  gone ;  and  Finn  is  described  bitterly  saying
to  him  that  he  was  only  sorry  that  the  women  of  Erinn
were  not  there  to  see  the  pale  face  of  the  darling  they
had  so  much  loved.  But  Diarmait  asked  Finn  to  fetch
him  some  water,  that  he  might  drink  from  the  palms  of
his  hands ;  for  Finn,  when  he  obtained  his  power  of
divination,  had  it  also  granted  him  that  whosoever  drank
water  from  the  palms  of  his  hands  should  at  once  be
cured  of  all  wounds  and  diseases.  Finn  said  that  Diarmait
did  not  deserve  it  of  him,  whereupon  Diarmait  proved
that  he  did  by  recalling  to  Finn's  memory  the  various
occasions  on  which  he  had  rescued  Finn  from  the  hands
of  his  enemies.  Then  Finn  said  there  was  no  water  to
be  found  there,  which  Diarmait  showed  to  be  untrue,  at
the  same  time  that  he  pointed  out  a  spring  only  nine
paces  from  where  he  stood.  Finn  was  very  unwilling ;
but  he  was  threatened  by  Ossin  and  the  other  Fenians,
who  loved  Diarmait  more  than  Finn  :  so  he  went  to  fetch
water,  but  on  his  way  back  he  thought  of  Grainne,  and
spilt  it :  he  was  forced,  much  agaiost  his  will,  to  go  a
second  time,  but  the  result  was  similar.     Ossin  and  the

1  Note  83  to  the  Pursuit,  ij.  p.  81.


510  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

Fenians  grew  furious,  and  lie  set  out  the  third  time ;  but
when  he  came  with  the  water,  it  was  too  late :  Diarmait
had  expired.  Grainne's  grief  when  she  heard  of  it  was
no  less  profound  and  frantic  than  that  of  Aphrodite  when
her  darling  Adonis  was  killed  by  the  boar  he  was  hunting,
a  parallel  which  might  be  followed  further.  To  return
to  Finn :  he  was  wily  enough  to  induce  Grainne  at  last
to  become  his  wife,  and  to  make  use  of  her  to  obtain
peace  from  the  Sons  of  Diarmait  when  he  had  found  that
they  could  not  be  resisted  in  arms,  and  that  they  had
meant  to  avenge  on  him  their  father's  death.  Lastly,  as
soon  as  Aengus,  Diarmait's  foster-father,  became  aware  of
it,  he  came  to  fetch  his  body  :  that  night,  he  said,  was
the  first  since  his  foster-son  was  but  nine  months  old
that  he  had  not  watched  over  him  and  protected  him
against  his  foes.  He  was  not  prepared  for  Finn's  treach-
ery, as  he  had  made  peace  between  them.  Now  he
carried  away  Diarmait's  body  to  the  Brugh  of  the  Boyne,
saying  that  though  he  could  not  call  him  back  to  this
life,  he  would  put  a  soul  in  him,  so  that  he  might  con-
verse with  him  daily.

So  ends  this  story,  and  it  is  scarcely  necessary,  after
the  remarks  made  on  the  subject  on  diverse  previous
occasions,  to  say  that  it  all  represents  the  varying  fortunes
of  the  struggle  between  the  Sun-hero  and  his  dark  anta-
gonist for  a  goddess  of  the  usual  type,  who  is  represented
first  betrothed  to  Finn,  then  eloping  with  Diarmait,  and
after  his  death  becoming  Finn's  wife  likewise.  It  may
here  be  noted  as  to  her  name,  that  Grainne  implies  some
such  an  early  form  Grannja,  the  close  relationship  of
which  to  that  of  Grannos  of  the  Apollo  Grannus  of  the
Celts  of  antiquity  cannot  be  mistaken.     Finn's  character


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  511

is  a  subject  of  considerable  difficulty,  to  which  I  shall
return  later;  suffice  it  here  to  compare  Finn  with  the
Welsh  Gwyn  ab  Niid,  who  contests  with  Gwythur  (lie
hand  of  Creictylad  daughter  of  Llud.  But  Gwyn's  story
offers  no  parallel  to  Finn's  tortuous  way  of  leading
Diarmait  to  meet  his  death  in  a  hunt;  rather  are  we
reminded  of  Gunther  and  the  hunt  he  had  a  hand  in
planning  for  the  assassination  of  Sigfricd.  Lastly,  the
nature  interpretation  of  the  role  assigned  the  Boar  of
Benn  Gulbain  is  subject  to  no  doubt :  the  savage  brute
symbolizes  the  same  element  as  the  terrible  worm  born
with  Cian  (p.  392).  So  the  noble  Diarmait,  beloved  of
all,  and  the  grisly  Boar  were  the  offspring  of  one  mother:
they  represent  light  and  darkness.

Irish  literature  speaks  of  other  mythic  swine,  one  of
which  may  be  mentioned  here :  it  was  a  monster  sow
belonging  to  Mesroida  mac  Datho  king  of  Leinster,  a
prince  of  the  same  class  as  Ailill  Aulom  and  the  like.
The  milk  of  three-score  prime  cows  went  to  feed  the
sow  of  Mac  Datho  every  day  for  seven  years ;  and  it  was
reared  with  malice  and  venom  that  it  might  be  the  bane
of  the  men  of  Erinn.  It  was,  however,  not  the  only
remarkable  property  of  Mesroida,  for  he  possessed  also
a  hound  called  Ailbe,  which  resembled  Culann  the  smith's,
killed  by  Cuchulainn,  except  that  the  range  of  its  watch-
ing was  much  wider,  being  nothing  less  than  the  whole
of  the  province  of  Leinster.  Now  both  Conchobar  king
of  Ulster  and  Medb  queen  of  Connaught  sent  to  Mac
Datho  to  ask  him  for  the  dog :  both  made  magnificent
offers  to  him.  This  plunged  the  owner  in  perplexity
and  despair ;  but  he  had  a  shrewd  wife  who  persuaded
him  to  promise  the  dog  to  both,  and  to  invite  them  both,


512  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

with  their  followers,  to  fetch  it  on  a  given  day.  The
Ultonians  came;  so  did  the  men  of  Connaught;  and
either  company  was  surprised  to  meet  the  other  at  Mac
Datho's  gate.  He  welcomed  all,  and  killed  the  great
swine  to  feast  them:  by  this  time  its  stomach  alone
would  have  been  a  load  for  nine  men.  ~No  sooner  was
the  banquet  ready  than  the  question  arose  who  was  to
carve  the  colossal  carcase ;  and  they  proceeded  to  decide
it  according  to  the  merits  of  the  men  of  Ulster  and
Connaught  in  the  raids  which  each  had  made  into  the
other's  country.  One  after  another  of  the  would-be
carvers  had  to  give  way  to  somebody  whose  claim  was
superior  to  his,  until  at  length  it  looked  as  if  the  Con-
naught brave  named  Ce't  mac  Magach  was  to  be  the  man ;
but  at  the  last  moment  Conall  Cernach  rushed  into  the
room.  Ce't,  who  recognized  in  him  a  formidable  rival,
but  knew  not  what  business  had  made  him  late,  addressed
him  in  words  to  the  following  effect : 1

'  Welcome  Conall,  heart  of  stone,
Fierce  glow  of  Lug,  sheen  of  ice,
Ruddy  force  of  wrath  in  a  hero's  breast2
Covered  with  scars  and  victory —
Finnchoem's  son  I  see3  against  me.'

1  For  the  text,  see  Windisch,  p.  96,  &c,  and  for  an  abstract  of  the
story,  see  O'Curry's  MS.  Mat.  p.  486,  note ;  also  his  Battle  of  Magh
Lena,  p.  1 4,  note.

2  The  Irish  fochich  I  treat  as  involving  cich,  usually  signifying  a
breast  or  pap ;  but  I  have  been  influenced  in  the  translation  by  the
Welsh  equivalent  cig,  meaning  simply  flesh :  so  fochich  would  mean
'  beneath  the  breast  or  beneath  the  flesh,'  in  the  sense  of '  in  the  body
or  person  of.'  Perhaps  Lug  should  here  be  treated  as  lug,  and  rendered
'light.'

3  The  text,  Bk.  of  Leinster,  113?;,  has  adcomm,  which  I  do  not
understand,  so  I  have  treated  it  as  adcimsa  or  adciimsa.


V.     THE    SIN    HERO.  513

Conall  replied  in  the  same  wild  strain  and  bade  Cet
leave  the  carver's  place,  which  the  latter  did,  sullenly
remarking  that  Conall  would  not  carve  had  his  brother
Anluan  been  present.  'But  he  is  present,'  rejoined  the
impetuous  Conall,  pulling  Anluan's  head  from  his  girdle
and  hurling  it  at  Get.  After  this,  Conall  began  to  divide
the  swine  among  his  friends,  and  by  the  time  he  had
finished  he  had  himself  eaten  the  nine  men's  burden.
As  to  the  warriors  of  Connaught,  there  was  left  for  them
only  the  two  fore  feet  of  the  animal,  which  they  did  not
consider  quite  enough.  Then  followed  a  promiscuous
fight,  in  which  Mesroida  let  his  fierce  Cerberus  take  a
part :  on  the  whole,  the  men  of  the  West  got  the  worst
of  it,  and  the  pursuit  of  them  began,  in  the  course  of
which  the  Ferloga  incident  happened  (p.  142).  This  story
is  clearly  another  version  of  the  victory  of  the  Sun-god,
and  the  remarkable  feature  of  it  is,  that  Conall  Ccrnach,
that  is  to  say  in  terms  borrowed  from  other  stories,
Ciichulainn's  avenger,  slayer  of  Ailill1  of  Cruachau,
and  beheader  of  Mesroida's  brother  Mcsgegra  (p.  32!)),
is  the  one  permitted  to  divide  the  carcase  of  Mesroida's
swine,  and  also,  more  than  all  others,  to  devour  it :  he  is
par  excellence  the  avenging  Sun-hero.2

The  porcine  representation  of  darkness  was  not  peculiar
to  the  ancient  Irish ;  traces  of  the  same  sort  of  nature
myth  are  to  be  found  also  in  Wales;  for  to  return  to


1  O'Curry,  ij.  291.

2  As  a  picture  of  manners,  I  leave  the  story  to  tell  its  own  tale  :  it
is  in  this  respect  one  of  the  most  striking  within  the  whole  ran]
Irish  literature  ;  and  the  incident  has  heen  tieated  by  Prof.   Zimmer
in  his  Kelt.  Studim,  ij.  189 — 193  ;  also  by  21  Duvau  in  the  Rev.  Arch.
viij.  336.

2  L


514  V.     THE    SUN    HEEO.

Diarmait,  it  is  important  to  notice  the  time  of  his  death.
It  took  place  on  the  last  night  of  the  year  or  on  the  morn-
ing following.  Now  as  the  Celts  were  in  the  habit  for-
merly of  counting  winters,  and  of  giving  precedence  in
their  reckoning  to  night  and  winter  over  day  and  summer
(p.  360),  I  should  argue  that  the  last  day  of  the  year
in  the  Irish  story  of  Diarmait's  death  meant  the  eve  of
November  or  All-halloween,  the  night  before  the  Irish
tSamhain,  and  known  in  Welsh  as  Nos  Galan-gaeaf,  or
the  Night  of  the  Winter  Calends.  But  there  is  no
occasion  to  rest  on  this  alone,  as  we  have  the  evidence
of  Cormac's  Glossary  that  the  month  before  the  beginning
of  winter  was  the  last  month ; 1  so  that  the  first  day  of
the  first  month  of  winter  was  also  the  first  day  of  the
year ;  and  that  according  to  the  ancient  Irish,  it  was  the
proper  time  for  prophecy  and  the  unveiling  of  mysteries,2
while  in  Wales  it  was  not  unusual  within  almost  recent
times  for  women  to  congregate  on  that  night  in  the
parish  churches  to  learn  their  own  fortune  from  the  flame
of  the  candle  each  held  in  her  hand,  and  to  hear  the
names  or  see  the  coffins  of  the  parishioners  destined  to
die  in  the  ensuing  twelvemonth :  it  sometimes  happened

1  This  is  accepted  by  O'Donovan  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Bk.  of
Rights,  p.  lv ;  but  in  Stokes's  Three  Irish  Glossaries,  p.  20,  precedence
is  given  to  another  MS.  which  reads:  Foganiur  .i.  donmfs  derid  is
ainm  isin  fogamur  .i.  fog/mm  ,i.  gaeth  7  mur,  &c.  This  is  rendered
as  follows  in  O'Donovan's  translation,  p.  74  :  'Fogamur  it  is  a  name
for  the  last  month  in  the  autumn,'  &c.  ;  but  the  Irish,  which  has
been  tampered  with  by  somebody  who  did  not  understand  the  ancient
reckoning,  only  means,  as  it  stands,  'for  the  last  month  is  it  a  name  in
the  autumn.'  I  should  propose  to  mend  the  original  very  slightly
thus  :  Fogamur  .i.  donmis  derid  is  ainm  insin  .  fogamur  .i.  fog/iam,  &c.
'Fogamur,  (to  wit)  for  the  last  month  that  is  a  name,'  &c.

2  For  a  few  instances,  see  O'Curry,  p.  284,  and  iij.  201  et  seq.


V.    THE   SUN   HEBO.  516

that  one  saw  one's  own  coffin,  and  many  were  the  pallid  ic
events  connected  with  this  pagan  survival.1  In  Ireland
it  was  also  the  time  for  another  custom :  it  was  then
that  fire  was  lighted  at  a  place  called  after  Mog  Kuith's
daughter  Tlachtga.2  From  Tlachtga  all  the  hearths
in  Ireland  are  said  to  have  been  annually  supplied,
just  as  the  Lemnians  had  once  a  year  to  put  their
fires  out  and  light  them  anew  from  that  brought  in  the
sacred  ship  from  Delos.3  The  habit  of  celebrating  Nos
Galan-gaeaf 'in  "Wales  by  lighting  bonfires  on  the  hills  is
possibly  not  yet  quite  extinct ;  and  within  the  memory
of  men  some  of  whom  are  still  living,  those  who  assisted
at  the  bonfires  used  to  wait  till  the  last  spark  was  out,
when,  unlike  Diarmait,  the  whole  company  would  sud-
denly take  to  their  heels,  shouting  at  the  top  of  their
voices :


Yr  hwch  du  gwta
A  gipio  'r  ola' !


The  cropped  black  sow
Seize  the  hindmost !


1  I  may  refer  to  the  Bn/thon  for  1859,  pp.  20, 120  j  but  I  have  read
valuable  matter  in  the  folk-lore  offered  for  competition  at  the  London
Eistedvod  of  1887,  especially  in  the  MS.  of  the  writer  calling  himself
Gwerinwr.  I  am,  however,  not  certain  which  of  the  superstitions
attached  to  the  eve  of  the  first  of  November,  and  which  to  that  of  the
second,  called  Dygwyl  y  Metric  or  the  Feast  of  the  Dead.

2  Tlachtga  has  been  identified  by  O'Donovan  with  an  ancient  rath  on
the  Hill  of  Ward  near  Athboy  in  the  Minister  portion  of  Meath,  while
the  Well  of  Tlachtga  was  at  the  foot  of  the  Hill  of  Ward,  which
was  probably  the  Hill  of  Tlachtga,  where  she  died.  According  to
O'Donovan,  the  full  name  of  Athboy  was  Atlt  Buidhe  ThuMgha,
'the  Yellow  Ford  of  Tlachtgha  :'  see  the  Bh:  of  Eights,  pp.  3  and  10,
note;  also  p.  /,  and  O'Donovan's  Four  Masters,  A.D.  1172  (iij.  5).
Tlachtga  was,  in  the  first  instance,  the  name  of  the  daughter  of  Mog
Ruith  (pp.  211,  381):  see  the  Bk.  of  Leimter,  33  W>;  also  331c  and
326y,  where  a  man's  name  Fer  Tlachtga  is  derived  from  hers.

3  Preller's  67.  Myth.  i.  146.

O      r       •)

a  Ju  A


516  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

This  version,  which  comes  very  near  the  English  saying,
'the  devil  take  the  hindmost,'  and  means  that  originally
one  of  the  company  became  a  victim  in  real  earnest,  is
current  in  Carnarvonshire,  where  allusions  to  the  cutty
black  sow  are  still  occasionally  made  to  frighten  children.
In  the  upper  part  of  the  vale  of  the  Dee,  the  doggerel
takes  the  following  form  :


Hwch  du  gwta
Ar  bob  camfa,
Yn  nydu  a  cbardio
Bob  nos  G'langaea'.


A  cutty  black  sow
On  every  stile,
Spinning  and  carding
Each  November-eve.


Nos  Galan-gaea'
Bwbacb  ar  bob  camfa.


Here  a  stile  takes  the  place  of  the  cross-roads,  which  are
apt  to  figure  in  English  folk-lore  ;  and  we  have  it  again  in
the  corresponding  but  less  specific  rhyme  from  my  native
part  of  north  Cardiganshire,  which  runs  thus :

On  November-eve

A  bogie  on  every  stile.

Add  to  this  that  the  Scotch  Gaels  have  formed  from  the
word  Samhain,  'All-hallows,'  a  derivative  Samhanaeh,
meaning  an  All-hallows  demon  or  goblin,  supposed  to
steal  babies  as  well  as  perpetrate  other  atrocities  then.1
Now  the  Irish  story  makes  it  clear  what  all  this  means,
and  why  the  night  in  question  was  regarded  as  the
saturnalia  of  all  that  was  hideous  and  uncanny  in  the
world  of  spirits.  It  had  been  fixed  upon  as  the  time
of  all  others  when  the  Sun-god,  whose  power  had  been
gradually  falling  off  since  the  great  feast  associated  with
him  on  the  first  of  August,  succumbed  to  his  enemies
the  powers  of  darkness  and  winter.     It  was  their  first

1  The  Cymmrodor,  vi.  176-7  :  see  also  the  first  number  of  the  Scottish
Celtic  Review,  where  one  should  read  samhanaeh  for  lamhanach  in  the
introductory  remarks.


V.     THE    81  N   HERO.  517

hour  of  triumph  after  an  interval  of  subjection,  and  the
popular  imagination  pictured  them  stalking  abroad  with
more  than  ordinary  insolence  and  aggressiveness;  and,  if
it  conies  to  giving  individuality  and  form  to  the  deform-
ity of  darkness,  to  describe  it  as  a  sow,  black  or  grisly,
with  neither  ears  nor  tail,  is  not  perhaps  very  readily
surpassed  as  an  instance  of  imaginative  aptitude.1

Outside  Celtic  we  have  parallels  in  the  Norse  smith
Volundr  (p.  381)  and  the  German  Wieland,  but  with
the  deformity  reduced  within  the  narrow  limits  of  lame-
ness. So  also  in  the  case  of  the  Greek  god  Hephaestus,
who  was,  however,  the  father  of  the  dragon  form  of
Erichthonius,  one  of  the  early  kings  of  Athens.  Hephaes-
tus and  Athene  were  closely  associated  in  the  ugly  story
of  his  origin  and  in  the  pious  cult  of  which  they  were
both  the  objects  in  Attica.  On  the  Celtic  side,  the
latter  association  recalls  the  Irish  mythic  magician
Mog  Ruith  and  his  daughter  Tlachtga  (p.  211),  whose
name  is  connected,  indirectly,  it  is  true,  with  the
annual  distribution  of  fire  to  the  hearths  of  Erinn  at
Samhain  or  the  first  of  November.  For  at  Athens
that  was  the  time  of  the  Chalceia,  an  ancient  feast  in
honour  of  Hephiestus  and  Athene,  the  exact  date  being
the  ivy  ko.1  vU  of  the  month  of  Pyanepsion,  that  is  approxi-
mately the  last  day  of  October.  This  feast  was  preceded,
immediately  preceded,  as  it  is  supposed,  by  the  Apaturia,
which  was  the  meeting -time  of  the  phratriie  or  the
tribes,  both  at  Athens  and  in  most  of  the  Ionian  commu-

1  With  tlie  Welsh  instances  already  mentioned  Bhonld  also  be  ranged
the  'grimly  boar  all  black  in  a  cloud'  seen  by  Arthur  in  a  dream,  ami
interpreted  to  refer  to  the  Spanish  giant  (p.  331)  he  was  to  overcome  :
sec  Malory,  i.  173-1,  and  Geoffrey,  x.  3.


518  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

nities.  It  lasted  several  days,  and  was  partly  devoted
to  civic  business,  such  as  the  adopting  of  new  members
into  the  tribes,  and  more  especially  to  the  registering,
subject  to  close  scrutiny,  of  the  names  of  all  the  legiti-
mate children  born  during  the  year  then  ending.  When
the  sacrificing  and  feasting  on  the  last  day  were  over,
the  children's  fathers  and  other  representatives  of  the
tribes  went  forth  in  a  procession,  after  lighting  their
torches  at  the  state  hearth.  Then  the  Chalceia  began
with  a  torchlight  race  engaged  in  by  the  younger  men ;
and  altogether  the  part  played  by  the  torch  in  the  doings
in  honour  of  Hephaestus  on  those  festive  days  is  very
noticeable.  The  nearest  Celtic  parallel  is  to  be  found  in
the  racing  away  from  the  bonfires  in  Wales  and  the  dis-
tribution of  fresh  fire  in  Ireland ;  but  it  is  to  be  added
that  the  Samhain  feast  in  the  latter  country  was,  like  the
Greek  Apaturia,  partly  devoted  to  business,  namely,  to
a  public  scrutiny  of  the  trophies  which  the  Irish  braves
claimed  to  have  won  during  the  year  then  ending ;  other-
wise the  feast,  which  occupied,  not  only  Samain  or  the
first  of  November,  but  also  the  three  days  before  and
the  three  days  after  it,  was  given  up  to  the  usual  games
and  the  fair,  to  pleasure  and  amusement,  to  eating  and
banqueting.1      Having  digressed  so  far,   I  can  hardly

1  See  Windisch,  Irische  Texte,  p.  205,  and  Stokes  in  the  Rev.  Celt.
v.  231 ;  but  for  details  about  the  Apaturia  and  Chalceia,  see  Preller's
Gr.  Myth.  i.  146-7  ;  A.  Moinmsen's  Heortologie,  pp.  302-17,  also
table  i. ;  and  Daremberg  and  Saglio's  Diet,  des  Antiq.  grecques  et
romaines  (Paris,  1887),  s.v.  Apaturia  and  Chalceia,  also  calendrier,
where  it  is  shown,  in  connection  with  the  Macedonian  calendar,  exclu-
sively adopted  (with  modifications)  in  the  East,  that  the  year  was
treated  in  more  than  one  reckoning  as  beginning  with  what  we  should
call  the  end  of  October  or  the  beginning  of  November  :  see  especially
pp.  829  £,  831//.


V.     Till-:    SIN    HERO,  519

turn  back  without  searching  whether  the  Greek  calendar
docs  not  offer  something  to  match  the  other  two  great
feasts  of  the  ancienl  ( Vlts  at  the  beginning  of  the  months
of  August  and  May ;  for  I  have  never  been  able  to  find
that  they  held  any  remarkable  feast  in  winter,  a  lacuna
which,  if  not  more  apparent  than  real,  must  have  had  a
meaning.  But  however  that  may  be,  it  follows  from
the  coincidence  between  the  Goidclic  Samhain  and  the
Greek  Chalccia,  that  the  Panathensea,  with  its  great
variety  of  games  and  contests  in  honour  of  the  goddess
Athene,1  who  used  to  be  then  presented  with  a  splendid
peplos,  must  have  taken  place  at  the  same  time  as  the
Lugnassad,  said  to  have  been  established  by  Lug  in  honour
of  Tailltiu  or  Taillne  his  foster-mother.  The  parallel  in
other  respects  between  the  great  festival  of  the  Greeks
and  the  feasts  held  at  the  same  date  in  all  Celtic  lands
(pp.  409 — 424)  would  take  up  too  much  time  to  discuss
here;  but  having  proved  two-thirds  of  my  case,  so  to
say,  I  must  now  continue  my  digression  to  the  remaining
third.  At  this  point,  however,  I  must  confess  to  some-
what less  success,  as  the  Greek  calendar  shows  nothing
occurring  just  three  months  before  the  Panathenaea.  So
one  has  to  be  content  with  an  approximation  in  the  Athe-
nian Thargelia,  centring  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  month  of
Thargelion.2  This  is  at  least  six  days  later  than  one  could
wish  for  a  feast  to  match  the  Goidclic  Beltaine,  or  the
first  of  May ;  but  it  was  also  about  the  time  of  the  Delia
in  the  island  of  Delos.  Both  were  held  in  honour  of  the
Sun-god  Apollo;  and  further  the  Thargelia  commemorated

1  See  Preller's  Gr.  Myth.  i.  173,  &c;   A.  Mouimsen's  Hcortologie,
pp.  11G— 205.

-  Pi-ollcr,  i.  209;  A.  Mummscn,  p.  122.


520  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

his  slaying  the  dragon  Pytho ;  but  it  had  another  feature
which  encourages  one  to  equate  it  with  the  Goidelic  feast
in  spite  of  the  discrepancy  of  date,  namely,  that  it  was
considered  the  regular  occasion  for  all  kinds  of  purifica-
tion in  order  to  preserve  the  city  from  plague  and  pesti-
lence. Among  the  peculiar  rites  that  characterized  it
was  the  leading  about  of  two  adult  persons,  as  it  were
scapegoats,  excepting  that  at  the  end  they  were  sacrificed
and  burnt,  so  that  their  ashes  might  be  dispersed.  With
this  may  be  compared  Cormac's  account  of  the  ancient
lMtaine,  when  he  says  that  it  was  so  called  from  two
fires  which  the  druids  of  Erinn  used  to  make  with  great
incantations ;  and  cattle,  he  adds,  used  to  be  brought  to
those  fires  and  driven  between  them  as  a  safeguard
against  the  diseases  of  the  year.  The  regretable  brevity
of  Cormac  is  made  less  serious  by  what  is  known  of  the
practices  connected  with  the  First  of  May  in  Scotland ;
since  we  clearly  learn  from  them  how  one  man  originally
became  a  victim  for  his  companions,  and  how  the  selec-
tion was  made  :  they  did  not  choose  him  for  his  ugliness,
as  the  ancient  Greeks  seem  to  have  done.1  The  parallel
which  has  been  roughly  drawn  here  between  the  Celtic
and  the  Greek  calendar  suggests  that  at  one  time  the
Greeks  regarded  the  old  year  as  ending  with  the  Apaturia,
and  the  new  one  beginning  with  the  Chalceia  in  honour

1  As  to  the  Thargelia  and  Delia,  see  Preller,  i.  209-10,  and  A.  Momni-
sen,  pp.  414-25;  Cormac's  statement  will  be  found  in  the  Stokes-
O'Donovan  edition,  pp.  19,  23  ;  but  for  an  account  of  the  Scotch
Beltaine,  see  Sir  John  Sinclair's  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  Vol.
xi.  p.  620;  also  Pennant's  Tour  in  Scotland  in  1769  (3rd  ed.,  Warring-
ton, 1774),  i.  97,  186,  291;  Stephens'  Gododin,  pp.  124-6;  and  an
interesting  monograph  on  the  subject  by  Dr.  Murray  in  the  New
English  Diet.  s.  v.  Beltane.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  521

of  Hephaestus  011  the  o'>/  kuI  vka  of  Pyanepsion.     Lastly,

a  year  which  was  common  to  Celts  with  Greeks  is  not
unlikely  to  have  once  been  common  to  them  with  some
or  all  of  the  other  branches  of  the  Aryan  family.

Diarmait's  Home  and  Duben's  Name.

After  this  digression,  I  must  now  return  to  Diarmait
and  Core,  since  the  remarks  already  made  on  them  would
be  incomplete  without  devoting  some  little  space  to  the
name  of  the  lattcr's  mother.  It  is  given  in  the  Book  of
the  Dim1  as  Duibind  in  the  accusative,  which  might,  as
nd  and  nn  have  in  that  manuscript  much  the  same  value,
be  written  Duibinn,  were  it  not  more  probable  that  it
ought  to  be  corrected  into  Duibin,2  as  the  genitive  there
given  is  Dutbm,  more  normally  written  Didbne,  in  modern
spelling  Duibhnc.  This  helps  to  fix  the  declension  of  the
name  in  Old  Irish,  and  we  may  treat  it  as  nom.  Dubcn,
gen.  Duibnc,  dative  and  accusative  Dubin  ;  but  it  seldom
occurs  except  in  the  genitive,  which  is  common  enough ;
for  there  was  not  only  Core  Duibne,  but  also  a  people
called  Corco3  Duibne,  a  name  Anglicized  into  Corcaguinny

1  See  the  facsimile,  pp.  53  b,  54  a.

2  This  agrees  with  the  form  used  by  Keating,  namely,  Duihhin,
which  he  would  probably  use  both  as  ace.  and  nom. :  O'Connor's  edition,
p.  273.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  the  mistake  would  arise,  it  wu
suppose  the  scribe  to  have  converted  nn  into  nd,  and  to  have  found
Duibin  ningin  eonairi,  'D.  daughter  of  C.,'  written  or  spaced  inexactly
in  the  copy  before  him.

3  What  relation,  if  any,  the  word  corco  or  corca  bears  to  Core's
name,  I  am  unahle  to  say;  but  here  are  a  few  notes  bearing  on  them.
Cure  makes  in  the  genitive  Cain;  and  the  lord  of  a  territory  called
Muacraighe,  after  Cairbre  Muse,  Core's  father,  used  in  the  eleventh
century  to  give  himself  the  name  O'Cuirr,  or  Core's  Descendant :  virr

i,  one  of  the  districts  called  Muscraiyhe  wafi  distinguished  later


522  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

in  that  of  a  barony  situated  on  the  Dingle  peninsula  in
Kerry.  But  the  descendants  of  Duben  were  at  one  time
much  more  widely  spread,  and  the  island  of  Valentia  is
found  called  Dairbhre  of  the  Ui  Duibne,1  or  the  D.
of  Duben's  Descendants ;  and,  according  to  O'Donovan,
the  principal  families  of  the  Corco  Duibne,  which  were
the  Ui  Failbhe  or  OTalvys,  the  Ui  Seagha  or  0' Sheas,
and  the  Ui  Congaile  or  O'Connells,  were  in  possession
of  the  following  lands  shortly  before  the  English  inva-
sion :  the  O'Falvys,  of  Corcaguinny ;  the  0' Sheas,  of  the
territory  of  Ui  Rathach,  now  called  the  Barony  of  Iveragh,


as  Core's,  namely,  the  barony  of  Clanwilliam  in  county  Tipperary.
See  the  Four  Masters,  A.D.  1043,  1044,  1100,  1503.  Cuirc  is  written
Quirk  in  English,  while  in  early  Irish  it  was  Curd,  attested  by  an
ogarn  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Dingle.  As  to  corco  or  corca,  the
dative  plural  6  na  Corcaibh,  'from  the  Corca,'  is  given  in  the  Book  of
Rights,  p.  97,  and  the  genitive  plural  na  (g-)  Core,  'of  the  Corca,'  p.  104,
in  reference  possibly,  as  O'Donovan  suggests,  to  clans  called  Corca
Acblann,  Corca  Firtri  and  Corca  Mogha ;  a  plural  Cuirc  is  treated  in
the  same  way  as  meaning  the  Corca  in  a  note  by  Prof.  Hennessy  to
his  edition  of  the  Book  of  Fenagh,  pp.  30,  31  ;  but  these  last  seem  to
have  been  so  termed  as  the  descendants  of  a  Core  Ferdoit  son  of
Fergus,  and  the  term  might  be  Englished  '  the  Cores.'  The  late
tendency  was  very  decidedly  to  prefer  corca  to  corco,  as  in  Corcaguinny
and  Corkaree,  a  barony  in  the  county  of  Westmeath,  supposed  to  be
the  tribe-name  given  in  Adamnan's  Vita  S.  Columbce  as  Korkureti
(Reeves's  edition,  p.  89).  So  I  am  on  the  whole  inclined  to  see  in
korku  and  corco  a  word  like  the  Old  Irish  mocu,  moco  or  mitco  (treated
later  as  maccu  and  even  mac-u),  to  which  Stokes,  in  Kuhn's  Beitrcege,
i.  345,  would  give  the  sense  of  grandson  or  descendant.  It  entered
with  a  collective  meaning  into  clan-names,  such  as  Mocu-Dalon,  Mocu-
Sailni  and  Mocu-Runtir,  Latinized  ' genus  Runtir :'  see  also  the
remarks  on  the  word  in  Rhys'  Lee.  on  Welsh  Phil}  pp.  407 — 412,
but  cancel  the  suggestion  there  made  that  the  word  involves  ua  or  o,
'grandson.'  Perhaps  neither  corco  nor  muco  is  a  word  of  Celtic  origin.
1  The  Bk.  of  Rights,  O'Donovan's  note,  p.  47.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  523

iii  the  south-west  of  the  county  of  Kerry;  and  the
O'Connells,  of  that  of  Magunihy,  in  the  south-east  of
the  same.1  Add  to  this  that  Core  Duibne  was  supposed
to  have  left  descendants  of  his  settled  near  Kinsale,2  in
the  county  of  Cork,  and  one  may  infer  that  most  of  the
ancient  inhabitants  of  Kerry  and  a  good  deal  more  con-
sidered themselves  descended  from  Duben.  However,
the  survival  of  the  name  Corco  Duibne  as  Corcaguinny  f
allows  us  to  infer  that  the  traditional  descent  from  an
ancestress  Duben  continued  more  vigorously  accredited
on  the  Dingle  peninsula  than  anywhere  else,  and  it  so
happens  that  this  can  be  corroborated  in  a  remarkable
manner ;  for  the  barony  of  Corcaguinny  is  richer  in  Ogam
inscriptions  probably  than  any  other  Irish  district  of  the
same  area.  Two  of  them  are  of  special  interest  to  us
here,  as  they  seem  to  refer  to  the  mythic  ancestress.  For
if  you  put  Duben,  genitive  Duibne,  back  into  the  form
Avhich  the  name  should,  according  to  analogy,  have  had
in  early  Irish,  you  will  have  some  such  a  name  as
Dubina  or  Dobina,  genitive  Dubinins  or  Dobiriias :  this
is  exact  enough  to  enable  you  at  once  to  recognize  the
name  in  its  attested  forms  in  Ogam.     One  of  the  stones

1  Ibid.;  also  p.  76,  and  the  same  scholar's  notes  to  the  Four  Masters,
A.D.  1095  (Vol.  ij.  950),  1495  (Vol.  iv.  1220),  1581  (Vol.  v.  1756);
also  his  edition  of  the  old  Topographical  Poems  (Dublin,  18G2),
pp.  108-9,  and  notes  594-9.

2  The  Bk.  of  Fenagh,  note  by  the  editor,  32.

3  The  change  of  sound  is  not  a  very  unusual  one  :  Corco  Duibne
was  softened  down  to  Corco  Dhuine ;  but  the  spirant  sound  which
analogy  would  indicate  the  (///  to  have  once  had,  has  long  since  been
generally  superseded  by  that  of  gh.  The  pronunciation  represented  by
the  spelling  Corcaguinny  was  evolved  in  consequence  of  a  tendency,
discernible  here  and  there,  to  reduce  the  spirant  git  into  a  correspond-
ing mute  g.


524  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

I  allude  to  lies  in  a  disused  burial-place  called  Ballin-
taggart,  near  Dingle,  in  the  barony  of  Corco  Duibne  or
Corcaguinny,  and  it  reads  :  Maqqvi  Iaripi  Maqqvi  Moccoi
Dovvinias ;  that  is  to  say  '  (The  Grave  or  the  Stone)  of
Mac  Erp,1  son  of  Dovvina's  Descendant.  Mocco  Dovvinias
was  probably  the  standing  designation  of  the  head  of  the
clan  to  which  Mac  Erp  belonged,  and  with  it  may  be
compared  the  fashion  in  use  now  of  speaking  of  the
O'Donoghue  or  the  0' Conor  Donn,  meaning  respectively
the  Descendant  of  Donchadh  and  of  Conchobar.  In  any
case,  the  pedigree  implied  in  the  inscription  is  made  to
end  with  the  distant  ancestress  whose  name  in  the  geni-
tive is  given  as  Dovvinias.  The  final  sibilant  was  very
precarious  even  in  early  Irish,  and  no  trace  of  it  occurs
in  the  other  inscription  to  be  mentioned.  This  latter
occurs  on  a  stone  in  the  same  neighbourhood,  which
stands  on  a  small  headland  near  Dunmore  Head  in  a  wild
situation  arguing  no  lack  of  sentiment  on  the  part  of
him  who  chose  the  site  :  the  legend  is  the  following  : —


Ere  Ma  qv  i  Ma  qv  i


MoDov  i    n    i   a


1  This  is  a  guess  ;  but  Erp  would  be  the  name  whose  genitive  occurs
as  (H)irp  in  the  Bodley  MS.  Laud.  610 ;  see  fol.  95  b\  where  we  read
of  a  Cathmol  mc  Hirp,  who  was  buried  with  Lugaid  mac  Con  in  Cuil
m-Broclwll,  somewhere  in  South  Munster.  The  name  occurs  in  the
Welsh  Triads,  i.  40  =  ij.  5,  as  that  of  Yrp  Lluydawg,  who  obtained  a
vast  host  from  the  Welsh  by  outwitting  them  in  arithmetic.  He  was
possibly  a  Pict ;  the  name  Erp  was  borne  by  several  persons  also
in  Norse  literature  :  see  the  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  51,  56,  58,  also  ij.  2,  6,
where  a  poet  Erp  Ljutandi  is  mentioned.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  625

We  are  hero  mot  by  a  difficulty  as  to  whether  MoDovima
is  to  be  construed  with  the  legend  on  the  other  edge  of
the  stone  or  by  itself,  as  the  writing  is  not  continuous.
On  the  whole  I  am  inclined  to  the  former  view,  and  to
render  the  inscription  thus  :  '  (The  Grave  or  Stone)  of
Ere,  son  of  the  Son  of  Erca,1  (daughter  or  descendant)  of
MoDovina.'  It  is  possible  that  a  word  meaning  daughter
or  descendant  has  been  effaced  by  the  weather  before
MoDovima  on  the  right-hand  edge  of  the  stone ;  but
that  is  not  essential,  nor  would  the  construction  in  the
absence  of  it  be  more  abrupt  than  in  the  case  of  Core
Duihne,  or  Duben's  Core,  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun.  I
have,  however,  failed  to  detect  any  more  traces  of  writing
on  that  part  of  the  angle,2  but  the  existence  on  the  stone
of  this  little  word  mo,  to  be  identified  possibly  with  Irish
mo  '  my,'  is  one  of  its  peculiarities.  It  marks  the  mythic
ancestress  as  the  object  of  special  endearment  and  respect,
probably  of  divine  reverence.  The  same  thing  occurs  in
the  case  of  other  such  mythical  personages  as  Ailill  Aulom
or  Olom  (p.  391),  who  is  sometimes  called  Ailill  Mo-
haulum,  and  in  that  of  Mo-Febis,3  whose  sons  were  Mog

1  Erca  would  be  the  early  nominative  feminine  corresponding  to  the,
genitive  Erc'ias  of  the  inscription.  One  reads  of  Clann  Erci,  so-called
from  their  mother,  in  Scotland  :  see  the  Bk.  of  Fenagh,  pp.  330-1.

2  It  is  right  to  say  that  Mr.  Brash,  p.  179,  omits  the  particle  mo  or
mu — for  the  vowel  is  not  certain — after  quoting  an  inaccurate  reading
of  Mr.  Windele's;  while  in  his  posthumously  published  work  on  Ogham
Inscriptions,  Sir  S.  Ferguson,  whose,  recent  death  I  deeply  deplore,
calls  (p.  41)  the  scorings  here  in  question  'characters  not  now  Legible  ;'
but  the  examination  of  the  stone  by  my  wife  and  myself,  under  more
favourable  circumstances,  in  the  summer  of  1883,  led  us  to  the  unex-
pected conclusion  which  has  just  been  stated.

3  For  Mfi/t'ii/fitii>,  see  the  Bodley  MS.  /.</'/</.  010,  where  we  have
Ailill  Mohaulum,  94^2,  95a1,  Ailclla  Mohauluim,  95b1,  Mohaulum


526  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

Kuith,  mentioned  on  previous  occasions  (p.  211),  and
L6ch  M6r,  one  of  the  most  formidable  foes  killed  by
Cuchulainn  on  the  Tain.  The  pagan  formula  was  con-
tinued by  the  Irish  in  the  names  of  their  saints  in  Chris-
tian times,  as,  for  example,  in  Mo-Gobnait,  Mo-Bi6c,  and
dozens  of  others.1  In  point  of  etymology,  Duben  is  obscure
and  not  improbably  of  Ivernian  origin ;  but  it  is  excep-
tional that  the  v  of  the  ogmic  form  Dovinia  or  Dovvinias
should  have  been  retained,  written  b,  in  the  later  forms,
as  the  general  rule  would  require  its  complete  disappear-
ance.2   If  you  will  look  at  the  map,  you  will  observe  that

alone,  94  b9;  Mohauluim  gen.  95a2;  the  h  is  represented  by  an  s  with
a  dot,  which  is  liable  to  be  forgotten  by  the  scribe,  as  happens  once  on
95a1,  where  also  Moluigid  occurs,  applied  to  a  Lugaid  identical  probably
in  point  of  origin  with  the  slayer  of  Cuchulainn.  As  to  Mo-Febis,
see  the  Bk.  of  the  Dim,  74,  where  Febis  or  Fernis  is  said  to  have
been  the  mother's  name ;  but  the  Four  Masters  make  Mofebis  a  man,
and  date  his  death  A.M.  3751,  though  they  mention  his  son  Mog
Kuith  engaged  in  war  A.M.  3579,  or  172  years  earlier.  Allusions  to
Mafemis  will  be  found  also  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  \bb,  19  a,  and
Mofemis  in  O'Curry's  Manners,  ij.  9.

1  See  the  index  to  the  Martijrology  of  Donegal  (Dublin,  1864),  and
Stokes'  Calendar  of  Oengus,  p.  ccxciij.

2  It  is  right  to  say  that  the  exact  sound  meant  to  be  represented  by
vv  is  not  known,  if  it  be  taken  to  have  differed  from  the  ordinary
power  of  a  single  v.  The  irregular  retention  of  the  consonant  may
be  supposed  based  on  some  peculiarity  of  dialect  connected  with
Munster ;  and  an  important  parallel,  which  countenances  this  view,
offers  itself  in  the  name  Eber  of  the  mythic  ancestor  or  eponymous
hero  of  the  Ivernian  populations  of  the  south  of  Ireland,  especially
Munster.  The  name  is  otherwise  reduced  to  Ier,  Er  and  Ir,  which  is
the  one  usually  preferred  as  that  of  the  ancestor  of  the  Ivernian
element  in  Ulster :  the  form  represented  in  common  by  Eber  and  the
shorter  names  must  have  been  in  early  Irish  Iveros  or  Everos.  Eber
is  also  written  Emer,  which  comes  down  from  a  time  when  both  b
and  m  here,  as  well  as  the  b  in  Duben,  Duibne,  were  sounded  v.  Ier
is  not  often  to  be  met  with,  but  it  occurs,  for  instance,  in  the  Bk.  of


V.     THE    SUN   HERO.  527

the  country  with  which  Dnben's  name  was  more  or  less
closely  connected,  forms  a  kind  of  an  indented  peninsula
between  Kenmare  River  and  Tralce  Bay,  such  a  position
as  regards  the  western  sea  as  one  might  have  considered
the  special  domain  of  a  goddess  of  dusk  or  dawn  :  com-
pare the  relation  of  Duben's  Welsh  counterpart  Arianrhod
and  others  of  the  same  class  to  the  world  of  waters
(pp.  236,  380).  With  regard  to  the  divinity  of  the  Irish
goddess,  the  reader  may  naturally  ask,  how  any  one
about  whom  there  was  such  a  story  as  that  about  Duben
and  her  relations  with  Cairbre  Muse  could  have  been
the  object  of  respect,  not  to  say  of  divine  reverence,
such  as  may  be  inferred  to  have  been  hers.  Here
mythology  and  religion  probably  went  their  own  several
ways,  just  as  readers  of  the  Odyssey  do  not  find  the
piety  of  Eumteus  much  disturbed  by  the  hideous  tales  of
lewdness  which  Greek  story  had  to  relate,  not  only  of
the  minor  divinities,  but  especially  of  Zeus,  the  greatest.
The  dark  side  of  Duben's  character  is  much  less  dwelt
upon  in  Irish  literature  than  is  that  of  Arianrhod  in  the
Welsh  Mabinogi  of  Math  ab  Mathonwy ;  but  the  faded
outline  of  a  flattering  picture  of  the  latter  has  neverthe-
less come  down  to  us  within  the  narrow  compass  of  a  triad,
which  allows  her  to  rank  as  one  of  the  Three  White  or
Blessed  Ladies  of  the  Isle  of  Britain.1     All  this  means

Lcinstcr,  326^,  and  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  99  a,  where  wc  have  in  the
gen.  ier  diernaib  minium,  'Iveri  de  Ivemiia  Momonis:'  compare  Erj>,
genitive  Hirp,  and  the  Iaripi  already  referred  to  ;  also  a  dissyllabic
genitive  lair  in  Stokes'  OaU  ndar  of  Oengus,  Oct.  26.

1  The  Triads,  i.  73,  iij.  107.  The  word  I  have  rendered  'White
or  Blessed  Ladies'  is  gwenriain,  consisting  partly  of  gwen,  the  fern,  of
ijinjii.  '  whit t','  which,  though  one  of  the  commonest  words  in  my
language,   I  am  unable  satisfactorily  to  translate  into  English  ;   for


528  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

that  there  was  a  distant  time  when  religion  and  mytho-
logy were  at  one  as  to  the  character  of  such  divinities  as
Duben  and  Arianrhod.  Even  Lugaid  appears  to  have
been  once  the  object  of  worship  :  you  may  take  the  name
Mo-Lugaid  as  evidence,  and  note  the  fact  that  the  ancient
centres  of  Irish  paganism,  left  '  waste  without  adoration,'
are  compared  to  the  site  of  Lugaid's  house.1

In  connection  with  my  attempt  to  show  that  Diarmait,
Core  and  Duben  were  intimately  associated  with  Kerry,
it  is  worth  while  to  observe  that  the  inhabitants  of  that
part  of  Ireland  were  probably  among  the  least  purely
Celtic  and  the  most  thoroughly  Ivernian  in  the  island.
Though  nothing  conspicuously  different  from  the  legends
of  other  districts  seems  to  characterize  those  of  Kerry,
it  is  not  impossible  that  a  closer  examination  of  them
would  result  in  the  discovery  of  non-Celtic  traits.  That
is,  perhaps,  the  light  in  which  one  should  "regard  the
attribution  to  Diarmait  of  a  mole,  described  as  a  love-
spot,  on  his  face,  and  curly  hair  on  his  head  of  a  dusky
black  colour,2  the  Ivernian  race  being,  as  it  is  supposed,
itself  of  a  dark  complexion.

besides  'white,'  it  may  mean  'respected,  holy,  felicitous,  blessed,'
with  a  variety  of  nuances  which  no  single  English  word  will  convey  :
thus  the  poets  speak  of  Dmv  gwyn,  '  holy  or  blessed  God,'  and  nef  wen,
'the  blessed  or  blissful  heaven,'  while  their  lemans  have  not  unfrequently
been  addressed  by  them  as  fy  nyn  wen,  'my  heavenly  maid;'  and  my
father  used  to  call  his  respected  step-mother  mam  wen,  a  term  in
common  use  in  parts  of  Mid- Wales,  and  best  rendered  by  the  French
belle  mere.  These  and  the  like  uses  of  the  adjective  are  paralleled  by
the  Lithuanian  treatment  of  baltas,  'white:'  see  Nesselmann's  Did.
p.  319.

1  Stokes,  Calendar  of  Oengus,  Prolog,  lines  205-8.

2  See  Tlie  Pursuit,  i.  §  5,  and  pp.  61-2  ;  also  the  poem  referred  to  in
my  note,  p.  504,  which  seems  to  give  Core  or  Diarmait  the  epithet


V.     THE    SUN    J1K110.  02! I


The  Celtic  Sun  Hero  and  the  Norse  Balder.

It  is  proposed  at  this  point  to  give  you  the  means  of
comparing  the  story  of  the  Sun-god  of  the  Celts  with  that
of  Balder.  The  latter,  as  given  in  old  Norse  literature,
is  approximately  as  follows:1 —

Balder  was  one  of  the  sons  of  Woden  and  Frigg:  he
was  the  best  of  the  Anses  and  praised  of  them  all.  He
was  so  fair  of  face  and  so  bright  that  rays  of  shining
light  issued  from  his  body.  The  whitest  of  all  plants
was  compared  to  Balder' s  brow  and  known  by  that  name,
whence  an  idea  may  bo  formed,  says  one  author,2  of  the
beauty  of  his  hair  and  of  his  body.  lie  was  not  only
the  whitest,  the  sweetest-spoken  and  the  mildest  of  all
the  Anses,  but  it  was  a  property  of  his  nature  that  he
could  not  go  wrong  in  his  judgments.  He  dwelt  in
a  place  in  heaven  called  Breicfablik  or  Broad-gleam,
the  most  blessed  of  all  lands,  where  nought  unclean  or
accursed  could  abide.     But  once  on  a  time  Balder  began


donn,  '  brown  or  dark,'  ij.  85  ;  bnt  the  words  are  separated  by  the
artifice  or  the  straits  of  the  poet,  and  the  editor,  taking  a  view  dif-
ferent from  mine,  treats  Donn  as  a  separate  name,  ij.  89.  The  con-
jecture that  Diarmait  is  to  be  reckoned  as  belonging  to  the  Ivernians,
is  in  some  measure  corroborated  by  the  fact  that  hitherto  no  successful
attempt  lias  been  made  to  explain  his  name  as  Celtic,  and  that  the
same  remark  applies  to  that  of  Duben.

1  The  sources  which  I  have  consulted  are  the  following  :  the  Prose
Edda  in  Edda  Snorronis  Sturlcei  (Copenhagen,  1848),  i.  90-2, 102,  104,
172-8G  ;  Vigfusson  &  Powell,  Corptis  Poet.  Bor.  i.  G9,  71,  104,  L08,
114,  181-3,  197,  201,  574-5,  ij.  23,  G23-4,  628,  637,  641-8;  Simrock,
£He  Edda  (Stuttgart,  1855),  pp.  292-3,  295-6,  299,  316-20.

2  What  plant  or  flower  he  referred  to  is  not  quite  certain  ;  the  cofida
foetida,  pyretkrum  inodorum,  and  the  eye-bright  or  euphrasy,  an;  men-
tioned in  Vigl'ussun's  Icelandic  Dictionary,  s.v.  Baldr.

2  31


530  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

to  be  disquieted  by  dreams  of  ill-omen  ;  and  when  he  told
the  Anses  of  it,  they  took  counsel  together  how  to  ensure
his  safety.  The  result  of  their  deliberation  was,  that
Woden  went  down  to  the  nether  world  to  consult  a
dead  sibyl  about  the  dreams  that  haunted  Balder ;  and
Frigg,  who  dwelt  in  a  house  called  Fensalir  or  the  Hall
of  the  Fen,  sent  to  make  all  things  swear  that  they  would
not  hurt  her  beloved  son  Balder :  the  oath  was  exacted
from  fire  and  water,  from  iron  and  all  metals,  from
stones  and  earth,  from  the  trees  of  the  forest,  from  dis-
eases and  poisons,  from  four-footed  beasts  and  from  birds
and  serpents  :  the  mistletoe  alone  was  deemed  by  Frigg
too  young  a  thing  to  be  asked  to  swear.  But  Loki,  the
brewer  of  mischief  and  the  sire  of  a  bestial  triad  consisting
of  the  Fenri  Wolf,  the  Leviathan  of  the  deep,  and  Hell
the  witch  of  Mnheim  or  the  Home  of  Fog,  was  by  no
means  pleased  to  see  that  Balder  could  not  be  hurt  like
others ;  so  one  day  when  the  Anses  were  amusing  them-
selves by  throwing  their  spears  and  arrows  at  Balder,
since  they  knew  they  could  not  hurt  him,  Loki  went,  dis-
guised as  an  old  woman,  to  where  Frigg  lived  in  the  Hall
of  the  Fen.  When  the  hag  was  asked  what  the  Anses
were  doing,  she  replied  that  they  were  throwing  missiles
at  Balder,  and  she  inquired  if  it  was  true  that  nothing
would  hurt  him.  Frigg  answered  that  everything  had
been  bound  by  oath  not  to  hurt  him  except  the  mistletoe.
On  hearing  this,  Loki  found  excuse  to  depart,  and  went
to  the  spot  where  Frigg  said  the  plant  called  mistletoe
grew,  a  little  to  the  east  of  Walhalla ;  and  he  brought  a
twig  of  it  to  where  Hoctr  stood  in  the  outskirts  of  the
assembly ;  for  that  was  the  name  of  a  blind  god  of  great
strength.     Loki  asked  Hddr  why  he  did  not  join  the


V.    THE   SUN   HERO.  53]

others  in  honouring  Balder,  to  which  he  replied  that  he
could  not  see  where  Balder  was,  and  that  he  had  besides
no  arms  :  then  Loki  cunningly  handed  him  the  mistletoe,
and  directed  him  whither  to  throw  it.  So  Hottr  hit  Balder,
who  fell  dead  on  the  spot.  The  Anses  were  shocked,  hut
they  could  do  nothiug,  as  the  spot  was  a  sanctuary  or
asylum.  Frigg,  however,  asked  who  would  earn  her
goodwill  and  love  by  hastening  to  Hell  to  treat  with  her
for  the  release  of  Balder.  *  Hcrmodr  the  Swift,  another
of  the  sons  of  Woden,  undertook  to  set  out  on  his  father's
horse  Sleipnir  on  that  perilous  journey.  But  first  of  all
the  Anses  brought  Balder's  body  down  to  place  it  in  his
ship  called  Einghorn,  which,  as  it  surpassed  all  other  ships
in  size,  they  could  not  move  an  inch  towards  the  sea.  So
they  sent  for  a  giantess  called  Ilyrrokin,  or  Fire-smoke,
to  come  from  Giant-land  to  launch  it  for  them,  which  she
did  at  the  first  push,  with  such  effect  that  the  rollers  under-
neath it  struck  fire  and  all  the  earth  trembled,  a  perform-
ance which  struck  Thor  as  so  like  his  own  that  he  was
with  difficulty  restrained  from  smashing  Hyrrokin's  head
with  his  hammer  Mjolnir.  Balder,  after  Woden  had  wh  i  s-
pcred  in  his  ear,  was  then  placed  on  the  funeral  pile  in
his  ship,  a  sight  at  which  the  heart  of  his  wife  Nanna
broke :  so  her  body  was  placed  on  the  pyre  by  his :  the
fire  was  lit,  and  Thor  hallowed  it  with  his  hammer  and
threw  a  dwarf  into  it  called  Lit.  Moreover,  Balder's
horse,  with  all  his  harness,  was  burnt  with  his  master,
and  Woden  laid  on  the  pyre  his  gold  ring  Draupnir  or
Dropper,  which  from  that  time  forth  had  the  peculiarity
that  every  ninth  night  eight  gold  rings  of  the  like
weight  with  itself  dropped  from  it.  Not  only  the  Anses
assisted  at  the  funeral,  but  also  a  multitude  of  mountain

2  M  2


532  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

giants  and  rime- ogres.  Vengeance  was  wreaked  on
the  slayer  of  Balder ;  for  Woden  was  told  when  he
went  to  the  sibyl  about  the  dreams  that  haunted  his
son,  that  Hoctr  bearing  the  fatal  branch  would  be  his
death,  but  that  Woden's  son  Yali,  born  of  Vrindr  in  the
Halls  of  the  West,  would  avenge  his  brother  when  he
was  only  one  night  old ;  '  He  shall  neither  wash  his
hands,'  was  the  reply,  '  nor  comb  his  hair,  till  he  has
borne  the  murderer  of  Balder  to  the  funeral  fire.'  Such
was  the  horror  in  which  Balder' s  murder  was  held  among
the  Anses  that  they  never  wished  to  hear  the  name  of
Hoctr  ever  mentioned  afterwards.  The  vengeance  in-
flicted on  Loki  was  very  terrible :  when  he  saw  how  angry
the  Anses  were  at  what  be  had  done,  he  fled,  and  finally
sought  refuge  in  the  form  of  a  salmon  in  a  waterfall ;
but  the  Anses  made  a  net  and  caught  him.  They  then
took  him  into  a  cave,  where  they  left  him  bound  with
bonds  of  iron  on  three  jagged  pieces  of  rock,  one  under
his  shoulders,  one  under  his  loins,  and  the  third  under
his  knee-joints,  while  a  terrible  serpent  hangs  over  his
body  distilling  venom  in  his  face.  Loki's  wife  stands  by
with  a  cup  to  receive  the  venom,  and  when  it  is  full  she
empties  it ;  but  while  she  is  doing  that,  the  venom  drips
on  Loki's  face  and  then  he  writhes,  causing  what  men  call
earthquakes ;  and  this  goes  on  till  the  doom  of  the  gods.
That  is  one  account ;  but  another  makes  Loki,  before  his
doom,  appear  among  the  Anses  to  bandy  words  with
them,  and  even  to  boast  to  Frigg  that  he  was  the  cause
why  Balder  no  longer  rode  into  the  hall.  He  is  then
reminded  by  Woden  that  he  had  already  undergone  dis-
grace eight  winters  underneath  the  earth  in  the  form  of  a
Woman  and  milkmaid,  and  another  of  the  Anses  told  him


V.    THE   SIN    HERO.  533

that  they  were  about  to  bind  liim  on  swords  with  the
intestines  of  his  rime-cold  son,  the  punishment  already
mentioned;  for  the  intestines  turned  into  bonds  of  iron,
lie  then  left  the  Anses  as  he  was  threatened  by  Thor,  of
whom  he  went  in  bodily  fear.  As  to  Hcrmodr,  he  pursued
his  journey  for  nine  nights  without  interruption  through
glens  deep  and  dark,  till  he  came  to  the  river  called  Gioll
or  Yell,  when  he  was  questioned  as  to  his  errand  by  the
maid  who  had  charge  of  the  Yell-bridge.  On  he  rode  until
he  came  to  the  fence  of  Hell's  abode,  which  his  horse
cleared  at  full  speed,  and  on  entering  the  hall  he  found  his
brother  Balder  seated  in  the  place  of  honour.  He  abode
with  him  that  night,  and  in  the  morning  he  asked  Hell
to  let  him  ride  home  with  him  to  the  Anses.  He  urged
her  to  consider  the  grief  which  everybody  and  everything
felt  after  Balder;  to  which  she  replied  that  she  would
put  it  to  the  test  by  letting  him  go  if  everything  animate
and  inanimate  wept  for  him,  and  by  detaining  him  if  any-
body or  anything  declined  to  do  so.  Hermodr  was  accom-
panied to  the  gate  by  Balder,  who  gave  him  the  gold  ring
Dr<  ipper  to  take  to  Woden  as  a  token,  while  Nanna  gave
him  a  mantle  and  other  gifts  for  Frigg,  and  a  gold  ring
for  Fulla,  Frigg's  maid  and  confidante.  With  these  pre-
sents  Hermoctr  reached  home,  to  announce  to  the  Anses
the  answer  which  Hell  had  given  to  his  request.  Mes-
sengers were  at  once  sent  forth  to  the  world  to  bid  all
be  weep  Woden's  son  out  of  the  power  of  Hell.  Tin's  was
done  by  all,  by  men  and  animals,  by  earth  and  stones,  by
lives  and  by  all  metals,  as  you  have  doubtless  seen  these
things  weep,  says  the  Trose  Edda,  when  they  pass  from
frost  to  warmth ;  but  as  the  messengers  were  on  their
way  home  after  discharging  their  duty,  they  chanced  to


534  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

come  across  a  cave  occupied  by  a  giantess  called  Thokk,
whom  they  ordered  to  join  in  the  weeping  for  Balder  with
the  rest ;  but  her  answer  was — '  Thokk  will  weep  dry
tears  at  Ealder's  balefire.  What  have  I  to  do  with  the
Son  of  Man  quick  or  dead?  Let  Hell  keep  what  she
holds.'1

The  ogress  was  suspected  of  being  Loki  in  disguise ;
for  this  happened  before  his  punishment  had  overtaken
him.  But  be  that  as  it  may,  the  refusal  prevented  Balder's
return  just  then.  Eeturn,  however,  he  did  at  the  proper
time;  for  the  story  would  be  incomplete  without  the
prophecy  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  third  and  last  sibyl
of  the  Volospa,  to  the  following  effect :  "I  behold  Earth
rise  again  with  its  evergreen  forests  out  of  the  deep ;  the
waters  fall  in  rapids  ;  above  hovers  the  eagle,  that  fisher
of  the  falls.  The  Anses  meet  in  Ida-plain ;  they  talk  of
the  mighty  Earth-serpent,  and  remember  the  great  decrees
and  the  ancient  mysteries  of  Fimbul-ty.  There  shall  be
found  in  the  grass  wonderful  golden  tables,  their  own
in  days  of  yore.  The  fields  unsown  shall  yield  their
increase.  All  sorrows  shall  be  healed.  Balder  shall  come
back.  Balder  and  Hodr  shall  dwell  in  Woden's  mansions
of  bliss,  in  the  holy  places  of  the  blessed  gods.  .  .  .  Then
shall  Hoeni  choose  the  rods  of  divination  aright,  and  the
sons  of  the  Twin-brethren  shall  inhabit  the  wide  world
of  the  winds.  ...  I  see  a  hall  brighter  than  the  sun,
shingled  with  gold,  standing  on  Gem-lea.  The  righteous
shall  dwell  therein  and  live  in  bliss  for  ever."  Lastly,
Balder  had  a  son  called  Forseti,  meaning  a  judge,  and  he
dwelt  in  heaven  in  a  house  called  Glitnir  or  the  Glistener,

1  Corpus  Poet.  Bur.  i.  126.


V.     THE   SUN    HERO.  535

buill  on  pillars  of  gold  and  thatched  with  silver,  where
ho  sat  all  day  giving  judgment  in  all  cases  of  law:  his
was  the  hesl  tribunal  for  both  gods  and  men,  for  every -
body  quitted  it  having  had  his  due.

The  foregoing  is  a  summary  of  the  most  important
passages  bearing  on  Balder  in  old  Norse  literature;  but
I  should  not  have  thought  it  needful  to  give  it  at  such
length  had  there  been  any  work  to  which  one  might
refer  as  reproducing  the  substance  of  the  various  allu-
sions to  Balder,  without  omitting  particulars  of  impor-
tance to  the  line  of  argument  here  adopted.  The  myth,
when  detailed  in  a  fairly  complete  form,  has  the  advan-
tage of  telling  with  so  much  clearness  its  own  tale  as  to
the  solar  nature  of  the  hero,  that  it  needs  no  exposition
beyond  an  incidental  remark  or  two  by  way  of  com-
paring or  contrasting  it  with  some  of  the  Celtic  stories
which  have  been  passed  in  review  in  my  previous  remarks.
It  is  needless  to  observe  that  the  prophetic  form,  in  which
alone  a  part  of  the  story  is  preserved,  is  due  to  Christian
and  Biblical  influence,  and  especially  to  the  idea  of  those
who  saw  in  Balder  a  type  of  Christ,  who  was  to  come  to
make  all  things  new  in  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth ;
and  as  Malachi .prophesied  that  'the  sun  of  righteous-
ness' should  'arise  with  healing  in  his  wings,'  so  Balder
was  to  come  back  and  all  sorrows  were  to  be  healed.  It
is  important  to  notice  Balder's  compulsory  delay,  as  it
follows  from  the  fact  that  Balder  was  not  simply  the  sun,
but  the  summer  sun,  whose  return  is  witnessed  by  the
dwellers  in  the  North  only  after  protracted  waiting.
Balder's  obscurer  brother  descends  after  him  to  the  abode
of  Hell,  and  leaves  it  the  next  morning;  and  his  other
brother  and  avenger  Vali  is  of  more  rapid  growth  even


536  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

than  the  Celtic  representatives  of  the  sun,  since  he  is
born  in  the  Halls  of  the  West  during  the  night,  and  rises
in  the  morning  to  conquer  the  power  of  darkness  to
which  Balder  had  succumbed.  These  less  illustrious
brothers  of  his  have  their  counterparts  in  Celtic,  not  so
much  perhaps  in  Lug's  more  obscure  incarnations,  as  in
Cuchulainn's  comrades  and  rivals,  Loegaire  and  Conall,
the  latter  of  whom,  second  only  to  Cuchulainn  himself
in  valour,  survived  to  be  the  avenger  of  his  death.

It  is  remarkable  that  Balder  has  a  dwelling-place
in  the  heavens,  and  this  seems  to  refer  to  the  arctic
summer,  when  the  sun  prolongs  his  stay  above  the  hori-
zon. The  pendant  to  the  picture  would  naturally  be  his
staying  as  long  in  the  nether  world.  At  length  a  general
weeping  for  Balder  takes  place — a  tender  touch  which
the  writer  of  the  Prose  Edda  seems  to  have  correctly
interpreted  by  a  reference  to  the  tears,  as  it  were,  with
which  most  objects  are  bedewed  when  warmer  weather
follows  a  hard  frost.  Of  course  Frigg's  messengers,  who
are  the  unnamed  suns  of  the  days  between  winter  and
summer,  can  with  their  increasing  warmth  make  most
things  weep,  but  not  the  ogress  Thokk1  who  dwells  in  a
cave  penetrated  neither  by  the  light  of  day  nor  by  the
frost  of  winter,  and  her  tearlessness  is  artistically  made
the  obstacle  to  Baldcr's  return.  In  other  words,  it  was
still  too  soon ;  but  in  due  time  he  fails  not  to  come  back,
and  then  follow  the  happy  results  described  by  the  sibyl.
The  latter  makes  his   murderer  Hodr  be  his  brother

1  The  giantess  is  probably  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  form  of  Loki,
but  rather  as  a  personification  of  fate  or  destiny ;  and  I  suggest  with
diffidence  that  her  name  is  of  the  same  origin  as  the  Welsh  tynghed,
1  destiny,' Irish  tocad:  see  Nigra's  Reliquie  CeUlche,  p.  43.


V.    THE    SUN   HERO.  637

and  come  back  with  him;  for  the  Norse  nature  myth
pictured  darkness  as  brother  to  light,  and  death  as  fol-
lowing in  the  track  of  life  ;  but  the  touching  picture
of  the  murdered  and  his  murderer  returning  together
to  live  in  peace  and  amity  in  the  new  order  of  things,
betrays  the  influence  of  the  notion  that  the  story  of
Balder's  death  was  a  sort  of  account  of  Abel's  and  the
first  fratricide.  As  to  Hocir,  he  was  a  blind  god  of  great
might;  and  taken  in  conjunction  with  these  two  attri-
butes, his  name  Hodr,  genitive  Iladiir,  is  a  remarkable
one,  as  it  is  the  same  word  which  we  have  in  the
Anglo-Saxon  head'u,  '  war  or  battle,'  also  in  Irish  and
Welsh  cath  and  cad  respectively  of  the  same  meaning.
From  this  it  seems  to  follow  that  he  was  chiefly  a  per-
sonification of  promiscuous  death,  such  as  would  be  sug-
gested  to  the  primitive  mind  by  the  startling  incidents
of  battle,  in  which  it  was  frequently  thought  that  the
wrong  man  fell,  while  he  who  ought  to  succumb  escaped ;
and  with  this  agrees  the  fact  also  that  there  was  a  femi-
nine Hod,  who  was  a  Valkyria  or  chooser  of  the  slain.
This  approach  to  a  blending  in  the  god  Hoctr's  person  of
Mars  and  Pluto  has  its  parallels  in  Celtic  myths,  where
the  god  of  death,  always  present  in  the  battle-field,  may
be  easily  mistaken  for  a  god  of  battle  in  the  proper  sense
of  the  word :  witness,  for  example,  a  poem1  in  the  Black
Book  of  Carmarthen,  where  Gwyn  ab  Niid  is  made  to
enumerate  the  great  battles  in  which  he  had  been  present ;
but  Gwyn  is  not  so  much  a  war-god  as  a  god  of  the  dead
and  king  of  the  other  world,  who  fetches  the  fallen  to
his  own  realm.

1  Skene,  ij.  54,  55.


538  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

The  story  of  Balder,  in  the  only  form  we  have  it,
makes  Hodr  the  innocent  slayer  of  that  god,  by  giving
the  genius  of  mischief  which  guides  him  in  his  act  a
separate  personality  bearing  the  distinct  name  of  Loki ;
and  it  must  have  been  a  nice  question  who  murdered
Balder ;  for  it  might  be  argued  that  it  was  not  Hodr,  as
he  could  not  see,  and  that  it  was  not  Loki,  as  he  did  not
throw  the  fatal  twig.  Norse  law  would  treat  him  as
murdered  by  them  both,  by  Hodr  as  the  hand-bani,  or
the  one  whose  hand  committed  the  deed,  and  by  Loki
as  the  rad-bani,  or  the  one  who  contrived  it.  But  who
slew  Cuchulainn  ?  The  stories  vary ;  for  we  found  one
stating  that  it  was  Ere,1  and  one  that  it  was  Lugaid,  a
discrepancy  which  one  might  be  at  first  inclined  to  put
down  to  the  carelessness  of  Irish  story-tellers ;  but  the
Norse  tale  allows  one  to  suppose  that  it  is  to  be  traced
to  a  different  origin;  and  the  Irish  accounts  as  they
stand  are  best  explained  on  the  theory  that  they  were
both  his  slayers.2  Now  Ere  and  Lugaid  appear  in  them
as  warriors,  but  there  is  no  more  reason  to  regard  them
as  originally  and  essentially  war-gods  than  in  the  case
of  Hodr  and  Loki,  though  Ere  at  least  came  sooner  or
later  to  be  invested  probably  with  that  character, — a  view
which  derives  indirect  corroboration  from  the  fact  that
Irish  hagiology  makes  a  saint  bearing  the  name  of  Ere
resemble  St.  Martin,3  an  assimilation  which  I  should
trace  to  a  probable  equivalence  of  the  names  Ere  and
Mars.     I  should,  therefore,  venture  to  regard  the  Ere

1  See  the  Bk.  of  Ballymote,  quoted  by  O'Curry,  pp.  513-4.

2  The  view  of  O'Curry  at  p.  507,  where  he  tries  to  derive  it  from
Tigernach.

3  Mart,  of  Donegal  (Dublin,  1864),  pp.  292-3.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  539

who  had  a  hand  in  the  slaying  of  Cdchulainn,  as  cor-
responding closely  enough  in  his  character  of  a  quasi
Mara  to  Hodr.  The  avenger  of  Ciichulainn  was  his
foster-brother  Conall  Cernach,  or  C.  the  Victorious,  who,
according  to  different  stories,  slew  both  Lugaid  and  Ere,
and  carried  away  their  heads.  In  Conall  we  have,  as
already  hinted,  another  personification  of  the  sun;  for
he  was  the  son  of  the  sister  of  Ciichulainn's  mother;
and  her  name  Finnchocm,  meaning  white  and  lovely,
would  seem  to  point  to  her  as  a  dawn  or  gloaming
goddess :  she  was  Ciichulainn's  foster-mother  as  well  as
the  mother  of  Conall.  Further,  the  latter's  name  is
Cynwal  in  Welsh,  which  is  more  conservative  of  con-
sonants, and  this  represents  an  early  Celtic  form  Cuno-
valos  or  Cuno-tvalo-s,  the  genitive  of  which  occurs  as
Cvnovali  on  an  old  inscribed  stone1  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Penzance  in  Cornwall.  The  correspondence  between
Conall  and  the  slayer  of  Hodr  suggests  the  inference  that
in  the  latter's  name  Vali  we  have  the  remains  of  a  full
name  answering  to  Cuno-valos  reduced  and  modified  in
a  way  not  uncommon  in  old  Norse.  Moreover,  as  the
Anses  caught  Loki  in  the  waterfall  of  Franang,  so  Conall
overtook  Lugaid  bathing  in  the  Liffey  and  beheaded  him,
leaving  his  body,  with  the  exception  of  the  venomous
head,  for  others  to  bury  beneath  the  notorious  Three
Flags  of  Lugaid's  court  (p.  483).  It  is  needless  to  point
out  how  this  recalls  the  three  stones  of  torture  on  which
Loki  was  laid  in  bonds  of  iron.

One  might  at  first  sight  be  tempted  to  regard  Lu<i<<i<l

1  Hubncr's  Inscrip.  Brit.  Christianas,  No.  2;  Rhys'  Lectures  an
Welsh  Philologfp,  pp.  379,  406,  where  the  surmise  that  vol-  is  cognate
with  wolf  is  probably  to  he  cancelled.


540  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

and  Lola  as  kindred  names  ;  but  that  would  be  hazardous.
The  former  makes  in  the  genitive  Lugdech,  which  in  its
early  form  in  Ogam  is  found  variously  written  Lugudeccas
and  Lugudeca,1  which  yields  the  crude  form  Lugudec,  to
be  treated  probably  as  a  compound  Lugu-dec,  meaning
one  who  had  something  to  do  with  Lug  or  lug;  this
cannot,  however,  be  defined  so  long  as  the  signification
of  the  second  element  is  unknown.     Provisionally  per-
haps one  might  regard  it  as  equivalent  to  '  Lug-slayer,'
or  possibly  the  darkener,  conqueror  or  devourer2  of  lug
in  the  sense  of  light.     It  might  be  objected  that  Lugaid
is  not  made  in  Irish  story  to  kill  Lug,  but  Cuchulainn ;
that,  however,  does  not  much  matter,  as  Cuchulainn  is
an  avatar  of  Lug  or  the  latter  in  another  form.     Had
more  Irish  myths  been  preserved,  and  in  a  more  ancient
form,  one  might  expect  to  find  that  Lugaid  was  in  the
first  instance  matched  with  Lug  and  not  with  Cuchu-
lainn.    As  it  is,  we  are  only  told  that  Lug  was  slain  by
Mac  Cuill,'6  whose  name  being  interpreted  seems  to  mean
the  Son  of  Destruction,  which  would  also  exactly  suit
Lugaid,  the  Loki  of  Goidelic  mythology.      The  name
of  Lugaid  was,  however,  not  confined  to  Ireland;  for
wherever  the  Sun-god  roamed,  there  his  mortal  foe  must
also  come  in  his  time;  and  as  we  found  traces  of  the

1  The  stones  are  at  Ardmore  and  Kilgrovane  in  co.  Waterford  :  I
examined  both  in  1883  ;  but  see  Brash,  pp.  247,  257,  pi.  xxxvi.

2  What  the  original  figure  may  have  been,  it  would  be  hard  to  guess
with  any  certainty  ;  but  compare  the  old  Teutonic  idea  that  an  eclipse
of  the  sun  was  owing  to  his  being  swallowed  by  a  celestial  beast  of
prey,  and  see  an  ingenious  picture  of  the  scene  in  York  Powell's  Old
tSturiesfrom  British  History  (London,  1882),  p.  11.

3  It  admits,  however,  of  being  also  translated  '  the  Son  of  (the)
Hazel.'


V.     THE    SIN    IIKRO.  511

cult  of  Lugus  among  the  Colts  of  the  Continent,  so  also
his  adversary  must  have  figured  in  their  beliefs.  In
feet,  one  finds  in  the  country  of  the  Gaulish  Arevaci  of
Spain  the  Latinized  form  of  a  name  practically  identical
with  that  of  Lugaid:  I  allude  to  an  inscription  found
at  the  Arcvacian  city  of  Segovia,  giving,  among  other
proper  names,  that  of  a  certain  Luguadicus,1  whose  son
Valerius  Anno,  as  we  learn  from  the  monument,  was
a  native  of  another  town  of  the  Arevaci,  namely  Osma,
the  ancient  Uxama  and  the  very  place  where  another
inscription,  as  already  mentioned  (p.  424),  connects  the
cult  of  the  Lugoves  with  a  temple  superintended  by  a
college  of  cobblers.  One  or  two  minor  points  have  still
to  be  noticed  very  briefly.  The  relationship  between
Lug  and  Ciichulainn  is  not  without  its  parallel  in  the
story  of  Balder,  who  had  a  son  Forseti  or  Judge,  another

1  My  attention  was  called  to  this  by  a  paragraph  in  the  Rev.  C<lt.
vij.  399  ;  but  the  inscription  will  be  found  given  by  Hiibner  in  Vol.
ij.  of  the  Berlin  Corpus,  !No.  2732,  as  follows  :  Valerio  Ann[o]ni
Lngnadici  f(ilio)  Ux[am(ensi]  a[nn(orum]  xxv  sodales  [f(aciendum]
c(urarunt).  One  might  be  tempted  to  explain  the  Irish  Lugudec-,  taken
alone,  to  mean  'the  biter  or  tearer  of  Lug,'  in  reference  to  some  such  a
story  as  that  of  the  Boar  of  Benn  Gulbain  killing  Diarmait,  or  as  the
Welsh  one  that  gave  Lieu  the  brute  form  of  the  Aurwrychyn  or  Gold-
bristle  previous  to  his  being  killed  by  the  hunter's  hounds  :  compare
the  second  element  dec-  with  such  words  as  Greek  8«kj/<o,  'I  bite,'  and
the  Gothic  tahjan,  'to  tear;'  but  i£ Lugudec-  and  Luguadicua  are  to
be  taken  together,  one  is  led  to  suggest  the  possibility  that  the  ori-
ginal nominative  was  Lugu-ddix  or  Lugu-ddex,  and  the  genitive  Zugu-
odScas,  yielding  in  early  Irish  Lugu'detccu,  later  Zuigdeeh:  compare
such  words  as  Irish  beothu,  'life,'  genitive  bethad,  as  evidence  that  tlie
accent  was  at  one  time  movable  in  Irish.  With  adec-  I  know  of  no
Celtic  word  to  compare,  unless  it  possibly  be  the  Irish  adu'g,  'night,'
or  aidche  of  the  same  meaning,  but  standing  for  an  early  feminine
derivative  ad>  <ya.


542  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

edition,  so  to  say,  of  himself,  for  Balder  also  was  an
unerring  judge.  At  first  sight  it  looks  a  little  capricious
to  make  the  sun  a  judge ;  but  from  the  point  of  view  of
those  whose  imagination  gave  the  myth  its  form,  nothing
perhaps  could  have  been  more  natural ;  for  if  the  Sun-
god  was  to  be  regarded  as  a  judge  at  all — and  every
great  prince  had  to  give  judgment  on  all  sorts  of  occa-
sions— he  must  excel  in  that  capacity,  for  the  position
of  vantage  occupied  by  him  would  make  him  impartial,
and,  for  the  dwellers  in  the  far  North,  patient  to  listen
all  the  livelong  day  to  all  comers,  at  the  same  time  that
he  saw  all  that  went  on  in  the  world  below.  This  excel-
lence as  a  judge,  without  however  laying  too  much
emphasis  on  the  habit  of  sitting  long  to  hear  suits,  pro-
bably a  characteristic  to  be  traced  only  to  the  slowness
of  the  summer  sun  in  the  arctic  regions,  belonged  also
to  Lug,  who  is  described  as  jurisconsult  and  historian,
and  more  especially  to  his  son  Cuchulainn,  who  boasted
to  Emer  that  he  revised  the  verdicts  of  the  Ultonian
brehons,  whereby  he  constituted  himself  a  sort  of  court
of  appeal  in  his  own  person ;  and  in  this  connection  it  is
worth  the  while  to  mention  how  the  conquest  of  Erinn
by  the  Milesians  brought  with  it  the  replacing  of  Mac
Gre'hie,  or  Son  of  the  Sun,  by  Amorgen  of  the  White
Knee  (p.  365),  who  has  the  combined  functions  of  a  just
judge,  of  poet  and  of  historian  or  story-teller  ascribed
to  him;  but  it  is  in  the  person  of  Moen  (p.  311)  that
the  Celtic  Sun-god  is  before  all  things  a  judge,  that  he
is  neither  king  nor  warrior,  but  a  great  brehon  alone.

These  remarks  on  the  parallelism  between  the  Celtic
Sun-god  and  Balder  would  be  incomplete  without  a  word
respecting  the  hitter's  mother  Frigg.     She  is  proved  by


V.    THE   SUN   HERO.  543

the  Anglo-Saxon  word  Frigedceg,  now  Friday,  and  by  the
Old  Norse  habit  of  calling  the  planet  Venus  Frigg's  Star,
to  have  been  treated  to  a  certain  extent  as  a  counterpart
of  the  Latin  Venus.  Her  dwelling  in  a  mansion  called
Fensal,  the  Hall  of  the  Fen  or  Swamp,  recalls  Lien's
mother  Arianrhud  and  her  sea-girt  castle.  But  we  have
also  treated  as  her  counterpart  the  maiden  giantess  Gefjon,
who  created  the  island  of  Seeland,  which  she  brought,  as
an  addition  to  Denmark  and  as  the  price  of  her  love,  from
the  site  since  occupied  by  lake  "Wencr.  She  knew  every-
body's destiny,  and  passed  for  one  of  Woden's  loves ; l  but
Frigg  was  his  wife,  and  even  the  latter' s  life  had  not  been
immaculate,  though  her  laches2  could  not  vie  in  enormity
with  those  of  Arianrhod  or  Duben.  Both  Frigg  and
Gefjon  belong,  however,  to  the  same  class  of  goddesses
as  the  Celtic  ones,  though  there  is  little  left  to  prove  it
in  the  case  of  Frigg  except  the  name  of  her  abode  in  the
Fenn.  The  strolling  maiden  Gefjon  belonged  perhaps
to  a  lower  stage  of  culture  than  the  ideas  of  the  Wicking
period,  which  brought  the  Anses  to  dwell  together  and
made  Frigg  lead  a  matrimonial  life  comme  il  faut  as
Woden's  consort.

Taltessin.

In  the  last  section  I  spoke  of  the  Sun-god  in  the
person  of  a  mythic  judge :  we  have  now  to  discuss  a
Welsh  story  which  makes  him  a  great  bard  and  poet,
bearing  the  well-known  name  of  Taliessin.  It  is  conve-
nient to  follow  the  long-established  custom  of  speaking
of  certain  Welsh  poems  as  Talicssin's,  and  of  a  manu-
script of  the  13th  century  in  which  they  are  contained

1  Corpus.  Pod.  Dor.  i.  101,  ij.  465.  2  Ibid.  i.  105.


544  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

as  the  Book  of  Taliessin.  Those  poems  represent  a  school
of  Welsh  bardism,  but  we  know  in  reality  nothing  about
their  authorship;  and  the  personality  of  Taliessin  is  as
mythic  as  that  of  Gwydion  and  Merlin,  both  of  whom
have  also  been  treated  as  the  authors  of  Welsh  verse.
The  name,  however,  of  Taliessin,  viewed  in  this  light,
has  an  interest  far  surpassing  even  that  of  Merlin ;  this
will  be  best  understood  with  the  aid  of  what  we  read  in
the  so-called  History  of  Taliessin.1  There  we  make  the
acquaintance  of  Kcrridwen,  wife  of  Tegid  the  Bald,  whose
jDatrimony  was  where  Llyn  Tegid  or  Bala  Lake  now
lies.  Besides  other  children,  including  a  daughter  who
was  the  handsomest  woman  of  her  time,  they  had  a
son  Avagdu,  who  was  the  ugliest  man  in  the  world ;  so
Kerridwen,  thinking  that  he  had  no  chance  of  being
tolerated  among  gentlemen  unless  he  had  some  noble
excellence  or  science,  undertook,  with  the  aid  of  the
books  of  Fferyif,  as  Vergil  the  magician  is  called  in
Welsh,  to  boil  for  his  benefit  a  cauldron  of  poesy  and
science,  that  he  might  gain  reputation  for  his  knowledge
and  skill  with  respect  to  future  events.  She  placed  a
blind  fellow  called  Mordav  and  a  certain  Gwion  the  Little
in  charge  of  the  cauldron,  while  she  went  forth  to  gather
herbs  of  virtue  according  to  the  hours  of  the  stars  and
the  directions  of  astronomy.  The  cauldron  was  to  boil
on  without  interruption  for  a  whole  year ;  but  before  the
time  was  up,  three  precious  drops  from  the  cauldron
fell  on  one  of  Gwion' s  fingers,  and  on  account  of  the
scalding  sensation  he  put  it  in  his  mouth,  when  he
suddenly  knew  everything,   and  above  all  things  that

1  Guest's  Mah.   iij.   321-6,  356-61;   Stephen's  Literature   of  the
Kymry2,  p.  425.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  545

he  had  everything  to  fear  from  Kerridwen :  so  he  fled,
leaving  the  cauldron  to  burst  from  the  virulence  of  its
contents.  Kerridwen  pursued  Gwion,  and  it  went  so
hard  with  him  that  he  had  to  assume  various  forms,  but
always  with  the  result  of  being  checkmated  by  her :  at
last,  beholding  a  heap  of  wheat,  he  dropped  into  it  in  the
shape  of  a  grain,  whereupon  she  changed  herself  into  a
crested  black  hen,  found  him  out  and  devoured  him.
In  due  time  he  was  born  again,  and  with  such  a  fair  face
that  Kerridwen  his  mother  had  not  the  heart  to  destroy
him,  so  she  had  him  wrapped  in  a  hide  and  cast  into
the  sea ;  the  hide  was  picked  up  at  Aberdovey  on  one  of
the  stakes  of  Gwydno's  weir  on  the  Calends  of  May,
under  the  following  circumstances.  It  was  usual  to  find
in  the  weir  the  value  of  a  hundred  pounds  every  First  of
May,  so  that  year  Gwydno  gave  it  to  a  hapless  son  of
his  called  Elphin,  who  accordingly  went  with  his  men  to
examine  the  weir  at  the  proper  time.  Their  disappoint-
ment was  so  great  that  one  of  them  said  to  Elphin  that
he  had  never  till  then  been  really  luckless,  when  he  had
broken  off  the  luck  of  the  weir.  Observing  the  hide
on  the  weir,  Elphin  said :  l  This  may  contain  the  value
of  a  hundred  pounds.'  The  man  engaged  in  opening  it
exclaimed,  on  beholding  a  child's  forehead,  '  Here  is
a  charming  forehead  (tal  iessin)V  l  Taiiessin1  let  him
be,'  said  Elphin,  lifting  the  boy  with  his  hands  and
bewailing  his  lack  of  luck.  Presently  the  baby  Taliessin
sang  a  poem  to  console  Elphin  in  his  disappointment ;

1  Elphin's  reply  is  ambiguous  :  if  read  Tal  teuin,  it  means  '  fine
forehead,'  but  if  Tdl  iessin,  'fine  pay;'  while  read  as  one  word,  t ho
distinction  would  be  lost ;  but  the  story  as  it  proceeds  implies  tdl,
'pay  or  profit:'  see  Guest,  iij.  328,  3G3.

2  N


546  V.    THE    SUN   HERO.

this  was  followed  shortly  afterwards,  to  everybody's
astonishment,  by  two  more  poems  to  which  he  gave
utterance  in  answer  to  questions  as  to  his  previous
existence  and  as  to  his  knowledge.  On  this  I  need
scarcely  make  any  remark,  as  you  cannot  fail  to  see
at  once  how  closely  it  corresponds  to  the  story  of  Moen
picked  up  from  the  sea  and  heard  to  speak  thrice  in  the
first  hours  of  his  life  (p.  311).  In  the  case  of  Lieu  and
Gwri  and  Cuchulainn,  the  precocity  was  one  of  growth
generally,  but  here  it  is  confined  to  speech  and  wisdom.
The  First  of  May  must,  according  to  Celtic  ideas,  have
been  the  right  season  for  the  birth  of  the  summer  Sun-
god  ;  and  his  mother  who  drops  him  in  the  sea  and  goes
her  way  is  Kerridwen  the  Minerva  of  Welsh  poets :  she
may  probably  be  ranked  with  Arianrhod  and  Gefjon.

Let  us  now  return  to  the  story  of  the  three  stray  drops
from  the  cauldron,  to  which  Taliessin's  knowledge  of  all
things  is  traced.  Kerridwen  had  taken  as  husband  him
of  Bala  Lake  called  Tegid,  in  whose  baldness  we  have
probably  a  touch  of  the  same  kind  as  the  croppedness  of
Core  and  Ailill  Aulom.  The  contents  of  the  cauldron  had
been  intended  by  Kerridwen  for  the  intellectual  endow-
ment of  Tegid's  son  Avagdu,  whose  name  is  no  longer
known  to  the  Welsh  except  as  a  synonym  for  Hell  or
for  the  prince  of  darkness,  in  the  Christian  sense  of  the
term.  The  legend  deriving  poetry  and  knowledge  from
the  powers  of  the  nether  world  had  probably  a  con-
siderable variety  of  forms ;  and  the  supposed  fact  of  that
derivation  of  the  muse  is  the  key-note  to  much  that  is
characteristic  of  the  most  peculiar  poems  in  the  Book  of
Taliessin.  For  our  purpose  it  matters  little  what  man
or  how  many  men  wrote  them,  or  even  when  they  were


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  547

written ;  for  they  contain  an  element  of  thought  which
clearly  belongs  to  an  ancient  order  of  things.  It  is  more
to  the  point  to  note  that  many  of  them  imply  an  anta-
gonistic school  of  poets,  which  Taliessin  is  represented
relentlessly  attacking.  This  may  be  supposed  to  have
been  a  more  Christian  school  than  that  to  which  he  is
made  to  belong ;  and  that  was  probably  of  the  essence  of
the  feud.  The  legendary  life  of  Taliessin  opposes  his
patron  Elphin  and  the  bard  himself  to  the  powerful  sixth
century  prince  Maelgwn  of  Gwyned,  and  the  poets  of
his  court  respectively.  Maelgwn,  according  to  Gildas,
his  contemporary  and  critic,  had  for  a  time  been  a  monk  ;
and  he  is  believed  to  have  received  his  education  from
no  less  a  teacher  than  St.  Cadoc,  with  whose  name  "Welsh
tradition  connects  a  number  of  sayings  of  a  philosophic
and  Christian  nature.  Be  that  as  it  may,  Maelgwn  be-
longed to  the  dynasty  of  Cuneda,  which  was  so  famous
for  the  number  of  distinguished  saints  it  gave  the
Church,  that  it  is  termed1  one  of  the  Three  Holy  Clans
of  Britain.  Further,  it  was  under  Maelgwn's  rule  that
Bangor  in  Arvon  is  supposed  to  have  first  become  the
home  of  a  bishop  ;  and  everything  suggests  that  the
poets  favoured  by  Maelgwn  and  his  court  were  likely
to  be  less  pagan  in  the  tone  of  their  teaching  than  those
can  possibly  have  been  who  appropriated  the  name  of
Taliessin,  that  is  if  we  may  judge  from  the  poems  ascribed
to  him.  The  quarrel  was  even  then  probably  of  old
standing ;  it  may  be  supposed  to  date  from  the  time
when  the  Brythons  began  to  accept  Christianity,  and  to
have  combined  itself  possibly  with  the   Pelagian  con-

1  Triads,  iij.  18.
2  N  2


548  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

troversy.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  certain  that  it  lasted
many  centuries  after  Maelgwn's  death ;  for  even  in  the
fourteenth  century  the  bardic  or  semi-pagan  school  was
sufficiently  vigorous  to  elicit  a  bitter  denunciation  from
a  Welsh  priest  and  poet,  Sion  Kent,  who  treats  it  as
consisting  of  the  Men  of  Hu,  whose  muse  was  the  genius
of  lying  as  distinguished  from  the  better  muse  that  was
of  Christ.1  Kent's  words  briefly  indicate  with  sufficient
clearness  the  nature  of  the  charge  which  a  Christian
poet  would  bring  against  the  semi-pagan  bards  of  the
Taliessin  school.  The  latter  retaliate,  in  the  assumed
person  of  Taliessin,  by  charging  the  others  with  gross
ignorance  of  the  mysteries  of  bardism.  Thus  Taliessin
now  and  then  propounds  to  them  and  to  the  monks  long
lists  of  questions,  mostly  of  an  impossible  and  unanswer-
able kind,  but  all  asserted  to  lie  within  the  limits  of  his
personal  knowledge ;  for  he  has  gone  through  all  sorts
of  transformations,  and  has  in  some  form  or  other  assisted
at  all  the  great  events  through  which  the  world  has
passed  since  its  beginning.  He  challenges  them  also
to  prophesy  to  their  patron,  thereby  intending  them  to
fathom  their  inferiority  to  him,  who  can  tell  all  that  is
to  happen  till  the  end  of  the  world.  In  a  word,  his  pre-
tensions are  of  the  most  extravagant  kind,  and  cannot
well  have  been  surpassed  by  those  of  the  druids  in  the
days  of  their  greatest  power  in  Erinn  and  Mona,  or
by  those  of  the  boldest  sorcerer  among  the  savages  of
modern  times.

The  only  pretensions  closely  resembling  Taliessin's,
and  decidedly  of  the  same  origin  as  his,  known  to  me  in

1  See  the  original,  quoted  in  Pughe's  Dictionary,  s.v.  Hu.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  540

Celtic  literature,  are  those  of  Amorgcn,  the  seer  of  the
Sons  of  Mile,  on  the  occasion  of  their  invading  Ireland.1
There  is,  however,  a  difference  between  them :  when
Taliessin  asserts  that  he  was  present  at  the  great  events
of  all  previous  ages,  that  is  an  intelligible  way  of  mag-
nifying his  own  importance ;  but  when  he  states  that  he
had  gone  through  many  forms,  and  specifies  that  he  had
been  a  word,  a  book,  a  bridge,  a  coracle,  a  sword,  a  drop
in  a  shower,2  and  the  like,  one  fails  to  see  the  point
of  the  brag  ;  whereas  Amorgen  is  clear ;  for  he  would  not
say,  '  I  was'  or  '  I  have  been,'  but  'I  am : '  thus,  among
other  things,  he  says  he  is  the  wind  and  the  wave,  a  loch
on  the  plain,  a  spear,  a  tear  of  the  sun,  and  the  like.
Some,  doubtless,  of  the  assertions  he  makes  owe  their
strangeness  to  a  primitive  formation  of  predicate  without
the  aid  of  a  particle  corresponding  to  such  a  word  as
'  like.'3  But  even  allowing  for  this,  there  remains  enough
to  show  that  we  have  here  to  do  with  the  self-glorification
of  the  chief  of  the  initiated,  whether  you  call  them  bards
or  seers,  poets  or  prophets ;  by  means  of  his  knowledge
and  skill  in  druidism  or  magio,  he  can  take  any  form  he
likes,  and  command  the  elements  according  to  his  will.
It  is  in  this  light  that  I  would  read  a  certain  class  of
transformations  which  Taliessin  boasts  having  under-
gone.    As  to  his  visits  to  the  other  world,  he  not  only

1  Bk.  ofLeinster,  12  &  ;  Trans,  of  the  Ossiank  Soc.  for  1860,  v.  234  ;
M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville's  Cycle,  pp.  244-6,  where  the  author  dwells
on  the  parallel  and  the  difference.

2  Skene,  ij.  137-44.

3  A  remarkable  instance  of  this,  with  the  absence  of  the  definite
article,  will  be  found  in  the  poem  where  Mider  describes  his  own
fairy  realm  :  for  the  text,  see  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  1315,  and  Windiach'a
Iriache  Texts,  pp.  132-3.


550  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

professes  to  have  been  in  Caer  Sidi  and  the  Glass  Fortress,
he  not  only  boasts  having  taken  part  in  the  harrying  of
Hades ;  but  it  is  a  familiar  country  to  him,  and  he  has
witnessed  how  its  inhabitants,  whom  neither  plague  nor
death  can  reach,  quaff  a  drink  sweeter  than  wine  from
a  copious  fountain  with  which  that  submarine  isle  is
blest.1  He  knows  every  dwarf  beneath  the  ocean,  and
has  observed  the  rank  assigned  to  each.2  This  is  not
all :  so  truly  is  he  a  bard,  that  he  is  recognized  as  such
even  in  the  mythic  mother-country  of  all  bardism  and
knowledge ;  and  that  recognition  takes  the  tangible  form
of  a  bardic  or  professorial  chair  reserved  for  him  in  Caer
Sidi,  and  for  his  successors  in  his  profession  for  ever.3
But  he  had  other  chairs,  one  of  which  was  called  the  Chair
of  Kerridwen  of  uncertain  location ;  and  the  triad  is  com-
pleted by  one  belonging  to  him  called  the  Chair  of
Teyrnon,  which  is  possibly  to  be  looked  for  also  in  the
direction  of  Caer  Sidi  and  the  realm  beneath  the  waves
of  ocean,  for  Teyrnon  was  one  of  the  lieges  of  Pwytt
Head  of  Hades,  according  to  the  account  in  the  Mabinogi
called  after  his  name.4  The  Chairs  of  Kerridwen  and
Teyrnon  are  the  subjects  of  two  poems  in  the  Book  of
Taliessin.5

Let  us  now  examine  the  Taliessin  legend  from  another
point  of  view,  and  begin  with  the  name.     This  has  pro-

1  Bk.  of  Taliessin,  poem  xiv. ;   Skene,  ij.  155,  and  poem  xxx.  ;
Sk.  ij.  181.

2  lb.  poem  vij. ;  Sk.  ij.  135,  from  which  one  may  be  referred  also
to  the  Black  Book,  line  4  of  poem  v.,  Skene,  ij.  7.

3  lb.  poem  xiv.;  Sk.  ij.  154-5.

4  R.  B.  Mob.  p.  22 ;  Guest,  iij.  66.
6  Skene,  ij.  155-7,  158-9.


V.     THE    SUN    IIERO.  551

bably  been  tampered  with  by  popular  etymology,  and
its  ordinary  form  is  perhaps  less  to  be  relied  on  than  the
rarer  ones  of  Telessin,  or  Telyessin.1  What  it  may
have  exactly  meant,  we  know  not;  but  it  is  clear  that
it  is  a  compound,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  second
part  should  be  treated  as  essin  or  eisin,  which  I  would
equate  with  the  name  of  the  great  mythic  poet  of  the
Goidels,  Ossin,2  better  known  in  English  in  the  form  of
Ossian,  which  it  has  taken  in  Scotland.  The  same  view
expressed  in  another  way  would  be  that  Ossin  is  the
reduced  or  de-compounded  form  of  a  longer  name  corre-
sponding to  the  Welsh  Telessin,  or  Telyessin.  I  would,
however,  go  beyond  this  verbal  equation,  and  regard
Taliessin  and  Ossin  as  representing,  in  point  of  origin,  one
and  the  same  character  belonging  to  an  earlier  stage  of
Celtic  mythology.  On  the  Welsh  side,  Taliessin  is  Gwion
re-born,  while  on  the  Goidelic  side  Ossm  is  the  son  of


1  Telessin  and  Telyessin  are  the  forms  in  Rhonabwy's  Dream  (R.  B.
Mob.  pp.  150,  160),  while  the  Kulhwch  story  has  the  less  intelligible
spelling  Teleessin  (p.  107).  If  the  first  element  in  the  name  was  telg,
that  would  account  for  the  optional  forms  Telyessin  (i.e.  Telj-essin)
and  Tel-essin,  the  g  being  either  represented  by  the  semi-vowel  or  com-
pletely dropped.  Telg-  might  be  regarded  as  related  to  the  Irish  word
t'lile,  'strong,'  and  tailce,  'strength,  firmness;'  but  there  would  also
be  no  lack  of  words  to  connect  with  tel  or  tal,  supposing  either  of  them
fen  be  the  first  part  of  the  name:  witness  the  Welsh  telyn,  'harp,'
and  te/aid,  '  fair,  graceful,'  telediw,  '  fine,  handsome,  beautiful,'  not  to
mention  tal  in  the  Gaulish  name  Vepotalos,  whatever  that  meant.
Tin'  Iil'K'k  Book  shows  a  decided  preference  for  Taliessin,

2  Ossin,  Oissin  or  Oitrin,  is  said  to  mean  a  'little  fawn'  (O'Curry,
p.  304),  from  oss  or  os,  'cervus.'  But,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  fitness
of  the  name  is  nowhere  made  conspicuous;  if,  however,  it  should
prove  well  founded,  I  should  compare  Lieu  in  the  story  which  repre-
sents him  killed  by  staghounds.


552  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

Finn,  which  is  contrary  to  the  ordinary  rule  that  regenera-
tion is  more  common  in  Irish  stories1  than  in  Welsh  ones.
The  discrepancy  is,  however,  not  such  as  to  preclude  our
comparing  Gwion  and  Finn  with  one  another.  In  the
first  place,  Finn  was  the  chief  of  a  band  of  warriors  called
the  Fiann?  Now  in  this  term  Fiann  we  have  a  word
admitting  of  being  equated  letter  for  letter  with  the
proper  name  Gwion,  the  meaning  of  which  is  unknown
in  Welsh.  This  alone  does  not  amount  to  a  proof  of
the  identity  of  the  names,  but  it  becomes  an  important
item  of  evidence  when  backed  by  an  unmistakable
parallel  between  the  stories  about  Gwion  and  Finn.
How  Gwion  got  his  knowledge  and  power  of  predicting
the  future  by  tasting  of  the  brew  meant  for  another
person,  the  hideous  Avagdu,  has  already  been  told  ;  and
it  only  remains  to  relate  how  on  the  other  side  Finn  got
his  wisdom.

The  principal  foes  of  Finn  and  the  family  to  which  he
belonged  were  called  Urgrenn  son  of  Lugaid  Corr,  and  Goll
the  '  One-eyed '  son  of  Morna ;  and  Finn  as  a  boy  was
with  difficulty  hidden  away  from  them  and  their  men.  In
order  to  cope  with  them,  he  went  to  a  poet  to  learn  his
art,  and  Finn,  whose  name  was  DemneFinn,  that  isDemne3

1  Though  Finn  is  not  said  to  he  re-horn  as  Ossi'n,  there  was  an
Irish  story  which  gave  him  a  second  life,  namely,  in  the  person  of  an
Ultonian  king  called  Mongan  :  see  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  133a — 134&;
also  M.  d'A.  de  Jubainville,  Cycle,  pp.  336 — 343,  and  O'Curry,  iij.  175.

2  A  poet  is  represented  addressing  them  as  Fidn  Find :  see  Bk.  of
Leinster,  296  b:  the  poem  is  quoted  hy  O'Curry,  ij.  385.  The  term
Fiann  occurs  as  a  collective  used  in  the  feminine  singular,  while  the
individual  members  were  called  in  the  plural  Fianna.

3  The  word  looks  as  if  it  ought  to  be  an  abstract  noun  meaning
'assurance,  certainty/  from  dcmin,  'sure,  certain.'


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  553

the  Fair  or  White,  told  his  tutor  that  his  name  was
Demne.  Now  the  tutor's  own  name  was  also  Finn,  more
usually  called  Finn  Eces  or  Finn  the  Seer.  The  boy
found  the  sage  watching  Fiac's  Pool  in  the  Boyne ;  for
there  was  a  prophecy  that  Finn  was  to  catch  one  of  the
Salmons  of  Knowledge  and  eat  of  it,  with  the  result  that
he  should  no  longer  be  in  ignorance  of  anything  he
might  wish  to  know.  He  had  been  watching  the  pool
seven  years,  when  at  last  he  caught  the  long-expected
fish.  He  handed  it  to  his  pupil  to  cook,  with  strict
orders  not  to  taste  of  its  flesh ;  but  when  it  was  brought
him  cooked,  the  boy  was  obliged  to  confess  that  he  had
in  cooking  the  fish  burnt  his  thumb,  which  he  then  put
in  his  mouth,  just  as  Gwion  did  with  his  scalded  finger;
he  was  next  made  to  confess  that  his  name  was  Finn ;
and  his  tutor,  perceiving  that  all  his  labour  had  been
in  vain,  handed  him  the  whole  salmon  to  eat,  and  pro-
nounced him  the  real  Finn  of  the  prophecy.  From  that
day  forth,  Finn,  whenever  he  wanted  to  know  anything,
had  only  to  put  his  thumb  in  his  mouth  and  chew  it.1

In  order  to  make  you  further  acquainted  with  the  source
of  Finn's  knowledge,  I  could  not  do  better  than  quote  the
following  passage  from  Prof.  O'Curry's  Lectures  on  the
Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Irish,  ij.  143  :2
"  In  those  very  early  times  there  was  a  certain  mystical
fountain  which  was  called  Connla's  Well,  (situated,  so

1  The  original  of  the  story  will  be  found  published  by  Dr.  K.  Meyer
in  the  Rev.  Celt.  v.  201  :  see  also  pp.  197-8;  likewise  Joyce's  Old
Celtic  Romances,  pp.  414-5,  note  25,  where  we  are  told  that  Linn
1'ic,  or  Fiac's  Pool,  was  near  the  village  of  Slane.

2  See  also  the  Stokes-O'Donovan  ed.  of  Cormac,  p.  35,  s.  v.  Caill
Orinmon,


554  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

far  as  we  can  gather,  in  Lower  Ormond).  As  to  who
this  Connla  was,  from  whom  the  well  had  its  name,  we
are  not  told;  but  the  well  itself  appears  to  have  been
regarded  as  another  Helicon  by  the  ancient  Irish  poets.
Over  this  well  there  grew,  according  to  the  legend,
nine  beautiful  mystical  hazel-trees,  which  annually  sent
forth  their  blossoms  and  fruits  simultaneously.  The  nuts
were  of  the  richest  crimson  colour,  and  teemed  with  the
knowledge  of  all  that  was  refined  in  literature,  poetry,
and  art.  No  sooner,  however,  were  the  beautiful  nuts
produced  on  the  trees,  than  they  always  dropped  into
the  well,  raising  by  their  fall  a  succession  of  shining  red
bubbles.  Now  during  this  time  the  water  was  always
full  of  salmon;  and  no  sooner  did  the  bubbles  appear
than  these  salmon  darted  to  the  surface  and  eat  the  nuts,
after  which  they  made  their  way  to  the  river.  The
eating  of  the  nuts  produced  brilliant  crimson  spots  on
the  bellies  of  these  salmon ;  and  to  catch  and  eat  these
salmon  became  an  object  of  more  than  mere  gastronomic
interest  among  those  who  were  anxious  to  become  dis-
tinguished in  the  arts  and  in  literature  without  being  at
the  pains  and  delay  of  long  study ;  for  the  fish  was  sup-
posed to  have  become  filled  with  the  knowledge  which
was  contained  in  the  nuts,  which,  it  was  believed,  would
be  transferred  in  full  to  those  who  had  the  good  fortune
to  catch  and  eat  them.  Such  a  salmon  was,  on  that
account,  called  the  Eo  Feasa,  or  '  Salmon  of  Knowledge ; '
and  it  is  to  such  a  salmon  that  we  sometimes  meet  refer-
ence among  our  old  poets,  where,  when  speaking  of
objects  they  pretend  to  be  above  description,  they  say,
1  unless  they  had  eaten  of  the  salmon  of  knowledge  they
could  not  do  it  justice.'"     The  author  then  proceeds  to


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  555

give  references  in  point  from  Irish  literature ;  but  we
meet  with  the  crimson  nuts  elsewhere  mentioned  as
forming  part  of  the  food  of  the  gods  of  the  ancient
Goidel,  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann,1  and  they  were  pro-
bably believed  to  account  for  the  surpassing  wisdom
and  cleverness  ascribed  to  those  gods.  With  the  salmon
that  lay  in  wait  for  the  crimson  nuts  may  be  compared
in  passing  the  Salmon  of  Llyn  Llyw,2  connected  by  the
story  of  Kulhwch  with  the  Severn,  and  stated  to  have
been  the  first  animal  created,  his  memory  being  made
to  go  back  in  the  matter  of  Mabon's  history  (p.  29)  further
than  all  the  other  ancients  of  the  brute  creation,  which,
arranged  in  the  order  of  the  lengths  of  their  ages,  were
the  Eagle  of  Gwernabwy,  the  Owl  of  Cwm  Cawlwyd,
the  Stag  of  Ehedynvre,  and  the  Blackbird  of  Kilgwri.3
It  is  not  very  clear  whether  Erinn  was  supposed  to  have
but  one  sacred  and  secret  well  of  the  kind  described,
bearing  various  names  and  mysteriously  connected  with
all  the  chief  rivers  of  that  country,  or  else  several  such
wells  severally  connected  with  them.  But  we  read  of
the  sacred  well  in  connection  with  the  Shannon  and  with


1  TJie  Pursuit,  i.  §§  51,  54 ;  Joyce's  Old  Celtic  Romances,  p.  314.

2  R.  B.  Mob.  pp.  130-1 ;  Guest,  ij.  300.

3  R.  B.  Mdb.  pp.  129-31;  Guest,  ij.  297—300.  Kilgwri,  according
to  a  note  in  Guest's  Mob.  ij.  362,  is  in  Flintshire;  but  according  to
Morris'  Celt.  Remains,  p.  90,  it  is  "Worrall  in  Cheshire.  Cwm  Cawl-
wyd is  above  Llanrwst  in  the  Geirionyd  district,  and  I  trace  Gwer-
nabwy in  the  name  of  a  farm  called  Bod  'Ernabwy,  near  Aberdaron,  in
the  extreme  west  of  Carnarvonshire,  where  Rhedynvre  likewise  occurs
as  tbo  name  of  another  farm,  now  shortened  to  'Uynvra.  The  poet  D.
ab  Gwilym  makes  a  graceful  allusion  to  these  ancient  animals  iu  his
poem  lij.,  p.  99  of  the  London  (1789)  edition.


556  T.     THE    SUN    HERO.

the  Boyne : !  the  former  was  Connla's  "Well,  of  which  the
paragraph  cited  speaks,  and  a  verse  in  the  Book  of
Leinster  describes  the  tree  overshadowing  it  as  'a  many-
melodied  hazel  of  knowledge ; ' 2  it  also  derives  the  name
of  the  Shannon  from  a  lady  called  Smarm,  daughter  of
Lodon  son  of  Lir,  there  being  no  river  so  called  till  she
presumed  to  gaze  into  the  sacred  well,  when  the  water
suddenly  burst  forth  at  the  insult  in  pursuit  of  her  and
drowned  her :  that  is  how  the  Shannon  was  formed  and
named.  A  similar  story  in  the  same  manuscript3  gives
the  like  account  of  the  calamity  which  happened  to  a  lady
called  Boann  (pp.  123,  144).  She  had  been  rash  enough
to  visit  the  secret  well,  which  nobody  durst  do  except
Nechtan  and  his  three  drink-bearers  alone ;  the  infuriated
stream  pursued  her  across  the  country  as  far  as  the  sea
and  drowned  her.  So  was  formed  and  named  the  river
Boann  or  Boyne,  which  fills  a  great  place  in  Irish  legend,
and  is  identified  by  the  writer  of  the  story  referred  to,
in  some  mysterious  way,  with  other  rivers  known  to
literature,  such  as  the  Severn,  the  Tiber,  the  Jordan,  the
Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,  whereby  he  brings  the  Irish
stream  into  connection  with  Paradise  and  satisfies  his
wish  to  blend  the  legends  of  his  own  country  with  those
of  other  nations.  Another  form  which  the  Boyne  story
took  was  to  the  effect  that  this  most  mystic  of  Irish
rivers  traversed  the  whole  world  in  seven  years.4

With   the   Irish   source  of  knowledge,   so  jealously


1  See  O'Curry's  Manners,  &c.  ij.  144,  and  compare  the  stories  of  the
Shannon  and  the  Boyne  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  156a  and  191a.
8  Bk.  of  Leinster,  156  a,  line  17:  fail  coll  necsi  nilcheolach.
3  lb.  191a.  4  Joyce,  Old  Celtic  Romances,  p.  188.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  557

guarded  from  the  gaze  of  women,  may  perhaps  be  com-
pared what  is  said  in  old  Norse  literature  respecting  the
fountain  of  Woden's  wisdom,  as  described  in  the  passages
brought  together  by  Vigfusson  and  Powell  in  their
Volospd  Reconstructed,  to  the  following  effect :  "  Where
is  the  chief  abode  or  sanctuary  of  the  gods  ?  .  .  .  It  is  at
the  Ash  Ygg's  steed,  where  the  gods  held  their  court
every  day.  This  Ash  is  the  greatest  and  best  of  trees ;
its  limbs  spread  over  all  the  world,  and  three  roots  of  it
stretch  across  the  heaven,  and  hold  it  up  and  stretch  won-
derfully far.  One  turns  towards  the  Anses,  the  second
towards  the  Rime -ogres,  where  once  the  Yawning  Gulf
was,  but  the  third  stretches  over  Cloud-world,  and  Hwer-
gelme  [Cauldron-Whelmer]  is  under  this  root,  and  Felon-
cutter  [the  snake]  gnaws  the  bottom  of  this  root.  But
under  the  root  that  trends  towards  the  Rime-ogres  is
Mim's  Burn,  wherein  is  wisdom  and  understanding,  and
he  that  owns  the  burn  is  named  Mim ;  he  is  full  of  know-
ledge, because  he  drinks  from  the  brook  out  of  the  Yell-
hom."1  Here  the  communication  with  the  whole  world,
which  Irish  paganism  leaves  to  the  mystic  river,  is
replaced  by  the  mighty  ramifications  of  a  vast  world-
tree  ;  but  we  are  chiefly  interested  in  the  passage  repre-
senting Woden  so  greatly  coveting  the  water  of  wisdom
that  for  one  draught  alone  he  pledged  his  eye  to  the
giant  who  owned  it.  It  is  thus  put  in  Yigfusson  and
Powell's  Reconstruction  of  the  Volospd  : 2

"  "Well  I  know,  Woden,  where  tbou  didst  hide  thine  eye,  in  the  blessed
Burn  of  Mim ;

1  Vigfusson  &  Powell's  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  ij.  634,  where  the  sources
of  the  several  passages  are  given.

2  Vigfusson  &  Powell,  ibid.  p.  623.


558  V.    THE    SUN   HERO.

I  see  a  river  pouring  forth  a  stream  of  loamy  water  out  of  the  pledge
of  the  Lord  of  Hosts.

I  know  where  Heimdall's  Horn  is  hidden  under  the  shadowy  Holy
Tree  :

Mim  drinks  out  of  the  clanging  Horn  a  draught  of  mead  every  morn-
ing from,  the  Burn."

All  this  agrees  fairly  well,  despite  the  mythic  tree  of
the  ancient  Norsemen  being  an  ash,  with  the  ancient
Irish  idea,  which  traced  science  and  wisdom  beyond  the
Salmon,  and  even  the  holy  water  in  which  he  swam,  to
a  Tree  of  Knowledge  that  overshadowed  its  banks —
more  correctly  speaking,  to  nine  trees ;  and  this  is  to  be
specially  noticed,  as  it  seems  to  give  a  clue  to  the  mean-
ing. The  Salmon  of  Llyn  Llyw  had  more  to  say  than
the  other  ancients  questioned  by  Arthur's  men,  because
he  had  lived  longer  in  the  world ;  and  here  probably  the
nine  hazels  are  to  be  regarded  as  symbolic  of  time,  the
bringer  of  experience  and  the  great  teacher  of  all.  The
number  nine  refers  here,  I  take  it,  to  the  nine-night
week  of  the  ancients,  as  it  does  also  in  the  case  of
another  source  of  knowledge,  the  wonderful  Cauldron  of
the  Head  of  Hades,  that  was  kept  boiling  by  the  breath
of  nine  maidens  (p.  256):  these  are,  to  borrow  other
terms,  the  Nine  Muses  of  the  Greek  classics,  and  the
Nine  Maiden  Mothers  of  Heimdal,  whom  the  Norsemen
of  old  sometimes  regarded  as  the  first  birth  of  time,  the
father  of  princes,  churls  and  thralls  alike.

We  left  Taliessin  and  Gwion  placed  respectively  over
against  Ossm  and  Finn.  Beyond  the  account  of  Gwion
tasting  of  the  contents  of  the  Cauldron  of  Sciences,  and
the  unfailing  knowledge  he  thereby  acquired  of  all  com-
ing events,  the  references  to  his  name  in  Welsh  literature
are  so  obscure  that  we  learn  little  from  them.     They


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  559

favour,  however,  tho  notion  that  the  character  of  Talies-
sin,  who  boasts  himself  Gwion,  was  a  reproduction  of
that  of  the  latter;1  but  Taliessin  pretended  to  have  been
not  only  a  poet  or  prophet,  but  also  a  warrior  engaged
in  various  important  expeditions  to  the  other  world,  to
which  reference  has  been  made  more  than  once.  Was
Gwion  also  a  warrior  ?  The  allusions  to  him  in  Welsh
poetry  are  too  obscure  to  be  said  to  prove  this,  but  he
was  probably  the  person  mentioned  among  the  warriors
and  champions  enumerated  in  the  story  of  Kulhwch,
where  we  read  of  Gwion  the  Cat-eyed,  so  called  because
he  was  so  sharp-sighted  that  he  could  cut  a  haw  from
off  the  eye  of  a  gnat  without  hurting  it,2  an  exaggerated
sharpness  of  sight  probably  to  be  traced  to  the  solar
origin  of  the  hero  to  whom  it  is  ascribed.  On  the
Goidelic  side,  Ossin  is  not  only  represented  as  a  famous
warrior,  but  also  as  a  great  poet,  in  both  of  which  roles
he  only  reproduced  the  character  of  his  father  Finn,  who
was  not  merely  celebrated  as  a  warrior  and  huntsman,
but  especially  as  poet  and  diviner ;  so  much  so,  in  fact,
that  the  strange  statement3  is  made,  that  no  warrior  was
allowed  to  join  his  Fiann  unless  he  was  well  skilled  in
the  poet's  art,  a  curious  qualification  for  membership  in
a  body  which  some  speak  of  as  'the  militia'  of  ancient
Erinn.

There  remains  a  difficulty  which  we  must  now  try  to
discuss.  I  have  already  treated  Finn  as  the  Goidelic
equivalent  of  the  Welsh  Gwyn,  son  of  Nud,  king  of  the

1  Skene,  ij.  108,  303  (i.  287):  see  also  ij.  130  (i.  525),  ij.  153  (i.
535).

2  R.  B.  Mab.  p.  112;  Guest,  ij.  268.

3  See  Keating,  quoted  by  O'Curry,  ij.  381.


560  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

fairies  and  the  demons  of  the  spirit  world ;  whereas  it  is
impossible  to  identify  Gwion  or  Taliessin  with  that  re-
pellent personage,  or  with  any  other,  perhaps,  but  Gwyn's
direct  antagonist,  the  Sun-god.  Briefly  put,  the  explana-
tion is,  that  the  Irish  have  confounded  two  Finns  of  the
most  incompatible  characters  under  the  one  name.  Finn
means  'white  or  fair,'  as  its  Welsh  counterpart  Gwyn
means  also  '  white ;'  but  whether  the  "Welsh  ever  called
Gwion  by  the  name  Gwyn  or  Gwion  Givyn,  I  cannot
say :  if  they  did,  they  must  have  in  time  dropped  it  in
order  to  avoid  the  sort  of  confusion  which  I  suppose  to
have  arisen  on  Irish  ground.  The  proof  that  this  cor-
rectly represents  the  Irish  case  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact,
that  the  stories  about  Finn  divide  themselves  into  two
groups,  namely,  (1)  those  connected  with  a  Gwion- Finn
(or  Deimne  Finn,  corresponding  to  Gwion),  but  espe-
cially that  concerning  his  acquisition  of  the  power  of
divination,  and  (2)  those  relating  to  a  Gwyn-Finn  (or
Finn  Eces,  corresponding  to  Gwyn  ab  Nud),  such,  for
example,  as  the  long  story  of  the  antagonism  between
Finn  and  Diarmait.  The  friendship  of  the  latter  as  a
Solar  Hero  with  Finn  as  a  Solar  or  Culture  Hero,
would  have  analogies  on  Irish  ground ;  but  their  mutual
hostility  at  another  time  in  their  history  would  be  very
difficult,  mythologically  speaking,  to  explain :  why,  for
instance,  should  Grainne,  who  was  betrothed  to  Finn,
elope  with  Diarmait  on  the  night  when  she  was  to  be
wedded  to  Finn,  and  then  become  Finn's  wife  years  later,
after  Diarmait  had  died  under  circumstances  that  placed
it  in  Finn's  power  easily  to  save  his  life  ?  Why  should
Finn  have  employed  in  the  pursuit  of  Diarmait  diverse
kinds  of  witches  and  uncanny  beasts,  at  the  same  time


V.    THE  sux  uy.no.  5G1

that  he  failed  to  shake  the  friendship  of  his  own  son

Ossin  or  of  his  grandson  Oscar  for  Diarmait  ?  As  soon
as  we  treat  Finn  here  as  the  counterpart  of  Gwyn,  it  all
becomes  plain,  and  finds  its  parallel  produced,  somewhat
in  the  other  direction,  it  is  true,  not  only  in  the  story
already  mentioned  of  Lieu  and  his  wife  Blodcucd,  but  in
one  where  the  god  of  darkness  and  death  appears  as
a  principal  under  the  very  name  Gwyn  which  now
engages  our  attention.  His  antagonist,  occupying  the
position  corresponding  to  that  of  Diarmait  in  the  Irish
tale,  is  given  the  name  of  Gwythur  vab  Grcidiawl,  which
may  be  Englished  Victor  son  of  Scorcher,  not  a  very
inappropriate  designation  for  the  summer  sun ;  and  the
whole  episode,  as  incorporated  in  the  story  of  Kulhwch,1
where  alone  it  occurs,  discloses  such  a  vista  of  ancient
savagery,  and  ends  with  such  a  quaint  arrangement,
that  I  make  bold  to  quote  it  at  length,  as  follows: — "A
little  previously,  Crcictylad,  daughter  of  Llild  of  the
Silver  Hand,  had  gone  with  Gwythur  ab  Grcidiawl;
but  before  he  had  slept  with  her,  Gwyn  ab  NM  came
and  took  her  away  by  force.  Gwythur  gathered  a  host
together  and  came  to  give  battle  to  Gwyn.  The  lattor
prevailed,  and  caught  Greid  ab  Eri,  Glinneu  oil  Taran,
Gwrgwst  Ledhvm  and  Dyvnarth  his  son.  He  caught
also  ....  ab  Ncthawc  and  Nwython,  together  with
Kyledr  the  "Wild,  Nwython's  son:  he  killed  Nwython,
t  <  ii  >k  out  his  heart  and  forced  Kyledr  to  eat  his  father's
heart:  it  was  therefore  Kyledr  became  wild  and  left
the  abodes  of  men.  This  was  told  Arthur,  and  he  came
to  the  North,  summoned  Gwyn  to  his  presence,  released

1  11  B.  Mab.  p.  134  ,  Quest,  ij.  305.
2o


562  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

his  knights  from  his  prison,  and  made  peace  between
Gwyn  and  Gwythur.  That  peace  was  made  on  this  wise :
the  damsel  was  to  remain  at  her  father's  house  untouched
by  either  party.  They  were  to  fight  for  her  on  the
Calends  of  May  every  year  thenceforth  till  the  Day  of
Doom,  and  he  who  should  prove  victorious  on  the  Day
of  Doom  was  to  take  the  damsel  to  wife."  Such  is  the
story,  but  to  discuss  it  here  would  take  up  a  great
deal  of  our  time  ;  so  a  remark  or  two  must  suffice.
Though  Gwythur's  name  seems  to  be  the  Welsh  equiva-
lent of  the  Latin  word  victor,  Gwythur  is  not  expressly
described  as  victorious,  like  Conall,  surnamed  Cernach  or
the  Triumphant ;  but  the  act  of  fighting  on  the  Calends  of
May  meant  victory  for  him ;  and  if  we  had  the  myth  in
a  more  extended  form,  Gwyn's  victory  would  be  found
to  happen  at  the  beginning  of  winter.  In  other  words,
the  Sun-god  should  recover  his  bride  at  the  beginning  of
summer  after  his  antagonist  had  gained  possession  of
her  at  the  beginning  of  winter.  In  an  ancient  poem  in
the  Black  Book  of  Carmarthen,  Gwyn  is  made  to  give  his
name  as  Hud  Gwyn,  '  the  White  Spell  or  White  Magic,'
and  to  call  himself  the  lover  of  Creurdilad,1  as  the  lady  is
there  called.  The  name  is  to  be  recognized  in  Shakspear's
Cordelia,  though  the  story,  as  it  reached  the  great  drama-
tist, had  confounded  Llud:  with  Llyr  or  Lear,  who  also  had
daughters  who  figure  in  Celtic  romance.2   But  the  father

1  Skene,  ij.  54,  where  the  original  runs  thus  :

4  hud  im  gelwire  guin  mab  nud.
gorterch  creurdilad  rnerch  hit.'

2  For  instance,  in  the  Irish  tale  of  the  Children  of  Lir,  published
by  O'Curry  in  the  Atlantis,  iv.  113 — 157,  and  in  Joyce's  Old  Celtic
Romances,  pp.  1 — 3G.


V.    TITE   SUN   HERO.  503

of  Crciriylad  was  LI  fid,  the  Celtic  Jupiter,  so  that  the
story  lends  itself  the  more  readily  to  comparison  with
that,  among  others,  of  Persephone,  daughter  of  Zeus,
canied  away  by  Pluto,  who  was,  however,  able  to  retain
her  at  his  side  only  for  six  months  in  the  year.  That
dusky  divinity  of  the  classics  forms  an  apt  counterpart
to  Gwyn  ab  NM,  and  the  Finn  who  corresponds  to  him
in  Irish  literature.

Before  closing  this  chapter,  the  story  of  the  childhood
of  Amorgen,  father  of  Conall  Cernach,  deserves  to  be
mentioned.  It  is  to  the  effect  that  there  was  in  Ulster  a
famous  smith  called  Eccet  or  Eccen,  surnamed  Sdlach,
the  Dirty  or  Sooty;  he  was  such  a  master  craftsman  that
Ulster  never  boasted  a  better.  Now  Eccet  had  a  gorgeously
dressed  daughter  and  an  infant  boy  called  Amorgen :  ho
was  a  hideous  creature  and  in  every  way  disgusting,  not
to  mention  that  he  had  reached  the  fourteenth  year  of  his
age  without  uttering  a  word.  It  happened  one  day  when
Eccet  was  from  home,  that  Aitherne's  man  came  on  an
errand  to  the  smith's  house,  and  beheld  Eccet's  daughter
sitting  in  splendid  apparel  in  a  chair,  with  the  hideous
Amorgen  on  the  floor  hard  by.  lie  cast  grim  looks  at
( iivth,  for  that  was  the  name  of  Aitherne's  man,  and  pre-
sently asked  him  if  he  ate  curds  and  other  things  which
the  urchin  himself  considered  dainties.  But  Greth  was
frightened  at  being  addressed  by  an  infant  that  had  never
spoken  before,  and,  hearing  the  question  repeated,  he
rushed  out  of  the  house  and  hastened  home,  whore  his
master  was  astonished  by  his  frightened  looks.  Then  he
told  Aitherne  all  that  had  happened  ;  but  in  the  mean  time
the  smith  had  also  come  home  and  heard  from  his  daughter

that  Amorgen  had  spoken  for  the  first  time.    lie  at  onco

o  A  o

tt  O  A


504  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

guessed  that  the  ingenious  wording  of  the  boy's  utterance
betokened  coming  greatness,  and  that  Aitherne,  who
would  probably  be  of  the  same  opinion,  would  come,  as
he  feared,  to  kill  the  boy  in  order  to  avoid  the  rise  of  a
possible  rival.  So  it  was  thought  expedient  to  take  the
boy  out  of  the  way,  and  his  sister  took  him  to  the  sea
near  Slieve  Mis  in  the  south,  which  must  mean  either
the  Bay  of  Dingle  or  of  Tralee,  in  the  west  of  Kerry,  while
his  father  made  an  earthen  image  of  him,  which  was
dressed  up  to  counterfeit  Amorgen  asleep  close  to  where
Eccet  was  at  work.  It  was  not  long  ere  Aitherne  came,
as  anticipated :  it  was  ostensibly  to  have  work  done  by
the  smith ;  but  after  receiving  from  the  latter' s  hands
an  axe  finished  and  hafted,  he  gave  a  blow  with  it  to  the
supposed  child :  this  was  assumed  to  have  killed  it,  and
Aitherne  was  pursued  to  his  house,  and  the  nobles  of
Ulster  undertook  to  fix  the  eric  which  he  was  to  pay  to
the  smith,  and  the  latter  so  managed  the  matter  that
Aitherne  was  bound  to  include  in  the  eric  an  engagement
to  educate  a  son  of  Eccet' s  until  he  should  be  equal  to  the
poet  himself  in  his  profession.  When  this  had  received
the  usual  sanction,  Amorgen  was  fetched  and  delivered
to  Aitherne  to  be  brought  up  by  him.  Sooner  or  later
Amorgen  lost  his  hideousness,  and  he  eventually  became
the  chief  of  the  professional  men  of  Ulster ; 1  and  when

1  The  tale  occurs  at  length  in  the  Ek.  of  Leinster,  117  b,  118  a,  and
briefly  in  Corruac's  Glossary  (Stokes-O'Donovan  edition),  p.  85,  where,
besides  other  differences,  Amorgen's  age  is  said  to  have  been  seven.
The  name  of  the  smith  varies  in  the  MSS.  between  Eccet,  Echen  and
Ecul :  I  should  guess  the  correct  spellings  to  have  been  Eccet  and  Eccen,
corresponding  to  possible  Welsh  forms  Adgant  and  Adgan,  the  latter
of  which  occurs  as  Atgan  in  the  Lives  of  the  Camhro-Brit.  Saints
(Llandovery,  1853),  p.  88.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  B65

they  competed  for  the  fostering  of  Ciichulainn  lie  is  made
to  describe  himself  as  famed  for  prowess  in  arms  as  well
as  wisdom  and  eloquence  of  speech.1

Now  in  the  Welsh  talc  of  Talicssin,2  the  father  of  the
ugly  hoy  Avagdu  was  a  nobleman  called  Tegid  the  Bald
of  Pennyn,  whose  abode  was  where  Bala  Lake  now  lies,
and  Eccet's  gorgeously  dressed  daughter  in  the  Irish  ver-
sion is  matched  by  Tegid's  daughter  Crcirwy,  who  was  the
handsomest  woman  of  her  time.  Tegid  had,  however,
more  than  one  ugly  son,  for  Avagdu  had  a  brother  called
Morvran,  which  literally  means  a  sea-crow  or  cormorant.
Of  him  it  is  said3  that  he  had  the  luck  to  be  one  of  the
three  warriors  who  escaped  from  the  Battle  of  Camlan ;
for  his  appearance  prevented  anybody  from  touching  him,
as  he  was  taken  to  be  an  auxiliary  devil  from  hell :  he
was  hairy  all  over,  like  a  stag.  His  brother  Avagdu
was  probably  still  more  hideous,  since  we  leam  that  his
lack  of  personal  attractions  was  perceptible  even  to  his
mother  Kerridwen,  who  accordingly  exerted  herself  to
bring  him  up  endowed  with  transcendent  talents.  It
is  to  be  noticed  that  in  the  Irish  tale  the  mother  is
not  once  mentioned,  everything  being  left  to  the  father
and  his  daughter,  neither  of  whom  does  anything  in  the
Welsh  version  ;  but  it  is  something  to  be  able  to  place
Eccct  the  Sooty  Smith  over  against  Tegid  the  Bald,  of
whom  Welsh  literature  says  little.  The  first  part  of
the  story  of  Amorgen  is  just  the  reverse  of  that  of  Lieu  or
Ciichulainn  with  their  precocious  growth,  or  that  of  Finn,


1  Windisch,  p.  142.

2  Guest's  Mob.  iij.  321,  35G.

3  R.  /?.  Mob.  i>.  108  j  Guest,  i.j.  201  ;   Triads  iij.  83.


566  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

who  was  a  royal  champion  at  the  age  of  nine ; 1  for  at  the
age  of  seven  Amorgen  was,  according  to  one  of  Cormac's
versions,  no  bigger  than  a  man's  fist ;  and  it  contrasts
equally  with  the  story  of  Taliessin  and  Moen,  who  were
endowed  with  the  power  of  speech  from  the  hour  of  their
birth.  Goddesses  of  the  class  of  Arianrhod  and  Duben  had
children  of  two  kinds,  representing  darkness  and  light
respectively ;  and  Amorgen  should  be  the  counterpart  of
Dylan  and  Core.  In  fact,  the  story  of  his  being  taken  to
the  sea  west  of  Kerry  compares  curiously  with  Core  taken
out  of  Erinn  to  an  islet  on  the  same  coast.  Whether  he
underwent,  while  in  the  west,  any  change  corresponding
to  that  of  Core  cleansed  of  the  taint  of  his  incestuous
origin,  we  are  not  told ;  nor  do  we  know  how  or  when
he  got  rid  of  the  indescribable  hideousness  of  his  person.
The  more  usual  versions  of  the  myth  would  suggest  two
boys,  one  a  hideous  creature  like  Amorgen,  and  the  other
his  brother,  chubby  and  xanthous;  for  it  is  not  to  be
believed  that  the  story  gave  any  warrant  for  the  change
of  the  one  character  into  the  other.

Some  help  to  get  over  the  difficulty  will  be  found  in
a  view  which  the  Irish  sometimes  took  of  the  poet's  art,
namely,  when  they  treated  it  as  a  personification  at  first
repellent,  but  radiant  at  a  later  stage  and  fair  to  behold.
Thus  an  Irish  poet  called  Senchan  was,  at  the  moment  of
his  embarking  once  on  a  time  for  the  Isle  of  Man,  asked
free  passage  by  a  youth  to  whom  the  poet's  retinue  gave
a  wide  berth  as  soon  as  his  request  was  granted.  It
turned  out  that  on  all  occasions  when  SencMn  was  likely
to  be  hard  put  to  in  matters  of  skill  in  his  own  art,  the


i  O'Cm-ry's  Maylt  Lena,  pp.  68 — 71.


V.     THE    SUN    IIERO.  507

hideous  youth  auswered  for  him  with  marvellous  prompt  i-
tudo.  The  adventure  as  related  by  Cormac,  partly  in  Irish
and  partly  in  Latin,  ends  thus:1  When  they  came  back
to  Ireland  they  saw  the  aforesaid  youth  before  them ;
and  he  was  a  young  hero,  kingly,  radiant,  with  a  long
eye  in  his  head,  and  with  his  hair  of  a  golden-yellow
colour ;  fairer  than  the  men  of  the  world  was  he,  both  in
form  and  in  dress.  He  then  went  sunwise  round  Senchan
and  his  suite,  '  et  nusquam  apparuit  ex  illo  tempore :
dubium  itaquc  non  est  quod  ille  poematis  erat  spiritus.'
O'Donovan's  comment,  that  '  the  spirit  of  poetry  is  repre-
sented as  ill-visaged  at  first,  because  of  the  difficulty  of
the  art  to  a  beginner,'2  fails  adequately  to  explain  why
the  picture  should  be  made  disgusting  and  revoltingly
loathsome,  as  other  ways  of  representing  the  difficulties
of  an  art  would  have  been  more  natural  and  more  to  the
point.  The  key  has  to  be  sought  rather  in  the  ancient
notion  that  poetry  traced  its  origin  to  the  world  of  the
dead,  whose  king  was  sometimes  given  the  outward
appearance  and  lividness  of  a  corpse ;  and  one  has,  in  fact,
only  to  read  the  beginning  of  Cormac's  account  of  Sen-
ehan's  Sj'iritus  Poematis  to  see  at  once  that  it  is  in  part
a  description  of  a  corpse  in  an  advanced  stage  of  decom-
position. Compare  the  livid  divinity  called  in  a  poem
in  the  Book  of  Taliessin  Uthr  Ben,8  or  Wondrous  Head,
who  appears  in  Geoffrey's  narrative  with  his  name  ex-
panded into  Utherpendragon,  otherwise  Utlur Ben-dragon,

1  Stokes'  Tltroj  Irish  Glossaries,  s.v.  pnffi  (  =  Welsh  pnoystl),  \>.  38,
ami  Stokes'  Bodleian  Fragment  of  Cormac's  Glossary,  read  buiorc  the
K.  Ir.  Acad.  Nov.  30,  1871.

2  Seo  the  Stokes-O'Douovau  ed.  of  Cormac,  p.  13S.

3  No.  xlviij  :  ■    : •".  i.l.   203-4.


568  V.    THE    SUN   HERO.

that  is  to  say,  Wondrous  Head-dragon  or  Leader.  This
comparison  is  all  the  more  relevant  as  Uthr  Ben  repre-
sents himself  in  the  Taliessin  poem  as  bard,  harper,
piper,  crowder — in  a  word,  seven-score  professionals  all
in  one,  an  idea  to  be  faintly  traced  in  the  Mabinogi
of  Branwen,  when  it  makes  Bran,  on  his  expedition  to
Ireland,  wade  across  with  the  musicians  of  his  court  on
his  shoulders  (p.  269),  and  when  it  afterwards  represents
Bran's  head,  detached  from  his  body,  keeping  his  men
company  for  many  years.1  Outside  Celtic  literature  one
may  compare  the  Norse  story  of  Mim's  head  conversing
with  "Woden  and  telling  him  many  secrets,2  but  especially
that  of  Woden's  visit  to  the  dead  sibyl  to  inquire  about
the  future  of  his  son  Balder.3  On  that  occasion  Woden
rode  to  the  spot  "  where  he  knew  the  Sibyl's  barrow
stood.  He  fell  to  chanting  the  mighty  spells  that  move
the  Dead,  till  she  rose  all  unwilling,  and  her  corpse
spoke :  '  What  mortal  is  it,  whom  I  know  not,  that  hath
put  me  to  this  weary  journey  ?  I  have  been  snowed  on
with  the  snow,  I  have  been  beaten  with  the  rain,  I  have
been  drenched  with  the  dew,  long  have  I  been  dead.'"

We  cannot  here  enter  fully  into  the  question  of  the
assimilation  of  a  divinity  of  death  to  a  corpse,4  but
enough  has  been  said  to  explain  how  Amorgen's  story
has  a  parallel  in  that  of  the  Spiritus  Poematis,  and  on  the
Welsh  side  we  have  Amorgen's  counterpart  in  Avagdu,
though  the  preparation  for  the  latter' s  intellectual  endow-
ment is  interrupted  in  the  story  of  Gwion.     We  gather,

1  R.  B.  Mab.  pp.  35,  40-2  ;  Guest,  iij.  117,  124-8.

2  Vigfusson  &  Powell,  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  ij.  636.         3  lb.  i.  182.

4  One  of  the  Breton  words  for  death,  ar  maro,  is  in  point,  as  it
literally  means  'the  dead.'


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  5G9

however,  from  a  boast  of  his  mother's  in  one  of  the
Taliessin  poems1  that  it  was  so  far  resumed  that  he  was
enabled  to  be  victorious  among  his  bardic  rivals.  But  I
am  forced  to  leave  unexplained  the  discrepancy  that,  while
Amorgen's  tutor  Aitherne  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  Culture
Hero,  I  have  hesitatingly  to  treat  Gwion  as  a  form  of  the
Sun-god.  A  word  or  two  must  now  be  devoted  to  another
Amorgen,  for  we  found  Taliessin's  extraordinary  preten-
sions and  transformations  matched  in  Irish  by  those  only
of  Amorgen  the  White-kneed,  poet  and  brehon  of  the
Milesian  invaders  of  Erinn  (p.  3G5).  The  Tuatha  De
Danann  of  that  time  are  described  as  under  the  rule  of
three  chiefs  called  Mac  Greinc,  '  Son  of  the  Sun ; '  Mac
Cuill,  '  Son  of  Destruction ; '  and  Mac  Cecht,  c  Son  of  the
Plough :'  a  three-fold  arrangement  which  in  some  measure
recalls  the  three  departments  of  Zeus,  Fosidon  and  Pluto,
in  Greek  mythology.  When  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann  are
defeated  by  the  Milesians,  Airem  the  'Ploughman'  is
made  the  slayer  of  Mac  Cecht,  Eber  of  Mac  Cuill,  and
Amorgen  of  Mac  Grdine,  whereby  it  was  meant  to  oppose
Amorgen,  so  to  say,  to  Mac  Greine ;  and  his  solar  naturo
may  perhaps  be  inferred  from  this  as  well  as  from  his
epithet.  De  is  said  to  have  been  an  impartial  brehon
and  to  have  delivered  the  first  judgment  in  Erinn.2  Iu
any  case,  he  seems  to  have  had  nothing  in  common,
except  his  name  and  the  attribute  of  poetry,  with  tho
pupil  of  Aitherne.  The  latter  Amorgen  belongs  to  the
Ultonian  cycle,  and  the  other  occurs  in  stories,  which,
connected  as  they  are  with  the  south-west,  place  Ainor-

1  No.  xvi :  see  Skene,  ij.  158.

8  Ilk.  o/Leineter,  126 — 136;  M.  u'A.  do  Jubainvillu'd  Cycle,  pp,
242-61.


570  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

gen's  landing  in  Kerry,  and  his  first  battle  near  the
mountains  called  Slieve  Mis.  The  name  Amorgen  seems
to  have  literally  meant  a  wonder-child,  and  this  would
aPPly  equally  well  to  Eccet's  ugly  progeny  and  to  Amor-
gen the  White-kneed,  whose  pretensions  resemble  those
of  Taliessin,  and  whose  birth  and  infancy  may  have
formed  the  burden  of  a  story  like  that  of  Taliessin.  One
may  here  compare  Lug  termed  par  excellence  the  child  of
victory,1  which  in  its  turn  vividly  recalls  the  career  of
the  newly-born  Apollo,  master  of  the  lyre  as  well  as  of
unerring  arrows.

The  Stratification  of  Solar  Myths.

This  lecture  would  be  incomplete  without  some  allu-
sion to  the  fact  that,  though  Celts  and  Teutons  appear
to  have  originally  had  the  same  notion  of  a  Sun-god,
which  was  likewise  Aryan,  probably,  in  the  widest  sense
of  the  word;  they  have  also  had  a  habit  more  or  less
general  of  treating  the  sun  as  a  female.  I  have  been
searching  in  vain  among  the  ever-growing  mass  of  writ-
ings on  Aryan  mythology  for  any  clear  recognition  of
this  two-fold  treatment.  The  theory  I  have  been  forced
to  form  is,  that  the  myths  about  the  sun  under  such

1  It  occurs  in  the  British  Museum  MS.  Harl.  5280,  fol.  63a  (52a),
as  gein  mbuada,  or  child  of  victory ;  and  Amorgen  analysed  may  be
explained  as  gein  n-amra,  'wonderful  child,'  an  attested  description
of  another  person  :  see  Windisch,  p.  590,  s.v.  gein,  and  Stokes'  Three
Irish  Glossaries,  p.  lxxxiij.  Gein  maks  gene  in  the  genitive,  and  is  a
neuter  of  the  same  origin  and  formation  as  the  Latin  genus,  generis ;
but  the  corresponding  Irish  declension  being  little  used,  some  uncer-
tainty prevailed  as  to  the  case-endings,  and  the  nominative  appears  as
Amorgene  and  Amorgin  ox  Amairgin,  as  well  as  Amorgen:  see  Win-
disch, p.  870,  s.v.


V.     THE    SUN    HERO.  571

names  as  Lieu  and  Lug,  GYichulainn  and  Balder,  failed
at  an  early  period  to  tell  with  distinctness  and  precision
the  tale  of  their  origin,  and  that  they  ceased  to  be  under-
stood as  applying  to  the  sun,  so  that  the  stories  in
which  they  figured  became  severed  more  or  less  com-
pletely, so  to  say,  from  their  original  fountain-head.
This  being  so,  the  sun  under  other  and  familiar  names
might  serve  as  the  source  of  other  myths  different  from
the  earlier  ones.  How  ancient  those  of  the  earlier  order
must  be  will  appear  from  the  following  brief  examination
of  some  of  those  belonging  to  the  later  one ;  but  it  may
be  premised  of  the  latter  that  they  are  comparatively
poor  in  point  of  mythic  development ;  for  l  words  like
Hcmera,  day,  Nyx,  night,  Helios,  sun,  Selene,  moon,  may
send  out  a  few  mythological  offshoots,  but  it  is  chiefly
round  dark  and  decaying  names,  such  as  Kastor  and
Pollux,  Apollo  and  Athene,  that  the  mythological  ivy
grows  most  luxuriantly.'1  The  word  for  sun  is  in  Irish
grian,  genitive  grtine,  of  the  feminine  gender,  as  it  is
also  in  the  Gaelic  of  Scotland  and  of  the  Isle  of  Man.  The
term  is  unknown  to  the  Brythonic  branch  of  the  Celtic
languages,  but  it  probably  means  that  which  shines,
glitters  or  sparkles,  for  it  is  related  to  Irish  grian,  geni-
tive griin,  '  gravel,'  which  is  a  masculine  represented  in
Welsh  by  graean  or  graian  of  the  same  meaning ;  hence  a
single  particle  of  gravel  is  called  in  Welsh  graienyn,  and,
according  to  a  Welsh  proverb,  it  is  its  business  to  shine
or  sparkle — Tyivynnid  graienyn  ei  ran,  that  is  to  say,  '  A
particle  of  gravel  shines  its  destined  best.'  Thus  the
two  Irish  words  grian  may  be  said  roughly  to  represent

1  Max  Miillei  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  for  1885,  xviij.  035.


572  V.    THE   SUN   HERO.

the  highest  and  lowest  powers  of  shining,  or  the  utter-
most poles  of  our  imagination  in  that  respect.  The
other  Celts  use  a  different  word,  which  is  common  to
them  with  many  other  Aryan  nations :  in  Welsh  it  is
haul,  '  sun,'  formerly  heul,  0.  Cornish  houl,  heuul,  Breton
heol :  the  Gothic  word  was  sauil,  and  the  0.  Norse  sol,
whence  the  modern  Danish  and  Swedish  is  sol  also ;  to
these  must  be  added  the  Lithuanian  sdule  (for  saulja)  and
the  Latin  sol.  Of  these  words  the  Latin  is  masculine,
the  Gothic  neuter,  and  the  Scandinavian  ones  feminine :
in  fact,  one  of  the  Eddie  poets  speaks  of  more  than  one
female  sun,  as  follows : 1  l  The  Sun  [Sol]  shall  bear  a
daughter  ere  the  Wolf  destroy  her ;  that  maid  shall  ride,
when  the  powers  have  passed  away,  along  the  paths  of
her  mother.'

It  may  be  remarked  next  that  the  word  used  in  the
Brythonic  languages  is  masculine,  exclusively  masculine
if  one  follow  the  dictionaries ;  but  I  have  no  doubt  that  it
was  formerly  feminine  in  them  all,  though  I  can  only  prove
it  with  regard  to  Welsh,2  in  which  the  sun  is  still  some-
times spoken  of  in  that  gender :   I  have  heard  it  now

1  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  (Grimnis-Mal),  i.  68.

2  That  haul,  '  sun,'  was  at  one  time  feminine  in  the  literary  language
is  proved  beyond  doubt  by  a  passage  in  Brut  y  Tywysogion,  and  con-
tained in  manuscripts  dating  as  late  as  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century.
In  the  Eolls  edition  (London,  1860)  it  reads — "  Yny  ul6ydyn  honno
du6  Calan  Mei  y  symuda6d  yr  heul  y  tH6,  ac  y  dywa6t  rei  not  erni
dilfyc."  If  heul  had  been  masculine,  we  should  have  U6  and  ama6
for  1116  and  erni.  A  reference  to  the  event  occurs  also  in  the  Myvyrian,
iij.  577.  The  entry  is  under  the  year  1185,  and  it  is  a  propos  of  an
eclipse  of  the  sun.  Add  to  this  a  curious  passage  too  long  to  quote,
which  occurs  in  the  Red  Book,  col.  516,  lines  11 — 19.  Lastly,  D.  ab
Gwilym  addresses  a  poem  to  the  sun  as  a  she,  in  the  course  of  which  he
invokes  her  as  Ymmerodres  Tes,  or  the  Empress  of  Warm  Weather.


V.    THE  SUN  hero:  573

and  then  in  my  native  county  of  Cardigan,  where  one
may  also  near  a  riddle  in  which  the  snn  and  the  moon
are  alluded  to  as  a  gold-headed  maid  and  a  silver-headed
youth  respectively.  Englishmen  of  the  present  day
think  it  strange  that  the  Germans,  who  use  the  same
word  as  they  do,  should  nevertheless  make  it  a  feminine
Sonne,  forgetting  that  their  own  ancestors  did  the  same
thing,  for  the  Anglo-Saxon  sunne,  i  sun,'  was  always
feminine.  The  change  from  that  gender  to  the  masculine
took  place  possibly  under  the  influence  of  Latin  and  the
Romance  languages,  and  in  "Welsh  under  the  influence
of  Latin  and  English.  The  Latin  sol,  as  already  stated,
was  always  masculine,  and  so  was  the  Greek  jJ'Aios,  whether
etymologically  related  to  it  or  not,  while  Sanskrit  not
only  calls  the  sun  siirya  and  siiryd,  masculine  and  femi-
nine respectively,  but  also  svar,  neuter.  Add  to  tin's
the  fact  that  the  old  Slavonic  word  was  also  a  neuter
sltouec,  with  which  the  modern  Slavonic  forms  agree.
Still  the  Slaves  cannot  be  said  to  have  never  per-
sonified the  sun,  for  they  sometimes  regarded  that
heavenly  body  as  a  woman  stepping  into  her  bath  in
the  evening,  and  rising  in  the  morning  refreshed  and
purified,  or  else  as  sinking  at  night  into  the  arms  of
her  mother  the  Sea.1  To  return  to  Celtic,  the  sun,  per-
sonified under  the  "Welsh  name  of  Uaul,  has  a  trace  of
myth  associated  with  her  in  the  supposition  that  she
enters  a  fortress  in  the  evening:  this  betrays  itself  in
the  Snowdonian  term  for  sunset,  which  is  hauligaera,  or
(the  going  of  the)  Sun  to  (her)  Fortifications.  But  the
sun  appears  to  have  been  the  subject  of  another  myth

1  Max  MuIJor'd  Chips,  ij.  82.


574  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

under  another  Welsh  name  which  was  also  feminine,

namely,  huan.     This  occurs  in  a  poem  in  the  Book  of

Taliessin : 1

1  ~Nj  6yr  neb  pan  rudir  y  bron  huan  : '
Nobody  knows  where  the  Sun  reddens  her  breast.

The  allusion  would  seem  to  be  to  a  ruddy  sunset,  bnt
it  must  be  admitted  to  be  somewhat  obscure.  Nor  is  it
very  evident  what  the  word  huan  means,2  but  it  would
seem  to  have  been  originally  the  exponent  of  a  myth  asso-
ciated with  the  sun  as  a  female,  though  we  are  left  with-
out the  means  of  realizing  clearly  what  that  myth  was.
Whatever  it  and  that  connected  with  the  word  haul  may
have  been,  they  go  with  the  names  of  the  later  order ;
and  these  last,  together  with  the  others  noticed,  belong
to  the  period  of  the  separate  existence  of  the  nations
using  them,  and  not  to  that  of  the  undivided  Aryan  family.
This  may  be  regarded  as  sufficiently  shown  by  their  lack
of  agreement  in  the  important  matter  of  gender,  and  also
probably  by  the  comparatively  scanty  nourishment  which
the  mythological  ivy,  so  to  speak,  is  found  to  have  drawn
from  them.  Had  the  Celts,  or,  still  better,  the  Goidclic
Celts,  been  alone  in  making  the  sun  feminine  at  a  certain
point  in  their  history,  one  would  have  been  tempted  to
see  in  that  tendency  the  influence  of  a  non- Aryan  race
conquered  and  absorbed  by  them ;  but  the  divergence  of
gender  pointed  out  is  not  such  as  to  favour  that  view :
it  only  warrants  the  inference  that  each  nation  acted

1  Skene,  ij.  134  (poem  vij.  line  145).

2  Possibly  it  signified  one  that  howls  or  barks  as  a  hound  giving
tongue.  D.  ab  Gwilyni  treats  the  moon  as  the  huan  of  the  night  in
poem  civ.  line  28,  p.  204;  and  an  owl  is  called  in  Welsh  a  daUhuan,
or  blind  huan.


V.    THE   SUN   HERO.  575

independently.  Nor  are  those  that  were  led  to  regard
the  sun  as  a  female  to  be  considered  peculiar  in  so  doing;
for  there  is  no  lack  of  other  peoples  in  different  parts  of
the  world  who  took  the  same  view  of  that  heavenly  body.
This,  however,  by  no  means  precludes  our  asking,  why
the  sun  should  be  treated  as  a  he  by  one  nation  and  as  a
she  by  another,  or  even  by  the  same  nation  in  a  different
stage  in  its  history.  Very  possibly  geography  and  climate
may  have  had  something  to  do  with  it,  but  the  question
must  for  the  present  be  regarded  as  one  which  the  student
of  mythology  has  not  yet  sufficiently  studied :  it  awaits
the  attention  both  of  him  and  the  anthropologist.

Another  difficulty  attaching  to  solar  myths  is  one  that
has  occurred  to  me  in  reading  M.  Gaidoz's  remarks  already
mentioned  (p.  55).  His  summary1  of  the  history  of  the
Roman  Jupiter,  for  example,  is  that  he  was  made,  by
way  of  extension,  into  the  god  of  the  sky  from  being  the
god  of  light ;  but  in  the  early  times  to  which  this  must
refer  the  god  of  light  must,  it  seems  to  me,  have  meant
the  god  of  the  sun.  Then  comes  the  question  as  to  the
relation  in  which  a  sun-god  of  this  order  stood  in  the
mythology  of  the  Aryans  to  the  younger  divinities  to
whom  it  usually  gives  solar  attributes.  Did  the  older
Sun-god  cease  to  be  specially  associated  with  the  sun  and
become  identified  with  the  sky  at  the  same  time  that
other  solar  gods  rose  into  repute  ?  "Were  the  two  things
brought  about  by  a  common  cause,  and  as  the  working
out  of  one  and  the  same  idea?  In  Greek  mythology,  for
example,  the  treatment  of  Apollo  and  Heracles,  as  sons
of  Zeus,  wmild  seem  to  fa\<mr  an  affirmative  answer.    The

1  ittudes,  p.  93.


576  V.     THE    SUN   HERO.

case  is  not  very  dissimilar  on  Celtic  ground,  where  the
place  of  Zeus  is  held  in  Irish  by  Nuada,  and  that  of  a
subordinate  in  command  of  his  forces  by  Lug,  the  Sun-
god  ;  or  take  another  cycle,  with  Conchobar  standing  for
Zeus,  and  Cuchulainn  for  the  Sun-hero,  a  youth  devotedly
attached  to  him  as  his  lord  and  foster-father.  Nay,  in
the  former  case  one  seems  to  detect  Lug  stepping  into
the  place  of  the  Celtic  Zeus,  namely  in  the  legend  of
the  Ida  Fail  or  Stone  of  Fal  (pp.  206,  210) ;  for  it  states,
among  other  things,  that  it  was  at  Tara  the  stone  had
been  placed,  but  that  it  was  at  Tailltin  it  should  perma-
nently remain,  and  that  there  the  meeting-place  should
be  for  games  as  long  as  sovereignty  belonged  to  Tara.1
How  it  got  to  Tailltin  is  related  briefly  in  the  Book  of
Leinster  (9«),  which  gives  it  the  name  in  Fdlmor  or  c  the
Great  Fal,'  and  explains  that  it  was  a  Stone  of  Vision  at
Tara;  but  it  also  terms  it  an  idol,  and  states  that  its
welcome  to  Conn  (p.  205)  was  the  last  instance  of  its
functioning  as  an  oracle,  as  its  heart  sprang  out  of  it
from  Tara  as  far  as  Tailltin,  where  it  appears  to  have
been  known  as  Fal's  Heart ;  and,  lastly,  it  is  hinted  that
the  real  cause  of  the  idol's  power  coming  to  an  end  was
the  birth  of  Christ.  That  is,  doubtless,  a  comparatively
late  comment,  and  it  is  needless  to  repeat  how  Tailltin
and  its  great  fair  of  the  Lugnassad  (p.  410)  were  closely
identified  with  Lug;  and  the  passing  of  the  Lia  Fail
from  Tara  to  Tailltin  would  seem  to  imply  nothing  less
than  the  eclipsing  of  the  older  god's  glory  by  that  of  the
younger.  When  Lug  prophetically  declares  the  des-
tinies of  the  kingdom  to  Conn  (p.  210),  he  may  be  said  to

1  O'Curry,  quoting  and  translating,  pp.  618,  G20,  from  the  Harl.
MS.  5280  in  the  British  Museum.


V.     THE    ST'N    HERO.  577

usurp  the  functions  of  a  god  corresponding  to  the  Welsh
Merlin  acting  in  the  capacity  of  prophet.  It  is  true  that
it  is  with  Nuada  it  has  been  attempted  to  connect  the
Lia  Fail,  and  that  the  etymological  equivalent  of  Nuada
is  in  Welsh  Nild:  or  Llud,  and  not  Merlin's  name.  On
the  other  hand,  should  Nuada  Finn  fall  prove  to  mean
Nuada  of  the  White  Fence,  one  would  have  to  admit  the
probability  of  an  allusion  in  the  epithet  to  a  pellucid
prison  like  Merlin's.  Add  to  this  that  a  passage  in  the
Welsh  story  of  Kulhwch,  the  significance  of  which  has
been  overlooked,  associates  with  Lliitt  the  sort  of  impri-
sonment which  has  in  these  lectures  (p.  155)  been  dwelt
upon  in  connection  with  Merlin:  it  makes  Mabon  son
of  Modron  say,  when  about  to  be  released  by  Arthur
from  the  dungeon  where  he  had  been  for  ages  incarcerated
(p.  29),  that  his  captivity  was  more  grievous  even  than
that  of  L1M  of  the  Silver  Hand  and  of  Greid  son  of
Eri.1  These  two,  with  Mabon's,  would  seem  to  have
formed  a  triad2  of  the  most  remarkable  incarcerations
the  story-teller  had  ever  heard  of,  and  one  is  tempted  to
treat  Lliict  and  Merlin  as  the  names  of  one  and  the  same
divinity  in  two  distinct  cycles  of  stories.  Further,  Mabon
is  to  be  identified  with  the  Apollo  Maponos  of  the  Celts
of  antiquity  (p.  21),  and  the  vast  duration  of  his  cap-
tivity is  probably  to  be  explained  by  his  having  to  a
certain  extent  been  assimilated  to  the  older  god  to  be
detected  in  Merlin  and  Llud:.     In  other  words,  it  is  pro-

1  R.  B.  Mob.  p.  131  ;  Guest,  ij.  300-1.

2  It  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  form  to  he  expected  in  the  ordinary
lists;  but  see  Triads,  i.  50  =  ij.  7,  49  =  iij.  Gl,  in  which  Mabon  figures
with  Liyi  instead  of  Llud ;  see  also  R  B.  Mob,  pp.  300,  30G,  and  tlio
Cyu:)itrodor,  vij.  130.

2  r


0/0  V.     THE    SUN    HERO.

bably  an  instance  of  the  Celtic  Apollo  taking  the  place
of  the  Celtic  Zens,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Irish  Lug.

When  we  pass  beyond  the  limits  of  Celtic,  we  may
suppose  a  displacement  of  a  somewhat  similar  kind  to  have
happened  with  regard  to  the  god  whom  one  may  briefly
describe  as  the  Zeus  of  the  Aryan  family  generally  :  he
was  at  first  presumably  the  god  of  the  sun,  but  he
became  that  of  light  and  the  luminous  heavens,  while
among  the  Celts  he  showed  a  tendency  to  become  further
modified  into  a  divinity  of  the  sea  and  even  of  the  nether
world.  Lastly,  the  relative  positions  of  this  most  ancient
of  sun-gods  and  of  the  younger  divinities  or  heroes  asso-
ciated with  the  sun  seem  to  afford  data  for  fixing  the
order,  so  to  say,  of  the  mythological  stratification.  Thus
by  way  of  a  precarious  inference  we  penetrate  to  a  primary
stage,  with  the  Aryan  Zeus  as  the  Sun-god  of  the  system ;
then  we  ascend  to  a  secondary  one,  characterized  by  the
rise  of  such  younger  gods  as  Apollo,  Lug  and  Balder,
around  whose  names  myths  were  developed  in  marvellous
abundance;  lastly  we  come  to  a  tertiary  stage,  marked
by  the  sun  appearing  variously  as  he,  she  and  it,  sur-
rounded by  no  abundant  accumulation  of  myth.


Lecture  VI.

GODS,   DEMONS  AND   HEROES.


Irish  Mythography  on  the  Gods  and  their  Foes.

It  will  be  convenient  now  to  devote  some  space  to  a
general  consideration  of  the  gods  and  heroes  associated
with  the  name  of  Dann  and  those  which  Irish  mythology
opposes  to  them  ;  for  the  latter  had  its  demons,  so  to  say,
as  well  as  its  gods  and  heroes  of  a  more  or  less  divine
origin.  The  term  Tuatha  De*  Danann,  or  the  Tribes  of
the  goddess  Danu,  is  somewhat  vague,  as  are  also  others
of  the  same  import,  such  as  Tuath  Dea,  '  the  Tribe  of
the  Goddess,'  and  Fir  Dea,  'the  Men  of  the  Goddess;'
but  the  important  figures  among  them  were  never  very
numerous.1  The  Tuatha  De*  Danann  are  represented
fighting  successively  against  other  inhabitants  or  invaders
of  Ireland  :  these  last  bear  the  names  of  Fir  Bolg,  of
Fomori,  and  of  the  Children  of  Mile  or  the  Milesians,  as
they  are  sometimes  called.  The  nature  of  their  struggles
has  an  interest  which  reaches  beyond  the  limits  of  Celtic

1  They  were  Echaitl  Ollathar  or  the  Dagda  Mdr,  Nnada  of  the
Silver  Hand,  Ogma,  TianCecht,  Goibniu,  Lug,  Bodb  the  Red,  Lir,
Mider,  Echald  Aixem  and  Echaid  Foidlech,  and  the  triad  Mac  Cuill,
Mac  Cecht  and  Mac  Greine,  together  with  a  lew  others,  including
Danu  herself  and  a  sister  .sometimes  ascribed  to  her,  called  L'e-Cuill  or
the  Wile  of  Coll.

2  p  2


580         VI.  GODS,  DEMOXS  AXD  HEROES.

mythology ;  but  in  order  to  guess  the  signification  of
them,  it  is  necessary  to  go  into  the  legendary  history
of  early  Ireland  at  some  length.  The  outlines  of  it  were
contained  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun,1  so  they  date  not
later  than  the  year  1106;  still  they  clearly  form  a  re-
daction— and  relatively  a  late  and  clumsy  one — of  old
materials  by  somebody  who  was  acquainted  with  what
passed  for  history  among  other  nations.  He  was  anxious,
for  example,  to  connect  Irish  legend  with  the  Biblical
account  of  Noah  and  his  descendants.

So  there  had  been,  he  says,  five  distinct  invasions  or
colonizations  of  Erinn  after  the  deluge,  and  the  first  took
place  under  the  leadership  of  one  Partholon  son  of  Sera,
who  arrived  with  twenty-four  married  pairs  in  his  train.
They  multiplied  in  the  land  and  became  5000,  when  in
the  course  of  one  week  they  all  died  of  a  plague,  except
a  single  man  destined  to  tell  the  story  of  his  friends'  fate.
According  to  the  usual  custom  of  the  Irish,  whose  good-
nature does  not  permit  them  to  abandon  a  favourite
pagan  to  the  risk  of  hell-fire,  he  is  made  to  survive,
after  passing  through  many  scenes  and  changes,  to  become
a  Christian,  and  the  whole  story  is  put  into  his  mouth ;
but  so  far  as  regards  this  portion  of  it,  the  greatest  puzzle
it  contains  is  the  name  Partholon,  which  has  sometimes
been  supposed  to  be  merely  a  form  of  the  Biblical  name
Bartholomew :  Giraldus  calls  him  '  Bartholanus,  Sere
films,  de  stirpe  Japhet  filii  ISToe.'2  The  next  to  take
possession  of  the  country  was  one  of  the  same  race  as
Partholon :  he  was  called  Itemed  son  of  Agnoman,  and

1  Facsimile,  pp.  15a — 16fc.

2  Giraldus,  Topograplua  Hibernica,  Dist.  iij.  cap.  ij.  (Rolls  ed.  Vol.  v.
p.  140);  see  also  the  Four  Masters,  A.M.  2520,  note.


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES,         581

he  reached  Erinn  after  suffering  great  hardships  on  the
high  seas,  which  in  this  instance  are  made  to  include  the
Caspian.  When  he  landed  in  Ireland,  his  people  consisted
of  only  four  married  pairs  ;  but  they  multiplied  until
they  were  no  fewer  than  34,000  such  pairs.  The  next
to  come  to  take  possession  of  the  island  was  one  Semion
son  of  Stariath,  and  from  him  and  his  people  descended
the  Fir  Bolg,  the  Fir  Donmann  and  the  Gailioin,  of  whom
more  anon.  Their  leader  is  elsewhere  sometimes  called
Simeon  Brec  or  the  Freckled  (p.  213),  and  the  invasion
of  the  island  under  his  command  is  collectively  known
as  that  by  the  Fir  Bolg.  These  last  survived  there  to
fight  with  the  next  comers,  who  were  led  by  Beothach
son  of  Iardonel  Faith,  that  is  I.  the  Yates  or  Seer
(p.  202),  and  this  was  the  race  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,
whose  origin  is  unknown,  except  that  the  learned  guess,
as  the  writer  says,  that  they  were  of  the  number  of  the
exiles  driven  out  of  heaven ;  but  he  treats  them  as  con-
sisting of  gods  and  not-gods,  terms  which  he  proceeds  to
apply  to  them  as  human  inhabitants  of  the  island,  and
to  explain  to  mean  men  in  political  and  professional
authority,  and  men  devoted  to  husbandry  and  farming
respectively.  So  he  knew  no  more  than  we  what  was
originally  meant  by  describing  the  Tuatha  De  as  gods
and  not-gods;1  and  his  story  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun  is
brought  to  an  abrupt  close  owing  to  the  loss  of  a  part  of
the  manuscript,  but  it  is  well  known  from  other  sources
that  the  fifth  invasion  was  that  of  Mile  and  his  sons.
His  name  means  Soldier,  and  he  is  once  called  quidam

1  It  is  evidently  an  old  formula:  it  ocean  in  the  /»'/,-.  of  ///.  Dun,
166,  77a;  BU.  of  LetTuter,  9a,  756j  and  it  has  been  suggested  to  me
to  compare  it  with  the  'Sanskrit  dec  ■  and  cub  va.


582  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

miles  Hispanicus,1  for  it  is  from  Spain  he  is  fabled  to
have  come,  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  way  of  tracing
the  descent  of  the  Milesian  Irish  from  the  Celtic  Dis
(pp.  90-1,  262-3).  Mile  is  described  as  the  father  of
two  sons,  Eremon  and  Eber  or  Emer,  who  divide  the
island  between  them ;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that
they  represent  the  Aryan  and  the  non- Aryan  elements
respectively  in  the  population  of  ancient  Ireland.  At
any  rate  it  is  only  with  this  fifth  invasion  of  the  country
we  begin  to  have  regularly  to  do  with  the  human  inha-
bitants of  Erinn ;  not  that  it  by  any  means  follows  that
from  the  Milesian  settlement  forth  the  history  of  Ireland,
such  as  it  is,  confines  itself  to  real  men  and  women ;  but
the  story  of  the  previous  invasions  is  scarcely  human,
except  in  that  it  is  a  product  of  the  human  mind.

Putting  aside,  then,  the  Milesian  invasion,  there  remain
for  our  consideration  four  mythic  ones,  namely,  by  Par-
tholon,  by  Nemed,  by  the  Fir  Bolg,  and  by  the  Tuatha
De"  Danann  respectively.  Now  when  Partholon  and  his
people  had  been  some  time  in  the  island,  they  were
disturbed  by  a  race  called  the  Fomori,  under  the  leader-
ship of  a  giant  and  his  mother,2  and  they  had,  according
to  some  authors,  as  Keating  tells  us,  been  living  by
fishing  and  fowling  200  years  in  the  island  when  they
met  with  Partholon  and  his  people.  A  great  battle  ere
long  took  place,  in  which  the  latter  destroy  the  Fomori,
but  not  so  as  to  prevent  our  hearing  of  them  again
more  than  once.  It  is  of  importance  to  notice  that
the  Fomori  are  said  to  have  landed  at  Inver  Domnann


1  Saa-Marte's  Nennius  et  Gildas,  §  13  (p.  35).

2  Keating,  pp.  68 — 71.


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.         5S3

or  the  Estuary  of  Domnu,  which  was  probably  Broad-
haven  in  Irrus  Domnann,1  now  called  Errifl,  in  the  county
of  Mayo,  and  that  this  battle,  the  first  said  to  have  been
fought  in  Ireland,  occurred  at  a  spot  called  Blemna
Maige  Itha.2  Their  leader  is  said  to  have  been  of  the
mythic  race  of  Umor  (p.  150) :  he  was  a  Fomorian  called
Cichol  Gri  ecu  Chos  or  the  Footless,  and  his  followers
have  been  described  as  not  men,  but  demons  and  monsters
with  one  hand  and  one  foot  each.3  Cichol's  mother's
name  is  given  as  Lot,  which  means  destruction ;  and  the
whole  brood  is  always  treated  as  foreigners  in  the  legen-
dary history  of  Ireland.  The  next  invasion  was  that  led
by  Kerned,  who  is  to  be  identified  with  the  Welsh
Nevyd,  the  owner,  according  to  a  Welsh  triad  (iij.  97),
of  the  ship  in  which  the  human  race  was  preserved
from  extinction  by  the  deluge  caused  by  the  bursting
of  the  Lake  of  Llion :  so  there  is  a  certain  fitness  in
making  Kemed  one  of  the  first  to  take  possession  of
the  island-home  of  the  Goidcls.  He  and  his  sons,  how-
ever, were  not  left  in  quiet  possession  of  the  country,

1  According  to  O'Curry,  the  Bay  of  Malahide  in  the  county  of
Dublin  was  formerly  called  Inver  Domnann;  but  it  is  not  improbable
there  may  have  been  more  than  one  water  so  named.  1  have  followed
Mr.  llennessy,  Blc,  of  Fenagh,  p.  18,  note.

2  The  Four  Mastt  rs,  A.  M.  l! ."> ,"3 0  :  Keating  gives  the  name,  pp.  70-1,
less  precisely  as  Magh  Iotha.

'■'■  I " 1 1 1 • '. r  is  also  written  Ughmdr  and  Uthmdr,  whence  Sliah  Timor,
(Jghm6r  or  Uthmor,  which  ( )'Curry  believed  to  have  been  the  (Joidelic
name  for  the  Caucasus:  see  his  Manners,  ij.  L'.'iii.  Cichol  Ghri  is  com-
pared by  M.  d.  A.  de  Jubainville,  Cycle  Myth.  p.  32,  with  the  Hindu
demon  Vritra ;  and  as  to  the  other  demons,  the  same  author,  p.  !'.r»,
quotes  the  Bk.  of  Leiruter,  5a,  and  Hennessy'a  Chronicum  Scotorum
]».  6.  See  also  the  Four  Masters,  A.M.  2530,  and  Keating,  pp  08 — 71,
by  both  of  svhon  Cichol's  name  is  written  Giuccal  or  Ciocal,


584         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

for  they  had  to  struggle  with  the  Fomori.     Nemed  and
his  sons,  one  of  whom  bore  the  unusual  Irish  name  of
Artur,  conquered  the  Fomori  in  three  or  four  battles,  in
which  there  fell  of  their  leaders  two  called  Gann  and
Genann,  while  another  called  Conaing  (p.  262),  having
performed  great  feats  of  valour,  survived  to  carry  on  the
contest.1     Nemed  died,  and  the  Fomori  were  now  able
to  exercise  great  tyranny  over  his  people ;  for  Conaing,
from  whom  Tor  Conaing,  or  Conaing's  Tower  in  Tory
Island,  took  its  name,  and  More,  a  name  already  familiar
to  you  (p.  262),  collected  a  fleet,  by  means  of  which  they
levied  a  heavy  tribute   in  Erinn.      This   consisted   in
giving  to  them  every  Eve  of  Samhain  or  the  Winter
Calends  no  less  than  two-thirds  of  the  children,  of  the
corn  and  of  the  milk,  besides  other  grievous  exactions
that  were  to  be  brought  direct  to  Tory  Island  to  More
and   Conaing.      The   warriors    of   the    sons   of  Nemed
mustered  at  length  to  fight  the  Fomori,  to  the  number
of  30,000  by  land  and  as  many  by  sea,  and  they  suc-
ceeded in  destroying  Conaing's  Tower,  and  in  slaying
Conaing  himself  and  his  sons :  this  is  the  tower  described
by  Nennius  as  one  of  glass  in  the  middle  of  the  sea
(p.  263).    The  Fomori  now  received  reinforcements,  con-
sisting of  a  fleet  brought  from  Africa  by  More ;  and  in
the  battle  which  ensued  the  combatants  were  overwhelmed
by  the  sea  so  that  only  a  handful  of  the  Nemedians
escaped,  the  crew  of  one  boat  and  three  chiefs.     After
due  preparations  these  left  for  the  east,  leaving  their
kinsmen  under  the  complete  tyranny  of  the  Fomori,  with
More  at  their  head ;  but  there  is  another  account  more


1  Keating,  pp.  8-1-7.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    IIEROES.  585


in  keeping  with  Irish  mythology,  namely,  one  which
makes  Nemed  and  his  sons  leave  Eriun  for  Spain,  a
name  here  to  be  interpreted  to  mean  the  other  world.

When  the  Fir  Bolg  come,  we  read  nothing  about  any
collision  between  them  and  the  Fomori :  the  reason  will
become  evident  as  we  go  on.  The  former  and  their
allies  are  said  to  have  come  to  Ireland  under  five  leaders
called  Slainge,  who  took  possession  of  the  old  province
of  Leinster  from  the  mouth  of  the  Boyne  to  Waterford :
Gann,  who  had  South  Minister ;  Sengann,  who  had  the
north  of  the  same;  Gcnann,  who  had  Connaught;  and
Rudraige,  who  had  Ulster.  The  Gailioin  settled  in
Leinster  under  Slainge,  the  Fir  Bolg  in  the  two  parts
of  Minister,  and  Fir  Domnann  in  Ulster ;  and  a  site  for
the  capital  of  the  whole  island  was  selected  at  a  spot
which  came  later  to  be  known  by  the  name  of  Tara.1
The  Tuatha  De  Danann  came  to  Ireland  next,  and  they
had  been  in  the  island  some  time  before  they  were
aware  that  it  contained  any  other  inhabitants;  but  at
length  they  showed  themselves  to  the  Fir  Bolg,  and  the
account  they  gave  of  their  advent  was  that  they  had
arrived  on  the  wings  of  the  wind.  The  Fir  Bolg  sent
one  of  their  chiefs  called  Sreng  to  parley  with  the
Tuatha  ~D6  Danann,  who  selected  one  of  their  number
named  Bres  to  meet  him.  Through  him  they  asked  the
Fir  Bolg  for  half  the  island  as  their  own.  This  was
declined,  and  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  posted  themselves
at  Mount  Belgadan  in  the  present  county  of  Mayo,  and
near  it  they  fought  a  great  battle  on  a  plain  or  field
called  Mag  Tured  or  Moytura,  near  Coug.2     It  began

1  o'Cuny,  p.  I'll.  "  lb.  p.  245.


586         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

on  Midsummer- day,  and  proved  disastrous  in  the  ex-
treme to  the  Fir  Bolg.  Their  king  Echaid  son  of
Ere  was  pursued  and  killed  by  three  men,  called
Sons  of  Nemed,  on  the  strand  of  Ballysadare,  where  a
great  cairn,  raised  over  his  body,  became  a  well-known
feature  in  the  topography  of  the  neighbourhood.  There
remained  of  the  Fir  Bolg  only  Sreng  with  three  hundred
men ;  but  they  were  able  to  secure  peace  and  possession
of  the  province  of  Connaught,  where  descendants  of
Sreng  were  believed  to  live  on  almost  to  modern  times.1
In  the  course  of  the  battle,  Sreng  clove  the  shield  of
Nuada,  king  of  the  Tuatha  D6  Danaan,  and  cut  off  his  arm,
which  compelled  him  to  give  up  his  office  of  king.  It
was  then  entrusted  to  Bres,  who  by  descent  was  connected
both  with  the  Tuatha  De"  Danann  and  the  Fomorians.
Bres  held  the  government  for  seven  years,  during  which
he  made  himself  so  unpopular  as  to  draw  on  himself  the
first  satire  ever  made  in  Ireland,  as  was  mentioned  in
another  lecture  (pp.  252-4).  At  last  he  was  obliged  to
flee  to  his  father  Elathan  the  Fomorian,  leaving  Nuada,
who  had  made  himself  eligible  again  by  having  had  a
silver  hand  made  for  him,  to  resume  the  kingly  office.
This  brought  on  a  war  with  the  Fomori,  though,  accord-
ing to  another  account,  the  cause  was  Lug's  killing  the
tax-collectors  of  the  Fomori,  who  held  the  country  under
a  grievous  tribute,2  and  who,  after  Lug's  onslaught,  sent
an  army  under  the  leadership  of  Bres  to  ravage  the
western  portion  of  the  island,  which  was  ruled  by  Bodb
the  Eed,  son  of  the  Dagda.  Lug  successfully  met  Bres
and  forced  him  to  make  peace,  as  he,  Lug,  was  preparing


1  O'Curry,  p.  246.  2  Joyce,  Old  Celtic  Romances,  p.  37.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.

for  a  great  battle?  that  was  to  bo  fought  with  the  Fomori
on  another  Moytura.1  The  diverging  versions  of  the
story  end  with  this  battle  of  the  northern  Moytura,
which  came  off  on  the  last  day  of  October,  or  the  eve  of
the  first  day  of  winter.  The  leaders  of  the  Fomori  wire
Balor  of  the  Mighty  Blows,  also  called  Balor  of  the
Evil  Eye,  and  Indech  son  of  Dea  Domnu,  that  is  of  the
goddess  Domnu  or  Domna.  The  result  is  usually  de-
scribed as  a  victory  for  the  Tuatha  De"  Danann ;  but  in
achieving  it  they  lost  their  king,  Nuada  of  the  Silver
Hand,  who  was  killed  by  Balor,  while  this  latter  was
only  slain  some  time  later  by  Lug  in  the  manner  men-
tioned in  a  previous  lecture  (p.  397).  Besides,  we  read
of  the  Dagda  going  to  the  camp  of  the  Fomori  to  ask
them  for  a  truce  of  battle,  which  was  granted  him.  It
would  seem,  then,  as  if  the  story  has  made  a  series  of
struggles  into  one,  the  beginning  of  which  was  a  defeat
for  the  Tuatha  De"  Danann,  who  lost  their  king,  and  the
end  a  victory  for  them  over  Balor,  slain  by  Lug,  who
was  thereupon  made  king.  As  to  the  name  Moytura,  or
Mag  Tured,  it  is  explained  to  mean  the  plain  or  the
field  of  the  pillars  or  towers,  in  reference  to  the  sepulchral
monuments  for  which  both  sites  are  remarkable:2  the
monuments  mark  real  interments,  no  doubt,  and  they
may  be  taken  to  account  for  the  sites  fixed  by  story  for

1  About  fifty  miles  from  the  Moytura  where  they  had  measured
swords  with  the  Fir  Bolg :  the  spot  in  question  was  in  the  parish  of
Kilmactranny,  in  the  barony  of  Tirerrill,  in  the  present  county  of  Sligo
(Joyce,  pp.  406-7).  Had  it  been  history,  one  would  naturally  suspect
the  two  Moytura  battles  of  being  originally  one,  as,  in  foot,  they  have
been  treated  more  than  once;  but  I  am  by  QO  means  convinced  that
the  suspicion  is  warranted  in  this  case  of  mythology.
I  ►'Carry,  M8.  Materials,  pp.  217,  250.


588         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

the  two  mythic  battles:    scenes  of  real  interment  are
calculated  to  attract  imaginary  battles.

When  the  Milesians  first  arrived  in  the  island,  the
Tuatha  D6  Danann  were  defeated  in  a  great  battle  at
Tailltin  or  Teltown  in  Meath,  and  those  who  escaped
entered  the  hills  of  Erinn  as  a  sort  of  fairies  forming  an
invisible  world  of  their  own  (p.  148) ;  they  never  figured
afterwards  as  a  people  in  the  history  of  the  country.  Their
power,  however,  did  not  come  to  an  end,  for  though
they  gave  up  their  possession  of  the  land,  they  still  had
means  of  making  their  influence  felt ;  for  they  proceeded
to  ruin  the  corn  and  the  milk  of  the  Milesians,  so  that
the  latter  were  forced  to  seek  the  friendship  of  the  Dagda,
who  thenceforth  spared  them  the  produce  both  of  their
fields  and  their  dairies.1  In  fact,  the  Milesians  went  still
further  in  their  desire  to  conciliate  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann;
for  the  nobles  of  the  former  were  wont  at  one  time,  we
are  told,  to  become  the  foster-parents  of  the  children
of  the  fairies  who  lived  nearest  to  them,  in  order  that
neither  corn  nor  milk  nor  bloom  should  be  lost  in  Erinn.2
Not  so  with  the  Eir  Bolg  and  the  Fomori ;  for  we  read
of  the  Milesians  every  now  and  then  having  wars  with
them;  and  the  stories  about  them  not  unfrequently
associate  with  the  Fir  Bolg  the  remains  of  the  non-Celtic
inhabitants  under  the  name  Ernai^  a  late  form  of  the
more  ancient  one  of  Ivernji  or  'lovepvioi.

Such  is  a  somewhat  intentionally  consistent  version  of
the  legend  of  the  early  invasions  of  Erinn ;  a  little  more
use  of  stories  avoided  by  the  historians,  though  no  more


1  Blc.  of  Leinster,  p.  245  fr.

2  Irish  MS.  Scries  (of  the  Proc.  of  the  K.  Ir.  Acad.),  i.  169.


VI.    GOBS,    DEMONS  AND   nEROES.  5S0

removed  from  the  domain  of  real  history  than  some  of
those  they  have  in  part  accepted,  would  at  once  render
the  inconsistencies  and  contradictions  much  more  glaring.
Even  as  I  have  sketched  them  to  vou  they  are  sufficiently
so,  and  in  that  the  Fomori  arc,  among  other  things,  not
made  to  fight  against  the  Fir  Bolg  when  these  last  come
and  divide  the  whole  island  between  them.  The  reason
was,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  that  the  names  Fir  Bolg
and  Fomori  mean  the  same  sort  of  mythic  beings,  which
is  confirmed  by  their  common  hostility  against  the  Tuatha
De*  Danann  and  the  Milesians.  Their  close  kinship
results  also  from  other  considerations,1  but  it  must  not  be

1  Such  are  the  following:  (1)  Of  the  five  leaders  of  the  Fir  Bolg,
three  may  be  said  to  have  boon  Ganns,  for  they  were  Gann,  Sen-gaim
or  Old  Gann,  and  Genann  or  Little  Gann,  while  Gann  and  Genann
also  appear  (Keating,  p.  85)  as  leaders  of  the  Fomori  in  battles  won
over  them  by  Nemed  and  his  Sons  (compare  also  the  three  Genans  in
Stokes  &  Windisch,  Ir.  Texte,  ij.  122,  153).  As  to  the  remaining  two
Fir  Bolg  leaders,  Slainge  and  Rudraige,  these  were  also  the  names  of
sons  of  Partholon,  and  Rudraige  was  important  as  a  chief  ancestor  of
the  Piets  and  Scots  of  Ulster,  or  the  Ulster  men  who  were  reckoned
'True  Ultonians,'  and  represented  the  ancient  non-Celtic  inhabitants.
He  is  probably  the  same  with  Rugraide,  great-grandson  of  Fomor,
placed  long  afterwards  in  the  Four  Masters'  arrangement  of  the
legendary  history  of  Ireland,  A.M.  4981.  (2)  Next  may  be  mentioned
the  circumstance  that  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Fomori  in  the  battle  of
the  northern  Moytura  was  Indech  son  of  the  goddess  Domnu,  at
whose  invcr  the  Fomori  were  said  to  have  landed  before  the  time  of
Partholon  (Keating,  p.  70) ;  while  the  Fir  Domnann  oi  Men  of  Domnu
formed  one  of  the  chief  peoples  engaged  in  the  Fir  Bolg  invasion  ;
according  to  some  versions  of  the  story,  they  also  landed  at  the  Bame
inver  of  the  goddess  Domnu  (Four  Masters,  A.M.  3266).  (3)  On  tho
other  hand,  the  Fomori  in  the  time  of  Nemed  had  to  encounter  him  and
his  sons  as  their  enemies,  while  three  men  called  Sons  of  Nemed  wens
the  slayers  of  Echaid,  king  of  the  Fir  Bolg,  at  the  battle  of  the  soiu1i.mii
Moytura  (p.  586).    (4)  Some  accounts  bring  Fir  Domnann  and  Gailioin


590  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    A.ND    HEROES.

pressed  too  hard ;  for  Irish  literature  never  consciously
identifies  these  Titans  and  Giants ;  so  their  names  never


or   Gailiuin   into  Ireland   in   the   train   of  Labraid   Longsech,    and

these  strangers,  in  Irish  gailJ,  are  sometimes  made  into  Galli  or  Gauls

(O'Curry,  ij.  256-7),  while  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  159  a,  speaks  of  them

as  Dub-gaill,  or  Black  Strangers,  following  Labraid  from  Denmark

under  one  Ernoll.     The  fact,  however,  is  that  Labraid's  coming  with

Fir  Domnann  and  Gailiom  is  merely  another  version  of  Morc's  arrival

with  a  fleet  from  Africa  to  aid  the  Fomori  in  Tory  Island  :  in  short,  one

would  probably  not  be  far  wrong  in  taking  Labraid  to  have  been  one

of  the  names  of  More,  otherwise  called  Margg,  steward  of  the  king  of

Fomori  (Bk.  of  Leinster,  160  a),  in  Welsh,  March  (ab  Meirchion),  who

had  a  horse's  ears  (Cymmrodor,  vi.  181-3) :  compare  the  Breton  story  of

the  king  of  Fortzmarch  (Rev.  Celt.  ij.  507).    In  Irish,  the  owner  of  the

equine  ears  usually  bears  the  name  of  Labraid  (ib.  ij.  197-8).    (5)  Four

of  the  Fomori  are  said  to  have  escaped  from  the  battle  of  the  northern

Moytura  and  to  have  employed  themselves  in  ruining  the  corn  and

milk,  the  fruit-crops  and  sea-produce  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  :  one

of  these  was  called  Kedg  (ib.  i.  41).     As  the  Fomori  were  the  enemies

of  Lug,  so  the  Fir  Bolg,  under  Ailill  of  Cruachan,  who  was  one  of  them,

were  arrayed  against  Ciichulainn,  and  finally  under  Ere  they  triumphed

over  him.     It  is  to  be  noticed  that  on  the  Tain  one  of  the  foes  killed

by  Ciichulainn  was  called  Marc  (Bk.  of  the  Dun,  70b);  also  that  the

person  bearing  the  very  uncommon  name  of  Bedg  was  likewise   in

AililPs  retinue,  and  on  one  occasion  engaged  by  him  to  compass  the

great  Ultonian's  death,  when  he  fell  at  the  latter's  hand,  the  victim

of  his  own  stratagem.     He  is  described  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  10b,

as  Ailill's  satirist,  that  is  to  say,  one  whose  business  was  the  formidable

one  of  pronouncing  baleful  incantations :   it  was  planned  by  Ailill  that

he  should  introduce  himself  to  Ciichulainn  and  ask  him  for  a  gift,  with

the  customary  choice  of  naming  it :  this  turned  out  to  be  Ciichulainn's

spear  or  javelin,  and  that  in  the  hour  of  his  greatest  straits.    Cuchulainn

said  he  had  more  need  of  it  than  Kedg,  and  that  he  would  give  him

treasure  instead.     No,  he  would  accept  nothing  but  the  javelin  :  so

Cuchulainn  threw  the  weapon  at  him  with  the  but  end  foremost,  and

with  such  force  that  the  recipient  declared  that  it  was  more  than

enough  of  a  gift,  as  it  went  through  his  body.     The  same  tactics  were

employed  by  Ere  and  his  Gailioin  on  Ciichulainn's  fatal  day  (Bk.  of

Leinster,  119rt,  Rev.  Celt.  iij.  178-80),  and  though  he  killed  the  boon-


VI.     SODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROE   .  591

become  quite  synonymous.  The  Fir  Bolg  arc  more  like
the  human  race  than  arc  the  Fomori,  and  through
Srong,  Ailill  of  Cruachan  and  others,  they  are  supposed
to  have  been  the  ancestors  of  historical  families  in  Ireland,
whereas  no  family  is  known  to  have  traced  its  descent
directly  to  a  Fomorian.  This  distinction  may  here  be
disregarded,  as  it  seems  only  to  mean  that  Srcng,  Ailill
and  analogous  figures,  were,  to  certain  tribes,  forms  of  the
ancestral  Dis,  and  the  identity  of  Fir  Bolg  and  Fomori
may  for  our  present  purpose  be  assumed.  This  is  an
important  step  in  the  simplification  of  the  question  before
us,  which  is  to  discover  an  intelligible  line  of  demar-
cation between  them  and  the  Tuatha  ~D6  Danann.  In
order  to  come  nearer  to  that,  the  names  here  in  point  have
to  be  now  more  closely  examined.  Let  us  begin  with
the  most  intelligible  of  them,  namely,  that  of  the  Fomori.
It  is  derived  partly  from  the  Irish  word  muir,  '  sea,'  and
Irish  historians  persistently  treat  it  as  meaning  sea-rovers
or  pirates,  as  if  they  understood  the  whole  compound  to
mean  transmarini,  whereas  it  can  only  mean  submarini,  as
the  prefix  fo  does  not  mean  '  beyond,  over  or  on,'  but
'  under  or  below.'  There  is  a  short  story  illustrative  of
this  in  a  commentary  on  one  of  the  old  Irish  laws :  it
runs  thus : l

u  One  time  then  thereafter  Fergus  and  his  charioteer
(Muena  his  name)  set  out  to  the  sea,  reached  it,  and  they
slept  on  the  sea-shore.     Now  luchorpdin  came  to  the

begging  satirists  successively,  his  enemies  found  the  rnauceuvre  answer

no      O  y  '

their  purpose.

1  Senchua  M&r,  i.  70-1  :  it  has  been  published  also  by  stokes  in  the
Rev.  Celt.  i.  256-7,  with  the  translation  here  borrowed  word  for  word
from  hi  in.


592         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

king  and  bore  him  out  of  his  chariot,  and  they  first  took
his  sword  from  him.  They  afterwards  took  him  as  far
as  the  sea,  and  Fergus  perceived  them  when  his  feet
touched  the  sea.  Whereat  he  awoke  and  caught  three
of  them,  to  wit,  one  in  each  of  his  two  hands,  and  one
on  his  breast.  '  Life  for  life '  (i.e.  protection),  say  they.
c  Let  my  three  wishes  (i.e.  choices)  be  given,'  says  Fergus.
1  Thou  shalt  have,'  says  the  dwarf,  '  save  that  which  is
impossible  for  us.'  Fergus  requested  of  him  knowledge
of  passing  under  loughs  and  linns  and  seas.  '  Thou  shalt
have,'  says  the  dwarf,  '  save  one  which  I  forbid  to  thee :
thou  shalt  not  go  under  Lough  Eudraide  [which]  is  in
thine  own  country.'  Thereafter  the  luchuirp  (little  bodies)
put  herbs  into  his  ears  and  he  used  to  go  with  them
under  seas.  Others  say  it  is  the  dwarf  gave  his  cloak  to
him  and  that  Fergus  used  to  put  it  on  his  head  and
thus  go  under  seas."  The  words  luchuirp  and  luchor-
pdin  appear  to  mean  literally  small  bodies,  and  the  word
here  rendered  dwarf  is  in  the  Irish  abac,  the  etymological
equivalent  of  the  "Welsh  avanc,  the  name  by  which
certain  water  inhabitants  of  a  mythic  nature  went  in
Welsh,  such  as  the  avanc  of  the  lake  killed  by  Peredur,
and  that  other  dragged  out  of  the  Conwy  by  Hu  the
Mighty  and  his  two  oxen :  the  stories  of  both  imply  that
they  had  more  or  less  completely  the  human  form,  and
that  the  latter  was  of  a  large  size.1  So  much  by  the  way;
I  only  wished,  however,  to  point  out  that  the  preposition
in  the  foregoing  extract  rendered  by  under  is  always  fo,
and  under  seas  is  fo  muirib,  that  is  to  say,  the  very  words


1  See  R.  B.  Mai.  pp.  2234,  226;  Guest,  i.  341,  343,  345;  Evans'
Did.  vf  the  Welsh  Lang.  s.  v.  aj'anc  ;  Triads,  iij.  97.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AXD    IIEROKS.  593

which  form  the  key  to  the  compound  Fomori,  for  which
the  adjectival  form  Fomoraig  is  also  frequently  to  be
met  with.  It  thus  appears  that  the  monsters  so  called
were  imaginary  creatures  originally  believed  to  have
their  abodes  in  or  beneath  the  lakes  and  the  sea,  whence
they  paid  unwelcome  visits  to  the  land.  The  Book  of  the
Dun  supplies  us  with  a  quaint  account  of  the  beginning
of  them  and  their  kindred.1  The  writer  sets  out  from
the  intoxication  of  Noah  and  the  curse  pronounced  by
him  on  his  son  Ham,  who  in  consequence  thereof  became,
as  we  are  told,  Cain's  heir  after  the  deluge,  so  that  from
Ham  are  descended  Luchorpdin,  Fomoraig,  Goborchinn,
and  every  human  being  of  unshapely  appearance.  The
term  Goborchinn  here  introduced  is  said2  to  mean  '  Horse-
headed,'  and  the  monsters  so  called  were  otherwise  human,
so  that  they  contrasted  curiously  with  the  centaurs  of
Greek  mythology,  but  corresponded  to  the  figure  of  Midas
with  his  asinine  ears.  In  the  same  class  must  be  placed
a  certain  Echaid  Echchenn,  or  Echaid  Horse-head,  king
of  Fomori  ;3  and  you  are  now  familiar  with  the  name  of
More  or  Margg  (p.  262),  in  Welsh  March,  a  word  which
means  a  steed  or  stallion.  His  other  Irish  name  appears
to  have  been  Lab-raid,  by  which  he  goes  in  the  famous
legend  of  his  equine  ears,  to  which  may  be  added  the
further  story  how  Labraid  chose  to  wife  the  daughter  of
the  king  of  Fir  Morca,  or  the  Equine  Men,  in  the  west

1  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  2a  ;  also  the  Rev.  Celt.  i.  257,  where  the  passage
has  been  published  by  Stokes.

2  It  is  not  quite  certain  that  it  should  not  be  rendered  'goat-headed.1
Cormads  Glossary  (Stokes-O'Donovan  ed.  p.  83)  explains  that  gabur
was  a  goat,  while  gobur  meant  a  horse.

3  The  Four  Matters,  A.M.  3520.

2  Q


594         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

of  Erinn.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  monsters
in  question  were  all  of  the  same  form ;  and  the  name
Caitchenn  or  Cenn-Cait,  'Cat's  Head,'  has  already  been
mentioned  (p.  313),  namely,  in  connection  with  the  Aithech
Tuatha,  a  term  sometimes  rendered  Peasant  Tribes  and
sometimes  Rent- paying  Tribes,  not  to  add  that  they
have  been  ere  now  imagined  to  be  the  Atecotti1  of
Roman  Britain.  They  are  in  reality  to  be  regarded  as
belonging  to  the  same  category  as  the  Fomori,  and  the
term  aithech,  sometimes  meaning  a  peasant,  was  applied  to
any  boorish,  ill-natured,  ill-clad  fellow.  In  a  tale  related
in  the  Book  of  the  Dun,  it  is  used  of  a  hideous,  brutal
giant  who  caught  his  victims  by  enveloping  them  in  a
thick  fog,  and  he  is  introduced  attacking  successively
the  three  Solar  Heroes,  Loegaire,  Conall  and  Ciichulainn,
the  last  of  whom  overcomes  him.2  He  is  not  called  a
Fomorian,  but  the  term  would  apply  to  him  in  most
respects,  and  among  others  in  that  of  stature ;  for  I  ought
to  have  said  that  the  Fomori  are  normally  represented
as  giants.  In  fact,  the  singular,  pronounced  foawr  in
the  Isle  of  Man,  and  in  Scotch  Gaelic  somewhat  similarly,
though  written  fomhair,  famhair  and  even  foghmhair,  has
in  those  dialects  respectively  become  the  ordinary  word
for  a  giant :  it  is  the  one  which  occurs  throughout  the
Gaelic  in  the  well-known  volumes  of  Campbell's  Popular
Tales  of  the  West  Highlands.     In  a  story  already  men-

1  I  have  tried  in  my  Celtic  Britain,  p.  279,  to  explain  this  name;
but  whatever  scholars  may  think  of  the  attempt,  our  charlatans,  as  I
have  seen  more  than  once  of  late,  repeat  the  absurd  old  notion  which
identifies  the  Atecotti  with  the  Aithech  Tuatha.

2  Fol.  105  a;  Windisch,  Irisclw  Texte,  pp.  272-3,  357.  It  is  simi-
larly used  of  Searbhan  (pp.  356-7)  in  The  Pursuit,  ij.  §§  15,  17.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.  505

tinned  as  relating  how  Ciiehulainn  rescued  the  daughter
of  Buad  king  of  the  Isles  (p.  464),  the  Fomori  assume
the  place  occupied  by  the  dragon  of  the  legends  of  other
lands.  The  king's  daughter  had  been  exposed,  as  you
will  remember,  on  the  sea-shore  as  tribute  to  the  Fomori,
three  of  whom  were  hourly  expected  to  arrive  from  distant,
islands  to  fetch  her.  Ciiehulainn,  on  hearing  this,  has-
tened to  the  princess  and  learned  her  story  from  her  own
lips.  She  charged  him  to  leave  before  the  Fomori  arrived,
which  he  declined  to  do.  The  three  Fomori  came  at  last,
and  Ciiehulainn  slew  them.  The  rest  of  the  story  is  mostly
of  the  usual  kind;  for  in  fighting  with  the  last  of  the
three,  Ciiehulainn  was  wounded  in  one  of  his  fingers,
and  the  princess,  tearing  a  strip  of  her  dress,  tied  it
round  the  finger  of  her  rescuer,  who  thereupon  departed
without  giving  his  name.  Then  many  a  braggart  asserted
that  it  was  he  who  had  slain  the  Fomori,  wherefore  he
claimed  the  princess  to  wife,  according  to  the  proclama-
tion previously  made  by  her  father.  But  the  princess
believed  none  of  them,  and  the  claimants  were  called
together,  when  Ciiehulainn  was  recognized.  In  this
story  it  will  be  observed  that  the  three  Fomori  stand  for
so  many  heads  of  the  dragon  in  the  better  known  versions
told  among  other  peoples ;  but  it  is  more  perhaps  to  the
point  that  the  Welsh  equivalent  is  the  avanc  of  the
Conwy,  in  whose  name  the  counterpart  of  that  of  the
Irish  abac,  as  applied  to  one  of  the  Luchorpain,  has  been
pointed  out.  The  Welsh  avanc  was,  however,  no  '  small
body,'  but  a  big  monster,  while  a  girl  is  involved  in  the
oldest  known  version  of  the  story  of  IIu  the  Mighty's
feat,  and  in  some  respects  the  avanc  in  it  behaves  like  a
Scotch  kelpie.

2q2


596         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

Lastly,  the  Fomori  are  known  to  the  Irish  of  the
present  day,  as  I  have  had  recently  occasion  to  learn
from  a  gentleman  living  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Kill-
orglin,  in  the  county  of  Kerry.  When  he  was  one  day
a  few  years  ago  exploring  the  recesses  of  an  underground
rath,  he  was  kindly  warned  by  one  of  the  peasants  to
beware  of  the  Fomori  or  Fowri,  according  to  the  modern
pronunciation  repeated  to  me.  This  would  suggest  that
the  Fomori  may  be  encountered  under  ground  as  well
as  under  water ;  but  I  take  it  that  the  modern  ideas
about  them  identify  them  to  a  certain  extent  with  the
fairies.

Having  said  most  of  what  I  had  to  say  about  the
Fomori,  I  now  come  back  to  the  Fir  Bolg,  and  that
version  of  the  story  about  Fergus  which  says  that
the  abac  gave  the  king  his  cloak  to  put  round  his
head  when  he  wished  to  roam  in  lake  or  sea.  This
is  the  shining  cap  of  salmon- skin  that  figures  in  Irish
tales  about  lake  fairies  ;  for  when  one  of  them  was
caught  on  land  and  robbed  of  her  cap,  she  could  not  go
back  into  the  world  of  waters.  It  figures  also  in  a
Welsh  tale,  where  it  is  de  trop,  as  the  modern  narrator
knows  no  use  for  it.1  I  mention  this  as  it  is  possible
that  this  cap  is  the  explanation  of  the  bolg,  'bag,'  in
the  term  Fir  Bolg,  singular  Fer  Bolg,  'a  Bag-man  :'  in
any  case  it  is  as  good  an  explanation  as  the  one  usually
offered,  to  the  effect  that  the  Fir  Bolg,  before  coming  to
Ireland,  were  slaves  in  Greece,  where  they  were  forced
to  carry  earth  in  leathern  bags  to  cover  the  rocks  in  that
country,  a  passage  taken  from  one  of  the  legendary  expla-

1  The  Cymmrodor,  v.  87-8,  92-3.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.  597

nations  of  the  name  of  the  Myrmidons,  as  recorded  by
Strabo.1  They  left  their  work  unfinished,  for  we  are  told
that  they  fled,  and  converted  their  bolga  or  bags  into  cora-
cles, in  which  they  ventured  on  the  sea.  This  last  part
of  the  story  is  the  only  one  worth  noticing,  and  it  makes
for  the  explanation  which  I  have  suggested  :  in  other
words,  the  latter  would  include  it  and  render  it  intel-
ligible. The  conjectural  interpretation  offered  to  you  of
the  term  Fir  Bolg2  may  be  said  to  derive  some  con-
firmation from  the  name  of  their  allies  the  Fir  Domnann.
Now  Domnann  should  be  the  genitive  of  a  name  making
in  the  nominative  Domnu  or  Domna  ;  and  construing  De
Domnann  in  the  same  way  as  De  Danann,  I  take  Domnu
to  have  been  the  name  of  a  goddess  and  not  of  a  god.
Put  it  back  into  what  must  have  been  its  early  form,
and  you  will  have  a  nominative  Dumnu  and  a  genitive
Dumnonos,  implying  a  stem  Dumnon  :  form  from  the
latter  an  adjective  Dumnonios,  you  will  then  have  as  its
plural  Dumnonii,  the  attested  name  of  two  peoples  of

1  See  Meineke's  (Teubner's)  edition,  Bk.  viij.  6,  16  (p.  532)  :
Mvp/uSdi'as  8e  KXrjdrjvai  (paviv  ....  OTt  fiVpfArJKOiV  t/307tov  opiTTOVTts
TWV  yrjv  kTnfyepouv  cVt  Tas  7T€Tpas  wctt  <?X€l"  ycw/Dyeiv,  &  ^€  T0's
opvypaviv  oiKeiv  <pnZ6p(.vot  ttXLvBwv.

-  Fir  B"i'j  is  possibly  connected  with  the  story  of  the  sacks  con-
taining armed  men,  from  which  Dunbolg  is  supposed  to  have  derived
its  name,  and  also  with  that  of  the  slaughter  of  the  nobles  of  Erinn,
said  to  have  been  effected  by  the  Aithech  Tuatha  at  a  place  called
Mag  Bolg  or  the  Bag  Plain,  now  called  Moybolgue,  in  the  county  of
Cavan  (Four  Mash  ro,  A.D.  76).  Other  place-names  involving  the  same
yocahle  occur  in  Wales  and  Scotland.  Their  history  is  obscure,  but
one  at  least  of  them  dates  from  the  Roman  occupation,  namely,  Bla-
tobulgium,  which  must  havo  meant  the  Meal  bag  :  it  is  supposed  to
have  been  at  Middleby  Kirk,  near  the  river  Annan:  see  my  Celtic
Britain,  pp.  268  9,  280-1.


598         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

Soman  Britain,  situated  respectively  by  the  Severn  Sea
and  the  Firth  of  Forth.  The  name  meant  a  people  who
had  something  to  do  with  Domnu,  and  that  something
may  have  been  a  claim  to  be  the  descendants  or  the
favourite  people  of  Domnu ;  while  Domnu' s  own  name,
derived  from  the  same  origin  as  the  Celtic  words  for
'deep,'  probably  meant  the  goddess  of  the  deep.1  Thus
two  historical  peoples  and  one  mythic  had  their  names
from  this  goddess,  of  whom  nothing  is  otherwise  known
except  that  she  was  the  mother  of  Indech,  one  of  the
leaders  of  the  Fomori,  and  that  several  waters  were  called
after  her,  such  as  Inver  Domnann  or  Broaclhaven,  in
the  county  of  Sligo,  and  Malahide  Bay,  near  Dublin
(p.  583).  In  this  last  respect  she  resembled  the  Dee  or
Aerven,  as  she  may  have  done  in  others  likewise.

It  now  remains  to  say  a  word  or  two  of  the  Gailidin.
They  mustered  as  a  part  of  Ailill's  forces  on  the  Tarn,
and  they  were  so  much  superior  to  the  rest  of  the  army
in  skill  and  especially  magic,  that  Medb  was  jealous  of
their  reputation  and  wished  them  killed,  but  she  could
only  get  them  dispersed  and  incorporated  among  the
other  batallions.2  It  was  not  long  afterwards  ere  the
army  surrounded  a  herd  of  no  fewer  than  eight  score
wild  deer,  and  they  wounded  them;  but  every  one  of
the  deer  except  five  came  where  there  stood  a  man  of  the
Gaili6in,  and  the  rest  of  the  army  had  to  be  content  with
the  five  alone.3  No  remark  is  made  on  the  incident,  but
it  would  seem  to  imply  that  the  Gailioin  had  a  surpassing
reputation  as  magicians.    This,  it  would  appear,  was  what

1  Possibly  the  name  should  be  compared  rather  with  Lat.  dominus.
-  J3k.  of  the  Dun,  5Gb,  57  a.  3  lb.  57 a.


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.         590

made  them  hated  as  descendants  of  Simon  (p.  213).
Their  name  is  puzzling,  and  it  is  sometimes  said  to
have  been  borne  by  the  province  of  Leinster,  which
agrees  with  the  story  of  Slainge  and  his  Gailioin.  At
first  it  looks  as  if  we  had  in  it  a  word  of  the  same  origin
as  the  name  of  the  GalU  of  the  continent,  a  supposition
which  would  tend  to  make  of  them  a  purely  human
and  Aryan  people.  This  would,  however,  be  highly
inconsistent  with  the  usual  habit  of  treating  the  Fir
Bolg  and  the  Fir  Domnann  as  subjugated  or  enslaved
tribes.1  But  this  manner  of  speaking  of  them  is  some-
what misleading,  and  we  should  come  nearer  the  truth  if
we  called  them  an  uncanny  and  detested  race ;  and  the
means  adopted  to  get  rid  of  them  are  characteristic.  Thus
O' Curry,  setting  out  from  queen  Medb's  treatment  of  the
Gailioin,  uses  the  following  words:2  "Such,  however,
was  the  envy  and  jealousy,  if  not  the  fears,  which  their
valour  and  fame  had  raised  against  them  in  the  country,
that  the  Druids  of  Erinn,  whether  at  the  instigation  of
Queen  Medbh  or  not  I  cannot  say,  pronounced  withering
satires  and  incantations  against  them  (according  to  the
story);  so  that  their  whole  race  became  extinct  in  the
land,  excepting  a  few,  and  these  few  of  the  '  Gallians,'
as  well  as  the  whole  of  their  fellow  foreign  tribes,  the
Laighinns  and  the  Domnanns,  were  afterwards  totally  ex-
tirpated by  the  monarch  Tuathal  Teachfmar,  on  his  acces-
sion to  the  throne  of  Erinn,  A.D.  79."  In  other  words,
as  you  will  see,  the  bulk  of  the  Gailioin  were  not
quelled  by  force  of  arms,  but  exorcised  by  the  druids  or

1  O'Curry,  Manners,  &c.  (Sullivan's  Introduction),  pp,  xxvij,  xxix.
-  lb.  ij.  2G1.


GOO         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

magicians  of  Erinn :  they  were,  in  fact,  mere  personifica-
tions of  the  evil  powers  of  nature.  Keating1  derives  the
name  of  the  Gailidin  from  gdi, '  a  spear,'  the  ancient gaesum^
and  this  etymology  is  the  explanation  of  their  name  being
rendered  Viri  Armorum  in  the  Irish  version  of  Nennius.2
Further,  their  fellow-foreigners  the  Laighin,  whose  exist-
ence seems  entirely  based  on  the  name  of  Leinster,  for
Zagin-setv  (in  Irish  Lagin  or  Laighin),  had  an  appel-
lation of  similar  meaning,3  as  lagen  meant  a  spear ;  but
the  coincidence  which  would  make  the  same  province
successively  bear  two  names  referring  equally  to  spears
and  spearmen  of  foreign  origin  is  a  little  too  much  to
pass ;  but  Lagin,  the  genuine  name,  has  probably  been
the  means  of  fixing  in  connection  with  Leinster  the  other
name  Gailioin,  which  may  be  said  to  consist  of  an  unfor-
tunate contribution  from  the  classics  by  an  early  pedant
whose  name  is  deservedly  lost  in  oblivion.4

1  Pp.  100-1.  2  Pp.  44-5.  3  Bk.  of  Leinster,  p.  159  a.

4  One  is  put  on  the  right  track  of  the  history  of  the  term  Gailidin
in  the  Irish  version  of  Nennius  (pp.  130-1),  where  the  Cruithni  or  Picts
are  traced  to  Scythia,  on  the  strength  partly  of  the  similarity  of  sound
between  Scotti  and  Scythia,  and  partly  of  such  lines  in  the  Georgics
of  Vergil  as  ij.  114-5  :

'Aspice  et  extremis  domitum  cultoribus  orhem,
Eoasque  domus  Arabum,  pictosque  Gelonos.'
Or  iij.  461-3  :

c  Bisaltae  quo  more  solent,  acerque  Gelonus,
Quum  fugit  in  Khodopen,  atque  in  deserta  Getarum,
Et  lac  concretum  cum  sanguine  potat  equine'
In  the  Nennian  passage,  Gelonus  son  of  Hercules  by  Echidna  becomes
Geledn  mac  Ercoil,  and  the  Picts  appear  as  his  offspring.    Having  begun
their  wanderings,   they  reach  Gaul,  where  they  build  a  city  called
Pictava,  now  Poictiers,  and  in  due  time  they  reach  Erinn,  landing  at
the  mouth  of  the  Slaney  at  Wexford  (Ir.  Not.  pp.  122-3,  134-5),  where


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.  C01

Those  of  the  Fir  Bolg  and  their  allies  who  escaped  from
the  battle  of  southern  Moytura  made  their  way  intu  the
islands1  of  Arann,  Islay  and  Rathlin,  the  Western  Islands
of  Scotland  and  many  others,  including,  according  to  the
Historia  Brittonum  of  Nennius,  the  Isle  of  Man.2  They
are  afterwards  said  to  have  been  expelled  the  islands
by  the  Picts,  whereupon  they  obtained  land  subject  to
tribute  from  Cairbre  Niafer  king  of  Leinster;  but  the
tribute  drove  them  to  Ailill  and  Medb  in  Connaught,
a  movement  known  as  the  migration  of  the  Children  of
Umor  (p.  150).  From  Medb  they  obtained  lands ;  and
not  a  few  local  names  in  the  west  are  traced  to  them,
such  as  Loch  Cimbe  (now  Lough  Hackett  in  the  county
of  Galway),  called  after  one  of  their  chiefs  named  Cimbe

Labraid  Longsech  and  his  Gailidin  are  also  said  to  have  come  to  land
{Four  Masters,  A.M.  4658  ;  O'Curry,  p.  257).  In  fact,  they  form  the
same  invasion,  and  this  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  GailicUn  aro
reckoned  among  those  in  Ireland  who  were  not  of  Goidelic  descent,  as
in  the  Irish  Nennius  (pp.  268-9).  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  treated,
in  a  passage  published  in  the  Senchus  Mor,  i.  70,  as  one  of  three  chief
peoples  of  ancient  Erinn,  which  seems  to  mean  that  the  name  was
regarded  as  merely  synonymous  with  that  of  Login,  or  Leinster  men.
The  editors  of  the  Irish  Nennius  have  only  given  us,  at  p.  120,  the
faulty  form  Gueleon  and  the  shorter  one  Gleoin,  but  at  p.  130  they  have
the  regular  genitive  Geleoin  (more  correctly  Geleoin),  corresponding  to  a
nominative  Geleon  ;  and  as  the  Irish  for  the  classical  genitive  Geloni
was  Geleoin,  the  plural  Geloni  should  yield  Geleoin.  Here,  however,
a  false  etymology  introduced  a  gdi,  '  spear,'  making  the  spelling  into
Gailtdin,  of  which  we  have  an  alternative  spelling  in  Gailioin,  seem-
ingly tho  oldest  form  occurring.  This  yielded  a  variant  written  Gailinin ;
further,  the  genitive  of  Gailioin  would  bo  Qailidn,  which  had  a  variant
Gailidn,  also  written  Qalian,  as  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster,  lib,  where
O'Curry,  p.  482,  loosely  explains  it  as  '  an  ancient  name  of  Leinster.'

1  Keating,  pp.  106-8.

2  See  San-Marte's  Nennius  et  Gihlas,  §14  (p.  36),  where  one  reads  :
"Builc  autem  cum  suis  tenuit  Euboniam  insulam,  et  alias  cireiter.


602  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

Cethairchenn  or  Cimbe  the  Four-headed,  a  name  which
reminds  one  of  the  Fomori.1  Their  betaking  themselves
to  Medb  whose  husband  was  of  the  Fir  Bolg,  needs  no
explanation,  and  their  fleeing  to  the  islands  is  of  a  piece
with  the  view  taken  of  the  sea  by  the  Celts,  who  regarded
the  islands  as  the  abodes  of  the  departed,  and  the  melan-
choly main  as  the  lurking-place  of  darkness.  It  is  also
natural  that  the  last  thing  heard  of  their  leaders  is  their
succumbing  to  the  Solar  Heroes  Ciichulainn  and  Conall
Cernach  with  their  friends.2

Lastly,  the  three  chief  races  in  the  legendary  history
of  ancient  Erinn  are  very  summarily  characterized  in  a
poem3  taken  from  an  old  book  by  Duald  mac  Firbis,  a
notable  Irish  antiquary  of  the  17  th  century.  It  makes  the
latest  comers  into  a  noble  caste  of  warriors,  and  the  Tuatha
De  Danann  conquered  by  them  into  clever  and  artistic
freemen,  while  the  Fir  Bolg  vanquished  by  the  Tuatha
D 6  Danann  take  their  places  at  the  bottom  of  the  scale
as  thralls.  This  attempt  to  treat  them  as  so  many  castes
in  the  social  system  of  ancient  Ireland  reminds  one  in
some  respects  of  the  Norse  lay 4  descriptive  of  the  wan-
dering Eig,  supposed  to  be  Heimdal,  becoming  the  father
of  earls,  churls  and  thralls  respectively.  But  at  least  in
his  treatment  of  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann  and  the  Fir
Bolg,  the  Irish  poet,  whoever  he  was,  has  stopped  short
of  effacing  altogether  their  mythic  features.  The  lines
chiefly  in  point  are  to  the  following  effect :

1  Bk.  of  Leinster,  152a;  Keating,  pp.  106-9;  O'Curry,  Manners,
ij.  121-3.

2  Keating,  pp.  108-9;  Bk.  of  Leinster,  152a.

3  O'Curry,  pp.  580  and  215-27.

4  Corpus  Poet  Bor.  i.  235-42.


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.         003

Every  white  man  or  brown,  every  bold  man,
Every  brave  man,  hardy  in  the  fray,
lively  man  generous  in  deed  without  noiso,

Is  of  the  Sons  of  Mile  of  great  renown.
Every  fair  Bpoiler  great  on  the  plain,
Every  artist,  harmonious  and  musical,
Folk  wont  to  resort  to  tricks  of  magic,

Are  of  the  host  of  the  Tuatha  T>6  Danann.
Every  blustering,  vicious  man  ....
Every  gross,  lying,  unholy  fellow —
Remnants  these  of  those  three  peoples,

Of  Gailidin,  of  Fir  Lolg  and  of  Fir  Domnann.

Our  business  is  more  especially  'with  these  last  at
present,  or  rather  with  the  Fir  13olg  and  the  Fomori.
They  have  a  remarkable  feature  in  common,  namely,  their
hostility  to  man  and  their  baneful  influence  on  his  works ;
while  their  pretty  general  connection  with  water  would
seem  to  suggest  that  their  malevolence  is  a  mythic  way
of  describing  the  cold  mists  and  baleful  fogs  that  retard
the  growth  of  the  farmer's  crops,  the  excessive  damp
that  robs  living  things  of  their  bloom,  and  last,  but  by
no  means  least,  the  subtle  processes  of  corruption  to  which
the  dahy  is  now  and  then  liable  without  any  perceptible
cause.  The  action  of  bacteria  in  milk  is  sometimes
strange,  and  at  all  times  so  difficult  of  explanation  that
it  has  been  reserved  for  modern  science  to  detect  its
nature,  while  the  ordinary  peasant  can  in  no  way  account
for  its  effects,  except  on  the  supposition  of  its  beiug  pro-
duced by  witchcraft  or  the  intervention  of  Heaven  to
punish  him  for  his  sins.  This  malevolence  towards  man
will  be  found  an  index  to  the  classification  of  the  spirits
of  the  Celtic  world ;  the  classification,  frequently  made
by  writers  on  classical  mythology,  into  light  and  dark
divinities,  fails  entirely  to  meet  the  case  before  us,  even


604  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

if  it  does  any  other  on  a  large  scale,  which  may  be
doubted.  For  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann  contain  among
them  light  and  dark  divinities,  and  those  standing  some-
times in  the  relation  of  parents  and  offspring  to  one
another.  Some  members  of  the  Irish  pantheon  are  cruel
and  repellent  characters,  but  on  occasion  they  may  prove
friendly.  Thus,  though  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  under
the  Dagda  are  accused  of  blighting  the  corn  and  spoiling
the  milk  of  the  Milesians,  the  latter  were  said  to  con-
ciliate them  so  as  to  make  them  spare  both  farmer  and
shepherd.  This  is  not  all;  for  when  Eedg  and  the
other  three  Fomori  that  had  escaped  from  the  slaughter
of  Moytura  were  engaged  in  ruining  the  com,  the  milk,
the  fruit-crops  and  the  produce  of  the  sea,  they  were
expelled  the  country  by  the  wily  gods  Mider  and  the
Mac  Oc,  and  the  terrible  goddesses  the  Bodb  and  the
Morrigu;1  not  to  mention  that  a  successful  king's
reign  was  marked  by  good  seasons  and  plentiful  crops,
for  the  reason  that  he  forced  the  Fomori  to  abstain  from
their  ravages :  thus  we  read  of  three  triple-headed  Fomori
of  vast  voracity  secured  by  Mac  Cecht's  valour  as  hos-
tages at  Conaire's  court,  that  their  kin  would  not  spoil
either  corn  or  milk  in  Erinn  as  long  as  Conaire  reigned.2
But  to  return  to  the  contest  with  Eedg,  it  is  to  be
observed  that  it  is  located  at  a  spot  called  Slemna
Maige  Itha,  which  enables  one  to  identify  the  engagement
with  the  first  battle  said  to  have  been  fought  in  Ireland,
namely,  the  one  in  which  Partholon  is  represented
annihilating  the  Fomori,  which  is  by  no  means  incon-

1  BK:  of  Fermoy,  24 b2,  quoted  by  Hennessy  in  the  Rev.  Celt  i.  41.

2  Dk.  of  the  Dun,  89  h,  90a  :  see  also  Celtic  Britain,  p.  64.


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES,         605

sistent  with   the  later  history  of  the  Fomori,   if  their

nature  be  taken  into  due  account.     That  also  was  fought

on  Slemna  Maigc  Itha,  which  literally  means  the  Smooths

or  Clear  Parts  of  the  Plain  of  Ith  ;  and  one  of  the  plains

cleared  in  Partholon's  time  was  also  a  Mag  nltha;   in

fact,  Mag  nltha  appears  to  have  been  not  an  uncommon

place-name  in  Ireland,  and  even  Slemna  Maige  Itha  is

said  to  have  been  that  of  a  spot  near  Lough  S willy  in

the  county  of  Donegal.1     Ith  is  probably  to  be  regarded

as  a  name  of  racial  significance,2  but  mythology  may

have  had  something  to  do  with  locating  it,  and  we  have

indirect  evidence  that  Mag  nltha  was  a  name  figuring  in

Irish  myths  as  late  as  the  advent  of  the  Norsemen ;  for

the  Eddie  poem  of  the  Yolospa  makes  the  Anses  meet  in

the  Field  of  Ith  in  the  golden  age  to  come : 3

'The  Anses  shall  meet  on  the  Field  of  Ith,
And  do  judgments  under  the  mighty  Tree  of  the  "World.'

The  Norse  poet,  it  is  evident,  had  not  badly  learnt  his
lesson  in  Irish  mythology  when  ho  chose  as  the  last
meeting-place  of  the  gods  the  spot  where  they  had  been
wont  to  give  battle  to  the  blighting  monsters  and  the
malevolent  giants.

On  Welsh  ground  the  contrast  between  the  gods  and

1  The  Four  Masters,  A.  M.  2530,  note,  and  2550.

2  Hh  ia  siid  in  Irish  legend  to  have  heen  the  name  of  an  uncle  of
Mil.',  ami  he  may  have  been  a  god-ancestor  of  the  lvernians  :  see  my
Celtic  Britain,  p.  2GS.  Whether  there  has  not  been  Bome  confusion
with  the  Irish  word  ith,  'corn,'  gen.  etho,  is  not  quite  certain.  One
may  now  consult  the  story  of  the  place-name  in  the  Bk.  of  Balhjmote
(Dublin,  1887),  fol.  399.

3  Corpus  Poet.  Bur.  ij.  G28;  see  also  i.  191,  201,  and  ij.  G33,  where
tho  Norse  is  Ida-vbllr,  while  in  the  other  passages  we  have  the  words
'  a  Ida-velli.'


606         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

the  ill-disposed  powers  comes  out  very  clearly  in  the
story  of  Llud:,1  who  had  to  contend  with  three  scourges
from  which  his  realm  suffered.  One  of  them  was  the
race  of  the  Coranians,  who  were  so  knowing  that  any
sound  of  speech  that  reached  the  wind  would  come  to
their  ears :  so  it  was  hard  to  overcome  them.  To  be  rid
of  them,  Llud:  was  advised  to  invite  them  to  a  feast  with
his  own  people,  and  then  to  besprinkle  all  present  with
water  in  which  a  certain  insect  had  been  ground  :  it  had
the  effect  of  killing  the  Coranians  without  harming  any-
body else.  I  do  not  profess  to  understand  the  story
about  the  water,  and  our  principal  source  of  information
about  the  Coranians  is  their  name,  in  Welsh  Coraniaid,
from  a  singular  Cor  an,  derived  from  cor,  l  a  dwarf.'  The
Coranians  were  in  the  first  instance  dwarfs,  corresponding
to  the  diminutive  folk  called  in  Irish  Luchorpain,  and
they  survive  in  Welsh  folk-lore  as  a  distinct  kind  of
fairies  signalized  by  their  hideousness  and  mischievous
habits.2  Another  scourge  which  Llud:  disposed  of,  and
that  by  a  hand-to-hand  fight,3  was  a  thieving  giant  who
spread  siren  music  and  sleep  around  him  and  his  opera-
tions, which  consisted  in  carrying  away  Llud's  banquets
in  a  basket  or  creel  that  never  seemed  full.  Here  we  have
a  Fomor  described  from  the  Welsh  point  of  view,  unless
we  should  rather  call  him  a  Fer  Bolg,  and  regard  the
Welsh  basket  as  the  counterpart  of  the  Irish  bag  or  sack
in  this  instance,   which  would  have  the  advantage  of

1  R.  B.  Mob.  p.  96  j  Guest,  iij.  311.

2  The  Cymmrodor,  v.  55.  It  is  hopeless,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  to
expect  our  charlatans  to  leave  off  identifying  the  mythic  Coranians
with  the  historical  Coritani  of  Roman  Britain.

3  R.  B.  Mab.  pp.  91-5,  97-9 ;  Guest,  iij.  308,  312,  314-5.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    IIETCOES.  G07

supplying  us  with  an  alternative  explanation  of  the  term
For  Bolg  or  Bag-man.  This  is  all  the  more  permissible
as  the  giant  conquered  by  Lliici  seems  to  survive  in
Welsh  nurseries  under  the  name  of  Sion  y  Cijdau,  or
Jack  with  the  Bags  ;  for  I  have  a  lively  recollection  of
being  more  than  once  threatened  with  the  unwelcome
advent  of  that  formidable  croqac-mitaine,  who,  as  I  had
been  given  to  understand,  dearly  loved  to  chuck  little
boys  into  his  bags  and  carry  them  away  to  his  cave.

The  remaining  scourge  was  more  terrible  than  the
other  two,  and  is  described  as  a  shout  raised  over  every
hearth  in  Britain  on  the  eve  of  every  First  Day  of  May.
It  went  through  the  hearts  of  the  men,  we  are  told,
frightening  them  so  much  that  they  lost  their  colour  and
strength,  and  their  women  their  expectations,  while  the
young  of  both  sexes  lost  their  senses  through  it,  and
general  fruitlessness  overcame  the  beasts  of  the  field,
the  woods,  the  fields  and  the  waters.1  The  story  pro-
ceeds to  trace  this  mischief  to  the  attempt  of  the  dragon
of  a  foreign  race  to  overcome  that  of  Britain.  But  in
one  of  the  Triads,  iij.  11,  the  scourge  so  explained  is
distinguished  from  that  of  the  First  of  May — the  two
accounts  are  not  essentially  inconsistent — and  the  latter  is
there  further  described  as  that  of  March  Malaen.  This  is
more  usually  written  March  Malcn,  '  the  Steed  of  Malen,'
and  it  enters  into  a  proverb,  'A  gasgler  ar  farch  Malen
dan  ei  dor  yd  a;'  that  is  to  say,  'What  is  collected  on
Malen's  horse's  back  will  find  its  way  under  his  belly,'
or,  as  it  is  better  known  in  English,  '  What  is  got  on
the  devil's  back  will  be  spent  under  his  belly.'     How

1  II  B.  Mob.  p.  94 ;  Guest,  iij.  308.


008  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

far  the  English  have  been  wont  to  ascribe  to  the  devil
the  shape  of  a  horse  I  know  not;  but  with  regard  to
the  Welsh  it  may  here  be  pointed  out  that  they  were
familiar  with  a  fancy  of  that  kind,  as  in  the  story
about  Peredur  tempted  to  mount  the  demon-steed,  and
in  the  identity  of  Brim  de  Morois  with  the  horse  called
Du  Moro  (p.  370)  in  Welsh.  Still  more  to  the  point  is
the  story  of  March  ab  Meirchion's  equine  ears,  and  of
the  identity  of  his  name  with  that  of  the  Irish  More  or
Margg,  not  to  mention  Labraid,  who  had  the  same  pecu-
liar ears,  and  had  to  wife  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Fir
Morca  (p.  593).  Now  More  it  was,  who,  according  to  the
Irish  story,  acted  as  chief  of  the  Fomori  in  levying
tribute  in  Ireland  from  the  Sons  of  Nemed,  consisting  of
two-thirds  of  their  children  and  of  the  produce  of  their
husbandry  in  the  corn-field  and  in  the  dairy.  This
agrees  in  substance  with  the  effects  of  the  shout  on  the
First  of  May,  as  described  in  the  story  of  Llud:.  In
Mai  en's  March  we  have  a  specimen  of  a  monster  such  as
would  be  in  Irish  an  Echchenn,  or  Horse-head,  and  he  is
to  be  identified  probably  with  Ellyll  Malm,  or  Malen's
Demon.     In  any  case,  Malen's  scourge,1  however  desig-

1  For  Malen's  Demon,  see  Triads,  i.  70  =  ij.  45  =  iij.  95,  and  for
the  foreign  origin  of  March  Malen,  see  Triad,  iij.  11.  The  word
Malen,  Malaen,  Melen  or  Melan,  for  all  these  forms  occur,  are  very
obscure ;  but  they  seem  to  represent  a  feminine  to  be  regarded  as  pos-
sibly derived  from  the  same  origin  as  mall  or  mallt,  whose  meaning
can  be  somewhat  more  nearly  defined.  Now  mall  being  used  in
the  feminine  becomes  with  the  definite  article  Y  Vail  (written  y  Fall,
meaning  the  evil  one),  a  personification  which  enters  into  the  term
Plant  y  Fall,  which  might  be  Englished  by  disregarding  the  gender
into  '  Children  of  Belial  or  the  devil's  imps.'  Moreover,  the  Yellow
Plague  is  called  Y  Fall  Felen,  '  the  Yellow  Mall,'  also  Y  Fad  Felen,
or  '  the  Yellow  Death ;'  and  the  word  mall  sometimes  has  the  force


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.         609

natod,  comes  to  Britain  as  a  foreign  oppression,  just  as
More  is  said  in  Irish  legend  to  bring  his  fleet  from
Africa  (p.  584),  the  land  peopled  by  the  descendants  of
Ilam,  the  reputed  father  of  the  whole  brood,  according
to  the  story  as  modified  to  joiu  on  to  the  liible.  Bnt
Welsh  literature  has  preserved  no  clear  and  sweeping
distinction  between  the  spirits  of  the  pagan  world,  corre-
sponding to  the  Irish  division  into  Tuatha  De  on  the
one  hand,  and  Fomori  and  Fir  Bolg  on  the  other.  This
Irish  classification,  otherwise  expressed,  assumes  a  quasi-
historical  aspect :  the  Ultonian  cycle  of  stories  substitute
the  Ultonians  under  Conchobar  for  the  Tuatha  De  under
Nuada,  and  the  Men  of  Erinn,  that  is  to  say,  of  Leinstcr,
Munster  and  Connaught,  for  Fomori  and  Fir  Bolg,  whilst
Lug,  the  great  warrior  of  the  Tuatha  De",  has  his  counter-
part among  the  Ultonians  in  Lug's  later  self,  Ciichulainn.
The  ranging  of  the  Ultonians  or  the  Men  of  Ulster
against  the  Men  of  the  rest  of  Erinn,  looks  like  an  anti-
cipation of  the  history  of  Ireland  in  later  times  ;  but
that  is  accidental,  since  the  district  chiefly  associated
with  the  Ultonian  heroes  of  Irish  epic  tales  consists  of  a
tract  of  country  extending  from  beyond  Armagh  towards


of  the  adjective  evil  or  bad  in  the  widest  sense,  but  the  verb  mallu
means  to  be  spoiled,  said  of  such  a  thing  as  dough  when  it  fails
to  rise  after  it  has  been  leavened.  Further,  as  11  not  unfrequently
stands  for  an  older  ///,  we  have  also  a  form  mcHU  in  the  term
vhrflt,  '  the  evil  one  or  the  evil  goblin,'  and  in  that  of  Mallt  y  X  -\
'the  Nighl  Mallt,'  a  sort  of  she-demon  associated  with  the  cold  mala-
rious fogs  that  lie  on  marshy  lands  during  the  hours  of  the  oight.
Lastly,  the  compound  term  mad/all,  a  newt  01  blindworm,  which  lite-
rally seems  to  mean  'the  good  Mall,'  in  the  sense  presumably  of  the
harmless  Mall,  would  seem  indirectly  to  prove  that  YFoU,  as  the  per-
sonification of  evil,  was  supposed  to  take  the  form  of  a  reptile.

2r


610  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.

the  site  of  Dublin.1  The  coast  from  the  mouth  of  the
Liffey  to  that  of  the  Newry  river  may  have  been  the
first  part  of  Ireland  settled  by  Celtic  invaders ;  and  so
far  the  mythological  division  into  Ultonians  and  the  Men
of  Erinn  may  have  had  a  historical  basis.  This  may  be
compared  from  that  point  of  view  with  Welsh  literature
giving  Vortigern  (pp.  151-5)  as  his  allies  Picts  and  Scots
and  Saxons.

Greek  and  Norse  Comparisons.

To  return  to  Lluct,  the  older  form  of  his  name  was
Nfid,  the  exact  equivalent  of  Nodens,  in  Irish  jNuacla ;
and  his  surname  was  Llawereint  or  Silver-handed,  of  the
same  import  as  the  surname  of  Nuacla ;  but  in  the  case
of  Nuada  we  have  the  story,  how,  having  lost  one  of  his
hands,  he  came  to  be  provided  with  one  of  silver  (pp.  120,
381),  while  the  corresponding  Welsh  account  is  not
extant.  Had  it  been,  it  would  have  probably  been  some-
thing similar  to  the  Irish  version.  At  any  rate,  one
cannot  help  seeing  that  the  wars,  in  which  Nuada  engaged
with  the  Fir  Bolg  and  the  Fomori,  have  their  Welsh
counterparts  in  those  between  Llud  and  the  scourges
just  mentioned,  though  the  treatment  of  the  story  is
somewhat  different.  In  both  cases  the  hostile  forces
were  identical — the  blighting  fogs,  the  malarious  mists,
the  cold  and  stormy  winds  and  the  other  hurtful  forces  of
nature.  If  one  wishes  for  comparisons  beyond  the  limits
of  the  mythology  of  the  Celtic  nations,  one  has  only  to

1  Compare  what  was  said  at  p.  455  respecting  Ciichulainn's  name
Setanta  and  that  of  the  British  people  of  the  Setantii.  As  to  the
southern  boundary  of  ancient  Ulster,  see  p.  140  above,  and  O'Curry,
p.  269  ;  also  the  Rev.  Celt.  viij.  52-5.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.  Gil

turn  to  that  of  the  Teutons,  especially  as  represented  in
old  Norse  literature.  There  we  are  at  once  confronted
with  Thor  the  friend  of  the  northern  Aryan,  "the  hus-
bandman's god,  whose  wrath  and  anger  are  ever  directed
against  the  evil  powers  that  injure  mortals  and  their
possessions,  whose  bolt  destroys  the  foul  thick  blights
that  betray  the  presence  of  the  wicked  ones,  and  smites
through  the  huge  cloud-masses  that  seem  to  be  crushing
the  earth."1  But  the  exact  equivalent  of  the  Irish
Nuada  of  the  Silver  Hand,  king  of  the  Tuatha  De*
Dananu,  in  Welsh  NM  or  L1M  of  the  Silver  Hand,  was
Tiu,  called  in  old  Norse  Tyr;  and  it  has  already  been
briefly  related  how  he  lost  his  right  hand  in  binding
the  Fenri  Wolf  (p.  121).  The  effort  was  successful  as
regards  the  Wolf,  as  he  was  left  in  bonds,  which  would
hold  him  till  the  terrible  day  when  the  Anses,  according
to  prophecy,  were  to  meet  their  doom,  and  the  Wolf
again  to  break  loose.  Here  the  power  of  evil  is  con-
centrated into  one  great  monster,  while  the  Irish  story
places  it  in  a  motley  host  of  monsters  making  war  on  the
Tuatha  Dd  Danann;  otherwise  the  role  of  Nuada,  who
wins  a  victory  over  the  Fir  Bolg,  but  loses  his  hand  in
the  conflict,  where  it  is  cut  off  by  Sreng  the  champion
of  his  enemies  (p.  120),  corresponds  to  that  of  Tyr.  The
surviving  Fir  Bolg  flee  to  the  islands  to  the  Fomori,
and  the  next  great  battle  of  the  Tuatha  De  Dananu  is
with  the  Fomori,  when  Nuada  is  killed  by  Balor  of  the
Evil  Eye,  while  Ogma  and  Indech  mac  De*  Domiiaun
fall  by  each  other's  hands.  Finally,  however,  Balor  of
the  Evil  Eye  is  slain  by  Lug,  who  is  chosen  king  of  the

1  Vigt'usson  &  Powell's  Corptu  Poet.  Bor.  ij.  4G3.
2  it  2


612         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

Tuatha  De*  Danann  after  the  battle.  All  this  has  its
counterpart  in  Norse  literature : 1  there  is  the  mustering
of  the  powers  of  evil  under  the  lead  of  Swart  '  the  Black
One'  and  of  Loki,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  blast  of
Heimdal's  horn  brings  the  Anses  together  :  Heimdal
fights  with  Loki,  Frey  with  Swart,  Woden  with  the
Wolf,  who  swallows  the  god,  but  the  latter' s  son  Yidar
kills  the  Wolf.  Thor  slays  the  World-dragon,  but  falls
himself  from  the  effects  of  the  venom  of  the  serpent;
and  lastly  Tyr  fights  with  the  hound  Garm,  and  both
die.  Then  Swart  sets  fire  to  the  world,  and  the  terrible
flame  plays  against  the  canopy  of  heaven.  Another
fragment  which  is  less  allegoric  runs  thus  :2  "  The  sun-
shine shall  wax  dark,  nor  shall  any  summer  follow,  and
all  the  winds  shall  turn  to  blight ;  the  sea  shall  rise  in
tempest  against  the  very  heaven  and  cover  the  land,  and
the  sky  shall  be  rent,  and  out  of  it  shall  come  snow-
storms and  mighty  winds.  I  can  see  the  sea  a-fire  and
the  land  in  flames,  and  every  living  thing  shall  suffer

death,  when the  powers  shall  perish."

Nevertheless  there  is  to  be  a  restoration,  for  the  sibyl
sings  that  a  man  and  a  woman  will  have  survived,  feeding
on  the  dew  of  the  morning,  and  becoming  the  parents  of
a  new  generation  of  men ;  for  after  the  fire  of  Swart  a
scene  follows  which  is  described  thus  : 3  "I  behold  Earth
rise  again  with  its  evergreen  forests  out  of  the  deep ;
the  waters  fall  in  rapids ;  above  hovers  the  eagle,  that
fisher  of  the  falls.  The  Anses  meet  on  Ida-plain,  they
talk  of  the  mighty  Earth-serpent,   and  remember  the

1  See  Vigfusson  &  Powell's  Corpus,  i.  198—200,  ij.  626-30.

2  lb.  ij.  G30.  3  lb.  i.  200-1 ;  compare  also  ij.  628-9.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES:  G13

groat  decrees,  and  the  ancient  mysteries  of  Fimbul-ty
(the  unknown  God).  There  shall  bo  found  in  the  grass
wonderful  gulden  tables  [dice  or  draughts],  their  own  in
days  of  yore.  Tin'  fields  unsown  shall  yield  their  increase.
All  sorrows  shall  be  healed.  Balder  shall  come  back.
Balder  and  Ilodr  shall  dwell  in  Woden's  mansions  of  bliss,

in  the  holy  places  of  the  blessed  Gods Then  shall

Uceni  choose  the  rods  of  divination  aright,  and  the  sons
of  the  Twin-brethren  shall  inhabit  the  wide  world  of  the

winds I  see  a  hall,  brighter  than  the  sun,  shingled

with  gold,  standing  on  Gem-lea.  The  righteous  shall
dwell  therein,  and  live  in  bliss  for  ever."

This,  you  will  observe,  is  poetry  of  no  mean  order,
and  it  takes  the  form  of  a  prophecy  about  a  golden  age
to  come ;  in  fact,  one  of  the  sibyls  is  made  to  resume
silence  with  an  allusion  to  the  advent  of  the  Messiah  in
words  to  the  following  effect:1

"Then  there  shall  come  One  yet  mightier,
Though  I  dare  not  name  him.
There  he  hut  few  who  can  see  further  forward
Than  the  day  when  "Woden  shall  meet  the  Wolf."

But,  in  my  opinion,  the  pagan  original  which  served
as  the  basis  of  the  lays  of  the  chief  sibyl  was  a  nature
myth  descriptive  of  the  conflict  of  the  elements  in  winter
and  the  re-appearance  of  the  summer  sun  in  the  person
of  Balder,  who  is,  however,  accompanied  by  Ilodr ;  for
where  the  sun's  light  reaches,  there  darkness  follows  in
its  turn,  bringing  with  it  the  alternation  of  day  and
night.  But  how,  you  will  ask,  came  this  Norse  poetry
to  assume  the  form  of  prophecy  ?     This  the  Irish  story


Vigfusson  &  Powell's  Corpus,  ij.  G30.


G14         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

helps  us  to  understand,  for  the  great  encounter  between
the  Tuatha  D 6  Danann  and  the  Fomori  was  expected
beforehand :  of  the  time  and  place  of  it  they  were  well
aware,  so  that  preparations  of  all  kinds  were  made  by
Lug  and  the  nobles  of  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann  for  a  long
while  in  advance.1  But  this  feature  of  the  story  is  not
always  reproduced  by  those  in  whose  hands  myths  are
wrought  into  historical  narrative,  as  it  might  be  found
hard  of  explanation.  From  the  mythic  point  of  view  it
is  simple  enough ;  for  once  you  admit  that  it  refers  to  a
struggle  between  the  forces  of  nature  which  takes  place
annually,  no  mystery  remains  or  room  for  prophecy,
except  in  assigning  the  days  of  its  commencement.  In
the  Irish  version  this  is  fixed  on  the  last  day  of  October
or  the  first  day  of  November,  and  there  is  a  certain
amount  of  fitness  in  the  Irish  dates  :  at  midsummer  the
Tuatha  De*  Danann  have  a  great  victory  over  the  Fir
Bolg,  but  later,  at  the  beginning  of  winter,  they  enter
on  a  conflict  with  the  Fomori,  which  lasts  an  indefinite
length  of  time,  and  which  is  fatal  to  many  of  their  chiefs,
until  at  last  Lug  rushes  into  the  battle  and  slays  Balor
of  the  Evil  Eye,  which  ought  to  be  towards  the  begin-
ning of  summer.  The  battle  of  Fomorian  Moytura  was
not  exclusively  fought,  it  ought  to  have  been  explained,
with  ordinary  weapons  of  war :  thus,  for  example,  the
druid  of  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann  engaged  to  bring  down
in  the  faces  of  the  Fomori  three  showers  of  fire,  and  the
Dagda  undertook  to  work  as  many  such  wonders  as  all
his  colleagues  put  together.  But  to  bring  into  relief  the
similarities  between  the  Celtic  and  Norse  myths,  it  is

1  See  O'Curry,  p.  249 ;  Joyce,  pp.  50,  62,  84,  406.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.  015

necessary  to  compare  them  step  by  step,  somewhat  as
follows :

1.  The  Anses  resolve  to  bind  the  Fenri  Wolf,  of  whom
terrible  things  were  prognosticated  ;  they  succeed,  but  at
the  expense  of  Tyr's  right  hand.

The  Tuatha  D6  Danann  fight  with  the  Fir  Bolg  and
conquer  them,  but  at  the  cost  of  one  of  Nuada's  bauds,
cut  oif  by  Sreng  the  champion  of  the  Fir  Bolg.

2.  The  sibyl's  account  of  the  array  of  the  evil  powers,
with  which  the  Wolf  comes,  is  to  the  following  effect :

"Swart  shall  come  from  the  South  with  a  plagueful  staff  of  fire,
A  1)  lightness  as  of  the  sun  shines  from  the  Demon's  sword;
Muspell's  sons  follow  him  ....
A  ship  shall  sail  from  the  "West  ....  the  Hell's  brood  shall  come

over  the  waves,  and  Loki  shall  steer  her.
All  the  monster-brood  shall  march  with  the  Beast,
Byleist'a  brother's  daughter  [Hell]  is  with  their  company.
They  that  dwell  with  Hell  shall  lay  waste  the  world  whereon  men

dwell.
From  the  East,  Rym  shall  drive  out  of  Giant-land,
The  Rime-ogres  [Titans]  follow  him.  .  .  ."

The  Fomori  with  their  allies,  including  the  scattered
remnants  of  the  Fir  Bolg,  as  well  as  the  forces  of  Loch-
lann  or  the  World  beneath  the  Waters,  muster  agaiust
the  Tuatha  De*  Danann,  and  form  altogether  an  army,  as
the  story  goes,  of  the  most  hideous  troops  ever  Been  in
Eriun,  following  as  their  leaders  Balor  of  the  Evil  Eye,
aud  Indech  son  of  the  Goddess  of  the  Deep.

3.  The  Anses  lose  several  of  their  leading  men  in  the
contest.  Woden  the  Culture  Hero  is  slain  by  the  Wolf,
while  Tyr  and  the  hound  Garni  fall  in  mutual  slaughter.

The  Tuatha  De*  Danann  lose  most  of  their  chiefs  in
the  battle,  including  their  champion,  Ogma  the  Culture


616         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.


Hero,   who  falls   killing   Indech,   while   Nuada  of  the
Silver  Hand  is  killed  by  Balor  of  the  Evil  Eye.

4.  Thor  the  Son  of  Earth  slays  the  Dragon,  walks
nine  paces,  and  dies  of  the  venom  of  the  Serpent.

Echaid  Ollathair,  called  the  Dagda,  dies  of  the  venom
of  the  wonnd  which  he  received  in  fighting  with  Cethlenn
the  hag-wife  of  Balor.1

5.  Swart  was  disposed  of  we  know  not  how,  while
Balder  the  Sun -god  appears  as  the  great  figure  and
inaugurates  a  golden  age.

Balor  of  the  Evil  Eye,  which  it  was  death  to  behold,
is  killed  towards  the  end  of  the  contest  by  a  sling-stone
cast  by  Lug  into  the  Evil  Eye ;  and  Lug,  after  the  war  is
over,  is  elected  king  by  the  Tuatha  De"  Danann :  he  reigns
prosperously  for  many  a  long  year.

This  last  item  of  comparison  requires  a  remark  or  two  :
Swart  carries  a  fiery  sword,  and  he  may  naturally  be
supposed  to  represent  the  dark  thunder-cloud  from  which
the  bright  lightning  flashes  forth ;  and  this  fits  the  case
of  Scandinavia,  where  the  thunderstorms  take  place  mostly
in  winter.  It  would  not  be  safe  to  go  so  far  as  to  say
that  the  fiery  sword  of  Swart  is  not  represented  in  the
case  of  Balor ;  for  the  latter's  evil  eye  may  be  treated
as  the  equivalent.  When  he  wished  to  make  use  of  the
evil  eye,  the  eyelid  had,  as  in  the  case  of  Yspydaden
(p.  491),  to  be  lifted  by  an  attendant,2  and  when  that  was
done,  it  was  death  to  those  who  saw  it.  The  same  feature
is  dimly  attested  in  the  name  of  Goronwy  Pevr  (p.  240),
in  which  the  epithet  seems  to  refer  to  a  peculiar  glare  of
his  eyes.    Lastly,  the  silence  of  the  Norse  poem  as  to  how

1  The  Four  Masters,  A.M.  3450,  note.

2  The  British  Museum  MS.  Had.  5280,  fol.  69a  (58 a).


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.  G17

Swart  was  conquered  and  how  Balder  eame  back,  suggests
the  question  whether  originally  Balder  was  not  made  to
finish  the  conflict  by  killing  Swart.  As  it  is,  Balder
appears  on  the  scene  in  the  most  mysterious  way;  but  it
would  not  be  safe  to  suppose  that  the  Norse  myth  was
exactly  what  the  Celtic  versions  would  suggest.  In
any  case  thoy  come  very  near,  for  the  latter  mentions  no
feat  of  arms  ascribed  to  Lieu  except  the  crowning  one  of
slaying  Goronwy  by  a  cast  of  his  spear  through  the  mass
of  rock  behind  which  the  latter  sheltered  himself.  The
Norse  myth,  by  having  such  a  passage,  would  both  account
for  the  disappearance  of  Swart  and  lead  up  to  the  supre-
macy of  Balder,  and  that  without  greatly  jarring  with  the
usual  treatment  of  the  latter  as  one  who  was  cared  for
by  others,  especially  as  the  Norse  myth  represents  his
great  father  at  the  time  dead.  Note  in  passing  that  we
appear  to  have  a  Greek  equivalent  in  the  birth  of  Apollo,
his  rapid  growth,  and  his  immediate  despatch  of  the  Py tho
with  the  first  arrow  discharged  from  his  bow.  But  to
return  to  Lieu  and  Balder :  the  protection  and  guardian-
ship of  them  by  their  respective  fathers  and  friends  is  a
very  remarkable  feature  of  both  versions,  carrying  out
the  idea  that  the  Solar  Hero  was  the  youthful  son  of  the
Culture  God ;  and  it  is  not  without  its  interest  to  mention
that,  though  this  is  usually  much  obscured  on  Irish
ground,  where  the  two  characters  are  wont  to  be  merged
into  that  of  the  son,  one  of  the  most  detailed  accounts  of
the  battle  of  Moytura  gives  distinct  evidence  that  this
treatment  was  the  original  one  in  Irish  likewise.  I  allude
to  a  British  Museum  manuscript,1  which,  after  giving  the

1  It  is  Harl.  5280,  repeatedly  cited  in  these  lectures  j  and  t lie  story
in  question  is  the  one  drawn  upon  by  O'Curry  as  quoted  by  me  at


618  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

references  to  Lug  sundry  solar  touches,  including  among
them  an  epithet  meaning  'half  crimson,'  on  account,  as
it  is  there  explained,  of  Lug's  colour  being  red  from  sun-
set till  morn,1  and  after  relating  how  he  had  been  the
chief  organizer  of  the  battle,  states  that  the  Tuatha  De*
Danann  resolved  to  keep  him  out  of  the  conflict  himself
'on  account  of  his  comeliness,'2  a  motive  which  vividly
recalls  the  care  taken  of  Balder  by  the  Anses.  The
former  carried  their  resolution  into  effect  by  placing  Lug
under  a  guard  of  nine  men.  When,  however,  the  war
had  been  dragging  on  for  an  indefinite  length  of  time,  his
guard  had  their  attention  drawn  away  from  Lug,  and  he
gave  them  the  slip.  He  then  rode  away  in  his  chariot,
and  appeared  at  the  head  of  the  forces  of  the  Tuatha  De*
Danann,  exhorting  them  to  deeds  of  valour ;  but  no  feat  is
reported  of  him  till  he  met  Balor  of  the  Evil  Eye,  when
a  conflict  took  place  which  quickly  ended  with  Lug's  slay-
ing Balor.  Lug  addressed  him  as  the  monster  of  Lugaid,
a  term  which  brings  into  curious  rapport  with  one  another
the  victorious  antagonist  of  the  Sun-god  in  the  person  of
Ciichulainn  (p.  471),  and  the  vanquished  foe  of  the  same
divinity  in  the  person  of  Lug.

p.  253  above.  He  says,  p.  250,  that  he  had  it  copied  by  his  son  in
1855  ;  but  though  it  is  mythologically  most  curious,  it  has  not  yet  been
published,  which  is  much  to  be  regretted.  M.  d'A.  de  Jubainville,
Essai  d'un  Cat.  p.  80,  assigns  it  to  the  fifteenth  century.

1  Fol.  69 &  (586),  alug  letsuanaigh,  which  is  glossed  .i.  dath.  derc
nobid  fair  ofuine  greni  comaidin.  Here  suanaigh  should  probably  be
sianaigh,  from  sion,  '  digitalis.'

2  The  MS.  reads,  67a  (56a),  aracoime,  which  may  be  supposed  to
stand  for  arachuime.  Taken,  however,  as  it  stands,  it  would  perhaps
be  admissible  to  render  it  'on  account  of  their  fondness  (for  him);'
but  coime  usually  means  loveliness,  comeliness,  or  the  aggregate  qualities
which  make  one  pleasing  to  others.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.  G19

The  results  obtained  by  comparing  the  Celtic  and
Teutonic  myths  relating  to  the  contests  of  the  gods  with
the  giants  and  the  monsters,  encourage  one  to  look  for
comparisons  somewhat  further  afield :  so  I  now  turn  to
(  heek  mythology,  and  there  we  find  Zeus  and  the  other
dwellers  of  Olympus  engaged  in  a  scries  of  conflicts,  first
with  the  Titans,  then  with  the  Giants,  and  lastly  with  the
monster  Typho  that  was  a  host  in  himself.  All  these
antagonists  of  the  gods  are  described  as  the  offspring  of
earth ;  but  at  first  it  would  seem  as  though  the  war  of  the
giants  with  the  gods  should  be  merely  another  and  need-
less repetition  of  that  of  the  Titans  with  them.  That  is,
however,  not  so,  since  not  only  are  the  two  battles  of
Moytura  required  in  Irish  mythology,  but  the  Welsh
story  of  LI ud  and  the  Norse  myth  have  just  three  conflicts,
as  in  Greek.  For  besides  that  between  the  Anses  and  the
Wolf  when  Tyr  loses  his  hand,  and  the  great  struggle
when  the  Anses  are  killed,  we  read  of  one  called  the
first  war  ever  engaged  in  by  them :  it  was  against  the
Wanes,  who  broke  into  the  burgh  of  the  Anses  and
tramped  over  the  war-wasted  field.1  It  is  curious  here  to
notice  that  the  Wanes  occupy,  as  regards  the  Anses,  the
same  sort  of  position  as  the  Fir  Bolg  with  regard  to  the
Tuatha  1)6  Danann.  The  sequence  of  the  conflicts  be-
tween Zeus  and  the  unwieldy  children  of  earth  is  not
altogether  the  same,  it  must  be  admitted,  as  that  of  the
Teutonic  ones ;  but  their  general  nature  is  the  same ;  and
I  venture  to  call  attention  in  particular  to  the  struggle

1  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  196,  ij.  624,  where  a  reference  also  is  made
to  Fre}  ja  being  given  '  to  the  kindred  of  the  Giants,'  which  would  seem
to  challenge  comparison  with  Bxanwen  married  to  Matholwch,  in  the
Mabinogi  called  after  her  :  compare  also  i.  81-2.


620  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND   HEROES.

between  Zeus  and  Typho  (p.  121),  who  is  represented
as  a  terrible  monster  born  in  Cilicia,  and  possessed  of  a
human  head,  together  with  a  hundred  dragon  heads  and
many  other  formidable  features.     He  looked  fire  from
his  eyes  and  flames  blazed  forth  from  his  many  mouths ;
not  to  mention  that  he  was  formed  on  such  a  scale  that
he  reached  the  stars  on  high.     From  the  first  he  declared
war  against  Zeus  and  the  gods,  who,  when  they  saw  him
making  for  Olympus,    fled  in  various  brute  forms  to
Egypt.     Zeus   alone  kept   his   ground  and  hurled  his
thunderbolt  at  Typho,   but  without  much  effect ;   the
monster  drove  him  to  the  other  side  of  Syria,  where  Zeus
attacked  him  in  close  combat  with  his  sickle ;  but  he  was
taken  in  the  coils  of  his  multiform  foe,  who  snatched  the
sickle  out  of  his  hands  and  with  it  cut  out  the  muscles
of  the  god's  hands  and  feet ;  then  he  carried  him  on  his
shoulders  through  the  sea  to  Cilicia  in  a  helpless  state
and  threw  him  into  a  cave,  at  the  same  time  that  he  hid
his  muscles  away  in  a  bear's  skin,  which  he  set  a  dragon-
maid  to  guard.     Hermes,  however,  with  the  rural  god
JEgipan  came  and  stole  the  tendons,  which  the  former
fitted  back  in  Zeus' s  body.     The  god  then  recovering  his
strength  and  his  liberty,  careered  forth  presently  from
Olympus  in  his  chariot  drawn  by  winged  chargers,  and
began  anew  to  ply  Typho  with  his  lightning,  which  had
at  length  the  effect  of  reducing  the  monster  to  a  scorched
skin.1

1  See  Apollodorus'  Bibliotheca  (in  Westerniann's  Scriptores  Poeticce
Historice  Grceci),  i.  6,  3 ;  but  there  is  another  version  of  the  story  of
the  tendons  on  record,  for  which  see  Nonnus'  Dionysiaca,  i.  3G3 — 534,
to  the  effect  that  Zeus  in  his  direst  need  was  aided  by  Cadmus,  who,
disguised  as  a  shepherd,  charmed  the  monster  with  music,  and  obtained


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS     \\D    HEROES.  621

Here  Typho  is  represented  fiery  like  Swart  in  the  Norse
lay,  aiid  his  eyes  glare  fire,  which  reminds  one  of  Balor's
evil  eye  in  the  Irish  tale.     Still  more  remarkable  is  the

fact  that  Hermes,  who  restores  to  Zeus  the  use  of  his
hands  and  feet,  has  a  fairly  exact  counterpart  in  Dian
Cecht,  the  skilled  physician  of  Irish  mythology,  which
makes  him  provide  Nuada  with  a  silver  hand  of  won-
derful ingenuity  to  replace  that  which  he  had  lost  in  the
first  battle  of  Moytura.  Thus  Zeus,  who  is  found  to  be
represented  in  Irish  by  Nuada,  and  in  Teutonic  by  Tin,
Norse  Tyr,  is  overtaken  by  much  the  same  sort  of  misfor-
tune as  Nuada  and  Tyr  in  carrying  on  much  the  same  sort
of  struggle  with  the  same  sort  of  antagonists,  and  he  gets
over  his  misfortune  with  the  aid  of  the  same  sort  of  friend
as  Nuada  did.  The  conclusion  seems  unavoidable  that
tin1  coincidence  is  not  the  result  of  a  mere  accident ;  nor
would  it  be  to  the  point  for  the  student  of  Greek  literature
to  tell  us,  that  the  story  of  Zeus'  conflict  with  Typho,
or  at  any  rate  the  details  just  mentioned,  are  only  to  be
found  in  the  writings  of  late  authors,  unless  he  could
show  that  those  late  authors  were  the  inventors  of  them ;
for  even  had  no  scrap  of  Greek  literature  been  lost  to
this  day,  which  is  far  from  being  the  case,  there  is  no
reason  to  suppose  that  all  the  ancient  legends  and  folk-

from  him  the  tendons  of  Zeus,  on  the  pretence  of  his  going  to  use
them  as  strings  for  his  lyre,  while  in  reality  he  carefully  preserved
them  for  the  god's  triumph.  It  would  take  too  much  time  here  to
discuss  the  relation  between  Cadmus  and  lit  lines,  or  how  the  latter  is
sometimes  called  Cadmus  and  Cadinilus  or  Casmilue  (Preller,  i.  310).
It  is  curious  that  the  name  of  the  alphabet  hero  should  appear  in  this
context  just  as  that  of  Ogma,  associated  with  writing  by  the  [riab,
should  be  mentioned  as  that  of  the  champion  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann
in  the  second  battle  of  Moytura  where  .Nuada  fell.


622  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

lore  of  Hellas  were  ever  committed  to  writing.  Per-
haps the  wonder  in  the  present  case  is  that  two  Greek
authors  of  any  kind  should  have  been  found  disposed  to
place  on  record  a  story  which  represented  the  great  ruler
of  Olympus  in  a  plight  than  which  none  could  have  been
conceived  as  more  undignified  and  perilous.

The  Distress  of  the  Gods  and  the  Sun  Hero's  Aid.

Enough  has  now  perhaps  been  said  to  show  that  the
stories  once  current  among  Celts,  Teutons  and  Greeks,
about  contests  between  the  gods  and  their  monster  anta-
gonists under  their  various  names,  all  represent  in  their
way  the  same  primaeval  Aryan  myth ;  and  we  may  say,
taking  the  existence  of  that  myth  for  granted,  that  none
of  the  stories  extant  among  the  nations  alluded  to  repro-
duce it  in  its  entirety :  one  gives  one  part,  and  another
another,  while  of  some  parts  there  are  several  variants ;  not
to  mention  that  the  utmost  freedom  of  treatment  may  be
regarded  as  the  rule  throughout.  Now  the  garbled  and
incomplete  versions  of  one  branch  of  the  family  help,
however,  to  explain  the  equally  garbled  and  incomplete
versions  of  another  branch,  and  the  comparison  enables
one  approximately  to  restore  the  original.  Let  us  apply
this  view  to  the  story  of  the  contest  between  the  Olympic
gods  and  the  giants.  According  to  Apollodorus,1  the
chief  giants  were  Porphyrio  and  Alcyoneus,  who  was
immortal  so  long  as  he  fought  on  the  earth  that  gave  him
birth.  He  drove  away  the  cattle  of  the  sun  from
Erythria,  and  it  had  been  foretold  the  gods  that  not  one  of
the  giants  could  be  destroyed  by  them,  and  that  they  could

1  Bibliutheca,  i.  6,  i.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.  G23

only  quell  tliom  if  they  called  in  the  aid  of  a  mortal.  Earth
Mas  anxious  to  prevent  this,  but  Zeus  was  beforehand  with
her,  and  the  aid  of  Heracles  was  secured  by  Athene.
Heracles  then  proceeded  to  direct  his  arrows  at  Alcyoneus,
and  having,  at  the  suggestion  of  Athene,  drawn  him  from
where  he  was  invincible,  he  slew  him.  The  next  to  be
killed  by  Heracles  was  Porphyrio,  who,  offering  violence
to  Here,  was  assailed  by  her  husband  with  the  thunder-
bolt, while  the  other  giants  were  attacked  by  the  other
gods ;  but  not  a  single  one  of  them  could  finish  his
antagonist  without  the  aid  of  Heracles,  who  despatched
them  with  his  invincible  arrows.

The  question  which  this  inevitably  suggests  is,  why
the  gods  should  require  the  aid  of  a  mortal,  why  they
should  not  have  succeeded  without  his  alliance,  and  why
there  was  a  prophecy  that  they  could  not.  Let  us  now  turn
to  Celtic  and  Norse  literature,  and  what  do  we  there  find  ?
This,  namely,  that  according  to  the  interpretation  of  the
myths  in  point  adopted  in  these  lectures,  the  sort  of  power
wanted  to  give  the  gods  victory  was  that  of  the  sun,  and
more  especially  of  the  summer  sun.  Thus  it  is  the  Solar
Hero  Lug  who  ends  the  Fomorian  battle  of  Moytura  ;  and
when  the  Anses  have  been  killed  by  Swart  and  his  allies,
they  only  appear  again  after  Balder  has  returned,  and
all  ills  are  healed  at  his  coming  (p.  535).  Further,  we
find  that  both  Celts  and  Teutons  regarded  the  Solar  Hero
as  the  son  or  offspring  of  the  Culture  Hero,  and  that  there
are  reasons  for  regarding  the  latter,  whether  we  call  him
Gwydion,  Woden  or  Indra,  as  a  man-god,  that  is  to  say
a  god  who  was  by  origin  a  man  ;  by  virtue  of  his  descent
from  a  human  father,  the  offspring,  namely  the  Solar
Hero,  would  also  reckon  as  a  mortal.     This  explains  the


024         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.


story  of  Apollodorus,  in  which  Heracles  abides  most
strictly  within  the  limits  of  his  solar  character,  achieving
his  victory  by  means  of  his  arrows,  which  may  be  taken
to  represent  the  rays  of  the  snn.  It  follows,  moreover,
that  we  are  confirmed  in  the  opinion  that  the  contests
between  the  gods  of  Olympus  and  the  Titans,  between
them  and  the  giants  and  Typho,  are  all  to  be  regarded
as  climatic  ones,  fought  with  the  evil  powers  of  nature  as
the  respective  seasons  of  the  year  come  round.  But  to
regard  the  Solar  Hero  or  Sun-god  as  the  offspring  of  the
Culture  Hero  belongs  to  such  a  primitive  way  of  looking
at  things,  that  it  would  seem  to  have  been  always  liable
to  be  effaced.  In  Irish  literature,  for  instance,  the  two
characters  are  most  frequently  treated  very  unequally,
and  with  the  effect  in  the  person  of  Diarmait,  for  example,
that  it  is  impossible  at  times  to  say  whether  he  should  be
regarded  as  the  Solar  or  as  the  Culture  Hero — he  is  so
like  both  rolled  into  one.  It  is  found  to  be  much  the
same  with  Owein  ab  Urien  in  Welsh ;  but  Cuchulainn,
though  his  father  is  reduced  nearly  to  a  cipher,  remains
decidedly  the  Solar  Hero,  as  might  be  said  also  of  Hera-
cles ;  and  the  similarity  between  the  two  does  not  end
here,  as  will  be  seen  presently.  The  father  of  Cuchulainn
is  of  no  importance,  and  no  Culture  Hero  is  placed  in
close  relationship  to  Heracles  in  Greek,  excepting  Pro-
metheus released  by  him  from  bonds,  and  Hermes  asso-
ciated with  Heracles  as  his  protector.

The  converse  case  seems  possible,  where  the  Solar
Hero  is  kept  more  or  less  out  of  sight  for  the  greater
glorification  of  the  Culture  Hero  ;  but  the  "Welsh  instance
which  first  suggests  itself  as  in  point  proves  on  exami-
nation to  be  but  doubtfully  so :   it  is  that  of  IVyll  in


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.  625

the  Mabinogi  slaying  Arawn's  enemy  for  him;1  for  on
the  whole  Pwytt  is  scarcely  to  be  regarded  a  Sim-god  in
the  same  sense,  for  example,  as  Lug.  Perhaps  one
might  venture  to  treat  him  as  a  Sun-god  in  the  sense  in
which  the  Celtic  Zeus  has  been  explained  to  have  been
solar  (p.  575),  or  else  he  may  be  a  Culture  Ilero.  I  find
it  hard  to  decide,  though  I  am  inclined  to  the  former
view.  In  either  case  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  Pwytt's
action  in  slaying  Arawn's  foe  is  subjected  by  Arawn  to
a  restriction  which  seems  only  capable  of  being  accounted
for  on  the  supposition  of  its  having  originally  applied
only  to  the  Solar  Hero.  I  allude  to  Pwytt's  being
warned  by  Arawn  not  to  deal  the  hitter's  enemy  more
than  one  blow,  as  that  single  blow  would  be  fatal  to
him,  while  we  arc  left  to  infer  that  a  second  blow
would  have  marred  the  effect  of  the  first.  It  looks  as
though  the  habit  of  regarding  the  Sun-god  finishing  the
contest  by  a  single  effort,  as  in  the  case  of  Lieu  and
Lug,  had  been  generalized  into  a  rule  that  the  Sun-god
was  bound  never  to  repeat  the  blow,  and  as  though  that
rule  had  then  been  somewhat  loosely  extended  to  others.
At  any  rate,  it  would  be  hard  to  explain  how  any  such
a  limitation  applied  in  the  first  instance  either  to  the
Culture  Ilero  or  to  the  Mars-Jupiter  of  the  Celts.     On

1  Perhaps  the  story  of  Cadmus  helping  Zeus  might  he  cited  here,
and  it  may  be  that  the  case  of  Cadmus  is  to  be  regarded  as  not  so
unlike  those  of  Gwydion  and  Woden  as  it  might  seem  at  first  Bight,
for  he  had  a  grandson  called  Pentheus,  whose  name  recalls  weeping  ;
so  it  is  just  possible  that  in  Pentheus  we  have  a  dim  counterpart  of
Balder,  the  god  bewailed  with  many  hitter  tears.  Lastly,  may  it  not
be  that  the  term  KaS/toyevifc,  as  applied  to  Beracles,  referred,  in  spito
of  the  usual  explanation  (Preller's  Or.  Myth.  ij.  179),  to  a  tradition
representing  Heracles  as  son  or  grandson  of  the  Culture  Hero  Cadmus  I

2  8


C2G  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.

the  other  hand,  it  readily  applies  to  the  case  of  the  Sun-
hero  Ciichulainn,  of  whom  we  read  that  Labraid  of  the
Swift  Hand  on  the  Sword  had  long  craved  Cuchulainn's
aid;  but  that  when  the  hero  actually  came,  according
to  an  old  prophecy,  and  proceeded  to  deal  slaughter
among  his  friend's  foes,  Labraid  became  very  anxious
that  he  should  not  kill  too  many  of  them :  at  all  events,
no  reason  is  suggested  for  his  anxiety.  The  same
idea  is  to  be  traced  also  in  the  story  of  Peredur,  but
in  a  somewhat  different  form  :  he  deals  the  witch  of
Gloucester  just  one  blow  of  his  sword,  and  that  suffices
to  quell  the  witch's  courage,  as  she  recognizes  in  Peredur
a  man  of  whom  it  had  been  prophesied  that  he  should
come  and  conquer  her  and  her  formidable  sisters.1  This
prophecy  is  to  be  compared  with  the  foreknowledge  pos-
sessed by  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  as  to  the  final  battle
of  Moy tura,  and  the  oracle  which  had  warned  the  Olympic
gods  that  they  could  only  conquer  the  Giants  with  the
aid  of  a  mortal,  who  proved  to  be  Heracles.

Thus  far  we  have  been  looking  to  what  extent  Celtic
and  Teutonic  forms  of  the  myth  elucidate  the  Greek
versions ;  let  us  now  turn  round  and  see  what  light  the
latter  may  throw  on  the  former.  We  may  begin  just
where  we  left  off,  that  is  to  say  with  Heracles,  who  was
originally  a  Ov^tos  or  mortal,  but  became  a  god.  This
short  and  general  method  of  distinguishing  between
heroes  and  gods,  between  men  and  the  immortals,  must
have  once  been  available  in  the  like  manner  among  both
Celts  and  Teutons.  For,  as  regards  the  latter,  suffice
it  to  mention  the  story  of  Gochnundr  reigning  over  the

1  B.  B.  Mai.  pp.  210,  243;  Guest,  i.  323,  370.


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.         627

Land  of  Immortality,  in  the  far  north  (p.  457);  while  tho
former's  idea  of  the  immortality  of  the  gods  is  indirectly
exemplified  by  the  length  of  life  incidentally  assigned,
for  instance,  to  the  Welsh  Mabon  (p.  20)  and  to  tho  Irish
Mider  (p.  145),  in  whose  lifetime  certain  events  occur
severed  by  a  millennium  and  more.1  A  very  compre-
hensive proof  offers  itself  in  the  fact  that  the  ordinary
Celtic  word  for  a  human  being  means,  as  already  ex-
plained (p.  02),  a  mortal.  But  it  happens  that  a  re-
markable expedient  for  giving  expression  to  the  preg-
nant distinction  between  mortals  and  the  immortals
is  adopted  in  one  Irish  instance,  and  it  has  mainly
to  do  with  the  Irish  counterpart  of  Heracles,  namely
Ciichulainn.  The  latter,  together  with  his  father,  belong
to  the  court  of  tho  king  of  Ulster,  but  they  differ
from  the  king  and  his  courtiers,  and  the  difference  is
brought  into  relief  in  the  following  manner.  The  strange
custom  of  the  courade,  found  to  have  existed  here  and
there  all  over  the  world,  was  known  in  Ireland,  at  least
in  Ulster,  and  when  the  great  invasion  of  that  province
took  place  under  the  leadership  of  Ailill  and  Medb,  with
their  Fir  Bolg  and  other  forces,  they  found,  as  indeed
they  had  intended  to  find,  that  all  the  adult  males  of  tho
kingdom  of  Conchobar  mac  Nessa  were  laid  up,  so  that
none  of  them  could  stir  hand  or  foot  to  defend  his
country  against  invasion,  excepting  Ciichulainn  and  his
father  alone.  These  two  were,  for  reasons  unknown  to
Irish  literature — unless  we  suppose  the  foreign  extraction
of  Cuchulainn,  originally  implied  perhaps  in  calling  him
Setanta  (p.  455),  to  be  one  of  those  reasons — free  from


1  Wiudiscli's  I, .  1  .  ■-,  p.  131.

_.     0     -I


028         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEEOES.

the  weakness  which  periodically  afflicted  the  rest  of  the
Ultonian  warriors,  the  king  included ;  and  by  dint  of  the
most  marvellous  feats  of  valour,  Ciichnlainn  kept  the
whole  force  of  the  enemy  at  bay  for  some  time.

You  will  perhaps  think  it  a  strangely  Irish  treatment
to  make  the  gods  languish  en  couvade  while  mortals
went  free  ;  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  all  Irish
mythology,  and  Welsh  also,  reaches  us  through  Christian
channels,  which  usually  make  the  gods  into  men  liable
to  die  like  other  men.  Within  the  pagan  period  there
was  probably  no  lack  of  distinctions  believed  to  exist
between  gods  and  men,  and  the  idea  of  the  former's
deathlessness,  or  at  any  rate  the  millennial  duration  of
their  lives,  must  have  been  one  of  them.  But  it  is
remarkable  that  what  in  Irish  is  represented  as  merely
an  indisposition  and  inactivity  on  their  part,  amounts  in
the  Norse  Edda  to  nothing  less  than  the  actual  death  of
the  Anses  at  the  hands  of  the  powers  of  evil,  followed
though  it  be  by  their  unexplained  return  to  life  when
all  ills  are  healed  at  the  coming  of  Balder.  Whether  we
call  their  inactivity  death  or  mere  indisposition,  there  was
a  mythological  reason  for  it,  as  we  shall  presently  see ;
but  that  reason  may  be  regarded  as  having  ceased  to  be
intelligible  at  an  early  date,  long  probably  before  any
Aryan  wanderer  had  landed  in  these  islands.  So  the
persistence  of  the  myth  of  which  the  Ultonian  inactivity
formed  an  integral  part,  would  naturally  come  to  be
interpreted  sooner  or  later  in  the  light  of  the  only  custom
that  seemed  to  make  it  intelligible,  namely,  that  of  the
couvade.  The  explanation  was,  it  is  needless  to  say,
a  mere  expedient,  but  rather  an  ingenious  one,  though
it  proves,  when  you  come  to  examine  it  a  little  more


VT.    GODS,    DEMONS   A\D   HEROES;  029

closely,  to  have  been  Ear  from  large  enough.  For  instance,
the  Irish  couvade  (p.  3G3)  should  last  only  four  days
and  five  nights,  a  space  of  time  out  of  all  proportion  to
the  interval  during  which  the  heroes  of  Ulster  lay  hors
de  combat,  leaving  Ciichulainn  alone  to  face  the  enemy ;
besides,  who  ever  heard  of  a  couvade  that  included  all
the  adult  males  of  a  whole  province  at  one  and  the  same
time?  It  did  well  enough,  however,  to  indicate  the
radical  difference  of  nature  that  was  supposed  to  exist
between  Ciichulainn' s  and  that  of  the  nobles  of  Ulster.
Ciichulainn  had  inherited  it  from  his  father,  who  similarly
differed  from  them  before  him  ;  and  this  chimes  in  exactly
with  the  conclusion  drawn  in  these  lectures  as  to  Gwydion,
Woden  and  India,  that  they  were  in  point  of  origin
human,  and  not  divine.  It  is  true  that  Ciichulainn's
father's  importance  is  reduced  to  a  minimum ;  but  so  far
as  any  distinctive  character  is  left  him,  it  coincides  well
enough  with  that  of  Gwydion  and  Woden :  he  devotes  his
attention  to  his  son,  who  is  however  too  strong-willed  to
be  ruled  by  him,  so  that  in  the  long  run  the  father
becomes  the  son's  attendant  and  messenger.

The  result,  as  regards  the  Solar  Ilero,  is  to  prove
the  identity,  so  far  as  identity  can  be  approached  in
such  matters,  of  Ciichulainn  with  Heracles.  It  would
take  too  much  time  to  pursue  this  idea  into  the  general
similarity  between  certain  of  the  labours  of  Heracles  and
those  of  Ciichulainn,  and  I  will  only  call  attention  to
one  or  two  other  points  of  resemblance.  Thus  I  may
observe  that  as  Heracles  was  persecuted  by  Here  the
stern  consort  of  Zeus,  so  the  Mdrrigu,  or  Great  Queen
of  the  Goidelic  war-god,  is  described  offended  with
Ciichulainn,  and  taking  an  active  part  against  him  at  a


G30  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

moment  when  he  was  already  formidably  matched ;  but
she,  like  Here,  fails,  and  appears  afterwards  reconciled  and
friendly  to  him  (p.  471).  On  the  other  hand,  yon  will
remember  that  the  great  friend  and  helper  of  Heracles
was  the  grey-eyed  goddess  Athene,  daughter  of  Zeus:  she
not  only  aided  him  when  he  was  in  dire  distress,  but  pro-
vided for  his  ease  and  comfort  when  he  felt  tired  and
wearied  after  his  great  efforts:  for  example,  she  wove
him  a  splendid  peplos  in  which  to  lounge  when  he  laid
aside  his  armour,  and  she  would  on  occasion  make  warm
springs  gush  forth  from  the  ground  to  provide  her
favourite  hero  with  a  refreshing  bath.1  Now  the  com-
plement of  the  reasoning  which  would  identify  Cuchu-
lainn  with  Heracles,  would  make  the  Ultonian  court  a
counterpart  in  Irish  of  Olympus  in  Greek  mythology,  as
I  have  already  tried  to  explain  (pp.  136—144);  so  the
Irish  counterpart  of  Athene  should  be  a  daughter  of  the
king  rendering  kindly  service  to  Cuchulainn.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  it  happens  that  this  part  of  the  myth  has
not  been  wholly  blotted  out  by  the  blanching  touch  of
time :  at  any  rate,  it  is  just  possible  to  read  it  in  the
light  of  the  Greek  idyll.  Conchobar  had  a  passing  fair
daughter  called  Fedelm  of  the  Nine  Forms  (p.  378),  for
she  had  so  many  fair  aspects,  each  of  which  was  more
beautiful,  as  we  are  told,  than  the  others ;  and  when
Cuchulainn  had,  at  the  news  of  the  approach  of  the
enemy  from  the  west,  advanced  with  his  father  to  the
frontier  of  the  realm,  he  suddenly  hastened  away  in  the
evening  to  a  place  of  secret  meeting,  where  he  knew

1  See  Preller's  Gr.  Myth,  ij.  161,  189  ;  also  his  note  (on  the  former
page)  on  the  vase  inscription, 'H/aaKAeovs  Kop-q,  'd  .i.  Geliebte  des
Heracles.'


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HERO!  C31

Fedelm  to  have  a  bath  got  ready  for  him  in  order  to
prepare  him  for  the  morrow  and  his  first  encounter  with
tlu1  invading  army.  Fedelm,  according  to  some  accounts,1
was  the  mother  of  Ere  and  Acall  (p.  483);  nor  is  she
usually  associated  with  Ciichnlainn;  and  she  is  so  abruptly
introduced  into  the  epic  tale  that  the  passage  was  a  puzzle,
some  eight  hundred  years  ago,  to  the  writer  of  the  oldest
text  now  known  of  it.  But,  treated  comparatively,  it
becomes  intelligible,  and  carries  us  back  a  distance  of
time  which  might  almost  be  characterized  as  geological.
All  that  we  have  thus  far  found  with  regard  to  the
contests  of  the  gods  and  their  allies  against  the  powers
of  evil  and  theirs,  would  seem  to  indicate  that  they  were
originally  regarded  as  yearly  struggles.  This  appears
to  be  the  meaning  of  the  foreknowledge  as  to  the  final
battle  of  Moytura,  and  as  to  the  exact  date  of  the  engage-
ment on  the  Plain  of  Fidga  in  which  Cuchulainn  assists
Labraid  of  the  Swift  Hand  on  the  Sword,  a  kind  of
Celtic  Zeus  or  Mars-Jupiter  as  the  ruler  of  an  Elysium
in  the  other  world  (p.  342).  It  was  for  a  similar  reason
that  the  northern  sibyl  could  predict  that,  after  the
Anses  had  been  slain  by  Swart  aided  by  the  evil  brood,
Balder  would  come  to  reign,  when  all  would  be  healed,
and  the  Anses  would  meet  again  in  the  Field  of  Ith.
Nor  can  the  case  have  been  materially  different  with  the
Greek  gods,  as  proved  by  the  allusion  to  the  prophecy
about  the  issue  of  the  war  with  the  giants.  And  this  was
not  all;  for  we  are  told  that  the  Cretans  represented
Zeus  as  born  and  bred  and  also  buried  in  their  island,
a  view  sometimes  formerly  regarded  as  confirming  the

1  O'Curry,  p.  51  1.


C32         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

character  ascribed  to  them  for  lying ;  but  that  deserves
no  serious  consideration,  and  the  Cretans  in  their  mys-
teries are  supposed  to  have  represented  the  god  going
through  the  stages  of  his  history  every  year.1  A  little
beyond  the  limits  of  the  Greek  world  a  similar  idea
assumed  a  still  more  remarkable  form,  namely,  among
the  Phrygians,  who  are  said  by  Plutarch  to  have  believed
their  god  to  sleep  during  the  winter  and  resume  his
activity  during  the  summer.  The  same  author  also
states  that  the  Paphlagonians  were  of  opinion  that  the
gods  were  shut  up  in  a  prison  during  winter  and  let  loose
in  summer.2  Of  these  peoples,  the  Phrygians  at  least
appear  to  have  been  Aryan,  and  related  by  no  means
distantly  to  the  Greeks ;  but  nothing  could  resemble  the
Irish  couvade  of  the  Ultonian  heroes  more  closely  than
the  notion  of  the  Phrygian  god  hibernating.  This  in  its
turn  is  not  to  be  severed  from  the  drastic  account  of  the
Zeus  of  the  Greek  Olympus  reduced  by  Typho  to  a  sinew-
less mass  and  thrown  for  a  time  into  a  cave  in  a  state  of
utter  helplessness.  Thus  we  seem  to  be  directed  to  the
north  as  the  original  home  of  the  Aryan  nations ;  and
there  are  other  indications  to  the  same  effect,  such  as
Woden's  gold  ring  Draupnir,  which  I  have  taken  (p.  3G6)
to  be  symbolic  of  the  ancient  eight-day  week :  he  places
it  on  Balder's  pile,  and  with  him  it  disappears  for  a  while
into  the  nether  world,  which  would  seem  to  mean  the
cessation  for  a  time  of  the  vicissitude  of  day  and  night,
as  happens  in  midwinter  within  the  Arctic  circle.  This
might  be  claimed  as  exclusively  Icelandic,  but  not  if  one


1  Pauly's  Real-Eneycl.  (s.  v.  Jupiter),  v.  597.

2  De  hide  et  Osiride  (the  Diclot  ed.),  69.


VT.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.  C33

can  show  traces,  as  I  have  attempted  (pp.  3G5-75),  of
the  same  myth  in  Ireland.  Further,  a  sort  of  comple-
ment to  it  is  supplied  by  the  fact  that  Ciichnlainn  the
Sun  Hero  is  made  to  fight  several  days  and  nights  with-
out having  any  sleep,  which,  though  fixed  at  the  wrong
season  of  the  year  in  the  epic  tale  in  its  present  form,
may  probably  be  regarded  as  originally  referring  to  the
sun  remaining  above  the  horizon  continuously  for  several
days  in  summer.  Traces  of  the  same  idea  betray  them-
selves in  Balder's  son  Forseti  or  the  Judge,  who,  accord-
ing to  a  passage  in  old  Norse  literature,1  sits  long  hours
at  his  court  settling  all  causes  in  his  palace  of  Glitnir  in
the  skies.  These  points  are  mentioned  as  part  of  a
hypothesis  I  have  been  forced  to  form  for  the  interpre-
tation of  certain  features  of  Aryan  mythology;  and  that
hypothesis,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  will  not  now  be  con-
si  <lered  so  wild  as  it  would  have  been  a  few  years  ago ;
for  the  recent  researches  of  the  students  of  language  and
ethnology  have  profoundly  modified  their  views,  and  a
few  words  must  at  this  point  be  devoted  to  the  change
that  has  come  over  the  scene.

Among  the  great  discoveries  of  modern  times  must
undoubtedly  be  ranked  that  of  the  fact,  that  Sanskrit
and  the  more  important  languages  of  Europe  are  closely
akin ;  but  this  discovery  was  accompanied  by  several
erroneous  assumptions  of  far-reaching  influence.  One
A\as  that  Sanskrit,  if  not  the  mother  of  the  other  Aryan
languages,  was  at  any  rate  their  eldest  sister ;  and  alto-
gether the  importance  of  Sanskrit  used  to  be  greatly
exaggerated.     Another  of  these  assumptions  was  that  all

1  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  71  ;  Simrock,  p.  :296.


634  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEEOES.

the  nations  speaking  Aryan  languages  were  of  the  same
race.  Then  we  have  to  add  to  these  and  the  like  assump-
tions the  long-standing  habit  of  regarding  all  the  nations
of  the  west  as  of  eastern  origin.  But  within  recent
years  the  ruthless  hand  of  critical  inquiry  has  begun  to
sweep  away  these  cobwebs,  and  Sanskrit,  which  will
doubtless  enjoy  the  reputation  of  always  being  a  highly
important  and  instructive  language,  has  so  far  lost  its
exaggerated  weight  that  Professor  Sayce  begins  his  Pre-
face (dating  in  November,  1884)  to  the  third  edition
of  his  '  Principles  of  Comparative  Philology'  with  the
following  remarkable  words :  '  Since  the  publication  of
the  second  edition  of  my  work  in  1875,  a  revolution
has  taken  place  in  the  Comparative  Philology  of  the
Indo-European  languages.  Sanskrit  has  been  dethroned
from  the  high  place  it  once  occupied  as  the  special
representative  of  the  Aryan  Parent-Speech,  and  it  has
been  recognized  that  primitive  sounds  and  forms  have,
on  the  whole,  been  more  faithfully  preserved  in  the
languages  of  Europe  than  in  those  of  India.'  The  ethno-
logist, waking  up  likewise  from  the  delusion  which  he
had  allowed  his  too  impetuous  brother,  the  student  of
language,  to  infect  him  with,  finds  that  it  is  out  of  the
question  to  suppose  the  various  peoples  speaking  Aryan
languages  to  be  of  the  same  race.  It  then  remains  that
we  should  regard  the  original  Aryans  as  having  spread
their  language  and  institutions  among  other  races  by
conquest,  and  that  the  various  nations  of  the  world
speaking  Aryan  languages  are  not  all  equally  Aryan  in
point  of  blood :  so  the  question  arises,  what  Aryan  nation
or  nations  most  closely  resemble  the  original  stock  of
that  name  ?     It  is  argued  with  great  probability,  that  it


VI.     GOP?,    DEMONS   AND    TIEIIOES.  C35


is  the  tall,  blue-eyed,  fair-skinned  and  light-haired  inha-
bitants of  Scandinavia  and  parts  of  North  Germany.  It
is  urged  that  this  type  was  dominant  also  among  the
ancient  Gauls,  and  that  it  is  still  so  in  a  somewhat  modi-
fied form  in  Slavonic  lands ;  while  it  can  be  shown  to  have
likewise  enjoyed  great  prestige  in  ancient  Italy  and  Greece,
most  of  the  great  heroes  and  heroines  of  the  latter  land
1  icing  described  in  the  classics  as  £av66i  or  golden  as  to
the  colour  of  their  hair.  According  to  this  view,  the
least  Aryan  in  race  would  be  the  Hindus;  and  the
Sanskrit-speaking  conquerors  of  the  Land  of  the  Five
Eivers  must  be  regarded  as  the  Eurasians  of  their  time ;
accordingly  it  is  found  that  the  least  swarthy  of  their
descendants  in  our  time  belong  to  the  highest  caste.  Thus
to  regard  Sanskrit  as  the  typical  Aryan  speech,  and  the
Hindu  as  Aryan  par  excellence,  is  to  begin  at  the  wrong
end,  much  as  if  you  treated  a  Bombay  Eurasian  as  a  typical
representative  of  the  English  people  at  home.  The  his-
torian also  calls  attention  to  the  direction  of  the  Asiatic
conquests  of  Macedon  and  Eome,  of  England  and  Eussia,
to  the  eastward  migrations  of  Scythians  and  Thracians,  also
of  the  Gauls  who  left  their  name  to  Galatia,  and  to  the
spread  southwards  of  Slaves  and  especially  of  Teutons.
In  fact,  he  would  substitute  for  the  irrepressible  and
inexplicable  tendency  supposed  to  have  been  innate  in
the  ancient  Aryan,  and  to  have  left  him  no  peace  of
mind  till  he  wandered  to  the  west,  reasons  of  no  mys-
terious a  nature.  According  to  him,  dire  necessity  and
the  prospect  of  material  advantages  were  the  motives  that
impelled  the  Aryan  to  conquer  fresh  territory  towards
the  south  and  the  east.  Lastly,  Dr.  Latham's  argument,
forgotten  for  a  time  but  never  refuted,  is  again  invoked,


63G         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

to  the  effect,  that  'to  deduce  the  Indo-Europeans  of
Europe  from  the  Indo-Europeans  of  Asia,  in  ethnology,
is  like  deriving  the  reptiles  of  Great  Britain  from  those  of
Ireland  in  erpetology.'1

Thus  the  voice  of  recent  research2  is  raised  very
decidedly  in  favour  of  Europe,  though  there  is  no  com-
plete unanimity  as  to  the  exact  portion  of  Europe  to
regard  as  the  early  home  of  the  Aryans ;  but  the  com-
petition tends  to  lie  between  North  Germany  and  Scan-
dinavia, especially  the  south  of  Sweden.  This  last  would
probably  do  well  enough  as  the  country  in  which  the
Aryans  may  have  consolidated  and  organized  themselves
before  beginning  to  send  forth  their  excess  of  population  to
conquer  the  other  lands  now  possessed  by  nations  speaking
Aryan  languages.  Nor  can  one  forget  that  all  the  great
states  of  modern  Europe,  except  that  of  the  Sick  Man,
trace  their  history  back  to  the  conquests  of  the  Norsemen
who  set  out  from  the  Scandinavian  land  which  Jordanis3
proudly  calls  officina  gentium  and  vagina  nationum.  But
I  doubt  whether  the  teachings  of  evolution  may  not  force
us  to  trace  them  still  further  towards  the  north :  in  any
case,  the  mythological  indications  to  which  your  attention
has  been  called,  point,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  to  some  spot
within  the  Arctic  Circle,  such,  for  example,  as  the  region
where  Norse  legend  placed  the  Land  of  Immortality,  some-
where in  the  north  of  Finland  and  the  neighbourhood  of

1  Latham's  Germama  of  Tacitus,  Epilegoinena,  p.  cxlij.

2  See  more  especially  Penka's  Origines  Ariacce,  Vienna,  1883  ;
Schrader's  Sprachvergleiclmng  und  Urgeschicltfe,  Jena,  1885  ;  Wilser's
Herlcunft  der  Deutschen,  Carlsrulie,  1885  ;  and  Penka's  Herkunft  der
Arier,  Vienna,  1886.

3  De  Origlnc  Actihusque  Getarum,  ed.  Holder,  cap.  4  (p.  6).


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.  037

the  White  Sea.  There  would,  perhaps,  be  no  difficulty
in  the  way  of  supposing  them  to  have  thence  in  due  time
descended  into  Scandinavia,  settling,  among  other  places,
at  Upsala,  which  has  all  the  appearance  of  being  a  most
ancient  site,  lying  as  it  does  on  a  plain  dotted  with  innu-
merable burial  mounds  of  unknown  antiquity.  This,  you
will  bear  in  mind,  has  to  do  only  with  the  origin  of  the
early  Ayrans,  and  not  with  that  of  the  human  race  gene-
rally;  but  it  would  be  no  fatal  objection  to  the  view  here
suggested,  if  it  should  be  urged  that  the  mythology  of
nations  beside  the  Aryans,  such  as  that  of  the  Paphla-
gonians,  in  case  of  their  not  being  Aryan,  point  likewise
to  the  north ;  for  it  is  not  contended  that  the  Aryans
may  be  the  only  people  of  northern  origin.  Indeed,  I
may  add  that  a  theory  was  not  long  ago  propounded  by  a
distinguished  French  savant,  to  the  effect  that  the  entire
human  race  originated  on  the  shores  of  the  Polar  Sea  at
a  time  when  the  rest  of  the  northern  hemisphere  was  too
hot  to  be  inhabited  by  man.  M.  de  Saporta,1  for  that
is  the  learned  writer's  name,  explains  himself  in  clear
and  forcible  terms;  but  how  far  his  hypothesis  may
satisfy  the  other  students  of  this  fascinating  subject  I
cannot  say.  It  may,  however,  be  observed  in  passing,
that  it  need  not  disconcert  even  the  most  orthodox  of
men,  for  it  supposes  all  races  of  mankind  traceable  to
a  single  non-simian  origin,  and  the  Bible  leaves  it  an
open  question  where  exactly  and  when  the  Garden  of
Eden  flourished.


1  Revue  des  Drux  Monde8,Vo\.  lvij.  (1883),  where  pp.  81  — 1 19  are
devoted  to  an  article  entitled,  '  Un  Essai  de  Synthase  paleoethnique  :'
see  also  Warren's  Paradise  Found,  published  at  Boston  in  the  United
States  in  1S85.


638  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.

The  gods'  winter   indisposition,  inactivity  or  death,
which  led  me  to  make  this  digression,  must  not  be  con-
founded with  their  voluntary  visits  to  the  nether  world.
Of  these  we  have  an  instance  in  the  Ultonian  cycle  of
Irish  stories,  where  Conchobar,  who  here  stands  in  the
position  of  a  Celtic  Zeus,  goes  with  his  men,  including
young  Cuchulainn  the  Sun-god,  to  the  house  of  Culann
the  smith  to  be  entertained   for   the   night   (p.   446).
Culann  is  to  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  forms  of  the  dark
divinity  or  Dis  of  the  Celts,  and  in  Greek  mythology  he
has  his  counterpart  in  Hephaestus,  excepting  that,  owing
to  the  departmental  narrowing  of  the  latter' s  character-
istics, Culann  was  somewhat  wider ;  for  he  was  not  only
smith,  but  diviner  and  prophet,  the  owner  of  herds  and
flocks,  and  of  a  Cerberus  that  guarded  his  house  and
chattels  until  it  was  killed  by  Cuchulainn.    That  Culann
is  a  form  of  the  dark  divinity  is  favoured  by  the  fact
that  his  name  has  sometimes  become  synonymous  with
that  of  the  devil.     He  is  sometimes  associated  with  the
Isle  of  Man,  where  he  manufactured  a  sword,  a  spear  and
a  shield,  of  such  transcendent  excellence  for  Conchobar,
that  he  was  invited  by  him  to  dwell  in  his  realm :  Culann,
accepting  the  offer,  settled  on  the  Plain  of  Murthemne,1
where  the  story  of  the  Tain  represents  him  living.     But
that  Plain  was  fabled  to  have  been  formerly  situated
beneath  the    sea,  which  reminds  one  of  the   Homeric
story  about  Hephsestus  working  for  nine  years  beneath
the  sea  unknown  to  gods  and  men,  excepting  Eurynome

1  Trans,  of  the  Kilkenny  Arch.  Soc.  for  1852-3,  ij.  32-3;  also  the
Manx  Society \  Vol.  xv.  129.

2  Bk.  of  the  Dun,  60  b,  61  a;  R.  Irish  Acad.  (Stowe  MS.)  D.  iv.  2,
foL  81  a  British  Museum  MS.  {Hurl  5280),  fol.  206.


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.         039

and  Thetis,  who  gave  him  shelter.1  lie  had  been  thrown
into  the  sea  by  his  mother  Here,  who  was  ashamed  of
his  ugliness :  compare  the  drowning  of  Lug's  brothers
(p.  316),  the  taking  of  Core  into  a  small  island  outside
Erinn  (p.  309),  and  the  haste  with  which  Dylan  made  for
the  water- world  (p.  307).  The  dark  nature  of  Hephaestus
may  also  be  inferred  from  his  union  with  such  goddesses
as  Charis,  Aghea  and  Aphrodite,  also  Athene,  the  quasi-
mother  of  Hephaestus'  monster  son  Erichthonius.  The
same  remark  applies  to  his  struggle  with  Zeus,  who
hurled  him  from  Olympus,  a  nature  myth  otherwise
expressed  by  the  story  of  his  accident  with  the  fiery
steeds  of  Phoebus;  and  we  have  the  other  side  of  the
picture  in  the  return  of  Hephaestus  to  Olympus  with
Dionysus,  at  the  head  of  a  f ollowing  of  silens  and  nymphs,
that  challenged  comic  treatment  at  the  hands  of  poets
and  artists.  The  masterpieces  of  his  art  were,  as  in  the
case  of  the  mob  of  lesser  spirits  associated  with  working
in  metals,  not  unfrequently  wrought  in  malice  and  fraught
with  misfortune  for  those  who  accepted  them.  It  was  to
the  hall  of  Culann,  then,  a  dark  divinity  corresponding  to
Hephaestus,  that  C'onchobar  and  his  court,  that  is  to  say
the  gods  of  the  Ultonian  cycle,  resorted  for  a  night's
entertainment,  which  originally  appears  to  have  meant
their  sinking  into  the  sea.  In  Norse  mythology  this
has  its  counterpart  in  the  Anses  and  Ansesscs  banqueting
in  the  hall  of  the  brewer  of  the  gods.  He  was  not  one
of  them,  but  a  sort  of  giant  called  ^Egir.2     The  Greek


1  Iliad,  xviij.  394—409.

2  Jacob  Grimm,  in  his  Deutsche  Mythologie,  suggested  an  etymolo-
gical connection  between  JEgir  ami  the  Anglo-Saxon  Edgor,  'Beo,1  and


640  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

version  of  the  myth  in  question  is  to  be  seen  in  the
flitting  of  the  dwellers  of  Olympus  in  order  to  go  and
enjoy  their  hecatombs  from  time  to  time  at  the  ever-laden
table  of  the  dark  Ethiopians.  According  to  the  opening
portion  of  the  Odyssey,  these  mythic  people,  with  their
faces  tanned  by  the  scorching  rays  of  the  sun,  inhabited
the  two  regions  of  the  world  which  were  the  most  distant
from  one  another :  that  where  the  sun  rose  in  the  morn-
ing and  that  where  he  descended  in  the  evening :

AWioiras,  rol  8i-^6a  SeSatarat,  ecr^a-rot  dvSpwv,
01  jx\v  Bvcrofxevov  'Y7repiovos,  ot  8    olviovtos.

Such  a  myth  requires  no  explanation;  and  possibly  a
veiled  reference  to  the  Table  of  the  Ethiopians  is  to  be
detected,  with  an  unexplained  change  of  scene,  in  the
story  of  Hepha3stus  limping  about  as  cup-bearer  to  the
gods  on  Olympus ;  but  it  is  perhaps  preferable  to  regard
this  as  a  mere  piece  of  later  humour,  or  else  to  compare
it  with  the  case  of  the  Dagda  acting  as  chef  of  the  kitchen
of  Conaire  the  Great,  or  Glewlwyd  Gavaelvawr  discharg-
ing the  duties  of  chief  porter  at  Arthur's  court  on  great
occasions.1

It  is  not  evident  whether  the  myth  of  the  imprison-
ment of  the  Celtic  Zeus,  as  in  the  person  of  Merlin,
should  be  reckoned  with  that  of  the  inactivity  or  death
of  the  gods,  or  else  ranked  with  the  flitting  of  the
Olympians  to  feast  at  the  Table  of  the  Ethiopians ;  for
in  some  versions  of  the  myth  the  idea  of  imprisonment
is  not  expressed,   though   it   admits  perhaps  of  being

English  Eager  as  the  name  of  the  Bore  in  the  Trent  and  other  Anglian
rivers ;  hut  modern  phonologists  find  a  difficulty  in  the  vowels.

1  Bl:  of  the  Dun,  94;  R.  D.  Mob.  p.  103;  Guest,  ij.  254  :  see  also
p.  372  ahove.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEBOEft  641

dimly  inferred.     Take,  for  instance,  the  story  of  Labraid
(p.  342),  who  from  his  island  home  ruled  over  a  sort  of
martial  Elysium,  in  which  he  required  the  aid  of  the  Sun-
god  Ciichulainn  against  a  people  called  the  Men  of  Fidga.
These  were  fabled  to  derive  their  origin  from  Britain,1
which  in  this  context  means  Ilades  (p.  90).      In  the
next  place,  Labraid's  wife  and  queen  was  Liban,  in  whom
one  recognizes  the  Lake  Lady  of  the  Merlin  story  (p.  150).
Lastly,  Labraid  is  not  mentioned  as  quitting  his  realm
to  visit  this  world,  but  his  wife  goes  and  comes  at  will.
Now  the  path  to  the  region  inhabited  both  by  Labraid
and  the  Men  of  Fidga  led  past  two  double-headed  ser-
pents; and  when  Liban  fetched  to  her  court  a  person
destined  to  come  back  alive,  she  had,  at  the  dangerous  spot
alluded  to,  specially  to  protect  him  by  taking  him  by
the  shoulders.2     This  is  probably  the  key  to  the  story
of  the  strange  punishment  selected  for  PwytFs  queen
Ehiannon,  when  she  was  condemned  to  carry  all  visitors
to  the  court  on  her  shoulders  from  the  horse-block  into
the  hall  (p.  49S).3    For  the  role  of  Pwytt  Head  of  Hades
is  perhaps  best  interpreted  as  that  of  a  Celtic  Zeus  in  that
world,  while  Ehiannon  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  goddess
with  free  access  to  both  worlds.

Celtic  Accounts  of  the  Aryan  Deluge.

The  mythic  struggles  which  led  us  away  into  the  digres-
sion concerning  origins,  enable  one  to  see  to  sonic  extent

1  See  the  Ek.  of  Leivstrr,  15a,  where  they  are  also  called  Tuath  Fidga
or  Fidha,  and  said  to  have  used  poisoned  weapons.

2  Windisch,  IrUche  Texte,  pp.  210,  219  (§  14,  &  §  34,  lines  21-3);
Rev.  Celt.  v.  231.

3  It.  B.  Mob.  pp.  20,  23,  and  Guest,  iij.  G3,  G7-8.

2  i


642  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.

how  to  classify  the  parties  opposed  in  them  :  among  other
things,  we  are  taught  that  it  will  not  always  do  to  take
them  according  to  their  descent,  since  Prometheus,  for
example,  though  the  son  of  a  Titan,  fights  on  the  side  of
the  gods ;  and  we  are  further  helped  to  distinguish  the
Olympic  party  into  two  groups,  consisting  respectively
of  the  gods  with  Zeus  at  their  head,  and  of  the  heroes
who  began  their  existence  as  mortals.  Without  attempt-
ing to  pursue  this  question  of  classification  further,  I
now  wish  to  make  some  additional  comparisons  showing
how  some  of  the  principal  figures  in  the  mythology  of
the  Greeks  and  other  Aryans  had  their  counterparts  in
the  theology  of  the  ancient  Celts.  Treating  Zeus  as  the
central  figure  in  the  Hellenic  pantheon,  and  assuming
his  identity  with  the  Tyr  of  the  Norsemen  and  the
Nuada  of  the  Irish,  let  us  turn  our  attention  to  Cronus,
whom  Zeus  is  represented  as  having  superseded  and
expelled.  Now  Earth  wishing  to  be  rid  of  her  husband
Uranus  or  Sky,  incited  her  sons  the  Titans  to  mutilate
him,  but  they  all  hesitated  except  the  youngest,  who
is  characterized  as  dyKvXo^T^,  or  Cronus  of  crooked
counsel.  He  accordingly  accepted  a  sharp  sickle  from
his  mother  and  perpetrated  the  deed.  His  father  Sky
then  cursed  Cronus  to  suffer  in  his  turn  at  the  hands  of
his  own  offspring,  wherefore  Cronus  took  the  strange
precaution  of  devouring  them  as  fast  as  they  were  born ;
but  his  wife  Ehea  succeeded  in  concealing  one  of  them
from  his  voracity.  This  was  Zeus,  and  as  soon  as  he
grew  to  maturity  he  declared  war  on  the  Titans  :  proving
victorious,  he  thrust  Cronus  and  the  other  Titans  into
Tartarus,  according  to  one  account.  Another,  however,
makes  the  dispossessed  Cronus  go  to  the  Isles  of  the


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.         643

Blessed  to  reign  over  the  happy  dead.  lie  is  found  also
associated  with  harvest-time  and  abundance,  the  harvest
month  being  called  in  parts  of  Greece  Kpovniv  after  Cronus,
and  there  was  a  harvest  feast  called  KP6via  which  was
celebrated  with  practices  recalling  a  fabled  age  of  golden
prosperity,  labourless  plenty  and  social  equality.  On
the  other  hand,  his  name  was  usually  identified,  espe-
cially by  comic  authors,  with  all  that  was  antiquated
and  out  of  date.1     The  poets  sometimes  call  him  iro\i6v

and  TrpecrfivTriv  6e6v}  also  TTdTepa  Trpea-fSvryjv  Kpoi/oiy2  not  to  men-
tion that  Greek  philosophers  and  theologians  at  length
made  of  him  a  god  of  time,  and  that  his  name  Kp6vo$t
which  is  of  uncertain  meaning,  came  eventually  to  be
explained  as  xp°vo<i,  time.

On  the  one  hand,  Cronus  is  a  crafty  and  cruel  Titan  of
marvellous  voracity ;  and  on  the  other,  he  is  an  ancient
father,  king  of  the  happy  departed,  and  a  god  of  abun-
dance and  mature  plenty.  The  same  peculiar  combination
is  to  be  traced  to  some  extent  on  Celtic  ground;  for
Livid  of  the  Silver  Hand,  the  Welsh  equivalent  of  the
Irish  Nuada,  is  represented  as  the  youngest  son  of  Beli
the  Great.  The  latter  may,  therefore,  be  taken  to  be  in
a  sense  one  of  our  equivalents  to  Cronus.  The  name  Beli
appears  to  mean  death,  and  to  refer  to  the  sinister  aspect
of  his  character;  in  Irish  it  is  represented  by  that  of
Bile  king  of  Spain,  that  is  to  say  of  Hades,  and  ancestor,
through  Mile,  of  the  Milesian  Goidels  (pp.  90-1),  while
a  related  form  Balor  was  restricted  to  what  may  be
regarded  perhaps  as  the  same  divinity  with  all  his  good

1  Preller'a  Or.  Myth.  i.  43—47.

2  Luciau,  Ta  Trpos  Kpovov,  5;  /Eschylus,  Eumenides,  G41.

2t2


G44         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

attributes  removed.  Be  that  as  it  may,  Beli  and  Bile
wore  doubtless  forms  of  the  Dis  of  the  ancient  Celts ;  but
when,  for  instance,  the  time  of  Beli  is  referred  to  in
"Welsh  literature  as  the  golden  age  of  Brythonic  inde-
pendence, one  is  induced  to  think  that  very  possibly  a
Celtic  counterpart  of  Cronus  or  Saturn  has  been  con-
founded and  identified  with  Beli :  the  analogy  of  the
cognate  myths  would  lead  us  to  expect  to  find  them
closely  associated  but  scarcely  amalgamated.  A  more  com-
plete representative,  however,  of  Cronus  on  Celtic  ground
is  to  be  detected  in  the  Irish  Dagda,  whose  name  seems
to  mean  the  '  good  god'  (p.  154).  He  is  an  OUathair  or
Great  Father,  like  Cronus,  and,  like  him,  his  character
readily  lent  itself  to  comic  treatment,  as,  for  instance,
in  a  description  of  his  making  a  heavy  meal  of  porridge,
of  which  he  was  over-fond ;  like  Cronus  also,  he  was
deprived  of  his  house  and  home  by  his  Mac  Oc  or  Young
Son,  for  that,  and  not  ISTuada,  is  the  name  in  this  con-
nection of  the  counterpart  of  young  Zeus;  but  the
triumph  of  his  son  is  made  the  result  of  a  trick  (p.  147),
and  not  of  a  battle  as  in  the  case  of  Cronus.  In  the  next
place,  he,  duly  conciliated,  is  said  both  himself  to  abstain,
and  to  cause  the  other  gods  to  abstain,  from  blighting
the  crops  and  spoiling  the  milk  of  the  Milesian  Irish.  So
here  again  he  may  be  compared  to  Cronus,  and  regarded
as  the  god  to  be  propitiated  by  the  farmer  and  the
shepherd.  This  would  naturally  imply  that  he  had  power
to  a  certain  extent  over  the  atmosj)here  near  the  earth,
which  is  borne  out  by  his  promising  that  at  the  final
battle  of  Moytura  he  would  himself  work  as  many  atmo-
spheric wonders  as  all  the  druids  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann
put  together.     Thus  it  would  seem  that  he  was  one  of


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    A\T>    HEROES.  C15

the  Celtic  gods  who  had  the  thunderbolt,  which  Greek
mythology  tends  to  place  at  the  exclusive  disposal  of
Zeus;  even  Cronus'  influence  over  the  harvest  and  the
ripening  crops  would  seem  to  postulate  the  assigning  of
a  certain  amount  of  atmospheric  power  to  him  also.  It
is,  however,  not  to  be  doubted  that  Cronus  is  left  with
comparatively  little  influence  as  compared  with  this  Celtic
counterpart  of  his,  for  there  were,  as  we  shall  see,  several
others  belonging  to  other  cycles  of  sagas,  Irish  and  Welsh.
Before  leaving  this  mention  of  the  Dagda,  it  is  worth
while  pointing  out  his  Norse  equivalent,  whom  we  seem
to  have  in  Thor.  This  will  appear  from  the  following
summary  of  Thor's  attributes  by  Yigfusson  and  Powell,
in  their  Corpus  Poelicum  Boreale,  ij.  463  :  "  Wide  is  the
contrast  between  Woden  and  Thunder  in  the  lays  of  the
earlier  poets.  Thor  is  a  less  complex  divinity,  with  a
well-marked  and  individual  character ;  the  friend  of  man,
the  husbandman's  god,  whose  wrath  and  anger  are  ever
directed  against  the  evil  powers  that  injure  mortals  and
their  possessions,  whose  bolt  destroys  the  foul  thick
blights  that  betray  the  presence  of  the  wicked  ones,  and
smites  through  the  huge  cloud-masses  that  seem  to  be
crushing  the  earth.  Thus  we  see  him  ever  associated
with  Earth,  who  bore  him  to  Heaven  . .  .  . ;  her  proudest
titles  are  the  Mother  of  the  Giant-killer,  the  Mother  of
the  Ill-dam's  foe.     So  also  he  is  '  husband  of  Sif,'  the

golden-haired  goddess  [the  Corn-field,  Ceres] The

homely  features  of  Thor's  character  mark  him  out  for
humorous  treatment,  and  the  anonymous  Aristophanes  of
the  West,  and  Snorri  himself,  deal  so  with  him.  Alone
of  all  the  gods  we  find  his  image  carved  on  stocks  and
stones,   a  long-bearded   face   with    the    hammer    hung


G4G  VT.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.

beneath ;  and  the  hammer  itself,  a  primitive  stone-headed
sshort-hafted  instrument,  is  found  separately  as  a  charm.
The  '  Anse,'  or  '  the  God  of  the  country,'  or  '  the  Mighty
God'  in  the  old  carmina  of  oaths  and  vows,  always  refers
to  Thor.  It  is  curious  to  notice  how  ill  the  sturdy
farmer's  friend  suits  the  new  Walhall.  The  poets  get
out  of  the  difficulty  by  making  him  stay  away  fight-
ing giants ;  his  uncouth  might  is  scarcely  needed  when
Woden  has  a  host  of  chosen  warriors  ever  ready  to  defend
himself  and  his  friends."  I  will  only  add  that  the  word
ass  or  anse,  as  applied  to  Thor,  has  its  etymological  equi-
valent, as  observed  in  a  previous  lecture  (p.  61),  in  the
name  Esus  of  the  Gaulish  god,  usually  equipped  with  a
long-hafted  hammer  and  an  axe  or  bill,  with  which  he
is  sometimes  represented  lopping  the  branches  of  a  tree.
The  identity  is,  roughly  speaking,  fairly  certain.

Another  parallel  in  Celtic  to  Cronus  must  now  be  men-
tioned, namely,  Fergus  mac  E6ig,  whose  story  belongs
to  the  Ultonian  cycle,  in  which  the  place  occupied  in
Greek  theology  by  Zeus  is  held  by  Conchobar  mac  Nessa,
king  of  Ulster.  The  latter's  predecessor  in  power  was
Fergus,  and  it  was  briefly  told  in  another  lecture  (p.  137),
how  Fergus  was  done  out  of  his  kingdom  by  the  boy
Conchobar  aided  by  his  mother  Kessa,  how  he  was  beaten
in  the  war  that  ensued,  and  how  he  went  as  an  exile  to
the  court  of  Medb  in  Connaught.  There  he  became  the
father  of  several  of  Medb's  numerous  offspring,  and  he
acted  as  one  of  the  chief  leaders  of  Ailill  and  Medb's
expedition  into  Ulster.  When  they  reached  Ulster,  the
Ultonian  braves  were  in  their  couvade,  and  the  frontier
was  left  in  the  charge  of  Ciichulainn  and  his  father.
.But  when   at  last   the  Ultonians  career  forth  in  their


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.  G-17

war-chariots  and  pursue  the  western  foe  in  his  retreat,

Conohobar  and  Fergus  meet  face  to  face  in  battle,  and
the  former  reminds  the  latter  of  his  having  driven  him
forth  from  his  lands  and  inheritance  to  the  haunts  of  the
deer,  the  hare  and  the  fox :  we  seem  to  be  going  to  have
a  wordy  description  of  a  mighty  combat ;  but  the  epic
author  hesitates,  and  the  combatants  are  separated.1
So  he  leaves  unmodified  the  salient  fact  of  the  defeat
and  banishment  of  Fergus  by  Conchobar,  who  got  pos-
session of  his  kingdom  by  the  craft  of  his  mother.  The
comparison  with  the  Mac  Oc's  treatment  of  the  Dagda
and  Zeus's  dealings  with  regard  to  Cronus  is  obvious,
though  the  story  of  Fergus  went  further,  in  that  it  gave
him  a  second  lease  of  power  in  Ulster2  and  a  second
exile  in  the  west,  which  discloses  the  secret  of  the  myth
as  one  originally  referring  to  the  alternation  of  day  and
night.  One  of  the  gessa  or  prohibitions  which  Fergus
durst  not  violate  was  to  refuse  a  feast  offered  him,  which
may  perhaps  be  set  over  against  Thor's  eating  three  whole
oxen  at  supper,3  if  not  against  the  appetite  of  Cronus.

In  a  previous  lecture  it  was  suggested  that  Fergus  was
the  same  mythic  person  originally  as  Fergus  Fairge  or  the
Sea  Fergus,  and  the  connection  with  the  sea,  to  which  I
wish  now  to  call  your  attention,  is  by  no  means  confined  to
tins  instance  in  the  case  of  the  counterparts  of  Cronus.


1  Bk.  ofLeinder,  102  b ;  O'Curry,  ij.  321.

2  According  to  the  Bk.  of  the  Dim,  -22  a,  lie  regains  only  a  pari  of
his  kingdom,  the  Plain  of  Murthemne,  which  was  in  Cuehukunn's
charge;  but  two  other  versions  published  by  Stokes  and  Windisch  in
theii  TriiHshe  Texte,  ij.  212,  restore  to  Fergus  the  kingship  of  Ulster
without  any  qualification,  and  that  is  dearly  the  older  story.

3  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  222  ;  but  as  to  the  gen  of  Fergus,  see  Stokes
&  Windisch,  ij.  125,  129,  15G,  159.


648  71.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.

The  association  of  Cronus  with  the  sea  is  not  much  empha-
sized :  one  version  of  his  story  makes  him  sail  away  to  the
Isles  of  the  Blessed,  but  another  represents  him  wandering
for  a  long  time  on  sea,  and  at  last  arriving  on  the  west
coast  of  Italy,  whence  he  sailed  up  the  Tiber  as  far  as  the
Janiculum,  where  he  is  said  to  have  been  kindly  received
by  Janus  who  lived  there.1  For  the  Eomans  identified
Cronus,  and  doubtless  on  the  whole  correctly,  with  their
own  Saturn.  He  was  then  believed  to  have  taught  Janus
and  his  subjects  various  useful  arts,  such  as  that  of  ship-
building and  coining  money,  whence  the  Eoman  pieces
with  the  head  of  Janus  on  one  side  and  the  ship  of
Saturn  on  the  other ;  to  which  may  be  added  the  fact  that
the  cellar  beneath  the  latter's  temple  came  to  be  the
treasury  of  the  city.  Above  all,  Saturn  was  associated
in  many  ways  with  agriculture  :  thus  his  name  in  its
oldest  form  of  Saetumus  appears  to  have  referred  to
sowing;  and  the  practice  of  manuring  the  ground  was
traced  to  him,  whence  he  derived  such  epithets  as  Ster-
culus,  Stercutus  and  the  like.  Moreover,  the  Saturnalia
recalled  his  name,  and  the  Saturnia  Regna  or  the  golden
age  of  peace  and  plenty,  when  he  was  supposed  to  have
reigned.2  It  is  not  easy  to  determine  exactly  the  extent
of  the  influence  of  Greek  mythology  on  the  Saturn  legend
and  cult,  but  I  see  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  habit
of  associating  him  either  with  farming  or  shipping  was
an  imported  one.

My  object  in  dwelling  so  long  on  this  is  not  to  draw
another  parallel  between  Cronus  or  Saturn  and  Fergus

1  Vergil's  jEneid,  viij.  319-58  ;  Ovid's  Fasti,  i.  233-43,  v.  625-8.

2  Preller's  Bom.  Myth.  pp.  163,  409—415.


VI.     GODS:,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.  G49

in  his  connection  with  the  sea,  as  that  would  be  impos-
sible from  the  lack  of  data  relative  to  the  latter.  It
is  not  so,  hoAvever,  in  the  case  of  another  mythical
person,  in  whom  we  have,  as  I  wish  now  to  point  out,  a
third  representative  of  Cronus,  namely,  Nemed,  who  has
been  mentioned  in  the  earlier  portion  of  this  lecture
(p.  5S0).  from  which  I  must  now  repeat  two  or  three
remarks.  Nemed  was  one  of  the  earliest  colonizers  of
Erinn  after  the  flood ;  he  and  his  fleet  set  out  from  the
east ;  but  for  what  reason  they  left  their  own  country  we
arc,  I  believe,  nowhere  told.  They  wandered,  at  any  rate,
so  long  on  sea,  and  suffered  so  much  from  hunger  and
thirst,  that  only  a  mere  handful  landed  with  Nemcd  in
Erinn.  Now  Xemed's  Welsh  namesake  is,  as  already  men-
tioned, Nevyd,  the  builder  of  the  ship  in  which  a  man  and
a  woman,  Dwyvan  and  Dwyvach,  were  saved  when  the  rest
of  the  race  was  drowned.  He  it  is  also  to  whom  Welsh
poetry  ascribes,  under  the  kindred  name  of  Nevwy,  a  sort
of  Noachian  role;  and  he  is  likewise  called  Neivion,  which
lias  come  to  be  treated  as  the  Welsh  for  Neptune.  So
Nemed  and  Nevyct  taken  together  fully  reflect  the  naval
touch  in  the  story  of  Cronus.1    But  Cronus  is  represented

1  Possibly  they  might  be  said  to  do  more,  for  when  one  conies  to
examine  their  names  they  prove  to  be  derivatives  from  m  m  and  nev  or
nef,  the  Irish  and  Welsh  respectively  for  sky  or  heaven,  so  that  they
appear  to  have  described  their  bearers  as  in  some  way  connected  with
the  sky  or  heaven  :  in  what  way  it  would  be  difficult  to  decide.  But
one  explanation  is  readily  suggested  by  such  Creek  words  as  ovpai'ios
and  especially  OvpanViai,  which  referred  to  the  Titans  as  the  of&pring
of  Oiyxzvos.  Nevwy  will  be  found  in  the  Black  /•'/.-.,  the  Bh  of
Taliessin  and  the  Bed  Bh:  (Skene,  ij.  39,  147,  20G,  301).  In  the  third
of  these  passages  Neowy  is  seemingly  nsed  for  the  Irish  Nemed\  as  it
i>  brought  into  close  contact  with  Ard-nevon,  by  which  was  doubtless


650  vi.

received  by  Ehadamanthus  in  the  other  world,  and  this
also  has  a  sort  of  counterpart  in  the  story  about  Nemed,
or,  to  be  more  accurate,  in  a  story  about  a  Nemed  ;  for  the
stories  as  we  know  them  are  not  usually  regarded  as  in
any  way  connected.  Now  the  one  in  point  relates  how
Nemed  married  the  widow  of  the  murdered  king,  Conaire
the  Great,  who  has  been  treated  (p.  1 35)  as  one  of  the  forms
of  the  Celtic  Zeus,  and  how  Nemed,  sheltering  the  mur-
derer Ingce'l,  was  overwhelmed  with  him  in  the  vengeance
wreaked  on  them  by  Conaire' s  children,  the  three  Cairbres.
This  I  take  to  be  the  same  Nemed  as  the  early  colonizer,
differently  treated  in  a  story  belonging  to  a  different
cycle ;  and  his  marrying  Conaire' s  widow,  that  is  to  say
the  Dawn-goddess,  makes  him  into  a  god  of  darkness,  as
does  also  his  alliance  with  Ingcel ;  nor  need  it  occasion
any  surprise  that  Nemed  here  comes  before  us  more  as
the  chief  character  instead  of  appearing  as  a  new-comer
befriended  by  the  cyclops  Ingcel  (p.  135);  for  so  also
Cronus,  received  by  Ehadamanthus,  takes  rank  as  judge

meant  the  island  of  Ard-Nemid,  or  Nerned's  Height,  now  known  as
the  Great  Island,  near  Cork  {Four  Masters,  A.M.  2859,  note):  the
poet's  theme  was  Cadwaliawn's  return  from  Ireland.  Difficulty  attaches
to  Neivion  (also  Neivon),  for  the  "Welsh  Noah  is  called  in  a  Triad,
iij.  97,  Nevyd  Nav  Neivion,  where  possibly  Nevyd  Nav  may  be  com-
pared with  the  Irish  Nemed  mac  Nama,  which  sometimes  occur ;  but
it  is  probably  for  an  earlier  Nemed  Nama,  where  Nama  might  be
regarded  as  of  the  same  origin  as  Ndv.  In  any  case,  Nevyd  Nav  pro-
bably meant  'N.  the  Lord:'  compare  Vortigern,  interpreted  to  mean
a  supreme  lord  (p.  154).  Neivion  is  derived  from  Ndv,  and  forms  a
sort  of  reduplication  of  it  to  be  compared  with  March  Meircliion  and
the  like  (p.  271);  but  Neivion  is  also  used  alone  as  the  Welsh  for
Neptune ;  and  in  the  passage  from  the  Bk.  of  Taliessin  translated  at
p.  258  above,  it  would  seem  to  have  meant  'the  Lord,'  in  reference  to
the  Christ  of  the  line  immediately  following.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.  G51

above  the  latter.1  Irish  myelography  treats  Nemcd's
colonization  of  Ireland  as  only  the  second  after  the
deluge,  the  first  one  being  that  of  Partholon  of  unex-
plained name ;  but,  as  already  suggested,  there  is  every
reason  to  regard  his  story  and  that  of  Nemed  as  very
similar  to  one  another,  and  to  treat  what  is  said  of
the  one  as  mostly  applying  in  a  sense  to  the  other  like-
wise. Now  in  the  case  of  Partholon  the  reason  is  given
why  he  left  his  own  land,  and  why  his  people  died  out  in
Ireland :  it  was  because  he  had  killed  his  own  father.2
This  is  undoubtedly  an  Irish  version  of  Cronus  muti-
lating his  father  Uranus,  and  of  his  having  later  to
wander  on  the  high  seas.  In  the  course  of  these  remarks
I  have  set  over  against  Cronus  and  Saturn  no  less  than
four  Irish  personages,  the  Dagda,  Fergus,  Kerned  and
Partholon,  while  on  the  Welsh  side  allusion  has  been
made  chiefly  to  Nevyd,  to  whom  should  be  added  Yorti-
gern  driven  out  of  his  realm  by  the  boy  Merlin  Ambrosius.
Both  of  these  characters  (pp.  151-5)  history  misled  has
been,  as  already  explained,  in  the  habit  of  claiming  as  her
own.

These  remarks  would  lack  completeness  without  some
further  reference  to  the  representatives  of  Cronus  and
Saturn  in  Aryan  theologies  other  than  Celtic :  Thor  has
already  been  brought  into  the  comparison,  though  nothing
was  said  of  him  in  relation  to  the  sea.     Perhaps  you


1  Preller's  Or.  Myth.  i.  G71.

2  See  Keating,  pp.  68-9,  where,  it  is  right  to  explain,  the  historian
says  that  Partholon  had  killed  hoth  his  parents,  namely,  in  an  attempt
to  wrest  the  kingdom  from  his  brother.  The  source  whence  Keating
took  the  story  is  unknown  to  me,  so  I  cannot  say  how  far  the  histori-
cizing  of  the  myth  is  of  his  own  doing.


652  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

may  tliink  that  there  is  good  reason  for  the  silence,  that,
in  fact,  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  sea.  But  this
would  not  be  quite  right,  for  he  is  described  going  forth
on  a  memorable  occasion  in  a  boat  to  fish,  and  one  of  the
names  applied  to  him  was  Jciola  valdi,  keel-wielder  or
master  of  the  ship,1  not  to  mention  that  he  was  invoked
in  perils  at  sea,  and  that  one  of  the  colonisers  of  Iceland  is
represented  consulting  Thor's  oracle  as  to  the  spot  where
he  should  land  and  settle.2  Thor,  however,  was  not  the
only  Teutonic  counterpart  of  Cronus ;  for,  as  was  pointed
out  on  another  occasion,  Zeus  has  his  counterpart  not
only  in  Tyr,  but  also  probably  in  the  Swedish  Frey,  or  the
1  Lord ;'  and  so  Frey's  father  would  have  as  much  right,
to  say  the  least  of  it,  to  be  set  over  against  Cronus  and
the  Dagda  as  Thor.  This  is  borne  out  by  what  Norse
literature  says  of  Morclr,  for  that  was  his  name.  Thus
Niorctr,  who  was  himself  one  of  the  "Wanes  and  not  of  the
Anses,  was  the  father  of  Frey,  who  is  called  the  best
among  the  Anses,3  just  as  Cronus  the  Titan  was  the  father
of  Zeus  the  god.  Mord:r  came  among  the  Anses  as  the
hostage  of  the  Wanes,  and  in  the  Doom  of  the  Age  he
was  to  return  to  them ; 4  but  the  Wanes  were  the  enemies
of  the  Anses,  and  they  made  the  first  war  on  them  when
they  broke  into  the  Anses'  burgh.  The  Doom  of  the  Age
means  the  final  contest  and  overthrow  of  the  Anses  by
Swart  and  his  allies,  so  that  indirectly  the  latter  are  iden-
tified in  a  manner  with  the  Wanes,  who  in  any  case  take

1  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  222.

2  See  Vigfusson  &  Powell's  Corpus,  i.  412,  where  they  quote  from
the  Landndma  Bole  a  passage  which  will  be  found  at  pp.  148-9  (iij.
14,  1-3)  of  the  first  volume  of  their  Icelandic  Origins.

3  lb.  i.  106.  4  lb.  i.  60.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    IIEROl  653

up  a  position  in  Norse  mythology  analogous  to  that  of

tlic  Titans  in  Greek  and  of  the  Fir  ISolg  in  Irish :   it

follows  that  the  presence  of  Nibrdr  for  a  time  among

the  Anses,  and  his  finally  taking  sides  with  the  Wanes

in  their  war  against  the  Anses,  may  be  compared  with

the  Titan  Cronus  ruling  over  the  gods  until  he  and  the

other  Titans  were  utterly  routed.    So  much  of  the  darker

side  of  Niordr's  character;    and  as  to  his  connect  ion

with  the  sea,  an  Aristophanic  touch  in  one  of  the  Eddie

poems1  identifies  him  with  it.     Further,  a  fragment  of  a

lost  poem2  describes  a  difficulty  between  Nibrdr  and  his

consort  Skadi,  who  as  a  great  huntress  was  fond  of  the

rocks  and  the  mountains,  while  her  husband  loved  the

sea.     As  regards  Niordr's  attitude  towards  man,  both  ho

and  Frey  were  held  to  be  the  givers  of  wealth,3  and  the

father  is  referred  to  in  terms  that  would  have  applied

equally  to  Thor,  as  the  guileless  helper  of  man;4  and  he

was  invoked  at  sea  as  the  ruler  of  the  wind  and  the  waves.

The  order  of  the  toasts  at  the  public  festivals  was  that

the  first  should  be  drunk  to  "Woden  :  next  came  Niordr's

toast  and  Frey's  for  good  seasons  and  peace.5     Lastly,

with  regard  to  Niordr's  cult,  he  is  represented  as  ruling

over  countless  temples  and  high  places;6  and  at  Nbatun,

where  he  had  built  him  a  hall,  he  has  a  high-timbered

altar-place.7

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  Yedic  pantheon  of  the  ancient
Hindus,  and  sec  what  great  figure  there  takes  up  a  posi-


1  The  Loka-senna:  see  tho  Corpus  Poet.  Bt>r.  i.  106.

2  Corpus  Poet.  Bur.  i.  12G  ;  see  also  Simrock,  \>.  293.

3  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  274.  4  lb.  i.  71;  Simrock,  p.  293.
B  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  404.          6  lb.  i.  6G.  •  lb.  i.  71.


G54  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

tion  like  that  of  Cronus  and  his  counterparts  in  the  theo-
logies of  the  Western  Aryans.  One  soon  lights  on  Yama
as  showing  a  certain  similarity  to  the  character  we
are  in  quest  of.  His  name,  according  to  Vedic  scholars,
means  '  a  twin  ; ' 2  he  is  represented  as  the  first  man,  and
his  sister  and  wife2  Yami  as  the  first  woman.  This
double  relationship  reminds  one  of  a  reproach  made
by  Loki  to  the  Norse  Morclr.3  "Now  Yama  as  the  first
man  was  the  first  of  the  dead,4  so  he  functions  as  their
lord  and  king ;  but  he  is  not  satisfied  with  the  number
of  the  subjects  he  has.  He  is  accordingly  described
actively  engaged  in  adding  to  their  number ;  so  he  is  not
only  king  of  the  dead,  but  also  death.5  He  is  sometimes
represented  as  personally  fetching  the  dead  or  making
himself  the  i/^xotto^ttos.6  He  had,  however,  two  terrible
hounds,  described  as  guardians  of  the  road  to  him,7  and
sometimes  as  his  messengers  wandering  forth  among  men
in  quest  of  those  about  to  die.8  The  way  to  Yama's
home  was  long,  and  a  canoe  to  cross  a  river  is  men-
tioned.9 He  is  said  in  the  Big-Veda  to  have  crossed
the  rapid  waters,  to  have  shown  the  way  to  many,  and
to  have  first  known  the  path  taken  by  the  fathers  in
crossing  subsequently.10     The  protecting  aid  also  of  a

1  B.  &  Koth's  Diet.  s.  v.  Yama.

2  Bergaigne's  Religion  Vedique,  i.  90  (Rig-Veda,  x.  10,  3).

3  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  106.

4  Ziramer's  Altindisches  Leben  (Berlin,  1879),  p.  421.

6  Bergaigne,  i.  85,  90-2 ;  Zimmer's  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  422  (R.
Ved.  ix.  113,  8,  x.  14,  1,  x.  165,  4).
6  Bergaigne,  ibid.  7  lb.  i.  93  (R.  Ved.  x.  14,  10-12).

8  Zimmer,  p.  422  (R.  Ved.  ibid.).       9  lb.  p.  409  (R.  Ved.  x.  63, 10).
10  Max  Midler's  Lectures*,  ij.  563  (R.  Ved,  x.  14,  1  &  2).


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  BER0E8.         655

god  called  Pfishan  is  sometimes  described  as  requisite:1
in  what  relation  the  latter  stood  to  Yama  does  not  very

clearly  appear,  but  at  any  rate  there  was  no  guide  like
him,  as  he  was  familiar  with  all  ways  and  paths,  includ-
ing that  which  the  dead  had  to  pursue.  lie  was  besides
the  guardian  of  the  flock  and  the  augmentor  of  wealth,
and  in  his  love  for  his  sister  Siirya,  the  Sun,  he  stood
on  the  level  of  Yama.  But  then  he  was  an  ancient  god
who  had  lost  his  teeth,  and  therefore  lived,  like  the  Dagda,
on  porridge  or  pap,  and  used,  like  Thor,  to  be  drawn  by
goats  when  he  chose  to  drive  forth  in  his  glory.2  To  come
back  to  the  dead,  their  destination  was  the  abode  of  Yama,
which  is  called  the  house  of  the  gods  and  Hades  : 3  it  Mas
far  aloft  in  a  remote  quarter  of  the  three-storied  heaven4
of  which  fancy  made  this  nether  world  the  under  structure.
There  in  that  heaven  of  his,  Yama  sits  drinking  with  the
gods  under  a  widely  spreading  tree  with  large  leaves,
and  there  he  welcomes  the  fathers  of  the  human  race  to
share  the  delights  of  a  land  whose  every  brook  runs  with
honey,  whose  heavenly  cows,  that  kick  not,  offer  their
milk  of  their  own  accord,  whose  pleasures  lack  nought  of
the  delights  of  the  harem,  and  whose  dwellers  never  suffer
from  old  age  or  decay.5  In  the  like  manner,  Zend  litera-
ture makes  Yima,  the  Zend  namesake  of  Yama,  inaugu-
rate a  golden  age  during  which  the  human  race  enjoyed
itself  in  his  spacious  paradise  in  immunity  from  death.
until  Yima  by  lying  lost  his  majesty,  and  with  it  his
dominion,  which,  together  with  Yima's  life,  was  taken

1  Zimmer,  p.  409.

2  B.  &  Roth's  Diet  s.v.  Pushan  (R.  Ved  x.  17,  3-4,  x.  17,  G).

3  Zimmer,  p.  410  (/?.  Ved.  i.  35,  G,  x.  135,  7).

4  Bergaigne,  i.  85;  Zimmer,  p.  409.  5  Zimmer,  pp.  410-13.


056  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

by  the  dragon  Dahaka.1  The  end  of  Yima  recalls  Adam
as  the  first  of  men  and  lord  of  the  Garden  of  Eden
till  he  was  expelled,  owing  to  the  wiles  of  the  serpent,
and  became  subject  to  death.  "What  may  be  the  exact
relationship  between  the  two  stories  is  a  question  which
does  not  concern  the  present  subject;  but  they  prove
beyond  a  doubt  that  Hebrew  and  Persian  ideas  must
have,  some  time  or  other,  come  in  contact  with  one
another.  All  this,  however,  leaves  us  in  considerable
uncertainty  as  to  the  relative  positions  of  Puskan  and
Yama ;  but  the  former  as  the  world's  herdsman  who
never  loses  a  beast2  may  be  compared  with  Yspyctaden's
shepherd  (p.  488),  and  perhaps  with  the  Norse  god
Heimdal,  while  Yama  is  left  us  to  compare  with  Cronus
and  the  Dagda.  At  any  rate,  Yama's  being  considered
the  first  man  to  have  died  cannot  be  reckoned  as  radically
distinguishing  him  from  the  other  dark  gods.  For  the
model  on  which  they  were,  one  and  all,  fashioned  in  the
first  instance  by  fear  and  fancy  was  probably  that  of  the
dead  ancestor,  as  the  nature  of  the  sacrifices  with  which
different  nations  have  been  wont  to  propitiate  them  would
seem  to  indicate.

Having  touched  on  Yama,  there  are  reasons,  as  will
appear  later,  why  I  should  say  a  little  more  about  him,
so  I  begin  with  the  habit  which  Sanskrit  mythology
has  of  associating,3  not  to  say  confounding,  Yama  and

1  Justi's  Handbuch  der  Zcndsprache,  s.  v.  Yima.

2  See  the  Rig -Veda,  x.  17,  3,  where  Ludwig  has  Vieh,  though
Grassmann  preferred  tin  Reich :  the  original  is  anashtapacur,  which  L>.
&  Roth  render — der  von  seiner  Heerde  nichts  verliert.

3  See  Max  Midler's  Lectures*,  ij.  561,  where  he  quotes  the  Rig-Veda,
x.  14,  7.


TT.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.         G07

Varuna  with  one  anotlior.  This  implies  locating  both
Yama  and  Varuna  in  the  skies,  and  it  involves  at  least
two  distinct  questions.  One  is  that  of  the  use  in  Sanskrit
literature  of  the  name  Varuna  as  that  of  a  great  god,
instead  of  letting  it  sink  into  comparative  disrepute  like
Uranus.  This  has  been  touched  upon  before  (p.  181),
and  the  case  was  put  from  a  Western  Aryan's  point  of
view,  as  though  Varuna  had  exchanged  places  with
Dyaus,  the  counterpart,  etymologically  speaking,  of  Zeus
and  Tyr.  Neither  Dyaus,  however,  nor  Varuna  is  out
of  place  in  the  skies ;  but  how  comes  Yama  to  be  there  ?
how  comes  the  ruler  of  the  dead  and  his  subjects  to  bo
aloft,  and  not  in  some  region  below  ?  That  is  the  other
question  I  had  in  view ;  but  I  have  no  answer  except
that  cremation  would  seem  naturally  to  point  upwards,
and  especially  the  idea  that  the  dead  vanished  aloft  with
the  flames  of  the  funeral  pile.1  Possibly  one  ought  not
to  leave  altogether  out  of  the  reckoning  the  sultriness  of
Indian  climate,  which  makes  the  dweller  on  the  plain
sigh  for  the  hills,  and  the  English  official  migrate,  if  he
can,  to  their  breezier  heights  every  year  as  the  hot  season
sets  in.  Perhaps  it  was  also  partly  an  idea  derived
from  some  non- Aryan  race  with  which  the  Aryan  con-
queror of  India  came  into  close  contact.  But  whatever
the  reason  may  have  been,  there  is  no  denying  the  fact
that  the  aristocratic  authors  of  the  hymns  of  the  Rig-
Veda  set  their  faces  against  the  idea  of  going  below  after
death.  Sanskrit  scholars  tell  us  that,  some  time  or  other
after  the  Vedic  period,  Yama  came  to  be  regarded  as  lord

1  This  would  seum  to  be  M.  Bergaignc's  view,  i.  78-9.

2  u


C58  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND   HEROES.

and  king  of  the  dead  in  the  nether  world.1  This  may  be
true  in  the  limited  sense  that  the  idea  of  Yama  reign-
ing over  the  dead  in  the  nether  world  finds  no  explicit
expression  in  the  Eig-Yeda ;  but  to  convince  a  student
of  Aryan  mythology  as  a  whole,  that  such  an  idea  only
grew  up  in  India  posterior  to  the  Yedic  times,  would,
it  seems  to  me,  be  out  of  the  question ;  nor,  in  fact,  did
the  authors  of  the  Eig  succeed  in  keeping  it  wholly  out
of  their  hymns.  Thus  one  of  them,  speaking  of  inhuma-
tion, says  that  the  tomb  should  drip  with  butter,  in  other
words,  that  it  should  be  well  supplied  with  the  proper
food  for  the  dead;  and  another  breathes  a  prayer  to
Yama  that  he  and  the  Pitaras  or  ancestors  might  be
pleased  to  make  the  dwelling  of  the  dead  in  the  tomb  stead-
f  ast.2-  These  are  traces  of  a  belief  which  probably  obtained
among  the  people  at  the  time  when  the  Yedic  priests
looked  forward  to  an  Elysium  on  high,  whither  the  smoke
of  the  funeral  pile  wafted  the  deceased,  with  the  aid  of
the  fire-god  Agni,  who  was  the  natural  ^vxo7ropro's  of  this
system.  Hence  it  followed  that  the  sun  was  considered
one  of  the  principal  abodes  of  the  dead,  and  that  Agni,
supposed  to  descend  from  heaven  and  to  take  mankind
away,  came  to  be  regarded  as  intimately  connected
with  the  origin  of  the  human  race.3  The  incompati-
bility of  the  two  views  is  placed  in  very  clear  light  in
connection  with  the  question,  whither  those  Pitaras  had

1  B.  &  Roth's  Sansk.  Did.  s.  v.  Yama  :  '  Die  nachvedische  Zeit
sieht  in  ihm  den  Beherrscher  der  Todten  in  der  Unterwelt  und  fasst
seinen  Namen  als  Randiger.'

2  Bergaigne,  i.  77,  91  (R.  Ved.  x.  18,  10-13).

3  lb.  i.  82-3  (R.  Ved.  i.  109,  7,  i.  125,  6,  x.  107,  2).


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.  C59

gone  who  had  not  been  cremated  hut  buried  in  the
earth.  According  to  one  account,  they  had  gone  aloft,
but  according  to  another,  that  could  not  be.1  So  even
the  hymns  of  the  Kig-Veda  may  be  taken  as  indirectly
proving  in  a  variety  of  ways,  that  Yama  did  not  origin-
ally dwell  on  high,  though  the  view  predominant  in  them,
and  mainly  representative  of  the  cremation  period,  trans-
ports him  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Yaruna.  Before  clos-
ing these  remarks  on  Yama,  I  would  revert  for  a  moment
to  his  double  character  of  one  of  the  dead,  namely,  their
king,  and  of  one  actively  engaged  in  adding  to  their
number,  whereby  he  assumes  the  part  of  Death — an  asso-
ciation of  ideas  not  unfamiliar  to  the  Celts  (p.  567),  as,
for  example,  when  the  Bretons  give  Death  as  one  of  his
names  that  of  arMaro,  which  literally  means  the  Dead  One.
It  is  this  double  role  of  King  of  a  Golden  Age  and  of
grim  Death,  that  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  key  to  the  in-
compatible attributes  of  Beli,  of  Fergus  as  the  friend  of
Ciichulainn  and  the  ally  of  Ailill  with  his  Fir  Bolg,  of
Niordr  as  a  benignant  god  and  as  a  Wane  hostile  to  the
Anses,  and  of  Cronus  as  ruler  of  the  Happy  Isles  and  as
a  cruel  Titan  of  revolting  voracity.

Sanskrit  mythology  is  not  content  with  one  origin  of
the  human  race,  for  besides  Yama  and  other  offspring,
Vivasvant,  their  father,  had  a  son  called  Manu.  lie  was
the  mythic  legislator  of  the  Hindus,  and  his  name  signi-
fies Man :  how  he  was  the  ancestor  of  men  is  explained
by  the  story  of  a  deluge  occurring  in  his  days.  This
was  predicted  to  him  by  a  fish2  whose  life  he  spared  on

1  Bergaigno,  i.  78-9,  83-4  (Biff-Veda,  ix.  83,  1,  x.  15,  14).

2  With  this  prescient  fish  should  perhaps  be  compared  the  Irish
Salmon  of  Knowledge  (p.  554) ;  but  Manu  was  warned  about  the

2  u2


660  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

its  being  accidentally  brought  to  him  one  morning  in  the
water  with  which  he  was  to  wash.  The  fish  advised
Manu  to  build  him  an  ark ;  and  when  he  entered  it,  at  the
coming  of  the  deluge,  the  fish  undertook  to  guide  the  ark
to  the  place  where  it  was  to  remain  until  the  waters  sub-
sided. When  at  length  Manu  was  able  to  leave  the  ark,
he  meditated  and  sacrificed  to  the  waters,  pouring  into
them  libations  of  clarified  butter,  milk,  whey  and  curds,
until  at  the  end  of  a  year's  time  there  came  forth  a
lovely  maiden,  emerging  from  the  midst  of  the  libations,
with  which  she  was  all  dripping.  She  told  Manu  that
she  was  his  daughter,  for  he,  she  said,  had  brought  her
into  being  by  his  prayers  and  sacrifices  of  clarified  butter,
milk,  whey  and  curds,  which  he  had  thrown  into  the  waters.
She  was  called  Ida ;  she  became  Manu's  wife  and  bore
him  children.1  Manu,  though  reckoned  among  divine
beings,  figures  in  Sanskrit  as  man  par  excellence,  and  he
was  regarded  as  the  father  of  men  ;2  while  in  Greek  the
literal  namesake  of  Manu-s  was  MtWs.  Now  Minos
was  the  mythic  ruler  and  legislator  of  ancient  Crete :

deluge  as  a  reward  for  his  kindness  to  the  fish,  which  reminds  one
of  Welsh  stories  about  stranded  mermaids  on  being  helped  to  the  sea
warning  the  fishermen  who  show  kindness  to  them  of  the  coming  of
storms,  or  else  leaving  their  captors  a  piece  of  homely  and  useful  advice :
see  the  Cymmrodor,  v.  119-20,  and  the  story  of  Tibal  in  the  Kil-
kenny Arch.  Society's  Journal  for  1852-3,  p.  32;  Manx  Soc.  xv.  129.
Compare  also  Norse  stories  to  much  the  same  effect  about  captured
mermen,  and  see,  for  example,  Vigfusson  &  Powell's  Corpus,  ij.  359;
also  their  Icelandic  Origins,  i.  54  (ij.  5,  2),  and  the  legend  of  Half  in
liafn's  Fornaldar  Sogur,  ij.  31-3.  It  is  needless  to  relate  the  story  of
Proteus  caught  by  Menelaus  :  see  the  Odyssey,  iv.  382  &  seq.

1  Max  Midler's  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature  (London,
1860),  pp.  425-27  (Qatapathabrahmana,  i.  8.  1,  1).

2  B.  &  Koth's  Diet.  s.  v.  Manu.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.  GG1

he  was  a  potentate  of  great  power,  acquired  by  means
of  his  fleet;  but  though  Greek  mythology  has  several
deluges  to  speak  of,  it  does  not  associate  any  of  them  with
Minos  ;  it  does,  however,  with  Deucalion,  who,  according
to  some  accounts,  was  son  of  Minos.  For  Zeus  is  said  to
have  become  so  enraged  with  the  human  race  that  he
determined  to  sweep  it  off  the  face  of  the  earth.  So
Deucalion  was  warned  by  Prometheus,  whose  son  he  is
sometimes  called — hence  it  is  that  some  take  two  Deuca-
lions  for  granted — and  counselled  him  to  prepare  himself
by  building  him  an  ark.  Deucalion  did  as  he  had  been
advised,  and  he  became  the  father  of  a  son  Hellen,  the
eponymus  of  the  Hellenic  people.1  On  the  other  hand,
the  story  of  Ida  has  an  unmistakable  counterpart  in  Greek
literature  in  that  of  the  foam-born  Aphrodite ;  and  from
the  Hindu  version,  together  with  the  fate  of  the  Norse
Ilymi  (p.  115),  one  may  conclude  that  the  churning  of
the  ocean  which  resulted  from  the  mutilation  of  Uranus
and  ended  with  the  evolution  of  Aphrodite,  was  part
and  parcel  of  the  mythic  event  which  Celts,  Teutons  and
Hindus  regarded  as  a  deluge,  that  which  one  may  briefly
term  the  Aryan  flood.  Nay,  it  is  by  no  means  impro-
bable that  it  is  the  part  ascribed  to  Minos  in  a  lost
Greek  story  about  that  deluge,  such  as  his  making  an
ark,  entering  it  and  wandering  in  it  on  the  face  of  the
deep  till  it  moored  itself  in  Crete,  that  formed  the  basis
of  the  euhemcristic  account  of  him  as  a  great  naval
potentate.  Lastly,  as  Cronus  was  sometimes  associated
with  Ehadamanthus  and  the  departed,  so  was  Minos  even
more ;  for  the  double  aspect  of  the  powers  of  the  other

1  Apulludurus,  Bibliolltcca,  i.  7.  1,  iii.  1.1.


6G2        VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.

world  is  reflected  in  his  story :  Minos  was  not  only-
reckoned  brother  to  Rhadamanthus,  but  he  became  him-
self a  judge  of  the  dead,  an  office  in  which  he  enjoyed  a
reputation  for  the  most  complete  impartiality,  whereas
he  was  regarded  during  his  life  in  this  world  as  the  cruel
tyrant  who  exacted  from  Athens  a  tribute  of  boys  and
girls  to  be  devoured  underground  by  the  Minotaur,  a
monster  with  a  human  body  and  a  bovine  head.  With
this  Cretan  Fomor  compare  the  horse-headed  More,  or
March,  and  his  Fomorian  fleets,  with  their  head-quarters
on  Tory  Island,  exacting  from  the  men  of  Erinn  a  tribute
consisting,  besides  other  grievous  exactions,  of  two-thirds
of  their  children  every  year  as  the  Winter  Calends  came
round  (p.  584).  The  story  of  Cuchulainn  slaying  the
three  Fomori  who  came  on  November-eve  to  cany  away
the  King  of  the  Isles'  daughter  (p.  464),  reduces  the
tribute  to  a  single  person,  and  forms  a  connecting  link
between  the  Celtic  idea  of  Fomorian  demons  and  the
dragon  of  the  stories  of  our  childhood.

Let  us  now  take  the  words  Manns  and  MiVw-s  as  our
clue  and  see  if  we  can  identify  any  others  here  in  point.
First  may  be  mentioned  Manes  or  Manis,  said  to  have
been  the  name  of  an  ancestral  king  of  the  Phrygians ; 1
but  the  connection  remains  doubtful,  and  one  is  safer
under  the  guidance  of  Tacitus  in  the  Germama,  where
he  mentions  Mannus  as  the  ancestor  of  the  ancient
Germans,  and  as  the  son  of  Teuto  or  Tuisco.  We  are
not  told  whether  he  was  reckoned  a  giant  or  a  god ;  but
the  position  given  him  in  the  pedigree  hardly  suggests
that  he  was  regarded  as  a  mere  man ;  while  he  who

1  Plutarch,  De  Mde  et  Osiride,  xxiv. ;  Fick3,  i.  166.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.  663

escaped  the  deluge,  occasioned  by  the  mutilation  of  tho
cosmic  person  of  Hymi  in  the  Norse  story  (p.  115),  is
named  Ber-gelmix  and  called  a  wise  giant,1  which  excludes
him  from  being  one  of  the  Anses,  just  as  Cronus  and  his
brothers  were  Titans,  and  not  of  the  number  of  the  gods
strictly  so-called.  It  is  not  said,  however,  that  he  saved
the  human  race  in  his  ark ;  but  that  the  original  story
was  to  that  effect,  may  be  inferred  from  the  cognate  ones
in  Greek  and  in  Welsh.  In  the  latter  the  name  found
given  to  the  rescuer  of  the  human  race  is  Ncvyd ;  but
the  one  we  are  now  seeking  should  be  the  etymological
counterpart  of  the  Greek  and  Sanskrit  forms  serving  as
our  clue,  and  traces  of  it  offer  themselves  in  the  Welsh
Manawyctan  and  the  Irish  Manannan.  Now  the  latter
is  fabled  to  have  been  the  name  of  the  first  king  of  the
Isle  of  Man,  whence  that  appellation  has  sometimes
been  assumed  to  be  derived.  But  this  is  an  error,  and
it  inverts  the  relation  of  the  names ;  for  the  matter
is  not  as  simple  as  it  looks.  It  comes  briefly  to  this :
Manann&n  gave  his  original  name,  in  a  form  corre-
sponding to  Manu  and  its  congeners,  to  the  island,  making
it  Manavia  Insula  or  Mtvwi'a  N^o-os,  as  it  were,  for  which
we  have  in  Welsh  and  Irish  respectively  Manaw  and
Manann?     Then. from  these  names  of  the  island  the  god


1  Corpus  Poet.  Bor.  i.  6G.

2  Manann  (also  written  Manand)  is  the  genitive,  but  it  is  also  used
as  the  nominative,  which  should  have  been  Mann  :  compare  the  case  of
Danann,  p.  89.  But  a  dative  Mane  implies  another  nominative,  which
Stokes  (Celtic  Declension,  p.  18)  doubtfully  reads  Manavia  t'"r  Pliny's
Monapia,  while  Manu,  Manann,  should  stand  for  an  earlier  Manavjv,
Manavjunos.  "Welsh  seems  likewise  to  have  had  two  forms  of  tho
name:  wo  have  one  in  the  attested  Manaw  for  an  early  Manavis  or


6G4         VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.


')


derives  his,  in  its  attested  forms  of  Manawydan  and
Manannan,  which  would  seem  to  mark  an  epoch  when
he  had  become  famous  in  connection  with  the  Isle  of  Man.
The  name  Manaw  or  Manann,  however,  was  not  confined
to  the  island,  as  it  is  found  fixed  also  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  Forth,  where  it  survives  in  Clackmannan  on
the  north  and  in  Sl&mannan  Moor  on  the  south  of  that
river.1  As  to  Manannan's  attributes,  no  story  is  known
to  associate  him  with  the  deluge ;  but  he  was  regarded
as  a  god  of  the  sea,  and  we  read  of  him  in  Cormac's
Glossary,2  as  follows :  "  Manannan  mac  Lir,  a  celebrated
merchant  who  was  in  the  Isle  of  Mann.  He  was  the  best
pilot  that  was  in  the  west  of  Europe.  He  used  to  know
by  studying  the  heavens  [i.  e.  using  the  sky],  the  period
which  would  be  the  fine  weather  and  the  bad  weather,
and  when  each  of  these  two  times  would  change.  Inde
Scoti  et  Brittones  eum  deum  vocaverunt  maris,  et  inde
filium  maris  esse  dixerunt,  i.  e.  mac  Mr,  '  son  of  sea.'  Et
de  nomine  Manannan  the  Isle  of  Mann  dictus  est."  To
this  euhemeristic  account  of  the  god,  O'Donovan  has
added  the  following  note:  "He  was  son  of  Allot,  one
of  the  Tuatha  De*  Danann  chieftains.  He  was  otherwise
called  Orbsen,  whence  Loch  Orbsen  now  Lough  Corrib.
He  is  still  vividly  rememberd  in  the  mountainous  district
of  Deny  and  Donegal,  and  is  said  to  have  an  enchanted
castle  in  Lough  Foyle.  According  to  the  traditions  in
the  Isle  of  Man  and  the  Eastern  counties  of  Leinster
this  first  man  of  Man  rolled  on  three  legs  like  a  wheel

Manavja ;  and  Manawydan  testifies  to  a  longer  one,  Manawyd,  for  an
early  Manavija.

1  Celtic  Britain,  p.  154.         a  The  Stokes-O'Donovan  ed.  p.  114.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.  005


through  the  mist,"  But  in  Irish  literature  he  figures
mostly  as  the  chief  of  the  fairies  in  the  Land  of  Promise
(p.  355).  Of  course  his  character  was  as  self-contradic-
tory as  that  of  Cronus,  for  he  appears  mostly  as  the  tricky
druid  of  the  other  world ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  things
were  so  managed  at  his  court  that  no  one's  food  there
would  get  cooked  if,  while  it  was  on  the  fire,  one  told  a
story  which  was  untrue ; l  and  it  is  to  Manannan  we  are
perhaps  to  ascribe  the  banishment  of  three  men  from
fairy-land  to  the  Irish  court  of  Tara :  they  were,  we  arc
told,  to  remain  there  for  the  space  of  three  reigns  as  a
punishment  for  lying  or  acting  unjustly.2  In  the  "Welsh
Mabinogi,  bearing  the  name  of  Manannan's  counterpart
Manawychm,  the  latter  is  not  much  associated  with  the
sea,  excepting  perhaps  his  sojourn  with  Bran's  Head  in  the
lonely  island  of  Gresholm  (p.  90).  It  makes  him,  however,
take  to  agriculture,  especially  the  growing  of  wheat,3
which  reminds  one  of  Saturn.  He  is  also  called  one  of
the  three  Golden  Cordwainers  of  Britain,  owing  to  his
having  engaged  successively  in  the  making  of  saddles,
shields  and  shoes,  and  taught  it  to  Prydcri,  son  of  Pwytt
Head  of  Hades.4     This  may  perhaps  be  set  over  against

1  Kilkenny  Soc.  1852-3,  pp.  32-4;  Manx  Soc.  xv.  134.

2  See  the  story  of  Brw.len  da  Derga  in  the  B/c.  of  the  Dun,  9Ga,  b.

3  R.  B.  Mob.  pp.  52-3;  Guest,  iij.  175.

4  R.  B.  Mab.  47-9,  52  ;  Guest,  iij.  167-9,  174  ;  Triads,  i.  77  -  ij.  58.
The  first  of  the  Mabinogion  passages  referred  to  contains  a  mythic
account  of  the  origin  of  the  Celtic  art  of  enamelling,  for  some  references
to  which,  see  Elton's  Origins  of  English  History,  p.  305.  The  great
place  given  to  certain  of  the  useful  arts  in  the  Mabinogi  of  Manawyttan
is  in  some  degree  clue  perhaps  to  a  false  etymology  associating  with  his
name  the  "Welsh  for  an  awl,  which  is  mjnawijd  (Breton  menaoued,


666  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND   HEROES.


Saturn  instructing  Janus  in  the  arts  of  building  ships
and  coining  money.1  The  sinister  aspect  of  Mananniin
is  scarcely  reflected  by  ManawycTan,  who  is  represented
as  gentle,  scrupulously  just,  and  always  a  peacemaker ;
neither  is  he  described  as  a  magician;  but  he  is  made
to  baffle  utterly  one  of  the  greatest  wizards  known  to
Welsh  literature.2  His  connection  with  the  other  world
is  to  be  inferred,  among  other  things,  from  his  marked
attachment  to  his  brother  Bran,3  the  terrene  god  men-
tioned in  the  first  lecture  (p.  94).  Further  ManawycTan,
like  Cronus  vagrant,  figures  as  one  of  the  three  landless
monarchs  of  Britain.4  This  description  only  ceases  to
be  altogether  applicable  to  him  when,  late  in  life,  he
becomes  the  husband  of  Ehiannon,  widow  of  Pwyir  Head
of  Hades,  and  accepts  as  his  own  a  district  in  the  territory
of  Pwytt's  son  and  successor  Pryderi.  How  he  came  to  be
without  land  and  without  power  is  partially  explained
in  the  Mabinogion:  while  Manawydan  was  away  with
his  brother  Bran,  possession  was  taken  of  the  throne
of  this  country  by  their  kinsman  Caswaiiawn  son  of  Beli
(p.  153).  For  Caswaiiawn  had  put  on  a  magic  tartan
that  made  him  all  invisible  except  the  sword  with  which

mod.  Irish  meanadh).  So  one  sometimes  finds  him  called  Manawyt
(with  a  t  not  standing  for  d),  as  in  the  Bks.  of  Aneurin  and  Taliessin  :
see  Skene,  ij.  63  and  155,  in  the  latter  of  which  Manawyt  and  Pryderi
are  associated  with  Caer  Sidi  (p.  249).

1  Preller's  Rom.  Myth"2,  p.  411.

2  R.  B.  Mob.  pp.  53-8;  Guest,  iij.  175-84.

3  He  appears  very  sparingly  in  Irish  as  Manannan's  brother :  he  is
called  '  Bron,  the  son  of  Allott,  and  brother  of  Mananann  [sic]  mac  Lir,
by  Brash,  who,  p.  210,  cites  the  manuscript  Bk.  of  Lecain.

4  R.  B.  Mob.  p.  44  j  Guest,  iij.  163  ;  Triads,  i.  14  =  ij.  35  =  iij.  38.


VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.  GC7

he  cut  down  all  resistance  to  his  rule.1  This  garb  of
invisibility  lias  its  counterpart  in  the  invisible  cloak
sometimes  ascribed  to  Aengus,  perhaps  also  in  his  port-
able glass  bower,  and  even  in  the  pellucid  walls  of
Merlin's  prison.  So  Caswattawn  clad  in  the  invisi-
bility of  his  magic,  is  the  Celtic  Zeus  surrounded  with
unapproachable  brilliance  driving  away  his  enemies,
among  whom  we  here  find  Manawyctan.

What  the  enchanted  palace  of  Mananndn  in  Lough
Foyle  may  have  resembled,  I  have  nowhere  read ;  but
the  strangest  thing  said  of  Manawydan  is,  that  it  was
he  that  caused  to  be  built  the  Stronghold  of  Oeth  and
Annoeth.  This  is  described  as  a  huge  prison-house
of  the  shape  of  a  bee -hive,  nor  was  it  seemingly
much  less  elaborate  in  its  numerous  compartments
both  above  and  below  the  ground.  The  walls  of  tho
dismal  edifice  consisted  wholly  of  human  bones  built  with
mortar.  The  euhemerist,2  however,  explains  it  to  have
been  meant  for  prisoners  taken  in  war  and  for  male-
factors, the  cells  under-ground  being  specially  reserved
for  those  guilty  of  treason  against  the  state ;  but  we  read
nothing  of  the  kind  in  the  Mabinogion,  where  Glewlwyd
Gavaelvawr  boasts  of  his  having  been  there;  and  the
Triads  only  tell  us  that  Arthur  was  once  incarcerated


1  R.  D.  Mob.  pp.  41,  44  ;  Guest,  iij.  126,  162-3 ;  see  also  p.  153  of
this  volume,  where  Caswattawn  should  not  have  been  called  a  solar
hero  without  some  qualification ;  for  he  seems  to  combine  inseparably
the  attributes  of  a  Celtic  sun  hero  with  those  of  a  Celtic  Zeus.

2  I  mean  the  author,  in  the  Ldo  MSS.  pp.  187,  599,  of  the  only-
account  I  know  of  the  Prison  of  Oeth,  &c. ;  however  mistaken  he  was
in  his  views,  the  tract  is  valuable  and  curious.  See  also  the  Gorugiau
Triplets  in  the  same  volume,  pp.  263,  668.


G68  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND    HEROES.

there  for  three  nights,  when  he  found  in  a  youth  named
Goreu  a  Theseus  to  liberate  him.1  One  cannot,  it  seems
to  me,  help  seeing,  in  Manawydan's  ghastly  bone-prison
the  Welsh  counterpart  of  the  ill-famed  labyrinth  made  in
Crete  in  the  reign  of  Minos,  and  used  for  the  reception  of
the  boys  and  girls  destined  by  him  for  the  death-monster
abiding  in  its  recesses.

You  will  have  observed  that  it  is  very  hard  to  keep  the
Celtic  congeners  of  Cronus  and  Minos  from  encroaching
on  one  another.  Greek  analogy,  however,  helps  us  a
little :  thus,  as  compared  with  Nemed,  Partholon,  who
slew  his  own  parents,  is  more  exactly  Cronus  than  the
former  could  be  said  to  be.  On  the  other  hand,  both
Nevyd:  and  Manawydan  are  comparable  to  both  Cronus
and  Minos.  Perhaps  one  or  even  both  of  these  two  last
names  originally  belonged  to  the  god  or  demon  of  dark-
ness and  the  other  world,  whither  Cronus,  driven  from
Olympus,  retired  to  reign.  At  any  rate,  it  is  probable  that
the  struggle  between  him  and  Zeus,  though  raised  to  the
dignity  of  an  article  of  the  theogonic  faith  of  the  Greeks,
was  in  its  origin  a  nature  myth  representing  the  common-
place contest  between  darkness  and  light,  as  in  the  case
of  Fergus  and  Conchobar.


1  R.  B.  Mob.  pp.  104,  306  ;  Guest,  ij.  256  ;  Triads,  i.  50  =  ij.  49.
The  earliest  reference  to  Oetli  and  Annoeth  is  one  in  the  Stanzas  of  the
Graves  in  the  Black  Bk.  of  Carmarthen  (Skene,  ij.  31),  where  the
Household  of  Oeth  and  Annoeth  are  ascribed  'the  long  graves  in
Gwanas.'  But  the  passage  raises  a  number  of  questions  which  cannot
be  discussed  here ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  its  Gwanas  ought  to  be  some-
where in  Gower,  a  far  more  likely  locality  also  for  the  Prison  of  Oeth
than  where  the  Iolo  MSS.  fix  it,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Margam  in
the  same  county  of  Glamorgan.


vi.   gods,  demons  and  heroes.  gc9

The  earliest  Creed  of  the  Celts  inferred.

"When  the  Aryan  languages  in  use  or  on  record  had
been  for  some  time  subjected  to  a  comparative  study
as  to  vocabulary  and  word-building,  a  glottologist  was
now  and  then  found  to  try  the  experiment  of  putting
a  short  fable  or  a  simple  story  back  into  the  Aryan  parent
speech  inferred,  and  we  might  at  this  point  essay  some-
thing analogous  on  the  mythology  of  the  early  Celts
of  pre -historic  times.  The  object  is  to  enable  you
roughly  to  realize  what  sort  of  a  mosaic  the  bits  I  have
handled  in  these  lectures  would  make,  when  restored  to
their  proper  places  with  regard  to  one  another  and  the
whole  design.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  difficulty
is  great,  both  on  account  of  the  later  materials  mixed
up  with  the  original  pieces,  and  of  the  lacunas  left  by
the  original  ones  which  are  still  missing ;  so  we  have  to
shift  as  best  we  can  by  comparing  and  by  borrowing
from  cognate  sources.  But  in  other  respects  the  aid  to
be  derived  from  without  is  not  so  considerable  as  might
be  expected ;  for,  though  Aryan  mythology  started  well
with  the  identification  of  the  Zeus  of  the  Greeks  with
his  congeners  in  the  myths  of  the  other  Aryan  nations,
it  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  as  yet  advanced  very  much
further ;  its  attention  has  of  late  been  a  good  deal
given  to  the  important  matter  of  improving  the  methods
adopted,  and  of  giving  the  instruments  used  more  pre-
cision. So  the  summary  I  am  now  going  to  give  you  is
to  be  taken  strictly  for  what  it  is,  a  mere  guess : —

In  the  beginning  Earth  and  Heaven  were  great  world-
giants,  and  they  were  the  parents  of  a  numerous  offspring;
but  the  Heaven  in  those  days  lay  upon  the  Earth,  and


670  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND   HEROES.

their  children  crowded  between  them  were  unhappy  and
without  light,  as  was  also  their  mother.  So  she  and
they  took  counsel  together  against  Heaven,  and  one  of  his
sons,  who  was  bolder  than  the  others,  undertook  shame-
fully to  mutilate  Heaven ;  nay,  he  and  his  brothers  stayed
not  their  hands  till  they  had  cut  the  world-giant  their
father  into  many  pieces.  Out  of  his  skull  they  made
the  firmament,  and  the  spilling  of  the  blood  of  his  body
caused  a  great  flood,  which,  as  it  settled  in  the  hollows
of  the  earth,  made  up  the  sea.

Some  of  the  children  of  Earth  and  Heaven  were  born
bright  beings  or  gods,  who  mostly  loved  the  light  and
the  upper  air ;  and  some  were  Giants  or  Titans,  who  were
of  a  darker  and  gloomier  hue.  These  latter  hated  the
gods,  and  the  gods  hated  them.  The  daring  son  of  Earth
who  began  the  mutilation  of  the  world-giant  was  one  of
the  Titans,  and  he  became  their  king ;  but  the  gods  did
not  wish  him  to  rule  over  them  and  their  abode,  so  he
was  driven  from  his  throne  by  his  youngest  son,  who  was
born  a  god.  The  king,  beaten  in  battle,  sailed  away  to
other  parts  of  his  realm ;  and  after  much  wandering  on
the  sea,  he  was  at  last  received  in  the  country  of  the
happy  departed,  whence  he  was  afterwards  thought  to
bless  the  farmer's  toil  and  to  help  man  in  other  ways.

When  the  great  flood  caused  by  the  mangling  of  the
world-giant  took  place,  all  men  were  drowned  save  a
single  pair  saved  in  a  ship.  He  who  made  and  owned
the  ship  was  not  a  man,  nor  did  the  gods  own  him  as
one  of  them ;  but  he  was  a  Giant  or  Titan  who  was  kindly
disposed  towards  the  race ;  and  when  he  had  safely  landed
them  where  they  were  to  dwell,  he  went  away  to  the
same  place  as  the  dethroned  king.     For  he  was  of  his


VI.  GODS,  DEMONS  AND  HEROES.         G71

kith  and  kin,  unless  perhaps  those  are  to  be  followed
who  thought  the  two  were  but  one  and  the  same  person,
and  that  person  no  other  than  the  ruler  of  the  departed
himself,  the  god  of  all  beginning  and  all  end.  Viewed
through  the  medium  of  the  latter,  he  appeared  to  be
the  demon  of  darkness  and  horror  and  death,  ever  busily
adding  to  the  number  of  his  victims ;  but  through  the
former  he  was  seen  to  be  the  first  father  and  great  parent
of  all ;  so  it  was  ever  a  matter  of  piety  to  reckon  dark-
ness before  light,  the  night  before  the  day,  and  winter
before  summer.

The  new  king  of  the  gods  was  of  a  passing  brilliant
nature ;  so  they  called  him  Bright  and  Day  and  Father
Sky.  lie  was  a  mighty  warrior;  but  he  had  terrible
foes,  who  forced  him  to  take  part  in  many  a  fearful
struggle.  When  he  fought  in  summer  he  always  tri-
umphed, but  he  fared  ill  in  the  winter  conflicts.
On  one  occasion  he  was  badly  wounded,  and  would
never  have  recovered  his  former  strength  and  form
but  for  the  timely  aid  of  a  man  who  was  a  cunning
leech  ;  and  on  another  he  and  the  other  gods  would  have
been  hard  beset  had  they  not  taken  care  to  secure  the  help
of  the  Sun-hero.  This  last  was  not  a  god,  but  the  youth-
ful son  of  a  mortal.  There  was,  however,  no  sjDcarman
anywhere  to  equal  him,  and  his  father  was  so  wise  and
crafty  that  he  had  forced  the  gods  to  treat  mankind  far
better  than  they  had  before  been  wont  to  do.  For  the
good  things  bestowed  on  man  were  often  begrudged  by
the  gods,  and  most  of  all  by  the  owners  of  the  wealth
of  the  nether  world  and  the  land  of  the  happy  dead.
They  hated  this  mortal,  so  kind  to  his  race,  and  made
him  suffer  untold  pain  and  torture ;  but  he  always  sue-


672  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS   AND   HEROES.

ceeded  in  the  end  in  all  that  he  set  his  mind  on  achieving,
as  when,  for  example,  he  cheated  them  of  the  dog  that
was  to  be  the  hunter's  friend  and  servant ;  also  of  the
other  animals  he  stole  from  them  as  likely  to  be  of  use
to  his  kindred.  It  was  from  the  same  nether  country
that  he  likewise  obtained  by  craft  and  falsehood  the
strong  drink  that  was  to  cheer  man,  to  give  him  the
.dreams  of  poets  and  the  visions  of  prophets.  These  and
other  boons,  too  many  to  name  one  by  one,  made  him
very  famous  and  beloved,  more  so  in  some  lands  than
even  the  king  of  the  gods  himself.

Thus  far  the  summary  of  the  creed  of  the  earliest
Celts  :  if  approximately  correct,  it  would  require  scarcely
any  important  modification  in  order  to  apply  equally  to
the  Aryans  in  the  distant  ej)och  of  their  pro-ethnic  unity.
It  errs  mostly,  perhaps,  in  not  leaving  more  inconsis-
tencies and  contradictions  on  the  surface ;  for  it  is  hard
to  place  one's  mind  on  the  low  level  of  the  infantile  in-
telligence of  a  savage  such  as  early  man  must  have  been.
But  some  aid  to  that  end  may  be  found  in  the  perusal  of
what  the  savages  of  modern  times  think.  The  widely
spread  occurrence  of  a  story  more  or  less  like  that  of
Uranus  has  already  been  alluded  to  (p.  114);  and  one
may  also  borrow  illustrations  from  the  animistic  ideas
which  certain  savages  have  entertained  of  the  sun,  the
moon  and  the  stars.  "In  early  philosophy  throughout
the  world,"  says  Dr.  Tylor,1  "  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  alive
and  as  it  were  human  in  their  nature.  Usually  contrasted
as  male  and  female,  they  nevertheless  differ  in  the  sex
assigned  to  each,  as  well  as  in  their  relations  to  one

1  Primitive  Culture"1,  i.  288.


VI.     GOB*,    DEMONS    AXD    HEROES.  673

another.  Among  the  Mbocobis  of  South  America,  the
^\l<»on  is  a  man  and  the  Sun  his  wife,  and  the  story  is
told  how  she  once  fell  down  and  an  Indian  put  her  up
again,  but  she  fell  a  second  time  and  set  the  forest
Mazing  in  a  deluge  of  fire."  Or  take  the  curious  con-
versation of  some  Algonquin  Indians  with  one  of  the
Jesuit  missionaries  of  the  seventeenth  century: l  u  Je  leur
ay  demande*  d'ou  venoit  1' Eclipse  de  Lune  et  de  Soleil;
ils  m'ont  respondu  que  la  Lime  s'eclipsoit  ou  paroissoit
noire,  a.  cause  qu'elle  tenoit  son  fils  entre  ses  bras,  qui
empeschoit  que  l'on  ne  vist  sa  clarte*.  Si  la  Lune  a  un
fils,  elle  est  mariee,  ou  l'a  e'td,  leur  dis-je.  Oiiy  dea,
me  dirent-ils,  le  Soleil  est  son  mary,  qui  marche  tout  le
jour,  et  elle  toute  la  nuict;  et  s'il  s' Eclipse,  ou  s'il
s'obscurcit,  c'est  qu'il  prend  aussi  par  fois  le  fils  qu'il  a
eu  de  la  Lune  entre  ses  bras.  Oiiy,  mais  ny  la  Lune  ny
le  Soleil  n'ont  point  de  bras,  leur  disois-je.  Tu  n'as
point  d'esprit;  ils  tiennent  tousiours  leurs  arcs  banded
deuant  eux,  voila.  pourquoy  leurs  bras  ne  paroissent
point.  Et  sur  qui  veulent-ils  tirer  ?  Hd  qu'en  scavons
nous."  Nevertheless,  the  American  who  helped  the  Sun
to  her  feet  could  scarcely  hope  to  attain  to  the  privileged
audacity  of  the  druids  of  ancient  Erinn,  who  maintained
that  they  were  the  creators  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth.-
On  the  other  hand,  had  there  been  a  missionary  to  ques-
tion the  ancient  Aryans  on  the  difficulties  which  their
ideas  of  the  origin  of  things  presented  to  his  mind,  he
would  doubtless  have  often  received  in  effect  the  Algon-
quin reply,  lie  qu'en  savons  nous  ?

1  Ibid.,  from  Le  Jeune's  communications  in  the  Relations  des  J<  suit'  *
d'ins  la  Nonvelle  France,  1634,  p.  26.

2  O'Curry,  ij.  21.

2  x


674  VI.     GODS,    DEMONS    AND    HEROES.

The  notions  which  I  have  ascribed  to  the  ancient
Aryans  and,  among  them,  to  the  earliest  Celts,  may  be
termed  cosmogonic  or  theogonic,  but  no  word,  however
convenient,  must  be  allowed  to  obscure  the  probable  fact
that  at  one  time  they  formed  part  and  parcel  of  their  ordi-
nary beliefs.  For  what  may  seem  to  one  generation  of
men  a  mere  matter  of  mythology,  is  frequently  found  to
have  belonged  to  the  serious  theology  of  a  previous  one ;
and,  conversely,  those  whom  sentiment  prevents  from  plac-
ing the  starting  point  of  the  Aryan  family  on  a  low  level,
must  forego  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  luxury  of  contem-
plating its  prolonged  rise,  such  as  it  is  faithfully  registered
in  the  archaeological  record  of  speech  and  myth,  of  rudely
made  tools,  and  other  material  remains  of  Aryan  handi-
work. Science  proudly  and  justly  makes  much  of  evolu-
tion in  its  more  visible  aspects ;  but  even  more  absorbing
is  the  interest  attaching  to  its  subtler  workings  in  the
world  of  intellect  and  morals.  In  our  Aryan  branch  of
the  human  family  we  have  found  traces  of  them  car-
ried out  on  the  lines  of  the  ideas  of  religion  and  morality
which  found  favour  from  time  to  time  in  the  eyes  of
our  ancestors,  from  the  grey  dawn  of  their  pre-history
onwards  to  our  own  era.  It  remains  for  ever  true
that  the  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man ;  and  even
early  man  is  not  beneath  contempt,  especially  when  he
proves  to  have  had  within  him  the  makings  of  a  great
race,  with  its  highest  notions  of  duty  and  right,  and  all
else  that  is  noblest  in  the  human  soul.


ADDITIONS    AND    CORRECTIONS.


Pages  46,  74 :  the  dative  BeA.>/<ra/u  is  also  given  as  B?;A.^o-a/« :
which  is  right  I  know  not.

Page  117:  for  Diibr-duin  read  Dubr-dviu.

Page  153:  y  Wenwas  means  the  abode  of  felicity  in  the  sense
of  Heaven  in  the  Black  Book  :  see  Skene,  ij.  46.

Page  1(37:  the  allusion  to  the  abbreviation  of  Maxim  in  the
Nennian  genealogies  is  misleading,  as  the  name  occurs  also  fully-
written  Maxim  in  them:  see  the  MS.  Harl.  3859,  fol.  1936.

Page  232 :  the  statement  that  the  sacrifice  of  human  victims
to  the  Gaulish  Mercury  was  unknown  is  too  absolute :  see  M.  P.
Monceau  on  the  Great  Temple  on  the  Puy  de  Dome,  in  the  licvw-
Ilist.  1887,  Vol.  xxxv.  255,  where  he  quotes  Tertullian.

Page  250  :  for  Idrijs  read  Idris.

Page  262:  Iarbhoinel  is  Iarboncoil  in  the  Bl\  of  Lcinstcr,  8  b,
and  lardanel,  for  which  see  p.  581  above,  in  the  Bk.  of  the  Dim,
166:  both  are  genitives,  and  the  latter  looks  as  if  the  nominative
might  have  been  Iar-domncd.

Page  415:  as  to  Tailltin,  also  Taillne  at  p.  519,  one  learns
from  the  MS.  Harl.  5280,  fol.  65  a  (54a),  that  Taillne  was  in  the
first  instance  another  name  of  Lug's  foster-mother  Tailltiu.

Pages  500-1 :  Pendaran  Dyved's  role  is  here  like  that  of  an
Irish  druid,  and  his  position  answers  to  the  meaning  of  his
name,  which  probably  signifies  '  Head-druid  of  Dyved,'  Pendaran
being  partly  derived  from  ddr, '  an  oak.'  Compare  the  etymology
of  the  term  Drwidae  itself,  p.  221  above.

Tage  511:  for  Sigfricd  read  Siegfried.

Page  516  :  I  find  that  the  Hwch  du  gwta  is  also  remembered
in  Anglesey.

2x2


676  ADDITIONS   AND    CORRECTIONS.

Page  521.  As  to  the  ancient  year  common  to  Celts  and  Greeks,
I  have  now  the  authority  of  Dr.  Vigfusson  for  adding  the  old
Norsemen.  Their  great  feast  occupied  three  days  called  the
Winter  Nights,  and  began  on  the  Saturday  falling  on  or  between
the  11th  and  the  18th  of  October.  One  feature  of  the  feast  was
the  sacrifice  to  Frey,  the  god  of  good  seasons ;  and  besides  the
toasts  drunk  to  the  Anses,  as  alluded  to  at  p.  653  above,  a  formal
commemoration  was  made  of  all  deceased  friends  who  had  gone
into  the  barrows  during  the  year :  compare  the  "Welsh  Feast  of
the  Dead,  p.  515.  It  was  the  time  when  the  sibyl,  seated  on  an
elevated  seat,  chanted  the  fortunes  of  the  coming  year :  she  was
consulted  on  all  kinds  of  questions,  but  especially  as  to  the
seasons,  and  above  all  as  to  the  winter  then  commencing.  On
the  first  night  the  spirits  were  abroad,  and  one  instance  is
recorded  of  a  man  being  slain  by  them  on  his  going  out  then ;  but
this  was  the  night  when  wizards  sat  out  of  doors,  who  wished  to
consult  the  demons  of  the  invisible  world.  Compare  the  Welsh
and  Irish  beliefs  and  practices  alluded  to  at  pp.  514-7.  Dr.
Vigfusson  thinks  that  the  feast  of  the  Winter  Nights  was  the
original  Yule,  and  that  it  marked  the  beginning  of  the  ancient
year.  The  whole  question  is  to  be  the  subject  of  an  excursus  in
Vigfusson  and  Powell's  forthcoming  work  on  Icelandic  Origins.
It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  Old  Norse  year  approached  the  astro-
nomical year  more  nearly  than  the  Celtic  one  (p.  419),  for  the
reason,probably,that  winter — and  therefore  the  year — commences
earlier  in  Scandinavia  than  in  the  continental  centre  from  which
the  Celts  dispersed  themselves.  Vice  versa,  the  Aryan  year  may,
if  the  Aryan  home  was  at  first  in  the  far  North,  have  been  origi-
nally astronomical,  the  calendars  of  the  Celts  and  other  Aryan
nations  having  subsequently  deviated  from  it  more  and  more
as  those  nations  acquired  new  homes  in  more  southern  latitudes ;
nor  is  the  fact  to  be  overlooked,  that,  according  to  the  Syro-
Macedonian  calendar  and  others  of  kindred  origin,  the  year
opened  with  the  beginning  of  October,  however  that  is  to  be
accounted  for.

Page  552  :  Lugaid  Corr  (Windisch,  It.  Gram.  p.  122)  should,
mythologically  speaking,  be  identified  with  the  slayer  of  Cuchu-
lainn.     Corr,  which  probably  meant  a  crane,  recalls  the  cranes


ADDITIONS    AND    CORRECTIONS.  G77

at  pp.  331,  333-4.  He  should,  perhaps,  be  farther  identified  with
the  Lugaid  son  of  Ith  who  gave  his  name  to  the  Kerry  lake  called
Loch  Lugdech,  and  better  known  as  Lough  Corrane,  near  Water-
villa  For  a  remarkable  story  about  him  and  Fial  his  wife,  see
M.  d'A.  de  J.'s  Cycle,  p.  253,  and  the  Bh  ofBallymoU,  39Z>,  40a.

Page  554:  with  the  Eo  Feasa  compare  stories  of  the  type  of
Siegfried  eating  of  the  heart  of  the  dragon  Fafhir.

Page  579:  for  Ollathar  read  OUathair.

Page  588:  move  the  accent  on  'lovcpvioi  towards  the  end  of
the  word,  or  else  cancel  it,  as  its  place  is  not  known.

Page  619:  I  see  now  that  the  correspondence  between  the
great  conllicts  entered  on  by  Zeus  in  Greek  mythology,  and  by
the  gods  holding  the  same  rank  in  the  other  Aryan  mythologies,
admits  of  being  expressed  more  clearly  than  I  have  done.  Thus
the  Titans  conquered  by  Zeus  correspond  to  the  Coranians  dis-
posed of  by  Llud  (p.  606),  and  the  Giants  quelled  by  the  gods
of  Olympus  with  the  aid  of  Heracles  to  the  scourge  of  the  First
of  May  to  which  Llud  put  an  end,  while  Typho,  eventually
destroyed  by  Zeus,  has  his  counterpart  in  the  Wizard  Knight
overcome  by  Livid :  it  is  to  be  noted  that  in  the  story  of  both
Typho  and  the  Wizard  Knight  music  plays  a  most  important
part,  Irish  and  Norse  literature  agree,  however,  in  giving  us
another,  and  presumably  a  more  original,  sequence  of  the  con-
flicts. Thus  the  Fir  Bolg  begin  a  battle  with  the  Tuatha  De
Danann  at  Midsummer:  they  are  beaten  in  it,  and  they  corre-
spond to  the  Wanes  at  war  with  the  Anses.  In  the  next  place,
Nuada's  right  hand  and  arm  were  cut  off  in  a  duel  with  Sreng,
which  is  usually  made  a  part  of  the  Fir  Bolg  war;  but  as  this
is  represented  extending  over  a  long  time,  the  encounter  of
Nuada  with  Sreng  is  probably  to  be  treated  as  a  separate
struggle.  The  latter,  whose  name  Sreng  challenges  comparison
in  point  of  origin  and  meaning  with  the  English  word  strong,  is
to  be  set  over  against  the  Fenri  Wolf  biting  off  one  of  Tyr's
hands,  and  Typho  disabling  Zeus  in  his  hands  and  his  feet.  The
third  contest  was  that  of  the  Tuatha  De"  Danann  with  the
Fomori,  who  succeed  in  slaying  many  of  the  former's  leaders,
and  are  only  beaten  by  the  arrival  of  Lug  the  Sun-god,  who  slays
Balor  of  the  Evil  Eye  and  begins  his  reign  of  prosperity.     The


G78  ADDITIONS   AND    CORRECTIONS.

corresponding  Norse  war  is  that  in  which  Swart  and  the  Evil
Brood  attack  and  slay  the  Anses,  who,  however,  re-appear  with
the  advent  of  Balder.    The  seasons  implied  by  this  more  ancient
sequence  of  the  events  are  the  middle  of  summer,  the  begin-
ning of  the  winter  half  of  the  year,  and  the  beginning  of  the
summer  half.     So  mid-winter  is  left  without  any  great  event,
and  this  falls  in,  as  will  have  been  seen,  with  the  season  when
Zeus  languishes  helplessly  in  a  cave,  and  Nuada,  deprived  of  his
nght  hand,  vacates  his  throne  for  Bres,  his  Fomorian  supplanter.
As  represented  in  the  Ultonian  cycle,  it  would  be  Conchobar
and  the  nobles  of  his  court  en  ccnivade.     Here  also  should  pro-
bably be  fixed  the  grievous  incarceration  of  Llud  referred  to  in
the  Welsh  Triads  (p.  577),  and  here  perhaps  we  are  to  look  for
the  reason  why  the  Celts  had  no  great  feast  in  the  middle  of
winter.    Such  may  have  likewise  been  the  case  with  the  Teutons
before   their  Yule   was   shifted   to   that   season.      Lastly,   the
death  of  Nuada  and  other  chiefs  of  the  Tuatha  De"  Danann
in  the  battle  with  the  Fomori  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  piece  of
euhemerism.     Treated  as  historical  persons  the  Tuatha  De  must
die  some   time  or  other;    but,  mythologically  speaking,  they
should  have  survived,  like  the  gods  of  Olympus  when  Heracles
despatched  the  Giants  for  them.

Page  643 :  before  Loeg,  on  his  way  with  Liban  to  the  other
world,  comes  to  the  two  serpents  (p.  641),  he  is  said,  in  the
account  in  verse  (Windisch,  p.  219),  to  have  seen  Bill  Buada  or
Bile  of  Victory,  whose  name  possibly  meant  victorious  Death,
the  same  Bile,  in  fact,  that  was  mentioned  at  pp.  90-1  above
as  king  of  Hades  under  the  name  of  Spain.  But  the  prose  para-
phrase (Windisch,  p.  217),  which  is  probably  later,  treats  Bili  as
the  Irish  word  bile,  which  appears  to  have  signified  '  any  ancient
tree  growing  over  a  holy  well  or  in  a  fort.'  This  raises  a  question
as  to  the  relation  between  bile  and  Bile,  and  suggests  another
treatment  of  the  chief  tree  mentioned  at  p.  188.  According  to
the  B.  B.  Mai.  p.  93,  it  is  doubtful  whether  one  should  say  in
Welsh  Beli  (pp.  90,  644),  or  the  Bcli.

With  regard  to  Rhiannon,  I  am  now  inclined  to  identify  her
with  the  moon  rather  than  with  the  dawn,  and  similarly  in  the
case  of  several  others  whom  I  have  loosely  treated  as  goddesses
of  dawn  or  dusk.


INDEX  OF  NAMES  AND  OTHER  WORDS.


abac,  592,  595.

Abdallah,  215.

Abdiel,  215.

Abel,  389,  537.

Aber  Sein,  272.

Aberystwyth,  401.

Abrad-ruad,  143:  see  Concliobar.

Acall,  483,  485,  631.

Achan,  51-2.

Acbilles,  106,  410.

Achlann,  Corca,  522.

Achren,  244,  346.

acbt  tage,  364.

Achtlann,  343-4,  346.

adaig,  541.

Adamnan,  320,  332.

Adeon,  164-5.

adfeilio,  38.

Adgan,  Adgant,  564.

Admetus,  29.

Adonis,  510.

Aed  Abrat,  463.

iEgipan,  620.

yEgir,  639.

Aengus  of  tbe  Brugh,  171,  508,

510.
Aengus  the  Mac  6c,   144-6,   150,

169,  171-3,  370,  667:  see  6c.
Aengus  of  the  p.  Spear,  134,  503-4.
Aengus  son  of  Umor,  150 :  see  l'un

Aengus.
Aerven,  598.
Aesculapius,  25.
sesir,  61.
JEbob,  60.
yEthillieard,  204.
Aetblem,  346.
Africa,  584,  609.
afu,  43y.


Agamemnon,  106.
Agdi,  457.
dyKvXofiil'jTijS,  642.

Aglsea,  639.

agmen,  19.

Agni,  658.

Agnoman,  580.

clyopa,  369.

ahu,  62.

ahura,  62.

Ahuro  Mazdad,  62.

Ai,  330  :  see  Cruachan.

aidche,  541.

Aife,  451,  458.

aige,  368.

Ailbe,  511.

Allien,  485.

Ailill  Aulom,  391-2, 505,  511,  525,

546.
Ailill  of  Cruachan,  137-8, 140,  142,

170,  322,330,367-9,373,  410,

444,  468,  475,  479,  482,  513,

590-1,  598,  601,  627,  646,  659.
Ailill  Find,  138.
Ailill  Flann,  247.
ainmgorti,  468.
airecht,  oirecht,  276.
Airem,  247  :  Bee  Echaid  Airem.
Aithech  Tuatha,  312,  594,  597.
Aitherne,324,  326-9,  331-4,336-7,

366,  373,  382,483,485,  563-4,

569.
ajma,  19.
Alawn,  276.
Alban,  312,  343,345-6,  354,  449-

50,  477.
Albeinwyn,  371.
Albion,  246,  345.
Albiorix,  4  2.


G80


INDEX.


Alcyoneus,  622-3.
Algonquins,  the,  673.
aftawr,  186  :  see  Red  Altar.
All-hallows,  514,  516 :  see  First  of

Nov.
Allraer,  M.,  5.
Allobroges,  4,  5,  7,  9,  21,  25,  58,

73,  77,  100-1,  149.
Allot,  664,  666.
atttud,  45.
alveolus  ligneus,  67.
Amaethon,    Amathaon,    90,   244,

286,  319,  333.
Amaltheia,  87.
Ambrosius,  151-2,  154,  158,  161,

184.
Amlawd,  486  :  see  Anlawd.
Araorgen,  Amorgin,  365,  542,  549,

563-6,  568-70.
Amorgene,    Amairgin,    570 :    see

Amorgen.
dua,  191.

Anbual,  170,  172  :  see  Etal.
And6e,  368-70.
andra,  295.
Andras,  Andros,  200.
Andraste,  200.
Angiras,  294,  296.
ahhu,  ahhva,  61-2.
Anlawd,  486,  494.
Anluan,  513.
Annoeth :  see  Oeth.
Anse,  the,  62-3,  68.
Anses,  the,  115, 121,  529-34,  543,
557,    605,   611-2,  615,   618-9,
623,  628,  631,  639,  646,  652,
659,  663,  676-7.
Ansis,  61.
antrisc,  295.
Apaturia,  the,  517-8.
Aphrodite,  413,492,510,639,  661.
Apollo,  2,  3,  20-31,  79,  80,  88,
194-5,222,384,430,436,443-4,
497,  510,  570-1,  575,  617.
Apollodorus,  622,  624.
ar,  6.
ara,  431.
aracoime,  618.
araith,  276.
Arann,  150,  322,  601.


Aranrod,  90  :  see  Arianrhod.

Aranuagyl,  371.

Ara\vn,191,  244,276,  333,339-42,

344-5,  354,  457,  625.
Arberth,  205,  338,  498,  500.
Arcadia,  183,  186.
Archan,  96.
archil,  447.
Ard  Brestine,  327.
Ard-Nemid,  650.
Ard-Nevon,  649.
ard-noenden,  362.
Ardu,  251.
Ares,  132.
Arevaci,  424,  541.
Argetlam,  120:  see  Nuada.
Arianrhod,  90,   161,  180,   236-9,
284-6,   299,   306-7,   319,    379,
385,  389,  392,  406,  425,  432,
435-6,   504,  527-8,   543,   546,
566.
Ariosto,  158.
Arftechwed,  236.
Armagh,  609.
arnaisai,  416.
Artaius,  5,  6,  73.
Artas,  5.
Artay,  5,  6.

Arthur,   29,   91,   155,   162,   198,
248-9,   264,   334,   347,   350-2,
355,   372,   486,  488-9,   492-3,
517,558,  561,  577,  640,  667.
Artio,  6,  73.
Arverni,  5,  9.
asar,  61.
Asbib'rn,  63.
Asburg,  289.
Asciburgium,  289.
Ash,  289.

Ash  Ygg's  Steed,  557.
aska,  63.
Asleikr,  63.
Asmodr,  63.
ass,  61.
acrrv,  11.
asura-s,  62.
asu-s,  62.
asynja,  62.
atbail,  38.
atbel,  38.


INDEX.


C81


Atecotti,  594.

Atepomaros,  428.

Atgan,  564.

Athboy,  515.

Athene,  72,  288,  381,  413,  423,

517,  519,  571,  623,  630,  639.
Athremail,  3G7,  309  :  see  Maim'.
Athubodva,  43.
Atlas,  89.
Attica,  517.
Attila,  32.
Auguselus,  354.
August,  421-2.
Augustae,  101;  see  Matres.
Augustodunum,  34.
Augustonemetum,  7.
Augustus,  2,  421,  424.
a  id,  38.
Auramazda,  62.

Aurelius,  1 5 1 , 1 54 ;  see  Ambrosius.
Aurwrychyn,  404-5,  541.
Autun,  34.

Avagdu,  541,  546,  552,  565,  568.
Avattach,  423.
avanc,  354,  592,  595.
awen,  268.
awi,  70.
Awst,  421-2.
Aztecs,  the,  295.

Bacchus,  196.
Badb,  43  :  see  Bodb.
Baeda,  322.
bagha,  54.
Baginates,  47,  54.

bailey,  366.

baili,  bali,  366.

Baiscinu,  322  :  see  Corco.

Bala,  204,  544,  565.

Bala  Deulyn,  400,  405.

Balder,  284,  328-9,  382,  430,  492,

529-38,  541-2,  568,  571,  578,

613,616-8,623,  625,628,  631,

633,  G7S.
ballium,  366.
bally,  366.
Ballysadarc,  586.
Balor,  78,  314-7.  391,396-7,  417,

587,  611,614-6,618,  643,  677.
baltas,  528.


Baugor,  547.

baptism,  Gwri'a,  499.

Baranton,  159,  184,  186.

Bardsey,  155,  159,  160.

Barthelemy,  M.  A.  de,  r,9.

Bartholanus,  580.

Bartholomew,  263,  580.

beadu,  44.

bebla,  38.

Be-Cuill,  579.

Bectgelert,  151.

Beggery,  124.

beili,  366.

1V1  Dragain,  172.

Bel  Sead,  172.

Belatucadr-os,  -us,  37,  74,  91.

Belgadan,  Mount,  585.

Beli,   90-1,   153,    165,   168,   274,

284,  318-9,  377,  425,  643-4,

659,  666,  678.
Belisaiua,    BeA?/o-a/*a,   B^A?jcra/xa,

3,  46,  74,  675.
Belismius,  74.
Bellinus,  90.
belsit,  38.
Beltaino,  519-20.
Benn   Gulbain,   Benbulbin,    507,

511.
Beothach,  262,  581.
beothu,  bethad,  278,  541.
berbaim,  26.
Berendon,  186.
Ber-gelmir,  663.
Bern,  30.
berw,  26.
Bestla,  284.
Bible,  the,  609.
bi-duum,  117.
bile,  678.

Bile,  90-1,  318,  643-4,  678.
Birds'  Battle,  the,  257.
Biioge,  315.
Bituriges,  47.
Black   Knight,   the,   185,  350-1,

354.
Black  Sainglend,  the,  441.
Black  Woodward,  the,  348-50.
Math,  473.

Bl&thnat,  473-4,  476,  478.
Blutobulgium,  597.


C82


INDEX.


blodeu,  473.

Blodeued,    239,    241,    300,    384,

430,  473-4,  561.
Blodemved,  239  :  see  Blodeued.
Bloody  Foreland,  the,  317.
Boand,  Boann,  144,  169,  556.
Boar  of  Benn  Gulbain,  the,  507-8,

511,  541.
bod,  44.

Bodb  (fern.),  43,  452,  604.
Bodb  (mas.),  170-1,  579,  586.
Bodnod,  44.
Bodvogerms,  44.
Bodvognatus,  44.
bogies  on  the  stiles,  516.
bogu,  54.

Boi,  Biii,  309,  504-5.
bolg,  bolga,  596-7.
Bolor,  396  :  see  Balor.
Bolvinn-o,  35.

bonfires  on  the  1st  of  Nov.,  515.
Bonus  Puer,  22.
Book,  the  Black,  406,  537,  562.
Book  of  the  Dun,  the,  468,  525,

580-1,  593-4.
Book  of  Leinster,  the,  467, 479, 556.
Book   of  Bhyderch,    the  "White,

402.
Book  of  Taliessin,  the,  544,  546,

567,  574.
Bor,  115,  284.
Bore,  the,  640.
Boreadae,  195.
boreu,  bore,  400.
Borraana,  25-6.
Bormanicus,  25.
Bormanus,  25-6.
Bormo,  25-6.
Borr  in  Broga,  443.
Borvo,  25-6.
Boudicca,  199.
Bourbon-Lancy,  25-6.
Bourbon-rArchambault,  26.
Bourbonne-les-Bains,  25.
Bonn,  31.
Bouhy,  35.
Boyne,  123,  129,  144-5,  433,  443,

446,  459,  493,  502,  507.
braint,  76.
Bran,  508.


Bran,  94-7,  245,  248,  256,  2G9

568,  665-6.
Branwen,  94-5,  256,  269, 568, 619.
Breas,  253,  397  :  see  Bres.
Brecilien,  156-7,  159,  168,  184.
breenhin,  77  :  see  brenhin.
Breidablik,  529.
breint,  76.
brenbin,  77.
brentyn,  77.
Bres,  252-4,  275,  317,  322,  388,

413,  478,  586,  678.
BriLeitb,  331.
Brian,  393-5.
Bricriu,  363,  430,  434.
Bride,  St.,  75.

Bridge  of  Dread,  the,  451.

Bridget,  St.,  75.

Brfg,  76,  388  :  see  Brigit.

Brigantes,  75,  77.

Brigantia,  75,  77.

Brigindo,  75-6.

Brigit,  74-6,  254,  275.

Brihatt,  75.

Briou,  396  :  see  Brian.

Brisinga,  83-4.

Britain,  90,  641.

Brittones,  664.

bro,  149.

Broad-Boyne  Bridge,  148.

Broadhaven,  583,  598.

Bron.  666  :  see  Bran.

brud,'  148.

brug,  148.

Brug :  see  Brugh.

Brugh,  the,   148,  151,  171,  251,

414,  433,  443,  493,  502,  507,
510.

bruig,  149.
Brun  de  Morois,  608.
bryeint,  76.
Brynbild,  241.
bryntyn,  77.
Buan  (fern.),  484-5.
Buan  (mas.),  468.
Buanann,  450.
Buarainecb,  78.
Buddha,  79.
Builc,  601.
bull-feast,  the,  443.


1MH.X.


G83


bwbacb,  516.
Byleist,  615.

cncc  na  m-bo,  476.

Cacus,  -477.

cad,  32,  537.

Cadd,  Cat,  454.

cader,  cadair,  251,  -J"-!.

Cadmilus,  621.

Cadmus,  620-1,  625.

Cadoc,  St.,  547.

cadr,  37.

Cadwaftawn,  650.

Cael,  251-2.

caer,  38.

Caer,  170-1,  173-4,  434.

Caer  Arianrhod,  236,  307,  406.

Caer  Dathal,  225.

Caer  Leu,  &c,  406.

Caer  Ochren,  248.

CaerSeon,  271-2,  307.

CaerSidi,  248-9, 254, 257, 270,550.

( !aer  Vyrdin,  1 « » <  >  _

Caer  Wydyr,  248.

Caer  yn  Arfon,  272.

Caerabar,  170  :  see  Caer.

caerthann,  358.

Caesar,  1,  8,  20,  32,  49,  50,  52,

55-8,  69,  74,  76-7,84,  91,  153,

175,  320.
Caesarodunum,  7.
Caber  Conree.  472-6.
Caill  Crfnmori,  553.
Caill  Ciian,  415.
Cain,  356,  593.
Cainte,  3'Jl.
Cairbre,  305,  321,  323.
Cairbre  Baiscinn,  322.
Cairbre  Cinncbait,  310-4,  317-8,

320.
Cairbre  son  of  Cormac,  134.
Cairbre  the  CroAvder,  255.
Cairbre  son  (if  Etan,  253-4,  276.
Cairbre  of  K»ny,  252,  255.
Cairbre  the  Luignian,  98-9,  255,

337.
Cairbre  of  Man,  323-4.
Cairbre   Muac,   346-7,  255,  305,

308-10,  317-8,  320,  345,  379,

503,  505,  521,  527.


Cairbre  Niafer,  321  2,  601.
Cairbre  Rigfota,  322.
Caire  Ainsic,  257.
Caitchenn,  313,  594.

calatli,   1  I.

ruled,  1 1.

Caledones,  487.

Caledonia,  487.

Caledonius,  152  :  see  Merlin.

Calendar,  the  Greek,  519,  520.

Calendar,    the   Macedonian,   518,

676.
Calends  of  Winter,   the,   459-60,

514  :  see  First  of  Nov.
Calvus  Patricii,  215.
camera,  40.

Camlan,  the  Battle  of,  565.
Campbell's  Popular  Tales,  594.
Camulodunon,  39,  207.
Camulogenus,  39.
Camulognata,  39.
Camulorigi,  39.
Camuloris,  39.
Camulos,  38-9,  41,  123,  178,  180,

208.
camurus,  40.

Canine  horse  of  Conall,  the,  472.
cantalon,  75.
Cantguic,  168.
Cantire,  454.
Cantre'r  Gwaelod,  463.
Caracalla,  25.
Carman,  411-2.
Carmarthen,  160,  406.
Casmilus,  621.
Casnar,  501.
Caspian,  the,  581.
Cassivellaunns,  -us,  7,  153.
CasAvattawn,  Caswatton,  153,  425,

666-7.
cath,  32,  537.
Cathair  Chonrai,  472-3.
Cathbad,  137,  223.
Cathbuadach,  142.
Caturiges,  7,  32,  47.
Caturix,  32.
Catuvellauni,  7,  47.
( lancasos,  583.
Cauldrons,  remarkable,  256-7,  347,

371,  373,  473,  176,  558.


G84


INDEX.


Cecht,  Mac,  569,  579,  604.
Ceithlenn,  Cethlenn,  319,  616.
Cellach,  134.
Cenn  Cruaich,  200-1,  203,  208,

210,  215.
Cenncait,  310,  313-4,  318,  594.
Cennfaelad,  318.
Cerberus,  447,  473,  513,  638.
cerdin,  cerdin,  cerdingen,  358.
Ceres,  60,  72,  645.
Cernach,     329,    403,     562  :    see

Conall.
Cernenus,  78.
Cernunnos,  61,  65,  78,  80-2,  84-6,

88-9,  92,  97  8.
Cerquand,  M.,  65.
cess  noinden,  363.
Cet,  136,  512-3.
Chair  of  Kerridwen,  the,  550.
Chair  of  Taliessin,  the,  550.
Chair  of  Teyrnon,  the,  550.
Chalceia,  the,  518-20.
Charis,  xapiTes,  495,  639.
^poros,  643.
Charon,  14.
Chorges,  33.

Chrestien  de  Troyes,  403.
Chrocus,  9,  10.
Chuill,  Mac  an,  320.
clnvioryd,  62.
Cian,  390-4,  396,  403,  405.
cich,  512.
Cichol,  583.
cig,  512.
Cilicia,  620.
Cimbe,  601-2.
Cinnchait,  310,  313-4,  318:    see

Cenncait.
Cioccal,  Ciocal,  583  :  see  Cichol.
.  Citharoedus,  Apollo,  79.
Clackmannan,  324,  664.
Clann  Erci,  525.
Clanwilliam,  barony  of,  522.
Clas  Myrdin,  168.
Cleghile,  211-2,214.
Cliach,  170-2.
Cliff  Bridge,  the,  451.
Cloch  Chinnfhaolaidh,  316.
Clochan  Chinnchait,  318.
Clothru,  139,  478.


Cnamchoill,  211-2,  214.

Cnoc  na  fola,  317.

Cocidius,  37,  44,  67.

Cocosus,  37.

Coed  Alun,  167.

Coerabar  Boeth,  172:  see  Caer.

cdic,  92.

coicthiges,  361.

coimdiu,  comdiu,  103-4.

coinie,  618.

Coirpre  Cundail,  344-5.

Coll,  142:  seeCuill.

Collegium  Sutorum,  424.

Columba,  St.,  211,  224,  314.

Columella,  67.

comalta,  480.

Comedonae :  see  Comedovae.

Comedovae,  103.

commentum,  377.

Con,  Mac,  472-3,  524.

Conaing,  262-3,  584.

Conaire,  133,  135-6,  305,  321-2,
367,  369-70,  604,  640,  650.

Conall  Cernach,  138,  329,  403,
430, 432,  439, 454, 47 1-2, 483-5,
503,  512-3,  536,  539,  562-3,
594,  602.

Conall  Core,  309.

Conchobar  mac  Nessa,  133,  135-
44,  324,  326,  330,  335,  337,
343,  345-6,  363,  379,  431,  434,
444-5,  449,  452-3,  459,  502,
511,  576,  609,627,  630,638-9,
646-7,  668,  678.

Conchobar  of  the  red  Eyebrows,
143-4.

Conconnetodumnos,  7.

Condla  Coel  Corrbacc,  344.

Cong,  585.

Congaile,  Ui,  522.

Conn,  133,  205-6,  210,  247,  391,
416-7,  443,  576.

Connaught,  439,  511,  585-6,  609.

Connells,  the  O',  522-3.

Connla's  Well,  553-4,  556.

Conor,  136.

Con-roi,  472.

Constantine,  166.

Conu-ri,  472.

Conwy,  the,  387,  592,  595.


INDEX.


GS5


Cooley,  140,  446.

c6r,  co-ran,  600.

Coranians,  tlio,  006.

Corbre,  255  :  see  Cairbre.

Core,  308-9,  314,   503-5,  521-3,

525,  528,  546,  500,  039.
Core  Ferdoit,  522.
Corcaguiny  or  Corcaguinny,  393,

521-2.
corco,  corca,  322,  522.
Corco  Baiscinn,  322.
Corco  Duibne,  521-4.
Cordelia,  502.
Coritani,  GOG.
Corkaree,  barony  of,  522.
Cormac  mac  Airt,   1 33-6,   144-0,

247,  357,  503.
Cormac  son  of  Cairbre,  308,  500.
Cormac's  Glossary,  74,  'J  8, 170, 5 14,

520,  567.
corn,  78.
cornu,  78.
comu  copiae,  87.
Coronis,  430.
Corpri,  313:   see  Cairbre.
Corr,  552,  676  :   see  Lugaid.
Corrbacc,  344,  340-7.
Coscraid  Menu  Macha,  439.
Cotageib  Ule,  308-9.
couvade,  the,  140,  303,  027-9,  G78.
Crseb-riiadi,  12.
Crede,  252,  255,  322.
Creidylad,  Creurdilad,  511,   561,

563.
Creirwy,  565.
Crete,  660-1.
ciiafol,  358.
Crickbowel,  204.
crin,  201.
Crochnuit,  506-7.
Cromm  Cruaieh,  201.
Cronus,    111-2,    115,    137,    139,

146-7,    149,    152,    154-5,   185,

207,    642-54,    056,    659,    661,

663,  665-6,  668.
cropped  black  sow,  tbe,  515,  517.
Crotta  Cliacb,  172.
cruacb,  201.
Cruachan   Ai,    330,   410-1,    444,

513,  590-1.


Crug  Ilywel,  204.

emit,  170.

Cruithni,  600.

Cuailnge,  Ciiailgne,  140,  446.

Cuch,  tbe,  338,  340.

Ciicl.ulainn,  90-1,  138,  140,  142 -4,
223,259,  261-2,  264,321,  323,
326,  342-7,  353-4,  307,  369,
374,376,378-9,  393,395,  397,
403,  429-32,  435-45,  447  55,
457-62,  464-8,  470-7,  479-83,
487,493-4,  501,511,520,  530,
538-42,546,  505,  571,570,  590,
594-5,  002,  010,  018,  024,
626-31,  633,  638,  641,  646-7,
659,  662.

Cuhelyn,  269.

Cuil  m-Brocholl,  524.

Cuill,  Mac,  540,  569,  579.

Cuirc,  521-2.

Culann,  446-7,  452,  511,  638-9.

Cultor,  6  :  see  Mereurius.

Cumall,  40,  178,  180,  187.

Cundail,  344-5  :  see  Coirpre.

Cuneda,  270,  547.

Cunovali,  539.

Curci,  522.

C uracil  Life,  Curragb  of  Kildare,
506.

Cii-n,  Cii-roi,  Cu-rui,  472-7,  479.

Curry,  O',  599.

Custennin,  489-90,  494-5.

Cwm  Cawlwyd,  Owl  of,  555.

cwelan,  cwellan,  38.

Cybele,  3.

Cyclopes,  100.

cyfaift,  cyfaiHt,  480.

cyu  ('roc,  374:   seo  Neol.

cymlion,  400.

cynthron:  see  cynrbon.

Cynwal,  539.

Dacia,  454.

DsBdalua,  381.

dseg,  490.

dagas,  497.

Da-da,  the,  75-6,  135,144-50,  152,
154,  169-70,  191,  257,  371,
388,  579,  586,  604,  614,  616,
640,  644-5,  647,  651-2,  655-6.


686


INDEX.


dagis,  496.
dagr,  497.
Dagovasus,  11.
dah,  496.
Dahaka,  656.
Dair,  213.
Daire,  473.
Dairggdig,  435.
Dairthechta,  142.

Sa/O'O),  541.

SuKpv,  467.

Dal  Eiada,  322.

Dattben,  282.

dalthuan,  574.

Daftwaran,  282.

Dattweir,  282.

Daftwyr,  282.

Damona,  25-6.

dan,  394-5.

Danann,  89  ;  see  Danu.

Danu,89,  91,  395-6,  579,  597, 663.

dar,  675.

David,  St.,  193.

David's,  St.,  380.

Darthula,  335.

Dath6,  330,  483,  511-2.

dawn,  395.

Dawn,  the,  299,  300,  302,  385,

444,  456,  458.
Day  of  Doom,  562.
de,  89,  118.
De  Domnann,  597.
dea,  89,  144.
Dea  Domnu,  587.
Dead  Ancestor,  the,  656.
Death,  479,  659.
Decet,  70.
Dechtere,  141,  143-4,  174,  379,

431-4,  443,  496-7,  502.
Dee,  the,  455,  598.
deep  wheel,  Gefjon's,  379.
degu,  496.
deigr,  467.

Deisi,  the,  134,  321,  478,  504.
Delia,  520.
Delos,  384,  515.
Delphi,  222.

Deluge,  the  Aryan,  641,  649,660-1.
Demetse,  242.
demin,  552.


Demne,  Deimne,  552-3,  560.

demon-steed,  the,  607-8.

Denmark,  590.

der,  der,  467.

Derborgaill,  465-7,  479.

Derdrin,  335-6.

derg,  122.

Dermot ;  see  Diarmait.

Derry,  664.

Dervorgild,  466.

Deucalion,  661.

Aev86pi£,  30.

Devil,  the,  516,  608.

deu-lynn,  400.

deus,  117.

Deutsch,  45.

deva,  117.

devas,  117.

deve,  117.

devi,  117.

Devo  Nodenti,  126.

Devognata,  117.

dew,  468.

dhvan,  92.

dhvanta,  92.

dia,  117-8,  144.

Dian  Cecht,  381,  390,  579,  621.

Diana,  44,  70.

Diarmait,  135,  146,  187-92,  347,

355,    357,   503,    505-11,   514,

528-9,  560-1,  624.
Dienstag,  41.
dies,  118.

Diespiter,  109,  117.
Diet,  45.
Dietrich,  30-1.
dieu,  116.
Dimanche,  202.
Dingle,  473-4,  522-4,  564.
din,  34,  406.
dinas,  34,  406.
Dinas  Dintte  :  see  Dintte.
Dinas  Emrys,  151,  161,  173:  see

Emrys.
dinech,  309.
dineu,  309.
Dinevor,  423.
Dinioch,  309.
Dintte,  Dintteu,  236,  272,   307,

401,  406-7,  413,  420.


INDEX.


687


Dinffef,  400,  406  :  see  I  initio.
Dinmeirchion,  406.
dio,  117.

Aioyewjs,   117.

Dion  Cassius,  2  1.

I  Dionysus,  039.

Awfe,  110.

6ios,  117.

Dio  vis,  116.

Dirona,  27.

Die,  65,  69,  77,  81,  84,  91,  99,

360,391,475,582,591,638,014.
Distorted  Ono,  the,  438.
diu,  110.

ditip  rodul,  284,  435.
div,  1 1  3.
diva,  117.
divasa,  1 1 7.
(lives,  81.
Diviciacus,  1.
Divona,  27.
divus,  117.
divya,  117.
do,  270.
Dobar,  257.
Dodona,  222.
Doel  Dermait,  345-7,    354,   374,

451,  494-5.
doini,  92.
doiu,  117.

Dome,  Puy  de,  182,  675.
Domhnach,  202.
Dominoc,  103-4.
dominicum,  202.
dominus,  598.

Doninall,  Domnal,  323,  449,  458.
Domnu,  Domna,  583,  589,  597-8.
doinuiniur,  377.
Don,  89-91,  236,  244-5,  271,  274,

283,  306-7,  318-9,  333.
Donand,  89  :  see  Danu.
Donegal,  664.
Donn,  504-6,  529.
donner,  58.
Donon,  182.
Donovan,  O',  314,  319,  522,  567,

664.
Dontaurios,  92.
Donu,  89,  91.
donum,  395.


Doom  of  the  Age,  652.

Dorney,  O',  71.

Dornolla,  458.

doruthethaig,  L42.

Doum,  12,  13.

Dovvinias,  Dovinia,  524,  526.

Suvi'ov,  428.

Dowth,  148.

Dragon,  the,  616:  see  Earth-
serpent.

Draupnir,  328,  365-6,  308,  373,
375,  531,  533,  632.

Drogheda,  148.

Droichet  an  Alta,  451.

Dropper,  531  :  see  Draupnir.

drui,  213.

Druidae,  221,  675.

druidechta,  (!<'•,  224.

druids,  the,  91,  137,  599,  073.*^  £<

Drumnatinne,  314,  317.

Drunemeton,  ^pwi^rov,  219,  221.

Spvs,  221.

Du  Moro,  370-1,  608.

Du  Traws,  352.

Du  y  Moroed,  370.

Duach  Dal],  409.

Duald  mac  Firbis,  602.

Dub  Sainglend,  441.

Duben,  338,  314,  379,  503,  505,
521-3,  525-9,  543,  566.

Dubgaill,  590.

Dubhros,  355-6.

Dublin,  010.

Dubr-duiu,  117,  675.

Dugan,  8hane  O',  314.

Duibind,  521  :  see  Duben.

Duibne,  Ui,  522.

Duibni,  Duibne,  314,  504-5:  see
Duben.

duine,  92.

Dulyn,  185.

duma,  13.

Dumiates,  12-3,  47.

Dumnonii,  597.

Dunmu,  597.

Dun  Aengus,  150.

Dun  Inbir,  462,  464.

Diin  Mauann,  324.

diinaim,  35.

Dunates,  33-5,  47.


688


INDEX.


Dunbolg,  597.

Dunmore  Head,  524.

dunon,  34,  428.

Durlas,  211-2.

Durthacht,   142,   328,   335,    366,

373-4,  382.
Dutch,  45.
duw,  116,  119.
Duw  Gwyn,  528.
dvina,  92.

dwarfs  under  the  sea,  550.
dwinan,  92.
dwindle,  91.
dvvyf,  117.
dwyfol,  117.
Dwyvach,  649.
Dwyvan,  649.
dwyne,  91.
Dyaus,    109-10,   114,    116,    118,

181,  220,  301,  657.
Dyaushpitar,  40,  109,  116.
dyd,  118,  175,  496.
dyfyd,  277.
Dylrdwyf,  117.
Dy'gwyl  y  Meirw,  515,  676.
Dylan,  307-8,  386-7,  389-90,  393,

430,  504,  566.
dyn,  92,  377.
dynes,  92.
dyneton,  92.
Dynthle,  407.
Dyu,  40-1,  118.
dyv,  dyw,  116-7.
Dyved,  242,  306,  341,  501,  504.
Dyvnarth,  561.
Dyvnwal,  449.
dywawd,  277.
dyvvedyd,  276.

Eadaoin,  91 :  see  Etain.

Eager,  the,  640.

Eagor,  639.

Earth,  72-3,  111-4, 181,  645,  669-

70.
Earth-serpent,  534,  612.
Eber,  526,  582.
Eccen,  563.
Eccet,  563-5,  570.
Echaid:  seealsoEochaid,Eochaidh.
Eehaid  Airem,  247,  579.


Echaid  Bairche,  450.

Echaid  Echbel,  477.

Echaid  Echchen,  593.

Echaid  of  Eol,  342.

Echaid  Feidlech,  579.

Echaid  Glas,  344,  353-4,

Echaid  mac  Luchtai,  326-7.

Echaid  mac  Maireda,  463.

Echaid  Ollathair,  579,  616.

Echaid  Eond,  374.

Echaid  son  of  Ere,  409,  586,  589.

Echchen,  608:  see  Echaid  Echchen.

Echen,  564:  see  Eccen.

Echidna,  600.

i)(VpOS,  34.
e'xco,  34.

Ecu],  564  :  see  Eccet.

Edain,  317  :   see  Etain.

edeithor,  497.

Eden,  the  Garden  of,  637,  656.

Edne,  Edle,  417.

Eglwys  Wrw,  380.

Egypt,  620.

Eigr,  486.

Eirene,  495.

Eistedvod,  the,  18,  208-9.

Eithne :   see  Ethne.

Eivl,  236.

Elatha,  Elathan,  254,  274-6,  278,

280,  586.
Elcmar,  147.

elegy  to  Ciiroi,  the  Welsh,  475.
Elen,  161-2, 164-5,  167,169,173-4,

456,  678.
Eleranus,  201.
elfyd,  42.
Elidyr,  370-1.
Elijah,  214.
Ellen,  161.
ettyft,  138.
Eftytt  Malen,  608.
Elphin,  545,  547.
Eltheod,  45.
Elunet,  351.
Emain,  330, 346,433-6, 447,452-3,

462,  496.
Embla,  285.
Emer  (fem.),  395,  443,  448,  455-6,

458,  461-2,  466,  479,  485,  542.
Emer  (mas.),  526,  582 :  see  Eber.


INDEX.


(iS'J


Emrys,  151-5,  161,  165-6,  108-9,

173,  194.
Enamelling,  tho  Art  of,  G65.
€\'Sios,  117.

ei'i]  Kal  via,  308,  517,  521.

englyn,  210,  244.

Enfti,  155.

Enniskillen,  319.

ent,  entisc,  295.

Eo  Feasa,  554,  677.

Eochaid :  see  Ecfaaid.

Eochaidh  Gharbh,  409.

Eogan,  63.

Eogan  mac  Durthacht,  142,  335,

452.
Eogan  of  Inber,  342.
Eogan  Mor,  91,  122.
Eoghan,  63  :  see  Eogan.
Eol,  gen.  Iiiil,  342.
eolus,  278.
Eos,  384.
Epona,  27.
Er,  520.
Ere  king   of  Leinster,   321,   471,

479,  482-3,  538-9,  590,  631.
Ere :   see  Eehaid.
erch,  483.
Eicias,  524-5.
Ereol,  600.
Eremon,  582.
Eri,  501,  577.
Erichthoniua,  517,  639.
Erinn,  417-9.
Erinnyes,  104.
Erna,  Ernai,  527,  588.
Ernoll,  590.
Erp,  524,  527.
Erris,  583.
Ertliam,  73.
Erythria,  622.
esa,  61.

Esni,  179,  478.
Essenberg,  289.
Esugenonertus,  63.
Esugenos,  63.
Esunertus,  63.
Ebos,  61,  03-5,  08,  72-3,  80,  232,

040.
Etain,  91,  145-6,  317.
Etal,  170,  172.

9


etan,  275-0.

Etan,  253,  317-8.

Ethiopians,  the,  010.

Ethlenn,  Eithlenn,  390,  410,414,

443  :   see
Ethne,  319,  390-1,  410,  417.
Etline  [ngubai,  458.
Ethne  Uathach,  478.
Ethne  wife  of  Concliobar,  139.
Ethnea,  315-0,  390:  see  Ethne.
Eubonia,  001.
Eudav,  104.

evSien'OS,  117.
evSua-repos,  117.
Eugein,  03.
Eugenius,  03.
eulodeu,  399.
Eumasus,  527.
Eumenins,  26.
Eunomia,  495.
Euphrates,  556.
Eurgein,  371.
Eurynome,  638.

Faehtna,  137,  139,  144.

Fad  Felen,  y,  608.

fad,  318.

Faery,  445.

Fafuir,  677.

fagus,  54.

Failbhe,  Ui,  522.

Fairge,  328,  335.

Fairguneis,  220.

fairguni,  220.

faith,  202,  277-8,  283.

Fal,  123-5,  130,  108,  206-8,  210,

212,  214-6,  576.
Falga,  475-6.
Fall,  y,  608-9.
Falvys,  the  O',  522.
Fand,  342,  460-4,  460,  407,  477.
i'anna-tyr,  119.
lath,  277-8.

Fathach,  137,  139,  277.
Feast  of  the  Dead,  the,  076.
Feats  of  Crichulainn,  the,  440.
Febis,  526.
Fedelm,  378,  630-1.
Fomis :  see  Febis.
Foni,  the,  357(


J.  Y


GOO


INDEX.


Fenri's  Wolf,    120-1,    392,   530,

611-2,  615,  619,  677.
Fensal,  Fensalir,  530,  543.
fer,  fir,  21,  282.
Fer  Baeth,  480.
Fer  Diad,  480-1.
Fer  Tlachtga,  515.
Feradach,  312.
Ferceirtne,  474.
Ferchertne,  331.
fergara,  469.
Ferghoir,  489.

Fergus  the  Black-toothed,  134.
Fergus  Fairge,  328,  647.
Fergus  mac  Rdig,    137-40,   328,

335,  435,  522,  646-8,  651,  659,

668.
Fergus  and  the  Luchorpain,  591-2,

596.
Ferloga,  142-3,  513.
Ferna,  393.
fervere,  26.
Fferytt,  544.
Fflam,  179-80.
Ffleudor,  180.
Fflewdur,  179.
Ffiur,  fflur,  153,  239.
Fford  Elen,  167.
Fiac's  Pool,  553.
Fial,  677.

Fiann,  Fian,  98-9,  552,  559.
Fidba :  see
Fidga,  631,  641.
Field  of  Ith,  605  :  see  Ith.
file,  144,  442.
Fimbul-ty,  534,  613.
fimm,  flint,  365.
Finland,  636.
Finn,  40,  98,  144,  146,  178,  181,

187,  251-2,  255,  322,  355,  357,

552-3,  508-9,  560,  565.
Finn  Eces,  553,  560-1.
Finnchoem,  432,  434,  512,  539.
Finnfal,  122-4,  130,  208,  577.
Finnghlais,  474.
Fir  P.olg,  120,  150,  213,  252-3,

277,  321,409,419,  579,581-2,

585-9 1, 596-7, 599, 601-3, 606-7,

609-11,  614-5,  619,  627,  653,

659,  677.


Fir  Dea,  89,  579.

Fir  Domnann,  581,  589-90,  597,
599,  603.

Fir  Morca,  593,  608.

firgen,  220.

First  of  Aug.,  516,  518-9.

First  of  May,  498-9,  519-20,  545-6,
562,  607.

First  of  Nov.,  459-60,  473,  514,
584,  587,  614  :  see  Nov.-eve.

Firtri,  Corca,  522.

Fjorgynn,  220.

Flann,  171,  173,  211.

Flood,  the  :  see  Deluge.

Flouest,  M.,  69.

fo,  591-2.

foelaid,  318.

Fogamur,  514.

Foi,  212.

folk,  46.

Fomor,  Fomhair,  589,  594,  606,
662.

Fomori,  Fomoraig,  253-4, 262, 275,
280,  387-9,  391,  396-7,  413,
419,  427,  449,  464,  466,  579,
582,  584-91,  593-6,  598,  603-5,
608-11,  614-5,  662,  677-8.

foraith,  277.

Forgall,  376,  395-6,  416,  448,  450,
455-7,  465-8,  479,  487,  492-3.

formach,  23.

Forseti,  534,  541,  633.

foss,  1  1 .

Fothad,  505.

Four  Dimples  of  Ciichulainn,  437.

Four  Kisses  of  Aengus,  370.

Four  Trefoils  of  Olwen,  490-1.

Franang,  539.

Freija,  read  Freyja.

Frey,  492,  612,  652,  676.

Freyja,  84,  619.

Friday,  543.

Frigedaeg,  543.

Frigg,  529-33,  536,  542-3.

Fuad,  441.

Fulla,  533.

Fursa,  172.

fylkir,  46.

gabur,  593.


INDEX.


69]


Gaea,  111,  115.

gaesum,  381,  600.

gai,  381,  441,  481,  600-1.

Gai  Bolga,  the,  441,  481.

Gaidoz,  M.,  8,  42,  55-6,  60,  65-6,

118,  176-7,  453,  575.
Gailcrfin,  Gailiiiin :  soo
Gailioin,  330-1,581,  585,  589-90,

598-601,  603.
gaill,  590.
Gair,  250.
Galli,  599.
Gallians,  the,  599.
Gallizenae,  196.
Gann,  584-5,  589.
Gardens  of  Lug,  448,  455.
Garni,  612,  615.
garta,  448.
Gascony,  154.
Gauta-tyr,  119.
Gavaelvawr,  372.
Gavida,  314,  316-9.
Gefjon,  284,  379,  435,  543,  546.
gein  n-amra,  570.
gein  m-buada,  570.
geir,  Geir,  250,  270,  280.
Geirionyd,  250,  555.
Geirroedr,  456-7.
Geiryoed,  Geiryoed,  250,  280.
Geiryon,  250.
gcle,  geleu,  400.
Gele6n,  600-1.
Gelonus,  Geloni,  600-1.
Gem-lea,  534,  613.
Genann,  584-5,  589.
geniessen,  128.
genus,  570.

Geoffrey,  129,  354,  567.
Georgics,  the,  600.
Gerdr,  492.
Germania,  the,  662.
Geryon,  14,  477.
gess,  gessa,  99,  507-8,  647.
ghar,  22.
ghrna,  22.

Giants,  the,  619,  670,  677-8.
Gildas,  547.
Gilchrist,  215.
Gilla  Dacker,  the,  318.
gille.  215.

o


Gillecomded,  215.

Gillecrist,  215.

Gilvaethwy,  90,  336.

Gioll,  533.

Gnaldus,  580.

Glas  Gaivlen,  the,  319.

Glass,  217.

Glass  Fortress,  the,  264,  550.

Glass  House,  the,  155-6,  161,  264.

(ilaucus,  126.

gleam,  22.

Glen,  the,  344.

glenn,  399.

Glenn  ngaibthech,  451.

Glewlwyd,  372,  640,  667.

Glinneu,  561.

Glitnir,  534,  633.

Gloaming,  the,  385.

Glodaith,  497.

Gloucester,  G26.

Gloyw  Wattt-lydan,  501.

Goborchinn,  593.

gobur,  593.

God  of  Druidism,  the,  443.

godeith,  godaith,  4'.'7.

Godeu,  244,  248,  257-8.

Goddess  of  the  Deep,  the,  615:

see  Domnu.
Godmundr,  456-7,  626.
Godo,  180.

gods  and  not-gods,  581.
Goewyn,  306,  336-7.
Goibniu,  90,  319,  388,  579.
Goleudyd,  486,  494,  496-7.
Goll,  552.
Goreu,  668.
Goronwy  Owen,  97.
Goronwy  Pevr,  240,  474,  616-7.
gorsed,  205,  206  9.
Gorugiau  Triplets,  the,  667.
Gothia,  454.
Govannon,  90,  307,  318-9,  386-7,

389-90.
Govynion,  Govynnion,   90,   319  :

see  Govannon.
Gower,  668.
graienyn,  571.
Grainne,  146,  357,  506-7,  509-10,

560.
Gianheim,  24.


1  X  Z


692


INDEX.


Grannos,  Grannus,  3,  21-2,  24-5,

27,  510.
Gratian,  166-7.
Graunes,  Eaux,  24.
Graux,  24.
Great  Island,  650.
Gregory  of  Tours,  9,  10.
Greid,  561,  577.
Greidiawl,  561.

Greine,  Mac,  418,  542,  569,  579.
Gresholm,  96,  665.
Greth,  563.
Gretti,  85.

Grey  of  Macha,  the,  441.
grian,  571.
Griaii-ainech,  20.
grianan,  145-6.
gruagach,  189-90.
Gudriin,  457.
Guernsey,  198.
Guest,  Lady  Charlotte,  306.
guetid,  277.
Gula  Augusti,  424.
Gule  of  August,  412.
Gundfled,  287-8,  298,  337.
Gungnir,  284.
Gunther,  482,  511.
Guth-ard,  200.
Gwair,  250  :  see  Gweir.
Gwalchmai,  430.
Gwales,  96-7.
gwalstawt,  gwalstot,  489.
Gwanar,  180.
Gwanas  Gwyr,  668.
gwarawt,  277.
gwared,  277.
gwas,  '  a  man,'  23.
gwas,  'a  mansion,'  11.
Gwas  Duiu,  117.
Gwasgwyn,  153-4.
gwawd,  277-8,  283.
gwawl,  123,  168.
gwed,  276.
gwedyd,  276-7.
Gweir,  249-50, 252, 254,  270,  282,

285.
Gweiryoed,  249-50:  see  Geiryoed.
gweled,  277.
Gwen,  161.
Gwendyd,  157.


Gwennan,  161.

gwenriain,  527.

Gwent,  Nether,  498.

Gwenwynwyn,  180.

Gwernabwy,  the  Eagle  of,  555.

Gwilym,  D.  ab,  555,  574.

Gwion,  544-5,  551-3,  558-60,
588-9.

gwir,  21.

gwledig,  151,  162,  165.

gwr,  21,  282.

Gwrgwst,  561.

Gwrhyr,  489.

Gwri,  486,  500-1,  546.

Gwron,  282.

gwyd,  277.

Gwyd,  271,  277-9.

Gwydion,  225,  236-45,  248-9,
254-5,  258-9,  262,  270-2,  274,
276-80,  283-8,  291-4,  297-9,
300-1,  304-8,  313-4,  318,  321,
324,  326,  330,  333,  336-7,  341,
347,  379,  382,  384-6,  389-90,
398,  404-6,  425,  544,  623,  629.

Gwydno,  155,  545.

Gwyl  Awst,  421.

Gwyl  Fair,  421.

Gwyl  Fihangel,  421.

Gwyl  Iwan,  421.

Gwyn  ab  Md,  84,  146,  179,
181-2,  355,  371,  473-4,  478,
511,  537,  559-63.

Gwyn  da  Gyued,  371.

Gwyn  da  Reimat,  371.

Gwyn  Gohoyw,  501.

Gwyn  son  of  Esni,  478.

Gwyn  son  of  Nwyvre,  478.

Gwynnwesi,  153  :  see  Wenwas.

gwynt,  35,  71,  282.

Gwysmeuric,  153.

Gwythur,  355,  511,  561-2.

Gyges'  ring,  378.

Gylfe,  284.

Gymir,  492.


Eicon,  226.

Hades,  90,  96,  248,  256-7,  261,
267,  276,  286,  291,  313,  326,
330-1,  333,  337-44,  346-7,  354,


INDEX.


G93


373,  441,  447,  451,  457,  501,

550,  G41,  643,  655,  678.
Half,  660.
half-week,  the,  438.
Hallinskidi,  83,  85.
Ham,  5'J3,  609.
hand-bani,  538.
Banga-ttfr,  119.
Happy  Isles,  the,  659  :  see  Isles

of  the  Blessed,
hare-witches,  199.
Harlech,  94,  96-7.
Ilarits,  the,  495.
haul,  heul,  houl,  572.
hauligaera,  573.

Havgan,  191,  339,  342,  344,  354.
Head  of  Hades,  373,  501,  550, 558,

665-6  :  see  Pwyft.
Headoric,  33.
headu,  537.

Heaven,  110-3,  182,  669-70.
Hediich,  33.
Heimdal,Heimdall,  82-5,365, 558,

602,  612,  656.
Heimdali,  85.
Helen,  167.
Helgi  Lays,  the,  198.
Helicon,  554.
Helios,  503,  571.
Hell,   329,  332,    347,   382,   430,

530-1,  533,  535,  546,  615.
Hellas,  622.
Hellen,  661.
Hcmera,  571.
Hen  Fenyw,  380.
Hengist,  154.
heol,  572.
Hephaestus,  381,  517-8,  521,  638-

40.
Heracles,  14-6,  20,  89,  141,  225,

234,  281-2,  284,  287,  291,  296,

378,  432,444,471,575,  623-6,

629-30,  678.
Hercules,  66, 68, 131,  273-4, 288-9,

477,  600  :  see  Heracles.
Here,  43,  72,  432,  471,  623,  630,

639.
Hericus,  429.
Hermes,  15,  20,   274,   287,  427,

620-1,  624.


Hermudr,  329,  382,  531,  533.

Hesiod,  495.

Hesus,  II,  47.

Hill  of  Ward,  the,  515.

himil,  39.

himmel,  39,  178.

hir,  27.

Hirp,  mac,  524.

hlafma'sso,  411.

Hod,  537.

Hodr,  530-2,  534,  537-9,  613.

Hoeni,  534,  613.

homo,  92.

Horace,  303.

Hone,  the,  495.

horn,  78.

Horsa,  154.

Hours,  the,  494-5.

Howel,  162.

Howth,  329.

Hu,  548,  592,  595.

huan,  574.

Hiibner,  Dr.,  126.

Hud  Gwyn,  562.

huitaine,  361.

luira,  115.

luima,  115.

Hwch  du  gwta,  yr,  515-6,  675.

Hwergelme,  557.

Hy-Fiachrach,  355.

Hy-Many,  343,  374.

Hyrrokin,  531.

by  ma,  115.

liymi,  115,  180-1,  661,  663.

Hyperboreans,  the,  194.

Hyperion,  111.

Ilyveid,  498.

Hywel,  102.

lair,  527.

iarann,  70.

Iarbhoinel,  262,  675:  seelardonel.

[arboneoil,  675.

[ardobar,  257.

Iardonel,  581,  675.

Iaripi,  524.

iarn,  70.

Iau,  175.

[bar  Cinn  Trachta,  461.

Iccavos,  75.


694


INDEX.


Icht,  467.

Ictian  Sea,  the,  467.
Ida,  660-1.

Ida-plain,  534,  612  :  see  Ith.
Ida-vbllr,  605  :  see  Ith.
Idris,  250,  279,  675.
Ier,  526.
Igrayne,  486.
Ildanach,  the,  427.
Inber,  342.

Indech,  587,  598,  615-6.
in-diu,  118.

India,  40,  181,  232,  292-301,  304,
382,  385-6,  390,  425,  623,  629.
iiidra,  295.

Ingcel,  135,  367,  650.
Inis  Ceithlenn,  319.
Inis  Fail,  206.
Inny,  139.
Insi  Gall,  476.
Inver  Domnann,  582,  598.
Iobath,  262.
ion,  62.
ior,  62.
iot,  117.

lovepvioi,  588,  677.
Ir,  526.

Isle  of  Man,  the,  663-4.
Isles  of  the  Blessed,  the,  643,  648.

t'cr^w,  34.

ith,  117.

ith,  etho,  605.

Ith,  Itha,  534,  605,  612,  631.

Iuchair,  393.

Iuchna,  477.

Iucharha,  393.

Iveragh,  barony  of,  522.

Jahveh,  50.

Janiculum,  648.

January,  360.

Janus,  94,  360,  648,  666.

Japetus,  14.

Japhet,  580.

Jason,  291-2.

jaiit,  117.

jauti,  117.

Jesuit  Missionaries,  the,  673.

Jesus,  22.

Jordan,  the,  556.


Jordanis,  61,  636.

Joshua,  50-1.

Jove,  2,  40-1,  47-9,  54-6,  58,  60,

72,78,80,109,117-8,122,132,

175-6,  178,  181,  195,  234,  295,

563,  575.
Jovius,  71.
Juliomagus,  7.
Juno,  43,  175.
Jupiter,   Jovis,    Jove :   see  Jove,

Zeus.
jus,  117.

KaS/xoyei/7js,  625.
Kadyrieith,  489.
Ka/xupa,  39.
kamara,  40.
kamaredha,  40.

KapvOV,   KiipVV^,  78.

Kastor,  571.

Keating,  409,  582-600.

keen,  the,  388-9.

Kei,  347,  490.

Kelydon,  486-7.

Keredigion,  463.

Kerridwen,  269,  544-6,  550,  565.

Kicva,  501.

Kildare,  193.

Kilgwri,  the  Blackbird  of,  555.

kill,  38.

Killaraus  Mons,  192.

Killare,  192-3.

Killorglin,  596.

Kilmactranny,  587.

Kilyd,  486.

Kineely,  Mac,  314-6,  318-9,  390.

king,  46.

Kinsale,  523.

kiola  valdi,  652.

Kp,z\e$pov,  40.

Knowth,  148.

Korkureti,  522.

Kpovia,  643.

K/Dovtwv,  643.

K.povo<s,  643.

Kulhwch,  28-9,  478,  486-95,  555,

559,  561,  577.
Kyledr,  561.
Kynan,  164-5.


INDEX.


G95


Kyndelw,  2G8-9,  408.
Kynon,  347-51.

K  ynval,  Kynvael,400 :  seeCynwal.
Kynyr,  317.
kyvarws,  488.

Labraid  of  the  Swift  Hand,  342,

346,  353,  4G1,  463,  631,  641.
Labraid  Longseeh,  590,  5(J3,  601,

608.
Labraid  Lore,  590.
Lady  of  the  Fountain,  351-3,  378.
Lady  of  the  Lake,  156-8,  641.
Lady  of  the  Van  Lake,  422-3,  463.
Laertes,  289-90.
Lag  an  Aonaigh,  418.
lagen,  600.

Lagin,  Laighin,  599-601.
Lam-fada,  390,  397,  409  :  see  Lug.
Lamia,  104,  106.
Lammas,  409-11.
Lancelot,  484.
Land  of   Immortality,   the,   627,

636.
Land  of  Promise,  the,  355-6,  397,

665.
Lang,  Mr.  Andrew,  111-2.
Laon,  420.
Last  day  of  Oct.,  587:  see  First  of

Xov.
Lares,  3.

Latham,  Dr.,  635.
Latona,  195,  497.
Lear,  562.
Leda,  173.

Leim  Conculainn,  462.
Lein,  Lake  of,  356.
Leinster,  467,  504,  511,  585,  599,

600,  609.
lenn,  399.
Leodus,  454.
Leto,  28,  444,  487,  497.
letsuanaigh,  618.
Leviathan,  530.
Lhuanys,  422.
I.ia  Fail,  206,  576-7.
Liath  Macho,  441.
Liban,  342,  460-3,  611.
Liflfey,  471,484-6,  506,  539,  610.
Liun  Feic,  5J3.


Linn  Leith,  441.

Lion,  Chevalier  au,  403,  503.

Lir,  342,  411,  461-2,  556,  579,
664,  666.

lir,  666  :   see  Lir.

Lit,  531.

Livy,  67.

Little  Van  Lake,  422.

Llandyssul,  230.

Llannvst,  555.

Llassar,  256.

Llawcreint,  125,  610.

LlawgyfFes,  237-8,  383,  399.

ttef,  405,

lietuegin,  385.

Lieu,  237,  385,  398-401,  404-7,
409,  413,  419,  425,  430,  432,
436,  473-4,  486,  493,  501,  504,
543,  546,  551,  561,  565,  571,
617,  625  :  see  Llew.

tteu  babir,  408.

fteufer,  tteuer,  408,  429.

Llew,  237-40,  248,  259,  272,  284,
299,  300,  305,  308,  318-9,  324,
341,  383-6,  389-90,  393,  398-
402,  404,  407,  486  :  see  Lieu.

flew,  237-8,  398,  401.

Lli,  96.

Lliaw,  Lliaws,  180.

Llion,  Llivon,  463,  583.

ttuched,  59.

tiuehio,  59.

Llud,  125,  127-30,  144,  173,  249,
511,  561-3,  577,  606-8,  610,
619,  643.

Llychlyn.  355.

Llydaw,  168.

ttyg,  428.

ttygliw,  428.

ttygoden,  428.

Llyn  y  Gadair,  404.

Llyn  Llion,  463.

Llyr,  94,  249,  425,  562,  577.

Llyvni,  405-6.

Loch  Cimbe,  601.

Loch  Cuan,  415,  465.

Loch  Derg,  326.

Loch  1  lergdeirc,  326.

Loch  Dub,  441.

Loch  Lamraith,  471.


696


INDEX.


Loch  Lugdech,  677.

L6ch  M6r,  526.

Loch  Tondchuil,  471.

lochdub,  428.

Lochlann,  129,  347,  355-6,  465,
467-8,  487,  615.

lochruna,  428.

Lodon,  556.

Loeg,  343,  441,  461.

Loegaire  Buadach,  430,  536,  594.

Locgaire  mac  Neill,  259,  416.

Logh,  408,  410.

Loki,  83,  120,  530-2,  534,  536,
538-40,  612,  615,  654.

Lomna,  98-9.

London,  129.

Lord's-day,  the,  202.

Lot :  see  Loth.

Loth,  Lothus,  125,  129,  583.

Lothar,  Lothor,  Lothur,  478.

Lothians,  the,  129.

Loucetius,  133.

Kovy&ovvov,  419.

AovyovSovvov,  419-20.

Lough  Corrane,  677.

Lough  Corrib,  664.

Lough  Foyle,  664,  667.

Lough  Hackett,  601.

Lough  Neagh,  279,  463.

Lough  Rudraide,  592.

Lough,  Strangford,  465.

Lough  Swilly,  605.

Xovyos,  lugos,  428.

Louth,  454.

Luachair,  462.

Luain,  336-7.

Lucan,  44-5,  47,  49,  60,  68,  70.

Lucdunum,  429  :  see  Lugdunum.

luch,  428.

Luchorpain,  the,  591,  606.

Luchuirp,  the,  592.

Luchtai,  326.

Lucian,  13,  20.

Lud,  129.

Ludgate,  129.

Ludi  Miscelli,  421.

Lug,  143,  210,  237,  316-9,  383,
390-1,394-8,407-14,418,420-1,
423,  426-7,429-31,435,  442-3,
445,  448,  454,  486,  496,  501-2,


512,  519,    536,  540-2,   570-1,

578-9,   586-7,    590,   611,   614,

616,  618,  623,  625,  639.
lug,  512,  540.
Lugaid,  328,  343,  443,  465,  471-3,

477-85,  503,  528,  538-41,  618.
Lugaid  Corr,  552,  676.
Lugaid  mac  Con,  524,  677.
Lugaid  son  of  Ith,  677.
lugbairt,  429.

Lugdunum,  34,  419-20,  428-30.
Lugdunum  Convenarum,  420.
Lugh,  397,  409  :  see  Lug.
lugliath,  428.
Luglochta  Loga,  448,  466.
Lugmod,  420.
Lugnassad,  409-11,  414-6,   418,

420,  423,  519.
Lugoves,  238,  419,  424-6,  430-1,

541.
Luguadicus,  541.
Lugudeceas,  Lugudeca,  540.
Lugus,  238,  419-20,  428-31,  486.
Lunet,  351-2,  378-9.
Lusca,  466.

Lycsean  Mountain,  the,  183.
Lynette,  351.
Lyons,  34,  419.
Mabon,  mahon,  21,  28,  31,  249,

400,  404,  423,  555,  577,  627.
mac,  320.
mac  legind,  320.
Macbeth,  104.
Macpherson,  335.
Macha,  330,  441.
macht,  23.
Macrobius,  56.  .
maccu,  522.
madfaft,  609.
mael,  215.
Maelan,  161.

Maelgwn,  12,  271,  547-8.
Maelmuiri,  215.
Maelpadraic,  215.
Maen  Ketti,  193.
Maen  Twrog,  244.
Mag  Bolg,  597.
Mag  Cro,  312.
Mag  n-Itha,  583,  605.
Mag  Mor,  275.


INDEX.


C07


Mag  Slecht,  200-2,  208,  215.
Mag  'fared,  387,  414-5,  5;S5  :  see

Moytura.
maga,  24.
magavan,  24.
M  i   ■  '.■,  Island,  477.
magna,  23.
maghavan,  23.
Magniac-o,  6,  7.
magnun,  23.
magu,  23.
main,  23.
Maine,  328,  366-70,  372-7,  380,

382.
Maini,  the,  366-7,  369-70,  373-4  :

see  Maine.
Mainz,  23.
mair,  124.
Maistiu,  150.
Malachi,  535.
Malahide  Bay,  583.
Malen,  607-8  :  see  March.
matt,  math,  608-9.
inalu,  59.
main  wen,  528.
man,  377.

Man,  324,  601,  638,  664.
Manann,  663-4.
Manann,  Dun,  324.
Manannan,   147,  256,   342,   377,

397,411,  461-2,464,  474,477,

663-7.
manas,  377,  380.
Manaw,  663-4.

Manawyctan,  377,  425,  663-8.
Manawyt,  666.
Mane  :  see  Maine.
Manes,  Mania,  662.
maiiman,  377.
Mannus,  377,  662.
Mans,  lc,  420.
juavrts,  377.
Mann,  377,  659-60.
maouez,  23.
mapon  :  see  mahon.
Ma])onos,  Maponus,  21,  27-8,  68,

404,  577  :  see  Apollo.
Marc,  590  :  see  Margg,  More.
March,  239,  271,  590,  650,  662.
March  Malaen,  607  :  see  Malen.


Ma  relies,  the,  11 9.

Margam,  668.

Margg,  590,  593,  608  :  see  More.

Marianne,  215.

mark,  149.

Maine,  29.

Mart,  ar,  568,  659.

marriages  at  Lugnassad,  418-9.

Mars,  2,  32-3,   35,   37,   40-2,    II,

48,  50,  68-9,  91,  118,  126,  130,

133,  181,  210,  537-9.
Mars-Jupiter,  468,  625,  631.
Martin,  St.,  538.
Martius,  71.
martulus,  59.
Math,  225-6,  236,  239,  241,  246,

284,  298,  305-8,  326,  336,  38  1,

389,  398,  406,  424,  432,  527.
Mathohvch,  94-5,  619.
Mathonwy,  305,  527  :  see  Math.
Mathremail,  367,  369.
Matraa :  see
Mat  res,  100-4.
Matrona,  27,  29.
Matron*,  100.
mavi,  23.
maw,  23.

Max  Miiller,  Prof.,  107.
Maxcn,  160,  162,  164-9.
Maxim,  167,  675.
Maximianus,  167.
Maximus,  166-7.
may,  23.
Mayence,  23.
Mayo,  583.
Mhocobis,  the,  673.
meal,  59.
mealde,  59.
nieanadh,  G66.
meaning,  377.
Medb,  137-40,  142,  170,  322-3,

330,  367-9,410,444,  468,  4  7:.,

478-80,   482,   511,   598,    601,

627,  646.
mediant,  103.
Medea,  291-2.
Meirchion,    239,    271,   590,   650:

see  March.
Mela,  130,  174,  196-9.
fitXadpov,  40.


G08


INDEX.


metit,  59.

Melyngan  Gamre,  385.

memini,  377.

fxifiora,  377.

menaoued,  665.

Menai,  405.

fteveacvu),  377.

Menelaus,  660.

Meneviensis,  380.

menma,  377.

/xevos,  377,  380.

mens,  377.

Mevrwp,  377.

Menw,  380  :  see

Menyw,  375-7,  380,  489.

Mercceur,  8.

Mercoiray,  8.

Mercoire,  8.

Mercoiset,  8.

Mercuer,  8.

Mercurette,  8.

Mercurey,  8.

Mercurie,  8.

Mercurot,  8.

Mercury,  a  place,  8.

Mercury,  the  god,  1,  3,  6-9,  35,  47,

49,73,  80,88,110,  231-2,274,

281,  285,  294,  321,  428,  675.
Merlin,    125,   144,   151-61,    174,

184,   187,    192-5,   225-6,    544,

577,  640-1,  651,  667.
mermaids,  198,  660.
Mersey,  the,  454-5.
Mesgegra,  136,  330,  483-5,  513.
Mesroida,  511,  513.
Messiah,  the,  613.
meu,  407.

meudwy,  23,  117,  407.
Midas,  593.
Middleby  Kirk,  597.
Mider,  145,  331-4,  395, 473,475-7,

549,  579,  604,  627.
Midluachair,  462.
Midsummer-day,  586.
might,  23.
Milbel,  368.
Milde  mon,  Mil  de  mal,  449  :  see

Domnall.
Mile,  90-1,  147,  313,  569,  579,

581-2,  603,  643.


Miles  Hispanic,  263,  582.
Milesians,  the,  506,  542,  569,  579,

582,  588-9,  603-4,  643-4.
Milscothach,  368-70.
Milton,  479.
Mim,  557-8,  568.
mind,  377.
Minerva,  Menerva,  2,  3,  73-5,  77,

377,  379-80,  546.
Mmgor,  367,  369.
Minocannus,  90.
Minos,  Mtvws,  377,  660-3,  668.
mistletoe,  the,  530.
Mithras,  3,  100.
Mjolnir,  59,  531,  646.
mlatiti,  59.
mlatu,  59.
mlunij,  59.
mo,  525.

Mo  Dovinia,  524-5.
M6  Epert,  367-70.
moco,  mocu,  muco,  522.
Mocu-Dalon,  522.
Mocu-Euntir,  522.
Mocu-Sailni,  522.
Modaib  Loga,  420.
Modron,  28-9,  400,  423,  577.
moel,  449.

Moel-mud,  449  :  see  Dyvnwal.
M6en,  311,  317-8,  542,  546,  566.
Mo-Febis,  525-6.
Mog  Neit,  215.
Mog  Nuadat,  122,  215.
Mog  Euith,   211-2,  214-6,   381,

515,  517,  526.
mb'gen,  23.
Mogha,  Corca,  522.
Mogounos,  Mogounus,  22-4,  27.
Moguntia,  23.
Moguntiacum,  23.
Mo-haulum,  525-6.
Mold,  204.
molina,  59.
Mo-ling,  211.
molo,  59.

Mo-luigid,  526,  528.
Momaros,  428.
mon,  376.

monach,  manach,  376,  395.'
Monapia,  663.


INDEX.


699


raonoo,  377.

Mongan,  552.

Mons  Jovifl,  167.

Mont  St.  Michel,  91,  161,  334.

Montmartre,  8.

Montmeroure,  8.

Moon,  the,  672-3,  678.

Morann,  310-4,  317,  323-4.

More,  262,  584,  590,  593,  608-9,

662  :  see  Marc,  Margg.
Morcant,  229.
Mordav,  544.
Morecambe  Bay,  455.
Morgan,  229.
Morgant,  160.
Morgen,  229,  408.
Morgor,  367,  369.
Moridunon,  160.
Morien,  229.
Morn,  496  :  see  Eos.
Morna,  mac,  552  :  see  Goll.
Moro,  370-1 :  see
Morois,  371,  608:  see  Brun.
Mdrrfgu,  43-4,  452,  468,  470-1,

604,  629.
Morris,  Lewis,  97.
morrow,  408.
Morva  Dintteu,  407.
Morvran,  565.
Morvud,  423.
Moses,  52.
Mothers,  the,  101-2.
Mowat,  M.,  64-6,  78-9,  82.
Moytura,  585,  587,  589-90,  601,

604,  614,  617,  619,  626,  631,

644  :  see  Mag  Tured.
mruig,  149.
Muena,  591.
mug,  23,  407.
Mug.iin,  139.
Mug-eime,  247,  320.
main,  374.
Muineamon,  373.
muir,  257,  467,  591-2.
Muirn,  252.
Mulpatrick,  215.
Munster,  585,  609.
Muroif,  371 :  s^e
Murias,  257,  371.
Murthemne,  393,  435,  444,  446,


452,  454,  459,  471,  481,  638,

647.
Muse,  308,  310,  317,  320-1:  see

Cairbre.
Muscraige,  321.
Muscraigc-Thiro,  441.
Muscraighe,  521,
Muscry,  321.
Muskerry,  321.
Muspell,  615.

Mwynvawr,  370:  see  Elidyr.
Mydvai,  423.
Mygnacli,  153.
Mynach,  372.
Mynawg,  376-7.
mynawyd,  665.
Mynogan,  90,  377.
Mynyw,  380.
Myrdin,  151,  160,  168.
Myrmidons,  the,  597.

Naas,  329-30.

Nama,  mac,  650.

Namnites,  196.

Nanna,  533.

Nantes,  196.

Nanttte,  Nanttteu,  240,  400,  405.

nao,  362.

Nar,  478.

nassa,  416.

nassad,  nasadh,  410,  415.

nauda,  128.

Naue,  Mac,  320.

naut,  128.

Nav,  Naw,  180,  271,  650.

naw,  362,  364.

Nawmod,  376  :  see

Nawmon,  371-2,  376.

neat,  128.

Necht,  122-3,  130.

Neehtan,  122,  556.

nef,  649.

nef  wen,  528.

negar,  123.

Neivion,  Neivon,  258, 27 1,649-50.

nem,  649.

Nemausus,  100.

Nemed,  Nemid,  213,  262-3,  580,

582-3,  585-6,  589,  608,  649-51,

668.


'00


INDEX.


Nemedians,  the,  584.

Neinetiali-,  101-2.

ve/J.t]Tov,  46,  102.

Nemetona,  42.

Nemon,  42.

Nennius,  151,  167,  584,  600-1.

Neol,  374.

neotan,  128.

Neptune,  123,  126-7,  130-1,  649-

50.
Nereids,  the,  106.
Nessa,  135-7,  143,  324,  646.
Nestor,  15.
Net,  42,  215.
Neta-Ttrenalugos,  12,  203.
Nethawc,  561.
netta,  neta,  33,  203.
Netta-Segamonas,  33-4.
Nevenhyr,  258.
Nevwy,  649.

Nevyd,  583,  651,  663,  668.
Newgrange,  148.
newid,  362.
Newry,  461,  610.
Newtown  Hamilton,  441.
nexus,  415.
nia,  33,  203.
Niad,  321.
Niafer,  321-2,  601.
Niall,  374-5,  475.
Niaman,  42,  323.
Nibelungen  Lied,  the,  32,  96.
Nick,  123.
nieor,  123.
Niflheim,  530.
nigiro,  123.

Nimeth,  263  :  see  Nemed.
Nine  Forms,  376,  378.
Nine  Gates,  373.
Nine  Hazels,  373,  554.
Nine  Hearts,  378.
Nine  Hostages,  374.
Nine  maiden  Mothers,  365,  558.
Nine  Maidens,  373.
Nine  Muses,  558.
Nine-night  Week,  360,  365.
Nine  Porters,  372.
Nine  Tricks,  376.
Nine  Witches,  373,  626.
ftibrdr,  652-4,  659.


niutan,  128.

nix,  123.

vt£w,  123.

njbta,  128.

Noah,  Noe,  580,  593.

Noatiin,  653.

Nodens,  125-8,  130-3,  159,  176,

178,  610.
noinden,  noenden,  the,  362-5,  368,

370-1,  438,  480.
Nos  Galangaeaf,  514-6.
Nbis,  mac,  479.
nomad,  364.
Norns,  the,  334.
nouitiou,  362.
November-eve,  459-60,  464,  473,

507,  514,  516,  662  :  see  First

of  Nov.
Nuada,    119-23,   125,   129,   133,

135-6,  144,  181,  208,  252,  275,

381,  396,  414,  427,  576-7,  579,

586-7,    609-11,    615-6,    621,

642-4.
Nud,  125,  127-8,  159,  179,  181,

559-60,  563,  577.
nundinse,  361,  363.
Nuts,  the  Crimson,  356.
niitze,  128.
Nwython,  561.
Nwyvre,  123,  179-80.
nyfed,  102.
Nyx,  571.

6,  522.

oath,  a  form  of  Manx,  361.

6c,  the  Mac,  144-50,  152,  155,
161,  169-71,  185,  191,  225-6,
604,  644,  647  :   see  Aengus.

Occidentalis,  Cumulus,  168.

Oceanus,  111-2.

Ochidient,  Cruc,  168.

Ochren,  248,  346  :  see  Achren.

Odenn,  Odinn,  278  :  see  Woden.

bdr,  278.

Odysseus,  280,  291,  327.

Odyssey,  the,  327,  527,  640.

benach,  362,  369.

Oengus,  144:  see  Aengus.

oer,  38.

oerfel,  38.


INDEX.


dl


Oeruectawc,  371.

Oeth,  G67-8.

ofyct,  17.

Ogam,  18-20,  33,  98,  271,  523-1.

Ogma,  17-20,  274,  321,  579,  611,

615,  621.
Ogmios,   13,   16,  18-9,  274,  281,

285,  287,  294,  296,  301,  304.
oy/ios,  19.

Ogo  Macn  Cymwd,  97.
Ogyrven,  267-9,  275.
ogyrvena,  the,  268,  274.
dibell,  38.

oidheam,  19.

Oingus,  144:  see  Aengus.

Oissin,  Oisin,  55 1  :   see  Osshi.

Olaf,  286,  456-7.

Olgen,  245.

Ollathair,  644.

Olom,  391,  525:  see  Ailill.

Ohven,  28,  413,  486-8,  490-2,  494.

Olympus,  183,  620,  622,  624,  640.

Oppianicnos,  57,  75.

Orbsen,  664.

Orkney,  454.

Ormuzd,  62.

Orpheus,  291.

Osbeorn,  63.

Osborne,  63.

Oscar,  561.

Osismi,  196.

Oslac,  63.

Osma,  424,  541.

Ossin,  551-2,  558,  561.

Osmod,  63.

oss,  os,  551.

ouareis,  278.

oulodeu,  399.

Oiy)ai't<5as,  649.

Oi-paros,  40,  115,  180,  649:  see
Uranus.

ovyct,  17-8,  274.

Owein,  63,  162,  185,  191,  347,
350-4,  378,  401-4,  423,  429-
30,  430,  457,  472,  494,  624.

owl,  the,  241.

pabwyr,  408  :  see  lieu.
page,  23.

7TCu5lOl',  23.


Pair  Dadeni,  256.
Panathenaa,  the,  414,  423,  519.
Papa,  112-3.
Paradise,  556.
Parisii,  130.
Parjanya,  220,  295.
Partholomaeus,  263  :  see
Parthnlon,   580,  582,  589,  604-5,

651,  668.
Patrick,  St.,  193,  200-2,  213,  215,

259.
Patroclus,  410.
Paul,  St.,  129.
Peblic,  258.
Pelagianism,  547.
Pelagius,  230.
Tre/Aird^o),  365.
Penates,  3.
Pcncawr,  373.
Pendaran  Dyved,  500-1.
Penka,  Dr.,  636.
Penk  ridge,  203.
Penltech,  371.
Pcnllyn,  565.
Penn  Cruc,  203.
Pennocrucium,  203.
penrhyn,  406.
Pentheus,  625.
penthryn,  406.
Penzance,  539.
Peredur,  373,  403,  430,  592,  608,

626.
Perilous  Glen,  the,  451.
irepKos,  483.
Perkunos,  219-21.
Persephone,  131,  563.
Perverse  Black  Knight,  the,  352-4,

494.
Peter,  St.,  83,  211,  412.
Petrylew,  371.
peuttawr,  407.
Phoebus,  127,  501,  639.
^/yoraios,  54.
^yos,  54.
Pictava,  600.
Pictet,  M.,  61.
Picts,  the,  600-1,  610.
Pitaras,  the,  658.
Plain  of  Itli,  the,  605.
Plant  y  Fall,  608.


702


INDEX.


Pliny,  9.
7rAo{rj-os,  81.

IIAoi'tcov,  81. :  see  Pluto.

Plutarch,  632.

Pluto,  81,   83-5,  131,  475,  537,

563,  569.
poculuni,  67.
podium,  8.
Poictiers,  600.
Polar  Sea,  the,  637.
Pollux,  36-7,  571.
Polyphemus,  280,  288,  327.
Porguini,  220.
Porphyrio,  622-3.
Portzmarch,  590.
Posidon,  130,  569.
Posphorus,  22,  24.
poutlorawr,  407.
Powell,  Mr.,  83,  557.
Prayer,  the  Gorsed,  209.
Prithivi,  114-5,  181.
Procopius,  153.
Prometheus,  225,  287-8,  291,  298,

624,  642,  661.
Proteus,  660.
priill,  567.
prwystl,  567.
Prydelaw,  Pry  del  w,  371.
Pryderi,  242-3,  246,  248-9,  255,

341,  500-1,  665-6.
pryderi,  500.
Prydwen,  248-9.
xpv^oTrofiiro?,  the,  654,  658.
Pueblo  Indians,  the,  295.
pugillares,  407.
purdu,  402.
purwyn,  402.
Pushan,  655-6.
puy,  8.
Pwyft,  191,  242,  248-9,  255,  337-

42,  344,  346-7,  354,  457,  497-8,

500-1,  550,  624-5,  641,  665-6.
Pyanepsion,  517,  521.
Pytheas,  194.
Pytho,  the,  520,  617.

quercus,  217.
quicken  berries,  356,  358.
quinque,  92.
quinzaine,  361.


Quirk,  522.

rad-bani,  538

raim,  431.

raith,  431.

Ramayana,  298.

Rangi,  112-3.

rath,  205,  596.

Rath  Croghan,  330.

Rathach,  Ui,  522.

Rathlin  Island,  454,  601.

raiidmi,  389.

Red  Altar,  the,  186,  233.

Red  Book,  the,  401,  407.

Red,  King  of  the  Isles,  454,  464  :

see  Ruad.
Redg,  590,  604.
Reidi-tyr,  119.
Renan,*M.,  230.
redtan,  389.
Res,  399.
Reuda,  322.
Rex  Sacrorum,  228.
reynir,  358.

Rhadamanthus,  149,  650,  661-2.
rhawd,  277.
rhed-eg,  277.
Rhea,  642.

Rhedynvre,  the  Stag  of,  555.
rhi,  32.

Rhiannon,  97,  498-501,  641,  666.
Rhiwatton,  423.
rhodedig  farch,  385.
Rhonwen,  154.
rhyfel,  38.
ri,  32.

Riab  n-Derg,  472  :  see  Lugaid.
Riada,  322.
Riangabra,  441.
Riastartha,  the,  438.
Ribble,  the,  455.
Rig,  83,  602.
Rigfota,  322.
Rigisamos,  42.
Rig-Veda,  the,  654,  657-9.
Rime-Mane,  468.
Rime-Ogres,  the,  577,  615.
ring,  Woden's  :  see  Draupnir.
Ringhorn,  the,  531.
robur,  218.


INDEX.


703


Roc  mac  Diocain,  507-8.

rochore,  309.

rodana,  389.

Rodasi,  389.

Rdig,  mar,  137,  139,  328,  33a.

Romove,  219,  221.

Bond,  Echaid,  37  I.

ronn,  ronne,  358.

Ros  na  EHgh,  U8.

Roa  Ruad,  322.

Ross,  139.

Roth  Fail,  210,  212,  214-6.

Roth  Ramach,  210,  212.

Rowan,  the,  358-9.

Rowen,  154.

ruad,  389.

Ruad,  322,  464-5,  595.

Ruadan,  368-9.

rudo,  389.  ■

Rudra,  389.

Rudraide,  Rudraige,  Rugraide,  585,

589,  592.
Runtir,  genus,  522.
lydajy,  389.
Rym,  615.

Sadh,  391-2.

Saegon-,  273,  290.

Saeturnus,  648  :   see  Saturn.

Saga,  286.

Saint,  273  :   see  Seint.

Salach,  563  :  see  Eccet.

Salicidun-i,  12.

Salmon  of  Knowledge,  the,  358,

553-4,  659.
Salmon  of  Llyn  Llyw,  555,  558.
Samhain,  Samain,  396,  516,  518-9,

584.
Samhanach,  the,  516.
Samoans,  the,  177.
samthach,  320.

Samthainn,  Mac,  314-5,  319-20.
Sanskrit,  633-1.
Saporta,  M.  de,  637.
Sam  Elen,  167.
Satan,  479.

Saturn,  68,  644,  648,  651,  665-6.
Saturnalia,  the,  648.
Saturn ia  Regna,  648.
Saturday,  490.


sauil,  572.

sauli,  572.

Saxons,  tho,  610.

Sayce,  Prof.,  634-5.

Scath,  259-60.

Sc&thach,  450-1,  454-5,  480-1.

Schrader,  Dr.,  636.

Scone,  206.

Scimacb,  414.

Bcoim,  439.

Scots,  the,  610.

Scotti,  263,  600,  664.

scyphus,  67.

Seytbia,  454,  600.

Scythians,  the,  475.

Se,  271,  281,  290.

Seagha,  Ui,  522.

Searbhan,  355-6,  594

secht,  366-7.

seehtmain,  366-7.

Seeland :  read  Zealand.

sefytt,  277.

Segeint,  272.

Segestia,  291.

Segimundus,  291.

Segomaros,  46,  74.

Segomo,  33-5,  39,  281.

Segontiaci,  273.

Segontium,  271-3.

Segovia,  541.

Sein,  158,  160,  168,  174,  195-7,

199.
Seint,  Saint,  272-3.
Seiont,  270-1,  281,  290.
Selene,  571.
Sena,  196.
Senach,  342.
Sencha,  76.
Senchan,  566-7.

mn,  585.
Bennight,  361.
septem,  366.
Beptimana,  366-7.
Sera,  580.
Serapis,  25.
Seseronis,  428.
Setanta,  432,  445-7,  455,  501-2,

610,  627.
Set  nit  ii,  455,  610.
Suteia,  the,  455.


'04


INDEX.


Sethor,  &c,  332.

Severn,  the,  127,  129,  132,  556.

Seviri  Augusti,  3.

Shakspear,  104,  501,  562.

Shannon,  the,  556.

Sheas,  the  0',  522.

Shepherd  of  Yspydaden,  the,  488,

656.
sibyls,  568.
Sid,  148,  247.
Side,  169.
sieg,  34,  281,  291.
Siegfried,  291,  482,  511,  675.
Sif,  60,  72,  645.
sigis,  34.
Sigrdrifa,  241.
Sig-tyr,  118,  217.
Silchester,  273,  290.
Silvanus,  64-5,  67-9.
Silver  Hosts,  the,  166,  173,  456.
Silver  Wheel,  435.
Simeon  Brec,  213,  581.
Simon  Driii,  213,  223,  599.
Simon  Magus,  210-4,  223.
Sinann,  556.
Sinclair's  Stat.  Ace.  of  Scotland,

520.
sinum,  67.
sion,  618.
Sion  Kent,  548.
Sion  y  Cydau,  607.
Siorna,  28.
sir,  27.
Sirona,  27-8.
siur,  61.
Skadi,  653.
Skirni's  Lay,  492.
sky,  sky,  116.
Sky,  109-10,  114,  116,  180,  182,

642,  671 :  see  Heaven,  Uranus.
Slainge,  585,  589,  599.
Slamannan,  665.
Slane,  village  of,  553.
Sleipnir,  531.
SlemnaMaige  Itha,  583,  604:  see

Ith.
Sliab  Fuait,  441.
Sliab  Um6r,  583.
Sliabh  Ban,  171.
Slieve  Mis,  473,  564,  570.


sliinuce,  573.

Smirdubh,  171.

Snorri,  645.

Snowdon,  185,  199,  251,  279.

Sokk-mimi,  286.

sol,  sol,  572-3.

Solinus,  291.

Solstice,  the  Summer,  422.

soma,  296-9.

Son  of  Man,  534.

sorg,  408.

sorrow,  408.

Spain,  90-1,  263,  409,  413,  424,

446-7,  541,  582,  585,  643.
Spanish  Giant,  the,  517.
Spiritus  Poematis,  567.
Sreng,  585-6,  591,  611,  615.
Stanzas  of  the  Graves,  the,  668.
Stariath,  581.
Starn,  213.
o-reyos,  62.
Sterculus,    Stercutus,    648  :     see

Saturn.
Stone  of  Vision,  576  :  see  Lia  Fail.
Stonehenge,  192-5,  197.
Stygius,  78  :  see  Jupiter,  Cernun-

nos.
Sucelos,  Sucaalos,  Sucellos,  54-5.
sun,   Sun,    299,    300,   573,    655,

672-3.
sunne,  573.

Suptung,  286,  291-2,  297.
Surya,  573.
Surya,  573,  655.
svar,  573.
Swart,  612,  615-7,  621,  623,  631,

652,  678.
Swine  of  Mac  Dathd,  the,  511-2.
Sylvaticus,  152  :  see  Merlin.
Syria,  620.

Tacitus,  85.

tag,  496-7.

tahjan,  541.

taile,  551.

Taillne,  414-5,  519.

Tailltin,  148,  409-11,  415,  418,

576,  588.
Tailltiu,  409,  412-5,  423,  519.
Tain,  the,  138, 140,  323,  330,  367,


TNDKX.


TOG


369-70,  373,  434,  443  4,  468,
475,  478-9,  482,  526,  590,  598,
638.
tal-,  tal-,  iessin,  545.
talg,  408.

Talieasin,  21,   38,  97,  270,  386,
543-51,  558-60,  565-6,  568-70.
tallow,  408.
talmaide,  144.
tahnidu,  502.
Tanarus,  58.
Tane-Mahuta,  113.
Tara,  462, 479, 485, 503, 576, 665.
taran,  69.
Taran,  561.

Taranis,  44,  47,  65,  70-3,  232.
Taranucus,    Taranucnus,    57,    60,

69,  72.
Taranus,  57,  69,  70.
tarbfes,  443.
Tarquin,  67.
Tartarus,  642.

tarvos,  61,  86.
Tawhiri-Matea,  113.
tear,  467.
tech,  teg,  467.

Tech  n-Duind,  504.

Tegid,  544,  546,  565.

T«yo5,  62,  467.

tei,  tai,  62.

Teirgwaed,  375,  489.

Teivi,  338,  3S0.

telediw,  551.

Telessin,  Teleessin,  Telyessin,  551 :
see  Taliessin.

Teltown,  409  :  see  Tailltin.

telyn,  551.

Temait  Fail,  207.

Tennyson,  158,  351.

Terndg,  172.

T.rra,  66,  68,  73.

Tethra,  449.

Teutates,  44-5,  232  :  BeeToutates.

Teuto,  46,  662.

Teutobochus,  46.

Teutobodus,  46.

T<  utomeres,  46.

Tcutones,  46.

Teyrnon,  499-501.

ftararos,  92.


Thargelia,  519.
Thargelion,  519-20.
thcod,  45.
theoden,  46.
Theodoric,  -us,  30-2.
Theseus,  668.
Thetis,  639.
GeuSeptyo?,  30.
thiuda,  45.
thiudans,  46.
thjdd,  45.
thjddann,  46.
Avijtos,  92,  626.
Thokk,  534,  536.
Thor,  58-60,  62-3,  65-8,  72,  110,
233,   358,    531,   611-2,   645-7,
652-3,  655.
Thorsuess,  233.
Thorsteinn,  456-8.
Time  Blemishes  of  the  Ultonian

Women,  the,  439.
Three  Blows,  the,  386.
Three  Cairbres,  the,  650.
Three  clever  Countings,  the,  442.

Three     Colours     of    Ciichulainn's
Hair,  the,  437.

Three  Cows  of  Mider,  the,  476.

Time  Cranes,  the,  331,  333-4.

Three  Daniosels,  the,  334.

Three  Exiles  from  Faery,  the,  665.

Three  Flagstones  of  Lugaid's Court,
the,  483,  539.

Three  Gods  of  Ddn,  the,  394.

Three    golden    Cordwainers,    the,
425,  665.

Three  Graces  of  Greece,  the,  495.

Three  holy  Clans,  the,  51  > .

Three  Borse-loads,  the,  ."»,  0.

ThreeHoundsulLugaid'sPedigree,
the,  472-:;.

Three  landless  Monarchs,  the,  666.

Three  Divisions  of  the  Daytime,
the,  495.

Three  Teats  of  the  Mdrrigu's  Cow,
470.

Three  weird  Sisters,  the,  334.

Three  white  Ladies,  the,  527.

Three  Whites  ofEmain,  the,  178.

thunder,  Thunder,  57-8,  645  :  sec
Thor.


2  z


706


INDEX.


thunor,  58.

Thurles,  212.

Tibal,  660.

Tiber,  556,  648.

Tibullus,  67.

Tigerna,  327.

Tigernmas,  417.

Tigris,  556.

Tioutates,  44  :  see  Teutates.

Tir  fa  Tonn,  190,  347,  355.

Tir  Mab  Don,  271.

Tirerrill,  587.

Titans,  the,  615,  619,  624,  642,

649,  653,  659,  663,  670.
Titbonus,  158.
Tiu,  41,  109,  115-6,   611,  621  :

see  Tyr.
tivar,  119.

Tlacbtga,  381,  515,  517.
tocad,  536.
toirn,  tairn,  69.

TOOVTLOVS,  160.

Tor  Conaing,  262,  584.

Tor  More,  315.

Toranias,  70-1.

Torinis,  262.

tdrroach,  23.

Torna,  70-1.

torunn,  torrunn,  69.

Tory  Island,  262,  314,  584,  590,

662.
tota,  45.

Totates,  44  :  see  Teutates.
Totatigens,  44.
Toutates,   44-5,  47,  49,   50  :    see

Teutates.
Toutiorix,  21,  30,  45.
Toutissicnos,  57.
touto,  45.
town,  34.
Tralee,  473,  564.
Tre'  Ga'r  Anthrod,  406.
Tree  of  Knowledge,  558.
Tree  of  the  World,  605.
Trees,  Battle  of  the,  257.
Tre'Meirchion,  406.
tref,  406.
Trent,  640.
trl  dee  dana,  394.
tn-duum,  117.


trigaranus,  86.

tripartite,  the  day,  375-6.

Triton,  127.

troediog,  the,  305.

tromma,  439.

tuath,  45.

Tuath  Dea,  579  :  see  Tuatha  De
Danann.

Tuatha  De  Danann,  1 8, 20, 89, 1 20,
129,  138,  206,  253,  257,  275,
319,  321,  323,  331,  356,  358,
371,  387-8,  391,  394-6,  398,
409,  414,  427,  442,  454,  507,
555,  569,  579,  581-2,  585-91,
602-4,  609,  611-2,  614-6,  618-
20,  626,  644,  664.

Tuathal  Teachtinar,  599.

tud,  Tud,  45,  160.

Tudri,  30.

Tuesday,  41,  116.

Tuirenn,  393-4,  427.

Tuisco,  Tuisto,  46,  662  :  see  Teuto.

Tumatuenga,  113.

Tured,  Mag,  427,  585,  587  :  see
Moytura,

Tutates,  44  :  see  Toutates.

tutor,  21.

Tutenganahau,  113.

Tvashtar,  297.

Twrch  Trwytb,  29,  346.

Tylor,  Dr.,  108,  672.

tynghed,  536.

Tynwald,  208,  361.

Typho,  72,  121,  136,  142,  619-21,
624,  632.

Tyr,  41,  49,  109,  115-6,  118-21,
611-2,  615,619,  621,642,  652,
657.

Tyryawc,  244  :  see  Maen  Twrog.

Tysdagr,  41.

ua,  522.

Uaman,  170.

Uathach,  451,  458.

ufel,  38.

Ui  Maini,  374.

Ulfilas,  46.

Ulster,  140,  439,  442.  462,  511,

585,  609-10.
Ulysses,  287-91.


INDEX.


707


Um6r,  Ughxndr,  Uthmdr,  150, 583,

601.
unda,  463.
I  inline,  463,  466.
dpsala,  637.
Uranus,  40,  111,  115,  180-1,  642,

651,657,661:  see  Heaven,  Sky.
urceus,  67.
Urdawl  Ben,  97.
Ureconn,  4.07.
CJrien,  185,   347,   350,  371,   401,

423,  429,  457,  472,  494,  624.
uro,  38.

Qrogenonertus,  88.
Ursula,  166,  174.
UTU3,  88.

Usk,  499.

Usnech,  137,  192-3,  335.

I'tlirr  Pen-dragon,  5G7  :  see

[Jthi  Ben,  97,  151,  269,  567-8.

uwd,  117.

Uxama,  424,  541.

Valentia  or  Valencia,  211,  522.

Valerius  Anno,  541.

Vali,  532,  535,  539.

Valkyria,  537.

Vallentin,  M.,  5,  37.

vandu',  463.

Varuna,  40,  115,  180-1,  657,  659.

vas,  11.

Vasio,  100.

vastu,  1 1.

Vassocalct-i,  10-2.

rates,  278,  280.

Vaughan,  12.

Veilaun-o,  6,  7  :  see  Vellaun-o.

Velenryd,  the,  244.

Vellaun-o,  6.

Vence,  36.

Veneria,  71.

Vens,  36.

VrlltllS,   35.

Venus,  543.

Vepotalos,  551.

Vercassivellaunos,  7.

Vergil,  Virgil,  67,  217,  279,  544.

Veiiugodumnos,  7.

Verona,  30.

verus,  21.


Vesontio,  100.

Vicious  Bridge,  the,  451.

victor,  561-2.

Victor,  Mercurius,  6.

Vidar,  612.

Vienna  (Vienne),  4-6,  100.

Noire,  the,  103.
Vigfnsson,  Dr.,  198,  557.
Viniios,  35-7,  40,  68-9,  71.
vir,  21,  92,  282.
Virgines,  102-3.
Viri  Armorum,  600.
Virotut-i,  21.
Vivasvant,  659.
vdds,  278.
Volcanus,  8G.
Volospa,  534,  557,  605.
Vblundr,  381,  517.
Voretovirius,  282.
Vorti-ern,  151-2,  154-5,  161,  184,

610,  650-1.
Vrindr,  532.
Vritra,  583.

Walhalla,  530,  646.

Wanes,  the,  619,  652,  659.

was,  11.

Waves  mourning,  the,  387,  389.

water,  463.

Wayland  Smith,  381.

wealhstdd,  489.

"Wednesday,  278.

Well  of  Wisdom,  the,  373.

Wener,  Lake,  543.

Wen  was,  y,  675.

Western  Isles,  the,  454,  464,  476,
601,  662.

Westimarialanda,  153.

WThite  Sea,  the,  637.

Wieland,  517.

Will..,  46.

Wilser,  Dr.,  636.

wind,  35.

winters  did,  so  many,  360.

witches,  198-9,  626.

w6d,  278.

Woden,  49,  60,  110,  115,  232,
241,  278,  280,  283  93,  295,
2H7-8,  301,  304,  328 -30,  359,
365,  368,  373,  375,  382,  426,


708


INDEX.


529-34,  543,  557,  568,  612-3,

615,  623,  625,  629,  632,  645-6,

653.
Wolf,  the  :  see  Fenri.
-wood,  278.
Wordsworth,  52.
Woi ld-dragon,  the,  530,  534,  612  :

see  Leviathan,  Earth-serpent.
Worrall,  555.
Wrekin,  407,  420.
■\vud,  wuth,  278.
wuth,  278.

Avvbod,  dyn  da  ei,  377.
Wye,  the,  499.
wythnos,  360,  370.

Yama,  297,  654-60.
Yami,  654.
year,  the  Celtic,  419.
Yell-bridge,  the,  533.
Yell-horn,  the,  557.
Yima,  655-6.


Ymi,  115:  see  Hymi.

Yrp,  524.

ysgyfaint,  439.

Yspydaden,  373,  487,  489-95, 616,

656.
yu,  117.

Zealand,  543.

Zend  literature,  655.

Zenodorus,  9.

Zev,  109,  116.

Zeus,  40-1,  49,  54,  60,  72,  87, 109,
115-9,  121-2,129-33,  136,  139,
141-2,  146-7,  149-52,  159,  178,
181-3,  185,  195,  197,  199,  200,
217,  220,  225-6,  234,  295,  337,
432,  527,  563,  575-6,  578,  619-
21,  625,  629-32,  638-42,  644-7,
652,  657,  661,  667-9.

Ziestag,  41.

Ziu,  41,  109,  116.


C.  Green  &  Son,  Printers,  178,  Strand.


11,  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Gtabdbn,  London;

20,  South  Fbbdebiok  Stbbnt,  Euinuuuou.


CATALOGUE     OF     SOME     WOEKS

PUBLISHED    BY

WILLIAMS    &    NOBGATE.


Agnostic's  Progress,  An,  from  the  Known  to  the  Unknown.  2G8
pp.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.  5s.

Alviella  (Count  Goblet  d')  The  Contemporary  Evolution  of  Ecli-

gious  Thought  in  England,   America  and  India.     Translated  by  J.    BloDEN.
8vo,  cloth.  lOtf.  6c?.

Baur  (F.  C.)  Church  History  of  the  First  Three  Centuries.  Trans-
lated from  the  Third  German  Edition.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  Allan  Mexzii>.
2  vols.     8vo.  21*

Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.

Baur  (F.  C.)  Paul,  the  Apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  his  Life  and  Work,
his  Epistles  and  his  Doctrine.  A  Contribution  to  the  Critical  History  of
Primitive  Christianity.  Edited  by  E.  Zellek.  Translated  by  Rev.  Allan
Mbnzibs.     2  vols.     Svo,  cloth.  21s.

Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.

Beard  (Eev.  Chas.)  Lectures  on  the  Eeformation  of  the  Sixteenth
Century  in  its  Relation  to  Modern  Thought  and  Knowledge.  Hibbert  Lectures,
1883.     8vo,  cloth.     [Cheap  Edition,  is.  64.]  10*.  6rf.

Beard  (Eev.  Chas.)  Port  Eoyal,  a  Contribution  to  the  History  of
Religion  and  Literature  in  France.  Cheaper  Edition.  2  vols.  Crown
8vo.  12«

Beard  (Eev.  Dr.  J.  E.)  The  Autobiography  of  Satan.  Crown  8vo,
cloth.  7s.  Bd.

Bible  for  Young  People.  A  Critical,  Historical,  and  Moral  Hand-
book to  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  By  Dr.  H.  Oobt  and  I  >r.  J.  Hoots  \.\s,
with  the  assistance  of  Dr.  Kuenen.  Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  the  Rev.
P.  11.  Wiokbtbbd.  Vols.  I.  to  IV.,  Old  Testament,  12&j  V.  VI.,  New  Tes-
tament^ 8*.     Maps.     6  vols.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.  •J(J.^.

Bleek  (F.)  Lectures  on  the  Apocalypse.     Edited  by  T.  Kossbai  n.

Edited  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  S.  Davidson.     8vo,  cloth.  lOtf.  &d,
Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.


Catalogue  of  some  Works


Channing's  Complete  Works,  including  the  "  Perfect  Life,"  with

a  brief  Memoir.     Centenary  Edition.     868  pp.     Crown  8vo,  Is. ;  cloth,      2s.

The  same,  large  type,  4to,  cloth.  7s.  6d.

Cobbe  (Miss  F.  P.)  The  Hopes  of  the  Human  Pace,  Hereafter  and
Here.  Essays  on  the  Life  after  Death.  With  a  Preface  having  special
reference  to  Mr.  Mill's  Essay  on  Eeligion.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo,
cloth.  5s.

Cobbe  (Miss  F.  P.)  Darwinism  in  Morals,  and  (13)  other  Essays

(Religion  in  Childhood,  Unconscious  Cerebration,  Dreams,  the  Devil,  Auricular
Confession,  &c.  &c).     400  pp.     8vo,  cloth.  (pub.  at  10s.)  os.

Cobbe  (Miss  F.  P.)  The  Duties  of  "Women.  A  Course  of  Lectures
delivered  in  London  and  Clifton.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.       5s.

Cobbe  (Miss  F.  P.)  The  Peak  in  Darien,  and  other  Piddles  of  Life

and  Death.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.  7s.  6d.

Cobbe  (Miss  F.  P.)  A  Faithless  World.     With  Additions  and  a

Preface.     8vo,  cloth.  2s.  Qd.

Cobbe  (Miss  F.  P.)  Broken  Lights.     An  Inquiry  into  the  Present

Condition  and  Future  Prospects  of  Religious  Faith.     Third  Edition.     Crown
8vo,  cloth.  5s.

Cobbe  (Miss  F.  P.)  Dawning  Lights.     An  Inquiry  concerning  the

Secular  Results  of  the  New  Reformation.     8vo,  cloth.  5s.

Cobbe  (Miss  F.  P.)  Alone  to  the  Alone.  Prayers  for  Theists,  by
several  Contributors.     Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  edges.  os,

Davids  (T.  W.  Ehys)  Lectures  on  the  Origin  and  Growth  of  Eeli-
gion, as  illustrated  by  some  Points  in  the  History  of  Indian  Buddhism.
Hibbert  Lectures,  1881.     8vo,  cloth.  10s.  6d.

Echoes  of  Holy  Thoughts :  arranged  as  Private  Meditations  before
a  First  Communion.  Second  Edition,  with  a  Preface  by  the  Rev.  J.  Hamil-
ton Thom,  of  Liverpool.    Printed  with  red  lines.    Crown  8vo,  cloth.      2s.  6d.

Evolution  of  Christianity,  The.   By  Charles  Gill.    Second  Edition,

with  Dissertations  in  answer  to  Criticism.     8vo,  cloth.  12s.

Ewald  (Professor  H.)  Commentary  on  the  Prophets  of  the  Old  Tes-
tament. Translated  by  the  Rev.  J.  Fred.  Smith.  Vol.  I.  Yoel,  Amos,
Hozea,  and  Zakharya  ix. — xi.  Vol.  II.  Yesayah,  Obadya,  Micah.  Vol.  III.
Kahum,  Sephanya,  Habaqquq,  Zakharya  xii. — xiv.,  Yeremiah.  Vol.  IV.
Hezekiel,  Yesaya  xl. — lxvi.,  with  Translation.  Vol.  V.  Haggai,  Zakharya,
Malaki,  Jona,  Baruch,  Appendix  and  Index.  Complete  in  5  vols.  8vo,
cloth.  each  10s.  6d,

Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.


Published  by  Williams  and  Norgate.


Ewald  (Professor  II.)  Commentary  on  the  Psalms.  (Poetical  Books
of  the  Old  Testament  Part  I.)  Translated  by  tho  Rev.  E.  Johnson,  M.A.
2  vols.     8vo,  cloth.  each  10*.  Gd.

Vide,  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.

Ewald  (Professor  H.)  Commentary  on  the  Pook  of  Job.  (Poetical
Books,  Part  II.)  Translated  by  the  lie  v.  J.  Frederick  Smith.  8vo,
cloth.  l(k  Gd.

Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.

Gould  (S.  Baring)  Lost  and  Hostile  Gospels.  An  Account  of  the
Toledoth  Jesher,  two  Hebrew  Gospels  circulating  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and
extant  Fragments  of  the  Gospels  of  the  First  Three  Centuries  of  Petrine  and
Pauline  Origin.    By  the  Rev.  S,  Paring  Gould.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.     la.  Gd.

Hanson  (Sir  Richard)  The  Apostle  Paul  and  the  Preaching  of
Christianity  in  the  Primitive  Church.  By  Sir  Richard  Davis  Hanson,
Chief  Justice  of  South  Australia,  Author  of  "  The  Jesus  of  History,"  "  Letters
to  and  from  Rome,"  &c.     8vo,  cloth.  (pub.  at  12s.)  7s.  Gd.

Hausrath.  History  of  the  New  Testament  Times.  Tho  Time  of
Jesus.  By  Dr.  A.  Hausrath,  Professor  of  Theology,  Heidelberg.  Translated,
with  the  Author's  sanction,  from  the  Second  German  Edition,  by  the  Revds.
C.  T.  Poynting  and  P.  Quenzer.     2  vols.     8vo,  cloth.  21s.

Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.

Hibbert  Lectures,  vide  Beard,  Davids,  Kuenen,  Miiller,  Pfleiderer,
Renan,  Renouf,  Reville,  Rhys.

Home  (Rev.  W.)   Religious  Life   and  Thought.      By  William

Hornk,  M.  A.,  Dundee,   Examiner  in  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  St.
Andrews ;  Author  of  "  Reason  and  Revelation."     Crown  8vo,  cloth.       3s.  Gd.

Jones  (Rev.  R.  Crompton)  Hymns  of  Duty  and  Faith,  selected  and
arranged.     Second  Edition.     247  pp.     Foolscap  8vo,  cloth.  3s.  Gd.

Jones  (Rev.   R.   Crompton)  Psalms  and  Canticles,    selected    and

pointed  for  Chanting.     18mo,  cloth.  la.  6<£

Anthems,  with  indexes  and  References  to  the  Music     18mo,  cloth.      Is.  3d.

The  Chants  and  Anthems,  together  in  1  vol.  2&  Sd.

A  Book  of  Prayer  in  30  Orders  of  Worship,  for  Public  or  Private  Devotions.

12mo,  cloth,  L'v'.  Gd.

The  same  with  the  Chants.     18mo,  cloth.  3s.

Keim's  Ilistory  of  Jesus  of  Nazara,  considered  in  its  connection
with  the  National  Life  of  Israel,  and  related  in  detail.  Translated  from  the
German  by  A.  Ransom  and  the  Rev.  E  M.  GBLDABT,  in  6  vols.  8vo,
cloth.  each  10s.  Gd,

Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.


Catalogue  of  some  Works


Knighton  (W.)  Struggles  for  Life.   By  William  Knighton,  LL.D.,

Vice-President  of  the  Eoyal  Society  of  Literature;  Author  of  "The  History

of  Ceylon,"  "Forest  Life  in  Ceylon,"  &c.  &c.     8vo,  cloth.  10s.  Qd.

Kuenen  (Dr.  A.)  The  Eeligion  of  Israel  to  the  Fall  of  the  Jewish

State.     By  Dr.  A.  Kuenen,  Professor  of  Theology  at  the  University,  Leyden.

Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  A.  H.  May.     3  vols.     8vo,  cloth.  31s.  6d.

■ Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.

Kuenen  (Professor  A.)  Lectures  on  National  Eeligions  and  Univer-
sal Eeligions.  Delivered  in  Oxford  and  London.  By  A.  Kuenen,  LL.D.,  D.D.,
Professor  of  Theology  at  Leyden.     Hibbert  Lectures,  1882.  10s.  6d.

Macan  (Eeg.  W.)  The  Eesurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  An  Essay-
in  Three  Chapters.     Published  for  the  Hibbert  Trustees.     8vo,  cloth.  5s.

Mackay  (E.  W.)  Sketch  of  the  Eise  and  Progress  of  Christianity.
8vo,  cloth.  (pub.  at  10s.  6d.)  6s.

Martineau  (Eev.  Dr.  James)  Eeligion  as  affected  by  Modern  Mate-
rialism ;  and,  Modern  Materialism  :  its  Attitude  towards  Theology.  A  Critique
and  Defence.     8vo.  2s.  6d.

■ The  Relation  between  Ethics  and  Eeligion.     8vo.  Is.

Ideal  Substitutes  for  God  considered.     8vo.  Is.

Mind :  a  Quarterly  Eeview  of  Psychology  and  Philosophy.  Con-
tributions by  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  Professor  Bain,  Mr.  Henry  Sidgwick,
Mr.  Shadworth  H.  Hodgson,  Professor  Flint,  Mr.  James  Sully,  the  Eev.  John
Venn,  the  Editor  (Professor  Croom  Eobertson),  and  others.  Vols.  I.  to  XL,
1876  to  1886,  each  12s.;  cloth,  13s.  6d.  12s.  per  annum,  post  free.

Midler  (Professor  Max)  Lectures  on  the  Origin  and  Growth  of
Eeligion,  as  illustrated  by  the  Eeligions  of  India.  Hibbert  Lectures,  1878.
8vo,  cloth.  10s.  6d.

Oldenberg  (Prof.  H.)  Buddha :  his  Life,  his  Doctrine,  his  Order.
Translated  by  William  Hoet,  M.A.,  D.Lit.,  Member  of  the  Eoyal  Asiatic
Society,  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  &c,  of  her  Majesty's  Bengal  Civil  Service.
Cloth,  gilt  18s.

Peill  (Eev.  G.)  The  Three -fold  Basis  of  Universal  Eestitution.
Crown  8vo,  cloth.  3s.

Pfleiderer  (0.)  Paulinism.     An  Essay  towards  the  History  of  the

Theology  of  Primitive  Christianity.     Translated  by  E.  Peters,  Esq.  2  vols.
8vo,  cloth.  21s.
Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.

Pfleiderer  (Professor  O.)  The  Philosophy  of  Eeligion  on  the  Basis

of  its  History.  I.  History  of  the  Philosophy  of  Eeligion  from  Spinoza  to
the  present  Day.  Vol.  I.  Spinoza  to  Schleiermacher.  By  Professor  Otto
Pfleiderer.  Translated  by  the  Eev.  Allan  Menzies  and  the  Eev.  Alex.
Stewart,  of  Dundee.  8vo,  cloth.  10s.  6d.
Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.


Published  by  Williams  and  Norgate.


Pfleiderer  (Professor  0.)  Lectures  on  the  Influence  of  the  Apostle

Paul  on  the  Development  of  Christianity.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  J.  FbedERIOK
Smith.     Hibhert  Lectures,  1885.     8vo,  cloth.  lO^-.  G<1.

Poole  (Reg.  Lane)  Illustrations  of  the  History  of  Medieval  Thought,

in  the  Departments  of  Theology  and  Ecclesiastical  Politics.  "8vo,  cloth.  10x.  G</.

Pratt  (Dr.  II.)  New  Aspects   of  Life  and  Religion.      440  pp.

Crown  8vo,  cloth.  7*\  Gd.

Protestant  Commentary,  A  Short,   on  the  New  Testament,  with

General  and  Special  Introductions.     From  the  German  of  Hilgenfeld,  Holtz-

mann,  Lang,  Pfleiderer,  Lipsius,  and  others.     Translated  by  the  Rev.  F.  II.

Jones,  of  Oldham.  3  vols.  8vo,  cloth.  each  10a  Gd.
Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.

Penan  (E.)  On  the  Influence  of  the  Institutions,  Thought  and
Culture  of  Rome  on  Christianity,  and  the  Development  of  the  Catholic
Church.  By  Ernest  Renan,  Membre  de  lTnstitute.  Translated  by  the  Rev.
Charles  Beard,  of  Liverpool.  Ilibbert  Lectures,  1880.  8vo,  cloth.  [Cheap
Edition,  2*.  Gd.]  10a  Gd.

Ecnouf  (P.  Le  Page)  Lectures  on  the  Origin  and  Growth  of  Eeli-
gion,  as  illustrated  by  the  Religion  of  Ancient  Egypt.  Hibbert  Lectures,
1879.     8vo,  cloth.  10s.  6d.

Eeville  (Prof.  Albert)  Prolegomena  of  the  History  of  Eeligions.
By  Albert  Reville,  D.D.,  Professor  in  the  College  de  France,  and  Hibbert
Lecturer,  1884.  Translated  from  the  French.  With  an  Introduction  by  Pro-
fessor F.  Max  Muller.     8vo,  cloth.  10a  Gd.

Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.

Eeville  (Prof.  Albert)  Lectures  on  the  Origin  and  Growth  of  Ecli-
gion,  as  illustrated  by  the  Native  Religions  of  Mexico  and  Peru.  Translated
by  the  Rev.  P.  H.  Wicksteed,  M.A.    Hibbert  Lectures,  1884.    8vo,  cl.  10a  Gd.

Eeville  (Eev.  Dr.  A.)  The  Song  of  Songs,  commonly  called  the
Song  of  Solomon,  or  the  Canticle.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.  1a  G(/.

Eeville  (Eev.  Dr.  A.)  The  Devil :  his  Origin,  Greatness,  and  Deca-
dence.    Translated  from  the  French.     Second  Edition.     12mo,  cloth.  2a

Ehys  (Professor  J.)  Lectures  on  the  Origin  and  Growth  of  Religion

as  illustrated  by  Celtic  Heathendom.  Hibbert  Lectures,  1886.  8vo,  cl.    10^.  Gd.

Samuclson  (Jas.)  Views  of  the  Deity,  Traditional  and  Scientific  ;  a

Contribution  to  the  Study  of  Theological  Science.  By  James  Samublson,
Esq.,  of  the  Middle  Temple,  Barrister-at-law,  Founder  and  former  Editor  of
the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.  4*  Gd.

Savage  (Eev.  M.  J.)  Beliefs  about  the  Bible.     By  the  Eev.  M.  J.

Savage,  of  the  Unity  Church,  Bostou,  Mass.,  Author  of  "Belief  in  God,"
"Beliefs  about  Man,"  &c.  &c.     8vo,  cloth.  7^-.  Gd.


Catalogue  of  some  Works


Schurman  (J.  G.)  Kantian  Ethics  and  the  Ethics  of  Evolution.  A
Critical  Study,  by  J.  Gould  Schurman,  M.A.  D.Sc,  Professor  of  Logic  and
Metaphysics  in  Acadia  College,  Nova  Scotia.  Published  by  the  Hibbert
Trustees.     8vo,  cloth.  5s.

Seth  (A.)  The  Development  from  Kant  to  Hegel,  with  Chapters  on
the  Philosophy  of  Religion.  By  Andrew  Seth,  Assistant  to  the  Professor  of
Logic  and  Metaphysics,  Edinburgh  University.  Published  by  the  Hibbert
Trustees.     8vo,  cloth.  5s.

Sharpe  (S.)  History  of  the  Hebrew  Nation  and  its  Literature,  with
an  Appendix  on  the  Hebrew  Chronology.  Fourth  Edition.  487  pp.  8vo,
cloth.  7*.  Od.

Sharpe  (S.)  Bible.    The  Holy  Bible,  translated  by  Samuel  Sharpe,

being  a  Revision  of  the  Authorized  English  Version.     Fourth  Edition  of  the
Old  Testament ;  Eighth  Edition  of  the  New  Testament.     8vo,  roan.       4s.  6c?.

Sharpe  (S.)  The  New  Testament.  Translated  from  Griesbach's
Text.     14th  Thousand,  fcap.  8vo,  cloth.  Is.  6d.

Smith  (Eev.  J.  Fred.)  Studies  in  Eeligion  under  German  Masters.
Essays  on  Herder,  Goethe,  Lessing,  Franck,  and  Lang.  By  the  Rev.  J.  Fre-
derick Smith,  of  Mansfield.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.  5s.

Spencer  (Herbert)  Works.    The  Doctrine  of  Evolution.    8vo,  cloth.

First  Principles.     Sixth  Thousand.  16s.

Principles  of  Biology.     2  vols.  34s.

Principles  of  Psychology.     Fourth  Thousand,     2  vols.  36s.

Principles  of  Sociology.     Vol.  I.  21s.

Ceremonial  Institutions.     Principles  of  Sociology.     Vol.  II.     Part  I.  7s.

Political  Institutions.     Principles  of  Sociology.     Vol.  II.     Part  n.  12s.

The  Data  of  Ethics.     Principles  of  Morality.    Fourth  Thousand.    Part  I.     8s.

Spencer  (Herbert)  The  Study  of  Sociology.    Library  Edition  (being

the  Ninth),  with  a  Postscript.     8vo,  cloth.  10s.  6d.

Education  (Cheap  Edition,  Seventh  Thousand,  2s.  6d.).  6s.

Essays.     2  vols.     Third  Edition.  16s.

Essays  (Third  Series).     Third  Edition.  8s.

Spencer  (Herbert)  The  Man  versus  the  State.  Is. ;  or  on  better
paper,  in  cloth,  2s.  6d.

Spencer  (Herbert)  The  Philosophy  of  M.  Comte — Seasons  for  Dis-
senting from  it.  (Republished  from  "The  Classification  of  the  Sciences,"  &c,
1864.)  6d.

Spinoza.  Four  Essays,  by  Professors  J.  Land,  Kuno  Fischer,  and
Van  Vloten,  and  Ernest  Renan.  Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Pro-
fessor W.  Knight,  of  St.  Andrews.     8vo,  cloth.  5s.


Published  by  Williams  and  Norgate.  7

Stokes  (G.  J.)  The  Objectivity  of  Truth.  By  George  J.  Stokes,
B.A.,  Senior  Moderator  and  Gold  Medallist,  Trinity  College,  Dublin;  late
Hibbert Travelling  Scholar.   Published  by  the  II ibbert  Trustees.   8vo,  eloth.  5*;.

Strauss  (Dr.  D.  F.)  New  Life  of  Jesus,  for  the  People.  The
Authorized  English  Edition.     2  vols.     8vo,  clotb.  24a

Tayler  (Eev.  J.  J.)  An  Attempt  to  ascertain  the  Character  of  the
Fourth  Gospel,  especially  in  its  Relation  to  the  First  Three.  New  Edition,
8vo,  cloth.  5s.

Ten  Services  of  Public  Prayer,  taken  in  Substance  from  the  u  Com-
mon Prayer  for  Christian  Worship,"  with  a  few  additional  Prayers  lor  parti-
cular Days.

Ten  Services  alone,  crown  8vo,  cloth,  2a  6<l.  ;  with  Special  Collects.     3a

Ten  Services  alone,  32mo,  1a  ;  with  Special  Collects.  1a  Sd.

Psalms  and  Canticles.     (To  accompany  the  same.)     Crown  8vo,  Is.  6d.

With  Anthems.  2s.

Thoughts  for  Every  Day-  in  the  Year.  Selected  from  the  Writings
of  Spiritually-minded  Persons.  By  the  Author  of  "Visiting  my  Relations."
Printed  within  red  lines.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.  2s.  Gd.

Theological  Translation  Fund.     A  Series  of  Translations,  by  which

the  best  results  of  recent  Theological  investigations  on  the  Continent,  con-
ducted without  reference  to  doctrinal  considerations,  and  with  the  solo  purpose
of  arriving  at  truth,  will  be  placed  within  reach  of  English  readers.  A  litera-
ture which  is  represented  by  such  works  as  those  of  Fwald,  F.  C.  Baur,  Zeller,
Roth,  Keim,  Noldeke,  &c,  in  Germany,  and  by  those  of  Kuenen,  Scholten
and  others  in  Holland.

Three  Volumes  annually  for  a  Guinea  Subscription.  The  Prospectus,
bearing  the  signatures  of  Principal  Tulloch,  Dean  Stanley,  Professors  Jowett,
H.  J.  Smith,  Henry  Sidgwick,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Martineau,  Mr.  W.  G.  Clark,  the
Rev.  T.  It.  Cheyne,  Principal  Caird  and  others,  may  be  had.

36  Volumes  published  (1873  to  1886) /or  £12.  12a

Protestant  Commentary,  a  Short,  on  the  New  Testament.     3  vols.

Keim's  History  of  Jesus  of  Xazara.     6  vols.

Paul's  Paul,  his  Life  and  "Work.      2  vols.

Baur's  Church  History  of  the  First  Three  Centuries.     2  vols.

Kuenen.     The  Religion  of  Israel.     3  vols.

Ewald.     Prophets  of  the  Old  Testament.     5  vols.

Ewald's  Commentary  on  the  Tsalms.     2  vols.

Ewald.     Rook  of  Job.

Bleek,  on  the  Apocalypse.

Zeller,  on  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.     2  vols.

Hausrath's  History  of  the  New  Testament  Times.     2  vols.

Pfleiderer's  Paulinism.      2  vols.

Reville's  Prolegomena  of  the  History  of  Religions.

Schroder's  The  Cuneiform  [nscriptiona  and  the  Old  Testament.     2  vols.

Pfleiderer's  Philosophy  of  Religion.     4  vols.


Williams  and  Norgate's  Publications.


Theological  Translation  Fund — (continued) '.

All  new  Subscribers  may  purchase  any  of  the  previous  volumes  at  7-?.  instead  of
10s.  Qd.  per  volume.

A  selection  of  six  or  more  volumes  from  the  list  may  also  be  had  at  the  Sub-
scribers price,  or  76%  per  volume.
In  the  Press.

Schrader's  Cuneiform  Inscriptions,  Vol.  IT.

Pfleiderer's  Philosophy  of  Religion,  Vol.  II.

Vickers  (J.)  The  History  of  Herod ;  or,  Another  Look  at  a  Man

emerging  from  Twenty  Centuries  of  Calumny.    388  pp.    Crown  8vo,  cloth.  6s.

"What  I  have  taught  my  Children.     By  a  Member  of  the  Theistic

Church.     12mo,  cloth.  2s.  6d.

Williams.  (Dr.  Rowland)  The  Hebrew  Prophets.    Translated  afresh

and  illustrated  for  English  Readers.     2  vols.     8vo,  cloth.  22s.  &d.

Zeller  (Dr.  E.)  The  Contents  and  Origin  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apos-
tles, critically  investigated.  Preceded  by  Dr.  Fit.  Overbeck's  Introduction
to  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  from  De  Wette's  Handbook.  Translated  by
Joseph  Dare.     2  vols.     8vo,  cloth.  21s.

— —  Vide  Theological  Translation  Fund  Library.

PAMPHLETS.

Athanasian  Creed.     Two  Prize  Essays.     By  C.  Peabody  and  C.  S.  Kenny.  Is.

Beard  (C.)  William  Ellery  Channing.     In  Memoriam.     A  Sermon.     12mo.  6d.

Beard  (C.)  The  Kingdom  of  God.     A  Sermon.  M.

Beard  (C.)  The  House  of  God,  and  two  Sermons  by  Rev.  R.  A.  Armstrong.  Is.

Butler's  Analogy  :  A  Lay  Argument.     By  a  Lancashire  Manufacturer.  Is.

Hopgood  (Jas.)  Disestablishment  and  Disendowment  of  the  Church  of  England.  6c?.

Hopgood  (Jas.)  An  Attempt  to  Define  Unitarian  Christianity.  6c?.

Howe  (Rev.  C.)  The  Athanasian  Creed.     Two  Discourses.  Is.

Jesus  of  Nazareth  and  his  Contemporaries.  Is.

Journey  to  Emmaus.     By  a  Modern  Traveller.  2s.

Lisle  (L.)  The  Two  Tests  :  the  Supernatural  Claims  of  Christianity  tried  by  two

of  its  own  Rules.     Cloth.                                                                                  Is.  6c?.

Marriage  of  Cana,  as  read  by  a  Layman.  6c?.
Martineau  (Rev.  Dr.  James)  New  Affinities  of  Faith  ;   a  Plea  for  free  Christian

Union.     12mo.  Is.

Must  God  Annihilate  the  Wicked?     A  Reply  to  Dr.  Jos.  Parker.  Is.

Reasonable  Faith,  A,  the  Want  of  our  Age.  Is.

Savage  (Rev.  M.  J.)  Herbert  Spencer  :  his  Influence  on  Religion  and  Morality.  6d.

Sharpe  (S.)  Journeys  and  Epistles  of  the  Apostle  Paul.                                     Is.  6c?.

Sidgwick  (H.)  The  Ethics  of  Conformity  and  Subscription.  Is.

Tayler  (Rev.  J.  J.)  Christianity  :  What  is  it?  and  What  has  it  done  1  Is.

WILLIAMS  AND   NORGATE,

14,  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London;

And  20,  South  Frederick  Street,  Edinburgh.


14,  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London  ;

20,  South  Frederick  Street,   Edinburg


CATALOGUE     OF     SOME     WORKS

PUBLISHED    BY

WILLIAMS    AND    NORGATE.


Beard   (Rev.  Chas.)   Port  Royal,  a  Contribution  to  the  History  or

Religion  and  Literature  in  France.    Cheaper  Edition.  2  vols.    Crown  8vo.     12s

Bopp's  Comparative  Grammar  of   the  Sanscrit,  Zend,  Greek,  Latin,

Lithuanian,  Gothic,  German,  and  Slavonic  Languages.  Translated  by  E.  B..
Eastwick.     Fourth  Edition.     3  vols.     8vo.  cloth  31s  6d

Brewster.     The   Theories    of  Anarchy   and    of  Law :  A   Midnight
Debate.     By  H.  B.  Brewster,  Esa.     Crown  8vo.  parchment  ^s

Christ    (The)    and    the    Fathers,  or  the  Reformers   of   the   Roman

Empire  ;  being  a  Critical  Analysis  of  the  religious  thoughts  and  opinion
derived  from  their  lives  and  letters,  as  well  as  from  the  Latin  and  Greek
Fathers  of  the  Eastern  and  Western  Empires  until  the  Nicene  Council,  with
a  Brief  Sketch  of  the  Continuation  of  Christianity  until  the  Present  Day  in
accordance  with  the  Comparative  Method  of  Historical  Science.  By  an  His-
torical Scientist.     8vo.  cloth  js  6d

Cobbe   (Miss  F.  P.)   The  Hopes  of  the  Human  Race,  Hereafter  and

Here.  Essays  on  the  Life  after  Death.  With  a  Preface  having  special
reference  to  Mr.  Mill's  Essay  on  Religion.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.
cloth  5*

Cobbe   (Miss  F.   P.)   Darwinism  in  Morals,  and  (13)  other  Essays.

(Religion  in  Childhood,  UncODScious  Cerebration,  Dreams,  the  Devil,
Auricular  Confession,  &c.  &c.)     400  pp.     8vo.  cloth  (pub.  at  io.v)  54

Cobbe  (Miss  F.  P.)  The  Duties  of  Women.     A  Course  of  Lectures
delivered  in  London  and  Clifton.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  cloth         5$

Cobbe  (Miss  F.  P.)  The  Peak  in  Daricn,  and  other  Riddles  of  Life
and  Death.     Crown  8vo.  cloth  Js  6d


DATE  DUE

Cobbe   (Miss
Preface.     8

ns  and  a

2s  6d
!  Present

n.     Crown

rning  the

5*

leists,  by

2S                  $S

>  before  a

Hamilton

2s6d

1  Edition,

Cobbe  (Miss

Condition  a
8vo.  cloth

Cobbe   (Miss

Cobbe  (Miss
several  Con

Echoes  of  Ho

First  Coram

Thom,  of  ]

Evolution  of  C

with  Disser

12S

Gould  (S.  Ba

nt  of  the

Toledoth  Je
extant  Fragi

Ages,  and
5etrine  and

Pauline  Oric

DEMCO  38-297

)th.     p  6d

Jones  (Rev.  R.  Crompton)  Hymns  of  Duty  and  Faith,  selected  and
arranged.     Second  Edition.     247  pp.     Foolscap  8vo.  cloth  3s  6cl

Mackay  (R  W.)  Sketch  of  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  Christianity.
8vo.  cloth  (pub.  at  10s  6d)  6s

Mind  :  a  Quarterly  Review  of  Psychology  and  Philosophy.  Contri-
butions by  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  Professor  Bain,  Mr.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Mr.
Shadworth  H.  Hodgson,  Professor  Flint,  Mr.  James  Sully,  the  Rev.  John
Venn,  the  Editor  (Professor  Croom  Robertson),  and  others.  Vols.  I.  to  XII.,
1876-87,  each  1 2s.     Cloth,  13s  1 2*  per  annum,  post  free

Oldenberg  (Prof.  H.)    Buddha:    his  Life,  his  Doctrine,  his  Order.

Translated  by  William  Hoey,  m.a.,  d.lit.,  Member  of  the  Royal  Asiatic
Society,  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  &c,  of  Her  Majesty's  Bengal  Civil  Service.
Cloth,  gilt  ids


Published  by  Williams  and  Norgatc.


Sdltus.     The  Anatomy  of  Negation.     By  Bdgar  Saltus,  Author  of
"The  Philosophy  of  Disenchantment."     Crown  8vo.  cloth  7*  Cd


Samuelson  (Jas.)  Views  of  the  Deity,  Traditional  and  Scientific;  a
Contribution  to  the  Study  of  Theological  Science,  By  James  Samublson,
Esq.,  of  the  Middle  Temple,  Barrister-at-Law,  Founder  and  former  Editor  of

the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science.     Crown  8vo.  cloth  44  6d


Sharpe  (S.)  History  of  the  Hebrew  Nation  and  its  Literature,  with
an  Appendix  on  the  Hebrew  Chronology.  Fourth  Edition.  487  pp.  8vo.
cloth  p  6d

Sharpe  (S.)  Bible.     The  Holy  Bible,  translated  by  Samuel  Sharpe,

being  a  Revision  of  the  Authorized  English  Version.     Fourth  Edition  of  the
Old  Testament ;  Eighth  Edition  of  the  New  Testament.     8vo.  roan       4.V  6d

Sharpe  (S.)  The  New  Testament.  Translated  from  Griesbach's
Text.     14th  Thousand,  fcap.  8vo.  cloth  is  6d

Smith  (Rev.  J.  Fred.)  Studies  in  Religion  under  German  Masters.
Essays  on  Herder,  Goethe,  Lessing,  Franck,  and  Lang.  By  the  Rev.  J.
Frederick  Smith,  of  Mansfield.     Crown  8vo.  cloth  $s

Spinoza.      Four    Essays,  by  Professors   J.   Land,   Kuno    Fischer,

Van  Vloten,  and    Ernest    Renan.       Edited,   with    an    Introduction,   hy
Professor  W.  Knight,  of  St.  Andrews.     8vo.  cloth  5s

Strauss    (Dr.    D.    F.)  New  Life  of  Jesus,    for  the  People.     The

Authorized  English  Edition.     2  vols.  8vo.  cloth  24*

Thoughts  for  Every  Day  in  the  Year.     Selected  from  the  Writings  of

Spiritually-minded    Persons.      By   the  Author  of   "Visiting  my    Relations."
Printed  within  red  lines.     Crown  8vo.  cloth  %$  6d

Williams  (Dr.  Rowland)  The  Hebrew  Prophets.  Translated  afresh
and  illustrated  for  English  Readers.     2  vols.  8vo.  cloth  22s  6d
