The High Price of Bullion
David Ricardo (1810)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): David Ricardo's 'The High Price of Bullion, a Proof of the Depreciation of Bank Notes' (third edition, with additions; London: John Murray, 1810). Scan via Internet Archive (University of Illinois). Library stamps trimmed from the front; ends with the edition's 'finis'. The publisher's advertisement for Bosanquet's reply at the back is trimmed. This 1810 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THE  HIGH  PRICE

OF

BULLION,

A  PROOF  OF
THE  DEPRECIATION

OF

BANK NOTES.


THIRD EDITION,

WITH ADDITIONS.


BY  DAVID  RICARDO.


LONDON  :


Printed  by  Harding  $  Wright,  St.  Juhn'ssquare,
FOR JOHN  MURRAY, 32,  I  LEET-STREF.T,

1810.


INTRODUCTION.


THE  writer  of  the  following  pages  lias
already  submitted  some  reflections  to  the  at-
tention of  the  public,  on  the  subject  of  paper-
currency,  through  the  medium  of  the  Morning
Chronicle.  He  has  thought  proper  to  repub-
lish his  sentiments  on  this  question  in  a  form
more  calculated  to  bring  it  to  fair  discussion  ;
and  his  reasons  for  so  doing-,  are,  that  he  has
seen,  with  the  greatest  alarm,  the  progressive
depreciation  of  the  paper-currency.  His  fears
have  been  augmented  by  observing,  that  by  a
great  part  of  the  public  this  depreciation  is
altogether  denied,  and  that  by  others,  who  ad-
mit the  fact,  it  is  imputed  to  any  cause  but
that  which  to  him  appears  the  real  one.  Be-
fore any  remedy  can  be  successfully  applied  to
an  evil  of  such  magnitude,  it  is  essential  that
there  should  be  no  doubt  as  to  its  cause.  The
writer  proposes,  from  the  admitted  principles
of  political  economy,  to  advance  reasons,  which,
in  his  opinion,  prove,  that  the  paper-currency
of  this  country  has  long  been,  and  now  is,  at  a


IV  INTRODUCTION.

considerable  discount,  proceeding  from  a  su-
perabundance in  its  quantity,  and  not  from
any  want  of  confidence  in  the  Bank  of  England,
or  from  any  doubts  of  their  ability  to  fulfil
their  engagements.  He  does  this  without  re-
luctance, being  fully  persuaded  that  the  coun-
try is  yet  in  possession  of  the  means  of  resto-
ring the  paper-currency  to  its  professed  value,
viz.  the  value  of  the  coins,  for  the  payment  of
which  it  purports  to  be  a  pledge.

He  is  aware  that  he  can  add  but  little  to  the
arguments  which  have  been  so  ably  urged  by
Lord  King,  and  which  ought  long  before  this
to  have  carried  conviction  to  every  mind  ;  but
he  trusts,  that  as  the  evil  has  become  more
glaring,  the  public  will  not  continue  to  view,
without  interest,  a  subject  which  yields  to  no
other  in  importance,  and  in  which  the  general
welfare  is  so  materially  concerned.

Dec.  1,  1809.


HIGH  PRICE  OF  BULLION,


A  PROOT  OF


THE  DEPRECIATION OF BANK  NOTES,


T

J_  HE  precious  metals  employed  for  circulating  the
commodities  of  the  world,  previously  to  the  establish-
ment of  banks,  have  been  supposed  by  the  most  ap-
proved writers  on  political  economy  to  have  been  di-
vided into  certain  proportions  among  the  different  ci-
vilized nations  of  the  earth,  according  to  the  state  ot
their  commerce  and  wealth,  and  therefore  according
to  the  number  and  frequency  of  the  payments  which
they  had  to  perform.  While  so  divided  they  pre-
served every  where  the  same  value,  and  as  each  coun-
try had  an  equal  necessity  for  the  quantity  actually  in
use,  there  could  be  no  temptation  offered  to  either  for
their  importation  or  exportation.

Gold  and silver, like  other  commodities,  have  an
intrinsic  value,  which  is  not  arbitrary,  but  is  depend -


( 2 )

ent  on  their  scarcity,  the  quantity  of  labour  bestowed
in  procuring  them,  and  the  value  of  the  capital  em-
ployed in  the  mines  which  produce  them.

"  The  quality  of  utility,  beauty,  and  scarcity,'*
says  Dr.  Smith,  "  are  the  original  foundation  of  the
<e  high  price  of  those  metals,  or  of  the  great  quan-
"  tity  of  other  goods  for  which  they  can  every  where
cc  be  exchanged.  This  value  was  antecedent  to,  and
<c  independent  of  their  being  employed  as  coin,  and
"  was  the  quality  which  fitted  them  for  that  employ-
ce  ment."

If  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  world  em-
ployed as  money  were  exceedingly  small,  or  abund-
antly great,  it  would  not  in  the  least  affect  the  pro-
portions in  which  they  would  be  divided  among  the
different  nations — the  variation  in  their  quantity-
would  have  produced  no  other  effect  than  to  make
the  commodities  for  which  they  were  exchanged  com-
paratively dear  or  cheap.  The  smaller  quantity  of
money  would  perform  the  functions  of  a  circulating
medium,  as  well  as  the  larger.  Ten  millions  would
be  as  effectual  for  that  purpose  as  one  hundred  mil-
lions. Dr.  Smith  observes,  cc  that  the  most  abund-
"  ant  mines  of  the  precious  metals  would  add  little  to
"  the  wealth  of  the  world.  A  produce  of  which  the
re  value  is  principally  derived  from  its  scarcity  is  ne-
ff  cessarily  degraded  by  its  abundance."

If  in  the  progress  towards  wealth,  one  nation  ad-
vanced more rapidly  than  the others, that  nation"^
would  require  and  obtain  a  greater  proportion  of  the


( 3 )

money  of  the  world.  Its  commerce,  its  commodities,
and  its  payments,  would  increase,  and  the  general
currency  of  the  world  would  be  divided  according  to
the  new  proportions.  All  countries  therefore  would
contribute  their  share  to  this  effectual  demand.

In  the  same  manner  if  any  nation  wasted  part  of
its  wealth,  or  lost  part  of  its  trade,  it  could  not  re-
tain the  same  quantity  of  circulating  medium  which
it  before  possessed.  A  part  would  be  exported,  and
divided  among  the  other  nations  till  the  usual  propor-
tions were  re-established.

While  the  relative  situation  of  countries  continued
unaltered,  they  might  have  abundant  commerce  with
each  other,  but  their  exports  and  imports  would  on
the  whole  be  equal.  England  might  possibly  im-
port more  goods  from,  than  she  would  export  to,
France,  but  she  would  in  consequence  export  more  to
some  other  country,  and  France  would  import  more
from  that  country ;  so  that  the  exports  and  imports
of  all  countries  would  balance  each  other  ;  bills  of
exchange  would  make  the  necessary  payments,  but  no
money  would  pass,  because  it  would  have  the  same  va-
lue in  all  countries.

If  a  mine  of  gold  were  discovered  in  either  of
these  countries,  the  currency  of  that  country  would
be  lowered  in  value  in  consequence  of  the  increased
quantity  of  the  precious  metals  brought  into  circula-
tion, and  would  therefore  no  longer  be  of  the  same
value  as  that  of  other  countries.  Gold  and  silver,
whether  in  coin  or  in  bullion,  obeying  the  law  which
r.  2


( 4 )

regulates  all  other  commodities,  would  immediately
become  articles  of  exportation ;  they  would  leave  the
country  where  they  were  cheap,  for  those  countries
where  they  were  dear,  and  would  continue  to  do  so,
as  long  as  the  mine  should  prove  productive,  and  till
the  proportion  existing  between  capital  and  money  in
each  country  before  the  discovery  of  the  mine,  were
again  established,  and  gold  and  silver  restored  every
where  to  one  value.  In  return  for  the  gold  exported,
commodities  would  be  imported  ;  and  though  what  is
usually  termed  the  balance  of  trade  would  be  against
the  country  exporting  money  or  bullion,  it  would  be
evident  that  she  was  carrying  on  a  most  advantageous
trade,  exporting  that  which  was  no  way  useful  to  her,
for  commodities  which  might  be  employed  in  the  ex-
tension of  her  manufactures,  and  the  increase  of  her
wealth.

If  instead  of  a  mine  being  discovered  in  any  coun-
try, a  bank  were  established,  such  as  the  Bank  of
England,  with  the  power  of  issuing  its  notes  for  a
circulating  medium ;  after  a  large  amount  had  been
issued  either  by  way  of  loan  to  merchants,  or  by  ad-
vances to  government,  thereby  adding  considerably
to  the  sum  of  the  currency,  the  same  effect  would
follow  as  in  the  ca^e  of  the  mine.  The  circulating
medium  would  be  lowered  in  value,  and  goods  would
experience  a  proportionate  rise.  The  equilibrium  be-
tween that  and  other  nations  would  only  be  restored
by  the  exportation  of  part  of  the  coin.

The  establishment  of  the  bank  and  the  consequent


( s )

issue  of  its  notes  therefore,  as  well  as  the  discovery  of
the  mine,  operate  as  an  inducement  to  the  exportation
either  of  bullion  or  of  coin,  and  are  beneficial  only
in  as  far  as  that  object  may  be  accomplished.  The
bank  substitutes  a  currency  of  no  value  for  one  most
costly,  and  enables  us  to  turn  the  precious  metals
(which,  though  a  very  necessary  part  of  our  capital,
yield  no  revenue, )  into  a  capital  which  will  yield
one.  Dr.  A.  Smith  compares  the  advantages  attend-
ing- the  establishment  of  a  bank  to  those  which  would
be  obtained  by  converting  our  highways  into  pastures
and  corn-fields,  and  procuring  a  road  through  the  air.
The  highways,  like  the  coin,  are  highly  useful,  but
neither  yield  any  revenue:  Some  people  might  be
alarmed  at  the  specie  leaving  the  country,  and  might
consider  that  as  a  disadvantageous  trade  which  re-
quired us  to  part  with  it ;  indeed  the  law  so  considers
it  by  its  enactments  against  the  exportation  of  specie  ;
but  a  very  little  reflection  will  convince  us  that  it  is
our  choice,  and  not  our  necessity,  that  sends  it
abroad;  and  that  it  is  highly  beneficial  to  us  to  ex-
change that  commodity  which  is  superfluous,  for
others  which  may  be  made  productive.

The  exportation  of  the  specie  may  at  all  times  be
safely  left  to  the  discretion  of  individuals,  it  will  not
be  exported  more  than  any  other  commodity,  unless
its  exportation  should  be  advantageous  to  the  country.
If  it  be  advantageous  to  export  it,  no  laws  can  ef-
fectually prevent  its  exportation.  Happily  in  this
case,  as  well  as  in most  others  in  commerce s


( 6 )

there  is  free  competition,  the  interests  of  the  indivi-
dual and  that  of  the  community  are  never  at  vari-
ance.

Were  it  possible  to  carry  the  law  against  melting  or
exporting  of  coin  into  strict  execution,  at  the  same
time  that  the  exportation  of  gold  bullion  was  freely
allowed,  no  advantage  could  accrue  from  it,  but  great
injury  must  arise  to  those  who  might  have  to  pay,
possibly,  two  ounces  or  more  of  coined  gold  for  one  of
uncoined  gold.  This  would  be  a  real  depreciation  of
our  currency,  raising  the  prices  of  all  other  commo-
dities in  the  same  proportion  as  it  increased  that  of
gold  bullion.  The  owner  of  money  would  in  this
case  suffer  an  injury  equal  to  what  a  proprietor  of
corn  would  suffer,  were  a  law  to  be  passed  prohibiting
him  from  selling  his  corn  for  more  than  half  its  mar-
ket value.  The  law  against  the  exportation  of  the
coin  has  this  tendency,  but  is  so  easily  evaded,  that
gold  in  bullion  has  always  been  nearly  of  the  same
value  as  gold  in  coin.

Thus  then  it  appears  that  the  currency  of  one  coun-
try can  never  for  any  length  of  time  be  much  more
valuable,  as  far  as  equal  quantities  of  the  precious
metals  are  concerned,  than  that  of  another ;  that  ex-
cess of  currency  is  but  a  relative  term ;  that  if  the
circulation  of  England  were  ten  millions,  that  of
France  five  millions,  that  of  Holland  four  millions,
&c.  &c.  whilst  they  kept  their  proportions,  though
the  currency  of  each  country  were  doubled  or  trebled,
neither  country  would  be  conscious  of  an  excess  of
currency. The  prices  of  commodities  would  every


( 7 )

where  rise,  on  account  of  the  increase  of  currency,
but  there  would  be  no  exportation  of  money  from
either.  But  if  these  proportions  be  destroyed  by
England  alone  doubling  her  currency,  while  that  of
France,  Holland,  &c.  &c.  continued  as  before,  we
should  then  be  conscious  of  an  excess  in  our  currency,
and  for  the  same  reason  the  other  countries  would  feel
a  deficiency  in  theirs,  and  part  of  our  excess  would  be
exported  till  the  proportions  of  ten,  live,  four,  &c.
were  again  established.

If  in  France  an  ounce  of  gold  were  more  valuable
than  in  England,  and  would  therefore  in  France  pur-
chase more  of  any  commodity  common  to  both  coun-
tries, gold  would  immediately  quit  England  for  such
purpose,  and  we  should  send  gold  in  preference  to
any  thing  else,  because  it  would  be  the  cheapest  ex-
changeable commodity  in  the  English  market ;  for  if
gold  be  dearer  in  France  than  in  England,  goods  must
be  cheaper  j  we  should  not  therefore  send  them  from
the  dear  to  the  cheap  market,  but,  on  the  contrary,
they  would  come  from  the  cheap  to  the  dear  market,
and  would  be  exchanged  for  our  gold.

The  Bank  might  continue  to  issue  their  notes,  and
the  specie  be  exported  with  advantage  to  the  country,
while  their  notes  were  payable  in  specie  on  demand,
because  they  could  never  issue  more,  notes  than  the  va-
lue of  the  coin  which  would  have  circulated  had  there
been  no  bank.*

*  They  might,  strictly  speaking,  rather  exceed  that  quantity,
because  as  the  Bank  would  add  to  (lie  currency  of  the  world,  Eng.
land  would  retain  its  share  of  the  increase,


( 8 )

If  they  attempted  to  exceed  this  amount,  the  ex-
cess would  be  immediately  returned  to  them  for
specie  ;  because  our  currenc}',  being  thereby  diminish-
ed in  value,  could  be  advantageously  exported,  and
could  not  be  retained  in  our  circulation.  These
are  the  means,  as  I  have  already  explained,  by  which
our  currency  endeavours  to  equalize  itself  with  the  cur-
rencies of  other  countries.  As  soon  as  tiiis  equality
was  attained,  all  advantage  arising  from  exportation
would  cease ;  but  if  the  Bank  assuming,  that  because
a  given  quantity  of  circulating  medium  had  been  ne-
cessary last  year,  therefore  the  same  quantity  must  be
necessary  this,  or  for  any  other  reason,  continued  to
re-issue  the  returned  notes,  the  stimulus  which  a  re-
dundant currency  first  gave  to  the  exportation  of  the
coin  would  be  again  renewed  with  similar  effects  ;
gold  would  be  again  demanded,  the  exchange  would
become  unfavourable,  and  gold  bullion  would  rise,
in  a  small  degree,  above  its  mint  price,  because  it  is
legal  to  export  bullion,  but  illegal  to  export  the  coin,
and  the  difference  would  be  about  equal  to  the  fair
compensation  for  the  risk.

In  this  manner  if  the  Bank  persisted  in  returning
their  notes  into  circulation,  every  guinea  might  be
drawn  out  of  their  coffers.

If  to  supply  the  deficiency  of  their  stock  of  gold
they  were  to  purchase  gold  bullion  at  the  advanced
price,  and  have  it  coined  into  guineas,  this  would  not
remedy  the  evil,  guineas  would  be  still  demanded,
but  instead of  being  exported  would  be  melted  and


( 9 )

sold  to  the  Bank  as  bullion -at  the  advanced  price.
"  The  operations  of  the  Bank/'  observed  Dr.  Smith,
alluding  to  an  analogous  case,  <c  were  upon  this  ac-
tc  count  somewhat  like  the  web  of  Penelope,  the  work
rc  that  was  done  in  the  dav  was  undone  in  the  ni'o-ht  "
The  same  sentiment  is  expressed  by  Mr.  Thornton  :—
"  Finding  the  guineas  in  their  coffers  to  lessen  every
"  dav,  they  must  naturally  be  supposed  to  be  desirous
"  of  replacing  them  by  all  effectual  and  not  extra  va-
ff  gantlv  expensive  means.  They  will  be  disposed,  to
"  a  certain  degree,  to  buy  gold,  though  at  a  losing
"  price,  and  to  coin  it  into  new  guineas  ;  but  they
cc  will  have  to  do  this  at  the  very  moment  when  manv
f(  are  privately  melting  what  is  coined.  The  one  par-
"  ty  will  be  melting  and  selling  while  the  other  is
"  buying  and  coining.  And  each  of  these  two  con-
"  tending  businesses  will  now  be  carried  on,  not  on
cc  account  of  an  actual  exportation  of  each  melted
"  guinea  to  Hamburgh,  but  the  operation  or  at  least
ce  a  great  part  of  it  will  be  confined  to  London  ;  the
"  coiners  and  the  melters  living  on  the  same  spot,  and
"  giving  constant  employment  to  each  other.

"  The  Bank,"  continues  Mr.  Thornton,  "  if  we
u  suppose  it,  as  we  now  do,  to  carry  on  this  sort  of
"  contest  with  the  melters,  is  obviously  waging  a  very
"  unequal  war  ;  and  even  though  it  should  not  be
"  tired  early,  it  will  be  likely  to  be  tired  sooner  than
€<  its  adversaries."

The  Bank  would  be  obliged  therefore  ultimately  to
adopt  the  only  remedy  in  their  power  to  put  a  stop  to


( 10 )

the  demand  for  guineas.  They  would  withdraw  part
of  their  notes  from  circulation,  till  they  should  have
increased  the  value  of  the  remainder  to  that  of  gold
bullion,  and  consequently  to  the  value  of  the  curren-
cies of  other  countries.  All  advantage  from  the  ex-
portation of  gold  bullion  would  then  cease,  and  there
would  be  no  temptation  to  exchange  bank-notes  for
guineas.

In  this  view  of  the  subject,  then,  it  appears,  that
the  temptation  to  export  money  in  exchange  for  goods,
or  what  is  termed  an  unfavourable  balance  of  trade,
never  arises  but  from  a  redundant  currency.  But
Mr.  Thornton,  who  has  considered  this  subject
very  much  at  large,  supposes  that  a  very  unfavourable
balance  of  trade  may  be  occasioned  to  this  country  by
a  bad  harvest,  and  the  consequent  importation  of  corn;
and  that  there  may  be  at  the  same  time  an  unwilling-
ness in  the  country,  to  which  we  are  indebted,  to  re-
ceive our  goods  in  payment ;  the  balance  due  to  the
foreign  country  must  therefore  be  paid  out  of  that
part  of  our  currency,  consisting  of  coin,  and  that
hence  arises  the  demand  for  gold  bullion  and  its  in-
creased price.  He  considers  the  Bank  as  affording
considerable  accommodation  to  the  merchants,  by  sup-
plying with  their  notes  the  void  occasioned  by  the
exportation  of  the  specie.

As  it  is  acknowledged  by  Mr.  Thornton,  in  many
parts  of  his  work,  that  the  price  of  gold  bullion  is
rated  in  gold  coin  ;  and  as  it  is  also  acknowledged  by
him,  that  the  law  against  melting  gold  coin  into  bul-


(  »  )

lion  and  exporting  it  is  easily  evaded,  it  follows,  that
no  demand  for  gold  bullion,  arising  from  this  or  any
other  cause,  can  raise  the  money  price  of  that  commo-
dity. The  error  of  this  reasoning  proceeds  from  not
distinguishing  between  an  increase  in  the  value  of
gold,  and  an  increase  in  its  money  price.

If  there  were  a  great  demand  for  corn  its  money
price  would  advance;  because,  in  comparing  corn  with
money,  we  in  fact  compare  it  with  another  commo-
dity ;  and  for  the  same  reason,  when  there  is  a  great
demand  for  gold  its  corn  price  will  increase ;  but  in
neither  case  will  a  bushel  of  corn  be  worth  more  than
a  bushel  of  corn,  or  an  ounce  of  gold  more  than  an
ounce  of  gold.  An  ounce  of  gold  bullion  could  not,  what-
ever the  demand  might  be,  whilst  its  price  was  rated  in
gold  coin,  be  of  more  value  than  an  ounce  of  coined
gold,  or  31.  17s.  10|rf.

If  this  argument  should  not  be  considered  as  con-
clusive, I  should  urge,  that  a  void  in  the  currency,  as
here  supposed,  can  only  be  occasioned  by  the  annihi-
lation or  limitation  of  paper  currency,  and  then  it
would  speedily  be  filled  by  importations  of  bullion,
which  its  increased  value,  in  consequence  of  the  dimi-
nution of  circulating  medium,  would  infallibly  attract
to  the  advantageous  market.  However  g^eat  the  scar-
city of  corn  might  be,  the  exportation  of  money  would
be  limited  by  its  increasing  scarcity.  Money  is  in
such  general  demand,  and  in  the  present  stace  of  ci-
vilization is  so  essential  to  commercial  transactions,
that  it  can  never  be  exported  to  excess ;  even  in  a  war


( 12 )

such  as  the  present,  when  our  enemy  endeavours  to
interdict  all  commerce  with  us,  the  value  which  the
currency  would  bear  from  its  increasing  scarcity,
would  prevent  the  exportation  of  it  from  being  car-
ried so  far  as  to  occasion  a  void  in  the  circulation.

Mr.  Thornton  has  not  explained  to  us.,  why  any
unwillingness  should  exist  in  the  foreign  country  to
receive  our  goods  in  exchange  for  their  corn  ;  and  it
would  be  necessary  for  him  to  shew,  that  if  such  an
unwillingness  were  to  exist,  we  should  agree  to  indulge
it  so  far  as  to  consent  to  part  with  our  coin.

If  we  consent  to  give  coin  in  exchange  for  goods,
it  must  be  from  choice,  not  necessity.  We  should  not
import  more  goods  than  we  export,  unless  we  had  a
redundancy  of  currency,  which  it  therefore  suits  us  to
make  apart  of  our  exports.  The  exportation  of  the  coin
is  caused  by  its  cheapness,  and  is  not  the  effect,  but
the  cause  of  an  unfavourable  balance  :  we  should  not
export  it,  if  we  did  not  send  it  to  a  better  market,  or
if  we  had  any  commodity  which  we  could  export  more
profitably.  It  is  a  salutary  remedy  for  a  redundant
currency;  and  as  I  have  already  endeavoured  to
prove,  that  redundancy  or  excess  is  only  a  relative
term,  it  follows,  that  the  demand  for  it  abroad  arises
only  from  the  comparative  deficiency  of  the  currency
of  the  importing  country,  which  there  causes  its  supe-
rior value.

It  resolves  itself  entirely  into  a  question  of  interest.
If  the  sellers  of  the  corn  to  England,  to  the  amount
I  will  suppose  of  a  million,  could  import  goods  which


( 13 )

cost  a  million  in  England,  but  would  produce,  when
sold  abroad,  more  than  if  the  million  had  been  sent  in
money,  goods  would  be  preferred  ;  if  otherwise,  money
would  be  demanded.

It  is  only  after  a  comparison  of  the  value  in
their  markets  and  in  our  own,  of  gold  and  other
commodities,  and  because  gold  is  cheaper  in  the
London  market  than  in  their 's,  that  foreigners  pre-
fer gold  in  exchange  for  their  corn.  If  we  dimi-
nish the  quantity  of  currency,  we  give  an  addi-
tional value  to  it  :  this  will  induce  them  to  alter
their  election,  and  prefer  the  commodities.  If  I
owed  a  debt  in  Hamburgh  of  100/.,  I  should  endea-
vour to  find  out  the  cheapest  mode  of  paying  it.  If
I  send  money,  the  expence  attending  its  transportation
being,  I  will  suppose  5/.,  to  discharge  my  debt  will
cost  me  105/.  If  I  purchase  cloth  here,  which,  with
the  expences  attending  its  exportation,  will  cost  me
106/.,  and  which  will,  in  Hamburgh,  sell  for  100/.,
it  is  evidently  more  to  my  advantage  to  send  the
money.  If  the  purchase  and  expences  of  sending  hard-
ware to  pay  my  debt,  will  take  107/.,  I  should  prefer
sending  cloth  to  hardware,  but  I  would  send  neither
in  preference  to  money,  because  money  would  be  the
cheapest  exportable  commodity  in  the  London  market.
The  same  reasons  would  operate  with  the  exporter  of
the  corn,  if  the  transaction  were  on  his  own  account.
But  if  the  Bank,  iC  fearful  for  the  safety  of  their  esta-
blishment," and  knowing  that  the  requisite  number  of
guineas  would  be  withdrawn  from  their  coffers  at  the


( 14 )

mint  price,,  should  think  it  necessary  to  diminish  the
amount  of  their  notes  in  circulation,  the  proportion
between  the  value  of  the  money,  of  the  cloth,  and  of
the  hardware,  would  no  longer  be  as  105,  106,  and
107 ;  but  the  money  would  become  the  most  valuable
of  the  three,  and  therefore  would  be  less  advantage-
ously employed  in  discharging  the  foreign  debt.

If,  which  is  a  much  stronger  case,  we  agreed  to
pay  a  subsidy  to  a  foreign  power,  money  would  not  be
exported  whilst  there  were  any  goods,  which  could
more  cheaply  discharge  the  payment.  The  interest  of
individuals  would  render  the  exportation  of  the  money
unnecessary.*

Thus  then  specie  will  be  sent  abroad  to  discharge  a
debt  only  w  hen  it  is  superabundant ;  only  when  it  is
the  cheapest  exportable  commodity.  If  the  Bank
were  at  such  a  time  paying  their  notes  in  specie,  gold
would  be  demanded  for  that  purpose.  It  would  be
obtained  there  at  its  mint  price,  whereas its  price  as

*  This  is  strongly  corroborated,  by  the  statement  of  Mr.  Rose,
in  the  House  of  Commons,  that  our  exports  exceeded  our  imports
by  (I  believe)  sixteen  millions.  In  return  for  those  exports  no
bullion  could  have  been  imported,  because  it  is  well  known,  that  the
price  of  bullion  having  been  during  the  whole  year  higher  abroad
than  in  this  country,  a  large  qnantity  of  our  gold  coin  has  been  ex-
ported. To  the  value  of  the  balance  of  exports,  therefore,  must  be
added  the  value  of  the  bullion  exported.  A  part  of  the  amount
may  be  due  to  us  from  foreign  nations,  but  the  remainder  must  be
precisely  equal  to  our  foreign  expenditure,  consisting  of  subsidies
to  our  allies,  and  the  maintenance  of  our  fleets  and  armies  on  fo-
reign stations.


( 15 )

bullion  would  be  something  above  its  value  as  coin,
because  bullion  could,  and  coin  could  not,  be  legally
exported.

It  is  evident,  then,  that  a  depreciation  of  the  circu-
lating medium  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  its  re-
dundance ;  and  that  in  the  common  state  of  the  na-
tional currency  this  depreciation  is  counteracted  by
the  exportation  of  the  precious  metals.*

*It  has  been  observed,  in  a  work  of  great  and  deserved  repute,  the
Edinburgh  Review,}:  that  an  increase  in  the  paper  currency  will
only  occasion  a  rise  in  the  paper  or  currency  price  of  commodi-
ties, but  will  not  cause  an  increase  in  their  bullion  price.

This  would  be  true  at  a  time  when  the  currency  consisted  wholly
of  paper  not  convertible  into  specie,  but  not  while  specie  formed
any  part  of  the  circulation.  In  the  latter  case  the  effect  of  an  in-
creased issue  of  paper  would  be  to  throw  out  of  circulation  au
equal  amount  of  specie ;  but  this  could  not  be  done  without  adding
to  the  quantity  of  bullion  in  the  market,  and  thereby  lowering  Up-
value, or  in  other  words,  increasing  the  bullion  price  oj  commo-
dities. It  is  only  in  consequence  of  this  fall  in  the  value  of  the
metallic  currency,  and  of  bullion,  that  the  temptation  to  export  them
arises  ;  and  the  penalties  on  melting  the  coin  is  the  sole  cause  of
a  small  difference  between  the  value  of  the  coin  and  of  bullion,  or
a  small  excess  of  the  market  above  the  mint  price.  But  exporting
of  bullion  is  synonymous  with  an  unfavourable  balance  of  trade.
From  whatever  cause  an  exportation  of  bullion,  in  iichange  for
commodities,  may  proceed,  it  is  called  (I  think  very  incorrectly)
an  unfavourable  balance  of  trade.

It  is  highly  essential  to  a  due  understanding  of  this  subject,  that

we  should  accurately  distinguish  between  cause  and  effect. In  the

work  to  which  I  have  already  alluded,  it  is  said,  $  ii  When  the

"  local  rise  of  the  price  of  goods  consists  in  the  actual  increase  of

I Vol.  1,  page  183.  §  Page  181.


( 16 )

Such,  then,  appear  to  me  to  be  the  laws  that  regu-
late the  distribution  of  the  precious  metals  through-
out the  world,  and  which  cause  and  limit  their  circu-
lation from  one  country  to  another,  by  regulating  their
value  in  each.  But  before  I  proceed  to  examine  on
these  principles  the  main  object  of  my  enquiry,  it  is
necessary  that  I  should  shew  what  is  the  standard  mea-
sure of  value  in  this  country,  and  of  which,  therefore,
our  paper  currency  ought  to  be  the  representative,
because  it  can  only  be  by  a  comparison  to  this  stan-
dard that  its  regularity,  or  its  depreciation,  may  be
estimated.


"  their  bullion  price,  a  real  fall  of  the  foreign  exchange  will  gene-
"  rally  take  place,  and  will  occasion,  by  the  demand  for  bullion  to
u  be  exported,  a  fluctuating  excess  of  the  market  price  above  the
"  mint  price  of  gold."  Here,  and  in  many  other  parts  of  the  same
article,  the  fall  in  the  exchange,  or  the  unfavourable  balance  of
trade,  is  stated  to  be  the  cause  of  the  excess  of  the  market  above
the  mint  price  of  gold,  but  to  me  it  appears  to  be  the  effect  of  such
excess.  An  increase  of  paper  currency  we  have  just  seen,  lowers
the  value  of  gold  bullion  but  raises  its  money  price.  It  is  the  fall-
in  its  value  which  causes  its  exportation,  and  therefore  the  fall  of
the  exchange.

When  the  circulation  consists  wholly  of  paper,  any  increase  in
its  quantity,  will  raise  the  money  price  of  bullion  without  lowering
its  value,  in  the  same  manner,  and  in  the  same  proportion,  as  it
will  raise  the  prices  of  other  commodities,  and  for  the  same  reason
will  lower  the  foreign  exchanges  ;  but  this  will  only  be  a  nominal,
not  a  real  fall,  and  will  not  occasion  the  exportation  of  bullion,
because  the  real  value  of  bullion  will  not  be  diminished,  as  thert
will  be  no  increase  to  the  quantity  in  the  market.


( n )

No  permanent  *  measure  of  value  can  be  said  to
exist  in  any  nation,  while  the  circulating  medium  con-
sists of  two  metals,  because  they  are  constantly  sub-
ject to  vary  in  value  with  respect  to  each  other.  How-
ever exact  the  conductors  of  the  mint  may  be,  in  pro-
portioning the  relative  value  of  gold  to  silver  in  the
coins,  at  the  time  when  they  fix  the  ratio,  they  cannot
prevent  one  of  these  metals  from  rising,  while  the
other  remains  stationary,  or  falls  in  value.  Whenever
this  happens,  one  of  the  coins  will  be  melted  to  be  sold
for  the  other.  The  great  Mr.  Locke,,  Lord  Liver-
pool, and  many  other  writers,  have  ably  considered
this  subject,  and  have  all  agreed,  that  the  only  remedy
for  the  evils  in  the  currency  proceeding  from  this
source,  is  the  making  one  of  the  metals  only,  the  stan-
dard measure  of  value.  Mr.  Locke  considered  sil-
ver as  the  most  proper  metal  for  this  purpose,  and
proposed  that  gold  coins  should  be  left  to  find  their
own  value,  and pass  for  a  greater  or  lesser  number  of


*  Strictly  speaking,  there  can  be  no  permanent  measure  of  value.
A  measure  of  value  should  itself  be  invariable;  but  this  is  not  the
case  with  either  gold  or  silver,  they  being  subject  to  iluctuations  as
well  as  other  commodities.  Experience  has  indeed  taught  us,  that
though  the  variations  in  the  value  of  gold  or  silver  may  be  considera-
ble, on  a  comparison  of  distant  periods,  yet  for  short  spaces  of  time
their  value  is  tolerably  fixed.  It  is  this  property,  among  their  other
excellencies,  which  fits  them  better  than  any  other  commodity  for
tin-  ues  of  money.  Either  gold  or  silver  may  therefore,  in  the
point  of  view  in  which  we  are  considering  them,  be.  called  a  rate.
sure  of  \alue.


( 18 )

shillings,  as  the  market  price  of  gold  might  vary  with
respect  to  silver.

Lord  Liverpool, on  the contrary, maintained  that
gold  was  not  only  the  most  proper  metal  for  a  gene-
ral measure  of  value  in  this  country,  but  that,  by  the
common  consent  of  the  people,  it  had  become  so,  was
so  considered  by  foreigners,  and  that  it  was  best  suit-
ed to  the  increased  commerce  and  wealth  of  England.
He,  therefore,  proposed,  that  gold  coin  only  should
be  a  legal  tender  for  sums  exceeding  one  guinea,  and
silver  coins  for  sums  not  exceeding  that  amount. As
the  law  now  stands,  gold  coin  is  a  legal  tender  for
all  sums  ;  but  it  was  enacted  in  the  year  1774,  '"  That
"  no  tender in  payment  of  money  made  in  the  silver
<c  coin  of  this  realm,  of  any  sum  exceeding  the  sum  of
cc  twenty-five  pounds  at  any  one  time,  shall  be  reputed
"  in  law,  or  allowed  to  be  legal  tender  within  Great-
ic  Britain  or  Ireland,  for  more  than according  to  its
"  value  by  weight,  after  the  rate  of  5s.  2d.  for  each
><r  ounce  of  silver." The  same  regulation  was  revived
in  1798,  and  is  now  in  force.

For  many  reasons  given  by  Lord  Liverpool,  it  ap-
pears proved  beyond  dispute,  that  gold  coin  has  been
for  near  a  century  the  principal  measure  of  value,  but
this  is,  I  think,  to  be  attributed  to  the  inaccurate  deter-
mination of  the  mint  proportions.  Gold  has  been
valued  too  high  ;  no  silver,  therefore,  can  remain  in
circulation  which  is  of  its  standard  weight.

If  a  new  regulation  were  to  take  pUce,  and  s^ver  to
be  valued  too  high.,  or  ( which  is  the  same  thing) if


( 19 )

the  market  proportions  between  the  prices  of  gold  and
silver  were  to  become  greater  than  those  of  the  mint,
gold  would  then  disappear,  and  silver  become  the
standard  currency.

This  may  require  further  explanation.  The  relative
value  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  coins  is  as  15t|?  to  1.
An  ounce  of  gold  which  is  coined  into  31.  17s.  lOltf.
of  gold  coin,  is  worth,  according  to  the  mint  regula-
tion, I^t^t  ounces  of  silver,  because  that  weight  of
silver  is  also  coined  into  31.  17s.  lOfrf.  of  silver  coin.
Whilst  the  relative  value  of  gold  to  silver  is  in  the
market  under  15  to  1,  which  it  has  been  for  a  great
number  of  years  till  lately,  gold  coin  would  necessarily
be  the  standard  measure  of  value,  because  neither  the
Bank,  or  any  individual,  would  then  send  15-r£  +  ozs.
of  silver  to  the  mint  to  be  coined  into  3l.  17s.  lOjrf.
v\hen  they  could  sell  that  quantity  of  silver  in  the
market  for  more  than  31.  Vis.  \0{d.  in  gold  coin,  and
this  they  could  do  by  the  supposition,  that  less  than  15
ounces  of  silver  would  purchase  an  ounce  of  gold.

But  if  the  relative  value  of  gold  to  silver  be  more
than  the  mint  proportion  of  \.d-g^io  1,  no  gold  would
then  be  sent  to  the  mint  to  be  coined,  because  as  ei-
ther of  the  metals  arc  a  legal  tender  to  any  amount,
the  possessor  of  an  ounce  of  gold  would  not  send  it  to
the  mint  to  be  coined  into  31.  17s.  IQid*  of  gold  coin.
whilst  he  could  sell  it,  which  he  could  do  in  such  case,
for  more  than  31.  17,v.  \0\d.  of  silver  coin.  Not  only
would  not  gold  be  carried  to  the  mint  to  be  coined,
but  the  illicit  trader  would  melt  the  gold  coin,  .and  sell
c  2


( 20 )

it  as  bullion  for  more  than  its  nominal  value  in  the
silver  coin.  Thus  then  gold  would  disappear  from
circulation,  and  silver  coin  become  the  standard  mea-
sure of  value.  As  gold  has  lately  experienced  a  con-
siderable rise  compared  with  silver,  (an  ounce  of  stan-
dard gold,  which,  on  an  average  of  many  years,  was
of  equal  value  to  14!  ozs.  of  standard  silver,  being
now  in  the  market  of  the  same  value  as  151  oz.)  this
would  be  the  case  now  were  the  Bank  Restric-
tion-bill repealed,  and  the  coinage  of  silver  freely  al-
lowed at  the  mint,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  of  gold  ;
but  in  an  act  of  parliament  of  39  Geo.  III.  is  the  fol-
lowing clause : —

u  Whereas  inconvenience  may  arise  from  any  coinage  of  silver
"  until  such  regulations  may  be  formed  as  shall  appear  necessary  ;
u  and  whereas  from  the  present  low  price  of  silver  bullion,  owing
"  to  temporary  circumstances,  a  small  quantity  of  silver  bullion
"  has  been  brought  to  the  mint  to  be  coined,  and  there  is  reason  to
"  suppose  that  a  still  further  quantity  may  be  brought  ;  and  it  is
"  therefore  necessary  to  suspend  the  coining  of  silver  for  the  pre-
(l  sent ;  be  it  therefore  enacted,  That  from  and  after  the  passing  of
"  this  act,  no  silver  bullion  shall  be  coined  at  the  mint,  nor  shall
c<  any  silver  coin  that  may  have  been  coined  there  be  delivered,  any
"  law  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding."

This  law  is  now  in  force.

It  would  appear,  therefore,  to  have  been  the  inten-
tion of  the  legislature  to  establish  gold  as  the  standard
of  currency  in  this  country.  Whilst  this  law  is  in
force,  silver  coin  must  be  confined  to  small  payments
only,  the  quantity  in  circulation  being  barely  sufficient
for  that  purpose. It  might  be  for  the  interest  of  a


( 21 )

debtor  to  pay  his  large  debts  in  silver  eoin  if  he  could
get  silver  bullion  coined  into  money  ;  but  being  pre-
vented by  the  above  law  from  doing  so,  he  is  necessa-
rily obliged  to  discharge  his  debt  with  gold  coin.
which  he  could  obtain  at  the  mint  with  gold  bullion  to
any  amount.  Whilst  this  law  is  in  force,  gold  must
always  continue  to  be  the  standard  of  currency.

Were  the  market  value  of  an  ounce  of  gold  to  be-
come equal  to  thirty  ounces  of  silver,  gold  would
nevertheless  be  the  measure  of  value,  whilst  this  pro-
hibition continued  in  force.  It  would  be  of  no  avail,
that  the  possessor  of  30  ounces  of  silver  should  know
that  he  once  could  have  discharged  a  debt  of  3/.  17*.
l0\d.  by  procuring  ID-^omices  of  silver  to  be  coined
at  the  mint,  as  he  would  in  this  case  have  no  other
means  of  discharging  his  debt  but  by  selling  his  30
oz.  of  silver  at  the  market  value,  that  is  to  say,  for
one  ounce  of  gold,  or  31.  17s.  lOid.  of  gold  coin.

The  public  has  sustained,  at  different  times,  very  seri-
ous loss  from  the  depreciation  of  the  circulating  me-
dium, arising  from  the  unlawful  practice  of  clipping
the  coins.

In  proportion  as  they  become  debased,  so  the  prices
of  every  commodity  for  which  they  are  exchangeable
rise  in  nominal  value,  not  excepting  gold  and  silver
bullion  :  accordingly  we  find,  that  before  the  re-coin-
age in  the  reign  of  King  William  the  Third,  the  silver
currency  had  become  so  degraded,  that  an  ounce  of
silver,  which  ought  to  be  contained  in  sixty -two  pence,


(  m  )

sold  for  seventy-seven  pence ;  and  a  guinea,  which
was  valued  at  the  mint  at  twenty  shillings,  passed  in
all  contracts  for  thirty  shillings.  This  evil  was  then
remedied  by  the  re-coinage.  Similar  effects  followed
from  the  debasement  of  the  gold  currency,  which  were
again  corrected  in  1774  by  the  same  means.

Our  gold  coins  have,  since  1774,  continued  nearly
at  their  standard  purity ;  but  our  silver  currency  has
again  become  debased.  By  an  assay  at  the  mint  in
1 798,  it  appears  that  our  shillings  were  found  to  be
twenty-four  per  cent.,  and  our  sixpences  thirty-eight  per
cent,  under  their  mint  value ;  and  I  am  informed,  that
by  a  late  experiment  they  were  found  considerably  more
deficient.  They  do  not,  therefore,  contain  as  much
pure  silver  as  they  did  in  the  reign  of  King  William.
This  debasement,  however,  did  not  operate  previously
to  1798,  as  on  the  former  occasion.  At  that  time  both
gold  and  silver  bullion  rose  in  proportion  to  the  de-
basement of  the  silver  coin.  All  foreign  exchanges
were  against  us  full  twenty  per  cent.,  and  many  of
them  still  more.  But  although  the  debasement  of  the
silver  coin  had  continued  for  many  years,  it  had  nei-
ther, previously  to  1798,  raised  the  price  of  gold  or
silver,  nor  had  it  produced  any  effect  on  the  exchanges.
This  is  a  convincing  proof,  that  gold  coin  was,  du-
ring that  period,  considered  as  the  standard  measure  of
value.  Any  debasement  of  the  gold  coin  would  then
have  produced  the  same  effects  on  the  price  of  gold
and  silver  bullion,  and  on  the  foreign  exchanges,  which


( 23 }

were  formerly  caused  by  the  debasement  of  fhe  silver
coins*.

While  the  currency  of  different  countries  consists  of
the  precious  metals,  or  of  a  paper  money,  which  is  at
all  times  exchangeable  for  them  ;  and  while  the  me-
tallic currency  is  not  debased  by  wearing:,  or  clipping-,
a  comparison  of  the  weight,  and  degree  of  fineness  of
their  coins,  will  enable  us  to  ascertain  their  par  of  ex-
change. Thus  the  par  of  exchange  between  Holland
and  England  is  stated  to  be  about  eleven  florins,  be-
cause the  pure  silver  contained  in  eleven  florins  is
equal  to  the  pure  silver  contained  in  twenty  standard
shillings.

This  par  is  not,  nor  can  it  be,  absolutely  fixed  ;  be-
cause, gold  coin  being  the  standard  of  commerce  in
England,  and  silver  coin  in  Holland,  a  pound  sterling,
or  |4-  of  a  guinea,  may  at  different  times  be  more  or
less  valuable  than  twenty  standard  shillings,  and  there-
fore more  or  less  valuable  than  its  equivalent  of  eleven
florins.  Estimating  the  par  either  by  silver  or  by
gold  will  be  sufficiently  exact  for  our  purpose.

If  I  owe  a  debt  in  Holland  ;  by  knowing  the  par  of
exchange,  I  also  know  the  quantity  of  our  money
which  will  be  necessary  to  discharge  it.


*  When  the  gold  coin  was  debased,  previously  to  the  re»coiuage  in

177  1,  cold  and  silver  bullion  rose  above  their  mint  prices,  and  till
immediately  on  the  gold  coin  attaining  its  present  perfection.  The
exchanges  were,  owing  to  the  same  causes,  from  beiug  unfavourable
rendered  favourable


( 2* )

If  my  debt  amount  to  1 100  florins,  and  gold  have  not
varied  in  value,  100/.  in  our  pure  gold  coin  will  pur-
chase as  much  Dutch  currency  as 'is  necessary  to  pay
my  debt.  By  exporting  the  100/.  therefore  in  coin,
or  (which  is  the  same  thing)  paying  a  bullion  mer-
chant the  100/.  in  coin,  and  allowing  him  the  expences
attending  its  transportation,  such  as  freight,  insurance,
and  his  profit,  he  will  sell  me  a  bill  which  will  dis-
charge my  debt ;  at  the  same  time  he  will  export  the
bullion,  to  enable  his  correspondent  to  pay  the  bill
when  it  shall  become  due.

These  expences  then  are  the  utmost  limits  of  an  un-
favourable exchange.  However  great  my  debt  may
be,  though  it  equalled  the  largest  subsidy  ever  given
by  this  country  to  an  ally  ;  while  I  could  pay  the  bul-
lion-merchant in  coin  of  standard  value,  he  would  be
glad  to  export  it,  and  to  sell  me  bills.  But  if  I  pay
him  for  his  bill  in  a  debased  coin,  or  in  a  depreciated
paper-money,  he  will  not  be  willing  to  sell  me  his  bill
at  this  rate  ;  because  if  the  coin  be  debased,  it  does
not  contain  the  quantity  of  pure  gold  or  silver  which
ought  to  be  contained  in  100/.,  and  he  must  therefore
export  an  additional  number  of  such  debased  pieces  of
money,  to  enable  him  to  pay  my  debt  of  100/.,  or  its
equivalent,  1100  florins.  If  I  pay  him  in  paper-mo-
ney; as  he  cannot  send  it  abroad,  he  will  consider  whe-
ther it  will  purchase  as  much  gold  or  silver  bullion  as
is  contained  in  the  coin  for  which  it  is  a  substitute :
if  it  will  do  this,  paper  will  be  as  acceptable  to  him  as
coin  ;  but  if  it  will  not,  he  will  expect  a  further  pre-


( 25 )

nnnm  for  his  bill,  equal  to the  depreciation  of  the
paper.

While  the  circulating  medium  consists,  therefore,
of  coin  undebased,  or  of  paper-money  immediately  ex-
changeable for  undebased  coin,  the  exchange  can
never  be  more  above,  or  more  below,  par,  than  the
expences  attending  the  transportation  of  the  precious
metals.  But  when  it  consists  of  a  depreciated  paper-
monev,  »t  necessarily  will  fall  according  to  the  degree
of  the  depreciation.

The  exchange  will,  therefore,  be  a  tolerably  accu-
rate criterion  by  which  we  may  judge  of  the  debase-
ment of  the  currency,  proceeding  cither  from  a  clip-
ped coinage,  or  a  depreciated  paper-money.

It  is  observed  by  Sir  James  Stuart,  "  That  if  tlic
*  foot  measure  was  altered  at  once  over  all  England,
"  by  adding  to  it,  or  taking  from  it,  any  proportional
"  part  of  its  standard  length,  the  alteration  would  be
"  best  discovered,  by  comparing  the  new  foot  with
"  that  of  Paris,  or  of  any  other  country,  which  had
"  suffered  no  alteration.

"  Just  so,  if  the  pound  sterling,  whicli  is  the  En-
"  glish  unit,  shall  be  found  any  how  changed  ;  and  if
"  the  variation  it  has  met  with  be  difficult  to  ascertain,
"  because  of  a  complication  of  circumstances ;  the  best
"  way  to  discover  it  will  be  to  compare  the  former
"  and  the  present  value  of  it.  with  the  money  of  other
"  nations  which  has  suffered  no  variation  This  the
"  exchange  will  perform  with  the  greatest  exact*
"  ness."


( 26 }

The  Edinburgh  reviewers,  in  speaking  of  Lord
King's  pamphlet,  observe,  that  "  it  does  not  follow
"  because  our  imports  always  consist  partly  of  bullion,
"  that  the  balance  of  trade  is  therefore  permanently  in
"  our  favour.  Bullion/' they  say,  "  is  a  commodity,  for
"  which,  as  for  every  other,  there  is  a  varying  de-
"  mand ;  and  which,  exactly  like  any  other,  may  enter
"  the  catalogue  either  of  imports  or  exports  ;  and  this
"  exportation  or  importation  of  bullion  will  not  affect
"  the  course  of  exchange  in  a  different  way  from  the
"  exportation  or  importation  of  any  other  commodi-
iS  ties."

No  person  ever  exports  or  imports  bullion  without
first  considering  the  rate  of  exchange.  It  is  by  the
rate  of  exchange  that  he  discovers  the  relative  value
of  bullion  in  the  two  countries  between  which  it  is
estimated.  It  is  therefore  consulted  by  the  bullion-
merchant  in  the  same  manner  as  the  price-current  is
by  other  merchants,  before  they  determine  on  the  ex-
portation or  importation  of  other  commodities.  If
eleven  florins  in  Holland  contain  an  equal  quantity  of
pure  silver  as  twenty  standard  shillings,  silver  bullion,
equal  in  weight  to  twenty  standard  shillings,  can
never  be  exported  from  London  to  Amsterdam  whilst
the  exchange  is  at  par,  or  unfavourable  to  Holland.
Some  expence  and  risk  must  attend  its  exportation,
and  the  very  term  par,  expresses  that  a  quantity  of
silver  bullion,  equal  to  that  weight  and  purity,  is  to
he  obtained  in  Holland  by  the  purchase  of  a  bill  of
exchange,  free  of  all  expence.  Who  would  send  bul-
3


( 27 )

lion  to  Holland  at  an  expcncc  of  three  or  four  percent,
when,  by  the  purchase  of  a  bill  at  par,  he  in  fact  ob-
tains an  order  for  the  delivery  to  his  correspondent  in
Holland,  of  the  same  weight  of  bullion  which  he  was
about  to  export  ?

It  would  be  as  reasonable  to  contend,  that  when  the
price  of  corn  is  higher  in  England  than  on  the  Con-
tinent, corn  would  be  sent,  notwithstanding  all  the
charges  on  its  exportation,  to  be  sold  in  the  cheaper
market,

Having  already  noticed  the  disorders  to  which  a
metallic  currency  is  exposed,  I  will  proceed  to  consi-
der those  which,  though  not  caused  by  the  debased
state  of  either  the  gold  or  silver  coins,  are  neverthe-
less more  serious  in  their  ultimate  consequences.

Our  circulating  medium  is  almost  wholly  composed
of  paper,  and  it  behoves  us  to  guard  against  the  de-
preciation of  the  paper  currency  with  at  least  as  much
vigilance  as  against  that  of  the  coins.

This  we  have  neglected  to  do.

Parliament,  by  restricting  the  Bank  from  paying  in
specie,  have  enabled  the  conductors  of  that  concern  to
increase  or  decrease  at  pleasure  the  quantity  and  amount
of  their  notes ;  and  the  previously  existing  checks
against  an  over-issue  having  been  thereby  removed,
those  conductors  have  acquired  the  power  of  increas-
ing or  decreasing  the  value  of  the  paper  currency.

In  tracing  the  present  evils  to  their  source,  and
proving  Iheir  existence  by  an  appeal  to  the  two  uner-


( 29 )

ring  tests  I  have  before  mentioned,  namely,  the  rate
of  exchange  and  the  price  of  bullion,  I  shall  avail
myself  of  the  account  given  by  Mr.  Thornton  of  the
conduct  of  the  Bank  before  the  restriction,  to  shew
how  clearly  they  acted  on  the  principle  which  he  has
expressly  acknowledged,  viz.  that  the  value  of  their
notes  is  dependent  on  their  amount,  and  that  they  as-
certained the  variation  in  their  value  by  the  tests  I
have  just  referred  to.

Mr.  Thornton  tells  us,  ""That  if  at  anytime  the
u  exchanges  of  the  country  became  so  unfavourable
"  as  to  produce  a  material  excess  of  the  market  above
"  the  mint  price  of  gold,"  [here  the  cause  is  mistaken
for  the  effect]  rfthe  directors  of  the  Bank,  as  appears
f{  by  the  evidence  of  some  of  their  body,  given  to
i(  parliament,  were  disposed  to  resort  to  a  reduction  of
"  their  paper,  as  a  means  of  diminishing  or  removing
"  the  excess,  and  of  thus  providing  for  the  security
*'  of  their  establishment.  They  moreover  have  at  all
*c  times,"  he  says,  ec  been  accustomed  to  observe  some
"  limit  as  to  the  quantity  of  their  notes  for  the  same
*c  prudential  reasons."  And  in  another  place :  "When
"  the  price  which  our  coin  will  fetch  in  foreign  coun-
"  tries,  is  such  as  to  tempt  it  out  of  the  kingdom,  the
•*  directors  of  the  Bank  naturally  diminish,  in  some
"  degree,  the  quantity  of  their  paper  through  an  anxi-
"  ety  for  the  safety  of  their  establishment.  By  di-
iC  minishing  their  paper,  they  raise  its  value ;  and  in
"  raising  its  value,  they  raise  also  the  value  in  Eng-


( 29 )

•'*"  land,  of  the  current  coin  which  is  exchanged  for  it.
"  Thus  the  value  of  our  gold  coin  conforms  itself  to  the
"  value  of  the  current  paper,  and  the  current  paper  is
<c  rendered  by  the  Bank -directors,  of  that  value  which
"  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  bear  in  order  to  prevent
"  large  exportations  ; — a  value  sometimes  rising  a  little
"  above,  and  sometimes  falling  a  little  below,  the  price
"  which  our  coin  bears  abroad."

The  necessity  which  the  Bank  felt  itself  under  to
guard  the  safety  of  its  establishment,  therefore,  always
prevented,  before  the  restriction  from  paying  in  specie,
a  too  lavish  issue  of  paper  money.

Thus  we  find  that,  for  a  period  of  twenty-three
years  previously  to  the  suspension  of  cash  payments  in
1797,  the  average  price  of  gold  bullion  was
SI.  17s.  l\d.  per  oz.  about  2{d.  under  the  mint  price;
and  for  sixteen  years  previously  to  ]774,  it  never  was
much  above  4Z.  per  oz.  It  should  be  remembered
that  during  these  sixteen  years  our  gold  coin  was  de-
based by  wearing,  and  it  is  therefore  probable  that
M.  of  such  debased  money  did  not  weigh  as  much  as
the  ounce  of  gold  for  which  it  was  exchanged.

Dr.  A.  Smith  considers  every  permanent  excess  of
the  market  above  the  mint  price  of  gold,  as  refcrrible
to  the  state  of  the  coins.  While  the  coin  was  of  its
standard  weight  and  purity,  the  market  price  of  gold
bullion,  he  thought,  could  not  greatly  exceed  the
mint  price.

Mr.  Thornton  contends  that  this  cannot  be  the  only


( so )

cause.  "  We  have/'  he  says,  "  lately  experienced
f(  fluctuations  in  our  exchanges,  and  correspondent
ec  variations  in  the  market,  compared  with  the  mint
*'  price  of  gold,  amounting  to  no  less  than  eight  or  ten
ee  per  cent. ;  the  state  of  our  coinage  continuing  in  all
e(  respects  the  same."  Mr.  Thornton  should  have  re-
flected that  at  the  time  he  wrote,  specie  could  not  be
demanded  at  the  Bank  in  exchange  for  notes  ;  that  this
was  a  cause  for  the  depreciation  of  the  currency  which
Dr.  Smith  could  never  have  anticipated.  If  Mr.
Thornton  had  proved  that  there  had  been  a  fluctu-
ation of  ten  per  cent,  in  the  price  of  gold,  while  the
Bank  paid  their  notes  in  specie,  and  the  coin  was  un-
debased,  he  would  then  have  convicted  Dr.  Smith  of
<e  having  treated  this  important  subject  in  a  defective
et  and  unsatisfactory  manner."*

But  as  all  checks  against  the  over-issues  of  the
Bank  are  now  removed  by  the  act  of  parliament,
which  restricts  them  from  paying  their  notes  in  specie,
they  are  no  longer  bound  by  C(  fears  for  the  safely  of

*  An  excess  in  the  market  above  the  mint  price  of  gold  or  silver
bullion,  may,  whilst  the  coins  of  both  metals  are  legal  tender,  and
there  is  no  prohibition  against  the  coinage  of  either  metal,  be
caused  by  a  variation  in  the  relative  value  of  those  metals ; — but  an
excess  of  the  market  above  the  mint  price  proceeding  from  this
cause  will  be  at  once  perceived  by  its  affecting  only  the  price  of
one  of  the  metals.  Thus  gold  would  be  at  or  below,  while  silver
was  above,  its  mint  price,  or  silver  at  or  below  its  mint  price,  -whilst
gold  was  above.

In


( 31 )

their  establishment,"  to  limit  the  quantity  of  their
notes  to  that  sum  which  shall  keep  them  of  the  same
value  as  the  coin  which  they  represent.  Accordingly
we  find  that  gold  bullion  has  risen  from  Si.  17s.  lid.
the  average  price  previously  to  1797,  to  4/.  lO.s.  and
has  been  lately  as  high  as  4/.  13s.  per  oz.

We  may  therefore  fairly  conclude  that  this  differ-
ence in  the  relative  value,  or,  in  other  words,  that
this  depreciation  in  the  actual  value  of  bank-notes  has
been  caused  by  the  too  abundant  quantity  which  the
Bank  has  sent  into  circulation.  The  same  cause
which  has  produced  a  difference  of  from  fifteen  to
twenty  per  cent, in  bank-notes  when compared  wilh


In  the  Litter  end  of  1795,  when  the  Bank  had  considerably  more
notes  in  circulation  than  either  the  preceding  or  the  subsequent
year,  when  their  embarrassments  had  already  commenced,  when
they  appear  to  have  resigned  all  prudence  in  the  management  of  their
concerns,  and  to  have  constituted  Mr.  Pitt  sole  director,  the  prfce
of  gold  bullion  did  for  a  short  time  rise  to  4/.  3s.  or  4L  4s.  per
oz. ;  but  the  directors  were  not  without  their  fears  for  the  conse-
quences. In  a  remonstrance  sent  by  them  to  Mr.  Pitt,  dated  October
1795,  after  stating,  "  that  the  demand  for  gold  not  appearing  likelv
"  soon  to  cease,"  and  "that it  had  excited  great  apprehension  lithe
'*  court  of  directors,"  they  observe,  '*  The  present  price  of  gold
u  being  4/.  3s.  to  4/.  4*.  per  ounce,  and  our  guineas  being  to  be
"  purchased  at  3/.  175.  10j</.,  clearly  demonstrates  the  grounds  of
il  our  fears;  it  being  only  necessary  to  state  those  facts  to  the
u  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.'"  It  is  remarkable  that  no  price
of  gold  above  the  mint  price  is  quoted  during  the  whole  year  in
Wetenhall's  li^t. In  December  it  is  there  marked  31.  17a.  6il.


32 )

gold  bullion,  may  increase  it  to  fifty  per  cent.  There
can  be  no  limit  to  the  depreciation  which  may  arise
from  a  constantly  increasing  quantity  of  paper.  The
stimulus  which  a  redundant  currency  gives  to  the  expor-
tation of  the  coin,  has  acquired  new  force,  but  cannot,
as  formerly,  relieve  itself.  We  have  paper  monej'  only  in
circulation,  which  is  necessarily  confined  to  ourselves.
Every  increase  in  its  quantity  degrades  it  below  the
value  of  gold  and  silver  bullion,  below  the  value  of
the  currencies  of  other  countries.

The  effect  is  the  same  as  that  which  would  have
been  produced  from  clipping  our  coins.

If  one-fifth  were  taken  off  from  every  guinea,  the
market  price  of  gold  bullion  would  rise  one-fifth
above  the  mint  price.  Forty-four  guineas  and  a  half
(the  number  of  guineas  weighing  a  pound,  and  there-
fore called  the  mint  price, )  would  no  longer  weigh  a
pound,  therefore  a  fifth  more  than  that  quantity,  or
about  56/.,  would  be  the  price  of  a  pound  of  gold,
and  the  difference  between  the  market  and  the  mint
price,  between  56/.  'and  46/.  14s.  6<r/.,  would  measure
the  depreciation.

If  such  debased  coin  were  to  continue  to  be  called
by  the  name  of  guineas,  and  if  the  value  of  gold  bul-
lion and  all  other  commodities  were  rated  in  the  de-
based coin,  a  guinea  fresh  from  the  mint  would  be  said
to  be  worth  1/.  5s.  and  that  sum  would  be  given  for  it
by  the  illicit  trader ;  but  it  would  not  be  the  value  of
the  new  guinea  which  had  increased,  but  that  of  the


( 33 )

debased  guineas  which  had fallen. This  would  im-
mediately be  evident, if  a  proclamation  were  issued,
prohibiting  the  debased  guineas  from  being  current
but  by  weight  at  the  mint  price  of  3/.  17s.  lOfrf.  ;  this
would  be  constituting  the  new  and  heavy  guineas,  the
standard  measure  of  value,  in  lieu  of  the  clipped  and
debased  guineas. The  latter  would  then  pass  at  their
true  value,  and  be  called  17  or  18  shi  lings-pieces. So
if  a  proclamation  to  the  same  effect  were  now  enforced,
bank-notes  would  not  be  less  current,  but  would  pass
only  for  the value  of  the gold  bullion  which  they
would  purchase. A  guinea  would  then  no  longer  be
said to  be  worth  1/.  5s.  but  a  pound  note  would  be
current  only  for 16  or  17  shillings. At  present  gold
coin  is only a  commodity, and  bank-notes are  the
standard  measure  of  value,  but  in  that  case  gold  coin
would  be  that  measure,  and  bank-notes  would  be  the
marketable  commodity.

"  It  is,"  says  Mr.  Thornton,  r<  the  maintenance  of
"  our  general  exchanges,  or,  in  other  words,  it  is  the
4  agreement  of  the  mint  price  with  the  bullion  price
"  of  gold,  which  seems  to  be  the  true  proof  that  the
"  circulating  paper  is  not  depreciated."  fc

When  the  motive  for  exporting  gold  occurs,  while
the  Bank  do  not  pay  in  specie,  and  gold  cannot  therefore
be  obtained  at  its  mint  price,  the  small  quantity  that
can  be  procured  will  be  collected  for  exportation,  and
bank-notes  will  be  sold  at  a  discount  for  gold  in  pro-
portion to  their  excess.  In  saying  however  that  gold
is  at  a  high  price,  we  are  mistaken ;  it  is  not  gold,  it
n


-/  ( 34 )

is  paper  which  has  changed  its  value.  Compare  an
ounce  of  gold,  or  31.  17s.  10k/.  to  commodities,  it
bears  the  same  proportion  to  them  which  it  has  before
done ;  and  if  it  do  not,  it  is  referrible  to  increased
taxation,  or  to  some  of  those  causes  which  are  so  con-
stantly operating  on  its  value.  But  if  we  compare
the  substitute  of  an  ounce  of  gold,  31.  17s.  \0id.  in
bank-notes,  with  commodities,  we  shall  then  discover
the  depreciation  of  the  bank-notes.  In  every  market
of  the  world  I  am  obliged  to  part  with  47.  10s.  in
bank-notes  to  purchase  the  same  quantity  of  commo-
dities which  I  can  obtain  for  the  gold  that  is  in
31.  17s.  \0\d.  of  coin.

It  is  often  asserted,  that  a  guinea  is  worth  at  Ham-
burgh 26  or  28  shillings ;  but  we  should  be  very  much
deceived  if  we  should  therefore  conclude  that  a  guinea
could  be  sold  at  Hamburgh  for  as  much  silver  as  is
contained  in  26  or  28  shillings.  Before  the  alteration
in  the  relative  value  of  gold  and  silver,  a  guinea  would
not  sell  at  Hamburgh  for  as  much  silver  coin  as  is
contained  in  21  standard  shillings  ;  it  will  at  the  pre-
sent market  price  sell  for  a  sum  of  silver  currency,
which,  if  imported  and  carried  to  our  mint  to  be*  coin-
ed, will  produce  in  our  standard  silver  coin  21s.  bd*

It  is  nevertheless  true,  that  the  same  quantity  of
silver  will,  at  Hamburgh,  purchase  a  bill  payable  in
London,  in  Bank-notes,  for  26  or  28  shillings.  Can
there  be  a  more  satisfactory  proof  of  the  depreciation
of  our  circulating  medium  ?

*  The  relative  value  of  gold  and  silver  is  on  the  Continent  nearly
the  same  as  in  London.


( 35 )

It  is  said,  that,  if  the  Restriction-bill  were  not  in
force,  every  guinea  would  leave  the  country.*

This  is,  no  doubt,  true;  but  if  the  Bank  were  to  di-
minish the  quantity  of  their  notes  until  they  had  in-
creased their  value  fifteen  per  cent.,  the  restriction
might  be  safely  removed,  as  there  would  then  be  no
temptation  to  export  specie.  However  long  it  may  be
deferred,  however  great  may  be  the  discount  on  their
notes,  the  Bank  can  never  resume  their  payments  in
specie,  until  they  first  reduce  the  amount  of  their  notes
in  circulation  to  these  limits.

The  law  is  allowed  by  all  writers  on  political  eco-
nomy to  be  a  useless  barrier  against  the  exportation  of
guineas ;  it  is  so  easily  evaded,  that  it  is  doubted  whe-
ther it  has  had  the  effect  of  keeping  a  single  guinea
more  in  England  than  there  would  have  been  without
such  law.  Mr.  Locke,  Sir  J.  Stuart,  Dr.  A.  Smith,
Lord  Liverpool,  and  Mr.  Thornton,  all  agree  on  this
subject.  The  latter  gentleman  observes,  "  That  the
{<  state  of  the  British  law  unquestionably  serves  to  dis-
"  courage  and  limit,  though  not  effectually  to  hinder,
e<  that  exportation  of  guineas  which  is  encouraged  by
rt  an  unfavourable  balance  of  trade,  and  perhaps
"  scarcely  lessens  it  when  the  profit  on  exportation
"  becomes  very  great."  Yet  after  every  guinea  that
can  in  the  present  state  of  things  be  procured  by  the

*  It  must  be  meant  that  eYery  guinea  in  die  J&uk  w oukl  teare  tht
country;  the  temptation  of  fifteen  per  cent,  i^  amply  sufficient  to
send  those  out  which  can  be  collected  from  tin*  circulation.


( 36 )

illicit  trader,  has  been  melted  and  exported,  he  will
hesitate  before  he  openly  buys  guineas  with  bank-notes
at  a  premium,  because,  though  considerable  profit
may  attend  such  speculation,  he  will  thereby  render
himself  an  object  of  suspicion.  He  may  be  watched
and  prevented  from  effecting  his  object.  As  the  pe-
nalties of  the  law  are  severe,  and  the  temptation  to
informers  great,  secrecy  is  essential  to  his  operations.
When  guineas  can  be  procured  by  merely  sending  a
bank-note  for  them  to  the  Ea.ik,  the  law  will  be  easily
evaded  ;  but  when  it  is  necessary  to  collect  them  openly
and  from  a  widely  diffused  circulation,  consisting  al-
most wholly  of  paper,  the  advantage  attending  it  must
be  very  considerable  before  any  one  will  encounter  the
risk  of  being  detected.

When  we  reflect  that  above  sixty  millions  sterling-
have  been  coined  into  guineas  during  his  present  Ma-
jesty's reign,  we  may  form  some  idea  of  the  extent  to
which  the  exportation  of  gold  must  have  been  carried.
— But  repeal  the  law  against  the  exportation  of  gui-
neas, permit  them  to  be  openly  sent  out  of  the  coun-
try, and  what  can  prevent  an  ounce  of  standard  gold  in
guineas  from  selling  at  as  good  a  price  for  bank-notes,
as  an  ounce  of  Portugueze  gold  coin,  or  standard
gold  in  bars,  when  it  is  known  to  be  equal  to  them  in
fineness  ?  And  if  an  ounce  of  standard  gold  in  gui-
neas would  sell  in  the  market,  as  standard  bars  do  now,
at  47.  10s.  per  oz.,  or  as  they  have  lately  done  at
4/.  13s.  per  oz.,  what  shopkeeper  would  sell  his  goods
at  the  same  price  either  for  gold  or  bank-notes  indif-


( 57 )

ferently?  If  the  price  of  a  coat  were  31.  17s.  lOhl.,
or  an  ounce  of  gold,  and  if  at  the  same  time  an  ounce
of  gold  would  sell  for  4/.  13s.,  is  it  conceivable  that  it
would  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  tailor  whether
he  were  paid  in  gold  or  in  bank-notes  ?

It  is  only  because  a  guinea  will  not  purchase  more
than  a  pound-note  and  a  shilling,  that  many  hesitate  to
allow  that  bank-notes  are  at  a  discount.  The  Edin-
burgh Review  supports  the  same  opinion  ;  but  if  my
reasoning  be  correct,  I  have  shewn  such  objections  to
be  groundless.

Mr.  Thornton  has  told  us  that  an  unfavourable
trade  will  account  for  an  unfavourable  exchange  ;  but
we  have  already  seen  that  an  unfavourable  trade,  if
such  be  an  accurate  term,  is  limited  in  its  effects  on
the  exchange.  That  limit  is  probably  four  or  five  per
cent.  This  will  not  account  for  a  depreciation  of  fif-
teen or  twenty  per  cent.  Moreover  Mr.  Thornton  has
told  us,  and  I  entirely  agree  with  him,  ','  That  it  may
"  belaid  down  as  a  general  truth,  that  the  commercial
lf  exports  and  imports  of  a  state  naturally  proportion
"  themselves  in  some  degree  to  each  other,  and  that
"  the  balance  of  trade  therefore  cannot  continue  for  a
"  very  long  time  to  be  either  highly  favourable,  or
"  highly  unfavourable  to  a  country."  Now  the  low
exchange,  so  far  from  being  temporary,  existed  be-
fore Mr.  Thornton  wrote  in  1802,  and  has  since  been
progressively  increasing,  and  is  now  from  fifteen  to
twenty  per  cent,  against  us.  Mr.  Thornton  must
therefore  according  to  his  own  principles  attribute  it


( 38 )

to  some  more  permanent  cause  than  an  unfavourable
balance  of  trade,  and  will,  I  doubt  not,  whatever  his
opinion  may  formerly  have  been,  now  agree  that  it  is
to  be  accounted  for  only  by  the  depreciation  of  the
circulating  medium.

It  can,  I  think,  no  longer  be  disputed  that  bank-notes
are  at  a  discount.  While  the  price  of  gold  bullion  is
47.  10s.  per  oz.,  or  in  other  words,  while  any  man  will
consent  to  give  that  which  professes  to  be  an  obliga-
tion to  pay  nearly  an  ounce,  and  a  sixth  of  an  ounce
of  gold,  for  an  ounce,  it  cannot  be  contended  that
47.  10s.  in  notes  and  4/.  10s.  in  gold  coin  are  of  the
same  value.

An  ounce  of  gold  is  coined  into  31.  17s.  10$& ;  by
possessing  that  sum  therefore  I  have  an  ounce  of  gold,
and  would  not  give  47.  10s.  in  gold  coin,  or  notes
which  I  could  immediately  exchange  for  4/.  10s.,  for
an  ounce  of  gold.

It  is  contrary  to  common  sense  to  suppose  that  such
could  be  the  market  value,  unless  the  price  were  esti-
mated in  a  depreciated  medium.

If  the  price  of  gold  were  estimated  in  silver  indeed,
the  price  might  rise  to  47.,  5/.,  or  10/.  an  oz.  and  it
would,  of  itself,  be  no  proof  of  the  depreciation  of
paper  currency,  but  of  an  alteration  in  the  relative
value  of  gold  and  silver.  I  have,  however,  I  think
proved,  that  silver  is  not  the  standard  measure  of  value,
and  therefore  not  the  medium  in  which  the  value  of
gold  is  estimated.  But  if  it  were  ;  as  an  ounce  of
gold  is  only  worth  in  the  market  151  oz.  of  silver,  and

1


( « )

as  15£  ounces  of  silver  is  precisely  equal  in  weight,
and  is  therefore  coined  into  80  shillings,  an  ounce  of
gold  ought  not  to  sell  for  more  than  4/.

Those  then  who  maintain  that  silver  is  the  measure
of  value,  cannot  prove  that  any  demand  for  gold
which  may  have  taken  place,  from  whatever  cause  it
may  have  proceeded,  can  have  raised  its  price  above
-il.  per  oz.  All  above  that  price  must,  on  their  own
principles,  be  called  a  depreciation  in  the  value  of
bank  notes.  It  therefore  follows,  that  if  bank-notes
be  the  representative  of  silver  coin,  then  an  ounce  of
gold,  selling  as  it  now  does  for  4/.  10s.  sells  for  an
amount  of  notes  which  represent  17!  ounces  of  silver,
whereas  in  the  bullion  market  it  can  only  be  exchanged
for  15y  ounces.  Fifteen  ounces  and  a  half  of  silver
bullion  are  therefore  of  equal  value  with  an  engage-
ment of  the  Bank  to  pay  to  bearer  seventeen  ounces
and  a  half.

The  market  price  of  silver  is  at  the  present  time
5s.  9lzd.  per  oz.  estimated  in  bank-notes,  the  mint  price
being  only  5s.  2d.,  consequently  the  standard  silver  in
100/.  is  worth  more  than  112/.  in  bank  notes.

But  bank-notes,  it  may  be  said,  are  the  representa-
tives of  our  debased  silver  coin,  and  not  of  our  stand-
ard silver.  This  is  not  true,  because  the  law  which
1  have  already  quoted  declares  silver  to  be  a  legal  ten-
der lor  sums  only  not  exceeding '25/.  except  by  weight.
If  the  Bank  insisted  on  paying  tlie  holder  of  a  bank-
note of  1000/.  in  silver  coin,  they  would  be  bound
either to  give  him  standard sjher of  full  weight,  or


( 40 )

debased  silver  of  an  equal  value,  with  the  exception
of  25Z.  which  they  might  pay  him  in  debased  coin.
But  the  1000Z.  so  consisting  of  975Z.  pure  money,  and
25/.  debased,  is  worth  more  than  11  \2l.  at  the  present
market  value  of  silver  bullion.

It  is  said  that  ths  amouat  of  bank-notes  has  not  in-
creased in  a  greater  proportion  than  the  augmentation
of  our  trade  required,  and  therefore  cannot  be  exces-
sive. This  assertion  would  be  difficult  to  prove,  and
if  true,  no  argument  but  what  is  delusive  could  be
founded  on  it.  In  the  first  place,  the  daily  improve-
ments which  we  are  making  in  the  art  of  economizing
the  use  of  circulating  medium,  by  improved  methods
of  banking,  would  render  the  same  amount  of  notes
excessive  now,  which  were  necessary  for  the  same  state
of  commerce  at  a  former  period.  Secondly,  there  is
a  constant  competition  between  the  Bank  of  England
and  the  country-banks  to  establish  their  notes,  to  the
exclusion  of  those  of  their  rivals,  in  every  district  where
the  country  banks  are  established.

As  the  latter  have  more  than  doubled  in  number
within  very  few  years,  is  it  not  probable  that  their  ac-
tivity may  have  been  crowned  with  success,  in  dis-
placing with  their  own  notes  many  of  those  of  the
Bank  of  England  ?

If  this  have  happened,  the  same  amount  of  Bank  of
England  notes  would  now  be  excessive ;  which,  with
a  less  extended  commerce,  was  before  barely  sufficient
to  keep  our  currency  on  a  level  with  that  of  other
countries. No  just  conclusion  can  therefore  be  drawi)


( 41 )

from  the  actual  amount  of  bank-notes  in  circulation,
though  the  fact,  if  examined,  would,  I  have  no  doubt,
be  found  to  be,  that  the  increase  in  the  amount  of
bank-notes,  and  the  high  price  of  gold,  have  usually
accompanied  each  other.

It  is  doubted,  whether  two  or  three  millions  of
Bank-notes  (the  sum  which  the  Bank  is  supposed  to
have  added  to  the  circulation,  over  and  above  the
amount  which  it  will  easily  bear,)  could  have  had
such  effects  as  are  ascribed  to  them  ;  but  it  should  be
recollected,  that  the  Bank  regulate  the  amount  of  the
circulation  of  all  the  country  banks,  and  it  is  proba-
ble, that  if  the  Bank  increase  their  issues  three  mil-
lions, they  enable  the  country  banks  to  add  more  than
twelve  millions  to  the  general  circulation  of  England.

The  money  of  a  particular  country  is  divided
amongst  its  different  provinces  by  the  same  rules  as
the  money  of  the  world  is  divided  amongst  the  different
nations  of  which  it  is  composed.  Each  district  will
retain  in  its  circulation  such  a  proportionate  share  of
the  currency  of  the  country,  as  its  trade,  and  conse-
quently its  payments  may  require,  compared  to  the
trade  of  the  whole ;  and  no  increase  can  take  place  in
the  circulating  medium  of  one  district,  without  being
generally  diffused,  or  calling  forth  a  proportionable
quantity  in  every  other  district.  It  is  this  which  keeps
a  country-bank  nolc  always  of  the  same  value  aa  a
Bank  of  England  note.  If  in  London,  where  Bank  of
England  notes  only  are  current,  one  million  be  added
to  the  amount  in circulation, the currency  will be-


( 42 )

come  cheaper  there  than  elsewhere,  or  goods  will  be
come  dearer.  Goods  will,  therefore,  be  sent  from
the  country  to  the  London  market,  to  be  sold  at  the
high  prices,  or  which  is  much  more  probable,  the
country  banks  will  take  advantage  of  the  relative  de-
ficiency in  the  country  currency,  and  increase  the
amount  of  their  notes  in  the  same  proportion  as  the
Bank  of  England  had  done  ;  prices  would  then  be
generally,  and  not  partially  affected.

In  the  same  manner,  if  Bank  of  England  notes  be
diminished  one  million,  the  comparative  value  of  the
currency  of  London  will  be  increased,  and  the  prices
of  goods  diminished.  A  Bank  of  England  note  will
then  be  more  valuable  than  a  country-bank  note,  be-
cause it  will  be  wanted  to  purchase  goods  in  the  cheap
market ;  and  as  the  country  banks  are  obliged  to  gi\e
Bank  of  England  notes  for  their  own  when  demanded,
they  would  be  called  upon  for  them  till  the  quantity
of  country  paper  should  be  reduced  to  the  same  pro-
portion which  it  before  bore  to  the  London  paper,
producing  a  corresponding  fall  in  the  prices  of  all
goods  for  which  it  was  exchangeable.

The  country  banks  could  never  increase  the  amount
of  their  notes,  unless  to  fill  up  a  relative  deficiency  in
the  country  currency,  caused  by  the  increased  issues
of  the  Bank  of  England*. If  they  attempted  it,  the


*  They  ifiight,  on  some  occasions,  displace  Dank  of  England  notes,
but  that  consideration  does  not  affect  the  question  which  we  ar«
npw  disQiissiug.


( 43 j

same  check  which  compelled  the  Bank  of  England
to  withdraw  part  of  their  notes  from  circulation
when  they  used  to  pay  them  on  demand  in  specie,
would  oblige  the  country  banks  to  adopt  the  same
course.  Their  notes  would,  on  account  of  the  in-
creased quantity,  be  rendered  of  less  value  than  the
Bank  of  England  notes,  in  the  same  manner  as  Bank
of  England  notes  were  rendered  of  less  value  than  the
guineas  which  they  represented.  They  would  there-
fore be  exchanged  for  Bank  of  England  notes  until
they  were  of  the  same  value.

The  Bank  of  England  is  the  great  regulator  of  the
country  paper.  When  they  increase  or  decrease  the
amount  of  their  notes,  the  country  banks  do  the  san^e;
and  in  no  case  can  country  banks  add  to  the  general
circulation.,  unless  the  Bank  of  England  shall  have
previously  increased  the  amount  of  their  notes.

It  is  contended,  that  the  rate  of  interest,  and  not  the
price  of  gold  or  silver  bullion,  is  the  criterion  by  which
we  may  always  judge  of  the  abundance  of  paper-
money  ;  that  if  it  were  too  abundant,  interest  would
fall,  and  if  not  sufficiently  so,  interest  would  «»se.  It
can,  I  think,  be  made  manifest,  that  the  rate  of  interest
is  not  regulated  by  the  abundance  or  scarcity  of
money,  but  by  the  abundance  or  scarcity  of  that  part
of  capital,  not  consisting  of  money.

"  Money/'  observes  Dr.  A.  Smith,  "  the  great
"  wheel  ot°  circulation,  the  great  instrument  of  com-
" 'merer,  like  all  other  instruments  of  trade,  though
"  it  makes  a  part,  and  a  very  valuable  part  of  the  eapi-

3


( 44 )

"  tal,  makes  no  part  of  the  revenue  of  the  society  to
'*  wfiich  it  belongs ;  and  though  the  metal  pieces  of
"  which  it  is  composed,  in  the  course  of  their  annual
"  circulation,  distribute  to  every  man  the  revenue
"'which  properly  belongs  to  him,  they  make  them-
ff  selves  no  part  of  that  revenue.

Ci  When  we  compute  the  quantity  of  industry  which
•'the  circulating  capital  of  any  society  can  employ,
f1  we  must  always  have  regard  to  those  parts  of  it
**  only  which  consist  in  provisions,  materials,  and
/"  finished  work  :  the  other,  which  consists  in  money,
/  rc  and  which  serves  only  to  circulate  those  three,  must
"  always  be  deducted.  In  order  to  put  industry  into
''motion,  three  things  are  requisite: — materials  to.
'■'  work  upon,  tools  to  work  with,  and  the  wages  or
'r  recompense  for  the  sake  of  which  the  work  is  done.
"  Money  is  neither  a  material  to  work  upon,  nor  a
"tool  to  work  with;  and  though  the  wages  of  the
<f  workman  are  commonly  paid  to  him  in  money,  his
".  real  revenue,  like  that  of  all  other  men,  consists  not
"  in  money,  but  in  money's  worth ;  not  in  the  metal
"  pieces,  but  what  can  be  got  for  them."

And  in  other  parts  of  his  work,  it  is  maintained,
that  the  discovery  of  the  mines  in  America,  which  so
greatly  increased  the  quantity  of  money,  did  not  lessen
the  interest  for  the  use  of  it :  the  rate  of  interest  being
regulated  by  the  profits  on  the  employment  of  capital,
and  not  by  the  number  or  quality  of  the  pieces  of
metal,  which  arc  used  to  circulate  its  produce.

Mr.  Hume  has  supported  the  same  opinion. The


(  «  )

value  of  the  circulating  medium  of  every  country  bears
some  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  commodities  which
it  circulates.  In  some  countries  this  proportion  is
much  greater  than  in  others,  and  varies,  on  some  oc-
casions,, in  the  same  country.  It  depends  upon  the
rapidity  of  circulation,  upon  the  degree  of  confidence
and  credit  existing  between  traders,  and  above  all,  on
the  judicious  operations  of  banking.  In  England  so
many  means  of  economizing  the  use  of  circulating
medium  have  been  adopted,  that  its  value,  compared
with  the  value  of  the  commodities  which  it  circulates,
is  probably  (during  a  period  of  confidence*)  reduced
to  as  small  a  proportion  as  is  practicable.  What  that
proportion  may  be  has  been  variously  estimated.

No  increase  or  decrease  of  its  quantity,  whether
consisting  of  gold,  silver,  or  paper-money,  can  increase
or  decrease  its  value  above  or  below  this  proportion.
If  the  mines  cease  to  supply  the  annual  consumption
of  the  precious  metals,  money  will  become  more  valua-
ble, and  a  smaller  quantity  will  be  employed  as  a  cir-
culating medium.  The  diminution  in  the  quantity
will  be  proportioned  to  the  increase  of  its  value.  In
like  manner,  if  new  mines  be  discovered,  the  value  of
the  precious  metals  will  be  reduced,  and  an  increased
quantity  used  in  the  circulation  ;  so  that  in  either  case
the  relative  value  of  money,  to  the  commodities  which
it  circulates,  will  continue  as  before.


*  In  the  following  observations,  I  wish to he  understood,  at

supposing  always  the  same  degree  of  confidence  and  credit  to  exist.


( 46 )

If,  whilst  the  Bank  paid  their  notes on  demand  in
specie,  they  were  to  increase  their  quantity,  they  would
produce  little  permanent  effect  on  the  value  of  the  cur
reney, because  nearly  an  equal  quantity  of  the  coin
would  be  withdrawn  from  circulation  and  exported.

If  the  Bank  were  restricted  from  paying  their  notes
in  specie,  and  all  the  coin  had  been  exported,  any  ex-
cess of  their  notes  would  depreciate  the  value  of  the
circulating  medium  in  proportion  to  the  excess.  If
twenty  millions  had  been  the  circulation  of  England
before  the  restriction,  and  four  millions  were  added  to
it,  the  twenty-four  millions  would  be  of  no  more  value
than  the  twenty  were  before,  provided  commodities  had
remained  the  same,  and  there  had  been  no  correspond-
ing exportation  of  coins  ;  and  if  the  Bank  were  suc-
cessively to  increase  it  to  fifty,  or  a  hundred  millions,
the  increased  quantity  would  be  all  absorbed  in  the
circulation  of  England,  but  would  be,  in  all  cases,  de-
preciated to  the  value  of  the  twenty  millions.

I  do  not  dispute,  that  if  the  Bank  were  to  bring  a
large  additional  sum  of  notes  into  the  market,  and
offer  them  on  loan,  but  that  thev  would  for  a  time  af-
feet  the  rate  of  interest.  The  same  effects  would  fol-
low from  the  discovery  of  a  hidden  treasure  of  gold
or  silver  coin.  If  the  amount  were  large,  the  Bank,
or  the  owner  of  the  treasure,  might  not  be  able  to  lend
the  notes  or  the  money  at  four,  nor  perhaps,  above  three
per  cent. ;  but  having  done  so,  neither  the  notes,  nor
the  money,  would  be  retained  unemployed  by  the  bor-
rowers ;  they  would  be  sent  into  every  market,  and


( « )

would  every  where  raise  the  prices  of  commodities,
till  they  were  absorbed  in  the  general  circulation.  It
is  only  during  the  interval  of  the  issues  of  the  Bank,
and  their  effect  on  prices,  that  we  should  be  sensible
of  an  abundance  of  money  ;  interest  would,  during
that  interval,  be  under  its  natural  level  ;  but  as  soon
as  the  additional  sum  of  notes  or  of  money  became
absorbed  in  the  general  circulation,  the  rate  of  interest
would  be  as  high,  and  new  loans  would  be  demanded
with  as  much  eagerness  as  before  the  additional  issuer.

The  circulation  can  never  be  over-full.  If  it  be
one  of  gold  and  silver,  any  increase  in  its  quantity
will  be  spread  over  the  world.  If  it  be  one  of  paper,
it  will  diffuse  itself  only  in  the  country  where  it  is  is-
sued. Its  effects  on  prices  will  then  be  only  local  and
nominal,  as  a  compensation  by  means  of  the  exchange
will  be  made  to  foreign  purchasers.

To  suppose  that  any  increased  issues  of  the  Bank  can
have  the  eifect  of  permanently  lowering  the  rate  of  in-
terest, and  satisfying  the  demands  of  all  borrowers,  so
that  there  will  be  none  to  apply  for  new  loans,  or  that  a
productive  gold  or  silver  mine  can  have  such  an  effect,
is  to  attribute  a  power  to  the  circulating  medium  which
it  can  never  possess.  Banks  would,  if  this  were  pos-
sible, become  powerful  engines  indeed.  By  creating
paper  money,  and  lending  it  at  three  or  two  per  cent,
under  the  present  market  rate  of  interest,  the  Bank
would  reduce  the  profits  on  trade  in  the  same  propor-
tion ;  and  if  they  were  iufficiently  patriotic  to  lend
their  notes  at  an  interest  no  higher than necessary  to


( 48 )

pay  the  expences  of  their  establishment,  profits  would
be  still  further  reduced ;  no  nation,  but  by  similar
means,  could  enter  into  competition  with  us,  we  should
engross  the  trade  of  the  world.  To  what  absurdities
would  not  such  a  theory  lead  us  !  Profits  can  only  be
lowered  by  a  competition  of  capitals  not  consisting  of
circulating  medium.  As  the  increase  of  Bank-notes
dues  not  add  to  this  species  of  capital,  as  it  neither  in-
creases our  exportable  commodities,  our  machinery,  or
our  raw  materials,  it  cannot  add  to  our  profits  nor
lower  interest*.

When  any  one  borrows  money  for  the  purpose  of
entering  into  trade,  he  borrows  it  as  a  medium  by
which  he  can  possess  himself  of  ce  materials,  provi-
sions, &c."  to  carry  on  that  trade;  audit  can  be  of
little  consequence  to  him,  provided  he  obtain  the  quan-
tity of  materials,  &c.  necessary,  whether  he  be  obliged
to  borrow  a  thousand,  or  ten  thousand  pieces  of  mo-
ney. If  he  borrow  ten  thousand,  the  produce  of  his
manufacture  will  be  ten  times  the  nominal  value  of
what  it  would  have  been,  had  one  thousand  been  suf-
ficient for  the  same  purpose. The  capital  actually

*  I  have  already  allowed  that  the  Bank,  as  far  as  they  enable  us
to  turn  our  coin  into  u  materials,  provisions,  &c."  have  produced
a  national  benefit,  as  they  have  thereby  increased  the  quantity  of
productive  capital ;  but  I  anuhere  speaking  of  an  excess  of  their
notes,  of  that  quantity  which  adds  to  our  circulation  without  effect-
ing any  corresponding  exportation  of  coin,  and  which,  therefore,
degrades  the  notes  below  the  value  of  the  bullion  contained  in  the
ooin  which  they  represent.


( « )

employed  in  the  country  is  necessarily  limited  to  the
amount  of  the  "  materials,  provisions,  &c."  and
might  be  made  equally  productive,  though  not  with
equal  facility,  if  trade  were  carried  on  wholly  by  bar-
ter. The  successive  possessors  of  the  circulating  me-
dium have  the  command  over  this  capital :  but  howe-
ver abundant  may  be  the  quantity  of  money  or  o^
bank-notes;  though  it  may  increase  the  nominal  prices
of  commodities ;  though  it  may  distribute  the  produc-
tive capital  in  different  proportions  ;  though  the  Bank,
by  increasing  the  quantity  of  their  notes,  may  enable  A
to  carry  on  part  of  the  business  formerly  engrossed  by
B  and  C,  nothing  will  be  added  to  the  real  revenue
and  wealth  of  the  country.  B  and  C  may  be  injured,
and  A  and  the  Bank  may  be  gainers,  but  they  will
gain  exactly  what  B  and  C  lose.  There  will  be  a  vio-
lent and  an  unjust  transfer  of  property,  but  no  benefit
whatever  will  be  gained  by  the  community.

For  these  reasons  lam  of  opinion  that  the  funds  are
not  indebted  for  their  high  price  to  the  depreciation  of
our  currency.  Their  price  must  be  regulated  by  the
general  rate  of  interest  given  for  money.  If  before
the  depreciation  I  gave  thirty  years'  purchase  for  land,
and  twenty-five  for  an  annuity  in  the  stocks,  I  can
after  the  depreciation  give  a  larger  sum  for  the  pur-
chase of  land,  without  giving  more  years'  purchase,
because  the  produce  of  the  land  will  sell  for  a  greater
nominal  value  in  consequence  of  the  depreciation  ;
but  as  the  annuity  in  the  funds  is  paid  in  the  depre-
ciated medium there  can  be  no  reason  why  I  should

£


( 50 )

give  a  greater  nominal  value  for  it  after  than  before
the  depreciation.

If  guineas  were  degraded  by  clipping  to  half  their
present  value,  every  commodity  as  well  as  land  would
rise  to  double  its  present  nominal  value ;  but  as  the  in-
terest of  the  stocks  would  be  paid  in  the  degraded
guineas,  they  would,  on  that  account,  experience  no
rise.

The  remedy  which  I  propose  for  all  the  evils  in
our  currency,  is  that  the  Bank  should  gradually  de-
crease the  amount  of  their  notes  in  circulation  until
they  shall  have  rendered  the  remainder  of  equal  value
with  the  coins  which  they  represent,  or,  in  other  words,
till  the  prices  of  gold  and  silver  bullion  shall  be  brought
down  to  their  mint  price.  I  am  well  aware  that  the
total  failure  of  paper  credit  would  be  attended  with
the  most  disastrous  consequences  to  the  trade  and  com-
merce of  the  county,  and  even  its  sudden  limitation
would  occasion  so  much  ruin  and  distress,  that  it  would
be  highly  inexpedient  to  have  recourse  to  it  as  the
means  of  restoring  our  currency  to  its  just  and  equi-
table value.

If  the  Bank  were  possessed  of  more  guineas  than
they  had  notes  in  circulation,  they  could  not,  without
great  injury  to  the  country,  pay  their  notes  in  specie,
while  the  price  of  gold  bullion  continued  greatly  above
the  mint  price,  and  the  foreign  exchanges  unfavour-
able to  us.  The  excess  of  our  currency  would  be  ex-
changed for  guineas  at  the  Bank  and  exported,  and
would be suddenly withdrawn from circulation.


( 51 )

Before  therefore  they  can  safely  pay  in  specie,
the  excess  of  notes  must  be  gradually  withdrawn  from
circulation.  If  gradually  done,  little  inconvenience
would  be  felt ;  so  that  the  principle  were  fairly  ad-
mitted, it  would  be  for  future  consideration  whether  the
object  should  be  accomplished  in  one  year  or  in  five.
I  am  fully  persuaded  that  we  shall  never  restore  our
currency  to  its  equitable  state,  but  by  this  preliminary
step,  or  by  the  total  overthrow  of  our  paper  credit.

If  the  Bank  directors  had  kept  the  amount  of  their
notes  within  reasonable  bounds ;  if  they  had  acted  up
to  the  principle  which  thejj  have  avoived  to  have  been
that  which  regulated  their  issues  zvhen  they  were
obliged  to  pay  their  notes  in  specie,  namely,  to  limit
their  notes  to  that  amount  Which  should  prevent  ihc
excess  of  the  market  above  the  mint  price  of  gold,
we  should  not  have  been  now  exposed  to  all  the  evils
of  a  depreciated,  and  perpetually  varying  currency.

Though  the  Bank  derive  considerable  advantage
from  the  present  system,  though  the  price  of  their
capital  stock  has  nearly  doubled  since  1797,  and
their  dividends  have  proportionally  increased,  I  am
ready  to  admit  witli  Mr.  Thornton,  that  the  directors,
as  monied  men,  sustain  losses  in  common  with  others
by  a  depreciation  of  the  currency,  much  more  serious
to  them  than  any  advantages  which  they  may  reap
from  it  as  proprietors  of  Bank  stock.  I  do  therefore
acquit  them  of  being  influenced  by  interested  motives,
but  their  mistakes,  if  they  are  such,  are  in  their  effects
quite  as  pernicious  to  the  community


( 52 )

The  extraordinary  powers  with  which  they  are  en-
trusted, enable  them  to  regulate  at  their  pleasure  the
price  at  which  those  who  are  possessed  of  a  particular
kind  of  property,  called  money,  shall  dispose  of  it.
The  Bank  directors  have  imposed  upon  these  holders
of  money  all  the  evils  of  a  maximum.  To-day  it  is  their
pleasure  that  4/.  10s.  shall  pass  for  31.  17s.  10fd.,  to-
morrow they  may  degrade  4/.  15s.  to  the  same  value,
and  in  another  year  10Z.  may  not  be  worth  more.  By
what  an  insecure  tenure  is  propert}r  consisting  of  mo-
rtey  or  annuities  paid  in  money  held  !  What  security
has  the  public  creditor  that  the  interest  on  the  public
debt,  which  is  now  paid  in  a  medium  depreciated  fif-
teen per  cent ,  may  not  hereafter  be  paid  in  one  de-
graded fifty  per  cent.  ?  The  injury  to  private  cre-
ditors is  not  less  serious.  A  debt  contracted  in  1797,
may  now  be  paid  with  eighty-five  per  cent,  of  its
amount,  and  who  shall  say  that  the  depreciation  will
go  no  further  ?

The  following  observations  of  Dr.  Smith  on  this
subject  are  so  important,  that  I  cannot  but  recommend
them  to  the  serious  attention  of  all  thinking  men.

/■'  The  raising  the  denomination  of  the  coin  has  been
"  the  most  usual  expedient  by  which  a  real  public  bank-
fC  ruptcy  has  been  disguised  under  the  appearance  of
'/  a  pretended  payment.  If  a  sixpence,  for  example,
"  should,  either  by  act  of  parliament  or  royal  procla-
<(  mation,  be  raised  to  the  denomination  of  a  shilling,
"  and  twenty  sixpences  to  that  of  a  pound  sterling,
'f  the  person  who  under  the  old  denomination  had  bor-


( 53 )

"  rowed  twenty  shillings,,  or  near  four  ounces  of  sil-
"  ver,  would,  under  the  new,  pay  with  twenty  six-
"  pences,  or  with  something  less  than  two  ounces.  A
"  national  debt  of  about  a  hundred  and  twenty  mil-
"  lions,  nearly  the  capital  of  the  funded  debt  of  Great
f*  Britain,  might  in  this  manner  be  paid  with  about
"  sixty-four  millions  of  our  present  money.  It  would
"  indeed  be  a  pretended  payment  only,  and  the  crc-
"  ditors  of  the  public  would  be  defrauded  often  shil-
"  lings  in  the  pound  of  what  was  due  to  them.  The
"  calamity  too  would  extend  much  further  than  to  the
"  creditors  of  the  public,  and  those  of  every  private
"  person  would  suffer  a  proportionable  loss  ;  and  this
c  without  any  advantage,  but  in  most  cases  with  a
"  great  additional  loss,  to  the  creditors  of  the  public.
"  If  the  creditors  of  the  public  indeed  were  generally
u  much  in  debt  to  other  people,  they  might  in  some
(C  measure  compensate  their  loss  by  paying  their  cre-
' '  ditors  in  the  same  coin  in  which  the  public  had  paid
'f  them.  But  in  most  countries  the  creditors  of  thepub-
"  lie  are,  the  greater  part  of  them,  wealthy  people,  who
"  stand  more  in  the  relation  of  creditors  than  in  that  of
"  debtors  towards  the  rest  of  their  fellow-citizens.  A
"  pretended  payment  of  this  kind,  therefore  instead  of  al-
"  leviating,  aggravates  in  most  cases  the  loss  of  the  ere-
"  ditors  of  the  public  ;  and  without  any  advantage
"  to  the  public,  extends  the  calamity  to  a  great  mim-
"  ber  of  other  innocent  people.  It  occasions  a  gcue-
"  ral,  and  most  pernicious  subversion  of  the  fortunes  of
"  private  people;  enriching  in  most  cases  the  idle  and


( Mr )

u  profuse  debtor  at  the  expence  of  the  industrious  and
"  frugal  creditor,  and  transporting  a  great  part  of  the
'•'  national  capital  from  the  hands  which  are  likely  to
cc  increase  and  improve  it,  to  those  which  are  likely  to
"  dissipate  and  destroy  it.  When  it  becomes  necessary
"  for  a  state  to  declare  itself  bankrupt,  in  the  same
<c  manner  as  when  it  becomes  necessary  for  an  indivi-
"  dual  to  do  so,  a  fair,  open,  and  avowed  bankruptcy
<f  is  always  the  measure  which  is  both  least  dishonour-
fC  able  to  the  debtor,  and  least  hurtful  to  the  creditor.
/'  The  honour  of  a  state  is  surely  very  poorly  provided
(C  for,  when  in  order  to  cover  the  disgrace  of  a  real
"  bankruptcy,  it  has  recourse  to  a  juggling  trick  of  this
<{  kind,  so  easily  seen  through,  and  at  the  same  time  so
ce  extremely  pernicious."

These  observations  of  Dr.  Smith  on  a  debased  mo-
ney, are  equally  applicable  to  a  depreciated  paper  cur-
rency. He  has  enumerated  but  a  few  of  the  disastrous
consequences  which  attend  the  debasement  of  the  cir-
culating medium,  but  he  has  sufficiently  warned  us
against  trying  such  dangerous  experiments.  It  will
be  a  circumstance  ever  to  be  lamented,  if  this  great
country,  having  before  its  eyes  the  consequences  of  a
forced  paper  circulation  in  America  and  France,  should
persevere  in  a  system  pregnant  with  so  much  disaster.
Let  us  hope  that  she  will  be  more  wise.  It  is  said
indeed  that  the  cases  are  dissimilar  :  that  the  Bank  of
England  is  independent  of  government.  If  this  were
true,  the  evils  of  a  superabundant  circulation  would
not  be  less  felt ;  but  it  may  be  questioned  whether  a


( 55 )

Bank  lending  many  millions  more  to  government  than
its  capital  and  savings,  can  be  called  independent  of
that  government.

When  the  order  of  council  for  suspending  the  cash
payments  became  necessary  in  1797,  the  run  upon  the
Bank  was,  in  my  opinion,  caused  by  political  alarm
alone,  and  not  by  a  superabundant,  or  a  deficient
quantity  (as  some  have  supposed)  of  their  notes  in
circulation*.

This  is  a  danger  to  which  the  Bank,  from  the  na-
ture of  its  institution,  is  at  all  times  liable.  No  pru-
dence on  the  part  of  the  directors  could  perhaps  have
averted  it :  but  if  their  loans  to  government  had  been
more  limited  ;  if  the  same  amount  of  notes  had  been
issued  to  the  public  through  the  medium  of  discounts ;
they  would  have  been  able,  in  all  probability,  to  have
continued  their  payments  till  the  alarm  had  subsided.
At  any  rate,  as  the  debtors  to  the  Bank  would  have
been  obliged  to  discharge  their  debts  in  the  space  of
sixty  days,  that  being  the  longest  period  for  which  any
bill  discounted  by  the  Bank  has  to  run,  the  direc-
tors would  in  that  time,  if  necessary,  have  been  ena-
bled to  redeem  every  note  in  circulation.  It  was  then
owing  to  the  too  intimate  connection  between  the  Bank
and  government,  that  the  restriction  became  necessary  ;
it  is  to  that  cause  too  that  we  owe  its  continuance.

To  prevent  the  evil  consequences  which  may  attend

*  At  that  period  the  price  of  gold  L.j>t  steadily  under  i'<  mint
price.


[ 56 )

the  perseverance  in  this  system,  we  must  keep  our  eyes
steadily  fixed  on  the  repeal  of  the  Restriction-bill.

The  only  legitimate  security  which  the  public  can
possess  against  the  indiscretion  of  the  Bank  is  to  oblige
them  to  pay  their  notes  on  demand  in  specie ;  and  this
can  only  be  effected  by  diminishing  the  amount  of
bank-notes  in  circulation  till  the  nominal  price  of  gold
be  lowered  to  the  mint  price.

Here  I  will  conclude  ;  happy  if  my  feeble  efforts
should  awaken  the  public  attention  to  a  due  consider-
ation of  the  state  of  our  circulating  medium.  I  am
well  aware  that  I  have  not  added  to  the  stock  of  in-
formation with  which  the  public  has  been  enlightened
by  many  able  writers  on  the  same  important  subject.
I  have  had  no  such  ambition.  My  aim  has  been  to
introduce  a  calm  and  dispassionate  enquiry  into  a  ques-
tion of  great  importance  to  the  state,  and  the  neglect
of  which  may  be  attended  with  consequences  which
every  friend  of  his  country  would  deplore.


finis.


r  ,//


PRACTICAL
k NERVATIONS


REPORT


